

The Religious
Significance
of the War.
BY
The Rev. B. LINDEN WEBB, B.A.
With FOREWORD
BY
The Rev. W. H. BEALE.




THE
RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE
OF THE WAR.
BY
THE REV. B. LINDEN WEBB, BA
With FOREWORD
BY
THE REV. W. H. BEALE.




FOREWORD.
AMONGST the most affecting consequences of the
present international strife is the abandonment and re-
versal of sentiments and ideals it has brought about in
ecclesiastical circles respecting war and peace. That conception
and ideal of Peace which has been clothed and garlanded in the
Christian thought with every fantasy of attractiveness and
beauty has been so completely thrust into the back-ground
that, by almost common consent, it is now held to be untimely,
if not unpatriotic and disloyal, for even Christian teachers to
sound its praises, bemoan its absence, or insist upon efforts
for its restoration. The pulpit has become as belligerent as
the press, with the added blemish that war is being justified
and apologised for in terms of religion and morals, at the
peril of inducing that most fatal condition of moral obliquity
when men calf evil good and good evil In the days of primitive
and simple Christianity when its disciples were near enough
to its Founder and sufficiently under the spell of His spirit
and example to apprehend His ideals and purposes, those
who named. His Name chose to die rather than to fight; now
Ecclesiasticism converts its temples into recruiting grounds,
and proclaims in effect that His kingdom is of this world
and that His servants must fight. It is not intended here to
canvass the political and international considerations out of
which the present conflict may have arisen, and by which it
may be justified or condemned; but to urge that whatever
politicians may say as to the merits of this or any other war,
it is for the subjects and subalterns in the Kingdom of
| Christ to point out at this time with the deeper emphasis and
| solicitude how utterly and irreconcilably alien is war to the
J methods and purposes of that Kingdom, and how vain and
I foolish is the dream that moral triumphs and transforma-
j tions are to be wrought by physical force. The lawfulness
lor otherwise of this war, the incidence and extent of the
j blame attachable to the parties tajt, from the stand-poink
oKpolitical necessity and from considerations of internation-
al relations and national honour, these have been and are the
subject of extended and heated controversy between the
statesmen of the hostile nations and between the most dis-
tinguished and representative divines and teachers on either


■side; but from the stand-point of Christian morals, and'test-
ed by the touchstone of Christ’s own teaching and example,,
the wrong and sin and shame of the whole heart-breaking
business aie beyond' controversy or doubt. For, to quote
words which are as true as they are strong. “It is not’because
war kills that it is the devil, but because it depraves; and it
because it depraves that it is condemned by the* religious
I
I prostrate on the battlefield, but the brute rampant in the
I mother-land; the general lowering of ideal, the blatant ma-
I terialism and defiant selfishnessTThc open and shamclcss~3i-
I vorce between ethics and religion, the naked and unashamed
between ecclesiasticism and the powers r of this"
world. TE is with the discussion of this consideration, and
not of any question of political expediency or international
relationships or obligations— not with the" justifiableness or
otherwise of this or any other particular war, but with the
moral quality and character of all war—that the following
pages occupied, Mr. Webb is a young Minister, stand*
ing only just across the threshold of his life-work; but one
is moved to congratulation and envy of a congregation en-
joying the of a ministry marked by such deep
conviction, and which is as clear in its spiritual insight as it
is admirable in its temper and courageous and faithful in
its outspokenness; and which presents so true and penetrat-
ing a view of the bearing of Christian ethics upon those
fields of life and conduct which are too commonly regarded
as unrelated to Christian teaching. Certainly the Methodist
Congregation of JFTay will be rightly instructed, and in no
uncertain or. ambiguous tones, that whatever may be claimed
for, the employment of the engines of war in the settlement
of international quarrels, it cannot be claimed to be Chris-
tian.
W. H. BEALE
Hunter’s Hill,
April 21, 1915.


I.
THE WAR AND CHRISTIAN IDEALS.


I.—THE WAR AND CHRISTIAN IDEALS.
If my Kingdom were of this world/ then would my servants fight y
that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now is my Kingdom not
from hence.” (John xviii. 36).
In our services during the past few months I have fre-
quently made reference to the European turmoil, but I have
not preached what are popularly known as “war sermons.” I
have purposely refrained from doing so. It has seemed to
me wiser, especially during the early period of excitement
and unrest occasioned by the war, to go on with our usual
services undisturbed. lam convinced that the truths which
lam endeavouring to teach all the year through have a most
profound meaning for every phase of our individual and na-
tional life, and as an intelligent people you can apply them
yourselves to this or any other world-crisis.
To-night, however, I am constrained to speak on “The
Religious Significance of the War” for two reasons. First,
because of the scoffs of unbelievers who assert that this
conflict is the deathblow to Religion. Second, because there
are some professed Christians who declare their faith in the
principles of Jesus, but dare not stand to it in the face of the
practical problem of the day. We speak of Peace and Good-
will; we teach the Brotherhood of Man, and they say: —
“Hush! don't talk about it. Of course, we believe all that,
but this is not the time to mention it. All we can do is to
keep our swords sharp and our powder dry, and let such
teaching wait until we have seen this business through.”
Such an attitude is a challenge to the Christian Church to
declare her mind plainly. If men talk like that, then we
must not keep silent. We must show to the scoffers that our
faith is not one whit disturbed, and we must remind all fol-
lowers of Jesus that the principles of Christian truth are to
be upheld as uncompromisingly throughout this trouble as
at any other time.
I approach this subject very humbly, and under a grave
sense of responsibility. lam conscious that I may say
things which are very unpalatable to you. You may think,
when it is all over, that I am only an unpractical dreamer.
Yet the dream must be told, for back of it is no dream, but
the certain knowledge of Christ, I assure you, my friends,
that I have no desire to thrust on you my own private
opinions. My one concern is to interpret to you the mind
of the Master, whether you accept the message or not. I
may express myself imperfectly; I may not be able to make
clear to you the things that I see; but I would have you
*(A sermon preached in the Methodist Church, Hay, N.S.W., January
3, 1915).


believe that every statement is the earnest conviction of one
who has prayerfully endeavoured to penetrate the obscur-
ing mists .and catch a glimpse of the ever-shining sun. If
you listen reverently and patiently, I think that, despite
possible conflict of opinion in regard to details, 'you, too,
may be held and gladdened by that fragment of Eternal
Truth my soul has sought and found.
1. In our text Christ states quite clearly that, while
the “Kingdoms of this world” are maintained by force. His
Kingdom is not to be maintained that way. “If my King-
dom were of this world, then would my servants fight; but
now is my Kingdom not, from hence.”
Of course, taken by itself, that may be construed as
an argument in support of the war. A man may reason
thus: “Jesus Himself said that the material kingdoms were
to be defended by fighting, and that His own servants would
fight for such a cause.” ■ Let me deny very positively that
Jesus said anything of the kind. He did not say that fight-
ing for the “kingdoms of this world” was right; He merely-
recognised the fact that that was the method adopted by
men of the world. He did not say that His servants (mem-
bers of His spiritual Kingdom) would fight for such a cause;
He only said that if His Kingdom had been “of this world,”
then His servants would naturally have adopted the world’s
way. If He had been worldly-minded, of course, His ser-
vants would have been worldly-minded, too; but “now is
my Kingdom not from hence,” and His servants are conse-
quently under a new and higher law. That is-surely the
plain meaning of the words. He does not directly declare
whether fighting for “this world’s kingdoms” is either right
or wrong; He does distinctly imply that His Spiritual King-
dom of Truth is not sustained that way.
That is as far as the actual words of the text carry us;
but this suggests something else. If the “kingdoms of the
world” become truly Christian, —if they become “the King-
dom of our Lord and of His Christ,” —will not the same
principle apply to them? I think it is abundantly evident
from the whole spirit and teaching of the Master that we
are justified in making this inference. Fighting origi-
nates from a materialistic conception of greatness. If
the true, ideal of kingship in Christ’s mind had been
an ideal of wordly ' power, then His ■ servants (those
who heM the same ideal) -would fight; but that is
not Christ’s ideal of kingship or of greatness fit all.
No careful reader of Scripture can fail to see' that,
from our Lord’s point of view, “the Kingdoms of this world”
are based on a false estimate of the value of material pos-
sessions. He declined the suggestion to seek that kind of
8
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR.


kingdom as a subtle temptation of the Devil; He told His
disciples that they were “not of the world,” and He showed
in a hundred ways that the type of life He expected in His
followers was entirely different from that represented by
the kingdoms of this world.” So His Kingdom wins its
way by an altogether different principle. The way of the
world is not the way of Christ. He refuses to accept the
defence of the sword, even to save His life, for His King-
dom is founded on Love. And He faces us with the tre-
mendous responsibility of living for the same ideals and
under the same law.
We may differ in our views of the exact application of
this principle to individual and national affairs, but we can
hardly question that it is the principle our Saviour taught,
not only by word, but by the whole of His devoted life. Let
us, under the guidance of His Spirit, earnestly try To dis-
cover the bearing of this teaching on the present world-
struggle.
11. “The kingdoms of this world” act on the belief that
material well-being is essential to a nation’s life, and must be
maintained and increased by the exercise of brute force*
That is why all the leading Powers of the world have been
spending countless millions of money in military prepara-
tions, and diverting the energies of thousands of splendid
lives from peaceful avocations to learning the grim art of
war. While the nations’ conception of greatness is a material-
istic —a self-seeking conception,—there is bound
to arise a conflict of interests; and though treaties and con-
ferences may stave off actual bloodshed for a time, there are
some quarrels which are never settled save by an appeal to
arms. It is the natural method of nations with such ideals.
“If my Kingdom were of this world, then would my ser-
vants fight”-—and fight men do and fight they will, so long
as the world-spirit dominates their minds.
Though we profess to have other ideals of national great-
ness, and though many of our leaders do indeed believe
that there are intellectual, moral, and spiritual qualities of far
greater importance to the nation than wealth and honour and
power; yet it is not for these things that we go to war, —it is
not the existence of these ideals which creates international
strife.
In this present struggle Germany asserts that her desire
is to bless mankind. With- the type of
.cultureand the bulk of the British nation just as heartily
believes that our Empire has been drawn into the war out
of loyalty to a moral obligation,—a contract of national
honour. But it is sheer hypocrisy, to pretend that the "huge
armaments of the nations have been built up for either of
9
THE WAR AND CHRISTIAN IDEALS.


these purposes. Germany knows full well that her culture,
if it be true culture, will win its widening way, through the
world far swifter by its own essential worth than by any of
the methods of force. We are not quite so foolish as to
believe that the vast machinery of the Prussian military
system has been called into being for the bestowal of in-
tellectual and moral blessings on the world. As for us, it
has been said that this war is an affair of honour, and that
there is no self-seeking in it ; yet we are bound to own that
it is for material ends that our army and navy exist,—at
leaat~Jbr self-preservation, to maintain our lordship of the
seas, to protect our trade routes, and, out here in Australia,
to retain possession of this wealthy land for ourselves. I
am not saying just now whether all this is right or wrong, I
am simply stating the principle that material warfare is for
material things. It may be engaged in the. name of Re-
ligion, Morality, Civilisation, or anything else, but back of
it is the idea that material prosperity, temporal power, the
sway over men's bodies, is the preponderating factor in a
nation's welfare.
111. The Kingdom of Christ is based on a different ideal
of greatness, and employs a different method to advance its
ideals. The greatness of this Kingdom lies not in triumphs
of the material realm, but in the perfect development of
man's moral and spiritual resources, to which all temporal
things are subservient; and '‘the sword of the Spirit," by
which its dominions are extended, is self-sacrificing Love.
For the maintenance of such a kingdom force is worse than
useless, and it needs no force. Not the soldier, but the
missionary, is the agent by whom Christ's lordship is to be
established. There are no distinctions of race or colour,
wealth or class here; for this kingdom stands on the belief
that, deeper than all divisions in "the kingdoms of the world,"
is an essential spiritual unity, an universal brotherhood of
man in a common relationship to the Eternal Father,—God.
This Kingdom, to Christ's way of thinking, is not some
visionary ethereal thing divorced from life in the world; it
is a Kingdom ahead- set mp on the earth and it is some day
to conquer the world. It numbers among its loyal adhe-
rents men and women in all parts of the gtobe,—of all
classes, all colours, all temporal circumstances, engaged in
the ordinary occupations of life, sane, practical people, who
can take their place with any in every honourable sphere of
human activity; and yet, while they are in the world—living
here and working here—they are not of the world, for they
do not share "this world's" materialistic spirit. They do
not ignore nor despise the material and temporal, but they
hold it forever subordinate to the spiritual and eternal. They
10
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR,


are the masters, not the slaves, of material conditions. In
international affairs there can be no conflict of their supreme
interests; “before man made us citizens, great Nature made
us men/’ and in the Christian conception all international
disputes are secondary to man’s essential brotherhood.
Christians may be never so loyal to the land of their
birth or their adoption, but thev must not fail in the higher
loyalty they owe to that spiritual realm in which all conflict
of material interests is forgotten in the oneness of true
human life.
IV. These then are the two kinds of kingdom to which
we may belong. The question arises as to whether we can
consistently hold the ideals of both and adopt the methods of
both. For long men have tried to persuade themselves that
it is possible. They have said, in effect: “We as individuals
can accept the spiritual principles of Jesus and advance His
Kingdom by self-giving love; but as members of a nation
we cling to. the materialistic ideal of national power, and we
will maintain this kingdom by weapons of hate.” Yet,
throughout the centuries there has been a growing uneasiness
in regard to this dual kind of life. Men have felt that their
ideals and methods for individual and national well-being
ought to be in harmony. They have felt that robbery and
murder were robbery and murder, even though committed
bv a nation, instead of an individual. And they have begun
to realise that, if it is right for an individual to love his
enemies, it must also be right for a nation to act on the
same principle. It is not merely that we are dealing with
two separate spheres of human life, in which it may be
possible to adopt different methods in accord with one prin-
ciple; it is that here we have two entirely different and
contrary principles, and we cannot consistently follow both.
The Kingdom of Christ makes spiritual things supreme and
works by love; the “kingdoms of this world” make material
things supreme and work by something which is certainly
not love. There are those who are beginning to think that
these two contrary ideals cannot consistently co-exist. A
man's life is one whole, both in public and private, and
men feel that their conduct should be in accord with one fun-
damental principle throughout. Just as a man cannot
honestly live “to the flesh” six days in the week, and “to
the Spirit” on the seventh, so he cannot separate between the
principles which govern his public and those which govern
his private conduct. The God of the nations cannot be a
different God from the God of the individual soul. Yet,
the method employed by the nations in the settlement of their
disputes is diametrically opposite to that employed by the
Christian in maintaining the integrity of the kingdom to
11
THE WAR AND CHRISTIAN IDEALS.


which he belongs. Is it any wonder that there is a cry
that one of these things should go? When the war broke
out it was suggested that we shut up the churches and give
up Religion altogether. On the other hand, there are those
who think we might more profitably “shut up” the war, and
give up our materialistic ideals forever. As a matter of
fact, we are not doing either; only we are becoming more
and more conscious that the two things cannot both be right.
We are more than ever convinced that no nation can be
truly Christian till it will accept the ideals and act on the
principles of the Kingdom of Christ. This war is not in
keeping with our profession of Christianity; it is the outcome
of materialism, worldliness, godlessness. In the leading
article of the “Sydney Daily Telegraph” of December 25th,
there appeared the following paragraph:—-
On this Christmas morning, when the voice of the Herald Angels
is heard re-echoing through the corridors of time, the Clad Tidings of
Peace on Earth, the most terrible war ever known is raging. And who
are the combatants? Not the heathen in their blindness, but the people
who accept the glorious peace message as sent to them, and for cen-
turies past have professed to regulate their lives in accordance there-
with. It is only now on this nineteen hundred and fourteenth anniver-
sary of its reception that such a saturnalia of savagery has ever made
humanity hideous. Nearly all the most enlightened and, professedly,
most religious nations of Christendom are now employing the whole
of the strength which their enlightenment gives them in the work of
mutual destruction. And the heathen to whom they have spent ages
preaching their gospel of peace, are appealed to on this latest Christmas
Bay to come and aid them in spreading as much destruction and sorrow
as possible amongst its preachers. The other day the Kaiser, after a
German victory in Poland, real or alleged, modestly allowed that The
glory belonged to God alone/ Could there be a more blasphemous irony
than to imagine that the Creator of the Universe could find glory in the
fact that a few of His mortal creatures were able to spread slaughter
amongst another few weaker than themselves, and sorrow amongst their
helpless dependents? War, of course, is war. But it is certainly not
what the spirit symbolised by the Christmas festival is supposed to
stand for, and both cannot exist together. Out of respect to the event
which to-day commemorates, therefore, it would at this time of the
world’s history be only a fair thing to let the war—which, if we must
have we must have—be war, and not bring the Deity into it at all. To
celebrate the festival of peace aiid goodwill the Germans have forcibly
requisitioned Christmas cheer from the inhabitants of Belgium, from
every corner of which goes up the smoke of the they have wrought
and the cries of the orphans whose fathers they have slain. To cele-
brate Christmas in the midst of such work as this is not only a mock-
ery of everything that the day suggests, it is also a ghastly insult to the
intelligence of the modern world/’
Whatever this editor’s personal attitude towards Christian
ethics may be, it is evidently his opinion that we cannot have
both the spirit of Christmas and the spirit which issues in
war. I don’t think anyone will dispute that. The ideals
of the kingdoms of this world and of the Kingdom of Christ
12
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR.


are not only different, they are mutually exclusive, and we
must make our choice between them.
V. Which then shall we choose ?
(A).. Supposing we become frankly materialistic, accept
the world ideal of greatness, and live accordingly, what will
happen? Why, precisely what has happened, only on a
bigger scale, the further we carry it. After the six leading
nations of the world have been engaged in a mad race for
armaments, till they are almost exhausted, after they have
spent for years past an average of close on £400,000,000 per
annum between them in maintaining their military effici-
ency, under the unhappy delusion that that was the surest
way to secure peace, at length the whole of Europe is
involved in a cruel fratricidal struggle,— £450,000,000 is the
year's estimated war expenses for Great Britain alone; science
is being prostituted to the terrible business of making instru-
ments of destruction; and thousands upon thousands of lives
are being ruthlessly sacrificed. That is the sort of thing to
which we are led by the materialistic ideal, and the better
sense of the civilised world revolts from it. Humanity is
coming to regard war with abhorrence. There are few who
can take any glory in it now. Once it was regarded as a
triumph; to-day it is looked on as a failure, and a tragedy.
Once it was considered the main business of life; the soldier’s
calling was the finest thing on earth; and the conquering
nation told its exploits of destruction with fiendish glee.
To-day all that is changed or changing. We have already
gained a new sense of the awfulness of war. We welcome
the news of victories with quiet satisfaction, mingled with
a solemn sorrow that they have been purchased at such a
cost. The days are coming when tales of blood and iron
will no longer thrill us, but sadden and disgust.
So, serious people are beginning to wonder whether any
of the gains achieved by war are worth the price. After all,
what can this war accomplish? There are some who im-
agine that it is going to bring untold blessing to mankind;
I wish I could share their confidence, but I do not believe it.
No one of the nations engaged will be better off in a material
sense. It will take them generations to recover their losses,
and the progress of civilisation will be delayed for years.
And what of the moral gain? Surely that cannot be in any
way commensurate with the fearful moral loss. Naooleon
had seen much of war and had won many victories, yet when
his conquests were over and he had time for serious reflec-
tion. He said: “The more I study the world, the more lam
convinced of the inability of brute force to create anything
durable.” We, as a nation, earnestly hope for victory. We
are a peaceable and peace-loving people, and we believe that
13
THE WAR AND CHRISTIAN IDEALS.


we are fighting against a tyrannical military despotism whose
victory would be a calamity to the world. Some think,
then, that if only we can crush the Prussian military organi-
sation, the reign of Peace on Earth will be assured. It is
not so, my friends. The nations may be so crippled as to
make such a war as this impossible for many years to come,,
but all the force in the world cannot destroy the materialis-
tic spirit which is at the back of it, and the grave danger is
that the victorious nations may become imbued with the:
same madness that they are trying to crush. By material
force we may overthrow a hostile material force, and then
ourselves be overthrown by putting our trust in our own
mighty power. Already men are talking as if the only les-
son of the war were that we must adopt the German method
of conscription for the future. That means the defeat
of some of the best things in our British civilisation; that
means that Germany's method is right and ours is wrong.
So easily do we surrender our liberties to materialistic
ideals. A war does not of necessity bring moral good to
either victors or vanguished. 1870 left France humiliated
but embittered, and Germany swollen with pride. According
to Canon Scott, at Oxford: “England never touched a lower
moral and spiritual level than in the years in which she
emerged from the long war with Napoleon. She came out
of that war, not so much purged as coarsened. It was a
time in which Religion had almost died out of the land.”
God save us from such a fate again! Neither can we hope
that by conquering our foe we shall thereby convert him.
The pious wish that Germany may be born again at the point
of our soldiers' bayonets is doomed to disappointment. We
surely do not seriously think in this 20th century that mo-
rality is to be superimposed on people by conquest of the
sword. We do not fight men to make them good. The
Prince of the Kingdom of moral and spiritual truth did not
think that was the way, at any rate.
Yet there are some compensations which we should not
fail to see. The splendid wave of patriotism which has
swept over the Empire is good to think about. The ready
self-sacrifice in the interests of their country, the swift re-
sponse to the nation's call for service has lifted our people
of the Old Land out of their selfishness and their lust for
pleasure, and set them for the time on a more exalted plane.
That is a fine thing, yet we must not deceive ourselves into
thinking that it is all. A man may join the eager throng of
patriots, and yet be a very sordid, mean sort of man. We
sometimes speak as if every man who dons the uniform and
takes arms to fight is at once transformed into a saint and"
a hero. Alas, war does not make saints,—it is more likely
14
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR.


to make devils; and there are heroes who never slay as
valiant as any soldier whom we praise. The sacrifice of men
fighting for their country has been compared to the sacrifice
of Christ. That is a terrible blasphemy. Yet the thrill
.and uplift of truejatriotism is a good thing. It is possible,
tooTTßat out of the travaiFof thTsTwar, the nations
of the world may learn a lesson of the folly of war; yet not
much will be gained until they also leafn a new spirit. They
are learning that, too, thank God, —not from the war, but
from the despised teachings of the Christian Church. The
little leaven is leavening the whole lump 5 and to some minds
at least saner, more Christian methods are suggesting them-
selves. But for the present the world fights on. We may
well suspect that there is something radically wrong with
the ideals of the kingdoms of this world, when the only prac-
tical method of maintaining them is such an irrational, futile,
brutal one as war. We may well begin to ask if the nations
“do not need a changed conception of greatness.
(B) Well, suppose we accept the Christian ideal of a
great kingdom, where will that lead us? How will it carry
us through the turmoil and strain of these troubled days?
The answer is that it is the only ideal that works. It is
the one thing which, had it been accepted by any nation en-
gaged in this tragic struggle, would have saved that nation
much of the suffering and ail of the sin of war. It is the
only conception of life which will keep us men C9.lm and
hopeful and happy, whilst all the material kingdoms of this
world are shaken to their very foundations.
(1) There are those whom the grim material reality has
blinded to the greater Reality beyond. The smoke of battle
has obscured the light, and men cry, mocking, to the Chris-
tian, “Where, now, is thy God ?” Well, our God is as near
;and dear to us as ever. The war ds the practical denial of
Christian principles, but it does not disprove their truth.
No real Christian will waver. Material ideals are failing, but
spiritual ideals abide more wonderful than ever in their un-
shaken splendour. The war and its horrors are the result
of forsaking Christianity. Had men and nations accepted
the teachings of Jesus, there would be no war. But there
are many of us who have seen this calamity coming for a
long time. Precisely because there is a God the world can-
not defy His laws and go scatheless. The war is the logical
outcome of rebellion against God. It is not that God is tak-
ing vengeance, but that He is allowing the nations to work
out their own punishment and reap the crop of their own
sowing. Let me quote a few plain sentences from the “Chris-
tian Advocate”
15
THE WAR AND CHRISTIAN IDEALS.


•‘This talk about the breakdown of civilisation because Europe has
temporarily gone crazy—how shallow it is. This charge that Christianity
is exploded by a war in which five nominally Christian nations are
embroiled—how senseless it is! . . . . . Wh t folly it is to suppose that
even a world war can defeat the growing aspiration of mankind for
social order and international peace. Gan we not see that the very
sense of outrage which almost universal humanity feels towards those
who provoked this Titanic. conflict is itself a proof that civilization has
not collapsed, If it had there would be no scandal in Christendom on
account of the EuropeaS war. . . . . We know civilization survives be-
cause the war is everywhere denounced as a diabolical insult to the
intelligence and moral sense of the race. Christianity a failure? It
would be if it ceased to thunder against the infamy of war. ... • If
not Christianity which is judged by this war. Christianity is itself
judging the nations as never before.”
(2) Yet the fact that such a war. has been pOiiiblg 1R
the 20th century is a sad commentary on the work of the
churches during all these weary years. The churches may
claim to have accomplished a good deal in the way of soften-
ing the conditions of warfare and making the old barbarous
and piratical methods, if not altogether a thing of the past,
at least a thing contrary to international honor. The univer-
sal revulsion against war too is certainly largely due to the
more humane spirit inculcated by the churches. Another
fact of some significance is that at this time of stress and
suffering there is a great return to the churches. Men know
that the churches have, or ought to have a message for them
in the deep, dark problems of life, and now they are coming
for comfort, direction and inspiration. Yet the churches are
at the judgment bar. We ought to feel very humbled at our
ineptitude and failure. We have not succeeded in teaching
men the true spirit of brotherhood with all our talk. Per-
haps it is because we ourselves have failed to learn it. While
churches act as hostile rivals instead of co-workers for the
one Kingdom, how can we expect the world to do better "
Again, the churches have not been able to awaken in men
the ardour and enthusiasm for Religion that men are giving
to their country. To defend their material possession! fflgfl
gladly give money and strength and life itself: to maintain
the spiritual Kingdom of Christ they begrudge a few shil-
lings a year and a little personal inconvenience.
Is not the Church responsible for trying to accommodate
its message to please instead of to command and capture
the people? Has not our Christian warfare been too anaemic,
too unheroic, too prosaic to have any thrill for men of spirit?
I. fear we are not blameless in this.
(3) But however we may have failed, the ideals for
which we stand must never be surrendered. It is a sad day
for the Christian Church if she lowers her ideals to compro-
mise with the world. Men may mock at our faith, for they
16
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR.


cannot see what we see; but through all their scorn we must
hold to our convictions undismayed. The day of Christ’s
seeming failure was the day of His greatest triumph. To the
brutal force of His enemies He had no like force to oppose.
His servants He would not allow to fight for Him; and the
Jews thought they had Him in their power, thought they had
conquered Him —but they did not know. That day He was
victorious over all that hate could do: “If my Kingdom were
of this world then would my servants fight . ... but
now is my Kingdom not from hence —I am indeed a King.”
And when the coarse argument of the “Kingdoms of this
world” are thrust upon us and we have no answer that they
can understand, we need not falter, for we know that, how-
ever we may be oppressed by the kingdoms of material
power, we are members of a far greater Kingdom still, and
as such we are rich and free.
There are to-day earnest Christians fighting on both
sides in this fearful conflict under the firm conviction that
they are doing God service. _ We-' honor them for the brave
and loyal men they are. Yet we cannot Torget that there
are others—aliraeTflcSTand much despised—who on con-
scientious grounds will mot take up arnls. They would die
for theiTcoTintry, but they will not fight for it: and it takes
ciHTneFTit^TTourage to stand to that just now than it does
to rush off to the scene of There are some who shrink
Torn war as the Devil’s pestilence —-not because they are
afraid of its suffering and danger, but because they are
afraid of sin. They will not deny what they conceive to be
the teachings of their Lord even at the bidding of their coun-
try. You may think them mistaken. You may be very angry
with them. But you cannot reasonably refuse to credit them
with a sincerity of purpose, a courage and a loyalty as genuine
as your own.
It has been argued that Jesus believed in warfare, be
cause it is recorded that He told His disciples to “sell their
Garments and buy a sword.” Well, some queer things are
proved (?) from the Bible. I once read an eloquent sermon
1)v a Presbyterian minister in which he used that text as
the basis of his argument for compulsory military training.
It seemed to me a strange sort of exegesis and a sad piece
..f moral blindness on the part of a Christian teacher. So
do men “wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction.”
Jesus was talking to the disciples of the changed conditions
under which they would soon have to preach the Gospel.
When He had sent them out before, they had been kindly
received in all quarters and their every need supplied. “When
I sent you without purse and scrip and shoes, lacked ye
anything?” And they said, “Nothing.” Now, however,
17
THE WAR AND CHRISTIAN IDEALS.


things would be different. The disciples would be persecuted
and impoverished and hated, and they might even have to*
part with their clothes to save their lives: “Now he that hath
a purse let him take it and likewise his scrip: and he that
hath no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one.” It
is a picture of the hard, strenuous, dangerous days so close
at hand: we dare not say that it is more. The disciples did
not catch His meaning. He had said “beware of the leaven
of the Pharisees,” and they thought “it is because we have
no bread.” He says to them now, “sell your coat and buy
a sword,” and they say, “Lord, here are two swords.” “Here
are two swords, Lord”; and with an exquisite touch of
humour and pathos Jesus replied, “It is enough.” Maybe He
was too grieved at their dulness to explain further just then:
by and by they will understand, and after Pentecost they
will not talk of swords like that. Two swords are “enough”
said Jesus. Two swords to meet a band of armed men! Have
we no sense of humour, or do we really think that Christ
was so foolish as that? When Peter used his sword the
Master rebuked him sternly: “They that take the sword
shall perish by the sword”—that is not my way.
So, whatever individual Christians may choose to do,
the ..Christi.an-Oiurch dare not command men to take up
the weapons of a material warfare" If "she dlTdET'Klngdom
of Christ would be divided against itself, and how should
that Kingdom stand? If the Christian Church calls on its
members belonging to different races to put the requirement
of the_ “Kingdoms of this world” first, and confront each
other in battle array in direct contravention of the law of
the greater Kingdom of Christ, she is a traitor to her
charge. “Unto Caesar the things that are Caesar’s,” but
rob not God for Caesar’s sake. The late Pope nobly refused
_to bless_the mission of the armies, saying “I bless Peace”_p
and the Christian Church Tl~ugl woriaUiiust stand
to _that— “l bless Peace.”
“The Kingdoms of this world” are at war, and the pro-
fessed members of the Kingdom of Christ are divided into
hostile camps. Is that right? Is it Christian? I cannot
believe it is. Though all the world be at war the Christian
Church must hold to the eternal truth of the Brotherhood
of Man—that mightier than hate is Love, and that the sub-
limest sacrifice is that of him who gives his life freely not
to slay men but to save.
(4)_ This, I am sure, is the ultimate way of Peace for
the nations. In this war we feel that our nation is rela-
tively in the right. She stands out nobly by comparison
with her opponents both in the motives which prompted
18
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR.


her to take up arms and in the straightforward manner in
which she is carrying on the struggle. But would a nation
which, even approximately, fulfilled the ideal of Christ go
to war on any pretext? Would she base her national life
on material greatness maintained by force at all?
While the nations are what they are we must have war,
but let not the Christian Church lose the loftier vision. The
Kingdom of Christ is not in this war. Our warfare is a
different thing from that. We sing
“Onward! Christian soldiers,
Marching as to war,
With the Cross of Jesus,
Going on before/’
That is not the song men sing as they march to the field
of blood. The Cross is there, on the battlefield, not as the
soldier’s badge, but with the ministers of mercy, the doctors
and the nurses. It is there a sign that Christ has not died
altogether in vain—a strange, mournful protest against the
cruel spirit of war.
In the “Daily Telegraph” on Christmas Day there ap-
peared an article by “G.C.P.” from which I quote:
“If the world had but heard the long insistent appeal of the re-
current Christmas seasons, it had long ere this have given up the mad
and wicked idea of the settlements of its quarrels amid a haze of
smoke and clash of steel. . . . There is a spirit in the season that would,
ii but universally accepted, cry permanent truce to all the wars of the
world. On the first Christmas Day that the world ever knew, there came
into our human life a new viewpoint that might long ere this have
settled all our troubles.”
And if a nation wholeheartedly adopted this “new
viewpoint,” what would happen? Well, between two
and three thousand years ago a man named Isaiah had
a vision of the “Suffering One who should
be despisel and rejected and swept aside by the
world; yet One who should bring the supreme blessing
to men. But no one understood. They thought it an im-
possible thing, and when the “Servant” came they nailed
Him to a Cross. Yet to-day He is loved and worhsipped by
thousands, and we read the old vision of Isaiah with won-
dering reverence. Now there are some of us who have seen
a vision of a “Suffering Nation”—a people who will dare to
stand by the principles of Jesus though they must die for
it; a nation which shall keep the peace not merely because
the others have agreed to do the same, but because she
dares be faithful to the ideals of her Lord no matter what
it may cost her. “The Kingdoms of this world” are not
ripe for this message yet, but some day they must hear it.
Men would only greet it with derision now, for there is no
Christian nation in our time. To the mind of the world, it
19
THE WAR AND CHRISTIAN IDEALS.


is a mad, unpractical dream; yet no more mad and unprac-
tical than the one which Christ fulfilled. I do not say that
this vision is bound to find fulfilment. I think it more
likely that the whole “Kingdom of Christ” shall bring de-
liverance to the world rather than any particular Christian
nation, which is after all only a small section of His King-
dom. But in the Christian Church the conception of a “Suf-
fering Nation” ought not to he an impossible conception.
The goal is far off, very far, but may we not see it and
rejoice in it? And may we not call our nations on to it
hopefully and confidently? Our trust is in the Eternal God,
and they that hope in Him shall never be confounded. We
are idealists whose ideals are not shaken, for they are His
ideals. We are visionaries whose dreams do not deceive,
for He is our Light. The world has had false ideals and
they have failed. The world has had evil dreams which
can never be realised while Love is God and God is Love.
But when the Christian Church shall live for the ideals
of Christ; when national leaders shall work towards them,
then and then only shall we be on the way to rid humanity
of the cruel curse of war. If we as a nation have a mission
to be the world’s peace-makers, His is the way to do it.
“Follow with reverent steps the great example
Of Him whose holy work was doing good.
80 shall this wide world seem our Father’s temple,
Each loving life a psalm of gratitude.
Then shall all shackles fall; the stormy clangour
Of wild war music o’er the world shall cease;
Love shall tread out the baleful fires of anger,
And in its ashes plant the tree of Peace.”
Thus not only in the lives of individual Christians, but in
the “Kingdoms of this world” Galilee shall vanquish Corsica.
“Not by might nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith the
Lord of Hosts.”
20
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR.


II.
THE WAR AND THE CHURCHES.


II.—THE WAR AND THE CHURCHES.*
“Though we walk in the flesh we do not war after the flesh; for
the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty through God to
the pulling down of strongholds,” (2 Cor. x., 3,4).
1 have announced that I would speak to-night on the
subject, “The War and the Churches.” The question of
the attitude which should be adopted by organised Christian-
ity towards warfare in general, and towards this war in par-
ticular, is one of the utmost importance. The Churches, no
less than the nations, are being tried as by fire, and on the
stand they take at such a time depends in large measure their
fitness to represent the ideals of Christ to the world.
j The matter is far too serious to be approached in a
spirit of contention, or under the spell of preconceived no-
tions. The issues of a mistaken choice either way are much
too awful to permit of a hasty decision. We must not assert
our private views with the arrogance of self-will in the face
of those who differ from us. On the other hand, we must
not simply allow ourselves to be carried along by the tide
of popular opinion, despite the deeper instincts of our soul.
We must seek in deadly earnest to bring all our judgments
into vital connection with the fundamental principles of the
Christian Life, —the Life as it was in Jesus, and as it still
may be found in those who are likest Him. If we are led
to convictions which are not popular, we need not fear on
that account. We must at all costs seek truth ; and he who
will seek Truth patiently and reverently, with a mind in
touch with the mind of Christ, and a heart aglow with His
Love, shall assuredly find what is the will of his Master,
Though often perplexed, the direction of his thought will
ever be towards the Light of Life; and on a question of such
plain moral significance as that we are about to discuss it
should not be impossible for the Christian to arrive at con-
victions which amount to a positive certainty. The man
who has once “learned Christ” may safely hold to those basic
principles of ethics and religion which our Lord made mani-
fest, though all the world laugh him to scorn. He may be
in erroi about many things, but he will not be in error there.
while our subject is beset with difficulty, there are some
main conclusions of which we can speak clearly and defi-
nitely, though always, of course, in a spirit of charitable
consideration for those who do not agree with us.
In the New Testament we have no direct teaching in
reference to the relation between the early Christian Churches
and international quarrels. But we have frequent and un-
*(A sermon preached in the Methodist Church, Hay, on March 21st.
1915). . ’


mistakable statements of fundamental moral principles which
may very well serve as a starting point from which to ap-
proach our problem.
In these words of our text we have St. Paul’s own testi-
mony that he and his co-labourers are not working for world-
ly ends nor on worldly principles,—“Though we walk in the
flesh, we do not war after the flesh.” Also, that Christianity
has in it a power adequate to accomplish its own ends with-
out the aid of carnal weapons,—“The weapons of our war-
fare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling
down of strongholds.” In making this assertion the great
Apostle is not merely speaking for himself, he speaks as a
representative Christian; and while the words on his lips
have a particular application, they are also the expression of
an universal truth regarding the aims and methods of Chris-
tianity. To put the teaching in a general form we may say.
first, that Christianity does not aim to assert her authority
over men by wordly methods, nor does she depend on such
methods to maintain her cause ; and, second, that Christianity
has weapons which are ultimately effective for bringing all
“to the obedience of Christ.” Surely, no one who has studied
this text in connection with the chapter in which it occurs
can deny that those two propositions are a faithful represen-
tation of its meaning. A further deduction, which we shall
presently justify, is that the Christian Church should restrict
herself to the use of her own weapons, which are not carnal,
but spiritual.
I* There are two kinds of warfare which may be waged
by men—Christian warfare and carnal warfare. In the view
of the leaders of the Primitive Church these two are not only
different, but irreconcilable. They did not hesitate to de-
clare that “the carnal mind is enmity against God,” and that
all bitterness and strife have their source in a wisdom which
is “not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish.” Of
course, those statements are made in reference to a spirit of
“worldiness” in individuals, and it may be said that they
have no application to disputes between nations. But we
cannot so easily escape from the logical consequences of
accepting the Christian ideal for our individual life. In
whatever pious forms the motives which lead to war may
flaunt themselves, the weapons of such warfare are weapons
which give the lie to our profession of universal love. As
a nation at war with another nation, we do not “love our
enemies.” It has been publicly stated, in both secular and
religious papers, that during war time we have no right to
speak of “loving our enemies,” lest such sentiment should
sap the vigour of our national patriotism. So it is idle to
say that material warfare is conducted on the same principles
24
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR.


as those which primitive Christianity adopted in the warfare
for Christ’s Kingdom. Ido not know that it has ever been
seriously argued by anyone that material warfare amongst
nations belongs to any other category than war “after the
flesh.” Whatever the origin of a war the appeal is always to
brute force, which is a carnal appeal. If we consent to
steal and kill, the fact that we do it in the name of the
nation and the nation's righteous cause, does not absolve us
from, moral responsibility for such action—at least, the early
Christians did not think so. It is beyond question that in
the earljy days devout and earnest Christians refused on
religious grounds to serve in the army, just as in our own
day the Friends and an increasing number of other Christians
decline to involve themselves in what they regard as a moral
wrong. “It is not legend,” says Dr. Horton, “but historic
fact, that in the second century Christian soldiers preferred
death to fighting, and allowed themselves to be cut down by
their comrades rather than cut down the enemy at the com-
mand of their officers.” However, we may think of it, there
is no escape from the fact that in the early Christian Church
material warfare was regarded as a carnal method, and, there-
fore ,not compatible with Christianity. While there are no
explicit statements on the question in the New Testament,
writings, there are a great many passages which insist on
the Christian conducting his whole life in accord with prin-
ciples which we cannot possibly reconcile with the principles
which govern the nations in the settlement of their disputes
by war. On the other side, there is not a single verse in
the New Testament, which, subjected to an honest and
intelligent exegesis, gives any support for Christianity en-
gaging in this kind of thing. There are plenty of texts
which have been used for that purpose, but the manner in
which they have been made to serve this end is a mockery
of our intelligence, and a perversion of the whole ethical
outlook of the Book. You will find abundance of justifica-
tion-for war in the immature morality o£ the Old Testament. .
but not in the h7g¥ s TeacKmgs =E oFthe New. Tothe mind of
these writers at any rate, the Christian Church stands for
an ideal and a method utterly different to that of the
carnal world. Through all the centuries the Churches have
taught this in regard to the individual life, but, with rare
exceptions, they have not ventured to apply it to internation-
al relationships. They have seemed to think that the world is
better won by an ingratiating compromise than by persis-
tently holding up before her ideals which she does not like.
The growing friendship between the Churches and the world
may have in it much that is good. It shows in the Churches
a broader human sympathy and a more intelligent grasp of
25
THE WAR AND THE CHURCHES,


the very difficult problems of public administration. It
shows, too, that the world is more and more inclined to listen
to and accept the guidance of organised religion. But it is
fraught with grave perils for the Churches. With no in-
tention of being false to the moral principles of their faith,
they have given their consent and even their support to an
infra-Christian system in the political realm. They have
not set their face relentleslsy against war and the interna-
tional rivalries and suspicions which lead to war. They have
even come to believe that the sword is a legitimate weapon
with which to make way for the Cross. So, while the
Churches have advanced to a position of power and influence
among the nations, their own ideals seem to have been
lowered in the process. A compromise with the carnal
world which would have been impossible to the Apostolic
Church, has come to be the recognised wisdom of the
Churches of the present day. The great mass of mankind
still holds the idea that the spiritual methods of Christianity
are applicable only to the matter of individual salvation, and
have little value in dealing with the big affairs of the nations;
and, long as we are content to admit that our ideals are
too visionary and impracticable to be worth holding to in
a time of national crisis, we are not doing much to dispel the
fallacy.
11. Mow the Churches are face to face with the tremen-
dously difficult problem as to whether they should carry
their friendship for the world and the world’s methods so
for as to give their support to the present war. We must
remember^-o£" course, that this war is a challenge, not only
to the Churches of the Britishh Empire, or of the Allied Na-
tions, but to the Christian Churches in every land. There
are sister Churches in Germany, and they must face the pro-
blem there. The Churches in neutral lands, too, may feel
bound to bear their witness to the ethical and religious sig-
nificance of the struggle. And in our own country we are
obliged to determine the attitude we shall adopt in regard
not only to the relative justice of our nation’s cause, but
chiefly to the more fundamental question as to whether war
is ever really Clnistian and whether we, acting on thorough-
ly Christian principles, can give our unreserved religious ap-
proval to the determination of any nation to settle its dis-
putes by war.
In regard to the question, as between ourselves and our
opponents, as to which nation is most in the right, we have
no doubt. Viewing the matter with all impartiality, in S
the light of the fullest information, we are able to gather, |
the conclusion seems inevitable that Germany is the ag-|
gressor. At the same time, the Christian Churches should*
26
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR.


be careful not to lend themselves to rhetorical exaggfixaliaa
of the wickedness of the hostile nation,_or undue exaltation
of the virtue of their own. We must remember that our judg-
ment of the political situation rests on only partial knowledge.
We are only told just so much as the war officials are pleased
to tell us. The official utterances and communications do
which the public has free access do not let us “behind the
scenes” of the European situation at all. Of the antecedent
and contributory causes of the war we are very much in the
dark. It is practically certain that we have fuller and more
accurate information in regard to the whole affair than is
given to the German public, but we do not know everything
by a long way. Moreover, we are apt to be prejudiced
judges of the information we have. Our patriotic zeal at a
time like this predisposes us to credit anything good and
heroic of our own country, or the allied countries, and any-
thing vile of those opposed to us, whether it be true or not.
We shall have to forget a lot of history before we can be-
lieve it possible for the ordinary citizen to take an alto-
gether unprejudiced view of the rights and wrongs of a
quarrel in which his own country is concerned.
But the deeper question that we have to decide is not
simply the relative justice of the British cause, but whether
as a Christian Church we should advocate or discountenance
participation in the warfare of the “kingdoms of this world.”
There are some who argue that on moral and religious
grounds we are obliged to go to war, and that in this war,
at any rate, we are but God’s agents in a holy cause. We
that not only would our own interests suffer if we
stood out, and not only should we lose prestige amongst
the other nations- —arguments which of course, have little
weight from the truly Christian point of view—but that we
jsjiould be guilty of a moral wrong to the world It is said
that our refusal to resist Germany would mean that German,
or, rather, Prussian Militarist ideals would be imposed on the
whole of Europe, and that we are fighting, not against Ger-
many, but, as a Christian duty, fighting against those ideals.
Well, if killing Germans could destroy their ideals, there
might be some sense in it, though it would still be question-
able whether we had the right to adopt that method. But the
trouble is that brute force cannot accomplish what we profess
to be aiming at. There is no doubt that as a people we are
honestly fighting for liberty and right; but moral liberty and
truest right are not wisely built on the foundation of ma-
terial conquest. The recent revolution in China is an il-
lustration of this. China fought for “liberty and right,”
and by the power of the sword overthrew the tyranny of the
Manchu dynasty; but China is as much enslaved as ever, for
27
THE WAR AND THE CHURCHES,


n°w she is under the tyranny of the military dictator, Yuan-
shih-Sai. It is not only that China was not ready for de-
mocratic governmnent; it is that she went the wrong way
about getting it. Had she trusted to educational and moral
influences, instead of to force, she would have been
saved much bloodshed, and would have been as near
if not nearer, to her goal than she is today. The same
consideration applies to the European situation. However
tedious and futile it may seem to endeavour to overthrow
the evil doctrines of Prussianism by moral and spiritual
weapons, the weapons of slaughter are far more futile still
In a recent work dealing with this subject, Mr. Norman An-
gell has a passage which we may well ponder—“ The anni-
hilation of Germany/’ he writes:
“Is a meaningless phrase. You cannot annihilate sixty-five or seventv-
ve million people. They will remain, the men who have built their
homes, and the men who have fought their battles will still be there
You cannot divide them up between France and Russia, save at the cost
of making those two States highly militarised, undemocratic and op-
P r ™ *rr\n If ?° U br ° ke UP these seven ty-five millions into
separate States, there is no reason why, if a Balkan League could oe
rm^-. and fight ' Wltb success, a German League could not do likewise,
or this reason Prussianism will never be destroyed by a mere military
the °defe°Hf °nf * noth ? T - If tlle war is to begin and end with
S® f ß *® at f 10 er J nan armies, and the subjugation of the German
State, the result will be either to transfer Prussianism and all that it
i epresents in the way of militarism from one capital to another or to
others; or to create a situation in which the struggle for military domin-
ation on the part of the German people will break out afresh in another
form; or else to achieve both these results: to revive the military am-
utmns of France, to stimulate those of Russia, anl so to recast Giose
of Germany as to make them material for future explosions. The
expectation that you can cure Germans of Prussianism, that you can
drive a false doctrine from their minds merely by overpowering their
armies and invading their country, is not only very false philosophy but
Happens to be curiously enough, the characteristically Prussian philos-
ophy; it is Prussianism pure and simple, and falls into the very fallacy
which marks Prussianism as so stupid and evil a thing.
. A be^ r Europe depends not only—perhaps not mainly—upon the
military defeat of one particular nation, but upon a general recognition
that the struggle for political power which all nations have pursued when
opportunity offered is a barren and evil thing; that the attainment of
such power adds neither to the moral nor material welfare of those who
achieved it; and that if Europe is ever to be truly civilised, we must
honestly and sincerely abandon this struggle, and all the shoddy con-
ceptions of pride and glory and patriotism with which it is bound up, in
favour of the co-operation of all for the security and welfare of all The
society of nations must be based as all other civilized societies are
based, upon the agreement of partners co-operating to a common end
and m the circumstances, the lead in this new conception must be ffiven
by the victorious Allies.
1 * 1 * Tile y e be no P eace Europe until the Germans are convinced
that Rmssia, France, and England do not desire to encroach upon their
Fatherland. The question is: How shall convince them of that?
borne of us are saying: “By dismembering their Fatherland.” Will
28
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR.


that convince them that they are not threatened, and do not need to
revive their armaments ?. ...... We have decided in Britain that
the Prussian military party desired and plotted this war for the pur-
pose of subduing France, challenging the power of Britain, and making
Germany the dominant State of the world. That is possibly a true view,
but it is not the explanation of the war which the military party have
given to the German people. . . . Sixty million Germans are absolu-
tely persuaded that they are fighting this war in defence of their Father-
land, to save their nationality from destruction. It is not a question of
whether they are right or wrong; that is undoubtedly what the over-
whelming mass of Germans sincerely and honestly believe. But now
the anti-militarist party in Germany, when they see their country or their
colonies about to be invaded by five enemy nations, are wondering
whether after all, the Prussians were not right in asking for larger
armaments. If Germany is beaten, the Prussians will be able to say:
“If you had given us all that we asked for in the way of armaments, we
should not have been beaten.” *
In our railing against the military system of Germany we
-seem to forget that this system is to a large extent the natur-
al outcome of a policy of preparedness for war, which has been
adopted by all the leading European States, and in a measure
"bv ourselves We~bavlEall been in the race for armaments,
and if we had not the great Prussian military system would
never have been built up. We do not seem to see what it
means to Germany that we have the most powerful navy
in the world, and that we insist on keeping it at the highest
standard of efficiency. It is our own boast that the British
Navy was just as ready for this war as the German army.
However much we may protest that we would never use
our navy to wrong Germany or any other nation, and that
we can safely be trusted to exercise our dominion of the seas
solely tor thc_gqod of humanity, European nations can hardly.
to believe that. We seem to have forgotten,
too, that France and Russia are both far more military
countries than Germany. They haven’t perhaps achieved"
THe~T>rutal swagger of the real Prussian, and their military
systems may not be so well organised or efficient, as is the
case in Germany, but as a nation their life runs along more
ardent military lines. Conscription is not universal in Ger-
many, but it is so in France. There every man goes through
the barracks, and the whole training of the nation is purely
military. In Germany nearly half the young men of the
country are not soldiers, and the educated classes are prac-
tically exempt from barrack life altogether. So if Germany
has built up a great military organisation, which is a menace
to the world, she is not alone in her sin. It is surely ques-
tionable whether the allied nations have the right to put
themselves in the place of God to be her judge and execu-
tioner while their own hands are not clean. The materialism
*(“Prussianism,” by Norman Angell, pp. 60-64).
29
THE WAR AND THE CHURCHES,


of all the States has but found its ultimate logical expression
in the brutal arrogance of Prussia. We can only destroy
that materialism by showing that we have no faith in it.
But there is another ground on which we feel we were
forced into this war: that is our moral obligation to heroic
little Belgium, backed up by a solemn pledge to defend her
in the event of her liberties being endangered. _ Now, the
Christian should be the last to make light of a nation’s pro-
mise. If truth is sacred to our national leaders, it is doubly
sacred to us. But let us look a little closer at this pledge
before we conclude that there is no honourable escape from_
it. Although not a man amongst us knows, the text of the
Belgian Treaty, we can accept the official representation
that we are bound by its terms to respect and maintain the
neutrality of Belgium, even at the cost of going to war.
This treaty, let us remember, was made over "seventy : five
years ago, and during the period that has since elapsed there
has been great progress made in the education of the con-
science of humanity on the subject of war. When the
treaty was made it is possible that it was a true reflexion of
the will of the British nation, but now there are a great
many people in our nation who on conscientious grounds are
opposed to' war, and they would never give their consent to
such a promise. From the standpoint which regards war
as a wrong thing, such a promise ought never to have been
given, and ought never to be fulfilled. A simple illustra-
tion will make this clear. There is a man in this State at
present actively engaged in Christian work, who in his
younger days was a noted thief. On one occasion, he gave
his solemn promise to a comrade that on a certain night he
would join him in a burglary at a place agreed upon. Before
the night came, however, he had come under the influence of
religious teaching, and his life had been completely changed.
Is he to keep his promise now? Will not the whole world
agree that such a promise was an immoral promise and is
not binding upon him at all? Loyalty to a deeper truth
demands that he should break it. You may say that no
such conversion of the British nation has taken place since
the making of her promise to Belgium, and that is true. But
the gap between the morality which can promise to go to
war, and the morality of the Christian ideal is to my mincT
as great as fifarTretween the man who promised to commit
a theft, and the “new man” to whom such a thing was ab-
horrent. We are earnestly told in the religious press that
“there are worse things than war,” but that doesn’t affect
our position in the least. If it be meant that there are
worse things than the sufferings caused by war we readily
agree. No one is more keenly sensitive of the unspeakable
30
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR.


sorrow and pain of the victims of this war than the Chris-
tian. The grief in the heart of the truly Christian man is
double and more than double that of the man of the world.
This man only cares for those who suffer on his side, but
the Christian’s sympathy goes out to the wounded and be-
reaved and impoverished in every land. When the aver-
agS-J&Qrldling is appealed to to spare a thought for 'tHe~dis-
tressed ones in Germany, he carelessly replies, “Oh, we don’t
count them.” But God counts them, and any man worthy
of the name of Christian counts them. Human woe, wher-
ever it is, makes its appeal to the Christian heart. Worldly
people may sneer that wicked, devilish sneer, “The Ger-
mans are only vermin and we must get rid of them.” But
the Christian cannot forget that there are men as brave and
women as pure as our own, and who are as innocent of this
war as we are, who, nevertheless, are giving themselves —
the one to death and the other to a lifelong sorrow—for
Germany’s sake. Yet, however terrible the sufferings of
war may be, we do not question the deadly truth that there
are things far worse than that. But from the arguments
adopted by the users of this phrase it would seem to mean
that there are moral evils worse than the moral evil of war.
But what Is the point of such reasoning? ~ If it be once ad-
mitted that war is a moral evil,, then that is the end of it
for the Christian. There may conceivably be worse moral
evils, but that is no excuse for committing this one. We
are never obliged to “do evil that good may come,” or to
commit one crime to save ourselves from another. To re-
frain from engaging in the hopeless endeavour to overthrow
wrong ideals by brute force, and to refuse to be bound by an
unrighteous pledge are surely hot “worse things” than the
moral infamy of war.
War is a reversion to the materialistic principles of
paganism, and all our eager assertions to the contrary cannot
alter the fact. The wanton burning of defenceless farms
the wholesale looting and the ruthless butchery of men who
had thrown aside their arms and begged for mercy, which
carried out by our own troops in South Africa only a"
( decade and a half ago, supply abundant evidence of the"
1 crue! > wicked'things which are done in war. even by a racT
so naturally just and merciful as our own.
There are many perplexing things in connection with
this struggle. There are many arguments put forth- which
seem to appeal to what is truly noble in us, and some of our
best have been deceived. Loyal, truth-loving, kind-hearted
Christians have gone and are going to give their lives for
their country as a sacred duty, and, only incidentally, to kill
other men. We do not for a moment question the sincerity
31
THE WAR AND THE CHURCHES,


of their personal Christianity, and we admire their zeal and
courage. But that does not make war right. It does not
make this war right; and it certainly does not make it a
Christian weapon for the Christian Churches to use. There
are some of us who are more than ever convinced that the
Churches, as the official representatives of Christian Truth
in the world, ought to be able to see this and to say it.
If our participation in the war be so manifestly a Chris-
tian thing, as some represent it to be, all the Churches of
all the world should rush to our support; but even the most
ardently patriotic amongst us do not ask for that. We
recognise that the Churches can never speak with one voice
on this matter, so long as they are content to bow their
ideals before the demands of the tribal god of war.
To me it is a sheer impossibility to conceive of the Man
Jesus going out in the name of any nation to shoot down
some of the men who love and trust His Father in heaven,
merely because they happened to belong to a nation whose
rulers had led them into international strife. And what
Christ could not do the Church of Christ ought not to coun-
sel.
In the light that He has given the fundamental moral is-
sue is clear. The question is: —Are we to adopt the prin-
ciples of the carnal world or the principles of Jesus Christ
in dealing with national affairs? In a book on “The Moral
Damage of War,” by Rev. W. Walsh, we read:
“Two kings are to-day laying fresh claim to the allegiance of
Christendom —Christ and Caesar. In form, of course, neither claim is
absolute. . . both the men and the motives are mixed. It is essential
to a great act of moral decision that the choice be obscured, the issue
complicated .... the possibility of error balanced with the probability
of truth; and Christendom is still troubled by a doubt whether the
tempter be devil or angel, whether the swift and easy sword of Caesar
be really a better way of acquiring the kingdoms of the world and the
glory of them than is the slow and suffering Cross of Christ. Yet ... .
slowly the masses of men, the church in the world and the world in the
church, are gravitating into one of two camps, —the tents of Caesar or
the tabernacles of Christ. Dimly the distinctive goals of modern civili-
sation begin to glimmer through the gloom,—sovereignty by brute force
or salvation by moral influence. Strongly the claims of two rival raon-
archs begin to urge themselves upon the modern world, —bloody Mars or
“gentle Jesus.” A new strenuousness begins to be felt in the historic
contest between the Prince of Peace and the Prince of the Power of the
Air. The Heavenly Father of Christianity and the blood-spattered Baal
of Imperialism have closed in grapple for the soul of the twentieth cen-
tury. The question is, Who is to dominate the Christian world, Imperial
Baal or Christian Cod? If Baal be god, follow him; but if the Lord
be Cod, then follow Him. The modern Church is in the wilderness of
temptation. She must decide for conquest of crucifixion; she must take
up either the sword or the cross; she must choose this day whom she
will serve.” *
*(“The Moral Damage of War,” p. 274).
32
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR.


111. The answer the Churches have given to the chal-
lenge is the answer of compromise. They have not denied
that Christianity and Christianity’s methods of moral sua-
sion offer the only ultimate solution of all earth’s problems.
They could not do that. But they have endeavoured to
show—what the Founder of Christianity and the leaders of
the primitive Church disavowed, that in this imperfect world
carnal warfare is of necessity one of Christianity’s weapons,
and, in the present crisis, Christianity’s chief weapon for
1 the overthrowing of anti-Christian ideals. The Call to Arms
is represented to be indeed the Call of God; animal courage
has been for the time exalted as one of the greatest among
the virtues, and anyone who does not respond to the martial
call is most unjustly stigmatised as a coward. The messages
of many pulpits—though couched in religious terms —are not
far above the level of the secular press. The same idea is
dominant in both, that man’s present and most pressing
duty is to wage war. It seems to me a terribly serious
thing, my friends, that the Churches which started with a
hesitating acquiescence in the war as an inevitable evil,
which they could not prevent, have now thrown aside all
scruples and joined in an open and unashamed alliance with
the powers of “this world.” It has been quoted with great
triumph that nearly twenty thousand priests are serving in
the French Army, and it is argued that France will now
learn respect for the Christian Church. Perhaps she will,
—the respect she accords to her soldiers,- —but will she have
any deeper respect for the Gospel of Jesus on that account?
Is it at all likely that the priests’ laying down their lives in
carnal warfare will prove the most effective means to con-
vert and save the French nation for Christ. To my mind
the thing is not a glory, but a dreadful tragedy to the Chris-
tian Church. It betokens, at least, a very imperfect con-
ception of the high ethical obligations of Christianity and
of the sacred functions of those who are ostensibly set apart
to be the Messengers of Peace. You see what it means!
The Churches have not faith in their own principles in the
presence of a crisis like this. We are saying very emphatic-
ally that our trust is “not in horses and chariots, but in the
Lord God Eternal.” Is that really true for many of us?
Has there not crept into our conception of life a subtle ma-
terialism which, while cloaking itself in pious terms, is
really a betrayal of Christian ideals? Here are two items
of news. The first reads:—“On Sunday a great service of
intercession was held in St. Paul’s. Anglicans and Roman
Catholics joined with every branch of the Free Churches and
the Jews in offering their petitions for victory. Their ap-
peals went up in unison with those of the Church of France,
33
THE WAR AND THE CHURCHES,


the Church of Belgium, and all the sects which are represen-
ted throughout the British Empire.” The second news item
is this: —“It is estimated that the Allies are able to put over
ten million men into the field as against the five millions of
Germany.” Honestly, which of those two most inspires us
with confidence as to the issue of the struggle? For the
average man, I venture to say, prayers for victory are alright,
but ten million armed men are something far more tangible
and reliable. In an address at the outbreak of the war one
of our Governors, with delightful frankness, declared “God
is on the side of the big battalions, and we have the big
battalions.” The Churches may vigorously protest against
the first part of that statement, but if they are true with
themselves they must own to a great feeling of relief that “we
have the big battalions.” “Our trust is in the Lord!” Should
we not say “in the Lords Kitchener and Jellicoe?” It is
to them rather than to the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ that the people look for salvation; Surely the
Churches knowTHat it is “vain to trust in princes” and war-
lords. Admirable as these particular men may be, they
are not the leaders of Christianity in her battle with the
spirit of the world, and if we exalt them to that position we
are setting the weapons of carnal warfare above and beyond
those weapons which St. Paul said “are not carnal, but
mighty through God to the pulling down of strongholds.”
The Churches have done much good work in insisting
upon moral purity in the indivdual lives of the soldiers; in
protesting against drunkenness and lawlessness; in setting
forth clearly the moral considerations which make our cause
relatively a just cause; in pointing out the fallacy of the
doctrine that “might is right,” in assisting to the utmost
those who are suffering from the devastating effects of the
war, and so on. But there remains yet a loftier duty, if
they can only be brought to see it. That is to declare that
ideals are even now more potent than the sword, and
that
IV. The truly Christian answer to the international pro-
blem is the way of the Cross. “The greatest force,” writes
Andrew Carnegie, “is no longer that of brutal war, which
sows the seeds of future wars, but the supreme force of
gentleness and generosity—the golden rule.” The logical
development of civilisation is against war; in times of peace
we are agreed that it is the greatest of all follies; the con-
science of the best men throughout the Christian centuries
has revolted from such barbarous, futile methods, and the
Christian Church holds a truth which, if she dared proclaim
it consistently to the nations, would speedily banish war
34
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OE THE WAR.


forever from the earth. If all the Churches of all the na-
tions, instead of adapting their message to their popular de-
mand, were to unite in a common effort to bring the war to
an end, they would be doing a great service to humanity. No
benefit to the world in any way equivalent to the wrong done
can be accomplished by the nations killing each other’s men.
The Christian Churches ought to be able to see that, and
they ought to be able to say so with united voice, and bid
the carnage cease. But the fact of the matter is, the
Churches don’t want the war to cease, —not yet. “There can
be no* peace,” says the English preachers, “until we have
destroyed Prussian militarism. We don’t want peace till
we have* accomplished a complete victory and can dictate
our own terms to Germany.”
So the infamy goes on, not only unopposed, but deli-
berately encouraged by those who are called to proclaim the
gospel of Brotherhood and Love. An earnest proposal for
united action on the part of the Churches in the interests
of peace, put forward by Rev. R. J. Campbell, is laughed to
scorn by the leading religious paper of Australia, because
our sectarian prejudices are more deeply rooted than our
genuine desire to bring this trouble to an end. It is a
fallacy to suppose that the war must be fought to a finish, and
that one side must win Many a jßght between individuals
is stopped before it is half through, and no one is any the
worse for that. Even now, if the Christians of the world
would speak unitedly against war, it would go a long way
towards bringing this struggle to a speedy termination. But
while the Churches add their voices to the clamour for more
war, for a crushing defeat of the enemy; even, alas, for ven-
geance, what hope is there that the war will end till the
nations are torn to shreds? And yet, as has been shown be-
fore, all this will not accomplish the purpose for which we
as Christians, are supposed to be fighting—“to pull down
strongholds .... and every high thing that exalteth
itself against the knowledge of God.”
There is but one sure and effective way; that, is the
Christian way of love and sacrifice.
Of course, such a way is impracticable for the nations in
their present mood. We do not question for a moment
that the British nation, with her present views of national
honour and morality, was obliged to enter upon this war
to justify those ideals, and, so far, we uphold her action; but
that doesn’t make war Christian, and the Churches ought to
be able to point out to her “ a more excellent way.” The
fact that a peaceful settlement has been found impracticable
is due to moral causes, and not to any inadequacy in the
35
THE WAR AND THE CHURCHES,


Christian principle. If a nation once thoroughly under-
stood what the Christian principle is, she could safely dis-
band her army and navy, and say to the world ‘‘Henceforth,
lam done with war.” Such an action may seem quixotic
and unreasonable, but I verily believe it would do more to
overthrow Prussian militarism than all our bullets and bay-
onets can ever do. It would thrill and capture the deep
heart of humanity. The nation which acted thus might
have to suffer for its principles, but what man is there who
is a, real Christian who is not prepared to suffer rather than
do wrong? The Christian martyrs were “unpractical
dreamers,” and they paid dearly for their dream, but they did
not suffer in vain. It is exceedingly doubtful if the suffer-
ing involved on a Christian nation would be nearly as great
as the loss and sorrow which even now are coming to us
through war. Had Belgium, for instance, said to Germany,
and will not quarrel and fight with you or anyone else, even
tEough you wrong If you take advantage of our urn
defended position, it is not our honour which is lost, but
yoursT If Belgium, I say, had taken that high stand, she
would not to-day be desolate and her people in mourning.
There is no nation in the world (much less the German na-
tion) that in cold blood could ruthlessly attack and hack
to pieces a defenceless people. The cruel outrages upon
/Belgium have all been wrought, whether officially or other-
wise, in the dreadful madness of war.
I do not suggest that we or any nation should calmly
submit to the domination of the Prussian military autocracy,
but I say most positively that there are other and better
ways of resistance than by sending our sons and husbands
and brothers to kill and be killed in mortal combat with men
who are, very many of them, no more guilty of the inter-
national quarrel than we are ourselves.
Of course, the nations cannot be expected to receive
such teaching, but this view will be quite intelligible to
those who have whole-heartedly embraced the Christian ideal
and law of life.
We send our Missionaries into heathen countries, and
they go with simple faith in Christian principles. They go
amongst the most undisciplined, savage* people of the world,
and yet they carry no arms for their self-protection. What
weapons of carnal warfare are powerless to accomplish they
achieve by the Christian weapons of Love. Rarely are they
molested or injured, and on the comparatively few occa-
sions on which missionaries have been murdered the crime
has been generally traceable to some provocation of the
36
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR.


natives by other white men. Herbert Spencer in his “Study
of Sociology/’ says:
If we compare critically the accounts of Cook’s death, we see
clearly that the Sandwich Islanders behaved amicably until they had
been ill-used, and had reason to fear further ill-usage. The experiences
of many other travellers similarly show us that friendly conduct on the
part of uncivilised races when first visited is very general, and that their
subsequent unfriendly conduct, when it occurs, is nothing but retaliation
for injuries received from the civilised. Such a fact as that the natives
of Queen Charlotte’s Island did not attack Captain Cartaret’s party until
after they had received just cause of offence, may be taken as typical. . .
When we inquire into the case of the missionary, Williams, “the Martyr
of Erromanga,” we discover that his murder, dilated upon as proving the
wickedness of reclaimed natures, was a revenge for injuries previously
suffered from wicked Europeans.” *
In any case, the missionaries themselves would be the last
to appeal to us to wage war on the native races to make way
for Christian teaching. They know only too well how disas-
trous such a method is; and they have thorough confidence
that the Christian weapons are quite adequate for their work,
and able to accomplish their purpose far more quickly without
any of the adventitious aids (or hindrances) of carnal con-
quest.
If we have faith in such weapons for the individual
missionary amongst barbarous savages, it should not be un-
reasonable to have faith in the same principles for our nation
amongst the nations of the earth. After all, Germany is,
on the whole, quite as civilised and responsive to Christian
appeals as our Allies, whatever we think of our virtuous
selves. Just now, we see her only through the murky
glasses of racial enmity, but we can "still believe that even
hostile Germany would respect an act of such self-renuncia-
tion on the part of Great Britain, if we could but rise to it.
If we were to confront her with the answer that I have sug-
gested as the Christian answer, she simply could not attack
us.
I am not talking of what is immediately practicable for
a semi-Christian nation, but of the ideal of a truly Christian
nation, which the Churches should not fear to proclaim
amongst believers, and steadily work towards in all her
public activities.
And there is something else for the Churches to do.
should not merely teach the far-off ideal, they should
in this crisis live for their ideals, already, even at the cost
of suffering and abuse. There is a symbolic storv in the
twelfth chapter of Revelation, which tells of “war in’heaven”
against the “great red dragon,” which sought to devour the
woman’s man child. The story says that Michael and his
* (Herbert Spencer's Study of Sociology, pp. 210, 211).
37
THE WAR AND THE CHURCHES,


angels overthrew the dragon, and cast him out, and it is
said “they, overcame him by the blood of the Lamb and the
word of their testimony.” Whatever their original signi-
ficance, these verses may be used as a parable of the con-
flict of the Churches with the red dragon of militarism,
which would devour the man child of the nations, and the
method by which the Churches must cast down and destroy
this dragon is “by the blood of the Lamb and by the word
of their testimony”—by living and teaching the heroically
peaceful methods of Jesus in the midst of a war-maddened
world. St. Paul’s warfare is “by the meekness and gentle-
ness of Christ,” and these are the true weapons of the
Church.
There is an incident which took place in Paris during the
dark days of the civil war in June, 1848. At the beginning of
the description of the capture of the barricades by the troops
the history reads :
‘•'Ere the attack commenced, a sublime instance of Christian heroism
and devotion occurred, which shines forth like a heavenly glory in the
midst of those terrible seasons of carnage. Monsignor Afire, Archbishop
of Paris, horror-struck with the slaughter which for three days had been
going on without intermission, resolved to effect a reconciliation between
the contending parties or perish in the attempt. Having obtained leave
from General Cavaignac to repair to the headquarters of the insurgents,
he set out, dressed in his pontifical robes, having the cross in his hand,
accompanied by two vicars, also in full canonicals, and three intrepid
members of the Assembly. Deeply affected by his courageous act, which
they well knew was almost certain death, the people, as he walked
through the streets, fell on their knees ,and besought him to desist, but
he persisted, saying, ‘lt is my duty. Bonus pastor dat vitam suam pro
ovibus suis.’ At seven in the evening he arrived at the Place de la
Bastille, where the firing was extremely warm on both sides. Undis-
mayed by the storm of balls the prelate advanced slowly, attended by
his vicars, to the summit of the barricade. He had descended three
steps on the other side when he was pierced through the loins by a shot
from a window. The insurgents, horror-struck, approached him when he
fell, stanching the wound, which at once was seen to be mortal. . . When
told he had only a few minutes to live, he said, ‘God be praised, and may
He accept my life as an expiation for the omissions during the episcopacy,
and as an offering for the salvation of this misguided people/ and with
these words he expired. Immediately after his decease, proposals came
for a capitulation from the insurgents, on condition of an unqualified
amnesty.” *
The amnesty was refused, and the fighting continued
till the barricades were swept away and the defenders slain,
but the heroic death of the Archbishop had taken the heart
out of the rebels. This is a picture of the part which might
be played by the united Christian Churches to-day. They
cannot literally walk with a crucifix between the vast oppos-
ing armies of Europe; but it is surely their office to follow
the same sacrificial law and to uphold before all contending
* (Historians’ History of the World, vol. xiii. pp. 101, 102).
38
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR.


parties, as their rebuke and guide, the sacred witness of the
all-conquering Cross of Christ, that they may overcome the
dragon, not by the fierce might of armies, but “by the blood
of the Lamb and the word of their tesimony.” This lam
sure is the Christian way; it is not easy, and it is not popular,
but it is the way of Christ and that is enough for us.
I do not hold these convictions lightly. I have not ar-
rived at them without earnest thought and a pretty extensive
reading of what there is to be said on the other side. It
would be a very simple matter for me to stand up and preach
the righteousness of war, as so many others are doing, but
before God I cannot. Nothing less than the ideal of Christ
will do. lam aware that I have said things with which
some of you will not agree. lam not particularly concern-
ed that you should agree on all minor points; but, my friends,
I am most deeply anxious that you should give this matter
prayerful and thorough consideration. It is of very little
moment to the Churches if I am wrong; but if I am right,
what then? It is vital to a full-orbed Christianity that we
should accept the principle of self-sacrificing Love as the
supreme law of life. If such a thing seem unintelligible to
you, it must surely be that you haven’t yet understood what
real Christianity means, and that is a very serious thing.
This matter is not simply a question of Patriotism or of
International policy, it comes back to us after all as a chal-
lenge to our faith, to our spiritual vision, and to our personal
ethics.
“As Life’s unending column pours, two marshalled hosts are seen,
Two armies on the trampled shores that Death flows black between.
One marches to the drum-beats’ roll, or wide-mouthed clarion’s bray,
And bears upon a crimson scroll—“ Our glory is, to slay!”
One moves in silence by the stream, with sad, yet watchful, eyes,
Calm as the patient planet’s gleam that walks the clouded skies.
Along its front no sabres shine, no blood-red pennons wave,
Its banners bear the single line —“Our duty is, to save!”
Two paths lead upward from below, and Angels wait above,
Who count each burning life-drop’s flow, each falling tear of Love.
While valour’s haughty champions wait till all their scars are shown
Love walks unchallenged through the gate, to sit beside the Throne!”
(O. W. Holmes’ “The Two Armies.”)
39
THE WAR AND THE CHURCHES.


III.
THE WAR AS A PROBLEM TO FAITH.


III.—THE WAR AS A PROBLEM TO FAITH.
“Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.
But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.”
(Matthew xxiv: 12, 13).
This text is taken from a passage in which Christ speaks
of troubled, stormy times in store for His followers, —times
of danger and suffering, confusion and war —in which their
faith would be strained to the uttermost. “There shall be
wars and rumours of wars'’; “nation shall rise up against
nation and kingdom against kingdom;” ‘They shall deliver
you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you;” also “False pro-
phets shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.” But
“see that ye be not troubled . . . he that shall endure to
the end, the same shall be saved.”
This is surely a message for the present day. The words
of course have no direct reference to the twentieth century
and cannot fairly be applied in detail to current events ; but
they set forth two general truths which hold good in every
age and are very apposite to the problems which perplex and
distress men’s souls just now.
Christ points out (i) that the troubled times of which He
speaks would be disastrous to the religious life of many,—
their “love shall wax cold;” and (2) that the way of assured
victory lies along the line of simple fidelity to spiritual truth,
—“he that shall endure to the end, faithful to his love, true
to spiritual ideals, the same shall be saved.” This is the
word we need.
The war has raised for some men a problem which has
strained their faith almost to breaking point. I do not
refer to the scoffers who are glad to find what they imagine
to be another argument against Religion, but to not a few
earnest, good, we may even say—Christian people who are
really distressed and perplexed. In a recent issue of “The
Southern Cross” is mentioned the case of one who writes
saying that “an old friend a man of standing
in the city, and a good Anglican has given
up his Christianity on account of the war It has
destroyed his Christian Faith.” We may hesitate in accept-
ing the verdict of a friend that a person has “given up his
Christianity”: he may only have given up his Churchianity,
and that is a very different thing. For aught we know he
may in reality be finding his way into deeper waters; but,
for the present, it is evident that the war has raised a tre-
mendous problem in his religious life which is endangering
r- if it has not got so far as to “destroy”—his Christian Faith.
I am convinced from what I have heard and seen that there
*(A sermon preached in the Methodist Church. Hay. on February
21st, 1015).


are others in a similar difficulty. They may not openly ques-
tion Religious Truth, but the war is having a depressing,
deadening effect on their spiritual life; their enthusiasm and
whole-hearted confidence in Religion is wavering—“the love
is waxing cold.” I want to help such people. I want to
show them that the Christian Faith can stand and must stand
through all this turmoil, and that he who, in spite of all
perplexity, will be loyal and true to the deep spiritual ties
of life shall win to light and confidence at last, —“he that
shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved,” and
Christian salvation includes all that triumph and assurance
and perception of spiritual realities which are for each one
of us the ultimate solution of this and every other dark
problem of life.
I. The war has accentuated for some men the difficulty
of reconciling the Christian belief in a good God with the
fact of a world in which evil and sorrow are rampant. “If
God be good, why does He permit it?” is their repeated
question. “If God really cares, why doesn’t He intervene
to prevent so much cruelty and pain?” It is the old problem
of the existence of suffering and sin—a problem intensified a
thousandfold in its significance by the events of the past few
months. Now it is not a fair thing to sneer at people for
being puzzled by a question like this which presents no
difficulties at all for most of us. It is an honest difficulty to
some folk, and must be honestly met. The most simple and
direct answer is, that God permits this sort of thing because
He has given to men freedom of will, the power to choose
good or evil, and they themselves have made the choice which
has led to this tragic conflict. It is not God but man who
has begun and is carrying on this war. If there is a wrong
in it, it is man who has done the wrong. God could not
make it impossible without robbing us of the power of moral
choice which belongs to us as men. If God were to make
us all into mere machines—just blindly doing everything
He desired—then there would be no sin, but neither would
there be any real virtue. Instead He has made us men: He
has given us the power to choose our own destiny; power to
rebel against Him; power to work havoc and ruin in His
beautiful world; but also the power to serve Him and love
Him and attain to a beauty and strength and gladness of
life which is Heaven itself. God has created men with pow-
ers of moral decision akin to His own, and that is our glory:
that man has abused those powers is no reflection on the.
goodness and wisdom of the God who gave them to him. And
when man chooses the wrong way, it is not a sign that God
does not care if that wrong way leads to terrible suffering.
It is not a cruel but a beneficent law which says. “The wages
43
THE WAR AS A PROBLEM TO FAITH.


of sin is death.” God must teach men to abhor evil even
at the expense of allowing them to taste some of its bitterest
fruit. We have made our own bed, and we must lie in it:
there is no reason to blame God if we are uncomfortable.
But that is by no means the whole of the problem.
These explanations of general law may sound alright to the
spectator, but they are not so satisfying to the person who
through no fault of his own is involved in the dreadful con-
sequences of other men’s sin. He may be willing enough to
accept the law as a general principle, but it is the particular
applications of it that hurt. “Why,” some troubled souls
are asking, “did not God teach the nations the danger they
were running before things had come to such a pass as this?
Christianity holds that God is present and active in all human
life, directing and disposing human affairs; why then did He
not over-rule our wilfulness and save us from this infamy?
We certainly did not want to come to this. Although we
have freedom of will, there are limitations to our freedom.
If God loves us, why did He not exercise His powers of
moral suasion to turn our hearts from evil before it was too
late? Has God done, and is He doing, all that is possible
consistently with this law of free will to bring to an end the
universal woe?” To all such questionings we can but
answer that, whether God has done all that is possible or
not, He has certainly done enough to have saved us if we
would. He has given us a sufficient revelation of His will
in Jesus. In that heroic life He has made to us the tender-
est and most moving appeal conceivable, and if the nations
have refused that what else can we expect God to do? Is
it not possible that the wisest and most loving way of deal-
ing with the human race as a whole under the circumstances
is to let sin run its course until it works its own ruin? And
for the rest, for the thousand and one perplexing details
of sorrow which we are powerless to explain, let us be con-
tent to say “We do not know.” Only it is not quite rea-
sonable to challenge God’s goodness, because here and there
are matters which you do not understand. I suspect that
God knows how to manage His universe better than we;
and so long as we are sure, as we may be sure, that there
is sanity and goodness at the heart of the universe, the little
difficulties which do not touch the fundamental question can
wait till we have more wisdom to solve them.
11. But for most troubled ones, I think, this difficulty of
explaining things is not the real problem at all. That strikes
deeper, and is an affair not merely of the : ntellect, but of the
soul.- It is not that they can formulate any unanswerable
question. It is not that, as a matter of cool reasoning,
they find it impossible to reconcile all the turmoil and dis-
44
THE RELIC LOUS ' SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR.


tress with the existence of a good and gracious God. It
is that their whole soul feels the jarring discord and is dis-
mayed and stunned; they have lost the buoyancy and iov
and freedom of Faith, and their songs of triumph freeze
upon their lips. Their whole scheme of life seems to have
been suddenly shattered. All their hopes and the realisa-
tion of all their ideals have been ruthlessly frustrated. It
would seem as if they had been living in a world of happy
dreams, in which the nations were every year becoming more
brotherly and more Christian, and then they awake to the
sound clashing swords and the murderous hiss of shells,
—and this is the Reality!. . Their little, easy-going, conven-
bona! world is turned clean upside down. The doctrines
of the Church which seemed so grand and thrilling in the
days of Peace, now pale into insignificance beside this tre-
haS , Sudden] >’ burst u Pon mankind.
rJI? v ! 1S + en f aßlng A attention of the whole human
. a V' Not the teachings of Jesus, but war, war, war. What
is it that most concerns each one of us-good and bad alike ?
Aot how fares it with the progress of religious truth,” but
how goes the war? What is the supreme duty of man?
Nothing but war So, the rude clamour of the world thun-
ders at the gate ol a man’s soul, and he is a brave man and
;, ee F - d ° eS not shll dder at the noise. It may be urged
t iat that is an exaggerated view of the case, or, at least
one-sided. 1 know it is; but it is none the less the way
A£ Aw “ gnP ® Sf - me earn . est ’ anxious souls. You may
tell us that mans importunity i s God’s opportunity,” and
that already the war is bearing good fruits. You may
point out that men and women have been startled out of
their selfishness, and are now learning the high lessons of
>mpatny and sacrifice; that the war has broken down class
prejudices, and obliterated private feuds and hates; that there
las been a revival of religious interest in all the nations
engaged; that the people of England and France and Ger-
many have thronged the churches; that family prayer has
leen instituted where it was never known before; *that in
the camps at home and in the trenches on the battlefie d
the men are learning to pray; that Russia, at the cost of
mnety-six millions to herself, has abolished the liquor trade;
ana that France has prohibited the sale of absinthe, reduced
moralT A 1 °ih gam lg ’ , Set Iler face a & ai "st im-
morahty. All these are great things, and we do well to
rejoice in them; but, as an answer to the problem of the
distressed soul, they are puny, petty, little things in face of
the terrible crime and slaughter of the war. They mav
serve to show that humanity is not wholly given over to
the devil; that the war has not yet driven olit
45
THJi WAK AS A PROBLEM TO FAITH.


of the world; and that God’s gift of free-will to men has
not proved altogether a failure, —for beside the catastrophe
of sin there is the glory of goodness, of service, of duty, of
sacrifice. It is a sign, too, that in the great crises of na-
tional life good morality is found essential to national safety.
But all these arguments are not enough to restore the con-
fidence and hope and balance of soul to those upon whom the
cold breath of the nightmare horror has come. A rush to
the churches in times of stress and strain may mean very
little advance of spiritual truth. A crowd going to hear
“war sermons” is not of necessity crowding into the King-
dom of Heaven. That the Churches have returned with enthu-
siasm to the ethics of the Old Testament is not the same
thing as returning to Christ. We are not surprised to
learn now that the first ardour for Church attendance in
the Old Country has ceased, and a sad process of harden-
ing has set in. The religious work in the camps and
trenches is a fine thing, but we surely don’t imagine that even
this splendid work can counterbalance the loss of promising
young lives, cut off so soon, and the moral loss to those who
go forth strong and pure, and return hardened and soiled
and shamed for ever. It is not enough that the Churches
on both sides have pronounced their blessing on this war.
That in no way makes the thing any less revolting and ter-
rible. To some minds, indeed, that is the biggest part of
the problem. To see the armies of the nations march out
in battle array is a sufficiently disquieting spectacle, but to
behold the Christian Churches invoking God’s aid for the
carnage is a sight more alarming still. So we must get
to something deeper than arguments about Church attend-
ance and social improvements and the like, if we are to
meet the moral and spiritual chill, —the shuddering despair—
which has come to some sensitive souls.
We must find an answer, too, which will be adequate to
stand the test, even of defeat. I say this because some
folk speak and write as if their faith in the sanity of the
universe depended on the victory of the Allies’ arms. We
are quite confident that the Allies will win, and we believe
their victory will make possible the maintenance of institu-
tions and customs which are very helpful to the promotion of
a full and free religious life. But if Christianity has no
deeper basis than that, it does not deserve to live. If
Christianity is true, then even the breaking up of the British
Empire would not alter one jot or tittle of its truth. We
must find a ground for our faith so firm and unshakable
that, though all our institutions be shattered, and all our
liberties be taken from us, we shall still hold to the ideals
of Christ and the certain truth which He revealed. If we
46
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR.


haven’t that faith we are like those who, when “iniquity
abounds/’ grow “cold in their love.” It is all very well to
cry “I believe in God,” while our armies are driving back
the armies of the foe, but we must still be able to raise that
cry if our armies were to fail. “Our cause is just,” you say,
“and, therefore, we are bound to win.” Well, it is no doubt
a tremendous help to believe that our cause is just, but
there are other things beside the justice of the cause which
contribute to the winning of a war. Sometimes even a
just cause fails. China’s cause was just, every bit as just
as ours is now, when she resisted the importation of opium
three-quarters of a century ago. No one questions that
China was in the right, and Great Britain was utterly and
hopelessly wrong; but China was beaten, and to this day
we bear the shame and China the burden of that wicked
trade which we have so cruelly forced upon her. Bel-
gium’s cause was just, but Belgium has been overrun and
can never be the same again; we would not on that account
justify the Belgians turning atheist, —nor are they. Ger-
many, we believe, is going to be beaten, but we shall still
expect German Christians to retain their faith in God when
it is all over. But the faith which can stand that test must
be deep.
Last week I had a dream, in which I was acting as
chaplain and also helping the ambulance in a great battle.
I dreamed that the whole fate of our cause depended on that
battle, and that we were beaten, and I with some others
was taken prisoner. As I was there under guard of a Ger-
man soldier, there seemed to come to me this terrible de-
pression of soul which I have been trying to describe, —
such a feeling of helplessness and hopelessness to which
Religion seemed to offer no comfort. Ido not want to
pass through the same experience again, even in a dream, —
it was awful. A whole life’s work and all the teaching and
preaching of Christian ministers through all the years seem-
ed to be swept into oblivion at a stroke, and the whole house
of Faith dashed down to ruin. But the feeling only lasted
a moment, for as I talked with the rough soldier, whose
bayonet was kept ready to kill me if I moved, I realised
that I had something no brutal force could ever destroy. I
felt that not he, but I, was the victor, for I had held to my
Christian ideals, and I knew in that hour that those ideals
were the ideals of God, and God could never fail. It was
all just in the flash of a dream, but there is the solid truth.
In the very worst of our Religion need not, must
not, go; and if we are faithful to its teachings it will carry
us safely through.
But this is a Faith which has its strength, not in Churches
47
THE WAR AS A PROBLEM TO FAITH.


merely,*not in creeds only, not in institutions and laws, not
even in national existence, for all these things are unstable,
but in those vital spiritual forces which come to us from
God in Christ. lam thinking that one of the greatest bene-
fits of the war will be if in challenging our faith it drives
us back to this,—back from our formal, external, institutional
Religion to find the Rock whereon our feet may rest secure
in every storm.
There is such a Rock, my friends, and in finding that
we shall find the solution of our problem.
The only way to find it fully and unmistakably is to be
absolutely true to the Christ. Through the life lived fear-
lessly and consistently for His ideals, we come in ever closer
touch with Him and through Him we come at last in touch
with God. There all the horror of war, —all the overwhelm-
ing sense of personal impotence it may bring,—is powerless
to take away from our souls the triumph and joy in the
Eternal Love who “doeth all things well.”
If you are over-wrought and distressed in spirit by the
terrible happenings of the present day, let me re-assure you
in the Master’s words. Their glorious truth is being verified
by many thousands now, and may be verified in your ex-
perience, too. All those who will hold fast to the great
truths He has revealed, all who will be steadfastly faithful
to Him and to His high ideals, shall arrive at last at the
haven of their souls, where is sure rest and peace. Some
of us can see these things. We stand with Christ though
all the world be against us. If you will do that, trusting
where you cannot understand, throwing open the windows
and doors to receive the light, and warmth and love which
stream from God and God alone, you, too, may have His
Peace. ‘See,” He says, “see that ye be not troubled. . . .
He that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.”
48
THE RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WAR.
