

THE LOSS OF THE SHIP
"NORTHFLEET"
WITH PHOTOGRAPHS.












THE LOSS OE THE SHIP
“NORTHFLEET,"
With Photograhs of
THE VESSEL, ROMNEY CHURCH, CAPTAIN AND MRS. KNOWLES,
MR. S. F. BRAND, AND MARIA TAPLIN.
A COMPLETE ACCOUNT OF ALL CONNECTED WITH THE SAD DISASTER.
THE ENTIRE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE TO BE DEVOTED TO RAISING A
NATIONAL MEMORIAL
TO CAPTAIN KNOWLES, MR. BRAND, AND OTHERS WHO PERISHED IN THE
“NOETHELEET.”
PRICE—HALF-A-GUINEA.
[All Rights Reserved.]




TO HER MOST GRACIOUS MAJESTY
(zUnnn "^O-ctaria,
THESE MEMORIALS OF THE
“NOETHFLEET”
ARE MOST RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED,
AS A MARK OF THE NATION’S HIGH APPRECIATION
OF THE WOMANLY TENDERNESS
AND KIND SOLICITUDE FOR THOSE IN SORROW,
WHICH HAVE ENDEARED OUR BELOYED SOVEREIGN
TO ALL HER PEOPLE.




PREFACE.
The deep interest shown throughout the kingdom in every incident relating to
the loss of the “ North fleet,” has induced the Compiler to lay before the public
the following full and official records of that lamentable disaster.
/
As rays of light illumine a darkened chaos, so shines brightly forth the
heroism of those true-hearted men, who, amid the horrors of that awful night
fought with despair, conquered self, and then died nobly, striving to the last to
save the weak and helpless ones around them.
It is well that noble lives and noble deaths should have some lasting memorial,
that other lives may, by such teaching, become more pure, and wise, and true.
A hastily-written volume, containing a brief history of the “ Northfleet,” and
all connected with her, would, in itself, be but a poor monument to the memory of
her lost Captain, Officers, Passengers, and Crew; it is therefore proposed that the
profits arising from the sale of this work be devoted to the purpose of raising a
" Hational ocmonal,
as the Country’s tribute to the memory of those who perished in the
“ N OKTHPIEET.”




PHOTOGRAPHS.
The “ Northfleet,” given on our first page, was photographed by Mr. F. 0. Gould,
of Gravesend, as the ship lay there, a few days prior to her departure on her last
ill-fated voyage.
It has been printed for this work by the Heliotype Company, 221, Regent
Street.
The orphan child, Maria Taplin, was photographed by Messrs. Lambert
Weston and Sons, of Dover and Folkestone, who have very kindly printed copies
at a merely nominal cost.
The photographs of Captain and Mrs. Knowles were taken by Mr. E. S. Clowes,
238, East Street, Walworth Road, and have been printed by the Stereoscopic
Company, to whom the Author owes many thanks for their kind liberality in
undertaking the work at cost price.
The portrait of Mr. S. F. Brand is by Mr. Marks, of St. Paul’s Churchyard ;
the Stereoscopic Company have also printed this on the same terms as the
above.
Romney Church, photographed by Messrs. Lambert Weston and Sons, of
Dover and Folkestone, has been reproduced by the Heliotype Company.
In this case, as in that of the “ Northfleet,” they have made a most liberal
arrangement to furnish copies at cost price.
The Author wishes to record his sincere thanks for the courtesy of Messrs.
Lambert Weston and Sons, Mr. Gould, Mr. Clowes, and Mr. Marks, in
gratuitously allowing the negatives in their possession to be copied by the
Heliotype and Stereoscopic Companies, to whom many thanks are also due for the
kind interest they have taken in the work, and for the able and generous manner
in which they have aided the Author in his project of erecting a “ National
Memorial.”




THE LOSS OF THE “NORTHFLEET.”
Eauly on the cold bleak morning of January 23rd, 1873, news was brouglit to
the good old town and port of Dover, of a disastrous collision having occurred off
Dungeness, a distance of some twenty miles, as the crow flies.
The emigrant ship “Korthfleet” was said to have been rundown, and to
have foundered with hundreds of souls on board.
Telegrams were instantly despatched, by Lloyds’ agents, to all points along
the coast, requesting those in authority to furnish immediate information of those
saved, and to supply all survivors with needful food and clothing, the cost of which
should be gratefully repaid.
As time went on, the sad news proved but too true.
A lugger, the “Mary,” of Kingsdown, came into port bringing thirty rescued
men. They told their melancholy tale of how the “ Northfleet,” after leaving the
South West Indian Docks on the 13th of January, and Gravesend on the 19th,
encountered stormy weather and was compelled to run for Margate Eoads.
Again attempting to get down Channel, she was forced to anchor off
Dungeness.
There she lay on the night of Wednesday, January 22nd; when, soon after
half-past 10, most of the passengers and crew being in their berths, and the watch
on deck, a fearful cry was raised that a steamer was upon them, and almost imme-
diately, a violent collision occurred, which shook the ship from stem to stern.
The watch hailed the steamer, imploring her to stand by the ship, as she was
in a sinking state, with 400 souls on board; but, to the disgrace of humanity be it
said, heedless of the agonising shrieks of the terror-stricken crowd of men, women,
and children, the steamer proceeded on her way, without rendering the slightest
assistance.
Captain Knowles, in that trying hour, acted with the most commendable calm-
ness and decision. It was found that the steamer had severely damaged the
1


“ Northfleet ” on the starboard side, and that she was rapidly filling. Efforts
were simultaneously made to stop the breach, keep down the water by means of the
pumps, and to attract the attention and obtain the assistance of the surrounding
ships by sending up rockets. Meanwhile the scene on board was most heartrending.
Many of the passengers were in their night-dresses, and others had only such
scanty clothing as they could find when hurriedly quitting their berths. Children
were screaming for their parents, parents vainly searching for their children, while
husbands and wives were hopelessly separated ; the horror being increased by the
darkness of the night.
The efforts made to repair the breach were altogetner futile, and the water
in the ship rose so rapidly, that the workers at the pumps soon relinquished their
task as a hopeless one.
There was then a general rush for the boats, and in that direful struggle for
life a wild panic rendered the mass of human beings on the deck almost inhuman
and wholly uncontrollable.
Captain Knowles did his duty to the last, like a brave British seaman. Standing
on the poop, he gave command that the women and children should first be placed
in the boats, but the order was disregarded by the brutal navvies, who, madly
fighting for their lives, took possession of a boat, cut the tackles by which she was
suspended, and drifted away from the ill-fated ship, having neither oars nor rudder,
but left to the mercy of the wind and waves, until rescued by the “ Mary of
Kingsdown.”
Upon landing at Dover, they were kindly received and carefully tended at the
Sailors’ Home.
And then the anxious question was, “Where are the rest? ”
Presently the steam-tug “City of London” hove in sight, her deck appearing
crowded.
“ Thank God, more are saved! ” was the cry that found an echo in the hearts
of all assembled on the Pier to receive and welcome those who had passed through
such a terrible ordeal, and yet had been saved by the mercy of a kind Providence
To the eager question, “ How many have you brought us ? ” Captain Kingston
replied, “ All I could; but I’ve only thirty-four all told, and among them an orphan
child, a poor woman with a baby at her breast, and the Captain’s wife.” These
were all taken to the “ Home,” with the exception of the Captain’s wife, who found
a refuge at the house of the Bev. Win. Pate.
Captain Kingston reported that the Pilot Cutter, No. 3, the “ Princess,” was
astern of him, bringing more rescued ones.
With a glass, the trim graceful little ship could be seen in the distance, beating
up for Dover, and bearing her precious living freight to a haven of safety.
At length she arrived, and what a hearty welcome awaited her !






“ How many have you ? ” was again tlie cry. “ Twenty-one, sir, all told,”
replied tlie weather-beaten skipper; “ I only wish we’d got more.”
These men were speedily got ashore and taken to our “ Home,” there to
receive those comforts, of which, from exposure, hunger and cold, they were
sorely in need.
On that memorable morning of January the 23rd, the scene at the Sailors’ Home
was altogether indescribable. One turned with repugnance from the rough crowd
of navvies, who formed the greater portion of the saved, to gaze with glistening
eyes and saddened heart upon a little group gathered round the tire. There was
poor young Lucy Sturgeon, with her six months’ old baby in her arms, humbly
thanking God, with trembling lips, for sparing her life, her husband, and her
child, although she had lost ail else. Close by, weeping and desolate, sat poor little
Maria Taplin, who had lost her father, mother, and two sisters, and now seemed
sadly alone in that rude crowd; her miserable state soon attracted the notice
of a resident of Hover, who at once took her to his home and placed her in safe
keeping, until the next day, when she was sent to some relatives in London, under
the kind care of Mrs. Knowles.
The wreck of the Northfleet, with all its gloomy horrors, yet has its compen-
sating side in the expression of warm and generous sympathy evoked by the sad
plight of the survivors. The whole population of Dover vied with each other in
their efforts to succour the distressed, and during the brief stay of the wrecked
passengers, the Sailors’ Home was inundated by visitors anxious for their comfort.
The general feeling of the town found expression in many ways, the following,
in particular, must be noticed :
There was one deep sorrow, so sacred in its intensity, that the most tender,
pitying love scarcely dare attempt to soothe it: but the wide-spread, reverent feel-
ing of sympathy for the fair young girl whose life had been deprived of its
greatest blessing was shown, when Mrs. Knowles left for London, and every man
in the crowded station at Dover stood bare-headed as the bereaved lady and orphan
child passed to the carriage, which the railway company had respectfully placed at
her disposal.


Examinations on Oath, instituted by the Receiver of Wrecks at the Port of
Dover, in pursuance of the 448th section of the Merchant Shipping Act,
1854,17 th and 18th Victoria, Cap. 104. re “ Northfieet.”
SAMUEL KINGSTON, being duly sworn, deposes as follows, namely :
That he is master of the ship “City of London,” of the Port of London,
of the registered tonnage of 66 tons, the official number being 47,359. That the
said ship is a steam-tug, with engines of 140 nominal horse-power.
That the said ship is owned by George Blyth, residing at Commercial
Road, in the city of London.
That the said ship left London on the 20th instant, in search of employ-
ment in the English Channel.
That the said ship proceeded on her said intended voyage, as above stated,
until she reached Dungeness. She was brought up there at about 7 p.m. of the
22nd instant. Dungeness light then bore W.S.W., distant 3 miles.
That on Wednesday, the said 22nd day of January, 1873, at 10.30 p.m.,
the tide at the time being ebb, the weather wet, and the night very dark, and the
wind W.N.W., blowing a strong breeze, the said ship was at anchor with her steam
up, when deponent, who was on deck, saw rockets sent up from a ship lying to the
eastward of this steamer. Deponent immediately weighed anchor, and proceeded
with all haste towards the spot whence the rockets were fired. A boat full of
people, and full of water, came alongside. Deponent then perceived a full-rigged
ship. This vessel went down suddenly. Deponent afterwards saw large numbers
of persons struggling in the water. Cries for help w r ere heard from all sides.
Deponent flung life-lines and life-buoys to the people in the water. Several people
climbed up the sides of deponent’s ship. Deponent and crew were employed in
saving life for at least three-quarters of an hour. The mate of deponent’s vessel
left in the wrecked ship’s lifeboat, and took buckets to bale out the water which
was in her. Deponent afterwards steamed for the shore to obtain provisions for
the passengers, —some of whom were in an exhauslei condition.
That at the time the rockets were observed by deponent, as aforesaid, the
lights of the shipping could be seen at a distance of two miles. The wrecked
ship was about two miles distant from the spot where deponent’s ship was
anchored.
That deponent succeeded in rescuing thirty-four persons, who were
landed at Dover at 10 a.m. of the 23rd instant.


That the above contents are in all respects correct and true to the best of
deponent’s knowledge and belief.
SAMUEL KINGSTON,
Deponent.
Sworn at Dover, this 23rd day of January, 1873,
Before me,
G. B. BAGGETT,
Deceiver of Wrecks.
JOHN EASTEB, being duly sworn, deposes as follows, namely :
That he was boatswain of the ship “Northfleet,” of the Port of London,
of the registered tonnage of 876 tons, her official number being 11,967.
That the said ship was owned by John Patton, residing at 3, White Lion
Court, Cornhill, in the city of London.
That the said ship was rigged as a full-rigged ship ; that she was built
of wood at Northfleet in the year 1853, and that she was classed in Lloyd’s List as
A 1 for ten years from 1867.
lhat the crew consisted of thirty-four hands, including deponent; that the
deponent has no certificate.
That the said ship had on board a general cargo of railway iron and
fine goods stowed by Mr. Westhorp, of Limehouse, London, and consigned to order
in Hobart Town.
That said ship had on board, in addition to the cargo aforesaid, 310
passengers, adults, besides the wife of the master.
That said ship proceeded from London on her intended voyage as named
below, on the 13th day of January, 1873, last past, at 11 a.m., the tide at the time
being high water, the weather fine, and the wind blowing a moderate breeze from
the North.
That, at the time of sailing as above, the said ship was in good condition
in every respect.
That the said ship was bound for Hobart Town.
That the said ship proceeded on her said intended voyage, as above stated,
until she reached Gravesend, and was there moored to the buoy at 4 p.m. of the
13th instant. She remained there until 6 a.m. of the 17th instant, when she was
taken in tow by a steam-tug and towed to Dungeness, where she arrived at
9 p.m. of the same day. The tug then let go, and the ship was put under sail; wind


was W., blowing moderate breeze. Ship was kept beating to windward until
Sunday at 7 p.m., when, as the wind was blowing a gale from the S.W., she bore
up for a roadstead.
That on Sunday, the 19th day of January, 1873, at 3 p.m., the tide at the
time being flood, the weather squally, and the wind in the S.W. blowing a gale,
the said ship was brought up in Margate Roads, where she remained until next day
at 9 a.m., when the weather haying moderated, and wind changed to N.W., the
ship was again put under canvas, and course shaped down Channel. She proceeded
as far as Folkestone, when the wind veered to S.W., but continued moderate.
Said ship kept beating down Channel until 9 a.m. of the 21st instant, when she was
off Fairleigh, and the wind having freshened to a gale from S.W., she bore up for
Rungeness, and there anchored about noon, with her port anchor in 14 fathoms
of water, and veered to 60 fathoms of chain. The weather still continuing bad,
and the wind to blow a gale from S.S.W., every preparation was made for letting
go a second anchor. The whole of the next day, "W ednesday, the ship rode to her
anchor, and at sunset the riding light was hoisted in the starboard fore rigging, and
the ship was riding with her head towards Rungeness light. The anchor-watch
was set at 8 p.m. of the said 22nd instant, the said watch being composed of two
men and one petty officer. Nothing further occurred until 11 p.m. of the said
22nd instant, when, deponent being below, heard the watch hailing a steamer,
asking, “ What steamer is that ? ” “ Where are you coming to ? ” Reponent
immediately went upon deck, and found a steamer had struck the ship on the star-
board side just before the main hatchway. The steamer was hailed several times,
but no answer was got from her, and she backed astern out of sight. Reponent at
this time saw the master upon deck, and heard him giving orders to the officer of
the watch. The said master ordered all hands upon deck, and the pumps to be
sounded. They were accordingly sounded and manned directly. It was quickly
ascertained that the ship was sinking. The master ordered immediately blue lights
to be burnt, and rockets to be sent up, as signals of distress. The master’s next
order was to fire the signal gun, but it was not in order, and could not be fired.
The master then ordered the starboard lifeboat to be cleared away.
That deponent was ordered to take charge of her. As she was being
lowered about twelve persons jumped into her, but she was canted by the main
sheet bolt and stove. In consequence of her making a good deal of water the
master ordered deponent to row with all speed to the first ship he could make. In
about fifteen minutes he fell in with a steam-tug, and put the passengers (with the
master’s wife) on board. He then pulled away in the direction of the wreck, and
picked up four persons who were struggling in the water. Ihe boat was now full
of water, but deponent succeeded in reaching the steamer. Reponent saw the
“ North fleet ” founder shortly after he took charge of the lifeboat.


That the above contents are in all respects correct and true to the best of
deponent’s knowledge and belief.
JOHN EASTER,
Deponent.
Sworn at Dover this 25th day of January, 1873,
Before me,
G. B. RAGGETT,
Receiver of Wrecks.
GEORGE BRACK, of 58, Burdett road, Limehouse, London, being duly
sworn, deposes as follows :
That he was Trinity House Pilot of the ship “ North fleet,” of the Port of
London, of the registered tonnage of 876 tons, her official number being 11,967.
That the crew consisted of thirty-five hands, including deponent; that the
deponent holds a first-class licence from the Corporation of the Trinity House for
piloting ships from London to the Isle of Wight.
That said ship had on board a cargo of railway iron from London, to Hobart
Town.
That said ship had on board, in addition to the cargo, 310 passengers,
adults ; the wife of the Captain was also on board.
dhat said ship left Gravesend on her intended voyage, as named below, on
the 17th day of January, 18/3, last past, at 7 a.m., the tide at the time being ebb,
the weather clear, and the wind blowing a light breeze from the W. That deponent
there and then took charge of said ship as pilot. The ship taken in tow by
the steamer “ Middlesex,” of London.
That at the time of sailing, as above, the said ship was in good condition in
every respect.
That the said ship was bound for Hobart Town, in Tasmania.
That the said ship proceeded on her said intended voyage, as above stated,
until she reached Dungeness, at 11.30 p.m., on the said 17th instant, when the
steamer let her go, and the ship was put under canvas. She stood off from the
land with wind W. by S., the breeze freshening. The said ship was kept beating
to windward until 11 a.m. of Sunday, the 19th instant, when the wind having
increased to a gale and the w r eather thick with rain, the ship bore up and proceeded
towards the Downs. On getting there that roadstead was found so full of shipping
that deponent deemed it prudent to proceed on to the North Foreland. There the
ship was brought to anchor at 3.30 p.m. of the 19th instant. The ship rode at the


North Foreland until Tuesday, the 21st instant, when the wind having veered to the
N.N.W., the anchor was weighed and she proceeded to the southward. She con-
tinued her voyage until the morning of the 22nd instant, when off Fairleigh,
the wind again began to blow heavily from the S.W., and there was every appearance
of had weather. Barometer was very low. At 10.0 a.m. of that day the ship
bore up, and at noon she was anchored in Dungeness Loads with her largest bower
anchor, and veered to seventy fathoms of chain. She was anchored in fourteen
fathoms of water, with Dungeness light bearing S.W. by W. |-W., distant between
two and three miles. Nothing occurred until sunset, when the anchor light vas
hoisted in the fore part of the fore rigging. The said anchor light was a brilliant
light. At 8.0 p.m. the ship was pumped out, and the anchor-watch set. The wind
wls at the time W.N.W., and weather moderate, but the night was dark. A little
before 11.0 p.m. deponent was sitting in the saloon and heard the anchor-watch
cry out, “Pilot, pilot, come out! ” Deponent jumped out, but before he could reach
the deck found the vessel struck with great force. As soon as he got
on deck he saw a steamer backing out from the starboard midships. He,
at the same instant, looked for the riding light in the ship in which
he was, and saw that it was burning brightly. Deponent cried to the steamer,
“ What steamer is it ?” but got no answer. The steamer backed away clear of the
ship. The concussion had brought every person on deck. Deponent ordered the
carpenter to set the pumps going, and they were accordingly set going. Deponent
then went below to see what damage the ship had sustained. He found her stove
“ midships,” and the water rushing in. Deponent then w T ent upon deck and con-
ferred with the captain. The latter agreed to have signals of distress made at
once. Blue lights were burned, and all the rockets which were on board the ship
were sent up in quick succession. During the time great confusion ensued among
the passengers, who were in great distress, seeing that the ship was sinking, lire
two quarter boats were lowered, and the master, who retained perfect self-possession,
ordered that none but the women and children should get into them. There was
a great rush amongst the male passengers towards the boats, and as far as deponent
could see, the port-quarter boat was filled with men and cut away from the ship.
Deponent saw at this time the starboard boat leave the ship full of people. The
ship was now settling down forward rapidly, and deponent flew into the mam
rigging, but before he reached half-way up the rigging she foundered, leaving
deponent and a mass of human beings struggling in the water. As soon as depo-
nent recovered himself he saw the raizen topmast cross-trees out of the water. He
swam, therefore, to the mizen, and clung to the same until rescued from this posi-
tion by the pilot cutter “Princess,” of London. The last time deponent saw the
master he was on the poop of the ship giving orders, which he did with calmness
and great propriety.


9. Ihat the above contents are, in all respects, correct and true to the best of
deponent’s knowledge and belief.
GEORGE BRACK,
Deponent.
Sworn at Dover this 23rd day of January, 1873,
Before me,
G. B. RAGGETT,
Receiver of Wrecks.
JOHN BEVERIDGE, of 20a Block, Peabody Buildings, Blackfriars, being
duly sworn, deposes as follows :
That he was a steerage passenger on board the “Northfleet,” which left
Gravesend on the 17th January.
} That the said slli P proceeded on her voyage until Tuesday afternoon, about
1 o’clock, when she.was brought to anchor in Dungeness Roads. She was anchored
some two or three miles off Dungeness Lighthouse. She remained at anchor
there until Wednesday night at 10.30, when deponent went upon deck. After he
had been there about five minutes he heard one of the crew shout “ Ahoy! Ahoy! ”
and he then blew a whistle. This man continued to shout and whistle for about
five minutes, when deponent saw a two-masted screw-steamer with a straight bow
come stern on and strike this ship amidships. Deponent saw the riding light of this,
deponent’s ship, at the time of collision, burning brightly. Deponent noticed
that the deck was bulged up. Deponent sung out to the steamer to stand by this
ship, as there were 400 souls on board. No answer came from the steamer. The
steamer was higher out of the water than the “ Northfleet,” and deponent
could not see any one on deck. She (tbe steamer) had no bowsprit or figure head.
Deponent went below with the captain and the carpenter, and held a light whilst
the carpenter attempted to stuff oakum and other things into the leak, but it was
found of no effect whatever. Deponent then went upon deck and assisted to get
the lifeboat down on the same side as the ship had been struck. The boatswain
had charge of the loading of the boat. Deponent got into the rigging of the main-
mast. The ship appeared to rise up a little, and then swing round to the right.
She afterwards settled down suddenly by the head. Deponent after the ship
foundered, struck out and got hold of some part of the ship’s rigging, where
he remained until he was rescued by a boat belonging to the cutter “Princess”
of Dover.
That when deponent went upon deck at half-past 10 o’clock, before the
collision took place, the weather was wet drizzling rain, wind was blowing a
moderate breeze off the land. The night was dark, but the shore lights could
2


be seen distinctly. Deponent heard the men of the watch shouting to the
steamer which struck this ship, at least five minutes before the collision took
place. That from twenty to thirty minutes elapsed from the time of this ship being
struck to that of her foundering. That deponent saw the captain, at the time
of the ship’s going down, on the port-side, giving orders.
That the captain from first to last never lost his self-possession, and the
orders which he gave were obeyed by the officers and crew.
That the above contents are in all respects correct and true to the best
of deponent’s knowledge and belief.
JOHN BEVERIDGE,
Deponent.
Sworn at Dover this 24th day of January, 1873,
Before me,
G. R. RAGGETT,
Receiver of Wrecks.
It may not be generally known that in all cases of disaster at sea, the ship-
master is compelled, under the Maritime Daw, to enter a minute of such disaster
before a Notary Public within forty-eight hours of the vessel reaching port; this is
called “Noting a Protest:” subsequently the full particulars of the calamity are
gathered from the ship’s log, and embodied in a document called an “ Extended
Protest.” To the truth of this document the master and principal members of the
crew are duly sworn before the notary, and it then forms the groundwork for
enforcing any claims for compensation for damages in cases of collision against the
ship occasioning the damage, or in the event of the casualty happening by tempest
or otherwise against the underwriters of the ship and cargo; the following docu-
ment is the extended protest of the “ Northfleet,” as made by the sole surviving
officer of that ill-fated ship—he taking the position of the unfortunate master.
tip's public instrument of protest, be it known and made manifest to all
people whom it doth or may concern, that on the 23rd day of January, 1873,
before me, William Henry Payn, Notary Public, residing in the town and port of
Dover, in the county of Kent, in the kingdom of England, by lawful authority
admitted and sworn, personally appeared, John Easter, boatswain of the ship or
vessel called the “Northfleet,” belonging to London, of the burthen of 876 tons
or thereabouts, and duly noted protest. And on this 24th day of the same month
of January, again personallyappeared the said John Easter, and upon his faith and
honesty solemnly declared, and for truth affirmed, that the said vessel was laden
with a general cargo and passengers numbering about three hundred and forty, at


the South West India Docks, in London, and departed thence on the Idth day of
January instant, about 10 p.m,, in charge of a pilot, and in tow of a steamer, the
vessel being in good order and condition, staunch, tight, and well found in every
particular, and manned by a crew consisting of thirty-four hands, all told, on a
voyage from London aforesaid, bound to Hobart Town; they towed down to
Gravesend, and brought up there on the 14th, about 4 a.m., they weighed anchor
and proceeded in tow of a steamer. At Dungeness the tug left the ship, and sail
was made on her, the wind then being light from W.N.W. But little way could
be made on the ship, and on the 19th instant, when off Fairleigh, the wind
freshened to a gale and veered to southward, they were compelled to bear up, and
they ran for Margate Roads, where they anchored at 4 p m. in nine fathoms water,
with sixty fathoms chain, they lay there until the morning of Tuesday, the 21st
instant, when the wind having veered to northward they got under way and
proceeded down Channel. Off Dungeness the wind veered to the southward,
but they worked the vessel on and off until the following day about 10 a.m.,
-when the wind freshened, and they were compelled to run back to Dungeness
Roads, and anchored in the East Bay about noon in fourteen fathoms water.
At sunset the anchor light was hoisted and continued burning brightly;
the anchor watch was set, consisting of an officer and two men. At 11 p.m.
the watch saw the lights of an approaching steamer, and hailed her loudly,
asking where she was coming to. Ho answer was returned, and in an instant
she struck the ship in the starboard side just below the main hatch, cutting
completely through her side into the cargo. The steamer was again loudly
hailed, and asked to stand by, as there were four hundred emigrants on board. No
notice, however, was taken of this second hailing, but the steamer backed astern,
and then proceeded down Channel. Orders were immediately given by the master
of the ship to sound the pumps and man them; this was immediately done, and
there were at once some fifty volunteers to work the pumps; this deponent, the
boatswain, was then directed by the said master to go below and ascertain the
extent of the damage. lie found the ship’s starboard side completely stove in, and
the water rushing in fearfully. This w r as reported to the master, who ordered blue
lights and rockets to be fired as signals of distress, and the gun to be got ready.
The boatswain was then directed to clear away the starboard life-boat, and to take
in all the women and children, but he and the boat’s crew experienced great
difficulty in doing this, owing to the rush of passengers into the boat; in fact,
nothing could be done until the master having first cautioned the male passengers,
begging of them to keep back, was compelled as a last resource to fire his pistol
amongst them, and one man was slightly wounded in the leg. This had the effect
of partially deterring them from crowding in, and the said appearer obtained more
control of the boat, but in lowering her she was stove in on the port bow by the


main sheet bolt, and she partly filled. A number of passengers crowded in as the
boat was being lowered, but tbe appearer kept ber alongside (but clear of tbe vessel's
side)by orders of tbe master, for about five minutes, when the master gave orders
for them to leave and seek a place of safety. They made towards a steam-tug
which was lying off, but before reaching ber be saw bis ship go down bead fore-
most. They afterwards succeeded in reaching tbe tug, but tbe boat was then full
to tbe thwarts. The passengers in tbe boat were put safely on board tbe tug, and
tbe said appearer and boat’s crew, with tbe assistance of the mate of tbe tug, again
pushed off their boat, although in a sinking state, and rescued four more of tbe
passengers from drowning. Meanwhile, tbe tug cruised about as near the wreck as
she safely could, rescuing several passengers by means of life-buoys and lines.
When all that was possible bad been done, tbe ship’s boat was hauled on board the
tug, and she lay by until daylight tbe following morning, when she went round
tbe wreck and afterwards proceeded with those she bad rescued for Dover, where
they were received at tbe Sailors’ Home. Tbe said appearer then ascertained that
tbe rescued in all numbered about seventy-five passengers and ten of the crew.
And tbe said appearer doth further depose that tbe said loss and damage has not
occurred or been occasioned by or through any of this appearer, or any
one on board tbe said ship, nor from any fault or defect m tbe said ship, her tackle
or furniture, but entirely from tbe circumstances before stated, therefore, tbe said
appearer bath required a protest. Wherefore, I, the said notary, do hereby protest
against tbe wind, weather, and sea, but more particularly against tbe said steamer
(name at present unknown) for all losses, damages and costs suffered to be sued for
and recovered in time and place convenient. Thus done and protested in Dover
aforesaid, in tbe presence of Sydenham Payn and John W atts, witnesses thereto
called and requested. In testimony of tbe truth whereof, tbe said appearer and
witnesses have subscribed their names in tbe registry of me, tbe said notary, and
I, tbe said notary, have hereunto set my band and affixed my notarial seal, the day
and year secondly above written.
WILLIAM H. PAYN.
Tbe said John Easter was sworn on the Holy Evangelists to tbe truth of the
foregoing protest, at Dover aforesaid, this twenty-fourth day of January, One
thousand eight hundred and seventy-three,
Before me,
WILLIAM H. PAYN,
A Commissioner to administer oaths in Chancery
in England.


LIST OF PASSENGERS SAVED FROM THE “NORTHFLEET.”
AGE.
Bannister, Alfred ... 21 years.
Barry, John 40 „
Batchelor, Walter ... 22 „
Beckenham, William ... 21 „
Beveridge, John ... 28
Biddiss, Thomas ... 28 ~
Brown, John 18
Brown, William ... 29
Butterfield, George ... 30 „
Canty, James 21
Chivers, George... ... 28 ~
Clark, Albert George ... 19
Cole, William ... ... 23 „
Conroy, John ... ... 25
Cooper, William ... 18
Crowley, Dennis ... 23 ,
Cummins, Caleb ... 37
Dareman, J. ... ... 32 ~
Darnell, Frederick ... 18
Davies, William ... 31
Davies, William ... 28
Delmar, John ... ... 33
Dewdney, James ... 19
Dixon, John 42
Fahan, Thomas . 32
Farrant, Jonathan ... 40
Forster, James ... 24
Fowler, William ... 23
Garrard, Edward ... 18
Gray, John ... ... 34
Green, James ... 21
**• 55
Hadley, John 37
Harding, James 27
Harris, Alfred ... . 25
Hawkins, Samuel ... 27 v
Huggett. Elijah 40
Jackson, William .... 36
AGE.
Jewell, Henry ... ... 28years.
Kitney, Edwari ... 30 „
Lee, Thomas ... ... 20 „
Line, Joseph ... ... 25 „
Lovelock, Amos ... 38 „
Lynch, John 32.,,
McCarthy, Dennis ... 21 „
McLachlan, John ... 32 ~
Mason, George ... ... 22 „
Medley, James ... ... 23 „
Murphy, Dennis ... 21 „
Newby, Robert ... ... 22 ~
O’Leary, John ... ... 18 ~
Preston, George Montague 24 ~
Richardson, Thomas ... 38 ~
Rixon, William Maby ... 22 „
Rolfe, Charles ... ... 22 ~
Sharp, Joseph ... ... 22 „
Shepherd, David ... 21 „
Smith, George Henry ... 23 „
Smith, James ... ... 28 ~
Smith, Robert ... ... 24 „
Stammers, George ... 22 „
Start, John ... ... 22 „
Sturgeon, John ... ... 23 „
Lucy 22 „
„ Harriet ... 7 mths.
Swift, James ... ... 18years.
Taplin, George ... ... 20 „
Taplin, Maria ... ... 10 „
Tapsel, George ... ... 18 ~
Tapson, Edmund ... 48 „
Taylor, Richard ... 28 „
Turner, Thomas ... 22 „
Turner, William ... 23 „
White, Reuben... ... 20 „
Woolford, John... ... 35 „


List of Passengers Lost in the “ Isorthfleet.”
AGE.
Abbley, James ... ... 44 years.
„ Ann ... ... 43 „
~ Caroline ... 18 „
William ... 16 „
Henry... ... 14 „
~ Maria ... ... H
Alice ... ... 8 „
Abbott, George ... 22 „
Aery, James ... ... 37 ~
Alexander, William ... 24 „
Attryde, George ... 35 „
Baker, Charles ... ... 28 ~
Balls, Henry 14 „
Banks, William ... 20 ~
Barclay, Edward ... 29 „
„ Charlotte ... 28 ~
Ann 8 months.
Bates, Henry ... ••• 22 years.
Beadle, William ... 23 ~
Bedford, George ... 31 „
„ Elizabeth ... 24 „
Elizabeth ... 10 months.
Bird, William ... ••• 21 years.
Burfoot, Joseph ... 19 „
Bradford, Emanuel ... 17 „
Brand, Arthur 22 „
Brand, Samuel Frederick 23
(Cabin Passenger)
Brown, Daniel 38 „
Brown, John ... ... 37 ~
Bunting, George ... 23
Burton, Frederick ... 29 „
Butterfield, Sarah ... 34 „
Catherine, Emile ... 27 „
Chandler, Timothy 30
Chapman, William ... 34
Chi vers, John ... ... 37 „
Chi vers, Emily ... ... H
AGE.
Olivers, Caroline ... 9 years.
Carr, Jolin ... ... 46 „
Clark, George 22 „
Clark, Walter ... ... 23 „
Claydon, John ... ... 32 „
Cole, Charles Thomas ... 17 „
Cole, George ... ... 18 „
Collins, James ... 22 „
Condon, Michael ... 35 „
„ Sarah ... ... 25 „
„ Rosina... .. 9 „
Cooper, Edwin ... ... 30 „
„ Martha... ... 33 „
„ Frederick William 1 year.
Coppin, Saunders ... 38 years.
Cor field, John ... ... 31 ~
Cornhill, William ... 80 ~
Courtney, George ... 26 „
„ Fanny ... 25 ~
Coventry, Henry ... 18 ~
Cox, George ... ... 25 ~
Crawford, Andrew ... 19
I)anby, Albert ... ... 21 „
Dann, George ... ... 29 „
„ Tibitha ... ... 29 „
Harwell, Joseph .. .. 21 „
Day, William ... ... 34 „
Dixon, Esther ... ... 43 „
„ Esther ... ... 2 „
„ Sarah 9 months
Holding, John ... ... 21 years.
Easter, John 36 „
„ Eleanor 27 „
Fitch, William 32 „
Fleet, George ... ... 28 „
Fleet, John ... ... 19 „
Gaunt, John ... ... 29 „
Gaunt, Sarah ... ... 24 „


AGE.
George, William ... 31 years.
Ginn, William ... ... 41 „
Goddard, George ... 32 „
Golding, James ... 24 „
Golding, George ... 34 „
„ Sarah ... ... 30 „
„ Lizzie ... ... 3 „
„ Alice ... ... 1 „
Goodchild, E. ... ... 34 „
Goodridge, William ... 29 „
„ Eliza ... 22 „
„ Jane ... 3 „
„ Arthur ... 1 „
Gray, George ... ... 21 „
Green, William ... 20
Gunn, John ... ... 32 ~
„ Jane 27 „
„ Charlotte ... 4 „
Gwilliam, Arthur ... 30 ~
Hales, George ... ... 34 „
„ Jemima .... ... 27 „
„ George 7 „
„ Elizabeth ... 3
Harmes, Thomas ... 21 „
Hart, William ... ... 26 „
Hatter way, Thomas ... 30 ~
Hawkings, Henry ... 26
Hayden, John ... ... 24
Heath, George ... ... 18 ~
Herbert, William ... 20 „
Hills, Charles ... ... 31 „
„ Mercy 26 „
„ Frederick ... 8 „
„ Sarah ... ... 7 „
Holland, Charles ... 22 „
Hopgood, William ... 22 „
Horsnell, Charles ... 28 ~
„ Elizabeth ... 23 „
„ Charles ... 4 „
AGE.
Horsnell, Henry ... 2 years.
Howard, Frederick ... 22 „
Hussey, William ... 24 „
„ Eliza ... ... 23 „
Jackson, Henry ... 29 „
Jackson, Frederick ... 28 „
„ Eliza 22 „
„ Mary Ann ... 1 year.
Jarvis, William ... 28 years.
Kelly, John ... ... 20 „
Kelly, Joseph ... ... 20 ~
Knott, Benjamin ... 32 „
„ Sarah Ann ... 27 „
„ Sarah Ann ... 7 „
Lacey, John ... ... 19
Larkins, Alfred ... 30 „
Lee, Henry 23 „
Littlewood, George ... 23 „
„ Elizabeth ... 24 „
Lumbuss, William ... 21 „
M’Kew, Walter ... 33 ~
Martin, Joseph ... ... 23 „
Maul, William ... ... 20 „
Maynard, James ... 18
Meggs, Thomas ... 19 „
Miles, Frederick ... 19 „
Munday, George ... 31 ~
Neville, James ... ... 40 „
„ Patrick ... 14 „
„ James, jun. ... 12 „
Newbury, John ... ... 26 ~
Norkett, William ... 22 „
„ Emma 26 „
„ Matilda ... 3 months.
Norman, William ... 24 years.
Nye, William 21 „
Oakley, Thomas... ... 27 ~
Pamplin, John ... . , 38 ~
Parish, Edward... ... 37 ~


AGE.
Parker, D. ... ... 28 years.
Parsons, William ... 18 „
Pearse, Enoch ... ... 28 ~
„ Mary Ann ... 30 „
„ Harriet ... ... 5 „
„ Maria Emily ... 3 ~
„ Frederick Charles 1 ~
Penfold, Thomas ... 27 „
„ Elizabeth Ann 27 „
„ George ... 10 months.
Penny, George ... ... 28 years.
Peppett, Alfred ... ... 25 „
Phillips, Henry William 19 „
Poiney, Charles... ... 31 „
~ Mary Ann ... 35 ~
„ Robert ... ... 8 „
„ Mary 1 „
Porton, Henry ... ... 28 ~
Quin, John ... ... 30 ~
Rawlins, Francis ... 26 ~
Raynor, Amos Frederick 27 „
~ Mary Ann ... 25 ~
„ Joseph Thomas 5 „
„ Charles Edward 1 „
Raynor, Thomas... ... 25 „
Reader, Thomas... ... 45 „
Reed, Edward ... ... 20 „
Reville, William Thomas 25 „
„ Elizabeth ... 27 „
„ Ellen 7
„ Emily 5 „
Reynolds, George ... 29 „
Richardson, George ... 30 „
Roberts, John ... ... 39 „
Robins, William ... 18 „
Rogers, Joseph ... ... 20 „
Rowley, Henry ... ... 21 „
Ruffle, Henry ... ... 24 „
„ Fanny 26 „
AGE.
Ruffle, Henry ... ... 3 years.
„ Fanny ... ... 1 year.
Salmon, Charles 18 years,
Sewell, Charles ... ... 38 „
Sherrin, William ... 29 „
~ Louisa ... ... 30 ~
„ Walter... ... 3 ~
Sims, David ... ... 27 „
„ David, junr. ... 4 „
Sims, William ... ... 30 „
„ Abra ... ... 37 „
„ Lucy 7 „
„ Mary 9 „
„ Sarah ... ... 5 ~
„ Susan 7 months
Slack, William 30 years
Smith, George ... ... 36 „
„ Mary Ann ... 29 „
Smith, James 19 „
Smith, James Peter ... 21 „
Smith, Sydney ... 40 ~
„ Charlotte ... 30 ~
„ George Henry ... 14 „
„ Caroline... ... 10 „
Smith, William... ... 22 „
Snelling, John 19 „
Standen, Samuel ... 26 „
Stephens, James ... 20 „
Stone, James ... ... 26 „
Stone, John ... ... 21 „
Stone, Stephen ... ... 32 „
Tack, William 21
Taplin, John ... ... 44 „
„ Caroline ... 43 „
„ Sarah ... ... 13 ~
„ Caroline... ... 10 „
Tapson, George 36 „
Tapson, Edmund, Junr. 16 „
Tough, Edwin ... ... 31 „


Ages
Tough, Ellen ... ... 38 years.
„ Jane Mary ... 6 „
Turner, John 24
Turner, Thomas 18
Wallis, E. ... 21
7 x. ??
Wallis, George ... ... 28
Waltos, John ... ... 30
Ward, George 20 „
Ward, Isaac ... ... 26 ~
„ Rebecca 26 „
Ward, Samuel ... ... 22
Ward, William 29
Ward, William ... ... 17
Warren, Alfred... ... 20
» Sarah 20
Webb, George ... ... 22
Webb, Thomas ... ... 30
„ Catherine ... 25
„ Henry 3 „
Ages.
Webb, Thomas ... ... 2 years.
» and baby... ... 1 month
Webster, \\ illiam .., 22 years
Weeks, William... ... 40 „
Wellbelove, John ... 18
Wells, Thomas ... ... 21
Whitburn, Charles ... 25 „
White, Henry ... ... 24
White, John 25 „
Williams, Thomas ... 30 years
Wilson, John 32 „
Wiltshire, George Ralph 30 ~
„ Catherine ... 33 „
Woods, George ... ... 21 „
Woods, William 38 ~
» Mary 40
„ Mary Anne ... 9 „
„ Busan ... ... 8 „
Young, Richard... ... 48 „
List of the Crew of the “Northfleet” Lost.
Knowles, Edward, Master
Gloack, Alexander, Ist Mate
Blyth, G.M., 2nd Mate
Stephen, Alexander, Carpenter
Assow, Lee, Steward
Suckles, Frederick, Cook
Williams, J, R., 2nd Cook
Kunde, Hermann, Surgeon
Rina Ido, J ohn, Sailmaker
Natir, Jonas
Gustafson, John
Thomson, Thomas
Anderson, August
Cogan, John
Sielaff, Franz
Hasselborn, Akel
Hansen, Hans
Hadborn, G.
Reynolds, Frederick E.
Webb, William
Thorpe, Arthur
Bailey, J. R.
Bennison, George
List of the Crew of the “Northfleet” Saved.
Easter, John, Boatsvain
Humphreys, Charles, 3rd Cook
Andero, M.
Lass, Robert
Bjounes, Theodore
Roberg, Albert
Hansen, Carl
Andersen, Carl
Watkins, Samuel
Beganson, John


Summary.
■
LOST.
SATED.
TOTAL.
Cabin Passengers (including Captain’s wife) ...
2
1
3
Steerage Passengers, viz. ; —
Men
177
71
248
Women...
41
1
42
Children between 1 and 12 years
43
1
44
Infants...
7
1
8
Crew (including Pilot) ...
23
11
34
293
86
379
An Account of the Ship and her Officers. —From Lloyd’s Register ot
Shipping, we learn that the good ship, “ Northfleet,” of 895 tons register, was
build at Korthfleet, on the Thames, in 1853, and classed A 1, 14 years.
In 1867, after a most rigid inspection, the surveyor reported so favourably
that a continuation of first-class was granted for nine years; and in December,
1872, while in dry dock, the ship was re-coppered, and examined thoroughly both
by the surveyor appointed by Government to watch specially all vessels intended
to carry passengers, and by Lloyd’s surveyors, who all reported so favourably
of the material and condition of the vessel, that an additional two years was
granted on the nine years’ extension, giving the “ Korthfleet ’’ six years A 1
at Lloyd’s, from the date of her recent departure from London.
The ship was in splendid trim, she had 340 tons of railway iron, and 260 tons
of general merchandise. Railway iron is a good and buoyant cargo when pro-
perly stowed, and ship masters prefer it to ordinary dead weight cargo. The
mode of stowing is thus—A few layers are placed lengthwise, i.e. , fore and aft
in the vessel, until a flat surface is gained, which insures a uniform pressure on
the timbers of the ship, and thus prevents any injury from straining; the rails are
then placed open, crossed diagonally, forming a perfect network, the centre of
gravity being maintained by keeping the iron denser in weight amidships; the
ship’s carrying capacity was 1,120 to 1,130 tons of coal, rice, or other dead weight
cargo. The whole of the between decks was devoted to the passengers, and fitted
under the supervision of the Board of Trade Commissioner, with all the recent
improved requirements.
She was the property of Messrs. John Patton, Jun., & Co., and had been
engaged in the India and China trade, under the command of Captain Oates, for
more than five years, during the whole of which time the late lamented Captain
Knowles served most creditably as chief officer.


Immediately preceding the “ Northfleet’s ” departure from dock, Captain
Oates, being subpoenaed by the solicitor for the Crown, in a pending criminal trial,
was reluctantly compelled to give up the command.
Haying been so intimately acquainted with Mr. Knowles for many years, and
feeling that his seamanlike qualities well fitted him for the post, Captain Oates
named him to the owners as the man best suited to succeed him in the command of
the good ship “ Northfleet,” which had been his cherished home so long.
This recommendation and the good opinion these gentlemen entertained of
Mr. Knowles, induced them to appoint him to the responsible post, which he
nobly filled until the day of his untimely death.
Mr. Oloack, who had served for several years as an officer in Messrs. J. Patton
and Co.’s employ, and possessed their full confidence, was telegraphed for, left his
wife and family in the North of Scotland at an hour’s notice, and joined the ship at
Gravesend. With scarce leisure to write any account of his new appointment to
his loved ones at home, he sailed as Chief Officer under Captain Knowles, and
perished while in the act of vainly endeavouring to restore order and carry out the
order, “ Clear away the remaining boats.”
Mr. Blyth, the Second Officer, had already served on board the “ Northfleet”
for the space of eighteen months, was a steady, trustworthy man, and well qualified
for his post; he leaves a wife and mother to mourn his untimely death.
The Carpenter, Alexander Stephens, had been two previous voyages in the
ship, was married a few days before Christmas to a young widow, who is now a
widow for the second time, at the age of 24. He was a steady, industrious,
thrifty man.
John Rinaldo, who had sailed in the ship as sailmaker, was, on account of
his straightforward, honest principles, kindly, even-tempered disposition, appointed
to the responsible post of storekeeper. He was a native of Sweden; he was
well educated, and possessed general information beyond his apparent position in
society.
Frederick Reynolds, and William Webb, midshipmen, were young gentlemen
of respectable family connection—the former having previously sailed in the
“Northfleet,” and the latter in another of Messrs. Patton & Co.’s ships—they were
both promising youths, and were looking forward to service as officers in the
employ, as soon as their experience would warrant promotion.
The Inquest.
An inquest on the body of Samuel Frederick Brand, a cabin passenger, who
was on board the ill-fated ship “ Northfleet,” the only one that has yet been picked
up, was opened on Saturday afternoon at the Town Hall, Lydd, before the Bailiff,


Mr. Thomas Finn, ex officio Coroner; Mr. Stringer, the clerk of the court, was also
present. A touching incident occurred, when bare-headed a sympathising group stood
around the body, a gentleman to whom readers of the Times are grateful for many
sweetly-told narratives in connection with this fearful casualty, stepped forwaidand
removed from his coat a little bouquet of violets and laid them on the breast of
the poor youth. Can one wonder that many an eye moistened ? Mr. William
Forster, of the firm of Latham and Co., Dover, Captain Oates, the former captain of
the vessel, and the representatives of the deceased, were also present. After the
jury had been sworn and had visited the body, the court re-assembled, and previous
to opening the proceedings Mr. "W illiam Forster said he had just received a telegram
from Dover, stating that Her Majesty had graciously sent to Lloyd’s to ascertain
the address of Mrs. Knowles, the widow of the captain, and the particulars of her
arrival and departure from Dover, thus showing the interest Her Majesty had evinced
in the sad occurrence. This announcement was received with the greatest satis-
faction, and but for the mournful occasion this feeling would have been expressed by
a ringing cheer. The first witness was
Captain Thomas Oates, who deposed—l was formerly captain of the “ Northfleet ”
and Captain Knowles was appointed, as I had to leave her very suddenly. I left
Gravesend the evening before the ship went to sea. The ship was taken in charge
by Captain Knowles, and a Gravesend pilot. The pilot thought he would get
out about two o’clock in the morning, but he did not get away tdl six.
Mr. Stringer —Of course she was under charge of the pilot ? M itness
Yes. I have seen the body of deceased, and I recognise it as the body of Mr.
Brand; he was a cabin passenger on board the Northfleet.” I had seen him
frequently previously to the “Northfleet” sailing. I know his father ; he is a surgeon,
residing at No. 23, Cornhill. I called upon him about business. By the Coroner
—I have no doubt about his identity. I produce a photograph of deceased while
living. The photograph was here handed to the jury.
Mr. Wollaston Knocker, solicitor, of Dover, here entered the room, and said
he appeared on behalf of the owners of the Murillo screw steamer, and asked
had he permission to be heard, and allowed to cross-examine the witnesses. Per-
mission was given.
John Stanley deposed—l am mate of the pilot cutter “ Princess,” No 3, of
London, and saw the wreck. The first thing I saw were blue lights and rockets
burning. This was on the night of the 22nd instant. I was called about a quarter
to eleven o’clock. I was on board the “ Princess ” pilot cutter. We were cruising
off Dungeness, There were a great many ships at anchor. I should say there were
from 200 to 300 sail.
What sort of night was it? —Very squally, dark, dirty night. It was as much
as we could do to carry all sail.


A\ as it clear enough for you to see the light of the vessels anchored near?—
No, not at all times.
At times could you ?—Yes.
Ihe Coroner—Were the squalls very severe?—Yes, at times the wind was
blowing W.N.W.
The Coroner—lt was not blowing from one point then ?—No, sir, it was very
shifty.
Were there any other pilot cutters cruising about in the bay ?—Well, sir, I
can’t say; there are so many vessels knocking about that we can’t at all times
make out the lights. Our station was from Dungeness, to Dymchurch. I saw r the
foreign cutters at anchor. It was my watch below. At half-past eleven o’clock
I was called, thinking I was wantei to ship a pilot. A ship was burning blue lights
and rockets. Before Igo any further, it was half-past ten when I was called. I
looked at the clock, and saw it was just half-past ten when I was called out. I
thought it was a ship wanting a pilot. It was my duty to turn out, and man the
boat to put a pilot on board.
The Coroner —Now, will you be good enough to tell the jury what you saw
when you came on deck ?
Witness—When I came on deck it wanted ten minutes to eleven. I had
my oilskin trousers on. I sang out, “How far is she off?” and they replied
“Not far.” When I came on deck I saw six or seven blue lights and rockets
burning all at once. As fast as one went out another was sent up. They were
nearly abreast of us. Dungeness Buoy was S.W. of us then. I thought they were
about a mile off I thought they were signals for a pilot; when we saw so many
lights being sent up we thought there was something more than ordinary about.
When a ship signals for a pilot we order all hands to get ready. We answer vessels
with “ flare-ups ”as quick as possible. I know her lights were answered by us before
I came on deck. We kept on answering her, and quicker than usual, because she was
burning so many lights. As soon as one flare-up went out we shoved up another.
The Foreman of the Jury—Do you know what lights the ill-fated ship was
burning previous to her being struck ?
Witness—l had previously noticed she was burning a good bright light; in
fact, a better light I had never seen in a main rigging. We got both boats ready,
and bore down upon the vessel.
The Coroner—There was no time lost in sending the boat to her ?—Witness—
No time whatever; both boats were immediately ready. It was a dark, dirty,
night. I could just see the lights of some of the vessels around us. I could
more particularly see the blue lights.
Coroner —From the time you came on deck till you got to the ship how long
did it occupy ? —Witness—Ten minutes.


Coroner—What did you make her out to be?—A ship iu distress. We saw
the ship going down head first. We sang out as hard as possible that we would
try and get all hands in the cutter.
Coroner —What did you see when the lights were burning ? —We saw people
with children clinging round them, crying for us to help them. I could see every-
body as plainly as I can see any one in this room, because we were so close to
them. We went as close to them as we could in a pilot cutter | in fact, we
ventured closer than we ought to have done. We saw people crowding towards
the boats; two boats were full of people. We tacked the cutter immediately
after passing the ship, and both our boats were lowered and sent to her. I had
one boat to myself, and proceeded to the ship at once.
Coroner—Wdiere were the people when you went to them? Some were
floating, and some were in the rigging, and some were in the boats. By the time
I got the boat lowered and arrived at the vessel she had sunk. I saw her gradually
going down. She was sinking at the time the boat was lowered. In going to the
vessel I shipped a sea in my boat, and my light was washed out. I could hear the
people close to me, but could not see them, owing to the light being out. I rowed
towards the ship, hearing cries from the rigging. I did not pick up any one before
I got to the rigging. I rowed round the ship to see what position she was in.
She had sunk by this time. I took twenty-one people altogether from the rigging ;
ten of these were from the mizen rigging. At the time I took the people from the
mizen rigging I had fourteen men in the boat, including myself. I then rowed
back to the ship, but did not get back till about one o clock. I had a mile to row ,
it was so dark that the pilot cutter had lost sight of me, and I did not know where
to find her. They did not know where we were; it would be dangerous for a
sailing vessel to get near a sinking vessel, or a small boat either. I knew the
cutter when I saw her by her light. I reached the cutter with those I had saved
between half-past twelve and a quarter to one. I put those I had saved from the
rigging on board the pilot cutter, and this batch included the pilot, whom X took
from the rigging. I then rowed back again to the vessel, and on my way back I
saw another boat, and asked them if they had picked any men from the rigging;
there was no reply. There were plenty of ships near. I returned again to the
wreck, and saw some men on the main rigging, and asked them if any other boat
had taken anybody off. They said, “No,” and I replied, “Well, my lads, keep
quiet, and I will take you off.” I took five men from the main rigging. I saw
six more in the fore rigging. I returned with the five men to the cutter, and lost
my light a second time. I could not have taken more than six men at one time,
as it would have been dangerous. I returned again, and took off six men from the
main rigging. The vessel at this time had sunk, and all that was visible above
water was her gallant yards. I passed several vessels iu going to the cutter. I


passed a ship at anchor, and I passed a steamer just coming to anchor. I did not
want help; they could not have helped me. I sang out to several ships that there
was a ship sinking, but there was no answer. If the ships had,gone there at an
earlier hour they might have rendered assistance. It would have been no use their
going there then, because I had taken the last of the survivors off the rigging.
The other boat saved four people who were clinging to a boat. The “ City of London ”
tug was lying near, and I think that if it had been possible for it to have gone
there earlier many more would have been saved. There were a great many ships
there, and had they known of the occurrence they could have helped. When I saw
the vessel it would have been of no use for them to have gone, as they could have
rendered no assistance.
Coroner Had there been any more boats present when you first saw the vessel
would more have been saved ?
Witness Ho, sir, when the ship went down, all went down with her, except
those who were clinging to the rigging. We took the signals for those of a ship
signalling for a pilot, and did not find out our error until we got close to the vessel.
If the vessel had not been in a safe position we should have taken the lights for
those of a vessel in distress. We always go to any vessel through a rocket-signal,
but seeing so many blue lights burnt we naturally thought it something more than
ordinary. I did not see the vessel lying there at anchor in the daytime. W r ewere
cruising near, and we must have seen her had she been at anchor. I saw her all
that day cruising off Dungeness. She was making her way to windward as fast as
she could. I think she brought up at anchor about 9.30 o’clock. She was in her
proper position tor a large vessel. We little ships are bound to give way to big
ships, and go further away. We don’t want to get in the roadstead of big
ships. I here was no better anchorage in Dungeness Hoads than where she was
anchored. When we got down to the wreck I saw the “ City of London” steam-
tug steam towards her. I saw another screw steamer just bringing up when
I got back to the cutter with the second lot of survivors. There were no lights
burning after the vessel had sunk, but I saw them there before she went down.
They were as good lights as ever I saw in a ship, and were burning in their proper
place. I took more particular notice of her riding-light than I did of any other,
because it was a particularly bright light. As I have said before, when I first
came on deck I thought from the light that was burning that they wanted a
pilot. We kept cruising about the spot till daylight the next morning (Thurs-
day), when we proceeded to Dover, and on our way we shipped two pilots, one
in a brig, and the other in a barque. On getting to Dover we landed those we had
saved from the wreck, and about half-past 10 on Thursday night we weighed
anchor and left Dover with the wind S.S.W. My watch was up at 12 o’clock.
I went below till 4 o’clock the next morning. When I got up again it was


blowing a fresh breeze. We kept cruising between Dungeness and Dymchurch,
as I felt certain that we should fall in with something of the wreck. I tacked my
cutter off the land, and about half-past 7 on Friday morning I thought I saw
a speck in the water. I was down off Dungeness Lighthouse, bearing west, and
about four miles from it. X ordered the vessel to be tacked immediately. I
went towards it to see what it was ; but for some minutes I could not do so. I
put two hands at the bows to look out, and went to the helm myself to steer close
to it. On coming near it I saw it was the body of a dead man, when I immediately
ordered a boat to be lowered and rowed towards it. I went in the boat myself. I
came up to it and put a rope round it. I fastened the rope to the boat and dragged
it towards the cutter. He was dressed, and wore a lifebelt. I could not get the body
into the boat without taking the belt off, so I took the liberty of cutting it away, and
by this means I managed to lift it into the cutter; this was at eight o’clock in the
morning. I laid the body on deck, and put something under his head. I then
unfastened his jacket, when a revolver fell out. I think it was a six-chambered
one. I saw three bullets in it. I brought the body to Lydd, and placed it in the
care of the chief boatman there. I also gave notice to the churchwarden. The
body has been identified as that of Mr. Brand, and the body now in the shed is the
same one that I picked up.
The Coroner; I should have supposed more boats would have arrived there
earlier?—Witness : Ho, sir, no small boat could have gone close enough in the
position the Northfleet was in till she had sunk under water, or else the sinking
ship would have sucked her in. A steamboat might have done so. A ship in the
position of the Northfleet would have sucked a sailing vessel down. If a steam-
boat laid close to her she might have saved some hands, but she would have not been
able to move her paddles without smashing or killing the people around her.
By the Coroner: After I came on deck and saw the blue lights burning, I said
it was something unusual.
By Mr. Knocker ; When the ship went down there was only one light burn-
ing, and that was the riding-light; it was by the aid of the blue lights that we saw
the people holding up their children. The part where I saw her light hoisted
would be under water when she sank. The forestay was under water. The riding-
light of a vessel is not placed on top of the mast. It is generally hoisted ten or
twelve feet from deck.
A Juryman : Could the steamer that ran the Northfleet down see her lights ?
—I should consider that the steamer could have seen the lights of the Northfleet at
any time. The lights could have been seen at least two or three miles off. We
could see her lights from any position we were in. We sailing vessels have not side
lights, we have only masthead lights. Our duty is not to get in the way of ships,
but get out of their way as much as possible.


The Coroner. VV ere the blue lights stationary, and were the lights in the
Northfieet such as are used by vessels when at anchor ?—Witness : Yes.
The Coroner: Then it is your opinion that the vessel was at anchor?—
Witness: Yes.
This was the conclusion of the evidence, when Mr. Stringer said that the coroner
had desired him to tell the jury that for the present the inquiry had better be
adjourned for a few days, because it was one respecting an occurrence in which many
had been lost. They must gain some further information respecting the going down
of the vessel, for of course it would have been a great sacrifice of life for which some
one might or might not be responsible. It was very desirable that some further
information should be obtained respecting the sinking of the Northfieet, notwith-
standing there could be no doubt that the young man whose body they had just seen
was on board of the ill-fated vessel when she went down.
The Coroner considered it advisable to adjourn the inquest till Saturday next,
when the inquiry would be proceeded with, and all the additional evidence and facts
would be adduced.
The Adjourned Inquest.
The adjourned inquest was resumed at Lydd, on Saturday, February Ist, Mr.
Finn, the ex-officio coroner, presiding, and Mr. Henry Stringer, the town clerk of
Lydd, acting, Mr. William lorster, of the firm of Latham & Co., representing
Lloyds. Mr. Knocker, of Dover, again appeared as representing the owners of the
Murillo,” which is believed to have caused the catastrophe. At the opening of the
court, Mr. Stringer read a correspondence between himself and Mr. Knocker,
regarding an application to have the captain and watch of the Murillo examined as
yesterday—rather a difficult matter seeing that they are in Spain—and the reply of
Mr. Knocker, who declined to admit the identity of the Murillo as the peccant craft.
John Easter, the boatswain, was the first witness called. He said : I belonged
to the Northfieet. We unmoored at Gravesend on Friday morning, 17 th January,
and went down in tow of a steamer to the Ness. Captain Knowles was in command.
She was an emigrant vessel, taking out emigrants to Hobart Town, to make a new
railway. I don’t know how many passengers exactly, but I believe 378. There
were 378 all told, of whom thirty-four were the crew. A pilot was on board. I knew
the deceased as being on board as Mr. Brand, and as one of the passengers. He was a
fine, able young gentleman, apparently not over twenty. The whole crew were all
able men, and the navvies, I believe, were under Mr. Brand, next to the captain,
who, I believe, had the chief command, Mr. Brand being a person of some influence
amongst them. The first mate was Mr. John Gloack. It is a Scotch name. The
second mate was Mr. Blyth. I don’t know his Christian name. The only other
officers were myself, and the carpenter, Alexander Stephens. I knew him as Sandy
4


Stephens. There were no midshipmen. The pilot in charge was Mr. Geo. Brack.
On Friday evening we got off the North Foreland, and by 11 p.m. we got off
Dungeness, lugged by a steam-tug. She left us on the Saturday night, and
then we made sail and proceeded down Channel. TV e made all sail and got on
down Channel, hut the wind got southward on us, and we ran back to
Margate Hoads, and remained there till Tuesday morning. Then we got
under weigh again, and got as far as the Ness again, when the wind freshened,
and we had to take in canvas again. On TV ednesday morning, when
somewhere near Fairleigh, we bore up, and ran back again to Dungeness.
We anchored about three miles from the land abreast of us, not the lighthouse
point. I don't know the bearings. I did not look out for that. The lighthouse
was on the port-bow as we headed in shore. It was about 12.30 noon when we
arrived. It was very dirty weather when we ran back, blowing hard, with squalls
of rain and wind. There were a large number of other ships at anchor, neaily 200
sail I should think. The pilot was on board, and he selected the anchoring ground.
I heard him give the order to let go the anchor. I was close by tending the chain
at the windlass at the time. The vessels round us were only just a nice clear berth
of each other. The nearest was about two cables’ lengths —that is, 240 fathoms,
there being about 120 fathoms in each chain; so the distance would be 240. The
nearest ship to us was the “ Corona ” —a large ship with painted ports. She was
riding head to "wind. The wind was to the westward, and the ship was nearer the
Ness light than we were. 1 did not observe the other ships but there was a baique
as far off as the “ Corona ” on the other side of us, and other ships within a short
distance. It was clear enough to see the land all the way along where we anchored,
I made no exact observation of the position of the ships between us and the land.
I think we were the outside vessel, or very near it; being a very big ship, we were
one of the outside vessels. I don’t know that there is a big-ship roadstead, and a
small-ship roadstead, at the Ness. There were ships astern of us, also just clear of
us, and on a line with us. We were heading in for the shore when we anchored,
the wind being to the westward. Everything was orderly on board when we an-
chored, and no confusion. I had sailed with Captain Knowles before, but not as
captain. He was a good sailor, so were the mate, and second mate. I have been
anchored in the same place before many times, and in about the same position. I
have anchored inside of it, but never further out. I think it was a proper position
for a big ship. I think the ordinary track of steamers would be a mile and a half
outside of where we were lying. TVe were not anchored in their ordinary track.
No steamers passed us in the daytime, but a steamer brought-up the same
night about two o’clock, not far from us. There was a light screw-boat anchored
in the roads when we came in. She was a mile inshore, and ahead of us. I
don’t know the number of women and children on board, but I think there


were between thirty and forty married people ; I don’t know bow many children.
Nothing happened during the day; all went along straight and quiet.
By Captain Oates ; The passengers were equal to 310 adults, by the emigration
officers’ report, two children under twelve being equal to one adult. No change
took place in the shipping that day. If there were pilot cutters about they were
brought up inside. Some of our people knew the “Corona” in London; that
was how I knew her name. I did not see it myself. We set the evening watch at
the usual time, and before sundown we set the masthead light, about 5.30 or 5.45 p.m.,
and also the riding-light, which was in the starboard fore-rigging in the usual
place, about here (making a rough sketch of the shrouds of a ship). No matter
how a vessel was coming she could always see that light. I could see the riding-
lights of all the other vessels, and also the Ness light on the land, but not the
lights in the houses. Watch was set at 8.0 p.m. The night was dry, dark, and
fine, but rather hazy. It was not a rough night. I remained on deck till about
10.30. The watch were the carpenter and two of the men in the forecastle,
their watch being up at 11 o’clock. Nothing occurred up to the time of my
going down below. The light was burning brilliantly until the water put it out
when she went down. The first thing I heard was the officer of the watch and
the two men shouting out, “ Steamboat ahoy! where are you coming to ? ” That
was about a quarter of an hour after I had gone below, and had not seen the steamer.
I stayed till I heard the cries, and then I went on deck; it was near on the stroke
of eleven. Then there was a crash like the report of a gun. I knew from the
hailing it was a steamer that had run into us. I ran on deck, and met the captain.
He told me to turn all hands out to man the pumps. I then saw the steamer
backing astern from the ship, but I did not think she was going away altogether.
She ran on to us just before the main hatchway. The captain gave me orders
to take a light and go below, to see what the mischief was. I went down with the
pilot for that purpose, the carpenter being at the pumps. I found the starboard
side all stove in. I saw Mr. Brand on deck, on the poop, I came on deck, and
got orders from the captain to get blue lights and rockets, and clear away the gun.
When we got to the gun the sponge head came off, and then, when I tried to get it
out, the worm-head came off, so the gun was net fired ; it was quite useless.
The captain then gave me orders to clear away the starboard lifeboat. The
steamer was then going away round our stern. She was hailed by pilot,
carpenter, passengers, and crew to stand by us. We all hailed her, and told her we
were in a sinking state, with 400 souls on board. There was no reply. They could
hear us, I have no doubt about that. I never saw distinctly any one on board,
but I think I should have seen any one on the bridge. She made off down Chan-
nel. None of the watch were saved. The captain told me to take all the women;
and children I could in the starboard lifeboat. I tried to get the boat clear, but I


could not, because the people all got round me and filled the boat. During this
time they were firing rockets and blue lights. We had six boats —two of them life-
boats. I daresay they would have held nearly all the people, if we could have
stowed them on board ; but they would not let us clear them away. I could not for
a long time clear away the boat, which was full of men. I threw some of them
out. The boat was then on the davits. In lowering the boat she got stove. This
was the one I left the ship in. The captain was then trying to keep the people
back while we swung out the boat. Just before we swung the boat the captain
brought his wife. He then got a little order amongst the passengers, and we suc-
ceeded in swinging out the boat and lowering her'. But in going down she got stove.
I lay on my oars till I got the order from the captain to leave. He said,
“ Boatsvain, is the boat all right ? ” I said, “Ho ; the boat is stove.” He then
said, “ Shove off ! And God bless you ! Mind your charge ! God bless you ! ”
I then shoved off, with the captain’s wife, six of the crew, and four passengers.
When I got a reasonable distance I saw the ship go down. I then pulled to the City
of London steam-tug with the boat in a sinking state. Before leaving the ship I
saw the passenger named Brand. Mr. Brand had on a cork jacket belonging to
the boat I was in. I could see, also, he was wearing his watchguard. Mr. Brand,
the captain, and the doctor, must have gone down together. I did not see any other
boat got down. They were working at them when I was away. When I got to
the steam-tug and discharged my passengers, I shoved off and picked up four
more; but I never saw Mr. Brand again after leaving the ship. We were landed
in Dover.
By a Juror : I believe the ship lies very near three miles from the shore. The
proper course of a steamer would be a mile outside us going down Channel.
By the Coroner: The captain was mostly engaged after the shock in seeing to
the rockets and blue lights and giving orders. H e did all he could to save the
women, and to induce the men to leave the poop and let the boats be lowered. He
pushed some of them off the poop. From the time the ship was struck till when
she went down was not more than twenty minutes.
By Mr. Knocker : When I first saw the steamer she was two fathoms off.
She had a straight up and down stem, and had both lights burning. She was trying
to starboard her helm when she was first hailed. I did not hear Captain Knowles
give any order to turn in, nor say that the damage was not great, and it would be
all right. I myself told the captain that I did not think the injury was so bad as
the captain thought.
Samuel Kingston, the master of the steam-tug “ City of London ”: On Wednes-
day evening, January 22nd, I brought up at Dungeness about two o’clock in
the afternoon. We were lying about a quarter of a mile below the Boar Sand
Buoy, to the westward of the light-house. A great many vessels were at anchor in


the bay. The “ Northfleet ’ ’ was about two miles, or two miles and a half, to the east-
ward ot me. It is a place where large ships usually anchor. I saw lights at night,
and I have no doubt hers amongst them. I was on deck about 10.30 in the evening,
and I saw a rocket go up. I then counted seven blue lights continuously burning,
and rockets going up in a minute. When I saw the seven rockets together I
thought it was a collision, and got my anchor directly. I proceeded to the spot and
saw more rockets and blue lights. Then it was just beginning to rain, and set in
very dark. After I was started I saw no steamer. I think it took me half an
hour to get to the “ Horthfleet.” She was then going down. I had not seen anything
of the steamer. All at once the light disappeared, and I saw she was a ship going
down. I heard cries for help, and I threw life lines and buoys overboard, and told
the people to cling to them. One man close by the tug called out to me to save him.
I threw him a line and got him to the fore sponson of the tug, where three men
hauled him in. I then heard screeches all round, and almost lost my senses for a
moment, and at that moment the lifeboat came alongside. I sang out to my mate,
“ For God’s sake jump into the boat and see how many lives you can save.” He
went away, taking buckets to bale out with, and saved four men, but she returned to
the ship in a sinking state, and in half a minute would have gone down herself.
I he night was so dark, and the cries coming from all round me, that I was afraid to
move the engines, so I was obliged to let the tug drive until we heard no more
cries. I saw on coming up a very bright light burning, but I did not know until
the ship went down that it was her riding light.
By the Coroner : If I had been a quarter of an hour earlier at the scene of
the disaster I could have laid my tug alongside, and have saved a great many lives.
I saved thirty-four lives. In fact, I may say thirty-eight, counting my own men’s
lives, for they would have sunk in a few seconds more; but I carried thirty-four to
Dover. I was driving away with the cries which I heard all round, and I was
afraid to move the boat for fear of injuring the people in the water. The pilot
boat would not have lived another three minutes if they had not got alongside me.
She was half full of water. I got thirty-four into Dover. A man named Brown
swam to our fore sponson, and three of us hauled him in. Amongst those who
came on board was the Captain’s wife, and Mrs. Sturgeon with a baby.
Mr. William Forster handed the witness a letter from the Lord Mayor,
thanking him on behalf of the committee for his brave conduct in saving the lives
of thirty-four of the passengers. This was read in court, and excited much
applause.
The next witness called was Thomas Henry Rogers. He said : lam a Trinity
House Pilot. I was on board the pilot cutter “ Princess ”on the 22nd January.
The cutter was cruising in the East Bay, Dungeness. About 10.30 p.m. we saw
rockets to the westward, about two miles off. We proceeded in that direction,


expecting to find it was a ship requiring a pilot. We answered the signal as usual,
by flare-up lights every few minutes. I saw myself six rockets at one time, and
then six others, a proceeding that is unusual. I made the remark at the time. I
judged that it was a collision. Then there were blue lights, as we were proceeding
west as fast as we could possibly go. Then we found it was the “ JSTorthfleet.”
We had seen her anchor before dark where she was. Hearing so many voices on
board, we knew it was the “ Northfieet.” We did not take notice whether she had
her riding lights, the ship being illuminated with lights. We had a boat towing
astern, and into that Stanley (the mate) and three of the crew got. We made all
preparations to get out a second boat, which was on deck. I got into that second
boat, with Mr. Blaxland and Mr. Randall, pilots, and the steward of the cutter.
We proceeded then in the direction of the cries; but as we slipped our first boat
the “ Northfleet ” went down. There was then nobody to be seen at all, though
we had a light in our boats. We spoke to the “ City of London,” which was
amongst the people. The heaviest cries coming from the windward, we pulled to
windward, and came firstly to a large spar with no one on. Then we came to a
boat bottom upwards with no one on, and then we came to a boat with four people
on, whom we took off into our boat, and in doing so got our own boat half full of
water. They were taken on board the “ City of London ” steam-tug. As we
pulled in these four, there were cries all round, but our boat was full and with the
water had as much as she could carry. We could not have saved any more. It
took us a quarter of an hour to bale out, but then we could hear no more cries. We
pulled then to the wreck, but the other boat of the cutter had saved all out of the
rigging. It was imprudent for our boats to be out as they were. If more boats
had been out other lives would have been saved. When we had baled out we could
see neither the cutter nor the vessels in the roads, and we towed for twenty minutes
before we got into the roads. We burnt blue lights then on the tug before we
could make our position. The intention was that the cutter was to tend both boats,
bnt she could not do it. When she found we were near the tug she went back after
the first boat, in which Stanley was for an hour before he could get rid of them.
The cutter did her best, and did well in saving those she did save that night.
James Pilcher is the captain of the cutter. In picking up the people we did not
see any other ships, though they were not more than four cable lengths, off. One
with 308 women on board, the “ Corona,” was lying close to her. We hailed her
before daylight in the morning to know whether she had saved any of the pas-
sengers of the “ Horthfleet,” but we got no answer returned to us. One of the
pilots hailed her. When I was in the boat it was away out to sea, the cutter being
also outside. There was no ship that could have heard the cries except the
“ Corona,” which was to leeward, and could hear them as well as we could. It was
the cutter which hailed the “ Corona.” I don’t know whether Stanley also hailed


her when passing in. I have been a pilot for five years, and have been mate and
master in the cutter for thirteen years, seven years a North Sea pilot, and pilot to
London, so I know the locality, and I consider the “ Northfleet’s ” berth a good
and safe one for a large ship, and steamers bound either east or west ought to be
outside of where she was altogether. We went close under the stern of the
“ Northfleet ”in the afternoon, but I did not see the name of the “ Corona.” The
steamer which struck the “ Northfleet ” if steering a proper Channel course would
have gone on shore at Dungeness if she had kept on. She was two miles inside the
proper track for a steamboat. When we were about two miles east of the “ North-
fleet,” running from her, we saw a steamer running down Channel; that was about
ten o’clock as near as possible. I have no doubt that was the steamer which caused
the collision. When we first saw the rockets, I said to the captain of the cutter,
“ I think that is a collision off Dungenes ; ” but he said, “ Oh, no ; it is only two
of the Bremen boats saluting each other. I have often had a chase after them/’
They are in the habit of firing off rockets to each other, and I think it is high time
that was put an end to. We were two miles inside of the steamer which caused the
collision when we saw her. So I could not tell whether she was then steering the
usual Channel course. Up to the time of the collision lights were distinctly visible,
and therefore there was no excuse for the steamer on the ground of darkness. I
was on board the cutter when the body of Mr. Brand was discovered, and saw it
brought on board. His watch had stopped at seven minutes past eleven o’clock.
An inventory was made of that and everything found on him. There is a large
ship and a small ship roadstead. The “ Northfleet ” was lying in the large ship
roadstead, and in a very nice berth for a ship of her size.
By Mr. Knocker : I think about half an hour elapsed between the rockets first
going up and the ship going down. Steamers do bring up in the same roadstead
as where the " Northfleet ” was lying, and one brought up outside of the “ Corona ”
on the same night
John Beveridge ; I am a fish curer of Berwick-upon-Tweed. I was not a
passenger, and I know nothing of this matter. A further examination of this
witness showed that he had been summoned, and replied that he knew nothing
about it, and insisted if they wanted him to come they must send him his expenses,
which was done by Messrs. Patton, and then, and not till then, the canny old Scot
came on to the scene of the disaster.
The boatswain then explained that the real John Beveridge was a tall, thin
man,
George Pout: lam master of the lugger “ Mary,” of Kingsdown, Beal. On the
22nd January, I was in the lugger in Dungeness Roads, at anchor. It was a dark,
dismal night, with 250 ships at anchor. I saw the “Northfleet” come in and
anchor about 12.30 on that day. I have been a sailor thirty years, and a channel


pilot twenty-five years. It was a good berth for a ship of her size, and two miles
inside the course of steamers. I should have selected such a place to bring up a
ship of her size. I was called up at 10.50 by our clock, and went on deck and saw
a ship to leeward throwing up rockets. She was about a mile off, as I judge. We
turned out all hands, and got our anchor. At first we thought it was a steamer
throwing up rockets for a pilot, as they frequently do off Dungeness, and then when
we saw them come so fast, we were pretty sure it was a collision. We did not
know at the time, as there were vessels between us, that it was the “ Horthfleet.”
We proceeded to the spot as quickly as possible, passing several vessels, perhaps
eight or ten, on the way, but we did not hail them. I could see the ship’s riding
light, when the rockets were going up, and thought that the ship was drifting. I
steered for it, and found that she was anchored. We ran directly to the ship’s stern,
and we were lowering our sails when we saw three blue lights burning at the same
time on board. One man on our bows sang out, “ Hard up, here is a boat right
under our bows ! ” I was at the helm. The people were crying out, “ Save us,
save us, for God’s sake save us; the ship is sinking!” We got our sails down,
but we shot past the boat, and I stayed round and ran towards her. We were close
to the ship then, and I sang out, “ Ship ahoy ! ” and we could see the people on the
poop by the blue lights, but they were screaming, and they could not hear us. We
got off five people from the boat, and while I. was turning my head T saw that the
ship had sunk. We took out of that boat, which was in a sinking state, thirty
people. She had no plug, and only one oar, with the water up to her thwarts. She
would have sunk in five or six minutes. When we got the people in we made sail,
and stood in right for the ship, we having been blown to seaward by the wind off
the land. We got close in, but we could neither see nor hear anything. We heard
no cries after taking the people out of the boat. The people were wet and
cold, and we thought we would make the quickest passage we could up to Dover
with them. I think it was about twenty minutes to twelve when the ship went
down, judging from the time when we weighed anchor and got to the ship, not more
than twenty or thirty yards from her. We did not like to stand in closer than we
did after rescuing the people in the boat, as we did not know what wreckage might
be floating about, and a very slight touch would have stove our lugger, and sent us
to the bottom too. I saw nothing of any steamer that could have caused the
collision.
James Sumner, Chief Boatman at Ho. 2 Battery, Coast Guard Station,
Dungeness : I was not on the look-out on the night of the 22nd of January, but
I was called about 11 o’clock, and then there were no lights visible except the
anchor lights of the ships in the roads. The patrol called me to tell me a vessel
was burning blue lights and rockets, but all was quiet when I got out. I remained
out half or three-quarters of an hour, and nothing was to be seen. Next morning


I observed the sunken vessel at two and a half or three miles, bearing E.S.E. from
No 2 Battery by compass. I ordered the boat to be got out and launched, when
I saw a ship’s boat pulling towards the shore between Nos. 1 and 2 Batteries. I
was then told by the pilot of the “ Corona,” who came ashore in that boat, that it
was the emigrant ship “ Northfleet ” which was sunk. I then went to No. 1, and
our station boat came and picked me up, and we went off to the wreck, speaking
the hovelling lugger “Pilgrim,” of Kingsdown, Her boat had been close to unbend-
ing the top-gallant sails. He told me they saw the light, but did not know what
to make of it, and did not get under way till daylight. The “ Corona ” was lying
in shore of the “Northfleet” towards Dungeness Light, about 450 or 500 yards.
The “Northfleet” was lying outside of all, drifting at that time. The captain
of the “ Corona,” which was of Dundee, from London, bound to Melbourne, told
me he was very much annoyed to think that his ship was so near, and he was not
called to render any assistance, and that with his boats he could have saved
hundreds of the passengers, but that his watch had never called him nor reported
anything to him. I did not speak to the watch. He said the watch had seen the
rockets and blue lights, and had heard the screams, but did not know what to make
of it, and that he, the pilot, and the chief mate, heard nothing of it until 4 in
the morning. He said there were two men and a petty officer forming the anchor
watch. I don’t know his name. I spoke an Italian barque, which was about 600
yards in shore of the “ Northfleet.” I spoke to the pilot, and he said he knew nothing
of the “Northfleet ” until daylight, and that no one had ever called him. I spoka
a vessel belonging to Eye, a brigantine, and the master said he knew nothing of
it until daylight. I spoke to the captain of a three-masted schooner on hind in o',
and he said the same thing—that the anchor-watch had seen the lights, but had
reported nothing to him. My people told me they did not know whether it was
a ship wanting a pilot, or whether it was a collision.
By the Jury; The captain of the “Corona” did not tell me that he had
put two men in irons for not calling him.
The Coroner then said that there was not evidence enough to enable them to
say what ship had run down the “ Northfleet,” and therefore he must adjourn the
inquiry for the present, but that full notice would be given of its resumption.
The funeral of Mr. Samuel Frederick Brand took place in the ancient little
town of New Komney, four miles away, the next afternoon, and was of .a very
impressive character. The body had been placed in a handsome oak coffin, and a
number of bunches of violets, maidenhair fern, and camelias had been placed on
the breast of the corpse, whilst on the velvet and silk pall which covered the coffin
were wreaths of immortelles, which were buried with the body. The cortege left
the residence of the Misses Buckhurst, at Eomney, where the body had been
5


removed tlie preceding evening from Lydd tliese ladies are connections of the
deceased. The hearse was followed by Dr. Brand, the father, and Mr. John Brand,
a brother; next came Mr. EL D. Walker, a county magistrate ; and Captain Oates,
Mr. W. D. Walker, J.P., and sub-agent for Lloyd’s ; Mr. Forster, of the firm of
Latham and Co., Lloyd’s agents at Dover; Mr. John Jones, J.P., Dymchurch; Mr.
John Humphreys, and Captain Henry Stringer, who conducted the inquest for the
bailiff of Lydd on Saturday. The blinds in every window in Lydd and New Eomney
were drawn down, and large numbers of persons witnessed the departure of the
funeral from one town and its arrival in the other. The vicar of St. Nicholas
Church, the Eev. E. Smith, officiated; and Mr. Fryse, of Ashford, performed a
mournful dirge on the organ as the body was taken into the church, and the Dead
March in Saul ”as it was taken out into the churchyard. The grave had been dug
under a fine old yew tree, and it is a singular fact that it is very near that of a
relative of Mr. Brand; whilst from it can be seen, in the distance, the spars of the
“ Northfleet,” just visible above the surface of the sea. The churchyard was
crowded, and most of the lookers-on were unable to control their emotion as the
last solemn rites were performed over the remains of a fine young English gentle-
man who perished with an heroic captain, both doing their duty bravely to the
last. Frequently since, the funeral fresh flowers have been placed on the grave by
sympathizing friends.
It is over this grave that it is proposed to erect a —
NATIONAL MONUMENT
To the memory of those
Who perished in the ill-fated ship
“ NORTHFLEET.”
Emblematic of the grief of England, and as
a trilmte of respect for those whose loss is
mourned; whose characters are admired
and venerated.


CHAPTER II.
NARRATIVES OF THE SURVIVORS.
Among all tlie sad cases of desolation and bereavement occasioned by tbe
wreck of the “ Horthfleet,” few excited greater sympathy than that of poor little
Maria Taplin, a child ten years of age.
bhe left London in the ATorthfleet ” with her father, mother, and two sisters.
The father, John Taplin, was going to Tasmania to work as a labourer in the
formation of the railway, and his two married daughters were to follow in the next
ship that left for Hobart Town. On the night of the wreck they were all sleeping
in then berths, when the crash of the collision aroused them. The poor mother told
the children to dress themselves, and when this was done they all rushed on deck.
Mrs. Taplin put Alaria into a boat, but she had to get out again while it was
lowered into the water. Her father then replaced her in the boat, and endeavoured,
but in vain, to save his wife and other children. The “ Horthfleet ” settled down,
and poor little Maria drifted away from her in a boat in which there were the
captain’s wife, Lucy Sturgeon and her baby, and thirty men.
After a brief stay at the Sailors’ Home, she was taken to the home of a gentle-
man who lived close by, and remained there until the following day.
It was soon discovered by Maria’s new friends that she had two married sisters
living at Holloway, so they were at once communicated with, and they expressed a
wish for the child to go to them at once.
Airs. Knowles kindly took charge of her during her journey to London, and
she remained with her sister for about ten days.
Meanwhile, letters were received from all parts of the kingdom, expressing
the most tender commiseration for the poor little orphan so suddenly and awfully
deprived of her earthly parents. Alany loving mothers offered her a home, but
the dear child’s own wish was to return to the friends who had taken her from the
Sailors’ Home that terrible Thursday morning, when, with an almost broken heart,
she wept for her lost father, mother and sisters, who were hidden from her sight by the
cruel waves, as the boat which bore her from the wreck drifted away to be cast
hither and thither until its precious freight was rescued by the steam-tug “ City of
London.”
John Dixon, the Engineer, thus tells his own sad story :
“I joined the ‘Northfleet’ on Monday, January 13th. When I got to Gravesend,
in consequence of the engineer, who had been engaged for the condensing engine,
failing to turn up, I was employed in his place. Captain Oates got a man down


from the works where the engine was built, and he spent a day on board, in order
to show me the construction and the working of the machine, and as I am an engineer,
I soon picked it up and found I could work it with ease. I was going out to
Tasmania with my wife and children, to be employed as engine-driver on the
Tasmanian Railway.
I had been a driver on the North London Railway for two years and six
months.
I had been two years and a half on the Great Eastern Railway, and before
that I was employed in the same capacity for two years in the East Indies.
Altogether I have been an engine-driver twenty years, ten of which I spent
on the Caledonian Railway, under Mr. Sinclair.
My wife and two little girls went on board the Northfleet with me. Ihe
youngest child was eleven months old, and the elder a little over two years.
On the night of the wreck I went to bed about half-past 9. M r e w r ere in
the married couples’ quarters and had one large bunk to ourselves.
I had turned in, as nearly as I can remember, about an hour, when I heard
the loud crash of the collision, which took place on the starboard side of the ship,
w T here we were lying. I thought I should only add to the general confusion if I
went on deck, so I remained below a little time. I told my wife not to be
frightened and to keep quiet; but after a while, hearing the cries on deck, I went
up to see if there was really any danger. I was alarmed to find that the vessel
was sinking fast. I returned to my bunk, and told my wife to dress herself and
wrap the children up in a shawl. She very quietly did so, and went with me to the
deck. I assisted her on to the poop and placed my arms around her. She had
both her children in her arms, so that I was in reality supporting them all. I
don’t think I had been on the poop more than a minute, when the ship seemed to
have so sunk that the poop was on a level with the water. It was very rough, and
a wave suddenly struck me and jammed me between the cabin sponson and the
front of the poop, at the same time carrying my wife and children out of my arms.
I don’t know whether they were hurt, but they disappeared in an instant.
I never heard or saw more of my wife and bairns. The first thing I recollect
was, that I found myself in the water, with the tackle of some rigging around my
legs. I was sufficiently conscious to know that unless I got myself clear of that, I
should be sure to go down, although lam a very good swimmer. I was in the
midst of a number of poor people who were drowning. It was a terrible sight, for
they were dragging each other down, as fast as possible and the shrieks of the
women and the shouts of the men for help could be heard all around.
After a time I managed to get clear of the tackle, and then I swam as w'ell as
I could with my left arm. Three of my ribs and my breast-bone ami collar-bone
were broken, so one side of me was disabled altogether.


After a time, I came in contact with one of the life-boats, which was bottom
upwards.
After a deal of trouble I managed to get on it. There were five others upon
the bottom of the boat, and we remained there I don’t know how long; but it
seemed three or four hours. We tossed about and the waves came rushing over us,
but still we contrived to hold on to the boat, with the exception of two who were
washed off. The other three and myself were picked up by the pilot cutter, and
then passed into the “ City of London ” tug.
Upon landing at Dover, Dixon was carried to the Seamen’s Almshouse
Hospital, a good old Dover institution very little known to any but those whom
it personally benefits. It is a quaint old house supported by an ancient endowment,
and presided over by a worthy matron (the widow Howes), who is known to all
connected with the Hospital as “ The good Mother.” Well does she deserve the
title, for her unremitting kindness to all under her charge, her bright cheery ways
and kind old face, endear her to all who, either as patients or visitors, have the
entree at the Dover Seamen’s Hospital.
Thomas Biddies, the man who was shot by Captain Knowles for refusing to
obey orders, gave the following account of the catastrophe. He is a single man,
and was going out to Tasmania as a labourer:—He retired to rest at about half-
past 10 on the evening of the 22nd, and he thinks he had been in.bed not quite
half an hour when the vessel received a very severe shock. On getting out of bed
he ascertained that the vessel had been run into by a steamer, and almost
immediately after he had received this information, the ship’s carpenter having
examined the injured part of the vessel, gave orders for all hands to get on deck as
quickly as possible, for the vessel was sinking. Biddies went up on deck with the
rest, where a scene of great confusion presented itself. The unfortunate emigrants
were streaming up on the deck half dressed and almost mad with fright; rockets
were fired off; bells were rung, and the usual signals of distress were all quickly
given. Biddies thinks he remembers one gun being fired. The pumps were set to
work almost immediately, and almost every one on board worked with hearty good-
will for about fifteen minutes. Every effort to gain on the water ceased, however,
when at the expiration of that time it was discovered that the water had reached the
second deck, the floating boxes underneath which could be heard thumping against
the upper deck. Biddies very much wanted to save something he had in his chest
below, and left the pump to go below for the purpose of doing so, when he found
that the water had already reached the top of the steps leading down to the deck in
which his cabin was situated. The confusion now increased on deck, some men
were going about to find their wives and children, some were preparing for the
awful catastrophe which every one knew must soon happen unless they received
help from on shore or from a passing vessel, by laying hold of spare spars, ladders,
pails, &c., indeed anything .that would float, while others were rushing frantically


to the boats. But amid all was heard the firm voice of Captain Knowles, who.
having seen his wife into one of the boats, stood at the wheel giving directions for
the firing of signals, and devising the best means for saving as many lives as
possible out of 400. “ The women first. I’ll blow the man’s brains out that dares
to get into a boat.” But this threat came almost too late. Biddies saw that the
boats on either side were filling fast with men, and seeing no reason why he should
not make an effort for his life as well as the rest, he jumped into a boat at the stern
almost immediately under the captain’s eye, in which the captain s wife vas sitting
under the care of the boatswain, and crouched up into the bow. But Captain
Knowles saw the movement, and anxious that every opportunity of escape should
be given to the frightened women, he ordered him out. Biddies knew that the
vessel would sink almost immediately he got on board, and that this was his last
chance of escape, so he resolutely refused to obey. The captain repeated the order,
and threatened to fire if it was not obeyed.
The boatswain, who had charge of the captain’s wife, attempted to force him
out, but it was of no avail. Captain Knowles motioned to the boatswain to stand
clear, and discharged his revolver at Biddie’s head, and he almost felt the ball pass
over it. The captain, discovering that the first shot had not hit its intended mark,
fired again at the miserable man, and this time with effect, for the ball em-
bedded itself in the flesh just above the left knee. Biddies almost forgot the pain
which followed, for the shrieks and cries for help proceeding from the now fast sinking
vessel, which were awful, almost drowned the sound of the alarm bell, which rang
incessantly. The boat in which Biddies had escaped but barely with life was still
lying alongside, and the poor creatures still on board, finding that it was the only
available chance of escape with their lives, made a rush to the stern of the vessel
to get in, but Captain Knowles still persevered in endeavouring to save the
women. Again the revolver was raised at the first man who entered the boat; the
trigger was pulled, but fortunately for the man, nicknamed by the crew Billy
Ducks,” the pistol missed fire. The boat was soon filled with the five others, and
before Captain Knowles could offer any further remonstrance, the ropes were cast
off, and the boat was rowed hurriedly away to the tug, which had just steamed up
to the spot, and lit up the horrible scene with her lights. Hardly had the boat,
containing nine persons, the captain’s wife, the boatswain, and four labourers,
including Biddies, together with three of the ship’s crew, got alongside the tug,
’ when, by the gleam of the last rocket in the sky and the lights from the tug, the
figure-head of the Northfleet was seen slowly to sink under water. The crowded
stern rose up in the sea, and with a loud rushing noise almost immediately dis-
appeared under water, leaving nearly 400 people struggling for their fives amongst
the waves. Biddies says that this was a scene that neither he nor any on board the
tug will ever forget. The shrieking women, and the loud cries of the men for


help, were awful, and must have been beard miles off. Some of those that could
not swim were floating in the water on barrels and pails, of which they were
obliged to leave go from sheer exhaustion. Biddies noticed one friend of his in
the water, a married man, who, with his wife and only child, was clinging to a
ladder, when a wave came and washed all three off—man, woman, and child sank,
and never rose again. The unfortunate fellow managed to clutch the ladder again,
hut it was out of his power to save his wife and child. Thirty-four people were
picked up by the tug, which remained close to the spot the whole night,
Biddies, under the careful charge of Dr, Grandison at the Dover Hospital,
where he was taken on being brought ashore, makes rapid progress towards
recovery. He has excited much sympathy; for, to use his own words, “ When
he rushed on deck and saw the awful position of matters, that the ship must go
down, he hastily returned to the ’tween decks, and secured from his berth the
books he treasured so highly, his Bible and his Prayer Book.” In the fight for
the boat this gentle though muscular Christian was deprived of his cherished
treasures; and after trampling down helpless women and children, gained his
position in the boat and crawled beneath the thwarts. The result of his pathetic
story has been a whole shower of Bibles and Prayer-books, accompanied by other
comforts, which are doubtless much appreciated. These gifts are from those
who will not believe that the shot from the noble Captain’s pistol was a fitting
reward for his selfishness and heartless brutality.
An interview between Captain Kingston and the special correspondent of the
Daily News resulted in the enjoyment by the public of the following narrative in
the honest Captain’s own style :
“ How was it that Captain Kingston, of the steam-tug ‘ City of London,’
went to the aid of the sinking ship, and rescued thirty-four passengers? Well,
sir, and ladies, I’ll tell you all about it as well as I can in my plain language.
We were, as I said, lying at anchor off Dungeness on Wednesday night on the
look-out for a job. I was on deck myself, keeping my eyes open for ships coming
up, when about half-past 10 o’clock I saw away to the eastward a rocket go up.
At first, like the other ships you tell of, I thought it was a signal for a pilot to go
off; but before I had taken another turn on my watch another went up, half-a-
dozen followed, besides which blue lights were burnt furiously. There’s something
wrong over there, I says. Heave up the anchor, my lads. The anchor was up in
a jiffy* and the steamer’s head turned in the direction where the blue lights were
burning and the rockets still going up. An hour or two earlier the stars had
been shining, and the weather was middling fair, but just then the stars had gone
in and the rain come on, and it was so dark you couldn’t see a foot before you.
However, we had a good beacon to steer for, and with all steam up we went
ahead towards it. After steaming for about twenty minutes we began to hear


shouts and screams. 4 She’s foundering. She’s going down now,’ I said, for all of
a sudden there were no more lights. I ordered my men to show lights all over the
steamer. I thought if there were any poor creatures swimming about, they would
know where to steer for. A voice called out from the water quite close to us, and
I could hear other voices coming out of the thick darkness ahead, so I thought the
best thing I could do was to stop my engines, for the sea seemed so thick with
human beings that having regard to my paddle-wheels, it was like walking over a
dark floor strewed with eggs. It was well I stopped when I did, for standing on
the paddle-box, peering over into the darkness, I saw something white gleam up out
of the water, just ahead of the port paddle-wheel. 4 Show a light over there,’ I
shouted out, and when it came we made out a poor fellow clinging hold of the
chains under the wheel. 4 Stick to it, old chap,’ I says, ‘ We’ll throw you a rope ; ’
but when the rope hung over within reach of his hand he was too far gone to lay
hold of it, and three of my men jumping over, hanging on to the wheel, managed to
pass a rope under his arm-pits, and so we hauled him up. He had swam all the
way from the wreck, and was just giving up the fight, when he caught hold of our
chains. All this time the shrieking was going on somewhere close ahead of us,
and we dare not move for fear of crushing somebody ; 4 Keep up,’ I shouted out as
loud as I could, 4 We’ll come as fast as possible.’ In the middle of it all a boat
dropped alongside full of people, if possible fuller of water, as she was quite level
with the sea, and the passengers were sitting up to their waists in water. It was
quite a miracle to us how she floated till we knew she was corked for a lifeboat and
couldn’t sink. I’ve got her now on the beach here, and you’ll see that she is
actually ripped up on the starboard bow owing to catching on a bolt sticking out
from the side of the ‘Northfleet ’ when she was lowered from the davits. We got
the passengers out, and when I found there were some women among them I
took them down into my cabin, and says, 4 There is my place, do the best you
can with it; get among the blankets, and leave your clothes out to be dried.’ I
found out afterwards that the young-looking lady was the captain’s wife. The
other with the baby was Mrs. Sturgeon, and this child (Maria Taplin) here made
up the lot.
“ I left them there and ran on deck, where I found that the boat was still
fast astern. I says to my mate,' 4 See if you can pick any o’ them that’s floating
about.’ It looked like certain death to go out in that boat, but my mate never
hesitated a moment. He jumped in with a bucket in each hand, and began
baling the water out to keep her afloat, whilst the sailors from the 4 Northfleet,’
who had pulled her before, took the oars, and they set out in search of strays.
< You won’t leave us,’ said my mate, as the queer-looking craft put off. 4 JNo,’
I says, 4 I’ll wait here till you come back.’ Whilst they were gone I ran down
to my cabin to look after the ladies, and found them getting quite comfortable,


only the little lady began calling out for her husband, the captain. As soon as
she saw me, ‘ Oh, marm, he’s all right,’ I said, ‘ he’s gone off in a Deal lugger.’
1 hope I may be forgiven for telling such a lie ; but what could I do, seeing the
wee tnmg there in such a state, and refusing to drink the tea I had made for
er with my own hands. The old boat came back safely, bringing four men
with her whom she picked out; and then we drifted slowly to leeward, picking
up a dozen or more on the way.
“ Mrs. Knowles didn’t altogether believe the story about the Deal lugger;
anyways she made me to lay by the wreck till daylight, and though as the morning
came on a nasty chopping sea got round us, I had passed my word, and I kept it.
stopped till daylight, and spoke all vessels about; but none knew anything of
the captain. Three masts sticking up out of the water, with the top-gallant yards
standing, was all that was left of the ‘ Northfleet,’ and we got out of sight of it as
soon as we could, for it was not a pleasant thing for the poor creatures on board us
to see. When we steered into Dover harbour I spoke a boat, and asked whether
there was any news of the captain. ‘ Yes,’ says the man, ‘ he’s ashore all right.’
This v as joyful news, and set my mind at rest about the Deal lugger business ; but
when I went ashore myself to know where I was to land the passengers, I found it
was a mistake. Mrs. Knowles sent for me when I got back, but I could not face
her again, and made an excuse to keep out of the way. All the passengers came
crowding round me when the plank was down for them to go ashore, shaking
hands with me like mad, and blessing me, and that till I was nearly blubbering
just to keep some of them company. Mrs. Knowles, catching sight of me, came
running up, and taking a ring off her finger, saying, ‘ Here, Captain Kingston, take
my ring, give it to your wife—l have nothing else to give you.’ ‘Ko, thank ye,
ma am, I says, ‘ I have done nothing to earn rings, and if I have I’ll get paid
hereafter; and with that we said good-bye, hoping to meet again in better
weather.”
Captain Kingston has not had to wait till the great hereafter of which he
spoke before receiving some reward for his humane efforts to save life. The Lord
Mayor and Committee of the Eelief Fund have not only sent him a letter, express-
ing their thanks and admiration for his good work, but have also made a grant of
£l5O to be divided between the tug, cutter, and lugger which all did their duty
so well.
On Thursday, January 29th, news reached Dover that the body of a woman
had been found on the beach midway between that place and Folkestone, and had,
with great difficulty, been carried up to the cliff (or zig-zag, as it is called) and
deposited at the Eoyal Oak, a roadside public-house.
Superintendent Dewar, of the Kent County Constabulary, and the representa-
tive of the owners, went off at once and found the poor creature had been put into a
6


parish, coffin, in the miserable condition in which she had been cast upon the shore.
She was covered with dirt and sand; her hair was matted and tangled ; altogether
her pitiable state showed but too plainly that no loving or reverent hands had tended
her. However, she was now taken from her wretched coffin, and though no woman’s
help was near, a womanly tenderness guided stronger hands, and soon she was once
more laid to rest in her narrow bed, clad in seemly white, and as well cared lor as
though home love had surrounded her at her death.
She was then photographed, and next day laid in her lowly grave m the quiet
little cemetery churchyard at Oaple-le-ferne, the agent of the owners being present
as only mourner. The Rev. F. Wrench performed the ceremony most impressively.
Orders were given for shrubs to be placed at the head and foot of the gra~v e.
Numbers of photographs were sent down to Dover; among them, one repre-
senting a group-father, mother, and child. The mother bore a strong resemblance
to the face of the poor woman above described. The friends were communicated
with, and the clothes she wore at the time of her death were forwarded to them, and
at once established the identity; and at the head of the grave now stands a stone,
with a cross, bearing the simple inscription
ELLEN TOUGH,
Passenger in
“ Northfleet,”
Drowned the 22nd January, 1873.
Few the words, but most thrilling are they.
Before us lies a picture most touching in its sadness, and yet sweetly suggestive
of hope. It is the photograph of the wee bairn cast ashore at Dungeness, four days
after the wreck.
The little one lies in her humble coffin, with as sweet a smile upon her baby
lips as if she were sleeping in her cot, and had been hushed to rest by the gentle
tones of a loving mother’s voice. Her own dear mother, doubtless, lay in the bosom
of the mighty sea, but other hands, with pitying love, brought fair sweet flowers
and placed them on her breast. She was taken to Lydd, and buried in the old
churchyard, Captain Oates and Mr. Prescott being present at the funeral.
That nameless little grave will not be forgotten, but loving friends will strew
sweet flowers there from time to time, fit emblems of the “ wee white rose ” that
perished so sadly, but yet shall live again.
Nine days after the wreck the bodies of a middle-aged man and of a woman,
about thirty years of age, came ashore at Worth, near Sandwich. As soon as
the information reached Dover the authorities at Worth were communicated
with, and orders given that the bodies should be photographed, but such painful
pictures were the result that it was determined to abandon photography in all
future cases


Captain Greorge Coleman, of Sandwich, kindly made all necessary arrange-
ments that the bodies should be decently prepared for burial, and he also per-
sonally attended the funeral at Worth, accompanied by J. Henderson, Esq., J.P.,
the Rev. Sydney Smith reading the service with deep feeling.
On Thursday, February 6th, the body of a young male'child was cast ashore at
St. Margarets-at-Cliff, a well-known village on the coast, midway between Deal
and Dover. It had remained so long in the water that it would have been wholly
unrecognisable had its dearest ones come to gaze upon it. It was not there-
fore photographed ; but the little shoe and sock, which were the only things remain-
ing on the poor baby, have been carefully preserved, and may possibly lead to
identification, unless, as is most probable, all who knew and loved the child
perished with it.
The Rev. E. C. Lucey, the vicar, made arrangements for the funeral to take
place on Sunday, when Captain Oates and Mr. William Forster attended.
The little coffin had been prepared as for a well-beloved child, whom they
laid in the grave with mourning hearts. It bore this inscription : « Cast ashore,
the body of a male child. Supposed to be from the wreck of the ‘ Forth fleet,’ off
Dungeness. Buried, February 9, 1873.” Many of the villagers attended the
funeral, in spite of the falling snow and intense cold, drawn thither by tender
pity for the little one whose life had ended so sadly. The Rev. E. C. Lucey
read the service most impressively, and. then the poor little unknown babe was
laid to rest.
Stone crosses are to be placed at the head and foot of the nameless grave, to
mark the spot where gentle hands have left him sleeping.
Out of 293 who were lost in the “ Forthfleet,” only six bodies have been
recovered. These have all been followed to the grave by representatives of
the owners and of the Mansion House Relief Fund Committee, who have earnestly
striven, by every means, to increase the probability of the deceased being recognised,
and after seeing that everything had been done for them that their nearest and
dearest relatives could desire, they have had them interred, and stone crosses have
been erected to mark where they lie. If we are tempted to regret that 287 still
lie in an ocean grave, let us take comfort from the thought that—
There is in the lone, lone sea,
A spot unmark’d, but holy,
For there the gallant and the free,
In his ocean bed lies lowly.
Down, down, beneath the deep,
That oft in triumph bore him,
He sleeps a sound and peaceful sleep,
With the wild waves dashing o’er him.


He sleeps, lie sleeps, serene and safe,
From tempest and from billow,
Where storms that high above him chafe,
Scarce rock his peaceful pillow.
The sea and him in death
They did not dare to sever,
It was his home when he had breath,
’Tis now his home for ever!
Sleep on, sleep on, then mighty dead,
A glorious tomb they’ve found thee,
The bright blue sky above thee spread.
The boundless ocean round thee,
Ho vulgar feet tread here,
No hand profane shall move thee;
But gallant hearts shall proudly steer,
And warriors shout around thee.
And though no stone may tell
His name, his worth, his glory,
They live in hearts that lov’d him well,
And they grace Britannia’s story.
BOARD OF TRADE INQUIRY.
On Tuesday, February 4th, the inquiry ordered by the Board of Trade into the
circumstances attending the loss of the <e Northfleet ’ was opened at the Greenwich
Police-court, before Mr. Maude, magistrate, and Captain Harris and Ilight,
nautical assessors.
Messrs. John Patton and Co., the owners of the “ Northfleet,” were represented
by Mr. L. M’Diarmid; Mr. Nelson watched the proceedings on behalf of the
Spanish Government; and Mr. Myers was present for the contractors, Messrs.
Edwin Clark, Punchard and Co.
Mr. Thomas Gray, assistant secretary of the Marine Department of the Board
of Trade, was present on the bench.
Mr. Hargreave Hamel (barrister) briefly opened the case. He said he had
been instructed by the Board of Trade to conduct this inquiry. They were anxious
that the inquiry should be of the most searching description, in order that those
persons to blame should be punished •, and, if possible, that means should be adopted
to prevent the recurrence of another such disaster. There were, he said, at the time
of the collision 344 souls on board the “ Northfleet,” which was suddenly struck by
a strange vessel, by which nearly 300 persons were launched into eternity. The


miscreant vessel, instead of extending a helping hand to the drowning people, sheered
off, with the object, it was fair to assume, of avoiding the responsibility of the
terrible havoc she had done. The name of the ship was the “ Murillo,” a Spanish
vessel, which had fled into a Spanish port to avoid detection. It had, however,
been satisfactorily ascertained that the “ Murillo” was the vessel to blame, and the
Spanish Government had guaranteed, in the event of its being proved that the
captain, or, indeed, anyone on board the “ Murillo,” was culpable, he should meet with
the same punishment he would receive if tried at Westminster. After remarking
that it was satisfactory to know that no English vessd was to blame, the learned
gentleman went on to describe the dimensions and tonnage of the “ JSTorthfleet,”
together with the circumstances of the collision, the full particulars of which have
so recently appeared in those columns that it is unnecessary to again publish the
painful details.
Mr. John Patton, jun., was then called and sworn. He said he was the owner
of the “ Northfleet.” She had, during the past five years, been principally
employed in the China trade. She had undergone large repairs before witness
bought her in 1868. She had been repaired and overhauled in dry dock at Bill-
head in December last. She had been newly coppered, and her main and ’tween
decks were caulked. After the survey she was classed A 1 at Lloyd’s, registered
ten years from 1868, leaving her five years more to run. The loading brokers
were Messrs. Devitt and Moore. She carried a full complement of emigrants, and
in her lower hold was general merchandise. Witness had formally complied with
all the regulations required by the Emigration Act. She carried between 600 and
700 tons of cargo in the lower hold weight and measurement. This was
exclusive of the emigrant stores and water. He had told Devitt and Moore that
she would require about 400 tons of dead weight to make her “ stiff” enough.
She was loaded under the supervision of the emigration officers. She was insured for
£9,300 on the hull, and £SOO on the freight. Witness was not aware whether any
of the lives of the passengers were insured. The married couples paid £3O for
their passage, and £l4. 15s. was paid by the single men. These fares included the
victualling and conveying. Witness was not aware if the charterer received any-
thing in addition to those amounts. Government had nothing to do with the
passengers. Although they were sent out under the Emigration Act they were
not emigrants in the common acceptation of the term.
Mr. M’Diarmid.— What amount of dead weight did she carry?
Witness. —1,120 tons.
Robert Wilson Lloyd, clerk to the charterers, read a series of letters which
had passed between Messrs. Devitt and Moore, and Messrs. Clark, Punchard and
Co., previous to the sailing of the “ Northfleet.” They were simply negotiations


for the engaging of the vessel. Messrs. Clark and Co. insured the passage-money
of the emigrants in the London and Lancashire Insurance Company. They were
insured sufficiently only to recover their liability to the charterers.
Captain Harris (to the witness).—Did the 344 passengers include the infants
on board ?
Witness.—Yes, sir.
Mr. Hamel.—ls the list you produce perfect up to the time the “ Northfleet ”
left Gravesend ?
Witness.—Yes.
. John Langford Sinclair, the manager of Messrs. Devitt and Moore (the loading
brokers), said the cargo consisted of railway iron, measurement goods, bales, and
cases. He cleared the ship at Gravesend offices with 310 statute adults, and a full
cargo of 664 tons, consisting of 341 £ tons of iron rails, 85 tons of salt, and 101
tons of miscellaneous weight, consisting of tin plates, nails, and 136| tons of light
weight, making a total of 654 tons. The cargo was all stowed under the superin-
tendence of Captain Oates. She was not a full ship. There was room for more
cargo. They had to leave room for baggage, but witness thought there was more
room left than was necessary. She had a clear side of 8 feet 2 inches under the
covering board.
Captain Harris.— Had she a raised gangway ?
Witness.—She had a poop and a main gangway.
Then did you measure up to that ?—Oh no, sir. I measured up to the cover-
ing. The question with us was, whether she was sufficiently deep, not whether she
had too much on board.
Mr. M’Diarmid.—Was any objection made to the loading of the vessel before
you left the dock ?
Witness.—Yes ; the Emigration Commissioners desired us to put in 69 tons
more of rails in order that she might be deeper in the water.
Then was she considered in good trim ?—Yes, after the extra weight was
put in.
Captain Harris.—Where were the extra rails put ?
Witness.—ln the middle section upon the other rails.
Mr. Maude. Did the Commissioners know what goods were to come in when
they ordered the ship to be put deeper into the water ?
Witness.—No, they knew nothing about it. All they wanted was to have the
ship deeper. They did not consider her in good trim without the extra tons they
ordered.
Edward Brown, a shipbuilder, deposed that the “Northfleet ” passed under
his supervision while in the graving dock at Billhead, and that she was in a sound
and seaworthy condition at that time.


Mr. Samuel Tom Cornish, the government surveyor to the Board of Trade
(formerly shipwright surveyor under the Emigration Commissioners), said that
he surveyed the “ Northfleet ”in December and January last. She had two life-
boats of large dimensions, and four cutters. The lifeboats were new, and stowed
one on each quarter side of the vessel. The boats were 26 feet long by 6 feet 6
inches broad and 2 feet 9 inches deep. They were stowed bottom upwards, and
there were no means of launching them with facility. The lifeboats were fitted
with tubes and covered in. The beams were 6 feet 6 inches. He could not say
whether there were any life buoys on board.
By Mr. M’Diarmid.-r—Last saw the “ Northfleet ”in January. The boats were
larger than those exacted by the statute to the extent of nearly 100 cubic feet.
In answer to Captain Harris, witness said that he thought emigrant ships
carried more boats than the weak crews of the present day could manage.
James Taylor Webbe, clerk in the in-searchers’ office of the Custom House,
produced the specification, showing that the deadweight on board the “ JSTorthfleet ”
was 440 tons of general merchandise; wine and spirits, 2,000 gallons in casks and
110 gallons in cases, besides other merchandise, apparel, &c., of the value of £3,000,
making the total value of the light merchandise £3,200. There were 46 married
couples and 224 single men, 43 married women and three single women, 18 male
and 27 female children, and nine infants—making a total of 370 souls. [The
witness here gave evidence regarding the number and dimensions of the boats,
which corroborated in detail the foregoing evidence.] The bond which was given,
as required by the Emigration Act, amounted to £2,000.
The enquiry was then adjourned until half-past ten o’clock next day
(Wednesday).
The official inquiry into the circumstances attending the loss of the JSTorthfleet
was resumed on Wednesday at the Greenwich Police-court, before Mr. Maude, the
magistrate, and Captain Harris and Hight, nautical assessors.
Mr. Hargreave Hamel appeared for the Board of Trade ; Mr. L. M’Diarmid
for Messrs. Patton and Co., owners of the “ Northfleetand Messrs. Parker and
Clark for the contractors, Messrs. Edwin Clark, Punchard, and Co. Mr. Nelson,
instructed by the Spanish Consul-General, watched the proceedings-
Captain John Thomas Forster, senior emigration officer of London, in answer to
Mr. Hamel, deposed that he surveyed the ship before she left for emigration purposes.
She was then in the south West India Dock That was early in December, soon after
she came out of dry dock. The witness then gave a detailed account of the measure-
ment he had taken of the ’tween deck space for passengers—mentioning the various
alterations he had suggested for the accommodation of the emigrants, and stating that
the total available space was 4,657 feet, including 306 feet for hospital purposes.
The usual space allowed for each adult was fifteen superficial feet, not less than six


feet high. He also attended to the stowing of the cargo generally. The question
was put to him whether he would like as much as 750 tons of iron, but to this he
objected. The further evidence of this witness, which was given at some length,
went to show that the vessel was properly fitted, provisioned, and loaded. Whilst
on board he conversed with several of the passengers, and desiring to see the crew
together he ordered them to lower the two quarter boats, which was done. He
conversed with the chief officer, Mr. Gfloack, and thought him a proper person for
the post. She had a full complement of sailors. According to the ordinary scale
the “ North fleet ” would have required only thirty-three men, whereas she had a crew
of thirty-seven, all told. She carried six boats; two life boats at her quarters’ out-
board, and the other four were aft on skids over the quarter deck.
Mr. Hamel. —Were these skidded boats fixed in the most convenient way?
Witness.— There is a great difference of opinion as to the best way in which
boats should be carried on skids. They were all bottom upwards. Each boat was
properly supplied with gear.
Mr. Hamel.— Do you think that bottom upwards is the best way to carry the
boats ?
Witness.—lf they are turned the other way they might ship water to a great
extent in a heavy sea, and be damaged, or even lost.
Captain Harris.—l suppose you are aware that if the boats are bottom upwards
they are not so easy to launch ?
Witness.—lf you wished to launch them aft it would not be so easy, but by
passing the rope over them and launching them from the davits they would be
turned over by the rope as they were being put over the side.
Captain Harris.—ln your opinion, as a professional man, was it not possible
to carry boats in a better way ?
M itness. —lf you put the question in regard to this particular case, where it
was desirable to carry emigrants at as cheap a rate as possible, I should say no
I do not think it would have been possible, with efficiency, to have carried more
boats.
Could she not have carried a long boat ?—The smaller boats are easier handled,
and therefore better. The present emigrant scale in respect to boats is in excess
of a man-of-war s. The emigrant ships have a greater amount of cubic feet of
boat per head per adult than is the average in the case of a man-of-war. The
large Indian transports are almost on the same scale with regard to the boats as
emigrant ships, there being a slight advantage in favour of the latter.
Have you given your attention to signals?—Yes. I compiled a commercial
code. I think I should be inclined to carry out the last suggestion in the code;
that is, that there should be a simple, separate danger signal. I should propose
an ordinal y bright rocket, such as is used for pilots. If you wanted a pilot the


rocket would be thrown up with two or three minutes’ interval, and in urgent
cases they could be thrown up in quick succession, using besides every other means
to attract attention.
You are an advocate for throwing rockets at stated intervals?—Yes; but I
mean, also, that there should be a certain coloured rocket used, especially as danger
signals. Other fireworks might still be used as private signals, but not the special
rocket used for danger.
Mr. Hamel: The difficulty seems to be with rockets that they would not be
seen in a fog.
Witness : In this case the signal for pilots drew more assistance probably than
it might have drawn had it been looked upon simply as a danger signal.
Captain Harris : Is there anything else you would like to add ?
Witness: I might mention that, inasmuch as the emigrants had in this case
been on board for three days, they had ample time to settle down. It is generally
considered necessary that an emigrant ship should remain a day and a night in the
river in order that the passengers may settle down. It is desirable that they
should remain in the river for one night in order that it may be ascertained whether
there is proper sleeping accommodation.
Have you seen suggestions that cork beds might be used?—l have, but it is
necessary to attend to cleanliness. If you have straw beds they would cost only about
35., and could therefore be thrown away if they became dirty; but if cork beds of
a sufficient size to float a person were supplied, they would cost about 265. or 275.
each, which no doubt would lead to then being preserved from voyage to voyage.
What do you say to cork pillows ?—I would much rather increase the number
of life-buoys. I think that the use of such things as cork beds and cork pillows
would scarcely be worth the cost. As to the dangers of the Channel I think it
would be a very reasonable precaution to take the steam-tug as far as the Isle of
Wight.
Do you think that more emigrants are carried than is quite safe ?—lf you take
the.loss of life from all causes I don’t think the larger ships are more unhealthy than
the smaller ones.
I wish to know if you would confine the number of emigrants to the number
which the boats would carry ?—Ho. I would not. That would raise the question
of increased rates for emigration. Accidents to emigrant ships are very rare.
In answer to Mr. M‘Diarmid,
The witness said that, as a rule, with regard to emigrant ships, they required
4 clear inches of side, measured from the upper deck amidships for every foot
draught of water. The “Horthfleet ” had a clear side of Bft. 2in., with a draught
of 17ft. 3in. He did not examine the gun or lights, but it was done by some
one else.
7


Captain Harris : It has gone forth that one of those boats was found bottom
upwards, and the theory is that if ihey had been the right wmy up they might
have floated off.
Witness : There is just that chance. The boats were all made fast, and would,
therefore, have had to be cut adrift before they could have floated off.
Mr. James Colquhoun Sconce, emigration officer to the Board of Trade, said
that he surveyed the u Northfleet ” previous to her last voyage. He was constantly
on board the ship, and the result of his survey was contained in a report made to
the Board of Trade. The witness corroborated the evidence of Captain Forster with
regard to the boats and general fittings of the ship being in an efficient condition,
stating that there were four life-buoys hanging on the poop-rail, and twelve life-
belts—six being placed in each quarter boat. She had one set of lamps, including a
riding light, 36 rockets, 36 blue lights, 1 signal gun, 36 charges, and a complete
set of flags and signals. The gun was under the break of the poop. The gun,
which was an iron six-pounder, was complete in every respect. She had two deep-
sea leads, one lead-line, and two hand lead-lines. She had two fire-engines, one of
which was fixed and the other portable, and twelve fire-buckets complete. Her
draught of water on leaving Gravesend was 17 feet 6 inches forward and aft. The
height of side forward to the lower part of the covering-board was 9 feet 2 inches
and 8 feet 10 inches aft. In round numbers she carried 490 tons dead weight, and
about 150 tons measurement. There were 2 male cabin passengers, 263 males on
the lower deck, and 77 females; making the total number of souls on board the ship,
exclusive of the crew, 342. The crew was 37, all told.
By Captain Harris : The 36 cartridges were in a copper magazine. The gun
was in the wing on the starboard side under the poop, with the muzzle pointed
forward. It had no lock.
Captain Harris : This point is rather important, as this gun failed at the time
it was wanted.
Witness continued: My attention was called specially to the gun. I believe
it was a new gun. It was a nice little gun, with brass fittings. There was a ramrod,
and so forth , but I did not notice whether the head screwed on or was fixed, It
was a new ramrod.
Captain Harris ! Hid you notice whether it had a priming wire ?
Witness : I daresay it had; but I did not particularly notice.
What description of light was her riding light ?—lt was a large globe light.
Quite large enough, I should say, for the purpose. I did not exercise the boats to
see whether they went all right. Ido not know that there was any list of boats’
crews made out. There had been no time, as the captain only joined her 48
hours before she sailed.
By Mr. M Diarmid : All the requirements of the Passenger Act were fully
complied with in the case of the “ Northfleet.”


Mr. Fenton Wake, assistant-shipwright-surveyor to the Board of Trade, said
that he inspected the signals and lights of the “ Northfleet ” on the 15th of January
at Gravesend. The vessel had been previously stopped, as the lights were not on
board. When he inspected the vessel the side lights were placed in the after-part
of the top-gallant forecastle, clear of all obstructions. They were 14 inches high
by 9 inches back and side. The lenses were inches long and 6 inches broad.
They burned paraffin oil, with a 7-Bth of an inch burner. Nine and a-half inches
will show ten points of the compass. Eight inches was the smallest allowed. The
regulations only required that the lamps should have an 8-inch diameter. There
was a ship’s bell in the forecastle, and a fog-horn.
Captain Oates was the next witness examined. He said that he was master of
the “ Northfleet ” .for five years and a half. He was to have gone with her for the last
voyage, and she was entirely loaded uuder his superintendence. He was guided in
the loading by the emigration surveyors. She was ready to sail on Monday, the
13th of January. The emigrants were to have embarked at Gravesend, but owing
to a gale of wind which was blowing they were unable to get out in time, and
the emigrants were consequently taken on board, some at the landing-place, and
some at the entrance to the dock. The ship was bound to Hobart Town direct,
there being a stipulation with the charterers that she was not to call at any inter-
mediate port, unless from stress of weather. They reached Gravesend on the
following morning. After she had been cleared he received notice from the Trea-
sury that he would not be allowed to leave the country, as he was required as a
witness. The command was given to the first officer, Captain Knowles, who held
a master’s certificate. He (the witness) left the ship at 9 o’clock on the even-
iug of Thursday, the 16th, and she sailed on the following morning. He had
carried emigrants before, and considered the “ Northfleet ” in every respect qualified
for the purpose. The gun, which was a 6-pOunder, was perfectly new. It had an
apron-priming wire, and everything else In fact, the gun was complete. It was
lashed to one of the mooring posts under the break of the poop. The rockets
were all kept in the captain’s cabin.
In answer to Captain Harris, the witness stated that the life-boats were new.
The davits were thick, and capable of carrying much larger boats. The boats were
secured bottom upwards upon the skids. He thought that those boats were as
ready as it was possible to have them in a merchant ship. The largest cutter was
in the fore-part of the ship when she was in dock, but upon the alteration being
made it was found necessary to carry it aft so that it should not interfere with the
comfort of the passengers. In fine weather he thought they might venture to carry
the boats upon their keels. The lights were even more than was required by the
regulations of the Board of Trade. They had several spare rockets and blue
lights.


By Captain Hight: It would have taken me with my own crew in a case of
emergency about a quarter of an hour to have launched one of the boats from the
skids. That is, if there was pressure of time and lashings were cut. In bad weather,
when the ship is knocking about, it would, doubtless, take longer.
By Captain Harris : I do not see that the boats could have been carried in any
better way. I think if boats were placed between the mainmast and the foremast
they would be easier got off. We expected to be about 85 days going to Hobart
Town, and the “ Northfleet ” was victualled for 140 days.
By Mr. M‘Diarmid : I have always been in the habit of taking my wife with me
on every voyage for the past five years, and she would have gone with me had I not
been prevented leaving London. I saw the poor man Brand brought ashore. He
bad on one of the ship’s life-belts, which had evidently kept him floating up to his
waist only in water. The body was picked up on Friday morning, having been in
the water since Wednesday.
Captain Harris; Would not the set of the tide there be likely to carry the
bodies out into the North Sea ?
Captain Oates : The north-east wind set in on the following day, which would
bring down the flush from the North Sea, and sweep them to the west.
. Captain Harris ; How many life-buoys were there ?
Witness : Five, four of which were new.
Captain Harris; Is it not strange that some of these were not taken by some
of the passengers?
Captain Oates : They probably were, and were sunk by the large number of
people who held to them. They probably have also been carried to the west. I
heard from some of the crew that the lashings of the boats and the open spars were
all cut before the ship went down.
Captain Samuel Kingston, of the “City of London” steam-tug, said that on
the evening of the 22nd of January, the night of the disaster, he was at anchor near
the Dungeness light. The night was bright, but about half-past 10 o’clock it
became very dark and dirty. He could see, however, the lights of vessels riding all
round. The wind was west-north-west, and there was a strong ebb tide running to
the westward. About half-past 10 o’clock he saw seven rockets go up in about a
minute. When he saw so many go up he thought there was something wrong.
There were some blue lights burning. He called up all hands to heave up the
anchor directly. That took about five minutes. From the time he first saw the
rockets to the time he got to the ship was about half-an-hour. Just as he got to
the ship she went down. She was then about a cable’s length off. As she went
down he stopped his engines, and heard screams and cries all about to windward of
him. Just as the paddles were stopped a man hung on to the guard-chain, and two
of the tug’s men rescued him. By that time he was surrounded by people crying


for help, and he was afraid to move his paddles. It was so black he could see
nothing. The pilot-cutter then came alongside with people. After the vessel went
down the life-boat came alongside full of people. He threw two life-buoys over,
and did all he could to save their lives. He could not say how many he saved out
of the water, but he bad on board thirty-four altogether. He saw the Northfleet’s
riding light quite plain before she went down.
By Mr. Maude.—l should say I was two miles away when I first saw the rocket.
I knew of another ship below her. I should say not more than a quarter of a mile
away. I did not see any motion on that vessel to show that she saw and was
answering the signals. If there had been anybody on the look-out they must have
seen the signals.
At the conclusion of the evidence of this witness the Court adjourned until the
next morning.
On Thursday, the 6th of February, the Board of Trade inquiry into the circum-
stances attending the sinking of the “ IS 7 orthfleet ” was resumed at the Greenwich
Police-court, before Mr. Maude, the magistrate, and Captains Harris and Hight,
Nautical Assessors.
The same professional gentlemen attended as on the previous day.
Mr. George Brack, licensed Trinity House Pilot, said he took charge of the
“ Northfleet ”on the morning of the 14th of January, at Gravesend, being engaged
to take her as far as the Isle of Wight. She left Gravesend at daybreak on the morn-
ing of the 17th, in tow of a tug. At half-past 11 o’clock the same night the tug was
discharged, and the ship was put under sail. At that time Dungeness lighthouse bore
north, the wind was west by south, freshening, and the vessel stood off the land.
Instructions were given by the owners to tow as far as Dungeness, which was done.
During the 18th the ship was beating to windward, and backing occasionally, the
wind being fresh from west by north. At 10 p.m. the wind began to blow hard from
the south-west, with heavy rain, which compelled the shortening of sail, until she
was reduced to the three lower top-sails, it blowing a gale at the time. At midnight
of the 18th the ship was wore with the head off the land. On Sunday, the 19th, the
weather was more moderate and the wind less, but, having a low barometer, and the
weather threatening, the ship bore up for the Downs. At 2 p.m., finding the Downs
in a crowded state, she proceeded to the North Foreland, where she anchored at
3.30 p.m. The ship lay there all Monday, the wind being W.S.W., the
barometer falling, with rain, snow, and lightning. The barometer was ex-
ceedingly 10w—28.65. On Tuesday, the 21st, at daylight, the wind veering
round to N.N.W., they began shortening-in cable, weighed anchor at 10 a.m.,
and proceeded S.W. At noon she passed through the Downs. At 2 p.m. the
wind blew more west, and the ship was then beating between the South Fore-
land and Dungeness, tacking occasionally. At midnight Dungeness Light bore


distant five or six miles. On Wednesday, the 22nd, at 4 a.m., as the wind began
to blow hard from south-west, with blinding rain, they hauled courses and upper
topsails. At 9 a.m. the weather cleared, and the wind was west by south. The
barometer was then 28*70. At 10 the ship bore up, and at noon anchored in the
Dungeness Roads, the light bearing S. by W. J W., about two or two and a quarter
miles from Dungeness Lighthouse. A cast of the lead was taken, and 14 fathoms
were reported. At dusk a glimmer of the red light of Dungeness was seen. The
ship anchored with 70 fathoms of cable, with the best bower anchor, on the port
side of the ship. The mainroyalyard was sent on deck, and the ship made snug
for the night. At dusk the anchor light was placed on the foremost shroud of the
starboard rigging, about 8 or 10 feet above the leading blocks, in a most con-
spicuous part, where it could be seen all round. The light was an extra good light,
having reflecting-glasses all round. At 8 p.m. the ship was pumped out, and the
anchor watch, composed of a petty officer and two seamen, was set. The wind at
10 o’clock was W.N.W., fresh, with passing showers. The night was dark, but
clear enough for an anchor light a mile and a half or two miles off to be seen
At 10 o’clock the captain and his wife retired, and witness was sitting before the
fire in the saloon. About 10.50 he heard an alarm on deck, and cries of “ Pilot,
pilot, come out!” The carpenter —the petty officer—who had the watch, called
out this. Feeling something serious was the matter, he rushed to the deck, but
before reaching it he heard the crash or collision, and that something had run
into the vessel. The crash was of a grinding character, making the ship tremble.
On getting on deck he immediately looked to see if the anchor light was burning,
which it was brilliantly. Immediately afterwards he satv a steamer backing out
from the “ Northfleet,” and which was lost sight of as she steamed away
to the southward. The witness then recounted the efforts to save life,
and said that the first boat which left, as far as he could see, contained
only emigrants, having neither sailors, women, nor children in her.
A moment before the ship foundered he sprang into the main rigging on the star-
board side, and calling to others to follow him, jumped into the sea. He succeeded
in reaching and clinging to a part of the wreck, and was saved by the “ Princess ”
pilot boat, with twenty others. He was of opinion that.the anchor watch on board
the “ Corona,” now on her passage to Australia, and which was lying to windward
of the “ Northfleet,” could not have been set, or that they were asleep, otherwise
the signals made, and the screams of those on board the “ JN T orthfleet,” must have
been seen and heard. As near as he could guess the collision occurred at 10 minutes
to 11, and the foundering twenty-five minutes after that hour, it being beyond his
comprehension that such a vessel could have been so quickly sunk. On hearing
from the carpenter that the steamer was either a French or Spanish vessel, the
thought came into his mind that it was the “ Murillo,” which he knew. At the


time lie expressed an opinion that the vessel which had occasioned the collision had
escaped uninjured* His recommendation was that a new code of danger signals for
all ships should be devised.
John Easter, the Boatswain on hoard the “ Nonhfleet,” was the next witness.
He spoke to the seeing the night anchor signal light being set at 5.30 on the night
of the collision, and confirmed the statement of the pilot as to its brilliancy of
light. He also spoke to setting the anchor watch, and seeing them on deck at
8 o’clock. While in bed, before going on deck, he heard the carpenter and others
sing out, “ Steamer, ahoy!” and then the crash came. On rushing on deck he
heard the steamer hailed to stay by them, as there were 400 lives on board. The
steamer was at that time backing away from the ship, and was about six or seven
fathoms off, all her three lights being visible. There was some noise on board the
steamer, and several of the passengers of the “ Northfleet ” had then come on deck,
and were screaming for assistance. The witness, in describing what afterwards
occurred, said he went to fire the gun as a signal of distress, and in sponging it
prior to putting in the cartridge the sponge-head came off, and was left in the
gun. The worm was then put in to draw out the sponge, and the worm-head came
off, rendering it as useless as if it had been spiked. An attempt, by order of
the Captain, was made to clear the gun with gunpowder, but this had no effect.
This witness escaped by one of the ship’s boats, having in it six seamen, two women,
two children, and nine men. Had there been order on board he had no doubt that
more lives could have been saved, as he would have had time to make another
trip with his boat. There was an “ harangue,” lasting about five or six minutes,
before the boats were lowered from the davits, sufficient to make a trip. In answer
to a question the witness said he was certain that the vent-hole of the gun about
being fired was clear, and not choked up with white lead.
John Bezanson, an able seaman of the “ Northfleet,” in his evidence recapitu-
lated many of the facts deposed to by the previous witness, adding that before
resorting to the pumps the carpenter took the measurement of water in the ship,
and from the appearance of the rod he judged it was a depth of 4 feet or 5 feet.
This witness was one of the crew of the boat the passengers in which were received
on board the “ City of London ” steam-tug, and he, with another of the ship’s crew
and the mate of the tug, returned with the boat, which was damaged and in a
sinking state, and rescued four other persons who were upon some boards.
Mr. Parker, who appeared as solicitor t> the charterers of the “North-
fleet,” said he had then been three days at the Court and was anxious to leave, but
before'doing so he wished that some expression from the Court should be given as
to the manner in which their duties had been discharged.
Mr. Maude said that everything on the part of the charterers appeared to
have been most satisfactory.


Mr. Nelson, who represented the Spanish Consul-Gfeneral, said he had no
evidence from Spain to offer to the Court respecting the steamer “ Murillo,” of
which they had heard so much ; and he thought it right to mention that if
such evidence should be asked for there would necessarily be a delay of some days,
in consequence of the insurrectionary state of that country. At present it was
his intention to call three witnesses, of whom he knew nothing but what had
been read of in the public newspapers, and whose names had been furnished to
Mr. Hamel, who was conducting the inquiry.
Mr. Maude said it was probable that a request might be made by the Court
for the production of witnesses from Spain who were on board the “ Murillo”
on her last voyage, and there would be no difficulty, after receiving all the
evidence which was ready to be produced, in adjourning for any number of
days.
The first witness called was John Beveridge, at present staying at the Sailor’s
Home, Batcliff. He was a steerage passenger, and at half-past 10 on the night of
the wreck he was on deck. He observed the lights of different vessels all round,
and also the shore lights. The anchor signal-light of the “Northfleet,” was
burning brilliantly, and shortly afterwards he heard a man on board the ship call
out “ Ahoy! Ahoy! ” and blow a whistle. A steamer which had no lights on
board then came into collision with the ship. He was standing on the side of the
ship which was struck, and about five yards only from the part damaged. The
steamer was higher out of the water than the ship, and had a straight bow, no
figurehead or bowsprit, and no gilding, at least so far as he saw. He called out to
those on board the steamer not to leave the ship, as there were 400 souls on board.
After the steamer had gone away he went and aroused the boatsw 7 ain and the
captain, and on the pumps being resorted to it was found that the water came in
over the side of the vessel as quickly as it was pumped out. On going with the
boatswain to assist in lowering a boat on the port side, they found two passengers
already in the boat, and one man had to be turned out of it twice. The boat was
at length lowered, and the boatswain called to the men to put their shoulders to it
and get it over the davits, as it was their last chance. Some did this, but others
held on with their hands, fearing it would leave without them. With some diffi-
culty the boat was got over, when two or three entered it. Others wanted to
follow, but the boatswain threatened to cut their hands off if they attempted to do
so. Witness then went to the fore-part and found another boat hanging by the
bows to the tackle. Several persons tried to get into this boat. *He then went
away to the four boats which were lying on the skids, and called to some of the
men, but none of them came. Witness, not being able to loosen one of them, spoke to a
woman who was near him, placed a life-belt around her, and made for the rigging.
He had scarcely reached it when the ship went down. He then felt himself going


through the water, and on recovering consciousness found himself under some
ropes. On rising, he got hold of some chain, and was on the rigging for about
three hours and a half, when, with four others, he was taken off by the “ Princess ”
pilot-cutter. Just before the ship went down he saw the captain on the deck be-
tween the davits on the port side, surrounded by the women and children. The
lights and rockets from the ship were sent up before the steamer could have got too
great a distance away for the people on board to see them if they had looked back,
Samuel Watkin, able seaman, said that at the time of the collision he was
asleep. He was aroused by the carpenter, whom he accompanied with a light and
an armful of oakum. On reaching the seat of the injury he found the side stove in,
and berths where passengers had been sleeping driven nearly amidships. Hearing
the water rushing into the ship he told the carpenter it was useless staying there.
The carpenter took his maul and oakum to attempt to stop the leak. Witness was
engaged in cutting away spars and royal yards on deck, and had only time to spring
into the main rigging when she went down. He was also one of those rescued by
the pilot-cutter.
James Pilcher, master of the Deal pilot-cutter “Princess,” having described the
state of the weather and the darkness on the night of the wreck, said that at half-past
10,when in the western cruising course of Dungeness, he had his attention attracted
to rockets and blue lights sent up from a vessel about two miles distant. Thinking a
pilot was wanted, he made towards it, and found the ship was sinking. When he got
within hailing distance he hailed her, and told those on board to take to the rigging,
and that assistance would be rendered to them as quickly as possible. Two of the
cutter’s boats were lowered, one being sent to the wreck, and the other employed
in picking up those who were found in the water. His mate Stanley and three of
the crew manned the former, and the steward and three of the crew the latter. The
cutter was kept close to the wreck, so that the boats, the lights of which had been
washed out, might come close to it. The boat which went to the wreck came back in
about an hour with ten persons who had been taken from the mizen rigging. It
made another trip, and brought five from the main rigging. A third trip
being made, six persons were taken from the fore-rigging. The second boat rescued
four men from the sea. The cutter and boats were kept by until daylight, but
no other persons were seen, and those saved were landed at Dover. In coming
out of the inner roads of Dungeness he did not notice any steamer. The pilot in
the second boat reported to him that he had passed a boat bottom upwards, and
nobody upon it. Witness had not heard anything of persons being taken off
floating spars; the majority of the bodies of persons on board at the time of the
wreck, looking at the tide and wind, must have been carried to the westward,
and he was not at all surprised that no bodies had been picked up in the bay.
8


The body of Mr. Brand was picked np the morning following the wreck at a spot
from which Dungeness was four miles distant. He suggested that a ship wanting
a pilot should burn a blue light and white rocket, and a ship in distress a red
rocket and signals. He admitted that he had a doubt whether, on a hazy night, at
a distance of five miles, he could distinguish between a red and a white light. He
thought a blue light might be used as a signal for a pilot, and rockets in cases of
distress. The National Line of steamships between London and New York, as
also those of the Bremen Line, used a red, blue, and white light, and a rocket when
a pilot was wanted. It would be advisable to have a light which would burn 10
or 12 minutes, if they could be made. The blue lights used on board Dutch ships
burned much longer than those used in English vessels. The riding anchor light
of the “ Northfleet ” prior to and at the time she sank was a capital light.
The above witnesses, belonging to the ship, were cross-examined principally
upon one point. They stated that they did not hear anybody on board when the
collision had occurred say to those in the steamer, “No damage has been done, and
you can sheer away as quickly as possible.”
Mr. M‘Diarmid elicited from Mr. Maude that his remarks on the previous
day as to the very satisfactory manner in which the “ Northfleet ” was chartered,
were meant also to apply to the way the ship had been fitted out by the owners.
The enquiry was then adjourned.
The official enquiry into the circumstances connected with the loss of the
“ Northfleet ” was resumed on Saturday at the Greenwich Police-court, before
Mr. Maude, the magistrate, and Captains Harris and Hight, Nautical Assessors.
Mr. Hargrave Hamel conducted the inquiry on behalf of the Board of Trade ,
Mr. L. M'Diarmid represented the owners ; and Mr. Nelson watched the proceed-
ings for the Spanish Consul-General.
John Stanley, mate of the “ Princess ” pilot cutter, said that at half-past 10
o’clock on the evening of the collision he was called up to lower the boats to take
a pilot to a vessel. At about a quarter to 11 o’clock he came on deck and saw
rockets and blue lights going up almost a mile off. Both boats were then ordered
to be got ready immediately, as they thought it was a ship in distress. The cutter
then made for the ship, and got so near that they hailed it. The cutter then backed,
and, as they did so, the ship was just going down head-first. He got into one of
the boats, and rowed towards the ship as she was sinking. The topsail yards were
then just above the water, and he heard the cries of people on each side of the boat
as it was rowed towards the ship. He put the lights over the side of the boat, but
could see nobody. He still heard cries from the ship’s rigging. He went round
the ship once or twice to see where he could take the people off first. He then
rowed to the mizen crosstrees, and took the people off. There was not a heavy sea
on, but a nasty swell. He took the ten men to the cutter, and went back, when he


took five men off the main cross-trees. He had more difficulty then, as the sea was
getting up. He saw a boat backing to the rigging, and told them to take the men
off, but he got no answer. He said, “ Is that our boat ?” but he got no answer. He
made a third trip, when he found that the boat had not taken them off. He then
took the last six. He was first at the ship about 11 o’clock, and took the last six
off at a quarter to 3. The boat he saw had three hands in her.
Captain Harris : Was it light enough for you to see what the boat did ?
Witness: I rowed towards them, and saw there were three men in her. When
I got back the boat was gone. I rowed round the ship to see the position the ship
was in, and I then told all the men on the rigging that I would take them off if
they would do as I told them.
By Mr. Maude: I saw a large ship lying about a quarter of a mile from the
wreck. I knew it was the “ Corona.” I should think that there were from 200 to
300 ships brought up in the roads, the nearest being within a quarter of a mile of
the “ Northfleet.” There were plenty of ships anchored within half-a-mile. I should
think in the direction in which I was the cries might have been heard about a
hundred yards off.
Mr. Maude : Ho you think the people onboard the “ Corona ” could have heard
the noise on board the ship ?
Witness ; I should think they could not. I cannot give any reason why I
think not, except that a quarter of a mile is a good distance.
By Captain Harris: They might have heard the bell. I heard a bell, but I
could not tell whether it was that of the tug or of the “ Northfleet.”
By Mr. Hamel: After we had taken the people off the rigging we remained
near the ship until daylight.
By Captain Harris : We did not make more than three trips in the boat. We
remained in the cutter. When I was cruising in the boat I saw no floating spars.
By Mr. Maude : I picked up the gentleman in the life-belt two days after-
wards. I should say he was four miles from Dungeness. At daylight we could
see the wreck, but we saw no debris. After we had picked Mr. Brand up we found
a box of clothes, which we landed at Heal.
George Pout, master of the lugger “ Mary,” of Kingsdown, said that on the
night of the 22nd of January he was anchored in Hungeness Hoads. At ten minutes
to 11 o’clock, by his time, he saw three rockets thrown up from the “ Northfleet,”
which was from a mile to a mile and a half off. He thought it was a signal for a
pilot. Then rockets and blue lights went up faster, and they thought it was a ship
in distress, so got their anchor up as quickly as possible, and made for the ship.
He saw a bright ship’s light at the spot where the rockets were going up, from
which he concluded that it was a ship at anchor. They arrived close to the ship’s
stern. He hailed her, but could get no answer, as there was a continuous screaming


on board. There was a man standing in our bow, and be called, “ Hard, hard np
there ! there is a boat under our bows.” They had only just time to save running
over it. That was the boat that had thirty hands in her, and they were screaming
as loudly as the people on the ship. A rope was thrown to them, but the men did
not take it. He afterwards picked up the boat, which had only one oar and a piece,
and she had no plug in her. He was told that afterwards.
By Mr. Maude : From what the men told us the boat had a deal of water in
her directly she was lowered, We had only got three men out of the boat when the
ship went down. We got the thirty men from the boat. There was one seaman
amongst them. He told us that he was not a regular sailor, but was working his
passage out. As soon as we had got the people in we made for the ship, and got
there again in about half-an-hour. We could see nothing, nor hear any cries. Some
supposed that the other boats had picked up the remainder. We therefore made as
much haste as possible to get the people ashore.
By Captain Harris: When we picked up the boat I should think we must
have been a hundred yards away. I heard no cries after the ship went down
We saw none of the people floating past us. We took the thirty men to the
Sailor’s Home at Dover. We left the scene of the wreck at about half-past 2.
By Captain Hight: Before we met with the boat we heard the cries, and could
see the people on the ship’s poop as the blue lights and rockets were sent up.
William Ticehurst, commissioned boatman of the coastguard stationed at
Dungeness No. 2 Battery, examined by Mr. Hamel; I was on duty on the
night of the 22nd of January, from 5.15 to midnight. At about 10.15 I saw two
rockets go up. I thought it was a signal for a pilot. I proceeded to the station
as quickly as possible and conferred with another man, and then we thought it
was a signal for a pilot. I was a mile and a quarter from the station when I
first saw the rockets. I then saw more rockets and blue lights, and thought it
was something out of the common. As I went to the station the rockets went up
faster and faster. I went to the station and called out the officer, Mr. Sumner.
That occupied altogether nearly half-an-hour from the time I first saw the rockets.
I told the officer that something was wrong, but by the time we came up there
was nothing more to be seen. Mr. Sumner was out in about five minutes, and
told me to tell the next man if he saw anything more to call him again. We
often see rockets fired for pilots. I have seen as many as 30 rockets fired by
steamers, but not in such quick succession as these. Had we have known what
was the matter, we could have rendered no assistance, as we should have been
unable to launch our boat, the sea being too heavy upon the beach.
By Captain Harris : Our boat is a four-oared galley, 19 feet 8 inches long, with a
considerable beam in proportion to its length. There were two men on duty that night.
James Sumner, chief boatman in charge of No. 2 Battery of the coastguard at


Duugeness, deposed: On tlie evening of tlie 22nd of January the last witness
reported to me at about 11 o’clock that he had seen blue lights and rockets
going off from amongst the shipping at anchor in the Roads. I immediately went
out on the beach, and all was then quiet. That was not more than five minutes
after I was called. I saw one moving light, which I took to be a mast-head light
of a pilot-cutter which was cruising. I could see the riding lights of vessels at
anchor. I told the last witness to tell the man who relieved him to call me again
if anything happened. We could not have got our boat out, as there was too much
sea on the beach that night. The tide was about four hours’ ebb, and we should
have had to launch her about 500 or 600 yards over the sand, besides about 100
yards of shingle. At daylight, when I saw the ship sunk, I gave orders to launch
the boat. That was the first intimation I had of the accident. The weather was
more moderate then, and we only had to launch about 100 yards over the shingle.
I sent a man to report the fact to my divisional officer, Mr. Young, and that I was
about to launch the boat. I then observed a ship’s boat pulling towards the shore,
about half a mile distant. I immediately proceeded to the spot where she landed,
and was then told by the pilot of the ** Corona ” that the sunken ship was the
“Northfleet.” We then went about half a mile further, to No. 1 Battery. By
this time our own boat was launched. When I got to No. 1 Battery I went off to
the sunken ship. There was a Deal boat there, called the “ Pilgrim,” of Kingsdown,
unbending her topgallant sails. I asked them the particulars about the ship, and
they told me that they were inside the shipping and saw the lights, but did not know
what they meant. I told them to deliver the topgallant sails up, and then proceeded
to the “ Corona,” which was distant about 400 or 500 yards. I asked the captain
of the “ Corona ” if he could give me any information as to the sunken ship, and
he told me that he was very much annoyed that his watch did not call him, as the
pilot and he might have saved lives. He told me that there were two able seamen
and a petty officer on watch; that they heard the cries and saw the lights, but
they had raised no alarm. I think that the “ Corona ” was near enough to have
heard the cries. I think they must have seen the lights and heard the cries.
In answer to Captain Harris,
The witness said that the nearest life-boat station to No. 2 Battery was at Great-
stone, about four miles distant. If the life-boat was required, from any casualty,
in the East Bay, his instructions were to send up four rockets, and burn three blue
lights immediately after. That was understood by the life-boat men to mean launch
immediately.
Captain Harris : Can you tell us how it was that the life-boat did not go out
on this occasion ?
Witness: No, I cannot. There is always a man on duty from the coast-guard
station along the coast. The life-boat is manned by coast-guardsmen.


Mr. Hamel said that he had no other witnesses to call at present, and would
therefore ask for an adjournment. The Board of Trade was now in communication
with the Foreign Office, and he hoped that some arrangements might be made by which
he would be able to produce some witnesses who were on board the “ Murillo.” They
hoped by that time to get the three English subjects who were on board that vessel.
The enquiry was then adjourned until Tuesday, 4th March, at eleven o’clock.
MANSION HOUSE RELIEF FUND.
On Friday, 24th January, a Committee composed of the following gentlemen
met at the Mansion House to devise measures for the distribution (so as best to
suit the wants of the sufferers) of moneys at once, liberally promised by a
generous British public :
The Right Hon. the Lord Mayor, Chairman.
Alderman and Sheriff White.
Sheriff Perkins.
Right Hon. the Earl of Shaftesbury.
Samuel Morley, Esq., M.P.
R. IST. Fowler, Esq., M.P.
Henry Edwards, Esq., M.P.
George Moffatt, Esq.
E. Hornan, Esq.
Alfred Rothschild, Esq.
Baron A. Grant.
John Patton, Junr., Esq.
J. J. Tickers, Esq.
T. L. Devitt, Esq.
George Sheward, Esq.
John Chapman, Esq.
Wm. Dent, Esq.
Captain J. G. Johnston.
Albert Ricardo, Esq.
Edwin Clark, Esq., C.E.
Geo. Moore, Esq.
Thos. Baring, Esq., M.P.
A. J. Waterlow, Esq.
H. Green, Junr., Esq.
Philip Cazenove, Esq.
R. P. Walker, Esq.
The Rev. Canon Harvey.
The Rev. W. Rogers.
R. C. L. Bevan, Esq.
J. Gurney Hoare, Esq,
Wm. Leaf, Esq.
Rev. A. S. Herring.
Rev. W. Yates.
C. W. Price, Esq.
J. B. Davison, Hon. Sec.
The Committee met from time to time to consider and relieve pressing wants ;
distribution of moneys to furnish mourning to the relatives of the deceased,
and suitable clothing to the survivors.
It is matter for much regret that the conduct of some, both of the passengers
and crew, showed how little worthy they were of the warm sympathy and cordial
assistance held out to them.
On Thursday, January 23rd, the Lord Mayor, on taking his seat in the
Justice-room of the Mansion-house, referred to the deplorable calamity off Dunge-
ness, and said he had felt it his duty to lose no time in appealing to gentlemen


among his acquaintance in the City, including, among others, Mr. Samuel Morley,
M.P., Mr. George Moore, the Sheriff of London, and several 'members of hank-
ing firms, to form a Committee with him to aid in relieving the consequent distress.
The suggestion was promptly responded to, and money had already begun to flow
in. The Committee, he added, were desirous of sending as much money down as
possible by that evening for the relief of the destitution among the survivors from
the wreck, and especially in providing them with clothes. He also stated that the
Committee hoped to be able to establish a fund for the relief of the orphans by the
dreadful calamity. This announcement was much cheered by the people who
happened to be in Court at the time. By noon about £SOO had been raised by
way of a beginning.
With that warm-hearted sympathy and benevolence which have done so much
to endear Her Majesty to her subjects, and which are ever so promptly manifested
when occasions for kindness and condolence arise, the Queen lost no time in doing
what lay in her power to console those who suffered from the fearful calamity that
befel the emigrant ship “ Korthfleet.” Through the President of the Board of Trade
Her Majesty caused the following telegram to be forwarded on Saturday to Mr.
John Patton, jun., one of the owners of the ill-fated vessel;—
“I have Her Majesty’s commands to convey her heartfelt sympathy to the
survivors of the ‘ Korthfleet’ calamity. Her Majesty desires to know how Mrs.
Knowles is.”
In reply to this Mr. Patton telegraphed to Mr. Chichester Fortescue as follows:
“ The Queen’s most gracious message has been communicated to Mrs. Knowles
and the survivors. Mrs. Knowles is as well as can be expected, but in great mental
distress. She and they feel deeply grateful for Her Majesty’s sympathy. The
survivors have been supplied with money and clothing, and are well cared for.
Many of them are at the Sailor’s Home. Others have returned to their friends,
the railway fares having been supplied to them.”
Her Majesty also caused the following letter to be addressed to Sir Sydney
Water low, the Lord Mayor :
“ Osborne, Jan. 25.
“My Lord—l am commanded to acquaint your Jjordship that the Queen,
having been informed that a subscription is being raised in the City at your
suggestion for the relief of the survivors from the wreck of the ‘ Korthfleet,’
and of the wives and families of the men who perished, desires me to enclose you
a cheque for £2OO as a donation from Her Majesty; and I am, at the same
time, to express Her Majesty’s deep sympathy with the sufferers by this dreadful
calamity. —I have the honour to be, my Lord, your most obedient servant,
“T. M. Biddulph.
“ To the Bight Hon. the Lord Mayor.”


The Queen has further shown her deep concern in this lamentable disaster by
desiring Mr. Chichester Fortescue to keep her informed of all that relates to the
steamer which caused the collision. In reference to these Royal proofs of consi-
deration, we have received the following memorandum from the Board of Trade,
which also furnishes the opinion of the department with regard to the circum-
stances of the collision :
Her Majesty, with that anxious solicitude she always displays for
sufferers in any calamity, has commanded the Right Hon. the President of the
Board of Trade to convey her heartfelt sympathy to the survivors of the
Hungeness calamity, and has made special inquiry as to the widow of the brave
Captain Knowles. Her Majesty has further desired to be kept informed by the
President of any facts that may transpire tending to the discovery of the missing
steamer.” Her Majesty’s message of sympathy to the survivors of the calamity
and her kind enquiry after Mrs. Knowles gave the most profound pleasure to all
classes. When the telegram referring to it was read to the jury at the inquest,
it was only the painful nature of the event which brought them together that
prevented them giving a cheer. In Hover, the rough boatmen speak of it, and
say heartily, “ God bless the Queen.”
To the satisfaction of everyone, the Lord Mayor received an official com-
munication from Mr. W. B. Gurdon, the private secretary to Mr. Gladstone,
informing him “ that the Queen had been graciously pleased, on the recom-
mendation of the Prime Minister, to approve of Mrs. Knowles being granted
a pension of £SO per annum on the Civil List, in recognition of the heroic conduct
of her husband on the occasion of the loss of the ‘ Korthfleet.’ ” A letter,
exactly similar in terms, was sent to Mrs. Knowles, wffio was requested to name
two trustees to whom the pension might be made payable.
On the 27th of January a meeting of the Committee formed for the relief of
the sufferers by the calamity was held at the Mansion House The Lord Mayor pre-
sided, and there were present Mr. Alfred de Rothschild, Mr. Alderman and Sheriff
White, Mr. Sheriff Perkins, Mr. George Moore, Mr, Samuel Morley, M.P., Mr.
Henry Edwards, M.P., Baron Albert Grant, Mr. J. J. Vickers, of the firm of
Messrs. John Patton, jun., and Co., the owners of the vessel, the Rev. William
Rogers, rector of Bishopsgate, Mr. George Sheward, Captain Oates, Mr. C. W,
Price, the Rev. A. Styleman Herring, and Mr. J. B. Davison, the hon. secretary.
The Lord Mayor, on taking the chair, read the gracious communication he had
the honour to receive from Her Majesty the Queen on Sunday. His lordship added
that he had lost no time in forwarding a reply to Sir Thomas Biddulph. It was as
follows :
“ Mansion House, Jan. 27.
“ Dear Sir Thomas —I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of


yesterday’s date, expressing Her Majesty’s deep sympathy with the sufferers by
this dreadful calamity, and enclosing a cheque for £2OO, as Her Majesty’s contri-
bution towards the fund now being raised, towards the relief of the widows, orphans,
and others rendered destitute by this sad misfortune.
“ The kind sympathy expressed by Her Majesty will be a great consolation to
the sufferers, while Her royal bounty will afford them material support. —I have
the honour to he, dear Sir Thomas, yours faithfully,
“ Sydney H. Waterlow.
“ Sir Thomas M, Biddulph.”
At the suggestion of the Lord Mayor, the Earl of Shaftesbury, Mr. Bevan, hanker,
Mr. Gurney Hoare, and the Bey. Canon Harvey, were added to the Committee.
Mr. Davison, the Secretary, in reply to the Lord Mayor, said that requests
for assistance were continually coming in, so far as the passengers were concerned.
He had as yet no complete information as to the crew. As to the identification of
the bodies in the wreck, and their interment when found, he apprehended identifi-
cation in such cases would be very difficult. There had been applications from
friends to go down to the spot to identify relatives.
Mr. Morley, M.P., said these would be matters of detail which would not fall
legitimately on the fund. The special object of the Committee, he submitted, with-
out deciding on individual cases, was to help those who for the time wanted help ;
and then, after they knew the extent of the calamity, to decide what was to be done
with the money. They desired to preserve every one who had been saved, from the
pressing wants of the moment. He was anxious, at the same time, to guard
against anything of the nature of imposition.
The Lord Mayor said in cases where bodies were washed up, if their friends
could not provide decent interment, the Committee would step in. They had already
learnt from the charterers of the vessel that, so far as the passengers were con-
cerned, there wjere no cases of immediate distress, inasmuch as, before sailing, they
had signed papers —those of them, at least, who were going to Tasmania to construct
the railway—that they would not ask the contractors for the line for assistance for
their wives or families until after the lapse of a certain time.
The Secretary said, out of forty-one or forty-two married couples, and their
children, representing 143 lives in all, he believed only three men, one woman, and
two children had been saved.
Mr. Sheriff Perkins thought it important that the Committee should deal at
once with the question of the recovery of the bodies.
The Lord Mayor, replying to a question by the Eev. ¥m. Rogers, said under
ordinary circumstances poor persons who perished at sea, and were washed on shore,
were interred at the expense of the parish, but that would be out of the question
in this case.
9


Mr. Alfred. Rothschild suggested that the Lord Mayor should have a discre.
tionary power to assist in sending poor people down to the spot who wished to
identify relatives.
The Lord Mayor said up to that morning the fund now being collected at the
Mansion House amounted to nearly £3,000, and it was thought about eighty-five
people were to be provided for. He thought he might say there were six widows
of passengers, and about ten widows of the crew and their families. Most of the
crew were foreigners, and it was difficult as yet to obtain accurate information as
to their dependent relations. From that estimate Mrs. Knowles, the widow of the
captain, was excluded, as standing in a different position, and something substantial
should be done for her. She was nineteen years of age and an orphan, and had
lost all that she had.
The Rev. Mr. Herring suggested that a weekly allowance for the present
should be made to the men now staying at the Sailors’ Home, or who had not gone
to their own homes.
It was resolved accordingly that for three weeks an allowance of 10s. a
week should be made to ten of the crew and seventy-five of the passengers, to be
paid to them through the Superintendent of the Sailors’ Home.
The Lord Mayor observed, by the way, that the saved passengers had all ex-
pressed a wish to resume the voyage, and to carry out their contract; but he
thought they ought to be provided with fresh kits.
Some further conversation ensued on this point; in which an opinion was
expressed that there must be many relatives who had been dependent on passen-
gers that had perished in the wreck, and who must, therefore, have lost their
breadwinners. On the other hand, the Lord Mayor cited a statement made to him
by Canon Harvey, that most of the men who went from his parish were single.
Both Mr. Morley, M.P., and Mr. George Moore stated that they had been
deputed by benevolent ladies to take charge of the poor orphan child,, Maria Taplin,
whose sad case has excited universal sympathy. To the honour of humanity there
was quite a competition to assume the care and maintenance of the unfortunate child.
The Rev. Mr. Rogers jocosely suggested that the question might be solved by the
applicants balloting for her.
The Lord Mayor, replying to a question by Mr. Morley, M.P., as to whether
anything was being done to ascertain the real extent of the claims on the fund now
being raised, said the Tasmanian Railway authorities in London had the names and
addresses of every passenger who sailed in the “ Northfleet,” and they were con-
stantly receiving communications from relatives of those who were lost. Messrs.
Patton and Co. were similarly engaged in obtaining information as to the crew.
Mr. H. Edwards, M.P., said it was satisfactory to find that everything was
being done that oould possibly be done in the emergency.


The Lord Mayor said of thirty-two of the crew, ten were saved; and the
twenty-two who perished left ten widows, so far as could be at present ascer-
tained, and they might have left other dependent relatives. All the information,
however, that Messrs. Patton could obtain on the subject was to be collected
and condensed against the next meeting of the committee.
During the sitting an incidental conversation arose as to the probable or
possible duration of the public subscription then being raised, and while there
appeared to be a general feeling in the committee that it ought not to go
beyond the emergency, it was thought, on the whole, that the time had not
arrived for coming to a definite decision on the point—an opinion in which the
Lord Mayor appeared decidedly to concur.
Mr. Alfred Rothschild expressed himself as strongly desirous, under the
peculiar circumstances, that the public should have every opportunity of contri-
buting to the fund to the full extent of the emergency, believing that they would
rather prefer to see some surplus than any shortcoming in the subscription on the
occasion.
During the sitting of the committee a letter was received from Dover, stating
that the man John Dixon, lying in the Seamen’s Hospital there, was still in a pre-
carious condition, though, if the inflammation was averted for a couple of days
longer, he would most likely recover. His breast bone and three ribs were broken,
and the lungs were penetrated. For some time past he had been maintaining him-
self and his wife and children by labouring about the docks in London, and before
they joined the “ Northfleet,” about £2O was advanced to them to get their goods
out of pawn. In his endeavours to save his wife and children he got crushed by one
of the boats and thrown into the sea, but he was afterwards rescued. His wife
and children were lost. WEen he was discharged from tne hospital he would be
utterly penniless, as everything belonging to him had gone down with the ship.
The other injured man, Biddies, was going on very well, and the ball in his leg
had been extracted.
The committee then adjourned.
On Tuesday, a meeting of the committee was held at the Mansion House
under the presidency of the Lord Mayor. There were present, among others, Mr.
Alfred de Rothschild, Mr. George Moore, Mr. Henry Edwards, M.P., Baron Albert
Grant, Mr. William Dent, the Bev. Canon Harvey, Mr. J. J. Vickers, (of the
firm of Messrs. Patton and Co., the owners of the Northfleet), Mr. Edwin Clark
(one of the contractors), Captain J. Gilbert Johnston, Mr. Henry Green, jun,,
Mr. A. J. Waterlow, Mr. J. Standish Haly, Mr. Robert S. Walker, and Mr. J. B.
Davison, the hon. secretary.
The Lord Mayor stated that he had received a letter from the Rev. Mr.
Herring, a member of the committee, who was absent that day, to the effect that


he and Captain Oates had been to the Board of Trade and ascertained that there
was no Government reward for the finding of dead bodies at sea. The reward of
10s. which the committee offered would, therefore, greatly aid their sympathetic
efforts on behalf of the relatives, though he thought there ought to be no
encouragement given to go down to identify the corpses. The Board of Trade
intended to present Mrs. Knowles, the Captain’s widow, with a handsome testimo-
nial (not pecuniary) in recognition of the heroic services of her husband, and they
would take care also to reward all those noble men who so gallantly rescued the
survivors. The Queen was intensely interested in the sad affair. The ship’s
carpenter, a noble and high-principled man, was, he heard, only married a few
days before the ship started. The more they went into the particulars of the
disaster, the more human misery they discovered, and, therefore, the more they
ought to ask the public to aid them in some degree to alleviate the sufferings
of the distressed people.
Mr, Vickers read a letter addressed by Mrs. Knowles, the wife of the Captain,
under date of Monday last, to Mr. Patton, one of the owners of the vessel, in
which she said : —“ Many thanks for your kind letter, received to-day. As lam
feeling slightly better I preferred answering it myself. I have in some way hurt
my side, and am feeling very weak in consequence. Unless you urgently wish to
see me at once, I should prefer leaving our interview until the end of this or the
beginning of next week. My uncle would see you on any business transactions,
and would call upon you any time you wished. I sincerely trust the body of my dear
husband will soon be found. It is a great comfort to me to know how highly he
was esteemed by all who knew him. Again thanking you for your kind offers, —
I remain sincerely yours, Frederica Knowles.”
The Lord Mayor was authorised by the committee to communicate with Mrs.
Knowles.
The Lord Mayor reported that up to that time £3,400 had been received on
behalf of the fund, and that subscriptions were being paid in at the London and
County Bank, Messrs. Coutts’s, and other banks in the metropolis. Replying to
Mr. Alfred de Rothschild, he observed that he was not able at present to form an
idea as to the amount of money necessary to be collected.
Mr. Vickers said he was in a position to give some information about the crew
and their relatives. The crew consisted of 34 persons, of whom 13 were British
subjects, three Germans, one a native of China, nine Swedes, four Norwegians, one
American, and two coloured men from Jamaica. Of these 10 had been saved, of
whom only two were British subjects. The widow of the chief mate, Mr. Gloack,
who lived at Broughty Ferry, near Dundee, had written to the firm, in answer to
their enquiries, stating that she had five children, the eldest 15 years of age, and
the youngest three, and that they were totally unprovided for. She was heartily


thankful for the cheering news that London was acting so nobly in the matter, and
she felt deeply touched with the expression of the Queen’s sympathy, and also that
of the Lord Mayor. Mr. Tickers explained that Mrs. Grloack would have received
during the voyage £4 a month, that being half her husband’s pay, and that the
firm would at once send her the amount due on the first month’s allotment note.
The second mate, G. M. Blyth, had left a widow, but no family, and the firm had
advanced her £5, as she was in poor circumstances. The ship’s carpenter, Alex-
ander Stephen, was married just before Christmas, and his wife lived at Fraser-
burgh. The doctor, Mr. Kunde, was, as the firm understood, a single man, but
they had written to his relatives in Pomerania to make enquiries. The steward
was a Chinaman, and he had left a mother living at Canton; and the relatives of the
two cooks resided at St. John’s and Bermuda respectively. There were two midship-
men drowned in the ship, one of them being a brother-in-law of an owner. As
to the rest of the crew, letters of enquiry had been addressed to the relatives.
The committee voted, for the relief of their immediate wants, £ls to Mrs.
Gloack, the widow of the first mate, and her family, and £5 each to the widows of
the second mate and carpenter. It was understood that in any case where the
widow of a member of the crew had received an allotment note, the owners were
prepared, under the circumstances, to cash it.
The committee had next under consideration the very deplorable case of Amos
Baynor, a poor man at Battersea, whose two sons, one with a wife and two children
and the other single, perished in the wreck. His wife in her old age, had since
died of grief, and her body was now awaiting burial. The committee voted £5
towards the burial of the deceased woman, through the clergyman of the parish.
The Lord Mayor said the next case was that of a daughter who had lost her
father and mother and all the members of her family. She was a domestic servant,
who had elected to remain in England. Her name was Abley. She was 20 years
of age, and asked for some assistance towards providing mourning. The com-
mittee voted the applicant £3.
The next case was that of a widow named Jervis, whose husband had been
drowned. She had depended, with her two children, on his sending her money
after he arrived at his destination. One of the children was two and a half, and
the other one year old. The committee voted her £5.
As the committee was about to separate for the day, Mr. George Moore took
occasion to say he had reason to believe that many people were holding back from
subscribing to the fund under an impression that there might eventually be a
surplus ; but, for his part, he thought the committee ought to raise £5,000 or
£6,000. (Hear, hear.) He was convinced that in Lombard-street and other
wealthy parts of the city there were many who would feel pleasure in subscribing
if they had any reliable data to go upon in reference to the probable extent of the


calamity as it affected poor and dependent persons whose near relatives had perished
in the calamity.
This statement appeared to be endorsed by the whole committee, and the
Lord Mayor expressed an opinion that only about half the money that was wanted
had been subscribed.
On the motion of Mr. William Dent, a sub-committee was appointed, con-
sisting of Mr, Alfredde Rothschild, Mr. Henry Edwards, M.P., Mr. George Moore,
Mr. J. J. Vickers, Baron Albert Grant, Mr. R. S. Walker, Mr. William Dent,
Mr. Henry Green, jun., and Captain J. G. Johnston, with full power to deal with
all cases of distress coming under their supervision.
The meeting then separated for the day.
On Wednesday, January 29th, a meeting of the Mansion House Committee was
held under the presidency of the Lord Mayor. There were present Mr. Alfred de
Rothschild, Mr. Samuel Morley, M.P., Mr. George Moore, Mr. Henry Edwards,
M.P., Mr. William Dent, the Rev. William Rogers, Rector of Bishopsgate; the
Rev. A, Styleman Herring, Incumbent of St. Paul’s, Clerkenwell; Mr. J. Standish
Haly, Captain J. Gilbert Johnston, Mr. George Sheward, Mr. J. J. Vickers, of the
firm of Messrs. Patton and Co., owners of the “ Korthfleet,” Mr, T. L. Devitt, Mr.
C. W. Price, Mr. H, G. Burch, Mr, R. S. Walker, and Mr. J. B. Davison, the
hon. secretary.
On the motion of the Lord Mayor, Mr. R. K. Fowler, M.P., and the Rev.
Mr. Yate, of the Sailors’ Home, Dover, were added to the committee, and Mr.
Styleman Herring and Mr. Yate to the sub-committee.
The Lord Mayor read a letter which he had received that day from Mrs.
Knowles, the captain’s widow. It was as follows :
“ My Lord—ln acknowledging the receipt of your gracious letter, I tender
you and the gentlemen of the committee my most sincere thanks for the kind
messages of condolence and the great interest you are taking in the welfare of
myself and fellow-sufferers through this great calamity. It is particularly gratifying,
even in the midst of my great trouble, to hear of the universal admiration of my
husband’s noble conduct, and to know how entirely worthy he was of all the praise
bestowed upon him. In laying before you my means of support, I have no wish
to plead poverty or to deprive others who are in greater need than lof assistance.
I have a share in some property which amounts, on an average, to about 15s. per
week. I have also about £IOO in the Bank of England which belonged to my late
husband. —Again thanking you, I beg to remain, obediently yours,
“Frederica Knowles,”
A formal intimation was made to the committee that the body of a child,
supposed to be that of a passenger on board the “ Korthfleet,” had been picked up
in the vicinity of the wreck and landed and that instructions had been


sent down to the spot to have the features photographed, with a view to the identi-
fication of the body.
Mr. Vickers said he had received a letter stating that Captain Oates, a member
of the Mansion House Committee, had arrived at Lydd, and had gone to the place
where the body of the child had been taken, with the view to assist in its
identification.
The Lord Mayor (addressing Mr. Vickers) said he supposed it might be
assumed by the committee that such of the bodies as might be found and were
recognisable would be photographed.
Mr. Vickers replied in the affirmative.
Mr. H. Edwards, M.P., said it was evident that everything was being done at
present that ought to be done on the spot, but it should be clearly understood that
the features of such of the bodies as might be recovered from the wreck or washed
ashore were to be photographed, with a view to identification by relatives or others;
On the suggestion of the Lord Mayor, the committee passed an unanimous
resolution entirely approving the arrangements which were being made by Captain
Oates for photographing the bodies, and undertaking to bear the expense of the
process.
The Lord Mayor reminded the committee that on Tuesday, the Mansion House
Belief Fund amounted to £3,400, of which £3,156 remained in hand. The whole
amount of the subscriptions, he said, up to yesterday, was £3,902 —namely, £3,652
actually received, and £250 promised. He also observed with satisfaction that a
subscription had been set on foot at Liverpool in aid of the fund, under the auspices
of the Mayor.
Mr. Vickers, in reply to a question, said the divers to be employed in recovering
the bodies would receive £5 for each body they might recover, but he did not know
from what source. A certain sum, he understood, would be awarded by the Board
of Trade —he believed £2 for each body. The divers were waiting a favourable
moment to commence operations. They were recommended by Lloyd’s Salvage
Association. The wreck was left entirely under the charge of the owners, who were
acting under the direction of the Salvage Association.
The Rev. Mr. Herring took occasion to remind the committee that the sur-
vivors staying at the Sailors’ Home, in Well Street, were now receiving 245, a
week each—namely, 10s. a week from the committee, and 2s. a day each from
other sources.
Mr. Davison, the secretary, stated that another ship would be ready within a
month to take the passengers to Tasmania.
The Lord Mayor announced that he had just received a telegram stating that
the boatmen were very anxious to know what they were to be paid for finding
bodies. In answer the Lord Mayor ordered a telegram to be sent on the subject to
Captain Oates, who was prepared to remunerate all boatmen finding corpses.


January, 30th, a meeting of the executive committee of the fund for the relief
of the widows and orphans of the emigrant passengers and the crew of the “ North-
fleet” was held at the Mansion House. Mr. George Moore presided, in the unavoid-
able absence of the Lord Mayor; and there were also present Mr. Alfred de
Rothschild, Baron Albert Grant, Mr. Henry Edwards, M.P., the Rev. Canon Harvey,
the Rev. A. Styleman Herring, Mr. John Patton, jun., Mr. J. J. Tickers, Mr. R.
S. Walker, Mr. Edwin Clark, Mr. T. L. Devitt, Mr. J. Standish Haly, Mr. N. G.
Burch, and Mr. J. B. Davison, the hon. secretary
It was reported that the telegram which had been received at Lloyd’s that
morning, announcing the arrival at Lisbon, in an undamaged state, of the steamer
“ Murillo,” which is suspected to have been the vessel that caused the disaster, was
erroneous. On this point a letter was read from Messrs. Edwin Clark, Punchard,
and Co., of 5, Westminster Chambers, the contractors for the Tasmanian Railway,
stating that they had just received a telegram from Messrs. Pinto, Baste, and Co.,
their agents at Lisbon, as follows :
“ Lisbon, Jan. 29, (7.35 p.m.)
“ Agent of ‘ Murillo’ telegraphed orders to Cascas (the captain) for her to pro-
ceed without coming in, but captain missed the order. She stopped at Belem, which
is unusual, and left suddenly, without landing her Lisbon cargo. Was fresh
painted, the starboard bow being in black and red to the water line. Had slight
indentations near the anchor davit port bow. Supposed gone to Cadiz, or Malaga,
or Tigo. Have telegraph to Macpherson (Cadiz), Crook Brothers (Malaga), and
Darcena (Tigo), to try and ascertain information.
“ Pinto, Baste, and Co.”
Messrs. Clark added that this tended to confirm their original belief that the
“ Murillo” was the ship that ran down the “ Northfleet” and that they were deter-
mined to do their utmost to get further particulars in the matter.
Mr. Davison announced that the subscriptions up to that afternoon amounted
to £4,150, including a donation of £lO5 from His Royal Highness the Prince of
Wales. Mr. Alfred de Rothschild stated that the directors of the Bank of Eng-
land had that day voted £lOO towards the fund Donations of £52. 10s. from
Messrs. Barclay, Perkins, and Co,, and £5 from Mr. Disraeli, were also said to have
been received. A telegram was read from Mr. Harding, of the Birmingham
Chamber of Commerce, asking to be authorized to collect subscriptions in aid of
the fund, and stating that a considerable sum would, doubtless, be received in that
town. It was resolved to answer the communication by remarking that the
committee would be happy to receive from Birmingham or elsewhere subscriptions
towards the fund.
Mr. Edwards urged that the committee ought as soon as possible to announce
to the public what sum they deemed sufficient for the adequate relief of the
sufferers.


Mr. Davison said the claims on the fund were multiplying daily and hourly.
Mr. Alfred de Rothschild said, seeing that fresh applications from the rela-
tives of the unfortunate people were still pouring in, it would be premature at
present to decide upon the limits of the fund. It would be quite time enough to
do that when all the claims were before the committee, for until then they could
not possible say how much money they were likely to require.
The Rev. A. Styleman Herring said he had received a telegram from Captain
Oates, stating that the parish cemetery at Lydd was full, and that objections had
been made against any bodies taken from the ship, and not actually washed ashore,
being buried within the parish. Romney, the adjoining parish, would take its own
share in the matter, but it objected to be responsible for the surplus from Lydd.
At Romney there was a disused burial ground, which might be made available for
the interment of the whole of the bodies recovered. He (Mr. Herring) suggested
that the committee should buy a plot of ground for that purpose, and ask Bishop
Parry, of Dover, at once to consecrate it.
Later in the day a further telegram was received from Captain Oates to the
effect that he had made amicable arrangements with the authorities for the inter-
ment of all the bodies cast ashore.
The Rev. Canon Harvey said he had that morning visited the orphan girl
Maria Taplin, and she and her relatives had expressed themselves very pleased at
the decision of the committee to place her in charge of Mr. William Forster at
Dover.
Mr. George Moore wished, through the press, to draw the attention of the
public to the case of a little boy named Sherrin, five years of age, whose parents
and an infant sister had gone down in the ship, remarking that he hoped some one
might be induced to adopt him. There was also a distressing case of two children
—a boy of eight and a girl of six—whose parents were lost, but who, as they hap-
pened to be illegitimate, would not be taken into any orphanage or similar insti-
tution.
The Committee then adjourned.
On Saturday, February 1, the Executive Committee held another meeting at the
Mansion House, the Lord Mayor presiding. There were present Mr. Sheriff Perkins,
Mr. George Moore, the Rev. Canon Harvey, Captain J. Gilbert Johnston, Mr. R.
S. Walker, the Rev. A. S. Herring, Mr. John J. Vickers, and Mr. J. B. Davison,
hon. secretary.
The Lord Mayor intimated that he had received a telegram stating that the body
of a woman, and also that of a man, supposed to be those of passengers by the ill-
fated ship, had been washed on shore, and waited identification. He went on to say
that he had received a letter from a gentleman at Hammersmith, who, with his
wife, was willing, with the consent of the committee, to adopt the orphan child
10


Horkett, six years of age. The writer had given unexceptionable references as to
his respectability, and the Lord Mayor thought the committee could not have a
better offer. He took occasion to say, at the same time, that, strictly speaking, the
committee had no right, and indeed disclaimed any such right, to hand over to
strangers the care of orphan children saved rom the wreck, without the consent
of any relatives they might have, or of the children themselves, supposing they
were of an age to give consent. He trusted, however, the religious question might
never arise in such cases.
The offer in the result was accepted with the grateful thanks of the committee,
subject to the consent of any relatives, and a grant of £lO was made for an outfit
for the child.
An order was made by the committee authorising the photographing of the
two bodies which had been washed on shore, with a view to their identification.
Mr. George Moore read a letter from a correspondent wishing to assume the
care and maintenance of the child Sherrin, for whose temporary necessities the
Mayor of Bridgewater had provided.
The matter was allowed to stand over for the day, the Lord Mayor taking
occasion to say incidentally that there were many institutions into which the orphans
might be received.
The Lev. Mr. Herring on the other hand, suggested that it would be desirable,
as far as possible, to have them adopted into private families.
On the motion of the Lord Mayor, it was resolved that the offers the com-
mittee had received from various institutions be recorded and acknowledged with
thanks, but that the consideration of them be deferred until the committee knew
precisely the number of orphan children for whom provision would have to
be made.
The Lord Mayor —replying to a statement made by the Rev. A. Styleman
Herring, to the effect that he had reason to know persons were going about collect-
ing subscriptions on various grounds alleged to have arisen out of the calamity, and
giving the names of the Duke of Argyll and others persons of consideration as sub-
scribers—took occasion to say that it would be well for all who were disposed to
subscribe to do so through the Mansion House Committee, otherwise persons in
distress arising out of the disaster might obtain relief from different sources, and
it might be—beyond the emergency. For example, he had received from more
than one quarter an intimation to the effect that some of the surviving members of
the crew had engaged themselves for exhibition to the proprietor of a music-hall
“ for twelve nights only,” as the placard stated, where, it was added, “ they would
relate some of the touching incidents of the sad collision.” He thought it right to
mention their names, as they appeared in a handbill —namely, “ Carl Hanson and
Carl Andersen, who saved the captain’s wife; Charles Humphreys, the black cook ;


Matt. Andero, Robert Lass, Theodore B. donnas, Albert 11 obey, and Samuel
Watkins. He thought the committee should not continue any assistance whatever
towards persons who presented themselves before the public for purposes of sensa-
tional excitement, and of making money. (Hear, hear.) He regarded such conduct
as disgraceful under the circumstances, and thought the committee should say the
money they had voted to them should be discontinued, for they were now receiving
245. a week from the committee and the owners of the ship together. (Hear,
hear.)
Mr. George Moore thought it was a flagrant case of indiscretion and indecorum
for men, after having been so miraculously saved from impending destruction, to go
and exhibit themselves in public for the purpose of making money.
Mr. Vickers reminded the committee that the men in question had received £1
each for outfit.
A unanimous resolution was passed to the effect that the men in question be
informed that if they attended at any music hall to exhibit themselves after that
evening, all assistance they were now receiving from the committee would be
withdrawn.
Mr. Vickers also intimated that the gratuitous assistance afforded them by the
owners would likewise be withdrawn.
The Lord Mayor announced that the total amount of the fund now being raised
at the Mansion House amounted, up to 2 o’clock that day, to £5,542.
The meeting at its rising, stood adjourned until next day (Tuesday) at-
-4 o’clock.
On Monday afternoon, February 10th, the Executive Committee of the fund
for the relief of the widows and orphans of the crew and emigrants and other
sufferers by the late disaster in the Channel met at the Mansion House for the
despatch of business. The Lord Mayor presided. It was announced that the fund
now amounted to £6,900, and that, in addition, various sums were promised from
the country, including £2OO, which had been collected at Liverpool The Committee,
after due deliberation upon each case, agreed to make the following distribution of
the money with which they had been entrusted by the public, namely—to Mrs.
Knowles, the captain’s widow, £I,OOO ; to Mrs. Gloack, widow of the chief mate,
and her five children, £800; to Mrs. Blyth, widow of the second mate, and her
husband's mother, whom he had supported, £3OO ; to Mrs. Stephens, the carpenter’s
widow, £3OO ; to the parents of Hermann Kunde, the surgeon, £IOO ; to the rela-
tives of eighteen of the seamen, £l5O ; to the fourteen widows and twenty-two
children of passengers, and five orphan children, £1,950 ; to other dependent rela-
tives of the deceased passengers, £6OO (of which £4OO has been already paid) ; to
the ten surviving members of the crew, £SO; for providing clothing and outfits, and
temporary maintenance for the seventy-six surviving passengers, £500; to (he


injured man, Dixon (or his family, whom lie had deserted), £200; to the pilot
Mr. Brack, by way of an honorarium, £2l; for recovering and burying the dead,
and local expenses, £l5O ; to the masters and crews of the steam-tug and luggers
who saved so many lives, £l5O (in addition to anything they may get from the
Board of Trade); and for general expenses and contingencies, £SOO. The manner
in which the various sums should be paid was left to the discretion of the Sub-Com-
mittee. The Lord Mayor said, before they concluded their labours he thought
they ought to suggest that some improved arrangements should be made with a view
to avert similar calamities to that which hefel the “ North fleet.” He had received
many communications with reference to improved signals, and other arrangements
for preserving life at sea. He had also been shown a most admirable plan for
lowering boats from a ship, and as simple as admirable. By it, passengers and crew
might get into a boat on the deck of a ship, and with the aid only of a hammer and
pin, lower themselves quietly and without danger into the water. He suggested that
the Committee hire a room for exhibiting the models to which he had referred, and
provide a catalogue of them. The suggestion was well received by the Committee,
and will he carried into practical effect in due time. On the motion of Baron
Grant, seconded by the Eev. Mr. Herring, it was unanimously resolved in effect
that the Lord Mayor be requested to put himself in communication with the Board
of Trade, the Trinity House, and also the Emigration Commissioners, with a view
of drawing their attention to the defective system of danger signals in ships as now
in practice, and to the absolute necessity of a code of rules being established for use
in vessels, with penalties by fine or otherwise for their contravention; and
especially that it should be compulsory upon vessels carrying passengers to carry a
full set of signals in accordance with such rules. The Committee then adjourned.
In closing our account of good work accomplished so wisely and so well by
the Mansion House Relief Eund Committee, we must pay a tribute to the untiring
exertions of Mr. J. B. Davison, the indefatigable honorary secretary, who is also
secretary to the Tasmanian Railway Company. The idea of the Mansion House
Fund originated in that Company’s Board Room.
Mr. Davison, who had himself engaged all the labouring men on board the
“Northfleet,” for Messrs. Edwin Clark, Punchard & Co., of course felt deeply
interested in all who suffered by the wreck, and when the awful amount of suffer-
ing and misery occasioned by the catastrophe dawned upon him, he at once wrote a
letter, intending to send it to all the papers next day, proposing a national sub-
scription for the benefit of the sufferers.
He, however, decided to lay the matter before the Directors at the Board
Meeting held next day ; and it was taken up most warmly by them.
It was thought advisable to ask the assistance of the Lord Mayor, who most
readily responded to the wishes of the Directors, and Mr. Davison. Several


gentlemen of influence, who were with his Lordship at the time, united most
cordially with him, not only in subscribing very liberally themselves, but in
undertaking the arduous duties of members of the Relief Fund Committee. On
the first day more than £I,OOO was subscribed, and this rapidly increased from
day to day, until upwards of £7,000 gave testimony to the deep feeling of interest
and sympathy, evoked by this most terrible calamity.
It must be most pleasing to Mr. Davison to feel, that his ceaseless exertions
have very largely contributed to the alleviation of the sorrows of the many
bereaved relatives of those who perished in the “ Northfleet;” and all who
have contributed to the.fund owe many thanks, not only to the Lord Mayor and
gentlemen of the Committee for the kind way in which they have sacrificed private
interests, to devote so much time and thought to their noble work of relieving the
distressed, but also to this gentleman, who has so well aided them in their labours.
The nation at large may indeed worthily record its gratitude to them all; and more
particularly because in the distribution of the fund, they have resolutely endea-
voured to succour the weak and helpless with most liberal grants, and have as much
as possible limited their supplies to absolute necessaries in the case of the strong
and selfish, who, alas ! formed the overwhelming majority of those rescued from
the “ Northfleet.”
The following letter well shows the kind feeling of sympathy evinced by the
owners for all who suffered by the loss of the “Northfleet.” Its tribute to the
memory of Captain Knowles, Mr. Brand, Dr. Kunde, and others, must be a comfort
to many mourning hearts ;
“to the editor of the ‘times.’
“ Sir, —Considering the deep and painful interest created throughout the
nation consequent on the catastrophe off Dungeness, we deem it a duty to the public
and justice to ourselves, in answer to certain comments which have appeared in some
of the daily papers, to affirm that the ‘ Northfleet ’ was in all respects fully and
properly equipped for her intended voyage. She was a strong, staunch vessel, built
principally of teak, A 1 at Lloyd’s, just out of dry dock, newly-metalled, and in
excellent trim. No expense or trouble was spared in her outfit. Mr. Patton,
assisted by Captain Oates, attended personally to her equipment, and we can there-
fore confidently assure the public that nothing was wanting which is requisite and
usual in the fitting out of an emigrant ship. She was well manned, and had a full
complement and measurement of boats and stores according to the Board of
Trade’s requirements.
“ While feeling deep responsibility as owners of the 1 Northfleet,’ we have the
consolation of knowing that no blame can attach itself either to ship, captain, or


crew, and that no precaution on our or their part could have averted the terrible
calamity which overtook the vessel. On this subject we court the fullest investiga-
tion from those whose duty it will be to inquire into these matters.
“ In our opinion, which we think will he endorsed by thoughtful men, had the
emigrants obeyed the directions of the captain and his officers, the disaster would
not have been attended with anything like so great loss of life. After searching
inquiries from the survivors we are able to state that the vessel went down twenty-
five to thirty minutes after the collision; that the sea was at the time comparatively
smooth, and we believe that it was not impossible to have launched and manned
most of the boats without accident, had it not been for the disorder and panic which
seized the passengers. It is not our wish, however, now to unduly reflect on the
panic-stricken emigrants who have perished, or on the survivors. The night was
dark, and the poor fellows were not inured to the dangers of the sea, but we wish
rather to point a moral to any who may in future be placed in like danger.
“As to the cause of this disaster there can he but one opinion, and we trust
that the name and whereabouts of the steamer, at present enveloped in mystery,
will soon be ascertained, and that those in charge of her, who acted such a cruel
and cowardly part, will personally receive from the public that opprobrium their
conduct merits, even though the law may be unable to inflict punishment adequate
to their deserts.
“We do not share the views expressed by some that the steamer has also
foundered, and are loth to believe it possible that she will elude the strenuous efforts
made to track her.
“We cannot close these remarks without expressing our admiration of the
manly and noble conduct of Captain Knowles, his officers, and crew. All honour
to their memory. Nor can we omit to mention the names of the late Samuel
Frederick Brand (first-class passenger), the late Hermann Kunde (the doctor), and
George Brack (the pilot), the last almost miraculously saved, who displayed great
courage and coolness in assisting the captain, regardless of their own safety.
“To the relatives and friends of those who have perished under such excep-
tionally painful circumstances, we offer our sincere sympathy, and we earnestly trust
that the future pages of our maritime annals will never be darkened with such
a sad story.
“We are, Sir, your obedient servants,
“ John Patton and Co.
“ 3, White Lion-court, Cornhill, and Lloyd’s, January 27th.”
The passengers rescued from the “Northfleet ” who remained in Dover over
Thursday night left for London by the noon train next day, their departure being
witnessed by a sympathising crowd. There was at that moment a rumour in the


town that the steamer which had mn their ship down had put in at Havre, and
there been identified, and the alleged fact was communicated to the passengers.
“ Thank God for that,” said one, clenching his fist, “I don’t care now for my
bits of things that went down, although they were all I had in the world ; but
I couldn’t have felt comfortable for the rest of my life if those scoundrels had
got clean away.” It is indeed difficult to find words to express the hot indignation
which the survivors of the “ Horthfleet’s ” passengers and crew felt against the
unknown steamer, and that sentiment was shared in a scarcely less marked degree
by the people of Dover.
But if the wreck of the “Northfleet ” will ever be memorable in history by
reason of the cold-blooded desertion of the hapless crew by the vessel which ran
them down, it has its compensating bright side in the expression of warm and
generous sympathy with the survivors, which their sad plight has evoked. Messrs.
Patton, the owners of the “ Horthfleet,” and Captain Oates, her former com-
mander, profoundly appreciate the warmhearted kindness with which the people
of Dover welcomed the poor waifs and strays from the doomed ship who were
landed in their town. Such kindness and tender sympathy counteract and
obliterate the mark, black as it is, which the captain and crew of the Spanish
steamer have scored against humanity ; the balance will come all right when the
spontaneous sympathy of the nation, of which we hear from all parts of the king-
dom, from Liverpool to the Mansion House, has been duly entered on the other
side of the account. In Dover, the whole population vied with each other
in their efforts to succour the distressed, and during the stay of the wrecked
passengers the Sailors’ Home was inundated by visitors anxious for their comfort.
A knock came to the door of the Rev. Mr. Yate (the clergyman who gave shelter
to the widowed wife of the “ Northfleet’s ” captain), a stranger asked to see Mr,
Yate, and placing a£s note in his hand, with the brief instruction that it was
for the wrecked people, walked hurriedly away. This is an isolated case, but it
faithfully represents the general feeling displayed in the town.


MEMOIRS.
SAMUEL FREFERICK BRAND.
The late Mr. Samuel Frederick Brand, a son of Dr. Brand, of 23, Cornhill,
and Buckhurst Hill, was born in London on the 22nd June, 1850.
He was partly educated at the Bungay and Aldborough Grammar School;
thence he was sent to the Middle Class College at Framlingham, in Suffolk. He
was a prominent member of the Buckhurst Hill Cricket and Gymnastic Clubs,
being very generally a successful competitor for honours in all athletic sports.
After leaving college, he engaged in a mercantile life, until he received an
appointment from Messrs. Edwin Clark, Punchard and Co. to go to Tasmania as
engineer and general superintendent of the works in connection with the
Tasmanian Railway.
It must always be a source of sweetest consolation to the many dear ones
who mourn his loss, that he died a glorious death.
The more we hear of the close of that young life, the more fervently can we
thank God that He gave him strength to suffer and to die bravely and calmly
doing his duty.
There is every reason to believe that to the last he stood at the captain’s side,
helping him in his arduous task of endeavouring to restrain the maddened crowd
on deck, in order that some at least might be saved.
Mr. Brand’s body having been recovered, a coroner’s inquest was held at the
Town Hall, Lydd, and it was decided that although the inquest was adjourned
the funeral should take place. His remains were accordingly buried on
Sunday, the 26th January, in the Romney churchyard, amidst every mark of
public sympathy. The coffin, which was covered with wreaths of immortelles and
bouquets of violets and camellias, was, about half-past three o’clock, carried from
the house to which it had been removed, being followed by Dr. Brand and Mr.
John Brand, father and brother of the deceased, and a long procession of mourners,
amongst whom were several justices of the peace, a number of the principal
inhabitants of the districts, Captain Oates (the former commander of the “North-
fleet”), and Mr. Forster, of the firm of Latham and Co., Lloyds’ agents at Dover.
As the procession passed through the town, all the blinds in the houses lining the
route were drawn down. The Rev. Richard Smith, vicar of Romney, met the pro-
cession at some distance from the churchyard, and conducted it into the church,






where the first portion of the service was read. As the bier was lifted for the
last stage of its journey, the organ pealed forth the solemn strains of the “ Dead
March in Saul.” The coffin, which bore the simple inscription,
SAMUEL FREDERICK BRAND,
DIED JANUARY 22, 1873,
AGED 23 YEARS,
was laid in the north-west corner of the churchyard, and is surrounded by the
graves of many shipwrecked mariners whom the tide has cast up on the beach by
Dungeness and the lighthouse.
Lee Assow, Steward of the “ Northfleet.”
Lee Assow, the steward of the “ Northfleet,” was a native of Fatshan, in the
province of Kwangtung, China.
Having committed some childish folly, he was banished from the house of
his father (who was a petty officer in the Chinese army), a piece of one ear was
cut off, as a mark of disgrace, and he was turned, as a castaway, into the streets.
His eldest brother taking pity on him, or wishing probably to obtain the bonus
from the emigration agents, sent him as one of 480 emigrants who sailed for Cuba
in January, 1866, in the ship “ Italia,” at that time commanded by Captain Oates.
He had no knowledge of the day or date of his birth, but was, apparently, at that
time about fourteen years of age ; a bright, intelligent, frolicsome lad, who won the
favour of the officers on board by his constant cheerfulness and readiness to do
anything required of him.
On arrival in Cuba, Captain Oates took him, with the consent of the boy and
his employers, as his own personal servant. In that capacity he came to England,
very quickly learned to speak English, and became proud of his new office and
costume. He, with Captain and Mrs. Oates, visited Yorkshire, Lancashire, and
South Wales, and whatever house he entered won for himself golden opinions for
his strict honesty, kind and cheerful disposition and attachment, and faithfulness
to his new employers. That he was possessed of a certain amount of spirit may
be seen from the following incident that occurred shortly after his arrival. When
with Mrs. Oates, on a visit to her friends in Huddersfield, he was exasperated by
boys frequently calling after him, “China boy, China boy.” One day, when on
an errand, being pressed too closely, he put down his basket, turned round on
them, and boxed them in true English style. Also, on being asked one day by a
gentleman if he was not the “China boy,” he replied, “No, me English gentle-
man,” for which he was rewarded with a shilling. He was at that time very fond
of going to church to hear the music, but having so little knowledge of i he language,
it was very difficult to explain to him the first principles of our religion. He
11


then commenced learning to read, and, when in Wales, went for a short time to
school, but he had much greater aptitude for mechanical than for literary pursuits.
As was once remarked, “ he had not an idle bone in his bodywas always employed
about something or another, his favourite pastime being boatbuilding, in which he
produced some very creditable models of ships, brigs, schooners, and steamers.
In May, 1868, when Captain Oates took command of the “ Northfleet,’’ he
joined her as cabin boy, and very soon became initiated in his new duties. On the
steward’s being dismissed in Shanghai in January of the following year, he was
considered so faithful and had so many qualifications requisite for making a good
steward, that, though very young, he was placed in that responsible position.
Graining knowledge and experience year by year, he fulfilled his duties to the entire
satisfaction of the owners, his captain and the officers, being trusted implicitly
with all stores, drinkables, and the captain’s personal property. He was a great
favourite with all passengers and visitors, very fond of and kind to all dumb animals.
As time passed on, he became anxious to revisit the scenes of his childhood,
and to see his mother. When the ‘‘‘ Northfleet ” arrived in Hong Kong in January,
1872, he had permission to pay a visit to his native place. He having entirely adopted
English costume, and dispensed with the characteristic “tail,” which by his
countrymen is looked upon as a mark of disgrace and dishonour, thought it prudent
to write and inquire if his friends would like to receive him. The event proved
the wisdom of this; he learned that his father was dead, and that his mother pre-
ferred coming to see him. She arrived with his uncle in Hong Kong, unfortunately
only the night before the ship was about to sail for Cochin China. The long-lost
child and parent enjoyed one brief evening of happy intercourse, he proudly relating
all his adventures to her, and she advising him to continue his faithful services to
his employers. The young fellow showed that fine trait of Chinese character,
filial love, and being of a very generous and grateful disposition, he paid her and
his uncle’s expenses for the journey, and gave her money to add to the comforts of
her declining years, both at that time and on a subsequent visit to Hong Kong a
few months later.
After the change in the command of the “ Horthfleet,” a few days before
sailing, there was no time to provide a proficient substitute. Captain and Mrs.
Oates very much regretted losing sight of him, even for a time, but thinking he
would be such a comfort to Captain and Mrs. Knowles, and so valuable to the
ship’s interests (as he proved during the short time he was with them), he was
allowed to go on the last ill-fated voyage, hoping to rejoin them on his return.
His last moments were spent in firing rockets and signals of distress. When the
knowledge that the ship was sinking broke upon him, he rushed down into the
cabin, advised Mrs. Knowles to get her trinkets, went to his own chest, got
something, probably his watch and chain and other valuables, then went on
deck again, and died bravely at his post.


During the long passages to and from the East he had continued his studies,
and became sufficiently advanced to keep his store accounts and read his Bible.
On Sunday afternoon he always had an hour’s religious instruction, and there is
good reason to hope that the seed then sown did not sink into barren soil. We
trust that he is now gone to his rest and reward, and that the glimmerings of his
faith may be accounted to him for righteousness when the Saviour shall gather
together the jewels of His crown.
Captain Knowles.
Edward Knowles, the late Captain of the Northfleet, was the second son of a
family of 13 children, and was born at Gravesend, 4th May, 1839. He was taken
to Tunstead, Lancashire, in the year 1841; his parents being appointed master and
mistress of the National School just built there. He was a quiet, reserved child,
remarkable for his superior knowledge of the subjects taught in the classes to which
he belonged, and for the intelligence he evinced at his school examinations.
After his father and mother were appointed to the Milton-le-Wold Schools,
Lincolnshire, Edward was apprenticed to his father as a pupil-teacher. It was
here he had the advantage of private tuition in Latin, given by the late Rev. E. W.
Hughes, the Rector. This highly-esteemed gentleman’s example of devotion to
duty, no doubt, assisted materially in forming the character of the late Captain of
the “ Northfleet.” It was here, too, that he showed that great skill in various athletic
sports, which rendered him a universal favourite with the young farmers in the
neighbourhood. He had a great love for all field-sports, and excelled in running
and jumping. His fondness for dogs almost amounted to a passion.
The following incident shows his school-hoy idea of honour :
He was out walking with a young companion one Sunday evening, and they
amused themselves by throwing stones at a cottage, in which some Wesleyan-
Methodists were worshipping; one stone went through a window. A friend of
his father’s wrote to acquaint him of it, and the boy was punished, taken to the
house to beg the pardon of the occupiers, and afterwards lectured by the school
trustees.
A few years ago, when in conversation with his father, amongst other remi-
niscences of his boyhood, he referred to this, but added,—“ My companion threw
the stones, but I determined not to tell of him. I always thought the school
trustees too hard upon me for that.”
Upon his father’s appointment to the old endowed grammar school at Burgh-
le-Marsh, Lincolnshire, his indentures were cancelled as pupil-teacher, and he
assisted his father in the school.


It was here that he first evinced a disposition to go to sea, and his father upon
becoming acquainted with this wish promised to fit him out and procure him a
berth in a ship, if he would w r ait a short time longer until the money could be
spared for the purpose ; but the lad, thinking, as he afterwards explained by letter,
that it would be a heavy tax on his parents’ limited resources, sold his watch
privately, and rising before the family were astir, made a bundle of his few
clothes, walked off to the station, and took the train for Hull. This was on the
3rd November, 1856. As soon as he was missed, his mother was very desirous
that he should be brought home again; but his father, knowing the lad’s determi-
nation of character, and at the same time greatly admiring his pluek, decided not
to prevent him, especially as he himself had, when a boy, felt the same ambition and
would have become a sailor, but for the affectionate entreaties of a devoted
mother.
He had written of his intention to a young friend in the neighbourhood of
Louth, who kindly met him at the station there and gave him half-a-sovereign.
Thus, with some two pounds in his pocket and a few clothes, he found himself in
Hull in search of a ship, and without a friend. In his search he met with Captain
Gale, who was himself looking for a command, and he, like a good Samaritan,
wishing to befriend the lad, took him to London and got him a berth in a collier
bound for Shields, probably in the hope that a short voyage would deter him from
his purpose. Captain Gale also kindly provided him with his kit for the voyage.
From stress of weather the collier had to put into Seaham Harbour, when our
young sailor, disgusted with the dirt, food, and treatment he had met with on
board, left her, and went to Sunderland.
Here he soon expended all his money, and was reduced to great straits.
Wandering through the docks in search of a ship, he saw one which he thought he
should like, went on board, and asked if they could give him a berth. The chief
officer asked him what he could do, he replied, “ Anything.” The kind-hearted
man gave him some employment, and after that a good supper, and allowed him
to sleep in his room. He was afterwards apprenticed for five years to the owners
of this ship, the “ Southern Cross,” commanded by Captain Manley. He was at
that time seventeen years of age. It was agreed that he was to receive £4O for
the time of his apprenticeship; £3 to be paid the first year. He found an excel-
lent friend in Captain Manley, and was greatly indebted to him for instruction in
navigation and seamanship. The object of his ambition now became to rise to a
command. With this always in view, he worked steadily at his post, and before
his apprenticeship expired, he had obtained his second mate’s certificate (conditionally
granted), and served in the ship in that capacity.
Having so far succeeded in his object in life, he for the first time revisited
his home and parents. From the mere stripling he had grown into the man, and


having become much changed in appearance, his father, whom he found digging in
the garden, did not recognise him. He first accosted him as a stranger, telling
him he had just returned from abroad, and had during his journeyings met with
his son. The father looked up —something in the voice and manner of the would-
be stranger struck him, and reminded him of his absent boy. The fact that it was
he, breaking upon him, he exclaimed, “Why, it must be Ned himself!”
After leaving the “ Southern Cross,” he went several voyages to Australia ?
China, and Japan, first as second officer, and then as chief in the “ W. W. Smith,’
one of the Black Ball line of ships, commanded at the time by Captain Harris.
Whilst in Sydney he narrowly escaped being drowned, in assisting to pick up a
man w r ho had fallen overboard. By some means ,he, too, got into the water; not
being a good swimmer he sank, and on rising was picked up insensible. When in
Yokohama, indulging his love for athletic sports, he joined some at that time taking
place among the Europeans, and notwithstanding his want of practice, gained the
second prize in one of the foot-races. Some years later he obtained a similar
one at Singapore.
In 1865 he joined the ship “ Tugela,” commanded by Captain Stuart, engaged
in the Natal trade, and always a favourite ship with passengers and emigrants, with
whom Mr. Knowles was at all times popular from the kindliness and urbanity of
his manners, his gallantry to the ladies, his fondness for the children, and his
attention to them. His soubriquet among them was “ Father Knowles.”
A strange coincidence may be named between the “ Tugela ” and the “'North-
fleet.” The first voyage Mr. Knowles took in the “ Tugela ” with emigrants and
passengers to Natal, whilst lying at anchor in the Downs, and in charge of Mr.
Brack (who was pilot of the “ Northfleet ” at the time of the disaster); she was run
into and seriously damaged by a steamer, and had to put back for repairs. The
“Tugela” was ultimately lost while under his charge. During a heavy gale
when she was at anchor in the harbour at Natal she broke adrift and drove ashore ;
all lives, however, were saved.
From Natal he returned home by steamer, spent some time amongst
his friends, and became engaged to her, whom he has left to mourn his un-
timely death. In June, 1868, he was appointed as chief officer to the ill-fated
“ Northfleet,” then about to sail for the first time under the command of Captain
Oates, she having been recently purchased, and re-classed, by the late owners,
Messrs. J. Patton, jun. & Co. In the four and a-half years he spent in the
“ Northfleet ” he earned for himself the esteem and respect of all who knew him.
As a sailor, he was thoroughly acquainted with all the duties of his profession,
ever at his post, cheerfully and unflinchingly carrying out the commands of the
captain, leading and encouraging his men to do their duty in every time of
danger and necessity.


He was of a reserved disposition, possessing great coolness and soundness of
judgment, and regarded by those most intimately acquainted with him during the
last years of his life as a simple and sincere Christian, not loud in profession, but
showing his principles in action.
The last action of his life must be a source of the greatest consolation to his
sorrowing widow, his father, and friends. Knowles died nobly at his post, doing
his duty to the last. Ko words can describe the grandeur of the closing of the
career of this gallant sailor. He perished as a hero and a martyr, and with
utter disregard of self. His memory will for all time be in the hearts of his
fellow-countrymen. One scarcely dares reflect upon the agony he must have
endured, at parting with his young and beautiful wife, bidding her farewell, and
saying to the faithful boatswain, “ Shove off! God bless you ! Mind your charge !”


THE “MURILLO.”
The Spanish Consul reported that the “Murillo” (steamer) left Antwerp, laden
with about 950 tons of rails and other merchandise, for Lisbon. The owner was
on board of her, and landed with the pilot at Dover, at about 8.30 or 8.45 on
Wednesday evening, his intention being to leave for London, and the pro-
ceeded. The owner thought that his vessel was the cause of the disaster to the
“Northfleet,” and that she must have sunk immediately after the collision. He
formed this opinion from the following facts—viz., the nature of the cargo, the
severity of the weather, and the thinness of the iron plates of the vessel, which
had one small compartment forward. He thought that a hole no larger than
a square foot would have been sufficient to sink her in three minutes. The
captain left in charge of the “ Mhinllo ’ was a most careful and intelligent man,
and certainly not one who would make off after disabling a vessel.
The master, Pearce, of the steamer “ Avoca,” arrived in London from Dublin,
reported that 1 a.m. on the 23rd January he sighted a steamer 7 or 8 miles W.S.W.
of Dungeness, steaming slowly ahead; he was himself going slowly in order to
make out Dungeness Light; he remarked that there was evidently something
wrong with the vessel, from the fact of the appearance of a light being over the
bows and its being taken in again, as though something was being looked for or
something done; no signals of distress were made from her. The vessel was in
the usual track of shipping bound down Channel, and was not in a position in
w r hich she would have been if desirous of escaping notice, sighted the vessel before
seeing Dungeness Light, but could not make her out, as it was dark and hazy at
the time; she was from two to three miles inshore of the “Avoca;” only saw one
steamer besides that night, and that was sometime after 2 o’clock. He did not
know of the disaster to the “ Northfleet ” at the time.
The “Murillo” arrived at Cadiz on the evening of the 30th January.
Measures were immediately taken at the instance of the British Consul, in order
that a searching inquiry should be instituted by the authorities.
Depositions made before the British Consul by the engineers of the steamer,
and an Englishman who was a passenger on board, confirm circumstantially the
main facts of the disaster; the description of the locality, the time of the occur-
rence, the appearance of the ship run into, the cries from all hands for assistance,
the voices on board of women and children, and other circumstances, coincide with
the accounts in the English press of the disaster to the “ Northfleet.”


The parties interested in the steamer admit that she came into collision with
some vessel on the night of the disaster at Dungeness, hut deny that the vessel was
the “ Horthfleet.” The external marks of the collision are scarcely perceptible on
the li Murillo.” A survey by the local authorities has been favourable to the
steamer. Another survey just held by the Lloyd’s surveyors has furnished
evidence of a collision with a wooden ship.
Pending the issue of the proceedings instituted, the master and some of the
crew were placed under arrest.
Tn consequence of learning that the boat “ Queen,” of Dover, had landed
passengers the evening of the casualty, telegrams were despatched at once to Lloyd’s,
the owners, and the charterers, stating what had been gleaned, and that a clue to
the wrong-doer had been found; these messages read as follows :
“ Steamer was going down Channel; we have a trace. Believe she is Portu-
guese or Spanish ; a man, we think the pilot, having landed here last night at 9.
Are endeavouring ascertain more particulars, and then will telegraph again.”
Upon reflection it was thought that this must be the vessel, and it was calcu-
lated that she must have left Antwerp at about noon of the day of casualty, and a
telegram to the following effect was despatched to Lloyd’s agent:
“ Please telegraph name of Spanish steamer leaving Antwerp about noon
yesterday. Schooner-rigged, two funnels, one abaft the other.”
To this he replied at 7.35 p.m. of the 23rd:—
“ The only Spanish steamer which left here yesterday was the ‘ Pelayo,’
Captain Tribas, for Havannah.”
This information was immediately sent to those interested, and was given also
to the receiver of wreck at the Custom House, who was advised formally that the
reward of One Hundred Pounds, offered by the Board of Trade for the identifi-
cation of the steamer, would be claimed on account of the local charities.
Everyone was most anxiously expecting more news, when at 3.45 p.m.
of the 24th, a telegram was received from Mr. Engels, Lloyd’s agent, at Antwerp,
before-named, which said :
“ From information received, ‘ Pelayo ’ had but one funnel; another Spanish
steamer sailed for Seville on 22nd. She belongs to same line, her name is
‘ Murillo.’ ”
This was immediately communicated by wire to London and Liverpool, and
was reported to the receiver of wreck, and the claim for the amount again renewed
on account of the charities of the town.
How all interest was turned, on the arrival of the vessel at her port of destina-
tion, and grave discussions took place as to how the delinquent steamer would be
dealt with. At length the “ Murillo ” arrived in the river Tagus, and the suspicions
as to her guilt were confirmed.


EXAMINATION OF THE “MURILLO.”
THE ENGLISH EVIDENCE.
The following summary of tlio depositions of Samuel Bell, a passenger, and
James Goodeave, second engineer, on board the “Murillo” steamer, arrived at
Cadiz, was received at Lloyd’s ;
“Cadiz, Feb. 2, 4.10 p.m.
Samuel Bell, passenger, and James Goodeave, second engineer, who were in
same cabin, depose on oath to hearing noise on board steamer, as if something
unusual were going to happen ; that both hastened out on deck, the collision
immediately taking place; the steamer going at quarter speed, with engines
already reversed before collision, which accounts for what seemed to them a slight
shock, Goodeave remarking that they had gone into what seemed to him a large
emigrant ship, with painted ports, white figure-head on the old style of build.
Both distinctly heard the cries of people—females’ and children’s voices, and one
voice in particular hailing the steamer ten or twelve times consecutively, to stand
by and send boats, to which both replied they would do so. Distinctly saw ship’s
mast-head light. Vessel ran into starboard side; apparently at anchor; hour,
quarter to eleven. Goodeave tried to make Spaniard understand to lower boats bv
pointing and calling ‘ Boat! ’ Fancied steamer was going round injured ship,
but was horror-struck on finding her leaving. Gules Bethell, chief engineer, was
in charge of engines; came momentarily on deck, returning immediately to his
duties, seeing no more than that they had run into a ship ahead; his engines were
reduced to quarter speed at 10.30 p.m. Stopped and reversed 10.45. A few
minutes after proceeded at easy speed.”
The following telegram was received by Messrs. Clark, Punchard and Co.,
Westminster, from Pinto Basto, Lisbon :
“‘Murillo’ coming up. Suppose was ordered away from Cadiz. Wire
instructions.”
A telegram from Cadiz announced that the British Consul there had demanded,
in the name of his Government, the attachment of the “ Murillo.” We at the
same time learnt from Madrid that the maritime authorities at San Fernando, near
Cadiz, had informed the Spanish Government that they had examined the steamer,
and finding no traces of a collision upon her, were of opinion that she did not run
down the “ Vorthfleet.” Meanwhile the captain and part of the crew remained
prisoners on board a man-of-war, and the rest of the crew were guarded, and not
allowed to land.
Cadiz, Feb. 4.
Three Englishmen—the two engineers and one passenger of the Spanish
12


steamer “ Murillo,” arrived off Cadiz—proved her to have run down the
“ FTorthfleet.’’
She was commanded by her chief mate, Felipe Barrati; her captain, Pascual
Marc, having landed at Dover.
The Spanish Government expresses great desire to assist in the reclamations.
(Reuter’s Telegrams.)
Cadiz, Feb. 4, Five p.m.
The “Murillo ” is still here.
The British Consul has demanded the attachment of the vessel in the name of
his Government.
The captain and the watch at the time of the collision are at present prisoners
on board a man-of-war ; and the crew are under the charge of a guard on board
the “ Murillo,” and are not allowed to land.
Madrid, Feb. 4,
The maritime authorities of San Fernando have telegraphed to the Govern-
ment that they had visited the steamer “Murillo” at Cadiz, and had found no
traces of the collision. They believed that she was not the vessel by which the
“ Northfleet ” was run down.
Madrid, Feb. 5.
The Impartial says :—“ The Commandant at San Fernando (Cadiz), is investi-
gating the case of the ‘ Northfleet ’ versus the ‘ Murillo.’ The British Consul is
permitted to take part in the proceedings in every way which he may deem
necessary.”
“ It is impossible,” says the Impartial, “ to form an exact judgment as to the
culpability of the ‘ Murillo,’ on account of the contradictions in the evidence
with regard to matters of fact.”
Cadiz, Feb. 5, Evening.
The maritime authorities have arrested the captain and mate, with part of the
crew of the “Murillo” who were on duty during the night of the “JSTorthfleet”
disaster. The vessel has been very carefully examined in the presence of the
British Consul, who also examined the logbook. The result of these investigations
is as yet uncertain, although the “ Murillo ” shows signs of having suffered a slight
collision. The examination continues, and the owners will be heard, and fresh
witnesses called. The declarations of the English passengers and the two engineers
are in contradiction with those made by the crew.
Cadiz, Feb. 6, 2.20 p.m.
The owners of the “ Murillo ” repudiate Captain Bussell as surveyor, owing to
his being the master of an opposition line of steamers.


Proceedings against the Owners of the “Murillo.”— An action in the
High Court of Admiralty in England has just been commenced against the owners
of the “Murillo ” by the owners of the “Northfleet ” to recover damages for the
loss sustained by the fearful collision off Dungeness. The claim is for £14,000.
A prior suit was instituted against the steamer for £15,000, but it was changed to
the present suit not against the ship hut the owners. The usual course is to arrest
a vessel, and bail is required to be given to answer the claim before she is released.
In this suit the proceedings are against the owners —in 'personam as it is termed, and
they are called upon to appear.
Previous to the arrival of the “ Murillo ” at Cadiz, the authorities were informed
that she was the steamer supposed to have run down the “ North fleet,” and a request
was made by our Consul that; in case suspicions were confirmed, measures should
be taken to secure the ends of justice. On the arrival of the “ Murillo ”on the night
of the 30th ultimo, the Consul having obtained what he considered to he proof
that she was the guilty ship, the naval authorities went on hoard early next morn-
ing to take the depositions of the crew. The captain and such of the crew as
formed the watch on the night of the disaster were made prisoners.
The British Vice-Consul also went on hoard, and brought the English pas-
senger on shore to make a declaration at the Consulate. This declaration, as well
as that of the first and second engineers, the only Englishmen on board, confirms
the statements of the survivors of the unfortunate “ Northfleet.” The passenger, as
well as the second engineer, heard the cries of women and children< They were
hailed, and asked to stand by and send boats. This they promised should be done.
They were horror-stricken, however, to see that they were leaving the ship imme-
diately after the collision, without stopping to render her any assistance.
They distinctly saw the light of the vessel run into, which they supposed was
at anchor. The second engineer describes the vessel as large, and of old build,
with painted port-holes and a white figure-head. He states that the collision took
place on starboard side. This statement is important, as the parties interested in
the “ Murillo ” are still under the impression apparently that that steamer did not run
down the “ Northfleet,” though they admit that she did strike against a vessel that
very night, at that very hour, and at that very place.
The “ Murillo ” has sustained no damage; hut the survey held by the Vice-
Consul’s orders sufficiently proves that she has been in collision with wood. The
orders given to reverse the engines and to proceed agree with the facts already
known.
The collision took place after reversing the engines. According to the
testimony of one of the witnesses the steamer struck the other vessel “ like with
a thud.” To quote the exact words he made use of in his depositions at the
Consulate.


The following letter was addressed to the newspapers, and doubtlessly did
much to soften public indignation :
“ Sir, —It is with a tremblinghand that I venture to refer to the terrible calamity
which occurred in the Channel on the night of the 23rd of January, and which has
filled with the deepest and sincerest affliction the hearts of all who have the privilege
of residing in this noble and hospitable country. But the fulfilment of a duty
obliges me to take up my pen for the purpose, in the first place, of entreating most
earnestly the generous people of England to suspend for the moment their judgment
upon the conduct observed by the captain and crew of the ‘ Murillo ’ at the time of
the terrible catastrophe by which, on the submersion of the ‘ Northfleet,’ 292 souls
passed so suddenly and awfully to their account; and, secondly, with the object of
mitigating, as far as it may be, the not unnatural spirit of prejudice and hostility
which might be awakened by the indignant comments and appreciation enunciated
by the public press,
“ It would seem, indeed, that much has been already discovered with regard to
the circumstances attending the unparalleled misfortune which we all in common
deplore; yet, if we bear in mind the special features of the locality in which the
ill-fated vessel, holding enclosed within her narrow sides the lives and fortunes of
400 human beings, was situated; the brief period (thirty to forty minutes) during
which the ‘Northfleet’ remained afloat after the collision; the panic and con-
sternation which must have reigned on board during those fearful moments of
supreme agony which intervened; the darkness of the night, and the disturbed
state of the sea; the fact that close by, within 300 yards of the spot where the
disaster ensued, a ship was floating which might easily have been mistaken for the
one that had foundered so suddenly; the further fact that none of the many vessels
anchored near at hand afforded, as it is affirmed, any assistance : the slightness of
the injury which the ‘ Murillo ’ appears to have sustained from the collision; the
delay which took place before she passed off the Isle of Wight; the fact of her not
attempting to take any refuge in the first instance within a national port; the
previous good character borne by Captain Berruti and his officers ; the circumstance
fairly to be deduced from Friday’s despatches, that the proper declarations as to
the collision were duly made immediately upon their arrival at Cadiz; and, finally,
if we remember the incalculable number and ever-varying nature of the vicissitudes
attending navigation, much—in my humble opinion—very much still remains to
be investigated and ascertained, before we may deem ourselves to be in full posses-
sion of the truth as to this sad event.
“ That everything which still requires to be ascertained will be thoroughly and
speedily sifted to the bottom, and that the full severity of the law will then be
applied as effectually,at Cadiz as it could be at Westminster, I will, in the name of
my country, take upon me to guarantee.
“ If it be found that Captain Berruti and the English and Spanish crew under


his command did, on the mournful night of the 23rd instant, neglect the duties
prescribed by the code of honour and the common feelings of humanity, then most
assuredly the Military Tribunal—which has already taken cognisance of the case,
and whose members are composed of distinguished officers of the Royal Navy—will
speedily make them feel that Melilla and Ceuta do not exist in vain.
“ Let me add, in conclusion, that as the Spanish law, in cases like the present,
allows the most ample liberty of intervention to all having a title to exercise it, no
reasonable doubt ought to exist that the strict ends of justice will be fully vindi-
cated.—l have the honour to be, sir, your obedient servant,
“ URBAN 0 MONTE JO.
“ Spanish Consulate General, 155, Fenchurch-street,
“February 1, 1873.”
Messrs. Edwin Clark, Punchard, and Company, the contractors by whom the
emigrants in the “ Northfleet ” were engaged, offered, it may be remembered, a
reward of £IOO for the discovery of the steamer which ran down the “Northfleet.”
This amount they awarded to Messrs. Pinto, Baste, and Co., of Lisbon, and Mr.
Macpherson, of Cadiz, through whose exertions the seizure of the “ Murillo ” at
the latter port was made, but those gentlemen have generously directed that
the sum should be handed over to the Mansion House Committee for the relief
of the sufferers. This has accordingly been done.
It was announced that the “ Murillo,” a Spanish steamer, had been discovered
to be the vessel that ran into the ill-fated “ Northfleet ” at Dungeness, and the
following telegrams will indicate what has since been done towards bringing the
captain and a portion of the crew to justice, which, the Spanish Consul promises,
shall not fail to reach the men who are guilty, whether they are in Spain or in
England:—
“ Cadiz, Sunday.
“The ‘Murillo’ arrived here on the evening of the 30th ult. Measures
were immediately taken, at the instance of the British Consul, in order that a
searching inquiry should be instituted by the authorities. The result of that
inquiry has not yet transpired. The parties interested in the steamer admit that
she came in collision with some vessel on the night of the disaster at Dungeness,
but deny that the vessel was the ‘Northfleet.’ The external marks of the
collision are scarcely perceptible on the ‘ Murillo.’ A survey by the local autho-
rities has been favourable to the steamer. Another survey just held by the Lloyds’
surveyors has furnished evidence of a collision with a wooden ship.”
“ Cadiz, Sunday Night.
“ Previous to the arrival of the ‘ Murillo ’ here, the authorities were informed
that she was the steamer supposed to have run down the ‘ Northfleet,’ and a


request was made by our Consul that, in case suspicions were confirmed, measures
should be taken to secure the ends of justice. On the arrival of the ‘ Murillo ’
on the night of the 30th ultimo, the Consul having obtained what he considered to
be proof that she was the guilty ship, the naval authorities went on board early
next morning to take the depositions of the crew. The captain and such of the
crew as formed the watch on the night of the disaster are prisoners. Samuel
Bell, passenger, James Goodeave, second engineer, who were in same cabin,
depose on oath to hearing noise on board steamer as if something unusual
were going to happen; that both hastened out on deck, the collision immediately
taking place; steamer going at a quarter speed, with engines already reversed
before collision, which accounts for what seemed to them a slight shock. Goodeave
remarking that they had gone into what seemed to him a large emigrant ship,
with painted ports, white figure head on the old style of build. Both distinctly
heard the cries of people—females’ and children’s voices, and one voice in parti-
cular, hailing the steamer 10 or 12 times consecutively, to stand by and send boats,
to which both replied they would do so. Distinctly saw ship’s masthead light.
Vessel ran into starboard side; apparently at anchor; hour, quarter to 11.
Goodeave tried to make Spaniards understand to lower boats by pointing
and calling ‘ Boat! ’ Fancied steamer was going Found injured ship, but was
horror-struck on finding her leaving. Gules Bethel, chief engineer, was in charge
of engines; came momentarily on deck, returning immediately to his duties,
seeing no more than that they had run into a ship ahead ; his engines were reduced
to quarter speed at 10;30 p.m. Stopped and reversed 10.45. A few minutes after
proceeded at easy speed.”
“ The e Murillo ’ has sustained no damage ; but the survey held by the Vice-
Consul’s orders sufficiently proves that she has been in collision with wood. The
orders given to reverse the engines and to proceed agree with the facts already
known.”
The following appeared in the Times of Feb. 18th, 1873 :
“ Release of the ‘ Murillo.’
“ Madrid* Feb. 13.
“ Advices from San Fernando state that the Committee of Inquiry charged
to examine the steamer ‘ Murillo ’ declared that she was not the vessel which ran
down the ‘ Horthfleet.’ The ‘ Murillo ’ has been released.”
England should say : “ Is this a just verdict ? ”
Continued Detention of the “ Murillo.”
It was, however, announced in the House of Commons, on Thursday night,
20th February, 1873, that she was still detained, and that the inquiry was proceeding.


Signals of Distress.
Mr. P. B. Claris, tlie Hon. Secretary of the Royal Cinque Ports Yacht Club,
which has the distinguished honour of possessing His Royal Highness Prince Arthur
for its Commodore, has, at the request of the members, addressed the following letter
to the President of the Board of Trade :
“ Royal Cinque Ports Yacht Club,
“Dover, 3rd February, 1873.
“ Sir, —In view of the recent appalling catastrophe in Dungeness Bay, I am
directed by the committee of this club to call your most serious and immediate
attention to the present defective system—or rather no system—of marine night
signals.
“ The evidence taken on every enquiry which has been held relating to this
lamentable occurrence establishes only too plainly the fact that three hundred
human beings perished within reach of help simply because they possessed no means
of making known their dire extremity, inasmuch as the mere want of a pilot or
imminent deadly peril is at present announced by precisely the same signals,
burning blue lights, firing guns, and throwing up rockets.
“ On Saturday last I heard the chief boatman at Dungeness give his testimony
on the inquest upon the remains of Mr. Brand, and he said that, being told by one
of his men that a vessel was burning blue lights and throwing up rockets, he came
out, saw one or two rockets thrown up, went back to clear his glass from the rain
that had fallen upon it, but on his return all was dark. How, had the very first
light shown indicated need of instant assistance scarcely five minutes would have
elapsed ere a crew of hardy, experienced blue jackets would have been straining
every sinew to reach the scene of danger. Besides this, the crews of the neigh-
bouring vessels—many only a few cables’ lengths distant —would have turned out
to the rescue, and, as the ‘Horthfieet ’ floated for more than half-an-hour after the
collision, in all human probability the greater part at least of those on board would
have been saved; but the signals being supposed to be for a pilot were left un-
noticed. Again, had there been no possibility of alleging a mistake of signals the
officer in charge of the steamer would scarcely have dared to proceed on his passage
leaving the hapless emigrants to their fate.
“ One of our members, Mr. .P. Mummery, has suggested that it should be
made imperative on all British vessels to carry rockets charged with red fire and
throwing out red balls, together with a certain number of red hand-lights, for use
simultaneously, in cases of danger, heavy penalties being of course imposed on their
being used for any other purpose.
“A complicated system of signalling would fail utterly in unpractised hands.


All that is wanted is something easy of application and unmistakeable in character,
the essence of which requisites, my committee venture to think, Mr. Mummery’s
proposal contains,
“Foreigners would, beyond all doubt, immediately avail themselves of so ready
a means of obtaining help in time of need, as the present rapidity of communication
would, in a very brief period, render it known to every maritime nation in the world.
“ My committee do not venture to intrude any scheme for carrying the notion
into effect, but content themselves with throwing out the above suggestion in the
earnest hope that by its adoption, the recurrence of such a disaster as that which has
so deeply stirred public sympathy, may be rendered for the future almost if not
absolutely impossible.
“ I have the honor to he, Sir,
“Your most obedient servant,
“PERCY BROOKE CLARIS,
“ Hon. Secretary.”
Copies have also been sent to the Secretaries of Lloyd’s and the National Life
Boat Institution, with a request to those bodies to urge the matter on the Board of
Trade.
“To the Editor of the ‘ Times.’
“ Sir, —Seeing in your impression of to-day that a practical suggestion has been
made that the rockets and lights burnt by ships in distress should be of some pre-
scribed colour, so as to distinguish them from ordinary signals for pilots. I feel
that something of the kind is very much wanted, as in this case, had there been a
distinctive rocket, assistance would have been given from many of the surrounding
vessels at anchor; but, from the frequency of rockets being displayed at this par-
ticular place, no notice was taken, although the signals were seen by many; all
came to the conclusion that it was ‘ Pilots, pilots, pilots.’ The same was thought
by the coast-guards. I would just add, that had the lifeboat’s crew known what
was occurring they could not, in the time that has been stated by some of the sur-
vivors, have reached the vessel with the lifeboat before she sank, the distance being
between three and four miles, and the boat’s crew having to come from adjoining
stations before she could be launched. Had there been a certain colour for a distress
rocket, many boats would have been launched from the beach, as the rockets were
seen by the officers and men of the Littlestone and Romney coast-guard stations,
but were confidently believed to be rockets from a ship requiring a pilot; thus
showing the great necessity of having some signal specially adapted for firing when
vessels are in distress.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your most obedient servant,
“ JOHN M. YORKE,
“ Coast-guard, Folkstone, Jan. 27. “ Commander R.N.”


A gentleman, signing himself “ A. T. T.,” wrote to The Times some time ago
a Government Committee, consisting of the most practical men in
the country, should he formed at once, and the several departments of the Govern-
ment, the Admiralty, Trinity House, Board of Trade, together with the Lifeboat
Institution, would, he thinks, find no difficulty in supplying efficient members to
propose a scheme for the prevention of such calamities as the loss of the “ North-
fleet.” “A. T. T.” mentioned the following important subjects which would have
to be considered :—“ 1. There can be no doubt of the absolute necessity of establish-
ing a certain number of steam life-vessels, and, as previously stated in The Times,
they could be so constructed as to be able to stand against the severest gales, and by
having life-boats and every description of appliances to meet any emergency. 2. It
appears that the present system of signals by blue lights, rockets, guns, &c., is
either not sufficiently defined or not understood. It is impossible to overrate the
importance of having a code of signals of the most simple description, and defined
beyond all chance of mistake ; those to be employed in case of distress to be distinct,
and on no account to be used for any other purpose, under a severe penalty; regula-
tions in more than one language to be in the possession of the captain or master of
every vessel, of every pilot, life-boat station, coastguard, &c. It is, moreover, very
desirable that every vessel leaving any port, harbour, or other place, should be visited
by a competent person, to certify that the signals are on board and placed in proper
and secure places, and are perfectly understood in reference to the established regu-
lations. 3. One of the most valuable means of making signals in case of distress is
from a gun. The discharge of the gun might in foggy or dark or misty weather
be heard when no other signal could render any service. If it should prove neces-
sary that a gun fired should be a signal for a pilot, let a considerable time elapse
between the rounds, and in case of distress fire as quickly as possible, and continue
to do so. But this must be clearly understood by all concerned, and no mistake.
A plain iron pin, with head to fit the vent or touch-hole, close down, so as to prevent
wet getting in is all that is required, and a piece of tarpaulin tied tight round the
muzzle and vent.”
It must be gratifying to all Dover to know that Admiral Sir W. 11. Hall,
F.R.S., who has always been a kind friend to, and liberal patron of, the Dover
National Sailors’ Home, has interested himself much upon this most important
question of danger signals, as the following letter shows :
TO THE EDITOR OF “ THE TIMES.”
Sir, —The admirable suggestions made by “ A. T. T.,” in The Times of Satur-
day last, with a view of preventing such awful calamity and loss of life as recently
occurred by the foundering of the ill-fated “ Northfleet,” induce me to bring to the
notice of the public generally and all owners of ships the absolute necessity of
13


having one universal signal of distress, to be used only in the case of utmost
need.
By the simple plan of hoisting either at the peak or at any of the mast-
heads three lights in a perpendicular line, white above, red in the middle, and
white underneath, every vessel within distance would understand that this meant
urgent distress, while the ordinary means of attracting attention, such as firing
guns or muskets, letting off rockets or blue lights should be resorted to. The
reply to the signal should be the hoisting of a red light.
This method would entail no expense on the owners of ships beyond the cost of
a red signal lantern; every vessel afloat has at least two white lights.
These lanterns should be kept in a place open to all, and the inspecting
officer at each port should satisfy himself that they are on board and in good order
at the time of sailing.
I ventured to suggest this plan to the Board of Trade about a year ago,
after a valuable vessel and cargo were lost entirely through the captain not being
able to make those within signal distance aware that his ship was sinking. Had
assistance been given, there is little doubt that the ship might have been saved.
A few days since I endeavoured to bring this matter again to the notice of the
officials at the Board of Trade, but no notice has been taken of either application,
and fearing that the time of that valuable department is so occupied that this
simple plan to avoid calamities in future might be lost sight of, I have no alter-
native but to appeal to the public through your influential paper, in the hope
that our great steamship companies and shipowners generally will adopt it.
Your obedient servant,
W. H. HALL,
Yice-Admiral, F.B.S.
48, Phillimore Gardens, Kensington, W., Feb. 10.
It may be mentioned that on the 13th of February, 1873, His Excellency,
the Burmese Ambassador, Mengyee Maha Sathoo Kenwoon Mengyee, was enter-
tained at a banquet at the Lord Warden Hotel, in Dover, on behalf of Her
Majesty the Queen, by Major McMahon, Major Burne and Captain Upton, R.S.F.,
on the eve of his departure for his country, after a sojourn in England of nearly
twelve months, during which period he has visited nearly every manufacturing
city, port, or town of importance, and, doubtlessly, has conceived, and will carry
home to his royal master, His Majesty the King of Burmah, the most favourable
impressions. He has not lost sight of the vast resources of this country, its insti-
tutions, freedom, commerce, wealth, industry, and importance, which can but have
a good effect upon the enlightened monarch, who has been so ably represented.
One cannot think too highly of the value of a visit of this nature which must


tend much to piomotc education, prosperity, and civilisation. It was a wise step
taken in the right direction when the king determined to send this mission.
Our visitors take back to their distant land sentiments of sincerest gratitude and
reciprocity for the hospitality and hearty welcome which awaited them throughout
the country.
Ihe party at table consisted of His Excellency, Mengyee Maha Sathoo
Kenwoon Mengyee (Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary from the
King of Eurmah), Maha Menhla Kyoden Paden Wbondouk (Minister of State
Second Grade), Attache to the Embassy; Maha Mengyee Rajah Phungyet
Woondouk (Minister of State Second Grade), Attache to the Embassy; Menllha
Mayathoo Seraydangyce (Secretary to the Embassy). Colonel Magrath, R.A., late
17th Brigade R.A., Major M’Mahon, Major Burnes, and Captain Upton, Royal
Sherwood Foresters, from the India Office, Colonel Macdonald, Captain Bruce, R.N.,
His Worship the Mayor of Dover, Mr. W. Forster, Dr. Williams, Mr. Jones (who
is attached to the Embassy), Mrs. McMahon, Mrs. Jones, and the Misses Dickinson,
His Excellency the Xenwoon Mengyee having specially telegraphed through Captain
Bruce to invite Captain and the Misses Dickinson, they having been introduced to
the Ambassador on his landing at Dover.
During the evening the Ambassador spoke of the wreck of the “ North fleet,”
expressing his horror at the terrible loss, and his deep sympathy with the survivors.
He said he understood that the orphan was in Dover, and he thought he knew her
protector. lie said he would like to see the child, and asked for her photograph,
which was afterwards given him.
Next morning at the official parting on the pier, at which were present the
Mayor of Dover, (E. R. Mowll, Esq.,) the Deputy Mayor, (F. S. Peirce, Esq.,) and
the principal members of the Corporation, Colonel Magrath, R.A., Major and Mrs.
McMahon, Major Burne, Captain Upton, Royal Sherwood Foresters, Colonel
Macdonald, Assistant-Adjutant General, Colonel Gall, C. 8., Assistant-Quarter-
master General, Captain Bruce, R.N., Admiralty Superintendent, Edmund Jones,
Esq. (who is attached to the Embassy), and Mrs. Jones, Mr. William Forster,
Colonel Collinson, R.E., Colonel Farmer, R.A., Colonel Franklin, R.A., Colonel
Vance, 38th Regiment, Major Daubeny, the Buffs, Captain Paton, Aide-de-Camp to
Sir Alfred Horsford, Steriker Finnis, Esq., Richard Iron, Esq., (Harbour Master),
and a brilliant assemblage of ladies, little Maria Taplin was presented to the
Ambassador. He shook hands with her, as did his chief officer and suite, and kissed
her : told her he was very fond of children, and presented her with a sovereign to buy
a toy with, and said she must not forget him. It is needless to say that this act of
kindness and condescension will never be forgotten by the little one. The gift has
purchased a very handsome work-box which bears a suitable inscription in honour
of the generous donor.


Churches near which lie Bodies Recovered.
Lydd, or Lid, written in ancient records Hylda, is an extensive parish and
ancient market town in the Liberty of Romney Marsh. Lydd partook of the
ancient privileges of the Cinque Ports, being joined with Romney, and is still a
corporation by prescription, governed by a bailiff, jurats, and commonalty, with
very extensive powers of jurisdiction. The bailiff is coroner, and the jurats
justices of the peace, with exclusive jurisdiction, and have power to hold a general
Court of Quarter Sessions, also a Court of Record, for the recovery of debts; there
is a small jail and house of correction.
The market day is Thursday. Lydd is not included in any of the schedules of
the Municipal Act.
Leland, who wrote in the time of Henry VIII., says :
“ Lydde is counted as a part of Rumeney : it is a 111 miles beyond Rumeney
town and is a market. The town is of a parte quantite and the townse men use boh s
to the see the which at this time is a myle of. The hole towne is contayned in one
paraohe but that is very large. Ine the mydde way betwixt Rumeney and Lydde
the -marsh land beginneth to nesse and arme yn to the se, and contynaeth a prety
way beyond Lydde and runnying ynto a point yt standeth as an arm, a foreland,
or a nesse.”
Camden calls it a pretty, populous town, whither the inhabitants of Promhil
betook themselves after the inundation which destroyed that village in the reign of
Edward the First. Lydd is now three miles from the sea.
The Church, dedicated to All Saints, is a fine edifice of considerable antiquity,
consisting of nave, side aisles, and three chancels, with a handsome tower at the
west end, surmounted with four pinnacles, and containing five bells : the interior
is well paved, and contains many ancient memorials and gravestones with brasses
on them. A lighthouse was erected at Dungeness Point, 4J S.S.E. from the
Church, in 1792, on the plan of the Eddystone lighthouse. It stands about 500
yards south of the old lighthouse.
New Romney.
The Church is a large, handsome structure, dedicated to St. Nicholas, consisting
of nave, side aisles, and three chancels, with a square tower surmounted with
pinnacles at the west end, in which are eight bells. The fabric is very ancient, and
the pillars between the aisles are very large, with circular arches and Saxon
ornaments.
Capel-le-F erne .
On the cliffs, midway between Dover and Folkestone, scattered over a bleak
and lonely country, the village of Capel rarely receives a visit from any of the






numerous ramblers and sightseers, who, enchanted with the lovely view from
Folkestone Hill, rest there to enjoy the wide-spread landscape and the fresh sea
breezes from the Channel.
But Capel is worthy of a visit. Its little church of St. Mary le Merge stands
in the midst of a dark circle of pine trees, its diminutive chancel is parted off by
three pretty pointed arches, and from the low square tower a solitary bell summons
the parishioners to prayer or tolls the knell of some departed soul. In one nook
of its quiet churchyard stands a pretty tombstone, with a cross, bearing the simple
but touching inscription—
ELLEN TOUGH,
PASSENGER IN
“nobthileet,”
DROWNED 22ND JANUARY, 1873.
The body which now lies sleeping there was cast ashore by the pitiless waves,
and for a time lay unknown and uncared for; but soon good friends were found to
prepare it decently for burial, and it was then photographed by Messrs. Weston
and Sons, Artist Photographers Royal, at Dover. The poor woman was next day
buried in Capel churchyard, and the Rev. Frederick Wrench (the minister in
charge, for the Rev. Gfeorge Pardoe, of Alkham Vicarage) performed the ceremony
in a most impressive manner; and shrubs and flowers were ordered to be planted
over the grave where the unknown lay.
A few days after, however, the gentleman who arranged her funeral was much
struck by the strong resemblance between her features and those of a poor woman
whose photograph, together w T ith that of her husband and child, bad been sent to
Captain Oates by some relatives anxious for the recovery of the bodies of their
dear lost ones.
These relatives wmre at once communicated with, and upon receiving the
beautiful photograph taken after her death, and also the clothing she wore when
picked up, were quite assured that it was the body of Ellen Tough, which had
been buried at Capel with such reverent care.
It is most interesting to those connected with the affair to know that Mrs.
Tough was a loving wife and mother, and universally respected during the short
time she was in the ship. As soon as the name of the poor woman was ascertained,
orders were given for the erection of a suitable monumental tablet as recorded
above; and on Saturday, February 15th, 1873, her relatives visited the grave, and
were deep in their expressions of gratitude for the kind thought of those who had
thus honoured the memory of their beloved one.
It should be recorded that the clergymen referred to have behaved in the
kindest manner, and voluntarily waived all fees in connection with this last sad
rite. Exertions are being made by the Rev. Frederick "Wrench to restore the


dear old church, and improve the appearance of the ground. Much has been
done by this gentleman already, but subscriptions are sadly wanted.
St. Margaret’s-at-Cliff.
The church of St. Margaret’s-at-Clitf, near Dover, is a remarkably fine
specimen of rich Norman architecture, of the best period ; and is now considered
one of the finest Norman buildings in Kent. The church dates back to the days
of King Stephen, and is supposed to have been attached to St. Mary’s Priory, in
Dover. It has recently been restored at the cost of upwards of £3,000. The
mouldings of the west doorway (emblematical of the Holy Trinity), as well as
the beautiful tracery of the arcades, chancel-arch, north doorway, are marvellously
fresh and perfect. The five east windows of the chancel have recently been filled
in with stained glass to the memory of an old parishioner, Mr. James Temple, the
late proprietor of a large school in the village of St. Margaret’s. He was much
beloved by his pupils ; and upon the restoration of the church they very willingly
responded to the invitation of the vicar, the Dev. E. 0. Lucey, and subscribed a
sufficient sum to erect these windows as a memorial of his earnest and useful life
among them.
"Worth, otherwise Word.
Worth Church is an ancient structure, with remains of the Norman style of
architecture.
The principal portions, however, are of a later period.
The Norman part consists of a fine pillar at the west end, and a doorway on
the north side, having a semicircular arch resting on small pillars.
No records exist to show the exact date of either the earlier or the later
portions of the edifice.
The church, as at present existing, consists of a nave and two aisles, one of
the latter is cut short at the west end. There is a chancel at the east end, and a
tower, quite new, at the west end.
In the church there is a stoup for holy water, and also a piscina, both pointing
to pre-Deformation times.
The church has been greatly improved within the last seven years, both
inside and out, new windows having been inserted and new pews built.
There are no monuments of special importance in the church itself.
In the churchyard a portion of ground has been set apart for the interment
of bodies cast on the seashore of Worth.
The two last interments were those of the bodies of a man and a woman, sup-
posed to have perished in the “ Northfleet,” when that vessel went down after the
disastrous collision off 1 Dungeness.
Head-stones have been erected over these graves in commemoration of that


lamentable disaster. The incumbent, the Eev. Sydney Smith, most kindly per-
mitted them to be placed there, and declined receiving any fees, either for this
permission, or for the burial service which he held over the bodies.
Each head-stone bears the following words :
“ HERE LIES THE BODY OF ONE OF
293 PASSENGERS AND CREW,
' DROWNED IN THE SHIP ‘ NORTHFLEET,’
NEAR DUNGENESS,
22nd JANUARY, 1873.
DOVER NATIONAL SAILOR’S HOME.
It. must be interesting to the readers of this volume to learn something respect-
ing the origin and progress of the Dover National Sailors’ Home, which gave a
shelter to the rescued survivors from the wreck of the “ Northfleet.”
In the winter of 1851-52 the necessity of a Sailors’ Home in Dover was first
brought under the notice of the Eev. W. Yate by Captain W. Hutcheson Hall,
of “Nemesis” fame-now Admiral Sir W. H. Hall, K.C.B. It had long been a
source of great surprise to many people, and to none probably more than to Mr.
Tl ate himself, that there should be no suitable place in such a port as Dover for the
immediate relief of destitute wrecked men, who were landed on the beach and in
the harbour.
Mr. Yate, in 1851, mentioned the whole circumstances to several ladies of his
acquaintance in Dover. They were much pleased with the thought of providing a
refuge for poor destitute men, and at once guaranteed to pay the whole cost, if Mr.
Yate would hire a house, undertake the management, and employ a sailor or a
suitable person to superintend. This was accordingly done. Premises were taken
in Council House Street. Many friends sent in furniture, linen, and bedding. The
first wrecked crew that arrived at the Home were Welshmen, who expressed them-
selves most gratefully for the kindness shown to them. After watching and waiting
for some time, the inhabitants of Dover began to see what a useful institution a
Dover Sailors Home would eventually become. Subscriptions came in very
liberally, and at the end of the year, instead of having to apply to the ladies who
had insured the expens es, there was a balance in the hands of the Treasurer of
£l/. Os. od. This, it must be acknowledged, was a very encouraging state of
affairs. Whilst the proposals for enlargement were brightened by the enquiries
which were made as to the objects and the future management of the institution, it
became obvious that much more commodious premises would in a short time be
required. The reading-room, though small and inconvenient, was much frequented.


Some London daily papers—among which was the Shipping Gazette —the Dover
Chronicle , and other local journals, being presented gratuitously, were laid upon the
table.
The case was made known to Her Majesty the Queen and Prince Albert, who
sent for the list of books already in the Home, and for a copy of the rules by which
the Home, in all its departments, was managed. The approval of Her Majesty
and the Prince was conveyed by an order to the Librarian of Windsor Castle to
furnish a number of volumes of good and useful hooks. It may here he stated
that there are now between two and three thousand volumes of literature of every
character, and of great variety. Five hundred volumes, by several instalments, of
these hooks were presented by the friends of the Hon. Secretary at Bridgnorth ;
sixty-five volumes of new, interesting, and valuable works were presented by Miss
S. De Lancey, of Cheltenham, and many more friends have added to the number.
The Religious Tract Society sent a large number of then- most interesting works.
About this time L A. Beaumont, Esq., visited the Home, and as a wrecked
crew were waiting for admission, and the accommodation was very scanty, so that
all could not he admitted, he advised that immediate steps should he taken for an
enlargement of the operations of the Home. His promises of assistance were very
liberal, and they were carried out to the letter. He not only gave a donation of
£SO, hut stated that he would advance, without interest, any balance that might be
due when a suitable building was erected, provided the Directors thought it advis-
able to enter upon such a necessary work, and a suitable site could be obtained.
This kind offer was heartily accepted by Mr, W. Yate, who was much encouraged
in his efforts—and they were ceaseless—to build a proper Home by the ready
sympathy and cordial offers of assistance received from time to time from Mr.
Beaumont, who has proved himself to be a most generous friend of the shipwrecked
mariner, and whose name will ever he connected with the success of the Dover
Home. The Directors concurred heartily in the plans of Mr. Beaumont, and did
not fail to render every assistance in their power in carrying them out. The late
Captain J. W. Noble, R.N., who died in the second year of his mayoralty of Dover
was a great and most judicious friend of the Institution, and his loss was deeply
lamented, not only by tire Managers of the Home, but also by the whole town of
Dover.
A recent Act of Parliament had abolished the office of Master and Warden of
the Cinque Ports Pilots, to whom was entrusted the application of the charities
known as barque money and Lector’s Charity for Sailors. Upon the repeal of the
Act, and the pilots being placed under the governance of the Trinity House, the
nature of the charity was laid before the Elder Brethren of that Corporation. They
refused to have anything whatever to do with it, so that the money which was in
the funds would have lapsed to the Government provided no other means for its


lawful appropriation could be adopted. The Directors resolved to request the Hon.
Secretary to lay the matter before Her Majesty’s Charity Commissioners, who at
once took up the case, and after several interviews with him, and consultations with
the Hon. Solicitors, Messrs. Pain and Fielding, and being satisfied with the rules
and management of the Dover Sailors’ Home, drew up a scheme, which was laid
efore the Attorney-General and submitted by him to the Court of Chancery and
approved by that Court A sum lying in the funds, which brings in annually
", ‘f’ , 18 drawn by the Chanty Commissioners, sent down to the Trustees
appointed by the Court of Chancery, and handed over to the Treasurer of the Home
for the time being, upon condition that the Institution preserve its original charac-
ter and be managed according to the rules laid down. Beyond this there was a
a ance in the hands of the Charity Commissioners of £126. Iss. 2d., which they
directed should be applied to the Building Fund.
Every foreign vessel entering the harbour pays the sum of two shillings as
Treasu “Tth William ForBter ’ and °™r to the
.treasurer of the Sailors Home once a year.
way was now °P<m commencing a permanent Home. The only
difficulty appeared to arise was a suitable site. Upon perusing the Merchant
Shipping Act the Hon. Sec. found that by the 546th clause of that Act corporate
homirT TT *° 6 f ranChise SiteB for Purpose of building sailors’
homes. Application was made to the Lord Warden and Commissioners of Dover
arbour to grant a site for such purpose. The memorial was favourably enter-
amed, and the present site of the Home was granted as a freehold so long as it
remains a sailors home. It cannot be appropriated to any other use, or it would
revert again to the authorities of the Harbour.
The way was now clear for the commencement of the building. Plans were
drawn out; tenders were called for; and as the architect thought Lt the space
was not quite sufficient, the Mayor and Corporation allowed the builders to come
«2 to ’"TT Wl<ling aDd “ ns ° f the H “‘
the l 7 T Mr ' Beaumont advanced £350, without interest, to pay
the balance due to the contractors ; for which liberal act the thanks of all parties
connected with the Home are eminently due. Mr. Beaumont would have advanced
a larger sum had it been required. The raising of such a sum for building in so
short a time shews the confidence which the public had, not only in the manage-
“nstitution “ Ukelj *° a ™ e fr ° m eBtabliBl ™ent of such an
, t v T p- f 77 atio^7 ne ™ S laM ° n the 6th ° f J ' une ’ 1855 > ™ th «• ceremony
by the Bight Hon. E. P. Bouverie, M.P., Vice-President of the Board of Trade, in
presence of the Mayor and Corporation, the Commanding Officers of the Garri-
son, the Dover Chamber of Commerce, and a large number of the inhabitants. On
14


Thursday, the 29th of November, the new Home was opened by the Mayor, James
Worsfold, Esq,, attended by the Corporation, who have always evinced a lively
interest in the success of the Institution, and have rendered every assistance in their
power. Captain W. H. Hall, R.N., came up from Portsmouth, and Mr. Montague
Core, from London, for the purpose of taking part in the proceedings. The event
was celebrated by a public dinner at the Royal Ship Hotel, and the Home was
thrown open for inspection for three days, during which time it was visited by several
thousands of all classes.
We should mention that at the laying of the foundation-stone of the Home no
coins were deposited. The names of the following gentlemen were placed in a her-
metically-sealed bottle; —Admiral Sir W. E, Parry (father of the Suffragan Bishop
of Dover), General Cosmo Gordon, Admiral Yemon Harcourt, J. A. Beaumont,
Esq., Captain W. H. Hall, R.N. (now Admiral Sir W, H, Hall, K.C.8.), Captain
J. W, Noble, R.N,, Montague Gore, Esq., Alfred Beaumont, Esq. (Architect), and
the Rev. William Yate (Treasurer and Honorary Secretary).
The following inscription, written on vellum, was also inserted in the bottle: —
“ Salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks (Isaiah xxvi., 1).
“ Except the Lord build the house they labour in vain that build it. Except
the Lord keep the city the watchman waketh but in vain (Psalm cxxvii., 2).
“ May a refuge always be provided for the destitute mariners who may be cast
upcn our shores.
“ May the blessing -of the Lord of Hosts, of God our Redeemer, descend and
abide upon all who shall dwell or may be brought beneath the roof-tree of this
building.
“ May the shield of Almighty Power so surround Britain that no enemy
may ever prevail against her.
“ May the commerce of our country increase and prosper, and the only rivalry
between us and other nations be a rivalry in the arts and sciences of peace, so that
men may beat their swords into ploughshares and their spears into pruning-hooks,
and learn war no more.
“ God Save the Queen.”
A life-sized portrait of the Hon. Secretary, painted by Waters, of Dover, was
-presented by the inhabitants of the town, and was placed in the reading-room. The
costly gilt frame was voted by the Dover Lodge of the Manchester Lmity of Odd-
fellows.
A splendid marine barometer was forwarded from the Meteorological Depart-
ment of the Admiralty and the Board of Trade, together with a complete set of
charts of the coast of Great Britain and Ireland, containing the most recent Admiralty
surveys, with sailing instructions and a description of the lights, tides, and harbours.


These latter were forwarded from the Hydrographic Office, and are placed for con-
sultation on the table of the reading-room. A very handsome clock was presented
by Miss De Lancey. This was placed in the porch of the Home, and is of great
public utility.
The Committee of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, at the
recommendation of the late Archbishop of Canterbury (Dr. Sumner), granted a
large supply of their publications for the use of the Home. The British and Foreign
Bible Society, the Naval and Military Bible Society, and the Religious Tract Society
have supplied copies of the Scriptures and of tracts, in the various continental
languages, as well as in English, to be given to shipwrecked sailors, so that every
one who is brought to the Home may carry with him a copy of the Word of
Life.
At the visit of H.M.’s Commissioners to investigate the various endowed
charities in Dover, they were pleased to express themselves as perfectly satisfied
with the proceedings of the Home, and would not suggest any alteration in the
management or in the application of the funds.
A Russian mortar, taken at Hango, was presented by Captain Hall, the officers,
and crew of H.M. s ship “Blenheim;” It is placed on a large granite slab in the
square. A resolution was passed by the Directors, and forwarded to the Roman Catholic
clergyman at Dover, that in the event of any inmates of the Home being Catholics,
their priest should at all times have free access to them, and every assistance they
required should be rendered by the Superintendent.
It must be mentioned that free passes are granted to Wrecked men by the
South-Eastern, and London, Chatham, and Dover but they must bear
the signatures of the Shipwrecked Mariners’ Royal Benevolent Society, and the
crew must be authenticated as wrecked men by the Superintendent of the Home.
I his is, as we know, a very necessary precaution.
In 1871 the biennial dinner which took place at the Lord Warden Hotel was
honoured by the presence of his Royal Highness Prince Arthur, who very graciously
through Lord Granville, consented to preside at the festival. His genial nature’
frank address, and unaffected manners have endeared him not only to his peers, but
to the very humblest of those with whom any circumstance has brought him into
contact. He seems as if he were raising his companions to his own level, and not
lowering himself to theirs. In the Artillery at Woolwich, in the Rifles at Canada,
and, more recently, at Dover—this venerable and charming watering-place—he has
shown how rational enjoyments may contribute to happiness—how hours of ease
can be employed profitably—how gaiety may promote pleasure
“ Within the limits of becoming mirth.’’
To those with whom duty or pleasure brings him into association, he is simply in


English gentleman ; thorough in all good English habits, presiding over many of
our most useful charities, and speaking with ease and facility—putting right words
into right places—with promise of future eloquence.
On this occasion the Prince, who discharged the duties of Chairman with a
winning grace and dignity that impressed all present, was evidently pleased with
the cordial reception which he enjoyea, and presented a cheque for £25 in aid of
the funds.
During the time that his Royal Highness was presiding a large wrecked crew
landed in the harbour and were conveyed to the Home.
At a special meeting of the Directors, held on Saturday, December 9th, Admiral
Sir W. H. Hall, K.C.E., in the chair, the following resolutions were passed unani-
mously :
Resolved—
“ That the most cordial and respectful thanks of the officers of the Dover
“ National Sailors’ Home be presented to his Royal Highness the Prince Arthur
“ for his kindness and courtesy in presiding at the dinner at the Lord Warden
“ Hotel, on Thursday last; and that the directors feel assured that the patronage
“ thus afforded by his Royal Highness will have a very beneficial effect upon the
“ interests of this institution and of others of a similar character.”
Resolved—
“ That the best thanks of the meeting be given to the Right Honourable Earl
“ Granville, K.G., for his continued patronage of the Dover National Sailors’
“ Home, and for the influence which, in his exalted position, he has used so
“ effectually in promoting the objects of the institution.”
The biennial dinners have been presided over by several noblemen and gentle-
men of the neighbourhood, amongst whom were Earl Granville, Lord Fitzwalter,
Lord Sydney, Lord Claud Hamilton, M.P., &c. All of these dinners were largely
attended by the commanding officers of the garrison, the Members for the county
and borough, the Mayor, and many gentlemen of the town and neighbourhood.
The pecuniary results have always been satisfactory. They are social parties where
the guests can meet on neutral ground without the slightest reference to sectarian-
ism or politics.
Annual sermons are preached at St. John’s (Mariner’s) Church, and always
realise a sum which is requisite to provide free sittings for sailors.
In summing up our description of the rise and progress of the Dover National
Sailors’ Home we cannot but come to the conclusion that it must be ranked amongst
the most flourishing of similar institutions, and that it is known abroad as well as
it is known in England.
We transcribe the list of Patrons, Yice-Presidents, Directors, and officers of the
institution as they are now found upon the first page of the Report. The Patrons


ge-Her Majesty the-Queen of Holland, Hi, Eoyal Highness the Prince Arthur.
Her Eoyal Highness the Duchess of Cambridge, His Grace the Duke of Aberoom
Lorf U W d rd Claud Hamiiton, M.P.), the Eight Hon. Ear! Granville
(Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports), the Eight Hon, the Earl of Yarborough, the
Eight Hon. Lord litzwalter, the Bight Hon. Lord Viscount Sydney, G.C.B. the
c'd HOn Erf E M lof n a^° r ’ J ' Augustus Beaumont . Esq., F.&S., Sir Edward
H hUT E ct” S “' P -’ CharleS Freshfidd > Admiral Sir W.
wp ‘ ’ K Q G p" E - Leigh Pemb orton, Esq., M.P., the Hon. G. W. Milles,
M.P and Sir George Jessel, M.P. (Solicitor-General). The President is the Mayor
of Dover for the time being; the trustees of the building, the Harbour Commis-
sioners ; the trustees for the endowment are gentlemen appointed by the Court of
Chanceiy (for that portion in the hands of the Chancery Commissioners). The
Vice-Presidents are 0. Stein, Esq., J.P., S, M. Latham, Esq., J.P., Captain Hyde
H.E.1.C.5., Steriter Penms, Esq., J.P., J. G . Churchward, Esq., JP J p
Crookes, Esq., J.P, E. S. Woods, M.A., the Collector of Her Majesty’s
Customs (Dover) W H. Payn, Esq. (Coroner), the Harbour Master (Dover), Bev.
J. Bampton, M.A., Captain Cow (Superintendent of Pilots), H. E Smith Esn
Captain Bruce, B N., Henry Johnson, Esq,, Captain Jenner, E.N„ Hon. Captl
Moreton, B.N Edward Hales, Esq., Captain Morgan, E.N., Dr. Sutton, and Dr.
Gill (Admiralty Agent). The Directors are Mr. W. J. Iron, Mr. A. Dottle Mr.
Marsh, Mr. Dyne, Mr. J. Birmingham, Commander Mdrrison, E.N., Mr. Henry
Cox, Dr. Colbeck, Mr. G. Browne, Mr. Samuel J. Davies, Eev. B. Pearce, Mr
William Forster, Mr. Harvey, and Mr. P. Sisco. The Hon. Surgeons are Messrs'
Sutton and Colbeck ; the Hon. Solicitor, George Fielding, Esq. ; the Treasurer and
Hon. Secretary, Eev. W. Yate (Minister of St. John’s, Mariner’s, Church); the
Eesident Superintendent of the Home and Collector, Mr. G. A. Hatch.
Since the foundation of the Home the following is a list of wrecked crews
consisting of 3,317 men, who have been received:
United Kingdom . . oon
6 • • • • • . 220 crews;
Trench . . . . . .
American . , . . # _ g ’*
Danish . . , . 16 ”
Norwegian . . . . , . 27 ”
Danish, Dutch, Swedish, Austrian; Italian, Eussian 24
mu i 376
Ihe late gales make the number of wrecked crews 382,
Such a list should excite the sympathy of the benevolent. It forms a claim
upon them for a share of their contributions. Surely of all men the shipwrecked


sailor is amongst the most destitute of the sorrowing sons of earth; he conies
to us as a stranger, almost without a friend.
At a special meeting of the Vice-Presidents and Directors held in the Board-
room, on Frida} r , November 22nd, the Major (E, E. Mowll, Esq.), in the chair,
the following gettlemen very kindly consented to act as Trustees to the Endowment
Fund, and were so appointed: —J. A. Beaumont, Esq., F.Gr.S.; Captain Bruce, E.N.;
Hi Johnson, Esq., London and County Bank; and the Eev. William Yate.
To those who have watched the origin, rise, and progress of the Home, the
recapitulation of its labours will no doubt be a welcome reminder of its benefits ;
to the younger generation of readers it will be an example that will point the
moral conveyed by the Cood Samaritan.
The survivors from the “ Northfleet ” were brought to the Sailors’ Home in
Dover in three batches; and the noble manner in which the Institution answered
its purpose may be best estimated when we say that, although the Superintendent
had not had a moment’s notice of the great demands that would be made on the
resources of the Home, the shipwrecked people, as fast as they arrived, were never-
theless supplied with dry clothing, breakfast; and, two hours later, with a capital
dinner, many friends of the Home being present, and lending a willing hand
in the “serving out” of the good fare. One of the most energetic was Mr. W.
Clark, who worked day and night, unceasingly attending to the requirements
of the shipwrecked emigrants and sailors. Most of them were rough navvies, and
One of them had been shot in the leg by Captain Knowles, who was anxious that
no men should get into the boats until the women were safe. The representatives
of the London papers came down to Dover and visited the Home in the evening,
and they spoke in terms of the highest praise of the great attention that was paid
to the survivors of the “ Northfleet ” by the Rev. W. Yate, and by Mr. and Mrs.
Hatch, the Superintendent and his wife. Fifty of the men were conveyed to
London on the afternoon of Thursday, the 23rd of January, and the remainder on
the following day, free passes having been furnished them all by the London
Chatham and Dover, and South-Eastern Railway Companies.
The owners of the “ Northfleet ” have presented to the Rev. W. Yate, the
hon. secretary to the Dover Sailors’ Home, a magnificent epergne in recognition of
the kind and generous conduct he displayed in attending to the wants of the sur-
vivors. The testimonial consists of a large and handsome silver epergne , standing
upon a silver pedestal, inlaid with plate glass, beneath which again is an ebony
stand. At the base is a group of elegantly carved dogs in silver, and the stem of
the epergne is twisted in the shape of a palm-tree branch, which supports a glass
\ase for flowers. The inscription upon it is as follows:—“Presented to the Rev.
W. Yate, Minister of St. John’s Mariners’ Church, by the owners of the “ North-
fleet” (Captain E. Knowles), which vessel was run down off Dungeness, the 22nd


of January, 1873, as a token of respect and gratitude for his benevolent care of
Mrs. Knowles and the other survivors of the ill-fated vessel.—2sth of February,
1873.”
Visitors to the Wreck.
Dover is too universally well-known to need any description here. Fvepy one
is well aware that it is an important military station, with numerous and extensive
fortifications > that from its old historical associations and present prosperity it is
the favourite resort of many, who prefer it to some more fashionable watering-
places. Its proximity to France and Belgium makes it the great highway to all
parts of the Continent, and it has well been called the “Key of the Kingdom,” not
only from its position, but from being strongly fortified. Its commerce has very
largely increased during the last few years, and the great improvements now being
carried on at the Harbour give every promise of future prosperity.
Dover has many charitable institutions, w hich appeal largely to public sym-
pathy, particularly its Hospital, Sailors’ Home, Seaman’s Hospital, &c., &c. These
institutions uamed have all been aiding in the good work of alleviating the suffering
of the survivors from the wreck of the “ Northfleet.” In speaking of Dover, the
Hew College should also be mentioned, as an excellent institution little known
at present, but which is doing an excellent work in training the minds of many
young lads, and fitting them well for the duties of life.
The first and second day after the disaster brought many relatives and
friends of those who had been on board the unfortunate ship to Dover, to make
inquiries after those they hoped were saved, yet feared were lost. Every in-
formation was given them, and many thought they would like to visit the spot
where the fearful event had happened. Taking an early train of the South
Eastern Railway from Dover, one arrived in a few minutes at Folkestone, an
antiquated town as regards the lower part of it towards the harbour, but which
in the course of the past few years has become a favourite watering-place, and
a most fashionable resort, thanks to a great extent, to the influence of the Railway
Company and the Continental Packet Service. It may be well, perhaps, to give
a short description of
Folkestone and the Coast to the Westward.
■ At the time of the Conquest, Folkestone was undoubtedly a place of great
importance, and it may have been even prior to that period a stronghold of no mean
importance, in the defence of the south coast. From its propinquity to Portus
LeMianus , the famous Roman port of Lympal, and the many Roman remains
found in the vicinity, we incline to the very popular belief that it owed its origin
to those pioneers of civilization, the legions of immortal Ctesar.


In “ Lambardis perambulations,” we find it asserted that Folcestone or FoL
stane, owes its name to two Saxon words, signifying “ a rocke coast, or flaw of
stone, which beginneth here, for otherwise the cliffe from Dover, till you come
almost hither, is of chalke.” Another account of Saxon date, extracted from the
deed of gift, by which King Athelstane transferred the district to Archbishop
Wulfhelm and translated into scarcely recognisable English by Leland, gives the
following quaint sketch of the old town and its environs “ Folchestan ys a v miles
fro’ Dover, and be algesse stondeth very directly upon Boleyn (opposite Bologne.)
Hard upon ye shore yn a place cawled ye Castel yard, be great ruines of a solemne
old nunnery, yn ye walls whereof yn divers places apere greate and long Briton
brikes, and on ye right hand of ye quier, a grave trunce of carved stone. The
castel yard hath been a place of great burial, yn so much as wher the se hath
woten on ye banke, bones apere half styking owt.” Leland also adverts to the
existence then of a monastery and abbey, dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, where
fc?t. Eanswitfi. was buried, and states that it was destroyed by the pagans.
We find after comparing the various accounts that a nunnery was built by
the Saxons, and that here St. Eanswith passed the greater part of her days; that
this edifice was raised by the danes or destroyed by an encroachment of tlje §ea-
and that in the year ]095 a monastery for Benedicts was erected in its stead fur-
ther inland by Sir Hi gel de Muneville; this however in its turn was not destined
to remain long intact, for the sea encroached to such a fearful extent that in 1138
(the very year that Queen Matilda, escorted by her brother Robert, Duke of
Gloucester, returned to England, to assert her rights, in defiance of her cousin
Stephen then on the throne) Sir William d’Albercis or d’Averenches, the Lord of
the Manor, built a new church still further inland and gifted it to the Benedictines
It was restored in Edward lll.’s time, by John de Seagrayes, Kt.: at the wish of
his wife Julianne, who however did not live to see her design executed. A small
portion of the walls remained until very lately, when improvement, that enemy of
antiquaries required its removal. Thus did we lose an interesting memorial that
many would fain have permitted to stand. Percival Barlow in his History of
Europe published in 1776, gives the followingFolkestone, a place of great
antiquity situated on the sea side, was formerly of some consideration but at present
only a small village. It had anciently five churches, a nunnery, a watch tower,
and a castle. On the ruins of the last a fort was erected in 1068.” It may be
interesting to note that the churches have entirely disappeared as also the fort,
which was built by William d’Averenches, the first Lord of the Manor, to whom
this part of Kent [was apportioned by William the Conqueror as expressed in
Domesday Book. Folkestone was prior to this event, a portion of the immense
territory of the mighty Earl Godwin, and would appear to have suffered equally
with that district, also belonging to the influential Earl, now known as the Goodwin
sands.


The Manor of Folkestone was subsequently held by de Crevecoeurs, de Sand-
wiches, Seagraves, the Earls of Huntingdon, Earls of Essex, and afterwards by the
Herdson family. In 1622 it passed to Basil Dixwell, and in the latter part of the
same century to the Desbouverie family, who still enjoy its possession. At present
it forms a part of the property of Jacob Pleydell Bouverie, Earl of Eadnor, and
Viscount Folkestone.
In 1378, the greater portion of the town was burnt by the French and Scots,
then allied against Eichard 11., and appears to have remained in a reduced state
until 1540, when a harbour was commenced under Henry VIII., who afterwards
paid the town a visit. During the turmoil attendant on the Spanish Invasion,
I olkestone appears to have shared in the preparations made to receive the formid-
able foe, for several small vessels were furnished by the townsfolk, and many
improvements made in the discipline of the inhabitants, and the fortifications of the
place. It was at this time that Queen Elizabeth paid Folkestone her memorable
visit of inspection. The only record we have of this event is, that Her Majesty
was received with great pomp and ceremony by the mayor and authorities of the
town, and was entertained and lodged at Sandgate Castle. The result of the
attempted invasion, and the fate of the invincible Armada, need no comment.
Folkestone is justly proud of the share her ancestors took in that great event.
Ancient Folkestone stood much further seaward than does the modern town;
indeed, the sea appears to have made such inroads here as to have entirely changed
the line of coast between Dover and Dungeness Point. In proportion to its en-
croachment here, it has receded at Hythe, leaving bare the tract of land called
llomney Marsh. The famous Eoman port of Lympne, to whose entrance the
sea once flowed, was situated four miles further inland than the present coast
line, as its ruins testify. Folkestone stands on very unequal ground, at the
base of the hills, which, four miles to the eastward, form the chalky promon-
tory of Shakespeare’s Cliff. The streets of the old town are narrow and steep,
and so constructed as to be scarcely capable of improvement; of this, however,
little need be said, the new town claiming chiefly the attention and notice of the
stranger. The new town is situated on the summit of the Cliff within five
minutes’ walk of the sea. It is regular and well built, the thoroughfares spacious
and airy. Within the last twenty years prodigious changes have taken place;
indeed, the march of progress seems to have’ gone on at the double. Where their
fathers used to play and gather flowers in infancy, terraces and squares have sprung
up, and the Lees, instead of being a pasture for sheep, presents the appearance of
an unrivalled promenade, lined with noble villas; the crowded resort of the fashion-
able and wealthy. Folkestone is seventy-one miles by road from London, and
seventy-eight miles by rail. It is a branch of the Cinque Port of Dover, and ranks
as a borough, with a mayor and corporation. Before the “ Municipal Corporations
15


Act/’ of 1835, it was a Corporation by prescription, consisting of a mayor, who
was one of twelve j urates, a recorder, town-clerk, chamberlain, and twenty-four
common councilmen. The mayor and chamberlain were chosen annually, by the
freemen, on the Bth September, at the ancient cross in the church-yard, the
steps to which still remain, surmounted now by a handsome sun dial with carved
stone pedestal, presented by Mr. Richard Hart, clerk to the magistrates, to com-
memorate the ancient usage.
The Town Hall. —The foundation stone was laid in 1856, under the
Improvement Act obtained in the pieceding year. The principal entrance faces
the Sandgate Road, and leads into a corridor, with doors on either side, con-
ducting to the magistrates’ and town-sergeant’s rooms. The large hall is situate
at the top of the stone staircase at the extremity of this corridor. It is 75 feet
in length, and 40 feet in breadth. The roof is arched, and, like the walls, is
profusely decorated. About the doorway is a gallery divided into three balconies,
capable of accommodating about 200 people. Here the county court and quarter
sessions are held, and public entertainments in rapid succession. The market place
is situated at the back, beneath the hall. On the top of the building, facing the
Sandgate Road, is a pediment, containing a handsome illuminated clock, presented
by the Member for the borough, Baron Meyer Rothschild. Leaving Folkestone one
soon reaches—
Sandgate.
Sandgate is about a mile and a half distant, in which parish it is partly erected.
It is situated at the foot of the hill, and is supposed to have derived its name from
the nature of the soil upon which it stands. The town is of no great antiquity, most
of the houses having sprung up during the last few years, but the castle dates from a
more remote period.
Sandgate owes it origin to a Mr. Wilson, who settled there about the year
1773, as a ship-builder, and built himself a residence and several rows of wooden
houses for his workmen. In 1794, an encampment was formed on the adjoining
heights, and barracks were shortly afterwards erected for infantry and artillery. In
consequence of the military, Sandgate began to be sought after as a watering-place,
and many lodging-houses were consequently erected. At the breaking out of the
Crimean war, a number of wooden huts were erected to accommodate the German
Legion, raised in 1845, and reviewed here by Her Majesty in the summer of 1855.
When the Legion was disbanded at the declaration of peace, Shorncliffe, owing to
its healthy situation and proximity to the sea, was adopted as a station for regular
troops, to accommodate 5,000 men. We believe it is in contemplation to erect
permanent barracks, instead of the wooden huts which are becoming every year
less habitable. Shorncliffe Camp is well-known throughout the United Kingdom,


-. ■■ - '•
ful prospect. The view of Hythe Bar in 1 77° 77 commands a d eligh
at Dungeness is open to the whole of the ho 8 • distant I{ S^hoii
are clean and cheerful, and thelate r eSS" We
elegant in their construction. ° 16 W ® St ° f the town are lofty an
Passing through here, Seabrook is next come to TV
wdl, by-and-by, become a and „ rnQ ThlS romautlc Pretty pl ac
to connect it with Folkestone and Hythe Wlth ° Ut doubt> A rmlwa
here turned by H.R.H. vZe fIC i The first sod wa
Constabulary, under Superintendent Dewar ZhT '7 ° f Kent Count y
of the poor woman who was washed b endered S ood service in the cas
district. * aShed asW from the “ Horthfleet ”in thi
Hvthe.
•* - — *-
. r J r w. . r r,*: ~“■«
against any invading force. Administration, as a defence
There is excellent fishing to be had here - nnrl +• i •
a • + -> f i . „ ° a nere > ana sometimes during a hard winter*
The School of Musketry is situated on the Ashford Rnnrt Q f +b
; v- T by G —‘*- 45S - hiss
nfle small parties of officers and men from each regiment in the
service, who in tnm impart instruction to their comrades.
The range is on the beach, and is a most excellent shooting ground
one olXrnTthe °° ntei “ ed “ andfonr parish churches,
church of St T Pm f“ B 8 ™ t 0 be ‘ een ) at West Hythe, the present
m- h of Si Leonard s (then a chapel to Saltwood), being included in the number
The Wn suffered greatly during the reign of Henry 11., and Godwin and his son’
during their exile, earned away and destroyed all the shipping lying in the haven.’
is surmised that as the sea receded from Lympne {Portus Lemanis), West
■tiythe sprang up in consequence of the loss of that ancient port, and that the
present town was eventually built when West Hythe was left high and dry by the
recession of the tide. 3 *


The church dedicated to St. Leonard occupies an elevated situation, on the
acclivity of the hill above the town, and is a handsome cruciform structure, partly
in the Norman and partly in the Early-English style of architecture, with a tower
on the west end, in which are eight musical hells.
In 1748, the tower fell down. It was rebuilt, and the church was repaired by
a brief; at this time the south transept was taken down by the Deedes family and
rebuilt by them, with a vault underneath for their bunal.
The middle or high chancel is approached by eight steps from the middle aisle,
and three more towards the altar the windows are lofty and remarkably elegant,
especially at the east end.
On the south side are small double arches and Bethersden pillars, similar to
those on the sides of the choir of Canterbury Cathedral.
In the crypt or vault under the east end of the middle chancel is piled up a
vast quantity of human bones and skulls, the pile being 28 feet in length and 8 feet
in height and breadth.
They are supposed, by some, to have been the remains of the Britons slain in a
bloody battle, fought on the shore between Hythe and Folkestone, with the retreat-
ing Saxons, in the year 456 ; and they are said to have attained their present white-
ness by lying for some time exposed on the seashore. Several of the skulls have
deep cuts in them, as if made by some heavy weapon.
In opposition to this theory a board in the vault states, that in the reign of
Ethelwolf, the Danes landed on the coast of Kent, near to the town Hyta (Hythe),
and proceeded as far as Canterbury, which they burned. At length the Danes were
defeated in an engagement, and pursued to their shipping on the seacoast, where
they made a most obstinate resistance.
The Britons, however, were victorious, but the slaughter was prodigious, there
being no less than 30,000 left dead, and their bones were afterwards piled in heaps,
and removed to one of the vaults of this church at Hyta.
Now commences a low flat country, very wild and picturesque ; the wide expanse
of shingle is almost inconceivable, and a visit to the district can alone give any
■ adequate idea of the peculiarity of the scenery ; driving along a road which is not of
the best, being mostly constructed of beach, into which the wheels of the carriage
sink, you come to Dymchurch Wall.
This is a most important structure, backed up by faggots and timber, with a
thick embankment of earth and rock, and faced with stone. Men are constantly at
work keeping it in repair. It protects from the sea upwards of 24,000 acres of rich
grazing and arable land. The management of this is in the hands of gentlemen
who are called “ Lords of the Level.” They impose a tax of so much per acre upon
the landowners, whose fields are protected by the wall, according to the expenditure.
This charge is called “ Scot-Money,” and it amounts to an average of about ss.


per acre per annum. A meeting of the “Lords” is held quarterly for the
transaction of business and the auditing of accounts. Here also must be noticed
the roadside well-known hostelry, the “ Ship,” kept hy mine host John Caister and
his kind-hearted wife. Better catering or more comfortable quarters cannot be
found throughout the county.
.. , T ,° S eld- B ports Dymchurch is well known; it is a splendid coursing
district, and those who meet continually here know, that under the direction of Mr
John Jones J.P 0 f Grove House, a day of glorious sport is insured. The number
of hares to be found is something wonderful; the land seems to abound with
them, and after a most pleasurable day’s outing friends meet a hearty welcome and
most generous hospitality at his home.
After passing several Martello towers, upon each of which a single smooth-hore
cannon, or 32-pounder is placed, and which are now inhabited hy the eoastguardmen
the next place of interest as the high road is followed along the coast, hut hearing
away somewhat inland, is New Romney. This is the nearest town to the scene of the
wreck ; it is a parish, seaport, market town, and member of the Cinque Ports Liberty
of Hastings. The town is supposed to owe its origin to the decay of the ancient
port and haven of Old Romney, which, being rendered useless by the withdrawing
of the sea from it, New Romney became frequented in its stead.
Romney Marsh.
Romney Marsh was known to the ancient Saxons, as appears by the Saxon
Chronicle, by the name of Merscwarum ; and in a grant of King Offato Archbishop
Janibert, about the year 795, it is called Merscware, by which name, Camden says,
the inhabitants of it were called, viz., Yiri, Palustrus, Marsh, or Fen men. Many
opinions exist as to the origin of Romney Marsh ; some assert that it was once
v holly covered by the sea ; others say it was only a large swamp, covered in many
places by the tide at times, and by the water of the river Lymene and Rother.
This was a large navigable river in ancient times. It rose in the county of Sussex,
flowed down to the town of Appledore, on the northern or inland side of this
marsh, and thence separated into two channels. Romney Marsh is now a spacious
level of marsh ground, lying on the southern coast of Kent, between the upland
hills and the sea shore. It is about ten miles in length from east to west, and four
miles in breadth from north to south.
Leland, who wrote in the reign of Henry VIII., says“ Rumeney is one of
the. Y Ports, and hath been a netely good haven, yn so much that within
remembrance of man shyppes have cum hard up to the towne, and cast ancres yn
one of the chyrch yardes. The se ys now a ii myles fro the towne, so sore
thereby now decayed that wher ther were iii great paroches and churches
sumtyme is now scant one wel mayteined.”


Leaving this town and port bj a winding road which makes the distance twice
that which it might be, Lydd is entered, and immediately the impression made
upon the mind of the visitor is most remarkable, the place is so quiet, and so
unlike modern towns. It is a primitive little village, three to four miles from
Dungeness Point, and separated from it by a dreary stretch of marsh shingly land
and beach. Before getting from Dover to Lydd, there are six miles of rail and
fifteen miles of posting to be done, the latter over a road that for some miles skirts
the sea, and finishes by leading the traveller through New Romney Marshes. Prom
the beach at Lydd, the three masts and topgallant yards of the wreck were for a time
plainly visible; when the weather was bright the wreck might be seen from the tower
of Lydd Church. With weather charmingly bright the tower was mounted, all
hoping to see the promised sight; but neither telescope nor opera-glass could bring
within range the relics of the emigrant ship. Around the church clustered the
neat little cottages and gardens of Lydd. Far away to the east it was possible to
make out the chimney-pots of Dymchurch, whilst New Romney seemed almost
within bow-shot. To the north and west the grass-grown marshes stretched ; and
then to the south was the sea, literally “ a silver streak,” glistening in the sun,
and looking as peaceful as if it had not, even at the spot gazed upon, opened its
jaws and swallowed at a single bite some three hundred human beings. Nothing
of the wreck of the “ Northfieet ” could be seen.
Lydd has a corporation, and considerable tracts of land are held by them in
trust for the benefit of their constituents. All the coast-towns or villages here-
abouts look as though they had been bigger and more important, as no doubt they
once were. The churches seem built for twice the population now clustered within
sound of the curfew-bell, and the existence of municipalities receiving considerable
revenue and some exceptional privileges reminds you that you are in the district of
the old Cinque Ports, and that they once held communities rich, prosperous, and
influential. One reason for the decay of Lydd, New and Old Romney, and other
quaint places in the district, arises from the fact that, though once ports of some
note, an unkind freak of father Neptune has gradually withdrawn the sea, which
once brought commerce and fortune to their doors. Old Romney is now miles
removed from the sea, which has gradually receded all along the coast, leaving a
vast beach of unequal width extending almost to Rye. Leaving Lydd yon have
to pass over two miles of this shingle before you reach the coast-line. It is hard to
drive or ride on, though harder still to walk on. The navvies, fishermen, and
others connected with the seaside, always fasten upon their boots by a leather strap
two pieces of wood, which form something between the snow-shoe and an English-
man’s clog or patten. These pieces of wood are called backsters, doubtless a
corruption of “backstays,” meaning a stay which prevents the foot fiom slipping
back when set into the pebbly track. With these supports, after a little practice,


you glide along by a nondescript motion, which is something between statins and
waiting, when otherwise yon would sink over the ankles “ad It the
leg whrryouTrr s is no i easy ’ and twe is a stra “ up ° n &e <***
g which you feel for many hours. Patches of furze, which are few and far
between alone relieve the monotony of this singular desert. Near the beach proper
isakw-lymg battery, crenated on the land face for musketry, and armed Jith
four 68-pounders and one 7-ineh Aimstrong gun; a few artilLymenZdert^
slTaTfrom th °®“ r f ° rm S ~’ could be seen
agefiomthe wreck which was washed ashore—two pieces of rough planting
which had perhaps, formed a partition door below deck betwe™ the
space aUotted to the married and the single men. Further along the coast is I
where' 1 th GT ™ d Eed ° ubi CIoSe hj tte batter J is a signal station,
e the names of passing vessels are made out by the man
on uty, and re sent to Lydd to be telegraphed to London. A
coastguard station and the men in the lighthouse further west complete the little
colony of Dungeness. Far out in the Channel (and the distance looks even
greater than the two miles which more practised eyes assign to it) lies the wrecked
s ip, the tops of its three masts showing conspicuously above the water. But it is
not the only vessel which has met its fate on this dangerous coast; the masts and
timbers of several may still be seen at low water embedded in the sand, which will
eventually swallow up all traces of their existence. The signalman can give you
g 1 y enough a whole catalogue of ships which have come ashore in East Bay, or
ave been run ashore as the last resource to save the lives of the crew. You may
see distinctly the remains of the “ Spindrift,” and of a famous China clipper They
he much nearer shore than the “Northfleet,” and the people on board her, happier
than the poor emigrants, escaped with their lives. The “ Electra,” the fine screw
Steamer which came into collision with another vessel, also lies here,'and divers
un u lately have been employed in recovering her cargo, and will probably be so
employed again. The “ Ann,” of Truro ; the brig, “ Helen Knappthe “ Belinda ”
a Guernsey vessel; the Ehoda, of “ Whitby,” with her head on the beach; and close
the ‘ T 2 1 !!* f renCh 310 ° P ; the “ Matoka ” a Mugged ship in ballast;
Jane May, of Falmouth, which was wrecked off No. 2 Battery, the crew being
saved in their own boats ; the “ Morning Star,” bound from London, for Trinidad -
all these and other wrecks, within a mile or two of the coast, and within a space’ of
a few years, attest the danger that in thick weather awaits vessels bound down
or up annel. In the East Bay lives are rarely lost, but in the West Bay the
sea is heavier, and wrecks are more dangerous to life. An exception to this rule is
L theta t B f VeSSe1 ’ the “ Aakendan >” of Copenhagen, which came ashore
n tlie Bast Bay and went to pieces, with the loss of all on hoard.
In thick weather one sees how it is that for centuries past good ships have


gone ashore here and strewn the coast with wreck. Despite its admirable light-
house, Dnngeness remains the point of danger to seamen in this part of the
Channel. It takes a good pair of eyes even now to see the lighthouse from the
shingle, though the tower rises a hundred feet high, and one can easily understand
how the intense glare produced by the electric light may often be reflected seawards
from the tower in vain.
At such times a fog-trumpet bellows hoarsely from the point over the sea—a
monstrous instrument blown by compressed air, and housed close by. When the
wind blows from the right, you may hear its far from dulcet notes at Appledore,
12 miles inland, and it has quite superseded the screech of the whistle and the
monotonous boom of the big bell which hangs close by the tower. The men in
charge of it may, by inserting iron tongues of varied thickness, change the notes of
this giant’s horn and make them shrill or deep, whichever seems best suited at the
time to prevail over the roar of the sea. But there are many days and nights of
foggy weather when the fog-horn has not a chance in competing with its harsh,
unmusical voice against the mighty noise of wind and wave. A short time after
the wreck of the “ Northfleet,” for example, it was blowing its hardest in the thick
weather to warn off mariners from the coast, yet three ships went ashore within a
mile of Fog-horn Villa, as the ugly red house is called which holds this hideous
horn and its steam-engine.
Like other places, Lydd hopes one day to gain importance by a railway.
Such a line has already been projected, and the proposal is to carry it to Dungeness
Point, for the benefit of the shipping in the Roads, the fishing smacks, and the
lighthouse. It seems only reasonable, however, to ask that Lydd shall first provide
a road over the two miles of shingle which lie between it and the Point. This
shingle is at all times difficult to pass over, both for horse and foot, and for heavy
vehicles it is next to impracticable.
In Leland’s time Lydd was only a mile from the sea. “ Mydde way between
Eumney and Lydde,” he says, “ the marsh land begynneth to neose and arme ynto
the sea.” The town is now four miles distant, and in strong westerly gales from
40 to 50 yards of pebbly beach have been known to be thrown up at the Point,
An inscription in the present lighthouse, built in 1792, states that the old structure
which it replaced stood 540 yards to the northward, but by the formation of new
beach it “ became useless to navigation.” Not many generations may elapse before
the same epitaph may be written of the present lighthouse, which, when built, was
100 yards distant from the sea at low-water mark, but cannot now be less than 350
yards distant. Thus Dungeness Point, shifting in a south-easterly direction,
makes every year slow advances towards the French coast, a curious natural forma-
tion which has hardly attracted the attention it deserves.
Before bidding farewell to Lydd, we must pay a passing tribute to the warm


* 7° rt reacted L y<W flat T* 1
destitute condition, having neither food P uv P ° n the beacli m a wretchedly
The heart of one good ,T *“** ° f “V 7
;° C l ß f y tollehed V the piteous tale of mise.“ £ J ° hn ™s
to be harnessed to a large wagon in wir I i f ordered horses
clothing, and blankets, and started for the seent of ‘ ° f fo « d .
hetweenthirtvandfortypoorGerinaneniioralrin , r u ke found
clothing the whole number, he manao-ed °t„ ap b condition; but, quickly
taking them to his own home, housed and fe’cTth T Safel ' T “ Ms wagon ’ and
would never accept any remuneration for his elen” “ d
Ihe emigrants were sent bnnL- tt i 1
kindness of their generous ° f ’““ grea ‘
Hamburg, that it voted a silver medal to Mr. Preltt w fh frt ““ *** ° f
high appreciation of his humane conduct Mr J Pwim ! expressing its
house when the wreck occurred rendered „r ' - Wellarf > who was a visitor at his
providing for their comfort. This was a als ° to tiese P°°r people in
Proctor was going down to thel Jde night for Lydd/ Mr.
shipwrecked emigrants. In passing over the Wch h f™ ** *° the
precipitated him into a large pond ofdeen w»t *° ok fright > wd
but for his faithful Newfoundland dog “Lion who " W ° U ' d beeD dro ™ed,
He could not obtain hold of his master in r ’ sprang in and swam to him.
upon which his teeth slipped “lT’"" '"***-* ******
the sagacious animal turned round placed £”*?, “ r appear > but is *™e,
who. seizing his tail, was “ f sinkiag »
help, in getting up the bank. ’ succeo ded, with the poor dog’s
and tun7Lt PP :xi 1 'ff * «-* ™s made,
faithful companion, o7“
radeddn^ag-^n^in^e^a^e^n^ks'his Limi*l A
Diving Operations,
Soon after the news of the foundering of the “Nnrthflo t •>
body of divers at Whitstable were telegraphed to d a “
“ m ’ -■> *— »™i~ ■» —X « It. •*:
” ““■ l l - —•-««% XXX
16


arrived in the Eoads, and after some negotiation an agreement was effected to
remove the spars, or any dead bodies, and then raise the cargo if possible, and bring
it to Dover, and barge it thence to London.
The cutters engaged are as follows, viz., the “ Prosperous,” the “ Star,” and the
“ Edith Annie.” Nothing of importance has been done ; the cutters have been in
attendance, but the tide runs too strong to stay long enough to make much show of
anything recovered, although they have removed the masts.
Doubtless, should the weather prove fine, a great portion of the cargo will be
recovered before this work is in the hands of the public.
The divers go below, not in the old-fashioned “ bell,” but clad in the water-
proof dress and helmet, with which most visitors to the Polytechnic are familiar.
A heavy metal shoulder-piece, leaden weights round the dress, and leaden soles to
the boots, take the diver to the bottom rapidly enough. He is let down by a rope
by his comrades on the little vessel. The life-line enables him to signal to the
men who are pumping down to him fresh air through the supply pipe which is
screwed on the diver’s helmet. The diver’s existence depends on the most vigilant
watching of the signals by his comrades, and the constant pumping of neither too
much nor too little air. The usual time for remaining under water is an hour, but
a terrible story is told at Dungeness of a diver employed in the summer of 1872 in
recovering the cargo of the “ Electra,” wrecked in the East Bay. Somehow, the
supply-pipe fouled in the shrouds, and the poor man could not free himself. He
gave the danger signal to his comrades above, but they found that they could not
haul him up without breaking the gutta-percha tubing. For nearly three horns he
remained below in dreadful suspense. According to his own account, in his
despair, he tried to cut the life-line with his knife; fortunately he did not succeed
in severing it, for had he done so he would have lost nearly all chance of escape.
In the attempt he cut his finger severely, and them became insensible, and for a
long time the men overhead got no signals from him. On reviving he found that
the slackening of the tide had disengaged the apparatus from the rigging, and
giving the usual signal, he was hauled up in safety, though greatly exhausted by
his long submersion. His companions thought he must be dead, and would have
sent their only other diver down in search of him, but this man happened to be
away at the time. The diver who so miraculously escaped was at work a few
days afterwards, as though nothing had happened. Warner, the other diver, lost
his life in the wreck very shortly afterwards. Such are the dangers of this very
arduous vocation.
The fishing smack “ Ann,” of Dover, has been engaged to anchor just over
the wreck, and burn a riding-light at night, in order to warn passing ships of the
hidden danger beneath the waves, which might seriously damage them.


Adjourned Inquest at Lydd-Vekdict op the Jdky.
Hall, Lyddfon 21st'P w Brand ™ S reSumed at tJI6 Town
H. Stringer, SoHcitor, rf New Bom^k B ““
witnesses on the part of the Bailiff; Mr. Knocker, Town Clerk of DoTerT a
for the owners of the steamer “ Murillo • ” and rw n 7 , ’ ap P eared
owners of the “ Northfleet.” ’ P n ° ates 011 tPe P art of the
* P-dt residing at the
the deek of the ill-fated vessel at the time o/the 7* “T™ °“
passenger on board the “ Northfleet” Tl n 1 * said-I was a
-w q-. " “r w .JzZ ‘zt- ; "r ■“
Tuesday, about 1 o’clock. On Wednesday nXht T' , P 7 PPed aiKfc,r ° n
had gone to bed. We were anchored in I, T f™’ of the rest
miles from the shore. I went on deck on 777 bet Ween two and ttrefi
about half-past 10 o’clock. It was the 22nd dly777 u 7 ’ TwTT
br<i IT 7? Sllore ' 1 WaS S ‘ anding 0n d6ok
j- nearu. tne man on watch cull nnf (( a a.,-.,., r r. »?>
SL" T" ! “ d ‘—i—
into tne Northfleet. It was a steamer without figure-head, straight bowed and
a yard two of the steamer. I was standing just opposite to the place where the
steamer ran into the ship. I walked to the place, and found the deck bulged up •
and I said to the watch, “ How is this P” and he said, “I don’t know.” then
ca led out to the steamer and asked them to stand by, and the sailors also called out
could not see any one on board the steamer. If there had been persons on the
forepart I could have seen them. I could not if they were elsewhere The steamer
was higher out of the water than the “ Northfleet.” Then the steamer was leaving us
and rounding our stem. After this I went to the boatswain’s cabin, and when he
TTTfI 77 7“ a Steamer had run into us - Tte nding-light of the
°™ et was burning brightly on the side where the steamer struck us. I then
went below, and met a great many men coming up, and I told them to go back as
i was a right. I had not then seen the damage done below. I saw that all the
berths were driven from their places. I then took up a bag of clothes and went on
deck. Seeing the confusion there, I took it back, and again ascended to the deck
Hie steamer was just then founding our stem. The men on the deck of the
“ Northfleet ” were shouting to the steamer. When the steamer struck us I walked
to the place, and was then within a yard of her, and the watch and I could have


got on board of her easily. I saw Mr. Brand standing on the poop, and be bad a
lifebuoy in his band. From the time when the steamer struck us the deck was
illuminated with rockets and blue lights. I saw two boats leave the ship; they
were filled with people. There was great confusion on board. After the boats had
gone I took to the rigging, and the next minute water caine over the bows of the
vessel, and washed the deck. She lifted herself, and then went down. I was in the
rigging of the mainmast. Afterwards I was taken off by the “ Princess ” pilot
cutter, and landed at Dover, where we arrived at a quarter past 12 o’clock on
Thursday. The steamer was a screw make. I did not see Mr. Brand after I saw
him on the poop.
A Juryman.—Where were you standing when the steamer struck the
“ Northfleet ” ?—ln the hind part of the vessel.
By Mr. Knocker.—l did not see the lights on board the steamer. I should
think the watch was calling out two or three minutes before she struck us. The
vessel came out of darkness; the next moment a hissing noise was heard, and she
struck us. I must have heard if any one had called out from her.
The witness then said, with the permission of the Coroner he should like to
make a few remarks. He had seen from the papers that the greater part of the
praise seemed to have fallen to the share of Captain Kingston, of the steam-tug “ City
of London ”; but it was his opinion that had she lowered her boat and steamed
slowly towards the “ Northfleet,” although she might have crushed three or four
persons by so doing, it would have been the means of saving many more lives, and
possibly there might then have been some one present better able to tell the sad tale of
the disaster than himself. He thought that Stanley, the mate of the “ Princess ” pilot
cutter, and the men who were with him, were deserving of all praise. After the
light carried in the small boat had twice been extinguished by the rough sea, they
continued their efforts to save life. He also explained that the John Beveridge
who at the last enquiry was brought from Berwick-on-Tweed, in mistake, was his
uncle.
The Coroner, addressing the jury, said they had heard the evidence, and
there were two points for them to consider —the cause of death, and who was
responsible. The cause of death was unquestionably the water, and, although they
had serious suspicions of the cause, they had no evidence to prove what vessel it
was which caused the disaster. He should therefore advise them to return an open
verdict.
The jury retired for about a quarter of an hour, and on their return delivered
their verdict, which was as follows :
“ That the said Samuel Frederick Brand came to his death by exhaustion in the
water, by reason of the foundering of the ‘ Northfleet,’ on board which he was a pas-
senger, in the East Bay at Dungeness on the night of the 22nd of January last. The


SMd f’ tJ 6 ™ dowa while at anchor hy a steamer whose
name and natron are unknown, hut that there must have been great negligent
carelessness on the part of those in charge of the said steamer.” The iuL a “ add
to them verdict that great praise is due to the masters and crews of th phot utter
Princess, the lugger “Mary,” and the tug steamer “City of London ’ for
tire exertions m saving the lives they did. The jury also consider that * the
steamer which caused the collision had stood by the sinking vessel instead f so
unmercifully leaving her to her fate most or all of the lives wouldhave been saved
dhey also consider that a distinct code of signals of distress should be established
In closing this volume, a brief resume should be given of all the principal
incidents, and the kind indulgence of the reader asked. The ship “Northfleet ”
was at anchor on Wednesday night off Dnngeness, with nearly 400 persons on
board, besides a valuable cargo. She was suddenly run down by a steamer, and
nearly cutinhidt She rapidly filled and sank, and only eighty-five out of the
whole number of the crew and passengers were saved. A calamity so fearful in its
extent and in its suddenness has rarely occurred on our coasts, and it was attended
by a peculiarly shocking incident. The steamer which ran the vessel down made
off without any attempt to render assistance; she left the ship to sink and dis
appeared so completely that her very name and nationality were unknown She
wus believed to be a foreign-rumour said a Spanish-vessel, but nothing more was
known ol her. Such a disaster adds a new horror to the perils of the sea If there
is any situation on the ocean in which emigrants might consider themselves safe it
18 at the anchorage off Dungeness in fair weather. There is a splendid lighthouse
on the point, illuminated by electricity; other ships were at anchor in the vicinity •
there was no material danger in the condition of the elements; a ship at rest
need fear no collision ; she might almost be considered as still in harbour and her
passengers were sleeping, in all the security of proximity to the English shore.
Danger was the very last thing they would dream of, and even if it arose they
would feel sure of succour. On a sudden the ship is cut down as mercilessly as
by a steam-ram in a naval engagement, the passengers are face to face with a
sudden death, and no succour is at hand. There is a rush for self-preservation
which is happily controlled by the bravery and determination of the captain; a
handful find refuge in the boats, and at the last moment two or three small craft
come to the rescue. But it is too late for effectual assistance, and beneath the
gleam of English lights, and within easy reach of a crowded English roadstead,
nearly three hundred souls sink into a sudden grave.
The conduct of the steamer appears so shocking that one hesitates to speak of it
as it seems to deserve. Yet, unless she sank herself, which seems impossible, there
seems no escape from the conclusion that those in charge of her deliberately aban-


doned to her fate the ship they had run down. For the honour of humanity we
must hope that some excuse may be forthcoming ; hut none is easily conceivable.
The charge is not that she rendered no assistance, but that she never waited to learn
whether any assistance was needed. The sole object of those who had control of
her must have been to escape from any legal consequences of the collision. It must,
in mercy to them, be presumed that they had not the slightest idea of the damage
they had done. A collision, of course, however slight, may give rise to a claim
for damages, and a captain is under a strong temptation to take no more notice of
such an accident than he can help. The mere impulse thus to avoid the
claims of justice is itself reprehensible ; but to indulge in it at the risk of
leaving crew or passengers to perish is an act of dtrocious recklessness. We
must hope that in these seas, at all events, it will not prove possible for such
an act to be committed without being traced home to its authors and thoroughly
investigated; and if it proves to be as bad as it appears, no legal penalty would be
too severe. The perils of the sea are sufficiently grievous without being aggra-
vated by man’s inhumanity, and it is only what might have been expected that
sailors should have acquired a reputation for kindliness of heart. They witness
and encounter so much danger that it becomes their habitual impulse to relieve it.
If the abandonment of the “ Northfleet ” was a deliberate act, it will be reprobated
with peculiar indignation by seamen, but it will be none the less necessary to
stigmatize it as it will deserve by the brand of the law. Mere recklessness
under such circumstances is highly criminal, and it ought to be established as a
first principle that any captain who after a collision fails to wait and learn the
extent of the damage he has inflicted is guilty of a heinous offence.
The Channel is notoriously a somewhat dangerous region, but only for ships
which are both in motion and crossing each other’s paths. A ship at anchor ought
under no circumstances to be run down by a steamer in full course. It is stated
by the survivors of the “ Northfleet ” that her lights were duly set. The night
was “squally, with occasional showers of rain,” and there were apprehensions of
a gale. But that the weather was not rough is sufficiently proved by the successful
efforts of the two or three small craft which went to the rescue. In such circum-
stances it ought to have been as easy for a steamer to avoid the “Northfleet ’ as
to avoid the “North Foreland,” but, of course, it would have been impossible for
her when lying at anchor to get out of the way. All she could do was to burii
the proper lights, and, if she did this, there must have been some inexcusable
negligence on board the steamer. This, again, is a point on which the requirements
of the Maritime Code ought to be rigorously upheld. The danger of collision is,
no doubt, greatly increased by the fact of fast steamers crossing the tracks of
sailing vessels without regard to wind or tide, and it is the more essential that
every known possible precaution should be observed. In these days there ought,


all events to be no difficulty whatever in affording effectual warning by means
of lights. As the electric light has superseded oil at some of our principal li„ht-
houses so, if necessary some more powerful lights than those at present used
.g be applied to ships. It may be safely said that such a disaster as the
present ought never to have occurred, and ought never to occur again. If a ship
is not safe at anchor in moderate weather off Duugeness, when is she in any degree
of sccunty t A passenger on board the “ Northileet >' that night might reason-
ably have considered himself as safe as in London, and nothing but some
unpardonable omission can have disappointed his confidence. The disaster is one
o t ose which ought to be effectually prevented for the future, and no pains will
be too great to insure that the lives of nearly three hundred emigrants shall not
have been lost in vain.
One of the strangest features of this calamity is that it should have occurred
so near the shore, and among so large a body of shipping, without attracting im-
mediate notice and assistance. On account of the westerly winds a whole fleet of
vessels was anchored near the “ Horthfleet.” Immediately after the collision
rockets were fired, bells were rung, and the usual signals of distress were given.
ut these were taken by some to be merely signals for a pilot. Some of those
nearest the vessel did not know till the next day that anything had happened.
The disaster may have the effect of directing attention more closely to the ex-
pedients by which such occurrences may be prevented. Every year the Channel
is becoming more dangerous, and the precautions which were sufficient in the old
days no longer insure safety. The slow-sailing craft of forty years since, with
their tub-like build and their leisurely movements, might be trusted not to do each
other much harm, if they were provided with a ship’s lantern or two in their
rigging. The vessels which now rush up and down Channel bear no more resem-
blance to them, than a Hansom cab, tearing along under the promise of extra fare,
bears to one of the old lumbering hackney-coaches. The rate at which the
steamers move, and the difficulty of checking them, make the ordinary lights a very
insufficient protection in a dark or foggy night. They are not seen until it is too
late to avoid the collision, in which, from the momentum acquired by extraordinary
speed, even a small vessel can sink a great one. If danger arises from the speed
of modern vessels, it arises also from their number and size; indeed, the Channel
is as a London street of the present time, compared with the same thoroughfare in
the last generation. Legislation has done much of late years to diminish the
risks of a seafaring life, and to insure the safety of passengers and cargoes, but
continual accidents suggest that on many points more efficient regulations are
needed.
One great point, that of having special signals of distress, by which any vessel
can implore help in an unmistakeable manner, has been brought prominentlv before


the public by this disaster. By some extraordinary fatality the distress signals of
the “ Norfhfleet ” passed unheeded, and these 293 unhappy creatures perished
miserably with the means of help all round them, Rockets were fired by the
dozen ; half-a-dozen blue lights were burning on deck at once; yet the lifeboat
stationed at Dungeness Point was not launched by the coastguard who had charge
of her; not one of some 200 vessels in the roads heeded the signals, and the crew
of the cutter answered them as though they were merely the ordinary signals
for a pilot, made by people who, for some reason or other, were in rather an
unusual hurry to get one. The pitiable sight of the ship sinking while deliver-
ance was literally within hail; the hapless people on the deck, who must have
thought themselves abandoned in their extremity; their despairing shrieks, some
holding up their little children high overhead, as though at least this mute appeal
should prevail, form an appalling picture of misery.
A practical suggestion has been made that the rockets and lights burnt by
ships in distress should be of some prescribed colour—presumably red—so as to
distinguish them from ordinary signals • for a pilot. Had there been such a dis-
tinctive colour here, the lifeboat at Dungeness would doubtless have been launched
in time to rescue many of the emigrants, and other help might have been forth-
coming.
There is still further cause for disappointment and wonder in the fact that only
one person was rescued out of the crowd who w r ere on the deck when the ship went
down, excepting those who took to the rigging. There were life-belts in the boats of
the £ ‘ Horthfleet,” and, from the statements of survivors, it is known that when all
efforts to launch the three remaining boats proved useless, the lashings were cut,
so that as the water rose the boats might; float. The loose spars were also cut
adrift, and, one would have thought, might have supported two or three score of
people in the water. Four men were picked up floating on the bottom of one of
these boats, by the crew of the second boat belonging to the cutter, and one man
clung to the chains of the steam-tug, and was dragged into it. But, with these
exceptions, and not taking into account the survivors in the two boats picked up
by the steam-tug, spars, boats, life-belts, all were useless. Then the rigging was
accessible without much difficulty, and 100 people might have clung to it. But
this resource also failed, save to the 21 men taken off by Sfanley, the mate of the
Princess pilot cutter, under the directions of James Pilcher, the master, and assisted
by the cutter’s crew. Amid so much that is depressing and almost unaccountable
it is satisfactory to note, though the fact does not appear in Stanley’s evidence
before the coroner, that all who clung to the rigging were saved, notwithstanding
the long and dreary time of suspense which many of them underwent. The
endurance of some of the survivors rescued in this way was sorely taxed, and, but
fur the new energy which hope lent them, it is probable that some would have


after SMey fet tut 5“ ° linging ‘° **“
themselves in rubbing the half-frozen iLbs' oTao™ f *
restore circulation. 1 tlle emigrants, in order to
: fr k * story ° f
It is just possible that, in the o-loom h VG rendere l no assistance,
cutter for a stranger. He htsflfTr’on °‘ W b » a ‘ ° f
agreeable to suppose that he was mistaken thaftlm PoSSlb ’ ll ‘ y ’ bUt Jt is more
vessel, though on the spot, could deliberated lee l • T° f ™ 7 Ilel S hbou ™g
drowning. ve 8 men to the risk of
the dark clotldTsorrowThatTungTc 1!“ 0 “ e gl6am ° f SUMbine P ieKe i
This was the receipt of The^^lowing^essag^ from tlnTor *"* ,»
the President of the Board of Trade to the°Secretary of h
Z'2 r v-i i.
Knowles ” To tv , } 7 " “P S ° licitou3 as to the state of Mrs
Knowles, though nl^K^grea t Tt '^ % J^ 8 ’ agei “’ Stating that Mrs '
had left Dover for London, takingunlrlerTargTZ
Her Majesty in this most
-swii’K; £j* S--
Commander, she claimed eagerlv the the7 f ’ the
her husbinfl Tf eo ari * ? P gG ot the Captain’s wife to accompany
ner Husband. It seemed like a stroke of fortune given in their favour a f fn
moment it was courted. Nothing could be more touching than the story of th^
partmg she clinging to him and begging to stay and share his fa e 7 resolved
to do his duty, to stay by the ship, and, however hitter the parting with her to I
at: Tf: "7 “r-' “ ‘ ba of a high-minded man and at™
boat to t I 1 7 c tenderly, called to the boatswain, who had charge of the
boat, to take care ot her, and then turned to his work, straining every nerve at the
supreme crisis to save, first, the most helpless of his passengers, but striving as we
have seen, in vam. His name and memory deserve honourable record 7th 27
of men who filled higher stations, but could have had no higher sense of duty "
-1 he proceedings at the inquest showed how gross and how criminal was the
negligence which hurried all these poor people to the spirit world. Again it was


established on the evidence of experienced Channel pilots that the “ Northfleet ”
was anchored in what should have been a perfectly safe position in the roadstead,
from \\ to 2 miles inside the track of steamers passing up and down the Channel.
The riding light of the “ Northfleet ” was clearly visible; and though at times the
night was dark and thick, this light, at the time of the collision, might have been seen
by the look-out men of a steamer coming from any direction. According to the
boastswain, John Easter-a fine young sailor, who gave his evidence with great
feeling and also with great clearness—the watch on the deck of the “ Northfleet,”
as well as the passengers who had hurried up on deck when the ship reeled under
the shock of the collision, hailed the steamer with shouts and entreaties, which must
have been heard by the people on board her. Besides this, whoever else doubted,
she, at all events, could have been in no doubt as to the meaning of the rockets
and blue light sent up from the “ Northfleet ” directly after the collision. So
large a vessel as the steamer,’ standing much higher out of water than the
“ Northfleet,” as the boatswain deposed, might have laid alongside the “ Northfleet ”
“ without fear of the suction,” which is the dread of seamen in such cases. “ She
might have thrown us a brace,” said the boatswain, “ and then we could easily
have passed on to her decks the greater number, if not all the people we had on
board.”
A deep, stern indignation showed itself among the people present at the story
of this shocking inhumanity, as again told by one of the men who had so narrowly
escaped from the wreck. This feeling changed to one of emotion when the boatswain
spoke admiringly of the courage and self-possession shown by Captain Knowles,
his anxiety if possible to save the women and children, and his noble but ineffectual
efforts with that end. When speaking of the conduct of the male passengers,
Easter could not restrain his anger and impatience. If, he said, they had listened
to reason, and if order could have been restored on board, the boats might have
been got’out and might have made, at least, two trips to the steam-tug, which was
then at the distance of only about five minutes’ pull. They crowded into the
boat which the captain ordered the boatswain to clear for the women and children,
It was Easter’s business to throw them back again into the ship, and he did throw
many of them, but as fast as one was thus disposed of, his place was taken by
another, and the navvies even crept under the thwarts-the seats which stretch across
a boat—in order to resist being forced out. In this way precious moments were
no doubt lost, and in the short space which remained the ship’s company was
rendered almost powerless to save either themselves or the emigrants. • Easter told
how the Captain first snapped a cap at the men who refused to obey him, and how
he then shot at one man, whom he hit in the leg. But the navvies had lost all
self-control, and, being strong, rough, resolute fellows, were quite able by their
superior numbers to shoulder the crew aside, and set at naught the Captain’s


orders. “ Nothing else would do for them,” said Easter f i •
the boats to themselves.” They did in f <«* • but havm o
y dl(A ’ m tact > g et possession of a second boat into
not one woman or child could penetrate. In this boat they put off hurriedly
from he ship, with only one oar, having neglected to put "the "
shouted to them, said the boatswain, -but they did not hear me Ly’ were
state ““lb r ng S °‘” The WaS their b ° at Soon became a sbking
the «En gXm”T 1 COUId make their to
ivmgsdov n lugger, which again lost valuable time on its way to the w/eck
ecause it had to stop and take in those men. They left the “ Northfleet ” sinking
i icmselves and pursued by shrieks. They were crying, - Save us, save us,” when
ey reached the bows of the lugger, and they were saved, one fears at the price of
otter lives. Easter .Iso recounted the Captain’s last words. He had ordered the
boatswain s crew to put off from the - Horthfleet ” and lie on their oars within hail
them c7n °T Sbip ’ S *** asM how thin^s with
them. In lowering the boat it had been badly stove, and Easter therefore told him
i was in a sinking s'ate. - Shove off, then,” said the Captain ; - God bless you f
m your charge ! God bless you ! ” It was hardly possible to listen without
emotion to this simple advice given by that noble fellow, who turned away in the
sight of his young wife, in order to die at his post. When last seen he was on the
poop along with Mr. Brand and the surgeon. An extract published from a medical
paper spoke of the surgeon, and in this sad narrative his name should not be
orgotten. He was a German, named Hermann Kunde, and along with Mr. Brand
he appears to have stood by Captain Knowles to the last, in the hopeless attempt
to preserve order among the emigrants. Heaven knows, these men must not be
judged harshly at so supreme a crisis, but among them the brute instinct of self-
preservation had obtained entire mastery, leaving no room for either the reason
which would have told them how alone all could be saved, or the mercy and
manliness which would have suggested consideration for the weak and helpless.
So completely out of her course was the steamer which ran down the
Korthfleet,” that if this steamer had kept her course after the collision she would
have run ashore at Bungeness Point. Of this there appears to be abundant
testimony. The “ Horthfleet ” was run down when she might have been supposed
to be almost as safe as though she were in the docks. When once this unexpected
catastrophe occurred, a remarkable chain of fatalities stopped the means of escape.
By most of the people who saw them, the rockets sent up were believed to be mere
signals for a pilot. Then, in sponging the ship’s gun, the head of the sponge
came off, and in trying to extract this the head of the worm came off. Thus the
gun, which could hardly have been disregarded by neighbouring ships or by the
Coastguard ashore, failed at the critical moment.
It is said that a homeward-bound vessel, in the joy of the captain’s heart at


reaching home, or wishing to get rid of an old stock of rockets, has been known to
send up as many as 40, though merely wanting a pilot; and that the Bremen boats
are in the habit of saluting each other as they pass. The signals of the “North-
fleet ” were set down on board the Kingsdown lugger as an exchange of rockets
between the Bremen boats, and the master, who had been deceived before, refused
at first to waste his time in what he declared would be a fruitless chase. Thus five
minutes were lost before the lugger stood towards the “Northfleet,” and on this
fatal night every minute was lost at the cost of human lives. In short the old fable
seems to have been exemplified; other vessels in the Downs have cried “ Wolf,”
and the poor people in the “ Northfleet ” suffered through false alarms by which
the pilots and coastguard had ceased to be alarmed, even when there was terrible
reason for hurrying to the rescue. The Board of Trade will, no doubt, consider
whether this practice of firing rockets indiscriminately and without check should be
allowed to continue, or whether a distinctive light should not be introduced and
restricted under penalty to use as a danger signal. More painful and more
unaccountable than all were the silence and apathy among the shipping which
was anchored near the “Northfleet.” It is generally right to say that, as the
wind blew off the shore and the “ Northfleet ” was, with one exception, the outside
ship of the fleet, the screams and cries for help might be carried seaward, without
reaching the ears of the drowsy watch on board the inshore-lying vessels, some 200
of which were in the Hoads. But the “ Corona,” a large vessel belonging to
Dundee, was anchored within 400 or 500 yards of the “ North fleet,” and there is
evidence that the anchor watch on board the “ Corona ” not only saw the rockets
and blue lights, but heard the screams, and were too lazy to report the fact to the
captain. The chief boatman at the coastguard station said he was told by the
captain that if he had known of the collision he could have saved the lives of at
least 100 of the passengers in his boats. One of the partv asked a question which
implied a rumour that the Captain of the “ Corona ” placed two men of the watch
in irons, as a punishment for this deplorable inhumanity. Until one hears it con-
firmed by more positive evidence, one is reluctant to believe that the screams
of drowning men, women, and children—and such screams at such an hour
could only come from them—were disregarded by seamen, in order, apparently,
to save themselves trouble in launching their boats. Perhaps the charitable
interpretation is that the watch on board the “ Corona ” and other vessels
anchored close by were more than half asleep at the time, and listened in stupid
wonder, without understanding what they only half heard.
It was reported a day or two after the disaster that the delinquent steamer
had been discovered, sunk, in the West Bay of Dungeness, and the owner of the
“ Murillo,” a Spanish steamer, who landed from his vessel at Dover about two
hours before the accident, believed that it was the “ Murillo ” that came into


collision with tile emigrant ship, and destroyed both the “ Northfleet ” and itself
In his opinion, the “Murillo,” being an iron steamer, constructed of thin plates,'
sank m a few minutes, and that this is the reason why no assistance was given.
There has been no relaxation of the efforts to discover the missing steamer. It is
i cu to understand that the steamer should have been so fatally damaged as to
sm imme late y. The statement of James Beveridge, who is said to be the only
survivor of those, who were on the deck of the “ Northfleet ” at the time, is that
le steamer came stem on, and struck the “Northfleet” amidships. Thus the
amage one to the Northfleet ” was likely to be far greater than that suffered
y the steamer, and it seems incredible that the steamer should have been so
crus ed as to sink at once. On the other hand if she kept afloat for any time, it
is wonderful that no one on board the “Northfleet,” in the boats, or on shore
should have known anything of the matter. The account given by those on board'
e Northfleet is that immediately after the collision the steamer cleared the
ship and was soon altogether out of sight. Did she steam down Channel, ignorant
or careless of the calamity she had caused, or did she go to the bottom ?
In any case, the statement of the owner of the “ Murillo ” is of the highest
importance. The time, as given by him, agrees with that of the disaster ; and his
statement confirms the suspicion previously entertained that it was a Spanish
steamer that had done the mischief. Unless the steamer be found lying bodily
beneath the waves, the inquiry must not be given up. It will be ascertained
whether she really ran down the -Northfleet/’ Fortunately for the interests of
justice, concealment in these matters is impossible. A steamer cannot run down a
vessel of 940 tons without a tremendous shock to the assailant. In the Atlantic
it often happens that a powerful steamer runs down a small vessel, as the fishing
craft on the Banks of Newfoundland, and does not feel it; but the crash which
destroyed the “Northfleet ” must have brought every man in the steamer to the
deck. Though a captain or a first officer may keep silence to save himself and
avoid compromising the interests of his ovyners, the crew and passengers have
no such motives - for reticence, and humanity urges them to tell all they know.
What remedy there may be against her owners or her captain is a further question,
which, perhaps, will not admit of a very satisfactory answer.
Lloyds’ List contained the following reports from its agents relating; to the
“Murillo”:— •
-Lisbon, January 29, 7. 25 p.m.
The Murillo steamer, from Antwerp, stopped at Belem, which is unusual,
and left suddenly without landing Lisbon cargo; was fresh painted starboard
bow black and red to water line; had slight indention near anchor davit port
bow.’
- [The Spanish Consul in London stated, with reference to the above report,


that the “ ‘ Murillo ’ steamer was painted in London and Antwerp just before starting
on her present voyage, and that she received the indentation in her port bow about
two years ago while entering the port of Havre.] ”
“ Cadiz, January 30.
“The ‘ Korthfleet ’ was run down undoubtedly by the steamer ‘Murillo,’
expected here this evening. She was wired to Lisbon to come on immediately to
Cadiz if in collision, and did so.”
“ 8. 45.
“ The ‘ Murillo ’ arrived; ascertained to have been the ship in the collision
with the ‘ Northfleet.’ ”
Lisbon, January 30, 10. 20 p.m.
Another report says :—“ Bows on one side newly painted. Belem Customs’
officials suspended; steamer illegally despatched for Cadiz.”
On the 31st of January, the following telegram was received from Mr.
M‘Pherson, Lloyd’s agent at Cadiz :
Cadiz, January 30.
“ It is positively ascertained that the steamer ‘ Murillo ’ was the ship which
came into collision with the ‘ JSTorthfleet.’
“ The vessel arrived here at 7 to-night, and has no apparent damage.”
The “ Murillo ” belongs to a regular line of Spanish screw steamers, which
leave Millwall Docks every ten days for Lisbon, Gibraltar, Cadiz, and Seville.
There are five ships belong to this fleet—namely, the “ Yaldes,” the ‘‘ Zurbaran,”
the “ Carpio,” the “ Yelasquez,” and the “’Murillo.” The ships occasionally call
at Antwerp, and it was from the latter port that the “ Murillo ” sailed on her last
ill-fated voyage. There is a singular coincidence in the circumstances attending
the former commanders of both the “ Northfleet ” and the “ Murillo.” It is well
understood that Captain Oates had given up the command of the “ ISTorthfleet ”to
his gallant successor, Captain Knowles, only a day or two before the ship left the
East India Docks, in consequence of having been subpoenaed as a witness for the
prosecution in the forthcoming trial for perjury of the Claimant to the Tichborne
estates. Captain P. Marc, up to a few weeks since, commander of the “ Murillo,”
was in Kovemoer last summoned overland from Seville (in which port the “ Murillo ”
was then lying) to give evidence in a case, in which the charterers of some goods
by that ship are endeavouring to enforce from the underwriters the insurance upon
a quantity of wines thrown overboard while, as Captain Marc alleges, the “ Murillo ”
was in imminent danger when off the Spanish coast. This suit has led to a neces-
sity for Captain Marc’s prolonged absence from duty, and the “ Murillo,” mean-
while, has been under the direct command of a Spaniard, named Felipi Berruti.
This man has held for some time past what is considered in Spain a master’s cer-
tificate, and during the past 12 months has acted under Captain Marc as first mate


of Murillo. The chef mate of the “Murillo” is named Don Manuel
„ ,T er n f aCIOS ; a ” 6 ° ffioerS m Charse of the are Englishmen. The
. uriHo «as built, it is said, for Spanish owners, in England—Messrs Robert
ndrew and Co of Bond-court, Walbrook, to whom the ownership of this ship
the 8 “7 3 , ” ’“7 a deClarati ° n at Ll V ds ’ that only connexion wit i
Murillo was in the capacity of agents for a Spanish company, and not as
owners themselves of the ship. 1 01 as
~ accidental landing of Captain Marc from the “ Murillo ” at Dover on
the 23rd mst. occurred in this wise, it is said l-Being at Dover when the
• t ,T 7 11 ° hannel > boand for Antwerp, and having no occupation
in order to kill time, he took passage in his old ship to Antwerp, and it was on his’
re urn voyage from that place that he landed with Mr. Svvainton, the Channel
pilot, at Dover.
It is to be feared that the conduct of the captain and crew of the “ Murillo ”
is only one of many similar acts of inhumanity. Only the other day it fell to Sir
Bober t Plnllimore to reprove the captain of the “ Prince Eugene ” for similar
behaviour. A vessel impinged upon a smaller craft, stove in the bow, and left her
crew to sink or swim. We fear that such scandals will too frequently occur so
long as the law retains its present unsatisfactory character. In the Merchant
ippmg Act of 1862, there is a clause which has not been brought to the front in
the recent discussions, and which is substantially as follows : “In every case of
collision between two ships, it shall be the duty of the person in charge of each
ship, if, and so far as he can do without danger to his own ship and crew, to render
to the other ship, her master, crew, and passengers (if any) such assistance as may
be practicable and as may be necessary in order to save them from any danger
caused by the collision.” A reasonable and proper provision, it will be said. But
what is the punishment if disobedience to this provision be proved ? Only suspen-
sion of the master’s certificate, or, at worst, the cancelling of it—a punishment
manifestly inadequate. There is also a want of proper inducement to masters, who
fall in with a vessel in distress, to take the trouble of saving life. Originally there
was no power to award salvage dues in respect of life. This defect was remedied,
but only inadequately so, by the Merchant Shipping Act. The late Dr. Lushington,’
however, weakened the force of the enactment by declaring that “ the Legislature
had not given salvage for the saving of life all over the seas,” and by confining
the operation of the Act to English vessels within three miles of land. Will no
Member of Parliament see to the remedying of this anomaly ?
The citation in personam issued from the Court of Admiralty, at the instance
of the owners of the “ Northfleet,” against the alleged owners of the “ Murillo,”
as the delinquent vessel, was made returnable in six days from the service, but
no appearance was entered. By the process the parties were warned that if no
appearance was entered the Court would take measures to proceed with the suit.


The Madrid Impartial of February 10th, stated that the enquiry instituted against
the “ Murillo,” at Cadiz, had not elicited any trace of her culpability; but that the
inquiry was being continued, and the captain and officers on board under arrest.
The acting captain of the Spanish merchant steamer “Murillo” surely must have
forgotten, at the moment he steamed away from the disaster he is charged with having
caused, that he carried on board his vessel three witnesses, who could neither be
coerced nor suborned into a denial of the facts. These were the two engineers and
a passenger, named respectively Bethell, Goodeave, and Bell, all Englishmen.
The chief engineer of the “ Murillo,” Mr. Giles Bethell, belongs to Painswiok,
Gloucester. He I stifled that, after leaving London, the steamer proceeded to
Antwerp, which port she left on the 21st of January. They took shelter in
Flushing that night, proceeding the next morning (22nd) on their voyage to
Lisbon, Cadiz, &c. At Dover they landed their Channel pilot and their captain,
Don Pascual Marc, who was ill. The chief officer, Don Felipi Berruti, assumed
command, and they stood out to sea. The chief engineer was at this time below
attending to the engines. They worked full speed till about 10 p.m,, when he
received orders to go at half-speed. In half an hour or so the speed was still
further reduced. They were going under easy steam till about 10.45, when
suddenly he received orders to stop and reverse his engines, which he did instantly.
Next moment he felt the steamer strike something, but dovn in the engine-room
the shock did not appear to him very severe. He rushed on deck, and saw
that they had come into collision with a large ship ahead. He saw dis-
tinctly that she had a very brilliant light burning at the head of the foremast, and
she appeared to be riding at anchor. Instantly returning, as was his duty, to the
engine-room, he saw nothing more of what was passing on deck. The next moment
he received orders to put on easy speed, and they continued at that pace all night,
not stopping till they arrived at Portland next morning. Mr. Bethell felt they
ought to have stood by the other ship till they had seen whether they had done
any damage or not. Soon after the collision he spoke to the captain on the subject,
and the latter remarked that he did not believe they had done much injury to her.
He thought they had struck her somewhere about the chains, and, after carrying
away the beam to which they were attached, had sheered gently off. They did not
communicate with the shore at Portland, but left when the weather moderated,
and in due time arrived at Lisbon, from which place, without landing any cargo,
they proceeded to Cadiz, which they reached on the 30th.
Mr. William Goodeave, of Wandsworth, Surrey, the second engineer, was off
duty at the moment of the collision, and in his state-room on deck talking to
Mr. Bell, the passenger, who shared the room with him. He confirms all Mr.
Bethell’s details as to the movements of the steamer up to the moment of the
collision. He said of the latter that his attention was attracted by sudden noises


rad bustle on deck. He had just time to cry out to Mr. Bell, the passenger, who
was undressed in his berth, “ Look out! We are going into a ship !” when he
felt the shock, which jerked Mr. Bell out of the berth. Rushing to the deck, he
found they had struck the ship on the starboard side. She appeared to be a long
ship, with painted ports, white figurehead, and had her foremast light burning
brightly. Mr. Goodeave corroborates the fact that at the moment of the collision
t e engines had been reversed, and they were going slowly. The ship was in
sight for four minutes afterwards. As the “ Murillo ” backed astern, Mr. Goodeave
thought it was the captain’s intention to go round her, and the idea that they
were leaving her never entered his head. He distinctly heard voices of men,
women, and children crying “ Don’t leave us! Send boats!” One voice re-
peated this cry ton or twelve times. He himself hailed them, “We shall not
leave you.” As he did not speak Spanish, he turned to some of the sailors of
the “ Murillo,” and, pointing to the boats, said “Boat, boat!” to them, but they
took no notice. J
Mr. Samuel Bell, of Jarrow, the passenger, describes the voyage from London
to Antwerp; the stay there, where they loaded about 500 tons of iron rails for
Lisbon, and other cargo for Gibraltar and Malaga, leaving Antwerp on the 21st of
January, put into Flushing that night: landed Channel pilot and master at about
9 p.m. of the 22nd at Dover. An hour and a half afterwards, being in his berth
m the second engineer’s room on deck, he heard unusual noises and commotion,
and instantly felt the shock of a collision which knocked him out of his berth. The
second engineer, who was standing by him, exclaimed, “ For God’s sake, put on
your things, as we are into a ship! ” Mr. Goodeave slipped on his trousers and ran
on deck. He found they were just clear of the ship, and backing astern. Loud
cries were proceeding from the ship of -Don’t leave us; send boats! ” He and
Mr. Goodeaye replied, “Ho ; we shall not leave you.” All this time the captain
and boatswain were on the bridge. In a few minutes Mr. Bell was horrified to find
they were steaming down Channel, without stopping to make any inquiries or to
render any assistance. Mr. Bell says the ship was a large one, and at anchor.
She had a very bright light at her foremast head. Hext night they put
into Portland roads, but did not communicate with the shore. They arrived in the
Tagus on the night of the 28th. Next morning they proceeded to Lisbon, but,
strange to say, did not land any cargo there. At 3in the afternoon they set off at
full speed for Cadiz. At 7 p.m. on the 30th they anchored in Cadiz Bav.
To the credit of Admiral Beranger, the Minister of Marine at Madrid, it
should be mentioned, that the moment he read the particulars of the disaster in the
first English papers which came here, and long before he received any official com-
munication from our Minister, Mr. Layard, on the subject, he telegraphed to all the
Spanish ports, ordering the arrest of the captains and officers of the “ Murillo ” and
18


the “ Pelayo ” the moment they arrived. It will be remembered that at that time
both these steamers were under suspicion. The innocence of the “ Pelayo ” has
since been established, and by virtue of these orders of Admiral Beranger, the
captain of the “ Murillo” and his two mates were placed in custody at Cadiz
pending the result of official investigations. Mr. Layard was most prompt and
energetic in his appeal to the Spanish Government, and at his instance the latter
directed the authorities at Cadiz to lend Mr. Consul Beade every" assistance.
The surveyors requested by Mr. Daniel M’Pherson, Lloyd’s agent at Cadiz,
to examine the Spanish steamer “ Murillo,” reported, on oath, as follows :
“We, the undersigned, having been ordered by Mr. Daniel M’Pherson,
Lloyd’s agent at this port, to hold a survey on the Spanish screw stehmer 1 Murillo ’
to ascertain if she has sustained any damage, also to report if she shows any signs
of having been in collision recently, proceeded on board this day, and found
as follows, viz.: —
“Upon a careful examination inside we cannot find any damage sustained,
either by her upper works or below water. We carefully examined all rivets and
butts in fore peak, and found all perfectly tight, and not the least sign of a leak at
or near the stem. We found that a loose scale of rust, about 1 feet 6-inches in length
by 10-inches in width, had fallen from the second plate from the main deck on
both sides, at 4 feet from the stem, and was now lying on its edge on the stringer
plate below, evidently having fallen through concussion or otherwise, as
the scale is not broken, but lying whole against the plate on the stringer
below. Outside we found the Peacock’s paint at the 10-foot mark on stem, and
8 inches abaft the stem, marked with black paint, and up to the 14-foot mark.
There are appearances of the ship having been in contact with wood. These
appearances are more distinct on the starboard side of the stem than the port side.
We found a sharp dent in the second plate from the main deck, under the
port cathead. This indention does not appear to have been done recently, as
we found the iron had a coating of red-lead under the black paint. Beyond
this we found no signs whatever of the ship having sustained any damage or
of having been in collision, with the exception of the before-mentioned marks
on the Peacock’s paint on starboard side of stem.
“John Bussell, Master of the steamship ‘ Lisbon ’ of London.
“ James Cochrane, Engineer.
“F. Donaldson, Carpenter, steamship 1 Lisbon.’
“ Sworn before me this Ist day of February, 1873.
“ DANIEL M’PHEBSON ”
The following letter from the alleged owners of the “ Murillo” to the editor of
the Times may be found interesting :


“ Slß — As much misconception seems to exist about the ownership of the steam-
ship Murillo, and as, notwithstanding the letter we addressed on the subject to
the Secretary of Lloyds’ Committee, many of the public still profess to believe that
she belongs to our firm, we have to beg that you will kindly find a place in your
columns for the following simple statement of facts with reference to the said
steamer; —
“ She ™ bunt in ] 865 by Messrs. Randolph, Elder, and Co. to our order, for
account of a Spanish firm, Miguel Saenz and Co., to replace another steamer of the
same name whrch belonged to the same owners. The present ‘ Murillo’ was trans-
ferred to them immediately on arriving out in Spain, and her whole cost was
charged to and paid by them, including a commission to ourselves, we having acted
simply as agents in carrying out the orders transmitted to us by M. Saenz and Co.
In the same capacity we have since had to effect insurances from time to time, and
when the steamer has been in London we have had to attend to her business in con-
formity with instructions from her owners, who have been debited and credited with
every account belonging to the 4 Murillo’ as soon as each transaction was closed.
“ It is almost needless to add that we neither appointed Captain Berruth nor did
we know that the ‘ Murillo ’ was to make her last voyage under his command, such
matters being entirely out of our province as London agents to the ‘ Murillo,’ and
we had nothing to do with ordering her from Lisbon to Cadiz.
“ We feel confident that the actual owners, Messrs. Miguel Saenz and Co., will
honourably meet any liability that they may have incurred through the act of any
of their servants. They have invited the fullest investigation into the ‘Murillo’s’
alleged connexion with the ‘ Northfleet’s ’ disastrous loss, and should Captain
Berruti be proved guilty of what he has been charged with, they would be the last
persons either to screen him or to evade their own consequential legal responsi-
bilities.
“ We remain, Sir, your obedient servants,
“ ROBERT MacANDREW and Co.
“Bond-court, Walbrook, E.C., Feb. 14,”
The Board of Trade offered £lOO reward for the disclosure of the name of the
foreign steamer concerned in the collision.
Messrs. Edwin Clark, Punchard, and Co., 5, TV estminster-chambers, Victoria-
street, S.W., wrote to the press stating that they had learnt, with feelings of most
profound regret, the sad accident which had happened to the “ Northfleet,” on her
voyage to Hobart Town, with a large number of their workmen for the Tasmanian
Main Line Railway, and that they were desirous of offering a reward of £lOO, in
addition to any other reward that might be offered, to any person or persons who
would give such evidence as would lead to the identification of the steamer which
ran down the “ JSTorthfleet.”


1 rom Portsmouth, the steam-tug Fiery Dragon, belonging to the Port of Ports-
mouth Steam-tug Company, was sent off into the Channel south of the Isle of
Wight to look out for the steamer.
Senor Pascual Marc, who recently commanded the Spanish steamer “ Murillo,”
stated in reference to the collision that from the time the vessel was built till the
end of last November, he acted as commander, and that he then temporarily resigned
his duties. He considered it his duty to correct the erroneous statement made in.
the newspapers as to the thinness of the iron plates of the “ Murillo.” The plates,
like her construction, are all they ought to be, and during the seven years that he
commanded her nothing occurred to alter his opinion that she was a first-class
steamer, and as seaworthy as any vessel afloat. He was the person who landed
with the pilot at Dover, and he is not the owner in. whole or part of the vessel.
It was evident that the “ Murillo ” sustained no serious damage. It
may seem extraordinary that such a collision should happen without damage to
both vessels—that one ship should be sent to the bottom and the other need only
a coat of paint or nothing at all. Put the records of such accidents show that
this is of not infrequent occurrence, when, as in the present case, a powerful,
strongly-built vessel comes stem on, like a ram, into the side of another. The
“ Northfleet,” a wooden vessel, of nearly a thousand tons, was a formidable mass to
strike against, but she was motionless at anchor, and the steamer cut into her with
its sharp bow without dislocating its own plates. This, however, takes away
from the Captain of the cc Murillo,” if she be the delinquent,! every excuse for
his conduct. The steamer ran into another vessel on a fine night within two
or three miles of the shore, and not far from other vessels. It is perfectly
certain that if those in charge of the steamer had felt the least apprehension that
she was damaged, they would never have proceeded on their voyage. The leak
caused by a blow inflicted on an iron ship is a serious matter, and the Captain
must have been perfectly sure that no such injury had befallen his vessel, when he
went on his way down Channel without communicating with the shore. But
then, on the other hand, those on board the steamer must have seen the signals on
distress, and known their sad meaning.
There is, therefore, no basis whatever for the only excuse which has been
suggested, namely, that the “ Murillo” was itself so injured, and its crew in such
a state of confusion and alarm, that it was impossible to render any assist-
ance to the sinking “ North fleet.” It would need very instant peril to exonerate
the master of a ship in such a case; but the defence might have been allowed if
the steamer had put into any Channel port in a disabled state. But we have now
too good ground for believing that the officer in charge coolly disengaged his ship
after that terrible collision, and steamed away with the shrieks of the passengers of
the “ Northfleet ” in his ears, well knowing there was no danger to his own vessel


or any inability to help its victim. Such an act cannot be too severely visited-bv
e criminal law if there be a legal remedy ; if not, by that public and general
reprobation which no man can regard with indifference. Possibly the defence may
be that those on board the “ Murillo " did not know the mischief the steamer hJ
done. This plea cannot be admitted. A collision which sends a ship of 895 tons
o the bottom cannot happen without those on board both vessels becoming at once
aware that something very serious has occurred. We have it in evidence from the
—°v h : 7 o rr ” that from the it
oale Wh 1 *° Reamer, and when the two vessels
noisetd olf 6 “ ™ mediate rUBi of the P asse ngera on deck, and the
noise and confusion were excessive. The two ships were foul of each other long
enough for the seamen in the “Northfleet ”to give a descrintion nf fbt> + &
ess. Are we to suppose that the people on board the “ Murillo ” knew nothing
of what was passing on board the other vessel T We must conclude that not oily
were those in charge of the steamer guilty through gross negligence of the Jffi-
sion with a vessel at anchor but that if w -X \ 8
, ’ our tnat, it not with inhuman recklessness at auv
let «7 e °i escaping from pecuniary liabi %
~ sol “e et pro“tt: vkn g ° f
n 1 1 r 1 ! at knew she was actually sinking or that she
thlt Tb d f red 80Ul8 0,1 board ’ bat “ aß ‘ have been peSell“
rsgnr ~“ ** -«v i.=
a Sp«niard!^n^^gKl^r^^i“ d t aPPe^ i to have been commanded by
this a British vessel, andlere therf ft t?" W< ”
would be taken in the matter, and we catot look , 1 ’ pr ° mpta ° tion
Government. The legal remedv wb’ b ° r GSS r ° m c^ksed
have against the owners of the “ Murillo ” iT ™ ay
need not concern ourselves at present W T. qUGStI ° n ’ Which W 6
beyond the remedy which the daman- ratlier ° f th ° Se who are
and we hope for some action in this \ J -n C ° Urt ° f JuStlCe Can afford >
human beings cannot be destroyed on the high se” 7™ *° W ° rU
interest of all nations that seafLng met sWd be d “j **
code by which their offences will bfiudo-ed in 11 7 aWar ® tbat tbere 18 a
escape through the diversities or Jr, if t e- U f 0 ™*™ 8 ’ and that lhe y cannot
number and size of ships, and in the n ” t ° Jttrl9dlctlon - The “crease in the
makes the enforcing of strict regulaf "" J ' °„ P ! rsons carried in a single vessel,
ever necessary. ° 10ns by all civilised Governments more than
the whole story of the “ Northfleet ”is told. The labour of the Writer


and Compiler is ended. Though the subject has been so sad, knowing the object
in view, the toil has been pleasant; it has served as a beacon and a strong support
when burning the “midnight oil,” and weariness from over-work has been creeping
on. The carefully copied Official Information and Documents, the arrival of the
Survivors at Dover, their Narratives, the Recovery of Bodies, the List of Lost and
Saved, the Coroner’s Inquest, the Board of Trade Inquiry, the arrival of Rela-
tives, the journey down the coast to Dungeness, Memoirs of Captain Knowles
and Mr. Brand, &c., the Churches, the Burial of Bodies, the Dover Sailors’ Home,
the Divers, Photographs, and the “Murillo,” cannot fail to be of the greatest
possible interest to all who have read of* that terrible calamity, and fearful
loss of life on the night of 22nd Januarjq 1873. The mournful tale of the
“ Northfleet ” has its few sweet lessons of comfort, and must not be forgotten.
Let us thankfully remember that in our darkest hour, when God and all good
Angels seem to have forsaken us, Mercy leads Homewards, though it may be
through storm and tempest and bitter grief. It may be, anxiety, grief, sorrow,
anguish, mourning, but “ Then comes sweet Peace.”
Those who, in that trying hour, perished nobly, showed others how to die;
and set an example of which Englishmen are proud. The memory of these men
will ever live in the hearts of their countrymen, who pay but a just debt of
gratitude in raising in their honour a
NATIONAL MEMORIAL.












