

y jM \ rjr "4tv v^?•*».
I mmm I 3 yygj ; Vi Jr tC ' BSK.
i JT ■ . ?m%*. ' tiff
f ||1 '0g -7 r ' /’' ■ J |
(J


I




0


THE GOLD-SEEKERS


BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
With a Coloured Frontispiece and other Illustrations
by Arch Webb.
Large crown B vo, cloth, 6/-
Chillagoe Charlie.
The Secret of the Sargasso.
The Moon-God’s Secret
London: T. FISHER UNWIN.




• 1 ,- l^ lb*
“ HE STRUCK OUT RIGHT AND LEFT AT EVERY HEAD THAT CAME
WITHIN REACH.”
(See page 140.)


A
TALE
OF ADVENTURE
A
COLD-EXTRACTING
MOTOR
THE
SAHARA
ITT
DESERT
*B; r
.C DONALD
1 o«
_
fe - x. C*»4 ,U
thb sargasso,”
j ♦♦ m*
' -J ■ -• tl wt,
KTC.
» r-K i
■> z
• ; itrs
' i
si) t2 OTHER
•
i ■ A j
;.'V JA ,
-’V.- **
w"
V> t > B
;■ : r\ . S | -V
✓
I. .
•
. ’ jH; i< 1
I. V A iN
THE GOLD-SEEKERS
A TALE OF ADVENTURE
• , . ;< l -\K. Mt MX
At j


I -TRUCK OUT RIGHT AM) LEFT AT !■'
Al' THAT CAME
WITHIN REACH
Sec page 140.


THE GOLD-SEEKERS
A TALE OF ADVENTURE
A GOLD-EXTRACTING MOTOR
AND THE SAHARA DESERT
ROBERT M. MACDONALD
AUTHOR OF
“CHILLAGOE CHARLIE,” “THE SECRET OF THE SARGASSO,’’
“THE MOON-GOD’S SECRET,” ETC., ETC.
WITH A COLOURED FRONTISPIECE AND 12 OTHER
ILLUSTRATIONS BY ARCH. WEBB
LONDON: T. FISHER UNWIN
ADELPHI TERRACE. MCMX


(All rights reserved.)


CONTENTS
CHAP.
I. THE SCHEME . . . . *9
11. THE FIRST TEST . . . .32
111. SAHARA BOUND . . . . 56
IV. WHO IS THE ENEMY ? . . . .79
V. FROM TUNISIA TO TRIPOLI . . . 106
VI. THE WEKIL OF THE WADI ZEMZEM . . 128
VII. MARCUS AURELIUS SMITH .... 153
VIII. “ LABBAIK ALLAHOMMA ! ” . . 176
IX. IN THE HEART OF THE SAHARA . . . 198
X. THE RED FOG ..... 221
XI. LAKE CHAD : CHANGE FOR WADAI . . 244
XII. PRISONERS ..... 266
XIII. THE BURIED TEMPLE .... 289
XIV. TOM GOES EXPLORING .... 310
XV. NEMESIS . . . 330




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
“he struck out right and left at every head
that CAME within reach ” . . Frontispiece
“ 1 GET OUT OR WE’LL FLING YOU OUT,’ SAID MILLER ” 20
“ TOM LIT AN ACETYLENE CYCLE LAMP ” . 32
“THE MAN TRIED TO OPEN THE PORTMANTEAU” . 94
“THE OFFICER RODE INTO THE PALMS AND DREW
REIN BESIDE THE BOYS ” . . . .112
“ THE CAR SIMPLY LEAPED THE INTERVENING SPACE
AND PASSED ON ” . . . . . 124
“ TOM WOUND A ROPE ROUND HIS THROAT ” . 166
“JACK CRAWLED UP TO THE OPEN window” . 208
“they halted at a wadi and had breakfast and
A BATH” ...... 248


U HE SPRANG AT THE HUGE SLAVE AS HE SPOKE” . 286
“ A FEW MINUTES LATER THE FOUR COMRADES WERE
WADING OVER TO THE FOREST-CLAD ISLAND ” . 302
“ HE LOWERED HIS TORCH INTO THE APERTURE AND
PEERED DOWN” ..... 318
“ A MAN SPRANG OUT FROM THE SCRUB AND BORE
HIM TO THE GROUND” .... 328


THE GOLD-SEEKERS
CHAPTER I
THE SCHEME
The firm of Messrs. Dunhill, Miller, Bolton & Co.
was a mystery to all other business concerns
in Glasgow. Bad times seemed to have no effect
upon it, and its partners were always smiling and
apparently well pleased with things. What its
chief business really was no one outside its own
extensive offices knew, and the staff, if possible, was
even more mystified. Its articles of association
proclaimed it to be a firm of engineers, ship-
builders, railway contractors, and aeroplane con-
structors. Incidentally it was also the sole agency
in Britain for Professor Smith’s “ Cure All ”
tabloids, the “ Kill All ” sheep dip, and the “ Boil
All ” concentrated food.
Messrs. Dunhill, Miller, Bolton & Co., accord-
ing to their circulars, had agents all over the world,
and so far as any one knew there was no reason to
doubt the statement. They certainly, occasionally,
sold engines and boilers to some bargain-desiring
buyers in South America ; smelters, for copper
mines somewhere in Queensland ; sheep dip to the
9


Argentine and elsewhere ; and other commodities
to various parts of the world.
But it was the nature and extent of their
Egyptian and general African trade that puzzled
all other firms. They were continually exporting
well-boxed goods to the various Mediterranean
ports of North Africa, and it was darkly hinted
in some quarters that these boxes did not always
contain the articles stated on the bills of lading.
But the fame of the firm was great among
engineers, and no one could actually say that he
knew a box consigned to, say, Algiers labelled
“ boiler parts ” did not carry boiler parts ; and
as all goods assuredly would be examined at the
landing port, clearly professional jealousy was the
cause of most strange rumours.
The partners were well known in the city, and
as men well liked, though perhaps for various
reasons. Mr. Dunhill was a tall, stout, good-
natured gentleman who wished well to all men. He
was often met with in the public places of Glasgow
and his hearty laugh rang true and sincere. Yet
even among friends he was thought a most
forgetful man, and they attributed this failing to
the supposed fact that his business required his
memory to be short. Miller was a slimly built man,
of boyish appearance, but he who tried to trade
upon his seeming youthfulness usually lost heavily
in the transaction. He was a shrewd man, but a
good fellow among friends, and was recognised as
a first-rate engineer.
But the third partner was an insolvable mystery
to all. He was feared by his own staff, and indeed
by most people with whom he came in contact.
He was a man of decided foreign appearance and


spoke English, German, and French with equal
fluency. He admitted he was not British born, but
as he spent money freely wherever he happened to
be, gave largely to charities, and generally
interested himself in the affairs of the town, often
at considerable expense to himself, people tried to
think him a good fellow, and never questioned him
as to his real nationality. He never spoke of
business matters outside the office, nor did he ever
attend social functions, although, being an ex-
tremely handsome man, well-mannered, and
wealthy, he was invariably invited to any fashion-
able event of importance. He often absented him-
self from business for long periods, and on such
occasions even his partners did not know where
he had gone. But as he always brought home big
orders when he returned they were careful not to
ask any questions which might better remain un-
answered. So, minding its own business, and being
friendly with all people, the firm of Dunhill, Miller,
Bolton & Co. prospered exceedingly.
It was half-past four in the afternoon, and the
clerks in the firm’s spacious offices near the Central
Station were amused. Outside, the city was
enveloped in a black fog which hid even the electric
arc lamps from view, and they were awaiting the
hour at which they might leave for their homes
by car, rail, or subway ; afterwards, some of them
would doubtless patronise one of the pantomimes
raging for the alleged entertainment of children,
or a music-hall. But they were in a state of hilarity
even now, although half an hour had still to elapse
before the time of freedom, and the reason was
that in a few minutes a man was coming to inter-
view the partners about some strange contrivance


he had invented for extracting gold from moon-
beams, or sea-water, or Glasgow fog, they did
not know which ; but it mattered little, the result
would be the same. They were not laughing at
the supposed invention. Oh, no, they knew that
their fellow-citizens were quite capable of inventing
something wonderful, but the idea of submitting
it to Messrs. Dunhill, Miller, Bolton & Co. tickled
them. They forgot that the inhabitants of their
great city did not know the real nature of the firm
so well as they did. So they laughed and joked
and watched the clock as the hands crawled round
to the time of closing.
In the room in which the partners generally dis-
cussed things the three heads were gathered. Each
was going home by car that night, for well they
knew the railway system extending from the
Central, Queen Street, and St. Enoch would be
disorganised by the dense fog which enveloped the
city and its environments in a huge soot-charged
blanket. They were, therefore, in no special hurry
to catch any train, and they were spending the last
business hour of the day in more or less friendly
conversation.
“ My motto is, ‘ Spoil the Egyptian,’ ” Mr. Dun-
hill remarked, standing with his back to the fire,
and gazing complacently around. “And I think we
are doing that fairly well considering the bad times.”
“ Yes, the Kill Alls and Cure Alls are doing
all right,” said Miller, “ but we’ll have to hustle
the Boil Alls ; the British public hasn’t yet caught
on to the exceptional value of that patent hash ”
“ I cannot allow you to talk so disrespectfully of
what has been so favourably reported upon by
so jnany experts,” broke in Dunhill.


“ These experts were well paid, of course,”
Bolton observed quietly. “ Still, I haven’t heard
that any one has died from eating the stuff.”
“ The Kill All is catching on in Australia, any-
way,” said Dunhill. “ We’re sending out another
consignment to-morrow.”
“ What did we make out of that German floating
dock? ” asked Bolton languidly ; he did not seem
to be much interested.
“Ha 1 ha ! ha I ” Dunhill roared. “ That was
a job after my own heart. Just think of it
and you’ll see the humour. A German firm ask all
over the world for quotations for a floating dock
and we scoop in the order, and then give it out
again to a German establishment in their own
town at a profit of fully twenty-five per cent.
Ha ! ha ! ha ! ”
‘‘We saved them the duty they would have to
pay if thev imported it, at any rate,” put in Miller,
“ and twenty-five per cent, isn’t much for teaching
them the resources of their own country.”
“ No,” Bolton admitted reflectively, fondling his
moustache ; “ but you seem to have forgotten that
we guaranteed the affair, and may yet have to
pay out a good bit more than the twenty-five per
cent, profit made.”
“ Don’t bring up unpleasant possibilities,” said
Dunhill. “By the way, I think we’ll scoop in that
order of Smith and Sons for a shunting locomotive.
One of our fellows found out from Smith’s man that
ours was the lowest tender. There will be a good
deal of plunder in that deal, for we bought an old
Caledonian pug as scrap-iron last week, and a
coat of paint will make her look like a Highland
Railway express engine.”


“ What’s wrong in the clerks’ room? ” Miller
interrupted. “ They are kicking up a bit of a row.”
“ It’ll be that inventor fellow,” said Dunhill
deprecatingly. “ I forgot to mention that I made
one of our fellows answer his letter.”
“ You don’t mean to say, Dunhill,” cried Bolton,
“ that you paid any attention to that silly note that
came in with other things this morning, dealing
with some supposed invention? ”
‘‘l did; I thought there would be no harm
in seeing the fellow and his machine ; there might
be something in it, for his letter looked genuine,
and —well, I wrote him to come here at four-thirty,
and that must be he now.”
“ But what is his patent about? ” asked Miller.
“ We can’t handle new-fangled things.”
“ I don’t know what it is, but we’ll soon see,”
Dunhill replied, as a clerk opened the door
and announced that a Mr. Allan had called by
arrangement to interview the firm. The clerk’s
face was expressionless, but his voice being ex-
tremely well modulated, and his language most
carefully chosen, the partners knew that he was
keeping back something, for usually their staff
blurted out their business in a style more precise
than polite, as they had been taught to do.
“ Show him in then,” said Dunhill, assuming
the most business-like air at his command, while
Miller sat down at a desk and scrutinised the
drawings of a suction-gas plant, and Bolton lit a
cigarette and looked out of the window at the fog.
And Mr. Allan came in and gave the partners
the surprise the clerks had already experienced.
He was only a boy of about eighteen years of age.
He carried a long, narrow box in his hand, and


did not seem in any way disconcerted by being in
the presence of the great men. He looked round
the room as if to single out the man with whom he
had to deal, and finally he seemed to decide that
Mr. Dunhill was the proper person. The partners,
as yet, had not said a word. Miller saw there was
no chance of selling “ Boil Alls,” or “ Cure Alls,”
or anything else to a “ kid ” as he afterwards
termed their visitor, and Bolton was annoyed at
having to be in the same room with a youngster
who could not possibly be of any service to them.
Only Dunhill rose to the occasion. His soft heart
at once warmed to the lad, and he beamed upon
him encouragingly.
“ I have brought my patent with me,” Mr. Allan
said, addressing Mr. Dunhill ; “ shall I start it
working? ”
“ Yes,” Dunhill answered. “ Surely. Bet’s see
what the animal is like.”
‘‘What can it do?” asked Miller, ‘‘Can it
make something out of nothing? ”
“ I don’t think you need trouble to explain your
idea,” Bolton said coldly. “ We’ve no time to
listen to the wild schemes of boys, and I’ll sack the
clerks who allowed you to come in.”
“ Yes, surely,” said the irresponsible Dunhill,
forgetting what he had already said. “ We’re a
business people, and if you’ve no business to
do ”
“ But I came here on business, as you must
know,” broke in the lad. “ I wrote you about my
patent and you asked me to call. If you have
since changed your mind, of course I can go away
again. I don’t think you are the only firm of
engineers in Glasgow.”


“Well, can’t you tell us what the thing is about? ”
said Miller irritably. “ Our time is too valuable
to waste without good reasons.”
“ It is about extracting gold, as my letter said,”
the lad answered, “ and I understood from your
letter that you were favourably disposed to deal
with it.”
“ Yes, surely,” said Dunhill, adjusting his glasses
and blinking at the young inventor. He would
have used the same words even if the object had
been to cut off his own head ; yet it was not for
want of language that he so often so parrot-like
expressed himself, for his command of English
—at times —was equal to Shakespeare’s, and he
occasionally flung words about that would have
broken the heart of a Cabinet Minister to emulate.
He was a strange man, and in more ways than one.
“ Well, you are not going to extract any gold
here,” said Bolton, “ so you had better clear out.”
“ I’d like to see how it’s done,” Miller put in.
“We work that game ourselves and don’t find
it easy.”
“ Very well, gentlemen, I’m sorry I called,” said
Mr. Allan, lifting his box and turning to the door.
“ Stay ! ” cried Bolton. “ You haven’t told us
what you extract gold from? Is it red herring,
unpaid bills, or the British public? ”
“ I told you in my letter it was from sand,” said
the youth. “My patent is a sort of dry-blower.”
“ Yes, surely,” Dunhill commented, looking very
Wise ; “so you did. You extract gold from a
dry-blower? ”
“ No, I extract gold by means of my dry-blower
from sand or any other powdered substance which
contains gold.”


“ Yes, surely,” said Dunhill. “ But where do
you find the stuff that contains the auriferous
metal? ”
“ He’s thinking of our scrap-heap of engines
and boilers, and steam winches,” Miller laughed.
“ Only there is no gold in it,” Bolton remarked.
“ We gave the gold in exchange for it*”
“My friends and I had the Australian and
Sahara Deserts in view,” said the inventor quietly.
” According to the Australian Government Mining
Reports, the sands of the great desert stretching
eastwards from Kalgoorlie carry traces of gold
ranging from three pennyweights to nearly half an
ounce per ton ; and I was at a lecture last week
where I learned that the sands of the Sahara,
especially in the region of Lake Chad, were almost
as rich, and that only the absence of water made it
impossible to extract the gold.”
“ Yes, surely,” Dunhill remarked with great
originality, wiping his glasses. “ I was at that
lecture myself, if you are talking of the corro-
borree in the City Hall recently*”
“ But it wasn’t a corroborree,” said the boy.
It was one of the Geographical Society’s lectures,
and the man who delivered it had crossed the
Sahara himself.”
“My lad,” began Dunhill, “ when you have
travelled around and throughout this gyrating
globe as much as I have done you will have learned
that the word corroborree is Australian for a meet-
ing, as kiaora is New Zealand’s word for express-
ing ‘ good luck ’ and aloha mi the Honoluluian
equivalent of the same ”
“ Shut up, Dunhill 1 ” growled Miller. “We want
to know about this patent, not about your travels
2


•which every man in Glasgow has heard about
a thousand times.”
‘‘Do you mean to insinuate that I
“ No, he doesn’t,” Bolton interrupted. “ But
what do you know of the Sahara, young man? ”
“ Nothing, but my comrade knows a lot. He
was brought up in Oran in Algeria, and he
knows that the desert beyond Fezzan is rich in
gold.”
“ Well, let us see your contrivance for extract-
ing it,” Bolton said, unusually talkative, and show-
ing a sudden excitement entirely foreign to his
nature.
“ Surely,” Dunhill agreed. “ Let’s see what the
thing is like. We won’t eat it ”
“ You couldn’t,” the youthful inventor returned
coolly. “ It’s made of steel, and in any case I
have no objection to showing it. There it is.”
He threw open the long box and disclosed a long
metallic tube resting within. Some fittings were
also contained in the box, but what purpose they
fulfilled was not explained by the exhibitor.
“ That’s only a tube,” said Miller. “We can
supply you with a mile of that at twenty per cent,
less than you can buy it elsewhere.”
“ I’m not buying any tubes,” the lad replied,
“ and I think you will find that this one is not
exactly what it seems ; the mechanism is all inside
apd ”
44 1 understand,” said Dunhill wisely, looking
through the tube ; 4 ‘ you shovel the sand in at
one end and the gold comes out at the pther.
We’ll send for some sand—or would it work as well
with coal dust, or flour? We have plenty of both
here.”


The great man paused in the act of pressing the
button of an electric bell communication.
“ No,” said the boy. “My patent doesn’t make
gold ; it only extracts gold from substances which
already contain it.”
“ Surely,” ejaculated Dunhill, nodding his head.
“ I follow you perfectly. I understand the whole
thing. All the same, young man, gold-extractors
are a drug on the market at present ; the tax-
collector has ruined that game. Now, if your
machine could take gold out of Glasgow fog, or
even out of some railway shares I hold, I would
buy one, but as it can’t, I don’t see the use of it.
I am looking for something to put gold into my
pockets, not to extract it.”
“ .Well, what do you want anyhow? ” demanded
Miller. “ What proposal have you to make to
us? ”
“ I don’t think I have any,” the lad answered
somewhat sadly. ‘‘We—my comrades and I—
thought you might have been disposed to take
an interest in our little affairs. But it doesn’t
matter ; we’ll carry the thing through ourselves.”
Again he turned to leave the room with his box.
“ Just hold on a moment,” Miller said. “ You
are far too independent to succeed in this world.
You don’t seem to realise the importance of the
people with whom you are dealing.”
“He doesn’t ; the little beggar is impertinent,”
added Dunhill.
“ Cut it, Miller,” Bolton said. “ Your dignity
is not at all impressive. I’ll talk to the kid.”
“ I don’t think you will, sir,” the lad broke
in. ‘‘l have no time to waste now. Other
people will be glad to interest themselves ;


and in any case I didn’t come here to be
lectured ”
“ But hang it all I ” said Miller. “ You can’t
expect to do business in that way. Now we’re
a business people. Tell us what your business
is. Do you want to sell your patent? ”
“ No ; I hoped you would assist us in building
a larger machine, and also help us financially in
setting it to work. We were prepared to give half
of the profits in return, but as I see I’ve made
a mistake in coming to you I needn’t say more,”
“ Let’s be sportsmen, gentlemen,” said Miller to
his partners. “ Let’s give the thing a trial. We can
afford to risk some money on it, and look how it
would advertise our business if we advertised patent
gold-extractors along with our other specialities.”
“ I second that,” cried Dunhill. “ What’s a few
pounds to us in the interests of science? We will
be the guardians of this new discovery and its
youthful inventor, and protect both from the
London sharks and the Glasgow she-foxes.”
“ Rot 1 ” interrupted Bolton. “We haven’t seen
the thing working yet ; in fact, we don’t even know
how it works. Then we can’t very well bring the
Sahara Desert to Glasgow to experiment with.
Leave your affair here, young man, and we’ll get
some expert reports upon it ; if they are favour-
able we’ll see what we can do.”
“ That’s solid sense,” commented Dunhill, for-
getting what he had already said. 44 We can’t
deal with any patent until we’ve had expert
evidence that it is all that is claimed for it.”
“ But I thought you were experts yourselves,
gentlemen,” the inventor observed in some surprise.
“ That is why I brought it to you. I will not leave


Ip wP * " i
vB ✓ Wmi
v 1 AM wBr P |&L * p|
V' 1 K. fc, Br wfil F ■'
gKi [ m .W ...
ffis S ? Hr *s ; Ik * jL;w ** -jHMBffl IwUL /■p lfe, t;. ,1
r It ~ * jK^;"
**** <^~^
SfHjr ' r fj/Kt "*?
‘“get out oh we’ll fling you out,’ said miller.”
To face page 20.




my model here, and if you feel you are not capable
of judging for yourselves regarding its abilities,
then I needn’t waste my time any longer.”
“ Then clear out of this at once,” roared Bolton.
“ Your insolence is insufferable.”
“ Yes, get out, or we’ll fling you out,” said
Miller.
“Surely,” added Dunhill. “.We’ll be made
fools of by no man. Leave your machine or ”
But the lad had departed, taking his gold-ex-
tracting apparatus with him. The laughter of the
clerks in the outer office continued until one of
them discovered that it was five o’clock, and then
they forgot the young inventor in their hurry to
quit the precincts of Dunhill, Miller, Bolton & Co.
A few minutes after the partners also left the
office, each going home his own way.
Tom Allan, however, was more disconcerted than
he had shown, for he had been hoping that the
celebrated firm would assist his two comrades and
himself in their scheme. He was a tall, handsome
youth of most thoughtful countenance, and an
observer might have guessed that his lithe form
concealed a strength far beyond that of most young
men of his age. He pushed through the dense
gloom of combined darkness and fog and boarded
a car which by its coloured light when near
showed that it was bound in the direction which
suited him.
When he arrived home he hastily partook of
tea and retired to the room used as his workshop,
where he at once began making some alteration
in the long, tubular part of his mysterious creation.
He had not told his parents of his disappointing
interview with the great engineering firm, but they


quickly guessed that something had gone wrong
with his plans. They had been well-to-do people
at one time, but a sequence of misfortunes had over-
taken Mr. Allan in his business, and now they lived
very modestly indeed. Still, they had contrived
to give their only son a first-class education, and
when Tom had shown a strong bent to engineering
and its kindred sciences, they offered no objec-
tions, although Mrs. Allan had hoped to see her
son adopt one of the so-called more learned pro-
fessions. Tom’s only thoughts were of his parents,
and he was determined that they should yet be
restored to their former position if it lay within
his power to accomplish such a change in their
fortunes.
But the prospects were remote, and certainly
as an ordinary engineer he had little chance of ever
achieving distinction sufficient to justify his hopes.
There were too many of his kind, and all good
men, for Glasgow is the birthplace of the world’s
most famous engineers. Still, he persevered in his
studies after his day’s work was done, and often
sat late into the night trying to master some intri-
cate point in the sciences of astronomy, electricity,
chemistry, hydrostatics, and dynamics. Thus at
an early age his store of knowledge was amazingly
great, and he had begun to apply his brains to the
extremely difficult problem of making use of what
he knew. He had two comrades who backed him
in everything. Both were bright lads themselves,
as full of confidence, as fearless, and as enter-
prising as himself, but yet lacking in that power
of assuming responsibility which marks the
leaders of men, and which Tom possessed in a
high degree. Of course they were not yet old


enough to trouble about the cares and sorrows of
this world, and to them life was one long
adventure ; although they did complain at
times that their lives had been cast in prosaic
Glasgow instead of in some foreign land where
they might have found exciting dangers confronting
them, and which, when overcome, according to
story-books, would disclose fortune to their grasp.
They lived in hopes that the day would soon come
when the three of them could leave the great fog-
bound city behind, and go exploring in some land
where the sun sometimes shone.
Jack Chalmers was a light-hearted lad with no
cares and no responsibilities. He was always
laughing, and even during the dismal fog he
managed to preserve a smiling face. He had been
born under sunny skies too, which, according to
Alfred Goodwin, ought to have made him more
miserable in the dreary Scottish climate. Jack
had first opened his eyes upon this world in Oran,
in Algeria. His parents still resided there, as Mr.
Chalmers was in sole control of a British firm
which had extensive interests in that town. Jack
had been sent home to learn engineering, and he
had already spent four years in one of Glasgow’s
most celebrated establishments. He could speak
French as easily as English, for his education had
been acquired in the magnificent French Colonial
College in Oran, and naturally his early com-
panions had all been French.
Alfred Goodwin was nearly a year older than
Tom and Jack. He had no relations alive of whom
he knew, and he earned his living by his skill as a
scientific instrument maker in the employment of
a world-famous firm in Glasgow. He was of ,a


gloomy nature, a pessimist, and in almost every
way the opposite to Chalmers. Yet he too had
dreams, and in them science had no part. He
was a thorough scholar, and perhaps his only hobby
was the study of Oriental lore, religion, and life.
The three comrades were boys in some respects
and aged men in others. Tom and Alfred were
always serious, and Jack was always the reverse.
They loved each other dearly, and, rightly or
wrongly, would have stood up, combined, against
the world, had the unfortunate world conspired
against one of them. But the world, having its own
business in hand, ignored their existence, and thus
they were left to scheme and plan and construct as
they liked, their work being governed only by the
limited funds at their disposal, And invent and
construct they did to a considerable extent, until
they felt they could do anything in those lines
which offered any promise of realising their hopes.
Meanwhile Tom worked away in his room and
soon forgot his disappointment in his interest in
what he was doing. A fortnight before the three
comrades had attended a lecture in the City Hall,
given under the auspices of the Royal Scottish
Geographical Society. The lecturer was a famous
traveller just returned from a journey across the
Sahara from the Mediterranean Sea to Lake Chad,
thence to the Niger country, and down that great
river to the Atlantic Ocean. He gave a very
interesting lecture, but one part of his discourse
took up the boys’ attention to the exclusion of
everything else. He said that since slave-trading
had been abolished practically the only industry
within the confines of the Sahara was gold-dust
collecting, and that; many nomadic tribes made as


much profit out of working some patches of the
richer sands as enabled them to send a caravan
to Tripoli and there exchange the gold for all
the latest products of civilisation.
“ I cannot recommend the Sahara as a field
for British enterprise, or hold out any hopes that
a gold-mining company could pay expenses there,”
the lecturer, who was a distinguished foreigner
himself, concluded. “ The gold is only in patches,
and even the natives cannot tell where to find the
parts worth working, as all the desert is alike. The
absence of water, too, prevents the gold-seekers
from wandering far from an oasis, and even if an
'extremely rich stretch were found it might be
impossible even for the wandering tribes to work
it. No, gentlemen ; it is not yet given to man
to know what that mysterious part of the land
surface of the globe conceals. Rome and Carthage
guessed its secret to some extent, but even before
those Empires other highly developed civilisations
flourished there. The Sahara was not always a
desert, as remnants of many temples and palaces
prove ; but now inscrutable Nature has reclaimed
it as her own, and who among mankind dare dispute
her sway? It is still possible for a well-equipped
camel team to cross from Tripoli to the Niger,
as I have personally proved. The track is well
defined by the bleaching bones of slaves, camels,
and horses, but the man who wanders from that
gruesome trail goes to his doom, There are oases
all along the route I followed, under the guidance
of friendly disposed Bedouins, but off that track
between the Mediterranean and the Niger is a
zone of death.”
The lecturer passed on to describe the fertile


Niger country, but three at least among his audi-
ence heard no more. Each of the three was
wondering if this dread Sahara offered the chance
for which they were looking. It held no terrors
for them, for they were young and enthusiastic ;
and they fully believed that whatever difficulties
it presented could be overcome if they set their
minds to the task of doing so. Truly they had un-
limited confidence in themselves 1 But self-con-
fidence is not necessarily conceit, and healthy youth
never takes risk into consideration.
On their way home that night the comrades were
unusually silent. The same idea had occurred to
all, but they had all received it differently. The
Sahara’s gold—at least, some of it—would be
theirs. Ever since, they had worked with that
object in view, although Alfred had, after some
thought, given it as his opinion that their scheme
was impracticable. Still, he had devoted all his
spare time to assisting his comrades in the making
of some little pieces of mechanism, and now the
contrivance Tom had designed was completed.
The young inventor worked alone in his room.
The night was still early, but all sounds in the
street outside were muffled by the fog. He might
well have been in the heart of the Sahara so far as
the visible presence or evidence of mankind was
concerned. So engrossed was he that he did not
hear the outer door bell ring, and it was with a
start that he turned and saw his mother and his
comrade Jack Chalmers standing beside him. The
lads exchanged greetings, and at once Jack dis-
carded his coat and jacket and began filing at
some little piece of apparatus left in the vice since
his last visit.


“ Can’t you stop your work for a night, boys? ”
Mrs. Allan said. “ You are confining yourselves
far too much, and I fear your health will not stand
it. A sharp walk, even through the fog, might
do you good, and if you went far enough out of
town you might even find fresh air.”
“We are all right, mother,” Tom said. “ I
think we are going out to-night, but we must
wait on Alfred first. Don’t worry about us. We’re
on the trail of something good.”
Mrs. Allan went away ; she knew Tom and his
comrades were trying to do something which a
mere woman could not understand, but she had
every faith in the boys, and only her motherly
fears made her anxious. After her departure Tom
and Jack conversed together until the bell rang
again, and the next moment Alfred had entered
the room.
“ The conspirators are all assembled, I see,”
he remarked, producing some finished brass-work
from under his coat, and laying it on the table-
bench. “Are we still going to the land of gold,
boys? ”
“ I think so,” answered Tom. “It works 1 ”
“ Does it? When did you try it? and where? ”
Alfred was certainly startled into betraying some
excitement.
“ I tried it last night in the room with some
sand I borrowed from the mason’s heap at the new
houses down the street. It worked exactly as we
calculated it would do, and it is now a teal working,
gold-extracting machine.”
“ Hurrah 1 ” cried Jack. “ I see the time of
our lives looming ahead ”
“Do you? ” said Alfred, “ You must have good
eyesight ; I can’t see through the fog.”


“ That is because you are a pessimist,” cried
Jack gaily. “If you were not, you would see that
the possession of a machine that will separate the
gold from the sand means shekels to us ”
“ I don’t quite agree with you, Jack, although
I should like to, We may have a machine to do the
work, but we’ve got to find the work for it to
do, and we can’t bring the Sahara Desert to
Glasgow.”
“ But ‘ if the mountain ’ —in our case the Sahara
—‘ won’t come to Mohammed, then Mohammed
must go to the mountain,’ ” said Jack. Then he
paused for a moment. “ Boys, I didn’t think what
I was saying when I made that quotation,” he went
on; ‘‘we are really going to Mohammed, for all
the Sahara tribes are fanatical Mohammedans.”
“ Well, that doesn’t matter,” Tom observed, still
working at the machine. “We don’t need to have
any dealings with them. We’ll extract all the gold
we want without their help once we get there.”
“ But if they interfere with us? ” said Alfred.
“We can’t fight whole tribes, you know ”
“ We’ll make it our business to keep out of their
way,” Tom answered. “ Fighting is not in our line.”
“ Then how are we to manage without water? ”
Alfred asked, “If we keep out of the road of
the tribesmen, that means we must give all oases
a wide berth,”
“ I think we can manage the water problem,
too,” said Tom, “ What I’m chiefly worried
about is, how are we to get there? We have no
money, and we can’t very well walk to the Sahara.”
“ Oh, we’ll get all the money we need, too,” Jack
exclaimed. “We will tackle each problem as it
comes along, and I don’t think we’ll stick at that.”


“ I’ve no doubt we’ll manage in some way,” said
Tom hesitatingly ; “ but I called on Messrs.
Dunhill, Miller, Bolton & Co. this afternoon and
they weren’t over-anxious to have anything to do
with us. In fact, they gave me a warm time.”
“Of course not,” said Jack. “ They would only
laugh at our wild scheme. They are a practical
people. I hope you didn’t give the idea of the
machine away to them, Tom* Engineers of their
calibre would spot the essential parts quickly.”
“ Well, they didn’t spot anything about our
patent,” Tom laughed grimly. “ I removed the
really important part before I showed them the
thing, but I need not have troubled, for they
didn’t seem to know as much about engineering as
a first year’s apprentice.”
“ Possibly not,” observed Alfred. “ They are
not engineers jat all.) I have had dealings with them
before. They asked our people to quote prices
of an electric motor to drive some patent aero-
plane, and when we asked for particulars as to the
current available for driving the motor, one of
the partners came round and told us that they
wanted an electric motor to 'drive the aeroplane,
and not something to drive the motor.”
“ That must have been Dunhill,” Tom laughed.
“ That is just his style. I suppose he thought an
electric motor was a self-acting clockwork arrange-
ment? ”
“ What he thought none of us could discover,”
went on Alfred, “ and when we explained that it
required an electric current to work it, he merely
said, ‘ Yes, surely,’ and went away, looking as
wise as an owl. We didn’t supply that motor, and
I never heard the outcome.”


“ -Well, their ignorance doesn’t concern us,” said
Jack cheerfully. “ Have you any more cold water
to throw on our idea, Mr. Pessimist? ”
“ We have already gone over every objection
that I can think of, except one,” Alfred said, with
a smile. “ We’ll take it for granted that we’re
on the ground and have overcome everything that
stood in our way. [What, then, if we find there isn’t
really as much gold in the Sahara sands as would
make half a sovereign? ” He looked at his com-
rades in gloomy silence, but there was a suspicion
of a twinkle in his eyes which suggested that he did
not altogether fear the result of a trial.
‘‘We heard the lecturer say that there was gold
finely divided through the desert sands in patches
scattered all over between the coastal ranges and
the Lake Chad country,” Tom replied, “ and some
of my old school books say the same. Besides, Jack
has verified the fact by writing to his parents.”
“ And my father says that there is more gold
in the Sahara sands than is in circulation in the
world,” Jack said. ** And he ought to know, seeing
he deals with the natives who come down to Oran
instead of Tripoli and Algiers for it.”
‘‘ln that case, then, we’ve got to go ahead and
meet all obstacles as they come, and trust to luck
to pull us through where we can’t force things
ourselves,” Alfred summed up. “So far as can
be foreseen we’ve a clear course, although it is
a bigger contract than Messrs. Dunhill, Miller,
Bolton & Co. could carry through.”
“ But we’ll do it,” said Tom quietly. “ One
step at a time will get us there, and as the con-
struction of this gold separator was the first move,
we’ll satisfy ourselves that it can do what we de-


signed it to do, and proceed with the next
move.”
“ Right,” cried Jack. “ We’ll force the scheme
through somehow ; but I’d like to see the thing
working, Tom. How far away is the nearest
sand? ”
“ There is a sand-patch in a park about ten
minutes’ walk from here,” Tom answered quickly.
“ Luckily, the fog will hide us from prying eyes,
for the park is small and surrounded by houses.
Take some of those brass filings with you, boys, and
we’ll get down to the sand at once. My mother
knows we are going out, anyway.”
Picking up the apparatus, Tom led the way out,
and, each carrying a pair of wheels on an axle, his
comrades followed. The fog was, if possible,
denser than ever, and except for the perambulations
of homeless wanderers, all pedestrian traffic had
ceased. Only the clang of car bells and the horn
blast of fog-bound steamers on the Clyde gave
indications that life was everywhere around them,
and they shivered as they groped along the pave-
ment, muffled up to the ears in their coats. Turn-
ing down a side street which Tom knew led to the
little park, they soon reached the vacant shrouded
space not yet seized upon by the übiquitous builder.
“ Count your steps,” cried Tom, “ or we’ll not get
out again until morning. Ah ! here is the sand.”


CHAPTER II
THE FIRST TEST
The boys dropped their loads and knelt down
beside them on the sand which they could feel but
not see. Tom lit an acetylene cycle lamp he had
thoughtfully carried in his pocket, and by its light
the three were enabled to see what they were
doing. Quickly they strung the complete model
together, for they were certainly expert engineers.
Tom had only submitted the tube to Messrs.
Dunhill, Miller, Bolton & Co. because in it
lay the chief idea, and he had assumed that any
engineer would easily understand its application
without seeing the subsidiary mechanism his com-
rades and he had evolved. But now the little
machine was to be put through a test for the
benefit of its makers, and surely no test ever took
place under stranger circumstances.
The front pair of wheels were much smaller in
diameter than the rear ones, and were keyed tight
on the axle. Two steel rods connected the two
systems, between which, set at an angle rising
from under the front axle to a point some inches
above the other, the long tube was suspended in
bearings which allowed it to revolve freely and also
of its angle being altered at will. A worm on the
32


pip- ;
|H| \ * /
a|^‘
'* ;;-i- v
“Tom lit an acetylene cycle lamp.’
To face page 32.


s


first axle gearing into a suitable wheel fitted round
the outside of the tube at a point some distance
from its end provided a motion so that when the
whole contrivance moved forward on its wheels the
tube would revolve in much the same manner as a
propeller-shaft in a steamer. The lip of the tube
lay an inch lower than the wheels supporting it,
but, as already stated, when not working in soft
sand it could be tilted up. But all this was merely
a means to an end, and was the best method
the boys could devise to work in harmony with
the real patent. This lay inside the tube and in
a little cup-shaped receptacle mounted just under
the upper end. The inside of the tube carried a
spiral fashioned out of a strip of best tool steel.
It wound its way around the inner circumference
and completed exactly one and a half turns by the
time it reached the other end. It was fastened
tightly and, of course, revolved with the tube.
When the carriage moved forward, therefore,
the revolving spiralled tube would scoop up the
sand and carry it in a continuous stream up the
spiral, discharging it at the high end in a finely
disseminated state.
The sand would then fall back to the ground
again in a more or less curved spray, but any
material heavier than the sand would fall abruptly
from the mouth of the tube into the receptacle.
A small fan worked off the back wheels made sure
that this cup would not become choked by acci-
dent, or by slightly heavier particles of sand which
did not shoot forward in the general body. It sent
a current of air up into the cup from underneath,
and Tom calculated'that while this would not affect
heavy substances like gold, it would effectually


clear out sand by blowing it over the top. He
had borrowed the idea from the principle of the
dry-blowers used all over the .West Australian
goldfields.
In a few minutes the miniature gold-extractor
was completed, for all the parts had already been
carefully fitted and only some nuts had to be
screwed up.
“ It’s lucky this fog came along to help us,”
Jack observed, as he rose to his feet after finishing
his work, “We would have hundreds of people
crowding round us if they knew what was goingon.”
“ Not to mention the police,” said Alfred. “ I
don’t think they would have allowed us to come
here.”
“ It doesn’t matter in any case,” Tom remarked,
rising from the sand. “ The thing is finished.
Give it a push, boys-; it’s not like some one’s
electric motor, and it needs power behind it.
Hullo I Did you hear anything? ”
All stood erect and listened intently, but only
the dull, muffled sounds of the city came to their
ears. It was not at all likely that any one would
trouble about their affairs even if it had been 9
night different from what it was ; but the excite-
ment of doing something unknown to others had
worked upon the lads, and their invention was fast
becoming a thing of world-wide importance—to
them. And yet it had not been put through its
first working trial I
“ We’ll speak lower, boys,” Tom said, “ I had
forgotten that we’re only forty steps distant from
the roadway, and although I don’t think the
glimmer of our light can be seen, our voices might
be heard.”


“ Well, we’re breaking no laws,” put in Jack,
“ unless, perhaps, we are trespassing.”
“ Put your strength into these wheels and never
mind,” Tom interrupted, “We don’t want to be
here all night.”
And the lads bent down and applied their utmost
pushing powers to the strange “ sand-groper.” It
moved. The geared wheels clicked.; the fan
whirred, and the tube revolved—all as had been
arranged. But something was wrong, and Tom
was quick to realise the fact. The power required
to push the affair was far too much, and they
could never hope to drive a larger machine with
any known form of power, and carry that power
with them. His heart sank.
“ Keep her going, boys,” cried Jack. “ It’s
going easier now. Maybe the scoop was digging
too deep.”
“ You may save your horse-power, young man,”
spoke Alfred, standing upright. “ The thing’s a
failure, and we’ve got to begin our dreams over
again.”
And it looked as if he were correct. Tom had
turned his lamp upon the exit fnouth of the tube,
and the sight almost broke his heart. The little
cup designed to catch the gold was jammed full of
sand, and it was easily evident that instead of
shooting gracefully over so as to miss the cup, the
sand had simply dropped straight from the end of
the tube and the blast from the fan had abso-
lutely no effect upon it. For a full minute they
stood in silence. Who were they that they should
hope to cross the Sahara when they couldn’t cross
a ten yards’ sand-patch?
‘‘We can’t help it, old man,” Alfred said


length, feeling that Tom required all their
sympathy. “We have played the game and lost,
and now we’ll try some other way of making our
fortunes ”
“We havent’ played the game out yet,” cried
Jack encouragingly. “ .We couldn’t see what we
were doing. This is no test at all. We’ll come
back on Saturday afternoon, in daylight.”
Tom did not speak. He couldn’t utter a word.
His dream was ended, and right bitter had been
the awakening. He had felt so sure too. And
had he not tried the working of the tube part
already?
“ Come on, lads ; let’s cart the thing away,”
said Alfred. “ I never thought we could get over
the first step, anyway. Bear up, Tom, it’s not your
fault. Everything worked all right, only—the sand
didn’t obey the law it should have ”
“ It’s mighty heavy sand,” put in Jack, as if the
sand had deliberately done them an injury.
Then Tom laughed hysterically. “ You’ve struck
it, Jack 1” he cried. “It is the fault of the sand !
What a horrible mistake we have made I ” He
began to clean out the cup, and to clear away the
sand from the working parts. Jack at once
assisted, but Alfred shook his head sadly and re-
peated his request to his comrades to come away.
He feared that Tom’s brain had become deranged.
“ We’ll not find sand made expressly for us
even in the Sahara, boys,” he said. “We have
to take things as they are, and not as they might
be. Besides, we are really not interested in the
sand ; it is the gold we are after, and we could
never drive that thing anywhere.”
“ Shut up and give a hand ! ” Tom cried, and


there certainly was no sign of madness in his
words. They were too abrupt for that.
“ Ease the tube out of the sand now,” continued
.Tom, “ and we’ll push the machine over under
an embankment that closes in one end of this sand
pit. Maybe we’ll find some shovels there.”
“What’s the idea, Tom?” asked Alfred, doing
as he had been directed. “ What have you found
out? ”
“ The sand is wet, that’s all, but it is enough.
It is sodden, and too heavy to leap the cup, and it
clogs in the tube and will not separate. Come on,
push 1 ”
And push they did, and now that the tube was
clear of the ground they had no difficulty in running
the strange sand-sifter over to an embankment
hidden by the fog until they ran into it. Here,
as Tom had surmised, they found some shovels
left by the workmen who had been employed in
the sand-pit that dayand although the sand was
comparatively dry here, having only that night’s
dampness upon it, they began to shovel off the top
layer with feverish energy.; they were not looking
for more disappointments 1
“ Now, boys 1 ” cried Tom. “ We’ve cleared
a track of some yards. Let down the tube, Alfred,
and we’ll try again.”
And Alfred lowered the scoop-end of the tube
without a word, and Jack and Tom pushed the
machine into the sand without waiting for his help.
They didn’t require it ; the affair seemed to shoot
forward this time with hardly any effort of strength
propelling it. The wheels went round, the fan
hummed, and the click of the spur-wheels and the
grind of the worm-gearing were as music in their


ears. But another sound was fast rising above
all others ; it was not unlike rain pattering upon
an iron roof. As a matter of fact, it was sand
falling all around in a fine spray, and rattling
against the framework and wheels. And very soon
it filled the air, and their eyes, ears, and nostrils,
and almost suffocated them.
The end of the dry patch was reached, and on
examination the cup was found to be empty ex-
cept for the presence of the head of a hobnail.
All the sand had either been shot over the cup or
been blown over by the air-current. Tom uttered
a shout of joy, and Jack likewise gave vent to his
feelings.
“ Easy there, you fellows,” said Alfred coldly.
“ I don’t see the reason for your great joy, and
anyhow I’m sure there is some one near this time.
I heard something stumble into the pit at the other
end. Hullo 1 Did you hear that? He’s climbed
out again I I’ll see what he wants.” Alfred ran
back into the fog and they heard him flounder
through the sand, but no other sound could they
distinguish, and after a bit their, comrade cried,
“ Sing out, boys ; I don’t know where you are,
and I’ve lost my man.”
Jack led him back by sound, and now they were
greatly excited, for Alfred was positive that a man
had just evaded his grasp and no more, and that
he was still hanging around under cover of the fog.
“ We’ll soon remedy that,” Tom said. “We
have no need to conceal anything, and we are
doing nothing wrong.” He stood up and called
out : “ Hullo 1 If there is any one near we should
be obliged if he could give us a match. We can’t
get a fire kindled and we’re perishing with cold.”


“ Good, Tom,” muttered Alfred. “ I didn’t
dream you had so much savvy in you. He’ll go
away now, when he knows we are homeless out-
casts or beggars looking for some warmth.”
No answer was returned to Tom’s words, and
shortly after they fancied they heard footsteps as
if of some one moving cautiously away. Then
Alfred’s usual pessimism asserted itself. “ .Well,
boys,” he said, “ we know now that we can scoop
up sand and scatter it through the air, but wouldn’t
the gold go the same road? ”
“ No,” promptly returned Tom. “ That nail-
head is proof that our theory is correct. Probably
it came out of the shoe of one of the men working
here through the day, but the fact that we caught
it in the cup shows that the law of gravitation still
acts as it should. But let us hurry now with the
final tests. Scatter all the brass and iron filings
you have on the sand, and we’ll turn our separator
and see if we can collect them again.”
Next minute his words were being carried into
effect. The machine was turned round, and metal
filings scattered over the sandy course. Then they
began pushing it along, and again the air was filled
with stinging sand. Tom was not required to give
his strength, so he shone his lamp into the cup
to watch what happened there.
“ It’s filling 1” he cried. “ The iron and brass
are dropping inside and the sand is flying over the
top ! ” He rushed to the front of the machine and
dropped some nails and some coins on the sand,
and when he got back to his place they were
all in the cup. Not one had been missed.
“ Let me try ! ” cried Jack, as they reached
the end of the sand and again turned the apparatus.


Tom took his place and Jack dropped a sovereign
in front of the scoop. Next moment it was heard
dropping into the cup, which had been emptied for
the next journey.
“ .We’ve got our first gold from the sand now ! ”
he cried jubilantly. “ Come on, boys ; out with
all your gold and give our little fortune-maker a
royal start.”
“ I haven’t any gold,” said Tom ruefully, and
Alfred had to admit that he was in a similar state.
“ And what purpose would it serve, anyway? ”
the latter inquired. “We know that we can pick
up nails and sovereigns if they lie in the track
of the spiralled tube ; but nails are not much use
to us, and we’re not likely to find sovereigns ready
made even in the Sahara. The point is, will it
save particles of gold as fine as dust? ”
“ I knew you would still find fault 1 ” Jack
laughed, “ but I’m ready for you this time. See,
boys ; here is a pill-box containing exactly five
pennyweights of gold dust. I knew Tom was ready
for the test, and to-day I filed down half my watch-
chain. I think the particles are almost as fine
as flour, so we’ll soon see.”
“Be careful, Jack ! ” Tom cried. “ Don’t be
reckless. It may be too fine to save.”
‘‘Why, Tom, I have more confidence than you.
It won’t be lost if the tube picks it up. There
it goes 1 Push straight, boys ! Ah, you’ve got it
all and about half a hundredweight of sand with
it. Keep pushing, boys, until we are sure it has
all passed through.”
As if their lives depended on the straightness
of their course, and the regularity of the motion,
Tom and Alfred pushed the strange little extractor


right to the far end. Not a word was said, and
no attempt was made to examine the cup. The
supreme moment of excitement had come, and
probably never in their lives would they again
experience the same sensation. They stopped ;
they had passed more than a hundredweight of
sand through the tube, and they were blinded by
the flying dust.
“ See if it is there, Jack,” said Tom, and his
voice rang strangely. He hoped, yet he feared.
And no wonder 1
“ No, you look,” Jack answered. “ You are
entitled to see the result first. I’ll bet we’ve got
it jail.”
Alfred said nothing. He hardly expected that
the flour-gold would be found in the cup, but
this was not the moment to express his pessi-
mistic feelings, and he sincerely hoped he was
wrong in his conjecture, for there was nothing
of ‘‘l told you so ” about Alfred. He was true
grit through and through, and his pessimism arose
chiefly from a deeper knowledge of the disappoint-
ments of life. He had had his share of them.
Slightly nervous, Tom took the lamp from Jack
and shone it over the cup. His comrades watched
him, neither venturing to look at the cup for him-
self. Tom suddenly became calm, his hand hold-
ing the lamp ceased trembling, and he turned away.
“ Boys,” he said, without any display of emo-
tion, and absolutely without expression of any kind,
“ the experiment has been a ”
“ Failure,” put in Alfred, obeying his natural
itnpulse in helping any one to realise unpleasant
things.
“ A success,” said Tom. “ Look for yourselves.”


He handed Alfred the lamp, and sitting down upon
the sand, buried his face in his hands. The strain
was over ; the first step in the realisation of their
dream was an accomplished fact. Surely by dint
of perseverance they could negotiate all the others?
His comrades made little comment, the moment
was sacred to them too, and there was no need
to say anything ; the cup contained a yellow heap
of metal which could not be much less than that
which had originally occupied the pill-box. Jack
carefully collected it, and replaced it where it had
formerly rested.
“ We’ll not insult the machine by weighing this,
boys,” he said, “ but we’ll go home and divide
the first gold extracted. If Providence is kind,
and gives us half a chance, it won’t be long until
we, at least, have acquired a more practical know-
ledge of the geography of this world. I see that
Sahara looming big in the near future.” Jack was
always hopeful.
“ Yes,” said Tom. “ Let us get home now ;
it must be late, and my mother will be anxious
about ius.”
“ And we’ve got to plan out the next stage,”
spoke Alfred. “ And that means, I think, a scheme
of finance.”
“ Well, we can tackle that too,” said Jack. “If
we are forced to it we can always sign on as
junior engineers on some old barge trading between
this country and the African coast. Then when
we get all our stuff down to some port, either in
West Africa or Egypt, we can risk the rest.
Besides, my father will help us if we ask him.”
“ But we can’t go and push any contrivance
across the Sahara Desert,” put in Alfred, as they


dissected the machine. “We might never find a
patch containing gold, and we couldn’t carry
water and stores to last us for more than two
days.”
“ There you go again,” laughed Jack, “ always
looking for trouble. Don’t you know, Alf, that the
fellow who looks for trouble always finds it. Now
we’ve already succeeded in doing what we all
agreed was the only thing that might be called
impossible in our scheme, and I’ll bet you a pair
of calipers we’ll do the rest.”
“ I think we will,” said Tom quietly, “ but we
must get away. Remember, we took forty steps
from the roadway to the sand.” He extinguished
his lamp, and carrying all the appliances with them,
they moved away. It took them some time to
discover the exit, but after they emerged into the
street a ten minutes’ walk brought them to Tom’s
home. It Was now very late, and only an occasional
car clanged past them. All the shops were shut
and the streets were entirely deserted.
Mrs, Allan herself admitted the boys to the
house. She said she had not been anxious as
she knew they were well able to take care of
themselves, and would do nothing of which they
might afterwards be ashamed ; but all knew that
she had been alarmed just the same.
‘‘There is a gentleman waiting on you, Tom,” she
continued. “ I told him you were all out together
and wouldn’t be home until late, but he said he
would wait all night, if need be. He told me he
was a friend of yours, so I showed him into your
workroom, and he is there still.”
“ A friend of mine, mother? ” cried Tom. ‘‘ All
my friends are here now. I have no others.”


“ He’s a spy 1 ” exclaimed Jack. “ He’s come
to see what you are doing. Hunt him out, Tom ;
we’ll watch the door here.”
“ You’re excited, Jack, and you too, Tom,” said
Alfred. “ .What does it matter although the whole
world knew what we were doing? Any one can
go and extract gold from the Sahara if he likes, so
far as I knolw.”
“ You needn’t be alarmed, Tom,” Mrs. Allan
said reassuringly, as Tom seemed about to spring
at the door of his workshop room. “ Your father
has been talking with him all the time, and he is
a very nice gentleman.”
“ But he is not a friend of mine 1 ” cried Tom.
“ I’ll soon see what his business is.” He opened
the door of his own room and rushed inside, and
both Jack and Alfred braced themselves for the
struggle which they anticipated in catching the
iJmpostor as he tried to escape.
But they were disappointed. Tom’s voice called
out : “ Come in, boys ; it’s only Mr. Dunhill.”
What a depth of meaning was contained in the
word “ only ” ! Evidently Mr. Dunhill was jiot
feared in any way.
“ Yes, it is Mr. Dunhill,” that gentleman said
as the two boys entered. “ Has any man anything
to say against him? ” He stood up, adjusted his
glasses, and glared around, the while Mr. Allan
was greeting the boys. They had left their loads
outside.
“ We have nothing against him at any rate,”
Alfred answered at once, with great tact. ‘‘We
are all engineers ourselves, and we have heard of
the fame of Messrs. Dunhill, Miller, Bolton & Co.”
“ Then, boys, as you are going to talk business,


I’ll leave you,” Mr. Allan said genially. “ I’ve
been doing my best to entertain Mr. Dunhill until
you returned, and I’ve shown him some of your
models, Tom. He is very much interested in them
and would like you to explain their purpose more
fully than I could.”
“Yes, surely,” agreed Mr. Dunhill. “Know-
ledge is power, and power is bullion, and bullion
is the best thing I know.”
“ I’ve no doubt,” grunted Alfred, who felt he
had to say something. “ But that drawing you
have in your hands is the private property of Tom,
Jack, and I, and it was never meant to be seen by
engineers.”
“And quite right, too,” Mr. Dunhill replied,
laying the drawing in question upon the bench ;
“ but as I don’t happen to be an engineer, and
don’t know whether that plan was a steam-engine
or a sausage-making machine, I presume you will
exempt me from having ulterior motives? ”
“ Certainly,” Tom said, as his father left the
room. “We are glad to meet you, Mr. Dunhill ;
and that is only a drawing of the framework of
a motor-car, or chassis, as it is*usually termed. I
am sure, too, you will excuse the condition of
affairs here. You see, we are not in business at
all ; we are only partners in a speculative venture,
and we do all the work ourselves.”
“ Surely,” spoke the great man. “ What’s the
use of employing outsiders to make a hash of your
work? I always do my own work myself ; it’s
cheaper, and more satisfactory, and that’s why
I’m here to-night.”
“ Please allow me to introduce my comrades and
partners, Mr. Dunhill,” Tom said. “ They’re both


the best of fellows, and they can do anything and
everything.”
“ Dear me I ” exclaimed the prosperous head of
the famous firm after the introductions had cere-
moniously been effected. “ I like you fellows.
Why have I never met you before? We have
lots of jobs which would be put in your way if
your prices were not unreasonable. My firm have
one of the biggest home, colonial, and foreign
businesses in Glasgow. We export and import,
buy and sell anything from a box of pills to a
Dreadnought.”
‘‘We know your firm well, Mr. Dunhill,” Tom
said. “ That is why I called on you to-day. You
haven’t met us in business dealings simply because,
as I have already said, we are not in business
for ourselves. Therefore I fear your visit to-night
is wasted ; we are only engineers in the employ-
ment of others.”
“ Yes, surely ; I know all about that ; I made
inquiries about you by telephone after you left
our offices to-night.”
“ Then why did you express surprise that you
had never met us in the usual business way? ”
asked Alfred, always suspicious.
“ Oh, simply because —well, because I had, for
the moment, forgotten. Do you understand Greek,
my young friend? I could give an explanation in
that language which English doesn’t allow of.”
“ Say it in French and I’ll grasp its subtlety,”
laughed Jack. “I am fairly strong in French.”
“ That’s good enough, young man, when you
are dealing with Frenchmen ; but you are not
now. If I had given the time I wasted in my early
days in learning languages to acquiring a sound


knowledge of engineering, I would be a multi-
millionaire now. As it is lam only a poor beggar
earning but ten or twenty thousand a year, and it
takes me all my time to do even that.”
“ How sad 1 ” muttered Alfred, who had a keen
sense of humour, “You can’t possibly live on
that? ”
“ Oh, I can rub along at a pinch, and some-
thing may turn up any day to alter things. But
I’m not complaining ; though in these hard times
people won’t buy either Cure Alls or Boil Alls,
and as for Kill Alls, the market is stocked with
them. Would you believe it, gentlemen, there is
as much sheep dip lying idle in Australia as would
float a fleet of Dreadnoughts ? ”
“ Yes, times are bad,” sympathised Tom. “ But
what can we do for you? I don’t suppose you have
come here to tell us of your bad luck? ”
“No, certainly not. I came here on a matter
of business. I want to know more about that
scheme you have on hand, and if it will stand a
good independent report by an expert, I’ll put
up the money you want.”
“ But we’re not floating our scheme into a
company,” Alfred said. “ And we’re not going
to allow any fool of an expert to see our patent.
Nor do we want your money ; we can easily get
plenty without any independent reports. In fact,
if we had to trust to the knowledge of most so-
called experts before we could do anything, we’d
have a very poor chance of ever leaving Britain’s
shores.”
“That’s right, Alf,” explained Jack. “We are
convinced ourselves, and that is enough ; we want
no help from any man. Expert report 1 I’ve met


a few of that kind of people already. An
expert never knows anything. Am I not right,
boys? ”
“ Yes, surely,” put in Dunhill, before any one
could answer. “ I wouldn’t plank down a penny
on the strength of what any fool of an expert
said. I’ve had dealings with those animals
before.”
“ But you have just said that you would finance
our scheme if it would stand expert report,” cried
Tom in surprise.
“ Did I say that? If I did I meant something
else. But it doesn’t matter. I came here to tell
you that I am interested in your idea of crossing
the Sahara, and I’ll stand by you.”
“ But I never said we were going to cross the
Sahara ! ” Tom cried. “ I said we were hoping
to extract gold from its sands.”
“ Yes, surely ; that’s what you did say, but I’m
assuming you said the rest, to save time ; it is after
midnight now, you know ; you boys ought to have
been home hours ago. In my young days ”
“ We’ll have to be getting home, Tom,” Alfred
broke in. “ We’ve got to turn out early, you
know ”
“ Young man, when I speak people usually
listen to what I have to say,” reprimanded Dunhill,
glaring at Alfred through his glasses.
“ Perhaps,” answered Alfred, in no way flurried.
“ But you must remember we are not your clerks.”
“ Do you mean to say that it is only my clerks
I talk to? ” demanded the important man.
“ Well, sir,” Alfred said apologetically. “ You
said they listened to you, and who else would? ”
“Ha ! ha ! ha ! ” chuckled Dunhill, much to


every one’s surprise, for they had expected he
would be very angry indeed. “ Well, you may take
it from me as a straight-out fact that the best
men in Glasgow listen to me —at times.” Dunhill
chuckled again, but whether it was at the recol-
lection of the times when the men of Glasgow
listened to him or at something else was not quite
apparent. “ Look here,” he broke out after a
bit, “ what are you fellows intending to do? Tell
me straight out and honour bright.”
“We are going to extract gold from the sands
of the Sahara,” Tom replied. “ And as I told you
at our first meeting, we have invented a machine
for the purpose. We have not yet got sufficient
funds to equip ourselves, and that is why I came
to your place to-day. We’ll manage through some-
how. That is all I have to say.”
“ And quite enough, my boy. Unfortunately,
you struck me at the wrong time to-day. My
partners were there, and they don’t look at life the
same way as I do. They must see at least a ten
per cent, commission on a man before they’ll speak
to him, and in matters of business I’ve got to
fall in line with them. But now lam a private
individual, and I don’t care a used postage stamp
for any man. I am interested in the Sahara, and
if you’ll let me into your scheme, I’ll fork out
my shekels in seeing you through.”
“ But we can’t tolerate expert reports,” said
Tom. “We haven’t time to waste ”
“ Hang expert reports 1 ” roared Dunhill. “We
got one in to-day for which we paid fifty guineas,
and it stated that the concentrated food submitted
to him by us was the most marvellous life-sus-
tainer that ever came under his notice.”


“ Well, surely that statement was worth fifty
guineas? ” Alfred said.
“ It would have been if it had been our Boil
Alls he was talking about,” sighed Dunhill. “ But
the blamed fool was reporting on our Kill Alls,
the stuff we export to Australia and the Argentine
as sheep dip 1 ”
‘‘We understand your feelings,” said Tom sym-
pathetically. “ The same great expert would say
just as readily for another fifty guineas that the
concentrated food you advertise is sudden death
to every form of life that comes within a hundred
yards of it? ”
“ He might,” Dunhill admitted, “ and the great
British public would believe him too. No, none
of your experts for me. I’d rather trust my own
instincts in things I did not know than go by what
an expert said.”
‘‘ But I thought you said at first that you wanted
an expert report on our ideas before helping us? ”
put in Alfred. “ The statement you have just
made doesn’t agree with that idea.”
“ Never mind, I wasn’t thinking for myself when
I said that ; I was only using the empty phrase-
ology adopted by most men when they don’t know
what they’re talking about. I copied it from
my partners. The fact is, boys, I know nothing
of business, but I have a fairly good knowledge
of human nature, and I have learned that no matter
how little I may know of any special matter, the
man with whom I am dealing invariably knows
less. But I didn’t come here to talk platitudes.
I am a fool, but my saving grace is that I know
it. Now, I don’t know anything about your scheme,
but I liked you, Mr. Allan, the moment I saw


you, and I came here to do a private deal in which
Messrs. Dunhill, Miller, and Bolton have no
interest. To put it briefly, I’ll provide any
financial assistance you require, and hang the
results 1 ”
The boys were silent for a time ; they knew
now that the first step towards the realisation of
their dreams was accomplished, and they .“were
very cautious of admitting any one else into their
confidences.
“ Are we to understand, Mr. Dunhill, that you
are willing to help us in our projects, financially,
without any guarantee? ” Tom asked at length.
“ Yes, surely,” replied Dunhill. “At what price
will you admit me into partnership? I don’t know
what you really intend to do, but I like you boys,
and I believe you’ll carry through anything you
undertake, and the Sahara has an interest for me
which you may understand some day.”
“ But our scheme is very much a wild dream,”
said Alfred deprecatingly.
“ I’ve been a dreamer all my life, young man,”
came the answer, “ and I hope to keep on
dreaming.”
“ Then you don’t (want an expert report? ”
asked Tom, “ and will risk even your money on
something you don’t understand? ”
“ You’ve spoken like an oracle, my boy. What
are the damages I’ve to pay to enter this secret
society? ”
“ The entire cost of everything,” said Alfred
promptly, fearing that his comrades might be soft-
hearted.
“ And about how much will that be? ” asked
Dunhill, producing his cheque-book.


“ Oh, not very much,” Tom laughed. “ You
see, we can make everything required ourselves,
and all the expense is for the raw materials, and
our passages to some port from which we can
reach the Sahara sands.”
“ I see. Then there are only three of you, I
understand. Now I wish to be the fourth and
final member. Put a figure on the costs.”
“ We’d have to calculate things first,” said Tom.
“ We never took into account the fact that we
might get help ; you see, there are so many appli-
ances we could purchase if we had the money
which would save a great deal more work on
our part than would equal the cost.”
“ But supposing you did nothing yourselves that
could be just as well arranged outside, what figure
would cover things? Tell me straight out, boys.
I am more interested than you may believe.”
“Say a thousand pounds?” suggested Alfred,
who certainly had no reason for stating that figure.
“ All right, my lad, a thousand will buy me a
fourth share in your enterprise. Now add on what
you consider would be ample to recompense for
your sufferings if I were allowed to go with you
and share in the actual joys and sorrows of your
work? ”
“ But you couldn’t do that,” Tom cried. “We
might do all sorts of reckless things. WeTe only
boys, you know, and we could never make you
as comfortable as you can be at home.”
Mr. Dunhill smiled. “ Young man,” he said,
“ I have been away from home before this. I
have circumnavigated this weary world more than
once, and I have a slight acquaintance even with
the Sahara. I can assure you that no discomfort


you can stand will knock me out. I’m not an
old man, and although a sojourn in this city of
smoke has made me more rotund than graceful
I am still as hard as nails, and I can easily demon-
strate ”
“ Oh, we can see you are an exceptionally
strong man,” Alfred broke in, “ but you can also
see we are not much more than boys. We are
very grateful to you for your offer of financial
help, although I didn’t really mean that we needed
a thousand pounds. But we are quite serious
about going to the Sahara, and I don’t quite
see how you could adapt yourself to our ideas
of things, for, without any disrespect, I may tell
you that Tom here is absolute chief.”
“Well, you might go round the world several
times and not find one more suitable. I don’t
want to be anything more than one of yourselves,
but I do want to join you and I am willing to
pay for the privilege.”
“But why? ” Tom asked. “ .We might be silly
dreamers for all you know.”
“ Haven’t I said already that I am a dreamer
myself? Boys, you cannot understand me fully,
but believe me, I am on the square all right.
I know something about the Sahara, for I have
pierced it a little bit from the Egyptian side. And
I want to penetrate its fastnesses again. Boys,
I like you, and I’ll take my place among you as
the humblest. I want to get away into the wilds
again. I want to forget Messrs. Dunhill, Miller,
Bolton & Co., and I don’t care although Kill
Alls, Cure Alls, and Boil Alls drop out of
the market. This country makes me feel a slave,
as in fact I am, for I must, parrot-like, repeat


what my partners say, and I have long since
lost the habit of thinking for myself. Take me
with you, boys, and you’ll find me as young as
yourselves, and as ready for the most reckless
adventures as any of you. Besides, my knowledge
might be useful, and whether you get gold or not,
I’ll not complain about the cost, which, of course,
I’ll stand.”
“ Have you any reason apart from what you
have told us for wishing to join us? ” Jack asked.
“ I have ; but it is quite honourable, and if
you’ll take me I’ll tell you all about it. With
force of numbers I could never carry out my
desires, but with you I see just a chance. Don’t
deny me, boys ; I really believe you will find me
useful, and my cheque-book is ready.”
“ All right,” said Tom, “ you can come ; but
remember, you must not expect to be treated
differently from the rest of us, and we cannot
make ourselves responsible for your safety.”
“ Then here is a cheque, my young comrades.
It is blank, so you can fill it in for what you like.
Don’t be afraid to spend money and double the
total amount you calculate you require. Good-
night ; I’ll expect you’ll give me notice of your
meetings.” Mr. Dunhill shook hands with all
and departed, leaving his cheque lying upon the
bench.
“We can send it back to him to-moribw,”
said Tom. “By that time he’ll have changed
his mind again.”
“ I don’t think so,” Jack answered. “ I think
there is more in our new comrade than appears
on the surface, and there may be some points on
which he does not agree with his partners. Jove I


I wonder who it was that hung around us while
testing our machine to-night? ”
“It doesn’t matter,” put in Alfred. “ We’ve
really negotiated everything now —unless Mr.
Dunhill stops payment of his cheque.”
“ You pessimist ! ” laughed Jack. “ I’ll bet he
won’t do that. It is now about one o’clock in the
morning, however, and time we were out of here.
Come on, Alf ; we’ll meet again to-morrow night.”


CHAPTER 111
SAHARA BOUND
“ Gentlemen, I repeat, spare no expense. Don’t
waste your time making any article necessary
which can be purchased.”
“ But we know the value of money, Mr.
Dunhill,” reasoned Tom, “ and we don’t like
buying any parts we can make ourselves. Our
time is of no value and we can mak'e almost
everything required.”
“ Your time is of more [value than my paltry
money, my boys, and just remember that every
day we save means a day sooner on the field of
operations. Hang expense 1 I say. I’ll meet it.
Only let us get away ”
“But you have never even seen our model
working,” said Alfred. “ ,We might be cranks
for all you know.”
“ I’ll admit I’m a fool, boys, taking everything
together, but I do know something about human
nature, and I’ll stake my life on you fellows.
I don’t want to see any model working'. You
have told me it does work and that is enough.
Let us get ahead with the programme now as
fast as possible, using your brains, my cash, and
as much of other people’s labour as we can
possibly obtain. Here’s another cheque.”


“No, no, we don’t require any more money,
Mr. Dunhill. We can’t even qse the five hundred
pounds we drew on your first cheque,” said Tom.
“ -We have now completed all our plans and our
money is sufficient.”
The four partners were discussing things in
Tom’s room on the Saturday following the test
of the model. Mr. Dunhill’s cheque had been
filled in for £5OO, and cashed, and now they were
to decide upon the succeeding) stages of their
scheme. Mr. Dunhill himself was more en-
thusiastic than the other three adventurers, and
this fact puzzled Alfred not a little. Certainly
the great man had already proved to be a fine
fellow, and they all liked him, although, as yet,
they didn’t pay much attention to what he said.
They took him to be a good-natured, irrespon-
sible man, of thorough education and knowledge
on all subjects except that of engineering, and
they could see that at heart he was as young as
they were.
“ Well, Mr. Dunhill, Alfred, and Jack,” Tom
resumed, “ here are the plans I have prepared.
Let us consider them, and 'make alterations ,as
we think fit. First, this drawing represents our
gold-separating device, slightly altered from the
model to allow of its being mounted on a more
suitable carriage. This carriage is simply a motor-
car chassis, for I have thought that it would be
more satisfactory, as well as less tiresome, to
use other power than our own strength to push
the carriage through the sand, and we can make
everything ourselves but the engines.”
“You’ll do nothing of the sort,” said Dunhill.
“ You see about your extracting appliances, and


I’ll get one of the best motor-car builders in or
near the city to provide the chassis to your
order.”
“ This, then, is the complete plan, Mr.
Dunhill,” said Tom quietly. “We meant to
build it ourselves, but it will certainly save time
if it is made for us. You will observe that the
base is exceptionally long ; that is to allow of
space for carrying stores and petrol, and our
extractor fits in the centre and is driven off the
engine shaft.”
“ Yes, surely ; so you mean to cross the Sahara
on a motor-car? ”
‘‘No, no, we couldn’t carry petrol to do that,”
said Tom. “We merely mean to drive our con-
trivance through the sand by engine-power instead
of pushing it. .We’ll have a base, of course,
where we’ll keep stores and petrol, and leave our
gold every time we return to it.”
“ But what is to hinder us crossing the big
sand-patch? ” asked Dunhill. “ I presume some
of you boys can navigate? And if tribes with
camel teams can cross, why can’t we? ”
“ But they doubtless follow a defined track
along a line of oases,” put in Alfred. “ And that
plan is of little use to us, for we want to strike
the unknown gold-belts, and it is not likely that
we’ll find them anywhere near oases.”
■“ Well, won’t we find these patches just as
well by cutting right across? We can tow a tank
of petrol behind on another pair of wheels with-
out a great deal of trouble ; and I’m open to wager
that we’ll be able to barter for petrol at any
of the oases on the great caravan routes, for I
happen to know that there are several motor-cars


running about in Timbuktu. Our firm sent a
couple there last month.”
“ Oh, there are motor-cars in Timbuktu, I
know,” said Jack, “ and in all the important centres
of the French army of occupation down that
way ; but I expect they went in by Senegal, or
perhaps by the Niger River. I know of one case,
however, in which a car crossed from north to
south. The father of one of my school chums
in Oran was a French officer, whose regiment
was stationed somewhere down on the Niger.
AVhile in Oran he bought a car, and when he had
to rejoin his regiment, instead of travelling to
Marseilles and joining a boat there for Senegal,
as is the usual way, he, with another officer, sent
the car by rail right over the Algerian ranges
to a place called Figig and from there struck)
right across the desert. I know they managed
'"all right, for my chum received a cablegram
only a week later announcing their safe arrival.”
“ Surely,” said Dunhill. “ iWhat was to hinder
them? And we can cross the bally old desert,
too. How far will a gallon of petrol carry the
four of us with the extractor working? ”
“ I hardly calculated upon flying across the
Sahara in that way,” Tom said ; “ but the idea
is .pleasing, and if we could scoop a furrow all
the way with our separator we might find some
abnormally rich patches. But that is departing
from what we know is practical, and taking risks
we never calculated upon.”
‘‘Dear me, boys I ” cried Dunhill. ‘‘Am I
actually the most venturesome partner in this
concern? You’ll have to give me a testimonial
to that effect to show Miller and Bolton. They’lf
never believe it.”


“ But surely you haven’t told your partners of
our scheme? ” asked Alfred. “ f We must preserve
secrecy now.”
“My boys, I would no more think of telling
my partners than I would of publishing our inten-
tions in the Glasgow Herald. But why can’t we
cross the Sahara? ”
“ kWe can,” Tom announced. “ A gallon of
petrol will carry us twenty miles under ordinary
circumstances, and probably fifteen through the
sand if our tyres are large enough to support the
weight. The actual power required to scoop up
the sand as we skim along is not really much,
for, of course, we should only scrape the surface
until we found an auriferous bit of ground. I
calculate, therefore, that one gallon of petrol
would carry us about thirteen or fourteen
miles.”
“ Then a hundred gallons in a tank hauled
behind would mean as many hundreds of miles,”
put in Dunhill. ” Design a tank, my boy, and
I’ll get one made on a ball-bearing system of
wheels, which won’t affect our speed much in
towing it. Calculate the size we need to carry
about a couple of hundred gallons. Give me
the required power of our car engine, and that
drawing of the framework. You get ahead with
your separator and leave the rest to me. Of
course you must give up your positions now where
you are employed, for our time is too precious
to waste on other people’s work. Draw your wages
from me, and begin saying goodbye to your
friends discreetly.” Mr. Dunhill had certainly
begun to hustle, and the change in his manner
surprised the boys tremendously. He was no


longer the vacillating person they had first met.
He was now the leading spirit almost among
them.
“ Very well, sir,” Tom agreed. “If you will
attend to those matters, we can have a full-
size gold-extractor built before next Saturday,
but after it is fitted into the chassis I should
like to make an aluminium sheath to enclose the
entire car, open, of course, at the top, but with
means of closing the upper part, too, if we were
rushed by some nomadic tribe. We would thus
be able to ignore them and get away, for they
couldn’t stop us or follow us, and we should have
a certain amount of protection against their
spears.”
“ Bullets,” interrupted Mr. Dunhill. “ Civili-
sation has reached even the Sahara, young man,
and if that sheath is meant to be an armour
protection against eventualities it will have to be
made strong enough to resist dum-dum bullets.
But I agree with yo(u : make our car a sort of
snail—only see that it can travel faster—with its
house on its back.”
“ Then we have only One other matter to
arrange,” Tom said, “ and that is, to what place
should we ship everything? .We can enter the
Sahara from Egypt, the West Coast of Africa, or
Morocco, Algeria, or Tripoli on the north.”
“ Let us take the nearest point,” Mr. Dunhill
advised, “ and cut straight across the desert to
the Nile, taking in the Lake Chad country ( on
the way.”
“By Jove ! you’re eager for a big contract 1 ”
Alfred gasped. “ You talk of travelling over some
thousands of miles of unknown desert as if we


were merely going out for a run on a well-made
country road ! ”
“ Which is really all we are going to do,”
answered Mr. Dunhill. “ Only the road which
we are going to travel has been in existence for
more centuries than man knows, and its course
is marked with skeletons instead of sign-posts
or mile-stones.”
‘‘You seem to know a surprising lot about the
Sahara,” put in Jack. “ How did you get all
your information? Have you crossed it before? ”
‘‘No, lads, I haven’t crossed it, but I’ve
pierced it a little from the Nile side, and it is to
the point where —well —where I left off that —that
I am anxious to reach from this side. I’ll tell
you the story later, boys, but not now. Only
let me caution you to say nothing of our plan to
any one ; there is an agency of terrific power which
will work against us if our object becomes known.”
“ You surely don’t mean the French authori-
ties? ” Jack asked. “They don’t care what we
do so long as we can look after ourselves.”
“ It is not the French authorities I fear,” Mr.
Dunhill replied. “It is a power that only
tolerates the French occupation because it hides
their own doings, and which will throw off the
supposed French control when the time comes as
easily as a dog shaking water from its back.”
“ I don’t think so, sir,” said Jack stoutly. “ The
French soldiers in Algeria and the country beyond
are as fine a body of men as exists anywhere,
and I would just like to see the kind of men
who could do as you say with them. Why, they
are the pick of all France and ”
“ Just ease off steam for a bit, young man.


I wasn’t saying a word against the French soldiers,
but I assure you that the power of the people
they will have to deal with some day is even
greater than all that France can put against it.”
“ Dear me, Mr. Dunhill,” said Tom, “ you must
be thinking of a possible combination of the tribes
of the desert. Surely a first-class European Power
doesn’t need to fear even that? ”
“ My boy, the Sahara is not all a desert, as
most people think, and the Sudan is anything l
but the waste encountered by our own brave
soldiers during the war which terminated in the
Battle of Omdurman. And more than a decade
has passed since then, during which the power I
fear has remained ominously silent.”
“ But didn’t our troops smash the Mahdi, or
Khalifa, or whatever you call him at that battle? ”
said Alfred. “ And cannot machine-guns counter-
balance superior numbers, supposing the Dervishes
should rise again? ”
“ Boys, you are on the wrong track. I never
said it was the tribes we fought during that cam-
paign I feared. I am not good at expressing
myself, I know, and my business life in Glasgow
has pretty well made me a sort of parrot-like
machine, useful only to repeat phrases used by
my partners, the exact meaning of which I do
not understand. But if you will try to grasp
what I mean, and forget that I am a fool in other
matters, I think I can explain, although not in
five minutes. It is still early. I’ll go and phone
up the manager of the Company’s works, at his
own house ; he is a friend of mine, and I’ll get
him to undertake our work and rush it through
at once. Afterwards, if you will honour me, I


should like you out to my place to dinner, and
then I will tell you everything, and why I am
so interested in your work.”
“ But we couldn’t think of inflicting ourselves
upon you in that way, Mr. Dunhill,” Alfred expostu-
lated. “We are only boys, and you must have
many social engagements to occupy your time.”
“ Boys, you are my partners now, and there
is nothing in life in which I am more interested
than in you. My sister knows all about you
already and will be delighted to see you. So
come.”
“ All right,” Tom said. “ We’ll put in an
appearance at any hour you say, if you tell us
where.”
“ Dear me I Don’t you know where I stay? I
thought every person in Glasgow knew my
address.”
“ Wait I ” cried Alfred abruptly ; “ I believe
we know too. You live out in Cathcart, in that
funny old house ”
‘"Enough, my lad, you’ve got me. I live in
‘ that funny old house in Cathcart,’ as you term it.”
“ Then you are Professor Dunhill 1 ” cried Tom,
suddenly realising many things hitherto inexplic-
able to him.
“ Guilty again, partner, but believe me it is
really not my fault. I am forced to live two
lives. I make my actual living by being senior
partner in the business firm you know, and I
spend any surplus in studying ancient history,
especially that of Egypt. One world, that of
commerce, knows me as the more or less ignorant
partner of Messrs. Dunhill, Miller, Bolton & Co.,
and another world respects me as the erudite


professor. lam a sham, boys ; I know nothing of
engineering, and the little I know, say, of Egypt-
ology is infinitesimal.”
“ But that little you know of Egypt and its
past, sir, is probably more than any other
man knows,” said Jack. “We know all about
you now, but we never dreamt before that you
were the famous Professor Dunhill.”
“ Don’t say famous, my boy ; I am quite con-
scious of my own ignorance, but I am terribly
anxious to learn more. In business circles it is
my object to appear to know more than I actually
do ; but in the study of ancient history I can’t
pretend ; it is too sacred to me. But to-night
we’ll talk over things among ourselves, for Egypt-
ology must loom large with us in the near future.
Take great care of yourselves, boys, for, believe
me, the enemies I dread are well represented
even in fog-stricken Glasgow, as I know to my
cost. At seven o’clock to-night in my house.”
Mr. Dunhill departed, and the lads were left
pondering over new possibilities. They had
thought that their chief trouble lay in getting to
the gold zones of the Sahara, but now it seemed
as if other dangers had arisen.
,f ‘ Have you any idea of the special trouble
we are likely to run into, Jack? ” Tom asked,
after some general talk.
“ Well, all the tribes are Mohammedans, and
if the followers of the Prophet arose from India,
or even Bagdad, to the Niger in one direction,
and from Turkey down through Algeria and
Tripoli to Central Africa in the other, they cer-
tainly could give any single European Power a
hard tussle. My father has often said so ”


“ But we spoiled the dream of a holy war when
we recaptured Khartoum,” said Alfred. “ And
now the tribes are all scattered again and mind-
ing their own business.”
“ I don’t think that was what could be called
a war between Mohammedan and Christian
though,” said Jack. “ You see, we were merely
helping Egypt to recover her lost territory, and
I think the Turkish flag was planted alongside
the Union Jack when we recaptured Khartoum .
Oh ! I know what Mr. Dunhill feared now. He
means the Senussi. Why did I not think of that
before? My father has often talked of them.”
“ The Senussi I ” exclaimed both Alfred and
Tom simultaneously. “ Who and what are they? ”
“ I don’t know ; but they form the largest
secret society in the world, and their headquarters
is somewhere on the desert between Algeria and
Egypt. I don’t know anything about them, but I
do know that the French authorities are very
careful not to offend them.”
“By Jove 1 boys,” said Alfred, “ our trip is
beginning to promise some fun, and perhaps there
is little wonder why the Sahara has been left
alone with its gold so long. It looks as if we
were about to start on a hunt for trouble.”
“ Croaking again I ” laughed Tom. “ What do
we need to care for Senussi or any other wild
beasts? We are not going to interfere with them.
In fact, we mean to keep as far away as possible
from all the tribes, and if any meddle with us
we can both fight and run away.”
“ I’m not howling out,” Alfred said, “ but I
think it is as well to know beforehand the dangers
and oppositions we are likely to meet. We’ll


have to carry rifles and revolvers now, as well
as petrol, and our trip has changed from a picnic
into a warlike expedition.”
“ Well, what does it matter? ” Jack laughed.
“ We’ll have all the more fun. Anyhow, Mr.
Dunhill seems to know everything, and if he is
ready to take all risks, I don’t think we need
object. We are young and free, and he—poor
beggar !—is neither.”
“ Well, we have promised to dine with him to-
night, so you fellows had better go home and make
arrangements for the ceremony,” Tom said. ‘‘ I
never dreamt our new partner was Professor Dun-
hill, but I can assure you, boys, we are honoured
beyond measure in being asked to dine with him ;
the Lord Provost was with him last night, and
the French Deputation to this country the night
before, while the German scientists at present on
tour through Britain were his guests last week.
Things are looking up with us, boys ; so remember
that we are ourselves and as good as anybody,
and that he is the famous Professor, and not
merely the head of a firm for which we have
no respect.”
‘‘Don’t worry, old man,” laughed Alfred.
“ We’ll go home and wash our faces, and in
other ways prepare for the great event, and we’ll
meet you at the Central Station at the 6.30 train.
The run only takes fourteen minutes, I think.”
The boys went their several ways, and Tom
hastily prepared some drawings, and then made
hurried alterations in his toilet and rushed to the
station.
His comrades were already there, but Jack
seemed to be somewhat excited. “ Read that,”


he said, as they entered the suburban train. “We
have just seen it, and it seems to point to a warm
time for us.” He handed Tom an evening news-
paper and indicated a paragraph which read :
FRANCE AND THE TOUAREGS.
A Sharp Fight.
Colomb Bechar (Tunis), Monday.
Captain Cancel, commanding the Touat Camel Corps, while
reconnoitring in the heights of Lerg with iBo men, came into
collision, on December 9th, with a band of Touareg horsemen
300 strong. A fight took place which lasted all night. In spite
of a spirited resistance, the Touaregs suffered serious losses.
They were pursued and dispersed in the so-called waterless
district, leaving behind them eleven dead and a quantity of arms
and stores. They succeeded in bearing away others of their
comrades who were dead or w’ounded.
The band was on its way to reinforce Abidin, a hostile Mar-
about. Abidin, who has recently made raids in the Soudan, on
30th November attacked a force of Soudanese troops, who re-
sisted heroically and suffered great loss.
As a result of the last engagement, Captain Cancel captured
100 camels which Abidin had raided in Sahara and was sending
to his camps. Several men of the escort were killed and others
captured.
This important success cost the French five native soldiers
killed and three wounded. It is rumoured that the lieutenant of
the Saharan Company was also killed. —Reuter.
“ But who are the Touaregs? ” asked Tom after
he had perused the article in question.
“ I don’t know,” Alfred replied. “ They might
be the Children of Israel, or a tribe of lost China-
men ”
“ They are the Lords of the Sahara,” Jack put
in, * £ and well the French officers know them. They
conquered all the tribes right down to the Niger
River, and, I believe, built the town of Timbuktu.”


f ‘ Our little scheme is beginning to look as
if it were of more importance than we thought,”
was Tom’s comment. “ All the same, we’d better
not tell Mr. Dunhill about this, for if he draws
away our funds, we’ll not be able to do much for
many months. Still, I would like to know what a
Marabout is, and a Touareg, and this question
of the Senussi is also of great importance. Jove !
boys, we seem to have become mixed up in what
will be world’s history later.”
“ Well, dry up meanwhile ! ” said Alfred.
“ We’re going to dinner and we are still in
Britain.”
Mr. Dunhill met them at the station and a
few minutes’ walk brought them to his house, a
large, curiously constructed mansion which was the
supposed home of mummies and other relics of
the dead past to most people residing in the
vicinity. Of course, such people were wrong, for
Mr. Dunhill’s house, inside, was very modern in-
deed. Miss Dunhill was an extremely pleasant-
faced lady, and she welcomed the boys in a
manner which at once made them feel at home.
She was greatly interested in 'their schemes, and
strangely enough, showed much enthusiasm.
After dinner, the four partners adjourned to
Mr. Dunhill’s “ den ” as he called his smoking-
room, and then began the discussion that was
to enlighten all as to what might be before
them.
“ Partners,” began Mr. Dunhill, lighting his
cigar, after having ascertained that his guests did
not smoke, “ I need hardly begin my speech by
saying how glad lam to have you here to-night. I
think you know that I am more pleased to be in


your company than in that of Glasgow’s so-called
famous men. But, boys, I must begin by saying
words which will stagger you a bit, and as I
am not now in the offices of Messrs. Dunhill
Miller, Bolton & Co., you may depend upon
what I say. I should never have asked you,
nor any other people, to attempt to cross the
Sahara Desert with me. I have an idea what
that great stretch is like, and the dangers which
may be encountered, and frankly, I don’t know
any one who would tackle the contract apart from
ourselves. We must risk striking oases for water ;
we must keep clear of all the nomadic tribes : we
must do a thousand things, and must not do
another thousand things. I tell you that danger
confronts us everywhere. Are you still of the
idea to go? ”
“ Certainly,” said Tom. ‘‘You haven’t yet
given us any reason why we should not. There is
danger everywhere, even in Glasgow. One might
be knocked down by a tram-car, or the house
one was living in might go on fire, or many other
things might happen to make life here risky. We
have already counted the cost of our little trip,
and now that you have provided the cost, we are
going to carry it through. We’ll risk Senussi,
Touaregs, and Marabouts, and everything else
that the old desert can bring along against us.”
“ Then you know about the Senussi? ” cried
Mr. Dunhill, jumping to his feet in his excitement.
“ Neither Alfred nor I heard the name until
to-night, but Jack knows something about them,
and we are very eager to learn who and what
they are.”
“ You mentioned Touaregs and Marabouts


also? ” went on Mr. Dunhill. “ Who told you
about them? ”
“ Jack ; he knows a lot about North African
matters, but he isn’t exactly a professor. He
told us that a Touareg is a wonderful fighter,
and that a Marabout is a sort of holy man or priest,
but he couldn’t say much about the Senussi except
that they were a secret society.”
“ Most wonderful 1 ” Mr. Dunhill exclaimed.
“ I didn’t dream that so much was known in
Glasgow, and you fellows only boys, too ! I fear
that my knowledge in those matters is as much
out of date as is my knowledge of engineering.
But surely, boys, the knowledge you have is not
shared by everyone? ”
“Oh no, Mr. Dunhill,” Tom said. “ Jack told
us, and he was brought up in Algeria, and so
couldn’t help knowing something of North African
affairs. As for myself, I have heard the names
before, but they were meaningless. Tell us all you
know about Senussi, Touaregs, and Marabouts.”
“ Certainly ; to begin with the least important,
the Touaregs are the remnants, or rather the
descendants of the Berber tribes who practically
ruled Africa from the Mediterranean shores down
to the Congo and the Niger. They founded
Timbuktu, and conquered the famous Hausa
people, and perhaps may yet reassert their absolute
independence of France, for they are born fighters.
They roam the desert at will, fear is unknown to
them, and, leaving out the fact that they (are
fanatical Islamites, they are very decent fellows.
All the same, I hope we don’t meet them.
“ The Marabouts are, as you know, a sect of
priests ; they preach the doctrine of the Koran


and are held to be sacred by all the desert
wanderers. But they are a tremendous power
in the land, and were they to preach a holy war
it is extremely doubtful if France could continue to
hold its sway throughout the Sahara. They, of
course, are learned men, and they know too much
to cause any disturbance until the exact moment
arrives when circumstances are entirely in their
favour. But the Senussi ! Boys, I don’t know how
to tell you about them. I have been afraid all
along that you might stumble across some know-
ledge of that mysterious sect, and change your
minds about our expedition. It was only to-day
that I felt man enough to resolve to tell you
everything ; for I like you, boys, and —well, I’ll
not blame you if you yet change your minds.”
“We won’t,” said Alfred. “We know there
is danger to be faced. We saw to-night’s paper,
and we were not going to tell you for fear you
might draw out ”
“ Ha, ha, ha ! ” laughed Mr. Dunhill. “ You
were afraid| I [might shirk the business? Well, that
is good, seeing that my chief worry was that you
might realise the true aspect of things and drop
the scheme yourselves. I saw this evening’s papers,
boys, and I know well what the news signifies. As
I told you this afternoon, France and Great Britain
combined may find their hands full if the Senussi
rise, and the Touaregs are only an insignificant,
unruly part of them.”
“ Then who and what are the Senussi? ” asked
Tom. “We may as well know now.”.
“ The Senussi are a sect of Mohammedans, the
followers of Sidi Mohammed ben Ali es-Senussi,
an Algerian born some time in the closing years


of the Turkish rule. He was a great and good
man so far as can be ascertained, but his descend-
ants have not followed his teachings, according
to our views. He established a sect of Moham-
medans which, although forced, then, to find its
headquarters at Siwa, an oasis in the Libyan desert,
has since spread its influence throughout Asia,
Africa, and Europe.”
“ But (didn’t we break up all that at
Omdurman? ” asked Alfred.
“ No, we smashed there the followers of a
Dongola boatman who called himself the Mahdi,
but according to the Senussi, he was an impostor,
and they certainly did not help him. If they
had, history most likely would have been different.
But I am not going to force upon you a lecture
on the Senussi. It is quite enough to say that
they comprise among them some of the most subtle-
minded thinkers of the near Orient, and all the
great fighting tribes such as the Touaregs. At
the signal from the head of the Order, whom I
suppose we should term the real Mahdi, three or
four hundred millions of men would rise, in China,
India, Persia, Turkey, Egypt* Algeria, Morocco,
the Sahara, and elsewhere. And that signal will be
given some day, and I am speaking now not as a
partner in a business firm, but as one who has
knowledge not yet known to the world. The
Senussi are biding their time. France knows that,
and the British and Egyptian Governments are
also aware of the fact.”
“ But why do we need to worry about them? ”
asked Tom. “If they are waiting for the sign to
rise against the civilised nations of the earth,
and have ignored the chances they had during


the Sudan War, why should they suddenly use their
strength against four harmless men who have no
quarrel with them and who neither know nor care
anything ,about them? ”
“ There should be no reason why they should
interfere with us,” Mr. Dunhill replied, “ were
it not that we greatly interfere with them. You
see, boys, they are, or claim to be, the real
descendants of the Prophet, and they fancy they
are sacred people who will be defiled by being
in the vicinity of those who know not Mohammed
and the laws laid down in the Koran. The Senussi
must not live where the ground has been polluted
by the foot of the unbeliever. He must move on
to other quarters. Well, he has been moving on for
some time now until he has not much more room
to move ; consequently, he doesn’t exactly love any
“ dog of a Christian ” who dares defile the sacred
territory, now the Sahara and the adjoining Libyan
Desert, and the regions farther south known as
Wadai, Darfur, and their dependencies. When the
leaders, who live at the oases in the Libyan Desert
known as Jarabub and Siwa —at least, so far as
we know —hear of our intrusion into their domain,
they will instruct the tribes faithful to the cause
to deal with us, and that will end the whole
matter.”
“ Very interesting,” said Alfred, “ and very
comforting ; but knowing all this, why are you
anxious to go? I don’t see any fun in being
butchered to make a Senussi holiday.”
“ Nor I,” Mr. Dunhill quickly answered. “ But
I am quite ready to take all risks, trusting to you
boys to pull through somehow, because I have
another object in view, and it is to tell you about


that that I asked you to come here to-night. Now
let me tell my story, as briefly as I can, for you
will gather the details later. Down towards the
sources of the Nile the country is not the desert
some people think it is. It is a swamp. There
are hundreds of rivers, all flowing—when they can
—towards the main stream, and in these rivers
are islands, some formed by the sudd which blocks
the flow, others from causes which are beyond
the reasoning power of man to define. On one
of these islands in a river which rises, no European
knows where, but which flows through the King-
dom of Wadai, is a temple, or rather the ruins of
one, and in that partly buried edifice is wealth
untold in the nature of relics of ancient Egypt, or
Nubia, or if you like the term better, of Meroe. I,
among some really distinguished men, notably the
German professors, think that down in that region
a mighty civilisation existed fully six thousand
years ago, and there are some who believe that
the Empire of Meroe was great when that of
Babylon was only beginning. However that may
be, a great race of people flourished there, and
their records are still left among those swamps
which feed the Nile. Now I have been there
already, but it is impossible for any European to
go there again from the Nile, as the Senussi have
forbidden their presence. But if one were daring
enough to attempt to cross the desert he might
arrive in that fascinating land from the other
side and never be detected, and as there cer-
tainly is much gold in the sands of Wadai, I see
no reason why we, armed as we are with the latest
inventions of Europe, should not make the attempt.
All the gold we may find, of course, is yours.”


“ We’ll get there if it is in our power,” Tom
said, “ but we cannot guarantee the impossible.”
“ Then all is arranged, partners. Your car
is already in hand and will be ready in a week.
I am going over to France on business on
Monday, so shall not see you again until every-
thing is finished. We can correspond though, and
I hope you will keep me posted as to how things
go? ”
The boys promised that they would inform him
by letter of developments, and after spending a
most enjoyable evening left for home.
On the Monday they started their own work
in earnest, and all the following week they worked
hard and constantly at the various parts of the
outfit which they would not trust to outsiders to
make for them. Mr. Dunhill sent them a telegram
from Paris informing them of his address in that
city, and wishing good luck to the enterprise,
but although they wrote daily telling of their pro-
gress, they did not receive any answer. This
fact did not worry them greatly because they
could get along perhaps better without his advice,
seeing he had already provided the funds, and
they soon concluded that their friend was involved
in the intricacies of some great engineering scheme
which required all his attention, and which would
doubtless benefit the great firm of which he was
head considerably.
A week passed and they were almost ready,
and then another week slipped by while they re-
duced everything to its smallest parts and boxed
those for shipment. They had already announced
their probable speedy departure to all their friends,
and the prospect of going south to the land of


sunshine was very pleasing. It was the season
of Christmas festivities ; but they had no thought
for anything but the one great matter on hand,
and day after day, and night after night, they
worked steadily towards its fulfilment.
Then, one day, they found that nothing more
remained to be done, that everything was complete
down to the most minute detail, and packed.
Petrol, of course, they would procure in Oran,
Algiers, or the port in Tripoli at which they might
land.
“ Look here, boys,” said Alfred, “we can’t
afford to waste our time in this country now, seeing
we have already burned our bridges, so to speak.
It is my opinion that Mr. Dunhill has forgotten all
about us, or else has changed from the professor
into the business man again.”
At that moment Tom’s mother entered the room
where they were assembled and handed Tom a tele-
gram which had just arrived. It was addressed to
Messrs. Allan, Chalmers & Goodwin, care of
Tom’s father, as had been the previous telegram
from Mr. Dunhill. Tom tore it open eagerly and
read the message. It ran : “ Unavoidably de-
tained. Will join you at Marseilles. Ship all
gear to our firm’s agent in Gibraltar, and travel
overland to Marseilles. Wire me when leaving
London —Dunhill.”
“ Jove ! that sounds like business, anyhow,”
Jack said. “We can leave as soon as we get our
stuff away now. What boat can it catch? ”
“ Oh, Messrs. Dunhill, Miller, Bolton & Co., will
attend to that for us,” Lorn replied. “ I suppose
Mr. Dunhill has given them instructions to do
that ! ”


“ Possibly,” commented Alfred, “ but somehow
I don’t like that telegram, and I don’t care at all
about the instructions. Why should we ship our
boxes to Gibraltar? And why can’t we consign
them to ourselves instead of to people who are
not concerned with us? ”
“ What does it matter? ” Jack laughed. “It
is only saving trouble, and we ought to be
grateful.”
“ Well, I’m not,” Alfred blurted out. “ And you
can laugh at me and call me a pessimist as you
like. We have a valuable machine in our posses-
sion, and Messrs. Dunhill, Miller, Bolton & Co. are
not the people to whom I should entrust it, either
here or at Gibraltar.”
“ Well, let us consign everything to ourselves
at Gibraltar,” put in Tom. “We can easily put
our boxes into the hands of Mr. Dunhill’s agents
there, if need be, for transhipment.”
“ But why Gibraltar at all? ” persisted Alfred,
who clearly had some doubts rankling in his mind.
*■* Because that is the nearest port in direct
communication with Britain to the North African
ports,” Jack answered, and Alfred seemed to be
satisfied.
That afternoon their boxes went down the Clyde
on board an Indian liner. They were addressed
to Gibraltar, but to themselves, and the bills of
lading were in Tom’s possession.


CHAPTER IV
WHO IS THE ENEMY?
Among the passengers on the 10.45 London night
express from the Central a few days later were
Tom, Jack and Alfred. At last they had departed
on their strange mission, and they would not now
turn back no matter what circumstances arose
against them. They were not foolishly reckless,
for they had considered well every possible con-
tingency and had made preparations accordingly.
Tom had had some difficulty in getting his parents
to consent to his going, but, strangely enough to
the boys, when they heard that Mr. Dunhill
was to go with them, they offered no further
objections. Jack was, in a way, only going home,
and Alfred had no one to consider as to his
movements. All were filled with the enthusiasm
which characterises healthy youth, and they had
no sentimental regrets at leaving dismal Glasgow
behind.
The snow was falling as the train rumbled out
on the great bridge over the Clyde, and the lights
of the shipping down the river seemed like distant
stars. But now they were rushing south, and soon
the cold of poor old Scotland would give place
to a warmer and sunnier climate. They didn’t
79


then take into account that they might get more
of heat and sun than would be comfortable, and
soon they rolled themselves up in the corners of
the pleasantly-warmed carriage and fell asleep.
And the train climbed over the Beattock summit
and thundered down into Carlisle, where the engine
was changed and the journey south resumed.
About half an hour before the train was due at
Euston the boys awoke, washed themselves, and
felt quite ready for the next stage. Tom was
commander-in-chief and he did not allow time
to be wasted. They breakfasted in London at
one of the early restaurants and left the world’s
metropolis at 10 o’clock, passengers on the conti-
nental mail from Victoria Station. London was
enveloped in fog and snow and they saw none of
it. Soon they reached Newhaven, where they
boarded the palatial turbine channel steamer await-
ing, and as darkness was beginning to close in on
the congested waterway, Dieppe loomed up sud-
denly just ahead. Here all was bustle and
confusion as those Britons who had never been on
foreign soil argued with the Customs authorities
concerning their baggage which had not been
registered to its destination. In most cases, too,
the noisy ones spoke English, entirely indifferent
to the fact that they were now in a land where
quite another language was the rule.
But Jack came in useful here. He spoke a
few sentences to an officer, who marked their bags
at once without the slightest investigation, and
a few minutes later they were in the train, not
feeling in any way that they were now in a foreign
land.
They arrived in Paris prompt to booked time,


6.43, and Jack took temporary command as he had
been in the French capital before.
While most of the passengers not French were
engaged in clearing their baggage and arranging
for its transport to some hotel, the boys simply
picked up their own belongings and, led by Jack,
walked out of St. Lazare Station, crossed the street,
and entered an hotel, where they were at once
welcomed in English. They dined here, and after-
wards sought out the hotel in which Mr. Dunhill
had been staying, Jack’s knowledge of French
making this an easy matter. But that gentleman
had gone some days ago and had left no word
as to his movements, so when the boys got back
to their own hotel they resolved to continue their
journey south as soon as possible. Paris had no
attraction for them, and even their little experi-
ences in hunting up Mr. Dunhill’s hotel had tired
them of it.
“ Come, boys I Let’s get out of here,” said
Alfred. “ People may talk of this city as they
like, but I don’t see that we’ve any special reason
for remaining in it. When can we get away, Jack? ”
“ To-night if we like,” Jack answered. “We
can catch the night express from the Gare de Lyon,
the P.L.M. station.”
“ Oh, talk English, if you can ! ” said Alfred.
‘‘What do we know about the P.L.M.? ”
“ I don’t know, but as the Paris, Lyon, and
Marseilles Railway Company run some of the
fastest trains in the world, your ignorance is not
much to boast about.”
“ We’ll catch that train,” Tom hurriedly inter-
posed. ‘‘When do we get into Marseilles?”
‘‘To-morrow forenoon some time. I’ll m V e
6


you the exact hour when I look up the time-
table ”
“ Oh, never mind the time-table,” Alfred said ;
“ we are as well in the train as looking around
this place, and an hour or so earlier in Marseilles
may mean catching an earlier boat.”
Thus, when the P.L.M. express left Paris a
few hours later, the boys were on board, feeling
much the same as they did the night before on
leaving Glasgow. France certainly did not seem
much of a foreign land to them, for they all had
a slight knowledge of the language, and the people,
so far as they had gone, were most pleasant and
polite. The train was not filled entirely and they
again managed to secure a carriage to themselves.
Down through France they sped, past Dijon,
Macon, Lyon, Avignon, finally arriving at Mar-
seilles about nine o’clock next morning.
They went at once to an hotel that Jack said
was very popular with people who came over to
France from Algeria, and where they intended to
wait until Mr. Dunhill joined them. They had
given this address to his firm in Glasgow, so that
if he were in communication with headquarters
he might readily know where to find them. Still,
they thought his conduct rather strange, and since
leaving Paris had become greatly concerned over
the matter. The hotel —the Continental —was quite
close to the harbour, and as nearly all the staff
spoke English, the boys began to think that France
was not really a foreign land. They didn’t realise
that they had not yet left the great British over-
land track to India, China, and Australia, and
that most of the people they had met depended
upon their knowledge of English, to some extent,


for their living. They could all speak schoolboy
French, but Jack, of course, knew that language
as well as English.
While breakfasting, the head waiter brought a
telegram to them, and from its manner of address
all knew that it was from their missing partner.
The message was in English and read : “ Pro-
ceed at once to Oran. Will join you there at Hotel
Victor on Sunday.” The boys looked at each
other in surprise when Tom had read the few
words. They could not understand Mr. DunhilPs
tactics. If he had not been so anxious to join their
party they would not have worried, but he had
made statements to them which admitted of no
doubt as to his desires. Then why had he ordered
their boxes to be sent to Gibraltar?
“ There’s something about this I don’t like,”
said Alfred. “ Here we are in a strange land
and without knowledge of what we are to do.
Where is Oran, and how do we get there? ”
“ Oran is the town where I was born,” Jack
answered. ‘‘lt is the chief commercial town in
the French colony of Algeria and we go there
by steamer from this port. It is a two days’
voyage across the Mediterranean, and from there
we can go inland right to the verge of the Sahara,
by rail. The boats leave here on Wednesday
nights and Saturday mornings. I suppose Mr.
Dunhill means to travel over by the fast Saturday
steamer, but wishes us to go across by the
Wednesday boat.”
“ I don’t know about that,” Alfred observed
doubtfully. “ This wire came from Glasgow, I see,
last night. He could just as easily have followed
us and joined us here.”


“ Oh, fair play, Alfred,” cried Tom. “He is
a business man and may have many private
arrangements which would prevent him leaving
at once on his return to Glasgow. I vote we do
as he says. We are going to Oran in any case, and
the sooner we are there the better.”
“ That’s all right, but our stuff is at Gibraltar,”
Alfred reminded. “ I am not of opinion that we
should lose sight of our property.”
“ I had forgotten,” Tom said. “ Our gear will
be in Gibraltar to-morrow some time. If we had
consigned it as we were told it wouldn’t matter,
for the agent there would have reshipped it.”
“ What day is this? ” broke in Jack. “ I’ve
got an idea from the newspaper here.”
“ This should be Tuesday,” Tom said. “We
left Glasgow on Sunday night, Paris the night
after, and we’ve only been that night in the train
coming here from Paris.”
“ Then we don’t need to worry about anything,”
Jack continued. “ I see by this paper that the
P. and O. boat from Australia is late and will
only arrive here to-day.”
‘‘ What does that matter to us? ” asked Alfred.
“We’re not P. and O. travellers?”
“ Oh, one never knows ; we can be if we like,
as far as Gibraltar. If we leave here to-day by
the P. and O. steamer we’ll be in Gibraltar on
Thursday morning at daylight. If I remember
rightly, the Navigation Mixte boat leaves Gibraltar
on that day on its homeward journey via Melilla
and Oran. We could catch it and be in Oran via
Gibraltar only a few hours after the boat that
leaves here for Oran direct to-morrow night gets
•
m.


“Well, what do we gain by all this record-
breaking and juggling with boats and the towns
of Europe and Africa? ” asked Alfred. “
look at the cost ”
“ Hang the cost ! ” put in Tom. “ Thanks to
Mr. Dunhill, we are well provided with funds,
and he told us not to consider expense. We’ll
go out and draw some money on our letter of
credit now, and inquire about the times of the
boats ; luckily Jack can talk like a phonograph.
If we could take in Gibraltar and get our boxes,
and be in Oran in time to meet Mr. Dunhill
just the same as if we left here direct to-morrow
night, I think we should try to do so ; we should
then have our gear under our own eyes.”
“ Right,” cried Alfred. “ Whereas if we don’t
go to Gibraltar we may never see our boxes, for
we didn’t consign them to an agent as directed.”
“ Which is where we made our first mistake,”
said Tom. “ Perhaps Mr. Dunhill had arranged
the transhipment? ”
“ Perhaps,” Alfred grunted, “ but we are a bit
too old to depend upon ‘ perhaps ’ now.”
“ Come on then, boys, I’ll show you round
this wonderful old town and we’ll make all in-
quiries while out,” Jack cried, and without more
comment they arose from the table and went out
to see the place.
But they did not see much. The imposing
edifice Notre Dame, with its unique hydraulic
railway, at once attracted their attention, as it does
that of every visitor to Marseilles, who cannot
help seeing it, perched upon the summit of the
ridge that commands the town, and visible from
all parts. “We’ll go up and see it,” said Tom,


“ and then we’ll hunt round for the Palais de
Longchamp and the Chateau d’lf of ‘ Monte
Cristo ’ fame.”
“ All right,” said Jack, “ I can take you to
them all. The Palais de Longchamp is at the
head of this street, a car will take us there, and
a little steamer runs to the Chateau dTf—that’s it
on that island out in the sea—at a charge of
half a franc, or fivepence, per passenger. As
for Notre Dame, we’ll get a car to the foot of
the hill, too, and then the hydraulic railway will
take us up to the church. But we’ll see the
shipping offices first, they are all in the rue
Cannebi&re. Hullo ! here is the office of the
chief Algerian shipping company, the Navigation
Mixte. We’ll go in and ask about the times of
their boats.”
And thus it was that they saw little of Mar-
seilles. They found out that, as Jack had thought,
their first steamer for Oran left on .Wednesday
night ; but being the slowest of the fleet, she would
not be due until Saturday afternoon ; whereas
the steamer of last week to Oran, Beni Saf, in
Algeria, Melilla and Tetouan in Morocco, thence
Gibraltar, Tangiers, and home by the same ports,
would be due to leave Gibraltar on the homeward
run on Thursday at noon.
‘‘But when is it due in Oran?” Jack asked
in perfect French.
“ Saturday forenoon,” he was answered, “ but
Gibraltar is farther away from 1 here than Oran ;
that steamer can be of no use to you.”
“ Oh, yes, it can,” Jack said. “We can catch
it at Gibraltar by travelling thither with the P. and
0., leaving Marseilles for London to-day. Come


on, boys, we’ve no time to see the place. Let’s
get our berths on board the homeward-bound
Mooltan; we can just manage.”
“ Anything for a quiet life I ” murmured
Alfred. ‘‘ I’d give a lot for a good sleep, but
I suppose we’ve got to do without that now.”
“ You’ll get all the sleep you want at sea,”
Jack laughed. “ We’ve got to hustle if we want
to catch the Mooltan .”
But they did catch it, and only an hour later.
The big steamer was already a day late through
having been delayed in the Suez Canal, but her
commander was eager to make up the time before
reaching London. The boys, and one other, were
the only passengers from Marseilles, and there
was plenty of accommodation as fully three-
quarters of the former passengers had left at Mar-
seilles to travel overland to London. It was a
strange experience for Alfred and Tom to be on
board a big liner ; Jack had travelled on one
before. But perhaps they all felt the most in-
explicable sensation when they listened to the other
passengers’ talk. This, invariably, was of England
and home, whither all were bound from the most
remote parts of the earth, and although travelling
the same way, the boys were going away from
that land of fog and frost the sun-tanned wanderers
were talking about in delightful anticipation.
“ Home I ” Alfred grunted that night as they
leaned over the gunwale and watched the distant
lights of the Spanish coast, the while a concert
was being held in the saloon. “No home for me,
thank you, until we’ve made the Sahara a bit
poorer than it is. I have no special desire to work
hard all day for other people so that I may earn


the means to live. Give me the sunshine and a
chance to do something, and you’ll never hear
me grumbling.”
“ Note that down, Tom,” Jack laughed. “ He’ll
get both sunshine and chance enough in a few
days, and we’ve got to remind him that he can’t
grumble.”
“ I wonder what the etiquette on board a
steamer is about speaking to strangers,” broke
in Tom irrelevantly. “ I have been watching our
fellow-passenger from Marseilles, and I notice he
doesn’t seem to have made many friends. No
one speaks to him and he must feel very miser-
able. Here he comes. I think he would like to
speak to us, for I’ve seen him watching us more
than once.”
“ Your soft heart will bring us into trouble
yet,’ 1 said Alfred. “ That fellow is a foreigner
of some kind, and he’s too good-looking for my
taste. Probably he can’t speak English and in
any case we’re only going to Gibraltar, so what is
the use chumming up with him? ” The man in
question strolled slowly past at that moment,
apparently in deep reverie. He didn’t even look at
the boys, and Tom got no opportunity of speaking
to him. At dinner that night they could not see
him at any of the tables, although he was on
deck while they took exercise later on before
turning in. He was a good-looking man with
a carefully-trained black moustache and dark,
lustrous eyes that shone like live coals at times.
He was dressed in perfect style and his manners
so far as the boys took the trouble to note were
also perfect. His face was dark in complexion,
but not nearly so swarthy as that of some of


the jolly, open-hearted Australians on board.
Whether he kept aloof from choice or not the
boys could not determine, and as they had much
to talk about among themselves they soon ceased
to notice him at all.
At daybreak on Thursday morning the Moottan
dropped anchor off the Gibraltar breakwater and
the boys gazed interestedly at the great rock so
famous in their country’s history.
They lost no time in getting ashore, and very
soon they had claimed the many boxes landed
the day before by the Bombay-bound liner from
Glasgow. They had some trouble in clearing them
as, evidently, some other people had mistaken them
for their property. The bills of lading in Tom’s
possession settled the matter, however, and in
another hour’s time the cases were stowed safely
in the hold of the French boat Emir , just about
to start on the return journey to Tetouan, Melilla,
Oran, and Marseilles. Thus the three youthful
adventurers did not see any more of Gibraltar than
of any of the other towns they had visited, and when
the Moottan picked up her anchor and sailed out
of the bay, first stop Plymouth, the little Emir
with a tricolour floating proudly over her stern
steamed alongside until the ways parted.
Then with a start the boys noted that the only
passenger on board besides themselves was the
swarthy-skinned, good-looking man who had come
down with them from Marseilles, The Captain
and the officers of the Emir were good-natured
Frenchmen, and were most friendly with the boys
at once. The latter were nojw called upon to
use their knowledge of the French language for
the first time, but it was wonderful how they got


along, and very soon they felt that the Frenchmen
were about the finest fellows they had ever
met.
That afternoon they arrived off the Moroccan
port Tetouan, but as the city lay inland some
miles and the ship was not billed to stay more
than two hours unless cargo was forthcoming, the
boys did not go ashore. About a hundred
quaintly-garbed Moors joined the ship just before
she sailed, all deck passengers for Oran. They
were the first non-Europeans Tom and Alfred had
seen in numbers, and their methods and manners
excited their curiosity greatly. They squatted all
over the deck and laughed and talked to each other
like children. Men and women were there, but
the latter were closely veiled, and this fact was
the only means Tom and Alfred had of distin-
guishing between the sexes. Jack, of course, was
familiar with their customs, and went among them
freely, discussing anything and everything with
those who could talk French, which nearly all
seemed able to do. Most of the men carried
carbines slung vertically on their backs ; some
worked assiduously polishing brass trays, which.
Jack said, they hoped to sell in Oran. All were
bare-footed. All were dressed alike, one long—
seemingly endless —robe, not over-clean, being the
height of fashion among them. And all ate onions.
Their faces were pleasant and their laughter
infectious. All were tall, strong-looking, and wiry,
and their look of disdain when the stewards
ordered them off the saloon deck was a sight the
boys remembered. But it was hard to imagine
that these people were at one time lords of the
world from India to Granada, and harder still


to think that they might yet again assert their
authority. They seemed to be all good fellows,
however, without cares or sorrows, and although
they were continually washing themselves at the
pump provided for the purpose they seemed to
be always dirty. The boys mixed among them
until near sunset, when the chief officer came along
the forward deck and told the lads that dinner was
almost ready in the saloon. “ Come away at once,”
he added in an undertone, in French. “ These
people don’t like the presence of the unfaithful
while saying their prayers, and it is just about
sunset now. I see among them some “Touaregs
and we are always afraid of trouble when we have
them on board.”
The boys went aft and soon were partaking
of the most luxurious meal they had ever enjoyed.
Of course they had never travelled on a French
steamer before. The Captain inquired kindly as
to whether they were on holiday from Angleterre
or on business, and Jack answered that they were
hoping to combine business and pleasure.
“ That is impossible,” the Captain laughed.
‘‘Not even an Englishman can do that. And you
are only boys.”
‘‘Well, we’ll grow older, I suppose?” said
Jack. “ And youth isn’t a crime yet even in
France? ”
‘‘But where has the other passenger gone?”
Tom broke in, using his best French. “ I haven’t
seen him since Tetouan.”
“ Oh, he left there,” the Captain replied,
drinking his coffee and lighting his cigarette.
“ He has some business in Tetouan.”
“ Do you know anything about the Sahara


Desert, Captain? ” asked Alfred, also in French
of a kind.
“Well, I crossed French North Africa when I
was serving with the colours, but we didn’t see
much desert.”
“ Then do you think we could cross it? ” Jack
went on, seeing that Alfred and Tom only spoke
with difficulty.
“ Why not? There are oases all the way, and
if you don’t fall foul of the Touaregs, and keep
clear of the Senussi, what is to hinder you? You
being infidels, I expect, should also keep an
eye on the Marabouts, but they don’t count much
at present, for Franee has given them to understand
that if they preach any holy war business they’ll
suffer.”
“ Do you think there is any gold in the Sahara? ”
Tom asked.
“ Yes, any amount, but you can’t find it easily ;
it is in patches and the tribes work them when they
find them within striking distance of an oasis, and
you fellows couldn’t safely go in among those
people.”
“ Oh, I think we can go pretty well where we
like,” Jack laughed, “ if the French Government
does not object to our robbing them of their
treasure.”
“ They won’t object, my boy,” the Captain said,
“ but all the same they’ll very likely prevent you
from going out behind, if they come to hear that
you have any intention of trying any silly game.
You see, France is responsible for everything that
happens on the Sahara, and it is much simpler
preventing any people from running into trouble
there than putting tombstones up afterwards.”


“ Which means that if any one wished to study
geology on the Sahara they would be better not
to tell the French authorities anything about their
intentions? ” Jack said.
“ Perhaps they’d have a better chance of seeing
the actual sand-dunes if they kept their own
counsel,” the Captain admitted, rising. “ But, your
pardon, gentlemen, I must go on the bridge now
for this is a bad coast for sailors. Come up beside
me afterwards and we’ll continue our con-
versation.”
And the boys did join him later on the bridge,
and learned much that might profit them later,
although Alfred declared his tongue was kinked
when they retired that night, it not having been
designed to speak the language of the gallant
Captain. The cabins were all double-berthed, so
that, after drawing lots to decide the matter,
Alfred and Jack occupied one cabin and Tom took
sole possession of the adjoining compartment. The
boys were tired and at once fell asleep,
Alfred and Jack soundly, and Tom to dream con-
fusedly of Senussi, Touaregs, Marabouts, and
mountains of gold which came to him, expressly
because he could not raise sufficient energy to go
to them. A strange reversion of the story pf
Mohammed and the mountain. Suddenly he
awoke. Some one was near him. For a time he
tried in vain to recollect where he was, but his
dream mind had still a hold on him —probably
owing to the fact that he was not used to French
dinners —and he was powerless to move. Still, he
could see, for the lights in the passage outside the
cabin shone through the ventilator netting. And
what he saw was the face of the mysterious


passenger who had accompanied them from Mar-
seilles to Gibraltar, and thence to Tetouan, where
he was supposed to have gone ashore. The man
was looking for something evidently, and he hauled
Tom’s portmanteau from under his bunk and began
to open it with a bunch of keys.
Just then Tom recovered all his senses, and with-
out a word of warning, he rolled out of his bunk
and dropped straight upon the back of the stoop-
ing night prowler, squashing him flat upon the
cabin floor with a thud that seemed louder than the
beat of the engines. “ Now, my mysterious
friend,” Tom said, “ perhaps I can help you to
find what you want if you’ll say what it is—
Jupiter 1 ” The man had wriggled from under him,
apparently without any effort, and Tom was speak-
ing to himself. “ Jove ! ” he muttered, “ I’ve been
dreaming ! Yet I am quite sure I dropped out of my
bunk deliberately. I’ll eat less at dinner after
this.” He climbed up into his bunk again and
after a bit fell asleep, awaking only when the
Emir dropped anchor in the Bay of Melilla just at
daybreak.
The boys partook of some coffee and went
ashore to see the town which had so recently been
the centre of the Spanish-Riffian war. They found
it to be a huge, white-painted fort, into which
stores and ammunition were hoisted by an
enormous crane, at the landward side of the fort.
Flat-roofed buildings —mostly cafes, saloons, and
bazaars —stretched up the hill and along the shore
for a mile or so in both directions ; but a curious-
looking Moorish fort standing almost on the beach
marked the boundary between Spain and Morocco,
and the town of Melilla stopped within a few


rag
mm*~- ~m
Ip . f & I- L
I,
* /t > JL ■■ (
v I Hi w’jwi
~ mi
| .- bL
“the man tried to open the portmanteau.”
To face page 94,


.
■


hundred yards of it. Everywhere were youthful
Spanish soldiers, most courteous and polite, but
all with that wistful expression in their faces which
showed that they longed for the hills and valleys
of their beloved land, and cared little for the
bleak rocks which Spain called her own, and had
spent so much in blood and money to hold, on the
northern shores of Africa.
After a walk through the town, the three adven-
turers purchased picture post-cards, and addressed
them to their friends at home at a table under
the veranda of one of the cafes. All the business
people seemed to speak French as well as their own
language, but when the cafe proprietor learned
that the boys were British, he wouldn’t even accept
payment for the lemon-squashes they had ordered,
a fact that surprised them greatly, for they had
hitherto thought that all foreigners doubled their
charges when dealing with Britons.
As they were rowing back to the ship Tom told
his comrades of his strange dream, and Jack
laughed heartily, trailing his hand in the water
meanwhile. But some sea creature, fish or some-
thing else, bit or stung his finger, and his merri-
ment ceased abruptly. Alfred was inclined to
laugh too, but as he was ever pessimistic he didn’t.
“ But you can’t lay any stress on a dream, Tom,”
he said. “ How could a man who left our ship at
the last port come into your cabin last night? ”
“ I don’t know,” Tom answered. “ I thought
the thing was only a dream myself, but I cannot
understand how I could fall out of my bunk, which
was the top one, and find myself on the floor with-
out hurting myself, unless something broke my
fall. Besides, I have the impression that I dropped


solidly on the man, and that he knows more about
the incident than I do.”
“ Well, it doesn’t matter,” said Alfred. “We
are able to look after ourselves. If you dreamt the
whole affair, the matter ends there ; if it were
real, your visitor was a common thief, and, as we
have nothing worth stealing with us, it doesn’t
matter although he were the king of his
fraternity.”
They got on board, and shortly after the steamer
sailed for Nemours, the frontier town between
Morocco and Algeria, which was reached in the
evening ; but as there was no cargo the voyage
was resumed without delay. At four o’clock on
Saturday morning Beni-Saf was reached, and going
on deck at once, the boys saw the town as if on
a bioscope screen. They were in a bay only a
few yards from the shore, on which rows of electric
arc lamps made the hour as clear almost as day.
Even then Bedouins or some other kind of North
Africans were bathing themselves in the water on
horseback, and long trains freighted with what
looked like iron ore steamed backwards and for-
wards between some mines unseen and ore-ships
alongside the Emir , in an endless chain.
*' Nevaire mind going on ze shore,” the chief
officer advised the youths in his best English as
they came on deck. “Ze plaice eet ees not much,
and ze dust eet ees not good. Everyting ees vairy
ordinaire, and we’ll sail for Oran in one hour. You
go down saloon and drink much more coffee.”
And the boys did ; they reasoned that an hour
on shore was not worth the trouble of arguing with
the boatmen who would take them there, and by
that time they knew that the expense of getting


back in time might be more than they would be
justified in spending.
About half a hundred more passengers came
on board, all, apparently, pilgrims bound for
Mecca, traders journeying to Oran, or warriors
returning to the port from which they could most
readily reach their tribes.
In the early afternoon the Emir steamed into
Oran, and as the panorama of the magnificent city
opened out before the boys, Tom and Alfred
marvelled that their geographies had not made
them more acquainted with the size and importance
of the cities of the French colonies.
“ My boys,” said the Captain, as they sailed
slowly up to the anchorage, “ I don’t know that I
have any right to advise you.” He spoke in
French, of course, and only Jack followed him,
at the moment. “ But if your business here
is political, you should change your plans, for
too much is known of them already. Your boxes
have been broken into in the hold, and although
nothing has been damaged, or removed, the fact
points to your having powerful enemies, and some
of them must be hidden among the deck
passengers.”
“ It couldn’t be that fellow who travelled with
us to Tetouan? ” said Jack inquiringly.
“ No, it is since we left that port that we have
found that the hold has been entered.”
“ Is there any man among those deck passengers
with a broken nose, or a face bruised in any
way? ” Tom asked, grasping the meaning of the
Captain’s last words.
“ Yes, many,” answered the Captain. “ I
haven’t seen any, but I heard more than seventy
7


Astaghferallahs last night, and that means that
some one was vowing vengeance against the world
at large, and that he would give his life to gratify
his feelings. That word is a sacred formula of
all true Mohammedans. What it means I do not
know exactly, but roughly it stands for ‘ I seek
shelter in God.’ Now, the Prophet commanded
that any believer who sought shelter in God seventy
times in succession was absolved from any con-
sequences of his own acts, for the man who would
take the trouble had certainly reason to feel as
murderously inclined as if some one had spoiled
his beauty,”
M And there was blood on the floor of my cabin,
the steward told me,” observed Tom reflectively.
“ And it wasn’t my blood.”
“ What did you say? ” cried the Captain in sud-
den excitement. “ What blood was in your cabin? ”
Then Tom told his story, and when he had
concluded, with Jack’s help, the Captain said
slowly ; “ Boys, I can see you have enemies ; I
advise you to turn back. Come on with me to
Marseilles, and start again from there, if you must
carry your plans through, and they are not in any
way against my country’s Government.”
“ Captain,” said Jack, receiving the sign from
Tom, who could understand French much more
easily than speak it, ‘‘ we are harmless men. We
have the idea of crossing the Sahara from some
point on the Mediterranean to some point on the
Upper Nile, and we now ask you to advise us as
to the best route. We have no designs upon the
French Government.”
“ But what motive have you? ” asked the
Captain. “ What can you gain by your work? ”


“ Gold,” said Alfred. “If we can do what
we hope we can do, we’ll get gold ; if we can’t —
well, we’re the sufferers ourselves. We have no
other object.”
“ Ah, yes,” said the Captain. “ You are the
risk-taking 1 Englishmen, and you don’t care what
happens. Very well, gentlemen, I will help you
if I can, and I advise you, therefore, not to clear
your boxes in Oran —at least, until you know more
fully what you are going to do. If you really wish
to cross the Sahara, the best route is via some port
in Tripoli, and you and your goods can be landed
there in four days from now, if you like, by chang-
ing into another of our steamers this evening. We,
as you know, proceed to Marseilles from Oran.
You must change your plans in any case, as you
have enemies who already know too much of
them.”
“ Strange I ” Jack mused. '* We have done
nothing to make enemies, and we wish ill to no
man.”
The Captain shrugged his shoulders. “ Ah,
well,” he remarked, ” I can tell you that, whether
because of friends or enemies, you will not be
allowed to leave Oran with your boxes for the
interior. Something will happen to make that
impossible. Go on shore with your baggage and
take rooms at one of the hotels up in the town.
We shall not land your boxes until the last minute,
and if you find reason to think that you are
watched come down to the Emir after dark, and
let me know, and I’ll get your boxes put on board
the Tripoli steamer without landing them at all, and
—well, that is enough, gentlemen. You have been
unfortunate in running against the Senussi so


soon ; but they are not so powerful as some people
think, and you may beat them yet. I only wish I
were going with you. The Sahara fever is in my
blood, boys. It is France’s Colonial Empire, and
perhaps yet the desert may flourish under my
country’s rule as it did in the days of Carthage.
But I must go on the bridge now. Au revoir ,
friends 1 Remember my advice.”
Shortly afterwards the Emir was safely moored,
and the boys went ashore, carrying their own
baggage with them. A shouting mob of Arabs,
negroes, and nondescripts at once surrounded them,
offering their services as guides, and begging in
a language which was certainly most picturesque
French. Jack spoke a few words to them, and
they melted away at once ; they had taken the
boys for foreigners, but Jack’s words had dis-
illusioned them 1 He knew their kind well.
Boarding an electric car, they were swiftly carried
up the well-engineered roadway to the city proper,
which was built on the top of the great plateau
which forms the south Mediterranean shore for
many hundreds of miles. And the city certainly
surprised Tom and Alfred ; it seemed to them to
be the most magnificent place they had yet seen.
Large hotels, churches, halls, and public buildings
were everywhere ; motor-cars with gaily dressed
occupants flashed along the streets without any fear
of a speed limit, and military officers in smart
uniform rode past on noble Arab chargers. All
seemed happy and prosperous ; even the native
Algerian in his simple but picturesque dress had
an air of contentment about him that showed he
was well pleased with himself and the world.
Truly, the influence of the sun is great, for only


four days distant poor old Britain was still en-
gulfed in the gloom of damp, dreary, sunless
winter. They left the car. after it had carried
them right through the city, and Jack led the way
to his father’s house, where they meant to stay
while in Oran,
Here the first great surprise awaited them : the
house was shut up and only a French maidservant
in possession. She did not know Jack, never having
seen him, but she informed the boys that Mr. and
Mrs. Chalmers had left for Marseilles two days
before on receipt of a cablegram from their son.
“ But my cable said we were coming here ! ” ex-
claimed Jack in French.
“ Ah, yes ; that was the first one, but the next
said you had met with an accident.”
‘‘ The next? There was no next. I only cabled
once.”
The servant shrugged her shoulders. “ Per-
haps,” she said, “ but please remember I don’t
know you, and I cannot talk of my master’s affairs
to strangers. His office is opposite the Hotel
Continental, and you can obtain any information
there.” So saying, she closed the door in their
faces, and they were obliged to turn away, as
Jack did not wish to make a scene in his father’s
house. He had grown from a boy to a man since
he had been sent home from Oran, and although
the people dwelling in the next houses would know
him, he had no desire to call upon them —at least,
just then.
“ There is something wrong here,” he said, as
they walked away. “ You fellows know I cabled
we were coming. We’ll go round to the offices and
see what we can be told there.”


But the offices were closed for the day ; and
after they had called at the house where the chief
of the staff had lived in Jack’s time and found that
he had removed elsewhere, they decided to put up
in the hotel where they were to meet Mr. Dunhill.
Jack was now in a great state of alarm, and little
wonder. His was a strange home-coming. They
entered the Hotel Victor and at once received
two other surprises in the form of telegrams. One
was for Jack alone, and the other they knew from
its style of address was from Mr. Dunhill.
Jack opened his, glanced at the message, and
with a cry of despair handed it to Tom, who read
out : “ Forbid you to take part in mad scheme.
Return immediately to England.” It was signed
“ John Chalmers.”
“ Never mind, Jack,” sympathised Alfred. 44 I
expect this message will tell us that Mr. Dunhill
has lost the boat, and we can wire him to speak to
your father.”
“ It’s not that,” Jack exclaimed. 44 My father’s
name is not John. John Chalmers is only the trad-
ing name of his firm. I’ll cable to my father now.”
“ Wait until we know what Mr. Dunhill says,”
advised Tom. 44 His boat is due in Oran in an
hour now.” He tore the message open as he spoke
and read : “ Regret cannot see my way to proceed
farther in scheme without having independent ex-
pert report. Wire reply Glasgow.” This tele-
gram was signed “ Dunhill.”
“So we’re burst up ! ” spoke Alfred. 44 I half
expected we should be.”
41 No, we’re not,” cried Jack. 44 The man is
mad. We’ll wire back and tell him that.”
*' No,” said Tom, after some thought. 44 We’ll


not wire at all. Mr. Dunhill has simply changed
his mind again, as I thought he might do all
along. He has forgotten, too, that he has already
paid us all the money we needed, and that we really
never wanted him with us. In any case he expressed
himself quite decidedly about experts already, and
certainly we’re not going to begin to worry about
that fraternity and what they think of our scheme
now.”
“ Scheme? ” repeated Alfred. “ That word is
used in both messages. I wonder ”
“ vWell, you needn’t,” said Jack, ** the word is
free to all ; but what am I to do? ”
“ We’ll cable your father, Jack,” Tom advised,
“ and see if we can’t get him to give his consent.
As for Mr. Dunhill, we don’t care whether he sees
his way to proceed or not, we’ll do the proceeding
without him and pay him back his money out of
our profits when we get home again. We are
better without him anyhow Hullo 1 here’s that
French girl we saw at your father’s house, and
she’s looking for you, Jack, I’ll bet.”
And she was. She had a telegram in her hands,
and when she saw the boy's seated at a table under
a palm-tree in the hall —she rushed up to them, and
with French impetuosity spoke volubly, and unin-
telligibly to all but Jack, for a full minute. He,
meanwhile, had taken the telegram from her hands,
and, while Tom and Alfred endeavoured to console
her, was mastering its contents. The message was
in French, and addressed to the maid, by name, at
Mr. Chalmers’ house. Jack read out the translation
almost immediately as follows : " Jack Chalmers
and friends will arrive to-day from England. Place
the house at their disposal, and inform office staff


to attend to them. Also inform Jack that I suspect
I have been tricked here for some reason not yet
apparent, that I have no objection to his going
anywhere with his friends. Tell him to draw on
the office for any funds. Not to await my return
unless sure plans are not known. Give him this
telegram.” Marseilles was the place of origin, and
the signature was “ C.8.C.,” which Jack said were
his father’s initials.
They got rid of the girl, assuring her that they
did not blame her in the least for not knowing
who they were, and that they might come round
to the house afterwards. They also purchased
boxes of chocolate for her, and she went home
happy.
“ Well, boys,” said Alfred, as they sat down
at the little marble table again, and sipped lemon-
squashes as nonchalantly as if they had no project
on hand, and were merely Cook’s tourists, “ it
strikes me we’ve run across something that promises
plenty of adventure at least. Just imagine how
we should be fixed if our stuff were still at
Gibraltar consigned to other people 1 ”
“ Yes, there is a mystery about the business that
beats me,” Tom remarked. “ And it doesn’t show
up well for Messrs. Dunhill, Miller, and Bolton.
I suppose they thought they could get us stranded
here and collar our boxes at Gibraltar.”
“But what about my affairs?” cried Jack.
“ What do my cables mean? ”
“ I think they mean, Jack,” said Tom, “ that
the Captain of the Emir was right when he said
we had powerful enemies who didn’t always act
forcibly if other means could serve.”
“ You surely don’t mean the Senussi? ” Alfred


asked. “ They couldn’t exist in civilised coun
tries.”
“ I don’t know, but I am of opinion that we
should throw our enemies off the track whoever
they are. We have lost nothing so far, thanks to
ourselves ; but I think now there was much sense
in the Captain’s advice this afternoon, and I move
we get down to the harbour. It’s dark now, and
he’ll shift our boxes into the Tripoli steamer with-
out any fuss.”
“ Isn’t that Arab sheikh at that table outside
wonderfully like our friend who travelled from
Marseilles with us? ” put in Alfred. “If his face
were white and not muffled up so much, and he
were wearing European dress, he would be the
exact counterpart.”
“ You forget I broke that fellow’s nose,” Tom
laughed ; ‘‘at least, I dreamt I did. But let’s
get down to the harbour and see what the Captain
says.”
They went, and the Captain said so much that
the following Thursday afternoon they landed with
all their belongings at the Port of Gabes, in Tunis.
He had decided that Tripoli was now out of the
question for several reasons.


CHAPTER V
FROM TUNISIA TO TRIPOLI
The afternoon was drawing to a close, and the
light of the setting sun gleamed through the noble
palms and lit up with ever-changing tints the
foliage of the orange, lemon, and pomegranate
trees and the clinging vine clusters that stretched
in graceful festoons between the larger trunks.
Almost every kind of fruit-tree flourished in the
sheltering shade of the lordly palms—peach, pear,
plum, apricot, olive, and fig being very plen-
tiful indeed. The air was laden with fragrance,
water was everywhere, and all the senses were
pleased. Birds of gay plumage flitted among the
tree tops, and doves cooed softly to each other
among the almond-groves. Hares and other
smaller animals ran about fearlessly, and the ruins
of what must have been an imposing edifice, judging
from the remnants of richly carved columns which
still flanked the entrance, added a picturesqueness
to the scene strongly suggestive of dreamland.
Such was the first camp of the adventurers in
the oasis of Gabes. Scattered around them were
the many oddly-shaped boxes containing their car-
frame, engines, and wheels, their separator, stores,
rifles, ammunition, and, in fact, everything that they
106


had thought necessary for their trip, except petrol,
which they had calculated upon being able to pur-
chase at their landing port. And that port was
Gabes 1
It was just visible through the trees on their
right, a patch of dazzling white sand lying between
the edge of the oasis and the flat-roofed buildings
of the town. They sparkled in the light of the
western sun as if inlaid with diamonds and rubies,
and beyond the deep blue of the tranquil Mediter-
ranean stretched away until blended in the horizon.
The boys were cooking. On a fire a billy was
boiling, and from another pot the appetising odour
of a stew issued. Tins of jam and some French
rolls were spread out on the top of one of the
larger boxes, and enamelled cups and plates were
also in evidence. A rifle and some tools lay near.
Slowly the sun sank behind the distant ranges,
and darkness was upon them with startling sud-
denness. The electric lights of the town below
flashed out, and the ships in the roadstead became
illuminated. The music of the band of one of
the French regiments in the great barracks, as it
played in the square while its officers dined, floated
up over the sands on the delightfully cool evening
breeze, and the boys felt at peace with the world,
even with the vacillating Mr. Dunhill.
“ This is a glorious life, boys 1 ” Suddenly
Alfred spoke, rousing himself from a reverie, and
passing round the boiling tea. “ I think the people
who live in this place must get full value out of
their lives. I am surprised that week-enders from
Britain haven’t found it out. They will some day,
and then, I suppose, Gabes will grow into a big
city.”


“ Alfred,” said Tom, also rousing himself from
a day-dream, “ I am surprised at your ignorance.
Don’t you know that we are at present sitting among
the ruins of perhaps the best work of two mighty
empires? ”
“No, I don’t ; I’m only a poor ignorant
mechanic, and it has taken me all my time to
acquire the art of pushing a file straight. I’m
not a freak of solid wisdom like you. What empires
do you mean, anyhow? ”
“ Carthage founded this place, right where we
are now, I believe ; then, when she fell, Rome
thought this spot good for the site of a monument
of her greatness. But empires pass away, as well
as people, it seems, for this country is now French,
and they have considered the best place for the
town is down on the sea. Even the ruins of the
work of Carthage and Rome have disappeared, I
remember hearing a lecturer say, for the stones
were taken away, time after time, to build other
places.”
“ That’s so,” said Jack, “ but our stew is more
important in the meantime. I’ll dish it out.”
And he did, and all dined well, the light of the
fire serving wonderfully well for illumination.
“ Well, I can’t enthuse like you, Tom, over old
empires and cities ; I’m more interested in aero-
planes and other things of our time,” Alfred re-
marked when the meal was nearly over, “ but I
do think that the French people are the finest people
I have ever met. Just think of the trouble the
Captain of the Emir took over us, and of how the
Soudan's skipper insisted on our landing here in-
stead of going on to Tripoli, because we should
be under French protection here, while we should


have to take all risks at Tripoli, and he knew the
Senussi were on the look out there for foreigners.
Then imagine, if you can, a British regiment help-
ing us as that French regiment did to-day. Why,
we could never have got our gear up here ourselves.
And we are almost filibusters in their country too.”
“ Oh, our own Tommies would have done as
much too, I think,’’ said Jack. “ Still, it is a bit
strange to think that we’re comfortably camped
here, and all owing to the good nature of soldiers
of a foreign nation. I don’t suppose we have a
countryman nearer than Tunis, yet we feel as safe
as if we were on the Grampian Mountains in Scot-
land. And we’ve been invited to lunch with the
officers of the garrison to-morrow.”
“ After which they will send us up as much petrol
as we require with that Bedouin camel team the
Captain told us about which is bound for Bornu in
the Niger country,” Tom added. “We have cer-
tainly been very fortunate so far, boys ; who would
have thought that that letter the Captain of the
Emir gave us to the Captain of the Spahi regi-
ment here could have meant.so much? And then
the officers of the Tripoli steamer, the Soudan ,
got our stuff landed without any fuss being made
by the Customs. Boys, I think we’ve got a good
start, and we’ll have luck.”
” And we’re not yet a fortnight away from old
dismal, cold Glasgow,” said Jack, “ and here we
are in the finest climate, perhaps, in the whole
world, and ready to begin our grand scheme.”
“ All very fine to talk about,” put in Alfred ;
“ but what about the Touaregs, the Marabouts, and
the Senussi? ”
“Hang them all !” laughed Jack. ‘“Sufficient


for the day is the evil thereof.’ But, boys, I’m as
sleepy as a night-watchman. Let’s get things
washed up and turn in,”
They slept that night in the pure open air of
the oasis, and were not even troubled in dream by
the spirits of those who had so long ago held high
revelry in a magnificent palace, probably on the
very spot on which they were slumbering. In the
morning they began to unpack the cases, after
having had a swim in the pool beside them. The
population of a native village near gathered round
to watch them, but all stood a good way off ; they
had been told to be careful not to interfere with
the boys by the French officers in Gabes, and, if
they valued their lives and the welfare of their
souls afterwards, not to go within a kilometre of
their camp after sunset. The boys went down
into the city at noon and lunched with the officers
of the garrison, one of whom was a brother of the
Emir’s Captain, and nearly all of whom had known
Jack’s father in Oran. Help to construct their plant
was offered, but Tom declined any assistance, say-
ing that they could manage easily themselves now.
He did not wish the Frenchmen to know all their
business.
When they got back to Camp, they found that
several large tanks of petrol had been deposited
near, by a camel team which had just passed, and
as all their requirements were now at hand, nothing
remained but to construct their appliances and get
started. They already had everything in the way
of maps the French officers could provide, as well
as their advice as to the best way of dealing with
nomadic tribes between Gabes and Wadai. After
Wadai they would be in British Egypt, and if they


got so far, the lads thought they need have little
fear about continuing their journey on to the Nile,
for it would be as easy going ahead as coming back.
Everything was already unpacked, and in a very
short space of time they had fitted the frame of
the car together, not a difficult matter to young
engineers like them, seeing that all the parts had
been carefully marked in Glasgow, and it was now
only a matter of reassembling. Soon the axles were
in place, and then, jacking up the car, they slid
the wheels on, and screwed the lock nuts up. Then,
with the assistance of two French officers, they
lifted the four-cylinder engines into position, and
while Alfred adjusted the timing, Tom fitted the
carburettor, and Jack completed the fixing of all
the petrol tubes and valves. They were wonderful
engineers and worked together as if machines
themselves. By sundown the car was completed
except for the body, which, in this case, was the
metallic sheathing designed by Tom, and the fitting
of the sand-sifter.
The officers rode home greatly impressed with
the skill of the lads, and marvelling that any people
but Frenchmen could so scientifically fit together
a powerful motor-car. They would have been
more surprised had they seen what followed. The
boys made some tea hurriedly, and after partaking
of it, they set to work again with the aid of candle-
light. They fitted the gold-extractor and all the
arrangements they had devised to allow of its
working without interfering with the movement
of the car, and then they hastily strung together
the trailer intended to carry their store of petrol.
Before daylight they had bolted on the casing
which had been designed as armour, and just


as the sun rose above the Libyan Desert on the
east they had stowed away all their stores, filled
the radiator with water, adjusted the engine clutch,
and filled a water-tank with ten gallons of water
for their own use should they not strike an oasis
during their day’s journey.
All was now complete and they were ready to
start. They knew that a well-marked track led
southwards for a considerable distance, but they
were also aware that the beaten track was of
no use to them for more reasons than one ; they
would not find gold upon it, and they would cer-
tainly run into trouble.
They studied their maps intently while they
prepared their last breakfast within reach of
civilisation, and memorised all the features
marked. “ Shouldn’t we say goodbye to the
officers before starting on our overland trip? ”
Alfred suggested. “ They will think Britons have
no manners if we glide away without a word of
thanks.”
“ Hullo ! I see that Captain fellow who knows
my father so well riding through the sand in our
direction now,” Jack cried, interrupting his com-
rade. “ And by Jupiter, he’s in a hurry 1 ” The
officer rode into the palms and drew rein beside
the boys. He eyed the strange-looking car for
a moment and smiled. “ You are quite ready? ”
he asked in his own language.
“ Quite,” Jack answered. “ Won’t you dismount
and have a cup of coffee with us? ”
“ Your car can travel all right, and you have
all available maps? ”
“ Yes,” Tom replied, “ and we are coming down
to thank you fellows.”


'
“the officer rode into the palms and drew rein beside
THE BOYS.”
To face page 112.




“ I don’t think you are Is there anything
you require or would like that we can provide? ”
“ Nothing, sir, you have already given us every-
thing we needed. But we should like if you would
drink a cup of coffee with us.”
“ Hand it up then. I had forgotten we were
in a Mohammedan country.” The officer took the
hot beverage which Tom handed up to him, and
rising in his stirrups, he cried : “ Success to your
journey, boys. May Allah never be absent from
you, and may your ways be in peace.” He
drained his cup and continued : ‘‘l came to tell
you that the Commander has received instruc-
tions by cable this morning to prevent any ex-
pedition from leaving Gabes for the interior. He’ll
send up a detachment of soldiers after breakfast,
and he told me to convey to you the fact that the
officers of the Spahi Regiment wish you good
luck. Fly the tricolour when you fall in with
wandering Bedouin tribes ; you’ll find it will be a
better friend to you in the Sahara than your own
flag, for France exacts an eye for an eye and a
tooth fora tooth every time and tfieyknow it. Keep
clear of the Senussi—and don’t stop until you are
beyond the reach of the telegraph. Au revoir ! ”
He saluted, turned, and galloped away, and the
boys looked at each other.
“ Come on, lads, we haven’t too much time,”
Tom said suddenly. “ I hear the band playing
now, and the soldiers will be here before we’re
very far away. By Jove 1 but the Frenchmen are
decent fellows.”
In a few minutes all the cooking utensils were
flung inside and the boys took their places. The
car was simply a large oblong box mounted upon
8


the framework and extending beneath it all round.
This box was constructed of very light metallic
sheets bolted together and a canvas roof could
be drawn over at will. Holes served for windows,
and could also be closed at will. Altogether it
was designed for travelling through sand, and
although it was not the finished article seen in
fashionable cities, it would probably serve its
purpose better than one with a highly ornamented
and costly body. The sand-scoop was completely
covered and only the cup for catching the gold
was easily accessible, the idea being to make
the dust and sand pass under the car when treated
and thus avoid the unpleasantness of its presence
in the faces of the operators. Two portholes
fitted with thick plate-glass commanded the view
in front, and the stores, which consisted of tins of
compressed meat, jams, flour, rice, coffee, tea, and
sugar, with one or two other commodities in small
quantities, were packed in the car’s interior very
carefully. In fact, everything was calculated
exactly. They had stores to last a month, and
water for four days, or five at a pinch.
The boys did not suffer from want of confi-
dence in their own powers. Still, they were fully
aware of the dangers they would possibly em
counter. Of course they knew that the Sahara
Desert was not the impassable sand waste people
in Britain imagined it to be, and that the great
slave route stretched across from the Mediterranean
at Tripoli to Lake Chad, passing through many
oases and villages. They had also the knowledge
now that French regiments regularly crossed to
the Congo possessions by that route, and that
caravans laden with gold-dust, ivory, feathers,


and perhaps slaves were ever coming northward
on it, while others, carrying coloured cloth, cheap
clocks, gramophones, mirrors, and perhaps even
petrol for motor-cars owned by some mighty chief
were just as regularly proceeding south.
So long as the boys kept within touch of this
ancient track they would never be very far from
an oasis, and possibly trading natives who might
be disposed to be friendly. They had already
made all their plans, their idea being to cut south-
east through the coastal ranges to the plateau
beyond and then plough through the sand-dunes
marked on their maps until they struck the great
overland route leading through Fezzan. Then they
would follow the caravan track as nearly as
possible either to the right or left of it, keeping out
of sight all day, and running in to the nearest
oasis when they needed water. And now their
great venture was about to commence. All could
handle a car, or, indeed, anything with wheels —or
without. They were, indeed, a wonderfully skilled
trio, yet full of that boyish enthusiasm which some-
times carries a scheme through where the sagacity
of elders would fail.
Alfred and Jack were already seated inside, and
Tom ran to the front and gave the engine a few
turns with the handle. It started at once, and
in a few seconds the strange car was threading
its way out through the timber towards the military
road that ran through the oasis far into the heart
of Tunisia. Soon they were bowling over this
track at twenty miles an hour along the course of
the River or Wadi Gabes. They passed through
several large villages, the occupants of which gazed
curiously at the car, but made no demonstration.


They were used to motor-cars along the military
road, for nearly all the officers in Gabes owned cars.
At length they reached the source of the Wadi
Gabes, a stream famous in history before the
Thames and the Clyde were known, and yet now
only an almost stagnant water-hole, flowing only
in the wet seasons, but still giving life to the twenty-
mile oasis which flanked it. The road now led up
a long incline. On either side were myriads of
large stones, and the track had been formed simply
by clearing the stones away from the line of road-
way. When they reached the top, they had left
civilisation behind. In front lay the Sahara. The
road had split into two, the main one heading
almost due south to Ghadames and the other, a
mere camel-pad, bearing more easterly diagonally
through long ridges of sand not unlike great waves
suddenly stilled.
“ Now, boys,” said Tom, slowing down, “ this
is our last chance to decide. According to our
maps the Tripoli and Lake Chad track lies about
a hundred miles east from here on the other side
of these sand-hills. Shall we tackle it or not?
This pad leads all the way, but we can’t travel
along a camel-pad, and we may stick in the sand
if we leave it.”
“ Chance it,” advised Jack. “ We’ve water for
four days, and we could walk the distance in
that time if we broke down.”
“ And if we don’t we’ll be there to-night,”
Alfred added. “ Let her rip, Tom ! ”
Tom did. The troubles of the journey had
now commenced in earnest. They dared not lose
sight of the pad, yet it looked as if progress might
be easier if they drove along the bottom of one of


the valleys between the sand-hills instead of
floundering across the ridge into the next, running
down it for some distance, and then crossing into
another. These depressions and ridges all ran in
parallel lines east and west ; what they ended in
the boys’ maps did not show, but in any case they
had to travel south as well as east unless they
wished to strike Tripoli, and the camel-pad kept
on diagonally crossing ridge after ridge. It was
no easy task handling the car, but luckily the tyres
were very large and did not sink in the soft sand
flanking the pad as much as might have been ex-
pected.
Hour after hour they forged ahead, the dust
forcing itself through every seam and almost
stifling them. Of course they used the lowest
gear in negotiating these sand-waves, and even
then it was as much as the engines could do to
drive the car up one slope with its wheels buried
well over the rims, and down the other side with
the “ bonnet ” clearing the sand away like
a plough. The heat was intense, and the blinding
glare of the sand most trying to the driver, who
had to keep his eyes ahead through the portholes.
Several times he moistened his throat with
water, but it was warm, and not being used to
this little detail of desert life, he felt sick. At
length he gave up his place to Jack, and lay
down in the body of the car behind and fell asleep.
When he awoke —a few minutes later, he thought,
but in reality three hours later—the car was speed-
ing along over a track of level, hard ground, a
low range of mountains looming hazily on the
extreme left and a bolder chain growing every
moment more distinct in front.


“ Where are we now? ” he inquired, seeing with
surprise the time by his chronometer.
“ I don’t exactly know,” Alfred replied, “ but
if we keep on travelling at this rate we’ll soon
hit the Red Sea. We’ve come sixty miles, I see by
our speedometer, since leaving the Ghadames road,
and I think those hills ahead must be the range
running south which the old slave route skirts.
Hullo ! here is more sand, but it is level.”
Almost as he spoke the car plunged into a
sand-patch, and Jack at once reduced the gear
to give the engines every chance of pulling them
through.
“ I see a way round,” cried Jack. “ Look, there
is a track leading off here which circles right round
the sand. We’ll take it.” He turned the car round
on the new track, at once regaining hard ground,
and they flew along as before. But not for long.
Without warning of any kind the ground suddenly
fell away from under and the car flew through the
air down into a large depression. It landed on
soft sand luckily, and stopping the engines, the
boys got out to see the damage. There did not
seem to be much wrong ; their water had splashed
out to some extent through the lid of the tank, and
some tins of condensed milk had rolled from their
position. But most fortunate of all was the trailer.
It had landed softly and overturned, but as the
petrol was sealed hermetically, that mattered little,
and the boys soon put it back on its wheels again.
Then they looked about them to see the nature
of the strange place into which they had fallen.
“ Boys, we’ve struck something good,” ex-
claimed Jack. “ This is one of the cave dwellings
so much talked about at home.”


“Is it? ” asked Alfred. “ I never heard of
them, and I don’t see anything good about the
business. How are we to get out is what I want
to know ! ”
“ We’ll get out all right,” said Tom. “ Don’t
you worry. I’ve read of these places and there
always is a road out.”
“ But where is the population? ” cried Jack.
“ Probably waiting in some of those holes over
there until they get a chance to spear us,” Alfred
answered. “ I don’t like this quietness ; if we
could see our enemies I shouldn’t mind.”
“ Rot 1 ” interrupted Jack. “ We’ve no enemies
here. We came here of our own free will, and
besides, Alfred, the people who live in this part
of the world don’t use spears now ; they use the
very latest pattern of rifles, and from the fact
that we haven’t been shot already I fancy the
owners of this place are not at home.”
And Jack was correct, to a certain extent. The
owners were not at home, but their wives and
families were, as the intruders soon discovered.
The depression into which they had so uncere-
moniously been launched was about forty feet in
depth, but a drift of sand in the middle took
about fifteen feet off the drop. It on first sight
looked like a quarry, for underneath the surface
sands the formation was solid rock. In the walls
of this basin, which, roughly, was about a hundred
and fifty feet in diameter, were innumerable holes,
those on the lowest level serving, apparently, as
doors, and those higher up as windows. No
road out was in evidence.
“ We’ll explore the place anyhow,” said Tom.
“ Knowledge gained early is always an advan-
tage.”


He led the way into the chief entrance on the
ground level, and almost at once they found them-
selves in a richly-furnished dwelling-house, accord-
ing to the ideas of wealthy Bedouin tribes.
Magnificent mats lay upon the floor, and hung
round the walls, all green in colour, and woven
of some material the boys did not then know. A
pyramid-shaped piece of furniture, apparently built
of gold, and inlaid with gems of the turquoise
variety, occupied the centre of the apartment, and
curiously embroidered cushions lay promiscuously
all around. Light came in from one of the holes
in the rocks above.
“ Boys, we have no right here,” said Tom.
“ This is a private dwelling, and we are not
common housebreakers.”
“ Anyhow, that pyramid affair is only made of
wood and covered with gold foil,” Alfred com-
mented. “ And we have no room to carry mats,
nor carved metal plates like those ornamenting
the walls, even though we were here for plunder.
Let’s get out, I say.”
“ Certainly,” agreed Tom. “ Show us the way.”
Alfred pushed aside one of the mat curtains
and they entered another room, and instantly p
chorus of shrieks greeted the boys. About a dozen
closely veiled females were huddled together in
a corner and they certainly had good luffg power.
“ We’ve done it now, boys I ” cried Tom.
“ We’ve struck the sheikh’s harem, I suppose.”
“ Let me speak to them,” Jack cried. “ They’ll
likely know some French. We beg your pardon,
ladies ; we are not robbers, and are here by
accident. Tell us how to get out and we’ll
go with the greatest pleasure.” Jack, of course.


spoke in perfect French, and the shrieking gradu
ally subsided.
“ On the other side, past the stables,” spoke
one of the muffled figures in a wonderfully
musical voice. “ But go quickly, or you will be
caught by our people.” The speaker’s eyes shone
out like diamonds as she spoke and the boys
knew she was not much more than a girl.
“ Good-day, then, ladies ; we are sorry to have
frightened you, but really we couldn’t help our-
selves. Can’t you show us the way? We’ve got
a conveyance with us and it must get out too.”
Another series of shrieks greeted his words,
showing that all understood French, and that he
had asked something impossible.
“ Very well, ladies, we’ll try to find the way
ourselves. Give our respects to your people when
they come home, and tell them that we are very
sorry we couldn’t stay to accept their hospitality.”
“ Go away quickly, or you will be killed,” cried
the lady who had first spoken. “ Sheikh Abdulla
is a very jealous man and he will return any time
now.”
“ We’re off,” cried Jack. “We don’t want to
meet any jealous men, let alone Arab chiefs.
Come on, boys, this is no place for us.”
“ To the setting sun lies the way,” spoke the
lady of the flashing eyes in excellent French.
“ But beware of the people of my father’s tribe,
as well as Sheikh Abdulla. Take me to Paris with
you ”
“ We couldn’t think of it,” Jack hurriedly re-
sponded. ‘‘We are not going that way, and I
fancy we would rather tackle Sheikh Abdulla and
his men than ”


“ Don’t be rude, Jack,” Tom interrupted, who
understood French much better than he could speak
it. “ Say we’ll call again.”
But Jack had cleared out from the place, and his
comrades lost no time in following. They had
serious business on hand which did not permit of
any Don Quixotic actions. Running across the
open space outside towards the declining sun, they
found a large, tunnel-like passage leading into
the rocks at an angle which promised to lead to
the surface in time. This passage was exactly
opposite to the dwellings they had already
explored, and from it there opened numerous side
galleries, in some of which were horses.
“ This is the way out,” Jack cried. “In these
cave cities the stables are always in the entrance
passage. Go back and start the engines, Tom, and
we’ll get out some of those horses to help to haul
the car out of the sand.”
“ We don’t need any help,” Tom cried back.
“ Get on board at once, and if that passage leads
to the upper world, and is wide enough, we’ll soon
get there. Hurry, boys ; it’s getting late and we
must strike the main south road before dark.”
And they did hurry. Jack ran on ahead to
prove the existence of a passage, and Tom and
Alfred hastened back to the half-buried car, and
with their hands removed as much sand as possible
from the wheel track. Then Tom gave the engines
a turn or two, but, to his horror, they would not
start.
“ Sand has got into and is choking the car-
burettor,” cried Tom. “ And, oh ! here come the
women 1 ”
Come on, boys I ” shouted Jack from the


surface of the desert above, “ the road leads right
through, and there are no obstructions.”
“ Quick, Alfred 1 ” cried Tom. “ Pour some
petrol down the air-inlet pipe and perhaps that
will start us.”
In an instant Alfred had done as requested,
and when Tom next gave the handle a vicious
turn, the engines caught and ran perfectly. Next
moment both lads were on board, and letting the
clutch “ in ” with a jerk, which certainly would
have stripped the gear wheels of their teeth had
they not been cut from the solid of a new steel
alloy only recently discovered, the rear wheels of
the car were driven round rapidly in the sand for
a few turns, then the car leaped forward.
Straight into the ascending tunnel passage Tom
steered, and the shrieks of the females behind were
more discordant than the blast of many motor
horns. Up the inclined path the machine moved
slowly on the lowest gear. Tom was afraid to
travel faster in the semi-darkness, but Alfred was
afraid, chiefly, that the howhng ladies would jump
on from behind. If they had been men he
wouldn’t have worried so much, but female Der-
vishes, even although they could speak French,
were a bit beyond him. Luckily the trailer
was between them, and it afforded no means of
catching on.
Suddenly the car shot out into daylight on the
surface of the desert, and Jack ran alongside and
scrambled in beside Alfred. “ Let her rip, Tom 1 ”
he yelled ; “ there seems to be half a million of
horsemen galloping down upon us I ”
“ I fear she won’t rip,” Tom replied sadly.
“ The carburettor is blocked with a grain of sand


or something, and we may stick any moment.”
He threw open the throttle, nevertheless, and flung
the gear-changing lever round to the top speed.
Right nobly the car responded, and in less than a
minute she was on the defined east-leading track.
Jack and Alfred picked up their repeating rifles,
but Tom never took his eyes off the track in front.
From the south and south-east bands of horsemen
were galloping to cut them off, and for a time it
looked as if their magnificent Arab chargers
would beat the car in the race to the point where
the track passed over a slight ridge. All the
tribesmen had their rifles unslung and one or two
shots were fired, but to no effect, except to make
the boys continue the race, whereas they might
have stopped and tried to convince the men that
they were not there with intent to harm. But even
Arab chargers cannot gallop forty-five miles an
hour for long, and the car was now racing forward
at that speed towards the ridge which was the ob-
jective of both parties. Still, Tom knew that their
power was liable to fail any moment ; for a single
grain of sand could block the flow of petrol in the
carburettor were it to become lodged in the nozzle
of the spraying-jet, and he was well aware that
some sand had gained access as a result of the fall
down into the cave dwellings.
The desert tribesmen and the car were now
only a few hundred yards apart, and their yells of
rage against the supposed robbers of their homes
told the boys that their daring venture would
speedily end if they fell into the warriors’ hands.
But they didn’t. Petrol, science, and coolness
were more than a match for the angry Bedouins.
The car simply leaped the intervening space, and


/m '
jjjjf
\ '**’ %
i •- % ■ ■' -,/vi^-c : v^te. : i
“ the car simply leaped the intervening space and
PASSED ON.”
To face page 124.




passed on into the desert while the converging
riders were yet fully a hundred yards off. A
shower of bullets followed them, but the armour-
casing of the car shielded its occupants wonderfully
although it was pierced in several places. A
minute after passing the ridge they were out of
range, and a few minutes later still darkness fell
and made further progress risky. They couldn’t
afford to stop, however, and for fully half an hour
afterwards Tom steered straight ahead, Alfred and
Jack assisting in looking out for the track boun-
daries. At length they felt they were safe from
pursuit, and Tom slowed down.
“We must be near the overland track now,
boys,” he said. “ Perhaps we had better camp
until daylight for fear we cross it without seeing
it. We have left our friends at least twenty miles
behind, and I don’t expect they’ll follow us in the
darkness.”
Alfred and Jack agreed with him, and he turned
the car off the track for about a couple of hundred
yards and brought it to a stop. They were
hungry, thirsty, and half-choked with sand, but
their purpose was as strongly fixed in their minds
as ever. Jack at once drew some hot water from
the radiator and began to bring it to the boil
on a fire made of some tufts of a grass of the
spinifex variety, and the other two walked back to
the track and obliterated with their feet the trail
of the car wheels so that they might not be
followed by the tell-tale marks. Soon they were
dining on tinned meat, rice, and tea and jam,
and when dinner was over Tom dissected the car-
burettor and flushed it out. He did not believe
in taking any more risks than could be helped.


“ Well, boys,” said Alfred, after everything had
been made right for a start again, “ we’ve
started our trip at any rate, and had some fun.
Our next business is to look for gold patches.
I would give a lot for a bath, but perhaps I’ll
get that if we ever reach Lake Chad or the Nile.”
“ We can’t be far from the Tripoli track now,”
Tom observed. “ I’m sure we’ve covered the
distance marked on our maps. Hullo I I’m sure
I saw a light away over there to the east ! ”
“ Yes,” cried Alfred, “ I see a lot of lights
now ; lie down here and look over past the top
of that sand-hill. I do believe we’ve struck the
track, boys, and that is the town or village named
Mizda on our maps.”
“ I thought those lights were stars? ” Jack said.
“ They’re high above the desert, and ”
” And Mizda is marked here as being eighteen
hundred feet above the surrounding country,” Tom
observed, bending over the faintly flickering fire
with the map the French officers had given them.
‘‘lt appears from this map that the Tripoli and
Lake Chad track leads along the face of those
mountains we saw in front before sundown, and we
must, therefore, rise considerably before we can join
it. I propose, boys, that we go ahead now, and get
past the village in the dark. We can’t very easily
climb the face of the ranges if we don’t join the
main track, and we can’t afford to fly through
Mizda in open daylight, as we must do unless we
leave this trail? ”
“ Good old Carthagenians I ” Jack sang out. *‘ I
expect they made this camel-pad, and as they
knew what they were doing, I vote we stick to it.
We don’t want to run into any more cave-dwellers’
dens.”


“ All right,” Alfred said. “ Let’s get ahead
cautiously, and if we can miss the village and
get started on the south track we can congratulate
ourselves on having done what most people at
home would say was impossible.”
“ Rot ! ” cried Jack. “ People at home have the
habit of saying a thing is impossible simply because
they know nothing about it. Look at Mr. Dunhill,
for instance ”
“ No, no 1 ” Tom interrupted. “If we think
of him we’ll go mad. I only hope he is not a
type of our business-men. Expert report I I
wonder if the man thought we were trying to sell
patent pills, or an unsinkable submarine boat.”
“ It doesn’t matter what he thought,” broke in
Alfred. “ We’ve started on our journey and we’ll
see it through or give up the ghost. There lies the
Great South Road. Are we going forward to it
to-night or not? ”
“We are,” said Tom. “ Get on board.”
An hour afterwards the car was skirting the
village of Mizda in the attempt to hit the south
leading track. Mizda had no attractions for them.
Indeed, it probably would have meant the end
of their journey had they entered the place, for
the natives were out against all unbelievers.
Eventually they cut the great slave route of
the Arabs. They could not very well miss it, as
it was flanked by heaps of bones of camels and
of human beings, and it led south almost in a
direct line as far as they could see by starlight.
They ran on for about ten miles and halted : a
huge camel caravan was just ahead.


CHAPTER VI
THE WEKIL OF THE WADI ZEMZEM
“ WHAT a nuisance I ” exclaimed Alfred petulantly.
A caravan has no right to block the road like
that.”
“ Not in Britain, or in France,” said Jack ;
‘ but we are in Tripoli, you must remember, and
travellers usually rest at night, you know. Besides,
we are not conforming to British law ourselves ;
we have no lights, and we’ve exceeded the speed
limit, shamefully.”
‘‘Well, what are we going to do?” Tom in-
quired. ‘‘lt doesn’t matter much what the law
of Tripoli is on any matter, for we will break no
laws, and we can’t very well appeal to it if we do
get into trouble. Shall we camp for the night? ”
“ Then those fellows ahead will see us at daylight
and perhaps cause considerable inconvenience,”
said Alfred. “ Probably none of them can talk any
language but their own, and they’ll think they’re
in duty bound to kill the Christian dogs who have
no business in their country.”
‘‘Rot!” commented Jack. ‘‘Those people
ahead are probably returning pilgrims, or more
or less honest traders. In any case they’ve met
white people before, and are perhaps as civilised
128


in their own way as we are. I’ll go forward and
speak to them if you like.”
“ No, you won’t,” said Tom. “ We’re taking
no risks we can avoid. There is no special reason
why we should camp here to-night, seeing that
one of us can drive while the rest sleep. I vote
we make a detour round that caravan in front and
keep on going. The first water on the road, I see,
is at the Wadi Zemzem, about a hundred miles
from here. We’ll fill up our tank there at day-
light.”
“By Jove I Tom,” Alfred laughed. “ You
mean to cross the Sahara in record time. We’ll
be at Lake Chad in a week if we keep on in this
manner.”
“ You forget that it is not to have a look at
Lake Chad we came on this picnic,” Tom said
quietly. “If it were only that, I see no reason
why we shouldn’t be there in much less time than
a week, seeing we have a track to follow all the
way. According to the map given us at Gabes,
we are now somewhere between latitudes 31° and
3 2°. The lake or marsh lies between the 14th
and 1 sth parallels, and as our course is due south
that means roughly that only a distance of twelve
hundred miles is between ”
“Is that all? ” asked Alfred with a laugh.
“ Why, we could walk that if we were in a hurry.”
“ But as every twenty miles means at least
a gallon of petrol,” Tom reminded, “we must
start our gold-extracting process before we get
there, for we’ll be in a bad position to do much
except return when we have covered the distance.”
“ Don’t you worry, old grandfather I ” Jack
laughed. “We’ll get petrol before we need it,
9


somehow. I shouldn’t mind betting there’s some
among the load of that caravan in front. One
would think, to hear you speak, that the Sahara was
uncivilised.”
‘‘And isn’t it?” asked Alfred. ‘‘When I was
at school I know I was led to believe that it was
pretty well a desert, over which bloodthirsty Der-
vishes roamed, and which was not thought worth
holding by any civilised nation.”
“ I doubt you’ll have to go back to school again
then, Alfred. The Sahara is part of the French
Colonial Empire, and is under the laws of France.
It, according to my teaching—and I think I re-
member Mr. Dunhill telling us the same —was
civilised before our ancestors were ; it is not all
a desert, and there are some very powerful little
kingdoms on the rivers of its southern division.”
“ Shut up, professor I ” interrupted Tom.
“ We’re not here to acquire knowledge ; we’re here
to get gold. Get out, one of you, and start the
engines. We’ll strike off the track and make a
detour round our friends camped ahead. We’ll
stop at the Wadi Zemzem when we get there, and
I only hope it will provide enough water for a
wash after our tank is refilled.”
Alfred had started the engines before he had
finished speaking, and carefully he steered out
into the stony ground which flanked the broad
track. It was risky work, but the night was not
very dark and all helped to look out for obstacles.
It took them a long time to get ahead of the cara-
van ; for although it was camped for the night, its
outposts were flung widely, and the boys could
see armed men sitting over small camel-dung fires,
on guard, at least a mile beyond the main camp.


Clearly it was an important caravan, for it com-
prised more camels than the boys had ever seen
before, and there seemed to be horses enough
to serve a regiment of cavalry. Probably it was
composed of returning pilgrims who had been to
Mecca, and had banded themselves together for
the journey across the Sahara to their homes in
distant oases or on the banks of the Niger.
But the boys cared little what kind of people
formed the caravan. They knew that their busi-
ness was to keep clear of all parties unless they
were looking for trouble, and that, they reasoned,
they would have to face soon enough without rush-
ing foolishly to meet it. They rejoined the great
south road after nearly an hour’s erratic flounder-
ing among stones and rocks. They couldn’t
mistake the track because it was well marked all
along its length with heaps of bones, and Jack
explained that he had been told that every caravan
which used the road was in duty bound to add
something to those little mounds if it couldn’t
provide a new one of its own by leaving a man or
a camel by the wayside.
“ We’ll leave the smell of exploding petrol gas,”
said Alfred. “ All the same, it was very thoughtful
of the desert-crossers to mark the way. I suppose
this road will soon be obliterated now, though,
seeing that slave-trading is not what it was? ”
“ Oh, there are plenty of pilgrims to take the
place of the slaves,” Jack answered, “ and the
number is increasing every year. I expect
the French will run a railway from Gabes or
Tripoli to the Niger some day, for the pilgrims
are mostly wealthy, and they have an objection to
leaving their bones along this road which would


make them prefer the railway carriages no matter
what they had to pay.”
“ Look here, you fellows,” broke in Tom,
“ there is no need for us all tiring ourselves out,
and thus going along half dead to-morrow. Let
us take watches as they do at sea. You two try
to sleep now, and I’ll keep the old car heading
south until midnight. Then one of you can relieve
me, and at four in the morning the third man
can take command. By daylight we’ll be some-
where near Wadi Zemzetn.”
Tom’s proposal was good, for it would be well that
some one was always in the best possible condition.
Hitherto, they had experienced only the joys of
travel ; but that life had been left behind at Gabes,
and now that they were on the borders of Tripoli
and Fezzan —a sort of no man’s land, where even
yet the French had little influence, and where the
people professed loyalty to their own sheikhs, to
the Sultan of Turkey, to the Senussi, to the
French, or to no power other than themselves, as
best suited their purposes at the time —it was very
likely indeed that they would experience some of
the unpleasantness soon.
Jack and Alfred promptly lay back and fell
asleep, and Tom kept his eyes fixed ahead and
opened the throttle farther.
Mile after mile was left behind, and now the
bone-flanked track was beginning to descend, as
was evidenced by the increased speed of the car.
Suddenly a dry watercourse yawned in front, but
Tom saw it in time and swerved into the latest
made cut leading off the main road down into the
hollow, and up the opposite bank. Soon he was on
the old track again, and the monotonous desert


stretched away on all sides, flat, barren of vegeta-
tion, and free even of the stones which had
previously covered its surface. A ridge of hills
loomed dimly in the distance, the stars shone
brilliantly above. Over all was the stillness of
the great waste. “We must be crossing a de-
pression now,” Tom mused. “We have just
descended a long slope and we must rise over that
ridge ahead before we enter the plains of Fezzan.
By Jove ! it is in such depressions as this that
there ought to be gold, if my text-books were
correct and the mountain range we have been
running along ever carried any —I’ll try the sands
anyway and see.”
He swung the car off the track and ploughed
into the desert. Then he changed the gear to a
lower speed so as to give more power, and pulled
the lever which lowered and raised the scoop of
the gold-separator, and at the same time put the
machine into gear. Instantly the sand showered
against the metallic casing which formed the floor
of the car, and the whir of the spiralled tube
drowned even the beat of the engines. Luckily
the entire working parts of the extractor were
under the car, and the sand was thus prevented
from suffocating the operators. The car’s gear-
box and all other vulnerable parts were also pro-
tected against the sand. But the little cup that
caught the gold was accessible from the inside of
the car by means of a sliding door which could
just be reached from the driver’s seat. Tom drove
a furrow through the sand for about half a mile,
then he stopped and examined the cup by match-
light. It was empty, not even a grain of sand
was inside. Clearly the sand at that point carried


no gold, for the machine was working perfectly,
and if any gold had been caught up by the re-
volving scoop it would have been found in the
receptacle.
“ Ah, well,” Tom mused, “we can’t expect
to be lucky at the very beginning, I suppose.
We’ll have to get a bit nearer Lake Chad before
we enter the gold-bearing region.” He started
away again, meaning to rejoin the track, but he
allowed the extractor to remain in gear, neverthe-
less, though hardly hoping that gold would now
be found. Still, he stopped again as he swung
on to the road, and looked at the cup ; then he
uttered a cry which roused his sleeping comrades
on the instant.
‘‘ What’s the matter?” Alfred inquired. ‘‘Are
we held up by the police, or have we entered a
ten-mile limit? ”
“ No, we’ve struck gold, that’s all,” Tom replied,
pointing to the cup. It was half filled with a
fine dust which even in the light of a match
gleamed brightly yellow.
“ You’re not playing us a trick, Tom? ” cried
Jack. “If not, how could you scoop up gold on the
roadway? ”
Tom explained, and the boys were silent for
a full minute.
“ Our fortunes are made 1 ” then Alfred
said. “ There is about an ounce and a half in
that cup, and there must be plenty more where it
came from. How long did it take you to get this,
Tom? ”
‘‘Not more than twenty minutes, I should say,
if we leave the time out in which I drew blank.”
“ Then turn and go back over your tracks, Tom.


Why should we worry about Lake Chad when we
can get gold here so easily? ”
Next moment the car was ploughing its way
back alongside the trail it had come, Jack and
Alfred both assisting in looking out for the triple
lines it had left in the sand. They were excited
beyond measure, but Tom was quite cool.
Suddenly he stopped the car. “ There is no gold
beyond this,” he said, “ for it was just here I
first examined the cup. See what we’ve got now.”
Alfred opened the little slide and unscrewed
the cup from its place. “ It’s full 1 ” he cried.
“ We’ve got three ounces now.”
“ Well, don’t let the whole world know,” Jack
admonished. “ Empty the gold-dust into an empty
jam-tin and we’ll get some more.”
But it was soon evident that it was only a patch
they had struck, and a narrow one at that. No
gold was found to the north, and when they doubled
back again a hundred yards to the west of the
known auriferous stretch they found only a few
grains of the precious metal. In time they
narrowed down the payable 'ground to a belt which
ran almost parallel with the roadway, probably
the covering of a reef hidden under the sands.
They furrowed this patch up and down until they
seemed to have passed all the surface sand through
their machine, and the contents of the cup when
periodically removed began to get less and less.
Then Tom noted that they had been rather prodigal
in their use of the water, for, not being used to
desert work, they had suffered from a continual
thirst, and so had gone through nearly the whole
calculated four days’ allowance.
“ Boys, this is all very well,” he remarked,


“ but our radiator needs refilling', and we would
be the better of a wash ourselves. We can’t con-
tinue working here, because we’ll be seen by every
caravan that comes along. Let’s get ahead to Wadi
Zemzem and decide upon things after we have got
more water on board.”
“ Right 1 ” agreed Alfred ; ‘‘l would give a
lot for one more drink of cool water.”
“ You’re too hard to please,” Jack laughed.
“ Cold water doesn’t grow on the Sahara Desert.
What’s wrong 1 with our gold? Try a drink of it.
That seems to be the only thing we can spare ;
we’ve got over ten ounces of it.”
“ I’d like to know how many tons we’ve sifted
to get that ten ounces,” said Alfred, “ and how
much petrol it has cost.”
“ Well, you can figure out these matters for
yourself,” Tom answered. “ I vote for that Wadi
with the funny name right now ; it can only be
forty miles distant and we’ve yet got a couple of
hours before daylight.”
“ We’ve also got that thing called the Hamada
on the map to cross,” put in Alfred.
“ Well, aren’t we crossing it now? ” said Jack.
“ Hamada means wilderness merely, and surely
this is one? ”
Tom started the car while they were still speak-
ing and headed straight down the track towards
the distant range which seemed to block their
passage.
Soon they began to rise, and almost before they
had noticed the change in the country they were
travelling up a long slope which necessitated
careful steering owing to the manner in which it
was cut up by watercourses, and the great masses


of detached weather-worn boulders which were
scattered everywhere off the main track. In time
they gained the summit, and after running at full
speed along level ground, the increased hum of the
engines and machinery told them they were on the
down grade. The morning stars shone with great
brilliance in the eastern sky, and a delightfully cool
breeze sprang into being. The roof of the car
of course, was open, as were also all the port-
holes.
“Jove I we’re travelling all right,” cried Jack.
“ It’s a good thing there isn’t much traffic on this
road, for we’d be dead certain to have an accident
if there were.”
“ Plenty of time yet,” consoled Alfred, “so
cheer up Hullo ! I believe that is a lake
or a river over on the left.”
“ That must be our Wadi,” said Tom. “ I see
our map shows that its course is parallel to ours
for some distance. Shall we leave the track and
go over to it ? There may be some caravans camped
where the road crosses it.”
“ Let’s make for the nearest water by the
shortest possible cut,” Alfred advised. “ There
are no ‘ keep off the grass ’ notices in this part of
the world, and as the sun is just coming up
we’ll be seen presently if any people are about.”
They left the track and speedily ran over to
a long, narrow pool of stagnant water which
occupied a basin of a deeply torn channel. As
far as could be seen on either hand this was the
only water in the wadi, but a large plantation of
date-palms just visible in the distance indicated
that in the vicinity also the precious fluid existed.
“ Come on, you fellows 1 ” Jack cried, jumping


out. “ I’ll bet I can beat you both in swimming
the pool ”
“ Just go a bit slower,” Tom advised. “ We’ll
get all our work done before we start play. We
didn’t come here for a swim exactly ; we could
have had all we wanted of that in the Mediter-
ranean, you know.”
“ Oh, all right, old Socrates,” retorted Jack.
“ May I wash my face, then? ”
“ You can do what you like after we refill our
tank and radiator, and have drawn all the water
we need for breakfast ; we don’t want it stirred
up until we have finished with it.”
Jack admitted there was some sense in what
Tom said, and they at once proceeded to replenish
their water supply. Afterwards they had a swim,
and then breakfast ; material for their cooking-
fire being provided by a few decayed palm-leaves
which had fallen from a cluster of date-palms
on the banks of the pool.
When all was finished Alfred threw himself
back on the ground with a sigh of satisfaction.
“ If we only had a few hours’ sleep now,” he said,
“ we would be ready to go all the way to Cape
Town.”
“ I have been thinking that it might be as well if
we did camp until evening,” Tom remarked. “It
is much cooler travelling during the night, and we
can keep out of sight more easily.”
“ I don’t think we need to worry so much about
keeping out of sight,” said Jack. “ The people
are not savages, and if we can screw out a
Bismillah occasionally, we’ll get along all right
with our knowledge of French. Besides, we can
always run away if trouble arises.”


“ Only that by the time we know that trouble
is going to arise,” put in Alfred, “ it will most
likely be too late to run away. A fellow can’t do
much in Marathon racing with a spear or bullet
hole in him ; and from what I’ve heard about
those precious pilgrims they would soon attend
to that. Don’t they get seventy thousand mansions
in heaven for every ‘ dog of a Christian ’ they
kill while en route to Mecca? ”
“ Not that I know of,” said Jack. “ They get
seventy thousand palaces, and seventy times
seventy thousand for doing lots of things, but I
don’t think they get anything for killing a
Christian.”
“ Oh, shut up, you fellows ! ” remonstrated
Tom ; “ run away and play like good little boys.
I’m going to have an hour’s sleep.”
“ And we’ll take a walk along the banks of
this funny old river,” said Jack. “We might
see something we could shoot and thus save our
stores a bit.”
“ All right,” grunted Tom. “If you run across
a garage, bring back all the petrol you can carry.”
So saying, he threw himself down under a palm-
tree and promptly dropped asleep. It was not yet
twenty-four hours since they had left Gabes, on
the shores of the Mediterranean, but it felt like
years ; and certainly they were almost as far away
from European civilisation as they could be, for
as they approached Lake Chad they would again be
coming into the regions well under the influence
of either Britain or France.
Jack and Alfred walked away ; the former carried
a shot-gun in the hopes of bringing back some
game, but Alfred was more interested in the pebbly


wash in the dry bed of the Wadi. He confided
to Jack that he thought there might be all sorts
of gems there. If there were he didn’t find any,
nor did his comrade see anything to shoot a,t
until they reached the cluster of date-palms they
could just see, over the ridge, from their camp.
Then he saw a creature whose appearance baffled
him for some time to find a name for it. It was
a goat. Next moment he saw there were hundreds
of them, all nibbling peacefully at some coarse
form of herbage which grew along the banks of
the large pool which lay among the trees.
“ What have we struck, Alfred? ” he called out.
“ The desert here blossoms like the rose anyhow 1
And look 1 I see horses and camels I We must
have run into a camp 1 ”
“ And I see houses,” cried Alfred —“ unless it
is a mirage which is deceiving me. We are in a
village. Oh 1 ”
A number of men garbed in what seemed huge
winding shrouds had sprung upon him, uttering
words unintelligible. He saw that Jack had been
similarly attacked, and tried to force his way
towards him, striking out right and left at every
head that came within reach. He fought well,
and Jack fought well, but two boys were no match
for a score of wiry Bedouins, who, strangely
enough, used no weapons other than their hands,
and soon they were lying together, bound helplessly
with stout leather thongs. Their captors treated
them gently, however, and they were unharmed.
After some discussion among themselves the natives
lifted them and carried them into the village that
nestled among the date-palms, depositing them on
the mud floor of a square, flat-roofed, whitewashed


building, also built of baked mud. It was almost
dark inside, the only light coming in through
a ventilating hole in the flat roof. The men
unbound the lads and left them, muttering some
words in Arabic which Jack thought meant, ‘ In
the name of God, do not fear ! It is the Wekil’s
command that you be well treated.”
“ Who and what is the Wekil? ” Alfred asked.
“ And why on earth, Jack, didn’t you sling out
seventy times seventy thousand Bismillahs at them?
You know you said that word would work magic
about here.”
“ Oh, shut up, Alfred ! You’re always grumbling,
and your ignorance is something awful. A Wekil
is a man who, by a special dispensation, is allowed
to deal with unbelievers on behalf of important
sheikhs or prophets, without contamination. He
is usually a well-learned man, and invariably a
sheikh himself. We’ll likely have a visit from
him shortly.” *1
“ But what about poor Tom? ” said Alfred.
“He’ll go mad when time passes and we don’t
turn up. Jupiter ! to think that we were collared
so easily and so soon.”
“ Well, you needn’t shout about it. It was
Allah’s will, and we may as well say, Kismet ”
(“So be it”).
“I’m sure we’ll say nothing of the sort. We’re
not Mohammedans, and we’ll fight right through
to the end.”
“Of course we will, Alfred ; I was only trying
to be in front of you with the grumble ; we’re
not dead yet, and we may be able to convince
the Wekil that we are doing no harm. Hullo !
I’ll bet this is the very man coming in now ! ”


“ Bismillah! ” spoke a gorgeously-dressed per-
son, entering. He wore a richly ornamented sword,
and in his gaudy belt were a pair of the very
latest pattern of French revolvers. His light brown
face was decidedly handsome, and he was carry-
ing a case of cigarettes in his hand.
“ Bismillah ! ” the lads responded, rising to their
feet and bowing in their best style.
“ Ma’es salameh /” (“May peace abide with
you I ”) went on the visitor, proffering his cigarette-
case.
“ Salamat ” returned Jack, who was well aware
of the proper answer: “ Parlez-voas Frangais? ”
“ Oh, certainly, but I prefer English if that
language is known to you.”
“ What ! ” gasped the prisoners. “ You can
speak English ! Who and what are you? ”
“ I am one of the Wekils of the Mahdi, my
young friends, and I speak nearly all languages.
I have been an officer in the Turkish Army and
I received part of my education in Edinburgh
University. Now that you know me, may I ask
who you are, and what your business is here? ”
“ Oh, we’re nobody ; we belong to a place
called Glasgow, and thinking the Sahara Desert
was large enough to hold us, and that it was
free, and under French laws, we came here. We
mean harm to none, and we don’t see why any
people should fear us.”
“ That’s right, Jack, rub it in,” said Alfred
when Jack finished. “We are breaking no laws
so far as we know and ”
“ What is your object in coming here? ” asked
the Wekil. “ I would give a lot to be elsewhere
in London, or Paris, for instance.”


“ Then why don’t you go? ” asked Alfred.
“ There can be nothing in this place to keep
a man like you in it.”
“ Oh, I’m seldom here, I go pretty well all
over the world —at least, the Orient ; but then I
am sent, I must obey orders.”
“ And were you ordered to attack us and take
us prisoners?” Jack asked. “Because if that
is the kind of work you do you must have ,a
mighty poor opinion of yourself, especially if you
passed through Edinburgh University.”
“ Astaghferallah! Astaghferallah! Astaghfer-
allah! ” ejaculated the Wekil, repeating the word
several times with frowning face, and the boys
knew he was very angry indeed. If his displeasure
lasted while he repeated seventy Astaghferallahs,
he would not be committing any sin although
he did grievous bodily harm to them.
But he did not get beyond a dozen utterances
of the word when his face cleared and he smiled
sweetly. The prophet Mohammed was certainly
most wise in some of his decre’es, and the command
that no man might act in anger until he had
“ sought shelter in God ” seventy times has prob-
ably prevented much bloodshed among his fiery
followers.
“ You are only thoughtless boys,” he laughed ;
“ there must be some mistake made about you.
You don’t seem to know that I could order you to
be killed and that there would never be a word said
about you.”
“ But why should you want to kill us? ” Alfred
asked. “ You seem to be civilised ”
“ Astaghferallah! ” muttered the other. “Is it
only the uncivilised who kill, do you think? ”


“ Well, we are not so friendless in any case,”
said Jack. “My father is an important business-
man in Oran and he would make things lively for
you. And the officers of the French Army in
Gabes know that we are here, and you might have
more trouble explaining things to them than you
think.”
The Wekil laughed heartily. “My dear young
friends,” he said, “ I see there is some mistake,
for your ignorance is too natural to be assumed.
I shall order coffee to be sent in to you presently,
and make more inquiries concerning you.”
“ Couldn’t you just as well open that door and
allow us to be free? ” suggested Alfred. “ We’ve
a long way to go.”
“ My instructions from Tripoli are to hold you
fast. But I understood there were three of you.
I trust your comrade has not been injured? ”
“ What comrade? ” Alfred inquired quickly,
seeing through the ruse. “ I tell you straight,
sir, we cannot understand you. Who told you
to stop us, and under which Government’s
authority do you interfere with us? We are British
subjects, and only the French can have any objec-
tions to our presence, and we don’t believe they
have.”
“ You are held by command of a Power stronger
than any Government, and which recognises jio
authority except the laws of the Prophet. France
and Britain know the resources of that Power, and
respect it, because they are well aware that when
they please the Senussi can sweep both from
North Africa—the former from Algeria and the
Sahara, and the latter from Egypt and the Sudan.
What the plans and projects of the Senussi are,
are not for me to disclose, but they have pto-


ceedings on hand now which will not brook inter-
ference from any combination of nations on earth.
Therefore I am here, and others of my rank are
elsewhere. Our duty it is to see that no infidel
places foot on holy ground, for where the un-
believer breathes air the Senussi must not. Hence
we who are Wekils —people specially trained, and
allowed to breathe the same atmosphere as
Christians —must see that the Senussi are allowed
to carry out their schemes in peace until the storm
breaks ; after that they will see to it themselves.
Then the green banner of the Prophet will float
triumphantly over London and Paris. Cambridge
and Oxford and my own beloved Edinburgh shall
be cities famous for their mosques, and the prayers
of the Faithful will be heard throughout the land
of the Anglo-Saxon. The real Prophet hath said
it, and when the moment comes our warriors shall
rise in their millions and carry the sword of Islam
throughout the world.”
“ You would make a good actor,” commented
Jack. “ You have got a fine voice, and your
eyes roll in real stage style. But we’ve heard
most of what you have said before. Didn’t your
prophet call many years ago? And all he did was
to murder a brave British officer in Khartoum.
Didn’t his successor call again some ten years
later, and did not the Battle of Omdurman decide
that a Christian church, and a college in memory
of General Gordon, should be built in Khartoum
instead of our universities being turned into
mosques? I wish I were as strong in British
history as Tom is, but you see I was brought
up in Oran and it was French history we were
taught most.”


“ Astaghferallah ,” murmured the Wekil, then
he smiled. “Is it not strange that other people’s
ignorance should irritate a man? ” he said. “ Here
was I getting angry with you, and yet you were
merely showing me how ignorant you were of
the world’s history.”
“ Oh, it’s easy for you to get angry, you can
afford it without any danger to yourself,” sneered
Alfred, who had grown most aggressive of late.
“If we had you in our hands with an army of
engineer apprentices behind us, we might be say-
ing Astaghferallah too.”
“ If you feel angry, my dear young friends, say
it seventy times, and you’ll find yourselves cured.
I’ve proved its value times without number, for
it has pleased Allah to test my poor virtues by
filling my veins with hot blood, and yet I have
never raised my hand against another man.”
“ Precious little need, I should think, if you
kept swearing all the time,” Alfred observed.
“ We’ve got men in our country who do that
too, but we don’t think much of them. And
where does our ignorance show itself anyhow? ”
The Wekil seemed somewhat struck with Alfred’s
words, and he lit another cigarette before speaking.
“ Gentlemen, I ask your pardons if I have inad-
vertently taken advantage of our present positions
to give you reason for complaint. I am not as
good a man as I should be, but believe me I
strive very hard to follow the teachings of the great
Prophet, and it made me very angry for the time to
hear you unbelievers talk as you did.”
“ We beg your pardon, sir,” said Alfred con-
tritely. ‘GWe didn’t mean to, hurt your feelings ;
but we resent being prisoners without knowing what


we have done that is wrong, and your high talk
about Oxford and Cambridge being mosques some
day perhaps made us say things which made you
angry.”
“ Yes, because your words were not true, or
rather betokened much ignorance. The so-called
Mahdi who ruled for some time in the Egyptian
Sudan was a false prophet, not recognised by the
Senussi, the real heads of the Faithful, and whose
chief, at one time a dweller in the North Libyan
Desert but who now lives in Kufra in its heart, is
the living descendant of the blessed Mohammed.
He is a man of peace, and will not allow even .a
Christian to be killed until the day of the holy
war, and that day is not yet. The self-styled
Khalifa who succeeded the slayer of your brave
Gordon, and whose bones your soldiers gave to
the dogs after the battle you mentioned, was mad.
He had no sanction from the one and only living
Prophet whose unworthy servanf I am. When he
gives the signal to rise, how can Europe stand up
against him? How can its* machine-made soldiers
prevail against the millions of our naturally trained
fighters like the lordly Touaregs? ”
“ What about our Highland regiments, or the
Devons, or the Dublins, and what about our
many famous English regiments who have jiever
given way before any foe? ” Alfred asked. “ And
I’m sure France and Germany can turn out many
‘ machine-made men ’ as you call them, who can
handle machine-guns a good deal better than your
Touaregs. Then where does America come in?
Do you think the people of the United States and
Canada would suffer the Koran to be read in
St. Paul’s, or see the Archbishops of York and


Canterbury displaced by fanatical Marabouts?
Again, who could imagine a London business man
saying prayers seventy times before he went into
the city, or a Glasgow man repeating so many
Astaghferallahs before he said what he thought
to another Glasgow man? ” Alfred certainly was
worked up to a pitch Jack had only seen equalled
when his comrade was taking the losing side in an
amateur debate some months before.
“ And yet,” said the pleasant-faced represen-
tative of the real Mahdi or Mullah or Khalifa, the
head of the Senussi, “ I think if you know any-
thing about history, you’ll agree that very little
saved London and other places from coming under
the Crescent when Constantinople fell nearly five
hundred years ago. Where was your superiority
then? The greatest empire the world ever saw
went down in a crash that paralysed humanity—l
beg your pardon, lads, I meant Rome, not Britain.
Your empire didn’t exist then, although England
alone had just finished a hundred years’ war with
France ”
“ Oh, we know all about the fall of Constan-
tinople,” said Alfred, “ and that the much-talked
of crusaders before that really bungled things, but
Constantinople is not London or Paris, or Berlin,
or New York, nor is it the capital of the world.”
‘‘No, but it would have been had the conqueror
only poor Europe to fight then. With all due
respect to the heroes of Austria and Hungary and
their supporters, it was not them who stemmed
the advance of the Crescent—which, after all, was
only one of Islam’s agents. It was the now
despised people of the East who made it im-
possible for the conquest to be carried farther.


The successors of Tamerlane were too strong for
my ancestors, and they had to be content to rest
on their honours until the next wave in their favour
came round. That wave has taken since 1453
to return, but it is heralded now, and the de-
scendants of the great Abi Sa’id are once more
our chief adherents.”
“ I never heard of the gentleman,” said Alfred,
“ and I am grateful to you for giving us so much
knowledge, which I am sure would pay you well if
you wrote a book, and gave it to the world.”
“ I can’t say I feel much interested in the dis-
cussion,” put in Jack, “ seeing that we seem to be
the first victims of the new state of affairs ; but
might I suggest that European Powers have navies,
and big guns, and trained gunners. How would
your lordly Touaregs —of whom I have some
knowledge—stand against these circumstances?
You must remember the civilised world has
moved on since the fall of Constantinople in
1453.”
“ And do you imagine we have been standing
still? ” the Turk cried. “ I may tell you that the
most promising of our faith have been made
Wekils so that they could go to the seat of learn-
ing of the infidels and learn all they knew. Then,
to that knowledge is added all the Senussi teachers
know in occult wisdom and other sciences of which
your people do not dream. We laugh at your
Dreadnoughts , for they cannot fight on land,
and it is the land we shall want ; the waters of the
earth you may keep. As for the big guns of so-
called civilised States, we fear them not. The
sword of Allah is mightier than all the engines
of war man can construct.”


“ That’s all very well,” said Jack, “ but how
do you know that the sword of the Lord will fight
on your side? Most Europeans fancy it will help
them.”
“ Astaghferallah! Has not Allah told our holy
Prophet Senussi el-Mahdi that he is the leader of
the Faithful? And has not he commanded him to
prepare for the day when the Faithful shall be
called upon to arise and smite the unbelievers? ”
“ But our people are not unbelievers ! ” put in
Alfred. “We have the same God as you.”
‘‘They are not the true believers, and therefore
must perish,” said the Wekil, and his words were
uttered in a way that showed he thought he had
settled the matter.
“ Well,” said Alfred, “ seeing that the war hasn’t
started yet, what are you going to do with us?
I never knew we were of such importance before.”
“ I mean to send you back to Tripoli, with an
escort, to-morrow, if the inquiries I will make
to-day do not show that a mistake has been made,
which, after all, is possible, for my orders were
to stop three desperate would-be profaners of holy
ground, and you are only two, and boys at that.”
“ And if a mistake has been made? ” asked
Alfred.
“In that case you shall be my guests until
the first French regiment bound for Bilma comes
along, and you can join it. You would assuredly
be killed by our zealous Touaregs, whose country
lies south of this, were you to proceed south alone.”
“ Then what about the profaning part of your
story? ” cried Alfred. “ Surely a French regiment
can do a good bit more profaning work than we
could, and yet you don’t seem to mind it.”


“ The French do not profane our holy places ;
they keep to the caravan track, and to parts long
ago evacuated by the Senussi. They are care-
ful not to go near the places we hold sacred, for!
well the French Government knows that if they do
not observe our laws they may lose their African
empire in the round of one sun.”
“ I understand,” Alfred said ; “ you tolerate each
other in the meantime? The sword of Islam
worries the French a bit, and the Senussi don’t
like their big guns No, don’t trouble repeating
that swear word again, sir, I mean no harm. One
thing I am burning to know, however, is how you
can get instructions regarding us from anywhere
before you mean to deport us to-morrow. There
is no telegraph line between here and Tripoli? ”
“ The Senussi have means of communication
of which the world is not aware,” answered the
Wekil evasively, offering more cigarettes ; “ but
as you must be hungry now, for it is afternoon, I
will go and order refreshments to be sent you.”
He departed without another word, and the door
clanged behind him, showing that it, at least, was
built of iron.
“ [Well, Jack, for poor, insignificant mortals like
us, we seem to have struck something great,”
Alfred remarked. “ What can it all mean? What
harm can we do, and why should we be of such
interest to people we didn’t know existed? ”
“ Don’t you remember Mr. Dunhill telling us
about the Senussi, and of how they daren’t stay
where an unbeliever has put his foot? ”
“By Jupiter, Jack 1 I believe he is the real
cause of all our trouble. I’ll bet he’s done his
best to get us stopped when he found that we


went on without him and his precious expert’s
report.”
“ But he couldn’t yet know for certain that
we did go on,” Jack said. “ Remember, we’re only
a day from Gabes, and we didn’t go near Tripoli.
I’m awfully worried about Tom, though ; if they
don’t catch him before morning, I suppose we’ll
have to tell about him.”
“ We’ll wait and see,” Alfred answered hope-
fully. “ One thing, Jack ; we’ve got a method of
fast communication as well as the Senussi if we
could only use it.”
44 Astaghferallah! ” Jack muttered.


CHAPTER VII
MARCUS AURELIUS SMITH
When Tom awoke the afternoon sun was shining
down upon him. In fact, that was the cause of
his awaking just then, for the sun had climbed
through the sky while he had been sleeping, and
the shade in which he had been resting was fast
becoming anything but a cool place. Thus, when
the first rays of the descending sun shot under-
neath the fronds of the palm-tree right into his
eyes, he awoke.
“ Jove I I must have had a decent sleep,” he
muttered. “ I suppose the boys are sleeping too,
or they would have kicked me up long ago. Ah,
well ! ” He rose and stretched himself. “ We’ll
have to prepare for the road again.” He went
down to the pool and laved his face with the
tepid water, then he examined the car and saw that
everything was ready for a start.
‘‘Where are you, boys? ” he shouted, when he
saw that his comrades were not inside the car.
“ We’ll have to be getting ready for the next stage
of our journey.”
No answer greeted him, and he continued ,to
look around for them : “ Really, you must get
up? ” he expostulated ; “it is getting late in the
153


afternoon.” He took out their little store of gold
and examined it while awaiting his comrades’ ap-
pearance. “ About ten ounces I should fancy,”
he mused. “ Not bad for our first night’s work.
iWe’ll soon have to make a special place for storing
it, if we strike a rich patch towards Lake Chad
Dear me, boys ; where are you? ”
A solitary bird overhead squawked his only
answer, and he became alarmed. “ I hope they
haven’t gone out among the sand-hills and got
lost,” he said ; then he shouted on his comrades,
by their names, with no result, and he now felt
the perspiration break out on his face. His com-
rades were not within hearing distance, nor could
he see them. iWhere were they? He was greatly
excited, and he kept on shouting until his throat
became parched.
“ They are gone,” he muttered, “ and I may
never see them again. Wihy did I allow myself to
fall asleep? They may be wandering helplessly
among the scorching sand-ridges at this moment,
and will assuredly perish of thirst before long.”
His eyes fell on the car, and he ceased reproach-
ing himself.
“ Surely I have the means to follow them,” he
murmured. “ They must have left some tracks
in the sand if they left the hard ground. I’ll
run along the edge of the wadi and see.”
Suddenly he was cool ; his reasoning instinct
had reasserted its full power. He sat down, and
thought, and presently he laughed. “ How foolish
it is to become excited 1 ” he soliloquised. Al I
might have gone and made matters worse had
I acted as I thought I should do a few minutes
ago. Now, let me think out the position. Jack


and Alfred left here this morning to walk down
this wadi. I see the track of Jack’s boot on the
bank there, and I know Alfred would keep down
among the pebbles to look for the gems he says
must exist throughout the Sahara. They went
away about ten o’clock, and it is now almost four.
Even if they have left the wadi and lost themselves,
they can’t have gone very far, and I can soon run
them down by their tracks. If they did not leave
the wadi, they couldn’t possibly lose themselves,
for they had just to turn and come back. Maybe
they’ve found something and can’t leave it, so
are waiting for me to come along. I’ll run down
the bank a few hundred yards and see if I can
see anything beyond that bluff.” He slung his
binoculars on his back, and started running, keep-
ing Jack’s footmarks in view all the time. These
were plain enough until he came to a rocky piece
of ground, and there they disappeared. He ran
on farther, scarcely feeling the broiling heat, and
unconscious of the blinding glare of the sands
which fringed his track. -At length he reached
soft ground again, and to his joy saw that the
foot imprints were still present.
But he stopped abruptly. Many tracks had sud-
denly come into the soft bank, and next moment
their full meaning burst upon him. His comrades
had been attacked. A button which he recognised
as one belonging to the flap of Alfred’s shirt-
pocket was lying at his feet, and it spoke volumes.
iWith an effort the lad retained his coolness.
“ They have been captured,” he muttered, “ but
by whom? I must move cautiously now or I’ll
be captured too, and then our whole game is
done. I am better pleased now that I know they


are not floundering out among the sand, for surely
it is within my powers to rescue them with the
resources at my disposal.”
He raised his eyes and saw the white walls of
some buildings glinting in the sunlight. His
surprise was great, but other emotions were
stronger than his feelings of astonishment, and
he made no comment. But he climbed a tree near
and looked around with his glasses, and then,
despite himself, he was amazed at what he saw.
Close beside him were one or two flat-roofed
houses almost hidden among the brilliant lemon-
coloured foliage of some creeping vegetation.
These houses were most substantially built of
massive dressed stone slabs, most of which were
curiously engraven.
“ I must be dreaming,” the lad spoke aloud.
“ How can desert tribes build houses with dressed
stones? And where could they get the stones even
if they could carve them like those? ”
This question answered itself next moment when
he swept the scene farther with his glasses. Every-
where around were ruins of what must have been
noble edifices at one time. Great carved pillars
and fluted stone columns reared themselves among
the trees and far out on the desert beyond. Mounds
of masonry and crumbling walls seemed to stretch
as far as he could see. Clearly the existing houses
had been built with the stones from some of these
magnificent ruins. But how had the ruins got
there? And what was the meaning of it all?
The sound of voices underneath interrupted his
musings and brought him back with a jerk to a
full knowledge of his position. What did it matter
to him although the ruins were those of a prehis-


toric city? His comrades were prisoners somewhere
near, and unless he acted with extreme care he
would soon be a prisoner too. He strained his
ears and listened. Perhaps he might understand a
word or two of what the two men standing in the
shade of the very tree he had climbed talked about,
for he had studied Arabic ever since the Sahara
idea had given promise of fulfilment.
But the men were not talking Arabic, yet surely
their language was familiar. He seemed to under-
stand it perfectly. And well he might, for they
were speaking English, although it took the listener
some seconds to realise the fact.
“ Here is the place where they were caught,”
one man was saying, “ They fought as Britons
always do, but they had no chance and noVv they
are sleeping safely where they can’t escape, unless
they can fly. I have been wondering, though, if
we have got the right people, for you said there
were three, and we found only two? ”
“ I expect the third one made his escape,
or ”
“ No man escapes from my men,” interrupted
the first speaker, a man dressed something like a
Turkish officer, and who was of most handsome
countenance, as, indeed, they both were.
‘‘ .Well, as the third one couldn’t possibly hide
anywhere near here we must presume that he
deserted his comrades in Oran or wherever they
tricked me. But I know them well, I’ll tell you
when I see them ; but you must arrange that they
do not see me, for then they could not be allowed
to go home to their own country with their story.
I am too well known in Britain ”
“You shall see them, after prayers, from the


roof, and they need not see you ; but understand, I
shall not agree to any ill-treatment of them.
They must go hence, with all the honour due to
my departing guests, for they have broken none
of our laws, and I have received no orders other
than those sent by you from Tripoli regarding
them. For my own part, I cannot see what harm
they can do, even if they were so inclined, which
I doubt, and to me it doesn’t seem worthy of
the cool, deliberately-thinking, and all-powerful
Senussi to make such a fuss over two or three
British boys. Britain has respected all our laws
in Upper Egypt. She is a friend of Turkey, and
she is the defender of our Faith in India and the
Far East. Is she not the one obstacle, too, that
prevents Germany from profaning our holy places
in Arabia with her railways? All our people speak
well of the British nation, and why, therefore,
should we object to some schoolboys picnicking
in the Sahara Desert? ”
“ I see your faith has been shaken while in
the land of the unbelievers. Do you know why
these people have come here?; The French
authorities tried to stop them when they knew.”
“ ,To trade perhaps, or to look for gold ;
possibly to deal in ivory ; or it might be just to
cross to the British territory on the Niger River.
People think, you know, that the crossing of the
Sahara is an almost impossible feat, and Britons
and Americans always like to try to do that which
is thought impossible.”
‘‘You are wrong ; these people have come here,
assisted by some strange device they have invented
—I know not what it is—to probe into the secrets
hidden in the Bahr el Ghazal. That cannot be


allowed as you are aware, and surely the Senussi
are well able to guard their own even if they must
not kill yet.”
“ Astaghferallah! Surely ; but come and look
at the prisoners and put the matter beyond doubt.
Have you been here before? ”
“No ; my duties have chiefly been in the
Orient hitherto. What ruins are those scattered
around? ”
“ Those of a Carthagenian city ; the inscrip-
tions on the stones tell us that.”
‘‘But this is a desert; surely & city couldn’t
exist here? ”
“My brother, this was not always a desert.
Underneath the sands even now lies a fertile soil.
It is only since man deserted the country that the
sands encroached. In parts where people have
resisted its advance, as in Fezzan farther south,
the country is one of the fairest on earth.”
“ But why did man leave this place then? Tell
me, please, for in common with all our kind I
am anxious to gather knowledge.”
“ When Carthage fell Before the might of
Rome,” responded the other, “ the powerful tribes
formed into many equally powerful kingdoms,
some of which even now exist. They fought long
and well, but unsuccessfully, against the power of
Rome, until the coming of the Vandals. For
about five hundred years these parts were next
under the Vandal rule until the wave of Byzantine
influence swept the fair-haired people from exist-
ence. Then came the great Arabian conquest,
and the word of the Prophet was spread throughout
the land from the Nile to the Niger, and from the
Mediterranean to the mystic Central lakes. But the


people who should have been living throughout
the Sahara were now either slaves or leading a
strange nomadic life under their respective chiefs
in accessible parts where they could not well be
followed, and the faithful people found the great
cities of Carthage, Rome, Byzantium, and Mauri-
tania deserted and desolate. For them the cities
built by the infidels could never be abiding-places,
for free sons of the great eastern plains beyond
the Red Sea were they. Thus the insidious attack
of the desert was fought by none, and in time the
great cities of so many civilisations were but ruins.
The name of this city I cannot tell, but if I am
not called away soon I shall make much investiga-
tion in the hope of discovering it.”
“ Why should you? Has not the Prophet said
that the very names of the unbelievers and their
works shall perish? ”
“ I don’t think he used these words exactly as
they are translated into English. I fear I must soon
do much penance, however, for I have many
friends among the Christians, and truly they have
performed great works.”
“ My studies have been more in connection with
Buddhism than with Christianity,” said the receiver
of so much knowledge, and J, too, will have
to do penance some day soon. But let us go
and see those prisoners now ; it is almost the time
for prayers, and we must free our minds from
all earthly thoughts before then.”
The men turned away, but as they did so the
last speaker turned and looked up into the tree in
which Tom lay. “ The third person couldn’t have
climbed that tree, I suppose? ”he said. “ Doubt-
less your men would examine it? ”


“ Doubtless,” agreed the other ; “ but what
Christian do you imagine could climb a palm of
that nature? Let us hurry.”
And they did hurry, with Tom running along
the dry bed of the wadi a safe distance behind.
When the man had looked up into the tree, the
lad had gazed straight into his eyes, and his amaze-
ment nearly caused him to fall. The man was
the mysterious passenger who had accompanied
them from Marseilles to Gibraltar, and then from
that port on to Tetouan in Morocco, and farther,
for Tom was quite convinced now that his strange
night experience on the French boat was no dream
—the man had a partly-healed scar across his
nose I
“By Jupiter 1' my friend,” Tom muttered.
“ The third person you’re so anxious about
wouldn’t mind meeting you alone if he hadn’t his
comrades to think about. Your mate is a decent
fellow, and very well up in ancient history, but
you’re simply a bounder paid by some people to
do their dirty work.”
Suddenly the men in front prostrated themselves
on the ground and cried out aloud some words in
Arabic, which, from the frequent occurrence of
44 Allah ” Tom knew were prayers. He lay flat
on the ground too, and waited, and while the men
prayed the sun went down. Darkness followed
almost immediately, and the lad was glad ; he
could now move about more freely, and he had
much to do. When the two men resumed their
walk into the oasis wherein the few houses were
built, he was as close behind as was consistent
with caution. He had gathered by this time that
the village was merely a halting-place for caravans,
11


and that the ruins were no indication of anything
save of a past greatness.
And now he was actually in the village ; it had
no lights, and the darkness was intense. He crept
closer to the two men and soon was near enough
to hear their conversation.
“ They are in here,” were almost the first words
he heard. “ Come, and we shall look at them
from the roof. They have a light inside and will
not be able to see us.” This was spoken, he
knew, by the man he had liked.
“ I would rather have something to eat first ;
the dogs can wait 1 ” said the other. “ Astaghfer-
allah! ”
“ Very well, but as all my men were to ride
north after prayers to meet a heavily-laden cara-
van and protect it from attack, the village will
be empty now, and I thought that you didn’t wish
to be seen taking any interest in the prisoners.”
“ Oh, if they are in there that is enough for
me,” the other laughed. “ I can sleep now in peace,
Astaghferallah! ”
“ Why are you so bitter against them that you
seek shelter in God iso soon after prayers? ”
“ Astaghferallah! Look at my nose. I got it
from one of them I Astaghferallah! ”
“ You did? ” the listener muttered. “ Then that
point is settled. Perhaps you may get another
memento before long.”
“ But the Koran says that seventy blows is
no excuse for anger ; for every blow you receive
seventy thousand mansions in heaven will be given
you.”
“ Oh, you are a Turk, and can find satisfaction
for any insult in the sayings of the Prophet, but I


am half a German and I don’t feel quite the
same way. I’ll sacrifice a couple of camels,
though, when the first caravan gets in, and that
will square my sins for some time to come.”
“ Here is my present dwelling-place. Enter,
in the name of Allah, and may He listen to the
supplications of the Prophet for you I ” The other
suitably responded and they passed inside.
Tom could gain nothing by loitering near, so,
sitting down under an open space in the walls,
which served for a window, he thought deeply.
He could hear the men’s voices inside, and he
knew they were about to partake of dinner. The
house was surrounded by a garden in which grew
richly-scented roses and many large flowering
plants, which completely hid it from chance passers-
by. Not a sound came from the outside ; the
village seemed to be deserted, asleep, or at prayers.
Quickly he decided upon his plans. He did not
care to take risks that could be avoided, but some
were unavoidable. He calculated that while he
might communicate with his comrades while the
men dined, it would only mean wasted time, as
he couldn’t help them then, and their excitement
might prove fatal to his scheme by causing sus-
picion to those whose prisoners they were, when
they visited them later. He knew the dinner would
last half an hour and he reasoned out his chances
coolly and deliberately.
In a few minutes he silently ran from the garden
and dropped into the wadi, beside the large pool
of water which was the sole cause of the garden’s
existence. He had barely room to find a footing
between the edge of the pool and the bank, but
he wasn’t exactly particular as to whether he got


his feet wet or not just then, and he ran at top
speed until clear of the village. He climbed out
on the bank at the tree which had sheltered him)
that day already and flew on again. Myriads of
stinging insects burrowed into his perspiring skin,
but he ignored their ravages and continued his
rapid course. Soon the car loomed up before
him, and he hastily gathered up all the cooking
utensils and other gear lying around and threw
them inside. A moment more and he had started
the engines and taken his place by the steering-
wheel. Then he steered towards the village on
the top speed, not from choice, but because the
car ran almost noiselessly on that speed. The
light of the stars had now rendered the darkness
less intense, and he could just make out the bank
of the wadi. If he had toppled over into it every-
thing was finished, but he took that risk, and
in a few minutes crossed the main south leading
track, which passed through the village. Then
he swung round and skirted the roadway, plough-
ing through soft sand which threatened every
moment to force him to reduce the gear. This
he couldn’t risk doing, for the noise would certainly
be heard. Steering skilfully, he ran the car past
the village and brought it to rest among the ruins
of what at one time must have been an imposing
building a fejw yards from the track. He knew
the nature of the country around well, for he had
studied it from the tree that afternoon, and he had
also a fair idea of the plan of the village. It
was not yet twenty minutes since he had left the
window of the house where the men were hiding,
and in another five minutes he had skulked back
through the shadows to the same position. But


he saw no signs of life anywhere, not even a light
issued from any open space in the walls ; the
place seemed as dead as the ruins which lay to the
south. In the house in which he was interested
only were there signs indicative of the presence
of human beings.
The men were drinking coffee and smoking
richly-perfumed Turkish cigarettes when he re-
gained his place by the glassless window, and he
knew, therefore, he was still in time. He had
brought with him his revolver and knife and some
long pieces of stout cord, and a few other small
articles he thought might be useful. He smiled
grimly as he thought of what might happen before
the next hour passed. He was desperate, and
nothing was in his mind but the rescue of his
comrades. To effect that he would shoot both men
and suffer the consequences, if need be. His plan
was to allow both men to pass ;out of the house
while he hid among the bushes. Then when all
was clear he would stretch cords to trip them on
returning, and, if he had * time, tie ropes round
their throats before they could rise, and if no,t—
well, he had his knife and revolver, and his own
friends were worth more to him than the lives
of two prayer-chanting fanatics.
But the best-laid schemes of men are often
upset, and Tom’s had to undergo reconstruction
much sooner than he was prepared. But Fate
seemed working for him, and the alterations he was
forced to make, after a few moments’ thought,
seemed to be to his advantage.
“ If you wish to have a look at our prisoners
now,” he heard the Turkish officer say, “ I will
go and prepare. You can follow me ten minutes


later, and by climbing to the roof you will be able
to see them without their seeing you, as the interior
will be lighted by my lamp.”
“ The plan is good,” answered the man with
the scar on his nose. “ I shall follow you in ten
minutes.”
‘‘Not if I can prevent you,” Tom muttered.
“ You’ll have more than a broken nose presently.”
The first man passed out into the garden and
walked towards the square-walled prison, and the
moment he had disappeared Tom set about stretch-
ing his cord to trip up the man following in ten
minutes’ time. “ I hadn’t hoped to get you one
at a time,” the lad said to himself, “ but Allah
is good.” With this pious thought in his heart he
crouched among the roses and waited. He was
hungry, but that was a detail. But he could
not help marvelling that the man whom he had
last seen on board the Emir should be down so
far into the Sahara already, seeing that they them-
selves had travelled night and day and on a fast
motor-car. That the little party of gold-seekers
had run against the mysterious sect of Moham-
medans known as the Senussi he had now no
doubt, and that they had been tracked from
Glasgow seemed most probable. Then who in
Glasgow could have given them away? Only the
firm of Messrs. Dunhill, Miller, Bolton & Co.
knew of their intentions, and Mr. Dunhill was their
partner. “ I suppose it must have been he,” Tom
mused. “He would be talking in his usual
bombastic style somewhere or other, probably
saying we were going to do something deadly,
and as there are quite a number of Algerians in
Glasgow, it is possible that one overheard him


\ * fy * M'* •5®®' Jaafe^jl.-:
-" *% ifii' ■ jNk I
§.m 4 1
' lj^
I KSJhk
IM T
v V
.
“TOM wound a rope round his throat.”
To face page 166.




and spread the news. Perhaps that is why we
were told to ship our boxes to Gibraltar. He
may have heard that our plans were known and
wished to mislead any people who might be
watching us. Of course he got afraid afterwards
when he heard we were actually in Oran and ”
He ceased giving the matter any more thought ;
the ten minutes had passed, and the man with the
marked nose was standing in the doorway of the
house lighting a cigarette.
“ My friend is beginning to shake in his beliefs,”
the man spoke aloud. “He would question where-
fore and why regarding things. He forgets that
blind obedience is the first test of the Senussi
Wekil. Well, it matters not, for I cannot inform
on him even if I would, for the Senussi know
nothing about this adventure. I’ll go and have
a look at those daring boys and perhaps discover
how they got here so soon.” He walked towards
the taut rope as he spoke, speaking to himself all
the time. “ Yes, the pearl and turquoise inlaid
wall of the temple is worth a man’s soul,” hq
went on, “ but the Senussi themselves don’t know
that. When I get them, I’ll become a Christian
and receive absolution from them. Anyway I can
always kill some camels and some goats which
don’t belong to me and win pardon that way
Astaghferallah ! ”
He had tripped over the rope, and whatever
pardon he might gain by his future sacrifices,
he suffered fully for his immediate sins during the
next few minutes. Tom sprang upon him as he
fell, and wound a rope round his throat and
twisted the ends until the helpless victim ceased
struggling. Then he hauled him into the shrub-


bery, and gagged him with a piece of cloth, and
after binding him securely to a palm-tree stem,
relaxed the throat bonds, and threw some water
over him which he fetched from the pool in his
hat. The man was safe now for some time the
lad knew, but he had yet another to meet. And
he prepared for his second encounter without loss
of time. He hurried from the garden and ran to
the house wherein his comrades were confined.
His intentions were certainly not favourable to
the man whom he knew was inside interviewing
them, but, finding the stairway leading to the roof,
he climbed aloft to see if he might form any better
idea of how to deal with the position than by
attacking the man whom he had grown to think
was not unfriendly. He crawled over the fiat space
and looked down into the lighted room. He was
just immediately over their heads and he felt very
much inclined to cry to them. In fact, he thought
Alfred saw him, for they were gazing into each
other’s eyes. But his reason told him he could not
be seen and he lay still and listened, hoping to
obtain information which would decide his actions.
“ Very well, boys,” the Turkish officer was
saying, “ if you cannot promise not to try to escape,
I cannot ask you to spend the night with me in
my place, so you must remain where you are.
I may tell you that a gentleman who knows you
has been watching you from the roof these last
few minutes, and I am going now to drink coffee
with him and talk over the sayings of the Prophet.
I wish you good-night, and may Allah take com-
passion upon you.” He bowed, and backed
through the doorway, which closed with a clang.
The two prisoners were secure for the night—at


least, so their captor thought, and such was also
the impression the boys had themselves.
“ Ah, well, Alfred,” said Jack, “ Tom’s not
caught yet, and I’ll bet he’ll not be long in nosing
us out. Just fling that funny coffee-cup through
that hole in the roof ; it might hit some watching
beggar ”
“ No, don’t,” Tom spoke, and at the
of his voice the boys almost yelled in startled
surprise.
“ It’s Tom 1 ” cried Jack.
“ Then he must be a prisoner too,” groaned
the pessimistic Alfred, suddenly reassuming his
old nature, as it dawned upon him that Tom had
somehow taken command again and thus freed
him trom moral responsibility.
“ I’m not a prisoner,” Tom called down, reach-
ing his head into the light, “ but if you continue
to make such a racket. I’ll very likely soon be
one. Just wait until I follow the fellow who
has left you and club him on the head, then I’ll
haul you out.”
“ Don’t club him, Tom,” entreated Jack. “ He
is a decent fellow, and I am sure he doesn’t care
although we do escape. It is some other man who
is our special enemy, we have gathered ”
‘‘Yes, I know ; he’s an old friend of ours ;
but he has got more than a broken nose now.
He’ll not interfere with us until a search party
finds him. Come out of this ; time is pressing,
and we’ve a long way to go before morning, and
I’m as hungry as can be.”
“We can’t fly out, Tom,” Alfred said, “ but
I’ll pitch you up some funny cakes we’ve been
gorging ourselves upon.”


“ No, put them in your pockets and I’ll get
them later. Come up on this rope ; there’s a
beam here I can pass it round, but you’ll have to
pull like blazes yourselves, for I doubt if I’ve
the strength now to raise you alone.” He slung
a rope over the beam that formed the ridge of
the ventilating shutter and lowered both ends.
Jack at once formed a loop for his left foot at one
extremity, and next moment was dangling in mid-
air, Tom hauling from the top and Alfred from
the bottom on the other end of the rope. Alfred
retained his grip while Tom pulled Jack out on
the roof beside him, and then the free end of the
rope was pulled up, and only the looped end
lowered. Now two were on top and they calcu-
lated they could raise Alfred direct. And they
did, and the three comrades were once more
together, although in the middle of an unknown
village, and among powerful enemies. Tom wasted
no time in explanations. “ Come on,” he said ;
“ the car is out beyond the town and we’ll have
to skulk in the shadows until we reach it.”
“ Then let us skulk,” Alfred grunted. “ Any-
thing for a quiet life. All the same, I’d like
to say goodbye to the Wekil. He’s a good
fellow.”
“ Say it by post,” Tom interjected. “We
haven’t time for ceremony now, unless it is with
a club, a knife, or a revolver, and I don’t like any.”
The boys were soon on the ground, and skirt-
ing the village along the tracks of the car, they
found themselves among the broken columns and
half-buried walls of the Carthagenian city. Both
Alfred and Jack would have liked to stop and
ask questions, but Tom was in command and he


rushed them along impetuously without a word
of explanation. They reached the car without
adventure and got on board, and next minute
were speeding southwards along the bone-lined
track. The stars were shining brightly and
afforded sufficient light for them to keep within
the grim limits of the roadway, and opening the
throttle to the fullest extent, Tom drove along
at the utmost speed the engines could develop.
After an hour’s running, the road began to rise
again, and soon was flanked by high, jagged rocks
which almost shut out the air, it seemed. For an
hour they continued to travel through this defile —
the passage into Fezzan —and then the stony
broken-up hamada again appeared. Still the
great slave track led ahead as straight as if it
had been marked off by railway engineers who,
having run short of mile and gradient posts, had
built heaps of bones to serve their purposes. The
boys had by this time told each other of their
experiences and all felt that they had engaged
in a mission which promised to be fraught with
much more than they had anticipated.
“ Well boys,” Tom remarked as they swept down
over a comparatively smooth stretch of country,
“ we’ve started on this business and we’ll carry
it through. We’ve won all along so far, and after
all, I think we’re more than a match for Senussi,
Wekils, and every kind of Mohammedans. I would
like to know, though, how that fellow with the
broken nose got down after us so soon.”
“ And that is what troubles them about us,” said
Alfred. “ The Wekil didn’t seem to think we had
any special means of fast travelling. We can guess
now, however, that there is something hidden away


among the sand-hills which must be of great value ;
for I, for one, do not believe that even fanatical
Senussi care two pins for all the profaning of
their holy places that we can do.”
“ Oh, it is the buried temple Mr. Dunhill spoke
about,” Jack put in \ “ didn’t Tom hear our
friend of the broken nose mention that in his
opinion the gems which it contained were worth
a man’s soul? ”
“ Well, it doesn’t matter,” Tom decided.
“ We’ve come here for gold, and we don’t want
to interfere in what does not concern us. Cer-
tainly, we’ll keep as far away from holy places
as possible. I hope that there really is no wire-
less telegraphy throughout the Sahara, all the
same, for things will be awkward for us if the
French garrison down at Bilma have received word
to look out for us and hang or shoot us. If the
French turn against us we’re pretty well done.”
“ Stop Tom, quick ! ” interrupted Alfred. “ I
saw a light ahead. Jupiter ! we’re in a village
now. We’ll be dead directly.”
“ And there’s a big camel-caravan camped near ;
I smell it,” cried Jack. “ Open her out, Tom,
and run for it.”
Tom had slipped the engine clutch at Alfred’s
first cry of alarm, but as he realised that they
were actually in the heart of a village already
and couldn’t now escape detection should any
people be about, he allowed the clutch to drop
into gear again and the car leaped forward between
two mud-walled erections not seen before because
of their likeness to some rocks also near.
A series of yells burst out on the icool, calm
air of midnight, and simultaneously a fusillade


of carbine-shots rattled against the car. But it
was too dark to see anything but the track, and
crouching low behind the cases of foodstuffs, the
young adventurers peered ahead and rushed on,
Tom also bent as low as possible considering that
he had to steer. They soon cleared the village,
and long before its sleeping population was roused
they had sped past the well round which the
houses were situated and ran into the midst of
a huge camel-caravan camped on the outskirts.
The shrieks of surprise and terror which now
filled the air seemed to arise from the throats of
a mighty army ; but it was only when the hail of
bullets came around them that the boys paid any
attention, for they knew that all the fleet chargers
in the camp could not equal their four-cylinder
engines when it came to a test of speed and en-
durance.
Suddenly Jack cried out in horror. They had
left the camp proper behind, although tents were
still flanking the track, apparently the abodes of
a different class of merchants or pilgrims from
those first encountered. But it was not anything
in connection with those scattered tents that had
caused Jack’s exclamation, and also made Tom
jam on all the brakes hard. Just discernible, by
means of the white nature of the roadway, were
the bodies of some hundreds of men stretched
right across the track and huddled in heaps any-
where and everywhere. An instant more and the
car would have cut through them. Yet none moved,
although there were many mutterings of unin-
telligible sounds from among them. The car
stopped dead. “ Get up, you fellows,” Tom cried
in French. “ We’ll run over you.”


“ Well, go ahead then,” came an answer in
English. “ I guess there ain’t any one here wants
to stop you.”
“ An Englishman ! ” Tom gasped.
‘‘No, sir, an American if you please. Sorry
I can’t ask you to dinner, but you see I’m hitched
up to these other beggars and I haven’t any dinner,
anyway.”
“ Great Scot ! ” cried Tom springing to the
ground. “ What do you mean? What are you
doing here? ”
“ Cut it short, mate ; I have been so long among
praying madmen and sand-hills that I guess my
tongue can’t get round the words I should like to
use. But how is the world? Who is President,
and . Sorry you haven’t time to answer, gentle-
men ; here come the fighting-men, and you’ll not
like the lashes any more than I do.”
“ Quick, boys,” ordered Tom. “ Get on board
at once and start.” As he spoke he slashed at
the man’s bonds with his knife, and with an effort
of his strength lifted him into the car. At the
same moment Alfred fired at the galloping horse-
men, and Jack started the engines.
“ Are there any more white men out there? ”
Tom cried to the American. ‘‘lf there are we’ll
stay and fight.”
“ There ain’t another white man between here
and the equator,” the man answered feebly. “Do
you think there could be two people in the world
as mad as I am? ”
The warriors were now upon them, but in
another second the car charged backwards at the
fierce Arabs, and, puzzled beyond measure, and
yelling out prayers to Allah, the startled horse-


men hesitated, and then began a full retreat, Alfred
assisting them in this matter with his Winchester
rifle. As soon as sufficient clearance had been
obtained, Tom steered off the track and, after
bounding over some rough rocks and jumping
cracks in the ground for some distance, worked
back to the track on the other side of the slave-
gang. Once more the course was due south, and
fleet indeed would be those who could follow.
“My name is Marcus Aurelius Smith,” mur-
mured the American. “I’m mighty obliged to
you ” Then he fainted away into Alfred’s arms.


CHAPTER VIII
“ LABBAIK ALLAHOMMA ! ”
“We must be near Murzuk, Tom ; that last wadi
we crossed is marked on our map as being only
fifty miles from that city or village or whatever
it is. Hadn’t you better ease off a bit in case we
charge into it ; remember it is the capital of
Fezzan,”
“ Well, Fezzan isn’t numbered among the
Dreadnought -building nations, Jack,’’ Tom replied.
“It is only a more or less civilised dependency of
Turkey, or France, I’m not sure which, and as we
cannot afford the time to call upon the Mayor of
Murzuk —I beg his pardon if that is not his title —
—we’ll have to give the town a wide berth. By
Jove ! the old car has been running well these last
ten hours ; we’ve covered about three hundred
miles. I wish it were daylight, though ; I’d like
to see the nature of the country around us.”
“ It’s very fine country,” spoke a voice from
behind, and Tom and Jack started surprisedly.
It was the voice of Marcus Aurelius Smith. He
had been in Alfred’s hands the last few hours,
and only now had he come to his senses.
The boys hastened to say how glad they were
that he had pulled round, and Jack added that
they would stop for breakfast at sunrise.
176


“ Breakfast ! ” exclaimed the American. “ The
word is like heavenly music in my ears. I haven’t
had any these last three or four months. You
couldn’t give me a smell of anything eatable now,
I suppose? I shouldn’t really eat much.”
Tom steered the car off the track. “You can
eat our whole stock if you like,” he said, “ and
now. We never thought you might be hungry.
It is just on sunrise, anyhow, and we daren’t yet
go on through the day.”
‘‘No, I suppose my life is too valuable for
you to take risks, but who sent you after me?
And which way are you heading now? ”
“ You are slightly in error,” said Alfred. “ We
didn’t come here for you at all ; we never heard
of you before, and so far as we know no one
cares anything about you.”
“ What I didn’t the New York ? ”
“ No, it didn’t,” Tom interrupted. “ Stanley,
you surely know, spoiled the game of looking for
explorers. We are here to look for gold, and
we don’t care a hang how many lost explorers
there are in the Sahara.”
“ Then you didn’t come here for me? ” gasped
the American.
“ No,” said Jack, “we came hefe for gold. We
are glad, all the same, that we have been able
to be of service to you, but we know nothing
about you except your name we are a private
expedition, and entirely on our own.”
“ Shade of Longfellow I Then I’m not rescued
after all? And I was looking forward to that
so much ”
“ Here, old fellow, bear up,” said Jack. “ You
are rescued. We’re Britons, and we’ll see you
12


through your troubles no matter what it may cost
us.”
“ Cost be blowed, gentlemen 1 I’m a million-
aire when I’m at home, and ”
“Possibly,” Tom laughed, stopping the car $
“ but you are a good bit away from home now.
However, we’ll look after you ; our car was built
to carry four in any case, and we’ll see you safely
to the nearest French settlement. The French
people will look after you then, and you’ll soon
be able to enjoy your millions.”
Alfred already had a “ Primus ” stove in work-
ing order, and just as the sun shot up over the
desert hot coffee was ready. All got out of the car
so as to breathe the fresh morning air. Nothing
was in sight of a nature to cause alarm, but
to the surprise of the boys the country around
was anything but a desert. Date-palms grew in
clusters here and there as far as they could see,
and even grass, of a kind, was in evidence around
them, while a running stream of fairly clear water
flowed sluggishly past, only a few hundred feet
away.
They breakfasted, and then Tom proposed that
they should make a detour and pass the Fezzan
capital, Murzuk. “If we keep far enough off the
track,” he said, “ we’ll not be seen, and anyway,
we don’t want to see Murzuk and more Senussi.”
“ Senussi 1 ” exclaimed Marcus Aurelius, “ what
do you know about them? ”
“ Oh, I think we know everything,” Alfred re-
plied. “ They are a sect of Mohammedans who
must not live where the foot of the unbeliever
has trod. .We’re on wheels, however, and if we
do pass through their holy places we’ll take care


not to come out of the car. All the same, I think
it would save a lot of trouble if they put up
notice-boards, the same as we have at home, re-
garding speed limits.”
14 Boys, I haven’t asked what business you are
after here,” broke in the American, 44 and I don’t
want to interfere in any way ; but you have given
me a square meal, and I feel I —l would like to
help you if that were possible. Now can’t you
ask me questions ? Maybe I know some things that
you don’t, and which I can’t tell you without being
asked. Remember, I’ve been a slave for some
time.”
44 Well, you are not now,” said Jack, 44 so speak
out, and say what you like ; we’ll listen to you, and
if you tell us anything we don’t know we’ll be
grateful. Your own story, for instance, would be
interesting.”
44 I guess it would, young man, and wheri I get
my book finished the publishers of the world will
fight for it like Touareg raiders for a Wadai
female slave. How many dollars a word do you
think I should ask for it? ” Marcus looked round
anxiously, but the faces of his companions had
suddenly become grave.
44 Is your book nearly written? ” Tom asked,
more with the desire to say something than for
information. He thought the man was mad.
44 No, it isn’t started yet ; I had no paper, nor
pencils, and I didn’t get any time with my last
master. Still, I think a dollar a word wouldn’t be
too much to ask from a publisher.”
44 If I were you I should ask ten,” Alfred ad-
vised. 44 Why should the publisher make a for-
tune out of you? He didn’t go through your


experiences, and it is therefore only you who should
gain any benefit.”
“ But if you are really a millionaire why worry
over a few paltry thousands or hundreds of
thousands dollars? ” Jack asked. “ Why not give
your book free to whoever will read it? It would
have a far better circulation if you did that, you
know.”
The American grinned. “ Maybe you’re right,”
he said. “ I’ve been so long away from New
York that I don’t know how things go in the
world. But do you give me your word that you
are not journalists come for my story? ”
“ We do,” Tom said, “ and you may keep your
story for ever so far as we are concerned. As
we have already told you, we are here to look for
gold, and the fact that we have separated you
from your companions was only an accident. At
the time we thought you weren’t in a very happy
condition ; but doubtless you were only tied up
to a nigger for the sake of the experience.”
“ Shut off steam, young man ; you are tearing
along on the wrong rails,” broke in Marcus Aure-
lius. “ I am mighty grateful to you for taking
me away from that crowd, but I can’t help feel-
ing a bit disappointed that you were not an ex-
pedition sent specially to rescue me. I’ll tell you
my story in the world’s record time, though, and
then you’ll know why I’m a bit excited.”
“ But you are not excited,” said Alfred. “ You
seem to be as cool as if we were motoring along
a well-defined first-class road in Britain, where
only police traps and speed limits exist to trouble
one.”
“ Don’t stop my story, boy, and don’t try to


make me spoil it by useless explanations. Here
it is. Chapter one : lam fond of ancient history,
and go to Egypt to study it. Chapter two : I
meet others of similar mind. Chapter three : We
find a buried city while out exploring. Chapter
four : We descend into its hidden halls and
temples. Chapter five : We make many strange
finds. Chapter six : We make more strange dis-
coveries. Chapter seven : The Senussi put in
an appearance. Eight : We fight, we hide, we are
found, we prevaricate. Nine : Dunhill escapes.
Ten : I am a prisoner of the Senussi (here will
follow a complete history of these people, with
an account of their strange beliefs and methods).
Eleven : A slave waiting for a northern-bound
caravan. Twelve : On the great Sahara track.
Thirteen : How it feels to be a chained slave.
Fourteen : My attempt to escape, and the result.
Fifteen : I know that I am destined to die. Six-
teen : Experiences in Fezzan oases. Seventeen :
The utmost depths of despair. Eighteen : Am
rescued in the night by. a mysterious box on
wheels. Nineteen : Back into the heart of the
Sahara with three kids. And at this chapter,
gentlemen, my book must end meanwhile, for I’m
beat to imagine what the next chapters or acts
can be.”
“ Oh, we’ll fill them in,” Jack laughed.
“ Chapter twenty will tell of further adventures
in the Sahara with the kids you mentioned before.
Twenty-one will probably deal with your meeting
with the French at Bilma, and your return to
civilisation. Of course, you can add some extra
chapters about the kids, as you call them, and I
should say that chapter twenty-two will find us


pretty near Lake Chad. Twenty-three : That
buried ancient city of yours will be rediscovered.
Twenty-four : Our fight with the Senussi ; and
Twenty-five : Our triumphant return home, either
down the Nile or down the Niger, with untold
wealth. I believe you might have enough material
to make more chapters, but as few would read
them and less believe them, I think you should stop
there,”
“ I think we’ll have to stop at where I left it,
my boy,” Marcus Aurelius smiled. ‘‘Not that I
doubt your ability to carry it on, but I fear the
Senussi might prove a bigger mouthful than you
could swallow. However, now that you know my
story, and all about me ”
“ But we don’t,” said Tom, ‘‘ you’ve told us the
headings of your proposed book, but that doesn’t
explain things at all. .We understand that the
Senussi people are a very bad lot who will kill
us if they get the chance, or make us slaves, which
is worse, perhaps ; but it seems to me that when
you reached any civilised town you had merely
to announce your nationality to be free. No
power on earth would dare allow an American
citizen to be a slave.”
“ Young man, you speak like a Member of
Congress ; but, like most of them, and of your
Parliament too, you are barking up the wrong
tree. Now let me explain things a little bit. The
Senussi are the people who govern this part of
the world, and all that lies south as far as Lake
Chad. They are a mighty strange lot of people,
although I must admit they have some good points.
You will be captured soon, too, and then you’ll
know all about them.”


“We have been in their hands already,”
Alfred interrupted, “ and we didn’t think much
of them.”
‘‘You will when you know as much as I do,”
returned the American, as he assisted to wash the
enamelled breakfast dishes. “ The Senussi are
as cute as any people on earth.”
‘‘But I thought that although they were com-
manded not to live where an unbeliever placed his
foot, they were also commanded not to take human
life? ” said Tom.
‘‘l’m surprised you know that,” returned
Marcus ; “ and seeing you do know so much, I
am more surprised that you don’t know the rest,
and in that rest comes my experiences. Now,
if you’ll give me time to explain, I —l will explain.
Senussi may not kill, but there is no law against
them preventing your shuffling off this planet on
your own. They don’t recognise colour as being
any distinction in a man, although you may take
it from me that if your skin happens to be white
you’ll be allowed every chance of going to the
happy land with the express train. They didn’t
kill me, it is true, but they gave me as a present
to some slave-raiding people with instructions. I
laughed at first, for I knew that I would be free
the moment I entered any country under the in-
fluence of a European Power. But I didn’t then
know the Senussi, and you can bet your bottom
dollar that they knew their business well. They
couldn’t kill me, themselves ; but they never in-
tended that I should reach any civilised town.
They knew too much to allow that, for my book
would raise the world against them before they
were ready. Well, they chained me to a nigger


from Bornu at first, but he died the second day
and—l will spare you the details —after that I was
anchored on to a leprous sort of fellow from
some of the Nile head-waters. He died, too, soon,
luckily for me, although the poor beggar was a
decent fellow, I believe, for he never said a word
I understood. After his carcase was flung aside,
I was hobbled alongside two dirty beggars from
somewhere down on the Congo, but when we had
dragged the dead body of one, propped up between
the two of us, for a day, they cut me out and
tied me to a sulky brute who wanted to die. W<ell,
I hadn’t any desire to pass in my checks, and I
told my mate so, for by that time I knew a bit
of all the languages. I also told him that if we
reached any civilised place, alive, I should see
that he got away with me, and would you believe
it, that fellow bucked up and became one of the
strongest men in the crowd. He practically car-
ried me along when I was knocked out, and never
complained. But that spoiled the game, for the
bosses saw that I might have gone under had it
not been for him, so they separated us and gave
me a new partner. He was a madman from the
Timbuktu regions, and he cut his throat the
first night I was with him. I expect it was mine
he meant to cut, but you can never depend on
fanatical niggers. f Well, it was then that I made
my only attempt to escape. I slipped my chains
and cleared out into the desert. The air was cool
and delightful, and the pale moon shone down on
the ever-moving sands with gorgeous effects —gor-
geous is a good word, isn’t it?—disclosing to my
wondering eyes millions of emeralds, diamonds,
and sapphires at every floundering step. I grasped


at them, but, alas ! they were but the flitting
phantoms of a moon-mad-mind—l’ll work in some
poetry here, I think,”
“No, you won’t,” said Tom ; “ cut all the
descriptive bits and come back to your story. Did
they come after you? ”
The American looked reproachfully at Tom.
“ Young man,” he observed, after some contem-
plation, “ I perceive you are not possessed of
the true journalistic spirit. I think a fairly long
paragraph of my feelings and another of desert
impressions would go well in here.”
“ No, it wouldn’t,” said Alfred, “ people know
all about the Sahara now, and they haven’t time
to read how you felt, even although they cared.
We’ve got a story ourselves which, if we would
write it, and get people to believe it, would cause
a sensation.”
“ Finish your yarn, Mr. Marcus Aurelius,” Jack
broke in. “ Never mind these fellows. They’re
jealous, that’s all.”
“ And sleepy,” murmured Tom, “ and anxious
to get on the other side of Murzuk, where the
golden sands lie.”
“ Boys, I suppose I need hardly ask ’’—Marcus
spoke irrelevantly, and hesitatingly—” if you have
anything in the way of a smoke you could spare
a fellow who hasn’t had one for more years than
he knows? ”
Tom jumped up. “ I had forgotten,” he cried,
“ that we have some boxes of cigars we bought
in Gibraltar for Mr. Dunhill. Just wait a minute
and you’ll have them.” He climbed into the car,
and next moment reappeared with a box of the
desired “ smokes ” which he handed to their guest.


“ I guess the world can end now when it likes,”
that individual grunted in satisfaction. “I’m
happy, and it can have nothing new in store for
me. Did you mention the name Dunhill, young
man? ”
“I did,”*Tom answered, “and I was going to
ask you about that same name after you had
finished your own story. You mentioned that name
also, you will remember, in connection with one
of the chapters of your proposed book? ”
“ Yes, Dunhill was my comrade, and a mighty
good fellow he was, too —but his escape is another
story, and, anyhow, it can’t be the same man
that you know, or you would already know me.”
“ But you haven’t told us your own story yet,”
Alfred reminded him. “You broke off while find-
ing gem-mines in the desert.”
“I believe you are right ; I had escaped from
bondage when I stopped and was admiring the
beauties of the moon effect? ”
“ Well, proceed from there, leaving out the
moon,” advised Alfred. “ I think we’ll have to
be doing something ourselves soon.”
“ I have mighty little more to say,” the smoke-
loving one returned. “ I couldn’t live on moon-
reflecting sand-grains, and I soon had a thirst like
ten woolly west boys. I wandered on until sunrise,
almost hoping that the beggars would track me
down and find me. But I found them, then. I
had been travelling in a circle, and when the sun
rose I saw the camp lying just a few hundred
yards in front. Well, boys, I was hungry and
thirsty, and I just slid in past the sleeping guards
and slipped in to my shackles again without a
word. Later the caravan owners found the dead


madman beside me, but I had had his breakfast
as well as my own first ; and concluding:, I suppose,
that they couldn’t get rid of me in the usual way,
seeing that I always survived while my mate gave
up the ghost, they shifted me up among the
warriors. But they were all decent fellows, and
although chained up at night, and only given a
slave’s rations, the men themselves made up the
difference between theirs and mine, and I had,
comparatively speaking, a good time. Of course
I always carried chains, and they didn’t ; still, I
kept up, for they only wanted a chance to leave
me by the track. And so we skirted Bilma, the
French garrison place, I afterwards found out,
and arrived at Murzuk, the capital of Fezzan.
Here I tried to raise a mutiny, but it didn’t
come off, and since then I’ve been back amopg
the slaves, living on a handful of dates per day
and perhaps a lash or two so as to reduce my flesh.
My companions died all around me, but somehow
I held on to life in spite of every attempt to
help me to die, and—well, I’m with you now, and
already my experiences seem like a dream.”
" Then just continue to dream if you can, old
man,” Alfred said, “ and you’ll awake pleasantly
when we reach the French garrison at Bilma,
wherever that is.”
“ Hang Bilma I I want to see this game through
now, and go where you fellows are going. I’m
an American, I’d like you to know, and I guess we
never say die until we’re dead, and then we can’t
say it.”
“ Well, we’re not dead, but we’re tired,” re-
marked Jack ; “ still, if Tom sticks to the steering
wheel we’re as good as an army of fanatical


Bedouins or Senussi. I wonder how far Murzuk
is from here though ; we’re hunting for gold, you
know, and we can’t very well begin our search
until we leave the fertile oases of Fezzan behind.
Of course we’ll see you right at the earliest possible
moment.” . :
“ Murzuk is a day’s march from here,” said
Marcus. “ I guess I know every yard of the track
well.”
“ That means an hour to us,” rejoined Tom,
“ for your day’s march couldn’t be more than
twenty-five miles, and we can do that easily inside
an hour.”
“ Sixteen miles, I calculate, was our daily
journey,” corrected Marcus. “We marched ahead
at the rate of so many kilometres per hour, but
as we never did more than twenty of them in a
day I guess you’ll find that sixteen good honest
English miles is what that amounts to —at least,
near enough for most purposes.”
“ Then you count your days as a little more
than half-hours to us,” said Alfred. “We can
touch even forty miles an hour if circumstances
are favourable ; how many days away is your
buried city? ”
“ Years, you mean, my boy? I calculate it’s
more than a thousand years since old Dunhill and
I parted. I don’t know what happened to him,
but I’ve now told you what happened to me.”
“ But I thought slave-trading didn’t exist now,”
put in Alfred. “ We’re living in a time well on
in the twentieth century, and slave-trading has been
abolished.”
“ In most places,” finished the American, “ but
not in Mohammedan countries. There is still as


big a slave-trade between the equatorial provinces
of Africa and Tripoli as there is of pilgrims bound
for Mecca. What happens to the slaves who
survive the journey I don’t know, and to be frank,
I don’t now much care. I only knew that I was
not intended to see the journey through, boys, for
the moment we touched any French town I could
simply slip my bonds and walk free. No, boys, the
Senussi must not kill, but they have many ways of
seeing that you do not live .”
“ Well, you are safe now,” commented Tom.
“ We don’t fear the Senussi nor any other people,
and after we get enough gold, if we’ve time, we’ll
maybe hunt up that buried city of yours which
Mr. Dunhill has already told us about pretty fully,
and give you all the facts necessary to add some
further chapters to your book.”
“ What kind of man was this Dunhill you
knew? ” asked the American. “ The name is not
so common that you can find it cropping up on the
Sahara anywhere. And my friend couldn’t possibly
fail to have told you all about me.”
“ Our Mr. Dunhill is a tall, powerfully built
man, of perhaps forty odd years of age. He is
a famous Egyptologist, but is also an engineer ;
at least, he is partner in a firm supposed to be
engineers. He smokes cigars, and wears glasses
which he is always cleaning. He says ‘ yes, surely ’
to everything any one says to him, but when speak-
ing himself has a wonderful command of language.
He will agree with any proposal made by any one,
probably adding a few words of commendation,
and then promptly forget all about it ; so that
when another man proposes something exactly
opposite he will at once agree with him and be


indignant at the idea that any other suggestion
could be entertained for a moment.”
“ That's not my man,” Marcus Aurelius inter-
rupted. “ You’ve described him in some things,
but my friend was as brave as any man who
ever lived, and wouldn’t agree to anything he
thought was wrong. He feared no man. He it
was who discovered that temple, and he read its
meaning as easily as I could at one time read a
newspaper. The Empire of Mereo he made out
was probably the greatest the world has ever
known.”
“ That’s our Mr. Dunhill, then,” cried Jack.
He told us all about that forgotten Empire one
night in his own house.”
“ And I didn’t mean to say that he was afraid
to disagree with any man,” added Tom. “ Perhaps
he thought peace best at any price, or it may be
that he thought each man, in turn, who put forward
any statement was in the right. All the same,
his memory was short, for, in our own experience,
he varied in his intentions and statements like a
weather-cock. I should say that he simply forgot
all about you ; he never mentioned you to us, but
for a time was most anxious to come with us, and
it was his idea that we should penetrate the Sahara
from the north, and it was he who gave us the
money to enable us to come at all.”
“ Then why didn’t he come too? ” Marcus
Aurelius was interested, but he never ceased puffing
at his cigar.
“ Oh, he changed his wonderful mind,” Alfred
laughed. “He met some man, I expect, who
told him we couldn’t do what we thought, and
he forgot he had already financed us, and wired


us to Oran that he couldn’t see his way to proceed
further without an expert’s report. Some time
before he had said nasty things about so-called
experts, but we weren’t surprised when he veered
round. But as our work was to be done by our-
selves, and we didn’t need to please any people but
ourselves, and we certainly did not wish to take
the world into our confidence, why, we just came
on, and here we are.”
“ Still, there are some influences at work against
us,” put in Jack, “ and we have reasons for think-
ing that Mr. Dunhill was playing a double game.
He didn’t know that we had formed our own
opinions of him and his partners in Glasgow, and
doubtless imagined we trusted entirely in his
superior judgment.”
‘‘And didn’t you?” asked Marcus. ‘‘l think
I should have done so, notwithstanding all you have
said.”
“ No,” Tom said. ‘‘lf we had consigned our
boxes to his firm’s agents in Gibraltar, as advised,
and as he must have thought, we did, and gone on
to Oran ourselves, also as instructed, we should
simply have been stranded there, without any
chance of recovering our property, and we could
never have gone on ourselves. But as we didn’t
do exactly as told, we are How here in Fezzan, look-
ing for gold, and now you know our story.”
“ Except that we’ve been shadowed all the way
from Marseilles by mysterious people, have been
prisoners in the hands of the Senussi, and, thanks
to Tom, escaped,” added Alfred, “ And we think
this is great fun, and have already got some gold.”
“ You fellows beat me,” Marcus Aurelius sighed.
“ But my brain-box is not yet in working order,
and maybe in time I’ll get the hang of things.”


“ Don’t worry, old man,” said Tom. “ We’ll
look after you now. You see, we have the means
of getting over ground much faster than a camel
caravan in this car, and we can carry water and
provisions to last quite a long time. Now, I pro-
pose we all go for a swim in that big pool over
there, then we can take turn about at keeping
watch while the rest sleep until dark. I had
thought, though, that the Sahara was a desert? ”
“ And it is, young man, away from the oases,”
the American said. “ But in Fezzan these are
so plentiful that one might live for ever in their
welcome shades and never know anything of the
sand wastes beyond, where once great cities
flourished.”
All enjoyed the swim in the pool, but none
sought sleep afterwards. Instead they listened to
the details of their new friend’s experiences. He
had lost all idea of time, and it took some clever
calculation on Tom’s part to make out that he had
been nearly five years in the desert. He had gone
down the Nile from Khartoum with other tourists,
but when the little steamer turned after reaching
the limit of navigation at a place called Wau, on
the Bahr el Ghazal, he and some others had
decided to do some exploring work between that
village and the Bahr el Arab farther north. But
although enthusiasts in some things and well
learned in all matters pertaining to ancient Egypt,
they were not explorers, and as a result soon found
themselves following a weed-overgrown water-
course flowing to the south-west. Game was abun-
dant, however, and they had native servants who
attended to all their requirements, and they cared
little whether they were on the headwaters of the


Congo, as it seemed they were, or on those of the
Nile. For weeks they proceeded down the strange
sluggish stream in native canoes, until one day
they landed on an island in mid-channel. They
discovered signs there which told of man’s
presence at one time, and after some patient search
Mr. Dunhill found some masonry ruins in the heart
of a clump of dense scrub. But their servants had
suddenly become alarmed, and that night they
deserted in a body. Still, the enthusiastic but
amateur explorers refused to be downhearted,
They toiled away in stifling heat and raised some
of the great flat slabs of stone, many of which were
inscribed with hieroglyphics seemingly quite read-
able to Mr. Dunhill, who explained that they had
stumbled across the ruins of a city of the great
Mereo Empire, an empire that made those of
Rome and Carthage only recent, comparatively.
For a month the party of five men worked under
Mr. Dunhill’s directions, and one night they lifted
a horizontally-lying stone and found that a great
cave had opened underneath them. “ But it wasn’t
a cave of any kind,” the narrator went on. “It
was a temple we had broken into from the buried
flat roof. Mr. Dunhill and I were alone when we
realised what we had found, and shouting out to
our comrades to follow us, we lit torches and went
down the massive stone steps which began at our
feet leading to the interior, now far beneath the
level of the sudd-blocked river. Boys, what we
saw will never be rightly known, I fear, for I’m
no good at descriptive work, and —well, there are
none left but me, it seems, to do the telling. The
temple was in almost a perfect state of preserva-
tion, and golden images and gem-inlaid figures, thq
13


meaning of which I don’t know, were sitting there
as they must have been perhaps six thousand years
ago ”
“ Hold on a minute,” Tom interjected here. “ I
think most people who have given the matter any
study are agreed that the Empire of Mereo was
more oveir towards Abyssinia and the great lakes.
Surely it didn’t extend to the Congo? ”
“ I don’t know. I wasn’t living at the time, and
I can’t say I care much,” the American replied.
“ I am telling you Mr. Dunhill’s opinion, and I
guess he knew pretty well all that was known on
the subject, and all that is likely to be found out.
But you’ve knocked me off the rails just as I
was coming to the station. I guess I’ll need
to start another cigar before I can get ahead
again.”
Jack handed him one without a word, and light-
ing it from the red embers of the last, Marcus
puffed a while reflectively, and then continued :
“ .We were much surprised that our fellows
hadn’t come after us, but we were too much taken
up with the wonders around us to worry over the
matter, and it was only when we went aloft to
get better torches to help us to see the place that
we realised something was wrong. Our mates
weren’t there, the camp fire was still burning, and
everything looked as usual, but somehow we knew
differently. And we didn’t get touch time to think,
I can tell you. Almost before we had asked each
other what their absence meant, a wild yell burst
out, and a million, or at least a dozen of madmen
of some kind rushed in on us with fire-belching
revolvers. Well, I went down in the first act,
and old Dunhill wasn’t long after me. We were


left lying where we fell, while the howling mob
made free with our belongings down on the water’s
edge. We wriggled away and hid in the temple,
but in the morning we were found and hauled out.
We then tried to say that we had been there for
ever, and I did my best to prove that I was a
mummy, but the niggers weren’t having any fairy-
tales that day, and we were invited to accompany
them, or hang ourselves.
“ We went with them, boys, and you know the
rest. They were Senussi of the most fanatical kind.
What had been the fate of our comrades we never
knew. Our captors wouldn’t speak to us, and
we could only guess that the poor fellows had
gone exploring in a land where the people of the
Prophet and the followers of Christ would at least
get fair play. For, a long time we were kept
chained to each other and forced to travel west
along with the mob, which by and by grew into a
small army, its numbers being added to at every
village we passed.
“By this time we knew we were to be sold as
slaves and had learned the ways of the Senussi
from some other nigger prisoners who had been
captured. At length—after a year, I should think
—we came to a big river which a poor half-dead
slave told me led south into British territoryand
that night, having calculated all the chances, and
believing that the river was a Niger feeder, Dunhill
half strangled the guard who was placed over us,
and after changing clothes cleared out down-stream.
Of course he didn’t want to go without me, but
I showed him it was best because I had strained
my leg and couldn’t travel fast if pursued, whereas
he could get a British qi! French party sent to


rescue me if he ever reached any place. I never
saw him again, and none worried over his dis-
appearance. I guess they knew he couldn’t go
far. iWe continued our journey westwards, moving
slowly, and gathering cattle and slaves by the way,
until we reached Lake Chad, and there our party
split up, the slaves going north with a strong escort,
and a strong band of warriors still farther west
to hunt for more. I was with the second crowd
because the old praying sinner we had for a chief —
I never knew his name —had taken a fancy to learn
the strange language I spoke. Well, I guess he
learned it all right, and I got the hang of his, but
it took a hundred years, or at least two, to do it ;
and then, just as he could swear like as if he had
been in New York all his life, a newly captured
slave wrung his neck, and he passed on to occupy
his seventy times seventy thousand mansions in
heaven. Then my bad luck came along ; the
fellow who succeeded as chief had a grudge against
me_ because I had been such a favourite with the
old beggar, and he sent me north with the first
slave and pilgrim caravan, giving instructions that
I must give up the ghost on the road. Well, boys,
I guess that has been a long yarn, and I started
at the wrong end first, but you’ve got it all now.
Could you spare me another chunk of that mummi-
fied beef, I wonder? I see it comes from my own
country, according to the label on the tin ; and
as I cannot go there, like Mohammed to the
mountain, you might hustle a piece of its produce
to me,”
He got the contents of a tin and when he had
devoured this, he smiled sweetly and murmured, “ I
guess I’ye spoiled myself for a pilgrimage to Mecca


now ; still, in all Christian sincerity I repeat :
‘ Labbaik enal-hamda , Vanahmeta lak Labbaiki! ’ ”
“ AVhat on earth does that mean? ” inquired
Alfred. Both Tom and Jack already knew 1 .
“It is the poor pilgrim’s cry of thanksgiving
when after a long and trying journey the end is
in sight,” replied the weary wanderer, and it means
in English as near I can put it : ‘ Verily here
am I, O Allah I All praise and glory to Thee.’
Boys, don’t put me down as a canting old
hypocrite. I am not, I assure you, but the first
prayer I have uttered since my childhood days
was offered up just some sixty seconds before you
hauled up your Juggernaut car in front of me.
It was ‘ Almighty Allah 1 I am tired of this
pilgrimage. Set me free 1 * It was life’s pilgrim-
age I meant, boys, and it was my soul I wished
set free, for I was indeed weary. In immediate
answer you came, ‘ Labbaik , Atlahomma , Lab-
baik !’”
Marcus Aurelius Smith bowed his uncovered
head, and the boys instinctively did likewise.


CHAPTER IX
IN THE HEART OF THE SAHARA
It was night again, and the four comrades were
speeding southward along the great track. But
what a difference in their surroundings 1 Palm-
trees flanked the roadway, and here and there were
dotted sweetly-scented orange-groves and fruit-
bearing trees of many varieties, while flowering
shrubs of luxuriant growth met the eye everywhere.
They were in the rich oases region of Fezzan,
where the people still fought a winning fight
against the advance of the grim desert, which had
obliterated the works of man so remorselessly all
around, and which would just as surely overwhelm
Fezzan when its patient, persevering people grew
tired of the ceaseless conflict. Even now the
insidious encroachment was evident to the boys,
and it would have given them some cause for
reflection did not more pressing matters require
their attention.
Still, the nature of the country was such that
they could not help noting it. Flying along
through flourishing natural gardens, they would
suddenly plunge into a sand-patch running across
their track, for all the world like a river intercept-
ing a road* and they could see by the break in the
198


sky-line of tree-tops that this sand intrusion was
continuous. Usually these patches of desolation
were about a hundred and fifty yards wide, and
after crossing them on the lowest gear, firm fertile
land would again be underneath, and thirty miles
an hour again become the travelling rate. But
these sand-rivers soon began to cut the track more
frequently, and the stretches of good land grew
smaller and smaller. They were now approaching
the village of El Gatrun, the southern extremity
of the oases region. Murzuk had been passed
at a safe distance half an hour after starting and
then the main track had been joined again. The
boys already had grown to like their new friend.
He was so modest, so sympathetic, and so full of
the knowledge they specially required. He had
shown great interest in the gold-recovery appli-
ance, and while crossing one of the strange sand-
channels Tom set it in operation, much to his
delight. A few “ colours ” were obtained in the
cup, much to every one’s surprise, but they dared
not stop there although nuggets had been found.
“ I guess you fellows have the makings of the
biggest trust in the world in you,” Marcus Aurelius
remarked. “I’m only a poor millionaire myself
when at home, but it seems to me you have a
corner in gold, and if you don’t restrict the output
it will fall in value.”
“ Not much fear of that,” Tom laughed. “We
only scooped in about three grains in crossing that
last patch ; that, I think, works out at sixpence.”
“ Just what I allowed when making out my
calculation,” replied the American ; “ but if you
get three grains out of a two inch deep furrow
a hundred and fifty yards long and only an inch


wide, what do you calculate to extract from a
patch measuring hundreds of miles each way? ”
“ Oh, but all that stretch of country wouldn’t
be gold-bearing,” reminded Alfred. “ The gold
is only in patches.”
“ My boy, I know what I’m talking about. The
country over near the Wadai country —I don’t know
whether it is now British, French, Turkish, Italian,
or independent—all carries gold, and fairly rich
too. Now suppose you drew a furrow, say fifty
miles long, that means 5861 grains, allowing only
one grain for every hundred and fifty yards. Well,
turn and come back with another furrow, and as
every inch in breadth means another and
there are twelve inches in a foot, or used to be in
my time, thirty-six in a yard, and sixty-three
thousand, three hundred and sixty in a mile, and
we’re supposing only fifty miles to begin with, what
does that make? ”
“ I don’t know,” said Tom, who was steering,
“ but Jack can work it out if you like.”
“He doesn’t need to ; it means thirty-seven,
million a hundred and seventy one thousand two
hundred grains in one mile, and as these figures
have now got too big for any one not a freak calcu-
lator, such as I was at one time, we’ll reduce them
to ounces before we multiply by our fifty miles.
Now there are four hundred and eighty grains in
an ounce, troy ; so, dividing our figures for the
mile by that, we get seven hundred and seventy-
four thousand four hundred ounces of gold.”
“ Well, that’s nothing,” broke in Alfred, just
to show that he could dabble in figures too. “ At
four sovereigns per ounce that would only yield
a paltry three million odd.”
“ Be exact, young man,” advised Marcus, fi I


tell you there is nothing like exactness in this
world, and I guess I have played with figures
these last four years —to keep myself from going
mad, you know—to such an extent that I can tell
you the answer to any figure-juggling almost
before I know the figures. Now, instead of a
paltry three million, you would possess a hundred
and fifty-four million eight hundred and eighty
thousand pounds.”
“ .Which isn’t enough to pay for a quiet holiday
in the country somewhere,” Tom laughed. “ Can’t
you make it more? ”
“ Multiply by the depth of the sand, young
man,” came the smiling answer. “ I guess you’ll
find it is about a hundred feet deep, and I’ll
speculate my teeth on the fact that it gets richer
as you go down. Your furrow is only two inches
deep, so you’ll have six to the foot, which means
you’ll have six hundred times the amount already
mentioned.”
“Oh 1 ” gasped Jack, “ but we couldn’t dig
a hole in the Sahara fifty miles by fifty miles by
a hundred feet. Where could we put the sand
that came out? ”
“ If you knew the Sahara as well as the poor
beggars who live on it do, you wouldn’t ask that,
my boy. The hurricanes that blow across periodi-
cally would shift the sand as fast as you scooped it
out and pile it up over some village which still
wages war against it by building barricades.
Another oasis, too, would occupy the hole you
made, and perhaps a great city might spring up
by the side of the lake which would soon form. I
tell you, boys, you can revolutionise the world
with the enormous wealth at your disposal.”


“ But the time? ” said Tom. “We could never
dig such a hole in the earth’s surface.”
“ Give work to the world’s unemployed then.
Borrow all the world’s money at, say, ten per cent,
and start a thousand of your machines to work.
Make them so big that they would scoop out a
fair-sized canal at a time, and when the fifty-mile
square was finished I could take you to another
patch.”
“ Here’s a big one now,” cried Jack. ** Jupiter !
it looks just like a flowing river of sand ! ” As
he spoke, the car plunged into an intercepting
sand-course, larger than any they had as yet en-
countered, and Tom at once reduced the gear to
give the engines every chance to drive the car
through.
“ A river ! ” echoed the American. “ I should
smile. It is a river, but it’s one of the darndest
funniest rivers you ever saw. Like all the others
we’ve crossed, it’s an actual sand-river, but it’s
flowing from the sea into and over the land, instead
of the other way about, and it’s only a question of
time, and man’s combative powers, when it will
swamp the whole land between the Atlantic and
the Nile, and the Mediterranean and the Congo.
If the French people get leave to govern this
country as they like, they’ll fight the advance of the
desert, but no other people can. Yes, boys, the
great Sahara is a moving sea of sand, and these
rivers are the advance waves it throws up on the
old land. Fezzan has fought it long ”
“ Lights ahead ! ” sang out Jack as they once
more rolled along on firm ground. ” I suppose
we have reached El Gatrun? ”
“ Surely not? ” said Marcus. M EI Gatrun was
nine marches from Murzuk,”


“ How many miles is in a march,” asked
Alfred—“ or, rather, how many kilometres? I
forgot we were on French soil.”
“ I make a march out to be about ten miles
when it is a slave caravan that does the marching,”
replied the American. “ And I don’t care how
many kilometres a French army can'travel; we
never met one, or I wouldn’t be here now, you can
bet.”
“ Never mind, Mr. Smith,” consoled Jack ;
“ you’re with us now and we’ll see you safe. You
might try on my spare trousers, and Alfred can
give you a shirt.”
‘‘Just what I was thinking about, lads. You’re
all dressed wrong for this part of the world.
You simply must adopt the native costume if you
hope to escape trouble. Thanks for the offer
of the trousers, all the same, my boy, but I’ll square
it by trying to get you an outfit.”
The car was now at a standstill ; Tom wished
to hold a consultation before going farther. “If
ten miles is a march,” he said, “ this must be
El Gatrun, for we have travelled one hundred and
ten miles since we left our last camp beyond
Murzuk, and it is not yet eleven o’clock.”
“ I got into trouble while passing through El
Gatrun,” said Marcus. “ I wish we could miss it.”
‘‘-Well, we can,” Torn answered. “ ,We can
fill up with water here and head for El War, which,
according to this map, is about a hundred and forty
miles ahead.”
“ But we can’t safely travel on this track down
there after daylight, and we certainly can’t get
ahead off it, for the region of eternal sands begins
soon.”


“ We’ll be there, bar accidents, at four o’clock
in the morning,” said Tom. “ The engines are
running well, and Alfred can relieve me at the
steering-wheel. Jump out and churn the handle
again, some of you. We’re not going to camp
here all night.”
In a few seconds the car was again in motion,
and rapidly the daring gold-seekers bore down
upon the village, now plainly discernible in the
peculiarly brilliant starlight. There seemed to be
about a dozen flat-roofed, whitewashed mud houses
in the place, all sheltering among clumps of date-
palms, and the endless track ran right through
between them. There was a light in one house,
but not a sound broke the stillness of night.
“ Boys, I’d like to pay the people back some-
thing on account of what I owe them,” said Marcus
Aurelius, “ but it is too risky a job. We’d better
steer round a bit or we’ll have them about us
like hornets, and they can all shoot pretty straight.”
“ We can do that too,” Alfred observed, “ but
I don’t see why we should risk sinking in some of
these sand-drifts for. fear of disturbing their
slumber. This is some king’s highway, I take
it, and there is no law against night traffic.”
“ Hullo 1 the village is built on a slope leading
down into an enormous lake or something like
that,” cried Tom. “ We’ll charge right through,
boys, and the people will never know ; we can
throw the engines out of gear and free-wheel down
that steep hill. It will save petrol, anyway.”
“ But remember, boys, the Sahara proper lies
before you now. After we plunge down the hill
in front you have a series of dry salt-lakes, and
sand stretches with no life thereon, except perhaps


a slave team coming through, until we reach El
War. Can this contrivance of yours do that dis-
tance? It took us twenty marches from El War
to here.”
“ You’ll see El War at sunrise, as I have already
said, unless we break down or are captured by
some night-raiding tribe,” Tom replied ; “ but
after El War we must get to work); our petrol
is going down in the tank behind much faster than
I allowed for in my calculations.”
“ I would like to see what the people in that
house with the light are doing,” broke in Jack.
“ Couldn’t you put on the brakes hard as we
are passing and I’ll get out to see? ” The car
was now running noiselessly down the slope with
engines disconnected.
“Well, Jack, it’s foolish to run needless risks
just to satisfy curiosity,” Tom answered, “ but
somehow I feel much the same way as you. I’d
give a lot to spy in upon these people. Probably
they’re playing bridge, or arguing over some point
in high finance which Mr. Marcus Aurelius Smith
could settle for them in a moment.”
“ Be careful, boys, be careful ! ” implored the
individual last mentioned. “ You don’t know what
it is to be a slave, but I do, and I entreat you to
do nothing rash. Remember, the people of the
Sahara fear nothing but the supernatural, and can
use the latest improved firearms as well as if not
better than those who invented them. They are
also physically much stronger than the peoples
of Europe and America, and if we fall into their
hands, well, goodbye to your thousands of
millions.”
The boys laughed in answer j thek friend was


too serious for them, and clearly he was out of
date. They knew that if their engines didn’t break
down, or their supply of petrol suddenly cease,
they could run away from any danger, unless the
other side had heavy artillery with which to send
even speedier messengers after them.
In a few minutes they were within the environ-
ments of the town, and gardens, curiously fenced,
flanked the track, in which grew all kinds of
fruit-trees, and, under their sheltering shade, vege-
tables of many varieties. The town now seemed
much larger than had at first appeared, and a
domed building of some pretensions loomed up
ahead, which without being told the boys knew
was a mosque. Swiftly and silently the car sped
down the incline until opposite the house in which
were lights. Then Tom jammed the brakes on
hard, and almost instantly the car was stationary.
Without a word Jack slipped out and ran up to
one of the window spaces, Tom meanwhile pump-
ing lubricating oil into the engines, and Alfred
watching with his rifle to cover Jack’s retreat,
should occasion demand.
But Jack did not take long to complete his
investigations. He came running back to the car
after a brief look through the open window space,
and evidently he was greatly excited. “ There’s
magic here, boys,” he whispered, as he came along-
side, “or else I’m mad. Let’s away at once at
full speed,”
“ I second that proposal,” chimed in Marcus
Aurelius ; we may be surrounded any moment,
and it is not pleasant being sent to the happy
land after sunset, Jump in, young man, and don’t
stop to wipe your feet.”


“ What’s the matter, Jack? ” asked Tom.
“ What have you seen? No, don’t start the
engines, we can start easily when I release the
brakes.”
“ There are two men in there,” gasped Jack.
“ They are playing a game of cards, but one
is the fellow who collared us at the Wadi Zemzem,
and the other is the mysterious passenger we first
saw at Marseilles, and whose nose Tom broke later.”
“ Surely you are mistaken, Jack? ” Tom said.
“ How could they get here? ”
“ The same way as you did, I’ll bet,” Marcus
muttered. ‘‘You haven’t the monopoly of stinking
machines.”
‘‘What luck!” exclaimed Alfred. ‘‘Now we
can get some more petrol if we can find their car.
Of course they must have come down per motor,
and they would pass us during the day, while we
were camped off the track.”
“ But, but—l left the other fellow tied up like
a mummy,” put in Tom. “ How could he escape
and be here so soon? ”
‘‘Never mind,” advised the American. ‘‘We
must deal with facts as we find them. I presume
you know the gentlemen who have got in here
ahead of us? ”
“We do,” Tom replied, “ and as we do not
desire to have any dealings with them no(w, or
afterwards, we must take steps to see that they
can’t follow us farther. Jack, go back and watch
our friends, and if they discover they are spotted
inform them as politely as you can that you, not
being a Senussi, can kill at Will. Alfred will
stay by the car and I’ll hunt round to see where
their car is, for certainly they must have one.”


“ And what about me? ” asked Marcus. “Am
I no good at all? ”
“ You are our guest,” Tom said, “ and there-
fore we cannot allow you to run into any trouble.
Hullo 1 I believe I see their car over among
those rose-bushes 1 Hurry, boys, we’re in luck
after all.”
And so it seemed ; a powerful car of the best
French make was standing quite near, and its
presence explained many matters which hitherto
had been a mystery to the boys. To them, how-
ever, it meant a supply of petrol ; it was quite fair
to rob their enemies of the power that made them
formidable, and, besides, the adventure was
pleasing. All grasped the situation immediately,
and all acted promptly. Jack, with a couple of
revolvers in his hands, crawled up to the open
window, and Tom ran over to the other car with
some tools. The tank behind was nearly full,
but there was no tap for draining it, and he did
not wish to remove the “ bonnet ” to get at the
carburettor. Marcus had followed him, carrying
a couple of ordinary two-gallon petrol tins.
For a moment Tom was at a loss what to do ;
he could easily have wrecked the car by cutting
the wires off, or otherwise ruining the little dynamo
that generated the spark, or by unscrewing the
tappits on the cylinder heads. But they needed
the petrol, and certainly without it the magnificent
high-powered French car would be helpless. He
ran back and produced a piece of copper tube
from the tool-chest of their own car, and bending
it into a shape like the letter U, but with one leg
much longer than the other, he inserted the short
end into the petrol tank of the other car, and lying


► ~T
I? )— /
* ■p* n i '^HH
.f ; w* ■ Hpr JB
■ ■ VI
->. mjkp
/ . • * ■
y JB
r a x '
“JACK crawled up to the open window.”
To face page 208


.
.


on the ground, placed the other end in his mouth
and pulled his utmost. Instantly a gust of petrol
came, and spitting out the first mouthful, the long
end of the tube was then placed so as to carry
the petrol into the tins which Marcus had in readi-
ness. The tank of the enemy’s car was being
syphoned out, and every tin meant between thirty
and forty miles I
Not a word was spoken and the sleeping
villagers did not stir. Inside the house the two
gorgeously-dressed :Wekils played some strange
card game, doubtless passing the time as pleasantly
as possible until they expected the boys to be
in the vicinity. Meanwhile their car was parting
with its source of power, rapidly. rWhen one tin
was nearly full Marcus ran with it over to thd
trailer-tank of their own car and emptied its con-
tents into it, Tom replacing the first tin with the
second, and, when it in turn was filled again
substituting the emptied first.
In this way the entire supply of petrol was
drained from the tank in' about ten minutes and
transferred to the well-sunk stock of the trailer-
tank of the other car. Marcus had also rummaged
through the iWekil’s car and taken therefrom
several two-gallon tins of petrol which apparently
were kept in reserve. For these he substituted
some empty tins, but otherwise the car was not
harmed. “ They’ll be able to start after us,”
Tom chuckled, “ and there is enough petrol in
their front tank to carry them a dozen miles or
so, and then they’ll be stuck, and I should fancy
a car stranded about twelve miles south of here
would sell very cheap, second-hand.”
“ I say, Tom,” whispered Jack, when the signal
U


was given that they were ready to start, “ would
it be wrong to steal some cigarettes from these
fellows? If you made a noise over there, they
would rush out and I could jump in by the window
and lift the boxes I see on their table, and before
they could get their automobile started we could
be sailing down the hill, first stop Bilma or Lake
Chad.”
“ It is not worth the risk, Jack,” Tom answered.
i% It would simply let them know we were still an
active party, and they might be able to do many
things we don’t know. If we clear out now, they’ll
never suspect anything until their petrol fails them,
and even then they’ll likely blame that fact on a
leak, or a faulty carburettor. Come on, let’s
away.”
And they went. Tom merely slipped the brakes
off, and the car glided away silently. Down past
imposing-looking mud houses not previously visible,
and through gardens from which emanated de-
licious intoxicating scents, they rushed at terrific
speed, for the hill was steep, and at length Tom
dropped the engine into gear so as to brake down
the pace somewhat —of course, not allowing any
petrol to reach the cylinders. But even the well-
known expediency of making the car drive the
engines barely sufficed to retard the speed to a
safe limit. At length the level plain loomed in
front, and Tom opened the throttle to the fullest
and allowed the car to do its utmost.
And it did. On across the salt-pan it flew, the
surface cracking beneath the wheels like newly-
formed ice. Then a soft sand-patch intervened,
and Tom was forced to resort to the lowest gear
to force the car through. But the well-defined


track led on as usual, the ghastly monuments
still marking its boundaries unfailingly. The
adventurers were now in the Sahara in all its
grimness, and they did not like it. Sand was
everywhere ; and even on the track, the highway
which had existed for more centuries than the
years of the oldest among them, it flew up from
the flying wheels and enveloped the car in a dense
cloud. Luckily indeed for them, they were inside
a tightly-fitting casing ; but even that fact had
its disadvantages, the chief of which was lack of
ventilation. All perspired as if they were inside
a boiler, and repeatedly Tom had to wipe the
glass port-holes in front to enable him to see.
They covered fifty miles in two hours, however,
as their speed indicator proved, and as it was
only two o’clock in the morning they had every
reason to hope that the oasis of El War would
show up before sunrise. As they were struggling
through an exceptionally soft patch, Tom thought
they might as well test it for gold, and changing
the gear to the lowest, he dropped the actuating
clutch of the extractor, and instantly they were
scooping up the dust through which the Romans
and Carthagenians had trod in the hoary past, to
say nothing of the mighty peoples before them.
And almost at once a small slug of gold was shot
into the cup, now illuminated by a tiny electric
lamp, the current for which was derived from
the little dynamo, which also was responsible for
the ignition.
Slowly now they forged ahead, all eyes watch-
ing the cup, and oblivious to the fearful storm of
sand flung past between them and the object of
their attention. And as they looked they gasped


in surprise. Through the blinding sand they could
see the cup filling, and the boys, at least, knew
by this time that it was not possible for sand to
drop inside. It was rapidly becoming filled with
gold 1 Five minutes later Tom stopped the car
and withdrew the cup and its contents. Two ounces
of auriferous treasure was the result, and as the
machine had only been working for about a quarter
of an hour, the significance was obvious, and
Marcus Aurelius Smith’s comment that they could
now multiply their original calculated thousand
odd millions by one hundred was received without
laughter. Truly gold would soon cease to have
any value if it were as plentiful as it seemed 1
Tom recovered himself first, “We can’t stop
here, boys,” he said, “ even if we bould extract
an ounce per minute. The Wekils and their men
could ride here in a few hours.” He flung the
speed-changing lever forward as he spoke, and
in response the well-built car leaped ahead.
Nor did it stop until the presence of some palm-
trees by the wayside indicated they were approach-
ing an oasis.
“ This must be El War now,” Tom announced.
“ We’ve travelled fully a hundred and forty miles
since leaving El Gatrun, and it is still an hour
from sunrise.” He turned the car off the track
and ran in among some dense form of scrub.
*’ Go slow then,” advised Marcus Aurelius. “El
War is a place that will require careful negotia-
tion. It is the converging point of all the desert
caravan routes, and usually there are one or two
teams camped there, waiting to join with others
for the journey north.”
The four wanderers climbed out of the car,


and stretched themselves ; they were cramped,
hungry, and sleepy, and felt as if they were covered
with a coat of sand many inches in thickness.
Sand also filled their eyes, ears, nostrils, and
throats, and a bath was the thing most desired
by all. But no friendly pool was near, although
the vegetation around was of a nature which could
not exist without abundance of water.
“ How are we going to get our water-tank filled
this time? ” asked Alfred. “ I suppose the town
of El War is built around the only well in the
place? v
“ Yes,” answered Marcus, ” but you can always
strike water in any oasis around here by digging
down a few feet. Surface water cannot exist,
owing to extreme evaporation, I think, but I guess
you’ll find more than we want at a depth of three
feet.”
And they did. Marcus soon dug a hole in the
soft soil, and it filled almost immediately with
clear water. Jack prepared breakfast of ham,
rice, and coffee, while Alfred replenished their
water supply, and Tom added to the meal some
eggs, nests of which he had found in the heart
of some bushes near. Afterwards each stripped
in turn, and bathed himself in the hole of bub-
bling water. It was not a spacious bath, but the
water was delightfully cool and refreshing, and
it certainly washed the sand out of their skins.
‘‘ Look here, boys ! ” Alfred after the
breakfast dishes were washed and everything made
ready for a start if they wished or if necessity
arose. “ Something has gone wrong with the sun,
or else our watches are all wrong ; it’s now seven
o’clock, and the sun isn’t up yet 1 ”


“ Well, it isn’t our fault,” Jack said. 44 We
can’t help it if it doesn’t get up at all to-day.
But—but something else is wrong. It is quite
clear but I cannot see a yard ; why, I’ve even
lost sight of you I Where are you, boys? I’m
blinded. The world is a red fog before my eyes.
I’ve lost you all 1 ”
“ Everything is a red blur to me too,” cried
Tom. “ I can’t see anything, and yet I know it
is quite clear.”
“ We’ve been caught by some eye trouble, boys,”
Alfred said. “I, too, am surrounded by a red
mist, and it’s getting denser although I am now
aware that it is broad daylight. Where is Mr.
Smith? ”
44 Here, smoking one of the cigars you gave
me ; what’s wrong? ” came a voice from some-
where. “ I should advise you not to talk too
loudly, for I’m of opinion that we’re much nearer
the town than we should have gone.”
M We can’t see you,” Tom said. “We are
all seeing red. Do you know what it means? Are
you blinded, or is it some desert disease of the
sight? I seem to be in a fog, only it is red? ”
44 Well, it is red,” replied the voice of Marcus
Aurelius. “ Did you expect it to be green or
blue? All fogs on the Sahara are red.”
44 Then do you see it, too,” Tom asked, 44 and
can you explain? ”
44 Don’t talk so loud, my boy, unless you want
to have a fight. There’s nothing to explain. We’re
in a fog, that’s all. I knew it was coming when
I noticed the daylight was so long in showing
itself, but maybe it is for our good, anyhow,-”
44 But I never heard of a red fog before ! ”


said Alfred incredulously. “ And this is surely
denser than any fog ; I can’t see a yard ahead.”
‘‘You are always adding to your knowledge,
then,” returned Marcus. “ I’m not one of those
fellows who profess to be able to explain every-
thing, but you can take it from me that we are
now in a Sahara fog, and that such fogs are always
red ; for further particulars write to any of the
cheap papers, and I guess you’ll get more know-
ledge than you can carry in the reply columns.”
‘‘Can you suggest what we should do? ” Tom
asked. M I fear, also, that we are quite close to
the town, and if we are discovered it will not be
pleasant for us.”
44 Of course we are near the town,” the American
replied ; “as a matter of fact, we are in it, and
in some sheikh’s private property, at that. Those
eggs you found were ordinary hen’s eggs, and
fowls in these parts don’t go exploring far from
home to find nests. I’ll bet the owner of the hens
that provided the best part of our breakfast is
not more than a hundred yards from us at this
moment.”
tl Jupiter 1 ” exclaimed Jack. “ Let us go and
call upon him and apologise for trespassing. We
didn’t see any ‘ keep off the grass ’ notices.”
”Do you know, boys, I think this is good for
us, really,” said Marcus Aurelius, u and I’ll tell
you my reasons. The other fellows, even sup-
posing they have a store of that stuff you call
petrol handy, can’t come on in this fog, and I
guess they’ll be stuck in a place a good bit worse
than where we are, whether they found out they
were tricked or not. Well, I know the languages
of all the tribes about here, and I propose that I


go tn tQ the village and buy. some native garments
for you, then we’ll all stain our faces to make
us look as like returning Wadai pilgrims as pos-
sible. After that we can either clear out if the
fog lifts or sleep peacefully if it doesn’t.”
“ But we don’t want to dress ourselves in wind-
ing shrouds,” expostulated Alfred. “ We’re not
going to mix with the natives if we can help it.”
“ Boy, I know what it is to be a slave, and you
don’t. A time is bound to come when we’ll be
forced to meet natives, for we can’t always hide or
run away. Now what I have proposed is solid
sense, and here is the reason. From El War, south,
the people we’ll meet are used to seeing all kinds
of returning pilgrims, and seldom do they under-
stand their languages, for every tribe has a dif-
ferent dialect unless when quoting the Koran.
Now, I can talk most of them, as I told you, and
you boys are under vows of silence until you have
sacrificed seven camels, or swallowed your teeth,
if you like. Therefore, dressed as befits our
position, we can enter any village and hear all
the news, of course leaving your patent locomotive
outside, and we can then act as suits us best.”
“But will they not see we are frauds? ” asked
Tom. “ Surely they could guess we were white
men in disguise? ”
“ Not if you didn’t speak ; and besides, Turks
are white, and the French are white. The former
are the champions of the Faithful, and the latter
the present governors of the country. It is true,
all the same, that the French have to travel jn
regiments or they would be exterminated ; still,
the people are afraid of them. Again, we would
throw your friends off the track if we became


lost among the pilgrim bands, and we might even
leave information carefully thought out for their
benefit. In any case, boys, I may tell you that
unless you shake the Senussi agents off your track,
you are bound, sooner or later, to fall into their
hands. I know what I am talking about, and I
honestly believe your best scheme is to disguise
yourselves, then no one will pay any attention to
you.”
“ But the car? ” said Tom ; “ won’t that give
us away? We can’t very well disguise it so that it
will resemble a camel? ”
“ There is no need. We can always hide it.”
“ Then why not hide ourselves too? ”
“ Because we’ll need water, and we can only
get that at the wells after this ; possibly, too, we
may require food, and ”
‘‘l’m more concerned about getting petrol,”
Tom put in. “ All the same I believe there is
sense in what you say. We may as well blacken
our faces and roll ourselves in table-covers, seeing
that we are not of the fashion in the Sahara if
we don’t.”
“ And we must learn in what region the slave-
hunters of fhe Senussi are at present working,”
went on the American, 41 so that we can avoid
them. They exploit different parts each year,
you know.”
44 I don’t see what all the fuss is about,” broke
in Alfred ; “ you’re only trying to make us afraid.
We’ve come through all the opposition that the
Senussi could bring up against us so far, and
we’re only about two hundred and twenty miles
from the French garrison at Bilma now. We can
rush that in less than twelve hours, and then you’ll


be safe and we can begin on our own work.”
Alfred spoke a trifle sneeringly, but Marcus did
not seem to notice.
“ I was going to suggest that we should not go
near Bilma,” he said slowly. “ The French people
there will not allow us to proceed farther if we do.”
“ But we can’t keep on for ever without renew-
ing our supply of petrol,” Tom reminded, “ and
we were told that the officers of the garrison had
one or two cars, and might give us what we
required.”
“ How far can you travel yet without more of
the stuff? ” Marcus’s tones were almost wistful.
Tom groped his way to the trailer-tank and
tapped it with his hand to ascertain the level of
the spirit inside. “ Thanks to the amount we
were able to borrow from our friends, we have still
enough to carry us a thousand miles, I think,”
he said ; “ but we did not come here to see how
far we could travel in a straight line, we came
here for gold, and we can’t draw very many inch
furrows across your fifty-mile patch, and have any-
thing left to take us back again.”
“ That’s true,” the American mused. “ How
far is it to the nearest British outpost in Nigeria? ”
Tom consulted his map with some difficulty,
the strange red fog making it almost impossible
to read even as close as he could hold the map.
“ I make Lake Chad to be about two hundred
and eighty miles from Bilma,” he answered, “ and
there is a place named Kuka in British territory
about sixty miles farther south.”
” How far across is it from Lake Chad to the
British Sudan boundary? ” Marcus seemed
strangely eager.


“ The breadth of Wadai ; about six hundred
miles, takes us into Dar Fur, and there we’re on
the Nile headwaters —at least, on the branch
marked Bahr el Ghazal.”
“ Boys, if you go down to Kuka in Nigeria, I
believe you’ll find the telegraph-line there. I’ll
give you a cheque for a million, solid, and you
can wire my bankers in New York to see that it is
all right. I only impose one condition, and that
is that you take me into Wadai and dump me down
somewhere on any of the feeders of the Nile or the
Congo. You can then go on to any town on the
main Nile stream and send up to Khartoum for a
boat-load of petrol with which you can plough
the desert for its gold until you have made your-
selves the wealthiest men in the world. You don’t
need to give me another thought. I pay a million
for my passage to Wadai.”
“ But you can’t take the buried temple’s treasure
away yourself? ” said Jack, wondering at the
change in their friend’s voice.
44 I’m not thinking about any buried temple,
young man ; I’m thinking of my old comrade Dun-
hill. If he escapes alive he’ll be back now look-
ing for me, and he’ll only be caught again if I
don’t turn up ; the Senussi never make a mistake,
and no man can enter their domain without their
knowing it, and once they fix on a man they’ll
follow him round the world until he dies, for only
by his death —yet they may not kill him—can the
land be restored to the Faithful.”
“ Wadai is the chief stronghold of the Senussi? ”
Tom interrogated.
44 Yes.”
41 And it’s from the Nile they expect Europeans
to come? ”


“ Yes ; they know the desert track is pretty
well impossible.”
“ And they never leave off following a man when
once they set out on his trail? ”
"No ; I expect you’ll find that out yourselves,
later. Want of petrol will not keep them back.”
“ Then we’ll take you to Wadai, and we don’t
want your million. Some things are clear to me
now.”
“ And the proof of Mr. Smith’s statement that
the Senussi never give up a chase is at hand
already,” interrupted Alfred. “ I hear the beat
of a four-cylinder-engined car ”
“ Praise Allah for the fog 1 ” murmured the
American. ” We’ll get more petrol.”


CHAPTER X
THE RED FOG
The four companions stood motionless, they knew
they could not be seen through the strange red
fog ; but they were well aware that their position
was critical. The sounds Alfred’s keen ears had
first detected were now unmistakable. An engined
vehicle of some kind was approaching and it
needed no brilliant deductions to know that it
was a powerful motor-car, the one they had already
depleted of its petrol store, and driven by their
old acquaintances, the Wekils. Clearly, they had
found means of replenishing their petrol supply,
and had come on very soon after discovering how
they had been tricked. The track passed by only
a few yards away from where the listeners stood,
and the car was lumbering heavily towards them.
“By Jove, boys ! ” whispered Jack. “ The silly
beggars are using pneumatic tyres, and one of
them, if not two, are as flat as pancakes. Just
listen to the heavy drag 1 Isn’t it lucky we had
the sense to adopt solid tyres? ”
“ They’ve got more than punctures wrong with
their car,” said Tom ; “ don’t you hear that clank -
clank-clank? That’s a pin loose in one of the
engine cranks and it is hitting the casing every
revolution. They could tighten it up in a minute
if they only knew how to do it.”


“ Perhaps they do know,” Alfred put in. “It
isn’t likely that the Edinburgh University fellow
doesn’t know as much about cars and their engines
and their failings as we do. Probably he has
been most anxious to get to El War, and couldn’t
stop unless forced to until he got there. Their
car is more powerful than ours ; I move we steal
it.”
“ No,” said Tom. “ We’ve not come down
to that, yet, I don’t mind puncturing their tyres,
short-circuiting their sparking plugs, or cutting
the wires of their low-tension magneto, or doing
anything that will prevent them from being able to
follow us, but I bar actual theft. We’re Chris-
tians, and one of our laws says, ‘ Thou shalt not
steal ’ ! ’
“ But you don’t call borrowing petrol stealing,
surely? ” Marcus asked. “We can give it back
again, some time.”
“ Oh, if they have any petrol, we’ll Certainly
borrow it if we can,” laughed Tom. “ That really
is not stealing, in our case, for doubtless they’ve
stores all over the country, and we can leave
ample payment for what we take.”
“ Here they are,” muttered Alfred ; “ shut up
until they pass I ”
“ Astaghferallah! ” exclaimed a well-known
voice as the heavily handicapped car laboured past.
“ This fog will help them to escape.”
“ I don’t think so,” answered the soft-toned
Turkish Wekil, who claimed to be from the
Edinburgh University. “ They cannot go ahead
any more than we can, and doubtless we’ve passed
them on the road somewhere. We are now in El
War, and ”


The voices were no longer distinguishable, as
the car had passed.
“ Boys,” said the American, “ you trust me,
don’t you? ”
“ Certainly,” they all answered, as one.
“ Very well, allow me to go into the town after
these follows. I’ll hear what I can, and I’ll
bring back some garments for you if you can
oblige me with some French coins until I can
repay you.”
Jack jumped inside the car and emerged again
with a handful of silver and copper.
“ Thanks, comrades,” Marcus said, taking the
money. “ Now, don’t go exploring on your own
account whatever you do. I won’t be any longer
than I can help, and you can listen carefully
for me whistling the first bar of ‘ Home, sweet
home.’ ”
“ Why on earth should you do that? ” asked
Alfred. “We don’t particularly desire to hear
you whistling anything, and ‘ Home, sweet home,’
is the last air we should prefer, if we must listen
to you.”
“ Shut up, Alfred ! ” admonished Jack. “ Can’t
you tumble to the idea? ”
“ You see,” said Marcus, ** I’ve forgotten all
other tunes except ‘ Marching through Georgia,’
and ‘ Lead, kindly Light,’ and I thought that you
fellows would know ‘ Home, sweet home,’ best.
When I hear you whistle the second bar. I’ll
know where you are, and by means of our
whistling, I’ll be able to steer back to you through
the fog without any one knowing.”
“ I see now,” exclaimed Alfred, “ and I apolo-
gise for my rude remarks. The whistling is but
a signal which only ourselves can understand.”


“ That’s so,” Marcus smiled ; “ but if you hear
me whistling the second bar instead of the first,
don’t answer at all, but get ready to clear out,
because in that case I’ll be in trouble and while
supposed to be leading our enemies to you, will
whistle the signal and take them as far past you
as possible. I don’t expect I’ll be found out,
however, and I’ll get away now.”
He walked into the fog and the boys heard
his feet crunching along the track until the sounds
became lost in the distance. Then they held a
council among themselves.
Look here, Tom,” began Alfred, “ what idea
have you got into your brain about this crossing
the desert into the Kingdom of Wadai? Of course
I’m with you in anything you propose but I haven’t
yet got the hang of this new scheme.”
“ H isn’t really a new scheme, Alfred,” Tom
replied. “We are merely going to try to carry
out the original intention, and oblige a fellow-
creature, and make profit for ourselves, all at
the same time.”
“ But I thought we merely came to the Sahara
to work its sands for gold-dust? ”
“ Well, we haven’t seen much of the Sahara as
yet, old man, and we certainly couldn’t stop to
work the patches of gold we did find. I think
I understand now why the gold in the Sahara sands
has been neglected so long by London and Paris
company promoters. Getting the gold is the
easiest part of the business, but fighting the
Wekils and the fanatical tribes is quite another
matter. Now, Mr. Dunhill—our Mr. Dunhill, I
mean—gave us his money in the belief that we
were going to attempt to cross to the Nile, and


as he has since withdrawn his support, appar-
ently, if we do not try to do so I don’t know but
that we may get into trouble for obtaining money
under false pretences.”
“ But we never intended to cross to the Nile,”
put in Jack, “ unless it seemed the best thing
to do.”
H And doesn’t it?” asked Tom. “ W.e have
petrol to carry us to the Nile, the Niger, or
back to the Mediterranean, and it doesn’t matter
to us which way we go. But the gold district
—at least, the richest —lies to the east, according
to both our Mr. Dunhill and our new American
friend. Very well, let us go east, and thus do
what we half contracted with Mr. Dunhill to do,
what will pay us best so far as gold is concerned,
and what will help Mr. Marcus Aurelius Smith.
Of course, I believe that the Mr. Dunhill we know
and his comrade are the same, but I don’t like
to emphasise the fact that that gentleman finally
refused to come with us without an expert report.
Still, when I think of • how we might have been
tricked all along, how Jack’s father was called
away, and of many other things, I am inclined
to think that perhaps we may really have been
tricked into believing some things which are not
yet apparent to us. ,We know now, too, that the
Senussi people will dodge a man for ever, and
I fancy they have been keeping an eye on Mr.
Dunhill, for didn’t he tell us about that buried
temple too, and isn’t he the famous Egyptologist? ”
“ Ah, well, it doesn’t matter,” said Jack. “ ,We
somehow have got mixed up in a funny sort of
game and we’ll play it through. No one at home
will believe us when we tell our story, but then, we
15


don’t need to care much if we get plenty of gold,
and perhaps a walk round that old temple. I
wonder why people, especially those of our own
nation, should be so ignorant ; I’ll bet not one
in ten in Britain ever heard of the Senussi, and yet
they could get in among them in four days from
London.”
“ That’s hardly fair, Jack,” Tom answered.
“ Britain has had no cause to deal with the Senussi
so far, unless they are a power in Egypt and the
Sudan, and I don’t think they are. You are half
French, you know, and therefore know more than
we do about them, for undoubtedly France has
her hands full between all the different sects be-
queathed to her from Rome and Carthage and
the Turks. But as we know the Senussi must
not kill, I don’t see that we need worry much ;
if they do capture us, we’ll contrive to escape
before they kindly allow us to die. In any case,
we may as well go forward as go back, for the
petrol question remains the same.”
‘‘But we might go south into Nigeria much
easier than east to the Nile,” said Alfred.
“ Nigeria is nearer.”
‘‘Yes, but I don’t know that we could run a
motor-car through that country,” answered Tom.
‘‘lt is cut up by real rivers and mountain ranges,
and I have never heard that there is much gold in
the northern district, and what there is could not
be extracted by our arrangement, even if we could
travel through its endless forests. The Sudan is
British too, and if we can scorch through Wadai
we’ll be on the Nile headwaters before we know
where we are. Besides, just think of the fun
running across an old temple or two, built before
the time of Moses maybe ”•


“Oh, all right,” said Alfred. “We’re ready
to go to Cape Town if you like. But I do
wish we had some more petrol.”
They talked on, discussing matters of more or
less importance for some time, and almost forgot
the presence of the red fog. Suddenly, however,
Alfred cried : “ Listen, boys 1 I’m sure I heard
a whistle. Our friend must be coming back.”
“ Yes, I heard it too,” exclaimed Jack. “ There
it is again 1 Sha.ll we answer, Tom? ”
“ Great Scot, boys 1 ” cried Tom. “ That is
the second bar of ‘ Home, sweet home,’ I heard ;
he is in trouble 1 ”
Just then a musical whistle sounded out again
close beside them, and unmistakably it was, as
Tom had said, the second bar of the famous
melody, and therefore the signal of danger.
“ By Jove 1 ” Alfred exclaimed, “ what are we
going to do? He’s been collared by the niggers,
and they’re looking for us.”
“ And maybe they’ll find us,” was Tom’s answer.
“We are not going to.allow our friend to remain
in their hands without an effort to release him ;
but first, boys, we must be sure it is not a trick.”
“ There it is again I ” cried Jack. “ Can’t we
answer in some way just to let him know we
hear? ”
“ Yes,” answered Tom eagerly, “ whistle the
first line of ‘ Marching through Georgia.’ He’ll
understand from that that we are near, and on
his trail.”
“ Jack put his fingers in his mouth and blew
forth the stirring air, or as much of it as was
contained in the first line of the great song.
Immediately, the second line was warbled out only


a short distance away, then a silence ensued which
was soon broken by the crunching of feet on the
soft track.
The boys with one accord ran forward until
they felt the edge of the roadway with their feet ;
they were not going to allow their friend to be
a prisoner without an effort to save him, but
exactly what they could do in his behalf was not
quite clear. They lay flat on the verge of the
road and waited, and next moment a group of
phantoms flitted past through the red haze, but the
noise of their sandalled feet showed that they were
substantial ghosts. Instantly the boys were stalk-
ing them, endeavouring to find out their numbers.
This they soon discovered to be four, their com-
rade making a fifth. He was not bound in any
way, and was chatting to his captors as freely
as if they were the best of friends. Evidently
he understood their language well.
“ Can we tackle them? ” Alfred asked in a
whisper. “We daren’t get too far away from
the car.”
“ .We’d best give him notice first,” Tom advised.
“ Jack, whistle the first bar of ‘ Home, sweet
home,’ and that will give him the hint that some-
thing is going to happen.”
And something did happen. While the four
tribesmen were wondering what bird could sing so
melodiously in a dense red fog, and doubtless
muttering prayers to be sheltered from the Evil
One, three were seized by ferocious devils from
behind, and pulled backwards. The fact that each
unseen devil had, according to the latest rules of
the game, planted his knee in the small of the
back of his victim, and exerted the backward


pressure on the throat, materially assisted in lay-
ing the warriors prostrate ; then the devils were
on their chests. The fourth man turned to see
the meaning of these strange, gurgling sounds,
and at the same instant experienced a sensation
somewhat similar ; for although he did not know
it his companion, Marcus Aurelius Smith, Esquire,
and millionaire, had sprung upon him and per-
formed the throat trick as skilfully as if he had
been a professional thug.
“ Thanks, boys,” the American drawled, when
his man was unconscious. ‘‘l can’t see you but
I know you are here.”
‘‘Where did you think we should be?” asked
Alfred, rising from the victim of his strength, “ and
what has happened anyhow? ”
“ Not so much as may have appeared, boys,
but we didn’t arrange enough signals to cover
emergencies. These poor beggars —I’ll pray for
them when I have time—were the guards over the
thing on wheels we saw at El Gatrun, and which
passed here this morning. I did my business
in the town, and hearing that there were ;many
skins of wine going south with a caravan camped
in the town, and that the wine had an extremely
bad taste and an evil smell, I visited the team, and
found that the other fellows’ car was anchored
amidst the people who owned the caravan. I tried
to deal with them ; but they informed me that they
had orders not to sell any of their palm-wine, and
that they would have dearly liked to empty a skin
themselves, only it tasted so badly, and the Koran
forbade it. I told them I knew where they could
taste it freely without money and without price,
and that no one would know anything about it,


and that if they felt bad afterwards, they could
always sacrifice a camel and obtain absolution ;
and thus the presence of the guards of the
magician’s car here. They thought they were
about to repeat the wonderful performances of
Bagdad, and it seems to me that, in a way, they
have done so. However, boys, we can now annex,
or borrow, or steal enough petrol to carry us to
the South Pole, if we can carry it, for these wine-
skins were petrol-tanks, and we can pretty well
take all we want when we like. I led them out
here, meaning to dodge them in the fog and rush
back to you, but hoping all the time that you
might grasp the situation, and act accordingly.
.Well, you have done so, and now we’ve got to get
that petrol.”
“ And the dresses of these men,” said Tom.
“ That was what you left us to obtain, you know.”
“ Certainly, that was why I led them here,
although I didn’t quite see how I could give the
signal to you boys to come out and help me, and
I’m quite sure I couldn’t have gone for them all
myself. But the trick is done, and now we’ve only
to attend strictly to our own business, and by
careful attention to details, and all the rest of the
advertisement which I forget, hope to merit a
share of old Lady Good Luck’s patronage.”
“ But where are the people who came here in
the car? ” Tom asked. “ They are the men we
have reason to fear, and they must now half fear
us? ”
“ Oh, they are dining with some sheikhs in the
village. I fprgot to say there are four big caravans
here at present, and El War is turned upside down.
One big slave caravan has just arrived from Bornu


with about a thousand female slaves destined for
Siwa, Kufra, and Constantinople, and Smyrna.”
“ But France will not allow slaves in her
possessions,” interrupted Tom. “ Nor will any
Power who owns the Mediterranean sea-board of
Africa.”
“ That’s true —you are not turning your man
the right way though ; he’ll wriggle out of that loop
if he knows anything, as I’ve done hundreds of
times. Never mind his feet ; tie his hands behind
his back, and I’ll show you the only way of making
sure of him, after but no slaves pass through
any civilised States. The male slaves go overland
from here to Siwa and Kufra, and other places in
Mohammedan Africa and Asia ; but the females,
who are in greatest demand, go to Constantinople
and Asia Minor from ports belonging to European
Powers, not as slaves, but as wives of the sheikh
in charge of the caravan. He marries three or
four hundred of them and his chief men marry the
rest. Then he books passages for the mob and
pays up like a Christian and no one can interfere.
He sells his wives, of course, in the slave-markets,
and comes back for more.”
“ .Well, I don’t think my man will take many
wives across the Mediterranean unless he is
released,” said Alfred. “ I’ve tied him up like a
mummy, and he can’t move in any way.”
“ And I’ll bet mine won’t win any Marathon
race,” laughed Jack.
“ Boys, if you’d been tied as I have been, you’d
know that a man can slip through almost anything
in the way of knots or loops. Now watch me,
and I’ll show you the surest and simplest way
of making certain a man will remain where you


leave him. See, I tie my fellow’s hands behind
his back ; he can’t do much with them now.”
“ I don’t know,” said Tom doubtfully, “ allowing
that you don’t tie his feet, he might wriggle away
and cut these cotton strips on a sharp stone. I
think I should prefer to pass a strip of this bed-
sheet my man is wearing round his feet.”
“ Don’t,” spoke the American. “ It’s cruel, and
you may take it from me that it doesn’t do any
good. If you had allowed me to finish you
would ”
“.Well, finish now,” growled Alfred, who was
not very fond of talk when work had to be done.
“ How are you going to fix your man? ”
“ Easily enough,” Marcus replied sweetly. “ I
pass a strip of his garments round his chest, under
his tied arms, like this ” (he illustrated) ; “ then I
continue the binding cotton upwards behind his
back, between his tied arms, and tie it to the branch
of this tree overhead. Unless he can break these
strips, which I don’t think he can do, or I should
have placed the band round his neck instead of
under his arms, he’ll wait there until some of
his friends find him, and to prevent his disturb-
ing them with his prayers when he regains a know-
ledge of his surroundings, I’ll now tie this gag
in his mouth.” Marcus worked as he spoke, and
the man was bound helplessly, yet apparently
simply, even as the boys watched. He could not
escape unless the bonds broke, and there was little
chance of that ; even if by reason of enormous
muscular strength he inverted himself and swung
by his free feet, the strap round his chest could not
slip over his bound arms.
Very soon all the warriors were bound in the


same manner, but only the dress of the first man
was cut up to supply the cords, as that of the
others was required by the boys. The victims
did not recover consciousness, and they were left
stretched upon the ground. They could rise to
their feet and kick each other if they so desired,
but that was the limit of possibilities.
“ Now, boys, get into these garments,” said
Marcus Aurelius. “Luckily, they have been
washed recently, and you’ll not suffer much. We’ll
have trouble though in getting back to our own
camp.”
“ No, we won’t,” Tom interrupted. “It is
exactly eighty paces back along the track, and
then twenty to the right. I counted them.”
And Tom was correct. In a few minutes they
were by the side of the car, and soon after Marcus
Aurelius had transformed them into good-looking
Touareg warriors. True, they did not look terribly
ferocious as all Touaregs do, but in the fog that
fact would not attract much attention, and in any
case coffee-bean stain couldn’t do any more in
the way of adding 1 fierceness to their complexions.
“You’ll do,” finally said Marcus. “ Now we’ll
go and get some skins of badly smelling and evil-
tasting palm-wine 1 But remember you are
Touaregs, and that all other people are so far
beneath you that you need not talk to them. Come
on.”
And they went. Carefully keeping to the track,
they soon entered the village ; they could not
see anything until it loomed directly in front of
them. Almost the first object which they ran
against in this way was a huge mud castle which
Marcus said was a prison. They passed on


hurriedly, and at once were in the heart of the
village. Houses were all round them, but their
outlines were only dense, shadowy forms, and the
boys were not particularly anxious to inspect them
at closer range. The population of the place,
owing to the presence of so many caravans, was
enormous, and warriors and traders flitted past
in the fog as if in the heart of a great city.
All were laughing, chatting, or praying, and at
the same time endeavouring to cheat their fellows
over some commercial transaction. And there was
much to barter. One big caravan was southward
bound with all the products of Europe likely to
command a good exchange in ivory, gold-dust,
slaves, or other commodities. This team also
carried many skins of palm-wine, a strange fact
when it is remembered that Mohammedans are
forbidden to drink wine. The second caravan was
the slave caravan already mentioned by Marcus
Aurelius, and the other two were in from the east
and west, respectively, to barter their ivory, gold,
and slaves for whatever took their fancy among
the goods of the south-going people.
Soon the four explorers found themselves in
the great open space in the middle of the town
used as a bazaar. Quaintly dressed men from all
the districts of Central and North Africa jostled
them, all good-naturedly apologising and quoting
appropriate passages from the Koran. The boys
never answered, but Marcus Aurelius kept up a
continual conversation with one or other of the
people he ran against. All had different dialects,
and probably that of Marcus, being, in a way,
general, was better understood by most of the
raiders and traders than that of any other single


individual. He led his comrades right through
the unseen town and out to the camping-ground of
the caravans. The north-bound one was preparing
to start at nightfall, and all was bustle and con-
fusion, the cries of the unfortunate slaves causing
the boys to experience strange emotions. But they
were powerless to interfere, and well they realised
that fact.
Suddenly a car loomed out before them, in the
middle of the track. Not a man was near it,
although the jabbering of many voices all around
showed that plenty of people were in the vicinity.
Probably they, not being Wekils, were afraid to
come near the sinful piece of mechanism contrived
by the Christian dogs to cast ridicule on the sacred
words of the Prophet, which said : “ The horse
is man’s best friend, and the camel his next.”
The boys weren’t troubled in the same way,
however. They recognised the car at once, and
although they marvelled that its tank was again
filled with petrol, they didn’t allow their surprise
to interfere with the duty they had on hand ; and
that was quite clear from the first. The car was
the latest triumph of the French mechanic’s art,
but it was sadly in need of some attention ; two
tyres were burst, and the lubricating oil cups were
empty, and evidently had been for some time. A
brief inspection also showed that the gear-changing
fork had broken, that the throttle was full “ on ”
when it was supposed to be “ off,” according to
the levers ; that the tappits on the cylinder ends
were all out of time, and that many pins were
slack in positions where absolute tightness was
a necessity.
But they were not there as expert engineers,


unless, perhaps, to disable the car still further. The
one thing which took up their attention was the
fact that the body of the car was completely filled
with great bulging skins of some liquid substance.
These might have contained water, but palm-wine
was what they seemingly held, judging from the
manner of sealing. Yet it was neither ; the skins
were filled with the best petrol, as Tom soon
proved.
Now, boys, what can we do in this affair? ”
Marcus Aurelius asked. “If you have any plan
spit it out ; I can keep the people around in con-
versation while you do anything.”
“ Td like to run this car back alongside our
own,” said Tom. "We must have this petrol
somehow.”
“ How about running our own here? ” suggested
Alfred. “ This old rat-trap of a thing won’t go
unless we push it.”
“ .WeTe done, boys 1 ” whispered Jack. “ I hear
some people coming, and I’m sure I recognise some
of the voices.”
‘‘We’ll have to half strangle them, then,” said
Marcus Aurelius. ‘‘We cannot stand upon cere-
mony now. If we allow them to get one yell out
we’re done, so be ready, boys.”
“ Nonsense 1 ” spoke Tom. “ The fog will hide
us, and we don’t need to strangle any one. Draw
back a bit and wait. The people coming are
our old friends the Wekils. Likely they are coming
to overhaul their car. I hope this fog will stand
by us now.”
The four comrades drew back a few yards and
waited. The approaching men were speaking
in English, and the first words the listeners


overheard proclaimed their identity beyond
doubt.
“ I don’t know how they managed to escape
from your hands,” one said, “ but if they once
fall into mine they’ll never escape alive.”
“ Why didn’t you see to that at your last inter-
view? ” the other laughed. “It didn’t look as if
they had much trouble in fixing you in the garden
on the Wadi Zemzem. If I hadn’t found you, I
fear our people would now be short of one of their
most zealous agents.”
“ Astaghferallah! Do you know how I shall
repay them? When they thirst they shall have
salt water to drink, and when they hunger the
fever-raising flesh of the carrion crow. They will
pray for death, but all our sciences shall be used
to keep them in life until they have suffered in full
the vengeance of the Prophet’s messenger.”
“ Don’t you think that the present Khalifa, our
beloved master, would cast you out from his service
if he ever came to hear of how you treated some
boys who only sinned against him through ignor-
ance? ”
“ Astaghferallah! the Khalifa will never know.
He is too soft-hearted ; he would even make peace
with the unbelievers of Europe. He gives no
thought to his people now, but lives with his wives
at Kufra, and leaves his Wekils to do all
work ”
“ Here is our car. Do you know, I half expected
that these wonderful boys would have spirited it
away by this time. But as it is still here, we may
be assured that they are stuck somewhere back
on this track and we’ll catch them when they come
near. I have already given orders to our people


to spread out over the desert to look for them.
But I can’t understand why we should be troubled
about them • they are only gold-seekers, and can’t
possibly do us any harm. The Senussi do not
make war upon private traders.”
“You are wavering in your faith ; the un-
believers have cast their spell over you ; you are
a traitor to the cause and unworthy to be a
Wekil.”
Astaghferallah astaghferallah astaghfer -
allah!” muttered the pleasant-voiced Wekil, then
he laughed. “ I have long ago mastered my
passions,” he said, “ and I do not now become
angry easily. Still, if you use words like those
you have just spoken again, I’ll become a
Christian and kill you on the spot.” There was
a terrible earnestness in the quietly uttered words,
and the listeners felt that the speaker would
assuredly do as he said, for a Senussi may not lie
unless to an unbeliever.
The other Wekil evidently thought so too, but
his laugh was forced, and his voice much altered
when he replied : “I only joked ; I was merely
testing you. Let us get those tyres changed and
be ready for eventualities. I expect those boys
to come along any moment. Luckily we have
petrol and spare parts in every village, and they
can’t have anything except what they carry. We’ll
run them down soon.”
“ Perhaps,” answered the Wekil whom the boys
liked, lighting a cigarette. “ Come back and have
lunch ; Sheikh Abdullah will be anxious about us,
and it is time for noon prayers.”
“ But what about the rest of the palm-wine? ”
•“ I have informed the sheikh in charge of the


caravan that a messenger will reach him before
nightfall with instructions where to leave it.”
The two iWekils walked back towards the
village, and the boys once more gathered round
the car. But Marcus Aurelius had an idea and
he wasted little time in expounding it. “ How
long do you need to get your car started? ” he
asked.
“ A few seconds,” Tom replied ; “ but we want
all the petrol we can carry.”
“Yes, I know, but after you fill up your tank
how many of these skins could we take on
board? ”
“ There are about five gallons in each,” Tom
mused. “ I think we might be able to stow away
six or seven, even if we had to tie some of our
provisions on the outside. The weight won’t affect
us much if we can find the room.”
‘‘ All right, boys. I’m going to be that
messenger that fellow spoke about, and I’m going
now to tell the Sheikh to load a dozen of his palm-
wine skins on his camels and transport them to
where we are camped. You fellows had better
get back and see that everything is right, and that
our prisoners are safe. We’ll cut the beggars free
when we’re ready to leave, and they’ll never know
what happened to them or who caused their
troubles.”
“ But what about you? We’re not going to
leave you in danger alone,” Jack said.
“ There isn’t any danger as yet, but there will
be very soon, for I see that the fog is going to
clear away. Ah 1 here are some of the Berber
people who own the south-going caravan. Don’t
speak 1 ” Marcus Aurelius waited until the


shadowy forms were just passing, then he hurled
out a long string of words entirely meaningless
to his comrades, although they guessed that some
most potent prayers and curses got an airing.
The effect was instantaneous. A dozen men
gathered round at once, all with carbines slung
on their backs, and all girdled with many belts
jammed full with dum-dum cartridges. The boys
endeavoured to look as ferocious as possible, but
luckily the fog hid their faces and the others never
doubted their genuineness. One of them, evidently
a sheikh in charge of a section, responded volubly
and evidently in a friendly manner to Marcus’s
address, and turning, led the way among some evil-
smelling tents to where a number, of camels were
standing ready loaded to continue their march.
Three of these ungainly ships of the desert were
laden with the supposed palm-wine skins, slung
in couples, saddlewise, across their backs. Again
Marcus turned on his eloquence, and as a result a
young Berber and a slave from the Bornu country
stepped to the head of one of the patient animals.
The slave picked up the noose rope and at once set
off, pulling the camel after him, as is the custom,
and Marcus and the boys followed with the free
warrior. Through the village, laughing and joking
with all who came in their way, they made their
way slowly, steadily, and quietly, and no notice
seemed to be taken of them. This was not strange
as camels with loads were moving about every-
where, and the fog rendered close inspection
impossible.
“ I wish a couple of you fellows would get
ahead and find out where our little home is,”
Marcus whispered to the boys as they neared the


north end of the village. “ (We’re past all risky
places now, and I don’t like having to half-kill
this decent fellow with us,”
Tom and Jack shot ahead at once, and after
some trouble, materially lessened because Tom
knew exactly how many steps they had taken from
their camp to the prison walls and they had been
careful never to leave the main track, found every-
thing as it had been left. A whistled signal, which
was answered, soon brought the others up, Jack
meeting them on the roadway.
Here Marcus recited a few prayers, and spoke
some hundreds of words which evidently meant
that the Wekil of the living Prophet desired that
the skins of palm-wine should be deposited right
where they stood. And they were, the young
warrior and the happyl-go-lucky slave each going
back with blessings, given by deputy, sufficient
to secure them at least seventy times seventy
thousand mansions in heaven. The four comrades
stood by the side of the discarded skins of wine
shouting Bismillah after their obliging friends
long after the fog had enveloped them, but Marcus
turned suddenly and said : “ Now, boys, we’ve
got to be mighty slick in our part of the pro-
gramme, or we’ll be carrying heavy chains north
to the Mediterranean again, and none of us are
likely to be favourites with those in charge of
the gang.”
“ Oh, we’re not so ignorant as it may some-
times suit us to pretend to be,” said Alfred, lifting
one of the skins on his shoulder. “We pretty well
know our position, but we’ll back ourselves against
the whole population of this town we’ve passed
through but haven’t seen.”


He carried his burden to the car, and each
appropriated a similar load and did the same, all
returning for the four remaining skins. Then all
worked fast and furiously ; they were hungry, but
there was no time to prepare a meal, as Marcus
assured them that the fog would be dispelled within
half an hour.
But four energetic people can do much inside
half an hour, and the four in question were quite
equal to what was required of them. The camel
had carried four double skins of palm-wine to
them, or eight in all, four being slung on each
side, and in a few minutes Tom and Jack had
emptied two into their trailer tank, and completely
filled it. Alfred and Marcus Aurelius, meanwhile,
had strapped a number of the sacks and cases
of stores carried inside, hitherto, on the outside and
roof of the car, and after filling the car’s own
tank with petrol, room was found inside for the
remaining six skins. Then Alfred and Marcus
ran to where their prisoners were still awaiting
helplessly whatever was in store for them, and
cut the thongs which bound them to the branches
overhead. The poor victims never saw who had
relieved them, and continued praying with renewed
energy.
One minute later the four daring ones were
slowly driving across the track to the east. They
could not see, but they moved extremely carefully
and slowly. Soon they passed the limit of vegeta-
tion and the soft sand of the desert lay under
them, but they continued eastwards until Tom
announced that they had covered two miles. Then
he swung the car to the south, and allowed it to
gain more speed. Five miles were reeled off in


this direction, and just as the fog lifted like a
rising curtain, he turned to the west again and
rejoined the main track. El War glistened in the
light of the afternoon sun like a city of golden
domes and minarets, but the sight cheated none
of the adventurers ; they knew that the place was
only a dirty little village with houses of mud,
and they also knew that two very angry men, if
not more, would, in time, set out on their tracks, if
they found them. Alfred prepared some coffee
on the primus stove, and they dined as well as
the circumstances would permit. At sunset they
were a hundred miles to the south of El War, and
the village of Yat lay only twenty miles ahead.
They halted on the top of a range which the track
crossed, and washed at a wadi which intersected
their path. Then they had tea, and refilled their
water-tanks, and a couple of hours later started off
again. Bilma lay a hundred and twenty miles in
front and they meant to pass round it before
sunrise. Lake Chad was two hundred and eighty
miles beyond Bilma.
“ First stop, bar accidents and halts for meals
is Lake Chad,” Tom sang out gaily as he flung
the speed-lever round to top speed. “ We’re the
Sahara overland express, and we’re due at Lake
Chad to-morrow afternoon.”


CHAPTER XI
LAKE CHAD : CHANGE FOR WADAI
The night air was cool and pleasant, and the
stars shone out in full tropical spendour, while,
sinking in the western sky, the young moon flamed
out, an impressive emblem of the crescent, the
supreme symbol of the Faithful. All the port-
holes were open, and the musical hum of the
perfectly running engines was most lulling in its
effects. It was one o’clock in the morning, and
Alfred and Jack were coiled up in the back of
the car asleep, the tireless Tom was at the steer-
ing wheel, and Marcus Aurelius sat beside him.
The track was covered with drift-sand, and only
distinguishable by means of the bone-heaps which
marked its borders. A mighty sea of sand
stretched everywhere around, and it seemed to
Tom that they had entered a world of desola-
tion which had no end. They couldn’t go back,
and what lay in store forward was unknown.
Still, if their engines didn’t break down, or some-
thing happen beyond their powers to repair, they
would reached the shores of the mysterious Lake
Chad before they were a day older. Always
allowing that they were not stopped by the French
authorities at Bilma, now only fifteen or twenty
miles away. As for being overtaken by the Wekils
244


and some of their men, Tom thought they could
deal with them when they came. He dropped
the actuating clutch of the gold-extractor and
shifted the speed-gear lever to the slowest speed
notch.
Instantly a cloud of sand was around them,
and Marcus climbed over the seats and closed
the ports, thereby almost suffocating every one,
for the heat was intense and the absence of air
at the slow speed almost unbearable.. But Tom
was an enthusiast, and inconvenience of a personal
nature was nothing to him.
The result was that the little brass cup Was
filled with gold-dust in less than fifteen minutes.
Tom opened the glass slides, removed the cup,
and emptied its contents into their gold-bag.
“ We’re getting quite a store of this yellow stuff,”
he observed, as he placed the cup, and closed
the slide. “ I don’t understand why it should
be worth so much.”
“My boy,” said Marcus, “ you’ve struck the
thing of the century'. I don’t know how you do it,
and I’m not asking, remember, but you can make
a corner of gold when you like. Now what
figure would you put as the price of a fourth
partnership? Apart from the million I promised
you, I’ve got several more, you know, and I think
this affair of yours is a mighty good investment.”
“ You cannot possibly purchase a fourth share,
Mr. Smith,” Tom answered. “ Mr. Dunhill is
already our fourth partner.”
“ Well, a fifth? ” Marcus urged.
“ That you are already ; a fifth of all the gold
we obtain, less the original money spent, will
be yours, so long as you are with us. We have


now advanced beyond the idea that the posses-
sion of gold is the sum total of happiness on
earth. We’re having a good time, and so long
as we can make it pay our expenses, and a few
other incidental things, I don’t think that any
of us have any special desire for more.”
“ That’s right, Tom,” spoke Jack, waking up ;
“ what do we want with gold? All the same,
I should like a look at that buried temple
Hullo ! are you extracting gold from the sands? ”
“ Yes,” answered Tom, removing the second
cup, “ there seems to be quite a lot here. I wonder
if there would be any more if we tried the sands
off the defined track.”
“ Can’t you let a fellow sleep? ” growled Alfred.
“ I’ve got to drive all day to-morrow. Gold be
blowed ! we don’t want it. It’s the temple I’m
after ”
“ I see a light ahead,” Jack cried. “ Where
are we, Tom? ”
“ I don’t think we can yet be at Bilma,” Tom
replied. “ But you look at the chart for your-
self.”
“ We are just arriving in the Oasis of Bilma,”
said Marcus. “It is about fifty miles in length
and there are many villages scattered throughout
its fertile deposits. That light you see is in the
village of Anai ; Elji follows next, ten miles or
a march farther on ; then Shimmedru, and
Madema, three miles apart, and Kalala, and Garu,
where the track from the west joins, and which
I know so well. Bilma is only a mile beyond
Garu, but this track forks there, and, if we keep
to the left, misses Bilma by some miles.”
Tom removed the cup a third time. “ It’s a


pity,” he remarked, “ that we’ve fallen foul of
the Senussi, for this gold-extracting business is
about the softest thing I’ve ever experienced.”
He raised the scoop out of action and threw on
full-speed, and with throttle open to the fullest,
the car darted ahead as if endowed with the power
of annihilating distances. The village seemed to
be rushing down upon them. There was a light
in one house, but it was passed at terrific pace,
the track now having become hard and more
favourable to high speed. Before they had time
to realise the size of the place, they were beyond
it, and flying through the palm-clad oases which
ended to the south of Bilma, the famous French
garrison town. Almost before they had exchanged
some words in admiration of the luxuriant nature
of the oasis they had entered they had flashed
through the village of Fiji, and were approaching
the slumbering town of Shimmedru. It too was
passed at top speed, and a few minutes later
Madema also was left behind, and the mud build-
ings of another village came in sight.
“ We seem to be on a suburban railway-line,”
Alfred commented sleepily ; “I’m glad we’re on
a non-stop train. Hullo ! there’s London straight
ahead. Look at the lights I ”
“ That is Bilma,” explained Marcus Aurelius,
“ and those lights come from the barracks. I
expect the officers are watching for you boys,
for there are ways and means of sending news
across the Sahara of which we poor, ignorant
Christians do not dream. But here is the parting
of the ways. There are many caravans pass
along this route that the French are not supposed
to see, therefore this track to the left was marked


off. It misses Bilma, as I said, but joins on
again fifty miles south.”
“ Then we’ll take it,” said Tom, swinging off
to the left. “ Perhaps we’ll see Bilma some other
day.”
“You see it now,” Marcus Aurelius put in.
“It consists of that huge mud barracks, some
houses of European pattern for the officers, a
few traders’ huts, a bazaar, and the ruins of a
prehistoric city. There are also many vegetable-
gardens, and a prison and a theatre. I never
passed through the place, of course, or I shouldn’t
be here now, but I’ve been told all about its
glories.”
“ Hang them ! ” grunted Alfred ; “ waken me
when it’s my turn, Tom, or when we’re at Lake
Chad.”
The car scorched along the track which cut
out Bilma, and soon the civilised desert strong-
hold was left far behind.
At daylight a hundred miles intervened, and
Tom had added another three cups of gold to
their treasure-chest. They halted at a wadi, not
marked on their map, and had breakfast, and a
bath. Then Jack took the wheel and, with Alfred
as his adviser and companion, continued the race,
southwards, while Tom and Marcus Aurelius slept.
They had already joined the main track, and after
rising over some ranges, ploughing through some
ancient salt-lake beds, skirting a north-bound slave
caravan, and rushing through a south-moving
trader’s team, they reached a deserted village.
Here they filled up with water, without waking
the sleepers, and, not pausing to investigate the
reason why the place was without population, sped


m t ' «MP iJteiW
) *
dM 1 lv JST
** -■ iiiifiiTr liilFf*H^^^^
#> *#►. . . *'' I
r . 1trii • ■#• • "\. ... ir. I
« 7 jijE I
I '■-t^fcfci| fc ."" 4HB|
“they halted at a wadi and had breakfast and a bath.”
To face page 248.




on again. Noon passed, and another empty, or
sleeping, village was passed, and then Alfred, who
was now steering, dropped the gold-extracting
machinery-lever. He had filled and removed three
cups when Tom awoke.
v I’m mighty hungry,” were his first words.
“ Suppose we stop and have something to eat.
By Jove, it’s hot 1 I feel like a baked potato 1 ”
“ You’ll feel more like a cremated onion before
you go far on the eastern track,” laughed Marcus
Aurelius, wiping the perspiration from his face.
“ I guess the white man who passes through
Wadai will never feel inconveniently hot in this
life again.”
“ Look I look 1 ” cried Jack ; “ what great city
is that just on the edge of the horizon? See the
noble spires, and domes, and look at the great
lake fringed with palms which it surrounds. I
never knew that any city existed down here. What
is its name? ”
“ It might be Constantinople,” grinned Marcus,
“ but it isn’t ; it’s one of them blamed frauds of
which this part of the world is full ; it’s only a
mirage. There is no city there, and I’ll bet there
is no water in the lake ; just keep your eyes fixed
on it, and watch how the blamed cheat disappears.
You’re in the land of mystery now, boys, and I
guess you’ll find you are looking at what is called
Lake Chad on most maps.”
And Marcus Aurelius Smith was right. The
car now began to run so easily that all knew
they were on a decline, and even as they watched,
the beautiful city of their vision faded into noth-
ingness, and a waste of coarse grass took its
place. Down the declivity the car rushed at


terrific speed, making a breeze that was delightful.
The roof of the car sheltered the occupants from
the fierce, scorching rays of the sun, but the heat
inside, nevertheless, was as that of a furnace. All
the port-holes had been opened, but were it not
for the breeze made by the speed of the car, the
boys would have fared badly.
At length the track swerved sharply to the right,
and a minute or so later it crossed another well-
marked track at right angles.
“ Gentlemen,” said Marcus Aurelius, rising in
his seat and pointing to the mass of coarse grass
or rushes in front, “ allow me to introduce Lake
Chad to you. If we continue south we’ll enter
British territory very soon, but this thing on wheels
can’t very well travel there, as mountains, rivers
and valleys, I understand, lie ahead. If you turn
along that track we have just crossed you’ll hit the
Nile in time, if nothing stops you, and Wadai lies
just ten marches, or five hours of your contrivance,
ahead. There is Lake Chad, however ; look at
it, and carry back impressions which, if you write
them, may serve to correct some people’s ideas of
geography, as well as add to their knowledge.”
“ But I don’t see any lake? ” cried Alfred, as
Tom brought the car to a stop. “ Where is it? ”
“ About a hundred miles south, if there have
been any rains recently,” Marcus Aurelius
answered ; “ but these reeds mark its utmost, or
rather its one time boundary. Many rivers flow
into it, I believe, chief among them being the
Shari from the French Congo regions and the
Waube from British Nigeria ; but nothing leaves
it, so far as I know, except by evaporation. It
is the Dead Sea of the Sahara, gentlemen, and if


any living man can correct me, then he must have
been a slave for a longer time than I have been.
The lake is in the centre of that marsh, and if
you want ducks or other, water-fowls a fifty-odd
mile journey will bring you within range.”
“ Thanks, we don’t care about motoring through
that morass for the sake of our dinner,” said
Tom. ‘‘lf that is Lake Chad, I’ve seen all I want
to see of it. Tell me where the Wadai track lies,
and we’ll steer to cut it. All the same I’m hungry,
and I shouldn’t mind having something good to
eat.”
Bang ! Alfred’s rifle spoke out and a huge
bird fell to the ground near. “ I don’t know what
it is,” the shooter said, “ but we’re needing some-
thing.
“ That’s a Lake Chad turkey,” Marcus Aurelius
answered, “ and it is considered a great luxury
even by the sheikhs of the slave caravans. I’ll get
it in a minute ; don’t try to follow me, or you
may go down in the shifting sands.” He ran in
among the sea of reeds and procured the heavy
bird, which he threw inside the car. “If it’s
all the same to you bold, bad boys,” he remarked,
“ I think we should get off this track as soon
as possible. I know this country well, I fancy,
and it is wonderful how many unpleasant surprises
one can get.”
“ Well, we’ve still got a couple of hours’ day-
light,” said Tom. “ Tell us where the Wadai
track lies, and I’ll live on a couple of biscuits
until we hit it.”
“ The main east and west road crosses this track
on the southern shore of Lake Chad, but, boys, I
would rather miss that region if possible, for the


slave-hunters are busy down there. If you can
steer by the stars without any track to guide you,
I think I could take you through the Kanem
country, and miss all the towns. We’ll join the
main track somewhere near the divide between
the Congo and the Nile, and any time you like
after that you can dump me.”
“ We won’t dump you, old man,” Alfred said.
‘‘We’ll fight for you. Where is our road?”
“ Back over our tracks about a mile. The
road which skirted the north side of this depres-
sion known as Lake Chad will take us as far as
the Kanem villages, but after that we’ll have to
steer easterly and southerly until we hit the main
slave track. That track, boys, if not absolutely
the oldest in the world, is older than we can go
back. At the dawn of humanity on the Upper
Nile it existed, connecting with the Congo ; and
unless some of the river-valleys of Central Asia
saw human beings earlier, we are heading for the
world’s first highway.”
“ Let us head, then,” Tom “I’ll steer
you east as straight as a bullet flies, but remember
we don’t know where we are going now, for the
map the French officers gave us doesn’t show any-
thing east of Lake Chad except the names : Kanem,
Tibesti, Wadai, Dar Fur, and Kordofan, and the
Shari River and the Bahr el Ghazal headwaters of
the Nile.”
“ Then aim for the most convenient point
between the Shari and the Bahr el Ghazal, my
boy, and there you’ll also find some of the Congo
feeders. In fact, the kingdom of Wadai is the
highland that parts these rivers, and its people
are as brave and fearless as any other people


at the present time. They are also fanatical
Senussi, though, and we must keep clear of them.”
All were now in the car, and after examining his
compass and marking the position of the setting
sun, Tom swung the car round to the east, and
next moment they were flying through the soft
sand as fast as the engines could drive them.
Soon the edge of the mysterious lake dropped away
to the south, and when night fell they were in the
midst of a monotonous waste of sand, apparently
boundless. They ran on for another couple of
hours in the starlight, then, tired and weary, stopped
for some refreshments. This was prepared by
Jack on the little oil stove, and after they had
dined as well as circumstances and the state pf
their larder permitted, Jack jumped on board him-
self and began running furrows through the sand
with the gold-separating scoop. He ran up and
down past his comrades, completely enveloped in
the cloud of fine sand caused by the working of
the apparatus.
“ This isn’t a fifty-mile patch,” he cried out as
he passed them the first time, “ but I reckon it’s
as good as if it were.” He whirred on into the
darkness, and in time returned. “ I’ve filled the
cup twice,” he sang out as he approached. “We
ought to have made it much larger.” He ploughed
his second line through the sand and on coming
back on his third, he stopped the car and said,
“ Boys, that stuff we see around us must be nearly
all gold ; I’ve filled the cup half a dozen times
already.”
“ Yes,” grunted Alfred, “ but look at the petrol
you’re wasting.” Alfred was always a pessimist.
“ It’s palm-oil I’m using,” retorted Jack, “ and


I am going to use another glass of it too ; I want
to earn a hundred pounds’ worth of gold.”
“ Go ahead and do it then,” said Tom, “ then
we’ll clean some of the sand out of the bearings
and get ready for the next stage of our journey.”
“ And you’ll excuse me mentioning it, boys,”
put in Marcus Aurelius, “ your faces need some
touching up again, and you are not half careful
about your dress. We are liable to be held
up by a hunting tribe of Touafegs or Tibestis at
any time, you know, and after a bit the Wadai
soldiers will be mighty curious about us.”
“ But if we are to keep clear of their villages
they’ll not see us,” said Alfred, “ and this dress
is such a nuisance.”
“ Hullo 1 ” interrupted Jack, sitting in the car.
“I’m sure I heard something like the sound of
galloping horses 1 Listen I ”
“ I see something coming towards us,” cried
Alfred. “ Fling in our pots and pans, and that
stove, boys ; we’ll have to move.”
“ Not if you’ve the nerve to bluff things,” said
Marcus Aurelius. “ We’ll meet wandering tribes
every day from now on. I expect these are the
scouts of a slave-hunting band such as the one
which first collared me. We’re Touaregs, though,
and whoever those people may be, they’ll respect
us. We’re on special service for the Prophet,
you know.”
“ That’s all right, but I’d rather be inside the
car with the engines started,” said Tom. “ I don’t
feel any interest in their Prophet, and I’ve more
faith in our engines than in slave-raiders.”
“Risk it, Tom,” Jack advised. “Marcus
Aurelius can do the talking, and if they’re nasty
we can surely get some chance of escaping.”


“ All right,” agreed Tom. “ They’re riding
down on us in a style that suggests they’ve
already calculated upon adding some slaves to
their collection. They must have seen us before
sunset.”
“ Attend to your dress, boys I ” cried Marcus
Aurelius, “ and keep your faces in shadow as much
as possible.”
“ And your revolvers loaded,” added Alfred.
“ We’re not going to give up our liberty without
a fight for it, in any case.”
“ Shut up ! ” Tom growled. “ They’ll hear us
presently. By Jove I they’re fine horsemen ; but
why, I wonder, do they wear that funny veil over
their mouths? I should think it must feel un-
pleasant.”
“ Shut up, yourself,” whispered Alfred ; “ that
veil is to keep the sand out, of course. But aren’t
they ferocious-looking fellows? ”
“ Lie fiat, boys,” said Marcus Aurelius, in a
low voice. ‘‘They don’t see us, after all. Lie
behind the car.”
The boys obeyed at once, and stretched on the
sand they watched the night-riders of the desert
approach. They were certainly remarkably well-
built men, and their steeds were superlative indeed.
Each man had a carbine slung vertically on his
back, the barrel gleaming brightly above his
head in the weird light of the disappearing moon
and stars. Each also carried a long spear, and
all were muffled in strangely contrived veils which
completely covered the lower part of their faces.
There were about a hundred in the party. On
they came at a hard gallop, singing some wild
Bedouin desert song in chorus.


Clearly they were not expecting trouble, for their
spears were at rest and their carbines unslung.
They made a very impressive sight, but the
watchers were not in a position to appreciate it
fully. An army of such men, they thought, could
easily do more than hold their own with any other
body of cavalry in the world.
But they were now galloping past the car,
apparently not noticing it, and in a few seconds
they had rattled away to the west, their war-like
song floating back on the breeze, which had just
sprung up, with strange effect upon the listeners
behind the car.
“ I’m mighty glad these fellows didn’t see us,
after all,” spoke Marcus, rising and gazing over
the sands after the men. “ They are Tibesti
warriors, and I guess they’re out looking for
trouble. I know that song they were singing, and
you can go your last cent that it acts on them a
good bit more even than the Marseillaise does on
Frenchmen. But aren’t they fine riders? ”
“ But how can they sing with muzzles over their
mouths? ” Alfred asked.
“ Their mouths are not really covered,” Marcus
replied ; “ that style of face decoration is the
sign of the warrior, and it makes them simply
irresistible when dealing with the ladies.”
“ But why didn’t they see us? ” inquired Tom.
“ They must have noticed the car, and surely that
form of locomotion is not so very common down
here that the sight of a car causes no attention.”
“ You can go nap on the fact that they didn’t
see us or the car,” said Marcus Aurelius grimly.
“ I don’t think the Touaregs and their people love
each other very strongly either, and I’m beat to


know how Allah saved us from them. I never
knew of the like before.”
“ I know,” cried Tom from the other side of the
car. “ It’s Jack we’ve got to thank. The car
is covered with sand on this side and looks exactly
like a heap of sand. From the distance at which
they passed they would never suspect it was any-
thing else, and Jack’s furrows were covered almost
as he made them.”
“ What about working some overtime and push-
ing on a bit further east? ” suggested Alfred, after
all had viewed the car from the other side and
seen how the gay riders had been cheated. “ This
part of the world isn’t very healthy for poor little
boys like us, and I want to make some gold while
you fellows sleep. Our turkey, too, requires atten-
tion, and we can’t cook it until we get some stuff
to make a decent fire.”
“ All right,” Tom answered. “ Get on board,
all passengers for the kingdom of Wadai ! ”
Five minutes later they were forcing a passage
over the sands. It was impossible to drive along
at full speed because the engines were unable to
exert full power with such a heavy strain upon
them. Alfred therefore reduced the gear to the
second slowest speed, and not wishing to waste
any opportunity also dropped the separator clutch
into action. Meanwhile his comrades slept. The
car’s speed was now only ten miles per hour, but
Alfred thought that fast enough seeing that he
had to steer over unknown and trackless desert
in starlight, and keep his eyes on the little cup
of the extractor at the same time. Hour after hour
he headed eastwards, and at length the morning
stars appeared. Regularly he had removed the
17


gold-cup, and emptied its contents among that
already obtained, and when the first streaks of dawn
flashed quiveringly over the land he had added
about fifty ounces to their store. The machinery
had never been out of action since starting, but
two hundred pounds worth of gold was encouraging
reward for the night’s work.
But the end of his triumphal progress was now
at hand, for the time. As the light increased a
long line of palm-trees stretched in front and
the ground became broken up. The car had been
rising slightly all night he knew, but not enough,
he thought, to take it into the region of flowing
rivers ; yet beyond the barrier of palms a broad
sheet of water intercepted the course, and it had
no end as far as could be seen. Game af all
kinds were in evidence among the trees and over
the water’s surface, and many great animal
creatures were disporting themselves in the water.
Alfred stopped the car at the edge of the water.
“ Get up, you fellows,” he cried ; “ we’ve
arrived at the Nile, and you’ll have to change
here for other parts.”
“ We’ve arrived at the Bahr el Ghazal,” mur-
mured Marcus Aurelius. “It took us a hundred
marches to cross between it and Lake Chad, and
I forgot to mention it before. It is not the Nile
Bahr el Ghazal.”
“ Petrol is a stronger marcher than even a slave-
raiding band,” Tom commented. “ But how are
we to get across? ” He got out of the car and
stretched himself.
“ We’ll think of that later,” Alfred answered.
“ Meanwhile I see chances of being able to have
a good feed and a real swim, and I’m sure we’re
now far out of the track of any wandering tribes.”


“We are, I think,” said Marcus cautiously,
“ but the population of these parts, especially along
the fiver banks, is more than you would think.
Entire tribes camp along the water way, moving on
from time to time, as their horses and flocks eat
up the herbage, or until a raiding band stronger
than themselves comes along. Of course, the
French have stopped a lot of the raiding game,
but they’ll never kill it until they find some means
of enlisting the proud tribesmen in their army.
The Touaregs, Tibestis, Wadais, and some others
are born fighters, and as death to them means
the usual seventy thousand mansions in heaven,
and perhaps seventy times that number of Houris
to attend them, I guess they would make a bit
of a sensation if employed against, say, Germany.”
“ Look at those big creatures in the water ! ”
cried Jack, after Tom had suitably replied to
Marcus Aurelius > “ they are crocodiles 1 ”
‘‘And hippotamuses,” added Marcus ; “excuse
me if I haven’t used the .correct plural form ;
I don’t know it.”
“ I think most people say hippo now,” said
Tom, “ but it doesn’t matter much ; how can we
get to the other side? ”
“ We can either run up or down to the end of
this water-hole, or wadi, or make a raft to float
us over,” said Alfred. “ Fling out that turkey,
Jack.”
“ One end is up among some desert ranges that
no white man has ever seen,” Marcus replied,
“ and the other end is in Lake Chad. This is
not the Nile Bahr el Ghazal, of course. The people
who named these wadis were Arabians, and the
name merely means river of the wild goats. Over


on the Nile headwaters you can see thousands of
them.”
“ But I thought a gazelle was a sort of ante-
lope,” said Tom ; “ and surely we are near their
home now, anyway? ”
“ Gazelle and ghazal are two different names,
my boy. Ghazal is Arabic, as I have said, and
has no connection with the other word. But never
mind. We are in Wadai now, and if we head a bit
more south, as well as east, you’ll see many thing's
you never knew existed before. We are just on the
line which divides rich, overgrown Central Africa
from the great desert. A day running south would
take us into the impenetrable forests of the Congo
basin.”
“ What have we done to deserve all this know-
ledge being flung at us? ” groaned Alfred. “ We’ve
acted as fair and square as we could.”
“ You needn’t grumble,” Jack laughed. “ Just
think of the people who will read our friend’s
book when it is published.”
“ Oh, I’m beginning to think you’ll figure in
it pretty considerably yourselves,” returned Marcus
imperturbably ; “ but if you’ll allow me the honour
I’ll cook that turkey for you ; I know something
about cooking, and afterwards we’ll build a raft.”
No one objected to Marcus being allowed to
show his skill, and he instantly set about his work.
Timber was plentiful, and he soon had a huge fire
burning, preparing the necessary hot ashes. The
boys, meanwhile, had stripped off their borrowed
garments and were enjoying the luxury of a swim.
They gave no thought to the amphibious and
purely aquatic creatures who had been in posses-
sion before their arrival, and although some of


the larger water-horses, or “ hippo,” and one or
two enormous crocodiles seemed to resent their
presence at first, they soon saw that the new
bipeds wished them no harm, and afterwards
ignored them. These same bipeds swam across
the river and back again, and then attended
to their face make-up under directions from the
acting-cook. After having dressed to represent
wandering Marabouts, or holy men, which was
the best idea Marcus Aurelius could evolve, they
set about cutting down timber for a raft.
Breakfast was late that morning, but when it did
appear it was in the form of a turkey nicely
browned in hot ashes which came off with the
feathers, and it fully recompensed for the delay.
Then the raft was built. It wasn’t exactly a Clyde
model of shipbuilding, but it was large enough
to float half a dozen cars ; the builders had been
taking no risks. Before noon the travellers had
poled it to the other side of the desert river,
and then refilling the water-tanks and the car’s
radiator, emptying all the palm-wine skins into
the depleted petrol-tank trailed behind, and filling
the car’s own store receptacle to the brim, they
were ready to start off again. They had washed
the car thoroughly while crossing the water. They
were now in Wadai, and they knew the desert
practically was ended.
Tom took the wheel after some game had been
added to their stores, and steered south-east, as
advised by the American, who now thought it
advisable to strike the main track as early as
possible for fear of becoming hopelessly lost
among the many headwaters which he said existed
throughout Wadai.


All the afternoon the car raced ahead, ever
rising, but occasionally finding hard pieces of
ground over which the top speed was able to be
used. The nature of the country was now changing
rapidly, and clumps of timber were becoming quite
frequent. Soon herds of antelopes were additional
features of the scene, and towards nightfall many
animals and birds, which even Marcus Aurelius
did not know, were overtaken and passed by the
swiftly moving vehicle of man’s construction. In
all cases these creatures seemed to be too much
surprised even to run away, and it sometimes
caused Tom much trouble in avoiding running them
down. An hour after sunset the car suddenly
dashed across a well-marked track, and the usual
bone sentinels along its route at once proclaimed
it to be a main highway, Marcus Aurelius gave
it as his opinion that it was the road they had been
aiming to cut, but he confessed that the speed
at which they annihilated distance was disconcert-
ing to his powers of calculation. “ Anyhow,” he
said, “ this track runs east, and it is a main track ;
it will take us through the heart of Wadai, and
we can skirt the towns if we have luck, as there
is nearly always a road round the outside of them,
so that the sheikhs may not know officially the
nature of all the caravans which pass.”
After a sumptuous tea they went on again, for
they were as well travelling as camping, seeing
that all could sleep but the one who was steer-
ing. All through the night the car made good
headway, Jack relieving Tom, and Alfred taking
the wheel just before morning. The country had
now changed entirely. The road lay through dense
forests of enormous trees, through which many


night-prowling creatures roamed in search of prey.
The track was good, however, and although it rose
steadily, allowed of a good speed being made over
its surface. Several times a patch of sand had
intervened—one of those advance waves thrown
southward by the ever-moving desert —and on each
occasion the sand-scoop had been lowered and the
gold obtained added to their fast increasing
treasure.
When morning broke they were speeding
through a country which looked somewhat like
the highlands of Scotland, only everything—hills,
trees, and animals —was on a much larger scale.
They were now on the great central plateau which
shed feeders of Lake Chad on the west, the Congo
on the south, and the Nile on the east. Rivulets
were everywhere around, and from a forest-clad
mountain on their right a large waterfall leaped
in one unbroken mass of snow-white foam, a sheer
two thousand feet. The sight was sublime, but
the roar of the falling waters was deafening, and
the car was not stopped. Crossing a shallow but
broad stream of crystal water, in the bottom of
which gleamed many stones of deep blue and
purple hues, they ran off the track into the forest
and waited while Alfred and Jack went back to
examine the stones, and on hearing them shout out
that these were of value, Marcus Aurelius and Tom
at once left the car and joined them.
The stones which had attracted Alfred’s atten-
tion were zircons, sapphires, and little waterworn
nodules which they could not name. They filled
a small sack with them indiscriminately, intending
to chip their faces and examine them when they
had a more convenient opportunity ; then, after


breakfast, they were ready for the road again, and
without delay they started, Tom at the wheel.
Up over a mountain slope they toiled at the
slowest speed, through dense forests of all kinds
of tropical trees, in the branches of which, far
overhead, birds of gay plumage chattered in-
cessantly, as if deeply resenting the advent of
the white man and his modern methods. Suddenly
they shot through a deep gorge which formed a
pass between two high peaks, and almost im-
mediately were racing along a bare wind-swept
plateau. On every side except on the north, huge
ranges towered into the sky, all densely clad with
vegetation, but on the north the grim desert was
still lord of all. How long the fertile water-parting
would resist its insidious attacks was a problem
that did not concern them, although Marcus
Aurelius volunteered the information that the desert
was actually being driven back owing to the
strenuous efforts and wise tactics of the Wadai
people. Marcus was a mine of knowledge, but
the boys did not yet fully realise that fact.
An hour later when the sun’s rays were beat-
ing down fiercely upon the car roof, and the
occupants thought seriously of seeking some shade
for an hour or two, the road suddenly led down
into a hitherto unseen depression, and almost
instantly they were in the middle of a large,
quaintly-built town, and forced to halt because
a big, swiftly-flowing river blocked the road.
There was a curious-looking ferry-boat on the
other side, but it was already crossing towards
them, and it was filled with powerful-looking
warriors, all fully armed with spear and shield,
and not a few with rifles. At the same moment


as the car stopped a series of yells burst out all
around, and from every side men closed in upon
the adventurers in hundreds.
“ 'We’ve done it this time,” groaned Alfred ;
“ and I never liked being a slave.”
“ Remember your characters, boys,” said Marcus
Aurelius. “ You are holy men under a vow not
to speak a word of your own language until you
have—got out of this fix. Let me do all the talk-
ing, and for any sake hide your shooters. Get out
and make a bow to these fellows.”
Tom saw that they could not possibly help them-
selves in any way. The village was on both sides
of the river, and consisted of a thousand or so
curiously built houses, all mounted on piles and
beehive in shape. All were thatched with palm-
leaves, and ladders led up to the entrances from
the ground. He got out with the others and
watched the howling mob of brown-skinned
humanity surrounding them. He blamed himself
for the position, but it was .now too late to remedy
matters.


CHAPTER XII
PRISONERS
On came the stalwart population of the place,
summoned from their houses by the sound of some
enormous drum which seemed to be an alarm call.
The boys certainly were not cool, but they hid
their feelings wonderfully well, and appeared to
be unmoved and unimpressed by the formidable
display of martial power around them. They
trusted in Marcus Aurelius to do all that could
be done, and if his efforts were unavailing—well,
they knew that any show of fight on their part
would not count much. They were now com-
pletely surrounded, and absolutely no way of
escape was open, for before they could start the
car, turn round, and dash back the way they had
come hundreds of warriors would have leaped on
top of the slow-moving vehicle on its uphill
journey, and the end could not then be long
delayed/ A Sahara fog of any colour would truly
have now been of considerable service.
Tom was somewhat surprised at the splendid
physique of the natives. All were tall and very
broad-chested. Their faces were not covered in
any way as had been those of all the Sahara
people they had met, and though not unhandsome,
or thick lipped like the negro, their skin was much
266


darker in Complexion than the other tribes. Their
dress, too, was different, consisting of only one
clinging garment, not wound round the body, but
belted in the middle ; though some only wore
the belt, having discarded the superfluous robe !
All wore sandals, and while some sported a fez
on their heads, some turbans, most wore no cover-
ing. Probably their skulls were sun-proof 1 Tom
also wondered where so many of them had got
their rifles, but as they were now shouting and
gesticulating around the little party and the car,
he ceased speculating upon what was of no press-
ing importance, and brought himself back to their
present condition. Not one of the four sham
Marabouts had moved, but Marcus Aurelius now
took one step forward and made a sign with his
outstretched arms, which had the effect of bringing
[about an absolute silence. Then he harangued
the people in what sounded like most eloquent
language, but the boys did not understand a word,
and the populace seemed to have some difficulty
in following his magnificent flight of oratory.
But they grasped the main facts evidently, and
the concourse of angry people became changed into
a peaceful crowed of reverent listeners. Some of
the more devout even prostrated themselves.
“Rub it into them, Marcus,” muttered Alfred.
“ Show them the evil of their ways. You’ll make
your fortune —I mean another one —as a street-
corner preacher or a labour agitator, if ever you
get home.” Jack and Tom both administered a kick.
“ Choke him off, boys,” implored Marcus
Aurelius, half turning rounds “ remember you
cannot speak. “ I’ve just told the people that.”
He continued to address the assembly, becoming


even more fluent as he saw he was impressing them,
and when he had at length finished a wild cry
arose from the multitude such as none of the
boys had ever heard before. The cry was—
Teharik Allah. Ayddkum Ghebul!” (“May
God be glorified. And may your festival be
accepted 1 ”)
( When the great acclamation died away a
gorgeously dressed person stepped out from the
crowd and made some suitable reply to the words
of Marcus Aurelius. At least it seemed appro-
priate, for the people dispersed muttering formulas
which the boys knew were prayers.
“ Now, boys, be careful,” Marcus Aurelius
whispered, turning to his companions. “ Re-
member you cannot speak your own language, so
don’t make an attempt. This fellow coming over
is some sort of boss, and if we get the right side
of him we may be allowed to go ahead as soon as
we like. I’ve told them all about your greajt
virtues.”
“ Then we’ve no hope,” groaned Jack, “ for
we haven’t any virtues. Hurry up and tell him
you’ve made a mistake, and he’ll perhaps be easier
on us.”
Marcus Aurelius made no reply. He couldn’t
very well have done so, as the native chief or
headman was close beside him. This individual
was a pleasant-faced young man in most elaborate
costume. His belt was richly jewelled, and a
magnificently mounted sword was suspended there-
from, while daggers and revolvers also bristled all
round. He wore a Turkish fez on his head, in
the front of which a large blue gemstone glistened.
Altogether he was a handsome man who would


have attracted attention in either London or Paris.
He saluted Marcus Aurelius as he came near, and
received what doubtless was an appropriate answer.
Then a friendly discussion arose, it seemed to the
boys, at the end of which Marcus turned to his
comrades, and in an atrocious mixture of French
and English and some other language led them
to understand that the picturesquely dressed visitor
was a Prince of Wadai and would like to talk to
them if they knew any other language than their
own, which, of course, he wouldn’t dare ask such
holy men to use, knowing they had taken a vow not
to do so until they had bathed in the White Nile.
The boys heard of this for the first time, of course,
and mentally placed their friend high in the scale
of the world’s most famous prevaricators.
But the Prince was speaking, and the sham holy
men at once saluted as per instructions received
earlier from Marcus Aurelius.
“ Parlez vous Frangais?" the Prince asked,
bowing in true Mohammedan fashion in acknow-
ledgment of the sign of the Marabout.
The boys could speak French, but they did not
respond until they saw that Marcus Aurelius
approved of their answering, and then Jack in-
formed the Prince that they were fairly conversant
with that language, but were surprised to find any
one in Wadai speaking it.
The Prince laughed. “My fathers must re-
member that Wadai is now part of the Empire of
France,” he said in pure Parisian French. “ I
fought to the last for our independence, as you
must know, and then, when the end came, I went
to France with the sons of other mighty Maba
chiefs and learned the customs and all the bad


habits of civilised Europe. But I am a true
Mohammedan still, and a faithful Senussi, and
my services are at your disposal.”
“ We desire to bathe in the waters of the White
Nile,” Jack replied, “ and may not speak our own
language until we have done so. We too know
the language of the French because we have
studied it, as well as many other things, though
not in Paris. How far lies the Nile from here? ”
Jack was a trifle bold.
“Not far, my fathersa day’s journey on your
motor will take you to the Bahr el Ghazal feeders.
But is it not strange that poor peaceful Marabouts
should have adopted the contrivances of Europe?
I am a Wekil, of course, and have two cars of my
own, but I thought that you people were not
privileged in the same way.”
“ A mistake on your part,” Jack answered un-
blushingly ; “we have another object besides our
Nile pilgrimage, arid it fully justifies us in our
method of travelling. With your kind permission
we shall get ahead, as time is precious.”
“ I should never obtain forgiveness for my many
sins if I allowed you to depart without first break-
ing bread with me,” said the Prince. “ You surely
can delay your bath for another day? ”
Here Marcus Aurelius broke in. He did not
understand French very well, and he feared that
Jack was saying too much. What he Said himself
the boys did not know, but when he finished he
signed to them to follow, and walked off with the
Prince to the most imposing-looking erection in
the town, outside which the entire population had
now assembled, with many quaint musical instru-
ments, to do them honour.


The inside of the thatched building was far
more pretentious than the outside, being richly
ornamented with great curtains of tapestry, the
equal of which none of the guests had ever seen.
Exquisite panels inlaid with all sorts of gems,
too, were here and there let into the walls, which
although of baked mud were as smooth as marble.
And the coolness was delightful, and the scent
of many flowers intoxicating. But perhaps the
chief thing that appealed to all was the delicious
draught of cold water which they were given on
entering. They had not enjoyed the luxury of
a drink of cold watetf since leaving the French
steamer on the Mediterranean.
“ I am sorry that all our people are not here to
do you honour,” the Prince said in French, when
coffee and cigarettes had been brought ; “ but
half a hundred of our best riders are out on what
you may call patriotic business at present.”
“ Are slaves plentiful around here?- ” Tom asked,
casually, in his best French..
“ Well, not in Wadai, but away to the south
we can always capture all we require for our
purposes. But our fellows are not out after slaves.
They have joined the Tibestis and some others to
ambush a French force operating in the Massalie
country. I expect the French have been ex-
terminated by this time if Allah has been good
to our cause.”
The boys instantly thought of the night-riders
who had passed them.
“ But I thought Wadai was under French pro-
tection and was well pleased ” began Jack.
“ Can the lion ever suffer the presumption of
the jackal even though its cunning may for a
time give it a place near? ”


“ But surely France is not a jackal to the lion
of Wadai? ” Jack persisted, rather indiscreetly.
“ Wait and see,” the Prince responded. “We
tolerated the French because they respected our
sacred places, but of late they have forgotten their
manners, and it Was decreed that we should teach
them a lesson. Britain knows better than to excite
our people’s passion. She has forbidden all her
wealthy game-hunters and cheap tourists to play
themselves in the Bahr el Ghazal province, and
as for Dar Fur, the Senussi themselves will see
that their territory there remains inviolate. Britain
is our friend so far, for her rule in Egypt has
been just, and in the Sudan as we should desire.”
“ Then your Highness is a friend of Britain
although an enemy of France,” said Jack. The
others were not well enough versed in the French
language to venture upon much talk.
“ I am an enemy of no people unless they make
themselves the enemies of my people or my faith,”
replied the Prince with great dignity. “My King
reigns supreme throughout Wadai, and his orders
only I obey. True, France exercises a pro-
tectorate over us, according to the laws of Europe,
but we laugh at that, and France should know
by this time, had they the powers over nature
that we have, that their soldiers are as nothing
to our warriors. Even now her force has been
annihilated, I expect, and if not, we can still give
another hundred highly trained riders, and our
other towns can raise a thousand, while the
kingdom of Tibesti can furnish even more, and
Bagirmi can still yield two thousand horsemen
each equal to a dozen of France’s best.
“ Are you not underrating the powers of


France?” Tom put in. “You must know that
although you succeed in wiping out one or two
garrisons, mostly comprised of native troops,
probably there are many more soldiers of un-
doubted courage and skill to take their places.
France has never wanted for brave men, you must
know.”
“ You speak strangely for a Marabout,” laughed
the Prince. “ Now, what would you say if I
told you that there are at this very moment a band
of people expressly seeking to profane our holy
places, and that although warned of their in-
tentions, the French authorities, instead of pre-
venting them setting out, actually helped them? ”
“ I should say that the probabilities were that
you had been misinformed,” Jack answered boldly,
seeing that the faces of his comrades had under-
gone a change.
“ Then you would be wrong, my youthful
father,” smiled the Prince. “ The party has been
followed into the heart of.the great desert, but
so far they have escaped. We are watching for
them now, for it is said they travel quickly. As
you must know, we have our own method of wire-
less telegraphy which makes a fool of the European
system. But those to whom their capture has been
delegated will be here during the night, and you
can then get full information. I don’t suppose
you have seen anything of such a party as I have
mentioned? ”
“ No,” said Tom ; “we were too much occu-
pied with our own pilgrimage to trouble about
other people’s affairs.”
“Of course,” the Prince agreed. “ The Nile
pilgrimage is a long one, and you must now be
18


sadly in need of your bath. I suppose you got
special exemption while in Mecca to allow you
to remain so long unwashed? ”
The Prince evidently was having his joke with
the holy men, but Jack quickly answered, “No,
we haven’t been to Mecca yet, we hope to go
there via the Nile as far, as Khartoum, thence to
the Red Sea at Port Sudan, where we may join a
pilgrim ship.”
“ Yes, you may, but the chances are you will
not,” laughed the Prince. “ Marabouts who can
travel in motor-cars know better than complete a
pilgrimage in that fashion. What part of the
world do you hail from? ”
“ Algeria,” promptly answered Jack, now fear-
ing with his comrades that they had been dis-
covered, “ and we really have not time to share
your hospitality longer. We’ll pray for you at
all our -places.” Jack had a fair idea
of the customs of pilgrims.
“ I shall entrust you with my prayers before
you depart, my fathers,” the Prince said, “ but
I cannot hear of your setting out to-night. The
French may be in force in the vicinity for all
I know, and if they are not our own people will
be gathering, and I fear they might not recognise
peaceful pilgrims during the night. I’ll go and
consult my advisers as to the best way of help-
ing you ; but meanwhile, my fathers, you are my
guests. My house is yours, and all that it contains.
Make free with everything, and may the blessings
of Allah rest on your pious heads.” He left the
room, and the four comrades looked at each other
in questioning wonderment.
“ That fellow is a humorist,” Marcus Aurelius


remarked, taking another drink from the water-jar,
an exquisite piece of pottery which showed the
people of Wadai were well advanced in some arts
at least.
“ I don’t see much humour in out 4 position,”
Alfred grumbled. “ We’re practically prisoners,
and we’ve lost our car. Hang all Marabouts 1 I
vote we tell that Frenchified nigger when he
comes back that we are British and American
citizens, and that his blamed kingdom will have
to reckon with more than France if we’re
killed.”
“Don’t worry, my boy,” said Marcus ■; “they
won’t kill you, unless in open battle. It is against
the law of the Senussi to kill ; they can only
torture you to death in some way, and I guess
the four of us will not be idle while they are
doing that.”
“ But that fellow knows we are frauds,” said
Tom, “ and we are locked in here now, and our
car will be stolen.”
“ I thought, young man, you were more of a
philosopher than to talk like that,” Marcus re-
plied reprovingly. “ I’ve been a slave, and I know
all about the business, and I don’t like it a bit.
Still I have found it a mighty good plan —and
I believe it is now approved of by science and
the Emperor of Germany—not to worry over
prospective trouble ; ten to one it won’t come to
schedule time, and if it comes at it is quite
time enough to screw on your worry-cap then.
Now, we are comfortable here. Outside the heat
is intense, inside the coolness is very pleasant.
We have cold water to drink, and I presume there
is plenty to eat. What more can any man in


this part of the world want, unless a good sleep,
and we can have that too? ”
“He might want to be moving on,” Jack said ;
“we do, at least. Of course, you are satisfied,
for all you asked us was to be dropped down in
Wadai somewhere, and you have now got all your
requirements. But we came here for a different
purpose, and—well, we don’t care about wasting
our time in a prison, especially as we have been
told that the people are rising against the French,
our friends.”
“ We can’t alter the decrees of fate, boys,”
replied Marcus wearily. “If you decide uj>on
trying to escape now I certainly will fall in with
your views, but my experience of life has hammered
the lesson into me that strategy counts far more
than sheer strength. Now, if we are suspected of
being Christians in disguise, the people will not
go near the car in case they catch some infectious
disease—mind you, they don’t think much of us
down here —and if they believe we are what we
pretend to be, they’ll not touch it because it is
our property. In any case, I’ll guarantee that
the car will be standing where we left it a month
after this, unless we remove it ourselves. Now,
boys, if you will take my advice, you will try to
sleep, for you may not have the opportunity again
for some time. When our friend from Paris re-
turns we’ll doubtless be able to determine our course
from his words and actions. Anyway, Darfur is
only a day distant, and it is a British province.”
“ Boys, Mr. Marcus Aurelius Smith is right,
I think,” said Tom. “We shouldn’t worry until
trouble really arises. As yet, we are the guests
of the gentleman who saved us from the mob,


and perhaps it is etiquette in Wadai to lock guests
inside some place where they will be safe from
outside interference or attention. Let us try to
sleep so as to recuperate our strength and energy.
iWe can act as we think best when we know our
position exactly.”
“ You’re boss, Tom,” Alfred and Jack answered
simultaneously, and with sublime irresponsibility
lay down on the hard-baked floor and fell asleep.
Marcus did likewise, and thus Tom was left alone
to ponder over matters. He did so for a time,
and then lay down also. But he did not sleep,
and soon he was aware that Marcus was not sleep-
ing either. The two rolled beside each other and
talked long and earnestly, in low tones, so as not
to disturb their comrades.
And thus the afternoon passed and the hour
of sunset prayers approached, a fateful time indeed
to sham pilgrims.
“ We’d best kick up the boys,” Marcus said
to Tom then. “ Most likely we are being watched,
and we must keep up our characters as holy men.
Luckily you fellows are under a vow not to speak
your own language, so while you prostrate your-
selves and pray silently, I’ll do the orthodox thing.
No, Tom, my boy, you needn’t think you are going
back on the religion of your forefathers ; you’re
not. You pray to the God you know, so shall
I, but I’ll do it in Arabic. There is no God
but God, you know, and whether Mohammed is
His only prophet or not is not our concern. We
are Christians in a predicament, and while we
may respect the particular views of other people
we may still retain our own faith and pray with
them. After all, it is to the One and only God,


and He is ours as well as theirs, although they may
call us unbelievers.”
Alfred and Jack were awakened and informed
of certain conclusions at which Tom and Marcus
Aurelius had arrived, and as a result they each
took a drink of cold water and assumed also
a devotional attitude. Tom joined them, for he
was a Marabout on a vow of silence, but Marcus
Aurelius made up for their tongueless prayers with
an eloquence surprising beyond measure. Before
he had finished the swiftly falling darkness had
fallen over all, and only the prayers and shouts
of the people outside gave evidence that they were
in the midst of a vast population of human beings.
And certainly none were more sincere in their
prayers than the four guests, or prisoners, inside,
although their supplications may have been of a
somewhat different nature from those of other
Marabouts. They continued at their devotions
until they heard the door opening, then Marcus
turned indignantly towards the disturber. He
couldn’t see him' in the darkness, but he guessed
Well. ’ !
“ How darest thou intrude thyself during sacred
hour? ” he demanded in choice Arabic, although
his comrades did not know that his words meant
such. ‘‘Depart, or be accursed by Allah.
Knowest thou not that we are holy men? ”
“ Your pafdon, my fathers,” a well-known voice
answered ; “my reason for intruding may bring
about my forgiveness.”
He spoke in French, doubtless because to him
it was a more advanced language, and he also knew
that three of his hearers could not reply in Arabic
or in the W-adain dialect.


“ Then state thy business, and depart speedily,
so that we may finish our devotions,” cried Marcus,
again in Arabic.
(The boys guessed the sense of his words and
remained silent ; they had gathered a wonderful
amount of knowledge of late.
“ Then listen,” cried the Prince somewhat ex-
citedly. “ Our people have destroyed the French
army of occupation, only a few of the traitor slaves
have escaped. Wadai is rising. Bornu and the
Ghari States are in arms, and as far east as
Darfur the Senussi are in readiness. We wait
only for the signal of the Prophet in Kufra to
arise and drive the French and British from the
land between the Atlantic and the Red Sea. I
have come also to apologise to my fathers. I
doubted them at first, and set a watch over them.
But they have proved themselves to be of the
Faithful and will therefore now rejoice at the
downfall of France.”
‘‘ Certainly—l mean, yes—that is—our prayers
are with those in the right',” Jack answered. He
fully understood the phraseology of the Prince,
but the others did not grasp it at once. His
reply, nevertheless, was rather vague, and the
Prince seemed somewhat astonished.
‘‘You do not seem to rejoice, my fathers,” he
said in perfect Parisian French. “Surely you
cannot sympathise with the infidel? ”
“Not by any means,” Jack answered ; “we
are for the true faith, and whoever is not is against
us ; Allah is Allah.”
“ And Mohammed is His Prophet,” the Prince
responded, according to usual custom, “ But you
will now understand why you cannot proceed on


your Nile pilgrimage just at present. I am
responsible for your lives to the Sultan of Wadai,
and the French would assuredly kill you if you fell
into their hands.”
“ But if your people have already annihilated
the French how can we fall into their hands? ”
Jack asked. “ Dead men’s hands won’t harm us,
and we are positively dyeing to bathe in the waters
of the Nile.” The subtlety of Jack’s play on the
word “ dyeing ” was quite lost in French, but his
comrades somehow grasped his meaning, and could
hardly repress their amusement.
But Tom had made up his mind ; Marcus and
he had anticipated all possibilities. He moved
between the Prince and the door. His face wore
a grim expression, but the lamp which the Prince
had lit didn’t show it.
“ But we are quite willing to risk all trouble
with the French,” Jack went on ; “ they respect
our calling, and we have never had any cause for
complaint against them. In fact, we have an im-
portant appointment to keep which means we must
go on whether the French interfere or not.”
The Prince smiled. “My fathers must know
the law,” he said, “ and as the representative of
the temporal power of Wadai in this town I forbid
you to move from here until I receive direct orders
from the Sultan to allow you to proceed.”
“ But you know we are of the Faithful,” Marcus
cried in horrible French. “We must get ahead.”
“ I know everything,” the Prince responded,
“ but in the words of another great man whom per-
haps you know, ‘ What I have said, I have said.’ ”
“ But our car will be ruined if left out in the
sun,” cried Jack, perceiving Tom’s sign.


“ Oh, no, it won’t. I have given orders that no
man must go within one hundred metres of it.
It will rest safely until you board it again.”
“ But you have made us prisoners,” cried Tom
indignantly. “ Why have you done so? ”
‘‘You err, my father; I have not. Before I
came in here I gave orders that your persons
were to receive all respect due to your callings.
I also commanded, I may as well tell you, that if
more than two of you were seen outside together,
you might be treated as spies sent here by the
French and dealt with accordingly, so you can
decide which couple of you will first come out and
see my city.”
“ Oh, I don’t think any of us have any desire
to see a city in which we were treated as
prisoners,” said Jack. “If we can’t go together,
we’ll stay at home until the Sultan gives you leave
to allow us to proceed or the French have stormed
your place.”
“ The Sultan will never give you leave to depart
from Wadai, my father ; I may as well tell you.
You are from Algiers, and therefore likely to have
some sympathy with the French. Now, I have
done my best to make your position as comfortable
as possible, as you must surely understand, for I
must wait here with the remaining two while the
others have the freedom of the city.”
“ The others are hostages, you mean? ” said
Jack. “Why not speak plainly and let us know
exactly that Wadai is no longer a civilised State
and that we are prisoners? ”
“ Wadai is a civilised state,” retorted the Prince,
somewhat hotly, “ and it is because of that that
lam allowing you to go free in couples. What


State in Europe would do the same? Germany
would treat you as spies. Russia would see that
your days were not long upon earth, and Austria
would imprison you for life.”
“ Oh, well, we’ll not go into that question
now,” said Tom. “ I suppose you will allow
those two men to go out first to see the city?
When they return we can go forth, if we care
to, I understand. Tom indicated Alfred and Jack,
and while Marcus Aurelius began a long speech
in Arabic he explained to them his idea. They
grasped it quickly, and when Marcus had com-
pleted his peroration, they were fully alive as
to the part they had to play.
“ The two fathers can go forth now,” said the
Prince, ‘‘and when they return you two can go.
I shall Wait here and do my best to entertain you
meanwhile, but I may as well introduce to your
notice my Bornu slave and personal attendant ;
you will perceive he is over seven feet in height
and built in proportion.” He signed to some one
in the background to come forward, and in answer
a huge negro stepped up beside him.
“ Sold again 1 ” muttered Alfred ; “ what now,
Tom? ” He spoke in English, but in low tones.
‘‘What I told you,” Tom answered. ‘‘Go out
and get command of the ferry, and start the car ;
then whistle the first bar of * God save the King,’
the same as Marcus Aurelius did of ‘ Home, sweet
home,’ and wait on us. We’ll join you somehow,
or you’ll know the reason why we don’t. Explain
to Jack and cut the ferry adrift, if need be.”
“ What are my fathers discussing? ” asked the
Prince. “ The door is open. Two of you may
go”


“ Thanks, your Highness,” Jack responded.
“ We’ll take a Walk round now, and pray for your
people. I trust you have given orders that we are
not to be molested ; for we are under a vow
not to speak Arabic, as you know,”
“Go about without fear, my fathers. I have
already given full instructions regarding you,”
replied the Prince, and with this rather enigmatical
statement the boys had to appear satisfied.
Alfred and Jack walked out into the night, and
Tom and Marcus Aurelius were left alone with
the Prince and the gigantic slave. It was clear
to them that the Prince suspected them, but that
he was not yet quite sure his suspicions were justi-
fied. They intended to place the matter beyond
doubt as soon as possible.
“ That other fellow is too big to be very strong,”
Marcus whispered to Tom. “ I’ll bet I’ll break
his back, first try. The Prince will be a handful,
though.”
‘‘We’ll just cut and run for it when we hear
the signal,” Tom answered. “We needn’t fight
unless we are forced.”
“ My fathers seem to have a knowledge of many
tongues,” broke in the Prince, smiling, in French.
‘‘ It is not much of a penance to them to refrain
from speaking Arabic.”
“ Oh, yes, it is,” Marcus responded. He did
not know exactly what the Prince had said, but
he was a wonderful guesser, and he was certainly
fluent in the language of the “ One and Only
Prophet.” “ But why do you keep us inside this
place? Why can’t we go and admire your city
with our comrades. Surely your warriors are able
to guard themselves against four poor pilgrims?


If the Sultan of Wadai knew how the Prophet’s
followers were treated in your town, he might
have to sacrifice more than one camel to obtain
forgiveness. We can’t help belonging to Algeria,
and surely you can’t look upon us as enemies, even
though you have ambushed and massacred a
French force. We are no more French than you
are. I never saw France, while you are the most
Frenchified person I have ever met.”
“ Your pardon for interrupting, my father,” the
Prince broke in, “ but you are under a delusion
to some extent, a.nd if you will allow me to explain,
I am sure you will admit that any inconveniences
you may suffer are not caused by any want of
thought on my part. Listen and I shall explain.
In the first place, Wadai is experiencing trouble-
some times. Wadai was a kingdom when France
was in the ice age, as Egypt was before Britain
had shaped itself.”
“ Great George Washington ! ” gasped Marcus
in tones so low that only Tom heard. “ I guess
he would class America as not having arrived
yet.” Again he grasped fairly correctly the im-
port of the Prince’s words.
“ Egypt for the time has bowed to the con-
queror,” the Prince continued, “ but Wadai never
did. Our civilisation is as old as the world, and
although the French defeated our army ten years
ago that was because our people, being Senussi,
looked upon taking life as the greatest sin man
can commit, and were in consequence shot down
by the French where they stood. But times have
changed, and we have changed with them. The
Prophet who now lives at Kufra, but who depends
upon our Sultan to uphold his dignity, has now


issued a decree that in self-defence we may kill,
although we must always suffer much because we
are so highly civilised.”
“ Oh, cut it,” growled Marcus, who couldn’t
very well follow the language the Prince used.
Then Tom interposed. He was afraid that
Marcus was becoming angry, and he had already
realised that he was hot-headed. “We know the
glorious history of Wadai,” he said in the best
French he could use, “but we were asking why
we were kept prisoners.”
“ Then to answer briefly,” the Prince replied,
“it is thus : I have orders to look out for some
spies travelling through our country, and frankly,
I suspected you. But I may be wrong, as I half
believe, for I heard your prayers. But that doesn’t
help me much, and therefore I expect that if you
are of the true Faith, you will understand, and
help me. I have orders to stop some people and
for all I know you may be them. My people
believe you to be what you seem, and if they
thought you were imprisoned might cause a revolu-
tion in the State. Now I have done the best I
could. I have allowed you to go forth in twos and
show yourselves. I have called no guard to watch
the remaining two, for fear of the result on the
populace. When I have definite news you will be
allowed to proceed, and helped in every possible
way, but until then my faithful slave and I shall
guard r you ourselves. No outsiders will know,
and thus J do my duty, and the people will be
pleased to pay you all honour as you walk among
them, in turns.”
“We understand,” Tom replied in French.
“ You do, not trust us, and we are therefore relieved


from any obligations ourselves. Still, I think you
have made a mistake if you think you two men
can keep us here by force.”
A loud whistle sounded out at that moment, and
the air of “ God save the King ” followed, rather
harshly and out of tune, but still recognisable.
Alfred never was famous for his musical powers,
and when it came to rendering a tune with his
fingers in his mouth, his efforts were only con-
spicuous by the volume of tone, not the quality.
However, his listeners were not expecting an
orchestral concert, and they responded with
surprising quickness.
“ Oh, we can easily handle half a dozen Mara-
bouts ourselves,” the Prince went on, not noticing
the signal ; ‘‘we are both well trained, and are
equal to a dozen Frenchmen or Britishers, any
day.”
“ That’s where you lie I ” roared Marcus in
English -; “ I’m an American, but I can’t hear the
Old Country slandered like that. He sprang at
the huge slave as he spoke, and simultaneously
Tom flew at the prince’s throat. To hit first is
always half the battle, but this time it was the
whole ; so sudden and so unexpected was the on-
slaught that both the Prince and slave went down
almost without resistance. The way of escape
was now open, but Tom thought he ought to
explain matters, so while Marcus, having half
choked the giant slave and possessed himself of
the keys of the place, was taking a final drink of
cold water, Torn said apologetically, in French :
“ I am sorry, your Highness, but we cannot fall
in with your ideas, and as you have explained
that you look upon us as spies, and meant to treat


fi ; 5 * * 11
' ■<% i jM
Hjpgr M ' } | ■ j
r5fiMRr . •■ • , ~tt»> ■-■■J&s
M mSS*M yr^W- 11 ** 1 ••" / -4 *S
“ HE SPRANG AT THE HUGE SLAVE AS HE SPOKE.”
To face page 286.




us as such, we had no alternative as to our treat-
ment of you. We are not spies, we have no
interest in your quarrel with France, and we wish
everything that is good to the Kingdom of Wadai.
But we are not slaves, and it is time you learned
that when you attempt to interfere with other
people’s liberties you make a lot of trouble for
yourself. Goodbye, and if we meet again, I hope
there will be no unnecessary unpleasantness
between us.”
The Prince did not answer ; he couldn’t, just
then, his throat was too much compressed.
Marcus Aurelius lit a cigar which he had re-
frained from smoking for a full day, as Tom
and he passed out of the house, locking the door,
or rather, barring it, behind them.
Then they ran down to the bank of the river,
where already the car engines were sounding
loudly, also a ringing metallic sound which seemed
like as if some one were cutting the links of a
chain with a chisel and hammer. Many people
were about, but in the darkness the sham natives
looked even more respectable than the real in-
habitants.
” Hurry, boys,” a voice cried in English, “ but
answer if it is you or not, or we’ll drop you.”
“ It’s us all right, Jack,” Tom replied ; “ what
is the game? ”
M Alfred is cutting the ferry adrift, because a
guard of a thousand men is on the other side.
Get on board the car and run it on the ferry.
Hurry I the natives will tumble to our scheme
any time now.”
In a minute Tom had run the car on to the
raft-like ferry, and as Alfred had now cut the


mooring chain, it was drifting down the river,
but making slightly towards the far side, as steered
by the boys with the long poles they found on
board. But they knew better than to land in the
heart of the town on the other side, so when they
saw they could handle the bulky craft, they allowed
it to drift with the stream until well clear of the
town.
Just then a wild clamour arose and a fusillade
of shots rang out, but far behind.
“ They’ve discovered we’re lost,” grinned
Marcus Aurelius. “ Now, I wonder whether this
stream feeds the Niger or the Nile.”
“ I don’t think it matters much to us,” said
Tom. “We can’t stay by its banks in any case,
and the main eastern track lies somewhere through
those trees on our left. We’ll now try obstacle
racing on a !motor-car.”
They beached the stolen ferry and ran the car
on shore. Lights began to appear on the river
and along the banks. The people were out after
the daring thieves.


CHAPTER XIII
THE BURIED TEMPLE
It was morning. Towering mountain ranges, some
capped with snow, arose on every side, all clad
with forests from the base far upwards into cloud-
land, or until the snowy zone arrested their climb-
ing progress. Slowly the sun mounted over the
barrier range on the east, and its golden glory
transformed the silent shadowy land of vapours
into a vale of splendour and sound. Through the
night the cold had been intense, but at the approach
of the sun a pleasant warmth had come over all,
and birds of gay plumage awoke from their sleep
and with much melodious song—and much chatter-
ing that was not in any way melodious —hastened
to perform their ablutions in the gurgling streams
now everywhere throughout the smiling country.
And through the great plateau, flanked by im-
penetrable forests, the track wound along, ever
eastward, but curving now and then to negotiate
a mountain pass, or to cross a stream at the most
favourable point. It was not an ideal motoring
road, and no weak-nerved driver could have steered
over its broken surface. But none of the boys
were troubled with nerves, nor did they give
much thought to the fact that they probably were
the first Christians to travel along the Central
19 289


African highway other than as slaves. Ever
climbing, the car moved ahead until at length the
summit of the pass was reached. Before them,
and stretching downwards, was a waving ocean of
tree-tops. Behind them was another of the same.
They were on the crest of the ridge pass which
determines the flow of Central Africa’s mighty
waterways. Above them, on either hand, two giant
sentinels reared their snow-crowned heads into the
sparkling blue of the heavens, their timber-clad
slopes simply blazing with the vivid colours of
many flowering parasitical growths which spread
like a net over the tree-tops, seeking upwards
towards the sun.
“ Well, boys,” Marcus Aurelius said, “ I guess
we ought to get out here and plant a Union Jack
if we’ve got such a thing. We might also sing
or whistle ‘ God Save the King.’ Behind us is
French territory, if the people of Wadai haven’t
taken it from them again ; before us lies Darfur,
a British-Egyptian province. The capital of
Wadai, a big town called Abeshr, which, I believe,
the French stormed in 1900 but couldn’t hold,
lies at the base of that big peak you can just see
far over on our left. The main road doesn’t pass
through it, but there are hundreds of side tracks
leading to it.”
“ Thanks,” said Tom, “ but we are not going
to Abeshr in the meantime. Whereabouts are the
golden sands you mentioned, and where do you
wish to go now? ”
“ The desert begins about ten marches from
here if you follow this road, and take the left-hand
fork when we come to it. The left, or north
track leads across the desert to Kordofan, on the


Nile, but the southern road leads through the Bahr
el Ghazal province and goes right down to the
Nyanza lakes, and farther, I believe, if you like
to follow it. As for me, boys, carry me on for
a day yet, and then I’ll not be far away from that
island on which is the buried temple. I’ll hang
around it until old Dunhill turns up, or I pass in
my ticket. I’ll never be a slave again, you can bet.”
“ Are there no gold patches on the south road? ”
Tom asked. “ I take it that is the way you wish
to go? ”
“ Oh, yes, we slaves were kept working for
days at some stretches of sand, and we got a lot
of gold. You see as we get down into the low-
lands again we enter country which the desert
has conquered ”
“ But I understand you thought the island you
found was in a river flowing south? ” Alfred put in.
“ That seems to point out that your river flowed
into the Benue, thence the Niger, or the Übangi
and the Congo. And if so how does it happen to
be on the eastern side of the dividing range? ”
“ To tell the truth, boys, I don’t know, although
I suppose a rivet can cut through a range if
it likes. After we were caught we wandered about
so much that we lost all bearings. We gathered
lots of knowledge from the other slaves, of course,
and I know that we were many days—many years
it felt like, before we crossed this ridge.”
“ Anyhow,” said Jack, “ the Übangi headwaters,
which are the Congo’s streams up here, don’t need
to cut a gorge through this range if they flow
south, they may run parallel.”
“ I wish we had a good map,” Totn 1 said ; ‘‘it
seems we don’t know where we are now.”


“ Well, what does that matter? ” Alfred replied.
“ Keep straight ahead and we’ll hit the Nile, and
if we don’t find old buried temples we’ll get our
gold-extracting machinery in action when we reach
the desert again. We’ve enough petrol to carry
us a thousand miles yet, and we’re in British
territory, where we have a right to fight any people
who interfere with us.”
“ That’s the way to talk, Alfred,” cried Jack
approvingly. “ We’re in our own country now, and
we’ll very soon let any Wekils know that if they
turn up.”
Marcus Aurelius smiled. “My boys,” he said,
“ if the French are in trouble with the natives
you may bet your tooth-brushes Britain is a bit
mixed up in it too. But we’ll not meet trouble
until it comes, as we agreed before. See how
quickly the country is changing I ”
The car was now running down the eastern slope
at top speed, and it seemed as if a new world
had been entered, so great was the apparent change
in the country’s nature. Really, however, the
change was not so great. They had been passing
through a land of luxuriant tropical vegetation
all night ; but the strange forest noises, and the
gloom of the overshaded track, which was denied
even starlight and moonlight until filtered through
the great pall-like branches, had exercised a de-
pressing influence on all but Marcus, who seemed
proof against all imaginary sensations. Now that
the sun was rising and kindling up the world with
its joyous and life-giving rays, everything looked
different, and the boys speedily reassumed their
usual spirit of hopefulness.
Herds of gazelles ran across the track, and


myriads of parrots rose in the air, as the car
hummed along* over the track that had existed
for countless centuries, A motor-car was surely
incongruous in that old-world road, and the denizens
of earth and air seemed to resent the innovation
deeply. Perhaps the smell of the exhaust gases
was not pleasant 1
Tom ran the car through a shallow watercourse,
and then stopped to allow of breakfast being pre-
pared. They had outdistanced any chance pursuers
now, unless they too travelled on motor-cars, and
if such were the case, they were quite ready and
willing to argue out matters in any manner the
other people liked.
What a splendid breakfast they had 1 Marcus
caught some fish in the stream and Jack found
some eggs. Then they had the remnant of the
Lake Chad turkey, which was excellent. While
Tom and Marcus were attending to the washing up
afterwards, Alfred went exploring in the river bed,
and Jack went out with his gun to look for their
dinner that night. Each was well pleased with
his work. Alfred brought in a sack filled with
stones which he asserted were gems of great value,
and Jack added several birds and animals, which
even Marcus could not name, to the larder.
Incidentally too, Tom noted that they were running
downwards and eastwards. All the streams were
at right angles to their path and flowing south-
wards. '
“ This river must be a feeder of the Übangi,”
he said, “ and that is the chief northern tributary
of the Congo.” 1
“Well, who cares though it fed the Clyde?”
rejoined Alfred. “It has given us a fair amount


of gem-stones, and I only wish we could stay to
collect more.”
“ All aboard for the Nile headwaters I ” Tom
sang out. “ Time is precious, and we don’t know
what enemies are behind.”
Alfred took the driver’s seat, and in a few
minutes the car was once more in motion, speed-
ing down the ancient roadway. His comrades
promptly went to sleep, and for hours he scorched
through ever changing country without any regard
for possible speed limits. And the sun rose higher
and higher, and the heat became almost unbear-
able. At noon the dividing range was a hundred
miles behind, but still Alfred raced on ; he wished
to reach the Nile watershed, but as yet all the
streams seemed to belong to the Congo basin.
Jack relieved him at the wheel early in the after-
noon and the reckless race continued, although now
every one was awake and keenly on the look-out.
They were now down on the plains again, and
evidences of the desert, in the shape of occasional
sand-patches, were becoming frequent. In each
case the gold-scoop was dropped, and invariably
the returns were more than up to expectations.
In time they reached the forked roads mentioned
earlier by Marcus, but without any halt or con-
sideration the southerly of the two tracks was taken.
At nightfall they ran alongside a which,
afterwards swinging southwards, they crossed, and
skirted its opposite bank for some distance. The
waterway suddenly widened out into a lagoon, and
feeling that they now deserved a rest and some
food, the boys decided to camp until they had
partaken of supper.
iWhere the river flowed to, or what great


waterway it joined, they didn’t know, nor did they
care ; they were not on an exploring trip. But
as ducks and other water fowls were abundant —
as ;were also crocodiles, hippo, and many other
forms of amphibious creatures —the inducement to
rest awhile was great. They were now over four
hundred miles from the town in which their
journey had almost ended, and they felt they were
comparatively safe. Turning off the road which
here left the river, they ran down the banks for
a couple of miles and halted.
“ I move we have a good sleep to-night,” said
Alfred. “We haven’t had a stretch out since
we left Gabes, a year ago, or a week ago, I’m
not sure which.”
“ You’re always wanting a sleep,” Jack
laughed. “ Can’t you wait until we get to the
Nile? ”
“ I’ll wait only until we have had supper,” Alfred
responded ; “ and if we are going on through
the jiight you can stow me in the petrol-tank ;
it’s getting empty, anyway.' We didn’t come here
to break records across Africa.”
“ We’ll camp here to-night, Alfred,” Tom said.
“ I think we are all needing a rest, and, besides,
we must keep a look-out for that funny temple
island ; we must be somewhere near it now, and
I shouldn’t like to pass it in the dark. This
river answers the description, you know.”
They had supper, a really first class meal, for
everything required was plentiful, and Marcus was
an excellent cook. The boys had now grown to
regard him as one of themselves, and although he
must have been about twice their ages, he was
in most things as much a boy as any of them.


They did not care to think about the time when
Marcus would leave them on his strange quest,
but they knew he was still of the same mind on
the subject.
The moon was now almost half full and it lit
up the sluggish waters and the forest on the
opposite bank with eerie effect. Marcus was un-
usually silent and depressed that evening, and in
answer to Alfred, who tried to open up an argu-
mentative discussion with him on some subject
no one knew anything about nor wanted to know,
he said : “ Boys, I know I’m a bit of a wet blanket
among you to-night, but I can’t help it. I feel
we are near the spot where the murder of the Nile
touring party took place, and I see ghosts in all
those trees across the water.”
“ Your nerves are out of order,” Tom said
kindly. “ Hadn’t you better roll yourself up in
my rug and try to sleep? You’ll be all right in
the morning again. I don’t like this place my-
self ; there is something depressing ”
“ Yes,” broke in Alfred, trying to be sym-
pathetic ; “I seem to see dead men grinning at
us everywhere I look ” Jack flung a burn-
ing log at him and he stopped abruptly.
“ Boys, Il’m more grateful to you than I can
ever tell,” Marcus spoke, apparently not having
noticed Alfred’s words, “ and if you can provide
me pen and ink I’ll now write a note to my
bankers in New York asking them to pay over
the figure I promised you.”
“You’ll do no such thing,” cried Tom. “Do
you think we are barbarians? ”
“ Or taxi-cab drivers? ” added Alfred.
“ But I must pay you for taking me here in


the only way I can, boys. Money is little to
me ”
“ Well,” Alfred growled, “ do you think it is
everything to us? iWe can earn all we require,
and it seems to me that that means only the price
of petrol, for Nature gives us everything else down
here. We like you more than your money, Mr.
Smith, and we’ll stand by you to the last.”
“ We will,” echoed Tom and Jack.
“ I thank you, boys,” Marcus replied brokenly,
“ but you are heaping up a lot against me, and I
guess I’ll have to go bankrupt so far as squaring
matters is concerned if you won’t relieve me of
some of my dollars as payment.”
“We won’t,” said Tom. “We are having the
time of our lives, and getting more gold than
we ever expected to find, and the Nile main
upper feeder, the Bahr el Ghazal, can’t be very far
distant. We can get some more petrol at Wau,
for the tourist steamers come down there during
this season, and we can plough the desert which
you told us about until we get all the gold we
want. You are welcome to stay with us as one
of ourselves, or you can leave us when we reach
civilisation.”
“ My boy, I am leaving you here, and that’s
what makes me feel so bad. I am a poor man
indeed if my dollars don’t count. I never had
any real friends, for my life was spent making
money. But on that awful slave march Dunhill
and I became more than friends, and it is for
him that I am here now. I know he would never
cease in his efforts to trace me up, and I feel
it is on that temple island he would start. True,
years have passed, but it may have taken him


years to reach some civilised place, and then he
might not have had the money, for I forgot to
give him power to draw upon me when we parted.”
” But why should he come here? ” asked Tom.
Would it not have been better simply to have
notified the French, British, and American authori-
ties that you Were a prisoner in the hands of the
Senussi somewhere in Africa? ”
“ Probably he did so, but what do you think
any Power could do against fanatical nomadic
people? Britain, after may years, scattered them
in the Sudan, but they simply crossed to French
territory, and you have heard that the poor French
soldiers have been massacred, only yesterday.
Supposing France sends a strong force down into
Wadai to punish the murderers, they will find
everything in order and the Sultan in utter
ignorance of anything wrong. The people who did
the trick will be somewhere else, address unknown
at the Wadai post-office. As a matter of fact, they
would be a combination of picked warriors from
the Touaregs, Tibestis, Wadais, and other big
fighting peoples, and all Europe couldn’t conquer
them if a holy war were proclaimed.”
“ Allowing all that,” Tom put in, “ what grounds
have you for thinking that your old comrade
would come back to the buried temple to look
for you? He would surely know that you could
not be there, easily, or that if you did manage to
get there, you could without much trouble go on
to Wau on the Nile navigable tributary?)’'’
“You forget that we set out from Wau and
eventually got lost,” Marcus said, “ and that it
was by accident we found the temple on a south-
flowing river. Now, seeing I couldn’t have a


motor-car, if once I got my, way back to the
island, I fancy I should try to make my way
down its stream until I reached some place instead
of trying to make for Wau, which must be many
hundreds of miles distant. In any case, boys,
it is more instinct than reason which brings me
back here. I have learned by this time that a
fellow’s reasoning powers may get a kink in them,
but you can’t go far wrong if you follow your
instincts.”
“ I don’t know,” Tom responded thoughtfully ;
“ you are saying, practically, that brains are no
good to a man.”
“ I didn’t mean that ; you see, I’ve been so
long used to talking all kinds of Arabic dialects
that I can’t say just what I mean in any other
language. I’ll try again : I reasoned that when
Dunhill came for me he would come down from
Tripoli or some port on the Mediterranean, so I
went quietly with the caravan until I lost hope.
Yet all the time my instinct was telling me to get
back to the old temple, that being the one place
both of us knew so well. After all, too, that is
the only spot where he could begin tracking me,
for we never knew where we were while on the
march. Well, we haven’t met him, so I guess
if he’s not at the temple now, he won’t be far
away front it ; and now you know the cause of my
feeling bad to-night, for excepting Dunhill, you
are the only people I care much for on earth,
and I hate parting with you.” Marcus rose to
his feet, waving aside the cigar which Jack offered
him. “If you’ll excuse me for a bit, boys, I’ll
walk down the bank a hundred yards or so.
Maybe the exercise will help, me.”


“ All right,” Alfred said, “ but remember we
are your friends, and we’ll see you through. Don’t
go out of sight of our fire, and don’t be too long
away.”
Marcus walked away and the boys held counsel
together.
“ Poor old fellow,” said Tom, “ he is feeling
very bad 1 ”
“ Isn’t it one of those kinks on the brain he
talks about? ” Alfred suggested. “Why on earth
should he imagine his comrade would come
here for him? and if he did, the two of them
would still be liable to the same dangers.”
“ I’ll tell you what we’ll do, boys,” said Jack ;
“ we’ll hunt up the island and its temple and have
a look at it with him. Then when he sees there
is no sign of his comrade ever having been there,
we’ll get him persuaded to come on with us to
that place called Wau on the Bahr el Ghazal.
He can go home from there on the first steamer
going down the Nile, or he can come back with
us when we get more petrol if he likes.”
“ I am afraid he’ll not leave that buried temple
if we ever run across it,” Tom said ; “ and I
hate to tell him that although his comrade certainly
meant to come back to the ruins, he afterwards
found he couldn’t do so without an expert report
on our method of extracting gold.”
“ Then you think our Mr. Dunhill and his com-
rade are the same person? ” asked Alfred.
“ I don’t think there can be any doubt about it,”
Tom replied, “ although how the weak-minded man
we know could ever have been the strong, deter-
mined man Marcus knew beats me to explain.
Why, he would require an expert report upon


the customs; and feeding diet of the crocodiles in
a river before he would dream of escaping down
its stream.”
“ And yet,” Jack reminded, “he told us he
had no faith in ‘so-called experts.’ Don’t you
remember his story of * Cure Alls ’ and ‘ Kill
Alls ’? ”
“ Ah, well, boys, I can’t explain,” said Tom.
“ We can’t blame our Mr. Dunhill, because without
his help we could never have come here, and we’ll
pay him exactly a fifth of all our profits. Still,
if he is the man —and I think he is—whom
Marcus expects to find somewhere about here, well,
it looks as if Marcus were going to be disappointed,
for we came by the quickest route, and we have
not delayed much by the way. All the same I
should not mind having a look at that old temple.”
“ Hullo, here’s Marcus 1 ” exclaimed Alfred.
“ He’s running, and he looks a bit excited. .What
is the matter, old man? ”
Marcus ran into camp and flopped down. “My
quest is ended,” he said slowly. “ I’ve found the
island ”
“Where?” gasped all, springing up in great
surprise, yet fearing that their comrade had lost his
senses.
“ That’s it in front of you ; these trees right
across where you, young man, saw dead men
grinning at you hide the entrance to the ancient
temple. No, boys, I’m quite sane, I give you my
word, and I’m talking straight.”
“ But you are looking across the river,” cried
Tom ; “we see no island ”
“ You do,” Marcus said, “ you are looking at
it now. That isn’t the other side of the river over


there, that is the island, and the temple is hidden
among the scrub directly opposite you.”
For a space all were silent, then Tom, ever
practical, said : “ Surely you are making some
mistake? If that is an island we see, it can’t very
well be yours, because you told us you had been
sailing southwards for weeks before you ran on
to it.”
“ Well,” murmured Marcus, “ I guess you might
sail south on that waterway for weeks, easy
enough.”
“ Possibly, but you forget we crossed it only
a couple of miles back, and surely you or some
of your people would recognise the great east and
west track when you drifted past it? ”
“By the stars and stripes, young man ! I
believe you’ve just explained why our native
servants deserted us. They saw the roadway and
knew what it meant, and we didn’t. They were
the stuff that good slaves are made of, and they
didn’t want to live so near the slave caravan
track.”
“ Then you still think that this is your island? ”
Alfred asked.
“ I’m sure it is. If you will walk down (the
bank with me for a bit, you’ll see the remnant
of our raft lying high up on the shingle where
we first beached it at the south end of the island.
The moon is shining fair down on it ; but even
before I saw 4 it I felt sure I was at my journey’s
end. Boys, I am leaving you. You’re the best
fellows I ever knew and ”
“ Rot 1 ” exclaimed Tom, “ you’re not leaving
us. We’U go over with you to your temple island,
and after you have seen all you want and satisfied


I Cv
I
I : ' '*■ ■ ..,.<
I -■ . “-
H I :: Ip-^
jL** I 1 0 J
■'■ ! ' "' _ HWLwv SP/y * %
If
I | ‘ JL i ; ,
“a few minutes later the four comrades were wading
OVER TO THE FOREST-CLAD ISLAND.”
To (ace page 302.




yourself that your" old comrade isn’t there, you’ll
come with us to the Nile, wherever it is.”
“ I can see there is no sleep for me to-night
yet,” Alfred grumbled ; “ all the same, I don’t
mind missing a week’s sleep to see a real buried
temple ; perhaps there may be something good
in the way of gems in it that nobody particularly
wants.”
“ There was, my boy, but the temple may have
been found again since we saw it. But let us get
over ; you fellows can build a raft, but I’m going
to swim over now. Crocodiles won’t come near a
fellow if he splashes enough.”
“ Then we’ll splash alongside you,” said
Tom ; “ the car can wait here all right, and damp
clothes won’t hurt us much in this part of the
world.”
A few minutes later the four comrades were
wading over to the forest-clad island which in
the darkness they had taken for, the opposite bank
of the river. They landed, safely, despite the
presence of many water creatures which showed
great interest in them, although careful not to
interfere with their passage.
Marcus at once pushed through some dense
scrub, and squelching snakes and other reptiles
either too lazy or too surprised to Wriggle out of
the way ; the boys followed, still half in the idea
that their comrade was bereft of his senses.
Suddenly Marcus stopped. “ Comrades,” he
said, “ I don’t remember exactly what I told you
of this place, or how we found it, and how we were
at last captured, but I do recall that I did give
you a wrong impression in one respect, although
I only did it to cut my story shorter.”


“ What’s the mattetf Jiow? ” Tom asked. “ Have
you forgotten where the temple entrance is? ”
“No, but I forgot until this moment that no
one else knows unless it has been re-discovered.
I told you we hid in the temple but were finally
caught. Well, I’ve now got to say that if we had
stayed in the place we might never have been
slaves. It was in coming out that things went
against us. We thought the other people had
gone, but they hadn’t ; still, it was outside among
the ruins in the scrub that we were caught, and
so far as I know, they never saw the temple,
although they must have known, or at least
suspected, that we had found something of great
importance. We never, told, however ; we couldn’t
because we didn’t then know Arabic, and although
one painted-faced beggar knew English as well
as I did, and asked us plenty of questions, we never
gave the show away. Now, boys, prepare to enter
a place that was old perhaps even when the
Pharaohs were kings in Egypt.”
“ Oh, give the poor old temple half a chance,”
said Alfred. “ I didn’t know that Mereo existed
until some thousands of years after those gentle-
men. In fact, I was under the impression that
that mysterious Empire was at its zenith about the
same time as Rome.”
Marcus turned round : “ Are you a student of
ancient history? ” he asked excitedly.
“ Not much,” Alfred admitted, “ but I know
the difference between 500 B.C. and 5000 8.C.,
and I’ve read enough to know that when you talk
of the Pharaohs you are talking of men who have
been dead a very long time. But trot out your
temple ; I’ll bet Tom will soon tell you its age and
all about it.” -.


“No, boys, first work yourselves into a humble
frame of mind. I don’t know when Mereo
flourished, but this temple may have been built
even earlier than that Empire. Its inscriptions
prove it to be at least as old as the Pharaohs.”
“ Is there a temple at all, old man? ” interrupted
Alfred ; “if so, let’s see it. I don’t like so many
snakes squirming about my legs, and I’m as
humble now as I can be.”
“ Then behold ! ” cried Marcus dramatically.
He parted some dense creeping vegetation with his
hands and disclosed a circular, weather-worn slab
of stone lying on the ground. The moon shone
down through the overhanging branches, and its
light made the scene most weird. Clearly the
stone had been placed in its position by the hands
of men, and even yet part of some hieroglyphic
inscriptions could be traced upon its flaky surface.
Marcus was now greatly excited, and the
perspiration poured from his brown face in
streams. He pointed to the stone, but for some
time could not speak, and the boys waited patiently
and full of sympathy for the man who had come
back to the spot where he had been made a slave,
drawn by some strange impulse.
“ The stone has not been moved since we left
it,” he muttered at length. “ Lift it, boys ; we’ll
find torches inside.”
Alfred and Jack seized one end of the great
slab, but it moved without much effort ; it was
balanced in some peculiar manner not evident'.
A long flight of stone steps descended into the
cavernous depths thus uncovered. A couple of
long, gummy torches lay on the second step, their
ends showing evidence that they had already been
20


ill use. Marcus lit one and Alfred appropriated
the other. The reddish glare of the torches did
not penetrate far into the gloom beneath, but it
enabled the explorers to perceive the massive steps.
Following Marcus, they passed inside from the
world of the twentieth century to that of an age
shrouded in the mists of unknown antiquity. A
feeling of reverence came over all, and involun-
tarily they halted when they had gone down a few
steps and tried to realise their environment.
They were in a long, descending passage, the
walls and roof of which seemed to consist of huge
slabs of smoothly dressed stone fitting together
so neatly that the joints could not be seen. An
endless picture in hieroglyphics graced each wall,
but the roof, so far as the torch-light enabled
them to discern, was given over entirely to
mysterious geometrical signs, the import of which
was not clear, unless they were spells to ward
off all evil influences. The steps were the full
breadth of the passage, and this Alfred soon
announced was about fifteen feet.
“ There are ninety steps in this long stairway,”
added Marcus, “ and each is ten and a half inches
in depth and twenty-one inches broad, so we there-
fore descend seventy-eight feet nine inches, and
in doing so travel forward exactly double that
distance, or one hundred and fifty-seven feet six
inches.”
“ Marvellous 1 ” Alfred ejaculated. “ How do
you do it? Doesn’t it give your brain a kink to
figure out these things? ”
“ Do you know the other way out? ” Tom asked,
not paying much attention to what was said.
“ There is no other way as far as I know, my


boy. We never found any, and old Dunhill said
that these pictures on the walls told that this was
the way into this temple, although they also said
a ;lot more which he didn’t get time to under-
stand. Of course, this place was either built in
a great depression and the river afterwards
diverted so as to surround it, or we must believe
that the land surface has risen about eighty feet
since it was built.”
“It Was too dark to see the nature of the country
when we camped to-night,” Tom said ; “ but I
fancied. I saw a wall of solid rock near us on our
left, and if I did, that seems to suggest that the
country is not such as could be silted up, unless it
were a lake bed, which had since been filled.”
“ In any case this old temple down below must
have been built by people who knew how to make
a watertight job,” said Jack ; “ although it seems
to me that it was meant to be underground,
from the fact that the entrance is from the
roof.”
“ I think you are right, Jack,” said Alfred, who
certainly was well versed in most things ancient,
in history or in legend. “ This place was a big
lake with an island in the middle, as it is now, and
the people simply excavated the centre of the
island and built their temple in the space thus
made. They may have diverted the feeding river
while working, but they afterwards turned it back
again. Why, this island is solid rock to the
surface, as I saw when we landed, and that proves
the temple couldn’t have been buried by the silted
mud of centuries.”
“ Very well, gentlemen,” put in Marcus ; “ now
that you have settled everything to your satis-


faction, perhaps you will be ready to go down and
see the temple.”
“ Lead on then,” cried Alfred, “ but I’m sure
Tom wants to say something. I can see he’s
Worried a lot.”
“ Oh, no, not much,” Tom answered. “ I was
going to suggest, at first, that the lower regions
must be full of carbonic acid gas, or at least foul
air, for the atmosphere of the time when this place
was built couldn’t be exactly fresh now.”
“ I never thought of that,” cried Marcus, “ and
Dunhill didn’t seem to realise that the mummified
air ought to have killed us, either. Yet the temple
must be jammed full of air that was breathed by
the people of the forgotten past.”
“ I don’t think it is,” said Tom quietly. “ I
think it is full of fresh present-day air. If it
were not we should have felt the result by this
time, but I see proof that the place is thoroughly
ventilated, possibly by another open entrance some-
where, in the flame of these torches. Just look
how the flame is blown backwards by some air-
current.”
“ But could that not be caused by the bad air
escaping upwards through our open doorway,”
asked Marcus —“ the same way as smoke goes up a
funnel? ”
“ No,” Tom laughed, “ smoke wouldn’t rise up
a funnel unless it were lighter than the outside
atmosphere, or blown up by artificial means,
or by a draught caused by an access of air from
the bottom. Now, this air is rising, and as air
laden with carbonic acid gas is much heavier than
pure air, and as there cannot be any artificial
appliances working, it seems to me that there must


be access of air from some passage down below
which is causing the draught.”
“ But hang 1 it, Tom I ” cried Jack, “ if the temple
is watertight, it must be airtight, and if there were
any holes the water would certainly come in.”
“ I don’t know,” Tom mused ; “we will be far
below the level of the river’s bed when we get
down those ninety steps.”
“ Theji let us get down now,” said Marcus.
“I’m beginning to feel hungry again already, and
anyhow we are not here to report upon the old
temple as a health resort, and we’re not floating
it into a limited compay as a first-class hotel. v
“ Quite true,” Alfred agreed, “ but I wonder
what our Mr. Dunhill would have said on that
subject. He would have required an expert report
on the political beliefs of its builders, I’m sure.”
They resumed their downward journey, and on
the ninetieth step reached the bottom.


CHAPTER XIV
TOM GOES EXPLORING
The walls of the staircase came to an end, and
the vast, dim space of the temple was before them.
The floor was paved with slabs of marble-like
smoothness, all of different shape, yet evidently
designed to form part of some master plan, for
they fitted perfectly, and resembled the shapes
seen in, a kaleidoscope. Carefully the four adven-
turers stepped out on the floorway, the torches
giving light barely sufficient to illuminate more
than a few yards around. In time they came to
one of the walls ; it was carved exquisitely from
the floor as far up as their torches showed, and
the designs were doubtless significant to those who
could read them, but to the boys they were almost
meaningless. They groped along the wall to the
right and soon reached a series of recesses in
which were strange images in even stranger
positions. One was formed after the figure of a
female, greatly enlarged, and Marcus said it was
supposed to represent life, although why his
comrades could not quite understand.
The next was a gigantic statue of a man-like
being, which presumably represented death, but
the connection was as difficult to perceive as in
the first case. Alfred suggested that the figures
310


were Isis and Osiris ; the latter being the son
of heaven and earth and the judge of the
dead, according to Egyptian beliefs, and the
former his wife. But Marcus would not hear
of this, because it implied that the temple was of
Egyptian origin. At least, he thought it did.
All round the walls, at regular intervals, were
these recesses, each containing a statue of strange
shape and size. Sometimes an enormous lion-like
creature with a human face would stand out in
the torchlight, and occasionally a huge cat would
glare upon them . Once, too, a man-faced bull of
greatly exaggerated size confronted them, and on
seeing it Tom thought he had solved the mystery
of the temple-builders, and at once proclaimed
them to have been Assyrians.
“ You’re out of it, Tom,” Alfred said ; “ the
idea of the bull can only have been borrowed
from those people. Probably there were some
Assyrian captives of war here, and they gave the
idea. Look, here is a ship ! You can’t very
well say that that proves British people were
here? ”
“No, because that ship may be emblematical
of Egypt, or the land of Punt, both of which
countries built ships before the Clyde or the
Tyne were on the map. I think the collection
goes to prove that it was some people who had
dealings with Egypt, Assyria, Punt, Ethiopia, and
perhaps Libya, who built this place, and maybe
all those images are trophies of war.”
“Or copies,” said Marcus. “ Dunhill said the
ancient people of Mereo were the most skilful
artificers in the world, barring the Phoenicians in
later times.”


“ I wish we could read those inscriptions round
the walls,” said Jack. “ I expect they are telling
the whole story to any one who can make them
out.”
‘‘Well, we can’t,” Alfred grunted, ‘‘although
I’ll bet that picture there with the three spearmen
in line, and those fellows facing them with bows
and arrows who have just come out of that ship
mean that the two parties had a fight, and if we
pass on a bit we’ll maybe see who won.”
“ I’ll back the spearmen ! ” Jack said ; “ they’re
good-looking fellows, and the others are as ugly as
sin. It’s the spearmen’s people who are telling
the story.”
And Jack apparently was correct. All along
the wall were the same three mechanical-like
spearmen. In the next series of pictures they were
trampling the bodies of the puny bow-and-arrow
men, and farther on they were facing in the
opposite direction, evidently to repel an attack
by a horde of horsemen from the west. But the
result was always the same. Sailors from the east
or Punt, or perhaps beyond, and horsemen from
the west, all went down before those three mighty
spearmen. The explorers reached the end of the
wall and turned along the side which ran parallel
with the river. The recesses still existed at regular
distances, but now the gods which they contained
were more terrifying in appearance although better
known to Alfred, at least. One was a huge
monstrosity in the form of a hippopotamus stand-
ing erect, and another was a squatting ape-shape
of gigantic size, and next to the latter was an
upright crocodile-man with a huge head orna-
mentation. Alfred seemed to know them at once,


and he informed all that the first was the hippo-
potamus goddess Thaueris, the second the dwarf
ape-god Bes, and the third Sebik, all famous
Nubian deities.
“ These figures prove that the people here were
Nubians,” he continued. “ Hullo I the next is
Thoth, the ibis-headed god of wisdom ; and
Anubis, the jackal-headed assistant of Osiris in
his court of the dead, follows. I’m beat, boys,
for these last are purely Egyptian.”
“ It’s a mighty fine temple, anyhow,” said
Marcus, “ and I guess those gods would be worth
a fair amount of dollars if we could shift them to
London or New York.”
“ Let us try and read those pictures,” suggested
Tom ; “ they look simple enough, and if we had
brought over an acetylene lamp we might have
been able to see enough at a time to grasp the
entire meaning.”
“ Well, we’re on the north and south running
wall, now,” said Marcus. “ And these three
straight-limbed spearmen are evidently killing
negroes from central Africa in this series where
they face south, and —but move on to the next
caravan, boys ; here they are sticking their spears
through these little fellows from the north, Libyans,
I should guess, if not natives of lower Egypt
proper.”
“ But what are all those little metal boxes lying
everywhere in those smaller recesses? ” Jack asked.
“ I didn’t know the people who lived so long ago
knew how to work in metal.”
“ Now, I can help you,” said Marcus. “ I’m
an adept when you come to metals. Those things
are not boxes, they are ingots. Those in the south


end of the wall were gold, I’ll bet my boots, or
what I wear for boots ; those in the middle here
are bronze, and we are now coming to the silver
zone.”
“ Then let’s go back to the gold,” said Jack,
“ it’s worth more.”
Ah I there you’ve solved the problem of these
pictures,” said Alfred. “ Why could we not see
the explanation before? What they point out is as
plain as can be? ”
‘‘ls it?” asked Marcus. ‘‘Then expound unto
us the meaning, O wise man, and it may be that
thou shalt not be unrewarded.”
“ Why,” said Alfred, “ the people who came
against those who built this temple were armed
with bows and arrows, or with weapons made
of gold or silver. But even although they far
outnumbered the warriors of this place, the de-
fenders’ knowledge of bronze enabled them to beat
back all invaders, whether they came from the
north, south, east, or west. Their spear-heads
were of bronze, hence their victories over all
comers, who knew only gold and silver.”
“By Jove, boys I ” said Jack. “ It’s lucky for
the world that these three spearmen didn’t know
anything about high-speed tool steel. They would
have knocked old Rome out, first round, when
she came along, and they would have had super-
Dreadnoughts on Lake Chad, and spearmen flying
about the world on aeroplanes.”
Shut up 1 ” growled Alfred. 4 ‘ They can keep
their bronze ; we’ll only take the gold.”
“I’m hungry and sleepy,” said Tom. “ I move
we get back to fresh air, and continue our ex-
plorations to-morrow.”


“ Yes, surely,” agreed Marcus, and the others
looked at him. Well they remembered the man
who in their opinions held the copyright of the
expression. Marcus expected to find him in the
temple, but of course they knew such an irrespon-
sible man as Mr. Dunhill had long ago forgotten
his comrade, the temple, and everything else.
But Jack and Alfred were tired and hungry too,
for it was almost midnight, and they had been
leading a strenuous life of late. Thus, all agreed
that fresh air was highly desirable, and a general
move was made towards the long staircase. This
they found after much groping and stumbling
against colossal pillars, and after another laborious
effort they climbed to the top, and passed out
into the moonlight. The air was like new life to
them, and the cool water of the river was yery
refreshing as they waded through its shallow
depths towards the bank where their car waited.
The amphibious creatures of the night did not
attempt to interfere with them, and eventually
they climbed up on the bank safely. A fire was
soon kindled, and after partaking of hot coffee
they lay down on the ground beside the car and
soon were fast asleep.
.With the first signs of dawn all were awake,
and ready for whatever the day had in store for
them, although Jack and Tom both confessed they
had been dreaming of weird monstrosities and
gigantic temples all night. Breakfast was a great
affair and such as few first-class hotels could have
equalled. Fish of many kinds were in abundance,
as were also eggs, and cold turkey and duck,
and other fowls which no one could name. Marcus
was the cook, assisted by Tom ; and Jack and


Alfred provided the fresh material, and incidentally-
provided the material for several meals ahead.
After breakfast, a council was held, and it was
decided to hide the car as much as possible in
case some wandering tribes came along of an in-
quisitive nature, and afterwards to explore the
temple thoroughly. A slight ridge rising near,
clad with vegetation, of a kind unknown to jail,
offered a hiding-place for the car, and it was
at once run in among the scrub, where it wais
completely lost to view from the river’s bank.
Then loading themselves with materials for a cold
lunch in the temple and a possible meal later on,
they waded out to the island once more. Actuated
by some strange fancy, Alfred insisted on floating
their stores out in a case, asserting that such a
method was much easier as well as more scientific
than carrying them. Every one agreed, but the
chief result was that far more provisions than
could possibly be required in a day’s sojourn were
landed upon the island, as well as some ducks
shot during the passage, and several dozens of
eggs collected on the banks. Tom also filled
one of the old palm-wine or rather petrol-skins
with water before going below, and he had
provided himself with a cycle acetylene lamp, a
compass, and a ball of twine. Why he had taken
the last-named commodity he could not well have
explained himself, beyond the fact that it might
prove useful.
Thus, while the sun was yet low in the eastern
skies the four adventurers again descended the
ninety steps which led to the temple, each thinking
that by night they would be speeding on towards
the Nile with much gold added to their store.


The acetylene lamp was a great improvement
on the torchlight, and almost three times the space
was illuminated by its rays than the torches could
penetrate. They resumed their journey of ex-
ploration where they had left off the night before,
leaving all their provisions on the bottom step
of the long stairway. They had not hitherto
observed the massive pillars which supported the
roof, although they knew they were in existence
because they had collided with them often enough
while endeavouring to find the steps on their last
outward journey. But now, the acetylene light
showed them in all their grandeur, and truly they
were imposing witnesses to the skill of their
builders, being carved from their bases as far
upwards as the light could show. There seemed
to be a great number of them, but beyond noting
that fact the four comrades were not specially
interested in them.
Round the walls they continued their wander-
ings, marvelling sometimes at the nature or name of
the animal-god creatures that confronted them in
the recesses, and puzzled exceedingly to make any
meaning out of the strange pictures that ran on
in one unbroken line round the walls. Blocks
of metal, something like bricks, lay profusely
around all the images in the recesses, and it needed
no metallurgist to tell that many were of solid
gold, although, clearly, the place of honour was
always given to ingots of bronze. Evidently the
people who had once dwelt in the vicinity were
wiser in some things, if less sophisticated, than
those of a much later generation.
“ I tell you, boys,” said Alfred, “ we might do
a bit of trading here which would please everybody


concerned, and trouble none. .We might take all
these gold bars and send some tons of best steel
in their places.”
“ You are a vandal,” Tom laughed ; “ we’re not
temple-robbers. But take this acetylene lamp and
go ahead yourselves. I want to study these
pictures, and I can’t do that when you’re all
talking. A torch is all I need, and I’ll join you
later, I can always see your light.”
The other three went on, and Tom sat down
on the floor with a lighted torch in his hand. He
was looking at a strangely-shaped human-faced
god of enormous dimensions, and endeavouring to
understand the meaning of the hieroglyphics in-
scribed on the walls of the recess, which probably
told the history of the deity it contained. It was
simply a fluted pedestal surmounted by a gigantic
human-like head on which rested a huge ball of
metal around which a snake had entwined itself.
The ball showed that the image was one of the
many sun gods, but Tom’s knowledge of Egypt-
ology, though not much, was sufficient to tell him
that a sun-god of lower Egypt was very much out
of place among the other gods he had seen in the
temple. The whole structure was about twenty feet
high and between four and five feet in diameter.
“ Ah, well,” Tom mused, “ maybe this place is
only a sort of museum where the people stored
all their important trophies and curiosities, and in
that case these gods mean nothing special. It’s
a pity to see so much gold wasted, though ; I
really don’t think there would be any harm in
taking some of these bars. The people who put
them there have no interest in metals of any kind
now.”


* JgHfig&w
;/ J| Hk
m w
“ HE LOWERED HIS TORCH INTO THE APERTURE AND PEERED DOWN.”
To face page 318.


.


He arose and walked into the recess. Various
objects were lying around, all symbolical, doubtless,
of incidents relating to the god. But Tom didn t
give them much attention. He noticed that the
back of the pedestal was cut into steps unobserv-
able from the front, and their meaning was
obviously to provide means of climbing to the
god’s head.
And he climbed. He couldn’t have explained
why ; but the steps seemed to promise a further
knowledge of things, and Tom was always eager
to know everything. Soon he was resting on the
shoulder of the column which he had climbed.
He could see his comrades farther down the wall,
and even hear their conversation, a fact which
made him realise that the acoustic properties of
the temple were perfect. He gripped the pro-
jecting tail of the bronze snake and pulled himself
up on the head. Then he uttered an exclamation
of surprise. The ball was open on the top. It
was hollow I Standing on the reptile, which
seemed to be an indispensable part of the head
design, he lowered his torch into the aperture,
and peered down. He uttered another exclama-
tion. A flight of narrow steps led down the
inside. “ Jove I ” he muttered. “ I’ve heard of
wheels within wheels before, but this looks like a
temple within a temple 1 ” He clambered still
farther up and sat on the ball, dangling his feet
inside. The passage was more than sufficient for
a man to pass through, and it seemed to widen,
somewhat, as it went down. The steps were
vertical and resembled the rungs of a ladder more
than anything else, seemingly made of flat straps
of stone flanged with bronze. “ I’ll see what kind


of country is at the bottom of this hollow god,”
Tom went on, resting his feet on the first support.
And he did, much sooner than he expected. The
step, or rung, yielded under his weight, and he
crashed down through the ladder-way, like a heavy
mass of metal falling through sheets of glass.
Stairs or ladders, when their age is counted in
thousands of years, can hardly be deemed reliable.
How far he shot downwards he didn’t know ;
he was also considerably worried over the fact
that he had forgotten the formula the faithful
repeated under conditions like his. He thought
he continued falling for an hour, but suddenly
ice-cold water closed over him, and the luxury
was exquisite. Broken fragments of steps con-
tinued to fall after him for some time, but as
he was under the surface they did not harm him,
and in a few seconds he had swam beyond the
danger zone. He still retained his torch although
it had been extinguished in the water, and as
he clambered out on a ledge he smiled to think
how he would astonish his comrades with the story
of his adventure.
Then he heard his name shouted, apparently
beside him, and he answered lustily. Again the
cry of his comrades rang out, and he thought
all had fallen down the hollow god as he had
done. He shouted again, and the echoes rang
loudly in his ears, and appeared to drown his
original effort of voice. And now he heard his
comrades calling on him from all directions, and
he was greatly perplexed.
“ I’m all right, boys,” he yelled. “ Where are
you? ” A strange feeling of drowsiness stole over
him, and he felt wonderfully happy and comfort-


able. “ What a noise the boys are making 1” he
murmured. “ They’ll awake all the mummies that
may be in the temple.” He fell asleep and dreamt
pleasantly.
Meanwhile his comrades were greatly alarmed.
They had heard his first cry while examining p.
group of animal-gods at the far corner of the
temple walls. A couple of curiously-formed
bronze chains hung from above, and their ends
were just out of reach of the images, all of which
were looking upwards, evidently keenly desirous
of getting their clutches upon them.
“ What does this mean, I wonder? ” Alfred
muttered. “ I can’t see what these-gods want with
those chains.”
“ I’d rather know what the chains mean? ” said
Jack. “ They seem to come right down from the
roof.”
“ We’ll soon see about them,” cried Alfred,
leaping upon one of the monstrosities and reaching
towards one of the chains. He caught it. “I
hope it isn’t connected with a plug in the river
bed,” he cried, “ for I’m going to pull it.”
“ Pull away,” grunted Marcus ; “we can always
run up the stairs if the poor old temple looks
like being flooded. But don’t pull hard ; the
fixtures must be in want of a plumber by this
time, I guess.”
“ Here goes, then I ” Alfred laughed. “ Pre-
pare for a shower-bath.”
He pulled one of the chains, and it came
away in his hand, crashing down amongst the
gods with terrific force, and smashing them to
fragments. He escaped by a miracle, for the
god upon which he stood was reduced to powder,
21


and he fell from his position with a heavy
thud. But he was unhurt, and just as Jack
announced that fact, Tom’s shout rang out,
apparently beside them. All responded promptly,
greatly surprised at the amount of sound their
voices made. Again and again Tom’s cry re-
echoed through the great space, each time
apparently coming from a different direction.
Marcus, Jack, and Alfred in turn cried out, asking
as to his whereabouts, but in the babel of sounds
which followed no answer was intelligible.
They ran back to where they had left Tom,
but no trace of him could be found, and now
their cries received no answer. That something
had happened was evident, but what no one knew
nor could guess. For an hour or so they rati
around the temple, shouting on Tom to speak,
but no answer broke through the awful din their
voices caused, and finally Marcus called a halt
to consider matters.
“ He’s maybe gone aloft,” he said. “He would
know we could follow.”
“ Not he,” said Jack. “He wouldn’t run away
without us no matter what the danger was.”
“ Could that falling chain have anything to do
with him? ” queried Alfred. “It was just as it
fell that we first heard him.”
“ You wait here and I’ll run up the stairs,” put
in Marcus. ‘‘Maybe I’ll find him on top, and it
is as well to see anyhow. The two lads sat down
disconsolately, and Marcus ran up the steps. Not
a sound now broke the silence of the great temple,
and the boys shivered as if a cold wind had struck
them. They did not speak. Tom was the only
object of their thoughts, and if anything had


happened to him the mystic monument of an
ancient civilisation would be theirs also, for they
would never leave the place without their comrade.
Marcus was a long time away, but when he
rejoined them below, breathless and perspiring,
they could see that some additional calamity had
befallen them. After a space, Marcus spoke :
“ Boys, we’re prisoners,” he said, “ and I guess
we’ve got our call. We’re shut in.”
“ What do you mean? Have the iWekils
arrived? ” Jack asked indifferently.
‘‘Not that I know of,” Marcus replied, “ but
the door overhead is closed tight and no strength
of ours can move it, I fear. That chain evidently
controlled its mechanism, and now —well, now
we’ve got to wait here until the end, or old Dunhill
turns up-”
“It doesn’t matter much,” said Alfred ; ‘‘ we’ve
got to find Tom in any case, and after that we’ll
face what comes along. All the same we’ll see
what that other chain means now probably it
is connected with some levers for opening the door
up aloft.”
“ And we have provisions and stores for a long
time if we are careful,” said Jack hopefully, “ so
why worry over being shut in? Let us find Tom
and then we’ll soon force a way out.”
Both Marcus and Alfred were of Jack’s opinion,
and they resumed their search for their missing
comrade, sometimes shouting his name, but never
knowing whether they received any reply or not,
as the reverberations of their own voices filled
the vast space for many minutes after they cried
out, and completely drowned any possible other
sounds. Piling up the debris of the fallen gods


and standing on top of the heap, Alfred pulled
the second chain, but the result was the same
as when he had interfered with the first. Round
and round the temple walls they felt their way,
one torch only being now used, so as to save their
means of light as much as possible. But no sign
of Tom nor any reason for his disappearance could
be found. Tired and weary and broken-spirited,
the three comrades finally sat down on the lowest
step of the great stairway and partook of some
refreshments, Alfred noting by his watch, with
much surprise, that it was now well on in ,the
evening. They made another tour of the temple,
and then, worn and exhausted, they lay down and
slept. Little they now cared for Senussi, Wekils,
temples, treasure, or even Sahara gold. . . .
And in the unsuspected regions beneath their
lost comrade also slept. His slumber was sound.
Pleasant vapours filled the chamber in which he
lay, and the dark, silent pool was motionless.
He awoke suddenly and sat up. “ Dear me ! ”
he ejaculated. “ I’ve actually been sleeping. I’ll
better see about getting back to the others at
once. I’m as hungry as if I hadn’t tasted food
for many days, and— — Jove ! how queer I feel !
what on earth is wrong with me? ” He reeled
and fell to the ground the moment he stood up-
right. He lay still for a moment, and then he
fumbled in his pocket for his watertight bottle
of matches. Next moment his torch was relighted,
and he again attempted to stand on his feet.
This time he succeeded, and he gazed around
wonderingly, the while endeavouring to recall the
events which had led to his being in his present
predicament. Like a flash everything came back


and he laughed aloud. “ I’ll have to find the hole
I dropped through,” he said, “ and then shout up
to the boys to lower a rope. Anyway I’ve found
another temple, and I’m sure there must be gn
independent road out ; this air, though heavily
laden with scent, is fresh and Hullo I my watch
has stopped. I wonder what time it is.”
But he was left to wonder, for no sign of
day or night made itself evident in the lower
vault into which he had fallen. Still, when he
saw the time at which it had stopped, he was very
much surprised. “ Why !” he exclaimed, “it was
some time in the forenoon I dropped down here,
but this watch says six o’clock. Now it couldn’t
have been anywhere near that time when the water
of the pool stopped it, even if it had got in.”
He began winding it up, and again his astonish-
ment found vent in words. “ The thing has run
down ! ” he cried ; “ that’s funny, for I remember
winding it up last night before turning in. Surely
it can’t mean that I’ve been sleeping until that
time next morning after falling down the hollow
idol? Ah, well, I’ll soon know, I suppose.” He
Staggered along the wall he saw on his right
by aid of his torch, but suddenly remembering
that the easiest way out would most likely be the
way he came in, he retraced his steps and sat
down where he had been sleeping, very tired and
hungry.
But he was no farther forward. The pool lay
before him, and a roof of some kind was over-
head, but where the base of the image lay he
could not see ; it was certainly hopeless to think
of flying up through the roof. He shouted several
times, but only the echoes answered him, and they


shot from wall to wall in spiteful cracks of sound
like the reports of many rifles.
He was too weak to persist in his efforts, and
he soon ceased to try. “ Probably they have gone
over to the car to have some food,” he reasoned,
“ but I’m a bit surprised that they didn’t trouble
to look for me first. However I’ll investigate this
place now that I’m here and perhaps find the
other road out by following the direction the flame
of the torch indicates.” He again began to
follow the wall of the cavern, noting that the
temple was no longer built of smooth stones, but
roughly hewn out of solid rock, and more like
a cave than anything else. The walls were damp
too, and water trickled through at many places.
The pool by which he stood seemed to be a
centre on which opened numerous galleries, all
leading in to the heart of the rock like spokes
from a hub. At the entrance of each were piles
of metallic ingots, and it needed little discernment
on Tom’s part to tell that these were bars of
gold, silver, copper, and zinc.
Apparently he was in the storehouse or treasure-
chamber of the temple and, presumably, where
none of the ancient people, except the priests or
rulers, had ever been.
“ There seems to be a draught coming through
all these passages,” Tom said to himself. “ I
fancy all must have an exit, somewhere, to the
outside world ; but I’ll follow this one, and chance
things ; it is the biggest, and anyhow I can’t wait
here any longer.”
And follow it he did. In the narrow passage
his torch easily gave sufficient light, and passing
huge piles of gold bricks which were built into


small recesses all along the jagged tunnel sides,
and occasionally catching a glimpse of a dwarfish
idol or god which had evidently either been dis-
carded or was under repair, he forced his way
ahead, conscious that he was rising all the time.
How long he wandered in that gloomy passage he
did not know, the draught of air seeking exit
always pointed his torchlight in front, and he
followed almost blindly.
At length, just as he was on the point of giving
up hopes of ever seeing his comrades, or daylight
again, he fancied he saw a faint suspicion of a
streak of light a little farther on. He made
another effort, for he was greatly exhausted, much
to his own surprise, and after what seemed like
many hours he turned a corner, and found himself
looking through a narrow, scrub-blocked aperture,
into daylight. He shouted joyously, and staggered
forward again, trampling over snakes and lizards
and many creatures which had made the cool
tunnel entrance their home.
He was now forced to crawl, for the passage
had narrowed considerably, and was now a mere
irregular hole in the rocks. At last he burst
out into the wild-rose bushes which grew in front
of the entrance, and next moment was gazing on
the outside world once more.
The first thing he observed was that the sun
was just setting, but it was some time before his
senses were collected sufficiently to allow him to
take in all his surroundings. And as his brain
began to act he realised that the sun was rising
instead of setting, and that the scene before him
was familiar. He rubbed his eyes and (looked
again. He was standing amidst a clump of wild-


rose bushes at the base of a rocky ridge. In
front, only a couple of hundred yards distant,
a broad, weed-overgrown river flowed past and a
scrub-covered island of some size bisected it just
opposite where he stood. He was looking at the
temple island, and from a position in which he
surely must have stood before 1 Next moment
everything was clear. He saw the big, boxed
car resting among the scrub only a few yards to
his left, and nearer the he could see the
remnant of their previous supper in the shape
of feathers, wings, fish-bones, and other discarded
material.
“ Can I actually have slept an entire night
down in that tomb? ” Tom muttered. “ I wonder
where the boys are. It seems they haven’t been
here anyway, or there would be signs of their
having dined. Probably they are in the temple
still, looking for me, and likely they would be
sleeping when I shouted on them last.”
He ran over to the car and climbed inside.
He had only one idea at that moment, and that was
to get something to eat. The cold fowl of their
last breakfast was still there, tut it had gone so
bad that, even hungry as he was, Tom could not
touch it, and with an exclamation of disgust he
threw it as far away from the car as he could.
But the stock of tinned meat was not yet exhausted,
and Tom soon had devoured the contents of one
tin, swallowing copious draughts of water from
the tank with it. He also found part of a weird
floury concoction Marcus had baked, and
although it was as hard as a stone he nibbled
through it and at length felt that he could wait
until the boys came without any regular meal.


iSml 'm. \ V jllfi Al
! j
IT A '■■ JB'I *
5. wKp J
w \ # jME*
JIM ", JIBk i
™ -4A Jp’ A> *'' j
' ; • P ■ ipr v y '^InS
**w , jtfjf BgM
I. (««*»
■■R
“a man sprang out from the scrub and bore him to the
GROUND.”
To face page 328.




But the boys were not in evidence, and Tom
started towards the river-side, intending to cross
to the island and go down into the temple after
them. He didn’t get far, however, when a man
sprang out from the scrub upon him and bore
him to the ground. Tom struggled violently, but
the man was gifted with strength far superior to
his, and soon he had pinned the lad on the ground
in scientific fashion.
“ I beg your pardon for my method of intro-
duction, young man,” the attacker said, “ but
I had no choice ; and after all, I really don’t want
to hurt you.”
Tom wriggled round. “ Mr. Dunhill ! ” he
gasped.
“ Yes, surely,” the other answered, relaxing his
grip in astonishment. “ Who are you? ”
“I’m Tom Allan. Let toe up. How did you
get here? Marcus is expecting you.”
The powerful man assisted Tom to his ,feet,
and peered into his face. “By the ghost of
Isis, it is 1 ” he exclaimed, “ and with a black face
and But explain, my lad. How did you get
here, and why did you dodge me? ”
Tom sat up. “We didn’t dodge you,” he said,
“ and we have done your work for you if you really
are the comrade of Marcus Aurelius Smith.”


CHAPTER XV
NEMESIS
Tom wasted little time with explanations. He
told how, after having been misled and misdirected
by Mr. Dunhill’s cablegrams until they were dis-
gusted, they had resolved not to be thwarted in
their plans, and came on themselves. He didn’t
trouble to detail their adventures, but concluded
by saying : “We look upon you as having a
fourth share in our profits, but, of course, we
cannot tolerate your interference, as, frankly, we
have no faith in your reasoning powers. If this
does not please you we can pay you back the
money you advanced us with five per cent. interest ;
but in no case will we now submit our gold-
extracting machine for any fat-headed expert’s
report. We are satisfied with it, and no other
people are concerned. Now that you know every-
thing, if you’ll excuse me I’ll go and call my
comrades. I forgot to tell you how we happened
to meet Mr. Marcus Aurelius Smith, but he can
tell you himself.”
“ Yes, surely,” Mr. Dunhill observed, when Tom
finished his rather severe remarks ; “I came here
to find my old comrade, but I haven’t yet grasped
the meaning of all you have just said. I don’t
want any money back ; I don’t want any share
330


in the profits of your wonderful machine, and
certainly I should never ask an expert’s report
upon anything, I know their kind too well. And I
resent your words about my cablegrams misleading
and misdirecting you. I never sent you any cable-
grams or telegrams. I never even wrote to you.
In fact, I fdo not understand you at all. I thought
I had a big grievance against you ; for you
deliberately gave me the slip at Marseilles, for
what reasons I don’t know.”
“ Mr. Dunhill,” said Tom, ‘‘ I hope you’ll excuse
my speaking plainly, and understand what my
words mean ”
“ Yes, surely,” said Mr. Dunhill, wiping his
glasses ; “I know that means you are going to
insult me, but never mind.”
“ Well,j we knew you to be a man with no mind
of your own, or, at most, an erratic one, liable
to changes as often as the weather in poor old
Scotland. You said one thing one day, but you
would agree with a proposal exactly opposite the
next, and ”
“ I wasn’t aware of that, young man. I don’t
claim to have the wisdom of a certain biblical
personage, but I always acted as my reason
directed.”
“ And your reason somehow always directed as
any other man dictated, Mr. Dunhill ; and your
memory was so short that you didn’t know
that ”
“ Are you trying to pick a quarrel with me,
young man? I have admitted that I am no freak
of wisdom, but I don’t see any call for you to
keep rubbing that fact in to my bones.”
“ I shouldn’t, only you said you never sent us


any messages, and—well, I have them now. I
merely wished to suggest that you have forgotten
you sent them.”
“ Look here, my black-faced, frank person,
hadn’t you better tell me I’m a liar and a skunk,
and be done with it? ”
“ Oh, no, for I don’t think you are either. You
are simply very forgetful, and if we had consigned
our boxes to your firm’s agents at Gibraltar gs
you! instructed, we should not be here now.”
“ You are raving, boy ; I never instructed you
to do that.”
“ And we didn’t ; but your wire at Oran want-
ing an expert report was more than we could
stand.”
“ I never wired you to Oran or any other place,”
cried Mr. Dunhill. “ I waited on you, as arranged,
at Marseilles, but I saw you board a P. and O.
homeward liner there, in spite of what I had
instructed our firm to tell you, that I had arranged
for our passage to Alexandria and a special steamer
down the Nile from Khartoum.”
“ It is you who are raving,” Tom laughed. “ We
never heard of any such instructions. We boarded
the P. and O. boat at Marseilles because it would
land us at Gibraltar sooner than any other means.”
“ Gibraltar 1 Why did you wish to go to
Gibraltar? ”
“ We didn’t ; but our boxes were there, accord-
ing to your instructions, and we didn’t mean to
part with them.”
“ My instructions 1 ” cried Mr. Dunhill ; “ I gave
none. I asked my people to make you aware
that everything was arranged, that I had booked
your passages to Alexandria, and that you were


to ship your goods to that port. I never dreamt
of Gibraltar.”
“ Then some other people have been interest-
ing themselves in our affairs I ” cried Tom. “We
certainly were misled everywhere by cablegrams
purporting to be from you, and at last we were
forced to act as we thought best ourselves, or
else allow our scheme to fall through.”
“ Yes, surely ; there’s nothing like having to
think for oneself.”
“ So we crossed the Sahara, and here we are.
Our gold-extractor works, and your old temple is
over there.”
“ Slow up a bit, boy ; you didn’t cross the
Sahara so quickly as that, and how did you happen
to meet my old comrade? It was for him I came
here.”
“ Yet you never mentioned him to us, Mr.
Dunhill.”
“Did I not? Surely you are I I have
been existing these last few years solely so that I
might one day join him again, in bondage or in
freedom. Where is he? ”
“In the temple, with Jack and Alfred. Come,
we’ll go over now and give them a surprise. They
must have slept in it all night, for J see they
haven’t been at the car this morning.”
“ Have you still got your car? And is it here?
My boy, I hope you are not dreaming.”
“ Oh, no, I’m not. I’ve just left it up there
among those rose-bushes.”
“ But I have been here nearly two days look-
ing for the temple entrance, and no human being
has been on top of the: ground anywhere near
during that time.”


“ Well, look for yourself,” cried Tom ; “ there
are the feathers of the duck we had for supper last.”
“ But when was that? Those bones at any rate,
are a week old. Look here, my lad, you’re a bit
mixed up.”
“ Perhaps I am ; everything seems confused in
my brain. Are you real? and if so how did you
get here? ”
They were now at the water’s edge and the
island lay just in front. Tom felt somewhat ill.
Matters had somehow got muddled, and his brain
absolutely refused to attempt the unravelling.”
“ You can safely allow that I’m as real as ever
was any man of my size,” said Mr. Dunhill. “ I
shall tell you my little story though so that you
may the better realise that, and be more willing
to concede that I am not your enemy, although
things may look that way to you.”
“ I never thought you were,” Tom said, “ but
it seems that some people are both your
enemies and ours.”
‘‘ Fot which they’ll be sorry, my lad, some day.
But let me get my history off my mind ; I was
in Paris on business, as you may remember, seeing
about the sending off of some patent boiler tubes
to Tripoli, for the supply of which our firm had—
thanks to Mr. Bolton —got the contract. Of course,
you know that any contracts we undertook we
gave out again to people in the country, if possible,
from which the order came? Well, I saw the
tubes sent away ; they were wonderfully like rifle
tubes, but Mr. Bolton doubtless knew all about
them, and, at all events, we made a good profit
out of them. But while in Paris I learned that the
Messageries Maritimes Company were running a


steamer to Alexandria from Marseilles to connect
with a special Nile steamer going as far south as
possible with tourists. That seemed to offer us
our chance, and I wired to Mr. Bolton to inform
you to join me at Marseilles, and to consign your
boxes to Alexandria ”
“ We received a wire from you telling us to
send our gear to your agents in Gibraltar.”
“ My boy, you may have received such a tele-
gram, but it was not from me. But don’t harp back
on that again. It is quite clear we have enemies.
I saw you board the P. and O. boat, but thinking
you did so on some private business of your own,
and that you would soon join me on the
Messageries steamer, I made no sign. But you
sailed away, and I lost confidence in all men, for
I had trusted you wholly. The idea of setting
out to look for my old comrade, however, had
grown so much upon me since I met you, that I
determined to go on myself, so, wiring the firm
that I was taking a holiday, I came on as I
intended we should all travel. From Alexandria
I railed and boated to Khartoum, and at that
town I joined the Sudan steamer with about a
score of big-game hunters bound south. We
sailed fast down or rather up the Nile, and when
we reached Wau I engaged a couple of servants
and started out to strike the river I knew was
somewhere to the north-west. We rode night and
day, and finally struck the water channel I re-
membered so well. Then my men deserted, as
they did once before, and they took the horses
with them. I made a raft and floated down until
I reached this place, which, thinking I recognised,
I landed to explore, and here I am.”
Mr. Dunhill paused and wiped his glasses.


“ Your story is even more wonderful than ours,”
said Tom, “ but I cannot understand how you
did such a journey in the time, and surely it is
most marvellous that we should meet here after
having crossed the desert by different routes.”
“ The world is small, my boy, as you may
realise by the time you have wandered as much as
I have. Still, my time can be well explained.
I suppose I was at Khartoutn tyy the time you had
landed at Oran. Then, a week or so brought me
to Wau, and since leaving that most wonderful
place I’ve been three days and three nights
travelling on horseback, two days here, and ”
‘‘ But you have already accounted for more time
than we have taken,” Tom interrupted. “We
came here at record speed, and we travelled
straight to Lake Chad, and then straight here.”
“ Boy, you talk as if Lake Chad were Loch'
Lomond and a popular tourist resort. That you
have arrived here is fairly evident, but I am also
here, you surely will admit, so I expect if you
got here so very much before me you must have
been sleeping since. It is certainly more than a
few days since you dined on the bird which sported
those feathers.”
Ton; looked at Mr. Dunhill, but remained silent.
He was thinking.
“ We’ll let all matters of discussion alone in
the meantime,” he said at length. “ We’ll go
and see our comrades, and fight things out later.”
“ But have you really found the old temple? ”
asked Mr. Dunhill eagerly.
“We have,” answered Tom. “It is on that
island, and our comrades are inside now.”
“ And Marcus Aurelius Smith is there too? ”


“ He is, or was, when I fell through the hollow
ball and snake god, unless I’ve dreamt about him.
But come on, we’ll soon see ; and every one will
be delighted to find you are not another confounded
iWekil such as we’ve been meeting all along the
track.. If Alfred says nasty things, don’t mind
them j we really thought you had repented of
having had anything to do with us.”
“ Don’t you worry, my boy. Since I took up
a business career in Glasgow I’ve got so used
to people saying unkind things to me that your
comrade’s caustic remarks, although undeserved,
will make me half imagine I’m talking to Miller
or Bolton.”
“ Then: come on,” said Tom ; ‘‘l want to know
how long I have been sleeping, what some in-
scriptions mean, and generally to hear all about
the temple. And I do want to see the meeting
between you and our comrade Marcus.”
‘‘l do hope you are talking with reason,
not because you are under the influence of any
Senussi device. You know I couldn’t find the
temple, although I felt almost certain that it was
on that island.”
“ You are far too much afraid of the Senussi ;
we’ye shown your friend Marcus that we don’t fear
them, and that we can beat them at every game
they try. Follow me, and you’ll see the temple
presently.”
They waded through the shallow, weed-covered
waters and soon reached the island. Tom walked
straight towards the dense scrub which hid the
entrance, and in a few infinites Mr. Dunhill and he
were standing on the great circular slab of stone.
“ This is the door,” said Tom. “ Don’t you
22


remember it? Our comrade Marcus told us it
was you who found it.”
“ Yes, surely,” answered Mr. Dunhill ; “of
course I did, but my memory is not what it once
was. But how do you get into the temple? ” He
rubbed his glasses, and, adjusting them, looked at
Tom inquiringly.
“ We raise that stone and go down the steps
Surely you cannot have forgotten what you dis
covered yourself? ”
‘‘ Boy, to tell you the truth, I remember some
things only as if they had been part of a dream.
I think I must have got a blow on the head at some
time, for occasionally I feel wonderfully clear in
my thinking machinery, and shortly afterwards I
can’t tell whether I’m dreaming or not. Now, I
seem to know this place, but I don’t feel sure
where my dream ends and actual fact begins,”
‘‘l understand,” said Tom. ‘‘We thought as
much ourselves. Your memory plays you tricks, and
if you do happen to send a telegram, for instance,
you forget all about it next minute, perhaps.”
“ Don’t you harp back on that string again,
young man. I don’t mix up telegrams with
memories of the past. I sent you no telegram, and
please remember that I know what I am talking
about in this case.”
“ All right ; give me a hand to lift this stone ;
it swings on a pivot. I don’t remember having
closed it, though, when we went down last.”
“ Then my advice to you is i cultivate your own
memory before you worry about mine. You must
have closed it yourself when you came through
last.”
‘‘ Oh, no, I didn’t. I came out another way.


Jove 1 the stone is much more difficult to move
now than it was yesterday.”
“Here’s a young tree; let’s use it as a lever.
See, the stone moved that time. You block it up
with something to keep it from falling back, and
I’ll get another grip.”
It took them some time and much hard work, and
not a little skilful engineering, to swing the stone
into an open position. But they finally managed
it, and as they had talked during their work, both
gained much knowledge* Nr> sooner had they
passed through on to the steps than the great door
swung back violently, and they were in complete
darkness.
“ Hullo ! ” Mr. Dunhill exclaimed, “ we’re
prisoners now ; we can never open that thing from
the inside.”
“ Well, don’t worry,” laughed Tom. “ I know
another way out, as I have told you several times
already. Come down and see the boys, and watch
your feet on the steps ; you counted them before,
you know.”
“ Yes, surely, but lead on. I feel new life
coming to me now. Some of my dreams jmust
have been true.”
“ Perhaps,” agreed Tom, “ but we’re nearly
down now, and I don’t see any lights. I hope the
boys haven’t all gone after me through that funny
hollow idol.” He lit a match and uttered an ex-
clamation of surprise. On the lowest step his
three comrades were stretched, asleep. Mr.
Dunhill also ejaculated some words, but Tom did
not understand them.
“Get up, boys 1 ” he cried. “I’ve brought a
friend to see you, and he has come a long way.”


“ With a yell of astonishment, gladness, and
doubt, the three sleepers leaped to their feet,
simultaneously, and gazed at the new arrivals.
Then Tom’s match went out.
“ Speak, Tom, if it is you,” crfed Jack. “If
it is your ghost, pass on.”
44 Ghost be bio wed 1 ” growled Tom. “ Why
should I not be myself? It is morning. Get
up and see whom I have brought to see you* I
think he is hungry too, and a drop of tea would
be welcome if you have nothing else left.”
A torch flared up at that moment, and Marcus
called out. “We have mighty little but life left,
but if you are not a creature of fancy’s creation
you can drink the last of that billy’s contents. I
guess I’ll believe my senses if I see you tackling
that Hullo 1 Boys, goodbye, I see Dunhill’s
ghost 1 I’m called to the next world.”
44 Get out I ” cried Alfred. “ You’ve been drink-
ing too much tea, and the other world is on the
other side of that circular stone overhead. Take
us with you if you go.” The speaker lay down
again as if to resume his sleep, but Marcus seemed
too excited still, and Alfred jumped up again to
see the reason.
“ Hullo, Dunhill,” said Marcus, after a fit of
trembling. “ It’s a fine morning.” He appeared
to be unconcerned now, but the boys knew
differently.
44 Yes, surely,” replied Dunhill ; 44 for this time
of the year it is remarkably cool.” Both men
shook hands as they spoke, a proceeding soon
followed by the boys as they recognised the visitor.
44 You’ve been a long time coming, old man,”
went on Marcus. 44 I suppose you’ve been busy? ”


“ Fairly,” replied Mr. Dunhill, removing his
glasses. “Trade has improved greatly of late.
You are looking much older than when I saw you
last.”
“ And you have grown considerably stouter, I
guess,” said Marcus. “ Still, I’m glad to see you.
This is the temple you found, but we can’t make
much sense of it, and we lost Tom there a week
ago, and have pretty well been hunting for him
ever since.”
“A week ago I ” cried Tom. “Why, it was
yesterday we came in here.”
“ Yes, yesterday, a week back,” chimed in
Alfred. “ Where have you been? We’ve starved
here since you left us because we couldn’t get
out, and now it seems you will die of starvation
too.”
“No fear, young man,” said Mr. Dunhill. “ All
our troubles are now over.”
“ How do you know? Have you got some
expert’s report on our condition? ” Alfred cer-
tainly was a trifle sarcastic.
“ Mr. Dunhill himself is the greatest expert in
this case,” said Tom, trying to make things
pleasant for the short-memoried man. “He of
all men can read the riddle of this place, and after-
wards we can extract all the gold we want from
the sands round about, and go on to some place
where we can get more petrol.”
“ But you haven’t explained what happened to
you yet, Tom',” cried Jack. “Of course, we can
allow that Mr. Dunhill dropped from an aero-
-1 > > 1 i I ! ■' '!- :l ■ifl
plane. 1 !
“ Boys, I can’t explain any more than to tell
you I fell into another temple or series of cellars


under this place, yesterday, it must have been, and
I’ve been sleeping since.”
‘"lt is eight days since you left us, my lad,”
said Marcus. “ We’ve counted them by our
stores.”
“ Nonsense I ” Tom cried. “ How could I sleep
for a week? I’m not Rip Van Winkle.”
“ Oh, the sleeping part of the business is easily
enough explained,” Marcus went on. ‘‘l’ve been
told many times of how the priests of olden times
protected their holy places without actually taking
the life of those who intruded.”
n Dear me 1 ” Mr. Dunhill interrupted ; ‘‘l like
your voice, Marcus. Do you remember when we
were haltered together, and how we used to scheme
to avoid having to carry the tree between our
necks? ”
“ That subject is much too recent, in my case,
to be pleasant,” Marcus answered. “ But you
must know how people in these parts used to
sleep, too. Tell the boys ; my command of the
English language is not much, now.”
“ Ah, yes, old comrade, we have much to tell
each other. The Senussi must not take life, so
far as the body is concerned, but there is no law
against his destroying the spiritual part, as we
know.”
“ Well, I guess we ought to know, old man,
and they’ve gone through most of the dodges to
get rid of us. But tell the boys ; they are fine
fellows, and I hope that while we live we’ll always
be comrades, as we are now.”
‘‘Of course we will, Marcus,” interjected Alfred ;
■‘ we’ll stick to you even though you’re a poor
millionaire. All the same we are hungry, and tired


of the atmosphere of this temple, and I propose
we get out if Tom knows a way.”
“ But what about my week’s sleep? ” asked
Tom. “ I can’t believe that. Certainly I do
know a way out ; it is down through a hollow
god back there somewhere, but ”
“ Young man,” broke in Mr. Dunhill, “ you
may take it from me that you have been sleeping
a week, at least. I tumbled to that soon after we
met. You entered a place forbidden by the priests
who once controlled this temple and became a
victim, as they intended you should, thousands of
years ago. The people who lived around these
parts knew more than we know in some respects.
Their laws, I see by the inscription on that pillar,
although I knew it before, forbade them to kill,
but the priests had no scruples in otherwise
rendering unconscious those who troubled them.
One plan was to send them to sleep by means of
strange soporific gases, and another was to rob
them of their memory by some method which I
never discovered. You, Tom, fell into a gas-
charged chamber and promptly fell asleep, as
possibly many others did thousands of years before
you. The gas, or vapour, being heavier than
air, remains at the lower levels, but you being
healthy, and probably much stronger, constitu-
tionally, than the original inhabitants of this
region, survived your long sleep and so live to lead
us through the chamber of sleep to the outside
world.”
“ That’s all right,” put in Jack ; ‘‘ we can see
Tom has come through his long sleep, but what
about you? I suppose you’ve been a victim of
the second scheme you mentioned.”


“ Boys, we’d better leave all explanations until
we have more time to spare,” Tom said hurriedly.
“ !We are all here, and that is the main thing.”
“ Except to get out,” broke in Alfred* “ We’ve
been here all the time, you know.”
‘‘ Very well, follow me, and you’ll see daylight
very soon.; but you’ll get wet clothes first, and
feel as sleepy as —as —l did.”
‘‘Lead on, then; we’re hungry enough to eat
those gods,” said Marcus, “ and I’m happy enough
to lie down and die now. Boys, my fortune is
yours ; let’s get somewhere where you can spend
it.”
‘‘ Rot 1 ” exclaimed Alfred. “ You’ve said that
before, and we’re tired of hearing of your great
wealth. Now that you have found your comrade,
on have been found by him, perhaps we may be
able to get on with our own work. You can keep
this precious temple as far as we are concerned,
although I am certainly going to have one of
those gold bricks.”
** You bet your biggest boots we’ll have more
than one,” Marcus laughed good-naturedly.
“ This place is in the British Sudan, and the
temple’s treasure is ours by right of discovery.
We’ll fight for our rights against all comers,
whether they are Senussi or other animals.”
” Yes, surely,” echoed Mr. Dunhill. “ We’ll
fight anything and everything.”
But not before breakfast,” said Alfred. “A-
week in this stuffy old temple has been enough
for me, and if you, Tom, can show me a road
out, I’ll go and feed for a week, while you and
Mr. Dunhill read these inscriptions. After dining,
I’d like to sleep for another week, swim about in


the river among the crocodiles for a month, and
then go on with our gold-extracting.”
“ All right,” answered Tom, “ follow me, and
you’ll get the chance of eating and sleeping as
much as you like.”
He led the way to the pillar-god ; but it was a
long time before they dropped through the hollow
ball which crowned it. Mr. Dunhill could read
the inscriptions and pictures as easily as an evening
newspaper, and in spite of themselves, the boys
were greatly interested. He soon informed them;
that the temple was merely a storehouse of gods
collected from distant lands, and that the hiero-
glyphics were statements regarding them, correct
only so far as the priests were aware. The age
of the temple he put down as being about six
thousand years, but he explained that it probably
had been built by a people who, although highly
civilised, were not the original inhabitants of the
country, and who had afterwards been driven out,
or exterminated by those who had turned the
temple into an old disused god-museum. The
meaning of everything was as the boys had already
guessed. Their knowledge of bronze had enabled
the last conquerors to triumph over the perhaps
more artistic and, possibly, higher civilised people
who dwelt around the sudd-choked Nile feeders
originally. In turn, likely enough, they themselves
had gone down before another race of invaders who
knew something about steel.
But the boys were not then disposed to allow
Mr. Dunhill to revel among the gods ; they were
hungry and the gods had become stale to them
during the last week. Consequently, when they
reached the lower regions, by means of a length


of bronze chain, they pushed on after Tom, without
delay, and finally safely reached the outside world,
although not without experiencing the potent
soporific influence which had caused Tom’s long
sleep. So much so did the strange heavy gas
act upon all that when they did reach daylight they
threw themselves down and didn’t care though
they slept a month.
But the fresh outside air of the twentieth century
a.d. soon dispelled the noxious sleep-inducing
vapours of the dead past, and in a few minutes
all were restored to their normal condition and a
meal was at once prepared. Afterwards they sat
and explained things to each other, Mr. Dunhill
telling his experiences, and the others taking turn
about in making him acquainted with theirs.
Mr. Dunhill was rapidly becoming a favourite
again, and his words, even apart from the one
subject upon which he was an undoubted authority,
occasionally showed a depth of thought which was
by no means in keeping with the character the
boys had given him. The affection Marcus and
he showed for each other was truly wonderful, and
greatly impressed their younger comrades, who had
not idreamed that apart from their own little
partnership of three such a state of affairs existed
anywhere. Marcus sang their praises in whole-
hearted fashion, and Mr. Dunhill freely conceded
that in crossing the Sahara against such opposi-
tion they had proved themselves worthy of the
best traditions of the Anglo-Saxon race.
When they told of their success in winnowing the
gold from the desert sand, too, Mr. Dunhill was
as pleased as could be. “My boys,” he said,
“ enormous fortunes may be yours, for the desert


is large enough ; and now that you are in British
territory, and have the means of running away
from nomadic tribes who might prove troublesome,
you can go on accumulating gold until —well,
until you are tired, and want no more. Remember,
however, that gold is not everything in this world
although it is a good ninety-odd per cent. The
people who built that temple had plenty of gold,
but they went down before the men who knew
about baser metals.”
“ Oh, that’s all right,” laughed Alfred. “We
know all about high-speed tool steel, and petrol,
and I’ll back these against bronze, any day. But
we’ve got a bit of the day in front of us yet.
Come out and see the extractor working. I see a
stretch of sand over there, and if there is any gold
in it, we’ll get it.”
And there was gold in it ; and they did get it.
Only Alfred went out with Mr. Dunhill in the car,
the others being keenly desirous of providing fresh
provisions, and of building a sort of shelter against
a sand-storm which they saw was impending. At
sundown the car came back, about thirty ounces
of gold having been added to their store. By this
time a crude erection had been thrown up, and a
supply of ducks and other fowls and animals hung
up for future meals.
After supper, a general council was held to
decide upon the next proceedings. Matters had
now undergone several changes, and the prospects
were very bright indeed. Only the petrol question
troubled the lads, and nothing at all now worried
either Mr. Dunhill or Marcus. They lay back
upon the ground round the camp fire and smoked
cigars, at peace with the whole world. The night


was hot and sultry, but in the Sudan one gets used
to small inconveniences and unpleasantness.
However, a decision was at length reached, and
it was that next day Marcus and Tom should make
a rush for Wau with the car, leaving all the stores
and encumbrances behind, and taking only enough
petrol to bring them back again. They did not
know where Wau was exactly, but it was clear
that if Mr. Dunhill could ride the distance from
that town to the river in three days, the car would
not take long on the journey, and doubtless the
track led there, or to some other town on the Bahr
el Ghazal. From Wau a telegram could be sent
to Khartoum to the agent of Messrs. Dunhill, Miller,
and Bolton there, and as a result petrol would be
sent up the Nile with the first steamer. Mean-
while, the car would come back, and, between
locating the best auriferous patches with the petrol
still in the towed tank, and thoroughly exploring
the temple and its treasure-filled cellars, all could
find profitable employment until such time as the
consignment of petrol was due at Wau. Then, a
wholesale ploughing of the rich sand-patches would
take place, and occasionally the car could run
to Wau with the spoils obtained from both temple
and desert, bringing back any of life’s luxuries
which might be obtainable there either in the
town or from the steamer.
When all was settled the various members of
the party stretched themselves out to sleep. No
thought had they of Senussi, and other possible
dangers they did not fear. And the moon, now
full, climbed through the starry sky, and the
amphibious denizens of the weed-blocked river
croaked and grunted, and finally dawn approached
again.


But through the watches of the night other
people had been in motion, and when Tom sat up
the first thing he noticed was that the camp was
surrounded by fully a thousand ferocious-looking
horsemen, armed with carbines, and other weapons
of civilised warfare ( 1). These warriors were
closing in on the camp, evidently having discovered
it earlier by means of their scouts.
“ Get up, boys,” Tom cried. “ Here’s more
trouble, unless I’m on another week’s sleep, and
only dreaming I see Wadai soldiers and our old
friends the Wekils.”
‘'By Jove!” muttered Alfred, sitting up.
“ There’s no dream about this business. I suppose
we’re as good as slaves now? Open your eyes,
you fellows, and see what Santa Claus has
brought.”
“ Missed the bus again, by thunder 1 ” Marcus
exclaimed, taking in the situation. “ We’re done
this time, boys ; our faces are piebald now, and
in any case they’d make us slaves.”
“ I don’t know,” said Mr. Dunhill ; “we are
Britons, and on British territory. We’ll argue the
point with them, and if need be bribe them to leave
us alone.”
” They ate Senussi,” Alfred grunted, “ and must
not leave us alone. But I feel I don’t mind being
a slave for a bit if I get even with that dirty-faced
Wekil that followed us from Marseilles. Boys, I’m
going to drop him the instant the fun starts.”
“ And I’ll send a bullet through that Wadai
prince-fellow,” said Jack. ‘‘l’m not a Senussi,
and self-defence is allowed to Christians.”
“ Very well,” added Tom, “ the good-looking
Wekil from Edinburgh is my man. I’ll spoil his


fancy, dress with blood, for I’d rather they’d kill
me than make me a slave.”
‘‘How about charging through them on the
car? ” suggested Marcus, lighting a cigar.
“We might try it,” said Tom. “ You and Mr.
Dunhill get inside, and after we deal with our
men I’ll start the engines and we’ll give petrol a
chance. The sides of the car will ward off some
bullets, anyway.”
“ We’re not going inside, young man,” Mr.
Dunhill answered ; “ we can stop bullets with our
bodies as well as you, and we’ll see this little
affair through one way or another. If you think
we can’t rush away now, we’ll just sit still where
we are ; we’re doing no wrong.”
“ And you might give me a spare shooter if
you have any,” said Marcus. “ I used to be
counted fairly good at trigger-pulling, and some
of these beggars riding up would be better
dead.”
Tom walked over and started the engines.
“ Very well,” he said, “ we’ll reason with these
people, but at the first sign of trouble each of you
jump for the car. Hullo 1 the Wekils are coming
in front.”
‘‘ Now, my black-faced Britons,” cried he
whom they had first noticed at Marseilles, and
whose nose still bore evidence of Tom’s work,
“ we have rounded you up and you may as well
give in.” The Wekil of the Wadi Zemzem and
the Prince rode up with him.
“ You’re not very clean about the face your-
self,” retorted Alfred j “ We’re in British territory,
and you can go and smother yourself.”
“ Boy, tell me where that temple is or you’ll be


tortured to death. You needn’t think you have any
friends, for I have already attended to Dunhill ”
“ Bolton 1 ” gasped Mr. Dunhill, jumping to his
feet. “ You infernal liar and skunk and ”
“ Ha 1 ” yelled the swarthy-faced Wekil as he
recognised his business partner ; “ then my agents
have failed, after all. But I’ll finish you now,
myself.”
He raised his arm and a revolver gleamed
in ( the sunlight. But he was not the only
one who raised a revolver, and he certainly
was a second too late in pulling the trigger. All
the comrades had covered him, but it was an almost
noiseless discharge from another weapon that
dropped him Writhing upon the ground. A shout
arose from the warriors, who had now completed
a circle around the five comrades, but they did
not move. The Wekil of the Wadi Zemzem
lowered his hand, and his little Swiss revolver was
hardly visible. The French-speaking Wadai
Prince looked at him in unbounded astonishment,
but the good-looking Turk was as cool and un-
emotional as he ever was. His weapon clicked, and
he smiled. He was ready to shoot again if need be.
For a moment a deep silence fell over all.
Mr. Dunhill had rushed up to his prostrate partner,
and was staunching his life’s blood with his own
shirt. But the man kicked out at him even as
his eyes began to show that his time on earth was
short, and his stained face grew ghastly.
“ Gentlemen,” said the handsome Wekil, bowing
towards the comrades, who still stood horror-
stricken and amazed at the turn affairs had taken
and the startling suddenness of everything— ‘‘ I
regret having to trouble you, but my motor has


broken down a few miles back, and I am not skilled
enough in mechanism to make it right again.
Might I ask if one of you would come and assist
me with your undoubted knowledge, or if you
would kindly give me a lift to Wau. I must get
to Paris as soon as possible to explain that the
Senussi had absolutely no hand in bringing about
the recent French disaster in Wadai.”
The man spoke as coolly as if he were on a main
road near London instead pf being in the heart of
the Sudan. He never looked at the man he had
shot. The Prince stood motionless and the
warriors were also silent.
“ We hardly understand you, sir,” Tom replied.
“Do you mean that you are making terms with
us? We may as well tell you that although our
faces may be black and our dress not the latest
London or Parisian fashion, we are British, and our
country will look after us.”
“ My dear young friend, I know you are British.
I already have met two of your comrades, and
I suppose if I had met you then, too, neither of
us would be here now. I am making no terms of
any kind. I am asking you to do me a favour, as
one unluckily-placed motorist might ask another.”
“ Then you do not look upon us as your
prisoners? ” said Marcus. “ I’m an American, and
I can tell you if you think you can tackle both
Britain and the States, you’re making a howling
mistake.”
“ I don’t understand you,” answered the
handsome Wekil. “ I am attacking no one, lam
merely asking an obligement. These soldiers
happen to be with me, but they have no quarrel
with you so far as I know ; they are merely doing


their best to escape from the domain of the French
Government, and perhaps anxious to capture some
slavesl which could be sold profitably to those who
desire them.”
“ Are you not Senussi,” cried Jack, “ and
chasing us? ”
The Wekil smiled. “lam a Senussi,” he said,
‘‘as is also my friend here, and possibly that
fellow lying on the ground with my bullet through
him.”
“ Then why did you follow us, and try to stop
us everywhere? ” demanded Alfred ; “ and if these
fellows are not intending to pick a quarrel with
us, give them the order to march on. We’ll take
you to Wau all right if you’ll tell us where it
“ This man is going before the One God,” broke
in Mr. Dunhill. “ Please cease your wrangling
and let him go in peace. With you all I say there
is no God but God. He watches over all. Let
this man’s last moments be his own, either as
Christian, Mohammedan, or of any other faith.”
The Wekil smiled and lit a cigarette, explaining
to the Prince the purport of Mr. Dunhill’s words,
in French.
“ You are a good fellow, Dunhill,” muttered the
dying man, “ but you are pretty much an idiot.
Clear out with your kids before I spend my last
breath in invoking all the curses of heaven, earth,
and the other place upon your empty head. Keep
your hidden temple ; keep your gold-extracting
apparatus ; and keep the business which I made
in Glasgow. . . . Ah 1 . . . Stand out of the
way, partner . I want company on my long journey
through the dark.”
23


He raised, himself on his left elbow and aimed
a revolver at the imperturbable Wekil standing
near.
“ Fire away, my friend,” said the latter gentle-
man, as the trigger clicked harmlessly. “ I
emptied that weapon long ago. Nevertheless,
I feel I owe you an apology for allowing you to
live so long after I found you out. My excuse
is that I had to justify the Faith in which I
believe, and whose exponents I serve, irrespective
of nationality. I was suspicious of you when first
we met at the Wadi Zemzem, but I was sure soon
after, by means which you do not know, and which
ignorance in itself proved you to be acting outside
the powers of Wekils. Therefore, my one-time
friend, you are going to face the Great God whom
I serve, and you have only some seconds in which
to rectify the wrongs for which you are responsible.
If you wish to die of our Faith confess at once,
and I shall see to your body being placed
correctly. If you are not of our Faith then die
as you please, and I shall explain afterwards.”
“ Listen, then,” murmured Bolton faintly. “ I
die a true believer. Bend down, Dunhill, so that
you, can hear how you were fooled. The Koran
says I must confess, but I don’t repent anything
I’ve done except the causing of this trouble between
Wadai and France. You were never a prisoner
of the Senussi, as you thought. You and your
dirty-faced comrade were captured by a slave-
raiding gang in which I was one of the chiefs
and held a large financial interest. Your natives
were in league with our fellows, and they told
us, when they deserted you, that you had found
an old temple somewhere stuffed full of ivory and


gold. So we made you our prisoners, and the
Senussi had nothing to do with the act. But
you wouldn’t tell anything, and we couldn’t find
any temple. I was a Wekil all the same, and most
of our men were of the Senussi sect. I soon found
out you were a famous, though an ignorant,
Egyptologist, and when you escaped I followed
you and we travelled home from Lagos on the
same steamer. You never recognised me, of
course, for I had washed my face as white as
nature had originally made it. I may miss the
rest, for you can guess it, and my breath and
time, are short. I put you under the influence of
a drug known only to the Senussi Wekils, and
made you a mere parrot. It was easily done by
ilmpregnating your cigars with it. I made you
my partner and the head of the firm which bears
our names, not because you were of any use, for
you never were, but because of your name as an
Egyptologist in Britain. That name, Dunhill, has
got over a quarter of a million rifles into the
Sahara under the guise of boiler-tubes, and other
things no one in these parts knows anything about ;
so you see you have this French reverse to answer
fori yourself. ... No, don’t interrupt me, I can
only hold out another minute. ... I had always
the idea that I could get the position of that temple
out of you, but you were such an idiot that I at
length lost hope. Then these boys, or one of them,
came along with their gold-extracting machine, and
I saw that you were in a fair way of recovering your
memory and reasoning powers because of it. Well,
I followed them through the fog one night and
learned enough to know that they could do what
they intended. The rest you know. I got you


sent off to Paris and concocted wires to them in
your name after your own style. But they started
on their journey ; so, sending Miller to Egypt
on some pretext, I followed, after having made
arrangements for your exit. I wanted the patent
badly, for I knew 1 what gold the Sahara con-
tained, and I gjuessed they knew about your temple.
I used the power of the Senussi to help myself,
but I swear that I had the interests of the Faithful
at heart all Ah ! turn me round, partner !
Forgive ”
His spirit had fled, even as he lay in his partner’s
artns.
“ Peace be with his soul 1 ” murmured the Wekil,
throwing away his cigarette and making mysterious
signs with his hands. “ I fulfilled my mission,
and if I did wrong, Thou, O Supreme Architect,
judge me ! Thou, God of the Christian, of the
Mohammedan, of the Buddhist, of the World, have
mercy, not upon me, but upon the soul of him now
before Thy throne, sent thither prematurely by my
hand.”
“ I’m sorry to interrupt, old man,” broke jn
Marcus, “ but I think you did blamed well right
in! giving him his ticket. And to cut all sentiment
short, are we free men or not? and why did you
plug that fellow? ”
“ You are free men,” answered the Wekil, as the
warriors bore the body away in response to the
Prince’s sign, “ and I shot that man because he
had Pronged, not you, but the Senussi. They have
no interest, other than friendly, in you, yet he
endeavoured to array their influences against
you. As the chief acting Wekil at present in the
British Sudan I dealt with him when confronted


with those whom he sought to wrong, which right
was denied, to me until such moment.”
Mr. Dunhill rose to his feet. His face was
ghastly white and his great frame shook with
emotion. “ Enough,” he spoke, holding up his
hand. “He was my partner. I fjorgive him freely,
and I have surely suffered most. What do you
now require of us? ”
“ Nothing, sir,” the Wekil answered, “ except
the obligement I first asked.”
“ And these men? ” said Marcus. “ I suppose
they are here for their health? ”
“ They are, my friend. They are journeying as
far out of the way of the French soldiers coming
from Bilma as possible. Their Prince kindly
offered to take us along, when they overtook us
in the car which I expect you knew would break
down somewhere.”
“ But we gave him a rough handling in his own
town,” said Alfred. ‘‘He must be wanting to
get square with us.”
“ Repeat your words in French, and possibly
he’ll answer" you himself.”
“ I what was said,” put in the Prince, in
French, “ and my answer is that as I made the un-
pardonable mistake of detaining you—or of trying
to do so—without authority from the only people
I obey, you were justified in treating me as you did.
I am a Senussi, and I rejoice that my Faith renders
me proof against the elementary feelings of
revenge, and other sinful desires implanted in the
hearts of most men. Go your ways in peace and
(with my prayers, and be for ever welcome to
all that is mine.”
“ Jove, boys ! ” said Marcus, “ we’re getting on.


The Senussi are not bad fellows after all. Hold
hard, though ! You, Mr. Turkish Wekil, excuse
my; not talking French, I’ve lost the hang of that
tongue since I became a slave, although I can
follow it all right.”
“ Well,” smiled the Wekil, “ what troubles you
now? ”
“ Oh, I understood the Senussi must not live
where the foot of the unbeliever has defiled the
ground, and as we have no intention of leaving
this place for good, it seems to me that you still
must have some game up your sleeve. I propose
that we fight the thing out fair and square.”
“ Let them have the old temple,” said Tom,
“ we don’t want it.”
“We have no differences which call for any
fight,” the Wekil answered. “ The Senussi do not
live here, nor do they wish to. If you think they
are concerned about any old buried temples which
exist round about here, many of which we know,
you are making a great mistake. The Senussi
concerns himself only with the future, he has no
interest in things belonging to the dead past.
Keep your temples and their contents. We look
not for earthly gain. We are but pilgrims
here.”
“Of course seventy thousand mansions in
heaven is a fair recompense,” said Marcus
meditatively. “ We’re pilgrims here ourselves,
and you can bet your false teeth I’m tired of the
game, I guess I want to see old New York as
badly as you want your heavenly mansions.”
“ Very well, gentlemen,” put in Tom. “It
seems there have been several mistakes made, and
that we are not really the enemies of the Senussi,


and have quite a right to be here as far as they
are interested.”
“ You speak truly/’ the Wekil observed. “ May
I now repeat my request to be taken on to Wau? ”
“ We’ll take you now,” Tom answered ; “do
you know the way? ”
“ Follow the river bank for about sixty miles.”
“ But Wau is on the Bahr el Ghazal.”
“ I know ; that river there is the Bahr el
Ghazal.”
“ What ! ” cried Mr. Dunhill. “ Impossible I
It is flowing in the opposite direction, and we
wandered weeks away from the Bahr el Ghazal,
and then floated down through the sudd another
week when! I first was here.”
“ Doubtless, this river circles considerably in
its -course,” said the Wekil. ‘‘You cut across a
big bend and struck the same water again, and
if you had floated down another couple of days,
you would have reached Wau where you started.”
That evening the five comrades and the Wekil
were in the quaint little township which marks
the limit of the Nile’s navigable western head-
water ; and the Prince and his happy and reckless
warriors were safe within the boundless forests
to the south of the temple island. France would
not be likely to trouble them for some time.
Next morning the Wekil left on the little stern-
wheeled steamer for Fashoda and Khartoum,
promising to see that petrol was sent back by the
first southward-bound vessel. Neither Mr. Dunhill
nor Marcus would leave the boys, and, freed from


all worry now, all looked forward to the time
when, together, they should journey home to old
England down the Nile, laden with the treasure
of the desert, and perhaps of the ancient temple.
But, like the Senussi, they now valued worldly
treasure slightly in comparison with other bless-
ings. In each other they had found treasures
which were beyond all price ; and, tried and true
comrades, though strangely assorted, they were
ready to face what the future had in store. They
knew they would meet the handsome Wekil again
too, for he had said so, and a Senussi does not
lie.
THE END
UNWIN BROTHERS, LIMITED, THE GRESHAM PRESS, WOKING AND LONDON.




0


■
fit I
3 1508 00232505 3


Wei?.*:
