

The
Great Opportunity.
By
D. A. WELSH. M.A., B.Sc., M.D.,
F.R.C.P., Edin., Professor of Pathology
in the University of Sydney.
Sold in Aid of the Allies’ Day Fund.


booK
have
it.
along
The Camp Library,
Church of England Tent,
Liverpool.


The
Great Opportunity.
By
D. A. WELSH, M.A., B.Sc., M.D..
F.R.C.P., Edin., Professor of Pathology
in the University of Sydney.
Reprinted from “Hermes,” the Magazine
of the University of Sydney.
Sold in Aid of the Allies’ Day Fund.
November 1915.


These wards were written at the request of the
Editor of ‘ 1 Hermes ’ ’ for 1 ‘ something on the
war. ’ ’ lam deeply conscious that 1 have not
escaped the besetting sin of confused thinking,
[put down the thoughts as they came to me ,
in the hope that they might stimulate others
to do so?) le thinking for themselves , and might
encourage them to translate their mental pro-
cesses into appropriate action.
November , 1915.
D.A.W


The Great Opportunity.
Nothing had more deeply moved the
Empire within the last few years than
the gallant Captain Oates going to his
death in the Antarctic to give his com-
rades a better chance of life. “I am just
going outside,” he said, “and may be some
time.” He went out into the blizzard, a'nd
was never again seen of human eyes. Out
of the commonplaces of our modern life,
that heroic sacrifice stood transcendent.
It made a personal appeal to every mem-
ber of our race. It could not be counted
a’ loss. It was a gain to that heritage, un-
paralleled among the nations, in which the
most remote Dominion is privileged to
share, and every member felt ennobled by
the thought that kindred blood coursed in
his veins,
His death was a witness that the spirit
of the race was not dead. In that act of
strangely deliberate courage, he revealed
us to ourselves in the days before the war.


We felt sure that not less bravely would
other members of that expedition, and of
other expeditions, have trodden the same
path. We realised that not less bravely
would thousands of ordinary men, leading
ordinary lives, have made the same choice.
Not less bravely in actual fact did Scott,
Wilson and Bowers accept the almost
certain risk of death rather than desert
their failing comrade. Not less bravely
did they endure steadfast to the end of
their heroic adventure. But only to Cap-
tain Oates was granted the great oppor-
tunity of deliberately laying down his life
for his friends.
It is one of life’s ironies that most men
never get a chance of realising the best
that is in them. Many men build up a fine
character and do good work, but the
chance of putting it all to a supreme test
comes only to a few. Men who would
gladly embrace the great opportunity
never find it. Men who could act as pil-
ots in times of stress and storm are left
in the backwaters of life. Doubtless it
was the revulsion from a backwater exis-
tence that impelled Captain Scott and his
companions to hazard all in one grand
coup for the honour of their country, the
advancement of knowledge, and the pur-
suit of an elusive ideal. So they adven-
tured into the desolate unknown. Think
for a moment of their achievement. Fore


stalled in the most dramatic object of their
quest, the attainment of the South Pole,
they also failed in their purpose of re-
turning safely to their base. Through a
series of accidents and miscalculations
the expedition ended in disaster. Con-
trast their tragic failure with the unbrok-
en success of the Norwegian party, and
then say which of the two has won the
more imperishable record, which of the
two has done more to influence for good
the human race. They were the stuff
that men are made of, and their failure
only brought their opportunity. Their
dying was the culmination of their living,
and they are numbered with the im-
mortals of our race.
Adventure has always made an irresis-
tible appeal to our people. Danger has
been only an additional incentive. The
prospect of hardship has never been deter-
rent. But it is not the spice of danger that
makes the venture most attractive; it is
the subconscious pull of some spiritual
ideal, unformulated, perhaps, and dimly
appreciated, but inherent in the enterprise,
nevertheless. It is that hunger and thirst
after dimly perceived ideals that makes
of us, who are passionately devoted to the
land of our birth, the most enterprising
and adventurous of peoples. Those who
are worthy of this great inheritance will
find no lack of adventure, and danger and


hardship in the world to-day, and no lack
of inspiring ideals.
To an adventurous people the supreme
test is always imminent. We like to think
that, when it does come, it rarely finds us
wanting. To die bravely, when there is
no escape from dying, is a chance that has
often been accepted at a moment’s notice
by the men and women of our race. To
face death at the call of duty is a test that
may daunt but does not deter them. To
resign the only means of safety to a more
helpless fellow-sufferer is the spontaneous
and instantaneous reaction of many char-
acters in an emergency. Not once in a
generation, however, does the great op-
portunity of self-sacrifice for a high ideal
come to more than a few. But on that
fateful August of a’ year ago, when Britain
declared war to defend the right, it came
to the Empire as a whole.
The Supreme Opportunity.
Never in history has there been so great
an opportunity as that now offering.
There have often been times in the past
when arrogance a J nd oppression were ram-
pant, when liberty was threatened with
extinction, and progress with arrest, when
thousands of men dared greatly and died
nobly that life for others might have a
higher content. Had they faltered in their
response, had they failed in their high


endeavour, v/e should not be where we are
—in the forefront of the mightiest empire
the world has ever seen, we should not be
what we are—integral parts of the mighti-
est instrument under God for the uplifting
of the human race. We all admit our in-
debtedness to those who have gone before.
We dl admit that it is our duty to see that
their sacrifice is not rendered vain. We
all admit that we, the heirs of the ages of
freedom, are under an obligation to pass
on our inheritance intact. But three mil-
lion men of our race have, within the past
year, done more than make these intellec-
tual concessions. They have, of their own
free will, joined the ranks of those who
are prepared to sacrifice all that thejr hold
most dear, in order that right may tri-
umph. The very immensity of this oppor-
tunity lifts it above all others. Three mil-
lion more men will be wanted, ere this
monstrous upheaval of savagery can be
suppressed. There is literally not one
single young man, fit and free, who is not
sorely needed. The great opportunity has
come to all.
And the quality of the opportunity is
unique. Never has so dread a disaster
threatened to overwhelm the highest
ideals for which mankind has striven and
suffered throughout the ages. Truth and
honour, freedom and justice, mercy and
pity and love—the eternal verities, the


eternal graces—are being officially oblit-
erated from the face of the earth. A
greater opportunity is offering than that
which fell to the lot of Captain Oates.
Places are waiting in a grander expedition
than that organised by Captain Scott. A
foe more ruthless than the most pitiless
Antarctic blizzard has to be overcome. A
higher ideal beckons. A worthier destiny
calls. It is not only to save our country
and all that it holds dear that we are sum-
moned ; it is not only to rescue the little
nations that trusted us; it is, we honestly
believe, to save the eternal purpose from
a set-back. ‘“'For we wrestle not against
flesh and blood, but against principali-
ties, against powers, against.the rulers of
the darkness of this world, against spiri-
tual wickedness in high places.” Who can
doubt that they who die in such a calling
find a J consecrated death? Who would
deny those young lives that supreme mo-
ment of their living when death claims
them for eternal honour?
The opportunity is no less great because
the men are not wanted to die. They
serve the Empire best who live, not they
who die. The roll of honour is not limit-
ed to the dead. It includes all who an-
swer to the call of their country, a'nd fight
for the ideals of liberty and justice for
which she stands. It does not detract
from the merit of the response that in


many cases it is more instinctive than de-
liberate, a natural expression of character
rather than a reasoned process of judg-
ment. Nor is it any the less meritorious
because we know that the great majority
will come back safe and sound. All hon-
our to those who die for their country.
But all honour also to those who brave the
risk, whether they return sick, or hurt or
well. It is not only dying that makes a
hero; it is not necessarily the doing of
great deeds; it is the spirit that animates
the endeavour.
There is, unfortunately, another side to
the picture. This is the most tragic of
wars. It is full of noble tragedies—those
of Belgium, France, Poland, Servia, and
millions of homes on both sides made de-
solate by honourable death. But there
are ignoble tragedies, too. There is the
spectacle of a once great nation so bent
on aggression that she deliberately adopts
principles of dishonour and untruth, and
a policy of frightfulness and treachery—
so obsessed by arrogance as to believe that
her infamy will be condoned and justified
by her success —so dead to all sense of
shame that she parades this monstrosity
of “Kultur” openly before a shuddering
world. There is yet another and a near-
er tragedy. There are men of our race
who do not realise that the call to serve
has come to them now, who may not real


ise it until the war is over and some sud-
den vision reveals their ignoble attitude
and brings them abiding shame. They
will hold up their heads in the years to
come; they will fob off their children’s
queries with some easy lie; but in their
hearts they will bear the gnawing cancer
of remorse and of regret that they closed
their ears to the cry of the world’s agony,
and failed to quit them like men. I am
one of those whom the logic of fact has
convinced that it is unfair and wasteful,
during a great war when all resources are
needed, to throw upon the individual the
burden of national defence. Neverthe-
less, until the national consciousness is
awakened, the individual responsibility
must stand.
Let not the young men say that it is
easy for the older men to talk like that,
since they do not have to go to the front.
It is the penalty of advancing years that
the more developed character can see the
issues more clearly, and can more fully
appreciate the urgency of the call, at a
time when nature is setting a limit to the
physical value of the fighting machine.
It is just because their fighting value is
past, that it becomes an obligation on the
older men to help in other ways —to put
their special knowledge and experience at
the service of the state —to write and
speak words of encouragement and en


lightment—to give all they can to the re-
lief of want and suffering—to do their
ordinary work thoroughly and well. Let
it never be forgotten that in one respect
the older men and the women of the na-
tion have surpassed the younger men.
They have accepted a greater opportunity.
They have made a greater sacrifice.
Fathers and mothers have given freely,
yet with infinite regret, the lives of their
sons; wives have given their husbands;
sweethearts their bethrothed. All these
have given, and are prepared to go on giv-
ing, lives that are not their own, lives that
they would gladly give their own to save.
And that is more than any young man
can give, for he can only give his own.
To every man and woman there is of-
fered some opportunity of furthering the
great cause. For those who cannot go to
the front, there remains a chance not so
dramatic, but not less difficult. If they
cannot offer to die for their country, they
can at least make an effort to live more
worthily for it . No one is so insignificant
that he cannot do something to help. It
is something, if he puts an added earnest-
ness into his daily life and work. It is
something, if he keeps an open mind, and
is prepared to change his habits of
thought, and habits of life to meet the
changing circumstances of our national
existence. It is something, if he tries to


form within the circle of his friends the
nucleus of a sane and wholesome public
opinion. No one is so poor that he can-
not contribute something to the common
weal. It is something, if he adopts one
of the laws of the boy scouts, and does a
good turn to others. Rich' and poor alike,
by taking thought, can add much to the
value of their giving, whether it be money,
or material, or service.
The National Responsibility.
At this epochal moment in its history
the Empire itself cannot evade its collec-
tive responsibility. It has reached a
crisis in that age-long contest between
the powers of darkness, and those that
seek the light. We can only hope, as we
believe, that we are fighting on the side
of the angels. That hope and that belief
should nerve our arm, and strengthen our
will to conquer. But the justice of our
cause will not win the wa'r for us, if it is
handicapped by infirmity of purpose.
Moreover, the toll of human woe is al-
ready immeasurable, and much more will
be exacted by the relentless enemy. It is
for us to see that all the sacrifice and all
the suffering shall not have been in vain.
But, if through our inertia, and our un-
wisdom, we fail in this high calling, we
may delay God’s purpose as surely as if
we were fighting against it.


We are a peculiar people, immersed in
routine work and in sport, undemonstra-
tive, imperturbable. But, though' we may
not know it, though we may not acknow-
ledge it, we are highly sensitive to spirit-
ual ideals. As a nation, we are gifted with
a rare insight into distinctions of right
and wrong. We are endowed with force
of character and with practical ability.
But there is a gap in our mental equip-
ment. We are honestly desirous of do-
ing the right thing, but we have great dif-
ficulty in deciding the proper steps to take.
To appreciate an ideal is one thing; to de-
termine a course of action that will lead
to its practical realisation is quite another.
And, when there is an actual conflict of
ideals, our collective thinking is
rarely equal to the strain; our thoughts
become confused; our actions contradict-
ory. We can see. We can act. We can-
not think.
If there is one word that most men
would select to express our national capa-
city, it is the adjective “practical.” We
like to think of ourselves as a practical
people. As a matter of fact we are, in
some respects, the most unpractical of the
greater nations, because we are charac-
terised by this most unpractical tendency
to stultify our insight by confused think-
ing, and so hamper our action. Pursuit of
the same ideal may lead different men to


opposite conclusions, since one will think
rightly, another wrongly. Our national
deeds sometimes contradict our national
ideals, and expose us to the accusa-
tion of hypocrisy and to a contempt
that is not unmerited. It is hardly too
much to say that many men never think.
They go through life with amazing intel-
lectual limitations, gaining no fresh
thoughts, but acquiring prejudices, which
they term convictions, and which they de-
clare with pride to be unalterable. In the
light of our racial endowment and educa-
tional advantages, this hide-bound mental
attitude must be counted a' national sin,
for which we are individually and collec-
tively responsible.
It'is painful but necessary operation to
probe this evil further. That we were
unprepared for the stern task confronting
us more than a year ago, may be taken as
proof of our innocence of aggression. It
is equally proof of our innocence of saga-
city, since we were warned of the menace
before it burst upon us, but chose to ig-
nore the warning. That we remain un-
prepared still, though the tdsk is increas-
ingly grim., proves only our innocence of
practical common sense. It is an out-
standing illustration of our national in-
capacity for handling a crisis.
I do not pretend to know the causes of
our historic incompetence. I am only


groping for a' solution. One element in
our failure appears to be that we have
adopted, as our national watchword, the
motto, “wait and see.” Those who have
accepted the responsibility of government
wait for the people to move. The people
wait for their governments to act. In
Australia we wait and see what England
is going to do. In England we wait and
see what Germany does. It would be a
shocking exhibition of energy and enter-
prise for us to anticipate the moves of the
enemy. Such a degree of intelligent an-
ticipation would cerainly take him by
surprise. It might even take him at_a dis-
advantage. Therefore, we will wait and
see.
Our national indecision is fatal to suc-
cess. It is largely due to that habitual
confusion of thought which prevents us
taking prompt and concerted action. Con-
fused thinking was never so prevalent, nor
so disastrous, as it is to-day, for the simple
reason that our national ideals have never
been brought into sharper conflict one
with another, and have never been put to
the test by sterner facts. Not even a 1 ter-
rible year of war has enabled us to re-
concile that conflict and to pass that test.
One of our most cherished national
ideals is the liberty of the subject. It is a
high ideal. It has often illumined our
path to progress. Yet do we never inter


fere with his liberty? Do we not enforce
restrictions in the interests of the public
health ? Do we not limit the hours he
shall work, and fix the pay he shall re-
ceiver Do we not force him to disclose
his wealth and to contribute to the ex-
pense of Government such proportion as
we may decide? These and many other
restrictions are imposed for our mutual
comfort and safety and progress, and for
the furtherance of other ideals with which
indiscriminate liberty would conflict. But,
when our very existence as a nation is
imperilled, we must be careful how we in-
terfere with the liberty of the individual.
We must not restrict the sale of alcohol,
because it would interfere with his liberty
to get drunk and inefficient. We must
not adopt compulsory military service,
because it would interfere with his liber-
ty to shirk his first duty as a citizen. We
must, above all things, be consistent.
To many men consistency is the epi-
tome of all the virtues, and the key to all
right thinking and right action. They
make a fetish of it, and perpetrate un-
numbered sins in its name. They do not
realise that obsession by a'n ideal, however
high, is the negation of progress. The
Spanish Inquisition was obsessed by an
ideal, and was consistent. Germany is
obsessed by her ideals, and is consistent.
Consistency may be only the expression


of intellectual perversion, or of intellec-
tual poverty. Is there no such thing as
learning from past mistakes? Is there
no such thing as progress in mental and
moral development?
Let us examine two possible infringe-
ments of the liberty of the subject in the
light of our national responsibility at this
crisis in our history. The one is concern-
ed with restrictions of the sale of alcohol,
the other with compulsory national ser-
vice. It will be conceded by all that the
state has two—-and only two —supreme
duties in this hour of trial. It must pro-
vide an adequate number of soldiers, and
it must secure the highest efficiency both
in the individual soldier and in the organi-
sation of our national resources for vic-
tory. Let us try to deal honestly with
these matters —and with ourselves. Let
us not be careful a'nd troubled about our
consistency. Let us not smother discus-
sion by an appeal to our unalterable con-
victions. Let us seek the truth, and be
prepared, if necessary, to readjust our
whole mental attitude and our course of
conduct.
Liberty and Alcohol.
The sale of alcohol throughout the Em-
pire is already restricted both as to place
and as to time. The subject is not at
liberty to sell alcohol at other than auth


orised places nor at other tha'n authorised
times. The only question then is, how
far and in what directions the restrictions
now in force should be extended. We will
assume that no alteration need be made,
unless it can be shewn to be in the inte-
rests of the state, or of the soldier, or of
both. We will be guided by the fact that
there is nothing too good for our soldiers,
that both as citizens and as soldiers they
have merited the best that we can give
them.
As soldiers they have done more than
prove their worth. On that 35th of Ap-
ril, through the stillness of that Eastern
dawn, the first contingents sailed to ac-
complish feats of arms that set the world
ringing with their fa'me. Australia is
torn with grief at the interminable lists
of her dead, her wounded and her ill. But
deep in her heart is an honourable pride
that her sons, together with men from
the motherland, were set a superhuman
task, and did not fail. They ate the true
supermen who dare such impossibilities.
Yet, had they failed to make good that
historic landing, they would have been
heroes still.
Our men are heroes all. Some of them
are very human heroes, with very hu-
man failings. They cannot all maintain
that high standard of conduct which alone
is consistent with their high calling. Yet


they have earned our deepest gratitude,
and they deserve our utmost help to see
that they are not needlessly tempted be-
yond their strength. Nevertheless those
are the truer heroes who realise that their
patriotic effort does not end with their
enlistment, who feel that they are not at
liberty to indulge in any license that
might endanger their health and reduce
their value as effective fighting units. It
is a continuous obligation that rests on
every soldier to keep himself fit and well
ft he great majority of our men recognise
this obligation and fulfil it scrupulously.
Iv is no less a continuous obligation on the
community to help and not to hinder the
soldier in this endeavour.
The citizen who enlists at this time ha's
realised the highest ideal of citizenship.
The soldier is without exception the most
worthy and the most honourable citizen
in the Commonwealth. He derives his
worth from the great service he is ren-
dering, and his honour from the great sac-
rifice he has made. His sacrifice includes
the renunciation of ma'ny of the privileges
of the ordinary citizen. He has given up
his home, his family, his friends, his work.
He is not master of his actions, nor of his
fate. He has given up his personal liber-
ty, he is prepared to give up his life, that
his country might haVe liberty more ab-
undantly, and fulfil its imperial destiny.


The relation of alcohol to disability and
disease among the .forces is inseparable
from its physiological action in health.
The alcohol which we drink in ales,
wines and spirits, is only one of many al-
cohols known to chemistry, and all of
them are toxic. It is a drug to which the
human organism is peculiarly sensitive,
for the simple reason that in it the cere-
bral centres are most highly developed.
Its main action is to stimulate, and then to
depress, the central nervous system, and
both the stimulating and the paralysing
action of the drug show themselves first
on the highest cerebral centres. There is
invariably an increased activity of low-
er centres, followed in larger doses by par-
alysis of all the nerve centres. “It may
be,” says Dr. Hale White, “that alcohol,
hke disease, leads to the removal of the
inhibitory influences of the highest cen-
tres, and thus the apparent increase in ac-
tivity of lower centres is really dependent
upon the paralysing effect of the drug on
the highest centres. The action of alco-
hol in this respect is very similar to the
effects produced in the early stages of cer-
tain forms of insanity.” The pleasurable
sensations which follow moderate drink-
ing kre really mild manifestations of these
toxic effects.
Of the pathological effects of alcohol
the most serious for the civilian are those


due to chronic poisoning from continual
“soaking.” For the soldier the most seri-
ous effects are due to more acute toxic
action from occasional over-indulgence.
The military significance of alcohol is de-
rived mainly from its relation to the in-
cidence and severity of infective diseases
among the forces. Indirectly, alcoholic
excess relaxes those inhibitory influences
on which self-control and good conduct
largely depend, so that men under its in-
fluence become exposed to foul diseases,
which they would otherwise be less liable
to contract. It is the cause of much of the
incapacity and invalidism that are insepar-
able from military camps, as they are at
present conducted. It is a handicap to re-
cruiting, since mothers shrink from the
prospect of an unclean life for their sons
more than they dread a clean and honour-
able death.
Further, acute alcoholism predisposes
the subject to all manner of infectious
diseases. Frequently this effect is again
indirect. He falls down in a drunken
sleep, wet or insufficiently clad, and so
“catches a chill,” which means that some
lurking bacterium has taken advantage
of his lowered resistance to gain a footing
in his tissues, and initiate an infection. In
this way, pneumonias and other inflamma-
tions often have their origin. Sometimes
the effect is more direct and more serious.


Recovery from any infective disease is
due to the patient successfully develop-
ing in his tissues immune substances
which antagonise the invading microbes,
and neutralise their toxins. But among
the pathological effects of alcohol, is a re-
markable power of inhibiting- this immune
response, so that the toxic effects of the
alcohol may be said to reinforce the toxic
effects of the microbe. The result is not
only that an alcoholic is more liable to
take pneumonia, but that his illness will
assume a more severe type, and he will
have a lessened chance of recovery. The
same considerations apply to other bac-
terial infections, such as meningitis. It
is impossible to estimate the exact pro-
portion of disease and death directly and
indirectly due to alcohol. The fact re-
mains that alcohol is an important pre-
disposing cause of both. It is a legiti-
mate inference that, if the toxic effects of
alcohol were reduced, fewer lives would
be lost, and a greater proportion of the
men would maintain a high standard of
efficiency.
There is no need to elaborate these
points. They are not personal opinions
which can be argued away. They are
scientific facts which must be faced. They
indicate that the present restrictions on
the sale of alcohol are unsatisfactory. Fur-
ther regulations are needed in the inte


rests of the soldier who has earned the
right to be freed from undue temptations
with their attendant risks of disease and
death. They are equally necessary in the
interests of the Commonwealth, which
has the right to dema'nd the utmost effi-
ciency in its soldiers.
I am impressed by the argument of Sir
Thomas Anderson Stuart that a man may,
if he desires it, be permitted alcohol with
his evening meal, but that any later drink-
ing is unnecessary, and becomes more and
more injurious with every hour that pas-
ses. Hence alcohol should be forbidden
to soldiers after an early hour in the even-
ing. This further restriction would in
most cases turn the scale in favour of the
soldier, and in favour of efficiency as
against disabling disease.
Even if this restriction did not apply to
the civilian, the military gain would be
so enormous as to justify the discrimina-
tion dgainst the soldier. Drunkenness in
the ordinary civilian is no less reprehen
sible, but it is less dangerous to our na-
tional safety. Nevertheless, the whole
Empire would be strengthened in its hour
of need, if greater sobriety were enforced
throughout the whole people. The tide
of public opinion is flowing strongly in
this direction. The community has no
wish to shirk its obligations to the men
who have not shirked. The people will


wholeheartedly support any government
that makes a' resolute endeavour to give
practical expression to a national ideal so
worthy of the great opportunity.
Liberty and Service.
The other vexed question is compulsory
national service, of which conscription
forms only one part. I have read with
care the reasons that have been given for
and against conscription, and I must ad-
mit that those who support it have all
the best of the argument. Those who op-
pose it take two main grounds—that it is
an illegitimate interference with the liber-
ty of the individual, and that the volun-
teer is necessarily superior to the con-
script.
Grant for the moment that the volun-
teer is a better fighting man than the con-
script. It does not follow that the Em-
pire is better served by a voluntary effort
that is haphazard, than it would be by a
compulsory service that can be organised.
Unregulated, or imperfectly regulated,
voluntary effort is utterly wasteful. It has
resulted in fathers of large families being
killed, and the Empire being burdened
with a needlessly large number of de-
pendents. It has led to workers in in-
dustries essential to our national resis-
tance being lost to their work. Volun


tary effort cannot avoid this wastage, and
still secure the numbers that are needed.
Compulsion, on the other hand, can re-
gulate enlistment. It can call first upon
the unmarried, and the less essential
worker. It can ensure that each draft
can be mobilised in time to be thoroughly
trained. It can maintain that large and
regular supply of men that a great na-
tional effort would demand. It would
conserve our resources, and shorten the
war.
And, after all, the assertion that the
conscript is inferior to the volunteer is
only special pleading. It is not borne out
by the history of our battles in the past,
nor by the experience of other nations. In
the present there is many a young man
honestly uncertain between his duty to his
family, and his duty to the Empire, who
would welcome a national decision of his
conduct. Even those who do not feel the
call would not disgrace the traditions of
the race. There is a fundamental identity
of character, and of training, which would
carry them through all trials. The home
life and the school life have developed
habits of independent thought and initia-
tive ; an instinctive practice of playing the
game; a sense of honour; a realisation of
"the decencies of life, including those of
the fighting life. These things go deeper


than the difference between the volunteer
and the conscript.
It is the Germans who have brutalised
the conscript, and brought the word, con-
scription, into disrepute. We would be
more than foolish' if we were to allow
their abuse of the system to debar us from
its legitimate use. Our French allies are
no less passionately devoted to liberty
than we are. Yet they were compelled in
self-defence to adopt conscription. It is
the premium they have had to pay for
national insurance, and had they not free-
ly paid, they would have been devastated
by fire and sword. Who can doubt that,
with France prostrated, Germa'ny would
have launched a bitter attack on Eng-
land? It is no exaggeration to say that
conscription has for the moment saved
our Empire, though it wa's not her own.
Conscription has saved Australia for
further efforts. Her frontiers are the
frontiers of the Empire, and these are in
Western and in Eastern Europe. They
are the true gates of Australia, and, when
these gates are forced, the beginning of
the end is in sight. To wait until the
enemy threatens to land on our shores be-
fore organising our resistance is not stra-
tegy. It is merely suicide. It might be
preferable to such servitude as the enemy
in his mercy might be prepared to grant,
but it would be suicide nevertheless.


Thanks to the sacrifices of our allies and
to our own great effort, the issue of the
war is no longer in doubt. What is grave-
ly in doubt is the price we shall pay for
victory. That is in doubt only because
we do not know when the nation will
a'wake to its responsibility, and swiftly
and intelligently organise its every re-
source. Meantime every day adds to the
drain on our greatest imperial asset —the
best young lives of the race. Every day
adds to the horrors of war endured by
our allies in Belgium, France, Poland and
Servia. Every day adds to that paralys-
ing debt which civilization will have to
pay in the long slow years of recovery.
The last man and the last shilling of the
Empire should be organised now, not to
be prodigally expended, but to arrest that
expenditure of life and of the good things
of life, and to check the sufferings of our
allies who look to us for succour.
History will record that our voluntary
effort was as magnificent as it was lament-
able. It will record that we were carried
away by a spirit of high adventure to the
neglect of sterner and less romantic du-
ties. It is not less honourable for a man
to go because his country assigns that
for his duty, and he has no less a claim
on the gratitude of those who stay.
But this is the land of the free. It is
free to become enslaved. Surely a higher


sense of freedom is possible—freedom to
choose to be free—freedom to resolve that
the accumulated energy of the Empire
shall be directed towa'rds one mighty ef-
fort to be free, and that all her resources,
material, intellectual, spiritual, shall be
organised to that end. Only by such an
effort can the great opportunity be ade-
quately realised.
The Sydney and Melbourne Publishing Co., Ltd.,
11 Wilmot St., Sydney.
