

I ft-™* ®L#
■ ■ ■:
LYTTELTONIK
FROM A FORMULA
SUPPLIED BY MEMBERS
TRANSPORT "M."


Ml || |jj|


The
Lytteltonik
From a Formula supplied bp Members of Transport "M "
EDITORIAL.
With a musical rattle of chains the anchor was
weighed and the troopship "M" was soon plough-
ing the waters of Plymouth Sound on the long
voyage to the land of the Southern Cross. A
thousand eyes gazed to those green patchwork
hills, so peculiar to England, and although seme
felt that perchance they could not come that way
again in Khaki, yet to others it was but a case of
"Au Re voir." And so we stood out to sea past the
high-pooped black and white relics of Nelson's day,
and we looked a weird fleet; the experts in
"camouflaging" having turned our sides into a
delirium of design and colour that would bring joy
to a futurist's heart. Soon Plymouth Hoe of Drake
fame had dropped below the horizon and we crept
along the channel wondering what our fate might
be, yet all feeling that nothing: could happen as
we watched the screen of destroyers clearing the
way and sweeping about; far from forgetting our
own cruisers on whom the bulk of the work has
fallen in bringing us safely through the nest of
pirates and across the broad Atlantic to the half-
way port, where we now joyfully make the safe
run to Home and bid our grey guardians of the
past weeks good-bye.
A TOAST.
You sit back in your deckchair and breathe a
sigh of ease; the submarine guard has been dis-
banded and the striking of the match on deck to
light pipe or cigarette will not now bring down
upon you the wrath of superior authority. Anxious
nights were they when we stole along like phantom
ships, the dark lightless hulls silhouetted in the
moonlight. And it is when the danger is over that
the idler on deck realizes to the full the debt he is
under to the men who go down to the sea in ships,
to the Navy for its eternal vigilance and guidance,
and to the Merchant Service, ploughing the
trackless main with cold contempt for the horrors
that lurk 'neath the waves.
ON DECK.
Poets and Novelists tell us that the day breaks
in the East, and I am not in a position to dispute
their statement as I have never been far enough
East to hear it break. As the day dawns the
travel-stained troops crawl out of their ham-
mocks, off hatchways, from tops of tables, also
from underneath tables, and those who believe in
the open-air life may be seen crawling from
amongst the deck machinery, others out of wash-
houses and shower-baths. Then one character
stands out from the rest of those on the ship. His
expression is one of pained anxiety, and if you
follow the track of his bare feet you will observe
him searching furtively in the wash-houses, shower-
baths, and all the dark nooks and corners of the
ship as though he had planted something and could
not remember where. After breakfast the builders
and contractors take possession of the after hatch,
and a very lively business is carried on until the
builders grow wise; which usually occurs when
they find that they have been building down in-
stead of up, and have excavated the contents of
their pockets.
Of pastimes on board there are many
From two up to " Anchor and Crown,"
But the favourite one with the pure fnugs
Is "House, get ready! eyes down!"
They roar it, and scream it, and sing it,
In science it reaches a height,
From its " clickity click" in the morning
To its last legs eleven at night.
'Twas a day full of joy for the Ausies
When the Red. Cross good cheer came to light,
With slippers and shirts and tobacco
That filled up a pillow-case tight.
And pyjamas, "what ho!" do you get me?
Why, they dazzled old Tropical Sol,
And instead of a troopship our steamer
Looked more like a fancy-dress ball.
Vol. 1. No. 1.
November 1917.
Atlantic Ocean.


THE LYTTELTONJK.
Nov., 1917.
At Sea.
WHAT'S IN A NAME?
"A rose by any other name would smell as sweet,"
wrote the Immortal Bard. And so in the same
.spirit we have christened this publication the
" Lytteltonik," feeling sure that under this, as
any other name, it will be an acceptable souvenir.
Not that the selection of a title did not entail
much thought and discussion. On the contrary,
the offer of a .small prize caused some 800 brains
to seeth violently, and many and varied have been
the titles evolved. Some missed the mark by
reason of their length, while others were plagiar-
isms from previous similar publications on Austra-
lian Transports. "Call it the Liarbird " suggested
one far-seeing genius, while another plumped for
the "Returning Boomerang," while a third cast a
rather unkind reflection on many of his comrades
by nominating " Leads winger " as the most suit-
able appellation. Picturesque but lengthy was
another submission, " From Hell to Home, or a
record of the voyage of H.M.A.T. ' Port
Lyttelton' with sick and wounded soldiers from
the Great War." From a host of others might be
mentioned the following: "The Dinkum Oil,"
" Dinna Forget the Port Lyttelton," " Homeward
Bound Whizzbang," " Birdwood's Wombats,"
"Hugh's Mixture," "Flotsam, Jetsam," "Sub-
marine Guardian," "Fragments from Stem to
Stern," "The Lyttelton Mirror; See Yourself and
your Friends," and the "Great Lyttelton." The
selected title was submitted independently by
several competitors, but the first received was
signed by Private R. S. Fox, 58th Battalion, and
to him, therefore, are the laurels awarded.
MERCHANTMAN JACK.
We sing of our armies, our navies, our guns,
We sing of our soldiers and sailors, brave sons;
And we're apt to forget in our praises of these,
Old Merchantman Jack, who roams o'er the seas.
Without armies or navies perchance' wars would
cease,
Without soldiers or dreadnoughts perchance there'd
be peace;
But without ships for cargo or crews for the same,
This Island of ours would exist but in name.
So we must mot forget the good work that is done
By the dogged old shellback who follows the sun;
He's taking big risks every time he "signs on,"
And he brings back the food we are fighting upon.
Now lift up your glasses and listen to me,
Here's a health to the roamer of every sea ;
And if in our Empire no famine is: seen,
Give thanks to the men of the Merchant Marine.
WAITING.
What though the Days seem endless,
And the hours were they ever so long ?
I banish all thoughts of sadness,
I fill my heart with a song.
What though my life seems empty,
And the birds sing a song in vain?
I think of the Days that will come
Like sunshine through summer rain.
What though the seas are between,
And the skies such a leaden hue ?
1 only think of my baby,
I only can think of you.
What though eld Time be sluggish?
A fig for his scythe and sand,
I laugh at his mean endeavours,
I live for the Day I land.
What though my heart be aching,
What though I now live in hell ?
I shoulder it all with gladness,
I know that 'twill all be well.
For a. sweet little girlie is waiting,
Is waiting far over the sea;
And the loveliest thoughts, in her dear little
heart,
Wing their message of courage to me.
NIGERIA."
11.M.A, Transport "Port Lyttelton
At Sea 13/11/1917.
IN THE TROPICS.
In the Tropics the sea is at its best; a vast
circle of deep shimmering blue, where the porpoise
races towards the boat in delirious leaps, and
flying-fish whirl and sparkle in the sun like dainty
monoplanes of dazzling blue and green. At night
under the spangled canopy of heaven, with per-
haps the moon casting a giant ribbon of silver to-
wards you as she rises, you lean on the rail watch-
ing the phosphorus that flashes and clings to the
ship's side as she glides noiselessly onward in the
warm night.
To-morrow, perchance, comes a stormy, choppy
sea, with masses of spray or miles of white-capped
rollers, that sport with the ship as if she were
a cork : an endless roar of rushing falling water
about the vessel in your ears, and when night
comes down, you marvel at the grandeur of the
monsters that rush hither and thither, tippej
with phosphorus headlights,


At Sea.
THE LYTTELTONIK.
Nov., 19.17.
THE TATTOO MAN.
He reminds me of a merchant squatting cross-
legged in one of the little stores of the Persian
Bazaar in Old Cairo. Like Mustapha, he too is a
man of mystery : his body glitters with sigiis,
symbols and hieroglyphics. What are they ? An-
chors, Hearts, Cockroaches, Curly Endives, Cauli
flowers, Lions, Lizards and Leeches from Liver-
pool. Snakes, Spooks and Spars; Men, Women,
and Antelopes' Fingers; Balls of Snow, Shooting-
Stars, Green Eyes and Gherkins; also Chillies,
Crowns, Foxes, Fiends, Fish, Flags and other
frivolities. If you don't see them on his body
look in the catalogue. He moves little, and the
soldiers crowd about him. Is he a sorcerer, a
juggler—surely a mesmerist : for a man sits before
him like a dead rabbit. Pots of pigment lie strewn
about, and a multifarious medley of mysteries
wherewith he works his black art. A click, and
something purrs, whirrs and spits. He picks it
up and all is still. Surely he is a terrible man, for
with one sweep of the purring devil he blasts the
face of nature, and in one second makes an ever-
lasting mark upon your body. After a time he
shudders, the infernal machine ceases to dance and
whirr, the victim sighs, comes to life and staggers
to his feet. The sorcerer demands a few pieces
of silver, and bursting into appeal of demoniacal
laughter,_grabs another body. So it goes on.
Take care ! The goblin will get you, if you
don't watch out.
SIERRA LEONE.
Thou gate to a mysterious beyond, where men
Bisk health and life itself pursuing gold,
Or tearing the jungle down, and building up
New growth, rubber, and such wealth untold,
For lands afar. Greeting the raging beast
And slaying; plodding o'er vale and hill
Through heat, where death, disease and danger
Wait to break thine indomitable will.
We who have looked on paths the Pharoahs trod
And wandered where Napoleon's Armies strove,
Shout thee ottr greater admiration as you stand
Far flung from home, within the torrid cove.
No conquest flaunting on your shield or sword,
No threats of pain or ruin as you roam;
Just unseen, honest labour in the untouched wild,
Feeding the wheels of far-off industry at home.
Think not your strife forgotten and unsung.
A thousand brothers passing from the war
Have felt your help, and know your sacrifice,
Your toil upon the portals of dark Africa.
G. H. P.
A FALSE ALARM.
'Twas a strange signal flag which fluttered from
Transport "M, ' and attempts to decipher it
caused much heartburning on her sister ships and
cruiser escort. Was it a call for help, a sub-
marine warning, or a request fpr a tow ? The
latter seemed the most likely, to judge from her
position in the convoy. Blissfully ignorant of the
excitement she was causing was Transport "M"
herself. But suddenly the officer on watch spotted
the fluttering pennant and invoked a malediction
on the useless soldier who had allowed his laundry
to be entangled in the wireless aerials. The way-
ward shirt was rescued, and once again all was
peace.
It took me a long time to come at that "Huuse"
game. Then one day in a fit of recklessness I
took a backsheesh card.
I didn't win, but I liked the excitement —that
" filling 'em up " and waiting for the god to
speak the number you just wanted to win. I
was dead happy, and the cry of " Housey, Housey,
Housey" drew me like a magnet. So the days
passed happily, with the wheel of fortune up and
down on "single lines" and "full houses."
Then one day as I sat with my card between
my knees, waiting for number 35, 1 got the jumps
badly. Suddenly someone shouted " House," and
in the check I found that 35 had come out long
before.
The crowd rocked with laughter as I rose to my
feet with a curse.
My doom was sealed. I was dopey ! I dashed
madly away, with " Housey Housey" ringing in
my ears; everyone jeered arid threw butts at me,
crying "Dopey." Even the waves rushed together
whispering, and then fell away in a seething scat-
ter of hollow laughter.
I became desperate and flew below, and still
further below; where at last I found a quiet store
and sneaked in. It was heavenly, and I have
been there for two days, living, mostly, on tinned
and dried fruit. Now you know where the Red
Cross fruit is going to.
LEGS ELEVEN."
THE HEATHEN IN HIS BLINDNESS
While we were putting " de money in de basket "
at Sierra Leone, a passenger objected to Sambo
playing with the fruit, in the canoe, and yelled,
"Keep yer hands off the fruit, yer —."
The dark one gazed placidly up and asked,
"Please, wat langwidge dat!"


At Sea.
THE LYTTELTOMK.
Nov., 1917.
SIERRA LEONE.
A shout from the look-out in the crow's nest,
"Land ahead," and all eyes turn to a faint haze-
like blur on the horizon; deck games are forgotten,
and the looming mountains of Sierra Leone are
accorded a hearty welcome after twelve days' vista
of never-ending seas. Like a monarch worthy of
his name, Lion Mountain looms far above the other
lofty peaks, while far below the pretty town of
Freetown basks in the morning sunlight. The har-
bour itself is the wide mouth of a tidal river,
bearing the same name as the colony. Soon we are
inside the boom which will protect us from the
encroachments of the insidious submarine, and
Freetown and its surroundings form a half-moon
panorama of beauty before us; of shelving beach
and gloomy crag; of palm-tree studded vegetation
and romantic bungalows; while on the placid
waters of the bay, quaint native craft, cunningly
hollowed out of logs, contrast strikingly with the
hulls of our sister Leviathans of the deep.
The town itself, seen from the ship, appears to
cover a considerable area, innumerable wharves and
warehouses looming in the foreground. Already
some of those on board have made the acquaintance
of fruit vendors from the shore, and business is
soon very brisk; the sampans and catamarans are
.so full of fruit that the wonder is that the owners
did not experience shipwreck on the way out; but
they have achieved the impossible, and here they
are passing their wares—bananas, cocoanuts, oranges
and nuts—up the ship's side in little baskets, having
taken the precaution to secure the money first.
Keen business instinct have these ebony-coloured
merchants. Oranges are eight for one shilling, and
cocoanuts. fourpence each; a vast increase on the
price paid by the buyer ashore for oranges, i.e.,
2s. 6d. per 100. Still, innocence is bliss, and the
boys part up willingly. Divers there are in plenty,
too, charmingly clothed in beaming .smiles. Silver
thrown overboard is quickly retrieved; but a half-
penny cunningly wrapped in silver paper caused
sorrow to the youth who recovered it; " O-bad-O,"
he roared.
A day ashore confirmed the pleasant shipboard
impression of Freetown. The seaboard of the
Colony of Sierra Leone, it has a population of
34,000 negroes, mostly Mandingo tribes. Of typical
negro features, the people on the whole are of
splendid physique, and appear to have happy and
contented dispositions. The town itself is well
laid out and contains many fine residences and
business houses. A wander through the native
quarter, called Krootown, was full of interest, and
one could not help noticing the cleanliness of the
streets and the general air of prosperity; a pleasing
contrast to the native quarters of Cairo. The
female portion of the population appears to revel
in bright and gaudy clothes, and, despite the
terrific heat of the day, native beauties and beaming
dowagers were to be seen decked out in picturesque
hats and elaborate dresses, bright hued as the
rainbow. There are two methods of travel around
the town : on foot or in hammock. The hammocks
are carried on two poles, each resting on the heads
of four boys, and a day's luxurious riding in this
way costs you, in all, only three shillings.
Freetown has a white population numbering 150,
out of a, total of 34,000 people, while the Colony
numbers 750 whites and 75,000 natives. Two
narrow gauged railways radiate from the town, one
running into the hills and the other penetrating
about 45 miles inland. The Colony itself extends
from 8 to 20 miles inland, and has an area of 515
square miles, then merging into the Protectorate
of Sierra Leone, which extends inland for another
180 miles, and has a population of lg millions. The
principal products of Sierra Leone are Palm Oil,
Kolanut, Kubber, Coffee, Cocoa, Tapioca, Ginger,
Maize, ivasava and Cotton. Freetown has a par-
ticular interest, in that it became in 1786 a settle-
ment for freed slaves.
Certain well-meaning people have sent us contri-
butions in the form of eloquent eulogies on certain
sergeants whom they greatly admire. For fear of
jealousy, we are unable to publish such praises, but
will forward the manuscripts to the wives, mothers
or sweethearts of these splendid fellows at the first
Australian port.
You have a better chance in a full house than in
a full dug-out!
The Ship's Captain doesn't know how many
Anchors we have aboard. Neither does the C.O.
of Troops know how many Crowns there are.
Bill: "Why did the Captain Hayter ? "
Joe : "I dunno."
Bill: "Because her Soul was Scarlett."
It is not generally known that a certain singer
aboard was offered an engagement by wireless to
sing with the famous NELLIE, but owing to an
outbreak of scarlet fever in the tropics he declined.
However, we understand that he intends to console
himself with a fish cart, " Apres la guerre."


At Sea.
THE LYTTELTONIK.
Nov-., 19 IT.
THE LUCKY RING.
His name was Singh Poor, or something like
that —1 called him Cassidy for short, and he wasn't
fussy. A scrawny Hindoo from away up in the
hills near Trimulgherry. He came on to the beach
one day and pitched my way with a string of
mules. He was a character. His wide shorts
Happed like great Hags about his skinny thighs,
and his boots had been picked far too ripe. But
he was happy all the time. There he'd squat be-
fore a dugout, gazing placidly out to sea; smiling,
yet singing sad little songs. I suppose they were
home songs, I don't know. He wore a ring, a
big brass thing, engraved with two rows of Hin-
dustani, and one day, as I grabbed his hand to
have a look, he only smiled, and with the other
measured various heights from the ground as he
said, " Missus like Memsahib." I suppose he
meant his wife and kids. Anyway, I was nearly
going to pinch that ring. However, Merrick, of the
Battalion, had been in India with the Dragoons,
so I asked him what it was. "Oh!" he said, "a
lucky ring that the family give them when they
leave, very sacred too." So I decided not to pinch
Cassidy's ring. And then one afternoon late, we
were puffing slowly up Shrapnel Gully, me in
front and Cassidy coming behind with his mules.
At the clear patch I peeped out, and just as I
waved Cassidy to come on quick, old Abdul got
a sight and sprayed that open .patch like blazes.
1 waved Cassidy back, but the mule had too much
way on, and dragged him into the limelight. Poor
little black devil. He and the mule were knocked
rotten in two shakes. I grabbed Cassidy and he
had a nasty flip-Hop kind of a leg on him, but he
just wore a worried look, and said nothing. My
cobber and I fixed him up and took him back to
the beach. Struth! He was light. He stayed
there for a couple of days and I missed him like
blazes—kept butting in to have a screw how he was
doing. Just before they took him off he handed
me the brass ring, and said, "Good cobber." 1
wasn't having any, but he cried and made a row
so that he broke me up, and I found myself back
in my possy just gazing at poor old Cassidy's ring.
I always remembered what Merrick said about
that lucky ring, so I used it as a seal on parcels
to Australia, but it didn't get my things through
the post any better. And then we went to France
in the " lonian," and going ashore at Marseilles,
the wharf was lined off with Indians to prevent
us getting out. A bunch of us went along to see
how things looked, but these Cassidy-looking
blokes came "on guard" and made a hell of a
fuss. I strolled over to one bloke and tried to
kid him that I wanted to go to the latrines—kept
pointing that way. All of a sudden he gives a
yell and grabs at my hand, sticking his face al-
most on top of Cassidy's ring and calling to the
others, who all left their posts and rushed over.
Then all my cobbers rushed through and off, and
a lot of others too. The niggers kept up a hulla-
• baloo about Cassidy's lucky ring, laughing and
jabbering. I suppose they could read it, but 1
don't know what they were saying. All I know
is that I was grabbed for interfering with native
guards and got 28 days' clink. I carry Cassidy's
ring in my pocket on a chain now. I wish I could
find Merrick.
" WHIZZ BANG."
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS
Anzac 19456. —When Sgt. Mitchell was short of
paper some one rushed in, and took your article
away by mistake. Sorry !
Wat. A. Mess 2.—We dumped your poem, and
will ask a passing steamer to drop a few flowers
over it.
Roy X 392.—You're too hot! In fact, over the
fence, and into the next yard.
W.C.IX Pioneers.—Frintance, " Farewell, my
love," the Anzac cried as he clasped his sweet-
heart to his breast. " I'll send your passage money
when I " here the junior Editor unfortunately
burst into tears and your story was washed away
into the W.P.B.
C.8.0., Mess 47. —We assure you that the white-
haired officer on board is not a Padre.
A.S. —Y.M.C.A. Cabin: Oh! Naughty, Naughty !
Whatyermean ! Cut it out.
" Tres Bon," 606.—C'est Pourri, Pourri Mon-
sieur, Napoo.
Artillery, 3092. —You fired a " dud.
Blackheads, 4th Battalion.—These are due to the
fact that when you wash you only polish the back
of your neck with common soap. However, you 1
case has been passed to the beauty specialist.
No. 99920. —It is terrible that your disease is
not understood. Read "The Doctor's Dilemma"
by Bernard Shaw. For goodness sake be careful.
Anxious. —The crutches and walking sticks be-
longing to the " Parkhouse Flying Corps" have
not yet been discovered. Come on the day before
we reach Australia.
Nosey Parker.—-Yes! The sigh of relief given
by the soldier, named "Windy," when submarine
Guard was washed out, did blow a ship out of her
course.
8010 Pip.—Your sleeplessness needs careful
dieting. Try eating less jam.


At Sea.
THE LYTTELTONIK.
Nov., 1917.
Mac. • N.—"Oh! La, La!" also Struth ! ! like-
wise Pish Tush! ! !
Bombardier.—Yes, ollicers are fever and disease
proof, and so are always allowed ashore at Tropi-
cal Ports.
W. McD. asks : Was Shakespeare classified B2i>
when he wrote "To be or not to be"? Referred
to* the S.M.O.
Peter. —Your query, "When is a rope not a
rope " has been referred to the Chief Engineer.
The Miller.—Your poem commencing " I caught
a cold a beauty, Was paraded sick, and all I got
was No. 9 and duty," has been handed to Sergt.
Mitchell.
DIVINE SERVICE.
Although the Transport "M " does not boast
a Padre among its complement, Divine Services
have been regularly conducted 011 board, Mr. A.
V. Soul, the Y.M.C.A. representative, having
charge of the C. of E. and other Protestant de-
nominations, while Major J. H. • O'Halloran has
officiated on behalf of the Roman Catholic faith.
CONCERTS.
Saturday evening Concerts have been regularly
arranged by Mr. A. Y. Soul, and held on the for-
ward Mess Deck. All ranks have contributed to
the programme, and considerable talent has been
displayed by many performers, among whom might
be mentioned the Ship's Captain, Captain Hayter,
who possesses a very robust voice.
Tonk.—Your story about " Why did the Cap-
Australia is the cleanest, sweetest, healthiest,
tain Hayter or the Scarlett Soul" had a similar sunniest, happiest, and everythingelsest country in
fate. the whole blooming world. Amen.




¥ •——•—•—'——— —— *—•—•—•—f
I "Co
) From
t c%Cy jdddress is
I
)
Australian Expeditionary Force
)
)
)
I
h




