

THE RETURN
OF THE
Royal Australian Navy
AND OF THE
Australian Imperial Forces
WITH WHICH IS INCORPORATED
A NEW, REVISED AND ENLARGED EDITION
OF THE
Return of the Anzac.
Mr. Linter—Dear Sir. —Your poems breathe the true
atmosphere of war.—Yours sincerely,
HARRY LAUDER.
Melbourne, May 7, 1919.
The following poem is designed to commemorate
the consummation of the greatest war in which the
British Empire has been engaged. Minstrels may
be inspired in other climes to sing the cessation
of hostilities; therefore, the theme of this poem is
"The Return of the Royal Australian Navy and of
the Australian Imperial Forces." Of the valour
and heroism displayed by the navy on the sea, and
the army in the field of battle, the poem takes
little or no cognisance, as future historians will
more properly assume the task of depicting the
scenes in which Australian valour triumphed over
the military and naval skill and might of the
enemy, and will pay the glowing tribute enshrin-
ing the memory of the heroic dead. For we, as
yet, are perhaps too near those scenes to perceive
their real proportion and greatness. The composi-
tion is dedicated, with every sentiment of esteem
and veneration, to the members of the Royal Aus-
tralian Navy and of the Australian Imperial Forces,
whose prowess on the sea and in the field is equalled
only by their modest stillness and humility in the
piping times of peace.
LAVENDER LINTER.


CRITICISMS.
Of the criticisms which have been received concerning
the poem, the following are selected for publication. The
Rev. Father McKenna writes :
St. John's Presbytery,
Heidelberg, May 5, 1919.
Dear Sir, —I have read your poem with great pleasure,
and I am sure it will find its way into every home in the
Commonwealth. —I am, yours faithfully,
(Signed) M. F. McKENNA.
In "The Return of the Anzacs" the author takes
a now familiar event and handles it with poetic
fancy. Each successive narrator uses a different
metre, each of which seems to befit its user. There
are a few lines which fall below the standard of the
rest. The culminating "Hymn of Victory" is the
best portion of the poem, and leads on to a final
vision of the lasting "Peace" to which all are look-
ing forward.
(Signed) THOS. C. ROBINSON, Capt. Chaplain.
16. A.. G. H. MACLEOD.
I have read with great pleasure Mr. Linter's
fine poem, which eloquently expresses the feelings
awakened by the return of the Australian army.
(Signed) G. M. MUIR.
CONTENTS.
PART I.
Recitation.
The Song of the Cruiser Grey.
Recitation.
Song: As When Sweet Lips Meet Lips as Soft and
Sweet.
Recitation.
The Song of the Moon.
Recitation.
Song: We that Go Down in Our Ships to the Sea.
Recitation.
The Song of the Wind.
Recitation.
Song: He Will Come No More, Maiden Weeping.
PART 11.
Recitation.
Song: All Hail to Thee, My Native Land.
Recitation.
Song: I Left Old France in a Dinkum Trance.
Recitation.
Song: At the Hour of Milking There's Nothing but
Lilting.
Recitation.
Song: The Song of the Profiteer.
Recitation.
Song: Soft as the Fall of the Dew is Their Sleep.
Recitation.
Sister's Song: Mine Eyes Have Seen the Glory of
the War that Ye have Won.
Recitation.
Song: Hymn of Victory.
Recitation.
Song: PEACE.


Part I.
RECITATION.
The watch is past; and o'er the deep hlue sea
The Austral ships are sweeping in their pride,
And lifting wave and wild wind rushing free
Tell out their joy as on the victors ride.
Their flag was hailed by men of fair renown
In seas where once the mighty Nelson fought,
What time he broke the power of Denmark's crown,
And peace and glory to his country brought.
But from the scant, pale ray of polar star,
'Neath which the winds the seas for ever toss,
As things of life the ships have wandered far
Where lasting summer greets the Southern Cross.
And to the deck of her that leads the way
The sailors come to catch the first, glad sight
Of dune or range, of headland, cape, or bay,
That lies in beauty 'neath the glowing night.
How sweet the moonbeams sleep upon the deck,
And on the face of those still waters fair;
'Tis hard to think the wasted, battered wreck
Of some fair ship has ever drifted there.
Yet, as the sailor views the tranquil scene,
He thinks of that fair ship, the cruiser grey,
That fell a victim to the submarine,
And tunes his voice to sing her haunting lay:
"THE SONG OF THE CRUISER GREY."
"Ye may hear the song of the cruiser grey
When the mists have gone from the German sea,
And the west winds blow, and the wavelets play,
While the sea-mews scream in their boundless
glee.
"With a heavy curb the big Dreadnoughts ride,
But the cruiser lightly bestrides the wave;
And she bounds away o'er the heaving tide
In her eager search for a foeman brave.
"As a hawk she watched for the wary foe,
And away she flew at her destined prey;
And her iron hail fell high and low
On the rending deck and the flashing spray.
"But a tin-fish pierces the cruiser's side
Ere the victory's won and the fight is o'er;
And the grey ship plunges beneath the tide,
And sinks to rest on the ocean's floor.
"On the slimy ooze of the sea's lone bed
Her crew are sleeping their last, long sleep;
While the waves and the winds above their head
Sing the cruiser's song in their wild, glad sweep."
RECITATION.
And there was one among the gallant crew
Who often spoke with pride of his dear home,
And of the winsome maidens that he knew
And loved, ere he went forth afar to roam.
Yet was his speech, withal, too frank and free;
He spoke of things a wiser youth would hide
And oft loud laughter floated o'er the sea
At some quaint thing he spoke with honest pride


Thus when he told of one fair, rustic maid, —
A girl whose hair was of a yellow hue,
And whose sweet eyes were of a deeper shade
Than any flower, or sky, or ocean's blue;
Who used to run at eve upon the lawn
With feet uncumbered with a servile shoe,
And how she ran more graceful than a fawn,
More swift than wind, more light than fall of
dew,
His mates made him the butt of their rude wit;
And woke his pale and ineffectual ire;
But on this night he found occasion fit
To sing of her with all a minstrel's fire.
"Give me," said he, "the reed to tune my voice,
That I may sing of that sweet girl of mine,
And I shall make the murmuring waves rejoice,
And warm your hearts as with a draught of wine.
And till the mem'ry of this night will fade,
Whene'er ye see a woman passing fair,
Ye'll think of that bright, winsome, rustic maid,
Her snow-white feet and yellow, flowing hair."
SONG.
"As when sweet lips meet lips as soft and sweet
The flowerets spring to kiss her shining feet,
And when she walks along the dewy sod
The eye can scarcely see where she has trod,
So lightly touch her feet the slender grass
It scarcely bends as they in fleetness pass.
"The sun's warm rays fall on her auburn hair,
And find a light as noonday glory there;
The deep blue sky beholds in her fair eye
A hue as soft as ever shone on high;
The bloom of beauty gilds her perfect face
O'er which bright smiles in joy each other chase.
"On her at eve the dewy leaf and flower
Pour their rich fragrance in a living shower;
But to the leaf and flower her breath goes up
And fills with sweeter scent their fragrant cup;
The swan and emu envy her the grace,
Which in each limb their jealous eyes can trace.
"But sweeter than the charm of hue and line
To eyes more keen to see their worth than mine,
Are those bright features of her regal mind
That in high deeds of love and mercy find
Their due expression, and their great reward,
By hut and cave, by lake and sylvan sward."
RECITATION.
Among the crew there was a sombre wight,
Who turned from men to gaze at moon and star,
To him they gave the reed, and with his might
He spoke and sang while rolled his voice afar.
"Let lovers sing in praise of woman's charms
Of curl and tint, of form and lip and eye;
And poets rave of shining feats of arms
Which thrill us for an hour and then pass by.
But 'tis the sailor's deep and pure delight
To sing, in strains that speak the glowing soul,
Of her that rules the sweet and pensive night,
And floods with light the earth from pole to pole.
To every sailor's heart three things are dear:
The sea, the wind, the moon; and of the three
The moon is ever dearest far; then hear
How oft upon my watch she sings to me."


THE SONG OF THE MOON-
"To the earth below I seem all aglow,
But in me is no heat;
No plant, shrub, or tree can be found upon me,
No birds their light wings beat,
And never a lair on my mountains bare
Is seen by any eye;
The waves of the deep around me ne'er sweep,
My river beds are dry;
In my spaces long there is heard no song,
No moan or wail of pain,
No soft breezes blow; no clouds sift their snow,
Nor send out hail or rain;
Whatever there be of glory in me,
Comes from the kingly sun;
I reflect his light on the earth's short night;
Light of my own I've none.
"Yet I rule the night by an ancient right
While stars around me gleam,
And their bright rays flow to my beams below,
As creeks into a stream;
A.nd the streamlet bright of our wedded light
Falls on the earth below;
On its vales and hills, its rivers and rills,
And mountains capped with snow,
And over the path where the sea in wrath
Awakes its loudest tone,
And where its waves flow when the light winds
blow
Soft in a warmer zone.
And beneath my beams the icicle gleams
O'er the explorer's grave,
And the icebergs creep in the wild wave's sweep
Where the great blizzards rave.
"I heap up the tide of the oceans wide
As men heap up their grain;
And drive it ashore with a mighty roar
To hurl it back again;
And over the sea, where the winds blow free,
I love to pour my light
When the tall ships sail through the swelling gale
With white wings glist'ning bright;
For the sea is mine, and on her I shine
With all a lover's pride,
Till her strong, deep breast scorns the thought of
rest,
And heaves with boundless tide;
At the end of days, when I hide my rays,
She moans in grief and pain,
Till my bright'ning light illumes the night
On her sweet face again.
" 'Neath my yellow beams, by murmuring streams
True lovers fondly stray;
And speak in my ears the hopes and fears
They hide from gaudy day;
I mark when the light of their eyes grows bright
As joys their bosoms thrill;
And I hear the sigh on the breeze go by
Soft as a purling rill.
For joys of the earth from the hour of birth
Are mingled yet with pain;
And with ill is fraught the piercing thought
They may not meet again;
But I lure away from their spirits gay
The thought they deeply fear;
And I waken still all the hopes that thrill
The hearts to me so dear.
"At his cottage door when his work is o'er
The toiler takes his ease;
While under my ray his young children play,
And climb upon his knees;
And the mother smiles at the father's wiles
His children's love to gain,


While her eye grows bright with a sweeter light
Than shines on earth or main;
I look in disdain when the great man's train
In pride goes sweeping by;
For in spite of all that gleams in his hall,
The springs of love are dry;
And a loveless life is yet full of strife
Wherever man may dwell;
But love is supreme where my bright rays gleam
O'er the cot in the dell.
"When the big clouds rise in the midnight skies,
And the live thunder leaps,
As a hunted stag, from a mountain crag,
Where the great eagle sleeps,
I scatter my beams where the lightning gleams,
And the hail and the rain
Their trackless path find through the rushing wind
To the hill and the plain;
I watch till the last of the storm is past,
And then in earth and sky
I form the bow that rose ages ago
On Noah's gladdened eye;
The green and the blue and the saffron hue
Cling to the cloud alway,
Till the morn arise and the sweet bow dies
In the eye of the day."
RECITATION.
He ceased; and from the deck there rose a roar
Of wild applause, and some there were who
vowed
That they would visit Venus' shrine no more,
But turn to altars where they ne'er had bowed.
Yet if the moon no votaries can find
Save in the men that sail the ships at sea,
The thought will often come into her mind,
No goddess has such worshippers as she.
For sailors' love is of the wind and sea,
And of the clouds that through the heavens
range,
Thai, are, though bright and beautiful and free,
Constant in nothing but eternal change.
But this apart, it is unseemly still
To scan a fault in those whom we hold dear,
And from the theme we'll turn with eager will
Another sailor's voice in song to hear.
Pure as the sea his tone breaks on the ear,
Deep as the sea his tone floats o'er the wave,
And earth holds nothing half so sweet to hear,
Nor hides she aught so sweet within the grave.
SONG.
"We that go down in our ships to the sea
View in our joy the great wonders of God,
Here in its pride the wild wind rushes free,
Here the leviathan has its abode.
"From distant zones away down in a dale
Icebergs come forth at the call of the sun,
They shape their course by the current and gale,
Current that still towards the bright line doth
run.
"Here is an emblem of purity found,
Brightness that shames the sweet maiden's fair
eye,
Music divine in the wind's swelling sound,
Charm never failing endearing the sky.


"Oft when the storm rises out of the hreeze,
Lifting the wave and the ship up to heaven,
Reeling as drunken with wine on the lees,
We cry in grief as with fear we are riven.
"Down in the deep where our brave comrades
sleep,
Sun's brightest rays never shed a faint gleam,
Winds never sigh, and the waves never sweep,
Naught e'er disturbs the long glorious dream."
RECITATION.
And there was one whose sire was wont to be
A maker of weird almanacs that told
The fate of kings and men of high degree,
And if the weather would be hot or cold.
He knew the time a barn-door cock would crow,
The hour at which a cow would lick her calf,
The day on which a cloud would sift its snow,
The year in which an unborn child would laugh.
He knew how many pints of water lay
Within the basin of the Tasman Sea;
How many sharks swam in Port Phillip Bay,
How many leaves grew on a blue-gum tree.
He knew the names of all the winds that blow —
Indeed, he loved the winds the best of all,
And, like his sire, the son would sometimes go
At midnight on the deck to hear them call.
Unto the son the sailors gave the reed,
And when its last, wild note had died away,
He braced himself to sing with strength and speed
What all agreed to call a breezy lay.
SONG OF THE WIND.
By the bright sun kist, I blow where I list,
But no one yet can say,
Though he hear my sound that he now has foand
The secret of my way:
And whither I go the wisest may know
When he in language plain,
To the high and low, and the dull can show
How thought starts in the brain.
I scorn the old thought that I can be caught,
And tied in hempen bags;
And carried away to some distant bay
As stores of rotten rags;
There's nothing so free as I on the sea,
Nothing so strong and so gay;
The shore binds the sea: but what can bind me
When I go out to play?
The place of my birth may be the green earth
On mountain, vale, or lea;
Or the deep, blue sky, when the clouds go by
On their way from the sea;
Wherever it be, it is dear to me
As to a son of earth;
And I hold in scorn the mortal that's born,
Or high or low his birth,
Whose heart never burns whenever he turns
In thought to his own land;
But heedless can stray in the light of day
Along an alien strand.
And I love full well the old ocean's swell,
That rose ere earth was given;
Or the veil that lay o'er its boundless sway
By primal light was riven.
7


I sieep on the stream when the sun's bright beam
Pierces the depths below;
And I take my rest on the mountain's crest,
In the lap of the snow;
And I lay me down on the iceberg's crown
Far in the Arctic zone;
And dream not of ill though the wild waves still
Break to their loudest tone;
And I go to sleep on the mighty deep
As a babe on the breast;
For the earth and sea are as one to me
When I have need of rest;
But the sleep and rest I love the best
Come in some Eden fair,
When my eyelids close near a dewy rose
Breathing its fragrance there.
I rend the blue rock with a mighty shock,
And cleave the sea in twain;
And turn in my haste to a dreary waste
The rich and fertile plain;
I bury the vine, the temple, and shrine,
The sceptre, crown, and ball;
Vain symbols of power which last but an hour
To bind men in a thrall.
I bear on my wings to the tombs of kings
And cities of renown
The small grains of sand from the ocean's strand
All light as thistle down;
And the sand hides them all; tomb, city, and wall,
Far out of human sight;
Nor shall they return till the bright fires burn
On the last judgment night.
With all their sails set and all dripping wet,
The tall ships sullen stand,
As the rain squalls rise in the darkling skies,
And pass from sea to land;
But when I arise in the sunset skies
Another sight is seen;
I change the dark hue of the sky to blue;
To white, the sea's pale green.
I lift up the sea in my boundless glee
As an angry bull the loam,
And hurl it before to the distant shore,
A wall of hissing foam;
And ere the look-out on the prow cries out:
"Wind to the larboard, ho!"
I strike the tall mast that groans to the blast;
The sea the hull below.
'Tis well with the ship whose canvas will rip
And tear to let me go;
With the mariner that has charge of her,
And the smart crew below;
Swift orders are made, and swiftly obeyed,
And the taut ropes go free;
And the ship rides high with a groan and sigh
As I sweep to the lee;
But woe to the ship whose sails do not rip
Nor tear to let me go,
To the mariner that has charge of her
And the dull crew below;
I press the ship down on the huge wave's crown
As a bird on the lea;
And a sorry speck is the helpless wreck
On the face of the sea.
Though onward I sweep o'er the roaring deep,
Yet think I must and will,
Of the wreck I made in the evening's shade,
And the hearts that are still;
For the sailor boy was the pride and joy
Of hearts both fond and true,
That thrilled with delight when he came in sight
Across the ocean blue;
But eyes that were bright are now dim as night,
And cheeks, once red, are pale,


And the tone so sweet, his coming to greet,
Is turned into a wail;
In their restless sleep the lone widows weep
As they dream of their dead;
But of those that sleep in the mighty deep,
Their blood is on their head.
The mariner knows wherever he goes
Of things the normal trend;
His vessel must sail with the swelling gale,
Or be flung on its beam end;
And he has the vim to enable him
This needful truth to see,
He must sail his ship to the far-off rip
In sweet accord with me;
I am but the slave of the Will that gave
The sailor heart to roam,
And the vision clear his vessel to steer
O'er hills of rolling foam;
And blow I must to fulfil the trust
That is reposed in me,
To carry away the ships of the day
O'er glad seas flowing free.
I scatter with ease the germs of disease,
Wherever they may be found,
And bring health to all in hamlet and hall,
And sweeten all around;
On the tall Plane trees I cull the green leaves,
And cut away the dry;
And drink up the dew in its silver hue
Ere morn breaks in the sky.
When the gentle shower falls on leaf and flower
I bear their scent away;
And the maidens smile as they stray awhile
In fields of fragrant hay.
I breathe on the grass as at morn I pass;
And, ere the sun goes down,
The mantle of green on the sweet earth seen
Is turned to russet brown.
Then down through the gorge I roar as a forge,
And smite the startled lake;
And its waters rise to the lowering skies
As a mad-headed snake;
And the fish that swim in the lake's clear rim
Flee to their lowly beds,
As I lash with hail the fisherman's sail,
And tear it into shreds;
And no son of man since the world began
Has stilled me in my glee,
Save the Man in power, in remembered hour,
On the lake of Galilee.
I laugh at the might of Time in his flight,
And scorn his palsied pace;
And I oft deride the deep-flowing tide,
That dares with me to race;
Were it not for me the much-lauded sea
Would wallow as old swine;
For, but for the wave at the beach and cave,
Its liftings all are mine;
In his slimy cot he might lie and rot,
Wrapped in his swaddling bands;
Nor dream of the vim which lies hid in him
Till roused by my strong hands;
But I veil my face in due awe of Space,
And also of the Light;
For these in their zone are the robe and throne
Of Him in Whom is might.
In the hoary past, with resistless blast,
I mowed the forests down,
The shrubs and the reeds and the stalwart weeds,
To make black coal and brown;
And even to-day, in my sport and play,
I tear up by the roots


The gum, box, and pine, the fir and the vine
As though they were but shoots;
Then upwards I sweep towards the shining steep
Where angel feet have trod,
And return again to the sons of men
With messages from God.
On my swift, strong wings the dread King of kings
Has deigned a while to ride;
Then I mourn in shame for my haughty claim,
And wail me for my pride.
RECITATION.
And then a youth of meek and gentle mien
Tuned his low voice to sing of some lone maid,
Whose lover perished in a submarine
When he upon the foe made hapless raid.
The lusty life was coursing through his veins,
The glow of health was on his noble brow,
When his ship fouled the foemen's anchor chains,
And sank like lead beneath the vessel's prow.
SONG.
"Far off among the Gippsland mountains is a
stream
On whose rich banks four happy settlers made
their home,
And there in time fair children loved to play, or
dream
Away the golden hours, nor ever wished to roam.
"The glory of the morn is in their face and eyes,
The stillness of the midnight lies upon their
soul,
The meekness of the dove in their bright spirit vies
With chasteness of the ice that binds the
southern pole.
"And with the flight of years the maidens lovely
grow,
In arts of husbandry the youths wax strong and
wise,
And oft the parents' wistful eyes with pleasure
glow
To view the flame of love in their dear children
rise.
"At dewy eve sweet Ruth and Leo wander far
Rapt in the bliss which only love's young dream
can know;
And bursting bud and flower, and rising moon and
star,
Shed o'er the lovers' heads their fragrance and
their glow.
"But when the blast of mighty war fell on the ear,
And England's piercing cry for help came o'er
the sea,
Young Leo left his home and all that he held dear,
And sailed away to fight that men might still be
free.
"But He who rules the fate of men by night and
day,
Whether upon the mountain high or ocean deep,
Had willed the daring youth should perish in the
bay,
And on its slimy bed find everlasting sleep.
"And when the wail had died upon the mountain
stream,
And Ruth came back from woe fragile and weak
as breath,
She often sang in waking hour and troubled dream
Of him she never ceased to love e'en in his
death."


RUTH'S SONG.
"He will come no more, maiden weeping,
He will come no more to thee;
Now in death he is sweetly sleeping-
Down and away in the sea.
"Nevermore shall thine arms entwine him,
Nevermore for him thou'lt call;
Though in love thou may'st enshrine him
As bravest and best of all.
"O'er his brow the water is sweeping,
The smile still brightens his eye;
Then why dost thou sit, maiden weeping,
Hearest thou not his glad cry?"
"And then once more along the river's brim she
strays,
As though she went to seek for him she ne'er
can find,
And so in vain she spends the weary nights and
days,
Robbed by the war of all the glory of her mind."
Part II
RECITATION.
Eastward the noble ship has ploughed her way
Through deep, blue seas and oceans rolling high,
And now at morn in some sweet, sheltered bay,
She lies in peace beneath an Austral sky.
With firm, proud step, a soldier treads her deck,
The light of joy illumes his fair, young face:
No more of dangers past his soul shall reck,
Nor look away to far-off years of grace.
With him the kindling moment —now —is all;
Earth's highest truth stands naked to his eye;
He sees 'tis best to yield him to the thrall
Of those deep things that swift are passing by.
And so, when comrades speak in accents grave
Of scenes now past on Europe's fateful shore,
His eyes still sweep across the tiny wave
That bars his footsteps to his father's door.
And till the word which bids the good ship speed
Once more upon her way is heard again,
He sits him down, and takes his oaten reed,
And plays an air which lures men to his strain.
The air is redolent of mighty trees,
Which grow upon the banks of some full stream;
Of wattle-bloom soft swaying in the breeze,
And festooned creepers in the sun's bright beam
And fertile vales, o'er which the golden grain
Stands high to fill the toiler's heart with pride;
And fruit and grass upon the sweeping plain,
And wildflowers blooming on a mountain side.
And when the last, low note has died away
Upon the face of those deep waters bright,
He lays aside his reed, and sings his lay
To his loved land that lies before his sight:


SONG.
"All liail to thee, my native land,
That rises to my sight;
Bright oceans lave thy circling strand,
Thy mountains stand in light.
"The bloom of youth is on thy cheek,
Love glows in thy sweet eye,
As some fair bride, with aspect meek,
Thy sylvan ranges lie.
"To waken joys for maids and swains,
Thy golden wattles grow,
And far away, through sweeping plains,
Thy lordly rivers flow.
"As keen to see thy beauty's sway
The ocean burst his band,
And sleeps in many a tranquil bay
Along thy golden strand.
"No fleeting gleam of martial fame
Can add to thy delight:
Thou art as fair as when earth came
From ocean's bed and night.
"To thee in boundless, heaving tide
My love now flows along;
In thee I joy, as in a bride,
To thee I sing my song."
RECITATION.
Soft murmurs of applause from comrades near
Greet his sweet song, and wistful eyes are cast
Across the bay, till one, to folly dear,
Assumes the reed and sings of scenes now past.
The love of mirth stirs in his reckless heart,
The light of mirth shines in his roguish eye;
He sings of one whom he misnames a "tart,"
And who deceived him as the hours went by.
It was a wild and mirth-provoking strain,
At which his comrades roared their deep delight
Yet some laughed loudly to conceal the pain
Of hopeless love that rose before their sight.
SONG.
"I left old France in a dinkum trance,
With scratches to remind me,
When I awoke, with a soft, sad shock,
I'd left the war behind me;
A Sister said, as I lay in bed,
In dear, old, merry Blighty,
'Get up, old man, as fast as you can,
And don this little nighty.'
"When 1 was well I went for a spell
Somewhere in Piccadilly,
And lost my heart to a gay, young 'tart,'
Which was extremely silly;
Around my waist, to my bloomin' taste,
She slipped an arm so lily,
I thought the snow from the plains below
Had come to Piccadilly.


"With childlike air, she oft kissed me there,
And made me feel so kindly;
I thought my heart would break for the 'tart'
I'd leave in tears behind me;
And oft she said, as she laid her head,
With its fair curls, beside me,
'l'll rue the day that you go away,
Whatever may betide me.'
"And when word came to my gay, young flame,
She soon would lose her Billy,
She wept aloud in sight of the crowd,
And called me her 'dear Willy';
And, blow me tight, if she wasn't right,
I was a willy-nilly;
She pinched my purse, and left me to curse
My luck in Piccadilly."
RECITATION.
And when the laughter died along the bay,
A youth of stalwart frame and ruddy face,
Whose home amid the Gippsland mountains lay,
Sang his rude song with no attempt at grace.
SONG.
"At the hour of milking there's nothing but lilting,
Lilting of songs that are soft, sweet, and gay;
For fortune no longer at pleasure is tilting;
Home are the lads who for years were away.
"At the hour of drinking there's nothing but
clinking—
Clinking of glasses that sparkle with wine:
And though Mum is winking, my Dad keeps on
drinking
Health to his laddie, and health, too, to thine.
"At the hour of gloaming there's nothing but
roaming,
Roaming with lassies both lovely and gay,
And none thinks of groaning or weeping or
moaning,
Home are the lads who for years were away.
"At the hour of shearing there's nothing but
jeering,
Jeering at lads who to war would not go;
But who kept 011 leering and shouting and cheering
As though big words would lay the foemen low."
RECITATION.
And there was one among the merry band
Who fetched his blood from Israel's noble breed,
And who, from love of his dear, native land,
Went forth to fight in her deep hour of need.
But with his love of home there also grew
In sweet accord a keen desire for gain,
A predilection which becomes a Jew,
Or Scot from Aberdeen, or roving Dane.
To him they gave the reed, and when his eye
Had run along its slender form, with care
He ran his hand along, then heaved a sigh,
And slow assumed a sad, dejected air.


"Alas," said he, "I think 'tis scarcely meet
That this fine reed, which is so near divine,
And oft has shed the soul of music sweet,
Should fall so swiftly into hands like mine.
"But, by your leave, I'll keep it till I know
What is its worth in pure Australian gold,
And meanwhile sing to make your proud blood flow
In its red channels, sluggish, thick, and cold.
THE SONG OF THE PROFITEER.
"The poets may sing of the bright bird's wing,
Of stream and vale and hill;
But I sing the song of the golden throng
Of coins my pockets fill:
To the god of wealth, in sickness and health,
I pay the tribute dear,
As I count my gains, wrung from tears and pains,
For I'm a profiteer.
"I smile in the morn when the price of corn
Advances ten per cent.,
I laugh at midday when the papers say
There's a big rise in rent;
I am wild with mirth at the evening's birth,
When up go wine and beer;
By the midnight hour I'm drunk with power,
As suits a profiteer.
"When the big guns roar on the Flemish shore,
And Death his wallet fills,
I laugh at the fools in the gory pools,
Whose kindred pay my bills;
As the heroes fight by day and by night,
And fill the world with din,
I ply the old trade my fathers made,
And rake the dollars in.
"And I care not, I, if the orphans cry
When there is lack of bread,
And the widow seeks from the shrunken cheeks
To wipe the tears they shed;
The walls of their lair may be low and bare,
Their beds may be hard and small;
But my heart is gay, by night and by day.
Mine are the profits all.
"1 lend my new car to the big bazaar,
Where women sell their toys;
In the Mayor's sight I offer my mite
For comforts for the boys:
When the lads get praise in some soaring phrase,
I storm and shout and cheer,
But I bless the day that they went away,
For I'm a profiteer.
"My doctrines may hold with the love of gold.
But not with the love of home;
Yet the tenets of all the creeds I hold
From Palestine to Rome,
And deep in my heart I love the Hun's part,
In spite of gibe and jeer;
'Tis the law of man, let him take who can,
And I'm a profiteer."
RECITATION.
A silence deep as death upon them fell,
A sense of wrong in their young bosoms glowed,
Till one who loved his fallen comrades well
Tuned his low voice, and smooth these accents
flowed.


SONG.
"Soft as the fall of the dew is their sleep,
And fair as the clime where their mem'ry dwells,
By the shore, where the ocean's proud waves sweep
High, onward, in joy to the Dardanelles.
"And deep as their sleep is the shade that falls
From the graceful pine and the cypress tree,
When the noonday sun on the sweet wind calls
To sing o'er the graves by the deep, blue sea.
"No matron or maid from our own fair clime
May bedeck the graves with a floweret bright,
Fond emblem that fades ere the flight of time
Leaves it to die in the dew of the night.
"Yet ages unborn shall revere the bier
Of our sires and sons who for freedom bled,
And see through the gleam of the gushing tear
Eternal honour bloom above their bed."
RECITATION.
SISTER'S SONG ON RETURN OF THE
AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCES.
But who can tell what rapture fills the soul,
What veneration quickens in the heart,
What tender passions o'er the spirit roll,
When some sweet sister comes to sing her part?
"Her hands had staunched the bleeding of their
wounds,
Her voice had soothed the anguish of their soul,
Her skill revived them from their heavy swounds,
And half its sorrows from their dark fate stole.
Her ears had heard the deep-mouthed cannon's
roar
Break high o'er hill and valley lying dim;
Her eyes had seen the horror of the war
In shattered nerve and mutilated limb.
And she, alas! had seen the human soul
rtush from its bright abode in gentle youth,
While from his eye the glance of anguish stole,
And wakened all her woman's eager ruth.
And yet she saw and felt somewhere within
The veil that lay upon the face of all,
That bright and good would triumph over sin,
As mercy triumphed o'er man's primal fall.
And so she sang the soul of mighty strife,
The instrument by which the Maker still
Doth cleanse, enrich, and glorify our life,
And move us to obey His righteous will.
SONG.
"Mine eyes have seen the glory of the war that ye
have won,
And an empire's stainless honour bequeathed from
sire to son;
In seeming weakness from his sleep a lordly lion
rose,
And, shaking off his heavy sloth, rushed forth to
meet his foes.


"The foe's dark path is strewn with deeds that set
just ire aflame,
While our highway lies all unmarked by trace of
ill or shame;
And never yet has our proud name shone brighter
than to-day,
Or our race shown itself more fit to wield imperial
sway.
"Of stronger love and deeper faith we'll reap a
boundless yield
From each wild strife that ye have waged upon the
stricken field,
Then, glory to the Lord of hosts, from whom all
glories are,
And glory to the noble men whose fame shines
bright and far."
RECITATION.
A padre then assumed the simple reed,
And tuned his voice to sing in soaring strain
The thoughts which form of praise the fitting meed,
For victory on mountain, vale, and plain.
SONG.
"THE HYMN OF VICTORY."
Lord God, by Whom our monarchs reign,
By Whom our princes nobly live.
By Whom in arms we still maintain
The empire Thou hast deigned to give.
From Thee alone high honour flows,
To Thee alone is due the praise,
That we, for triumph o'er our foes.
In glad and soaring accents raise.
Thy tempest rends the granite rock,
And cleaves the pathless sea in twain;
To meet the whirlwind's dreadful shock
The hoary mountains rise in vain;
And what is man that he should dare
To draw the sword against Thy laws,
And in his arrogance to swear
Deep enmity against Thy cause?
In pride of power the foemen came;
Their legions burst their ancient bands,
To add yet more to their high fame,
They devastated many lands;
Through deeds more foul than ocean's slime,
Down to the depths our children went;
The foemen hymned their loathsome crime,
And blasphemy the heavens rent.
In patience Thou didst wait, O Lord,
The heavy years dragged slow away,
And darker deeds defiled the sword,
New horrors filled each closing day;
At length, O Lord, Thou didst arise,
Thy shining turned our night to day,
And happy omens filled the skies,
That Thou hadst sealed our ancient sway,
By Israel's plains and lofty hills,
Where Jordan's sacred waters flow,
Our foemen fled as mountain rills,
And melted as the summer snow;
To wreak their ire on loyal Rome,
As wolves that rush upon the fold,
In pride our foemen left their home,
And died on Alpine mountains cold.


The rivers of the West beheld
The tide of war arise in vain;
Thy hand the flowing waters held,
And drew them back o'er hill and plain;
And when their strength had ebbed away,
And we were as the boundless sea;
Thou savedst them in mercy's day,
For Thou, O Lord, art more than we.
Our fathers knew 'Thee in their day,
And gloried to be known of Thee;
To them on land Thou gavest sway;
Thou gavest sway upon the sea;
The gates of all our foes are Thine:
To us in grace Thou gavest all;
By waving palm and lofty pine,
We hold them still in our deep thrall.
As is our triumph now, O Lord,
So shall it be through all the years;
Our sons shall sway the victor's sword
In spite of all their doubts and fears:
The seer, in high, prophetic strain,
Sang of the fate that waits us yet:
We shall be great till Thou dost reign
Through Thine own Son on Olivet.
RECITATION.
And when the hymn of praise had died away,
The Anzacs begged the padre for a song
Of that sweet Peace who now has set her sway
The whole wide world and rolling sea along.
"SONG OF PEACE.''
East called to West, the South invoked the North,
To arms the heroes of the nations sprang;
With sounds of war the distant islands rang,
In serried ranks the ends of earth came forth.
With seas of blood and boundless treasure spent,
The guerdon of high victory was bought,
The stars for us in their steep courses fought,
And potent aid the winds and billows lent.
And He, from Whom alone high honour flows,
Who in his balance weighs the deeds of men,
And recompenses to them all again,
Gave us great victory o'er all our foes.
In her lone banishment, sweet, gentle Peace,
From whose soft eyes the tears of sorrow fall.
Now hears with joy the voice of victory call
For her to come and from her sorrows cease.
In snow-white mantle clad, she swift descends,
Fair garlands of white flowers her temples grace,
And winsome smiles enwreath her primrose face,
While earthwards she her gentle hands extends.
A milk-white dove sits on her lily hand,
With outstretched wings as ready to obey,
And mount the glowing heights of perfect day
At primal sound of that fair maid's command.
And now the dove on high spreads out her wings,
The blood-soaked earth assumes its native hue;
And ocean's waves roll on in unstained blue,
While new-born hope o'er all its glories flings.


Broad streams of balm from many fragrant springs
Plow forth to heal the world's deep wounds anew,
And pity's tears the deep-set scars bedew,
And rob the wounds of all their bitter slings.
Stern eyes that blazed with bitter scorn and hate,
Soft eyes that late were dim through boding fears,
Aglow with love, look forward to the years
When men shall meet as brothers at the gate.
The zephyrs tune their slender notes to sing,
In melody the sunlit rivers flow;
To speak the joy of meaner things below
The fountains gush, and modest flowerets spring.
And who shall say in worlds beyond our ken
No note of joy awakes to swell the song,
That breaks the whole wide earth and sea along.
In that sweet Peace has come to us again.
RECITATION.
And then upon the balmy morning air
Arose the strain that never fails to thrill
The loyal heart, the strain that holds the prayer
That God would bless and save our monarch still.
SONG.
God save our gracious king,
Long live our noble king,
God save our king;
Send him victorious,
Happy and glorious,
Long to reign over us,
God save our king!
LAVENDER LINTER.
Victoria, April 22nd, 1919.
J. T, Picken & Son, Printers, Melbourne.
