

THE
MINISTRY
OF HEALING
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
APPOINTED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH RESOLUTION 63 OF THE
LAMBETH CONFERENCE, 1920
Price 6d.
S.P.CK.


THE MINISTRY OF HEALING




THE MINISTRY OF
HEALING
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
APPOINTED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH RESOLUTION 63 OF THE
LAMBETH CONFERENCE, 1920
LONDON
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING
CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE
NEW YORK AND TORONTO ; THE MACMILLAN CO.
1924


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


RESOLUTION 63 of the Lambeth Conference, 1920,
runs as follows :
“For the general guidance of the Church this Con-
ference requests the Archbishop of Canterbury to ap-
point a Committee to consider and report as early as
possible upon the use with prayer of the Laying on
of Hands, of the Unction of the Sick, and other
spiritual means of healing, the finding of such a Com-
mittee to be reported forthwith to the authorities of
the national, provincial, and regional Churches of the
Anglican Communion.”
In accordance with the above Resolution I ap-
pointed a Committee ‘ ‘ to consider and report as early
as possible upon the use with prayer of the Laying
on of Hands, of the Unction of the Sick, and other
spiritual means of healing.” The Bishop of Oxford
was Chairman of the Committee, and the Report
which follows is the outcome of its long and careful
deliberations. The Report has now been formally
presented to me and I circulate it in accordance with
the terms of the Lambeth Conference Resolution.
It will not, however, be supposed that I am thereby
claiming responsibility for what the Report contains.
It claims only to carry the authority of the members
of the Committee by whom it has been prepared.
It will be obvious that they were men of capacity,
learning, and thought, who are well qualified to
handle a difficult subject.
RANDALL CANTUAR.
Novtmber 13, 1923.


The following were appointed by the Archbishop
to serve on the Committee :
The Bishop of Oxford (Chairman).
The Bishop of Southwark.
The Bishop of St. Albans.
The Bishop of St. Edmundsbury and
Ipswich.
The Bishop in Assam.
The Bishop of Goulburn.
Bishop Chandler.
Professor Sir Clifford Allbutt.
Sir Robert Armstrong Jones.
Dr. William Brown.
Dr. Hadffeld.
Dr. W. H. Rivers.
Dr. Jane Walker,
The Rev. Canon A. J. Mason, D.D.
The Rev. The Master of Selwyn College,
Cambridge.
The Rev. Prebendary E. J. Bicknell.
The Rev. W. B. Trevelyan.
The Rev. Canon Streeter.
The Rev. H. Anson.
The Rev. Canon Roseveare.
The Rev. J. R. Pridie.
The Committee sustained a great loss by the death
of Dr. Rivers in July, 1922.


CONTENTS
PAGE
Committee’s Report - - - - 9
Appendix I.—Historical Evidence for a Ministry
of Healing - - - - - 22
Appendix ll.—Forms of Service suggested for
Use at the Anointing of the Sick - - 38




THE MINISTRY OF HEALING
We decided that there were three main heads under
which we should approach our task ;
A. —The historical question—what is the evidence
for what is called the Ministry of Healing,
and what was the precise character of such
a Ministry, if it existed ?
B. —A comparison between the different methods
of healing and the consideration of their
relation to Christian thought.
C. —The question whether a Ministry of Healing
should now be recognised and sanctioned.
A. —Canon Mason kindly undertook to write a
memorandum on the historical question, and this has
been added to our Report as Appendix I.
B. —Prolonged discussion took place on the com-
parison of different methods of healing, and on the
series of problems which such a comparison raised.
In the first place, religious treatment of bodily
illness must be related to other methods of treatment;
and, secondly, religious treatment is seen to aim at
something more than the cure of bodily illness, and to
have in view the restoration of the patient’s whole
nature. This double distinction must be borne in
mind throughout.


The power which heals the body makes use of three
avenues of approach;
x. Material, as surgery, drugs, diet, etc.
2. Psychical, as suggestion and different forms of
mental analysis.
3. Devotional and sacramental.
“ Spiritual ” healing may be said to be that which
makes use of all or any of these factors in reliance
upon God, though in popular use the term is often in-
accurately confined to the last. And in all these
methods of healing faith is, or may be, an important
element, contributing powerfully to the cure; but it
must be noted that, so far as purely physical healing
goes, faith works irrespectively of the grounds on
which it rests. In the third line of approach, where
something more than physical healing is in view, the
character and trustworthiness of the faith are of
primary importance.
1. MATERlAL.— Treatment from this side rests upon
the scientific doctrine that there is a real and objective
virtue in certain vegetable and mineral products, and,
in fact, in all means employed for protecting and pro-
moting bodily health. At the same time drugs often
depend for their effect on the confidence of the
patient both in the physician and the prescription;
that is, faith and suggestion are both already at work.
Still more, the physician is conscious all the time
that he is working with a mysterious partner inherent
in life, which we call the "vis medicatrix natures ,” or
the tendency of an established system to recover its


equilibrium, but the real nature of which, though in
the end all healing depends upon it, no scientific
analysis can reveal.
2. The second line of approach we call PSYCHICAL.
Its general name is psychotherapy, or mental healing;
it includes three main departments ;
(a) Re-education and persuasion.
(b) Suggestion, including auto-suggestion and
hypnotic suggestion.
(c) Methods of mental analysis.
(a) Treatment by re-education and persuasion
aims at mental and moral readjustment by means
of reason and argument. Such cases as aphonia or
functional paralysis can often be effectively treated by
this method.
(b) Suggestion aims rather at influencing sub-
conscious processes, for it is in the subconscious and
unconscious parts of the mind that the source of many
nervous and moral ills lies. These suggestions may
be given to himself by the sufferer, as in auto-sug-
gestion ; or made by another, as in hetero-suggestion;
and in this latter case the suggestion may be made
either under hypnosis or in a quiescent or hypnoidal
condition.
( c ) Analytic methods have as their aim the investi-
gation of what are assumed to be the deepest layers
of the mind, and depend for their success upon the
discovery of latent “complexes" and morbid pro-
cesses which have given rise to the symptoms.


The chief exponents of these methods are Freud
and Jung, although they differ radically in theory
and in practice.
Besides these two exponents there are other schools
of mental analysis followed by many physicians who
do not accept the extreme view of Freud or Jung, and
yet in the main follow their line of investigation.
Whether these theories as to the ultimate origin of
nervous diseases will be confirmed by scientific in-
vestigators of the future is not a matter upon which
the Committee feels itself competent to pass judg-
ment. But since in human experience spiritual
disorder often leads directly to moral and mental
disorders, and indirectly to such physical disorders
as hysteria, it is recommended that those who have
the “cure of souls’’ should be encouraged to study
the psychological principles which lie behind these
various methods of psychical treatment.
But it is important to add that with all the advances
in psychology in the last few years there is still con-
siderable diversity of opinion even amongst experts
on questions both of principle and practice in such
treatment: nor is any of these methods without its
dangers both of a moral and physical kind. Very
frequently, no doubt, illness calls for careful analysis
or investigation into the patient’s relation to
the problems, moral and social, of his own life.
This is clearly an important part of any psycho-
therapeutical treatment, but it should not be carried
out by unqualified persons. It is a great evil when


such analysis is undertaken by persons without
considerable medical experience and not working
in close connection with a well-qualified physician.
It is desirable also that they should have had
training in psychology, ethics, and moral theology.
In unskilled hands forces may be liberated in the
patient’s mind that the amateur healer is incapable
of controlling, and the patient is thereby made
worse. In addition to this the Committee cannot
be blind to the fact that exponents of some of these
methods have departed from their legitimate field of
scientific investigation, and propagated views that are
subversive of both moral and religious principles.
3. The line of approach with which we are more im-
mediately concerned is the DEVOTIONAL and SACRA-
MENTAL. Here the appeal is direct to God as the
immediate source of all life and health without the use
of any material means. It is an appeal which has taken
various forms, as in Christian Science and kindred
doctrines. Within the Church it has occasioned
the revival of systems of healing based on the
redemptive work of our Lord. They all spring
from a belief in the fundamental principle that
the power to exercise spiritual healing is taught
by Christ to be the natural heritage of Christian
people who are living in fellowship with God, and is
part of the ministry of Christ through His Body the
Church; they rest upon a definite doctrine as to the
nature of disease, the object aimed at in its treatment,
and the results which should be expected.


Every sort of curative treatment assumes, obviously,
that disease is an evil to be combated. Theologically
stated, this means that health, or an orderly condition
of body, mind and spirit, is God’s primary Will for
all His children; and that disease, as a specific viola-
tion or falling short of this orderly condition, is not
only to be combated, but to be combated in God’s
Name and as a way of carrying out His Will. It is, of
course, also obvious that disease, like other forms of
evil, is permitted by Him to exist, it may be, as a
result of man’s misuse of his freedom; it may be, as a
stimulus to human sympathy and scientific research;
it may be, as a means of spiritual discipline and
efficiency. But, however it may be brought about, and
in whatever way it may be overruled for good, it is in
itself an evil. 1
In fighting this evil we should recognise the weight
of medical science in matters of diagnosis both on the
physical and mental sides.
With regard to the ultimate end, spiritual healing
aims definitely at the purifying and strengthening
of the whole life, especially the spiritual life as the
centre of personality. This it seeks to do by awakening
the sense of the Power and the Love of God, by em-
phasising the true relationship of the patient to God,
and by helping him to realise the healing presence
1 It is much to be hoped that some of the language used in
the Office of the Visitation of the Sick may be reconsidered
in this connection, and due emphasis given to the principle
just expressed.


of Christ. It is thus spiritual in its origin and aims.
The restoration of the whole man, which is the goal of
spiritual healing, will often include his physical heal-
ing; but this is only a fraction of the work aimed at
and will not be the exclusive preoccupation of the
healer. The success of the treatment will not consist
simply in the achievement of bodily health, but in
raising the man’s whole nature to a higher plane. The
result, when attained, will be spiritual, and indicates
a spiritual cause at work.
With regard to results achieved, these are of
two kinds: firstly, complete or partial bodily re-
covery; secondly, and more important, spiritual
strengthening as in the case of St. Paul, who when
the “ stake ” was not removed, learnt that God’s Grace
was sufficient for him.
To sum up, spiritual healing must not exclude
medical means or methods, which have their due share
in the resulting recovery. When real spiritual treat-
ment has been used we claim that not merely is the
disease healed or alleviated, but the whole nature of
the patient raised to a higher level. In other words, in
spiritual healing the healing of the spirit is primary,
the healing of the body secondary.
C.—ln order to assist us to arrive at a decision
whether and in what form a Ministry of Healing
should be recognised and sanctioned, we appointed
a Sub-Committee to confer with representatives of
different societies working within the Church; it
reported as follows;


“ There is considerable evidence that those who are
definitely applying the truths of Christianity to
patients suffering in mind or body, with the definite
belief and suggestion that it is the Will of God, pro-
claimed by our Lord, that sickness as well as sin
should be overcome, are obtaining remarkable results
in many cases.
“ We found no cases in which those who were prac-
tising ‘spiritual healing’ did not desire to work with
the medical profession.
“ Some of those who came before us believed them-
selves to possess a natural ‘ gift of healing,’ and one
witness regarded this as having a quasi-magnetic
nature; others regarded it as a natural aptitude for
helping the sick, consecrated to religious uses. One
witness regarded it as showing a lack of faith to ask
any question as to physical results.
“ The best and sanest form of healing by spiritual
methods appeared to us to be when the aim was to
relate the whole personality of the patient to the Will
of God, believing that physical harmony would
normally result as a by-product of this harmony, but
laying little stress upon merely physical results, or any
ecclesiastical technique.
“ Our Committee has so far found no evidence of any
cases of healing which cannot be paralleled by similar
cures wrought by psychotherapy without religion, and
by instances of spontaneous healing which often occur
even in the gravest cases in ordinary medical practice.
These facts do not, in our opinion, detract from the


good done by many religious healers; and, where the
religious influence is of a wise and reasonable kind,
greater and more permanent results may be expected
than from non-religious methods.
“No witness desired the licensing of ‘healers.’
“ There was a general desire for the definite
authorisation of the use of anointing.
“ There was a considerable doubt as to the value of
' Services of Healing,’ to which crowds of sick folk
are invited to come to receive spiritual healing. 1
“ We are of opinion that much good might be done
by the appointment of a permanent Committee of
clergy, doctors, and psychologists, to advise the
authorities of the Church on these matters.
1 The Sub-Committee were unable to interview Mr. Hickson
as he was at the time sailing for South Africa ; he informed
them that he had nothing particular that he wished to lay
before them. It may be added that the question of Healing
Missions has engaged the serious attention of the Committee.
It was felt that the terms of reference required the Committee
to deal with principles rather than the special conditions
under which those principles should be applied. The par-
ticular conditions implied by Healing Missions involve
questions of “ mass psychology,” on which the data before the
Committee do not entitle them to go beyond the conclusions
of the Sub-Committee. It is to be noted that some Bishops of
churches overseas, where such missions of healing have taken
place, inform us that, apart from the experience of remark-
able physical cures or incipient cures, the sense of spiritual
revival in the life and work of the Church produced by services
conducted in connection with healing missions has been un-
mistakable. Evidence of a contnuy character has reached us
and many share the doubts expressed by the Sub-Committee.


“ We have not felt called upon to examine witnesses
from the United States or the British Dominions.”
As a result of our deliberations we lay down certain
general principles:
1. The chief work of the Church in regard to
disease is:
(a) To develop in all its members a right attitude
of confidence, love, and understanding towards God :
and to train them to approach all questions of disease
both for themselves and for others in this spirit.
(. b ) To bring together those who care for the soul
and those who care for the body in co-operation.
(c) To insist on hygiene and plain living as part of
the ordinance of God.
2. The Church must sanction methods of religious
treatment of bodily disease, but in doing so must give
full weight to the scientific discoveries of those who
are investigating the interrelation of spirit, mind,
and body.
3. It is not the function of the Church to apply its
means of restoration if no higher end is sought
than the recovery of bodily health. Indeed, to do
this would gravely compromise the meaning and
purpose of the Church’s rites and sacraments. No
sick person must look to the clergyman to do
what it is the physician’s or surgeon’s duty
to do.
4. Whatever the means employed by the Church
emphasis should be laid upon the primary purpose of


deepening the sense of fellowship with God secured
for us in Jesus Christ. Whether the sick person throw
off the sickness or not, the work of the Church will
have been effective if he has thereby found truer peace
of spirit and a more real knowledge of the uplifting
presence and power of Christ.
With regard to the Form of Ministry to be used,
we make the following suggestions:
(a) For purposes of healing, prayer and sacrament
should be used in conjunction. Before any sacra-
mental rites are employed, earnest and united prayer
should be offered on behalf of the sick person in
church as well as by the patient himself and his
friends at home.
(b) Whilst religious methods are applicable to all
cases of sickness, they would seem to be most appro-
priate where moral or intellectual difficulties and per-
plexities have contributed to the disorder. These
deep-lying roots of evil should be dealt with before
any specifically bodily healing is attempted; other-
wise we shall be in danger of dealing with symptoms
and neglecting causes; in which case no thorough or
permanent cure can be hoped for. This preliminary
treatment requires some real knowledge not only of
moral theology but also of psychology; so that it is
desirable that clergymen who give spiritual direction
should be adequately trained and so enabled to give
clear and practical guidance.
In this preliminary treatment an opportunity


should be given to the patient to make a special con-
fession of his sins, and the Priest shall absolve him
if he should “ humbly and heartily desire ” it.
(c) Then might follow treatment more immediately
directed to the complete restoration of the patient.
This may take the form of Unction (t.e., anointing
with oil by a priest), or of the Laying on of Hands
(either by a priest or a lay person), or of both. These
rites have scriptural authority 1 and are sacramental
in the sense that a blessing is sought and received
through the performance of outward and visible
actions. The motive with which they are used is the
dedication of the bodily life of the patient to God’s
Will; and the blessing received will be either restora-
tion of health, or grace to bear sickness patiently.
(1 d ) The whole treatment will end appropriately
with the patient’s reception of Holy Communion,
through which both body and soul are to be “pre-
served unto everlasting life.”
There are, of course, other methods of procedure.
Sometimes prayer may be used alone in private
gatherings of the patient’s friends. Sometimes,
again, a special gift of healing seems to be bestowed
on a particular person, where there is little or no
corporate action of the Church.
We hold that the licensing of individual healers
1 For Unction, St. Mark vi. 13 ; St. James v. 14 ; for Laying
on of Hands, St. Luke iv. 40 ; St. Matt. viii. 3 ; St. Mark v. 23 ;
(xvi. 18); Acts ix. 17.


or the official recognition of healing societies by
ecclesiastical authority is unnecessary and at present
impracticable.
We adopt the opinion expressed by our Sub-
Committee (p. 17) that much good might be done by
the appointment of a permanent Committee of clergy,
doctors, and psychologists to advise the authorities
of the Church on these matters.
(Signed) Hubert M. Oxon.
Cyril Southwark.
Michael St. Albans.
A. St. Edmundsbury and Ipswich.
Herbert, Bishop in Assam.
Lewis Goulburn.
Arthur Chandler.
♦Clifford Allbutt.
William Brown.
J. A. Hadfield.
♦Robert Armstrong Jones.
Jane Walker.
A. J. Mason.
J. O. F. Murray.
E. J. Bicknell.
W. B. Trevelyan.
B. H. Streeter.
H. Anson.
R. P. Roseveare.
J. R. Pridie.
(Dated) August 15, 1923.
* Desires not to associate himself with the recommendation
of the use of Unction.


APPENDIX I
THE HISTORICAL EVIDENCE FOR A
MINISTRY OF HEALING
By Rev. A. J. MASON, D.D.
(In consultation with the Very Rev. the Dean of Wells)
The Teaching of St. James
In considering the subject of a Ministry of Healing,
the well-known passage of St, James forms the
natural starting-point for Christian students.
In the Revised Version the passage runs thus:
“Is any among you suffering ? let him pray. Is any
cheerful ? let him sing praise. Is any among you
sick ? let him call for the elders of the church, and
let them pray over him, anointing [or, having
anointed] him with oil in the name of the Lord : and
the prayer of faith shall save him that is sick, and
the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have com-
mitted sins, it shall be forgiven him. Confess there-
fore your sins one to another, and pray one for
another, that ye may be healed. The supplication
of a righteous man availeth much in its working.


Elijah was a man of like passions with us, and he
prayed fervently,” etc.
It may be assumed that this method of treating
the sick was not unknown before. St. James is not
prescribing it for the first time, nor “ promulgating 1,1
it, as a thing previously instituted but hitherto kept
secret. From the way in which he speaks of it, how-
ever, we may gather that it was not so well known,
or so generally observed, as he would have wished.
The two short injunctions with which the passage
begins are a kind of argument for doing what fol-
lows, as if the writer said; “ Such treatment of the
sick should be as natural as to pray under suffering,
or to sing praise in mirth.” 2
At the same time, St. James does not claim any
special sanction for what he prescribes. There is
nothing like St. Paul’s “For I have received of the
Lord that which I also delivered unto you.” 3 The
anointing is indeed to be done “ in the name of the
Lord.” Even if the words “of the Lord ” are omitted
from the text, it is probable that St. James means
“the name of the Lord Jesus Christ”; but if they
are retained, there are several places in which he uses
1 It is the language of the Council of Trent on the subject :
“ A Christo Domino nostro institutum et a beato Jacobo apostolo
promulgatum.”
3 In the same way St. Peter clenches the duty of obedience
to rulers by saying, “ Honour all men. Love the brotherhood
Fear God. Honour the king.”
3 x Cor. xi. 23.


that appellation in its Old Testament sense, so that
the point cannot be pressed. The sentence, “ Take,
my brethren, the prophets who have spoken in the
name of the Lord for an example,” is not in favour
of understanding the anointing to be done specially
in the name of the Lord Jesus.
Anointing the sick with oil had been practised by
the Twelve before our Lord’s Ascension— i.e., before
the Christian dispensation had fully begun with the
outpouring of the Spirit. “And they went out and
preached that men should repent; and they cast out
many devils, and anointed with oil many that were
sick, and healed them.” 1 Whether they did so by
express command of our Lord, we are not informed.
They may have employed an old traditional Jewish
method of assuaging or removing ailments. That
oil and other lubricants were used for such purposes
among the Jews is certain. Isaiah speaks of
“ wound and bruises and putrefying sores ” which
“ have not been closed nor bound up, neither mollified
with ointment.” 2 Jeremiah asks whether there is “no
balm in Gilead,” and “no physician there.” 3 It
may have been a continuation and a spontaneous
following of this practice when the Twelve healed
1 St. Mark vi. 13. It is not necessary to discuss the use of
oil by Gentile physicians, like Galen. Of all the N.T. writings,
none is less likely to have been influenced by them than the
Epistle of St. James.
2 Isa. i. 6.
3 Jer. viii. 22 ; cp. xlvi. it, li. 8.


the sick by anointing them. Another practice which
is curiously interwoven in history with unction, is
the laying on of hands. This is said by the author
of the epilogue to St. Mark’s Gospel to have been
definitely recommended by our Lord as a means of
healing: “ They shall lay hands on the sick, and
they shall recover.” It was a means which He Him-
self had used; “He laid His hands upon a few sick
folk, and healed them.” 1 His disciples after the
Ascension certainly followed this example. “ Paul
entered in and prayed, and laid his hands on him
and healed him.” 2 Irenaeus speaks of this custom
continuing with good effect in his day. 3 Origen,
even while quoting St. James, interpolates the words,
“ Let them lay their hands on him.” 4 It may be
that the two symbolic actions were treated as
identical and interchangeable, both in this case and
in the case of what we call “ Confirmation.” But
this does not prove that our Lord “instituted” the
rite as one to be observed on pain of being con-
sidered unfaithful.
To ask whether the unction recommended by
St. James was regarded by him as remedial or as
religious is to ask a question belonging to another
date and to different circumstances from St. James’s.
The science of medicine was still in its infancy
among the Jews. There was a tendency to regard
1 St. Matt. vi. 5.
3 Hccr. 11. xxxii. 4.
1 Acts xxviii. 8.
4 Horn, in Levit., ii. 4.


all diseases as directly inflicted by God or by
evil spirits. In a case of sickness, or of some other
misfortune, like blindness, it was natural to look
for the sin which had caused it. 1 Healing was
never purely physical. When the prophet Isaiah
ordered a plaster of flgs to be laid upon the ulcer
from which Hezekiah suffered, it was not an exercise
of superior technical knowledge, but a token of
Divine mercy. 2 Although the Book of Ecclesiasticus
offers what might be called almost a rationalistic
account of the “sweetening” of the waters of Marah, 3
and a knowledge of “the diversities of plants and
the virtues of roots” 4 was considered by the author
of Wisdom to be part of the endowment of Solomon,
yet both writers turn instinctively to another mode
of speech. “It was neither herb nor mollifying
plaster,” says the Book of Wisdom, “that restored
them to health, but Thy Word, O Lord, which healeth
all things.” 5 The physicians themselves work by
spiritual methods. “They shall also pray unto the
Lord, that He would prosper that which they give
for ease and remedy to prolong life.” 6 It is in this
dim, half-explored region that St. James moves.
Clearly the healing is not purely the result of apply-
ing oil. It is not the physician that is summoned to
the sick-bed, but “the elders of the Church.”
1 St. John ix. 2.
3 Ecclus. xxxviii. 5.
5 Wisd. xvi. 12.
2 Isa. xxxviii. 21.
4 Wisd. vii. 20.
6 Kcclus, xxxviii. 14.


It is only putting the same question in another
form when we ask whether the cure which St. James
expects is sacramental or not. A sacrament may be
understood to mean a rite in which God pledges
Himself to give the benefit desired, unless the
recipient nullifies the action by wrong dispositions.
This cannot be St. James’s meaning, or no good
Christian who used the unction would ever have died.
It was through no failing of faith that St. Paul’s
thrice repeated prayer for the removal of his “ stake
in the flesh ” was not granted. The promise which
St. James attaches to the unction is not unconditional.
Nothing could be less like a magical operation than
that which he describes. So far as his actual lan-
guage goes, the whole benefit is traced to prayer—to
the prayer of Christian men in no way different from
others. “ The prayer of faith shall save the sick.”
Thfere were in certain parts of the Church men pos-
sessed of "gifts of healing.” 1 But of these St. James
makes no mention. He does not bid the sick man
send for persons who have this particular charisma ,
but for “ the elders of the Church.” Doubtless he
means the official leaders of the local community—
the clergy of the parish, as we might say. But he
assumes that the parish priests have not only an
ecclesiastical status: they are also qualified to offer
“ the prayer of faith.” They are “ righteous men,”
whose “supplication availeth much in its working.”
1 i Cor. xii. 28, 30.


When we examine the effects which St. James
ascribes to this Visitation of the Sick, we find that
they are not restricted to body-healing, but extend
also to spiritual benefits. From the point of view of
a later theological analysis, it may be correct to say
that two different “sacraments” are brought to bear
—a sacrament of unction for the bodily infirmity, and
a sacrament of penance for the remission of sins.
St, James himself does not mark the distinction. It
cannot be said that at the words, “And if he have
committed sins,” he passes from the one to the other.
He returns, if only for a moment, to the bodily cure
in the words, “ Confess therefore your sins one to
another, and pray one for another, that ye may be
healed.” Undoubtedly from that point onwards his
thought is mainly fixed upon the spiritual benefit.
It is of more importance. It is harder to make sure
of. St. James therefore urges the sick person to seek
the help of his brother men : “ Confess therefore your
sins one to another, and pray one for another.” He
encourages this intercession by an example. Elias
was but a brother man; yet he exercised the power
of retaining and absolving sin, on a national scale.
This might well be claimed as a type or illustration
of the “ power of the keys ” rather than of unction.
But St. James attributes all to one undivided action—
to the “ fervent prayer ” of the elders of the Church,
which obtains healing for the sick, and, in case the
sick has committed grave sins, forgiveness also. We


cannot say that, in St. James’s view, the anointing
aims only at a bodily benefit, neither can we say
that in itself it includes and supersedes the benefit
of absolution. The answer to prayer contains both.
Bodily healing, such as St. James contemplates, can
hardly fail to convey grace to the soul.
The Tradition of the Church
The tradition of the Church on the subject in
early times is far from clear. Father F. W. Puller,
in his erudite and scholarly treatise on the Anoint-
ing of the Sick, 1 has gathered the material together
in very convenient form.
Practically all ancient service-books contain prayer?
for the hallowing of oil, with more or less direct refer-
ence to its employment on behalf of the sick. First
stands the Egyptian Church Order, which we may
now confidently ascribe to Hippolytus. It claims to
represent the traditional practice of the Church, par-
ticularly of the Church at Rome. 2 It has the direc-
tion : “If anyone offers oil—let the bishop return
thanks, saying, ‘As sanctifying this oil Thou givest,
O God, health to those who use and receive it, from
whence Thou didst anoint kings, priests, and
prophets, so let it convey comfort to all who taste it
1 S.P.C.K. (for the Church Historical Society), 1910 (second
edition).
8 About a.d. 215-220. See the passage in Dom Connolly,
Texts and Studies, vii. 4, p. 176.


and health to all who use it’ ” Whether the text is
quite right or not may be doubted. However that
may be, the oil in question is “ offered ” by members
of the Church. It is destined to be employed in
various ways—to be taken internally, or to be used
as an unction. However used, its natural affinity
to the most solemn of all unctions is not forgotten.
The benefits asked for in connection with it are “ com-
fort ” and “ health.”
Next in order of antiquity comes the Sacramentary
of Serapion of Thmuis, in Egypt (A.D. 3SO). 1 It
shows that in Egypt, as at Rome a hundred years
earlier, people brought oil (among other things) to
the church to be blessed for various uses. The first
prayer in this connection says; “We bless through
the name of Thy only begotten, Jesus Christ, these
creatures. We name the name of Him who suffered,
upon this water and upon this oil. Grant healing
power upon these creatures, that every fever and
every demon and every sickness may depart through
the drinking and the anointing, and that the par-
taking of these creatures may be a healing medicine
and a medicine of complete soundness, in the
name of Thy only begotten, Jesus Christ; through
whom,” etc.
The second prayer is entitled, “A prayer for oil
of the sick or for bread or for water.” It runs, with
' See F. E. Brightman in Journal of Theol. Studies, vol. i.,
pp. 88, 247. The translations are, in the main, F. W. Puller’s.


some abbreviations; “We pray Thee to send out a
curative power of the only begotten, from Heaven,
upon this oil, that it may be to those who are anointed
(or partake of these Thy creatures) a throwing off of
every sickness and every disease, a protective medi-
cine against every demon, a separation of every
unclean spirit, an expulsion of every evil spirit, a
driving out of every fever and ague and every
infirmity, good grace and remission of sins, a medi-
cine of life and recovery, health and soundness of
soul, body, spirit, and perfect strengthening. O
Lord, let every Satanic operation, every demon, every
wile of the adversary, every plague, every scourge,
every smart, every pain or stroke or shaking or evil
shadow, fear Thy Holy Name,” etc.
Father Puller suspects this prayer of having suf-
fered interpolation. That Serapion should have
prayed for the remission of sins in connection with
blessed oil, or bread, or water, seems to him almost
inconceivable. It is quite possible that the words
may have been intruded. They come in somewhat
abruptly. But Dr. Brightman seems to find no diffi-
culty in them. Certainly they do not constitute the
main purpose of the prayer. The main purpose is
the aversion or cure of maladies of soul or body,
which are specified at great length. The dependence
upon St. James is not obvious; otherwise the mention
of forgiveness in this connection might not seem
strange.


It is not'possible for the most part to date litur-
gical formularies; but the East Syrians, or so-called
“ Nestorians,” have so long been separated from the
rest of Christendom that it may be assumed that
their rites and ceremonies, at least in their main out-
lines, have not been borrowed from other Churches,
but carry us back to about the time of the Council of
Ephesus, when the separation began. Their service-
books have a blessing of oil, which is mixed with
dust from the tomb of a saint, to strengthen its
efficacy;
“ Bless it, O Lord, the mighty God, with Thy bless-
ing, and hallow it with Thy holiness, and make the
right hand of Thy mercy and the power of Thy Holy
Ghost to abide in it, and grant by means of it to
those who receive it health of body and soul, in the
name of the glorious Trinity.”
This blessing is now in abeyance amongst them.
There is no form of prayer among them appointed
for the application of the oil. But it is important to
observe that in the ordination of a presbyter the
bishop prays, among other things, “ that they may
lay hands upon the sick and they may be healed.”
Ancient prayers over the oil, which serves two pur-
poses—both for the unction of the sick and for the
unction before baptism are found among the
Jacobite Syrians, and among the Copts. Ancient
prayers for the oil of the sick representing the
Churches, Rome (Gelasian) and of Milan remain to


show what was thought and expected about the end
of the fifth century. Father Puller has justification
for saying that a change came over the Western con-
ception of the unction of the sick in the eighth or
ninth century. Perhaps the change took place some-
what earlier in the East. Men began to look for
spiritual benefits rather than bodily. Perhaps they
were led to do so by the experience of finding that
bodily healing was, as a matter of fact, rarely granted
as a result of the anointing. Another meaning had to
be put into the rite with which they were familiar. It
took two different directions. In the West it became
a sacrament of the dying—the Extreme Unction; in
the Orthodox Church of the East—the Euchelaion,
though having bodily cure always in view, became a
means of grace to be frequently resorted to —part of
the normal preparation for Communion. 1
It will be observed that the earliest sacramentaries
and ritual-books give no formula for applying, but
only for blessing, the sacred oil. We have no evi-
dence of a rite of the Church, founded on St. James’s
precept, earlier than the fourth century; 2 and even
then the oil is not necessarily applied to the sick
1 Information given by the Rev. P. R. B. Brown, formerly
of the Theological School at Chalce.
The Greek theologian Androutsos says that it is not to be
used only in case of grave illness, but for any sick person, or
indeed, for persons in sound health { Dogntafike , p- 406).
2 The earliest that I am acquainted with is in Aphraates
Demonstrationes, 23, 3 (Patrol-Syr., 11. 6).


man’s body by a minister of the Church. Presumably
in the first ages the “ prayer of faith ” at the actual
anointing was left to the inspiration of the moment,
somewhat as the Eucharistic thanksgiving was left,
when qualified persons were present to offer it. 1
It was natural that the unction of the sick should
normally be applied, as St. James directs, by the
presbyters of the Church. But this was not always
the case. Sometimes the sick person applied it to
himself; sometimes his friends applied it to him. In
a well-known letter to Decentius, Bishop of Gubbio,
Innocent 1., in the fifth century, tells his correspon-
dent that, provided that the oil has been consecrated
by the bishop, “it is lawful not for the priests only,
but for all Christians to use it for anointing in their
own need, or in the need of members of their house-
hold.” 3 The language of Innocent is repeated by
Cassarius of Arles early in the sixth century. 3 Doubt-
less Caesarius was well acquainted with Innocent’s
ruling, though he does not mention him. This was
the main purpose for which oil was “ offered,” that
the people might take away the oil so blessed, for
use at home. 4 The custom receives illustration from
the story of St. Genovefa (about A.D. 500) which
Father Puller quotes. 5 The saint was accustomed to
visit the sick and heal their sicknesses by applying
1 Justin, ApoL, 67, 5. Cp. Didache, 10.
2 Ep. xxv., ad Decentium, 8. :
1 Ibid., p. 86.
3 Puller, p. 66.
6 Ibid., p. 60.


the holy oil which they kept. On one occasion she
found the oil exhausted in the vessel which had con-
tained it; and at her intercession it was miraculously
replenished. Even the condition that the oil should
have been hallowed by the bishop is not insisted
upon in the East. The Russian Macarius calls this
condition a deviation from orthodoxy, saying that the
Apostle St. James “ speaks in general, with regard to
the anointing with holy oil, of the priests of the
Church, without any mention of the bishops.” 1
A very interesting collection of instances of heal-
ing in various parts of the Church, by hallowed oil,
is given by Father Puller. Sometimes the healers
were bishops, like St. Martin, or presbyters, like
St. Macarius of Alexandria; sometimes they were
laymen, like St. Aphraates of Antioch, or women,
like St. Genovefa. The cures were wrought upon
Christians, and upon heathens, and even upon cattle.
But it may be observed that the very fact that such
instances are recorded is a sign that they were
unusual. If the unction recommended by St. James
was in constant use and was commonly followed by
the effects which he describes, these healings would
not have stood out as remarkable. Those who sought
for healing no longer sought it by the old methods.
They were more inclined to resort to persons who had
a reputation for possessing miraculous gifts. With
1 Theologie Dogm. Orthod., vol. ii., p. 560.


the increasing cultus of the martyrs there was a fur-
ther decline in the use of unction for healing pur-
poses. The beginnings of new ideas may be seen
in the throngs which gathered to the yearly festival
of St. Theodore the Recruit, 1 or in what St. Augus-
tine tells us of the posthumous miracles of
St. Stephen, 2 of which he had personal knowledge.
The movement reaches a climax in the mediaeval pil-
grimages to St. Thomas at Canterbury. The modern
pilgrimages to La Salette and Lourdes represent a
yet further development.
When it is urged that a “ Ministry of Healing ”
should be “recognised,” history leads us to ask
whether it is a manner of ministration or an order of
ministers for which recognition is desired, or both.
In the former case, we have seen that anointing and
laying on of hands have almost an equal claim to the
position; while the anointing has become obsolete in
some Churches, and in those where it is still a living
rite, has departed from the original purpose, and
that in different directions. In the latter case, the
Ministry of Healing, according to St. James, already,
or still, exists. It is none other than the Catholic
priesthood. If another class of persons, possessed of
special gifts, is desired, we would ask what recog-
nition they require. Those who possessed the “ gifts
1 Gregory of Nyssa's Oration on him.
a De Civitate Dei, xxii. 8.


of healing ” in ancient times do not seem to have
needed any special recognition. The fact that they
were proved to possess these gifts was recognition
enough, and their Divine endowment was thankfully
welcomed and used by their fellow believers.


APPENDIX II
FORMS OF SERVICE SUGGESTED FOR
USE AT THE ANOINTING OF THE SICK
The Committee have no authority to recommend Forms of
Service, nor would it come strictly within the terms of their
reference to do so. At the same time it was thought it might
serve a useful purpose to set out Forms of Service which
illustrate in practice what is stated on the subject of the Form
of Ministry (pp. X 9-21). The Committee hope that the Forms
of Service here suggested might become duly authorised.
(«) The Form in the First Prayer-Book of King
Edward the Sixth
If the sick person desire to be anointed, then shall
the priest anoint him upon the forehead or breast only,
making the sign of the cross, saying thus.
As with this visible oil thy body outwardly is
anointed; so our Heavenly Father, Almighty God,
grant of His infinite goodness, that thy soul inwardly
may be anointed with the Holy Ghost, Who is the
Spirit of all strength, comfort, relief, and gladness.
And vouchsafe for His great mercy (if it be His
Blessed Will) to restore unto thee thy bodily health,
and strength, to serve Him: and send thee release of
all thy pains, troubles, and diseases, both in body and
mind. And howsoever His goodness (by His Divine


and unsearchable providence) shall dispose of thee; we
His unworthy ministers and servants humbly beseech
the Eternal Majesty to do with thee, according to the
multitude of His innumerable mercies, and to pardon
thee all thy sins, and offences, committed by all thy
bodily senses, passions, and carnal affections: Who
also vouchsafe mercifully to grant unto thee ghostly
strength, by His Holy Spirit, to withstand and over-
come all temptations and assaults of thine adversary,
that in no wise he prevail against thee, but that thou
mayest have perfect victory and triumph against the
devil, sin, and death, through Christ our Lord: Who
by His death, hath overcome the prince of death, and
with the Father, and the Holy Ghost evermore liveth
and reigneth, God, world without end. Amen.
Usque quo Donline. Psal. xiii.
How long wilt Thou forget me, O Lord, for ever ?
how long wilt Thou hide Thy face from me ?
How long shall I seek counsel in my soul ? and be
so vexed in mine heart ? how long shall mine enemy
triumph over me ?
Consider and hear me, O Lord my God, lighten
mine eyes, that I sleep not in death.
Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against
him: for if Ibe cast down, they that trouble me will
rejoice at it.
But my trust is in Thy mercy, and my heart is
joyful in Thy salvation.


I will sing of the Lord, because He hath dealt so
lovingly with me.
Yea, I will praise the name of the Lord, the Most
Highest.
Glory be to the Father, etc.
(b) The Form in “A Prayer-Book Revised”
(Mowbray)
One of the Psalms following shall be said at the
Minister's discretion, with this Antiphon before and
after.
Antiphon. O Saviour of the world, Who by Thy
Cross and Precious Blood hast redeemed us, Save
us and help us, we humbly beseech Thee, O Lord.
Psalm 23, Dominus regit me.
Psalm 71, In te Domine speravi.
A short Lesson to be read by the Minister.
Is any sick among you ? Let him call for the
elders of the Church; and let them pray over him,
anointing him with oil in the Name of the Lord; and
the prayer of faith shall save him that is sick, and
the Lord shall raise him up.
P. If the Confession and Absolution of the Sick is
not used here, then shall one of the general Confes-
sions and Absolutions be said, at the discretion of
the Minister. Then shall he say:
Let us pray.
(.Silent Prayer )


Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Our Father.
V. O Lord, save Thy servant;
R. Who putteth his trust in Thee.
V. Send him help from Thy holy place :
R. And evermore mightily defend him.
V. Help us, O God of our salvation;
R. And for the glory of Thy Name deliver us and
be merciful to us sinners, for Thy Name’s sake.
V. Lord, hear our prayer ;
R. And let our cry come unto Thee.
Let us pray.
O Almighty God, Who art the Giver of all health
and the aid of them who seek to Thee for succour, we
call upon Thee for Thy help and goodness mercifully
to be shewed upon this Thy servant, that he being
healed of his infirmities, may give thanks unto Thee
in Thy holy Church; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.
(Silent Prayer )
P. Then , if the oil be not already blessed , the
following Consecration may be used by the Priest:
O Almighty Lord God, Who hast taught us by
Thy holy Apostle St. James, to anoint the sick with


oil, that they may regain their bodily health, and
render thanks unto Thee for the same; Look down,
we beseech Thee, and bless and sanctify this oil; and
grant that those who shall be anointed therewith
may be delivered from all sickness; through our
Lord Jesus Christ, Thy Son, Who with Thee and
the Holy Ghost liveth and reigneth, God, world
without end. Amen.
P. Then shall the Priest anoint the sick person
upon the forehead, making the sign of the Cross,
saying thus:
As with this visible oil thy body outwardly is
anointed: so our Heavenly Father, Almighty God,
grant of His infinite goodness, that thy soul inwardly
may be anointed with the Holy Ghost, Who is the
Spirit of all strength, comfort, relief and gladness:
and vouchsafe for His great mercy (if it be His
Blessed Will) to restore unto thee thy bodily health
and strength, to serve Him, and send thee release of
all thy pains, troubles and diseases, both in mind
and body; through Christ our Lord, Who by His
Death hath overcome death, and with the Father
and the Holy Ghost evermore liveth and reigneth,
God, world without end. Amen.
Let us pray.
(Silent Prayer )
V. The voice of joy and health is in the dwelling
of the righteous.


R. The Right Hand of the Lord bringeth mighty
things to pass.
O Holy Father, Physician of souls and bodies,
Who didst send Thine only begotten Son to heal the
sicknesses of men and to save them from death;
Deliver Thy servant from all bodily and spiritual
weakness, and quicken him by the grace of the same
Thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord, Who liveth and
reigneth with Thee and the Holy Spirit, one God,
world without end. Amen.
Unto God’s gracious mercy and protection we com-
mit thee. The Lord bless thee and keep thee. The
Lord make His face to shine upon thee, and be
gracious unto thee. The Lord lift up His Counten-
ance upon thee and give thee peace, both now and
evermore. Amen.




PK,Ni£D IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
BILLING AND SONS, LTD
GUILDFORD AND ESHER
