

Supplement to “ The Tocsin, ’’ October 12, 1899. A 0 r / Ô
The United Labor Party of Victoria.
PLATFORM.
(a) One Adult One Vote.
(b) The Referendum to be applied to the settle-
ment of vexed publie questions.
(c) Progressive tax on land values, town # and
country, without exemptions, exclusive of
improvements.
(d) The establishment of a State Bank.
(e) The establishment of a Department of Labor
with a responsible Minister.
(f) The establishment by law of Courts of Con-
ciliation and Compulsory Arbitration for
the settlement of disputes between employ-
ers and employes.
(g) The maintenance and perfection of the policy
of Protection, the adoption of the eight
hours system, a trades union wage in all
protected industries and the abolition of
all revenue duties.
(h) The establishment of a Pension Fund for Aged
Persons.
(i) The sustaining of Village Settlements and the
creation ot a body of small landholders In
contra distinction to large ones.
(j) Provision for enfranchisement of seamen and
others following migratory occupations
(k) A cumulative tax on all incomes over £2OO
per year
(1) That with a view of preventing undesirable
aliens being brought into the Colony by sea
and land, a poll tax of £lOO be imposed on
Chinese and other Asiatics.
(m) No further alienation of land.
(n) Reform of the Upper House on the electoral
basis of the Legislative Assembly, with
single electorates.
ORGANISATION.
i. The name shall be The United Labor Party of
Victoria.
2. The United Labor Party of Victoria shall consist of
all trades and labor unions, and all adult persons who will
give their adherence to the party’s Platform, and become
members of the organisation in the district in which they
may be entitled to vote.
3. The Central Council shall have its headquarters in
Melbourne, and all funds shall be devoted only to the
objects of the Labor Party.
4. Central Council to consist of the Executive Officers
for the time being of the Trades Hall Council, four dele-
gates of the Parliamentary Labor Party, and one delegate
from each Political or District Branch, consisting of not less
than 20 members up to 50; from 51 up to 100, two; from
101 to 150, three; from 151 to 200, four. Four to be the
maximum.
5. Admission of Delegates T) the Central Council. —
The Chairman shall put the question that the delegate or
delegates be received and accepted, when, if any delegate
shall object, a ballot shall be taken forthwith, and if a
majority of the delegates present vote against the admission,
such delegates or delegate shall not be received, and the
organisation concerned shall be informed of the delegate or
delegates thus rejected.
6.—The Executive Committee of the Central Council
shall consist of a President, two Vice-Presidents, Treasurer,
Secretary, three Trustees, and nine members elected from
and by the Central Council. Ten to form a quorum.
7. Only one branch of the League may be established
in each electorate, but sub-division can be formed when-
ever necessary, subject to the control of such branch.
8. The officers of branches shall consist of a President,
two Vice-Presidents, Treasurer, Secretary, two Trustees,
and a Committee of not less thän five members.
9. The Central Council shall meet not less than once
in each month, and at such other times as may be deemed
necessary. Fifteen to form a quorum.
10. The expenses of representatives from Branches
shall be defrayed by the branches. The expenses of the
Executive Committee shall be defrayed by the Central
Council. (
ii. —District Branches shall have complete control
over their own funds, save and except Threepence per mem-
ber per quarter, which shall be transmitted to the Central
Council for general expenses through their Secretary, and
no branch shall be entitled to representation which has not
complied with this rule one month after admission of their
delegate.
12. District Branches shall raise funds to contest
Parliamentary elections by such methods as they may deem
advisable. All Branches shall have the right to select their
candidates, subject to Rule 13.
13. Selection of Candidates for Parliament. —Every
district political branch, or organisation connected with the
Labor Party of Victoria, shall have the right to nominate a
sufficient number of candidates to fill the vacancies which
will occur at the expiration of Parliament by effluxion of
time. Such nominations to be submitted to the Central
Council for approval or otherwise, but all nominations must
be in the hands of the Secretary of the Central Council not
later than three months prior to the date of such expiration
of Parliament. Persons nominated for selection must have
been members of some recognised labor organisation,
political or industrial, for a period of six months prior to
date of selection. Before any candidate is nominated, he
shall give a written pledge through the Branch nominating
him that he will retire if not selected.
14. Before any candidate is nominated, he shall give a
written pledge through the Branch nominating him to the
Central Council that he will support the platform of the
Party, and, if returned to Parliament, shall on all gccasions
do his utmost to ensure the carrying out of the principles
embodied in the platform of such Party.
15. In electorates represented by members of the Labor
Party in the previous Parliament the sitting member shall be
regarded as the selected candidate for such electorate, unless
he shall be convicted by the Central Council of having
violated one or more planks of the Party’s Platform.
16. In all cases of bye-elections and sudden dissolu-
tions of Parliament, the Central Council shall immediately
be called together to take such action as may be considered
advisable.
17. The Central Council, when appealed to, shall
decide upon all differences arising in any organisation, and
such decision shall be final.
