

THE
"X'-PRESS
A PRODUCT OF
THE TROOP-DECK
Hospital-Carrier " X "
VOLUME I.
March 4th -March 15th, 1918.
Price 1/- Nett


FOREWORD.
This volume I'm sure will prove to be of great interest to
those who have voyaged back to their Homeland in this ship. It
recalls many pleasant and amusing incidents of the passage which
will" be brought back to them when it falls into their hands.
I have always read with great interest the Morning Editions,
on the Notice Board, and quite enjoyed the clever witticisms on
current events of the day.
This is my first experience of carrying Australian Troops. It
is a very agreeable one, and I hope it will be my pleasure to have
Australians with me again, returning to their homes after their
well-fought fight with our common enemy. I am also very glad
to be again about to renew my acquaintance with the Country
that I knew so well some thirty-odd years ago, memories of
which are still so pleasant to me.
Wishing you all success, which you so well merit,
I am, yours sincerely,
T. CHOPE,
Master, Troopship.
A ship's newspaper is now quite a recognised institution on
board all Australian Troopships. It provides a means, not only
for promulgating information which cannot be inserted in the
formal Routine Orders, but also for the expression of opinions
which, to a C.O. Troops, are, within certain limits, of the utmost
value, assisting him to ensure the comfort and welfare of all ranks
under his command.
This little publication, I submit, amply fills the above bill and
in addition has been the means of enlivening many dull moments
which on a long sea-voyage come sometimes to all of us.
I take this opportunity to place on record my appreciation of
the excellent spirit in which the W.O's, N.C.O's and Men accepted
the Inevitable during that weary eight days' sojourn in our first
port of call. It is difficult sometimes to understand the reason
for many orders, but there always is a good reason, which can-
not perhaps be made public.
However, the excellent conduct of all ranks and the cheerful-
ness with which the many unavoidable inconveniences attendant
to shipboard have been borne, amply justify me in promising to
secure for the Troops every possible privilege which can be
obtained from higher authority.
I sincerely trust that this little paper will meet with the greatest
success and, at the close of the voyage, will be treasured as a
souvenir of many happy days spent on this fine ship.
L. DOBBIN, Lieut.-Col.
O.C. Troops.
I have carefully perused the above letters from the Commander
and O.C. Troops. With exception of Reference to Destination,
which occurs in each, these communications are now passed for
press. Would that the following pages needed but as little
scrutiny and revision !
R. D. TYERS, Capt.
Adjutant to Carrier —" X.
Censor of " THE 'X'-PRESS."
Second Port of Call.
21st March, 1918.


THE "X"-PRESS
A PRODUCT OF THE TROOP-DECK.
UNOFFICIAL OF ORIGIN.
IRREGULAR OF APPEARANCE.
Edited by E. J. HART (Ship's Orderly Room) and dedicated to "BILL."
(No. 1).
SIERRA LEONE, 4th March, 1918.
Complaints having been received of
" Conduct Prejudicial " on the part of
Troops recently ashore at Freetown, this
privilege will, in future, be granted
only in exceptional circumstances.
''C 3" men wishng to represent
Ship's Tug-of-War Team against West
African Rifles Team at Freetown Gar-
rison Sports on Anzac Day (April 25)
should communicate with Secretary,
Sports and Entertainments Committee,
not later than 11.15 a.m., April Ist.
Men who have not yet had Hospital
Furlough may hand in particulars to
Troop-Deck Commanders during C.O.'s
inspection. On production of Fit-to-
Travel certificate, signed by 5.M.0.,
twenty-one days' XMAS LEAVE to
England, Scotland, Ireland or Flanders
will be granted, with free return to
Sierra Leone. Rational allowance will
be drawn at A.I.F. Administrative
Headquarters, 130, Horseferry-road,
London (look for the Blue Light); and
advances will be made against De-
ferred Pay. Vouchers for this pur-
pose may be obtained from Pay Ser-
geant in 2nd Class Music Salon. Men
proceeding on Xmas Furlough are re-
quired to deposit their Red Cross Kit-
bags in Purser's Strong Room for safe
custody until rejoining the vessel.
Mess Orderlies will in future wear
regimental colour-patches on back of
singlets, to distinguish them from Ship's
stokers. Patches will vary according to
deck, and will be of a texture and shade
to be determined by a Board of Officers
and Lady Passengers. They will be
worn midway between shoulder-blades,
at a point 4g inches below back-collar-
stud. Troop-Deck Commanders please
note.
Officers occupying Cabins 135 and 137
will keep windows closed from 6 a.m.
until 10 p.m. daily. These adjoin the
Troops' Bathing Tanks, and No. 9876528
Gunner Fitz-Adenoyde-Smythe, J.D.K.Z.
(117 th Tasmanian Light Infantry), re-
ports that the language wafted yester-
day to his ears, from windows above-
indicated, raised the temperature of the
water to 347 degrees Fahrenheit, there-
by causing an old wound to reopen; to
Lis great discomfort and personal incon-
venience.
Officers and Other Ranks who, for
urgent Domestic, Political, Financial or
"Other" Reasons, require to reach
Australia before the next General Elec-
tion, should apply to Ship's Fifth Offi-
cer, Mr. F. B. Jones, for accommoda-
tion in Ship's lifeboats. Permits, en-
dorsed by Ship's Adjutant (Capt. R.
D. lyers, Cabin 114), will be issued in
rotation and in strictly limited num-
bers. "1914 "-Class men, whose Special
Indulgence Leave expires in August,
may proceed overland to the Cape by
rickshaw.
(STOP PRESS: Received 11.53 a.m.
Admiralty Wireless,
via Ascension Is.)
oFomrT-?; , "llanstephan
UAS ILK having been converted into
a Flagship for the Duration, all Officers,
N.C.O. s and Common Soldiers wishing
to establish Permanent Residence with-
in a ten-mile radius of Freetown Cus-
tom House, should make application to
Secretary, RETURNED SOLDIERS'
WIVES ASSOCIATION, Melbourne,
for Free Passage of Next of Kin from
Australia to Sierra Leone. Special
building facilities will be granted by
D.A.Q.M.G. Blankets and Bedding wdl
be issued by Ship's Quartermaster.
(Capt. H. Kaufman, Cabin 128.)
COMMERCIAL ANNOUNCEMENTS
(LOCAL).
Plumbing, Gasfitting, Glazing, etc., etc.
Popular Prices.
For Estimates call or write
JACOBO FERNANDEZ,
27, SACKVILLE-ST., Sierra Leone.
CASH ADVANCES.
A Square Deal to all Branches of the
Service. Money advanced on part-worn
clothing, 1.0.U.'5, artificial plates, War
Bonds, and any other security. Trans-
actions arranged any hour, Day cr


Night (the latter preferred). Sundays barrassed owner, Warrant Officer Mc-
not excepted. Launches sent from pier- Killop, Ship's Sergeant-Major.
head to bring off prospective clients. (Editorial.—We are requested by
"PTTTYDn TAPAcon Ship's Commander to contradict ru-
1'ii.iJIiU 1A J3AoL/L/, mour that his consent had been
49, KISSY-ST., SIERRA LEONE. granted to melting down of How-
nr>i 77q/i t itzers to 'provide brass "A's" to be
( Phone 3784 Tophet). worn over Mess Orderlies' Colour
TO T FT Patches.
We cheerfully give publicity to this
BUNGALOW, furnished, 5 rooms, matter, and regret that misapprehen-
bath (h. & c.), every modern incon- 810111 should have arisen.)
venience. Excellent view of shipping
anchored in Bay. Suit young couple. /XT
—For particulars apply, Ship's Orderly THE 'X -PRESS. (No. 3).
Room. *
~ ' (PASTEURISED EDITION FOR GIR-
THE "X" PRESS ■ (No. 2) OTJLATION IN UPPER REGIONS.)
Sierra Leone, ; 5th March, 1918. In compliance with D.O.R.A.
Wireless communication is now estab- Sierra Leone, March 6, 1918.
Wireless communication is now estab-
lished between this vessel and A.I.F.
Headquarters, London. All applications
for discharge in Sierra Leone must be
accompanied by written guarantee of
profitable employment.
Applications will be received for the
position of overseer at the Yaka-Hula
Rubber Plantation, the last official hav-
ing recently died of Small-pox, con-
tracted through over-indulgence in na-
tive 'fruit.
Previous service in Anzac Provost
Corps will be favourably considered.
Nursing Sisters wishing to be dis-
charged at this port should arrange to
be met at the landing-stage by a local
representative of the Y.W.C.A., who
will conduct them to respectable rooms
for the night, and care for them until
they are able to make their own ar-
rangements.
Men returning to the vessel from
Marriage-Leave must produce certificate
for verification by Ship's Padre. Failure
to comply with this regulation will be
severely dealt with, the alleged marriage
will be declared null and void, and the
alleged bridegroom detained in close
arrest pending full investigation by the
Adjutant.
It is noted with satisfaction that since
Iced Lime-Juice has been issued with
the Troops' meals, complexions have be-
come clearer, blood has grown cooler,
and eyes resumed their normal lustre.
It is, however, earnestly requested that
the practice of using surplus lime-juice
for the purpose of swilling down Troop-
Deck floors and Mess-Tables be discon-
tinued ; not so much for the sake of
economy as for the sake of the health
of all on board; for the practice tends
to clog the scuppers, besides attracting
the inquisitive house fly and the
malarial mosquito.
Lost: Toupet (or "transformation")
of inut-brown artificial hair, slightly
waved. Finder kindly restore to em-
We are asked to state that the green
ribbon adorning the Bosun's chest does
not denote religion or cubic capacity.
This well-won and well-worn decoration
was bestowed on the late Robert
Emmett and handed down to present
direct lineal descendants through eight
generations of glorious Hibernians.
The sympathy of All Decks is extend-
ed to No. 0008, Lance-Corporal Sweet
F.A., of the "First Twenty-Thousand."
This N.C.O. chafes at protracted so-
journ in port and sighs audibly for his
loving wife and four children, three of
whom he has not yet seen. While re-
luctant to touch on Corporal Sweet's
domestic affairs we may mention—en
passant —that above total includes a set
of triplets.
We are credibly informed that our
present mooring-place is to be renamed
SEE 'ER ALONE.
"Submarine Guard" inquires: "Will
habitues of the Boat Deck remain at
their posts until the Southern Cross
comes into view?" We have no direct
information on the subject but think it
highly improbable.
No; the pale, sad youth (in terra cotta
shirt) who reclines all day and every
day on the little Red-Cross stool is NOT
guarding the Starboard Saloon-Deck
companionway. Leastways, not offi-
cially. Nor is he paralysed or other-
wise incapable of movement. Notta
tall. He's merely a Lonely Micawber-
like-Soldier, waiting for something to
turn up. And until it does won't some
kind person please go along and read an
improving book to him, or send him a
few of hubby's socks to darn, or a little
crochet-work for the Stewardess' bottom-
drawer ? Please!!!
"This is the Last Straw!" muttered
tho steward, mopping a fevered brow
what time he removed from the Pro-
menade Deck (during the luncheon in-


terval) his 983 rd " squash "-glass since
breakfast. " Tork ter ME 'bout their
bully-tin of shell-'ole water once a
bloomin' fortnight! LOOKS like it; I
don't think! Eighteen squashes? and
a ginger-ale for the lady, sir? Yessrr,
thenk-ye, sir! (more straws!)"
The Sports and Entertainment Com-
mittee announces two special features
for this afternoon:
1. First (and probably last) appearance
on any Troopship of Chunder-Loo,
Oriental equilibrist and tight-rope
artiste. By arrangement with Mr.
Lionel Lindsay this intrepid per-
former will, at 3.45 p.m., give an
exhibition along the ship's aerials,
from mast to mast. At 4 p.m. he
will take afternoon-tea (and Aber-
nethy biscuits) at a 3-legged occa-
sional table, supported on, a Wind-
sor chair balanced upon the rim of
ship's funnel. On this artiste's behalf
we respectfully solicit the loan of
one Japanese umbrella.
2. Professor J. A. Sibley, A.A.D.C.
(late New York Swimming Club),
will, at 4.30 p.m., execute his high
divo from the Crow's Nest into one
of the Canvas Bathing Tanks, a
total distance of 193 feet, non-stop.
Commander of "G" Troop-Deck
will detail a working party of 1 ser-
geant and 12 men to assist Ship's
Carpenter in reinforcing Main Deck
with additional steel girders for pro
tection of Troops on deck below.
Emergency Party, under Captain H.
O. Chapman, A.A.M.C., will stand by
with stretchers and last-aid appliances
throughout both exhibitions.
While in mid-air performers will be
given an option of burial ashore or at
sea. As an alternative this minor point
may be decided by ballot, Under-Age'
Personnel voting with Adults.
THE "X"-PRESS. (No. 4.)
Sierra Leone, March 7, 1918.
Will the lady who found the meer-
schaum cigarette-holder embedded in
her breakfast-roll this morning kindly
hand same to her cabin-steward for re-
turn to ship's baker? Owner asks us
to explain that he " don't want to kick
up a fuss about it, but it's a sort of
keepsake mo girl give me nine years
ago, and I don't want to lose it."
The ultimate success of prolonged
experiments has encouraged the Ad-
miralty to include in their scheme of
camouflage for troopships the extensive
use of red sunshades. It is confidently
predicted that, under the circumstances,
no Submarine Commander will attack
without warning.
" MUDHOOK" inquires: ''ls not
the sporting phrase * She's a Skinner
for the Old Man ' taking on a new
significance?" Dunno. Not OUR busi-
ness, anyway.
Despite his striking resemblance to
one of Sydney's stipendiary magistrates,
we are authorised td announce that the
ship's pianist (or Chef d'Orchestre) and
Mr. Smithers of the Water Police Court
are not identical. Mr. Smithers has
large feet.
"The Garden of Kama," at 6 degrees
north of the Equator! Ruby, how
CAN you? And what a constitution!
Phew! ! ! .
Our London correspondent sends the
following cable: "Financial crisis now
paralysing Throgiriorton, Threadneedle
and Lombard Streets directly attribut-
able Pte. Gordon's (Southall Flying-
Corps) subjection to lure of small ivory
cubes. Deputation prominent bankers
will board you Cape Town."
She saw the danger-signal in his hair
and promptly took cover. Who shall
blame her? Or the Other Fellow? It's
an 111 Wind . . .
Information has been sought in Naval
circles as to ownership of one pair of
white silk stockings last seen ornament-
ing Boat-Deck stairway. Photographs
were secured by our Intelligence De-
partment, and are now in the hands of
Adjutant, who has undertaken to watch
developments. Amateur Kodakist-s are
invited to leave spare films and surplus
printing-frames at Official Photo-
grapher's Studio (Cabin 114).
If the lady who took Part in yester-
day's shore-picnic will call at our Offices
we shall be happy to tell her something
about that missing tortoiseshell back-
comb.
While sympathising with natural ob-
jection to the overdressed, we should,
however, point out that the Order re-
quiring Identity-discs to be. worn at
all times # (climatic conditions notwith-
standing) is based on practical common-
sense and should be complied with by
all ranks.
TIIE "X"—PRESS. (NO. 5).
At Sea, March 8.. 1918.
To-day we stand corrected. Long be-
fore reveille, despite thunder and tropi-
cal rains, the Editorial Offices were be-
sieged by no less than fourteen of our
lady readers. Some said it one way,
some another; but it all boils down to
the one definite objection. So, with
full apology to all concerned, we hasten
to admit that the hosiery erroneously
described in yesterday's issue as " white
silk " was of " cashmere, with cotton
tops."


We notice that the Canteen-Sergeant
invariably quenches his personal drought
at the Ist Class Saloon-Bar. What's
wrong with the Troops' "Sarto,"
Arthur?
(138.) No, sir; heat-rash is not a per-
manent disability, nor does it carry the
gold 1 stripe.
"What! Again?" exclaimed Pte.
Bluegum 011 being told that we should
be boarded at the Cape by the Em-
barkation Staff. " Thought when we got
past Ryan and Maudsley they'd leave a
bloke alone for the rest of the trip!
Makes yer want ter vomit! "
The black-and-gold millinery band
and the black-and-gold epaulette!
Some "match," what?
A routine-flush, with nothing out
against you but a pair of miserable
sevens! * Stiff luck, Syd. ! but not so
very much worse than a Routine-Order
with a Please-Explain out against you.
We presume that the stakes were only
"Capstans" (vide 5.5.0., para. 22).
We take off our hat to No. 2431,
Sapper Albert Edward Neal, of the 3rd
Tunnelling Company; Food Controller
of Sergeants' Mess. Musing peacefully
011 "J." Troop Deck in the wee, sma'
hours his reverie was disturbed by the
clanging of the ship's bell. It clanged
once, twice, and then thrice. In far less
time than it takes to tell Albert Edward
had "done the necessary." But —if
you feel you simply MUST discuss the
unwonted spectacle of the Seven-ami
Twenty Sergeants —lifebelted and bare
of foot —who "doubled up to Respective
Boat Stations" at one-thirty ak-emma,
do it quietly, and steer clear of the 2nd
Class Music Salon, where the memory
is still raw and painful.
Corporal Wright, of "Angels' Rest,"
inquires plaintively: "What are all the
'A ' Class men doing, anyway? " He's
in charge of amputation cases and has
just received a requisition (allegedly)
from For'ard Galley, for " two men with
wooden legs to mash potatoes."
Speculation still continues as to which
of the Senior Officers will finally be
elected to Presidency of the Sisters'
Mess.
We hate talking " shop " outside busi-
ness hours. It isn't done. But here's
something rather too "swish " to pass
over. A sergeant breezed in this morn-
ing with a request for half a dozen
Crime Sheets. "Got three birds
for Orderly Room." he explained.
"Given 'em every chance; warn-
ed 'em till I'm fed up; they're
simply poling on their mates and I'm
going to run 'em. By the way, you
might look 'em up on your nominal roll
and tell me what decks they're 011."
We did so, and found that the men in
question had never embarked! Yes,
Winnie, old dear, you "came a prover-
bial." But we won't rub it in. Not
likely!
We have in our possession a strip of
dark browin velvet, 1 inch wide, 264
inches long, and redolent of some elu-
sive perfume, which is neither opopo-
nax, trefle incarnat, patchouli, attar of
rose, nor sweet pea. Discovered yes-
tern eve in one of the starboard life-
boats, the ribbon was brought to us
for our information and (necessary action,
please. Fifth" Officer Jones, who
< hanced to be present, immediately as-
sumed a sleuth-like air. One single in-
halation of the bewitching fragrance
wrung from him a spontaneous "h'm,
h'm, isn't this Mrs. X.'s?" Now how
should we know?
Ship's Standing Orders (Para. 12) —
and here's the how of it: "Throwing
Articles Overboard: No paper, clothing,
rubbish or article of any description
shall be thrown overboard "
Bo'sun visited us this morning and com-
plains that this Order is being obeyed
in the Spirit of the Letter (and very
properly too, said we). Whereupon we
were regaled with much descriptive pro-
fanity. Regulations do not permit us
to quote him verbatim, but the trend
of his grievance is that "it's all aster-
isk-ing Red Tape," and means for the
Bos'll and his highly-trained deck-clean-
ing suite "an ell-uv-allot " of unconsid-
ered trifles to be picked up around the
decks every morning Sorry, and all
that, but, well — Orders is Orders, and
there you are!
In future all inquiries such as " What
shall 1 be when I grow up?" "Is my
wife still faithful?" " When's the War
going to end?" "How much wood
would a woodchuck chuck?" "Is Venus
'square' to Mars?" "When shall we
get to Melbourne?" and questions of a
similar nature, will be referred to 2nd
Officer Beaumont, phrenologist, astrolo-
gist, bacteriologist, hypnotist, palmist,
planchetist, crystal-gazer, sand-diviner,
master of the occult, and general
"medium." Horoscopes cast any hour
and any distance. Who'll have a card?
Pte. C. W. Prohasky asks us to ascer-
tain whether the little bit of millinery
picked up on the boat-deck early this
morning and now awaiting identifica-
tion in the Ship's Chart Room, is the
one he mislaid yesterday afternoon.
We've just been un to see. Sorry to
disappoint you, Prohasky, but this is a
red one, with ribbons.
The communication which we repro-
duce below reached us too late for in-
clusion in yesterday's issue. Scorning to
avail ourselves of the literary licence
which would condense an eloquent let-
ter into a three-line-par, we present the
document "in extenso," thus retaining
the refreshing crispness that makes it
what it is:


"Chamber of Horrors,"
" Llanstephan Street, 7/3/18.
To the Editor of (X) Press.
Digger.—At a meeting of the mess
orderlies' association held last night
(which has a membership of 250,009)
with millions of pounds invested in the
War Loan, strong exceptions were taken
to your paragraph in your valuable
paper, dated March 4th, 1918, dealing
with the mess orderlies more especially by
the Anarchist Members of our associa-
tion who came with pockets full of
bombs and wanted to draw lots to see
who would blow you and your valuable
staff up. Being a powerful President,
I pursuaded them to place it in the
hands of our solicto s (Sir John Bunny
and Co.. Barbery Lane) unless a full
apology is published throughout the
press of this boat legal action will be
taken for slander ori immediate arrival
in Australia, which I have reasons to
believe will be about April, 1923. You
s.iem to forget digger that my associa-
tion comes under the protection of the
Defence of the Realm's Act and the
ancient society of "Bots." You refer
to us wearing colour patches; surely
we are coloured enough by standing at
the " Cook House" waiting for the
tucker. You infer that some of our
members do not wear singlets. I might
state that our members at a consider-
able expense had their singlets washed
and to our dismay (to say nothing of
the languge) some were stolen; we
have placed the matter in the hands
of our detecitives, the well known P.C.
Carey (late Westham police), who has
traced the same to your office; we
have every reason to believe that you
and your staff have a clean singlet on
every month now. You seem to forget
digger the heroic services rendered by
our members trying to balance the stew
(corning down the stairs) to feed the
troops. Seeing that the concert party
is exceedingly short of talent we wiil
be very pleased to come forward at
a moment's notice to giving them an exi-
bitiori of stew balancing and duff
juggling. Owing to the shortage of
paper on deck and elsewhere we will
have to close by warning you that any
further abuse the Black Hand Society
will deal with you.
(Signed)
Professor Von Nipi Nipi Bom Bom,
5.M.0., V.C., 8.0. T., 0.K.,
President of the Ancient Order of Mess
Orderlies.
Again we stand corrected. Our first
issue was produced under somewhat
peculiar circumstances, and errors crept
in, as errors sometimes will. In the
para graph complained of we referred to
regimental colour-patches to distinguish
mess-orderlies from ship's stokers.
We take this opportunity of extend
ing a sincere apology not only to tne
aggrieved mess-orderlies, but also to
the ship's stokers, who have already
voiced a similar grievance. When we
cxp'ain that what we really intended
to say was "Native Colliers," we feel
that tranquillity will again vei ,r n in all
breasts. Are wo unduly optimistic?
THE "X " PRESS. (No. 6.)
AT SEA. 9-3-18.
Our respectful compliments to the
Commander, and will lie please pro-
hibit the use, between 8.30 and 10 p.m.,
of signalling-lamps for communicating
with vessels astern? This practice, we
are told, is much resented by all occu-
pants of the Boat-Deck, wifli, perhaps,
the single exception of one Hardy pas-
senger ; the latter suggests that any
man who can carry on in the face of
this blinding glare is deserving of the
Military Cross (with bar, in the case of
those already possessing this coveted
decoration).
Some advocate the use of arnica,
others would apply adhesive strapping,
but Matron says: " Give me a dry
boracic dressing, every time! " And
she ltntm?.
Anybody lose a Navy-Blue Gossamer?
Or a white-bordered hanky of dove-
grey, branded "F. S s*'? Or a
fragment of diaphanous silk material —
sort of a coral-pink? This appears to
have been "on the wire " and fluttered
down from the Boat-Deck to our
Offices, where it may be reclaimed. We
still have the hanky, too.
Those privileged to note the zest with
which our Adjutant attacked his eggs
and bacon this morning will appreciate
the S.M.O.'s advice anent beneficial
effect of Upper-Deck-Breeze upon the
appetite.
We are informed that Miss Rosie
Rosette has sworn off deck-quoits for
the remainder of the voyage. Cheer up,
Rosie; we all have our little slips!
We regret to learn that Sister Skin-
ner has been getting herself into hot
water. May the scalded finger soon
heal.
The strip of brown velvet described in
yesterday's issue has now been handed
over by us, on the following authority:
(a) Ship's pasteboard chit, proclaim-
ing, in neat, rotund characters:
" This is to certify to all that it
may concern that I have author-
ised bearer to procure for me a
piece of brown velvet, lost on deck
the afternoon of Thursday, 7th
inst., in the year A.D. 1918.
"C."


Friday Night hath set her
silvern lamp. All is soft .hush and mild
delight. What doth the moon reveal?
Aha! A shoe. A white shoe with
5-inch heel drumming gently 'gainst
the pendant lifeboat. We strain our
eyes (we do, indeed). How now? A
stocking. Yea, a white stocking; lots
of it. And then? Alas! the rest of
the picture is inside the boat !
(b) Official buff slip
" Received from Editor of ' X
Press one strip of delicately-per-
fumed brown velvet ribbon, 1 inch
wide, 264 inches long.
"L C i."
Thus do the Seas (or should it be
"C "s?) reveal their little secrets!
Anything been done yet about those
gloves? (Ek-Ek-Ek-Ek)! !
Our Black-and-Whitc artist suggests
that ladies who take the precaution of
attiring themselves in all-black costumes
before adjourning (to breathe the cool
of the evening) in the upper regions,
should urge a like discretion 011 the part
of their snow-clad cavaliers.
We aro asked to state that, owing to
overcrowding, after-dinner seats in the
Ist Class Saloon Lounge cannot be re-
served ten days in advance; nor even
ten minutes! An upturned chair-leg, a
torn ball-gown, legal proceedings, strafe,
tears, burial at sea. and what not. Let's
be happy, at any price!
Hoes Tiny take two lumps in his tea.
or three? Some like it neat; others
aren't fussy at all; ANY old thing!
The set of "Topical Tropical Verse"
from the facile pen of 2nd-Officer Beau-
mont, which we had hoped to publish to-
day, failed to pass the Censor. Better
luck next time, sir!
Sad disappointment for the lady who
went aloft last night for an early
glimpse of the "Southern Cross." The
constellations seem to have been slightly-
jumbled up, and her escort was over-
heard to complain that all they could
discern was the "Seven Sisters." And
quite enough, too!
'Nother roar from the "Fifth." This
time it's the lighting restrictions. "So
confoundedly dark up there that you
can't even distinguish sexes!" Who's
been asking him to? Cheerio, Fifth;
brighter times in store.
THE " X"-PRESS.
(No. 7).
AT SEA, SUNDAY, 10TH MARCH,
1918.
This glorious Sabbath morn finds us
disappointed and depressed. We had—
or thought we had —reason to expect
that
(and five more lines of it, all blue-
pencilled just as we were getting it
011 to the machines! D.0.R.A., we
HATE you!)
We deplore the shortage of glassware,
a shortage—O Readers—that compels
us to share one tumbler 'tween two.
Straws show which way the wind blows.
How true !
Shorty hands us a large cigar to cele-
brate success of his recent action against
the Union-Castle Line. £lOO damages.
Congratulations, sir; put it there ! £lOO
because the " Llanstpphan" deck was
built just a shade too close to Shorty's
coastline. We'd have given much for a
seat in Court.
Ship's Sergeant-Major McKillop, hav-
ing conceived a new interpretation of
"The Manual of Millinery Law," is
now confined to bed with a mild attack
of 'gitis. We wish our dear old com-
rade a speedy and complete recovery.
' Bout turrn!
Under the heading "Racing News,"'
Pte. P. M. Fox sends the following:
Promenade Hurdle Race.—Results: 1,
"Bergoo"; 2. "Sausage"; 3. "Cheese."
All left Cookhouse in fine style. Owing
to heavy rainfall " Bergoo" simply ran
home. "Sausage" rolled in a good
second. Five lengths behind came
"Cheese," hopping along hi great
form. "Greasy xStew" slipped at second
hurdle. "Tea" too weak to run.
Fresh wind to-day and cooler condi-
tions generally. We note, without sur-
prise, that Japanese fans are now being-
discarded. Our sleuth brought ope in
this morning. Same old place! Helio-
trope, with floral design. We shall, of
course, guard it carefully till owner
calls upon us or sends written authority
as to disposal. But why wasn't it hand-
ed to the PURSER for safe keeping?
Why, Oh! 'Why?
X.B. —Closer inspection reveals —
pencilled on fan's (small "f," please,
Mr. Printer) outer rib —the mystic figure
"5": but whether in indication as to
Cabin, Cost of Purchase, or Number
in Family, we have not yet been able
to ascertain.
Rumoured that troops are in the habit
of taking lifebelts from stacks as a sub-
stitute for pillows. From personal ob-
servation (we may not divulge how,
when, or where), we are able to state
that the dearth of soft-and-yielding
head-rests is by no means general. Let's
nestle. Shall us?
They piloted her down, right through
the common herd, to our very doors.
And she came inside, and gave us a
pro-forma receipt, and smiled upon us.
and thanked us so prettily that we
scarcely feel the loss of the little white-
bordered, dove-grey ten-by-ten, describ-
ed 111 yesterday's issue. Unfortunately


wo hadn't time to get it laundered for
the lady.
Overheard below-decks: First Stew-
ard : " Greedy 'og, that's what I calls
the likes of you! " Second ditto:
" Wodjer-mean? " First: "Bin watch-
in' yer in the pantry, day arter day."
Second: "Well, what's wrong with
that?" First: "Wrong with it? Why,
you eats just like them blokes in the
saloon! " (Passed by the Censor, with
grave misgivings.)
A short par. from an unknown source:
"Found, black lady's shoe; apply Elec-
trician." Now which JS it?
S.M.O. and Chaperon all-in-one. Some
stunt, Major! And wtiat a responsi-
bility !
" Stumpy " tells us he's feelin' pretty
good, and is anxious to try conclusions
with any one-legged man up to 18 st.
Best of 3 falls; Graeco-Roman or Catch-
as-catch-can. Sticks barred. Challenge
open to all ranks. Stakes to be de-
posited with Sporting Editor, who has
undertaken to arrange time and place,
and to act as referee.
Bosun drifted in again this morning.
Says we're taking away his character.
And not a day too soon f Better with-
out it, Ave think. Any seconders?
"Green Eye" inquires: Is the guard
posted at entrance to "Staff Quarters "
on duty for the Duration? We've ask-
ed the sentry; he savs, "I hope so."
THE "X "• PRESS
(No. 8)
AT SEA. MONDAY, lltli March, 1918
With unfeigned satisfaction we an-
nounce the extension of our Literary
Staff. Encouraged by the growing in-
terest manifested in our first few edi-
tions, and recognising the necessity for
covering a wider field, we have now
secured the whole-hearted co-operation
of three Lady Representatives, whom
we :now beg to present to our readers
as under:
"FLORA ": Special Correspondent on
all matters pertaining to Promen-
ade Deck, Dining Salon, Social
Gossip, and kindred subjects. She
will, in addition, contribute special
articles on Cookery, Gardening,
Needlework, Advice to Young Peo-
ple, and so forth.
"DORA": Special Correspondent on
all matters pertaining to Boat Deck,
Saloon-Lounge, Entertainment (in
all its branches), Art, Drama, etc.,
etc. (watch those etceteras!). From
the same fertile source we are pro-
mised an occasional article on Hints
to Mothers, The Children's Corner,
and sich-like.
"NORA": Expert proof-reader, typ-
iste and stenographiste. Certified
speed 24| knots.
Supported by this unique Staff we are
now ready to do really useful work.
Come ye all with your little troubles and
grievances and wrongs and have 'em
adjusted by Flora, Dora, and Nora.
Fifth Officer Jones, with tears iin his
voice, entreats us to do something to
dispel general belief that our little
paper is edited, controlled and financed
by himself. We will. But the belief
is not quite so "general" as he fears.
Our Promenade-Deck Correspondent, as
recently as yesterday afternoon, report-
ed having overheard one of our Mili-
tary Officers accept entire personal re-
sponsibility for "THE 'X' PRESS"
and contents thereof. We understand
that with delightful modesty —he
begged the lady to let it go no further;
didn't want it to " get about"—might
injure his Reputation, and all that sort of
thing: what? The lady is altogether
blameless, and probably still respects the
" Secret-aiii<s-Confidential - Information."
But the S.-&-C.-T'. aforesaid was pitched
in a key just one semi-tone too high for
FLORA to miss. By the way, it' this
graceful and retiring Officer (let's call
him Violet, for short) will favour us
with a call we'll be just tickled to
death to hand over a file of communica-
tions, addressed to the Editor, and in-
advertently dealt with by our lowly
selves. They mainly threaten action for
Libel and Defamation, aind we'll be
mighty glad to pass 'em along to the
"responsible" party. 'Course, if Violet
won't step forward and help us out, we
must just carry on as heretofore and
append our initials at foot of each issue,
as ordained by Instruments Act (para.
47/ ciii), 1890.
Some people are so delightfully trans-
parent, are they not? Hello! so YOU
inoticed it too? Perhaps we'd better
keep the Cream of the Joke to our-
selves after all. Sssssssh !!!!!!
Short tropical shower yesterday.
Lasted only a few seconds, but coming
as it did, just at tea-time, WAS rather
inconvenient.
May we remind thosfc nocturnal vocal-
ists who serenade the precincts- of these
offices, just as we go to press, with the
little ballad extolling " her lily-white
teeth and her nut-brown eyebrows," that
our Editorial Staff gets along better if
undisturbed? NORA, while not actually
complaining, asks us to mention that
this sort of thing breeds printers' errors.
Rumoured that Storekeeper Lipton,
who doles out the Troops' jam and but-
ter and cheese with such mathematical
precision and exactitude, is to retire
shortly from the Grocery World. Future
plans include the establishment of a
modern steam laundry. Garrison Mar-
ines, please note.


S3
W
§
S
<4
ijll.1! i
iilifi ■
IsSfLt
nmii
S'D £ £
SG&LSFA
PlPsl
IjlillS J
.,
iHssle ! J
||?!11S
TSSGJO,
IsllalS
ipsia
ii«ra
BOCSS-S
',S§£'GXA-
CP.SB^«S§
sfilHl
JH „ S3
H1&:
l|Ssl°|
Isllllf
Kite?
■so»SSfe3 vi
:iijsl? ,j
lilllll 'J
!&!!*
iiflll!
s l:Pll
°.STSO


A frenzied howl from the Orderly
Room Sergeant. Will we persuade Pay-
Sergeant Middleton to tear himself
away from those long, iced spiders once
in a while and identify himself with his
legitimate job? The Troops—so the
complainant alleges—have not yet realis-
ed that there's a Pay Staff aboard, and
besiege the Orderly '.Room (" bombard "
was the word originally used, but let's
be moderate) with an endless procession
of inquiries about Pay and Overdrafts.
Seems to be a case of "glass houses."
By way of reply we ask: Isn't it time
the Orderly Room woke up and did
something to justify that "Staff Mess."
Far's we can ascertain, the whole .De-
partment is nothing better than a sort
of general rendezvous for loafers and
tenth-rate Bridge-players of assorted
rank. The real work of the place is
said to be done entirely by the mess-
orderlies. Two of 'em; for a "Staff"
of six! "Nearly as bad as Horseferry
Road! " exclaimed one disgusted war-
rior this evening. And we, who over-
heard, quite agree.
"Jean" throws out a gentle feeler:
"Is the substitution of Navy Blue for
Navy White the outcome of a friendly
hint offered in a recent issue of your
valuable paper? " Not altogether.
Jean. Hadn't you heard of the con-
gested state of affairs in the ship's
laundry?
FLORA. signalling this afternoon
from the Children's Corner, reports:
"All quiet, as usual; 'specially in the
Lounge." By the way, will our fair
correspondent tell us: (1) Name of lady
who remarked: "I'd give ten years of
my life for a head of hair like the
Quartermaster's"? (2) Whether she
referred to Captain Kaufman, or to
S.Q.M.S. ?
"Found, a RUBY." Thus runs the
announcement on Bureau notice-board.
DORA will please furnish detailed report
as to: (1) How. (2) When. (3) Where.
P.S. —On second thoughts we won't
trouble you about item (3).
A little soft soap, so we're told, often
goes a long way. We shall be interested
to hear of its effect upon the epicurean
palate of our dear old friend from No.
t> Mess. A welcome substitute for
butter? Bread and soft soap, with a
top-dressing of plum-and-apple. Quite
the Bairnsfather touch. Oh. these
Saturdav-night-sergeants!
Signaller R. T. Morgan asks us to
insert the following advertisement:
"Anyone wishing to learn The Shcll-
Shock Lancers or The Wobbly Mazurka,
should communicate with ' Ragtime.'
c/o Ship's Hospital. Terms moderate."
E.J.H., Ed., "THE f X' PRESS"
(till "VIOLET " comes along and takes
over). .
(No. 9.)
THE " X"-PRESS.
At Sea, Tuesday, March 12, 1918.
We advance to the footlights and
blush fully accept a dainty floral tribute
from our esteemed colleague, 2nd
Officer Beaumont.
THE CARMELITE.
'Twas on the briny ocean
That some one conceived the notion
All the happ'nings on the ship to tell.
To those who did not know them
(There were those who said. " Oh, blow
them !")
Others said a word that rhymes with
WELL.
Some said, " I know that fellow ;
He's got jaundice, really yellow;
Never comes on defck till after dark."
Some claimed the credit (?), wrongly,
Not to put the case too strongly;
"Of course they only said so for a
lark." ' .
Some of those who have been men-
tioned,
Tho' of men the best intentioned,
Are out 'a-seeking for the caitiff's
blood;
While the little. "Jacky Homers"
Kissing in the darkened corners,
Said the fellow's name was Blank-
Blank MUD.
Others say, amid their laughter,
There will be a sad hereafter
For a person owning gifts so great
(oh stop !)
In the way of wild invention (Sorry !
OUR mistake!)
(The short word one mustn't mention)
Hasn't placed them at the service of
the State.
For, when the war is ended
(In the way which we intended),
Don't ask ME when, for I can only
guess:
'Twill be when monks are shriven
And the "Carmelite" in Heaven,
The Other place's reserved for "THE
• X ' PRESS."
In the. Censor's opinion this is miles
and miles ahead of those "Topical
Tropicals." We concur.
We note that the revised nominal
roll of domestic pets in the butcher's
menagerie includes an emu and a
kangaroo. The latter seems to have
got his tail down over something or
other. Can some kind reader throw a
little light on the subject?
We are asked to ascertain whether
a certain Third-Divvy-Sergeant, after
three weeks' sun-bath up aloft, has
developed the desired shade of Galli-
poli-Egypt-Sinai tan.


Some drop their aitches, others their
"i's." Need we say More?
Wifey's on the war-path. Take cover!
Wo quake for the Party-of-the-Second-
Part. " Hell hath no Fury . . (etc.) And
after all these years! Dora says we
may rely on her to do her little durndest
to bring 'em together again; failing
that, she offers to be a "sister" to the
neglected bride.
Our silver tenor laments. Pianist
Owen's touch is too heavy for The
Voice. Told Biljim, 011 Aft-Well-Deck
this morning. "Every time he accom-
panies me he very nearly drowns me!"
You'll never guess what Biljim said in
reply. .Said he: " ' ' 'pity 'e
didn't complete the job!" Alas! poor
Maudie!
Confusion somewhere. Did he mis-
take the open sea for Sierra Leone Bay?
and tho deck steward for a native coin-
diver? If not, why those silver-papered
ha'p'nies at yesterday morning's Church
Collection. Did SHE' notice the psuedo
two-shilling donation (on their joint be-
half) to the Disabled Seamen's Fund?
Just a "joke," of course. Quite!
Quite ! ! Oh ! Quite !
"Embarrassed" asks: "Is Local
Treatment advocated in the case of
superficial injury to base of skull, due
to sudden contact with deck-flooring?"
'Fraid we know less of these matters
than we should. And even if we did,
we couldn't advise. Recent instructions
prohibit the discussion in these columns
of any form of treatment, whether local
or general. Better put your case to the
S.M.O. Sick Parades, 9 a.m. and 4.30
p.m. daily.
'Bout that MJ .: Bravery 111 the Field
or On the Boat-Deck? We'll ask Dora.
What's all this about 110 Soap in the
Upper Regions? Will Flora please as-
certain and report?
So Zillo (sweet name!) had his own
way and came up, after all? Is he
happy with his new playmate? "A
Jovial Monk am I, contented with my
Lot!" Struth! we should shaysho. Re-
ported that the wee darling subsequent-
ly swallowed the 3rd Officer's " Onoto,"
and that, in dealing with future social
engagements, if he can't come he'll
write. Wonder if he knows anything
of that rifle-bolt?
We are asked to state that yester-
day's Invasion of the Upper Circles by
Tribe of Israel does not portend the
floating of another War Loan. They
assembled for nothing more serious than
a photographic group, which we hope
to publish in due course.
Phyllis thinks it high time some of
these Lounge-rs forsook the one Bridge
for t'other, and did something to cheer
the lone grass widows. We may be in-
curably astigmatic by day, and subject
to night-blindness after sunset, but—"re-
liable sources" assure us that Phyllis'
little outburst is without foundation and
due, almost entirely, to petulance. The
Bridge at Midnight. May I to Hearts,
Partner? MAY we!! Wow-wow!!!!!
Anybody hear about the Horrible
Mess our Third has got into? Says the
situation is more than he can Bayer.
'Xtra-Second (Fourth, as well, for that
matter) reported as chronic diabetics.
Expect interesting disclosures this side
of the Cape.
The lady who semaphores hubby
every morn before breakfast is sym-
pathetically entreated to tell us what
code she favours; and whether by
hanky, by towel, or what?
The Sports Committee, feeling that
it is their privilege, no less than their
obligation, to carry out the wishes of
the passengers, will be delighted to re-
ceive, through the columns of The
" X"-Press, any suggestions for the
further conduct of Deck Sports. (Don't
make it TOO solid, boys!) In particu-
lar they fear that the continuous round
of strenuous games which they have so
diligently kept going, day after day.
may have been too much strain 011 the
physique of those participating. They
would welcome an opinion as to whe-
ther the programme of these admitted-
ly healthful recreations should not be
reduced to, at any rate, 3 or 4 hours
per day.
Sister French, we learn, is down with
Heart-Trouble. Ah well! Girls WILT,
be girls!
Wrong again, Phoebe; tho Port-side
is the side on which they dropped that
bottle yesterday morning. There's a
certain "dry" humour in the incident
if you've time to turn it over.
Jaunty Julius —O.C. Cello in Ship's
Orchestra —is probably the most lachry-
mose man aboard. Just been en-
deavouring to cheer him. No use!
He'll weep and weep and weep till he
hits on some way of tucking the old
fiddle under his chin. Poor Julius!
A place for everything, and every-
thing in its place. Now, who stacked
those Bibles? And why?
Suggested that lounge-chairs be re-
served by visiting-card, in tho case of
civvies; for Others an identity-disc
would answer equally well.
About that fan. Will you sign the
receipt or won't you? You said we
could keep it, but please reflect, and
tell us quite definitely.
E.J.H., Ed. " X"-PRESS. (Watch
for change of initials.)


THE 44 X "-PRESS. (No. 10.)
AT SEA, WEDNESDAY, 13TH
MARCH, 1918.
44 Excelda " makes a sporting appeal
to our Better Instincts. We (that means
you, as well, O Brethren of the Troop-
Decks) are besought to avert our mascu-
line gaze when the Saratogas and suit-
cases make their weekly appearance in
our midst. We regret to announce that
the activities of last Baggage Day at-
tracted to the Aft Well-Deck no less
than 948 Other Ranks—out of a 44 pos-
sible " 971 (total figures include 12
Naval Ratings, 32 Munition Workers,
sundry Hospital cases, Editorial Staff
and—bien entendu—our Canteen Ser-
geant). Field-glasses came into play,
from various coigns of vantage, and—
though we shrink from mentioning it —-
our Artist, for whom we had hitherto
entertained a healthy regard, was de-
tected in a strategical position at the
very summit of the mizzen, gloating on
a little rough sketch which he subse-
quently submitted to ourselves, under
the alliterative title : " The Camouflage
of the Camisole " (or something equally
horrid). Rough wasn't the word for
it! We are happy to assure our readers
that it was instantly rejected, with be-
fitting scorn.
"Nother Baggage Day Monday, boys.
Let's see you behave !
44 Plum Warner " asks: 44 Are.the Ser-
geants keeping something up their
sleeves (no, he doesn't mean stripes),
or can it be" that they simply don't
understand the game? " This inquiry
has been passed to Secretary, Sports
and Entertainments Committee.
The following wireless message is
published for general information:
44 From Senior Medical Officer,
H.M.T.S. NORMAN.' At Sea;
To Editor, THE 4 X-'-PRESS,
H.M.T.S. 'LLANSTEPH A N
CASTLE.'
44 desire explain monday after-
noons manoeuvres (ak, ak, ak) forty-
one husbands this vessel paraded
sick last 24 hours (a.a.a.) twenty-
seven definitely diagnosed chronic
eye-strain (a.a.a.) have recommended
commander alter course " (ends).
Above message, which has apparently
been delayed in transmission, should
dispel absurd rumour that, in response
to repeated S.O.S. from Sierra Leone,
we were hastening by shortest route
back to The Boys on the 44 Bacchante."
Our proud privilege, yesterday, to
shake hands with lady-signaller men-
tioned in our Sunday edition. Introduc-
tion kindly effected by FLORA. Quoth
the former, in an outburst of highly-
italicised indignation: "I'll semaphore
to my husband when I please and how
I please, and iust to show how little
I care about your rotten old paper,
I'll wave, not with one hand, but with
both ! " What! What! !
A gleam of rare humour, from the
Sergeants' Mess: 44 Our Corporal Mess-
Orderly does not smoke or drink, nor
does he wear purple socks. But, Gee!
he does love the girls! "
(Provost-Sergeant !!!!!!!! At the
double !!!!!!!!!!)
A propos Corporals and Lurid Socks.
Anybody ever notice the snowy-haired,
lovelorn laddie who at times evades the
vigilant barrier-sentry and snuggles in
among the quaite naice people? Thought
so! We asked him to-day (or was it
yesterday?) why he wore such noisy
half-hose. 44 To keep my feet from go-
ing to sleep," came the insolent rejoin-
der. Whereupon wo left him to ln&
well-merited fate. There's a 44 live-
wire " electrician in the immediate
vicinity, and FLORA predicts a short-
circuit. By way of foot-note, she adds
something about: 44 That'll take the cud
out of his fleece," but our sight (as we
have so often remarked) is poor, and our
correspondent's pencilled jottings are a
trifle feint. NORA (invaluable soul!)
shall decipher them when she reports
back from the early-morning-skip.
44 Bakerloo " —a straphanger of no
mean attainments—strongly advocates
suspension of leathern thongs from
Lounge ceiling. The suggestion, we
learn, is put forward for the benefit of
ladies ascending to their cafe-noir, after
the Other Sex has installed itself.
Hearken, all ye good Australians, to
44 4 Bluey' the News Giver," and lend
careful ear what time he administers
(through the hospitality of our ever-open
columns) reproof to a homesick 44 1914-
Class " catcchist. Enter Bluey. Chord
on. Red limes, please (yes, we know,
and no cider either, so don't try to in-
terrupt) .
We adjure you (Bluey speaking, of
course) to preserve your equilibrium
with your imminent reappearance in
Ozzie. 11l doth it become the warrior
to allow trifles such as a sea-trip back
to the Commonwealth to disturb his
tranquillity of mind, after such a brief
and uneventful interval of absence.
Why, man alive! the ship reeks with
sentimentality, and the maudlin observa-
tions overheard about 44 Home," etc..
have become intolerable to the more
sober-minded. The surrounding atmos-
phere seethes with vain and foolish
speculation as to 44 What will it be
like? " etc., etc. In similar circum-
stances such expressions from, say. a
regiment of uninitiated W.A.A.C.'s


might perhaps be excusable; but, com-
ing from the present quarter we accept
it as proof-positive of the effeminating
influence of Army Life.
However, we risk an accusation of
pandering to your weakness and have
interviewed a Melburnian, much re-
nowned on board by reason of having
sojourned in his native city as recently
as October. 1917. He brings the glad
tidings that Young and Jacksons still
appease the drought-stricken on ye olde
familiar corner. (Who said the famous
landmark had been demolished? Sac-
rilege!) The waters of the Yarra are
crystalline as of yore, contrasting
strongly with the turbid wasters (Par-
don ! we mean turbid waters) of Port
Jackson. Percy Brunton, the peanut
king, has abdicated his Melbourne;
throne, and now spends his leisure in
jocose discussions with Sydney magis-
trates. Our informant also relates that
Melbourne trams remain unrivalled for
speed, which still necessitates the frantic
warning, " Mind the Curves! " Not-
withstanding Mi'. John Norton's demise
in 1915 his typical veracity and Truth
continue to play an important part in
moulding thought, and in exalting the
mental state of both old and new ad-
herents.
Bravo Bluev ! Stuff t' gie 'em !
E.J.H., Ed. "THE ' X '-PRESS."
(Step forth, Violet! She KNOWS it's
you.)
THE " X "-PRESS. (No. 11.)
At Sea, Thursday, 14th March, 1918.
Our Art Supplement has struck yet
another note in the complicated (tho'
responsive) chord-system of Second Offi-
ce!* Beaumont, ivho now offers us gentle
reproof, mingled with mild adulation
and enlivened by an occasional trill from
"The Three Fishers." Behold the
finished product:
ANOTHER FLORA L TRIBUTE.
Three little maidens, somewhere out
West,
Somewhere out West —where the sun
goes down.
Seizing their fountain pens ("Swans"
of the best),
Started to write all the "Happenings "
down.
One little mannikin, " One of the Best "
(It's hardly the truth, 'but we'll set it
down),
With frown terrific and lips comprest,
Strafed "The Second " and got ©one
Brown.
Three little maidens and one little man !
(Jolly hard luck for the Fair Un-
known !)
No doubt they divide him as best they
can,
Hair and hide of him, flesh and bone.
(This sort of thing must be stopped.
FLORA, DORA and NORA are grass-
widows of unimpeachable respectability.
-Ed.)
Three little maidens, list to my plea—
Bear no spite as these lines you can—
In whatsoever you write of me,
Cherish the truth as you cherish Man.
Three fair maidens, and God's Good
Man—
Shades of Washington! do not frown—
I have to Blarney 'em all I can;
Tisn't my fault if the truth is known.
Four against one doesn't seem quite
fair
(Which one's fancy to sketching flew?)
You might have given me < e -cut hair I
That's all 1 think I may ask of you.
Three little maidens, one Man of Fame
(Fame deserv-ed, I must confess),
In all your writings please " play the
game."
Now I've finished; your move, " f X'-
PRESS."
Padre Henderson, believing that our
Nautical Bard had confused the initials,
came in and talked of Libel. Our
credentials satisfied the Reverend Cap-
tain that the term " God's Good Man "
may apply equally to the Editor. As
a mark of general goodwill the entire
literary staff will be happy to waltz in
our " Second's " warm embrace at the
next Promenade-Deck Soiree.
"An Ode to Spring," by The Bos'n,
is unavoidably rejected as being a trifle
too —shall we say? —Arcadian in its
treatment.
Over our cup of Orange Pekoe and
"Savory " cigarette, Nora has just
submitted what she calls The Germ of
an Idea, compiled by herself from
rough jottings made on deck yesterday
(Wednesday) afternoon. Bv way of en-
couragement we'd really like to release
it from our "Held-Over" file. The
opening line ("There's many a Slip.
Aboard the Ship") promises well, but
pressure on our space prevents its pub-
lication in to-day's edition.
Boxing Tournament to be aban-
doned? Not while Lieut.-Col. Butler
retains his control of The Sports and
Entertainments Committee! We heard
tho rumour and followed it un. Inter-
viewed this morning, Lieut.-Col. Butler
authorised us to announce that the Big
Event will be well and truly held on
Monday next, 2.30 p.m. Aft-Well-Deck.
And we'll all be there. If Baby's


Money-Box will stand the strain (and
that's quite a big "If" at the present
moment), trophies—in the form of
medals —will be purchased ut Cape
Town. Meanwhile victors will be
officially decorated with a special Rib-
bon, to be worn on the right breast.
Further entries are required. These
will be accepted up till 9 p.m. Satur-
day. ( competitors are urged to run
alon'*" and hand in their record-Cards
to Ship's Sergeant-Major McKillop
(O.C. Stoush), or leave their particulars
at. Ship's Orderly Room.
"That's rnore'n Atlas could do!"
exclaimed one of vour pampered menials
us he bore in the third course of to-
day's 1 uncheon. "'E might've balanced
the World on 'is 'and, but I'll be 'anged
if 'e could do it with the Troops'
Duff!"
Albatrosses (in reply to Nancy -
Mabel's inquiry) are the elite of sea-
birds, and only condescend to patronise
the waters contiguous to Australia.
Hence their absence between Devon-
port and here. Navigating Officer will
enlighten you as to where "here" is.
No ; they do not lay their eggs in the
Crow's-Nest.
Will the thoughtless, who address the
Naval Petty Officer (located in the
Sergeants' Mess) as "Jack," please
note that his baptismal name was —and
still is—Edgar (without the "H").
Utter the name "Jack' anywhere in
public and quite a host of dinkum
Jacks will respond, with nary a solitary
bluejacket represented in the chorus.
Our naval correspondent points out that
the original "John" was either a mili-
tary policeman or a slit-eyed producer
of vegetables, washer of other people's
clothing and frequenter of Li'llee-Lon
and Li'llee-Bourke Streets; thorough-
fares of unsavoury memory. Readers
are pohtely requested to eliminate the
"Jack" from future conversations or
arguments (as the case may be) with
deep-sea mariners.
Irresponsible Suggestions from Irre-
sponsible Sources: (a) That the divid-
ing rail between Ist and 2nd Class
decks be treated with a coat of lumin-
ous paint and retouched generally, (bl
That the Prohibition Notice thereon be
renewed, the lettering having been
gradually obliterated by interchange of
social visits between deck and deck, (c)
That Sentry-Saint Peter be replaced
bv barbed-wire entanglements and re-
leased from guardianship of the Hal-
lowed Portals with a view to assisting
lower-citegory fatigue-men in lower-
regions. (d) That St. P. aforesaid be
provided with a pair of puttees and ati
extra camp-stool for his heels.
Among to-day's illustrious visitors to
the Editorial Sanctum we were privi-
leged to entertain Captain T. Chope,
R.N.R. (the genial skipper of our float-
ing palace). Dropping in casually dur-
ing his tour of Inspection, he asked
for Flora, with whom he desired to
confer with regard to recent Beauty
competition, which, we learn, resulted
in a dead-heat with our Adjutant. On
the subject of THE "X"-PRESS the
Commander gave instructions that It
be printed on his own private press,
and has thus facilitated its produc-
tion and circulation on board.
We hope to make a further
announcement in this connection,
in the not-too-dim future. We are as-
sured that our earlier issues cannot be
printed "till after the Cape,'' and should
have been proud to distribute a few
"back numbers" among those of our
readers who have asked for this form,
of souvenir of their voyage from Ply-
mouth to Cape Town iin the "Llan-
stephan Castle," "Hospital Carrier
' X.' " (By the way, it is pointed out
that the use of the letters I-I.M.T.S is
incorrect, the vessel being a Requisi-
tioned Liner.) To those passengers to
whom w r e have, in all optimism and
childlike innocence, promised to deliver
printed copies of our little effort before
reaching Table Bay, we offer our un-
reserved apologies. Nora, ever ready
to lend a helping hand, has risen to the
occasion, and is willing to hammer out
a few specimen, copies on the editorial
typewriter, when not otherwise employ-
ed. If the ladies referred to will send
instructions to the Editor, Nora will
put in her overtime at the machine
and run off the old editions. But time
is growing short., amd we require to be
notified with as little delay as possible.
Later, we shall make our appearance in
book form, and shall be happy to mail
the finished article to any part of the
world from first Australian port of call.
[P.S. —Cape Town, 20.318.
But we man iged to get the jolt rushed
through by the "Cape 'limes" staff
after 'aft \-Ed.\
Lieut.-Colonel Dobbin (O.C. Troops)
authorises us to announce that certain
Lady Passengers foregathered this
morning and decided (quite spontane-
ously, quite unanimously and quite
among themselves) that the Troops'
Sports' Fund and the Troops' Comfort
Fund are very much their personal con-
cern. So, with ne'er a syllable to C.0.,
Adjutant, or any other of the Military
Powers-that-Be, these same ladies re-
solved themselves into an impromptu
sub-committee and enlisted the smiling
co-operation of Flora, Dora, Nora and
sundry other ladies. With the nett re-
sult that, a little later in the day, a
very astonished and very delighted O.C.
Troops was handed the sum of
£lB 3s. Od.,
to be expended in the manner indicated.
\\ 7 ho says Nobody Loves the Troops?


Our lady correspondents report fever-
ish activities "Up Aloft" in connection
with forthcoming concert bv the Musi-
cal Mountebanks. Industrious ladies
have devoted hours and hours and hours
of their valuable time to such matters
as constructing Pierrot costumes and
preparing a hundred and one other
little surprises ("for the Troops"),
which we're not going to spoil by talk-
ing of till the time comes. But, alas!
no one ever seems to accept the
Editorial Word for anything. Read,
then, O Unbelievers! the open letter of
our worthy comrade " Rodg-o" :
"To the Editor, *X'-Press:
"Sir, —Through the columns of your
unique paper I would like you to con-
vey to the ladies (whose names I regret
to state I do not know) our sincerest
thanks for the interest shown and ex-
cellent work done on behalf of ' The
Musical Mountebanks.'—Yours faith-
fully,
IT. ROY ROGERS-HARRISON (Cpl.),
Hon. Sec., Sports and Entertain-
ments Committee."
"15-3-18."
So there you are! We've been (and
not altogether without cause) a gloomy,
depressed mob, this first month on
board; but the trip is still in its early
infancy, and, now that we seem to bo
getting a move on at last, why, bless
your hearts! there's no reason why the
2nd and 3rd and 4th months of our
little cruise shouldn't be made just one
long continuous whirl of gaiety. 'Sope
so, anyway !
The Editor will now summon his
faithful adherents and distribute offi-
cial instructions regarding the next
edition.
You, Flora dear, will please seek out
a certain Officer (as per sealed orders
herewith; you'll identify him by the
decoration) and ascertain something
definite about that ill-considered invita-
tion which he issued last evening
(Wednesday) in Ye Lounge, and which
was promptly and unexpectedly ac-
cepted. We must know whether he re-
grets his impetuosity. Just one more
little item. (Now what the 'ELL-IS it?
Forgive the impatient expletive.)
And you, Dora, will (in the parlance
of the " Three-Card"-exponent) en-
deavour to "find the lady," and tell us
just how she feels about the incident.
On the one hand, she may not wish to
discuss it; on the other, well there's
always the possibility that she MAY.
Next, we want one of you to investi-
gate the origin (Cause and Effect
please) of those agonising yells of
" Steward ! Steward !! Steward !!! "
and give us the Story of the
Tap. We suggest that you treat this
as "The Bath Tragedy," though you
will of course exercise your own dis-
cretion in the matter. Repeat, if pos-
sible- (and as accurately as circum-
stances—and censorship—permit) what
she told the Engineer and what the
Engineer told her. The Troops are
not particularly FINICKEY as to
"dressing" of the story, but in your
next batch of " Health Hints" we shall
welcome an opinion as to advantages—
or otherwise —of the matutinal cold
plunge.
No. 1926, Fte. Gordon, ('., of the
Soufchall Flying Corps, reports loss of
one pair khaki "slacks." If the person
who discovered same in this soldier's
hammock will have the goodness to
communicate with us we shall be happv
to hand him Pte. Gordon's artificial
leg and braces; owner having no fur-
ther use for same.
The Commander looked in again this
morning to pass us the time of day
and. incidentally, to hand in a short
announcement for our Agony Column.
However, "Charlotte" having been
subsequently arrested on "F" Troops
Deck and conveyed to her kennel hard
by the Bridge, this notification of her
loss has been withdrawn.
No. old dear; that perpetual throb-
bing, pulsating, "thump-thump, thump-
thump" which disturbs your midnight
slumber is not due to the revolution
of the Ship's engines. It's merely the
rumbling echoes of our printing plant
and denotes that your morning copy of
THE " X"-PRESS- is "on the
machines" and that Events of the Day
will be found in their accustomed place
when you turn out for a broezer before
breakfast.
E.J.H., Ed., THE "X"-PRESS.
(No. 12).
THE " X"-PRESS.
At Sea, Friday, 15th March, 1918.
A despondent wail from The Pessimist:
Tell me not in mournful numbers life is
but an empty dream,
Life is full of froth and bubble, and
things are not what they seem.
For an instance, let me tell you when
you see a one-armed bloke,
Don't think you've got the advantage,
you'll be sorry that you spoke.


THE «X
There aremen who've fought their bat-
tles with the mitts before the war,
If a "stump" they now possess, it's
still enough to break your jaw.
Don't imagine, when you purchase
ginger-ale on board this boat,
You are going to sell the bottle, though
you hide it 'neath your coat.
Men on board have made their living—
Ante Bellum—at the game,
Oath' ring "dead marines," and now
they try to do the very same.
They will hang around and haunt you,
armed with corkscrew and with Cup,
And they don't forget to taunt you if
you will not give it up.
Do not hope, one single instant, for a
quiet reposeful day,
"With a book beneath the awnings, to
pass the pleasant hours away.
Rudely you will be awakened, tlio'
you're ever on your guard,
By the yells of ' She's a 'Tupp'ny!''
"Kelly's Eye!" " OO'll 'ave a
card?"
Cigarettes are quite the fashion, issued
out in lieu of rum,
If you smoke them all, you're lucky;
someone's always "on the hum,"
Just because they lose their issue dip-
ping in "the lucky bag,"
Losing, therefore, buttonhole you with
the old " Gie us a fag? "
On this ship and down on "B " Deck,
where the Troops ablutionise,
Lives a would-be washerwoman, who,
for "neck," must scoop the prize.
Tho' there are two basins only, and a
wash-trough, in the place,
Yet lie fills them all with clothes, mono-
polising all the space.
Men are said to be mere children—in
their ways they're often so,
Some in fact do get more childish,
every day they older grow.
Have you ever noticed children, when
they see a monkey inear,
Gather round, and want to pet it, held
back only by their fear?
P'raps it's to their type reverting, when
you see a crowd of men
Playing with their predecessors—and it
happens, now and then,
You all know just what that lady found
one morning in her roll,
V hat about that bit of pudding which
contained a lump of coal?
Though from coal we extract perfume,
cresol, tar and dyes, 'twould seem,
It is used on board this vessel mainly
for producing steam.
\\ hy not keep it in the bunkers, use
it in tho Galley-range?
But, as substitute for food it will be
found a poor exchange.
PRESS.
These few items may impress you that
life is not all a dream;
Life on board is full of trouble, aind
things are not what they seem.
E.J.H. —Ed. "The 'X' -Press."
("Violet" says: "1 don't want the
Job !").
The Second Class Music Salon have
ing been renovated and decorated and
titivated and fumigated, is again thrown
open to its members. Missing electric
bulbs have been replaced, upholstery
and tapestry have been vacuum-cleaned,
and the Sergeants may now be seen, in
the deodorised lounge-chairs and set-
tees. chatting, with even more than
customary animation. By the way, who
told Dora they were "only cock-
roaches " ?
Master Walter Craven (aged 9 years)
confides: "I do think soldiers are
funny; they're so different to the offi-
cers! " Quite so, Walter, but has it
taken you nine long years to make the
discovery ?
A fusillade of pertinent and impertin-
ent questions from an inquisitive non-
commissioned officer:
"Things we wish to know of the
Editor, ' X '-Press:
1. Who were you with last night?
2. Which was switch on the lady's
3. Where all the members of the fair
sex—late Prom-Deck frequenters—have
disappeared to?
4. Who pinched the Lime-Juice Issue?
5. Exact relationship of S. M. Mc-
Killop to the late Captain Kettle.
6. What happened to those four 2,000-
ton submarines?
7. Whether the Sergeants know any
other game than cricket?
8. What's wrong with the Old Hook?
9. Who'll have a card?
Four short verses (and a half) from
our self-appointed Boat-Deck Poet:
UP ALOFT.
The sun was slowly sinking to the old
Atlantic's breast
As the Sub-Guard swung his hammock
and prepared to go to rest.
He removed his hat and tunic; he re-
moved his boots as well,
Then, suddenly, remembered news his
mate he had to tell.


(2)
He went to where his "cobber" slept;
he yarned for 'arf-a-mo',
Forgetful of the couples coming up from
down-below.
The deck was their conservatory, a dance
was in full swing,
And for a spot to dodge the crowd,
sure! this was Just the Thing.
(4)
So he sat him down in silence (what
else was there to do?)
And listened, cyn-i-cal-ly, to the old, old
bill-and-coo.
And, after just on two full hours, at
last they went below,
The Guard grew sort-of pensive as he
sat and watched them go.
(4j)
(3)
The Guard was much embarrassed, and
he voiced a hapless groan,
When he found his " pozzie " taken by
a Three-Pip (not aloiie).
They nestled close together, the Guard
they didn't see;
He hadn't heart to turn them out,
though very tired was he.
And, as he clambered into bed, he mut-
tered, with a frown:
"MY OATH! TO-MORROW I'LL
TURN IN BEFORE THE SUN
GOES DOWN !! "
With her personal guarantee that
she'll be more careful in future, we are
returning that heliotrope fan to the lady
who mislaid it. The incident will now
close.
VOL. 11. of The "X "-PRESS will be published as soon as
circumstances permit.
Advance orders may be booked now at "X -Press Publish-
ing Department, Upper Deck, midway between 2nd Class
Music Salon and Troops' Ablution-shed.


ylutographs


