

The Voyage of the Otter
1 795 - 1 797
By
George Pratt Insh
Reprinted from The Scottish Geographical Magazine,
Vo!. 67, No. 1 (1951), pp. 10-19




THE VOYAGE OF THE OTTER , 1795-1797
By George Pratt Insh
“ An American ship named the Otter ” —so runs the second paragraph
of a long Dispatch of 30th April 1796 from the Governor of New South
Wales to the Duke of Portland, the Home Secretary—“ commanded
by Ebenezer Dorr and belonging to Boston, having touched at this
Port to refresh his Ship’s Company and to have some small repairs
done to the Ship, being bound on a Voyage to the North West Coast
of America and China; after having been treated here with much
Civility and assisted in his Repairs as far as it was in our Power to
forward them, he contrary to a very pointed Article in the Port
Orders, which he had received on his Arrival, carried from hence
several People, for whose Embarkation he had not obtained any
Permission, and amongst this number, Mr Thomas Muir.” 1
The gaol-delivery which touched Governor Hunter to not unjusti-
fied indignation, was on a more extensive scale than one would gather
from the measured condemnation of his dispatch. When the Otter
cleared from Sydney on 18th February 1796 she carried under her
hatches not fewer than sixteen convicts : a day out from port she
picked up a small boat in which Muir, accompanied by two servants,
had slipped out from Port Jackson under cover of night.
Hitherto historians have been interested in the Otter mainly on
account of the part it played in the escape from the convict settlement
of Thomas Muir, the young Scottish advocate, whilom a student of
the College of Glasgow and one of the victims of the judicial Terror
of Braxfield. Muir, however, formed one of the crowded and curious
ship’s company only for part of the voyage—from Sydney across the
Pacific to Nootka Sound in Vancouver Island. We know a good deal
about that trip across the Pacific. But we know about it only as a
result of the exercise of the acquisitive instincts of the New England
skipper before he reached Sydney. Of Captain Dorr’s activity we
obtain a vivid glimpse in the shadow of the great basalt cliffs of
Amsterdam Island. Apart from the collection at this ocean outpost
of the sea-otter skins which the Boston skipper held had been stored
up for him by a benevolent Providence, and apart from his recruiting
his ship’s company from the straggling huts of the convict settlement,
the two years’ voyage of the Otter (1795-1797) has at least two more
general interests : it reveals the details of the trade carried on at that
time by the American ships between their north-west coast and China ;
it has its own little share in the story of the exploration of the Pacific.
For the Scottish student, however, its main interest will probably
always be its connection with the varied Odyssey of Thomas Muir.
II
According to that legendary account of the adventures of Muir,
which still attracts a certain amount of not too robust credence, the
Otter was sent by President George Washington to carry off Muir
from Sydney, j


A quarter of a century ago an American historian pointed out that
at the time when the Otter cleared from Boston (20th August 1795)
the international situation was such that the President was not likely
to do anything of the kind. His government was then engaged in the
closing stages of the negotiation of an important treaty with Britain.
In these circumstances the dispatch of an American ship to carry off
from a British penal settlement a convict whose trial had attracted
attention on both sides of the Atlantic could hardly form part of the
policy of the President. 2
While one is quite prepared to admit the cogency of this argument,
one does not feel altogether satisfied. One demands, not unnaturally,
something more positive. Can one find out anything about the
departure of the Otter from Boston ; about her call at Sydney ; about
the voyage across the Pacific to Nootka Sound ; about the trade in
which she was engaged ?
Through the kindness of archivists, librarians and other friends of
research in California, Mexico, Australia, Great Britain, France, and
Spain it is now possible to answer these questions. We know precisely
who were the owners of the Otter ; we know the details of her size and
rig ; we know the number of guns she mounted ; we know the cargo
she carried ; we know the course she followed from Boston to Sydney ;
we know her course across the Pacific to Nootka Sound ; and we know
that at Nootka Sound Muir, far from suffering shipwreck as the legend
will have it, quitted the Otter for an entirely personal reason to embark
on a Spanish schooner that was on a coastal cruise northward from the
naval station of San Bias in Mexico.
The owners of the Otter —here our authority is the records of the
Boston Bureau of Customs—were a group of Boston merchants with
a strong family flavour about it : Ebenezer Dorr, John Dorr, Joseph
Dorr, Ebenezer Dorr Jr., and William Rodgers. The ship—we speak
on the authority of the same record —was a square-sterned vessel of
one hundred and sixty-eight tons ; her length was seventy-seven feet;
her breadth twenty-two feet; her draught eleven feet; she had two
decks and three masts. 3 From the diary of her navigating officer we
know that she carried ten guns.
When she cleared from Boston on 20th August 1795 the Otter
carried under hatches a miscellaneous trading cargo : molasses, rum,
tea, Madeira wine, port wine, and general merchandise in fifteen bales.
The value of these bales was 5100 dollars ; that of all the rest of the
cargo taken together was 3643 dollars. The destination of the Otter ,
as entered on the Daily Register of Clearances, and sworn to by the
Captain, was “ Norwest Coast America.” 4
At this period the trade on this part of the Pacific coast was mainly
in the hands of New England skippers. These resolute and enterprising
voyagers threaded the inlets that bite deeply into the coast of Vancouver
Island, and exchanged their trade-goods for the sea-otter skins collected
and cured by the Indians. From Vancouver Island the New England
ships carried the sea-otter skins across the Pacific to China and ex-
changed them for silks and tea.
For the north-west coast of America Sydney had become a con-


ANAMOUCKA (NOMUKA): TONGA ISLANDS
Visited by Captain Cook, 1774 an d 1777; by Bligh in the Bounty, 1789; and by Dorr and Peron, with Thomas Muir, in the Otter, 1796
(lnset) Thomas Muir, Scottish political reformer, transported by Judge Braxfield for fourteen years, 1793


FRIENDLY COVE, NOOTKA SOUND
The monument commemorates its discovery by Captain Cook, 1778, and the Spanish occupation, 1789-1795
AMSTERDAM ISLAND, INDIAN OCEAN
Crater of an extinct volcano


venient port of call, for wood and water, on the outward voyage from
Boston by way of the Cape of Good Hope. Indeed, during the early
years of the settlement most of its overseas trade was carried on with
the north-west coast of America. Far from being engaged in anything
of the nature of a political mission, the Otter , in coming in to Sydney,
was making a conventional call in a voyage in what had become a
well-defined branch of maritime enterprise. 6
If we desire the most emphatic corroboration that Muir’s departure
from Sydney in the Otter was entirely fortuitous we have it in his own
words. When he had left the Boston ship at Nootka Sound and was
the guest of the Spanish Governor at Monterey in California, he wrote,
on 15th June 1796, a long letter to President Washington. Of the
circumstances under which he left Sydney he gave a precise account:
“ . . . I was ... to depend alone upon my own escaping and upon the
providence of God.
“ The Otter of Boston, commanded by Captain Dorr, arrived in
Port Jackson, in the month of January last. The Captain agreed to
give me a Passage to Boston, provided I could effectuate my escape
from that Port without danger to himself.” 6
111
When on the afternoon of 24th January 1796 the Otter anchored
in Sydney Cove, her arrival provided the culminating point in a
crescendo of excitement all too seldom experienced in that remote
and lonely settlement. On 23rd January the signal flag at the Harbour
entrance indicated the approach of a vessel : it turned out to be the
Ceres , a store ship from London, which had touched at the ocean outpost
of Amsterdam Island and had brought away from it five Crusoes —
a French officer, two French sailors and two English sailors. Next
morning the signal flag indicated the approach of another vessel :
the snow Experiment from Calcutta, which brought a large assortment
of Indian goods. A few hours later the Otter furled her sails in the land-
locked harbour.
The French officer brought from Amsterdam Island by the Ceres
—Captain Peron —was not long in seeking out Captain Dorr.
Peron, a man of twenty-seven, belonged to Brest. In the good
Breton tradition he had gone to sea at the age of fourteen. He made
many voyages to the Indian Ocean. On 31st July 1792 he had left
the Ile-de-France, on the brig fimilie, bound for the north-west coast
of America.
When the fimilie was about to sail, news had arrived from France
that hostilities between France and Britain were likely to break out
soon. To be ready for whatever might happen, the owners of the
£milie decided that her crew should consist, in equal parts, of French-
men and Americans, and that the vessel should sail under the American
flag. The command of the ship was given to an American, Captain
Owen. To Peron fell the appointment and the prerogatives of First
Officer.
Off Amsterdam Island the Jimilie met in with the Nootka , Captain


Wamsley of Canton. From the island Wamsley had just taken off
seven men who had been collecting the skins of sea-otters for seventeen
months. The idea of leaving a party on the island to gather otter
skins appealed strongly to Captain Owen. Four of his crew—two
Frenchmen and two Americans —agreed to stay on the island. Peron
volunteered to be Crusoe-in-Chief. The otter-hunters were to be taken
off by the fimilie on her return from the north-west coast of America.
The fimilie, however, did not return. At Canton she had been
seized by the commander of a British warship, who had not been
deceived by the American camouflage. For forty weary months —until
16th December 1795 —Peron and his four assistants remained mar-
ooned on the island. To add to the tedium of solitude and to the
monotony of their toil they had the harassing experience of a cleavage
in the little garrison which resulted in a species of civil war.
When the Ceres dropped anchor off the island her Captain received
Peron kindly and promised him and his little party a passage to Port
Jackson. He regretted, however, that owing to his heavy cargo —he
was already overloaded—he could not take on board the otter skins.
The skins—two thousand and seven hundred of them—had to be left
behind on Amsterdam Island.
On this remote and desolate outpost they were not to remain long
unclaimed. A few days after the Ceres resumed her voyage to Sydney,
the Otter arrived off the island. Detecting at once, with characteristic
New England perspicacity, the hand of Providence in leading him
to the store of furs, Captain Dorr had them transferred at once to the
hold of his ship.
Arrived at Sydney, Captain Dorr paid his official visit to Governor
Hunter. Soon after Captain Peron paid his visit to the Otter. With
Peron went the Captain of the Ceres. For a long time Dorr skilfully
evaded the main point of the interview. Then he declared himself
happy that Providence had sent him at the right moment to ensure
the safety of Peron’s furs : it would take some time, however, for
Peron to dispose of them ; in the meantime he offered Peron the post
of First Officer on board the Otter for the voyage to the north-west of
America, to China and back to Boston. Determined not to lose sight
of his precious furs again, Peron accepted the offer. 7 - 8
IV
When Captain Peron arrived at Port Jackson on the Ceres from
Amsterdam Island, he brought with him a neatly written journal of
his experiences on the island and some carefully executed drawings
of the scenes among which he had been so long confined. On his
voyage in the Otter from Port Jackson across the Pacific he kept a
similar record. The only other glimpse we have of this part of the
voyage of the Otter comes from a single sentence in a letter written
at Monterey on 14th July 1796 by Muir to his Scottish fellow-reformer,
the Earl of Lauderdale : “In an American ship I have traversed a
considerable tract of the southern ocean, visited the lately discovered
Islands, and explored some hitherto unknown.” 6


The course of the Otter across the Pacific from Sydney to Nootka Sound: based on the logged observations of Captain Péron.


From Port Jackson Peron, on whom devolved the navigation of
the crowded little vessel, set his course eastward with the intention of
passing to the north of New Zealand. In the closing days of February
the deep blue of the hitherto untroubled Pacific gave place to a chilly
grey, with a long swell and white-capped waves. The swell subsided
on the 2nd March ; the wave-crests huddled down ; in a short time
the sea was as smooth as glass, and of a whitish tint: the ship lay
becalmed amid a great shoal of medusae —bonnets flamands Peron calls
them. Night closed down on the ocean. The phosphorescent gleam
that rose from the sea all around them enabled the company on the
Otter to read even small print. At sunset they had noticed great flocks
of birds winging their way to the north-east—towards, they thought,
some island of which Peron’s chart gave no indication. At three
o’clock in the morning a strong breeze sprang up. Around them the
swell once more ran high and the curling waves broke in a white
smother of wind-tossed foam.
On 7th March, at two o’clock in the morning, they passed the
Tropic of Capricorn. A light wind from the north bore to them the
fragrance of flowers. They had a distant view of the palm-crowned
ridges of some islands. That same day they saw flocks of land-birds.
They steered past aquatic plants trailing on the surface of the sea.
Peron’s observation gave the Otter a position sixteen leagues to the
south-east of Anamoucka (Nomuka) —in the Tonga or Friendly
Islands—according to the position of this island fixed by Captain Cook.
Next day, at eleven o’clock, sailing west by nor’west, they could
make out some twenty islands whose clustered palm-trees stood out
dark above the deep blue of the sea and against the lighter back-cloth
of the sky. On three long reefs —one to the north, one to the east
and one to the west —a ragged line of white foam curdled and spouted.
At noon Peron took his observation. Then, three leagues off, there
surged up on the sky-line the two-crested, palm-crowned hill-tops of
Nomuka. 9
Between the Otter and Nomuka lay a little, low island. All round
it the white breakers tossed and spouted. Through this heaving girdle
of broken water shot a fleet of canoes. The flashing paddles urged
them swiftly towards the approaching ship. When the Tongans had
scrambled on board they gave the name of their island as Mango-Lahi.
As the ship tacked to and fro off this island another canoe, manned
by five stalwart Tongans, drew alongside. One of the natives, who
gave himself out to be the chief, handed to Captain Dorr and his
officers, according to the custom of the Islands, some cooked fish
wrapped in leaves of coco-nut palm. The officers of the Otter gave the
chief a hearty welcome. When they told him their purpose was to
make for Anamoucka (Nomuka), he clapped his hands, chortled
gleefully, and hugged the seafarers to his chest.
Sending his canoe away the chief conned the Otter to the north
of Nomuka —the breeze came steadily from the north-east. The north
point of the island rounded, they steered down the west coast, keeping
about two miles off-shore. They kept the lead going constantly and
had resolved to bring up at the first suitable anchorage. Everywhere,


however, they found only a sea-floor of coral, at depths varying from
fifteen to six fathoms. Night drew on. They had to anchor in .ten
fathoms, on a coral bottom to the south-west of Nomuka.
All the time they had been seeking an anchorage they had been
busy trading with the Tongans. By evening the deck was piled like
a market place with bunches of bananas of five or six kinds ; with
water-melons, the least of which weighed twelve pounds ; with clusters
of yams, sweet potatoes, oranges, pine-apples, bread-fruit and sugar-
cane.
When the swiftly descending tropic night began to lower over the
palm-crested hills of Nomuka Captain Dorr fired a gun. As the smoke
drifted away in the still evening air the Tongans swarmed down into
their clustered canoes and paddled for the white sand of that beach
off which Captain Cook had twice anchored.
More than a thousand islanders had trod the deck of the Otter.
Tall and strong, renowned both for their skill with their weapons and
their readiness to appropriate anything that might take their fancy,
they might well plan an assault on the little vessel and, despite the
Port Jackson reinforcements, its comparatively insignificant ship’s
company. It was deemed wise to be on guard. At intervals round
the deck were stacked muskets and sabres. The ten guns of the Otter,
loaded with grape-shot, were massed as a battery on the poop.
V
The night, however, passed without incident. The morning gun
from the Otter sent its echoes hurtling through the coco-palms massed
above the glistening white beach of Anamoucka. The canoes, with
their paddles flashing in the morning sunlight, darted out from the
shore. A hundred of them bobbed about round the weather-beaten
hull of the New England ship.
Traffic began again briskly. To their visitors the islanders sold
cloth very finely woven from the fibres of the bark of trees and dyed
in variegated colours ; ropes and fishing lines ; fishing hooks fashioned
out of mother-of-pearl; clubs, lances, bows and arrows, all of most
artistic workmanship. The visitors caught a glimpse of some pigs in
the canoes ; but the Tongans were by no means ready to part with
these valuable animals —in exchange they wanted wares which were
not included among the trade-goods of the Otter.
Meanwhile the quest for a good anchorage went on. In the course
of taking station at different anchorages they lost one anchor, and
another anchor was fouled. They set their course for the north-east.
After sailing three leagues they found themselves in the midst of a
great cluster of little islands, all ringed round by girdles of white
breakers. They steered back between Nomuka and the first little
island they had noticed on quitting their anchorage. During the night
they stood off and on every two hours. The islanders of Nomuka,
realising the plight of the ship in the midst of the breakers, lit a big
fire on the beach to serve as a beacon.
On the 14th of March, at day-break, Peron set a course similar


to that of the preceding evening, hoping to find a channel to the north
of this anchorage. At seven o’clock they passed between the little
island —which on the evening before Peron had named the Door of
the Labyrinth—and a line of reefs over which the water broke only a
mile to the east. At mid-day, to his great astonishment, Peron made
out twenty-six islands scattered all over the horizon. This new portion
of the archipelago was bounded, west, north and east, by chains of
reefs on which a heavy sea pounded continuously : the stretch of water
enclosed by these chains was strewn with reefs, some a few feet beneath
the surface of the sea, others thrusting themselves up above. Peron,
however, refused to give up hope of finding a passage, and they con-
tinued to thread their way cautiously to the north-east among the
breakers. Baffled after an effort of several hours they had to steer
southward again.
At mid-day several canoes approached them. In one of these one
of the men from the Otter went ashore. “II ceda probablement,”
opined Peron, “ aux offres d’hospitalite, qui lui furent faites.” The
following day (15th March) five of the passengers from Port Jackson
followed him. This little group of evacuees stole away to settle among
the islanders of Ea-00-wee.
On the 16th of March Peron noted with relief in his journal :
“ This evening we drew clear of the Friendly Islands.” His self-
congratulation, however, was premature. A fortnight later the Otter
was still tacking to and fro in the vast Pacific labyrinth, with its clusters
of palm-fringed islands and its long barriers of coral on which the seas
pounded without ceasing.
At nightfall on 3rd April they drew near a little island smothered
in clusters of coco-nut palms. At daybreak they stood in towards
the shore. They noticed two men who walked along the shore, keeping
pace with the ship. Others showed themselves on the crests of hillocks
and beneath the palms. The determined hostility of these people
convinced the officers of the Otter that they had not seen any strangers
before. The officers felt that they might justly claim the honour of
having discovered a new island—indeed a group of three new islands.
Peron gave to the group the name of Otter Islands : the island to the
east he called Peron-et-Muir ; that to the north he named Dorr ;
the third received the name of Brown, after one of the officers of the
ship.
The following day, sth April 1796, Peron was able to record, with
a finality that was not to be subjected to any further challenge, that
they were drawing clear of the vast archipelago of the Friendly Islands.
They set their course north-north-west. Until the 9th of April they
saw many birds. By this time, however, they had lost sight of the
last of the islands.
VI
The course set by Peron took the Otter well clear of the cluster of
banks and reefs round Midway Island, the western outpost of the
Hawaiian Group. During the night April they crossed the
Tropic of Cancer, At the end of May—early on the morning of the


29th —the snow-covered mountains of America replaced for Peron,
Muir, and their fellow-voyagers the unsubstantial pageant of sunset
clouds. There, across forty miles of sea sparkling in the morning
sunlight, rose, in a vast crowded amphitheatre, the great gleaming
mass of white peaks, ridges and slopes.
They made their landfall at the entrance to the Strait of Juan de
Fuca, to the south of Vancouver Island. For three weeks the Otter
tacked and reached steadily northward off the island-fringed fjord-
bitten coast of the island : you can follow the carefully controlled
sallies of this darting progress on Peron’s chart. On 19th June 1796
Captain Dorr stood in to the spacious, sheltered channel of Nootka
Sound —that remote Pacific haven whose name had suddenly become
familiar, at a time of acute international crisis, to political leaders and
men of affairs in Britain, Spain, France and Russia.
The sight of a Spanish schooner, the Sutil, at Friendly Cove in
Nootka Sound caused Muir to reconsider his plans. To go on to China
with the Otter meant that at least eighteen months must elapse before
he could reach the United States. By travelling south with the schooner
to the Mexican naval port of San Bias and then proceeding overland
by the old highway of the treasure trains to Mexico and Vera Cruz,
he might hope to get to the United States in six months. He persuaded
the Spanish Captain to take him as a passenger to Monterey—where,
almost a century later, another Scottish exile, Robert Louis Stevenson,
was to sojourn—and thence to San Bias.
Peron, however, went on to China. His sea-otter furs were still
under the hatches of the Otter. At Canton, however, he could stand
the New England skipper no longer. He parted from Dorr. He made
his way, however, on the Grand Turc to Boston. There he raised an
action against Captain Dorr for the value of the furs carried off from
Amsterdam Island. The legal debate was long and lively; the
Presiding Judge made un resume clair et lumineux ; the jury gave their
verdict in favour of Peron. Captain Dorr was ordered to make good
the value of the furs he had carried off, subject to a deduction for the
expenses of their freight. “In this affair,” notes Peron, “my whole
fortune was at stake : it was the reward of my sufferings and my
labours that was being contested. The judgment of the court made
me bless the noble and beneficent institution of the jury which in a
distant country affords protection to the stranger as well as to the
native.”
The author is indebted to his son, Captain G. P. Insh of the School of
Navigation, Aberdeen, for charting the course across the Pacific. Acknowledgments
are also due to Miss Paterson of Jordanhill for the miniature of Thomas Muir ; to
the Mayor of Victoria and the Provincial Archives of British Columbia for the
photograph of Nootka Sound ; and to the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich,
for the prints of Anamoucka and Amsterdam Island.
1 Public Record Office. Colonial Office. Original Correspondence. Volume
13. (C.O. 201.)
2 Masson, M., and Jameson, J. F. Odyssey of Thomas Muir. American Historical
Review , *949, 29 : 69.


3 National Archives, Washington, D.C. R.G. 36, Records of the Bureau of
Customs. Collector of Customs, Boston, Massachusetts. Permanent Register
No. 227, dated August 20, 1795.
4 National Archives, Washington, D.C. R.G. 36, Records of the Bureau of
Customs, District of Boston and Charleston, Vol. g. Clearance of the Ship Otter,
August 20, 1795.
5 Greenwood, Gordon. Early American-Australian Relations. Pp. Ix 7-120.
Melbourne, 1944.
6 Archives General of the Indies, Seville. Estado Guadalajara, leg. 1.
7 Collins, D. History of New South Wales, 321. London, 1804.
8 Memoires du Capitaine Peron sur ses Voyages. Paris, 1824. 2 vols. Vol. I :
x 72-259.
9 , Ibid, , p. 261.








