



CLAIMS AND BEMON STRANGE
01’ TIIE
(
! POLYNESIA COMPANY, ,
' ■ ... '.... , .... '• y/
v , -. . ' . - ' • 1 .
i ■ ■ ■ -. . ?
OF iMFEX^BOTJKJSriE,
EXAMINED AND REFUTED.


CLAIMS ANT) BEMONSTRASrCE
THE POLYNESIA COMPANY,
OP 1 MELBOUBHEj
EXAMINED AND REFUTED.
LEVUKA, OVALAU, FIJI:
pBEJTED.BZ WILLIAM COOK, “ AEG US ’’QmCX




PRELIMINARY NOTE.
The present Pamphlet is a reply to one published in Melbourne,
by the Polynesia Company (Limited), of that city, entitled a.
against the unlawful withholding of the Company’s
lands at Fiji.”
The bulk of the present publication is due to the necessity of refuting,
step by step,' the positions of the Remonstrance, and of quoting at length
the numerous official documents to which reference is necessarily made ;
but it may appear to some that arguments which require so large a
Space for their enunciation must be necessarily unsound, and that if the
Remonstrance cannot be answered in fewer pages than are now presented
to the reader its Allegations must be difficult to disprove.
The chief pbints in dispute may, however, in themselves bo very
briefly stated, and as briefly disposed of. 1 ■’ 1
The Remonstrance of the Polynesia Company consists of thr.ea
parts. The first patt attempts to establish that Cakobau was, in 1868,
King of Fiji, and recognised as such throughout the group. We, on the
contrary, assert and prove that he was not so, and that the witnesses
quoted by “the Remonstrance in favor of his haying held such a position
all bear conclusive testimony to the contrary. h
; In the second part it is sought to show that by a Charter granted
in 186 S the Polynesia Company obtained from the King of Fiji a grant of
200,000 acres of land, and various privileges of an exclusive character.
'• We reply, that Cakobau was not King of Fiji in 1868, and that the
land he pirofesse'd to give to the Company was beyond the districts over
which he Cxerpised'control.
' We add, that| even had he been King of Fiji, he could not, without
the consent of the local proprietors, have granted to others, large tracts of
thickly peopled land, and that his unfulfilled promise to commit an act
of iniquitous spoliation 1 could not possibly be made good by the Imperial
Government. 1 " 1 ! ’
' In this part of the Remonstrance it is also asserted that the Com-
pany is in possession l and occupation of the greater part of the land it
claims. • •' ! ‘
We meet this assertion with a distinct.and flat denial, and by proofs
which cannot be controverted, that these lands are still in the occupation
pf their aboriginal proprietors, with the exception of a few hundred acres
in the hands, 1 not of the Company, but of persons who have purchased
from it, and hold the 1 land oil their own account.
The third part of the Remonstrance is devoted to complaints that
the claims of the Company have not been adequately considered by the
Imperial and Mry.jrar.r-ntn. 'TV. cr, ‘V.e other hand, maintain'


and establish, by ample documentary evidence, that they have been fully
aud carefully investigated, and equitably dealt with.
Among the shareholders of the Company there are no doubt many
who are very imperfectly, if at all, acquainted with the real character of
the rash and lllrisory speculation into which they have been induced to
enter, and who will learn from these pages, for the first time, something
of its true nature 'arid ‘history. Had it not been for the printing and
circulation of the “ Remonstrance,” however, it is improbable that any
such publication as the‘present would have been contemplated, and the
Directors have therefore only themselves to thank for the exposure
which they have thus incautiously invited.


MEMORANDUM
uros THE
POLYNESIA COMPANY’S
“ REMONSTRANCE.”
The Pamphlet issugi
of Directors of the Polynesia
Company, entitled “ against the unlawful withholding
of the Company’s Lands, at Fiji, by 11. E. Governor Sir Arthur
Gordon,” is divided into three parts, and for the sake of perspicuity
it may be answered in the same manner.
I’art the First is a resume, from the Polynesia Company’s point of
view, of the circumstances attending the proposed cession of Fiji to
England in 1858, and endeavours to show that Thakombau, the Chief of
Bau, possessed Sovereign power throughout the whole group of islands
known as Fiji, and that such sovereignty, or kingship, was recognised
by Colonel Smythe, the Bev. J. "Waterhouse, the Iter. Thos. Williams,
and other authorities. The testimony of the witnesses, cited by the
Polynesia Company, is supplemented by that of Mr. 8. C. Burt, who, from
IS7I to 1874, held various official appointments in Fiji. This part of
the pamphlet touches also upon the Fijian debt to America, the
unfavourable report of Colonel Smythe upon the proposed cession, and
contains some stringent remarks upon the statement of Sir Hercules
Robinson that when Thakombau executed the Charter to the Polynesia
Company he was “ only the Chief of Bau.”
Before proceeding to weigh the value of the Company’s opinions
upon these several subjects, or to test the accuracy of their citations
from the gentlemen quoted as authorities, it may be convenient to give
a succinct sketch of the origin and conduct of the Company in Fiji, up to
thc>2Brd July, 18G8, when the Charter, known as the second Charter,
was signed, as it has been gathered from authentic and official sources.
About the end of July, 18G7, a Mr. W. H. O’H. Brewer visited
Fiji, representing himself as the agent of certain commercial men in
Melbourne, whose attention had been directed to this group of Islands.
He visited the British Consulate once during his stay, and obtained a
return of the preceding years imports and exports. His conversation


at this visit was confined solely to the commercial prospects of the
country.
Some time afterwards, the Consul’s attention was called to a
report in the Melbourne newspapers of a public meeting held in that city,,
with the object of forming a company to trade with Fiji. The promoters
of the scheme were Mr. Brewer, Mr. Vandammo and Mr. Cairns.
Lengthy papers were read, and several statements were made that
were not in accordance with fact, and which were likely to mislead the
public. Mr. Brewer announced the principal feature in the scheme, viz.,
the liquidation of the American claim against Thakombau, in consideration
of a grant of land and certain privileges. He enlarged upon the
resources of the group, and, having doubled the amount of the return
for ISGG, received from the British Consul, quoted that gentleman as
his authority ; further adding “ that the British Consul highly approved
of the project ” in regard to the liquidation of the American claim,
the fact being that the Consul had never heard of the scheme. A
resolution to form a company found no one to second it, and the
meeting broke up without anything being done to further the object of
the promoters.
It is worthy of notice that the very inception of the scheme-
which in time gave birth to the Polynesia Company, was characterised
by misrepresentation, and from that time to the publication of the
present “ Remonstrance,” the same want of frankness in dealing with
its own shareholders and the general public has constantly displayed
itself.
Nothing more was heard of in Fiji as to this scheme until the 22nd
May, 18G8, when the steam ship “ Albion ” with Mr. Brewer and Mr.
Evans on hoard, arrived in Lcvuka from Melbourne. These gentlemen,
representing themselves as delegates of certain financial men in Victoria,
immediately sought an interview with Thakombnu, the Chief of Bau, who
was then in Lcvuka. They had brought with them a document prepared
in Melbourne, purporting to bo a Charter —and which subsequently
became known as the first Charter. Upon the following morning,
Thakombau, while on board the “ Albion ” was induced to sign the
“Charter” leaving the area of land to be granted, and some other
considerations in blank ; and, in the evening of the same day, it was
shown to the British Consul, on board the “ Albion,” in that condition.
Feeling satisfied that Thakombau could form no adequate conception
of the obligations he was professing to incur, and seeing that the extra-
ordinary powers (if they could be exercised) vested in the Company
would operate to the disadvantage and injury of earlier settlers, and
moreover that the judicial and other authority, professedly conceded to
the Company, was of a nature likely to cause inconvenience to Her
Majesty’s Government, the Consul, in strong terms, protested against
the charter, and enjoined the delegates to proceed no further in the
matter until he had conferred with the Commodore commanding upon the
Australian Station, then daily expected in Lcvuka.
Learning upon the 2Gth of May that Thakombau had signed upon
the 23rd some paper called a schedule, the Consul addressed the dele-
gates, Messrs. Brewer and Evans, and requested an accurate copy of the


documents. This letter was replied to three days afterwards (on tho
29th), the interval being employed in filling up the blanks in an
intelligible and convenient manner. The following is a copy of the
Charter.
Know all men by these presents, that I, Kin" Thakomban, of the Fiji group of
Islands, in consideration of William Harry O’Halloran brewer and John Lavington
Evans, of Melbourne, in the Colony of Victoria, now on a visit to me as delegates
and agents appointed for and on behalf of a certain Company about to be formed
in the said Colony, under the “ Companies Statute, ISM ; ” hereby undertaking
for and on behalf of such Company, and, immediately after its formation, to make
suitable provision for the settlement of a claim of £IO,OOO, or thereabouts, preferred
against me as such King, by or on behalf of the Government of the United States
of America for losses said to have been sustained by certain American subjects who
resided in my kingdom, owing to certain alleged depredations and. acts of
incendiarism committed and caused by my native subjects, and which said, claim
the said Government of the United States of America, are now threatening to
enforce, and also in consideration of the said William Henry O’Halloran brewer
and John Lavington Evans, as the delegates and agents of such intended Company
further undertaking, after the formation of the said Company, to : pay me, the said
King, the annuity or yearly sum of 1,000 dollars. Also, in consideration of such
delegates undertaking that the said Company will at all times, after its formation,
well and truly aid, assist mo in upholding and defending my said kingdom : do by
these presents for ever grant, cede, transfer, and set over unto the said William
Harry O’Halloran Brewer and John Lavington Evans, and also Andrew Lyell and
Frederick Cook, of Melbourne aforesaid, gentlemen (hereinafter respectively called
trustees, for and on behalf of the said intended Company, the several islands, parts
of islands, and other territory in Fiji, forming part of my kingdom), which arc
respectively mentioned and set forth in the schedule hereinafter written, together
with the soil or bed of all seas, rivers, and waters adjacent to or abutting on tlio
said scheduled territory, or any part or parts thereof, and also harbours, seas, rivers,
creeks, and inlets thereunto belonging or appertaining, or which the said trustees,
or the said intended Company may now or hereafter think necessary to the
settlement and enjoyment of the said scheduled territory, or any part or parts
thereof, and also all mines and minerals, or upon the same. And I, the said King,
do hereby also grant and give unto the said Trustees, for and on behalf of the said
intended Comp.uuy, and the said intended Company the sold and exclusive right to
impose and levy such duties of custom as to them as may seem fit on the exportation
from, or importation into any part of my kingdom, of any goods, wares, or
merchandise whatever, with full power to impose and levy wharfage and harbour
dues, and also the"sole and exclusive right to establish in any part or parts of my
kingdom banking institutions, and the sole and exclusive right to issue and
circulate throughout all or any part of my kingdom, bank notes ; and I, the said
King, do hereby pledge myself and my successors, not hereafter to sell, alienate,
or cede to any person or persons whomsoever any part or parts of my territory
without previously offering the same to the said intended Company, and giving
such Company the option and prefercntail privilege of acquiring the same. And
I, the said King, do hereby grant and give unto the said intended Company, full
power and absolute authority from time to time to ordain and make all such laws
for the good government and welfare of the natives, inhabitants, settlers, and
people for the time being on the said scheduled lands, and any other portion of
the land forming part of my kingdom,' which may hereafter be acquired as
aforesaid, as such Company shall consider just, equitable, and right; and also all
such laws as the said intended Company may think necessary or proper, to regulate
the trade and commerce of my said kingdom, or of such islands, or other portion
of my territory as now are, or hereafter may be inhabited by white population, or
that of a mixed one, and to establish courts, and appoint judges and magistrates,
and other officers to administer and execute such laws. And 1, the said King
hereby solemnly pledge myself to uphold and defend such laws, and to protect the
inhabitants and settlers for the time being of the lands belonging to the said
intended Company, and the property and effects of such inhabitants and settlers


from native or other violence, molestation, or interference, attacks, pillgae, and
robberies, either from within or without.
In witness whereof I, the said King, have hereunto set my hand and seal the
23rd day af May, in the year of our Lord 1808.
(signed) Ebenezer Thakombau,
Ha Vunvalu, or King of Fiji, his x mark.
Signed, sealed, and delivered by King Thikombau, in the presence of :
(signed) John F. Horsley, Wesleyan Missionary.
Saml. W. Brooks, Wesleyan Missionary.
And we, the undersigned, being the principal Chiefs, Chiefs under King
Thakombau, hereby ratify and comfirm in all respects the foregoing Charter.
(signed) RatU Savanaca Naulivou, liis x mark.
Ratu Elijah Koroiravulo, ins x mark.
Witnesses to signatures :
(signed) John F. Horsley, Wesleyan Missionary.
Saul. W. Brooks, Wesleyan Missionary.
The Siiedule hereinbefore referred to,
Two hundred thousand acres, as specified below, including Suva Harbour, and
including both banks of the Navua River and running back to the large Rewa
River, that is, all lands within the boundary not already sold, tlic remainder to be
mutually arranged.
(signed) Ebenezer Thakombau, his x mark.
Ratu Savanaca Haulivou, x lxis mark.
Elijah Raroieavulo, his x mark.
Witnesses :
(signed) William Moore.
J>'o. F. Horsley.
This is to certify that the within was faithfully and truly explained to King
Thakombau in the presence of the, undersigned, by Itev. Wm. Moore, of Levuka,
Ovalau, the 23rd day of May ISGS.
(signed) Jno. F. Horsley.
Saul. W Brooks.
Upon the arrival of the Commodore, he, after perusal of the
Charter, fully concurred with the views expressed by the Consul, and
the delegates found it advisable to abandon the first and to
prepare a second charter, which they hoped, might obtain Consular
assent and assistance.
Their first intimation of this resolve was conveyed in the following
letter to the Consul, dated Gth July, 18G8, containing a. draft of the
second charter.
Levuka,
July Cth, 18G8.
Sib, —On finding tlio Charter, signed by King Thakombau on the 23rd May, ia
open to certain objections which we have the power to remove, we have sent you


copy of another, which wo ask you will be good enough to peruse, and give us your
idea of. The clause having reference to not selling the land on certain Islands,
without first offering them to the Company, we think you will agree with us is
THE ONLY REAL SECURITY WE shall HAVE. On your return to the Consulate we
.shall be happy to discuss this intended new arrangement at our leisure.
We have the honour to be,
Your obedient Servants,
For Self and Mr. Brewer,
J. L. Evans.
J. B. Thurston, Esq.,
H. M. Acting Consul,
Fiji and Tonga.
Know all Men by these Presents, that I, King Thakombau, of the Fiji Group
of Islauds, in consideration of William Harry O’Halloran Brewer and John
Lavington Evans, of Melbourne, in the Colony of Victoria, now on a visit to me as
Delegates and Agents appointed for and on behalf of a certain Company about to
be formed in the said Colony, under the Companies Statute, 18(M, here undertaking,
for and on behalf of such Company, and immediately after its formation, to make
suitable provision for the settlement of a claim of Nine Thousand Pounds preferred
against me the said King for and on behalf of the Government of the United
States of America, for losses said to have been sustained by certain American
subjects who resided in my Kingdom, owing to certain alleged depredations and
acts of incendiarism committed and caused by native subjects, and which said claim
said Government of the United States of America are now threatening to enforce.
Do by these presents for ever grant, cede, transfer, and set over unto the said
William Harry O’Halloran Brewer and John Lavington Evans, and also Andrew
Lycll and Frederick Cook of Melbourne, aforesaid, Gentlemen, hereinafter called
Trustees for and on behalf cf the intended Company, the several Islands, parts of
Islands, and other territory in Fiji, forming part of my Kingdom, which arc
respectively mentioned and set forth in the Schedule hereunder written, together
with the Soil, or Beds of all Seas, Itivcrs, and Waters, adjacent to, or abutting on,
the Scheduled Territory, or any part or parts thereof, and all Harbors, Beas,
Rivers, Creeks, and Inlets, thereunto belonging, or appertaining, or which the said
Trustees, or the said intended Company, may now, or hereafter think necessary,
for the settlement or enjoyment of the said Scheduled Territory, or any part, or
parts thereof. Ai«l also all Mines, or Minerals, upon the same. And in considera-
tion of the Company paying to me annually the sum of One Thousand Dollars, I,
on the part of myself and Successors, forever, grant to the said Company exemption
from all Taxation on Imports on the Importation into, or the Exportation from
any of the Lands, Harbours, Rivers, &c., that now, or hereafter, shall form part of
the said Scheduled Territory. -And I also grant to the said Company the solo and
exclusive right, for the term of Twenty-one Years, to establish in any part, or
parts, of my Kingdom, Banking Institutions, and the sole and exclusive right to
issue and circulate throughout all, or any part, of my Kingdom, Bank Rotes. And
I, the said King, do hereby pledge myself, and my Successors, not hereafter to
sell, alienate, or cede to any person, or persons, whomsoever, any part, or parts, of
my territory within the following Islands, viz. : —Viti Levu, Koro, Kaudavu, Ono,
Angau, Narai, Ambitiki, Vatu Lelc, Moturiki, and Mbenga, without previously
offering the same to the said Company, and giving such Company the option anil
preferential privilege of acquiring the same. And I, the said King, pledge myself
to protect the Inhabitants and Settlers of the Lands of the Company from Native
or other violence, molestation, interference, attacks, pillage, and robberies, both
from within and without.
Ia Witness whereof, I, the said King, have hereunto set my hand and seal,
day of in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Eight Hundred
and Sixty-Eight.


The following correspondence then took place between the delegates
and the Consul.
Levuka, Ovalau, Fiji,
July 17th, 1868.
Sir, —We have to request your information as Consul on the following points
in connection with the affairs of the Melbourne Company wo have the honor to
represent :
Ist. If we decide to cancel the Charter granted by Thakombau to us Trustees
for the said Company shall wo be permitted to carry out the second document
submitted to you for approval in its entirety ?
2nd. Arc there any clauses in the second contrary to British law, if so please
point them out, as wc arc ready to amend them ?
3rd. Are we forbidden by you as Consul to agree for the payment of the
debt due by King Thakombau to the United States Government in a legal form ?
4th. Will you assist us in carrying the transaction through ?
Oth. If wc have acted in any way contrary to the rules laid down for British
subjects it has been through want of the necessary legal knowledge, and we request
to be allowed to rectify the same.
We have the honor to remain,
Your most obedient servants,
J. L. Evans.
W. H. O’H. Brewer.
To H. M. Consul,
J. B. Thurston, Esq,
British Consulate,
Fiji, 17tli July, 18G8.
Gentlemen, — I beg to acknowledge your communication of this day’s date
asking me for information on certain points in connection with the affairs of the
Polynesian Company you represent, the first of which is that—lf you decide to
cancel the Charter granted by Thakombau to you as Trustees for the said Company
will you be permitted to carry out the seooud document you have drawn up.
In reply, Ist, I have no intention of answering queries commencing with a
condition. You have .been distinctly informed your actions and the contents of
the Charter obtained from Thakombau are illegal.
2nd, I liavo no knowledge of the Company to which you allude.
I have, &c.,
(Sd.) J. B. Thurston,
Acting Consul.
Messrs. Brewer and Evans,
Levuka.
Levuka, Ovalau, Fiji,
July ISth, ISCB.
Sin, —\Ve beg to acknowledge receipt of your communication of yesterday’s
date, received this morning.
We have to request your information as Consul on the following points in
connection with the aiiairs of the Melbourne Company we have the honor to
represent:—
Ist. The Charter granted to us as representatives of a Melbourne Company
having been declared illegal and therefore null and void we request you to inform


us if we shall be allowed to carry out the second document submitted to you in its
entirety ?
2nd. Are there any clauses in the second document contrary to British law, if
so please point them out and we are ready to amend them ?
3rd. Are we forbidden by you as British Consul to agree for the payment of
the debt due by King Thakombau to the United States Government in a legal
form 1
5. If we have acted in any way contrary to the regulations laid down for
British subjects it has been through want of the necessary legal knowledge, and we
request to* be allowed to rectify the same. We have the honor to inclose the
credentials we brought to King Thakombau, which we hope will be a sufficient
guarantee that we are the representatives of a Company in Melbourne, as stated
by us.
Should you require further confirmation of our representative capacity we will
procure a copy of the letter we brought from General Latham, the United States
Consul in Melbourne, to the American Consul in Fiji, introducing us as Delegates
from a Melbourne Company sufficiently influential to carry through any arrange-
ments we may make for the payment of the debt due to the American Government
by King Thakombau.
We have the honor to be,
Your most obedient servants,
J. L. Evans.
W. H. O'H. Beewek.
J. B. Thurston, Esq.,
Acting British Consul,
Lcvuka.
British Consulate. Fiji,
18th July, ISGB.
Gentlemen, —In reply to your communication of this day's date I have to
inform you, that as you thought proper, ou your arrival in Fiji, to thoroughly
ignore my position and authority, and have further treated my injunction of the
25th of May with indifference, I decline to take any interest in the business that
has brought you to this group of Islands. My duty as Consul in Fiji is to advise
and assist resident British subjects, and not to give legal opinions to gentlemen
from the neighbouring Colonies, whose province it was to have sought advice from
competent legal authority in those Colonics.
You are not forbidden by me as Consul to agree, in a legal form, for the
payment of the debt due by Thakobau to the United States Government.
But I inform you I do not withdraw my protest against your actions, and I
caution and warn you not to pay a large sum of money to, or on account of the
Chief Thakombau, for which he has not the power or authority to give an equivalent
or security.
I have. Sec.
John B. Tiiuestox,
Acting Consul Fiji and Tonga.
Messrs. Brewer and Evans,
&c., &c., Sec.
Lcvuka, Ovalau, Fiji,
July 20, ISOS.
SlE,— We hare to request that you will inform the Chief that you do not
wish to prevent him from entering into a legal arrangement for the payment by


■us of the debt due by him to the United States, as he is under the impression that
lie is forbidden so to do by you as British Consul.
He states he is ready and willing to enter into the above arrangements as soon
us he is assured you permit him so to do.
Several Chiefs have proffered assistance in giving land to help him out of his-
difficulties, and others are prepared to come forward for the same object.
AVe have the honor to be,
Your obedient servants,
J, L. Evans.
J. B. Thurston, Esq.,
H. 31. Consul,
&c., &c., kc.
British Consulate, Fiji,
21st July, 1808.
Gentlemen, —In reply to your letter of the 20tli instant, requesting me to
inform the Chief of Bau I do not wish to prevent him entering into a legal
arrangement for the payment by you of the debts due the United States Govern-
ment by him, as he is under the impression he is so forbidden by me as British
Consul, I have to state, the Chief of Bau has already been informed that I do not
forbid any arrangements to be made for the liquidation of his debts to the United
States Government by British subjects. Provided always that such arrangements
do not contravene International or British law. At your request the Chief shall
again be informed of this.
In thus complying with your desire I again remark for your information that
I do not forbid you to make arrangements for the payment of the Chief's debts to
the United States Government, but, considering the result of an enquiry made by
H. M. Commissioner, Colonel Smytlie, as to the ability of the Chief of Bau to
convey to Her Majesty two hundred thousand acres of land in consideration of
the debt you now propose to settle ; and considering the evidences of the actual
power and authority possessed by the Chief of Bau, as shown by the archives
of this Consulate (in addition to which I beg to add my personal and private
knowledge) I deem it my duty to caution and warn you as British "subjects not
to accept from Thakombau securities, or privileges, in consideration of
the obligation for which you propose to provide, when H. M. Commissioner
has expressed his opinion Thakombau is incapable of ceding 200,000 acres of
land.
In addition to the conveyance to yon of a Block of land exceeding the area
above written, you desire the Chief of Ban to enter into obligations which he is
morally and physically unable to perform.
It is necessary, in conclusion, that I inform you on the part of Her
Majesty's Government, that in proceeding in this matter you will hold yourselves
responsible for future results.
I have, &c,
John B. Tiiueston,
Acting Consul Fiji and Tonga.
Messrs. Brewer and Evans,
kc., kc., kc.
How in tlic face of this correspondence the Polynesia Company can
coolly assert that Mr. Thurston “in his official capacity of British
Consul very materially assisted the consummation of the contract between


the King and the Company,” “ fully approved ” of the Charter, and
“ exercised his influence to facilitate the execution of it ” (p.p. 23, 24)
it is not easy to imagine.*
After the 21st, July, when the Consul distinctly warned
Messrs. Brewer and Evans that in regard to the proposed second
charter he did not withdraw his protest against their action, and
notified them, on the part of H. M.’s Government, that they
must hold themselves liable and responsible for future results, he
had no further communications with them, and left Levuka with Com-
modore Lambert on the 25th July. The promoters of the scheme,
however, had determined to proceed in spite of liis continued protests
and warnings, and upon the 23rd, Thakombau signed the second charter
referred to in the Consul’s letter of the 18th of the same month. Of this
act Mr. Thurston heard only upon return to his office on the sth August,
when he obtained a copy of the following charter, since known as the
“ Second Charter.” •
Copy of Charter between Melbourne Company and King Thakombau.
23rd July, 1868.
Know all men by these presents, that I, King Thakombau, of the Ban
Dominions, in consideration of William Harry O’Halloran Brewer and John
Lavington Evans, of Melbourne, In the Colony of Victoria, now on a visit to mo as
delegates and agents, appointed for and on behalf of a certain Company about to
be formed for the said Colony, under ‘‘ The Company’s Statute. 1864,” hereby
* The Polynesia Company are not happy in the references they make to
British Consuls, or to the assistance accorded it by those officers. In August,
1875, Mr. Consul Layard became aware that an attempt had been made to impress
the shareholders of the Company with a belief that he would support their claims,
and in consequence he addressed the following letter to His Excellency Sir Arthur
Gordon :
Mr. Consul Layard, to His Excellency the Governor.
British Consulate, Levuka,
August 26th, 1875.
Sir.—My attention has been called to a report of a “ special meeting of the
“shareholders of the Polynesia Company ” in the Melbourne “Argus” of the 24th
April last, in which Mr. J. S. Butters, late of Levuka, is reported to have said.
“ While (Mr. Butters) was in Fiji, Mr. Layard the British Consul went carefully
“ over the whole of the Company’s papers, and had recommended that not only
“ should the contract with them be carried out, but that they should receive
“ 20,000 acres in addition to the quantity originally ceded.”
2. If Mr. Butters’ words are correctly reported, I have simply to state that
they are wilfully untrue, as my opinion of the nefarious nature of the whole
transaction has been too openly expressed to allow of any mistake.
3. May I request your Excellency to place this letter on record in case Mr.
Butters statement be hereafter referred to.
H.B.M. Cousul for Fiji, and Tonga.
, A copy of this letter was forwarded to the manager of the Polynesian
Company, with a request that he would communicate its contents to the share-
holders at his earliest convenience, but the Colonial Government have never been
informed whether this request was acted upon.


■undertaking for and on behalf of such Company, and immediately after its
formation, to make suitable provision for the settlement of a claim of £9,000
preferred against me, the said King, for and on behalf of the Government of the
United States of America, for losses said to have been sustained by certain American-
subjects who resided in my kingdom, owing to certain alleged dopredation and acts
of incendiarism committed and caused by my native subjects, to which said claim
the said Government of the United States of America are now threatening to
enforce, do, by these presents, for every grant, and cede, transfer, and set over,
unto the said William Harry O’Halloran Brewer and John Lavington Evans, and
also Andrew Lyell and Frederick Cook, of Melbourne, aforesaid, gentlemen
(hereinafter called trustees), for and on behalf of the said intended Company, the
several islands, parts of Islands, and other territory in Fiji, forming part of my
kingdom, which are respectively mentioned and set forth in the schedule hereunder
written, together with the soil or beds of all seas, rivers, and waters, adjacent to,
or abutting on, the scheduled territory, or any part or parts thereof ; and all
harbours, seas, rivers, creeks, and inlets thereunto belonging or appertaining, or
which the said trustees, or the said intending Company, may now, or hereafter,
think necessary for the settlement or enjoyment of the said scheduled territory, or
any part .or parts thereof, and also all mines or minerals in or upon the same ; and
in consideration of the Company paying to me annually the sum of £l,OOO dollars,
I, on the part of myself and my successors, for ever grant to the said Company
exemption from all taxation or imposts on the importation into, or the exportation
from, any of the lands, harbours, rivers, &c., that now, or hereafter, shall form part
of the said scheduleb territory : and I also grant to the said Company the sole and
exclusive right for the term of 21 years, to establish in any part or parts of the
kingdom, banking institutions; and I undertake not to give such right to any
other person or Company in my territory, and the right to issue and circulate
throughout all or any part of my kingdom bank notes :) and I, the said King, pledge
myself to protect the inhabitants and settlers of the lands of the Company from
native or other violence, moiestation, interference, attacks, pillages, and robberies,
both from within and without. In witness whereof, I, the said King, have
hereunto set my hand and seal, the twenty-third (23rd) day of July, in the year of
our Lord 1868.
(signed) Epenisa Cakobau, his x mark.
Signed, sealed, and delivered by King Thakombau, in the presence of Epenisa
Cakobau, his mark.
And we, the undersigned, being the principal Chiefs under King Thakombau,
hereby ratify and confirm in all respects the foregoing Charter.
(signed) Savanaca Naulivou, his x mark.
IIATU Dkanibaka, his x mark.
Katu Epeli Nailatikau, his x mark.
ItATU Elijia Toroca, his x mark.
Sitivani Tukana, his x mark.
Tiie Schedule.
200,000 (two hundred thousand) acres of land, of which the following blocks
arc a portion :
1. Commencing from the River Kukuruku, in Viti Levu Bay, following the
coast towards Bau to the township of Veidrala, and back inland, making it a
square block.
2. Also land at Thackaudrove, Natawa Bay, Island of Vanua Levu (4) four
miles, commencing from the township of Tivo, up the coast, and about the same
distance inland.
3. Also the Island of Mbenga, and the following Islands : —Moturiki, Levuka
Jlaluma, Nanuku. within that reef.
4. Also Suva, its harbour, territories, and district, commencing from Lami,
running along the coast towards Bcwa, to the township of Kalabo, and running
inland to the Wai-manu.


And I also agree to cede other lands suitable for the occupation of the Company,
■or extend the boundaries of one or other of the foregoing tracts of country above
ceded, in the same proportion of coast to land, to complete the grant of 200,000
acres.
(signed) Epexisa Cakobau, his x mark.
Kavanaca Naulivou. his x mark.
Ratu Epeli Nailatikau, his x mark.
Ratu Draxibaka, his x mark.
Ratu Elijia Toroca, his x mark.
Sitivaxi TUKAN A, his x mark.
The following agreement accompanied this Charter :
The Company agree not to alienate any of the land until the whole of
the American debt he paid. Should the amount not he paid within the time
specified in the agreement of the Company with Dr. Brower, the land
reverts to King Thahomhau.
( signed) W. 11. O’II. Brewer.
Witnesses : J. L. Evans.
(signed) Joseph Curtis.
James C. Smith.*
With this sketch of the preliminary history of these transactions,
the consideration of the Company’s present remonstrance may be
commenced.
In the first of the “ Remonstrance ” it is stated, under
the heading “diplomatic events,” that in 1858 a “ Deed of Cession was
drawn up by the British authorities,” and a little further on, “by the
British and Hawaiian Consuls.” But it will suffice here to say that the
British Consul, Mr. William Thomas Pritchard, in this, as in many
other things, acted without authority, and was shortly afterwards
removed from office.
With regard to the Hawaiian Consul, history is silent. There is
positively nothing on record indicative of the diplomatic views enter-
tertained by the Hawaiian Government of that day. The fact, however,
of such a deed having been executed by Thakombau, as Tui Yiti, and
attested by two Consular officers and two missionaries, in itself proves
nothing whatever in favour of the sovereign status claimed for Thakombau.
Upon the other hand, the fact of Her Majesty’s Special Commissioner
ordered to Fiji by the Duke of Newcastle to make enquiry and report
upon the spot, finding that in several important points Mr. Consul
Pritchard’s information was wrong, must be regarded, so far as the
British Government is concerned, as conclusive evidence against such
assumed sovereignty.'
Colonel Smytlie says, “ In' several important particulars I have
“ found the information furnished by Mr. Pritchard to Her Majesty’s
“ Government, and embodied in my instructions, incorrect. Thakombau
“ (the Vuni Valu of Ban), has no claim to the title of King of Fiji.
“ There is in fact no such title. He is only one, though probably the
“most influential, of the numerous independent Chiefs of Fiji, and has
“ consequently no power to cede the sovereignty of the entire group to
“ Her Majesty.”
* This agreement was not communicated to the shareholders, and is not
quoted in the Company’s “ Remonstrance.”


“He could not convey to Her Majesty 200,000 acres of land as
“ consideration for the payment of these claims (the American) for him,
“ as he does not possess them.”*
It must be remembered that Her Majesty’s Commissioner, Colonel
Smythe, has been cited as an authority by the Polynesia Company : a
reference, therefore to that officer, is, in fact, to one of its own witnesses.
But other testimony than the Company’s own witnesses is not needed.
In page 10 of the “Remonstrance” it is said, “Now the regal homage
“ accorded to Thakombau, both by the Consul and British Envoy, was not
“in the slightest degree superfluous or inappropriate; for Thakombau was
“ not a mere titular lung, but an absolute one, possessing great powers.
“ The Rev. J. Waterhouse, fourteen years a missionary, at the islands, in
“ his book, entitled, “ The King and People of Fiji,” published in 1860,
“ informs us that Thakombau was born a prince, being the son of King
“ Tanoa; and the reverend author, in referring to events so far back as
“ 1853, asserts (page 201), that “ Thakombau having long been possessed
“of the power of King, now became entitled to the name.” '
It is very astonishing that the Company should have quoted extracts
from Colonel Smythe’s “ ten months in the Fiji Islands,” considering how
the evidence of that gentleman puts them to confusion ; but it is still more
strange that it should call up the Reverend Joseph Waterhouse, whose
book, like that of Colonel Smythe, speaks for itself, and is in so many
people’s hands. The Reverend Joseph Waterhouse, in his book, refers to
Thakombau as King of Bau, not as King of Fiji. Tanoa, Thakombau’s father
was King of Bau. With this Tanoa, Commodore Wilkes made a sort of
Treaty, intituled “ Commercial Regulations,” as the “ King and Chief
of Bau,” only a few days after he had made a treaty with Tui Cakau as
King and Chief of Thakaudrove. This document is signed, 14th May,
1840, “ Tanoa, his X 111 ai'k, King and principal Chief of Bau, and
the adjacent islands and districts.”
In’ an official report, dated August 20th, 1857, the late Mr. C. St.
Julian referring to these transactions says, “These regulations were
“ made for the dominions of the Bau Chief, but others of exactly the
“ same character were agreed to by the other Fijian rulers of the day.”
The language used in that passage of Mr, Waterhouse’s book (“The
King and People of Fiji ”) from which the foregoing extract was made,
is altogether clear, and nbthing but a desire not to understand could lead
to any other conclusion than that Mr. Waterhouse writes of Thakombau
as King, or Chief, of Bau, and nothing more. The writer of the
“ Remonstrance,” whoever he may be, had Colonel Smythe’s work by
him, and there he could at least have found the means of correcting
any wrong impression. At page 230 of that book (“ Smythe’s ten
months in the Fiji Islands ”) is published the following letter :
Letter from the E,oy. Joseph Waterhouse, Wesleyan Missionary to
Colonel Smythe.
“Matai Suva, Eewa, January 23, 18G1.
“ Sir, —“ In reply to the questions contained in your favour of the 18th inst.,
I beg to say,—
“1. Thakombau (the Mbauan Vunivalu) has never been recognised as the
King of the Fiji Group.
* Colonel Smylhc to the Duke of Newcastle, Fiji, May Ist, 1861.


“ 2. He has not 200,000 acres of land which he could convey absolutely to Her
Majesty as consideration for a sum of money.
“ 3. To the best of my knowledge, every particle of land in*Fiji has an owner.
But land belongs generally to families rather than to individuals. There is a small
quantity of land, however, over which thero may not extend a right of private
ownership, the private owners of which—if so they may be termed—being liable to
expulsion at the mercy of their superiors. Yet even this laud is portioned out
among the respective families dwelling on it, who sometimes, by revolt, will make
themselves absolute owners of the same.
“ I have. &c.,
“Joseph Wateehouse.”
“To Colonel W. J. Smythc, It.A.,
“ H.B.M. Commissioner to Fiji.
“ Levuka.”
"With regard to Tliakombau being “ not a mere titular King,” Mr.
Waterhouse, in the very preface of bis work, offers it to the Public as
the “ notes of the first Englishman who, without conforming to savage
“ manners, was permitted to reside in the city of Tliakombau, the titular
“ King of Fiji.”
This is the evidence of the second authority quoted with such
emphasis by the Polynesia Company. The book upon “ The King and
people of Fiji ” was not printed until six years after the date of the above
letter to Colonel Smythc, and did not, and with any candid person could
not convey in any part the meaning ascribed to it by the Polynesia
Company.
But there is still another missionary of standing and authority
brought forward by the Company to give evidence in its favour. At
page 11 of the “ .Remonstrance,” by way of utterly exhausting what the
Company puts forward as sweeping and comprehensive proofs of
Thakombau’s sovereignty, it is thus written. “ It may be further stated
“ that the Rev. Thomas Williams, who was thirteen years in Fiji, in his
“ book, entitled ‘ Fiji and the Fijians,’published in 1858, records the
“ fact that Thakombau held the reins of government shortly before the
“ old King’s death in 1554, and at that time he received a letter in English
“ from General Miller, H.B.M. Consul-General in the Pacific, addressing
“ him ‘ King of Fiji.’” Here the quotation conveniently ceases.
The following is the passage in extcnso from the book referred to.
“Before the death of King Tanoa, the whites residing in Fiji wrote to
“ General Miller, H.B.M. Consul-General at the Sandwich Islands,
“ complaining of their ill treatment by Thakombau, the young Chief of
“ Bau, and heir of Tanoa, who already virtually exercised kingly power.
“ General Miller sent a letter to the Chief, addressing it ‘ To the King
“of Fiji.’ When this letter arrived, a Tonga chief, who had visited
“ Sydney, and could read English, was staying with Thakombau, to whom
“he interpreted the Consul’s despatch, translating the address ‘Tui
“ Viti.’ This title, till then unknown, thus becamo fixed, and proved of
“ great use to the young chief during his regency, though a cause of
“bitter jealousy to other chiefs, some of whom I heard comforting
“ themselves by saying, ‘ It is without authority; foreigners gave it to
“ him,’ At the death of the aged King, however, the proud appellation


“ was laid aside, and Thakombau received the hereditary title of Vuni
“ Valu.” *
Now it is impossible to misunderstand the author of these words. So
far as “ King Tanoa ”is concerned. Mr. Williams is referring to the
King or- Chief of Bau (and Bau only), to distinguish him from the King
of Kewa, the King of the Reefs, and other “ Kings,” whose names were
legion, and in like manner he speaks of Thakombau.
In the same chapter of the book the author describes his being
present at Somosomo when an important Bau Chief was received by the
“ Somosomo King ” (Tui Cakau), and almost on the same page describes
the ceremonies which occurred upon the presentation of a canoe to
Thakombau, by Tui Nayau, “ King of Lakemba.”
So far then the Rev. J. Waterhouse, the Rev. Thos. Williams, and
Her Majesty’s Commissioner, Colonel Smytlie—the very authorities cited
hy the Company to support their absurd allegations touching the validity
of Thakombau’s “ sovereignty throughout the Group ” —give unanimous
and conclusive testimony to the contrary. A perusal of the works
written by the authors referred to, will supply proofs by the score
that the assertion put forward that the worthless charter of 1868
was granted by the King of Fiji, is without the slightest foundation
in fact. It will also supply overwhelming evidence that in quoting the
authorities named the writer of the “ Remonstrance ” has quoted only
just so many words or sentences as, read without their context, suited
his own purposes. This is a dangerous experiment, and shows, slightly
altering the words of the pamphlet in reference to Sir Hercules
Robinson, “ what straits the Company must be put to when it is con-
“ strained to resort to such untenable statements as those already glanced
“ at, and which it is seen are abundantly refuted by historical testimony.”
After the foregoing proofs (from its own witnesses) of the Company’s
error in claiming for Thakombau a sovereign status throughout Fiji in
1868 it is perhaps superfluous to seek any additional evidence. One other
authority may, however, bo quoted, and one which the company will scarcely
question,—that of its sometime Chairman of Directors and late Attorney
in Fiji,—Mr. C. R. Forwood, —who, in a Memorial addressed to the
Commissioners, Commodore Goodenough and Consul Layard, on the 12tli
January, 1874 (referred to in the formal application of the Directors to
Sir Arthur Gordon, of the 24th August, 1875, as “fully setting forth
the Company'sposition and claims”), speaks of the Charter as having
being granted by Thakombau, then “ Chief of the Bau Dominions,”
states that “ in 1871 the King of Bau became constitutional King of the
whole Fijian group, subject to the ratification of the then independent
Chiefs,” and describes the Chief Tui Cakau as “ the independent Chief
of Cakaudrove.”
It is indeed singular that in a document published hy authority of
the Board of Directors of a public company such flagrant instances of
the suggestio falsi should be detected at the very opening of the statement
of their case; and it must bo regarded as singularly unfortunate for the
value of their arguments, if it is discovered that a complete perusal of.
* Fiji and the Fijians, by Thohias Williams, p. 26.


the Remonstrance only multiplies these instances of suppression, and
intensifies the opinion that the case is only remarkable as an instance of
the boldness with which hollow pretensions can be urged.
The following passage (p. 12) alleges an attempt on the part of
Sir Hercules Robinson’s to strip Thakombau of “ state, rank, and
sovereignty: ”
But while Sir Hercules Robinson attempts to degrade the King in IS6B, by
stripping him of that “ state, rank, and sovereignty” which in 185 S was “recognized
by Great Britain, France and America,” and reducing him to a mere chief ; yet
his Excellency, no doubt, would have everybody to clearly understand that when
he, so shortly afterwards, in IS7-1, negotiated the Cession of the Islands, Thakombau
was by all means the full King of Fiji ! enjoying a long-established sovereignty
over the entire group ; and thereby possessed of authority and power sufficient even
to transfer the Government of the whole country to a foreign power ! I We must
conclude therefore that the regal power established in 1858, which attained its
meridian glory in 1875, was in absolute abeyance on the 23rd of July, 1868, when
the King of Fiji suddenly became “only the Chief of Mbau,” and that this
wonderful transition took place for no other reason than that Sir Hercules Robinson
would have it to be so, to the prejudice of the Polynesia Company ! !!
The truth of the matter is just the reverse of that stated above.
Sir Hercules Robinson did not “ wish everybody to clearly understand
that when he negotiated the cession of the Islands Thakombau was by all
means the full King of Fiji! enjoying a long established sovereignty
over the entire group,” &c. On the contrary, he (coinciding with the
views expressed by Her Majesty’s Commissioners who visited Fiji in
1874) did not think that Thakombau enjoyed the sovereignty of the
group. Sir Hercules Robinson carefully made it understood that he
could not, and would not, accept the cession from Thakombau alone, or
as King of Fiji. The Cession was from “ Thakombau styled Tui Viti,
Yuni Valu, and the other High Chiefs of Fiji for themselves and their
respective tribes.” Nothing can be clearer than this, excepting it be the
“ straits ” the Company is put to in order, by wresting historical
testimony, to support their assertions of injustice sustained at the hands
of Sir Arthur Gordon.
The “ regal power established in 1858,” was that of the person
described by the Rev. Joseph Waterhouse, as “the young Chief of Bau,”
and “ the titular King of Fiji.” The words used by Sir H. Robinson are
identical with those of the Rev. Joseph Waterhouse, a missionary for
thirteen years, and the first European of repute resident in Thakombau’s
capital. The exception taken to Sir Hercules Robinson’s expression is there-
fore ridiculous, as also is the assertion, “ That statement Sir Hercules
Robinson’s) was remarkable for the boldness of its error; it was this,
that when Thakombau executed the Charter to the Polynesia Company in
18G8, that is ten years after the formal declaration of his kingship
and sovereignty throughout the whole Fijian territory by the British
authorities (cited in section 2), he was"not yet a King, but “only the
Chief of Bau.” It has been shown that the “ British authorities ” were
the British and Hawaiian (!) Consuls, who attested Thakombau’s signa-
ture, and whose representations, when enquired into by the direct agents


of the Imperial Government were found, —to use the mild expression
of H. M. Commissioner—incorrect.
As to the statement that the sovereignty of Thakombau
was recognised by Great Britain, France, and the United States of
America, there is an abundance of proof to the contrary. Prior to IS7I,
when his government received a certain qualified amount of “de facto ”
recognition, the representative of the British Government only recognised
Thakombau as the Yuni Valu, Chief of Bau. France, with which,
nation Thakombau effected a treaty of peace and commerce, styled him “ Roi
de Bau; ” and as it has been shown,the United States recognised him only
as the compeer of Tui Cakau,Tui Rewa, and other powerful Tuis’, until the
enforcement of a claim against him for alleged wrongs committed by persons
whom, in many instances, he did not control, and who, in some cases, were
his hereditary enemies. Then by American Officers he was styled King of
Fiji, and by them, and them only, held responsible for all the native wrong
doing in the group. At the last visit of an United States ship of war, the
“Jamestown ”in 1869, to enquire into the claims imposed upon him, he
refused to visit the ship, or be present!at the enquiry, as “ King of Fiji,”
and was then addressed as “ Thakorqbau, Yuni Valu, King in Fiji.”
There is therefore, as before said, no appearance of any facts justifying
the assumption of the Company that Thakombau was ever the King or
Sovereign Chief of Fiji, and in the very Charter published by the
Company, and upon which its existence is based, he only styles himself
I, King Thakombau of the Bau Dominions. In history as in law, “de
non apparentibus et de non existentibus eadem est ratio,” and hence the
argument of the Company upon the Soveieignty of Thakombau may be
dismissed.
The narrative of the Company then proceeds—
10. But, to resume our narrative, we may state that, to the surprise of everybody,
and the disappointment of many, Colonel Smythe proved to be opposed to annexa-
tion. He reported that the Fijis did not lie in the track of any great commercial
rout, and that the possession by Great Britain of a group of islands in the western
section of the Pacific was not only not required, but would bo a source of
embarrassment in the event of war. The natural result of this report was that the
King’s overtures, embodied in the Deed, fell through, and the Fijis were left to
their fate, to suffer for another ten years a humiliating monetary depression under
a heavy indebtedness to a foreign power. But let it be clearly understood that,
however unaccountable the views of Colonel Smythe from first to last may appear,
that officer distinctly admitted the validity of the Deed of Cession, and therefore,
of necessity, that of the contract embodied in the Deed to alienate 200,000 acres of
land in payment of the American claim. For, in a letter to His Grace the Duke of
Newcastle, dated at Fiji on May 1, 18G1, Colonel Smythe writes thus :—“ The
cession may bo considered valid, as being acquiesced in by the other chiefs. ” Here,
then, is an admission by Colonel Smythe of the validity of the very Deed which
stipulated the alienation of the same quantity of land, and for the same considera-
tion, as that contracted for by the King with the Polynesia Company.
Now this section of the Company’s remonstrance is only another
instance of “ bold error.” Not only had Colonel Smythe reported that Fiji
did not lie in the track of any great commercial route, &c., but he had
reported a great deal more, viz., that the information forwarded to Her
Majesty’s Government, and embodied in his instructions, was “incorrect;”


that Thakombau was not King of Fiji; and that he could not convey any
large area of land in consideration for the large sum of money it was
proposed to pay on his account. As for the statement that the
group was left to its fate, to suffer for another ten years “a
humiliating monetary depression under a heavy indebtedness to a
foreign power,” it must be understood that no such alleged monetary
depression took place. Money was almost unknown. Manchester
prints, Sheffield cutlery, and Whale’s teeth were recognised currency.
Without any aid from the Polynesia Company the trade of the group
gradually improved, until its exports in 1870 rose approximately to the
value of £IOO,OOO, not a pounds worth of which could be traced back
to the Company. As for any depression caused by indebtedness to a
foreign power, the assertion is purely an imaginary one, and the
arguments based upon this and similar statements are thoroughly
inconsequential.
But the climax of error is reached in the closing sentences of the
section quoted above, when it is declared that however “unaccountable
the views of Colonel Smythe may appear,” he distinctly “ admitted the
validity of the Deed of Cession, and therefore, of necessity, that of the
contract embodied in the deed, to alienate 200,000 acres of land in
payment of the American claim.” This conclusion is based upon the
fact of Colonel Smythe having written to the Duke of Newcastle that
“ The cession may be considered valid as being acquiesced in by the
other chiefs.” It will be observed this is again a solitary sentence of a
letter selected as usual without any reference to its context.
In the ninth paragraph of Colonel Smythe’s letter of May 1, 1861,
the paragraph from which the extract is taken, he says, referring to the
American claims, “ He (Thakombau) is most desirous to get quit of the
“ claims of the latter country, for which the United States Officers, for
“ their own convenience, have made him responsible, although {he amount
“of the claim has been apportioned by them among several tribes. He
could not convey to Her Majesty 200,000 acres of land as consideration
“ for the payment of these claims for him, as he does not possess them,
“nor does he acknowledge to have offered more than his consent that land
“to this extent might he acquired hy Her Majesty's Government for
“ public purposes in Fiji. Although, in offering to cede the sovereignty
“of the Islands, Thakombau offered what was not his to bestow, the
“ cession may be considered valid, as being acquiesced in by the other
“ chiefs.”
Here we have a distinct denial of the Company’s own witness to the
•dogmatic assertion of Thakomban’s sovereignty and ability or willingness
to cede land for the consideration specified. What Thakombau under-
stood that he and his fellow chiefs offered was the Sovereignty of the
Group, with perhaps a pre-emptive right to the land, in consideration of
the payment of the claims against him, and when Colonel Smvthe said
the “ Cession may be considered valid ” he meant the Cession of the
Sovereignty.
But was the Charter or instrument signed by Thakombau and others
on the 23rd July, 186 S, and which formed the contract between
Thakombau and the Polynesia Company in like manner “ acquiesced


in “by all the other chcifs as stated in the “ Remonstrance ? ” It was
not. It was signed by Thakombau of the “ Bau Dominions ” and was
“ ratified and confirmed ” by five chiefs of Bau, not one of whom was
even the ruling chief of a town. Out of four of them one was a son of
Thakombau, one was a nephew, and two were half brothers. They
actually could not dispose of a rood of land among them. The fifth, or
remaining person, was a petty chief enjoying sway over half an island
situated on the Bau reefs, and comprising an ared of about 150 acres.
Yet it is this document that is compared by the Company to the
Deed or offer of Cession of 1858 reported upon by Colonel Smytlie,
and to the actual Deed of Cession signed by all the recognised and
ruling Chiefs of Fiji (after jears of discussion upon the subject) on the
10th October, 1874.
During the course of the foregoing remarks it has been found
necessary to notice the frequent instances of suppression practised by
the promoters of the Polynesia Company, and as reference has again to
bo made to the Charter and the schedule of lands purported to be
granted by Thakombau and five members of his family on the 28rd July,
18GS, it may be observed (see page 13) that the following engagement
was entered into, “ The Company agree not to alienate any of the land
until the whole of the American debt be paid. Shoidd the amount not be
paid ivitliin the time specified in the agreement with Dr. Brower, the land
reverts to King Thakombau.
It may be further observed that this agreement was not communi-
cated to the Shareholders and it is not quoted even in the pamphlet
lately published by the Company. Notwithstanding its engagement
the Company did alienate the land before the American claim was
paid, and in fact only succeeded from time to time in raising the required
money by alienating the lands. This fact would not justify Thakombau
in renouncing his agreement, if he had ever been in a position to keep
it, as the American claim ultimately was paid ; but it shows, together
with the instances quoted and these to come, a want of good faith
and that from the beginning the Company has published only just
what suits its convenience and no more.
Divested of those dangerous aids, the “ suggestio falsi ” and the
“ suppressio veri ” the early history of the Polynesia Company resolves
itself into the record of a wild and very questionable speculation, for
the results of which its promoters were ten years ago warned on the
part of Her Majesty’s Government that they “must hold themselves
responsible.”


PART 11.
Having disposed of the arguments based upon the alleged
sovereignty of Thakombau as put forward by the Polynesia Company
in the first part of its “ Remonstrance,” the consideration of the second
part which professes to narrate the history of the Company from 1868
to the date of Cession in 1574 may be proceeded with.
As before, the inaccuracy of the Company’s statements is again
palpable to any one having a knowledge of Fijian affairs. “ America
“ proceeds ” so runs the heading of Part II of the “ Remonstrance,” “ to
“ enforce payment of her claim against Fiji—seizes three of the islands,
“viz., Goro, Batiki, and Angau, thereby bringing the whole country
“ under foreign domination.”
It can only be said in reply to this statement, that the United
States authorities in Fiji did not at any time “ seize” the above named
islands or any other in the group.
Upon the 11th July, 1867, after some unavailing fencing and protest
from Thakombau, a document, of which a copy is subjoined, was handed
to him with a demand for his signature within twenty-four hours, and
an intimation that if this were not done his town would be shelled.
Contemporaneously with the conveyance of this mandate the U.S.S.
“ Tuscarora ” took up a position convenient for carrying the threat
into execution. Upon the morning of the 12th of July Thakombau
signed—and once more “ admitted ” the debt.
This Indenture, made and entered into at Bau, the Capital of Fiji, on this
twelfth day of June A.D. 1867, by and between Ebenezer “ Cakobau,” King of the
Fiji Islands on the part of the Government of Fiji, and Captain F. Stanly,
commanding the United States ship “ Tuscarora, and I. M. Brower United States
Consul to Fiji and the dependencies thereof on the part of the Government of the
United States of America.
IVitnesseth.
That whereas Cakobau King of Fiji has and does hereby assume admit as
correct, and agree to pay unto the Government of the United States or the Consul
thereof to Fiji, as Indemnity for injuries to and destruction of property owned and
belonging to citizens of the United States, the particulars of which claims for.
Indemnity were investigated, and established by the Officers of the U. S. ship
war Yandalia, in October of 1858 (see Register No. 121, U. S. Consular Record)
the sum of Forty-five thousands Dollars, (45,000 dols.), and whereas that sum of
Forty-five thousand Dollars less the sum of Fourteen hundred and thirty.fivo
dols. eiglity-one cts. at this present date remains due and unpaid leaving a balance
now duo of (43,564 dol. 19 cts.) Forty-three thousand five hundred and sixty-four,
dols. nineteen cts. Now therefore this Indenture as aforesaid “Witncsscth”
that the said Ebenezer Cakobau, King of Fiji Islands does hereby promise, agree,
and bind himself his heirs or successors that he will, and they shall will and truly
pay or cause to bo paid unto the Government of the United States or the Consul
thereof to Fiji the said sum of Forty-three thousand five hundred and sixty-four
dols. nineteen cts. (43,564 dols. 19 cts.) in accordance with the following ’stipula-
tions.
To Wit.
1. The aforesaid sum of 43,564 dols. 19 cts, shall be well and truly paid as
aforesaid .within the term of four (4) years from the first day of May A.D., 18G7,


2. The aforesaid sum of 43,5G1 dols. 19 cts., shall be divided into four equal
portions or instalments of Ten thousand Eight hundred and ninety-one dollara
each.
3. The first instalments of 10,891 Dollars shall be paid on the first day of May
A.D., IS6S.
4. One year from that date, tho second instalment of 10,891 dollars shall be
paid, and so on in each succeeding year upon the first day of May, until the whole
sum of Forty three thousand five hundred and sixty-four dols (43,5G1 dols.) shall
have been paid.
5. As security and in pledge for and of the faithful fulfilment of the foregoing
stipulations and payments the Islands of “ Moturiki,” “ Batiki,” and “ Narai,” of
the Fiji Group of Islands, are hereby hypothicated in assurance of the payment
of the first instalment, which being duly paid at maturity May Ist, 1808, the
aforesaid Islands shall remain in hypothecation for tho full payment of the second
instalment and so on from one instalment and year to another, until the whole
number are paid, and then tho said Islands shall be released, but not before.
Provided, however, that in default of tho payment of the first instalment or
cither of the succeeding instalments thereafter, upon tho day upon which it or
either of them shall become duo, then it shall be lawful and is hereby permitted-
that the United States Government or the Consul or Agent thereof may enter upon
possess and sell in “ fee simple,” and forever tho aforesaid Islands of “ Moturiki,”
“ Batiki,” and “ Nairai,” and appropriate the proceeds of such sale to the payment
in whole or part of such instalment as may be due and unpaid. In witness
whereof I, tho said Cakobau King of Fiji for the Government of tho Fiji Islands,
and we Captain F. Stanly and I. M. Brower for the Government of the United
States have hereunto day and date before written set our hands and Official
seals.
(L.s.) (Signed) Cakobau,
King of Fiji.
(1.5.) (Signed) F. Stanly,
Captain U. S. N.
(Signed) I. M. Blower.
It is expressly understood that if it shall become necessary to sell the above
Islands or any part of them as above stated that it shall only be so sold by orders
from the Secretary of State of the United States.
(Signed) F. Stanly,
Captain U. S. N.
It is very apparent from the postscript to the foregoing document
that the commander of the “ Tuscarora,” Captain F. Stanly, did not
altogether assent to the project of placing the absolute disposition of
the three islands in the hands of one person, and his minute or postscript
was an effectual method for compelling the resident Consular officer
to refer to "Washington before taking a step that might have caused
considerable inconvenience to his government.
The assertion that Thakombau’s signature actually placed “ the
whole country under Foreign domination,” is only another instance of
the extravagant style in which the Company’s statements are couched.
The text of tho Charter signed by Thakombau on the 23rd July,
18G8, has already been given (page 11 ), and it is now only necessary for
the complete understanding of this part of the subject to add that of the
Indenture made and entered into between the United States Yice-ConsuL
in Fiji, on the one hand, and Messrs. Brewer and Evans on the other.
The following is a transcript of tho Indenture:—
This Indenture, made and entered into this 24th day of July, A.D, 1808, by


and between J. M. Brower, United States Vice-Consul in Fiji of the first part, and
John L. Evans and W. H. O’H. Brewer of the second part, witnesseth—That
whereas Cakobau, King of Fiji Islands, is on this day justly and truly indebted to
the Government of the United States of America by the failure on his part to keep
and comply -with the terms of a convention made and entered into on the twelfth
day of June, 18G7, in the sum of 42,248 dol. forty-two thousand two hundred and
forty-eight dollars, and interest on said amount since the first day of May, 1868,
at the rate of six per cent, per annum. Now, therefore, we, John L. Evans and
W. H. O’H. Brewer, of Melbourne, Victoria, for ourselves and on the part of a
Company (incorporated) about to be formed in the colony of Victoria, Australia,
do hereby covenant and agree that in consideration of a certain Charter and Grant
of Lands bearing date July 23rd, 18G8, to us made and delivered, copy of which
is hereunto attached, we will well and truly, on the part and on behalf of
the said Cakobau, King as aforesaid, make provision for and pay to the United
States Vice-Consul in Fiji, the aforesaid claim and indebtedness of 42,248 dol.
with interest as hereinafter specified, subject to and under the following terms,
conditions, and stipulations, to wit, Wc, John L. Evans and W. 11. O’H. Brewer,
agents as aforesaid, agree and bind ourselves hereby that within twenty days after our
arrival, in Melbourne, Victoria, we will pay into the Bank of New South Wales to
the credit of J. M. Brower, United States Vice-Consul in Fiji, the sum of 9,575 dol.
nine thousand five hundred and seventy-five dollars, and that on or before the 24tli
day of July, A.D. 1869, provided that Cakobau, King of Fiji as aforesaid, shall
have faithfully and truly complied with the terms of said Charter and Grant
hereinbefore referred to, wo will pay to the said I. M. Brower, United States Vice-
Consul, his order, or his successor in office, the sum 32,G73 dol. thirty-two thousand
six hundred and seventy-three dollars, together with interest on that amount
(32,673 dol.) at the rate of six per cent, for one year. It is understood and agreed,
however, that in the event of failure on the part of Cakobau, King &s aforesaid,
to comply with the terms of the aforesaid Charter, then the stipulation for the
payment of the sum of 32,G72 dol. shall become null and void, save and except
the interest thereupon, which in any event shall be paid as aforesaid, and after
being deducted from the first payment of 9,575 dol. the remainder of the
said'sum of 9,575d01. shall be held to be due to said Agents or Company from the
original indemnity claim, and whenever said claim is realised or enforced by the
United States Government that balance shall be allowed to said Agents or
Company in the same manner and upon the same terms as to other individuals
interested by award in said indemnity claims, that is either in lands or cash. It
is understood, also, that the United States Consul or Agent in Fiji will at all times
render to said Agent or Company such moral support as may be in his power,
not inconsistent with his official position, for securing the faithful execution of
said Charter on the part of Cokobau, King as aforesaid. In witness whereof and
in pledge of the faithful performance thereof wo have hereunto set our hands and
seals day and date before written.
Witness to signatures,
Otty Cudlip.
John Lavington Evans.
W. H. O’H. Brewer.
Accepted, J. M. Browep.,
“U. S. V.-Consul”
It is understood that no personal responsibility shall be attached to Messrs.
Brewer and Evans in this indenture other than such as is equally shared with them
by their associates, Frederick Cook, financial agent; Andrew Lyell, merchant ;
J. S. Butters, M.L,A., Mayor of Melbourne ; W. C. Smith, Banker, Ballarat; T.
Davey, Mayor of Ballarat; &c., &c., &c.
J. L. Evans.
W. H. O’H. Brewer.
Witness to signatures, Otty Cudlip.
Accepted, J, M. Beowek, “U. S. Vice-Consul.”
Witness, Otty Cudlip.


The Company, in its “ Remonstrance,” lays groat stress upon this
agreement, and particularly upon the stipulation that, “ in the event of
“ failure on the part of Thakombau to comply with the terms of the
“ Charter then the stipulation for the payment of the sum of 32,673
“ dollars shall become null and void ; and that the first payment of
“ 9,575 dollars shall also be held to bo due to the Agents or Company
“ from the original indemnity claim whenever such claim is realised or
“ enforced by the United States Government.’'
Now the simple and actual meaning of the agreement was, that if
Thakombau “ faithfully performed ” his part of the contract, the Agents
of the Company were to pay the sum of money named in such agreement;
and that, if ho failed, the contract with the U.S. Vice-Consul became, ipso
facto, void, and the first instalment of money paid (9,575 dollars) was to
be returned to them. These stipulations, the Company aver, clearly
indicate “ the intention, both of the U.S. Vice-Consul and the Company,
“ that there should be nothing speculative about the transaction, but that
“ the right of the Consul to retain the indemnity money should be
“ founded upon a faithful compliance with the Charter by the King,
“ and upon that alone.” To this proposition the Company may very
properly adhere, and as Thakombau never did comply, and never could
have complied with the terms of. the Charter, the Company may
perhaps claim a refund of the 42,248 dollars in virtue of the terms
of their agreement with the American Vice-Consul. The understand-
ing that the Vice-Consul should at all times render the Company such
moral support as may be in his power, shows that in view of the speculative
character of the transaction he carefully guarded himself from any
material pledge in the matter. But as a further evidence that the
risky and speculative character of their venture was well known
to the Agents of the Company, their letter of the Cth July, 1868,
transmitting to the British Consul the draft of the second charter may
be quoted. (Page 6.) Referring to the clause prohibiting the sale of land
on certain islands without first offering them to the Company, the Agents
say —“ We think you will agree with us this is the onhj real security
we shall have.” How then can the Company say that there was
“ nothing speculative ” about the transaction ?
And here it may be pertinently asked, what has boon the practical
result of the contract between the King and the Company ? The
answer is—comparatively nothing.
Of the whole 200,000 acres of land supposed to have been
conveyed to the Company only a very few acres have been occupied
by persons who purchased its scrip. These, by dint of pcrscverence and
patience, and in some instances by commending themselves to the
natives have contrived to make their occupations permanent, but
ninety-nine hundredths of the land remains as it did on the day the
Charter was signed.
As the Agents of the Company were frequently warned by the
'British Consul, Thakombau was morally and physically unable to carry
out the obligations to which he had bound himself. Throughout the
whole of their “ Remonstrance ” the Company argue as if Thakombau had
faithfully performed his part of the contract; as if they had actually


acquired and occupied the lands described in the schedule to their
Charter; —and as if the Colonial Government of Fiji were now depriving
them of such lands.
The truth is that the Company has never been able to
get possession of the scheduled lands. In other words they have
nothing of which to be deprived. Neither from Thakombau the King of
Bau, nor from Thakombau as the de facto King of Fiji could the
Company obtain possession of any land, excepting a small tract at
Suva. Whether standing alone, as Thakombau did prior to 1871, or
assisted by European advisers, as he was from 1871 to the date of
annexation, the result was the same. The Company’s Agents constantly
demanded the land, and Thakombau and Thalcombau’s advisers as
constantly avowed their inability to give it to them.
To test the value of the Company’s occupation, and particularly to
the Suva lands which (page 29) it is declared have been “in possession of
the Company ” ever since the date of the Charter, the following extract
from a letter, addressed to the Minister for Lands (under Takombau’s
Government) by Mr. C. R. Forwood, the Chairman of Directors, and
Agent in Fiji of the Polynesia Company, dated October, IS7I, may be
cited :
Mr. C. li. Forwood to Minister of Lands, Fiji.
Levuka, 20th October 1871.
I beg to inform you that on the first of the blocks ceded (known as the Viti
Levu Bay block,) no less than four claimants have appeared, who, I believe, allege
to have bought in 18G9 from lloko I'ui Viwa large portions of the lands granted to
the Company.
As to second of said blocks (that at Natcwa Bay) the King has executed no
grant (as I am informed) in pursuance of the charter.
As to the third block, (the Islands of Benga, Moturiki, Lcvuka, Malumu, and
Mamuka), various claimants have opposed the Company’s obtaining possession
among whom are the Chief Maafu and Messrs. Williams and Wilkinson.
_ And as to the fourth (or Suva) block, the Western side of the harbour is
claimed by local chiefs, and part of the Eastern side by private parties. You will
therefore sec that even as to the lands specifically named in the charter there has
been altogether a failure to carry out the King’s engagement, although the Com- t
pany have paid ofE as agreed the whole of the King’s debt to the American
Government.
In a letter to 11. M. Commissioners, Commodore Goodenougli and
Consul Layard, dated so lately as the I2tli January, 1874, Mr.
For wood, in describing the unavailing efforts of tbo Company to obtain
possession of the Suva land writes:—
“ The eastern (the best) side of the harbour ( Suva) was claimed by
“ Mr. Swanston and others. The western was claimed by Maafu and the
*' chief of Namosi, and other portions the surveyors were defied to enter
“ upon, on the ground that Thakombau had no right whatever to dispose of
“ them, as they did not recognise his sovereignty. In fact the surveyors
“ ran great risks in effecting what they did outside the lands of Suva point
“ and the Wai Manu river, and it is feared that settlement at any distance
“ from the coast or river side will be attended with danger from the local
natives unless vigorous measures are taken by the King’s Government


“ to carry out his professed right to deal with the lands ceded in his
“ neighbourhood.” These are the terms in which the Chairman of the
Directors of the Polynesia Company refers to the stale of existing
things six years subsequent to the date of the Charter and grants
upon which the claims of the Company are founded.
When writing to the Governors of Victoria and Hew South Wales
in 1868 the British Consul in Fiji, said, in connection with his observa-
tions on the proceedings of the Company’s Agents, “So slight is the
“ authority of Thakombau that he cannot protect from robbery or violence
“ those European settlers who have bought lands in the districts he
“assumes to control. From this and the fact that Fiji is without any
“ form of Government—a mere congeries of savage tribes, incapable at
“ present of entering into civilized relations—your Excellency will be
“ aware that any attempt to obtain (by taking advantage of Thakombau’s
“ pecuniary difficulties) comparatively enormous tracts of land, at the
“ expense of independent tribes, must precipitate those complications
“ which I fear will inevitably, as it is, arise in the future.” How
correct the Consul was in his opinions is amply proved by Mr. Forwood’s
letter to the Commissioners, quoted above.
But the native occupants of the Suva block were not exceptional in
resisting the Company’s Agents, whom they naturally regarded as
intruders. “ The natives ”on Benga (Mr Forwood to Commissioners,
12th January, 1874) “ refused to permit either Thakombau oi the Com-
“ pang's agents to land, and Maafu, the former chief of the Lau con-
federacy and now Viceroy of the Kingdom, claimed the island to be
“ his.” Everywhere upon the south side of Viti Levu the Agents of the
Company and Thakombau were met with open signs of hostility, and as
before said, with the exception of a few pieces of land on Suva point—a
place not very highly valued by the natives, no land whatever could be
obtained for occupation.
As it was on the south so it was on the east side of Viti Levu.
When Messrs. Martelli and Wingate, (the surveyors), first landed at Na
Viti Levu bay, and ran their surveying chains over the ground, the
natives, who had never before seen such things, looked on with surprise
and amusement, but when they found out the grave import of their
measurements they gave these gentlemen such summary notice to quit
that they lost no time in acting upon it.
Mr. Martelli (petition to the Fijian Legislative Assembly, 12th
December, 1871) says that on attempting to survey the Viti Levu Bay
block he was interfered with and threatened “by natives of the. tribe of
which the said chief, Isekeli, is (as your petitioner believes) the head,”
and also “by persons who claim to have purchased portions of said
block from “ that chief since the date of the said Charter of the
Company.”
Thus as at Suva, (with small exception), and at Benga, the
Company failed to obtain a foot hold at Viti Levu Bay, or even to
complete their survey of the land so lavishly disposed of by Thakombau
on the 23rd July, 18G8. At Natewa Bay, (Yanua Levu) no attempt was
made to obtain formal possession from the wholly independent and


powerful chief Tui Cakau. To this day the native occupants of that
part of Fiji are in ignorance of the existence of the Polynesia Company
and of its claims to their lands.
From the foregoing it will be seen that from the very beginning of
the Company’s transactions in Fiji up to the period of the cession of
the islands to Her Majesty, the native owners and occupants of the soil,
nominally alienated by Thakombau, successfully resisted the Company’s
claims or attempts to acquire possession. Everywhere its agents were
met with such violent threats of resistance that even in the year of
annexation to Great Britain (six years after the date of the Charter)
the Chairman of the Directors of the Polynesia Company (who for at
least four years had lived in the group), is found intimating .that
“ vigorous measures,” in other words war, ought to be undertaken “ by
the King’s government to carry out his professed right to deal with the
lands ceded in his neighbourhood.” Surely it is unnecessary to further
expose the fallacy of the Company’s arguments, or the incorrectness of
its assertions (par. 17), that “very considerable sections of land
transferred and conveyed by the King to the Company, in virtue of the
Charter, havo been ever since, and still are, more or less in the occu-
pation of the Company,” and that the area of the sections alluded to is
“ 90,000 acres.” So absolutely untrue is this assertion that the
company cannot point out one single piece of land that now is, or ever
was, in its possession. The Polynesia Company —qua company—has
never had any manifest existence in the islands, if the fact of a
resident agent or attorney be excepted. It is true, as before said,
that a few persons who bought Polynesia Company’s Land Scrip
succeeded after infinite annoyance and trouble in settling down upon
various parts of Suva Point. Their tenure at that place has been one
of sufferance more than anything else, and their occupation has been for
themselves, not for the Company. The Governor in Council has not.
interfered in any way with such persons, nor is there much doubt but
that they will in due time receive their Crown Grants. But all such
Grants will be made upon the ground of occupation, and of the
prescriptive right which occupation and use may equitably, and
in view of all the circumstances, be deemed to have created, but in no
instance as founded upon a title from the Polynesia Company.
In the fourth article of the Deed of Cession it was provided that all
lands should vest in Her Majesty “if not shown to be now alienated so
“as to have become bona fide the property of Europeans or other
“Foreigners,” &c., &c., and the question is—have the lands, claimed
by the Company, become at any time lona fide its property or not ?
In reply it has been shown—that Thakombau and his family had
neither right nor power to alienate the lands named in the schedule to
the Charter—that the actual occupants and bona fide native proprietors
protested against such assumption of right, and to this day have success-
fully resisted any power attempting to eject them—and that, as was
predicted by the British Consul in 1868, and as the Company’s agents
were repeatedly warned, Thakombau and his chiefs have failed absolutely
to fulfil their contract.
What the Company therefore really asks the Imperial and Colonial


Governments to do is—not to confirm it in the possession of 200,000
acres of land already acquired and occupied in virtue of its contract with
Thakombau, but to accept the liability of carrying out the broken—
and withal impossible—contract of that chief; —to do, in fact, what
Thakombau, his chiefs, and government could not do; —to take
vigorous measures ” for ejecting the native subjects of Her Majesty
from their ancestral planting grounds;—to render operative and
remunerative an impossible agreement made with a semi-civilized chief
eight years before the Fijian group of islands was erected into a British
Colony, and for the results of which impossible agreement the Agents
of the Company were at every stage of their proceedings distinctly
warned and cautioned that they must hold themselves responsible.
The Company, it is true, state that the warning given by the
British Consul on behalf of Her Majesty’s Government before the signing
of the Charter, referred to the first and not to the second document so
called—and in paragraphs 20, 25,2 G, 27, 28, of the “ Remonstrance,” it is
asserted that Mr. Thurston “never advanced the slightest objection to
the second or present Charter.” It is also added, that “ only two days
before the execution of the Charter he exercised his influence to bring
it about,” and “ materially assisted ” its consummation. In paragraph
26 it also quotes an extract of Mr. Thurston’s letter to the Company’s
delegates, dated the 21st July, 1868, and in so doing conveys an utterly
false impression of Mr. Thurston’s official relations with the delegates.
The whole of this letter has been already given (page 10), and from
it, and from the preceding correspondence, which will be found in the
same place, those interested in the Company will be able to form a
very fair idea of its well sustained powers in rising superior to truth.
Mr. Thurston’s not having “ forbidden ” Thakombau to sign the
Charter is easily explained. He had no power to forbid the chief doing
anything to relieve himself of the pressure brought to bear upon him by
the American Consul. Whatever might have been his private and
personal opinions in regard to the equity and justness of the American
indemnity claim, it was no part of his duty, public or private, to
forbid the attempt of Thakombau to liquidate it. It was, how-
ever, within his province to counsel and advise the chief, and even to-
protest against his actions, inasmuch as he was dealing with British
subjects, and particularly as he (the Consul) saw that the lands promised
to be given never could be given, that the privileges intended to be
granted never could be enjoyed, that much annoyance and pecuniary loss
would be incurred by such residents in the Australasian Colonies as
entangled themselves in the Company’s scheme, and that much trouble
and inconvenience would probably be forced upon the Imperial
Government.
Mr. Thurston advised Thakombau accordingly, hut he did not “forbid"’
him, as‘lie possessed no authority or control over any chief in Fiji.
With the Company’s Delegates the case was different. In addition to
the impossibility of Thakombau “ faithfully performing ” his part of the
contract, and the certainty of a great wrong being done to the British
public in Australia by the Promoters of the Company, the Charter or
agreement contained provisions to which it was the Consul’s duty to


object. It will be seen by reference to the Charter that the object of
the company was nothing less than to found a Colony.* The company
was to have pre-emptive rights over all the lands in Western Fiji, the
sole right to issue Bank notes and to do Banking business for twenty-one
years, freedom from taxation or imposts upon exports and imports, rights
to all mines and minerals, rights' over all beds of seas, rivers, and waters
adjacent to the scheduled territory, and to all harbours, seas, rivers, and
creeks thereunto belonging. The object of the Promoters of the Com-
pany, as • disclosed by this part of their agreement and by their own
personal communications, was, in the Consul’s opinion, opposed to
international and consequently to British law. He assumed that
neither individuals, nor bodies of men, the subjects of any nation, can
form a colony except with the consent and under the direction and
control of their own Government, and that from any such settlement
formed, without such consent, their own Government might expel them.
For all these reasons, therefore, he forbade British subjects to commit
acts which he deemed illegal, and protested and warned the Promoters
of the risks they ran. Her Majesty’s Government, without specifically
endorsing his opinions, approved of the action taken by him, as
indicated by the following despatches :
Mr. Murray to Acting Consul Thurston.
Foreign Office,
4th December, 1868.
Sir, —With reference to your despatches noted in the margin I am directed by
Lord Stanley to acquaint you that the Secretary of State for the Colonial Depart-
ment has informed his Lordship that the Gevernors of Victoria and of New South
Wales have been told that undertakings such as that originating with a Company
at Melbourne for obtaining rights aud jurisdiction in the Fiji Islands can receive
no encouragement or authority from Her Majesty’s Government.
I am Sir,
Your most obedient humble servant
James Murray.
-J. B. Thurston Esq.,
Acting British Consul,
Earl Granville, K. G., to Governor the Hon. Sir J. H. T. Manners
Sutton :—
Downing-street, 3rd December, 1868.
SIR, —I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your despatch, No. 142,
of 12th of September last, enclosing copies of papers relating to negotiations
entered into by some persons acting, as it appears, on behalf of a Company at
Melbourne to obtain rights of jurisdiction and property over a portion of the Fiji
Islands.
I approve of the course which you have taken in this matter.


It should be distinctly understood that undertakings like the present receive-
no encouragement from Her Majesty’s Government.
I have, &c.,
(Signed)
Gkanville.
The Hon. Sir J. H. T. Manners Sutton,
&c., Sec., &c.
If, therefore, “ the Company naturally look to the British Govern-
ment to endorse the official act of its representative ” in Fiji, it has no
reason to feel surprised or aggrieved if H.M. Government ignores its
Charter, and all acts and matters based upon, or arising out of that
Charter, and leaves the Company to make the best of those results for
which it alone is responsible.
The Company, in its “ Remonstrance,” has found it necessary to
accuse Hr. Thurston of “ misrepresentation ” and of despatching a letter
to the authorities at Melbourne, the head-quarters of the Company, of an
“ unjustifiable character,” the design of which was “ detected and
baffled by the American Consul at Melbourne, General Latham (a
shareholder in the Company), who took prompt action, to disabuse the
public mind of the effect of Mr. Thurston’s missive.” The substance of
Mr. Thurston’s letter is thus given and commented on by the
Company (Sec. 29 of “ Remonstrance”): —
“ Extract from the Melbourne Argus, Bth September, 1868.
“ tVe are requested by the Chief Secretary to publish the subjoined memorandum
“ for general information : — 11 Authentic and authoritative information, under the
“ latest date, viz., 22nd July, has been received from her Majesty’s acting consul at
‘ Fiji, in which he states that the arrangements which had then been entered into
‘ by Messrs. Evans and Brewer, of Melbourne (on behalf of a certain company
“ about to be formed), with Chief Thakombau, had been repudiated by the chief,
“ and that Messrs. Evans and Brewer’s proceedings had been protested against by
“ him, the consul.”
“ This communication was dated one day after the above quoted
“ letter to the delegates, and one day before the execution of the Charter
“by the King and Chiefs ; but it could hardly have left Mr. Thurston’s
“ hands before the 28th, on which day the mail for Melbourne was made-
“ up, and the letters of the community generally posted. This, however,
“is certain, that the approved Charter, substituted for the one objected
“ to by Mr. Thurston, had with his hnowledge and consent, been executed
“ at the American Conlulate seven dags before the latest dates left Fiji on
“ that occasion. The vessel that carried the mail was the John Wesley,
“ which sailed from Fiji on the 30th July.”
Although the Company state that Mr. Consul Thurston had
“ materially assisted ” the consummation of the contract between the
King and the Company, “ fully approved of the Charter, and “ exercised
his influence to facilitate the execution of it,” and that it had “ with his
knowledge and consent ” been executed at the American Consulate seven
days before the latest dates left Fiji yet it is very clear that the
American Vice-Consul a person quite as much concerned in the-


negotiations as the Company, took a very different view of Mr. Thurston’s
action, and this the Company have ingenuously taken some pains to prove.
In page 27 of its remonstrance the Company quotes the following extract
from a letter addressed to the United States Consul in Melbourne.
United States Consulate,
Fiji, 25th July, 1877.
“ They (Messrs. Brewer and Evans) have met with a strong opposition in
obtaining their Charter and Grant of land from King Thakombau from H. B. M.
Consul in Fiji, and the Commodore of H. M. S. “ Chalenger,” now on a cruise to
Fiji. King Thakombau has notwithstanding executed a Charter, the privileges of
which, though quite liberal are much curtailed from the original design.
* * * * * *
(Signed) I. M. Beower,
U. S. Vice-Consul.
The plain meaning of the foregoing extract is that despite the
advice, -warning, and protest of the Commodore and Consul, Thakombau
executed a Charter, &c. The reckless statements of the Company
are nowhere better exemplified than in this place when it declares on one
page that the Charter was executed with Mr. Thurston’s “ knowledge and
consent,” and on the very next cites the American Vice-Consul in
Fiji to prove it was signed notwithstanding his “ strong opposition.”
The statements with regard to Mr. Thurston’s “misrepresentations”
are therefore shown to be not less untrue than those of the Company
relating to Mr. Thurston’s correspondence with its Agents before noticed
(pp. 8,9, 10). The misrepresentations were entirely on the part of the
Company, not of the Consul. Upon the 21st of July, 1868 (see page
10), the Consul wrote his final letter to the Agents, and they abandoned
all hope of gaining his official aid in any shape. From his final inter-
view with Thakombau he also thought the negotiations were virtually at
an end ; and upon the morning of the 23rd he left Levuka, returning
again on the morning of the 25th, when he embarked on board H.M.S.
“ Challenger,” and with Commodore Lambert proceeded to another part
of the group. His letters to the Governors of New South Wales and
Victoria were written and posted upon the 22nd. Messrs. Brewer and
Evans, the Company’s Agents, knew that he had left Levuka, and knew
that he had not returned up to the 30th July, the day upon which they left
Fiji in the “ John Wesley.” They knew, and all concerned knew, that
he was in entire ignorance of the events of the 23rd instant, but the fact
of the departure of the mail so many days after the date of his despatches
was cleverly and adroitly seized upon to “baffle” his design of warning
the Victorian public against a project that he could only look upon as
delusive, if not something worse. Upon this subject it only remains
to add that Mr. Thurston returned to Levuka upon the sth of
August to find that the Agents of the Company had left some
days before, bearing with them the Charter, a draft of which they had
forwarded to him on the 6th of the preceding month, and as to which
and to their actions generally they had been informed he did “ not
“ withdraw his protest ” (see page 9).


A consideration of paragraph 30of the Company’s “Remonstrance”
may afford some proofs that it is the Promoters and Managers of the
Company (and not any person or persons in Fiji), who have been guilty
of most unjustifiable conduct and most gross misrepresentation. The
paragraph referred to is as follows :
“ The Polynesia Company was incorporated December 7th, 1868,
“under the Companies’ Statute 1864, enacted by the Victorian Legis-
“ lature. The nominal capital was £lOO,OOO, and the number of shares
“ issued was 13,700, and land warrants under their Charter to the extent
“ of about 160,000 acres, distributed amongst a large number of colonists
“in Victoria and New South Wales, including many of the leading
“ citizens in Melbourne, amongst whom were the Mayor, and the Consuls
“ for the United States and Germany.”
When and what date were the land warrants for 160,000 acres
of land sold and distributed among a large number of colonists in
Victoria and New South Wales ? And in putting the question let it be
distinctly borne in mind—first, that the Company agreed with Thakombau
“not to alienate any of the land until the whole of the American debt was
paid ” secondly, that there was “ nothing speculative ” about its tran-
sactions ; and thirdly, that “ the retention of moneys paid to the
American Consul was conditional upon the faithful performance by the
King of the obligations he had bound himself to/’
Now, did the Company pay off the American claims, and then issue
its land warrants, or, falsely representing that it had already acquired
the land, did it sell its land warrants to the extent of 160,000 acres—
(warrants to land of which its Agents and Attorneys knew it could not
get possession) in order to obtain the very means of settling with the
American Vice-Consul ? Was there “ nothing speculative ”in making
an agreement for a sale of lands in a barbarous and remote part of
Polynesia, and straightway selling such land to a confiding public in
Australia as the only means of raising the money to pay the price of
the original purchase? Selling it too when the native owners “ refused
to permit either Thakombau or the Company’s Agents to land !” when the
Company’s surveyors were driven off “ with great risk,” or “ defied to
enter ” upon the scheduled territory!! when the natives of the soil refused
to admit Thakombau’s “ sovereignty ” or “ right to dispose ” of their
lands!!!
The answer to these questions is easy. The Company did sell lands,
of which it had not possession, or even reasonable hope of possession,
before it paid off the American claims. The American Vice-Consul’s
acquittance to Thakombau is dated 19th November, 1870, two years and
four months after the date of the Charter with Thakombau and the Indenture
of Agreement with the Consul. By these unjustifiable proceedings and
misrepresentations the Company succeeded in selling that of which, only by
a fiction, it could pretend to possess; and it now comes forward, and
in an aggrieved tone, prays Her Majesty’s Government to make fiction
fact at the cost of an enormous injustice to Her Majesty’s subjects
inhabiting the lands in question and an irremediable wrong to the
Colony.
Her Majesty’s Government has most distinctly announced that it


will not be responsible for any liabilities incurred by Thakombau or any
other persons professing to administer or represent the Government of
Fiji prior to the 10th day of October, 1874, although as an act of grace
and favour it is not indisposed to undertake the payment of such
liabilities incurred before cession as, after proper inquiry, it may appear
just and fair for it to assume.
The Company (paragraph 12) correctly assert that "the right of
the American Consul to retain the indemnity money ” was “ founded
upon a faithful compliance with the Charter by the King, and upon that
alone.” And viewing the matter in this light, and as a matter of favour,
and not right, the Colonial Government has offered ex gratid to
carry out the terms of the Indenture of Agreement made between the
United States Vice-Consul in Fiji and the Agents of the Company,
dated the 24th day of July, IS6B, by which the sum of 42,248 dollars
was to be repaid the Company in the event of Thakombau failing to
comply with the terms of the Charter. To suppose that the Colonial or the
Imperial Government is in honour bound, or can be called ; upon either
at law or in equity to carry into effect the broken contracts of Thakombau,
or any other Fijian chief, is simply absurd, and the declaration that a
refusal to do so is “ a bold violation of every principle of law and equity,
standing without a parallel in the annals of civilised diplomacy,” is
a mere ad captandnm sentence requiring no particular comment.
Only one thing more remains to be noticed in connection with this
part of the Company’s “ Bemonstrance.” It refers in support of its
claims (paragraph 23) to an Act of the Fijian Legislature, called the
“Indemnity Act, 1871,” as being a recognition of the Company’s
Charter by “the Constitutional Government of Fiji in 1872,
four years after the Charter was granted.” This Act did not
refer specifically to the Company’s Charter, but to any and all contracts
“lawfully entered into.” On the 23rd of July, 1872, however, the
House passed a Bill to empower the King’s Cabinet to grant Charters
for the establishment of Banking Institutions in the Kingdom, upon the
ground, as the Treasurer of the day put it, that the Polynesia Company
had failed to comply with the conditions of their Charter, or to
establish a Bank; and further that various drafts, bills, and other
evidence of debt due by the Company had been dishonoured, and remained
unpaid.” The testimony of the Fijian Legislature, therefore, like other
authorities quoted by the Company, is dead against it, the “ Consti-
tutional Government of Fiji” having left an unmistakeable record that,
in its opinion, the Charter or Agreement of the 23rd July, 1868, had
become null and void.* The history of the Polynesia Company in Fiji
* It is not within the scope or object of this memorandum to refer to the
alleged breaches of its contract by the Polynesia Company, and particularly as
to the annuity of two thousand dollars per annum which from the date of the
“ Charter ” the Company were to pay Thakombau, but the following extract from a
leading article in an issue of the Melbourne ‘ Age,” August, 1870, shows in a
truthful though amusing manner the state of public opinion in Melbourne (the
“ head quarters of the company ”), at that date.
The “ Age,” Melbourne, August, 1870.
“ One paragraph of Mr. Butters’s secret instructions had much better have


up to the time ofannexation to Great Britain has now, though some-
what rapidly, been correctly given. The Company’s allegation of
“ Unfair treatment by the British Authorities ” will be dealt with in the
next part of this pamphlet which will contain a succinct account of its
correspondence and relations with the Colonial Government up to the
present day.
remained so; no wonder that some of the shareholders protested against the
revelation.” We quote it entire King Thakombau’s annuity:—Mr. Butters’s
“ particular attention is drawn to the subject of the £2OO annuity to King
“ Thakombau, mentioned in the charter. Instructed to consult with Dr. Brower
“as to how this matter can be best compromised. To state that the Directors do
“ not consider this a present liability of the company ; that they are desirous to
“ avoid any unpleasantness in the adjustment of the claim : that the banking
“ privilege is valueless while the storekeepers in the islands can issue notes of their
“ own, against which infringement of the charter’s privilege the company have
“no provision.” Having obtained the land ; having got rid of the American
difficulty; having made Thakombau a plaint tool, the Polynesian Company,
Limited, now propose to further limit their liability by repudiating the obligation
to give the mess of pottage for which they purchased the heritage. Poor Thakombau
is to be “ arranged ” with, and no doubt Mr. Butters will arrange on the most
advantageous terms. The King will be gravely informed of the peculiar meaning
of limited liability, and of the essential difference of a contract which can be
enforced and one that can not ? And his ‘ particular attention ’ will further bo
drawn to the audacious infringement of the charter by the local storekeepers, who
issue their own promissory notes instead of taking those of the Polynesia Company,
Limited.”


PART 111.
The Third Part of the “ Remonstrance ” professes to narrate events'
which have taken place since the annexation of Fiji, and denounces, in
no measured terms, the conduct and actions of the Imperial and Colonial
Governments. It is sought to excite sympathy for the Company, not
by argument, but by a narrative of its assumed wrongs, in which so many
important facts are wholly suppressed, and others so misrepresented,
that it would be hopeless to render its correction intelligible otherwise
than by a fresh relation of the transactions between the. Company and
the Government. Thfe independant narrative, borne out by documents
which will be fully quoted, may be compared with the version of the
same events given in the “ Remonstrance,” the bare assertions of
which are unsupported save by a few carefully chosen lines and
fragments, extracted from letters with the context of which they are
sometimes at variance.
On the arrival in Fiji of Commodore Goodenough and Mr.
Layard, as Commissioners appointed to report on the offered Cession
of the group, the claims of the Polynesia Company were brought to their
consideration by a letter from Mr. Forwood, then Chairman of the Company
and its Agent in Fiji, bearing date January 12, 1874, to which reference
has been already made.**
In their Report the Commissioners mention that the Company was
“ fully warned of the inability of Thakombau to carry out the engage-
“ ment he entered into with them, and of the futility of his promises,”
and that “ very little of the land given to it is as yet occupied.”'!;
■ Along with the Report of the Commissioners certain conditions of
cession, framed by Thakombau/s Ministers, were transmitted to England
for the consideration of H, M. Government. It is a significant fact that
among them we find this stipulation : “ The Charter granted by His Fijian
“ Majesty to the Fiji Banking and Commercial Company, Limited, to be
“ confirmed, and also all the contracts made or concluded by His Fijian
“ Majesty or his Government, excepting that with the Company Tcnown
“as the Polynesia Company of Melbourne, Victoria ; ” the claims of
which were thus expressly excepted from those which it was
suggested that Her Majesty’s Government should undertake to satisfy.
The Imperial Cabinet, however, absolutely declined to be bound in any
manner by Thakombau’s acts or promises, and instructed Sir H. Robinson
not to accept of any Cession, “ unless all questions as to titles to land,
compensation, &c., were freely left to the decision of Her Majesty’s
Government.”
Sir H, Robinson reported as follows on the claiins of the Polynesia
Company:—
“ The Charter to this Company was granted by Thakomban in Is6B, and
professed, in consideration of £9,000, prid in satisfaction of the American claims,
: ! —; :
* Page 16,
| Parliamentary Paper, c. 1,011, of 1874,


to cede to the Company 200,000 acres of land in Viti Levu, Vanua Levu, and other
parts of Fiji. In consideration of a further annual payment af 1,000 dollars,
Thakombau promised to the Company a monopoly of banking for twenty-one years
and perpetual exemption from taxation. The Company has received about 90,000
acres of land, and now claim the balance of 110,000 acres, with the other rights
and privileges specified in the Charter. I enclose a copy of a letter which since
my arrival in Fiji, I have received from the Manager of the Company. It must be
borne in mind that when Thakombau executed the Charter, he was only chief of
Mbau, and had no right or title whatever to cede or deal in any manner with
seven tenths of the land professed to be granted to the Company. Of this the
Company appears to have been warned at every step by the British Consul, and the
senior Naval Officer on the station, so that they entered into the speculation
with their eyes open, and at their own risk. Of the 90,000 acres which have
nominally been handed over, about from 400 to 500 acres only, in Suva Bay, have
been actually occupied and cultivated by the Company, and nearly the whole of
the valuable portion of the remainder is in the occupation of natives, who could
not bo dispossessed and driven from their homes without great hardship and
injustice. Indeed, it is asserted that, without Government support and protection,
the Company could not venture to take possession of the greater portion of the
90,000 acres which have nominally been surrendered to them,
14. I would recommend that this Charter should not in any way be recognised
as valid by Her Majesty’s Government, but that, as the readiest mode of settling
this claim, and with a view of preventing annoyance to the native occupiers, an
offer should be made to the Company, without prejudice, to repay them the £9,000
advanced to the American Government, and to leave them in possession of the
400 or 500 acres now in the occupation of the tenants of the Company in the Suva
district, and actually under cultivation ; the remainder of the 90,000 acres, and
all further claims under the Charter being surrendered to the Colonial Govern-
ment.*
These views received the concurrence of Her Majesty’s Government,
and on the 4th March, 1875 Lord Carnarvon thus wrote to Sir Arthur
Gordon with respect to the claims of both the Fiji Bank and Polynesia
Company.
“ I see no reason to differ from the general conclusions arrived at by Sir H
Robinson as to these two Charters. Not only are they necessarily rendered void by
the efiacement of the so-called Government which professed to grant them but are
in some obvious respects contrary to those principle of policy, which must prevail
in a British Colony. If after inquiry you see no objection to dealing with these
Companies in the manner proposed by Sir H. Robinson, you have my sanction for
taking that course.”*
Sir Arthur Gordon was also instructed to
* * * “ cause it to be very clearly understood that Her Majesty’s Government,
and the Colonial Government absolutely and entirely decline to admit that they
are necessarily under any obligation to take up the liabilities incurred by those
who have purported to administer the aflairs of the Islands. No claim of the kind
preferred by way of demand, or as of right can for a moment be entertained, acd
to prevent any possible misconception on such a question, it may be desirable to
relieve the Government from any attempts to press such claims by passing an
Ordinance declaring that no action shall lie against the Crown or tie Colonial
Government in respect of liabilities incurred by the late King, or by any person
not in the employment of the Crown or the Colonial Government.”*
An Ordinance f (No. XVII., of 1875) was accordingly passed to
* Parliamentary Paper, c. 1,114, of 1875, page 60.
* Parliamentary Paper, o. 1337 of 1875, page 8.
* Parliamentary Paper, C. 1337 of 1876, page 7.
f See appendix, page 59.


give effect to these instructions. It has received Her Majesty’s confir-
mation, and is now law. It will be found in the Appendix..
In September, 1875, Mr. G. A. Woods, who, as Premier of Fiji,
had, in 1872, repudiated the claims of the Polynesia Company to the
banking and other exceptional privileges granted by the Charter, arrived
in Levuka in the novel and unexpected character of the Company’s
Agent, in which capacity he delivered to the Governor the following
memorial:—
To His Excellency Sir Arthur Hamilton G ,r '.mi, K.u.r. ' :
Islands, Consul General of Polynesia, &c., &e.
The memorial of the Chairman, Directors. r.i d Slum '• 1 b . i-
Company, Limited.
Bespectfully sheweth.
1. That the said Company is incorporated under ‘-The Companies Statute
1864 ” of the Colony of Victoria in Australia, for the carrying out of a Charter
granted to the Promoters of the then intended Company on the twenty third July,
one thousand eight hundred and sixty eight, by King Thakombau and his feudatory
chiefs,* with the knowledge and consent of the British and American Consuls
resident in Fiji,* of which Charter a copy is appended hereto.
2. That a memorial fully setting forth the Company’s position, and claims, was
-placed in the hands of the Koyal Commission at Fiji, on the twelfth day of January,
one thousand eight hundred and seventy four, by the Company's Agent, Charles
Kossiter Forwood, Esquire, Attorney General in the late Fijian Parliament, which
memorial was duly forwarded to England for the consideration of the Imperial
Government. That document narrates in detail the steps which have been taken
to obtain the remainder of the land due to the Company. A copy of that memorial
can be furnished if your Excellency requires it.
3. That in the said Charter the King and chiefs covenant to make over to the
Company two hundred thousand acres of land, from the Territories Scheduled in
the Charter, in consideration of the Company paying the sum of forty-five thousand
dollars, equal to nine thousand pounds, to the American Government, through the
United States Consul at Fiji, Isaac M. Brower, Esquire, in satisfaction of a long
standing claim against the King and people of Fiji,—the liquidation of which had
become an urgent necessity, as the United States Government was determined to
enforce the payment of its claims, having long since taken security by way of
mortgage over the Islands of Goro, Gau, Batiki, and divers others of which the
King claimed Sovereignty.f
4. That in one thousand eight hundred and fifty eight the King and chiefs had
offered two hundred thousand acres or land, and the Sovereignty of Fiji to He
Britannic Majesty, on condition of Her paying off this very same American claim
which was eventually liquidated by the Company. In ike year named Mr. Consul
Pritchard was the bearer to England of a proposed Deed of Cession on the
above terms, signed by Thakombau as “ Tui Viti,” (King of Fiji). This deed was
flrmally ratified by all the leading chies of Fiji upon the arrival at the Islands of
Colonel Smythe in the following year, but from political considerations by the
Imperial Government the negociation for the proposed Cession, which extended
over three years, did not terminate in the annexation of the Islands to Great
Britain. ||
5. That in consideration of the Charter the Company have paid off the whole
of the American claim upon the King, and thereby completely satisfied the American
Government, and released the whole of the pledged lands. An acknowledgement
of this from the late Vice Consul in Fiji, of the United States is held by the
Company.
* The untruth of those statement? has been already shown (p. p. 11, 19).
f Incorrect, see p. 22.
|| It is unnecessary to encumber the present narrative by references to the
history of Colonel Smythe's mission, but it maybe observed that the statement that
“ negotiations" on the subject of Cession extended over three years is erroneous.


G. In entering upon the Charter an agreement was concluded between the
•promoters and Isaac M. Brower, Esquire, the then and now United States Consul
of Fiji, by which he bound himself, and as your memorialists submit his Government
also, (his action in the matter having been confirmed and adopted) to give all
practicable moral support to the Company in enforcing a fulfilment by the King
of his part of the contract under the Charter.
7. That the Charter also confers certain privileges, and monopolies upon the
Company, for another and separate consideration, but the Company have been
prevented from availing themselves of this part of the contract, through the tardy
manner in which the several mere instalments of land have been made over, aud
through the King’s default in not making over within a reasonable time the bulk of
the land due to the Company.
8. That in compliance so far with the terms of the Charter, the King and
chiefs have from time to time made over certain parts of land from the scheduled
territories as follows :
Viti Levu Bay
■ ... 50,000 acres.
Suva
.,. 27,000 acres.
Island of Benga
.. 10,000 acres.
Nataivi Bay
. ... ... ... 10,000 acres.
97,000 acres.
Whole quantity due
-200,000 acres.
103,000 acres.
‘Odd acres claimed ou Viti Levu
and Benga by white
settlers
7,000 acres.
Total deficiency 110,000 acres,
These are the amended quantities contained in the respective blocks of land,
and derived for the most part from actual surveys by Messrs. Martelli, J. Wingate,
David and Thomas Sellars, and W. H. Surplice, the full particulars of which are
given in Mr. Forwood’s memorial, dated January the twelfth, one thousand eight
hundred and seventy-four. There are then one hundred and ten thousand acres of
land still duo to the Company under the Charter.
9. That at the sitting of the first Parliament under the new Constitution-at
Fiji, the first Act passed (Act No. 1) declared that •* all contracts lawfully made
“ between the King and ary person, persons, or corporations shalll be carried into
“ effect as if this Act had not passed.” And it was after this Act that the King
with the advice of his Ministers executed the Grant to the Company of ten
thousand acres of land at Nataivi Bay. And in a speech of the Premier on the
eighteenth day of July, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-two, he stated
“ that His Majesty’s Government would use every means at their command to
“ assist the Polynesian Company to obtain immediate possession of every acre of
“ laud they are justly entitled to ” (vide Fiji Gazette, July 20, 1872.)
10. That of the two hundred thousand acres of land granted the Company
under the Charter, about one hundred and sixty thousand acres have been sold, so
that the holders cf land warrants to the extent of sixty thousand acres have not
yet been able to obtain their lands, and many of them have suffered under incon-
venience through the delay, and in being prevented from proceeding to Fiji to
reside upon their properties.* Also the shareholders generally have suffered much
* Tliis statement is somewhat remarkable, and merits attention. The assertion
that one hundred and sixty thousand acres have been sold by the Company and
that holders of land warrants to the extent of sixty thousand acres have been
unable to obtain their lands, necessarily implies that the remaining one hundred
thousand have been placed in the hands of their purchasers—a manifest untruth.
The Company itself only claims to have been put in possession of 90,000 acres.
Where then are the 10,000 acres situated of which it has given possession to others
without having itself ever enjoyed it ?
ftow too has it sold 70,000 acres more than it has obtained ?
If, indeed, the Company have sold 160,000 acres of land it may probably be
Enid with truth that the purchasers have been unable to take possession, not bf
*OO,OOO acres only, but of 159,000,


loss and inconvenience through the delay on'the part of the King in fulfilling his
agreement under the Charter, while from the same cause the most important
objects of .the Company have been frustrated.
11. That on the third day of December last a memorial was transmitted to
the Earl of Carnarvon setting forth the claims of the Company, and praying that
his Lordship would be pleased to direct that a delivery to the Company lie made
of one hundred and ten thousand acres of land, and the payment by' the new
Colony of twenty-five thousand pounds for the Banking and other privileges
together with exemption for ever from taxation contained in the Charter.
12. That when the timely service rendered by the Company, and the obliga-
tions of the Charter are considered, your memorialists venture to hope your
Excellency will be pleased to view the sum named to be taken in lieu of the
“ privileges ” as very reasonable, and one that ought under the circumstances to
be honourably met by the new Colony.
13. In conclusion your memorialists humbly trust that your Excellency will
be pleased to take the just claims of the Company as above stated into your
favourable consideration, and order that they be dealt with at the earliest possible
date.
And your memorialists as in duty bound will ever pray, &c.
.(Signed) Alex. Kennedy Smith, Chairman ] '
W. Crosbie. I n; , ■ ■-
Samuel Amess. /, ectors -
Geo. H. Johnson. ;, J ■• '
Edward Khull, Manager. • -
And twenty-nine other shareholders.
The claims put forward by the Company were, substantially;
three:—
1. A claim to compensation, estimated at £25,000, for the
non-fulfilment by Tkakombau of his promise to confer on the Company
certain exclusive privileges of Banking, and exemption from taxation.
2. A claim to the fulfilment of the promise made by Thakombau to
convey to the Company 110,000 acres in some as yet unspecified island
or islands, in addition to those lands of which the Company claims to
be now in possession.
3. A claim to receive Crown Grants of the lands alleged by the
Company to be already held by it.
Of these claims the two first, —( and to these alone the above Memorial
Telates,) —were clearly not matter for investigation by the Lands Titles
Commission, but for consideration by the Governor in Council.
No request is contained in the Memorial with regard to the lands
said to be already conveyed to the Company. Crown Grants of these
were asked for in the ordinary form, and the petitions lodged in the
Crown Lands Office in the same manner as those of other parties
claiming to be possessed of lands in the Colony. These applications
were as a matter of course referred to the Lands Titles Commission.
The other claims of the Company were, meanwhile, reviewed by the
Governor and his Council.
The Charter had been pronounced invalid, but considerations of
■equity and policy might, it was thought, possibly be found to suggest
the expediency of compliance with some 1 of the Company’s demands,
'-siot as a matter of right, but as one of grace and favour.
The Executive Council had, then, in the first place to consider
whether the Polynesia Company was entitled to compensation dor-the


C. In entering upon the Charter an agreement was concluded between the
•promoters and Isaac M. Brower, Esquire, the then and now United States Consul
of Fiji, by which ho bound himself, and as your memorialists submit his Government
also, (his action in the matter having been confirmed and adopted) to give all
practicable moral support to the Company in enforcing a fulfilment by the King
of his part of the contract under the Charter.
7. That the Charter also confers certain privileges, and monopolies upon the
Company, : for another and separate consideration, but the Company have been
prevented from availing themselves of this part of the contract, through the tardy
manner in which the several mere instalments of land have been made over, and-
through the King’s default in not making over within a reasonable time the bulk of
the land due to the Company.
8. That in compliance so far with the terms of the Charter, the King and
chiefs’have from time to time made over certain parts of land from the scheduled
territories as follows :
Viti Levu Bay
■ ... 50,000 acres.
Suva ... ...
... 27,000 acres.
Island of Benga
v. 10,000 acres.
Nataivi Bay ...
10,000 acres.
Whole quantity due
97,000 acres.
,. 200,000 acres.
103,000 acres.
‘Odd acres claimed on Viti Levu and Benga by white
settlers 7,000 acres.
Total deficiency 110,000 acres,
These are the amended quantities contained in the respective blocks of land,
'and derived for the lhost part from actual surveys by Messrs. Martel)i, J. Wingate,
David and Thomas Sellars, and W. H. Surplice, the full particulars of which are
given in Mr. Forwood’s memorial, dated January the twelfth, one thousand eight
liundred and seventy-four. There are then one hundred and ten thousand acres of
land still due to the Company under the Charter.
9. That at the sitting of the first Parliament under the new Constitution ■at
Fiji, the first Act passed (Act No. 1) declared that all contracts lawfully made
“ between the King and ary person, persons, or corporations shalll be carried into
“ effect as if this Act had not passed.” And it was after this Act that the lung
with the advice of hl's Ministers executed the Grant to the Company of ten
thousand acres of land at Nataivi Bay. And in a speech of the Premier on the
eighteenth day of July, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-two, he stated
“ that His Majesty’s Government would use every means at their command to
“ assist the Polynesian Company to obtain immediate possession of every acre of
“ laud they are justly entitled to ” (vide Fiji Gazette, July 20, 1872.)
10. That of the two hundred thousand acres of land granted the Company
under the Charter, about one hundred and sixty thousand acres have been sold, so
that the holders cf land warrants to the extent bf sixty thousand acres have not
yet been able to obtain their lands, and many of them have suffered under incon-
venience through the delay, and in being prevented from proceeding to Fiji to
reside upon their properties.* Also the shareholders generally have suffered much
* This statement is somewhat remarkable, and merits attention. The assertion
that one hundred and sixty thousand acres have been sold by the Company and
that holders of land warrants to the extent of sixty thousand acres have been
unable to obtain their lands, necessarily implies that the remaining one hundred
thousand have been placed in the hands of their purchasers—a manifest untruth.
The Company itself only claims to have been put in possession of 90,000 acres.
Where then are the 10,000 acres situated of which it has given possession to others
without having itself ever enjoyed it ?
Row too lias it sold 70,000 acres more than it has obtained?
If, indeed, the Company have sold 160,000 acres of land it may probably be
said with truth that the purchasers haye been unable to take possession, not bf
*OO,OOO acres only, but of 159,000.


loss and inconvenience through the delay on'the part of the King in fulfilling hiS
agreement under the Charter, while from the same cause the most important
objects of.the Company have been frustrated.
11. That on the third day of December last a memorial was transmitted to
the Earl of Carnarvon setting forth the claims of the Company, and praying that
his Lordship would be pleased to direct that a delivery to the Company be made
of one hundred and ten thousand acres of land, and the payment by' the now
Colony of twenty-five thousand pounds for the Banking and other privileges
together with exemption for ever from taxation contained in the Charter.
12. That when the timely service rendered by the Company, and the obliga-
tions of the Charter are considered, your memorialists venture to hope your
Excellency will be pleased to view the sum named to be taken in lieu of the
“ privileges ” as very reasonable, and one that ought under the circumstances to
be honourably met by the new Colony.
13. In conclusion your memorialists humbly trust that your Excellency will
be pleased to take the just claims of the Company as above stated into your
favourable consideration, and order that they be dealt with at the earliest possible
date.
And your memorialists as in duty hound will ever pray, &c.
.(Signed) Alex. Kennedy Smith, Chairman 1
W. Crosbie. I Directors
Samuel Amess. • . (, Ul,cotcrs -
Geo. R. Johnson. ; , J
Edward Kiiull, Manager. ■ ,
And twenty-nine other shareholders.
The claims put forward by the Company were, substantially,
three:—
1. A claim to compensation, estimated at £25,000, for the
non-fulfilment by Tkakombau of his promise to confer on the Company
certain exclusive privileges of Banking, and exemption from taxation.
2. A claim to the fulfilment of the promise made by Thakombau to
convey to the Company 110,000 acres in some as yet unspecified inland
or islands, in addition to those lands of which the Company claims to
be now in possession.
8. A claim to receive Crown Grants of the lands alleged by the
Company to be already held by it.
Of these claims the two first, —(and to these alone the above Memorial
Telates,) —were clearly not matter for investigation by the Lauds Titles
Commission, but for consideration by the Governor in Council.
No request is contained in the Memorial with regard to the lands
said to be already conveyed to the Company. Crown Grants of these
were asked for in the ordinary form, and the petitions lodged-in the
Crown Lands Office in the same manner as those of other parties
claiming to be possessed of lands in the Colony. These applications
were as a matter of course referred to the Lands Titles Commission.
The other claims of the Company were, meanwhile, reviewed by the
Governor and his Council.
Ihe Charter had been pronounced invalid, but considerations of
| equity and policy might, it was thought, possibly be found to suggest
the expediency of compliance with some 1 of the Company’s demands,
v\ot as a matter of right, but as one of grace and favour.
The Executive Council had, -then, in the first place to consider
whether the Polynesia Company was entitled to compensation -for-tbe


banking privileges which the Charter professed to give. It was admitted
that the Company had never exercised these privileges. It appeared
probable that it had declined to establish a Bank when it was invited
to do so. It was clear that its claims were regarded as worthless by
the Fijian Legislature in 1872. Moreover, a most unwise and unsafe prece-
dent would have been established by any admission that Her Majesty
was bound to make compensation for failures of agreement on the part
of Thakombau, if indeed, in this instance, the failure could be charged
to him, and ra* :: r v rather due to the inability of the. Company itself to
fulfil its cv.r. rulcrir.kl'ip. I' was, therefore, felt that the Company
was not (r.thlec, 1. any ccim-cm ation from the Government of the
Colony for the c .uw j.-Mlcj*':. granted by the Charter.
Was the Company u.m. entitled to have lands granted to it suffi-
cient in addition to those mentioned in the schedule to, make up an
extent of 200,000 acres ?
It was contended, on behalf of the Company, that although the
Charter might be invalid as a Charter, it nevertheless constituted an
absolute grant from Thakombau of the acreage specified therein. To this
it was replied, that a grant must be that of some definite portion of
land in a known locality, as the Company had itself admitted by obtain-
ing subsequent transfers even of those blocks of land mentioned in the
schedule to the Charter, and that the Charter could only be regarded as
a promise on the part of Cakobau to convey to the Company certain
specified lands named in the schedule, and others as yet unspecified to
make up the amount of land in question.
That it was so regarded by the Company itself is apparent from its
own language.
All liability to discharge such obligations had been energetically
repudiated by Her Majesty’s Government, and by an act of the local
Legislature, confirmed by the Queen. It was, therefore, a question of'
policy only, whether, and to what extent, such promises should be made
good. Convinced that Thakombau had no power to make any such grant,,
and that it could not be made now without gross injustice to the native
occupants of the soil, and great expense to the Government, (which would
have in the first place to purchase and extinguish existing native rights,)
the Board was clearly of opinion that the engagements into which Tha-
kombau had incautiously entered should not be assumed by the Crown.
The Council therefore unanimously decided that not only was the
Colonial Government under no legal liability with respect to Thakombau’s
promises, but, that taking all the circumstances of the case into con-
sideration, n# equitable claim had been shown to compensation for the
loss of the exclusive privileges the Company had looked for,—(or
rather for the failure to obtain them,) —and that it ought not to receive
any grant of lands beyond those alleged to be already in its possession.
The question whether it might not be generous and politic to make
some compensation to the Company for its disappointment, was
adjourned until the Lands Titles Commission should have investigated
the claim of the Company to those lands for which it undoubtedly
held deeds and transfers, on the value of which it would he the duty
of that Commission to report.


The Land Titles Commission, which consisted of the Chief Justice
of the Colony, Colonel Pratt, Royal Engineers, the Commissioner of Crown
Lands, and H. G. Emberson, Esq., did not commence its sittings until
the month of December, 1875, it having been found necessary to allow ample
time for the reception of claims before entering on its labours. The first
enquiries of the Commission were directed to the important island of
Taviuni, but on the return of its members to Levuka, the applications
of the Company for Crown Grants were taken up, and on the sth
February, 1876, Mr. Woods, the Company’s Agent, was called upon to
open his case. He stated that the original title to the lands claimed
was the Charter of 1868, and that all sub-claims must stand or fall by it.
The Commission, after hearing his statement and examining the petitions
put in on behalf of the Company, and the schedule of deeds, attached to
each,* adjourned the further consideration of the case, and addressed the
following letter to the Colonial Secretary :
The Lands Titles Commissioner to the Colonial Secretary.
Nasova,
21st February, 1875.
Sir, —Certain applications by the Polynesia Company, and Fiji Banking and
Commercial Company, Limited, for lands in this Colony, which they claim in virtue
of Charters granted to them by the late so called Government of Fiji, have been laid
before us.
As these claims rest on the validity of these Charters, we do not consider
ourselves justified in dealing with them till we have learnt whether their validity
is recognized by the Imperial Government, and that of the Colony.
We have the honour to be,
Your obedient servants,
Charles Mitchell,
(On behalf of the members of the Commission.)
The r*ply was as follows:
The Colonial Secretary to the Commissioner of Lands.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Levuka, 22nd February, 1876,
Sir,—l have received, and laid before the Governor your letter of yesterday’s
date.
2. I am directed by His Excellency to inform you in reply that the validity of
the Charters in question is not admitted by the Imperial Government, and
consequently is not admitted by the Government of this Colony.
3. His Excellency has been instructed by the Secretary of State for the Colonies
with respect to both these Charters, “ that not only are they necessarily rendered
“void by the efiacement of the so-called Government which purported to grant
“ them, but they are in some obvious respects contrary to those principles of policy
“ which must prevail in a British Colony.”
_ 4. Her Majesty’s Government are disposed to receive any claims to consideration
which the shareholders of these two Companies may appear equitably to possess,
and to deal with them in a liberal spirit, but no claim urged as of right, and as
having been conferred by the Charters in question can for a moment be entertained.
I have &c.,
A. E, Havelock,
Colonial Secretary.
* The petitions and schedules will be found in the appendix, p. 60.


On the receipt of this communication the Commission agreed to
the following Report:—
The Lands Titles Commissioners to His Excellency the Governor.
Lands Commission Office, -
Marcli 6th, 1876.
Sir, —We have the honour to report that from an investigation of the
documents connected with the claims of the Polynesia Land Company, and a short
primary hearing of the claim, it appears that the title of the Company to hold land,
in Fiji is dependant on a Charter granted by the Government as it existed
previous to the annexation of Fiji. *' ~
As the Charter is held to be invalid by the Imperial Government, there is no
object to be attained by the Lands Commissioners investigating the Claims of the
Company as a Company. ~,
It is therefore, proposed in accordance with Par 4of the Colonial Secretary’s
letter of the 22nd February, 1876, that all persons who
(1.) individually have bought defined tracts of land from the Polynesia
Company :
(2.) have cultivated or taken possession of lands claimed by the Company :
(3.) have bond fide expended money on defined tracts of land claimed
by the Company :
shall be heard in support of their respective claims, which shall be reported
op with a view to their being dealt with in the manner stated in the Colonial
Secretary’s letter.
We have thehonour to be.
Xour obedient servants,
W. HaCKETt, Chief Justice.
Charles Mitchell, Commissioner for Lands.
F. E. Pratt, Lieut. Colonel, R.E., Surveyor-General.
Horace G. C. Emberson.
The members of the Commission had no other course than this open
to them. The validity of the Charter was clearly a matter beyond their
competence to deal with, and Mr. Woods’ refusal to base the claim on
any other ground precluded them from considering what weight should
be given to any equitable claims which might have arisen from
subsequent transactions.
Had Mr. Woods, as he might have done, pressed the claims of the
Company as based on actual grants or transfers, or on possession or
occupation, he would undoubtedly hav- been heard at length, and
allowed to call as many witnesses as he That ho would have
made good a claim to blocks of land all interest in which had, for valuable
consideration received, been parted with by the Company, is certainly
highly improbable, On the other hand, had, for example, a claim to the
islets in Suva Bay been based not on an unrecognized Charter, but solely
on the sale of them to the Company by,Mr. W. M. Moore, it would
unquestionably have received,full investigation and serious consideration.
But not only did Mr. Woodfchot put forward such grants or transfers,
but all reference such documents was, except in one instance,
deliberately omitted from the schedule of deeds forwarded to the
Commission as those through- which the Company claimed. Their.


petitions, state that “ All deeds, papers, etc., on which petitioners
claim is founded, are specified in the schedule hereto,”* and that
schedule refers to three deeds only , —the Charter, —the engagement of
the prompters of the Company with the United States Consul, —and the
United States Consul’s acknowledgment of payment. It must be supposed
Mr. Woods feared that by resting upon later deeds he would virtually
abandon the claim unijep the Charter, and with it all hope of inducing the
shareholders of the Company to believe that they might still receive
either substantial pecuniary compensation, or profitable' commercial
privileges, and a large.'area of yet unknown and ’ unindicated land.
He also knew well that the actual “ Crown Grants ” of Thakombau were
issued, not to the Polynesia Company, but to those who had purchaseil
from it, and that as regarded the greater part of the lands he could not
prove occupation. He therefore elected to abide by the claims under
thp'Charter, and must not quarrel with the results of his own election.
The decision of the Commission was coipmunicated to. Mr. Woods in
following letter;—
The Commissioner of Crown Lands to Mr. Woods.
pands Office, Nasova.
April 5, 1876.
Sir, —In answer to your letter of this date regarding the examination of Dr,
Brower by the Commission, on behalf of the Polynesian Company’s claim to land.
I am instructed to Inform you that as the claim of the Company is based on a
Charter, which the Imperial Government declares to be void, the Commission
considers it unnecessary ■ to enquire further into such claim, and does not intend to
take evidence with respect to them
It will remain for His Excellency the Governor in Council to determine
whether any consider ation, and if so what, is equitably due to the claims of the
Polynesia Company, and a meeting of the Executive Council for this purpose
will be held in the course of a few days, the result of which will be immediately
communicated to you.
This meeting would have been held sooner, but for the unavoidable absence of-
the Attorney-General from his official duties.
I have the honour to be,
Your obedient seryant.
Charles Mitchell,
Commissioner of Lands.f
The meeting of the Executive Council announced in the foregoing,
letter was duly held, and the Governor in Council resolved that the.
Commission had acted rightly in rejecting a claim preferred on such a
foundation, but that as a sum of £9,000 had undoubtedly been paid by the
Company, (or at least in its name), to the American Consul, on behalf
pf Thakombau, it would be well to repay that sum to those by whom it
* See appendix. Petition marked B, p. 60.
f The last two paragraphs of this letter are omitted in the Eemopstrance."-


had been advanced, ■although the Colonial Government was under no
legal obligation to do so.
Who the parties were to whom the money should be paid, in virtue
of this decision,-it was, however, a matter of some difficulty to decide.
To avoid confusion, in the narrative no mention has yet been made of
the Association popularly known as the “ Forty Thieves.” The claims of
that Association will subsequently be more fully explained. Meanwhile,
it is sufficient to say that the £9,000, paid to the United States
Consul by the Polynesia Company, was in fact furnished by the body
thus ominously designated,* and that in return the Company had made
‘over to it all its interest in about half the land it claimed. The em-
barassment caused the Government, by this circumstance is thus
described by Chief Justice Sir W.'llackett, in a letter to the Governor
'Levuka,
March 22, IS7G.
. My Wear Sir Arthur, —The introduction of the ‘' Forties ” into the question
of the Polynesian claims complicates matters, and raises points which it would
require the arbitrating powers of a Caims to settle satisfactorily.
First Come the Polynesians, to whom we say, “we don’t admit the validity of
your Charter, but as you have paid your money you shall have it back.”
Before, however, we have parted with the money, up come the “ Forties,” and
say “ the money which was paid was ours, and was paid in consideration of certain
lands sold to us by the'Polynesians, and which we now claim.”
If the “ Forties ” have really paid their money, fairly and honestly, I think it
would be the duty of the'Government, before paying the money over to the
Polynesians to inquire whether any, and what portion of it ought not in fairness
to be paid to the'‘Forties.” ,
If the “Forties” sued the Polynesians in a Court of law, they would be
entitled at the very least to a return of their purchase money with interest,
I do not know how much land they supposed themselves to have got under
this contract with the Polynesians, but of course that would haYe to be taken into
account in considering their claims, ,
The“ Forties ” no doubt have strong—indeed, in reality the ONLY—equitable
claims, as between themselves and the Polynesians, but on the other hand the
money was paid through the Polynesians, and ostensibly by them. The
Government therefore has to decide whether it will take up the position of having
no concern with the persons who bought from the Polynesians, being a private
matter with which the Government has nothing to do, and for which redress must
be sought through the ordinary channel, or whether the Govemineut will' stretch a
point in favor of persons who have paid their money honestly, "and may be m
danger of losing it altogether, if the Government does not interpose in its favour.
If the intervention be possible, that is to say, if the Government can arbitrate
satisfactorily in the matter, my own feelings would be in favour of the latter
course.
But as * * says, in his minute, it may for reasons of policy he
“ impossible for the Government to go beyond the Company without raising an
unnecessary, inconvenient and interminable correspondence.”
I am afraid which ever way the matter is settled there will be a howl of
‘disappointment, as no one will get as much as he expects.
Very sincerely yours,
W. llackett.
It Was finally decided that the money should not be paid until aii
* The appellation was due to the fact that the association consisted of Forty
persons holding fortieth shares of certain lands bought from the Polynesia
''Company, and that it had no short or convenient legal designation of its own.


• . ’ * \
arrangement between the different claimants had been arrived at,; and
the following letter was accordingly written to Mr. Woods :
The Colonial Secretary, Levulca, to Mr. G. A. Woods.
Colonial Secretary,s Office,
. Eevuka, 21st April, 187 G.
• Sir, —The memorial of the Chairman, Directors, and Shareholders, of the
Polynesia Company Limited, bearing the date, 24th August last, and placed by
■you in the hands of the Governor some, time ago, bas received the careful con-
sideration of His Excellency, and the members of the Executive Council.
2. I am directed to inform you that Her Majesty's ' (Government doe 3 not
.acknowledge the validity of the Charter purporting to 'have been granted to the
Company by. Thakombau, and refuses to recognise any Tights professing -to be
from that document', the .provisions .of 'Which ,besides being in some
respects contrary to those principles of policy which must preyail }n a British
colony, have been necessarily rendered-void by the effacement of the authority
which purported to grant it. » , » ,
. 3. His Excellency, therefore, is unable to admit the existence, of any claim
founded thereon a,s against the Government of this Colony. At the same time,
■bearing in mind the fact that a large sum of money was undoubtedly paid on
Thakombau’s behalf by the promoters of the Company, in consideration of the
grant to them of advantages which they have in a great degree, failed to obtain,
fhe Colonial government is not unwilling to refund to those who fumished.it, the
sum of £9,000,50 advanced. ~ ~ .. .. . „ , .
i. His Excellency, is, howeyer, informed, that in consideration of a money
.payment which enabled the Polynesia Company to meet the engagement into
which it had i entered towards the United States Government', that Company
previously to its discharge of those engagements made over tp parties represented
by three trustees, viz.', Septimus Martin, Charley Croaker, and Samuel Amess’,
their interest,ty about one half of the lands which they supposed themselves to
have obtained tinder the Charter. ...
. '5, ' These, parties would therefore appear, to be.,entitled to received portion 'bf
the'Tefund-which it is now proposed to make} and , the sum Or £9,000 above
mentioned will therefore be ip the hands qf the "Colopial Treasurer until
the shares in which it should be paid have been adjusted.by mutual agreement or
by recourse to a Court of Equity. , i .
0. It must also be distinctly understood, that, the ,present .offer iis made
simply as a matter of grace and favour, and without prejudice to the rights of the
Crown should such offer fail to, prove acceptable to the-Company}— a contingency
which, however, His Excellency will hot anticipate.
I liave, &c.
A, E; llavKlock,
Colonial Secretary;*
, It was at tlie same time intimated to those who had purchased 1 land
from the Polynesia Company that in cases where parties had, previous
to the 'Cession, actually entered on occupation of lands purchased by
them from the Company} the-Governor was disposed to recommend A
Grant by the Crown of such'lands to those who might have
occupied them,
The three claims of the Company had riow'been all carefully eon-
* This important letter is not given in the'“ Remonstrance,'” from which also
every allusion to the refund 1 offered by the 1 Colonial ■ Government is careful}?
omitted.


sidered and dealt with, and the reply of the Governor in Council to the
demands of the Company Was, shortly, this :
1 “ You are not entitled, legally or equitably, to compensation for
the alleged loss of exclusive privileges which you have never exercised.
“ You are not legallyentitled to have Thakombau’s unfulfilled pro-
mises made good to you by the British Government; nor could they be
made good without grave injury to H.M.’s’subjects, and the contravention
of sound public policy.''' ' ,l M
“ You are not entitled to lands in virtue of the Charter, op which
alone you choose tp rest ybur'claim: '*• ’
“Whether you are or are not -entitled to the possession of certain
portions of land in' virtue of other deeds' arid transfers is a question
which we have not been called on to decide. 'The validity of these
papers is disputed, and. their value will’be tested when the claims of the
“ Forty ” are investigated by the Lands Titles Commission.
“You are not legally, or indeed morally, entitled to any consideration
whatever; but the Governor in Council 'deems that it will be for the
Oredit of the new Colony that the sum actually paid in yoijr name, on
behalf of Thakombau, should be returned to those who paid it.
1. ' ;<« Those who have bona fide purchased land " from'the Company
and occupied it, have, in our opinion, a moral and'equitable right to the
Undisturbed enjoyment of their purchases, and on proof of tlieir claims
before the Lands' Titles Commission, they will receive Crown Grants
of their holdings. ■ v * ’
• “ Nci'recognition can, on the other hand be Recorded to merely specu-
lative purchase's of' indefinite claims to land of which occupation has
never been taken, and the locality of which has in most cases never been
discovered.” > - i >
The course taken by the Government pf Fiji was approved by Her
Majesty’s Government, in the following despatch ; 1 ‘ ’
The Secretary of State for the Colonies to the Governor of Fiji,
Downing Street,
20th September, 1876.
Silt, —I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your despatch No. 118,
of the Gth of July, respecting the land claims of the Polynesia Company and of
others who'purchased land from that Company.
■ "The arrangement which you propose for settling these claims, asset forth in
the letters from the-Colonial Secretary, dated the*2lst April last, and-addressed
respectively .to Mr. G. A. Woods, the .Attorney for the Company, and to Messrs,
Septimus Martin and others, appears to me to be fair and right, and such as I may
properly concur in on behalf of Her Majesty’s Government; '
> I observe,'however, that no-mention is made of the proposal made by Sir H.
Robinson that the Company should be left in possession, of' some 400 or GOO acres
of land actually under cultivation by their tenants.
■ Ido not perceive that any valid claim to this land could be established, but if
you should think it desirable, as a matter of grace to grant them the land in
question or a part of it, I should be ready to approve your decision.
I have the honor, &c.,
Carkmivw.


. The letter of .the Colonial Secretary of the 21st April received no
reply from the Company for nearly five months, but in the early part of
September the following letter reached Levuka
; , The Directors of the Polynesia Company to the Colonial Secretary,
Fiji.
Polynesia Company, Limited,
Offices 49, Flinders Lane, W.
. Melbourne, 21 August, 1876,
Sir,; —Your letter No. 76,557 dated the 21st April, ,1876, addressed to G. A.
Wood 3 Esq. , the Attorney of this Company informing him that the memorial of the
chairman, directors, and shareholders, dated 24 August, 1875, had received the
careful consideration of His Excellency, and the members of the Executive Council
has been laid before the directors.
The Company regrets to be informed that Her Majesty’s Government does not
acknowledge the charter purporting to have been granted by Thakombau, and that
for the reasons set out in paragraph 2 of your letter, His Excellency is unable to
admit the existence of any claim founded thereon as against the Colonial Govern-
ment of Fiji. ii
We have the honor in reply thereto to say— 1 > ''
Ist. The Company submit that the deed called a Charter contains an absolute
grant by Thakombau and his chiefs, of. the lands specified in the schedule thereto.*
; 2nd. That following upon the execution of that deed, and long prior to the
acquirement by Her Majesty’s Government of any rights in Fiji, the Company
occupied, and are still in occupation of a large portion of the lands so granted to
them.* i. ... , • ' ■ ■
' 3rd. The original grant was Subsequently confirmed by various further grants,
and conveyances.! • •
4th. The title of the Company dates from 1868,' and us derived from the same
source as'that 1 of Her Majesty’s Government under the Act of Cession, dated
October, 1874.|| . .
!, 6th. ■ That the said Act of Cession specifically excepts all lands previously bond
fide alienated. . . . ...
6th. The Company claim that these lands were for a valuable consideration
bona fide alienated. . ...
7th, A refusal to acknowledge' such grants on the ground that its provisions
are in some respects contrary to the principles of policy which must prevail in a
British Colony, established six years after the date of such grants is a retrospective
Act repugnant to the constitution of England, and contrary to law.J
* The inaccuracy of these statement has been already shown (p. 24, 25, 26,
27, 28, 40). _ • .
f This is only true of certain portions of the scheduled lands, ' and it is to be
remarked that these confirmatory deeds, whatever they may. be worth, and which
undoubtedly form the best part of the Company’s title, are hardly referred to in the
“ Remonstrance,” and, except in one instance, were riot placed on the schedule
transmitted to the Lands Commission. . - • * ;
|| That this is not the case has been already shown (p. 19, 20), and will be
more fully set forth hereafter (p. 56). . .
t A retrospective act is one which makes unlawful some action 1 which at the
time of its commission was not unlawful. It is not contended that the Charter was,
as regards some of its provisions, invalid because it embodied principles of policy
which have since been declared such as could not prevail in a British colony.
Many of its provisions were contrary to Imperial policy when granted, and therefore
when Fiji became a British Colony they necessarily lapsed. >lf the Charter had
contained a provision conveying to the Polynesia Company an exclusiva privilege
of carrying on the slave trade, it would have been no retrospective act which,
rendered such a privilege valueless on the assumption of sovereignty by Uritairi.


Bth. The proposition that the authority of Thakombau, and his chiefs exercised
in 1868 was effaced by the Cession to Her Majesty’s Government in 1874 is
Unreasonable, and at variance with the provisions of the Act of Cession.
'' 9th, That until some competent court having jurisdiction shall have ruled that
fho lands granted to the Company were not boni fide alienated, the Company
cannbt accept His Excellency’s refusal to admit that claim as a decision binding
upon, the Company. ' '
Ein l ally we are desired to say that the Company with, all respect have to'
decline His Excellence's offer! to pay the Company as a matter of, grace and favor,,
a moiety* of the suqfbt • '
. . The! Company i$ advised that it is both.legally, and 1 equitably, entitled to have
the full area’of the land, originally alienated, or its equivalent value.
The Company oannot but hope that' His Excellency will see fit to reconsider
liis opinion, feeling assured that’'upon Ununfpartial'representation of the facts and,
Circumstances Her Majesty’s Government will not approve of any act in breach,
of its honor and good, faith whereby the Company may be deprived of its rights.
\Ve have the honor to be,.
Your most obedient servant,
Alee. Kennedy Smiju?, chairman,
Edward Khull, manager.
2}he Afiting Colonial', Secretary ,. Fiji/ to the Chairman and:-
Jjirectors of the Polynesia Corny anj.
Secretary’s office,
Levuka; 25th September, 1876.
Gentlemen, —Tour-letter c£ the 21pt ultimo has been received, and laid/
Before thd Governor.' '' 1,1 •
.2. In that letter you' state that “ until' some competent Court having
jurisdiction "shall have rattd'that the lands granted to th'e Company were not
“ bon§, tjde ’ alienated, the 'Company’cannot aco&pt HJs Excellency’s refusal to.
admit that claim,as a decision binding upon the 'Compady,” and you urge that'
“ the Company is both, legally and ; equitably entitled to the full area, of the land
“ originally alienated!’’ In other words you demand, as of right, that the Colonial
Government should give effect'to engagements alleged to have been entered into;
previpui'to the'Cession of Eiji to Great Britain, As His Excellency has received'
distinct' instructions not to entertain fob a moment any olaipv so preferred,, it is
uselßsis; until such claim-of: light is withdrawn, to enter into" further discussion of
the .oiler contained in my letter'of tlje April addressed to Mr. G. A, Woods,
"it is only right that I should at once observe that many of the state-
rpepts-cohtained in your letter under acknowledgement appear to His- Excellency'
tio Be very faf from accurate, ' 1
' V A cdpy bf your letter will be forwarded to the Secretary of. State for the
CoibmcS) but His Excellency directs me to add that he cannot hold out to you auy
expectation)'that; terms more favourable than those' contained in my letter,
dhove quoted' 1 afe,'likely to be'conceded to the Company by Her Majesty’s
Government.' 1 " ’ *•
I have, &c.,
Alfred Maudslay.
Acting Colonial Secretary.


That this reply received the entire appvoval of the Imperial Gpyern-
rpent is shewn by the following despatch :
The Secretary of State for the Colonies to the Governor of Fiji.
Downing street,
2nd December, 1876.
Sir,—l hate the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your despatch, No. 165’.
gf the 27th September, enclosing copies of further correspondence between the
Polynesia Company and the Colonial Secretary of Fiji.
I approve of the terms of the reply which you caused to be addressed to the
Company, in reference to their claims, and I have to instruct you, as suggested in
your despatch, to inform them that after a careful perusal of their letter of the
21st August, signed by the Chairman and Manager oh behalf of the Company, I
see no reason for making any alteration in.the proposal already laid.before them.
As regards the ofEer of. a refund of £9,000 to those who paid that sum to the
United States Government'on Thakombau’s behalf, I am prepared to acquiesce in
your proposal that it should remain in force till the 30th June, 1877, after which
date, if not accepted, Her Majesty’s Government -null consider themselves no longer,
bound by the terms offered.
I have the honor to be, &c.,
Carnarvon.
The decision of Her Majesty’s Government was at once communi-
cated to the Polynesia. Company.'
The Colonial Secretary, to the Chairman of the Polynesia Company.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Levuka, 26th January, 1877.
Sir,—l have the hpnor to.acquaint you that His Excellency the Governor has
received instructions from, the Secratary for the Colonies to inform you that, after a
careful perusal of your letter of the 21st of August last, signed by yourself and the
manager of the Company you represent, Her Majesty’s Government sees no reason
for making any alterations in the proposals already made to you by His Excellency.
His Excellency is further directed to intimate that his ofEer to refund the
sum of £9,000 to those who paid that sum to the United States Government on
behalf of Thakombau, will remain in force until the 30th June, 1877, after which
date Her Majesty’s Government will consider itself no longer bound by such ofEer.
I, have, &c.,
John B. Thurston..
The Governor’s attention had been especially attracted by that
passage of Messrs. Smith and Khull’s letter, -which stated that the
Company was “ in occupation of a large portioi} ” of the land granted to it,
and he directed the following letter to be transmitted to the Directors,
along with that of the same date previously quoted.
The Acting Colonial Secretary to the Chairman and Directors of the
Polynesia Company.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Levuka, 2oth September, 1876.
Gentlemen, —1 am directed by the Governor to state that His Excellency,


would be much obliged if you would have the kindness to inform mo of the
jiosition of the lands which have been occupied, and are still occupied by the
Polynesia Company, and the name of the agent or manager by whom they are so
occupied on the Company’s behalf.
I have, &c.
Alfred P. Maudslay,
Acting Colonial Secretary.
This query seems to have somewhat puzzled the Directors, who
appear to have thought it their safest course to return no reply.
For eight months some information, oh the subject was patiently;
but vainly, awaited, and then a reminder that the question asked by
Governor remained unanswered was addressed to the Company.
, The Colonial Secretary, Levuka, to the Chairman and Directors of
the Polynesia Company.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Levuka, Bth May, 1877.
Gentlemen, —Upon the 25th September last my predecessor informed yoif
that His Excellency the Governor would be much obliged by your informing him’
of the position of the lands which have been occupied by the Polynesia Company!
and the name of the agent dr manager by whom they are so occupied on the
Company’s behalf.
As no reply to this enquiry has been received, I do myself the honour, by His
Excellency's direction, to repeat it.
I have, &c.;
John B. Thurston,
This communication at length evoked an answer, referring the
Colonial Government to Mr. Woods.
The Manager of the Polynesia Company to the Colonial Secretary.
Offices of the Polynesian Company.
49, Flinders Lane, W.
Melbourne, 22 June, 1877.
■ Sir,—in answer to your despatch of Stli May, 77,427 — 1 am instructed by the
Chairman and Directors of the Polynesia Company to inform you that G. A.
Woods, Esq.,'is the attorney for that Company, and will be able to advise you as to’
the position of the lands which have been occupied by them—Also to give any
other information that may be required.
I have the honor to be
Your most obedient servant,
Edward Khull,
. . Manager.
To this letter the following answer was returned.
The Colonial Secretary, Levuka, to the Manager of the Polynesia
Company.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Levuka, 10th July, 1877. .
Slltl'—llnstructed'by Ilia Excellency the Governor to acknowledge your


» , - » 'v
letter of the 22nd ultimo, in reply to my predecessor’s despatch of the 25th
September, .1875, and mine ofthe Bth May last ; informing me that G. A. Woods,.
Esquire is the attorney for the Polynesia Company, and that he will be able to
advise me as ,to the position of the lands which have been occupied by them.
2. In reply I do myself the honour to inform you that Mr. G. A. Woods is
now resident at Samoa, a group of islands some five hundred miles distant from
this Colony, and therefore not easily communicated with.
3. During the last visit of Mr. G. A. Woods to this Colony (in the early part
of May last) His Excellency at a personal interview, at which I was present,
requested him to indicate the lands which you state have been occupied, and to be
Still occupied by the Polynesia Company, but this' the Company’s Attorney, Mr.
Woods expressed himself as quite unable to do, nor could he advance anything
whatever in support of such an allegation.
4. In my despatch of the 30th August, 1877, I had the honour by command of
His Excellency to enclose to Mr. Wyleigh, then manager of the Polynesia Company,
a copy of a letter addressed to His Excellency by Mr. Consul Layard, and requested,
that he would be good enough to communicate its contents to the shareholders at
his earliest convenience. In reply, Mr. Wyleigh informed me he had received, and.
handed that letter over to you, but np reference having been made to this enclosure
fp any of your subsequent letters, I beg leave to ask whether its contents were
communicated as requested?*
I have, Sic,
John B. Thcrston.
On Mr. Woods next visit to Fiji lie was accordingly appealed to.
The Colonial Secretary to G. A. Woods, Attorney for the Polynesia!
Company.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
21st August, 1877.
Sib, —On tbe 25th September, 1876, and in reference to a letter of the
Chairman and Directors of the Polynesia Company my predecessor in office
requested them to inform him of the position of the lands which have been occupied
by the Polynesia Company, and the name of the Agent or Manager by whom they
are so occupied on the Company’s behalf. _ ,
On the 22nd of June they replied stating that you tbe Attorney for the
Company, and would be able to advise me-of the position of the lands which have
been occupied, and also to give any other information that may be required.
. I have therefore the honor to repeat the question—Where ..are the lands that
have been occupied by the Polynesia Company situated, and what is the name'
of the Agent or Manager who occupies them oh the Company’s behalf ?
I have, Sec.,
John B' ThukstoN.
Mr. G. A. Woods to the Colonial Secretary,
Levuka, Fiji,
21st September, 1877.
Sik, —In only now acknowledging the receipt of your letter of 21st ultimo!
and replying to the questions contained therein, I beg you will excuse what
very much like apparent neglect, but a difficulty had arisen in my mind, through
. *No reply has been received to this enquiry. For Mr. Layard’s letter see
foot note, p. 11.


ijot having, the link of connection in my previous correspondence that would,
Explain the object of the information sought.
I now find that the question of your predecessor arises from the fourth para-
graph of a letter (dated 21st August 1876) sent direct to the Hon. the Colonial
Secretary by the Manager of the Polynesia Company, and a copy of which has
recently come into my possession.
In reply to your inquiry.—“ Where are the lands that have been occupied by
“ the Polynesia Company situated, and what was the name of the agent or manager ? ”■
I have now the honor to state that the lands so occupied are'situated on the
Suva peninsula, and country, adjoining, and that those lands have been’
ccupied, more or less by the officers, agents, and warrant holders of the Com-’
pany from January, 1869, the date of arrival of the local board of management
and surveyors.
I, beg, to enclose for your information a copy (reduced scale), of the survey,
made by the officers of the Company showing the disposition of.the said lands by
the Board of Directors to the warrant holders, of whom many have been, and some
, few are still in personal occupation.'
The local “Agent or Managers” have not been resident on the
spot since Mr. Butters arrived from Melbourne in that capacity,*'
This position was held by that gentleman for some time, he was relieved by Mr.
Eorwood, who was subsequently succeeded by myself..
Ihave,.&c,
G. A. Woods.
Into this then the bqastod “ possession ” of the Company resolves
itself.! This is the “.occupation” on which it founds a title!
Of three out of the four blocks of land claimed, i.e. of 70,000 out
pf the 90,000 acres nominally made oyer to it, it is tacitly admitted that
the Company has never beep, in even partial occupation. At Suva only,,
lands are said to be occupied by “ warrant holders,” who have bought
from the Compapy,,and occupy, not on its behalf, but their own. No
officer or agent of the Company has for the last eight years lived at
Suva, or on any other part of the larjds claimed, and this admission it
has taken exactly one whole year to extract from the reluctant lips of
the Company!
But, after all, the question contained in the Colonial Secretary’s letter
of the 21st August remains unanswered. Instead of furnishing the
names of agents or managers who now occupy lands on the Company’s
behalf, Mr. Woods only gives the names of gentlemen who, within his
own knowledge never did enter into such occupation !: An inference
that Mr. Butters’ predecessor resided at Suva may be drawn from the.
reply of Mr. Wopds, but as a matter of fact, such was not the case,
and the suggestion which Mr. Woods, without distinctly asserting it,
contrives to convey, that until 1870 land at Suya had been occupied on
tjehalf of the Company by its agents, is more ingenious than ingenuous.
The Company’s advocates certainly display greater audacity or
ignorance than discretion when they venture to press its claims on the.
ground of “ occupation/’
No other communication has been received by the Government of
!Fiji from the Polynesia Company with the exception of the following
protest against the foundation of the capital at Suva.
It will be observed that in this document the Company claims to be
the “ owner of the land in question,” although the rights of the Company,
* i.e., in 1870. —Mr. Butters relieved Mr. Cook, who lived at Levuka, not
at Suva.


whatever they may be worth, have been sold to the persons now occupy,
ing it.
Mr. Woods, to the Governor ;
Fiji.
August 21st, 1877.
To his Excellency to Honorable Sir Arthur Gordon, K.C.M.G., Governor of .
Fiji, Sec., Sec. ' ■ ■ ■ —'
Sir, —I have the honor to addyess your Excellency with-resppet to the rightful'
claims'of the Polynesia Company (Limited) to the' lands'of. Suva —its harbors,,
territory and, district —commencing at Lami River, thence running along the coast'
towards the Rewa River and Kariibo, and thence inland to the Waimanu River.
2. Yoiir Excellency has already been, made aware of the fact that I am the.
Attorney of the said-Polynesia Company (Limited) under an irrevocable power.
2. The fact that Suva has been officially announced as the 'future seat of
Government, renders it obligatory upon me to respectfully remind your Excellency
that the Polynesia Company (Limited) does not in any way on degree withdraw
from its positionas owner'of the land, See., Sec., in.question,.
' 4. The Company declines most positively to accept the money consideration-
offered by your Excellency in liquidation of its claims, and' maintains its right to
(he peaceful possession of that which it has bought' and for which it has paid, and'
which it has cost up'to this date the amount of.say £45,000, without any dimunition
or derogation as regards title or otherwise..
6'. As the subject matter will 'doubtless have to be decided by the highest
judicial authorities' of the realm, I find it my duty, to present my very respectful
but decided’protest against any dealings with the said lands, Sec., until such'
decision has been arrived at.
6. T need scarcely state that any and all steps with, respect to the holding or.
disposing of said lands and interests of the Polynesia Company (Limited) must be
taken with due regard to and respect for the rights herein set up, and which have
been long known.to your Excellency.
7. It becomes part'of my duty to notify to the public the position taken by the
Company, as. well in. the protection of its interests as of those who might (in
ignorance of the state of. the matter) be disposed to purchase any of the said land, ,
ipc., from the Government..’ But, should your Excellency desire that the public'
protest assume'any other form, I shall be glad so to modify it "to meet your.
Excellency's views as far as l ean consistently with tfie discharge of the trust I
have undertaken.—l have the honor to be, your Excellency’s most obedient
servant,. .
G. A. Woods,
Attorney for the Polynesia Company, Limited.
The Colonial Secretary, to Mr. Woods,
Colonial Secretary’s Office.
Levuka, 22nd August, 1877.
SIK, —I am directed by His Excellency the Governor to acknowledge the receipt,
of your letter of the 21st instant. 1 '
I have &c.,
John B. Thurston.
The “ Remonstrance ” concludes with a string of propositions, fire,
in number, which,, in the opinion of the writer, set forth the strongest
points of the Company’s case. If they indeed be such, no great
amount of force is required to overthrow so flimsy an edifice.
‘‘ 1. The Company submit that the Deed called a Charter contains an absolute;
grant by King Thakombau [A.] and his Chiefs [l3.] of the lands specified in.the
•‘.schedule thereto.”


[A.] That the Charter is not an absolute grant of lands not specified
in it no argument is needed to show. That it was regarded as only a
promise in respect even of those mentioned in the schedule itself, is
shown by the deeds and transfers subsequently executed, all mention
of which is omitted from the “ Remonstrance.” ,-
, [B Jlf by the words “his chiefs” it is meant to imply that the
principal chiefs of Fiji, possessing rights over the lands specified in the
schedule, signed the Charter, the assertion is untrue.
. If, on the contrary, the five members of Thakombau’s family who
signed the Charter along With him, are referred to, the signatures of any
five gentlemen in Melbourne would have conveyed just as much right to
the lands in question, v over which they exercised no authority, and in
which they possessed no interest.
. “2. That following upon the execution of that Deed by the King, and long before
‘■‘her Majesty’s Government acquired any rights in Fiji, the Company possessed (and
“ are still in possession of j a large portion of the lands so granted to them.”
! The totally inability of the Company’s agent in Fiji to makegood
{his assertion has been already shown (p. 51). ; .
Of by far the greater portion of the lands scheduled, the Company
is not, and never has been, in possession. It may indeed be almost said
that the Company, as such, has never been in possession of any part of
the land, although possession has been taken by persons who have pur-
chased rights from it.,, .....
It may not be out of place, here, to devote a few words to the
actual condition of the four blocks of land claimed to be “occupied” by
the Company:—
1. The Yiti Levu Block.—This block contains a very large native
population, living in numerous furnished with churches and
schools, and surrounded by cultivation. It also contains a few white'
Settlers who have purchased from the native proprietors. There is not,
and never has been, living on it a single individual possessing claims
derived from the Polynesia Company. _.
2. The Natewa Bay Block.—Nine-tenths of this block are occupied
by natives, who are in entire ignorance that their ownership is disputed.
One solitary purchaser from the Company has, by arrangement with the
local chiefs, established himself within the limits of , the Company’s
claim, and applied for a Crown Grant,- which he will piobably receive.
3. The island of Benga.—On this island there is not a single white
man. The population is numerous, and the villages particularly neat
and well built. At the chief village is.a handsome church and school,
and a spacious courthouse. It also possesses a subtantial stone pier.-
A large proportion of the island is under cultivation, and a considerable
amount of copra is manufactured by the inhabitants.
4. The Suva Block.—From half a dozen to a dozen whites are in
occupation of portions of this block, of whom two, at least, however, claim
to have purchased from the native proprietors prior to the date of the
Polynesia Company’s Charter. The remainder have purcnased their claims
from the Company, but are not in any sense its tenants, or occupants on!
its behalf. All the rest of the block is entirely in the hands of the


natives, whose occupation has never been disturbed, and who have five or
six considerable towns on it.
■ The "meiUbers'of the so-called Government of Thakombau were
hampered in their treatment of this question by the undoubted promise
Of the'individual'whose ministers they professed to be. 'They were alsp
responsible to a Legislature, in which the Polynesia Company was largely
represented, but to their honohr be it said they never hesitated in their
indignant repudiation of the Company’s pretentions to expell from these
theit'native inhabitants. The following language was used'by
the Chief Secretary of the Fijian Government in reply to such a
suggestion. ' ’• !
- “I have now in reply to the query contained in paragraph four of.
“ your letter as to the ‘ course proposed to'be taken in the fulfilment of.
“ tlie’pledge given ip Parliament on the 18th July last’ to inform you
“ most frankly that, (as has already been 'personally explained to you),
“ b'eihg 1 fully 1 alive to the questionable circumstances attending the
“ contract between King Thakombau and the 'then Agents of the Poly-
i: nesia Company,‘ari'd to the undoubted fact that much of the land ceded
to them was at the time of cessionj riot Subject to the authority of the
“ King, the present Cabinet declines'to attempt the carrying out of such
“ promise by the unjust and arbitrary coitrse Of summarily ejecting fr'Orri
“ their hereditary planting grounds the inhabitants of 200,000 acres of
“ agricultural land: Whether or not the attempt, if made, would be
“ ultimately successful is doubtful, but it is very certain that it would
“ induce a most impolitic and expensive war, the responsibility of which
“ ministers feel they cannot undertake.”* • ' ’
“3. That the said Deed or Grant was amply confirmed, and the validity of it
“ firmly established by the subsequent transfers of lands, and legally-executed
“ conveyances, made to the Company by the King and the Constitutional
Government in part payment of the '200,000 acres'granted therein.” ‘ '
This statement in the form in which it stands is also untrue.
Certain transfers in fulfilment of the engagement entered into by the'
Charter were executed by Thakombau in 18G9, 1 but no constitutional
Government had been then established. The grants which the King 1
and constitutional Government, issued in 1873, wel-e made, not to the
Polynesia Company, but to the Company to which the Polynesia
Company had. transferred its interest—“the Forties.” Their validity is
rtow the subject of investigation before the Lands Titles Commission,
but in that question the Polynesia Company cannot pretend to an
interest.
“ 4. That the Company’s title under the said Deed or Charter dated in 1868 is
“ derived from precisely tiie same source, and, therefore, is JUST AS BINDING!
“ as that of her Majesty’s Government under the Act of Cession in 1874, viz., from
“ King Thakombau and his principal Chiefs.”
This is, perhaps, the most audacious misstatement in the whole
Remonstrance.
* Chief Secretary of the Fijian Government to Mr. Forwood, 2Gth October,
1872.


Its entire baselessness is at once shown by a comparison of the
signatures to the two deeds.
Signatures to Charter, 1868.
■Cakobau.
■Signatures to Deed of Cession, 1874.
Cakobau R.
B.ATU EpELI. [Cakobau’s eldest son,]
;Epeli. [Boko Tui of Tai Levu—Cako-
bau’s eldest son.]
Maafu. [Roko Tui of Lau—ln 1808
absolute ruler of the Windward
Islands, and even in 1874 owing
little more than a nominal allegiance
- to Cakobau.]
Tui Cakau. [Boko’Tui of Cakaudrovi,
In 1868 independant chief of Cakau-
drovi. In 1§74 feudatory to Cakobau,
but admitting no claim on Cakobau’s
part to own or dispose of his land'.
It is in this chiefs .province that
v Natewa Bay is situated.]
Vakawelbtabua.. [Boko Tui of Bua,
In 1868 independant King of a large
part of Vanua Levu, and governing
with the aid of European ministers,
under a constitution similar to that
’'sIVeNACA
[Cakobau’s half brother.]
, afterwards adopted, at Bau.]
SAvenaca. [ln 1868 without land. In
1874 Boko Tui of Lomai Viti.]
Isikeli. .[BokoTui of Viwa. In 18G8
sovereign chief of Ra, owning feudal
allegiance to Cakobau, but nothing
more. .In this chief’s teritory the
. Viti Levu Bay block is situated.]
•Natu Kini. [ltoko Tui of Nadroga, the
south western part of Viti Levu.]
Bitova. [Boko Tui of Macuata, a dis-
trict comprising nearly the whole of
. the north of Vanua Levu.]
Katonivere. [Ahigh chief ofMacuata,
the rival of Bitova.]
MatanitabuA. [Roko Tui of Namosi',
the south central mountain district
of Na Viti Levu.]
Boko Tui Dreketi. [Boko Tui of
Bewa—A chief of as high rank as
Cakobau himself, and in whose pro-
vince both Suva and Bega are
situated.]
Na Cagi Levu. [Boko Tui of
Kadavu.]
■itATU Deanibaka. ' [Half brother b£
Cakobau—landless.]
Hatu Elijia ToEOca. [Native magis-
trate at Bau--]andless.]
'Sitivani Tukana. [A chief of Viwa,
a small island two miles from Bau.]
. Marika Toroca. [Cakobau’s nephew,
a magistrate and scribe at Bau —
landless,]
'Let any bhe "who 'reads these 'two lists judge whether 'they are
“.precisely the same” 'and whether the signers of the'Charter 'had


pretention to be called “ llio principal chiefs of Fiji,” or to dispose Of
lands in the territory of other chiefs, or in short, to be anything but
what in fact they were, —dependent members of the family of which the
chief of Bau was the head. .......
“5. That the said 'Act ot Cession specifically excepts all lands previously
1 bona fide’ alienated, and therefore excepts the Company’s lands specified in the
“ schedule to the Charter, which lands were most undoubtedly, for a valuable
“consideration, ‘bona fide’ alienated, a record of which is registered at the
“ United States Consulate, Fiji, bearing date 24th July, 1868.”
The deed of Cession excepts from the surrender to Her Majesty
all lands shewn to have been bona fide alienated, and also all lands in
the use and occupation of chiefs and tribes. It has not been shewn,
and cannot be shewn that the lands claimed by the Polynesia Company
Were in 18G8 bona fide alienated by those who possessed them, whilst it
has been shown that they are in the use and occupation of chiefs and
people who could not be removed without injustice to the natives and
danger to the public peace.
Undoubtedly a valuable consideration was paid for the signature of
the Charter, but it was paid to one who did not possess, and therefore
could not alienate, the lands for which it was ‘given, nor can the
Company profess ignorance on that point, for • the Want of power on
Thakombau’s part to execute his.agreement was pointed out to its agents
before the Charter was signed.
We have now given a full and exact narrative Pf the communications
which have passed between the Government of Fiji and the Polynesia
Company, and have noticed the five reasons 'urged against the course
which has been adopted.
Throughout the whole of this third part’of the “ Remonstrance ”it
will be in vain to search for arguments to meet, or contest. Its conclu-
sions that the Imperial Government has pursued in its correspondence
with the Company a dishonourable course', that the local Government
has made promises which it has not fulfilled, and that the holders of land
purchased from the Company have been deprived of their property, aro
based, not on argument, but on bare assertions. , Were it indeed
true that either-'Her Majesty’s Government or the Colonial Government
had acted as is there assumed it would follow as a matter of course that
a wrong had been done; ; But it has been shown that this is not the
case. It has been shown that the claim of the Company to the possession
of lands has been referred to the Lands Titles Commission in exactly the
same manner as all other claims to land. It has been sh'oWn that those
claims in so far as they rest on a so-called Charter, which the Imperial
Government has already pronounced invalid, and refused to recognise,
were necessarily rejected by the Commission, and that in so far as they
•rest on any other ground, whether of subsequent deeds; or occupation,
they have not been heard-at-all, and are still open for hearing. It has
been shown that although the Crown has from the commencement of the
negotiations for cession refused to • become bound by-the'liabilities of
Thakombau, and its irresponsibility for such liability has 1 been declared by
legislative enactment, the question whether the Company was morally and
equitably entitled to receive from the' Crown the concessions asked for id
the Company’s letter of the 28th of January, 1 1875, (to Which alone Lord


Carnarvon’s reply refers), lias been considered, and dealt yyitli in the
manner prescribed for dealing' with such claims, and that the decision
of the Governor in Council has received the full approval of the
Secretary of State.’ It has been shown moreover that far from the
purchasers of land from the Company being deprived of their possessions,
the case of each such applicant will be dealt with on its own merits, and
with the full intention of confirming every ,bona fide occupant in his
possession. 1 AH that"‘remains is' to point out the detailed misstate-
ments and misrepresentations of the writer of the “ Remonstrance,” and
this can only be done by its minute dissection, paragraph by paragraph,
a tedious but, perhaps, not wholly useless task: Such an examination
will be found appended to the present remarks!'
Reference has in the course 6f this narrative been more than once made
to the “Forties.” Fully to appreciate the position of the Polynesia Company
some further accountof its connection with that Association must be given.
It was formed chiefly out of shareholders of the Polynesia Company,
for the purpose of obtaining money to enable the Polynesia Company to pay
the United States Consul. This money was advanced by the ?• Forties,”
who, m return, acquired the whole‘of the Company’s interest in the Viti
Levu Block and Bega, and a promise of 10,000 acres at Suva. Sup-
posing the Charter to have been valid, this was a perfectly legitimate
transaction. It was so- regarded by Thakombau and his Government,
and Crown Grants of Bega and Viti Levu Bay were issued to the
Trustees of the Forties. But, whilst the sale to the “Forty”'is not denied,
the Polynesia Company has shown an unmistakeable hankering after
the retention of the interests it has parted with. In the memorial of
of the Company no mention is made of the transfer to the “ Forty,” and
among the applications of the Company for land are to be ■ found
petitions for the very same blocks for which the “ Forty ” had received
transfers from the Company and grants from Thakombau !
It is true that a letter was afterwards received from Mr. S. C. Burt,
Mr. Woods attorney, withdrawing some of these applications ; but, oh
the other hand, Mr. Woods, himself, on appearing before the Lands
Commission, on the sth February, 1876, claimed for the Company both
Viti Levu Bay and Bega, without reservation or qualification. Mr. Burt’s
letter is not signed on behalf of the Company, and may possibly be dis-
avowed on the ground that he was not its Agent. It is difficult, however,
to see why the Company should dispute the claim of the “ Forty.” It is no
doubt alleged that parts of this land havebeen sold again by the Company
to other parties ignorant of its previous alienation to the “ Forty,” but
although the habitual want of .frankness of the Company in dealing
with its shareholders may account for the origin of such tales, it is
impossible to attach any serious credit to them.
The “Forty” have been informed that the Government cannot
recognize the claims derived through the Polynesia Company’s Charter,
but that the claim of the Association, based on Thakombau’s Grants of
Viti Levu Bay and Bega, will be investigated by the Lands Titles
Commission, and that in any case, whether those Grants are to be held
good or not, the claims of bona fide settlers, who have acquired land from
the “ Forty, ” and occupied it, will be respected.


APPENDIX;
PIJI.
No. XVII, 1875.'
AN ORDINANCE
(Enacted by the, Governor ,of the Colony of Fiji with the advice and
consent of the Legislative Council thei eof )
TO'DECLARE THE IRRESPONSIBILITY OF THE CROWN
IN RESPECT OF CERTAIN LIABILITIES.
[L.S.] ARTHUR GORDON.
19th November, 1875.
WHEREAS no legal obligation or responsibility in any wise
attaches to the Crown or Colonial Government in respect
of any liabilities incurred by Thahombau styled Tui Yiti and
Vunivalu or .by any persons professing ta administeror to represent
the Governmental’ Fiji prior tp. the tenth day of October 1874.
And whereas ii js desirable to remove all doubts or possible cause
of misapprehension relating to the recognition of such liabilities.
Be it therefore enacted by His Excellency the Governor with
the advice and consent of the Legislative Council as follows :
, ,I. No action suit or other proceeding whatsoever shall lie or
shall be commenced instituted or entertained as against the Crown
or the Colonial Government in any Law Court of the Colony in
respect of any liabilities incurred at any time by Thakombau styled
Tui Yiti and Yunivalu or by any persons professing to administer
or to represent the Government of Fiji prior to the tenth day of
October 1874.
11. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent any such liabilities'
being duly scrutinized and equitably dealt with upon principles of.
justice and sound public policy and in such manner as the Governor
in Council may from time to tims direct.
Passed in Council this: eleventh day.of November in the yea'i/
of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and seventy-five.


PETITIONS FOB LAND OF POLYNESIA COMPANY,
To His Excellency the Governor of Fiji, <j-c., <J'c., <yc.
The Petition of Polynesia Company, Limited, of Melbourne, Victoria, and Fiji.
Humbly Sheweth.
Date, June 2Gth, 1875.
1. That your petitioner on or about the 23rd day of July, A.D. 18G8, became
possessed of (or entitled to) certain lands situated in the Colony of Fiji, containing
about one hundred tho- isand acres (more or less), and situate as follows :
On such islands, and in one or more blocks as may be necessary to complete
the whole two hundred thousand acres, granted to this Company by Charter on the
above date.
2. Title—That your petitioner became possessed of (or entitled to) the said
lands by purchase.
3. Consideration—That duo consideration to wit. One moiety or half share
of nine thousand pounds was given to the native possessors of the said lands for
the purchase thereof as per Charter.
4. That all the deeds, papers &c., on which your petitioner’s claim is founded
will be sent when required for your Excellency’s consideration. ,
'Wherefore your petitioner prays that your Excellency will be pleased to direct
'a Crown Grant of the said lands to be issued to him under the Seal of the Colony.
Dated this 26th day of June, A.D. 1875.
G. A. Woods.
Attorney for Polynesia Company, Limited.
[B.J To His Excellency the Governor of Fiji, fyc., fyc., #c.
The Petition of the Polynesia Company Limited, of Melbourne, Victoria, and
Fiji.
Humbly Sheweth :
June 26, 1875.
1. That your petitioner, on or about the 23rd day of July, A.D. 1868, became
possessed of (or entitled to) certain lands situated in the Island of Bega, in the
Colony of Fiji, containing about acres more or less,) and bounded as
follows:
' By the sea, that is to say, the Island of Bega situated ofE the south coast o
Viti Levu, together with the islands of Moturiki, Levuka, Malumu, and Nanuk
situate within the reef of Bega.
2. Title.—That your Petitioner became possessed of (or entitled to) the said
lands by purchase.
3. Consideration.—That duo consideration, to wit one moiety of nine thousand
pounds'was given to the native possessors of the said lands for the purchase
thereof by
.4. Registry.—That such purchase was duly registered on the day cf
*• A.D. , in the office at
5. That all deeds, papers, &c., on which your petitioner’s claim is founded are
specified on the schedule hereto, and will bo sent for your Excellency’s
fconsideration when required.
Wherefore your petitioner prays that your Excellency will bo pleased to direct
a Crown grant of the said lands to bo issued to him under the Seal of the Colony,
Dated this 26th day of June, A.D. 1875.
(Signed) G. A. Woods,
Attorney for Polynesia Company Limited.
. .. [endorsement.]
SCHEDULE REFERRED TO.
1868, July 23, Cakobau and others to the Polynesia Company—Grant and
Charter.
1868, July 20,1. M. Brower, \V. L. Evans, and W. 11. 0 11. Brewer—Agreement.
,1869; January 20, Brewer and others, to the Polynesia Company,—Conveyance;


To Ilis Excellency the Governor of Fiji, 4'C. §-c. <j'c.
The Petition of the Polynesia Company, Limited, of Melbourne, Victoria, and Fiji,.
Humble Sheweth :
Date June 26th, 1875.
1. That your petitioner, on or about the 23rd day of July, A.D., 1868, became
possessed of (or entitled to) certain lands situated in the Island of Viti Levu, in
the Colony of Fiji, containing about ten thousand acres (more or less.) and bounded-
as follows :
Commencing from the River Ruku Ruku, Viti Levu Bay, thence along the
coast to the town of Vei Drala, thence inland on either side a sufficient distance to
form a square block.
2. Title.—That your Petitioner became possessed of (or entitled to) the said-
lands by Purchase
3. Consideration. —That due consideration, to wit was given to the
native possessors of the said lands for the purchase thereof by
4. Registry.—That such purchase was duly registered on the day of
A.D. , in the office at
5. That all the deeds, papers, &c., on which your petitioner’s claim is founded,
are herewith sent for your Excellency’s consideration.
Wherefore your petitioner prays that your Excellency will be pleased to direct
a Crown grant of the said lands to be issued to.him under the Seal of the Colony.
Dated this 26th day of June, A. D. 1875.
(Signed) G. A. Woods,
Attorney for Polynesia Company, Limited.
[endorsement.]
SCHEDULE REFERRED TO
As per application of the Polynesia Company, Marked B.
To Ilis Excellency the Governor of Fiji, &c., &c., &c.
The Petition of the Polynesia Company, Limited, of Melbourne, Victoria, andi
Fiji. Humbly Shewetk.
Date, Juno 26, 1875.
1. That your petitioner, on or about the 2.3 rd day of July A.D. 1878, became
possessed of (or entitled to) certain lands situatod in the island of Vanaa Levn
in the Colony of Fiji, containing about ten thousand acres (more or less) and
bounded as follows :
Situate at Natewa Bay. district of Cakaudrovi, commencing at the town of
Tiria. haying a frontage to the sea coast of four miles or more, and running inland
a sufficient distance to complete required area. _ * ..
2. Title.-—That your petitioner become possessed of (or entitled to) the said
lands by purchase.
3. Consideration.—That due consideration to wit a moiety of nine thousand
pounds was given to the native possessors af the said lands, for the purchase
thereof,
therefore your petitioners prays that your Excellency will be pleased to,
direct a Crown Grant of the said lands to be issued to him under the Seal of the
Colony.
Dated this 26 day of June, 1875.
(Signed) G. A. Woods,
Attorney for Polynesia Company Limited,
SCHEDULE REFERRED TO.
As per application of the Polynesia Company, marked. B,


i To His Excellency the Governor of Fiji, &c., &c., &c.
The petition of the-Polyuesia Company, Limited of Melbourne, Victoria, and
pji. ” ‘ ;
pumbly Sheweth.
Date June 26th, 1875.
1. That your petitioner on or about the 23rd day of July, A.D. 1868, became
possessed of (or entitled to) certain lands situated in the Island of Viti Levu, in
the Colony of Fiji, containing about fifty thousand abres (more or less), and
bounded as follows : '
1 • • On the south by the sea coast, extending along the said coast to the township
of Kalambo, and running inland to the Waimanu River, thence following the
•Waimanu to the Rewa River, that is to say: Suva its Harbour, Islets, Territories,
and District.
’• 2. Title—That your petitioner became possessed of (or entitled to) the said
lands by purchase.
i 3. Consideration—That due consideration to wit a moiety of nine thousand
pounds was given to the native possessors of the said lands for the purchase thereof
py the Trustees of the Polynesia Company.
4. Registry—That such purchase was duly registered in the office H.B.M.
Consul at Levuka, Fiji, No. 889.
1 6. That g.ll the deeds, papers, &c., on which your petitioner’s claim is founded
are specified in ' the schedule heretfy and will be sent when required for your
Excellency’s considerations.
Wherefore your petitioner prays that your Excellency will be pleased to direct
a Grown Grant of the said lands, to be issued to him under the Seal of the Colony,
i Dated this 26th day of June, a.d. 187 J. ■ • ■ '
G. A. Woods,
Attorney for Polynesia Company, Limited.
SCHEDULE REFERRED TO.
1868, July 23rd.—Cakobau and others to the Polynesia Company.—Grant and
Charter. .
’ ■ 1868, July 24th.—I. M. Brower, U. S. Consul of Fiji, and Messrs. F. L, Evans,
and W. H. 0. H. Brewer.—Agreement.
i- 1869, July 13th.—Cakobau and Jacobi Natika to the Polynesia Company.—
Conveyance of lands at Suva.
* 1869, October 6th.—Roko Tui Suva to W. M. Moore. —Conveyance
islets in Suva Harbour.
1870, February Ist.—W, M. Moore to Polynesia Company.—Conveyance of
ditto. '■ . ■ .
1 1869, January 26th,—Brewer and others to the Polynesia Company.—Con-
veyance. , ... " ' - ■ • t' *
w. c .. .


The “ Supplementary Letter from S. C. Burt, Esq., late Attorney-
General, Fiji,” ' " ....
The correspondence between Mr. Khull, Acting Manager of the
Polynesia Company, and Mr. C. S. Burt, is given on page 39 of the
Bemonstrance, and is a not' unfitting conclusion to that remarkable
production. The Company, with a view of supporting the alleged regal
status of Thakobau and his sovereign powers throughout Fiji, requested
Mr. Burt to favour it with any information or suggestions bearing upon
the point. The reply of Mr. Burt, is''at'least'amusing. He says, “I
have no doubt whatever that from a period long antecedent to his dealings
with the Polynesia Company, and up 'to the Cession to Great Britain,
on the 10th October,' 1874, Thakombau' exercised supreme power
throughout the Fijian group,” and he adds, in a tone at once conclusive
and satisfactory, “in fact, 1 his right to the sovereignty was derived by
descent from the Ser'u (Royal) family.”
The mere fact of Mr. Burt being untroubled by any historic doubts
as to the sovereign status of Thakombau, at a period long antecedent to
his (Mr. Burt’s) arrival in Fiji,' cannot be accepted as a circumstance
material to the case itself. As Mr. Burt’s opinion, it may go for what it is
worth, but as opposed to the combined testimony with regard to the Chiefs
actual position, cited in the earlier part of the foregoing memorandum,
it cannot be considered as entitled to the weigh't attached to it by the
Company. The alleged “fact” of Thakombau’s right to the sovereignty
being “ derived by descent from the Seru (Royal) family 1’ is a “ sugges-
tion ” of so very flimsy a nature that it cannot even be classed as e ben
trovato. Thakombau (or Evil to Bau) was the last name given to the chief
Of Bau. Before that he was known as “ Thikinova,” or The Centipede,
and earlier still as “ Seru,” or The Comb, a name very frequently given
to native children throughout the group, without regard to sex or social
position. A “ Royal ” family of Fiji is a thing unknown, and'the name
Seru has in no sense the significance attached to it'by Mr. "Burt,
Mr. Burt has, he says, “a very vivid recollection” of an interesting
scene that took place upon the formation of an European system of
government in Fiji; of his placing a chart of Fiji upon' 1 the table ; and
of an important conversation he held with Thakombau. ' The gist of
the affair was that Mr. Burt asked the chief how much of the group was
his, and the chief, somewhat melodramatically, answered “ All 11 ” And
this sort of thing is brought forward as evidence, or something akin
to it. .i
It will not be out of place to obserre that Mr. Burt, up to the date
of his leaving the islands, was entirely unacquainted with the Fijian
language. He for a time held, it is true, the post of Attorney-General
under the Fijian Government, and that of Crown Prosecutor, for some
few months after the cession of the Group to Great Britain, in both of
which posts he displayed a considerable amount of natural ability.
' But neither tho previous nor the subsequent avocations of Mr. Burt


Tv ere even remotely connected with the study or practice of the law, and
hence his semi-legally expressed opinions cannot, beyond the circle of
the Polynesia Company, be accepted as having any legal value. The
f‘ vivid recollection ’’ and exuberant imagination of Mr. Burt, as disclosed
in his letter to Mr. Khull, cannot fail, however, to command the fullest
recognition from all persons qualified to speak of the period and the
pircumstaaces to which he refers.


ANALYSIS OF THE THIRD PART OF THE COMPANY’S
REMONSTRANCE.
It is proposed in the following pages to examine in some detail the
statements contained in the various paragraphs of the Remonstrance.
“ 33. The Secretary for the Colonies having, in the early part of January, 1875,
received a memorial from the Polynesia Company, at Melbourne, setting forth the
claims of the Company upon the British Government, in virtue of their Charter,
sent out a despatch dated the 28th to the same month, informing the Company
that their case “ will be fully considered and dealt with by the Governor of the
new colony after,his arrival at Fiji.” [A] Upon receipt of this despatch the Board of
Directors convened a special general meeting of the Company to lay it before
them, and the conclusion arrived at by the meeting was that it now remained for
the Directors to adduce such evidence to Sir Arthur Gordon as should convince
him that the Company’s claim was a perfectly fair and just one; and so immediate
action was taken in the matter.”
[A.] The claim spoken of in this correspondence, as will be seen
from the Company’s memorial printed below,* is not the Company’s claim
* The memorial of George Thomas Wyleigh, of Melbourne, Manager of “ The
Polynesia Company, Limited,” Melbourne.
Humbly showeth.
Basis of the Company. 1. The said Company became incorporated in the Colony of
Victoria on a basis of a Charter, which was granted in July, 1868, by King
Thakombau and the Feudatoey Chiefs of Fiji * to enable them to meet pressing
demands then about to bo enforced by the United States Government.
Payment in full of) 2. In consideration of the Charter, a copy of which is
American claims. ) here with lodged, the Company have satisfied the American
claim, amounting to 42,218d015. with the interest due thereon, and have always
been prepared to pay £2OO per annum to King Thakombau upon being placed in
full possession of the land and “ Privileges ” conferred by the Charter.
The Company have not) 3. The Company have so far received 90,0C0 out of the
yet received half of f 200,000 acres of land ceded by the .Charter as set forth in a
their land. J memorial presented in January last to the Royal Commis-
sioners in Fiji, and by letter in September last, addressed to His Excellency Sir
Hercules Robinson, copies of which already been submitted to your Lordship.
Jfonopolieshighlyvalu- ) 4. At the time the Company were formed thousands of
able to the Company. ) acres wcje to be had in Fiji FOE LESS THAN ONE SHILLING
PEE ACEH, FEEE FROM THE COST OF SURVEY, CLEARLY PROVING THE “ RIGHTS AND
PRIVILEGES ” WERE THEN CONSIDERED THE MOST VALUABLE PORTION OF THE
Charter.*
Losses and expenses) 5. The Company have differed very serious loss from the
still to be incurred. ) non-fulfilment of the Charter by the Fijian authorities, and
■will yet have to make expensive surveys before each shareholder can be put in
possession of his respective allotment of land.
America kept from) G - The Company were the■ means of preventing the United
taking islands by the [ States Government from taking possession of a portion, if
Company. ) not 0 f cn tire group, of Islands known at the Fijis.*
The Company’s claim) 7- So far as can be ascertained by your Lordship’s memora-
tlie oldest now exist- [ list the claim of the Company dates back prior to that of all
“S’ ) other existing ones.f
Shareholders desirous) 8. Numbers of the shareholders being desirous of settling'irt
of settling in Fiji. J the Fijis are now calling on your Lordship’s memoralist. td


to Grants of the land mentioned in the schedule to the Charter (the only
matter which has been, or could be, brought before the Lands Titles
Commission), but the claim to compensation from H. M. Government for
the non-fulfilment .by Thakombau of the promise to confer exclusive
commercial privileges on the Company, and that to grant an amount
of lands, in addition to those mentioned in the schedule, sufficient to
make up the acreage promised by the Charter.
These claims have been considered and dealt with, not by the Lands
Titles Commission, but by the Governor in Council, in the manner pre-
scribed by the Secretary of State, with regard to the treatment of claims
against Thakombau or his Government.
“ 34. As the Colonial Office refrained from expressing any opinion whatever upon
any one of the points contained jn the memorial, setting forth the Company’s
claim, but preferred to inform the Company that their case was referred to the
Governor of Fiji to be “ fully considered .and dealt with by him,” the Board of
Directors had every reason to believe that the despatch meant what it conveyed,
and they then depended upon having their claim investigated by Sir Arthur Gordon
upon some principle of justice. Everybody now concluded that if the Company’s
agent at Fiji could adduce such evidence’ as .would satisfy his Excellency the
Governor —Ist, That there “did ” exist a Fijian debt to the United States Govern-
ment of 42,248 dollars. 2nd. That payment of the debt “ was ” pressingly
demanded by that power in 1868—3rd That a contract “ was ” entered into
between the King and Chiefs on the one part, and the Company on the other, which
stipulated the alienation of 200,000 acres of land, etc.; for the payment of that debt
by the Company—4th. That, in virtue of the said contract, the debt “ was ” paid
in full to the United States Vice-Consul, Dr. J. M. Brower (who was then present,
and could have certified to the fact) —And, 6. That the King and subsequent.
Constitutional Government “ had ” confirmed the contract by making successive
transfers of ldhds, to the extent of 90,002 acres, in part payment of the stipulated
200,000 acres ; —such evidence would establish the “ bona tides ” of the contract,
and clearly entitle the Company to the balance of land still due under the same.”
H. M.' Government never for a moment admitted that the so-called
Charter had any legal validity, but it wag willing, to authorize the
Governor of Fiji to enquire whether any of the Company’s claims were
such as, in equity and fairness, should be Complied with. The writer
assumes that'had evidence been adduced as to certain facts which he
place them in possession of the land to which they are entitled. Your Lordship’s
memoralist therefore' httinbly prays that your Lordship will be graciously pleased
to order that the Company shall without delay receive the balance of land still
due, Amounting to one hundred and ten thousand acres, say 110,000 acres, and
Prayer for the balance h Fiji being now a possession of the British Crown rendering
of land due, and for/ the existence of monopolies there objectionable, your Lord-
a consideration in ( gy p w ij[ be graciously pleased further to order that the new
vileges” of the Com-C Colony (of Fiji) shall as soon as is possible, in lieu of the
jjauy. j “ Privileges ” contained in the Charter, pay to the Company
a consideration in money of not less than twenty-five thousand pounds (£25,000.
Your Lordship’s memoralist therefore humbly prays that your Lordship will
be graciously pleased to grant his memorial, and your Lordship’s memoralist will
ever pray, &c.
Geo. T. Wyleigh,
Manager. '
Meboume, 3rd December, 1874.
* Untrue. ,
, , f There are eight hundred and fourteen claims anterior to that of the
Company.


enumerates, the bona ftdes of' the contract would ‘have been
established, and the Company’s rights under it recognized.
Most of the points enumerated in this paragraph are matters of
notoriety entirely undisputed by the Colonial Government. Whether there
did exist a Fijian debt to the United States may indeed be questioned, but
the Governor, without requiring any fresh evidence, was undoubtedly
already “satisfied” that a large sum of money had been claimed
from Thakombau by the United States Government, and that the
recognition of that claim had been pressed for in 1807. That a contract
with Thakombau and his family, (not “ the King and his Chiefs,”) had
been entered into ; (that in virtue of this contract the debt had been
paid by the 'promoters of the Polynesia Company, though not within
the stipulated period ; —and that the ■ King and his Government had
conveyed to the Company, and those claiming through it, certain portions
of the land mentioned in the schedule, were facts too clearly proved by
documentary evidence to need confirmation by oral testimony. But the
writer is quite in error in supposing that these facts were in themselves
sufficient to entitle the Company, to demand from a power not fettered by
Thakonfbau’s . engagements, the fulfilment of /Thakombau’s contract.
Many other things had to be ascertained before a moral claim against the
British Government could be admitted, and the writer whilst stating
that “unimpeachable testimony affirming, the above.yspecified five points
of evidence could have been brought forward,” refrains, prudently enough,
from professing to have been able to adduce evidence that those who signed
the Charter had the power to alienate the lands of which they affected
to dispose;—that the Company has ever been-put in possession of
what it nominally obtained; —or that the greater 1 part of the lands in
question are not now—(as they'have always been, without a day’s
interruption,)—in the hands of natives. Nor does lie profess his ability to
shew that the inhabitants and owners of the lands in question have,
received any consideration whatever for their proposed extrusion from
their homes, or that the Colonial Government possesses the power, if it
had the will, to alienate lands not its property, but in the actual use and
occupation of native chiefs and tribes. As little does be venture to affirm
that there had been no prior sales, by the true owners of parts of the
territory claimed.
“35. Unimpeachable testimony affirming the above specified five points of evidence
could have been almost immediately brought forward by the Company’s agent after
his arrival in Fiji, if it had been intended to accord fair play to the Company, for
all the parties interested in the Charter, whose evidence was essential, were still
in Fiji, and close at hand.” .. ....
The “unimpeachable evidence,” referred to, is just as attainable
now as it was in 187 b. Thakombau and Dr. Brower are still in Fiji. The
missionaries mentioned had left it Deforc Sir A. Gordon’s arrival. But as
already stated their testimony was not required, the facts being notorious
and abundantly proved by documentary evidence. No one doubts the
execution of the so-called Charter. ■- ■.
“ 3G. About five months alter the receipt of Lord Carnarvon's dispatch, upon
■which the Company took action as above stated, sending an agent to Fiji, another
despatch from his Lordship arrived, dated June 11th, in reply to a letter from the


Company .dated January 28th referring to their claim set forth in the Memorial
previously forwarded, and begging his Lordship to take action thereon. In this
despatch the Company were again referred to the Governor of Fiji, and were given
to understand that the consideration and settlement of their claim was so fully
committed. to Sir Arthur Gordon that it was quite unnecessary to address any
f urther communication to England. And to this was added that his Loraship did
not admit, on the part of. Her, Majesty’s Government or the Government of Fiji,
the validity of any claim made or to be made by the Polynesia Company ; a very
extraordinary .statement iri the face of the pending investigation so recently
appointed by His Lordship to' determine the merits of that claim, and one which,
to say the very least, was,both inappropriate and unseasonable, The Company
therefore accepted that statement, for. the time being, for what they considered it
to be worth, knowing full well they could easily establish the validity of their claim,
to the balance of the 200,0>00'acres of land' upon’the first opportunity afforded them
at the expected forthcoming enquiry at Fiji.”
The letter of the 28th January from the Polynesia! Company, here
inentioned, again referred,' not to its request for Crown Grants of the
lands professedly in its possession,’ but to the claims founded on’
Thakombau’s Unfulfilled promises. These ciairfts were accordingly
considered and dealt with the Governor, in Executive Council, with
the concurrence of the Chief Justice, deciding, as has already been
shown,
1. That the Polynesia Company had never exercised its banking
find other exclusive privileges, and was riot entitled to any compensation
for the non-recognition by the British Government of privileges which'
it had never enjoyed, and which had been’ alrea'dy set aside in 1872 by
60-called Fijian Parliament.
2. That it was not entitled to any further grants of land ; and
8. That had it been entitled to then!' it Would have been impossible
to grant them, insomuch as the Colonial Go'verrimerit did not possess'
the land, and that it would have been impolitic had it been possible, as
the actual occupants eould not be expelled without injustice, and the’
probability of serious troubles.
,■ ,‘;37. Upon the arrival of the Company’s agent at Fiji and the presentment by him
.cl a letter to Sir Arthur Gordon, together with Lord Carnarvon’s despatch of the'
23rd January, he was at once officially recognised' as the agent, sent there to
personally conduct the claims of the Company before such board of officers as hia
Excellency might be pleased to appoint to consider the same ; or in such other
manner as hi's Excellency might think fit in accordance with Lord Carnarvon’s
despatch. ”
, ,The immediate “ official recognition ”of Mr. Woods is probably
dwelt upon because his right to act on behalf of the Company was chal-
lenged by a former Agent.
It was no part of the Governor’s duty to interfere in the
quarrels of those who',claimed to represent the Company. It was
sufficient for him'that Mr. Woods brought a letter from the Company
authorising him to act on its' behalf.
“The agent now commenced a correspondence with the Government,' which,,
through the tardiness attending every step taken by either of the departments, wasr
dtr exceedingly protracted one, and became at length very up-hill work.’’


jf The “ protracted ” correspondence referred to is summarized in the
note below.*
“ His object may be briefly stated as follows :—lst. To ascertain in what manner
the Government intended to adjudicate the Company’s case, 2nd. To submit such
suggestions, as the line of procedure became indicated by the Government, as he
conceived to be essential to fender the same satisfactory to both parties ; and 3rd.
To obtain a fair Rearing for the Company’s witnesses.”
1., Mp. Woods obtained a knowledge of the manner in which the
Government intended to adjudicate on the case within five minutes of
his seeing Sir A.., Gordon, viz., that it was intended to refer the claims of
the Company (o definite blocks of land to the Lands Titles Commission*
and that the question whether the Company was entitled to the fulfil-
ment of Thakombau’s unfulfilled promises, or the grant of compensation
in lieu of them, would be considered by His Excellency in Council.
2. There was nothing to prevent his submitting any suggestions he
pleased, although suggestions.as to.the mode of conducting an enquiry
inade on behalf of one only of the parties interested, are not altogether
usual.
3. No exertions on Mr.' Woods’ part were requisite to obtain a fair
hearing from the Lands Commission for the witnesses brought before it.'
“ 38. If the simple, easy, and natural method of settling the question, as indicated
in section 35, had suited Sir Arthur Gordon, the business, could have been got
through in about three days;. fo,j; the whole thing lay in a nutshell, having no obscure
or complicated surroundings whatever.” ,
No doubt it would have. been exceedingly convenient to the
Polynesia Company that its claim should have been at once taken up
before the counter memorial of the “. Porty,” and the petition of those,
claiming to hold by priority of purchase, from the natives portions of ;
the land claimed,-could be received and' considered.. Whether it would'
have been equally consistent With justice may be questioned.
“ But, instead of that, adfesultoi/ correspondence,'discussing matters apparently
preliminary to some form of investigation, was perpetuated through a period of
eight months 1 during which no less than seven, so called, “ Progress Reports”
were forwarded to the Directors of the Company in Melbourne."
The reasons why the Lands Commission did not meet for some months
* Up to 6th April the following communications had passed between Mr.
Woods and the Colonial Government, with regard to. the Company’s.claims :
30th September, 1875.—Mr. Woods to, the Colonial Secretary.—Forwarding
Memorial fj-pm the .Polynesia Company upon their claims
under a Charter from Thakombau. ,• i
4th October, 1875.—Colonial Secretary to Mr. Woods.—Acknowledging receipt of
Memorial • ■ > t i.
15th December, 1875.—Mr. Woods to. Commissioner Lands :—Requesting to know
• , .if Counsel will be heard by the Commission . u : .
28th December, 1875.—Secretary to the Lands Commission, to Mr. Woods, informing
Mr. Woods that the Commission does not intend to hear'
Counsel.
sth April, 1876. —Mr. Woods to Commissioner of Lands.—Asking that Dr. Brower
may be examined in regard to the Company’s claim.
sth April, 1876.—Commissioner of Lands, to Mr. Woods.—stating that the Com-
mission considers it unnecessary to make further enquiry into the
claim of the Polynesia Company. (Vide p. 43.)


After Mr. Woods arrived has been already mentioned. The “ desultory
correspondence ”, “perpetuated ” [sic] during this time, (for the greater
part of which, Mr., Woods was engaged as Agent at Kadavu for the
Pacific Mail Steam Company) is that already referred to at page 37.*
‘‘ And then, when the proceedings had readied that point where a witness
outside ofthe Government service and pay should be called in, and witness being
no other than Dr. Brower, the Vice-Consul for the United States already referred
to, the whole enquiry was (on April sth, 1870) ruthlessly strangled by Sir
Arthur Gordon in obedience, -to- a despatch from Downing street, dated 4tli of
March, 1875 ! thirteen months previously ! I proving most unmistakably that the
-reference of the Company’s case to the Governor of Fiji to be “fully considered and
dealt with by him,” together with all the proceedings at Fiji during the said eight
months, under his Excellency’s direction, professedly in compliance with the said
despatch of January 23rd, was neither more nor less than a right down sham from
beginning to end!!!”..,
This sentence, which is little more than a shrill shriek that the
whole enquiry into the Company’s claims has been “ ruthlessly strangled,”
proclaims with more force than elegance “ the whole of the proceedings
at Fiji ”to have been “ neither more,nor less than a right down sham.”
It has already been shown - that the claims to which the Colonial
Secretary’s despatch referred were not claims which came before the
Lands Titles Commission at all. The claim to be confirmed in the
possession of certain definite lands was one thing;—the claim to a
fulfilment of unfulfilled promises was quite another. , It was this latter
claim with which Lord Carnarvon’s despatch dealt: -it has been most'
carefully considered, and most justly dealt with.
“S 9. It may be seen, then, that the Company falling in with the views of Lord
Carnarvon, and in conformity with arrangements he had made, sent down an agent
to Fiji, authorizing him to represent the Company and submit their claim to the
Land Commissioners, and give all the information in his power with respect to it.
A correspondence ensued between the Agent and the Commissioners which seemed
to be, and ought to have been,' preliminary to a full and formal investigation ; but
upon the Agent requesting that the evidence of Dr. Brower, the U. S. Vice-Consul,
should be taken before that gentleman would leave for America, the whole enquiry
was suddenly frustrated and brought to an abrupt termination by the extraordinary
course pursued by the Colonial Office, which completely circumvented the
Company.” _ ■ .
The wording of this paragraph would imply that before the
enquiry into the Company’s claim to land were closed witnesses in
the Government service had been called in, and that the Commission, or
the Government, feared to admit the evidence of Dr. Brower.-* In point of
fact the enquiry broke down on a preliminary point before any witness could
be examined. Mr. Woods persisted in pressing his claim on the strength
of the Charter, and the Charter only.. The Commission had no alterna-
tive but to declare that they needed no witnesses, and the Chief Justice
stopped the further proceeding of the case, exactly as in the Supreme
Court he would have stopped a suit based on a repealed or non-existent
statute.
It lias already been sliown tliat the claims to which Lord
Carnarvon’s despatch referred were not the claims to be submitted to
the Lands Titles Commissioners ; that the Agent of the Company disa-
vowed all agency except as to the claim to lands ; that the enquiry


before the Lands Commission was brought to an abrupt termination, not
by Mr. Woods’ request that Dr. Brower should be examined, but by his
doteimination to rest the claim of the Company upon the validity of its
Charter from Thakombau, and that the remaining claims were fully
considered and dealt with by Sir A. Gordon, and in his Council, in the
manner prescribed by the Secretary of State.
It was not the demand for the examination of Dr. Brower, but the
reply of Air. Woods that he founded his claim, exclusively on the
“ Charter,” that led to the decision of that Board to discontinue its
enquiry.
“40. The Company rely upon a fact, which civilised communities have in all ages
relied upon, as giving validity to the claim of one of two contracting parties against
the other, viz., that the full consideration for which the stipulated “ quid pro quo ’’
is now demanded, has been fully paid over and acknowledged. It is repugnant to
our sense of justice and honor, after a contract has been entered into by a King—a
Christian King—joined in by his principal Chiefs [A.], and executed in the presence,
and with ihe recognition of the agents [B.] of the great countries interested therein
(the Consuls for England and America), and after such contract has been partly
fulfilled by the King making successive instalments extending through a period of
four years;—wc say, with a contract so accredited and confirmed, it would be
contrary to justice and honor for a third party to come forward and say, “We want
the property which is due by the King ; let us, therefore, repudiate the contract, and
take possession of it ourselves.” [C.] The Company aver that the British authorities
have no moral ground whatever to stand upon in rejecting their manifestly just
claim [D.,] but are acting in a purely arbitrary manner, as the foregoing narrative
clearly demonstrates; and the whole of the colonists in Victoria, New South Wales,
and New Zealand, holding 13,700 shares, and land warrants and conveyances for
the land purchased from a legally-constituted and duly-accredited Company—such
colonists, being subjects of Great Britain, America, France, and Germany—do
hereby record their emphatic protest against the course pursued in parrying on
proceedings with the Company ft Melbourne and Fiji for more than twelve months'
with the ostensible object of determining the merits of their claim ; and then, upon
the first witness being called on behalf of the Company, to betray the hollowness
of those proceedings and their despotic character, by absolutely ignoring the claim,
without according a hearing to a single one of the Company’s witnesses ; thus
ruthlessly depriving them, the said colonists, of their civil rights as free men and
citizens, to have their titles to the lands purchased from the Company tried by a
legally constituted tribunal, before being, dispossessed of the properties they have
justly and honorably acquired. ” [E.]
[A.] It lias already been shown that Thakomban was not a King,
tnd that the Charter was not joined in by the chiefs of Fiji.
[l3.] Does the author really mean to assert that the Charter was executed
in the presence of the Consuls of Eng and and America, and with their
recognition? Either he must know the assertion to be absolutely false,
or he must be so ignorant of the Company’s history and transactions as
to be altogether incompetent to express an opinion with regard to them.
[C.J It is to be assumed that the writer wishes it to be understood
that the Colonial Government is in the position of the third party who
wants and takes property due to another.
This, however, is far from being the case. The Colonial Govern-
ment asserts not only that Thakombau had no right to dispose of lands
in the use and occupation of natives over whom he had no control, bn£.
that it has itself, under the deed of Cession, no such right to dispose of
those lands, and could not make good the illusory grants of Thakombau
without great wrong and injustice to the proprietors of the soil.


[D.J The denunciation of the course adopted by the British
Government, as having no moral ground to stand on, may be taken as
an admission of the legality of its action.
[E.] In the last very long sentence of this paragraph, the author
of the Remonstrance complains, with a breathless volubility far too rapid
to be restrained by syntax, that those who have purchased titles to
land from the Company havo been dispossessed of the properties they
have honourably and justly acquired. This, as has been already shown,
is simply the reverse of fact, as every individual who is bona Jide in
possession of land purchased from the Company will have his occupa-
tion confirmed by the issue of a Crown Grant for the land so occupied
by him.
