

THE CASE OF THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN SQUATTER


BY THE
REV. JULIAN E. T. WOODS,
AND MAY BE HAD OF
H. T. DWIGHT, BOOKSELLER,
MELBOURNE.
GEOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS IN SOUTH
AUSTRALIA.
Numerous Illustrations. B vo. 14s,
“NOT QUITE AS OLD AS THE HILLS:
A LECTURE ON THE EVIDENCES OF MAN’S ANTIQUITY.
8 vo. Is.
NORTH AUSTRALIA:
ITS PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY AND NATURAL HISTORY.
8 vo. 2s.
ALSO, IN THE PRESS,
And will be ready shortly ,
THE HISTORY OF THE DISCOVERY
EXPLORATION OF AUSTRALIA,
In two vols., price 28s.
Containing Accounts of all the Exploring Expeditions in this Country.
Subscribe ns’ Names are respectfully requested as early as pos-
sible, in order to prevent disappointment.


f Cpt / j
i v'v/ / i f
THE NEW VALUATIONS;
THE CASE OF THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN SQUATTER
FAIRLY STATED.
WITH AN APPENDIX SHOWING THE MANNER IN WHICH
THE RUNS HAVE BEEN VALUED.
BY HENRY JONES, ESQ.
JHRtiourne;
HENRY TOLMAN DWIGHT.
ADELAIDE: W. E. RIGBY.
1864.




AT-S-ir
NOTICE.
I beg to state that in preparing this pamphlet for the press
I have received important and valuable assistance from the
Rev. Julian E. T. Woods, and take this opportunity of
tendering him my very sincere thanks.
HENRY JONES.
Binnum Binnum, Tatiara, S.A.,
November 9, 1864.
P) \l6s/ 'FfOfff
v




THE NEW VALUATIONS;
THE CASE OF THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN SQUATTER FAIRLY STATED.
South Australia is at present going through what every other colony
has had to experience in the course of its history. The old vexata
questio has come in its turn for solution, and in due course the usual
amount of excitement and acrimony has ensued. It is strange
perhaps that the question has not presented itself long ago. It
has come and gone in Sydney and Melbourne, and has passed
through so many stages, that one is as much puzzled to remember the
beginning, as to foresee the end. But in South Australia the subj ect has
only newly arisen. It is true there was an assessment made upon
stock about six years ago, but that was accomplished with but very
little difficulty. There was not much excitement about it, and
though it was somewhat like a breach of faith, yet seeing that
injustice and rapacity were the order of the day in dealing with
squatting questions, the squatters were glad to put up with the
imposition, and congratulated themselves upon getting off so easily.
But, now, the evil and long-deferred day has come at last. South
Australia has to go through her course of indisposition and febrile
excitement like any other infant community. Catching the infection
from her neighbours, it has come to her at last in a very aggravated
form, and the result is that her life seems to be threatened by the
serious character of the attack. If the disease developes itself as it
has begun, the prospects are indeed gloomy, and we may justly feel
that if the colony does survive, it will never be the same after the
crisis.
At the very outset many will say that the question is about to he
approached by a person of extreme views. Well, it seems rather
singular that it is one which cannot be discussed with anything like
good temper or moderation by any side. But do you know why ?
It is because, first, it is a dispute about money, and that is a subject
upon which men are generally very acrimonious at all times.
Secondly, because one side thinks it is being robbed, and the other


that it is being cheated. We think (I say we, for I admit, of course
that I am a squatter) that you are so bent upon plundering us, that
you will not hear either justice or reason. You think on the other
hand, that our interests are inimical to the general prosperity of
the country, and that we are burdening the question with sophistica-
tions for the sake of avoiding a settlement. . I propose now to
argue the matter from the squatters’ side; T admit, as I have already
stated that I am a squatter, and, if you will, that my interests are
largely involved in the question. I admit, also, that my statement
is one sided I shall try, however, in spite of these drawbacks to dis-
cuss the subject in moderation and good temper. It is not so easy
to do this, but I promise to try and forget all the mis-statement,
abuse, and unjust accusation to which we have been subject since
the matter came before the Adelaide public.
In the first place, let me state that I deal with the question
principally as it affects the South Eastern district of South Australia,
that is to say, the portion of the colony which lies between the
boundary of Victoria and the River Murray. I know, of course,
that the subject affects the whole colony, and I ought not to deal
with it as far as it affects myself individually, but as many of my re-
marks, in the first instance, have reference to matters of purely
personal experience, it is necessary that I should state from whence
that experience has been derived. I ought also to add that a good
deal of what I shall allege does not apply to the districts north of
Adelaide, where the squatters have a very different kind of country
to deal with.
Let me commence by giving a summary of the history of the
squatting question. Twenty years ago the land which is now oc-
cupied by my home station, out-buildings, arid my improvements,
was a solitude, only trodden by the wild savage in the pursuit of
game. At the same lime, I need not inform my readers, Melbourne
and Adelaide were very different places from what they are now. A
man who came there, no matter what his position or expectations,
had to put his hand to hard and disagreeable work, unless he
wanted to starve. It was no use stopping about the towns, and the
bush was not considered very safe. Like many others I had heard
that a living was to be made by taking a few sheep into the outlying
districts, and occup}ing some of the waste lands. There was a
great deal of talk, in those days, of the new country situated in a
sort of debateable ground, between the colonies of South Australia
and Port Phillip. They said that the land was pretty good, but that
the blacks were very troublesome. Sheep might do there, it was
thought, if water could be found, but there might be other drawbacks,
such as distance from town, and dangers of the bush, which might
make the speculation unfavourable, and at best it was considered
a. hazardous experiment. But there were a good many going, and I,
like others, for whom the wild adventurous life had a charm, whether
it paid or not, started up with a few sheep. Now lam not going to


dwell much upon the dangers or difficulties with which I had to
contend. They were many and great, but for all that I don’t wish
to make too much of them.
It has been the custom of late years to make appeals on behalf of
the squatters, on the ground that they were the pioneers of civiliza-
tion into the distant bush. No doubt they were, but perhaps a little
too much has been made of the fact. It is true, some of them have
fallen victims to the natives, and others have been lost in the bush
under most distressing circumstances in their explorations. There
are risks of life and property in every pursuit, however, from that
of the bricklayer to the engine-driver, and our case differs from
theirs only in being endowed with a little more hardship. To my
mind we have no reason to complain that the public lose sight of
this. We have rather to object that they do not put us in the same
category with the labourer and the hard-worker. If we have done
no more, we are at least entitled to no less. It is a recognized
principle of right and justice, that a man who has by small begin-
nings, hard work, and slow progress, attained to ease and affluence,
is fairly entitled to the reward of his labours. Every one will at
least admit that we have had to work hard for all that we enjoy,
and at the time of which I speak—when I set out with my small
flock of sheep to reclaim some of the distant wilderness—l can
assure my readers, I was not without a fair share of troubles. lam
not going to delay them with any statement of what these troubles
were. The blacks w T ere treacherous. Many a poor fellow fell a
victim to this treachery. Often, of an evening, around our camp
fires we would have stories to tell of how we had been chased while
looking for the horses, how a bullock had been speared, and a small
mob of sheep driven away. Tales of a much more gloomy com-
plexion would sometimes be heard—a shepherd on the flat had
been murdered, or the overseer at some other place speared. These
were stirring times. A man would no more think of going out
without his firearms than he would think now of going out without
his clothes. Think of this, you new comers, who are crying out
that the waste lands of the Crown do not produce sufficient revenue.
What did they produce as they were, and what would they have
produced if we had left them as they were? You will say, perhaps,
that if we have reclaimed them, we have done so only in the pursuit
of our own interests, but who does anything else but look after his
own interests ? The general who wins a battle, the explorer who
crosses a continent, the farmer who tills his lands —all consult their
own interests, and when that interest largely coincides with that of
the country, it is a recognized principle to reward it. Well, Igo
on now to tell how I prospered in my new pursuit. Prospered, do
I say ? At first it was anything but prosperity. The wild dogs in
a single night would sweep off the profits of a year. Some of the
country was not healthy for sheep, and has only lately become fit
for pasturage. I don’t want to say that it was all loss, but it looked


like it, and the reward for our labours seemed very distant. Every
one knows that for the first few years station property had a merely
nominal value, for a man to be a squatter was then as much as to
say that he was engaged in very hazardous speculation It was
hard work and small profits. The litttle wool that could be got
was not sold easily ; indeed, those merchants that gave an advance
upon it only did so because they got a large interest for their money,
and could sell their stores in return at a good profit. They were
hard times. Early settling has some pleasing recollections for the
old colonists, but these are not among them. The only home was
a miserable bush hut, with neither comfort nor safety in it, and
when shearing time come round, it bore its full share of anxiety and
disappointment. Yes, and work, too, for we had to take a pair of
shears like any one else. Well, when the wool was off, and the
drays, with the few bales, started, the best cabbage-tree hat was put
on, with a new blue shirt, and down we went to see our merchants
about the fleeces to be sold. The conference was often a terrible
one. The merchant spoke in an under tone, shrugged his shoulders,
and told us that he could do no more than make an advance of Bd.
a pound, and we had to be content with this fiat. Why, with our
few sheep, this was little better than starvation. These were the
good old times as we call them, but how few there are who can now
in comfort and prosperity recall those days.
It is not so very long ago but half of us were not able to pull
through things. One of my neighbours had to leave his run be-
cause of the blacks, and many a one was smothered by taking an
advance of Bd. when the wool at home barely cleared 6d. a pound.
Thus, more than half fell away and were ruined in opening up the
new country. For those who were left behind it seemed only a
question of time. Then came the boiling down days, and after that
the diggings. We were never free from troubles, for many a long
day, neither indeed are we now, and I will only recal them to the
memory of the public in order that it may be borne in mind how
short a time it is since these things happened. What has been,
may be. If wool were to come down to the old prices, half of us
would be ruined, and the rest as poor as Lazarus.
In 1851 we got our leases. There was an Imperial Act passed,
which gave control of the waste lands to the local legislatures, and
in consequence of this, leases were granted for fourteen years. Here
one would think we were to reap the fruits of our labours, that is to
say, that in consideration of our opening up the distant bush, we
were to be rewarded by a long period of fixed tenure at a low rental.
And many do think that we have been so rewarded. Nothing, how-
ever, could be a greater error. The leases were a mere sham, and
we would have been much better without them. Nominally, they
were for fourteen years, but there was a distinct proviso enabling
the Government to cancel them, and resume the lands at only six
months’ notice, Now, I ask any person whether such a provision


did not destroy the idea of a lease or a secure tenure though it
might preserve the name. Would any man take a farm on such
terms, or rather, would not any landlord, or man of business, be
ashamed to offer it ?
It maybe said, then, Why did they take it ? Why, we could not
help ourselves. Besides, there was a clause in it which seemed at
any rate to offer some compensation for the insecurity of tenure.
In Sir Henry Young’s despatch, dated April, 1849, he said dis-
tinctly, “ When the Imperial Act comes into operation, the waste
lands will be held on lease, and as licences will be abolished, there
will be no assessment except for purposes of local revenue.” There
is some quibbling on the words “local revenue,” and many insist that
it means for the purpose of the colony generally. However, be that
as it may, the lease told us plainly enough that we were not to pay
more during the fourteen years than 10s. a square mile, so that we
consoled ourselves for the insecurity of tenure by knowing that if
we were liable to be turned off at six months’ notice, we should get
the land cheap enough until that time came. But in this we were
miserably deceived : scarcely had half the term expired, when the
Government abruptly informed us that we were to pay a further
rental in the shape of an assessment of 2d. for every sheep, Is. for
cattle, and 2s. 6d. for horses. The motion was carried, not how-
ever without much opposition, because a sense of justice actuated a
large minority of the House of Assembly. One reason, in fact, the
only one given, was, that the squatters were making money, and
could well afford this moderate assessment. I need not, I trust,
explain to men of common sense how unfair, how detrimental to
public morality, such a reason is. If this impost were a tax and
not a rent, which our wealth was the reason for laying on us, why
not be fair and straightforward, and make it an income-tax, or a
property tax, so that one class should not be more heavily dealt
with than another ; but when it is considered that our leases were
liable to be cancelled at any time, then this infringement of the
only advantage we possessed was not only unjust, and an open
violation of the rights of industry, but it was an ungrateful attempt
to take advantage of our defenceless position.
But many will say, as many have said, you must admit that you
were making large profits out of the crown lands, and you could
afford to pay even a much larger tax. In reply, I must object first,
that that is not the question. If the taxes are unfair, whether lam
able to pay five pounds or a thousand is of no consequence. You
have no right to take one sixpence from me unjustly, and if the
principles of honour are violated in my case because I am wealthy,
every man may tremble who is richer than his neighbour, whether
squatter or merchant. But, putting these considerations on one
side, and admitting that we were making large sums out of the
waste lands of the Crown, who made these lands of any value at
all ? Our wealth arises not from the fact that we occupy lands at


a low rental, but because by industry we have, amid much labour
and hardship, improved our small capital. The lands owe their
value principally to us, not only because we have explored and ren-
dered them available, but because, as every old settler will bear me
out, we have by our stock, by cultivation, and by importing Euro-
pean grasses, rendered them worth double what they were when we
first came upon them.
We learnt, therefore, from this experience about the assessment,
what we might expect from Colonial Governments when dealing
with the rights of the much abused squatters. Many, perhaps, will
think that I have laid too much stress upon the insecurity of tenure
and though the Government had the right of resuming, that it was
not often exercised. So far from this being the case, many runs in
this district, and situated nearly 300 miles from Adelaide were re-
sumed before six years of lease were expired, and at the present
moment more than 7000 square miles have been resumed at six
months’ notice. If my run has not been included in the number,
it is by the merest chance, and with the example of my neighbours
before me, I never considered my lease as affording me the slightest
security. This, then, is the case of the squatters with their boasted
advantages and immunities. We have had to struggle hard to make
the land of any value at all, and some of the fruits of our labour
have been taken from us. We have made ourselves a home in the
wilderness, and security for it has been refused to us. As tenants
we have been obliged to put up with the most unfair and exacting
tenure that ever a landlord could require. And now after these
drawbacks the leases are about to expire, and, according to a pre-
vious understanding, they are to be revalued, and let again for a
shorter term. This is the present state of the question in South
Australia, and this revaluation is the cause of all the excitement in
Adelaide and the bitterness of feeling against the squatters. There
are it appears three parties in Adelaide :—The squatters, who do
not object to pay a fair rental, provided they are treated with jus-
tice ; the Ministerial party, who wish to take as large a share of the
profits from the squatters as they possibly can ; and, lastly, the
extreme party about Adelaide, composed chiefly of new chums,
idlers, and unsuccessful speculators, who are ready to vote for any
measure which will secure them a share of the plunder, as they
think. To the latter class, fortunately, I have no occasion to address
myself. The good sense and upright feeling of the colony is against
the prevalence of their counsels. It is astonishing, however, how
much of the excitement is due to the agitation of these men. To
them we owe the animosity shown by one section of the Press,
They are the authors of the anonymous correspondence filled with
absurd calculations as to our profits, which would make us smile if
we were not sadly sure that all these things help to influence the
cupidity of the public. I have no occasion to answer these, for
the interests of society in the protection of property is our safeguard


against them. Their motto is Envy, and their watchword
Plunder.
I desire, however, to deal calmly with those who wish to take as
large a portion of our profits as they possibly can. The ground
they take is this. “ You squatters, ” they tell us, “ are tenants. The
Crown has leased you a certain portion of land, which you, at your
risk, have improved upon. Your lease is now expired, and we are
going to make you pay a higher rental. It is true your improve-
ments have very much increased the value of your land, but we will
make you allowance for that in the rent we shall charge you. You
have no right to complain of a high rental, because you have had
fourteen years undisturbed possession, and you know very well that
every landlord, in renewing a lease, thinks himself perfectly justified
in renting it at the increased value of the property.”
Now with reference to this very plausible statement, I have only
to say, that there is no parallel between our case and that of an
ordinary landlord and tenant. What may be very fair for a private
individual, becomes altogther different when exercised by a govern-
ment towards members of its community.
The government administers the laws and imposes the taxes for
the benefit of the whole. It is not in the position of a landlord
bound to get as much as ever he can for his property. In reality the
government does not own property at all. It belongs to the com-
munity, of which the squatters form as much a part as any other
section. Its duty is not to see how much, but how little it can do
with in the way of revenue, so as not to interfere with any interest
or damage the resources of the country. No one will deny the
squatters and those depending upon squatting for their livelihood,
form a very large portion of the community, and no one will deny
further, that wool is one of the staple productions of the colony.
Now, if we can prove that the proposed action of the government
will nearly destroy one of the largest resources of the colony, and
materially damage the interests of a considerable section of the
community, then the parallel between the government and squatters
and landlords and tenants vanishes at once. Many, perhaps,
will not follow me in this train of argument, but every one will
admit this simple proposition, that the government must not injure
the interests of any one portion of the community, unless for the
manifest advantage of the majority. Here we come to a very clear
issue, which simplifies the matter in dispute. On the one hand,
the government says we are not injuring your interests, though we
diminish your profits, and, secondly, the general welfare of the
majority is a sufficient guarantee for what we propose to do. We,
on the other hand, say, you are injuring our interests, and, secondly,
no benefit to the community will result from what you propose.
As to the first point, we ought to be the best judges as to whether
this tax will be injurious to our interests or not. We are both
interested parties, and our statement is as much entitled to credit as


yours. The best plan in such a case is to appeal to facts, and this
I gladly do, for the sake of showing, from actual experience, what
fallacies have been palmed off on the public in this matter. My
run has an area of 190,000 acres, the number of sheep upon it is
30,000. This, you perceive, is exactly four acres to the sheep. At
the rate of sixpence an acre, this would be two shillings a sheep.
Under the most favorable circumstances, that is to say, with very
high prices for wool, and a fair market value for the carcase, no sheep
ever produce the squatter, on an average, after deducting losses, more
than three shillings annually. What is to pay working expenses
out of the residue? “But” says my opponent, “who is going to charge
sixpence an acre ? If your run will only carry a sheep to four acres
it must be a very bad one, and that circumstance will be taken into
consideration.” But this is what I don’t believe. My run is not
such a bad one, and judging from what has been done in other
places, it is not unlikely that its carrying capabilities will be over-
rated. It is all very well to tell me not to call out until the mischief
is done. It will be too late then, and I wish to protest against the
evil as far as it has been pursued hitherto. I say, emphatically,
from the very facts afforded by the Surveyor-General in his eighteen
valuations, that the capabilities of the runs have been over estimated.
Take the instance of Dutton’s run, north-west of Kapunda. It is
admitted to he only a winter run, because of the want of water. A
charge of £l4O is made, because the run is estimated to carry 2500
sheep. Yet it is obvious that if the run will only carry 2500 sheep
for six months, 1250 sheep, or half that number should be the
estimated capability for the whole year. Will any one tell me that
1250 sheep will enable a person to pay, with a profit, a rent of £l4O ?
I know I could not if the land is anything like mine. I can con-
ceive no justification even in the extremest case for such a rent
being charged by the government. The public will better under-
stand the case from the ruinous effects of even a tax of threepence
an acre on my run, which I repeat is considered a very fair run by
my neighbours in the district where I reside. The property is
divided into paddocks, and named according to the native names of
the principal places in them. The Cadgee paddock contains 28,800
acres, and is estimated to carry 4,000 sheep all the year round, but it
must be borne in mind, that without fencing, it would certainly not
carry more than 2,000. The country looks good, but not being drain-
able is occupied byimmenseswampsin winter,andthehigher grounds
are covered with stringy hark forest. In round numbers the rent I
should have to pay for this paddock, at only threepence an acre,
would be £340. The improvements in the paddock amount to
£1305. That is to say for fencing, and sinking a well. Now, how
are four thousand sheep to pay the interest on this outlay, and the
rent I have just mentioned ? Another paddock named the Gap
paddock, contains 26.000 acres, and being rather drier than the last
carries 5,000 sheep. But it is a kind of country into which a shepherd


would not think of going. So that without fencing, 2000 sheep would
be a high estimate of its depasturing capabilities. The value of im-
provements in this padddock, which I have made, amounts to
£1417 10s, At threepence an acre the rent would be £325.
Ten per cent, on the improvements would amount to £l4l 15s,
So that £460 would have to be cleared, or very nearly two shillings
a sheep, in order to pay even my rent, to say nothing of the
working expenses, and the losses to which every one is subject.
It should be mentioned, too, that the fact of fencing does not de-
crease the expenses of working a station, but only increases the
number of sheep enabled to depasture. Instead of shepherds we
have to get boundary riders, who are provided with horses, and from
the nature of their duties require a higher rate of wages ; I can
generally get shepherds at from fifteen to eighteen shillings per
week, but all my boundary men get £65 per annum.
Let me put these calculations, however, in another way. The
amount of stock in the whole of the south-eastern district is in
round numbers 1,000,000 sheep, 35,000 cattle, and 9,000 horses.
Estimate the whole value of these at £BOO,OOO, and that, you per-
ceive, is allowing much more than ten shillings as the value of
a sheep. The interest to be derived from station property is at the
outside 13 per cent., that is after deducting costs and expenses. The
interest of £BOO,OOO at that rate would be £104,000. Now to what
rate would the government reduce the profits by an average of six-
pence an acre on the whole district ? To less than one-half! Sixpence
an acre on the counties of Robe, Grey, and McDonnell alone would
amount to £50,000. So that the proposed assessment would leave
us less profit on our capital, than we should get by investing in
government debentures, for the assessment for the district would be
over £75,000. Supposing, however, that it was only one-half, that is
threepence an acre or eight pounds a square mile, the rent would
amount to £42,500, leaving us 4 per cent, less than bank interest.
Now I ask two questions on these facts. Will it be a beneficial thing
for the government to throw such impediments in the way of private
enterprise, that the return from station property shall realize less
than the government gives for its loans; or in other words, shall
the people pay a higher interest for loans than they could realize
themselves. It is true that the burden will fall only on one intex-est;
well, this proves my point. If any one interest can return less profit
than other branches of industry it is thereby mined. The other
questioxx I ask is this : —Have you any right to say to any class—we
intend to devote half of your profits to the pui-poses of genei’al
revenue ? Every man of fairness will admit that one-fourth of the
profits is more thaxx should be in justice demanded, and yet if we
proposed a rental of only l-|d. our pi’oposition would be x’eceived
with ridicule. What, howevei’, is the result of these calculations as
applied to myself. If lam asked to pay £2O a squai’e mile, or 7 Jd.
an aci’e, my rent would be £3740. At 6d. an aci’e, I should have


to pay £3OOO a year. The other rates can be calculated, hut I ask
how am I to pay expenses and such a rent with 30,000 sheep and
800 head of cattle ?
The mention of cattle brings me to another calculation with refe-
rence to them. Every one knows that they are not so profitable as
sheep, but I will just briefly show what they are likely to cost, and
how profitable an assessment of 6d. an acre is likely to prove in their
case. A. run fitted to carry 5000 head of cattle must comprise
80,000 acres, all good, the rent of which would be £2,000. It
would be a very good run if the owner could send 800 fat cattle to
market every year, and he would be lucky if they averaged £4 a
head. This would leave him £I2OO out of the sale after deducting
rent. From this take overseer and rations, £l5O, stockkeeper and
rations, £IOO, married couple and rations, the same, which brings his
profits to £BSO. Supposing that he had started with 1000 head of
cattle at £4OOO, with £IOOO added for home station, huts, yards,
&c., besides £2OO for working material, it would be five years at the
very least before he would send any cattle at all except, perhaps, a
few steers on the third and fourth years. Look at his outlay mean-
while, and calculate the interest at the end of ten years his profit
would amount to. It would be found not to have paid 6 per cent.,
and, more than that, the first tew mobs of fat cattle would be sold at
an actual loss on the outlay. Now, you will say—but at the end of
ten years he would commence to receive profit. What profit ? Five
thousand head of cattle, returning £I2OO per annum clear profit!
Why, that is, valuing the cattle at £4 per head, just 6 per cent.
I trust, therefore, I need say no more to convince any sensible
man that the revaluation, as proposed will be destructive to the
pastoral interests. It has been urged as an argument against us
that the prices at which runs are continually sold is a proof of the
value we set upon the runs. It is argued that if a run is sold at £1
per sheep, that 10s. of that represents the value of the stock, and
the other 10s. goes for the goodwill of the crown lands. I say that
this method of calculation is most unfair. In the first place, the
price of a small flock of store sheep for the market is no criterion
as to the value of a large and complete series of sheep of all ages fit
for the purposes of breeding and the growth of wool. Then again,
after deducting the price of the stock, what remains does not repre-
sent alone the value of the goodwill of the land. It represents not
only the improvements, which comprise houses, furniture, gardens,
vineyards, orchards, &c., but also working stock, such as woolsheds
and presses, and often valuable imported stock for the improvement
of the breeds of horses, cattle, and sheep. As a proof of what I say,
I can assert that settlers have been often offered £2 a head for small
flocks of picked sheep, and as for myself I am sure I would not take
£4 per head for 200 or even 50 of my half-bred Negretti sheep. So
that it is wrong to say that 10s. represents the value of the sheep;
at least with those who are expending large sums in improving the


stock, and that includes nearly all the settlers of the district. In
any case, however, the present price demanded for sheep runs is an
unfair standard which only the present high price of wool and stock
can justify. In many cases they have obtained a fictitious value,
and some of the instances quoted against us I can only characterize
as instances of rash speculation, which an alteration in the price of
wool will convert into disastrous loss. Great stress has been laid
upon an instance which has occurred near Adelaide of a sheep farmer
giving £I3OO for the use of twenty thousand acres of purchased
land. This is an example, upon the merits of which, of course, I
cannot argue fully, because 1 do not know the locality, and am not
acquainted with the nature of the soil, neither can I tell the particular
advantages which the place offered to the lessee to enable him to
give such a rental. One thing, however, I do know, and that is,
that purchased land offers an immense advantage to the sheep
farmer over that which he obtains from the crown. The lessee can
cultivate it, and sell the produce, which he cannot do with Crown
land; he can Jay it down in wheat, vines, or any other thing he
pleases. Best of all, he has security of tenure, which the Crown
would never give him. With even all these advantages I can say,
conscientious!}', that I would not give half the amount for 20,000
acres on my run. Here, then, I have done with the question as to
whether the new valuations will injure the squatters or not. The
facts I have given have reference to more than myself, in proof of
which I may state that the south-eastern district of South
Australia is considered one of its most fertile provinces. The ex-
treme south end is divided into three counties, viz., MacDonnel,
Kobe, and Grey ; these counties do not, by any means, include the
whole of the leased land, since considerable portions of the best
grassed country is to be found in the North. The amount of stock
in the district is a million. Now supposing all the stock were able
to feed in the three counties, which they are not, fully a third being
outside them, this would be four acres to every sheep, for these
counties contain four million acres. No one complains that our
runs here are not stocked, in fact, the complaint has been the other
way. An assessment of threepence on these three counties, will
represent more than the value of the wool exported from the whole
district, as by an appeal to statistics, I shall presently show.
We are frequently told that we can well afford to pay a high
assessment, because in Victoria they do not object to pay as high a
rate as eightpence a sheep, but I say, at once, no comparison can
be instituted between the colonies of Victoria and South Australia.
One acre in Victoria, of average quality, is better than two of the
average in South Australia. In the shape of better markets,
abundance of water, and a better climate for sheep farm-
ing, producing more wool by nearly a pound, Victoria has a
manifest advantage over South Australia, not only in this respect,
but the land is better, and there is more of it, in proportion to the


srcub In proof of this I call attention to the following figures.
The area of Victoria is 55,000,000 of acres, out of which, over
41,000,000 are let for squatting purposes, depasturing 8,000,000
sheep, 500,000 cattle, and 34,00(J head of horses. The area of South
Australia is 300,000,000 acres, of which 31,500,000 are let on lease,
depasturing 3,500,000 sheep, 56,000 horses, and 350,000 cattle.
From these figures it appears that two-thirds of the country in
Victoria is fit for occupation, whereas only one-tenth is available in
South Australia, and that five acres to the sheep suffices in Victoria,
whereas seven are necessary in the other colony. So much, therefore,
for the pretended parallel between our case and that of the Squatters
of Victoria. I need not dwell, further, upon the advantages of
markets, &c., because every sensible man must see that the neigh-
bouring colony gives, in that respect, incalculable advantages to the
squatter. In Mew South Wales the experiment has been tried of
leasing the lands to the highest bidder, and yet with all their
advantages nothing near twopence an acre was obtained for the
best. The average of all the leases was a little over a pound a
square mile.
I have dealt, perhaps, rather at too great length in proof that the
valuation is injurious to the squatter, because it is in excess of
what the land will produce. lam now to prove that it is an injury
to the community, which is not justified by the necessities of
the colony. No one doubts that the largest article of export is
the wool, the only articles which come at all near it being minerals
and wheat. In 1863, the copper and other minerals exported from
South Australia were valued at £547,619. The breadstuffs, grain,
&c., at £633,241, The wool at £635,270. From this it appears that
the wool is the most valuable article that we have to export from this
colony. The farming interest employs about 12,000, while 8,000
are employed in connection with stations, that is to say taking into
consideration every description of labour, such as wool carriers
and carters, generally to and from ports to the squatting dis-
tricts, and the adult population of those towns, such as Penola, Nar-
racoorte, &c,, are exclusively dependent upon squatters for their
employment. Mining only employs 3000. The mining interest
it would appear only employs one labourer for £3OO pounds
of export. Agriculture, a labourer for every £SO, and squatting
one for every £BO. It must not be thought, however, that the
present rate of employment is by any means in proportion to what
it will be. Every year enables us to find an increased hold for our
exertions, to develop our means for employing labour. Now it does
not require any wisdom to point out, that anything which interferes
with so large an interest must be very prejudicial to the colony at
large. Suppose the revaluations do not prevent the squatter from
following his avocation, as I am afraid it will, it will at least run so
close to his profits, that he would be obliged to reduce his expenditure
to the narrowest possible limit. He will employ little or no labour,


and cease developing the prosperity of the country, by improving the
value of its lands. And if, as easily may happen, a notable fall should
take place in wool, absolute ruin will be the result, not to him alone,
but to the country. The public are, perhaps, not aware to what extent
the lands of the country have become security in the banks. Scarcely
a single squatter has purchased 3,000 acres of his ground, that has
not done so by mortgaging the deeds to a bank. His only hope of ever
paying this money back, is by the continuance of a high price for
wool, and moderate rental from the government. One of these ex-
pectations has been disappointed, and another may be. And once
the banks apply pressure, a general insolvency will result. These
anticipations may be lightly estimated, but let the public examine
the facts upon which they are based, before they treat them as
gloomy forebodings without foundation. You cannot oppress an
important section of the community, without its effects being felt
by the whole. You cannot attack capital without injuring labour
too, and paralyzing industry.
I have not touched yet upon the most important point of this
proposed measure, and that is with reference to the improvements.
It is proposed in the new valuations to make a certain allowance in
them for improvements that have been put upon the runs by the
lessees. At the end of five years these allowances are to be discon-
tinued, and the improvements will become the property of the
Government. Now, what will be the effect of this measure ? It
will simply stop all improvements throughout the country.*
Is this a wise measure —to say nothing of its justice? Is it an
advantage to the colony, or is it not, to have the lands improved ?
It used to be a proverb—that the man who made a blade of grass
grow where none grew before was a benefactor to the human race.
Without going to this extreme, it will not be disputed that the
whole colony benefits by every shilling and every day’s labour ex-
pended on the waste lands. Who is likely to continue improve-
ments when at the end of five years they are to cease to be his. It
has been objected to us—that we do not employ sufficient labour in
proportion to the revenue we derive from the crown lands ; but a
most effectual means is now being taken to make the amount next
to nothing. Our grand object must be, if we can keep on our runs,
* While these sheets were passing through the press the House of Assembly
passed a Bill to allow squatters for their improvements by deducting one fifth of
the rental every year for the next five years. It is also proposed to allow for
improvements made during the renewed term. The latter clause would be a real
boon to the labouring classes if the rents were not made so high that there is
little probability of the leaseholders making any more improvements, or, indeed,
of their doing anything except trying to save and reimburse themselves for the
capital which they now believe they have wasted upon a country governed as it
is with so little security for property from popular agitation. As the Bill has
not passed the Upper House, I have nothing to alter in the above statements,
especially as the Bill does not propose to give value for the improvements unless
the squatter abandons them to the Government,


to work them as cheaply as possible, and to stop all outlay from
which we are to get no adequate return. Of course, under any cir-
cumstances, we must employ much less labour if we possibly hope
to pay the extravagant rental put upon us, but when, in addition to
this, all improvements are stopped, the outlying districts will be-
come almost depopulated. For my own part, I should have con-
tinued to make improvements as I have hitherto done, and my
neighbours will admit, or the figures will show on what an extensive
scale that has been. But I shall certainly stop now. I don’t see
how common prudence will justify me in doing otherwise, and I
suppose that ray neighbours throughout the country will do like-
wise, So that the effect of this measure will be not only to injure
the resources of the country, by stopping the employment of labour
and capital upon it, but it will cripple its industry, and injure the
labourers, more even than the squatters. Nor is this the only evil.
The colony will lose the benefit of what has been already done.
Unless the tenants of the Crown are assured that they will receive
compensation for their improvements, naturally enough they will
allow them to go into ruin. Who would replace a broken panel ?
when a bit of brush will answer the purpose as well; since it is
only for a year or so. Who will keep his wells in thorough repair,
when to get water from them for a year or two is all that he wants ?
Thus the expenditure of vast sums will be utterly lost to the
country. A most extraordinary line of argument has been adopted
with reference to these same improvements. It is said by the advo-
cates for their confiscation that the squatters have already more than
paid themselves for their outlay upon the runs. Fencing in, for
instance, has brought such large profits that the capital employed
in their construction has been repaid, and a large interest upon it
as well. So far as concerns myself, this is not true, and I believe
it has no more truth in my neighbours’ case than in my own. The
statement is simply preposterous, and made without the slightest
knowledge of the tacts of the case. As a means of increasing the
profits on our capital they have no doubt been useful, but to say
they have returned both principal and interest in the few short
years, is simply absurd. It is no doubt to such false conclusions
that the present fabulous conceptions of the wealth of squatters are
owing. But even were the statement true it is singularly beside the
purpose. Supposing we have made such large profits on our im-
provements, is that any reason why they should be taken away from
us. If we had cleared the outlay over and over again, we should
still have a better right to them than any one else. It was our
capital and our labour that made them of any value at all, and is
there any reason or justice in stepping in to seize them because
they are worth the taking. It is authority and might and not
justice which steps up to say—Here, you rich squatters, you have
had enough profit out of your capital, we mean to take a portion of
it whether you like it or not. As far as I have seen, this is the only


argument which, under the name of reasoning, seeks to justify a
seizure of our property. If the question of improvements were to
be decided according to English law, the Government would find
themselves obliged to make compensation for improvements. It is
the same in Scotland, and one of the greatest causes of Ireland’s
decline has been the observance of a contrary practice.
Hitherto I have been only speaking of the improvements made
upon the land, but the improvements in stock have caused an
enormous outlay to nearly every settler. I have paid over £2OO for
an imported ram and ewe, and stock generally has cost me in the
same proportion. No one doubts that such importations are a
benefit to the country as well as the squatter. Not only will they
be stopped now because under an enormous rent we cannot afford
to pay such prices, but because there will be no inducement to im-
prove property which is so insecurely held.
For all these reasons I protest most earnestly against these
new valuations. They ai’e unreasonable and they are un-
fair. They will bring ruin upon the squatter, as I most con-
scientiously assert, and they will bring disaster upon the country,
by depressing an interest which furnishes at least a third of the
exports. They will make the bush no longer a refuge for the
working man. They will stop the employment of labour and
capital in the country, and finally they will shake the confi-
dence in the colony as a field for investment. It is a bad sign
of the morality which dictates this movement to hear it said, as we
do so often—that the squatters have had good times and must now
disgorge a portion of their wealth. It is true we occupy the crown
lands, but that does not justify the Government in dealing unfairly
with its tenants. The fact of the matter is, we are capitalists who
have the misfortune to be in the power of a Legislature elected by
universal suffrage, and representing the unmoneyed classes. Let
me then address an appeal to them. If a tax upon capital be your
object, deal fairly with us, and do not raise it from one class more
than another. Make it a property tax, and then we will cheerfully
bear our part if the wants of the country require an increased taxa-
tion. These wants have not been made clear to us, for it has not
been shown why such a heavy impost should be laid on at all. If
it must be so, we will pay our share, but in the name of equity we
have a right to demand that it should fall equally on all. Why should
the miners export £547,000 worth of property, and pay no annual
tax, and yet the squatters who export very little more, and yet em-
ploy four times the amount of labour, be singled out to contribute
the largest share of their profits to the revenue.
It is unjust, as well as impolitic, and such an unequal burden
will make itself felt generally. The squatters already pay £77,000
to the revenue. What do the other interests pay ? What does the
mining interest pay, or the mercantile interest, or the farming
interest ? But, it will be said—you are using our lands. Yes, and


you are making that an excuse for laying an enormous tax upon our
capital, and seizing the improvements which, trusting to your good
faith we have expended our money upon. We have no objection to
pay a fair rent for the lands upon which you lay so much stress,
hut if you want to tax capital, w r e must object to being singled out
moi’c than any other class. But, it will be said—what do you call
a fair rent ? because this is the point on which we differ. Well,
this is what I should propose. Let the Government tax the sheep
and not the land. A land tax must always be unfair, because it
allows no safe means for our ascertaining what is the value of the
lessee’s capital. Some runs may carry a sheep to every two acres
and others will not carry a sheep to every eight. An assessment
upon the stock must necessarily be the fairest, and there can be no
difficulty in arriving at the necessary facts.
I would propose, then, that a tax of sixpence a head on all the
sheep, and three shillings for horses and cattle. Let this rate be
adopted for the next five years, and then let the leases expire, the
lessee receiving full value for his improvements, unless for those
who choose to renew them, for fourteen years, at an additional third,
or ninepence. One valuator should be appointed by the squatter
and another by the Government, with power to appoint an
umpire. No one can say that this proposition is not fair and rea-
sonable. The rental to be collected from this district alone, at the
first mentioned rate, w r ould be £32,000, or more than one-fourth of
the extremest limit of our profits. Surely the government cannot
demand more for what they give us. No other government demands
so much. No other government demands half what we offer for
twice as much. It is a bad instance of the undue pressure brought
to bear upon one class, that they should be obliged to make such an
offer at all. A fair rental I should consider even less than this, but
I am obliged to base my offer, not upon what ought to be, but wffiat
we are likely to obtain. I fear even this concession will be of no
avail. I should be sorry, however, to think the dreams of possess-
ing wealth, as great as ours is imagined to be, should deaden the
feelings of all my fellow colonists to what is right and just. I have
stated my case simply and truly, and I leave it to the consideration
of every honest man, whether my class, which helps the colony to
thrive and prosper, should be dealt with as the government now
propose. If self interests still render the answer doubtful, let me
ask would they wish the same measure to be meted to themselves ?


I a / h •'"1 /<n rTff /ft
m SI
''W /
Karr
\J
APPENDIX I
iM.&o
■X>
The following Table is added to show the extravagant assessment
per sheep as far as the valuations have hitherto gone, and also to
prove the curious irregularity of the valuator who charges Is, per 'OO
sheep in some cases, 2s. in others, with every intermediate gradation.
No better proof ot the unsatisfactory and unfair nature of the “acre 4 ’ *
system” could be given : ' > ‘ K ■
Name of Run. No of Total Rate
Square „ ' Annual Sheep
Miles. anee V' Value. p Acre.
£
World’s End ... 34 7,480 680 21-8
Burra Creek ... 42 8,400 672 19-2
Dutton’s Murray Flat - - 150 .30,000 3,000 24 0
Baldina .... 28 5,600 476 20'4
Baldina North ... 33 5,940 528 21-3
Butaloo .... 57 10,260 798 18 7
Booyoolee .... 194 49,470 3,298 16'0
Hope’s Run, Broughton - 95 19,000 1,520 19-2
Mananarie .... 98 20,090 1,508 18*7
Tungala - ... 42 9,240 756 19>6
Crystal Brook - . . 285 57,000 5,130 21’6
Bundaleer ... 312 90,480 7,800 20‘7
Canowie .... 140 44,800 4,200 22'5
Booboorowie ... 28 8,960 840 22'6
Anama and Bungaree • - 217 41,230 3,906 22‘7
Hill River ... 50 15,000 1,000 24‘0
McDiermids ... 19 3,515 342 23'4
Murray Scrub... 20 2,500 160 15'4
Mount Ryan ... lo 1,700 210 212
Caroona.... 58 5,800 290 ■ 12‘0
Munjibbee .... 31 6,200 465 IH-0
Woocongarie ... 31 6,975 496 17 0
Gortbib’s Wells ... 93 18,135 1,520 19*6
Eldoratilla ... 84 13,608 800 14-1
Nackara .... 12 1,620 84 12'4
Black Rock ... 38 4,180 j 228 13-1
Mitchelli .... 68 11,220 820 17-5
Pekina .... 320 43,200 4,000 22'2
Hummocks - . . 251 51,455 | 5,020 23-4
Gleeson’s Middle Run - 55 6,765 I 570 19 5
Mount Templeton - - 4 400 56 19 2
Dunn’s .... 5 400 51 10s. 19*3
Old Telowie ... 15 2,400 165 16-5
New Telowie ... 28 4,592 j 327 Bs. 17-1
Average - - .. ' .. 19-2
A“A (A fatingzAwl cJrv-
ry ****** jgfi&aaylre


APPENDIX 11.
The following correspondence needs no comment to prove the
arbitrary and unjust manner in which the new valuations have been
made, and with what a total disregard of every reasonable request
on the part of the squatter. It will be seen that in every case the
leaseholders prove that Mr. Goyder was not in possession of the
true facts of the case, and had neither time nor observation suffi-
cient to form a true estimate of the value of the runs in question.
The allegations are supported by facts, to all of which Mr. Goyder
gives little more than bis word as a denial, and will not reconsider
the cases :
Kooringa, August 24, 1864,
Sib, — Seeing from the list of valuations of pastoral leases expiring in June, 1865,
that Mr. Goyder has estimated the grazing capacity of our Block No. 7, at the
World’s End, at 220 sheep per mile, instead of 125 as heretofore, we are compelled
to apply to you for an investigation, as there is manifestly either an error in judg-
ment or figures, the run in question being fully stocked with the lower number, viz,,
125. Hoping you will kindly institute enquiry,
We have, &c.,
WARE & CHAPMAN,
The Hon. Chief Secretary, Adelaide.
Memo. —We purchased the World’s End run in April, 1862, fully stocked, at 255.
per head, with the full belief that, on the falling in of our leases, we should obtain
the five years’ renewal at about the same rent and assessment; but we are now asto-
nished to see, by Mr. Goyder’s list, that the run is considered capable of carrying
nearly twice the number of sheep, which is impossible, as the estimate was fully
high before, and we are expected to pay nearly fourteen times as much, which in
our case amounts to confiscation—showing that Mr. Goyder must be in error, either
in judgment or figures.
Kooringa, September 10, 1864.
Sib, —Having seen Mr. Goyder’s late valuations made public in detail, and find-
ing that several of his statements in connexion with our run at the World’s End are
incorrect, we ary sorry to have again to trouble you to enquire into the matter. In
the first place, Mr. Godyer says at the time of his visiting the run there were about
6,000 sheep and several horses on it. There were only about 5,000 sheep, the half
of which were removed very shortly after, and about twelve horses. He then says
our head station and woolshed are on the north bank of the creek, showing that he
could not have been particular in examining the place, as the head-station and wool-
shed are on opposite sides of the creek, and nearly half a mile apart. Distance
from Adelaide he gives as eighty-five miles; it is fully ninety-five. What he states
to be low, bare, and scrubby rises are on the south side of the creek, known to be


about the roughest country in the colony—in fact, dangerous to ride over, and of
course perfectly useless. He gives the area of scrub at three miles; it is nearer ten.
The spring he speaks of in the range as being enough for a flock is so close to the
creek as not to be required, and has never been opened up or proved to be capable
of watering any number of sheep. The well at the south end is 140 instead of 100
feet, and no supply of water. He says the whole of the country can be fed from the
creek, with the exception of five square miles. Now the country running down
south is a narrow strip, and the boundary being ten miles from the creek, renders
this simply impossible. The distance from the station to Kapunda he gives as thirty-
five miles ;it is fully forty-five. He states that the run is now understocked, and
that several thousand sheep were sold to rest the country. Where he got his infor-
mation from we are unable to judge, as having received no intimation of his visit,
neither of us were at home when he called. We have certainly sold sheep, as every
other squatter does ;we have bred and bought others. We deny that we are “ spell-
ing” the country, and can only repeat our former assertion that the run will not carry
more than it was formerly estimated to do, viz., 125 sheep to the mile, making a
total of 4,250, instead of 7,500. We are working altogether about 120 square miles
of country, and can only shear from 11,000 to 12,000 sheep, including lambs.
The facts which we have here stated we are prepared to prove at any time. We
hope, therefore, you will excuse our troubling you, and will be good enough to see
that Mr. Goyder’s statements are rectified.
Meantime, we have, &c„
WARE & CHAPMAN.
The Hon. Commissioner of Crown Lands,
[Endorsement on above.']
The statement that the head-station is on the north side of the Burra Creek and the
woolshed on the south is correct. It will be seen thus in my plan and sketches of
the run.
My statement that all the stock upon the run can be watered from the Burra Creek,
with the exception of about five miles on the south end of the run, is correct, as may
be seen by the accompanying plan, which accurately delineates the nature of the
country.
I gained my information respecting the stock depastured and stock sold, and cir-
cumstances under which sale was effected, from the person who accompanied me,
and who was in the employ of the writers. This person also informed me that the
portion of the run west of the Burra Range or south of the Burra Creek had been
transferred and was fed over by stock belonging to Messrs. Duflleld and Porter. No
legal transfer has, however, been made ; consequently it belongs to the run, and has
been included accordingly. Of this fact the writers make no mention. The country,
with ordinary management, can easily be made to carry the stock estimated; even
the south end can be fed over in winter by the cartage of water to the huts.
No one can sympathise more than I do with persons situated like the writers ;
but I imagine that if they purchased the run from Mr. McDonnell on the guaranteed
understanding that no additional rent would be charged, they have their remedy. I
can only commiserate their error. The run, with improvements, is valued by me
at £2O per square mile, or 7£d. per acre. This I consider a most liberal valuation.
What, I would respectfully ask, would be thought of a valuation under that amount,
when lands in the same vicinity, of no better average value, and with but an annual
tenure, realise from £3O to £5O per square mile ? Though sympathising with the
writers in the error they have committed, my duty is to deal with the land—not the
present lessees—and I see no reason whatever to depart from the valuation named.
G. W. GOYDER,
Surveyor-General and Valuator.
September 10, 1864.


Baldina, September 7, 1864.
Sir, — I see by tbe published list of valuation of pastoral leases expiring in June,
1865. that Mr. Goyder has estimated the grazing capacity of my Block, No. 33, on
the Baldina Creek, at 180 sheep per mile, instead of 155 as before. lam compelled
to apply to you for an investigation, as there is manifestly an error, the block in
question being fully stocked with the lesser number, viz., 155.
I would further bring to your notice the fact that the eastern portion of the block
referred to being composed of mallee scrub, from which the Burra is chiefly sup-
plied, is cut up in every direction by innumerable roads made by the wood-carters,
and my having to find grass for the working bullocks belonging to these parties ;
also, tbe fact of large numbers of overland sheep passing over my run during tbe
best of the season, for which I would humbly submit I am entitled to consideration.
Hoping you will institute enquiry,
I have, &c.,
ADFEED BAKEE.
The Hon. the Chief Secretary, Adelaide.
[Endorsement on above.]
The circumstances named by the writer were all considered by me, and the nature
of the country delineated on the plan. I consider the run liberally valued to the
lessee at AT6per square mile, or 6d per acre. I can recommend no reduction.
G. W. GOYDEE,
Surveyor-General and Valuator.
September, 19, 1864.
Kooringa, September 1, 1864.
Sir, —We take tbe liberty of addressing you in reference to the renewal of our
pastoral lease, No. 22, at Baldina, containing twenty-eight square miles.
We wish to show you that the carrying capabilities of the same are considerably
over-estimated by Mr. Goyder.
Adjoining this twenty-eight block we have twenty-four miles more, making a total
of fifty two miles, on which we have had for the past year 6,000 sheep, and in the
month of May of this year, in consequence of the scarcity of grass, we had to make
arrangements with a neighbour for depasturing of a flock of ewes and lambs on a
portion of his run; and but for this arrangement our increase must have been
reduced one-half.
Doubtless you are aware of the fact that from 100,000 to 150,000 sheep leave the
North annually for the other colonies. The whole of these pass through this claim
(No. 22) from the west boundary to the eastern, a distance of some twelve miles.
For tbe whole of this distance the feed, for a mile to a mile and a half in width, is
either eaten or destroyed by these travelling sheep, they being generally three days
on the run. This will show you what becomes of nearly one-half of the grass that
grows on the twenty-eight mile block. It is true there are two running creeks on
this claim ; but so close together that one would answer every purpose, the water
of neither extending more than three miles into the run, and that through the nar-
rowest part of it.
Before fixing the rental for the next five years we trust the Government will give
due consideration to our remarks, whom we ask whether tbe valuations of Mr.
Goyder in our case are or are not “ manifestly unjust.”
We are, &c.,
F. & C. W. COWPEB.
To the Hon. the Commissioner of Crown Lauds, Adelaide.


[.Endorsement on preceding .]
The circumstances named by the writers are all alluded to in my report. Were
evidence called upon the subject it would only tend to show the liberal nature of
the valuation made, I cannot propose any reduction.
G. W. GOYDER,
Surveyor-General and Valuator.
September 19, 1864.
Adelaide, September 13, 1864.
Sir, —Without caring to review the statements put forth by political agitators on
the question of re-valuation of pastoral leases, and freely admitting that the Surveyor-
General, and the Ministry to whom he is accountable, are actuated by the most
sincere desire to do justice, according to their ability and the knowledge within their
reach, I feel it due to the government, to the public, and to myself, not merely to as-
sert, but to prove by incontrovertible facts that it is impossible for any one man—no
matter how talented—to arrive at anything like an approach to a fair valuation of the
waste lands of this province—an estimate which cannot be correctly made without
careful examination of the land, minute enquiry as to numbers of stock depastured
thereon, average annual value of produce, cost of management, cost of transit of
produce to market, amount of capital invested in stock, working plant, stores, and
improvements, and number of years during which these operations have been carried
on without any profit to the lessees.
I know, by dearly-bought experience, that a skilful manager of stock and stations
in the south-east is useless in the north, A man who works profitably on one side
of a range makes serious losses on the other—not 50 miles from the scene of his
successful management. A man who well understands grass country is lost among
saltbush; and yet a former Commissioner of Crown Lands has remitted this com-
plicated and important valuation to one man—the Surveyor-General—a gentleman of
great skill and integrity in his department, who has for many years enjoyed the respect
and confidence of myself, and of most people with whom he comes in contact,
officially or otherwise. Still, admitting the undoubted worth and ability of this
gentleman, I need not go far to demonstrate that he (whether from lack of time,
want of reliable information, or other causes) has already sent in some very erroneous
information.
Valuations of Canowie Run, Lease No 129, as assessed in 1864, 140 square miles;
total rent and assessment, £396 13s. 4d.; estimated carrying capabilty, 250 sheep
per square mile—which was excessive, inasmuch as the run never did or could carry
the number; still the lessees paid it rather than incur the cost of trouble and appeal.
The same run is valued in May last, for the contemplated five years’ renewal of
lease, thus—l4o square miles, at 320 sheep per mile; improvements, £5,887; value
per mile, £3O; annual value, £4,200; annual rental, allowing for improvements,
£3,080; leased on the assumption that in the month of May, 1864, there were de-
pasturing on the run of 166 miles, 49,000 sheep, besides a few cattle and horses;
estimating the 140 miles now under lease to carry, in average seasons, 45,000 sheep,
or 320 sheep per mile—an excess of 70 sheep per mile over the previously supposed,
and 106 sheep per mile over the real ascertained carrying capability of the run in an
unusually favorable season, and that after taking away 26 square miles of by far the
best grassed and watered portion of the run. Forty-nine thousand sheep 1 Sir,
there never were 40,000 sheep on the Canowie Run any day in any year since it was
discovered.
In October, 1863, the whole run of 166 square miles carried to shearing about
35,000 sheep and 14,500 sucking lambs. Immediately after shearing we commenced
selling surplus stock; the sales, consumption for rations, deaths, and losses, reduced
the stock of sheep and lambs by 31st December to 41,6 1 5; and being still overstocked,
we sold a flock of 2,093. Rations, deaths, and losses reduced the stock by May


(commencement of the lambing season) to 38,373, being by far the largest number
with which the whole run of 166 square miles has ever begun a lambing season—say
231 per square mile.
The 26 square miles resumed in the Hundred of Anne, by far the best grassed and
watered portion of the run (nearly all the waters in which, except the reserve for
travelling stock, are in my freehold) carried at that date 321 sheep per square mile,
or 8,362 —thus reducing the actual stock of sheep and lambs on the run of 140
square miles to 30,011, or about 214 per square mile, which, at an estimated rental
of £4,200, gives about 2s. 9id. per sheep per annum, on a lease resumable at six
months’ notice, 90 miles from the nearest shipping port, and the run being at the
time so heavily stocked that several neighbours, more experienced than myself, are
blaming me for depreciating the size and quality of the sheep by overstocking ; the
cattle on the run being insufficient to supply the station with ration beef and work-
ing bullocks; the horses being no more than absolutely needed to work the station,
and no brood mares.
The improvements Mr. Goyder estimates at £5,887, on which he proposes an
allowance of £1,120 per annum. The enclosed list gives actual cost and value of these
£7,196, on a piece of country which, without this expenditure, never did or could
carry more than one flock of sheep, seeing that I only know of one available per-
manent surface water in the whole run (the spring on the east side of Brown’s Hill
Range, being within the Hundred of Anne). It requires very careful management,
good seasons, and high prices, to enable us to pay from proceeds of surplus sheep
the annual expenses of a run like Canowie, where so large a quantity of water is
raised from great depths by pump and other costly appliances, and, in many instances,
to be carted long distances. In adverse seasons, or with store sheep at low rates, or
in times of war, or other disturbance, the whole proceeds of wool and surplus stock
would barely cover the cost of management and proposed annual rental. Where then
shall we look for interest on capital, or that margin of profit which every man should
get who embarks his means and energies in a precarious business, always liable to be
expelled at six months’ notice ?
Without asking you, Sir, to adopt my figures (every one of which can be proved),
I think I have shown enough to convince you and your hon. colleagues that Mr.
Goyder’s (undoubtedly honest) attempt to arrive at a fair valuation has utterly
failed, and I ask for myself and the whole colony to have his estimates referred to
two or more valuators, or such other tribunal as may be expedient to secure to the
public, as well as the lessees of the Crown, that to which all alike are entitled, and
which I feel certain the Government desire to administer—impartial justice.
I have, &c.,
ABM, SCOTT.
The Hon. the Commissioner of Crown Lands.
The above letter is accompanied with an estimate of the cost and value of build-
ings, wells, and other improvements at Canowie, which is given as £7,196 ; and for
dry and useless wells a further sum of £777 10s. is estimated.
[.Endorsement on above. ]
Without going into detail referred to in this letter, I beg to state that the quantity
of stock said to be depastured was named to me by Mr. Good, the manager of the
run. My report refers to portion of that stock running in the Hundred, also to the
two springs or surface waters—one east and one west of Browne’s Hill Range, both
of which are in the leased land, and not in the Hundred. My estimate of the value
of improvements was made from their present state or actual value ; buildings erected
and used for some years deteriorate, they do not improve. My estimate of the car-
rying capabilities of the run is formed from observation, not from stock depastured
thereon. The value placed by me upon the run per mile is, in my opinion, most
liberal. It can easily be made to carry the stock according to my estimate. I can


propose no reduction; were the land leased at auction in blocks suitable it would
fetch, with improvements, not less than Is. 6d. per acre, or £l9 per square mile per
annum. The justice, indeed the liberality, of my valuations may easily be ascer-
tained by the writer giving notice, according to the Act, and the run being sub-
mitted to public competition at auction.
G. W. GOYDER,
Surveyor-General and Valuator.
September, 19, 1864.
Glenelg, August 17, 1864,
Sib, —Having seen the report of Mr. Goyder, as per schedule laid on the table of
the House of Assembly yesterday, I beg to call your attention to a great error in this
statement, under the head of i£ Nature and quantity of stock on run.” At the date
of his valuation, he states the amount of my stock at Booyoolee to be 48,000 sheep,
350 cattle, and 1,000 horses ; the fact being that at that time the number of stock
upon my run, including my purchased land, was 37,616 sheep, 350 head cattle, and
122 horses, including foals. To verify my statement I enclose the return of my
manager from 9th March until 18th April, 1864, which I shall feel obliged if you
will return after examination.
Seeing the great discrepancy between Mr, Goyder’s valuation and the actual fact,
I must request you not to confirm the valuation.
I have, &c
HERBERT B. HUGHES.
The Hon. the Chief Secretary.
Appended to this letter is a return showing the number of sheep at Booyoolee from
9th March till 18th April, 1864, according to which the number is 37,616.
[.Endorsement on above.']
Mr. Hughes objects to the quantity of stock stated to be on his run. Mr. Hughes
was my informant. I may have erred in noting his statement; the subject is, how-
ever, immaterial, as my estimate is formed from the character of the run. The run
is valued at a trifle over 6d. per acre. Cannot recommend any reduction in the
amount.
G. W. GOYDER,
Surveyor-General and Valuator.
September 19,1864.
Glenleg, September 16, 1861.
Sir, —I have the honour to submit to your notice the following estimate of the
capability of the Booyoolee Run, and feel sure that you will allow that Mr. Goyder’s
valuation is manifestly unjust.
I have, &c.,
HERBERT B. HUGHES.
The Hon. the Commissioner of Crown Lands.
The appended estimate enters too much into detail to be printed here. The income
from the station is estimated at £11,875; and the working expenses, including wages


and stores, and also the interest on capital invested, improvements, losses, and sheep
for rations, are placed at £lO.llßl, leaving a balance out of which to pay rent, assess-
ment, and profit and loss of £1,491. Another table is given to show that estimating
the station with 40,000 sheep as being worth £50,000, and taking all the improve-
ments which have been made on it, the value of the bare run is only £9,000, which
at six per cent, per annum would give a rental of £540.
The Bbiers, August 29, 1864.
Sib.—Some short time since I wrote to the Government on the subject of Mr.
Goyder’s valuations, and enclosed returns to show how erroneous his figures were as
to the amount of stock on the runs held by me at the time of his valuations.
Having now had the opportunity of seeing bis more elaborate returns, I have no
hesitation in saying that the rent he proposes is unjust and oppressive in the ex-
treme, as well as impolitic.
Having reduced the rent as proposed on the eighteen runs to a rate per head, the
result is so absurd to any who, like myself, is practically acquainted with the relative
merits of the run, and the expenses of management, that I am at a loss to conceive
on what data Mr. Goyder has based his calculations.
To explain my meaning and bring the subject practically under your notice, I will
make comparisons between a few of the runs, based upon the acknowledged axiom,
“ the better the country, the better the wool.”
No. 15. Anama and Bungaree.—2l7 miles (of which 89 are porcupine and mallee
scrub) is calculated by Mr. Goyder to carry 190 to the mile, and the sheep are
assessed at Is. BJd. per bead.
No. B.—Assessed to carry 205 to the mile, joining No. 15, the same distance from
Adelaide, the wool shipped at the same port, and carted about the same distance, is
rated at Is. 2d. per head, or 6Jd, less than No. 15.
No. 7. —Assessed to carry 255 sheep to the mile, twenty-three miles from a ship-
ping port, the wool placed on board vessels for England at a cost not exceeding that
from Euns No. 15 and No. 8, is rated at Is, Id. per head, or 7jd. less than No. 15.
No. 6. —180 to the mile, about 25 miles from port of shipment, is rated at 9d. per
head, or less than No. 15.
No. 11.—Assessed at 200 to the mile, about 10 miles from a shipping port, is
rated at Is. 2d., or 6£d. less than No. 15.
I could continue the comparison through all the runs, but have quoted sufficient
for my argument.
These runs are all well managed, and there is scarcely any difference in the quality
of sheep.
As regards the fattening qualifications of the various runs, I can only state that off
No. 15 during the last two years I have only been able to send 540 wethers to the
Adelaide market, out of which 170 were returned as unsaleable.
An element which Mr. Goyder seems altogether to have omitted in his valuation
is, in addition to the great liability of resumption, the great expense the holders of
runs nearest to the settled districts are put to in attempting to protect the grass trom
the very large number of cattle trespassing, which entails a heavy loss on the lessees.
To charge rent on improvements is acknowledged by all to be unjust; but I cannot
pass over the manner in which Mr. Goyder has attempted to fix the rent on these
improvements without a few remarks.
Those on my runs have nearly all been made during the last three years, and many
are of a character likely to last for half a century. Nearly all the huts are of stone,
and well built by competent masons. The wells are large shafts—timbered where
there is not rock—and the fences the best that can be put up with posts and wire.
These are to fall in to the Crown at the end of five years, and notwithstanding this,
Mr. Goyder has put on a rent that amounts in the five years to £145 more than the
total value of the improvements.
To give you some idea of the oppressive and unjust nature of the rent proposed, I
would point out that on the Anama Run during the last seven years the average net


proceeds of the wool have not exceeded 9d. per pound ; that the average weight of
wool per sheep has not exceeded pounds; and that the cost of management, ex-
clusive of all shipping expenses, has been over 2s, per head per annum.
On an average of seven years the expenses and rent proposed—which with, 10 per
cent, added, is over Is. lOd.—would amount to over 3s. lOd. per head, the net return
being 3s. 4Jd. The increase, after a set-off for deaths and losses, would not pay 5
per cent, on the capital invested. In addition to this, the run—two-fifths of which
are porcupine and mallee scrub—is asssessed at nearly 6,000 sheep more than it can
carry, or than were on it at the time when Mr. Goyder made his valuation, and when
he said the run was fully stocked.
He has assessed it to carry 44,755 when the number actually on it was a little
under 39,000 ; consequently, there is about .£SOO more to be added to the rent,
which would bring the rate per head to over 2s.
Mr. Goyder has entirely overlooked the losses and risks from fires, droughts, &c.,
and the sudden depreciation in the value of wool that may occur at any moment from
European wars or revolutions.
It is well known that in 1848 wool fell, without the slightest notice, from 50 to 75
per cent.; and that greasy wool fetched very little more that what covered freight and
charges.
These sudden falls have often occurred during the last twenty-five years, though
not always to the same extent; and in some years the wool and increase have not
paid the expenses of the station.
The present price of stock has only been maintained by the demand for Riverina;
and the moment this demand ceases, which it must do before long, sheep will again
come down to boiling prices.
All these points, and many others bearing the question, which could be named if
I went more into detail, should be taken into consideration in valuing the runs.
No one has a higher opinion of Mr. Goyder, as Surveyor-General, or of his integrity
of purpose, than I have; but it is utterly impossible for any one person to arrive at
an equitable decision on a matter of such immense importance, affecting as it does
one-third of the productions of the country.
The incorrectness of his figures—the great discrepancies in the rate per head,
apparently adopted without any system —the unfair rent proposed by him on the
improvements—point out that though as Surveyor-General he may be quite compe-
tent to judge of the relative carrying capabilities of the various runs, he does not
possess the adequate knowledge to enable him to form a correct judgement as to the
commercial value of the properties in question, or to place a fair and equitable rent
upon them.
I would, therefore, as a lessee of the Crown, strongly impress on the Government
the necessity of appointing a Board of Valuators, which they have full power to do
under Act, No. 20 of 1858, to take evidence, and then decide on the rent to be paid
for each run. And I have no doubt that if this plan is adopted the result will he an
equitable arrangement between the country and the lessees.
I have, &c.,
GEORGE C. HAWKER.
The Hon. the Commissioner of Crown Lands.
[Endorsement on above,]
Portion of the contents of this letter will be alluded to in my report of to-day,
which will be shortly forwarded. The propriety of appointing a Board of \ aluators
is for the consideration of the Government alone.
G. W. GOYDER,
Surveyor-General and Valuator.
September 19, 1864.


Adelaide, August 30, 1864.
Sir, —In Air. Goyder’s report upon the Booboorowie Run, Lease 130 (28 miles),
Valuation, No, 14, we find some errors, which we consider of sufficient importance
to entitle us to object to the revaluation made by that gentleman.
The improvements are valued at £lOO only; the cost of them was over £3OO, and
we consider them worth £3OO now.
We have always found the country to be fully stocked with 7,000 sheep. Mr.
Goyder estimates its capability at 9,000, and remarks “that the run had not been
fed over to anything like its carrying capability.’’ This is quite true of last season,
and no doubt, misled Mr. Goyder. We had purposely reserved it, because large areas
of laud were being surveyed in other parts of our run, and we were compelled to keep
a place ready to remove our stock to, in case we could not buy that land.
In anticipation of these land sales we had also reduced our sheep about 7,000
below the usual number kept at Booboorowie; added to this the heavy rains in
October produced a larger crop of grass than we have had since 1853.
You will see that Mr. Goyder examined the country under conditions which were
peculiarly unfavourable to his forming a correct estimate of its capability, and we
trust you will not advise his valuation to be confirmed without further enquiry.
We are, &c.,
W. .1. & J. H. BROWNE.
To the Hon. the Commissioner of Crown Lands.
[.Endorsement on above.']
I have seen the country referred to repeatedly during the last five years ; my esti-
mate is therefore based upon repeated observation. Surely the Messrs. Browne
cannot have been over the run lately. I can recommend no alteration,
G. W. GOYDER,
Surveyor-General.
Adelaide, August 17, 1864,
Sir, —On reference to Mr. Goyder’s report on my runs—Anama, Bungaree, &c,,
—I find a very serious error, which must entirely upset the basis of his calculations.
He states the number of sheep depastured on my runs, including purchased lands
and commonage, to be 91,000 (ninety-one thousand). The actual number was, on
March 31st, 73,540, since reduced to 71,151.
The largest number ever on the run, including unweaned lambs, was at last shear-
ing, viz., 83,039.
To verify my statements, I enclose the original returns received from my manager
for the last four quarters, which I shall feel obliged by your returning to me.
Under these circumstances I have to request that the valuation of my runs be not
confirmed.
I am, Sir, &c.,
GEORGE C. HAWKER.
To the Hon. the Chief Secretary,
Accompanying this letter there are returns of sheep on the runs for several quarters,
showing a gradual decrease in the numbers. The last return for the quarter ending
30th June, 1864, gives 71,151 as the number at that date.
[.Endorsement on above.]
It will be seen by my report that I state the quantity of stock upon the run was
partially fed upon other lauds; consequently this circumstance could have guided me


but little in my estimate, which was formed from the character of the country. My
information respecting the stock was received from the manager of the run, and if
the figures were erroneous it is immaterial, as I was guided by the observations made
whilst going over the run, and not by the stock depastured on several other leases
and lands.
The run is valued by me, including improvements, at £lB per mile, or Ofd per
acre—a valuation which I consider most liberal, and I can recommend no alteration.
G. W. GOYDER,
Surveyor-General_and Valuator.
September 19, 1864.
Adelaide, August 30, 1864.
Sir, — I object to Mr. Goyder’s revaluation of the Mananarie Run, Lease No. 61,
Valuation No. 9, because it is based upon incorrect data, and is consequently too
high.
The Mananarie Run is held under two leases -No. 61, 98 miles, and No. 371, 24
miles; in all, 122 miles. The country lies all together, and is worked as one run.
Enclosed I hand you the overseer’s returns, showing that at the time of valuation
there were actually 1,000 sheep less on both runs than Mr. Goyder states were on
one.
The average number shorn on these runs for the last five years is rather under
23,000 (see return 30th June), and about 4,000 are sold immediately after, as the
runs will only keep about 18,000 to 19,000 sheep ; and it is a well-known fact in my
district that they have been rather over than under stocked with that number. I
would also remark that Mr. Goyder saw the country after the most favourable season
we have had since 1852.
Requesting you will return me the enclosed papers,
I have, &c,,
W. L, MARCHANT,
By his Attorney, J. H. Browne.
To the Hon. the Commissioner of Crown Lands.
This letter is also accompanied with very full and minute tables, giving returns
for quarters ending 31st December, 1863, 31st March, and 30th June, 1864.
[.Endorsement on above.']
My information as to the Stock on the run was received from the Manager, Mr-
Waugh. My estimate of the grazing capacity is fixed from actual observation—not
from what stock is upon the land. lam aware of the circumstances connected
with the leased run upon which certain of the stock is depastured, and alluded to it
in my report. My estimate of the annual value of the land is 6d. per acre. This
I conceive most liberal; the country will carry the quantity of stock named in or-
dinary seasons. It appears to be forgotten that I allow for a slight improvement in
the country during the ensuing five years. I can propose no reduction.
G. W. GOYDER,
Surveyor-General and Valuator,
September, 19, 1864.
Clarson, Sballard & Co., Printers, Melbourne and Sydney.




H. T. DWIGHT,
BOOKSELLER,
H©TSrS®S> SSKZ'BOUBJfffit
OFFERS the book-buying community for selection the largest
Collection of New and Second-hand Books for sale in Aus-
tralia, each work being faithfully described in the Catalogue.
Gentlemen however distant are enabled to form collections of
good Books with the same advantage as those that have the oppor-
tunity of examining them on the spot.
ORDERS FROM THE COUNTRY PUNCTUALLY ATTENDED TO.
Hooks not in Stock are diligently sought for, and if not found in
Australia, ordered hy the next Mail.
Catalogues Gratis. Posted , 2d. Beyond the Colony, Is. extra
H. T. D. is always ready to purchase, on liberal terms, large or
small quantities of books, and also to value, arrange, or catalogue
libraries in town or country.


