

y
18S1.


Professor Bastard.


THE
AUTOBIOGRAPHY
“COCKNEY TOM,”
SHOWING HIS STRUGGLES THROUGH LIFE, AND PROVING
THE TRUTH OF THE OLD SAYING “THAT
HONESTY IS THE BEST
POLICY.”
PUBLISHED UNDER THE PATRONAGE OF
||is (grallnwg Sir M. Jf. |frfaois, (O.CIR.Cj.
ADELAIDE:
McClory & Masterman, Printers, Grenfell Street,
1881.




PREFACE.
It has been said that were there is no sense of danger,
there no danger need be feared ; so the writer of this
Autobiography ventures, despite any array of critics, to
present the sketch of his life to a public whose indulgence
he craves. He claims no merit for literary workmanship,
but solely for truth and candour, and in those respects his
book cannot be excelled. As understood by the writer
of this preface, the aim of the work has been twofold,
namely, to leave to a large circle of cherished friends,
acquaintances, and relatives the exact memorials of a life
marked by more than an ordinary vicissitudes ; and also
of the manner in which it is intended to illustrate how
possible is the growth of evil habit, upon a genial, sociable
disposition, and how equally possible an absolute reformation.
If the work should prove pleasant, the author would be
pleased ; if profitable, he will be paid by coin that he would
not exchange for the best mintage of the world.


THIS WORK
IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED
MR. MATTHEW BURNETT,
THE GREAT TEMPERANCE ADVOCATE,
AS A SLIGHT TOKEN OF ESTEEM
BY HIS ADMIRING FRIEND,
THE AUTHOR.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
My Grandfather, and what he was ... .. 9
Introducing My Father and Uncle Phillip 10
My Mother, Foster-Mother, and Nurses 10
A Rich Aunt and an Old Gun 10
Nearly Burnt to Death ... ... ... ... ... ... . . 10
Old Gun Takes me Home—What he did with me there... 10
I am Apprenticed—My Master, and What He Was Like 10
I get into Prison, and make many acquaintances 11
I Get Out Again, and Return to My Master ... ... 11
I Run Away, and Travel to Gain Knowledge ... ... ... ... 12
I Commence Singing for a Living, and Return to London 13
My Courtship, Marriage, and many Hardships 14
A Change in My Life much for the better ... ... ... 15
Join the Choristers at St. Barnabas, Pimlico 16
Become a Tradesman, and have many Good Customers ... ... ... 17
I Catch the Gold Fever, and make up my mind to go to Australia ... 18
My Visit to the Rev. W. E. Bennett ... ... ... 18
His Parish Clerk ~ ... ... ... 18
I Embark at Southampton 19
My Voyage 20
My Arrival at Adelaide 21
What I Did, and How I Got My Living ... ... ... ... ... 21
I Leave Adelaide for Victoria and the Goldfields ... 24


My Arrival in Melbourne, and What I Thought of It 25
On the Tramp to the Diggings—Events on the Road 27
I Arrive at Forest Creek, and Make Acquaintances 31
Depart From Forest Creek, and Goes to Tarangower 35
The Ball at Castlemaine, and What Took Place There ... 42
Life on the Diggings at Tarangower .. ... 44
My Tramp Back to Melbourne 46
My Return to Adelaide 47
My Military Career as a Sergeant in the Army—My Discharge... ... 49
I Become a Bank Messenger, Public Singer, Agent, &c 51
Tired of the Bank, I Turn My Attention to Swimming ... 55
I Become Acquainted with the Man who Robbed the Duke of Edinburgh 56
Tries Boating on the River Torrens ... 58
The Dam Bursts Up, and I Lose All My Boats .. ... 58
I Establish Turkish Baths—the Good They Have Done to the City ... 61
My Wife Dies, and I take to Drink 62
I meet with the Rev. Matthew Burnett ... ... ... .. •■ • 63
The Good Result of His Doctrines 63
I Attend His Lecture on “Yankee Bill” 63
I Becomes a Sober Man, and Write this Autobiography .. ..65
Dat.es and Particulars •• 66


LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
Ayers, Sir Henry
Astles, Dr.
Anderson, J. M.
Allen, Joseph
Arch, A.
Edwards, Ellis.
Everett, Chas.
Evens, W, R.
English, Thos.
Fraser, Hugh, M.P.
Fabain, T.
Finniss, Hon. B. T.
Fowler, G. S., M.P.
Freeman, Geo.
Finlay son, J. fl.
Fleming, J.
Fox, Mrs. M.
Farr, Canon, M.A.
Bray, J. C., M.P.
Brind, Mrs.
Bower, D., M.P.
Bonythorn, J. L.
Burnett, J.
Brind, E.
Brooks, C. H.
Bean Bros.
Beresford, G. W. D.
Baye, H.
Brind, Edward
Berry, A.
Beyer, F. V.
Glyde, Hon. L.
Gosse, Dr. Wm.
Grundy, —.
Gall, David
Giles, J. F.
Gall, Thos.
Colton, J., M.P.
Cox, Rev. F. W.
Cooper, Wm.
Cockburn, Arthur
Chapman, Wm.
Compton, Chas.
Campbell, Dr. A.
Crawford, W. T.
Crawford, Fraser S.
Charlick, H.
Cox, J.
Cussen, R.
Clark, A.
Cox, G.
Christian, C.
Chittleborough, J.
Hill, Jno.
Henry, Ivan
Hooper, Wm.
Hack, Theodore
Hines, J. N.
Hagedorn, T.
Harris, T. W.
Hall, Jno.
Howell, C. W.
Hanton, J.
Hawkes, G. W., S.M
Harris, G. T.
Howells, P. A.
Heilman, F.
Hartisch, Otto V.
Hare, C. S., M.P.
Derrington, E. H., J.P,
Deslandes, J.
Dunn, John (Dunn & Co.)
Darling, J., M.P.
Davis, Mrs.
Day, Chas.
Dillon, W.
Downs, Geo.
Dearman, W.
Doyle, Thos.
Diamond, A.
Downer,J. W., M.P.
Dyer, C.
Jervois, Sir W. F. D.
Johnson, Thos.
Jackson, Thos.
Jury, R.
K.C.M.G
King, Hon. Thos
Klauer, A.
Lazar, S.
Lazar, A,
Laughton, Geo.


Lawrence, V.
Lyall, Rev. J.
Lee, Jno.
Lower, Fredk.
Lockwood, Geo.
Lee, Phillip
Longson, E. 0.
Longson, Chas.
Morgan, Hon. Win.
Morphett, Sir Jno.
Maddison, T.
McCarthy, B.
McEllister, Thos.
Matson, Miss
Madge, M. H.
McDonald, Mrs. J.
Mumme, C.
Mead, Rev. S.
Morey, Benj.
Main, Wm.
Millbank, Geo.
Malcom, A. R.
Marshall, 0. W,
Nankivell, J.
Ninness, W.
Nimmo, Jas.
Norman, Dr.
Oldham, N.
Oehlmann, H.
O’Halloran, H. D., J.P.
Otto, F. H.
Parr, J. H,
Peacock, Caleb, M.P.
Pickering, Jno.
Perrin, E.
Powell, Thos.
Penman & Galbraith
Russell, Dean
Ramsay, Hon. J. G.
Rounsevell, W. 8., M.P.
Rowe, —.
Russell, —.
Robertson, H.
Robertson, Geo.
Rigby, C.
Robinson, —.
Rowe, P. J.
Rees, R., M.P.
Rough,—.
Smith, E. T., Mayor of Adelaide
Stow, J., J.P.
Santo, Hon. P.
Setch, G.
Solomon, J.
Solomon, S.
Stevens, W. B.
Schrader, Mrs.
Stone, —.
Stratton, W.
Stoneham, H.
Solomon, Emanuel
Spiller, E.
Squire, J. H.
Schlork, T. H.
Smith, Captain
Stone, Geo.
Sawers, W. R.
Stuckey, Robt.
Simms, W.K., M.P.
Sanderson, F.
Saunders, S.
Stewart, Chas.
Seymour, G,
Stewart, Chas.
Temple, Chas. %
Townsend, Wm., M.P.
Turnbull, J. T.
Tomsett, Wm.
Way, Chief Justice
Warburton, Major
Worsnop, Thos.
Wright, Fredk.
Wright, E. W.
Way, Dr.
Woodcock, H.
Weber, P.
Woodforde, Geo,
Wilson, T.
Winham, W.
Wigley, J.
Wigley, J. S.
White, Chas.
Vauzey, R.
Vaughan, Richard
SUBSCRIBERS.


AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF COCKNEY TOM,
PART I.
I, Cockney Tom, am the son of a gun, who was so called because
his father was a general in the Navy. Now this requires a little ex-
planation. My grandfather, you must know, was master-at-arms on
board the Royal Standard, 74 guns. It was his duty as a warrant-
officer to officiate when a man was to be flogged for getting drunk,
or any other crime. They were tied up to a grating and punished
with the cat in those days. Thank goodness it is not so now in
the British Navy. It was the duty of the armorer to attend the
surgeon of the ship in full uniform, with drawn sword, to see that
the prisoner received his allowance. The armorer was to count
the lashes, jynd the doctor’s duty was to tell the boatswain to cast
the man off when he saw he could bear no more. So that is how
the aforesaid son of a gun’s grandfather was nicknamed the flog-
master-general. Gun was armorer’s mate, fought in three engage-
ments, and got his discharge without pension. His brother was
not so fortunate. He rose by merit to be a second lieutenant, and
one day was ordered to man the boat and go on shore at Ports-
mouth with orders for the ship. When he reached the stairs the
men begged so hard to be allowed to go on shore for a short time
to purchase some necessaries, that Gun’s brother gave them leave,
on their engaging, on their honor, to return soon. Imagine his
feelings when he returned to find that all his men had deserted.
In this dilemma Gun’s brother did not know what to do ; to go on
board he was ashamed, and therefore he made up his mind to follow
the example of the men and bolt. He did so, was caught, and
was sent to Portsmouth gaol to be identified by his brother officers.
They came the next morning and took him on board, and placed
him in irons. A court-martial was called ; he was reduced from
lieutenant to common seaman, and then they sentenced him to two
dozen lashes, which he received on his birthday as a very unwelcome
present. Gun obtained his discharge, went to London, and got
married, by which transaction he increased and multiplied the
earth to the extent of ten children, I being the wind-up of the lot,
which consisted of nine boys and one girl.


Now began some of the stirring and painful events of my
wonderful life. My mother died when I was only five months old,
and my sister became my only nurse. Bhe used to carry me round
the parish to mothers who had babies, and beg a drop of milk from
one and another, so that I had many foster-mothers. Now, it so
happened that I had a rich aunt, and she made an offer to Old
Gun that if he would give me up entirely to her care, she would
settle her property on me, as she had no children of her own, which
offer Old Gun readily accepted. The will was made and duly
registered, and I was taken from Old Gun and placed under the care
of a good nurse. Old Gun took to drink, and when drunk visited
my nurse, and listened to her complaints against my aunt. He
called and had words with her, which so disgusted the old lady
that she sent for a lawyer and altered her will, without leaving me
a single penny. (So much for drink.) I remained with this nurse
about five years. About this time I was nearly burned to death,
my nurse having left me to mind the house. I got playing with the
fire until my pinafore caught alight, when I ran out into the street
all in a blaze. Two working men, who happened to be passing, seized
me and threw me into a ditch close by. After that they took me
to a doctor, and I was laid up in bed for twelve months. When Old
Gun heard of it, he took me away from my nurse, and when he got
me home he made use of me to fetch his gin, while he was on the
drink. I remember fetching Gun as many as nineteen half-
cjuarterns of gin before dinner, and sometimes he would be on the
fuddle for a fortnight. Gun having got into debt with a publican,
to the extent of two pounds, he summonned him for the amount.
As Gun refused to pay, the publican caused him to be sent to gaol
for six weeks. I used to visit father Gun in prison,- and take him
coffee and sugar. Now, while Gun was in trouble I was also
doomed to suffer. Gun’s landlady refused to give me a night’s
lodging. I lived on the few coppers earned by running about the
city and holding gentlemen’s horses. At last, to get rid of me the
landlady took me to the workhouse, and left me there till Gun came
out of prison. When Gun did come out, it was only to have a change
from s:aol to workhouse. At last the end came, and Gun died a
penitent sinner.
The parish apprenticed me to a shoe-maker, a man that wanted
the premium much more than he wanted the boy. My master
treated me more like a dog than a human being, 1 was fed badly,
and clothed worse ; was allowed one suit of the commonest corderoy
that could be got per year. In fact I wore one pair of trousers until
they became kneebreeches. One pair of common boots a year,
and a good sound thrashing twice a week. Not only were my hours
of labor from five o’clock in the morning until ten at night, but my
fare was far worse. Now it so happened at this period of ray life
that I took a fancy to swimming, and in order to gain a knowledge
of this art I used to get up very early every morning, and bathe in a


canal which was not far off. This pastime nearly cost me my life.
No less than three times was I brought ont of the water nearly
dead ; but I was determined not to be beaten, and after taking* lessons
of a professor I became a very fair swimmer. I soon found that
my master was a bad man, the woman that lived with him had left
her husband (a respectable farmer in Yorkshire), and both these
worthies took to heavy drinking. At this time I was between 15 and
16 years of age. My master kept a fine house, but like many other
worthies, he forgot to pay his rent, and w r as so clover that he got into
debt with everyone. At last, being greatly troubled in his mind, he
determined to shoot, not himself, but the moon, as it is called in
London, which being interpreted means that he ran away from his
house in the night time, not forgetting to take his goods with him ;
but in his hurry and excitement he left an old bedstead in the
house. I Avas ordered to g*o early the next morning and get this
bedstead out by the back door, my master being there to help mo
carry it home. To accomplish this task I had to get through the
cellar window. I succeeded in taking down the bedstead, put the
screws in my pocket, and got it outside, Avhcn, alas, I beheld that
kindest of friends, the policeman, A\ho most affectionately put his
hand upon my arm and marched me off to the lockup on a charge
of house-breaking. I Avas taken before the magistrate and the
landlady appeared against me. I Avas committed for trial on the
charge, and Avas most graciously conveyed in Ilis Majesty King
William the IV’s carriage to Horsemonger Lane Gaol I Avas kept
in prison eleven days before my trial, and no one Avas alloAved to see
me but my fellow prisoners, and when at last I Avas tried, I pleaded
my own case, and succeeded in justifying my conduct by explaining
that I Avas only an apprentice, and Avas therefore bound to obey my
master’s orders, and keep his secrets, according to the Avordingofmy
indentures, and so I Avas honorably acquitted. While I Avas in gaol
I had to attend chapel. Now any moral or religious benefit I
might have received from such attendance was utterly neutralized
by the bad management of our prisons, in compelling comparatively
innocent persons to mix with the greatest blackguards and thieves
in London. As a matter of fact there was some prisoners there
at the same time that I Avas obliged to associate Avith avlio
Avere guilty of every crime you can mention, including murder.
Amongst them, however, Avas a Rca*. Dr. Taylor, who Avas imprisoned
for speaking against the Bible and tin' Government. He used to
lecture at the Rotunda in the Blackfriar’s Road. He made my
acquaintance, and taught me many good things, and although a
prisoner, he was not by any means a bad man, for he had the fear of
God in his heart. He persuaded me to attend Sunday-school and
church Avhen I got out. Altogether this reA r , gentleman’s influence
upon me Avas for my good, and far more likely to effect my reforma-
tion than any punishment in gaol, especially Avhen injudiciously
administered. I did not forget his good counsel, for when I got
11
COCKNEY TOM.


back to my master I begged to be allowed to go to a Sunday-school,
and also to church. This request was granted, and many a time I
went without my Sunday’s dinner rather than be late at school. The
Parish Clerk found out that I had a voice, so he sent for me and
gave me lessons in hymn and psalm singing, and chanting the
service. I felt very proud of this, and although I occasionally
received a good thrashing from my master for the most trifling
mistakes in my work, I bore up well till I was nearly seventeen years
of age. By this time, however, my master’s treatment gTew rather
worse than better, so I determined to run away and try the country,
for a change of air. I had a married brother living at Hastings, in
Sussex, and to go there I began to save up for the journey out of my
pocket money, which was only threepence per week, out of which I
saved two-thirds.
At length, with my savings, which amounted to tenpence, a two
pound loaf, and no butter, I rose at three o’clock on a beautiful
summer’s morning and crept down stairs very softly, opened the
door and got outside without being heard by any of the inmates.
After walking about five miles without resting, I began to sing a
verse from an old man-a-war s song, as follows :
‘ ‘ I wish I was at Hastings
With my true love along with me,
Everything that’s fitting,
To serve His Royal Majesty.
Where liquor there is plenty,
Flowing bowls on every side,
Hard fortune ne’er shall daunt me,
For I’m young and the world is wide.’
After walking eight miles, I had a rest, and refreshed the inner man
with bread and water. While resting, a fish van happened to pass
on its way to Hastings, the very place I was bound for. I made a
dart and got up behind. When the driver stopped to change horses,
I asked him if he would allow me to ride behind, for which
privilege I offered to skid the wheel, which means, in railwav
language, put on the brake. When the driver learnt that my
brother lived at Hastings he took an interest in me, and was very
kind for the rest of the journey. I arrived safe and sound the same
night, and found out my brother’s residence, but, unfortunately, my
brother was ten miles from home, working at a gentleman’s seat,
and did not return for a week after my arrival. My sister-in-law
was very good to me at first, but soon began to speak in terms that
convinced me that she was no friend of mine. She used to drink
gin on the sly, and get drunk, and deceive her husband by making
him believe that she was ill. Fearing that I would let my brother
into the secret, she became my bitter enemy. I saw through it, and
when I had managed to get work, I left my brother’s house and
took lodgings amongst a tribe of gipsies who lived in the neighbour-
hood. My new master was a regular “ out and outer,” a splendid


workman, well educated ? a good reciter, but too fond of company and
drink, which kept him poor, and made his wife miserable. She was
very good to me, and gave me many a meal when my master was on
the spree.
I left the Gipsies, and found cheap lodgings by the sad sea
waves, in the fishing boats. I used to rise early and assist the
fishermen to wash and pack their fish for market, for which service
J used to get a fish for breakfast. It was at Hastings that I
improved in the art of swimming; I might have been seen in the
sea three times a day; and so the time rolled on. 1 improved in my
trade, but, unfortunately, at the end of the season I had no work to
do. I then took it into my head that I would return to London,
and find out my sister. The next question was how to get there
without money to start with ? The thought struck me that I could
sing my way back. I started accordingly early one morning and
walked eight miles to a place called Battle, the spot where the great
battle of Hastings took place. When I arrived, I found there was
a fox hunt on, and that after the hunt there was to be a dinner for
the sportsmen, so I made up my mind to stay and offer my services
as a singer, and trust to their generosity as to what they would
give me. I did so, and so pleased the company that they gave me
a good dinner and four and ninepence to boot, and the landlord
gave me a night’s lodging. I started next morning for Tunbridge,
in Kent; next I went to Maidstone, where I met with a harpist
with whom I joined company, I to sing, and harpy to play, and go
share in the profits. We waited on the mayor of the town, and got
his permission to play and sing in the streets. We did well, lived
like fighting cocks, and saved money. From Maidstone we travelled
to Sittingbourne, where we were engaged to play and sing in the
Assembly Rooms, and there made a great hit in my song*, “ Funk-
ing the Cobbler,” sung in caricature. I now began to fancy
myself. From there I found my way to Chatham, where I was
engaged in a low concert room, frequented by soldiers, sailors, and
bad women. I learnt no good there, but a great deal that was
bad. I did not stop long there but went on to Rochester, got work
at my trade, and for a time gave up singing.
From Rochester I went to Gravesend, where I worked at my
trade, singing now and then professionally. Thence I travelled to
London and found out my sister, who received me with sisterly
love. I got work and lived very happily with her for a long time.
It so happened that my sister had an acquaintance who used to
call and see her occasionally. One day this friend brought her
eldest daughter with her. I was engaged at my work, singing away
as only shoemakers can sing, the following beautiful lines :
“ Beware of those finikin lasses,
And never by beauty be led ;
For the girl that surpasses all others
’Tis she that works hard for her bread,”


“Who is that singing?” enquired the young woman. “It is my
brother Tom,” replied my sister. “I should like to see him,” she
said. “ You shall,” said my sister, and she brought the young-
woman into the room where I was working. I blushed, for I thought
I had never before seen such a good-looking young person. We
all had tea, and I had the impertinence to ask her to take a walk,
and she did not refuse. From that time we became lovers, and were
four months afterwards married at St. John’s Church, Waterloo-road,
Lambeth. After I had bought the ring, paid the parson, and given
a dinner (which I had also paid for), I took my bride to furnished
lodgings. I got up the next morning to work with the large capital
of three shillings and sixpence to start a new life. I, however, was
not going to be discouraged with such a small beginning, and as
neither my wife nor 1 were deficient in pluck, we both determined to
work early and late, and soon got a home of our own—a small one,
in Walworth, where we lived as happily together, as if our house
had been a mansion.
But this happy state of things was destined not to last long.
When the winter came, I was thrown out of work, and my wife was
confined of a daughter, and things had now come to such a pass,
that I took to singing again in order to obtain food. The result of
having to be out late at nights, was that I fell ill, and was laid up
with a fever. The doctor ordered me to St. Thomas’ Hospital,
where I remained for eight weeks, during which time none of my
friends, safe my good wife, came to see me. At last I found myself
better, and left the Hospital; but only for a short time, for a second
attack obliged me to return for some weeks longer, until I had re-
gained my strength. 1 then made a fiesh start, got work at a be-
spoke shop, and became the don during the two years I worked as
journeyman. I then left Lambeth, and obtained work in Chelsea,
with better wages; but as food and rent was dear, I was no better off
than before I came to the west-end My troubles seemed as if
they would never end, for my wife and four children now took the
measles, and when my wife got better, I was again taken bad with a
cold in my eyes, which nearly blinded me. I then became an out-
patient at the Opthalmic Hospital, Charing Cross; and for many
weeks I could not work, and had to go to the parish for bread for
my children. After suffering great privation, I at last got better,
and again worked at my trade, and in order to make up for lost time,
I again took to singing at night in low concert-rooms, receiving from
three to five shillings per night, and my beer. I followed this up
for some time, when a sudden change took place in my life. It hap-
pened while I was working one day, and at the same time rehearsing
my songs for the night’s entertainment, that I was disturbed by a
gentle knock at the door. t “ Come in!” said I, and a lady entered,
with the remark, “ I beg your pardon,, but was that you singing
just now ?” “ Yes, ma’am,” said I; “ I have to get my living
partly by singing.” “Do you sing at church ?” “ No, I do not,”


I replied. u Can you sing l by music?” “No, ma’am.” “Would
you like to be taught?” “ 1 should like very much, ma’am,” said
I. “Do you go to our church? we have beautiful singing there,
and lam sure you would like it. Will you come it I promise to be
your friend ? 1 see you are a shoemaker. Would you object to work
for yourself instead of a master ?” I said that I should very much
like to be my own master, and be able to give up the concert-room
business. “ Well, then, to begin with, you can take my measure
for a pair of shoes, and come to my house in Grosvenor Place, and
I will leave several pair for you to repair, and if you want any money
to buy material with, you can have it.” “ Thank you, very much,”
I said ; “ and I will attend to it.” 1 told my wife when she came
home all about it, and she was delighted. “ I have heard of that
lady,” said she. “ She is a very good woman, and visits the sick
and relieves the poor, and takes an interest in every thing that is
good.” I called on the lady, the next day, and was received kindly.
To help me in my business, she introduced me to her servants, who
favored me with their orders, and gave as much work, as would take
me a week to perform. I finished the work and gave general satisfac-
tion. I was then persuaded to go to church and hear the singing,
which was very grand. The incumbent was a good preacher, and
used to attract the nobility from the west-end of London. I was
sent for by the minister, who undertook to have me taught music,
and for this purpose I was invited to attend practice, in order to meet
the organist, and try my voice. I did so, and was told it was some-
what a rough one, but that if I gave my mind to study, I would, in
course of time, make a fair chorister. I attended practice twice a
week for two years, and at church twice on Sundays. About this
time the Rev. W. C. Bennett conceived the idea of building a poor
man’s church, as his own church being crowded with the rich,
the poor were crowded out. When he announced his intention, Earl
Brownlow gave the land, and a collection was made, the proceeds
of which amounted to the large sum of £2,220, in the short space
of a quarter of an hour. Money came from all parts, and £50,000
was subscribed in less than three months. I was engaged to carry
a banner at the laying of the foundation stone; and when the
ceremony was over there was a good dinner given to the poor, and I
had the honor of singing at the feast.
My business increased so much every week that I soon began
to employ workmen, and at one time had fifty ladies of title on my
books; also lords, earls, dukes, and duchesses. The Countess of
Cardigan was one of my best customers, and the Duchess of Argyle
was another. My ambition at last got so high that I asked a lady
of honour to the Queen to try to get for me Her Majesty’s patronage.
In this I, however, failed, and was told that the Queen never
changed her trades people. I, however, succeeded in getting the
work of the Duke of Wellington’s household, the University Club,
Army, and Navy Club, Civil Service Club, and many-others,
15
COCKNEY TOM.


So I continued to on prospering till the Poor Man’s
Church was finished. That was a great day, and the church was
opened with much pomp and ceremony on St. Barnabas’s Day, the
11th of June. It was named St. Barnabas’s Church, from that cir-
cumstance. On that day, for the first time in my life, I was arrayed
in a surplice, and introduced to the singers as a member of the choir
of St. Barnabas, Plimlico; and I now felt not a little proud of
myself. Besides the church, they built a parsonage for the clergy-
man, and a schoolhouse to accommodate 1,000 children, with sleeping-
rooms for twenty singing boys, who were supported out of the
foundation fund, and who, besides being educated, were fed and
clothed like young gentlemen. The whole of the buildings cost
no less than £IOO,OOO when finished. I found out that to be a
chorister was no easy billet, as 1 had to attend daily service at 6 a.m.
on Holy Days; there were three services a day, with communion
and sermons on Sundays—early communion at 7 a.m., prayers at
8 a.m. for the poor, and breakfast at 9 a.m. All the singers (men
and boys) sang “ Non nobis Domini ” both before and after. At it
again at 11 a.m., litany, anthem, and sermon; after which came
post-communion; then home to dinner. After which I came back
again at 3 p.m. to baptism, followed by afternoon service. After
lea came evening prayer, at 7 p.m., with anthem and sermon.
After these engagements, I and the rest would adjourn to the
parsonage with the clergy, and have cake, or tea, or coffee, and then
we would sing the “ Benedictus,” and, lastly, return home to bed.
This is the way I spent seven years of my life, most happy in
my mind, and living in the fear of God, and endeavoring to bring up
my family in the same happy way. But this happiness was doomed
to have an untimely end. The newspapers declared war against Mr.
Bennett, and accused him of preaching the doctrines of the Church
of Borne, asserting that the service was more like an opera than
the sacred worship of God. The Bishop sent for him, and accused
him with unfaithfulness to the Church of England. The outside
public were against Mr. Bennett, and riots frequently took place on
Sundays. 1 was sworn in as a special constable to protect the
church property, and I used to go into the choir with a policeman’s
staff under my surplice. Meetings were called by the parishioners,
and votes of censure were passed against the Bishop. In this
trouble the poor also had their say. I was elected chairman of the
Poor Man’s Committee, with power to raise subscriptions for Mr.
Bennett. A meeting was called for the rich aud poor of the parish,
and I had to make a speech, in preparation of which I had sat up till two
o’clock in the morning. When it was my turn to speak, however, I
was so flurried that I could not make out my notes ; and 1 resolved
on speaking extemporaneously, and had the satisfaction of winning
a hearty round of applause. My speech was published in the Daily
Chronicle of February Bth, 1857. The unfortunate result of all this
dissension was that the Key, W. C. Bennett had to resign his


living, and went on the continent for the benefit of his health,
which was very much broken down by mental anxiety. His admirers
in their sympathy presented him with a purse of £7,000, and I
and thousands of others, lost a good friend. I left the church,
and transferred my singing to Westminster Abbey, and also sang
sometimes at St. Paul’s Cathedral. These events made me very
unhappy; and, through reading the newspapers, I became interested
about Australia. Whilst thinking of emigration I fell ill with
fever; but during my illness told my wife my thoughts on the
subject. She stoutly refused to join me, and said, “ Thomas, you
may go ; but I shall do nothing of the kind.” After considering
the advantages my children would have in a new country, I made
up my mind to go. As a first step, I called on a nobleman whom
1 worked for, Sir Frederick Rogers, the Emigration Commissioner,
and told him that I would like to go to Australia. “ How many
children have you ?” asked Sir Frederick. “ Six, Sir Frederick,”
I replied. “ Then you can’t go, as you have one child too many.
If you only had five I would give you your passage at once.” I
thanked him, and returned home very down hearted and dissappointed.
When I got home, I told my wife the result, and she was as glad
as I was sorry. Not long afterwards the new incumbent called
on me, and offered an appointment as verger and chorister at St.
Barnabas’s, with a decent salary and perquisites; and I accepted
the offer. I forthwith got measured for a black cassock and new
surplice, and on the following Sunday I presented quite a grand
appearance. But in spite of all this Australia kept running in my
mind. Now, it happened that one of my children was taken ill, and
I called in a doctor, who said the boy had water on the brain, and
accordingly treated him for it. The child, however, got no better,
and I got the services of a physician who said the boy had been
wrongly treated, for, instead of water on the brain the boy had
disease of the lungs. This doctor gave no hopes of his recovery,
and the child died shortly afterwards. I grieved very much over the
loss of my boy; but I was visited and condoled by many of my
friends. The clergy were very kind to me in my trouble, and
even allowed the chorister boys to go a distance of three miles to
Brompton Cemetery to attend the funeral. It was very impressive to
see them dressed in their surplices, and hear them sing psalms at the
grave, ‘and also a short anthem at the close of the service. All this
was very consoling to me, as it showed how much I was respected,
and how deeply and truly they all sympathised with me. But in
spite of all their love I was not happy; Australia still ran in my
head. Mr. Bennett returned to England improved in health, and
was oflered a living as vicar of Frome, not far from Bath. It was
in the gift of the Marchioness of Bath and Wells, and was worth
£7OO a-year, which Mr. Bennett accepted.
Things went on at St. Barnabas as before. Private confessions
to the clergy, baptismal regeneration, penance, fasting, keeping Saint


days, and the Real Presence in the Sacrament was the style of the
teaching which was held and believed in by the congregation.
u What has all this to do with Cockney Tom ?” some people may
ask. At any rate I could descry enough to see that there was
more behind the scenes between the Bishop and Mr. Bennett than
I had brains to imderstand, 1 gave notice to leave the church.
I called on Sir Frederick Rogers and told him that having lost one
of my children I was then within the limit. He told me to make
ready as soon as I could, and let him know, and he would get my order
made out so as to sail by the next ship. I undertook no more work.
I sold off my household goods, collected my debts, paid all I owed,
and took lodgings in Salisbury Court, Fleet Street. 1 received orders
to be ready to go on board at Southampton on a certain day. When
my wife saw the order she nearly fainted, and had a sleepless night,
but I comforted her all I could, and bought her a new silk dress. I
I was busy every day preparing for the voyage, and took leave of
my brothers and sister Sarah, my original dry nurse. Many tears
were wont to wet our cheeks as the subject of my departure was
discussed. I resolved to visit Frome before I left England. Ac-
cordingly I called on one of the church wardens, a friend of mine,
and told him I would like to see Mr. Bennett before I left. He
said “ I will go with you, I want a trip out of town,” so we fixed
the time to start, and bought a perfect model of St. Barnabas
Chureh, made by one of our members (a very clever architect).
We paid him three pounds for it, and it was well worth ten. So off
we started by the morning train for Frome, and arrived at five in
the evening. The vicar received us with all love and kindness. We
dined with him and his family, and after dinner the presentation took
place. He was delighted. I was given over to the parish clerk to
find me lodgings. This clerk, who was born and bred in Frome,
and had been parish clerk for twenty years, was, as they would say
in America, a most “ curious cuss.” Nothing would suit the clerk,
but he must take me to his “ pub,” where the choristers and him-
self used to booze. The ale was very good, and in fact the town
had quite got its name up for its ale. But sad to say the clerk got
drunk, and in the exuberance of his feelings would sing, thinking no
doubt that he would astonish me. This, however, he failed to do.
After much persuasion they got me to sing on Sunday at the.church.
I rose early on Saturday and visited the old church (where good
Bishop Kenn was buried), and also the market, and the river "which
runs through the town. After breakfast and morning prayer at the
church I visited the schools, and the hospital for the aged poor. In
the evening I went to their service, which was read by my friend,
the clerk ; then to bed. Up early on Sunday morning, a long walk,
back to refresh, and get ready for church. Sang Jackson’s
Te‘*“ Deum” and “Jubilate,” and was complimented by Mr, Bennett and
the choir.; arranged for the start back the next morning. Breakfasted
early, received from Mr. B. represent of a book to. remind me of my


visit to Frome, and lastly received his prayer and benediction. I
g-ot back safely, and found my wife willing to share my fate and
to emigrate to Australia. When every thing was ready I received
a letter from the Countess of Cardigan, full of good wishes foi me
and my family, and a cheque for £b which I did not refuse.
I and my family started from London to Southampton, where
we arrived the same night, and stopped at the depot. Very little
sleep. After breakfast took a walk over the old town of South-
ampton—nothing much to astonish a Londoner. Went on board to
report myself and family to the doctor, and to learn when we were
to be examined. On answering to my name on the roll being called,
the doctor said humorously, “Are you the person whom Sir
Frederick Rogers wro.e to me about?” 1 replied that I certainly
had the honor of knowing Sir Frederick, but 1 knew nothing about
any letter. “ I will not forget you,” said he, very kindly. “ To-
morrow you will be examined, and will sail on Sunday morning.”
Next day I passed the examination, and was sent on board. I and
my family got oui berths allotted and our luggage stowed away,
then the bell rang for the muster, and as the names were called
out they had to pass from one side of the ship to the other. When
my name was called out by the doctor, he bid me come forward, and
calling the attention of the passengers, said that he had the right to
appoint all constables, for the proper carrying out of the ship’s regu-
lations, and the general good order of the passengers, and it was his
pleasure to appoint the said Cockney Tom first constable of the
vessel “ William Stuart.” We were all very jolly on board the ship on
Saturday night, some singing, “ I’m afloat, I’m afloat,” others, “ A
life on the ocean wave, a home on the rolling deep.” I felt rather
dull. In the performance of my duty I had to walk the decks till
all the single women were locked up for the night, and to protect
them against all intruders, which I afterwards found to be so difficult
a task, as to be almost more than I could manage. The tug came
alongside next morning and took us on our way, not rejoicing, but
feeling rather “dicky” as we got out to sea. Sea-sickness is a
general complaint, and caused the passengers to turn up their noses
even at the sight of a roast beef and plum pudding dinner. Singular
to say, but nevertheless quite true, nobody found fault with the
food lor the first week, but after that, when the appetite returned,
there was a great deal of grumpling at finding the supplies insuffi-
cient to satify their ravenous hunger, although there were many on
board who had never lived so well in their lives before. Some of
them got as fat as pigs, others ate very little, on account of being
almost always sick. I was one of the latter. A few days sailing*
brought the ship into the Bay of Biscay. It was a grand thing for
bilious people, for it was as good as physic to most. At length we
got out ol the “ troubled waters,” and arrived at Maderia, and could
see the land and houses looking very beautiful. The weather was
fine, and dancing and concerts of an evening, and fishing in the day


time, made all very comfortable. Crossed the line; weather very
hot. Could not sleep below, so laid on dfick, crowded together
like sardines in a box. After being becalmed nearly a week we got
a start with the trade winds, and bore away down south into the cold
regions. Now I will tell you something that happened to my wife.
It was then very stormy weather, and the sea ran mountains high,
when she was confined and gave birth to a son, which they partially
named after the ship, Stuart; the name of my brother Philip,
being placed first. A great rejoicing took place on board, and all the
sailors got extra grog. I was appointed nurse, and had no objection to
the billet at night, except the difficulty of carrying in the dark the
necessaries required in such cases. For instance, when the ship was
rolling heavily my foot slipped and I fell down and nearly broke my
arm, at which mishap the sailors indulged in a hearty laugh. One
night when I was doing duty as nurse, a knock came to the hospital
door. “Who’s there,” cried Tom. “It is Jones, Mr. Constable,”
said the visitor, “ there is a smell of fire in the ship.” I was out in
a jiffey, and soon discoved that the second mate’s cabin was on fire.
We burst the door open, and there he was fast asleep, and part of
his clothes burning. There was a cask of rum in his cabin and other
spirits. We roused him out, got help, and soon put the fire out.
Had the wind blown in the opposite direction the ship would
have been burned to the water’s edge, and every soul have gone to
“ Davy Jones’ locker.” How thankful I felt for this delivery of all
from the very jaws of death. Soon after this I got into a little
tiouble. I had warned the sailors to keep away from the single
women, and threatened to complain to the doctor. The sailors
discussed the subject, and one of them was sent to inform me to look
out, or I would never reach Adelaide alive, but would be sent to feed
the fishes instead, which I did not believe in. The voyage, however,
was nearly at an end, and I kept my eyes open ; thought much, but
said nothing, At length we anchored off the Semaphore after a
voyage of seventy-eight days, ill nearly all the time. Next morning
I went on shore, having arranged with my wife that I would go up
to Adelaide in search of a house and work. In closing the first
part of my narrative, I feel constrained to record my sense of the
Providence of God that had preserved me amid so many vicissitudes
and privations, and although it has been said it is good to bear the
yoke in our youth, I cannot help thinking that had my earlier history
been spent under the advantages of good education I might have
developed a much better character and nobler career. The young,
especially, should learn to value the privileges and seize the oppor-
tunities for good which in these days are so freely offered to them,
but which were very sparingly bestowed in my time. I, however, do
not repine, but refer the kind reader to the more hopeful passages,
and altogether brighter aspects which marked my later history, and
which will appear in the second and third parts of this autobiography.


PART IT.
I was rather surprised to find Adelaide such a miserable
looking place; but that was in 1853. It is [very different now.
I failed at first in getting work, and found that house rent was high
and food dear. I thought I would dine at a pub, for there were no
restaurants were one could get a good “ feed” for one shilling in
those days. 1 had to pay 2s. fid. for my meal, which rather
astonished my weak nerves. Almost in despair I took up the daily
paper, and saw the following advertisement, Wanted a conductor
for the Star Concert Hall.” “ I think I understand that business,”
said Ito myself, so I called to see what it was like. The landlord
told me I might come that night, and let him hear what sort of a
singer I was. I next waited on the Dean, and presented a letter to
him from the Bishop’s brother in England to Bishop Short of
Adelaide. The Dean read the letter and told me it was simply
asking him to find employment for me, and that I might call on him
again, as the Bishop had gone to England, and he would see what
could be done for me and my family; but he never asked me to sit
down, or whether I wanted any assistance, although he was told
that I had a wife and six children on board the ship “ William
Stuart.” I left the Dean with a broken spirit, for I had expected to
have been received kindly by the olergy of the church that I had
endeavoured to serve with all sincerity in the old country. As night
came on I found my w r ay into a shoemaker’s shop, and asking for
employment I was told that there was scarcely any work to be done,
as nearly all the men were at the diggings in Victoria, and that Ade-
laide was like a deserted village. The shoemaker kindly advanced
me five shillings, and told me to repay it when I got work. I did
so, and afteiwards the same man became bankrupt, and was so
reduced in circumstances that he had to go to the Destitute Asylum,
where he died; but I never forgot the old shoemaker and his five
shillings. My first song was sung at the Concert Hail. It was a
long room, and would hold about 100 people. A big chair at the
end for the conductor, who, with piano and violin players, made up
the company of artists engaged ; amateurs did the rest. When I
entered the room I found it full of smoke, and lots of drink going
on ; and the landlord was acting as chairman. He possessed a fine
baritone voice, and sang several of Russell’s songs in good style ;
and, subsequently, played the flute and cornet with good taste, which
told me that I had no bad judge to sing to. After a time the
chairman rose and said, “ Gentlemen, we have here to-night a
gentleman from London, who will oblige us with a little harmony.”
Cries of “ Bravo !” came from all sides of the room. I went up to


the piano, and asked the player if he knew such and such airs ; but
to which he replied in broken English that he had never heard them.
He was a German, and a very bad accompanist*; so I sang without
music one of my favorite songs, “ Give me a Cot in the Valley I
Love,” and as I sang I thought of my dear wife on board, and broke
down. I sat down and felt thoroughly ashamed of myself. I had
nothing to drink, and altogether felt quite ill. Presently a gold
digger came in and sat down by my side. “What are you drink-
ing?” he asked. u I am not drinking at all,” said I. “ Then I’m
goingto shout,” he replied. “ Have a glass of hot brandy with
me; it will set you all right.” I consented, and the digger narrated
some strange stories about the diggings. I was listening at the
same time to some comic songs that seemed to please the company
better than the sentimental ones. A very good violinist then
showed up, and I called to him to have a chat with me. I told
him that I was also a professional, and asked him to accompany me
in a comic song. “ With pleasure,” said he. “Do you know
the first figure in the Irish Quadrilles?” “Yes,” said he. “ Can
you play in the key of D?” “ Yes,” said he. “ All right.” I replied,
and began to feel quite a new man. The brandy began to operate,
and when I felt its stimulating effects, I rose to my feet. The
chairman called to order, and I said, “ Mr. Conductor and gentle-
men—l find that I made a great mistake in my first effort, and if
you will give me another trial I will endeavor to make amends, and
will sing you a song of my own composing.” “ All attention !” said
the conductor. The fiddler and pianist played an introduction, and
I commenced to sing, and the company began to laugh. Every one
was delighted, and I had to sing it over three times. The land-
lord then sent for me, and said. “ What will you take to drink ?
Come and take the chair, and consider yourself engaged. You
shall stay here to-night, and breakfast with me in the morning, and
then we will settle about salary and other matters.” I went to bed
that night in better spirits than I had expected, and the next morn-
ing, being Sunday, I prepared for church, to return thanks to my
Maker for my safe voyage. 1 had dinner with my new master, and
agreed to sing every night, Sundays excepted, for three months at
one pound ten shillings per week, with board and lodging. I
signed an agreement to that effect, and was sorry afterwards that I
had done so". The next day I went to the Port to see if the ship
was in, and was informed that she would not be in for some time,
on account of low tide. I was very much disappointed at this,
especially as it cost me twenty shillings to be taken from the shore to
the ship and back again, which I could ill afford. I returned to
town, and wrote a letter to my wife, telling her all the news, and
promising to be at the Port when the ship came into harbor. After
this I took my nightly seat as conductor, and the place was always
crowded. I now began to feel myself at home again, and I made
all sorts of acquaintances, some of whom I did not care for, I was


next offered an engagment at a concert room, at a a salary of £1
per night, which, owing to my engagement, 1 was obliged to
refuse.
I next took a house, not far from the hall, at a rent of 255.
per week, so as to have a home to take my wife and children to
when they got on shore. I bought some furniture, a load of wood,
and such other things that were necessary for a commencement of
a new home. The days seemed like months to me till the ship
was in Port. The next day I was up early and, being anxious,
went down to the Port in the first cart, for there were no railways
in those days, nor was it anything unusual for the Port cart to be upset,
and for all the passengers to be pitched out on the road, and in
those primitive days colonists thought very little of such adventures,
which only served to produce a little excitement and interest in the
otherwise monotonous round of their everyday life. The vessel got
into port in the afternoon, and I went on board and bid the captain
and doctor good-bye ; took my wife, children, and luggage on shore,
engaged a drayman, loaded up the dray, placed my wife and children
on the top, and started for town, which we reached at dark. There
was then no gas, only dismal oil lamps, and every thing looked
wretched at night, I took them home, and left my wife crying when I
had to go to my engagement, but promised to be home as soon as
possible, and did so. Got up the next morning and chopped wood;
a job I was not good at, and went to market, and found everything
veiy dear. After a time I got a little work to do mending old boots ;
a thing I had not done for years. My wife did her best to get on ;
she took a family’s washing, and we used to fetch it four miles and
a half, and take it home again when it was done. So time went on.
The wife, however, did not like the neighborhood we lived in, so to
please her I took a house in Xorth Adelaide with a shop front, and
worked in the shop as I called it; but had no sto:-k except, my wife
and children, shoemaker’s tools, and some leather I had brought with
me. It so happened one day while I was at work that two men
passing stopped, and looked in. “ How do you do, shopmate ?”
said one of them, whom we will call Mr. Sweetwilliam; a gentle-
man from whom, in after days, I received many favors, which I take
this opportunity of acknowledging, and bearing testimony to his
kindliness of heart and superiority of intellect. His claim to mental
ability, however, does not require any confirmation of mine, as he has,
unaided, by his own talents, worked himself up commercially to one
of the leading positions of our city; and, politically, to the high
honor of being a Minister of the Crown. As a public speaker, few
can surpass him, and in kindly sympathy he has few equals in Ade-
laide. The profits of his great literary success, “ Lights and
Shadows of London Life,” have been entirely devoted to charitable
purposes, and the widow and orphan have had good cause to bless
this exercise of his mental activity; , also his exertions in aid of
the Blind, Deaf, and Dumb Institution, at Brighton, and many


other charitable institutions, bear better proof than anything I can
say to his benevolent disposition. Last, but not least, the assistance
he kindly lent me in establishing the Turkish Baths in Adelaide—
an undoubted blessing to our citizens, as supplying a neccesity and a
luxury for their use—which I now gratefully acknowledge. The other
was a Mr* Johns. “ How long have you been out?” said Mr. Johns,
“ Nearly two months,” said I. “ How do you like the climate ?”
said Mr. Sweetwilliam. “ Bather hot, at times,” said I. “We
have only been out a week,” said he, “we live at the corner up the
street. You come from London, I’ll swear.” “ I came from
Bermondsey,” said Mr. Johns, “ call in and see us when you are
passing. We brought out a stock of boots and shoes, perhaps we
may be able to do some business together,” said they. I agreed to
do so when passing. “ Where do you go in the evening ?” asked
they. “ I sing at the Star Hall,” said I, “ I am a professional
singer, you must know.” “We will come and hear you,” said they,
“we like a good song.” “All right! Good morning!” I called
accordingly, and had a look over the stock. They advised me to take
a shop and put up my name as shoemaker, from London. “ Can’t
we do some business together?” said Mr. Johns, “I’ll give you
credit if you have no money.” “ I’ll think over it,” said I. They
attended the concert and were very much pleased at my singing.
Mr. Sweetwilliam sang several very funny comic songs. Mr. Johns
made himself quite at home, and told me that he would call in next
morning. I consulted my wife about getting into debt. She wisely
suggested to take fifty pounds worth on sale or return, and. I did so,
Mr. Johns stipulated that I was to settle up once a month. I
selected my stock, made a show of goods, and sold two pairs the
first day, and felt that I had struck a lode, as the diggers would say.
All went on smoothly enough for some time. I increased my stock
till it amounted to two hundred pounds, and kept up my payments
too. Everybody had confidence in me. My engagement was then
up, and the landlord wanted me to renew it, but I said “ No, I have
been offered a pound a night to sing,. and it won’t pay me to do it
for two pounds a week.” “ I’ll give you more,” said he, but I
declined, having something eke in my head, and that was to try my
luck at gold-digging on the Melbourne side, I consulted my wife
about it. “Go by all means, Thomas,” said she, “If you think
you will be lucky.” This being settled, before starting I called on
my friends, including Mr. Sweetwilliam and Mr. Johns, who gave
me advice as to what I should do when I got there; which
advice turned out to be all bunkum, for they had not been there
themselves, and, as a matter of course, they knew nothing about it.
T had two neighbours who had also the gold fever. They had a
little money, and asked me to make one of their party. Seeing no
objection to this, I agreed to take them as mates, and accordingly
we all got ready, went to the Port, and took our berths on board
the steamboat “ Havilah,” bound for Melbourne. The passage money


then for the steerage was seven pounds each; now you can go for
two. My eldest son, Jack, and many friends, so-called, that could
drink nobblers at my expense, went down to the Port to see us off.
The captain was a friend of mine, and had been the chief mate of
the “ William Stuart” that brought me out from England, so we
wanted for nothing during the trip round, which was a very pleasant
one. We arrived safely in Melbourne on a Saturday night at dark.
There was a great rush to the wharf by the sailors, as they wanted
to get rid of their cargo, and I nearly lost the best of my things by a
mistake. We first went down Collins-street, and saw the City Coffee
House, with board and lodgings for travellers. We went in and took
tea at one shilling and sixpence each, made arrangements to
lodge there, put our things away, and then took a stroll about Mel-
bourne and found the buildings, there were superior to those in
Adelaide. Got home early and went to bed, but not to sleep, the
mosquitoes were too numerous, for there could not (as some
lodger remarked) have been a single one in the house ; they must
have been all married and with large families. Up early next
morning and took a walk to the Chinamen’s camping grounds, and
tried in vain to converse with them. Returned to our cafe, had
breakfast, went to church, but did not think much of the singing there.
In the afternoon took a long walk, returned, had tea, and then to
bed early, thinking to have a good night’s rest, but I supposed we
must have been very wicked, as there was no rest for us that night.
The mosquitoes mustered in full force and laid siege to our faces, so
that in the morning we hardly knew each other. So much for the
City Coffee House. Got up and went in search of fresh lodgings, and
got them in Little Bourke-street. Found a singing room, and got
an engagement to sing two or three songs a night at a salary of two
pound a week, from seven till nine o’clock. There was dancing
afterwards till two and three o’clock in the morning, but I had
nothing to do with that part of the business. I got work as a shop-
man in a large boot and shoe warehouse at a salary of four pounds
per week, aud might have saved money in Melbourne, but I was
determined to go further and try my luck at the diggings. I had a
letter of introduction to a very respectable man and his family in
Melbourne, from a dear friend of theirs in Adelaide. They received
me as if I had been a brother, invited me to supper, and asked me
to bring my mates also, as they intended to give a party. I accepted
the invitation, and made myself up for the occasion, and introduced
my friend, Jim the Fiddler, as I will call him in the future ; he was
a good player. There was a good supper provided. After supper a
littte music was proposed, and everybody said, “ Hear! hear!”
Fiddler Jim played Scotch tunes with variations, which gave im-
mense pleasure. After that nothing would do but that I must sing,
with violin accompaniment, the following song that had gained me
much applause in London :


“ I niiss thee, my mother, thine image is still
The deepest impressed on my heart;
Thy tablet so faithful, I in death must be chilled,
’Ere a line of that vision depart.
Thou wert torn from my side when I treasured thee most.
When my reason could measure thy worth,
And I know but too well that the idol I lost
Could ne’er be replaced upon earth.”
A Yankee gentleman present began to cry. He had left home when a
boy, and had not heard from his mother since. I also sang some
comic songs, which, by the aid of a little grog, made them all merry.
My new friends were very strict Roman Catholics, and they per-
suaded me to attend the Cathedral with them to hear the grand
music and their imposing ceremonies, which at once put me in mind
of St. Barnabas’s. They afterwards introduced me to their priest,
who was greatly affected with my account of St. Barnabas’s, and
remarked that I was as good a Catholic as himself. After a short
time they persuaded me to be conditionally received into their
Church. My kind friends put themselves about to witness
the ceremony, and wanted me to stop in Melbourne, and not to go to
the diggings at all, and offered to lend me £3OO to go into business
with, to be paid back by instalments with small interest. This I
declined with thanks, and made up my mind to go in search of the
precious metal. So I and my mates gave notice to leave to our
employers the following week. Fiddler Jim was a painter, and
George was a plumber and gas-fitter, and henceforth he will be
called “ Plumber George.” Before starting from Melbourne for
Forest Creek diggings, we went into committee to see what money
we had After fitting ourselves out as diggers, with blue guernseys,
knee-boots, pistols, tin pannikins, &c., we started on our journey,
walked a few miles out of Melbourne, and got hungry. We
stopped and took breakfast, paying for it three shillings each, and
believing that a nobbier would not hurt us, we called for three, for
which we paid very reluctantly one shilling each. We called a council
of ways and means, for it was plain at that rate of charges we
should not have sufficient money to take us half-way to Forest
Creek. It was agreed, therefore, to reduce ourselves down to two
meals per day, instead of three; two drinks, ditto, instead of three ;
and push on as fast as we could. We reached Keilor Plains, a
wild-looking country; not a tree to be seen, while the sun was so
hot that it burnt the skin off our faces. It was getting dark when
we arrived at the township of Keilor, which consisted in the year
1854, of two stores, butcher’s shop, and restaurant, where we put up
for the night. It was dreadful what we had to pass through that
night, for it rained so hard that it came in and ran down our mat-
tresses, which were on the ground. I got such a cold that I thought
I had quite lost my voice. My mates were also very ill. We
started early for the next town, Gisbourne, at the foot of Mount


Macedon, near the entrance to the Black Forest, and arrived there
about dinner time very hungry, but afraid to have anything, as our
funds were getting very low. We sat in committee outside' the
Forest Inn. Fiddler Jim said he wished that we were back in
Adelaide. “So do I,” said Plumber George. “ I’ll see what the
diggings are like first,” said I. “ How are we to get there ?” asked
they. “ Fear not, but trust in Providence,” I replied; and just
at that moment a gentleman rode up on horseback. I went up to
him, and said, “ shall I hold your horse, sir?” “My good man,”
he said, “ it is the first time that I have been asked such a question
since I have been in Victoria.” “ The fact is, sir,” said I, “my mates
and I are rather hard up, and are on our way to the diggings, and
have but very little money.” He dismounted, and handed me the
reins. “ I will not be long,” said he; and he was not many
minutes settling his business, and then he came to me and slipped
five shillings into my hand. I thanked the gentleman, and ran to
my mates. Fiddler Jim said he would starve before he would do
such a thing ; Plumber George thought different. “ Well, we will
have a drink out of the five shillings,” said 1. “ Most willingly,”
said Fiddler Jim ; for he was not too proud for that. We entered
the inn, and called for beer. The landlord was playing an accordion.
“ Are you fond of music ?” said I. “Very much,” replied the
landlord. “We can give you a treat in that line if you have a large
room,” said I, “ for one of my mates is a first-class violinist from
Julien’s Band, London, and I, myself, am a London concert-singer,
comic and sentimental.” “ Well,” said he, “It would not pay me
to engage you. There are so few people living about here.”
“Well,” said I, “If you will give us our board and lodging for
two days we will not charge you anything further.” “Have you
got any bills printed?” he asked. “No,” I replied; “but
we will write free orders, and take them round to the stores and
tents, and when we get the people here, we will make it pay you
and ourselves too.” “All right,” said he; “I’ll light the
room by eight o’clock; and now what will you take to drink?”
and we tried three nobblers of brandy. “ Now boys to work,” said
I. “ Get out writing paper and write out one hundred orders to
4 Admit bearer. Notice to the inhabitants of Gisbourne ! At the
Forest Inn a grand concert will take place this evening! Admit-
tance free. Cockney Tom, manager.’ ” These we distributed our-
selves at every tent within two miles round. Our programme was
a very simple one, and our stage was made of brandy cases, with
carpet over them. There was a chair for Jim the Fiddler, and one
for me, and Plumber George had to keep order as conductor. I
commenced with a sentimental song, which was followed by a
violin solo. Then came the landlord on the concertina; after which
I sang “ Billy Nutts, the Poet,” and had to repeat it; then came
a selection of Scotch airs, by Fiddler Jim, which was encored; and
that ended the first part. Refreshments all round followed, for the


benefit of the landlord. Part the second—comic song, in carica-
ture, by myself, entitled “ Timothy Black,” proved quite a sensa-
tion. Sang two more songs, then announced that after an interval
of ten minutes the dancing would commence. The company began
to get so numerous that we wondered where all the people came
from in that lonely part of the world. I spoke to the landlord
about passing round the plate. He entered into the idea with pleasure,
going round with it himself, and collected over four pounds, and
was requested to have the entertainment repeated the next night,
which was agreed to ; and we went to bed very tired. Next day
found a spring of beautiful water, had a bathe, and returned to
dinner. After a rest, we had a look around the place, and saw in
the afternoon what we had never seen before. A young’ man had
been to Melbourne and was returning to the diggings with a bullock-
dray loaded with provisions. He stopped at the Forest Inn, and
you may easily imagine he was drunk, for he began to boast of the
amount of money he was making. The landlord told him, as he had
so much money, he had better shout £lO worth of champagne. “All
right,” said he. “ is the money?” asked the publican.
“ You think I havn’t got it,” said he. “ I will show you.” and
then down went a £ 10-note, which the landlord put in his pocket.
Up came ten bottles of fiz. Everybody drank some ; the bullock-
driver got beastly drunk, and the landlord took him by the nape of
his neck and kicked him into the road. Next morning I fancied
I heard him sing the following lines :
‘ ‘ It was the cussed liquor that fired up my soul,
And caused me from my duty to depart;
So onward now my journey I’ll pursue—
But, golly ! how my head begins to smart 1 —
So, ‘ gee up Strawberry !’ ”
The second night the room was crowded. The same programme
was gone through as on the previous occasion, and nearly everybody
got the worse for drink. They were very generous, however, and
the subscription amounted to £ll, and we all had a good “booze”
at the close. The following morning, after breakfast, we prepared to
start for the next township, Kyneton, about 20 miles distant. The
road lay through the Black Forest. How it got the name of Black
Forest was on account of the many black deeds that had been done
in it. Numerous murders were committed, travellers were plun-
dered, and the gold escort stuck up. It was twelve miles through,
and had only one inn and a store passing the distance. There is
another reason why it is called the Black Forest, viz., that there
was a Black Thursday in those days, which is recorded in the
“ History of Victoria” as the hottest day ever known there. On
that day the forest took fire, and burnt for weeks, being one great
fire furnace for many miles, and when it died out every tree was
as black as charcoal. From that day to the present it has been
called the Black Forest.


We left Gisbonrne, with our treasury much increased, and we
felt grateful thereat. Walked on about five miles into the forest,
when we saw a house in the distance, which turned out to be a
public house; and, as it was very hot travelling, Fiddler Jim pro-
posed to have a drink. 11 If you like,” said Plumber George. “ I
don’t care about it,” said I; “so I’ll stay outside and mind the
swags.” I saw a flower-garden close by the house, and being
fond of flowers, I thought I would have a look at them, and did so;
but was surprised to see a black board there, on which was written—
“ Here lies the body of William Brown, who was murdered by his
mate whilst coming down from the diggings. He afterwards con-
fessed, and was hung in Melbourne in 1842.” I wanted a nobbier
after reading that inscription, and had one. On calling my mates atten-
tion to the board, it made them shudder. Further on we met the
gold escort, consisting of about thirty horsemen with drawn swords,
carbines, and pistols, coming from the diggings. Some were guard-
ing each side of the gold carts, and others acting as scouts, riding
through the bush near the road. They all wore red jumpers and
helmets, The next thing that we noticed was a poor bullock,
knocked on the head, merely because he was worn out. We got
through the forest at last, and it seemed a long twelve miles. It
was then getting late, so we pushed on as well as we could, but we
couldn’t walk fast, as our swags were too heavy, and Fiddler Jim
began to complain that he could not go much further. As dark-
ness came on we lost our way, but found it again and arrived
in Kyneton about 9 o’clock at night, completely knocked up.
Got up late the next morning, and took a walk through
Kyneton, which was the best-looking town we had seen out of
Melbourne. There were three good hotels, several stores, drapers,
watchmaker, tailors, shoemakers, and butchers, and bakers.
Lots of diggers were returning who had made their pile, and others
going to try to make theirs ; of course we were amongst the latter.
After sundry refreshments we went into committee to consider what
was to be done next. We all agreed that a day’s spell would do us
a deal of good, and that we should be all the better prepared for
gold-digging afterwards. We were then only twelve or fourteen
miles from Forest Creek, and I proposed looking for fresh lodgings,
as the house we were staying at was anything but respectable. This
was agreed to, and we searched and were successful in finding good
beds, food and liquors, and plenty of company. “ This will do,” said
I; “we must make some money here.” “ How ?” said Fiddler Jim.
“ The same as at the Forest Inn,” replied I. “At any rate we can
but try,” said Plumber George ; “ I am good to keep the door and
repair their beer engine, if through being overworked it should
happen to get out of order.” “ Well, I’ll see what’s best to be done,”
said I; “in the meantime you have a rest till I come back.” I went
into the kitchen and saw the girls. “ I beg your pardon,” said Ito
one of them; “ but will you inform me if you have a room large


enough for a dance.” “Oh ! yes; we use the lodge room when we
have a ball, and Mrs. Halliday is very fond of a dance; she will be so
pleased, so by all means go and see her at once, and let us know
when it is to take place. Plenty of people will be glad to come I
am sure,” said the girl, and so off I went to see Mrs. Halliday.
“Are you musicians?” asked she. “My mate plays and lam a
London concert singer, will you give us an engagement?” said I.
“ t No,” said she, “ I will not do that, but you can have the use of
our club room for nothing, and you can charge what you like for
admission.” I told her that at the Forest Inn the landlord found
us in board and lodging. “ Very well, then,” said she, “ I will do
the same. When do you propose to commence ?” “ To-night,” said
I. “ Then,” said she, “ I’ll tell the ostler to light up the room and
get your stage ready.” I had a nobbier and returned to my mates
and found them asleep. “ Wake up,” said I, “ there’s business to
be done.” “ What’s up ?” said Fiddler Jim. “ Anything fresh ?”
asked Plumber George. “ Yes,” said I, telling them all about my
arrangements. “ What’s to be done first ?” said I, “we must get a
large piece of cardboard and write on it in large letters, ‘ A grand
ball and concert will take place here to-night. Admission, 25.; to
commence at 8 sharp. Cockney Tom, Manager.’ ” The remainder
of the day was spent going about informing the inhabitants what a
treat was in store for them. You must know that Fiddler Jim and
myself had brought with us an old dress coat each, and black trousers
and white waistcoat, all the worse for wear. These, and my coats and
other rags for caricature business, and the fiddle, comprised our
professional stock-in-trade. Eight o’clock came and the folks began
to muster. Plumber George was at the door taking the two shillings,
which I thought was little less than a robbery, but I had agreed to
do it. They commenced the same programme as at the Forest Inn,
and all went off well. The interval as before, and drinks all round.
Everybody was eager for the dance; off they went. Mrs. Halliday
came in; she was a Scotch lassie, and couldn’t keep her feet quiet while
the “ Reel of Tullegoram” was being played; she rushed into the
room and began to twist and twirl about like an eel till she nearly
fainted. They kept it up late, and we promised to repeat the enter-
tainment the next night with a slight change in the programme.
We thanked the company, and retired to our room, counted the
cash, and found we had taken eight pounds. “ It’s not bad,” said
Fiddler Jim. “ Let’s have another nobbier before we go to bed,” said
Plumber George. “ All right,” rejoined I. The next day we took
a long walk; and found good farming country around Kyneton. Home
to dinner, everything going right. Rested in the afternoon, and then
got ready for concert and ball No. 2. The place was not rushed the
second night, but we nevertheless added four pounds more to our
treasury. After a good night’s rest we got up and prepared to start,
and bid goodbye to the landlady, the servants, and the town of
Kyneton. We had about twelve or fourteen miles to walk to the


great forest diggings that had given me the fever in London. We
stopped at Sawpit Gully and had a rest and beer, six miles more and
then we saw what is not easily forgotten. We arrived safely
at the creek, and were astonished to see the number of tents, the
thousands at work, men, women, girls, and boys of all ages, and the
deep holes nearly frightened me. When the diggers saw us they
they began to shout, “ Joe ! Joe !” which was responded to allround
the diggings. It was a saying or cry they had. When the police
went round to examine their licenses, I and my party walked on,
taking observations, when all at once some one called out, “Is that
you, Plumber George ?” “ Yes,” said he, “ all that remains of me
since I left London.” “ What do you think of the diggings ?” said
Mr. Postman. We had better call him by that name, for after he
left the diggings he came back to Adelaide and got an appointment
as mail guard, which he held for twenty years. He is alive now and
has retired, or is about to retire from the service an independent
man. Once he was a poor tailor in London. “ How long have you
been here ?” said Postman. “ Just arrived,” said we. Have you
had any dinner ?” “ What did you say ?” “ Have you Aad any
dinner ?” “ No,” said I, “we have only just arrived. “ You shall dine
with me in my tent, and I’ll give you a shakedown to-night,” said he,
“ Thanks,” said I. “My mates,” 'said Postman, “ are out pros-
pecting, and I don’t expect them back for a day or two. In the
meantime I will tell you a thing or two about the goldfields. Come
with me to my butcher’s.” The butcher’s shop was a tent, with two or
three sheep hanging up, also some sausages. “ A quarter of
mutton,’ said Postman. “ All right,” said butcher, “we expect to
have half of a bullock next week,” “ These are some friends of mine from
Adelaide; you may safely trust them if they get hard up,” said
Postman. “ They can have what they like on your recommendation.”
We arrived at his tent, and soon made a fire. “ How are you going to
cook?” asked Fiddler Jim. “You shall soon see,” said Postman.
Whereupon he got a tin bucket, washed it out, put water in, slung it
over the fire, cut off the leg of mutton, and in that went, after that
flour was made into hard dumplings, potatoes, onions, and oatmeal
all went in the same bucket that was used for getting out the gold dirt
from the holes. Then Mr. Postmi n proposed that we should go with
him to Johnny Allsort’s store and get some while the
dinner was cooking, to which we all agreed. Mr. Postman
gave us a hint that we had better look out for the holes, or
we might find ourselves in a bath. As we walked along Mr. Post-
man endeavored to enlighten us by explaining the names, &c.,
ot the various claims within view. Where we then were was called
Pennyweight Flat. “On our right is Moonlight Flat; then over
there is Long Gully ; that hill on the left is called Adelaide Hill;
and the one next is Friar’s Creek ; then further on is
Campbell’s Creek ; and then comes Murder Creek, which takes
you on to Tarangower ” We arrived at Johnny Allsorts, and had


two bottles of beer, for which we paid Bs. We were introduced to
Johnny as new arrivals. He had made his fortune by selling to new
chums such articles as tents, cradles, buckets, tubs, and frying-pans;
in fact he could supply anything except gold dust, which he bought,
or exchanged for tea, sugar, or grog. We arranged to call next
morning and do business with him. Got back safely, and enjoyed
our dinner, after which we had a long yarn about digging, followed by
a song. Some neighbours came in, and Jim turned out his fiddle, and
played a bit, after which we had some grog, fired off our pistols, re-
loaded them, made up the fire, and then turned into our blankets,
with our firearms under our pillows. I slept well till daylight, when
I got up and made a fire, put on the billy, and had breakfast.
We then gave Johnny Allsorts another call, all of us going-
together. Mr. Postman accompanied us to see that we were not
imposed upon. Johnny greeted us with, “How are you this
morning? Will you take a nobbier?” “After business,” said I.
“Good,” said Mr. Postman. “Now, then,” said Allsorts, “what
is the first thing?” “ A good, warm tent,” said Fiddler Jim. “I
can accommodate you to aT. I have one not far off that I bought
off three diggers who went to the new rush. Come with me and
you shall see it, aud then judge for yourself.” We all went to look
at it, and found it to be a good second-hand tent. “ It’s dirt cheap
at £5,” said Johnny Allsorts. “ Too much,” said Mr. Postman,
“if it was offered to you to-morrow you would not give any more than
£2 for it.” “ Well, we will not quarrel about a pound,” said he.
“It is yours for four.” “ All right,” said the lot of us. Mr.
Postman selected what we should want to begin with, such as a
cradle, buckets, rope picks, shovels, dishes, a camp-oven, flour,
potatoes, onions, matches, &c. When the account was made up we
had not enough to pay it; so Johnny said, “ Never mind the balance
now. If you are lucky, come and pay; and, in the meantime, give
me your names-for the amount, so that if you have to leave I may
have a claim on the tent.” We consulted together, and agreed to
his terms. We then had nobblers all round, took possession of our
goods, and moved into our new tent. We arranged that Plumber
George was to be cook for the first week, and the first thing that he
had to do was to chop a tree down, but Fiddler Jim, however, had
to help him. I went off to the butcher’s shop, and got credit for a
quarter of mutton ; and when I got back they had lighted a fire,
so I fried some mutton, boiled some potatoes, and had dinner; after
which we went into committee. “ What’s the first thing to be
done?” asked George. “We must take out our license before we
begin to dig,” said Jim. “Ah!” said I; “I forgot that! We
shall have to pay three pound for it.” “ And I should like to know
where the money is to come from,” said Fiddler Jim. “ I’ll try my
friend, Mr. Postman,” said George. He did so, and got it. We
then took a walk to the Commissioner’s tent, and got our licences,
after which we had a good look over the township, which was called


Castlemaine, and is so called to this day. It’s original name, how-
ever, was Mount Alexander. We returned, and marked out our
claim near a spot were we were told lots of gold had been found.
As it rained heavily, we agreed not to start work until the next day,
so we returned to our tent and wrote letters, informing the folks at
home of our safe arrival. Got to work next day, and took it in
turns, one to use the pick, and the other the shovel. We got down
about four feet the first day, and were very tired, our hands, not
being used io pick and shovel work, were very sore. The next day
we expected to bottom the hole. The diggers told us that we
should strike the pipe-clay at about seven feet. The deeper we went
the labor of getting the stuff to the surface was increased, as every
bit had to be drawn up in buckets. The third day we got to the
pipe-clay, under which was found a small deposit of gravel. We
hauled it up very carefully for fear of losing any, and we put it
through the cradle, as we had seen the others do, after which we
washed it in a tin dish, and then at the bottom of it we found some
very fine specks of gold, about two pennyweights, valued at about
seven shillings, and this was the glorious result of three days at the
diggings—a splendid sum to divide among three men. It is needless
too say that we were disheartened, and Jim the Fiddler was affected
almost to tears. As it was a moonlight night, I suggested a walk
into town, and we went; and it was not altogether unprofitable, for I fell
in with a man of the name of Ashton, whom I had known in Ade-
laide, where he had been Crown Lands’ Ranger. His father was
proprietor of a large establishment known as “ Ashton’s Hotel,” and
he had many acquaintances, but I only had the pleasure of his son’s
friendship. “Ah! my boy,” said he, “how do you get on? Come to
try your luck?” “Yes,” said Jim, “but it has only been bad
luck as yet.” “ You must not despair.” said Ashton. “ Come
and take a nobbier with me.” Not one of us refused, we all went
to the Albert Hotel, and had two nobblers each. The landlord
could see that we were new chums, as he had come from London
himself, so he told us, and had made money by digging, and had
invested it in the Albert Hotel. “What trade are you?” he
asked. “My mates are both tradesmen—one is a plumber, and the
other is a painter,” I replied. “And what are you?” said he.
u Why? lam a professional singer from London.” “You’d do well, if
you had some music with you,” said he. “ Why, one of my mates
is a first-class fiddler,” said I. “Humph!” said he; “comedown
to-night, and we will see what we can do for you; at any rate, I will
give you something to start with.” We bade our friend good-bye,
and promised him that if we made a change we would go to his
place at Tarangower. We returned to our tent and had tea.
Then we took the fiddle and went to our first engagement on Forest
Creek, for which we received about seventeen shillings and a bottle
of brandy. We were to play and sing every night there, unless we
had other engagements. We were next told that we should do


much better if we worked in the creek, as many were doing very
well there, so we gave that a trial, and found it much easier, and
much more profitable than sinking holes. We got several nice
nuggets of gold there; and what with gold digging, fiddling, and
singing, we soon paid Johnny Allsorts and Mr. Postman what we
owed them; and more than that, for we soon got our names up as
Jim the Fiddler and Tom the Singer ; and were engaged to play at
a grand cricketing dinner, to celebrate a match between eleven
Castlemaine players and eleven from Bendigo. There I sang the
Gold Digger’s Song, the chorus of which was as follows :
“ Merely ply the pick and spade,
And rock the cradle fast;
Here we pursue no idle trade,
For we may be rich at last.”
which was greatly appreciated much to the satisfaction of myself
and Fiddler Jim. We stopped there that night, but there was no
sleep as they all got drunk. Champagne was the order, not of the
day, but of the night, and a general scrimmage with pillows and
bolsters flying about, and such like, was carried on till daylight in
the morning.
Things went on with us pretty well for several weeks. Our
gold-digging averaged about half an ounce per day, which was not
so bad had it lasted ; but bad weather set in, and a lot of rain falling
the creek was flooded, so we had to work up to our hips in water,
and Plumber George was soon taken bad and could not work. When
the mail came in I and Jim went to the Post Office to see if there
were any letters for us. After waiting about two hours we got our
letters; one for George, one for Jim, one for Mr. Postman, and one
for me also. We returned to our tent and then went over to Mr.
Postman, who read his letters to us, which was to the effect that his
only child was dying, and that if he wanted to see it before it died
he must return at once. He was not long in making up his mind.
“I’m off,” said he “ to Adelaide to-morrow morning, and leave
everything to my mates to settle. I have made a little gold, and if
all goes well I’ll come back and make some more.” When we told
George the Plumber that Mr, Postman was off to Adelaide, he said,
“ I’ll be off with him, for I am sick of gold-digging ; this kind of life
may suit you who can make money by singing and playing, but it
don’t suit me at all, and another thing, I want to get home to my
wife, as lam quite sure this life don’t agree with me.” We gave
him a fair share of what we possessed, and the next morning saw
Mr. Postman and Plumber George off to Adelaide, Of course we
gave them several commissions, which they faithfully executed. We
only remained but a short time on Forest Creek after our mates had
gone. Truly we lived a fiddling kind of life for the violin and
singing was now our principle support, and strange were the scenes
we were obliged to witness. One night after playing and singing at
the Albert Hotel, we were just about to leave when we saw one of


the 11 traps” as they were called on the diggings, and which means
no more nor less than “ policeman in plain clothes.” I saw that he
had his eyes one some one, so we thought we would watch and see
what was up, and we had not long to wait. A poor drunken digger,
who had been shouting to everybody, came out of the Albert Hotel,
and strange to say the very man who ought to have taken him in
charge for being drunk, and have protected him from robbery, knocked
him down with his staff, knelt on him, and robbed him of all he
possessed, and then left him on the ground to die if he liked, and
what is worse to relate, it was more than your life was worth to utter
a word against this shameful proceeding. Such was the state of
society in those days on the gold fields.
Not far from us there lived two men given out to be diggers.
We thought that they were, but we soon found out our mistake.
They wormed themselves into our company at every opportunity, and
were uncommonly civil. I could see that these men were no good,
and found out that they got their living by sly-grog selling,
cheating at cards, or any other little game. As we could not get
rid of them, our only course was to leave Forest Creek as quietly as
possible. We did so, and meeting with some new chums who had
come to try their fortune, we sold them our tent, furniture, and stock-
in-trade at a loss; but which was better after all than selling them
to Johnny Allsorts, and off we started next morning for Tarangower,
a distance of only fifteen miles. We had to go through Campbell’s
and Fryar’s Creeks, Headman’s Gully, and Murder Flat, and at all
these places the gold fevei was raging. We passed through without
much chaff; now and then—there goes Fiddler Jim and Singing Tom
would be called after us from the creek, but we took no heed and
went on our way as fast as we could.
After walking about ten miles we came to a small township
called Mucklesford which lay in a beautiful valley, and reminded me
of my song, “ Give me a cot in the valley I love,” the cottages were
all built of wood, with neat little gardens around them, and a creek
of beautiful water ran through the township, which contained two
stores, one public house, and a smith’s and shoemaker’s shops. I had
a chat with the disciple of St. Crispian, and found him to be an old
hand from the other side. We enquired how they got their living,
and he informed us that most of them grew vegetables, and supplied
the diggers. We asked him to have a drink with us which he did
not refuse ; when to our surprise the two men we were in dread of
confronted and upbraided us for not telling them that we were going
to Tarangower. They knew where the new rush was, and would like
to chum in with us they said. We told them that we had a friend
there where we intended to stay ; but they would not be put off, and
determined to keep us company, to protect us in case of our meeting
bushrangers. They asked us many questions such as “You must
have made a lot of money at the Creek with your playing and singing.”
I told them we had made very little indeed, and what we had got we


had sent home to our wives in Adelaide. We were very civil to
these strangers for it was no use being otherwise, as they were well
armed and not particular.
After a long walk we arrived at Tarangower at dark, completely
knocked up. Fiddler Jim said he had never walked such a long
fifteen miles in his life ; it seemed to him more like thirty. I soon
found out my friend Ashton, who was glad to see us. We shouted
to the men who had kept us company, and bade them good night.
“ All light,” said they, “we will see you in the morning.” I told
Ashton about these men. “Oh ! I know them,” said he, “ they
are the biggest rogues and thieves on the diggings, and one has been
tried for murder; keep out of their company.” We thanked Ashton
for his advice. As he could not furnish us with lodgings, he took
us to a friend who kept a large saloon. He undertook to give us a
shakedown for three shillings each. About thirty of us slept in one
large tent on boards, with just a mattrass laid on them, every man
finding his own blankets. We slept pretty well, and got up early,
took a walk round the township, which was called Maulden, on
account of a man of that name owning a lot of land in that district.
It had formerly been known as Bryant’s Ranges. This Bryant was
a sheep farmer, and had made a large fortune when the diggings w r ere
first started by supplying the diggers with mutton. We had break-
fast and called on Ashton, who said, “ I am glad you have turned
up, as I have got you an engagement with my neighbour that keeps
the National Hall, he wants some one that is likely to draw well, so
I will go and introduce you to him ; he is a black man, but not a
bad sort.” We found his words true. Jim requested me to make
the engagements, as I was a better general at that sort of thing than
he was himself, so to oblige him I engaged myself and Fiddler Jim
to a black man for three months, at a salary of three pounds per
week each, and what money we could collect, with board and
lodging, and with the full right to dig in the day time. The agree-
ment being duly signed and witnessed, we cracked a bottle of wine
over it—which, by the way, was not very good. Our first night
was not such a great success as we had anticipated it to be. We
got our bills out; but the people did not show up at first, which was
to be accounted for by the fact that a week before we arrived there
had been a company of minstrels known as Rainer’s New York
Niggers playing there, who had done well, and then gone on to
Bendigo. We had a miserable attendance to begin with, but as the
evening advanced the company increased, and at the end of the first
part I made a speech to the effect that there would be a change _of
programme every evening, and dancing would commence at nine
o’clock and close at eleven ; also that there was to be no charge for
admission, but that they were to give what they liked to the
“musicians. Now,” said I, “take your places for the first dance.”
“ Let’s have a Scotch reel,” said one digger. “ Good,” said
another; and off they started. Presently more company arrived,






and in came Ashton and his friends, and they, all began te dance.
Fiddler Jim kept them close at it. Ashton went rpund with his hat
and collected three pounds the first time ; he repeated it again and
got nearly as much more. At the finish we all went to Ashton’s
tent and every one of us got more or less the worse for drink. We
found out afterwards thaf Ashton and our master, the black man,
were working together in more ways than one.
Next day we had a look round the diggings, and it was a grand
sight to see so many hills and gullies covered with tents of all sorts,
and occupied by people of all nations. We now purchased a new set
of digger’s tools, hearing that a new rush had taken place at Long-
Gully, a place about two miles from Maryborough. We did a fan-
business at the hall on our second night, for the ladies put in an
appearance in good force, arid we felt certain the men would soon
follow. The next morning we were off to the new rush. We had to
pass through a lot of bush country, and as there were no tracks we
lost our way, but after a long time fell in with a digger who set us
right again, and got to our destination about the middle of the day.
We marked out our claim close to the spot where we were told they
had struck gold, and as we had to get back to the hall in time for
dinner, we had no time to try our luck that day. We still heard
reports that lots of gold had been found near our claim, so next
morning early off we went, and got to work. We sank about four
feet and got no gold; our neighbours in the next claim got down to
the pipe clay, and struck a small patch of gold, about two penny-
weights, which gave them courage to persevere, and the next day we
bottomed, scraped up the wash-dirt, and carried it home to wash,
there being no water nearer than three miles, and of course we were
very anxious to see what gold We had got, and so washed it very
carefully, and found we had about half an ounce, and a few grains of
nuggety gold; which we considered not so bad a result.
The next day Jim was unwell, and could not work; so I went
to the claim alone. Imagine my surprise when I found the man I
v anted most to avoid coolly working our claim, and g-etting gold.
“ Hilloa I” said he; “ I heard this was your claim, and that"you
were going to give it up as a duffer. I’ll go in with you; my tent
is close by, and I shall be on the spot to see that no one jumps the
claim. I said that I would speak to my mate and give him an
answer the next day ; so he went to work, and I shared the gold
Avith him, which we sold at a store for two pounds. When I got
home I found Jim much better, and I told him about our Forest
Creek friend, which rather frightened him. “ You will have to
watch him pretty closely,” said he. “ I don’t know what else you
could do than keep in with him ; so keep on digging, and I will be
about and keep my eyes open, for you know I myself am not much
good at digging.” Fiddler Jim was right; he did not like the pick
and spade. Things went on very well, as we though; but an old
man who worked in the same hole to us, quietly said to me: “ Where


did yon pick np with your mate ?” I told him in confidence all I
knew about him. “ I know him,” said he. “ I came from Sydney ;
that’s were I met him. There has been a lot of tents robbed, and a
store down in the Gully was stuck-up last night, and this cove is one
of the mob suspected. Be careful, my boy,” continued the old
Sydney man ; “ I have been on the diggings four years, and have
made very little gold; but what little I do get I send to my poor
daughter, who is in Sydney.” After that I began to like the old
man very much.
In the afternoon of that day I heard a great noise, and a
voice shouting, “ A fight! a fight!” I got out of the hole to see
what was up, and sure enough there were two men stripped, and a
mob of blackguards backing them up. I thought I would go and
have a look on, but the crime carried the punishment, for I tumbled
down a hole and nearly broke my arm. I afterwards ascertained
that the men had quarrelled about a claim, and to settle the dispute
they determined upon a fight, and the best man was to have it. The
fight lasted nearly two horns, when they both were taken to their
tents—the losing man could not work for a week after, and the
winning man was more than a fortnight getting round. So much
for fighting. This took place on a Friday, and the next day my new
acquaintance came to my hole while I was at work, and said in a
whisper: “Are you by yourself?” “Yes,” said I; “my mate
has gone to a store to get a nobbier.” “ Then come up,” said he.
I did so, and after, the old man had a look round to make sure he
was not being watched, he unrolled a dirty, old, colored handker-
chief. “ Look at that, my boy. 1 have been looking after this for
four years, and now I am off to my dear child in Sydney, and I
shall never see you again. Don’t tell anyone about my luck,’ and
as he spoke he showed me a lump of gold and quartz as big as a
pint-pot. It must have weighed eight or ten pounds. He had
just struck it with his pick in a corner of his claim. He went away
very quietly, and I never saw him afterwards. We worked hard
there for some time after that, but there were no great nuggets
for us. . ,
It so happened one day that a man, whom I knew by sight,
called to me ; “I say, Tom, I can lay you on to a real good thing,
and it’s not to every one I would do so, but as I know you I give
you the first chance. It is this : —I have received a letter from my
sister, stating that my mother is dangerously ill, and that I must
go down to Melbourne as quickly as 1 can. Now, this claim of
mine is very rich, and if you like to give me a five-pound note you
can take my claim and work it out. You will get gold enough to
pay you back in one day. To convince you,”_ said he, “just come
down and judge for yourself.” I went with him, and he began to
pick away, and to examine the stuff. I looked on with astonish-
ment, as there was no mistake about it —there was gold in every
shovelful of dirt taken up. I said: “ I’ll tell you what I will do ;


I’ll give yon four pounds, and chance it.” “Well, as I want to get
away,” said he, “ I will take it.” When I told my mates what a
bargain I had struck, my Forest Creek mate remarked, “ Yon
“ have been nicely got at! That fellow gets his living that way.
You bet, the hole was prepared.” “What’s that?” said I. “Why,
he planted the gold there himself to deceive you.” I could hardly
believe it; but, alas! it turned out to be too true. I now began to
have a very bad opinion of myself as not being so smart a man as I
had thought.
A day or two afterwards, while a poor fellow was working
in his hole, which was not very far from my claim, and where, by
the bye, I was getting nothing, a cry arose that the
earth had given way and buried him. Everybody was ready to
lend a hand to dig him out; but when they recovered him he was
quite dead. This sad event put a stop to work that day, and I and
Fiddler Jim resolved to leave the Long Gully, and work nearer the
Hall. So a day or two afterwards we told our Forest Creek mate
what we were going to do, and, to our surprise, he was quite agree-
able, remarking that he wanted a change himself. “But,” said he,
“we may meet again. I didn’t like yon chaps at first, but I don’t
know how it is, I have taking a great liking to you all at once, so we
will have a drink together before we part;” which we did, and felt
relieved of a companion who had kept us both in fear. We next
went to work in German Gully, but got very little gold. We left
there and went to work at Chinaman’s Flat, and there did nothing
at all. Then we tried our luck at Sailoi’s Gully, and Spearmint
Hill, and got a little gold, bulb not enough to pay, as it cost us ten
shillings a load for water to wash the stuff we dug up. The pro-
fessional business at the Hall now began to flag, 0 and we found
out that the black man was very much in debt, and, consequently, we
could not get our salary. We went into council with Ashton, ’and
he advised us to stay and work up a benefit. He informed us ’ that
a digger’s ball was to take place, and that we might get the iob to
work it up. J
A day or two later I was destined to witness a painful sio-ht
which depressed my spirits for several days afterwards. As I was
going home to my tent I saw a crowd of diggers walking three
abreast, and carrying in front what seem a sailor’s chest. It looked
very much like a rollicking party of drunken fellows bent on some
bachanalian festival. Some were smoking, while others were
indulging in coarse jokes and loose conversation, and it was quite
evident to me that most of them were very much under the
influence of drink. When 1 came up to the party I naturally
inquired what was the matter. “ Oh, nothing particular—it’s only
a digger that has been found dead in his tent. He was bad for
some time, and his mates have got permission from the police to
bury him.” “ Has he no relations with him?” I enquired. “ None
that are known. Nobody even knows his real name; he is called


Bill the Sailor.” I followed them to a place leading up to the
mount, where they stopped, let down the box by the side of a hole
about three feet deep, and tried to get the box in; but the hole
was not big enough, and they had to set to work digging until it
was the proper size. At last they managed to get the box down,
and when fairly in the hole it was about two feet below the surface.
They shovelled in the earth over the poor fellow, who was buried like
a dog, without a word of prayer ; but not without a certain amount
of jesting and rude remarks, which nearly made me commit myself.
My feelings were harrowed up to such a pitch at this exhibition of
the demoralizing influence of gold digging, that I felt almost ready
to exhort them to think of their own latter end; but on thinking the
the matter over I decided that it would be better not to do so, but
offered a prayer to God in silence instead.
When I got back to the hall, Fiddler Jim and a man whom we
had better call Mr. Fiddler No. 2, who knew Jim in London, were
waiting to see me on business. “ What is it to be ?” I asked.
“ Well, said Mr. Fiddler No. 2, “ I am sent by Mr. Hitchcock, of
Castlemaine to offer you an engagement for a day and a night—
you to sing, and Mr. Fiddler Jim to play the fiddle, with me and a
pianist. We don’t want much rehearsal, as you understand each
other’s business. You will have to sing at the opening dinner, for
which there are two hundred tickets issued, at two guineas each,
and there is to be a ball and concert. It is to celebrate the opening
of a large restaurant to dine three hundred a-day, and they are
sparing no expense to get the thing up in Al style. Now, what
do you think would pay you to come ‘down the day before, and go
back the next afternoon?” “ Well,” said I, “ I don’t think we can
do it for less than five pounds each and expenses. What do you
think, Jim?” “I should say that is little enough; but mind, we
are not going down in a bullock-dray. Ho must send us up a decent
trap and a pair of horses.” “All right,” said Fiddler No. 2.
“ write out the agreement, and if you are agreeable to the terms you
shall sign it. I will 'witness it, and I will send it up to you with
particulars when you are to come.” “ All right, ’ I said; “we will
come, and now let us have a liquor. Had you not better stop to our
show to-night, and go down to-morrow.” “All right,’ said he;
“ but I only wish I had brought my fiddle with me.” “ Never mind
that,” said 1; “we can borrow one for you.” We had a very jolly
night of it; for bottled ale, porter, and sherry being the order of the
band. It w T as proposed that we should have the Huntsman s
Chorus, wdiich we all sang in union with the black man, Ashton, and
several others, I arranging the words as follows:
“ We will chase the kangaroo,
We will chase the kangaroo—
Thro’ the wild woods we will follow,
And will chase the kangaroo.”
No less than twenty times was this repeated, till everybody thought


we were mad, and they were not far out in their judgment. The
next day we saw our friend Fiddler No. 2 off, hut not before we had
arranged with him about our benefit. From that time we did very
little gold digging.
I made the acquaintance of a somewhat intelligent Chinaman,
who was cook at the police camp. Ho was well dressed, and had
his hair closely cropped. He drank no beer or spirits, but indulged
freely in tobacco smoke ; but no opium for him. He used to relate
droll stories about his country and their clever tricks, and, said for
plundering, no nation could beat his at that sort of thing, as their
depredations were simply wonderful. They could vie with all creation,
and they could live cheaper than any other people; also, that they
were more numerous than any other people, excelled in gambling
and cheating, and were the oldest-fashioned people on record. In
fact, everybody was just simply nobody when compared with the
Celestials. John Chinaman completely shut me up.
On the following Sunday Fiddler Jim and 1 received an in-
vitation to dine on Mount Tarangower. Mrs. Ashton gave out the
invites, and the party consisted of Mr. Blackman and wife, Mr. New
York and his sweetheart, a neighbouring digger and wife, two young
ladies, one of whom was a dressmaker, and the other took in wash-
ing, and Mr. and Mrs. Ashton, with two kangaroo dogs for hunting.
We started at 10 a.m. from the camp on a very hot day, and con-
sequently had to rest and refresh very often, and by the time we
reached the top of the mount it was past one o’clock ; but the magnifi-
cent sight rewarded us for all our trouble in getting there. The view is
altogether beyond my power to describe. The scenery about Mount
Lofty and Adelaide are grand, but Mount Tarangower eclipses both.
We had dinner, prepared by the ladies, and then took a walk. Met
a native with boomerangs under his arm, and the dogs would have
bitten him had not Ashton called them off. We asked the native
to show us how they used the boomerang, and he did so very
cleverly. The next thing to be done was, under orders from the
ladies, to get some dry wood and make a camp-fire. As a matter
of course we instantly obeyed, and on went a billy, which they had
brought with them. “ Now, you can have a smoke,” said Miss
Dressmaker. “ Yes, till tea is ready,” said Miss Washerwoman.
“ And a nobbier,” said Fiddler Jim. “ I second that,” said Ash-
ton, and it was carried unanimously. After a short stroll we returned
to tea, everything being first-class, consisting of boiled fowls, ducks,
pickles, cakes, etc. Ater tea we had nobblers all round, the ladies
joining in, and then made a start for home, which we reached in
half the time it took us to ascend. We were all very tired, and
soon got to bed, some to dream, and others to think over the
wonderful works of the great Creator. I could not sleep, my
thoughts wandering from the mount to Adelaide, and my wife and
children who waiting to receive me ; but eventually I dozed
off, I slept until roused for breakfast, after which I went to the


post-office to see if there were any letters for me. Sure enough there
was one addressed to “ Cockney Tom and Fiddler Jim, esqrs.,
National Hotel, Tarangower.” It read as follows : —“ Dear Sirs—
Consider yourselves engaged at Castlemaine for Wednesday next.
Your terms are accepted, and I shall be there to meet you
with carriage and pair. Get everything ready to start, and on our
way back we can see the races at Mucklesford. Trusting you are all
jolly, believe me, my dear brothers, yours sincerely, Fiddler No 2.”
“ All right,” said * Jim ; “we must get everything ready—clean
white vests, white shirts, neckties, and dress-coats.” “By George!”
said I, “ our boots are very bad, and we will have to see what we can
borrow. We must not look shabby in our carriage.” “ I believe,”
said Fiddler Jim, “ that I shall be the first of my family who ever
rode in a carriage to a five-pound engagement.” “ I can say ditto
to that,” replied I. We had got everything ready when Wednesday
morning arrived, and the carriage and pair, with our friend, Fiddlei
No. 2, looked mighty big in it. “ Give the horses a spell, and
let’s have a nobbier before we start,” said I. “I am quite agree-
able,” said Fiddler No. 2. “ By-the-bye,” said he, “do you think
I could do any thing in the photographic line up here.” “ I think
you would do well,” said I, “ as there is a lot of wpmen about,
and they are fond of that sort of thing.” “ 111 think it over, said
he. By this time we had got all our luggage in the carriage, our-
selves seated, we waved our hands to our friends, and started. Nothing
particular occurred on the road. We arrived at Mucklesford and
repaired to the racecourse, about a mile off. What a sight it was to
see so many people there. “Where did they all come from? was the
general enquiry. “ Some from one diggings and some from another,”
was the reply. Gambling and drinking were all the rage. We saw
but one race, they called it a steeplechase, and in that race a
jockey, a poor little boy, fell from his horse, broke his arm, and was
earned off for dead. We did not stop to see any more races, but
drove on and arrived safely at Castlemaine, refreshed ourselves,
and got ready for business. We were introduced to lots of people,
including our host, Mr. Barnes, who treated us as gentlemen. We then
made out our programme, which he approved of. The dinner was
to be on the table at 5 p.m., concert and ball to begin at 9 p.m.,
and to wind up we set down Sir Roger de Coverley for 4 a.m.; I
acting as toast-master, singer, manager, &c. At five o’clock the
first act commenced with eating and drinking, and corks were soon
flying about in all directions. In course of time they got tired of
that; then the chairman rose (he was the Commissioner of Police
stationed there) amid thunders of applause. “ Gentlemen,” said he,
“ Dr. Brown will preside at the piano, and a gentleman from London
will lead the singing. First I’ll give you ‘The Queen.” I then
sang the solos and the company joined in the choruses, after which
several grand speeches were made, and were sung. I sung
several songs and was encored, and then occupied myself in getting


others to sing, and so kept them alive. At 9 o’clock sharp, the ladies
began to arrive for the ball, and the old adage that it is not all “Gold
that glitters,” had its truth amply proved on this occasion. There
were many at that ball who had no proper notion of ball-room
etiquette. They had evidently come to see and be seen, just as some
people go to places of worship, and in all such cases we must
carefully draw the line. There were some present who could not
dance at all, and others who attempted and failed. The most amusing
part was the women laying their heads together and taking stock of
each other’s dresses ; and the vanity they displayed—some with gold
rings on every finger, others with necklaces composed of nuggets of
gold, with holes pierced through them, and strung together on a piece
of narrow ribbon, the same with their bracelets, and their dresses
simply baffled description. Some, however, were there dressed neat,
and not gaudy, which showed at least that they had been respect-
ably brought up, and consequently knew how to behave themselves
in company. When the dancing first commenced very few ladies
stood up. We had a walk-round, and then a polka, and, more ladies
arriving, things began to brighten up a bit. I dressed up for my
caricature song, and appeared on the stage, which was com-
posed of old cases from a draper’s store, one of which not being very
finn gave way and let me fall, to the great amusement of every-
body. I, however, not being hurt, soon got on my feet again, and as
the music began to play, I commenced signing, and the audience
laughed right heartily. I had to come on three times, and I was all
the go with the company for the remainder of the night. We had
supper at 1 a.m., and there was any quantity of champagne, all seem-
ing bent on enjoying themselves. Those who could not dance
were indulging in a little gambling freak in a back tent, got up for
the purpose. The affair was kept up till four o’clock in the morning,
when a fight was about to take place, but the police interfered, and
all made tracts for their tents, not quite sober. I and my mates had
coffee royal, and then went to bed at 5 a.m. I slept till past 11, got
up refreshed and had bottled ale and porter, after which we received
our pay, and ordered our carriage for '1 o’clock. Fiddler No. 2 re-
solved to go with us, and try his fortune as photographic artist
at Tarangower. We walked round the town, and saw many faces
we recognised from the creek. Some of them were doing well, whilst
others had not earned their salt. We got back to Mr. Barnes, the
landlord of the restaurant, and lunched with him. He was very
sanguine of making his fortune, and told us he had a good friend
in Mr. Hitchcock, as the restaurant and half the town belonged to
him. About ten years afterwaids I met Mr. Barnes in Adelaide.
“ How do you do ?” said he ; “ you’ve forgot me.” “ I think I have
seen your face before,” said I; “but I don’t remember your
name.” “ Don’t you recollect me paying you five pounds for sing-
ing five songs.” “What! is it Mr. Barnes?” “Yes, Tom; it is
I. I was a rich man then, and worth twenty thousand pounds,


and now lam a poor draper’s assistant at Mr. ’s, in Bundle-
street ” “Is it possible ?” said Tom ; “ What has become of Hitch-
cock ? ” “ Ah, poor fellow ; he went to law, lost all his property,
and now he is as badly off as 1 am.” “You astonish me,” cried
I; “ come and let us have a drink.” “ I will, with pleasure,” and
we did so. Since that time we have frequently met, and talked over
our experience at the diggings.
But to return to Castlemaine. We started at about 3 p.m.,
stopped once only at Mucklesford, and got back to Tarangower in
time for supper and concert. We spent a very pleasant evening,
and got to bed early, tired out, and almost done up. We went out the
next morning with Fiddler No 2 to get a tent for him to start
business in, and we got it for 10s, per week. Walked down the
town, and called at the saloon, where we saw the proprietor. “ When
did you get back?” said he. “ Last night,” said Jim. “I heard
that everything went off in first-clas style. Our ball comes off next
week ; it will take the shine out of the Castlemaine people. We
have a committee of gentlemen to act as stewards, and no one can
get a ticket except through them. No diggers will be allowed in
except they wear a silk jumper or dress coat. You bet, they will be
very particular as to what ladies they admit. I have been authorised
to entrust you with the job of working up the band. Ashton spoke
to me about you. He says you understand all about it. Will you
undertake to provide the band and superintend the dancing, and
then I shall have nothing to do but to look after the eating and
drinking department ” “ What he says I’ll agree to,” said Jim.
“ How many in the band ?” asked I. “ Five,” said he; “ two
fiddlers, piano, cornet, and trombone; but we cannot get them up
here ” “ I’ll tell you what we will do,” said I. “ I’ll engage to
provide you with as good a band as we can get, five in number,
for fifty pounds, cash down on the night of the ball.” “ Too much,”
said he. “ All right,” replied I; “there is no harm done; it will
cost nearly £2O to get a piano and player over from Bendigo.” We
then had a drink, and left. “We mighthave done it for forty,” said
Fiddler Jim. “He will give you fifty,” said Fiddler No. 2. He
was right, for in the afternoon I was sent for, and the bargain was
struck. We set to work to make the best arrangements we could.
There was a pianist at Bendigo who owned a piano, and we wrote to
him, offering him £lB to bring his piano and play at the ball. He
accepted, and we retained Fiddler No. 2 for £5, with a promise to
play for our benefit for nothing. We got a clarionet and cornet
player, with triangle, to come for nothing, just to see the fun, and
have a good booze.
The night of the ball arrived, and with it a great number of
people. The band played “God Save the Queen;” but no dance
music. “ When are you going to begin ?” asked the proprietor.
“ When you pay me £50,” I replied. “ That be blowed,” said he ;
“but I’ll tell the committee.” “ All right; we don’t play till we get the


money, and mind, no cheques.” He went away, and soon returned
with the cash, and paid it down with a bad grace. I gave him a
receipt, and ordered the band to play up. Nothing happened to mar
the pleasure of the evening until after supper, when a digger ran
up against the clerk of the police, who for some offence had got him
fined a day or two before. “ I’ll have that fine out of you,” said
he, and struck him such a violent blow that I thought he was killed.
The digger was arrested, and the man was taken into a small tent,
where the camp doctor mesmerised him, and got him round, and then
sent him to the camp to be taken care of, and the next day the digger
was fined £ls for assault. The ball was kept up till five o’clock
in the morning, and then, by way of a change, they indulged in
skittles and champagne, and how they got to their homes is a
mystery. We found our way home, and that is all we knew, except
that the Castlemaine ball was the best.
Next morning we paid the band people, after which we took a
rest, and wished ourselves away from Tarangower. After thinking
the matter over, we decided to stay for our benefit, and take away as
much money as we could, and then no more digging or fiddling
till we got back to Adelaide. So it was settled to get out our bills
at once, and the benefit was arranged to come off on the following
Monday. We had a fair house, and everybody seemed sorry we
were going. Ashton drove us part of the way to Castlemaine,
where we arrived that night, and put up at friend Barnes’, where we
met several gentlemen, who invited us to the police barracks to play
at whist, and they proved very kind to both of us. We left Castle-
maine the next morning after breakfast, and met nothing worth recording
till we arrived at Sawpit Gully, where we met with some troopers
whom we knew at Maryborough. “ What! Fiddler Jim, is that
you? where are you bound for?” asked one of the policemen,
“For Adelaide to our wives and children. We have had enough
of the diggings,” said I. “If it is not a rude question,” said
Fiddler Jim, where are you going to ?” “ Melbourne,” he replied ;
“we are taking down a man to be hanged for murder. He was
tried a few weeks back; but you must have heard of it. He nearly
killed a poor woman with a stick, and then completed the job by
putting her on the fire and burning her to death.” “ What a
beast,” said I. “Where have you locked him up?” “No where,”
said the policeman ; “he is sitting there, eating his dinner.”
“What!” said Jim, “ that old man ? why, he must be 70 years
old, at least.” “ You are not far out, according to his own account.
He doesn’t think much about it. We let him have what he likes to
eat and drink, and we are not to hurry him on the road. He will
be there soon enough. We are going to stay here to-night, and you
had better stay and keep us company over a hand of cards,” “No
thanks ; we must get to Kyneton to-night, as the landlady expects
us, and we must keep our engagement.” “ Well, if you must go,
let us have a liquor first.” We did not refuse the drink, and glad


we were to get away. Jim remarked that he could not have stopped in
the house with a man who had committed a crime like that. I also
said that when the policeman spoke of murder I thought of our
two Forest Creek friends, and it would not have surprised me if he
had been one of our late mates from Tarangower.
We reached Mrs. Halliday’s in time for supper, had a refresher,
and enjoyed our meal; and after a little chat went to bed, and slept
soundly and dreamed, not of murders, but of “ Home, sweet home.”
We were up next morning early, and made arrangements with the driver
of a conveyance to pick us up on the road. We had to pass through
some bad country for horses, but pushed on, were taken up by the
coach, and arrived safely at Gisborne. We stopped there that night,
and next day got into Melbourne, where all our old friends were
glad to see us. We put up at our old lodgings, and my Catholic
friends begged me to stop in Melbourne; but I could not be so
persuaded. As the steamer did not leave for several days, I went
to work for a warehouseman in a large firm. The principal of the
house was a Mr. Montefiore, the original owner of property situated
on a hill known by that name in North Adelaide; and I might have
stopped there, but preferred going on to Adelaide. While I was
there, however, I met with a gentleman from Adelaide, who had
heard of my church singing. This gentleman was a churchwarden,
and held a responsible position under Government. I was intro-
duced to him, and found him to be a kind-hearted man. He made
me promise to call on him when I got back to Adelaide; and
fortunately I did not forget, as he turned out to be a good friend to
me afterwards. As the time arrived for the steamer to leave we
bade Melbourne and our friends good-bye, took our swags on board,
and had a pleasant passage back. There was plenty of fun, as a
great many diggers were returning home with lots of gold; but, alas!
neither I nor Fiddler Jim belonged to that class, so could not join
in their merriment with anything like zest. Our pleasure was
confined to the knowledge that we were going home to those whom
we loved, and who were anxiously awaiting our return; and although
we were returning not much better off than when we started, yet we
had seen something of the world beyond the ordinary horizon, and
hoped at least that we had grown wiser.
“What do you advise me to do when I get to Adelaide?” said
Jim. “ Get a place, and turn dancing-master,” said I. And he did
so, made a lot of money, left Adelaide and went to Melbourne
again, where he did nothing worth mentioning, and died only a poor
fiddler. We arrived at last, safe and sound, after being away five
months. We had acquired much more knowledge than gold, it is
true; but in spite of all defeats and failures, there were two at least
who were thankful for all things, and they were my wife and I. In
this short period of five months, that completes the second stage of
my history, I experienced many adventures and vicissitudes, and
had much experience, which, though perhaps not very interesting to


the general public, contained many lessons highly interesting to me,
and which I have reason to believe acted beneficially upon my
subsequent career, and which, also, I cannot but think tended to
give a better tone to the third and last stage of my history, which I
am spending in South Australia, where, in spite of all my faults and
failings, the Almighty Ruler of events has been pleased to bless me
with a much greater measure of prosperity than I am conscious of
having ever deserved.
PART 111.
In those days there were no telegraphs or railways, so that when
I arrived at Port Adelaide I had no means of making my arrival
known to my wife and family, and was unable to make a quick
journey to the city, but had to be jolted along a rough road in a very
modest spring cart, 1 was not even favored with a public demon-
stration, but “ Never mind,” thought I, “ stop till I get home, for
there I know I shall meet a warm and loving reception from my dear
wife and children, perhaps more so than if I had been the Governor
of the Province,” and as it happened I was not far wrong. After a
great deal of pulling and hauling by the children, and kissing and
hugging by my wife, there was a pause, and then came questions
and answers too numerous to mention, and amongst others there
was, “ Have you been lucky, Tom ?” “ Yes !” replied I, “ lucky to
get home safely.” “ That is not what I mean,” said my wife, “ have
you got any gold?” “ Very little, lam sorry to say,” was my reply.
The news of my return, however, soon spread, and the neighbors
flocked in to see a returned digger, but, alas, with very little gold.
The next day I employed myself in taking stock, and it proved
anything but satisfactory; but it was no use to grumble at finding
myself in debt, as it proved, to the tune of two hundred pounds, and
with only about one to pay it, such, however, was the case. The
first thing to be done was to call on all my creditors, report myself,
and say, “ Have patience and I will pay thee all,” and I did so, and
was kindly received. Mr. Johns had taken a shop in Rundle-street,
and Mr. Sweetwilliam was engaged as his shopman. “ What luck?”
said Mr. Johns when I saw him. “ Very little,” I replied. “ Did
you get any gold?” asked he. “Yes!” said I, “and I have brought
you a nugget for your kindness to my wife while I have been away.”
“ I won’t take it as a gift,” said he, “ I shall give you full value for


it, and yon can pay me what you owe in instalments as soon as you
can, as I believe you are honest,” said he. “ Well,” said I, “I am
as honest as most men, and time will prove that.” I gave Mr. Johns
the nugget, it weighed an ounce, and was a very pretty specimen of
pure native gold. Mr. Johns was much pleased with it, and said, “I will
send this home to my dear sister in London,” which decision pleased
me very much. Whilst Mr. Johns was showing the nugget to his
wife, Mr. Sweetwilliam called me aside, and said, “ Keep in with
Johns, he is a good sort of fellow, at least I have found him so, and
he is going to start me in business on my own account, so he will
want a shopman, and you will just suit him.” I thanked Mr.
Sweetwilliam, and told him I intended to go in for singing if I could
get well paid for it. “ I won’t lose sight of you, however,” said
Mr. Sweetwilliam, “ I do a little preaching and singing myself on
Sundays.” “ I don’t intend to stick to shoemaking myself either if
I can help it,” said I. We then all adjourned to the York Hotel
and had a nobbier each.
On my way home shortly afterwards I met a postman named
Chapman. “What are you back again,” said he, “Have you no
engagement?” “No!” answered I. “I know of one,” said he,
“ where a man like you is wanted—a fellow that can please every-
body.” “ What is the salary?” I asked. “ You had better call and
make your own terms,” he replied, “ you can mention my name if
you like. “Thanks!” said I, “ but where is it.” “At the Black
Horse Assembly Rooms, not far from the Black Bull, Hindley-
street,” said he. I accordingly called there, saw the proprietor, and
took the engagement at three pounds per week, and a bottle of wine
to treat my friends with on Saturday nights. “Not so bad,” thought
I, “ and much better than doing nothing,” so I went home to tell
my wife of my good luck. I had just got home when a clergyman
came in and enquired for me. “I am the party.” said I; “ what is
your pleasure, sir?” “ I have been informed,” said he, “ that you
understand church singing, and your neighbor, Mr. Lilly white has
recommended 3 r ou to me.” “ What are the duties ?” asked I, “ and
what church ?” “ The duties,” he replied, “ are to teach the
children to chant and sing a few hymns, practice on Fridays, and
morning and afternoon service on Sundays. We are holding service
in the schoolroom until we get our church built. It is situated at
Glen Osmond, about four miles from Adelaide.” “ What is the
salary ?” asked I. “ Thirty pounds a year to begin with, and refresh-
ments on Sundays, and when the church is finished I will increase
the salary.” I accepted the offer and things went on smoothly fob
some time.
I afterwards called on my friend, Mr. Hawkesgood, at the
Treasury, who inquired into all the particulars of my family, and
what they were doing. “ I’ll take your eldest boy,” said he, “ and
see what I can do with him.” “ I’ll consult my wife,” said I, “ and
let you know in a day or two.” “ Very good,” said he; “ I will
48
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF


not forget my promise. If you want a friend let me know.” “1
will,” said I, and wishing him good morning, with many thanks,
I departed. I thought a great deal about my new friend, and told
my wife all about his offer. She consented, provided the boy
was allowed to come home once a week and go to church, which was
agreed to.
About this time the Crimean war broke out. France joined
England, and all the world seemed up in arms and eager for the
fray. Everybody said we should have privateers paying us a visit
some fine day, who would burn our houses, and send our wives and
children adrift. Meetings were called, and it was decided to form a
volunteer force, and every man was called upon to join, and, for
myself, I thought the matter over seriously. Now, at this time I
had a companion from London, whom I will call George Rollinson.
We met together and conversed on the subject, and Rollinson said
that unless he had a chance to go in as a substitute, and get well
paid for it too, he would not join. I said I would, on condition
that they made me an officer, which Rollinson said was not very
likely. A meeting was called at the Dover Castle, North Adelaide,
to enlist those who took an interest in bloodshed. The most agree-
able part of the programme put forth was that each man was to
receive six shillings per day when called out for practice, and each
company was to have the election of its own officers, who were to
be chosen by ballot; each company was also to appoint its own shoe-
maker and tailor. In fact, there was to be everthing to make the
men comfortable. A neighbour of mine, a good fellow, whom we
will call Mr. Sain (afterwards Captain Sain), and who had an eye
to business, called on me and said, “ I think we can manage it.”
“ Manage what?” said I. ‘'Well, I have been thinking the matter
over about the appointment of officers for the volunteer force, and
I don’t see why I shouldn’t be made captain, with you as my color-
sergeant. It would be good thing for me, and you too.” “ How
is it to be done,” said I. “ I’ll tell you,” said he. “ After we are
all sworn in, you make a proposition that William Sain is a fit and
proper person to represent the company as captain. I have a man
who will stand for lientenant, and if we are elected you shall be
color-sergeant.” “ I don’t care about the job,” said I, “ for it
don’t seem to me quite the thing, as everbody will have a vote; but
to oblige you I’ll do it.” The time came lound for holding the meet-
ing of the company for the men to select their officers, viz., captain,
lieutenant, ensign, color-sergeant, second sergeant, and two cor-
porals. There were three cheers given for the Queen, and then
more or less all present got the worse for liquor, and I went home full
of the soldiering business. My wife laughed at me for being such
a donkey. “ Never mind, ’ said I, “ wait till the Russians show up,
and then you won’t laugh.” Of course the Russians never did
show up. Rollinson did not come up to the swearing business;
possibly because he objected to swearing on principle. He acted!


however, afterwards as he said he would, as substitute for a man who
had to go into the country. Another meeting was called, and the
election took place; a poll was demanded, and my proposition carried.
Mr. Sain got in by a majority of one vote, and Lieutenant Franklin,
being a friend of mine, they decided that I should be sergeant Tom,
No. 1. My uniform, however, was far more brilliant than my military
career was destined to be.
In order to work myself up in discipline, I employed the drill-
master to give me private instruction, in the art of self-defence and
military movements ; so I soon became passable ; but there was one
part of the drill which I could not manage, and that was the goose-
step. I well remember on one occasion receiving orders from my
colonel to take a file of men and proceed to Private Hornabrook’s
residence, in Kermode-street, North Adelaide, and bring him on to
the parade-ground, to be dismissed from Her Majesty’s service, as
a warning to all volunteers for getting drunk, which poor Horna-
brook was in the habit of doing. This duty I carried out to the
letter, and when I arrived on parade the men were standing at
ease, and a great deal of giggling was going on in the ranks. Pri-
vate Rollinson was laughing, so I called “ Attention!” which
brought Rollinson to stand-at-ease and dress up. The colonel called
Hornabrook to the front. “ Attention I” shouted I. “ Private
Hornabrook, I dismiss you from Her Majesty’s service. You are a
disgrace to the company, and ought to be drummed out of the
regiment as a drunkard. Now, you can go,” said the colonel.
“ Thank you, my bunny,” said Private Hornabrook.
On the first of every month one of my duties was to go with
the captain to the Treasury to receive the men’s money. Now it
happened that the captain kept a public-house, and one of my orders
was that, after drill on pay-days, I was to march the men four
abreast from the parade-ground to his house to be paid. The
natural result of such a course was that the men spent the better part
of their pay in drink. As a frightful example of this may be
mentioned the fact that ex-Private Hornabrook mortgaged his cot-
tage and land to Sergeant Phelps, the landlord of the Scotch Thistle,
for money to spend in liquor, and was never able to redeem the
property. I merely mention this as an illustration which came
under my notice of one of the evils resulting from the curse of drink.
Such conduct didn’t speak much for military discipline in those
days. Happily things are much better in this respect now, and
doubtless they will go on improving as the Temperance flag waves
through our streets. In those old times, however, I went on pro-
gressing with shoemaking, singing, and soldiering, and, upon the
whole, was making a fair living.
About this time a change took place in my position in life, by
a gentleman calling on me to ask if I would sing at a concert for
the benefit of a poor widow woman, who had suffered severely in
being burnt out through a bush fire, and had lost all her property,


consisting of a small farm and its belongings. The gentleman who
called on me was a merchant in Grenfell-street, Adelaide, and having
heard that I could sing in glees, requested my help to make up the
number required. I said that I would most willingly give my
services, but being under an engagement I had to ask leave, which
was granted on my agreeing to find a singer to take my place at the
Assembly Rooms for that night. 1 went to the rehearsal, which
was at the Old Theatre, off Currie-street, and everything passed off
well. The Governor was there, and the poor widow had a good
benefit. The next night, when I went to my engagement, I was
told that after the following week my services would not be re-
quired. “ All right,” said I; “lean get other engagements as
good.” “ You may,” said the landlord, “but not at £3 perweek.”
As soon, however, as it became known that I was about to leave
the Black Horse, I was offered £1 per night for two years to sing
at the Black Bull, which I, of course, accepted. My next trouble
arose through the clergyman of the church where I was singing on
Sundays having a dispute with a Mr. Osmond Gillies, who had
given him the living, and a lawsuit was the result. The clergyman
lost his living, and, as a consequence, I lost the precentorship with
its emoluments. However I did not fret much about it, as it was
a long way to travel to the church every week. I next joined the
choir at St. Peter’s College Church, in which Mr. Hawkesgood, a
friend of mine took great interest. I sang sometimes at Christ
Church, North Adelaide, at Trinity Church, and at St. John’s
Church, but mostly at the College.
About this time another change took place in my history.
Whilst I was at work one morning I received a note from a friend,
who was then a churchwarden of St. John’s, informing me of a billet
at a bank, which my friend thought would suit me better than shoe-
making. “ Secure it at once,” said he “or somebody else will be
before you, and take with you the letters you brought out with you
from London.” I lost no time, and was soon at the Union Bank,
not far from King William-street, and was introduced to the manager
there. “ What’s your name ?” said he. “ Cockney Tom,” said I.
“ Where do you come from?” “ London.” “ Have you any letters
as to character!” “ Yes,” said I; “here they are, sir. One from
my late clergyman, one from the Countess of Cardigan, one from
Bishop Short’s brother, and several others.” After carefully reading
them over, he said, “ Have you any one in Adelaide you can refer me
to?” “ Yes, sir; I know Mr. Hawkesgood at the Treasury,” said I.
“ Well,” said he, “ can you wait till I go out for a short time?” and
when I return I will give you an answer.” I accordingly waited in
a small room till he returned, when I was again called into the
manager’s room. “ What wages do you expect?” said he. “ Just
what is usual, replied I. “It is a position of great responsi-
bility,’ said he, “ you will have to sleep on the premises, collect
large sums of money, and do whatever you are told to do either by


myself or by the accountant. The salary will be £l2O a year at
first, which will be increased according* to length of service. Do you
think you could live and pay your way out of that?” “ I have lived
on much less than that,” I said. “ Well, you may consider yourself
engaged,” said he, “ from this date.” He introduced me to the
accountant and teller, and I was soon set to work with orders which
were sent in from the country for collection. I soon shaped myself
to my work. I went home after business hours, and told my wife all
about my good fortune, which made us happy and grateful. “ Well,
it was a slice of luck,” said my wife. “ I will call on my friends,
Mr. Hawkesgood and Mr. Churchwarden Delany, and report,” said
I, “ and tender my thanks, and also my resignation of my engage-
ment at the Bull; for it would be hardly consistent with my engage-
ment at the bank during the day to be singing at a place of that
description at night.” “Just do what you think would be right,”
said my wife. The next day, whilst on my rounds collecting, I
called on my friend, Mr. Hawkesgood, and informed him what I had
done. “ I know all about it,” said he, “ the manager is a very
intimate friend of mine, and came to me respecting your character,
and I popped in a word for you” Oh!” said I, “it’s you, then, that
I have to thank for my appointment in the bank.” “ It's a pleasure,”
said he, “to be able to assist any one I think is deserving.” I then
informed my friend, Private Eollinson, that I did not intend to do
any more shoemaking; so, if he would like to take my shop and the
little business connected with it he was welcome. “ I’ll consider,”
said Eollinson. “ You know,” said he, “ that I have a wife and
family in England; and if I could manage to get them out, I would
accept your offer at once.” “ Think it over,” said I, “and if you
make up your mind, I will help you all I can.” “ I suppose,” said
Eollinson, “ you will be above drinking with me now that you are
connected with a bank; I wonder what you will be next?” I was
a little proud of my improved position ; but I was not too proud
to drink with Private Eollinson. He promised to let me know his
decision about the offer the next night, which he did, and said, “ I
have thought over the matter, and accept your offer; I have saved a little
money, and should have had much more had it not been for my long
illness at the Port, so I should like to get my family out here, as I
think that my son George would get on better in Adelaide than in
London.” It was settled that his wife and family should come out,
the passage-money was paid, and Eollinson took my business,
and all went well for several months, when Eollinson received a
letter from his wife, saying that they were about to sail for Adelaide.
He came to me and reported the fact, “ Keep steady, old boy,” said
I, “ and it will be all right by the time they arrive.” When they did,
Eollinson donned himself in full military uniform, looking for all the
world like a lieutenant, and such was the effect of his disguise that
his family scarcely knew him.”
Sometime after this, a circumstance occurred, which was the


cause of great unhappiness in my family. It should be remembered
that I had some Roman Catholic friends in Melbourne, who had been
very kind to me whilst I was there; and I had some in Adelaide
also, and amongst them was a watchmaker, a man of good moral
character, who persuaded me to go with him to hear Bishop Murphy
preach. I went, and was very much struck with the Christian charity
and goodwill to all men enforced in his discourse. Instead of speak-
ing against this or that denomination, the Bishop spoke rather in
favour of every religion being good, and calculated to make bad men
better. I remembered my pledge to my Melbourne friends, and
thought much over it. Shortly after this, I was introduced to the
Rev. Father Smyth, whom I found to be the very essence of goodness
in everything, and had several private interviews with him on matters
of faith, and a number of other things hard to be understood; but
Father Smyth soon explained them all, by telling me there were
many things practised in the Church of Rome which were not neces-
sary to a man’s salvation. He then introduced me to good Bishop
Murphy, who listened kindly to my history, and was pleased to accept
me as a member of the Catholic Church. I tried to keep all this to
myself; but it was soon spread abroad, and my wife felt very much
hurt at what I had done, and declared that she would sooner have
her arm cut off than desert the church in which she had been bap-
tized. Many cross words ensued, and my wife strongly objected to
our children being taken from the Protestant and sent to the
Catholic school, and I, for the sake of peace, yielded. After a time
I was summoned by the Bishop, and told it was my duty to join the
choir. I explained that I was but a poor scholar, and did not under-
stand English, much less Latin; but he introduced me to Father
Maurice Lencioni, a good man, who held the office of choir singing-
master and confessor, and whose duty it was to visit the sick, bury
the dead, and bring young people together for marriage. Everybody
liked this priest, myself particularly. He was an Italian, a
splendid musician, and gifted with a good voice; he undertook to
teach me the Latin service, and he had his work to do. It was a
long time before I could manage it; but at length I succeeded fairly
well, but never became A 1.
About this time the Bishop announced his intention to raise
money to build a cathedral, and collections were made, and the
money came in from all parts of the colony. A building com-
mittee was formed, and I was selected a member. My duty was to
watch the work, attend the meetings, and collect as much money as
I could; and every Sunday I might have been seen going about
West Adelaide with a collection book, receiving from the poor
Catholics their small gifts of 3d., 6d., and Is. per week, and they
gave most freely, according to their means. Just about this time
the good Bishop was taken ill. He had an account at the Union
Bank, and on one occasion meeting me there he offered me the collector-
ship of all the town rents belonging to the church, which I accepted


with thanks. The Bishop grew worse, and eventually died, and was
buried in the unfinished cathedral. The funeral was the largest ever
known in Adelaide, and was attended by all classes and denomina-
tions. Afterwards, when the cathedral was partially finished and
opened, I was requested to join the choir, and consenting, was
appointed receiver of all moneys taken at the doors by the collectors;
which money I had to pay into the bank every Monday to the credit
of the Cathedral Fund.
About this time that great singer Madame Anna Bishop paid a
visit to Adelaide, accompanied by Mr. George Loder, an accomplished
musician. They took apartments at the York Hotel, kept by a Mrs.
Bray, who conceived such a liking for Madame that in her will she
bequeathed her a legacy of one thousand pounds, besides making her
other presents. Madame required a local agent, and Mrs. Bray,
knowing me, recommended me to her. I was accordingly sent for
and engaged to make myself generally useful, to sing when required,
and to act as money taker at her concerts, and White’s Rooms were
fixed upon and engaged by me from the proprietor, Mr. Geo. White,
on behalf of Madame. The bank authorities allowed me the privi-
lege of taking the engagement at White’s Rooms so long as I did
not neglect my duty at the bank, and by such engagements I
was brought into the society of all the leading artists who visited
Adelaide. Perhaps it would not be out of place to mention some of
their names, viz., Madame Caley, fellow pupil of Jenny Lind,
Richard W. Kohler, Miska Hauser, the greatest violinist that ever
came to Australia, Linly Norman, Richard White, Madame Caran-
dini, Walter Sheiwin, Madame Goddard, the premier pianist, W.
Montgomery, B. Fairclough, and many others.
When I had been engaged at the Union Bank for about three
years and a half, the manager, a widower, got married, which made
me more work than I could well do ; my salary besides not being pro-
portionately increased, as was promised when I entered on my en-
gagement with the bank, I began to be discontented, and
thought that I would look out for something better than remaining
in that billet. About this time a new bank was projected by a
gentleman from Melbourne, as it was generally believed that as
there were at that time only three banks in Adelaide, and the colony
was steadily progressing, that there was room for one more, and so
it was decided to establish another. Adelaide can now boast of
seven, I thought I would try for a billet in the new bank, which
was to be called The National. I made application and was engaged;
there was only half the amount of work to be done as at my old
billet at the Union Bank, with a much better salary. I held the position
of bank messenger and collector there for seven years and a half. The
bank prospered, and the average collection for the last three years of
my service amounted to no less than two hundred thousand pounds
per annum; and lam glad to be able to say that I never made a
mistake, or lost any of the bank’s money.


One or two things worthy of mention occurred whilst I was in
the banks that might perhaps serve as a lesson to bank clerks, should
any of them perchance read this narrative. On one occasion the
teller was in such a mighty hurry to get to the races that in locking-
up the cash he forgot the exchanges on other banks. After they
were all gone, my duty was to go round to see that everything was
all right, when, lo and behold! I found the exchanges left in the
drawer, instead of being locked up in the safe. There was only the
trifling sum of seven thousand pounds in bank notes, and it was a
good thing for the bank that I was not a Kelly. I locked them up,
engaged a cab, drove to the racecourse, found the teller, brought
him back, and showed him what he had done, or rather what he had
not done. He locked up the money safely, thanked me, and begged
that 1 would not tell the manager. Upon another occasion five
hundred pounds were overlooked, and left under the counter. I slept
with the money under my head that night, and thought what a rich
pillow I had, and what a temptation it would have been to many who
not only had money on the brain, but the love of it in their hearts.
I gave it up the next morning, and was glad to be rid of it.
Just about this time, one of my daughters was living with a
family who were spending their summer months at Brighton for the
pleasure of sea bathing*. Whilst indulging with them in this
luxury she got out of her depth, and had it not been for two
gentlemen who happened to be passing she would doubtless have
been drowned. They rushed in with their clothes on, and brought
her out nearly dead. When I heard of it I was very much concerned,
and called on the gentlemen, and thanked them for saving my
daughter’s life. I wondered how I could show my gratitude, and
the idea that struck me was that though there were baths at hand,
there was no swimming master. I will apply to the Corporation
to be allowed to teach swimming, thought I, and did so, and the
privilege was granted to me, and for two years I taught every
Saturday afternoon, without fee or reward. Many availed them-
selves of this opportunity, and became good swimmers. About this
time the Adelaide City Baths were advertised by the Corporation to
be let by tender, and as I began to want a change, for I felt that I
had been in the National Bank long enough, and longed to be my
own master once more, so I tendered for the lease, which
was granted me, not alone because my tender was the highest, but
that I was thought to be the best man out of the four that tendered.
I consequently sent in my resignation to the bank, and in return
they made me a present of £2l, as an acknowledgment for past
services; they also gave me a testimonial as to character, which I
am proud of to this day.
It was in February, 1866, that I took charge of the baths, and
I flattered myself that I would make my fortune out of the specula-
tion; but at the end of the year I found nryself on the wrong side
of the ledger. I then had to turn my attention once more to pro-


fessional pursuits, and accordingly I engaged to serve Mr. George
Coppin as money-taker at the Town Hall and Theatre Royal; and I
was also engaged Avith the South Australian Jockey Club in the
same capacity for ten years. About this time a friend of mine sug-
gested the advisability of adding Turkish baths to my business in
Adelaide, believing that it would pay well, as a great number of
people were compelled to go to Melbourne and Sydney to obtain
them. I pondered over the matter, and also called on a gentleman
that had been to Sydney for that purpose, and who had received
much good therefrom. Now, as I knew very little of Turkish baths,
I consulted my old friends, Mr. Sweet-william, who was then Mayor
of Adelaide, and Mr. Johns, who w r as then a large tradesman, and
AA T ho since then has been a Corporation councillor, and a member of
Parliament. A meeting Avas called at which the Mayor took the
chair, and Turkish baths were decided on. The first thing to be
then done was to get the opinion of the medical faculty, and a promise
of their support, and I undertook that work, and succeeded.
My next step was to see AA'hat money I could raise towards
building them, and succeeded in this also beyond my most sanguine
expectations. I then employed an architect to prepare plans, and
wrote to the Corporation explaining everything, and offered to put
£4OO towards the building, if they would supplement it. Rather
more than £350 was subscribed by friends of the movement, to
Avhom I gave subscribers’ tickets, representing the full value of their
subscriptions, and the balance I made up myself. After the matter
Avas discussed in the City Council it was passed, after considerable
opposition, by a majority of three, and tenders were called for the
building, and the work commenced, and it was eventually opened to
the public by the Mayor and Councillors of the city. From that
time to the present (1881) the Turkish Baths have been a blessing
to many, especially to the afflicted; and numerous testimonials
have been given to me for establishing this institution in the city of
Adelaide.
At this time the then town clerk received a letter from ann n
calling himself EdAvard Baldiston, stated to be manager of the Turkish
Baths in Melbourne, giving a long account of his experience at
Constantinople, and other places in Turkey, and applying for the
management of the Adelaide Turkish Baths. The town clerk sent
his letter on to me, and advised me to answer it. I did so, but was
sorry for it afterwards. The baths in Melbourne Avere burnt down
shortly after that, and Baldiston found his way to Adelaide, and
presenting himself and wife at the baths, gave me to understand
that he had come over at the request of several gentlemen to super-
intend the Turkish Baths’ department. I disabused his mind at once,
and told him that no one had any power to engage him but myself;
whereupon he said, “ I’ll see about that.” He called on several of
my friends and made out that I knew nothing about keeping baths,
and in every possible way tried to injure my character. He did not,


however, succeed as well as he expected. The next thing he did
was to prepare a document for me to sign, appointing him shampooer,
and came down to the baths with this document while no one but the
boy was about. When he saw me he said : “Will you sign this?”
“No!” replied I, “I will have nothing to do with you.” He there-
upon struck me a blow in the face, which knocked me into the water.
I called for help, and my wife came to my assistance, and found
Baldiston, who was a powerful young man, trying to hold me under
water. “You wretch!” said she, “you are trying to drown my
husband.” “ Yes!” he answered, “ and I’ll drown you too,” and
the next moment in she was sent likewise. Hearing the noise, some
passers by came in, to whom he declared that the swimming master
and his wife had been trying to drown him, and in the struggle we
had all slipped into the water together. I went for a policeman and
gave him in charge, but the policeman refused to take the charge on
account of not having seen the disturbance, and before I could change
my clothes and get to the Police Court, Baldiston had anticipated
my action, and taken out a summons against me for an assault with
intent to drown. All that I could then do was to issue a summons
against the bad man, and employ a respectable solicitor named
Brooks. When the time arrived for the case to be heard Mr.
Brooks could not attend, so I secured the services of Mr. Bundey,
a very able lawyer, and now a Q.C. Baldiston engaged Mr.
Downer, who, of course, came down like a thousand of bricks on me for
the alleged attempt to drown his most respectable client. My solicitor,
however, gave a very different version of the whole affair, and called
my wife, who declared that Baldiston was holding me under the
water when she came to my assistance, and that before she knew
where she was she found herself floundering about in the bath, with
Baldiston threatening to drown her and her husband into the
bargain. Boars of laughter came from everybody in the court. My
daughter also gave evidence that she saw her father and mother
both in the water at the same time. (More laughter). Mr. Beddome,
and the Commissioner, gave their joint opinion that all parties were
in the wrong, and inflicted a fine of five shillings on each, with
costs, and I and my family and friends left the Court disgusted; but,
nevertheless, felt glad to be rid of a man who had taken his Maker’s
name in witness to a most deliberate falsehood. A few days after
that I received a letter from Baldiston, in which he confessed that
what he had stated in Court was untrue, and begged me to forgive
him and forget the past, and that he would endeavor to make amends
to me by working the baths into such a state of perfection that I
would be sure to make my fortune out of them in a very short time.
“ All my eye and Betty Martin,” thought I, “ I will have no more
truck with you.” But, alas, I did have, and that in such a manner
as will astonish the reader.
About this time an important undertaking in which I had taken
a great interest, and which was known as. the Torrens’ Dam, was


completed, and I had obtained permission from the Mayor to put
boats on the river, as I reckoned it a speculation that would pay well.
So I called on a friend who was blest with plenty of money, whom
we will call Mr. Gray—this gentleman was then reading* for the law,
and 1 mention this because, as one of our colonial youths, he won
golden opinions for his talent and industry, and did great things to
advance South Australia. He has also represented our fair city in
Parliament, and raised himself to the high position of Attorney-
General. “What’s your pleasure?” he asked. “Well, sir,” I
replied, “ I have a notion that money can be made on the River
Torrens by boating, and I want some one to go in with me and supply
the necessary means, and I myself will undertake to find the skill
and labor to make it a paying concern. How much money do you
want to begin with ?” asked he. “ Besides what I can raise I want
fifty pounds,” I replied. “ Well, here is my cheque for £50,” said
he, “ draw out an agreement and we will sign it at once, and I will
trust to your proper management of the whole thing.” It was soon
settled, and I took out a waterman’s license, purchased three boats to
begin with, and had them on the river the next day. Boating then
was all the rage, and my fleet amounted in a short time to ten crafts.
I formed rowing clubs, and my boats were well patronised. At one
time there was no less than forty boats on the river, and it gave quite
a new appearance to the city; but it proved too good to last, for a
sudden change took place that nearly ruined me. Bad weather set
in as late as October, and the floods came down from the hills carrying
everything before them. At last the water got underneath the dam
and down it went, and everything was carried away in the flood, and
amongst other things all my boats. At this disaster I was greatly
discouraged, seeing that all my hopes and expectations respecting
the dam were suddenly dashed to the ground; but my friend Mr.
Gray, took the matter quite easily, and endeavored to cheer me up.
Shortly after this the Duke of Edinburgh arrived in the colony
on a second visit to Adelaide, and about the same time the new
Governor, Sir James Fergusson, arrived. Now, at this stage of my
history something connected with the celebrated Baldiston occurred
which is worth mentioning. Through the interest of the late
Governor Daly he had been appointed valet-de-chambre to the
Prince, and had been recommended to him as a smart man, and in
a very short space of time Baldiston sustained his reputation in this
respect, for whilst the Duke was staying at Government House he
wantonly robbed him of his linen and other valuables; and not being
content with that, he forthwith fell in love with the Governor’s pro-
perty, and not only stole his plate, but had the audacity to appro-
priate the Governor’s under-garments. Housebreaking at this time
was quite common in Adelaide, so much so that the Government
had to increase the police force; but with all their sagacity the
police could not detect the theif.
Now, amongst my acquaintances at that time waft one Tom


Doyle, a corporal in the detective department of police. He called
on me one morning and said, “ How are yon, old fellow?” “ Quite
well,” said I. “ Have you heard of the numerous robberies that
have been committed lately, Tom?” said he. “ I saw a letter in the
newspaper,” said I, “ complaining of the police, and making out that
they could not be over smart, or they would long since have dis*
covered the thief; but don’t you suspect anyone?” “Well,” said
he, “ as you are a sworn constable, I’ll tell you in confidence that I
suspect that fellow that tried to drown you and your wife. So keep
your eyes open, and if you hear anything let me know at once. A
family in North Adelaide of the name of Fitzpatrick has had their
house robbed while they were at church. The thieves took Mrs.
Fitzgerald’s dresses, the child’s clothes, and a musical-box that was
on the table. Now, as you are fond of music, should such a thing
as that be brought here for sale, make some inquiries about it, and let
me know the result.” I kept a good look out, and it so happened
that I was destined to be the means of bringing the thief to justice.
One of my friends kept a watchmaker’s shop in Rundle-street, and
I cautioned him that if any person called to sell a musical-box, or to
have one repaired, to take down all particulars. “ Well, I shall have
enough to do,” said he; “ for every day I have repairs to make of
that kind.” 1, however, kept calling on my friend every day, as we
were very great chums and sang together at the cathedral, and other
places not worth mentioning, and on one of these occasions my
friend said, “Do you remember speaking to me about a musical-
box?” “ 1 do,” said I; “ what about it?” “ Nothing particular,”
said he; “only a woman came in to-day with one to have a new
frame made for it. The instrument is good, but there are one or two
teeth broken; I never had a job like it before.” “What is the
name of the person that brought it?” asked I. He looked in the
book, and read as follows:—“Mrs. Baldiston, Grenfell-street,
Adelaide.” “Good-bye,” said I; “ I will see you this evening;” and
the first thing 1 did was to see my friend, Tom Doyle, whom I soon
found. “My boy, I have got a scent, and believe I can put you on
to the man who stole the musical-box, and with that I told him all I
knew; and when I mentioned the name, Doyle was ready to jump
out of his shoes. “ That’s the man at Government House,” said
he, “ and we will soon have him. The first thing to be done is to
see Mr. Pfaendler, the watchmaker, and then to call on Mr. Fitz-
patrick and arrange with him to meet us at Pfaendler’s, to swear to
the box. If he can do so, I’ll get out a warrant to arrest my man,
and search his house.” We met at the appointed time at Pfaend-
ler’s, set the musical-box going, and before it had finished the
second tune, Mrs. Fitzpatrick exclaimed, “ That is my box, and I
will swear to it in any court of justice!” “ Sign this paper, then,”
said Doyle, “ and 1 will see you to-morrow morning.”
Doyle immediately took out a warrant and sent a policeman to
Baldiston’s house. He then walked down to Government House to


inquire, when who should answer the door to him but Baldiston him-
self in full livery. “ I want you,” said the detective. “ Want me !
what for?” asked the indignant valet. “ Here is my authority,” said
the detective, showing his warrant. “If you will be good enough to
wait till I change my clothes,” said the valet, “ I will go with you.
I won’t be long.” The detective was taken off his guard by this
little stratagem, for his prisoner quickly made tracks for the back
door, bolted down the garden, jumped the wall, and made straight
for his house. As soon as the detective discovered the trick, and
fearing the escape of his man, he also proceeded to Baldiston’s house
in Grenfell-street, to catch him there. As soon as he found the
detective was at his heels, he made his escape at the back door,
mounted the fence, got into Bundle-street, and crossed North Terrace,
followed by a crowd of men and boys who had heard the cry of stop
thief from the detective, who was not far behind him in the chase.
As they neared the Botanic Gardens they lost sight of Baldiston for
a short time, but a boy having given information that he had seen a
man get over the railing into the stableyards of Sir Henry Ayers,
the detective, and the mob that had gathered, besieged the yard and
stable, Doyle got into the hayloft, turned over the hay, and
found the wretched man rolled up like a dog. The detective pulled
him out, ornamented him with the bracelets, and took him first to his
own house, where he took Mrs. Baldiston also in charge, and
marched both of them off to the station. He had also taken the
precaution to leave a policeman in charge of the house, where the
thief had an immense lot of stolen property stowed away. The next
day they had their hearing, and the wife was discharged; but
Baldiston was committed and afterwards tried at the Supreme Court,
and was sentenced to seven years penal servitude. I never appeared
as a witness against him, for although he had robbed and maltreated
me and my wife sorely, yet I bore no malice towards the poor fellow,
but left him to his fate; neither were the Prince or His Excellency
the Governor called at the trial. This evil disposed man had robbed
so many people that at least a hundred charges could have been laid
against him, and there was a perfect dray load of stolen property
taken to the Police Station to be claimed by the owners.
Whilst in prison his conduct at first was fearful, he even
attempted to cut his own throat, but after a time finding it was no
good to be stubborn, he got to be as quiet as a lamb, and became
very pious, he even preached to the prisoners on Sundays when he
could get a chance, and wrote a long letter making full confession of
what he had done and left undone. Amongst the latter was a design
to blow up the City Baths. He stated in his letter that he intended
getting on to the roof of the baths and dropping down the chimneys
sundry bags of gunpowder, so that when the strings got burnt the
bags of powder would fall, and a general blow-up of the whole place
would have been the happy result. The Rev. Wilton Hack, a good
man and a minister of the gospel, used to visit the prison. This


gentleman took a liking to the prisoner, and is said to have converted
him, and after a time baptized him in the presence of all the prisoners.
He was relieved from hard labor and appointed attendant in the sick
ward. His general behaviour was so good that at the end of four
years he was released. Mr. Hack helped to set him up in business
in North Adelaide as a green-grocer; his wife rejoined him, and all
seemed to go well for some time. He held prayer meetings and
occasionally preached on Sundays, sometimes at one place and some-
times at another; but his wickedness could not have been thoroughly
eradicated, and an evil fate seemed to have cast its shadow over his
life. Truly the way of transgressors is hard. His wife left him,
and he mixed himself up with some old chums from the stockade.
At this time a cart and horse were missing, and somehow or other he
was summoned as a witness in the case, and when asked his name
he said it was Edward Turner; but the judge remembered him as
the notorious Baldiston who had robbed the Prince. The indefatigable
detective Thomas Doyle was promoted to the rank of sergeant, with
a reward of twenty pounds for the zealous performance of his duty
to his Queen and country in the celebrated Baldiston case.
About this time the Governor, Sir James Fergusson, was
taking a course of Turkish baths, and I used to attend him profes-
sionally, and instruct him in the art of natation; and the Governor,
in appreciation of my services, employed me to teach his children,
Master Charles and the two Misses Fergussons. I had some scruples
at that time with regard to teaching ladies to swim; but these were
soon got over by Sir James pointing out that it was nothing but
false modesty, and one that ought to be abolished; and further, that
in his travels round the world he had observed in every place he had
visited where bathing was practised, that the males and females
bathed together in costume, and concluded his remarks with the
well-known quotation, “ Evil be to him that evil thinks.” I then
undertook the task, and commenced my labours the next morning at
6 a.m. The young ladies were very anxious to learn, and soon
became good swimmers.. Master Charles was not quite so quick as
his sisters, but in time he also became a first-class swimmer. His
Excellency was so delighted when he came to the baths to witness
their performances in the water, that he complimented me, and sent
me a very handsome present in the shape of a beautiful breast-pin,
ornamented with a miniature painting on ivory of Lahore, Gale
Palace, India. It is mounted in gold, and bears the following
inscription:— <• Presented to T. B by His Excellency Sir James
Fergusson, Bart., Adelaide, 1870,” and was accompanied with the
following written testimonial:—“ Government House, 3rd December,
1872. Mr. T. B lam much obliged to you for the care you
have taken of my children, and for your excellent instruction to them
in the art of swimming, which I am sure will be of lasting service to
them. (Signed) James Fergusson.” It was, indeed, destined to
be of very great service to them; for in the month of April of the


following year, whilst Master Charles was bathing in the sea at
Robe, he swam out too far for his strength; but his sisters swam out
to his assistance, and saved his life. (See Adelaide Express , 3rd
May, 1872.) Sometime after the above event, I was appointed
swimming master to the Government Model Schools; and ever since
the date of my diploma—24th March, 1874—1 have enjoyed the
distinguished title of “ Professor.”
From this time my business increased considerably. My swim-
ming matches, which I had established in 1864, became very
successful, and many thousands of good swimmers have been the
result, and many lives have been saved in consequence. Two of my
daughters I brought out as swimming mistresses, and they have
taught a great number of young ladies swimming accomplishments.
About the end of the year 1877 business was very bad, and my
health also began to fail, and my medical attendant, Dr. Way,
advised me to abstain from drink, and take a change in the country;
for the reader must know the truth—viz., that I had given way to
excessive drinking—and I think now that it was hardly to be won-
dered at, considering the temptations I had been exposed to as
landlord of three public-houses in Adelaide—namely, the Prince
Alfred, the Earl of Zetland, and the Theatre Royal Hotel. In
those places I saw dissipation enough to make men shudder at the
thought of a drunkard’s life. The effect on me was the growing
habit of taking nobblers with everybody who asked me, which habit
became so confirmed that I felt as though 1 could not live without it;
but, happily for me, I have since found out that that was entirely a
mistaken notion. My good wife at this time was becoming too ill to
work, so I thought it was my duty to let her rest. I, therefore, took
a house, and made over the business to my son Phillip, and retired,
believing it would be as good for myself as for my wife. Everything
being arranged we left the baths, I still retaining the lease and the
rights thereunder. Shortly after this my wife’s illness became
serious, and she gradually got worse, and three months afterwards
departed this life in hope of a better beyond. lam glad to be able
to say, and those who knew her will endorse the statement, that
there was no reason to fear as to her future, for she died trusting
wholly in our Lord her Saviour. I was then left with ten children
out of fourteen, but fortunately most of them were grown up men
and women. It was a great blow to me to lose my partner in life,
after being married to her thirty-seven years. I returned to the
baths and lived there with my children; but not as the indefatigable
man that I had once been. After that time I kept myself alive with
free indulgence in company and nobblers, both of which stimulants
I have since discovered w r ere wofully deceiving. My end seemed to
be fast approaching, and 1 began to think seriously over my past
life, and came to the conclusion that, to a very large extent, it had
been a mistake, and that now it had become a case of life or death
with me, and that whichever it was to be rested entirely with myself.


“To be, or not to be!” that was the question. I had no strength of
my own left upon which to act, and I felt that, unless superhuman
help came to me, I was a doomed man. I secretly prayed for help,
and it came in a way I little expected.
Now about this time there arrived in Adelaide a good man by
the name of Matthew Burnett. He brought a good character for
benevolence and self-sacrificing work with him from Victoria, where
he had spent eighteen years of his life in preaching the word of
God,[and advocating the cause of temperance. He had made many
thousands of converts. Some people in Adelaide looked upon him
at first as one of the many adventurers who had come over from
Melbourne with the idea of doing better here; but they had mis-
understood him, as it was quite clear such was not his aim. It was
no pecuniary or sordid motive that had brought him over; but the
grand object of his life evidently was to rescue from an early grave,
and to lead on to God, and to everything that was good, those who
were being allured, step by step, to destruction through indulgence in
the cursed drinking system. At this time I met an old chum
named Dyer. “ Have you been to hear this man, Burnett?” said he.
“ No,” I replied; “ I don’t go to such humbug. Come and have a
drink.” “Well,” said he, “I will just have one with you; but I
mean to give it up, Tom. I went to hear him,” said he, “ and he
opened my eyes somewhat. He is a very wonderful man. Why,
there was one woman there who nearly fainted, his eloquence had
such power over her. He is a great man and no mistake; and I
intend to join next week. Just have one nobbier with me now; you
paid for the last, you know. Will you join if I do,” said Dyer.
“ I’ll think it over,” said I. I did think and that was all, until I
got so bad that I had to send for my friend, Dr. Way. When he
came and found me in bed, he said, very sadly, “ Ah! Tom, you
have been at it again,” and 1 could not deny it; for it was too true.
The doctor gave me good advice and physic, and I swallowed the
latter but forgot to practise the former. I stayed at home for
several days and got a little better, and tried hard to knock off my
bad habit; but although I was fully aware of the fact that my
frequent indulgence was the cause of my illness, I had not the
resolution to abstain from drink. A few days after this Mr. Burnett
paid a visit to the workmen at the Railway Works, to give them a
short lecture during their dinner hour, A great number were pre-
sent besides the workmen, and amongst them was I, who went there
merely as a looker-on and to kill time. The subject of the lecture
was “Yankee Bill,” a man that at one time wrote some lines to
Mr. Burnett, threatening to hang him on a wattle tree. He after-
wards thought better of it, and became one of Mr. Burnett’s best
friends, working with him in the good cause of temperance. The
life of Yankee Bill is a lesson most people might learn. I took a
S ie at interest in the lecture, and studied well the good advice it
contained, and jt seemed to me to go down much better than physic*


A day or two afterwards when I was taking a glass of ale, my
son Charles came to me and said, “ Father, there is a gentleman
waiting to see you upstairs. He says he don’t want any money, but
he wants to give you something good.” “ I’ll be there,” said I, and
I went to him at once. “ Your pleasure,” said I. “ Well, the truth
is,” said he, “I heard you were unwell, and called to see if you were
better. You remember Mr. Giles, who used to deliver letters to you
some time back?” “ I think I do,” said I; “and it’s very kind of
you to call. I have been very ill for sometime, but I know the cause
of it; I take too much to drink.” “ I thought so,” said he. “ Now,
if you were to join Mr. Burnett’s crusade, it would make a new man
of you. I have been a teetotaller myself for the last two years, and
can, therefore, speak from experience,” said Giles. “ I have a very
good mind to try it,” said I. “ Why don’t you say at once that you
will try it? You will never repent it as long as you live,” said
Giles; “ and, with your permission, I will call in and introduce
Mr. Burnett to you. He is a very pleasant man to speak to.”
“Well you may,” said I; “but mind I do not pledge to join.”
“Good afternoon; keep yourself quiet,” said he; “lean see you
are in a very weak state; but you will get over that in time, if you
follow Mr. Burnett’s advice.”
The next day, while I was indulging in a glass of ale, my
daughter Grace rushed into my room, and said, “ Here is Mr. Burnett
come to see you.” “ Ask him in,” said I; “ I will see him directly.”
At that moment I was engaged in warming my beer. I, however,
left it in the glass on the mantelpiece and went to see Mr. Burnett.
“How do you do?” said he; “I have much pleasure in making
your acquaintance, Professor; for I have heard a great deal about
you.” “A great deal of no good, I fear,” said I, “unless it has
been to landlords of hotels.” “You mistake me; you have many
good friends who fear that, in your love for society you are yielding
rather too freely to indulgence in drink, and positively injuring your
health by it. They don’t want to lose you yet, and they tell me that
they are heartily sorry to see such a marked difference in your looks;
and I tell you, my friend,” said he, “it cannot positively last long.
I have witnessed many cases like yours, and I tell you candidly
the remedy entirely rests with you. There are many days of health
and happiness in store for you, if you will only embrace the present
opportunity. Pledge me your word now that you will positively give
up the drink, and all that I promise is yours—peace of mind and
good health.” “ Well, it’s worth trying for,” said I; “ but if the
sudden knocking of it off kills me, as many say it will, I shall
have caused my own death by doing so.” “ That’s all nonsense,”
said Mr. Burnett; “you try it, and you will find that lam right and
they are wrong.” “ I have thought over the subject pretty well,”
said I, “ and I think I will give it a trial.” “ Good!” said
Mr. Giles, who was present at the interview; “sign at once.”
“ Oh! do, father,” said my daughter Grace. “ Will you sign if X


do?” said I. “ Yes, father,” was the reply. Mr. Burnett thereupon
produced the agreement, and I signed it ; and my three sons and
daughters have since joined, together with my three servants. It is
scarcely necessary to say that there was great rejoicing. I threw
my glass of ale into the fire, and I am glad to say that I have not
touched alcoholic liquors since.
I then described to Mr. Burnett how the desire for drink
increased, and the more I drank the more I wanted. “To prevent
that craving,” said Mr. Burnett, “I will give you a very simple
remedy; it was given to me by the celebrated Dr. D’Unger. It is
this, and you take three teaspoonfuls of it every four hours the first
day, two the next, one the next, and so on until you have taken the
contents of the bottle. My dear friend,” continued Mr. Burnett,
“ I will call and see you again in the course of a day or so, and in the
meanwhile take as much nourishing food as you can. Good-bye.
1 will call in, say on Friday, and Mr. Giles will call to-morrow with
Dr. D’Unger’s medicine.” The first day and night was a sore trial
for me. Oh, how I longed for beer and nobblers ! But I had given
my word, and I would not break it. 1 had lost my appetite, but
managed to take a cup of cocoa and a small slice of toast, and w r as
so reduced in body that when I weighed myself I was alarmed to
find that I had dwindled down from lOst. 41b. to Bst. The
next morning Mr. Giles called. “ What sort of a night did you
pass ?” said he. “ Very bad,” replied I. “ You will be better to-
night, after you have taken this medicine, which is not nauseous.
You will find your appetite return, and it will make you sleep as
well ” I found it all true what was said. It is a most wonderful
discovery, and its effect is simply marvellous. The second day after
I had taken it, I could eat and sleep well, a thing I h:id not
done for years. Mr. Burnett called on me on Friday, according to
promise, and gave me a few comforting words, which tended to
encourage and strengthen me under my severe trial ; but happily
for me the medicine was so effectual that every day seemed to bring
with it less of the craving for drink. In the course of about
a month I found myself getting the master of the cursed passion that
had enslaved me so long, and, alas ! not only me, but hundreds of
thousands besides; and I intend, with God's help, to continue
steadfast in my resolution to the end of life, and as long as I live
to use all my influence to promote the good cause of total abstinence,
and to follow the example of Mr. A. W. P. Ward, one of Mr.
Burnett’s converts, and the veritable l * Yankee Bill,” before
mentioned, whose warm advocacy induced no less than seventeen
thousand persons to take the pledge. In drawing this long’story ofmv
life to a close, I desire to inform the reader that it is not for my own
glory it has been written, but with the hope that some good may be
the result. I hope that nothing has been writt n that will offend
anyone, for I have endeavored to avoid anything like arguments on
vexed subjects, and to write the w hole truth and nothing but the truth..


If I have not been perfectly accurate in my dates, I wish to
set myself right by recapitulating the following facts:—l was bom
on September 22, 1818, in the city of London, and was baptized at
old Cripplegate Church; I was married on August the 10th, 1840,
left England in 1852, and arrived in Adelaide on July 16, 1852;
left Adelaide for the diggings in March, 1853, and returned the
same year, pursued the banking and professional part of my life
until the year 1866, established the Turkish Baths in 1870, lost
my wife in 1877, and became a follower of Mr. Burnett in 1880.
I here finish my autobiography up to the present and give
place to those who may think fit to criticise this humble attempt, and
leave the after to some one who knows me well to add something by
way of comment concerning my life, and to refer to what I have
done and undone; and I trust that when my hour shall arrive to
depart from this present state of being, I will be able to depart in
peace with God and goodwill to all men. In concluding this
narrative, I desire to inform the reader that I do not for a moment
flatter myself that I am giving forth to the world anything that
may be designated a literary production, but only an emanation from
one born within the sound of Bow Bells. I feel that I am merely
contributing a simple and unvarnished story of one who may be fairly
taken as the type of a large class in the great City of London,
1508 002A6773 1
60
AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF


MY EPILOGUE.
“ ’Tis Education that forms the mind,
Just as the twig is bent the tree’s inclined”—
So runs the adage of an age that’s past ;
An aphorism that is bound to last.
Long have I taught our gentle youth Natation,
And tried to raise the physique of our nation.
To better their physiques no physic they require
To train developed biceps that never tire.
To keep their heads with ease above the waters,
Much have I done to train our sons and daughters.
Now, as an author, I humbly strive to win—
Old pupils’ help. Come, gratify my whim,
And float me on the literary tide—
And make your Old Professor gratified.
Grant me your patronage, for ’tis most sure
This is the first fruits of my “ Water Cure.”
Before dear Matthew Burnett came, my nose
Did blush and blossom like the budding rose,
And, conscientiously, I did take my beer
As well as any in the hemisphere.
W ith festive glass I strove to drown my care—-
Reflect upon the past I scarcely dare —
Now on the path that doth become a man,
I tread, and have cast off the ban.
Help me, old colonists, to do what’s right;
Help me, old pupils, with your smiles so bright;
Help me, ye daughters of this sunny clime—
You’ll ne’er regret it in the coming time,
W hen you and yours upon the stream of life
Shall safely ride as husband or as wife ;
And as you con my book you’ll think of him
Who in your youth first taught you how to swim.


ADELAIDE.
Swimming Baths, Tepid Baths, Turkish
Baths, Sicilian Baths.
THE TURKISH BATHS.
Under the distinguished Patronage of
HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR,
Sir William P. B. Jeivois, K.CJLG.,
The Board of Management of the Adelaide Hospital, and the leading
Medical Men of the Colony.
LADIES’ DEPARTMENT UNDER THE SUPERINTENDENCE OF MRS.
PERRIN, SWIMMING MHTREBB, MISS EMMA BASTARD,
LADIES’ ASSISTANT, MISS C. CLARK.
The Turkish Bath
Hours of opening, from 10 till 6 daily, Thursday afternoons excepted,
which are reserved for Ladies. Charges—Yearly Tickets, £7 ; Half-Aeaily
Tickets, £4; a course of Six Baths, £1 Is.; Single hirst-Class 55.; and on
"Wednesdays and Saturdays from 7 a.m. till 0 p.m. for the working class, 2s.
Quarterly Tickets, £3. W. Johnson, Shampooer.
Swimming and Tepid Baths.
Summer Months, daily from 5 a.m. to 9 p.m.; Winter months daily from
7am to 7 p.m. Charges—First-class Swimming Bath, 6d.; Second-class
Swimming Bath, 3d.; Warm Bath, Is.; Yearly Ticket, £4.
Swimming SchooL
Boys’ Class, Mondays from 7 a.m. till 7’30 a.m ; Wednesdays and Satur-
dsys,* from 9to 10 a.m. Swimming Masters’ Fee, £2 2s.
T. BASTARD,
Swimming Master to the Government Model School.
CHARLES BASTARD, Manager.
j> Private Lessons in Swimming by Special Arrangement.
I*
V
62
CITT BATHS,


3 1508 00410999 2


