

THE EQUAL LEGAL STATUS
OF AIL THE CHURCHES
THE AUSTRALIAN COLONIES
THE RESULT OF THE MEETING
THE PRESBYTERIAN INHABITANTS
YAN DIEMEN’S LAND,
HELD IN
ST. ANDREW’S CHURCH, HOBART TOWN
12th AUGUST, 1846:
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND:
Printed by William Pratt & Son, 67, Elizabeth-street, Hobart Town,
1851.




From the formation of the Australian Colonies up to a late
date the Anglo-Episcopal Church was considered by the Colonial
Government —and apparently by the Home Government also to be
the Established Church of the Colonies. It seems to have been
maintained, that the act of settling a colony gave to that church the
character, the position, and the peculiar rights and attributes of an
Established Church. And there is some show of plausibility in this
view, on the principle “ that if an uninhabited country be discovered
and planted by English subjects, all the English laws then in being,
which are the birthright of every subject, are immediately there in
force.”* But it is only a show of plausibility. —The same authority
states, that this maxim “ must be understood with many and great
restrictions”—and “ that such Colonists carry with them only so much
of the English law, as is applicable to their own situation, and the
condition of an infant colony ; such for instance, as the general rules
of inheritance, and of protection from personal injuries.” The
fallacious argument is this : —The Protestant Episcopal Church is the
Church established in England by law. Upon the plantation of a colony
by English subjects, all the Englishlaws then in being, are immediately
there in force. Therefore the law establishing the Protestant Episcopal
Church, is immediately in force in anew colony. And, therefore also,
the Protestant Episcopal Church is the [Established Church of every
colony. This was the argument of the late Archdeacon Hutchins,
and of many of his cotemporaries. The restrictions were lost sight
of. It was forgot that the Statute establishing the Protestant
Episcopal Church as the Church of England, is strictly limited and
confined to England itself; to the Realm of England, as it existed
at the time the Statute was made. It was forgot that there is a
wide distinction between the British Dominions and the Realm of
England; and that the British Colonial Dominions are no more
included within the provisions of the Statute establishing the Epis-
copal Church as the Church of England, than Scotland is.
It was forgot that the limitation of the Act of Uniformity to
England, leaves the British Colonial Dominions exactly in the
position in which they would have been, had no Act of Uni-
formity existed; that these dominions are neutral ground, on
which all churches and religious communions stand on the same
legal level; that, indeed, all churches within these Dominions have
equal rights and privileges —whatever these rights and privileges may
be.
It was, however, taken for granted, that the Anglo-Episcopal
Church, was the Established Church in the Australian Colonies —
Blacksfcone.


having a right to all legal advantages possessed by that church in
England. It was also assumed that the Ecclesiastical Laws of
England in virtue of the Settlement of a colony—became at
once—and necessarily—of force in that colony—and that to these laws
ail the inhabitants of the colony were subject.
In accordance with this view, all Ecclesiastical matters were
arranged, and managed ; and the designation, Established Church of
the Colony, was both publicly and privately made use of as that
appropriate to the Anglo-Episcopal Church. Thus in the Procla-
mation of 18th May, 1825, issued by the Governor of New South
Wales, and its Dependencies, including Van Diemen’s Land, notify-
ing the erection of an Archdeaconry, the following passage occurs :
I do hereby in his Majesty s name, notify and proclaim to all,
his Majesty’s subjects the erection of the said Archdeaconry in this
colony, and its Dependencies, and the appointment of the Reverend
Thomas Hobbs Scott, to be the first Archdeacon thereof; and I do
hereby require all the clergy of the Established Church, and other His
Majesty s subjects, to yield all due canonical obedience to the said
Archdeacon, who will forthwith enter upon the duties of his Arch-
deaconship.” And from the terras of the Letters Patent, of 2nd
October, 1824, referred to in the Proclamation, erecting and consti-
tuting the Archdeaconry, it is evident, that this was held to be a
sound legal doctrine.
The introductory words of the Letters Patent are these
“ Whereas, the doctrine and discipline of the United Church of England
and Ireland, are professed and observed by a considerable number of Our
loving subjects within Our Colony or Settlement of New South Wales and its
Dependencies, including Van Diemen’s Land; and whereas it is expedient to
make further provision for the due regulation and order of persons duly
ordained to officiate as Ministers of the United Church of England and Ireland
within the same Colony or Settlement, we have determined to constitute
wnthin the same Colony or Settlement, Our Archdeaconry, subject during Our
pleasure, to the Jurisdiction, Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, of the Bishop of
Calcutta, for the time being; and We do hereby erect, found, and constitute
Our Archdeaconry in and over the British Territories within the said Colony of
New South Wales and its Dependencies, to be styled the “Archdeaconry of
New South Wales,” and to be subject and subordinate to tbeßishop of Calcutta
and his successors, as aforesaid, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws of this
Realm.
From the terms employed in the Proclamation, and in the Letters
Patent, it will at once be seen, not only that the Anglo Episcopal
Church was held to be the Established Church of the Colony, but
that the Ecclesiastical Laws of England were considered to be in
existence and of force in the colony. This is also evident from
suosequent passages in the Letters Patent, such as—
We do hereby declare that the said Archdeacon shall be within the said
Archdeaconry assisting to the Bishop of Calcutta in the exercise of his Epis-
copal jurisdiction and functions, according to the duty of an Archdeacon, by the


Ecclesiastical Laws of Our Realm of England, and in as full and ample a
manner as the same are, or may be, lawfully exercised by any Archdeacon
within Our Realm of England as is hereinafter described.”
And again :
“We command, and by these presents for Us, our heirs and successors,
strictly enjoin all and singular Our Governors, Judges, and Justices, and all
and singular Chaplains, Ministers, and others, Our subjects within the Terri-
tories aforesaid, that they and every of them be, by all lawful ways
and means, aiding and assisting to the said Archdeacon, and his successors, in
the execution of the premises in all things.”
It also appears from note H in the Appendix to the Bishop of
Tasmania’s printed Charge of 1846, that when the Archdeaconry of
New South Wales was erected in 1824, instructions were furnished
by Lord Bathurst (then Secretary of State for the Colonies) to Sir
Thomas Brisbane, communicating “ His Majesty’s pleasure upon
some of the more material questions which might be expected to
arise respecting the duties of the Archdeacon.” The Bth section of
these instructions is:—‘‘ln the event of its becoming necessary
that the Archdeacon should exercise the ecclesiastical jurisdiction
with which he is invested, you will signify to the Attorney-General
of the Colony, or, if from any reason he should be unable to act,
then to the Solicitor-General, that it is his Majesty’s pleasure that
he should act as Assessor of the Archdeacon’s Court, for the purpose
of assisting the Archdeacon’s judgment upon any questions of law
which may arise in the course of any judicial process depending
before him.”
All this shews that it was not doubted by the Government of that
day, that the ecclesiastical laws of England were extended to a colony by
the mere act of settling the colony, The view is erroneous and illegal,
but it was then considered unquestionable.
The views on which the Letters Patent creating an Archdeaconry in
New South Wales and its Dependencies were framed, were maintained
in other British?colonies also. This led to much heart-burning and
strife. Lord Durham, in his Report on the affairs of Canada, attri-
buted much of the irritation and discontent prevailing in that province
to the exclusive ecclesiastical system then existing. Lord Durham
said, that large as were the claims asserted on the part of the Anglican
Church, they had no real or substantial foundation, and gave warning
of the evils which would result were they persisted in and sanctioned.
“ Tlie great practical question,” he stated, “ on which these various parties
have for a long time been at issue, and which has within a very few months again
become the prominent matter in debate, is that of the clergy reserves. The
prompt and satisfactory decision of this question is essential to the pacification
of Canada. The Members of the Church of Scotland have claimed to be put
entirely on a level with the Church of England, and have demanded that these
funds should be equally divided between both. The various denominations of
Protestant Dissenters have asserted that the term” (Protestant Clergy) “ in-
cludes them, and that out of these funds an equal provision should be made
for all Christians who do not belong to the Church of Rome.”


And, proceeding, he states—
“ During all this time, however, though much irritation had been caused by
the exclusive claims of the Church of England, and the favour shown by the
Government to one, and that a small religious community, the clergy of that
church, though an endowed, were not a dominant priesthood. They had a
far larger share of the public money than the clergy of any other denomina-
tion ; but they had no exclusive privileges, and no authority, save such as
might spring from their efficient discharge of their public duties, or from the
energy, ability, or influence of members of their body. But the last public act
of Sir John Colbourne, before quitting the government of the province (Upper
Canada) in 1835, which was the establishment of the fifty-seven Rectories,
has completely changed the aspect of the question. It is understood, that
every Rector possesses all the spiritual and other privileges enjoyed by an
English Rector, and that, though he may have no right to levy tithes (for even
this has been made a question), he is in all other respects in precisely the same
position as a clergyman of the Established Church of England. This is re-
garded by all other teachers of religion in the country as having at once de-
graded them to a position of legal inferiority to the clergy of the Church of
England; and it has been resented most warmly. In the opinion of many
persons this was the chief predisposing cause of the recent insurrection ; and
it is an abiding and unabated cause of discontent. Nor is this to be won-
dered at. The Church of England in Upper Canada by numbering in its ranks
all those who belong to no other sect, represents itself as being more numerous
than any single denomination of Christians in the country. Even admitting the
justice of the principle on which this enumeration proceeds, and
giving that church credit for all that it thus claims, its numbers could not
amount to one third —probably not a fourth—of the population. It is not,
therefore to be expected that the other sects, three, at least, of whom—the
Methodists, the Presbyterians, and the Catholics—claim to be individually
more numerous than the Church of England, should acquiesce quietly in the
supremacy thus given to it, And it is equally natural, that the English Dis-
senters, and the Irish Catholics, remembering the position which they have
occupied at home, and the long and painful struggle through which alone they
have obtained the imperfect equality they now possess, should refuse to acqui-
esce for themselves in the creation of a similar establishment in their new
country, and thus to bequeath upon their children a strife as arduous and
embittered as that from which they have so recently and imperfectly escaped,
* * * * The result of any determination on the part of the British Go-
vernment or Legislature to give one sect a predominance and superiority,
would be, it might be feared, not to secure the favoured sect, but to endanger
the loss of the colony, and in vindicating the exclusive pretensions of the
English Church to hazard one of the fairest possessions of the British Crown.”
The claim of the ministers of the Anglo-Episcopal Church in
this colony, to the position and privileges of ministers of an Established
Church, has also caused much irritation. The history of colonization
as regards ecclesiastical questions, appears from this, and from
other circumstances, to have been much the same in all colonies.
Large claims have been urged—claims to supremacy as a right—
resting on no better foundation than the mere fact, that the Episcopal
Church is the Established Church of England. This cannot be
better illustrated than by the first of the reasons on which the Bishop
of Gibraltar founded his protest against certain articles of a code of


criminal laws for Malta, proposed by the Council of the Government
of that Island. The protest is dated so late as March 1850, and may
be taken as the index of the views of the Anglo-Episcopal Church
up to that date. The reason urged by the Bishop of Gibraltar is
unsound and incorrect. The reason is this :
“ Because, whatever may be the privileges granted to the Maltese,
the supremacy of the English Crown carries with it of necessity the supre-
macy of the religion of the Queen and of the people of England, and estab-
lishes it by the Law of the Land in every colony and dependency of the Em-
pire, Malta included.”
Malta is a colony or dependency of the British empire; therefore,
says the Bishop of Gibraltar, the supremacy of the religion of the
Queen and of the people of England is established in Malta, by the
law of the land. It may be asked, by the law of what land ? The
law of England is evidently meant by the Bishop of Gibraltar. But
Malta is not a colony or dependency of England, but of the British
Empire. And it was for the Bishop to show to what extent
the law of England, especially the law regarding religion, and
the supremacy of one religion, or religious sect, is of force
in British colonies, before he came to his conclusion, that the supre-
macy of the religion of the Queen and people of England is esta-
blished in Malta, and in every British colony or dependency.
This first reason of the Bishop of Gibraltar might be examined
into, as regards its principle, on other grounds; but this is not
necessary. The protest will appear in an appendix, and will shew
that, up to a very recent date, the doctrine maintained by
Anglo-Episcopal Churchmen was that the Anglo-Episcopal Church
is the Established Church in every colony of the British empire.
On this mere assumption, they have not failed to claim, in
many British colonies, peculiar and extraordinary Legislative, and
Government support. This has been in a marked manner the case
in Van Diemen’s Land. And the Government in numerous in-
stances, has not hesitated to countenance these illegal claims, and
to yield to these assumptions. This may have arisen from ignorance
of the true position of the Anglo-Episcopal Church, as was the case
in the days of Lord Bathurst. But such ignorance can no longer
be pleaded as an excuse for a departure from the principles of law,
and of even-handed justice. The attempt of Dr. Nixon to procure
the introduction into this British colony of Ecclesiastical Law, and to
establish Ecclesiastical Courts within it, met and defeated, as it has
been, has rendered it impossible for any Government to urge this plea
in defence of any future partial and unfair measures in Church
arrangements.
When Dr. Nixon, made the attempt, he was fully aware that the
Ecclesiastical Law did not extend to Van Diemen’s Land, and that
Ecclesiastical Courts could not be established in the colony. He had
been made acquainted with the opinion of the Attorney-General,
now Mr. Justice Horne, given so far back as May 1845 :


In obedience to His Excellency’s desire, I now forward my opinion
upon the drafts of two Acts which have been submitted to His Excel-
lency by the Lord Bishop of Tasmania for adoption in this Island.
The title of the first is “ An Act for the regulation of Ecclesiastical
Courts within the Diocese of Tasmania.” As to the first: This
draft is based on the Act of Parliament, 54 Geo. 3, c. 127, intituled
“An Act for the better regulation of Ecclesiastical Courts in England
and for the more easy recovery of Church Rates and Tithes,” by
which Act of Parliament excommunication, except in particular cases,
is discontinued, and the process upon the writ “Be contumace capiendo”
is regulated, preserving the rules and regulations established by the
5 Eliz. c. 23, for the due execution of the writ “De excommunicato
capiendo,” and extending those rules and regulations to the writ “De
contumace capiendo ”
The draft under consideration, proposes to effect the same objects
in nearly the same words, not limiting the jurisdiction of the proposed
Ecclesiastical Court to the persons of ordained ministers of the Church
of England or even to members of her communion.
The jurisdiction proposed by the Act is as general as that given by
the Statute referred to, and as completely so as though the Church
of England were the sole established and legally recognized church
in this colony as it is in England, and as though the whole ecclesias-
tical law of England were in force in this colony.
Now, the words of the proposed Act are upon this head the same
as those used by the Statute. “ That in all causes (or other pro-
ceedings) which, according to the laws of the realm of England, are
cognizable in the Ecclesiastical Courts, &c.” This Act, therefore,
aims at territorial power to be given to the Lord Bishop of Tasmania
to hold an Ecclesiastical Court, having cognizance over the laity as
well as the clergy of this Island, of all causes and offences cognizable in
the Ecclesiastical Courts of England, without regard to the question
whether the person to be cited by this Court be or be not of the com-
munion of the Church of England, or a clergyman of that church.
I object to this Act on two grounds; first of law ; next of policy.
Of Law.—lst. —Because Her Majesty the Queen has, by her
Letters Patent bearing date the 21st August in the sixth year of her
reign, defined the extent of the Bishop’s jurisdiction, spiritual and
ecclesiastical, and limited its exercise to the persons only of rectors,
curates, ministers, chaplains, priests and deacons in holy orders of
the United Church of England and Ireland resident within the
diocese. Whereas this Act is neither limited nor defined in its juris-
diction, but extends to all persons and to all causes cognizable by the
law of England in Ecclesiastical Courts.


2nd.—The Council has not the power of extending the Bishop’s
authority, as given by the said Letters Patent, any more than it would
have the power of revoking the Queen’s Letters Patent.
Of Policy.—Because by the several Acts of the Legislature of this
Island. 1 Yict. No, 16 ; 3 Viet. No. 17; 5 Viet. No. 9 ; the Churches
of England, Scotland, and Rome are placed upon a footing of perfect
equality, and should this proposed Act pass into law, a territorial
power will be given to the Bishop inconsistent with such equality f
and I can conceive no state of things so undesirable as that which
would make the members of the two other communions subject to
the laws of the one which would thus be made dominant.
So far as the members of the Scotch Church are concerned, I
apprehend (and they are a large and influential body in this colony)
a decided and stubborn repugnance to a law which would make them
subject to any prelate. And as to the Roman Catholics, an equal
repugnance to be made subject to the jurisdiction of a Bishop not
only not in communion with their church, but opposed upon principle
to their church.
These several churches having hitherto enjoyed an equality, wonld
consider that the one had the same right as another to a similar
enactment in favour of his church. This, it is evident, never could
be granted, if for no other reason, (and I abstain from pointing out
others) than this, viz., that the laws would clash, and the distressing
circumstances of another Lolley’s* case might be repeated here.
Upon policy, therefore, this Act appears to me to be most objec-
tionable.
As to the second proposed Act: —
This Act is also based upon a Statute of the Imperial Parliament,
intituled “An Act for better enforcing Church Discipline,” which
applies solely to England, and to the Established Church of England
alone, and to a state of things which does not exist here, and can
never exist here to the same extent. The very definition of the terms
used in the second section of the Statute, clearly shows the great
dissimilarity of our position with respect to the colonial clergy, and
that of the clergy of England.
The clergy of this colony, not excepting the Bishops, are all paid
out of the general funds of the colony. There is not one single
preferment in this colony as used in the Statute. The Queen alone
appoints chaplains in this colony ; and I apprehend the patronage of
the appointment belongs to the Queen exclusively; but there is not
a chapel in the island, as used in the Statute.
The Bishop, therefore, in his own Court, could neither deprive nor
suspend from any benefice, and the introduction of this Act would
not enable him, for there is nothing in this colony upon which such
* Russell and Ryan, 237.


a sentence could operate. The chaplains of this colony (if I may be
permitted the analogy) are very nearly in the same position as that of
chaplains to certain lunatic asylums in England : for instance, the
Hanwell asylum, although not regulated by Act of Parliament.
The same objections which prevail as to 'the first Act, bear with
almost equal force upon this, and without the introduction of
the first Act, this Act could not be w r orked. There are also objec-
tions to this Act upon the face of it. First, it gives to the Bishop
power over the salary of the minister or chaplain not given by the
Act before-mentioned, which authorizes the Lieutenant Governor to
issue salaries to ministers, and it also gives the Bishop power over
the funds of the colony, viz , to assign a stipend to some other per-
son than the accused clerk, during his accusation and inhibition.
It gives to the Bishop powers not granted by the Statute on which
it is founded, viz., of forming his commission of three instead of five
persons. It substitutes a commissary for three assessors of high
rank; and lastly, it enables the Bishop to reduce to actual want, at
a time of greatest need, a clerk accused before him, by stopping the
payment of any salary, even before sentence, whether he be guilty or
innocent. In those points the power sought to be conferred upon
the Bishop is beyond that given by the Statute.
I observe that the last clause of the draught Act is similar to the
last section but one of the statute, preserving to the Bishop all au-
thority over the clergy of his diocese, which according to law, he
may, personally exercise without process in court. But the non-in-
troduction of this statute as the law of this colony would not pre-
vent the Bishop holding his court for the trial of his clergy, and
their correction in any case, if necessary; and lam of opinion, that
the Bishops of this diocese would find their powers amply sufficient
for the purpose without the proposed law; for, by the 15th section
of the Church Act of this colony, 1 Viet. No. 16, it is enacted, that
no salary shall be continued, in any case, to any minister after it
shall have been certified to the Lieutenant-Governor, by the proper
ecclesiastical authority, that he has been tried and found guilty by
competent authority, according to the laws or usages of the church
to which he belongs, of such misconduct, or culpable neglect of duty,
specifying in particular, the instance or instances of such neglect or
misconduct, as according to the same laws or usages, renders the
discontinuance of such salary proper.
Ihus, by this section, effect of deprivation or suspension is at
once obtained,
I am therefore of opinion, that the statute is inapplicable to this
colony ; that it is not necessary for enforcing church discipline in
this colony; that it is inexpedient, as tending to create religious
jealousy, and religious animosity in this colony.
(Signed) THOMAS HORNE.
J. E. Bicheno, Esq., &c. &c. &c.


This opinion is clear and decided, It could not be misunderstood.
l)r. Nixon should have been guided by it.
Dr. Nixon however, chose, to follow his own guidance, and in
August, 1840, he took his departure for England, with the avowed
purpose of endeavouring to establish the Supremacy of his church
by procuring the erection of an Ecclesiastical Court, through means of
the British Government, and the British Legislature. It then became
necesssary for the Presbyterian inhabitants of the colony to adopt
measures to prevent this, and they assembled in public meeting
on 12th August, 1846, to consider what measures should be
adopted.*
The requisition calling the meeting of the Presbyterians—the
Resolutions—the Speech of the mover of the first Resolution —and
a Petition to the Queen agreed to by the meeting, embody the views,
and embrace the arguments of the Presbyterians. It has been con-
sidered necessary to bring all these under the notice of the Australian
public, and also various communications which appear in the Parlia-
mentary Papers, forming a Return to an Address of the House of
Commons t for “ Copies or Extracts of correspondence and other
papers relating to cases in which the Bishop of any Diocese in the
Australian Colonies has attempted to exercise Ecclesiastical Juris-
diction over any of his clergy, with or without resistance from the
parties, and of the issue of such cases, since the year 1837, and down
to the latest dates, and similar copies or extracts relating to the for-
mation of Ecclesiastical Courts in any of the said Dioceses. ’
Among these papers will be found a communication addressed to
Earl Grey by the Queen’s Advocate-General, the Attorney-General, and
the Solicitor-General of England, In this communication, these Law
Officers state “ that the Queen has no authority by Letters Patent,
to create the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction complained of by the Me-
morialists, (the Baptists and the Presbyterians), and that therefore
their objections are well founded.”
This opinion of the Law-Officers of England, has reference to all
the objections urged in the Petitions of the Presbyterians and Baptists,
and establishes the validity of their objections. It also establishes
the illegality, and invalidity of the Bishop of Tasmania’s Letters
Patent, and of the views the Bishop entertained as to the establish-
ment of an Ecclesiastical Court, and the introduction into the colony
of the Ecclesiastical Laws of England.
The announcement of the Law Officers that the Letters Patent,
under which the Diocese of Tasmania was instituted were illegal, and
beyond the authority of the Queen to grant, rendered it necessary that
* The Ministers and Missionaries of the Baptist and Independent Churches,
forwarded Petitions to the Queen with the same view.
f Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed, 25th March 1850, No. 175.


they should be withdrawn—and they were withdrawn accordingly—-
evidently much to the discontent of the Bishop of Tasmania To the
last moment, and nearly beyond the last decorous or prudent moment,
the Bishop struggled for his much desired Consistorial Court, and
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. The last letter from Mr. Hawes, however,
spoke out so plainly, that the Bishop of Tasmania seems at once to
have comprehended that the struggle was all in vain, and that he
must submit—and he submitted.
The original Letters Patent were withdrawn, (or altered to such
an extent as to constitute a virtual withdrawal), and new Letters
Patent were substituted for them. These are founded on the prin-
ciple, that the Ecclesiastical Laws of England are not of force, or
rather that they do not exist in the British Colonies—and that the
Lord-Bishops of Dioceses in British Colonies have neither territorial
jurisdiction, nor ecclesiastical supremacy; that they have not even
ecclesiastical superiority—but stand precisely on a legal level with
all the other Ministers of Religion in these colonies.
The questions of supremacy and of superiority among churches,
as well as that of the existence of the Ecclesiastical Laws of England
in the Australian colonies, have thus at last been set at rest. The
unanimous opinion of the Law Officers of England, shews that all
churches and religious communions in these and in other British
colonies, have an equality of status in the estimation of the law. It
therefore now remains only for the inhabitants of these colonies them-
selves to be careful that this position of legal equality among the
various churches is not broken in upon.
Indications have already appeared that attempts will be made to
subvert this equality. During the course of the debate on the Aus-
tralian Colonies’ Bill, in May last, Mr. Gladstone submitted a
motion for the introduction of a clause* into the Bill in reference to
the ecclesiastical arrangements of the colonies, which, had it been
carried, would, by means of the Bill, have established a supremacy in
the Anglo-Episcopal Church in these colonies. The Bishop of Oxford
made a similar attempt in June last. Both motions were happily
negatived. Had it been otherwise, a foundation would have been laid,
to use Lord Durham’s words in reference to the Canadas, for “ a
strife arduous and embittered,” of which, it is to be feared, “ the
result would have been,” again to use Lord Durham’s words, “ not to
secure the favoured sect, but to endanger the “loss of the Australian
colonies,” and in vindicating the exclusive pretensions of the “Anglo-
Episcopal Church to hazard one of the fairest possessions of Ihe
British Crown.”
The legal position of the Anglo-Episcopal Church in these colonies
being identical with that of the other churches, there can be no
necessity for legislative interference to enable it to carry on government
* The proposed clause will appear in the Appendix.


and to exercise discipline. The Roman Catholic, the Presbyterian, the
Independent, and the Baptist churches do both well and effectively, with-
out legislative aid—and so may the Anglo-Episcopal Church. Ihe Bi-
shops, the Clergy, and the Laity of that church haveonlyto agree among
themselves as to the rules to be adhered to, and the mode of pro-
ceeding to be followed in exercising government and discipline, and
nothing more is wanted. The Anglo-Episcopal Church, and the
Bishops of that Church, hold a position in the Australian colonies
precisely similar to that held by the Scottish-Episcopal and the
American-Episcopal Churches in their respective localities. These
churches have no authority derived from the legislature for the
exercise of government and discipline, and yet they exercise both
with effect. For many hundred years legislative authority for the
exercise of government and discipline in the Christian Church was
unknown. Such authority was not requisite during that period, nor
is it requisite in the present day. Lord Stanley, in his Despatch of
the 29th December 1844, says, “As in the neighbouring colony
of New South Wales it has been found possible for the Bishop to
maintain his authority without having recourse to the establishment
of such a Court, I trust that experience will show that such a mea-
sure will not be required in Van Diemen’s Land, for enforcing the
authority of the Bishop of Tasmania.”
The opinion given by the Law Officers of England in December
1845, bears out Lord Stanley’s view, that a Consistorial Court is not
necessary.
Doctor’s Commons, 27th December, 1845.
My Lord, —
In compliance with the request contained in the letter of Mr.
Under-Secretary Stephen, of the 18th October last, we have referred to the
letter of Mr. Under-Secretary Hope, of the 28th August last, and to the several
Acts of the Legislature of Van Diemen’s Land now laid before us, and with
reference to the questions submitted to us, touching the proceedings adopted
against certain clergymen in that colony, and the status of clergymen there,
we have the honor to report to your Lordship, that having also considered the
points suggested by Archdeacon Marriott, we are of opinion that upon the
appointment of a Chaplain to officiate in Van Diemen’s Land, whether by the
Government here, or in the colony, he cannot lawfully act without being
licensed by the Bishop of Tasmania.
That upon refusal by the Bishop to license, an appeal lies to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and to him only; that a license may be revoked by the Bishop ;
that upon the revocation of a license, no formal trial is necessary; that the
Bishop, however, should not act but upon what he deems sufficient cause, or
without giving the party accused an opportunity of answering the charge
against him.
That there is no form of institution or induction analogous to either in Van
Diemen’s Land. The appointment and the license are all that can take place ;
that the Bishop may try, convict, and punish, for ecclesiastical offences, without
the aid of any new court to be created by the Local Legislature, or otherwise;
but he must proceed judicially, with the assistance of such officers as are
created by the Letters Patent, and decide according to the best of his judg-


ment; there must be a distinct charge; the accused must have due notice, and
a fair opportunity of answering and defending himself, and of examining the wit'
nesses against him; that the 3 and 4 Viet,, c. 86, does not extend to the colonies,
that, therefore, if either of the clergymen in question was unlicensed, he could
not legally officiate at all; and that if any license had been granted, the revo-
cation of it by the Bishop was valid.
We have, &c.,
J. DODSON,
FRO. THESIGER,
FITZROY KELLY.
The Right Hon. the Lord Stanley,
Bfc. Bfc. Bfc.
In the debate on Mr, Gladstone’s motion in the House of Com-
mons, the Attorney-General maintained views in accordance with
those of the Law Officers of 1845. It may, therefore, be considered
a settled point, that legislative action is not necessary to empower
the Bishops of the Anglo-Episcopal Church in the Australian
colonies to maintain order and support their authority. Lord
Grey, indeed, it is reported, has said, that he intends to introduce
some general measure for the regulation of ecclesiastical matters in
all the colonies. It is difficult to discover how this can be con-
stitutionally done, as regards the Australian colonies. They have
now—or they soon will have—their own Legislative Assemblies.
In these bodies alone, it is presumed, will reside authority to
legislate on internal colonial matters. But, if it is found to be other-
wise, and if a legislative measure is provided for the Anglo-Episcopal
Church, or for any one of the other churches, granting exclusive
powers or privileges, or even any peculiar distinction, it is to be
feared that such interference will be attended with many evils, and
will lead to that deplorable state of affairs in the Australian colonies
which Lord Durham, in his Report, represented as having been so
mischievous and dangerous in Canada.


Requisition to the Presbyterian Inhabitants of Van Diemen’s Land.
The Bishop of Tasmania in his recent Charge, has declared his
design to endeavour, by the aid of the civil power, to obtain the
establishment in this colony of a Consistorial Court; and what is
obviously implied in the establishment of such a Court—the in-
troduction of more or less of the Ecclesiastical Law of England, so
as to be able to compel even those who are not of his communion to
appear as witnesses before him.
The same Bishop has also published the following passage in his
Charge:—
“ In these shifting days, the Secretary of State may be a Romanist,
a Presbyterian, an Unitarian, a Dissenter, nay, even an Unbeliever;
for these are not the times when the State feels it a duty to watch
with jealous care over the high principle of Christian truth as exhi-
bited in the Church of England, or when soundness in the ‘ faith
once delivered to the Saints,’ is likely to be regarded as a necessary
qualification for .a Minister of State.”
As we regard the design of establishing such a Court, and introducing
such laws in this British colony, in which neither the Anglican nor
the Scottish Church can legally claim any jurisdiction or precedence
whatever over the members of the other, as altogether repugnant to
our constitutional rights as members of the Scottish Presbyterian
Church of this colony, as these rights have been secured to us by the
Act of Union of Great Britain.
And as the publication of the above passage, in which Presbyte-
rians are associated in one most offensive charge with Romanists,
Unitarians, and Unbelievers, aud in which it is even avowed that for
the Sovereign to appoint a Presbyterian to an office of dignity or in-
fluence, is at variance with “ high principles of Christian truth,”
and “ soundness in the faith,” is not only an insult as gross and
unjust, as it is wanton and unprovoked, to every member of the
Presbyterian Church, but most disparaging to the honour and recti-
tude of Her Majesty the Queen, who though “ the Supreme Head
and Governor of the Church of England,” has sworn unalterably to
preserve and maintain, within the realm of Scotland the true Protes-
tant Religion, and government of the Presbyterian Church; and
who, moreover, presides every year, by her representatives, in the
Supreme Council of the same Church, in token of her Royal counten-
ance and good-will towards it.—We hereby submit to the Presbyterian
Inhabitants of the colony, the great importance of taking immediate


steps, by petitioning Her Majesty the Queen to repel this unjust and
disloyal insult, as well as to protect themselves against the invasion
of their hard won rights and privileges, which their ancestors have
bequeathed to them, and which have already been attempted to be
violated by the assumed powers of the Bishop’s Letters Patent, the
confirmation of which, it cannot be doubted, is one of the principal
objects of his mission to England.
We, therefore, most respectfully and earnestly solicit our Presbyte-
rian brethren throughout the colony to meet in St. Andrew’s Church,
Hobart Town, on Wednesday the 12th August, at 7 o’clock, to deli-
berate on this important subject. Signed—John Walker, William
Gunn, Adam Turnbull, Thomas Young, William Murray, John Ro-
bertson, William Robertson, James Thomson, Robert Officer, W.
M. Tennent, W. A. Bethune, Peter Fraser, James Sprent, Joseph
Dixon, A. Kissock, R. Kissock, John Jackson, George Hutton,
David Barclay, James Murdoch, M.D,, J. A. Thomson, John John-
ston, John Guthrie, R. W. Neilson, William Neilson, John M‘Con-
nell, John Wilson, Sinclair Williamson, John Mezger, Robert
Walker, John Wiseman, James Murdoch, Thomas Jhonson, Stephen
Coombs, Leonard Pearson, Duncan M‘Pherson, Thomas Brown, H.
Brock, G. H. Anderson, Andrew Crombie.—lth August 1846.
Resolutions of the Meeting of the Presbyterian Inhabitants of Van
Piemens Land, held in St. Andrew's Church , Hobart Town, 1 2th
August 1846.
I. That the publication of the charge of the Bishop of Tasmania to
bis clergy, which has taken place since he left the colony for England,
for the purpose, as therein declared, of obtaining the introduction of
ecclesiastical laws into this British colony, makes it imperative at
this meeting of the Presbyterian inhabitants of Van Diemen’s Land,
whose constitutional rights would be invaded by the introduction of
such laws, to assert the rights and privileges secured to them by the
Act of Union of Great Britain—Resolved, therefore, that neither the
Established Church of England, nor any of the ecclesiastical laws of
England, nor any power to put these laws in force (excepting those
only having reference to civil rights, which have been delegated to
the Supreme Civil Courts of the territory) can by law be introduced
into this British colony except in direct violation of the rights of the
Scottish Presbyterian inhabitants, secured to them by the said Act of
Union: and that Her Majesty’s Letters Patent, purporting to erect
a diocese in this British colony, are repugnant to the said Act of
Union, and therefore void in law.


11. That the Bishop of Tasmania in his charge uses the following
language as regards certain measures with reference to the Episcopal
Church in the colony “In these shifting days, the Secretary of
“State may be a Romanist, a Presbyterian, an Unitarian, a
*• Dissenter —nay, even an Unbeliever; for these are not the times
“ when the Secretary of State feels it a duty to watch with jealous
“ care over the high principles of Christian truth as exhibited in the
“ Church of England, or when soundness in the ‘ faith once delivered
‘ * to the Saints,’ is likely to be regarded as a necessary qualification
“for a Minister of State.” Resolved, that this passage, in which
Presbyterians are associated in one indiscriminate and offensive
charge with Romanists, Unitarians, and Unbelievers, in which it is
avowed that, for the Sovereign to appoint a Presbyterian to any office
of dignity and influence, would compromise the high principles of
Christian truth as exhibited in the Church of England, and the
“ soundness in the faith once delivered to the Saints, is an unpro-
voked indignity, which calls for public vindication, and justifies the
Presbyterian inhabitants of this colony in taking measures to prevent
its recurrence.
HI. —That while this meeting considers it incumbent on Presby-
terians thus publicly to vindicate their character from an indignity
publicly cast upon it, it is deeply sensible of the importance of do-
ing so in the spirit of that Christian charity, which, being first pure
and then peaceable, combines a paramount regard for the interests
of truth and justice with the subordinate feelings of forbearance
and good-will.
IV. That a petition be presented to Her Majesty the Queen on
the basis of the foregoing resolutions; and that the petition read be
adopted.
V. That a Convener and Committee be appointed to take charge
of this Petition; and they are hereby requested to transmit the
same to Her Majesty through His Excellency the Lieutenant-Gover-
nor, and at the same time to transmit printed copies of the same to
the Committee of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland,
earnestly soliciting their aid in protecting the petitioners in the en-
joyment of their just and equal rights with their brethren of the
Anglican Church.
VI. That a subscription be entered into to defray the expenses
consequent on the said petition.


Speech of Thomas Young, Esq., at the Meeting of the Presby-
terians at Hobart Town, 12 th August 1846.
Mr. Chairman and gentlemen,—lt has fallen to my lot, doubtless
through the partiality of my friends, to propose the first resolution
to this large and respectable assembly, on this very important occa-
sion, which, as the chairman has justly observed, is one that involves
your most cherished privileges and dearest interests. The resolu-
tion, which I will now read, adverts to matters requiring your
gravest consideration, and is as follows :
I. “ That the publication of the charge of the Bishop of Tasmania to his
clergy, which has taken place since he left the colony for England, for the pur-
pose, as therein declared, of obtaining the introduction of ecclesiastical laws
into this British colony, makes it imperative at this meeting of the Presbyte-
rian inhabitants of Van Diemen’s Land, whose constitutional rights would be
invaded by the introduction of such laws, to assert the rights and privileges
secured to them by the Act of Union of Great Britain—Resolved, therefore,
that neither the Established Church of England, nor any of the ecclesiastical
laws of England, nor any power to put these laws in force (excepting those only
having reference to civil rights, which have been delegated to the Supreme
Civil Courts of the territory) can by law be introduced into this British colony
except in direct violation of the rights of the Scottish Presbyterian inhabi-
tants, secured to them by the said Act of Union: and that Her Majesty’s
Letters Patent, purporting to erect a diocese in this British colony, are re-
pugnant to the said Act of Union, and therefore void in law.”
The propositions involved in this resolution are most unequivo-
cally put forth. They may appear startling, but, if I did not feel
the utmost confidence of being able to demonstrate, most fully, their
truth, I should not have ventured to appear before you. It is often
tiresome, on occasions like the present, to have to refer to books,
hut I must trouble you, in the course of my observations, with a few
important extracts from the volumes which are before me, for it is
most important that the subject now submitted for your consideration
should be put before you in the clearest light, and be most fully un-
derstood. The introductory statement, in the resolution requires me
to refer to the following extracts from the Bishop’s Charge
“ The establishment of a Consistorial Court would seem to be the natural
method of correcting these, and similar inegularities; as well as of ensuring
the maintenance of that sound discipline, without which, the good order of the
Church is at an end, if haply there should exist the disposition to disobey,
“ You are most of you aware that previously to my taking that painful step,
to which I have alluded, I applied to the Local Government, not so much for
the liberty of establishing a court of this description, (for that is one of the
unalienable privileges of a Bishop,) as for such aid as the civil power might be
able to afford, in the management of its details, the provisions for its machinery;
and the execution of its decrees.
“It is evident, that, in order to render a trial in its proper sense, either a
just, or an effective proceeding, we must have some means of ensuring the at-
tendance of the necessary witnesses. This obvious truth was not lost sight of
in the framing of the Letters Patent constituting this colony an Episcopal See,
for in them it is provided that the Bishop, either by himself or by his officers.


may, with reference to the clergy, ‘ enquire, by witnesses sworn in due form
of law, and by all other lawful ways and means, by which the same may be
best and most effectually done, as well concerning their morals as their beha-
viour in their said offices and stations respectively.
“ But careful as are the Letters Patent to invest the Bishop with this power
he is left without any certain means of exercising it. From the defect of the
colonial law, any witness, when summoned, may, if he so pleases, legally refuse
attendance ; or if he should think proper to attend, he may, as legally, decline
to be put upon oath, or indeed, to give any evidence at all.
“It was to remedy this anomalous state of things, and to ensure the cer-
tainty of good order in our future ecclesiastical proceedings, that I subse -
quently sought to procure the extension to this colony of the Act 53, Geo. 3,
c. 127, commonly called “de contumace capiendo’ My desire was to acquire,
through the medium of that Act, no ‘ territorial power,’ nor any illegal ascen-
dancy over those of other communions ; but simply so much of legal help, as
would enable me to act with certainty, and would ensure to you ample justice ;
affording, in fact, mutual protection to the Bishop and the clergy. It would
be needless to trouble you with the reasons why my request was refused ; they
will undergo revision elsewhere.”
The inferences to be drawn from these passages of the Bishop’s
Charge are irresistible ; the language is altogether based on the sup-
position that the ecclesiastical laws of England exist in this colony.
If it were not so, the power sought to be obtained of summoning
witnesses before him would be of no value, as his Consistorial Court
would be a mere nullity. To summon witnesses without the existence
of a Bishop’s Court, would be utterly superfluous. But I shall
show you that the belief of the Bishop that such laws do exist in this
colony is based on mere inference, drawn from his Letters Patent—
if he really does entertain the belief. The essential facts asserted by
the resolution are—that neither the ecclesiastical laws of England,
nor any power to put these laws into force in this British colony,
are in existence. I will refer you to a work of great authority, en-
titled “ New Commentaries on the Laws of England,” by Serjeant
Stephen, published very recently—the last volume within the last six
months. By the extracts lam about to read, you will see that, inde-
pendently of the Act of Union between England and Scotland, the
ecclesiastical laws of England have no application here. The Queen
has no authority to confer on the Bishop, or any other individual, by
Letters Patent, the right to establish a Consistorial Court in Van
Diemen’s Land, to be governed by the ecclesiastical laws of England.
This is constitutional doctrine ; but, it may be said, such language is
disrespectful to the Queen. It will, however, bear no such construc-
tion. It is well known that the granting of Letters Patent and every
other act of Her Majesty is substantially that of her responsible
advisers. I mean no disrespect to the Queen, nor can any be im-
plied, when I repudiate the power attempted to be conferred on the
Bishop. For, let it be remembered, that the setting aside of Letters
Patent by the law of the land is of frequent occurrence. The grant-
ing of Letters Patent is a prerogative of the Crown, but it is one


which the constitution watches with peculiar jealousy, so as to pre-
vent infringement upon the rights and privileges of the people. This
is made clearly manifest in the New Commentaries to which I have
made allusion. Serjeant Stephen says—
“ Colonies are no part of the mother country, but distinct (though depen-
dent) dominions. They are either gained from other states by conquest or
treaty, or they are acquired by right of occupancy only, that is, by finding
them desert and uncultivated, and peopling them from the mother country.
“ Both these rights are founded upon the law of nature, or at least upon that
of nations. But there is a difference between these two species of colonies
with respect to the laws by which they are bound, For in conquered or ceded
countries that have already laws of their own, these laws remain in force until
changed by competent authority, and the common law of England, as such, has
no allowance or authority there; while, on the other hand, it has been held
that if an uninhabited country he discovered and planted by English subjects,
all the English laws then in being, which are the birthright of every subject,
are immediately there in force. But this must be understood with very many
and very great restrictions. Such colonists carry with them only so much of
the English law as is applicable to their own situation and the condition of an
infant colony ; such, for instance, as the general rules of inheritance, and of
protection from personal injuries; the artificial refinements and distinctions
incident to the property of a great and commercial people ; the laws of police
and revenue, (such, especially, as are enforced by penalties) ; the mode of
maintenance for the established clergy; the jurisdiction of Spiritual Courts,
and a multitude of other provisions, are neither necessary nor convenient for
them, and therefore are not in force.
“ The Sovereign exercises as to colonies of every description, the right of
appointing Governors, and of issuing warrants for the appointment of all other
officers, whether judicial or administrative.
“ The right of legislation, too, is in many cases vested in the Crown ; for all
such colonies as have been acquired by conquest or cession, are subject to such
laws as the Sovereign in council may himself impose, or to such as may be
imposed by any Legislative Council established there under the Royal
authority. This does not extend, however, to colonies acquired by occupancy;
for in these the Crown possesses no such legislative right.” —VoL i.pp. 98, 99.
You will see from what I have read from the general law of
England, that the ecclesiastical laws applicable to a colony
constituted as this is, are not presumed to be in existence,
and cannot be extended by any exercise of the prerogative of the
crown. If it were otherwise, we might be said to live under an ar-
bitrary government. But it is not so; and when any improper
exercise of the prerogative takes place, we have the safeguard of the
constitutional law to protect us. But a still stronger barrier against
the assumption of power to establish a Consistorial Court to be
governed by the ecclesiastical law of England under Letters Patent,
is to be found in an article of the Act of Union of Great Britain. It is
there expressly enacted in language as plain and strong as can be
used, that the Church of England and all the privileges conferred
upon it, are limited to the Kingdom of England, the domi-
nion of Wales, and the town of Berwick-upon-Tweed, and the ter-


ritories thereunto belonging. And in like manner the Church of
Scotland is declared to be the established Church within the
kingdom of Scotland. And the 4th article of the said Act confers
equal rights and privileges upon the natives of each kingdom in
the British plantations from and after the union. A Consisto-
rial Court to be governed by the ecclesiastical laws of England,
cannot be established in this colony except in direct violation of the
Act of Union. Perhaps it might be maintained, that in colonies
acquired by conquest or cession, ihe royal prerogative could extend
the ecclesiastical laws to them; I will not stop to enquire into this,
because it has no application to these colonies. The Australian
Colonies are all colonies acquired by occupancy; and with
regard to such colonies it is expressly laid down that the crown pos-
sesses no legislative authority whatever; and this doctrine applies
especially to Van Diemen’s Land. Even before the union of Great
Britain the attempt to impose on such colonies the ecclesiastical
laws was never made. The American colonies, now the United
States, were taken possession of by English emigrants flying from
the scourge of these very laws, to secure to themselves liberty of
conscience. Our Scottish ancestors knew too well what they were,
when put in force through the spirit of a bigoted prelatic priesthood.
I need only remind you of the name “ Covenanters,” to recal to
your recollection the noble and resolute stand which they made
against prelatic domination. They acquired the freedom of their
church through much suffering and bloodshed ; and the fruits of
that noble struggle were sealed and secured to their descendants by
the treaty of union. I trust such a precious birthright will be
vindicated and asserted by all the descendants of these noble-minded
men who are assembled here this evening. To establish what I
have said, I will now read to you two extracts from the Act of
Union:—
“ Our Sovereign Lady, and the Estates of Parliament considering that by
the late Act of Parliament for a treaty with England for an union of both
kingdoms it is provided that the commissioners for that treaty should not treat
of or concerning any alteration of worship, discipline, and government of the
church of this kingdom, as now by law established, which treaty being now
reported to the Parliament; and it being reasonable and necessary that the
true Protestant religion as presently professed within this kingdom, with the
worship, discipline, and government of that church, should be effectually and
unalterably secured; therefore Her Majesty, with the advice and consent of
the said Estates of Parliament, doth hereby establish and confirm the said true
Protestant religion, and the worship, discipline, and government of this church
to continue without any alteration to the people of this land in all succeeding
generations; and more especially Her Majesty with advice and consent afore-
said, ratifies, approves, and for ever confirms the sth Act of the Ist Parliament
of King William and Queen Mary, intituled ‘ An Act ratifying the Confession
of Faith, and settling Presbyterian Church Government,’ with all other Acts
of Parliament relating thereto, in prosecution of the declaration of our Es-
tates in this kingdom, containing the claim of right, bearing date the 11th of


April, 1689; and Her Majesty, with advice and consent aforesaid, expressly
provides and declares that the aforesaid true Protestant religion, contained in
the above-named Confession of Faith, with the form and worship presently in
use within this church, and its Presbyterian church government and discipline
(that is to say) the government of the church by Kirk Sessions, Presbyteries,
Provincial Synods, and General Assemblies, all established by the aforesaid
Acts of Parliament, pursuant to the claim of rights, shall remain and
continue unalterable—and the said Presbyterian government shall be the only
government of the church within the Kingdom of Scotland.”
And in a succeeding article of the treaty Her Majesty declares
and statutes —
“ That after the death of Her present Majesty, the Sovereign succeeding her in
the Royal Government of the Kingdom of Great Britain shall at all time coming
at his or her accession to the Crown swear and subscribe that they shall invio-
lably maintain and preserve the aforesaid settlement of the true Protestant reli-
gion, with the government, worship, and discipline, rights and privileges of this
church, as above established by the laws of this kingdom in prosecution of the
claim of rights.”
An exactly similar article in the treaty, declares the Episcopal
Church to be the Established Church within the Kingdom of
England, the dominion of Wales, and town of Berwick-upon-
Tweed, and the territories thereto belonging. Such were the rights
of the two churches secured by the Act of Union. It fixed the
exact position of the rights of the two churches as they then existed,
and by the fourth article of the act, a mutual participation in all
other rights were granted to the inhabitants of each kingdom ; in
which of course is implied an equal participation in all religious pri-
vileges connected with the two Established Churches in all subse-
quent possessions acquired by the United Kingdom. If one of
these Established Churches with its Ecclesiastical Laws can be
transplanted to a British colony, so can the other with its laws ;
that either can be so transplanted is clearly hostile to the spirit of
the Act of Union. The fourth section of the act, is as follows :
“ That all the subjects of the United Kingdom of Great Britain shall, from
and after the union have full freedom and intercourse of trade and navigation
to and from any port and place within the said United Kingdom and the do-
minions and plantations thereunto belonging; and that there be a communi-
cation of all other rights, privileges, and advantages, which do or may belong
to the subjects of either kingdom, except where it is otherwise expressly agreed
in these articles.”
Now, I ask you to consider this section well. I submit to you that
it can bear no other construction than that an equal participation of all
rights is stipulated to be secured by the act to the inhabitants of each
country. If one of the churches therefore can be transplanted to
the neutral ground of a British colony, so can the other, with the
respective ecclesiastical laws of each. This, h owever, could not by
possibility work in practice ; and then it follows, that neither of the
churches nor the laws peculiar to it can so be established. I will
read another extract from Stephen’s Commentaries to prove to you


the inviolability with which the law protects the settlement of the
Union, in reference to the independence of the two churches. Mr.
Stephen says —being in confirmation of the same doctrine found in
Blackstone’s Commentaries—
“Upon these articles and acts of union, it is to be observed Ist. That the
two kingdoms are now so inseparably united, that nothing can ever disunite
them again, except the mutual consent of both, or the successful resistance
of either, upon apprehending an infringement of those points which, when
they were separate and independent nations, it was mutually stipulated should
be 1 fundamental and essential conditions’ of the union.’ —2nd. That what-
ever else may be deemed ‘ fundamental and essential conditions’ the preserva-
tion of the two churches of England and Scotland in the same state that
they were in at the time of the union, and the maintenance of the acts of
uniformity which establish our common prayer are expressly declared so to
be.—3rd. That, therefore, any alteration in the constitution of those churches
or in the liturgy of the Church of England, (unless with the consent of the
respective churches, collectively or representatively given) would be an in-
fringement of these ‘ fundamental and essential conditions,’ and greatly en-
danger the union.”
It would, therefore, be an infringement of the Union, and greatly
endanger it, to make the slightest alteration upon the laws of
either church, as established in each kingdom. This principle must
extend with equal force to the colonies ; and this proves that the one
church cannot be there established, or receive any description of
privileges to the prejudice of the other. I will now prove to you,
that the act of Union has ever been respected by the Imperial Par-
liament. I will first refer you to the opinions of the twelve Judges
of England on the question, propounded to them by the House of
Lords, on the 13th of April, 1840, regarding the Clergy Reserves’
(Canada) Act. It is as follows :
“ In answer to the first question, we are all of opinion that the words ‘ a
Protestant Clergy,’ in the statute 31 Geo. 111. c. 31, are large enough to in-
clude, and they do include, other clergy than those of the Church ot England,
and Protestant bishops, priests, and deacons, who have received episcopal
ordination.
“ And when your lordships desire the judges to state if any other clergy are
included, what other? we answer, that it appears to us that the clergy of the
Established Church of Scotland do constitute one instance of such other Pro-
testant clergy.
“ For by the Act of Union of the two kingdoms of England and Scotland
it is made a fundamental article of such union, ‘ that the true Protestant re-
ligion as then professed within the kingdom of Scotland, with the worship,
discipline, and government of the church should be effectually and unaltera-
bly secured within the kingdom of Scotland.’ And when a subsequent act of
the British legislature, relating to the government, laws, and religion of a
British colony, acquired by conquest since the union, and forming part of the
dominions of the British crown, employs, with reference to that colony, the
terms, ‘ a Protestant Clergy,' there being no words in the statute which neces-
sarily restrain and limit the meaning of the expression, we think it must be
held to include the clergy of the Protestant church established in Scotland;
and we feel ourselves confirmed in this opinion by observing that, on several


occasions, the precise expression is to be found in the statute book, * the clergy
of the established Church of Scotland.’ The 48 Geo., 111. c. 138, in its very
title mentions ‘the clergy of Scotland.’ In the 50 Geo. 111., c. 84, ‘the
rights and interests of the clergy of Scotland’ are repeatedly spoken of; and
in the 5 Geo. IV., c, 72. s. 7, a reference will be found to several acts
of parliament which make mention of the ‘ poor clergy of the established
Church of Scotland.
“And although in answering your Lordships’ question, we specify no other
church than the Protestant Church of Scotland, we do not hereby intend that
besides that church the ministers of other churches may not be included under
the term “ Protestant Clergy.” At the same time as we do not find on the
statute book the acknowledgment by the legislature of any other clergy
answering that description, and as we are not furnished by your Lordships
with any information as to the doctrine or discipline of any other denomina-
tion of Protestants to which the statute of the 31 Geo. 3, can, by possibility,
apply, we are unable to specify any other to your Lordships as falling within
the statute.”
Here is the highest opinion that can be had —that of the twelve
judges of England, at so recent a date as 1840, with regard to the
rights of the two churches, and they inform us that those rights are
equal in a British colony constituted as is this. It has long been
a popular opinion, which it requires some investigation to unravel
and dissipate, that the law of England, when extended to British
colonies, brings with it the Established Church and its ecclesiastical
l aws —that in fact they go together and are co-existent. But this
principle is not recognized in the 9th Geo. IV., cap. 83, the
Act by which the laws of England are administered in this colony.
If it were otherwise many other laws would in like manner be ex-
tended, —such as the game and poor laws, the excise laws and many
others, which it has been already seen from Stephen’s Commentaries
are not extended by the general enactment that the laws of England
shall prevail in the colony : and, indeed, it is there expressly stated,
that the mode of maintenance of the Established Clergy, and the
jurisdiction of spiritual courts are not so extended. The twenty-
fourth section of the last mentioned Act is as follows :
“ Provided also and be it further enacted, that all laws and statutes in force
within the realm of England, at the time of the passing of this Act, (not being
inconsistent herewith or with any charter or Letters Patent or order in Council
which may be issued in pursuance hereof) shall be applied in the administration
of justice in the Courts of New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land respec-
tively, so far as the same can be applied within the said colonies.”
Now Stephen’s Commentaries have explained to you the meaning
of the proviso, “ so far as the same can be applied within the same
colonies.” If the poor laws, excise laws, and many others are in-
applicable —equally so are the ecclesiastical laws. When the
act was proposed, no means existed of putting these laws
in force, and hence their inapplicability. But besides this reason,
the Act of Union forms another strong and insurmountable barrier
to their being extended. This proviso at once extends and applies


to that act; by which both churches and their ecclesiastical
laws are kept within the bounds prescribed to them. That these
laws are not extended to this colony, appears still more clearly from
the 12th section of the said Act. It is as follows :
“ And be it further enacted, that the said Supreme Courts respectively shall
be Courts of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and shall have full power and autho-
rity to administer and execute within New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land, and the dependencies thereof respectively, such ecclesiastical jurisdic-
tion and authority as hath been or shall be committed to the said Supreme
Courts respectively, by His Majesty’s said Charters or Letters Patent so issued
or to be issued as aforesaid.
You must perceive that the general enactment extending the laws of
England, could not have extended the ecclesiastical laws, otherwise
the act would have stultified itself in creating the Supreme Court, a
court of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and authorising his Majesty
to confer upon it such ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as his Majesty
might be pleased to do. If these laws had been extended by the
general enactment, then it would have been necessary that an excep-
tion should have been made, as to those laws which his Majesty
might transfer to the Supreme Court. The language of the 12th
section proves, however, that none of these laws were extended
under the general enactment. By the charter of the Supreme Court
his Majesty conferred upon it the only ecclesiastical laws which he
could confer on a civil court, namely, the right of granting probate
of wills, and letters of administration to intestate estates, these being
laws essentially relating to the administration of civil rights being
all which his Majesty could confer upon a civil court, under the au-
thority of the Act of Parliament; and these are all the ecclesiastical
laws, which do or can exist in the colony. Her Majesty’s advisers,
however, have not been so scrupulous in the Letters Patent creating
the Bishopric of Tasmania. I will read one or two extracts from
them, to establish this fact —
“ And we do further by these presents expressly declare that the said Bishop
of Tasmania and his successors having been respectively by us, oar heirs and
successors, named and appointed, and by the said Archbishop of Canterbury,
for the time being, as metropolitan for the said See, canonically ordained and
consecrated thereunto according to the form and usage of the United Church
of England and Ireland, may perform all the functions peculiar and appro-
priate to the office of Bishop within the said Cathedral Church of St. David,
and the said diocese of Tasmania, and may also by himself and themselves, or
by the Archdeacon, or the Vicar-General, or other officer or officers hereinafter
mentioned, exercise jurisdiction spiritual and ecclesiastical jwithin the said
Cathedral Church, and throughout the said diocese according to the ecclesias-
tical laws now in force in England.
« And we do hereby authorise and empower the said Bishop of Tasmania,
and his successors, and the Archdeacon, Vicar-General, or other officer or
officers hereinafter mentioned, being respectively delegated thereunto by the
Bishop or his successors, to administer all such oaths as are accustomed and
by law may be administered according to the ecclesiastical laws of our realm


of England, and to punish and correct the aforesaid rectors, curates, chaplains,
ministers, priests and deacons, according to their demerits by deprivation, sus-
pension, or other such ecclesiastical censure or correction as they would be
liable to according to the ecclesiastical laws aforesaid ; subject neveithelcss to
such right of review and appeal as are hereinafter given and reserved.”
“ Nevertheless, we will and do by these presents declare and ordain, that in
all grave matters of correction which are accustomed according to the practice
of the ecclesiastical laws of our realm of England to be judicially examined, the
same shall in like manner be judicially examined and proceeded in before the
said Bishop of Tasmania and his successors, or the said Archdeacon or the said
Vicar-General, or other officer or officers aforesaid, and all such causes shall be
proceeded in to final sentence in due form of law.”
“And we further will and ordain that the said Supreme Court of Justice ex-
ercising jurisdiction within the limits of the said diocese, shall have such and
the like jurisdiction and power of interfering by writ of prohibition or man-
damus, subject to the same laws, restrictions, and rules of practice as is or
may be exercised by our Court of Queen’s Bench at Westminster, in regard to
proceedings in the ecclesiastical court of England, regard being had neverthe-
less to any special provisions or exception contained in these our Letters
Patent, and to any other laws and regulations specially applicable to or con-
cerning that part of our dominions included in the said diocese.”
It has thus been seen that the Letters Patent are made to depend
entirely upon the ecclesiastical laws being in force in the colony. If
these laws are not so in force, and have no existence, it iollows of
necessity that the Letters Patent are a mere nullity. The powers
attempted to be conferred on the Bishop are repugnant to, and in
direct violation of, the treaty ot union ; and Stephen s Commentaries
have also established that they are repugnant to the common law of
the land. The Letters Patent, it is seen, cannot be brought into
existence, through the laws upon which they are entirely to
depend —these laws having no existence in the colony. The Bishop
says in his charge that all he w r ants to put his authority into force is
the extension to this colony of the Act commonly called “ de contu-
tnace capiendo and he endeavours to cast much obloquy on His
Excellency the Lieutenant Governor in not acceding to his wishes in
extending* this Act to the colony by an Act of the Local Legislature.
Gentlemen, all denominations of Christians in the community are
much indebted to His Excellency for thus preserving their constitu-
tional rights : for my own part I express my deep sense of gratitude
to His Excellency for this constitutional exercise of his authority.
If such a law had been introduced, all members of the com-
munity would have been exposed to have been dragged as witnesses
before the Bishop’s Court, and in default of their attendance to be
imprisoned or fined; and it would indeed have been a solemn
mockery of all justice to have been dragged before a court having no
law by which it could legally have put its decrees into force. That
this may ever continue to be so in the way contemplated by the
Bishop’s Letters Patent must be the sincere prayer of every man. The
very name of the ecclesiastical laws of England carry along with them


every odious association ; they are of foreign origin, and in every way
obnoxious to the genius of the English nation ; they are a mass of law
originating in the dark ages, made to gratify priestly domination and
their lust for power. It is only necessary to recall your attention to
the ear-cropping and nose-splitting penalties to satisfy you of this.
They may be a little modified in the present day; but their
spirit still remains the same. The Bishop alleges that His
Excellency’s refusal to concede to him the capiendo Act is one of the
reasons of his journey to England. In making this statement, gen-
tlemen, the Bishop has not told the whole truth ; there can be no
doubt, from many circumstances, that the Bishop is well aware that
his Letters Patent are a mere nullity ; and the danger chiefly to be
apprehended is, that he may get a rider added to some Act of Par-
liament confirming them, and extending the ecclesiastical law along
with them. If he does, he has alreadygiven us sufficient evidence of
his bigoted zeal, to make us well aware that with such powers
he would ride rough-shod over all those who in the least degree
thwarted him. Let his lordship again return to the colony with this
full-blown authority, and woe betide you! We happily live in a
time when our ears and noses are safe ; but w T e should still be ex-
posed, under his capiendo Act, to be punished for contumacy, if we
did not obey his summons as witnesses. To this indignity, I am
sure, gentlemen, you would never submit, I have thus shown you,
gentlemen, that the ecclesiastical laws of England, excepting those
which regulate civil rights, cannot by law be extended to a British
colony ; and, consequently, that a Consistorial Court can have no ex-
istence here. Having established this fact, in my opinion beyond all
controversy, I am still free to admit, that I think the episcopal
clergy should not be left without some authority to keep good order
in their community. The general body of the people is interested
in this. This can be easily done. And the same necessity must
exist with respect to the Presbyterian establishment in the colony.
But whatever modified measure may be adopted for this purpose,
respect should be had to the rights and privileges of the other Chris-
tian denominations in this colony. Gentlemen, I will not detain
you longer, further than to express ray sincere conviction that I
have established to your satisfaction the truth of the important
principles propounded in the resolution which I have had the honor
to submit for your consideration. To my mind the attempt to fix
upon this colony the ecclesiastical laws of the Church of England is
a most impudent attempt to rob us of those hard-fought-for rights
and privileges which were secured to us by the Act of Union of
Great Britain. If you agree with me in this, then I have no doubt
that there is not a Scottish presbyterian who now hears me, who
will not do all in his power to vindicate these rights, and thus estab-
lish that the same blood flows through his veins with the noble


men who in former times suffered so much from a dominant prelat-
ical priesthood, and, after much persecution and bloodshed, secured
these rights for their posterity, by the Act of Union of Great Bri-
tain.
To Her Most Gracious Majesty Victoria, Queen of Great
Britain and Ireland.
The Petition of the Presbyterian Inhabitants of Van Diemen's Land.
Humbly Sheweth,
That Van Diemen’s Land, to which Your Majesty’s Petitioners
belong, is a Colony of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, added to Your Majesty’s Dominions since the Union of the
Kingdoms of England and Scotland.
That the Act of Union between England and Scotland provides,
“that the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland shall, upon the
“ Ist day of May. which shall be in the year 1707, and for ever
after, be united* into one Kingdom, by the name of Great Britain,”
and further provides, “that all the Subjects of the United Kingdom
“ of Great Britain shall, from and after the Union, have full freedom
“ and intercourse of trade and navigation to and from any port or
“ place within the said United Kingdom and the dominions and plan-
“ tations thereunto belonging; and that there be a communication
“ of all other rights, privdeges, and advantages which do or may
“ belong to the Subjects of either Kingdom ; except where it is other-
“ wise expressly agreed in these articles.”
That when Englishmen and Scotchmen leave their respective
countries, and go, as in the case of Your Majesty’s Petitioners, to
reside in a British Territory, acquired since the Union, they are alike
under the protection of this national compact which guarantees to both
equally a communication of rights, privileges, and advantages, neither
having any lawful claim to have their peculiar Institutions preferred
to those of the other, and much less imposed on the other.
That Your Majesty’s Petitioners in illustration of the sacred and
inviolable character of this National Union, would refer to the fol-
lowing passage from a legal Work of eminent authority, “ The New
Commentaries of the Laws of England, by Henry John Stephens,”
who has adopted the passage as originally laid down in the Com-
mentaries of Blackstone: —
“ That whatever else may be deemed fundamental aud essential
“ conditions, the preservation of the two Churches of England and


“ Scotland in the same state that they were in at the time of the
“Union, and the maintenance of the Acts of uniformity which esta-
“ blish our Common Prayer, are expressly declared so to be. That
“therefore any alteration in the constitution of either of those
“ Churches, or in the Liturgy of the Church of England, (unless
“ with the consent of the respective Churches, collectively or repre-
“ sentatively given) would be an infringement of those fundamental
“and essential conditions, and greatly endanger the Union.”
That while it is the Supreme Parliament alone which has the
power to determine what modification these respective Institutions
of the two countries shall undergo, so as to adapt them to the new
circumstances of a British Colony, yet even that Supreme power is,
by the principle laid down in the forecited passage, to be exercised
with a due regard to the solemn obligations of the National Union.
That in those Acts of the Supreme Parliament which have been
passed, relative to Your Majesty’s Colony of Yan Diemen’s Land,
such regard has been had to the principle of a communication of
rights, privileges, and advantages recognized by the said Act of
Union.
That thus in an Act of Parliament passed in the ninth year of your
Royal Uncle and predecessor, His late Majesty King George the
Fourth, intituled “ An Act to provide for the Administration of
Justice in New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land,” and by
which justice is now administered in this colony, while it is enacted
that all the laws and statutes in force within the realm of England,
at the time of the passing of this Act, shall be applied in the admin-
istration of justice in the Courts of New South Wales and Van Die-
men’s Land respectively, it is by the same Act distinctly provided,
“ that this shall be so far as the same can be applied within the
said colonies, a proviso which naturally excludes all such laws as are
inconsistent with the fundamental articles of Union between England
and Scotland.
That a like deference has been paid by the Imperial Parliament to
the rights and privileges secured to the natives of both Kingdoms
by the said Act of Union, inasmuch as the Ecclesiastical Laws, pro-
perly so called, of neither England nor Scotland have ever been intro-
duced into this colony by any Act of the said Parliament.
That this is farther manifest from the 12th section of the forecited Act
of the ninth of George the Fourth, which enacts that the Supreme
of Court of this colony, which is properly a Civil Court, and stands in
a common relation to all Your Majesty’s Subjects, whether English or
Scottish, shall be a Court of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
That the nature of this Court as a Civil Institution, being incom-
patible with Spiritual functions, necessarily restricts its so called
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to matters that are not Spiritual, and thus


happily secures both Your Majesty’s English and Scottish Subjects
from being, in this British territory, subjected to the strictly Ecclesi-
astical Laws of the other.
That hence the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction which has, in virtue of
the said enactment, been conferred on the said Court, embraces only
the power to grant Probates of Wills and Letters of Adminstration
—a power which refers altogether to questions of property, and
which in no way interferes with the religious rights of either
Englishmen or Scotchmen.
That the said Act of Union provides, in the most explicit manner
for the Religion and Church Polity of the two Kingdoms of
England and Scotland respectively.
That it is therein declared to be a fundamental and essential con-
dition of the said Union, that on the one hand the True Protestant
Religion and Episcopal Church Government shall be unalterably
maintained within the Kingdom of England, the Dominion
of Wales, and the Town of Berwick-upon-Tweed, and the
Territories thereunto belonging; and that, on the other hand, the
True Protestant Religion and Presbyterian Church Government
shall be unalterably maintained within the Kingdom of Scotland.
That the natives of the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland,
being thus placed by the said Act of Union on an equal footing as
regards their respective forms of Religion and Ecclesiastical Govern-
ment, so long as they reside within their respective countries , carry
with them equal claims to protection and consideration in relation
to the same high interests when they remove to the neutral ground
of a British Colony.
That such claims are fully provided for, in the forecited article
of Union, which expressly secures a communication of all rights,
privileges, and advantages to all the Subjects of the United
Kingdom.
That this claim to equal consideration and protection, with refer-
ence to their Religion and Church Polity in a British Colony, has
been placed beyond all question by the unanimous opinion of the
Judges of England, who, in their replies to the questions submitted
to them by the House of Lords on the 13th April 1840, as to what
is implied in the words “a Protestant Clergy” in the statute 31 Geo.
111,, c. 32, regarding the Clergy reserves in Your Majesty’s colony
of Canada, gave it as their first and chief reason for recognizing the
Clergy of the Church of Scotland as being included in that desig-
nation :
“ That by the Act of Union of the two Kingdoms of England and
“ Scotland, it is made a fundamental and essential article of such
“Union, that the true Protestant religion as then professed within
“ the Kingdom of Scotland with the worship, discipline, and govern-


“ ment of the Church should be effectually and unalterably secured
“ within the Kingdom of Scotland, and when a subsequent Act of the
“ British Legislature relating to the Government, Laws, and Religion
“of a British Colony, acquired by conquest since the Union, and
“forming part of the Dominions of the British Crown, employs, with
“ reference to that Colony, the terms ‘ a Protestant Clergy,’ there
“ being no terms in the statute which necessarily restrain and limit
“ the meaning of the expression, we think it must be understood to
“ include the Clergy of the Protestant Church established in
“ Scotland.”
That Your Majesty’s Petitioners would, with the utmost humility
and deference, but at the same time with a sacred regard for their
Constitutional Rights, represent to Your Majesty, that Your Ma-
jesty’s Letters Patent, bearing date the twenty-first day of August,
in the sixth year of Your Majesty’s Reign, whereby the Church of
St. David in Hobart Town within the Colony of Van Diemen’s Land
is constituted a Cathedral Church and Bishop’s See, and the said
Colony of Van Diemen’s Land with its Dependencies is erected into
a Diocese, under the name of the Diocese of Tasmania, in so far as
they purport to confer exclusive jurisdiction, and to extend to a
British Colony the Ecclesiastical Laws of England, are repugnant to
the rights, privileges, and advantages of Your Majesty’s Scottish
Presbyterian Subjects in the said Colony, and void in law.
That thus when the said Letters Patent declare that “ the Bishop
“ of the said Diocese of Tasmania may exercise jurisdiction, Spiritual
“and Ecclesiastical, within the said Cathedral Church of St. David,
“ and throughout the said Diocese, according to the Ecclesiastical
“ Laws now in force in England, and may exercise and enjoy full
“ power and authority to enquire by witnesses, sworn in due form of
“ law,” and further, “ authorise and empower the said Bishop of
“Tasmania to administer all such oaths as are accustomed and by
“ law may be administered, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws of
“ Your Majesty's Realm of England, and to punish and correct
“ Rectors, Curates, &c., in the said Diocese, by deprivation, suspen-
“ sion, or other such ecclesiastical censure or correction, as they
“ would be liable to according to the Ecclesiastical Laws aforesaid ” —
they manifestly assume a power to enforce the execution of the said
Ecclesiastical Laws of England within this British Colony, and
thereby to infringe upon the rights of Your Majesty’s Presbyterian
Subjects.
That in proof of such an illegal power being assumed in the said
Letters Patent, Your Majesty’s Petitioners would quote the following
passage from the recently published Charge of the said Bishop of
Tasmania :
“In order to render a trial, in its proper sense, either a just, or
“an effective proceeding, we must have some means of ensuring


“ the attendance of the necessary witnesses. This obvious truth was
“ not lost sight of in the framing of the Letters Patent, constituting
“this Colony an Episcopal See, for in them it is provided, that the
“ Bishop either by himself, or by his officers, may, with reference to
“ the Clergy, enquire by witnesses, sworn in due form of law, and
“by all other lawful ways and means by which the same may be
“ best and most effectually done, as well concerning their morals, as
“ their behaviour in their said offices and stations respectively. But
“careful as are the Letters Patent to invest the Bishop with this
“ power, he is left without any certain means of exercising it. From
“the defect of the Colonial Law, any witness when summoned, may,
“if he so pleases, legally refuse attendance, or, if he should think
“ proper to attend, he may as legally decline to be put on oath, or
“ indeed to give any evidence at all.”
That it is here avowed by the said Bishop, that the very power,
with which it is affirmed the said Letters Patent have been careful
to invest him, of summoning witnesses and administering oaths,
may be legally defeated, by the said witnesses refusing to attend, or
attending, to be put on oath, and that all that is wanting to render
this power effective, is the means of exercising it.
That Your Majesty’s Petitioners also learn from the said Charge,
that “ the means” by which the said Bishop designs to make the
assumed power of the said Letters Patent effective, is the establish-
ment of a “ Consistorial Court” in this British Colony, with autho-
rity to compel the attendance of witnesses by force of law. And they
further learn from the said Charge, that “ to remedy this anomalous
“ state of things, and to ensure the certainty of good order in his
" ecclesiastical proceedings, the said Bishop has sought to procure
“the extension to this Colony of the Act 53 Geo. 111. c. 127, com-
“ monly called Be contumace capiendo .”
That—notwithstanding the said Bishop therein disclaims any
“ desire to acquire through the medium of this Act territorial power
“ or any illegal ascendancy over those of other communions.”—Your
Majesty’s Petitioners would nevertheless represent to Your Majesty
that the extensiou of the said Act to this Colony, by giving, as its
terms obviously bear, the power to the said Bishop of enforcing, by
heavy and vexatious penalties, the attendance of witnesses in his
Court, irrespective of their Communion, would have been a most
flagrant infringement of their constitutional rights and privileges ;
and they cannot but, in common with the other inhabitants of the
colony, express their deep gratitude to Your Majesty’s Representative,
the Lieutenant-Governor of this colony, for having “ refused” such
an unconstitutional request.
That while Your Majesty’s Petitioners wish it to be distinctly
understood, that they have no desire to intrude in any way upon the


province of another, but seek only to protect themselves against an
unlawful jurisdiction, and to secure the enjoyment of their just
rights and privileges, they would most humbly represent to Your
Majesty, that two most injurious consequences have resulted to Your
Majesty’s Petitioners from the said Letters Patent.—First—lnasmuch
as, by assuming to confer jurisdiction and power on the said Bishop
of Tasmania, inconsistent with the equal rights and privileges of
Your Majesty’s Presbyterian Subjects in this colony, they have
placed, and do place, these rights and privileges in jeopardy, from
the endeavours of the said Bishop to have such assumed power and
jurisdiction confirmed by the Legislature. And secondly—lnasmuch
as the said Letters Patent, purporting to bestow high privileges and
advantages on the Anglican Episcopal Church in this British colony,
while no equally decisive mark of Your Majesty’s Royal favour has
been extended to the Scottish Presbyterian Church, have conveyed
the impression that the latter Church has been neglected and under-
valued by Your Majesty, and have thus, in effect, broken in upon
that equality of privilege and advantage which (Your Majesty’s Peti-
tioners would most humbly submit) that Church is, in terms of the
said Act of Union, entitled to expect.
That Your Majesty’s Petitioners cannot, upon any other principle,
account for the sentiments expressed towards the members of the
Presbyterian Church in the following passage of the aforesaid Charge
of the Bishop of Tasmania:—
“ In these shifting days the Secretary of State maybe a Romanist,
“ a Presbyterian, an Unitarian, a Dissenter —nay, even an Unbe-
“ liever ; for these are not the times when the'State feels it a duty to
“ watch with jealous care over the high principles of Christian truth,
“as exhibited in the Church of England ; or when soundness in the
“ * faith once delivered to the Saints,’ is likely to be regarded as a
“ necessary qualification for a Minister of State.”
That whatever may have been the views or motives which led to
the insertion of such a passage into a public document, and whatever
may be said in extenuation of it, Your Majesty’s Petitioners must in
justice to Your Majesty, as well as to themselves, most humbly
submit to Your Majesty, that for one, who like the Bishop of Tas-
mania, holds office in virtue of Your Majesty’s Letters Patent, and
is a member of the Executive Council of this colony, thus publicly
to confound Presbyterians in one indiscriminate and most offensive
Charge, with Romanists, Unitarians, and Unbelievers, is not only an
indignity to all Your Majesty’s loyal and dutiful Subjects of the
Church of Scotland, but a disparagement of Your Majesty’s Royal
honour and Christian rectitude, inasmuch as it stigmatizes the
Church which Your Majesty has sworn unalterably to preserve and
maintain, by representing it as at variance with “ the high principles
“of Christian truth,” and with *' soundness in the faith,” for Your


Majesty to elevate a member of that Church to an office of dignity
and influence.
That while Your Majesty’s Petitioners have recourse to Your
Majesty as their constitutional and most gracious protector against
such a palpable indignity, they would refer to this injurious pro-
ceeding on the part of the'Bishop of Tasmania, as indicating the
strong necessity that exists for Your Majesty protecting Your
Majesty’s Petitioners from any manner or degree of subjection to
Episcopal jurisdiction, and granting to the Presbyterian Church in
this colony an equal participation in Your Majesty’s Royal counte-
nance and favour.
That though devotedly attached to their National Institutions,
and above all to their Protestant Religion and Presbyterian Church,
which they have received as a sacred trust from their venerated
ancestors, Your Majesty’s Petitioners have yet the most anxious
desire to live on terms of Christian amity and good-will with their
Episcopal fellow subjects, and to show all possible respect for their
peculiar Ecclesiastical Institutions ; and they would humbly represent
to Your Majesty how necessary it is for securing mutual respect and
good-will among the inhabitants of this remote community, that the
natives of neither the northern nor the southern divisions of Great
Britain should have ground for conceiving that the high interests of
their Church, with which all their holiest associations and recollec-
tions are blended, have received an unequal or inadequate share of
Your Most Gracious Majesty’s Royal protection and favour.
That Your Majesty’s Petitioners represent ten settled Ministers,
and as many congregations in the colony, and can with confidence
refer to Your Majesty’s Representatives, the present and former
Lieutenant-Governors of this colony, for the number and respecta-
bility, both as regards property and character, as well as for the
loyal conduct of the members of the Presbyterian Church of Van
Diemen’s Land,
And they trust that they can with equal confidence appeal to the
same high authorities that the public proceedings of the Presbyte-
rians of this colony have never been characterized by any want of
consideration for, and still less by any disposition to give offence to
the members of other religious communions.
That Your Majesty’s Petitioners humbly trust that Your Majesty,
taking these premises into Your Majesty’s most gracious considera-
tion, will be pleased to repeal the said Letters Patent, in so far as
they are repugnant to the just rights and privileges of Your Majesty’s
Petitioners, and that, in any subsequent proceedings which may be
adopted with reference to the Episcopal Church of this colony, Your
Majesty will be further pleased not to sanction any measure which
would be at variance with the equality of position, and the commu-


nication of rights, privileges, and advantages secured by the x\ct of
Union, alike to the English and Scottish Churches in a British
colony, or which would in any way interfere with the rights and
interests of the other religious denominations of the colony.
And Your Majesty’s Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
[Signed by 1053 Male Adults.]
Copy of a Letter from li. Hawes , Esq., to the Law Officers of the
Crown.
Downing-street, 13th May, 1847.
I am directed by Earl Grey to transmit herewith, for your
consideration, copies of two despatches which have been received
from the Officer administering the Government of Yan Diemen’s
Land, the one transmitting a petition to the Queen from the Baptist
Ministers of Hobart Town and Launceston, who therein pray that
Her Majesty may revoke so much of Her Majesty’s Letters Patent
as authorises the Lord Bishop of Tasmania to summon them as
witnesses before him in his Ecclesiastical Court; and the other
despatch transmitting a petition to the Queen from the members of
the Presbyterian Church in that colony, who pray that Her Majesty
will repeal the Letters Patent under which the Bishopric of Tasmania
has been instituted, so far as the provisions thereof are repugnant to
the rights and privileges of the petitioners.
I annex a copy of these Letters Patent, together with drafts of
Letters Patent which have been prepared by Your Majesty’s (your-
self) Advocate-General, for instituting several new Bishoprics, viz.: —
the Bishopric of Cape Town, the Bishopric of Sydney, and the
Bishoprics of Melbourne, Newcastle, and Adelaide, as subject to the
Bishopric of Sydney.
And I am to request that you will, in concurrence with Your
Majesty’s Attorney (or Solicitor) General, (or Advocate-General)
consider the said Letters Patent instituting’the Bishopric of Tasmania,
and the drafts of the Letters Patent instituting the other new
Bishoprics, so far as they invest, or propose to invest, the several
Bishops in their own persons, or in them represented by ecclesiastical
dignitaries and officers, with the rights of jurisdiction, power, and
coercion ecclesiastical, expressed in those instruments, and that you
and Mr. Attorney (or Solicitor) General, will report to Earl Grey
your joint opinion whether the objections of the Baptist Ministers
of Hobart Town and Launceston, and of *the members of the Pres-
byterian Church of Van Diemen’s Land to the ecclesiastical juris-


diction of the Bishop of Tasmania or of his officers, are valid in law,
and how far it might be expedient to maintain or modify the provi-
sions in that behalf contained in the Letters Patent constituting that
Bishopric, and in the drafts of the instruments for erecting the new
Bishoprics.
Lord Grey further directs me to request that you and Mr. Attorney
(or Solicitor) General would further take this opportunity of consi-
dering whether any real advantage is to be anticipated from the
introduction into the proposed Letters Patent of any provision
whatever, beyond a declaration of the Royal pleasure, that a new
Bishopric shall be created, with a specified' titular designation, and
with a distinct specification of the territorial limits of the intended
See, adding (if that be proper) the appointment by name of the first
or original Bishop. Lord Grey regards it as deserving of considera-
tion, whether everything beyond this is not really superfluous ; and
His Lordship has occasion to know that the Bishops to whom such
Patents have been addressed, have sometimes been involved in grave
difficulties, from regarding every part of them as really operative and
effectual, and from attempting to reduce every part of them to prac-
tice.
I am further directed to observe, that these arrangements have
long been delayed from causes beyond the control of Her Majesty’s
Government, and that, therefore, Lord Grey would wish to receive
as early an answer as may be practicable to the preceding inquiries.
I have, &c..
B. HAWES.
The Queen’s Advocate-General.
[A similar letter to Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Solicitor-General.]
Copy of a Letter from the Law Officers of the Crown to Earl Grey.
Doctors Commons, June 1847.
My Lord,
We are honoured with Your Lordship’s commands signi-
fied in Mr. Hawes’ letter of the 13th ultimo, stating that he was
directed to transmit to us therewith, for our consideration, copies of
two despatches which have been received from the Officer Adminis-
tering the Government of Van Diemen’s Land—the one transmitting
a petition to the Queen from the Baptist Ministers of Hobart Town
and Launceston, who therein pray that Her Majesty may revoke so
much of Her Majesty’s Letters Patent as authorises the Lord Bishop
of Tasmania to summon them as witnesses before him in his Eccle-


siastical Court; and the other despatch transmitting a petition to the
Queen from the members of the Presbyterian Church in that colony,
who pray that Her Majesty will repeal the Letters Patent under
which the Bishopric of Tasmania has been instituted, so far as the
provisions thereof are repugnant to the rights and privileges of the
Petitioners.
Mr. Hawes is pleased to annex a copy of these Letters Patent,
together with drafts of Letters Patent which have been prepared by
Her Majesty’s Advocate-General for instituting several new
Bishoprics, viz.: —The Bishopric of Cape Town, the Bishopric of
Sydney, and the Bishoprics of Melbourne, Newcastle, and Adelaide,
as subject to the Bishopric of Sydney.
Mr. Hawes is pleased to request that we would consider the said
Letters Patent instituting the Bishopric of Tasmania, and the drafts
of the Letters Patent instituting the other new Bishoprics, so far as
they invest, or propose to invest, the several Bishops in their own
persons, or in them represented by ecclesiastical dignitaries and
officers, with the rights of jurisdiction, power, and coercion ecclesias-
tical expressed in those instruments; and that we would report to
Your Lordship our joint opinion, whether the objections of the
Baptist ministers of Hobart Town and Launceston, and of the
members of the Presbyterian Church of Van Diemen’s Land, to the
ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Bishop of Tasmania, or of his officers,
are valid in law, and how far it might be expedient to maintain or
modify the provisions in that behalf contained in the Letters Patent
constituting that Bishopric, and in the drafts of the instruments for
erecting the new Bishoprics.
Mr. Hawes also states, that your Lordship is pleased to request
that we would further take this opportunity of considering, whether
any such advantage is to be anticipated from the introduction into
the proposed letters patent, of any provisions whatever beyond a
declaration of the Royal pleasure, that a new Bishopric shall be
created, with a specified titular description, and with a distinct
specification of the territorial limits of the see, adding (if that be
proper,) the appointment by name of the first or original Bishop.
Your Lordship regards it as deserving of consideration, whether
every thing beyond this is not really superfluous, and that Your
Lordship has occasion to know that the Bishops, to whom such
patents have been addressed, have sometimes been involved ni grave
difficulties, from regarding every part of them as really operative and
effectual; and from attempting to reduce every part of them to
practice.
Mr. Hawes finally observes, that, as these arrangements have
been long delayed from causes beyond the control of Her Majesty’s
Government, Your Lordship wishes to receive as early an answer as
may be practicable to the present inquiries.


Ta obedience to Your Lordships command, we have the honor to
report, that we are of opinion, that Her Majesty has no authority
by Letters Patent to create the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction complained
of in the memorials referred to, and that, therefore, the objections are
well founded. We do not think that the Patent of the Bishop of
Tasmania can be altered without his consent; but we have altered
the proposed Letters Patent creating new Bishops, although we are
aware that it is not desirable to have patents for the same object
in different forms.
We transmit the drafts, thus altered, subject to the approbation
of His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury,
We have, &c.
J. DODSON,
JOHN JERVIS,
DAVID DUNDAS.
The Right Hon. Earl Grey, fyc. fyc,
Colonial Office.
Copy of a Letter from Earl Grey to His Grace the Archbishop of
Canterbury.
Downing-street, 21st June, 1847.
My Lord Archbishop,
I do myself the honor to transmit herewith,
for your Grace’s information, copies of a correspondence which has
passed with Her Majesty’s law officers, as explanatory of the grounds
upon which it is proposed to exclude from the Letters Patent, con-
stituting the new Colonial Bishoprics, the provision which it had
been proposed to introduce into them for conferring certain ecclesi-
astical rights and jurisdictions on the Bishops of those sees respec-
tively ; and I have to request that your Grace will apprize me
whether you see reason for approving the drafts of the instruments
for instituting the new bishoprics as prepared by the law officers,
with the modification to which I have adverted.
I have, &c.
(Signed)
GREY.
His Grace the Archbishop
of Canterbury.


Copy of a Letter from His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury
to Earl Grey.
Canterbury, 22nd June, 1847.
My Lord,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your
Lordship’s letter of the 21st of this month, with copies of a corres-
pondence which has passed with Her Majesty’s Law Officers relating
to the Letters Patent constituting the new Colonial Bishoprics; and
after having read the several documents transmitted to me, I see
reason, under the circumstances therein stated, for approving the
draft of the Patents as prepared by the Law Officers of the Crown.
I have, &c.,
W. CANTUAR.
The Earl Grey, &c. &c. &c.
Copy of a Letter from Earl Grey to the Bishop of Tasmania.
Dowuing-street, 22nd June, 1847.
My Lord Bishop,
I have the honour to acquaint Your Lordship
that, having been advised by the Law Officers of the Crown that it
is not competent for the Queen to create by Letters Patent the
rights of jurisdiction with which the Patent instituting the Bishop-
ric of Tasmania purports to invest Your Lordship, I propose to
advise Her Majesty to alter that Patent, to the extent of omitting
the rights in question.
For this purpose, however, it will be necessary that I should be
enabled to certify to Her Majesty Your Lordship’s assent to the
intended alteration of that instrument; and I have therefore to re-
quest that Your Lordship will signify to me whether you are pre-
pared to assent to the course proposed.
I have, &c.,
GREY.
The Bishop of Tasmania.


Copy of a Letter from the Bishop of Tasmania to Earl Grey.
18, Sussex Gardens, 30th June, 1847.
My Lord,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your
Lordship’s letter of the 22nd instant, in which you inform me of the
decision of the Law Officers of the Crown as to the virtual invalidity
of a portion of ray Letters Pateut, and of Your Lordship’s proposal
to advise Her Majesty to alter the instrument, so far as that portion
is concerned.
I cannot at present see any difficulty that can prevent my acqui-
escence in the proposal; but (as Your Lordship will, doubtless, be
aware) it is my duty to consult the Archbishop of Canterbury prior
to giving any definite reply.
I have been unable hitherto to see His Grace; but hope to do so
at an early period.
I have, &c.,
F. R. TASMANIA.
The Bight Honorable Earl Grey, fyc. fyc.
Copy of a Letter from Earl Grey to the Lord Bishop of Tasmania,
Downing-street, 9th September, 1847.
My Lord Bishop,
With respect to the letter which I had the
honor to address to your Lordship, on the 22nd of June last,
acquainting you that I proposed to advise the Queen to alter the
letters patent, instituting the Bishopric of Tasmania, to the extent
of omitting the rights of jurisdiction with which that letter purports
to invest you ; I beg leave to remind your Lordship, that you have
not yet signified to me that you are prepared to assent to the course
proposed.
I have, &c.
GREY.
The Bishop of Tasmania.


Copy of a Letter from the Bishop of Tasmania to Earl Grey,
18, Sussex Gardens, 11th September, 1847.
My Lord,
In order that an accurate opinion respecting the question
referred to me by Your Lordship, in your letter of June 22nd, may
be formed by those legal friends who have kindly undertaken to
look into my Letters Patent, may I respectfully request to be
favoured with a copy of the “ opinion” given by the Law officers of
the Crown, as to the incompetency of the Queen to convey, by
such an instrument, ecclesiastical jurisdiction to the diocese of
Tasmania: may I further be indulged with the draft of the proposed
alteration in the patent 1
I regret the delay that has occurred in forwarding my own definite
reply in this matter; but Your Lordship will easily understand that
it is my duty to be cautious in a question which involves the
interests of my successors, and that I must naturally desire to
submit a full view of the case, in all its bearings, to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, before I seek His Grace’s final advice.
I have, &c.
F. R. TASMANIA.
The Right Hon. Earl Grey, fyc.
Copy of a Letter from Earl Grey to the Bishop of Tasmania.
Downing-street, 20th October, 1847.
My Lord Bishop,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of
your Lordship’s letter of the 11th ultimo, and in compliance with
your Lordship’s request, I transmit herewith for your information
a copy of the opinion of Her Majesty’s Law Officers, as to the
incompetency of the Crown to create, by Letters Patent, the right of
jurisdiction with which the Patent, instituting the Bishopric of
Tasmania, purports to invest your Lordship.
I have further to acquaint Your Lordship, that no draft has as
yet been prepared of the alterations which it is proposed, with your
consent, to make in that instrument.
I have, &c.
GREY.
The Bishop of Tasmania.


Copy of a Letter from the Bishop of Tasmania to Earl Grey.
18, Sussex Gardens, Hyde Park, sth Nov. 1847-
My Lord,
I have the honor to inform Your Lordship that my
legal advisers have intimated to me, that before I can, with pro-
priety acquiesce in the proposal to revoke a portion of the Letters
Patent creating the Diocese of Tasmania, I should be certified as
to the exact nature and extent of the contemplated alterations.
As soon, therefore, as I am favoured with a draft of the Patent
in its complete form, as proposed to be amended, no needless delay
shall occur in conveying my decision to Your Lordship.
May I request Your Lordship to accept my assurances that this
caution arises from the feeling that I am virtually called upon to
decide, not merely for myself, but for my successors.
I have, &c.
F. R, TASMANIA.
The Right Hon. Earl Grey, <^c,
Copy of a Letter from B. Hawes, Esq., to the Bishop of Tasmania,
Downing Street, 22nd November. 1847.
My Lord,
I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Your
Lordship’s Letter of the sth instant, requesting to be furnished
with a draft of the Letters Patent, as proposed to be amended,
instituting the Bishopric of Tasmania.
In my letter to Your Lordship of the 20th ultimo, I apprized
you that no draft had as yet been prepared of the proposed
alterations in that instrument; but in order that you may be made
fully aware of their nature, I transmit herewith, for Your Lordship’s
information, a copy of the Letters Patent, instituting the Bishopric
of Melbourne, and I have further to state, that the form in which
they were prepared was determined upon with the advice of the
law officers of the crown, and with the concurrence of the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury, and that the amended Letters Patent proposed
to be issued to yourself will be prepared strictly in conformity with
that precedent.
Should Your Lordship be desirous of receiving any further ex-
planation on the subject, I have to suggest that you should address
yourself to Her Majesty’s Advocate-General,
I have, &c-,
B. HAWES.
The Bishop of Tasmania..


Extract of a from Earl Grey to Lieutenant-Governor Sir
William Denison.
Duwning-street, 16th December 1547.
“ I transmit to you, for your information, copies of a correspon-
dence which 1 have recently had with the Bishop ot Tasmania on
various points connected with the ecclesiastical affairs ot "V an Die-
men’s Land.”
18, Sussex Gardens, 19th November 1847.
My Lord,
May I respectfully intimate to Your Lordship that the
official opinion of the crown lawyers as to the incompetencv of the
Queen to convey to the diocese of lasmania ecclesiastical jurisdic-
tion, through the medium of Letters Patent, places the Bishop in a
painful state of incertitude as to the real extent of his legal powers.
I trust, therefore, that Your Lordship will permit me to prefer an
earnest request that I may be favoured with the opinion of the
crown lawyers how I am to act in event of any such misconduct un-
happily occurring amongst the clergy, as might demand the Bishop s
examination and correction.
Permit me to observe that lam as desirous to secure to the clergy
a legal protection from any undue harshness or caprice on the part of
the Bishop, as to gain for him the certain means of prompt and
effective censure.
I have, &c,
F. R. TASMANIA.
The Bight Hon. the Earl Grey,
fyc. fyc. 8/-c. *
Downing-street, 27th November 1847.
My Lord,
I have to acknowledge the receipt of Your Lordship’s
letter of the 19th instant, in which you intimate that the official
opinion of the crown lawyers as to the incompetency of the Queen to
convey to the diocese of Tasmania ecclesiastical jurisdiction by Letters
Patent (alluding. I presume, to the report of the Queen s Advocate-
General, and the Attorney and Solicitor General of June 184/)
renders you uncertain as to the extent of your legal powers, and


request that you may be favoured with the opinion of the crown
lawyers how you are to act, in the event of any such misconduct
unhappily occurring amongst the clergy, as might demand the
Bishop’s examination and correction. I beg to refer Your Lordship
to a passage in a former opinion of the crown lawyers, (dated 27th
December 1845) “ That a license may be revoked by the Bishop;
that upon the revocation of a license no formal trial is necessary ;
that the Bishop, however, should not act but upon what he deems
sufficient cause, or without giving the party accused an opportunity
of answering the charge against him.”
Should these directions not appear sufficiently explicit for Your
Lordship’s guidance, nor applicable to all the cases which you con-
template, now that the impossibility of establishing your ecclesiastical
jurisdiction after the model of that of England appears established,
I regret that it is not in my power to give you the assistance for
which you ask. It appears to me an inconvenient course to submit
to the crown lawyers, not any specific case, or the consideration of
any difficulty which has actually arisen, but the doubts of a colonial
authority respecting the course which he may have to adopt under
contingent circumstances.
I beg, however, to repeat the request contained in my letter of the
22nd of this month, that you would address yourself to the Queen’s
Advocate-General for an explanation of any difficulties which might
occur to you in perusing the Letters Patent to the Bishop of Mel-
bourne, with a view to the alteration of your own.
Copy of a Letter from the Bishop of Tasmania to Earl Grey.
My Lord,
18, Sussex Gardens, 16th December 1847.
I have the honour to inform Your Lordship that I have
been favoured this afternoon with the opinion of my legal adviser,
respecting the proposed alteration in the Letters Patent constituting
the Diocese of Tasmania.
I am advised to consent that the amended Patent may be generally
framed after that constituting the Diocese of Melbourne.
I am further counselled to suggest one alteration which, as it
appears to me, may tend to render the question of church discipline
more clear, without interfering with the supposed or real rights of
others.


It is proposed that the clause respecting the Bishop’s power of
visiting the clergy should stand thus —(the additions being marked
with inverted commas) —and to enquire “upon oath or otherwise,”
as well concerning their “ doctrine and” morals, as their behaviour
respectively ; “ and to correct and punish according to the laws
ecclesiastical, whether by censure, suspension, deprivation, or other-
wise, all offences and all breaches or neglect of duty of them, or any
of them,” subject, nevertheless, to such right of review and appeal
as are hereafter given and reserved.
May I, in conclusion, respectfully observe, that it seems somewhat
inconsistent to require that the resignation should be made, not to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, but to the Bishop of Sydney, the oath
of allegiance being required to be made to the latter.
I have, &c.,
F. R. TASMANIA.
The Right Hon. the Earl Grey.
Copy of a Letter from B. Hawes, Esq, to the Bishop of Tasmania.
Downing-street, 23rd December 1847-
My Lord,
In the temporary absence of Earl Grey from London, I
am directed by his Lordship to acknowledge your letter of December
16, in which you express your intention of consenting to the framing
of your intended Patent generally after that which constitutes the
Diocese of Melbourne, and at the same time suggesting certain
alterations. lam desired by Lord Grey to call your attention to
what appears to his Lordship to be the probable effect of these sug-
gestions before taking the opinion of the law officers of the crown
respecting them.
You suggest, in the first place, that the Patent should run as
follows; —“ and to enquire on oath, concerning the morals, &c., of
the rector, &c.”
But these words, I apprehend, would give you no power of sum-
moning witnesses, or compelling witnesses to take an oath. If they
did, their effect would be contrary to the very purpose of the several
amendments made on the suggestion of the law officers of the crown
in the old form of Patent. Your power, and that of your Vicar-
General, and other officers, would then be confined to the adminis-


tering of what may be termed, in one sense, voluntary oaths, receiving
the sworn testimony of such witnesses only as were willing to give
evidence under that sanction. I need hardly point out to you that
this would be a very anomalous jurisdiction. I may add, that it
seems likely to lead to considerable abuse, as we must, of course,
contemplate the necessary exercise of these powers by inferior func-
tionaries, whom it might be scarcely desirable to entrust with large
discretion as to receiving or excluding evidence tendered on or with-
out oath.
Your next suggestion is, that the enquiry should be “as well
concerning their morals and doctrine, as their behaviour in their said
offices. &c.” It certainly appears an important part of the functions
of a Bishop to enquire concerning the doctrine of clergy under him.
But I would ask Your Lordship to consider whether sufficient power
in this respect is not already given by the words, “ or their behaviour,”
&c. If the word “ doctrine” be added in your Patent, it will appa-
rently convey a power which I apprehend is neither given to the
Bishop of Sydney nor of Melbourne in the same words ; it will
therefore necessarily show a doubt on the extent of their jurisdiction,
and reduce them also to the necessity of applying for alterations in
their Letters Patent, although, as far as is known, no such necessity
has hitherto been felt by them. Nor does the word “ doctrine,” in
this unqualified shape, appear free from objections. It mighty be
contended that it gave powers of an inquisitorial nature, certainly
not meant to be claimed by Your Lordship in the present instance.
Your next suggestion is, that the words “and to correct and punish
according to the law ecclesiastical, whether by censure, suspension,
deprivation, or otherwise, &c.,” should be added. With reference to
this, I have to observe, that without entering into any strictly legal
disquisition, it appears to me that these words would have the effect
of conveying precisely that ecclesiastical jurisdiction which it appears
to be the better opinion that Her Majesty cannot convey, and that
your right would, consequently, be immediately questioned. In
fact, they are almost the same words which have been struck out in
the amendment of the old Letters Patent. I therefore hardly sup-
pose that the law advisers of the crown would recommend their
re-insertion.
I do not exactly apprehend the meaning of the last paragraph in
Your Lordship’s letter, that “ it seems somewhat inconsistent to
require that the resignation should be made, not to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, but to the Bishop of Sydney, the oath of obedience
being required to be made to the latter.”
On referring to the Bishop of Melbourne’s Patent, to which, I
apprehend that your remarks apply, it appears that he is required to
take the oath of obedience to the Bishop of Sydney ; such oath being
administered by the Archbishop of Canterbury. Thus resignation
must be made to the Archbishop of Canterbury.


As Your Lordship is about to leave England immediately, I have,
in obedience to Lord Grey’s directions, laid these points before you,
and would suggest the re-consideration of your suggestions as soon
as you can conveniently attend to the subject.
I have, &c.,
B. HAWES.
Copy of a Letter from the Bishop of Tasmania to Earl Grey.
Roche Court, Fareham, 3rd January 1848.
As yet I have not received any answer from the legal friend to
whom I submitted your letter of the 23rd ultimo, respecting the
Letters Patent.
But as it is perfectly possible that I may embark to-morrow, I do
not desire to leave this question unsettled; and, therefore, I must
take upon myself, without further counsel, to say, that I am willing
to adopt the Patent constituting the See of Melbourne as the model
of the proposed alteration in my own.
I have, &c.,
F. R. TASMANIA.
The Right Hon. the Earl Grey,
fyc. s■<?. fyc.
Copy of a Letter from B. Hawes, Esq., to the Law Officers of the
Crown.
Downing-street, 25th Jan., 1848.
Referring to the correspondence which has passed relating to
the ecclesiastical jurisdiction with which the Bishop of Tasmania is
invested by the Letters Patent creating the Bishopric of Tasmania,
I have now received Earl Grey’s directions to acquaint you, that the
Bishop has reported to his Lordship that he is prepared to consent
to such Letters Patent being altered in accordance with the Letters
Patent creating the Bishopric of Melbourne, and I am accordingly to
request that you will, in conjunction with Mr. Attorney and Solicitor-
General, prepare and submit to His Lordship a draft of the proper
instrument for effecting the object in question. .
I am to enclose copies of the Letters Patent creating the Bishoprics
of Tasmania and Melbourne.
I am, &c,
B. HAWES.


Copy of a Despatch from Earl Grey to Lieutenant-Governor Sir
William Denison,
I have the honour to transmit herewith Letters Patent which
the Queen has been pleased to issue under the Great Seal of the
United Kingdom, defining the limits within which the Bishop of
Tasmania shall exercise spiritual jurisdiction within the diocese.
You will deliver this instrument to the Bishop of Tasmania.
I have, &c.,
GREY.
Governor SirW. Denison.
Extract from Patent Roll of the Twelfth Year of the Reign of
Queen Victoria.
Victoria by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Ireland, Queen, Defender of the
Faith.
To all to whom these Presents shall come :—Greeting—
Whereas, by Letters Patent under the Great Seal of Our United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, bearing date the 18th day of
August 1842, in the sixth year of Our reign, We did ordain, make,
constitute, and declare Our City of Hobart Town, and all that Our
Island of Van Diemen’s Land, and all islands and territories lying to
the southward of Wilson’s Promontory, in 39 degrees and 12 minutes
of South latitude, and to the northward of the 45th degree of South
latitude, and between the 140th and 150th degree of longitude East
from Greenwich; and also Macquarie Island lying to the South-
eastward of the same Island of Van Diemen’s Land, and all other the
dependencies of Our said Colony of Van Diemen’s Land, to be a
Bishoprick or See, called the Bishoprick or See of Tasmania, and
did name and appoint Francis Russell Nixon, Doctor in Divinity, to
be ordained and consecrated Bishop of the said See, and he" was
ordained and consecrated accordingly, and has ever since been and
now is Bishop of the said See of Tasmania ; and We did, among other
things, in and by Our said Letters Patent, ordain and declare that
the said Bishop of Tasmania should be subject and subordinate only
to the Metropolitical See of Canterbury, and to the Archbishops
thereof, in the same manner as any Bishop of any See within the
Province of Canterbury in Our Kingdom of England is subject to,
and under the said Metropolitical See : And whereas, by Our Letters
Patent under the Great Seal of Our said United Kingdom, bearing
date the 25th day of June, 1847, We did will and ordain that the
Bishop of Tasmania should be a Suffragan Bishop to the Bishop of
Sydney and his successors; and We did will and grant to the


Bishop of Sydney and his successors full power and authority as
Metropolitan of Australasia, to perform all functions peculiar and
appropriate to the office of Metropolitan within the limits of the
said See of Tasmania, and to exercise Metropolitan jurisdiction over
the Bishop of the said See, and his successors, and over all Arch-
deacons, Dignitaries, and all other Chaplains, Ministers, Priests, and
Deacons in Holy Orders of the United Church of England and Ire-
land, within the limits of the said Diocese: And whereas it is ex-
pedient that the said Letters Patent of the 18th of August, 1842,
should be revoked, so far as relates to the jurisdiction, spiritual and
ecclesiastical, of the said Bishop, and of the Archdeacon or Arch-
deacons, and the Vicar General, and other Officers in the said Letters
Patent mentioned: Now, therefore, we do, with the consent of
the said Bishop, hereby revoke the same accordingly; and for a
declaration of the Spiritual causes and matters in which the aforesaid
jurisdiction may be more especially exercised, We do by these
presents further declare, that the aforesaid Bishop of Tasmania,
and his Successors, may exercise and enjoy full power and authority
by himself or themselves, or by the Archdeacon or Archdeacons, or
Vicar-General, or other officer or officers hereinafter mentioned, to
give institution to benefices, to grant licences to officiate to all Rectors,
Curates, Ministers, and Chaplains of all churches or chapels, or other
places within the said diocese wherein Divine Service shall be cele-
brated according to the rites and liturgy of the Church of England ;
and to visit all Rectors, Curates, Ministers, and Chaplains, and all
Priests and Deacons in holy orders of the United Church of England
and Ireland resident within the said diocese, as also to call before
him or them, or the Archdeacon or Archdeacons, or the Vicar-
General, or other officer or officers hereinafter mentioned, at such
competent days, hours, and places, when and so often as to him or
them shall seem meet and convenient, the aforesaid Rectors, Curates,
Ministers, Chaplains, Priests, and Deacons, or any of them, and to
inquire as well concerning their morals as their behaviour in their
said offices and stations respectively subject, nevertheless, to such
rights of review and appeal as are hereinafter given and reserved;
and for the better accomplishment of the purposes aforesaid, we do
hereby grant and declare that the said Bishop of Tasmania, and his
successors, may found and constitute one or more Dignitaries in his
said Cathedral Church, and also one or more Archdeaconries within
the said diocese, and may collate one or more fit and proper persons
to be Archdeacons of the said Archdeaconries respectively ; provided
always, that such Dignitaries and Archdeacons shall exercise such
jurisdiction onlv as shall be committed to them by the said Bishop,
or his Successors; and the said Bishop and his Successors may also
from time to time nominate and appoint fit and proper persons to be
respectively the officers hereinafter mentioned ; that is to say, to be
Vicar-General, Official, Principal Chancellor, Rural Deans, and
Commissaries, either general or special, and may also appoint one or


more fit persons to be Registrars and Actuaries : provided always,
that the Dignitaries and Archdeacons aforesaid shall be subject
and subordinate to the said Bishop of Tasmania, and his Successors,
and shall be assisting to him and them in the exercise of his and
their episcopal jurisdiction and functions : and we will, and declare,
that during a vacancy of the said See of Tasmania, by the demise
of the Bishop thereof or otherwise, the said Dignitaries and Arch-
deacons and the said Vicar-General and other officers respectively
appointed as aforesaid, shall continue to exercise, so far as by law,
they may or can, the jurisdiction and functions delegated to them ;
and that the said Registrars and Actuaries shall respectively continue
to discharge the duties whereunto they have been appointed, until a
new Bishop of the said See of Tasmania shall have been nominated
and consecrated, and his arrival within the limits of the said diocese
shall have been notified to the said parties respectively. And we
further will, and do by these presents declare and ordain, that it
shall be lawful for any party against whom any judgment, decree, or
sentence shall be pronounced by any of the said Archdeacons, or by
the Vicar-General, or other officer or officers of the said Bishop, or
his Successors, to demand a re-examination and review of such
judgment, decree, or sentence, before the Bishop, or his Successors
in person, who upon such demand made, shall take cognizance thereof,
and shall have full power and authority to affirm, reverse, or alter,
the said judgment, sentence, or decree; and if any person shall
conceive himself aggrieved by any judgment, decree, or sentence,
pronounced by the said Bishop of Tasmania, or his Successors,
either in case of such review, or in any cause originally instituted
before the said Bishop, or his Successors, (it shall be lawful
for the said party to appeal to the said Bishop of Sydney,
or his Successors), who shall finally determine and decide the
said appeals: provided always, that in any such case of appeal
or review, notice of the intention of the party to make such
appeal, or demand such review, shall be given to the Bishop or Sub-
ordinate Judge by whom the sentence appealed from, or to be
reviewed, shall have been pronounced within fifteen days from the
promulgation thereof. And we do further will, and by these pres-
ents ordain, that in all cases in which an appeal shall be made, or
review demanded, as aforesaid, a copy of the judgment, or sentence,
in such case promulgated, or given, setting forth the causes thereof,
together with a copy of the evidence on which the same was founded,
shall, without delay, be certified and transmitted by such subordinate
judge to the said Bishop, or his Successors, or by the said Bishop, or
his Successors, to the said Bishop of Sydney, as the case may require.
Moreover, it is our will and pleasure, and we do hereby declare and
ordain, that nothing in these presents contained shall extend, or be
construed to extend, to repeal, vary, or alter, the provisions of any
charter whereby ecclesiastical jurisdiction has been given to any


Court of judicature within the limits of the said diocese; and for
removing doubts with respect to the validity of the resignation of the
said office and dignity of Bishop of Tasmania, it is our further
will, that if the said Bishop, or any of his Successors shall, by in-
strument, under his hand and seal delivered, and sent to the Bishop
of Sydney for the time being, and by him accepted and registered in
the Office of Faculties of the said Bishop, resign the office and
dignity of Bishop of Tasmania, such Bishop shall, from the time of
such acceptance and resignation, cease to be Bishop of Tasmania to
all intents and purposes, but without prejudice to any responsibility
to which he may be liable, in law or equity, in respect of his conduct
in his said office : And, lastly, to the end that all things aforesaid
may be firmly holden and done, We will and grant to the aforesaid
Francis Russell Nixon, that he shall have Our Letters Patent under
Our Great Seal of Our said United Kingdom, duly made and sealed.
In witness, &c.
By Writ of Privy Seal.


CHURCH OF ENGLAND.
Minutes of the Proceedings at a Meeting of the Metropolitan and
Suffragan Bishops of the Province of Australasia, held at Sydney,
from October to November ls£, A.D., 1350.
REPORT.
The Metropolitan and Bishops of the Province of Australasia,
having, by the good Providence of God, been permitted to assemble
themselves together in the Metropolitan City of Sydney, on the first
day of October, in the year of our Lord 1850, and having consulted
together on such matters as concern the progress of true Religion,
and the welfare of the Church in the several Dioceses thereof, did
agree to the decisions and opinions contained in the following
Report.
I. OBJECTS OF THE CONFERENCE.
We, the undersigned Metropolitan and Bishops of the Province
of Australasia, in consequence of doubts existing how far we are
inhibited by the Queen’s Supremacy from exercising the powers of
an Ecclesiastical Synod, resolve not to exercise such powers on the
present occasion.
But we desire to consult together upon the various difficulties in
which we are at present placed by the doubtful application to the
church in this Province of the Ecclesiastical Laws, which are in force
in England; and to suggest such measures as may seem to be most
suitable for removing our present embarrassment; to consider such
questions as affect the progress of true religion, and the preservation
of Ecclesiastical order in the several Dioceses of this Province; —and
finally, in reliance on Divine Providence, to adopt plans for the propa-
gation of the Gospel among the Heathen races of Australasia, and
the adjacent islands of the Western Pacific.
We request the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Newcastle to
act as our Secretary, and to embody our resolutions in a Report, to
be transmitted to the Archbishops and Bishops of the United Church
of England and Ireland.
W. G. SYDNEY,
G. A. NEW ZEALAND,
F R. TASMANIA,
AUGUSTUS ADELAIDE,
C. MELBOURNE,
W. NEWCASTLE.
xi. Canons of A. D. 1603—4.
We are of opinion that the Constitutions and Canons agreed upon
with the King’s Majesty’s license, in the Synod begun at London
a. d. 1603, and published for the due observation of them by His
Majesty’s authority, under the Great Seal of England, form part of


the established constitution of our Church, and are generally binding
upon ourselves, and the Clergy of our respective Dioceses.
Where they cannot be literally complied with, in consequence of
the altered state of circumstances since the enactment of the Canons,
we are of opinion that they must be, as far as possible, complied
with in substance.
We concur, also, in thinking that a revisal and fresh adaptation of
the Canons to suit the present condition of the Church is much to
fee desired, so soon as it can be lawfully undertaken by persons pos-
sessing due authority in that behalf.
A Supplement to the Sydney Morning Herald of 4th December
instant, has just been received, containing a paper commencing as
above. Now this is in many, if not in all respects, incorrect con-
fused, and delusive. What is meant by the three first words,
“Church of England,” taken in connection with this Meeting of
the Metropolitan and Suffragan Bishops of the Province of Austral-
asia ? The Church of England does not exist in the Australasian
colonies. And if it did, the Bishop of Sydney could not be Metro-
politan thereof. It is true he styles himself “ Metropolitan of the
Province of Australasia.” But this confirms the view that he is not
Metropolitan of any portion of the Church of England. How then
is it accounted for that the “ Minutes of the Proceedings of the
Metropolitan and Suffragan Bishops of the Province of Australasia”
is headed “Church of England?” A Church exists in the Australasian
colonies professing the doctrines and following the ritual of the Church
of England. But neither the profession nor the practice constitutes
that church the Church of England, nor even a constituent part of the
Church of England. The Church of England can exist only within
England, Wales, and the Town of Berwick-upon-Tweed, and the terri-
tories thereto belonging. Beyond these bounds, it has no existence—
and Australasia is not comprehended within them. When a clergyman
of the Church of England proceeds to a colony, he may have some sort
of connection with the Church of England from the circumstance of his
ordination by a Bishop of the Church of England—but he and his
colonial congregation do not on that account form a portion of the
Church of England —nor does the whole mass of colonial congrega-
tions form—the Colonial Church of England. The Church of
England exists by Statute, and by Statute only, and that Statute
limits its existence as above stated. On that account, the term Anglo-
Episcopal Church has been employed to denote the congregations and
clergy of the colonies adhering to the doctrines and ritual of the
Church of England, that term being preferred to a delusive misnomer.
Again, the title purports to give the Minutes of the proceedings of
the venerable and learned Bishops—but when examined, the paper
they have published turns out to be merely a report, and so they
themselves immediately following the title style it—“ Report.”


Under the first title, “Objects of the Conference,” namely, the
Metropolitan and Bishops state, that in consequence of doubts existing
how far they are inhibited by the Queen’s supremacy from exercising
the powers of an Ecclesiastical Synod—they resolve not to exercise
such powers. This was a very judicious resolution. But first they
should have ascertained if they formed an Ecclesiastical Synod. If
the Queen’s supremacy has anything to do with their Assembly, they
did not form an Ecclesiastical Synod possessing powers of any kind.
The opinion of the Law Officers should have taught them that. And
as they had no such powers, it was wise to resolve not to exercise'
them “o?i the 'present occasion .”
So grave a body as the “ Metropolitan and Suffragan Bishops
of the Province of Australasia,” should have been somewhat
attentive to phraseology, especially when they went so far as to take
into consideration whether “ they could presume to think they could
inform or guide the judgment of the church at large” on the doctrine of
Baptism, and decided that they could not, although at the same time,
they decided “that they could not refrain from stating what they
believed to be the just interpretation of the Creed, Articles, and Liturgy,
of the Church of England respecting the Regeneration of Infants
in Holy Baptism.” It may be remarked that their statement is at
variance with the judgment of the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council. Though they cannot presume to inform or guide the judg-
ment of the Church—and in not presuming so to do —they exercised
a sound discretion—they presume to impugn the judgment of the
Supreme Court of Appeal, in matters civil—as well as ecclesiastical.
Their disregard of the judgment of the Judicial Committee of the
Privy Council, renders it less to be wondered at, that they have paid,
but little regard to the opinions of the Law Officers of the Crown. They
speak in their report of “the doubtful application to the Church in
this Province of Laws which are now in force in England.” The Law
Officers of England have declared that there is no doubt about the mat-
ter. They have stated that all the objections of the Presbyterian Peti-
tion are" valid —that the Ecclesiastical Laws of England do not—
except as to matters civil—prevail in the colonies of Great Britain—
and that no Established Church exists in these colonies. Why then
should the Metropolitan and Suffragan Bishops disturb their mental
equanimity on the subject ? If they are so desirous to applv the
provisions of the Ecclesiastical Laws to their own individual case-
let them do so. But at the same time, let them apply these laws to
themselves only. No one will interfere with the five Reverend gen-
tlemen—who—abjuring their patronymics —have adopted as their
names respectively those of “Sydney, “New
“Tasmania.” “Adelaide,” “ Melbourne,” and “Newcastle,
in their personal application of these laws. And this should afford
them comfort.


It seems somewhat strange, but it may admit of explanation, that
u The Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Newcastle” should request
himself to act as Secretary, and should authorise himself so to act by
attaching his signature to the request. This reminds one of a passage
in a speech of the late Lord Jelfrey, in advocating the Scots Reform
Bill in the House of Commons, in reference to the illusory system
of representation then prevailing, It is as follows;
“ All the votes in the County of Bute were twenty-one, and it was ludicrous
to state that twenty out of the twenty-one had no property whatever in that
County; so that in that County, there was only a single voter connected with
it by property, who like a Sovereign, was uncontrolled within it. At one elec*
tion there, within the memory of man, when the day of election came, only
one person qualified to vote attended —and that person was the Sheriff, He
read tbe writ to the meeting as Sheriff. Then he constituted the meeting.
Then having constituted the meeting, he called over the names on the roll.
Then he answered to the names himself. Then he put the vote for a preses
to the meeting; he elected himself preses; he read over the minutes of the
last meeting; he moved that they should be confirmed; he confirmed them
himself; and, last of all, he put the representation to the vote, and, being
himself the whole meeting, made a unanimous return.”
Just so—the Lord Bishop of Newcastle first requests himself
to be Secretary—and, having acceded to his own request, au-
thorises himself so to act, and certifies to the fact by signing a
paper, bearing all this by implication on the face of it. The Lord
Bishop of Newcastle should be careful what he does in his capacity
of Secretary.
Notwithstanding “ the doubtful application to the Church of
the Province of Australasia of the ecclesiastical laws now in force in
England,” asserted to be the source “of the various difficulties in
which they are placed,” the six Bishops have no hesitation in
declaring that they are of opinion that the Constitutions and Canons
agreed upon with the King’s Majesty’s license, in the Synod begun
at London A.D. 1603, form part of the established Constitution of
their Church,” that is, the Anglo-Episcopal Church of Australasia—
“and that they are generally binding upon themselves, and the clergy
of their respective dioceses.
The learned Bishops should have known that “ at the dawn of the
Reformation in the reign of King Henry VIII., it was enacted in
Parliament, that a review should be had of the Canon law, and till
such review should be made, all Canons, &c.—being then already
made, and not repugnant to the law of the land, or the King’s pre-
rogative, should still be used and executed; and that as no such
review has yet been perfected, upon this statute now depends the
authority of the Canon law in England.” They should also have
known that “the Canons enacted by the clergy under James 1., in
the year 1603, were never confirmed in Parliament, and that “it has
been solemnly adjudged, upon principles of law and the constitution ,
that where they are not merely declaratory of the ancient Canon law.


but are introductory of new regulations they do not hind the laity ;
whatever regard the Clergy may think proper to pay them .”
Now, as the Bishops were not of opinion that the Canons existing
in the time of Henry VIII. were binding upon themselves and the
clergy of their respective dioceses, their opinion could only refer to
the Canons of 1603, “introductory of new regulations, not binding
on the laity, and not even binding on the clergy, whatever regard
they may think proper to pay them.” On what grounds then did
they form the opinion, that the Canons of 1603 are binding on
themselves and their clergy ? They may be of that opinion—and
their clergy may be of a different opinion.
But, it seems, when these Canons—binding—and yet not binding,
“ cannot be literally complied with, in consequence of the altered
“state of circumstances since their enactment,” the six Bishops are
“of opinion that they must be, as far as possible, complied with in
substance.” What all this means is not very clear. “Altered state
of circumstances!” Why, this is Australia, not England. And
in Australia neither Ecclesiastical Laws nor Canons are of force. And
if they were, what is complying with Laws or Canons “in substance.”
Truly, of this meeting of the six Bishops, it may be said—in the
■words of St. Gregory Nazianzen,* which we copy from an article on the
Gorham case, in the Edinburgh Review for July last—“ To say the
truth, I have utterly determined never to come to any Council of
Bishops ; for I never yet saw good end of any Councils ; for Councils
abate not ill things, but rather increase them.”
The third section of the Report treats of Synods and Conven-
tions, Provincial and Diocesan, and—doubts existing as to the
application of the Ecclesiastical Laws of England in these colonies—
(although it is certain these laws do not exist) the six Bishops
decline to define the exact meaning of the words “Provincial
Synod,” or “Diocesan Synod,” but declare that they under-
stand by these words, “ a body composed of onef or more
Bishops, with representatives chosen from among the clergy,
meeting at such times and in such manner as may not be inconsistent
with any law of Church or State.” They have doubts as to the
* But Gregory exalts the authority of the Church.—“On the occasion of
some seditious disturbances at Nazianzus, in presenting himself as a mediator
between the people and the civil officer, he exalts the authority of the Church
in very lofty language. He thus addresses the Governor of the City :— * The
law of Christ subjects you to my power, and to ray pulpit; for ours is the au-
thority—an authority greater and more excellent than that which you possess*
unless, indeed, spirit is to be subject unto flesh, and heaven unto earth ; you
command with Jesus Christ; it is He with whom you exercise your authority;
it is He who has given you the sword which you wear ; not so much for the
chastisement of crime, as for its prevention by terror and by menace,’ ”
Wadding ton's History of the Church.
f See Mr, Gladstone’s proposed clause and provisos.


application of the law of the Church in Australasia ; and yet they
intend to apply it, and to apply it to a body called “Provincial
Synod,” or Diocesan Synod,” although, as they do not define the
meaning of the word “ Synod,” that body may not be a Synod at all.
It may be a body to which the Ecclesiastical Laws—even if they .were
undoubtedly of force—would not apply. What straits have
thesis Bishops been driven to by refusing to listen to the voice of the
expounders of the law, and by clinging to old prejudices and exploded
notions.
But the laity, by duly elected representatives, in the opinion of the
Bishops, should meet in Provincial and Diocesan Convention, and,
with the clergy, consult and decide upon all questions affecting the
temporalities of the Church. And who should decide upon ques-
tions affecting the temporalities of the church, if not the laity. It
was not necessary for the Bishops to express any opinion on that
point. The laity can see to this themselves. And they will undoubt-
edly see to it. It will be “ only a question of time.” The laity are
also to have a voice “ in any changes affecting the constitution of the
church and no change is to “be valid without their consent.”
This is a great step in advance. We begin to think that the opinion
of the Law Officers has had some weight with the Bishops after all;
and that they have no doubt as to the non-existence of the Ecclesias-
tical Laws in these colonies, and no doubt either—as to their non-
applicability.
The Bishops, it appears from the Report, acknowledge as members
of the Church of England all persons qualified in a manner specified
in the Report. How far their acknowledgment can constitute any
one a member of a church of which they are not Bishops it is diffi-
cult to understand. They are carried away by the notion that the
Anglo-Episcopal Church in these colonies is the Church of England.
This notion leads them all astray ; and, until they obtain clearer lights
on this point, it is to be feared they will not come to a knowledge of
their true position in the colonies.
The words used in the third section of the Head “ Status of the
Clergy,” clearly points out that this is not understood. The
words are —“At the same time we consider it to be most desirable
in the present state of the Church of England in our own dioceses,
that, &c.”—as if the Church of England did, or could, exist in their
dioceses. The expression “ the Anglo-Episcopal Church in our
Dioceses” would have been correct, but clearly, not “the Church
of England in our Dioceses.” It is time this misnomer was dropped;
and yet it is of little consequence whether it is or not —provided the
people of these colonies know that it is a misnomer—and provided
also that Bishops and Clergy do not attempt to conjure or juggle by it.
Again under the Head “ Marriage within prohibited degrees,” these
words occur, —“We are of opinion that any clergyman who doth
solemnize matrimony between persons so related, will be acting in


violation of the Law of the Church.” These words imply, either,
that, in the opinion of the six Bishops—“A Law of the Church” in
these colonies exists, despite of the opinion of the Law Officers of
the Crown—or that an attempt is to be made to introduce into these
colonies some Law of the church, through the exertions and
influence of the Archbishops and Bishops of the United Church of
England and Ireland, to whom the Report is addressed. If the latter
is the implied meaning, all who take an interest in the welfare of the
colonies, should be on their guard. Other churches can manage
their own affairs without the aid of Legislative Enactments, and so
may the Anglo-Episcopal Church—unless, indeed, its constitution and
constituent elements are radically bad.
The subject, " Holy Baptism” occupies just one-fourth part of
the Report. We have carefully read every word of that portion of
the Report without receiving enlightenment. The Bishops, we
observe, differ in opinion upon it, Sydney, New Zealand, Tasma-
nia, Adelaide, and Newcastle, being against Melbourne, and Mel-
bourne standing out against them; all being opposed to the
doctrine of the Church of England, as declared by the highest Ec-
clesiastical Court of appeal —and of exposition of doctrine.
Truly, words found in the article in the Edinburgh Review on the
Gorham case, may be applied to this division and strife.
“As for these Sacramentarian quarrels” says good Bishop Hall,
—“Lord! how bitter have they been !—how frequent! —how long!—
in six several successions of learned conflicts. In these cases, the
very victory is miserable—such, as Pyrrhus said of bis, as is enough
to undo the conqueror.”
And, truly, also, as these Bishops, with their Metropolitan, seem
desirous of continuing an inter-colonial agitation on a question
already peacefully and legally settled, the words used by Abu
Musa in the sedition at Mecca, will apply to their proceedings, “ It
is a bad business, and he that meddles least with it has less chance
of doing wrong. For what says the Prophet, touching an evil thing of
the kind ?—He who sleepeth in it is better than he that waketh—he
that lieth than he that sitteth —he that sitteth than he that standeth
—he that standeth than he that walketh—he that walketh than be
that rideth.”
It would indeed be “ a bad business” for the colonies, were this
long existing agitation to continue longer. Should, however, the
six Bishops persist in carrying to extremes the purpose for which
they assembled at Sydney from Ist October to Ist November 1850,
it is to be trusted that the colonists will adhere to, and act up
to the principle, which actuated the men of England, in
the reign of Henry VIII., when they declared, in what Blackstone
calls “ those remarkable words addressed to the Ring’s Royal
Majesty,”—“This Your Grace’s realm, recognizing no superior under
God but only Your Grace, hath been and is free from subjection to


any man’s laws, but only to such as have been devised, made, and
ordained within the realm for the wealth of the same ; or to such
other as. by sufferance of Your Grace and your Progenitors, the people
of this your realm have taken at their free liberty , by their own con-
sent, to be used among them, and have bound themselves by long use
and custom to the observance of the same; not as to the observance
of the laws of any foreign province, potentate, or prelate,
but as to the customed and antient laws of this realm originally esta-
blished as laws of the same, by the said sufferance, consents, and
custom ; and none otherwise.”
Dr. Burn, in his Ecclesiastical Law, under the title Supremacy,
states —
“ The Civil Law is said to be the common municipal law of all the States
in Europe, (modified only according to the different circumstances of each
government); and those Princes of this realm who have most affected absolute
sovereignty, have been proportionable encouragers of the civil law. The
canon law hath the same lineaments and features; being framed to make the
Pope in the Church what the Emperor was in the State. And it must be owned,
they are both perhaps more for the ease of the governors, but not so convenient
to the governed.
“ Particularly as to the enacting part: They owe their very existence to the
sovereign will of the Supreme Governor; and consequently what is law to.day,
may not be law to-morrow; for the same power which enacteth may repeal.
For such is our will, is a harsh and grating sound to an English ear ; being the
sullen voice of insolence and wanton power. How much more humane is that
declaration — Be it enacted by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with
the advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same.
“ Again, as to the executive part, especially with respect to criminal prose-
cutions. A person accused in the dark; witnesses not confronted with the
party face to face ; the cruel oath ex offiico, whereby a man is compelled to
accuse himself (not to mention the diabolical rack and torture); and the whole
determined at last by the sole decision of the Judge, who must needs be often-
times an entire stranger to the parties; are disparagements of those laws which
will always obstruct their progress in a land of liberty. How much more
mild and gentle is that law, which is the birthright of every Englishman, how-
ever otherwise destitute and friendless, whereby he shall not be called upon to
answer for any crime he is charged withal, but upon the oaths of at least
twelve men of considerable rank and fortune within the county in which the
offence is supposed to have been committed, if they shall see probable cause
for further inquiry; and afterwards, shall not be condemned, but by the una-
nimous suffrage of other twelve men, his neighbours and equals in degree and
station of life, upon their oaths likewise; and at the same time he hath a
right to object to any one who is summoned to try him for his offence, if he
hath a reasonable cause of exception. The one is the law of tyrants; the other
of freemen, and may it ever prosper in the British soil 1”
Such is the opinion of Dr. Burn, Chancellor of the Diocese of
of Carlisle. Those who advocate the introduction of ecclesiastical
laws into a British colony, advocate the introduction of “ the law of
tyrantsthose who oppose their introduction, desire “ the law of
freemen to prosper in the British soil,” and act in conformity with
that desire. The six Bishops received warning from the Law


Officers of England, that their designs were opposed to “ the law of
freemen but they would not listen to that warning voice. Their
clergy may perhaps listen, or if not, they may perhaps listen to
another voice, a voice raised within sixty years from the establish-
ment of the Church by Constantine—the voice, namely, of St. Gregory
Nazianzen, as quoted above :—“To say the truth. I have utterly
determined never to come to any council of bishops; for I never yet
saw good end of any councils; for councils abate not ill things, but
rather increase them.” And what says Dr. Mosheim in his Ecclesi-
astical History, “These councils of which we find not the smallest
trace before the middle of this century, (the second) changed the
whole face of the church, and gave it a new form ; for by them the
ancient privileges of the people were considerably diminished, and
the power and authority of the bishops greatly augmented. The
humility, indeed prudence, of these pious prelates, prevented their
assuming all at once the power with which they were afterwards in-
vested. At their first appearance in these general councils, they
acknowledged that they were no more than delegates of their respec-
tive churches, and that they acted in the name and by the appoint-
ment of their people. But they soon changed this humble tone,
imperceptibly extended the limits of their authority, turned their in-
fluence into dominion, and their counsels into laws, and openly
asserted, at length, that Christ had empowered them to prescribe to
his people authoritative rules of faith and manners.” So true it is
that “councils of bishops abate not ill things, but rather increase
them,” and so anxious and careful should men be to check “ill things”
in their very origin and commencement.
The Minutes of Proceedings of the Metropolitan and Suffragan
Bishops of the Province of Australasia, are open to many other re-
marks. From their Report, as their Minutes turn out to be, it is
sufficiently apparent that their courage fled away with their fancied
and much vaunted supremacy. The Metropolitan and his Suffragans
must each, at the termination of their meeting, have felt, as did St.
Gregory Nazianzen —when he “utterly determined never more to
come to any council of bishops, seeing that they abate not ill things,
but rather increase them.”


APPENDIX.
To Her Most Gracious Majesty Victoria, Queen of Great
Biitain and Ireland. Ihe Petition of the Ministers and
Missionaries of the Independent or Congregational Churches
of Van Diemen’s Land,
Humbly sheweth —
That Your Majesty’s Petitioners emigrated to this colony for the
purpose of promoting the moral and religious welfare of their fellow-
countrymen. That while they claim no support from the public trea-
sury, which is accorded to all denominations in this colony,they be" to
present the following statement as evidence that their labours have
not been in vain. Within a period of 15 years, they have secured the
erection of 14 places of worship, and "the erection of 12 Sabbath
Schools, in which above seven hundred children are gratuitously
taught by 17 members of their respective churches and congre-
gations. °
That Your Majesty’s Petitioners have not confined their exertions
for the extension of true religion and morality to the Free Inhabitants
of the Colony, but have also directed their attention to the improve-
ment of the convict population, having gratuitously supplied reli-
gious instruction, either statedly or occasionally at road stations, in
hospitals, and other places, with the full sanction of the local autho-
rities.
That these labours were continued until Your Majesty’s Govern-
ment directed that the prisoners should receive religious instruction
from such persons only as belong to the Anglican, Weslevan or
Roman Catholic Churches. J ’
That Your Majesty’s Petitioners would respectfully call Your
Majesty’s attention to certain clauses of the Letters Patent issued
to Francis Russell Nixon, D.D., dated the 21st day of August, in
the sixth year of Your Majesty’s reign, which provide “ that (he)
“the said Bishop of Tasmania and his Successors, may exercise
“jurisdiction, Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, within the said church
“ (.St David’s Church) and throughout the said Diocese accord-
ing to the Ecclesiastical Laws now in force in England;” and
moreover, that the said Bishop of Tasmania and his Successors may
exercise and enjoy full power and authority to enquire by witnesses
sworn in due form of law relative to the morals and behaviour of his
clergy, thus granting to him power to summon Your Majesty’s Peti-
tioners and members of the respective churches as witnesses.
That while Your Majesty’s Petitioners were satisfied that no such
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was legally conveyed by the said Letters


Patent, and therefore could not be exercised, they refrained from
complaining of this, and of other invidious distinctions in favour of
a particular religious denomination. But since Your Majesty’s
Petitioners have understood that Dr. Nixon is proceeding to Eng-
land, with a view to procure the establishment in this colony of an
Ecclesiastical Court, with power to compel Your Majesty’s Peti-
tioners and members of their respective churches to appear as wit-
nesses in the matters of discipline between himself and his clergy
they can no longer be silent.
That Your Majesty’s Petitioners maintain the most devoted
attachment to Your Majesty’s Royal Person and Government, but
they would humbly represent, that they cannot conscientiously recog-
nize any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over themselves or the members
of their respective churches, which may be based upon secular
authority.
Your Majesty’s Petitioners would therefore humbly pray Your
Majesty to revoke so much of Your Majesty’s Letters Patent as
confers Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over themselves or other religious
denominations, and to withhold Your Majesty’s Royal sanction from
any measure calculated to interfere with that liberty of conscience
accorded to all men by the Divine Founder of our holy religion.
And Your Majesty’s Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
[Signed by all the Ministers and Missionaries of the
Independent Congregations.]
To Her Most Gracious Majesty, Queen Victoria. The
Petition of the undersigned.
Humbly sheweth,-
That your Petitioners have heard that Letters Patent have been
granted to Francis Russell Nixon, D.D., authorising him as Lord
Bishop of Tasmania, to erect a Consistorial Court, and to call before
him your Majesty’s subjects to give evidence in causes Ecclesiastical.
That having no power by the laws of this colony to subpoena such
witnesses, your petitioners are well informed that the aforesaid Frs.
R. Nixon, D.D., has proceeded to England with intent of prevailing
upon your Majesty to issue your royal command that a law may
pass to enable him to inflict pains and penalties on such as disobey a
summons to appear before him.
That your Majesty’s Petitioners are desirous at all times of render-
ing that obedience to the laws which becomes them as faithful and
loyal subjects, but they humbly submit to your Majesty's gracious
consideration their utter repugnance and dislike to courts Ecclesias-
tical based on Civil Legislation. That they conscientiously renounce
them as unscriptural in their institution—oppressive in their work-


ing—-inimical to the rights of conscience—and personal freedom—
and inconsistent with the mild and compassionate spirit of the
Gospel. That they never asked of Your Majesty’s Government for
legal aid to regulate and coerce the members of their own comma*
n i°. n, ~ or com P e l the attendance of witnesses belonging to others,
believing that such powers would be injurious to their fellow colo-
nists, and an abuse of your Majesty’s rightful authority, and your
petitioners humbly represent that it would be unjust to compel them
to interfere in such matters pertaining to another denomination.
That causes are brought into Courts Ecclesiastical, in which, if
bound to appear, your Petitioners would be assisting in the punish-
ment of clergymen for granting to your Petitioners’ children the
rites for Christian burial, and perhaps in some cases, to a violation
of the principles of Christ towards Christian Ministers for acts
which your Petitioners would consider in strict accordance with the
Holy Scriptures. They therefore humbly submit to your Majesty that
it would be cruelty to force, and ingratitude to give a testimony so
offensive to right feelings, and religious conviction.
That your Petitioners emigrated hither, in the reasonable expecta-
tion that the equality assured by the laws of their country, would secure
to themselves and their posterity, the blessings of complete religious
liberty,—they therefore contemplate with much alarm the efforts to
establish Courts, from which by your Majesty’s protection your
Petitioners hoped to escape for ever.
Your Petitioners therefore earnestly implore your Majesty to for-
bid their subjection to the losses, pains, and penalties, which the
aforesaid Lord Bishop of Tasmania proposes to bring in upon them,
and that your Majesty would be pleased to revoke so much of your
Letters Patent as may seem to countenance such attempts hereafter,
and your Petitioners will ever pray.
(Signed) HENRY DOWLING,
Pastor of the Baptist Chapel, Launceston.
SAMUEL HEWLETT,
Pastor of the Baptist Chapel, Hobart Town.
WM. R. WADE,
Baptist Minister.
Clause and Provisos proposed by Mr. Gladstone to be introduced into
the Australian Colonies’ Bill.
“And whereas, doubts have existed as to the rights and privileges
of the Bishops, Clergy, and other members of the United Church of
England and Ireland, in regard to the management of the internal
affairs thereof in the said colonies—Be it enacted, that it shall be
lawful for the Bishop or Bishops of any Diocese or Dioceses in the
said colonies, or in any colony which Her Majesty shall, by order in


Council, declare to be joined to them for the purpose next hereinafter
described, and the Clergy and Lay persons, being declared members
of the Church of England, or being otherwise in communion with
him or them respectively, to meet together from time to time, and at
such meeting, by mutual consent, or by a majority of voices of the
said Clergy and Laity, severally and respectively, with the assent of
the said Bishop, or of a majority of the said Bishops, if more than
one, to make all such regulations as may be necessary for the better
conduct of their ecclesiastical affairs and for the holding of meetings
for the said purpose thereafter.
“ Provided always and be it enacted, that it shall not be lawful to
impose or inflict, by any such regulation, any temporal or pecuniary
penalty or disability other than such as may attach to the avoidance
of any office or benefice held in the said Church.
“ Provided also and be it enacted, that no such regulation shall be
binding on any person or persons other than the said Bishop
or Bishops and the Clergy and the Lay persons within the said
colonies, who are, or may be, declared members of the Church of
England, or otherwise in communion with him or them respectively,
“Provided also and be it enacted, that any such regulation touch-
ing the existing relation of the said Bishops, Clergy, and others, to
the Metropolitan See of Canterbury, shall be forthwith transmitted
by the presiding Bishop or his Deputy, to the Archbishop of the
said See; and shall be subject to disallowance by the said Arch-
bishop under his hand and seal, at any time within twelve months
from the passing of the said regulation, or within six months from
the receipt thereof by the said Archbishop, but not afterwards.
“ Provided also and be it enacted, that it shall not be competent
to the said Bishops, Clergy, and Lay persons, or any of them, to pass
any regulation affecting the rights of the Crown, in the nomination
of Bishops, without the consent of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary
of State for the Colonies.
“ Provided also and be it enacted, that no such regulation made as
aforesaid, shall authorise the Bishop of any diocese to confirm or
consecrate, or to ordain, license, or institute, any person to any See,
or to any pastoral charge or other episcopal or clerical office, except
upon such person’s having immediately before taken the oath of
allegiance to Her Majesty, and having likewise subscribed the Arti-
cles of the United Church of England and Ireland, and declared his
unfeigned assent to the Book of Common Prayer.”
Protest of the Bishop of Gibraltar.
We, the undersigned, George, by Divine permission, Bishop of
Gibraltar, being, by virtue of our office and by the authority of Her
Majesty’s letters patent, invested with the power of exercising
episcopal jurisdiction, according to the ecclesiastical laws of England,


in all places belonging to the church of England within the island
of Malta, and being ordinarily resident within the said island, have
considered it to be our duty to examine those articles of the pro-
posed code of criminal laws for the said island which are entitled,
“ Concerning offences against the respect due to religion,” as
amended by the council of government, and having found that it is
therein proposed to make the church of Rome the dominant church
in Malta; to declare it to be exclusively the Catholic church; to
class the church of England and other religious bodies of her
Majesty’s subjects, as dissenting from the church of Rome, as it
at present exists in the said island; and to enact heavier penalties
for offences against the Roman Catholic worship than for offences
against others ; therefore we the bishop aforesaid do hereby protest
in the strongest manner against the adoption of the said articles for
the following reasons :
1. Because, whatever may be the privileges granted to the
Maltese, the supremacy of the English crown carries with it of ne-
cessity the supremacy of the religion of the Queen and of the people
of England, and establishes it by the law of the land in every colony
and dependency of the empire, Malta included.
2. Because this proceeding of the majority of the council in
attempting to make the church of Rome dominant in Malta, and
to declare the religion of the said church to be exclusively the
Catholic religion, is an attack upon the supremacy of the crown and
the fundamental laws of the empire, and an invasion of the rights
of the Catholic and Apostolic church of England.
3. Because the attempt to class the church of England and other
bodies of her Majesty’s subjects together as being merely dissenters
or dissentient from the church of Rome as it at present exists in
Malta, is an insult to the religion of the Queen and of the people of
England.
4. Because the enactment of greater penalties for offences against
the Roman Catholic worship than for offences against the worship
of other Churches is a violation of the principle of equal protection
for all classes of her Majesty’s subjects and of the rights and liberties
of Englishmen.
5. Because neither the clergy nor the people of the church of
England in Malta have given the least occasion for any such pro-
ceedings, they have been careful on all occasions to avoid giving
offence to their Maltese fellow subjects in all things connected with
their religion.
Given at Gibraltar Palace, in the city of Valetta,
this 20th day of March, in the year of our
Lord, 1850.
G. Gibraltar.
To His Excellency the Right Hon.
Richard More O’Ferrall,
Governor of Malta, &c.


