





W f" r " f
THE ETHIOPIAN TREASURER
OR THE NATURE AND EFFECTS OF TRUE RELIGION.
A SERMON,-
THE REV. W. HODGSON, M.A.,
OP SIDNEY SUSSEX COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE,
AND PRINCIPAL OF MOORE COLLEGE, NEW SOUTH WALES
SYDNEY;
JOSEPH COOK & CO., 219, GEORGE STREET,




SERMON.
“ Behold a man of Ethiopia, an eunuch of great
authority under Candace queen of the Ethiopians,
who had the charge of all her treasure and had
come to Jerusalem for to worship, was returning
and sitting in his chariot read Esaias the prophet.”
Acts vii. 27, 28.
Few things are more common in the mouths of some
persons than expressions or assertions about things
happening hy chance. Scarcely a day or an hour
passes without our hearing prosperous circumstances,
which have occurred to particular individuals
mentioned as pieces of good luck, or good fortune ;
while events of an afflictive character, in which any
persons have been involved, are described in the same
sort of way as accidents, misfortunes, mis-
chances. And yet the practical atheism which
such modes of speaking imply, too commonly
passes without rebuke, and even without notice.
But, however men may express themselves,‘it is
not by chance, or fortune or accident that the events
of this world are directed. God is the sovereign of
the universe, and it jis hy His never failing pro-
vidence, that all things in heaven and on earth are


Ordered: one use of the scriptures is, to impress
this truth upon our hearts, and we can scarcely
open them in any part without finding that even
the most minute and trivial circumstances are
evidently regulated by the Lord our God. Who,
for instance, can read the account of the interview,
between Rebecca and the servant of Abraham, with-
out exclaiming, as he reflects upon all the con-
sequences which arose out of it, “ this is the finger
of God “ the thing proceedeth from the Lord ?”
Who, again, can review the several steps, by which
Joseph was delivered from the murderous intentions
of his brethren, and raised to the chief authority in
Egypt, without feeling that the most minute cir-
cumstances even to the exact time of the Midianitish
merchants passing by, the direction of their journey,
the purchase which they made, and the numberless
other similar matters were all necessary to bring about
the result, and were all ordered and directed by the
Lord himself. This is the impression which such
narratives were designed to produce ; to this im-
pression, then, let us yield ourselves while we
meditate upon the history of that Ethiopian treasurer,
who on his return from Jerusalem heard and received
the Gospel, and “ went on his way rejoicing.”
As we go through his history, we can scarcely
avoid remarking that the road which he took, the
Volume which he had with him, the part that he was
reading, the person to explain it to him, and all
other things concerning him were provided by the
Lord himself. Let us mark then—
I. The character of the man,
11. The instruction afforded to him,
111. The effects which were produced by it.
I. It is a trite, hut a true remark that a man’s


circumstances must be considered before we can
form a right estimate of his character. It is small
commendation to say of a man, that he abstains from
those evils, which, from natural temperament or
peculiar position, he has no inducement to commit.
It is not much to say of a prince that he is not
given to picking and stealing, or that a beggar is
not proud and haughty, and overbearing. But it
is different when the beggar though poor even to
starvation, and with every temptation to pilfer, re-
mains scrupulously honest, or when a prince, with
every thing to foster pride and oppression, con-
forms himself to the meekness and gentleness of
Christ. We must therefore look at a man’s cir-
cumstances, in order to understand his character ;
and if we reflect how very disadvantageous to any
thing like true religion, was the position occupied
by the individual of whom we are speaking, we shall
perceive that his was no ordinary character.
1. Unlike ourselves, he had no ready access to a
place of public worship. In Ethiopia where this
man resided there was no Jewish Synagogue, no
inspired prophet, no Christian teacher. If he would
sacrifice unto the Lord or worship Him in His holy
temple, a long and tedious journey must first be
accomplished. In his case, attendance on public
worship was necessarily a rare thing. And how sad
an influence such prolonged absences produce upon
the character, is too evident to the experience of
most of us to require much observation or comment.
2. Then again he was surrounded on all sides by
idolatrous heathens. There was not only the
absence of good things, but the continual presence
of abominable idolatries and pernicious customs.
In such a situation if a man will be religious he
must be content to stand alone, to brave all the


scorn and ridicule and opposition of the determined
and resolute servants of the world, and perhaps to
•risk property and life as well.
3. Besides this, there were in his personal position
obstacles to true religion, of no small power. We
are told in holy scripture that not many of the rich
or talented or the noble are called so that they obey
the calling : and experience testifies that, with some
few splendid exceptions which show that religion is
not impracticable in such cases, in proportion as a
man rises in the scale of wealth, importance, and
authority, his concern for and his opportunities
of attending to matters of religion gradually decrease.
It should not be so, it need not be so, but so in
practice it usually is. So difficult is it for a man to
have riches without trusting in them, that only the
grace of God, which renders all things possible, can
keep him from this dangerous downfall. So difficult is
it to possess authority, without abusing it, that
none are found to do this except “men of truth,
hating covetousness who have the 'fear of God in
their hearts.* ’ Yet this man had large possessions
and great authority.
4. To all these obstacles there were superadded
the engrossing claims of important temporal busi-
ness. The Ethiopian Was not only a man of wealth
and authority, at the court of his mistress the queen ;
hut he had also the charge of all her treasure. To be
the steward or manager of a small estate, is found by
many men to occupy so much of their time and
attention, that they seem to he almost unable to
find for any other pursuit a Vacant moment: and
many more, without any such charge, show that
the management of their own concerns, affords them
more than sufficient employment, although they
“ rise early and late take rest, and eat the bread of


carefulness.” Here, however, was a man who in
addition to his own affairs as a man of wealth, had
to exercise the authority with which he was intrusted,
to occupy his post at the court of his sovereign, and
to see that the treasures of a kingdom were rightly
administered, and carefully preserved. He, there-
fore, if any were allowed to do so, might plead the
attention required by his temporal business as an
excuse for inattention to religion.
If then we remember how disadvantageous to
the rise and growth of true religion in the soul,
each one of these circumstances certainly is, and how
many there are who in their own case, count any one
of them as a sufficient reason for putting the service
of God, and the concerns of the soul altogether on
one side, we must see, I think, that the man who
breaks through all such obstacles as if they had,
no more strength than the thread of a gossamer,
is no ordinary character. Such then was the man
whose history is given us in the passage with which
our text stands connected.
His conduct throughout is truly remarkable,
whether we view him leaving home for his journey
to Jerusalem, or returning in his chariot, or con-
versing with Philip. A man in his circumstances
could not leave his home for a purpose not likely to
be understood, or appreciated by those amongst whom
he dwelt, (especially as the mere going and returning
would occupy, in those times, not less than sixty
days) without risking his favour with his sovereign,
and his post of authority, his office as treasurer. It
must have cost him something, therefore, even to
decide upon taking such a step ; and when the de-
cision was adopted, it would cost him still more to
put his plan into execution. We see, however, that
with him the contaminating influence cf surround-


ing bad example, was no effectual hindrance.
Others might be cold, indifferent, and hike-warm on
the subject of God’s service; but this could not
chill the warm and glowing spirit by which he was
animated. Wealth and power, and court favour,
could not prevail to damp his zeal, or to stifle his
determination to make the service of the Lord his
God, and the care of his own soul, his first and
most important business. Other businesses however
pressing were all made to give way to this. His
conduct in journeying from Ethiopia to Jerusalem,
shews that he found it not impracticable to leave
all his temporal affairs ; and that as a matter of
religion, it was with him no great thing to give up
much time, to encounter much danger and fatigue,
and to spend much money in the service of God.
In these particulars, I fear his character is one
so much above the mark to which we have any of
us yet attained, that it must show us how very far
short we fall of what we should be, and how utterly
inexcusable is that coldness and lukewarmness in
the service of God, which even those of us who
know the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ too fre-
quently display. But this is not the only remarkable
feature in this man’s character. His conduct while
on his journey homewards, opens to us another series of
excellent qualities. How was he engaged at this time ?
He was not inwardly praising himself for the great
things he had done in the service of God : he was
not supposing that the mere bodily service was all
that was required, hut “ sitting in his chariot he
was reading the prophet Isaiah.” See then how
strong was his desire to deepen and increase any
impression which might have been produced upon
his soul by the solemn service of the temple wor-
ship. He did not, as too many do when they leave


the house of God, fall immediately into empty con-
versation with any friend or neighbour about any
subject however trifling or unimportant. His object
wail to think over what he had heard, to compare it
with the scriptures, and to find what further light
they might throw upon it. “ Sitting in his chariot
he read the prophet Isaiah.” He was already in
knowledge, understanding, and character superior to
many, and yet he was actuated with an increasing
desire to know more of God and his ways, and was
seeking this knowledge in the study of the Holy
Scriptures. Observe too his wisdom in employing
fragments of time and intervals of leisure. With
him, travelling was not as with many it is in these
days, the excuse for neglecting to read and study
their scriptures, hut the opportunity for searching
them with care, and digesting them with serious
and patient meditation. Here again then materials
are supplied to us for reproof or for correction.
But the most remarkable part of his conduct, is
that which still remains to be seen in his intercourse
with Philip. The rich and influential officer of a
powerful sovereign while riding as we should say in
his carriage, in [the presence of his servants and
dependents, is accosted by a stranger, who to all ap-
pearance was a poor unlearned traveller on foot.
The question of the stranger was one which many a
poor and ignorant man would think insulting, even
if put to him by one who was evidently bis superior.
“ Understandeth thou what thou readest ?” Think,
my brethren, ye who are parents or masters, how
your spirit would brook such a question if put
abruptly to you by your servant or your child : and
learn from this man’s character the nature of that
true humility of mind which ought to be but which
alas ! is not the possession of us all. The enquiry


from one, who appeared to be so much beneath him,
excited in this great man’s mind neither surprise
nor indignation. He felt that he was ignorant, and
he at once acknowledged it. He wished to have his
ignorance removed. He is willing and glad to
receive information and instruction from the poorest
and most illiterate man that can supply it. “ Philip
said unto him ‘ understandest thou what thou
readest V And he said ‘ How can I, except some
man should guide me,’ and he desired Philip that
he would come up and sit with him.’ ’ Surely then
the character of this man was one of unusual ex-
cellence ; undeterred from serving God in earnest,
by circumstances the most disadvantageous to true
religion, careful to deepen any impression which
had been produced, diligent in improving time,
seeking increase in knowledge from the word of
God, and yet so truly humble as to be willing to
take even a poor man for his instructor, these
surely are traits of genuine excellence.
Is then a man of this description all that he needs
to be ? Is holiness and humility like this, the sure
passport for admission into heaven ? So some per-
sons think, but this man’s history, as recorded for our
learning, gives a very different view of such a thing,
and shows us that even the best and holiest re-
quire to come to the knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and that without right faith in Him there is
no salvation. If this man, with all his excellent
qualities had already been all that the Lord requires
of a man, what occasion was there that the spirit of
God should direct Philip to the exact place where
he was, and should then commission him to ap-
proach this particular chariot, and provide just that
specific instruction which was needed ? There is
nothing superfluous in the works of God —the in-


struction was necessary, or it would not have been
furnished by special revelation.
11. Let us proceed briefly with the second branch
of our subject, and notice the nature of the instruc-
tion which was provided. The Ethiopian was
reading a portion of that remarkable passage of
scripture which is found in Isaiah, liii. And as
that contained a full statement of the knowledge
which was necessary for him, for us, and for every
sinner that will be saved, “ Philip opened his mouth
and began at that same scripture, and preached
unto him Jesus.” The passage of scripture, upon
which the Evangelist commented, is, as most of you
are well aware, a prophecy concerning Christ,
describing the lowly station in which the Messiah
should be born, the reception He should meet with
from man, the reason, the nature and the benefit of
His sufferings, the meekness, gentleness and holi-
ness of His character, the kind of death He should
die, the persons with whom He should be executed,
the sort of tomb in which He would be placed, the
triumph which He should achieve over death, the
many souls that would be justified by his righteous-
ness, and many similar particulars which we need
not at present notice separately. This prophecy
had recently received its fulfilment, at least very
much of it had then been fulfiled, and the remainder
was daily receiving a more complete accomplish-
ment. To one studying it as this Ethiopian had
been, few words would be necessary to show how
fully and exactly these predictions pointed to Jesus
of Nazareth, who was born in the stable of an inn,
appeared in the form of a servant, in order to
minister to others, —was rejected and despised of
men, although approved of God by signs and
miracles, —displayed the perfection of meekness and


gentleness, praying even for his murderers, —was
holy without any guile or sin of any kind, —was
numbered with the transgressors being crucified
between two thieves, —was intended to have been
buried with them, hut had his tomb or grave with
the rich—by his death made an atonement for the
sins of the world—yet was raised again from the
dead, so as to divide the spoil with the strong, and
to see as the fruit of the travail of his soul thou-
sands of converted Christians, who should increase
to hundreds of thousands, and millions, and at last
should be so many that “ those justified through
the knowledge of Him” would be the “ great mul-
titude of all nations, and kindred and people, and
tongues which no man could number.” We can
scarcely wonder that, from this scripture, Philip
opening his mouth should preach Jesus as the Son
of God, who died for sinners, and who offers to
believers pardon and peace, grace and strength here,
and glory everlasting hereafter. “ Through this
man” the evangelist would say, “ is preached unto
you the forgiveness of sins, by Him, all that believe
are justified from all things,” only “ believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt he saved.”
Such we may well conceive was the nature of
the instruction at this time supplied by Philip,
when to his enquiring and attentive hearer, he
preached Jesus as the Saviour of sinners, and the
King of Saints. Observe, then,
111. The effects which this instruction produced
upon the hearer. So far as we see or know, this
was the first and only opportunity, which he ever
had of hearing the Gospel fully and plainly preached
to him. It was hut once preached, but it wrought
at once effectually upon his heart, because he re-
ceived the truth in the love of it, “ not as the word


of man, but as the word of God.” Without the
delay of a day or an hour, he believed what he had
heard. He was satisfied that it was true, and feel-
ing this, he allows no second thought about accept-
ing or rejecting it. It was information bearing
upon the everlasting interests of his immortal soul,
and realizing its truth he could not do otherwise
than count it “ worthy of all acceptation, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners.” Pardon
and peace, grace and strength, blessedness and glory
were not trifles to be despised, in the estimation of
one who saw the truth as he saw it. He received
the word with all readiness of mind. He believed
that Jesus was the Son of God, and that He was
mighty not only in atoning for sin, but also in
power to rule, protect, and bless all who trust in
Him,
The truth at once took hold of his heart, and
where true faith is, there evidence is immediately
given that faith is a living and fruit-bearing prin-
ciple. No sooner is the word of truth, the Gospel
of salvation heartily believed, then fruit begins to
appear. What then was the fruit in this instance ?
“ As they went on their way they came to & certain
water, and the Eunuch said ‘ See here is water,
what doth hinder me to be baptised V ” He who
to the comfort of his own soul, has received the
promises and declarations of scripture, desires to
submit to its precepts. He, who from the minister
of Christ has heard the Gospel, desires also to be
received as a disciple in the way of Christ’s appoint-
ment. He who with the heart had believed unto
righteousness, wishes with the mouth to make con-
fession unto salvation. He was not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, and he was ready to witness a good
confession before many witnesses.


Here then is one fruit of faith immediately pro-
duced, readiness to obey the Lord’s precepts, and
boldly to confess Him before men. Of his subsequent
conduct, the scriptures give us little information.
There is a tradition that the Christain Church in
Abyssinia, which though much corrupted from its
original purity still exists, was founded by this
officer of Queen Candace; and we may well
believe that such a man could not fail to strive to
spread amongst others that saving knowledge which
he himself possessed. Without however laying
much stress on this traditionary account, we have
the authority of scripture for asserting that “he
went on his way rejoicing.” He had joy as well as
peace resulting from his faith; and the way on
which he thus went rejoicing was not only the way
of return to his temporal dwelling, but also the way
of his pilgrimage towards his everlasting habitation
in the heavenly mansions of our Father above.
“ The path of the just is like the morning dawn,
which shineth more and more unto the perfect day
and if upon this principle we may imagine the con-
clusion of this man’s course from what we know of
its earlier portions; we may safely say that he
passed a life of holy usefulness, went down to the
grave in the full assurance of faith, and in the day
of final account, will receive from the righteous
Judge as a free and gracious gift, a crown of glory
which shall never fade.
In order to apply to the conscience the truths
which have now been brought before us, we may re-
mark that, from the contemplation of this remarkable
character, we may see something of the nature and
effects of true religion. Surely as we have gone
through the several particulars of his history, we
must have felt that religion is something more than


a name, a creed, or a profession. We must have
been convinced that it is a reality, a living principle,
a business which requires courage, attention, time,
exertion and self-denial. The religion which costs
us nothing is really worth nothing. Let me urge
then each of you promptly to find out the nature of
that which you have been accustomed to view as
your religion. Is it the kind of thing of which you
have just been hearing ? Does it cost you anything ?
Has it ever put you to any expense in the way of
serious thought and earnest attention ? Has it
called your courage into exercise ? Has it ever
cost you anything in time or money, or fatigue, or
self-denial of any kind ? Or does it literally cost you
nothing ? What is the character of your religion ?
Is it a shadow or a substance ? The form of godli-
ness or the power of it ? Is it more to you than
friends or enemies, fear or favour, business or
pleasure, or character or property, or life itself ?
Such is true religion to him that hath it, and such
it was to this Ethiopian.
If your religion is not of this nature, you may see
clearly enough that it will avail you nothing, and
also that you are altogether without excuse. You
may plead that your circumstances are such that
you cannot be religious : your companions ridicule
such things, or your master will be displeased, or
your friends will be angry, or your business will
suffer, or your family will starve, and you are
obliged to submit. You may say that you have
so much temporal business on your' hands that
positively you have not time to serve God in earnest:
but look again at this man’s character, and see if
you can honestly persuade yourself that such ex-
cuses will be received when you stand bodily before
the judgment-seat of Christ; see if you can escape


the conviction that God who sees your heart is
otherwise than displeased with them, and with you,
even at present.
If from any thing which has been brought before
you, you have been convinced that your religion
has not been what it should be, and that you yourself
are utterly without excuse, then let the instruction
which the Lord provided for this man, show you
what is the thing which God chiefly requires of you
and me, and every sinner that will be saved. The
main requisite is true, simple, earnest heart, belief
in Jesus Christ as the Son of God. “Itis a faith-
ful saying that Christ Jesus came into the world
to save sinners,” and if this is true, it is certainly
worthy of your acceptation. He is able to save to
the uttermost all who come unto God by Him; and
none are so vile that He will reject them, if only
they are conscious of their vileness, and will apply
to Him for the exercise ot His sovereign grace, and
His almighty power. There is no deceit or guile in
his invitations ; He is as willing to receive you as He
is powerful to protect and bless. Believe then on
His name, and His name, through faith in His name
will give you such perfect soundness in the sight of
all men, that you also shall be enabled to go on
your way rejoicing, and arrive in due season at
heaven as your home.
There is still another lesson which the conduct
of this Ethiopian may impress upon us all, and that
is the proper mode of employing ourselves in our
passage from the house of God to our own homes.
Let us remember that a few minutes for serious and
thoughtful meditation are then most profitable;
when the mind has first been solemnized by prayer
to God, or the heart has been affected by some
awakening truths of His holy word. If we wish to


make our attendance on public worship truly
serviceable to our souls, we must see that the great
enemy does not catch away the good seed from our
hearts before it has time to sink beneath the surface.
Let us he persuaded to think upon what we hear
ourselves, instead of doing Satan’s work in diverting
the minds of others from the truths to which they
have been listening. If we must have conversation
at such times, let us he then more especially careful
that it is not about trifling vanities, but of an
edifying tendency, and such that it may minister
grace to the hearer; let us strive to have it such
that, if like Philip and the Eunuch, we have no
further communication with our companion in this
world, we may each have good reason to remember
it with pleasure as one, in which a benefit was
received or imparted, which will remain unimpared
throughout all the ages of eternity.
T m oew Sold.
Joseph Cook & Co., “• Church Press,” 219, George street.






/ I
hJmn
I i
■■: I
'' 1
■; v
