

THE BOASTER REBUKED:
REMARKS ON DR. CAIRNS’ INSULTING ATTACK ON
THE BAPTISTS,
AND TWO LETTERS,
1.-T0 DR. CAIRNS. 2-TO THE P^IDOBAPTISTS.
BY THE
REY. ISAAC NEW.
“ Where men are the most sure and arrogant they are commonly the most
mistaken, and have there given reins to passion without that deliberation and suspense
which can alone secure them from the grossest absurdities.”— Hume.
MELBOURNE :
WILSON AND MACKINNON, COLLINS STREET EAST.
SOLD BY G. ROBERTSON, ELIZABETH STREET. S. MULLEN, COLLINS STREET.
STEPHENS, COLLINS STREET. BIRTCHNELL, BALLAARAT.
1863.
PRICE Is.


P E E F A C E.
The articles of the Pamphlet which has called forth these re-
marks, as they appeared monthly, I never read. I had heard
paragraphs read, and had seen some quotations, which appeared
to me so silly and offensive that I half formed the resolution not to
read them at all, and had they remained in the quiet nook of the
Presbyterian Messenger , I should have left them to slumber into a
speedy death, without for a moment attempting to disturb their
repose. But having started into an independent existence in the
form of a living Pamphlet, which has been placarded through the
city, soliciting attention and challenging notice, the question was
forced upon me by many individuals, as to whether our Denomina-
tion ought to remain under the stigma with which the writer had
sought to brand it 1 and whether his insolence should remain un-
rebuked 1 At length one was casually put into my hand by a friend,
partly on account of the reference made to me in the preface. I
therefore read a few pages ; when a feeling of indignation dissolved
my half-formed resolution, and the reader has the result.
I have written in defence of the Denomination to which I belong.
If any think I have been too severe on our opponent, it is hoped
that the grossness of the provocation will be duly considered.
These “ Remarks ” would have appeared some weeks ago, but
from numerous engagements.


THE BOASTER REBUKED.
In committing ourselves to the dreary and irksome task of answering
this pretentious and arrogant pamphlet, we are met at the outset with
one of the strangest jumbles of thought, confusion of ideas,, and contra-
diction of statements that it has been our lot for a long time to en-
counter. And had it not been for the poeans of praise with which its
publication has been celebrated, and the triumphant victory over the
Baptists with which it has been lauded, we should have abandoned
it to the neglect it deserves, and which we predict speedily awaits
it. ■We can imagine many of the friends of the cause which it has
espoused secretly ashamed of it, but afraid of letting their blushes
be seen. As to anything like argument, evidence, proof, there is
little or none; it is one continued course of turgid declamation, of
haughty assumption, and of contemptuous scorn from the beginning
to the end. And yet it is magnified as the production of “an able
and learned contributor, and characterised by distinguished erudition ,
by sound logic , and by a spirit of candour and fairness” Such is
the estimate of the Presbyterian Messenger. Of course ! Perhaps
our readers will be better able to form an opinion of this fulsome
eulogy before we have done.
This writer tells us he has “no intention of entering the lists of
controversy, or of throwing down the gauntlet in defiance of real or
imaginary foes.” What can he mean by this 1 Why, all his articles
from the commencement to the close are controversial, and it is as
clear as the light they were intended to be controversial; while they
bristle throughout in disdainful defiance of the Baptists, whom
he has done his best to crush. “We have a great distaste,” he says,
“ for debate on such a topic.” Then why rush into it 1 What
occasion was there for it ?If he had loved peace as much as he
loves war, he would not have so rudely obtruded himself in this
matter. “ Not,” he says, “ that we undervalue its importance, or
hold any indefinite opinion either as to the subjects to whom the
ordinance should be applied.” Who expected that he did ? This
is very superfluous information. “We are willing,” he tells us, “to
differ in this particular thing with our Baptist neighbours, and are
unable to understand how (why?) the church of Christ should be


city, soliciting
forced upon me by many individuals, as to whether our Denomina-
tion ought to remain under the stigma with which the writer had
sought to brand it 1 and whether his insolence should remain un-
rebuked 1 At length one was casually put into my hand by a friend,
partly on account of the reference made to me in the preface. I
therefore read a few pages ; when a feeling of indignation dissolved
my half-formed resolution, and the reader has the result.
I have written in defence of the Denomination to which I belong.
If any think I have been too severe on our opponent, it is hoped
that the grossness of the provocation will be duly considered.
These “ Remarks ” would have appeared some weeks ago, but
from numerous engagements.


THE BOASTER REBUKED.
In committing ourselves to the dreary and irksome task of answering
this pretentious and arrogant pamphlet, we are met at the outset with
one of the strangest jumbles of thought, confusion of ideas,, and contra-
diction of statements that it has been our lot for a long time to en-
counter. And had it not been for the poeans of praise with which its
publication has been celebrated, and the triumphant victory over the
Baptists with which it has been lauded, we should have abandoned
it to the neglect it deserves, and which we predict speedily awaits
it. We can imagine many of the friends of the cause which it has
espoused secretly ashamed of it, but afraid of letting their blushes
be seen. As to anything like argument, evidence, proof, there is
little or none; it is one continued course of turgid declamation, of
haughty assumption, and of contemptuous scorn from the beginning
to the end. And yet it is magnified as the production of “an able
and learned contributor, and characterised by distinguished erudition ,
by sound logic , and by a spirit of candour and fairness.” Such is
the estimate of the Presbyterian Messenger. Of course ! Perhaps
our readers will be better able to form an opinion of this fulsome
eulogy before we have done.
This writer tells us he has “ no intention of entering the lists of
controversy, or of throwing down the gauntlet in defiance of real or
imaginary foes.” What can he mean by this 1 Why, all his articles
from the commencement to the close are controversial, and it is as
clear as the light they were intended to be controversial; while they
bristle throughout in disdainful defiance of the Baptists, whom
he has done his best to crush. “We have a great distaste,” he says,
“ for debate on such a topic.” Then why rush into it % What
occasion was there for it 1 If he had loved peace as much as- he
loves war, he would not have so rudely obtruded himself in this
matter. “ Not,” he says, “ that we undervalue its importance, or
hold any indefinite opinion either as to the subjects to whom the
ordinance should be applied.” Who expected that he did ? This
is very superfluous information. “We are willing,” he tells us, “to
differ in this particular thing with our Baptist neighbours, and are
unable to understand how (why?) the church of Christ should be


broken up, by reason of an honest discrepancy of view as to the
administration of this particular sacrament. However the deed is
done.” Indeed! By whom? “ The breach has occurred.” Where?
“ The notable fact stares us in the face.” What fact? Explain it.
Why write so enigmatically? We may guess at his meaning ; but
why not tell us plainly, and not leave us to conjecture ? “ And if
we are satisfied that the theory of the Baptists is an erroneous one,
and has no foundation in the word of God,” &c. This, of course, is
but a hypothetical way of stating his belief that “ the theory of the
Baptists is an erroneous one, and that it has no foundation in the
word of God.” Well, we shall see.
“ We not only regard,” he says, “ infant baptism as a privilege of
great value, which Christian parents should not forego, but as
implying a duty of sacred obligation which cannot be neglected
without grave responsibility.” He regards the Baptists it seems in
serious error; their theory as having no foundation in the word of
God, consequently as false ; as neglecting a duty of divine obligation,
by which they incur a grave responsibility, and therefore a corres-
ponding amount of guilt; and yet he would not put forth a single
effort to save these Baptists from the fearful peril in which they are
involved, but would willingly “ differ in this particular thing with
his Baptist neighbours.” What a singular discrepancy between
these statements, and the generous pitying charity which he would
have us believe swells his bosom. If his zeal for their welfare had
been as ardent, as his apparent zeal to annihilate them, judging
from the spirit of this pamphlet, his conduct would have been
widely different. There were twenty courses open to him in pre-
ference to the one he has thought proper to adopt. But no, rather
than choose any one of these he preferred that which was most
offensive, as being more congenial with the feelings of his own heart,
and which is calculated to irritate rather than to soothe, to wound
rather than to heal.
We have then a long passage about the kind of preaching most
needed by this colony, and he concludes by telling us that he has
“ sought in his humble way, and with much (many ?) imperfections
to know nothing in the colony but Jesus Christ.” What a mercy it
is that this poor colony has one man at least of an apostolic spirit!
But the passage contains an inuendo that the Baptists are actuated
by a different spirit, for he says, obviously with an allusion to them,
“ it is a pity that any question should be raised that interferes with
this obvious work and calling of the churches of Christ.” We have
no wish to boast, but we remember that even an apostle was com-
pelled in one instance “to be a fool in glorying.” And we tell this
haughty critic of our doings, that the doctrines of the cross have
been preached as fully, as faithfully, as constantly, as uniformly, yea
and as effectually, in the Baptist pulpits in Victoria, with as little to
disturb their legitimate impression, as in any of the Presbyterian


pulpits, and from what we have heard we think a little more so.
What means then this insinuation to the contrary 1 Was it not de-
signed to have its appropriate effect'?
But in the judgment of this writer the principles of Presbyte-
rianism are “ declared in Holy Scripture, and are essential to the
proper constitution of the Christian Church.” This is certainly
attaching to them a sacred importance enough. “ But yet,” he
says, “ we have kept in abeyance our more distinctive church princi-
ples . . . we intentionally let them alone that we may have
no controversy with our sister churches.” What, when they are
essential to the constitution of a church ! If so, then we fearlessly
tell this Dr. that he is a traitor to his principles and his Lord for
the sake of a questionable peace. If they are thus essential , he and
those who think with him have received them as a sacred deposit,
not to be concealed, but to be proclaimed : and to keep them ia
abeyance on the ground of expediency is to be false to their avowed
allegiance to the Great Master whom they are bound to serve. But
is it so % Is there any nook or corner in this land where there is
any hope of raising a congregation but the Presbyterians are there.
And all honour to them ! They shame our flagging zeal, or perhaps
rather our limited means. They take State Aid, we do not. And
wherever they go do they not carry their “distinctive princi-
ples,” their standards, and confessions, and catechisms with them h
Is not their existence as a separate body a proclamation of these
principles 1 If it be meant they do not write books upon them
and thus seek to disseminate them, the question is, why 1 Simply
because they are quietly conceded by others not as essential , but as
matters of comparative indifference. Let them become a subject of
dispute, and let the Presbyterians become a “ sect everywhere spoken
against,” as the Baptists too often are, then would not the press
teem with publications, from the farthing slip to the portly pam-
phlet 1 and would not the ire of this Dr., who appears to have assumed
to be the sentinel of the Presbyterian citadel, flame in towering
wrath against whomsoever should dare to attack his darling prin
ciples. Thus, while we would save him from the charge of unfaith-
fulness, we cannot save him from the charge of the grossest incon
sistency in his statements.
Then comes the charge of proselytism, which, until he produces
something like definite proof, we pronounce to be as despicable as
it is wicked, and as wicked as it is despicable. It is spoken of as
an “ entire misdirection of effort, and an unnecessary expenditure
of zeal,” &e., &c. “But,” it is added, “it is needless to reason
with our Baptist neighbours in this strain.” Scornful slander !
What does he mean 1 Does he mean that clandestine efforts are made
to win over individuals to our views 1 Then let him prove it. If he
attempt it, then we will pledge the credit of our reputation to prove
it to be grossly false. Does he then mean, that by tracts or pam-


phlets, the effort has been made 1 and does he call this proselyting?
Well, Mr. Taylor tells us that of the 300,000 tracts distributed by
his church there has not been one on the subject of baptism. I,
too, have disavowed for myself and for my people the circulation of
a single tract or pamphlet bearing on the subject. It seems, how-
ever, that the friends in Collins-street have at different times dis-
tributed slips containing a reference to texts in the New Testament
on baptism. One of these was put into our hands some two years
ago, which is the only one we have ever seen. But surely this
theological Dr. must be exceedingly suspicious of the scriptural
authority of his infant baptism, to be alarmed or offended with so
light a missile. If, however, he be so confident of the truth of his
sentiments as this pamphlet would have us believe, and if this
trifling matter of the slips be of such formidable importance in his
estimation, he has the means in his power of counteracting their
tendency by the distribution of other slips, containing texts in refer-
ence to his own views. Why, then, get into a passion, and impute
to the Baptists all sorts of covert tricks to proselyte his hearers from
their faith] But suppose there are here and there individuals in
our churches—though we know of none such who have recourse
to secret means to win over persons to our views, is it fair, is it
honourable, is it manly, to impute their conduct to the whole body?
We can tell this writer, we should be ashamed if we could conceive
ourselves capable of imputing the spirit he has displayed throughout
this pamphlet to the whole Presbyterian Church. But besides this,
there is a body of Christians in the city who practise the immersion
of believers, but who do not call themselves Baptists, and are not
identified with us, and who circulate tracts containing sentiments
we do not believe and would not propagate. This is evident, from
the one quoted by an Elder of the Presbyterian Church in the
WeeMy Review. It is, however, an imgenerous and paltry device to
regard our denomination as responsible for these productions.
But, speaking of us, this writer says, “They are called Baptists
by courtesy, for they have no exclusive right to that appellation.
We are Baptists as well as they.” Well, admitting that the term
Baptists is based on an assumption, whether it was first used by
the Baptists themselves, or by their opponents in ridicule, is involved
in as much 'obscurity as the origin of the word Christians. But it
should be remembered that there is scarcely a distinctive phrase
employed in reference to religious bodies but equally involves a
questionable assumption. Take a few, “ The Presbyterian Church
of Victoria.” But there are Presbyterians who do not belong to it,
and who might say, “ you have no right to that appellation, we are
as much the Presbyterian Church of Victoria as you are.” In
reference to our friends the Wesleyans, there are several sects which
have branched out from them, who might say, “ you have no right
to that appellation any more than we.” And so with respect to


the Independents or Congregationalists, we may say, we are as much
Independents and Congregationalists as you are. And equally so in
reference to the Church of England, it is based on the assumption
that there is no other church in England but itself. Hence by
numbers in that church all other churches in England are wholly
ignored and branded as sects and schismatics. But history and
custom have conceded these designations, and courtesy allows them,
though their strict propriety is open to dispute. And in the same
way history and custom have conceded the designation of Baptists
to our body. But the courtesy allowed in all other instances this
writer thinks ought to be withheld from the Baptists. Of course.
What right have they to courtesy in the estimation of this charita-
ble Presbyterian divine 1 He admits we should be correctly de-
scribed by the term Antipasdobaptist. Well we should not care
much about that. It is “ precise and definite” he says, but “it is
heavy and cumbersome.” It is not exactly euphonious enough for
him. Yes, and there was another grand objection ; there is no
sting in it. Therefore it was rejected. “ And our neighbours” he
adds ** greatly prefer the nice pleasant dissyllable Baptist, and would
like to have it all to themselves.” Poor, pitiful, sneering sarcasm !
with enough of falsehood in it to make it relish. The fact is you
wanted a nickname Dr., in which you could concentrate the essence
of your bitterness without any circumlocution ; and as the terms
Baptist and Antipasdobaptist did not serve your purpose, you pre-
ferred to employ another, already coined to your hand, A nabaptist.
You candidly admit that it involves odium, but it would seem so
much the better for your purpose, for you have invariably used it
in the subsequent part of your pamphlet. And yet you seem ex-
cessively sore from your preface because we question your profes-
sions of charity. We can assure you, Dr., our minds are made up
on that subject, and we do not intend you to palm your notions of
Christian charity on the public without our exposing them. Did
you ever read Foster’s first letter on “ The Epithet Romantic 1” If
you have not, as you obviously need a little salutary chastisement
on this subject, we recommend it to your careful perusal.
But let us look at this matter for a moment or two. You refuse
to us the designation of Baptists because it involves an assumption
which you dispute, and yet you give us a nickname which is based
on a double assumption. First that you are Baptists, and secondly
that we are Baptists. For you say we re-baptize those who have
been already baptized, though you know as w«H as we, that we pro-
fess to do nothing of the kind. Your charge therefore is as disingenu-
ous as it is false. But you say that “ the theory of the Baptists is
an erroneous one, and has no foundation in the Word of God.”
Then our baptism as a Christian ordinance is no baptism at all ;
and. yet such is your consistency that you are willing to concede
the validity of our baptism, if we will concede the validity of


yours, at the very time you virtually tell us that our baptism is no
baptism. For how can it be if it has “no foundation in the Word
of God V’ But if we dare to say or to think that the theory of infant
sprinkling is “an erroneous one, and has no foundation in the
word of God,” you kindle into indignation, and would flash lightning
upon us if you could. You may well “ shudder” at “ inexorable
logic,” Dr., for the least touch of it converts your statements into
nonsense. This comes of using nicknames.
This writer quotes with evident satisfaction an “ old saying, that
a little theology makes a Baptist, and that a little more unmakes
him.” But yet he says, “ some of the brightest names of the pre-
sent age belong to that denomination.” Mirahile dictu ! what an
honour from such lips ! Thus having first offered what was ob-
viously designed as an insult; he then endeavours to mitigate it
by a spice of flattery. We know however how to estimate the one
and the other. But we are told, “ there is substantial truth in the
apothegm.” We will admit it. Only let individuals come un-
trammelled by theological Standards and Confessions to the
simple Word of God, and we have no fear of their becom-
ing Baptists. They are these dogmatic systems taught in creeds
and catechisms at an early age, which prepossess the mind, when,
if it was left free from any such perverting influence there is a high
probability that its impressions from the simple statements of Scrip-
ture would be far more legitimate and correct. Hence if you
please, Dr., we will reverse your apothegm, “Much theology makes
an infant sprinkler, and a little unmakes him.”
“ Anabaptist opinions,” our opponent tells us, “ have never had
much success in Scotland.” What sheer nonsense is this. We are
not however going to run down the Scotch, though they don’t like
the Baptists. With some notable exceptions, a nobler and braver set
of men do not exist on God’s earth. But we will hazard an asser-
tion, it may just go for what it is worth. There is not a people in
the world among whom there is so much theology as among the
Scotch; and not a people in the world among whom there is so
little of that simple, unsophisticated knowledge of the Scriptures
which results from an unbiassed perusal: and for this reason,
because they have been trained to read them through coloured
Presbyterian spectacles. No wonder therefore that the Baptists
have made so little progress in Scotland. But there have been
intimations of late that the eyesight is becoming stronger, clearer,
and more single, and that ere long the spectacles will in a great
measure be laid aside. Then will come the triumph of the Baptists.
“It will be found, we believe,” says our erudite Dr., “ that
Anabaptism proves most successful where there is little spiritual
life.” This is followed by a train of such excessively childish
remark, that it is really not worth the trouble of exposing i
puerility. At length we come to the following, which we quote fo


the amusement of our readers : “We look forward however to the
spread of this peculiar leaven (Anabaptism) among the excitable
people of this colony. Many of the causes which have fostered its
growth in republican America exist here, and will produce the same
sort of fruit. To a sad extent our fellow colonists are impatient of
restraint and fond of novelty. They soon weary of the grave and
solid preaching of our venerable system of doctrine. They long for
variety. Anything new is attractive, provided it be drest in silken
attire. They recoil from the quiet and massive grandeur of a
laborious preaching of the mystery of godliness, and prefer the
light and airy movements of a system that pleases their senses,
without taxing their ability to think. To the seeming plausibility
of the doctrine, there is added the solemn fascination of the public
baptistry , the fitting garb, and the effectual plunge. We observe that
this interesting ceremony is always reserved for Sabbath evening,
when the general public may have an opportunity of witnessing the
scene, and reaping some benefit from the imposing formalities of
immersion That hundreds of susceptible minds
will conceive it to be their duty to seek to be rebaptized, and to
attach themselves to a church which thus woos their sympathies, we
regard as certain as the effect of a lullaby on a restless childT !! !
The italics in the above extract are ours, fearing lest our readers
should not be sufficiently arrested by its beauties. We suppose
however that this is to be regarded as a specimen of the little
playful sentimental fun to which this Presbyterian giant occasionally
descends, when he wants a frolic. And what can we do with it 1
To attempt to answer it is out of the question. We could laugh at
it, but for another feeling, we shall not name, which represses the
tendency. But if we are to infer from this style of writing, the
character of the quiet and massive grandeur which distinguishes the
laborious preaching to be heard in Chalmers’ Church, we do not
wonder that people “ soon weary of it.” And it is to be hoped for
the honour and credit of the Baptist churches in this colony that
they will be long ignorant of it.
We are then told that “ one of the pernicious consequences of
Anabaptism is, not the proselytes it allures from other churches, but
the utter indifference about the baptism of children with which it
infects the community at large.” In support of this we are referred
to some statistics of the Presbyterian churches in America. And
this is spoken of in the most lugubrious strain, as “a melancholy fact,”
as “ a disastrous blight,” as “an alarming state of things,” as “ a
desolating calamity,” as revealing “ churches deformed,” as poor
“ Rachel weeping for her children and refusing to be comforted
because they are not.” Appalling!! and all attributed to “ the
specious error ”of Anabaptism. What funny creatures we are ! It
is really surprising how differently we look at the same facts. What
excites terror in this distressed and afflicted Divine, inspires us with


joy as a cheering indication of a very hopeful state of things,
though we have no doubt we shall be stigmatised as having “no
love for the lambs of the great Shepherd’s flock.”
Passing however from America, let us ask a few questions about
Scotland. Has not the same effect revealed itself there 1 Did not
some facts come to the knowledge of the Free Church sometime ago,
awakening a feeling of solicitude on this subject 1 Did not this in-
formation prompt to serious investigation, as to the extent to which
this state of things prevailed 1 Did not that investigation result in
a painful conviction that the evil prevailed more widely than was
supposed 1 And was it not a question of solemn consideration as to
the means by which the supposed evil might be arrested 1 We did
receive some intelligence of this kind from a Scotchman in this
colony a few years ago. But we should be glad to be more accur-
ately informed. If however these be facts, what can be the cause of
them 1 It cannot be Anabaptism. For this writer tells us proudly,
that Anabaptist opinions have never had much success in Scotland.
Then we must search for another cause. And may it not be, that
the people are becoming less trammelled by the dogmas of theology,
and are opening their minds more eagerly to the plain simple teach-
ing of the New Testament. If so, instead of crying about it, Dr.,
like poor Rachel, it ought to be a source of gladness.
We have occupied more space than we intended with this first
article • but we wished to give our readers a specimen of the erudite
thinking, the classical writing, and the finished elegance we have
to encounter in this unanswerable pamphlet. We shall therefore
pass over much of the declamatory rhetoric and inflated arrogance
with which it abounds, and confine ourselves more to the salient
points of the subject.
11. INFANT BAPTISM.
r This amiable writer, this professor of Christian love, this model of
meekness and gentleness, whose sensibilities are so delicate, as to be
tortured to anguish, because we dare to suspect his pretensions to
charity, starts out in his second article by saying that “ the church
of the Anabaptists is a family without children, a monstrous economy
to be seen or heard of nowhere else, either in heaven above, or in
earth beneath.” What a pity he did not advance a step farther to
complete the climax ! Nothing can this holy Divine say about us,
but in the most offensive spirit, and in the most insulting language.
No sooner do the Anabaptists loom on his vision then he starts as at
a spectre, and in an agony of terror, he shrieks out Monstrous !
And yet he thinks he ought to be dealt with as gently and
as gingerly as a languid lady. But we know our duty and we intend
to do it though we expect a tornado of abuse, and a whirlwind of
passion. We await the storm however with perfect composure. Such


a writer is not to be encountered on the ordinary terms of Christian
chivalry, when he spurns all the honours of the list. He spares no
one when his wrath is up, and we will not spare him. We have
devoted ourselves to the task of chastising him for his insolence; and
until he lay aside these airs of offensive consequence we will do it
again.
To proceed then. After being informed thatthe Anabaptist theory
originates in an “ erroneous view of the composition or constituent
elements of the visible church,” we are told that “ the term church
is from the Greek word oikos, a house.” On reading this sentence, we
looked again, and were amazed especially at this coming from a Dr.,
of “ distinguished erudition.” In our simplicity, and making no
pretensions to erudition, we thought that the term church came from
kuriakos, and that it had no more to do with the word oikos a house ,
than it has to do with the word ippos a horse. And every tyro in
Greek is acquainted with the fact that the word church is not an
exact equivalent of the word ekklesia, which is invariably rendered
church in the New Testament, but which ought to have been ren-
dered by the word congregation or assembly , or some other of analo-
gous meaning, and does not mean the “ house of God.” We are
however further informed that “ the family is synonymous with the
church.” What really can be done with the loose and astounding
statements of such a writer? What does he mean 1 Does he mean
that the term family is synonymous with the term church ! If there
is any definite signification to be attached to words, it is nothing of
the sort. Does he then mean that the constitution of things repre-
sented by the word family is synonymous with the constitution of
things represented by the word church 1 If so, it is a gross gramma-
tical blunder. Or does he mean that any father with the wife and
children making up a family is synonymous with the church 1 Then it
is not only a grammatical blunder, but an unscriptural absurdity. But
what does he mean 1 Can he tell himself 1 There is an ambiguity in
the word “ family •” there is an ambiguity in theword “ synonymous
there is an ambiguity in the word “ church.” And this is the sort
of thing we have incessantly to encounter in these precious papers.
We continually want an interpreter. That the Christian congrega-
tion is sometimes figuratively compared to a family, of which God is
the Father, the members of which are brethren, and Christ the first-
born, every one knows who is familiar with the Christian Scrip-
tures. But that the term family is synonymous with the term
church no one knows who knows anything with accuracy.
After this follow a number of pages in reference to which we de-
clare in all seriousness that we have never met in the whole course
of our reading with such a tissue of strange statements, incoherent
sentences, dogmatic assertions, gratuitous assumptions, confusions of
thought, written in so haughty and dictatorial a style, and all inter-
larded with such a variety of contemptuous expressions of the Ana-


baptists as would be enough to provoke an archangel. We shall
not attempt to follow him through his perplexities and confusions,
but we shall simply apply some tests to his inflated fabric and cause
it to vanish away of itself. Of course we do not expect to make
any impression on those who wish to believe what this self-complacent
writer has told them, but yet there is a thoughtful class who have
not lost their reverence for the Word of God, and who will bow to its
dictates in preference to the dicta of even a Dr. of Divinity. To that
class we make our appeal. We propose, then, the following topics
for inquiry, by which we may test the assertions of Dr. Cairns.
Ist. What is the Church of Christ 1 ?
2nd. Of whom is it composed 1 and
3rd. What are the requirements of character as conditions of ad-
mission into the church 1 ?
These points will cover the ground of this poor, flimsy defence of
infant baptism.
Ist. There are few words which have occasioned greater confusion
of thought than the word church. It is well known not to be, as
we have observed, an exact equivalent of the word ekklesia of the
New Testament, which would be more accurately represented by the
word convocation than congregation or assembly. (See Trench’s
Synonyms of the New Testament.) There is, however, no help for
us but to use it, and providing the sense in which it is employed
be clearly defined, it will involve us in no perplexity. The term
church , then, in the New Testament is used in reference to the dis-
ciples of Christ as called by God out of the world into a state of
separation from it, and of mutual association with one another to
subserve each others’ interests and to promote the Divine glory.
Any one may easily attest the correctness of this definition by a com-
parison of the numerous passages where the word occurs. But the
church, in its comprehensive sense, is presented in different lights,
according to the aspect under which its members are contemplated.
Sometimes they are regarded as in subjection to the authority of
Christ as their King, then the church is figuratively regarded as a
kingdom —the kingdom of God, of Christ, and of heaven. Some-
times they are regarded as children, the children of God, the sons of
God; then it is represented under the figure of a family, or house-
hold. Sometimes they are considered as sheep under the superin-
tendence of the Good Shepherd ; then the church is spoken of as a
flock, the “ flock of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood.” Then they are regarded as living stones in a living edifice,
each one inhabited by the Spirit j then it is figuratively compared
to a temple. It is thus exhibited under these various aspects, ac-
cording to the various relations which its members sustain. These
representations, then, may help us to a definite conclusion as to
2nd. The persons of whom the church is composed ; and the New
Testament, and not Presbyterian theology, shall be our guide. The


church at Jerusalem was composed of those who had “gladly received
the word,” who “ had believed ” and were “ saved.” The church at
Rome is addressed as “ saints,” as “ the beloved of God,” as
“ dead to sin but alive to God,” as being “ freed from sin,
and the servants of righteousness,” and as having “ received
the spirit of adoption.” The members of the church at Corinth
are said to “be sanctified in Christ Jesus,” to be “ called into
the fellowship of Christ,” as having “ received the grace of God by
Jesus Christ,” as having “ the Spirit of God dwelling in them,” and
as “ washed, sanctified, and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus.”
The church at Ephesus is addressed as composed of the “ faithful in
Christ Jesus,” as “ those who are quickened from death,” as “ saved
by grace through faith,” as “ fellow citizens with the saints.” The
fact is, we might go through the whole of the Epistles and we should
meet in them all with statements in perfect unison with these. The
evidence therefore thus adduced sustains the position that the
churches of the New Testament were composed of spiritual persons
—of believers—of those who were in Christ Jesus, and were saved.
And if any gained admission into them who were not so, yet it was
under the pretension that they were so. Hence, if any so acted as
to invalidate the pretension, they were excluded. The apostles
knew nothing of the distinction of the visible and invisible church.
That is a mere theological dogma, invented to buttress up a system.
The parables of the Tares and the Fishing-net, on which this system
is principally based, are susceptible of an interpretation contributing
to it no support.
3rd. The requirements of character then for admission into the
church are obvious. If the church is composed of saints, of
the saved, of the washed, the sanctified, the justified, the reconciled,
then they must have faith in Christ, for over and over again, in every
variety of phrase, those privileges and blessings are represented as
the portion of believers only. If the church is compared to a
kingdom of which Christ is the king, the subjects of this kingdom
must be subject to Christ, they must partake of feelings in
harmony with the spirit and constitution of the kingdom. They
must have new hearts and right spirits. They must be born again,
for “ except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of
God.” They must be converted, “for except ye be converted,”
says Christ, “ye cannot enter the kingdom of heaven.” They
must be poor in spirit, for only of such is it said, “ theirs is the
kingdom of heaven.” If the church is compared to a family, and
is designated “ the household of God,” those who constitute the
family must be “ brought nigh by the blood of Christ,” they must
be sons of God by being born of God; they must be led by the
spirit, for only such are the sons of God. They must be the
children of God by faith in Jesus Christ. They must cease to be
the children of the devil, and become the children of God. And


yet this writer would introduce into this kingdom and this family
those whom his standards tell him are “ unclean,” “ corrupt,”
“ conceived in sin and shapen in iniquity,” “ utterly indisposed,
disabled, and made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all
evil,” “ children of wrath,” “ bound over to the wrath of God, and
curse of the law.” Beautiful consistency ! The Anabaptist theory
has nothing like that! If the church is compared to a body of
which Christ is the Head, the members must be united to it by a
living principle, and must be actuated by the same spirit, for
“ there is one body and one spirit.” If to a vine, then those who
compose it must be “in Christ,” as the branch is in the vine ; and
must abide in him, and “ his words abide in them,” in order to their
bringing forth fruit. The fact is, every representation given of the
church literal or figurative is based on the assumption of a real change
of heart, of principle, and of character, and of a direct personal
interest in Christ through faith. But this theologian would intro-
duce into the church on system those whom his Confession tells him
are in a state of condemnation and death ; whom nevertheless he
calls “ children of the family, lambs of the flock, branches of the
olive tree.” If the economy of the Anabaptists is monstrous, yet
not quite so monstrous as that, Dr. But still in your eyes it is a
“ beautiful constitution which our hypothesis destroys.” No wonder !
This writer informs us that “ the church is composed of the
believer and his seed.” What church 1 ? We suppose he means the
Church of Christ. What seed 1 The seed of Abraham extended
down for nearly fifty generations as the church of the Old Testa-
ment, and they were members of that church, as it is called, by
virtue of their lineal descent from their great ancestor, without
respect to character. The majority of them became idolatrous,
unbelieving, rebellious, and at length they rejected Christ; but as
long as that constitution continued, they were still in what this
writer callsthe church. Does this theologian then mean that the Church
of Christ is composed of the believer and his posterity 1 He must mean
that, otherwise his parallel is destroyed as derived from the Abrahamic
constitution. But a believer’s posterity may branch into twenty
directions, and may survive through many generations ; they may
become infidels, atheists, heathens, yea, the most wicked and
depraved, as many of the descendants of Abraham became, yet
being “ the seed of a believer,” according to this theory, they are
still in the church. Admirable theology ! “ Beautiful constitution ! ”
Be gustibus, &c., Dr.
He further tells us, “ the child belongs to the church in virtue of
the faith of its parent.” Who told him so % We suppose his
“ theology.” We are sure the Christian Scriptures did not. And
then he says scornfully, “ It is the task of the Anabaptist to prove
that God has altered this constitution of his church.” Then we
will prove it to the satisfaction of every unprejudiced and reverent


reader of the New Testament, who can but forget his “ theology,”
in a profound deference to the Word of God. The church of the
Old Testament consisted of all who were lineally descended from
Abraham ;* the church of the New is limited exclusively to those
who have the faith of Abraham. The former was the church of God
according to the flesh ; the latter is the church of God according to
the spirit. The one was the type, the other the antitype. If so
the constitution must have been altered. The whole design of the
epistle to the Hebrews was to illustrate this. Now for our proofs.
When the Pharisees and Sadducees came to John to be baptized, on
the ground of their being the children of Abraham, he accosted
them as a generation of vipers, and bade them “ bring forth fruits
meet for repentance. Think not to say within yourselves we have
Abraham to our Father, for God is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham. And now also the axe is laid unto the
root of the trees, therefore every tree that bringeth not forth good
fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire. I indeed baptize you
with water unto repentance; but He that cometh after me is
mightier than I, He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and
with fire. Whose fan is in his hand, and he shall throughly purge
his floor, and gather his wheat into the garner, but he will burn up
the chaff with unquenchable fire.” Is there no intimation here of an
essential alteration of the component elements of the church 1 On
one occasion some of the Pharisees said proudly, “We are
Abraham’s seed.” “ I know that ye are Abraham’s seed,”
said Christ. “Abraham is our Father,” said they. “Jesus
said unto them, if ye were Abraham’s children, ye would do
the works of Abraham. But now ye seek to kill me, a man that
hath told you the truth, which I have heard of God. This did not
Abraham.” Intimating most clearly that whatever might be their
lineal relationship to Abraham, that henceforth those only would
be regarded as the children of Abraham, who were animated by
his spirit and did his works, —a spirit under the influence of which
they would receive the truth “he had heard from God.” In har-
mony with this is the argument of the Apostle in the second of
Romans, “ Behold thou art called a Jew, and restest in the law ;
and makest thy boast of God,” &c. But he virtually tells the Jew
that the constitution of things is changed from the letter to the
spirit, and that circumcision and uncircumcision make no difference.
“ For he is not a Jew (now) who is one outwardly, neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh. But he is a Jew who
is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit,
and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God.”
Then take the passage in the fourth of Romans. It is somewhat
long but we must quote it. 9 —17. “Cometh this blessedness
then upon the circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision also I
* Though we use the word church here, it is with demur.


For we say that faith’was, reckoned unto Abraham for righteousness.
How was it then reckoned ? when he was in circumcision, or in un-
circumcision 1 Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision. And
he received the sign of circumcision, a seal (an attestation) of the
righteousness of the faith which he had yet being uncircumcised,
that he might he the father of all them that believe , though they be
not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to them also.
And the father of circumcision to them who are not of the circum-
cision only, hut who also walk in the steps of that faith of our father
Abraham which he had being yet uncircumcised. For the promise
that he should be the heir of the world, was not to Abraham or to
his seed through the law but through the righteousness of faith.
For if they who are of the law be heirs, faith is made void, and the
promise is made of none effect. Therefore it is of faith that it
might be by grace, to the end that the promise might be sure to
all the seed, not to that only which is of the law hut to that also
which is of the faith of Abraham.” We have underlined those
sentences on which we wish the attention of the reader to be fixed.
And we appeal to any one who will fairly look at this passage,
whether the truth intended to be conveyed by it is not this, that
faith is the great principle under the present economy, which deter-
mines any relationship to Abraham, as the father of them that believe ;
and constitutes the exclusive condition of an interest in that blessedness
which resultsfrom the righteousness which was reckoned to Abraham.
Not however, the faith of parents, but the faith of individuals. “No
sophistry,” says our opponent, “ can darken this counsel to an un-
biassed mind.” Then why attempt it, Dr., for the glaring sophistry
is yours, not ours, inasmuch as not a word is said in the passage
about the children of believing parents being included in the cove-
nant, which is the purpose for which you quote it. You say
further, “ Upon this ground, distinctly on this ground, and with
a view to realizing this blessed hope, God commanded the children
of believers should be circumcised.” Where 1 not in the Bible.
You are in a theological dream Dr. As to the passage you quote, “ I
will establish my covenant between me and thy seed after thee.”
What has that to do with it 1 It does not say a word about the
children of believers being circumcised either directly or indirectly.
Well might logic, we say again, make you “ shudder.”
But further, in the ninth of Romans the Apostle says, “ Neither
because they are the seed of Abraham are they all children, but in
Isaac shall thy seed be called. That is, they which are the child-
ren of the flesh, these are not the children of God.” But they
were once, not now. Which proves that the constitution is altered.
“ The children of the promise are now counted for the seed.” And
in the epistle to the Galatians, we are told in language clear as
the light, who the children of the promise are. Not the chil-
dren of believers, as this writer would have us suppose, but believers


themselves. “ Know ye therefore, that they which are of faith the
same are the children of Abraham So then they which
be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham That the
blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through
faith Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises
made. He saith not, and to seeds, as of many; but as of one.
And to thy seed, which is Christ.” Obviously Christ, and his seec 1 .
. ... “ For ye are all the children of God by faith in Jesus Christ,
and if ye be Christ’s then are ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs accord-
ing to the promise.” Thus teaching as lucidly as language can
teach, that the constitution is altered, that it has passed from the
literal to the spiritual ; from the type to the antitype; from a system
of prefigurations to a system of realities. And the language in
Hebrews quoted from Jeremiah, bears on the same topic. God had
made a covenant with Israel after the flesh. “ But he says I will
make a new covenant This is the covenant that I will make
with the house of Israel, saith the Lord, I will put my laws into
their minds, and write them in their hearts ; and I will be to them a
God, and they shall be my people.” Who shall be his people]
Obviously those, and only those, in whose minds he should put his
laws, and in whose hearts, he should write them. If there is no
change in the covenant then there is no meaning in words.
“ Baptism,” this writer tells us, “ occupies that place under the
gospel economy, which belonged to circumcision in previous dis-
pensations.” What dispensations ] And who told him so ] Not
the New Testament, and till it does we shall not believe it. “It
is a sign, ”he says, “of faith in the covenant.” Who told him so ]
Not the New Testament. “It seals to believers the benefits of the
covenant.” Who told him so ] His theology, and not the New
Testament. The Spirit is said to seal believers. Baptism never.
The words of our Lord are then quoted. “Go teach all nations
baptizing them, &c.” “ The language of our Lord,” we are told, “is
quite precise, he orders them to teach and baptize nations.” Well,
Dr., do you teach the nations before you baptize them ] No, you bap-
tize first, and teach afterwards. Then you violate the orders of your
Lord. Did our Lord command his disciples to baptize nations as
such, irrespective of any qualifications ] Were they not first to make
them disciples ] You say that “ nations are families ; ” and then
you tell us that “ this farewell injunction of our Divine Master con-
cerns the baptism of families.” What a conclusion! If nations
are to be resolved into their constituent elements, why stop at fami-
lies ] are not families made up of individuals ] But do you baptize
families as parts of a nation ? You know you do not, you arbitrarily
limit baptism to the families of believing parents. How you can
infer your duty to do this from the commission of Christ, utterly
transcends all comprehension of ours.


We are then favoured with a picture of the olive tree, which is
utterly unworthy of any remarks for the purpose for which it is ad-
duced. We are however told that “ it is incredible that the children
of believing parents should be excluded from this sacred privilege of
baptism, without an express command to that effect from the mouth
of God.” In the name of common sense, why 1 If suchbaptism had
been a privilege granted to believers’ children under a previous
economy, and it was not intended to be granted under the present,
there would have been a necessity for such a command. But as it
is an entirely Christian institute, all that was needed was that the
proper subjects should be defined. If therefore God commands that
believers and only believers should be baptized, and does not com-
mand the children of believers to be baptized, does not that suffi-
ciently determine the course of conduct we are to pursue 1
But let that pass. We would however ask what benefits does
this “ sacred privilege ” confer on the children of our opponents
which are denied to our children who are strangers to it 1 Are they
regenerated by it 1 Are they visibly more blessed 1 Do they grow
up more obedient, more virtuous, more excellent, more holy 1 Does
a greater number of them afterwards believe in Christ, and become
more devoted to God than are to be found among the Baptists ?
Are theyadmittedtothe Lord’s Supper 1 or do they share in a greater
amount of ecclesiastical benefit than our children 1 In short we
should like this erudite defender of infant baptism to tell us wherein
these children of his family, these lambs of his flock, these tender
branches of his olive tree, about which he appears to us to expend so
much sentimental nonsense, are one iota better than the children, the
lambs, the branches of the Anabaptists, against whom he so superci-
liously sneers 1 He may tell us that by baptism his children are
brought into the covenant of grace. But he must prove it, before we
will believe it. If so, then we suppose that our children are left to
the uncovenanted mercies of God. So say the Puseyites. We can
assure him however that we are not alarmed. But in our judgment
there is far more of fancy in this “ sacred privilege,” than of truth
and fact.
We are then treated with the usual reference to the little children
who were brought to Christ, that he might bless them. One would
have thought that if the Saviour had intended that children were to
be baptized, seeing that our opponents have magnified it into such
transcendent importance, that this was just the occasion for the re-
ference to be made to it. But not a word did he utter on the subject.
Leaving out of consideration any criticism on the phrase, “of such is
the kingdom of God,” which pronoun this writer ought to know is
not a demonstrative but a correlative one, and has been understood to
mean by eminent critics who are not Baptists, “ of such as these,
that is, of such as resemble these, in a “ child-like spirit,” using
the words of Neander, “ free from pride and self-will, is the


kingdom of God.” And the correctness of this interpretation
is rendered highly probable by the subsequent verse in both Mark
and Luke. That the compassionate Christ should bless the little ones
when brought to him was only to be expected. And do Baptist
parents forbid little children from being brought to Christ any more
than Psedobaptist parents! Do they not recognize the blessing of
Christ on their offspring as most precious ! Do they not bring them
to him in faith and prayer and hope that he may bless them, as much
as the Presbyterians! or would this tender-hearted theologian brand
us with cruelty as well as treat us with scorn ! But what has the
bringing of the children to Christ that he may bless them, to do with
the bringing of them to the baptismal font ! If we do not baptize
our children, it is because we have no authority to do it.
We have then brought before us the language of Peter on the
day of Pentecost to the thousands pricked in their hearts, which
this writer quotes thus : “ Repent and be baptized every one of you
in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins
For the promise is unto you and your children,” &c. &c. What is
the meaning of this! Why leave out the subject of the pro-
mise ! Was there a design in it! We will quote it in full: “Repent
and be baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord Jesus for
the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost. For the promise is unto you and your children, and to all
afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.” Here the
subject of the promise is the Holy Ghost, not baptism, which is
nowhere spoken of as a subject of promise. And then as to the
word “ children.” This writer knows as well as any schoolboy
who can read his Bible, that the word children is used in multi-
tudes of instances in the Old and New Testament where it cannot
mean young children. Take such passages as the following, which
are exceedingly numerous : “ The children of wickedness shall no
more afflict thee.” “ The children of Benjamin did not drive out the
Jebusites.” “ The good seed are the children of the kingdom.”
“ The tares are the children of the wicked one,” &c. &c. Do these
expressions refer to infant children! No, and it does not refer to
them here. But to such as can repent, as can consciously receive
the remission of sins, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and as are
susceptible to the call which the Lord God may address unto them.
Can all this be asserted of infant children! It is added however
by this writer with a sort of proud exultation : “We know what
this means on our system, but on that of our opponents it is utterly
incomprehensible.” Yes, Dr., and we retort your own lan-
guage, “We know what this means on our system,” &c. You first
quietly assume the meaning of certain passages, and then you
proceed to extract from your own unsupported assumptions, the
smallest modicum of evidence you think you can obtain, shewing
the desperate shifts to which you are driven to support your theory.
B 2


We have then a reference to the following passage, “ The unbe-
lieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is
sanctified by the husband : else were your children unclean, but
now are they holy.” We here call attention to the statement, that
an unbeliever, while an unbeliever, whether husband or wife, is said
to be sanctified by the believing wife or husband ; and the children
springing from those mixed unions are said to be holy. We would
then ask this theologian if he means to say that the term sanctify
in this passage is used in the same sense, as it is when it is used of
believers, who are said to be sanctified through the truth and the
Spirit; and that the term holy is employed in the same sense as
when it is applied to the saints, who are called “ holy brethren 1 ”
In other words, does it mean a spiritual sanctification, and a
spiritual holiness ? If he does mean that, the whole doctrine of the
New Testament falsifies such an interpretation. Nay, the entire
doctrine of his own standards does so, which declare sanctifi-
cation to be “ through the virtue of Christ’s death and resurrection,
by his word and spirit,” while those children who are here said to be
holy are declared in the same standards to be “ unclean, unrighteous,
corrupt, and children of wrath.” If however he does not understand
these expressions in this sense, wherein do they serve his purpose ?
For if the persons thus mentioned are not spiritually sanctified and
holy, what have they to do in a church, the members of which are
said to be washed and sanctified, and justified, and reconciled, and
saved, and made the heirs of eternal life. One could wish that this
writer would tell us what he means, and not leave us in all the
uncertainties of ambiguity. He however concludes this vague and
indefinite article with the following specimen of bathos : “ Our
church is the good olive tree, consisting of the root and its branches,
conspicuous to every eye, the wonder and hope of the world.”
Enviable Presbyterians !! But hear what he says of us: “ The
church of the Anabaptists is a branchless stem, a fair body cruelly
mutilated. Rachel weeping for her children and refusing to be
comforted, because they are not.” Poor Rachel, in tears again!
If however our condition were as wretched as he imagines, one
would have thought that if his charity had corresponded with his
professions, he ought to have commiserated and prayed for us, and
not have insulted and abused us.
In this third article we are introduced to a philosophical dis-
quisition on prejudice, in which the writer quotes a well-known
commonplace of Lord Bacon. It is intended as a kind of preface to
an attempt “to describe the peculiar views of the Anabaptists as
the result of prejudice.” In which we are indulged with the follow-


ing erudite passage ; “In capacious and thoughtful minds ” —like
his own, we presume—“ the separating element is always kept
within the bounds of good taste and sound discretion lf the
capacity and thoughtfulness of this defender of the Psedobaptists’
faith are to be estimated by his “ good taste and sound discretion,” it
is not difficult to divine what will be the judgment of our readers.
“ The separating element,” he tells us, “is never permitted to assume
the place of a truth essential to salvation,” This is mean insinuation
the first. “It is asserted only at seasons and in ways when ‘duty
calls.” This is mean insinuation the second. “ But minds of a
feebler type take pains to magnify the baptismal text into a doctrine
of supreme importance.” This is mean insinuation the third.
“ They cannot keep it in the shade at any price, but must ever
parade it in the broadest glare of notoriety.” What beauty of
style ! This is mean insinuation the fourth. “ Their enthusiasm
for the Gospel is sometimes scarcely distinguishable from the fervour
of their sectarianism.” This is mean insinuation the fifth. “ Im-
mersion is their perpetual shibboleth, and the services of the
sanctuary can be so arranged, as that to the general public, one of
the holy sacraments of the church of Christ, may become almost as
imposing as a scenic display.” This is mean insinuation the sixth.
“ This unresting activity to propagate the dogma of anabaptism.”
This is mean insinuation the seventh. Pretty well this for a D.D.,
a Professor of C. C. in the Presbyterian College that is to be. But
as the professorship is a new one, we will translate the initials for
the benefit of our unlearned readers —Professor of Christian
Charity ! ! ! and if he should succeed in infusing his own spirit
against the Baptists into his pupils, the Baptists have a sore conflict
before them for many years to come. But really does this incipient
Professor know what Christian charity means 1 For this is Christian
charity demented. We always thought in our simplicity that one
of its peculiarities is “to rejoice in the truth.” But in these pages
it seems to rejoice in falsehood, and in mean, low, vulgar insinua-
tions.
But he goes on. “ That infants are members by adoption of
the spiritual Israel is also certain.” Certain ! what, when they are
declared in his own Confession to be “ unclean,” “ corrupt,” “ de-
praved,” “ unrighteous.” Does this writer think we are going to
take his assertion for gospel, and his “theology” for scripture 1 ?
“ And will not be disputed, ” he says. Why, millions have disputed
it, because it is false. The New Testament conveys no such senti-
ment. “To prove from Scripture,” we are told, “ that they were
excluded from the church by the very fulfilment of the promise
given to Abraham and his seed, will task the ingenuity of our
opponents, and gain them credit for nothing but persistency.” We
shall see. We are then informed that “ a church of adults is
not discoverable in the Bible.” But a church of believers is,


and that is all we need. “We thank God, ”he adds, “that the
gospel has not diminished the privileges of his people, nor revo-
lutionized the organic character of the household of faith.” We
are very glad to know that he thanks God for anything ; only
our pleasure would have been increased, had his gratitude been
more intelligent and scriptural. “It were an equivocal compliment
of the Christian system,” he says, “to say' of it that the children
of believers were deprived of the official standing enjoyed by them
under preceding and less glorious dispensations.” What mortal
man ever heard before of children enjoying an official standing
under any dispensation 1 What office have they ever filled 1
Have they been priests, or prophets, or apostles, or pastors,
or ministering spirits, or what have they been 'I We wait for
a reply, unless we are to regard this as a specimen of sub-
lime erudition, far beyond the reach of ordinary minds. Or
perhaps we may be tol(j it is “ a mistake of ignorance, that is all.
We have then, a vague, incoherent paragraph on the Covenants,
which is about as perspicuous as an object seen through a mist. We
refer to it here for the purpose of a quotation, “ Behold, I and the
children Thou hast given me,” and which is appropriated with the
most perfect sang froid to infant children, though this writer ought
to know that the term children is more frequently applied to adults
in the Bible than to infants. But this is a specimen of his gratui-
tous assumptions wherever he meets with the word children. He
further says, “In this solemn transaction parents acted for their
children.” What solemn transaction 'I for he has been speaking of
four covenants. “ The parent,” he tells us, “ made for the child a
profession of faith, and a promise of obedience.” When! Oh,
that we could but catch this writer giving us something like valid
evidence for the truth of his assertions. Are we to rest in the con-
clusion that it is not convenient 1 or, that he thinks his assertion
enough 1 But from the drift of his remarks, we are led to infer
that the same thing takes place at baptism. Well, when a parent
makes “ profession of faith for the child,” whose faith is it 1 Is
it the father’s faith '( and is his faith considered as imputed to the
child 1 or, is it a profession of the child’s faith ? because it is in-
capable of making the profession for itself. Or, is it a profession
of the future faith of the child 1 If so, it is a profession founded
on most deplorable ignorance. But the parent “ promised obedi-
ence.” Whose obedience is it 1 Is it the parent’s obedience that
is promised, as the substitute of the child 1 Or is it that the child
shall hereafter become obedient 1 If so, it is an awful presumption.
It is a promise without a guarantee. But we are told that “ the
parent introduced the child into the covenant.” In the preceding
paragraph', however, he says, “ The covenant with Abraham included
all his natural descendants,” &c. If so, then they were born in the
covenant. How then can the parent, by a second act, introduce his


child into a covenant into which he was born. But to be in the
covenant is obviously the same as to be in the family. At page 9,
however, he tells us virtually that the child is born into the family,
it is not initiated into it. But at page 15, we are told that infants are
“members by adoption of the spiritual Israel.” Is not then “adoption”
an act of initiation 1 What mystery, and perplexity, and confusion
have we here ! We have, first, children born into a covenant; then,
afterwards, introduced by the parent into the covenant. And, be-
sides this, we have children born into the family, and then adopted
into the spiritual Israel, but not initiated into it. What a singular
spirit of contradiction ! “ Distinguished erudition” again !! Then
we are told that “ circumcision was the seal of the covenant.”
Where does this writer find this 1 In his “ theology,” we presume,
not in Scripture. There is not a passage from the beginning of
Genesis to the end of Revelation which represents “ circumcision”
as a seal of any covenant. The apostle tells us in one passage that
Abraham received “ circumcision as a seal or attestation of a doc-
trine, viz., of justification by faith.” But he spoke of it only as a
seal to Abraham himself and to no one else. Baptism too is called
a seal of the covenant. But the Scriptures do not call it so. It
never has been a seal, and it never can be without an explicit revela-
tion from heaven. It seals nothing. These phrases get into theo-
logical systems to support a theory. They are quietly taken for
granted, without any investigation, as meaning something, when
they mean nothing. Hence they are repeated without thought,
when they are words and nothing more.
But this writer talks of a parent who “ enters into covenant with
God.” This is obviously a pet phrase with him. It is clear, how-
ever, that he derives it from his “ little more theology,” and not
from the Bible. Did Adam, did Noah, did Abraham, did Moses,
did the Israelites enter into a covenant with God 1 If so, when,
or where 1 There is not a passage in the whole Scriptures, as far
as we have examined, where man is represented, using a legal
phrase, as the covenantor and God as the covenantee. But God is
always the Covenantor, man never. The only two or three passages
which seem to militate against this assertion, are, first, the one in
Deut. xxix. 11 : “Ye stand this day, all of you, before the Lord
your God, your captains, your elders, your officers, your little ones,
Ac., that thou shouldst enter into covenant with the Lord thy God,
Ac.” But, let any one look at the original, and he will see at a
glance that the literal rendering of the passage is, “ in order to thy
passing into the covenant of the Lord thy God,” and not with the
Lord thy God, which is a very different thing, and this is the ren-
dering of the Septuagint. The second passage is, 50th Psalm, ver.
5, “ Gather My saints together unto Me, those who have made a
covenant with Me by sacrifice.” Turn again to the original, and
the literal rendering will be found to be, “ Those who have made, or


ratified, my covenant upon sacrifice.” Whatever the meaning may-
be, it affords no support to the notion of making, or entering into
a covenant vnth God. And then Hezekiah is represented as saying
(2 Chron. xxix. 10), “ Now it is in my heart to make a covenant
with the Lord God of Israel.” But the preposition (lamed) there
rendered with never signifies with except as denoting the cause or
author of anything, and that in very few instances of the later
Hebrew ; but it refers to that for which anything is done. The
desire of Hezekiah, therefore, was to make a covenant with the
Levites and his people, unto, or for, or in respect to the Lord God
of Israel, that his fierce wrath might turn away from them. What
comes then of this writer’s phrase of “ entering into a covenant
with God.” It sounds to us very much like presumption. It is
for us reverently to bow in submission to the Divine will, as that
is revealed in the covenant or arrangement under which God has
placed us, and not for us sinful and guilty creatures to talk of
entering into an arrangement with God.
“ It is objected,” we are told, “that the Old dispensation was ex-
ternal, typical, and ceremonial, whereas the New is spiritual. Under
the Old it is urged natural birth was the condition of membership.”
And does not this writer say so over and over again 1 “ Whereas
under the New, spiritual birth and saving faith are the conditions.”
This he denies, and says that the children of believing parents are
born into the church. Proof however he gives none. “ When a
Hebrew parent,” he says, “ presented his child for circumcision he
made a profession of the true religion, and the promise of spiritual
obedience.” He did nothing of the sort. The thing is prepos-
terous and absurd. Where do the Scriptures say this 1 Think of
thousands and tens of thousands of rebellious idolatrous Israelites
promising spiritual obedience ! when they circumcised their children.
“ What God authorised and commanded Jewish parents to do for
their children,” we are informed, “ is precisely what Anabaptists say
Christian parents have no right to do for their children.” The Ana-
baptists say that they have a right to do what God has commanded
them to do, and nothing more. But he has not commanded them
to promise “ spiritual obedience” for their children, simply because
he is a merciful and a righteous God, and does not exact from us
impossibilities. “ Spiritual obedience” indeed ! We scarcely dare
promise it for ourselves, without trembling diffidence, much less can
we promise it for our children. “It is not merely,” says our oppo-
nent, “ that Christian parents may do, what Jewish parents were
allowed to do, but they are bound to do it.” That is, we are to
present our children for circumcision and “ promise spiritual
obedience.” Beautiful theology! “ They violate,” he says, “ one of
the most important of their obligations, if they fail to present their
children for baptism.” Miserable sinners ! that we are. But who
authorised this dictator to say so. “It seems impossible,” we are


told, “to misapprehend the bearing of the Abrahamic covenant on
the question ; and yet it is misapprehended in a manner which
excites our surprise.” Yea, Dr., it is. You have supplied us with
the positive proof, we need no other.
We have then a long paragraph on the covenant of grace, with
respect to which this writer says, “It is objected that circumcision
was the seal of the national covenant made with Abraham, that it
was intended to mark the nationality of his descendants, and to
secure their interest in the national promises made to the patriarch.”
“ The fact is,” he says, “ that God made to Abraham three great pro-
mises ; first, that he should be a blessing, or that all the nations
should be blessed in him or in his seed. Then and in subordination
to this, that his posterity should be exceedingly numerous ; and that
his descendants should inherit the land of Canaan.” This then is
the covenant of grace, and we are told that this covenant continues,
and that we are under the same covenant. Is it so ? Is it pro-
mised that in our offspring all the nations shall be blest ? That our
offspring shall be exceedingly numerous? and that our offspring
shall inherit the land of Canaan ? If not, then we are not under
that part of the covenant at least. A change therefore has taken
place somewhere. As far as the covenant made with Abraham had
a reference to Christ providing and offering spiritual blessings to
men, it was limited as much under that dispensation to those who
believed, and who walked in the steps of their father Abraham, as
under the present gracious arrangement when the same blessings are
provided and offered to them that believe. It was then as it is now,
“ those who were of faith were blessed with believing Abraham,”
and no other. And on that principle of thus securing salvation
through faith, Abraham received circumcision as a seal, or an attes-
tation of this great truth, which was to be a continual memorial
unto all his descendants, that those who believed with Abraham,
their faith should be counted to them for righteousness, just as it
was counted to him. What nonsense it is therefore of this writer
to talk of the “hypothesis of the Anabaptists being absolutely
untenable.” “No man,” he says, “ ever was circumcised who did
not thereby profess faith in the Abrahamic covenant, and no child
was presented by its parents for circumcision in whose behalf a pro-
fession of faith was not thereby made,” which is as gratuitous an
assertion as was ever penned, without a particle of evidence to,
support it. No profession of faith is anywhere recorded ; and no
profession of faith was ever required. The law was that every
man-child of the stock of Abraham, and every male born in the
house of an Israelite, or bought with money of any stranger not of
his seed, was to be circumcised. And as Abraham had received
circumcision as an attestation of the great doctrine of justification
by faith, so it continued as a memorial throughout the Jewish dis-
pensation of that great truth, though multitudes disregarded that


truth. But as to any profession of faith in the Abrahamic covenant
being required, it is simply hooked in to support the author’s theory.
Every male child descending from Abraham was to be circumcised
without any reference to the father’s faith.
“ The idea of our opponents,” we are told, “ that under the old
dispensation the church was an external society, membership with
which depended on natural birth, whereas under the new it is a
spiritual society in which membership depends on spiritual birth, is
altogether chimerical and unscriptural.” Indeed ! The Jews were
a nation, placed under a given constitution, involving religious
privileges of a high and sacred character, and all the descendants
of Abraham were embraced within the limits of that constitution,
and were entitled to its privileges. There is nothing, we presume,
chimerical in that. But “ under the new dispensation the church is
a spiritual society in which membership depends on spiritual birth.”
The chimera then we conclude is there. But Christ says, “ Except
a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God.” “ Except
ye be converted and become as little children, ye shall not enter the
kingdom of heaven.” Are these statements of our Lord
chimerical ? Are they not plain enough 1 To avert the conse-
quences however of these simple words, a distinction is invented
between the visible and invisible church, of which the New Testa-
ment says nothing. It is a “ theological ” distinction to serve a
purpose, that is all. “No one,” it is said, “ was a member of the
true church of old who was not a Jew internally.” Every indivi-
dual, we reply, of the seed of Abraham was a member of the
commonwealth of Israel, and was entitled to its privileges without
any reference to his being a Jew internally. “ Then as now,” we
are told, “ the children of professing parents were by divine com-
mand recognised as church members.” Then as now, we say, all
the children of the Jews, without any regard to the profession of
their parents, were recognised as members of the Jewish economy.
Now the children of professing parents are nowhere in the New
Testament recognised by divine command as members of the Chris-
tian church. “ Children,” this writer tells us, “ are as much born
within the church as they were under the Patriarchal or Mosaic
dispensation.” Children are not born in the church at all, and it is
a gross impertinence to assert it, and if they get there it can only
be on the profession of the new birth, and of their faith in Christ
Jesus. “ Church membership,” it is further said, “ had always been
the birthright of the children of believing parents.” Church mem-
bership has never been the birthright of believing parents, as such.
One assertion, we suppose, is as good as another, unless this
divine is invested with credentials of some supernatural authority
denied to ordinary mortals. “ The neglect of infant baptism,” we
are gravely informed, “is therefore the rejection of these benefits.”
Dr., we ask you again, can you tell us of one single benefit which


your Presbyterian children possess, of which our children, by not
being baptized, are deprived. Here is the chimera, Dr. It is what
some people would call moonshine.
We had reached nearly the 20th page before we ascertained that
the successive paragraphs of this third article in the series were an
abstract of a paper in the British and Foreign Quarterly Review,
and which first appeared in the Princeton Review, We suppose it is
this that has made our opponent so very bold. He calls it very
masterly.” Well, we have read it, and as a defence of the theory
it assumes, it is good enough in its way. And those may think it
<£ masterly ” who are fascinated by the same views. in our
judgment, it is false in its premises, it is false in its logic, it is
false in its analogies. Many parts of it, too, are pervaded with
most mystifying ambiguities, and not a few with nothing but pure
assumptions. It is, however, written in the style of a gentleman
and a Christian, which is more than can be asserted of much in this
pamphlet, and if this is the best that can be done on infant member-
ship, the Baptists may very quietly compose themselves, from a
conviction that their ground is undisturbed by any logical earth-
quake. The pompous note of this writer is quite after his order.
By the way Dr. Hodge, once the chief in the theological department
of the Princeton Review , holds very different sentiments on the
Abrahamic covenant from the above reviewer, and more in harmony
with our own. See the number for October 1853. American Edn.
We do not intend to waste many words on this fourth article,
for it is not worth it. A few remarks must suffice. It begins
in the usually inflated style which seems to be congenial to this
writer’s tastes and self-complacency. When this sort of thing is
assumed, it may be generally set down as betraying a secret feeling ot
uneasiness, so that what such persons lack in argument, they en-
deavour to make up by the arrogance of their tone. This meek
and modest opponent tells us that “ he has never known of an Ana-
baptist who admitted the only matter of controversy, and grappled
with it in his discussions with an intelligent Psedobaptist. Invari-
ably as far as our experience goes,” he says, “ they mistake the
question, and divert attention from the real point to be established
by descanting on topics that are not relevant, or to the purpose.
The question at issue,” he adds, “ concerns the church-membership
of the infant children of believers.” We simply meet the question
by saying that the infant children of believers were never church
members. The use of such perplexing phraseology is an abuse of
words, tending to confound and not to enlighten, to bewilder and
not to convince. It is not difficult to detect the fallacy. The


Hebrew word hdhal , and the corresponding Greek word ekhlesia in
the Septuagint, are invariably applied to an assembly or congrega-
tion gathered together in some place, for any purpose whatever,
and so they are almost always rendered in our version. Now, while
the term church is used in the New Testament of separate organized
assemblies of Christians, yet it is also used of the whole incorporated
community of Christians on earth in voluntary subjection to Christ.
“He is Head over all things to the church.” But it is never used
with reference to the incorporated community of the Jews under
the theocracy. In that character they were called a nation , a people,
a politeia, rendered in our translation a commonwealth, “ The com-
monwealth of Israel.” That the infant children of the Jews, by
reason of their birth, were connected with this commonwealth of
Israel, and as they grew up to maturity, inherited all the civil, the
social, and the religious privileges which that constitution of things
involved, we admit, but to say on that account that they were church
members is an utter perversion of language. But those national
privileges they inherited not because they were the children of
believers ; for if their parents had been unbelievers, as we have before
said, it would have made no difference as to their natural rights.
To be members of a national polity was not to be church members.
And if they were never church members, how can they be deprived
of a privilege they never had 1 And if the constitution of things
under which they enjoyed any privileges at all has passed away, its
privileges have passed away with it. Does then that constitution
exist now 1 The question needs no reply. Another constitution
exists now, different from the former, under which churches are
formed, whose members have been born not “ of flesh, nor of blood,
nor of the will of man,” but are born of God, and those
who are thus born of God are stated to be believers
in Christ, —in whom they “ have redemption through His
blood, even the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his
grace.” If, therefore, the conditions of membership be such as
infants cannot perform, they are excluded by the very nature of the
constitution, a constitution which knows nothing of a religion by
proxy, or of admission into the church on the ground of a parent’s
faith. This may not be “ grappling” with the question in the estima-
tion of our erudite opponent. We do not, however, allow him to be
the judge in this matter ; we appeal to all thoughtful and right-minded
individuals who are desirous of knowing the truth. “ I speak as unto
wise men, judge ye what I say.”
This compassionate champion of Paedobaptism then indulges in a
strain of pathetic sadness, saying, “We know not with what feel-
ings the Anabaptist father looks on his infants excluded from a
household to which he himself belongs, and so far as privilege is con-
cerned, in the same position as the children of the outcast.” When
we read this passage, we honestly confess we could not forbear


laughing outright. However, we ask for the third time in all
seriousness, what one privilege do Presbyterian children possess
which the children of Baptist parents do not possess ? Can
we not bring them to the same Saviour ? Can we not present
them at His throne 1 Can we not with equal confidence invoke
His blessing? Can we not, as their minds expand, and their
faculties unfold, teach them the same truths, and train them to an
appreciation of the same blessings ?” In the same position as the
children of the outcast ! ! Poor Dr., what a warping, contracting,
perverting, thing is prejudice ! But really do spare your sorrow,
for we are above your pity.
It is not our intention to track the steps of our opponent among
the brakes of “historical testimony.” The few instances he has
gathered from the early periods of church history are surely meagre
and unsatisfactory enough. But it seems the fewer the better, for
silence he considers most valid evidence. We will, however, dis-
miss this subject by saying that when it is needful, where he can
produce one fact from the early church in favour of infant baptism,
we will engage to produce six in favour of the immersion of be-
lievers.
It seems from a note subjoined to this fourth paper, that after
branding the Baptists for being proselytizers, and propagandists,
that this writer wishes to try his hand at the sort of thing he so
strongly condemns, as he recommends “ a large order ” to be sent
home for an “ admirable production” for distribution in the neigh-
bourhood of Melbourne. This, however, is what the Baptists have
not done. But we tell him in all sincerity that we are glad of it,
very glad. It will set people thinking about it; and, by so doing,
they may find the way to the Hew Testament; that will be enough
for us.
V.—ON IMMERSION.
Our erudite antagonist next indulges us with an elaborate dis-
quisition on the mode of baptism ; and after some needless re-
marks on Divine adaptations, he preliminates three grand a priori
arguments, from which he infers that immersion cannot have a
Divine, and, therefore, must be of human origin. We will give
them for the amusement of our readers.
1. “ Whatever ceremony is not suited to the circumstances of
man in every part of the earth, and in every season of the year
may be presumed to be a human device, and not a Divine institu-
tion.” Admirable ! of course it follows that the Levitical institute
which was not adapted to the circumstances of man in every part
of the world, and in every season of the year, was a human device
and not a Divine institution. “ This principle,” he says, “ leads


us to suspect the authority claimed for the practice of immersion.”
2. “ Immersion,” he tells us, “ necessitates the change of raiment,
—another sign of its human paternity. Is it likely that God
would confer the privilege of baptism upon his people coupled with
such a condition as this V’ Triumphant! Therefore, the changes
of raiment which the successive ablutions imposed on the Levitical
priesthood, and on men and women undef certain circumstances,
were a sign of the human paternity of that arrangement. This is
about as good as anything Bishop Colenso has done, though not
half so plausible. It is setting up human reason as the test of
Divine revelation.
3. The third argument is derived from its indecency, “ Im-
mersion,” we are informed, “ mars the seemliness of the well-ordered
services of the sanctuary, and shocks the best feelings of the heart,
as an invasion of its solemn proprieties.” After this we have an
excessively silly description of a young lady, who had lived in an
atmosphere of hallowed purity, the tastes of whose opening mind
had been refined and sanctified by the study of the Bible, and a
habitual sense of the Saviour’s love ; in the bloom of whose early
womanhood she had moved about in her sphere of duty, an object
of affectionate regard to all who knew her ; the bright jewel of a
meek and quiet spirit, set by the congenial grace of an exquisite
delicacy. But at length this bright jewel clandestinely embraces the
vile doctrines of the Anabaptists, she offers herself for baptism, the
day of the ceremony arrives, and the picture is completed by the
introduction of this bright jewel's lover into the scene of the ser-
vice, where he sees her, who “in his eyes is the model of every
gentle grace, stripped of her seemly raiment, and clad in her bath-
ing gown,” &c. &c. We spare our readers the rest of this trash,
written, be it remembered, not by a youth of eighteen, who is just
trying his budding powers at description, but by an old man of
“ distinguished erudition.” This imaginary scene, however, of the
B.everend Doctor seems to awaken his disgust, his disgust kindles
into scorn, and his scorn at length explodes in the following burst
of rhetorical bombast —“ We assert that nothing short of a
voice from heaven, articulate, and unmistakeable, enjoining this
ordeal, could arrest indignation at its palpable .grossness, and in
the absence of such an order, right feeling revolts from it as an
unseemly thing, an offence against the modesty of woman, an offence
against the decencies of worship, in no degree alleviated by the
devout composure of the officiating minister, nor reduced by the
intensest sensation on the part of the sympathizing onlookers. The
practice carries condemnation on its forehead.” Well, Doctor, what
are we to think of you after this 1 We have long thought you
capable of strange things, but it appears that we have heretofore
greatly underrated your capabilities. It seems that your imagina-
tion is as corrupt as your mind is perverse; that your tastes are as


vitiated as your feelings are embittered; and that your vulgar
rudeness is as haughty as it always is when your irritated pas-
sions vanquish your reason, and put all decency and courtesy to
flight. To charge you with wilful, deliberate misrepresentation we
dare not. But we do charge you with grossly insulting a body of
Christians in reference to an ordinance to which they attach an
unusual solemnity ; in the celebration of which one in a thousand
has not discovered the slightest indecency; the very sight of which
has vanquished innumerable prejudices ; which multitudes have
come to witness in order to ridicule, but have retired to pray; and
which has been the means of impressing hearts, and bringing to de-
cision for the Saviour individuals without number. And for what
is all this % apparently for no other purpose than to gratify your
spleen against the Anabaptists, and involving them in reproach and
scorn. Are you sure that the practice of infant baptism presents no
scenes which ill-regulated minds might not turn into sport and mer-
riment. What would be thought of us were we to make the at-
tempt 1 But we leave that to the scoffers. But if, after all, this
service should be Divine 1 if this should be the mode of carrying
out the will of the Great Head of the Church in its administration '?
Can you escape from the dishonour of imitating those infidel men
who laugh at a religion they do not understand, and who endeavour
by their sneers, their mockery, and misrepresentation, to involve it
in infamy and contempt ! If we could conceive you susceptible of
any self-reproach from any thing you do, we should predict that your
conscience will many a time smite you, and your cheeks will many
a time crimson with shame before your God for ever putting to
paper that discreditable passage.
Leaving then this writer to his reflections, we shall proceed to
explain as briefly as possible the mode of baptism. And here it is
well known that in ascertaining the meaning of any word we usually
resort in the first place to Lexicons. But it should be remembered
that Lexicons are not an ultimate authority, they are but the
opinions of learned men who invite our confidence in proportion to
the accuracy with which they have investigated the sources of the
meanings they affix to any word. To establish, however, with cer-
tainty the truth of their renderings, recourse must be had to their
original authorities. The question then here to be settled is, what
was the meaning of the Greek words bapto, and haptizo which is de-
rived from it, in the time of Christ 1 And what was the meaning of
these words among the Greeks before and after the time of Christ 1
All Lexicographers are agreed that Bapto means to dip or immerse,
but it also acquired a secondary meaning to dye, as a consequence


of dipping. Baptizo signifies to dip or immerse, but never to dye.
It has, however, often a figurative meaning, and refers to being
overwhelmed by trouble or affliction, or debt. But it never signi-
fies to sprinkle or to pour. And the man who should assert that it
did would only endanger his reputation as a scholar.
In confirmation of this the Greek writers from Homer, 900 years
before Christ to Chrysostom 400 years after Christ, have all been
carefully examined by men of learning, and the passages in them
where these words occur have been criticized with the keenest
scrutiny, including Esop, Eschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Aristo-
phanes, Hippocrates, Xenophon, Plato, Aristotle, Moschus, Calli-
machus, Theocritus, Polybius, Diodorus Siculus, Dion Cassius, The
Septuagint, Philo, Josephus, Plutarch, Strabo, Porphyry, Lucian,
Epictetus, Athenaeus, Clemens, Heliodorus, Gregory, Thaumatur-
gus, Chrysostom, and others, and the testimony from all these sources
is uniform, invariable, consentaneous, and harmonious, without any
discrepancy or discord, that bapto signifies to dip or dye, and that
baptizo signifies to dip, to submerge, to plunge, to immerse and
nothing more. We have all the passages in our possession and they can
be produced when wanted. And Moses Stuart of America, as the
result of an elaborate investigation, says, “ that both these words
mean to dip, to plunge, to immerse. All lexicographers and
critics of ANY note are agreed.” We may be pardoned giving a
few instances, out of upwards of a hundred, from the writings of
learned men of all times since the Reformation.
Luther says, “ I would have those that are to be baptized to be
entirely immersed, as the word imports.”
Calvin says, “ The word baptize signifies to immerse, and the
rite of immersion was observed by the Ancient Church.”
Beza says, “ Christ commanded us to be baptized, by which word
it is certain immersion is signified. To be baptized in water
signifies no other than to be immersed in water.”
Yitringa says, “The act of baptising is the immersion of
believers in water.”
Salmasius says, “ Baptism is immersion, according to theforce and
the meaning of the word. Now it is rhantism or sprinkling, not
immersion.”
Witsius says, “ It cannot be denied, that the native signification
of baptize is to plunge to dip.”
Casaubon says, “ The rite of baptizing was that persons were
plunged into the water, which the word baptize sufficiently declares.”
Suicerus says, “ The proper signification of the word baptize
denotes immersion, or dipping into.”
And it may be mentioned that the Westminster Assembly in
1643 discussed the question of baptism, when 24 voted for immer-
sion, and 24 against it, and the vote against it was merely carried
by the casting vote of the chairman. In fact we could fill a


volume with quotations from the works of learned men, and
especially we may mention that the German commentators are
almost unanimous in their decision in our favour.
Lindsay of Dundee who has acquired a considerable reputation
as a linguist, and who like multitudes of others, had been brought
up to regard infant sprinkling as Christian baptism, but who had
his attention some years ago directed to the subject of baptism,
commenced an independent investigation of it for himself. In
doing which he searched all the Greek writers, the Septuagint, the
New Testament, the early Fathers, together with the earliest ver-
sions of the New Testament, and he has given us in a pamphlet, the
result of his researches. And in conclusion he says, “We have
examined the word baptizo in the classic authors, and found it
always to signify immerse. In the Old and New Testaments we have
found it always to signify the same thing. We have found that in
the early versions it is always translated by a word signifying to
immerse. We have found that all the early writers who have
mentioned the subject testify that immersion was the primitive
mode. We have found that all the Ancient Churches practice
immersion at the present day, with the exception of the Roman
Catholics who introduced sprinkling in 1311. And we have found,
finally, a great number of writers belonging to different communi-
ties who sprinkle, who admit that baptize is to immerse, and that
immersion was the Apostolic practice. The Divine command then
was to immerse, and no Divine command has ever been alleged to
sprinkle. “ I cannot,” he says, “ look upon the substitution of
sprinkling for immersion in any other light than a direct rebellion
against the authority of Heaven.”
With respect to the early versions, the Syriac, the Coptic, the
Ethiopic, the Armenian, the Gothic, together with later versions,
the German, the Dutch, the Danish, the Swedish, he has shown that
all have the Greek word baptizo translated by a corresponding word
which signifies to dip or immerse.
In the following passages in our version where dip is used, once
put into, and once plunge, the original word is bapto. Exod.
xii. 22 ; Lev. iv. 6, 17, ix. 9, xi. 32, xiv. 6, 16, 51; Numb. xix.
18 ; Deut. xxxiii. 14 ; Josh. iii. 15 ; Ruth. ii. 14; 1 Sam. xiv.
27 ; 2 Kings viii. 15 ; Job ix. 31 ; Luke xvi. 24 ; John xiii. 26 ;
Rev. xix. 13. In the following passages it is embapto, to dip into..
Math. xxvi. 23 ; Mark xiv. 20 ; John xiii. 26. In the 2 Kings v.
14, where we are told that “ Naaman dipt himself seven times in
the Jordan,” the original word is baptizo, the only passage in the
Old Testament where it is used. Surely here is a confluence of
evidence not to be despised.
Let us see how our antagonist deals with it. He says, “ what is
essential in this service (of baptism) is the application of water to
the body. The mode or manner of the application is from the


nature of the case of inferior importance.” If so, then of course,
the touching the tip of the little finger or the great toe of a baby
with water is baptism. “ Why,” we are asked, “ should not the
affusion of a little water on the body symbolize the baptism of the
Holy Ghost as distinctly and as effectually as plunging the body
overhead 1” Simply because afusion is not baptism. “ Our oppo-
nents,” he further says, “on this subject expatiate with much
confidence on the classical sense of the Greek words bapto and
haptizo.” And why not 1 If God condescends to speak to us in
human language, it is but natural to suppose that he will use that
language according to its ordinary meanings, otherwise his speaking
to us would be to no purpose, except to bewilder and confuse.
“ They maintain,” he says, that is the Baptists, “ that these words
invariably signify to plunge, to bathe, to immerse.” Well, we only
maintain what the most learned men in all ages have maintained.
We have already given some evidence of this, and we could amplify
it indefinitely. “ Our duty,” he informs us, “is to ascertain the
precise meaning attached to these terms in the word of God, for
our faith rests on the foundation of the Bible and not on the
authority of heathen writers.” If it did you would abandon infant
sprinkling to-morrow. “ The radical signification,” we are assured,
“of bapto is to tinge, to wash.” Dr., you are exposing your
ignorance, or something worse, inconceivably by making such an
assertion. The radical signification is to dip and nothing else.
Every lexicon of any importance tells you that. We happen to
have half a dozen at hand, and they are all agreed on this point. It
has however a secondary meaning, to dye , because dyeing was effected
by dipping. But it is only used once in the Bible in this secondary
sense, Ezek. xxiii. 15, where we read of “dyed attire.” And with
Carson we say, that baptizo always signifies to dip or immerse and
nothing else. Even when it is figuratively applied, this meaning
ever lies at the basis. And in Carson making that statement, he
has not made it without proof. He has gathered his evidence from
the whole range of Greek literature. Hence whatever may be said
of his work, any man who could read it, and deny him the praise
of extensive research, and a more than ordinary talent in the inter-
pretation of language, is either grossly stultified by ignorance, or
blinded by prejudice. As to Dr. Owen and Dr. Dwight, the two
grand authorities of our opponent, whatever eulogy they have
deserved as theologians, all who are capable of forming but an ordi-
nary judgment, know that they deserve but little on the ground of
accurate scholarship. As to Dr. Dwight having the hardihood to
affirm, “ That the primary meaning of these terms is to cleanse, —
the effect and not the mode of washing,” showed his utter disquali-
fication to write on the subject, for his assertion is in direct contra-
diction to the entire scholarship of Europe, Sciolists excepted.
With respect to the “ divers baptisms” mentioned in the Hebrews,


and adverted to by our opponent, as denoting baptisms differing “ in
their nature or mode” it is a pure assumption, and it would be suffi-
cient to meet it with a peremptory denial. He first asserts without
a single particle of proof that bapto and baptizo signify to wash , and
then he puts his own construction upon passages. We have on the
other hand supplied strong presumptive evidence from the testimony
of the most learned men that baptism signifies immersion, and no-
thing else. If so, it ought to be rendered so here. And the “ divers
immersions” refer to the divers things immersed under the law, not
to different modes of baptizing as this writer tells us. And by
turning to Deut. xi. 32, we see what a variety of things was re-
quired to “be put into water,” the original word is bapto. These,
however, were not the only immersions specified. Surely, then,
these facts throw some light on the “ divers baptisms.”
We have then a learned criticism on 1 Cor. x. I—2, “ Moreover,
brethren , I would not that ye should be ignorant how that all our
fathers were under the cloud , and all passed through the sea, and
were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea.” “ The
apostle is teaching,” we are told, “ the doctrine of Christ, and he
quotes an instance of baptism to prove that the Gospel was preached
to that people in far distant times, and that the privileges of the
fathers were similar to our own.” And this is theology ! “ The
word baptize,” says this learned divine, “ does not signify
immersion.” What then does it signify ? “It is expressly men-
tioned,” it is said, “ that they walked on dry land.” But is that all
that is said 1 Does not the narrative tell us, they we;nt into the
midst of the sea. Does not Paul say, they were under the cloud,
and were all baptized in the cloud and in the sea. Surely, they
were encompassed by that into which they were baptized. “ And
the doctrine of Paul declares,” we are assured, “ that children and
fathers alike received this baptism, and that it was effectual in God’s
sight.” What was effectual in God’s sight 1 And for what was it
effectual 1 Where does Paul declare anything of the sort h But we
are gravely informed that “ if water was used at all, it was not by
dipping in the ocean, for Israel journeyed on dry ground.” Oh, for
gravity enough not to laugh ! But he says, “ The clouds poured out
water.” How then, in the name of common sense, could Israel
journey on dry ground I He does not, or will not, perceive that
that expression of the Psalmist can refer to nothing but the action
of the clouds on their enemies and not on the Israelites ; but he
sagely concludes, “ The baptism was then by the pouring of water,
or the sprinkling of a shower. How could it be by the sprinkling
of a shower, if the clouds poured out water 1 And is this
to be dignified by the name of criticism 1 Yes, when
folly is wisdom, and nonsense is “ distinguished erudition.” This
writer seems to think the Baptists are as ignorant as himself in in-
terpreting this of a literal baptism. It is clear to every one of
c 2


ordinary discernment, where it is not perverted by prejudice or
passion, that it is a figurative baptism which is alluded to, derived
from the immersion of a body in water, to which the Israelites are
resembled when they had the water on either side of them, and the
watery vapour as a cloud covering them, even though they journeyed
on dry ground.
We are then favoured with an equally erudite criticism on
Matt. iii. 11: “He shall baptize you until the Holy Ghost and with
fire." In which we are learnedly told “ the verb baptize cannot with
any propriety be understood to mean immersion.” Why not 1 we
ask. But this writer of “ distinguished erudition” appears to think
his assertion enough, and that it is beneath his dignity to furnish a
reason. “To give it such a sense,” he says, “ would render the
passage unintelligible, for to say, He shall immerse you in the Holy
Ghost and in fire, is to ascribe absurdity to the dictates of inspira-
tion.” Will this critic dare to affirm that to baptize does not sig-
nify to immerse , and that the Greek en does not primarily signify in.
If he will not, then as far as the meaning of the words go, the pas-
sage may be rendered “in the Holy Ghost and in fire.” And many
learned men and theologians, not Baptists, do so render it. We
will give a few, just to show what kind of dependance is to be
placed on this Doctor’s rash and peremptory assertions. Cyril,
Bishop of Jerusalem in the fourth century, gives the following inter-
pretation : “ For the Lord saith, ‘ye shall be baptized in the Holy
Spirit not many days hence.’ For as he who sinks down in the
waters and is immersed , is surrounded on all sides by the waters, so
also they were completely immersed by (upo) the Spirit.” He has
another passage of a similar character. Theophylact has two pas-
sages in which he interprets the phrase in a similar way. And for
want of space we would only refer to the following authors—Bud-
daeus, Gurtlerus, Ikenius, Casaubon, Le Clerc, Bengel, Professor
Campbell of Aberdeen, Granville Sharpe, Wakefield, Professor
Lange of Bonn, Oesterzee, in his recent admirable comment on
Luke. We have all the references at hand. Montanus and the
Spanish version render it in. So also, we are informed, do the Vul-
gate, the Syriac, the Arabic, the Ethiopia versions. So also do the
French versions of Le Cene and Simon. So also we are told Tin-
dale’s Translation, Cranmer’s Bible, and the Bishops’ Bible. Robin-
son too, an American Congregationalist, in his Lexicon, notwith-
standing his grossly one-sided views, in his renderings of baptizo,
translates this passage : “ He shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost
and in fire.” And then take the presumptive evidence arising from
the preponderant use of the Greek en in the first eight chapters of
Matthew, where it is translated in or within sixty-one times ; at
but once ; and with the exception of this passage in question, it is
rendered with but three times. With whom then is the “ absurdity,”
with us or with this learned disquisitor 1


But he says, “ There is an evident harmony between the sign in
baptism and the thing signified, when the water is applied by affu-
sion or sprinkling.” What, does sprinkling a few drops of water on
the face represent the degree in which the disciples were pervaded
by the Holy Spirit \ That which figuratively represented the pre-
sence of the Spirit at the Pentecost filled the house where they were
sitting; so that they were encompassed by it, and “ they were filled
with the Holy Spirit.” Does sprinkle, therefore, adequately repre-
sent that by which they were filled ? The idea is that of abundance
so much so that they were all replenished by it. Is sprinkle a
proper figure for that I Immerse is, and corresponds with the fact.
With whom then, we again ask, is the absurdity 1 “ Our manner,”
says this writer, “of baptizing is in manifold and beautiful agree-
ment with the language of the prophets. “ I will pour water on him
that is thirsty, and floods on the dry ground.” Does sprinkling cor-
respond to pouring floods 1 Does not the one figure indicate abun-
dance 1 and. the other scantiness 1 And is this the notion this
writer has of “ beautiful agreement T’ Oh, the terrible influence of
theological theories in perverting the mind in reference to the Word
of God.
“ The same idea,” we are told, “is involved in the various
sprinklings ordained by the law of Moses, that is, the idea of puri-
fication from sin by the washing of regeneration and the renewing
of the Holy Ghost, shed on us abundantly, etc., etc.” What an
insensate jumble have we here ! Ist, Sprinkling corresponds to
poured out on us abundantly. Then 2nd, Sprinkling involves the
idea of washing. Then 3rd, We are referred to various passages,
without the slightest discrimination to prove that sprinkling the
body is cleansing it. Then 4th, We are told that baptism was
generally in this form or by washing. As these are pure assertions,
we might satisfy ourselves by just giving to each of them a flat denial.
But then we do not like to imitate bad examples. This Divinity
professor seems not to know that sin in the Levitical as well as in
the Christain code is considered in a two-fold relation, Ist, As
involving the sinner, or anything which was considered ceremonially
as sinful, in certain legal liabilities, purification from which was
effected by blood, or the sprinkling of the blood of atonement, and
not by water, except in one instance, “ The water of separation,”
Numbers, viii. 7; xix. 9 ; and which might be rendered water of
uncleanness (see Gesen., Lex.). But it is also called water of puri-
fying, or as Gesenius renders it, “ Water for the expiation of sin,”
and which derived its ceremonial virtue from the ashes of the sacri-
ficed red heifer, mixed with it. To this the apostle alludes
in the 9th of Hebrews, 13 and 14. ver., to which he presents the
blood of Christ as the antitype purifying the conscience from dead
works. To this we apprehend Ezekiel refers in those words so often
quoted, “ I will sprinkle clean, or cleansing, water upon you,” in


allusion to the expiation by the waters of the red heifer. But what
has this to do with baptism 1 Is baptism an expiation, or does it
represent expiation of sin 1 But
2nd. Sin was considered as involving impurity. Purification in
this sense was by washing the person, or thing in water, not by
sprinkling it; and that this washing might be effected by immersion
or bathing in water needs no very large amount of common sense
to know. But to say that baptism is by washing, so long as there
is any truth in words, or any dependance on the laws of legitimate
interpretation, it never was, and never can be by washing. To say
that washing may be an effect of immersion is one thing, but to say
that immersion is by washing is one of this learned critic’s
“ absurdities.” He may thus bewilder, he may confuse, he may
perplex, for he seems peculiarly gifted in that sort of thing. But to
prove his assertion in this instance will transcend his ability.
But this writer has endeavoured to draw an inference from the
pouring out of the Spirit and baptism with the Spirit, that baptism
means pouring. That is because in one of the prophets the Spirit is
figuratively said to be poured out, and in another place the disciples
are figuratively said to be baptized in the Spirit, that therefore the
figures mean one and the same thing as to mode. This may be
“ distinguished erudition ” according to the standard of the Presby-
terian Messenger, but we confess that it so exceedingly transcends
our unlearned comprehension, that we must pass it over as being
beyond our capacity, waiting till this Pmdobaptist oracle shall utter
his responses in distincter language to be understood by plain men.
We trust, however, we have said enough to enable our readers to
estimate more accurately the “ sum of his erudite exposition.”
Especially as in the midst of much that is profound and obscure, he
himself has told us that the word baptize is used to describe simple
washing by pouring or shedding, and “ That this is demonstrated
beyond the possibility of dispute." When Jupiter thunders we must
be silent. Q.E.D., as Euclid has it. We should, however, like a
little explanation of the difference between “ pouring and shedding."
“We are now in a position,” he says, “to examine the various
instances of baptism recorded in the New Testament.” What a
singular course our opponent pursues. But what appears to us as
aberrations may be only the beautiful movements of a great mind
revolving in a higher sphere. We, in our simplicity, thought the
wisest method in any pursuit was to begin with the plain and literal,
and then to ascend to the metaphorical and obscure. It would
seem however, that this course is to be reversed in the future Pres-
byterian College. “We are met,” this writer says, “at the thres-
hold of our investigation by the unqualified assertion that the Greek
prepositions sometimes translated into and out of, have in Scripture
no other meaning,” &c. Dr. we cannot charge you with deliberately
mitering an untruth, but we do charge you with revealing an amount


of crass ignorance in this statement, which certainly, we did not
suspect before reading this pamphlet. Whoever made the “ unqua-
lified assertion ” you here affirm ? What we assert, and what all
Greek Grammars and Lexicons assert, is that the predominant idea
of eis and ek is into and out of, and that all the secondary and
tropical meanings are regulated with a reference to the primary
meaning. And dare you assert the contrary ? “ Take the case, ” he says,
of Philip and the Eunuch. If it be certain, as is affirmed, that the
preposition into signifies going down under the water, or being
completely dipped, then Philip was dipped as well as the Eunuch.
The operating minister plunged himself over head in the water, as
well as the Ethiopian nobleman.” What elegance ; what “ beautiful
agreement” between this passage and the refined taste of this
cultivated mind. This writer, however, knows as well as we, that
no man in his senses would affirm that to go into signifies to go dovm
under, consequently the inference about Philip being plunged over
head as well as the nobleman, is but a bit of sneering mockery. By
this means he thinks he has put the Anabaptist “ theory to the rout.”
“ The very utmost,” he says, “ that can be supposed from the words
into and out o/is that the parties went into the water and came out
of it.” And that is all the Baptists say, and all they need to say.
But he tells us, “ these prepositions determine nothing as to the
mode of the Baptism, whether it was by pouring or whether it was
by immersion.” And what simpleton ever said they did ? But they
are in harmony with immersion, and with nothing else. But why
pour, or sprinkle, or immerse at all ? For this learned D. D. tells
us, page 37, that “ what is essential in this service is the applica-
tion of water to the body.” If so, then the Eunuch’s going into
the water, was very unnecessary, nay, he was foolish for going in at
all, for his simply touching the water would have been baptism,
there needed nothing more. What a strange thing Philip did not
know better. Had our Dr. been there he could have told him.
But we are indulged with a profound note here which we must
notice for the gratification of our readers. The question is as to
the sense of the word baptize in the Bible. And we are accused on
this subject of “ evading the point by directing enquirers to Greek
dictionaries and to classic authors.” Our opponent it seems has
sagacity enough to know where the battery is planted which he so
much dreads. But pray to what other sources can we direct enquirers
than to authors who have written in the language in which baptize
is found ? If Christ and his disciples did not use Greek words
according to their ordinary meaning then they spake in an unknown
tongue, and an especial revelation was needed in order to interpret
their speech. “ The Baptists,” we are told, “ boldly assert that the
word baptize always signifies immersion, and refer to heathen books,
for their authority. What a pity Jesus Christ should have em-
ployed a heathen language as the vehicle of his truth ! Our Dr.


would not, he would have invented one. “ But we are concerned,”
he says, “ with no book but that of God.” This is the sheerest
cant that can possibly offend a honest and ingenuous mind. Then
after referring us to three passages, he tells us the “ word baptize
does not mean immersion.” Mark gentle reader his conclusion,
“ Let our readers mark this!?!” My dictum is enough, who will
gainsay it.
He cannot however give up Philip ancT the Eunuch. He says
further, “It may be doubted whether they went down into the
water at all.” Who doubts it 1 We have happened in addition to
our own translation, to have consulted the Spanish, the Italian, the
French, and the German versions, Beza’s Latin translation, Booth-
royd’s English translation, and they all render it into and out of.
We have consulted Blomfield’s notes on the Greek Testament, who
alludes to the descent into the water, but not to the ascent out of it.
Adam Clarke renders it, “ They alighted from the chariot into the
water.” Doddridge renders it, “ They went down to the water and
came up out of the water.” Matthew Henry with all his preposses-
sions in favour of infant sprinkling bases his commentary on into
and out of. Baumgarten alludes to the “ coming up out of the
water,” but not to their going into it. We have quotations also
from Yitringa, Venema, Spanheim, Yossius, Piscator, Momma,
Turretine, Pictetus, Maestricht, Gurtlerus, Burkitt, and others, ail
of whom render it according to our version, and distinctly refer to
this passage as presumptive evidence that baptism was by im-
mersion. But it may be doubted, says our opponent. Of course it
may, for under the influence of prejudice the Jews doubted
whether Jesus was the Messiah. “Itis no better,” says our critic,
“ than silly assumption to maintain that these Greek prepositions
have no other meaning in Scripture.” But pray what novice
ever did maintain it 1 There is however something worse than silly
assumption, it is to insinuate falsehood against one’s neighbour to
involve him in contempt.
This antagonist still clings to the case of the Eunuch and
finds an objection in “ this parched and arid land.” Was there
not water there 1 ! “We would infer, we would infer, we would
infer,” is the constant subterfuge of this writer. Yes, and by
such sort of flimsy inferences Bishop Colenso is undermining the
authenticity of the Scriptures. We have more Bishop Colensos
than him who bears the name.
We are then referred to the 3000 on the day of Pentecost, who
were baptized, and we learn from this writer “ that to say they were
dipped is to argue without a particle of proof.” Indeed ! Have we
not shown from dictionaries, from Greek authors, from the testimo-
nies of learned men in all ages of the church that to baptize is to
immerse. And it should be remembered in questions of this kind
these are authorities. And from their almost unanimous decision,


the point may be considered as established. We can make no
higher appeal. Is there then no proof from the word itself ? What
degree of evidence will satisfy this Dr. ! In some things he has
the credulity of a child, in others he requires evidence equal to that
of flaming characters in the heavens. “ But it may be asserted,”
we are told, “ that they could not have been dipped.” And the
“ show of reason” for this, are the three following suppositions : —-
Ist. “ That there were no means for the service of immersion.”
2nd. “ That females were plunged by the apostles just as they were .”
3rd. “ That both sexes were dipped in their clothes, none having a
change of raiment at the time.” And on these three baseless sup-
positions, this writer has the boldness to say “ the thing is incredi-
ble.” We declare it in all seriousness, that in our judgment, there
is nothing in all Bishop Colenso’s book which can surpass that.
With respect to the first of these suppositions, the Baptists are con-
tinually twitted with the objection that there were no adequate
means for immersion, and when we have shown from well authenti-
cated facts that Jerusalem was abundantly supplied with water by
means of immense pools and otherwise, in which not only three
thousand might have been baptized, but three hundred thousand
had they required it; then this honourable opponent of ours turns round
and charges us in one of his acutely learned notes with mentioning
these “ pools as the baptistries in which the 3000 were immersed.”
Whoever mentioned them ! For any Baptist to have made such a
mention would only have revealed an ignorance equal to your own,
Dr. But is there not one of your mean insinuations here 1 We
have sufficiently proved the falsehood of your suppositions, when
we have shown that Jerusalem was abundantly supplied with water,
and that there were all the “ means” requisite for the immersion of
the multitudes, without affirming that they were baptized in these
pools.
With respect to the second supposition, that “ females were
plunged by the apostles just as they were.” Who told you so, Dr. 1
With respect to the third, “ that both sexes were dipped in their
clothes, having no change of raiment at the time.” Who told you
so, Dr. ! Is not your imagination suggesting some offensive in-
sinuation here ! Pray do give up this, childish mummery, and be
more of the Christian in your reasoning. Veracity in conducting an
argument is as great a virtue as veracity in the transactions of busi-
ness. We have no greater comfort to afford than that of assuring you
that we regard you as greatly demeaning yourself by indulging in
this puerile and contemptible nonsense. But it seems this is not all.
It is intimated to be physically impossible “ for the apostles to accom-
plish the supposed feat of baptizing 3000 persons in an afternoon 1
Why afternoon! Why apostles! Baptizing was not the exclusive pro-
vince of the apostles. There were other disciples there as well as
apostles. Paul tells us “ Christ gave gifts unto men, and he gave


some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some
pastors and teachers.” Why insinuate then that apostles only bap-
tized, and that twelve men could not, using your elegant language,
“ accomplish the feat.” We are then favoured with two quotations
based on the testimony of a “ gentleman of veracity,” and the
“ Confessions of a convert.” Why, sir we laugh at your credulity,
in believing such stuff. We should know something about it, and
we have no hesitation in telling you that'we regard your two wit-
nesses as reporting a falsehood, whether the falsehood was the result
of deliberation, or of a bewildering imagination. You quote with
evident satisfaction the numerical objection in the “Confessions of a
convert,” then why not feel an equal satisfaction in the numerical
objections of a Colenso, for the latter are by far the more plausible
of the two. Oh for the patience of Job in the task of having to
remove such rubbish from our path.
But says our Psedobaptist champion, “ When it is remembered
that the apostles baptized in Jerusalem, in Samaria, in Damascus,
in Corinth, in Philippi, in a desert, in a private house, and in a
prison, the Anabaptist doctrine of immersion seems strange and
paradoxical.” In the name of wonder why r i We have seen that
there was water enough in Jerusalem. The city of Samaria
(Sebaste) was in the midst of the valley of Nabulous, concerning
which Robinson tells us that the “ whole valley is full of fountains
irrigating it abundantly • that it is rich, fertile, and beautifully
green from abundant supplies of water.” The city of Damascus,
Kitto tells us, “was girdled by fertile fields, or gardens, being
watered by rivers and sparkling streams.” And again, “ the plain
of Damascus owes its fertility to the river Barrada.” Corinth was
a sea port, and consequently there was water enough there.
Philippi, Kitto says, “ was anciently called Chrenides from its many
fountains.” And the sacred historian happens to say “we went out
of the city by a river side.” In the desert there was a “ certain
water,” and Philip and the eunuch went into it. Why then is our
doctrine of immersion called “ strange and paradoxical 1” Echo
answers why 1 But it is said the apostles baptized in a “ private
house.” Where in the whole New Testament is this stated t If
the reference is to Cornelius, we are not so much as told that he was
baptized at all. We have no doubt that he was, but the narrative
does not tell us so, and consequently does not tell us where. And
then the New Testament does not say a word about the Philippian
jailer and his house being baptized “in a prison.” The jailer first
brought Paul and Silas out of the prison into his house ; he then
took them out of his house, and baptized them ; he then brought
them into his house again, and set meat before them. But suppose
they were baptized within the precincts of the prison grounds, is it
at all paradoxical to suppose that there were means of immersion
there 1 To what shifts men are driven to support an untenable
theory.


r We are then referred to John baptizing in Enon, because there
was much water there. This we are told is used as an invincible
argument.” Who ever called it an invincible argument] “ But it
is not said,” we are informed, “that the baptized were immersed.
It is said they were baptized, that is enough for us. “ All men came
to John,” says this writer. Who told him so 1 Not the New
Testament. He is as clever in his quotations as he is in his reason-
ing “ All men came to Christ,” the historian informs us, to be
baptized, and not to John. After a number of purely imaginary
statements to account for John baptizing in Enon, he says that to
assert that in baptizing he immersed these multitudes, is to assume
the very point to be proved. The assertion is without proof. It is
unsupported by a scintilla of proof.” We wonder the conscience of
this writer did not smite him, or that some feeling of self-respect did
not restrain him from penning that sentence. Has he the hardi-
hood to say there is not a “ scintilla of proof ” that to baptize is to
immerse in front of the accumulated evidence gathered from Greek
writers, from the Old and New Testaments, from the writings of
the Fathers, from dictionaries, from the testimonies of the most
learned men in all ages, not Baptists, who, notwithstanding their
preconceptions, have had the manliness to confess that to baptize
is to immerse , and nothing else. If so, it _is totally useless to
reason with such a man. The proper translation, however, of polla
udata, he tells us, is “ many waters or streamlets .” Let us test this
statement. The same expression is used but four other times in the
New Testament —all in the Revelations. 1. 15: The voice of Christ
“is as the sound of many waters.” Does it mean streamlets there ?
xiv. 2 : John heard a voice from heaven “as the voice of many
waters, and as the voice of a great thunder.” Does it mean many
streamlets there 1 xvii. 1 : The angel said to John, “ I will show
thee the judgement of the great harlot that sitteth on many waters ;
and in the 15th verse, the angel says, “ the waters which thou
sawest where the harlot sitteth are peoples, and multitudes, and
nations, and tongues.” Does it mean many streamlets there 1 ?
xix. 6: “I heard the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice
of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying
Alleluia.” Does it mean many streamlets there 1 We would refer also
to the following passages out of a great many in the Old Testament,
in all of which in the Septuagint it is the same expression as is found
in John iii. 23 ; Psalms xviii. 16, xxix. 3, xxxii. 6, Ixxvii. 19, xciii.
4 • Isaiah xvii. 13 ; Jeremiah li. 55. By consulting these the reader
will see how little dependanceis to be placed on this writer’s “ many
streamlets.” .. , 7 , , „„
We have then a page of remark on “ Can any forbid ot water l
on John baptizing with water, and on kataduno, as the preferable
word for immerse, evincing an “ erudition” so deep that we shall not
attempt to fathom it ; but, accompanied with such supercilious airs


of haughty consequence that we will not waste any scorn upon it.
A word or two, however, about kataduno * Beza says “to baptize
is to immerse, and differs from duno, which signifies to plunge in the
deep, and to drown." Casaubon says, “to baptize is to plunge into
water, which, as it does not signify duno , to sink to the bottom and
perish , so doubtless it is not epipolazein , to swim on the surface
Vossius and Turretine make the same distinction, and so does
Witsius, It is however to be observed that the Fathers sometimes use
kataduno in order to illustrate the word haptizo. Perhaps, however, the
authority of our erudite opponent is superior to that of these learned
men. If so, we stand rebuked.
Our author in this article starts out with a probability, “ a very
high probability,” that baptism was “by water applied to the body
by pouring or sprinkling ,” or we may add in any other way, for
we are assured that “what is essential to this service is the applica-
tion of water to the body.” No matter how for mode is not essential,
only he would have it by pouring or sprinkling, any how, only not
by immersion, that is his abhorrence. In fact he seems to be so hor-
rified by the thought that we may well fancy he is an utter stranger
to the felicity of a cold plunge. If so, we would advise him to try
it, and after having experienced its exhilirating effects, his prejudices
may so give way that it is not impossible he may apply to Mr. Taylor
to dip him in his baptistry. Stranger things have happened.
He proceeds, however, to appeal to cases. The first is that of
Saul. “He arose, and was baptized.” That is clear, for it is
“ plainly affirmed.” But “ how,” he says, we are not informed. “ He
however was not dipped ’.” That is his probability. “He might
have been washed by water applied,” he tells us, “or by water
sprinkled.” If by the former, Doctor, was he washed all over ? or
if by the latter, what need was there for it 1 For according to your
definition of baptism (p. 37) if Ananias had but touched the tip of
his nose with his finger dipt in water that would have been baptism.
“ But immersion,” we are told, “is not in keeping with the circum-
stances ; it does palpable violence to them all.” Of course there is no
answering that. But the second case is that of Cornelius. “ Can
any man forbid water that these should not be baptized, and he
commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.”
“Is immersion taught here V’ asks this writer. “ Can any man
forbid water 1" That is his triumphant refutation ! To suppose
immersion “is unintelligible.” What a pity it would be to attempt
to disturb his pleasant emotion. We pass on. His third case is
that of Lydia. “ She was baptized, and her household.” “It is
with the mode of baptism we are dealing at present,” he says, as if


we were likely to forget it. And after some nonsense about a family,
“ a family including children, even babes new born, &c.,” he says,
“ the probability is that Lydia and her family were not immersed.”
And on what ground does he rest his probability? You shall hear,
gentle reader. “ A woman—not unlikely she had female atten-
dants—perhaps daughters—for without evidence to the contrary, it
is reasonable to think that her household consisted of children and
servants ///” The italics are ours, and the note of exclamation
too. For we were unwilling that so notable a passage should be
passed over cursorily. And this is the ground of the probability that
she was not immersed. But what an immense amount of imagina-
tion may be expended within the wide limit of “ not unlikely,” and
“perhaps.” Let us try a little ourselves. If Lydia had female attend-
ants—-servants —it is “ not unlikely ” they were heathens, worship-
pers of Juno and Venus, for nothing is said about them in the nar-
rative. If so, did the faith of Lydia stand proxy for her heathen
servants and were they baptized on the ground of her faith ? Of
course. They were a part of her household. But if perhaps she had
daughters, is there not an equal perhaps that she had some stalwart
sons, and if so, that they too were heathens, worshippers of Apollo
and Bacchus, participating in the vices of the heathen youth of that
day ?Is not the one probability as good as the other ? Did then
the faith of Lydia stand proxy for these heathen sons, and were they
baptized and added to the Church because Lydia had believed ? For
that is the theory of our opponent. Would he then put these
among his lambs ? Pretty lambs they would be in the flock of
Christ. But after this writer has indulged in these vagaries of “ not
unlikely ” and “ perhaps,” he has another probability, and that is
that “ Lydia and her family were baptized by a simpler and less in-
delicate operation than that of dipping, viz., by effusion of water
upon them.” Was there not, Doctor, a simpler method still, “if
all that is essential to the service is the application of water to the
body without any reference to mode ?” Instead of causing an un-
comfortable shiver by pouring water on the face, could not Paul
have just touched her forehead with one drop of water? That
would have been an “ application of water to the body,” would it
not ? We wish you joy of your imaginary logic.
“ The fourth case,” we are told, “is that of the jailer, and the
facility with which party zeal can refer to this baptism as illustrat-
ing the practice of immersion satisfies us that our Anabaptist
brethren (brethren, indeed !) dwell in a world of their own, a mode
of thinking of their own, an exegesis of their own, a mode of
thinking as odd and curious as their mode of baptizing.” We are
proud to think that we have a world, and a logic, and an exegesis
different from that of this gentlemanly defender of Psedobaptism.
He first insinuates a falsehood against his brethren , —brethren, for-
sooth!! We discard the relationship ; and then on that insinuation


he bases a sneering sarcasm. What Baptist did he ever know,
that referred to the baptism of the jailer as illustrating the practice
of immersion 1 There is nothing in the whole narrative to illus-
trate it, and nothing is said about it, except as the idea is involved
in the word baptized. They do refer to it as evidence for the
necessity of faith previous to baptism. And this writer either
knew this, or he did not. If he did, what are we to think of his
honesty. If he did not, what are we to think of his ignorance 1
“ The man,” it is said, “ who can demonstrate immersion from this
narrative must be a skilful conjuror.” Are you judging us, Dr.,
from your own practice 1 We may as well then tell you
at once, we are strangers to legerdemain. “ How the Ana-
baptists,” we are told, “ convince themselves that the jailer
and his household were dipped is quite a wonder to us.” That
you should wonder, Dr., is no wonder to us. “The ceremony,”
he tells us, “ was performed in the dead of night, in the house of
a common jailer, when he and his were in a state of inexpressible
agitation —all of a sudden too in the greatest haste.” What a
series of blunders have we here. How could the night be said to
be dead , when they were all in a state of “ inexpressible agitation.”
Why is the jailer called a “common jailer V’ He was the head-
keeper of the prison, an office of no mean responsibility among the
Romans, and involving a corresponding respectability. And then
as to the “ inexpressible agitation.” From the statements in the
narrative we should have concluded that that had subsided. For
when he had found the prisoners all safe, one would have thought
his fears had given place to joy. And then, why all “of a sudden,
and in the greatest haste.” Oh, it was convenient, because that
would seem to make against immersion. But the jailer had taken
Paul and Silas into his house. Paul had preached the Gospel to
him and to all in his house. There is no indication of haste there. He
then took them, washed their wounds, and he was baptized and his
house. There is no indication of haste there. He then brought
them into his house, set meat before them, and he rejoiced, believing
in God with all has house. There are no marks of haste there.
All presents the appearance of deliberation and composure. “It
is incredible,” we are informed, “ that this baptism was by dipping.
We cannot believe without proofs; and here every feature of the
transaction is in the teeth of the hypothesis. It is as mere an as-
sumption as ever trifled with the legitimate interpretations of his-
tory.” Evoe ! Grand words these, Dr. ! How fond you are of
plunging into the incredibilities ; of asserting “ without proof,” and
of contemptuously charging us with assumptions. How marvel-
lously you would be improved, Dr., if you had a little more courtesy.
But we fear it is too late.
The next case is that of Stephanas. Paul baptized him and his
household, about which our antagonist does not think it worth


while to say much. But he does say, “ households are unequivo-
cally on our side.” Are they indeed ! “It will,” he tells us, “be
time enough to acknowledge our mistake when our sanguine oppo-
nents have ascertained on good grounds that in the household of Ste-
phanas, there was neither boy nor girl, neither child nor babe.” Well,
we must really confess our ignorance here. And how to get rid of it
we know not; for as the inspiring Spirit has not informed us, we
know of none who can supply the deficiency. Unless you can, Dr.
But this he has told us that the household of Stephanas, which
Paul had baptized, “ were the first fruits of Achaia, and that they
addicted themselves to the ministry of the saints ,” and there we must
leave it.
We have then a paragraph of the sheerest absurdity. It is in-
troduced thus ; “ It is a fact full of significance, that we never read,
never fall upon any trace of the baptism of the grown-up children
of Christian parents.” The insinuation obviously is, that such
children were baptized when their parents were baptized. That a
man, a Christian minister, a Doctor of Divinity in the bargain,
should record such a statement, literally confounds us. To say no-
thing with respect to the two facts, Ist, That the record in the
Acts of the Apostles as to the success of the Gospel among the
Jews, extends at the most not over more than three or four years;
and 2nd, Among the Gentiles from the time of Paul’s mission from
Antioch to his last visit to Jerusalem, extends only to about four-
teen years, and consequently affords not sufficient time for an ade-
quate development of facts. But leaving this out of the question
altogether, there is another reason out of many, that the economy of
the New Testament recognizes no distinction anywhere between the
children of Christian parents and the children of heathen parents
as such. The children of the one and of the other were believers
or unbelievers. If believers, they were baptized ;if unbelievers,
they were unbaptized. It contains no intimation of a middle class
in the covenant of grace by virtue of natural birth from a believing
parent. That is a figment found only in human systems of theo-
logy and not in the New Testament. Hence the strange hallucina-
tion of our opponent.
We are then introduced to a theological discussion and inter-
pretation, combined as usual with not a little theological scorn of
the Anabaptists, on two texts, Bom. vi. 3,4, and Colossians ii. 12.
“ We say frankly,” says our adversary, “ that, unless the wish had
been father to the thought, no such allusion would have been
discovered by the most microspic eye in either of these verses.”
“ The exegetical ingenuity,” he further says, “ that detects the mode
of baptism by water in these inspired expressions possesses the
subtle quality that extracts sunbeams from cucumbers, —is just a
new phase of the alchymists’ power of transmutation.” We suppose
you consider this bit of rhetoric fine and smart, Dr.


But let us give the passages. The first is Rom. vi. 3— 5.
“ Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Christ were
baptized into his death 1 Therefore we are buried with him by
baptism into death ; that like as Christ was raised up from the dead,
by the glory of the Father , even so we also should walk in newness of
life. For if we have been planted in the likeness of his death , we
shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection.” “ That there can he
no allusion here to the mode of baptism is evident,” says our sage
Theologian, “ from the fact that burying , and planting and crucify-
ing have the same meaning.” The same meaning ! This is to be
accepted, we suppose, as erudition of the same kind as
that which derives church from oikos. The Anabaptists are then
compared to Romanists who pervert Scripture to give shape and
currency to an invention of their own." How polite ! “ Quite as
flagrant,” says our learned Dr., “is their mistake as to the nature
of the process here described as burying ,” which is followed by some
“ erudite” remarks about the burying and sepulchres of the ancients,
displaying about as much ignorance as is usually found in this
profound pamphlet. We shall however pass it over as unworthy of
the space it would occupy to expose it, except the following elegant
and splendid passage of which our readers ought not to be deprived.
“ The burying was after a very different mode from ours. And this
simple and notorious fact stamps extravagance on the farfetched and
bizarre interpretation of our Anabaptist neighbours.” Poor things !
How these Anabaptists ought to tremble before this Presbyterian
giant ! But he goes on. “ For to be planted is to be born again.”
This is called exegetical theology ! We are told however “ that it
is egregious tampering with the word of inspiration to coerce this
Scripture into a contribution to the cause of Anabaptism. Let
them be consistent and hoist the flag of baptismal regeneration, for
never until they have identified the work of the Spirit renewing the
soul, with the operations of men in dealing with the body, can
they find in this passage the colour of an apology for their
grievous commandment .” We cannot put down the word which first
rose to our lips on reading this whole paragraph, lest our readers
should consider us rude. But if this is to be called theology, we
say it in all seriousness, The good Lord deliver us from it. Are
we to understand that this also is a specimen of the “ quiet and
massive grandeur of the laborious preaching” to be heard in Chalmers’
Church 1 If so, people have strange tastes.
So in reference to the passage in Colossians ii. 12. “ Buried
rvith him in baptism wherein ye are risen with him through the faith
of the operation of God.” Here too this arrogant Dr. speaks in the
same contemptuous tone of the Baptists. “ The question is,” he
says, “ does the apostle here allude to the external ordinance 1 The
Anabaptists allege that he does. What is their proof? They
have none. They make the assertion and stand by it. No man


will dispossess them of their conviction. They have said it, and
they will say it, for no reason whatever but that the word buried
seems to favour their darling idea.” And this Reverend Divine
expects to be treated as a gentleman. He may expect it when he
lays aside his vulgar insinuations, and rude scurrility. Not till
then. We will however endeavour to put him to the blush, if he is
capable of it, by some quotations, not from the writings of Baptists,
nor from those of Sciolists like himself, but of others whose
writings have a reputation co-extensive with the Christian world.
Doddridge says, “It seems but the part of candour to confess that
here (Rom. vi. 3,4) is an allusion to the manner of baptizing by
immersion as most usual in those early times.” Adam Clarke says,
“It is probable that the Apostle here alludes to the mode of
administering baptism by immersion, the whole body being put
under water." Bloomfield says (in his Greek Testament), “There
is a plain allusion to the ancient custom of baptism by immersion.”
Trollope says (Greek Testament), speaking of the typical nature of
baptism “ wherein the immersion of the body in imitation of
Christ’s death and burial for sin implies an engagement to die
from sin, and the rising from the water in imitation of his resurrec-
tion.” Jowett says, “ The meaning of this verse will be more
clearly brought out, if we recall the picture of baptism in the
apostolic age, when the rite was performed by immersion, and
Christians might be said to be buried with Christ.” Conybeare and
Howson say, “ This passage cannot be understood unless it is borne
in mind that the primitive baptism was by immersion.” Ellicott
says (on Col. ii. 12), “ There seems no reason to doubt that both
here and in Romans, there is an allusion to the sinking down
(katadusis and anadusis) and rising up again in baptism.” Alford
gives no comment of his own but quotes from Chrysostom which
we may translate, “ For when we sink down our heads in the
water as in a kind of tomb, the old man is buried, and sinking
down beneath is wholly and at once concealed ; then when we
emerge, the new man comes up again.” The last clause from
Chrysostom Alford has not quoted. Dr. Chalmers too seems to
have had “the subtle quality of extracting sunbeams from
cucumbers,” using the elegant figure of our opponent, and the
hardihood of “ egregiously tampering with the word of inspiration,”
like those who think to detect “ the mode of baptism in these
inspired expressions. His words are these, (Vol. xiii. p. 64). “ The
original meaning of the word baptize is immersion, and though we
regard it as a point of indifference, whether the ordinance so named
be performed in this way or by sprinkling,—yet we doubt not
that the prevalent style of the administration in the Apostle’s days,
was by an actual submerging of the whole body under water, we
advert to this for the purpose of throwing light on the analogy that
is instituted m these verses. (Rom. vi. 3,4.) Jesus Christ by


his death underwent this sort of baptism, even immersion under
the surface of the ground, whence he soon emerged again by his
resurrection. We by being baptized into his death, are conceived
to have made a similar translation, in the act of descending under
the water of baptism to have resigned an old life, and in the act
of ascending to emerge into a second or a new life.” Had this Ur.
of ours a spark of the generous candour, the simplicity of spirit,
and the noble manliness which distinguished that great man, we
should have had to do with a very different opponent from the one
we have to encounter. Character is sometimes elucidated by con-
trasts.
Having quoted from these modern authors, we will give a few
from the Fathers, beginning with Cyril of Jerusalem. Out of five
passages bearing on the same texts we will, for the sake of brevity
take one. When speaking of baptism he says, “So also thou having
gone down (katabas) into the water, and in a manner buried in the
water, as Christ in the rock, art raised again, walking in newness of
life.” Basil of Caesarea says, “ Imitating the burial of Christ, for
the bodies of those baptized are, as it were buried in the water.”
There are two other passages having a similar reference. We have
already quoted a passage from Chrysostom, we will give another:
“For to be baptized and to sink down (Jcataduesthai), then to
emerge, is a symbol of the descent into the invisible world (hades),
and of the ascent from thence. Therefore the apostle calls baptism
the tomb, saying, we are buried with him by baptism.” Athanasius,
speaking of baptism, says, “ Thou didst imitate in the sinking down
(katadusei) the burial of thy Master, but thou didst rise again
from thence.” Gregory Nazianzen, when speaking also of baptism,
says, “ Let us therefore be buried with Christ by baptism, that we
may also rise with him ; Let us go down with him, that we may be
also exalted with him ; let us come up with him that we may be also
glorified with him.” We might also quote from John of Damascus,
from Theophylact, from Hippolytus, from the Latin Fathers
Tertullian and Ambrose if space permitted.
But passing from the Fathers to times subsequent to the Reforma-
tion. Peter Martyr says, “As Christ by baptism hath drawn us
with him into his death and burial, so he hath drawn us out into
life. This doth the dipping into the water, and the issuing forth
again when we are baptized signify.” Jeremy Taylor says, “ The old
man is buried in the immersion under water, and when the bap-
tized person is lifted up from the water it represents the resurrection
of the new man to newness of life.” Dr. Hammond says, “It is a
thing that every Christain knows that the immersion in baptism re-
fers to the death of Christ, the putting the person into the water
denotes and proclaims the death and burial of Christ.” Cornelius
a Lapide says, “ We are baptized into a similitude of the death of
Christ. For they who are put under the water allegorically repre-


sent the Christ dead and buried.” Leighton says, referring to Rom.
vi. 4, “The dipping into the water represents our dying with
Christ, and the return from thence, our rising with him.” Hornbeek
referring to Col. ii. 12: “As our conformity with Christ consists
in dying and rising again with him. This is clearly presented to
our view by that immersion and emersion which are in baptism.”
Yitringa says, “To be immersed in water, and to be under water, re-
present the death and burial of our old man in virtue of the death
of Christ. To emerge out of the water signifies our being saved
from death and our being raised again to a new life.”
Booth has also given us quotations from the following authors,
with accurate references ; Witsius, Frankius, Baxter, Saurin, Dr. T.
Goodwin, Turretine, Bishop Patrick, Polhill, Scudder, Gerhard,
Buddaeus, Whitby, Bp. Hall, Pictetus, Bucan, Bp Davenant,
Maestricht, Grotius, Burkitt, Zauchius, Castalio, Stapfer, Lampe,
Manton, Altingius, Wolfius, Yossius, Luther, etc., etc., to num-
ber of seventy-five, all of whom agree in their intrepretation of
these two passages as alluding to the immersion of the body in
water. And not one of these belonged to the Baptist Denomination.
In the judgment then of our opponent all these eminent men,
scholars and commentators, possess “ the subtle quality of ex-
tracting sunbeams from cucumbers.” We should be sorry if any
of our readers were to suppose we have made these quotations and
references for the mere purpose of parade, our sole object is, if
possible, to overwhelm with shame this reckless writer.
YIII.
After wading thus far through the preceding articles with weary
struggle, and coming in contact with all the forms and expressions
of scorn, and derision, and sneering sarcasm, and haughty arrogance,
and supercilious disdain of the Anabaptists, clearly for no other
purpose than to involve them in dishonour in public estimation , it
will be easily conceived with what intense displacency we read the
first sentences of this concluding paper; “ There are few things
dearer to us than fellowship, true brotherly fellowship amongst the
disciples of the Lord Jesus, and few things more painful than
the prevention of such fellowship by alienated feelings or an
offensive policy. We trust we have a becoming appreciation
of the apostolic precept to keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, and are willing to bear much, and forego much, that
Christ’s mystical body may not be wounded, and that its dissevered
members may be reconciled.” After the spirit revealed in this
pamphlet can you peruse that, gentle reader, without a feeling ap-
proaching to intense repugnance. It is obvious that he considers the
Anabaptists are either not a part of “ Christ’s mystical body,” or


that they are just that part which he deems it incumbent upon him
to lacerate and wound, and to which he has no wish to be reconciled,
otherwise he would not have caused an impassable gulf between
himself and them by violating all the laws of Christian decorum.
But after having assailed the denomination by language the most
offensive, he thinks to escape from the melee by telling us he has only
to find fault “with a certain party.” And, pray, who is the “certain
party T Why not speak out 1 You must-have known, sir, the party
to which you refer. Why then assail a whole body of Christians
because of a “ certain party V’ Where is the honesty, the equity,
the Christianity of such a proceeding 1 But what* has this party
done to fire your spirit to such intense indignation 1 You charge it
with propagandism and proselytism. Define your charges, and
prove them. Why deal in vague generalities and loose inuendoes ?
Come to something more definite and palpable, that we may know
what to do. The fact is you cannot. You conceal your meaning
behind an ambiguous phraseology, because it will more effectually
screen your purpose of conveying to the public mind a detrimental
impression of those whom you were so intensely eager to malign.
“ The Anabaptist body,” we are told, “ consists of many sections.”
Not quite so many as the Presbyterian body. But we are indulged
with a classification.
The first is that represented by Dr. Innes. We had not the
pleasure of knowing Dr. Innes, except by report. But if he was
what we believe him to have been, such was his sense of Christian
honour, that he would have separated himself from all intercourse
with a writer of such a pamphlet as this.
From the ignorance, and insulting offensiveness of the fol-
lowing paragraph it is difficult to avoid language of more than
ordinary severity: “ Another branch,” we are told, “of the
Anabaptist persuasion is distinguished by the severe and unbending
rigour with which they limit baptism to immersion, and condemn,
and of course refuse to acknowledge any other mode of baptism, as
a positive infraction of the will or express appointment of Christ.”
By what authority, we should like to know, does this erudite
Paedobaptist claim to himself the right of deceiving the public by
the grossest misrepresentations, when his ignorance so completely
disqualifies him from writing truthfully on such a subject. He seems
perfectly unconscious of the fact, that there is no such “ branch ” of
the Anabaptist persuasion in existence as he specifies, for there is not
a Baptist in any part of the two hemispheres but believes baptism to
be immersion and nothing else, and is compelled, by the very
evidence on which his convictions rest, to refuse to acknowledge any
other mode of applying water to be baptism. Why then speak of
“ another branch 1 ?” “ With this class,” it is said, “ those who have
not been immersed are not baptized.” Will this “ skilled conjuror ”
condescend to inform us to what other conclusion they can come ?


But “ not being baptized,” he says, “ they are not members of the
church, and, therefore, not in communion with it.” This is an
abominable insinuation. There is not a Baptist in the whole of our
denomination, who is not a monomaniac, who would say, that indi-
viduals “ are not members of the church,” because they have not
been immersed. They regard all as “ members of the church ” who
believe in Christ and love his name. Would nothing less than a
recorded libel against a whole body of Christians satisfy him
in order to gratify his resentment] “The conclusion,” he tells us,
“is startling.” Yes, but it is only a conclusion from his own
imaginary logic. “ Seeing,” he says, “ that it virtually un-
churches every existing church, except that of the most rigid
sect —the Anaptists, and excommunicates ninety-nine out of
every hundred of the saints of God,” etc. That is, his own con-
clusion does, which his morbid fancy has deduced from his fanciful
premises, not any theory of the Baptists. “Of this uncompromising
body,” we are told, “ there are two parties known to us.—One who
hold their terrible belief quietly,” (What terrible belief ]) “ and
hesitate to put the match to their loaded shell.” It seems, according
to the figure of this elegant writer, that they keep their bombs
pretty well loaded with theological powder, but they are such
despicable poltroons that they dare not apply “ the match.” But
it appears there is another party, “ who glory in their attainment,
and would compass sea and land to make a proselyte.” Beautiful
charity ! Lovely exhibition of an ardently aspiring mind after
“ true brotherly fellowship with the disciples of the Lord Jesus !”
How the bewitching graces of Christianity cluster around this Dr.,
fascinating every eye, and endearing him to every heart!!
We have then the authority of Fuller quoted, but to which of
these two “ terrible” parties of the Anabaptists he belonged, he does
not tell us, but he does tell us how greatly he “ admires ” him,
except “ his narrow-minded views on this simple point.” For the
sake possibly, of some of our readers it may be needful to say that
there are two classes in our denomination, but neither of which
corresponds to the caricature this writer has drawn. The one class
is designated “ Strict Baptists,” because they refuse to admit to the
Lord’s table unbaptized persons, thus regarding baptism as a term
of communion. The other class is called “ Open Communionists,”
because they admit all the professed followers of Christ to their
communion, whether Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Wesleyans, or
Independents. They make no distinction, thus regarding faith in
Christ alone, and not baptism, as the exclusive term of communion.
Who would ever dream of this, from the vague and scurrilous state-
ments of this pamphlet ] We have however a question to ask of
this Presbyterian Divine. Is it, or is it not a fact, that you would
refuse communion to an unbaptized person ] If it be, you adopt
the very principle of Fuller. But you say you are a Baptist as well


as we. Then you are a Strict Baptist, you belong to the “ rigid
sect,” —the sect we presume that keeps the “ loaded shells.” Is not
however the chagrin which you feel, and the source of your abuse
just here, that Fuller and those who think with him will not admit
the validity of your baptism! But do you not act on the same principle
with the Quakers 1 No matter however pious and holy they may be
because they have not been baptized with water, you refuse them fel-
lowship, though they may have received the baptism of the Spirit, the
only baptism they admit. Just so the Strict Communionist in our body,
on the same principle refuses you fellowship at his table, because
you have not been immersed in water, which he regards as the only
true baptism. Why then should they be stigmatized as bigoted and
narrow-minded, while you arrogate to yourself the praise of mar-
vellous liberality. But the Open Communionists admit all who love
the Saviour, without distinction, to their table. And all the
churches belonging to the Baptist Association in Victoria, which
are the representatives of the Baptist denomination in this colony,
are we believe Open Communionists. As to which of the two then
it is that deserves the brand of bigotry and uncharitableness, this
libeller of the Baptists or we, we leave our readers to determine.
“ Mr. Fuller,” this Divine tells us, “ then refers to an incident in
the history of that pious prince Manasseh, &c,” Was this intended
as a sarcastic slur on that great man! It seems very much like it.
Pious Prince Manasseh , forsooth ! Where does Fuller make such a
reference 1 Nowhere. This writer merely fancies it, and down it
goes on his page as a fact. Or, perhaps, this is another instance of
the slovenly way in which this writer makes his quotations. “It
was then the opinion of this eminent Divine,” we are told, “ that
our baptism is invalid.” To be sure it was. And what other
opinion could he entertain 1 But do you not regard the baptism of
the Quaker as invalid ? “ That in consequence,” you say, “we are
not qualified to partake of the Lord’s supper.” And do you not
treat the Quaker, though he be as excellent as Paul, as one dis-
qualified to partake with you at the Lord’s supper 1 because he has
not been baptized with your water. “It is saddening,” you say,
“to contemplate the effects of this principle.” But the principle is
your own, not that of the Baptists in this colony, though you wish
to palm it on us. Thus you are realizing in yourself your own
beautiful figure, of the “ fleshless rawboned spectre,” which in your
exquisite taste, and celestial charity, you would incarnate in the
church of Christ dwarfed to Anabaptism.
Then follow two long paragraphs so utterly nonsensical that they
are not worth the trouble of an exposure. It seems however that
this hierophant of the Presbyterian body offers us certain terms as a
condition of future fellowship, amounting to an acknowledgment of
the validity of his baptism, which is equivalent to a requiring us to
admit as true, what we believe to be false. And after thus submit-


ing to us an impossibility, he threatens that unless we comply with
this impossibility, we are to be excommunicated. Terrible alterna-
tive ! Sufficient to carry dismay to the very heart of the Baptist
churches. However he need not trouble himself with pronouncing
the official sentence, the mind of the Baptists in this colony is
made up, and it is this : No more fellowship with Dr. Cairns
UNTIL HE HAS REPENTED OF, AND RETRACTED HIS SCURRILOUS LIBEL
on the Baptist Denomination.
We now come to the affair of Lacroix. For the information of
our readers we may state that Mr. Lacroix was an amiable, inde-
fatigable, and efficient missionary in India in connection with the
London Missionary Society. From his life it appears that he was
on most friendly terms with the Baptist missionaries, and some of
them with whom he was more intimate he highly esteemed, and
throughout the whole biography we cannot find that he had any un-
pleasantness with any of our missionaries. It would seem, however,
that at a certain period of his life some Puseyite missionaries of the Pro-
pagation Society of the Church of England invaded the sphere of
his labours, and sought to damage his missionary and ministerial
character in the estimation of his own converts. This severely
wounded him, and drew from him some strong expressions of re-
sentment, which also led him to lay the case before Bishop Corrie,
the then bishop of Calcutta, who gave him “ the written assurance ”
that for the future his missionary labours should not be interfered
with. Such then are the facts of the case. But could it be believed,
unless it had been done, that this honourable antagonist of ours,
in his fiery zeal to brand the Baptists with a stigma, takes hold of
these facts, and imputes what was done by these Puseyites to some
young Anabaptist missionaries, thus falsifying the facts apparently
to answer a sinister purpose, and leaving out the sentence, in his
quotation from Lacroix, in reference to Bishop Corrie which
would have exposed the cheat, and would have prevented it
from taking effect. A gentleman in the colony who knew
lacroix well, and who was acquainted with the whole affair,
wrote to the A. Evangelist to expose this nefarious deed, and
what was the result. This accuser of our brethren sends a lame
statement to the Presbyterian Messenger, in which the charge was
made, and says “it was a mistake of ignorance, that is all.” No
apology is made, no regret is felt, no sorrow is expressed for having
traduced our missionaries in the East, and for the odium he sought
to bring on the Baptists here. But with the most perfect non-
chalance he says “itis a mistake of ignorance, that is all.” Now
what are we to think of this man, this professing Christian, this
minister of Jesus Christ, this Doctor of Divinity 1 We say what
are we to think of him ? We will at least tell him this that if he
had been connected with any commercial guild he would have been
blackballed out of it as an unworthy member, unless he had made an


apology. But being a minister of Jesus Christ, his brethren can
look on and what 1 laugh at it, and think it a good joke 1 God
forbid that we should think so ; but look on and perhaps mourn in
secret that one of their number should so far forget himself as to be
guilty of such a violation of Christian honour. He, however, en-
deavours to shelter himself behind the Evangelical Christendom ,
and says he took his quotation of Lacroix “ verbatim” from that
periodical. Shall we convict him of an untruth % The Evangelical
Christendom is lying before us as we write, and we assert that he
did not take his quotation “ verbatim” from thence, for he has de-
liberately left out the sentence in reference to Bishop Corrie which
would have explained at once that it could not refer to Baptist
missionaries. But it seems this Jupiter gyrates in an orbit far be-
yond the conventional laws of inferior planets. He may think so.
But we have no hesitation in telling him that until he has made
an honourable acknowledgement in this matter, we shall hold
him guilty of an action worthy only of Christian reprobation and
rebuke.
Of a piece with the rest is the reference in this pamphlet to
the correspondence between Dr. Dill and the Rev. J. G. M‘Yicker,
of Ballymena, in Ireland. We have this correspondence too before
us, and a more insolent and arrogant document we never read
than that of Dr. Dill’s, except it be that of this Melbourne D.D.
In fact, our opponent seems to have caught his inspiration from
Dr. Dill; so great is the similarity in many points between the
two. But we should be willing to submit to any gentleman of
fairness and judgement whether the reply of Mr. M‘Vicker is
not a noble, manly, dignified rebuke administered to Dr. Dill,
and whether it is not a triumphant refutation of his false and
calumnious charges. We will give a few sentences, from whiih
it will be seen that our brethren have to do elsewhere what ve
have to do here.
“ Let me here dispose of the accusations with which your letter brisths
from beginning to end, and which I deliberately declare, with the clearest
sense of the gravity of the statement, to he wholly untrue. It is not the
truth that in our progress here we have pursued a course of the most meat
and unworthy proselytism. We claim the liberty, in public and private
of stating and defending ourviews, and call that right by what ill names you
please, we mean never to surrender it. But I can say for myself that I have
erred in abstaining from the very course with which you have charged us.
For nearly two years I avoided answering publicly the reiterated attacks
made on our views from almost every pulpit in this neighbourhood. And
in private 1 can appeal to every member of our church, and to those with
whom I have associated outside of it, how carefully I have shunned even the
appearance of attempting proselytism. I have very seldom spoken to them
who have united with us, till they came to tell me that they had found our
principles in the Bible.
“It is equally untrue that we have circulated Jesuitical tracts. After the
Tracts on Presbyterianism, Mo. 1, No. 2, &c., &c.; after your attack on us
in your ‘ Old Paths after slanders against us in anonymous pamphlets.


distributed in Presbyterian pews, and so forth, you have scarcely room to
complain of any kind of discussions through the press, and certainly not of
free and fair discussion, &c. &c.”
These quotations convey but a very defective impression of the
character of M‘Yicker’s entire reply.
But passing to another topic, we are informed that “ according
to the confident and reiterated assurances of our energetic neigh-
bours, their success is prodigious, their prospects animating, and
our annihilation an inevitable event. Were we to judge by the
loudness of their clarion, our danger is imminent, and the day
is at hand when the entire colony is to be dipt.” This is an-
other specimen of this Doctor’s rhetorical mendacity. But
he goes on. “ And the exertions to achieve such a glorious con-
quest are worthy of the ardour which sustains the cause. What
think our readers,” he. says, “of a champion of this intrusive host
asking a certain chapel for a certain time, and obtaining the use of it
in the belief that the object in view was the preaching of the gospel \
Fancy the ministers of the place attending out of respect for a
brother minister, and with no idea in their minds but that
they were to hear the heavenly message from his lips; and judge of
their feelings when the Anabaptist brother (brother !) treated them
to an exposition of his principles, preached his system, much to his
own satisfaction, and to their great surprise. Melbourne and its
vicinity has for some time enjoyed the best services of this hopeful
race.” There is something so excessively offensive in this Dr. in
every topic he touches, that it is exceedingly difficult to keep within
the bounds of ordinary propriety in remarking on his conduct. One
would have thought that having heard the report to which he here
refers, a little common sense, especially if it had been mingled
with the smallest amount of kindly feeling, would have suggested
the probability that there must be some defect in the statement, for
that no man, except an ignorant fanatic, could have been guilty of
the indecorum here attributed to Mr. Taylor. There is, however,
nothing too extravagant to be said to the dishonour of the Anabap-
tists, but such is the excess of credulity in this writer that he as
readily believes it as a child believes the story of Jack the Giant
Killer, But when Mr. Taylor has distinctly told us, that he had
been solicited to give a lecture on the nature and design of Christian
baptism ; that the Wesleyan Chapel had been kindly granted, with
this understanding ; that he had no more to do with obtaining the
chapel than this Dr. himself; that he knew nothing about it till he
arrived in Williamstown ; and that conscious of the awkward position
in which he was placed, he apologized to his audience. One would
naturally suppose that this ought to have been enough, and that the
story would not have been told again. And it would have been
enough for any gentleman with but the smallest amount of candour in
his nature. Not so with this Presbyterian Divine. He allows the


statement to remain, and aggravates it by an insulting note, which
he concludes by saying : “ The part acted by Mr. Taylor was in very
bad taste, and a singular display of self-complacency.” Bad taste!
And this charge coming from the writer of a pamphlet disfigured
and blotched throughout with the very quality he imputes. Self-
complacency! forsooth, insinuated by one whose exorbitant vanity
nothing seems to have power to limit or repress. Oh !it is sickening
work to have to do with one so reckless in his assertions, and so
utterly regardless of the principles of honourable controversy.
“It is painful,” this libeller says, “to be obliged to say as far as
our knowledge goes, the government of other churches, and the
most manifest rights of ministers are deliberately ignored by the
emissaries of this sect!' How ? When 1 Where 1 By whom 1
Who are the emissaries of this sect 1 This writer has so exhausted
our charity, that it is difficult for us to believe otherwise than that
something is referred to here, which, if fairly known, would give to
this offensive statement the colour and the force of a falsehood.
“ The work of conversion,” he says, “to their creed is carried on
in secret.” May God in mercy forgive his scandalous
imputations ! If he do not prove his statements, we wonder how he
can think to avoid being branded before the Church and the world
as a calumniator. But we have done. That this pamphlet should
conclude with what appears to us so much like hypocrisy awakens
our unmitigated disgust. “We hare written it is said, “ not in
anger hut in sorrow, We desire peace; we thirst for genuine unity!'
We will, however, be guilty of no such mockery. We have written
in righteous indignation against the spirit revealed throughout the
whole of this pamphlet; and we desire no peace ; we thirst for no
unity; we pant for no fellowship with a man who could so
deliberately set himself to vilify, to misrepresent, to treat with scorn
a whole body of Christians without any adequate provocation, until
he possesses another and a better mind. And our prayer for him
is that he may speedily possess it.


LETTER FIRST.
TO DR. CAIRNS.
Sir, —I offer you no apology for treating you in the manner I
have done in the preceding remarks. You have deserved it. Every
one who knows me, knows that it is neither natural, nor grateful to
me to write in this strain. But I have yielded to a sense of duty,
in order that you may know that you shall not be permitted to act
in the manner you have done towards a whole denomination of
Christians, without reprehension and severe rebuke. If you had felt
that there was a necessity laid upon you to oppose and controvert
our views of baptism, there was a Christian mode of doing it, which
however you have not thought proper to adopt, but you have
stooped to the despicable device of endeavouring to involve us in
contempt, as the more effectual way of accomplishing your object,
rather than by fair and scriptural argument. The rose of charity
was too sweet, therefore you must substitute the hemlock of bitter
sarcasm and scorn. Or if it had come to your knowledge that un-
worthy means were being employed, by some individuals to propa-
gate our views, it was easy to specify those means, and to single out
those individuals, but it was base to impute such practices as charac-
teristic of the whole body. I charge upon you therefore the re-
sponsibility of introducing into this controversy a spirit which can
have no other effect than that of embittering and alienating the
hearts of Christians from each other, among whom there is little
enough already of that brotherly love you so loudly profess, and
which ought to be their crowning excellence. You have done mis-
chief by your pamphlet which you will never repair to your dying
day. In proportion to your influence among the Presbyterians you
have awakened suspicions, and given birth to feelings against the
Baptists, which years will not subdue. And if this thought gives you
pleasure, lam truly sorry for it; I trust however the day will come,
when it will be to you a source of bitter remorse, and penitential
pain.
But pray what right have you to indulge in the spirit you have
thus revealed 1 Whence have you derived your authority to assume
this haughty and imperious style ? We are accustomed to pay de-
ference to men of distinguished genius, of intellectual power, of


eminent attainments, of solid learning, and of superior excellence.
But if we are to judge from your present production, we should like
to know what claims you can prefer to deference on any such
grounds ? Until you can show something better than this, we dis-
pute your claims, and will yield you no deference beyond what is
due from one man to another. I can assure you, that you will act
wisely to give up this sort of thing, and to take your position
abreast of your humbler brethren. Knowing something of human
nature, I tell you without misgiving that your comfort and honour
depend upon it. The lesson of your Divine Master ought not to
be lost upon you, “ lie that humbleth himself shall he exalted , he
that exalteth himself shall he abased.”
But I am told you are kind ; well, I will believe it, —that you
are generous ; I will not dispute it, —that you are hospitable ; I am
glad to hear it, —that you are beloved by your people; I congratulate
you upon the fact, —and that you have been useful in the colony ;
all honour to you, to that extent; I will not rob you of a single ray
of the glory your Lord has put upon you. But it is obvious there
is a sad foil to your excellencies. It is only needful for a little
opposition to be offered you, in order to bring out the more vulgar
elements of your character. It is clear you can be rude, you can
be offensive, you can be excessively disagreeable. You can surrender
yourself to the dominion of unlovely tempers, and violent passions ;
you can indulge in coarse unmeasured invective against both “ real
and imaginary foes,” when it will serve your end. But it is a pity,
Dr., a great pity, that your virtues should be sullied by such glaring
faults. If you had a little more of the meekness, the gentleness,
the patience and the forbearance of your Master and mine, there is
no question but it would bring you more peace, it would secure you
more love, it would render you more useful, it would make you
fewer enemies, it would less grieve your friends, and would supply
them with fewer occasions to apologise for your infirmities, while it
is highly probable your last would be your best days. It is not
every one that will tell you these things, Dr., and you ought to
account me one of your best friends for venturing to do so. Doubt-
less a private admonition would have been more grateful than this
public one. But what hopes of access to your presence could
be entertained by an Anabaptist for such a purpose ? If, how-
ever you will not regard me as a friend, then “ Fas est et ah hoste
doceri.” Should the lesson be received and have its effect, the
obligation will not be diminished.
From your singular preface, which is of a piece with the rest of
your pamphlet, you seem to be perfectly unconscious of the distinc-
tion between a statement of inferences as flowing from an admission
of certain truths, and what is positively offensive in tone and man-
ner and spirit, and is designed to be offensive. This is the charge
we bring against you. If any Baptist, whether in the Evangelist


or elsewhere, should say anything to wound the sacred feelings of
other Christians, let him be reprehended as severely as he deserves.
But where is the equity of treating this as a distinguishing feature of
the entire denomination ? Had your attack been designedly directed
against the Evangelist , why not say so I In that case the defence
would have been left to the Editor, who is perfectly capable of
taking care of himself. But it seems, according to your finely
balanced judgment, that the sins of the Evangelist ought to be visited
on the entire body. Hence, without distinction you have assailed
these Anabaptists, as you sneeringly call them, with an asperity and
a virulence which do you little credit.
It would appear however that whatever may be the offence of
which Mr. Taylor has been guilty, it is far surpassed in turpitude
by that which is attributed to me. And the ground of it is, my
suspicion of your “ professions of brotherly love.” Pray can you
tell me why you are to be considered as so “ hedged” round by an
inviolable sacredness, that you are to claim an exemption from the
laws of legitimate inference 1 ? We have it on high authority, “By
their fruits ye shall know them.” Well, is not your “ fruit” to be
found throughout the whole of this production 1 ? Surely we may
fairly infer the spirit of a man from what he says and does, and
from his manner of saying and doing it. And I would submit to
any reader of your pamphlet, whether he could by any possibility
conclude that the writer was under the influence of Christian love
to the A nabaptists when he composed it ? Is there any one sentence
from which he could draw such an inference ? But are there not
many, nay, would not the entire drift of your publication lead
to an opposite conclusion ? What then are all your professions in
front of such evidence ?
But you accuse me of “ scandalous licence.” Scandalous licence!
Indeed ! This comes with a singular grace from one who has
acheived a bad pre-eminence in this matter. It is a common thought
that the conspicuous faults by which individuals are distinguished,
they are the most apt to suspect in others. I have then some few
questions to ask you, was there no “ scandalous licence ” on your
part, when you made your clumsy attack on Mr. Ramsay, because
he would not join your Union ? Was there no “ scandalous
licence” in your rude behaviour to Mr. Wade, at a meeting assem-
bled for purposes of devotion, and when three gentlemen of the
Evangelical Alliance were appointed to wait upon you for an ex-
planation, and when you refused to see them ? Was there no
“ scandalous licence ” when you made Mr. Hetherington’s church
reverberate with your violent abuse of those who dared to differ
from you on the Sabbath question ; and when some of your
friends were grieved, and knew not how to frame an apology for
you? Was there no “scandalous licence ” when, in the midst of
your General Assembly, you stood up and uttered that astounding


statement, which appeared next morning in the papers, in reference
to a pamphlet I had ventured to write on that subject ? Has there
been no “ scandalous licence ” in your attacks on me, in your own
pulpit, where you thought you could do it with impunity, and in
other parts of the colony, of which I have heard, with respect to
that production 1 Have the brethren of the Free Church 1 nay,
are you sure, perfectly sure that some of the ministers in your own
church have no grounds for a similar accusation ? You seem to have
acquired such a monopoly in this article, that you are jealously
suspicious lest others should share it with you. But if you wish it
you are welcome to it all. Let me beseech you however to quench
this unhallowed fire in your own bosom, Dr. “ Cast the beam out
of thine own eye.” “Physician heal thyself.” Breathe the prayer
every day, “ Set a watch O Lord on my mouth, keep the door of my
lips.” Then you will not only be less liable to the charge of
“ scandalous licence ” yourself, but be far less likely to impute your
own fault to me.
Hoping that from the lesson you have thus received, you will be
prompted to the acquisition of more grace and wisdom and love, I
subscribe myself, whether you believe it or not,
Your true friend,
ISAAC NEW.


LETTER SECOND.
TO THE P^EDOBAPTISTS.
Friends, — In my preceding “ Remarks ” I have had to encounter
an opponent, whose evident aim has been to cover the Bap-
tists with opprobrium, and to involve them in dishonour in
public estimation. And in doing so he has not hesitated to
resort to the most unworthy means, and to reveal a spirit of
bitterness but rarely seen in controversial writings. Scorn, sarcasm,
ridicule, and contempt pervade his entire pamphlet. In his assault
upon us he has charged us with propagandism, and proselytism ;
with working in secret to effect the conversion of others to our views ;
with using clandestine means to accomplish our purpose; with
employing emissaries for this end. He has characterised our preach-
ing and public ministrations in language of disgusting oifcnsiveness.
He has accused some of us of unchurching other churches; of
ignoring the government of other churches ; of invading the “ most
manifest rights of ministers,” and of “ excommunicating ninety-nine
out of every hundred of the saints of God.” He has designated
the economy of the Anabaptists as “ a monstrous economy ;” the
church of the Anabaptists as “ a branchless stem, as a fair body
cruelly mutilated /’ our doctrine as one “from which unvitiated
nature revolts with recoil/’ our hymns as teaching “ baptismal
regeneration /’ our service as “ grossly indelicate /’ as marring “ the
seemliness of the well-ordered services of the sanctuary /’ as shocking
“ the best feelings of the heart ;” as an “ offence against the modesty of
woman /’ as an “ offence against the decencies of worship /’ so that it
“ carries condemnation on its forehead .” It is insinuated that
“ pains are taken to magnify the baptismal tenet into a doctrine of
supreme importance ,” that it is “ permitted to assume the place of
a truth essential to salvationthat it is paraded “ in the broadest
glare of notoriety /’ that “ immersion is our perpetual shibboleth, “ and
that “it is so arranged as that it can become as imposing as a scenic
display." Not satisfied with all this, in a manner the most shame-
ful he has sought to traduce our missionaries in India by charges
grossly untrue, simply, for no other apparent purpose than to in-
volve the Baptists here in odium. To all which flagrant charges
nd insinuations, with all the indignation I can concentrate in


the words, I say they are false, utterly, shamefully, false. But
not content with this, to falsehood he has added insult, and to
insult mockery and scorn. We ask then, is this to be tolerated ?
Is even a Doctor of Divinity to violate all the proprieties of decorum
in assailing a body of Christians, whose reputation will sustain any
comparison, at least with the Presbyterians ? Will you sanction this ?
Will you encourage it ? Will you smile on such conduct in
approbation as something grateful to*your feelings? I will not
believe it, I cannot for a moment entertain such a suspicion. I feel
that to do so would be to treat you with dishonour.
I have been in the ministry six and thirty years. I have been
connected at home with three churches of considerable influence ;
but by these churches I do not remember that ever a tract was
disseminated on the subject of baptism. No means were ever
resorted to to propagate our baptismal views beyond what the
pulpit supplied. I have traversed a great part of England at dif-
ferent periods, and have been variously in contact with our churches,
but have never heard of any such charges or insinuations brought
against us as have been brought by this unscrupulous writer. I
have been in friendly intercourse and communion with numerous
ministers of other denominations, and cannot recollect a single
instance wherein our harmony was ever disturbed by our differences
on baptism. I came out here in a spirit of peace, never for a
moment anticipating that it would be interrupted by this question.
Since I have been here, the subject has seldom been introduced
into my public ministrations, except when the ordinance has been
administered, and then never but in a spirit of kindness and
courtesy towards those who differ from us. And now to be branded
as a proselytizer, a propagandist, one of those who employ emissaries
to work in secret, and who resort to underhand means to win over
others to our views, this is really too much to be endured. On my
own behalf, therefore, and on behalf of my people, and on behalf of
my brethren in the ministry, and of all our churches in this colony,
I cast back the imputations with ineffable disdain.
It may be said that the Baptists have often used language in
their publications in reference to the Pacdobaptists most offensive
and ungrateful. If so they have no defender in me, neither would
they have in our ministers generally. And whoever have done it
or may do it, let them be treated with all the severity,of reproba-
tion they deserve. It should, however, be remembered in all fairness
that the publications of the Baptists have been often written in
defence, and they have been frequently provoked to say \yhat
otherwise they would not. It may be thought I have treated our
opponent severely enough, but it would be exceedingly unjust to
leave out of the estimate the gross provocation we had received.
When Mr. Landells changed his views on baptism, he thought it
right from the position he had occupied to state publicly his reasons


for the change, but no one could accuse him of violating the law
of kindness towards those from whom he had separated, by anything
in that statement. The late excellent Mr. Fletcher delivered three
lectures as a kind of rejoinder, on the subject of baptism. But
though here and there, there was a tartness against the Baptists,
yet there was little or no departure from the spirit of Christian
courtesy and charity. Hence there was no poisoned sting in his
lectures. And there is not a Baptist in the colony but would have
as heartily and as affectionately given him the right hand of fellow-
ship after those lectures as before them. Then steps this Presby-
terian Divine into the field. And what could the Anabaptists ex-
pect from such an antagonist 1 His pamphlet is his memorial.
Friends, I honour your conscientious convictions. I should think
it wicked to treat them with levity, and much more so, to treat
them with merriment and ridicule. You attach importance to the
ordinance of Infant Baptism. On this point I have no dispute
with you in this letter. The members of the Church of England
are taught that by baptism they are made “ members of Christ,
children of God, and inheritors of the kingdom of heaven. The
Presbyterians say that it is “ a sacrament, not only for the admission
of the party baptized into the visible church, but also to be unto
him for a sign and seal of the covenant of grace, of his ingrafting
into Christ, of regeneration, of remission of sins, and of his giving
up unto God through Jesus Christ, to walk in newness of life.”
lam not sure of the precise views entertained by our Wesleyan
friends, but judging from the lecture on the subject by the eloquent
Richard Watson, they appear to have an affinity with those of the
Presbyterians. Among the Congregationalists, there are those who
hold with Dr. Halley, and who think that all children without
distinction are entitled to the privileges of baptism ; and there are
those who hold with Dr. Wardlaw, who would limit it to the
children of believing parents. All, however, regard it as an ordi-
nance of divine appointment, conferring some special blessing, and
involving peculiar obligations. If so, these are sentiments not to
be concealed, but published; not to be kept back, but proclaimed
on the house top ; not to be held in abeyance, but propagated by
all fair and legitimate means. And we fully concede your right to
do this, not to concede it would be something worse than folly.
But it is a right involving a most sacred duty which you owe to
your Lord, and to all whom it may concern.
With respect to our views of baptism you are aware we simply
regard it as an act of personal obedience, to be rendered by one as
a public profession of his faith in Christ, of submission to His
authority, and of love to his name ; and that it can only be rightly
performed by immersion. We do not say that it makes the indivi-
dual submitting to the ordinance a child of God, or introduces him
into the covenant of grace, or confers on him any blessing, only so


far as an act of obedience performed in sincerity and faith must
ever secure the divine approbation, and consequently the divine
benediction. If then we concede to you the right and the duty of
propagating your convictions, whether by preaching, or tracts, or
books, or conversation, will you not concede the same right to us 1
Can you in equity deny it 1 Of course everything depends on the
spirit in which the right is exercised, and the duty discharged.
It is at all times difficult to adjust with accuracy the precise posi-
tion which such a subject as baptism should occupy in public
ministrations relatively to other great and essential truths. Every
one must and will be guided very much by his own feelings as to
the importance of the subject. Some may regard it as one of com-
parative indifference \ others may elevate it to a place in the
economy of Christian truth almost equal to those which are deemed
necessary to salvation. In either case it is to be regarded as an
error of judgment which it is our duty to tolerate. But of this I
am sure, that nothing ought to be treated with indifference which
our Lord has commanded ) and nothing ought to be magnified as of
pre-eminent moment, a mistake in reference to which does not
endanger the highest interests of the soul. And as diversified in-
fluences are ever operating to determine the faith of individuals
besides those which result from legitimate evidence in support of
any truth, interchanges will be perpetually going on between
different denominations. Some may therefore pass over from us
to you ; and some may pass over from you to us. But there is no
reason why this should be a cause of strife between us, or why we
should ungenerously impute to one another the use of all sorts of
sinister means to bring about such changes. Christian forbear-
ance is the great compensating law, an observance of which would
harmonize these disturbing elements, and prevent any serious mis-
chief. And this is our solemn and imperative Here we see
but in part, and know but in part. The grand adjustment of all
our conflicting differences is reserved for another economy. “When
that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be
done away.” In the meanwhile let us deal fairly and honourably
with one another. Let us cherish a mutual confidence, and a free-
dom from suspicion. “ Speaking the truth in love, is an eminent
Christian virtue. While therefore it is incumbent upon us honestly
to avow our convictions on all befitting occasions, it is equally
incumbent upon us to do it in kindness towards those who differ
from us. I have had no controversy with you in my preceding
“ Remarks,” but with him who has thought proper to become our
accuser. My spirit is for peace, I wish to give offence to none.
My conduct for five years in the colony is my testimony. I have
never attacked any one, though I have had several times to write
in defence against the attacks of others. As to the subject of bap-
tism, I care not if I never again put pen to paper upon it, and it


is a question whether I ever shall. These are dreary and profitless
conflicts. But we are not to be cowed into abject timidity by any
haughty and vulgar opponent, who may feel himself prompted to
step forward in order to vilify our denomination by scurrilous abuse
and false accusations.
With all consideration for your feelings, with all honour for your
convictions, and with all Christian respect as members of the
Church of Christ,
I am yours, most kindly,
ISAAC NEW.
WILSON AND MACKINNON, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.


