

T m liiDLii eitißßftlTl]@MB.
THE POOR AND FRIENDLESS BOYS OF SYDNEY.
LORD AND LADY CARRINGTON’S ENTERTAINMENT.
piihzi
Amongst the many festivities in connection with the Jubilee of Her Majesty
Queen Victoria, the entertainment by Lord and Lady Carrington of the poor
and friendless boys of Sydney deserves special mention. On Jubilee morning,
the 21st June, the lads engaged in selling newspapers in and about the
city, and the younger boys employed in the tobacco and other factories,
assembled to the number of about I,OQO at Captain Cook’s Statue, Hyde
Park, and were marched in orderly procession to the grounds in the vicinage
of Government House, where large luncheon marquees had been erected, and
every provision made for out-door recreation.
After the feast, which was a very liberal and keenly appreciated one,
had been concluded, and the speeches delivered, the National Anthem,
“ God bless the Prince of Wales,” and other patriotic songs were rendered,
the whole of the boys joining in the choruses. One of the boys—a lad
employed in one of the tobacco factories—then stepped forward to the plat-
form, and presented an address, on behalf of his fellow employees, to Lord
and Lady Carrington.
Lady Carrington briefly and feelingly responded, and then handed to each
of the boys a medal, struck off to commemorate the occasion, and bearing on
one side the Australian coat of arms, with the inscription: “Born,May, 1819;
crowned, June, 1838; married, 1840:” with the words “God save the
Queen” above; and on the reverse the Queen’s head, encircled with the
inscription : “ To commemorate the Jubilee of the reign of Queen Victoria,
1887.”
Amongst those who had seats on the platform with His Excellency and
Lady Carrington were, the Hon. Sir Henry Parkes, K.0.M.G., and Miss
Parkes; the Hon. J, E. Burns, M.P.; the Mayor and Mayoress of Sydney
(Mr. and Mrs. A. J. Riley); Mr. and Mrs. J. R. Fairfax and Miss Fairfax;
Captain Gascoigne, A.H.0., and several other prominent public men, including
Messrs. John Davies, C.M.G., and George Lewis, who had charge of the
boys, and had interested themselves personally in the arrangements of tho
movement.
Speeches of Lord Carrington and Sir Henry Parkes.
After calling for three cheers for the Queen, which were lustily given by
the boys,—
Lord Cabeington said: Now, my boys, lam right glad to hear those
cheers. You are not only showing your allegiance to the illustrious lady who
so worthily wears the crown handed down from the days of King Alfred ;
you do far more than this—you are proving your intention to uphold and
maintain order and the law as it exists. You are proving yourselves worthy
► '"7


of jour glorious inheritance of freedom, and in Sir Henry Parkes* memorable
words, “As real asserters of liberty you rally round the throne upholding the
laws of our great country.” (Cheers.) It has been a great pleasure to
myself and to Lady Carrington to welcome you here to-day, and with all
sincerity we hope for your welfare, as it is in the hands of young Australia
that the future prosperity of this country mainly lies. (Hear, hear.) We
can congratulate ourselves that we live in these days. An honest, upright,
working man is no longer disqualified for the high offices of State. At this
very moment that I am speaking, the leader of the Conservative party in the
House of Commons in England is a bookseller. (Cheers.) The best men,
however humble their station, can come to the front. Many old harsh laws
have been done away with, and the result is a higher and a better standard.
No man considers it a reproach now to own that he comes Horn a humble
stock. I will give you an instance of a case in point. Nearly 200 years
ago, about the time when the battle of Blenheim was fought, and the
British took Gibraltar, and England and Scotland were united, in the reign
of good Queen Anne, a little boy, whose father kept a shop, lived in the
town of Nottingham, in England. The boy worked hard, and when as a
man he took over the business, people would give him valuables and money
to take care of when they went abroad, as the country was unsettled, and
roads were unsafe. He died at a good old age, respected by his fellow-
citizens, and left his sons to carry on his small bank. I, in the reign of good
Queen Victoria, am proud to be able to say that that little boy was the
founder of my family, and I hope I may never do anything to disgrace his
name. (Cheers.) And now, my boys, looking at the bright intelligent faces
which I see before me, I would like to say, in conclusion, just one word to
you. Choose your part in the world from the instinct of your order, from
birth, or habit, or what not, but, above all, from conviction, and, having
chosen it, stand by it to the end. Stand by your country, and especially in
the hour of trial or of danger be sure you never falter, for be certain of this
that no misery can equal that which a man feels who has proved himself
unequal to his task, who has deserted the post to which his captain set him,
and who, when men said, “ Such and such a one is on guard, there is no need
to take further heed,” has left his w r atch, quailed before the foeman, to the
loss, perhaps to the total ruin, of his country, and the cause he had made his
choice. I pray God that such misery as this may never be yours or mine,
(Loud Cheers.)
Sir Hekey Paekes then addressed the boys, and when the cheers which
greeted his rising from his seat had subsided, he said : Y our Excellency, Lady
Carrington, and you, my dear boys, who are assembled here as their guests, I
know well how difficult it is to address an audience like this. It is easy to
address a multitude of grown men, easy to address men assembled in high
places, but it is very difficult to address you who are as it were so many
fountains which will overflow all parts of the habitable earth. I congratulate .
His Excellency on entertaining the happy thought of bringing you here
together. (Hear, hear.) An ordinary banquet, of which you no doubt some-
times read, means scarcely anything. Men assemble, perhaps speak, possibly
enjoy themselves, though I sometimes doubt that, and they disappear. But
seldom does anything of value to society follow. Not so this memorable ban-
quet. I venture to say that scores and hundreds of the boys who are gathered


33 55/jr
THE JUBILEE CELEBRATIONS.
here to-day will bear with them the memory of this entertainment until the
end of their lives. (Cheers.) Let me impress upon you to carry away with
you and preserve for ever any little memento of this event which you may
have received ; and never forget that thus early in your lives, when others
bestowed no thought upon you, the persons who occupy the highest places in
the land thought of you, and brought you here to enjoy yourselves at this
happy jubilee time. (Cheers.) It is no part of my intention to encourage
you to an unhealthy ambition. Ido not doubt for a moment that there are
boys here who will grow up and become ruling spirits of the next generation;
but let me impress upon you that it is simply impossible for you all, or even
the greater part of you, to attain high place. But there is one thing far
dearer, far better, far more to your honour, and in itself imperishable, —it is
within the reach of every boy here to become a worthy and useful member of
society. (Cheers.) As His Excellency has told you, boys in humble circum-
stances, no better than those of the humblest of you, have attained great dis-
tinction, You, my dear boys, must every one of you be acquainted with a
life-like statue in Hyde Park. You have every one seen the statue of Captain
Cook. Captain Cook when a boy of your age was no better off than any of
you. He was born in circumstances not simply of humble life, but of absolute
destitution. But he won his way, and became an explorer of the earth’s
surface second to none, and by his wonderful conquests for the cause of
science, for the cause of a practical knowledge of the world, to be followed
afterwards by the great enterprise of colonisation on a scale never before seen
in the world’s history—for all that he became an immortality. The name of
Captain Cook can never die —(hear, hear) —and he was a poor boy like any
one of you, with no greater advantages, with no greater accidental assistance,
than any one of you. All of you know the wonders of railway travelling. I
suppose nearly every one of you has at some time or other travelled on the
railway ; some of you perhaps for great distances. Sixty years ago there was
scarcely a railway in the world. Now, these great roads, by which men travel
at the rate of 20, 40, and even 60 miles an hour, are scattered all over the
habitable globe, even in China and Japan. The author of this wonderful
mode of locomotion was a poor boy like any one of you. Some of you hereafter
will travel in England, and you will see in populous places a statue of a grand
old Englishman. You will see the name George Stephenson written on the
commemorative marble. Now, George Stephenson was a poor boy, with no
assistance, no help, no friendly advice, no single circumstance to favour his
course in life; and he is the author of this marvellous system of railway
communication all over the world. (Cheers.) Here then, you have two
examples—the explorer by sea, who discovered practically this very land
of ours, and who added to the dominions of the British Crown some of its
most priceless possessions; and the other the author of this wonderful power
of compassing the globe by railway communication; both poor boys, who
belonged to the class to which you belong. Ido not doubt, as I said before,
that from amongst this company men will arise—l can see it in the character
of their heads, and in their striking faces—l do not doubt that men will arise
to wield a power perhaps quite equal in some province of enterprise to
either Cook or Stephenson. But it is not my object to-day to awaken any
inordinate ambition in your.young minds. My object here, in saying these
few words to you, is to lead you to thoroughly realise, whether your occu-
pation is that of selling a newspaper or that of blacking a boot—realise that


tins period of your life is more precious than any period of years to come
hereafter. At this time your characters are forming, and the seeds for the
future harvest are being sown. The foundation is laid on which your future
happiness will be built; and just in proportion as you profit by your oppor-
trinities, by the lessons offered to you—and remember, humbleness of circum-
stances in no way bars the door to receiving good lessons—just as you profit
by your opportunities, and by the lessons that are offered to you, will be your
future of more or less of happiness and usefulness. Above all things cultivate
kindliness of feeling. Be kindly one to another, and to all men. Never
resent an injury, but cultivate that finest of all manly qualities, of being above
resentment, above revenge. (Hear, hear.) Do this, and at the same time
take every opportunity that Hod bestows upon you to acquire knowledge.
Especially you who do not love books, try to cultivate a love of them ; and
any good book whatever, if you use it to the end of supplying yourselves with
knowledge, will become a blessing. Bear in mind that education is now
within the reach of all. No boy is so poor but he can get in some measure
education, and bear in mind that education simply means the keys with which
you unlock the stores of knowledge hereafter. If you cannot read, you cannot
profit by good books; and without books you will never be wise, do what you
will. Now, if you will only try to remember one or two of the things I have
said to you, you cannot fail to be greatly improved by this incident in your
lives. I think Lord Carrington, in calling you here, has done a great service
to the country. (Cheers.) He has, lam quite sure, in many cases let fall a
pebble that will turn the current of a young life, and I have no doubt but
that it will be turned to a wise purpose ; and he has set an example to those
who have it in their power to try to improve the condition of their fellow-
creatures. You, my bojs, when you leave here will have again to face the
many gloomy impediments of adversity. You will have again to resume your
humble callings; but let me beg of you never to forget that there are those
who think of you, who sympathise with you, and who wish you Hod-speed in
the course of life before you. That volume of life which is now opening
before you will probably lead many of you all over the world. One boy will
go east, another will go west. Some will go to Europe, some will go to
America. The majority, I trust, will remain here; but wherever you go
never forget the memory of this day, when the person occupying the loftiest
position in the country, thinking of you, called you together in all kindliness,
in order to give a noble impulse to your young lives. (Cheers.) Try to
profit by it; be good boys, make good men, and depend upon it there can be
no sounder lesson given to you than that real enjoyment of life depends upon
health and innocence. Do nothing to injure your health ; do nothing to
wound your conscience; and so long as you have the sense of an innocent
and healthy life, you have the greatest guarantee for your future happiness.
In conclusion, I can only say no one wishes you better fortune than I do.
No man can sympathise more with your struggles; and my earnest prayer is
that Hod may bless you, one and all! (Loud cheers.)
Sydney: Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lBB7.
