

s^‘
hip
3Q£T. 92099 9
r329
THE
Feminist Club
OF H.S.W.
“A Feminist is a woman with an
awakened sense of her indivU
dual responsibility towards life,
and an anxiety to express it in
action”
SILVER JUBILEE
SOUVENIR
1914


President:
’Phone: MA 4956.
Hon. Secretary:
Mrs.
P. A. Cameron, M.B.E., J.P.
Affiliations and Interests:
Miss
L. Marchant.
England—London:
Vice-Presidents:
Hon. Treasurer:
Miss
Mrs.
D. Egan.
Australian Federation of
F. Mortimer.
Mrs.
A. J. Keeling.
Women Voters.
Mrs.
Maurice Price, J.P.
State:
Hon. Life Patron:
Council of Action for Equal
Miss
Mrs.
W. Skinner, J.P.
Pay.
Ruby Rich, J.P.
Mrs.
F. L. Wilson.
Good Film League.
—
International Peace Campaign.
Mrs.
Hon. Life President:
Hon. Treasurer:
National Council of Women.
Preston Stanley Vaughan.
J.P.
Mrs.
M. Alldritt.
Parks and Playgrounds Move-
-
.
ment.
Hon. Life Members:
Joint Hon. Secretaries;
Standing Committee for the
Mrs.
Mrs.
A. P. Allan.
Reduction of Infantile and
Barker Young,
Foundation President.
Mrs.
P. H. London.
Maternal Mortality.
Mrs.
Margaret Dale,
Past President.
Mrs.
Mrs.
George Perrins.
YOUNGER FEMINISTS:
Director:
Jessie Street,
Past President.
Mrs. P. A. Cameron, M.B.E., J.P.
Mrs.
M. Butler.
Miss
M. J. Crain.
Mrs.
S. Mutton.
ENTERTAINMENT
President:
Mrs.
E. A. Elliott.
Miss L. B. Dow, J.P.
Mrs.
G. Perrins.
COMMITTEE:
Hon. Solicitor:
Mrs.
President:
F. Wilson.
Miss J. Donnelly.
Miss N. Healy.
Mr.
Eric N. Rowley.
HOUSE COMMITTEE:
Miss P. Marshall.
Hon. Auditors:
Miss K. Robins.
Mr.
E. Le Brun, A.C.A. (Aust.).
Miss
J. M. Gregor.
Miss M. Wharf.
Mr.
A. Cameron-Smith, A.F.l.A.
Page One
FEMINIST CLUB OF N.S.W.
SILVER JUBILEE SOUVENIR.
FOREWORD
AIMS AND OBJECTS OF THE FEMINIST CLUB
FEMINISM proclaims that Humanity is dual; that the life of the future belongs to Man and Woman. There-
fore, in opportunity, education, labour-reward and human dignity there should be no sex distinction.
The Feminist Club is founded on the principals of BROTHERHOOD and PROGRESS.
The definite objective of its Members is to secure equality of liberty, status, and opportunity in all spheres
between men and women, believing that only through the effective Womanhood of the Nations can the human race
wisely and wholly fulfil the great task to which this generation is called, namely, the reconstruction of our National
and international Life in accordance with a new and lofty ethic.
Feminism does not seek dominance for woman —It seeks simple justice and full expression, believing that the
time is quickly approaching when Man and Woman together shall guide and control the Nation, as they have the
Home through all the ages that are past.
The Feminist Club differs from other Women’s Organisations in its Universality.
It is a nucleus of universal Brotherhood, without distinction of race, creed, party, sex, or class.
Its duty is to outline the Feminist Policy on the civil, moral, economic enfranchisement of Woman, and to act as
the pioneer in these reforms.
Its doors are open to all who stand for a free, unfettered, noble and enlightened Womanhood, and are prepared
to work to that end.
Its Members are prepared to co-operate with all organisations, working for human betterment.


WOMAN AND THE BALLOT BOX
By MRS. P. A. CAMERON, M.8.E., President of the Feminist Club of N.S.W.
In view of the fact that all political parties appear to be preparing for elections, the Feminist Club
asks the women of Australian to seriously consider the value of their vote.
On page one you will read a reprint of a pamphlet issued
by one of the original organisations working for the recog-
nition of women’s claim to equality of status, opportunity
and reward. As you glance down the list of objectives
you will see how one by one the barriers have been broken
down, and to-day, women, through the efforts of early
Feminists, . have far greater opportunities for service and
self-expression than they had in 1901.
It is rather interesting to those of us who have taken
our vote for granted to look back and read of the battle
of words and arguments for and against women’s suffrage
put forward by such capable and unselfish women as Miss
Rose Scott, Mrs. Louisa Lawson, (mother of Henry Lawson),
Mesdames Annie Golding, Kate Dwyer and J. A. Nolan.
These women need no monument to perpetuate their
memory, their monument is built of alterations and amend-
ments to laws and conditions which were unfavourable to
the well-being of women and children and therefore un-
favourable to the well-being of the nation.
THE INAUGURATION OF THE SUFFRAGE
MOVEMENT
It was about the year 1873 that the Suffrage Movement
commenced in N.S.W. Although the Suffrage for women
had had the support of four Governors and Sir Henry Parkes,
it was not until the year 1902 that success was achieved.
In that year Sir John See introduced a measure abolishing
sex discrimination in electoral matters. It must not be
thought, however, that success came easily and without
effort. For twenty-nine years many prominent men and
women hammered away at successive Governments. Various
bills were introduced into Parliament, but they all lapsed,
were stonewalled or talked out. Opposition to equality to
women was very pronounced in the good old conservative
days. Some of the reasons given by opponents to the
Suffrage in the Press of fifty years ago are amusing:
(a) Women had no right to vote tor their country,
because in time of war they would not be called
upon to fight for it.
(b) Women would be degraded by the ballot as booths
were crowded with coarse, common men, who used
bad language.
(c) Women should not be allowed to attend political
meetings as it would keep them out late at night.
(d) The vote would make for discord in the home, as
arguments over politics might ensue (Bridge had
not at that stage commenced to disrupt family
' life!).
(e) Politics were necessarily corrupting, and “bad”
women would vote.
THE NEW ZEALAND AND ENGLISH SUFFRAGE
The vote was given to the women of New Zealand very
much earlier than in N.S.W. As usual, legislation there
was in advance of other parts of the world. In 1893, the
Suffrage Bill was passed, and New Zealand women were the
first women in the Empire to exercise the vote.
But what a tale of woe unfolds itself when study is made
of the movement in England. Prior to the year 1832, British
women had the franchise, but it was taken away from
them by the Reform Act of that year. Not for eighty-seven
years did they succeed in getting it back again. Then only
after a most desperate struggle, did they regain the demo-
cratic privilege enjoyed by other women. At first, the
Suffragettes, led by Christabel Pankhurst and Annie Ken-
ney-tried peaceful methods to secure equality with men.
When peaceful methods failed, militant tactics were reluc-
tantly adopted. In four year, four hundred women of all
stations in life were imprisoned and many were forcibly
fed when hunger striking; in 1913, the King’s Derby Horse
was interfered with by a suffragette at Tottenham Corner:
at Northampton, in 1906, a speaker carried a dog whip as
the only answer to the curs (the words are hers) who
jostled and insulted them; Lady Steel, wife of the Lora
Provost of Edinburgh, joined the passive resistors. She
refused to pay taxes unless allowed to vote, and as a
consequence, her furniture was sold over her head.
If time has not justified the tactics employed, it has at
least shown that the cause of the Suffragettes was a just
one. Not only the women pioneers, but other women all
over the world now have the franchise. A statue has some-
what belatedly been erected in London to the memory of
Mrs. Pankhurst.
DO WOMEN VALUE THEIR VOTE?
Asked the meaning of Woman Suffrage, recently, a young
school girl replied, “Woman’s Suffrage is the state of
suffering into which woman is born.” The girl who gave
birth to this choice “Howler” is thought by some women
to have expressed a grim truism. To those women, what
should be their most cherished possession—the Franchise—
is regarded as a nuisance, and they are content to vote a
party ticket instead of regarding their franchise as the
symbol of democratic freedom and citizenship.
WOMEN IN PARLIAMENT
There seems to be an impression abroad, that in Australia
women are out of place in high executive positions and
Parliament. The people who hold this view may subscribe
to the opinion of the English woman, who, when asked if
she would vote for Lady Astor, replied, “b’aint agoin’ to
vote for her to sit up in thet house all night with they
men.”
We Feminists hold the opinion that the Government can-
not properly reflect the wishes of women unless they have
direct representation. In having but four women in State
Parliaments, and none in the Federal House, Australia is
behind the times. In England and other parts of the world,
there are many woman representatives in Parliament.
This year, in England, Mrs. Lowe was appointed Chairman
of the London County Council and this month we read that
Miss Florence Horsburgh has been appointed Minister for
Health.
THE CHOICE OF YOUR REPRESENTATIVE
The trend of legislation into the homes makes it impera-
tive that women should use their vote with discrimination.
The laws that their candidate supports will affect their
wages and the wages from which comes their housekeeping;
the prices of foodstuffs; their housing and health problems.
There are two types of candidate from which to choose,
the ideal politician, and the real politician. The ideal
politician is a statesman, the real, like the poor, we always
have with us. Whoever your candidate may be, ask him
his views upon equal pay for women, upon adequate
endowment for mothers and children. When he kisses your
baby, learn his ideas on the problem of infant mortality
and mal-nutritlon in children. In other words, discover if
he is entitled to have the word “honourable” attached to
his name as he attaches a gold pass to his chain. It is
our experience that men who are prodigal in promises are
usually sparing in achievement.
It is always necessary to choose wisely and well, for
once your vote is cast, it cannot be undone. Most poli-
ticians usually run their allotted span, and stay put for at
least three years.
BERLITZ (Reg.)
DIRECT METHOD SCHOOL OF LANGUAGES
GRETA KALPUS, Principal (Est. in Sydney 1926)
We teach English, German, French, Spanish, Italian, Dutch, Japanese, Norwegian, Hungarian, Russian
and Swedish by the Famous BERLITZ Method.
ONLY ADDRESS: COLONIAL MUTUAL LIFE BUILDING
14 MARTIN PLACE (opp. G.P.0.), SYDNEY
"He who Knows Two Languages is Twice a Man” ’Phone, BW 6823
Page Two


.■■y ■;?- ••
■
Mrs. P. A. CAMERON, M.B.E., J.P.
f WmW
i"- JpjS
i|i||k %' *||||
Wr *4:Jr
1939 OFFICE-BEARERS OF THE FEMINIST CLUB OF N.S.W.
The Silver Jubilee Office-bearers of the Feminist Club of N.S.W. place on record their appreciation
of the splendid service given to the Club by the Office-bearers over the past twenty-five years.
MRS. D. EGAN,
Vice-President.
MRS. A. J. KEELING,
Vice-President.
MRS. MAURICE PRICE,
J.P., Vice-President.
MISS GRACE SCOBIE,
0.8. E., Vice-President.
MRS. A. P. ALLAN,
Hon. Secretary.
MRS. M. ALLDRITT,
Hon. Treasurer.
MRS. P. H. LONDON,
Hon. Secretary.
Page Three


=====—
GUARDIANSHIP OF INFANTS ACT, 1934
THE HON. L. 0. MARTIN, Minister for Justice, N.S.W.
The proof of the value of any piece of legislation is always in its use. Judged by that standard,
it can be said that the enthusiastic reception accorded the Guardianship of Infants Act 1934. a
measure fostered and largely designed by women themselves, has been fully warranted by results.
No legislation could have failed to be impressed by the enthusiastic work given by the Feminist
Club to achieve this measure.
It fell to my fortunate lot to settle the final draft of this
measure and also to introduce it and pilot it through the
legislature.
It was the culmination of the long continued effort,
tenaciously put forward by a band of women led by the
then President of the Feminists’ Club, Miss Preston Stan-
ley (now Mrs. Crawford Vaughan), to bring about an equal
state of affairs in regard to the guardianship of children
so far as the two parents were concerned, or their respec-
tive representatives in the case of their death.
It is an outstanding example of what can be achieved
if the purpose is clearly realised and steadily pursued.
Miss Preston Stanley, when in Parliament, had given
devoted attention to the purpose, and later on undertook,
for propaganda purposes, the very onerous task of writing
a play called “Whose Child?’’ and arranging for its pro-
duction, she herself appearing as one of the cast. 1 had
the advantage myself of witnessing the first presentation
of the play.
There is no doubt that the work done by the then
President of the Feminists’ Club greatly facilitated the
passage of the Bill in question.
In these days of what is called modern thought, it is a
little difficult to understand the long continued delay in
amending the law so as to provide that the mother should
have, at least, equal rights with the father in the control of
a child, especially during its early years.
However, when the present Government came into office,
the time was opportune and the field was set to make a
clan sweep of the desired reform and so the present Act
came into existence.
Broadly, it may be said that the main guiding principle
in the drafting of it was to make it manifest that the
mother, who had done so much for the child, should have
as a legal right, what almost everyone was prepared to
concede was her natural right, for natural rights and legal
rights do not always run together.
It should, however, be observed that in the huge majority
of cases, no contest ever arose, nor does it arise now, in
regard to the children. It is only in those cases where
parents fall out that the bitterness of legal conflict sur-
rounds a child’s life and well-being.
The Supreme Court, in its Equitable Jurisdiction, was'
continued as the main court to deal with questions of
guardianship when they arose, but its powers were widened.
In the very first section of the amending Act, that Court
was given absolute power in regard to the custody of the
infant, and the right of access of either parent on the
application of the mother.
It was directed to have regard to the welfare of the
infant, the conduct of the parents and the wishes of the
mother as well as those of the father.
The fact that a parent contemplated leaving the State
was removed as a reason for the denying of custody to
such parent as had previously been decided.
Another important matter was that the mere fact that
the mother was still residing with the father was made no
bar to her application, nor was it any bar to the court
making an order for weekly payments for the maintenance
of the child being made to the mother.
It had at last been realised that frequently the mother,
because of her lack of means, was not able to leave her
home. This had created much injustice, which was removed
none too soon.
At the same time, the reasonable rights of the father
were carefully preserved, but the old law, which gave the
father overriding rights was removed.
In order to meet country cases, the District Court and
the Court of Petty Sessions were given jurisdiction also,
and provision made for the enforcement of orders.
Many other amendments were made, all being based on
the fundamental principle of equality of rights, save in so
far as the mother’s rights in the case of young children
were given precedence.
In regard to the appointment of guardians, both parents
were given equal rights to appoint guardians, and on the
death of the mother, a guardian appointed by her, not-
withstanding the survivorship of the father, became joint
guardian with the father and, in the case of the death of
both parents, guardians appointed by both became joint
guardians.
Very careful provisions were worked out and inserted in
the Act in regard to consents to the marriage of minors,
and the mother’s rights were greatly extended.
• DISTINCTIVE FASHIONABLE JEWELLERY
Fashion centres of the world
report that pearl necklets
are becoming increasingly
popular. At Dempsters you
will find a varied range of
perfectly matched pearls
with an equally wide price
range.
Black Opal and White
Gold Earrings, £6/6/-.
Others from 70/-.
Black Opal Brooch, Cum Leaf Design, White B!aC j 9P. a ' Plf"
Cold 90/-, Yellow Cold 84/-; others from
Gold £9/9/-. Others
from £5/5/-.
Beautiful Australian Black Fiery Opals.
These selected stones beautifully cut and
in exquisite settings are a complement to
the good taste of Australian women. In-
spect Dempsters wide range in their private
selling rooms.
Page Four


DIRECT CASH SAVINGS
FOR YOU
GREEN COUPONS, WHICH ARE GIVEN FREELY FOR CASH PURCHASES,
ENABLE THE CAREFUL HOUSEWIFE TO SAVE MONEY.
THE CONSIDERED OPINION OF THE EXECUTIVE
OF THE N.S.W. FEMINIST CLUB IS EMBODIED IN A
LETTER TO OUR COMPANY, OF WHICH THE
FOLLOWING IS AN EXTRACT:
“The majority of the Executive believe that the dis-
tribution of Coupons for cash purchases encourages
cash payments and also gives women of limited means
an opportunity of getting a direct cash discount for
their purchases without increasing the cost of the
goods.”
As a means of increasing the Feminist Club’s Charity Funds, Green
Coupons may be handed to the Club Secretary and redeemed for cash.
GREEN COUPONS FOR GREATER SAVINGS
GREEN COUPONS PTY. LTD
697 GEORGE STREET
59 MACQUARIE STREET
PARRAMATTA
UW 8408
SYDNEY
M 6887 (2 LINES)
Page Five


GREETINGS FROM ORGANISATIONS AT HOME AND ABROAD
Mrs. B. S. B. STEVENS.
I should like to congratulate the Feminist Club on their
production of a Festival Journal, and at the same time,
to wish the Club every future success. Appreciating as
I do the value of its work in the past, 1 am sure that it will
continue to function as one of the most active and useful
women’s organisations in the State.
In a sense, the task of the Feminist movement is much
easier to-day, because—thanks largely to the devoted efforts
of the early Feminists —women have had chances to prove
their competence and have made good use of them. Recog-
nition of their claims is, in consequence, more readily con-
ceded than it was in days gone by.
But there is still much to do before women acquire that
equality of status and privilege which the Feminist move-
ment claims. After all, that claim is no more in the last
analysis than the right to share on equal terms in the
life and work of the community, than which there could
be no more just or reasonable claim. But the way has
been shown, not only in the ceaseless activities of the
Feminist movement as such, but in the patient, and often
heroic, endeavours of individual women to demonstrate
their worth. We may all feel confident therefore that
eventually the great goal will be fully attained.
Mrs. Lt. Commissioner, DALZIEL, of the Salvation Army.
“On behalf of the Salvation Army, I should like to send
greetings to the Feminist Club on the occasion of its
25th Anniversary.
“When we remember all the Club stands for and the
services which have been rendered to the community during
the years that have passed, our most earnest wish must
be that the blessing of God and His guidance will be upon
every effort to ‘awaken woman to a sense of her individual
responsibility towards life, and an anxiety to express it in
action.’
Mrs. M. GURTHRIE, Hon. Secretary, League of Women
Voters, Queensland.
“We greet you in a spirit of friendship, and of friendliness
most marked; this proves an indestructible bond for women.”
Mrs. E. WATERWORTH, President, The Tasmanian
Women’s Non-Party League.
“On behalf of the Tasmanian Women’s Non-Party League,
a constituent body of the Australian Federation of Women
Voters and of the Tasmanian Council for Maternal and Child
Welfare. 1 have very great pleasure in congratulating the
Feminist Club of Sydney on having attained its 25th
Birthday, and I wish it many more years of usefulness. It
is a centre of light and progress in a big city, and is
one of the forces which keep Australian, particularly in
times such as these, from forgetting the part which women
must play in any country which desires practical and
spiritual progress and development. At no time in our
history have women been called upon so insistently to keep
the influences which make for sane wholesome living
from becoming submerged and to help young people to face
life and its difficulties as bravely as possible.”
Mr. E. COCHRANE EMERTON. President, The Parks and
Playgrounds Movement of N.S.W.
“Congratulations on the completion of 25 years of service
and thanks for past co-operation.
“Best wishes for a vigorous future with the hope that
we may act together many more times in service to the
community.”
Miss J. MEREWETHER, Hon. State Secretary, National
Council of Women.
“The National Council of Women of N.S.W. congratu-
lates your Club on reaching its 25 th Anniversary, and on
the high standard of public service which it has always
advocated. The Council realises the value of the help such
a body as yours is able to give to the cause of women and
children, in co-operation with our other affiliated bodies.”
Miss D. SOLOMON, Chairman, British Commonwealth
League, London.
“The British Commonwealth League sends most cordial
greetings to the Feminist Club of N.S.3V. on the occasion
of its twenty-fifth Birthday.
“The British Commonwealth League is proud to count
the Feminist Club as one of its affiliated societies, and
hopes that it will continue its useful work for many years
to come.
“During this period of international uncertainty, it is
essential that women’s organisations should continue to
stand firm together and work harder than ever before for
better understanding between the nations. May the Femin-
ist Club have a long life before it, and all success in its
undertakings.”
Mrs. B. M. RISCHBEITH, 0.8. E., President, Australian
Federation of Women Voters.
Page Six
“1 hear that your organisation is about to celebrate its
25th Birthday foundation, and 1 hasten to send you on
behalf of myself and, I am sure, the officers and members
of our Federation, the heartiest good wishes and con-
gratulations.
“A quarter of a century of excellent effort stands to
your credit and 1 am so pleased to remember that included
in that is work undertaken with organisations of a like
platform in all other States of the Commonwealth, and
which is represented under the co-ordinate title of “Aus-
tralian Federation of Women Voters."
“1 do wish you and your officers and members a most
successful and inspiring celebration and a new dedication
to social service.”
Dr. E. BAINTON, Director, Conservatorium of Music.
“1 would like to congratulate the Feminist Club upon its
25th Anniversary.
"1 would like to thank the Feminist Club for the interest
they show in young musicians and the encouragement which
they have given to many of these by offering them engage-
ments at the outset of their careers, thereby giving them
the invaluable experience of performing to an audience and
also the opportunity of making themselves known.
“Since 1 came to Australia five years ago, it has always
been a matter of great surprise to me that more women
do not take part in public life. After the great advances
made in this respect in England since the War, it was
curious to find so much apathy on the part of the average
woman to the various sections of public life, in which
women in the Old Country have so large a share.”
LILIAS B. DOW, President, The Younger Feminists.
“With the issue of this Journal, the Feminist Club of
N.S.W. celebrates its 25th Anniversary, and we, the Younger
Feminists, are happy and proud to have this opportunity
of placing on record our esteem and appreciation of our
association with the parent Club.
“In the years that are past, we have witnessed much
that has made us proud to be a part of such a public
spirited organisation, and the spirit of the Club, the en-
lightened spirit, so much part of the twentieth century,
is our greatest inspiration.
"The happy times we have spent within the Club are
cherished memories with us; the sense of service we have
in our small efforts of assistance to those less fortunate,
is a benediction; and the friendships that have come to
us in our endeavours are lasting and real.
“As the Feminist Club of N.S.W. stands poised on the
threshold of a very new year (its 25th) with a wide un-
travelled path opening ahead, and an horizon that lengthens
as we gaze, we pause in reverie for a moment to wish with
all our hearts, and to realise that
Memory clings in a happy way
To every anniversary day—
And looking forward may we see
A future bright as our memory.”
Mrs. J. RAPKE, Victorian Vice-President, Australian Feder-
ation of Women Voters, Victorian Division.
“My salutations upon reaching the quarter century mark
in the history of your organisation. It is indeed a momen-
tous occasion for a feminist group to attain its Silver
Jubilee, especially so in a young country like Australia.
“Although women have advanced in so many directions
in the past 25 years, there is still scope for much greater
progress in social reform.”
MISS MARY TREVOR, President and Treasurer of the
Nether Stowey Women’s Friendly Society, which meets at
Nether Stowey, Bridgewater, Somerset. England, close to the
home of Mrs. P. A. Cameron’s grand-parents, sends greet-
ings to the Feminist Club on achieving its Silver Jubilee.
The Nether Stowey Friendly Society is believed to be
the oldest and only organisation of its kind still in existence
in England. Founded in 1806, it celebrated its 133 rd Anni-
versary recently.
The Society was founded by one Thomas Poole, and has
the unique distinction of being associated with two great
poets, Coleridge and Wordsworth. The banner carried in the
Festival Procession has a motto written by Coleridge,
“Foresight and Union,
Linked by Christian love.
Helped by the good below
And Heaven above.”
Every year the Women’s Club walk to Church, being pre-
ceded by a band. The Banner is carried by a girl and six
other little girls carry flowers in baskets. All the members
carry flowers also.
After Church, they walk around the village and then par-
take of tea and the report of the Club is read, at the Rose
and Crown Inn.
Miss Trevor has been the secretary and treasurer of the
Nether Stowey Club for the past 25 years.


CENTRAL SQUARE, SYDNEY
ALSO AT NEWCASTLE, WOLLONGONG, DUBBO, LISMORE, BROKEN HILL,
TAMWORTH, INVERELL
MERCHANTS, MANUFACTURERS, UNIVERSAL DISTRIBUTORS
Page
Seven


THE STORY OF MAGNA CHARTA
ly ERIC N. ROWLEY (Honorary Solicitor to Feminist Club of N.S.W.).
AT the time when Magna Charta was signed, women
played practically no part whatever either in the law
of the land nor in its Government, but the rights
granted by Magna Charta to men slowly and gradually
paved the way for the rights of women, and it was the
declaration in Magna Charta which provided equal justice
for all as a birthright which was responsible for the system
of justice throughout England and the British Empire which
has enabled the rights of women to have received considera-
tion which they do receive to-day.
Magna Charta was signed by King John at Runnymede
on 15th June, 1215. Prior to this date England was ruled
under the Feudal System. The people were ruled by the
barons, and the barons in turn were ruled by and paid
allegiance to the King. There was no such thing as a
parliament. The King made the laws, imposed taxes on the
barons, who in turn passed it on to their people, and the
King inflicted penalties and punishments for non-compliance
with his laws or non-payment of taxes.
It was Richard I. who really prepared the way for Magna
Charta by his continual demands for money. The cost of
his crusades, payment of his ransom, and the subsequent
cost of his war with Philip of France were only met by
excessive and severe extortion by him from the barons.
When King John came to the throne he not only increased
taxes, but imposed many fines upon such barons who would
not accompany him on his various campaigns. He then
alienated the church by seizins? its property and compelling
its revenue to be paid to the Royal Treasury. This quarrel
between King John and the Church caused a collapse of the
judicial administration and did more than anything else to
alienate the sympathy of the masses of the people against
the King and in favour of the barons.
King John accentuated the grievances by emploving
foreign mercenaries against the barons and rewarding them
for their services by positions in the local government of
England.
King John further antagonised his barons by appointing
Peter des Roches, Earl of Winchester, to the justiciarship.
Many of the barons were forced to leave the country under
pain of imprisonment and execution.
When Stephen Langton subsequently became the new
Archbishop of Winchester the barons returned. Stephen
Langton, with the support of the barons, endeavoured to
rectify the condition of affairs then existing. King John
swore on the gospel that he would love and maintain the
church, restore their lands to them, restore the good laws
of his predecessors, do away with all bad laws, judge all
men according to just judgment of his Court, and give to
every man his rights.
King John, however, made no attempt to carry out his
promises, but on the contrary determined to wreak ven-
geance on the northern barons who had refused to accompany
him on his campaign in France.
Stephen Langton again took up the cudgels of the barons,
demanding that they should be tried in the King’s Court
and should not be punished until they had been found
guilty. With very great reluctance and resenting inter-
ference of the Archbishop, King John ultimately gave way.
Stephen Langton then realised that the only way to
secure reform in the administration of the country and to
cdmpel King John to observe them was by a formal charter.
A document was then compiled, known as "The Unknown
Charter of Liberty.” which was probably the forerunner
of Magna Charta.
On 4th November, 1214, King John met the barons at
Bury St. Edmonds. The result of this momentous meeting
was as follows:
The barons definitely agreed amongst themselves—
I. Not to pay scutage (fines, taxes, etc.).
2. To withdraw allegiance to the King unless he would
confirm their liberties by a charter.
3. To present their terms shortly after Christmas and
in the meantime to prepare for war.
On 6th January, 12 15, the barons placed before King
John certain demands in the form of a charter, but by
various means the King managed to have the matter stood
over until Easter, when the barons again met him at Stam-
ford with the object of forcing a charter from him.
The King refused the barons’ demands, and on sth May,
1215, they renounced their allegiance to the King, chose
Robert FitzWalter as their leader, and entered London.
King John made frantic efforts to defeat the barons, but
it was too late. By his extortions, the wickedness of his
own private life, the penalties he had enforced on all and
several, he had alienated the sympathy both of the barons
and also his people.
On 1 5th June, 1215, King John, under compulsion, met
the barons at Runnymede, where he signed a document
which survives as the "Articles of the Barons.” This
document has since come to be known as “Magna Charta.”
The most important articles are Numbers 39 and 40, which
read as follows:
Article 39: ’ No free man shall be taken or imprisoned,
disposed or outlawed or exiled, or in any way destroyed,
nor will we go upon him nor will we send upon him unless
by lawful judgment of his peers or by the law of the land.”
Article 40: “To none will we sell, to none will we deny or
delay right or justice.”
Many of the other clauses were designed to remedy purely
feudal grievances, others deal with the grievances of the
merchants. The intention of the barons who drew up the
charter was to state the law as it should be.
It is the first clear agreement between the King and his
barons as to the exact demands which the King could make
on them and they could make on their men. The judicial
clauses were drafted with the obvious intention of improv-
ing the efficiency of the Royal Court, whilst the general
desire was that all classes of the community could get
certain benefits from fhe charter. It was a guarantee of
security against the arbitrary rule which had previously been
in existence.
From the day it was signed it has been looked upon
the guarantee of the rights of the Englishman.
Magna Charta is printed as the first of the statutes.
Much of it has since been repealed, and most of its clauses
are now understood in senses far different from those
which they originally had. The value of the articles is in
the interpretation and the meaning which successive genera-
tions of Englishmen have put upon them. In a wider sense
in which Magna Charta remains, it is undoubtedly the most
important document in the history of the English law. It
was a definite statement that the law should give to all men
an equal justice as their birthright.
During the middle ages the Charter was confirmed on
several occasions. In 1225 Henry 111. re-issued it in the
form in which it now appears in the Statute Book, Prior
to its signing, the King was the person who developed the
Common Law by royal power, but from 15th June, 1215,
under Magna Charta the nation began to take a hand in
framing and administering its Common Laws.
Magna Charta was the foundation for the subsequent for-
mation and growth of Parliament. It mean that the Common
Law of England was to be greater than the power of the
Page Eigkt


Over 250,000 Thrifty Housewives
Annually Obtain Valuable Gifts
Collecting
GROUP TOKENS
Group Tokens are given as a DISCOUNT for Cash
Purchases . . . Visit the spacious Showrooms, DANK’S
BUILDINGS, 324 PITT STREET, SYDNEY, and inspect
the wonderful range of Gifts you can obtain
ABSOLUTELY FREE
COLLECTING CROUP TOKENS!
SHOWROOMS also at NEWCASTLE,
CESSNOCK, WOLLONGONG and MOSS VALE.
These Coupons can be handed to the Secretary of the Club and redeemed for cash
in aid of the Club’s Charity Fund.
Coupons from the following products are inter-
changeable with Group Tokens: Sydney Flour,
Aeroplane Jellies, Kinkara Tea, Maxam Cheese,
Mother’s Choice Products, Golden Fleece Soap,
John Cahill’s Soap Products, and John Bull
Products.
LOOK for the
GROUP TOKEN
■®V*YOU PAY LESS
FOR YOUR GOODS WHEN BUYING FROM SHOPS GIVING
Page Nine


IMPORTANT HAPPENINGS IN THE HISTORY OF THE FEMINIST
CLUB OF N.S.W., WHICH WAS FOUNDED IN 1914
The Executive of the Feminist Club of N.S.W. wishes to acknowledge that in the campaign to secure
some of the major reforms listed here, other organisations and interested citizens assisted.
The true value of any organisation is in its ability and willingness to co-operate with others working
along similar lines.
The Feminist Club of N.S.W. stands for equality of
status, opportunity and payment between men and women
in all spheres. The Feminist Club of N.S.W. has worked
for and been associated with many movements affecting
the welfare of women and children, namely:
I . The passage of the Women’s Legal Status Act, under
which the women of New South Wales became eligible
for every office under the Crown, except that of Juror.
2. The establishment of the Chair of Obstetrics at the
Sydney University. A Chair of Veterinary Science was
already established and the Club slogan, "Horses
Rights for Women,” won the day.
3. The Club has been associated with a continuous cam-
paign for the extension of training of medical students
who intend to practise obstetrics.
4. Organised the Emilie Polini Petition, which was signed
by 25,000 women, and which was presented to Parlia-
ment and led to the drafting of the Infant Guardian-
ship Bill.
5. Worked for the removal from the Crimes Act of the
power of the police to use force in the searching of
female prisoners arrested under the Vagrancy Act.
6. Was associated with the experiment when a group of
children at the Children’s Court were mentally tested
in order to discover the exact ratio of child delinquency
and mental deficiency in this State.
7. Conducted an extensive campaign for the education of
the public in regard to the care, control and segregation
of mentally defective persons.
8. Associated with the campaign to secure adequate
female medical attention for the indentured women
labour of Fiji.
9. Conducted a social investigation into the living con-
ditions of the basic wage earner.
10. Contributed £9OO to the maintenance of the Little Citi-
Zens Free Kindergarten.
1I . Donated a Dental Trolly to the Children’s Hospital
during 1930.
12. Organised the Jean Batten Fund after her first
successful solo flight from England in 1934 and raised
£lOO.
13. Assisted with organising in connection with “Whose
Child,” a play written by Miss Preston Stanley, while
president of the Club. This play was responsible for
the finalising of the Guardianship of Infants Act, 1934,
by the Minister for Justice, the Hon. L. O. Martin.
14. For many years the Feminist Club of N.S.W. was
associated with the Campaign for equal Nationality
Rights for Women, which resulted in the Nationality
Act of 193 6, whereby the national status of women
who married British subjects or of British women who
married aliens, was clarified and improved, and where-
by special provisions were enacted as to married women
who, by reason of their marriage to aliens, have
acquired the nationality of their husbands.
15. The Feminist Club of N.S..W. has, since 1933, paid for
free milk for the children at the Frank H. Saywell
Kindergarten, Moore Park, and donated dolls and other
toys for the Annual Christmas Tree and sleeping
stretchers for the children.
16. The Club donated in the name of the President, Mrs.
P. A. Cameron. M.8.E., an Electric Clock at Christmas,
1938, to the Frank H. Saywell Kindergarten
17. The Younger Feminists Group was established in 1931,
and they have endowed a bed at the Crown Street
Hospital at a cost of £3O annually, and by their
Annual Revues have also given several hundred pounds
to various charities.
18. The Feminist Club of N.S.W. is affiliated or associated
with the following organisations, British Commonwealth
League, London; the Australian Federation of Women
Voters; the Council of Action for Equal Pay; the Good
Film League; the International Peace Campaign; the
League of Nations Union: the National Council of
Women; the Parks and Playgrounds Movement; the
Standing Committee for the Reduction of Infantile and
Maternal Mortality: and takes an active interest in
their work, delegates representing the Club at their
meetings.
19. The Club assists on an average some 20 families during
Page Ten
the year and on occasions, arranges for special food
relief and gives either legal advice or practical
assistance.
20. The Club annually takes 100 mothers and children from
Surry Hills for an all-day picnic into the country.
21. During 193 7-8 the Club worked solidly for a better
deal for the Australian Aborigines by arranging meet-
ings and attending Parliament, and is still working for
the appointment of women to the new Aborigine Pro-
tection Board.
22. The Feminist Club of N.S.W. took a very active and
important part in the Women’s National Insurance Cam-
paign, and the president of the Club, Mrs. P. A.
Cameron, M.8.E., in her official capacity as acting-
chairman of the Australian Federation of Women Voters
was leader of the deputation to Canberra. This was
the first time that a women’s deputation had been
received by the Prime Minister in the cabinet room
and discussed with him a Bill then being debated in
the House. The deputation secured amendments which
gave better conditions for women
23. In 1939, the Feminist Club of N.S.W. made their Club
rooms available, free of cost, for lectures on First Aid,
Home Nursing and Air Raid Precautions and during the
first three months of the year, 400 women qualified in
one or more branches of Red Cross work.
24. The Feminist Club of N.S.W. has for many years advo-
cated Women Magistrates in the Children’s Court, and
in April, 193 9. during the debate on the Child Welfare
Bill, the Public Service Board was instructed by the
Minister for Education, the Hon. D. H. Drummond, to
cal] for applications from women with the necessary
qualifications for appointments as magistrates at Child-
ren’s Courts.
25. The Feminist Club of N.S.W. has been associated with
the Coupon Defence League, because the majority of
the executive believe that the Coupon System en-
courages cash payments, does not add to the cost of
goods and gives the housewife an opportunity o:
securing many valuable gifts as a direct cash bonus
on her purchases.
26. Mrs. Margaret Dale, one time president of the Club,
was the first woman alternate delegate to Geneva.
27. Mrs. Preston Stanley Vaughan, while president of the
Feminist Club of N.S.W., was the first woman member
of Parliament, in New South Wales, and introduced the
original Guardianship of Infants Act.
28. Mrs. P. A Cameron. M 8.E., while president of the
Feminist Club of N.S.W.. was included in the New
Year’s Honours List. 193 9. and created a Member of
the Civil Division of the Most Excellent Order of the
British Empire, by His Most Gracious Majesty, King
George VI.
LADY ORATORS
Of old the lady with ideas
Was somewhat of a freak,
With mind and mein alike severe
And millinery antique,
Who terrorised the timid male
When she rose up to speak,
And thought a pleasing stage effect
Might hint her cause was weak.
Now, though reforming is the fob
Reformers have to do,
There is no need you should not make
Yourself and subject, too.
Attractive to the listening ear,
And easy to the view.
You zvant the public eye, be sure
The public eye zvants you.
— N. A. Evans.


fvERV roo m in the
■i ■■ | ■ HH H INSIST ON GENUINE
H FELTEX — LOOK FOR
| !■ B m the name
Patent No. 102301/37.
Page Eleven


SILVER JUBILEE
Programme of Week’s Festivities
to be held at the
FEMINIST CLUB OF N.S.W.
77 King Street, Sydney
MONDAY, JULY 24th, 1939, 7 P.M.:
SILVER JUBILEE DINNER
Chairman: Mrs. P. A. CAMERON, M.B.E.
Assisting Artists:
Miss ELMA HASLEM (Violin), Miss YVONNE CHANDLER
(Piano), Miss BONNIE McGUIRE (Cello), Miss MARJORIE
HIGGINS (Contralto), Miss KATHLEEN CONIGREVE
(Soprano).
Guests of Honour:
THE SPEAKERS and the PAST PRESIDENTS,
Mesdames Barker-Young, Margaret Dale, Preston-Stanley
Vaughan (Hon. Life Pres.), Jessie Street, and Miss Joy
Norman and Patron, Miss Ruby Rich; Messrs. Eric N.
Rowley (Hon Solicitor) and C. Le Brun (Hon. Auditor).
TOAST, "THE KING.”
TOAST, "OUR GUESTS."
Proposed by Mrs. W. Skinner, J.P., responded by Mr.
Eric N. Rowley, Hon. Solicitor.
TOAST, “OUR CLUB.”
Proposed by Mrs. P. A. Cameron, President, and
responded to by Miss Lilias B. Dow, J.P., President of
the Younger Feminists, and presentation of Birthday
Cheque.
TOAST, “THE AUSTRALIAN MOTHER.”
Proposed by Professor Harvey Suttion and responded
to by Mrs. Ella Waddell.
TOAST, “WOMEN IN THE HOME'.”
Proposed by Colonel Howard, of the Salvation Army,
and responded to by Mrs. Eleanor Glencross, President
of the Housewives’ Progressive Association.
TOAST, “WOMEN ON THE LAND.”
Proposed by Hon. C. Sinclair, M.L.A., and responded to
by Mrs. J. W. C. Beveridge, President of the Country
Women’s Association.
TOAST, “WOMEN IN SOCIAL SERVICE.”
Proposed by Mr. C. Evatt, K.C., M.L.A., and responded
to by Mrs. W. Reid, President of the Rachel Forster
Hospital for Women.
TOAST, “WOMEN IN PROFESSIONS, AND WOMEN
WRITERS.”
Proposed by Professor F. A. Bland, and responded to
by Dame Constance D’Arcy and Miss Kylie Tennant,
Author of “Foveaux.”
TOAST, “WOMEN IN INDUSTRY AND CIVIL SERVICE.”
Proposed by Sir Frederick Stewart and responded to
by Mrs. Florence Taylor, 0.8. E., President, Arts Club,
and Miss Grace Scobie, 0.8. E.
TOAST, “WOMEN IN COUNCILS OF STATE,”
Proposed by Senator Dein, and responded to by Aider-
man, Mrs. Lilian Fowler, only Woman Mayor in Aus-
tralia.
Page Twelve
TUESDAY, JULY, 25th, 1939:
THE SEVEN AGES OF WOMAN
(Her Contribution and Her Reward)
Opening Ceremony to be performed by Mrs. B. S. B.
STEVENS, 10.15 a.m.
Chairman: Mrs. P. A. Cameron, M.8.E., J.P.
MORNING SESSION: 10.00 a.m. to 12.30 p.m.
I. THE INFANT.
Leader of Discussion; Mrs. M. E. Orr.
To be sponsored by the Standing Committee for
the Reduction of Infantile and Maternal Mortality.
Miss Grace Scobie, 0.8. E.
2. THE SCHOOLGIRL.
Leader of Discussion: Mrs. D. Egan.
(a) Kindergarten, Miss J. Wyndham, B.Sc., Princi-
pal. Kindergarten Training College.
(b) General Education, Mrs. W. M. McNamara,
New Education Fellowship.
(c) Playtime, Miss E. S. Bingham, Recreation and
Leadership Movement.
3. THE ADOLESCENT.
Leader of Discussion: Miss Marjorie Stark.
(a) Physical Fitness, through training. Miss Thea
Hughes, 8.A., Women’s League of Health.
(b) Physical Fitness, through sport, by a repre-
sentative of the N.S.W. Women’s Amateur
Sports Association.
(c) Physical Fitness, through hygiene, Mrs. L.
Goodison, Racial Hygiene Association.
4. THE JUVENILE WORKER.
Leader of Discussion: Mrs. P. H. London.
(a) In Industry, Miss Grace Scobie, 0.8. E.
(b) The Unemployed Girl. Mrs. Colonel Richards,
of the Salvation Army.
(c) The Tragedy of the Juvenile Delinquent, Mrs.
Joan Harvey.
AFTERNOON SESSION.
5. THE SENIOR WORKER.
Leader of Discussion: Mrs. A. P. Allen.
(a) In Industry, Mrs. M. Heaghney, Joint Presi-
dent, Council of Action for Equal Pay.
(b) In Professions, Miss N. Cohen, Barrister.
6. THE CITIZEN.
Leader of Discussion: Mrs. F. L. Wilson.
(a) National, Miss M. Swain, Women’s Union of
Service.
(b) International, Miss Ruby Rich, Representing
the Equal Rights International World Women’s
Party, Geneva, National Women’s Commission of
1.P.C., Sydney.
7. THE HOMEMAKER.
(Members of the United Associations of Women.)
Leader of Discussion: Mrs. A. J. Keeling.
(a) The Value to the Community of the Work
of the Wife and Mother in the Home, Mrs. I.
Dalwood.
(b) The Economic Security of the Woman in the
Home, Mrs. H. J. Webster.
(c) The Mother’s Contribution to the Community
in Later Life, Mrs. I, Speight.
Recorders, Mesdames M. Alldritt and Maurice Price.


j
\
I
i
i
I
[
i
i
WEDNESDAY, JULY 26th, 1939
11.00 a.m.: Bus leaves Frank H. Saywell Kindergarten,
Moore Park, for Taronga Park Zoo, for an
all-day picnic for 60 children.
8.00 p.rn.: Dramatic Evening arranged by Younger
Feminists; Cheque to be presented to the
Crown Street Hospital. Plays to be presented;
“ELIZABETH REFUSES”
(Produced by Miss Carmel Carlson.)
A miniature comedy from Jane Austen’s “Pride and
Prejudice,” by Margaret Macnamara.
Characters:
Elizabeth Bennet Irene Mosher
Jane Bennet Muriel Newcombe
Mrs. Bennet (their Mother) Flora Floyd
Mr Collins Brian Hannaghan
Lady Catherin de Bourgh Lilian Marchant
“SOMEBODY CARES”
(Written and Produced by Miss Phyl Marshall)
Characters:
]yj an William Coleman
Qj r j Phyl Marshall
Miss Harper Florence Mortimer
Mr. Gentle Leonard Colliver
THURSDAY, JULY 27th, 1939:
MUSICALE AND DIVERTISSEMENTS.
Sub-Committee: Mesdames H. Cracknell, L. M. Foster, A. J.
Keeling, George Perrins, and S. E. Vickery.
Exhibition of Paintings by Mr. F. C. Medworth, recently
shown at David Jones’ Exhibition Hall, where several were
chosen for the National Art Gallery.
Exhibition of hand-made Flowers and Pottery by Miss A.
Newman, Arts and Crafts, Ash Street, Sydney.
Futuristic Statuary and Art Display by Mr. George
Francis.
Angora Wool Industry and Fibre Flowers Display by Mrs.
W. A. Cambourne and Mrs. M. Campbell.
Tudor Plate Display by Miss Ruby Rich.
Native Arts from Rabaul, Mrs. A Sherman.
Australian Aboriginal Arts and Crafts, Mrs. C. Tennant
Kelly.
China, Hobbies, Treasures, Handwork, Eastern Novelties,
by members of the Club, including Mesdames H. Cracknell,
P. A. Cameron, A. J. Keeling, Maurice Price, S. E. Vickery,
and W. Wells, and Misses J Crain, Lilia B. Dow, Jimmy
Donnelly and G. Hamblin.
ASSISTING ARTISTS;
Afternoon Session: Miss Marie Baker, Miss R. Neal, Miss
Mary Neal.
Evening Session: Miss E. Findley, Mr. F. Tuckerman, Miss
Virginia Bassetti, Mr. Fincham.
GUESTS OF HONOUR:
Afternoon Session: Miss Lena Basquette and Jocelyn
Howarth, of the Minerva Theatre.
Evening Session: Mrs. Florence Taylor, 0.8.E
“LADIES IN WAITING”
FRIDAY, JULY 28th, 1939
By Wendy St. John Maule. (Produced by Miss Jimmy
Donnelly.)
Gala Bridge Afternoon. Hostesses: Mesdames M. Alldritt,
P. G. Powell and M. Powell.
Characters:
Fair Visitor Phyl Marshall
Dark Visitor Florence Mortimer
SATURDAY, JULY 29th, 1939: SILVER
N urse Hazel Allworth
JUBILEE DANCE
Gi r j Jimmy Donnelly
Si s t er Lilian Marchant
Woman Mar J Wharf
Sub-Committee: Mesdames P. H. London and A. Wilson, and
Misses Lilia B. Dow, L. Marchant and F. Mortimer.
COMPETITIONS.
I. Most attractive hair-do.
2. Most original head-dress.
3. Prettiest ankle.
“THE HONEYMOON
COUPLE”
Neil Grant. (Produced by
Nancye Stewart.)
4. Oral test, at Cinesound Studio, two girls and two boys,
to be chosen by Mr. George Cross, Casting Manager.
5. "Belle of the Ball,” by secret ballot.
6. Fan Parade. Prizes awarded for a most attractive
fan; (a) most graceful competitor: (b) bought fan; (c)
home-made floral fan; (d) home-made paper fan.
Characters;
The Landlord
Paul
William Frenden
John le Petit
Anna
Nancye Stewart
Chambermaid
Irene Mosher
MENU
Soup.
Creme of Asparagus.
ENTREE.
Chicken Aspic and Ham.
Salads.
Fancy Meringues,
Fancy Cream Trifles.
Fruit Salad and Cream.
Iced Fruit Cup.
Black Coffee.
Page Thirteen


WOMEN’S PROGRESSIVE ASSOCIATION OF NEW SOUTH WALES
FOUNDED 1901.
Mrs. Kate Dwyer, one of the best known women in the early suffrage movement in N.S.W., forwards the earliest pamphlet
issued by the Women’s Progressive Association of N.S.W. in 1901. Mrs. Kate Dwyer was appointed to the University Senate
by the Holman Government in 1916. It will be noticed that many of these reforms have been achieved.
AIMS: Social, Industrial and Educational Reform.
1. Full rights of Citizenship to Women.
(a) Women to be eligible for the positions of Aldermen
and Shire Councillors. Achieved (Alderman Fowler
and Swift-Newtown).
(b) Women to be eligible for election to the State Par-
liaments. Achieved—Miss Preston-Stanley and Mrs
Quirk.
2. The right of women (a) to sit on juries, (b) to enter
the legal profession, and (c) to be appointed Justices of
the Peace. (B and C achieved, A not yet allowed.)
3. Consolidation of the Marriage and Divorce Laws, these
laws to apply equally to men and women. (Not yet
achieved.)
4. Family Maintenance Bill.
(a) The legal right of the wife to have a fair share
in the accumulations of the Marriage Partnership.
(Still to be solved )
(b) The legal right of the Mother with the Father in the
guardianship of the Children. (Achieved, see
Guardianship of Infants Act.)
5. Equal pay for women with men, for work of equal
merit. (Not yet achieved.)
6. Industrial.
(a) Women representatives on Wages Boards and on all
other Boards affecting women and children. (Not
achieved.)
(b) A legalised minimum wage for all unorganised un-
skilled women workers. (Achieved for adult women
covered by awards in industry.)
(c) Amendment of the Minimum Wage Bill to increase
minimum to beginners from 5/- to 7/6 per week.
(Superseded by industrial award.)
7. Educational Department of Public Instruction.
(a) Appointment of Women School and Truant Inspec-
tors. (Achieved.)
(b) Appointment of Directresses of Sewing and other
branches of Domestic Science. (Achieved.)
(c) Equal pay for men and women teachers. (Not yet
achieved.)
(d) Extended Teaching in Domestic Science and estab-
lishment of a Domestic Science College. (Achieved.)
8. University Reform. (The outstanding reforms were
achieved by the 1912 Amending Education Act.)
(a) Abolition of Fees. (Achieved in some States.)
(b) Abolition of Life Tenure of Office in the Senate.
(Achieved 1912.)
(c) Women representatives on the Senate. (Achieved.)
(d) Minister and Director of Public Instruction to be
members on the Senate ex-officio. (Achieved.)
(e) Women to be eligible for appointment to the Pro-
fessional Staff (Achieved.)
(f) Women to be eligible for appointment as resident
Medical Officers to the Sydney and the Royal Prince
Alfred Hospitals. (Not yet achieved.)
(g) The establishment of a Chair of Domestic Science.
(Not yet achieved.)
(h) Evening Science Classes and Laboratory Demon-
stration. (Achieved.)
(i) Granting Degrees in Arts, Law and Education by
examination to such as afe unable to attend lectures.
and a more liberal system of extension lectures.
(Achieved.)
(j) Establishment of affiliated Colleges in Country
Centres, as Grafton, Armidale, Newcastle, Wagga,
and Broken Hill. (Armidale only.)
(Mrs.) JESSIE DICKIE, Hon. Secretary.
ANNIE GOLDING, President.
Tel.: B-3623
Li lias 5. Don?
Frocks, Suits, Coats, Evening Gowns and
Sports Wear
GO
94a KING ST. (2 doors from Prouds)
AND AT 284 GEORGE STREET (near Hunter Street), SYDNEY
Page Fourteen


WOMEN’S LEGAL STATUS ACT—HOW FAR IT COES
NERIDA J. COHEN (Barrister).
To what extent the passing of the Women’s Legal Status
Act was influenced by the World War is problematical, and
there may be no significance in the fact that it bears the
date of December, 1918. The fact remains, however, that
prior to the war, it was only in Australia, New Zealand,
Norway, Sweden and Finland that women were enfranchised,
and since then twenty or more countries have granted them
at least partial enfranchisement. Further, with the war
came women’s first wholesale entry into industry outside
the home, and into public life. This was inevitable. But
it was not inevitable that after the urgent necessity for
female labour had passed, they should have remained in the
field. To some this would appear but one more of the
evils of war. To the majority of thinking people it but bears
out the truth that every major social advance results from
some drastic stimulus. It is a reflection on us that this
should be so. Inertia, lack of courage and determination,
and habitual fear and distrust of change, fetter us until we
are rudely shaken from our lethargy. Could we but antici-
pate the trend of human events, and strive for universal
justice and liberty in times of peace, the occasion for
drastic stimuli, such as wars and revolutions would eventu-
ally disappear.
It is for women to see that the opportunity to live a
free, full and independent life, thrust upon them by inter-
national disaster, should be fostered and encouraged in the
hope that in so doing such disasters may be obviated. Can
it be mere coincidence that in those countries which are
threatening the peace of Europe to-day, women are being
once more pushed into the background, with no effective
say in the policy or direction of their governments?
The added advances made by women since the war are
due mainly to the efforts of a few, and a formidable list
of achievements they have to their credit, but it is every
woman’s responsibility to see that justice and liberty are
achieved and the artificial barriers to individual fulfilment
created by sex, colour, religion, race and economic insecurity
are swept away.
The field opened to women by the Women’s Legal Status
Act was largely professional. It provides that women shall
not by reason of sex be deemed to be under any disqualifica-
tion to be elected a Member of Parliament, Lord Mayor or
Mayor, Alderman, Councillor, Judge, Chairman of Quarter
Sessions, Stipendiary or Police Magistrate, or a Justice of
the Peace, or to be admitted and practise as a Barrister,
Solicitor or Conveyancer. This Act greatly widened the
scope of women’s activities, and was a decided advance in
their status, but having achieved it they have tended to
sit back and feel that the battle is won. Twenty years
have now gone by, and a few women are gradually establish-
ing themselves in professional and public life. There are a
dozen or so lawyers, a sum total of two women have sat
in the Legislative Assembly, there has been one woman
mayor. There have been no women on the Judiciary, but
publicity has lately been given to the fact that no woman
has ever had the opportunity to sit on the Children’s Court
Bench. 1 use the word “opportunity” advisedly, for,
although the terms of the Women’s Legal Status Act would
appear to open the door to equal opportunity in this sphere,
a sphere where women should surely have an important
place, in actual practice, women are not admitted to that
section of the Justice Department from which the ranks of
the Children’s Court Bench are filled! And here we come
It is a far cry, but incredibly near in point of time, from
the days when a woman had no independent identity, either
physically or economically—not till 1896 was the right of a
woman not to be held a prisoner in the house by her hus-
band established—and women may feel proud of their
achievements in that short time, and grateful to thos.
indefatigable women who have made them possible. Now, it
is for every woman, for we all, married or single, in the
home, or in the industrial world, in one way or another are
the benefiters, to see that their efforts are carried to their
logical conclusion—the attainment of a state in which
individuals, whether men or women, are free to contribute
in the best possible way according to their bent, their
share in the harmonious life of the community.
THE
LEICAGRAPH CO.
5 STRAND ARCADE, SYDNEY
SPECIALISTS IN:
• DANCE
• HOME
• COMMERCIAL
Photography
• CANDID "
There is a Leicagraph Operator as near as your Telephone.
Phone 87485 (3 lines) For Service
Page Fifteen


pag
MISS F. MORTIMER. T ,
' li^Bl
Jtg MISS L. B. DOW, J.P.
f ft ■ = = =^
N .✓Jar
YOUNGER FEMINISTS’
U: -y
|B y ■ j
•v7 \Zy i
5
- -m
f* Stt*A
MISS L MARCHANT.
MISS K. ROBINS.
MISS M. WHARF.
MISS J. DONNELLY.
MISS P. MARSHALL
MISS N. HEALY.
Page Sixteen


THE FADING BIRTHRATE
ITS MEANING FOR AUSTRALIA
A. WATSON MUNRO, M.D., F.R.C.S. Ed.
Dr A. Watson Munro is known all over Australia as
one of the greatest and most unselfish fighters for proper
consideration by governing bodies of the value of the
Australian mother in national life. He has always been
ready to help women’s organisations in their campaigns along
these lines.— (Signed: Norma Cameron, President Feminist
Club of N.S.W.)
The Feminist Club has always taken a prominent place
among influences for the social and political betterment of
the State. At the moment, its members are making a review
of past endeavours. Self-examination, like stock-taking in
the business world, is always profitable, even if not at all
times a source of self-congratulation. It is good to face
facts, pleasant or otherwise.
One phase of public work seems to me to-day specially
calling for scrutiny and effort by such earnest and able
women as the Feminists of N, S. Wales, Reading their motto,
1 have just been placing it alongside the great words of John
Ruskin, prophet and reformer of last century;
“THERE IS NO WEALTH BUT LIFE. LIFE, INCLUD-
ING ALL ITS POWERS OF LOVE', OF JOY, AND OF
ADMIRATION. THAT COUNTRY IS THE RICHEST
WHICH NOURISHES THE GREATEST NUMBER OF
NOBLE AND HAPPY HUMAN BEINGS.”
Australia depends, and will ever depend, for greatness,
even for its existence as a nation, on the quality of its
mothers; their value to the Commonwealth transcends and
defeats any material calculation.
Motherhood, to-day as always, is the first asset of a
nation: and for the peace and prosperity of this Common-
wealth of ours, a MOTHERHOOD OF BRITISH STOCK,
healthy of body and soul, is our prime necessity, in com-
parison with which all forms of material riches will weigh
but as dust in the balances. “There is no WEALTH but
LIFE.” Too long has blind neglect of this, the greatest
of all British interests, tied the British world to a deluded
policy that threatens the Empire with disasters now fore-
casted by the leading men of our time.
OUR FADING BIRTHRATE.
The decline of the birthrate, persistently and continuously,
for the last two generations, and the accompanying process
of depopulation, have culminated to-day in a grave menace
to the safety of this nation and of the whole British
Commonwealth of nations. The English birthrate ranks as
one of the lowest in the world; the Australian is better, but
so low as to imperil our cherished White-Australia policy;
and the future in both these countries is more than doubtful.
A steady downward trend has persisted in this country for
70 years; and in the Homeland much longer.
WARNING VOICES.
We have had frequent warnings. We are emphatically
advised by our acknowledged leaders in economics and statis-
tical science, here and at the centre of the Empire, that the
diminishing natural increase of the population threatens
early stagnation in our numbers; and that, should the birth-
rate go on decreasing at present speed (as past experience
clearly suggests that it will), then, inevitably, within one
generation or so there will follow a further sudden and more
nrecipitate decline, down the road to national extinction.
THIS FORECAST APPLIES TO BRITISH COMMUNITIES
EVERYWHERE.
Our late Prime Minister, Mr. Lyons, in his policy speech
at last election, declared that "a tragic position has
developed.” Mr. W. M. Hughes, P.C.—the first of our states-
men to lay the plain facts before the public—has confessed
his "dismay” at the people's indifference to this national
danger. Sir Earle Page, P.C., leader of the Federal Country
Party, have repeatedly uttered the same warning. And only
the other day Mr Stevens, Premier of this State, spoke
these public words: “BEFORE A GENERATION HAS
PASSED WE SHALL BE FACED WITH A STATIC POPU-
LATION. THERE WILL BE AN OLDER POPULATION, A
LESS MASCULINE POPULATION; IN SHORT, A DECAD-
ENT POPULATION.” No statements could be plainer than
these.
The British Prime Minister also, Mr. Neville Chamberlain,
told us in plain terms in 1935 that the type of immigrant
Australia wants is not available in the Homeland; and,
in fact, the flow of British immigration is to-day a mere
Lrickle; while the present foreign arrivals offer no compen-
sation, being of doubtful types and standards of living, and
the best of them on a steadily sinking birthrate, like our
own.
Of late, we have given the matter increasing discussion
about it and about. Our Governments have at last become
awake to realities and are inviting immigration from oyer
the seas. But all the while, it is very remarkable that we
have been hearing comparatively little about THE AUSTRA-
LIAN BABY, his value and his potentialities, as the best
immigrant of all. Yet it is manifest to any thinking mind
that the harvest of the Australian cradle is our ONLY
CERTAIN HOPE, and the road back to Genesis our only
sure way out of the mess. And it is by giving heed to these
facts, and only so, that Australians can continue to hold
this continent and use it.
“THE TRAGIC POSITION.”
Let us inquire what has reduced Australia from the
abounding birthrate of some 70 years ago (about 40 per
1,000 of the population) to the low level of to-day (17 per
1,000, or less than half)? Many and various are the alleged
causes; economic hardship (the most popular explanation):
increasing industrialisation; malnutrition; overcrowding; un-
employment, especially for youth; and so on For some
sections of the people these are very real, though by no
means for all, they are, however, mostly secondary or conse-
quential, and can be overcome by wise democratic states-
manship, medical and political. But we must look deeper.
The conclusion reached by most students of the subject
is that this strikingly modern phase of human infertility has
come about with and by the WILL OF THE PEOPLE
THEMSELVES. Australian men and women, for health and
virility, ara foremost among the peoples of the world. There
is no ground, physiological or other, to doubt that, if and
when British parents desire increase, the children will come.
But to alter or reverse the reluctant mental attitude towards
parenthood, now quite undisguised, will prove the hardest
task of all, whether for statesman or doctor or saint. The
task, it would seem, is to convince a nation against its will.
A trial awaits the national soul; but it must be faced if we
are in earnest that Australia shall survive as a people and
a civilisation of mainly Britannic tyne. Here I quote an
eminent British hygienist: ”The problem of depopulation is
one, not of economics, but of spiritual values. We have to
deal with a society that has lost, not indeed the power, but
the will to survive.”
WHAT MUST WE DO?
Coming to the question of remedy and reform, I begin by
saying that, for a solution of the birthrate problem and all
it means for Australia, 1 am convinced of two things:
FIRST that no measures will be finally effectual, unless
inspired by a conviction, in the national mind, of the value,
and material, of family life as the real basis of our
civilisation. Therefore, before all things, there is necessary
an awakening of thought and conscience in the people The
TDnTu USt be broadcast - TELL AUSTRALIA THE WHOLE
TRUTH! Self-examination, though sometimes unpleasant,
is always salutary, for nations as for individuals. And
happy are they that hear their detractions and can put
them to mending.” Fortunately for Australia of to-morrow,
the mending is in our power even at this late hour. We
know the methods, we have the power: only the Will is
wanting. But further delay is criminal.
IN THE NEXT PLACE, that our first step of all must
be to make childbearing safe and easy and inexpensive.
We must renounce our barbaric outlook on Motherhood.
Here are some of our losses in maternity (excluding illegal
operations) ;
(a) New South Wales: In each of the 20 years ending
1936, one mother died in every 200 live births (or
5 per 1,000). For the first time 1937 is better, one
in 239 (or 4.2 per 1,000). May it continue so!
(b) Australia (taken as a whole): Here a favourable trend
appears within the 7 years ending 193 7, namely, a
yearly average loss of one mother in 217 live births
(or 4.6 per 1,000).
The sum total of Australian mothers lost within the seven
Page Seventeen


■ . V&l*. - ' ‘ ' i' ' • •; ;v;v.- 4 *>(*£• • KSIIm
lb — mm * * v
Hr '^p : - * \ p
j|
1L w...
HL ■ >■■ oj >;■";, v^fe-' ! ' '
|||^|&, -<- xi> ■ ■■^ > 1 / ■.■vV-X/ - - - ' , '
IPt - .. I" . ' ■ . ' ;.- * ■
?g» w !a— MARRIAGE.
BY NORMA CAMERON.
A cottage home, then a bassinet.
«ili*4$Sr ” /t. - *' Last V ear ’ s kim ' P’ ra P 5 a cigarette,
??$?£•■ •‘V'.' *'&% ..< Some well-darned hose on a w ire clothes line,
It V„* . 'Midst tiny socks for a babe-o'-mine
.,; _, , > .-T-.jv, A cookery book in a tidy drawer,
• V *'?, •• A good gas stove, though we might be poor,
• ) * A carpet of dreams where tiny feet
'Wav* Will toddle and learn life’s trials to meet
i'
A baby smile and a straying curl,
'^SsKt' ’*’ Bring joy to the life of a married girl;
The same old kirn and some more darned hose.
• iffi* v^'’ But baby dresses ’mongst other clothes.
,... f y.8.dJs». A kitchen hot and an aching side,
' V* * ‘fEj Still a lover’s kiss at eventide,
hw, Echoes of dreams that still come true,
5 y AnH thankc tn HnH thpf I mpt von
" w
J'l: > •
* £
EDITH (Cook) KELLY
and ANTHONY.
(Continued from
years mentioned was 3,664 (excluding illegal operations)
When illegal operations are included the total comes to
4,307. And so, from these causes, Australia loses an aver-
age of 615 mothers every year. These are grievous wounds,
unwarrantably inflicted on the family and the body politic.
We can observe by these figures a certain saving of
maternal life within the seven-year period. It is small, how-
ever, and quite insufficient to relieve the “tragic position”
brought about by decline of the birthrate. The record
altogether, is deplorable in a community professing to be
civilised. Let us take it penitently, as a clear call to re-
double all our efforts on behalf of Australian motherhood.
(There is no time here to discuss Maternal Morbidity,, that
is, the crippling of health following on complicated or mis-
managed confinements; it is a dark blot on our records,
hardly less momentous for the State than the deathrate
itself.)
THE SAME TALE IS ONLY TOO TRUE THROUGHOUT
THE ENGLISH-SPEAKING WORLD. Listen to an American
leader in Obstetrics, Professor Howard Kelly, of John Hop-
kin’s University. Just two years ago this veteran con-
demned “the enormous culpable losses, in so-called civilised
lands, of the lives of mothers and children, due to our
utterly uncivilised treatment of expectant and parturient
mothers.” This is fact, and thus is the fountain of life
stifled at its source. The time is come, that the story of
unwarrantable womanly suffering and death should cease.
Child-bearing, which is a NATURAL BODILY FUNCTION,
must be and can be made safe and easy and inexpensive.
It is otherwise to-day, only because of human neglect,
indifference and mismanagement. Common humanity and
the deepest interests of the State cry aloud for reform,
I believe the whole range of obstetric management needs
revision, and towards that end are here repeated briefly a
few of the measures I have advanced for years:—
(I ) Improve and extend the training in obstetrics of
medical students and of all maternity attendants.
Educate the public, spreading the truth broadcast:
especially to young people intending marriage.
(2) Make an investigation, expert and impartial, through-
out Australia, beginning <Hth our own State, into
cause and cure of the heavy deathrate of women and
infants in association with childbirth.
Page Eighteen
Echoes of dreams that still come true.
And thanks to Cod that I met you
With apologies to a writer in an overseas magazine who some five years
ago eulogised the joys of a Bachelor Girl.
previous page
iiiMiimiimiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiim*
Reading from left
BRIAN KENNEDY
son of Kath. (Cracknel!).
DORELLE DONNAN,
daughter of Dot (Oakley).
MAX COOPER,
son of Iris (Skinner).
SUZANNE PRIMROSE,
daughter of Edna (Hebden)
LEIGH COOPER,
son of Iris (Skinner)
GLADYS (Meade) TONKIN
and MICHELLE.
(3) Standardise and federalise the whole scheme of obstet-
rical education of medical undergraduates, and of
examinations for degrees and diplomas.
(4) Secure whole-time professorships of obstetrics in
every State.
(5) KEEP MATERNITY INSTITUTIONS ALWAYS
SEPARATE AND COMPLETELY APART FROM
HOSPITALS FOR THE TREATMENT OF GENERAL
DISEASE'S. THE PRESENT MATERNITY "WARD"
OR “ANNEX" IS A REPREHENSIBLE MAKESHIFT
PERMISSIBLE ONLY FOR EMERGENCIES. SUCH
COMBINATIONS ARE A CONTRADICTION OF
MEDICAL SCIENCE, SAFETY, AND COMMON
SENSE.
(6) Increase the public accommodation for maternity,
with special regard to the needs and convenience of
the more populous quarters of the metropolis.
(7) Standardise hospital records, statistics, notifications,
and mortality and morbidity records of maternity,
(8) Establish a new class of midwives on an extended
training; their necessarily inadequate pay to carry
substantial pensions as an offset. There is now a
“Midwives’ Act" (1936) in force in England on these
lines.
(9) Relieve the heavy modern drawbacks on parenthood
by appropriate financial measures.
(10) ENDOW GENEROUSLY. WITH MONEY, WHICH IS
ONLY RICHES, BUT LIFE, WHICH IS THE ONLY
WEALTH.
I must mention in conclusion TWO OUTSTANDING
EVILS which are main causes of the declining birthrate.
The public mind has for many years been abused by mis-
leading and pernicious preaching of artificial limitation of
the birthrate, in the forms of Contraception (masquerading
under the plausible name of “birth-control”) and the revolt-
ing practice of voluntary interference with the pregnant
state (wilful abortion). And the result to-day is that such
limitation has now become established, as if by the deliber-
ate choice of the people. “ 'Tis in ourselves that we are
thus or thus”; and from ourselves must the remedy come.
Both these evils are widespread and destructive of female
life and health in a high degree. They are working disaster
for Australia. They must be fought like the plague.


THE POSITION OF WOMAN WITH REGARD TO NATIONALITY
MISS JEAN MALOR (Barrister).
The nationality of a woman is her quality of owing
allegiance to a certain state. From the fact of this relation
of the individual to the State flow certain consequences
which are of importance, particularly in the political and
international spheres. The chief advantages of the posses-
sion of British nationality by an Australian woman are the
right to vote, the benefit of certain social legislation, such
as is contained in the Invalid and Old Age Pensions Act,
the right of unrestricted admission to the United Kingdom,
and British diplomatic protection and the right to obtain
a British passport for foreign travel.
There are two fundamental conceptions of the British
nationality law. The first, that any person born within the
King’s Dominions is a subject of His Majesty, is still the
law. subject to some exceptions which are not relevant to
this note. The second, that the nationality of a married
woman, is that of her husband, has been considerably modi-
fied. The grounds of objection to the second rule are many.
In the first place, it detracts from the equality of the wife
in the marriage status. More important still, however, is the
fact that the rule is not universally recognised. Thus a
woman,* on marriage with an alien, would lose her British
nationality, and might not acquire that of her husband
She would then be in that very position, stateless,
the disadvantages of which are obvious. Amongst other
things, there is no ministry which would give her a pass-
port.
Some amelioration of the harshness of the second rule was
contained in the Nationality Act, 1920, as it existed before
the 193 6 amendment. By the 1936 amending Act further
respite was given. I shall state the effect of the law as
at present existing. The principle that the wife of a
British subject is a British subject, and the wife of an
alien is an alien is expressly rtcognised, subject to the
provisions of the Act. A British woman who marries an
alien is an alien is expressly recognised, subject to the
reason only of the marriage, lose her British nationality,
and when a man, during the continuance of his marriage,
ceases to be a British subject, his wife does not lose her
British nationality unless she acquires the new nationality
of her husband. Even if, in the latter case, she acquires
the new nationality of her husband, she may make a declara-
tion that she desires to remain a British subject. A woman
who marries an alien and thus acquires his nationality, may
make a declaration that she desires to retain in Australia
or any territory the rights of a British subject, and there-
upon she shall, in Australia or any territory, be entitled
to the rights and be subject to the obligations of a person
owing allegiance to the King. The fact that the latter
provision applies only within the territorial limits of Aus-
tralia and her territories is noteworthy. The reasons for it
are constitutional and are too complex to be explained in a
short note.
The other provisions of the Nationality Act, 1920-1936,
dealing with married women provide that the wife of an
alien does not by reason only of the naturalisation of her
husband as a British subject, herself become a British
subject—it is necessary for her to make a declaration that
she desires to acquire British nationality; that the wife of
an alien who is the subject of a State at war with His
Majesty, if she was a natural born British subject, may
resume that nationality; and that a woman who acquires
the nationality of her husband on her marriage and does not
on his death or the dissolution of the marriage lose his
nationality and resume her former allegiance.
GUARD YOUR HEALTH
DAIRY FARMERS
BOTTLED MILK
AND
CREAM
THE DAIRY FARMERS' CO-OPERATIVE MILK COMPANY LIMITED
700 HARRIS STREET, ULTIMO
Phone: M 2131 (7 lines)
Branches and Vendors
in all Suburbs
M 4166 (4 lines)
Page Nineteen


j isit j
| Bebarfalds OPP. TOWN HALL, GEORGE STREET SYDNEY )
WOMEN AND THE FUTURE
HELEN FRASER, Ex-Councillor of Kensington Borough Council, London.
The political emancipation of women is just about two
decades old in the majority of the leading countries of the
world —here in Australia still earlier.
In that period, women have made great gains in political
life in opened professions, in public positions attained and
held, in the right to labour and to achieve. The records of
their national services are very fine.
We ‘would find, examining their achievements, distinctive
*work, outstanding personalities in discovery, in medicine,
in research, literature and the arts enriched and steady
faithful service in a myriad of spheres.
But what have women achieved in the real moulding of
social forms in these years? What have we contributed
to the thought of the world, to the philosophy of the gov-
erning of man in these years, to the interpretation of the
hidden wisdom of the universe.
Have we influenced society in fundamental ways? Have
we realised and used our true and real powers, or have
we sold our birthright for a mess of potage?
Could we, had we used our true genius, have helped to
prevent the present spectacle of a world sliding to war
or to the slowing down of all its constructive capacity, all
unease and fear?
Are we women clear about what our own real power is
and what we are trying to do with it?
What we have chiefly done since we were more free in
action is to set out to prove to man that we can do things
—that what he does we can do. This was a necessary phase
in a world which sees outer achievement as the greater
part of the meaning of life and we have done a great deal
of co-operative work with men of great usefulness. But
have we used our real genius—that fundamental woman in
us that is deeply unlike and complementary to man.
Man works and does things in the physical and mental,
and has things done to him in the emotional and psychical.
He is driven by great emotional urges, most of them sup-
plied by women.
Woman’s real power lies here—not only her power, but
her responsibility—a responsibility grave and heavy.
In the great social sense, this power has only been used
in muddled intermittent conflicting ways, but the essential
spirit of the suffrage movement was this.
Through what channels would we expect the true genius,
the real power of woman to express itself? One of her
most important functions in expression as inspirer must be
that of critic—but not merely a critic of forms, but a
critic of ends and achievements.
Here we have failed in the deepest sense. We have
neither criticised cogently, nor claimed as we should, nor
inspired to great ends. If we had, the world would have
been a better place to-day with fewer problems and infinitely
less suffering, less agony and less horror.
But we have one very real difficulty—a very few publi-
cations in the world desire to hear anything from women
on their philosophy of life—and yet—it is women above
all who should be encouraged in these times to tell us
what they think.
Women could, if they would be true to their own reality,
inspire and sustain men in their work—that must be done
—of changing the economic systems that part the world to
co-operative action that would sustain it in peace. -
My plea is that women be encouraged, even urged, to
voice our conceptions and our interpretations of life, to
work out with man a society that will welcome children,
that will have youth look out on a world of hope and
brave enterprise.
Let us hold a dream of a world in which the talent and
genius of human beings is freely used. Let us demand of
men that they make us a world of sanity, a world of free-
dom, a world that serves humanity.
Let us be man’s complement in the deepest and truest
sense.
(Signed) HELEN FRASER.
Ex-Councillor of the Kensington Borough Council.
Page Twenty


THE HOUSE OF CURZON
tes i o,
ope Sub.
e ti accox lurzons . .
. au hav 3 time to
ei So De ] d No bite
is icessio enty weet
I 'e at say , °
mver. . a serv
y lei anc
u ts to ine
o F *n in gn,
and so well to the fore with its facilities
for giving you real service.
And Curzons don’t believe in selling just
for cash . .. it’s not the prerogative of any
CUP AND POST TO - ■ ‘
- of CURZON, I tQe PITV STREET EXE
invites members of the Feminist Club
to open a Subscript ion Account
It's easy to open an account at Curzons . . . there are no unnecessary formalities
. . . furthermore you have ample time to pay. This is not an involved credit
scheme . . . there’s No Deposit and No Interest. . , It’s an ordinary entry account
plus the unique concession of tiventy weeks to pay.
It’s nice to he able to say , u Charge it to my account”
and SO convenient... a service you will appreciate.
Sydney's Newest and Brightest Store!
You will enjoy your visits to this Shrine store to tell you how to buy ... at
of Fashion ... so modern in its design, Curzons you can buy for spot cash . . .
CUP AND POST TO CURZON S.
I THE HOUSE OF CURZON,
i 211 PITT STREET,
= SYDNEY. E
§ Dear Sirs, E
or you can take advantage of our simple,
straight-forward, helpful Subscription
Account.
E lam interested in opening an Entry E
| Account at Curzons. Kindly forward me E
i full particulars.
1 Name
Address
ilium mu
Page Twenty-one


AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION OF WOMEN VOTERS
For six months of the year Mrs. Cameron was Acting
Chairwoman of the New South Wales Committee during
the absence of Mrs. Street abroad. During this period the
National Insurance Bill came before Federal Parliament.
Immediately the Bill was tabled it was found to be teeming
with discriminating clauses against women. An intensive
campaign was commenced by Mrs. Cameron as Acting Chair-
woman, and Miss Grace Scobie as Hon. Secretary.
A telegram was sent to all M'embers of Parliament, ask-
ing them to attend a meeting in order to hear the woman’s
point of view. The following members attended;— Senator
Dein, Sir Frederick Stewart, M.H.R., Mr. Albert Lane, M.H.R.,
The Hon. Eric Harrison, M.H.R., Mr. J. Jennings, and Mr.
W. McCall, M.H.R. It was one of the most outstanding
meetings ever sponsored by any woman’s organisation in
Sydney.
The Parliamentary representatives sat in the front row
and were addressed by Mrs. Cameron (Chair), Mesdames
Glencross and Littlejohn, and the Misses Grace Scobie and
Ruby Rich.
In reply, the Members of the House undertook to have
amendments made to the clauses discussed.
On the following day, newspaper placards bearing the
headline “Women Protest National Insurance” were every-
where throughout the city. From then on it was a con-
tinual fight to have the Bill amended. Finally, a deputation
headed by Mrs. Cameron left for Canberra on May 24th,
and for the first time in the history of Federal Parliament,
representatives of women’s organisations sat around the
Cabinet table and discussed with the Prime Minister a Bill
then being debated in the House, and were promised amend-
ments which would make the Bill more equable.
The National Insurance Bill has since suffered many
alterations, and is at present indefinitely postponed. We
are, however, still watchful and will move for a better
Bill now that Federal Cabinet has been reconstructed.
WOMEN IN
During the year a new woman Member, Mrs. Quirk, en-
dorsed by the Labour Party, was elected to the New South
Wales Parliament and started her Parliamentary career with
the good wishes of all women’s organisations, regardless of
party.
In Victoria, Mrs. Brownbill was elected to join Mrs. C.
Weber, and in Western Australia the two women Members,
Miss May Holman and Mrs. Carlisle McDonald, survived a
general election.
Tragedy, however, overtook Miss May Holman, who was
PARLIAMENT
killed in a motor accident. The woman’s movement of the
whole of Australia has lost a very worthy representative.
In April of this year, Mrs. Ella Waddell contested the
Waverley bi-election as the endorsed U.A.P. candidate, made
necessary by the death of her husband- She failed to win
the seat, but put up an excellent fight. Two Labour
machines, two Labour newspapers, and a Labour broadcast-
ing station, also the Labour candidates exchanging prefer-
ences proved too powerful for her party.
DOM
CI L E
MISS CHRISTIAN JOLLIE SMITH, LL.B. (Barrister and Solicitor)
A person’s domicile is his legal permanent home. There
are two sorts of domicile: the place of birth or the place
where a permanent home is made. If you do not acquire
a permanent home in another State or country, the place
where you were born becomes your domicile.
When a man and woman marry, they have the one
domicile, i.e., a woman’s domicile becomes that of her
husband! If the marriage breaks up, the question of divorce
has to be faced; and the Matrimonial Causes Act will only
grant divorce, whatever the grounds, to a woman domiciled
in this State. If a woman is deserted by her husband in
this State, supposing New South Wales to have been his
domicile before the desertion, she may retain this domicile
for the purpose of getting a divorce from him on the
grounds of desertion. But if he should have committed
any of the other matrimonial offences, such as cruelty,
drunkenness and failure to support, or adultery, and leaves
New South Wales, making some other State his home, she
cannot ask for divorce from our Courts, but must go to
the State where he is domiciled and present her case before-
the Courts there. This means the expense of taking both
herself and her witnesses to that State.
There is no Australian domicile, and so every State is
"foreign” to every other State. In the U.S.A., a woman
can in some cases acquire a separate domicile and the-
section of our law regarding a woman’s rights, if deserted,
is a step towards the American position. If the Federal
Parliament should pass an act making domicile in any part
of the Commonwealth a sufficient domicile for divorce in
any State, it would be an immense step forward, and would
reduce the expenses and difficulties sometimes insuperable
which face a woman with the breaking up of her home.
A resolution was moved by Mr. Blackburn and passed by
the Federal House to this effect some years ago, but
nothing further has been done to pass legislation remedying
the position.
INDIVIDUAL CASES HELPED BY
Master K. Discharged from the factory at which he was
employed on attaining the age of 1 7 years. Flis mother
approached us, as she was afraid this boy might become
one of the intermittent workers of the community Through
the interest of one of our members we were able to get the
boy a position in a well-established firm and with every
prospect of permanent employment.
Mrs E With eight children, whose husband had deserted
her was having difficulty with regard to maintenance orders,
and we were able, through the Child Welfare Department,
to expedite the payments of these orders.
Mr. and Mrs. K. A Russian couple with three_ children.
Could not speak English, were practically starving, their
money having been taken from them on arrival in Australia
from China by a so-called friend. Arrangements were made
through the Child Welfare Department for an inspector and
interpreter to visit the family. Special food relief was
granted and enquiries made with regard to the money.
Mrs. A. A mother of five children, the sixth born in one
of the leading women’s hospitals, had been ordered by her
doctor to have a complete rest on return to her home.
The husband applied to us to have the children placed in
one of the homes, and we were able to make arrangements
with the Stewart House Preventorium.
Page Twenty-two
THE FEMINIST CLUB OF N.S.W.
Mrs. B. A mother of nine children in difficulties over
interest payments on mortgage and back payments for
water and municipal rates. We approached the mortgagees
and made arrangements for small payments. Similar arrange-
ments were also made with the Water and Sewerage Board
and the local municipal council.
Mr. F. Widower with two children in homes at Carling-
ford, out of work and unable to visit them. Club provided
return train and ’bus fare and parcel for each of the
children.
Mrs. E'., mother of five children. Before the sixth arrived
we were asked to make arrangements for the mother’s admis-
sion to one of the big city hospitals. Other children had
been born in the home and she had dressed the children
and supervised the housekeeping through the whole of the
time she was in bed. The necessary arrangements were
made for the mother to be placed in the hospital and the
children to be cared for at home.
Gift of Bicycle. The Club made the gift of a bicycle to
a boy sponsored by the Christchurch Boys’ Welfare Society.
This boy had appeared before the Court and was adopted
by a mother who had three sons of her own, all of whom
possessed bicycles. The gift of the bicycle was the means
of bringing brightness into the life of this boy, enabling
him. as it did, to make week-end trips with the other boys.


C d Pianos traded in—’Phone M 2319 —Our Valuer
will call.
SOQDOD
PIANOS
here are Reasons
You will save Money
Our economical overhead allows us to offer greater value, and our
EXTRA EASY and PROVED PAYMENT PLAN enables you to have
the immediate delivery of a Piano to your home.
Sole Agents for the World-famous British-made
COLLARD & COLLARD
BABY GRAND
A modern range unsurpassed by any other maker,
leading Continental makes.
agents for
So that to-day, as in the year 1863, wisdom suggests “Come to
Elvy’s for pianos.” Trade-ins accepted.
KiiOlßlliin
HOWARD
MODERN
STREAMLINED MUSETTES
VIBRATION-DEFLECTION REPRODUCTION.
/ A new method of Pianoforte Construc-
™ " tion, ensuring greater depth and quality
of tone in a small instrument.
Prices range from £7B, or a small deposit
and payments from 6/6 weekly.
ELVY & CO. PTY. LTD
397 GEORGE STREET (between King and Market Streets), SYDNEY
Page Twenty-three


/ rv i ,
ol O I \
THE PRESIDENT, MRS. P. A. CAMERON, M.B.E.
A distinct honour was shared by the Club in the recog-
nition of the services to the community of the President,
Mrs. P. A. Cameron, who was created ar. M.B.E. by His
Most Gracious Majesty King George VI. in the 1939 New
Year’s Honour List.
It is a well-merited honour, of which every member is
proud. Mrs. Cameron has given completely honorary ser-
vice in many fields ever since she left school, and the
popularity of this award was shown by the fact that more
than 400 people, including representatives of Parliament,
social service, church, women’s organisations, and kinder-
gartens attended the receptions held in her honour.
The following quotation from a letter from the late Prime
Minister expresses the thoughts of all who have been associ-
ated with her in her many activities. .
“It is realised by all who have come in contact with
Mrs. Cameron that she is one of those public-spirited
citizens who leave an indelible mark on the life of the
community to which they belong.”
Since receiving this honour, Mrs. Cameron has been
entertained by the English-Speaking Union, the Kindergarten
Mothers’ Club, the New Zealand Women’s Club, the Queen
Victoria Club, featured as “The Woman of the Week” in
an interview over 2SM, and has given a special session,
"The Woman of the Moment,” over 2GB for the Australian
Gas Light Co.
CAN GIRLS HOLD THEIR PLACE IN INDUSTRY?
JOAN BOURNE, Secretary of the Council of Action for Equal Pay.
Many young girls and women fear the advent of Equal Pay for Equal Work lest it should mean
that large numbers of them will be replaced by men. This is dinned into their ears by men, who
say “that is the reason why lam in favour of it.” But if the position is investigated, the argument
turns out to be extremely specious.
No protagonist of equal pay would attempt to deny that
many girls are employed solely on account of the saving in
the wages bill; but, on the other hand, no antagonist of
equal pay could deny that very many women have won their
positions on their merits alone.
When a definite wage has to be paid for the work of a
position irrespective of who does it, there will be no advan-
tage of employing girls who come in the first category,
and it is idle to deny that some of them would be dis-
missed. However, they could hardly claim to have a just
grievance if they were dismissed for this reason. It is
surely not a matter for pride to think that one is regarded
as “cheap and nasty.”
The best advice to give these girls is this: “If you are
not 100 per cent, effective, admit it to yourselves and either
make yourselves fully competent in your present sphere of
employment or seek new fields to conquer.” There are so
many new avenues opening in these days that all who are
willing to make themselves efficient and to really work in
their jobs should be able to find congenial and remunerative
employment provided they are not exploited by being paid
far less than their work is worth.
Women are finding fresh avocations as dietitians, estate
agents, psychologists, pharmacists, chiropodists, masseuses,
advertisers, air hostesses, interior decorators, beauticians,
commercial artists, and one hundred and one other new and
interesting occupations. In these new careers equality of
pay and opportunity is conceded as a matter of course.
For the girls in the second category, those who have been
employed through sheer merit, can any thinking being
advance one reason for dismissing them to replace them with
men who may or may not be as effective? Change for
the sake of change seems to be a very fatuous idea.
One of the arguments raised against the employment of
women is that they will not remain in their positions for
long periods. If continuity of employment is desirable it
would seem to be the wildest idiocy to dismiss women who
are giving competent and completely satisfactory service.
A measure of equality of pay has for some time obtained
in certain sections of industrial work in Australia with suc-
cess. In the tailoring branches of the clothing industry
equal rate's are paid to men and women. It has not meant
the dismissal of women, but on the contrary, more women
are employed in this branch of the trade than ever before.
When it is considered how great are the number of
females in employment to-day, it is easy to realise how
impossible it would be to do without them.
In Britain, in 1936, ther were five and a half million women
working for wages; in Australia, in 1933, nearly one quarter
Page Twenty-four
of the workers were females. It is obvious that if any
attempt were made to displace large numbers of women it
could result in nothing but shortage of labour and economic
confusion.
Employers will always prefer to pay for brains and
ability rather than simple brute strength, and if a girl
makes herself economically valuable she need have no fear
of being out of employment.
An executive of one of our largest retail stores expressed
the opinion a few months ago that girls work far better
than men. It is hardly likely that such employers would
dismiss females merely to have the work performed by
males.
In October, 193 7, a new award providing a measure of
equal pay for shop assistants came into force. At the time,
many people, including the shop girls themselves, feared
that dismissals would take place in thousands. The award
has been in force for twelve months now, and it is possible
to gain a fair idea of its effects. Our shopgirls are still
holding their own.
Equal pay for equal work, it is proved, does not bring
trail of destruction to females in its wake.
The 1936 .census in Russia showed that the output of
women was rarely less than 80 per cent., the average being
over 90 per cent., and in some industries actually 110 per
cent, of the output of men. It is therefore perfectly
obvious that the ability and capacity of women in industry
is far from being inferior, per se, to that of men. Equal
pay would not mean the end of things for women.
Although in Australia equality of pay is carried out only
on a small scale, other countries have shown just how far
women can advance when asked to stand on their own mettle
and comnete fairly with men. In the medical world, notably
in America and Russia, women have advanced amazingly.
In politics, women in such important countries as India,
China, England, America and Turkey are holding portfolios.
But it is not only in the highly distinguished position
that equality of pay is an urgent necessity. It is the ran
and file of women who work, year in and year out, equally
as hard as a man, for about half the rate of pay.
No girl should feel inferior about holding her own in
job if she is well-trained and willing.
When women first entered industry, their advent was
greeted with male hostility. That prejudice has almost
been eliminated now.
It remains for women themselves to do all they can to
bring about equal pay and abolish the last prejudice to
their equality of ability and therefore just demand for equal
pay. Will they have the courage to; do it?
(Reprinted by courtesy “Red Tape.”)


mill iiiii ill
3 1508 01741783 8


■;
d 't ::
PRIVILEGES OF MEMBERSHIP OF THE FEMINIST CLUB OF N.S.W.
I. The Club Rooms are situated at 77, King Street, and
comprise a complete suite on the seventh floor. These
rooms are available for members every day from 9 a.m.
till 8 p.m. The Club Rooms are available at all times
for members to rest, read and write letters. Local
and overseas magazines are available for members in
the writing desk.
2. A shower and dressing room is provided for members
so that they may change in town before going on to
evening functions.
3. The Club rooms are available for members to entertain
privately by arrangement with the Secretary.
4. Light meals are always available at moderate charges
and special meals can be served by arrangement with
the domestic staff.
5. Members may bring friends to all Club functions, but
it is not desirable that the same friend should always
attend as by doing this that friend practically has the
privileges of Club membership.
6. Members may make use of the library at a nominal
charge per book. The selection of books is continually
revised, and members may suggest books to be included
in the library.
7. The Club Rooms are reserved for Bridge players on
Friday and games or tuition can be arranged if mem-
bers so desire.
8. Members receive a list of fixtures arranged for them
by the Entertainment Committee. These fixtures include
luncheon, afternoon and evening functions when local
and overseas speakers address the members and a dis-
cussion follows. The Club being looked upon as an
open forum for discussions on all subjects of interest
to the community in general.
9. Monthly Musicales are arranged and leading women in
national life, including politics, art circles, stage and
screen are entertained, as Guests of Honour.
10. Weekly luncheons are arranged at which Guest Speakers
address members. These luncheons are especially
organised to include those members who are not able
to attend afternoon or evening functions.
1I . Members may bring individual cases of hardship before
the Club executive and where possible, the Club will
help and place the person concerned in the right
channel to receive the help necessary.
12. Members desiring lectures on any special subject can
suggest subjects or speakers to the Entertainment
Committee.
13. Members may take an active part in the social service
activities of the Club by attending one of the Sub-
Committees, if they so desire. Two new Sub-Com-
mittees are suggested for 1939, (a) to donate an
electric sewing machine to the Rachel Forster Hospi-
tal, and (b) to endow a bed in the Children’s Hospital.
14. Younger Feminists who are in business may, if they so
desire, arrange for friends to attend the afternoon
lectures occasionally.
15. Members can assist the Club activities by saving
coupons, labels, and wrappers of all sorts and hand
them into the office. By special arrangements, these
tokens are redeemable for cash (if presented in bulk
form) to assist the Club charity work.
% ** <£*■ ■
I I
| Are you a Member of the Feminist Club of |
j N.S.W.?
O 9
IF NOT, WHY NOT?
| Subscription £2/2/- per year |
| Younger Feminists, 10/6 per year |
(Nomination by members of six months standing, or I
by application (with references) to Executive.
| _ __ !
’ 4 •»
Published by B. H. Macdougal & Co., 56 Hunter Street, Sydney, and printed by J. Lyons, 36 Union Street, Pyrmont.
\ \
