

rc .1 ft- rnm
♦ r L. : « .
* "i, > !
As ■ v j'
| THE
v
COLONIZATION
NEW ZEALAND.
PROFESSOR CHARLES RITTER,
OF BERLIN.
i
I
Cranslatrtf from tijc German.
<CU(aU)9V(«VvU iIUIU lyv wvlUUlß*
■♦v- *
■•V.
LONDON:
SMITH, ELDER AND CO., CORNHILL.
Ion: Printed by Stewaht and


■
'
.
■
■


THE
COLONIZATION
NEW ZEALAND.
PROFESSOR CHARLES RITTER,
OP BERLIN.
CramilateU from tfyc ©mnan.
LONDON:
SMITH, ELDER AND CO., CORNHILL.
■i
/


■
London:
Printed by Stewart and Murray,
Old Bailey.


PREFACE.
As recording the opinions entertained by a distin-
guished scientific foreigner, and reflected by him on
the minds of his intelligent countrymen, —the great
German nation, —on the no less interesting than im-
portant subject of the systematic Colonization of New
Zealand, it has been thought, that a translation of
Professor Ritter’s recent Publication would not prove
unacceptable to the British public.
The learned Professor passes in comprehensive
review, the past and present circumstances, as also
the future prospects of New Zealand ; deducing
from the latter nothing less than that, by a wise
administration of its affairs, and right development
of its vast natural resources, the “ double island ”
may eventually become the Britain of the southern
hemisphere. In this conception, conveying as it
does, a tacit hope that such may prove in effect the
crowning result, the enlightenment and philosophy
of a purely philanthropic mind are manifested ; nor
is there surely a patriotic British bosom which will


not cordially respond to these generous aspirations
for the reflection of Britain’s greatness in this her
latest, and most promising colonial offspring.
In the course of his remarks, Professor Ritter feel-
ingly deplores the consequences of the neglect in
which New Zealand had been left from the time of its
discovery by Cook, until a recent period, when the
attention of the British Government was only first
awakened to a sense of its injustice towards the
aborigines, by the example set to it in the work of
moral and social improvement by a private company
of benevolent enterprising individuals, animated by a
sincere desire to carry out to their full extent the true
principles of a humanizing colonization.
To the patriotic efforts of the New Zealand
Company, the Professor accords, indeed, the highest
praise; more especially as regards the very liberal
arrangements made by it for the welfare of the
natives, by the gratuitous assignment, for their sole
benefit in perpetuity, of one* tenth part of all its
territory purchased from them. It will, doubtless,
afford Professor Ritter pleasure to learn, that while
this inadequate translation of his able discourse is
passing through the press, accounts have been re-
ceived from New Zealand, of the successful establish-
ment of the Company’s Second, or Nelson Settle-
ment, at Tasman’s Gulf, on the Southern Shore of
Cook’s Strait; thus fully bearing out his own and
other testimony to the fact of the highly-favoured
districts bordering the respective sides of that strait,
being those to which settlers would naturally resort


in preference, as destined to become, in effect, the
true emporium of the colony’s future greatness.
As an indication of the watchful interest excited on
the Continent, by the progress of British Colonization,
Professor Ritter’s Pamphlet can scarcely fail to create
attention in this country, or to produce a salutary
effect upon our colonizing operations ; by proving
that they are subject to the searching scrutiny of
foreign contemporaries to whose opinion weight at-
taches, and who will be ready to hold them up to
general approval or condemnation, according to the
evidences of their merits.
The Translator.
London , April , 1842.




PROFESSOR RITTER
NEW ZEALAND.
The Colonization of New Zealand, through the me-
dium of the New-Zealand-Company, formed in
England, and especially in London, during my brief
residence there, a short time since, a prominent topic
of general conversation. I visited the New-Zealand
House, situated in the heart of the City, within the
walls of which building, a rich store of knowledge,
relative to that cardinal point of the earth’s compass,
was revealed to my attention, and where, at the same
time, as a diligent observer, I was brought into com-
munication with many of those who, up to this period,
had been leading men in promoting the colonizing
proceedings.
The first difficulties of the undertaking—the greatest
impediments which the Colonization had until recently
experienced, from the opposition of the Colonial Au-
thorities and the Legislature, because the British
Crown had as yet been undecided with reference to
the mode of taking actual possession of the double


Island, —were now triumphantly surmounted. The
Crown had proclaimed the Act of Sovereignty over
New Zealand: the substance of Parliamentary dis-
cussions and investigations of the affairs of the colo-
nization had been printed and published on the public
account: the public voice had unequivocally pro-
nounced in favour of the continuance of the Company’s
proceedings, and this was now assured by the partici-
pation in the enterprize, of members of some of the
most noted families, and of the first mercantile houses
in the kingdom.
The annually increasing want of a steady emigra-
tion from the European British Isles to distant colo-
nies, had now, in fact, resolved itself, in the minds of
this great sea-faring nation of twenty millions of men,
into a matter of the most urgent necessity. Nor was
it difficult to understand that a fruitful double-island,
hitherto entirely unappropriated, of the size of Eng-
land, and numbering at the most a native population
of 100,000 souls, —being scarcely twenty-five indivi-
duals to the German square mile,* —must serve as a
wide field of industry and development for British
subjects, crowded together in their own country in
the closest contiguity, in the proportion of 4,500 and
upwards to a similar square mile. The nobler part of
the British nation yielded the full measure of its
assent to the new, humane system of colonization,
differing entirely from all former systems, which was
now for the first time adopted. The astonishment of
the observer could not but be excited at the restless
activity displayed by a private Colonization Associa-
tion ; at the great amount of land purchased in New
Zealand through the medium of its agents; at the
* The German geographical mile is equivalent, to 4‘60 English
miles.— Translator.


rapid afflux to that distant region, of numerous emi-
grants of all classes of the British population the
rich and the poor alike ! Yet, without the assistance
of the Government, —nay, without its sanction, the
operations of the Colonizing Company, though not
quite two years had elapsed since its formation, had
been of so vigorous a nature, that already, possessed
of a capital of 100,000/., it had effected the purchase
of twenty millions of English acres, (1 acre = 1.5846
Prussian acres: 13744 acres = 1 German square
mile,) or 1,454 German square miles* of territory in
New Zealand, equivalent to nearly one-third part of
the entire Island. Already had about twenty-four
emigrant ships been despatched with /000 settlers,
comprising individuals more or less wealthy, the
whole of whom were conveyed to, and landed at
their destination, free of any expense to themselves !
Already had the foundations been laid of three not
unimportant harbour-cities ; while in the port of that
intended as the future metropolis of the Island, and
designated Wellington, (a name replete with interest-
ing associations to every Briton,) no less than 110
ships of various tonnage had entered during the first
year, laden with all necessaries for supplying the
wants of the settlers, and these vessels have been
followed by hundreds more. Down to the middle of
last summer, the cost of the dwelling-houses erected
at Wellington had operated the local circulation of a
capital of 18,000/., and the value of the goods and
stores in depot was estimated at 200,000/.! The
steady progressive development of the extensive en-
terprize to which, besides London, towns such as Ply-
mouth, Glasgow, and other places, had zealously at-
tached themselves, was now readily to be anticipated.
* See note ante.


Such a feature of the power of colonization which,
from its necessity, now embraces all zones, seas, and
the extreme ends of the earth—nay, the whole globe
itself—was obviously only practicable in our days,
when the ocean is made the subservient means of
promoting its animating impulse. Spiritual interests
must follow in the train of those of a physical kind ;
and what was formerly considered merely possible,
may now actually be effected. The wild ungovern-
able powers of nature, controlled and rendered sub-
ject by mind-accompanying power, must now become,
in lieu of opponents, serviceable auxiliaries and as-
sistants of the human race; in proportion as the
opposing elements of time and space are overcome,
their contraction must lead to unlooked for beneficial
relations; and, succumbing to new combinations, they
must serve to entwine more and more the natural and
the physical creation in a close mutual connexion.
The mere contemplation of such events developing
themselves before our eyes, in their earlier stages,
were, in truth, of itself, instructive. It would be
still more so as regards futurity; for, within per-
chance the compass of a century, may arise from that
double-island of New Zealand, in the midst of the
fertile shores of the Austral Ocean, a young renovated
Albion of the antipodean world. The object becomes
thus not unimportant to every well-wisher to the human
race. Readily will he conceive the realization, who
calls to mind the various historic phenomena
of this kind wherein, within the smallest germ lay
hidden, or lies hid, the whole eventual fruit; as in
the instance of the British Indian Empire; of the
giant stem of the United States of North America ;
or of the yet scarcely scattered seed in Algeria—in the
Caucasus, and in the Mohammedan East, which the


future is destined to mature. Here, in truth, is the
time to measure, in order fully to enter into such
considerations. In the midst of our so quiet, happy,
firm-rooted land, few indications are permitted us
regarding the affairs of a stormy agitated ocean, and
its yet half-savage islanders, who lie from us even
still more remote than from the first sea-navigating
nations of our section of the earth. Nevertheless,
sailing vessels from our ports have already traversed
the ocean washing those far distant shores, for in
our days the sea raises up no exclusive barriers.
And besides, are not those islands inhabited by our
fellow-men nay, already by Christian brethren?
That which externally reveals itself always operates
back again eventually within. Let us not, therefore,
overlook the coherence of things in the infinite, which
is ever reflected again in minuteness and speciality
because it always again becomes revealed to us anew,
for our own welfare in nature, as in human history.
To these considerations must be superadded the pros-
pect of a special participation, lately opened to us in a
popular way, so far as concerns those regions of the
antipodes, by means of the proposal of our Hanseatic
countrymen to found a settlement for German emi-
grants on the group of Chatham Islands,* which
form an appendage to the northern section of the
neighbouring islands of New Zealand ; and on such
a settlement the history of the development of the
New Zealand Colonization, would in every sense ex-
ercise the most beneficial influence.
The position of the antipodean island of New Zea-
* A Pamphlet on this subject, under the title of “ Auswan-
derungen und Colonisation, und die Chatham-Inseln, von J. C.
Beit,” has just been published at Hamburg, by Messrs. Perthes,
Besser, and Mauke, Booksellers, of that City.— Translator.


land, is immediately under our feet, on the opposite
side of the globe. Its fast-anchored land and moun-
tain mass rises majestically from amidst that un-
bounded ever-agitated world of waters, and varies
from ranges of richly wooded highlands to isolated,
bold, conic, snow-covered mountains. It is distant
thousands of nautical miles from each of the known
sections of the earth, which belt almost cohesively,
or as a continental circle, that ocean space; hence, it
is encompassed on the outward ring of such circle, by
the richest and most varied coast-land.—Even the
thousand scattered islets as well as the thickly-
crowded island-groups of the South-sea, stretching
from east to west like a milky way of glittering
stars, through the deep-blue sea, but firmly rooted to
its base by volcanic power, remain respectfully, the
remotest among all the islands behind New Zealand ;
as though the shape of the large double island had
restricted the formation of the smaller ones in their
approach towards the same. New Zealand takes
root at the southern end of the long-drawn island
chain in wild volcanic-ranges, as our great geologist
has termed them, which, belting Eastern Asia and
the Continent of Australia to the extent of 1,000
miles from north to south, stand as their coast at-
tendants imbedded in the deep, and as their last
joint southern members. After many volcanic and
marine struggles, the monuments of which are in-
wardly retained within it, in the shape of craters,
pumice-stone, hot-springs, and other evidences, the
double-island now seems with its many-peaked,mighty
elevations, to have sunk to rest in the full repose
of nature.*—The historic nature of its peace, has not
yet been unravelled ; but the portal of the theatre
* This, however, is not yet clearly ascertained.— Translator.


where the scene has been enacted, is now thrown
open to the necessary champion. Its animal world,
no less than its richly endowed vegetable kingdom,
bears in truth an Idyllic character; containing no
beasts of prey, nor any of the larger quadrupeds, nor
sheltering any venomous or dangerous reptiles.
But uncultured man, its inhabitant, was until
lately, a wild beast of prey; while the present savage
of the soil is still engaged with his race in perpetuat-
ing mutual feuds. His rude licentiousness struggling
with civilization, is however partially restrained, and
the European world of culture begins to exercise
thereon a salutary influence.
The seclusion of New Zealand from all other sister-
islands, whereof the far greater part are in a state of
less development; nay, the oceanic unity of this dou-
ble-island, is in strict unison with its size, its boun-
teous endowments, its intrinsic qualities, its self-suf-
ficing powers. It could itself amply suffice to provide
a natural abundance, and an organization of property
for its own population; and could be summoned, un-
like any other of the Australian sister-islands, to be-
come hereafter the fruitful mother of an extended
civilized race. Its nearest continental neighbour,
Australia, (New Holland,) with the convict settlement
of New South Wales, is distant from it 1,200 nau-
tical miles, and can only be reached on the ave-
rage, in ten or fourteen days; while during the pre-
vailing westerly wind, which is adverse, the passage
may be extended to three or four weeks, or more.
The two extraordinary harbour-rich islands which
constitute New Zealand, do not lie, as England and Ire-
land, breastwise, but lap over one another. A channel
four or five (German) miles broad, called Cook’s Strait,
from the name of its discoverer, divides the two, or


rather unites them in the highest sense; for to this
favoured country is given an advantage denied to the
American Continent, at the Isthmus of Panama;
namely, a navigable thoroughfare of the most supe-
rior kind, binding the east with the west, in the
shortest possible way. Forasmuch as throughout the
extent of this Strait, of fifteen or twenty German
miles,* the greatest number of good anchoring
grounds, and roomy harbours are to be found, be-
tween its jutting headlands, surrounded too by dis-
tricts of the most fertile character; so consequently
has it been foreseen that in the midst of this great
highway, the pulsating heart and arteries must be
sought, which are destined henceforward to diffuse
historic life through the entire social organization and
political system of this insular group; since only from
the maritime side, from the coast hitherwards, can
modern cultivation here commence its upward growth.
Here, then, during the past year, the foundation-stone
of Wellington, the future capital of the island-state,
was laid. The surface of the two islands, neither
quite 4,000 German square miles/ is about equiva-
lent to that of England and Scotland conjointly; their
extreme length of 200 German miles from north to
south, would, if measured on the soil of Europe, be
about co-equal with the known distance from Munich
to the outward southern point of Italy. Like-
wise, the climatrical position (34^ —47° 10'. South
lat.) would be equally analogous to that of this dis-
trict, excepting only, that New Zealand lies in the
middle of the ocean, the moisture of which tempers,
as is known, both heat and cold. But the breadth
of New Zealand surpasses that of the Italian pen-
insula from east to west, mostly in a twofold, fre-
* See note, ante , p. 8,


quently in a threefold degree. The theatre were
therefore large enough in itself for the seat of the fu-
ture dominion of a naval power —for a Britannia of
the Southern hemisphere : larger in fact in space than
the Italian central-seat of the Imperium Romanian in
the middle of the Orbis terrarum of the Roman
times, there also encircled by a far-extending territo-
rial dominion.
But we have few colonizers sufficiently sanguine
to dream amidst such remote conceptions. To the
outward, the material elements, must the inward, the
spiritual elements, approximate, in order to generate
and to develop greatness around the compass of the
earth’s dimensions. The question is here only of the
actually present and the recently past generations; but
the latter does not in truth offer us a bright vision of
the country under consideration.
New Zealand is a section of the globe where
Nature has indeed been bountiful, nay, lavish of her
choicest gifts, in return for which, however, mankind
has hitherto done nothing, beyond the country’s first
discovery, and the occurrences of the last year or
two, or rather has abused those gifts in various
ways. It stands yet in the childhood of its
first discovery, and since the first expression of
pleased astonishment at its rich constructure, no
smiling look of the European discoverer has fallen
back upon it, —not once was the flag of actual pos-
session-taking raised upon its soil by the nation
claiming its discovery. Its Son of Nature, the being
endowed with vigorous, though untutored energies of
mind and body—an Anthropophagus, was allowed to
revert to cannibalism, without a redeeming effort, or
the slightest benevolence of guardianship, on the
part of those organized thereto; who, on the contrary,


arrogating to themselves a wide superiority over him,
often sought, in the most arbitrary, sometimes in the
most reckless and revolting way, to dispose of his
life and natural inheritance. No enterprizing cha-
racter since Cook, the discoverer’s, time (1769), has
circumnavigated the 800 German miles of the island
coast; no geologist, no botanist, no philanthropist,
no one of the numerous tourists, whether of the
investigative or merely inquisitive order, has pene-
trated into its interior, and it has consequently
remained until lately, an unknown land, in the fullest
meaning of the term. Since only the last ten years,
since the teachers of the gospel in their triumphant
extension into the wildernesses of the South Sea
coasts, (as formerly into those of our own North Sea,)
have also here penetrated the hearts of many of the
most savage tribes, subdued their passions, and even
preserved with these Cannibals a friendly intercourse;
only since then have scattered paths been opened
amid the wilds of their forest homes. Nor was this
effected elsewhere than along the shores of the
northern islands, or in the case of other natives than
those by whom they were inhabited. Numbers
remained unknown, and the greater part of the inte-
rior, covered with a dense primeval forest, proved
inaccessible to the missionaries. These first endea-
vours to humanize the Aborigines of the northern
island, were followed but too quickly, from the
promulgation of the report of the rich provision of its
natural productions, and other promising sources of
profit and attraction, by the advent of speculators
and adventurers. The thousands of ships of all sea-
faring nations in the world, which now annually
plough the waters of the South Sea, the thousands
which yearly resort to the neighbouring groups


of harbours of New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land, as winter stations, in order to escape the ra-
vages of the southern storms of the Antarctic hemi-
sphere, before returning to their respective countries,
or proceeding to the India and China seas to prose-
cute their traffic; all these supply vagabonds enough,
whose well-being is in nowise cared for, and who,
with reckless daring, are ever ready to throw' them-
selves into the arms of chance and trust to fortune.
On a territory such as that of New Zealand, where
yet there was no observer of their irregular proceed-
ings, where yet no law obtained, no kind of order
existed, —where yet, in the depraved game of chance,
the wide prospect of freebootery, of riches, nay even
of wild dominion was held out to rapacity, because
no sovereign power for the control of the whole had
been called into existence; the intrusion of a class of
persons of the character described was especially
calculated to prove, as in effect it did, most baneful.
The island resembled a ship whose crew, become their
own destroyers, and which, whirled about at chance,
devoid of pilot, must fall a prey to barbarians. Al-
lured by the thirst of booty, the individuals men-
tioned could afford at first to be indifferent on the
score of bodily food ; since, for a long time past, the
Aborigines have raised in such abundance from their
fertile soil, the native or sweet potatoe, and more
recently also, the transplanted European root, that
this source of nourishment, viewed in conjunction
with the numerous swine, whether wild or domes-
ticated, abounding every where along the inhabited
line of coast, left but little ground for apprehension
on the score of food, on the part of the sailors who
might resort thither. Further, as a second and inex-
haustible source of food, the great fisheries in all the


rivers, creeks, and bays, lay always at their com-
mand ; these shores being, for the most part, only
temporarily inhabited by small groups of the wander-
ing tribes of the Aborigines, who otherwise, never
impede foreigners from benefiting by such gifts of
nature. The numerous shoals of colossal sea*animals,
the seal and the whale, driven since the last century
from the northern seas, have found in the southern
ocean a longer respite from the pursuit of man, and
still swarm, occasionally in considerable numbers,
about the southern shores of New Zealand, with their
young around them. The rich profit which their
chase affords has attracted yearly, since the last
century, numerous ships from the greatest distances,
into these waters, as also smaller vessels, from the
vicinity, particularly New South Wales. Almost
every bay and creek of the double-island, especially
the southern one, has already been rendered a place
of settlement by seal and whale fishermen of every
maritime nation, both American and European,
amongst whom the Australasians and the British form
the principal, although there is no deficiency, either
of Frenchmen, Norwegians, or German Hanseatics.
The service which the vigorous, extremely active,
and intelligent natives afford to foreigners in such
enterprizes, or in hewing down their own forest trees
for export timber or local ship-building, constitutes,
so to speak, their elementary school; wherein, until
now, next to the missionary schools, —these in the
north, the former mostly in the south, —has com-
menced the process of their assimilation to Europeans.
In this wise, they have the opportunity of learning
the use of the harpoon, the sail, the axe, the saw, of
fire-arms, and of clothing. No one, however, would
adduce such a rough mode of life, as an evidence of


the progress of culture, although a slight commence-
ment of civilization; and still less if considered in
conjunction with the admixture of the blood of the
white and coloured people. For, the temporary re-
sidence of so many foreigners leads to temporary
marriages with the native women, which are
followed by the introduction of a race of hybrid
children. Nevertheless, by the continuance of such
settlements, and progressive affinity with the robust,
well-formed, aboriginal race, there will spring up,
provided only that some discipline be enforced, a
posterity by no means ungraceful, which will not at
least fall back to cannibalism. Were it not for the
vicinity of the convict colony of New South Wales,
—whence disreputable fugitives, mostly thieves and
fraudulent insolvents, who, evading, on board the
ships about to leave, the closest scrutiny of the so-
called water-police, reach New Zealand, and there
diffuse the worst vices of the Europeans amongst
the natives, —the island would have only its own evils
to contend wdth. But such a neighbourhood, where
the bad run a more rapid career than the good, opens
the whole box of Pandora, and inundates thence the
whole New Zealand coasts, which, consequently,
here and there, may well bear within them the germs
of a Sodom and Gomorrah. The investigations con-
tained in the Parliamentary reports of the mother
country have served to open the eyes of all, in
reference to this matter. The wild love of strife of
the Aborigines, in whose untutored minds, revenge
was still identical with the instinct of self-preserva-
tion, luckily served in some degree to curb the bold
arrogance of European strangers, who, in their fleet
vessels, could readily cast anchor in any bay of their
selection. Only when assailed by European armed


superiority, numerously manned and gun-mounted
ships, would the courageous native in his fragile
canoe yield. Still, conflict after conflict not unfre-
quently ensued ; these generally hotly contested, and
often terminating in the bloody overthrow of whole
families and tribes. Also, conflagrations then ra-
vaged the dwelling-places of the natives, who, de-
spite their courage, mostly succumbed to the effects
of fire-arms. Nevertheless, this petty, desultory war-
fare could not materially extend itself, because the
coasts are but thinly populated, and many of the
bays contain but a small number of native residents.
But almost every part of the coast has witnessed
scenes of bloodshed of this description, and entire
boats’ crews of various nations been slain, many in-
dividuals among them being on such occasions de-
voured in pure cannibalism.
Far more frequently, however, than war has Eu-
ropean subtlety overcome the rude force of the New
Zealander, while avarice, and the thirst of gold,
have not unsuccessfully extended their net over this
double-island, whereby a new web of entanglement in
its disordered garden has been operated. Ano less
infamous than numerous portion of the Australian
speculators are notorious for their insatiable covetous-
ness for land—a propensity in the pursuit of which,
involving gain and gambling, they exercise in that
thinly populated country, a most nefarious power.
The general name they have acquired among the
people is that of land-swallower, or land-shark (Land-
hayfische). This passion it is which has fitted
them for the misuse of the refined ascendancy they
possess over a race of people yet in its minority.
Many among them, partly individuals, partly asso-
ciations, thirsting for great territorial acquisitions,


have well known how to take advantage of the want
of any restraining authority hitherto, on the coasts of
New Zealand, when excluded from the further pro-
secution of such transactions in the penal colonies,
through the operation of the laws. During the last
few years, ships carrying passengers and goods for
this kind of traffic, were weekly seen leaving the
Australian ports for the New Zealand shores, and
thence returning with documents which such parties
had themselves prepared as evidences of the purchases
alleged to have been effected.
The individuals and the articles of barter sent,
were of a character to obtain from ignorant chiefs, or
heads of families of those erratic scanty tribes, who
formed, first at one then another bay, their temporary
settlements, cessions of valuable tracts of land, vary-
ing more or less in extent. Without knowing what
he sold, without himself possessing the designated
territory, the New Zealander eagerly grasped, in his
crude anxiety, the proffered bales of stuffs, a red
handkerchief, a gilt-bordered cap, a few iron nails
and axes, a musket, or fowling-piece, with powder
and shot; and promised in return to the trafficker the
islands of the coast, or if he better pleased, the whole
visible circuit of the coast, including forests and all
other appurtenances. The white man thereupon
transcribed a document, the meaning of which he
alone understood, caused the native to affix to it his
mark, by way of vouching for its authenticity, and
his followers to testify thereto, so that hereafter he
might be able to establish his alleged right of domi-
nion, the descriptive limits of which he not unfre-
quently most absurdly falsified and extended. The
bargain concluded, the native once more cast his
fishing-tackle into the waters of another bay, planted


his potatoe beds for a speedy crop in the new but
equally fertile soil, cut the leaves of the flax plant,
which grows in wild abundance on the coast, and
quickly raised anew his hut of reeds. On the other
hand, the buyer, with his followers, imagining himself
to be the lord of the soil, quickly commenced the task
of hewing down the stately forest trees, in order to ex-
port the best timber at an extravagant rate, or to build
ships upon the spot. He next proceeded to erect his
wooden buildings whether for the purpose of a dwelling,
a saw-mill, a train-oil store, for the whale fishery, or a
magazine for his minor retail traffic, and invited
others from the vicinity for the furtherance of his
business. But at this second bay, the same chief
meeting a new comer, quickly sold to him the self-
same territory he had just before alienated to the pre-
vious party, without reflecting on a second, or per
chance on a third recurrence on the frequency of the
conveyance. Or, probably, a strange tribe thence
wandering, blood-enemies of the first, and dispos-
sessed by them of the mutually-claimed territory, had
in their turn sold it to other speculators on similar
terms. Hence disputes were generated amongst the
land-jobbers, as none could prove a better title than
the other, and no adjudication could be effected. As
they usually lived in irregular matrimony with the
native females, the tribes to which these belonged,
ranged themselves on the different sides accordingly,
and hence feuds and strife were engendered amongst
these from quarrels not, in truth, their own. A
murder which then not seldom happened, led to the
surprise and destruction of one tribe or the other,
and on such occasions, the white swindlers, the ori-
ginators of the mischief, were not always fortunate
enough to escape the danger, by fleeing to their


boats. But the survivors and conquerors have not
the less become, whether by their bloody deeds, or
by their subtlety, the great landed proprietors, the
powerful whites, in the country of the coloured Abo-
rigines, with whose chiefs they the more readily ally
themselves, in order to be thereby the better able to
maintain their supremacy. Very many of these are
the explorers of the local cultivation: they are the
founders of extensive plantations ; of the timber
trade; of large fishing establishments, of whaling
expeditions, and of numerous train-oil stores. They
have already spread themselves along almost all the
coasts of the double-island, and preferred claims of
dominion to a wide extent of surrounding territory.
Countless acts of this kind are under the cognizance
of the authorities at Sydney, and have transpired
through the Council of Colonial Legislation in New
South Wales, charged, though only lately, with the
investigation of claims to territorial possessions. Very
many, indeed most of the petty wars which have
always more or less prevailed amongst such wander-
ing tribes of Aborigines, have mainly originated in
recent times from this cause, and by its effects, the
numbers of the tribes must continually go on di-
minishing. They must, at the same time, become ex-
pelled, as every where else where civilization esta-
blishes itself among savages, by the weight of spiritual
preponderance, from their productive coast-lands to
less fertile districts in the interior, whither they must
still more slumber in their barbarism, or continue in
their savage state, or entirely succumb. The fate of
so many aboriginal races of men which have already
been obliterated from the world’s history ; the repeti-
tion of the rapid disappearance of the whole Indian
race of America, before the spread of European


colonization, as also of the Aborigines of New Hol-
land, there, in parts, even systematically rooted out,
threatens equally their brother-race in New Zealand,
by means of the still more rapid progress of civiliza-
tion on their insular territory.
Such was, generally, until lately, such is, partly,
also still, the condition of human life on an island
no less beautiful in aspect than richly endowed, con-
verted into an arena of the most fearful degeneracy
of passion, by men of the coarser, equally with the
finer kind, both of whom, though from opposite ex-
tremes, must be ranked as savages. Was it conceiv-
able that the natural consequences of that frightful
process could be fully averted from the scene of its
occurrence, by means of a benevolent society of civi-
lized individuals ? Yet has this happened in our days,
for with a certain predilection the British public has
identified itself with the undertaking.
The excess of the disorder has, in truth, reached its
term : it must now call forth the antitheses of legal
order. Dark, insidious delinquency must thus be
drawn from its concealment and dishonest subterfuge
detected. With the increased influx of visitors, the
eyes of intelligence, honesty and benevolence will
more and more be opened. The generally aroused
sympathy of the organizing authorities in the fate of
the aboriginal race, and against the injustice done to
them on all sides by the civilized population, has led
to associations for their welfare; as witness the Abori-
ginal Protection Society in London. It aroused like-
wise the guardian providence of individuals, no less
than of the Government, on behalf of the New Zea-
landers. And even herein is seen, as it seems to us,
a gratifying progress of the spirit of the times, the
development of which, notwithstanding the many


retrogradatlons experienced in separate instances, yet
in the great and whole, for the general welfare of
mankind, strides conspicuously forward.
Also, the Missions of Christianity, sending forth
their teachers to New Zealand, have operated a com-
mencement of that salutary progress. Through vigo-
rously prosecuted measures, they have acquired
within the lapse of scarcely ten years, an influence so
gentle over the minds of the natives in the various
settlements of at least the remote part of the Northern
island, as to have rendered these a striking marvel of
our times; for they have induced them, not only en-
tirely to abstain from cannibalism, but have imbued
them with peaceful, sociable habits; features, more-
over, which are becoming by degrees durably im-
planted amongst the contemporary tribes in the
Southern part of the Island, extending downwards
to Cook’s Straits.
It was the coloured people who now, happily, from
the operation of a regulated married life, resigned
themselves, of their own impulse, to a higher disci-
pline and religious order ; who, likewise regularly
assembled their families in their own huts with
songs of praise (for, like their forest birds, they have
melodious voices, and possess a musical taste) in
honour of the High Atua, and also in meeting houses
of their own erection, in celebration of the Sabbath;
and all this mainly brought about by the zeal of
their own coloured brethren who have become
Christian missionaries ; thus affording satisfactory
evidence of the Christian elements having taken firm
root amongst them. Nay, remarkable certainly it is,
that generally the Aborigines, both young and old,
evince at the same time a strong impulse for, and
aptitude in acquiring, school-instruction in reading,


writing, and other branches of knowledge; a spirit
which so awakened would, it may be inferred, con-
tinue to animate them even without the continuance
of European influence, from family to family, and
from race to race. Further, as the fruit of all this, is
to be reckoned a surprisingly quick and ready de-
ference and inclination, not merely towards their
teachers, but also, in consequence of their keen per-
ception of a higher moral standard, towards the
Whites generally, whom they designate by the name
of Pakeha.
The increased European insight into the rich
character, and the peculiar worldly position of this
island, as even this budding development adduced,
together with the interesting, evinced susceptibility,
no less than the spiritual nature of its Aborigines,
wherewith the mild disposition and steady affection
of the women, is especially to be considered, already
demonstrates that its inclusion within the system of
the universe, and in the course of the development of
the human race, involves manifestly a different, a
higher consideration than that of a mere waste,
detached island, the abode of wild multitudes, an
ungoverned territory, the scene of conflict between
barbarous crudity and shameless delinquency, in
contact with civilization, but withal, in disunity with
the rest of the world.
The intelligent, matured view of the world’s present
intercourse, now soaring on eagle-wings around
it, with the quickness of thought, shows that the
island of New Zealand already forms one of the
most precious pearls on the string of commercial
stations matured around the great terrestrial circle,
through the medium of the ocean. If, then, it were
inhabited by an intelligent agricultural, commercial,


sea-faring community, whose welfare had for its
bases British laws, European morality, and the
Christian Church, and the Aborigines of its soil were
in nowise excluded from the fraternal chain of the
great human family, but were elevated in the scale of
humanity, by an enlightened tutelage;—it might
thenceforth be expected to become both morally and
physically powerful.
By such process an island-organismus so spirit-
ual, endowed with full human vigour in social, politi-
cal, religious, and worldly intercourse, must occupy
the position of a necessary, nay an inalienable mem-
ber in the system of the historic development of the
Universe, and go on from century to century, improv-
ing towards maturity. Through the medium of a re-
gular post-communication, like that afforded by the
great steam-navigation of the present day, yon far
distant ocean-isle must more and more approximate,
in capacious relation, to European civilization :—and,
brought within sure and easy reach, by an unbroken
line of connection, must practically acquire the posi-
tion of a contiguous European island. Thus, it would
no longer lie out of the track of the great world’s
intercourse, but become the grand centrum of the
antipodean zone, as the directest course in the great
highway from continent to continent, and conse-
quently aid in blending as a whole the entire circum-
ference.
But much of what has here been only indicated as
possible, has already been projected in the course of
the past year, and is now brought into actual exist-
ence. The young colonization of New Zealand was
truly established in accordance with the principles of
a humane system. In pursuance thereof, the British
Crown formally took sovereign possession of the ter-


ritory. New Zealand was incorporated in the State
of Great Britain. As sovereign power, and as first
discoverer, the Crown proclaimed that double-island
as its colony, (May 1840.) It introduced there Bri-
tish law and the British constitution. The Church
consecrated the first Bishop of the Island, as supe-
rior of the Christian Congregation (in the autumn of
1841), and, for all that related to this charge, laid the
foundation of its highest spiritual welfare. From the
western harbours of England and Europe, through
the middle of the Atlantic ocean, direct to the narrow
neck of land in Central America, —the isthmus of
Panama, —the post communication was actually
established by means of a regular line of steam-ships.
These mails, being landed at Porto Bello, on the
River Chagres, are thence conveyed by couriers over-
land to Panama; while not less regularly, since the
middle of last year, has the communication with New
Zealand been effected, by means of swift sailing-
packets from the harbour of Panama, on the west
coast of Darien, which vessels, after traversing Cook’s
Strait, proceed on to the Australian colonies. This
service will also eventually be performed by steam-
navigation. By the route described, the regular
voyage from London to the Colonial City of Wel-
lington, in Port Nicholson, will be reduced to about
seventy days; the previous route requiring from 160
to 180 # days to reach the Island. The apparently
most distant Colony of the antipodes, is thus, with
reference to time, brought nearly one-third nearer to
* This, though sometimes occurring, is rather an extreme case:
the average voyage occupies about four months, or 120 days; but
instances are not wanting of the New Zealand Company’s well-
appointed ships having performed it under one hundred days.—
Translator.


the parent-state England, and to the entire civilization
of Western Europe. From thence, through India,
are similar regular communications to and from Aus-
tralasia. But the circumstance of Calcutta, Madras,
and Bombay having been brought into near commu-
nication with Europe by way of the African isthmus
of Suez, —thus destined to play a similar role to its
sister of Panama, in the world’s intercourse,—and by
means of steam navigation from Alexandria to Malta,
Gibraltar, and so onwards, has long been generally
known.
Thus begins then, for New Zealand, with these
remarkable coincidences of the past year, an entirely
new epoch in its history. Already had this vast im-
provement of the future been foretold by the German
naturalist, George Forster, the companion of Cook,
and joint discoverer with him of the double-island.
When, on the occasion of the second circumnaviga-
tion of the globe (1773), he was compelled to take
leave of this barely discovered spot, he inscribed in
his journal, in prophetic spirit, the following remark-
able words : —(vol. i. p. 394.)
“ Perhaps, at some future day, Europeans, having
lost their American Colonies, may contemplate form-
ing fresh settlements in far distant lands : may the
spirit of the former discoverer only then not slumber
over them ! May they regard the native inhabitants
of the South Sea Islands as their brethren, and prove
to contemporaries that colonies may be founded with-
out staining their soil with the blood of innocent
nations!”
That time is now actually arrived. Now is it in-
telligible what a colonization like that adduced, may
acquire as an indication for the future !—nay, what,
without having reached its climax, it may accumulate


for the ensuing generation, through the re-acting
strength of its ideas! And how peculiar must the
formation be in a country with such a former history
—that has participated in none of those blessings
which we, in our uninterrupted possession, have often
unconsciously and quite tacitly enjoyed ! For, amongst
its phases were none of the blessings of human social
life, neither of civilization, nor of law, the church,
hereditary dominion, the patriotic remembrance of
a national past, or the more cosmopolitan one of the
blended fraternal and spiritual world ! For the right
appreciation of this peculiarity of the colonization,
there are yet to be considered some characteristic
features of the soil to which it appertains; as affect-
ing the natural and human organized existence it has
assumed, and the principle within which its elements
must revolve.
The wildly rugged, yet majestic, coast-rich, natural
features of the double-island, such as Cook dis-
covered, and for the first time, circumnavigated it,
after a tedious effort of six months’ duration, have
not, in any respect since changed their character.
On the east side, four or five mountain ranges rising
in succession one behind the other, and surmounted
in the back-ground by stupendous snow-capped
peaks, formed, on the first aspect, in the sea-distance,
a surprising picture. Thick, along the coast, were
every where found evidences of strong volcanic for-
mation, steep headlands, wide isthmuses, projecting
rocks, yawning caverns opened by the action of the
waves, lovely bush-covered islands ranging in un-
bounded variety from inlet to inlet, and from bay to
bay. Within its inner half circle were only narrow
naked ranges of sea-shore and sterile plains ; but in
the back ground stretched the rising base of the


mountains and capes, covered with dark green prim-
eval forests, yet untouched by the axe of man.
But their own great age and the force of tempests
had everywhere brought down numerous giant trunks,
from which, imbedded in the soil, time had produced
a young light green race of foreign sprouts, and
these entangled with brushwood and circling plants,
with moss, with fern, and with lichen, formed one
wild, impenetrable mass of net-work. But nowhere
was there cultivation —everywhere a desert. Con-
jecture as to inhabitants was alone permitted by the
appearance on the forest verge, of heaps of broken
stones piled in rude pillar-shape though on the
beach a few reed-built huts gave evidence of human
life, as also single canoes, paddled across the bays by
dark athletic men, who, when they were approached
nearer, swung their clubs and spears above their
heads, with wild and threatening gestures.
The spot where he and his companions first landed,
Cook designated by the name of Poverty Bay, to
mark the impression which its desolate appearance
produced upon him; though the first forest which it
was there vainly sought to thread, exhibited to his
companion, Sir Joseph Banks, the naturalist, a vege-
table kingdom of twenty different kinds of trees,
whereof none was until then known to him. The
north shore of the island exhibited more variety,
greater softness, and greater richness in its deeply
indented bays, the recipients of the waters of navi-
gable streams penetrating numerous valleys. The
larger fertile plains were inhabited by numerous
* According to concurrent testimony, the natives are to this
day in the habit of thus piling up the stones which plentifully
strew the ground in various places, as remnants of the volcanic
operations which have occurred.— Translator.


Aborigines, who cultivated their native sweet potato,
and, on being visited, received the strangers with a
less threatening demeanour than those first spoken
of, so that here at least the discovered land was not,
as on the east coast, stained with blood.
Cook named this district the Bay of Plenty.
Here were seen larger and skilfully carved canoes, very
large fishing-nets, made from the native flax, much
exceeding in size those used in Europe, and generally
a higher degree of prosperity amongst the natives,
these being also of a finer appearance. In this
mildest, warmest part of the island, with an Italian,
only moister climate, the vine-plant thither trans-
planted already produces delicious grapes, and the
native wild peach-tree, the richest fruit. The melon
and the fig readily ripen there; and judging from
experiments hitherto made, the orange might likewise
be produced. All European fruits and cereals, as
barley, wheat, thrive pre-eminently; many vegeta-
bles, and especially the potato, which has spread
itself from hence, with astonishing rapidity, along the
whole line of coast.
All these are gifts which emigration has introduced :
for, in the time of the discoverer, a few kinds of
roots alone constituted, even in this mildest island,
the scanty vegetable nourishment of the Aborigines,
amongst which the bottle-gourd ( Flaschenkurhis)
and the sweet-potato (Convolvulus batatus), by some,
although rudely cultivated, and the everywhere
abundant wild-fern {Acrostichum furcatum) of fibrous,
sweet, but little-nourishing qualities, formed the most
important. The excessive richness of the coast fish-
eries, and the forest birds must, however, amply have
supplied the place of the many vegetable kinds of


nourishment, the production of which had been
denied to the soil by its peculiar vegetation.
Such, along the northern coasts, besides the Bay
of Plenty, also appeared to the discoverers, the
country around the contiguous harbours, and the
island-rich gulf, with the many navigable streams
flowing into it from the interior, and to which, from
the lovely rich meadow-land bordering its shores, the
appellation of the Thames was given. Such is the
Bay of Islands, with its half-dozen excellent har-
bours, the radii of whose position have not been un-
aptly likened to the extended thumb and fingers of
the hand. In all these configurations, the volcanic
formation of Norway (as at Bergen and Christiana)
and of Scotland (so celebrated on the Tay, and
the Clyde near Edinburgh and Glasgow respectively)
is undistinguishable.
Here, in this most genial section of the double-
island, have its sons of nature, the Aborigines evinced
the most gifted susceptibility for European assimila-
tion. The younger generation there has, in fact,
abnegated its cruelty and forsworn its revenge, be-
cause the provocatives for the exercise of these are
wasted. But they have the consciousness of their
substantiality, and retain unimpaired their national
feelings of honour. They go dressed like the Euro-
peans, and regulate their fashions correspondingly.
In agricultural and garden culture, in the practice of
felling trees, sawing, floating raft-timber, erecting
mills, ship-carpentry, navigation, marketing, trade
and barter, they are already become their very apt
pupils. But their chiefs have as yet by no means
abandoned their hereditary dignity. The natives are
naturally laborious; the hospitable reception and
c 5


entertainment of strangers is one of their distinguish-
ing traits, and they are now become peacefully dis-
posed. Personal offences alone arouse still, as for-
merly, their wild passions ; but as it is their custom
to exact Utu, meaning payment for injury, to which
compromise the European, in order to allay their
fierce resentment, readily accedes, by the cheap pre-
sent of a piece of stuff, or a few cigars, disputes
from this source are not of frequent occurrence. The
solemn pathos they exhibit in public transactions,
their taste for social intercourse, their joyous bur-
lesque humour, their natural wit, their predilection
for potatoes, their passion for tobacco-smoking, to
enjoy which they make any sacrifice, their indiffer-
ence to convenience, as against wind and weather,
their deep, tenacious religious spirit, readily mounting
to enthusiasm ; all these qualities have led to their
being repeatedly likened by the English and the
Scotch to their own native neighbours the Irish ; not,
however, the less recognizing in them one of the most
gifted aboriginal races in the universe.
Their women, on whom devolves almost all labour,
are, by the dominant attraction of their earnest dispo-
sition, the truest wives, and the most tender careful
mothers for the welfare of their offspring. They dis-
solve in tears, and gash their flesh with muscle-
shells, until the blood flows freely from the wounds,
in the excess of their grief at the loss of one
whom they have loved. The great national supe-
riority over Europeans, which both sexes have hi-
therto almost generally preserved, consists in the
natural aversion they entertain to the use of ardent
spirits.
It is in this Northern Section of the Island, where


the precepts of the Christian teachers of the Protes-
tant Missions, and their exemplary course of life,
have found an almost general introduction, and ready
imitation, and whence they have become extended
through the Northern tribes to their Southern breth-
ren, down to Cook’s Strait, attended almost uniformly
with a humanizing development. In a future reli-
gious history of New Zealand the Shores of Thames
Bay, the head-quarters of the Missionaries, will ap-
pear, as the scene of the first rising of the morning
dawn, an important spot; even as of old, appeared
on German soil the cleared forest glades of Buchan,
in the days of Bonifacius. Whilst in other sec-
tions of the Island, mostly entrenched by ridges of
rock, appear scattered villages, perched on elevated
sites, here, on the contrary, are numerous peaceful
settled villages, embracing within their enclosure,
schools conducted by coloured teachers, corn lands,
potato fields, maize plantations, and garden grounds,
interspersed with clean neat huts, the whole, in
flourishing cultivation, presenting a park-like aspect
amid the forest openings. From hence, have many
Aborigines wandered forth with their staff, in aid of
...
their brother Missionaries, for the conversion and civi-
lization of their yet, in many respects, savage country-
men in the Southern districts ; nor this unattended
with a good result. At the Bay of Islands, —which,
on account of its rich clustering havens, was formerly
the favoured emporium of industry, commerce, busi-
ness and navigation, whither hundreds of ships annu-
ally resorted, and a not inconsiderable number of
trading vessels of various tonnage, from the ports of
the South Sea, from North America and Great Britain
always lay at anchor, —was laid in the course of last


year, the foundation-stone of the town of Russell,
destined as the seat of the British local Government*.
No one, however, of the other coasts of the island
equals this North end in the progress of this kind of
civilization, although, also, as already stated, the
shady sides are not wanting.
The entire west side of the island, is a monotonous
line of coast, and on account of the prevalence of
westerly winds, as yet little visited ; but in its centre,
trending towards the funnel-shaped entrance to
Cook’s Strait, the high pyramid of Mount Egmont
rises like another Peak of Teneriffe, full ten thousand
feet above the level of the sea, and serving, conse-
quently, as a conspicuous land-mark for ships navi-
gating thitherwards from the west. Its bold, snow-
covered crest, ever shrouded in mist, has already
served as a beacon to numerous Colonists : for at its
wide Northern base, rich in fine undulating meadow-
land, the youngest Colonial City, named New Ply-
mouth, after its elder British sister, has been esta-
blished. Its base on the South-west, extends down
to the inner channel of Cook’s Strait, within which,
its opposite shores amply provided by nature with
the most excellent shipping stations and havens, the
London Company, as already stated, has chosen the
site of the chief Colonial City, Wellington.
Within this volcanic kind of disseverment of the
island, the channel of which forms a complete navi-
gable connecting sea-branch, from twenty to thirty
German miles long from west to east, and from ten
to five in breadth from north to south, lies that
splendid concentrated mass of haven richness, lately
become of inestimable value as the centre of settle-
* This intention however has not taken effect.— Translator.


ment, and its concomitant activity, on the grandest
scale.
Here, amid these varied havens, tarried long at
frequent intervals, the first discoverer, forasmuch
as he here found collected all that was requisite
for the recreation and invigoration of his ship’s com-
pany ; protection against tempests, excellent anchor-
age, exhaustless abundance of superior timber for
masts and ship purposes, fresh salubrious water, de-
licious fish in plenty, potatoes, and wholesome wild,
anti-scorbutic herbs, cress, celery, spoon-wort; and,
although occasionally a little wind agitated,— an
atmosphere so genial and salubrious, that the crew
then exhausted through fatigue and sickness while
within the tropics, speedily regained the strength
with which they had left their native shores, and like
renovated beings, were enabled to set out again to
encounter the hardships which awaited them in the
Antarctic regions.
Fully answering to such description were found
Tasman’s Gulf, # (Blind Bay,) Queen Charlotte’s
Sound, Admiralty Bay, Ship’s Cove, and many other
places in this glittering row of stations, of which,
however, those only on the north-eastern outlet parti-
cularly Cloudy Bay, were made use of on this occasion.
But the progress of discovery in our days, proves
that the southern coast of the opposite northern lying
shore, contains a similar natural treasure, which to a
maritime nation must be regarded as the highest con-
dition of a country’s value. Hence, it is here, at
Port Nicholson, where the new colonial city Welling-
ton, has been laid out, as the future centre of the
* The site lately selected for the Nelson settlement of the New
Zealand Company. — Translator.


great commercial traffic which may be anticipated,
and as the first sea-port of the New Colonial States.*
From the shores of Cook’s Strait, southwards, the
middle island stretches a hundred German miles fur-
ther down towards the Polar side of the earth, with
still bolder, continuous mountain chains, extending
lengthwise through its entire centre. Snow-covered
plains decorate the detached giant peaks which project
from out the long-drawn rocky ridge. Here, steppes of
manifold gradation, sloping on either side towards the
rugged coasts, are overspread with the thickest man-
tle of colossal primaeval forests ; a treasure of many
millions for future ages, but which, on account of
the uncommon acclivities of the formations is difficult
of acquisition. In this region, are every where, nu-
merous bays and inlets, but no where wide spreading
valleys, though many, but as yet unexplored level
districts lie in the interstices of the higher grounds ;
the narrow clefts being alike traversed by the waters
of roaring mountain-floods, and murmuring water-
falls. A stupendous mountain nature of the true
Norwegian character, and to which even the Scottish,
as well as that so esteemed of Wales and Cumber-
land must yield, is here predominant. But still the
extreme southern end of this island has the superior-
ity of a very mild south of England climate, where,
though rain, clouds, and tempests fail not, yet the
snow in severest winter, only seldom remains upon
the ground beyond a few days ; where the constant
verdure of the forest trees and the myrtle-shrubs
enshrouds the landscape in beauty the whole year
* This opinion, as to the great natural advantages of Port
Nicholson, is in strict accordance with all concurrent testimony,
and is a severe reflection on the strange fatuity which has sugges-
ted the placing of the seat of government upon a remote part of
the northern island.— Translator.


through ; where both maize and potatoes thrive ex-
ceedingly.
Here it was that the gentle-minded George Forster,
the German naturalist, whilst sojourning months
along with Cook, in the wild romantic region of
Dusky Bay, was forcibly reminded of the Salvator
Rosa artist-style of scenery. Man and cattle-herds
were wanting to this repelling sombre monotony; but
the melodious warbling at day-break of numerous
forest birds, brought back to him the sound of Eu-
ropean nature; the fluttering of the parrot-tribe at
mid-day, in the shady arched foliage of such lovely
forests, transported him to the sub-tropical regions of
the earth; but the naked cliffs of the sea-bay,
whereon, at twilight, groups of fat glittering seal-
calves congregated like a Proteus shoal for the
O c 5
night, proved to him that he was truly within the
expanse of the Antarctic neighbourhood.
Thus, speaking generally, the large middle island,
from its predominating Alpine character, and rich
coast development, will never be transformed into an
agricultural soil.* Nevertheless, as already men-
tioned, it is not wholly devoid, —frequently sporadi-
cally distributed between the mountain gaps,—of
uncommonly fertile districts well adapted for agricul-
tural purposes, though in nowise forming, as for
instance, in the west of England, a dominant con-
nected series of wide plains requisite for a corn-
growing country. In proportionately narrow intervals,
the country on either side of the central mountain
ridge, declines equally towards the sea, whereby the
* According to authentic accounts, however, parts of it are
eminently adapted with the progress of settlement, for a grazing
country, and in the vicinity of Cook’s Strait in particular, rich
pasture land abounds.— Translator.


dissevered coast configuration is brought by an
extraordinary expansion into immediate contact with
the mountain-lands. This volcanic rich coast, with
its fish and forest plenty, affords the ready indication
of a predominant maritime colonization, which must
proceed from numerous specially favoured localities,
and can thence extend itself only gradually into the
interior. Thus, formerly, was colonized by the Hel-
lenic race, from the coast upwards, as the celebrated
names of the maritime cities shew, —none of those
in the interior equalling them in renown, —the south-
ern end of Italy and Sicily (Magna Grsecia). But
the rich water abundance of New Zealand, although
no great river (to which, generally, the civilization of
internal landed districts is at first indebted) pene-
trates its larger plains, renders it conspicuously
analogous to long-stretching Norway, only with the
advantage of a twofold superiority of coast, both on
the east side and the west. And to this be added the
weighty consideration of a milder climatrical position.
Nor are the productions of each by any means so dis-
similar as might be expected for opposite hemispheres.
The mineral treasures of New Zealand have not
yet been determined, because its mountain-land
remains unexplored; and hitherto each kind of metal
has been supplied to it from without: but its coal-
formation which has lately been first opened on the
south-west coast, bids fair to create a New Zealand
Newcastle with its thriving industry.
On the part of Fauna , however, this country has
been treated only in step-mother fashion; no wild
beast of prey, certainly, but also no single kind of
the larger tribe of quadrupeds, is here indigenous:
the wild swine only of the marshy coast, and the
social dog, which, in every desert, has accompanied


man, give to the New Zealander, besides rats and
mice (introduced as he alleges, with European emi-
gration) his scanty nourishment of animal food.
Whether, forsooth, any of the chamois or the llama
tribe are to be found on the summits of the high barren
mountains, is a question which time must reveal.
In this land of vegetable variety, there is wanting
every kind of grazing flocks; and all domestic
cattle, as goats, sheep, horned-kine, and horses, have
been a gift to its cultivable world. Cook made the
first endeavours to introduce there these domestic ne-
cessaries of a civilized people ; the goats seem to have
thriven best, and have already greatly multiplied.
In the blessings of extensive flocks and herds, as
in rich pasture lands. New Zealand must for a long
time—indeed everlastingly —remain behind its neigh-
bour Australia, as with few exceptions, nature has
denied to its soil almost all the grass-kinds which
constitute the primary condition of herd-grazing
life.* The fine, nourishing, milk-yielding, condensed
grass-kinds, forming the soft adornment of European
plains, and rendering, like Swiss meadows rife with
fragrance, the mountains of the Upper Alps so at-
tractive, and through sinewy labour, so habitable to
man, are altogether wanting in New Zealand. In the
depths of the interior, they are supplanted by bushy,
dry, coarse-stemmed fern roots, or by tough fibrous
reed-plants, amongst which, most commonly, the
New Zealand flax, phormium tenax, so celebrated
for its strength and flexibility, is found in abun-
dance on all the coast-lands and plains. Only
where cultivation, or forest conflagration, by manure
or ashes, has first transformed the earth’s surface,
can artificial meadows and hay be insured by
* See note ante, page 39.


sowing. The Idyllic pastoral life was therefore de-
nied to the New Zealander, equally with the hunter-
life of other races, who, in combating with the larger
beasts of prey,—with lions in the tropical, with bears
in the polar world, —gave exercise to the development
of their bodily energies. Thence perhaps is it here,
that man, in the worst grade of passion, directed
even these in the bloodiest way against his fellow-
being ; but to the honour of human nature he has
evinced that he could be as quickly reclaimed from
such cannibalism, in proportion as ways for the appli-
cation of his vigour and mental interests were laid
open to him. Also, was the New Zealander a
stranger to the forest-life, since the axe and iron were
not amongst his gifts. Only in the murderous war of
brethren, —in a fishing, sea, and family-life, revolved
hitherto the whole existence of one of the most
gifted aboriginal races of the earth.
Should not then the colonization of New Zealand,
if considered, as generally it was, an urgent neces-
sity of the condition of the British population, in its
high cultivated native territory, be also at the same
time regarded as one no less imperative for the wel-
fare and improvement of the aboriginal race! After
Cook’s discovery, there was no longer the distinction
of a separate native territory ! It happened, there-
fore, that here, as every where else around the earth’s
compass, European civilization, in conflict with a
country which offers its natural treasures, and re-
quires many benefits in return, and with a people
(consisting of about 100,000 individuals),* must,
through the power of tradition, and the activity of
time, be drawn on with it, to a new historic life, in
which the old race must become elevated or expire.
* According to a return lately received by the New Zealand
Company, the number is about 107,000.


In this struggle, yet certainly going on, we now
see before our eyes, the fate of New Zealand entirely,
with the most rapid development, transformed.
And now a few observations in reference to the
manner in which has aided in such transformation
the particular colonization, of the brilliant results of
which, equally with its first progress, we have already
spoken, in the commencement of our investigation.
Only in two places, and within the last two years,
has this colonization system been in operation,
namely, at Wellington, in Port Nicholson, and at
New Plymouth, at the foot of Mount Egmont. We
have described the characteristics of their position.
The establishment of the third colony, Nelson, is in
growth, its locality however as yet unknown; as its
selection will only have been determined on in the
course of the present New Zealand summer, by the
Company’s officers on the spot.* Since the year 1825,
New Zealand, as a new rich field for relieving the
necessities of the superabundant population of Great
Britain, has attracted the most general observation.
From that period, there has been a conflicting variety
of projects, debates, and plans, on the part both of
private individuals and the government, with the
view to bestow upon that island-land the benefits of
law, the new principle of the Australian colonization,
but devoid of its evil influences as regards the Abori-
gines, and to put an end to the corruption of the life
of vagabondism there prevalent. But three different
Associations were necessitated, from want of means,
difference of principles, and the difficulty of ade-
* Very late accounts from New Zealand represent it as having
been established at Tasman's Gulf, on the south-west shore of
Cook’s strait—one of those places of which the author has given an
account so promising. See ante , p. 37. — Translator.


quately discharging individually a responsibility so
weighty, to merge eventually in one another, until it
appertained to that last formed, to conduct and to
accomplish on the largest scale, through a complete
reorganization, what on a smaller one appeared im-
practicable.
There was an union formed of men of high sta-
tion, who, with only private means—without any
assistance from the Government, but with a deep
practical discernment—of manifold experience, and
with large resources; were animated by a humane
desire to ameliorate the condition no less of their
necessitous fellow-countrymen than of the Aborigines
of the far ocean-island, and with whom the accom-
plishment of this object lay at heart. To their supe-
rior perception in the praxis of the world’s intercourse
—divested of motives of low avarice, but with a
legitimate spirit of speculation,—the period seemed
to have arrived for accumulating a treasure for the
benefit of themselves and others: nor were they mis-
taken. A capital of 100,000/. was considered by
these Directors as sufficient for the realization of
their great objects. This amount was raised in the
course of a few days, in four thousand shares of 2 51.
each ; and, shortly afterwards, a ship with the first
agents of the Company for effecting the proposed
land purchases, was despatched to New Zealand.
But not, as formerly, to traffic at chance and over-
reachingly with the Aborigines, but to select with
circumspection, and to acquire the best tracts of land
at a liberal price, and in a just and valid manner;
thus at the same time driving from the field of opera-
tions, those numerous land swindlers who sought to
obtain the same gratuitously. On this occasion,
goods to the value of about 10,000/. were appro-


priated to the proposed purchase. In the large tract
of land to be so acquired, the choicest spot on its
water frontage was to be immediately assigned as the
site of a large commercial capital, and adapted
accordingly. Every former colonization had always
pretty well proved a retrogradation from a better to a
worse and more uncomfortable condition ; whereas,
this on the contrary was destined to be a progres-
sion, and at the same time, yet in a measure of
spiritual development, to transfer all advantages of
the home civilization to the new settlement.—Already
the realization of this high conception which aroused
the confidence and induced the unlimited participation
of the British public in the enterprise, secured thereby
not only the outlaid capital, but led in a short time to
a not inconsiderable profit on the re-sale of the land
allotments. On either side of Cook’s Strait large
districts (to the extent in all of 1,500 geographical
square miles) were acquired in the way mentioned,
but properly, only one-tenth part (namely the coast
tract of the northern island), or 150 geographical
square miles, was taken possession of by the Com-
pany, the legitimacy of whose claim thereto was sub-
sequently recognized and insured by the Crown.
The chiefs of the Aboriginal tribes, there very thinly
scattered, received for the ceded territory an equiva-
lent in goods, fire-arms and money, the value of
which was by no means unknown to them ; though
of the territorial value of their superfluity of wastes,
and unused possessions, they could as yet have no ac-
curate conception, since this could obviously be only
of a contingent nature, accruing through the progress
of the settlement. The most excellent of the harbours
thereabouts, Port Nicholson, was discovered, uniting
in itself all that was desirable for the proposed loca-


tion ; as, ample size, shelter against storms from what-
soever quarter, safe entrance, natural fortification,
convenient sloping-ground for the site of the town,
Wellington, fertile garden and cultivable land of a
sufficient circumference, traversed by a navigable
stream, with a wide outlet into the harbour ; and
lastly, abundance of rich forest timber, adapted
whether for ship or house-building; the whole of these
great natural advantages moreover, being placed in
the heart of the great thoroughfare between the outer
sea of the Southern ocean, and the inner one of the
Australasian Colonies. A certain number of acres
(1100) was allotted for the erection of the city in the
noblest style of the parent state, and a still greater
number of acres (110,000 equivalent to nearly eight
German square miles) as garden or suburban sections
for the inhabitants. Both were sold in conjoint al-
lotments in each case of equal dimensions at a stipu-
lated price, viz.: one English acre to the 1 1, sterling.
All the sections were forthwith marked out by com-
petent surveyors, and plans thereof prepared for the
public information. The judiciously designed ground-
plan of the city, comprehended streets, market places,
quays, fountains, canals, park - enclosures, ship-
wharves, and sites for churches, schools and other
public edifices ; all which appropriations w'ere gra-
tuitously ceded by the Company, in accordance with
its liberal principles, for the common benefit of the
Colony.
Through the conformableness of these arrange-
ments, all possible advantages were insured to the
new dwelling-place, which now consequently began
to draw to itself, in considerable numbers, not merely
the poor, but the richer sort of settlers, so that the
value of the ground-lots of the whole settlement, rose


higher and higher in the most rapid progression.
The number of poor or unprovided settlers, namely,
the purely labouring class, must, it was now certain,
speedily follow the capitalist, or employing class in
still greater numbers ; because it was precisely through
the operation of the labour of the former class, that
the landed property of the latter must maintain its
rising value. This fresh aftergrowth of the Colony
the Company yet more fully assured by its prudent
moderation in the earliest direct participation which
it took in the mercantile profit of the speculation ;
that is to say, it contented itself with a reservation
of 25 per cent, on the sale price of its lands, appro-
priating the remaining 75 per cent, of such price
wholly and exclusively to the benefit of the Colony ;
namely, in procuring young labouring settlers of
both sexes, and in shipping them free of expense to
themselves to their destination ; and in making pro-
vision for the establishment of institutions of various
kinds; so as by these two-fold objects, not merely
to supply the bodily and material wants of the young
multitudes, but also the means of furthering their
higher spiritual welfare.
Never, for a settlement of this kind, has such wise
and generous care been taken by a business associa-
tion, and never probably has a commercial company
drawn, notwithstanding, so large a benefit from its
outlay.
Through its instrumentality, corn-stores, ware-
houses, a bank, inns, have been erected at the settle-
ment. A New Zealand Gazette was established; and
premiums for the promotion of the infant industry,
more especially for the invention of an improved
method of dressing the native flax, by machinery,
were freely offered. Through it also instructional


institutions, a school for land-surveying, a preparatory
seminary for colonists’ sons, destined for colonial life,
and many other arrangements of a similar enlightened
kind, are to be practically carried out. The colonized
portion of New Zealand becoming in effect by such
means a resembling portion of Old England, will in
all things become placed on an equality, nay, still
higher raised ; for there at least the galling contrasts
of excessive riches and anguish-stricken pauperism,
as in the parent-country, will be swept away ; nor
could the extremes there generate the same perni-
cious consequences; many of the existing evils of the
British state being thence pre-organized. The whole
project was arithmetically and statistically calculated
on such warning data , so as to give the preponder-
ance in the social equilibrium on the virgin soil, to
the middle and productive classes. As already in the
succeeding year, it was deemed expedient to establish
a second colonial settlement, namely Nelson, on the
same principle as the first, full 60,000/. of the pur-
chase-money of the allotments were applied to the
higher objects of the same: that is to say, 15,000/.
for the building of churches, schools, and for religious
objects; 15,000/. for the establishment of a New
Zealand University; and 20,000/. for the promotion
of steam-communication, which, while preserving
between Europe and New Zealand an unbroken
chain of connection, should benefit the whole Austral-
asian world; and should maintain the intercourse
with the continent of South America, already in its
beginning at Valparaiso and Chili.
In refutation of the many insinuations and sus-
picions which here, as in every case where the work
of improvement is attempted, were industriously pro-
pagated, the New Zealand Company gave striking


proof that it was in nowise animated, in order to insure
to itself exclusive benefits of gain, by a spirit of
jealousy at contemporary efforts to aid in the further-
ance of the true, humane system of colonization it had
introduced. On the contrary, it had only been de-
sirous to make smooth the path of improvement.
It incited, therefore, many others to similar objects,
and succeeding associations formed themselves as
filial institutions, on similar principles, in accordance
with its example. The most considerable of these,
the Plymouth Company, merits here at least to be
mentioned, because, with greater means, it resolved to
establish a yet larger colonial city, for the especial
benefit of the emigrating population of the crowded
west of England, and carried this resolution into
effect.* Animated by a noble national desire to pro-
mote the bodily as well as the spiritual welfare of the
emigrating members of the community, this Company
had manifested almost still greater care for their future
advantage. Its undertaking, therefore, as striving at
the same high line of action as its own, was met by
the New Zealand Company with open arms.'f'
As, lastly, also, the activity of a special, new re-
ligious missionary society formed at Glasgow, for the
benefit of the New Zealand Christian community,
put prominently forward, as of extreme urgency for
the rapidly increasing colony the foundation of a
bishopric on the double-island, the New Zealand
Company was immediately ready, in accordance with
its governing principle, to contribute from its means
an ample endowment for such object. We were
present, in October last, at the consecration of the
* This Company has since been incorporated by merger in
the New Zealand Company.— Translator.
f See ante, page 36.


reverend ecclesiastic appointed to this office, who,
as shepherd of a flock yet unknown to him, has,
with great self-denial, already departed on his mission.
But it is not necessary further to dilate on the
speciality of all the arrangements, and the interesting
history of the young colonization. From what pre-
cedes, the spirit in which it was undertaken manifests
itself with sufficient clearness, and which, also, has
crowned its efforts with the happiest evidences of
success.
As amongst the most brilliant, must truly be re-
garded its justification by the Government; since by
its progress, was the British Crown first determined
to validate its supremacy in New Zealand, to pro-
claim the double-island a British colony, and to take
the whole of its inhabitants under protection, in the
character of British subjects. Hereby, likewise, the
fate of the Aborigines became insured, at least partly,
against that former infamy of vagabond life, as
equally against that excessive rapacity, and nefarious
imposition, conjointly practised in reference to their
morality, their property, and their existence. Those
former territorial cessions, extorted by unprincipled
adventurers, whether forcibly, or by unrighteous
means, or, to speak more plainly, that despoliation of
the non-aged Aboriginal race so manifestly prevalent,
were not recognized by the Crown as the private pro-
perty of the claimants. But, whether on the other
hand, these Aborigines, by reason of the large
wealth which certainly has already accrued to
them from means of all kinds resulting from
their contact with the Europeans, would therefore,
and in consequence of the protection extended to
them, have a happy future to place in the balance,
is quite another question. According to the state-


merits of the New Zealand Bank, established at
Wellington, and already made use of by the Abori-
gines, it appears that these already possess amongst
them a money-capital of about 150,000 Z. For, in the
pursuit of industry and commerce those amongst them
thereto trained already emulate their masters. But
though, forsooth, many vain sons of the proud chiefs
be wont on the occasion of their visits on board Euro-
pean ships, to rattle gold pieces in their pockets, it
thence by no means follows that their princes are rich.
Most of them, in fact, as yet, set no value upon pro-
perty of which they know not how to make a profit-
able immediate use. Hence they have usually dis-
tributed amongst the members of their families, their
inferiors and their slaves, the articles received in
barter for their land, retaining but little for them-
selves after satisfaction. In this respect, a great
change in their condition must unquestionably ere
long take place. In proportion as civilization inducts
them more and more in the appreciation of the luxu-
ries of social life, so will it embue them with an in-
creased desire for riches.
Formerly, their fisheries, their potato-grounds, their
exhaustless supply of the fern-plant root, the domes-
tic use of their plentiful wild flax, and their P'dtu-
Pdtu, that is, their battle-axe, or tomahawk, ren-
dered them independent of every foreigner. But in
a measure, they are already become the slaves of
wants which their ancestors knew not. They must
have powder, lead, muskets, and tobacco, which,
even their women, as also their children from earliest
infancy, are wont to smoke. In addition to these,
they require knives, hatchets, iron-kettles, shirts, pan-
taloons, coloured stuffs, without the attirement of
which several articles of dress, they are, indeed no


longer willing to appear. When, therefore, they cease
to be able to acquire such things so readily as hereto-
fore, through the sale of lands, they must of neces-
sity, as now partly happens, be compelled to labour;
and hence very generally learn to understand the
value of money. Nor does this view of their condi-
tion by any means escape their keen penetration:
“If things thus proceed,” said one of the coloured
chiefs, “we shall become the bondsmen of the
Pakeha, that is, of the whites. We must all become
their hewers of wood, and drawers of water.” He
meant to say that the commerce of the whites had
levelled the tree of their native strength at the root;
that high and low of the coloured people must all
sink to the condition of a race of Rikka-Rikkas,
namely, slaves. Nevertheless, he was evidently sen-
sible there was no deliverance for them ; even driving
out and slaying all the whites would help them
nothing; for others would always be arriving to sup-
ply their place. Another coloured chief observed in
yet fewer words : “ The end will be, that we chiefs
shall yet break up the stones of the road on which
the white people stride through our country.”
For the preservation of these Aborigines, the New
Zealand Company has, from the beginning, consider-
ately exercised, in an especial manner, as far as lay
in its power, a protecting guardianship, which might
now be transferred over to the higher management
and to the wisdom of the supreme Government.
In every instance where a land purchase was
effected, the Company, through its agents, dealt with
the Aborigines, with their chiefs, their acknowledged
princes, or heads of tribes, as with those whom it was
necessary to instruct as fully as possible in regard to
the advantages and disadvantages of the contract into


which they were about to enter. Thus, confidence
was everywhere created; and, as care was taken in
the barter to supply in the most liberal manner, the
most desired and useful articles, a predilection to-
wards the Company, was commensurately insured.
A complete dispossession of the Aborigines from the
ceded lands, appeared neither just nor prudent; for,
in such case, there must have remained to them ulti-
mately only the worst districts of the Island, in
which, rendered more compact, and utterly excluded
from all humanizing intercourse with the Colonists,
they must have become to these only the more dan-
gerous with time, unless decimated by systematic
warfare or by grief. The fate of the Indian races,
both of North America and Australia, thus treated,
(even as wild beasts, no less by the Government than
by individuals,) was a fearful discouraging example
of such wholesale human degradation, and of the
eventual extirpation of whole races of people by the
Colonists in self-defence. Hence, a different method
was devised for New Zealand. The Company esta-
blished it as a principle on every land-purchase, uni-
formly to reserve a full tenth-part of the whole quan-
tity acquired, as an inalienable land-inheritance for
the Aborigines represented by their chiefs, to whom at
a proper season the same should be delivered over in
manorial possession. This appeared to the benevo-
lent projectors to be the only effectual way to pre-
serve the coloured race from the sad fate which it had
met with, in contact with civilization in all former
British Colonies; that is, to have become thrust,
through the conjoint influences of the spiritual pre-
ponderance of civilization, and the greater energy of
Europeans, into the lowest rank of the Aboriginal
rabble. In contrast with this afflicting, hitherto


almost inevitable fate of an utterly hopeless million
of aboriginal people of the wide earth, all sunk in
the lowest depths of abasement and debility, it was
proposed by the New Zealand Company, in the
disinterested, benevolent, in fact, noble manner indi-
cated, to place the condition of the aboriginal race of
New Zealand. It was not sought to repel them on
account of their barbarism ; but, inducted by hu-
manity, to receive them simultaneously into the lap
of civilization, and of domestic citizenship; there
also to prepare for them, in equal progress with the
general development, their future social position.
These reserves of the tenth part of its territorial
possessions were assigned by the Company to the
charge of an officer of its own, specially appointed
for the purpose, as guardian of the Aborigines, and
were drawn for, in the best discernment, promiscuously
with the allotments of the European settlers, amongst
which, consequently, they are interspersed.
As their money-value must rise in equal proportion
with that of the rest, it followed that from former
valueless, and to them waste-continuing lands, the
Aborigines now acquired in full right of ownership, a
considerable landed property. In the course of two
years (middle of 1841), this property, namely, the
tenth part of the 110,000 acres constituting the
Port-Nicholson Settlement, had already acquired, at
the market price of London, an increased value of
34,000/ , which, in equal progression with the growth
of the colony, must continue to augment, and might,
at no distant period, reach 100,000/. Such prospec-
tive value, together with the goods and money actually
delivered to the Aborigines immediately on the con-
clusion of the negotiations, was considered by the
Company as the proper price of purchase which


should be assigned to them, as the equivalent for
their ceded possessions; and also as a compensation
for their claims devolved, though unconsciously, yet
in effect, to the Crown of England by the .Declaration
of Sovereignty. This important landed property,
which, if at once surrendered to the control of the
native chiefs, on behalf of the tribes, would un-
doubtedly have been immediately alienated by those
still thoughtless, ignorant beings, below its actual
value, for very trifles, was preserved by a provideut
foresight, as a means of their future advancement in
the path of civilization; and especially for the suc-
ceeding generation, prepared for its enjoyment by a
greater share of Europeanism and general instruction.
By their high susceptibility and mental endowments,
no less the women than the men, and the happy de-
velopment of the qualities of the fine-formed New
Zealand youth, the most sanguine hope is to be en-
tertained that the common man, who has already
shewn himself so quick and active, will continue as
promisingly as he has begun, and materially aid in
strengthening, as a labouring class, the lower ranks
of the colony. Also the chiefs and princes (to whom,
as is known, at present appertains the prerogative of
the enforcement of Tabu , and the right of life and
death over their retainers), amongst whom many
estimable characters and mentally gifted individuals
already claim regard, will then, in their conjunction
with the British gentry, form a wealthy, coloured it
is true, but equal-born native upper class of the New
Zealand community. This indeed will be a necessary
consummation,in order to the advancement and preser-
vation of their present native bondsmen, the coloured
fellow labourer of the working class. Their own
wealthy endowment will, with time, operate their


56 PROFESSOR RITTER ON NEW ZEALAND.
affinity with the colonists ; and, if their cultivation be
preserved, will transfer them from the raw, compact,
threatening mass whereof they form a part, into the
circle of civilization, and into the ranks humanely
organized for its promotion. May such hopes speedily,
under our observation, meet fulfilment!
London: Printed by Stewart and Murray, Old Bailey.


WORKS ON EMIGRATION,
RECENTLY PUBLISHED BY
SMITH, ELDER AND CO.,
CORNHILL, LONDON.
In Demy 8 vo. with a Map and Plates. Fourth Edition, price Ss. cloth.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE SETTLEMENTS OF
THE NEW ZEALAND COMPANY,
From Personal Observations during a residence there.
By the Hon. Henry William Petre.
"This is a valuable contribution to our sources of information respecting New
Zealand, and the best proof of the Author’s very favourable opinion of the
country, is his making immediate arrangements to return there as a Colonist.”
An Edition in smaller type, without the Map, has been printed for the accommoda-
tion of Emigrants; price One Shilling.
Recently published in Foolscap B vo. with a Map and Outline Chart.
Fourth Edition. Price 2s. sewed.
INFORMATION RELATIVE TO
NEW ZEALAND,
Compiled for the Use of Colonists.
By John Ward, Esq. Secretary to the New Zealand Company.
Also by the same Author. Price 2s. sewed.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION RELATIVE TO
NEW ZEALAND,
Comprising Dispatches and Journals of the Company's Officers in
New Zealand, with Descriptions of the Natives, the State of
Society, and the Agricultural and Commercial capabilities of the
Country.
Just Published in Demy B vo. Price Is. sewed.
HOW TO COLONIZE.
The Interest of the Country, and the Duty of the Government.
Ross D. Matsgles, Esq. M.P.
In Demy B vo. Price 3s. 6d. sewed.
NEW ZEALAND DESCRIBED.
A Series of Letters to the Right Hon. Earl Durham, late Governor
of the New Zealand Land Company, &c. &c. on the Colonization
of that Island, and on the Present Condition and Prospects of its
Native Inhabitants. By John Dunmore Lang, D.D., Principal
of the Australian College, and Senior Minister of the Church of
Scotland in New South Wales.
" To persons who may have formed an idea of betaking themselves to this
new asylum, we earnestly recommend Dr. Lang’s Book, a seasonable, authentic,
and highly useful pamphlet.”— Times.


WORKS ON NEW ZEALAND,
Recently published in Demy Svo, Price 2s. sewed.
THE CLIMATE AND
CAPABILITIES OF NEW ZEALAND,
Observations on the Climate of New Zealand, particularly with
reference to its superior Sanative or Healthy Character, and its
Congenial and Remedial effects on the English Constitution, with
a general Account of the Island, its Animal and Vegetable Pro-
ductions, its Agricultural Resources, and its Commercial Capabi-
lities as a Residence for British Emigrants and Capitalists.
William Swainson, Esq.
“ This is a clear and faithful resumf. of every thing relating to the climate of
New Zealand, especially in reference to its influence on the Health of Europeans.”
Now ready , in Post Svo. with Maps and Plates. Price Bs. cloth,
NEW ZEALAND, SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AND
NEW SOUTH WALES.
A Record of Recent Travels in these Colonies, with especial
reference to Emigration, and the Advantageous employment of
Labour and Capital. By R. G Jameson, Esq. Surgeon Super-
intendant of Emigrants to Australia, &c.
“ One of the most intelligent accounts of New Zealand and Australia that has
yet appeared.” —Colonial Gazette.
“ Those persons who intend to settle in either of the places which Mr. Jameson
treats of, will certainly be made familiar through the medium of his book with many
things which they might otherwise only acquire at the expense of a long and dearly
bought experience.’’ — Globe.
Small Svo. Price Is. stitched.
THE PRESENT STATE, RESOURCES, AND
PROSPECTS OF NEW ZEALAND.
Edward Campbell.
“ This is the best Tract that has yet appeared concerning these Settlements ;
it is short yet full of information, and written with the strictest impartiality.
His picture of the Natives is extremely accurate and valuable.”— Atlas.
In Demy Svo. with Plate. Price 6d.
informat ton respecting
THE SETTLEMENT OF NEW PLYMOUTH,
In New Zealand, from the testimony of Eye-witnesses. Together
with the Terms of Purchase for Lands—Regulations for Labour-
ing Emigrants, &c. &c. Compiled under the direction of the
West of England Board of the New Zealand Company.
“This is a faithful Picture of New Plymouth from the testimony of eye-
witnesses who could have no interest in misstating, many of them being Emi-
grants of the labouring class; we therefore confidently recommend this useful
work to the notice of the public.”


PUBLISHED BY SMITH, ELDER AND CO.
Published under the Patronage of the Aborigines Protection Society.
Bvo. Price Is.
NEW ZEALAND AND ITS NATIVE
POPULATION.
By Ernest Dieffenbach, M. D. Naturalist to the New Zealand
Company.
On a Large Royal Sheet. Price One Shilling. ( With a View of
Lambton Harbour and Wellington.')
THE NEW ZEALAND ALMANACK
for 1842 ;
Containing, with the usual contents of an Ephemeris, complete
Lists of the Directors, Officers and Agents, &c. of the New
Zealand Company —Of the various Government Officers and
Appointments in the Colony. A Summary of Regulations for
Emigrants. The Terms of Purchasing Lands. Statements of
Wages, Gardener’s and Farmer’s Calendar, &c. &c.
Just published, price 3s. plain, Sf ss. coloured, with a descriptive Key,
A LARGE VIEW OF
LAMBTON HARBOUR in PORT NICHOLSON,
New Zealand, comprehending the Water Frontage of THE TOWN
OF WELLINGTON; beautifully executed in Tinted Litho-
graphy, from the Original Drawing by C. Heaphy, Draughts-
man to the New Zealand Company.
On a large Imperial Folio sheet. Price ss. coloured.
A COMPLETE PLAN OF
THE TOWN OF WELLINGTON,
The First and Principal Settlement of the New Zealand Company.
By Captain W. SiMith, Surveyor-General,
“ This is one of the most beautifully executed Plans of a Town we have ever
seen, exhibiting the natural features of the surface, such as Hill and Dale.
Every Town-Acre is marked with a double set of Figures shewing the original
numbers in the Surveyor-General’s Plan, and also the positions of the respective
Allotments, selected in the order of choice as drawn at the ballot in England, by
which Proprietors of Land in this favoured spot may see at a glance the exact
position of their respective Locations, and also that of their friends.
“ The extent of Land around the Town, reserved for Parks and Public
purposes, with the Native and Church Reserves, are also distinguished.”
Just published, price Is. 6d. in sheet; and 2 s. Gd. in case , coloured,
A MAP OF NEW ZEALAND.
A complete Map of the Islands of New Zealand, brought down
to the Present Time, from the Government and other recent
Surveys, and including the various Settlements of the New
Zealand Company; engraved from the large Map of New
Zealand. By J. Arrowsmith.


WORKS ON NEW ZEALAND, AND AUSTRALIA.
Just Published in Imperial folio. Price 3s.
A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN OF
THE HARBOUR OF PORT NICHOLSON,
With its various Bays, Islands, and Soundings, shewing also the
relative positions of the Town and Country Sections for several
miles round the Town of Wellington, and distinguishing the
Rivers and state of the Soil, &c. throughout the respective districts.
W, M. Smith, Surveyor-General.
“ This is truly a comprehensive and highly interesting Map, and beautifully
executed. The whole of the Allotments in this valuable and extensive tract of
country are clearly pointed out and distinguished by Numbers which at once
shew the Estates of the various proprietors.”
Just published , price ss. coloured.
A LARGE PANORAMIC VIEW OF THE
NEW PLYMOUTH SETTLEMENT
In the District of Taran'ake, New Zealand, taken from the Anchor-
age Bay, shewing the range of the Houses recently Built by the
Natives in anticipation of the Arrival of Emigrants.—From a
Drawing taken on board the “ Brougham,” by Geo. Duppa, Esq.
Price 3s. plain and ss. coloured.
A LARGE VIEW OF MOUNT EGMONT;
Taken from the North Shore of Cook’s Straits, New Zealand ;
the foreground shewing the Natives burning off Wood for Potato
Grounds. Executed in the highest style of Tinted Lithography
by T. Allom, from a Drawing by Charles Heaphy.
Post B vo. Price 2s. 6d. sewed.
RECENT INFORMATION RESPECTING
PORT PHILLIP AND AUSTRALIA FELIX.
Including the History, Geography, and Natural Resources of this
fine Territory, and Valuable Advice to Emigrants.
By the Editor of the Port Phillip Gazette, Melbourne.
In One Volume, demy B vo., with a New Map, price 15s. cloth.
THE HISTORY OF THE REPUBLIC OF
TEXAS,
With a Description of its Soil, Climate, General Resources, &c.
By N. Doran Maillard, Esq.
“ A picture of Texas and the Texans, which is no doubt a faithful one.”
New Monthly Magazine.


\


WORKS PUBLISHED BY
SMITH, ELDER AND CO., CORNHILL.
PLAIN TRUTHS TOLD BY A TRAVELLER,
REGARDING OUR VARIOUS
SETTLEMENTS IN AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND ;
Shewing things as they really are and as they ought to be,
Particularly in Sydney, Perth, Paramatta, Freemantle, the Swan
River, the. Canning, the Murray, the Darling, King George’s
Sound, and in Van Diemen’s Land.
The whole drawn up for the guidance of'Emigrants to these Settle-
ments.
J. Pitts Johnson, Esq.
Post B vo. Price 2s. 6c?. served.
THE RESOURCES OF AUSTRALIA,
THE PROSPECTS OF THE NEW SETfLEMENTS.
Comprising information essential to Emigrants ; iteing the result of
'fourteen years’ experience of an Australian Colonist.
“This woik is worthy of attentive perusal; in all matters*of fact it bears the stamp
of fidelity.’’ —Westminster Review.
Second Edition, 2 vols. B vo. Price 28s.
Illustrated with a large Map of Australia, by Arrowsmith ; Charts,
Fossils, Landscapes, and beautifully-coloured Plates of Birds, &c.
A NARRATIVE OF
TWO EXPEDITIONS INTO THE INTERIOR
OF AUSTRALIA,
Undertaken by Captam“CiiAßLES Sturt, of the 30th Regiment,
by order of the Colonial Government, to ascertain the Nature of
the Country to the West and North-west of the Colony of New
South Wales. y
“We heartily recommend these volumes to public notice. They are full of
interest, well and modestly written, carefully illustrated, and, on the whole, make
us better acquainted with the interior of Australia and its native tribes than any
other work we have hitherto met with.”— Athenceum.
Just published in Demy Bvo. Price 4s,
’ A TREATISE ON SHEEP.
Addressed to the Flock-masters of Australia, New Zealand, and
Southern Africa, showing the means by which the Wool of these
Colonies may be improved, and suggesting ideas for the intro-
duction of other Lanigerous Animals, suited to the climate, and
calculated to add to their Agricultural Resources.
By Thomas Southey, Wool Broker.
