

THE DARDANELLES CAMPAIGN
by
General Liman Von Sanders
TRANSLATION and COMMENTS
by
Colonel E. H. Schulz,
Corps of Engineers
U.S. Army
The Engineer School
Fort Humphreys, Virginia
1931




THE DARDANELLES CAMPAIGN
by
General Liman Von Sanders
TRANSLATION and COMMENTS
by
Colonel E. H. Schulz,
Corps of Engineers
U. S. Army
The Engineer School
Fort Humphreys, Virginia
1931




TABLE OF CONTENTS
Analysis and Comments, by Col. E. H. Schulz, C. E., A to I.
THE DARDANELLES CAMPAIGN
Page s
1-5
I. Preliminary Events
11. Naval Activity and the Great Attack of
March 18, 1915 7
111. The Preparation. March 24 to April 24, 19L) 8 11
IV. The Allied Landing of April 25, 1915 L 2 I<S
V. Results of the Great Landing of April 25, 1915. . 19—26
VI. The Great Suvla Landing of August 6th 27 24
VII. Operations of September to December, 1915 25 45
Extracts from Prigge. . 4(>—49
Extracts from Nevinson 49
Extracts from Masefield ° 4
T t 55—58
Index
Maps;
No. 1. General sketch of territory Opposite p. A
No. 2. Sketch of territory occupied. • • Opposite p. 12
No. 3. Sketch showing mine fields and
Searchlights Opposite p. 14
No. 4. Sketch from Masefield Opposite p. 50
No. 5. Sketch from Masefield Opposite p. 52


ANALYSIS AND COMMENTS.
by
Colonel E. H. Schulz, C. of E.
1. 1 lie Dardanelles Campaign (Von Sanders). General Von
Sanders Report I 1 unf Jahre J'urkei was published in Berlin in
R)R). The volume contains about 400 pages and covers: His ar-
rival in -Turkey; The Diplomatic Corps; The Military Commission;
The Entrance of Turkey in The World War; The Caucasus, The
Dardanelles, and the Palestine Campaigns; and other operations.
The Dardanelles Campaign is found on pages 64 to 136. The
translation was made amidst other duties. lam indebted to Tech-
nical Sergeant Raymond J. Lamar, 3rd Engineers, for all typing;
and to Master Sergeant Frank Wintera, 3rd Engineers, for pre-
paration of maps. The titles to the paragraphs are added by the
translator.
2. 1 his campaign is at once the most tragic and unfortunate
as well as the most sublime and heroic in history. Over a period
of 81 months, the forces engaged numbered over 200,000 British
<md T i ench. and over 400,000 Turks. The losses w r ere in excess of
of the forces engaged. The Dardanelles is the one major
campaign oi the War, with ships and landing parties against land
defense.
3. The account by Von Sanders is a general description of
events rather than detailed accounts of any particular phases.
Il covers the General’s plans and comments together with brief
reference to his subordinate commanders and their frequent shift
of command. It will be noted that officers of quite junior rank
are olten in command of Divisions and Corps. There are but
l* \\ German officers, and these mostly in command or communica-
tion control. The Turkish titles often found are Bei and Pasha. In
1 urkish military and social life, Dei was a title taken frequently
by field officers. Pasha was a more exalted rank and applied us-
ually to general officers.
4. The coast line of the Gallipoli peninsula south of Bulair is
about 110 miles long, a little less than that of Oahu Island, Hawaii.
Ihe area is about 375. sq. miles, about 70(7 of Oahu. The maximum
A






elevation is over 900 ft. At Bulair and through the Anaforta and
Maidos valleys the elevation is much less. There are many ravines
and deep gulches with steep slopes. The population, mostly Greek,
is about 30,000, of which Gallipoli has about 15,000.
The entrance to the Dardanelles is about 2.3 miles wide, and
at the narrows, less than one mile. The Dardanelles current is
very swift, about 2 to 4 knots per hour.
5. The Turkish south front at Sedd el Bahr had a length of
about 7,000 yards and was about 8000 yards from the point. The
Anzac and Suvla fronts had a total length of about 19,000 yards, the
greatest distance from shore being 5,000 yards. Tjie total area of
Allied occupation on the peninsula was about sq. miles for a
military population frequently of over 100,000 men.
G. The accounts by Nevinson, Masefield, Sir Hamilton,Call-
well, Buchan, Dane and others deal mainly with the British opera-
tions of landing and subsequent fighting, and contain little of
Turkish operations and measures of defense. The naval account of
Corbett gives more information as to Turkish coast defense and
fixed artillery. Captain Prigge, on Yon Sanders’ Staff, has written
a short diary on the Campaign. A brief partial translation of
Prigge’s account, and abstracts from Nevinson and Masefield,
with three maps, are appended to this report.
7. The Minister of War on the Turkish side was Enver Pasha
in direct control under the Sultan. Genaral Von dcr Goltz arrived
about December, 1924, from Belgium and became Adjutant General.
Early in 1915, the general defense of the straits was under Ad-
miral Usedon, with the local defenses under Colonel Djevad Bei,
and the command of Chanak Kale under Merten. The
3rd Corps of the Ist Army occupied the Gahpoli peninsula. Gen-
eral Von Sanders at first commanded the Ist Army. He did not
agree with Enver on the Caucasus Campaign, and was offered the
3rd Army in Asia Minor, but declined it. At the crucial time,
about March 24th, he was placed in command of the sth Army and
the Dardanelles Campaign .
8. Von Sanders held that Allied success could come only with
a great troop landing in conjunction with a forced naval passage,
including a simultaneous landing of Russian troops near the Bos-
phorus. The Turkish H.Q. at first decided on a plan by which
the Ist Army would defend the north shore of the Straits and Mar-
mora, and the 2nd Army the south side. This practically omitted
the outer defense of the entrance and coast lines. Von Sanders
considered it a weak plan and thoroughly disagreed with it. He
recommended one array for the outer Dardanelles, and another
B


force for the Bosphorus or Constantinople defense. On March Ist
the Turkish H. Q. directed removal of the 2nd Corps from Adrian-
ople and 4th Corps from Panderma which further weakened the
immediate defense.
9. According to Corbett’s “Naval Operations”, the Turks
had originally 140 guns to defend the Straits, increased by March
18, 1915, to 239 guns; of which 34 were up to 2.9” cal.; 103 of
3.1" to 5.9" cal.; 96 of 8.2" to 11.0" cal; and 6of 14" cal. The
six 14 in. guns were in the inner zone 14 to 17 miles from the en-
trance, of which 4 were on the Asiatic side. The Turks had but 13
searchlights. There were in all, 11 lines of mines (397), mostly
about 11 miles from the entrance. The most important batteries
were on the south shore to guard against attack and landing from
the Island of Tenedos.
10. The early Allied naval operations were directed to the
destruction of Sedd el Bahr and Kum Kale at the entrance. The
attempt to occupy Sedd el Bahr however failed.
In the meantime naval operations in the Straits continued and
culminated in the great attack of March 18th, with 16 major battle-
ships in action. Turkish losses were few. Three enemy ships were
sunk, the “Bauvet,” “Irresistible” and “Ocean;” the others were
injured. The Allied fleet retired and did not again attempt the pas-
sage during the war. A large Allied Expeditionary force was re-
ported to be organized together with the arrival of Sir lan Hamilton
and General D’Amade.
11. On March 24, 1925, Enver finally directed the sth Army to
be formed with Yon Sanders as Commander, Von der Goltz taking
over the Ist Army. Between this date and April 24th, Von Sand-
ers re-organized the Turkish forces, built and repaired roads, con-
structed defenses, etc.; and by April 25th when the Biritish and
French landed, he was well prepared for the attack ,
On the Gallipoli peninsula the important danger points were;
a. The southern end, including Teke Burnu and Morto Bay.
&. The west front at Kaba Tepe an£ Ari Burnu. This was
some 10 miles from the south front by water and about
15 miles by land.
c. The upper Saros Gulf near Bulair, about 25 miles by water
from west front and 35 miles by land.
The positions a and h were actually attacked, the position
c which if actually taken would sever the Ist Army from the coast,
was threatened but never seriously attacked.
12. To meet these possibilities, Von Sanders organized his sth
Army of 6 Divisions as follows: The sth and 7th to upper Saros
C


(Von Sanders), the 9th and 19 known as the 3rd Corps, under
Essad Pasha to the southern peninsula and the 11th and 3rd to the
Asiatic side under Colonel Weber. The 19th Division was under
Mustapha Kemal Bei, later the Pasha victor over the Greeks in
Smyrna, 1922, and now President of Turkey.
The division consisted of 3 regiments of infantry, 1 squadron
of cavalry, 1 regiment of field artillery, and 1 machine gun com-
pany; in all, about 10,000 men per division, or 60,000 for his im-
mediate defense. There were incessant marches, drills, defensive
and wire construction, emplacements real and dummy, road and
trail building. The stl* Army had no planes at this time. Thie
British had planes and balloons but their attacks were apparently
based on old air maps of little use. Von Sanders held a last man-
euver on April 24th. He distinctly states that the four weeks
time which the British used for re-arranging their equipment and
supplies at Alexandria gave him the requisite time for success.
13. On April 25th, the day of the Allied landing on the Sedd
el Bahr and Ari Burnu fronts, Von Sanders had his H. Q. at Galli-
poli. The alarm arrived at 5:00 A.M. The 3rd and 11th Divi-
sions on the Asiatic side reported attacks by the French. At the
south front the 9th Division battled with the British. At Kaba
Tepe and west front, debarkation was in progress and the 19th
was marching to re-take Ari-Burnu. In the upper Saros small
landings were repelled; the ships were high out of water and the
landing a ruse. Von Sanders took post near Bulair, to which the
7th Division was ordered.
14. The number of landings was a surprise. Von Sanders con-
sidered the British preparations admirable, but based on too old
data. He estimated the British had 80,000 to 90,000 men in these
encounters, and the Turks but 60,000. Two hundred allied vessels
were observed. Sir Hamilton called the task a heavy one. Lord
Kitchener had said, the fight once started must go to the end.
Masefield states the first British troops were about 80,000. On
April 26th reinforcements were urgent on the south front. The
9th Division had brought up its reserves. The 7th Division at
Bulair was ordered to send two battalions to Gallipoli (10 mi.),
embark there for Maidos (25 mi.), and march to south front (12
mi.).Also the sth Army was to send three battalions by the same
route, all water transportation being at night. The 19th Division
had repulsed the Kaba Tepe landing. As Saros Gulf appeared but
a demonstration, more troops of the sth and 7th Divisions were
turned over to Lieut. Col. Kiazim Bei, the C. of S., with orders
to move balance of troops if nothing further occurred. The upper
D


Saros was thus denuded of all troops except some pioneers and
laborers. It was a serious decision but had to be risked. Some
of the sth and 7th Divisions were sent to help at Ari Burnu, and
in general troops were shifted where urgently needed. Sodenstern
of the sth Division now took over the south front; Essad Pasha
the Ari Burnu front. Von Sanders took station in rear of the
latter.
On the Asiatic side the 3rd Division had driven off the French
at Kura Kale by April 29th. This allowed the 11th Division to
march to Chanak (20 mi.), ferry to Maidos (4 mi.), and proceed
to Sedd el Bahr front (12m). At Ari Burnu on April 29th part of
Anzacs fell back, but were reinforced and held on. Their base
was at Imbros, but 12 miles away.
15. Von Sanders states the brunt of these attacks fell on the
sth Army, and that the Turkish-German fleet played but a small
part. The Navy did furnish 24 machine guns to the sth Army,
and two battleships covered the Ari Burnu landing by indirect
fire. A Turkish torpedo boat also attacked in the lower Dard-
anelles. In general, the navy and separate fortress command was
limited to the inner Straits. The In Tepe forts had some decided
influence on Sedd el Bahr, but ammunition was short. -
The sth Army at this time had no heavy artillery. The south
front was subject to ships’ fire on three sides supported by power-
ful searchlights. The Turkish light artillery could not compete
in power or range.
16. Nothing remained but to repel the Allies by night at-
tacks, of which three were made on the south front, but could not
succeed, as daylight always brought the ships’ fire into action
Counter attacks were thus stopped, but not an inch was to be
given, and Achi Baba was to be held. After two weeks at Ari
Burnu, counter attacks were also discontinued but heights were
to be held at all costs. On both fronts the Turks dug in close to
the British and thus halted the artillery fire. Position warfare
thus came about in the first weeks of May. Many villages such
as Maidos, Gallipoli, Kilia and others suffered, and some were in
ruins.
The south British front was about 1600 yards south of Krithia.
Withdrawal of the Turkish line to Achi Baba was proposed, but
not adopted by Von Sanders as the new line would be longer and
more exposed. At Ari Burnu the British lines were hardly 800
to 1300 yards from shore. On May 10, the 2nd Division arrived
from Constantinople and was placed on this front. Turkish re-
inforcements for both fronts were also from the 4th, 13th, loth and
E


16th Divisions (sth Corps) and finally some heavy artillery. On
May 18th and 19th the 2nd Division attacked on the west front
with a loss of 9,000 dead and wounded. A truce (the only one
during the campaign) was had May 23rd to bury the dead. Von
Sanders takes the blame for this attack. After this for a time,
fighting was more or less passive.
17. Turkish transportation was difficult. The 7 days march
from Thrace was possible only by ox wagons, pack mules, or
camel, with but a few tons each. There were no trucks. The sth
Army was thus limited to water transportation including sail
boats and launches. The British U-boats could not stop all traffic.
The Turks were also short of supplies. There were not enough
sand bags. Wood and iron were taken from the wrecked vil-
lages, and wire from 1 fences. The ammunition supply was a
serious one throughout. The Anatolian was a good stoic soldier,
but not so always the officer.
18. On May 13th, the ‘‘Goliath”; on the 25th, the “Triumph”;
and on the 27th, the “Majestic,” were torpedoed by Turkish boats,
The Allies retired most of their larger vessels, and established all
possible counter measures against torpedoes. The British trans-
ports were thus unembarrassed, being especially aided by their
aircraft.
19. By the end of June, a German pioneer company arrived
with 200 men on the south front. In the first half of July some
troops on the south front were relieved by the 2nd Army under
Wehib Pasha, a brother of Essad. On July 13th, the British and
French attacked at Sedd el Bahr which was halted only by draw-
ing on Turkish reserves. There were also rumors of new landings,
Lord Churchill publicly stating that success was now expected.
There was no indication where the landing would be. Upper
Saros was still possible, also north or south of Ari Burnu. The
9th Division was placed west of Kaba Tepe. Three battalions,
a squadron and 4 batteries were placed to guard the coast from
Afinak Dere to Suvla Bay. The 7th and 12th Divisions were
placed in upper Saros Gulf. In this midst, Von Sanders was
asked to come to German H. Q. for consultation. After a pas-
sionate correspondence the order was suspended. The trouble
arose in Constantinople but not due to Enver.
20. The great Suvla or Anaforta landing began August 6th,
bringing 5 British Divisions (1 foot cavalry), between Ari Burnu
and Suvla Bay. There was a simultaneous attack at Sedd el Bahr
and Ari Burnu. The firsu reports reached Von Sande rs ai 9:00
PM. He immediately ordered the 7th and 12th Divisions (16th
F


Corps) to march from upper Saros to Anaforta valley, about 30
miles. About noon, August 7th, this Corps was reported to his
surprise to have arrived. At daybreak, August Bth, the attack by
Turks was to be made from both sides of Azmak Dere on the
Anaforta plain. Counter attacks by this corps were urgent as
Major Willmer’s troops were hard pressed. Essad Pasha ordered
the 9th Division at Ari Burnu to move northward. As they
marched up the south slope of Chemen Tepe, the British were as-
cending from the north. The Turks won the summit. This was
the first crisis of the August battle, as these heights commanded
the Anaforta valley and gave a fire to the Dardanelles Straits.
, The British captured Mest an Tepe (probably Chocolate Hil 1 )
on August 7th, but Ismail Tepe remained to the Turks. The 4th
Division went to reinforce the 9th Division. Reinforcements were
ordered from the Asiatic side via Chanak Kale, Kilia and Akbasch.
21. Von Sanders now went to Anaforta on August Bth, but
found the 7th and 12th Divisions were still far back and just
deploying. He then ordered the attack for sundown, August Bth.
The 16th Corps still delayed and that evening, he placed Mustapha
Kemal of the 19th Division, in command. On the morning of
August 9th, Kemal directed the attack and on August 10th he
drove the British down the north slopes of Chemen Tepe and
Sari Bair, and secured these heights for the Turks. This was the
second crisis.
22. The third crisis was the fight for Kiresch Tepe, begun on
August 15th. This ridge cuts off the peninsula sharply from Saros
Gulf. The sth Division was ordered to assist. The British
strength here was 1% Divisions. The Turkish reinforcements
from Kilia were hastily moved up and on August 16th the British
were beaten back.
The capture of Kiresch Tepe would have flanked the Turks in
the Anaforta valley. The Turks however held all commanding
heights. Von Sanders felt that the British were too slow after
landing. On the other hand the British did not expect the Turks
to bring reinforcements so swiftly. The British might have won
Kiresch Tepe in the first two days. The Turks parried the Ana-
forta landing by bringing in all available troops, thus denuding
the upper Saros Gulf a second time.
23. The Anaforta landing was ambitiously planned, and if
successful, would have been the turning point and changed the
campaign. The Turkish fleet afforded no material assistance ex-
cept machine guns used at Ismail Tepe.
G


The British attempted a second great attack on August 21st
in Anaforta, but the Turks with all reserves, won out.
The British losses in Anaforta fights are placed at 15,000 dead
and 45,000 wounded. The Turks removed 26,000 wounded.
The upper Saros Gulf was now turned over to the Ist Army-
under Von der Goltz, with H.Q. at Gallipoli. There was no further
heavy fighting on any fronts. On the south front there were 5
Allied Divisions, with five, and at times four, Turkish Divisions.
The British kept bringing guns ashore. The Turks were short of
guns. The Ari Burnu front was extended south to Kaba Tepe
under Essad Pasha. Kemal Pasha held the Anaforta sector with
6 divisions. Modern artillery and ammunition were scarce. The
extreme flank of the 11th Division at Kiresch Tepe was under
British ships’ fire several times. Suvla Bay with Allied vessels
was protected against U-boats by nets. The 12th Division placed
their lines well forward in the valley, to be near the enemy. The
9th Division held Azmak Dere with its defensive center at Ismail
Tepe. Three other divisions connected with Ari Burnu.
24. The German-Turkish relations were of the best. In Sept-
ember Bulgaria joined the Central powers, and by November,
communication and transportation through Serbia was secured to
Germany.
In September and October, parts of the 2nd Army were sent
to Thrace from the south front against the recommendations of
Von Sanders who considered the Campaign, especially on the
south front, not yet ended.
Von der Goltz now joined the 6th Army, and Essad Pasha
the Ist.
The Turkish troops did excellent patrol service. British pros-
pects were becoming more unfavorable. In November reports of
a new landing came in, but with no foundation. Austrian men
and artillery arrived. A 24 cm. mortar battery to Anaforta and a
15 cm. howitzer battery went to the south front. In all, 500 Ger-
man men and officers reached the Turkish front.
25. Toward the end of November the sth Array planned a
powerful attack. This was precluded by British withdrawal
from Suvla and Ari Burnu fronts, under Lord Kitchener’s visit
and orders. The Turks could know very little of the withdrawal.
It was skilfully prepared and executed, and occurred on the night
of December 19-20 on the Ari Burnu front. By the time the news
reached Turkish H. Q. and the orders to attack were given, some
time was lost. Ground mines brought consternation to the Turks.
The ships’ fire covered the withdrawal and the night was foggy.
H


The Anaforta withdrawal was similar. There were some clashes
as the fog was not so thick. Some Turkish troops took it for a
new landing. The British had paths marked for retreat. The
enemy practically embarked without any losses. The artillery
had been removed mostly a day or two before. The captured
booty by Turks of R. R., telephones, wire entanglements, supplies,
etc., was tremendous. There was a great quanity of artillery and
infantry ammunition, wagons, wood, limbers, and tents. Final
orders for departure were speedy. The withdrawal distances
were one half to 3 miles, very short.
26. The Sedd el Bahr front remained. A plan of attack by
8 Turkish divisions plus 4 divisions already there (a total of 120,
000 men) was prepared. In January, the British land guns be-
came weaker. The Turkish patrols sent out each night had to go
further to encounter resistance. The Turkish divisions were to at-
tack on January 7th, but on January sth, 9 divisions were ordered
withdrawn by Turkish H. Q. Von Sanders asked to be relieved.
He felt that the conclusion of the Campaign had been jeopardized.
The 12th Division the attack on January 7th and
gained some success. A great watching for withdrawal began.
Some Turkish artillery fired at Sedd el Bahr from Kum Kale.
During the night of January 8-9, the British withdrew from the
south front. It was successful. They were not all taken over
the long route. Some went to flank shores. The ships provided
the artillery support and self ignition fuses gave the semblance of
heavy fire. The Turkish artillery sank a transport. The booty
here was also immense, consisting of all sorts of war supplies.
27. The Turkish troops in all during the Campaign numbered
22 divisions—22o,ooo, which with replacements and reserves
probably totaled 400,000 men. Their total loss was 218,000 of
which 66,000 were dead, and 152,000 wounded. Of the latter.
42,000 returned to duty. Some regiments required 5,000 replace-
ments. The British fought bravely. Masefield reports their losses
at 115,000. Total forces, 215,000. The Turks had heavier losses,
and about 400,000 men altogether. Nevinson reports total British
casualties as 117,000 and total forces, 220,000. Number withdrawn
was 83,000 plus 35,000 recovered wounded, or 118,000 on all points.
The British dead were about 29,000.
Sanders later proposed a canal at Bulair, to provide a second
opening to the sea. He concludes by suggesting reference to
Turkish H.Q. reports for details of the individual actions.
Edward H. Schulz,
Colonel, C. of E.
I


THE DARDANELLES CAMPAIGN.
from
“FIVE YEARS IN TURKEY”,
by
GENERAL LYMAN VON SANDERS.
1919.
Translation by Colonel E. H. Schulz, Corps of Engineers,
U. S. Army
I
PRELIMINARY EVENTS.
To March 1, 1915.
1. IMPORTANCE OF DARDANELLES. Early in 1915,
The Dardanelles became more and more important. Many reports
as to enemy projects, ships and troops were received, especially
via Athens. A break of the British-French fleet through to Con-
stantinople was held possible.
2. THE COMMAND. The Turkish chain of command was
not entirely clear. Admiral Usedom was in general command of
the fortifications of the Dardanelles and the Bosphorus. As a
representative of Turkish H.Q., there was Admiral Merten in
Chanak Kale. The Commandant of the Dardanelles was Col.
Djevad Bei. Under him were the troops in the southern peninsula
and the coast defense on the Asiatic side. The troops in the
center and north of Gallipoli belonged to the 3rd Army Corps
under my command of the Ist Army. Also the Turkish H.Q. re-
served certain rights of command.
3. TURKISH MEASURES OF DEFENSE. To protect
against a possible break of the British —French navy to Constan-
tinople, I took such measures as commander of the Ist Army, as
would maLe an extended bombardment of Constantinople difficult.
NOTE: The subtitles and paragraph numbers are added by the trans-
lator. The translation from the German text is liberal and very slightly
abbreviated.


Many batteries had been placed whose fire eris-crossed the sea. Fly-
ing detachments had watch of the coast lines. Reserves were
held back. Moreover, we could count with certainty that the
“Goeben” and Breslau” would assist the Turkish fleet in attack-
ing the weakened enemy fleet long before the latter could reach Con-
stantinople.
4. THE DARDANELLES SHORES. According to ray
view, even if the Straits were forced and the allies won the sea
fight in the Marmora, they would still be in an untenable postion
as long as the entire coast line of the Dardanelles was not oc-
cupied by allied troops. If the Turks could hold these shores or
gain them again, the necessary flow of enemy subsistence and fuel
ships would be impossible. A landing of troops near Constanti-
nople, which might obtain the necessary supplies from adjacent
land, did not offer any chance of success in view of our own de-
fensive measures.
5. CHANCE OF ENEMY SUCCESS. A decisive enemy
success could therefore only occur if a great troop landing were
made in the Dardanelles simultaneously with a forced naval pas-
sage or just before. A landing following the naval passage could
not depend on an artillery support of a fleet which had just
forced its passage and had other problems at that time.
A sure chance of possessing Constantinople could at the most
occur only by a simultaneous landing of strong Russian troops
near the Bosphorus mouth in perfect cooperation with the other
allies.
But even against the Russian landing, the necessary measures
had been taken. The Black Sea coast on both sides of the Bos-
phorus was defended by batteries and flying detachments while
the 6th Army Corps located near, was ready to proceed against
any troops. This Corps was particularly prepared for such a
task by reason of many extensive exercises including night alarms.
So that already on December 27, 1914, I could properly tele-
graph the German H.Q. that the disquiet among the Military in
Constantinople resulting from reports on the threatened danger to
the Dardanelles, was without foundation, and that necessary pro-
tective measures had been taken.
6. GENERAL YON DER GOLTZ. Among the high Ger-
man officers in Turkey not belonging to the Military Commission,
was Field Marshall Yon der Goltz. He arrived in Constantinople
on December 12, 1914, exchanging his post of Governor General of
Belgium for Adjutant General of the Sultan. He was well known
and respected in Turkey. He had served 18 years as military in


structor and many of the higher Turkish officers had been his
scholars. The general referred to the Vice Generalissimo Enver
as his young friend.
For an active man like Von der Goltz, the position of Adjutant
General for the Sultan could unquestionably be but a stepping
stone to higher things. He soon had an office in the War Ministry
and took part in the discussions of the General Staff.
7. VON SANDERS, ENVER PASHA AND THE CAU-
CASUS. The displeasure of Enver at my contrary views regard-
ing the unfortunate Caucasus Campaign was further increased.
How correct I was in my judgement of the moral and physical
results of the winter catastrophe, is shown by the reports from
the consuls at Trapezunt and Erzerum. Enver wanted me away
from Constantinople so in mid-February he offered me the rem-
nants at Erzerum, as Commander of the 3rd Army. Hawis Hakki
Pasha had suddenly died on February 12th of spotted fever.
To the remainder of the 3rd Army, there had arrived about
20,000 recruits. No operations could be thought of for many
months.
I declined the command in decisive manner and reported the
matter to Germany. The German Ambassador shared my views.
8. TROOPS IN ASIA MINOR. Shortly after the return
of Enver from the Caucasus I began on January 29th, a short
official trip, to inspect the defenses of Asia Minor between the
Dardanelles and Smyrna. My first point was Edremid which I
reached by motor from Balikesir. In Aivalyk, which I visited
for the first and only time, I inspected the troops.
On the return journey, a heavy snow storm set in. As we
finally reached the railroad at Balikesir, it was found impassible
due to mountain slides. After repairs, we reached Panderma on
the Marmora, but we did not find our return ship, as all vessels
had to leave on account of the storm; so we were several days late
reaching Constantinople.
On February 15th, the Sultan was present in the Palace at
the dedication and presentation of flags of the 3rd Division.
9. THE ALLIED FLEET. The British-French fleet had
'gradually assembled in front of the Dardanelles, and found sup-
porting points in the Islands of Lemnos, Imbros and Tenedos. On
the last two islands, air fields had been prepared during the
winter for land and sea planes, and other military adjuncts had
been set up.
10. SHIPS, FORTS AND LANDINGS. The artillery acti-
vity of the enemy ships was directed at first on the destruction


IN PLACE NOVEMBER, 1914
EUROPEAN SIDE
ASIATIC SIDE
TOTAL
Outer
Inter. Inner
Outer Inter. Inner
Outer Inter.
Inner
16
10 39 (65)
11 16 49 (76)
27
26 88
= (141)
ADDITIONAL,
PLACED AND REPAIRED TO MAR. 18,
1915
0
58 0 (58)
0 40 0 (40)
0
98 0
= (98)
16
68 39 (123)
11 56 49(116)
27
114 88
= 239
AS TO CALIBRE
1.8"
to 2.9" 3.1" to 5.9" 8.2"
to 11"
14"
Totals
Outer
/European
0
8
8
0
!6\
i,> - 2“
\ Asiatic
0
2
9
0
HJ
Inter
/European
/Asiatic
14
20
44
28
10
8
0
0
Inner
f European
0
9
28
2
39l
> . 88
/Asiatic
0
'2
33
4
49) 50
Total
34
103
96
6
VS9
of the old works and batteries of Sedd el Bahr and Kum Kale,
which guarded the entrance to the Straits. The enemy ships with
their modern heavy artillery remained beyond the range of the
old Turkish guns. The equipment in this fight was too unequal
to leave the least doubt as to the victor. After a few shots, the
Turkish batteries were silenced and a part of the fort in ruins.
A repeated attempt to occupy Sedd el Bahr with landed
troops however, failed. In spite of the heavy bombardment, a
small Turkish detachment remained in the bombproofs, and drove
off the landing party.
11. [NOTE BY COL. E. H. S. ON FORT ARTILLERY. Ac-
cording to Corbett’s Naval operations, the Turkish artillery de-
fending the Straits was as follows;
The outer guns were at the entrance. The Intermediates
were mostly at a range of 9 to 13 miles and the inner guns 14
to 17 miles from the entrance. The largest outer guns were 11"
and not very modern. The 6 modern 14" guns were in the inner
zone. There were 96 guns of 8.2" to 11" calibre, quite a large
number. Six searchlights were on the European side and 7 on
the Asiatic, a total of 13.
Submarine Mines: There was an anti-submarine defense net
about 11 miles from the entrance with 10 lines of mines inside the
net and as far up as Chanak Kale, and 1 line parallel to shore in
Erenkoi Bay. This line was in quiet water, though the general


current in the Straits was up to 4 knots. The total mines were
397].
12. PREPARATION AGAINST ALLIED PASSAGE. To-
ward the end of February, the Turkish H.Q. took intense interest
in the probable success of a break through the Straits, and all
possible preparations were made by the Sultan, the State and
Finance Department, as well as the military and civil authorities.
In case of enemy success, these were to find safety in the interior
of Asia Minor. Such provivsions were justified, but the military
measures taken by the Turkish H. Q. from February 20 to March
Ist in anticipation of a fleet attack were of dire importance.
13. THE LINE OF DEFENSE. By the orders of February
20, a changed distribution of the Ist and 2nd Armies was decided,
in which the Ist Army Corps had its organization disrupted. And
then it was directed, and this is the essential part, that in ease of
a fleet dash, the Ist Army would defend the north shore and the
2nd Army the south shore of the Straits and Sea of Marmora. The
line separating the zones of action of the two armies ran from the
mouth of the Dardanelles and through the middle of the Marmora
from west to east, to the mouth of the Bosphorus in the Black
Sea. The Ist Army would then have front to the south and the
2nd to the north. The defense of the outer coast of the peninsula
with its commanding heights and of the Asiatic Coast at the mouth
of the Dardanelles, was practically omitted. It was the weakest
means of defense that could be imagined.
14. VON SANDERS DISAGREES WITH PLAN. This
plan, if executed, would have so influenced the course of the
World War in the Spring of 1915, that Germany and Austria
would have had to continue the fight alone, for the orders practi-
cally delivered the Dardanelles to an enemy landing.
I wrote on February 23rd to Enver, pointing out the endless
injurious results of the measures as ordered. I showed that
one Turkish Army was required to repel a British-French land-
ing in the Dardanelles, and another Army in the vicinity of Con-
stantinople, was needed to repel a Russian attack. The front
should not be to the south and north, but to the east and west.
On February 25th I received Enver’s reply that he would not
adopt my plan without even adding a word to justify his own
views.
15. FURTHER TURKISH ORDERS. ON March Ist the
Turkish H.Q. prepared orders that directed the withdrawal of


the 2nd Army Corps from Adrianople and of the 4th Army Corps
from the Panderma Line. But it was just the 2nd and 4th Corps,
which were located nearest the Dardanelles, and which in ease
of a landing, should be the first to be engaged.
16. VON SANDER’S FURTHER EFFORTS. I could not be
at peace with these direful and unfortunate orders of Enver, and
in the endeavor to get another decision, I turned to the German
Ambassador as well as to the Chief of Military Cabinet, I can-
not say as to the results of the above named German sources to
carry out my views, but something did occur to stay the execution
of the measures as directed, and which were wrong from every
point of view.
II.
NAVAL ACTIVITY AND THE GREAT ATTACK OF
MARCH 18, 1915
17. ENEMY ACTIVITY AND ATTACK OF ERENKOI. In
the month of March the activity of the enemy fleet reached its
highest point, and with the great attempt to break through on
March 18, begun its decline .
On March 1, five British line ships with numerous torpedo
boats moved toward the entrance of the Straits and attacked the
advanced howitzer batteries located on the heights of Erenkoi
and vicinity, from midday to about 6 :00 PM.
These batteries belonged to the fort artillery regiment No. 8
which had been attached to the Ist Army for the -support of the
defense of the Straits. The regiment which was apportioned to
various and changing groups on the Asiatic and European shores,
supported in excellent manner the operations of the fortress and
received much recognition. The enemy fire was expended not
only against his batteries but against his newly constructed and
ever changing searchlight positions.
During early March, attacks by the enemy fleet were con-
tinued, about 4 to 5 battleships being engaged daily, while at
night great activity to remove the mine fields was in progress.
18. THE GREAT ATTACK OF MARCH 18, 1915. On March
18 the allied fleet made the great attempt to pass the Straits. Col.
Wehrle reported 16 major battleships in action. They entered
the Straits in 2 echelons about 10:30 A.M. to silence the forts and
batteries.
In spite of great expenditure of ammunition, the enemy suc-
cess was small. The damage to forts and batteries was small,


though ammunition became scarce. The loss in life and wounded
was below 200.
The enemy had serious losses. We judged the “BAUVET”,
“IRRESISTIBLE” and “OCEAN” were sunk and the other ships
badly damaged. Also many smaller rescure ships were sunk. The
fire from Fort Hamidje was especially efficient. Just before
March 18, mine fields were placed in Erenkoi Bay. These con-
tributed greatly to success.
19. THE ALLIES RETIRE. It remained for the allied
fleet to retire and give up the attempt. The 18th of March re-
mains a glorious day for the command and defenses of the Straits.
Any attempt by the fleet to break through the Dardanelles was
not renewed during the war.
It became clear to the allies that the road to Constantinople
did not lie entirely by the sea. It was further evident that the
enemy would not give up the prize without further effort. Such
abandoment would not be in line with their stubborn determin-
ation and wanted energy. Hence we had to reckon with a large
land force.
20. ALLIES FORM AN EXPEDITIONARY FORCE. In
March, reports were at hand regarding a large expeditionary
force for this purpose. These reports came from Athens, Sofia
and Bukarest and had many contradictions. At one time it was
50,000 and then 80,000 British troops at Imbros and Lemnos,
at another time, 50,000 French were added. The arrival of Gen-
eral lan Hamilton to take command, and of General D’Amade
were reported. The existence of a landing pier in Mudros and
daily unloading of supplies was known. On March 17, 4 English
Officers landed at Pires and purchased there 42 big lighters and
5 tow boats.
21. TURKISH sth ARMY. Finally on March 24, Enver
decided to organize a separate Army, the sth, for the defenses of
the Dardanelles. My continued efforts to bring about this de-
cision was energetically supported by the German Embassy and
Admiral Suchar. Admiral Usedom, based on his Chinese ex-
periences, however did not consider a landing in force, as prob-
able.


III.
THE PREPARATION. MARCH 24 TO APRIL 24, 1915.
22. VON SANDERS TAKES OVER THE sth ARMY. Late
on March 24, Enver telephoned to see me at my office in Constan-
tinople. He then asked me to take over the new sth Army to be
formed. I accepted, but stated the present troops should be
strongly and promptly increased.
On March 25, I left Constantinople by boat for my new
station, and I was not to see the city again for ten months. On
such short notice I could take but a small part of the Ist Army
Staff, bringing C. of S. Kiazim Bei and two German Captains,
Prigge and Muhlmann. The remainder were to come later, con-
sisting entirely of Turkish officers except Capt Frese. The Staff
of the Miltitary Commission remained in Constantinople. Field
Marshall Von der Goltz took over command of the Ist Army, On
the morning of March 26 we landed at Gallipoli and took quarters
with command of the 3rd Army Corps.
23. GALLIPOLI—THE TOWN AND THE PENINSULA.
The town of Gallipoli was then a fairly prosperous place, not with-
standing some Greek families had already been ordered out by the
Turks. At the close of the campaign, the town was more than
half demolished by enemy artillery.
The Gallipoli peninsula on the northern or European side of
the Straits is a decidedly hilly country with sharp ridges cut by
deep ravines and steep gulches.
The only natural ground cover in this almost wasted land-
scape, were bushes on the ridges, small trees along the streams
which were generally dry in summer, and in addition, the lowland
pine woods.
The agriculture, dependent on rainfall, was limited to the few
valleys, and only those in the immediate vicinity of Maidos and
directly on the Straits showed evidence of much cultivation.
Here, there were several mulberry and olive plantations.
Toward the upper part of Saros Gulf, the valleys in the in-
terior are more open and fruitful.


24. THE ASIATIC SHORE. The Asiatic shore line dis
closes fruitful rolling hill country with lower stretches of meadow
through which flows in many bends, the river “Menderas”. This
valley is hidden from the sea by a fringe of hills along shore. The
heights formed for the enemy, natural artillery positions from
which his guns as well as ships artillery, could command the valley.
The “Menderas” and the smaller swamps of the valley would not
be a difficult country in the spring or summer for a well equipped
army.
25. THE GROUPING OF THE STH ARMY. There were
busy days ahead, as many changes were necessary in grouping the
troops and guarding the important coast stretches.
The sth Army at that time had 5 Divisions for the defense of
the European and Asiatic sides of the Straits. The Division con-
sisted of 9 to 12 Battalions, and the Battalion was about 800 to
1,000 men. * The British gave us a clear 4 weeks time to prepare
for their attack. They had taken some of their troops in the in-
terim to Egypt and Cyprus. This delay just allowed sufficient time
to take the most necessary measures and to bring the 3rd Division
from Constantinople.
26. POINTS OF DANGER. The outer coasts on both sides
of the Dardanelles, were naturally the first to be threatened with
a landing.
The important question was: Where would the enemy landings
probably occur? After that, the disposition of the limited troops
for such a long coast line would be determined.
The physical possibility of landing large bodies on many coast
stretches was worked out. These stretches could not all be manned,
tactical considerations had to govern.
27. THE ASIATIC POINTS OP DANGER. The most im-
portant batteries were on the southern or Asiatic side. The Island
of Tenedos held by the enemy was close to that shore, with its es-
pecially favorable landing places in the Big and Little Busika
Bays. From Tenedos, troops could be placed on Turkish shores
in the shortest time. As the batteries on shore covered only the
Straits and approaches, the enemy’s possible landing and attack in
rear of these defenses, offered considerable chances of success. Also
the road communications were fairly good, and at these shores the
greatest danger was evident.
•NOTE BY E. H. S.:- The sth Army of 5 Divisions, of about 10,000 men
each, would thus have a total of about 50,000 men. The Divisions were the
sth, 7th, 9th, 11th and 19th, and later the 3rd; a total of 60,000 men


28. THE THREE IMPORTANT POINTS IN On
the peninsula of Galipoli were three important and threatened posi-
tions.
The first was in the southern extremity at Sedd el Bahr in-
cluding Teke Burnu. This terrain was under ship’s fire from three
sides. A favorable landing here would invite the enemy to occupy
the visible and barren height of Achi-Baba (Elschi-Tepe) as his
next objective, which height could be easily ascended and involved
no great terrain obstacles. From the ridge of Achi-Baba some of
the Turkish works on the Straits could be taken in reverse.
29. THE SECOND POSITION. The second decisive posi-
tion lay on the west shore on either side of the beach at Kaba-Tepe.
From here, a wide valley, broken up at times with flat elevations,
led directly.to the town of Maidos. From the hills on either side
of Maidos, the Turkish batteries on the Straits could be easily com-
manded. North of Kaba-Tepe there lay close to the shore, the steep
heights of Ari-Burnu, with a well protected landing place. If the
enemy directed his mam action on by way of Kaba-Tepe, he
would have to capture the heights of Ari-Burnu, as these com-
manded the valley to Maidos.
30. THE THIRD POSITION. The third important position
was in the neighborhood of Bulair on the Upper Saros Gulf, where
the peninsula had a width of sto 7 km. While no direct artillery
action was possible from here on the Turkish positions, still there
was possibility of strategic decision at this place. Here the penin-
sula could be completely severed from Constantinople and Thrace.
If the enemy were successful in taking the narrow heights between
Saros Gulf and Sea of Marmora, it would not only cut off the sth
Army from land connection, but also threaten the water con-
nections inasmuch as long range enemy guns assisted by searchlights
could then command the narrow entrance to the Sea of Marmona.
The enemy U-boats which since September, 1914, had been active
against mine fields of the Dardanelles, and had attempted entrance
to the Sea of Marmora, could also further destroy the water com-
munications.
31. SANDERS ’ DISPOSITIONS. To meet these three
threatened dangers, I formed three fighting groups. The sth and
7th Divisions were disposed at the Upper Saros Gulf; the 9th and
11th Division and the 3rd (soon to arrive) were placed on the
newly formed 19th to the southern part of the peninsula and the
Asiatic side.
The disposition existing up to March 26th had to be completely
changed. A Up to this time, they were spread over the whole coast


line, similar to boundary defense troops of old times. The fortunate
enemy would have found some resistance everywhere, without our
being able to repel a strong enemy attack at the really vulnerable
points.
32. INSTRUCTION AND DRILL. Each division was or-
dered to keep its forces well in hand and take care of only the most
important measures of security in pushing forward any enemy
troops to the coast. No matter what happened, it was not the*
stubborn holding fast, but the mobility of the three groups that of-
fered possible success.
After the above re-dispositions and movements, the next most
necessary, was to march and drill the Turkish troops, which in their
coast patrol work had lost their snap and agility. They were
therefore given march exercises to make them mobile for the de-
cisive movements against enemy attack.
33. ROADS AND TRAILS. In order to move troops
promptly, boats and ships were assembled at the ports on the
Straits. Also roads were repaired and built by work battalions,
for the direct communication from sector to sector. There were
practically no through roads on the peninsula. Generally there
were foot and bridle paths on which pack mules in single file could
go. but no field artillery was possible.
34. AIRPLANES. To prevent observation by enemy planes,
the new groupment was executed by night marches.
The sth Army had not a single airplane available at that time.
The few planes at Chanak-Kale could at the most, be used only for
the needs of the Forts.
35. LOCATING DRILL FIELDS. The location of the troop
drills in these tense days required great care, as any division if
observed was immediately placed under fire of the ships moving
back and forth. To our surprise, the vessels even fired at individual
riders and foot troops when observed.
36. FIELD DEFENSES. All available forces were used in
strengthening the field defenses on the most exposed shores, and this
was done mostly at night. The available tools and materials for
obstacles were quite limited in the Turkish Army, and we had to
improvise where possible. Torpedo heads were used as ground
mines, and garden and field fences furnished wire and posts for
entanglement. At particularly favorable landing places, barbed
wire was placed near shore and under water.
37. ENEMY OBSERVATION. The enemy newspapers had
later stated that the British fliers had not correctly observed and
reported the Turkish positions. This explanation did not tally.


The plans for troop landings were apparently based on old ariplane
observations, and the later groupments were not seen by the enemy
due to our careful measures to prevent observation.
38. THE OUTER FORTS. The sth Army by the end of
March had taken over from the Dardanelles fortress command, the
shelled forts of Sedd el Bahr and Kum-Kale, so that the fortress
command had only to defend the inner Straits.
39. MANEUVER EXERCISES. On April 24th we had a
grand maneuver exercise with the 11th Division on the Asiatic side,
which included the possibility of an enemy landing in Little Basika
Bay. Late that afternoon I returned to Gallipoli.
IV
THE ALLIED LANDING OF APRIL 25, 1915.
40. THE FIRST ALARMS. At 5:00 A.M. on April 25 a mes-
sage flew in to the high command at Galipoli, of big enemy land-
ings already begun or about to threaten.
From the south, information was received from the 11th Divi-
sion on the Asiatic side, that enemy warships and transports were
concentrating and threatening to land. Further north at Kum-
Kale the advanced troops of the 3rd Division were in active struggle
with French troops, which had landed under strong fire of French
ships.
41. THE SOUTH AND WEST FRONTS. At the southern
point of Gallipoli peninsula, at Sedd el Bahr, Teke Burnu on the
Sigen Dere mouth, and in Morto Bay, strong British troops battled
with the advanced forces of the 9th Division for the possession of
landing places. These entire shore stretches and immediate hinter-
land lay under frightful fire of large calibre British guns.
At Kaba Tepe and near the valley toward Maidos, also at Ari
Burnu, debarkation was in progress from warships and transports,
while the fighting ships of the enemy lay in a half circle and poured
their heaviest fire on the beach and back land.
42. THE UPPER SAROS GULP. Nearest to us, in the
upper Saros Gulf, numerous war vessels and transports came in
close to the shore. Continuous fire was also observed from these
vessels. During April 25th, some boats set out from transports in
Saros Gulf and attempted to land, but were driven back by our fire.
This action appeared to me a ruse. Also it was evident from the
hull marks that the transporting ships were not lying deep in the
water. The decks of several transports were edged with thickly






standing brush, so that we could not tell whether troops were on
board or not. The fighting ships kept up continuous artillery fire.
On the Saros Gulf we felt strong enough to resist, even if the enemy
attempted a landing during the night.
43. THE NUMBER OF LANDINGS, A SURPRISE. It was
plain from the blanched faces of the reporting officers that morn-
ing, that while they certainly expected the enemy, yet their land-
ings in so many localities caused surprise and great concern. My
first view was that none of our measures need be changed. This
was a great satisfaction. The enemy had selected these points which
we ourselves had fortified as the most probable landing places.
That in all the selected places, great landings would occur,
did not seen probable, but it was not yet evident where the enemy
would seek decision. Further development alone would show.
44. SANDERS’ OBSERVATION POST. After the 7th Di-
vision had been alarmed and directed to proceed without fail to
Bulair, I rode with my German Adjutants to the heights of Bulair.
From the narrow ridge of Bulair on which no bush or tree ob-
scured the view or furnished cover, we had full sight of the Upper
Saros Gulf. We counted 20 big vesels, some battleships, some
transports. Also a few individual ships lay close to the cliffs
which projected to the shore at some points. Others lay further out.
in the Gulf or were still in motion. From their broadsides burst
uninterrupted fire and smoke, and the whole shores as well as the
heights lay under a shower of shell and shrapnel. It was an un-
forgettable scene. Signs of debarkation were not observed. It
was clear we had not arrived too late.
45. INFORMATION FROM ESSAD BASHA. After some
time, Essad Pasha, the Commander of the 3rd Corps, appeared on
the heights and brought some definite information. We were told
the enemy was attempting to land on the southern point and had
been so far frustrated by the 9th Division, but the British with
great stubborness were continually bringing in new troops. At
Kaba-Tepe things were good, and there the enemy had not as yet
gained a footing. At Ari-Burnu, the heights close to shore had
fallen to the British, but the 19th Division was marching to retake
them. From the Asiatic side no further reports were at hand.
46. I directed Essad Pasha to proceed at once with any sort
of vessel to Maidos and take command of the south forces.
I myself, had to stay for the present at Bulair, as it was very
important to keep the peninsula open here.
Messages from Gallipoli so far stated that all enemy attempts
to land in Besika Bay had been denied.


The troops on the Asiatic side I knew were in the capable hands
of Col. Weber.
Such was the preface to the Dardanelles campaign which was
to last 8y 2 months and would involve on the Galipoli peninsula,
over three quarters of a million men in both forces.
47. SANDERS’ ESTIMATE OF ENEMY. The preparation
of the enemy must be stated as admirable. They had the one mis-
take of being based on data too old, and that they underestimated
the resisting powers of the Turkish troops Hence any complete
decision in the first few days on their carefully planned actions
was denied them.
According to our estimate, the enemy had 80,000 to 90,000 men
available for the first encounter, whereas the sth Army had at the
most, 60,000 men, from which many had to be taken for observation
and security in other localities. In addition, the artillery superiority
of the British was tremendous and difficult to overrate. His means
of transport were also unlimited. On April 25, there were ob-
served from our observation posts as many as 200 large vessels,
transports and warships.
48. SIR HAMILTON’S VIEWS. That General Sir lan
Hamilton did not hold his task lightly is shown in his Field Orders
of April 21, for the landing, in which he said to the soldiers of
France and England, “Before us lies an adventure without pre-
cedent in modern warfare. With our Naval comrades we propose
to land by force in an open bay, in front of positions which our
enemv considers impregnable.
“The landing will be successful with the help of God and the
Fleet, and the conclusion of a great war will be brought one step
nearer.
“‘Remember.’ said Lord Kitchener, as he took leave, ‘That
when you are once on the Gallipoli peninsula you must fight to the
end.’
“The whole world will watch our progress. Let us show proof
that we are worthy of the great deed of arms entrusted to us.”
Tan Hamilton. General.
Even the opponent must acknowledge that the troops of
Hamilton took part in the landings with the greatest tenacity and
heroism, and brought honor to his hopes.
49. REDD EL BAHR. Soon after, Essad Pasha telegraphed
from Maidos that reinforcements were urgently needed at Redd el
Bahr and Hissarlikeron Morto Bay. The enemy had taken hold
and was steadily strengthening himself. Col. Sami Bei, the Com-






mander of the 9th Division, had brought up his last reserves and
placed them in line. As the impression of a demonstration was
still in my mind, I ordered the 7th Division then at the road forks
southwest of Bulair, to send two battalions the same evening to
Gallipoli and embark there during the night for Maidos to be avail-
able to Essad Pasha. At the same time ,the 3rd Division, which
was ready to dig in on the east shore of Saros Gulf, was directed
to send at once three battalions to Scharkeuj, which could also reach
Maidos by night transportation. We had to move at night, as
enemy U-boats had forced their way into the Straits and Sea of
Marmora. Already at noon of the 25th, they had shot at us on
Bulair heights from the rear.
50. KABA-TEPE. In the late evening, a message came that
all enemy attempts at Kaba-Tepe had failed, also that the 19th
Division had thrown back the advance troops of the Australians and
New Zealanders, who had pushed forward from Ari-Burnu over
Koja-Dere and were in battle for the shore heights.
51. SAROS GULF, APRIL 26. In view of the still possible
landing in Saros Gulf, I remained until the next morning (April
26) at Bulair Heights. The night passed quietly except for artil-
lery fire from the enemy ships, which constantly shifted their posi-
tions. As the concentration on the Upper Saros Gulf on the morn-
ing of April 26 showed unmistakably but a demonstration. I ordered
promptly that further detachments from the sth and 7th Divisions
should go by water the next night to Madios, and that the field artil-
lery of both Divisions should proceed by marching to the same place.
I then left Bulair to proceed by water to Maidos. I turned over
the command of the Upper Saros Gulf to the C. of S. of the sth
Army, Lt. Col. Kiazim Bei. He was directed to put in motion the
remaining troops of the sth and 7th Divisions to Maidos, if in the
next 24 hours no debarkation occurred.
52. UPPER SAROS DENUDED OP TROOPS. No debarka-
tion occurred, and so it was that the Upper Saros Gulf was al-
most entirely denuded of Turkish troops, while the enemy war-
ships and transports continued their demonstration to hold our
troops there. Finally Lieut. Col. Bei had left only a depot pioneer
company and a few labor battalions, the latter of which had to
pitch their tents on the edge of the bluff to deceive the enemy. The
withdrawal of troops from the Upper Saros Gulf was a serious and
far reaching decision for me as responsible commander. It had to
be risked in view of the great enemy superiority in the southern
part of the peninsula. If the British had known this weakness,
they would no doubt have taken decided advantage of it.


53. FIRE ON GALIPOLI TOWN. The Biritish ships soon
brought heavy indirect fire on Galipoli and wrecked a number of
buildings, particularly near the harbor.
54. REINFORCEMENTS. The reinforcements from the sth
and 7th Divisions which landed at Maidos on the morning of the
26th, were promptly advanced to the south group near Sedd el
Bahr, where the fight was the hottest. From the remaining troops
of the sth Division, several smaller detachments had to be sent to
the battle fields of Ari-Burnu to support the 19th Division.
It was not possible in these first days to determine in advance
the best use of the various detachments, as the urgency of the
danger had to decide this with each arriving reinforcement.
55. NEW COMMANDERS AT SEDD EL BAHR AND ARI-
BURNU. The Commander of the sth Division, Lieut Col. Yon
Sodenstern, on the arrival of his Division, took over the command
of Sedd el Bahr, while the command on the Ari-Burnu front was
turned over to Essad Pasha.
56. SANDERS’ POSITION. I myself took quarters at Mal-
Tepe about 4% km from the field at Ari-Burnu, taking with me to
the camp of Essad Pasha only the two German Officers, Captain
Prigge and Veterinary Captain Thieme.
57. ASIATIC SHORE, AND FRENCH DEPARTURE.
After four days of bitter fighting back and forth, the 3rd Division,
Lieut. Col. Nicolai, succeeded on April 29th, with heavy losses in
driving back the French forces which had landed at Kum-Kale and
had pushed forward as far as Jeni-Shir. These French were
Colonial and 175th Infantry. The Asiatic shore was thus freed of
the enemy, which was of great value to our whole situation. Firstly,
the Fortress was freed of threatened danger, and secondly, the 11th
Turkish Division could be spared and transferred to the important
actions in the southern part of Galipoli peninsula.
58. MOVING TURKISH TROOPS. Our troops were thus
in turn put in march to Chanak-Kale. During the next night they
were moved by boat across the Dardanelles to the European side.
Here the division was used on the Sedd el Bahr front. The 3rd
Division was still left to protect the Asiatic side of the entrance,
although some portions were detached to the peninsula.
59. THE sth ARMY AS MAIN DEFENSE. To understand
this short sketch of the Galipoli Campaign we must note in the
first place, that the campaign was practically conducted by the sth
Army and that the Turkish-German Navy could necessarily play a
very restricted part.


In Germany I have noted quite contrary views. In word and
print, the impression prevails at home that the battle decision in
Gallipoli on the Turkish side, was brought about equally by the
Army and Navy.
60. THE TURKISH FLEET. The Turkish-German Fleet
participated directly, by furnishing two machine gun detachments
of 24 machine guns to the sth Army, which were of great value.
Also the “Hair-reddin Barbarossa” and the “Torgut Reisz” for-
merly the “Weissenburg” and “Worth” covered in the first weeks,
the English landing places and ships near Ari-Burnu by indirect
fire from the Dardanelles Straits. The attack by a Turkish torpedo
boat in the low’er Dardanelles on the night of May 12-13, and the
only too brief activity of the German U-boats will be mentioned
later. The ‘ ‘ Goeban ’ ’ and Breslan ’ ’ were never in the Dardanelles
during the S 1 months campaign.
61. THE FORTRESS COMMAND. The separate command
of the German Navy under Admiral Usedom as regards the defense
of the Dardanelles fortress, was more or less related with the Bos-
phorus Command but there was on direct participation with the
sth Army in the many battles and fights on the Galipoli peninsula.
The mission of the separate command was limited to the inner
Straits, while all the major actions were on the outer coasts and
with the south group of the interior of the peninsula. The guns of
Port In-Tepe on the Asiatic side, could have won a decided advan-
tage against the landing and camp at Sedd el Bahr and against the
connecting roads leading northward, but they were denied any in-
fluence on the battle fields further north, on account of the distance
as well as the topography.
Also it was impossible to deliver frequent and continued fire
from the Asiatic side, on Sedd el Bahr coast and Morto Bay, on ac-
count of the shortage of ammunition.
Unquestionably it was embarrassing to the enemy to be fired
on from In-Tepe, hence they frequently placed these batteries under
fire of individual ships.
62. ENVER’S ORDERS. Later, Enver Pasha directed that
several heavy batteries be added to the sth Army which at first had
none.
Soon after the landing, Enver Pasha telegraphed from Constan-
tinople that we press urgently forward to the attack and throw
back the strong British forces which had landed at Sedd el Bahr,
Teke-Burnu, and Morto Bay.
63. THE SOUTHERN PENINSULA. The enemy ship’s
guns held the southern part of the peninsula under complete fire


on three sides. Viewed from the group Sodenstern, the enemy
fleet with the close line of gray ships and the network of masts and
funnels, made a picture of a great harbor. The commander of
the marine machine gun division, the gallant Senior Lieutenant
Boltz gives his impressions as he arrived on the battle field at Sedd
el Bahr on the evening of May 3, as follows: “It was a beautiful
and sad picture. The tip of the peninsula was surrounded with a
wreath of warships and transports, which were bathed in the bril-
liancy of their own many lights. The ship’s guns supported by
powerful searchlights, kept up a heavy fire on the Turkish lines. ’ ’
64. ARTILLERY SUPPORT. The enemy ships protected
the landings in the best sense of the word. We had available in
thosedays, only field artillery, and while these were urgently used
to repel landing attacks, we now had to conserve their ammunition.
Against the enemy battleships they could not compete either in
range or power.
65. REPELLING THE ENEMY. Nothing remained except
the attempt to force the enemy back to the ships by night attack.
This attempt was made on three nights by detailed orders of
the sth Army, thru Col. Von Sodenstern. The reinforcements ar-
riving from Constantinople were brought into action. All three
attacks progressed favorably. We came close to Sedd el Bahr, but
the desired success failed. Each time, dawn brought the ship’s
fire into play and forced the Turks back. The machine guns,
most, of which were captured, could not all be retired with our
forces.
66. CESSATION OP COUNTER ATTACKS. Much as I
regretted the decision, I had to order the cessation of further coun-
ter attacks at Sedd el Bahr, and to limit our operations to actual
defense. But not an inch of ground was to be given without a
stubborn resistance, as Eltschi-Tepe (Achi-Baba), the enemy’s next
big objective was not far away. The latter was faithfully held by
our men. I directed the Turkish troops in the front line to dig in
at the closest to the enemy. In this case only a few paces separated
us from the enemy trenches, and so the ship’s fire was halted, as
otherwise it would have endangered the British troops. This was
carefully explained to officers and men.
67. LAND ARMY VS FLEET AND LANDING PARTY. As
the Dardanelles Campaign is the one only big action of the World
War in which a land army had to fight for a long period against an
enemy army and fleet, it should here be emphaized that the artillery
fire of ships furnished an extra support for the enemy landings. It
followed that the ship’s guns could be fired as at pratcice and with


out being hit themselves. They also had available captive balloons
and planes, both of which were lacking in the sth Army. Capt.
Serno, who was later the organizer of the Turkish air fleet, was
available only incidentally for special tasks with the army and forts.
68. ARI-BURNU AND COUNTER ATTACKS. At Ari-
Burnu we were likewise not successful in driving off the enemy.
On April 29, a part of the landed Anzacs fell back under Turkish
fire to their ships but the enemy original situation was again re-
sumed by new enemy reinforcements brought on. It should not be
forgotten that the enemy base on the Island of Tmbros was hardly
20 km from Ari-Burnu, and that the British had ample ships and
troops available there.
Many times the Anzacs, supported by heavy ship’s fire at-
tempted to break through the Turkish lines, but they failed with
heavy' losses.
After the first two weeks of these bloody fights, I was forced to
direct Essad Pasha, that until further orders, any strong counter
attack must be held in abeyance on our part. Only the chain of
heights already held by us should be defended to the utmost. Every
favor of terrain and darkness of night was to be used to advance
our front lines to within a few paces of the enemy. This forced the
British to cease their fire against the advancing Turkish troops.
V.
RESULT OF THE GREAT LANDING OF APRIL 15th
69. CHANGE TO POSITION WARFARE. It thus came
about after the big landing, that in the first ten days of May, the
mobile fighting was changed to position warfare. The few vil-
liages, on the peninsula which'lay near shore or in the close hinder-
land, suffered frightfully from ship’s fire.
70. DEMOLISHED TOWNS. The formerly flourishing
“Maidos” was already on fire on April 29. The first building
struck by enemy shell was the local hospital filled with wounded.
In spite of all attempts at rescue, the fire assumed terrific pro-
portions and 25 British wounded as well as many Turkish troops
were sacrificed. Numberous peaceful inhabitants also lost their
lives. Under the rain of shell, men, women and children, trying to
save their belongings, had to be taken bodily from the houses. They
were then moved over Kilia Bay to the Asiatic side, and thus at
least, their lives were saved. In Maidos which was not garrisoned
by troops or staff, not a single building or wall remained intact.


Likewise, other localities, such as Kodja-Dere suffered as from
earthquake, and again others, as Bulair, Kara-Burgas, Jeni-Keui
and Gallipoli were badly damaged. With the same moral right
which demanded rehabilitation of Belgium and France, the Turks
might demand the reconstruction of all the towns on the peninsula
which were thus sacrificed, and which had no military importance
worth mentioning.
The seaport towns on European side of Dardanelles, Ak Basch
and Kilia were also placed under indirect fire, as well as the in-
terior towns. In both these places, the greater part of war supl-
- and material had to be moved.
71. TRANSPORTATION. A great task was the transporta-
tion of supplies for the sth Army. For the 7 day march over the
highway from the nearest R. R. station at Ussun Kopri, Thrace,
there were very few vehicles available. There were no auto trucks
with the Turks at that time, and the camels, pack mule trains, and
Turkish ox wagons could at the most take daily a few tons each. So
that the sth Army was practically limited to the waterway via the
Sea of Marmora. The enemy attempted to block this route by
British and French IJ-boats, but fortunately for the Turks, they
did not succeed, else the sth Army would have starved.
72. U-BOAT WARFARE. To judge the U-boat warfare, it
is important to note that in the narrow and easily visible Sea of
Marmora, 4 or 5 enemy U-boats operating at the same time could
not obstruct all sea traffic. Even if several Turkish boats were
torpedoed, still most of them got thru. They reached their goal
in trips, stage by stage. Also many supplies were carried by sail
boat and towed lighters to the debarkation points.
73. OPERATIONS ON SOUTH FRONT. On May sth, Col.
Weber who was available from the Asiatic side, took command of
the south group vice Col. Sodenstern, who was sent to Constan-
tinople on account of a knee injury. The front of the south group
was about 14/2 km south of Krithia lying in an east and west dir-
ection square across the peninsula from sea to Straits. Soon there
arose on both sides, complete trench systems in three or more lines
with many auxiliaries and approach lines.
74. SHORTAGE OF SUPPLIES. To be sure, the equipment
and supplies of the two armies were vastly different. While the
enemy had available all the modern war material of the world, the
poor Turks had first to get some of their supplies from the captured
enemy trenches, as very little trench material was available. The
most necessary wood and iron for the shelters had to be obtained
from the shelled villages. Not even sand bags were on hand in


sufficient quantities. When a few thousand came from Constan-
tinople, there was danger that the troops would use them to replace
their own clothes. Only because of the stoic quiet and cold nature
of the Anatolian soldier and his absolute indifference to personal
needs, was it possible to overcome all these deficiencies.
75. OFFICERS. The officers did not always show the same
nerve as, the men. During these times, it was repeatedly and ur-
gently proposed from many sides, to withdraw the battle front to
Achi-Baba as the plain south of Krithia offered no natural posi-
tions. In earnest argument, I warded off these proposals, which
would have violated my principle of successive defense. To my
mind, the more we moved to the north, the more troops we needed
for the wider peninsula. Furthermore, a defense line along the
heights of Achi-Baba would be visible from all directions, and
would have been exposed to the most overpowering ship’s fire. Our
success shows I was right.
76. DEFENSE OF ARI-BURNU. On the Ari-Burnu front,
the deep gulched hilly land held by Essad Pasha, gave the Turks
more favorable positions for their defenses than on the south front.
As the defense line ran north and south, the ships ’ guns could fire
only in one direction or at most from a small flanking angle. This
circumstance made the enemy advance very small, notwithstanding
the great bravery of the Anzacs. The Birtish posititons could thus
be advanced but 800 to 1200 m. from and hardly give land-
ing and maneuvering space.
77. TURKISH REINFORCEMENTS, THE sth CORPS.
The reinforcements now arriving for the sth Army were first the
4th Division, then the 13th, 15th, and 16th Divisions, in other words
the sth Corps whose transfer to Caucasus I had hindered in Jan-
uary.
With these fresh troops there also came from Constantinople,
some heavy artillery. Even if old or of oldest models, they were
all the more needed as the enemy was continually landing and
bringing in to position, heavy guns of different calibre.
78. MUNITION SUPPLY. A heavy problem was the muni-
tion supply of the sth Army. Infantry ammunition was fairly well
supplied, but the artillery was short from the beginning, as there
was no artillery ammunition factory in Constantinople, and as the
neutral lands between Germany would allow no transportation.
The Turkish batteries had to conserve ammunition from the very
beginning.


During the spring of 1915 an ammunition factory was begun
under Capt. Pieper and later others were erected. Still, even this
help could not keep pace with the needs, as neither the raw ma-
terials nor the machines were sufficiently available.
That the British did not think much of the new Turkish am-
munition, we recognized quickly by our results. Prisoners told us
that of 20 shells, only one would burst. However, the supply was
very welcome, as formerly some battalions had to shoot with maneu-
ver ammunition to deceive our own infantry in thinking they had
proper artillery support.
79. MOVE OF ARMY HEADQUARTERS, AND COVER.
The Army command moved its camp in May from Gallipoli to a
point 5 km behind the Ari-Burnu front and about 3km from the
town of Bigali (Boghali). The camp lay between low pine lands
and fitted so well with the topography that to the end of the cam-
paign, it was not observed by enemy fliers. Of course no visible
roads led to the camp. The few shots that hit the camp were pure
accident, as at times the whole peninsula was under ship’s fire.
80. ARRIVAL OF 2ND DIVISION, AND ATTACK OF
MAY 18TH. On May 10, the well drilled 2nd Division arrived
from Constantinople, and was placed behind the Ari-Burnu front
to assist in a last decisive counter attack on the enemy at this
coast. On the night of May 18-19, the 2nd Division attacked the
enemy’s center with great bravery and succeeded in breaking thru
his second line and reaching his first line. The British close range
auxiliaries and reserves however were too strong, and there was no
decided success.
81. THE LOSSES. The losses on both sides were so great
(our 2nd Division alone had 9,000 dead and wounded) that the
British local Commander proposed a truce to bury the dead. This
was agreed to for May 23, and was the only time that the fighting
on the peninsula was temporarily suspended.
82. SANDERS’ MISTAKE. This attack I must charge to
mvself as a mistake, in that I depreciated the enemy strength. The
preparation by our artillery, too few in numbers and with the
necessary economy in ammunition, prevented our obtaining the
desired results.
83. FIGHTING BECOMES PASSIVE. During the next
few days, we had the impression that with his newly arrived rein-
forcements, the enemy was making vigorous attacks to secure a
decision on the south front at Sedd el Bahr. On the other hand,


there were only a few vigorous blows at Ari-Burnu and the fighting
became passive. There thus oecured by day and night, small en-
counters which flared up occasionally into larger fights.
84. ASSISTANCE OF TURKISH FLEET. THE “GOL-
IATH,” “TRIUMPTH” AND “MAJESTIC” TORPEDOED. In
May the Turkish-German fleet gave us for the first time some relief,
by actively attacking the enemy ships.
On May 13th the British battleship “Goliath” was torpedoed
by the Turkish torpedo boat “Monavered Milli” (Lieut. Capt.
Firle) in the southermost part of the Straits near Morto Bay. The
attack was a surprise and so skillfully planned, that the torpedo
boat made the return in perfect safety. On May 25 and 27 ocurred
the two big victories by the recently arrived German U-boatis, in
which the battleships “Triumph” and “Majestic” were torpedoed
off the outer coast of the peninsula by Lieut. Capt. Herfing.
85. PARTIAL WITHDRAWAL OF BRITISH FLEET.
The Birtish now retired the greater number of their battleships to
the safe harbors of Imbros and Lemnos, and assigned the destroyers
and torpedo boats for the artillery support of their army. At the
same time, the entmy put into effect all possible counter-measures
against our U-boats, for which they had material readily available.
It thus came about that for the next seven months our U-boats’
were denied every success except the sinking of one transport.
86. ENEMY TRANSPORTS UNEMBARRASSED. As early
as June 16, I telegraphed Admiral Souehon at Constantinople that
the enemy was quite unembarrassed in moving and debarking his
troops from transports. On June 20, I again telegraphed that the
enemy ships were taking up active fire just as before our submarine
activity. On June 29. I informed him that on the preceding day,
during a heavy attack on our right wing on the south front, The
ships had assisted materially. This was repeated on the 29th with
the attack on the south group. The statement in German papers
is therefore erroneous that the assistance of the U-boats broke up the
attack against the sth Army. Such reports at home gave a wrong
estimate of the effectiveness of our submarines.
87. ENEMY AIRCRAFT. The almost perfect sea and quiet
atmosphere in this very warm summer, favored greatly the enemy
artillery, and simplified the enemy’s use of balloons and airplanes
in directing artillery fire. The thunder of cannon on the coast con-
tinued night and day. When the British land guns ceased, the
ship’s guns began, and vice-versa. In all the attacks, the land and
sea guns worked in harmony.


-88. GERMAN CONTINGENTS. Toward the end of June,
the first German contingents for the sth Army arrived, and during
the entire campaign, this was the only German body brought into
use. It was an assembled German pioneer company whose non-
commissioned officers and men were individual residents and
travellers arriving in Turkey. The Company about 200 strong was
attached to the south group near Sedd el Bahr. Due to the hot
climate and unusual Turkish food as well as to severe fighting, the
number was reduced in a short time to 40 men. These were util-
ized as foremen on the two fronts and did worthy work.
No other German troops came to the Dardanelles. Only Ger-
man officers and non-commissioned officers, the later mostly from
the artillery, were in the command posts and communication person-
nel of the sth Army.
89. RELIEF OF TROOPS ON THE SOUTH FRONT. Due
to the heavy losses in this continued fighting, it was necessary fin
the first half of July to withdraw a part of the troops from/ Hue
south front, which was possible by the arrival of fresh troops from
the Turkish 2nd Army.
90. THE SECOND ARMY—WEHIB PASHA. The leader
of the 2nd Army, Wehib Pasha, thus took command of the south
group vice Col. Weber. Weib was the younger brother of Essad
Pasha who commanded at Ari-Burnu. For the complete success it
was only necessary that these tw r o work in close and brotherly*
unison. Jealousy and antagonism which may occur between Turkish
generals was here missing. Wehib showed himself a very energetic,
determined and far sighted leader, which must also be said with
unstinted praise for the elder brother at Ari-Burnu, the knightly
hero, Essad Pasha, the well known defender of Janina in the Balkan
War.
91. THE BRITISH ATTACK OF JULY. Just during the
relief by the 2nd Army at Sedd el Bahr on July 13, the French and
English started a vigorous attack, which was only halted by draw-
ing on our last reserves. It was fortunate for us that the Biritish
attacks did not follow each other closely, there always being a few
days pause.
92. RUMORS OF NEW LANDINGS. In the last half of
July, reports grew that a big landing was imminent. On July 16,
a report from Salonica estimated the troops at Lemnos alone at fif-
ty to sixty thousand, with about 150 war vessels and transports.
Other authorities gave even greater numbers. The probability of a
new landing was based on the fact that the heavy battles of the
last few weeks had not brought the enemy perceptibly nearer to


victory. The Birtish Minister Churchill stated in a much adver-
tised public speech that the deserved success of the Biritish Land-
ing Army was now in close expectation.
There were no indications where this landing would be. The
south front had both wings resting on the shore, one to the east on
the Straits and the other on the sea. Their line could be strength-
ened but not lengthened.
93. ARI-BURNU, AND VARIOUS POSSIBILITIES. On
the Ari-Burnu front, both flanks were open. On the south wing,
the British had endeavored several times to increase their front.
Their only success was a small bending back of the Turkish left
wing. From the British north wing, a detached battalion was
pushed forward. This seemed important to me, but Essad Pasha
saw no threat in it. Several attempts were made to drive back
this detachment, in which even the Headquarters guard was used,
but we encountered stubborn resistance and did not succeed.
These were the only indications of extending the front, and
they were not significant. The possibility was not absent for the
enemy to attack the narrow isthmus opposite the upper Saros Gulf
and thus completely separate the peninsula from Constantinople.
A renewed landing on the Asiatic side after the defeats already sus-
tained by the enemy, was not probable.
The greatest concern of the sth Army lay in the oj en ?pace
between Ari-Burnu and the south front, for a strong landing here
would threaten the rear of the Turkish south group.
94. PLACING TURKISH REINFORCEMENTS. As several
detachments were now available, partly from new reinforcements
and partly by relief of a part of the south group, I placed the
9th Division under Colonel Kannen-gieszer in the open space tc the
west of the Kaja-Tepe projection.
To guard the coast next to the troops of Essad Pasha, from
Azmak Dere in the great Anaforta Heights to Suvla Bay, a detach-
ment of three battalions, one squadron and four batteries under the
Barvarian Major Wilmer was utilized. The infantry was composed
of the Gens d’ Arme Battalions Gallipoli. Brussa and part of the
33rd Regular Infantry.
On the upper Saros Gulf the 7th and 12th Divisions were
placed in readiness.
95. SANDERS REQUESTED .TO COME TO GERMANY
In the midst of these preparations against a threatened landing. I
received in complete surprise, a request from Chief of G.S. of the
German Army, to proceed to Germany for consultation with general
headquarters. What such a call entailed, to go from a live fight


ing front to a distant headquarters, was clear to me. I quote below
the correspondence so the reader may form his own judgement.
“Gen. H.Q., July 8, 1915. His Majesty directs me to inform
your excellency, regarding the Dardanelles Campaign, of his
warmest recognition of your activities there. His Majesty realizes
that your excellency percieves the importance of the task assigned
you in the progress of the war, and depends with certainty on your
superior leadership for success in the future as he has in the past,
in defeating the enemy.
Von Falkenhayn.”
“Gen. H.Q., July 22, 1915. To Military Attache. Reports re-
ceived here make it probable that beginning in August an even
stronger attempt will be made against the Dardanelles, possibly
combined with a landing in the upper Saros Gulf or on the Asiatic
side. It is advisable to conserve ammunition.
Von Falkenhayn/’
“Gen. H.Q., July 26, 1915. From General Von Falkenhayn
to the Turkish Government, Enver Pasha, and General Von San-
ders: To acquaint the Chief of Staff of German Army on the
military situation in the Dardanelles, His Majesty, the Emperor
would gratefully appreciate it if the Turkish Government would
send General Von Sanders to the Gen. H.Q. Field Marshall Von
der Goltz is available to take command of the Dardanelles, and the
Military Attache, Colonel Von Lossow is available as his Chief of
Staff if desired.”
96. VON SANDERS’ ANSWER. So, a change in command
was urged at this critical period, which change I could not forsee
in the early correspondence. My answer on July 28 to the Chief
of the Gen. Military Cabinet, was as follows: “My transfer to the
German Gen. H.Q. is desired to acquaint Gen. Von Falkenhayn on
the Dardanelles situation. This request is made after my leadership
of the sth Army in continued battle, in which Enver Pasha has
often thanked me for success, and confidence. It is made in a
moment when a great enemy attack is imminent, and with which
operations General Von Falkenhayn can have no direct connection.
I emphasize strongly that his Majesty do not order me to render
this report. At the same time, you propose Von der Goltz as my
successor, and the Military Attache, who normally and officially
should make the necessarjr reports, as Von der Goltz’s Chief of
Staff. I would desire an answer whether his Majesty the Emperor


and King, has directed that I request my departure and separation
from Turkish service, etc.,
, L. Von Sanders.”
97. LATER REPLIES, AND RESULTS. After two days,
I received answer from the Gen. H.Q. that for the time, no action
would be taken on my recall, but that Col. Von Lassow at the desire
of the German Army Command, would be attached to my Staff. The
latter reported August 15, but remained only for a short time, as I
had absolutely no official duty for him.
Later on I heard the whole story of this affair which originated
in Constantinople, but in which Enver asha had no part. All
details were given me confidentially. There is no need to give fur-
ther details here, as this brief account of the Campaign should not
not be interrupted by reference to personal intrigues.
Less serious were other alarming reports which came to me from
various sources in Constantinople, concerning a threatened new
landing, of which I will mention but one. The Adjutant of the
Military Commission notified me from reliable sources that the
enemy was so confident of success in the new operations, that
windows were being rented in the Pera Street to witness the entry
of British troops. Also the British Embassy would be open and
new furniture installed. My answer was to reserve a window for
me also in Pera Street.
Other possible landing places were at Aivalyk and Smyrna.
VI. THE GREAT SUVLA LANDING.
98. THE LANDING OF AUGUST 6th. On the evening of
August 6. the major operations of the enemy began, which in suc-
cession brought five British Divisions, of which one was foot cavalry,
to the Gallipoli shore between Ari-Burnu and the north side of
Suvla Bay. Simultaneously there was a strong attack on the south
group at Sedd el Bahr and one against the left flank at Ari-Burnu.
At first Essad Pasha had the impression that the landed troops
would decisively attack his left wing. Soon after 6 :00 P.M. it was
noted that the enemy movements were northward along shore from
the Ari-Burnu beach, and that further north, embarkation of other
troops was in progress. This was the decisive moment.
About 9 :00 P.M. the first reports reached the H.Q. of the sth
Army. The Chief of Staff Kiazim Bei journeyed late that after


noon to Ari-Burnu for consultation with Essad Pasha and could
not return at once as the whole of Ari-Burnu was under the heaviest
fire.
99. VON SANDER’S ORDERS. Immediately after receiving
the above reports I directed by phone that the 7th and 12th Divi-
sions at upper Saros Gulf, be alarmed and placed in quick readiness
to march. About one hour later, orders were given for both Divi-
sions to proceed at once in the general direction—Usum Hisirli—
to the eastward of Great Anaforta.
100. THE 9th DIVISION, AND CHEMBN TEPE. Essad
Pasha had alarmed the 9th Division early that evening and had
given them march orders northward.
As they were approaching from the south to the mountain mass
of Kodja Scheimendag (Chemen Tepe) early on the morning of the
7th, word was received that Birtish infantry were ascending from
the north. The first enemy had already reached the summit, while
the advance troops of the 9th Division were still climbing the last
heights. After a short fight the Turks succeeded in taking the
heights and driving the British down the north descents. Lieut Col.
Kannen giezer, leader of the 9th Division, was seriously wounded
in the breast while leading his troops to the top.
101. THE FIRST CRISIS. This was the first crisis won in
the Anaforta fights. It was of the greatest importance, as the
whole Ari-Burnu front would have had to retire, if the enemy had
won and retained the summit of these strong heights. The ridge
line moreover commanded the Anaforta Valley to the north and
gave artillery positions southward to the Dardanelles Straits, vis-
ible for quite a distance.
102. NORTH OF AZMAK DERE. In the Anaforta Valley to
the north of Azmak Dere, the British had taken Hill Mest an Tepe
(probably Chocolate Hill) on August 7, defended by a Company
of the Gens d’ Armes Battalion Brussa and the 2nd Battalion of
the 33rd Infantry. The British however did not capture the ad-
joining height of Ismail Tepe to the east.
103. REINFORCEMENTS FOR CHEMEN TEPE. Already
on the morning of the 7th of August, reinforcements were sent to
the important Chemen Tepe from the 4th Division under Djemil
Bei. This division was in rear of the right wing of the south group,
and had been itself reinforced by Wehib Pasha in spite of the fur-
ther vigorous attacks against himself.
104. THE 16TH CORPS ARRIVES IN ANAFORTA VAL-
LEY. To my astonishment, it was reported about noon August
7th by the Commanding General of Saros Gulf that the 16th Army


Corps (7th and 12th Divisions) had arrived at the march objective,
and according: to his dispatch, the troops had made a double march.
Orders were given personally to the designated leaders to at-
tack at daybreak August 8, from both sides of the Azmak Dere in
then Anaforta plain.
The British extended their landings continuously further to
the north.
The meager coast defense troops of Major Willmer held out
well, but could not continue to resist an ever increasing enemy.
The more British troops arrived, the more threatened became our
position in the Anaforta area, hence the 7th and 12th Divisions
had to counter attack at once.
105. REINFORCEMENTS FROM ASIATIC SIDE. Already
on August 7, Mehmed Ali Pasha on the Asiatic side had been
ordered to march his various battalions not in front line, and several
batteries, to Chanak Kale. They were to be ferried in the next
few nights across the Dardanelles to Kilia and Akbasch.
106. VON SANDERS GOES TO ANAFORTA. On the morn-
ing of the Bth I myself rode before daybreak to the vicinity of the
prescribed attack to be made by the Saros Corps in the general
direction of Great Anaforta. But I found no troops there. Finally
I saw a General Staff officer of the 7th Division, who reported he
was seeking an advanced position. From him I found that very
strong forces of his and of the 12th Division, were far back and
were just deploying, so that no attack could lake place that morn-
ing. I then ordered the attack to begin at sundown that evening.
This had the advantage that ships’ fire could not be so disastrous
at night.
107. THE 16TH CORPS DELAYS. Toward evening I heard
from Major Willmer that the troops of the 16th Corps had not
reached the approach position as directed, and as I requested ex-
planation of the delay from the Commanding General, he replied
that the condition of the wearied troops would not permit an at-
tack at that time.
108. MUSTAPHA KEMAL TAKES COMMAND. That even-
ing I transferred the command of the combined troops in the Ari-
Burnu sector to Mustapha Kemal Bei who up to this time had com-
manded the 19th Division, the farthest north on the Ari-Burnu
front.
Mustapha who won his first laurels in the Cyreenaika, was
by nature a leader fond of responsibility. On April 25th. he had
with the 19th Division alone, decisively attacked and driven back
the enemy advances, to the very shore, and then for three months


held back the enemy on the Ari-Burnu front, with stubborn un-
yielding resistance. I could rely thoroughly on his able coopera-
tion.
109. THE SECOND CRISIS. This was the second crisis of
the Anaforta fights. In the last moments we were successful in bat-
tling the advanced enemy in the Anaforta valley.
On the morning of August 9th, occurred under his command
the 3rd ordered attack on both sides of the Azmak Dere, and the
enemy was driven to the coast at several points. But the British
kept possession of Mest an Tepe. The last 24 hours could not be
regained, as in this time further British troops had landed.
On the morning of August 10th, Kemal, in a personally con-
ducted storm attack, assisted by troops arriving from the south
group, succeeded in driving the enemy down the north decents from
near the summit of Chemen Tepe and neighboring Jong Bahir
(Sari Bair) heights. The possession of these commanding heights
was therefore definitely secured for the Turks.
110. THE THIRD CRISIS, KIRESCH TEPE, On August
15, begun the third crisis of fighting on the northernmost part of the
new landing front, at the steep and bare ridge of Kiresch Tepe.
This ridge runs northward from Suvla Bay and cuts off the pen-
insula sharply from the Saros Gulf.
The position of the Gen d’ Amies Battalion ‘‘Gallipoli” with
two guns, on Kiresch Tepe was already under fire on August Bth
but on August 9th received a heavy attack from the landed troops.
The brave battalion held its position. In the next few days I sent
all available troops of the sth Division as well as many small detach-
ments from the coast defenses at Edje Liman and on August 10th
turned over the separate command of Kiresch Tepe to Major Wil-
Imer.
On August 15, the British attacked here with great strength.
At first they were successful and forced their way up to the mid-
dle of the slope. The Gen d’ Amies Battalion “Gallipoli” was
nearly wiped out and the Capt. Commander, Kadre-Bei was mort-
ally wounded. On August 16 the attack was renewed with more
troops. We estimated the enemy strength here at one and one half
divisions.
111. REINFORCEMENTS AND SUCCESS. The Turkish
battalions that came from the Asiatic si ie were marching up from
Kilia and Akbasch and had not yet reached the heights. They
were hastily brought up after taking off their packs. The ascent
to Kiresch Tepe was difficult and the approach to the bare ridge
was even more hazardous as several battleships in Saros Gulf were


firing from the flank on these easily visible targets, while the enemy
in the front kept the Turks under strong fire.
We were able to develop these troops as well as those placed
by Major Willmer but not without losses. By evening the enemy
was thrown back over the ridge and the former position was again
in our hands.
For the future the Birtish remained on the west side of the
crest and were limited to these slopes, and in spite of many small
attacks, they gained no new ground.
Thus the third crisis of danger on our outer flank was over-
come.
112. POSSIBLE BRITISH LINES OF ACTION. It the
British had captured on the 15th and 16th of August any part of
the Kiresch-Tepe, the whole sth Army would have been flanked,
and the first success could have fallen to the enemy. The crest
line of the Kiresch-Tepe and its southern slopes commanded the
broad Anaforta valley from the north. From its eastern descents,
a decisive attack might readily be made by way of the broad val-
ley which cuts from Akbasch deep into the peninsula.
It so happened that the various enemy troops halted not far
from shore and all interior commanding heights were held by the
Turks. Instead of an advance across the peninsula which would
have caused the Turkish troops at Ari-Burnu or at the south front,
to be forced back or completely cut off, nothing was accomplished
by the enemy except an extension of the Ari-Burnu front to the
northward.
113. BRITISH ADVANCES AND DIFFICULTIES. In
view of the great Birtish superiority, a decisive British victory was
no doubt possible. The British knew where they wanted to land
and could make the most minute plans. The Turks had to keep
their troops ready for difficult situations, and could only gradually
bring them to the sector selected by the enemy. The British ships’
artillery was available from the very beginning in any desired
strength, while the Turks lacked long range and heavy artillery and
the few guns they had could be brought into play only with great
difficulty. Modern means of defense were available to the British
only.
We all had the feeling that the British were too slow after
landing, instead of attacking at once.
The opponent cannot of course judge the enemy’s decisions.
In view of the known weakness of the Turks in the Anaforta
sector, the British probably thought we could not bring in rein-
forcements so soon, as many of our troops were involved in resisting


the vigorous attacks on the two fronts. Perhaps also the British
had physical difficulties, in part with new troops, which prevented
them moving with any speed through the cut-up, rocky terrain, in
which there were hardly any roads.
114. A CRUCIAL POSITION FOR THE TURKS. To men-
tion only one of the most crucial points for the Turks, we can state
that Kiresch Tepe under a strong rapid advance from shore might
have fallen into British hands in the first two days. On the part of
the sth Army, it would have been impossible on the eve of August
6 or 7 for the Turks to bring up any reinforcements worth while, as
the distances were too great. The British had the means of a deci-
sive attack on our outermost flank, in their great transport fleet
protected by their warships. But they began on the inner wing
and attacked with strong forces the outer wing only after con-
nection with the inner wing was secured by a continuous fire trench.
115. THE TURKS CONCENTRATE ON ANAFORTA. The
sth Army was able to parry the Anaforta landing in that it brought
up all fighting troops without regard to the adjacent fronts. And
sc lor the second time the upper Saros Gulf was completely de-
nuded of troops, and on the whole Asiatic side there were only three
battalions and several batteries left for coast defense. To deceive
the enemy these troops had in the last two weeks to make many
marches in various directions, which could be observed from the
enemy observation posts on the Island of Tenedos. The troops
were always brought back under cover of darkness to their old po-
sitions.
The decisive orders for the sth Army were given without loss
of time. Nevertheless the decision in the three crises rested mostly
on a knife edge.
116. COMMENTS ON THE BIG LANDING AT SUVLA.
The Anaforta landing was an ambitiously planned operation. It
was to open the Dardanelles by land to the Allies, and at the same
time, sever the sth Army from its base. If the campaign had been
brought to a tactical decision by the landing, the batteries on the
Straits which had very little ammunition, would have quickly suc-
cumbed. The mine fields in the straits could have then been re-
moved, and the mutual action of the victorious British army and
Allied fleet against Constantinople would have involved no great
difficulties. The Tschaltaldja position near the gates of Constan-
tinople which had served the city in the Turko-Bulgarian war,
would in this case have been only of small value as both wings
would have been under enemy ships’ fire. Certainly a Russian
army would have joined the British-French advance. Many re


ports from Bukarest and Athens had just informed us of the con-
centration of troops and ships in Odessa.
117. POSSIBLE UNION OF RUSSIANS AND ALLIES. The
certain union of Russia and the Western Powers would then occur
and Turkey be separated from the Central Powers. It seems more
than probable that Bulgaria in such a case would have abandoned
her neutrality and fallen into a thankless situation.
Thus the Anaforta landing which occurred at about the middle
of the eight and one half months campaign was also its military-
politicai turning point.
118. ASSISTANCE OF TURKISH FLEET AND LOSS OF
4 BARBAROSSA ”. In the Great Anaforta landing, our fleet
could help us only by providing some machine gun detachments al-
ready mentioned, and which were first used at Ismail Tepe. U-boats
were not available. The “Barbarossa” which was to bring us am-
munition and war material was torpedoed and sunk by a British
U-boat in the Sea of Marmora near Galipoli. The fortress with
separate marine command could not cooperate in the major decisive
actions on the west shore.
119. BRITISH ATTACK OP AGUST 21st . By concentra-
ting all troops landed on the new front, the enemy attempted a
large unit attack on August 21, in and on both sides of the Ana-
forta plain. This led to serious and violent fights, but the Turks by
bringing up the last reserves including cavalry, warded off the
enemy.
120. ENEMY LOSSES IN AUGUST FIGHTS. Several en-
enemy papers placed the number of their losses in the August fights
at probably 15,000 dead and 45,000 wounded. We removed about
26,000 wounded in the time between August 22 and 26. They were
mostly taken by water to Constantinople, as the newly built hospi-
tals on the peninsula did not suffice. The Turkish hospitals were
supported by the German sanitary Commission of the Red Cross.
The hospital of Major Trutschler, of Count Hochberg who with his
own means, unselfishly furnished equipment. But all these aids to
gether could not meet the extraordinary demands. At the same
time the hospital ships and the converted steamers did not suffice
to transport the wounded though the vessels were under way da>
and night.
121. VON DER GOLTZ TAKES COMMAND OF UPPER
SAROS GULF. As already stated, all available troops were brought
from the upper Saros Gulf on August 6 and 7 for strengthening
the sth Army. About the middle of Aug., the defense of the up


per Saros Gulf was assumed by the Turkish Ist Army, under Field
Marshall Von der Goltz, who moved his H.Q. to Gallipoli. The
command of the Army Corps at Saros Gulf was under Colonel
Back.
122. ENEMY ACTIVITIES. On this front as well as the
Asiatic side there were no further direct actions during the cam-
paign. The fire of individual warships which occasionally en-
tered upper Saros Gulf could do no particular damage to the well
covered troops in this defense.
The whole activity of the enemy was concentrated against the
three principal fronts of the Galipoli peninsula.
123. KRITHIA. In the southern sector at Sedd el Bahr, the
most advanced enemy line was about 1200 m. south of Krithia.
The many attenpts of the enemy to gain a foothold in Krithia (the
village was a heap of ruins) were always repulsed. Two French
divisions formed the right wing of the allied troops, and 3 British
divisions held the center and left wings, but there were several
non-essential modifications of sector boundaries and troops assign-
ments.
On our side, the south front under Wehib Pasha was held in
general by five divisions on the front line, at times by four.
124. ENEMY GUNS ASHORE. The number of batteries
brought ashore by the enemy was continually growing, while on
the Turkish side the artillery needed increase. The command under
Turkish Lieut. Col. Assim Bei was vigorously held. The fighting
on the south front remained generally severe.
125. ARI-BURNU. After the Anaforta landing, the Ari-Burnu
front under Essad Passha, was extended in a southerly direction
toward Kaba Tepe by a consolidated division, as the enemy there
was attempting an energetic enveloping movement.
A small intermediate group at Kajal Tepe (north of Achi-
Baba) provided a junction with the south group and assured at
the same time the possession of this height which flanked the Maidos
valley from the south.
126. THE ANAFORTA STRENGTH. The new Anaforta
group under Mustapha Kemal, defended the territory from the
northern slope of Kireseh Tepe to including Chemen Tepe, in di-
rect connection with the right wing of the Ari-Burnu front. This
group consisted of six divisions. On this front which lay parallel
to the coast and across the Anaforta valley, all the heights were in
Turkish hands and crowned with Turkish artillery. Unfortunately
this artillery was neither plentiful nor (except for the field guns)
was it modern. Moreover our ammunition was scarce. Other


wise a protracted occupation by the British in the deep lying
pockets of this front could not have been possible.
127. RIGHT FLANK OP TURKISH POSITION, AND 11TH
DIVISION. The extreme Turkish right wing on the Kiresch
Tope, consisting of the 11th Division under Major Willmer was
very much crippled by flanking fire from ships as well as by front
fire. Several times is was possible for the Turks to hit the ships
with their one 8.9 cm. long range battery and with several 15 cm.
howitzers. This dispersed such ships, but in general, the ships lay
beyond our range.
128. SIJVLA BAY. Suvla Bay enabled the British to support
the northern part of the front, and we often saw 12 to 15 ships there.
The bay was protected against U-boats by torpedo nets. Often
these ships fired their broadsides not only against the 11th Divi-
sion, but also against the 12th Division, adjoining on the south.
129. THE 12TH DIVISION. The 12th Division commanded
first by Selaheddin Bei, then by Lieut. Col. Henck, had to place
their defensive line well forward in the deep pockets, to be
the enemy. In rainy weather which occurred in the fall, the floors
of our trenches were almost continuously under water. Our
troops had the poor consolation that the opposing British troops
were nearer the coast and to the salt sea, and had conditions at
least as bad.
130. THE 9TH DIVISION. To the south the 9th Division,
connected with Asmak Dere of which Ismail Tepe was the defensive
center. South of Azmak Dere were three other Turkish divisions
connecting with the right flank of the Ari-Burnu front.
131. TURKISH ARTILLERY. Major Lieran, the excellent
artillery commander with the Anaforta sector, sank several Birtish
ships with especially good fire from Ismail Tepe and Kiresch
Tepe. He had already distinguished himself in the early days of
the landing. For many months after the British departure, the
wrecks of hull after hull were visible along the whole north coast.
During September, the entire artillery of the sth Army was
placed under Colonel Greszman who had arrived from the German
west front. Several weeks before this, Colonel Wehrle had taken
over the heavy artillery of the sth Army.
VII. OPERATIONS, SEPTEMBER TO DECEMBER, 1915
132. RUMORS TO CROSS THE ISTHMUS. The enemy re-
peated often in September and October, bitter but limited attacks,
but without any essential success.


On September 4 we had another of those thrilling reports from
Constantinople, which would have brought consternation to weak
minds. I repeat it word for word as it may be interesting to see
what queer information, sometimes official, comes to a commander.
“Gen. 11. Q., Constantinople, 4 Sept., 1915.
No. 1478.
Following plans are in effect:
While the larger vessels at the entrance to the Dardanelles en-
gage the forts and lead the Turks to big expenditures of ammuni-
tion, everything will be ready to take 200 ships’ boats from the
Gulf of Saros to the sea of Marmora via a quickly laid railroad
across the Gallipoli peninsula near Bulair. Material for this road
is partly with the troops and partly still to come. With these 200
well equipped boats, it is expected to force Constantinople. Fifty
of these boats would hardly have the value of one war cruiser,
but even if a great number of the boats whose parts are already
under way to the Dardanelles, were sunk in the attack on Constan-
tinople, the damage would be small to the expected success.”
Naturally not a word of this was true.
I commented on this report by saying: The story must have
come from the novel “Around the World in Eighty Days.”
133. GERMAN-TURKISH RELATIONS AND STATUS OF
SUCCESS. On August 23 many well known English papers had
published such impossible data regarding large British advances on
Galipoli, and entirely false reports on the relations of German and
Turkish officers, so that when I received knowledge of the same
four weeks later, I sent the following telegram to the German Gen.
H.Q. to deny the conception existing in our H.Q.:
“Camp Bigali. 23 September, 1915.
The British Anaforta action, undertaken with great force, may
be considered as completely foiled. As at Ari-Burnu, so also in
Anaforta sector and Suvla Bay, the British had in their possession
only a narrow strip directly on the coast, which they have en-
trenched and which they could keep only by direct protection of
their fleet. The British camps everywhere were directly on the
shore. All these narrow fingers of fore land were commanded by
heights held by the Turks. The Turkish communications on the
peninsula were all open, and not broken in single point. All attacks
of the British have fallen through with great loss to them. The re-
ports of controversies between German and Turkish officers are
a pure invention. The dirty sources in Constantinople from which
they came, might well have caused a quarrel, but they were not
successful. The present relation between German and Turkish


officers is the best. Both are proud of the continued success of the
Turkish army.
L. Von Sanders.”
134. RUMORS ON VON SANDERS. During the vivid events
of this busy time may be mentioned the following from a German
American: t
‘ * Mr. General:
After reading in the papers that you were first wounded, then
sick, then assasinated by Turkish officers, that you were out of favor
with the Sultan, and killed on the battlefield; I have heard with joy
from my friend General Eisentrautin Cassel, that you were hale
and hearty and I send you my best wishes, etc.,”
135. BULGARIA JOINS CENTRAL POWERS, AND
SHIFTS OF TROOPS. When in September, Bulgaria joined the
Central Powers, the sth Army directed its hopes on the early
opening of transport roads from Germany to Constantinople, and
thus obtain support from Germany of war materials and good artil-
lery ammunition. The hope could not be fulfilled until November,
when the way wag cleared through Servia.
In the latter half of September and early part of October,
portions of the 2nd Turkish Army were gradually drawn from the
southern front and sent to Thrace with other troops needed there.
To replace these withdrawn troops, others were sent from the Ist
Army at Saros Gulf. They were mostly of Arabian origin. Neither
their education nor their bravery could meet the high requirements
which the continued heavy fighting on the peninsula demanded.
It was soon necessary to bring further well trained troops, among
them, for example, the four splendid battalions of the guard regi-
ment, so that in the defense they would have some support. In at-
tack they could not be used.
136. WITHDRAWAL OF 2ND ARMY. The withdrawal of
the 2nd Army at this time was neither necessary nor fortunate. The
enemy pressure on all fronts was so continuously strong that fre-
quent regular relief of troops should have been necessary, as was
actually done in the British forces. Moreover the campaign was not
yet decided and strong Turkish reserves were desirable, so that we
could gradually take up the defensive at designated positions. In
February, 1916, the 2nd Army was still in Thrace without reach-
ing any activity. With the exchange of troops, Djevad Pasha, the
commander of the Dardanelles fortress, took the command of the
south front, relieving Wehib Pasha.


137. VON DER GOLTZ TO THE 6TH ARMY, ESSAD
PASHA TO THE IST. About the middle of October, Von der
Goltz was called to the command of the 6th Turkish Army in
Mesopotamia. Essad Pasha a little later took command of the Ist
Army. In his place as leader of the Ari-Burnu front came Ali
Rifa Pasha, to whom Major Eggert was assigned as Chief of Staff.
138. TURKISH PATROL SERVICE. The instruction of
Turkish troops in patrol service reached a maximum of ability dur-
ing the campaign. Many volunteers reported for the difficult patrol
operations. It is a great error to assume that the Anaforta soldier
can receive but limited instruction and develoment. It simply re-
quires longer for instruction in the offensive, to pentrate his brain
and be understood. Under good active subalterns and non-commis-
sioned officers, he will endure anything that brief attacks and
patrol service may demand of him in position warfare. Later we
found in the campaign at Softa Tepe, British orders in which the
Turkish patrols were given unstinted praise.
139. BRITISH PROSPECTS. From British sources, the pro-
spects for a successful ending of the campaign by late fall were not
so confident as formerly, as a telegram from the Secretary of the
State, Mr. Chamberlain, to the Viceroy of India will show: “Our
position and prospects are decidedly uncertain.”
On November Ist. reports from Gemrany were that a new land-
ing on Gallipoli would occur. It occurred just as little as the tele-
gram from Berne of 24th, November, reporting a fleet forcing the
Dardanelles.
140. ARRIVAL OF GERMAN ARTILLERY AND TROOPS.
NOVEMBER, 1915. In November, the long expected German artil-
lery ammunition finally arrived for the sth Army. With this ar-
rival the hope of a happy ending of the campaign was more secure.
The Turkish artillerists were well drilled and were good shots, but
with meager and poor ammunition they had but limited success.
This was now visibly improved.
On November 15, the first troops of the Central Powers ar-
rived as an active help for Gallipoli. It was an excellent Austrian
24 cm. mortar battery, modernized, and was placed on the left
wing of the Anaforta front and was soon giving effective fire ag-
ainst the Mesten Tepe. In December followed another good bat-
tery of 15 cm. Austrian howitzers which was moved up to the south
front. No other non-Turkish troops arrived on the peninsula be-
fore the British withdrew. The total number of all utilized German
officers, non-commissioned officers and men reached at this time
about 500.


141. PLANS FOR ATTACK BY STH ARMY. By the end
of November, plans were in hand for a powerful attack by the sth
Army. The plans were to push through the enemy front and ad-
jacent and right wing of Anaforta, and thereby cause both fronts
to withdraw. Reinforcements from the 2nd Turkish Army were to
be provided by Turk H.Q. Technical troops for this attack were to
come from Germany. By direction of the German H.Q., Col. V.
Berendt, Lieut Col. Klehmet, and Major Lothes came to Galipoli to
make the necessary investigation and preparation. The divisions
selected for the storm attack were retired from the front, one
after another, and were schooled for the attack in practice works
in the rear.
VIII. THE ALLIES WITHDRAW.
142. LORD KITCHENER AND THE WESTERN FRONTS.
The enemy precluded these attacks by withdrawal from the two
western fronts. The withdrawal (as later known) was entirely
due to Lord Kitchener, who at first decidedly opposed the plan. He
himself visited the Gallipoli fronts in November and made a study
of the situation and attack and of the chances of a further advance.
He indicated the discontinuance of further attack actions, and
held it possible to withdraw from the peninsula without too great
losses. Other British leaders had declared the retreat could only
be carried out with great difficulty. Lord Kitchener was right.
143. ENEMY ADVANCES MEAGRE. After failure to reach
the objective of Anaforta, there was no prospect for the enemy with
his present equipment to bring the attack to a successful con'-
clusion. The enemy advance on all fronts in the last weeks was
very meager and achieved at great sacrifice. All commanding
heights remained in Turkish hands. Hence abandonment of the
attack was the proper procedure for the enemy. While the first
and foremost reason was the small chance of success, there was in
addition the consideration, that even with newly arrived troops,
there would be hardly any change in their fate, in view of the now
open passage from the Central Powers to Constantinople.
144. TURKISH INFORMATION. Of course, to us the situa-
tion of withdrawal was not made known, even to the last moment.
The possibility was perhaps conjectured by the sth Army, and ac-
cordingly the leaders were warned in orders to give this their parti-
cular attention. But the very skilful preparation and execution of
withdrawal prevented an early knowledge even on the foremost
Turkish fronts.


145. THE NIGHT OF DECEMBER 19-20. On the night of
December 19-20, there was heavy fog over the coast and peninsula.
Until midnight, the fire on the fronts was as strong as
after that, weaker. The ships ’ guns were active in many directions.
On the afternoon of December 19th, there was still a vigorous
attack on the south front. In this night the British departed from
the Ari-Burnu and Anaforta fronts.
146. TURKISH COMMENTS ON WITHDRAWAL. The
news of the sth Army were as follows: Between 1 and 2A.M. a
mine was fired by the enemy on the Ari-Burnu front. As the op-
posing Turkish troops sprang forward to the crater to occupy the
crest (as was their custom) they found no resistance. As the Turk-
ish companies moved forward toward the enemy trenches, a few
shots from the ships fell among them, and then all was quiet. The
trenches were taken by the Turks and the higher commanders
notified. Till this information reached headquarters and orders
for further action were received, required some little time, as no
specific instructions for such a case had been given, and in the
fog any direct supervision was impossible. Where the passage led
thru the enemy trenches there were all sorts of obstructions to
overcome. In various places ground mines exploded with the
passage of our men, and brought disorganization and loss. In this
condition even the last departing enemy should have won an ad-
vantage. The fire of the ships covered the terrain marched over
by the Turks in this action. Even though the way to the shore was
short, still the descent in the dark foggy night over the loose, stony
hillocks, was difficult. As our first troops reached the shore, the
enemy had disappeared. At once, the ships placed their fire along
the beach.
147. THE ANFAFORTA WITHDRAWAL. By the same
method occurred the withdrawal from the Anaforta front, except
by reason of conflicting information, there were several clashes in
the distribution of orders. At several places along the beach where
fog was not so thick, and the glare of red lights was visible, some
subordinate Turkish leaders assumed that a new landing was taking
place.
During the Anaforta withdrawal, the first reports came to me
at H.Q. about 4:00 A.M. I immediately gave orders for a general
alarm and the instant use of all reserves including cavalry. Each
organization was ordered to move straight to the beach in its own
sector. But orders are not so easily executed, particularly where
two languages are concerned.


148. GROUND MINES, ETC. The troops of the Anaforta
group, in their easier terrain, fell on whole nests of ground mines,
causing many losses. In various places near shore, it even came to
short fights with rearmost enemy, as occurred with the 126th Turk-
ish Inf. But even here, the enemy embarked with hardly men-
tionable losses. The withdrawal was prepared with extraordinary
care and skillfully executed.
149. ENEMY LAND BATTERIES. The enemy artillery had
been taken away except for a few pieces which became our booty.
This was easily possible as all British guns were close to the shore.
It probably occurred to our artillery commanders that some en-
emy batteries had not fired at all in the last few days, or at least
only a few shots. This fact was not given any particular weight
and no report was made. It had happened several times before,
when batteries were changing their positions. An extra vigorous
ships’ fire was given.
150. CAPTURED BRITISH BOOTY. A great deal of war
material was left by the British. From Suvla Bay to Ari-Burnu
lay 5 smaller vessels and 60 boats. Narrow gauge railroad, tele-
phone and wire entanglement material, were found in great heaps,
as well as piles of equipment of all kinds, drugs, sanitary supplies,
water purifiers, etc.
A great quantity of artillery and infantry ammunition and
whole rows of wagons and limbers were left behind as well as small
arms of all sorts, hand grenades and machine gun parts. There
were many boxes of conserves, flour, subsistence and piles and piles
of wood. The entire enemy field tents remained standing and sacri-
ficed, which no doubt veiled the departure. Several hundred horses
which could not be embarked, lay dead.
151. BRITISH DEPARTURES, SUDDEN. How suddenly
the orders for departure must have been given at the last, was seen,
that in some tents freshly laid food was still on the tables. From
the orders found in the camp, it was apparent that a great portion
of the rear trops had returned to ship one or two nights before.
The captured orders also gave many other interesting things.
On the Anaforta front, the enemy had laid out foot paths
bordered by whitewashed sandbags and visible in the dark night.
They showed the way for the rearmost troops and so avoided the
well spread field of ground mines.
152. DISTANCES OF WITHDRAWAL. In this whole with-
drawal we must remember that the distance even for the British
front line troops, was short and between 1 and km. The re


treat at Gallipoli cannot therefore be compared (as it sometimes is)
with the extensive retreats on the European fronts.
153. SEDD EL BAHR FRONT. The enemy front at Sedd el
Bahr remained.
It was on the morning of December 20 that the sth Army re-
ceived orders to send its best batteries of the two abandoned fronts
to the south group. Also the best grenade throwers, patrol men
and pioneers were ordered to march to the south front.
The possibility was not removed that the enemy might retain
Sedd el Bahr as a basis for later operations. The British positions
there were very strong and peculiarly protected by ships’ fire. The
authors of this idea spoke of a second Gibralter to supplement a
Salonica position. With the sth Army this idea had no hold, but
it was thought possible that the enemy might remain for a long
time. This was not to be allowed.
154. PLAN OF ATTACK AGAINST SOUTH FRONT. Here
a plan of attack against the south front was taken up in which the
technical troops from Germany were to be utilized. An attack was
planned on the whole south front, with 8 divisions to be brought up
in addition to the 4 already there. (This would mean an additional
80,000 men or a total of 120,000). We took no more troops from
the 2nd Army as our own troops from other fronts were now avail-
able where only a few observation troops were needed. Many det-
achments were ordered by Turkish H.Q. to march to Thrace.
155. SANDERS PROPOSES AN ARMY FOR SALONICA.
On New Year’s Eve, I telegraphed the Military Attache at Const-
antinople for transmission to German H.Q. that I proposed after
complete departure of British from Gallipoli, to form an army
from our troops and to march via Demotika—Xanthia against the
right flank and rear of the enemy army in Salonica, while the
German-Bulgarian troops would attack them in front. From
our viewpoint, the enemy army in Salonica was a reservoir to
threaten the Turkish coast and in addition, stood on the flank of our
only land communication with Europe—in other words, of our
bridge to the Central Powers. That the German H.Q, had other
views and that this was only a proposition for the participation of
Turkish troops in the attack on the Salonica front, was self evident.
I received no answer.
156. JANUARY OF 1916. BRITISH LAND GUNS BE-
COMING WEAKER. In the early days of January, 1916 it be-
came apparent that the enemy land artillery at Sedd el Bahr was
becoming weaker. In some batteries only individual guns were


used, which often changed their positions. On the other hand, the
ships’ artillery became more brisk. Also embarkation of artillery
material was noted from the Asiatic side. The Turkish reconnais-
sance patrols sent out evenings and nights against the enemy
front, always had to go further to encounter strong resistance.
Of the divisions charged with the attack, the 12th had arrived in
rear of the south front. This division was to attack on January 7
an enemy defensive work projecting toward the outer right wing of
the Turkish Army. This position could have later afforded British
artillery a flanking fire against our position.
157. TURKISH ORDERS FOR PARTIAL WITHDRAWAL.
In the midst of these preparations, the Turkish Gen. H.Q. ordered
on January 5, the withdrawal of nine (9) divisions of the sth Army
and to march to Thrace. Among these divisions were several in-
tended for the great attack. There was no justification for such a
measure, as on the one hand, the situation on the south front had
not cleared enough, and on the other hand there was no need for
the withdrawal as the 2nd Army was still locked up in Thrace.
158. VON SANDERS ASKS TO BE RELIEVED. I tele-
graphed Enver Pasha the situation in clear tones, and bade for my
relief from the Turkish Army, as by this unwarranted order at the
last minute, he jeopardized the successful conclusion of the cam-
paign. In this case, whether a misunderstanding occurred due to
erroneous Turkish translation or whether the order was actually
given, I have never been able to learn. Other things were also dif-
ficult to understand in Turkey.
159. THE ATTACK OP JANUARY 7. On January 7 the
12th Division was directed to attack on the outer right flank. This
was preceded by 2 hours strong machine gun fire and mine ex-
plosions. They encountered heavy resistance, but had some suc-
cess in gaining territory in this objective.
160. THE WATCH FOR BRITISH WITHDRAWAL. The
Turkish troops on the south front were regularly relieved by others,
and the greatest attention paid to any indications of a night with-
drawal. Foot bridges were prepared for the infantry and artillery
to cross quickly the enemy trenches. A field artillery detachment
of the 26th Division (Asiatic side )under Captain Lehman was dir-
ected by the sth Army H.Q. to take position on the outer point at
Kum Kale. This artillery fired during the nights of January 8 and
9on the positions within range at Sedd el Bahr. Also guns at the
In Tepe delivered heavy fire.
161. THE NIGHT OF JANUARY 8 AND 9, AND WITH-
DRAWAL. During the night of January 8 and 9, the enemy


evacuated the south front. The Turkish troops followed as the fire
of the front trenches ceased. At several places there were furious
encounters. But in general in spite of all observation, the with-
drawal w T as successfully carried out. A great portion of the enemy
troops were not taken over the long route to the point of the pen-
insula but were embarked at the flank shores, where at designated
points, all sorts of transportation and vessels were ready for em-
barkation. During the embarkation the rear guards had fired vig-
orously from enemy trenches. Also the self-ignition fuses had
given the appearance of heavy fire. The ships had provided the
artillery support.
162. THE TURKS FOLLOW. Long before daybreak the
Turkish troops reached shore, but in many places they were delayed
by ground mines and suffered no few losses. One division captured
9 guns on the way to the coast.
At daybreak a loaded transport was sunk by our artillery on
the western coast. The enemy torpedo boats fired vigorously into
the water near the transport, as they thought it had been torpedoed
by a U-boat; but we had no U-boats at the enemy’s departure.
163. BOOTY ON SOUTH FRONT. The war booty on the
south front was also large. There were wagon and artillery parks
and whole rows of guns. Piles of ammunition and trench material
were found. Also here, the tent camps and barracks remained
standing, and in part, fully equipped. Many hundred horses were
killed or poisoned, but a great many horses and mules were also
taken and used by the Turkish artillery. A part of the subsistence
supplies had been drenched with a sharp solution to render them
unsuitable. In the next few days the enemy endeavored to fire
these supplies, tents and barracks, but in vain. The work of com-
plete cleaning up covered about two years. The great booty of war
material was made available for other Turkish troops. Numerous
consignments of conserves, flour, wood, etc., were sent to Constan-
tinople. The Turkish troops who were not too well dressed or fed,
used up a part. I attempted to stop this plunder by close chain
of sentinels, but it was no use. In the next few w T eeks we saw the
Turkish soldier in unbelievable costume made up of all kinds and
parts of uniform. They acted as children and even wore the British
gas masks for fun.
164. TURKISH BRAVERY. THE NUMBER OF TROOPS.
To the Turkish troops of which 22 divisions were on the main and
side fronts and in reserve under the sth Army, I must give un-
stinted praise for stubborn and enduring bravery. In numberless


fights against a very heavy enemy that attacked again and again
under efficient support of ship’s fire, they contested and held the
field.
165. LOSSES OF STH ARMY. The total loss of the sth Army
in the Dardanelles Campaign, considering the duration and inten-
sity of the fighting, was very high. It was 218,000 of which 66,
000 were dead. Of the wounded, 42,000 returned to duty. There
were Turkish regiments that required and received 5,000 replace-
ments in this campaign.
166. NEW COMMANDS. The Galipoli peninsula remained
for some time under the sth Army, with headquarters at Lule Bar-
gas in Thrace. The subordinate command of Gallipoli went to
Djevad Pasha.
167. PROPOSED BULAIR CANAL. At the end of the cam-
paign, I proposed to the Turkish Gen. H.Q., to replace the Dard-
anelles question, troublesome for centuries, on a different footing
by another entrance to the sea from Constantinople, namely by a
canal construction west of Bulair. I emphasized that another water-
way from Marmora to Agaean Sea would give a safe avenue of es-
cape for the Turkish Navy, whose base would have to remain at
Constantinople. The 30 km wide mouth of the Saros Gulf was
much harder to blockade than the narrow Dardanelles approach.
Tenedos had no worth and Imbros only part advantage against
Saros Gulf. The north shore of Saros Gulf, to which all material
from Thrace could be delivered, afforded a good harbor with forts
and land batteries. The Asiatic side of the Dardanelles could be
make a second buttress. The projected canal itself would be
back from the sea, so that if the north shore of the peninsula were
sufficiently fortified, an enemy attack was as good as defeated.
The economic results of such a canal for European Turkey
are highly estimated. Technically, the construction across a neck
of 5 km. affords jno difficulties, as confirmed from professional
sources. Perhaps some day a return to this proposition will be
made.
168. CONCLUSION. In the foregoing I have given a review
of the Dardanelles Campaign from the view point of the Com-
mander in Chief, and but little understood in Germany. A de-
tailed account of the individual actions should be available from the
reports of the Turkish General Staff.
L. Von Sanders.


ABSTRACT TRANSLATION FROM MAJOR E. R. PRIGGE’S
“THE FIGHT FOR THE DARDANELLES."
1. The Dardanelles are 57.5 km long, 1350 to 7500 m wide
(about the range of field guns). The entrance is 3800 m wide.
On the left or northwest is the Peninsula of Gallipoli, and on the
right the Asiatic Mainland. The Gallipoli shore is generally desert
and steep, mainly of limestone to 340 km height. The gulches are
deep and hills are steep and well adapted for defense. The popula-
tion of 30,000 is mostly Greek, of whom about 15,000 were in Gal-
lipoli. On the Asiatic side, the shores are flatter, fewer gulches,
and lower hills. The current in Dardanelles is up to 4 miles per
hour.
2. The lower end of the peninsula is easily attacked from the
sea; the forts here were old with small angle of fire. On the
European side is Cape Helles with Sedd el Bahr; on the Asiatic
side is Kum Kale with Fort Orhanie. The forts are of stone built
by Mohammed IV, for use against the Venetians in 1659. In rear
of these were earth works and beach batteries. Further in were
the works of Eski Hassarlik on European side and Ertogul on
Asiatic, where the channel is about 7500 m wide.
3. At the Narrows (1350 m wide) were Kilid Bahr, a 15th
Century stone fort with modern guns and beach batteries, on the
European side. On the Asiatic side was Chanak Kale with 15,-
000 population, and Fort Hamidie containing heavy Krupps and
minor batteries. There were also mines, cables and telephone cros-
sings. Further up the channel at a width of 2500 m were the forts
Nagara on Asiatic side, modern, and Boghali Kalesu, of granite,
old design, on European side. On the west shore of the Galipoli
peninsula there were no permanent works, but many improvised
works and a well defended line with 3 forts across the peninsula
at Bulair.
4. It was at the Narrows that Xerxes, Alexander the Great,
and others, made their crossings, viz4Bo B. C., Xerxes, 2 bridges


360 boats; 354 B. C., Alexander the Great; 1190 A. D., Crusaders;
1354 A. D., Osmans; 1462 A. D., Forts at Entrance built; 1707
A. D., Russians crossed; 1807 A. D., English under Admiral Duck-
worth forced passage to Constantinople; 1809 A. D., Treaty se-
cured open passage by permission of Turks and approval of Great
Britian, Von Moltke said: “If probably defended by artillery,
passage of Dardanelles would be impossible even if forced by
whole world’s fleet. ’ 1
5. Chronology:
Nov. 3rd, 1914—First bombardment by British, 250 shots.
Sidid Bahr magazines blew up. Nothing further until Dee. 12th.
Dec. 13, 1914 —British U-boat sinks Messudie; not much
loss.
Dec. 15, 1914—British U-boat is sunk at Chanak Kale.
Feb. 20, 1915—4 British, 4 French ships fight at longest
range; 600 shots from vessels, Commander of Fort
Orhanie killed.
Feb. 24, 1915 —Enemy vessels increased by arrival of
“Queen Elizabeth” to 8 British, 4 French, 3 cruisers,
18 torpedo boats, 2 U-boats.
Feb. 25, 1915 —Fire opens; outer works silenced, Agamam-
non and 2 others injured.
Next few days; Ships open long range.
Wait for Turk’s fire. Ships close in, defense fires,
ships retreat. This maneuver repeated several times.
Mar. 3, 1915 —British land patrol of 60 men at Sedd el
Bahr; taken by Turks.
Many days of artillery fire follow; outer forts cannot
hold out; fleet moves closer and enters Dardanelles.
The British manuever under the Turk’s fire, disregarding
losses and use mine destroyers. The fleet is strengthened. Situa-
tion is tense.
6. The Turks have a big job. Col. Wehrle, of artillery, pro-
vides several positions for each gun, arranged for quick transit,
special cover against air ships; false positions cunningly contrived.
Enemy’s fire is drawn.
7. In Gulf of Saros are French ships for attack on Bulair.
Kilid Bahr is hit by indirect fire, 14 km away, 31 shots fired, bar-
racks hit, batteries in dead angle not hurt. The German Admiral
Usedom takes two 1891 built line ships with 28 cm guns to return
fire. Ships are using much ammunition and seeking out dead
angles. In the attack the ships are moved up, protected by torpedo
boats, mine destroyers, armed shields for men. The first vessels


draw the Turks’ fire, and locate the position for the rear ships. The
shore batteries return the fire regularly.
Mar. 4, 1915. After 1000 hits, Kum Kale is in flames. The
enemy land 400 French. The 64th Regiment forces them back to
boats.
Mar. 7. The ships engage Fort Hamidie, the main fort of the
defense. Fire is returned at 13,500 m., and 2 hits made on Agam-
emnon. No hits or casualties at Forts.
8. Mar. 18, the fateful day arrives. At lUOO A.M. airplanes
come from Tenedos. Five British and four French ships circle
and fire. At 11:30 A.M. heavy fire begins on Chanak Kale; thou-
sands of shot and shell destroy the town. The Turks reply. At
2:00 P.M. the French “Bouvet” is hit by 2-14 in. shells from Ham-
idie ; a big white smoke, then a crash and ship sank, practically all
lost. A torpedo boat and two destroyers follow. A pause. Three
ships and tugs are taken away. Looks like battle is over. There
are 38 ships all told. At 6:00 P.M. the British ship “Irresistible”
received 4 hits; put out of action, goes to Bay of Dardanelles,
sinks 7:30 P.M. Some of crew lost. The ship “Ocean” hit, no
towage possible, sinks; fight ends. Also the “Gaulois” is later
hit and sunk (not known at the time). Turkish loss: 1 long 24cm.
(9.6”), 1 short (8.4”), Howitzer and light batteries not much
damaged. Fort Hamidie received 80 hits, some from 15” guns of
“Queen Elizabeth”; 20 killed. Population of Chanak fled, but re-
turned after battle.
9. Mar. 25. Von Sanders arrives, leaving Ist Army in Con-
stantinople. He takes command of the sth Army of 5 Divisions,
from Essad Pasha. Von Sanders inspects all troops and possible
battery sites. Positions on shore and hill thoroughly improved and
changed. No separated forces, but unified defense. The men have
been long in trenches; he has them march and change. Target
ranges and firing practice are established, hand grenades used.
Turks are apt students. Usable roads are scarce. Travel is mostly
by water, but dangerous even between Gallipoli and Maidos. Roads
are now improved, bridges built, trails improved to road size and
prepared for artillery. All troops changed by night. Sir Hamilton
distrusts information of his fliers.
Field bakeries are built, reserves of guns, equipment and
clothes made. Toward Saros many trenches laid out, new guns in-
stalled at Bulair, landing prepared at Nagara.
The sth Army prepares field artillery. The sth Division
places a battery at Karachali. The French ship “Henry IV” moves


up and down and takes soundings. On April 14 she fires 4 shots
and goes off.
10. April 18. The U-boat, E-15, sinks in Eren koi. Our in-
formation is that General Hamilton is at Tenedos since middle
March; under him General D ’Amade and Admirals Robeck and
Guepratte. In early April there is news that British and French
troops at Egypt are to combine with the Australian and Indian
troops. It seems the expedition will land at Smyrna. At Alex-
andria are 200 British and French transports, 180,000 men of which
50,000 are French. Also news that 150 ships are at Sebastopol
in Black Sea to bring troops to Bosphorus. Turks continue in-
trenching. Enver Pasha, Minister of War, realizes importance of
defense of Constantinople.
11. An imposing battle fleet is seen in Aegean Sea. Hund-
reds of transports, all quiet behind the islands.
April 25. The big landing of April 25th finds Turks well
prepared, a month early would have been disastrous. The ad-
vanced Turkish troops on Asiatic side are well intrenched and have
wire entangelemnts, flanked by machine guns. Wire is also placed
under water.
12. April 25th, Sunday A.M. Fleet appears, guns form.
4:30 A.M. The French attack Kum Kale, effect a landing,
held in check by Turks, completely routed 4 days later.
Gallipoli peninsula. Sanders gives alarm to 7th Division and
places them at crossroads northeast of Gallipoli, where they can
watch the north coast or Bulair, or go by boat to Chanak Kale,
Maidos or Kilid Bahr. Sanders is informed that enemy lands at
Kaba Tepe. A regiment supports troops at Ari Burnu, 8 :00 A.M.,
and takes position on heights west of Koja Dere. The enemy uses
anchored observation balloons. Their infantry lands at Cape Hel-
les, Sedd el Bahr and Morto Bay. Sanders goes by yacht to Maidos.
The enemy shells Bulair. Command stays at Gallipoli crossroads.
Sanders goes to C.P. Mai Tepe.
ABSTRACT FROM NEVINSON’S “DARDANELLES
CAMPAIGN”.
1. April 25th. Landing at De Tott’s battery, Sedd el Bahr
and V Beach, W Beach, X Beach and Anzac.
French feint at Kum Kale.
Allies decide to hold Anzac and advance from V Beach
toward Krithia, April 28th.
Turkish attack of May 10th.


Killed
W ov.nded
Missing
Total
Officers
1745
3148
353
5241
Men
26455
74952
10901
112308
28200
78095
11254
117549
May battles were from 7th to 19th. Armistice at Anzac.
June battles: 4th, at Helles; 6th to Bth, at Helles; 28th
at Helles; 29 at Anzac.
July: Pause at Anzac; 12th and 13th, fights at Helles.
August: 6th, at Helles; 7th and 13th, for vineyard; 6th
to 12th, at Anzac; landing at Suvla and attack for Sari Bair,
August 7th and 15th. August last effort: August 21st and 27th.
August 29th; last attack on peninsula.
2. The British losses in 2nd week of August were 30,000 out
of a total of 95,000. These 95,000 were distributed at follows:
Cape Helles: 23,000 British and 17,000 French; at Anzac, 25,000;
at Suvla, 30,000. The real fighting strength was about 75,000; they
were short 1,500 officers, 50,000 rifles.
By the end of August, the Allied forces were about 83,000 at
Anzac and Suvla.
Turks had about 100,000 men and 25,000 reserves.
During September, dysentery took about 1000 cases per day of
British.
3. Oct. 11th. General Kitchener asked for estimate of los-
ses in case of evacuation. Hamilton estimated 50%, but did not
recommend withdrawal.
Oct. 17th. General Hamilton relieved; General Birdwood in
temporary command.
Oct. 20th. General Sir Charles Munro took command.
General Kitchener arrived during November. About Nov-
ember 26th, heavy rain, sleet and frost; many casualties.
4. Evacuation was decided on and carried out as follows:
Suvla: December 14th to 19th, about 43,000 men, 5.000
animals 2,000 carts, 200 guns, 2,000 tons supplies.
Anzac: December 15th to 20th, about 40,000 men, etc.
Cape Helles: January Bth to 9th, 1916, about 35,000 men,
4,000 animals, 110 guns, 1,000 tons supplies.
French had already partly withdrawn from Helles.
Total embarked: 118,000 men, etc.
5. Probably 200,000 men used in campaign, with total casual-
ties ;






This left about 83,000 plus some 35,000 of recovered wounded,
or a total of 118,000 to be embarked.
The casualties were 58% of the total forces.
GALLIPOLI
By John Masefield.
1. April 25. 1915. The plans covered a feint at Bulair, a
French attack on Kum Kale, the Anzacs at Kaba Tepe, and the
29th Royal Navy at Helles. Landing places; Beach V, 300 yds.,
steep, easy defense; Beach W, 300 yds. not so steep, beach and bay
wired, death trap; beach X, 200 yds., low cliff. Kaba Tepe, 1 land-
ing, 200 yds., sandy cliff 70 feet high. Minor beaches: S, small, on
Morto Bay; Y, a strip of Aegean Sea.
2. The landings. April 25th, began at dawn. The men went
in boats to S and Y. Guns opened fire.
V beach. Men taken in towed launches, lighters, and “River
Clyde”. The latter was grounded and lighters used as
Turks fired when 20 to 30 yards from shore, often 10,000 shots per
minute. British used men and more men to bridge but did not get
ashore until night. Next day, 26th, this the bloodiest landing was
made secure. Late on 26th, French landed and assisted.
W beach. 6 ;00 A.M., April 25th, British rushed wire entangle-
ments, and took cover in dead angle of hill, tried to connect with V;
too much entanglement, etc.
X beach. April 25th, troops landed 1 hour after dawn; not so
difficult, and connected with W.
S beach, April 25th, Landing made without much loss.
Y beach, April 25. Landing made after much trouble, tried
to connect with X; re-embarked on 26th.
Kum Kale, April 25th. French landed early, took 400 prison-
ers; re-embarked on 29th.
Bnlair. One officer swam ashore, found large Turkish Army;
he used flares, then returned to ship.
Kaba Tepe, April 25th. British landed on beach just North,
Turks tried to intercept; awful fighting in fissured jungle. Turk-
ish artillery forced transports further out. British brought more
men and supplies, 8,000 men gotten ashore; fighting all day, no rest
at night, Turks firing at night, British fell back and during con-
fusion some embarked by mistake. This landing was almost a
failure.
April 26th. Turks attacked, British warships shelled them and
brought reinforcements, and seized new ground.


April 27th. Turks opened with shrapnel, but Anzacs fought
and held after 96 hours continuous fighting. This was a bloody
battle, Anzacs lost 46%. At Antietam the loss was about one third.
3. Cape Relies. Attack: April 27th to 30th; May Ist to Bth;
June 4th to 30th, By Noon, April 27th, whole force at X, V, W,
advanced about 1 mile, holding a line from Aegean at Sighir to
Eski Hassarlik on Dardanelles. Preparation for attack on Krithia
was made, reaching within % mi. But British were outgunned,
and had no supports, not enough mules, and were forced back a
little. Next few days comparative quiet.
May Ist. Turks came back with hard fire, having 9,000 in
front line and 12,000 reserves. Battle lasted until May sth, re-
ducing 29th Division by one half and officers by two thirds.
May 6th to Bth, British counter attacked. The Turkish main
position was Achi Baba, and British hoped to get Krithia at least,
but gulches, thorns, wire entanglements, machine guns were too
much, and the great onslaught ended May Bth. In this advance,
French were on right, 29th on left and some Anzacs as supports.
May 9th to 30th. In next three British made some small ad-
vance at Helles and Anzac.
June 4th. British make their second great attack at Helles, with
French on right, 29th on left, 42nd and Royal Navy in center. They
advance 400 to 600 yards over 3 mile front and nearly carry
Krithia, but not enough shell and shrapnel. Turks hold Haricot
on left of French. Next few weeks British organize and prepare
ground.
June 21st. The French win Haricot and advance 600 yards.
June 28th, British advance their left 1,000 yards; this is about
first real victory, except actual landing. With 10,000 men, under
6 months training, they move uphill and win 2 lines of trenches,
but could not go on for lack of 50,000 men.
June 29th to 30th. Turks make counter attack at Anzac.
Turkish strength 30,000 under Enver Pasha, but defeated by a 25%
loss.
4. General comments. Original war plans were for Russians
to attack on Black Sea and British on Gallipoli. In May, Hamilton
learned that Russians were out of the fight. There was blinding
heat in July and a pestilence of flies. Cape Helles was short of
water; at Anzac 60% of water had to be brought. In August
dysentery began.
July. A plan was formed for 3 simultaneous attacks: One
at Helles to contain the Turks there. One on the right of Anzac






position to hold Turks there and land more British troops on left
of Anzac. Third, to land new troops at Suvla, 3 miles north of
Anzac, and finally to make one great attack, with troops at Suvla
and Anzac, to battle for the Sari Bair heights and seize and hold
the line Kaba Tepe to Maidos, 4 mi. long, which would close the road
to Bulair. Many water courses were dry and to be used as roads.
The ground was crumpled and folded, broken, disjointed gulches
and thickets. It was 5 miles from Anaforta Sagir to Kaba Tepe,
with heights of 250 to 900 feet. Latter part of July. Anzacs made
ready for silently landing of 30,000 men during the nights, which
was done August 3rd, 4th, sth. A wonderful feat; needed 80 tons
water per day, had to be brought 500 miles. The Turks had 30,000
men at Sari Bair.
5. August at Anzac, and Helles. All was to begin August 6th
The left wing for Suvla landing was not concentrated or landed on
time; more or less confusion; troops were controlled from Imbros,
14 miles away, with telegraph to Anzac and Helles.
Krithia, August 6th, 4:00 P.M. British begun attack on
Krithia; August 6th to 13th, severe fighting, especially at Vine-
yard, which British almost won.
6. Anzac and Suvla. 5 :00 P.M., August 6th, British began at
Anzac to attack Lonepine. Turkish trenches were camouflaged and
covered; British fell in trenches, many killed. August 7th andl2th,
fight for Lonepine, finally won by British. Left of British took
Buckops Hill, failed on Chanuk.
Suvla, August 7th. British began landing 30,000; 11th Div.
waded ashore in 5 ft. water, took Lala Baba, won landing and pre-
pared for north of Suvla. The beach was soft and terrible to
walk, there was awful heat, the day was late, water was scarce and
much confusion. The British attacked Chocalate Hill, Scimiter
Hill abandoned by Turks and taken by British.
August Bth. The British on left flank not ready to go on with
Anzacs on right for Sari Bair. At noon, very critical between
Suvla and Koja Chemen Tepe. Turkish reserves but 10 miles a-
way. British could not move and seize Ismail Tepe east of Choco-
late Hill. Hours passed; British nearly succeeded but were wait-
ing for their left. Turks were preparing to take hill.
P.M., the Commander in Chief landed in Suvla and saw the
battle being lost before his eyes, but there was no chance to take
personal charge as in former days.
Suvla, August 9th. At daybreak British won the crest but
some were taken for the enemy and shot; a slight mistake of
watches; all day, weary fighting.


August 10th. 4:00 A.M. British supports came up; Turks
assault with 15,000 men like a wave and take Chunuk.
Battle thus ended, British failed by prompt landing and at-
tack on left; in last days by perhaps a half hour’s delay. British
losses were 25% on a 12 mile front.
August 21st. British had now secured their position at Suvla
and to east of Bay, and settled down to trench warfare. Sickness
and dysentery.
7. Operations and Comments. September to January, 1916.
Question now, was it warranted to keep 100,000 British on Penin-
sular simply to contain the Turks? September, dysentery became
worse.
October 11th. General Kitchener asked for losses in case of
evacuation. Hamilton estimated 50%.
October 17th. Hamilton relieved. October 20th, General
Munro took command.
November, Kitchener arrived. November 26th to 28th, big
blizzard, frost, rain, cold, flood, Suvla worst; 200 dead, 10,000 sick.
30,000 others badly off. Evacuation decided on.
December Bth. Preparation made to begin December 14th.
December 19th to 20th, night. Evacuation at Suvla and Anzac
completed. Turks were apparently deceived, by dummies, fre-
quent silent periods, etc. No losses.
Helles, January Bth and 9th, 1916. All evacuated.
8. Numbers. In all, the killed, wounded, missing, were about
115,000; the remainder, about 100,000, were at times sick. Total
forces, 215,000, about 2y 2 times the first landing parties of 80,000
men. Turks had heavier losses; their strength generally 15,000
more; and in all, they had probably 400,000 men, including the
reserves available.


INDEX.
Numbers refer to paragraphs unless otherwise stated.
Achi Baba; 28, 66.
Aircraft, British; 87,
Airplanes; 34.
Akbasch; 70, 105.
Ali Rifa Pasha; 137.
Allied and Russian union; 117.
Allied Fleet; 9; passage, preparation against, 12; chance of success, 5.
Allies’ Expeditionary Force, 20; ships retire, 19.
Ammunition supply, 78.
Anaforta valley, 109; landing, 98; strength of, 126.
Anzacs, 76.
Arabians, troops, 135.
Army, Ist, 13, 135.
Army, 2nd, 13, 135.
Army, sth, formed, 21, 22; disposition, 31; grouping, 25; as main defense,
59; orders for, 115; plan for attack on south front, 141; losses, 165.
Army, 6th, 137.
Army for Salonica, 155.
Ari Burnu, 29, 40, 54, 68; 76, 93, 125, 137; counter attack, 68; losses
at 81; British withdrawal from, 142.
Artillery, German, Austrian, 140.
Artillery support by ships, 64, 67.
Artillery, Turkish coast, 11.
Asia Minor, 8.
Asiatic shore, 24, 57; point of danger, 27.
Assim Bei, 124.
Attacks by night, 65.
Attacks by Turks, May 18th, 80; by British, of July, 91; of August 21st
119.
Australians, 50.
Azmak Dere, 102, 109, 130.
Back, Col., 121.
Barbarossa, loss of, 118.
Bauvet, loss of, 18.
Bigali (Boghali), 79.
Black Sea, 5.
Boats, captured by Turks, 150.
Booty, western front, 151; on British withdrawal, 150; south front, 153.
British advance meagre, 143; activity, 122; advantage and difficulties, 113;
guns ashore, 124; lines of action, 112; land batteries, 149; newspapers,
133; prospects, 139.
Bulair, danger point, 30; rumors to cross, 132; proposed canal, 167.
Bulgaria, 135.
Canal, proposed at Bulair, 167.
Caucasus, 7.
Chemen Tepe, 100, 109, 126.
Chanak Kale, 34, 58, 105.
Chocolate Hill, 102.
Churchill, Lord, 92.
Command, of fortress, 61; change of Turkish, 166.
Comments by Col. Schulz, pages A to I.
Comments on Suvla landng, 116.
Corps, Turkish Army, 2nd, 15; 3rd, 2; 14th, 5; sth, 77; 16th, 104; 16th
delays, 107.
Crises in Anaforta fight, Ist, 100, 101; second, 109; third, 110.
Counter attacks at south front cease, 66.
D’Amade, Gen., 20.
Danger points, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
Dardanelles, importance of, 1; shores, 4; crossing, 105; preparation for
campaign, 22 to 39.


Defenses, field, 36.
Demolished towns, 70.
Disposition of sth Army, 31.
Division, strength of Turkish, 25.
Divisions, Turkish, 2nd, 80; 3rd, 31, 40, 58; 4th, 77, 103; sth, 31, 51, 54;
7th, 31, 49, 51, 54, 94, 99, 104, 106; 9th, 31, 49, 94, 100, 130; 11th, 31,
40, 57, 127,; 12th, 94, 99, 104, 106, 128; 13th, 77; 15th, 77; 16th, 77;
19th, 31, 45, 54, 108.
Drill, 32.
Drill fields, 35.
Djevad Bei (Pasha), 2, 136.
Enver Pasha, 7, 14, 16, 21, 22, 62.
Erenkoi, attack, on, 17.
Essad Pasha, 45, 46, 49, 55, 68.
Estimate of British strength, 47.
Events, preliminary, 1 to 16.
Fleet vs land, 67; fleet, Turkish, 60, 118.
Forts, 10, 11; outer, 38.
Fortress command, 61.
Forces, German, 88.
French departure from Asiatic coast, 57; troops at Krithia, 123.
Front, south, 63; Turkish troops relieved, 89; Turks plan storm attack, 141,
154; in January, 156; British' withdrawal, 161, 162; booty on with-
drawal, 163.
Front, west, withdrawal from, 142.
Gallipoli, 23; points of danger, 28; fire on town, 53, 70.
German contigents, 88; artillery, 140.
German. Turkish relations, 133.
Goeben, 3, 60.
Goliath, torpedoed, 84.
Goltz, Gen. von der, 6, 22, 121, 137.
Greszman, Col., 131.
Ground mines, 148
Guns, British ashore, 124.
Hamilton, Gen. Sir lan, 20; his views, 48.
Henck, Lieut Col., 129.
In Tepe, 61.
Imbros, Island of, 68.
Instruction by Turks, 32.
Irresistible, loss of, 18.
Ismail Tepe 102, 130.
Kaba Tepe, 29, 40, 50.
Kadre Bei, 110.
Kannen gieszer, Lieut. Col., 100.
Komal Pasha, 108, 109, 126.
Kiazim Bei, 51, 52,
Kilia, 70.
Kiresch Tepe, 110, 111, 112, 114, 127.
Kitchener, Lord, 48, 142.
Kodja Dere, 50, 70.
Krithia, 123
Kum Kale, 38.
Land batteries, British, 149.
Landings, 10; surprise, 43; new, 92.
Landing of April 25th, 40; results of, 69 to 97; of August 6th, 98.
Land vs fleet, 67.
Lieran, Major, 131.
Losses by British in August, 120.
Losses at Ari-Burnu, 81; of sth Army, 165,


Maidos, 29, 40, 49, 51, 54, 70
Majestic, torpedoed, 84.
Mai Tepe, 56.
Maneuvers, 39.
Masefield, extracts from, pages 50-53.
Mehmed Ali Pasha, 105.
Merten, Admiral, 2.
Mines, 11.
Morto Bay, 40
Mustapha Kemal Pasha, 108, 109, 126.
Naval activity, 17; attacks of March 18th, 18.
Navy, Turkish-German, 59,
Nevinson, extracts from, pages 48 and 49.
New Zealanders, 50.
Nicolai, Lieut. Col,, 57.
Night attacks, 65.
Observation by British, 37.
Observation posts of von Sanders, 44, 56, 106.
Ocean, loss of, 18.
Officers, Turkish, 75.
Operations, September to December, 132, to 141.
Operations, south front, 73.
Patrols, Turkish, 138.
Passive fighting, 83.
Preliminary events, 1 to 16.
Position warfare, 69.
Prigge, Capt., extracts from, pages 45-48.
Reinforcements, Turkish, 54, 77, 94, 111; Chemen Tepe, 103; from Asiatic
side, 105.
Relations, Germau-Turkish, 133.
Relief of Turkish troops, partial, 136.
Roads, 33.
Russian troops, 5, 117.
Salonica, army for, 155.
Sami Bei, 149.
Sela Heddin Bei, 129.
Saros Gulf, upper, 30, 51, 121; denuded of troops, 52, 115.
Saros Corps, 106.
Sari Bair, 109.
Searchlights, 11.
Sedd el Bahr, 28, 38, 40, 49, 54, 91, 153.
Ships, 10.
Sodenstern, Lieut. Col., 55.
Strength of British troops, 47; of Turkish, 164.
South front, operations, 73.
Supplies, transportation for, 71; shortage of, 74; abandoned by British, 150,
163.
Supply of munitions, 78.
Suvla Bay, 98, 116, 128; British withdrawal from, 142 to 145.
Synopsis by Col. Schulz, pages A to I.
Trails, 33.
Teke Burnu, 28, 40.
Transportation of supplies, 71.
Transports, British, 86.
Troop movements, 58, 135.
Turkish command, 2; defense, 3; orders, 15; o. cers, 75; reinforcements,
77; cruical positions, 114; concentration at Anaforta, 115; fleet, 118;
artillery, 126, 131; patrols, 138; information as to British withdrawal,
144; change of command, 166; detailed reports, 168.
TJ-boats, 60, 72, 84.
Upper Saros Gulf, 30, 51, 52, 94, 121.


Usedom, Admiral, 2.
Vessels, number of, 47.
Von Lossow, 95.
Von Falkenhayn, 95.
Von Sanders, Ist Army, 2; Caucasus views, 7; disagrees with Enver’s plans.
14; Ids further efforts, 16; he takes over sth Army, 22; his posts, 44,
56, 106; his error at Ari Burnu, 82; he is requested to go Germany,
95, 96, 97; his orders of August 6th, 99; reports to Gen. H.Q., 133;
personal, 134; asks to be relieved, 158; proposes Bulair canal, 167.
Weber, Col. 46.
Wehrle, Col., 18.
Wehib Pasha, 90, 123.
Weissenburg, 60.
Willmer, Major, 94, 104, 110, 127.
Withdrawal, French, 57; partial of fleet, 85; from western front, 142; Turk-
ish information of, 144; on night of December 19-20, 145; from Ari
Burnu, 146; Turkish comments on, 146; from Anaforta or Suvla, 147;
booty, 150; by British was sudden, 151; distances to march, 152;
watched for by Turks, 160; on south front, 161.
Wounded, number of, 120. .
Worth 60.


25—Fort. Hrnnpreys, Va.—7-31-3]—250.
