

<2EV,l<alOJfe
JLu. nu a “■
“ THE SWEET SAVOUR OF CHRIST IN THE WORLD.”
A SERMON,
DELIVERED AT
THE OPENING
OF THE
<jjfrs of Oiqtoiiui,
IN CHALMERS’ CHURCH, MELBOURNE,
TUESDAY, 3rd NOVEMBER, 1867.
THE REV. W. HENDERSON,
Ulobwator.
MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BY GOODHUGH & HOUGH, 48 FLINDERS LANE EAST.
1857.
$




A SERMON.
2 Cor. ii. 15, 16.
For we are unto God a sweet savour of Christ, in them that are saved, and
in them that perish : to the one we are the savour of death unto death;
and to the other the savour of life unto life. And who is sufficient for
these things ?
Fathers and Brethren !—To me, revolving- much how to acquit
myself of the duty which has fallen upon me to-day, and to what
subject of meditation it was most fitting- that our thoughts should
be directed on the present occasion, it has appeared that there was
nothing better of which to hold discourse to you, so far as the
spirit of all grace shall enable me, than these words which we have
now read together. Vexed as we have been, and are, with mani-
fold cares and perplexities, all tending to distract our hearts, and
to weaken our hands in the earnest prosecution of the work of
God, which has been given us to do, —borne down with many a
burden which the devil, let us trust, far more than God, has laid
upon us, it becomes us more than ever to ponder with all earnest-
ness the very awful responsibilities under which we lie, as ministers
and office-holders in the Church of the living God, what is the
true thing he has given us to care for—the true burden where-
withal he has laden us. Accursed shall we be—Anathema
Maranatha—if we allow anything else whatever to cause us to
forget what a terrible trust it is that has been committed to us in
the souls of those to whom we minister, and among whom we are
to serve as the sweet savour of Christ Jesus, that may become a
savour of death unto death to some, a savour of life unto life to
others. Fathers and brethren ! —just because we have so many
other things to trouble us in reference to the state of the Church
among us, so many sad events that have taken place among us
during the last twelvemonths to look back upon, and so much still
that may look ominous or doubtful, as if God’s controversy had
not altogether been settled with us as a Church or people, there-
fore do I find it above all things necessary that I should seek now
for a little to stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance of
what God has said we are in the world, of what God requires
of us as his servants there. Bear with me, therefore, while I
address to you, most of whom have so much more experience of
the events of the Christian life, and the duties of the Christian


ministry than myself, a few inadequate words from the verses
which I have now read.
The Church of Corinth had cost the apostle of the Gentiles not
a little anxiety and trouble. He had been the founder of the faith
in that heathen city. And notwithstanding- all the opposition
wherewithal he had been met, by those especially of his own
nation, he had succeeded, by the grace of God, in introducing- the
relig-ion of Jesus, and the power of Godliness, into not a few hearts
and homes there. Hot many of the wise or the wealthy or the
noble of the capital of Achaia indeed, had received into their
proud hearts the faith of the lowly Jesus, but on many a darkened
soul the light of life had risen from among the poor to whom the
Gospel was specially preached. Into the open soil already well
prepared of many a weary anxious Corinthian heart, the earnest
words of the apostle had fallen as seed-grains of an immortal
harvest of glory, and fruit to the divine husbandman was soon
found even there. But though a wide door, and effectual, had
thus been opened for the Gospel there were many adversaries.
Situated as the infant Church there was, in a place where, more
than in any other place then in the world, Satan has his seat,
where every form of worldliness and all amount of devilry were
rampant, where carnal lust and impurity had reached a grand
apotheosis, and sins at which men are apt to blush had grown to
be reckoned only another form of piety, it was hard to keep the
purity of the faith safe from all contamination, or the practice of
Godliness among members of the Christian brotherhood in con-
formity with the law of the Lord. The world would not let go
its firm hold; Satan would not, without an effort, let his lawful
captives be delivered. And the apostle had not left them long
till sad and sore abuses began to steal in. One member at least
was overtaken in a grievous fault. And divisions and dissensions
had come in in a full flood everywhere. The love and brotherly
kindness of the converts, that tie which bound them to each other,
and which bound the whole to God, became loosened, and had lost
its power. And it was with a heavy heart that Paul had sat down
in his Ephesian lodgings to write that former epistle to the sinning*
and sectarian Church of the Corinthians. That epistle had not
been without its results. The offending member who had so fear-
fully fallen had been brought to repentance; the Church had
washed itself free of all fellowship with impurity. Things had
brightened not a little by the time that the apostle, now zealously
prosecuting the word of God in Macedonia, addressed this second
letter to his beloved “ Church of God at Corinthand though
there is evidence enough to show that divisions had not yet wholly
ceased there, that schism had not given over to disturb the peace
and hinder the prosperity of those who were “ called to be saints”
in that city, though there where still many who let their party
zeal for Paul, or for Peter, or for Apollos cause them to forget
that the whole brotherhood was one in Christ, still the apostle had
more comfort in his soul as he now turned his thoughts to Achaia,


and what God was doing for the brethren there. Yet still it was
above all things necessary that that Church should be brought to
see clearly that all ministers of the Gospel who came to them
preaching the word of life were not to be regarded as aught in
themselves, that the Gospel was not a setting forth of the merits
of Paul, or of the wisdom of Apollos, or the faith of Peter, that—
whoever was the messenger, and of whatever style the message,
it was evermore the Gospel of the living Christ—a word that had
life in it, death in it, —a message which, obeyed, was to lead
them to heaven; disobeyed, was to bring them to hell. “ We,”
no matter whether Paul or Apollos, or Cephas, “we,” as ministers
of the word of reconciliation, “ are unto God a sweet savour of
Christ in them that believe, and in them that perish : to the one a
savour of death unto death, to the other of life unto life.” We
do not commend, we do not preach ourselves. Our work is not
our own work. It is not done in our own name. It is not done
in our own strength. It is an awful work,—the thought of it
enough to lay us, to keep us in the dust. The burden of immor-
tal souls lying on us—some to be saved by us, others to go lost
and perish from us; this same Gospel we preach to be in some
the means of making those who hear us sons of God and heirs of
glory, in others ot hardening’ them in their sins, and making
them more meet for the nether pit! How awful the responsibility !
How solemn the charge ! Who, who is sufficient for these things ?
That Corinthian Church needed to be told this in the days of old.
Our people now need constantly to be put in mind of it. We
ministers ourselves ought never for one instant to forget it. Let
us seek by the divine grace to apply our hearts very earnestly to
it now.
I. “We are a sweet savour of Christ.” The minister of the
word is not there for the purpose of shewing forth the excellency
that is in himself only. It is not a savour of his own natural
gifts, or acquired learning that is to proceed from him.
The odour which comes from him, and from the doctrine he
proclaims, is to be something else, something infinitely higher and
better that which can flow from his own intellectual or moral
nature. If he savours not of Christ—if, through all the varied
discourse he may hold, and from all the tenor of his life and con-
versation, of his teaching and of his feeding of the flock, it be
not the name of Christ, precious as ointment poured forth, which
is being commended unto his fellowmen, but something’ else dif-
ferent from that, however good or excellent it may be, then he is
serving no good end in the Church. He is thwarting the noble
purpose for which he has had his place assigned him in the
Church. He is not for Christ, therefore he is ag’ainst Christ. Woe
unto him ! It shall not be well with him. Verily it is, and shall
be altogether ill with him. No matter what his aim may be. No
matter what his attainments may be. Though he be of “ the
most strictest sect” of the Pharisee’s faith, too pure to have much
intercourse with more ordinary Christians, or though his scholarship


be of the soundest, and there he no fault to find with his orthodoxy,
■ —though in intellectual wealth there be few to compare with him,
thoug’h nature and science have furnished him with their noblest
gifts,—yet if it be not his chief, his only concern to show forth
the excellency of the name, the beauty of the grace of the
Saviour, —if Christ be made no more lovely by his ministrations
unto those whose minister he is, —that man has no blessing from
the Lord. The harvest he is to reap from all his work must be
something* else than a blessing. Oh, think of it, fathers and bre-
thren ! What a high responsibility this is under which we are
placed ! Christ has a great work to be done in the world, and he
hath appointed us to do it. As the only Saviour he wishes to have
his salvation commended, made loveable and desirable to those
who must perish but for his salvation ; and it is we, and those
who are in the same ministry with ourselves, whom he has
specially appointed to carry the savour of his name unto our
fellow-men. This is the work of the ministry of the Gospel—its
distinguishing feature amid all the ministries and offices of the
world. We commend not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord.
And everything about us, our preaching and our manner of life,
is to be but the opening of the alabaster box, to let the odour of
his name which is in us flow forth upon others. The unction from
the Holy One is to be our mark among men—the unction, the
anointing’ that savours of the Christ. u Sweet savour of Christ!”
Oh ! how it condemns us. What distressing memories it calls up
in us of shortcomings, of altogether selfish withholdings in the
great work, of a thousand opportunities of usefulness lost, of
wasted hours in our ministry when our thoughts have all been
of ourselves, when our work has been mainly for ourselves. We
have been far more concerned about the outside appearance of the
box itself, than the precious ointment within. We have been
anxious to know whether we might not carry the costly thing’
itself to market, and get a good price for it. Oh ! Has it not been
base, cowardly, covetous self that, in some way or other, has got
itself exalted, instead of Christ, to serve as the chief text for most
of our preaching, the great subject to be laboriously studied and
set forth by us in our teachings ? How cold we have been in the
service of our Saviour ? What a small amount of self-denial
have we made for his sake ? How little the zeal of his house has
eaten us up ? How easily have we borne the burden of the
flock committed to us, —the weight of immortal souls who were
to be saved, or who were not to be saved, from eternal woe and
hell through that name which we have preached.
There is a sense, and a very high sense in which all Christians,
not Ministers alone, but every believing man and woman, are to be
a sweet savour of Christ. Not we who labour in word and doctrine
alone, but every renewed soul of man, is to exhibit the grace of
the Saviour and to make it lovely unto others too. And as
Ministers we are ever to stir up the congregation to remember that
they too are priests unto God; that the holy anointing oil is upon


them also; that from everything about them, from their working
clothes, from their instruments of labour, from their common talk,
from their whole living, there is to be an unction of godliness
distilling continually, that holiness to the .Lord is to be the inscrip-
tion on every thing belonging to them. Yes! I have to say to all
now hearing me, whether ministers, or elders, or hut plain mem-
beis of the Church I have to say to all who may hear me at any
time, if they have only the Spirit of Christ in them: this, dearly
beloved, is your high calling ; you are the means of communica-
tion through whom Christ seeks to convey the treasures of his
grace unto your sinful and disobedient fellow-men. By you men
be won to the Saviour. Through your means the kingdom
of Heaven is to be peopled. As the living epistles of Christ Jesus,
you are to give willing and constant testimony to his grace. And
amid all your daily work, and your companions, and your manifold
temptations, surrounded by vanity, and the evil and the spiritual
darkness of the world, ye are to shine as lights there, holding
foith the word of life 5 ye are to be a salt in the earth, preserving
it from ruin and corruption ; in an ungodly world the savour of
godliness is ever to be found proceeding from you. But all this
is in an especial manner true of those who are put in the ministry.
They have been set apart, solemnly consecrated and ordained to
this office. It is their life s work. To this, to nothing else than
this, are they to devote all the powers and energies that are in them
. e whole man, body, soul, and spirit, is to be devoted to this ser-
vice. The ministry of the Christian Church is a special provision
God has made to meet the wants and to satisfy the dim lono-ino-s
of men in all ages and all climes, to apply the one great salvation
to them under all circumstances, to point the way for all men
whereby they may come to the Father in Heaven. There is
nothing else like it under the sun. By it God does his own more
immediate work in the world. It is the continuation of the life of
Son of God among men. Behold, I magnify mine office. And
yet I need not. By the great God himself has it been already
magnified to an extent that words of mine cannot express, to an
extent that can only make me humbled and ashamed exceedingly
to think that I should have been admitted into it.
“ Sweet savour of Christ.” This is our character, fathers and
brethren. Whatever else we are or have, this is what we are first
and supremely to be. The grace is not our own, not of ourselves
but we are ever to be showing’ it forth. The sweet fragrance is no
product of our own beings, hut it is never to be awanting about
us. We are not to divide our lives with Christ, to give him so
much for his share of our hours and days, while we reserve the
rest to ourselves; we are to he all his, always having an eye to
Ins service, making his glory and the inbringing of men unto him,
and the advancement of his kingdom our chief concern. Of
course this does not mean that every hour of our lives is to be
employed in the direct work of the ministry. We are to give our-
selves to reading, so as not to fall behind in intellectual attain-


merits. Now and tlien we need, with such frames as we possess,
to get unbent to pass as Jesus and the Disciples wont to do,
aside to rest a while. And then other cares will come in on us
as on others, and we shall have to meet them as they come. But
evermore, however the surfaces of our lives may be moved, the
undercurrent and great force of the stream is to be Christward,
Godward. With singleness of eye we are to serve him. With all
simplicity and with earnestness of aim and of endeavour, we are
to yield up all we possess unto willing obedience, and our whole
lives are to smell of Christ. So is it that we see in the pleasant
and fragrant flowers wherewithal God has adorned this earth of
ours •, the odours they breathe give token to the inworking of a
power not of themselves. There was no fragrance in yon tiny
seed, no perfume in the brown soil in which it fell. But the dew
and the rain descended on it, and the sun, as he gazed, drew forth
and developed the hidden nature of the seed, till the thing stands
before you now, shedding a sweet scent on all the happy neigh-
bourhood j making the summer air more delicious and filling the
sense and the heart of the passer by with a higher gladness. And
just as the rose, and the violet, the lilac and the thyme, owe all
their beauty and all their sweet odour to the sun which shines on
them from the blue sky, so do we, also, as Christian men or
ministers, owe all that we possess to him who is the sun of our
righteousness, without whose light and warmth we too should have
been left dead and savourless. And just as they, during their
whole short lives, are ever engaged in sending forth the pleasantest,
and the loveliest witness to the power and the vital energy of that
source of light and life, so too is it our calling to be ever doing the
same, on the behalf of our Lord. Our spiritual life is all from
Christ, and it is all to be spent in his service. We may not have
all the same powers to use, the same graces to exhibit. The sweet
savour may not be just the same in all. The odour of the lily is
not the same as of the woodbine, nor does the eglantine commit
the same sweet treasure to the air as the spice tree or the balm.
And in different servants of the Lord there may be different graces
specially called forth. And it is the best ordered church in
which all continuing constantly true to the master, zealous and
eager to do his work and to make his name known and precious,
each still continues true also to the special gift that may have been
bestowed on himself, and is so stirring up the gift that is in him
as to yield the richest possible harvest from his life to the great,
the eternal husbandman—Fathers and Brethren, let us see to it
that such a church be ours.
11, We are a sweet savour of Christ wito God. The world in
which we live and labour here is displeasing unto God. It lies in
sin, in lust, in the wicked one, hateful and hating, and God—the
God of infinite love and of infinite holiness, can have no pleasure
in sin, or Just, or evil. The odour of wickedness is abominable in
his nostrils. The savour of the sinful world is not a sweet savour
unto him. He looks down upon our earth from out yon bright


Leavens, where his throne and his glory are—those heavens which
with all their brightness, are hardly pure in his sight, and he sees
not the image of his own holiness, of his own righteousness re-
flected back on him from the hearts of his creatures here. Men
have become filthy. They are gone out of the way. There is
none that doeth good. Into his listening ear ascends the cry of
the destitute, oppressed of his neighbour ; the wailing voice of the
widow or the orphan, whom no man regardeth ; the sound of many
a breaking- heart, which, had love been the ruling law, would have
been a glad and buoyant heart to-day. Yes! and loud over all
the shout of unholy mirth, the voice of the drunkard and the im-
pure, the adulterer, the fornicator, the blasphemer, all alike heed-
less of the listening God. Mammon grinding men’s souls into
dust, pleasure sending them to wallow senseless and filthy in mud
and pollution; souls with capacities for immortality in them, with
the dawnings of eternities in them; it is no sight pleasant unto
God, a sight which only the infinite mercy restrains) him from
sending summarily to its account. And in the midst’ of all this
we, the ministers of the Everlasting Gospel, have our place. We
are here as the preserving element in the midst of all this. We
are the sweet savour of Christ unto God, where all is savouring
else of vanity and sin. We! Oh ! it makes one stand in awe to
think of it, in ourselves and in those who are committed to us, in
the obedient who believe, aye, even in the disobedient who fall
away, we are still the one sweet savouring thing here unto God.
It is to us he looks as the one thing well pleasing and fragrant
before him. How awful to think of it if our profession be all a
lie, if we ourselves be in his church a hollow lie, a form only,
saying prayers and making sermons and the rest with no substance,
no godliness in us ! How awful to suppose that before God we
may not be a sweet savour of Christ at all, that we may be no
better than a stink in his nostrils, a smoke that burneth all the day
long-! Very terrible is the case, the doom of the ungenerated
minister. By solemnest ways God has sealed him as his own.
He was baptised unto God in his infancy, and the seal of the
covenant of life and truth put on him then. And when he sat
down at the table of communion, and received in fellowship with
the faithful, the sacramental body and blood of Emanuel, he put
to his seal anew, and said I am the Lord’s and belong to none else.
And again when he alone was singled out in the presence of the
people, and the hands of the presbytery were laid upon him, and
he too became a presbyter, this was a new form of giving himself
over unto God. But he has been untrue to all that has been done
for and in him. He has dishonoured God in every one of God’s
most holy ordinances. The gift of God that cometh by ordina-
tion—he did not care about the gift, he cared only about the form.
He wished to secure some end of his own by it. What matter
whether he served Christ by it or no ? And whatever he may be
before men, however well he may wear the pharisaic garment to
deceive, and speak the holiest words and do the holiest offices,


what is he unto God 1 A wretched and abominable thing", savouring
or sin and death—a thing" the Divine eye cannot look upon!
Awful, very awful to think of! Fathers and Brethren* let not the
lesson he lost on us !
But the true minister of the g"ospel is unto God a sweet savour,
because he savours of Christ. Bet him be g’oing" on with all dili-
gence and earnestness, doing with what might is in him the work
which God has given him j with the single eye and the humble
heart let him be waiting, and watching and working for the sal-
vation of the hock entrusted to him, till Christ Jesus be formed
within them; let him be pointing them the path to heaven while
he himself leads the way: then has he a very chief place in the
heart of the bather, in whose eyes there is nothing pleasanter to
be seen on earth than just such a sig'ht. Yes ! the man who
serves God in the ministry of reconciliation may not have all the
success in his work he would like to obtain. There may be few
who will believe his report, few to whom the arm of the Lord is
being revealed by his instrumentality. He may have to toil on in
what appears a thankless vocation, till his heart begins to fail
him utterly. “ Why should I attempt it any more ? What good
end am I serving’ ? I see no effect following’ my labours ! The
meanest workman of earth sees some result coming forth from the
thought of his brain, from the toil of his hands. I, what have I
to look to as the result of mine ? So many prayers offered up by
me, so many sermons delivered by me, so many meetings held, so
many members baptised by me, so many communions dispensed by
me, and of my hire, of the souls that were to be won by me to
the life eternal, of the wanderers that were to be brought back by
me to the Father s house, of the unstable that were to be strength-
ened by me, of the ignorant to be enlightened, of the careless to
be aroused—alas, where are they ? In that which constitutes the
minister s true wealth, am I not entirely poverty-stricken, bank-
rupt? Why did God ever appoint me to this work?” Nay, but
let not thine heart be utterly cast down. Quit thee rather like a
man and be strong. It is God’s work thou hast on hand, and so
long" as thou doest it bravely, faithfully, in all good conscience,
seeking his own grace to be with thee in the doing of it, so long
wilt thou be a sweet savour of Christ unto him. Thou shalt have
his approval in thy work, and what success he thinks adequate,
that also thou shalt reap. And may it not be true that thou hast
been looking too much for the tokens of thy success to man and
not to God ? It may be God has been blessing’ thee and the work
the while, though thou hast not seen the Kingdom of Heaven
coming with any observation. Let the minister of the Gospel
leave his success in the hands of God. Duty is his concern; let
him very earnestly, very constantly, in season or out of season, be
following that. Let him be showing" forth Christ unceasingly, so
shall he be well pleasing’ unto God; preaching" the Gospel of the
kingdom as he can, and in all his work he shall be unto God a
sweet savour of Christ.


111. And tins brings us to the third thing to which we have here to
direct our attention. The faithful minister is the hearer of Christ’s
testimony, and therefore pleasant unto the Father. But among
those to whom he ministers he may not succeed in commending
unto all the grace and the salvation 'of the Lord, He still finds
around him the two great classes to be found everywhere those
who are saved and those who are perishing. And though, in an-
swer to his fervent prayers, and to his affectionate warnings, one
or another may now and again he brought over to join the ranks
of discipleship,—though a few may leave Satan’s kingdom to become
subjects and heirs of the living God, yet still has he reason to
mourn and be in bitterness over many of his flock, who too evi-
dently are following the dark path that leads to death. Many of
those who have been baptised into the name of Christ, becoming
forgetful of the covenant, and of the God of the covenant, led away
by pleasure or engrossed by worldly business, or seduced into dark
and cheerless scepticism. Oh! fathers and brethren, what a fight it is
we have to maintain for those committed to us, over whose spiritual
estate the church is called to watch from infancy to the grave, against
the world, and him who is the prince of the world. Every soul of
the flock is a battle-field, and we have to fight for it lest it be lost to
the Lord. That immortal spirit is in danger of being lost, the powers
of hell are seeking for it, striving to choke every good seed of the
word that we may have planted there, to blast every dawning hope
that has grown up in it. And we, as shepherds of the sheep,°are to
fight for it, as David fought the lion and the bear of old for the sake
of the tender lamb they were ready to devour. No !it is not to the
devil it is to go, this immortal soul, if we, by any power that is in
us, can prevent it. If by our prayers we can engage the grace of
God in this warfare along with us, if by our earnest words we can
still keep the good seed from being snatched utterly away, the glim-
mering fire from being quite extinguished, we are not to allow the
great adversary to take away those who are so dear to us, and who
are so dear to the Lord. Still it is true that many of them are perishing
are making shipwreck of the faith, and of good conscience, are follow-
ing after the world and the things that are of the world, and be-
coming utterly forgetful of Christ. There are those who are perishing,
who are being lost, who are even dead in trespasses and in sins
around us, worshipping occasionally with us, or wilfully forsaking the
assembling of themselves together, who yet belong to us, and for
whom we are bound to care. And there are many, alas ! dyin°" im-
penitent, hard of heart, godless, christless, going away into the°dark
eternity with no grace to strengthen, and no hope to cheer, away into
the hell prepared for the devil and his angels, to reap there as they
have sown in the flesh. Many dying so—thousands, thousands
who, if they were to die to-day, would die even so. What shall we
say of it all. Is there no remedy provided, ye unregenerate sinners,
that ye can thus play the pleasant game of sin, while all the while
your consciences tell you you are on the way to the pit, and never
think of escape and never pray for pardon ? Is there no Saviour for


ye, ye despisers of God, that ye can let the world fasten her chains
around you, and Satan secure you as his slaves, while ye follow peace-
fully like lambs to the slaughter and never look round for safety ?
Is there no heaven for you, no eternal life, no light and immortality,
that you seem so bent on making these things not certain, but im-
possible for you for ever 1 Will ye not hear us, ye dead, slumbering
sinners 1 Will ye not awake to life and light and liberty 1
Between the two great classes of gospel hearers, between the living
and the dead, those that are saved and those that perish, the minis-
ter stands seeking to commend the savour of Christ’s name every-
where, and in every case proving at least a sweet savour of Christ
unto God. However his work may speed, if he only do the work
faithfully, it alters not his relation towards God. In those who
perish as in these who believe, in those who die in their sins, as in
those who turn and embrace the Saviour, he remains still the same
pleasant thing and fragrant before God as ever. But among men,
what a difference! “To the one, says the Apostle, to those who are
saved, we are the savour of life unto life : to the other a savour of
death unto death.” That same Gospel which we preach becomes so
different in its operations, according- to the different characters of
those whom we address. To the one class, to those who receive it as
the very truth of God, bringing salvation, it is life, life from the
dead, ever new life; among the others, who reject it, who hear it as
a pleasant sound, or mock at it as a vain delusion, who will not sub-
mit themselves to the free grace of God which it presents, it is death,
hardening them in their sins, not quickening them unto godliness.
It is no fault in the Gospel. It is not that it is fitted or designed
to bring death or condemnation anywhere. It does not lead any on
the way that leads unto eternal woe. It does not make any man s
death —his death in sin any more certain. Evermore the Gospel
that we preach is good news —glad tidings of a great deliverance,
the revelation of an unspeakable salvation. It is the union of
heaven and earth, the introduction of a kingdom of heaven into this
sin-ruined world of ours. It is the bringing of Christ, of the son
of God into closest proximity with us. Through it we hear the
knocking of the blessed hand at the door of our poor, carnal hearts.
By it we are offered a divine life, a divine nature. And it
brings with it nothing else save what it offers us, life and health, and
peace, and God. But like the sun which calls forth from the
fresh moist earth each seed of beauty and of fruitfulness to glad the
surface of the soil with its pleasant green, or its budding blossoms,
while it only adds a painfuller barrenness to the desert sands, so may
this same element of gladness, of light and peace, this everlasting
Gospel, when not received into living loving hearts, but into souls
selfish and dead, become a means not of enlightening and quickening
and saving, but only of making the hearers of it more hopelessly, help-
lessly lost in sin and in iniquity. Or, like the electric force, which,
in gentle and unseen operations, pervades all nature, dissolving the
dew-drops for the sake of each tiny flower, and helping life to
all its grand and beautiful developments, but which now and again


becomes a thing of wrath and terror, when the air has become over-
charged with it, and there are no means of escape provided, and it
bursts forth bringing destruction and death with it, so may it be,
when the atmosphere which, in the spiritual world separates us from
God, may have got filled with our sins—dark and threatful because
of our iniquities, if we seek not the only remedy and the only
refuge provided for us, then this very thing which we have hated
and scorned, this power of the Gospel of Christ, will become to us
no longer a source of life or joy, but a new element in our destruc-
tion. Men will not receive the Gospel. It comes to them as to all,
and its office is pardon, peace with God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Let them believe only—let them only turn from their sins
unto a Saviour. But they will not. They feel no need of this
Gospel of yours. There is no felt necessity within them of a grace
which is from heaven, of a salvation which they cannot work out
for themselves. They ! Oh they have not yet discovered that they
have any liabilities in time or eternity, in reference to this world or
the next, which they cannot in some way or other meet for them-
selves. Let them alone. It is their own concern. They are not
asking you, are they, to make their calling and election sure for them.
They hear the Gospel. They know something of its provisions, of
its revelations. But in their dead souls they have no sympathy with
it. Its light has shone upon them, but they have preferred the
darkness to the light. Christ has spoken to them in it, but they
have loved the world more than the Saviour. But does it leave
them then as it found them ? Are they in exactly the same position
relatively to the Gospel, relatively to God, relatively to eternity, as
before 1 In no wise. There was one way, only one, of salvation
provided for them, and they have rejected it. There was one Saviour
who could have aided them, but they have said we will not have
this man to reign over us. There was one path whereby they might
have made escape from the wrath to come, and found their way to
glory and the Father’s house, and they have obstinately chosen the
other. And the case of the man who hears the Gospel and refuses
it becomes ever more hopeless after each renewed offer has been
thrown away. Every time he listens to the word but puts it away
from him, saying this is not for me, —every new call there is for him
to repent of all sin and turn unto the Saviout, and he pays no heed
to the call, every fresh opportunity there is for him to attend unto
the invitation, believe and be saved, and he sits sullen and heedless
under it, saying what more have I to believe then beside what I
have believed already ?—on each such occasion the man carries away
a new element of condemnation. Another hope is blasted and
dead, which but for his impenitence might have brought forth plea-
sant flower on earth, and fruit unto eternity. Another means has been
rejected, and the means at the most are but few, and a little while
will be within his reach no more. This one thing might still save
him : no other thing can save him. And meanwhile the end is
getting near. Every offer of grace, and all hope of salvation will
be over for him soon. The darkness which he has chosen before


the light is threatening to become the outer darkness speedily, where
there is weeping and wailing and gnashing- of teeth.
But we, as ministers of the Gospel, are also a savour of life unto
life. The Gospel itself is meant to bring life to the dead. By its
means, through the aid of the Heavenly Spirit, it is ours to quicken
those who are dead in sin, to rouse these who are asleep, to bring
unto God those who are held captive of the devil. We see men
around us with no spiritual life in them, and in our hands is the
instrument whereby they are to be made alive. Brethren, I do
testify to you it is the highest and noblest office which any son of
Adam can fill. The man that is filling it aright is doing the highest
work that any man can do under the sun. He speaks the word which
is the means whereby, under the spirit of God, men are changed in
the spirit of their minds, and become, instead of heirs of wrath,
citizens of heaven and sons of God. Those words which you
preach concerning the great salvation, fathers and brethren, if they
be words truly spoken, are fitted to make dead men live, nay, to do
a greater work than to call a dead man from the grave, they are
fitted to introduce the life everlasting into the hearts of perishing
sinners. The life of God is appointed to flow through you as the
regular channel that life which is to be shared in by all the chosen
of God ] it is to flow through you out upon the Church and world,
till, in many a darkened heart, the light of life shall rise, and
where all was desolate and barren before, plants of the divine grace
shall begin to appear in loveliness and fruitfulness to the praise of
the Father in heaven. And as the work is honourable, so will you
find it arduous. You will have much to trouble and to try you,—
many adversaries to meet you in every wide door, and effectual,
which may be opened to you,—many temptations to sloth or indif-
ference, or carelessness. The flesh may weary, and g-row ashamed of
the bon of man ; the world may call for a truce, and offer you the
most advantageous of terms : but remember evermore, that the
good message ye carry is an offer of life from the dead to those who
are lost but for the Gospel ye bring. Rouse ye ! gird up your loins
for the grand warfare, quit ye like men. Ye have souls to win for
the Lord, and it is no thankless master ye serve. For they that be
wise in this work shall shine as the brightness of the firmament,
and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and
ever.
IY. And “ who is sufficient for these things ?” For such a great and
marvellous work as this who shall be found the fitting workman 1
Where is the strength that is to prepare us for all that unspeakable
office 1 Fathers and brethren, having spoken to you thus far, I
would pause before this solemn question. I have no words to speak
of it to you. It is not for me to give an answer here. It is for
yourselves to lay the enquiry to your own hearts, to see what answer
you have found for yourselves in your own spirits. “ Sufficient for
these things!” For the bringing of men to the Saviour! For the
reclaiming of the lost unto the Father ! For breaking the bonds
which the devil has forged for the souls of our fellow-men ! For


overcoming all the might and the power wherewithal the world holds
fast those who are devoted to worldliness ! For opening the blind
eyes, darkened by sin, so that they may look with all love to the
Lord against whom their carnal hearts have been at enmity before !
For changing the current of a man’s affections, so that he may hate
that sin he has loved before, and love that holiness he has hated
before ! I need not tell you no man is sufficient for these things.
Flesh and blood, all the intellect and wisdom of humanity, have no
power here. Only as one with thee, 0 thou almighty spirit, as hav-
ing thee to be with us, and in us, in this work, and in this warfare,
dare we venture forth into this work, can we venture out into
this warfare. Only by virtue of an organic union effected through
thee unto him who is the light and the life of men can we hope to
come any speed in the duties of this heavenly office to which we
have been called.
And yet, brethren, while, like the holy apostle, we humble our-
selves before God at the sense of our own insufficiency, and turn to
his throne, seeking our sufficiency there, let us not forget, or leave
out of view, that other lesson which St. Paul very evidently wished
to impress upon the minds of the Corinthian Church from the
words now before us. It is very manifest that he wished to show
them that there were marks of fitness whereby the true minister
of Christ might be distinguished from those who come not duly
accredited, and not properly furnished for the work. The question
itself is a wider one than our translators have rendered it. “ Who
is the fit man for these things,” is what the apostle asks ; and from
what he immediately subjoins —“ for we are not as many who cor-
rupt the word of God”—he very plainly shows that it is himself,
and those who in the same spirit preach the same Gospel, who are to
be received as those who have been fitted for this office. There
were many false teachers in Corinth, many who, instead of the simple
exhibition of the Saviour as the Lord of life and of salvation, were
preaching what was no more than a selfish or a sectarian doctrine,
setting far more account by those things which they taught under
the holy and the honoured names of Peter or of Apollos, than the
pure evangel of deliverance from sin and death through the death
of Christ, who was crucified. And Paul, while he, in all lowliness
and self-abasement, was ready to confess his own shortcomings and
his own unworthiness, while hq owned himself altogether inadequate
for the great work appointed unto him, felt all the more his right to
testify against the sin of those who mixed up those things, for the
performance of which they were themselves in their own strength
quite sufficient with the blessed word of the Lord. Those sectarian
teachers were quite able to expound the peculiarities of their system,
to set forth its excellencies over the simple Gospel of the apostle,
and just because the Gospel he had to deliver was not a thing for
which he, as of himself, was sufficient, he therefore was not afraid to
set forth his own excellency over them. He, by the grace of God
that was in him, was the man fitted for these great things of the
ministry; they, because they were mixing their own carnal things


with the Gospel, were not the fit persons. And therefore, fathers
and brethren, so long- as we are keeping by the great truths of the
words of the testimony of the Lord Jesus, not adding thereto what
is of ourselves, we may take courage. “We are not of those who
corrupt the word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the
sight of God speak we in Christ.” In no spirit of vaunting, but in
the deepest self-abasement, we claim, as Paul also did, to be received
as the proper servants of Christ in his work. We may have those
who testify against us, as there were those who testified against him,
for whom our Gospel is not at all narrow or sectarian enough. Let
them. There is little difficulty in that kind of work. Any man
with the proper lack of Christian charity, with the proper admixture
of worldly malice, in addition to a certain amount of knowledge of
Scripture doctrine, is sufficient enough for doing that work. I have
never heard that there is any special operation of the Spirit needed
to make a man preach Christ of contention, to enable a man to say,
“ Others are all unfaithful in their preaching of the truth, I am very
faithful,” Such a sectarian Gospel is the curse of any Church. It is
time for Churches, and for individuals, to learn that, amid all the
testimonies they may have to maintain, all the standards and ban-
ners they are to raise and display, the great testimony which the
Church, in the midst of a selfish and ungodly world, is for ever
called to uphold is on behalf of the oneness of the body of Christ
and of God’s law of charity and brotherly kindness ; that the banner
which has been given us is to be displayed because of the truth, the
truth which makes us free, but which can never make us exclusive,
which, while it hates as hell all latitudinarian license, is wide as the
poles asunder from the lofty Pharisaic “ Holier than thou !”
And, fathers and brethren, I feel that it would be nothing alien,
but something altogether akin to the spirit of the passage before us,
if I refer for a few moments in conclusion to the position of our
Church relative to union with other Presbyterian Churches,
and to the painful circumstances which have attended our honest
efforts in that cause, —a subject which has lain much on all our hearts
during the last twelvemonths bygone. Like Paul, we have been
trying to heal dissensions in a divided Church ; like him, we have
been only partially successful. For it was needful for us to know
that all separation involves sin, and that sin involves judgment.
Union after separation, after Christ’s body has been once wounded
and torn asunder, is not a thing to be reached easily, by sweet and
pleasant talk about brotherhood and alliance and the rest, —about
the softness of Hermon’s dew, or the ointment on Aaron’s beard.
The wound may have to smart far more in the healing, than in the
hour in which it was inflicted. It has verily come to this, that no
honest effort at union among the scattered members of Christ’s flock
but must first plunge those who attempt it in deeper bitterness and
woe. So, alas ! have we found it. The Church of our fathers,
which had been transplanted hither, had become divided. In one or
two matters men could not see eye to eye, and there had been a
separation. lam not hear to blame any one. Probably our section


of the Church may have been right enough at the time of separa-
tion, but have not we also been guilty of grievous sin in not
mourning over the separation itself, but in rather hugging- ourselves
in our new sectarianism 1 Christ had been wounded in the house of
his friends, and we had few tears to shed „on that account. But as
we looked on it the disease seemed to admit of easy cure. After
all it turned out there was little difference among us. But the sin
that had been done must first find us out. None of us had felt the
evil enough—had mourned enough over the sin, and it has over-
taken us. We have had more bitterness and dissension among
ourselves. We have had to be assailed by much vile abuse. We
have had to do the hard work which Christ sometimes lays upon his
servants—of parting from the offending member that will not be
obedient—of cutting off the offending right hand—of plucking out
the offending right eye. We have had to learn very solemnly that
separations and unions are not an easy game, to be played at to suit
ourselves or to please our own tastes, but the most serious of all
possible things for the Church, that a re-union after divisions is to
be obtained only after bitter tears and prayers.
But are we then to give over our attempts to realize the dying
Mediator’s prayer for the unity of the brotherhood * because we find
difficulties in the way 1 and to start off in sudden alarm because
things do not succeed according- to our mind at once ? In no wise.
It would be a very unrighteous reading of the -will of Providence in his
dealing with us. No work of restoration, no rebuilding of the fallen
temple, but is found to be hard and difficult, and to stir up many
foes. About the sorest of all work will be found the effort to reunite
the scattered members of the Father’s kingdom into one loving bro-
therhood. But, steadfastly pursued, it will not fail us in the end.
God will not let it prove in vain. And before all union let us ask
for a greater outpouring of the heavenly grace. Revival from God —
reformation in the Church itself, these are the needful precursors of
union. When God sends down his spirit upon a Church —when by
many tokens he shows that he is very peculiarly in the midst of her
—when through her instrumentality men are being brought to the
truth, careless ones beginning to be prayerful, and those who fol-
lowed iniquity with greediness ceasing to be profane,—this is the
surest sign that union may be looked for with other churches. It
never fails. Such a Church will soon find some other Church
similarly touched, ready to cast in its lot with hers. Oh that God
would thus pour out his Spirit upon our Church, upon the whole
house of our fathers ! Oh that we felt among us the stirrings of
that heavenly breath which animates dead souls, and infuses into
sinful hearts the life of heaven. It would be the surest evidence that
we were ready for—that we worthy of, union, and all the blessings
of union, and that all our efforts hitherto have not been in vain :
and the other churches from our native land would rejoice with us
together, and we should be able, in the power of the common
spirit animating us all, to sink all petty differences, and, in the
mutual enjoyment of the “ one faith, the one Lord, the one baptism,


the one God and Father of all,” we should tread the path of life
together, and fall no more out by the way. And so, too, looking
forward to union with other Churches, we ought to put away
from us all our own backslidings and sins. How strictly ought
we to examine ourselves ! How ready should we he to drag
forth and to destroy every unmortified lust or vanity of the flesh,
or the world that may he in us ! How anxious to detect all
wherein as members, or as ministers of the Church, we have been
giving in to selfishness, or hypocrisy, or Pharisaism ! Oh ! Is
there not a fearful lack of earnestness in our faith, of fervour
and heartiness in our charity ? Are we not frequently leaving
God out of account in all our thoughts and dealings ? Are we not
living with prayer restrained, not depending- on the Father for coun-
sel in all things ? As ministers, or elders, are we not bearing very
lightly the awful work entrusted to us? Oh! what coldness there
is among us ! Or worse than cold, are we not grown lukewarm—
like Laodicea, neither cold not hot ? Is it not so very generally
with Christians in Victoria ? Is it not very lamentably so with us ?
Let us bestir ourselves, friends. Let us awake and begird ourselves
for the work of God. Why should we sleep when the Lord is so
near ? Let us put far from us all that is sinful, selfish,
ungodly, and seek in all things, as representatives of the flock, to
approve ourselves unto God as a sweet savour of Jesus Christ.
And if God, as with all heartiness we pray, give this grace unto
the Presbyterian Churches of this colony, to turn more heartily
unto him, then shall all difficulty in the way of union be gone,
and no division shall be any more among us. Thus, too, eventually,
may we hope that, by the grace of God meeting the contrite
heart in the Churches, Christians of all sects shall look on each
other in the clear light of the Father’s face, and as they see eye
to eye, their controversies shall disappear like the wandering lights of
earth when the sun ariseth in his beauty, and they shall lose sight of
all that has separated them, and wonder that the difference should
have seemed so essential; and with every jealousy removed, with
all suspicions and heart-burnings healed, they shall all be one , even
as Jesus and the Father are one. So be it, 0 God. Amen.
Printed by Goodhugh & Hough, 4.8 Flinders Lane East, Melbourne.




*
? \
mini i i I Hill If
3 1508 01400799 6
