

The Message of Hope
TO THE RELATIVES OF OUR FALLEN HEROES.
Enclose a copy of The Massage in your . Letter of Sympathy to the Widow,
Mother, Sweetheart® Sister or Friend of
OUR NOBLE DEA-DI
- Order copies of Th® Message ©f Hope through GORDON & G.QTCH, Booksellers
■ or E 8 NORMAN MacLEAN, Mosman, Sydney.
price- «... *.«„ «• grrri


FREDERICK ARNOLD,
Monumental Sculptor.
53 Regent Street, Sydney.


Our Roble Dead!
His country called, and honour bade him go
To battle ’gainst a grim and deadly foe;
He helped to bring Australia into fame,
To build for her a never-dying name,
Foremost was lie, in thickest strife,
For King and Country laid he down Ms life.
“Pro patria mori.”
Leauname.
The Bereaved.
How little is being done to bring comfort to and to sustain the relatives
of our Fallen Heroes! The widow in her silent anguish, the mother
alone with ' her dear boy’s memories, the sister bereft of a brother’s
affection, the sweetheart robbed of her beloved—all weeping bitter - tears „
How can we help to bind up the broken, bleeding hearts?
May the Message of Hope, under Divine Blessing, help to cheer the
Sorrowing Ones, is the earnest prayer of —the Author.
1, To the Relatives and Friends of Members of the Highland Societies of
Australia, who have added fresh lustre in the- trenches of France and
Flanders and" on the heights of Gallipoli to Scotia’s Eternal Glory.
Ho long as grass grows green on the banks of Bonnie Boon,
So long will their memories be cherished.
From.'................._ A
2. We will never meet here again our Fallen Brave Boys of Scots’ Cob
lege, but their fragrant memories will endure as
Everlasting as the Bonnie, Bonnie Hills near Loch Lomond.
From . ...... .... .*1^001: .v.-. . ■
Profits- of sale of the Message provide' Free Copies for the Red,
Cross Book Depots, and for the bereaved, as the fatal lists appear.
Anyone wishing to aid the local Red Cross Society can have-
25 Copies for Sale , post free for 7s. 6d.
WILL YOU HELP?


May the Message Bring Comfort t® and Sustain the Sorrowing
‘Tear thou 'not,.- for I am with thee:
Be not dismayed; for l am thy God:
I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee
Yea I will uphold thee
With the right hand of my righteousness.” —-Isaiah 41: 1(\
Is Death the Ead?
He whom you loved is dead. . . To others, lie was but a unit in
the twenty million'men that wage Armageddon. To yon he was every-
thing. And you-—wife, mother, 'sweetheart, sister—-are left alone with


your sorrow and .your memories. ' Fragrantly dear and precious those
memories may be, yet they are unsatisfying.
Memories lie in the past, and we move away from them. Bleeding
hearts need something to which they can look forward; something that,
as the years pass, will come nearer. That something is
. RE-UNION.
And reunion depends on the “resurrection of the body.” To be assured
of that, to be quite certain that you and he will meet again—you to
know, him, and he to know you—would blaze with silver sheen the black
cloud of your grief.
EVIDENCE OF IMMORTALITY.
■What are the arguments and proofs that will make the faint hope
a sure and certain one? First, there is this, and it is tremendous:
Ever since there was a world- —and all over that world, among' sav-
ages that have never risen above their savagedom, among great civilisa-
Idons that have flourished and faded in all religions (pagan, heathen,
Jewish, Christian), from the most debased to the most sublime-—-there
has been a universal belief in the resurrection of the dead, and'of another
life. . It is instinct, and universal instinct cannot go wrong.
Resurrection—reunion, another life—is something that the whole scat-
tered races of the world have gripped, with no teaching, no intercourse,
no exchange of ideas. The lowest type of mankind have never thought
that death was the end of life. Human instinct is true. Mankind has
always been conscious of its own immortality.
NOTHING IS LOST.
Were death the end of life, then we should be confronted with this
amazing position—that whereas nothing in Nature really dies, the gem
of creation, the admitted masterpiece-—-Man-—does die, and ends forever
with’ his dying! It is inconceivable.
We may or may not believe in God. But a study of the wonderful
human body, the sheer glory of its mechanism, must tel! us there is a
Master Mind somewhere, and a Master Creator. If you believe in evo-
lution, that is but progressive creation, and a greater marvel! The
Master Creator does not' create for death. That would.be absurd and
wasteful. It would place the Master Creator on a lower plane than the
human sculptor, who so fashions and carves the- inanimate marble that
it may last. If we, so wonderfully fashioned, have but one life,'and
that life only so pitifully short, then the Master Maker makes for sport,
and must be mad, for he would be treating creation’s best, a thousand
times worse than creation’s lowest!' Yet none has ever dared- to say other
than that there is intelligence and purpose behind creation. ■ Nothing in
Nature is wasted or lost—nothing! Is the best in creation—the human
race—to live, to die, and to end for ever with its dying?
THE HEART KNOWETH.
No? quite apart from man’s instinct, quite apart from his- extra-
ordinary consciousness of immortality, that would contradict everything
which the minds of great men have learned of the world’s workings. To


create for death—that is what “no resurrection” would mean—would he
wasteful, unintelligent, and cruel. And Who. or what it was that set
the world spinning, and created or evolved life, none dare say that there
is waste or unintelligence in creation, '
A whole world, throughout all its generations, and among all itfs
varied types—-white, yellow, .and black—does not instinctively believe in'
resurrection if there be no resurrection. The heart of humanity holds the
truths
To prove the resurrection of the body as part of the Christian belief
holds this difficulty that those who are anti-Christian are thereby pre-
judiced. They jeer at “faith,” forgetful that it requires infinitely more
faith to disbelieve than to believe! But this can be rememberedthat
Christianity in proclaiming the resurrection of the body and another life,
proclaimed no new thing. It only said clearly what religions had held,
and what the beating heart of all ’ generations , had instinctively believed
in. The Founder of Christianity provided the proofs that the death of
the body was not the- end of life,'and that Death cannot hold when the
Master says “Loose!” Christ’s own resurrection, stands unchallenged
now, and is conceded by those who would deny His divinity.
If we reject the Christian teaching of the resurrection of the dead,
let this be remembered—there is no alternative belief.. It is not a choice
of two. but the rejection of one. . We should be left with nothing- to
hope for, and nothing to. live for. Better, in a sense, a 'wrong belief
that comforteth the dying and' cheers the bereaved ■■ than the blankness
of utter and hopeless despair that comes from believing nothing. Let
us rejoice that the greatest men with the greatest -minds have weighed
these matters and were glad to believe in the resumption of the dead.
UNCHALLENGED.
■ For the Christian Ms whole faith rests on the resurrection of Chris-
tianity’s Founder. Once that is proved—and the fact is as unchallenged
now as it was always unchallengeable—instinct becomes a certainty, long-
ing is swallowed up in assurance, and the resurrection of the body, reunion
■and a life in the world to come are his heritage, and his certain hope.
Thus death , loses its sting, and the grave is but a bed in Mother Earth,
where loved ones sleep.
And, quite apart from religion, it is beyond denial that the human
body holds more mere bodily life. Mind, conscience, memory, im-
agination,' self-consciousness, find expression through the body, but are
not of it. Therefore, they must survive death. If, as some would
■argue, personality—-one’s very self—is part of the body, and must die
with it, then how is it that sight, hearing, speech, feeling and limb after
limb may go, and yet personality remains? It should, were the argu-
ment sound, gradually disappear. The loss of - our body by death is
but the same .as, in life,' the removing of an overcoat. .
alt. doubts dispelled.
Imagination may reel at the thought that the millions of dead can.
be raised' and re-clothed with bodies; yet the yearly harvest of the- world
is-a bigger marvel. The wonders of creation make the resurrection of
the dead a small thing. He, Who can make, can make again. Nothing,..


too, of the bodies is- lost. It has passed its myriads of other forms, but
it is all there, and He Who mad© can surely re-assemble. True, it is
that the deeper we go into the subject the easier it is : to, believe, in the
resurrection of the dead.
Love' and justice, too, require that there should, be a resurrection
and reunion. , Tipw otherwise could love do justice to the young lives
stricken in this war? ' To die at twenty, with life unlived -and with
no resurrection would contradict the whole design of an intelligent
Creator.
The arguments against resurrection are pitiful. There are, but two.
The first is that this wonderful world, with its marvellous life of insect,
bird, beast, and man, has no creator behind it. It “growed!” The
second is that Christianity is a fable, based on forgeries and hallucination.
Yet the most brilliant scholars and the deepest thinkers of the world have
been Christians.
Believe then, and with absolute assurance for the proofs pile
themselves mountains high, that there shall be a resurrection and re-union.
instinct has not erred, and no condemnation can be too great ,
for. those mockers who would rob the afflicted of their consolation of faith
in personal immortality.—“ Answers
Immortality
The soul within me tells me I shall never die;
Else, whence this pleasing thought, this fond desire,:..
This longing after Immortality?
The soul, secure in' her existence,
Smiles at the drawn dagger and defies its point.
The stars shall fade away, the sun himself grow dim,
With age, .and. flowers cease to bloom; ,
But, the soul that' trusts in Him shall flourish-
In immortal youth, unhurt,
Amidst the War of Elements, ;
The - wrecks of matter, and.
The crash of worlds !
jfor
XLbc Bternal IRe.fuge, and
UlnDetneatb are
Bverlasting Unas.
More Than a Friend.
I v r as deeply interested in hearing of an incident that took place at
a soldier’s grave in one of the Southern States of America. A person
was seen .. decking it with flowers; and a stranger, - observing Mm, asked
with a tone of sympathy, “If his son were buried there?” “No,” was the
reply. ' “A brother?” “No.” “Some other relation?” “Wo.” . “Whose
memory, then, may I venture to ask, do you thus so sacredly and tenderly
cherish? Pausing a moment from emotion, he replied, “When the war


broke out I was drafted for the army; and as I was unable to procure
a- substitute, I prepared to go. Just as I was: leaving home to report
myself for duty, a young man whom I knew came to me, and said, “You
have a large family, whom your wife cannot support when you are gone.
I am a single man ,and have no one depending upon me. I will go for
you.” He went. In the battle of Chickamanga the poor fellow was
dangerously wounded, died, and was buried here. Ever since his death
I have wished to visit this place, and having saved sufficient funds I
arrived yesterday, and to-day have found his grave.”
The touching story concluded, he planted the rest of the flowers. Then
taking a board, he inserted it at the foot of the grave. On it were written
these simple words, and no more':
J/e dteci S~(rrm&
I know your heart "will glow when you think of that noble fellow’s
generous, self-sacrificing love for his friend. Does it not glow when you
think of One who died for you?" Is that deed forgotten, and not one
loving, grateful thought, given to His dear memory ? As that generous
soldier died to save his friend, so truly did Jesus die for you. Yes, far
more so. The soldier might have returned safe, but Jesus knew he went
forth to death for you. How have you treated Him?
This I did for Thee.
“I gave my life for thee;
My precious blood I shed,
That thou might’st ransomed be,
And quickened from the dead.
I gave My life for thee;
What'hast thou given for Me?
“And I have brought to thee, .
Down from My home above,
Salvation full and free,
My pardon and My love.
Great gifts I brought to thee;
What hast thou brought to Me?
“Oh, let thy life be given,
Thy years for Me be spent;
World-fetters all be riven,
And joy with -suffering blent.
Give thou thyself to Me,
And I will welcome thee.” ,
F. R. Havergal.
“In My Father’s house are many mansions (resting-places). Igo |o
prepare a place for you.,”-
St. John, 14-2.


(Reprinted from "The Sydnep Mailf," 4-10-11}


The Road to Beaven
BY R. NORMAN MACLEAN
Re=Unton
;In my father’s house there are many mansions. It it (were not so I.
would have told you. Igo to prepare a place for you,—St, John xiv., 2,
1 These words express Christ’s affectionate solicitude for the welfare;,
of His disciples, and were intended by our Lord to give comfort and
strength to their minds and hearts. ; He was about to die and leave them.
Their minds; were full of gainful apprehensions. The coming tragical,
events began to cast their shadows before, ■ The departure of their Lord;
wad to them a sorrowful event.. Christ perfectly understood: their anxiety H
and,.with His own peculiar tenderness gives them consolation. “Let not
your hearts be troubled.” These words cheered and sustained Christ’s.
followers in many an anxious moment, and if they were- precious and
helpful to'His disciples nearly 1900 years ago, they are just as, precious
and helpful to all perplexed and troubled hearts to-day, and I trust will-
be comforting to all of' you.. How very little do' we know of the world:
beyond the grave? At ordinary times, perhaps, we are content to know*;
little, but there comes a day when things for a moment assume their
right proportions, and time grows insignificant in view of eternity. When:
some terrible bereavement befalls us, what a new interest is given to all
we have heard about Heaven? When the young parents have lost their one-
only child, what painfully urgent questions are often put to those who go ■
to comfort them. Where is the spirit which has just taken its flight?
“In Heaven,” faith says to us. But where is Heaven? Is it a placet:
Is |t a state?- Are the dead conscious still of our love and our grief?;
Oh, where, where have they all gone? Our dearest friends die, men and
women die by thousands, young men and women cut down in their prime/:
little ones every minute called away. At every tick of the clock some
eighty spirits take their departure; yet not a»breath of sound' shakes-
the -curtain of impenetrable darkness which hangs between ns' and the
unseen world. Hot to one- of all the unnumbered generations whose dust
is blown upon the desert winds has it been permitted to breathe one
syllable or letter of the dim and awful secret beyond the grave. Arid yet
the faith of man has not been shaken, nor for all this deep and unbroken
silence has he ever ceased to believe that He who called us into being
will bless, will cherish, and'will''save the souls which he hath made. We
feel assured that our Heavenly Father did -not mean us merely, “to bd
borri-weeping, to live complaining,, to die disappointed, and so cease- td


be,” but that He lias a new home for ns prepared beyond the grave. Each
. race has fancied its own ideal of Heaven. Few, indeed, have been the
nations which have not imagined that there remains beyond the grave
a blessed paradise for holy souls. And all Christians, who have read the
revelation of St. John have dwelt with rapture upon the descriptions of
the Hew Jerusalem descending out of Heaven from God: The gates of
■ pearl, the foundations of precious stones, and the pure river of the water
of life. Yet, even these symbolic passages do not thrill the heart so
keenly as others:—“They shall hunger no more, neither shall the sun light
-on them,nor any heat. For the Lamb that is in the midst of them shall
feed them, and shall ■ lead them into living fountains of ’ water, and God
■shall wipe away all tears from their eyes/ 3 And if we need any symbols
to help us, they are symbols of transparent meaning—Green meadows,
where men may breathe God’s pure air, and see His golden heart, : glorified
'Cities, where no foul step intrudes, white robes —pure emblems of stainless
innocence; -the crown and the palm branch, the golden harp, and the endless
Song, which, do but speak of abounding happiness, the most innocent, the
most thrilling, the most intense.
Bear friends, if these emblems do not satisfy you* fear not; there are
other conceptions of Heaven which do not dgal in imagery at all, "What
may be the physical condition of Heaven we cannot tell, but so far as it is
a place at all, its fundamental conception is that it is a place where sin
is not, ■ Nb guilty step may pass the gates of pearl, no polluting presence
ding shadows on the golden streets. There is no slander there, no envy,
no hatred, no malice, no lies. Neither murder, nor wounds, nor war. No
"heart deceived by Satan, no mind depraved by sin, no soul degraded by
man’s brutal selfishness, no witness of his utter shame. The Bible gives
no details of Heaven, yet it is clearly revealed that the essence of it is
holiness, and that its/chief delight is the contemplation of God. Death
jealously guards the secret. His realm, is to us, and is meant to he the
land of mystery, the silent land whence no whisper can ever reach us.
And yet, while much is hidden, something also has been "revealed. One
has lived on this'earth from whom no secret was hid. If we would, then,
learn anything of Heaven ,surely it is in His words that we shall find
the information we desire. Hence I have chosen His own words for my
Text to see it is not the key to unlock some at least of, the secrets which
'perplex .us.
As to the' question, “Where is Heaven,”' we read:—“Jesus lifted up
His eyes to Heaven 33 and said: “Father.” He spoke of having come
“down from Heaven. The apostles are described as gazing, lost in wonder,
While a cloud'received' their master out of their sight. -Stephen, looking
up, beheld Jesus at the right hand of God. John, borne up in a vision,
"saw the' throne, and in the midst of it a lamb, as it had been slain. And
thus, with this conception of an above is combined that of an ascent of
"the divine humanity of Christ. He Himself, after speaking of the house
■■of "many mansions, gives this as the thought which His-own could grasp:—
“There I am, and I will come again and receive you to Myself; that where
T am, there ye shall be also.” Surely, then, in view of this testimony,
we can assure- ourselves that, whilst in a true sense,- Heaven is- being.


’Wltli God, here, there, anywhere; in a true sense, also, there is a sanctuary
-—a house of many mansions—a Heaven- of Heavens. In what part oi
God’s vast universe Heaven is situated we cannot tell. One thing, how-
ever, we do know, that so far as Heaven is a place, it is a -place selected
by the King of Kings, for the more immediate revelation of Himself, His
goodness, and His glory. It is where His throne is erected. It is where
Jesus in His glorified human body dwells. It is where all those who have
■"died in Christ” shall spend their never-ending existence. But Heaven
is not only a place, it is a state —a state of happiness; for what is place,
even the most beautiful, when the mind is unhappy? It is not in the
noblest mansions, nor in the most magnificent objects to chase sorrow
from the heart. If we mean to enjoy Heaven we must-first have. Heaven
in our soul. If we could enter Heaven in our sin, every pure look would
be a burning reproach to us, every rapture of it a burden, every nobleness
■of it a shame. If we wish to go to Heaven we must prepare for the
journey. -Friends,' the kingdom of God must be within you; ere you
enter the pearly gates you must free yourselves for ever from the low
-aims of this world. You must free yourselves from the joke of habit
and the power of temptation. You must desire only and do only what
is good. You must be honest, true, noble, sincere, genuine, pure, holy
to the heart’s inmost core —-that is Heaven..
Heaven is not only a place, it is a state; not only a- habitation, but a
disposition; not simply to go somewhere, but to be something; to become
the sons and daughters of God through Christ’s cleansing blood—that is
Heaven! Yes; that is Heaven! What more we know not. In other
stars,'amidst His countless worlds, for all we know, God may have work
for us to do. Who knows what radiant ministrations, what infinite acti-
vities, what never-ending progress -where all things are lovely honourable,
and pure. Why should we not believe that God, who is so good to us,
hath' such good things in store for all who love Him. -The mental-and
the spiritual treasure we amass here is to be our capital in the world
to come. Those who are at different stages of the spiritual life at the
moment of death will be at different stages at the starting point in the
next life. Scripture confirms this:- —"For as one star differetli from
•another star in glory so it is also in the resurrection of the dead.” That
is what gives to life such peculiar solemnity. We lose nothing by death
of all we have acquired. When old age comes on, and a man’s memory
fails him, those memories are not lost for ever. And when death comes
and the brain crumbles into dust, not one thought is destroyed. All that
we learn here, the virtues we acquire, the characters we form, are burs
for ever.' The man of science, who has by study and investigation learned
much about this corner of God’s creation, will have that knowledge for
his-precious possession in the other world as in this. The poet and the
painter, who have acquired the love of the beautiful, will have that delight
with them for all eternity. He who has painfully acquired any virtue
will not have to leave it behind him at the gate of death.. No effort is
. wasted, no toil thrown away. There is no dull uniformity, no stagnation,
In the other world. There is variety, there are many mansions (or, as
the word here means, resting-places), where all may be refreshed. Ex-
amine God’s workings where we will we find always these two character is


tics; It is gradual, and it is' progressive. There is no such thing as a
.pause or -a break in the continuity. And so we are led to expect that
death cannot be the real break in existence it seems to be. There is no
such thing in. all nature as life at a standstill. If a thing be living, it
must be suffering either growth or decay; so we must suppose that Heaven
is progress towards a Divine end —a becoming ever better and better, and
more and more like God. The words of our text confirm this: “My
Father’s house, the universe, consists of many stations along the road to
perfection. If it were not so, I would have told you.”
The future life, then, is seen to be only a continuation under more
blessed conditions of this life. Childhood dies into, youth,., so youth dies
into manhood, and manhood dies into old age; but in each case the
treasures of experience are handed on to the succeeding state, and only
the transient perishes. So death is only the passing into yet another
stage. All that is valuable in character and experience survives the shock
and every fresh step opens up new vistas to the, soul’s vision. We shall
advance from truth to truth, from virtue to virtue, from service to ser-
vice; we shall become more-and more blessed because more and more like
'Christ. The words St. Paul used to describe, the Christian’s. gradual glori-
fication must be true of the heavenly state as of the earthly;- “We all
with unveiled face, reflecting as a mirror the glory of God, are transformed
into the same image from glory to glory.” “In my Father’s house,”
baith Christ, “there are many mansions.” Our Elder Brother there speaks
of Heaven under the endearing title, “'My Father’s house,”' my Father’s
home. From that home he came, and having finished His work, was about
to return. “I go unto My Father,” that is, 1 am going home. What a
beauty, what an attraction does this- throw around Heaven! Home!, my,
■Eternal Home! At home with God as my Father, and ail the .good and
the true, the pure, and the noble of the universe as my companions. When
the words of our text come from the lips of our blessed Saviour, He was
going to His Cross, to His grave, to His intercession in Heaven,, to prepare
a place for'His people. There “our forerunner is for us entered.” There
lie intercedes and pleads' for us. Behold Him at the' Mercy Seat.. Behold
Him now in the midst of the Throne of God:
“Five bleeding wounds he bears, received on Calvary, .
■ They prove effectual prayer, they strongly speak for me,
Forgive him, oh, Tor give,’■they, cry,
Nor let the ransomed sinner die.”
Another question now presents itself, and it is to us the most im-
portant of all,- How are we to get to Heaven! How-are we,to;reach the
house of many mansions? How are we to gain, entrance into that
Heavenly Home? The late Dean Stanley answers these questions briefly
and strikingly. His direction-post reads:-—“Turn to the Eight, and go
straight' forward.” That is the only way to Heaven. Christ says;—“l
am the way, the truth, and the life.” There is only one way to Heaven, and
that, is “through the blood of Christ.” If you desire Heaven, you must
seek it here, and' if you love Heaven, you must love it now. No. one
need read these words further without having the stamp of eternal life


set upon your soul. Every sin-burdened soul may become a true Son of
God. Each one may enter the pearly gates and cast no shadow on the
golden streets. Christ's invitation is universal; “Whosoever will may
come.” “Him that cometh unto me I will in no wise cast out.” “God so
loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever
believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.”
God hates sin, but loves the sinner. This was the work for which
Jesus was born in Bethlehem, lived on earth, died on Calvary, descended
into the grave, burst the bonds of death, ascended to Heaven, and placed
Himself at the right hand of God, For this, He trod the lowest vale of
shame and grief; for this He drank the deepest cup of wrath and torment';
for this He grappled with all the powers of darkness; for this He reigns
and prays on high. It is tie work, too, for which the Holy Spirit strives
with us, knocking at the barren entrance of the sinner's heart. For this
He assails the fortress of self-love, reveals the perils : of sin, .and wrestles
with Ignorance and delay. For this He strives, until the arms of rebellion
fall and the contrite soul flees to the Cross and embraces Christ, who has
opened up a new and living way into the house of many mansions.
When the Venerable Mr. Meade in his dying moments was asked how
lie did, he replied: “I am going home as fast as I can, as every honest
man ought to do when his day's-work m done, and I thank God, I have a
good home to go to.” Yes, we are all going home, sooner or later:. Be
ready. Prepare for the journey. “How is the accepted time.” Decide
now. “Now is the day of ' Salvation.” Accept Christ, and you have
received your passport to the Heavenly Home.
Christian friends, those of you who have long learned the way, what
are you doing to add to the number of Christ's followers? How are you
endeavouring to swell the great multitude around the throne of God?
Remember, there is no joy equal to winning men and women to Christ,
and there are no possessions of the heart so precious. As there is joy
in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth, so
there is joy, great joy in the heart of him who has led a sinner to the
Saviour, When one has gained another to God, and a holy life, there
is a most dear and everlasting relationship established between them, the
one leading, so to speak, to the other’s good for eternity, and the other
beholding in him a benefactor, by whose work and example he is con-
sciously'exalted for. ever, and this gracious relationship'will give them an
eternal, mutual property in each other. This is the high and holy honour
of every Christian worker who is seeking to advance the' Kingdom of
God.
Mothers who have won their children to Christ, children who have
sometimes won their parents, masters their servants, pastors their flocks,
teachers their pupils, companions their comrades, are bound to each other
by a new and endearing friendship. Our work on earth is a preparation
for our service in Heaven. We do not know what form of work will be
given us there, but it is written: “Therefore are they before the throne
of God, and serve Him day and night in the temple.” Amen. Amen.


FREDERICK ARNOLD.
Monumental Sculptor,
53 Regent Street, Sydney.


YOUNG MEN 0F AUSTRALIA !
Your Mates from the Battlefields are Calling Loudly—
“dome ®v>cr anfc Ibelp Hie!”
A Picture that will Live for Ever in iVustralian History. *
Commonwealth Official Photo.
Anzac Band Flays the Australians into Banpaume, under German Fire,
Burning and Falling Buildings.
The Example of Heroic- Deeds is the Best Stimulus to Spirited,
Victorious Action.
Every Soldier, and Every Eligible, Strong Young Man Should Possess
a Copy of “The Message,”
mill Pou Ibelp ?
N.B. —Profits of sale of “The Message” provide free copies for the
Red Cross Book Depots, and for the Bereaved as the fatal lists appear.
Order copies from Gordon and Gotch, Booksellers
Or R. Norman Maclean, 52 Spit Road, Mosman. Sydney.
“Christian World” Print.
