





Sabbat!): patriarchal, ftfoisjj & Cjmstiau.
Chapter First.
the sabbath in the old testament times
The Primitive and Patriarchal Period
By the Rev. GEO. GRIMM, , M.A.
The sacred historian concludes his nar-
rative of the Creation with a notice of the
institution of the Sabbath, “ Thus the
heavens and the earth were finished and all
the host of them. And on the seventh day
God ended His work which He had made,
and He rested on the seventh day from all
the work which He had made, and God
£ blessed the seventh day and sanctified it,
* because that in it He had rested from all
His work which God created and made.”
Whether the creation-week consisted of
natural days or immensely extended periods
is of no material consequence to the argu-
* raent for the Sabbath. The point to be
observed is not length of time, but propor-
tion of time. After six periods of work
came a seventh period of rest; and the
fourth commandment, which prescribes the
lan- both for work and rest, takes the
primeval week, of whatever length, for its
foundation. “ For in six days the Lord
made heaven and earth, the sea and all
that in them is, and rested the seventh day,
wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath
day and hallowed it.” The foregoing
quotations establish the fact that the
Sabbath was instituted while Adam was
in a state of innocence. He was the last of
the Creator’s works, having been called
| into existence on the sixth day. The first
J day that dawned upon him was a Sabbath.
This order shows at once the meaning of
our Lord’s words when He said, “ The
Sabbath was made for man and not man
. for the Sabbath.” “Man” here signifies
~ mankind or the human race; and we are
thus taught that the Sabbath was designed
not for a part, but for the whole of the
species; not for Jews only, but for all
other nations as well. Its original con-
nection with the creation of the world, of
which it was intended to be a memorial,
pointed to the same universality, for the
benefits resulting from the handiworks of
the Almighty arc common to all mankind.
Such appears to be the natural and
necessary inference from a very plain state-
ment of Scripture. But some men who
have a theory to support will not admit
that the Sabbath was instituted tilblsrael
came out of Egypt; God’s blessing the
seventh day is hence explained as an act
done in anticipation of the fourth com-
mandment, which was not given till 2500
years after. But this forced interpretation
is not admissible in a plain and simple
narrative. If the blessing must be referred
to the distant future, how can the resting
be applied to the time then present ? If
one clause of the sentence must be inter-
preted figuratively, on what principle can
the other be taken literally? The meaning
can only be that God rested on the first
seventh day and blessed it for all time
coming. It is further objected that there is
no historical trace of the Sabbath from the
creation to the exodus. But this assertion
will not bear to be critically examined.
The Book of Genesis being only a brief
sketch of the history of the church and
the world for a period of 2369 years, it
would be absurd to expect a detailed
notice of every important event. Even if
the narrative made no allusion of any kind
to the Sabbath after the notice of its
institution at the beginning, the argument
from mere silence would be very unsafe.
Circumcision, for instance, is not mentioned
from the entrance into Canaan till the time
of John the Baptist; yet no reasonable man
doubts that the rite was practised, with
more or less regularity, throughout the
intervening period. Indeed, for 500 years
after the life of Moses, the ordinance of
the Sabbath itself is not once noticed in
Scripture, although the history is ample
and the statute was written on a tablet of
stone. Nothing could be more false than
to assert that the Sabbath law was not kept
because there is no precise record of its
observance. But it cannot be maintained


that there is ixo historical trace of the and this calculation also excludes the suu
Sabbath between the creation and the
exodus. There are allusions and indica-
tions which cannot be accounted for except
on the supposition of a Sabbath. Cain and
Abel are said to have come together to
offer sacrifice “ in process of time,” or, as
it is more literally rendered in the margin,
“at the end of days” ; which means, most
and the moon (Glen, xxxvii. 9.) All evi-
dence goes to show that the seven days of
the week took their start from the creation
period of seven, and that this reckoning
of time was handed down from a common
ancestry. The crucial test lies in the ques-
tion whether or not this septenary division
can be traced in the accounts which have
probably, at the end of the cycle of days been transmitted from the most ancient
which constitute a week, and therefore the nations. This appeal is strongly answered
day of this first-mentioned service would
be the Sabbath. The week as a measure
of time is also mentioned repeatedly in
connection with the Hood. The Almighty
forewarned Noah seven days before the
fountains of the great deep were broken
up; and when the time of deliverance
drew near the same patriarch is recorded
to have sent forth a dove and a raven at
intervals of seven days respectively. Later
on in the history, the week is mentioned
in the narrative of certain transactions
between Jacob and Laban. In the Book
of Job, which many of the best critics refer
to the same primitive period, that godly
patriarch is represented as offering sacri-
fice at the end of every seven days. This
measure of time so often met with in the
dawn of history, can have no other founda-
tion than the creation-week. The day, the
year, and the month are measured out by
the revolution of the earth on its axis, or
along its orbit, and by the phases of the
moon, but it does not seem possible to
account for the week on any astronomical
principle. It is true that the late Professor
Proctor attempted to establish such a basis.
He conceived the month to be roughly
divided into four weeks by the phases of
the moon, and that the week was limited to
seven days, inasmuch as a day was dedi-
cated to the worship of each of the five
principal planets along with the sun and
moon, which constitute the seven bodies
that appear to move over the disc of the
heavens. But all this is mere theory which
rests on no better foundation than conjec-
ture. Historical facts rather point the
other way, for the earliest notice of the
principal heavenly bodies reckons them at
eleven in number instead of five or seven ;
in the affirmative. Not only was reckoning
time by weeks a common practice, but the
seventh day was held by some of them as
being peculiarly sacred. The late Mr.
George Smith, a leading Assyriologist of
his time, while excavating among the
ruins of Nineveh in 1869, discovered a
religious calendar containing the division
of time into weeks, and providing for the
observance of the seventh day as a sacred
institute. The following is given as a
literal translation of this interesting record,
“The shepherd of many peoples may not
eat flesh of birds or cooked fruit” (on the
seventh day.) “The garments of his body
he must not change. White robes he may
not put on. Sacrifice he may not offer.
The king in his chariot may not ride. He
may not legislate in royal fashion. A
place of garrison the general by word of
mouth may not appoint. Medicine for the
sickness of the body one may not apply.”
The Assyrians, whose language was akin
to that of the Hebrews, used the word
Sabbatu for the seventh day, and a bilingual
tablet explains it as “ a day of rest for the
soul.” There can be no doubt that the
antiquity of this curious relic is extreme,
for it belongs to that portion of Assyrian
literature which was introduced from Accad
whose history is anterior to that of Nineveh
itself. The best critics believe that this
inscription goes back to the time of
Abraham ; and none have any doubt that it
is older than the Mosaic era. This recentty
discovered evidence completely demolishes
the fiction of those who have affirmed that
the Sabbath was unknown before the exodus,
and that God’s blessing the seventh day at
the beginning was only an act of anticipa-
tion.


ll.— Mosaic Pekiob.
In the sixteenth chapter of Exodus there
occurs the first Scriptural mention of the
Sabbath by name, but it is done in such a
manner as to imply its previous existence.
The Israelites having gone forth to gather
manna, found a double quantity on the
sixth day. The rulers of the congregation
informed Moses of the occurrence, and
were answered in these words, “ To-morrow
is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the
Lord.” The reply does not sound like the
first intimation of an ordinance of such
immense importance. The institution had
undoubtedly existed in the past, but its
observance would not have been possible in
Egypt where the people were held in
slavery. Probably the days of the week
were not known in the correct order till
information was given them in the Wilder-
ness of Sin. A few weeks after this inci-
dent the Sabbath Was formally promul-
gated from Mount Sinai, and incorporated
in the decalogue. Even when addressed
directly to the Jews there are at least five
conspicuous points in the fourth command-
ment which bear strongly upon its perma-
nent and universal obligation. This statute,
like the rest of the decalogue, was engraven
on stone to signify its durability and to
mark its distinction from the merely cei’e-
monial regulations which were to pass
away with changing times and seasons.
The word “Bemember” which introduces
the commandment, plainly calls attention
to the Sabbath as a previously existing
institution. Notice also that it is particu-
larly applied to all sorts of persons by
name, “ Thou, nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, nor thy man servant nor thy
maid servant, Ac.,” as showing how care-
ful the Lawgiver was that every one should
keep this commandment. Observe further
the significance of the reason annexed to
this commandment: “ For in six days the
Lord made heaven and earth the sea and
all that in them is, wherefore the Lord
blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it.”
Had the statute been grounded in some-
thing peculiar to Israel, such as their
deliverance from the thraldom of Egypt,
men might have had some colour or
excuse for calling it a merely Jewish
institution. But this limitation appears to
have been purposely avoided; and the
ordinance lias its foundation laid in the
fact of creation, the benefits of which apply
in the same degree to Jews and Gentiles.
Once more, attend to what is said about the
stranger within the gates of the city. If
he thought fit he might become subject to
the Mosaic law and so be reckoned to all
intents and purposes a Jew; or, if so
minded, he might decline this conformity,
and thus remain a stranger in the land.
But alien as he was, the stranger sojourn-
ing among the Jews was compelled to keep
the Sabbath. This is just what must have
been expected on the supposition that the
Sabbath was appointed to be an ordinance
for all men, and therefore of universal
obligation. The two principal statutes
found in the Mosaic code were the Pass-
over and Sabbath. The former was pecu-
liarly Jewish, and vfor .this reason no
stranger had permission to eat of the
paschal lamb ; the Ifttejr was designed for
all men, and therefore the stranger within
the gates was comshfk}.ed to keep the
Sabbath. .’i
Such then is the Sabbath as a divine
ordinance binding upon all men. It is
necessary to consider, next, in what respects
it was affected by incorporation with a|lc
temporary Jewish polity. When it became
mixed up with the ceremonies of the Old
Covenant, the Sabbath also, to some ex-
tent, assumed the characteristics of a
ceremonial institution, but all such accre-
tions were merely local in character and
temporary in duration. After being brought
into combination with the Mosaic ritual, it
is still most important to mark the distinc-
tion between the Sabbath as moral and the
Sabbath as ceremonial. An able writer
has compared those accretions to the
Sabbath proper to a climbing plant whose
tendrils have enveloped the trunk of a
giant oak. But only for a time. After a
few summers at most, the creeper will die
away leaving the monarch of the forest to
enjoy its unfettered life for centuries to
come, as it may have done for centuries of
the past. So it was with the Sabbath. It
existed for ages before the Jewish ritual
was instituted, and it was not weakened,
but strengthened, when that polity perished
with the fall of Jerusalem. The modifica-
tions which were introduced by the adapta-
tion of the institute to Jewish peculiarities
were numerous ; but it must be carefully
borne in mind that they were never in-
tended to be otherwise than temporary.
The Sabbath of that period is said to have


been a sign of the covenant between (xod primitive ordinance became affected by the
and Israel. But in this appointment there
was nothing inconsistent with the proba-
bility of the previous existence of the
Sabbath. When G-od entered into cove-
nant with IS’oah the rainbow was taken as
the sign; but it would be puerile to con-
clude from this appointment that the “ bow
in the cloud” was then for the first time
brought into existence. In the next place
the Sabbath was interwoven into the whole
texture of the Mosaic ritual. The seventh-
day Sabbath was taken as the basis on
which the Jewish cycles of festivals were
calculated. Was the seventh day a
Sabbath ? Then the seventh month was
also reckoned Sabbatical. So again, the
seventh year was appointed to be Sab-
batical or a year of release ; and the great
cycle was completed by seven times seven
or forty-nine years, which introduced the
Jubilee of the nation. All these were
ceremonial observances engrafted upon the
original stock of the seventh-day Sabbath.
There was yet another way in which this
same connection. The observance was
made exceedingly rigid, and would now be
considered burdensome. One enactment
forbade kindling a fire on the seventh day,
and the penalty was so severe that a man
was stoned to death for gathering sticks on
the Sabbath. Many persons have found
fault with the punishment as inhumanly
harsh ; but the two things should be taken
in their immediate connection, for the
transgressor was doubtless, of set purpose,
gathering fuel to put at defiance an exjwess
law of the Sabbath. Another Jewish regu-
lation prohibited the people from proceed-
ing more than 2000 paces from their
dwellings on this holy day ; which distance
came to be called a Sabbath day’s journey.
These burdensome observances were part
of that yoke of bondage under which the
fathers groaned, and from which Christ has
made His people free. “ Let no man, there-
fore, judge you,” says St. Paul, “In
respect of . . . the Sabbath days which
are a shadow of things to come.”


lll— Phophetical Peeiod.
Coming now to the later times of the
Old Testament we find the prophets insist-
ing strenuously on the necessity of ob-
serving the Sabbath, and inveighing very
severely against its desecration. The most
marked in his zeal for the sacred day is
Isaiah, who is first in spirituality among
the prophets, and so intensely evangelical
as to have merited the designation of the
fifth evangelist. His book of prophecy
falls into two parts so distinct from one
another that very many of the ablest
writers have maintained that both could
not have proceeded from the same author.
This proposition is incapable of proof, and
the probability is that the latter portion,
which is devoted to the times of the Messiah,
and is exceedingly lofty in its spirituality,
was written by Isaiah in his old age after he
retired from the public affairs of the nation.
The point to be specially observed is that
it is in the second division of his book that
the prophet treats with the greatest fre-
quency and fondness on the blessedness of
the Sabbath, while he points, with un-
doubted certainty, to its continued obser-
vance during the Gospel ages. The 56th
chapter speaks plainly of the Sabbath
being kept during the coming era after
the ceremonial regulations had been
abolished. “ The sons of strangers,” that
is, the Gentiles, are to be brought into the
Gospel Church, but yet will keep the Sab-
bath from polluting it.
In the latest part of the Old Testament
Scriptures, the Book of Hehemiah, some
important information is given concerning
the Sabbath of that period. After work-
ing a great reformation, Nehcmiah returned
to the court of Persia. Again visiting
Jerusalem some years later, he found not
reformation, but deformation. As it hap-
pens in ail periods of declension, the Sab-
bath was profaned by the intrusion of
business transactions to the great, scandal
of religion. The utmost efforts of the re-
former were therefore directed so as to put
an end to the desecration of the sacred day.
After denouncing this secular traffic, he
closed the gates of the city, and, in order
to thwart the opposition of interested
parties, he appointed guards over these
avenues of commerce uutil the Sabbath
had run its course. Like all other re-
formers, Kehemiah entertained no hope for
any form of religion worthy of the name,
so long as the fourth commandment was
trodden under foot.
IY.— Closing Peeiod.
In the later history of the nation the sin
against the Sabbath does not appear to
have consisted in disregarding it as a com-
mand, but in straining the letter and in
carrying out the observance to the most
absurd punctilios. At the commencement
of the’ Maccabeean war it was deemed
unlawful even to repel an attack of the
enemy if made on the Sabbath, and on one
occasion a thousand persons for this reason
lost their lives. This bitter experience led
the Jews to accept the principle of self-
defence on the Sabbath, but at the same
time to abstain from acts of aggression.
This reservation, however, proved their
ruin in the war waged by Pompey, for the
sagacious Roman general, knowing he was
safe from attack, so employed his army on
the Sabbath as to make it tell most effec-
tively against the Jews on the following
day.
It would be highly improper to close this
review of the Sabbath under the Old Tes-
tament without taking some notice of our
Lord’s attitude towards this institution.
So far as his earthly life was concerned,
the Man Christ Jesus belonged to the Old
Covenant, for He too was made subject to
the law. It must therefore be of supreme
consequence in the settlement of this ques-
tion to ascertain our Lord’s relation to the
Sabbath, and the precise position He took
up in reference to its observance. Rightly
to understand this subject, it is absolutely
necessary to keep before our minds what
manner of Sabbath it was by which our
Lord was confronted. Of course, it was
not yet the Christian Sabbath, but no more
could it be called the Sabbath of the
fourth commandment pure and simple. It
was no longer the sacred day as Moses had
left it, but a perversion of the Pharisees
who taught for doctrines the command-
ments of men. Of all the puerilities which
have come down from antiquity, there is
nothing half so puerile as the rules and
punctilios which this sect deemed neces-
sary for Sabbath-keeping. The most pre-
sentable of them all is enough to make one
smile, if this were a subject for laughter.
A man was not permitted to give a drink
to his beast in the ordinary way, but might


pour the water into a trough so that the acted thus in regard to any practice which
animal might come and drink for itself. It
was not lawful to kill a flea on the Sabbath
day except when causing insufferable un-
easiness. On one memorable instance this
ostentatious sect brought a charge against
the disciples of the Lord because they
walked through the cornfields on the sacred
day and plucked the ears of corn. One is
curious to find wherein the fault exactly
lay. It was not in plucking the ears, for so
much liberty the Law of Moses had ex-
pressly legalised: “ When thou comest
into the standing corn of thy neighbour,
thou mayest pluck the ears with thine
hand.” No more did it consist in walking
through the cornfields ; for even the Phari-
sees acknowledged the accepted Sabbath
day’s journey, which was long enough to
pass though many fields. Wherein then
could the sin find a lurking place ? It was
just here. The microscopic eyes of the
accusers saw in the palms of the hands
rubbing the ears of corn the action of two
millstones crushing the grain ! The evil
when hunted to its last liiding place was
found to be the sin of grinding on the day
of rest. They had laid their finger exactly
upon the sore; and now, with all the
majesty of defenders of righteousness,
approach the Lord with their complaint:
“ Behold, thy disciples do that which is
not lawful to do upon the Sabbath day,”
Is it possible that the Lord Jesus Christ
could have endured these and such-like
perversions of the beautiful simplicity of
the day of sacred rest without speaking
forth in no measured terms of denuncia-
tion? The one service now required for
the Sabbath was to clear away this heap of
Rabbinical rubbish by which it was over-
whelmed and well-nigh lost. At this time
the Son of Man, as the Lord of the Sab-
bath, came and delivered His own institu-
tion from the hands of its worst enemies,
notwithstanding their guise of friendship.
What He did from first to last in opposition
to the Pharisaic Sabbath and in vindication
of the fourth commandment fills no incon-
siderable space in the Gospel narratives.
It is very evident that our Lord looked
upon this question as fraught with un-
speakable importance or He would not
have occupied so much of His time in
dealing with this institution, and in clear-
ing it from misconceptions. He never
was merely ceremonial and intended to be
superseded by His death. This exceptional
line of procedure in reference to the Sab-
bath is clear evidence that He considered
it, not as ceremonial and evanescent, but
as moral, and therefore of permanent
obligation.
Chapter Second.
THE CHRISTIAN SABBATH.
I. — Theories Respecting its Origin,
Passing now from the Sabbath of the
Old Testament to the Lord’s Day of the
Christian Church, we emerge from one set
of controversies only to fall into another.
There are many theories, and variations of
theories, which have been propounded to
account for the origin of the Lord’s Day,
or the Christian Sabbath ; but they may
all be reduced to three fundamental types.
The first of these asserts that it is, to all
intents and purposes, the continuation of
the primitive institution which was meant
to be of perpetual obligation. The West-
minster Confession has the merit of setting
forth this view of the question with the
greatest clearness and force. “As it is of
the law of nature that, in genera,!, a due
proportion of time be set apart for the
worship of God; so, in His word by a
positive, moral, and perpetual command-
ment, binding all men in all ages, He hath
particularly appointed one day in seven for
a Sabbath to be kept holy unto Him;
which from the beginning of the world to
the resurrection of Christ was the last day
of the week; and, from the resurrection of
Christ, was changed into the first day of
the week, which in Scripture is called the
Lord’s Day, and is to be continued to the
end of the world as the Christian Sabbath.”
There is no uncertain sound here, nor the
least possibility of evasion. The Sabbath
which was instituted in Paradise and in-
corporated in the decalogue has, by the
resurrection of Christ, been transferred to
the first day of the week and, as such con-
tinues to be binding on all Christians till
the end of time. The second theory is the
opposite of the foregoing and, perhaps, a
recoil from its severity. Herein it is
affirmed that the Sabbath, in common with
ail Jewish institutions, of which it is held
to have been a part and nothing more, was


abolished by the death of Christ and is church. Midway between these two op-
therefore binding on no man. Nevertheless,
the early Christian Church finding it neces-
sary to have one day specially set apart for
public worship, fittingly choose of her own
motion, the day on which the Master rose
from the grave. But all this, it is con-
tended, is a merely human and prudential
arrangement having no higher authority
than the church can give it, and so being
only an ecclesiastical affair maybe abolished
without sin at any time the church may think
fit. This then is the ecclesiastical view of
the origin and relation of the Christian Sab-
bath. It is not the Lord’s Day in the
sense of having any authority or counten-
ance from Him, but only as being a human
appointment for divine service which more
properly falls to the first rather than to any
other day of the week. This theory has
usually found favor with the High Church
party who like to exalt the power of the
posing theories stands the third and last to
be noticed here. It starts with the asser-
tion that the Lord did not positively
found the institution, but left the
Apostles in charge to organise the
church under the guidance of the Spirit.
In the matter of the Sabbath, it is con-
tended, that they did not continue it from
the Old Testament church, or even found
its authority on the fourth commandment,
which is presumed to have been abrogated,
but gave it, in all respects, a new com-
mencement. It is acknowledged, however,
to bo of divine authority as a purely Christ-
ian institute, inasmuch as there arc clear
intimations of its observance in the later
books of the New Testament, and having
so high sanction, it is regarded as binding
on all Christians, who are, however, to ob-
serve it not in the spirit of the Jewish, but
of the Gospel dispensation.


ll.—Change of the Day.
The Sabbath has been definitely asso-
ciated with the three principal events of
the world’s history : the creation, the
deliverance from Egypt, and the death of
Christ, from each of which it has derived a
special feature. God having finished the
heavens and the earth rested on the seventh
day, which henceforth became a memorial
of the creation of the world. Having
delivered Israel from the servitude of
I%ypt> Jehovah restored to the nation the
neglected and almost forgotten Sabbath,
which ever after remained a day of hal-
lowed rest and a monument of their rescue
from the house of bondage, “ Eemember
that thou wast a servant in the land of
Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought
thee out thence through a mighty hand,
and by a stretched out arm, therefore the
the Lord thy God commanded thee to
keep the Sabbath day.” The Lord Jesus
Christ having by dying destroyed the
power of death, and by His rising from the
grave on the first day of the week invested
it with a new character, it henceforth
became commemorative of His resurrec-
tion. If the work of creation was worthy
of being kept in perpetual remembrance by
a positive institution, how much more is
the accomplishment of redemption an
object to be kept alive in the memory by a
standing ordinance P In the Epistle to the
Hebrews (chap, iv.) these two cardinal
events are compared at length in order to
point out this duty to the Christian people :
—“ For He spake in a certain place (Gen.
ii. 1-3) of the seventh day on this wise,
‘ And God did rest the seventh day from
all His works.’ . . There remaineth, there-
fore, a rest to the people of God. For He
(the Lord Jesus Christ) that is entered
into His rest, He also hath ceased from
His own works (of redemption) as God
did from His (works of creation.)”
So far the principle is clear, and the
practice of apostolic church is beyond
dispute. On the very day of Christ’s
resurrection, which must be dated as
the first Christian Sabbath, He appeared
to Mary Magdalene, to the two disciples
journeying to Emmaus, and to the assem-
bled apostles. The latter are said to have
returned to their secular callings, but on
the next first day of the week they are
again found together as if at a set time of
convocation for divine worship. Tin's
meeting also the Lop.] bless i with His
presence, and relieved Thomas of his doubts
which He had allowed to remain for seven
days till this second meeting came round.
When the Lord left our world the time of
the ascension in all probability, was the first
day of the week. That the feast of Pente-
cost, when the disciples were assembled
with one accord ami received the Holy
Ghost .was also the first day of the week is
too evident to admit of any reasonable
dispute. The assembling of the saints for
public w r orship on the Lord’s day plainly
settles down into an established practice as
is witnessed in the earliest history. The
apostles make no attempt to prove that the
first day of the week was observed for rest
and holy service. They treat it as too well
known to need proof ; and it is referred to
only incidentally which is, after all, the
surest kind of evidence. In a notice bear-
ing on Troas, it is added, “ We abode seven
days. And upon the first day of the week
when the disciples came together to break
bread Paul preached unto them ready to
depart on the morrow, and continued his
speech until midnight.” This was not a
private meeting, but a public assembly. It
was not a concourse born of the occasion
to hear St. Paul; but he preached to them
after they had come together for another
religious purpose, which was the celebra-
tion of the Lord’s Supper. The apostle
waited seven days for this opportunity,
preparing, in the meanwhile, for his depar-
ture as soon as the first day of the w r eek
was over. Again, (I. Cor. xvi. 1-2) the
same apostle gives directions to the Corin-
thians concerning a collection for the poor
saints at Jerusalem. The following are his
express words, “ Upon the first day of the
week let every one of you lay by him in
store, as God hath prospered him, that
there be no gatherings when I come.” If
they had not been in the habit of meeting
together on the first day of the week there
was no reason in asking them to lay aside
their contributions on that any more than
on some other day. This collection, fur-
thermore, was not to be made once only,
but to be continued till a sufficient sum
had accumulated. Here is an additional
evidence of a standing custom. Moreover,
St. Paul says he had given the same direc-
tions to the Churches of Galatia, which
proves that they also, held their meetings
on the first day of the week. The two


places were far separated by sea and land, servasti?” In the scanty writings of the
and in their secular affairs had nothing in
common. Coming now to the Epistle to
the Hebrews, which is a late production,
we find these remarkable words, “ Hot for-
saking the assembling of yourselves toge-
ther as the manner of some is.” This pas-
sage unquestionably proves that Christian
assemblies for public worship had grown
into an established practice ; and that some,
whose zeal had waxed cold, were neglecting
this recognised duty. Ho day is mentioned,
but the necessary inference from the omis-
sion is just this, that the day on which the
meetings were held, had become too well
known to need to be named. When the
last book of Scripture is reached —the
Eevelation, which God showed unto his
servant John,—the day is specially distin-
guished, and marked by what appears
to have become its well-known name (Eev.
i. 10) : “ I was in the Spirit on the Lord’s
day.” On this occasion the Eisen Lord
appeared to his disciple, and still further
signalised that day by walking amidst the
golden candlesticks and holding in His
right hand seven stars as representing the
ministers of His Church. St. John indeed
gives no explanation of the “ Lord’s day,”
and his silence is very suggestive; for he,
of all the Hew Testament writers, is the
most careful to leave nothing unexplained
■where misunderstanding could possibly
arise. Hot even the term Eabbi will he
let pass without telling what it means, and
lie thought it necessary to account for six
large waterpots being found in the house of
primitive Christians, the notices which
bear on this subject are sufficiently nume-
rous and definite to exclude ail reasonable
controversy, while the evidence from the
earlier and the later Fathers is quite over-
whelming. Thirty-one out of forty-seven
have adverted with more or less brevity to
the Sabbath. Justin Martyr, writing
about the year 140, states expressly that
the Christians were in the habit of meeting
together for the purpose of worship, read-
ing the Scriptures, and the celebration of
the Lord’s Supper on Sunday, being the
day on which the heathens worshipped the
Sun, but whichlhe connects with the resur-
rection of Christ. Irenaeus, towards the
close of the second century, says : “ On the
Lord’s Day every one of us keeps the Sab-
bath, meditating in the law, and rejoicing
in the works of God.” The historian
Eusebius has preserved a fragment of an
earlier Father, Dionysius, belonging ap-
parently to about the year 170, in which
the first day of the week is called the
“ Lord’s holy day,” when the church met
for instruction and worship. From this
date onward the testimonies are too abun-
dant for quotation. In the year 321 the
Emperor Constantine declared by an edict,
“That all judges and the civic population,
together with the workshops of artisans,
should rest on the venerable day of the
Sun.” Four years later when the first
Christian Council met at Hicaea, it was no
longer a question between the seventh and
the first day of the week ; and the decrees
a Jew. The only conceivable reason for of that august body on this subject were
his not giving the meaning of the “ Lord’s confined to the proper observance of the
day” is that explanation was no longer Lord’s Day. The spirit of these regula-
necessary. tions has continued to actuate the Christian
Passing now from the days of the world till the present time. It is beyond all
Apostles to the sub-apostolie Church, the question that the blessing of God has
first day of the week is again seen to be rested on the Christian Sabbath to a mar-
held as the Christian Sabbath. From an vellous degree, which surely would have
outside source and bearing the date of been withheld if this institution had been
about 110 A.D., probably not more than a nothing more than a commandment of
dozen years after the death of the Apostle men.
John, Pliny in his famous letter to the In opposition to the foregoing line of
Emperor Trajan speaks of the Christians argument anti-Sabbatarians adduce three
of his province as meeting together on a passages from the Hew Testament as, in
“ stated day,” undoubtedly the first day of their judgment, overthrowing the obliga-
the week, when they sang hymns to Christ tion of the Christian Sabbath. These are
as a God. The records of the earliest Homans xivth, Galatians ivth, and Colos-
martyrs show that one of the first points sians und chapters. It will help us to a
on which they were questioned was the ob- better understanding of these passages in
servance of the Lord’s Day—Dominicum detail if we attend first to several charac-


teristics which, they possess in common.
They are all taken from the Epistles of
the Apostle of the Gentiles, and, particu-
larly, from those parts of them in which he
is in direct conflict with Judaism. The
Christian, or semi-Christianised Jews,
formed a considerable element in the
churches in Home, Colosse, and though-
out the province of Galatia. Some of
them adhered to the ceremonial law as
being, at least, allowed; while others in-
sisted upon its observance as necessary to
salvation. The Apostle came in contact, in
different churches, with both of these
phases of Judaism, and he dealt with weak
or with dangerous brethren according to
the measure of their error. In the Church
of Some it was the milder form of Juda-
ism that prevailed. Sincere Christian
Jews were not altogether clear as to their
being relieved from the obligation of the
law of Moses under which they had been
brought up. In this doubtful state of
mind they deemed it safer to observe than
to neglect the old usages ; and so it be-
came a question of clean and unclean
meats, of fasting on certain days, and of
fasting on some others. This difference
of belief and practice gave offence to the
Gentiles, and perhaps also to some of the
Jewish brethren who desired complete
freedom from Mosaic observances in virtue
of that liberty wherein Christ had made
His people free. In the midst of this din
of contention the Apostle counselled
charity, even though it had to be exercised
towards weak brethren. Was it a question
of a fast day or a feast day, about eating or
abstaining from eating ? Then the Apostle
would say : One man esteemeth one day
above another, another (man) esteemeth
every day alike. Let every man be fully
persuaded in his own mind. He that re-
gardeth the day, regardeth it unto the
Lord; and he that regardeth not the day,
to Lord he does not regard it. He that
eateth, eateth to the Lord, for he giveth
God thanks ; and he that eateth not, to
the Lord he eateth not, and giveth God
thanks.” Head in the light of the occasion
which gave rise to the dispute, the whole
affair is seen to be a question of obsolete,
Jewish observances and nothing more.
The decision of the inspired writer regard-
ing indifference of days, of which anti-Sab-
batarians make so much account, applies
only to Jewish practices. The connection
makes it certain that St. Paul had not pre-
send to his mind the Lord’s Day with its
claim for rest and worship.
Among the churches of Galatia, on the
other hand, a wholly different type of
Judaism strove for the mastery. Certain
emissaries from the bigots at Jerusalem
had obtained the ear of the fickle-minded
Galatians, and. boldly asserted that unless
they were circumcised and kept the law of
Moses they could not be saved. In the
presence of such enemies, the founder of
these churches knew no compromise, and
would make no concession. His own con-
verts he charged with turning again to the
beggarly elements of this world, while they
observed days and months, and times and
years. That he referred to the obsolete
rites of the former dispensation is evident
from the declaration which followed, “ Be-
hold, I Paul, say unto you that if ye
be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing.” In these circumstance it was
necessary to use strong language in con-
demnation of their observance of days and
months, and times and years which com-
posed the cycle of Jewish festivals : but it
is simply absurd to adduce this passage as
a proof that the Sabbath, or Lord’s day,
has no place in the Christian Church. In
the quotation usually made from the second
chapter of Colossians in the same anti-
Sabbatarian interest, St. Paul is profes-
sedly treating of the abolition of the cere-
monial law through the death of the Lord
Jesus Christ, which he describes a& “ blot-
ting out the handwriting of ordinances that
was against us, which was contrary to us
and took it out of the way, nailing it to
His cross ; and having spoiled principalities
and powers He made a show of them openly
triumphing over them in it.” And he
continues: “ Let no man therefore judge
you in meat or in drink, or in respect to an
holyday, or of the new moon or of the
Sabbath days, which are a shadow of things
to come, but the body is of Christ.” It is
surprising that any intelligent reader, not
to say critic, could have perused these
verses, and yet have failed to perceive that
they could apply only to the ancient typical
ritual which was fulfilled in Christ. To
have seen in the apostle’s condemnation of
Sabbath days, as then observed by Judaists,
a prohibition of a dav of rest and worship
under the Christian dispensation, is a
blunder which could have been possible


only through an oversight of the fact that
this holy day is never called in the New
Testament the “ Sabbath,” but always the
“ first day of the week” or the “ Lord’s
day.” The “ Sabbath” is applied only to
its antecedent in the Old Testament; while
Sabbaths, or Sabbath days, usually desig-
nate the whole cycle consisting of the
weekly Sabbath in its ceremonial aspect,
the Sabbath of the seventh month, the
year-Sabbath which closed the period of
seven years, and the G-reat Jubilee Sab-
bath which completed the cycle in the
fiftieth year. These are the Sabbath days
concerning which the sacred writer exhorted
his converts to allow no man to judge them
so as to enforce their obligation
111.-— The Eveey-Day Sabbath.
There still remains for consideration an
oft-repeated cavil against the Christian
Sabbath or the observance of the Lord’s
day. To set apart one day in seven for
Divine service and worship, is stigmatized
by some as a disparagement of the spiritu-
ality of the New Testament, which should
exalt every day into a Sabbath. The roots
of this error are to be found in several
directions. For one tiling, it proceeds on
a mistaken estimate of the character and
value of the Old Testament. The philo-
sophic Bacon well remarked that, when of
two things one is seen to be much more
valuable than the other, the inferior comes
to be considered of scarcely any import-
ance at all. So it has fared with the Old
and the New Testaments in many quarters.
The New is, indeed, an advance upon the
Old in spirituality, as it is in other things.
But is it correct to describe the Old Testa-
ment as an unspiritual book ? Is there any
want of spirituality in the prophecies of
Isaiah, or in the Psalms of David ? Let
any Christian of our age read the ninety-
second Psalm, which is inscribed, “ A
psalm or song for the Sabbath day,” and
then let him ask himself how much superior
is his own spiritual frame of mind to that
of the Hebrew psalmist. What higher
exercise of the spirit can there be than the
emotion of pure and disinterested love, and
nothing less than this supreme demand the
Old Testament makes “ Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all thy mind . . . and thy
neighbour as thyself. On these two com-
mandments hang all the law and the
prophets.” But were the spirituality of
the New Testament ever so much superior
to that of the Old, secularising the Sabbath
would be a strange way to become imbued
with the same spirit. The end of this
ordinance is to make us more spiritual
than we could be without this precious
boon which Grod in His mercy has given to
the children of men. For, be it observed,
the question is not whether there might not
be found here and there a devout Christian
who could carry a high-toned spirituality
equally well through all the days of the
week ; but, whether mankind or men in the
mass, doomed to toil for daily bread amid
the keen competition of the world, could
secure their great spiritual interests without
the help of the Sabbath. It is quite evi-
dent that under such conditions the six
working days would not be sanctified as so
many Sabbaths, but that the whole week
would be secularised. In order to provide
for our legitimate interest in both worlds,
Grod has mercifully laid down this law for
the disposal of the week : “ Six days shalt
thou labour and do all thy work ; but the
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy Grod.”
Chaptee Thied.
THE SANCTIFICATION OF THE
SABBATH.
I. —Peepaeatoey.
The sanctification of the seventh day was
reckoned of so much importance that the
Jews made preparation for its observance
several hours before its arrival. The Sab-
bath began at sunset on Friday evening,
and from three o’clock of that afternoon
the people commenced to get ready for the
day of holy rest. All necessary work
which could not be postponed till after
the Sabbath was now performed; and, in
particular, the cooking of food, since it
was not lawful to kindle a fire on the
seventh day. These three or four hours,
during which all things were got ready for
the Sabbath, were of sufficient consequence
to give to the whole day the designation of
“ the preparation.” All the evangelists
mention it under this name, and St. Luke
gives this circumstance as a touchingly
beautiful note of the crucifixion, “ That
day was the preparation and the Sabbath
drew on,” It is surely not to be supposed
that this duty would be less binding, or its


advantages less precious, under our more
spiritual dispensation. Some kind of pre-
paration is necessary as a transition from
the atmosphere of worldly cares into the
holy rest and spiritual service of the
Sabbath of the Lord. Moses was required
to put off his shoes before he approached
the Divine Presence in the burning bush.
This transition from secular to sacred
II. — The Day as Sacked.
The fourth commandment speaks of a
twofold sanctifying of the Sabbath; the
one on the part of God and the other
on the part of man. W e are commanded
to keep the Sabbath day holy, and God is
said to have blessed the seventh day and
sanctified it by His own example. From
this double sanctity, it necessarily follows
duties has been aptly compared to the that actions which are sinful on other days
ringing of a great bell which has to be mustbeexceedinglyheinous on the Sabbath.
swung several times before it can be effec-
tively tolled. It was probably in con-
sideration of this difficulty, and with a
view to meet it, that the Saxon king Edgar
issued a proclamation requiring his subjects
to reckon the commencement of the Sab-
bath from nine o’clock on Saturday night.
One thing is certain that our forefathers
who loved the Sabbath, were not forgetful
to anticipate its arrival by a suitable
preparation during the closing hours of the
week when they had taken leave of their
ordinary employments. A touching glimpse
of this pious practice, as it prevailed a
century ago, is furnished by the national
poet of Scotland in his “ Cottars’ Saturday
iSTight.” Burns is a credible witness, for
the scene he so beautifully describes took
place under his own paternal roof. This
incident of the peasant life of Scotland has
been snatched from oblivion by the merest
chance; yet there is no reason to doubt
that it is a fair sample of a custom which
widely prevailed in the good days of old.
There is no valid reason for its falling into
disuse in the present time. The general
boon of a Saturday half-holiday, which-
brings a timely loosening of the bonds of
labour, affords a precious opportunity to
the willing mind to prepare for the ap-
proach of the holy Sabbath. But it is
greatly to be feared that these holiday
laours usually operate in the opposite direc-
tion. Relaxation frequently degenerates
into semi-dissipation. In the large cities
most of the inhabitants leave their homes
for the markets or the streets, where they
spend the closing hours of the week; and
when they return, their fitness to enter
upon the duties of the approaching Sab-
bath is much less than it would have been
if they had come directly from the factory
or the workshop.
Depraved men eagerly pursue their wicked
courses just because the day is holy, for it
is the nature of evil to rush upon things for-
bidden, and tread upon law from the very
wautonness of transgression. But others
are liable to censure on this score, who
would not like to be classed with profane
men. The merchant who does a little
secret business, and cheats still more
secretly, falls under the same condemn-
ation. It is surely awfully perilous for
those who say they have hope in Christ, to
be guilty of conduct on the Sabbath which
would not be lawful on other days of the
week. Such sins, if not broken off by
timely repentance, may be expected to lead
either to apostacy or despair.
Coming now to practices which are law-
ful on ordinary days, but are not
allowable on the Sabbath, we may notice,
in the first place, as occupying the fore-
front in the question, the pernicious and
very prevalent habit of spending the sacred
day in mere pleasure and holiday-making.
This mode of passing the day sins against
the Sabbath institute in two respects.
First, it is a usurpation of what belongs to
God. Under all dispensations He has
claimed a special propriety in this day. At
the beginning He blessed and sanctified it
as being His own rest, as well as a benefit
to men; under the Mosaic economy He
spoke of it as “My holy day and all
through the times of the Christian Church
it has been styled, by way of eminence,
the “Lord’s Day.” “Will a man rob
God?” is a question asked by Malachi, as
if it could not be affirmatively answered
without extreme impiety. And yet men
robbed God at that time in withholding
tithes and offerings, as they also do it now
by usurping His own holy day to spend
it in sensual pleasure. In the second
place, to devote the Sabbath to holiday-
making is to sin against the purpose of
rest for which it was appointed. Men may


become tired and worn out by pleasure ex-
cursions as well as by manual labour. A
convincing' testimony was borne to this
truth in England by a recent agitation for
opening the public-houses for some hours
on Sunday evenings. It was argued that
returning at that time from the Sunday ex-
cursions men were so jaded and wearied as
to need stimulants to refresh them. This
being the state of matters on the evening
of the day of rest, it might well be sup-
posed that the succeeding Monday would
have something of the same tale to relate.
And this is just the common experience
wherever the Sabbath is diverted from a
holy day to a holiday. In large factories
it is generally found that a Sunday so mis-
spent is followed by a Monday which turns
out to be the least productive day in the
week.
If this were a mere question of expedi-
ency, the foregoing facts show how inex-
pedient the practice would be; but it can-
not be too emphatically affirmed, or too
frequently repeated, that abstinence from
labour has been made the subject of ex-
press prohibition: “ The seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord; in it thou shalt not
do any work.” In its manward aspect,
this statute is grounded on the fact that the
Sabbath was made for man. The rest of
the seventh day is required for physical
reasons. Wherever it has been disre-
garded man has been a loser, even in re-
spects of his temporal concerns. That this
necessity for periodic rest has its root in
physiology has been sufficiently proved
from the experience of the beasts of bur-
den, which are so intimately associated
with man. Some years ago, this question
was satisfactorily tested by the proprietors
of an omnibus company in London. At
one time the hours during which the horses
were put to work were distributed equally
over the seven days of the week; at an-
other time the same number of hours were
completed in six days, the seventh day
being allowed for absolute rest. The
event proved that the advantage lay, unmis-
takably, with the latter course of procedure.
Experience has also justified the wisdom
of setting apart a seventh portion of time
in preference to any other measure. France,
in the midst of her revolutionary frenzy,
changed the Sabbath, by public statute,
from the seventh to the tenth day. The
experiment completely failed and a return
had to he made to the seventh day for such
a vestige of the Sabbath as was left to the
French people.
lll.— Works of Piety, Necessity, and
Mercy.
The prohibition “ Thou shalt not do any
work” is not to be construed in an absolutely
literal sense. The Sabbath was made for
man; and it, therefore, enjoins the rest
which he needs ; but this same benevolent
purpose occasionally requires the rule to be
reversed for the good of man, and some-
times for the beasts which he uses in his
service. An intelligent study of this whole
subject leads to the conclusion that three
exceptions may be made to this law of
Sabbath rest. These are—
1. Works of Piety.
So it was according to the Old Testa-
ment practice. The Sabbath day was the
busiest of the seven in the Temple; and
hence arose the saying that there is no
Sabbath in holy things. On that day
the morning and evening sacrifices were
doubled; and the shewbread also was
renewed. It was in reference to this work
in the sanctuary that the Saviour said,
Have ye not read in the law, how that on
the Sabbath days the priests in the temple
profane the Sabbath and are blameless ?”
This Sabbath work in holy things, though
in contradiction to the letter of the law, is
eminently in harmony with its spirit. To
be active after this manner is to fulfil the
end of the Sabbath even more than when
we rest according to the commandment in
the letter.
2. Works of Necessity.
By this class of works are meant such as
could not be performed before the day
arrived ; nor be deferred till after its close.
On the Sabbath day, as on all days, it is
necessary to eat and drink and attend to
the ordinary wants of nature. Accidents,
also, may arise calling for immediate active
effort. A fire may break forth throwing
the whole neighbourhood into imminent
peril. To refuse to extinguish a conflagra-
tion on the Sabbath day would not be
religion but fanaticism. In making this
exception for man’s benefit, Ood is again
showing that the Sabbath was made for
man, and not man for the Sabbath. But it
is expected, on our part, that this clause
shall be honestly and conscientiously inter-
preted as required by the sanctity of the


Lord’s day. Men of weak religious prin-
ciple will be prone to stretch this conces-
sion beyond legitimate bounds; for when
one finds it very much to his interest to
follow an exceptional course, it will not be
difficult to adduce some show of necessity
for his vindication.
3. Works of Mercy.
This permission also flows very directly
from the principle so emphatically asserted
that the Sabbath was made for man.
Healing is one of those acts of mercy which
are eminently lawful on the Sabbath day.
He who came from heaven to earth for our
benefit and went about doing good, has left
a noble record of healing on the Sabbath.
His argument was that it is surely lawful
to do good on the best of days. This view
of the case is brought to a point in the
instance of the woman who was loosed from
an infirmity of eighteen years standing on
the Sabbath day. After such a term of
suffering her release must, indeed, have
been a red-letter day in her experience;
and surely it was all the more appropriate
that the time was the Sabbath. On the
same principle of reasoning, it is lawful to
wait on sick beds and minister to the
afflicted on the Sabbath day; for in the
absence of such attendance healing is not
to be expected except in the way of
miracle of which there is no promise.
IY. —Religious Activity on the Day
of Rest.
So far the Sabbath has been considered
as a day of rest from the servitude of the
world, from unsatisfying pleasure-seeking,
and from manual labour. But this cannot
be the whole of the matter. There is no
merit in mere idleness ; nor could it have
been the purpose of God to reduce the
appointed day to absolute inaction. Simply
to do nothing, is no part of religion, but
usually lies considerably on the other side
of the line. God discourages indolence
both by example and precept. He rests
indeed from Creation, but continues active
in Providence. “ My Father,” says Christ,
“ worketh hitherto and I work'” The
Saviour went about His Father’s business,
both on Sabbaths and on week-days. Even
in heaven there is no inert idleness. The
cherubim and seraphim continually praise
God ; and His servants serve Him day and
night in His temple. However the Lord’s
day ought to be spent it cannot be right to
pass it away in dreamy inaction, uotwith-
standing the commandment to rest from
labour. In what manner then is the Sab-
bath to be employed so as to fulfil the end
of its institution ? In order to find the
correct answer to this question, we should
carefully ponder our Lord’s words, “ The
Sabbath was made for man” ; not for man
surely as a mere animal who eats and
drinks, and wakes and sleeps ; but for man
principally in his higher and nobler nature,
as made in the image of God. It has been
the common error of the so-called friends
of the working man to consider him only in
his lower capacities of enjoyment and limit
the Sabbath to this part of his nature. Of
these sciolists Hugh Miller well remarked,
“ Their expert, but unscientific, gunnery
takes no account of the parabolic curve of
man’s spiritual nature.’i The physical ele-
ment in man needs rest, but the spiritual
requires quickening. All precedent shows,
that to assemble together for public worship
and religious instruction, is a most appro-
priate engagement for this holy day. Under
the law of Moses the Sabbath is expressly
said to have been the set day for a holy
convocation, or an assembly of the people
for pious purposes. In later times, when
the service of the synagogue came into use,
the seventh day was the occasion which
brought the people together, “ Moses of
old time hath, in every city, them that
preach him, being read in the synagogues
every Sabbath day.” In the Apostolic
Church the Lord’s day was appropriated
for Divine service and the celebration of
the Sacrament of the Supper, “ Upon the
first day of the week when the disciples
came together to break bread Paul preached
unto them.” The Epistle to the Hebrews
contains the standing injunction, “Hot
forsaking the assembling of yourselves
together as the manner of some is.” And
this commandment was given at a time
when persecution made it perilous for
professing Christians to come together for
such a purpose, Hext to public worship,
family duties of a distinctly religious
character claim to be attended to on the
Sabbath. This is frequently the only day
on which the head of the household has
sufficient leisure to instruct his children.
These circumstances render it all the more
imperative that this duty should, by no
means, be neglected on the only occasion
when it can be efficiently performed. In
bygone days when there were no Sab-


batli schools, the religious instruction of
the family by the parents was far better
attended to than it is at the present time.
This is not an argument against the Sunday
School institution, but it intimates the
urgent necessity of home training, as an
indispensable requirement of the age.
Heads of families should not forget that
this is one of the most suitable occupations
for the Sabbath, and is at the same time
an effort which may be expected to even-
tuate in great benefit to the church and
the state. Those who have been reared in
families where this practice prevailed will
look back with fond remembrance to those
exercises at the domestic hearth as the
sunny spots of the springtime of their life.
But there are also private exercises which
are peculiarly appropriate to the blessed
hours of this holy day. Luther regarded
* the personal duties of a Christian man as
consisting principally in meditation, self-
examination, and prayer. The quiet of
the day of rest is specially favourable to
meditation, and the pious mind should be
f frequently employed in this profitable
exercise. In the “ Psalm or Song for the
Sabbath day,” which forms the ninety-
second in the collection, a delightful
instance of Sabbath musing has been pre-
served for the benefit of the Church of
God. The facts commemorated by the
Sabbath furnish the pious mind with ample
food for reflection. This institution having
been definitely associated with the creation
of the world, with the deliverance of Israel
from Egypt, and with the resurrection of
our Lord, the devout mind may very profit-
ably guide its meditation on these three
lines of thought. On this day, which now
represents all that was contained in the
, seventh, Glod rested from His labours, to
speak after the manner of men, and on
the review of His finished works, declared
them all to be very good. The contempla-
tion of the heavens and the earth should
also be a delightful exercise to ourselves.
\ If the Sabbath was meant, among other
things, to be a memorial of creation, it is
difficult to understand how the Sabbath
can be properly observed without making
the works of the Creator an object of
thoughtful attention. The fact, also, that
. the Sabbath was brought into intimate
| connection with the exodus from Egypt,
may well give a key-note for profitable
, musings on what Glod has done for His
church in the past, as a ground of hope and
confidence of what He will yet do in the
future. And, finally, in regard to prayer.
Luther’s third leading exercise of a godly
man, it is evident that the soul’s speaking
forth its desires to the Almighty can never
be more in place than on the Lord’s own
day. In the earliest accounts of the primi-
tive church this Christian privilege is con-
stantly noticed as the usual practice on this
happy occasion.
V.—Spirit op the New Testament
Observance.
Much of the stricture which still survives
in English speaking communities has descen-
ded from the times of the Puritans who are
often accused of austerity in observing the
Sabbath. Caricatureand malignity have fol-
lowed their own bent in drawing this
picture, although it is not to be denied that
the Puritans went too far towards the ex-
treme of rigidness, while we have gone
much further towards the opposite and
perilous extreme of looseness. It should
ever be remembered that the Christian
Sabbath is not a fast, but a festal day.
In our dispensation it is meant to keep alive,
the memory of our Lord’s Insurrection
and what event can be more joyful to the
Christian than the bursting asunder of the
bands of death and the grave by the Lord
of life and glory. So, at least, it was
esteemed by the primitive Christians who
stood nearest to this blessed event. Their
mode of observing the day was in keeping
with their gladsome recognition of the
Lord’s victory over the powers of evil.
The Epistle of Barnabas, which was pro-
bably written soon after the Book of
Bevelation, says, “We observe with glad-
ness the eighth day on which Jesus rose
from the dead.” These early disciples
deemed it inconsistent with this joyfulness
of spirit to pray on bended knees on the
first day of the week ; and, therefore,
stood upright as being the attitude most in
keeping with Christ’s rising from the
grave. They also showed their festive
conception of the day by wearing only
white garments. The change which super-
vened in later times was largely due to a
disproportionate study of the Old Testa-
ment, and from a failure to distinguish
correctly the Sabbath of the .lews from
Lord’s Day of the Christians. This is an
error which should be carefully avoided ;


nor need we have any misgiving regarding
Sabbath joy, so long as it is a joy in the
Lord. On that day more than any other,
the voice of rejoicing and salvation should
be heard in the tabernacles of the
righteous.
Vl.— Testimonies on Behalf or the
Sabbath.
If any further argument were needed to
enforce the observance of what has been
laid on every man as a solemn command, it
might surely be found in the great advan-
tages enjoyed by those that have made con-
science of this duty. So intimately has
the Sabbath been bound up with the in-
terests of religion and morality, that, when-
ever it has been kept in a Scriptural man-
ner, piety and virtue have flourished;
whereas those nations and communities
who have disregarded this statute have
reaped their own reward in irreligion and
dissoluteness of manners. The case has
not been otherwise with individuals who
are the component members of the state.
Before concluding it will not be improper
to quote several testimonies of private
Christians to the value of the Sabbath. The
first is from Dr. John Owen, one of the
greatest theologians of the Church in any
age. It is not free from his usual faults of
style; but the substance of his testimony
is A T ery precious: “'For my part I must
not only say, but plead whilst I live in this
world, and leave this testimony to the pre-
sent and future ages —if these paper see
the light and do survive—that if I have
ever seen anything in the ways and wor-
ship of God wherein the power of religion
or godliness hath been expressed; any-
thing that hath represented the holiness of
the Gospel and the author of it: anything
that hath looked like a prelude unto
the everlasting Sabbath and rest with
God which we aim through grace to come
to, it hath been there and with them,
where and among whom the Lord’s Day
hath been had in the highest esteem, and a
strict observance of it attended to as an
ordinance of the Lord Jesus Christ. The
remembrance of the ministry, of the walk-
ing and conversation, of the faith and the
love of those who in this nation have so
zealously pleaded for, and have in their
persons and families and churches or
parishes, been the most strict observers of
this day will be precious to them that fear
the Lord whilst the sun and moon endure.
Their doctrine also in this matter, with the
blessing that attended it, was that
for which multitudes now at rest do
bless God and in which many that
are yet alive do greatly rejoice. Let these
things be despised by those who are other-
wise minded, to me they are of great
weight and importance.” The experience
of the apostolic missionary Eliot may be
given as the next striking testimony. It is
recorded of him that, “ His observance of
the Sabbath was remarkable. He knew
that our whole religion fares according to
our Sabbaths; that poor Sabbaths make
poor Christians; and that a strictness in
Sabbaths inspires a vigour into all our
other duties. Hence, in his work among
the Indians, he brought them by a particu-
lar article, to bind themselves, as a princi-
pal means of confirming them in Christ-
ianity, ‘to remember the Sabbath day to
keep it holy as long as we live.’ As for
himself, the sun did not set the evening
before Sabbath till he had begun his pre-
parations for it. Every day was a sort of
Sabbath to him, but the Sabbath day was
with him a type and foretaste of heaven.
Nor would you hear,” says his biographer,
“ anything drop from his lips on that day
but the milk and honey of that country in
which there yet remaineth a rest for the
people of God.” The closing quotation will
be taken from the seraphic Archbishop
Leighton. “ The very life of religion doth
much depend upon the solemn observation
of this day. Consider but, if we should
intermit the keeping of it for one year, to
what a height profaneness would rise in
those that fear not God, who are yet re-
strained (though not yet converted) by the
preaching of the Word, and their outward
partaking of public worship ; yea, those
that are most spiritual would find them-
selves losers by the intermission.”




F
