

ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA.
5 STerto,
DELIVERED BEFORE THE
YOUNG MEN’S PRESBYTERIAN INSTITUTE,
IN THE
FREE CHURCH, MACQUARIE STREET, SYMEY,
SEPTEMBER 14th, 1864,
BY THE
REV. WILLIAM RIDLEY, M.A.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
Splints:
PRINTED BY HANSON AND BENNETT, EMPIRE ” OFFICE, PITT STREET




/d6~ O/J/f/jWo/
i/z Hi//f7j/j l4~JL^C^yQ 'C i c/&*j
HZ liUfjß/f/fS (h>s£
toy \VA LL4 yJAs/sfi
Si" W/jff/jGIL c # /w (aJr*fij&/)
!0U Wo LA BA /\anfa^<n>
Zu NO/fi/yoBA of pul/
SI WOLVOL JA c-unir
%a WU/fiTc/j t £&aA_J4tn*~oL>




S
' <-* f
2.2. Y(/11/M# fcfcz£fo4~*-0
du, Y(J 61A L sbftrr,c*. *




ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA.
% f stim
The relation between aboriginal races and colonising
nations is cne of very great and, in some respects, pain-
ful interest. In every land now occupied by a civilised
and progressive people there aro some evidences of the
previous existence of a race wbicb has lost its distinctive
character, either by destruction or by absorption into the
prevailing race. Modern historians find traces in Britain
of a people who inhabited that island before the Celts-*
evidence that the Britons who were dispossessed by the
Saxons and Danes bad themselves, before the landing of
Julius Caesar, exterminated an earlier race. As wave
after wave of population has moved onward
from the earliest 'homes of mankind about the
Caspian Sea towards the coasts of the Atlantic, there baa
been, in many oases, a gradual amalgamation of the
Invading and the conquered people. And the Briton
and the Frenchman of the present day have been taught
to ascribe the greatness and glory of the two fore-
most nations in the world to the union of the several
races from which they sprung.
In the ages of antiquity the same accession of national
power, by the amalgamation of invading and conquered
races, is observable. The Hellenes, wbo bequeathed to
the world an inheritance of art and intellectual attain-
ment which reflects undying renown on their name,
acknowledged their obligations to the Pelasgians, wbo
preceded them in Greece. And when the Hellenes
colonised the shores of the Mediterranean and pushed
far into Asia, they received many of the aborigines as
elements in the new communities they founded. In
many of the colonies of Borne, in Britain for instance,
the aboriginal and conquered people constituted the


greater part of the population, having garrisons of the
empire stationed among them, and enjoying the benefits
of Homan law and discipline.
From the history of ancient colonisation, it might
have been anticipated that when—upon the te-awaken-
ing of intellect and peaceful enterprise, after the mental
torpor and martial ferocity of the middle ages—the
Chris'i m nations of Europe sat oat on the work of
colonisation, their intercourse with the aborigines of the
lands they occupied would be attended with the happiest
results to those aborigines. But, unhappily, though
anoieut colonisation preserved and improved the aboii*
gices, modern colonisation has, in most instances, been
followed by the deatrnotion of aboriginal races. This
difference in the result is partly explained by the
different position in the scale of self-culture to which
the races brought into contact in ancient and modern
times hid come. The invaders and aborigines of ancient
history were so much alike in nature and habits, that
no great measure of self-denial was required to secure
the conquered race from aversion and extermination.
Interest and choice led the invaders to associate them,
selves with the oborigiaeos in forming new states, Nc
chasm separated toe races, as on the one side
civilised, on the other barbarous; and without doing
viola nee to any .natural feelings they gradually united
into one people. Bat in the coarse of the much more
tx 1 ensive colonisation of the last 300 years, the most ad-
vanced nations in the world have come to tribes
which bed for thousands of years been separated from
the rest of mankind, and had been daring the long period
of this separation s'aMonary or retrograde. Progress is
a law imposed by Divine Wisdom upon human nature ;
and individuals or nations that refuse to obey this law,
that cling to the pest or loiter in the present, and neglect
the opporunity of attaining a better future, inevitably
sink and perish. A narrow channel divided the habits
and dispositions of the Pelasgiaos and Hellenes, of
Romans and Cappadocian?, o! Celts and Teutones ; a
gulph elnoat impassable separated the Dutch, Spmish,
Portuguese, English, and French colonists from
the Malays, Combses, Bed Indians, and
Hottentots of modern times. And, though the
legions of emigrants who have gone forth from Europe
since the revival of geographical enterprise, have carried
with them, in profession, principles of truth and duty
nnknawn to the ancient nns ers of the world ; the
religion which unfolds ‘ the philanthropy of God” has


eot had snob a hold on the minds of thaas emigrants as
to overcome the contempt and aversion awakened by the
wide divergence of the abotigines from the ways of
civilised man. Surely, if the Christian civilisation, in
the extension of which we love to glory, were an
embodiment of "the mind of Cimst," it weald have
brought life and peace, not decay and death, to the
ptior inhabitants of the oonntiies oocnpied.
In soma British colonies the result of the contiguity
of our race and aboriginal tribes has bean the utter
extermination of the latter. In Australia the drama is
Dot yet worked on*; and somethin? may yet be
done to make the history of British influence
on the destiny of the aboriginal Aus'ra.iaos
different to what it would be if no just consideration
of the responsibilities arising out of onr relation to them
were brought to bear upon oar conduct towards these
people. The subject before ns is, therefore, not merely
one of ethnographical curiosity; it is a snbject that
touches the duty and honour of the British nation, and
that bears on the sacred obligations of the Church of
God in Australia.
The sources of information concerning the Australian
race are the journals of explorers, from Captain Cook to
Landsborongh and Stuart,— among which the works of
Leichhardt, M'Gillivray, and Sir Thomas Mitchell,
are especially worthy of perusal—the recollec-
tions of such settlers and their man, as have been for
years in constant communication with the blacks, the
records of the few missionaries who have gone among
them seeking their spirit aal good, and the narratives of
men who, through shipwreck or other misfortune, have
been compelled to spend a large time with them. From
these various sources volumes of accurate information
might be compiled, and data may be derived for the basis
of reasonable conjecture respecting the past history of
the race. So that there is ground for the expectation
that in the compendious History of the World which
a worthy successor of Sit Waiter Baleigh, Bolin and
Buckle will write in the twentieth oentory, the history
of Australia dating the lapse of the thousands of years
which passed before 1788 will not be a mere
blank.
In a lecture one can only present a few illnstra.
tiona of the information which has been collected can-
eerning the aborigines. 1 propose to put before yon,
some conjectures and some certainties concerning the
early history of the Australian race; some of their laws


sad customs; specimens of their language; a brief
account of their religion; sketches of individual oh a
rooter; end some notices of the missionary efforts which
have been put forth on their behalf. And under the beads
of laws and language, I assure yon, that if I do justice to
those of whom 1 speak, and succeed in conveying to your
minds a correct view of facts that have oome under my
own observation, yon will acknowledge that the aborigines
have preserved two grand relics of antiquity, and are
not to be set down as a brutish and mindless
race.
I. With respect to the early history of the aborigines,
one thing is certain, that they have been for many
centuries inhabitants of Australia; The unity of tbs
people is proved by the links which bind their namerons
languages together, and by the similarity of their form
and physiognomy, of their laws and customs; and the
dispersion of a people one in origin over the whole of
Ibis vast island, must have been the work of many
centuries. With all the resources at the command of
England and of America, neither of these nations has
extended its colonies at a rate that wonld overspread
Australia—as the black race have overspread it—in four
centuries. Then the wide divergence of the Australians,
in language and customs, from all other nations, be-
tokens a very long separation from the rest of mankind.
From the sorest of oil ancient histories we learn that
about 4000 years ego the speech of mankind was con*
founded by a Divine visitation, in order to frustrate their
combination to cluster permanently about the plains of
Sbinar, and so to defeat the purpose of the Allwise.
Thereupon the tribes of man went forth westward and
northward, and southward, end eastward to find new
homes. And probably from that early period, or soon
after it, the race now calling themselves Murti in the
Interior, and Djm or Dan on the coast, agreeing
together in language and disposition, and averse to the
regular labour and incipient refiaement of ether races,
were borne onwards, by their own roving temperament
and by the hostility of those who followed them ; and
like crest of fram upon the advancing wave flowed east,
ward before the Hindoo; Malay, and Mongolian tribes,
across India, Siam, and the islands of the Archipelago,
till they found undisturbed and ample homes in this
continent.
Since the Pacific has been extensively navigated by
Europeans, companies of savage men have several times
been met floating on rafters far from any land. The
defeated party in some of their frequent contentions


has often been driven to this venturesome
way of escape from the fnry of their con.
querots. It is not, therefore, difficult to imagine
bow, drifting or paddling from island to island, the first
human inhabitants of Papna and Aastralia found their
way from the mainland of Asia to the present abodes of
their descendants. As the whole family of Man was, np
to the time of their miraculous dispersion, acquainted
with the ordinary arts of civilised life, and endowed with
the knowledge of the one living and true God, there most
have been on the part of those who are now found
destitute of these advantages, an abandonment of whit
was onoe their inheritance. The Australian race, on
retiring from the presence of more energetic and intellec-
tual nations, chose not to retain the knowledge of God
or the means of individual and social progress; and as a
necessary consequence, declined from generation to
generation, until even the use of houses and of clothing
was forgotten. Their present mental and social condi-
tion may be regarded as " the desolations of many
generations," In eome instances these desolations have
been so effectually repaired that aborigines of Australia
have acquired a taste for the enjoyments and pursuits of
civilised life, have adopted European clothing, have
built houses, learnt to read and write, to speak English,
Gaelic, and Latin, and what is more important to ad-
here to a course of steady industry. The long process
of depression, therefore, has not destroyed in them the
capacity of rising to a nobler life.
To return,—when the Murri first came to Australia-
or as it is called by the inhabitants of the northern
coasts Kei Dowdai (great Dowdai)* in contradistinction
from Muggi Dowdai (little Dowdai) or New Guinea,—
they found here abundance of game. The kangaroo and
emu, that furnish their choicest luxuries, and the
opossum, the very staff of life, were here long before
man. Immense flights of pigeons and swans, and
ducks, all delicious fere, quickened his appetite and bis
genius to the invention of the boomerang, the scientific
laws of whose marvellous curve, causing it to
take an immense sweep and to return to the
thrower's hand, have been pondered by the
Universities of the British Isles. Along the coasts and
the rivers multitudes of fish incited the people to the
art of net making. While the marsupial animals have
left numerous fossil evidences of their having been in-
habitants of Australia for ages before man came hither;
there ate reasons for concluding that the dingo, or native
* Bee Note at the ead of the Lecture.


dog, via brought over by man. Coming, however, as the
servant of man, be has broken away Item his master,
and grown into one of the greatest pests in the eonntry,
committing ravages among the fl:cks which induced tie
late Minister for Lands to pat forth bis legislatorial
powers to devise a bill for the extinction of the dingo.
In farther illustration of the antiquity of the black*
fellow's occupation of Eei Dowdai, it is a fact worthy of
observation that they have appropriated districts, or
* taorais,” to families end tribes, which have been so
long isolated through enmity and suspicion, that their
dialects, though evidently of one origin, are now
mutually unintelligible.
11. Leaving the region of conjecture as to the past, we
oome now to inquire into their present condition, and 1
will successively present illustrations of their laws, re-
ligion, and national customs.
1, One law common to them, with all nations to a
greater or less extent, is Retaliation. This, it may be
said, is an instinct of man and beast—a passion which
laws are required to restrain. But among the Austra-
lians, as well as some other races, retaliation is re-
duced to a system. In some points the aboriginal law
of retaliation in Australia corresponds with the code of
honour, so called, which certain classes in Europe have
long maintained. When one blackfellow carries off the
wife of another, the injured husband and the betrayer
meet in mortal combat; and the spear
that spills the life blood repairs the wounded honour of
the one, or justifies in the eyes of society the
crime of the other. Another irjury which is avenged
with relentless fury is the invasion of the sacred seclu-
sion which surrounds the dead. Differing widely in
their modes of disposing of the dead, all agree in defend-
ing their remains with the utmost severity. When
Darumboys, or Davies, wbo spent thirteen years with
the aborigines near Wide Bay, was, with a companion
who had fled with him from the penal settlement,
gathering oysters on the beach, they observed a basket
hanging on a tree; and Davies’s comrade, finding it
contained nothing but some dry bones, and thinking it
would be handy for carrying oysters, threw out the bones
and made use of the basket. Unhappily, the bones
were those of • man ; and as soon as the
blacks found that the sanctity with which
they surrounded the remains of one of their
fathers had been violated, they killed the author of the
sacrilege. Darumboys himself only escaped through the
powerful intercession of some who believed that be was


a deceased blackfellow risen to life again with a wbila
ekin. The most terrible form of the law of retaliation
arises from the theory, which prevails in many parts of
the country, that death is always the result of injury in.
flioted by a fellow*creature. When one dies they believe
that his death has been compassed by means of a secret
by poison, or by an incantation or prayer to some
evil demon ; and they seek to trace the murderer by let*
tiog a winged insect fly from the corpse. The insect la
supposed to fly in the direction of the murderer, and
the person thus marked out is mercilessly slain. How
evident is the dominion of an Apollyon, a destroying in*
telleot, over the minds of the heathen I
2. Communism is another law of the aborigines. Tha
tribes have each their tribal inheritance, or taorai with its
boundaries exactly defined. All within the taorai is tha
property of the whole tribe, and what one obtains the
others claima right to enjoy; There is a limit, indeed,
which excludes females, and also young men until they
reach a certain age and have gone through the prescribed
ceremonies of admiss on to the rank of manhood—from
the choicest kinds of animal food. But they hold the
doctrine of M. Proudhon, the Bed Republican of Pari?,
“La Proprkte, o' est vol •: Beal and personal property in
individuals are rendered impossible by their systematic
communism. So when blaokfellows whose traditional
ideas ol law are not dispelled come to the stations and
receive presents or rewards, these are divided among
their companions; and it was not from mete thought*
lessness or ignorance of tha value of what they
possessed, nor yet from benevolence, that when a suit of
clothes was given to one, the company to which be be*
longed were seen accoutred, one with nothing but a coat,
another with a bat, another with trousers. A venerable
law banded down from many generations imposed tbia
division upon them. As caricatures convey useful
lessons, we invite the advocates ot communism to study
the illustrations of political economy supplied by the
aborigines.
3. The next law or system of laws is that of Pedigree
and Marriage. To this 1 invite your special attention.
For some aspects of this law ate in striking
contrast to the destructive fury of retails,
tion, and to the folly of communism.
This law prescribes a complete classification of the
people, of the nature of caste. By means of family
they are divided into four classes. Ippai, Murri,
Kubbi and Kumbo, are the names of men; and their
s,stars arerespeo.ivelj Lppata, Mata, Kapota, and J3uta,


In one family all the melee are called ippai, the females
ippata ; in another all the males are mart!, the females
mata; in a third all the males are bubbi, the females
iapota; and in a fourth all the males are bumbo, all the
females bate. Every family in all the tribes over a large
extent of country, including Liverpool Plains, the
Namoi, the Barwan, end the Bundarra, Is distinguished
by one of these four sets at names. The family name
Murrl (murree) differs from the national name
Marti (marry) in the quantity of the
last syllable. In some parts of the
district mentioned, Baia is substituted for Marti. The
names are hereditary; bat tbe tale of descent differs
from any other that I ever heard of. The sons of Ippai
(if bis wife be bapota) are all Marti (or ba<e) and bis
daughters Mata; tbe sons of Marti are Ippai and the
daughters Ippata; tbe eons of Eabbi are Eambo, the
daughters Bata; (he sons of Eambo are Eubbi, tbe
daughters Eapota. From a relaxation of the law of
marriage, to be noticed immediately, in favour of Ippai,
it appears that the children’s name is determined by tbe
mother’s, not by the fathers. For the son of Ippai and
Ippata is Eambo; the son of Ippai and Eapota is Marti;
whereas the son of Ippata (Ippai’s sister) is always
Eambo, whether she be married to an Ippai! or to a
Eabbi.
The law of marriage is founded on this system of
descent. Unhappily they have no law against polygamy;
hat while their law is not careful about the number of a
man’s wives, it denounces capital punishment against
any one who marries one of the wrong sort, Tbe rule
Is this:—
a, Ippai may marry Eapota, and any Ippata but his
own sister.
b, Marti may marry Bata only.
c, Eabbi may marry Ippata only.
d, Eambo may marry Mata only.
A genealogical table will illustrate this law, and show
how singularly the principles of caste and oommaniem,
sometimes deemed incongruous, are combined in this
system of descent and marriage. In some respects, for
instance in the larger marriage choice, Ippai is a
favoured class; but many who exercise a hind of
authority are Eambo. Now, observe that in the coarse
of a few generations every man’s descendants come into
the class of Ippai and Into that of Eambo. There is an
aristocracy of birth; but it is so regulated by the rules
of marriage and descent, that no family in the nation can
be kept out of it for three generations.


Kubbx
marries Ippita;
their children are all
Sambo (marries Mata) Bata (marries Marri)
their children ace their ohilsren are
Kabbi, whose) and Kapota,) Ippal, whose) and Ippata;
sens are I whose sons > sons are [-whose eona
Kambo j are Marri. j Marti, j are Kambo.
Kabbi’s grandchildren are of two classes, ippai and
kuhbi ; his great grandchildren are of the other
two classes, humho and murri ; and so on sue*
cessively. Thas, a rigid rule of descant brings
a man’s descendants in every two generations into each
class of soeiety. The design of these rales easily
be conjectured. And a brief consideration of that de-
sign will prove that the Australians had once a Salon
who was able to persuade a whole nation to adopt a rule
having important political and physical consequences.
First, here is a red republican spirit of equality en.
grafted on social life in a way that displays almost unique
ingenuity. Under a system of caste, the love of equality
is gratified by the sure prospect that the plebeian Kubibi
or Marti will see his sons or grandsons in one of the
patrician classes. And the rule of marriage has the effect
of preventing a man marrying either bis sist?r, hia
aunt, bis niece, or such first consins as ate the daughters
either of his father’s brother, or of his mother’s sister.
Thus Eubbi may marry Ippata oalv, Kabbi’s sisters
are Kapota, bis father’s sisters are Bata, his mother’s
sisters are Mata, his brother's daughters are Bata, bis
sister’s daughters are Mata ; hia father and hia father’s
brothers are named Kambo ; so that, his first consins,
the daughters of his father’s brother, are all Kapota; and
his first ooasins, the daughters of bis mother s sisters
(who are matas), ate all Kapota. All these relatives,
therefore, ace forbidden to him. But as his father is
Kambo and his father’s sister Bata, who marries Marti,
her daughters are Ippata, And again, his mother is
Mata, his maternal uncles ate Marri, and their daughters
are also Ippata. These, therefore, he is welcome to marry.
And it must be observed that while the first cousins
whom the aboriginal law allows a man to marry, the
daughters of a father’s sister or of a mother’s brother oaa
only be related to him on the one side; those whom ta
is fotEidden to marry may be doubly related to bun.
For as all brothers in the same family bear the same


name, It is always open to two or mote brothers to
marry wives of the seme family, and then the first
cousins are related both by the paternal and maternal
aide. Whether the aborigines who adhere to the tradi-
tional roles with the utmost tenacity until association
with white men teaches them to make light of the tradi-
tions of their fathers, ere aware of their design or not, it
is evident that a wise forethought has been exercised on
the subject; snd the practical result of the rule exactly
accords with the dictates of Christianity and of phy-
siology. So remarkable is the wisdom, and so exact the
application of soon! reason to a role of easy exercise,
that we may well suppose the folly of allowing polygamy,
and the exceptional liberty given to the Ippii, to have
been innovatione of a declining period is the morality of
Ihe nation. And if so, we may regard this system of
descent and rales of mmisge as a relic of antiquity, one
of the few monuments of early intelligence which this
lice has preserved.
This system of caste, with rules of descent and mar-
riage substantially the same, extends beyond the limits
o? the Eamilaroi language. Several tribes speaking other
languages use the eight names given above. Ippai, ippats,
&a.; and over a vide extent of country adjoining Moreton
Bay and Wide Bay the following names are used (for
men) Barang, Bacdar, Bandar, end Derwan ; (fes
women) Barangun (sister of Barang), Bundarun,Banda-
run, and Dervungun. The Eogai blacks to the west*
ward of the Batonne Bivet use these names—
Instead of Ippai and ippata—Urgilla and nrgillagun;
„ Mnrri and mats—Wnngoand vnngogun.
„ Eabbi and kapota— Obur and obnrngon.
„ Enmbo and huta—Unborti and nnburrigun.
Besides these family names they have, also, distinctive
names, nsnally taken from some animal or plant. 1 met
with a black called J.oky, whose ca'ive names were
Eabbi Mate (mate means opossum); and bis father's
name was Eatnbo Dinoun (emu). Bunder, one of the
eight family names at Moreton Bay, means in Eamilcroi
—kangaroo.
111. The Beligion of the aborigines in all puts of Aus-
tralia includes a belief in sorcery, and a dread of nume-
rous demons, spirits of the wood, of the river, of the
mountain and the pool. Some of these are the spirits of
dead men. I once met a party of thirty or forty men and
women who were traversing the country along the Bar-
wan, as strolling playactors, performing a pantomime in
the presence of every camp of their osuntrymen with the
avowed design of driving away the ghosts ol dead men*


All eight long the choir continued to sing these words:
" Turn thari nge, yarn thari ngna,
Dala ranga, dula ranga, yarn thari nge.”
In the morning having marked their bodies with earth
of various colours, yellow and bluish gray, they went
through a mimic fight with unseen foes, beating the air
with branches and rushing about in a frantic manner.
Alter alternately marching, dancing, and charging to the
stand of music, they declared that the ghosts were all
gone, end would trouble tbe inhabitants of tbe place no
more. The general name for ghost or spirit is *' wands."
And this came they give to white men, probably from the
impression which has spread among them that white
people are blackfeliows risen from the dead. Tbe chief
of all the wnndas, tbe arch demon, is said to appear at
their ioras, or public meetings, in tbe form of a serpent.
And there are figures of serpents out on tbe trees ia
some places, to which they pay religions homage.
Bat some tribes, at ail events, have a tradition which
ascribes creation (o One Being, Tbe Nemoi and Barwan
tribes say that “ Babme” (By am.e) made all things,
Tbe same name is need in tbe Wellington district for the
Creator, end with slight variations in sound, as Baiama
or P4cm?, is known over a large portion of New South
Wales. Taplin, superintendent of the
Mission at Point Maoleay, in South Aus-
tralia, states that tbe aborigines there believe
in a Supreme Being, whom they call " Narnndee.”
The blacks about Moreton Bay regard “ Mumbai” as a
being of supernatural power in the heavens; but I could
not ascertain while among them whether they ascribe
creation to him, Mumbai signifies tbander, and they
ascribe personal existence to tbe object thus named*
Some tribes; especially along tbe coast, eeem to have
lost tbe tradition concerning One Snpreme Creator;
but in all the country the belief in numerous demons,
or spirits, prevails, and as to tbe ascription of creation to
Baiame by the inhabitants of the western and north*
western parts of New South Wales, there is abundant
evidence. The missionaries of Wellington Vile long
since discovered the prevalence of this tradition, and
my own personal conversation with many aborigines,
who avow (bis belief, enables ms to state it with cer-
tainty. On the Namoi they told mo that Baiame is never
seen, bat (hander is his voice. Here, then, is a remnart
of tbe truth at first revealed to man—One invi-
sible God who made all things—and thunder
regarded ae tbe voice of the Lord. Once, however;
an old blaokfellow of a wasted tribe on tbe Hunter Bivec
told me that Baiame never came to them now, because


the blaokfellows of the district were elmost ell deed. Ha
gave me to understand that when a multitude used to
invoke the presence of Baiame he came into the midst of
them. 1 know of no evidence that they ascribe fatherly
providence, supreme wisdom, or justice to Baiame.
Faith In sorcerers, Erodgis, or Gnradgis, as they are
called, prevails throughout Australia. These men pre-
tend to cure diseases or to inflict them, to exorcise evil
spirits, end do other marvellous works. They have even
succeeded in persuading the younger members of their
tribes that they are able, by their incantations, to trans-
form themselves into kangaroos or pigeons. The in-
fluence acquired by their delusions is often most des-
potically exercised. The Erodgis sometimes prevent
young aborigines from going among the white people ;
and retain even over some who live and work at the
squatters' stations so strong a bold that they dare not
absent themselves from the periodical meetings at which
Iheit national rites are observed. In connection with
their religious belief ate the rites observed on important
occasions; The admission of young men to the privi-
leges of manhood, including the use of the best kinds of
food and power to take a wife, is an affair of much cere*
mony. At stated intervals, varying from two to three or
five years, hundreds of them meet together, and tribes
which at other times are at deadly enmity unite for the
occasion in apparently cordial amity; and the candidates
for admission to the dignity of manhood, having first
been kept for days in fasting and seclusion, are
brought into the charmed circle of the Boro, and undergo
the process which entitles them to take rank with their
tooth by one of the Erodgis is an essential part of the
ceremony. Other fat more revolting exactions ate in
some districts imposed on the candidates. All females
and strangers are rigorously excluded from these
mysteries.
Some observances of (his people singularly coincide
with those of the Mosaic law. Br. Leichhardt mentions
tribes in the north-east who practised circumcision;
and on the Barwan rules era observed in reference to
females in accordance with those recorded in Leviticus
xii. and xv. chapters. These facts seem to point to
■ communication J between the Marti and some
branch of the sons of Abrabam. And remembering bow
far the descendants cf Ishmael have made their influ-
ence felt, through Mahometan propagandists, not to
speak of the wide scattering of the seed oi Jacob, it


is not improbable that the observances in question now
found in Australia were derived originally from such a
source.
Various customs prevail as to the disposal of the
dead. Along the coast, northward, they have a
singular way of shoving their respect and affec-
tion towards departed relatives and friends, They cut
long strips or ribands of their shins, and carry these with
them as long as they can; and part of their flesh they
eat, not by way of a feast, but as a religions doty.
Cannibalism, or the killing and eating of human beings,
ia not an Australian custom. It ia only in some tribes,
and on exceptional occasions, that such a crime has been
known to be committed by them. It is reported that on
the of the Queensland Buoya.bnnya fruit—a
pine cone much resembling a bunch of ohesnnts in form
and taste—a young aboriginal is commonly killed end
eaten* The Banya*bnnya grows only in a limited
district of mountain ranges, and ripens only once in some
font years. When the season comes, blacks from many
distant localities flock to the place, to feast on this great
luxury. The tribes inhabiting the Bunya bnny#
country, while they allow their visitors to take freely of the
fruit, will not suffer them to kill an] of the animals there.
The strangers submit to this law; and after living for
several weeks on vegetable substances alone, feel an irre«
eistible craving for animal food; and rather than
break the law and provoke the enmity of the inhabitants
of the place, they are said to kill a youth of their own
company and devout his or her flesh* This is reported
and believed among the Queensland settlers. Horrible
as it is, if true, this is an exceptional case for which a
partial necessity in some measure accounts. The tribes
who eat a small portion of the flesh of their deceased
friends preserve the remainder, making a platform of
bark on poles from foot to six feet high, on which the
body is laid and coveted with leaves or grass. In soma
places fires are lighted nndet the bodies to smoke and
preserve them. When the flesh is gone, the bones are
laid np in baskets, and suspended on branches of trees.
In thelnteiior, at least in the north western parts of
this colony, a very different mode of treating the dead
ia observed. They are buried ka the ground, amid loud
lamentations, and exact traditional forms. Mounds era
raised over the dead, and are kept for years with great
cate. I have seen some of their circular tumuli, near
the Barwan, which bore evidence of their having
been visited by the hand of effaction. The
circle of sticks which surrounded them, the branches


!tid on the flat top, and the smooth sloping sides had
been renewed from time to lime, ss often as the foot ef
beast or the wind had disordered them. Some of their
cemeteries are in shady groves; and European travellers
have been amazed to discover, in the midst of a tangled
scrub, a spot sacred to the sleep of the dead, arranged
with the reitnesa of a garden, hoving smooth beaten
paths winding between the mounds. The solemnity and
beauty of such sacred spots may be discerned in two
engravings published in Sir Thomas Mitofeell’s narrative
of his explorations in the north, west. One is in the
midst of a grove j the other is the top of a bald hill,
commanding a view of a wide forest plain. There, as on
a Pisgah overlooking the wide region they hoped to
behold once more at the Resurrection, are three circular
mounds, which mark the sleeping places of the dead.
Surely; the people that selected such
beautiful and solemn testing places for
ILeir departed friends, and cherish their
memory by unfailing attention to the mounds that mark
their long home, are not a mindless or brutish race.
There was poetry in the souls of those who chose these
scenes to be their cemeteries; there is true human feel,
ingin the hearts of those who revisit and repair these
sacred mementos.
IV. The Languages of Australia are the next topic
These are multitudinous and elaborate. As the rapidly
advancing science of Pflilology enlarges its survey, tha
Australian tongues will be found to furnish matter
worthy of the study of the profoundest philologists, 1
shall attempt no mere at present than to state a few
facts illustrative of the peculiarities of this family of
languages. These languages are very numerous;—
within the oonparatively small circuit of my journeys
between Moreton Bay, the Balonne Rivet, Fort Boutke,
and the Peel, I met with twenty.five. Though they
ate linked by resemblances, which clearly prove
them to be all derived from one source, they are
ao diverse in their vocabularies that they
cannot be called dialects merely. The differences
between them are not like those between the dialects of
Attica and Laconia, or between those of Yorkshire and
Middlesex, shades of prononnoiation with a few peculiar
local words; On the contrary the words in which
identity can be traced, in two or mote Australian lan-
guages, are the exceptions; not the [rule. Some lan-
guages are limited to an area of some thirty or fifty
miles square. It is rare to find the same langoaga
awoken on (wo parallel tributaries of the Datlicg or tha


M array. A few languages seem to have a much wider
use. The following are the names of some languages
spoken in the interior, from 300 to 400 miles we tvard
from the coast, and between the 31st and 86th degrees
of south latitude: —(1) Kamilaroi, (3; W-iUroi, (3)
Wiraiaroi, (4) Wailwnn, (5) Kogai or Kogurre, (6) Pikam*
hul, (7) Paiamba, (8) Kingki. (The vowels are used here,
and throughout this lecture as in Freoah.) The first
five of these languages are named after their negatives.
In the first “kamil" signifies no; ia the second •* wol *
is no; in the third “ wira ” is no ; in the fourth " wail ”
is no; in the fiith M ko’’ is no< In Pikumbul, on the
other hand, *! pika ” means yes; so that the Australian
Muni in this instance named their language on tba
same principle on which the French acted in distin-
guishing the dialeots of France, as “ Lingua d* oo ” and
“ Langne d’ oui.” Along the coast, from Moreton
Bay to Wide Bay, these three languages,
among others; are Ispoken—Tutrnbnl, Ninganinge,
and Dippil. Of these Kamilaroi is most widely spoken,
and is evidently to some extent understood by aborigines
speaking far different languages. Kunilaroi is spoken
all down the Namoi, along the Barwan from the Mooni
to the junction of the Namoi, on the Bandarra north-
ward and the Liverpool Plains and the Upper Hanter
southward. It is understood on the Balonne; and even
natives of the country to the south of Sydney and of
Port Gartis have recognised Kamilaroi as a familiar
tongue*
To show that the differences between tbs languages
are not mere variations of pronunciation, tba word for
water is at Newcastle “kokoinj” at the head of the
Hanter Biver (which runs into the sea at Newcastle)it
is “ kelle;" at Moreton Bay it is “ tabbil;" afcnd at Wide
Bay “kong.” Fire at Newcastle is “ kuiyoag ;* at tba
head of the Hanter and all over the Kamilaroi country
it is "wi and at Moreton Bay it is "kudum." The
numerals one, two, three, supply a striking illustration
of the diversity, and still remaining unity of the lan-
guages. Most tribes have but three nnmtrals; soma
have four. And though the words for one and for
three in different parts of the country are as diverse as
may be, those for two are nearly tha
same. Thus at Newcastle tha numbers arc
(1) wakol, (3) buloara, (3) ngoro; in Kamilaroi they are
(1) mil, (8) balm, (3) galiba; at Moreton Bay, (1)
banner, (_8) badelar, (3) madden ; and at Portland Bey,
in the extrema west of Victoria, while the words for one
and three are different from any of the above, two is


n balm." The Sydney tribe, now extinct, else used
"bular" as the word for two. So that in going along the
eastern and southern coasts for twelve hundred miles,
we find two always represented by bular, or some slight
variation of that word, while the words for one and for
three differ in every tribe. Among the words which are
found north, east, south, and west are the pronouns of
the first and second person. The words for “he” and
•' she" differ as much as those for one and three. But the
words for " I" and “ thou,” '* we” and " you,” are the same
in substance all over Australia. «I” at Newcastle is
ngatoa; in Kamlaroi, ngaia; along the coast from
Moreton Bay to Wide Bay, ngai, ai, ngutta, or
ngatti; in South Australia, ngaii, in South.
Western Australia, ngadjo. In these several
places 41 we” is ngeen, ngeane, ngadlu, nganeel.
and “ thou” is ngintoa, nginda, nginta,
or ninta, and nginnei, or ninnas “ He” is
bo-untoa at Newcastle, ngerma in Kamilaroi; and
nnda or wunnal in Queensland. The pronouns
have a dual form. The first person (in Kamilaroi) Is
ngaia (I) ngunna (me), ngulle (wo 2, thou and I),
ngnllina (we 8, he and I), ngeane (we )
While the vocables differ widely, the grammatical
■truoture of the Australian languages marks their unity
most fully. They are all characterised like the German
by great facility in forming derivations and compounds.
Nouns, adjectives, and pronouns are by affixes turned
into verbs. 4 ' Mil” the eye, in kamilaroi is made a verb,
thus 4 ‘railmil,” to see. From 44 andi” who? comes
" anduma” say who. ,4 Muga,” blind or stupid, with
m binna,” tbe ear, makes 41 mugabinna" deaf. The most
remarkable feature in the Australian languages is com.
mon to them all; it is the elastic power of modification
in tbe verbs. Going eastward from Britain we find this
feature in languages constantly increasing, The Greek
has a middle voice in addition to the active
and passive. The Hebrew has also intensive,
causative, and reflective voices. The Australian
lauKuaees have, besides these, permissive and reciprocal
voices. The Bev. L. E. Threlkeld, in hla grammar of
the dialect spoken on the Lower Hunter, enumerated 15
modifications or voices of the verbs—(l) active transi-
tive. (2) active intransitive, (8) reciprocal, (4) continua-
tive, (5) permissive, (6) causative by pe«on* l agenoy,
(7) causative by instrumental agenoy. (8) effective, (»)
neuter, (10) double or increasing, (11) privative, (18)
imminent, (13) inceptive, (M) iterative, (16) epjnta.
neons. In Kamilaroi the affix-mulle signifies to eanse


to do • -Wile signifies to allow to do. Thus, " Nginda
nsnnna ngummilmulle,*' is '* yoa me make-to-see," i. e.,
“ehow me.” " Kamil Yarri ngunna buimoabille,” is
m not Harry me will-allow-to-be-beaten,” ie,, Harry is
my friend and protector.
In the tenses one inflexion signifies a little past,
another refers to yesterday, another to a distant past; so
of the future. " Goalngain,” means spoke (to-day); "goal-
mien,'* spoke yesterday; •' goallen,” spoke [long ago;
•• goalngari," will speak to-morrow; " S o ®**®’"
will speak at some future time. The
three forms of the imperative mood in Kamilaroi are re-
markably characteristic of the people. The common im-
perative ends in-a; -wa(with a strong emphasis) added to
this makes it very emphatic; -mia added to the root
forms an ironical imperative, meaning do it if you dare,
or if you can. Thns “goalie” means speak I
“goallawa** (prolonging the last syllable according to the
degree of earnestness with which the command or
entreaty is uttered) means f speak !or I’ll make you,”
“speak! or yoo’re a dead man," &3. “Goalmia’
signifies “ speak if you can—if you dare, &o.*’ When I
went up to a camp of blacks to whom I was a stranger,
and began to speak in Kamilaroi as well as I could, one
of them burst out laughing and said " Inda Kamilaroi
goalmia 1” that is "You speak Kamilaroi, if you can I"
of course intimating his opinion that I was a poor
scholar in his language. “ Inda ngunna bumalmia”
you beat me, if you dare! Thus the irony which
all whft have been among them know to be
intensely developed in the Monti mind, has embodied
itself in a mood of every verb in their language.
The aborigines are very exact in the use of their
numerous inflexions. And the marvellous flexibili’y
and precision of their language, of which the above are
a few specimens, constitute the second notable relic of
antiquity which they have preserved imid their decay.
A language capable of expressing by inflexion minute
shades of thought must have been the channel of com-
munication between minds endowed with considerable
acumen and power of generalisation. To illustrate the
power of expression in the Dippil and Kamilaroi, here
are two examples. The first is a dialogue between two
brothers in Dippil. (N B.—The vowels are pronounced
as in French.) First Bundar soliloquises: “ Kawnndao
ngunungai yemaryemar kurranimarain. Undarn nuna
wurang aieri. Unda wunna bunna bumgai, ngntta bom
bunnayemago." (Kawnndow has stolen my axe. He
has a bad heart to me; When he comes


back, 1 will scold him.) *' Eawnndao, ngunungai
ye maryemar minyala lota dummain 7” (Eawundow,
why did yoa take my axe?) “ Ngai benuog gir " (I
didn't take it). " lota tharra; yal yipalim” (Yoa did ;
yoa lie). “Qilkonworl Gilkonwoi I 1 * (Greyhead !
grey head !) With savage natures the hoary brad is a
reproach, and not a crown of glory, even when found in
the way of righteousness Eawundow continues:—
•*lnta minyala nganna yummum? 1 ’ (VVhy do you blow
me up 7) “ Biddi biddi wandat” (You’re light fingered).
" Ngutti na dalli bai-igo” (I’ll come and beat you),
“ Paiya puiya bakui” (bandy legs) I “Dungun durgua
dac-sr” (yoar fat paunch reaches down to the ground).
“ Qobo 1 ngutta nginna dakkira kaowogo” (Stop a bit 11
will cut you with my knife). But here the father of the
two disputants comes in, and addressing Bandar, says:
“Nun barwDtbnng wanna baiginye; yulinnai, nuniu
batburti ” (You elder brother don’t beat your younger
brother; don’t touch him ; don’t be stupid). Bandar re-
plies: 11 Ngutta karomina urs, ba ginata” (I would have
beaten him before now if he were a stranger), On
which Eawundow remarks: “ Ngin ba tanka butyabai;
ngin data knril nge inda yemain 7” (Don’t you have so
much to say; are you old that you say so much ?) And
thus the interview ends.
The next example is a missionary’s narration ia
Eamilatoi of the visit of Jesus to the house of Jaitus :
“Ngarageduli giwir, kait Yaairu. Neman mal miedul,
murruba miedul ” (Once upon a time there was a man
named Jseirns; be had one little girl, she was a nioa
little girl). " Miedul wibil ginye; ngumba boiyoi wane;
kamil miedul marra ginye; muni ginye wibil. ngalli.
man balani ” (The little girl fell sick; her mother gave
her boiyoi—a iteiioal herb ; the little girl did not get
well; she grew much worse, and was almost dead.)
" Baba yanani Immanuel ngammillego. Gir ngammi:
goe; loda barai taiyanacga ngai kundigo, marra
gimbildi ngai miedul. Ngai miedul wibil burul wibil
ngullimua balani, lada barai taiyanacga ngai kundigo,
marra gimbildi ngai miedul." (The father went to see
Immanuel, Truly he saw him; he said—Thou quickly
come to my bouse, make well my little git). My little
girl is sick, very sick, almost dead. Then quickly coma
to my house, well make my little girl.) “ Immanuel
goe: ngulle yanoai kundigo. 11a yanani bularc
kundigo.” (Immanuel said, let ns two go to tbe bouse.
Then went they both to the bouse.) “ Ngumba duri,
yugillona, go-e Ngii 1 Ngiil ngai miedul balani I Buraia
iuar kanungo yugillona, go-e;—ngiil ngiil miedul


balani. 1 * (The mother came ont, weeping, she said
Alas I alas Imy little girl is deal! Many women were
all weeping, they said; a)*a 1 alas I the little girl is
dead.) “ Immanuel goe Kurria yunga; hamil miedal
balani, yeal babillona" (Immannel said cease to
weep; the little girl is not dead; she is only sleeping.)
" Barnlabn gindami; ngarma git balundai winnngij Im.
manoel mntra kawane miedal; goe Miedal wariv. Ha
miedal moron ginye, watine, gone gca'.done.” (They
ell laughed ; they knew well she was dead. Immannel
took by the band the little girl end said, Little girl
arise. Then the little girl became alive, arose, spoke
words.) " Ngumba, baba ellibu, baral guiye. Immanael
goe; daadi wana." (The mother, the father also, were
very glad. Immannel said, Give her some food.)
V. The pereonal characteristics of the aborignes are
illustrated in the works of many travellers. Compared
races of the Pacific Ocean islands and the
Indian Archipelago, they are a mild, inoffensive people.
And, as a rale, the inhabitants of the interior, both in
the eastern and western parts of Australia, are mote in-
telligent and tractable, and less fierce than those along
the coast. Yet instances of cruel revenge and unbridled
passion are recorded in the history of the blacks about
the out-stations of colonisation. Like other savages
they resent an injury by seeking to destroy persons of
the same race as those who have offended them. The
same blind rule of vengeance to which the life of the
martyr missionary, Williams, was sacrificed at Erra-
manga, has led to the slaughter of whole families
of unoffending shepherds and hutkeepers at stations
in the interior. Indescribable cruelties have been
committed by white men upon the aborigines. The
evidence of some of these acts caused the venerable
missionary Threlkeld to tell tbe squatters in a lime of
drought that the heavens over them were as brass, be-
cause the “ blood of murdered aborigines cried to heaven
against them.” A minature war ot reprisals has betn
carried on for a time iu almost every district when first
occupied by colonists; and the most horrible acts of re-
taliation have been committed by the blacks. Their
frightful mutilation of slain combatants could not but
excite to a frenzy of rage the squatters and stockmen
who saw their companions cut to pieces by the savages.
But even in tbe very scenes of these atrocities the blacks
have shown that they know how to restrain their pas-
sion, and to enter into cordial relations of peace with
their late enemies. When I first visited Wee Waa (or
We Awe, as the blacks call it), on tbe Namoi, in 1853, I


6 aw an old blaokfellow named Charley, who had for years
been a trustworthy servant ta the squatters there, but
who was onoe the ringleader of a cattle spearing gang.*
Charley and bis troop bad determined to prevent the
settlement of the white strangers on the Namoi, and
perpetually harassed them, killing their cattle
and attacking their stations. One day a
stockman, seeing Charley ahead, chased him,
pistol in hand, and endeavoured to shoot him.
But Charley’s good legs served him in better stead than
the stockman’s horse, and be made good bis escape.
Not many days after this stockman was riding along an-
armed, when bis horse was knocked op, and be was
obliged to dismount and pull him along, While he was
in this helpless plight, suddenly out of a clump of mai>al
trees (acacia pendnla) sprung Charley, followed by seve-
ral of bis comrades, who instantly surrounded the stock-
man. Charley now had bis enemy and pursuer com*
pletely in bis power; but instead of taking vengeance,
be reminded him of his attempt to take bis life; and
then added " First time I good mind to kill you. Then
I say be! (not) 1 hill yon; bel blaokfellow any more ooola
(anger) against whitefellow; bel wbitefellow any more
ooola against blaokfellow.’’ Having asked and received
a present of tobacco as a token of he let bis pri-
soner go in safety, and from that time to the day of hia
death was a firm friend to the white men. A yet more
remarkable instance of forbearance was related to me by
a squatter who has since been a member of the Legist**
five Assembly. A party of white men were going
from the Bar won to tbe Balonne (or Biloon);
and left a sick dog in the care of a Balonne
blaokfellow at tbe Mooni Greek, a tributary of tbe
Batwan. As soon as tbe dog recovered the blaokfellow
set out with it for the Balonne. On bis way a white
mao, at whose but he had passed tbe previous night,
shot at him from behind a bank. The ballet passed
through his arm ; bat did not disable him. Thereupon
Ibe blaokfellow rushed upon his assailant and wrested
from him bis weapons, a gan and a pistol; bat made no
other use of his victory than to carry these weapons to tbe
station foe which he was bound.
No race of people have manifested more faithful
attachment to those of superior intelligence and power
than tbe Australians. From known instances of fidelity
and gtati ude, it may be concluded that if half the consi-
deration had been shown for tbe Marti of Australis,
which has been exercised towards the Maori of New
Zealand, the Muni would have been, not snob ambitions


and intellectual men, o t each resolate and skilful
soldiers, bat far more tractable and grateful friends.
The history of Mr. E. B. Kennedy, the explorer of Nor-
thern Australia, will perpetuate the memory of Jaohy
Jaoky, his faithful servant. This is not a singular case;
Jacfcy Jaohy being associated with the last moments of
one whose labours as a pioneer of British Australia have
made his name illustrious, will not be forgotten. But
many a fellow-countryman of Jaohy Jaohy has acted in a
similar manner. On the 13tb November, 1848, as related
la M'Qillivray’s narrative of tbe voyage of the Battle-
snake, Mr. Kennedy, Gostigan, Dunn, and Luff, leaving
eight men at Weymouth Bay, set out for Gape York, A
few days afterwards Gostigan accidentally wounded him-
self with a gun so severely that he was unable to travel
further; and be was left at Fnddingpan Hill in oharge
of Dunn and Luff, while Mr. Kennedy, accompanied only
by bis faithful Jaohy Jaohy, pushed on for the cape, to
get medical assistance for the wounded mar.
They travelled on amid great privations and
difficulties until they came in sight of Fort Albany, and
saw a ship, which proved to be the Ariel, lying at anchor.
But just as they thought their painful journey was almost
ever, they were pursued and speared by a large party of
blacks. Mr. Kennedy was wounded in the back. Jaoky
fired at the pursners ; which made them draw back for a
while. But they came again, throwing more spears.
Jacky, ia his account given on board the Ariel, says—"l
pulled out the spear at once from Mr. Kennedy’s back,
and cut out the jag with Mr. Kennedy’s knife ; then Mr,
Kennedy got his gun and snapped ; bat the gun would
cot go cff. The blacks sneaked ell along by the trees,
and speared Mr;Kennedy again in the tight leg, above the
knee a little, and 1 got speared over the eye.” Spears
fell thick and fast. Mr: Kennedy was wounded again in
the right side. The horses also were wounded, and
rushed into the swamp. Jacky went after the
saddle-bags; and as be returned ha saw
fhe blacks taking away Mr. Kennedy’s watch and hate
" Then,” he says, the blacks probably having left (hem to
divide the spoil, “I carried Mr. Kennedy into the scrub.
He said, ‘Don’t carry me a good way.’ Then Mr.
Kennedy looked this way, very bad (Jaoky rolling hia
eyes}, I said to him 1 Don't look fat away,’ as I thought
he would be frightened; I asked him often 'Are you
well now?’ and he said '1 don’t care for the spear wound
in my leg, Jaoky, but for the other two spear wounds In
my side and back,’ and said, 'I am bad inside, Jaoky,
1 ashed him ' Mr, Kennedy, are you going to leave me ?”


and be said 1 Yes, nry boy, lam going to leave yon.' Ha
eeld * 1 etn very bad, Jacky ; yon take the books, Jacky,
to the captain, bat not the big ones; the Governor will
give anything for them.' 1 then tied np the papers.
He then said ‘Jacky, give me paper and I will write.
I gave him paper end pencil, end he tried to write,
and be then fell beck and died ; and I
oangbt him as be fell back, and held him; and 1 then
tamed round myself end cried; 1 was crying a good
while until I got well; that was about an hour; and
then I buried him ; I digged up the ground with a toma-
hawk, and covered him over with logs, then grass, and
my shirt end trousers; that night I left him, near dark.”
And so poor Jacky Jacky, having discharged the last
duties of friendship to his master, made bis escape from
the enemy, and brought the papers to the ship. A few
days after, Jacky led the captain, Dr. Yallack, and two
other men, first in an ineffectual attempt to rescue poor
Costigan, Dunn, and Luff, and then ia a successful
movement for the deliverance of Carton and Goddard,
the only survivors of the party left at Weymouth Bay.
Thus did this noble aboriginal, after bravely, but in
vein, defending his master, accomplish all that remained
possible of Mr, Kennedy’s last cherished purpose, the
recovery of the poor sufferers whom be bad left in crier
to bring them succour.
The story of James Morrill, the shipwrecked sailor who
was seventeen years among the aborigines north of Rock-
ingham Bay, is still fresh in the memory of the public.
The kindness shown by the blacks to him and bis com-
panions in misfortune reflects much credit upon them.
The tenderness with which the natives at Cooper’s
Creek wept for the death of Burke and Wills; and com-
forted King, the survivor, can never be forgotten. Two of
my own personal friends owed the preservation of their
lives to the kindness of aborigines. One, the late Mr.
D, F. Mackay, having lost his way in the bush, was just
ready to perish with starvation when some blaokfellowa
found him, gave him nourishment, and carried him to a
staler?. The other, Mr. John Qaarry Cotter, when on
his wry from a station in the Ooadamine district to a
distant post office, was pursued by some hostile blacks and
Wounded with one of their speatsi He would have been
killed, bat a blaolfellow to whom he had formerly shown
kindness contrived by stratagem to get him away from
his pursuers. In times of flood many a
colonist has been saved from death by the
pity and courage of a black. Even the inars (women),
who are generally good sttimmets, have not seldom


rescued white people from drowning. And by sashing
snake poison from the bites they have saved many per.
sons. From their own savage fellow-countrymen they
have often defended the white men to whom they ware
attached. Among my hearers at a station called the
Bora, between the Lower Namoi, and the Castlereagb,
I once observed a blaokfellow who had mncb the look
and attitude of a British Tar; on inquiry I learned that
he bad once defended a lone bat-keeper from a band of
hostile blacks. The enemies came in a body to the hat,
bat the faitbfal blackfellow stood in the doorway and
defied them, saying that they should not kill the white
man till they bad first killed him. And he succeeded in
beeping them at bay till help came.
Parental affectiou is generally very strong in the
aborigines; and when a child dies tbs parents
testify their grief in the same way as the
ancient heathen Ganaanites, by cutting themselves 1
I have seen a number of women sitting down to mourn
with a bereaved mother—their skin p astered with white
clay and blood streaming down from large gashes made
with the tomahawk in their beads. la conjugal affec-
tion savages are generally deficient; But only two
months ago, during the flood on the Maoleay, an instanoa
of conjugal affection occurred, which is worthy of record.
The facts were related by Mr, Rudder, who came to
Sydney as a member of the deputation to appeal to the
G ivernmcnt and the Floods Belief Committee for aid to
the sufferers. An old blaokfellow and his wife were
carried down the flood, and were found in an exhausted
state on a field over which the water bad flowed. The
man, though himself almost dead, had clasped bis com*
panion in his arms, and kept her heal above water.
When warmed and fed the man gradually recovered, but
the poor woman died and wae buried by the white
people. A few days after, the man having regained hia
strength, and others of the tribe having omne down,
they exhumed the body, and buried it with their
national rites and with every demonstration of grief,
la reference to conjugal aff jolion, 1 have received a
certificate from the Rev. William Mitchell, Presbyterian
minister of Numba (recently inducted at Wollongong),
concerning William Lrnes, a blaokfellow who was re-
cently married in this city, by the Rev. John Reid, to an
Englishwoman, Mary Cults. Mr. Mitchell says that
Lynes was giving entire satisfaction to his employer,
David Berry; Esq,; that be was comfortably situated
and supported, and respected by his neighbours; that ha
and bis wife regularly attended Divine service at Coolin*


gatta; and that Lynes indaoed another aboriginal to
attend with him on Mr. Mitchell's preaching.
As a traveller in distant parts of the interior; I can
beat witness that aborigines have treated me with hind*
ness and with a polite consideration which 1 did not ez<
peot to meet in snoh a quarter. And 1 believe they are as
a people remaikably susceptible of impressions from hind
treatment. They recognised me as one who sought
their good, and were evidently pleased and tbankfnl.to
see that 1 thought them worth looking after;
In addition to what may be gathered from the facta
already stated as to the intellectual capacity of the
aborigines, their power of continued thought and reason,
ing is small; but their perceptive faculties are exceed,
ingly keen. Many a time has their superior shill in
tracking wanderers been the means of saving life; and
the recent recovery of the three lost children in Victoria
affords a most happy confirmation of their title to the
palm (or clearness ol perception. Their musical power
is strong. Of their very simple melodies, some have a
wild mirtblolness, and others a most plaintive melan-
choly. The very soul of the people seems to breathe
out in their brief songs. And when under training, their
musical taste has been successfully used as an aid in
their civilisation.
VI. It only remains now to say a few words about the
various missionary efforts that have been directed to the
evangelisation of the Australian tribes. The Church of
England, with the aid of the Government, carried on for
several years a mission in Wellington Yale. The labours
of the Bevs. Messrs. Watson and Gunther there were at.
tended with some permanent and happy results. I have
met some of their aboriginal scholars far from the scene
of the mission, in the Namoi district and elsewhere, who
were at least more useful as shepherds and servants than
they would have been without the instruction they
received at Wellington Vale. Mr. Watson travelled fat
and wide to gather to a home where they might be
trained in religion and useful labour, the half-caste
children frequently found in the camps of the blacks.
Such children are, or have been numerous j but from the
jealousy of the blacks they have often been killed in
early youth. Mr. Watson saved many of them from a
cruel death, or a degraded life. On the 16th of August
last, not a month ago, one of these scholars of Mr.
Watacn, a hall-oaste named Richard Davis, died happily
through faith in the Son of God.
The Rev, George King, now of St. Peter’s, Cook's
Biver, conducted a mission sohool for several years on


Swan Biver, in Weatern Australia; and some of hia
scholars, retaining the habits of industry and the know-
ledge of Christian truth and the practice of Christian
morals instilled into their minds under his care, still, as
reported from year to year, attest the efficacy of hia
labours there—labours which, according to the beautiful
language of one of the collects of the Church of England,
were “begun, continued, and ended in God." Thia
church also sustains, in conjunction with the sane
church in Victoria, a mission at Yalta, near the junction
of the Murray and Darling. But the moat fruitful of all
missions to the Australian aborigines, as far as is known ,
appears to be that at Poonindie, Port Lincoln, io South
Australia. Thia mission was established about twenty
years ago by Archdeacon Hale, and has bean conducted
by Mr. Hammond. Natives of the Murray Bivet and
other distant parts of the colony ha?e been induced to
settle theta, to engage in industrial pursuits, tilling the
ground, managing cattle and breaking in hors as , aad at
the same time to attend on Christian instruction and
worship. Eight years ago Mr. Hammond could reckon
eighteen decided converts—persons whose confession of
Christ, whose new habits of industry and piety, and ban -
volant concern for the spiritual good of their fellow crea-
tures, accompanied in soma oasas by most exemplary
patience under suffering, gave evidence of a real and
blessed ohanga ia their hearts. One of them, Daniel
Tudhku, who livel eight years at the station, and died
there, used to go out once or twice a year to his native
tribaon the Murray and bring back soma of his kindred
to share the blessings of the gospel. He was a leader in
prayer meetings and an example of industry and inta«
grity, Oa his death bad the ruling passion was strong ;
for his conversation ran oontinuilly on the hope that a
gospel mission might ba sant to the M urray. Iu the ust
agonies ol dying, while tha missionary was repeating
texts of scripture and seeking to com’ort him, he re-
plied "Ob! there’s no need for impatience. Tail is tha
Lord’s doing; let him do what saemeth him good.” Ba-
cantly a new mission has baan started at P nut Maoleay,
in that colony. At the annual meeting of the
Aborigines Protection Society in Adelaide on the 22 id
June last, tha Bishop of Adelaide spoke highly of tha
labours ol Mr, George Tapliu, tha missionary employad
at this station. About 300 black* are settled at Point
Made ay $ under tha superintendence s? M . Taplin, who
has translated portions of the Bible into their language,
and gained their attachment by his kindness. Taey
have cleared, fenced, and cultivated twenty acres of land
bow under wheat, and three with grean food for cows.


Last year, the wheal grown by the natives fetched £BO.
Many of the children already read and write with toler-
able ease. The Bev. B. L. Chase, of Melbourne, pub-
lished a memoir of a boy of the Wimmera tribe, who
went with him to England, and exhibited, before his
early decease, decided and delightful evidences of
Christian character.
The London Missionary Society sent to this colony a
faithful minister of Christ, the Bev. L, E.Tbrelkald, who,
during eleven years’ labours at Lake Macquarie, near
Newcastle, instructed many, and prepared a grammar
and key of the aboriginal language which form a valu-
able philological treasure.
The Bev. Pas tor Gossner, of Berlin, a man whos,
heart embraced the missionary work all over the world,
organised a band of nine missionaries, who, through cor-
respondence with the Bev. Dr. Lang of this city, were
directed to Moreton Bay; and there did much for the
improvement of the aborigines, teaching them the use of
the hoe and rendering them much more fit to do good
service in the work of colonisation. The good mission-
aries mourned over the absence of any evidence of con-
version among the heathen. Bat their work was not
lost. Two of them, Bev. G. Hausmann, and Bev. P.
Niquet, are now labouring as ministers of the Gospel
with decided marks of the Divine blessing among their
German fellow countrymen; and the rest, as active
members of Christian Churches; are serving their gene-
ration. Father Anjello, an Italian priest, gave up his
life in a mission at Pott Essington. Another attempt
was made by some priests of the Church of Borne for
the aborigines on Moreton Island.
The Wesleyans set on foot a mission at a place they
earned Bantingville, near Geelong, where the Bev,
Messrs. Tuokfield and Horst laboured till the tribe they
sought to benefit bad wasted down to eight persons. At
Bathurst and elsewhere, the Wesleyans have.numbered
among their scholars, class members, and communicants
a few aborigines who gave hopeful indication of a spiritual
change. Some of these cases are noticed by the Bev,
B. W. Yanderkiste in bis “ Lost, but not for ever.”
Heretofore, the Presbyterian Church in this colony
has not, as a body, taken up any mission to the aborigi-
nes. But it would be gross ingratitude on my part not
to mention here that one Presbyterian congregation in
Sydney, that assembling in the Scots Church, Church-
bill, contributed £l5O towards a mission in which I was
engaged to the aborigines of the north-western interior.
Other Presbyterians, ministers and laymen, connected
both with the Established and the Free Church, together


with Christian friends of other denominations, kindly
aided that mission by their contributions. Bat sorely
it is now high t<me that the Presbyterians, as a denomi.
nation, should undertake some permanent mission for
the thousands of aborigines who still inhabit the interior
of this continent. In Victoria the Presbyterian Church
has entered on this work. ... .
A new and promising mission to the aborigines has
been established for three or four years at on
the Yarra, about forty miles ft am Melbourne. The Key.
Bobert Hamilton, of the United Presbyterian Cborofc,
Gollingwood, Melbourne, in the Age newspaper, of b h
August, furnished a full description of this mission.
The Government have set apart there 23C0 acres for tha
use of the aborigines ; who cultivate the soil and are
forming a valuable settlement. Mr* Harm ton found
sixty-seven aborigines theie, including eleven married
couples, ten sing’e men, three grown-up lads, three
single adult women, fourteen girls, and fifteen boys, in-
eluding two infants. He describes them as “ reclaimed
from their wandering and savage life, enjoying the bene-
fits of education, raised high above the level of former
degradation in point of rel gions privileges, and
having, in some oases, a measure of decided Christian
excellence.” The children were cheerful, yet suborns,
sive, fond of music, affectionately attached to their
teacher, intelligent and industrious There were some,
now departed to another world, who seemed to possess
the blesings of a new and heavenly life in Christ.
Among the worshippers Mr. Hamilton saw ‘ a Goulburn
Biver blaokfellow, who by superstitious tiles, moante-
tions. and imposture, used to deceive the people. JN aw
the spell is broken. Jesus has oast out the demon; and
the victim of Satanic possession siU at His feet humble
aud docile, clothed and in his right mind. At all other
missions in Australia the servants of God have had to
lament over the rapid decay of the people they sought to
benefit. No means have seemed to avail in warding off
the mysterious decay of the race. But at Cor?nderrk
these remarkable statistics are supplied. During the
first year of the mission there (1861), there
crease of 19 by excess of deaths over births. In 1862
there was a loss of 9; in 1863 there was an exact balance
the births were equal in number to the deaths , in 1864
op to the time of Mr. Hamil on's visit, there was an in-
crease of Bby excess of births over deaths. This proves
that the combined effects of regular industry, moral
supervision, and Christian inslroo ion are adapted to
arrest the progress of national decay. There is another
miSjioQ in Gippb* Land, where the plans and labours of


JAfip • -O
l 0 JAN 1993 w
=H4PU3 Vfo,
I *
the missionary and the results are much of the same
nature as those at Coraaderrk,
There is enough in the history of missions to Austra.
lian aborigines to encourage the Lope that amid the
blessed company assembled from all nations, kindreds,
tongues, and peoples, to surround the throne of God '
and of the Lamb, there will be seen some of these ohil-
r’teu of Kei Dowdai. la concluding this lecture let me
illustrate the duty devolving on us as colonists, by an
extract from the instructions of our G aoious Sovereign,
Q reen Victoria, to his Excellency Sir John Young. The
17th seo’ion of these Instructions, which ate dated Os.
borne House, Isle of Wight, March 5,1851, is as follows:
"And it is out further will and pleasure, that yon do to
the utmost of your power, promote religion and educa-
tion among the native inhabitants of our said colony
(of New South Wales), and of the lands and islands
thereto adjoining; and that yon do especially take care
to protect them in their persons, and in the free enjoy,
ment of their possessions; and that you do by all
lawful means prevent and restrain all violence and in-
justice which may in any manner be practised or
attempted against them: and that you take such
measures as may appear to be necessary to further
their conversion to the Christian faith, and their ad.
vancement in civilisation." Without pressing the in.
quiry what steps have been taken by his Excellency and
bis Government to fulfil this Royal injunction—
an injunction worthy of the Sovereign of a
nation Honoured and blessed as Britain is by the
God of Heaven—it becomes ns, as Christians, to
obey the commandment of the King of Kings, the
Siviour of the world, “ preach the Gospel to every
creature.” The Christian churches in Australia have a
solemn responsibility yet to be discharged towards the
aborigines of this land. May the glorious Beat of the
Church inspire ns and our fellow. Christians in this
our country with the zeal, the wisdom, and the enduring
love which are requisite for the fulfilment of our duty in
this matter;
Note to pace s.— Tha interpretation of “ Kei Dowdai ” and
“ Muggi Dowdai,” given above, is that of Mr. M‘Gilivary in his
Narrative of the Expedition of the Eattlesnake In Kamilaroi,
however, kei or kai signifies small, and murri means great. lam
therefore, inclined to regard “ Muggi Dowdai ’’ as a variation of
the words Murri Taorai (or towrai), meaning “ great country;’’ and
“ Kei Dowdai” as Kai Taorai or ‘‘little country.” It is not to be
supposed that any aborigines near Cape York ever circumnavigated
either Australia or Papua ; and from the views they obtained of
the s upendous mountain chains of the latter, and of the low
narrow peninsula at the north-east corner of the former, they
probably regarded Australia as the lesser country, Papua as the
greater.






\ka.. ‘Arn
*y
A yty, <*-
/?> f!' J f .. t? (( /^. S/, -
-c g /t~cs efi~~
~~hw » 4r. ~
*£*'4/, /Xx fytn? , c*-*~ a— _,
&tx~oL*-*p, 0^- — oV\s £*f </X*/%~ **-- '.
t r ' ' ' &»
Owl AL U* f'kx y
WU-cL C <£_.
i* fl /!/ v -»v *"*
ft*. *7ko, "tLjl
' djJiuj aL CAx^-U.y
* ■ T ■ /I .■“..■*■ ■--iif
~W*. H 2, _ «_vw<_ /t«- -fiTZUrc+J-*^
: - oj T<U Oam*4x*J^
l?t)L{. 1 GULnrisfiyisiAjJL _-
W mi • A ; ■.’
I i o**GL£aj~ f'*~*Z*-£ZaC A*
J 3 , “TLx~ -ZJls
£3T,
A. cOihtJL • *TL*I C2-f^~d—
lS~b~
li TkjL CUjy\fiJyvJUo &j/*~ . l9t?Cf., 7j~4-~
,ZZZzLt- hf— h
■■ ■. ■ - : - . -'■-' 'J-'-'. ■ ■ ■ . ;fi


