

THE
RONALDSON-
TIPPETT
Type "NA"
VERTICAL AIR-COOLED
PETROL ENGINE
Instruction Book No. 163a
RONALDSON BROS. & TIPPETT
LTD.
Head Office and Works: CRESWICK ROAD, BALLARAT.
Melbourne Showrooms : 628 Bourke Street, Melbourne.
Interstate Distributors:
BRISBANE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, PERTH.
BUY THE RIGHT ENGINE FIRST


IMPORTANT
WHETHER you purchase the Engine direct from our-
selves or from our Distributing Agents, it is always
advisable to get into direct touch with us in Victoria,
or with our inter-State Agents,if in other States, with regard
to the speed at which any machines should be driven by the
Engine.
Many machines, such as Centrifugal Pumps, Chaffcutters,
Gornorushers, etc., must be driven at certain speeds accord-
ing to circumstances and to the horse power available in your
Engine. In these cases, by the simple substitution of a
larger or smaller pulley on the Engine, it will do its work
much better, therefore will give its user greater satisfaction.
When writing, you should state the make of machine to
be driven, and give the diameter of the pulley, also, if possible,
the speed recommended by the maker. In the case of
Chaffcutters, state diameter of pulley, number of knives on
knife wheel, width of mouth and particulars of elevator, if
any. If Engine is to drive a Centrifugal Pump, give name
of maker and size of pump, diameter of pulley, length and
diameter of suction and delivery piping, height of pump
above water, and total height to which water is to be de-
livered.
Please remember that we are glad at all times to give you
the benefit of our long experience with Internal Combustion
Engines. Our Service Department is always available to
advise you on any point concerning the running of your
Engine, and we ask you to make free use of it.
WHEN ORDERING SPARE PARTS, PLEASE GIVE THE
NUMBER OF YOUR ENGINE, THEN THE NUMBER AND
NAME OF EACH PART REQUIRED. (Refer to Duplicate
Chart and List on Pages at back of book). ,
RONALDSON BROS. & TIPPETTSy. Ltd.
Head Office and Works:
CRESWICK ROAD, BALLARAT.
Showrooms: 628 Bourke Street, Melbourne.
Interstate Distributors:
New South Wales: Western Australia;
RONALDSON BROS. & TIPPETT &r. Ltd. THE WESTRALIAN FARMERS LTD.
Fraser House, Cr. Bridge & Loftus Sts., 569 Wellington Street, Perth.
Sydney.
ALFA LAVAL SEPARATOR Co. Pty. Ltd. McLEAN BROS. & RIGG LTD.
298 Sussex Street, Sydney. 104 MuPPa ’' Stp6et ' Popth '
RONALDSON TIPPETT (QLD.) PTY. LTD. S ° Uth Austpal,a:
Parbury House, Eagle Street, THE IMPLEMENT co -
Brisbane. 92 Grenfell Street, Adelaide.


GENERAL ABBREVIATED INSTRUCTIONS
1. Drain and refill sump of new engine after first few hours’ run,
subsequently after every 50 hours’ work. Oil sump capacity,
pints.
2. LUBRICATING OIL. Lubricate with “Ronatip” Oil No. 13, ob-
tainable from us or our Interstate Distributors. Where this is
not obtainable, use Vacuum A, Shell Single, Wakefield Castrol
CW, “Caitex” Motor Oil S.A.E. 30, or other S.A.E. 30 oils
marketed by major oil Companies.
3. See that lubricating oil level is brought right up to brim of pro-
jecting oil filler, even to the point of overflowing, before com-
mencing work each day, otherwise engine may not be lubri-
cated.
4. Remember that poor oil, the wrong grade of oil, or dirty oil, will
cause excessive wear in the cylinder, piston and rings.
5. Do not use leaded Ethyl Petrols, unless unavoidable, and then give
preference to those having 68 to 80 Octane rating.
6. WHEN FILLING TANK, DO NOT ALLOW FUEL TO OVERFLOW
ON TO MAGNETO. IT WILL RUIN CONTACT POINTS,
BRUSHES, BEARINGS AND WINDINGS.
7. When stopping Engine, do not screw fuel valve down too tightly,
as this will spoil the fuel valve and its seating, and considerably
alter fuel adjustment.
8. if two or three unsuccessful attempts are made to start engine,
it may become flooded if still turned with fuel valve open.
When unable to locate cause of non-start, look for possible
flooding. Fuel valve may have to be turned right off until
Engine starts.
9. When installing Engine, see that provision is made for entry and
exit of ample cooling air into cowl grill on flywheel side and
from cylinder fins on opposite side.
10. If Engine runs erratically, or fails to start, may be due to dirt
holding up retention valve in suction pipe of carburettor.
Unscrew bottom half of pipe—tip valve out in hand—wash
valve and pipe in petrol, and replace.
11. Keep magneto make and break points clean with the break open-
ing 12/1000-in., which is the equivalent in thickness to two
“Gillette” type safety razor blades.
12. Spark plug point gap should be from 18/1000-in. minimum to
25/1000-in. maximum opening, that is, the equivalent in
thickness to from three to four “Gillette” type safety razor
blades.
13. If no compression, a valve may be held up off its seat. Free stem
with kerosene or remove and thoroughly clean. Sticky valve
stems may be caused by use of unsuitable fuel or lubricating
oil, not changing oil at correct periods, blocked or partially
blocked exhaust pipes or silencer, use of stale fuel which has
been exposed to the atmosphere for some time prior to use.
14. If duplicate parts required, be careful to give number of engine
as well as number of part, when ordering.
15. For detailed instructions, see Instruction Book.


INDEX
A Page
Adjustment of tappets 40
Air Cowl, to remove 35
B
Bedlogs, mounting engine on ... . 3
Bigend bearing, to fit new or take up 47
c
Camshaft, to fit new 40
Camshaft gear, to fit new 42
Carburettor 24
Carburettor body 24
Carburettor butterfly lever 27
Carburettor butterfly valve 24
Carburettor fuel valve 24
Carburettor gasket 26
Carburettor snifter valve assembly 26
Carburettor suction pipe 25
Changing oil 7
Concrete foundation 3
Cooling system 5
Connecting rod, to fit new 47
Crankcase breather, to clean .... 7
Crankshaft, to fit new 50
Crankshaft gear, to fit new 51
Cylinder, to fit new or rebored block 42
Cylinder head, to remove and replace 35
Cylinder head gasket, to replace ... 36
Cylinder worn 20
D
Duplicate charts and lists , . . . 54—60
E
Engine flooded . . 6
Engine stops 15
F
Failure to start 6
Flywheel, to remove 49
Foundation plan 2
Fuel 5
G
General running instructions .... 7
"Gits” oil seals, to renew 52
Governing troubles and their reme-
dies 34
Governor bracket oil return valve,
to clean or renew 33
Governor bronze bearing, to fit new 33
Governor lever and connections , . 7
Governor gear, to fit new 32
Governor plunger, to fit new .... 33
Governor weights, to fit new . . . . 33
Grinding valves 36
Gudgeon bush, to fit new 43
H
Head, to remove and replace .... 35
Head gasket, to replace 36
High tension cable, to fit new .... 28
i J
Installation of Engine 1
K Page
Knocking in Engine 21—23
L
Loss of power 13—15
Lubrication 7
Lubricating oil, excessive use of 20, 21
M N
Magneto 7
Magneto, to adjust breaker points 27
Magneto, to clean 28
Magneto, to fit new contact break-
er points 27
Magneto, to replace 29
Magneto contact breaker arm stick-
ing 28
Magneto lubrication 29
Magneto timing, to adjust 29
O P
Oil changing 7
Oil seals on crankshaft 52
Overheating 18—20
Piston, to fit new 43
Piston alignment 44
Piston rings, to clean 4?
Piston rings* to fit 45
Portable Engines 5
Preparation for running 5
Q R
Retention valve, to grind in , 25
s
Service Manual 24
Setting Engine 1
Smoky exhaust . . , 21
Spark plug 31
Spark plug, to clean and adjust , , 31
Spark plug, to test 31
Spark plug, type to use 31
Spark plug troubles 8 & 10
Speed erratic 16—18
Speed, to vary 6
Starting Engine 5
Starting troubles 6.
Sticking valves 6
Stopping Engine 6
T
Tappets, correct clearance of . . . , 38
Tappets, to adjust 40
Tappets, to fit new 39
Timing of valves 38
Timken bearings, to fit new 51
Trouble chart 8—23
U V
Valves, to fit new 39
Valves, to grind in 36
Valves, timing of 38
Valve spring, to fit new 39
Valves sticking 6
Variation of speed 6


INSTRUCTIONS
FOR
TYPE NA, VERTICAL
Air Cooled
Petrol Engine
No job should be done by either owner or mechanic without
referring to this book. It is a thoroughly practical manual, written
up by Engineers with general servicing experience.
SETTING, STARTING and RUNNING
The Engine should be set down on a solid foundation consisting of
bedlogs or concrete.
It must be set perfectly level each way and must be lined up truly with
the machine pulley to be driven. The correct method of lining up is to use
a piece of stout string stretched tightly across the edges of the pulleys on the
engine and machine, making certain that the string is just touching the
opposite edges of each pulley.
If the belt is to drive to fast and loose pulleys, it should be arranged
that when the belt is on the fast pulley it is nearest to the engine bearing.
On the other side of this page we show a general lay-out drawing of an
Engine set up on a concrete foundation.


Fig. 1.
GENERAL LAY-OUT AND FOUNDATION FLAN.
TYPE “NA” AIR-COOLED
PETROL ENGINES.
SPEED RANGE
H.P. R.P.M. SPEED RANGE.
2 1,000 850 to 1250 r.p.m.
fitted with V 76
governor weights.
2| 1,500 1250 to 1500 r.p.m.
fitted with NA76A
governor weights.
4 1,100 850 to 1200 r.p.m.
4i 1,200 fitted with V 76
governor weights.
DIAMETER OF FLYWHEELS.
2 h.p. and 2| h.p lli-in.
4 h.p. and h.p 13-in.
DIMENSIONS.
2SC 2| 4SC 4i
H.P. H.P.
A 19|-in. 22-in.
B si-in. 5-9/ 16-in.
C 6i-in. 9-in.
E li-in. H-in.
F 1-in. 1-in.
G 4i-in. 4i-in.
H 9|-in. 9|-in.
J 13-in. 13-in.
K 9-in. 9-in.
L 12-in. 12-in.
M 15-in. 15-in.
N 6-in. 6-in.
O 16-in. 16-in.
P 10-in. 10-in.
Q 10-in. 10-in.
R |-in. 1-in.
Foundation Bolts: 12-in. x
Keyway; 3/8-in. wide x l/8-in.
deep at edge.
2


ENGINE MOUNTED ON BED LOGS. If mounting the Engine on
bedlogs, the latter should not be less than 3-in. x 3-in. Red gum timber is
recommended.
These bedlogs should rest on squared cross logs not less than 4-in. x 4-in.
and 2-ft. long let into the ground flush with the surface. These cross logs
should be made as solid as possible by ramming the earth around them.
Attach Engine logs to cross logs with suitable coach screws.
MOUNTING ENGINE ON CONCRETE FOUNDATION. Make a
wooden foundation mould, using 6-in. x 1-in. timber, the inside dimensions
of which will correspond with the measurements of the raised portion of the
concrete block shown on foundation plan.
Two cross pieces 2-in. wide by 1-in. thick should be nailed across the top
of the mould in a suitable position, then bore 9/16-in. holes to take the
foundation bolts. Refer to foundation plan for bolt centres.
For foundation bolts we recommend 12-in. x -|-in. coach bolts with iron
washers 2-in. square and l/8-in. thick on the heads.
The washers could be welded to the heads of the bolts or could have
square holes punched so that they will fit over the squared shanks of the bolts.
The washers should be made a fixture by either method so that the bolts will
not turn round when tightening the nuts.
Make four tubes 10i-in. long and 1-in. in diameter out of ordinary sheet
iron, or preferably cut four pieces of 1-in. iron piping to that length. Slip
these over the bolts and pass the threaded ends up through the holes in the
cross pieces of the mould. Keep the bolts in a central position in the tubes
and tighten up the nuts. These tubes will permit a little movement of the
bolts when lining the Engine up to the machine to be driven.
Make the excavation for the concrete as shown on foundation plan,
then place the mould in position above it and make sure that you have lined
up correctly to the machine or pulley to be driven. Refer to dimension C
on foundation plan which gives the measurements from centre of engine to
centre of pulley. It is important that the mould should be kept square with
the machine or shafting to be driven by the engine or trouble may be experi-
enced with the driving belt.
Fasten the mould securely in position so that it will not move when the
concrete is being poured in.
The concrete mixture recommended is three parts of screenings or clean
creek gravel, two parts of clean sand, and one part of fresh cement.
Turn the mixture over at least three times dry and again three times after
water has been added.
Pour the mixture into the mould and ram it well, also use a thin knife
or hack-saw blade to work up the side surface of the raised portion. This
knife or hack-saw blade should be pushed up and down inside the mould to
liberate any air bubbles.
Take a piece of j-in. board with a straight edge and work the edge
backwards and forwards over the top of the foundation mould on top of the
concrete to smooth the surface and make it as level as possible. This makes
an even surface for the bottom of the Engine base. Keep adding more of
the mixture if it is found low at any particular spot, also make sure there is


enough rammed under the cross pieces so that there will be no low spots
there when the mould is removed.
Allow the foundation to set for at least 24 hours before removing the
mould and foundation bolt tubes. The Engine should then be placed in
position.
Make sure that the Engine bed is resting securely on the concrete at all
points. Pack up with thin metal wedges if necessary to get the Engine perfectly
level. Pieces of hoop iron are suitable for this purpose —two or three thick-
nesses if necessary.
If the base of the Engine is not resting evenly on the foundation, there
is a risk of distortion of the crankcase when the holding down nuts are
tightened, and serious trouble may follow.
Tighten the nuts down by hand only, then make a thin grouting mixture
of equal parts cement and sand and work this around and under the bed
with a thin knife, finally smoothing off to a good surface. This should be
done before the concrete is dry so that the grouting will bind.
Leave the Engine to stand for at least 48 hours before finally tightening
down the foundation bolt nuts.
The Engine should be allowed to stand for an extra day if possible
before starting up.
TO MOUNT ENGINE ON AN EXISTING CONCRETE BLOCK.
Line the Engine up to the pulley it is to drive, then mark through the
holes in the Engine bed to indicate where the bolts are to go and cut holes
with a hammer and cold chisel, about 1 5-in. square at the top and seven
inches deep, tapering the holes so that they are larger at the bottom than at
the top.
The foundation bolts should be 8-in. x 2-in. coach bolts with 2-in. square
washers on the heads. Place these diagonally down into the holes, then lift
the Engine into position over the bolts, screw the nuts on the bolts until the
bolts are just projecting through the nuts, then check the alignment again
and level the Engine as described above.
If the Engine is not required for service for two days, the bolts can be
grouted in with a mixture of equal quantities of cement and sand or fine gravel.
Mix to a consistency of thin porridge and pour into the holes, which will
be partly exposed. Ram the mixture in with a thin stick or a piece of stiff
wire. Fill the holes to the top, then grout around under the engine bed and
make sure that the grouting mixture is making contact with the bed at all
points, thus providing ample support.
If the Engine is wanted for service at once, molten lead can be used to
hold the bolts. If molten lead is used, be sure the holes in the concrete are
quite dry, otherwise the lead will explode when poured, resulting in danger
to the pourer.
Still another useful and reliable method is to melt sulphur in an old
saucepan or other suitable vessel and pour this into the holes, where it will
set in a few minutes.
If using either of the last two methods, make smaller holes in the concrete,
tapering them out as the depth increases. The dimensions of the square
plates on the foundation bolts can be reduced accordingly. In fact, providing
coach bolts are available, they can be dispensed with.


COOLING SYSTEM. These Engines are fitted with a fan incorporated
in the flywheel which ensures efficient air cooling.
See that provision is made for freedom of entry and exit of air to cowl
mill on flywheel side of Engine and from cylinder fins on opposite side.
TO PREPARE ENGINE FOR RUNNING. Fill the sump with oil.
The Engine sump will be empty when the Engine is new. Fill right to the
brim of projecting oil filler, even to the point of overflowing, with the recom-
mended grade of oil —Vacuum Mobiloil A, Single Shell, Wakefield Castrol
CW, "Caltex” Motor Oil S.A.E. 30, or S.A.E. 30 motor oils marketed by other
major oil companies. If the oil is not brought right up to the correct level,
engine will not be lubricated. The approximate quantity required is pints.
Oil governor lever and connections. See page 7.
PORTABLE ENGINES. See that the Engine is level when filling with
oil by placing a level at right angles to the crankshaft, and on the machined
face of the crankcase where cylinder block fits on. If in doubt as to Engine
being level, remember that it is preferable that the Engine lean away from
the filler rather than lean towards it.
The reason for this is that should the filler side of the Engine be lower
than the other side, you would be unable to pour a sufficient quantity of oil
into the Engine to give the dipper sufficient penetration, thus splashing
insufficient oil to thoroughly lubricate the moving parts. The dipper should
have as a minimum 5/8-in. penetration when the sump is full.
FUEL. Fill fuel tank with petrol (See Red Page), using the special
strainer funnel to prevent any grit getting into the tank.
If Ethyl spirit is used, it will be found that a white deposit will be
formed around the exhaust valve and this may bring about a sticking valve.
Should this occur, remove cylinder head as covered in instructions under
heading "To Grind Valves, page 36, and clean exhaust valve of white deposit.
WHEN FILLING TANK DO NOT ALLOW FUEL TO OVERFLOW
ON TO MAGNETO. IT WILL RUIN CONTACT POINTS, BRUSHES,
BEARINGS AND WINDINGS.
TO START ENGINE. Turn fuel valve "E”, Fig. 2, anti-clockwise
until the mark "S” (for Start) is opposite line "D” on top of carburettor
body. This is usually from one-quarter to three-quarters of a turn open.
Fit starting handle and turn smartly, at
the same time pressing in the air choke button
"H”.
Hold air choke button in for three or
four revolutions, then release.
When Engine starts, screw fuel valve back
until mark "W” (for Work) is opposite line
"D” on top of carburettor body.
The markings "S” and "W” are approxi-
mate only and may need to be varied to suit
the load, altitude, and climatic conditions.
With the Engine on load, screw the fuel
valve down from the "W” position until the
throttle valve opens or Engine falters, then
open up slightly (about 1/16-in. on outside
edge of the fuel valve knob) until engine runs
evenly and throttle valve settles back again.
Fig. 2.


FAILURE TO START . If Engine does not start after the second
attempt, look for the cause rather than risk flooding the engine with petrol.
It may be due to a sooted spark plug. Take spark plug out, put the base in
a vice and unscrew the bushing that holds the porcelain in position. Do not
tighten vice more than just sufficient to hold the plug, as you may distort it
or crack the porcelain.
Remove the porcelain and clean off the sooty deposit with a piece of rag.
Reassemble plug and see that the points are the correct distance apart. See
page 31. Before replacing it in the engine, crank the engine over for a few
revolutions with the starting handle to blow out any excess petrol that may
have accumulated in the combustion chamber.
If the compression is good and the engine still refuses to start, it may be
because it is flooded with petrol. Screw the fuel valve down till it is almost
closed, and do not operate the choke button when starting. After the first
charge is fired, open the fuel valve up to the "work” position.
If there is little or no compression, one of the valves may not be seating
owing to the valve stem being sticky. Sticky valve stems may be caused by:
1. Running the Engine too long before changing the lubricating oil in
sump.
2. Operating the Engine on stale petrol that has been allowed to stand
in the fuel tank over a lengthy period while the engine is not in
use.
3. Exhaust passage partially blocked with carbon formation, thus causing
back pressure.
4. Use of inferior or unsuitable oils.
In these cases the petrol tank must be removed so that you can get at
the valve inspection plate. Take this plate off and squirt a little kerosene
from an oil can through the valve springs on to the valve stems, or brush the
valve stems with a feather dipped in kerosene. A similar application should
also be applied to the valve stems above the guides. Woric the valves up and
down by placing the point of a screwdriver under them till they work freely.
Refer to Trouble Chart, page 8 12.
VARIATION OF SPEED. These Engines give off their full rated
horse power in accordance with the speed stated on the name plate, viz.:
2 H.P. Type "NA” 1000 r.p.m.
I'} H.P. Type "NA” 1500 r.p.m.
4 H.P. Type "NA” 1100 r.p.m.
H.P. Type "NA” 1200 r.p.m.
If put on light loads, the speed may be reduced, but reference should
be made to the Maker or Distributor of the Engine before doing so.
When Engine speeds are reduced, power is lost, and if the Engine speed
is reduced too much for the work the engine is put to, it will be overloaded.
Slacken the thumbscrew B, Fig. 2, to decrease speed and tighten to increase
speed. Tighten locknut again after any adjustment is made. Hold bend on
end of screw to prevent spindle turning.
TO STOP ENGINE. Screw the fuel valve down in a clockwise direction
on to its seat. Remember to screw it down lightly, and do not try to force
the valve as by doing so, it will spoil the fuel valve and its seating and thus
considerably alter fuel adjustment.
6


GENERAL
RUNNING INSTRUCTIONS
Do not use leaded petrols unless unavoidable, and then give preference
to those having 68-80 octane rating. Do not attempt to run on a half and
half mixture of petrol and kerosene.
LUBRICATION. Use Vacuum "Mobiloil” A, Single Shell, Wakefield
"Castrol CW”, "Caltex” Motor Oil S.A.E. 30, or S.A.E. 30 oils from other
major oil Companies. Do not try to economise by using cheaper or inferior
oils, because you will pay more for wear and tear in the long run if you do.
Remember that poor oil, the wrong grade of oil, or dirty oil will cause excessive
wear in the cylinder, piston and rings, as well as other moving parts.
INSPECT THE LEVEL OF THE OIL IN THE FILLER EVERY
DAY, making sure first that the 3/16-in. hole found alongside the breather
is not blocked. If this should be the case, there is a likelihood of a false
reading being shown when checking the oil level. Add to the quantity of the
oil in the sump, if necessary, to bring its level right up to the brim of the
projecting oil filler, even to the point of overflowing. The whole lubrication
system depends on the dipper on the bottom of the connecting rod entering
the oil at each revolution and causing the oil to be thrown up into the cylinder
and other working parts. If the level of the oil gets too low the oil will not
reach the piston, bearings and other moving parts, and rapid wear will take
place.
TO CLEAN CRANKCASE BREATHER. The breather valve should
be unscrewed from the side inspection plate from time to time, and washed in
petrol or kerosene to remove any grit or dust that might have accumulated
around the ball valve, thus causing it to stick on the seat, and not function
correctly. This would have a tendency to cause oil leaks.
CHANGING THE OIL. Unscrew the plug near the bottom of the
projecting oil filler and drain the oil from the sump after every 50 hours’
work.
Refill right to the brim of the projecting oil filler, even to the point of
overflowing, with the grade of oil specified above.
The Engine sump holds approximately pints.
Remember oil loses its lubricating quality with use, and must be replaced
before its condition is such that it will allow excessive wear to take place.
GOVERNOR LEVER AND CONNECTIONS. The only parts of the
engine that require lubrication by hand are as follows:
The governor spindle where it projects through the case and operates
the carburettor control lever, also the governor to carburettor control con-
nections and bearing. These points only require a few drops of oil once
a week.
MAGNETO. Refer to instructions under this heading, page 27.
WHEN FILLING TANK, DO NOT ALLOW FUEL TO OVERFLOW
ON TO MAGNETO. IT WILL RUIN CONTACT POINTS, BRUSHES,
BEARINGS AND WINDINGS.


SYMPTOMS
CAUSE
REMEDY
COMPRESSION APPEARS
QUITE SATISFACTORY.
spark across the plug points
is removed from the engine,
sion wire terminal must be c
cylinder head and all metal.
TO BE
There is a
when same
High ten-
lear of the
No fuel in tank.
Mixture not set correctly.
Refill.
Turn fuel valve "E”, Fig. 2, page 5,
clockwise until it becomes firm. Do not
use force. Then turn anticlockwise until
mark "S” for Start is opposite line "D”.
See instructions, page 5.
Engine flooded. Mixture taken into
gine contains too much petrol.
En-
Turn fuel valve clockwise until just firm.
Remove spark plug, and with the starting
handle, crank the Engine so as to blow
the enriched petrol fumes out of spark
plug opening. Replace plug. Try start-
ing Engine with fuel valve closed. If it
starts, open valve to running position
"W”. If not, open valve to "S”.
Spark plug carbonised, thus will spark
in the open but not under compression.
Remove carbon from porcelain by referring
to instructions, "Spark plug, to clean and
adjust, page 31.
Spark plug points not set to correct
g a P-
Set gap to from 18 to 25/1000-in. or equiv-
alent in thickness to from three to four
"Gillette” type safety razor blades.
Porcelain in spark plug fractured.
Renew plug.
The instructions given on the following pages are for the purpose of assisting Engine operators in locating
troubles and how to go about correcting them in conjunction with other information given in the book.
ENGINE WILL NOT START
TROUBLE CHART


SYMPTOMS
CAUSE
REMEDY
Accumulation due to condensation on
spark plug porcelain, causing sparking
across points, noticeable with plug re-
moved, but will not spark under com-
Dismantle plug and dry by following in-
structions, "Spark plug, to clean and ad-
just,” page 31. If plug non-detachable,
dry on stove or near fire.
pression.
High tension wire perished or worn
through. Changing position with spark
plug removed from cylinder head has
kept it away from making contact with
surrounding metal.
Closely inspect high tension wire. If
cracked or insulation damaged, renew.
Moisture on high tension wire, due to
atmospheric conditions, or conditions
under which Engine is operating.
Thoroughly dry surface of insulation on
wire, and for preference, see that the wire
is clear of all metal.
Movable breaker point in magneto par-
tially sticking on stud carrying breaker
arm. Sluggish operation retards action
of points closing. This gives spark at
plug points when Engine is cranked slow-
ly, but magneto points unable to close
when Engine is turned over briskly.
Free contact breaker arm on stud by refer-
ring to instructions "Contact Breaker
Arm Sticking,” page 28.
Incorrect magneto timing. Magneto
points not opening and spark occurring
when line marked "Spark” on periphery
of flywheel is directly opposite sawcut
line on top of crankcase.
Check, and if necessary adjust magneto
timing by referring to instructions under
this heading, page 29.
9


SYMPTOMS
CAUSE
REMEDY
COMPRESSION APPEARS TO BE
QUITE SATISFACTORY. There is a
spark across the plug points when same
is removed from the engine. High ten-
sion wire terminal must be clear of the
cylinder head and all metal.
(Continued from page 9.)
Governor spring disconnected. Carbur-
ettor buterfly controls in closed position.
Exhaust pipe or silencer blocked up with
carbon or foreign matter, thus prevent-
ing free exit of air and gases which in
turn prevents engine from taking in
charge of inflammable mixture.
See that sawcut line on top end of carbur-
ettor butterfly spindle is at right angles
to crankshaft, indicating full open posi-
tion.
Remove exhaust pipes, thoroughly clean,
also dismantle and clean silencer.
COMPRESSION APPEARS TO BE
QUITE SATISFACTORY. There is no
spark across the plug points when same
is removed from the Engine, although the
high tension terminal is clear of all metal
surfaces.
Spark plug carbonised, thus permitting a
leakage back from the electrode to the
plug body.
Spark plug points not set to correct gap.
Remove carbon from porcelain by refer-
ring to instructions, "Spark plug, to clean
and adjust, page 31
Set gap to from 18 to 25/1000-in. or equiv-
alent in thickness to from three to four
"Gillette” type safety razor blades.
Porcelain in spark plug fractured.
Renew plug.
Accumulation due to condensation on
spark plug porcelain, thus permitting a
leakage back from the electrode to the
plug body.
Dismantle plug and dry by following in-
structions, "Spark plug, to clean and ad-
just,” page 31. If plug non-detachable,
dry on stove or near fire.
High tension wire perished or worn
through.
Closely inspect high tension wire. If
cracked or insulation damaged, renew.
Moisture on high tension wire, due to
atmospheric conditions or conditions
under which Engine is operating.
Thoroughly dry surface of insulation on
wire, and for preference, see that the wire
is clear of all metal.
ENGINE WILL NOT START —Continued.


SYMPTOMS
CAUSE
REMEDY
Movable breaker point in magneto sticking
on stud carrying breaker arm, thus
causing breaker points to remain in the
open position.
Free contact breaker arm on stud by refer-
ring to instructions "Contact Breaker Arm
Sticking,” page 28.
Magneto contact points pitted, dirty, or
bridging with moisture.
Clean and adjust points by referring to
instructions, "Magneto, to clean,” page 19.
Magneto fails to give good spark or spark
is weak, even with contact points clean
and adjusted correctly.
Have magneto thoroughly overhauled on
a test bench, or forwarded to either the
Engine Manufacturers or Lucas State Dis-
tributor or his accredited agent.
POOR OR NO COMPRESSION. Spark
at spark plug when tested as above.
Valve stem sticking in guide, due to ac-
cumulation of gummy substance. May
be caused by using stale petrol, blocked
or partially blocked exhaust pipe, in-
correct mixture, not changing oil at cor-
rect intervals.
Either remove valve from guide, clean and
replace by referring to instructions,
"Valves, to grind,” page 36, or remove
fuel tank, carburettor and valve inspection
plate, and apply kerosene with oil can and
feather to valve stem above and below
guide. Correct cause of trouble.
Piece of carbon lodged on valve seat be-
tween seat and valve, thus preventing an
air tight seal.
Remove valve, clean, grind in to seat and
replace, also decarbonise combustion
chamber, by referring to instructions,
"Valves, to grind,” page 36.
Valve stems riding on tappets, thus pre-
venting valves from mating.
Adjust tappets so that clearance is 16/1000
in. If leakage still persists, remove and
grind valves into seats. Refer to instruc-
tions, "Valves to grind,” page 36.


SYMPTOMS
CAUSE
REMEDY
POOR OR NO COMPRESSION. Spark
at spark plug when tested as above.
(Continued from page 11.)
; Faces on valves and seats burnt or valve
warped due to retarded spark, valves
sticking or not seating, incorrect valve
clearance.
Remove valves, grind into seat. If badly
burnt have valve and seat trued up or
valve renewed. Refer to instructions,
"Valves, to grind,” page 36. Correct
cause of trouble.
Valves not making an air tight seal on
their seats, due to seats being distorted
through uneven or over-tightening cylin-
der head nuts, particularly those in the
vicinity of valve seats.
Adjust tightness of nuts until leakage stops.
This may occur after cylinder head has
been removed and replaced.
Leakage of compression down past piston
rings into crankcase, due to previously
running Engine with insufficient lubri-
cating oil, badly worn piston rings or
cylinder.
Renew or rebore worn cylinder, which in
either case is accompanied with a new
piston and rings. If cylinder wear or
damage to cylinder walls not excessive,
renew piston rings. Refer to instructions
"Piston rings, to fit new,” page 45, also
see that oil is kept up to recommended
level.
Leakage of compression due to damaged
head gasket.
Renew cylinder head gasket.
Loose cylinder head nuts.
Tighten firmly and evenly.
Broken or weak valve spring.
Renew spring by referring to instructions
"Valves, to grind,” page 36.
ENGINE WILL NOT START —Continued.


SYMPTOMS
CAUSE j
REMEDY
COMPRESSION APPEARS SATIS-
FACTORY.
Insufficient lubrication due to oil level in !
crankcase being below top of filler.
Fill oil to top of filler, even to point of
overflowing, and change at regular recom-
mended periods.
Mixture setting not correct.
Adjust fuel valve by referring to instruc-
tions "To Start Engine,” page 5.
Exhaust pipe or silencer blocked up with
carbon or foreign matter, thus prevent-
ing free exit of exhaust gases.
Remove exhaust pipes, thoroughly clean,
also dismantle and clean silencer.
Magneto timing. Spark not taking place
when the line marked "spark” on the
periphery of the flywheel is directly op-
posite the sawcut on the top of the
crankcase.
Inspect, and if necessary adjust timing by
referring to instructions "Magneto tim-
ing, to check and adjust if necessary,”
page 29.
Engine overheating due to restriction of
cooling air.
See that grill in cowl is not blocked and
that there is ample clearance for air to
reach the grill, and that its exit is not
restricted from the cylinder fins.
Pulley drive ratio not suitable for the
speed of the engine and the machine to
be driven.
Communicate with Suppliers giving size and
speed of driven pulley, also particulars of
load.
Engine overloaded.
Do not overload Engine or undue wear
and short life can only be expected.
See Trouble Chart re ignition under
heading "Engine will not start.”
See Trouble Chart re ignition under head-
ing "Engine will not Start,”
ENGINE HAS NO POWER


SYMPTOMS
CAUSE
REMEDY
COMPRESSION POOR OR NOT AS
GOOD AS MAY BE EXPECTED.
Insufficient lubrication due to oil level in
crankcase being below top of filler.
Fill oil to top of filler even to point of
overflowing, and change at regular recom-
mended periods.
Valve stem sticking in guide and not
making an air tight seal on seating.
Either remove valve from guide, clean and
replace by referring to instructions
"Valves, to grind,” page 36, or remove
fuel tank, carburettor and valve inspection
plate and apply kerosene with oil can and
feather to valve stem above and below
guide. Grind valve into seating. Correct
cause of trouble.
Insufficient valve tappet clearance prevent-
ing valve from making air tight seal on
seating.
Adjust valve tappet clearance by referring
to instructions "Tappets, to adjust,” page
40. If leakage past valve persists, re-
move and grind into seat. If badly burnt,
have valve and seat trued up or valve re.-
newed. Refer to instructions "Valves, to
grind,” page 36.
Leakage of compression down past the
piston rings into crankcase, due to pre-
viously running Engine with insufficient
lubricating oil, badly worn piston rings
or cylinder.
Renew or rebore \vorn cylinder, which in
either case is accompanied with a new pis-
ton and rings. If cylinder wear or dam-
age to cylinder walls not excessive, renew
piston rings. Refer to instructions "Piston
rings, to fit new,” page 45, also see that
oil is kept up to recommended level.
ENGINE HAS NO POWER— Continued.


SYMPTOMS
CAUSE
REMEDY
Piston out of alignment.
Inspect piston for alignment, and if neces-
sary, adjust by referring to instructions
"Piston Alignment, to test and if neces-
sary, adjust,” page 44.
Engine overheated, due to restriction of
See that grill in cowl is not blocked and
cooling air.
that there is ample clearance for air to
reach same, also for exit from cylinder
fins on other side of Engine.
POOR OR NO COMPRESSION.
No fuel in tank.
Refill.
Refer to Trouble Chart under heading
"Engine will not start.”
Refer to Trouble Chart under heading "En-
gine will not start.”
COMPRESSION APPEARS
SATISFACTORY
No fuel in tank.
Refer to Trouble Chart under heading
"Engine will not start.”
Refill.
Refer to Trouble Chart under heading "En-
gine will not start.”
Retention valve in carburettor suction
pipe jammed on or held off its seating
due to foreign matter.
Remove carburettor and fuel tank from
Engine, carburettor from fuel tank, and
unscrew the suction pipe in the middle
Clean and free valve, replace on to seat
and reassemble. See instructions under
heading "Carburettor Suction Pipe, page
25.
Carburettor snifter valve sticking in
snifter valve cover, due to wear or broken
snifter valve spring.
Adjust or renew worn or damaged parts by
referring to instructions "Carburettor
snifter valve assembly,” page 26.
ENGINE STOPS


SYMPTOMS
CAUSE
REMEDY
COMPRESSION APPEARS TO BE
QUITE SATISFACTORY.
Internal procelain in spark plug covered
with carbon formation, defective spark
plug, or incorrect spark plug gap.
Remove spark plug from cylinder head,
clean carbon from porcelain and adjust
gap by referring to instructions "Spark
plug, to clean and adjust,” page 31. If
plug still unsatisfactory, renew.
Movable breaker point in magneto stick-
ing on stud carrying breaker arm.
Free contact breaker arm on stud by re-
ferring to instructions "Contact Breaker
Arm Sticking,” page 28.
Magneto contact points pitted or dirty.
Clean and adjust points by referring to in-
structions, "Magneto, to clean,” page 28.
Magneto fails to give good spark or spark
is weak, even with contact points clean
and adjusted correctly.
Have magneto thoroughly overhauled on
a Test Bench or forwarded to either the
Engine Manufacturers or "Lucas” State
Distributor or his accredited Agent.
Moisture on high tension cable or insula-
tion broken down.
Thoroughly dry surface of insulation and
if damaged or perished, renew.
Valve stem sticking in guide.
Either remove valve from guide, clean and
'-“place by referring to instructions
"Valves to grind,” page 36, or fuel tank,
carburettor and valve inspection plate and
apply kerosene with oil can and feather
to valve stem above and below guide.
Correct cause of trouble.
ENGINE SPEED ERRATIC


SYMPTOMS
CAUSE
REMEDY
See "Governor Troubles and their Reme-
dies,” page 34.
See "Governor Troubles and their Reme-
dies,” page 34.
Mixture not set correctly.
Turn fuel valve E, fig. 2, page 5, clockwise
until it becomes firm. Do not use force.
Then turn anticlockwise until mark "S”
for Start is opposite line "D”. See in-
structions, page 5.
Wear- in carburettor butterfly spindle and
carburettor body where it passes through
same.
Renew worn parts.
Wear in inlet valve stem and guide.
Renew worn parts.
POOR OR NO COMPRESSION.
Valve stem sticking in guide.
Free valve by removing and cleaning, or
by application of kerosene to valve stem
above and below guide. Correct cause of
trouble.
Insufficient valve tappet clearance prevent-
ing valves from seating.
Adjust tappets so that valve clearance is
16/1000-in. If leakage still persists, re-
move and grind valves into seats. Refer
to instructions "Valves, to grind,” page 36.
Valves not seating due to foreign matter
between valve face and seat, valve warp-
ed or burnt.
Remove the valve, clean, grind into seat.
If burnt, reface and reseat before grind-
ing or renew valve and reseat. Refer to
instructions, "Valves, to grind,” page 36.


SYMPTOMS
CAUSE
REMEDY
POOR OR NO COMPRESSION.
(Continued from page 17.)
Leakage down past piston rings into
crankcase, due to wear in piston rings or
cylinder, or both.
Renew or rebore worn cylinder which in
either case is accompanied with a new
piston and rings. If cylinder wear not ex-
cessive, renew piston rings. Refer instruc-
tions applicable to replacement required.
Exhaust pipe or silencer blocked up with
carbon or foreign matter, thus prevent-
ing free exit of exhaust gases.
Remove exhaust pipes, thoroughly clean,
also dismantle and clean silencer.
COMPRESSION APPEARS
SATISFACTORY.
Exhaust pipe or silencer blocked up with
carbon or foreign matter, thus prevent-
ing free exit of exhaust gases.
Remove exhaust pipes, thoroughly clean,
also dismantle and clean silencer.
Mixture setting not correct.
Adjust fuel valve by referring to instruc-
tions, "To Start Engine,” page 5.
Magneto timing. Spark not taking place
when the line marked "spark” on the
periphery of the flywheel is directly op-
posite the sawcut on the top of the
crankcase.
Inspect, and if necessary adjust timing by
referring to instructions "Magneto Tim-
ing, to check and adjust if necessary,”
page 29.
Restriction of cooling air to grill in cowl,
and exit from cylinder fins.
See that the grill in cowl is not blocked
and that there is ample clearance for the
air to reach same, also for exit from cylin-
der fins on other side of Engine.
ENGINE OVERHEATING
ENGINE SPEED ERRATIC —Continued.


SYMPTOMS
CAUSE
REMEDY
'
Carbon formation in combustion chamber.
Remove cylinder head and decarbonize.
Refer instructions "Valves, to grind, page
36.
Piston out of alignment, inducing unneces-
sary friction accompanied by heat and
undue wear. This condition prevents the
piston rings from being parallel with the
cylinder wall, thus spoiling the air seal
and efficient piston ring lubrication.
Ensure that the sides of the piston are
parallel with the cylinder wall by refer-
ring to instructions "Piston Alignment,”
to test and if necessary, adjust,” page 44.
COMPRESSION POOR OR NOT AS
GOOD AS MAY BE EXPECTED.
Insufficient lubrication due to oil level in
crankcase being below the top of filler.
Fill oil to top of filler even to point of
overflowing and change at regular recom-
mended periods.
Use of unsuitable lubricating oil or run-
ning Engine over longer periods than
recommended between changes.
Use correct lubricating oil and change at
regular intervals as recommended.
Piston out of alignment, inducing unneces-
sary friction accompanied by heat and
undue wear. This condition prevents the
piston rings from being parallel with the
cylinder wall, thus spoiling the air seal
and efficient piston ring lubrication.
Ensure that the sides of the piston are
parallel with the cylinder wall by refer-
ring to instructions "Piston Alignment, to
test and if necessary, adjust,” page 44.


COMPRESSION APPEARS TO BE
QUITE SATISFACTORY, BUT BLUE
SMOKE IS EMITTED FROM EX-
HAUST.
Use of unsuitable lubricating oil.
Lubricating oil passing up beyond piston
rings into combustion chamber, due to
slots in oil regulating ring or return holes
in piston ring groove being blocked or
partially blocked with carbon.
Use correct grade of oil as recommended.
Remove piston rings by referring to in-
structions "To fit new cylinder or refit re-
bored cylinder block,” page 42. Clean
carbon from slot in oil regulating ring
with an old hacksaw blade or similar tool,
also ring grooves and return oil holes. If
rings worn, replace.
Piston rings not bearing for full circle on
oil seal side of piston ring groove in
piston.
Lap rings into ring grooves in piston with
fine grinding paste.
Engine overheating due to restriction of
cooling air.
See that grill in cowl is not blocked and
that there is ample clearance for air to
reach same, also for exit from cylinder
fins on other side of Engine.
SYMPTOMS
CAUSE
REMEDY
COMPRESSION POOR OR NOT AS
GOOD AS MAY BE EXPECTED.
(Continued from page 19.)
Leakage down past piston rings into
crankcase, due to wear in piston rings or
cylinder, or both.
Renew or rebore worn cylinder which in
either case is accompanied with a new
piston and rings. If cylinder wear not
excessive, renew piston rings. Refer in-
structions applicable to replacement re-
quired.
ENGINE USING AN EXCESS OF LUBRICATING OIL
ENGINE OVERHEATING —Continued.


SYMPTOMS
CAUSE
REMEDY
COMPRESSION POOR AND NOT AS
GOOD AS MAY BE EXPECTED AND
BLUE SMOKE EMITTED FROM EX-
HAUST.
Wear in piston, piston rings and cylinder.
Renew or rebore worn cylinder which in
either case is accompanied with a new pis-
ton and rings. If wear in cylinder wall
and piston not excessive, renew piston
rings only.
Piston out of alignment, thus upsetting
control of lubrication.
Ensure that the sides of the piston are par-
allel with the cylinder wall by referring
to instructions "Piston Alignment, to test
and if necessary adjust,” page 44.
COMPRESSION MAY BE GOOD OR
OTHERWISE, BLUE SMOKE EMIT-
TED FROM THE EXHAUST OR
OTHERWISE. There is oil leakage
showing at the crankshaft or any other
joints around Engine.
Accumulation of pressure in crankcase,
due to expansion of gases and leakage
past piston rings not being released by
crankcase breathing.
Make sure that the 3/16-in. hole found
alongside the breather in the crankcase
inspection plate and the breather itself
are not blocked, also inspect all seals and
gaskets to see that they are not damaged
or ineffective. Correct trouble by refer-
ring to instructions applicable to same.
KNOCK WHICH HAS A RESEMB-
LANCE IN SOUND TO A LIGHT
THUD AND IS OF THE SAME SE-
Engine loose on foundation.
Tighten foundation bolt nuts both firmly
and evenly.
QUENCE AS THE FIRING OF THE
ENGINE.
Flywheel loose on crankshaft.
Drive pulley loose on crankshaft.
Tighten nut on clamp bolt which passes
through boss of flywheel.
Tighten setscrew or tapered key whichever
is provided for locating the pulley on to
the shaft.
KNOCKING NOISES


SYMPTOMS
CAUSE
REMEDY
A KNOCKING NOISE WHICH IS OF
A SHARP METALLIC NATURE, AND
MAY BE EVEN OR INTERMITTENT.
Knocking is even and. comes on gradually.
This may be due to accumulation of car-
bon in the combustion chamber, reducing
the capacity of the chamber and thus in-
creasing compression ratio.
Remove the cylinder head by referring to
instructions "Cylinder head, to remove and
replace,” page 35, and decarbonize the
inside of cylinder head, top of piston and
cylinder block by referring to instructions
"Valves, to grind,” page 36.
Knocking is even and comes on gradually.
This may be due to wear in cylinder and
on piston, causing piston slap.
Renew or rebore worn cylinder which in
either case is accompanied with a new pis-
ton and rings.
Knocking is even and comes on gradually,
due to excessive tappet clearance.
Adjust tappets to 16/1000-in. See page 40.
Knocking is even and is noticeable after
having cylinder rebored, due to increased
compression ratio.
Add extra thicknesses of packing between
cylinder block and crankcase to meet re-
quirements.
Knocking is even, and is noticeable after
having new piston rings fitted, due to
top piston ring striking ledge around top
of cylinder.
Ledge indicating highest point of travel of
top piston ring should be relieved with
scraper or special tool after fitting new
rings.
Knocking is even and is noticeable when
Engine is put on to heavy load, due to
Engine being overloaded.
See that suitable size pulleys are used for
drive and that Engine is not overloaded,
otherwise undue wear and short life can
only be expected.
Ignition taking place too early.
Inspect, and if necessary adjust timing by-
referring to instructions "Magneto timing,
to check and adjust if necessary,” page 29.
KNOCKING NOISES —Continued.


SYMPTOMS
CAUSE
REMEDY
Knock is uneven and. occurs intermittently
when Engine is operating on load, due to
temporary failure of ignition.
Carefully check over magneto, referring to
cleanliness of breaker points and clear-
ance of same, freeness of contact breaker
arm on stud, also clean and tighten con-
nections throughout magneto assembly.
See that spark plug is clean and not dam-
aged on internal porcelain, and that the
points are adjusted to from 18 to 25
thousandths of an inch gap.
MOST PRONOUNCED KNOCK AT
ALL TIMES, EVEN NOTICEABLE
WHILE CRANKING ENGINE OVER.
Worn or damaged bigend bearing.
Looseness in the bearing should either be
taken up, or the bearing renewed accord-
ing to requirements. See instructions
"Bigend Bearing, to fit new,” page 47.
KNOCK HAVING A HOLLOW SOUND
WHICH IS VERY PRONOUNCED IN
THIS RESPECT, IF THE ENGINE IS
STOPPED AND AFTER HAVING
THE INSPECTION PLATES REMOV-
ED, IS TURNED OVER WITH THE
HANDLE.
Worn gudgeon bush or piston bosses into
which the gudgeon pin fits.
Piston rings worn. Very loose in ring
grooves.
Renew worn parts, referring to instructions
"Gudgeon pin and bush, to fit new,” page
43, and "Piston, to fit new,” page 43.
Renew piston rings, referring to instruc-
tions "Piston rings, to fit new,” page 45.
METALLIC RATTLING NOISE
NOTICEABLE EVEN WHEN ENGINE
IS TURNED OVER WITH THE
HANDLE.
Wear in timing gears. . .
Wear on magneto drive coupling pin or
hole in driven magneto coupling into
which it fits.
Replace worn or damaged gear or gears
by referring to instructions applicable to
same.
Renew worn parts.


SERVICE MANUAL
The following directions are to asisst in the carrying out of
all maintenance and repair work.
On any matters not referred to herein, advice should be sought
direct from the Makers or Distributors.
Jobs marked by a heavy black line in the margin should be
done by an experienced mechanic if it can possibly be arranged.
CARBURETTOR. The carburettor is very simple and efficient, and
there is little likelihood of it giving trouble. It consists of the following
component parts which are itemised and explained below.
1. Carburettor body. This is the portion of the carburettor which
is attached to the cylinder block and into and on to which are
fitted —
2. Butterfly valve situated in the neck of the body, which regulates
the amount of mixture—petrol and air-—which is permitted to
enter the combustion chamber, thus increasing or decreasing the
amount of power given off by the Engine in conjunction with the
speed of operation. The above, in its turn, is controlled by the
governor.
3. The fuel valve. This valve regulates the percentage of petrol in
the mixture by screwing it clockwise or anti-clockwise—clockwise
for decreasing the quantity of fuel or weakening the mixture, and
anti-clockwise for increasing the fuel or enriching the mixture.
This action is brought about by the valve being threaded into the
carburettor body, and having a tapered point on it which passes
down into the opening in the top of the carburettor suction pipe.
When screwing the fuel valve down to stop the engine or to ascer-
tain the starting position, which is from one quarter to three
quarters of a turn open, care must be taken that it is not screwed
down tightly. This would damage the valve and valve seat, thus
altering the setting and resulting in the "Start” and "Work” marks
on the fuel valve knob giving an incorrect indication of the best
starting and working positions.
The adjustment of the fuel valve should be checked from time to
time, and if necessary, the markings re-set, because if the valve is
screwed down too tightly at any time, a groove will be formed
around the taper of the valve, also the hole in the suction pipe
into which the needle fits will be opened up. The necessity for
caution as well as the periodical checking of adjustments will,
therefore, be clearly understood.
The checking of the adjustment is effected when the Engine is
operating on load by screwing the fuel valve down slowly in a
clockwise direction until the throttle valve opens or the Engine
falters, then opening it up slightly anti-clockwise about 1/16-th of
an inch travel on the outside edge of the fuel valve knob until
the Engine runs evenly and the throttle valve becomes steady again.


4. The carburettor suction pipe. This screws into the carburettor
body immediately below the fuel valve, and is in two half sections,
the top one being screwed into the bottom one.
This provision is made to enable a retention or non-return valve to
be incorporated in the suction pipe, thereby keeping the fuel up to
the top opening in same, and thus maintaining a constant supply
at the fuel valve by preventing the fuel from running back into
the tank.
It is essential that the operation of the retention or non-return valve
be perfectly free at all times, as if it is held up off the seat or
down firmly on to the seat, in either position it would interfere
with the constant supply of fuel to the fuel valve. This would
apply particularly when the level of the fuel in the tank becomes
low, and would result in the engine being hard to start and
running erratically.
If symptoms of Engine trouble give reason to suspect that the retention
valve is not operating freely, it should be removed, inspected, and if necessary,
ground in on to its seating in the bottom half of the suction pipe.
Fig. 3.
A. Carburettor body.
B. Top half suction pipe.
C. Retention valve.
D. Bottom half suction pipe.
To carry out this procedure, first remove
the small split pin which holds the rod to the
carburettor in the steel governor lever.
The rod can then be removed.
Unscrew and remove the exhaust pipe, also
the two nuts which hold the fuel tank and
carburettor assembly to the cylinder block.
The assembly can then be withdrawn clear from
the Engine.
Withdraw the carburettor and suction pipe
from the fuel tank.
If the suction pipe is then closely exam-
ined, it will be noted that there is a join in the
middle of it.
To unscrew, grip the pipe at both ends with
pairs of pliers or footprints.
Do not grip the bottom pipe in any posi-
tion other than at the end, as by doing so, the
retention valve seat may be distorted.
The retention valve can then be removed
from the bottom portion of the suction pipe,
freed, and if necessary, ground in on to the
seating, using fine grinding paste or knife polish,
and a small screwdriver. Place this in the
screwdriver slot provided in the valve for same,
and turn it back and forth.
Thoroughly remove all traces of the grinding compound, and test from
time to time, either with the mouth by blowing or sucking the pipe, or filling
it with petrol to see if the valve holds.
After attending to the retention valve requirements, re-assemble by
reversing dismantling procedure.


5. The carburettor snifter valve assembly. This is for the pur-
pose of regulating the amount of air taken in by the Engine before
it is mixed with the correct proportion of fuel, and consists of a
snifter valve or metal disc which is carried on the snifter valve
choke rod, which in its turn, is supported by, and passes through
the snifter valve cover.
A snifter valve spring holds the snifter valve against the face of the
carburettor body in which there are air holes. The snifter valve
spring is located between the snifter valve and the washer on the
choke rod.
The whole assembly is held on to the carburettor body with three
setscrews passing through the snifter valve cover, and screwing into
the carburettor body.
By this design, the snifter valve acts both as a choke when the choke
button is pressed in for starting the Engine, and as an air regulator,
when the choke button is out and the engine in operation.
The points that require periodical inspection, and if necessary, atten-
tion, are the hole in the centre of the snifter valve where it is
carried on the choke rod, and the choke rod where it passes through
this hole and the one in the snifter valve cover.
If wear has taken place, it may allow the outer edge of the snifter
valve to come in contact with the inner surface of the snifter valve
cover, thus retarding its freedom of operation, and perhaps causing
it to stick.
In cases where this is evident, the parts should either be renewed or
the outer edge of the snifter valve relieved with a file until it is
impossible for it to foul the cover.
The snifter valve choke rod should be quite free where it passes
through the snifter valve cover.
The snifter valve spring should consist of from nine to 10 coils, and
should be from l|-in. to 1-7/8-in. in length, both ends being square.
If the dimensions of the spring are not consistent with these specifi-
cations, the spring should either be renewed or adjusted with a pair
of pliers, carefully and slightly bending its coils all around.
The correct length of the snifter valve spring is an essential factor
in the satisfactory operation of the Engine. Should it be shorter
or longer than stipulated, the correct mixture would not be pro-
vided to meet the requirements of the Engine at varying speeds
and loads. For instance, the Engine may run evenly when idling,
but when put on load the mixture may be too lean causing mis-
firing, or too rich with the exhaust emitting black smoke.
CARBURETTOR GASKET. The gasket between the carburettor
and the cylinder block should be examined if the Engine is dismantled at any
time, and if the gasket is broken or faulty, it should be replaced with a new
one. Gasket cement should not be used on this gasket. Give it a thin
smearing of motor grease before assembling.
If the correct gasket is not available, use a piece of "Klingerite” 1000
jointing, 1/32-in. thick. This jointing has a wire mesh woven into it, and is
suitable for the job in an emergency.
If this jointing cannot be obtained, a piece of ordinary asbestos compound
jointing smeared with grease could be fitted temporarily until the correct
gasket is procured.


CARBURETTOR BUTTERFLY LEVER TO CONNECT TO
BUTTERFLY SPINDLE AND ADJUST LENGTH OF ROD TO
CARBURETTOR. This is in the event of carburettor removal or replace-
ment of component parts.
Fit the small brass butterfly lever over the butterfly spindle and press
the governor lever in towards the engine as far as it will go, then allow it to
come back about 1/16th of an inch. Hold in this position and, using a
screwdriver, turn the butterfly spindle in a clockwise direction as far as it
will go. This closes the butterfly valve right up. Now, still holding the
governor lever pressed in, as described above, screw the small setscrew into
the lever with the screwdriver until it is tight on the butterfly spindle. Release
the governor lever when if will then go back to its normal position.
The sawcut mark across the top of the butterfly spindle should then be
at right angles to the crankshaft. If not, adjust the length of the rod to
carburettor by screwing it in or out of the carburettor lever pin.
After giving the Engine a run, tighten the setscrew again into the lever
so that there will be no risk of it working loose on the carburettor butterfly
spindle.
MAGNETO, “LUCAS” TYPE R.S.I. To adjust the breaker points.
Remove contact breaker cover, then turn the flywheel round to find the
position giving the maximum opening of the points.
The correct gap when the points are opened fully, is 12 thousandths of an
inch, which is the equivalent in thickness to two "Gillette” type safety razor
blades.
Test the gap with a feeler gauge or razor blades and if necessary adjust as
follows:
Slacken the two locking screws in the contact breaker base (do not slacken
the screw nearest the felt pad). Insert a screwdriver in slot provided and lever
the bracket carrying the contact until the gap is from 10 to 12 thousandths of
an inch, afterwards retightening the locking screws.
It is advisable to check the gap again after tightening the screws to ensure
that no movement has taken place.
If the contact breaker points are pitted, they should be filed very carefully
so that they will make a good clean contact with each other. This, for pref-
erence, should only be done by an experienced fitter, using a fine file, and
finishing off with fine emery cloth or a fine carborundum stone.
Dirty points can be cleaned by putting a narrow strip of clean brown paper
between them and withdrawing it, repeating this at different locations on the
paper until the point faces are clean.
This procedure should be effected with the points in the closed position,
opening them each time to take the paper. The paper should also be folded
so that ragged edges will not stay between points.
Contact Breaker Points, to fit new. Remove the contact breaker
cover. Points are supplied fitted to the breaker arm and fixed point. These
should be removed by withdrawing the split pin from the stud carrying the
breaker arm, also the nut from the post over which the breaker arm spring
passes. The breaker arm assembly can then be removed, taking care not to
lose the collars and washers.
Unscrew the two screws holding the fixed point, (do not slacken the screw
nearest the felt pad). The fixed point assembly can then be removed.


When re-assembling, reverse the dismantling procedure, using the new
replacement parts, and taking care that the metal and fabric washers are
refitted in their correct order of removal.
Check up on point gap and adjust to requirements by referring to "Con-
tact Breaker Points, to fit new,” page 27. Replace the contact breaker cover.
Contact Breaker Arm sticking. This is a trouble that occurs with
magnetos occasionally in damp weather, and is due to either the surface of the
pin becoming corroded, or the composition in the breaker arm swelling
slightly with moisture and thus binding on the pivot pin.
This makes the breaker arm sluggish in its movement, perhaps even
preventing the points from closing.
To remedy this trouble, remove the breaker arm by following instructions
as given under heading "Contact Breaker Points, to fit new,” page 27. Exam-
ine the pin on which the lever works. If necessary, clean the pin with fine
emery cloth, wiping away all grit and moistening with oil before replacing the
lever. If lever still not free, wrap a little piece of very fine glass paper
around a 2-in. nail. Pass this through the pivot pin opening in the breaker
arm and revolve same a few turns lightly. Remember that very little has to
be removed from inside the arm to give it the necessary clearance and freedom
on the pivot pin.
If too much is removed, it will leave the rocker arm loose on the pivot pin,
thus resulting in the contact points rubbing together and wearing.
When the breaker arm is free on the pivot pin, apply a little vaseline or
good quality grease to the pin and opening in the arm before replacing same.
MagnetO) to clean. The magneto has, in many cases, to work under
conditions where it is exposed to dirt and moisture. Although the design of
the magneto is such that it cannot gain access to the interior of the magneto,
an accumulation of wet and dirt on the insulating surfaces of the plug, cable
and high tension terminal will tend to cause bad starting.
It is advisable, therefore, to wipe these parts with a clean dry cloth
occasionally.
The cam must be clean and free from any abrasive deposit; a cloth
moistened with petrol should be used for cleaning.
The magneto should not be dismantled or interfered with unnecessarily.
If its performance is unsatisfactory, the contact points may require clean-
ing, truing up or adjusting.
To render the contacts accessible for cleaning and truing up, remove the
breaker arm and fixed point by referring to instructions "Contact Breaker
Points, to fit new.”
To clean and true up the points, use a magneto file, finishing off with fine
emery or a fine carborundum stone.
Clean all traces of the cleaning medium away with a piece of cloth
moistened in petrol.
Re-assemble, seeing that the metal and fabric washers are refitted in their
correct order, also that the point gap is adjusted to requirements by referring
to instructions as given under "Contact Breaker Points, to fit new,” page 27.
High Tension to fit new. If, on inspection, the high tension
cable shows signs of perishing or cracking, it should be replaced. Replace-
ment cable must be 7 m.m. rubber-covered ignition cable.


The method of connecting the cable is as follows: Remove moulded cover
by unscrewing the two securing screws, unscrew the cable fixing screw on the
inside of the cover, push the cable well home into its terminal and then
tighten the screw, which will pierce the insulation to make contact with the
cable core.
Lubrication. Cam. The cam is lubricated by a felt pad. About every
100 hours’ running, inspect the pad, and if it is dry, smear with Mobilgrease
No. 2 or Mobiloil B or equivalent.
Contact Breaker Pivot Pin, About every 250 hours’ running place a
single spot of thin machine oil on the contact breaker pivot. This is accessible
when the cotter pin and washers are removed.
Replacement of magneto with similar or interchangeable type.
Assuming that the magneto only is being replaced, unscrew the four setscrews
which hold the magneto to bracket and remove magneto.
Unscrew the nut holding the coupling on to the magneto shaft, using
a "Stillson” or similar wrench to hold the coupling whilst removing the nut.
The magneto shaft on to which the coupling fits is tapered and the coupling
will therefore have to be prised or tapped off.
Fit the coupling over the replacement magneto shaft and screw up the
nut until it reaches the flat washer up against the coupling.
Now follow the instructions applicable to Checking Magneto Timing
and Adjusting, if necessary.
Magneto Timing, to check and adjust, if necessary.
The correct timing of the magneto is of vital importance. The contact
breaker points should just commence to break when the word "spark” on
periphery of the flywheel is at its highest point of travel, in which position
it is directly opposite a sawcut line on the machined top of the crankcase
where it adjoins the cylinder block.
This sawcut may be partly covered by paint, in which case scrape the
paint away with a knife blade until it can be seen clearly.
To check the timing of the magneto, first remove the air cowl top cover
and cowl from the engine by referring to instructions under heading "To
remove air cowl,” page 35.
Remove the magneto contact breaker cover.
Make sure that the points have the correct gap of 10 to 12/1000-in.
If not, adjust accordingly.
Turn the flywheel in a forward direction until the points just commence
to break. The word "spark” should be directly opposite the sawcut line as
referred to above, or not more than i-in. on either side.
It is advisable to make this check up two or three times as it is not
only an essential setting, but also sensitive.
It is preferable, however, that the setting be made correct, but in any
case if it is more than a £-in. it must be corrected.
To alter the timing of the magneto, first take out the four setscrews
holding it to the bracket, and remove magneto.
Unscrew the nut holding the coupling on to the magneto shaft using
"Stillson” or similar wrench to hold the coupling whilst removing the nut.
The magneto shaft on to which the coupling fits is tapered and the coupling
will therefore have to be prised or tapped off.


Fit the coupling over the magneto shaft and screw up the nut until it
reaches the flat washer up against the coupling.
This will now leave the coupling so that it is free to turn on the tapered
shaft, but has practically no end play. In other words, the slightest move-
ment of the nut will tighten and hold the coupling firmly on the tapered
magneto shaft.
Replace the magneto on the bracket holding it there firmly with two
setscrews in diagonally opposite corners and making sure that both the
driven coupling on the magneto shaft, and the drive coupling are correctly
lined up.
See that the word "Spark” on the periphery of the flywheel is at its
highest point of travel, and directly opposite the sawcut line on the machined
top of the crankcase as referred to above. The armature of the magneto
and contact breaker assembly should be in such a position that the contact
breaker points are just commencing to open, that is, the slightest travel of
the flywheel in a forward direction should break the points.
The simplest method of bringing about this procedure is to turn the
magneto armature with a screwdriver in the slot at the breaker end of the
shaft. Turn the armature in the opposite direction of rotation until the
points open for a period and then just close.
When in this position, place a screwdriver, or preferably two screwdrivers,
between both couplings—the drive and the driven—and prise them apart.
This has the effect of forcing and tightening the driven coupling on to
the taper of the magneto shaft.
Check up timing as referred to above.
If not correct, again prise the coupling loose and repeat the above
procedure.
When the timing is correct, carefully remove the two setscrews holding
the magneto in position on the bracket, after which it can be removed and
the nut on the magneto armature spindle tightened.
This can be accomplished with a "Stillson” or foot print pipe wrench
to hold the coupling whilst tightening the nut with a spanner.
Again replace the magneto on to the bracket, making sure that the
couplings are lined up correctly, and holding it there with two setscrews in
diagonally opposite positions.
Check up again to see that the timing is correct. Turn the flywheel
around slowly with the right hand, and with the thumb and forefinger of the
left hand rock the coupling on the magneto back and forth. This is to
ensure that there is a little play in all positions throughout a complete
revolution of the couplings between the drive pin in the drive coupling and
the hole into which it fits in the driven coupling on the magneto shaft.
When both of these latter adjustments are achieved, and not before, as
both are essential, the other two setscrews comprising the four which hold the
magneto on to the bracket, should be inserted and tightened.
If it is found when turning the flywheel of the Engine around and
checking the clearance between the drive pin and hole in the driven coupling,
that there is any position in which this clearance is non-existent, the reason
for this should be ascertained, and provision made to rectify same.


It could be caused either by the couplings not being lined correctly
horizontally or vertically, or both.
If horizontally, the magneto can usually be slewed one way or the other
to rectify same, whereas if it is vertically, equi-thickness packings must be
added between the base of the magneto and the bracket to meet requirements.
Whilst the first adjustment must be carefully watched, there is little
likelihood of the second occurring, unless, of course, one make of magneto
is replaced by another. In this case, it may occur, and special reference
should be made to the manufacturers regarding what alteration to the
magneto bracket or otherwise may be necessary in order to provide for the
conversion.
SPARK PLUG. The correct spark plug to use in these Engines is
known as the Normal Service type Plug, and it is preferable that it be of
a detachable design, that is easily taken apart for cleaning.
Three popular makes of plugs that can be used are "Leggetts” LB,
"Champion” C 7, or "Edison” 43.
With non-detachable plugs, the electrode cannot be cleaned as efficiently
as with the detachable type, and thus may cause difficult starting and erratic
running, particularly if the formation on the electrode cannot be satisfactorily
removed.
SPARK PLUG, TO CLEAN AND ADJUST. With the detachable
type of spark plug, place the body of the plug in a vice, exercising care to
see that the vice is just tightened sufficiently to prevent the spark plug from
turning. . .
With the aid of a good fitting spanner, preferably of the box type, then
unscrew the bush that holds the porcelain centre in position in the plug body.
The porcelain can then be removed from the spark plug body, and the
bottom portion which comes in contact with the heated gases from the com-
bustion chamber, cleaned of any carbon deposit with a piece of rag. If the
carbon is burnt into the surface, use a piece of fine glass paper.
Replace the porcelain when cleaned into the spark plug body, making
sure that the gaskets which make the seal between the body and the porcelain
are not damaged, and that they are perfectly clean.
When replacing and tightening the bush that holds the porcelain, see
that the latter is not overdone, as if such is the case, there is a risk of
damaging the porcelain.
Check the gap between the points, and do so regularly. If necessary,
adjust.
The plug electrodes burn away slightly in service, and thus in time the
gap width increases. The gap between the points should be normally from
18 to 25/1000-in. which is equivalent to the thickness of from three to four
"Gillette” type safety razor blades and should never exceed 25/1000-in.
When varying the gap, always adjust the point fixed to the plug casing.
Never interfere with the electrode.
Spark plug, to test. Remove the high tension wire from the spark
plug. Grasp the rubber-insulated part of the wire well back from the end
and hold the terminal steady approximately l/8-in. from the cylinder head
metal.


Crank the Engine over quickly when sparking should be visible between
the terminal and the head.
Remove the spark plug from the Engine, clean and adjust same.
Attach the terminal to the plug and lay the plug on top of the cylinder
head so that the terminal is clear of the metal.
Again crank the Engine over quickly when sparking should be visible
across the points.
If there is no spark at the points, or it is noticed that sparking takes
place across from the electrode to the body of the plug internally, it can be
assumed that the plug is faulty and should be replaced with a new one.
The above is only an elementary test. Even a faulty spark plug may
spark across the points whilst the plug is in the open, although it may not do
so when fitted to the Engine. The reason for this is that the resistance is
increased due to pressure known as compression.
GOVERNOR GEAR, TO FIT NEW. Remove the fuel tank and
carburettor assembly, after first unscrewing the exhaust pipe from the mani-
fold, the split pin from the rod to the carburettor, and the two nuts from
the studs holding the carburettor assembly on to the cylinder block.
Unscrew the four setscrews holding the magneto and magneto drive
coupling in position on the magneto bracket, and remove same.
Unscrew the three setscrews holding the governor cover on to the mag-
neto and governor bracket, and after slipping the end loop of the governor
spring from the stud over which it passes, this assembly can be taken away.
Place a piece of flat bar iron 1/4-in. thick in the slot across the driving
coupling, which in its turn screws into the governor gear.
If this is not obtainable, a good strong screwdriver in most instances
will do in its stead. Remove cowl, by referring to instructions, page 35.
Turn the governor side flywheel in an anti-clockwise direction, which will
bring the piece of bar or screwdriver up against the crankcase.
Continue turning in this direction, as by doing so, this will unscrew the
coupling from the governor gear.
The governor gear can then be withdrawn.
Withdraw the split pins and unscrew the nuts from the governor weight
pins, after which the pins and weights can be removed.
Refit the weights to the new governor gear, making sure, when tightening
the nuts, that all side play between the lugs and weights is taken up, but whilst
doing so, that the weights are given perfect freedom of operation.
After giving the portion of the governor gear which passes through the
governor bush, a liberal smearing of lubricating oil, place it in position,
refitting and tightening the drive coupling into same.
The magneto will in all probability need to be re-timed and the procedure
as given referring to this, page 29, should be followed.
Before replacing the governor cover, see that the governor plunger pin
is in its position between the recesses in the governor weights for same, and
that the gasket between the cover and the governor bracket is in its correct
position.
This can be ensured by first placing it over the three setscrews with them
projecting through the cover.


GOVERNOR WEIGHTS, TO FIT NEW. Remove the governor
gear, by referring to instructions "To fit new governor gear.” Withdraw the
split pins and remove the nuts from the governor weight pins.
After withdrawing same, the weights can then be removed and replaced.
After replacing, and whilst tightening the nuts on the governor weight
pins, see that they are screwed up just sufficiently to take up all side play,
but not enough to prevent the weights from working freely, then replace
split pins.
Replace governor gear, re time magneto, replace governor cover and
make various connections by reversing dismantling procedure and referring
to instructions applicable to same.
GOVERNOR PLUNGER, TO FIT NEW. Remove the split pin from
the end of the rod to carburettor) where it passes through the top end of the
governor lever, also the looped end of the regulating spring, where it passes
over the stud holding same.
If the three setscrews holding the governor cover in position are un-
screwed, the governor cover assembly can then be removed, taking care not
to damage the gasket.
The governor plunger pin can then be replaced, making sure that its
stem is a good free fit where it passes through the opening provided for same
in the governor cover.
Place the large end of the plunger between the recesses in the governor
weights provided for same, also the governor cover gasket over the projecting
portion of the three setscrews that hold the cover to the governor bracket.
This locates the gasket in position, and prevents it from being damaged.
Replace the end of the regulating spring over the stud provided for
same, also the split pin in the rod to carburettor, after the end of this has
been passed through the top end of the governor lever.
As mentioned above, the stem of the plunger must be a good free fit in
the opening provided for same in the governor cover, so that it can revolve
freely when the Engine is in operation.
GOVERNOR BRONZE BEARING, TO FIT NEW. Remove the
governor gear by referring to instructions "To fit new governor gear,” page 32.
The old bush can be removed from the governor bracket by driving it
out with a piece of round iron slightly smaller in diameter than the outside
dimensions of the bush.
After giving the outside of the new bush, and the opening into which it
fits a liberal smearing of lubricating oil, drive it into the bracket, making
sure that it is kept perfectly square for the first half inch.
The governor gear should then be fitted to the bush either with the aid
of a reamer and finishing with a scraper, or with a scraper on its own, where
a suitable reamer is not available.
Re-assemble by reversing dismantling procedure, also checking up on
magneto timing, and if necessary, resetting same.
GOVERNOR BRACKET OIL RETURN VALVE, TO CLEAN OR
RENEW. Remove the governor gear by referring to instructions, "To fit
new governor gear,” page 32. The valve body which screws down into the
drive coupling end of the governor bracket, can then be removed with a
screwdriver, after which the ball valve is exposed.


This valve makes provision for the oil to return into the engine crankcase.
After attending to the requirements of the valve and valve body, also
making sure that the recess into which they fit is thoroughly clean, re-assemble
by reversing dismantling procedure, finally checking up on magneto timing,
and making any adjustments that may be found necessary.
GOVERNING TROUBLES AND THEIR REMEDIES. If the En-
gine governs well on full load but hunts or governs badly when on no load
or'a very light load, it may be due to one or more of the following:—
1. The carburettor snifter valve spring may not exert the correct tension
on the snifter valve. This spring should consist of from 9to 10
coils and be from l|-in. to 1-7/8-in. in length, both ends being
square.
If not, the spring should either be renewed or re-adjusted with a
pair of pliers, carefully and slightly bending its coils all around.
2. The snifter valve may be distorted, which would prevent its face from
matching up correctly with the face on the carburettor body.
This valve is composed of light aluminium, and may be put out of
shape by striking or exerting too much thrust on the carburettor
snifter valve choke rod, which projects through the rear end of
the carburettor.
If this valve is distorted, it should be replaced with a new one.
3. If the central hole in the snifter valve, or the carburettor snifter valve
choke rod which passes through same is worn, it would allow the
outer edges of the snifter valve to come in contact with the inner
surface of the snifter valve cover, thus retarding its freedom of
operation, and perhaps causing it to stick.
This upsets the proportions of fuel and air in the mixture, and
therefore the outer edge of the snifter valve itself should be
relieved with a file to prevent it fouling the cover, or the worn
parts renewed.
4. If there is a leakage of air where the carburettor suction pipe screws
into the carburettor body, this is likely to upset the mixture and
it should be prevented by screwing the suction pipe tighter into
the body, or preferably, removing it, and after giving the thread a
thin smearing of gasket cement or red lead, replacing same.
5. If any of the governor levers are bent or their freedom of operation
retarded by paint or dryness sticking the joints, first remove the
end of the governor spring from the stud over which it fits, then
operate the governor mechanism by hand, ensuring its freeness
by correcting any of the above troubles that may exist.
After making sure that it is free and well lubricated, replace the
spring over the stud.
6. The stem of the governor plunger pin must be perfectly free where
it passes through the governor cover.
If the Engine has been standing idle for some time, or is operating
under conditions which would make any of its exposed metal
surfaces susceptible to corrosion, the surface of the governor
plunger pin stem may be affected in this way, thus preventing its
freedom of operation.
In such cases the governor cover should be removed, the pin released
and given an ample application of lubricating oil.


7. Whilst the governor weights must have freedom of operation, it is
essential that they should not have any side play, or undue
movement on the governor weight pins, due to wear.
The side play can be corrected by tightening the nuts on the pins,
making sure that the weights are not prevented from working
freely, whilst if the pins are badly worn, the worn parts must be
renewed-
8. The speed regulating spring may have lost portion of its tension,
which thus makes it more resilient, sometimes even to that extent
where it will be found beneficial to renew same.
A new and stronger spring often overcomes hunting in an Engine.
9. If the gasket which makes the joint between the carburettor body
and the cylinder block becomes damaged, it may allow a leakage
of air into the mixture passing from the carburettor into the
combustion chamber.
Apart from this making it difficult to set the mixture correctly, it
would have a detrimental effect on the carburettor providing a
uniform mixture to the Engine under varying loads.
The gasket in cases such as these should be renewed.
TO REMOVE AIR COWL. —referring to Fig. 2, page 5.
1. Unscrew the two nuts, "C”, holding the air cowl top cover on to the
cylinder head studs.
2. Unscrew the two button-headed setscrews, "A”, holding the bottom
of the cowl top cover to the cowl itself. The cover can then be
removed.
3. Unscrew the two button-headed screws holding the cowl on either
side of the cylinder block, also the screw holding the cowl on to
the bottom of the cylinder on the pulley side of the Engine.
4. Unscrew the two setscrews, "F”, holding the botom cowl support
lugs to the crankcase. The cowl can then be removed.
CYLINDER HEAD, TO REMOVE AND REPLACE. First remove
air cowl top cover from Engine by referring to instructions under "To Remove
Air Cowl,” above. The cylinder head is then exposed and the holding
nuts can be removed.
Gently tap the head with a block of wood, freeing it from the gasket and
studs. It can then be lifted off.
After removing the cylinder head and before replacing same, thoroughly
scrape all the carbon formation from inside the combustion chamber in the
cylinder head, also from the top of the piston and cylinder block, and around
the valves.
The cylinder head gasket should be removed and both its faces as well
as those on the cylinder head and cylinder block which come in contact with
it, thoroughly cleaned.
Whilst decarbonizing the cylinder block, the Engine should first be turned
over until both the exhaust and inlet valves are seating.
Before replacing the cylinder head, give the copper asbestos gasket a
thin smearing of motor grease, and when tightening the nuts, do so evenly
seeing that it is not overdone.


If the cylinder head nuts are not tightened down evenly, particularly
those in the near vicinity of the valves, the metal in the cylinder block may
be pulled or distorted, thus spoiling the airtight seal between the valves and
valve seats.
If there is a loss of compression after the cylinder head has been removed
and replaced, providing the fuel tank and carburettor assembly has not
already been taken off, it should be removed so that when the Engine is being
turned over a leakage of air past either of the valves would be noticeable
from either the inlet or exhaust ports as the case may be.
If this is evident, the nuts on the studs around the port through which
the leakage is occurring should be slightly eased, at the same time checking
up to see if any benefit is derived from doing so.
If this procedure does not bring about any improvement, it could then
be suspected that the valves are not seating, due to a foreign body being
between the valve and the seat, or that the valve in question may require
grinding into its seating.
CYLINDER HEAD GASKET, TO REPLACE. Remove the cylinder
head by referring to instructions under this heading.
Decarbonize the combustion chamber, and before fitting new gasket,
make sure that all surfaces are thoroughly clean, including the gasket. Then
give it a thin smearing of motor grease, and place it over the cylinder head
studs with the fold in the copper facing upwards.
When tightening the cylinder head nuts, do so evenly.
VALVES, TO GRIND. Remove air cowl top cover and cowl from
engine by referring to instructions under heading "To Remove Air Cowl,”
page 35. Remove the fuel tank and carburettor assembly, after first unscrew-
ing the exhaust pipe from the manifold, the split pin from the rod to car-
burettor, and the two nuts from the studs holding the carburettor assembly
on to the cylinder block.
Unscrew the nut holding the valve inspection plate on to the cylinder
block, after which the plate can be removed.
Remove the cylinder head by referring to instructions under this heading,
page 35.
Turn the flywheel until both valves are seating and there is clearance
between the valve stems and tappets.
Compress the valve springs one at a time with a valve lifter or in the
absence of this, with two screwdrivers.
This will enable you to remove the valve spring washer retaining pins.
The valves can then be withdrawn.
Remove the cylinder head gasket, decarbonize the cylinder head, top of
piston and cylinder block.
If the valves are worn and deeply grooved where they seat in the cylinder
block, they should be refaced in a valve grinding machine, or in a lathe before
grinding them in .
Make a thin smearing of valve grinding paste around the face of the
valve, and place it in position through the valve guide in the cylinder block,
making sure that there is ample clearance between the end of the valve stem
and the tappet.


If not, the locknut must be loosened, and the adjusting screw screwed
down into the tappet.
The valve can then be ground into the seating by placing a screwdriver
in the slot in the valve head and turning the valve with a semi-rotary motion.
The valve should be raised off its seat every few seconds to allow the
grinding paste lo be drawn back between it and the seating.
If the paste is of a dry nature, a drop of kerosene or water, whichever
happens to be a solvent of the paste, should be applied around the outer edge
of the valve to keep the grinding paste in a moist condition.
Wipe the grinding paste off, and examine both the valve and the seating
frequently, continuing with the grinding until an even marking is showing
right around both valve and seat.
When this seems satisfactory, give the valve face a very light smearing
of Prussian blue marking paint or a mixture of red lead and oil.
This must be a very light coating. In fact, practically the whole of it
can be wiped off, otherwise it will not show a true marking.
Replace the valve, and exerting a little pressure on it, give it a semi-rotary
motion two or three times.
Remove the valve, and see if the marking shows for a full circle on the
seat, also that a brighter marking shows around the valve, both indicating
that the face of the valve and seating are making contact throughout the
full circle.
If the marking is not showing right around both on the face of the valve
and the seating, re-apply grinding paste and again continue grinding and
testing until such is the case.
Before re-assembling, ensure that all traces of grinding paste have been
removed both from the valve and the seating.
Give the valve stems a liberal smearing of lubricating oil, and after
compressing springs replace the valve washers and retaining pins, over and
into the valve stems.
Adjust the tappet clearances as referred to in instructions under this
heading.
If the valve seat or seats in the cylinder block are badly worn or burnt
to that extent where it would be difficult to grind the valves into same, before
grinding, they should be trued up with a valve seat cutter.
The specifications referring to the correct type of cutter to use are Ij-in.
in diameter with a 45 degree angle, having a 5/16-in. diameter stem to fit
down through the valve guides.
Before using the cutter, first test the seat by pushing the valve sideways
in four different directions and lifting it.
Take note of the movement in each direction, as this should be even.
If not, extra pressure will have to be exerted on the cutter in the necessary
direction when truing up the seat.
When using the cutter, which will be available at most Garages, first
press it firmly on to the seat whilst revolving it until the hard surface is cut
through, then a little lighter till the cutter leaves a new seating not less than
l/16-in. wide for the full circle.


This cutter should be used sparingly, only taking off sufficient metal to
ensure a narrow seating for the valve.
If the seating is too wide and deep in the head, a second cutter with a
15 deg. angle should be used to cut down the surface and narrow the valve
seating.
If no cutter is available, use a scraper, but cut the valve seat down at
the high spots until you find that when grinding, it is marking well all the
way around, after which continue grinding until you get the seat correct.
It must be kept in mind when grinding valves that a full circle mark
must be recorded both on the valve and seat to ensure that the faces will
come together and make an airtight joint. If not the gases will leak between
the faces, and owing to the temperature of same being high, will cause them
to be burnt and even perhaps distort the valves.
TIMING OF VALVES AND CORRECT TAPPET CLEARANCE.
There is a line on the periphery of the flywheel of the engine which is
visible after the cowl has been removed and is marked "TOP”. When this
line is directly opposite the sawcut line on the machined top of the crankcase
directly above the crankshaft, the piston is at its highest point of travel or
"top dead centre.”
The sawcut in the crankcase may be partly filled and covered with paint,
in which case it should be removed with a knife or hacksaw blade until the
sawcut is clearly visible.
Theoretically, the exhaust valve should close on top dead centre, but if
the line marked "TOP” on the periphery of the flywheel is within 5 in. of
either side of the sawcut line on the crankcase, this will be satisfactory.
Theoretically, the inlet valve should commence to open a half inch travel
of the periphery of the flywheel in a forward direction, after the exhaust
valve has closed. It will, however, be satisfactory if it commences to open
i-in. travel of the periphery of the flywheel on either side of this position,
that is, from top dead centre to a point where the periphery of the flywheel
has travelled in a forward direction 1-in. past the line on the machined top
of the crankcase or top dead centre.
At no time should the clearance between the valve stems and tappets be
less than 16-thousandths of an inch.
If no feeler gauges are obtainable, the equivalent in thickness can be made
up by using two "Gillette” type safety razor blades, placing in between them
a single thickness of writing paper.
The final adjustment should be just a free sliding fit, using either the
feeler gauge or its equivalent in thickness in razor blades and paper.
If the top of the tappet is worn where it comes in contact with the end of
the valve stem, you will have to judge the 16-thousandths clearance by moving
the tappet up and down, as it will not be possible to check the correct clearance
either with feeler gauges or razor blades. It is preferable in instances where
this wear is experienced that the worn tops of the tappets be refaced.
It will be noted that we say, "at no time should the clearance be LESS
than 16 thousandths of an inch.” Actually, in order to get the correct timing
as above given, the clearance may be in excess of 16 thousandths, but this
will be quite satisfactory, and it is far more important to have the correct
timing than to consider the clearance.


It is highly unlikely that the tappet clearance will be less than 16 thous-
andths of an inch when the timing is correctly set, because this is provided
for when the Engine is manufactured.
If the Engine is totally dismantled, it is necessary to see that the gears
are put back in their correct relative positions. There is a centre dot on one
tooth of the crankshaft gear, also a centre dot at the bottom of the space
between two of the camshaft gear teeth. These gears should be meshed so
that the centre dot marks are exactly opposite each other. If this procedure
is not carried out, so also will the valve timing be set incorrectly.
In the event of a new timing gear being fitted, if it is not marked, this
should be attended to either by placing the new gear on top of the old one
and marking the corresponding tooth or space as the case may be, or on the
other hand, timing the valves by adopting the above procedure, then finally
marking the tooth or bottom of space respectively.
If, after timing an Engine, there is a blow back from the carburettor,
this could be due to the inlet valve opening too early, the exhaust valve
closing too late, or both, valve not seating or tappets not properly adjusted.
After grinding valves, the tappet clearance should always be checked, as
the valves tend to seat in a lower position.
VALVE, TO FIT NEW. Remove the valve, grind in the new one, and
re assemble Engine by referring to instructions under heading "To Grind
Valves,” page 36.
It must be kept in mind and the procedure adopted of seeing that there
is ample clearance between the valve stem and tappet before attempting to
grind the valve on to the seat, finally adjusting the tappet clearance to
16/1000-in.
VALVE SPRING, TO FIT NEW. Remove the old spring and replace
with the new one by adopting the procedure as given under heading "To
Grind Valves,” page 36.
It must be remembered that the valve to which the new spring is to be
fitted must be ground into its seat, and after the spring is fitted, the tappet
adjusted, all in accordance with the procedure outlined on previous pages.
TAPPETS, TO FIT NEW. Remove air cowl top cover and cowl
from Engine by referring to instructions under heading "To Remove Air
"Cowl,” page 35. Remove the exhaust pipe, fuel tank and carburettor
assembly and valve inspection plate by referring to instructions under head-
ing, "To Grind Valves,” page 36. Remove the governor cover by referring
to instructions under heading, "To Fit New Governor Plunger,” page 33, and
the governor and magneto bracket after unscrewing the six setscrews which
hold it and the magneto assembly to the crankcase.
Take particular notice of the thickness of the gasket or gaskets included
between the governor bracket and the crankcase, and see that the same gasket
or the equivalent in thickness to it is replaced when re-assembling, otherwise
the governor and camshaft gears will not mesh correctly.
The tappets are operated direct above the cams, so therefore, the cam-
shaft must first be removed before the tappets will drop down.
To remove the camshaft, first remove the flywheel by referring to in-
structions, page 49, then the camshaft by referring to instructions, page 40.


The locknuts and adjusting screws should be removed from the old
tappets and refitted in the new ones before replacing the tappets in the
crankcase.
When replacing the camshaft, see that the centre dot marks on the cam-
shaft and crankshaft gears correspond, to ensure correct valve timing, also
when refitting the governor bracket, make sure that the centre dot marks on
the camshaft and governor gears correspond to ensure correct magneto timing.
Adjust the tappets, giving them the correct clearance from the valve
stems, and replace valve inspection plate, governor cover, fuel tank and car-
burettor assembly, also air cowl and top cover.
TAPPETS, TO ADJUST. Remove air cowl top cover and cowl from
engine by referring to instructions under heading "To Remove Air Cowl,”
page 35, then remove exhaust pipe, fuel tank and carburettor assembly, also
valve inspection plate.
The minimum clearance between the adjusting screw in the tappet and
the bottom of the valve stem is 16/1000 in. 'l his must be the minimum
clearance at any part of the back of the cam.
Use a 16/1000-in. feeler gauge to check this clearance, or if this is not
available, the equivalent in thickness can be made up by using two "Gillette”
type safety razor blades, placing in between them a single thickness of writing
paper.
The final adjustment should be just a free sliding fit using either the
feeler gauge or its equivalent in thickness in razor blades and paper.
Turn the flywheel around until one of the valves is lifted to its limit,
then keep turning until the valve is closed.
Keep testing at all points on the back of the cam until the valve com-
mences to open again, and see that there is a minimum clearance of 16/1000-in.
Both valves require a minimum clearance of 16/1000-in.
Adjustment is made by using two tappet adjusting spanners. First of all,
slacken the locknut, then holding the tappet with one spanner, screw the
adjusting screw up or down as required until the necessary clearance is
obtained, finally retightening the locknut.
CAMSHAFT, TO FIT NEW. The camshaft runs on a spindle that
passes through the crankcase from side to side. The end nearest the governor
is stepped up in diameter and is a tight fit in the crankcase. The opposite
end passes into a hole in the crankcase and is held firmly with a setscrew.
This design provides for a full length bearing as against the usual type with
a short bearing at each end.
Remove air cowl top cover and cowl from engine by referring to instruc-
tions under heading "To Remove Air Cowl,” page 35, then remove exhaust
pipe, fuel tank and carburettor assembly, valve inspection plate, governor
cover, governor and magneto bracket and flywheel by referring to instruc-
tions under headings applicable to same.
Take particular note of the thickness of the gasket or gaskets included
between the governor bracket and the crankcase, and see that the same
gasket or the equivalent in thickness to it is replaced when re-assembling,
otherwise the governor and camshaft gears will not mesh correctly.
The camshaft and gear are now exposed, and can be removed after
withdrawing the spindle that passes through and carries them.


Make a mark on the exposed end of the camshaft spindle across on to
the crankcase so that when replacing it, you will be able to do so, ensuring
that it is in the same position as prior to its removal.
Unscrew the setscrew from the end of the camshaft Spindle three or
four complete turns, and give it a sharp tap with a hammer to start the
spindle moving out through the crankcase. Remove the setscrew and finish
tapping the spindle through till slack with a hammer and nail, or small
parallel punch that will pass down through the threaded hole in the end of
the camshaft spindle without damaging the thread.
When this spindle is withdrawn, the camshaft and gear can be removed
through the inspection opening.
Place the flywheel temporarily on the end of the crankshaft, locating
it with the key only. Do not remove the wedge.
The new camshaft and gear can now be fitted by first turning the flywheel
until the mark "top” on its periphery is directly opposite the sawcut mark
on the machined top of the crankcase immediately above the crankshaft.
Turn the camshaft until there is practically a flat across the exhaust and
inlet cams.
This is the position where the exhaust valve has just closed and the
inlet commences to open.
Holding the camshaft in this position, place it in the crankcase and
insert the camshaft spindle through same, gently tapping it until it is just firm
in the case.
Now adjust the tappets, giving them the correct clearance, which is
16/1000-in., and check up on the timing of the valves by referring to in-
structionis under this heading.
If the setting is not correct, the meshing of the camshaft in the crank-
shaft gear should be varied until the timing is correct.
A centre dot mark can then be made on the camshaft gear to correspond
with one on the crankshaft gear for future reference.
A variation of one tooth in the meshing of the gears, makes a difference
of approximately 1-in. travel of the periphery of the flywheel.
After the setting is correct and the gears marked, drive the camshaft
spindle home with a hammer, making sure that the marks across the end
of it and the crankcase coincide.
Replace and tighten the setscrew holding the spindle in position.
The governor and magneto bracket can then be replaced after first
turning the flywheel one complete revolution until the line marked "spark”
is directly opposite the sawcut on the machined top of the crankcase.
Remove the magneto contact breaker cover and turn magneto in the
direction of operation until the points are just commencing to break.
Make sure that the same gasket or the equivalent in thickness to the
same gasket, is included between the crankcase and the governor-and-magneto
bracket. Replace the bracket in position with two setscrews.
The magneto timing should now be checked by referring to instructions
under this heading, page 29, and the meshing of the governor and camshaft
gears varied if necessary.
When the magneto timing is correctly adjusted, centre-dot the camshaft
gear to correspond with the centre dot on the governor gear.


Fit remaining screws in the governor and magneto bracket. Replace
governor cover, valve inspection plate, fuel tank. and carburettor assembly,
exhaust pipe, flywheel and cowl on to the Engine in this order in their
respective positions.
CAMSHAFT GEAR, TO FIT NEW, Follo-.y dirccficns under head-
ing "To Fit New Camshaft.”
The camshaft gear is held to the camshaft by two setscrews, the points
of which after being screwed through the holes in the camshaft gear and
camshaft, are split open with a chisel to prevent them from working loose.
Before unscrewing these setscrews which hold the camshaft gear on to
the shaft, the spread points should be cut off flush with the camshaft flange
using a cold chisel.
When fitting the new gear, first make sure that the metal surfaces which
come together are thoroughly clean.
After tightening the setscrews which hold the camshaft gear on to the
shaft, place the heads of the setscrews on a solid iron block and split the
ends with a chisel or a similar pointed instrument.
TO FIT NEW CYLINDER OR RE-FIT REBORED CYLINDER
BLOCK. Remove air cowl top cover and cowl from engine by referring to
instructions under heading "To Remove Air Cowl,” page 35. Remove the
exhaust pipe, fuel tank and carburettor assembly, and valve inspection plate
by referring to instructions under heading "To Grind Valves,” page 36.
Remove the cylinder head and gasket by referring to instructions under
this heading, page 35, also the valves from the cylinder block, by again
referring to instructions under heading "To Grind Valves.”
Unscrew the four nuts holding the cylinder block on to the crankcase,
after which the cylinder block can be lifted clear from over the piston.
Withdraw gudgeon pin retaining spring rings with a pair of pliers, from
their recesses at each end of the gudgeon pin hole in the piston.
Tap the gudgeon pin out of both piston and gudgeon bush which is
located in the small end of the connecting rod.
The piston can then be removed.
Remove the crankcase inspection plate and examine the higend bearing.
If it is loose on the shaft, it should be attended to by referring to
instructions under heading "Bigend bearing, to fit new,” page 47.
The new piston accompanying the cylinder can then be fitted, finally
making sure that the retaining spring rings are replaced firmly in the recesses
in the piston. If they are allowed to jiggle about, wear will take place with
the possibility of the rings eventually breaking up and damaging the cylinder
walls.
Scrape off any particles of the old cylinder base gasket that may remain
on the crankcase and block. Place the new or rebored cylinder in position
over the piston and check up piston for alignment by referring to instructions,
page 44.
After ensuring that the piston alignment is correct, the piston rings can
be fitted to the piston, giving them a liberal coating of lubricating oil, and
seeing that their gaps are spaced evenly around the piston.
Place an equal thickness of cylinder base gasket to that removed, into
its position on the crankcase, over the piston and four cylinder block studs.


The cylinder block can then be lowered over the piston and piston rings,
taking care that these are fed into the chamfered portion of the cylinder
without damaging them.
If the correct thickness of cylinder base gaskets is not available, these
can be made up out of heavy brown paper.
Replace the valves into the cylinder block, and if these have not already
been ground into same, it will be necessary to do so. Make sure that the
cylinder block nuts are tightened down both firmly and evenly. Check up
and adjust the tappets to their correct clearance.
The cylinder head gasket, cylinder head, valve inspection plate, carbur-
ettor and fuel tank assembly and exhaust pipe, also air cowl, can then be
re-assembled in this order in their correct positions.
If fitting a new cylinder block with a standard bore, the same thickness
of cylinder base gaskets should be used as prior to dismantling.
Where re-bored cylinders are fitted, it may be found advisable to increase
the thickness of the cylinder base gasket owing to the increase in compression
brought about by the slightly larger bore.
If this procedure is not adopted, the engine when put into operation
under a load may show signs of detonation, or even if this is not evident
at this stage, it may develop shortly after, or when a small accumulation of
carbon has formed inside the combustion chamber, and reduced its capacity.
PISTON, TO FIT NEW. The old piston should be removed and
replaced by the new piston which should also be accompanied with a new
gudgeon pin by referring to instructions "To fit new cylinder or re-fit rebored
cylinder block,” page 42.
This piston must also be aligned, by referring to instructions under "Piston
Alignment, to test and if necessary, adjust,” page 44.
If the piston rings are worn, they should be replaced with new ones.
See heading, "Piston rings, to fit new,” page 45.
If the Engine has been in operation for some time, it will be found on
inspection that there, in all probability, is a sharp ridge around the top of
the cylinder, indicating the highest point of piston ring travel.
The metal in the cylinder above the ridge should be relieved with a
scraper until the ridge becomes non-existent. This is to provide against the
new top piston ring striking the ridge which must be avoided.
GUDGEON BUSH, TO FIT NEW. Remove piston from connecting
rod, by referring to instructions "To fit new cylinder or refit rebored cylinder
block,” page 42.
It is preferable that the connecting rod be removed from the crankshaft
by disconnecting the bigend bearing from same, referring to instructions "To
fit new or take up slack in bigend bearing,” page 47.
By adopting this procedure, the small end of the connecting rod can be
held firmly whilst removing and replacing the gudgeon bush, thus obviating
any likelihood of the connecting rod being bent whilst doing so.
The gudgeon bush, however, can be removed and renewed without the
connecting rod being disconnected from the crankshaft if the small end of the
connecting rod is held steady with a block of wood or iron. This should
be held against the rod by an assistant whilst the gudgeon bush is driven out
with a punch or round piece of iron slightly smaller in diameter than the
outside diameter of the bush.


It is essential that the block of wood or iron be held, against the small
end of the connecting rod as an assurance against the rod being bent, and
thus throwing the piston out of alignment.
After the old bush has been removed and before filling the new one,
slightly ease the sharp edge of the opening in the small end of (he connecting
rod into which the gudgeon bush passes, also give the bush and the hole into
which it fits in the connecting rod a liberal smearing of lubricating oil.
If the oil hole in the gudgeon bush is already drilled, this should be
lined up with the hole in the top end of the connecting rod before driving
the bush into same. Use a square ended piece of hardwood and as before
a block of wood or iron against the opposite side of the connecting rod to
take the jar.
Be careful to keep the bush square when driving it in for the first half
inch, otherwise you may damage it.
When finally in position, see that the bush is projecting equally each
side of the connecting rod.
If it is found that the gudgeon pin is not a push fit through the gudgeon
bush as may be the case, due to the bush partly closing when passing through
the opening in the rod, it should be fitted with a reamer or scraper. At the
same time take care to see that a piece of cloth or some such material is
placed around the rod and over the opening in the crankcase through which
it passes to prevent the waste metal from dropping into the oil sump.
If the oil hole in the gudgeon bush has not already been drilled, this
should now be attended to.
After a new gudgeon bush has been fitted, the piston rings must be
removed from the piston and the piston aligned with the cylinder by referring
to instructions under heading "Piston Alignment, to test and if necessary,
adjust,” below.
PISTON ALIGNMENT, TO TEST, AND IF NECESSARY, ADJUST.
Before the above procedure can be put into effect, the bigend bearing
should be fitted to the crankshaft journal pin, and the gudgeon pin checked
up to see that it is a good fit in the gudgeon bush and piston. If not, the
worn parts should be renewed.
If the piston rings have already been fitted to the piston, these should
be removed by referring to instructions, "Piston Rings, to fit new,” page 45.
The surfaces on the machined top of the crankcase and on the bottom
of the cylinder block which come together should be thoroughly cleaned,
after which place the cylinder block over the top of the piston, using the four
nuts to hold the cylinder block down firmly on to the crankcase.
Try the piston for rock at various positions in the cylinder throughout
a complete revolution of the flywheel and crankshaft.
If the piston is quite free to rock at all positions, it can be assumed that
its alignment if not correct, is not far out.
A check up with a feeler gauge should then indicate final requirements.
The feeler gauges for use whilst aligning the piston should be at least
4-in. long. The thickness of same will depend on the condition of the cylinder,
and whether the bore is standard size or worn oversize.
The gauge should be pushed down between the piston and the cylinder
walls at both ends of the gudgeon pin, and when the piston is correctly
aligned, you should be able to push the feeler gauge down the same distance
on either side, and it should have the same resistance whilst being withdrawn.


This should apply to various positions of piston travel up and down the
cylinder throughout a complete revolution of the crankshaft.
If the piston is found to be tight on one side of the cylinder throughout
a complete revolution of the crankshaft, the cylinder block should be re-
moved and the connecting rod set. This can be done by holding a piece of
3-in. x 2-in. timber, say 3-ft. long, against the connecting rod about 2-in. down
from the small end, and with a hammer and another short piece of hardwood
against the top of the connecting rod on the opposite side, tap it gently until
the rod bends sufficiently to meet requirements.
Further tests should then be made until the piston is at least free to rock
in one or more positions in the cylinder.
If the piston is found to be tight in some positions and free in others
throughout the complete revolution of the crankshaft, this indicates that the
centre lines of the gudgeon pin and crankshaft are not parallel. In this case,
the connecting rod should be slightly twisted one way or the other using a
round p:ece of bar through the gudgeon bush, and as before, testing after
each adjustment until the necessary requirements are met.
In carrying out the above procedure, you may have to remove and replace
the cylinder block from the crankcase, also the piston from the connecting
rod a number of times until the piston alignment is exactly correct.
It is most essential that the alignment be corrected, as otherwise the
best efficiency cannot be expected from the Engine, due to the faces of the
piston rings not being parallel with the cylinder walls. This would allow a
leakage of compression down pact the rings, as well as excessive lubricating
oil finding its way up past the rings and into the combustion chamber. Apart
from the above, excessive wear would take place, brought about by undue
thrust between the piston and the cylinder wall.
See that the gudgeon pin is well oiled before finally reassembling. If
the piston rings are already fitted to the piston, they should be removed
before the above instructions are carried out.
After the piston alignment is correct, the rings should be refitted into
the piston ring grooves and correctly spaced with their gaps equi-distant
around the piston.
The piston and rings should then be given a liberal smearing of lubri-
cating oil, and finally before lowering the block down over the piston,
inspect to see that the gudgeon pin retaining spring rings are fitted firmly into
their recesses in the piston.
PISTON RINGS) TO FIT N£Wi Dismantle, remove the piston,
and after the new piston rings have been fitted, re-assemble by referring to
instructions under heading "To fit new cylinder, or refit rebored cylinder
block,” page 42.
If the old rings are stuck in the grooves, work them loose, then insert
a thin flat blade under one end of the ring and revolve it round the piston,
at the same time pressing sideways on the end of the ring and following the
blade round till the ring is right out of the groove.
Start with the top ring and take it right off, then take the others off in
the same manner, working them from groove to groove until they are off.
To fit new ring, place one half of the ring slightly over the top of the
piston holding that end in position with one thumb and with the other thumb
gently force the ring on to the top land, then press it down until it drops into
the top groove.


Now insert a thin flat blade under
the ring at the joint and hold the ring
slightly over the second land as shown
in Fig. 4. Revolve the blade around
the piston, pressing the ring on to the
second land as the blade lifts the ring
clear of the groove, then press the ring
down until it drops into the second
groove. Repeat in same manner until
bottom groove is reached.
An alternative method to this is
to cut three strips of kerosene or petrol
tin about 5/16-in. wide and 3-in. long,
and space these equally around the
p.ston, so that the ends will reach the
lana above the groove into which the
ring is to be fitted. After heating the
piston ring, it can be slipped down
Fig. 4.
over these strips, which will prevent it from entering the other grooves on
the way down.
Before fitting new rings or replacing old rings, see that all carbon is
removed from the piston ring grooves, and that they are wiped out thoroughly
with a piece of cloth. See, also, that the oil escape holes in the bottom oil
ring groove are clear.
Duplicate piston rings are usually made slightly larger in diameter than
standard to allow for fitting. It is therefore necessary to test each ring in
the engine cylinder before putting it on the piston.
Piston rings more than a few thousandths of an inch oversize in diameter
to allow for fitting cannot be supplied for a standard bore. The reason is
that oversize rings will not enter in either end of the cylinder because
practically no wear has taken place at those points.
First of all try the ring in the part of the cylinder where most wear has
taken place and see that the gap is at least three thousandths of an inch per
inch of diameter of the cylinder.
The paper that this is printed on is approximately 3/1000-in. thick.
If the gap is less, a little must be filed off one end, a very little at a time,
until it is the correct fit.
When it has the required gap clearance in the worn part of the cylinder,
push it down to the mouth of the cylinder to make sure it will enter when on
the piston.
In a cylinder that is worn perceptibly you may find it necessary to file
more out of the gap of the ring so that it will pass through the mouth of
the cylinder.
Before placing new rings on the piston, heat them over a lamp or fire
until you can just bear to handle them.
This will prevent them from snapping when you spring them over the
piston.
It will be noted that where an Engine has been in operation for some
time, that there is a slight ridge near the top of the cylinder which indicates
the amount of wear at the highest point of travel of the piston rings.


This should be relieved with a scraper, as otherwise the top piston ring
would strike the ledge which would be detrimental.
After this has been attended to, the piston can be replaced on the con-
necting rod, giving the piston rings a liberal smearing of lubricating oil.
Run some oil into the ring grooves through the gaps in the piston rings, and
before replacing, see that the gaps in the rings are spaced evenly around the
piston.
Re-assemble by reversing dismantling procedure, and whilst doing so,
make sure that the cylinder base gaskets are intact.
F 3STOR3 RlJiiGSj To Clean. Follow instructions under heading of
"To fit new Piston Rings,” page 45.
CORJRIEGI I RIG ROD, To fit new. Follow directions under headings
of "To fit new bigend bearing,” below, "To fit new piston,” page 43, "To
test and if necessary, adjust piston alignment,” page 44.
EIGERID BEARBRIG, To fit new, or take up slack.
Remove the cylinder and piston by referring to instructions under head-
ing "To fit new cylinder or refit rebored cylinder block,” page 42.
Remove the side inspection plate, also governor and magneto bracket,
taking care not to damage the gaskets, as the same thickness must be replaced
in order to give the correct meshing for the governor and camshaft gears.
Withdraw the split pins from the bigend bolts, and after unscrewing the
castellated nuts, the connecting rod cap can be removed.
Take care when removing the shims to keep them on their respective
sides of the bigend bearing so that they can be replaced in the same positions
when re-assembling. This applies more so when taking up the bigend bearing.
Check up the connecting rod bearing journal to see that it is both smooth
and round —for smoothness by running the fingers around the circumference
of the bearing surface but not across, and for roundness with calipers, or
preferably, a micrometer.
If the bearing journal is found to be worn oval the high surfaces should
be relieved, first with a fine file, and finishing off with strips of emery tape
or braid. Pass them one at a time around the journal over the high or filed
portion, and see-saw it back and forth by pulling on both ends alternately.
If the bigend journal is in need of the above attention, it is preferable
that the crankshaft be removed from the crankcase, and the main bearing
timken rollers protected by covering them with a binding of clean cloth.
See that the crankshaft is thoroughly washed and cleaned before remov-
ing the protection covering from the bearings and prior to refitting the crank-
shaft into the crankcase.
When filing the connecting rod bearing journal, take only a little off at
a time, and test frequently with a micrometer or calipers—a micrometer for
preference. This is to make sure that the journal is kept true to ensure a
good fitting between the journal and the bearing.
It must be kept in mind that if the connecting rod bearing journal is
left oval-shaped, a good bearing surface cannot be obtained between it and
the white metal in the bigend, also if it is filed more on one side than the
other, there is a risk of throwing the piston and connecting rod out of
alignment.


Remove the old bearing shells and fit the new ones in position, making
sure that they are bearing all around in the connecting rod and cap.
Fit the connecting rod and cap on to the crankshaft journal and pull the
bolts up tightly in the first place to press the shells well into their housings in
connecting rod and cap.
Remove the connecting rod from the crankshaft and, gripping the rod
and cap alternately in a vice, file the projecting ends of the bearing shells
down until they are protruding about 3/1000dn. above the faces of the cap
and the connecting rod where they come in contact with the shims.
The reason for this is that when the bigend is bolted together with the
shims between the two halves, the bearing shells will press on to the shims
first and thus ensure that they cannot move. This also prevents the lubri-
cating oil from finding its way out.
It is sometimes necessary to ease the bearing shells a little at the sides
on account of the machining of the crankshaft journal being rounded slightly
at the corners.
A slight chamfer on the edge of the bearing shells should be all that is
necessary.
Keep in mind that they must be kept as snug a fit as possible.
Assemble the connecting rod on the crankshaft journal, and if you find
it is absolutely tight, add shims until you reach a point where the connecting
rod will just drop with its own weight, dry.
It is more likely that you will need to take some of the shims out when
fitting a new bigend bearing to a crankshaft journal that is slightly worn.
Smear a little Prussian blue or marking paint over the surface of the
crankshaft journal, then rub it around with the fingers till only a light even
coating remains.
Fit the connecting rod to journal with shims and cap and tighten the big
end bolt nuts. Swing the connecting rod around on the crankshaft journal
three or four times so that the paint will mark the hard bearing spots on the
white metal surface.
Take the bearing apart and place one half at a time in a vice, and scrape
the hard bearing spots with a sweeping motion of the scraper. When all
hard spots are eased off, again smear the crankshaft journal with Prussian
Blue, refit the connecting rod, mark and scrape the white metal bearing as
before.
If you have not scraped bearings before, use the scraper lightly, taking
off very little at a time. Do not scrape deeper at one side than the other,
as this may cause the piston to be thrown out of alignment.
As the scraping and testing proceeds, it will be necessary to remove
further shims in order to tighten the bearing to the necessary point.
Look for the bright spots on the surface of the bearing when making
these tests and scrape these away until you eventually get a good bearing
surface of 80 per cent, to 90 per cent.
Turn the crankshaft around and try moving the connecting rod back-
wards and forwards in different positions so as to make sure that it is going
to be a neat fit at all points. It must be remembered that before re-assemblinp,
that the connecting rod bearing must be a free fit on the shaft so that it will
just drop with its own weight, dry.


If it is a tight fit, the lubricating oil will be unable to form a film between
the metal surfaces, thus inducing friction accompanied by overheating, per-
haps causing the white metal to melt.
When finally assembling the connecting rod after making sure that the
bearing is alright, give it a good coating of lubricating oil.
The nuts holding the bearing cap in position must be tightened right
home.
If the hole to take the split pin is not in line with the slot in the nut, file
the base of the nut until it will screw up far enough to get the split pin in.
You will find that very little will need to be taken off.
The best method is to put a file on a table or bench and rub the nut
along the file. This will take the metal off evenly and more easily.
Split pins must be a tight fit in the holes. Do not use loose pieces of
wire. If no split pins are available, and wire must be used, it must be a very
tight fit in the bolt holes, otherwise it will rattle, wear, and eventually drop out.
The nut will then loosen, and a big smash may occur.
When assembling the big end, make sure that the shims are pressed hard
in against the crankpin before the big end nuts are finally tightened.
Drill the oil holes through the bearing shells to connect with the holes
already drilled in the connecting rod bigend, using 5/32 in. drill.
This must, of course, be done before the connecting rod is fitted to the
crankshaft journal.
The shims used between the halves of the big end bearing consist of one
block 1/8-in. thick, and three tag tin shims each 3/1000-in. thick on each side.
After fitting the big end bearing, carefully test, and if necessary, adjust,
the alignment of the piston, see page 44.
FLYWHEEL, TO REMOVE AND REPLACE.
Remove air cowl top cover and cowl by referring to instructions under this
heading, page 35. Draw the bolt which passes through the boss of the
flywheel, after slackening and undoing the nut.
A wedge must now be driven in the slot of the flywheel to spring it open
sufficiently to allow the wheel to slide out along the shaft.
It is advisable to take an old file and remove the paint out of the slot
before using the wedge, otherwise difficulty may be experienced in getting
the wedge to grip.
A suitable wedge can be made out of an old cold chisel or a piece of
5/8-in. by i-in. key steel at least 6-in. long, with the point tapered from
jr-in. to 3/8 -in. thickness for the first inch of its length.
The wedge should be passed through the slot from the back of the
flywheel, so that it will be on the horizontal. This is the most accessible
position.
The wedge should be driven into the boss as near as possible to the
centre, or if anything a shade to the back. The slot in the web enables
this to be done.
Particular care must be taken in this respect, as should it be driven in
near the outer edge, the boss will probably be cracked through from the
keyway, or possibly, a piece chipped out.


Half a dozen blows from a reasonably heavy hammer should be enough
to drive the wedge in sufficiently to allow the flywheel to slide freely off the
shaft.
Before di awing the wheel, see that there are no burrs on the shaft, also
oil it well, which will help in removing same.
Should there be any difficulty experienced in getting the wedge to hold,
dip the point in wet sand, and at all times stand clear of the wedge because
it may fly out and cause bodily injury.
The small feather key is not a tight fit in the keyway of the crankshaft,
and will slide along the shaft with the flywheel.
If replacing a new wheel, remove the wedge from the original one, and
carefully drive it in to the replacement one, trying it on the crankshaft after
every couple of blows with a hammer, so that the boss will not be unduly
opened. Do not open the boss any more than is absolutely necessary or it
may be distorted or cracked.
After sliding it on the shaft to the position previously taken with the other
wheel, place the key in the keyway, and withdraw the wedge. Replace the
bolt through the boss and make sure it is tight. After tightening with a
spanner, tap the head of the bolt three or four times, and retighten.
This will ensure that the head of the bolt has a good seating on the face
of the flywheel boss.
CRANKSHAFT , TO FIT NEW. Remove the cylinder block, by
referring to instructions under heading "To fit new cylinder or refit rebored
cylinder,” page 42.
Remove the side inspection plate and governor-and-magneto bracket from
the crankcase. Disconnect the bigend bearing and remove the connecting rod
and piston, referring to instructions, "To fit new bigend bearing,” page 47.
Remove the flywheel from the crankshaft by referring to instructions
"To remove and replace flywheel,” page 49.
Unscrew the four setscrews which hold the main bearing housing on to
the crankcase, and remove same. Remove camshaft by referring to instruc-
tions, "To fit new Camshaft,” page 40.
The crankshaft can then be withdrawn from the crankcase.
Take care not to damage the oil seals through which the crankshaft
passes in the crankcase and main bearing housing.
Place the crankshaft on a bench, and using a cold chisel with a thin
point, drive it down between the web of the crankshaft and the inner timken
race to drive the race out along the shaft.
This is a snug fit, and the chisel or whatever other tool is used should be
inserted at different points around the bearing, moving it out gradually and
evenly, until you can get behind it with the point of a punch. When using
the punch, continue to tap at various points around the bearing to remove
it evenly and easily.
On the crankshaft gear side, the chisel can be inserted between the gear
and the crank web, thus driving the gear and timken race off together.
Remove the crankshaft gear woodruff key from the shaft and refit it in
the new one.
It will be noted on inspecting the crankshaft gear that the bore is
relieved on one side. This side must be placed over the crankshaft first so
that it will come up against the crankshaft web.


If fitted the wrong way round, the gear would be prevented from coining
up against the side of the crankshaft web owing to the radius or rounded
portion preventing it from doing so.
See that the keyway in the gear is lined with the key in the shaft, and
remember that it is not intended that the key should make contact with the
top of the keyway, but on the sides only.
Drive the gear right up into its position against the crankshaft web,
using a piece ot pipe and a hammer, then replace the timken races using a
fairly close fitting piece of pipe over the shaft for this purpose, driving them
home with a hammer.
Replace parts in the reverse order to dismantling, referring to instruc-
tions, page 47, when fitting the bigend bearing.
When replacing the main bearing housing, be careful that the bearings are
not preventing the housing from coming up against the crankcase.
If they are and the setscrews are tightened, when the Engine is put to
work the bearings will be subject to undue thrust accompanied by wear.
Additional paper packing shims should be used in this case.
If the crankshaft has end play after tightening the setscrews in the main
bearing housing, the required thickness of paper shims should be removed
to take up same.
One paper shim must always be left to provide an oil seal. If the crank-
shaft still has end play after all with the exception of one paper shim has been
removed, the bearing outer rings should be packed out by inclusion of thin
washer shims in the recesses in the crankcase and main bearing housing
behind the rings.
To remove outer races, see instructions "Timken bearings, to fit new,”
page 51.
When again replacing crankshaft, adjust end play as referred to above.
The connecting rod and bigend bearing should then be fitted to the
crankshaft journal. In all probability additional shims will have to be added
to the bearing owing to the new shaft being slightly larger than the worn one.
When finally assembling, do not apply gasket cement to paper shims.
Nothing but a thin smearing of motor grease should be used.
Before replacing setscrews, wind a single strand of asbestos cord or sewing
twine around the head of each screw so as to make an oil seal. Reassemble
by reversing dismantling procedure.
CRANKSHAFT GEAR. TO FIT !\!EW. Follow directions "To fit
new crankshaft.” The new crankshaft gear will not have a marked tooth for
timing purposes. It will therefore be necessary to place it alongside the
original gear and mark the corresponding tooth.
TIIVIKEN BEARINGS, TO FIT NEW. Remove the crankshaft, see
page 50, and take off the inner timken races as described in these instructions.
To remove the cuter timken races, unscrew the two short setscrews used
as plugs in the bearing housing and crankcase, and replace them with longer
setscrews. If screwed in evenly each a little at a time, these will push the
outer timken races out of their recesses. If long setscrews are not available,
use a hammer and punch through the setscrew holes to tap the outer races out.


When fitting the new outer races, enter them carefully and drive them
home with a flat-ended piece of hardwood. Make sure that no small pieces
of dirt drop down between the outer races and the recesses into which they fit,
which would prevent them from being driven right home.
Be very careful to enter the bearing races squarely, and watch them
closely for the first quarter of an inch of their travel to see that they are
going in evenly all around. This is important.
For re-assembling, refer to instructions under heading, "To fit new
Crankshaft,” page 50.
“GITS” OIL SEALS, TO RENEW. If a leakage of oil is exper-
ienced from the main bearings, it may be necessary to replace the "Gits”
oil seals.
If the leakage is on the starting side, the main bearing housing would
have to be removed to attend to the seal replacement. If the leakage is from
the opposite side, the crankshaft would first have to be removed from the
Engine.
For removal of main bearing housing, see instructions "To remove air
cowl” and "To remove and replace flywheel.”
The- main bearing housing can then be withdrawn after unscrewing the
four setscrews holding same to the crankcase.
For attending to opposite side "Gits” seal, remove crankshaft by referring
to instructions under this heading.
When either removing or refitting "Gits” oil seals, drive them from the
outside towards the centre of the Engine.
Use a round piece of hardwood or metal slightly smaller in diameter
than the outer diameter of the "Gits” seal and with a square end.
When replacing a seal, make sure that it is driven in squarely.
3m.—-945.


NOTES.


Part No.
Description of Part.
*18029 1-
— A15 D.E. Bearing- complete,
3 5 mm
* I 8 0-J89-
—A13 C.E. Bearing complete
*4 5 1 378-
— G.D. Bearing Insulation Cup
1 Tit 1 04-
—Shaft Nut D.E.
140074-
—Washer Shaft D.E.
-157 48 8-
— Cam
11'4 1 9 4-
— Screw Cara Fixing
18505 I-
— Washer Cam fixing
4 57 3 3*>-
— Armature* Ass. (Rotor)
4 57 5 v? 5-
— Contact Set c/w. Fixing Parts
* M 3 5 \ 7 /
S—Felt (Cam Lubricating)
*1VS 10 0-
—Washer Felt retaining
*4 57 4 89-
—Cover C.B.
* 4 5 7 4 0 I -
—Spring Pin (C.B. coyer retaining)
-4 573 id-
—|[.T. Coil Wound
* 4 5 7 3 4 7-
— Coil Clamp Plate
— screw Long (Clamp Plate Fixing)
Part No.
Description of Part.
*105991 —
-Screw Short (Clamp Plate Fixing-)
*188330—
-Washer Shakeproof (Clamp
Plate Fixing)
*457524—
-Condenser Assembly
*457413—
-Condenser Insulation
*105033—
-Condenser Nut (connection)
*185006—
-Condenser Washer
*100270—
-Condenser Fixing Screw
*457542—
-Cover (Moulded)
*M3633/2-
—Screw (Cable fixing in Cover)
*188351—
-Washer (Cable fixing in Cover)
* 157 53 a —
-Contact in Coil Cover
*113574—
-Screw Coil Cover Fixing
*188320—
-Washer Cover Fixing Screw
*400174—
-Screwdriver and Point Gauge
Assembly
457395—
-D, end plate
AIR CLEANER
F 33—Air cleaner matching piece
F 67 —Air cleaner body
F 68—Air cleaner brass gauze disc
F 70 —Air cleaner body pin
NA379—Air cleaner complete
NA380 —Air cleaner copper wool or cocoanut fibre core
(Specify which required)
NA381—Air cleaner perforated plate
Parts marked thus (*) are not illustrated.


Duplicate Parts List
2 & 2¾ h.p. Type "NA” Air-Cooled Petrol Engines
It is important that when ordering Parts the Engine Number be given as well as
the Part Name and Number, also state whether Parts are to be forwarded
by Parcels’ Post, Passenger or Goods Train.
Parts marked thus (
Part No. Name of Part.
V 2 —Breather body
V 3 —Breather ball
V 4—Breather elbow
y s—Governor5 —Governor bracket oil return valve body
V 9—Governor bracket oil return valve ball
V oa-Camshaft
v lOb-Camshaft gear
V 11 —Camshaft spindle
V 12 —Camshaft spindle setscrew
V 13a-Camshart gear setscrew
V lBb-Carburettor fuel valve
V 21 —Carburettor butterfly spindle
V 22a—Carburettor butterfly lever
y 2 3 —Carburettor butterfly lever pin
V 2 4 —Carburettor gasket
V 2 sb—Carburettor shifting valve
V 26 —Carburettor shifting valve spring
V 27 —Carburettor snitting valve choke rod
V 2 9 —Carburettor sniffing valve spring washer
V 30a-Carburettor matching piece—bottom
V 32‘ —Carburettor matching piece valve
♦V 34—Carburettor shifting- valve cover screw
V 3 s—Carburettor5 —Carburettor holding down nut
V 38a~Crankshaft gear
V 39 —Crankshaft gear key
V 40 —Main tlmken roller bearing
V 41a-Crankshaft metal cased oil seal
V 42 —Drain plug leather washer
V 47 —Connecting rod bolts
AA 52 —Cylinder head stud, long
AA 54 —Cylinder head
AA 55 —Cylinder head stud, short
V 57 —Crankcase drain plug
V 58 —Gasket for crankcase inspection plate
V 59c-Crankcasc
V 60 —Crankcase Inspection plate
V 61—Inspection plate oil deflector
V 62b-Main bearing housing
V 63 —Paper joint and spacing washer for main
hearing housing
V 67—Fuel tank straps
V 71—Flywheel key
V 74—Governor cover
V 75—Governor gear
V 76 —Governor weight, 2 h.p., 850 to 1250
r.p.m.
*AA7Oa-Governor weight, 2J h.p., 1 250 to 1500
r.p.m.
V 77 —Governor weight pins
V 78 —Governor plunger pin
AA 79 —Governor lever (brass)
AA 80 —Governor lever (steel)
V 81 —Rod to carburettor
v 82 —Governor bearing (bronze)
V 85 —Governor bracket gasket
V 86 —Governor cover gasket
V 90—Governor lever pin
AA 91 a-Governor spring stud
V 92 —Governor adjusting rod
V 9 3 —Governor adjusting rod tlmmbscrow
v 9 s—Magneto5—Magneto coupling
v Oflg-Magneto, “Lucas” R.S.I. If not, state
make
v 97- -Magneto coupling. (Attached to magneto)
V I os—starting handle
V 1 07i’.-silencer (complete)
Vioob-Valve tappet
V I I o—Vrl sc tanpet adjusting screw
VI I I —Vrlve tappet adjusting screw locknut
VI I •>—starting handle pin
tVI 1 3—Bo torn casting for silencer, A'lo7a
Vll7a-In!et and exhaust valve
A VI 19 —Valve inspection plate
Vi2(ib-Valve guides
AA|■> l Gasket for valve inspection plate.
\l3i Fuel lank flange
*) are not illustrated.
Part No. Name of Part.
A.AI37 —Air cowl
AAI 3 B—Air8 —Air cowl top cover
VI 39 —Oil tiller cap gasket
*AAl39a—Air cowl strap
VI in—Oil tiller cap
*AAI 46—Air cowl screen
*AAl4B—Carburettor studs (5/16-in. x l|-in.)
AAI 4 9 —Stud to hold valve inspection plate
Vl6o —Connecting rod shims
V 1 r> i—connecting rod
VIO2 —Big end bearing shells
VI (13 —Connecting rod cap
VloB —Carburettor butterfly, 1-in. diam.
VI (19 —Carburettor suction pipe (top half)
VI78 —Magneto coupling drive pin
*V18(la-Top casting for silencer, Vlo7a
A'A3 00 —Cylinder
AA3 0 I—Replaced1—Replaced by AA 301 a
AA3 01 a—Cylinder head gasket
*V3O2 —Carburettor complete
V3O3 —Carburettor body
V 3 04 —Carburettor fuel valve spring
V3O3 —Crankshaft. Shaft projecting 6-in. from
crankcase on driving side. State
whether left or right hand start.
*AA3OS-Craukshaft with shaft projecting 3i-in.
from crankcase on driving side
V3oC—Main hearing oil baffle
AA 31 s—Flywheel5—Flywheel and fan
*AA3I6-Fuel tank, short, wide type
V3l7 —Fuel tank, long, narrow type
V3l9a—Gudgeon bush
V32oa-Piston
V 321 —Gudgeon pin
V322—Piston compression ring
V 32 3 —Piston oil ring
»AA326-5-in. diam. flanged pulley
*V333—Carburettor matching piece anti-splash
spring
*V334 —Carburettor matching piece composition
washer —anti-splash
♦V335 —Carburettor matching piece steel washer
—anti-splash
*V34fl—'Adaptor plate, used in conjunction with
V 432 when fitting “BTIf” magneto
in place of “Lucas” Type R.S.I
Vi I s—Sniffing5—Sniffing valve cover
V423—Paper gasket for cylinder block
V 430 —Gudgeon pin retaining spring ring
V432—Magneto and governor bracket combined
439a-Valve spring
AA 4 41—Valve spring washer
V 4 4 3 —Valve spring collar pin
1394—Fuel tank tiller cap and washer
1 3 9Ga-Oovernor spring
B 1 520—0il liner cap spring
GASKETS.
V 24 —Carburettor gasket
V 4 I a—Crankshaft metal cased oil seal
V 42—Drain plug leather washer
V 58—Gasket tor crankcase Inspection plate
V 93 —Paper Joint and spacing washer for main
bearing housing
V 85—Governor bracket gasket
V 8 9—Governor cover gasket
AA 12 I —Gasket for valve inspection plain
VI 39—0il tiller cap gasket
AA3OI a—Cylinder head gasket
*V3 3 4—Carburettor matching niece cotnposit.on
washer —anti-splash
•V3S5 —Carburettor matching piece steel washer
anti-splash
V423—Paper gasket for cylinder block
1 304—Fuel tank tiller cap and washer


DUPLICATE PARTS CHART FOR 2 & 2¾ H.P. Type “NA” AIR-COOLED PETROL ENGINES
IMPORTANT
When Ordering Parts the Engine Number as well as the Part Name and Number Must Be Given.
State whether Parts are to be forwarded by Parcels’ Post, Passenger or Goods Train,
and to where they are to be addressed.


Duplicate Parts List
4 & 4½ h.p. Type "NA” Air-Cooled Petrol Engines
Jt is important that when ordering Parts the Engine Number be given as well as
the Part Name and Number, also state whether Parts are to be forwarded
by Parcels’ Post, Passenger or Goods Train.
Parts marked thus (*) are not illustrated.
p ar t NO. Name of Pa,,t-
*", ? __Breather body
V 3 Breather ball
~ 4, Breather elbow
y 5 Governor bracket oil return valve body
y r Governor bracket oil return valve ball
y t|r_Gamsbaft
V ibb-Camshaft gear
11 —camshaft spindle
y]-2—Camshaft spindle setscrew
V 1 ? a—Camshaft gear setscrew
v ISD-Carhurettor fuel valve
y 2) —Carburettor butterfly spindle
V 22a-Carburcttor butterfly lever
V 2? —Carburettor lever pin
V 251)-darburettor snifting valve
y 20 —Carburettor snifting valve soring
y 9- —carburetor snifting valve choke rod
y 09 —Carburettor snifting valve spring washer
V ana-Caihurettor matching piece—bottom
V 3-’ —Carburettor matching piece valve
♦V 34- -Carburettor snifting valve rover screw
v r>s--carburettor holding down nut
V 39 —Crankshaft gear key
V 4' —Drain plug washer
v 4’ —Connecting rod bolts
NA ss—Cylinder head stud, short
* V 57 —Crankcase drain plug
y 5« —Casket for crankcase Inspection plate
V 60 —Crankcase inspection plate
V 61 —Inspection plate oil deflector
V 63 —Paper Joint for main bearing housing.
thick and thin
NR 67 —Fuel tank straps
V 71 —Flywheel key
V 74 —Governor cover
V 75 —Governor gear
V 76 —Governor weights
V 77 —Governor weight pins
V 78 —Governor plunger pin
NA 79 —Governor lever (brass)
V. 81 —Rod to carburettor
V 82 —Governor bearing (bronze)
V 85 —Governor bracket gasket
V 8 6 —Governor cover gasket
VB 89 —Gudgeon bush
V 90 —Governor lever pin
NA 91a-Governor spring stud
V 92 —Governor adjusting rod
V 93 —Governor adjusting rod thumbscrew
V 95 —Magneto coupling on governor gear
V 96g—Magneto. Tyne R.S.I “Lucas.” If other-
wise, state make
V 97 —Magneto coupling. (Attached to magneto)
VIO5 —Starting handle
NAII0 —Tappet adjusting screw
VI II —Tappet adjusting screw locknut
Vll2—Starting handle pin
Vll9—Valve inspection plate
Vl2ob-Valve guides
Vl2 I —Valve inspection plate gasket
NA I 22 —Setscrew to hold valve inspection plate
VI 30 —Fuel tank flange
Vi 39 —Oil filler gasket
NAl39a—Air cowl strap
Vl 40 —Oil filler cap
NAl46—Air cowl screen
NAlsl—Cylinder head
NAls3—Cylinder head stud —long
Vl68 —Carburettor butterfly
Vino —Carburettor suction pipe (top halt)
No. Name of Part.
VI78 —Governor couDling* driving' pin
AIM 8 I—Fiml1 —Fiml tank
VI 85 —Silencer complete
*VJ 8 oa-Siiencor—top Half
*VI S7a-Silencer—bottom half
Vl9la-lnle,i valve and exhaust valve
VRIOT —Fuel tank filler cap and washer
V 3(M —Carburettor fuel valve spring
V 3 33 —Carburettor matching piece anti-splash
spring
*V3 3 i —Carburettor matching piece composition
washer —anti-splash
*V335 —Carburettor matching piece steel washer
—anti-splash
A'A3oT—Air cowl
AA 3 0 B—Air cowl top cover
VlO0—Crankshaft
Vlol —Crankshaft gear
VD)2 —Crankshaft tirnken hearing
Vi 00a—Crankshaft oil retaining seal
Vio 9—Connecting rod
VI lo —Connecting rod cap
Vi ll—Connecting rod bearing shells
ARi I -1 —Carburettor body
Vi 15- —Carburettor snifting valve cover
.\A i 1 G —Cylinder
*NR i 17-Carburettor complete
AA i 18 —Cylinder bead gasket
Vi l o—Carburettor0 —Carburettor gasket
Vi 2 o—Connecting0—Connecting rod shims
Vi 2 Ib-Crankcase
Vi 2 2b-Maiu hearing bousing
Vi 23 —Cylinder block gasket {paper)
Vl2 6 —Flywheel
AA426—Flywheel and fan
VIM 20 —Gudgeon pin
V 43 and governor bracket nmibiniHl
AA i 3 3 —Governor lever (steel)
VH i 35 —Piston
VIM 3 compression ring
VIM 37—Piston oil ring
13i)a-Valve spring
AAiil —Valve spring washer
Vi 12 —Tappet
Vi 13—Valve spring collar pin
I 3 , .)Ga-Governor spring
PI 520—0 n filler cap spring
EI 8 1 2 —Gudgeon pin retaining spring ring
GASKETS.
V i2—Drain plug washer
V 58 —Gasket for crankcase inspection plate
VG3 —Paper joint for main'bearing bousing.—
Thick and thin
V 85—Governor bracket gasket
V so—Governor cover gasket
VI 21 —Valve inspection plate gasket
VI 30—Oil filler gasket
API 07 —Fuel tank filler cap and washer
*V33f—Carburettor matching piece composition
washer I—anti-splash 1 —anti-splash
*V33s—Carburettor matching piece steel washer
—anti-splash
ViOGa-Crankshaft oil retaining seal
A'AllB —Cylinder head gasket
vll o—Carburettor gasket
VI23 —Cylinder block gasket (paper)


DUPLICATE PARTS CHART FOR 4 & 4½ H.P. Type “NA” AIR-COOLED PETROL ENGINES
IMPORTANT
When Ordering Parts the Engine Number as well as the Part Name and Number Must Be Given.
State whether Parts are to be forwarded by Parcels Post, Passenger or Goods Train,
and to where they are to be addressed.


AT YOUR SERVICE!
If You Need Service
Urgently—Ring the
Following Numbers:
VICTORIA :
ill Head Office: Ballarat 222 (3 lines)
00283017 7 After Hours : Ballarat, 22-
NEW SOUTH WALES :
Ronaldson Bros. & Tippett Ltd—8.2029
(After Hours: FX.6255)
Alfa-Laval Separator Co. Pty. Ltd.—M.2olB.
QUEENSLAND :
Ronaldson Tippett (Qld.) Pty. Ltd.—8.4680
SOUTH AUSTRALIA :
The Implement Co.—Central 3300.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA :
The Westralian Farmers Ltd.—89971.
McLean Bros. & Rigg Ltd.—8.4184.
Ronaldson Bros. & Tippett
Ky. Ltd.
Head Office and Works:
CRESWICK ROAD, BALLARAT.
Melbourne Showrooms:
628 BOURKE STREET, MELBOURNE
Interstate Distributors:
BRISBANE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, PERTH.


RON ALDSON-TIPPETT
Farm Machinery
' ' 'V:
Petrol, Diesel and Kerosene Engines
Electric Lighting Plants
Fruit Spraying Plants
Milking Plants
Chaffcutters
Stationary and Portable Shearing Plants
Sheep Jetting Plants
Wool Presses
Sawbenches
Dragsaws
Corncrushers
Gristers
Earth Scoops (
Pump Jacks
N Pumping Plants
RONALDSON BROS. & TIPPETT
-fPf. LTD.
Head Office and Works;
CRESWiCK ROAD, BALLARAT.
Melbourne Showrooms : 628 Bourke Street, Melbourne.
Interstate Distributors:
BRISBANE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, PERTH.
BUY THE RIGHT MACHINE FIRST
2im.—9/45.
£>■
