

■■MHBBHHHMMi
PAGE 1
ss
mM -$l
Tauan
Hj
JHfflL Jagl
[mT
‘V H . ' ', : f' *7
. ‘ . j .j w , 'p :y "'f W •. *
■■ .
jJiP .M '
~ 1 | \ ,**X JSa ’ s^ 5 * #|b s a
&£ * } \ JHb/ V\yP8B| • $V W Ww * m
|y •^
K ' 5 fc,, - .
Ill Ta J \ ‘
l|..\k \ - • .•;• ra- .Wi -Aa-.I- ■
Il \ . • \ •/. vr, " ■
i
J i-:i:-'.y
JtimKjdr* Pr? Jt&m-f JrT'mtSm* *wM l/
]MWm w[-'i f \:i .jg9*f.'M: 'Jk'i ®||f JB
wP'J /W f \ & JTi
W I- ■ #7 'T : J iMLV-
v"A l v / X# v 1 *
fy
Vsu-jJ#r j
* 1 V \ / \. o ■ v F«H V
My
SH K MmWm ?
’
yssfs
'Jv J
mm
mV' 1 '#7 iMJ
r • / : M\
' 4 is
’ 00 y |3v /fl |
SH '""'"I
Hj
fi
H
-ft jhi #
;
A W ,.- 7 . •- v JMbh
"■ K II*' 1 y/~' : jia
Wfefc ■ $
flak '
'ffc’W'- '
wM
fist
w w mt
s mi-
y ’ TaHp ff ¥ A
M : jyll: ■ .
WwBj-' 'J
IlSwr ’iPr . i
(^S r ;
f A'
1
in
A\
It
di
fif
Pi
re
in
de
VO
Ec
an
Ai
fa
br
m
” N the previous pamphlets which have reached vou, you were
shown that the safety and honour of Australia make it
imperative upon every able-bodied man who values his own
honour to enlist at the earliest possible moment. It was
proved to you that Australia’s life, and the life of every
man, woman, and child throughout her coasts, are at present
deadly danger, and that that danger will not be over till the
ar is over, and has resulted in an outright victory for the Allies,
was further demonstrated that even if Australia were not in
re peril herself, she would nevertheless be bound in honour to
ht for the Empire which had secured her in peace, safety, and
osperity through so many long years: and, finally, you were
minded that civilisation itself is in the balance, and were
vited in the name of humanity to go forth and fight for the
feat of its most ruthless enemy.
Our Army—
What the World Thinks of it
If you are still hesitating, you might reflect on the obligation
u owe to your fellow-countrymen in the Australian Imperial
ree— the men who are now risking their lives to save yours,
d are in the most urgent need of your help. To belong to the
istralian Army is at present the proudest privilege which could
1 to any Australian of military age. Membership of it will
ing you immediate glory, and after the War it will be vour
Jst cherished memory and the most precious heritage of your
children,
those wh
— the m(
at the
Pozieres
delle, at
You w
this yeai
series of
rush on
thanked
magnifiof
Such t
true Aus
from oui
Allied fo
Similar p
dent obs(
Australia
on Gallip
the decla
active tr
men ever
and nobi
They wal
me of th
bathed. ’
The men by whose side you will be fightinv will be
o have made Australia’s name glorious all the world ovo ■
n who created for this country an imperishable tradition
Great Landing, atj [Lonesome Pine and Sari Bair at
and Bapau.me, at Lagnicourt, at Bulleeourt, and Paschen-
Katia, Rafa, and Jerusalem.
11 be the comrade in arms of the fighters who, in May of
, were congratulated by General l'o e h on the 1 ‘ masterly
operations” by which they stemmed the great German
Amiens, and who, on the same occasion, wore expressly
by Sir Douglas Haig for their ‘ ‘ gallant conduct and
nt achievement.”
ributes as these, which have made the heart of every
tralian glow, are all the more precious as coming, not
own commanders, but from the great leaders of the
■ces, who have specially singled out our Array for praise,
raise, heartfelt and: rjnstinted, comes from other indepen'
rvers. Would you jnht be proud to be a comrade of the
ns thus described by Mr. John Masefield, as he saw them
ob:-— ‘‘They were almost a!! men who had enlisted since
ration of war, and had had net more than six months’
aining. They were, however, the finest body of young
brought together in modem times. For physical beauty
ity of hearing they surpassed any men I have ever seen,
ked and looked like the kings in old poems, and reminded
e line in Shakespeare, ‘baited like eagles having lately
(Continued on pare ,?]
“Honoured”
■
( Continued from page 1) ing position, and thus made possible the sue- among the first ashore at Gallipoli, and, with capture of Malt Trench, and subsequently in
The Army you are asked to join to-day is cess of the greater operation. Subsequently, the the 9th, hold its ground stubbornly on the crag the capture of Lagnicourt. Other South Aus-
that of which Mr. Ashmead Bartlett has writ- Hth Battalion took part in the great battle of top for four days of incessant struggle. With tralian Battalions which run it close in point of MB!
ten:—“I do no think I ever saw so many Pozicrss, and when the Germans retreated from the 27th Battalion and the New Zealanders, it heroism are the 32nd, the 48th and the 50th.
1PL determined faces In my life. Whoever thought the Somme it helped to drive them back on Le held the advanced position on Sari Bair, known ’ VB
that Great Britain had such Colonials? If the Barque and Thilloy. Later, by its intrepid as the Apex, and was in the forefront of that , j
' * * * T : War has done nothing else before, It has dis- it helped to break the German rush terrible and splendid advance on the heights V^UeeilSland
covered these giants whom we did not know. at Lagnicourt, and led the right in the charge which so nearly resulted in the winning of „ , , ,
jag Their minds are as big as their bodies.” at Glencorse Wood. the whole Gallipoli campaign. In France it Queensland has sent to the War some of the
0 0 The 16th Battalion, while on the Peninsula, wen t over the top with the rest, of its Brigade « f qthn!*® Australian Infantry Bat-
?;1 Some Crack Battalions — was in the thick of the heavy fighting at Monash in the sweeping assault at Pozicres. It under- w! Lt repi * at “ n . of . liavlns
\TLT t \ Valley, and took part in the attempt to advance went all the rigours of the Somme winter, *** n a ‘ “S d ? f h , avi ?« 5?’
H Western Australia beyond Quinn’s Post to the hill known as Baby helped to beat the Germans back upon Le IT a „t u Pe " msu l a ln th « ■EBj
In Whatever State vou ioin to whatever Bat- Zoo. Afterwards it hung on to the crags of Barque, and at Louverval played a gallant part X a J* iT* 8 eng f. Red HSUK
taliou you are allotted, you will have glorious Abdel Rahman Bair under withering Turkish “J® *f V f?. ce upo ” the H in( ierburg Line. It of June 4 a ,i ( ] S ,j UTie 28 during which 'the
traditions behind you. There is not an Aus- fire, and, despite heavy losses, played a valiant carried on this proud tradition up to, and after, troops at Anzac made two’sorties to relieve the BEhK
tralian reuiment in existence which hns ,mt part ln the subsequent fighting. In Prance, it the third battle of Lpres, in the earlier stages t, . - ' . ,, T . e 0 „
helped i"!hTmakT„g e of htoor " C M vo„ are broke the German rush at Mouquet Farm as it of which, together with the 27th Battalion (also Austtlian to enZT the" Len hes ’in H :
a Western Australian, you may reflect with had broken the Turkish rushes on the Peninsula. South Australia), it represented Australia. France, and fought at the old German second
pride on such achievements as those of the 11th J b r rec ° r^ s „° f . ths , Lon S before this battle, the 27th Battalion line on the right flank of the Pozieres attack,
and 16th Battalions, which were originally 28th, 32nd, 44th and 51st Battalions (all Western hail established a splendid record. It helped to With the 15th, also a Queensland Battalion it
recruited in this State. Both of these took part Australian), are not less splendid. take the “Old German” trenches opposite the played a most gallant and successful part* in (
in the Landing, and the desperate struggles Camous Windmill a week after Pozieres: through- the great battle of Bullecourt.
which followed it. Part of the 11th Battalion Smith out the subsequent November it played its part The loth had already done work
p V Xn tU T^ Partl T iP f at h d f in t T 6 her ° ic T aU,t .r rm in what has been called “the most difficult fi"ht- on Gallipoli and at Mouquet Farm, and, with
uaha lepe. Just before Lonesome Pine, the The South Australian regiments, too, have a ing that Australians ever undertook.” In Feb* the 41st and 42nd (both Queensland) it
regiment seized a Turkish trench in a command- magnificent record. The 10th Battalion was ruary, 1017, it took a leading share in the fought through the battle of Messines.
(Continued on page 3)
y-'


[Continued from Page 2)
Here, we are told, “it was the 41st which
during the five days before the battle,
while our bombardment was gradually
shattering the hill-slope opposite, held the
whole front line of the third Australian
Division. They had to endure every re-
taliatory bombardment showered back by
the Germans whenever our own practice
barrages descended on them.”
T asmania
Tasmania’s record, which is proportion-
ally as splendid as that of any other State,
depends largely on the prowess of the
12th and 40th Battalions. The 12th
Battalion was in the thick of the fighting
at the Landing, and at Lonesome Pine.
No regiment on the Peninsula was given
more to do, or did it more gallantly. At
Pozieres it fought its first great fight in
France, “extending its position gradually
across the road under one of .the most ter-
rible bombardments that Australians have
ever experienced.” At Mouquet Farm, it
held the nearest position to the Farm that
was ever taken by Australians, With
the 40th Battalion which had already dis-
tinguished itself at Messines it rendered
most gallant service in the third battle of
Ypres.
New South Wal es
When we come to Victoria and New
South Wales with their largefr population
and greater contribution of man power,
the difficulty is to know which Battalions
to single out for special mention. Among
the New South Wales units, the 13th
Battalion was in the thick of the Landing
and of the desperate six weeks’ fighting
that followed. It played a very gallant
part in the great night attack of August
6. and in the battle of Hill 60. With
the 45th (N.S.W.) it was at Pozieres and
Mouquet Farm, at Bullecourt and Mes-
sines, and in the great attack at Ypres.
The 17th. 18th, 19th and 2Cth (N.S.W.)
Battalions had helped to capture New
Guinea, and were among the first Austra-
lian troops who saw active service. Sub-
sequently. they relieved part of the Aus-
tralian Array on Gallipoli during the worst:
of the August fighting, and did splendid
work on the Peninsula, and, in Prance.
The 13th Battalion was originally re-
cruited in great measure from Newcastle,
and the 2nd Battalion from Maitland.
The 13th took part, at Promelles, in the
first great battle of the Australian troops
in France, and helped to hold the German
trenches till morning, when the Germajis
worked in behind the flank, and a way
had to be cut back through them.
The Ist, 2nd, and 3rd and 4th Battalions
will live for ever in Australian history as
having borne the brunt of the great and
terrible Lone Pine charge. Subsequently
the Ist, with its sister Battalion, the 53rd,
was in the jflrst great assault at Pozieres,
and in the subsequent bombardment. Both
Battalions have seen heavy fighting since,
most notably at Bullecourt.
Victoria
Of the Victorian Battalions in the Aus-
tralian Imperial Force, the oldest are the
sth, 6th, 7th, and Bth. The 7th and Bth
had helped to repel the Turki di attack on
the Suez Canal at Ismalia. All four took
part in the Landing, and in the heavy
fighting that followed. Subsequently
they were transferred to the southern area
of the Peninsula at Helles, and, with the
New Zealanders on one flank and the
French on the other, took part in that
heroic charge of May 8, of which the on-
lookers “still speak with tears of pride in
their eyes.” Afterwards, in the Anzac
area the 6th took part in another great
charge—that on German Officers’ Trench
—and the 7th was “thrown into the Pine
on August 7, and for twenty-four hours
carried on the dreadful bomb-fight in
which four Victoria Crosses were won.”
After the half the strength of
these regiments was drafted into the
57th, 58th, 59th and 60th Battalions. Of
these eight, the 59th and 60th took part
in the fierce fight at FromeUes, and the
sth, 6th and Bth were in the thick of
Pozieres. All went through the Somme
winter, and afterwards fought with con-
spicuous gallabtry at Bullscourt and
Ypres.
The 14th (Victoria) Battalion won the
first Victoria Cross (Captain Albert
Jacka’s) secured by the A.I.F. With the
Jacka s) secured, by the A 1.1. With the They include the following:— This is a glorious record, and there is no reason (a) For wife living at home, 2/- a day.
46th, it went through the ordeal of Victoria Cross 33 why you should not help to increase it. (b) For each child under 16 years of age,
Pozieres ; with the 25th after the Somme Knight Commander of the Order of the „ , 6d. a day
winter, it broke the Hmdenburg wire, and Bath 4 Conditions of Enlistment , . „ . ...
living wage; but until such is found, the
Repatriation authorities must give him 1
sustenance at the following rates: —
A Week.-
Soldier without dependants . 42/--
With wife 52/-
\Vife and child &>/&
Wife and two children 59/-
Wife and three children 62/6
Wife and four or more children 66/-
A widoWer with children is entitled to
the same sustenance as if his wife were
living.
Liberal provisions are made for appren-
tice's. 'Where their apprenticeship has
been interrupted through enlistment, they
are to receive the difference between the
wages they actually get from their em-
ployer and the amount paid to Journey-
men. The training of a soldier or his
dependant in a vocation or profession may
be paid Tor onttt of .Repatriation! money.-
Money advances may he made to soldiers
possessing encumbered property, or desir-
ous of purchasing tools of trade and pro-
fessional instruments; and to soldiers
who, through enlistment, have lost their
businesses, and wish to buy new busi-
nesses, plant, stock, and live stock.
You will be able to ascertain the parti-
culars regarding pensions, etc., on appli-
cation at the Defence Department; and
from what has been already said, you will
see that Australia looks after her soldiers-
well. It is indeed beyond doubt that
their rates of pay and pension are in ad-
vance of those prevailing in any other
cbuntry in the world. 1 No man need hang
back from enlisting to-day through fear
that he and his dependants will not be
well treated.
Our Lost Battalions
There is one other matter of vital im-
portance to eligibles—one, indeed, which
urgently concerns the honour and pride
of all Australia. The regiments whose
deeds have been chronicled above have
made her fame ring throughout the world.
Recently, for lack of reinforcements, three
of her finest fighting Battalions have been
thrown upon the scrap heap; and unless
recruits are forthcoming, others must cer-
tainly follow. The 52nd Battalion, Which
has now been disbanded, was formed ftwm
the 12th Battalion (South Australia-
Western Australia and Tasmania) after
that regiment’s splendid period of service
on Gallipoli. Latterly, the 52nd had be-
come an entirely Queensland unit. It
had fought at Mouquet Farm, where for
three tremendous days it held its own
against the second Prussian Guard Re-
serve Division, till it was relieved by the
Canadians. Its subsequent record is thus
described by the Official Reporter with
the Australian Imperial Force: —“In its
next great fight at Messines, it reached the
furthest point gained on the first day, and
seized 800 yards of front line on the flank,
where a neighbouring division had been
held up. By so doing, it probably saved
the situation in the centre of this advance.
Later it was through the Ypres battle,
though not heavily engaged. But it
never gained more glory than in the recent
fighting, where it was one of the Battalions
which bore the brunt of the German
attack at Dernancourt (south of Albe t).
Within a fortnight afterwards, it made a
magnificent night attack of which all the
world knows, at Villers Bretonneux (east
of Amiens).”
The 47th Battalion has also been dis-
banded. At Pozieres it had borne the
brunt of a most terrible bombardment in
the Old German Lines. It took part in
the great charge of the 4th Australian
Division, which broke through the Hin-
denhurg wire at Bullecourt. It was one
of the attacking battalions at Messines.
and here, by desperate gallantry, won a
position to which it held like grim death
till reinforcements arrived next day. H
was in the thick of the third battle ol
Ypres, and, lately, it “took the main brunt
of the point of the Dernancourt attack
full in the chest after driving back the
Germans day after day from the railway
embankment.”
The 36th was the New South Wales
Battalion which, beyond question, saved
Villers Bretonneux when the Germans
flung themselves against the town on
April 4th last. “It also fought very
heavy battles on the right of the British
lines at Messines, and during the most
difficult and ambitious attack ever under-
taken before Ypres,”
To-day, these magnificent regiments are
no more, and their disbandment must be
a grievous blow to every patriotic Aus-
tralian. Had sufficient reinforcements
been forthcoming, all three Battalions
would certainly be in existence to-day.
Unless recruiting imnroves, further reduc-
tion is certain, possibly by the abolition
of a whole division at one-stroke. To-day
you are asked to do your “bit” toward
preventing this terrible and shameful
thing from happening.
seized the Hindenburg line near Bulle- Knia-ht Commander of’ the Order of St „ n * n ■ „ ~ . , A similar allowance as in (a) is payable under no more, and their disbandment must be
court. Both of these Battalions did Vmlmel anP Qt n onroo ' Tll , e flowing are the conditions of enlistment the same condition to those dependent upon him a grievous blow to every patriotic Aus-
heroic work at Messines, and the third Comnanion* of the Order n/the Bafh ’ ' 30 for the Australian Imperial Force:— for support—a married s’ster who is a widow, an tralian. Had sufficient reinforcements
battle of Ypres. Other Victorian Batta- Companion of the Order of St Michael and Age_.. .. ••.•••• •• •• ;■••••' 9 45 years invalid father whose wife is not alive; 6d. a day is been forthcoming, all three Battalions
lions with magnificent records are the companion ot the Order ot St. Michael and Mimmqm height (without boots) 5 ft. 2 in. allowed for brothers and sisters under 16 ye irs; would certainly be m existence to-day.
21st, 22nd, 23rd, 24th, 29th, and 31st. TWInD-nlahpH SoVviVa 07c Chest (fully expanded) ...... 33 in. children under 16 years of a married sister who is Unless recruiting imoroves, further redue-
Such are the records of a few of the S3 ‘sued Service Ureter -DO Notwithstanding the above minimum standard a widow, an( f of whom the soldier is the tion is certain, possibly by the abolition
leading Infantry Battalions; recruited Distiii ornished Pomlimt TVWlnl for height, men may be accepted for service with sole SU pp o rt; children under 16 years of of a whole division at one-stroke. To-day
from each State. It is nbt possible here MpSZ, 190 infantry units; with a minimum measurement of age of a so ldier who, after legal and you are asked to do your “bit” toward
to chronicle the prowess of th 3 rema-ning Military Mp/lal A - - n7 5 ft., and, with the approval of the District Com- mutual separation has been entered upon, con- preventing this terrible and shameful
branches of the Australian Imperial + 0 Di«fin<niiehp<i nww ’ u mandant, a few men under 0 ft. may be accepted tinues to maintain them by allotting a portion of thing from happening.
Force: yet their achievement—and espe- r> , luilitar-p •• •• for special service as machine gunners and drivers. his military pay for such purposes. Wives and
chilly that of the Engineers, Artillery and Bar to Distinguished Conduct'Medal' ' 8 neSeTTown Hal! ShiTe llalt ’ DnllHaf or Re* ™ oth f B may eam additional money by their owu The Call from the Trenches
Light Horse—is equally magnificent. Each r, QT . . Ifi7 . ft*'' 11 -nan, omxe n<ui, 1.11111 nan, 01 rve ellorts.
arm and each regiment has a tradition of . I + ivrrt M i'l 9 eruitmg Depot, where arrangements will be made Ever since the War began the Austra-
which every Australian must be proud. If 7 for medical examinations. .... lian Army has been fighting your battle.
you enlist, yon will participate in this li tj G , r °cf ' + i Pi- £ p p r\ Repatriation On the fields of France and Flanders is
tradition and heln to nernetivite it ?° yal Hl ™ ane Society 1 Kates Ot Pajr Per Day . . at present being decided the question
f d , d ept p p • Congratulatory 272 - Onfl . lflf , om .w Under the Repatriation Act, every effort has whether vour home will be polluted and
tracunon, ana neip to perpetuate it. Congratulatory . . . . 272
Honors Won by Australians Complimentary 189
Honors Won by Australians Complimentary 1.89 , E J b ]^LTion
J Honourable Mention 393 ~—t tet
If you are ambitious of personal dis- Mentioned in Despatches 2,921 Lieutenant ..... , P/-
tinction. you will have every opportunity Order British Empire 14 Sergeant , 10/-
of obtaining it. Since the beginning of French 77 Corporal I “A
the War, no less than 10,000 commissions Serbian 78 Private [ 5/-
On and Oom Date Under the Repatriation Act, every effort has whether your home will be polluted and
iif Embarkation been made to safeguard the returned soldier from
(nicimeferred Fay) hardship and injustice, and to secure him lucrative
i n/a employment. Each State possesses a Eepatria-
tion Board, which fixes the amount of aid to
be granted. In addition to this, the sol-
outraged by the Hun, or whether it will be
preserved from this unspeakable fate for
ever. The men in the trenches are over-
worked and, weary with incessant fight-
ing. The glorious Army to which they
, n XX —° » i-j.cxii.ii ii p. ■ , | c-/ fi / siauxcu. xjj <*uuiuuu w xiiia, me »ui- in g. rue glorious Army to wmen xne\
the War, no less than 10,000 commissions Serbian 78 rnvate .. ... . . . | /- j D /~ diers’ interests are watched by the Federal belong is being frittered away for lack
in the Australian Army have been given Belgian 16 QonarafJnn A llowanrpc Repatriation Commission, by local Committees, of the help you and your fellow eligibles
to men who have risen throug.i the ranks. Russian 21 oeparailOli -r*. iiuwaiices both in city and country, and by Sol- can gi ve .
Up till August, 19.18, 12,709 honours and Egyptian 1 Separation allowances wilL.be paid as follows to diers’ Industrial Committees. These en- Will you not enlist at once, and do your
awards had been granted to Australian Montenegrin .. 10 married men who are receiving less than 10/- a sure that the soldier shall be provided “bit” for the men who are risking every-
soldiers. Italian .. .... .... 31 day;— with employment returning him at least a thing for you ?
The Director-General of Recruiting* Victoria Barracks, Melbourne
Wholly tip ninl PrinU-J in \uMr*li« f<*r the Oirerlor-OoTiornl of Keoruitiny; by TLe Sp»-Hnlty Pty Ltd. % 189 Lit Collins Rt.. M«lb.
