





The Outlook
of T .ABOUR,
HUGH H. 'LUSK,
Barrister-at-La\v,
i£)n K\\Qj hvPwvvn
jahour cmd J^ipUai.
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY W. M. MACLARDV, 319 GEORGE STREET.


C. CR
Qeorgs -Hi
WEDDING & BIRTHDAY GIFTS
To Theatricals.
Paris Paste Jewellery, equal in
appearance to the Finest
Diamonds,
Gold and Silver Laces, Spangles, &c.
TEA SERVICES, VASES & ORNAMENTS.
Ladies should come and select from a large
assortment of
540 SGEORGE STREET,
Opposite Town Hall.
V ;r?


TO SIR GEORGE GREY, K.C.B.
this little work upon a great subject I
place, by his own permission, the name of
one whose example has inspired, as his words
have suggested, the attempt'which it embodies.
That all the opinions here expressed will obtain
the sanction of his approval I can hardly, perhaps,
expect; but that the object which it has in view
will command the sympathy of one whose long
and illustrious life has itself been devoted to the
furtherance of that object is the earnest hope of
THE AUTHOR.


AUSTRALIAN
MUTUAL FIRE SOCIETY
ESTABLISHED 1872.
Capital, £lOO,OOO, with power to increase to £1,000,000
BONUSES-
20 PER CENT. PAID ANNUALLY SINCE 1873.
fUvrctox*«
Hon. George Thornton, M.L.0., Chairman.
J. Wethekill, Esq., J.P. S. H. Cary, Esq.
James Green, Esq., J.P. Wm. Hezlet, Esq., J.P.
First Fire Society
established in
the Colony on the
mutual principle,
giving policy-
holders back part
of their premiums
a cash bonus
out of the' profits
every year.
Policy-holders
are perfectly free
by law from all
liability.
Head Office
Fifteen days r
grace allowed for
payment of re-
newed premiums.
Damage by light-
ningand explosions
by gas paid.
Prompt and
liberal settlement
for fires.
Fire Insurance
at lowest rates.
HEAD OFFICES-
Corner PITT & KING STREETS
WAtTEK CHURCH, Manager.


THE OUTLOOK OF LABOUR,
Chapter 1.
THE PRESENT POSITION
Labour Question is the problem of the age. Other
questions are of local importance; this one alone is
co-extensive with civilized society itself. Questions of national
policy, of constitutional reform, of fiscal regulation, are of
prominent interest in particular countries ; but the position of
Labour in its I'elations to Capital, and of poverty in its
connection with wealth, stand to-day like a dark and threatening
background equally behind constitutional reform and fiscal
regulations. Hitherto Rulers and Parliaments have equally
failed to face these questions, and it has been left to social
theorists on the one hand, and to labour organizations on the
other, to propound new schemes of society, and to struggle,
sometimes it may be by clumsy and mistaken methods, for relief
from oppressive conditions. At present, it must be admitted,
opinion is crude and unformed upon such questions.
The evils of things as they are are felt keenly by the
sufferers, and are even recognised by a large class of thinkers;
but the deep sense of dissatisfaction with existing conditions is
universal amongst the masses of humanity, while definite
projects for their improvements are usually conflicting and
inadequate, and nearly always dangerous. The sharp social
contrasts of extreme poverty and inordinate wealth, of the
increasing toil and hardships of the many compared with the
ease and luxury of the few, are contrasts, the full meaning of
which a wider knowledge and education have brought home to
all. The writings of social philosophers, the struggles and
sacrifices of labour organizations, the wild outrages of secret
political societies, are all attempted contributions towards


reform. We have but just emerged from one of these struggles
in Australia, and the scars of the conflict still throb and burn,
scarcely less, perhaps, on the side apparently victorious than on
that of the party apparently defeated. The representatives of
Capital have experienced losses that were serious, and they can
hardly shut their eyes to the fact that there is no finality
in their victory. The representatives of Labour have endured
no common hardships, and they smart under the conviction
that, with better judgment, different results might have followed
upon their heroic sacrifices.
The real lessons of the late struggle have probably yet to
be learnt by the great majority of both the parties engaged.
To learn that lesson it is necessary to ascertain the causes
which have led to the late Strike, and which will yet lead to
others. It is essential to consider how far these causes may be
temporary, and how far they indicate conditions which must
lead to social re organization or to social convulsion. It is also
imperative that we should see how far the various proposals for
reform are feasible in themselves, and how far they are adequate
to the realization of the ends they propose to accomplish.
The origin of the conflict between the representatives of
Labour and Capital is cider than civilization itself. From the
moment at which a man, or a class of men, obtained exclusive
possession of a larger part of the good things of life than remained
to others, and could refuse to share them with their less fortunate
neighbours, society, however rude its form, became divided into
the classes of the Capitalists and the Labourers. The man
less fortunate, less clever, less strong, or less diligent than his
neighbour became the natural progenitor of the class of
labourers. Having imperfect means of acquiring property, or of
keeping it when acquired, he became more and more dependent
for food and necessaries upon the more fortunate class which.had
the faculty of acquiring and the power of protecting what they
had gained.
In all, or nearly all the earlier forms of civilization this dis-
tinction was carried to its logical result, and resulted either in
Slavery or Serfdom. Of these, slavery was the most perfect
logical development of the law of individual selfishness, and
serfdom the first upward step which placed a limit to the rights
of capitalists in the disposal of the human labour machine. The
slave was the labourer who had been deprived of all rights but
those of being fed and clothed enough to keep the labour machine
effective, so long as it paid the capitalist better to do so than to
leave it undone. In his case capital was wholly triumphant,
labour utterly subservient. The serf was but the slave localized.
He represented labour attached to the land, while both land and
labour were grasped by the inexorable hand of capital. He was


subject to nearly all the evils of slavery, but clung to that last
feeble shred of liberty which assured him of a settled dwelling
place, however wretched, upon the soil which he cultivated.
There were long Centuries, how long no one can tell, during
which one or other of these forms of human degradation and
wretchedness pi’evailed over the world of so-called civilization.
That they died out at all has been in all cases due to external
causes, and in none to the spontaneous action of capital. In all
European countries, serfdom, which was there the prevailing form
of slavery, was gradually destroyed by the increasing demand for
labour. In England, where it ceased perhaps the earliest, the
system received its death blow from the ravages of the “ Black
death,” which, more than five hundred years ago, swept away a
large part of the labouring population. The selfishness which had
enslaved labour was for the moment arrayed in its defence. The
competition of capital, which has since become its deadly foe, be-
came for the time, its friend. Labour was encouraged and tempted
to stray from the soil to which it had been chained, and the
competition of capital enabled it to preserve the degree of
freedom which it had gained. Competition had thus the power
to raise labour from the lowest depths of oppression. The demand
for labour in the form of slaves enhanced their value, and
eventually on the whole, improved the conditions of slavery. The
demand for free labour loosened, and finally, broke the bonds
that attached the serf to the soil, and thus placed him upon the
first step which, after long struggles, led upwards from slavery to
citizenship.
With this emancipation the really beneficial influence of
competition upon the conditions of labour was nearly exhausted.
It embodied then, as it does to-day, no new or regenerating
influence for society. Competition may increase, nay, it has
increased, the riches of individuals and of nations in the
aggregate. It has developed trade and improved manufactures.
Legislation has aided it, and Science has been its handmaiden,
but the mass of the people have meanwhile been crushed beneath
its Juggernaut wheels. Poverty has increased with population,
ignorance has been the heritage of the vast majority of mankind,
and misery and toil have clung to them as their portion from
childhood to old age.
To all this it may be answered that these things are but the
result of laws immutable as those of the universe. That the
instinct to accumulate property is identical with that of self
preservation. And that, without the selfishness which has
throughout the ages of recorded history arrayed the class which
has against that which has not, society would have no stability,
and progress and civilization no incitements. In a sense, and in
a degree, these things are true. The instinct of self preservation


lies deep in human nature, and all schemes of social regeneration
which ignore it, or make light of its influence, however beautiful
they may be in theory, will almost inevitably fail in practice.
Yet the question cannot thus be got rid of. Education has
spread, and is spreading still, and in its train it has brought
inquiry into the reason of things as they are. That oppression
exists no longer satisfies men to acquiesce in its existence. That
there are classes of men who live in luxury, and others who
exist in wretchedness and want, is no longer accepted as a
conclusive reason why such things ought to be. The very
foundations of thought upon such subjects, which have for ages
been accepted, are to-day questioned and criticised as freely as
the most recent theories. It is useless, therefore, to refer to old-
world ideas, or received opinions. The men who feel that all
men, as men, are as clearly possessed of equal rights as all
horses are in their capacity as horses, will sweep away, without
hesitation, any reasoning founded upon a state of society which
they can only suppose to have been founded upon overmastering
selfishness, and the tyranny of the strong over the weak. To
them the past is but the age of injustice and oppression, in
which the possessors of the world’s wealth have grasped all they
could, to the exclusion of every principle but that of selfish
aggrandisement. Henceforth such questions must be considered
solely upon their merits. Taking for granted that all men have
originally equal natural rights, how are those rights to obtain
practical recognition ? Admitting that great wealth and grinding
poverty are alike conditions without justification in natural
right, in what way is wealth to be curtailed without violence and
injustice, and how is poverty to be reinstated in its rights
without anarchy ?
The injustice of the past has thus bequeathed its problems
to the future, and society must face and in some way solve them.
To evade them now would not merely be vain—it would be fatal.
The settled convictions of three-fourths of civilized mankind can
neither be ignored nor resisted. The prejudices of the past can
no longer be pleaded in their justification with those who believe
that to these prejudices they have owed their degradation. The
power of wealth is no longer the bug-bear which it has been
to those who know that in any appeal to force the battalions of
labour so vastly out-number those of capital. Society stands
upon the threshold of changes greater and probably more radical
than any that have been experienced for many centuries. To
convince us that these changes will come there needs but the
consideration of the myriads who are interested in change,
compared with the few to whom the world as it is appears to be
the world as it should be. What the social revolution is to be, how
far it is to go, who and what will be overthrown in its inevitable


march ; these are the questions which ought to occupy the minds
of men whose all may depend upon the answer. It is to the interest
of labour as well as of capital that whatever changes take place
are in themselves just and fair and are brought about without
violence or disorder. Labour, educated labour, which is the
coming power of society, can well afford to be just, because it
cannot in the end be successfully opposed. Capital cannot afford
to invoke violence to its aid, because violence is the weapon of
overwhelming numbers, and those numbers are not arrayed on
its side. The chapters that follow proceed upon two assump-
tions—first, that the relations of capital and labour are unnatural
and cannot last, and second, that they may be changed for the
better by the use of forces already at work operating by methods
of which we have some experience. As to the first assumption,
it may be denied by those who wish that it were not true, but
reasonable men who see what is going on to-day over the civilized
world can hardly be serious in doing so. As to the second, some-
thing will be said in the following chapters, which may, it is
hoped, prove suggestive to some at least of those who are
interested either on the side of labour or of wealth.
Chapter 11.
TRADES UNIONISM.
-‘■TIRADES Unionism will hereafter be regarded with the honour
due to an institution which has done great things for
humanity. In the form in which we know Trades Unions
to-day they are, indeed, of comparatively modern growth, but in all
essentials of object, spirit and purpose, their origin dates back to
the earlier part of the middle ages. In their very nature they
are a product of liberty, and it is on this account that they have
had their greatest and most consistent development amongst
English speaking communities. The Guilds, which in the middle
ages set limits to the power and pretensions of powerful nobles,
in later times served as a barrier against the encroachments of
city magnates. These were indeed the struggles of a class of
artizans which has no exact counterpart in Modern Civilization.
They did not intend to be the champions of labour generally, but
only of their own narrow brotherhood. Narrow as their objects
were, however, they served to keep alive the principle of
Association, and to convince others of its efficiency for purposes
of mutual advantage. Nor was the lesson thrown away.
It is true that the original Guilds, having gained their
objects and secured their own liberties, ceased to be the friends
of reform for others. In spite of this and of themselves,


however, they had become the founders of a system which was
destined to become as wide as their own organizations had been
narrow. In spite of penal laws enforced at the will of selfish
employers, English labourers have been thus in the habit of
combining to resist oppressive enactments as to wages for at least
three hundred years.
Gradually, very gradually it is true, persistent resistance to
injustice carried the day. Sixty-five years ago the efforts of
many generations of more or less organized workmen, bore fruit
in the final repeal of the penal laws againgt combinations of
labour. This repeal was the Charter of Trades Unionism. It
recognised and gave legal effect to the truth that the labourers
possessed exactly the same rights as the employers of labour.
That they might combine to forward by all lawful means their
own interests so long as they did not interfere with the exercise
of the same rights by others. Since this repeal the progress of
Trades Unionism has been rapid beyond all previous experience,
and year by year the rapidity as well as the expansion of its
development has increased. To-day the members of Trades
Unions amongst our own race may be numbered by millions,
while their influence is world-wide, and their power cannot be
estimated. They form a Government within many other Govern-
ments organized upon their own principles, managed by their own
officers, supported by the savings of their own loyalty and self-
denial.
Institutions with such a history, animated by such a temper,
could not fail to effect great reforms, and the work of Trades
Unions has been a great and on the whole a beneficent one. It
is true they have at times been made use of for purposes that
were hardly less oppressive towards individuals than the treat-
ment against which they struggled when applied to themselves.
Such errors as these were to be expected, however, at the initiation
of a system which had only begun to know its own strength;
and on the whole such errors have been rare. On the other hand
the history of Trades Unionism has been a noble example of self
government and of loyalty, self denial, and heroic endurance, on
the part of the members. It has again and again contended for
the rights of the labourer and wrested from capital concessions
to labour which could have been obtained by no other means.
To-day it stands forth as the bulwark of labour against the over-
powering force of capital, and the weapon which has been successful
in many a hard fought struggle.
THE STRENGTH OF TRADES UNIONISM
has already been demonstrated in a variety of ways, and yet it
is hardly appreciated either by its friends or enemies. It has
indeed been recognized that by its operation the power of the


individual workman which, so long as he stood alone, was hardly
felt in its opposition to realized wealth, has been increased many
thousand-fold. It has been recognized by the possessors of
capital that in this newly developed and daily growing force they
are confronted by a power which meets them on grounds of
something like equality. Its own leaders have become aware
that it is a weapon so formidable that they hardly know what
may not be accomplished by its agency. Its members are
conscious of the strength of mutual help, and of the dignity
which goes with the possession of rightful power. So far it may
be said that the importance of Trades Unionism in its newer
and more developed form has been recognized both by friends
and foes. On the other hand it is at least equally true that its
real position is as yet unappreciated by either party.
The widespread Strike which ended but the other day in
these Colonies affords illustrations of this truth. Without for
a moment discussing the merits of the dispute which caused the
Strike, it may safely be said that the employers of labour had
no idea of the force arrayed against them until it was actually
in the field. Their experience had been confined to local Strikes
for local purposes, and the spectacle of a Strike so universal, resting
on a question of principle and not of wages, was, and must have
been a surprise. That it was so both in Australia and in England
is evident from the results it has produced. To meet this new
and giant force of organized labour, capißal has for the first time
in history organized itself on a large scale for resistance. If a
million of men are claimed in England as Trades Unionists, they
are to be met by an organization of eighty millions of capital.
No greater tribute to the power of the new organization could
have been paid than this, as it means that already possessors of
wealth have felt bound to place their whole force in arms. By
this means, however, it would appear that some at least of the
representatives of capital hope to crush the power of Unionism,
and it is here they show that they do not even yet appreciate the
force of the new organization. There is a power in the organization
of great bodies of men which has no equivalent in the aggrega-
tion of great reserves of capital. Money may, indeed, in a sense,
breed money, but not in the sense in which human sympathy leads
to human co-operation. If the coalition of eighty millions of
capital is needed to oppose the coalition of a million of workers
successfully, what, it may be asked, will be needed successfully
to oppose the combination of four, six or ten times the number 1
Yet it is this which has to be reckoned with. In ten years
between 1880 and 1890 it is computed that in England alone the
membership of Trades Unions increased more than four-fold.
There is no agency known which can prevent the spread of the
same principle which in the past ten years has won so many
victories.


But it may be doubted whether as yet the representatives
of associated labour appreciate their position much more justly
than their opponents. They have learned, it is true, that
combination gives strength, and that already their unions are
amongst the most formidable forces of society. In the recent
struggle in these Colonies their leaders rather over than under
estimated their available force. They supposed it capable of
coercing society at large, and over-riding the influence of capital
by a single effort. In this, the event proved that they were
wrong; but no doubt it may be held that the miscalculation was
one of degree only. If the Trades Unions, as they now exist,
could do so much, it may be argued, at least plausibly, that
with three times the membership they could do so much more
that capital must submit to their dictation—even if that dictation
were arbitrary and unfair. That this might be so can hardly be
denied ; but such a result would be a social revolution necessarily
violent in character. To understand the true extent of the
misunderstanding and its origin, it will be necessary to say
something of—
THE WEAKNESS OF TRADES UNIONISM.
This weakness is caused mainly by mistaking a use to which
these organizations have been put, owing to temporary circum-
stances, for their natural end and aim. This was a natural error,
but it is not the less a serious mistake, productive of the greatest
evils to the Unions and their members. Trades Unions were
originally formed for the mutual support of their members. The
support that was required was at first confined to the struggle for
justice against grasping employers of labour. Their earlier mission,
therefore, was wholly a fighting mission, and their constitution
was intended to fit them for successful struggle. Their funds
formed a military chest for their campaigns against capital, and
their whole organization was adapted mainly to a state of warfare.
This was undoubtedly wise and necessary in the early stages of
the system. The evils against which unionism had to contend
were palpable evils which could be speedily dealt with and simply
redressed. If particular employers or a particular trade dealt
with their workmen in a manner grossly unfair, the Strike was
the most speedy and effective remedy of all. But that remedy
has been applied over and over again, until, at least in these
Colonies, the element of gross unfairness has largely disappeared.
It is not now usually a question whether workmen can live on
the wages they receive, because, in these Colonies at any rate,
they can all do that when employed. The question is rather one
of abstract justice, and it more and more takes the form of a
claim to have a voice in deciding upon the share of profits to


which employers are entitled, and that which equitably belongs
to labour. For this end, the merely fighting power cf the system
will be found wholly inadequate in the future as in the past.
The Strike has hitherto been the recognised and the only recog-
nised mode of operation by which Unionism could advance its
object or secure its ends. This is, as if we should say, that
because armed force may be necessary to establish a state or to
achieve liberty for a people, the army should ever after govern
the state, and the military spirit should perpetually guide its
councils. All can see the folly of such a course when applied to
a state. The free spirit nourished and strengthened by the
sacrifices made and the victories gained would naturally be the
foundation of all its future greatness. The habit of discipline
and the instinct of mutual support and loyalty, learned by its
citizens in the days of struggle, would be of infinite value in
making the state progressive and prosperous, but the constant
attitude of hostile preparation would quickly be dispensed with,
or it would speedily prove fatal to its interests. It is here that
Trades Unionism is at present weak. For Strike purposes indeed
it is enormously strong to-day, and will no doubt be still stronger
in a few months or years. But Strike purposes are after all only
purposes of warfare, and like other warfare, they are enormously
wasteful and ruinously costly to all concerned. A Strike victory
is only to be purchased by loss and suffering untold, and its
results even to the victors are often by no means worth the price
paid for them. A Strike which ends in defeat involves all, and
generally more than all the suffering of the other, without anv of
its compensations. Strikes are, in short, mere weapons, and like
any other weapon they are serviceable for warfare only. They
may, indeed, be used to desolate a country or even to build up a
despotism, but they cannot re-organize society, or lay the
foundation of a settled and permanent prosperity for any class of
its inhabitants.
In a country like Australia, the limit of the effective
operation of Strikes seems to have been nearly reached. The
Strike of 1888 was largely successful because is was a wages
Strike, and the issues were simple and self-evident. The Strike
of last year was entered on for the advancement of the principle
of co-operation ; the grievances to be redressed were abstract,
and did not strike the public mind as serious, and, as a consequence,
it failed. The same question of abstract justice between
employers and labour will henceforth generally distinguish these
disputes, and labour will consequently lose that public sympathy
which is necessary for success. Deprived of this sympathy, the
objects of organized labour can only be obtained by an appeal to
force—an appeal which in its very nature must destroy the
prosperity which it seeks to achieve.


Yet the true mission of Tracies Unionism is as beneficent
now as it ever was. The accident of its first practical applica-
tion has misled friends and foes alike into fancying that it can
only operate by means of Strikes. No mistake could be more
complete, none could be more fatal. In a country like Australia,
where wages are high and all men are free, it is hardly too much
to say that the operation of Strikes has ceased to be useful to
the objects of labour. The uses of Trades Unionism, rightly
understood, however, are to-day greater than ever; its strength
rightly appreciated and directed, is more overpowering than
ever; its value as a saviour of society ought to be more
manifest and unquestionable than at any former period.
Prom its first institution to this hour its real value has
lain in its organization. The fact that by its means
the forces of labour can unite and act as one by a common
inspiration, subject to a common guidance, and the training which
sixty-five years of association and of struggle have given its
members has been of infinite value. In whatever channels it
acts now it can act with precision and unitedly. To whatever
objects it may be directed it can be impelled with all the force
and effect which the habit of united action alone can give. For
political purposes its organization ought to render it all but
irresistible; for purposes of social reform its unity of action and
the loyalty of its members ought to give it an influence second
to no force in existence. There can be no doubt of the influence
of its wide-spread brotherhood ; nor of its power for good if
well directed. The question of real importance is how to arrive
at the proper objects for its attention, and the legitimate methods
in which it should exercise its power.
It remains, therefore, to consider what are the objects at
which the great federation of labour ought to aim for the benefit
of its members, and of society at large. Having arrived at some
certainty with regard to these, it may then be worth while to
examine the various methods which have been suggested as cures
or as palliatives for existing evils in our social arrangements.
Chapter 111.
THE AIMS OF LABOUR.
<S)).&)HAT then, it may be asked, are the objects of the present
wide-spread agitation on all questions affecting property?
For the most part they are vague and undeveloped. The relief
of present distress; the amelioration of the condition of the
great mass of wage earners, or of those who Avould fain earn
wages, but cannot —these questions are so pressing and so


personal, that, they very often obscure the ultimate issues. Yet
these issues are all important, for upon the nature of the object
aimed at, must, of course, depend the best method for its
attainment.
The great majority of persons, no doubt, confine their ideas
to the attainment of some reform that falls far short of an ideal
one, and take no trouble to imagine a society in which all
existing evils shall be redressed. Yet there are others who
cannot be contented with what they consider half measures.
At the present moment these persons are natui’ally the advanced
leaders of the thought of the masses. Their visions of a
perfected society, in which social inequalities have ceased, and
with them most of the evils that tend to degrade human life,
have a charm which it is hard for the mind to resist. There is
thus a danger that those who sympathize with reform may be
induced to substitute the beautiful dreams of idealists for the
less enticing paths of practical philanthropy.
Socialism, in some one or other of its modifications, has of
late been held up before the eyes of Labour as the true and only
worthy goal of their exertions. It lias been painted in colours
so glowing, and in contrasts to existing evils so vivid, that it is
not surprising that criticism has been tender of the manifold
defects and difficulties which it involves. It would be impossible
in the space now at command to enter largely upon the
consideration of these. For the present it is sufficient to point
out that such schemes are not only not within the present range of
practical politics, but they are not even within telescopic reach
of it. If it is possible to conceive such a change in our social
system as that to any system of State Socialism would involve
at all, it is only possible to do so as the result of a long series of
changes from which the new order of things would be gradually
evolved. Sudden change in the direction of Socialism is
inconceivable, just as its introduction by a violent revolution is
impossible. As a dream of a perfected society built up and
inhabited by a glorified humanity Socialism may be, and indeed
is, a beautiful vision. No lover of the human race can help
sympathizing with the picture of a state in which all are to be
free, prosperous, and happy; a society from which misery and
want, suffering and crime are banished ; a true city of God, in
which justice reigns, and universal goodwill and brotherhood
prevail.
We have but to come back from the contemplation of this
poetic vision to the facts of present existence to see that for
practical purposes its abstract possibility or the reverse, hardly
concerns us at all. Society, as it has developed through the slow
and troubled course of centuries, is as wide as the poles asunder
from a dream like this. The marvellous vision of the Exile of


Patmos was not more alien from the realities of the Roman
world than the visions of the Socialist from the facts of to-day ;
but the Apocalyptic Seer was more sober-minded than our own
political prophets, because he perceived that nothing short of a
New Heaven and a New Earth could realize for humanity the
splendour of his vision. There is nothing, however, to hinder
the believer in the perfect Republic as the goal of human effort,
from joining in every great work set on foot for the practical
improvement of society. If such a dream is ever to be realized,
it must be as the result of many a change in the experiences,
opinions and desires of men, and a gradual reversal of nearly all
their present ideas and aspirations ; and each change which
substitutes justice for oppression, liberty for servitude, and
mutual help for continual conflict, is a step towards the possible
attainment of the grand ideal. Such an ideal goal is, however,
by no means necessary, and in many cases it may even be
positively injurious. Present evils require a present cure.
Practical injustice and inequality of acknowledged l ights call for
measures that may be applied now, and not in the mists of a
glorified future. The mass of seething discontent, which more
and more occupies the lower strata of society, must find some
present and practical outlet for its forces, or it will before long
burst all bounds, and advance by paths of violence and anarchy,
not to an ideal Commonwealth, but to a wild Pandemonium, in
which brute force, animated by the memory of many wrongs,
will hold a Devil’s Carnival.
Present evils can only be met on the plane of present remedies,
and it is to the consideration of these that the friends of labour
will do well to confine their attention. Time which is spent in
elaborating ideal schemes of imaginary perfection is not merely
time wasted, it is time stolen from the actual work of the moment
which demands all our effort. Society may indeed be constructed
upon wrong lines—its artificial distinctions of rank may be
injurious; its respect for wealth and those who amass wealth
may be slavish and unworthy ; its laws and customs may operate
unfairly to perpetuate these distinctions and to glorify and exalt
this wealth. If we grant all this, and it no easy matter to deny
it, it does not follow for a moment that the road to reform is to
be found in adopting an untried ideal, the defects and difficulties
of which we cannot possibly estimate. Common sense would
seem to point in exactly the opposite direction. The removal of
artificial distinctions, the curtailing of excessive wealth, and the
abolition of its special privileges, are surely work enough for the
present; and when they are accomplished they will have brought
mankind nearer to an ideal state such as has been dreamt of, and
perhaps may enable society so far reformed to judge better
of the possibility of further changes.


The aim, therefore, of Labour at present need not be too
far-reaching or too much idealized. We aie face to face with the
problem of wealth and poverty —the wealth of the few, the
poverty of the vast majority. The problem calls aloud for some
solution. If none is forthcoming now or soon, the giant forces
of want and suffering, of ignorance and crime, will rise in their
ghastly strength and will devastate society. It is true that
poverty will not really benefit by the revolution, but it is also
true that wealth will be swept away in its course. The idea that
there is wealth enough for all at present is a common but a
wholly mistaken one. An equal division of the world’s wealth
to-day would leave the world still poor. A distribution of the
riches of the few, even if it were possible to do it fairly, would
leave the poverty of the masses but little relieved. The curse of
the system which has prevailed so long is that it has not only
made men and women paupers, it has also made the world poor.
The crushing force of our system of social inequality—parent of
ignorance, of social injustice—parent of crime, and of social
competition—parent of poverty and wretchedness, have retarded
beyond computation the increase of the world’s wealth. Before
poverty can be abolished there must be more wealth, and not
merely a fairer distribution of that which exists. It is here that
such remedies of the past as Strikes wholly fail us. They may
possibly wring from the hands of capital a somewhat fairer
division of wealth, but they can only do so by the diminution of
wealth itself. The distribution itself may be made more fair,
but there will be less to distribute where all is utterly insufficient.
The object, therefore, of labour should not only be a fairer
division of the wealth which exists, bub such a division brought
about by means which shall increase that wealth to the utmost.
There is no advantage to be gained by reducing the wealth of the
very rich if it has not the effect of relieving the poverty of the
very poor. The good of the Commonwealth may be secured by
increasing the wealth of all, but it cannot be done by merely
decreasing the wealth of a class. All methods whatever of
violence have this fatal defect. To plunder the rich may destroy
wealth, bub it will not now and never has enriched the poor.
Viewed in this light it would seem that the true aims and
interests of labour may be advanced in three ways. They may
be furthered by such legislative changes as tend to discourage the
accumulation of riches in the hands of the few, and to place it
within the reach of the many. In this direction the proposal
for Land Nationalization, either as represented by the Single
Tax Scheme of Henry George, or by those of other economists
who would nationalize the land by other means, deserves special
consideration. They may be advanced by the adoption of a
system of limited partnership between employers and employed,


by which the surplus profits, after payment of wages and interest
on capital, are divided, upon some ascertained principle, between
the capitalist and the workmen. This system, known as profit-
sharing, is worthy of special attention, because it is already in
course of being largely adopted by a certain class of employers
of labour, and has, in practice, shewn results that are said to be
encouraging, if not wholly satisfactory. Finally, they may be
promoted by the adoption of schemes of co-operation, by which
the workers themselves become associated as at once employers
and employed. This system has special claims to the considera-
tion of the representatives of labour, as it appears to offer
larger and more varied advantages than anything else which has
as yet been proposed. Experience has also shown that it tends to
the rapid increase of wealth in the hands of the workers without
withdrawing from the owners of x’ealized wealth, a reasonable
means of employing that wealth to advantage.
By the use of these means, a present, or at any rate, an
early cure may be found for the social difficulty which at this
time has become so urgent. Whether any or all of them can
produce an ideal Commonwealth in which idleness and crime as
well as poverty and want shall have disappeared, it may be hard
to say. Yet this can be said—each step in the progress of the
reform of society on these lines may be made a perceptible advance
towards a condition of social life in which the extreme pressure of
want and ignorance shall no longer produce crime and misery, and
debase a large section of our race to the level of beasts of burden
for the profit of others.
Chapter IV.
THE LEGISLATIVE CURE.
is no room to doubt that the laws of all Countries
have assisted to build up the inequalities and vices of the
social system under which a large proportion of the population
groans to-day. The rule of the strongest and the selfishness of
the rulers led to a system of law which as far as possible
perpetuated the possession of power in the hands of a class, and
secured to the selfish the rewards of self seeking. It is natural
that men who now feel keenly the evil origin and the fatal effects
of this legislation should imagine that a reversal of the laws
which have worked so much injury to society will suffice to
regenerate it. Nor can it be denied that in many respects the
enactment of good laws will tend eventually to remedy the evils
inflicted by the operation of bad ones. This result, however, will


neither follow so rapidly nor prove so complete as many suppose.
Laws have indeed encouraged the growth of evils from which
society is suffering to-day, but laws did not themselves originate
those evils. They were in truth rather the consequence than the
cause ; nor will their repeal at once or of itself create a revolution.
The whole framework of society has grown fixed and rigid, and
much more than a mere change in the provisions of one law, or of
many, is required to give it a fresh form and the impulse of a
new life.
The proposals which have been made by many advanced
thinkers to re-mould the laws whichin all civilized Countries deal
with the subject of land form the best known and the most
important of the legislative remedies that have been proposed
for the cure of the social evils of the age. Writers who main-
tain socialistic views would of course sweep away all individual
property in land as well as in most other things at present
regarded as property. There are many others, however, who
while rejecting all proposals to destroy individual property in
other things usually regarded as wealth, not only propose to
establish community of property in land, but proclaim such a
revolution as at once just and efficient for the cure of all the
pressing evils under which society now labours. The best known
and most widely influential of these writers has been Mr. Henry
George, whose recent visit to these Colonies has had the effect of
establishing an energetic and enthusiastic school of Propagandists
of the gospel of the Single Tax. The special claim of Mr.
George to recognition rests not so much upon the objects at
which he aims or the arguments by which he enforces his opinions
as upon the practical method by which he proposes to proceed.
Land Nationalization had many advocates before Henry
George, and some who had gone as far as he has done in pro-
claiming the inherent right of society to undo the wrongs and
amend the errors of past ages in dealing with land with a lofty
disregard of the supposed existing rights of individuals. The
special form given to Land Nationalization by Mr. George,
consists in the proposal to avoid certain difficulties by a method
calculated to operate insidiously and perhaps gradually, and
rather to confiscate all that makes the possession of land specially
valuable to the holder than to interfere with the nominal owner-
ship itself. For the present purpose, however, it is hardly
necessary to discuss any minute differences either in the method
or probable effects of the various schemes of Land Nationalization.
Nor does the question of the Equity of Mr. George’s proposals
come largely within our scope in these chapters. What we are
most concerned with is the question of its efficiency as the
legislative cure for the social disease of gross inequality of con-
dition between individuals entitled to the same natural rights.


George and those who follow him do not merely defend
their scheme for the virtual although not formal confiscation of
private property in land on the ground of absolute right, they
also maintain that this reform, if given effect to, would speedily
reorganizesociety, redistribute wealth, abolish poverty and want, and
in a word solve the problem of the age. To confiscate rental values
in land would, it is contended, enable everyone to obtain land,
and as land is the original source of all wealth, everyone would
speedily be placed in the position to become comparatively
wealthy. In no country in the world is it more easy to bring
some of these theories to the test of practical experience than in
Australia. It is true that in the colonies of Australia vast areas
of public land have been alienated by sale to individuals, who
will, if allowed to remain in possession on the existing terms,
become of necessity a class possessed of immense wealth and
overwhelming influence. It will mean the pepetuation, possibly
in a more intense form, of many of the evils which have brought
about the wide-spread misery and deep dissatisfaction of the present
time in Europe and America. It is therefore in itself a mischief
of the very first magnitude—a menace not only to the existence
of a true democracy but to the freedom of the individual and
the well being of society.
Admitting, however, to the full, the evils of land monopoly,
and the urgent need of taking steps for its destruction, the
question still remains how far that destruction would produce
the results hoped for and expected by the Land Nationalists. It
is evident that the State confiscation of the whole rental value
of land would render the holding of land merely burdensome to
the landlord class. The man who used the land as a tenant
before could do so still with as good, if not better, results than
previously; only the interest of the persons hitherto termed
owners would be gone. This, it is argued, would at once lead to
the distribution of the land amongst the persons able and willing
to use it. Lands held for speculative purposes would be taken
up for reproduction ; estates locked up would be thrown open ;
and a way would be made available by which thousands, who are
now labouring for an uncertain pittance, would become wealthy,
and the producers of much wealth to the country. This is the
ideal result of the proposed land legislation, and could it be
realized in fact, it would be no easy matter to exaggerate its
importance. Let us, however, look a little more closely at the
matter. At present the great mass of the lands, even of this,
the oldest Colony of Australia, are still Government property.
These can be obtained now upon easy terms as to payment, with
the special inducement to buyers, that, when improved, they can
be secured in fee simple by the purchaser, on deferred payments.
Are these lands at present sought after by the labourers who are


dissatisfied with the wages earned in town or country 1 As a
matter of fact we know they are not! If asked the reason why
they do not take advantage of the offered lands, they will reply
that they have not the capital necessary to insure success, or,
indeed, to avert starvation. And the answer is sufficient because
it is true. To give a hungry artizan land, is, literally, to give
the man who asks for bread, a stone. Imagination may, indeed,
picture a smiling homestead and fruitful fields, but the bitter
logic of facts brings them back in no long time to helplessness
and starvation. To offer land to the individual labourer is no
more than every one of the Australian Governments has been
doing for more than a quarter of a century. It has been offered,
nay, it has been pressed upon them, on terms as easy as any
rental value would be, and it has not been accepted. Nor can it
be so in the present state of affairs. In one of these Colonies
the Government has gone further, and has found the capital,
under certain conditions, to settle the people on the land, and
even there the settlers have been very far from uniformly
successful, and the scheme has been by no means universally
popular. Nothing could more plainly demonstrate the truth
that legislation which merely throws open the land to the people
falls far short of the provisions required to enable poor men to
enter successfully upon this path to wealth.
This is indeed no argument against a>-new and more equitable
land legislation. It affords no justification for land speculation,
nor for the state of the law which renders speculation in land
possible. There can be no doubt that the law relating to land
has tended more than almost anything else to create the class dis-
tinctions which in most of the older and more thickly populated
countries of Europe have gone far to make poverty and want the
portion of a large majority of the people. To prevent a repetition
of this in Australia should be the earnest endeavour of every
Colonist, and undoubtedly in so preventing it they will assist the
cause of labour as well as that of democracy and of freedom.
In the meantime, however, it is important that we should
see clearly how far land legislation is to be relied upon as a
present cure for the inequalities and injustice of our social
arrangements. The suppression of land monopoly, whether by
taxation or by Land Nationalization cannot fail to benefit the
position of labour. It will not enable any large number of
individual labourers to become land holders and farmers, indeed,
because without capital the attempt would only prove disastrous.
There will always, however, be some persons ready to utilize land
now lying comparatively idle, and as we shall see when we speak
of co-operation the number of such persons may be increased
almost indefinitely.


Tt may, however, be doubted how far it is necessary in these
Colonies to adopt any extreme legislative measures to produce
these results. A land tax, progressive in amount, upon all unus<*d
lands would probably go far to break up great estates in this
country, where as yet the renting of agricultural lands at any
rate is but in its infancy. Further legislation, having for its
object the prevention of accumulations of land by curtailing, as
in France and elsewhere at present, the power of dealing by will
and settlement with land, would no doubt be of much value as
applying to lands in cities and towns. Such measures would, with-
in a single generation, go far to break up the existing land
monopolies, and the total cessation of sales of land in Fee Simple
by the Government would do the rest. Such measures have the
advantage that they have all been tried and most of them
are even now the subjects of successful experiment in some of
these Colonies. South Australia is trying, with apparent success,
the effect of a progressive Land Tax. New Zealand has set
aside all the best of her remaining Crown Lands for perpetual
leasing, and is trying, with a good deal of success, the system of
Village Settlements in which the Government finds the capital
to house the settler and supply him with tools, fruit trees, and
seeds to enable him to become a producer upon the land. With
such experiments before us it is not necessary to wander into
the regions of untried theory for (he means of at least improving
our Land Laws Much may be done without raising those
questions of public faith and of honest dealing which surround
the application of Henry George’s Single Tax proposals. Much
also may be accomplished without grappling with the large
financial questions of acknowledged difficulty which surround any
other proposals for resuming the lands already sold by the State.
In connection with the utilization of the public lands for
settlement on a larger scale than heretofore by the people, the
position of the Public Railways should also receive careful
reconsideration. At present our Railways are treated as a State
speculation. They are indeed looked upon as valuable agents for
opening up the lands of the interior to settlement, but they are
expected to do this subject to the conditions of paying working
expenses and interest. The result is that our railways would, on
the present system, hardly assist the labouring farmer at all.
The rates of carriage, whether for goods or passengers, may not
be too large to return the profit required, but they are vastly too
large to promote the settlement of the interior by farmers, on a
small scale. To make any improved laws really effective for the
settlement of the people upon the land, existing railroads, and
others yet to be constructed, must be dealt with as a part of the
new system. If it is desired to cultivate, for instance, the country
of the Darling, and to settle along its banks tens of thousands of


prosperous farmers on small areas of, it may be, irrigated soil,
the means of reaching the Darling by train must no longer be
provided as a luxury, only to be secured by the rich. The State
must forego, and she can well afford to forego, all profit whatever
from her railways when she obtains her profits from the soil.
Distance must, as far as possible, be annihilated, so that the cost
of living on the Darling or the Murrumbidgee, shall but little, if
at all, exceed the cost of living in Sydney or Newcastle.
By such steps as these the work of social reform may be
enormously assisted by means of land legislation. Means may
be provided by which a vast rural population may be settled
upon the lands of the country, to their own benefit and that of
the Colony at large. The land monopolies, which threaten the
future as they impede the present prosperity of the country, may
be put down and extinguished ; and all this may be done without
violence and without injustice, or that which will seem to be
injustice, to any class.
Once more, however, it must be pointed out that however
great the necessity for this legislation may be, and however
excellent its results may be likely to prove, it is at best only a
small part of what is required. The part, indeed, is one of
great importance, but of itself it can give but very partial
relief from the evils now becoming so generally recognized. In
our present civilization only a small part'of any population can
become cultivators of the soil, and, while it is true that all
mining pursuits also spring directly from the land, the effect of
revised land laws and tenures upon Labour would be even more
slowly felt in relation to these than to agricultural settlement.
Direct legislative relief will therefore probably be found
capable of effecting but little. Its sphere must always be
rather a negative than a positive one. By laws we can remove
obstacles to progress in the emancipation of society, but we
cannot accelerate that progress, or ensure that emancipation.
Human effort, human sympathy, and human co-operation, these
must be the levers that are to move the social world, and the
most that we need expect from the pages of a Statute Book is
that these shall in no way retard the work.
Chapter V.
PROFIT SHARING.
Q*?HE evil of which labour has so long complained is the
injustice which gives to the worker a bare living, and
to the capitalist all the profits of the work performed. I wish
to deal in simple language, and this is after all the plain English


of that which has far generations been disguised under various
names and phrazes by the professors of the so-called science of
Political Economy. Writers on Political Economy indeed generally
admit that all wealth is the product of labour operating upon
nature, yet few of them appear to observe that the system in
force ends in this—that the labourer produces the wealth, and
the capitalist, who, at most, only assists him to produce it, gets
all the profits. What the wealth-producer gets is called wages,
and wages is only another name for the smallest amount of
money on which the labourer can be maintained in a condition
fit for labour. There is no profit sharing in this, any more than
the steam engine can be said to share the profits of the business
because it consumes a certain quantity of coals. Hitherto the
human worker has been treated as a machine, only not quite so
well. The lowest possible amount has been paid him in wages,
and this has frequently been too little to keep the human machine
at full working pressure—yet it has been forced to work or die
machines that are merely mechanical cannot be thus forced, and are
consequently supplied with ample fuel. The favourite doctrine of
supply and demand has accepted the existing state of things as
the right one, and has built upon it a so-called Science of
Political Economy. The flesh and blood worker, who has for
centuries accepted the dictates of stern necessity, but never
admitted their justice, has at last awakened to the fact that
necessity is no longer so stern as formerly, and that there maj be
found a way of escape from the tyrrany of generations. More
education and a wider knowledge of the world have been the
means of awakening the few who have been the pioneers in this
great march of human progress. By their means workers have
been taught not only that they have a right to a larger share of
the wealth they create, but that they have the means of securing
it. That means is called Co-operation.
The earliest development of the Co-operative spirit was that
which took the form of Trades Unionism, and proceeded to
wrest from the hands of wealth a less miserable recognition than
formerly of the rights of labour, in the shape of increased
wages. This, although a just and a most important service,
which was rendered, if rightly understood, to capital as much as
to labour, was but the first lesson in the rudiments of a new
science. It taught labour its importance, and its power, when
united, to obtain the recognition of that importance. Gradually
a few of the most intelligent of the employers of labour saw the
direction in which the labour movement was tending, and the
danger to trade, and to the trader which was involved in strikes.
From this arose the idea of Co-operation viewed from the
employer’s side. To give the worker a share of what he earned,
over and above wages, was to place him above the temptation to


join in Strikes, and so to give security to the employer : to make
him an actual sharer in profits was to enlist him as a partner in
securing the greatest profits possible.
From these considerations originally sprang the scheme
known as Profit-Sharing—which was, or is, merely Co-operation
between employers and employed on a system devised by the
capitalist, and chiefly intended for his own benefit. Although
this is absolutely and essentially true, it does not shut out the
further truth that the system has in many cases greatly benefitted
workmen as well as employers. In France, where the earliest
experiments in this direction have been made, the new principle
has, from the first, worked successfully. This was largely owing
to the benevolent and liberal men who were the first to adopt it,
and to the fair conditions which they were prepared to make
with their workmen. The work of M. Codin and a few others
has indeed been of great service, both to labour and capital. It
has shown that a limited partnership between capital and labour
is not only practicable, but may be worked out in a manner to
reconcile the interests and feelings of both parties. The
generous trust shewn by these employers in the employed has
gone far to make Profit-Sharing the sole form of Co-operation at
present likely to succeed in France. A more independent
Co-operation, when attempted, has appeared to French workers
to involve many more risks and difficulties, while its advantages
have scarcely impressed them as compared with the Profit-Sharing
Schemes set on foot by French capitalists in the form which they
gave it. In England, on the contrary, where it was taken up
later, it has, until very recently, been far less successful. The
workers have generally regarded it with suspicion and dislike,
and, it must be confessed, these feelings \vere generally well
founded. The attempt in Britain, and also in America, was at
first made to use Profit-sharing rather as a trap to enslave labour
for the increased advantage of capital than to give the worker
any real concession. Its true meaning was, however, quickly
perceived, and plainly denounced, and its consequent failure has
been followed by an attempt to introduce it in a fairer shape,
derived from the experience of France. In its new form it is
spreading rapidly, both in Britain and America, and is being
applied to a great variety of occupations, apparently with every
prospect of doing good service to society by enabling capital and
labour to work together in harmony.
Profit-sharing, like every other form of Co-operative
Association, is capable of many modifications. Its original
failure in England, and the disfavour into which it fell at first in
America, were caused alike by the failure of the employers to
see that the new system must plainly embrace the principle of
something like equal justice to the possessors of capital and the


possessors of labour, and must in no case be made a pretext for
securing to capital the lion’s share of what is gained by improved
methods of working. To induce the worker to make extra
exertions in order that he might enjoy a portion of the profits
obtained by these exertions, was not only no boon to labour but
it threatened a worse slavery than before. Even the surrender
of all the profits made by these extra exertions would have been
no real concession as they all belonged of right to the men who
earned them, at a cost in extra time and exertion, the price of
which no one could calculate. The system as worked out in
France by Godin and others presents other and far superior
features to these. The profits which are sliared are all the profits
that are realized from the enterprize. Amongst many varied
schemes three main features may be said to characterize all the
profit-sharing enterjirises that have so far proved really successful.
These are;—
1. That a fixed proportional share of all profits after payments
for wages, working expenses, and a small interest on
capital, becomes, of right, the property of the workers.
2. That this share is not disbursed to the workers in cash,
but invested in some way in the enterprize itself.
3. That the workers, through their elected representatives,
have a more or less efficient voice in the management of
the business itself.
It is manifest that the first of these conditions is that which
alone can make the System of Profit-sharing a benefit to the
Avorkers. Sharing profits only when they exceed a fixed sum has
been tried, and in practice it has been found that they scarcely
ever exceeded the sum, or if at all they exceeded it by so little
as to be Avorthless. The Bonus System has been tried and has
failed because the men haA 7 e felt thatnoreal partnership existed, and
have seen that the bonus paid might after all be only a portion of
the extra profit realized to capital by their own extra exertions.
The cry was raised in England and America (and the cry is still
to be heard) that on any other principle the Avorker Avould share
all the profits and escape the losses of the undertaking. In a
certain limited sense this is true. The fact is that the owners of
realized wealth have a lesson to learn Avhich is more than
disagreeable, but which must be learned, and that quickly. The
lesson is that the day of exclusive or even paramount privileges
for realized wealth and its possessors has passed away and will
not return. If realized Avealth is hereafter to remain an
inheritance at all it must be on the condition that it accepts its
true position. If it claims in the future, as it has in the past, a
privilege equal and superior to the fair play and justice which
men are entitled to because they are men —then it already totters
to its fall.


Hitherto, capital has lorded it over labour. It has assumed
that its possessors are entitled to whatever interest or increase
could be realized, while the workers, who alone enabled the
increase to be made, were to receive the lowest remuneration
they would accept, or the least they could exist upon. Thus the
(*reat fortunes of the age have been built up. Thus wealth has
grown wealthier by the increasing toil of the millions who have
on the whole grown poorer. The workers have, like the bees,
only accumulated honey for others, while their own share was
barely enough to enable them to accumulate more for the same
taskmasters.
Profit-sharing is, of course, based on an opposite view of
economical science. It assumes that the worker is equal to the
capitalist, and that his claims are certainly not inferior to those
of money. Results have so far shown that the System invari-
ably tends to increased production and increased economy, and
in the increased profit the workers are certainly entitled to share,
as they have created it. If, after all, there is no margin of
profit, the System will give none to the worker. If there should
be in any year a loss, that loss has at least been made smaller by
the exertions of the workers.
In all successful enterprises, where Profit-sharing has been
introduced, the System pursued has been that of claiming for
capital a low rate of interest, to rank as the equivalent of an
average rate of wages for the workers. After payment of these
charges and the other costs of production, the surplus, being
profit, has been divided into three parts, a Sinking Fund to
provide for less prosperous periods, and the profits on capital, and
those on labour. These have been variously apportioned, but it
is worthy of note that the more equitable the division has been,
the more it has admitted the perfect equality of the capital
contained in the worker’s skill and exertions with that in the
employer’s banking account, the more successful has been the
venture, and, in the end, the larger the profits for all.
The principle of investing the worker’s profits in the
enterprise itself is not universal in Profit-Shaiing Schemes, but
it is general, and, on the whole, it is successful. It may indeed
be urged that if the worker is entitled to his share of the profit
as a matter of right, he is also entitled to deal with it as freely
as the capilist employer is to deal with his share. And as a
matter of principle this must be at once conceded. Yet, after
all, it is but a usual incident of contracts that special conditions
are imposed, which do infringe upon personal liberty for the
general good. The employer offers to share profits with his
workmen, not so much from a sense of justice, as in the hope of
satisfying the workers, and averting dangers to himself by
identif} 7 ing their interests with his own. To give them so much


cash Bonus at the end of which year or half-year might satisfy
the workers as to the fairness of their treatment, but it would
not identify their interest with those of the employers, nor form
a bulwark against labour agitations. Nor are the advantages of
a little money in hand so great after all. A present advantage
no doubt it is, where men are prudent and steady, but the want
of means of investment prevents in most cases the realization of
any permanent benefit to the workman. Thus the scheme
usually adopted has in practice proved the best. The best class
of workers have valued it the most, because it provided for the
future. In such a system Profit-sharing merges gradually into
the more perfect form of Co-operation, in which the worker is
himself the employer, and in which capital takes its proper place
as the handmaid, and no longer the master, of labour.
But it is an essential part of any permanent success, that
all persons interested in the results of an enterprise should have
a voice in its management. Profit-sharing does, in fact, create a
partnership, but a partnership is a delusion if the partners have
no power of management or oversight. And this is especially
necessary in such a partnership as that between capital, so long
irresponsible, and labour, so long down-trodden. Confidence is
the first requisite for its success, and confidence can only be
secured by allowing labour a full and real control. Experience
has shown, and is showing day by day more clearly, that this
involves no real danger to the capitalist, but even if it were
otherwise, the time has arrived when some risk must be run.
The risk which capital runs day by day in the rising tide of
discontent, and the growing murmurs against injustice, is one,
the full meaning and extent of which we cannot yet know. The
risk involved in a system of Profit-sharing, which shall frankly
treat the workers as partners entitled to their profits and to their
full share of control, is one which experience discounts, and a
knowledge of human nature does not regard as imminent.
There are, therefore, some important advantages in that
species of Co-operation which takes the form of Profit-sharing.
Chief amongst these is the fact that it forms a preparatory school
for a more perfect system, for which many are not yet prepared.
Many schemes of Co-operative production have failed for want of
efficient management, and this, the Profit-sharing system,
largely provides against. The new partners, if they have not
so 'much power nor the same freedom of action as might be
theirs under a completely Co-operative system, have yet the
safety which arises from efficient management in hands
accustomed to the task. In any well-constructed scheme, also,
their power will increase year by year as their capital interest
grows greater, until, in the end, the enlarged experience entirely
coincides with increasing power.


Yet the Profit Sharing System is the capitalists’ rather than
the workers’ scheme for solving the labour problem. It is meant
to lend safety to capital already engaged in trade, commerce, and
manufactures, rather than full justice to labour, and therefore it
requires to be entered upon by labour with prudence, and closely
criticized in all its provisions. It is also a slow process for the
redress of many wrongs, because it will be found to be inapplicable
to a very large number of human occupations. In itself it
represents a concession which the uprising of labour has forced
from the hands of the more far-seeing of the possessors of capital.
As such it may be accepted and made use of to good purpose
as a stepping stone to a yet better state of things, in which the
men who do the work of the world shall be free partners, taking
from the possessors of capital only that which they require to aid
their enterprise, and only upon such terms as it shall pay them
to give for the commodity.
Chapter VI.
CO-OPERATIVE ENTERPRIZE.
3N the year 1795, the first Co-operative Store, in England, was
Established by the Bishop of Durham, at Mongewell, in
Oxfordshire. This example was followed in other places, and a
society was formed, which numbered George 111. amongst its
subscribers, “ for improving the condition and increasing the
comforts of the poor,” the chief business of which was to
increase the number of these stores. The principle was benevolent,
but in no proper sense what we now understand by the name
“Co-operative.” In these stores goods of all kinds were sold for
what they cost, with the addition of the actual expense of selling,
so that, undoubtedly, working men were able to get more for their
money than they would otherwise have done, yet they failed to
secure any great hold upon the confidence of the people at large.
Gradually they lost popularity, and as the benevolence which
had originally established them became less active they gave place
to private enterprize and within forty years of their institution,
these products of benevolent Co-operation had ceased to exist.
In 1844, a few energetic and far-seeing men at Rochdale,
after one or two experiments which had only a partial success,
established the first really Co-operative Store in England, or, so
far as we know, in the world. The new scheme was exactly the
opposite of that of the good Bishop of Durham in every respect.
It had no powerful benevolent patronage to rely upon, no list of
subscribers only interested in the scheme from motives of charity.
The founders were men who had not much to embark in the


enterprize, and who intended themselves to benefit by its operation.
They discarded the old idea of selling more cheaply than their
neighbours, contenting themselves with selling only good articles
at the lowest market price. The profits were, however, to be the
property of the customers, and were added to the capital as new
shares at the close of each year. Thus the workman who bought
his goods at the new store got as good value for his money as he
could get elsewhere, and in addition he got all the profits of the
business done with him in the year, returned to him in paid up
shares in the Society. Thus the new stores became People’s
Banks, in which were deposited for the workers the profit upon
their expenditure which would otherwise have gone to capitalists.
The capital thus gradually accumulated in the business received
interest at five per cent., and all other profits went to the
customers in proportion to the value of their custom, thus
converting them year by year from ordinary customers into
shareholders and capitalists.
Unlike the former system, this new scheme commended itself
to the common sense of English artizans and labourers. They
had looked with more or less suspicion on the system which rested
upon charity; they trusted that which merely assured them of
what their own expenditure had earned.
The success of the new Co-operative Store system has been as
great as it has been well deserved. In Great Britain there are
now upwards of fifteen hundred societies like that of Rochdale ;
the members of these societies number nearly 1,100,000; their
share capital is upwards of eleven millions sterling, and their
sales last year exceeded forty millions, and yielded a profit of
nearly four millions sterling. Nor has the principle been con-
fined to Great Britain ; Germany, France, Italy, and America, as
well as nearly every Colony of Great Britain has to a greater or
less extent adopted the system, and reaped some at least of its
advantages. Great, however, as its success has been, it is hardly
the success which was intended by those who, with a wise fore-
sight, laid the foundation of the system, In the original rules of
the Rochdale Society, productive and not merely distributive
Co-operation took the leading position. The founders saw that
whatever success attended the new venture it touched the evil
under which labour suffered on one side only, and that side the
one which was least important or effective. By means of Co-
operative Stores a workman might indeed, save a little of his
capital from flowing into the pockets of the possessors of wealth.
If he had a family, all his earnings probably went to support
them, and the new Co-operative Stores could do no more than
return him a small part of what would otherwise have gone to the
capitalist. Thus all that was accomplished was but a trifle
compared with what was left undone. The worker saved,


perhaps, a twentieth part of his wages which, but for the Co-
operative Store would have been lost to him and gone to swell
the wealth of the already wealthy ; but he still got only wages
and no part of the profits which his employers reaped from his
labour. It had been the original Rochdale scheme to provide for
this, but the very success of the distributive part of the business
seems to have prevented the other from being undertaken. 1 his
has, indeed, been the experience of the Co-operative movement in
England. The idea that it is better and safer to begin the work
of Co-operation by merely distributing on fair principles the
goods manufactured by others, sprang largely from the early suc-
cess of the Rochdale Stores, and has led to a paralysis of the
wider and far more important functions of the Co-operati\ e
system. It is only within the last few years that anything like
systematic efforts have been made in Great Britain to establish
productive Co-operation. There are even now only forty of such
associations, the great majority of which have been in operation
only a few years. Their operations extend over a great variety
of productions. The manufacture of pottery, cutlery, furniture,
boots and shoes, cottons, silks, clothing and watches, being
amongst them. There are also four farming societies, a fishing
society, and two engaged in painting and decorative work, while
others undertake printing and book-binding. At the Annual
Exhibition held in London, in August, 1890, the work produced
in all these branches of industry was admitted to be quite equal
to the best of the kind produced by capitalist manufacturers, and in
every case the progress of the business and the success of the
undertaking appeared to be assured.
It is not in England, however, that the best examples of
Co-operative production are to be found. While England was
content to work out her system of distributive stores, and thus
to secure the scraps and crumbs that could be saved for laboui
from inadequate wages, other Countries were experimenting in
different ways in the application of Co-operation to productive
work of many kinds. The difficulty experienced in England had
been that of procuring the capital needed to give these industries
a fair start. The same difficulty presented itself in Germany,
and was met by a scheme which has proved successful in that
Country. This was the scheme of Peoples’ Banks, in which the
minute savings of the workers were accumulated, and employed
in the encouiagement of Co-operative undertakings. These
Banks, which received deposits of a penny, have increased year
by year in number and popularity, until, after barely forty years
of existence, there are now more than two thousand two hundred
of these Banks scattered over the Country. In these Banks
more than a million persons, nearly all of the labouring class,
have accumulated savings, amounting at this time to upwards of


thirty-five millions of pounds. The enormous sum of nearly, if
not quite, a hundred millions of pounds has been advanced by
these Banks to Co-operative Associations, generally for productive
purposes, and there is to-day probably no department of industry
which is followed in Germany that is not represented by some
of these Co-operative Associations, established and supported by
the Peoples’ own capital, collected in the Peoples’ Co-operative
Banks. The impetus which this capital used in this way has
given to the cause of Co-operative labour cannot be fully
estimated, but it can hardly be over-rated. Trades Onions have
not been powerful agencies in Germany, and Strikes have been,
in consequence, comparatively rare in that Country. Yet the
results which have been obtained in England as the consequence of
Trades Union Co-operation, in the increase of wages and the
improvement of the position of the workers, have been more
than realized in Germany in the last twenty years without it.
In England, as the result of many struggles and much suffering,
the position of the average skilled labourer has improved by
about fifteen per cent., while in Germany it has improved fully
one-fifth, or twenty per cent., in the same time, partly in
consequence, it may be, of emigration, but partly, beyond all
doubt, owing to the establishment of Co-operative labour. Nor
could it be otherwise. The single fact of the existence of a
million persons interested as shareholders in Co-operative Banks,
expresses a force available for social reform equally compact and
far more powerful than a million members of Trades Unions,
whose only weapon is the Strike.
It must be admitted that the direction taken by Co-operative
labour in Germany has been largely influenced by the Peoples
Banks scheme of Schultze-Delitsch. In ho other Country has
Co-operative production advanced at anything approaching the
rate or to anything like the extent which it has exhibited in
Germany. In England such societies are even now very few,
and their operations are still so unimportant, compared with
trade generally, that they are almost lost sight of, unless by the
few who are interested in making inquiries about them. In
France they are even less numerous and less developed than in
England, and while Profit-sharing forms an important and
increasing feature in the manufacturing energy of France, such a
thing as a Co-operative manufactory, in the full sense of the
term, exists in but a struggling fashion, and only in a few
isolated instances.
In America Co-operation in anything but Trades Union
organization was unknown until the Labour War in 1886.
Since then attempts have been made to introduce the principle
both in the form of Profit-Sharing and of original Co-operative
Enterprize. Last year there were forty-four large establishments


in which the Profit-Sharing System had been introduced, and
so far as a short experience could be relied upon in every
case with success. A good many attempts were also being made
towards original Co-operative production, but the results were
by no means so satisfactory. The difficulty in all these ca-ses
was in some form or other the want of means. The establish-
ment of productive enterprizes is confronted by two difficulties
too often fatal to such attempts in their earliest stages. They
are either obliged to start with few resources in money and are
thus embarrassed in their operations from the first, or they rely
upon the capital of the propertied class for assistance which is
only given upon terms such as paralyse their efforts. For these
evils no remedy appears to be at once so available and so effective
as that of the Peoples’ Banks for the accumulation of the minute
savings of the wage earners. The capital thus provided can be
used entirely in the interest of labour. The one object to be
secured is that it shall be advanced safely and used effectively to
this end, and this, the experience of the German Banks has
shown, can be done with the best effects and with very few failures.
The advantages of original Co-operative Fnterprize when it
can be undertaken without risk of failure from want of support
are great. The system is the peoples’ system, and deals with
Co-operation entirely from the side of labour, in contest to
Profit-Sharing, which is Co-operation largely in the interests of
the capitalist. The Profit Sharer may indeed, in course of time,
obtain a position closely akin to the original Co-operator, but it
will only be after the lapse of many years, during which he will
not only have sacrificed a good deal to capital which might other-
wise have been secured to labour, but he will also have been
deprived of much of that training in self reliance and the
various habits of management and of government which are,
almost as much as realised wealth, at present the possession of
the capitalist class.
In these colonies more than almost anywhere else the
principles of Co-operation have a favourable field for the widest
application. Here also there is room for their application in
every form already tried, and in others as yet unthought of.
Here,under proper safeguards and closesupervision, the partnership
between capitalist and workmen known as Profit-Sharing may
safely be entered upon. Here also original Co-operative Fntei-
prize in many directions lies open before the path of labour.
The workers are here, as elsewhere, the mass of the people \
here their rights are in all respects equal to those of any other
class, and if they will but use their power wisely, and with
moderation, they cannot fail ere long to bo the actual rulers of
the country. The means at the command of labour in Australia
enormously exceeds that available elsewhere, and only a little


self-denial and careful organization are required to supply capital
of labour’s own providing to advance in these ways the true cause
of labour.
There will no doubt be found many a wiseacre to pooh-
pooh the notion of any extensive application of the principle of
Co-operation to meet the demands of labour. Capitalists will
decry the proposal as wild and impracticable, and even men who
have trusted so long to of Trades Unions and the
compelling force of Strikes*will be disposed to look at it with
suspicion. Such opposition need not deter anyone from joining
in the experiment. Money invested in a Penny Bank only to be
used in support of Co-operative Enterprize will, as experience
has shown elsewhere, be money well invested. 0
Farming operations may be undertaken here as well at leist as in
England. Mining ventures may be set on foot here on better
terms than in Germany where they have been already successful.
Stores may be established, contracts undertaken, new manu-
factures set on foot, and even if need be shipping enterprize
undertaken and developed, with the proceeds of that self-denial
and economy which have too often been expended in the doubtful
warfare of Strikes. The held of Australia is the fairest field
in the world for the experiment of Co-operative labour, not as
the enemy, but, if capital will only see it, as the equal partner of
realized wealth. In any case the field is one in which success
may be secured as the reward of one half the energy, loyalty
and endurance, which have fought the battle of Trades Unionism.
The experience of other countries is at our disposal, and what the
workers of Germany, France, or America, have done and are
still doing to raise labour to a position of true independence
without injustice and without violence, this, and much more
than this, can be done by Australian workers, who are second to
none, upon Australian soil which is their own to deal with, and is
superior to all other in its vast resources of wealth waiting but
the call of labour.
Chapter VII.
CO-OPERATIVE LEGISLATION.
fN a former chapter reference was made to a proposed legisla-
tive cure for the acknowledged evils of our present social
arrangements. It was there pointed out that the idea of such a
cure was, if not wholly fallacious, at least exaggerated; that the
evils were too deeply seated to be quickly remedied by a plan so
summary as that proposed, and too pressing and urgent to await
such improvements as it could reasonably be expected to bring.
On the other hand, it cannot be doubted that legislation may


either assist or retard the all-important work of Social Reform.
The evils, which have not originally sprang from bad laws, have
no doubt been increased and stereotyped by their operation.
The course of legislation is at all times mainly influenced by the
real or supposed needs of society at the time they are enacted,
and the existence of a vicious social system is necessarily
followed by the enactment of vicious laws, and the absence of
salutary statutes. That such is our condition at present can
hardly be questioned. Nearly all the laws relating to land are
based upon the idea that the monopoly of wealth, and of land,
the original source of wealth, in the hands of the few to the
exclusion of the many, is both a just and necessary idea. They
provide for monopoly at present, and carefully hedge about that
monopoly for the future. The man who possesses money is
encouraged to use it in the purchase of the freehold (or, in other
words, the absolute, and all but irresponsible monopoly) of the
soil, and the provisions of the law enable him to accumulate this
monopoly to an ever increasing extent in the hands of his
descendants.
In the same way all kinds of wealth have been protected by
the law, and hedged round with provisions that have had the
effect of perpetuating its possession in the same hands. The
interests of the State have, for the most part, been regarded as
those of the owners of property j and the laws, solely enacted by
that class, have protected them, and them alone, in the accumula-
tion of further riches, and the enjoyment of what they already
possessed. In these Colonies, for instance, vast sums of money
have been borrowed and expended on what are termed Public Works.
The people at large have paid, and are now paying, the interest
upon these loans j but for the most part the advantage rests with
a single class, and that not by any means the largest class of the
public. The Railway policy of New South Wales has involved
an expenditure of nearly thirty millions of money—something
like twenty-seven pounds for every man, woman, and child in
the Colony. The advantage of this expenditure has gone mainly
to the owners of land and the possessors of realized wealth, but
the debt is the debt of the people,- and the people as a whole—
not the directly benefitted classes —pay it from day to day.
If a new departure is to be made and a new Bra of Social
Reform inaugurated, it must be accompanied by a reconsideration
of much of the legislation which has sprung from the old ideas
about to be superseded. The land laws, the laws of inheritance,
those which give effect to the theory that holders of property
have a right to do as they choose with that property almost
entirely without reference to the public advantage, must be
amended. But this is not all. The legislation of the country
must recognize the changed social theory by providing new


encouragements and new safeguards for those who as yet are not
the possessors of any considerable amount of wealth. They
must ensure to the people at large the use of the land on terms
that can be taken advantage of by the masses if they desire it.
They must provide that the public works, on which the people’s
money has been spent, shall benefit the people as a whole and no
longer any particular class. They must boldly place the burdens
of taxation upon wealth, and no longer upon human beings as
such ; and they must concern themselves chiefly with the wants
and needs of those classes of the community that have hitherto
engaged the smallest part of their attention. Their object must
be to assist poverty in obtaining a reasonable share of wealth,
and no longer to aid wealth in becoming more wealthy. For
such purposes as these many kinds of legislation will be found
necessary. There will be new laws required and amendments of
old laws needed, dealing with social relations as they now exist.
So long as the class of wage-earners remains a large one provision
must be made as far as possible to remove causes of quarrel
between employers and employed, and to put an end to differences
when they arise. For such purposes Courts of Conciliation may
be of service, although they will at best prove only a palliative
and not a remedy for most of the evils they propose to deal with.
Legislation dealing with the hours of labour, although difficult
of application to some kinds of labour, will, if carefully applied
with a full recognition of the equal rights of labour, prove of
service to the employed, and in a short time present no real
difficulties to the employers. The laws dealing with special
industries, such as mining, and the employment of seamen, should
be amended in the same direction to an extent not yet attempted.
The employment of women and children in factories and shops
should be regulated with an enlightened recognition of the
importance of preventing undue competition and of protecting from
injury classes of workers the least able to protect themselves.
These, and other matters of pressing importance should, and
indeed must be dealt with, in a manner that may reduce to the
lowest point the evils surrounding the system of wage-earning
so long as that system continues to be applicable to a large
proportion of our people. By these means we shall not indeed
make the mere wages system a just one to the workers, nor shall
we render its permanence a thing to be desired, but we may
hope to remove some of its worst features, and to render
employers more willing to introduce and establish systems at
once more just to labour and more permanently beneficial to
capital.
But while such amendments of the law may be of much
service to the cause of labour in its present condition, and are
therefore worthy of close attention, and even of considerable


sacrifice for their attainment, they are by no means the whole or
even the best that legislation can do to remove obstacles from
the path of Social Reform. J hat Reform if it is to be either
etiective or permanent, must aim at doing away with to
which alone the legal changes already mentioned really applies.
It must look forward, not merely to improved relations between
employers and employed, but to the substitution of something
else for those relations. It must aim at producing a social
condition in which the mere earner of wages dictated by a master
no longer exists, but in which all workers are recognized as the
possessors of capital, which, like other capital, is contributed to
partnership undertakings. No laws could indeed produce such
a revolution suddenly, any more than it could be brought about
by violence and force j but as the existing law can do much to
retard it, so laws of a different character could be framed that
would do much to assist the change.
The whole idea of Co-operative industry is at present a
novelty, and its special needs are absolutely without recognition
on the statute books, not only of this but of every civilized
country. We have, indeed, statutes providing for joint stock
companies of various kinds. We have also laws for the
establishment and regulation of Friendly Societies and in a
sense both these classes of institutions are Co-operative. Neither
of them, however, contemplates anything at all resembling what
we mean by Co-operative enterprize, and the laws enacted for
their regulation will, in practice, be found clumsy and
unworkable if applied to it. Co-operative enterprize, it must be
remembered, if it is to meet the wants of society to-day if it is
to serve as a far-reaching regenerator of that society, and a
remedy for the acknowledged evils that beset it, must embrace a
great variety of objects, and provide for small as well as for
large undertakings To confine its operations to large and costly
enterprizes would be, to a great extent, to shut out labour from
its advantages. To insist upon its being hampered by all the
formalities with which our old ideas have surrounded the
establishment and operations of public companies and Friendly
Societies, would very often be to stifle it in its earliest stages of
development. Yet as the law now stands there is no provision
for all these things. If a few men proposed to enter upon a
Co-operative Contract to-day, which might last but for a few
months, there would be no legal method by which they could do
so, except the extravagant and inapplicable one of forming a
Company, or of entrusting their affairs, without practical control,
to one or two of their number, who would represent the rest, and
might easily deprive the others of their share in the benefits to be
derived from the enterprize. In a word, our laws have been
framed to protect the 00-operation of capital, but not the


Co-operation of labour. For the object aimed at they are fairly
successful, for the other and far greater object proposed they will
on trial be found to be wholly unsuited. As applied to the
Co-operation of capital, there is, perhaps, nothing unreasonable
in the expensive provisions which begin with the foundation and
registration of a Joint Stock Company and end in the far more
costly appeal to the Court of Equity for its winding up. Even
for this purpose, it is true, simpler and less costly and cumbrous
machinery could be devised that would equally attain the ends
of efficiency and safety. But for such purposes as the association
of labour for single enterprizes, and it may be for short period;?,
nothing could well be imagined less suitable or satisfactory.
For the Co-operation, therefore, of men, and not merely of
money, a new legal system is required. The old and clumsy
doctrines of law respecting Incorporation, the right methods of
working, and the liabilities of Corporate bodies, must be revised
and made simple and inexpensive to meet the case of those who
have no capital, easily convertible into costs of Court, and fees to
lawyers.
In some respects it may even be true that Co-operation will
for a time, at least, require more ample legal protection in the
case of labour than it has hitherto required in that of capital.
The interests involved are not only as great, or even greater, but
the persons to be protected are certainly as yet less able to
protect themselves against fraud and injustice. Special legislation
for the establishment and oversight of Co-operative Banks may
save the community from many and serious losses. New laws to
provide for schemes of profit-sharing in which, as legislation now
stands, the workers might easily become the victims of designing
employers, may go far to render even this imperfect mode of
Co-operation at once safe and profitable to the labourer. In a
word, the time has arrived when our legislators should look not
merely to the amelioration of present evils, but to the means of
building up a new and better fabric of society. As has already
been pointed out, this cannot be done suddenly, and in some of
its details it must not even be attempted too hastily. The social
evils of to-day are indeed sufficiently great to demand immediate
action in many of the directions here suggested, but we must
avoid the error of supposing that a sudden and complete overthrow
of existing social arrangements is either possible or desirable.
The march of progress to-day is indeed a rapid one, but, if it is
to be made with safety, we must never get wholly separated from
our reserves. Men may look forward to a wholly new condition
of society. They may prepare the way for its realization. They
may devote their lives and energies to bring it about. But if they
are to succeed they must never lose sight of the fact that progress
to be made safely must be made step by step. Good laws may


greatly assist this progress, but the best conceivable statutes
cannot take the place of steady and intelligent effort on the part
of the representatives of labour.
Capital and labour are tha two great factors of society and
from their long divorce have sprung most of the evils from which
society suffers to-day. Yet their reunion cannot be successfully
accomplished either by force or in haste. The fruits of the
labour of the past are neccessary for the prosperity of the present,
as well as for the higher and more just conditions of the future.
The object of the writer of these pages has been rather to
contribute something towards the general acknowledgement of
this truth than to command the applause of those, who, smarting
under the sense of wrong, may be ready to hail the most extreme
proposals for its redress. By taking a just view of the present
position of society without exaggerating the injustice of the rich
while fully sympathizing with the wrongs of the poor, we may
arrive at a sober and therefore a practical estimate of the changes
that are needed to regenerate society. By considering the past
services and the present power for good of Trades Unions we
can hardly fail to see the best uses to which these organizations
can be put in the future. By doing our best to form a clear
idea of the legitimate and attainable objects of labour we may
avoid the danger of wasting our present energies upon dreams
rather than devoting them to schemes of practical and beneficent
reform. And by adapting our legislation at once to the correction
of such of the evils of our social system of to-day as may be
capable of correction, and not less to providing encouragements
and safeguards for the new method of the future, we shall
advance by safe, yet by no means tardy footsteps, towards that
goal of social justice for all which cannot be safely reached by
leaps and bounds, and will never be attained at all by violence
and anarchy.
Chapter VIII.
THE POLICY OF CAPITAL.
fITHERTO in these chapters we have been engaged in the
consideration of the position, claims, and resources of labour
in view of the existing agitation which challenges the position
and rights of Capital. There is, however, another side to the
question, and it may reasonably be asked, what is the position,
what are the claims, and what the resources of realized wealth in
the meantime ? To answer these questions exhaustively, would
require a space hardly less considerable than that already occupied
in discussing the outlook of labour. Yet these questions are so
closely connected with each other that they cannot be left wholly


unmentioned without rendering very imperfect any view of the
future which is either probable or desirable.
The long divorce which human selfishness has decreed
between labour and capital, is manifestly the great obstacle to
Social Reform. It is not only that realized wealth has been
placed in a position of supremacy over wealth in course of creation,
and the intelligent agents by whose efforts it is being produced.
This is in itself a great evil; but besides this and beyond it is
the yet greater evil, that men have lost the power of compre-
hending the very grounds of the suggestion that it is an evil.
The habits of centuries are hard to shake off, and habits founded
in selfishness and promoting selfishness are the most difficult of
all to get rid of. The monopoly of power, influence, and material
well-being, which has followed upon the possession of realized
wealth, has been of such long standing, and so undisputed that it
has grown into an article of faith. The capitalist not only knows
that he possesses these advantages—not only feels that he is
powerful, while others are weak and dependent—rich, while
others are in want, and influential, while others are disregarded—
but he never doubts that these things are his by a divine right
more inalienable than that of kings. Law has been warped from
its original position as the handmaid of justice to enforce the idea;
religion has been called in to lend its sanction to the usurpation ;
custom has grown venerable, in the assertion of the mighty
wrong.
To awake a class of persons brought up in such a faith, and
accustomed all their lives to regard the so called rights of
property as something sacred, it must necessarily be hard to
accept a new belief regarding social economy. To most of these
persons it will perhaps seem better to fight for things as they are
and have been than to accept and provide for things as they are
to be. They will plume themselves upon the apparant failure of
the latest Strikes; they will hug to themselves the belief that
capital will and must prevail, and that there in no real
danger of a social and economic revolution. Of such persons
there will, no doubt, be many, and with them there is little to be
gained by debating the question. The logic of facts, it is true,
will probably in the end convince even them of their mistake,
but no other logic will affect them. They will cling to their own
views of the sacred rights of realized wealth ; they will resolutely
shut their eyes to the signs of the times; and they will contest
foot by foot the advancing, and, as they will in the end discover
irrestible, tide of human progress. It is to be hoped that even
amongst capitalists this extreme class will prove to be a limited
one. Were it otherwise the change from a worse to a better
state of things might, indeed, be delayed, but even then it could
not be prevented. Opposition might lead to violence, and violence


would assuredly result in loss and misery. The cause of Reform
might be arrested, and even for a time discredited, but the reform
would still take place —not so advantageously to the world at
large ; far more injuriously to the owners of capital,—but come
it would nevertheless.
To those possessors of wealth who are prepared to see that
in this, as in all other respects, or, perhaps, in this more than all
others, the world is “ spinning down the ringing grooves of
change ” at a pace which cannot be arrested, the question can
hardly fail to present itself, “ What *is the true policy of
Capital I’’ There are but three alternatives before the possessors
of realized wealth. They may, if they choose, elect to fight the
matter out. They may throw themselves into the breach, and
stake their position, wealth, and influence upon the issue of the
conflict. By combination and the power of wealth they may do
much. By these means many Strikes may be fought and baffled.
In this way the Co-partnership of labour with capital may be
refused, and the progress of Co-operative enterprise seriously
retarded for want of the capital necessary for its successful
inauguration. On the other hand, they may do nothing. They
may trust to the future, and allow matters to drift. They may
refuse to assist in the emancipation of labour. They may also
decline to enrol themselves amongst the opponents of that
emancipation. It may be hard to say which of these courses will
in the end prove most suicidal to the cause of capital. The
bolder course will probably for a time appear to have some
success, while the more timid and vacillating will from the first
be self-condemned. On the other hand, the policy of drift is less
likely to arouse bitter feeling, or to lead to violence, should that
ever unfortunately arise.
Better than either course, however, would be that of seeking
to find a means of bridging over the chasm which has so long
separated capital from labour, to the incalculable injury of both.
This may be done by at once and frankly following the example
of those who have themselves inaugurated a system of Profit
Sharing between themselves and those employed by them. By
this means, as experience has shown, and shows from day to day,
the capitalist will really lose nothing, while the workmen will
gain enough to render them disposed to become the bulwarks of
capital, instead of its most dangerous enemies. Greater efficiency,
more scrupulous economy, more ungrudging exertion—these are
the invariable results of such a change, and these guarantee the
employer under this system against paying a price which might
seem too heavy for the assured safety and stability of his
position.
The range, however, of Profit-Sharing Enterprize is not
sufficiently wide to meet all the necessities of the case. Only a


certain class of investments of capital present a field for the
application of the principle, and at the best they do not present
that field which will be most favoured in the end by the work-
men. Co-operative enterprize in the fullest sense of the term—
that development of labour which would render it at once
employer and employed, and would substitute free partnership
amongst equals for the relations, hitherto too often abused, of
master and servant, will manifestly be the most attractive as well
as the most beneficial under proper conditions to the workmen.
The question which naturally arises, therefore, is, can capital be
at once safely and profitably employed in aiding and fostering
Co-operative enterprizes ? Can the holders of realized wealth
employ it without great present loss, and with the prospect of
ultimate advantage by investing it in Co-operative enterprizes
started by labour and conducted by the workmen ? If it can be
so it should need little demonstration to prove that the true
policy of the capitalist who sees in any degree the evils of the
present system, and at all appreciates the dangers which on every
side threaten its future, is to invest his money largely in this
way. By doing so, indeed, he will at once abandon the traditions
and separate himself from the party of the supremacy of capital.
He will admit that the ideas of the past have been erroneous and
its practices something worse than faulty. He will assent to the
opinion that the reign of capital is at an end, and that henceforth
it must take its place as the handmaid and asistant, and no longer
as the master, and too often the oppressor of labour. In return
for these concessions he may become the partner of labour. He
may receive his fair share of the profits of Co-operative enterprize.
He will no longer occupy the unenviable position of the opponent
of reforms regarded as necessary by a very large and increasing
majority of the people; and he will find himself and his property
recognised and treated with respect when the time arrives, as it
shortly mustly arrive, when the ranks of labonr will exercise an
unquestioned preponderance in the legislation of every free
people.
It may, of course, be doubted how far this suggested alliance
can be carried out with safety to the cause of capital. On what
principle, it may be asked, can the capitalist secure himself
should he invest his money in Co-operative enterprize? The
question is one which cannot be answered in detail here. This
much, however, is certain. In other countries large sums have
been advanced in this way for such purposes, and the result has
been satisfactory. In Germany about a hundred millions sterling
have been advanced to Co-operative enterprize, and the losses
have been few and the gains many. To-day advances of capital
are made without fear to Joint Stock Companies, and also to
individuals engaged in enterprizes which are not Co-operative,


and therefore have not the guarantee of the united interests and
exertions of many to support them. Changes will no doubt be
required in the law before these operations can be readily and
safely performed, but these changes can be easily brought about
if the representatives of labour are but true to themselves, and
intelligent in their methods of working There is no reason
why individual capitalists should not adopt the methods which in
Germany have'proved successful in the case of the Peoples’ Banks.
If they obtain but a low rate of interest in the first instance, they
will find that it is largely increased by their share of profits. If
they are deprived of much, or even of all, their present control
over the various entei’prizes in which their money is invested,
they will still be able to satisfy themselves of the soundness of
the enterprizes which they support, and, under fair conditions, to
withdraw from it their capital if dissatisfied with its management.
There is nothing unreasonable in the proposal that the
realized wealth of the capitalist should thus be used in building
up the Co-operation of labour. It is, after all, only a question
of terms, and these could easily be arranged so as at once to
benefit labour and capital. If, for instance, the capitalist
brought his money to the assistance of productive Co-operation,
he would require to accept, in the first instance, a low standard
of interest as the fixed value of his money. If that standard
were fixed at the Government rate of three-and-a-half per cent.,
then three-and-a-half per cent, upon the capital advanced would
be as much a first charge upon earnings as the salaries paid to
those employed, and neither charge would come out of profits.
This sum would then become the standard of the interest of
the capitalist in the profits of the venture. As the worker
would receive from the profits a share in the exact proportion
which his salary or wages bore to the total amount of wage
capital put into the business in the year or half year, so the
capitalist would receive, as profit on his investment, in the exact
proportion which the standard interest on his contribution bore
to the entire wage capital put into it by the associated workers.
But it may be suggested that in this way, the share of the
capitalist is wholly dependent upon the success of the business,
and that in the event of failure he would have no real security,
even for the low rate of interest adopted as a standard. In a
word, it may be objected that the whole system would be based
upon success only, and that in the event of failure or loss, the
capitalist would be helpless. Justice must compel us to admit
that there is much in the objection at first sight. When a
capitalist, whether an individual or a monetary institution,
advances money for ordinary business operations the first con-
sideration is always the security offered. This is usually assessed
upon the amount invested by the borrower, and many ingenious


methods have been discovered of making such security available.
It is manifest that, in the first instance, Co-operative Associations
of labour would have little, if any, of such securities to offer. It
is this difficulty which has so far been the chief obstacle to the
great spread of the system in England, France, and America,
where no provision has been made to provide capital available for
this purpose, as was done by the institution of the People’s Bank
in Germany. It does not, however, appear to be impossible to
overcome this difficulty. A century ago the idea of insurance,
either of life or property, was little more than the dream of a few
mathematical enthusiasts; to-day it has been reduced to a
scientific certainty, as nearly complete and unimpeachable as any
other result of profound research and extended experience. We
have now institutions for assuring the continuance of life or of
some of its benefits to others. We have a hundred companies,
either proprietary or mutual, for the insurance of property against
fire or against losses at sea; and we have scores of offices in which
we insure the fidelity of clerks, We can to-day for a premium
insure the life of a favourite or valuable animal, the trustworthi-
ness of an agent, or the immunity from breakage of a glass
window—why not then with the same facility and equal certainty
insure the solvency of a particular undertaking or the capital
placed at the disposal of a particular association 1 The answer,
that it cannot possibly be done with safety to the insuring
Company, is an answer which was long ago worn threadbare by
reiteration in the cases of Fire, Life and Marine Insurance. Yet
all these doubts and disbeliefs have been falsified, by the
unquestionable success of the societies that ventured on the
experiment. Let the demand but arise for the new insurance of
stability, and the demand will be quickly supplied. Science will
rush to the aid of the new enterprise, experience will lend her
invaluable assistance; new tables will be formed, new data
collected, and within a year or two the new system of business
insurance will be fully prepared to enter upon a course of pro-
gressive success, and far better provided with reliable information
than that originally at the disposal of any of its predecessors in
the same line of business.
In this way, or in some such way as this, the chief obstacle
to the success of Co-operative labour allied with, and supported
by, capital may be removed. By its means the problem of how
safely to apply realized wealth to the creation of new wealth,
resting on a wider basis and extending its advantages to an
enormously larger proportion of humanity, may be solved. The
task may not be easy but as soon as the demand exists it will be
accomplished.
And if by any means this end can be achieved it is not too
much to say that it presents an outlook to capital as worthy of


welcome as anything it can do for labour- For to-day it is capital
rather than labour that is in peril. Labour has to-day little to
lose compared with capital in any social upheaval which a too
rigid determination to stand by old ideas and old methods may,
and if persisted in will, yet bring about. lo the capitalist,
therefore, more even than to the labourer, the question of how
to heal the breach between the two great economic forces of
society is a burning question. It is possible for the moment to
avoid it. It is practicable to resolutely ignore the facts of to-day,
and to put a blind confidence in the chapter of accidents for the
future. These courses indeed are possible, but from no point of
view can they be considered wise. Society has for half a century 7
been advancing rapidly on the path which leads to a social
revolution more profound than any which the world has yet seen.
Whether that revolution shall be peaceful and beneficent in its
incidents will indeed depend largely on the policy of capital, but
whatever that policy may be it will not prevent the revolution.
VY. M. Maclardy, Printer, 319 George Street, Sydney.


Bm>uo
f 11730
N c&iij




