

THE EFFECTS OF
THE ATOMIC BOMBS
AT HIROSHIMA
AND NAGASAKI
REPORT OF THE BRITISH
MISSION TO JAPAN


THE EFFECTS OF
THE ATOMIC BOMBS
AT HIROSHIMA
AND NAGASAKI
REPORT OF THE BRITISH
MISSION TO JAPAN
PUBLISHED
FOR THE HOME OFFICE AND THE AIR MINISTRY BY
HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
LONDON
1946




Foreword
UNTIL AUGUST, 1945, the attacks delivered
from the air by the allied and associated powers on enemy countries
had been of increasing intensity, but the effects from blast or fire were
such that the damage from a known weight of attack could be predicted
with some degree of accuracy from past experience. In the early days
of August the United States Air Force attacked Hiroshima and Nagasaki
with a new weapon. One atomic bomb was dropped over each city.
The destructive effects in each case were on a scale which far exceeded
that of previous air raids. New phenomena accompanied this form
of attack and the whole problem of counter measures and civil defence
generally required reconsideration.
IN THE COURSE OF THE WAR the Research
and Experiments Department of the Ministry of Home Security had
evolved a scientific method for the measurement of the effect of air
attack in the various forms and the Home Office, as the successors of
the Ministry of Home Security, as well as the Service Departments,
regarded it as desirable to invite the United States Authorities to agree
that a British team of experts trained in that method should co-operate
with the United States Strategic Bombing Survey to conduct an investi-
gation into the effects of the bombing of the two Japanese cities.
THE UNITED STATES AUTHORITIES
provided every possible facility for the investigation, and the detailed
arrangements were made by the United States Strategic Bombing Survey.
In addition to factual examinations at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the
United States Authorities placed at the disposal of the British experts
the records and observations which their more prolonged and detailed
study had produced. In particular the part of this report which deals
with the effects of atomic bombs on the human structure is based on
material supplied by the Medical Section of the Joint Commission for the
Investigation of the Effects of the Atomic Bomb.
BY AGREEMENT with the United States
Authorities this report by the British experts is now published in this
country simultaneously with the publication in America of the corre-
sponding report of the United States Strategic Bombing Survey.
HIS MAJESTY’S GOVERNMENT consider
that a full understanding of the consequences of the new form of
attack may assist the United Nations Organisation in its task of securing
the control of atomic energy for the common good and in abolishing
the use of weapons of mass destruction.
(75854) A«


The Members of the British Mission to Japan,
who were under the. direction of the Chiefs
of Staff, were:—
HOME OFFICE
Professor W. N. Thomas, M.A., D.Phil., M.lnst.C.E., F.R.1.8.A.
Dr. J. Bronowski, M.A., Ph.D.
D. C. Burn, M.A., M.lnst.C.E., A.M.T.Mech.E.
J. B. Hawker, A.R.1.8.A.
H. Elder, L.R.1.8.A.
P. A. Badland, B.Sc., A.M.Inst.C.E., A.M.l.Struct.E.
R. W. Sevan, B.Sc.
F. H. Pavry, B.Sc., A.M.Inst.C.E.
F. Walley, B.Sc., A.M.Inst.C.E.
O. C. Young, B.Sc., A.M.Inst.C.E.
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Dr. S. Parthasarathy, D.Sc., F.lnst.P., F.R.I.C.
ADMIRALTY (DNOr)
Lieut.-Commander A. D. Evans, B.A. (R.N.V.R.)
WAR OFFICE (SA/AC)
Colonel O. M. Solandt, M.D., M.R.C.P. (Canadian Army)
AIR MINISTRY (AIR STAFF)
Group Captain A. E. Dark, C.B.E.
Squadron Leader R. G. Whitehead, D.F.C., B.A.
MINISTRY OF AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION
Group Captain F. G. S. Mitchell, 0.8. E.


Contents
PARAGRAPHS
INTRODUCTION 1-2
Chapter 1. the two cities before attack 3-8
Hiroshima 4-6
Nagasaki .. .. .. 7-8
Chapter 11. the two cities after attack 9-16
Hiroshima 9-11
Nagasaki .. .. .. 12-15
Effect on City Life 16
Chapter 111. the action of the atomic bomb .. .. 17-20
Chapter IV. blast effects 21-4?
Scale and Kind of Effect 21-23
Damage to Commercial and Industrial Buildings
and Machines .. .. .. .. 24-36
Damage to Houses and Shelters 37-42
Damage to Public Senates .. .. .. 43-47
Chapter V. heat effects 48-68
Flashburn 48-61
The Problem of Fire 62-68
Chapter VI. radio-active effects 69-78
Chapter VII. casualties 79-88
conclusions .. .. 89-94
important effects (in diagrammatic form) .. At end


Introduction
1. On August 6th, 1945, shortly after 8 a.m., an American Super-Fortress
flying at 30,000 feet dropped a single atomic bomb over the Japanese mercantile
city of Hiroshima. The bomb exploded over the city centre. Three days later,
on August 9th, just after 11 a.m., a Super-Fortress flying at the same height,
which had found its primary target cloud-obscured, dropped a second atomic
bomb over the industrial city of Nagasaki. This bomb exploded over the
city’s factory area. In Hiroshima more than four square miles of city were
destroyed and 80,000 people were killed. In the smaller city of Nagasaki about
one and a half square miles were destroyed and nearly 40,000 people were
killed. The causes of destruction and of death differed in many points from
those which had acted in the conventional raids of the past. It was clear that
bombing had changed its character and its scale beyond recognition.
2. The British Mission which spent the month of November, 1945, in
Hiroshima and Nagasaki had been concerned in the past with the appreciation
of air raid damage in Great Britain, and subsequently on the Continent of
Europe. While some of its members had for other reasons made a wartime study
of Japanese conditions, it was not as a whole expert in Japanese affairs. Nor
was it instructed to obtain a detailed picture of those effects of the bomb which
were peculiar to Japan. The report which follows tells what was seen and
what could be learnt three months after the bombing in Hiroshima and in
Nagasaki. But its intention is, as it was the object of the Mission, to point
to general conclusions on the effects to be expected from similar atomic bombs,
should they fall outside Japan, and in particular in Great Britain. The reader
should picture the destruction here set down as it would strike a city which
he knows well, in its people, its houses, its public buildings, its factories and its
public services.


Chapter I
THE TWO CITIES BEFORE ATTACK
3. The cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki differed from western cities and
from one another in plan, in development, and in industrial importance. These
differences influenced the resulting damage and that to be expected elsewhere.
Hiroshima
4. Hiroshima is built on the islands and shores of the delta where the river
Otagawa falls into the Inland Sea. Although hills rise to 700 feet and 800 feet
to the immediate north-west and north-east, the city stretches over flat ground
in all directions for roughly two miles from the centre. The city centre, once
the Old Town, was dominated by a number of reinforced concrete buildings
owned by banks, insurance companies, department stores, newspapers, and
similar mercantile enterprises. Beyond the Old Town lay an industrial zone
developed during the early part of this century, and consisting of many small
wooden workshops set among dense Japanese houses. A few larger plants
devoted to engineering and silk manufacture lay on the southern and western
outskirts of the city. The city was a prosperous trading community having
some contacts with the outside world, and its centre was spaciously planned,
with fine streets and temples.
5. Like other Japanese cities, Hiroshima was growing rapidly before the
war ; its census population rose from 270,000 in 1930 to 345,000 in 1940.
It remained at this figure for the greater part of the war, but began to fall in
1944, and at the time of the attack it was below 245,000. This fall was the
result of evacuation, in the main compulsory and accompanied by the systematic
destruction of houses to form fire breaks. This programme, which had been
given impetus by the great incendiary raids on Tokyo and other Japanese
cities in the second week of March, 1945, was only partly completed when
the atomic bomb fell.
6. The census figures quoted are probably what Japanese call the “ regis-
tered ” population, used for such purposes as rationing. This is usually
thought to be about 80 per cent, of the actual population which, with about
10,000 troops, and perhaps 5,000 workers brought in to cut fire breaks, may
therefore have been as high as 320,000 at the time of the attack. This is
approximately the pre-war population of Hull or the Borough of Islington.
But Hiroshima is naturally more straggling than the latter, and covers altogether
an area of over ten square miles.
Nagasaki
7. Nagasaki Ites on the more southerly Japanese island of Kyushu, at the
head of a long bay which forms its natural harbour. The western shore is
occupied by port facilities, shipbuilding and repair, and the eastern shore by
smaller shipyards, wharves and dwellings. The main commercial and residential
area of the city lies on a small plain near the head of the bay on its eastern
shore. From here the valley of the river Urakami runs north for three or
four miles, and a smaller valley branches north-east for less than two miles,
making a total area of about four square miles. Both valleys are narrow, and
are separated and flanked by abrupt hills rising in places t 6 1,000 feet.
(75854) A**


The smaller valley is crowded with dwellings without plan, huddled around
narrow roads, market streets and temple squares. The Urakami valley contained
large steel, engineering, and armament works, together with smaller factories
and a host of home workshops with an attendant jostle of workers’ dwellings.
These industries, controlled by the firm of Mitsubishi, plainly dominated
Nagasaki, where everything which survives bears the stamp of a vast industrial
slum. In the spring of 1945 some dispersal was begun to workshops set up
for the purpose in tunnels and schools. The latter, constructed in reinforced
concrete, were among the few imposing buildings in Nagasaki. The city did,
however, possess a complex of modem hospital and medical school buildings
of which any European city of its size might be proud.
8. Nagasaki had at one time been a naval base, and its importance had
declined with the development of the base at Sasebo. Its population had
risen only slowly between 1930 and 1940, when the census population was
253,000, but had gone on rising during the war, which gave new importance
to its shipbuilding and its production of torpedoes and other armaments. As
at Hiroshima, there was large-scale evacuation from March, 1945. Calculating
in the same manner as at Hiroshima, it is estimated that the population actually
in Nagasaki when the bomb fell was just over 260,000. This is roughly the
pre-war population of Portsmouth or of Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Chapter II
THE TWO CITIES AFTER ATTACK
Hiroshima
9. Eye-witnesses in Hiroshima were agreed that they saw a blinding white
flash in the sky, felt a rush of air and heard a loud rumble of noise, followed by
the sound of rending and falling buildings. All also spoke of the settling
darkness as they found themselves enveloped by a universal cloud of dust.
Shortly afterwards they became aware of fires in many parts of the city.
10. The city had been virtually undamaged by air attack before the atomic
bomb fell. The bomb exploded near its centre over a point approximately
300 yards from the T-shaped double bridge which is a conspicuous feature of
Hiroshima ; and thence spread its destruction with great uniformity. Directly
or indirectly, it initiated innumerable fires among the wooden houses and
workshops, which burned unchecked for days and gutted the Old Town and
the industrial zone enclosing it. The more modern industrial buildings on
the edge of the town, however, at miles and more from the centre, escaped
with only minor damage. There are contradictory accounts of whether the
fire service did or did not attempt to fight fires in the first twelve hours ; but
no civilian defence services in the world could have met a disaster on this scale,
and these services were in fact overwhelmed. On August 6th, the authorities
in Hiroshima were making preparations to meet what they believed to be
a threatened incendiary attack : they were not prepared for a holocaust;
11. As photographs 1 and 2 show, Hiroshima today has the appearance of
a burnt city. The traveller who comes to it from the Japanese cities which
have been razed by incendiary attack, Tokyo, Kobe, Osaka and others, sees
the same unending stretches where wooden buildings have burned to the very
ground, broken only by a few shacks newly built from salvaged iron sheeting,
by tall chimneys which mark the sites of bumt-out public baths, and by concrete
buildings, the shells of which alone have survived the fires.


NAGASAKI
12. A detailed description of the attack on Nagasaki was prepared by the
Prefect for the Japanese government on September Ist. His report begins
with an uncertain account of the state of alert ; an Alert which had been sounded
earlier had been “ relaxed ”, but probably there had been no final All Clear.
This would conform with the Japanese practice of “ relaxing ” but not cancelling
an Alert when only a few enemy planes were in the neighbourhood. The same
conditions probably obtained during the attack on Hiroshima. The report
goes on to describe the dropping of three parachutes which preceded the bomb,
the bright flash of the explosion in the sky, followed by a haze of white smoke
which darkened rapidly ; and the accompanying roaring sound, with some
feeling of pressure and wind and of heat.
13. The Nagasaki Prefect’s report describes the bomb as “ aimed at the
industrial plants in the northern part of the city ”. The centre of damage is
in fact in the industrial area between the two large Mitsubishi Ordnance Plants
in the Urakami Valley. Hence the harbour and the commercial area, nearly
two miles distant, escaped with only minor damage; and so did the housing
in the smaller valley, screened by the intervening ridge of hills.
14. For these geographical reasons the area of damage and with it the death
roll were naturally smaller than in Hiroshima. This caused the Japanese first
to report the bomb as a smaller version of the Hiroshima model.
15. The few previous attacks on Nagasaki had been aimed at the shipyards,
so that most of the damage from them is outside the area of atomic bomb
damage. As in Hiroshima, the initial blast damage done by the atomic bomb
was followed by extensive fires, which here spread somewhat more slowly. But
where the area burnt out in Hiroshima was compact, in Nagasaki it is broken
by long lines of factory sheds, leaning their steel skeletons eerily away from the
explosion (see photographs 4 and 6). Within the factories, rows of machines
stand in a sea of tiles, corrugated sheeting, and timber roof boards ; fuze-boxes,
switchboards, and gear cases blown open and torn from their moorings hang,
fantastically supported by the remnants of their fittings ; and the whole is
festooned by the tangled service systems of wire, steam and gas piping. Furnace
doors blown open show the cold mass of the last charge under the brickwork
of the fallen furnace roof. Over a wide area such blast-resistant objects as
telegraph poles and tram and electricity standards lean away from the bomb;
on the surrounding hills, trees have been blown down at large distances. Thus
Nagasaki presents the appearance of a city struck by a brief but tremendous
hurricane.
EFFECT ON CITY LIFE
Is. Both in Hiroshima and in Nagasaki, the scale of the disaster brought
city life and industry virtually to a standstill. Even the most destructive con-
ventional attacks, the incendiary raids on Hamburg in the summer of 1943 and
on Tokyo in the spring of 1945, had no comparable effect in paralysing communal
organization. Witnesses report a panic flight of population, in which officials
and civil defence personnel joined, abandoning even the rescue services. All
large-scale effort had to await the return of population, which was slow; there
were still only 140,000 people in each city at the end of November. Even the
clearance of debris and the cremation ofthe dead trapped in it do not seem to have
been begun for more than a month, and members of the Mission still stumbled
upon undiscovered skeletons. Allowance must no doubt be made for the moral


effect of the end of the war, which had removed the backbone of communal
incentive. And some tribute should be paid to isolated feats of restoration, such
as that of electricity to Nagasaki and later that of the trams in Hiroshima. Never-
theless, the larger impression which both cities make is of having sunk, in an
instant and without a struggle, to the most primitive existence. Among causes
which are likely to operate outside Japan were the death of key personnel, the
destruction of public services, and the destruction of housing. In Nagasaki alone
the Prefect reported 60,000 homeless, and 25,000 living in damaged houses. As
photograph 16 shows, the construction of some form of shelter is a major
preoccupation of nearly all those who have returned. It is plain that local
services are unequal to dealing with such disasters, either immediately or later,
and that planned and energetic action by central government is essential
Chapter III
THE ACTION OF THE ATOMIC BOMB
17. It was officially announced by President Truman at the time of the
Hiroshima attack that the explosive energy of the bomb was equivalent to that
of 20,000 tons of T.N.T. Estimates of the equivalent amount of T.N.T. were
made by the Mission, based on the damage observed and on extrapolation
from experience with much smaller charges. The blast damage was judged to
be somewhat less than would have been expected from 20,000 tons, particularly
at Hiroshima. This effect may have resulted from the present uncertainties
regarding the extent to which damage per ton of explosive falls off as the
weight exploded increases.
18. The source and the manifestation of energy in the atomic bomb differ
from those in conventional explosions. The energy stored in an explosive such
as T.N.T. is chemical, and when liberated is used in the rapid conversion of the
explosive to a gas. This gas, seeking to occupy a volume many times larger
than did the solid explosive, exercises intense pressure on the surrounding air,
which in turn passes it on to the next layer of air, and so on. The belt of high
pressure thus rapidly moving outward from the explosion is the blast wave,
and is the major cause of damage from high explosive. All explosions also
release heat, but its contribution to the damaging effect is usually negligible.
19. In the process of atomic fission energy is actually created by the destruction
of an infinitesimal fraction of the material which is undergoing fission. Some of
this energy is communicated to the products of fission, and to the bomb case,
but the greater portion is communicated to the surrounding air, which is thereby
raised to an extremely high temperature. As a result, the air expanding under
the influence of this temperature rise exerts enormous pressure. This pressure
moves outward as a blast wave in the conventional manner.
20. At the same time a further large part of the energy created in atomic
fission is radiated. This radiation is of various wave lengths including that
of ordinary light, and also heat radiation, that is, radiation of longer wave
length, and X-rays and possibly gamma rays, that is, radiation of shorter wave
length than that of light, i Heat radiated by the atomic bomb (which should
not be confused either with flame or with heated air) and penetrating short
wave radiations are intense enough to kill thousands of people. By contrast,
conventional explosions release no penetrating radiation, and the heat released
is dangerous only at small distances—for example, to gun crews exposed to the
flash at the mouth of a gun.


Chapter IV
BLAST EFFECTS
SCALE AND KIND OF EFFECT
21. As mentioned in the previous chapter it is difficult to estimate the
equivalent amount of T.N.T. from the damage caused in Hiroshima and
Nagasaki, because the criteria are very insensitive. It may suffice, however,
to point out that an explosion of 20,000 tons of T.N.T. would be expected to
cause at a distance of | mile from the centre of damage an instantaneous
pressure rise of about 10 lb. per square inch, falling back to atmospheric pressure
in about i second : and since, during part of this time, there would be a wind
of the order of 500 miles an hour, the pressure initially imposed on parts of a
building might be as high as 30 lb. per square inch. Such figures could be
multiplied and become meaningless : the reader who finds them so may prefer
a summary analogy. This is that the scale of destruction expected would be
that which would befall a model town built to the scale of Gulliver’s Lilliput,
1 inch to the foot, if there were exploded above it a bomb more than twice as
large as the largest British “ blockbuster ”, which with its case weighed about
six tons.
22. This model and what has been said will also help him to understand
the major differences between conventional blast effects and those seen in
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. These were three in number.
Mass Distortion.— lt is usual for a bomb to damage only part of a large
building, which may then collapse further under the action of gravity. The
blast wave from the atomic bomb, however, was so large that it engulfed
whole buildings, pushing them askew in the manner shown in photographs 5,
6,11 and 12. The effect, which occurred with all types of buildings, resembles
damage done by wind, and operates somewhat in the same way. Thus
the pressure which damaged the long wall in photograph 5, w'hich shows
the side remote from the explosion, was transmitted in part from the
front wall through the roof and floors, and in lesser part was the wind
suction which is normally felt on the leeward side of an obstacle.
Infrequency of Blast Suction. —After the blast pressure has fallen from
its peak back to zero, there always follows a period of suction (unrelated
to the wind suction just mentioned). Although this suction is weaker than
the original pressure, it lasjs several times as long, and therefore normally
does much damage to objed;s which had no time to fail under the usually
brief initial pressure. Pressures from the atomic bomb, however, lasted
long enough to give windows, doors, walls, and even chimneys and telegraph
poles time to fail. As a result, effects which could be ascribed to blast
suction were unusually scarce, although a few were observed in Hiroshima.
Downward Thrust. —Because the explosion was high in the air, much
of the damage was due to downward pressure. Most characteristic was
the “ dishing ” of the flat roof slabs of reinforced concrete buildings,
some of which assumed a saucer shape. "For the same reason, telegraph
and other poles remained upright immediately below the explosion, but
were overturned or tilted at greater distances from the centre of damage.
Trees below the explosion remained upright, but had their branches tom
downward.


23. Screening from blast by large features, and similar effects, were not
unusual ; for example, almost the whole of the smaller valley in Nagasaki
was screened by the intervening mountain ridge. The reflection of blast,
which adds considerably to its force, was unusually marked but important only
in special cases, among them some bridges. Finally there may be remarked
the absence ,of the carriage of any heavy debris over large distances. Small
debris such as tiles and battens appeared to have been carried considerable
distances, and was found on tall buildings. But larger pieces of debris were
always found close to their point of origin, and where massive slabs such as
bridge decking had been shifted, the movement, although on occasion critical,
was small.
DAMAGE TO COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS AND
MACHINES
24. Photographs in this report and elsewhere show great areas of destruction
in which, rising here and there like islands, there remain reinforced concrete
buildings showing few signs of .external damage. There were in fact many
reinforced concrete buildings in Hiroshima and a number in Nagasaki. They
varied from exceptionally strong office blocks (see photograph 7) designed
to be proof against earthquake, to lightly constructed industrial buildings (see
photograph 10). Between these extremes were some schools and office buildings
of more or less normal design such as is usual in Great Britain. In comparison
with other forms of construction these buildings resisted the blast well. Owing
to the height of the explosion, the behaviour of buildings near the centre of
damage was greatly influenced by that of their roofs.
25. For example, the building of normal construction shown in photograph 8
collapsed at 200 yards from the centre of damage because the flat roof was
forced in. The Nagasaki school shown in photograph 5, which suffered mass
distortion at 500 yards from the centre of damage, while it had special weak-
nesses, may also be regarded as of roughly normal design. At 700 yards from
the centre of damage in Nagasaki, another school of normal design suffered
some structural damage, but did not collapse and one wing continued in use.
A school and an office block, each at f mile from the centre of damage,
remained structurally sound, although some internal walls were damaged.
In summary, reinforced concrete buildings of normal construction were usually
safe from partial collapse beyond 600 yards from the centre of damage, and
from structural damage beyond £ mile.
26. Reinforced concrete buildings of very heavy construction in Hiroshima,
even when within 200 yards of the centre of damage, remained structurally
undamaged. Flat roof slabs 6 ins. or 7 ins. thick were often dished, but a roof
thickness of 10 ins. appeared to be sufficient to resist permanent deflection.
27. It is appropriate here to draw attention to the building the interior of
which is shown in photograph 9. This was less massive than the strongest
Hiroshima buildings, but its design incorporated features which made it
unusually resistant to side pressure. As a result it remained structurally
undamaged, although only 500 yards from the centre of damage.
28. These observations make it plain that reinforced concrete framed
buildings can resist a bomb of the same power detonated at these heights,
without employing fantastic thicknesses of concrete. The main requirements
are a frame designed to withstand heavy side forces from any direction, and


a flat reinforced concrete roof perhaps 50 per cent, thicker than would be
normal practice. The reinforcement of external concrete walls should also be
tied into the supporting frame. It is believed that similar requirements would
suffice for steel framed multi-storey buildings, of which Nagasaki contained
the only example. These requirements ignore fire and casualty risks, which
are dealt with later.
29. Light single-storey concrete buildings, such as are employed for factories
(see photograph 10) and warehouses, failed at about a mile from the centre of
damage in both cities.
30. Of the industrial buildings seen, those most characteristic of western
practice were the steel framed single-storey factory sheds. Useful examples
were confined to Nagasaki, where they were plentiful throughout the Urakami
valley both north and south of the centre of damage. They were usually of
the type found in large engineering works, with travelling cranes and a covering
of thin corrugated iron or asbestos cement sheeting.
31. The bulk of the damage to these buildings was by Mast. In Nagasaki
fire had contributed to the damage in only about 10 per cent, of cases of damage.
In Hiroshima the few small steel framed sheds found had been damaged further
by fire, but this had probably originated in the wooden houses by which they
were there surrounded.
32. The most striking feature of damage was the mass distortion, in the
direction away from the explosion, of the entire framework of these buildings.
This distortion, which is shown in photographs 6, 11 and 12, occurred at
distances up to more than | mile from the centre of damage. Its amount
naturally decreased with the distance from the explosion. Distortion appeared
to be less severe in sheds which had been covered with a material which had
itself shattered under the blast, such as asbestos cement, than in sheds which
had been covered with a pliable material such as corrugated iron, which had
transmitted the pressure. (Roof and wall coverings of both types were destroyed
to distances of 2 miles and more from the centre of damage.) Beyond the
range Of mass distortion, steel framed sheds suffered damage to the structural
framework at distances up to roughly 1J miles from the centre of damage.
Like other buildings, sheds suffered more severely when they had a long wall
facing the blast, or if they lacked stiffness or bracing.
33. Of the machines housed in these sheds, only 5 per cent, had suffered
serious damage from the atomic bomb. TMs low figure is to be ascribed to
the absence of fire, so that damage was caused only by the movement of parts
of the structure which crushed or overturned adjacent machinery. The
Japanese had, however, allowed the undamaged machines to weather in the
damaged buildings without protection, with the result that the majority had
become unserviceable.
34. Nearly two-thirds of all machines in the Urakami valley had been housed
in smaller workshops and sheds of timber. These shops were burnt down
almost without exception to a distance in excess of 1J miles from the centre of
damage. As a result 50 per cent, of the machines housed in these shops were
destroyed or irreparably damaged. Their appearance today is shown on
photograph 13.,


35. Little information could be obtained on machines housed in reinforced
concrete sheds with thin concrete roofs, a type of factory, construction more
common in Europe than in Japan. Such evidence as was found suggests that
approximately 75 per cent, of the machines in such sheds (the vulnerability, of
which has been remarked in paragraph 29) would have suffered damage from
the heavy debris formed by the collapsing roof.
36. Reference has been made to timber framed single-storey buildings,
which were common as workshops and warehouses both in Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. These buildings behaved badly, being excessively vulnerable both
to fire and to blast. For example, the absence of internal stiffening, and the
great weight of the roof trusses and tiles, made them subject to collapse from
mass distortion at distances of 2 miles and more from the centre of damage.
DAMAGE TO HOUSES AND SHELTERS
37. The bulk of the damage in both cities, naturally, was to Japanese houses.
These houses are constructed on a frame of 4 ins. or 6 ins. square timbers.
The roofs are not trussed in the orthodox manner and are a source of weakness,
particularly since their covering of pantiles bedded in mud on J in. boarding
is disproportionately heavy. The walls are of bamboo covered with 3 ins. of
mud, which is sometimes protected by \ in. boarding ; but as photograph 19
shows, much of the wall space is occupied by paper-covered screens. Complete
collapse of these buildings from blast extended to 1| miles from the centre of
damage in Hiroshima, and to an average of miles in Nagasaki. Fire
completed the destruction almost to the same distance, except in one congested
area of Nagasaki, where it exceeded it. Beyond the region of complete collapse
damage decreased rapidly, the further zone in which houses had been damaged
beyond repair being little more than J mile wide. Minor damage extended
to large distances, 3 miles or more from the centre of damage.
38. Naturally, the subject of major interest outside Japan is the behaviour
of unframed brick buildings with load-bearing walls, which make up the bulk
of European housing. These buildings are rare in Japan, and those which
were found differed in important respects from British housing. The Mission
had therefore to draw its conclusions from such isolated examples as that
shown in photograph 15. (This building, although somewhat stronger than
British houses, had collapsed at 700 yards from the centre of damage.) Inter-
preting such examples in the light of its European experience, the Mission
estimated that a bomb of the same power, exploding at the approximate height
of those in Hiroshima and Nagasaki,
would cause the collapse of normal British houses to a distance of 1,000
yards from the centre of damage ;
would damage them beyond repair to a distance of 1 mile ;
would render them uninhabitable without extensive repair, particularly
to the roof timbers, to a distance of 1J miles ;
and would render them uninhabitable until first-aid repairs had been
carried out, to a distance of 2 to 2\ miles from the centre of damage.
39. Unframed masonry construction with load-bearing walls of greater
thickness is also widely employed throughout Europe for public buildings and
blocks of flats. Such buildings are subject to damage of equal severity, at


Photos Nos. 1 and 2. HIROSHIMA. General views looking across the
centre of damage, the approximate position of which is [?] ked with an arrow.
It will be seen that some of the framed buildings quite ne [?]the centre remained
standing. The tall building in Photo No. 1 is the same as [?] seen in Photo No. 7.
The foreground illustrates the [?]nants[?] of Japanes [?] gs, razed to the
ground. See paragraph 11.


Photo No. 3. NAGASAKI. A general view of the area near the centre of
damage, which is to the left in the picture, only 300 yds. away from the bridge.
Note the little that remains (in the foreground) of blasted and burnt Japanese
dwellings. For a view of such houses, undamaged, see Photo No. 19.
Photo No. 4. N AG ASAKI. A general view showing some of the industrial
buildings. That it th[?] eg[?]und was a gutted woodworking plant, just over a
mile from the cent[?]mage, which w. [?]yond the group of chimneys of the
Mitsubishi Stee W[?] .stance. See paragraph 15.


Photo No. 5. NAGASAKI. Reinforced concrete school with a timber
roof, 500 yds. from the centre of damage, which is to the right of the photograph.
The upper part of the long wall further from the explosion has been bent over,
partly by a thrust through the roof from the other long wall and partly by wind
suction. This is a typical case of “ mass distortion.” See paragraphs 15 and 22.
Photo No. 6. NAGASAKI. Mass distortion of steel framed shed
buildings about half a mile from the centre of damage,[?]ch was to the right of
the buildings in the photograph. it will be seen tha[?]tire main frame is
seriously distorted away from the explosion. See [?] 22 and 32,


Photo No. 7. HIROSHIMA. Reinforced concrete building about
300 yds. from the centre of damage, which is to the left of the photograph. There
was no serious structural damage, although a roof panel was depressed and some
internal party walls were deflected. Designed for earthquake resistance, this
building has a composite reinforced concrete and steel frame. See paragraph 24.
Photo No. 8. HIROSHIMA. Reinforced concrete building 200 yds.
from the centre of damage, which is to the right. The blast from the bomb forced
the roof slab down, the slab shearing round the column heads, leaving the internal
columns projecting through the debris. Few concrete buildings failed in this way,
See paragraph 24


Photo No. 9. HIROSHIMA, Reinforced concrete school 500 yds. from
the centre of damage, which is to the right. The frame of this building was of
special design (portal) and resisted the lateral forces. The outside walls were of
continuous reinforced concrete, and although they were deflected, as seen, they did
not fail. See paragraph 27.
Photo No. 10. NAGASAKI. Reinforced concrete single storey factory
rather less than a mile from the centre of damage, which is to the right. The
arched reinforced concrete roof failed, the side nearer the explosion being forced
inwards and the far side forced upwards. See [?] 24 and 29.


Photo No. 11. HIROSHIMA. Small steel framed shed ¼- mile from the
centre of damage, showing the distortion of the entire framework, with the
building leaning away from the explosion. See paragraphs 22 and 32.
Photo No. 12. NAGASAKI. Large steel framed shed in the Mitsubishi
Steel Works, ¾ mile from the centre of damage. The steel stanchions have been
bent (away from the explosion) and the roof trusses on both sides of these
stanchions have ceo[?]psed. See paragraphs 22 and 32.


Photo No. 13. NAGASAKI, ½ mile from centre of damage. Typical
damaged machines in one of the many timber workshops destroyed by blast and
fire. Some machines were overturned by movement of the buildings, some
destroyed by fire alone; others damaged by exposure to the weather. Sec
paragraph 34.
Photo No. 14. NAGASAKI. Blast effect on a gasholder ½ mile from
centre of damage. Note the way in which the whole framework has been bent
away from the explosion. See paragraph. 43.


Photo No. 15. HIROSHIMA. Three storey bank building with load
bearing brick walls of strong construction and comparable with British standards.
This degree of damage to such buildings extends to a radius of ½ mile from centre
of damage. Compare with the behaviour of the reinforced concrete framed build
ing in the background. See paragraph 38.
Photo No. 16. NAGASAKI. The Roman Catholic Cathedral 600 yds.
from centre of damage The walls were of heavy load-bearing brick construction.
Most of the damage is attributable to blast, although fire subsequently consumed
all combustible debris. Note in the foreground the huts erected by the Japanese
for temporary living quart[?]s after the atomic bomb raid. See paragraphs 11,16
and 39.


Photo No. 17. HIROSHIMA. Typical, part below ground, earth-
covered, timber framed shelter 300 yds. from the centre of damage, which is to the
right. In common with similar but fully sunk shelters, none appeared to have been
structurally damaged by the blast. Exposed woodwork was liable to " flashburn.”
Internal blast probably threw the occupants about, and gamma rays may have
caused casualties. See paragraph 40.
Photo No. 18. NAGASAKI. Typical small earth-coverea back yard
shelter with crude wooden frame, less than 100 yds. from the centre of damage,
which is to the right. There was a large number of such shelters, but whereas
nearly all those as close as this one had their roofs forced in, only half were
damaged at 300 yds., and practically none at Haifa mile from the cent re of damage.
See paragraph 41,


Photo No. 19. NAGASAKI. Typical Japanese houses in a street
screened from damage by the surrounding hills. Buildings of similar construction
formed the main proportion of buildings in Nagasaki and Hiroshima. See
paragraphs 37 and 80.
Photo No. 20. NAGASAKI, A room in the concrete hospital, ½ mile from
the centre of damage. The building was structurally undamaged, and one
of the few of its type [?] pe internal fire damage. The collapse of suspended
ceilings, partitions, etc., caused many casualties ; fire would have increased their
plight. See paragraphs 68 and 80.


Photo No. 21. HIROSHIMA. Roughening of polished granite by
" flash ” heat effect at 200 yds. from the centre of damage. The polish remains
only where shielded by (a) a man seated on the steps, (b) a man leaning against the
corner of the plinth adjoining the steps and (c) in the “ shadows ” of the plinth
mouldings. See paragraph 49.
Photo No. 22. NAGASAKI. Timber framing scorched by heat radiation
at ¾ mile from the centre of damage. The surface is un[?] rched where it is shielded
by the uprights. See paragraph 52.


Photo No. 23. HIROSHIMA. Shadow cast by valve-wheel on side of
gasholder 1 ¼ miles from the centre of damage. The bituminous coating on the
steel plates was affected by heat radiation except where shielded by t1e wheel
and spindle. See paragraph 53.
Photo No. 24. NAGASAKI. Section of ridge tile and part of pantile
recovered from the centre of damage, showing the “ bubbling ” effect produced
by the intense heat radiation. Note the gradations on the half round tile ; also
the unscorched section [?]6 the pantile where the tile has been protected by the
overlap of the adja [ ?]e. See paragraph 50.


smaller but considerable distances. Photograph 16 shows the damage to the
monumental Roman Catholic Cathedral of Nagasaki at 600 yards from the
centre of damage. Here the damage was completed by fire and other causes,
but effectively the building had already been destroyed by blast.
40. The provision of air raid shelters throughout Japan was much below
European standards. Those along the verges of the wider streets in Hiroshima
were comparatively well constructed : they were semi-sunk, about 20 ft. long,
had wooden frames, and 1 ft. 6 ins. to 2 ft. of earth cover. One is shown in
photograph 17. Exploding so high above them, the bomb damaged none of
these shelters.
41. In Nagasaki there were no communal shelters except small caves dug
in the hillsides. Here most householders had made their own backyard shelters,
usually slit trenches or bolt holes covered with a foot or so of earth carried on
rough poles and bamboos. These crude shelters, one of which is shown in
photograph 18, nevertheless had considerable mass and flexibility, qualities
which are valuable in giving protection from blast. Most of these shelters
had their roofs forced in immediately below the explosion ; but the proportion
so damaged had fallen to 50 per cent, at 300 yards from the centre of damage,
and to zero at about \ mile.
42. These observations show that the standard British shelters would have
performed well against a bomb of the same power exploded at such a height.
Anderson shelters, properly erected and covered, would have given protection.
Brick or concrete surface shelters with adequate reinforcement would have
remained safe from collapse. The Morrison shelter is designed only to protect
its occupants from the debris load of a house, and this it would have done.
Deep shelters such as the refuge provided by the London Underground would
have given complete protection.
DAMAGE TO PUBLIC SERVICES
43. It remains to discuss the behaviour of the major public services. Many
of these are subject to the consideration which has been implied in the discussion
of shelters : that bombs exploded at such heights have no effect below ground.
For example, gas and water pipes were in general undamaged except where
they were carried over rivers on bridges which were displaced. Sewers were
undamaged in Hiroshima ; they did not exist in Nagasaki. However, in
both cities the gas supply was destroyed by severe damage to the gas holders
(see photograph 14) up to 1| miles from the centre of damage. The producing
plant was not seriously damaged at this distance. In both cities, the water
pumping station was beyond the range of damage, but that at Hiroshima
was out of action for some weeks for lack of electric power.
44. Overhead electricity, tramway, telephone, and telegraph cables and their
supports were severely damaged to distances of \ mile to 1 mile. In addition,
the electricity supply was affected by damage to sub-stations, resulting in debris
damage to the switchboards and switchgear ; such damage was serious, for
example, in the main transformer station in Nagasaki, 1 mile from the centre
of damage. The great dispersal of the Japanese electricity system, however,
made it possible to supply current to most undamaged areas in Nagasaki within
a fortnight.


45. Damage to public transport was not considerable. Railway and tramway
tracks were only indirectly affected, by debris, adjacent fire, overturned rolling
stock and displaced bridges. The Prefect of Nagasaki reports that slow-running
trains reached the city along the main railway line, which runs within 100 yards
of the centre of damage, three days after the bombing. Trams, buses, and motor
cars were probably destroyed to distances of \ mile to 1 mile from the centre
of damage, and some tram motors were reported to have been burnt out beyond
2 miles. Fuel storage tanks were damaged beyond repair more than 1 mile
from the centre of damage.
46. There were 49 bridges within 2 miles of the centre of damage in Hiroshima.
Most of these were multiple girder bridges in steel or reinforced concrete, and
many had one or more suspended spans ; their overall length was usually
between 200 ft. and 500 ft. Only one wooden bridge, and one steel bridge in
bad repair, were destroyed by the blast ; and nine wooden bridges" were burnt
down in the subsequent fires. The remaining bridges were usable, although some
of them had suffered small displacement in the direction away from the explosion,
having perhaps been lifted by blast reflected from the river bed. Seven of
these bridges were destroyed by two floods before the Mission reached Hiroshima.
47. The 35 bridges within 2 miles of the centre of damage in Nagasaki were
all small and relatively light. As a result, all bridges within J mile of the centre
of damage suffered some damage or displacement, most severe in the least
massive bridges, but in only four cases did the damage require repair (in two
cases, extensive repair) before the bridge could be used. This excellent behaviour
in both cities is associated with the fact that bridges, almost alone among the
structures which have been discussed, are designed for vertical loads such as
resulted from the high burst of the bombs.
Chapter V
HEAT EFFECTS
FLASHBURN
48. It has been explained in paragraph 20 that some of the energy which is
created in the process of atomic fission is radiated as heat, on a scale immensely
larger than the heat flash released by a conventional explosion. A wide range
of materials was affected by the high temperature and heat flow which resulted
from this heat radiation in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. These effects on any
material subject to scorching are called flashburn.
49. Photograph 21 shows the manner in which heat has roughened the surface
of polished granite, which retains its polish only where it has been shielded
from the radiation (which travels in straight lines from the explosion), for
example by the man who was evidently sitting on the stone at the instant of
the explosion. This roughening is caused by the unequal expansion of the
constituent crystals of the stone ; for the quartz crystals this becomes critical
somewhat below 600° C. Therefore the depth of roughening and ultimate
flaking helps to determine average ground temperatures in the instants following
the explosion. Such roughening extended about 1| times as far in Nagasaki
as in Hiroshima.


50. The Japanese commonly employed twp kinds of roof tiles, on both of
which the heat flash raised characteristic bubbles. These were largest wherei
the radiation was most intense, that is, either where the tile was closest to the
explosion or, as in photograph 24, where it faced the radiation squarely. This
effect will serve to give independent estimates of ground temperatures. It
extended nearly 1| times as far in Nagasaki as in Hiroshima
51. Among miscellaneous materials affected by heat radiation were the
bronze of the ceremonial animals guarding a Shinto temple, immediately below
the explosion in Hiroshima ; the asphalt surface of roads, which retained the
“ shadows ” of those who had walked there at the instant of the explosion,
objects of macabre interest and pilgrimage for visitors ; and concrete and mortar
renderings of buildings, which had flushed to various shades of pink.
52. As photograph 22 shows, unpainted wood displayed the most striking
flashbums. These ranged from a just perceptible deepening of the natural
colour, which could be observed on telegraph poles at nearly two miles from
the centre of damage, through progressive scorching to complete superficial
charring at small distances, where isolated timbers had sometimes been fired.
Painted wood was also scorched, with no discernible selection of colours. In
all timbers, the soft portions of the annual rings were most deeply charred.
53. Some paints were also directly affected, the most sensitive being the
black coating on gas holders, where, as photograph 23 shows, exposure to
heat radiation gave a polished appearance to the original dull and sooty finish.
54. In all these cases, “ shadows ” were cast by intervening objects where
they shielded a part of the otherwise exposed surface from the direct heat
radiation. In the shadow, the surface retained its original state ; outside it,
across a more or less sharply defined boundary, it was scorched. When neither
the shielding object nor the scorched surface had moved, as in photograph 23,
it was therefore possible to determine the direction from which the radiation
had come. A number of such determinations then served to fix the position
of the explosion. This procedure had already been used by the Japanese and
others, and there was reasonable agreement between the determinations.
55. Where shadows were susceptible to precise measurement, for example
the shadows of vertical or horizontal bars, they were usually found to be
narrower than the shielding obstruction. In particular, there could be observed
the striking phenomenon of the complete disappearance of the shadows of
narrow objects at sufficient distances from the scorched surface. For example,
on a bridge in Hiroshima the lowest of three equal and parallel sets of bars
had cast a well-defined shadow, and the middle a perceptible one, but the
highest none. The main cause of this effect was probably the finite size of
the radiating fire ball.
56. There were cases where a clump of grass or the leaf of a tree had cast
a sharp shadow on otherwise scorched wood. Therefore the most intense flash
from the ball of fire had ended in a time less than that required to shrivel
vegetation. On the other hand, since direct injuries to the eye-ball were not
common, the heat radiation may be presumed to have required a perceptible
time to build up to its maximum intensity, during which some people had
closed their eyes.


57. A phenomenon more striking than important, but which attracted wide
attention, was the charring of darker patches on fabrics at distances from the
explosion at which lighter patches were no longer charred. Among the materials
which the Mission examined in Hiroshima, by the courtesy of the Medical
Section of the Joint Commission for the Investigation of the Effects of the
Atomic Bomb, were: —
A white cotton blouse the pale pink sleeves of which were patterned
with small sprays, each about in. in diameter, of green leaves and red
flowers. This blouse had been worn in the open well over a mile from the
centre of damage, and was unscorched; except that over an area on the
left shoulder the sprays alone had been burnt out and had left holes.
Over a larger surrounding area the sprays had begun to burn, and here
the red flowers had smouldered markedly earlier and more extensively
than the green leaves.
A white dress, unscorched except for its blue polka dots, which had
been burnt out over a large area. On the edges of this area the dots had
begun to smoulder, each from its centre outward.
A shirt of alternate dark and light grey stripes, each about J in. wide;
over an area of which the dark stripes were completely burnt out but the
light stripes remained.
A kimono patterned with white lozenges on a blue ground, large areas
of which were burnt and had had to be beaten out. This garment like
many others was said to have been fired directly by heat radiation. On
the edges of its burnt area, the white lozenges had survived and only the
blue ground had been burnt. Considering this in the light of the preceding
exhibits, the story of its flash ignition appears reasonable.
A piece of Japanese paper exposed nearly 11 miles from the centre of
damage, on which characters written in black ink had been neatly burnt
out.
These effects are in line with known experimental facts: for example, that black
cotton begins to char at temperatures perhaps 30° C. lower than does white
cotton. They may be the result of differences in colour, in colouring matter,
or both. These effects are interesting but not important, because they can
occur only where the heat radiation is falling just below the intensity which
would fire the fabric as a whole.
58. Witnesses say that people who were directly under the explosion in the
open had their exposed skin burnt so severely that it was immediately charred
dark brown or black : these people died within minutes or at most hours.
Both in Hiroshima and in Nagasaki, bums on exposed skin were very severe
up to about 1,500 yards from the centre of damage. At this distance, some
escaped with less severe bums, although very severe burns were occasionally
reported at nearly 1| miles from the centre of damage. Mild bums extended
to distances of 1\ miles and more. Stories that white people were unharmed
in Hiroshima where the darker skinned Japanese received fatal burns were not
substantiated.
59. In general, even thin clothing protected from flashbum. There were a
few exceptions, when the skin was burnt through uncharred fabric where the
latter was stretched tightly, say over the point of the shoulder. On other
occasions, equally rare, clothing caught fire without burning the skin. But in
general the correspondence between charred clothing and skin was close ;
for example, the girl wearing the flowered blouse described in paragraph 57
had bums, some of them severe, only where the sprays had burnt.


60. Buildings and walls gave complete protection from flashbum. For
example, of the men in the prison grounds of Hiroshima, roughly 1J miles from
the centre of damage, all suffered bums except those in or screened by buildings.
Of a group of 580 workers marching across a bridge in Hiroshima, nearly 1£ miles
from the centre of damage, all were burnt except three at the'rear of the column,
whom subsequent investigation showed to have been screened by the eaves of
a building. There were some very severe bums in this group, and nine deaths.
61. The Japanese reported that crops and other vegetation above ground
had been completely burnt at 1,000 yards from the centre of damage in Nagasaki.
In Hiroshima, some trees had been fired, apparently by flashbum, at greater
distances ; flashbum marks on trees in Nagasaki extended to 1| miles. It
was noticeable in both cities that where trees which had been stripped of foliage
were putting out new leaves, the fresh shoots sprang not from the branches
but from the trunk.
THE PROBLEM OF FIRE
62. Attention has been drawn to the great extent of fire damage in both
cities ; and that fire was not confined to wooden Japanese houses, but raged
fiercely in many concrete buildings, in some machine shops, and in other
buildings not normally subject to fire. The Mission therefore attached im-
portance to the determination of the causes of fire, particularly in industrial,
commercial, and public buildings, in order to assess the risk of fire in similar
conditions in western cities. The aim was to determine the relative importance
of two possible direct causes of fire —heat radiation, and convection by heated
air ; and two indirect causes —damaged appliances, and the spread of lire
from adjacent buildings.
63. The evidence presented throughout this chapter, particularly in paragraphs
52, 57 and 61, and similar evidence, leaves little doubt that heat radiation is a
cause of fires in unscreened buildings, probably up to distances of 1 mile from
the centre of damage. The Mission was most impressed by the accumulation
of indirect evidence from the many reinforced concrete buildings the basements,
the stairs, or some floors of which had been screened and contained no fire,
when floors of the same buildings with windows exposed to the flash were
gutted by fire. A number of reinforced concrete buildings in Hiroshima with
shuttered windows escaped fire, apparently because the heat radiation, travelling
at the speed of fight, had arrived and died away before the blast, travelling
only at a few thousand feet per second, blew out the shutters to expose the
interior. The dense surrounding fires did not spread to these buildings.
64. No evidence could be found of direct fires caused by converted heat
alone, that is, by heat transmitted by the air. It is difficult to think how this
cause could have been isolated, or that it can be important in the presence of
such intense radiated heat.
65. Indirect causes undoubtedly produced many fires. Braziers, widely used
in industry as well as in the home, must have started some; some will have
begun at gas leaks; and the primitive electric wiring no doubt started others,
however rapid was the circuit-breaking system. It was not important to press
this part of the enquiry, since experience has shown that the danger of indirect
fires always exists in large-scale bombing,, in every part of the world.


66. It is certain that firespread did occur in both cities; but more striking is
the evidence for vast numbers of separate points of fire, which made fire-fighting
among these combustible buildings hopeless from the outset. In incombustible
buildings, particularly in the industrial buildings of Nagasaki, the incidence of
fire in neighbouring bays was markedly erratic, and fires had not spread.
67. In summary, both direct and indirect fires must be regarded as active
dangers from atomic bombs. Indeed, whether radiated heat is or is not an
important cause of fire, the high temperatures produced by it plainly create
conditions exceptionally favourable to the emergence and continuance of
serious fires, however caused. For example, the debris of demolished Japanese
houses beyond the fire zone which was examined in Hiroshima would rarely
have supported fire at ordinary temperatures. Yet it must have been debris in
this state which burnt there for days, presumably as a result of the initial drying
and scorching by the bomb.
68. Combustible materials in fire-resistant buildings and heavy timber
sections in others were burnt with unusual completeness. This is evidence of
the long duration of fires even of medium intensity, which were allowed to bum
virtually unchecked. It-must be appreciated that the conditions of disorganiza-
tion and the multitude of individual incidents created by the atomic bomb will
throw an unequalled strain on any fire services. In addition, the Japanese had
provided fuel for the fires by introducing a mass of wooden detail into otherwise
fireproof buildings. Photograph 20 shows the interior of one of the reinforced
concrete buildings of the hospital in Nagasaki, \ mile from the centre of damage.
Having resisted the blast, these buildings and their services were denied to the
city at a critical time because they were filled with such material as that shown
in the photograph; a false lath and plaster ceiling hung on heavy timbers, a
wooden floor raised on wooden beams, and plaster walls on battens and laths.
As a result, about half the occupants were killed or were trapped and died in the
fires which broke out nearly everywhere among this material. It is a very plain
lesson that a fireproof building should not be converted into a major fire risk
and a trap for its tenants by iU-chosen fittings.
Chapter VI
RADIO-ACTIVE EFFECTS
69. The process of atomic fission gives rise to radio-activity in three ways :
First is the release of penetrating particles (neutrons) and radiation,
which are directly harmful to human beings.
Second are the new products into which fission breaks the constituent
material, either Uranium 235 or Plutonium 239. These fission products
are themselves radio-active.
Third are materials which, penetrated by the released neutrons, become
radio-active in their turn.
70. Of these effects, as they were produced by the bombs on Hiroshima and
Nagasaki, those due to the action of neutrons, either directly or indirectly,
were probably the least important. Neutrons did affect human beings, for


Japanese scientists found induced radio-activity in the phosphorus of their
bones ; but the scale of the effect does not appear to have been comparable
with that produced by penetrating radiation. Similarly, such radio-activity
as was detected in the ground was probably in the main not induced by neutrons.
71. At the time of the visit of the Mission, three months after the bombing,
there were areas which remained radio-active both an Hiroshima and in
Nagasaki. But the amount of radio-activity was trivial then, and had been so
soon after the bomb exploded. For example, cases are known of people in
both cities who worked near the centre of damage from the afternoon of the
bombing without ill effect. And in spite of stories to the contrary, plant life
was flourishing in both cities. Thus residual radio-activity is not a danger from
these bombs exploded at such heights. The small amounts of radio-activity
which remained in both cities were the result of the fall of a small fraction of
the radio-active fission products. In fact, the radio-active areas in each city
lie downwind from the explosion ; and Japanese physicists had identified three
known fission products in deposits in Hiroshima. It was foreseen that, from
bombs exploded at these heights, the amount of fission products which would
fall on the cities would be insignificant. From bombs burst at lower heights,
however, the ground, and particularly rough ground, would receive markedly
greater amounts of these products, in quantities which might leave it danger-
ously radio-active for days or longer.
72. The most important radio-active action at Hiroshima and Nagasaki
appears to have been that from penetrating radiation. The exact make-up of
this is unknown, and for convenience all this radiation will be summarily called
gamma rays. Its effect is to cause injuries which, so far as can yet be judged,
are analogous to but more severe than those caused by over-exposure to X-rays.
For the description of these effects, and the bulk of kindred material in this
report, (he Mission is indebted to the Medical Section of the Joint Commission
for the Investigation of the Effects of the Atomic Bomb, which will ultimately
publish a more detailed and more accurate report than this interim statement.
73. The gamma rays were very penetrating, and passed through the skin
without affecting it. As a result, those exposed to gamma rays, if they were
protected from flashburn and from indirect injury, showed no immediate
ill-effect. Even those severely irradiated probably did not show the characteristic
symptoms, nausea, vomiting and fever, for 24 hours, and rarely died in less
than one week. These first symptoms were followed by bloody diarrhoea,
occurring most frequently in the second week, at which time loss of appetite
and general malaise also became marked. Patients began to lose their hair
after the first week.
74. Thereafter, in the severe cases, the clinical picture came to be dominated
by signs of deficient blood formation. This effect on the blood is indirect,
and therefore delayed : the gamma rays do not attack the cells in the blood-
stream, but the primitive cells in the bone marrow, from which most of the
different types of cells in the blood are formed. Therefore serious effects
begin to appear only as the fully-formed cells already in the blood die off
gradually and naturally, and are not replaced as they would be normally by
new cells formed in the bone marrow. In severe cases, it was apparent that
the gamma rays had virtually killed the entire bone marrow. In such cases,
all three types of cells formed in the marrow became deficient : red cells,
platelets, and white cells (granulocytes). As red cell formation ceased, the
patient began to suffer from progressive anaemia. As platelet formation ceased.


the thin blood seeped in small and large haemorrhages into the skin and the
retina of the eye, and sometimes into the intestines and the kidneys. The fall
in the number of white cells, which was useful in diagnosing mild cases because
it could be detected by taking blood counts, in severe cases lowered resistance,
so that the patient inevitably fell prey to some infection, usually spreading
from the mouth and accompanied by gangrene of the lips, the tongue, and
sometimes the throat. Death in these cases was the result of a combination of
anaemia, internal bleeding, and infection. Deaths probably began in about
a week after the explosion, reached a peak in about three weeks, and had for
the most part ceased after six to eight weeks.
75. The distances at which these effects were felt are not easy to determine.
It is thought that gamma rays ultimately caused the death of nearly everyone
who was fully exposed to them up to a distance of \ mile from the centre of
damage. A figure can be obtained for the 50 per cent, chance of survival,
from the evidence of two groups of workers who had been brought into
Hiroshima from an outlying village, and who were working in the open but
screened by wooden buildings at 1,200 yards from the centre of damage. Of the
total of 198 men, 6 were killed immediately by debris and 95 of the survivors
subsequently died, it is believed all from the effects of gamma rays. Allowing
for some small protection afforded by the wooden buildings, it is estimated that
people in the open have a 50 per cent, chance of surviving the effects of gamma
rays at | mile from the centre of damage. As regards lesser effects, loss of hair
was recorded up to 1J miles from the centre of damage, and some doctors felt
that the milder forms of radiation sickness, more difficult to diagnose, may have
extended to 2 miles.
76. The gamma rays are capable of penetrating considerable thicknesses
of building and other material. They thereby pose new problems of protection,
the scope of which is not yet fully understood, and is best illustrated by examples.
An unusually strong three-storey reinforced concrete building at
Hiroshima, less than 250 yards from the centre of damage, contained 23
people whose fate can be traced. The building remained structurally
undamaged, and none of these people was killed immediately ; nearly all
had some lesser injuries from debris and fire, but were able to walk to
hospital for treatment. Subsequently, between the sixth and the seventeenth
day after the explosion, 21 of these people died, probably all from the
effects of gamma rays. The two survivors were in the telephone room
on the ground floor, where they were shielded by all the floors and possibly
by adjacent buildings.
In a five-storey reinforced concrete building 700 yards from the centre
of damage, gamma rays caused many deaths on the fourth and fifth floors
and a few on the third, but killed no one below this who was screened by
all the higher floors.
A partly underground concrete shelter less than £ mile from the centre
of damage had no gamma ray casualties, or indeed any but minor debris
injuries.
At distances approaching 1 mile from the centre of damage, less massive
buildings began to protect from gamma rays. For example in the City
Hall of Hiroshima, at this distance, there were no deaths from gamma rays
and at most 6 mild cases of radiation sickness.
Only tentative conclusions can yet be drawn from this and similar information.


77. The effects of gamma rays on human reproduction necessarily form a
long-term study, which will continue for some years. Of the effects already
detected, the most striking are those on pregnancies at all stages from two months
onwards. At distances up to 1,000 yards from the centre of damage, pregnant
women who survived have had miscarriages. At distances up to ! J miles from
the centre of damage, pregnant women who survived have had either miscarriages
or premature infants who died very soon. Even beyond this range, up to nearly
2 miles, only about one-third of pregnant women have given birth to what appear
to be normal children. Two months after the explosion miscarriages, abortions,
and premature births throughout Hiroshima were nearly five times as frequent
as in normal times, and formed more than one quarter of all deliveries.
78. Sperm counts made in Hiroshima show that a high proportion of men
exposed to gamma rays, up to perhaps | mile from the centre of damage, have
reduced powers of reproduction. Gamma rays also stopped menstruation
in women ; but this condition was so common throughout Japan, it is thought as
a result of war-time diet and overwork, that no conclusions regarding its
permanence can yet be drawn.
Chapter VII
CASUALTIES
79. The important causes of direct injury from the explosion, flashburn
and gamma rays, have been described in the two preceding chapters. However,
with the atomic as with other bombs, indirect injuries caused the death of
a high proportion of the casualties, and probably of the bulk of them —except
in so far as these were killed as it were several times over, by each lethal agent
separately.
80. The greatest number of indirect injuries, and indeed of all deaths, appears
to have been caused by the collapse of buildings. Photograph 19 shows the
Japanese house as a light building, but it is not therefore to be despised as
a lethal weapon, for its heavy roof timbers and tiling are inadequately supported
(see paragraph ‘37) and must have killed or trapped thousands. Photograph 20
shows that injuries of the satae kind were caused in the stronger buildings by
the mass of wooden detail with which the Japanese embellished them, and which
has been described in paragraph 68. Mechanical injuries resulting from people
being thrown about, or from having arms or legs violently removed by flying
debris, appear to have formed a lower proportion than in conventional attacks.
81. Fire in conventional air attack is rarely a major cause of casualties.
There have been exceptions, among them the great incendiary raids on Hamburg
and Tokyo, where the number of dead approached that in Hiroshima; but
drawn from a much larger damage area. Very many people were, however,
burnt to death in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, for there was almost no attempt to
rescue those who were trapped or hemmed in by debris while points of fire
sprang up round them. Bums received in the fires appear throughout the
records of those admitted, to hospital.
82. In Nagasaki but not in Hiroshima, a rumour was current which age has
made almost respectable, for it appeared in the London Blitz and before that
in Barcelona during the Spanish Civil War. This was that large numbers of
people had been ripped open by the blast, and their entrails exposed; their eyes


Distance from the
Percentage of those within
centre of damage
this zone who were killed
0-J mile
95 per cent.
J-J mile
85 per cent.
mile
58 per cent.
|-1 mile
35 per cent.
1-1| miles
, . . . 13 per cent.
1J-2 miles
. . . . 1 per cent.
and tongues were said also to have hung out. Experience in this country has
shown that blast pressure alone does not in fact cause these sensational effects
on the human body. It was therefore not unexpected that two Nagasaki
survivors who had spoken of seeing hundreds or thousands of such bodies on
examination reduced their claim to one or two. Flying debris would be
expected to produce a few such injuries. Cases of genuine injury from high
blast pressures, such as ruptured ear-drums, were rare among survivors.
83. No conclusions can yet be reached regarding the relative importance of
the different lethal agents. It is thought that those who died immediately were
divided roughly equally between those killed by debris and those burnt, either
by heat radiation or in the fires. Severe injuries from debris may extend to
2 miles, but are rare beyond 1 j miles from the centre of damage. Beyond this
distance gamma ray effects fall even more rapidly, and the major source of
casualties is flashburn and fire.
84. Disasters as vast as those which befell Hiroshima and Nagasaki are
difficult to fix in numbers. Most of the city records were destroyed, many
public servants were killed, and in the chaos which followed little note was
taken of the fate of individuals when the population was in mass flight. The
Mission had to content itself with estimating from such records as were
available that the number of people killed in Hiroshima lay between 70,000
and 90,000. Since then the Occupying Authority have published official figures
for Hiroshima, of 78,150 dead, as well as 13,983 still missing. For comparison,
the number of those killed by air attack during the whole war in London was
30,000, and the number of those killed throughout Great Britain, including
London, was 60,000.
85. The number of those killed by a bomb depends on the number and
whereabouts of those exposed to it. Therefore the number of dead is only a
crude measure of the effects of the atomic bomb ; a better measure is given
by the percentages of those at various distances from the explosion who died.
It was possible to estimate these from comparatively good records which exist
of the whereabouts in Hiroshima and of the subsequent fate of about 15,000
school-children. Few of these were actually in school when the bomb fell, for
most were scattered through the city in groups doing a variety of war jobs ;
so that it is believed that they form a representative sample of people going about
their normal work in the city, some in the open, others in buildings giving
varying protection. The Mission’s interpretation of the records of the fate
of these children is as follows :
Experience in Great Britain has shown that in conventional raids children, of
school age are neither appreciably more nor appreciably less vulnerable to
bombing than are adults. It is therefore reasonable to apply this table equally
to adults.


86. It was possible to obtain the distribution of population in Nagasaki,
where those in the Urakami valley exposed to the explosion numbered rather
less than 100,000. On applying the table to this distribution, the resulting
figure of dead is 37,000. This may be regarded as reasonable confirmation of
the table ; for it is in fair agreement on the one hand with the estimate of
34,000 dead made by the Mission from Japanese population records, and on
the other hand with the figure of 40,000 killed which is current among medical
authorities. No official figures for Nagasaki have yet been published by the
Occupying Authorities.
87. As the difference between the figures for Hiroshima and Nagasaki shows*
the number of those killed depends rather obviously upon the number of those
who were present. It is therefore customary in considering the effects of bombs
to use a casualty rate from which inequalities in the distribution of population
have been removed. For this purpose a standard density of population is
assumed at about 45 to the acre, the density in the central London boroughs
and the larger British cities. At this density the average effect of the Hiroshima
and Nagasaki bombs is 65,000 killed. In British cities, the better protection
afforded by the houses, their lower susceptibility to fire, and improved rescue
services, would reduce this figure by an amount which can only be conjectured,
but which is unlikely to exceed one-quarter. (This is equivalent to reducing
all distances listed in the table by one-eighth.) The standard figure in British
conditions would therefore be approximately 50,000 dead. The comparable
standard figure for the German V 2 rocket was about 15 dead.
88. The figure of 50,000 dead from one atomic bomb in average British
urban conditions is probably the most important which this report contains.
It shows that much the most serious effect of the atomic bomb is in producing
casualties. The problem of providing against and of treating gamma ray
casualties in particular is exceptionally grave and difficult.
Conclusions
89. Consider a British urban area with an overall housing density of about
15 per acre (including open spaces), and a population density of about 45 per
acre; and apply to it the radii of damage listed in paragraph 38. The explosion
of a single atomic bomb of the power and at the height of those in Hiroshima
and Nagasaki would demolish or damage beyond repair approximately 30,000
houses. The number of houses requiring extensive repair would be approxi-
mat6ly 35,000; the number temporarily uninhabitable and requiring first-aid
repairs would be between 50,000 and 100,000. Thus a total of roughly 400,000
people might be rendered temporarily homeless, of whom about one-half could
return to their houses after lesser repairs. Not all the remaining 200,000 would
constitute a rehousing problem: because about 50,000 of them would be dead
or would die within eight weeks, and a comparable number would require
extended hospital treatment. Therefore the number of non-casualties to be
rehoused, either permanently or for the months required to carry out major
repairs, would be approximately 100,000.
90. This picture somewhat over-estimates the average effect; for example,
in the nature of things, cities of less than 400,000 inhabitants could hardly have
so many homeless. In fact, few British urban areas are as dense as this through-
out a circle of 4 to 5 miles diameter, such as the application of paragraph 38


presupposes. Nevertheless, the figures make vivid the scale of the disaster;:
and will be appropriate to an incident in the larger British and other western
cities.
91. As paragraphs 29-35 show, the distances at which factory buildings
would be affected are roughly comparable, and the scale of the immediate
industrial loss would therefore be of the same order. The final industrial loss,
however, would be considerably lower if fire, precautions were adequate and if
machines were not left to weather.
92. It has long been known from the experience of raiding on Great Britain
that reinforced concrete and steel framed buildings are much more resistant
to blast than are buildings of the normal British and Continental design, having
load-bearing walls. The observations at Hiroshima and Nagasaki reported in
paragraphs 24-28 fully confirm this. Casualties in framed buildings are usually
the result of structural collapse, falling ceilings and partitions, and flying debris
and glass. These risks remain, and to them are added the risk from flashburn,
from fire (see paragraph 68), and from gamma rays. Framed buildings in which
these risks have been minimized should be advocated for all public and semi-
public buildings.
93. The conditions of the explosions in Hiroshima and Nagasaki could be
changed in a number of ways. One way is, that the height of burst could be
lowered. This would probably reduce the area of damage, but damage to massive
buildings and to bridges near the centre would become more severe, and from
sufficiently low bursts would extend to underground services. The increase in
casualties near the centre, particularly from gamma rays, would be expected
to be offset by the decrease in more distant casualties. A serious effect, however,
would be created by the greater density of fission products on the ground
which would result from a lower explosion, for these would make the area
dangerously radio-active for a period of days.
94. The overall picture, then, is sombre. Even ignoring changes in attack
and in the development of the bomb, the damage figures given, say, in paragraph
89, are very serious. And these figures are a measure only of the blast effect
of the bomb. With them must be kept in mind the grave problem of fire, direct
and indirect, which the bomb has created, which has been discussed in para-
graphs 62-68. Both are overshadowed by the scale of casualties produced by
the bomb, which make the mere disposal of the dead a major problem. The
figures given in Chapter VII speak for themselves.


THE MORE IMPORTANT EFFECTS OF ATOMIC BOMBS
ON PEOPLE AND THEIR HOMES
Explosion as at Hiroshima and Nagasaki


Crown Copyright Reserved
LONDON
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
To be purchased directly from H.M. STATIONERY OFFICE at the following addresses:
York House, Kingsway, London, W.C.2 *, 13a Castle Street, Edinburgh 2 j
39—41 King Street, Manchester 2 ; 1 St. Andrew*/ Crescent, Cardiff 5
80 Chichester Street, Belfast 5
or through any bookseller
1946
Price is. od. net
S.O. Code No. 34-312*
(75854) Wt. 2571/19 6/46 Hw. G. 544


Atomic Energy: Official Publications
A GENERAL ACCOUNT of the
Development of Methods of Using
Atomic Energy for Military Purposes
under the auspices of the United States
Government, 1940-45
Price: 2s. 6d. (by post 2s. gd.)
INTERNATIONAL CONTROL
OF ATOMIC ENERGY. Report
prepared for the Secretary of State’s
Committee by a Board of Consultants
.. . . Price: is. (by post is. 2d.)
A preliminary study of the problem to contribute
to the clarification of the position of the U.S.
Representative on the United Nations Commission
on atomic energy. The report is considered by
the Committee to be “the most constructive
analysis of the question of international control
we have yet seen and a definitely hopeful
approach to a solution of the entire problem.”
Both are reprints of Official U.S. Government
Publications
OBTAINABLE DIRECT FROM
HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
OR THROUGH ANY BOOKSELLER
