

« PRINTED BY AZZOPPARDI, HILDRETH AND CO.,
10, 12 & 14 POST-OFFICE PLACE.
REGISTERED UNDER THE COPYRIGHT ACT, 1863,


T EC E
LAND SELECTOES’ GLIDE.
Second Edition, Enlarged.
INDEX.
PAGE.
The Land Laws of Victoria ... ... ... ... ... ... 3
Plain Directions how to select and settle on the Public Lands ... 16
Schedules ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
List of Authorized Surveyors, and fees chargeable by them ... 26
Proposed Amending Land Bill ... 28
Illustration of Successful Co-operative Farming 31
The Lan'O Selectors’ Inquiry and Agency Office 34


JOSEPH NICHOLSON’S
New Patent Double-speed Back-delivery
REAPING AND MOWING
IMI-A-OHI X3STE.
The success of the above Machine has been unparalleled in the Colony as
regards the great satisfaction it has given to the Agricultural community.
Although only introduced late last Season, the large number of Testimonials
received as to its efficiency, and the great number sold, show the estimation
which Agriculturists place on this new invention.
LIST OF FIRST-CLASS PRIZES AWARDED IN 1872.
First Prize, Geelong Agricultural Show.
First Prize, Ballarat Agricultural Show.
First Prize, Clunes Agricultural Show.
First Prize, Smeaton Agricultural Show
First Prize, Silver Medal, Melbourne Intercolonial Exhibition.
First Prize, Beaufort Agricultural Show.
First Prize, Gipps land Agricultural Show.
First Prize, Gold Medal, Dunedin Agricultural Show.
Judge’s Certificate, Longford (Tasmania), as the best reaper
for general purposes in the yard.
CATALOGUES SENT FREE BY POST.
Manufactory, 23 Bouverie Street, Melbourne.


GRANT & CAMERON,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
SEED MERCHANTS,
41 BOURKE STREET WEST, MELBOURNE,
Respectfully notify that the following Seeds can be sent direct by
post, free of charge for carriage, by enclosing Postage Stamps, from
unknown Correspondents;—
GARDEN SEEDS.
Artichokes, 63 per packet
Asparagus, Is per oz
Beans —Broad, 6d per lb
„ —French, 6d to Is per lb
Brocoli, 2s per oz
Brussels Sprouts, Is do
Cabbage, Is do
Carrots, 6d do
Capsicum, 6d per pkt
Cauliflower, 2s 6d to 5s per oz
Celery, Is do
Cress —Water, Is do
„ Curled, 6d do
Cucumber, 6d per pkt
Cape Gooseberry, 6d do
Egg Plant, 6d do
Leek,ls oz
Lettuce, Is do
Mustard, 6d do
Melon—Rock, 6d per pkt
„ Water, 6d do
Marrow—Vegetable, 6d do
Onions, 1 s per oz
Parsley, 6d do
Parsnip, 6d do
Peas, 6d per lb
Pepper, 6d pkt
Pumpkin, 6d do
Radish, 6d peroz
Rhubarb, 2s do
Spinach, 6d do
Turnip, 6d do
Tomato, 6d per pkt.
AGRICULTURAL SEEDS.
Indian Corn, Broom Corn, Buck Wheat, Canary Seed, Hemp
Seed, Rape Seed, Cocksfoot, Lawn Grass, Rye Grass, Soft
Grass, Timothy Grass, and sundry English Grasses.
Clover (white), Clover (red), Clover (crimson), Cow Grass,
Lucerne, Mangel Wurzel, Tares, Tobacco Seed, Trefoil, and
Sugar Beet.
COLLECTIONS OF AUSTRALIAN TREE AND SHRUB SEEDS.
Purchasers of Fruit, Ornamental, and Forest Trees can
rely on being supplied with healthy Trees, and true to
name.


THE
LAND SELECTOR’S
GUIDE.
SECOND EDITION.
(enxabged.)
PRICE, ONE £H 1 LLI NQ.
PUBLISHED BY
GEOEGE AUGUSTUS GOODWIN,
LAN® SELECTOR’S AGENT,
158 QUEEN STREET NORTH,
MELBOURNE.
Registered under the Copyright Act 1869.
PRINTED BY AZZOPPAEDI, HILDRETH AND CO.,
POST OFPICK PLACE.


PREFACE.
The following brief exposition of the several Land Acts that
have been passed by the Victorian Legislature, is designed to
exhibit the most salient features of the respective laws which
have of late years regulated the disposal of the public lands
within the colony. The time seems opportune for such a pro-
duction ; and, so far as the compiler is aware, no other publica-
tion covers the same ground. It is hoped, therefore, that the
work may prove of use at the present time, as it serves to show
the principles which have been steadily pursued for years past
with a view to secure bona fide settlement within the colony,
while it may also help to check a strained and rigid interpretation
of the requirements of the existing law, which if pursued cannot
but be highly detrimental to the best interests, not of selectors
alone, but of the community in general.
There are two classes of applicants for land whose aims are
best promoted by the harsh administration of the law : the one
consisting of persons who do not intend to comply with con-
ditions, beyond payment of fees ; the other, of those who do
comply with conditions, by means of money supplied from
people in whose interest they are employed, while to the
genuine dona fide settler, who is endeavouring to carry out the
purpose and spirit, as well as the letter of the law in its entirety,
to his full ability, it is mere harassment, which culminates in the
crushing out of his efforts and hopes.
In the preparation of the work, the compiler has availed
himself of various published official documents, and of evidence
adduced before Parliament, as well as of the pages of numerous
public writers, who have from time to time given expression to
their thoughts and opinions upon the questions at issue.
GEORGE AUGUSTUS GOODWIN.
158 Queen Street, Melbourne,
31st Julv, 1873.


THE LAND LAWS OF VICTORIA.
So long as Port Phillip remained connected as a district with the
colony of New South Wales, orders of the Imperial Council
carried out under the jurisdiction of Governors and Lieutenant,
Governors, formed the mode under which the lands now com-
prised within Victoria were administered. The country was for
the most part held as runs for grazing purposes by pastoral tenants;
such Crown lands as were alienated in fee bring generally sold at
open auction, or selected after being offered for public sale.
After the creation of the district into a distinct province, which
dates from Ist July, 1851; strenuous efforts were made by the
pastoral tenants to retain, and by the general public to “ unlock”
the lands; and associations were formed on both sides to secure
the objects which each respectively had in view. Upon the procla-
mation of the Victorian Constitution Act, (passed 16th July, 1850,
and proclaimed 23rd November, 1855), the 'Acts in force relat-
ing to the disposal of the lands of the Crown became liable to be
repealed, and other provisions might be enacted by the Legislature
in lieu thereof; and thenceforward the public lands of the colony
were liable to be disposed of by enactments framed by the Parlia-
ment of Victoria. At this period and onward, until several years
after the discovery of gold in Victoria, the colony had made little
progress in agricultural settlement, the auction system having a
tendency to enable the larger capitalists to secure the choicest of
the land submitted to sale; but popular feeling on the subject
of settlement daily increased in force, and shortly, prior to the Ist
November, 1860, when the Hon. James Service was Lands
Minister, a strong disposition was evinced to apply such powers
as were supposed to exist, or could be strained under the orders in
Council to promote settlement; up to that period, “the ex-
tent of land alienated, amounted to 3,914,2-19 acres, which realised
£9,049,131. In this total, the alienation of Country lauds is
represented by 3,733 556 acres, realising £5,724,408, equivalent
to an average rate of one pound nine shillings per acre.”*
The total estimated area of land contained within the colony
of Victoria, is about fifty six millions of acres, from which about
thirteen millions of acres have been alienated in fee, and for publij
* Report of the Land system of Victoria, by H. Byron Moore, Department of
Land and Survey. April 24th, 1868.


roads ; about twenty five millions of acres are held under pastoral
licenses, of which amount about six millions of acres are deemed
unavailable for settlement; commonages, reserves, and lands held
under leases and licenses other than pastoral, approach to nearly
three millions of acres, and something in excess of fifteen millions
of acres are unoccupied ; so that the total unalienated lands of the
colony amount at the present time to about forty millions of acres,
and about sixteen millions of acres have been either alienated or
are liable to be so, inclusive of such as are temporarily or per-
manently reserved for special public uses.*
On the Ist November 1860, the law passed while Mr. William
Nicholson was Chief Secretary of the colony, and entitled “An
Act for Regulating the Sale of Crown Lands,” came into opera-
tion, Dr. Greeves being Land Minister at the time. It provided
for the survey, with all possible dispatch, of country lands to
the extent of three millions of acres (within one year after the
passing of the Act), as much as possible in districts, and not,
unless under circumstances of necessity, in isolated or scattered
allotments; that the allotments so surveyed should not be less
than eighty acres, nor more than six hundred and forty acres in
extent, and be divided in two equal portions to be called sub-
divisions and marked on plans and proclaimed open for sale by se-
lection ; that the uniform price of the land should be one pound
per acre; that the applicant who was declared the selector of one
subdivision, and paid the purchase money thereof, might elect to
take up the other subdivision on the same terms, or to obtain a
lease of it for a term of seven years at a yearly rent of one
shilling per acre, payable in advance; that at any time within
the term he might purchase the subdivision so leased for the
uniform price of the land; that improvements to the value of
one pound per acre should be made on the purchased subdivision
within one year from the commencement of the time of purchasing
and renting, or the lease would become void; that the selector
should be subject to a penalty of five shillings per acre if within
two years improvements the value of which in pounds sterling,
equal to half the number of acres purchased, had not been
effected, and such penalty might be sued for in the nearest
County Court by any person; and such penalty would be incurred
yearly until the mproveraents were effected, but the Governor-in-
Council muht direct that such penalty should not be enforced;
that on the expiration of a lease improvements effected in the
renied subdivision might be removed, but the fencing along the
* This is an approximate estimate primarily based upon the Surveyor
T-eneral’s evidence before the Legislative Council on Railways, October
10th, 1871.


external boundary might be valued and the value thereof added
to the price of the land, and the lessee be paid the amount of
such valuation out of the purchase money on the allotment being
sold. The assignment of the purchased land, until after the
expiration of one year from selection, rendered the selector liable
to a penalty of two hundred pounds, and residence on the part
of the selector or his assign, either on the rented or purchased
subdivision, was a condition imposed, or the lease became void.
The rented subdivision was to be used for pastoral purposes only.
This Act became the basis upon which subsequent legislation re-
lating to land was founded: there were many defects in its struc-
ture, and when about 804,G33 acres had been alienated under the
Act, it became necessary to legislate afresh in the interests of hona
fide settlement.
Mr. Richard Heales succeeded Mr. Nicholson as Chief Secre-
tary, with Mr. J. H. Brooke as Minister of Lands, and under the
68th clause of the Act regulations were published in the Govern-
ment Gazette under date 16th May and 28th August, 1861,
to give effect to the issue of licenses for residence and cultivation,
founded upon the power given to the Board of Land and Works
by that clause, to grant leases for a term nut exceeding seven
years, for such purposes as appeared to the Board to be for the
public advantage. These licenses, called residence and cultivation
licenses, required, as their designation implies, residence and im-
provements within reasonable time after issue of license; they
were for land from forty to one hundred and sixty acres in
extent; they might not be issued to minors; they could not be
transferred without the Board’s consent; the fee was two shillings
and sixpence per acre per annum, payable quarterly in advance ;
they were to be issued for one year, and might be renew ed annually
up to seven years; the land might be offered for sale by auction,
with valuation for improvements, upon the request of the licensee,
but the Government would refrain from selling it within the
seven years without the licensee’s request. These licenses were
declared, on trial before the Supreme Court of the colony, to be
outside the scope of the 68th clause of the Act, and therefore
invalid. Shortly after this decision, the Heales Administration
was succeeded by that of Mr. O’Shanassy, with Mr. Duffy as
Minister of Lands, and a new Land Act—that of 1862—became
law. It came into operation June 18th, 1862, and repealed all
former laws, orders-in-council, and regulations having the force
of law, under which the public domain had previously been sold,
granted, leased, or licensed.
This Act was framed in an exhaustive and comprehensive
spirit, and its administrator took immense pains to make its


provisions known. It was designed to give increased facilities
for settlement, and was throughout a compromise and an en-
deavour to reconcile conflicting interests. It failed partly
through laches in its administration; but chiefly because it did not
contain within itself effective means to ensure the fulfilment of
the obligations it imposed on the selector, the result being disas-
trous both as to the manner in which the public estate became
alienated under it, and as to the imperfections of title under
which much of the alienated land is still held, involving frequent
and costly appeals to legal tribunals, and causing feelings of
anger in the persons immediately concerned. The principal
feature of the Act consisted in the apportionment of ten and a
half millions of acres of the best lands of the colony into districts
comprising from twenty to thirty thousand acres each, under the
designation of “ agricultural areas,” and surveyed into convenient
sized allotments, varying from forty to six hundred and forty acres.
It was estimated that one hundred and fifty of such areas would
be proclaimed open to selection within three months after the
passing of the Act, containing not less than 4,000,000 of acres.
Surveys were to be made from time to time, as much as possible
in extensive districts ; plans were to be prepared and two millions
of acres were to be kept constantly open for selection; while so
much of the ten and a half millions of acres remained unsold.
The subdivision of the allotments into two equal portions was
retained. The selector could purchase the whole allotment at
one pound per acre, or could purchase one moiety
thereof and secure a • lease for eight years of the other moiety
at a rent payable in advance of 2s. 6d. per acre, the payments
going as purchase money for the land. The obligations im-
posed were, either that he enclosed the land so leased with a
substantial fence, or that he erected upon it a habitable dwelling,
or that he cultivated at least one acre out of every ten acres of
the allotment within one year after he became a selector, or
failing to comply with one or other of these obligations he became
liable to a penalty of ss. for every acre comprised within the
allotment, but no proceedings to recover the penalty could be
taken except by some person authorised in that behalf by the
Board of Land and Works. No action having been taken by
the administrator of the law, to ascertain whether the condition
of the leases had been complied with, and rents having, subse-
quently to the expiry of the first year of the leases, been ac-
cepted, it has been decided in actions tried before the judges of
the Supreme Court, that the acceptance of the rent was a
waiver of the condition; but as the penal clause was subsequently
re-enacted in the Act of 1869, the present Minister of Lands


can, if not satisfied as to the fulfilment of the improvement con-
dition by evidence furnished to him, refuse to issue the Crown
grants of the land until such penalty is first paid.
This Act also made provision, which was likewise continued
in the Amending Land Act of 1865, for enabling the holders of
residence and cultivation licenses,to obtain a legal title to their land.
Most of the licensees availed themselves of the benefits offered
to them under these respective Acts, but there are still about
twenty of them who failed to do so; and as the Act of 1869 made
no provision to meet their case, those persons are still without any
legal title to their land.
The rapidity with which the land was taken up under this Act,
while the obligations imposed were generally ignored, and the
inefficiency of the machinery of the Act to give effect to the
intention of Parliament, led that body to interpose its
authority, and to shut up the agricultural areas from selection,
the issue of leases for the lands selected being meanwhile delayed.
Upon the fall of the O’Shan assy Administration, which shortly
followed, Mr. McCulloch became Chief Secretary, with Mr. Heales
as Minister of Lands, One of the first acts of the new
Administration was to issue the leases to the Selectors under the
Act of 1862. Upon the death of Mr. Heales, Mr. J. M.
Grant, who had previously been appointed Vice-President of
the Board of Land and Works, became Minister of Lands,
and upon the 23rd March, 1865, the Amending Land Act
became law. The Amending Land Act of 1865 was to continue
in force for the same period of time as the Act of 1862, namely,
until the 31st day of December, 1870, and was to be construed
with and as part of that Act, the selection clauses of which
it repealed, substituting another mode of selection, different term
of lease, other rate of rental, and different conditions of occupa-
tion, and providing means of ascertaining whether those conditions
were fulfilled or not. The survey of allotments varying from forty
to six hundred and forty acres was continued, and the designation
of “ agricultural areas” to extensive districts was retained.
Leases under the seal of the Board of Land and Works, at a rent
of two shillings per annum per acre, payable halt yearly in
advance, for seven years, were granted. Subdivision ot the
allotments might be made on the request ot applicants, with
the approval of the Board. The conditions of every lease were, that
improvements to the value of one pound per acre should be made
on the allotment before the expiring of the second year of the
term ; that no part of the term created by the lease, nor any part
of the land comprised therein, should be assigned, transferred, or
sublet until after the expiration of three years from the creation


of the term; that a certificate under the seal of the Board of Land
and Works that the improvement condition had been fulfilled,
was indispensable to enable a lessee to assign his interest in the
land and in the lease; that upon the foregoing conditions being
fulfilled the lessee might apply, after the third year, to have the
allotment submitted to auction, with the valuation for improve-
ments added thereto; and further, that after the third year until
the end of the term of the lease, if the condition as to improve-
ments had been fulfilled and certified to by the Board, and the
rents duly been paid, and the lessee had been resident for
three years upon the land, he might obtain a grant from the
Crown of the allotment in fee simple on payment of one pound
per acre and fractional part of an acre, as the purchase money
thereof. All the land applied for under this Act was to be for
the lona fide use and benefit of the applicant in his own proper
person, and not as the agent, servant, or trustee of another
person. Upon the violation of the provisions of the Act, the
Governor-in-Council might declare the lease to be forfeited and
with it ad monies paid as rent in respect of it. Inspectors or
Bailiffs were appointed to examine and make reports upon the
improvements effected and the bona fides of the lessees, and
provision was made for arbitration, by arbitrators, in cases
where the lessee and the Board of Land and Works had not
agreed upon the value of the improvements effected. Beside the
before-named mode of leasing, provided for by the 12th section
of the Act, licenses were issued under the 42nd clause of the Act
for one year, which entitled the holders to reside upon and
cultivate the lands so licensed. Such licenses were for twenty
acres only, but the applicants for them became so numerous, that
by means of regulations made in relation thereto, it came to be
the practice of the Department of Lands to issue several licenses
of twenty acres each to one person, up to eighty and sometimes
to one hundred and sixty acres. This latitude made in the interests
of selectors had the effect of settling working miners, married
labourers, storekeepers, dairymen, and farmers upon the public
lands, and thereby homesteads sprung up with amazing rapidity,
especially within the neighbourhood of the gold-fields. An
interesting account of the settlement effected under this clause,
was published in the year 1869, by the special reporter of the
Argus newspaper.
Ihe success of the Act under Mr. Grant* s administration, in
promoting settlement, is undeniable. Within a few weeks after
it came into operation, there were upwards of a million acres
of land selected under it, and the revenue of the colony became
enriched proportionately. During the five years of his adrninis-


tration, the Board of Land and Woiks issued four thousand
certificates bearing its seal, to the effect that improvements in
conformity with the Act had been made by the lessees to the extent
of one pound sterling per acre and fractional part of an acre selected,
the total value of the improvements exceeding one and a half
millions of pounds sterling outlayed in fencings, buildings, dams,
clearing, sowing grasses, and the general work of preparing the land
for use and cultivation. The facts are noteworthy as bringing to
view:—lst The rapidity and briskness of settlement, and amplitude
of revenue obtained by the rapid selection of land. 2nd. The ab-
sorption of labour and material in effecting the improvements upon
the land, 3rd. The circulation of a large amount of currency
amongst the community. 4th. Asa consequence of the whole
general activity in trade and commerce. It realised, in a great
degree, a glowing description which a morning journal had given
when it said : —“ The farmer and his family require a house to live
in, barns to contain the produce of the land, and carriers to convey
it to market. He requires furniture for his house, harness for his
horses, agricultural implements for his farm, clothing for himself,
his wife, and children, as well as education for the latter. There-
fore, in every district studded with farms there springs up a little
community of people engaged in ministering to the wants of their
occupants. The wheelwright and blacksmith, the harness
maker, bricklayer, carpenter, clothier, boot and shoe maker, the
miller and general storekeeper; and, before long, the school-
master and minister of religion congregate, and fix their residence
at some convenient centre of the rural settlement, and the
foundations of a township are thus laid.”
As the period drew on when the Land Act of 1862 and the
Amending Land Act of 1865 would expire by effluxion of time,
it became necessary that provision should be made afresh for
disposing of the public lands, and in the session of 1869 Parlia-
ment passed the law which is at present in force. That came
into operation on the Ist day of February, 1870, and was
designed to continue until the 31st day of December, 1880.
In the preface which accompanies the authorised copies of this
Act, issued by its first administrator, Mr. James McKean, the
following passage occurs. Under “ the Land Act, 1869, a new
system is inaugurated, governing the occupation and alienation of
Crown lands in Victoria. It has been the special aim and
endeavour of the Legislature, in the framing and amendment of
this law during its passage through Parliament, to afford to all
persons, bona fide, desiring to acquire the fee-simple of
agricultural lands in this colony, with the intention to settle
thereon, the greatest facilities for the attainment of their object;


and it is hoped that the law now in operation (having reference
as well to the Rules and Regulations under the Act, as to the
Act itself), framed with a knowledge of the results of former legis-
lation, will enable settlers to acquire under its liberal provisions
valuable freeholds, as properties for themselves and heritages for
their families.” 8
The main features of the Act are, that it opens the whole
territory for selection; that no selector may take up more than
320 acres; that all persons who have selected to the extent of
820 acres, under former Land Acts, are prohibited from selection
under this Act; that it debars the owner of a pre-emptive
right from further selection ; that it excludes all persons from be-
coming selectors who, having made selections under former Land
Acts, had them forfeited or cancelled for evading the provisions of
those Acts; that no person under 18 years of age may become
a selector, nor any married woman who has not obtained a decree
of judicial separation, nor any person who applies as the agent,
servant, or trustee of another person. The selector is to apply
for the land hona fide for his own use and benefit, and for viola-
tion of the law money paid as fees becomes forfeited, and all
interest in the land selected ceases.
The mode of granting the land is by a license having three
years currency, the conditions of which are, that within six
months of the date of it, the licensee will go into occupation of
the land personally, and thenceforward up to the expiration of the
term will reside thereon; that within two years from the date
of the license he will enclose the land with a substantial fence ;
that within three years of the date of the license he will cultivate
one acre out of every ten acres comprised therein; that he will
pay an occupation fee of two shillings per annum for every
acre and fractional part of an acre by half yearly payments, in
advance, during the currency of the license; that he will not
assign the license, nor transfer his interest in it, nor in the land
described therein, nor sublet any part of the allotment; and that
the licensee will supply proof to the Board, by such evidence as it
shall require, that before the expiring of the term of the
license, he or she has effected improvements permanently con-
nected with the soil, to the value of one pound per acre and
fractional part of an acre of the allotment, to be certified to in
writing under the seal of the Board or under the hands of
arbitrators. It is to be noticed that while the Act conserves the
large powers with which it invests the Governor, it also qualifies,
in an important manner and upon equitable principles, the
rigidness of the conditions imposed, for in the matter of residential
occupation an exception is made in favour of the executors and


administrators of a deceased licensee; in the matter of valuation in
improvements effected, it controls and to some extent supersedes
the power of the Board by making the valuations of arbitrators
appointed conformably with the Act binding, final, and conclusive
as well against the Board as against the licensee, his executors
and administrators ; and in the matter of improvements it defines
what operations or things performed shall be included under that
designation. While the onus of proof, therefore, of having com-
plied with the conditions of the license is put upon the licensee,
the spirit of concession by which the Act is to be interpreted and
administered is made evident by the qualifications which ln l*
poses. It is important to keep this in mind, as it affords
evidence of the strongest kind that the framing of of
a harsh, harassing, and arbitrary nature for the purpose of carrying
out the routine and details of the law, are in the highest degree
repugnant to its spirit and to the intentions of Parliament.^
When the licensee has established, as before stated, his hona
tides, he or she is entitled to demand and obtain from the
Governor a Crown Grant for the allotment, upon payment of
fourteen shillings for each acre or fractional part of an acre, or
he or she may obtain a lease of the allotment for a term of seven
years, at a yearly rent of two shillings for every acre or fractional
part of an acre demised, such rent to be paid by equal half yearly
payments in advance, and the rents so reserved and paid shall
on the payment of the last sum due, be reckoned as purchase
money, or the lessee, or his legal representative, may at any time
within the term pay up the difference between the amount of
rent paid and the sum of one pound for each acre and fractional
part of an acre, and become entitled to a grant in fee of the
land leased. The application for a grant or lease is to be made
within thirty days after the expiration of the license, and if within
sixty days after the expiration of the license the Board does
not issue its certificate as to the value of improvements effected;
the improvements may be valued by arbitrators, who are to give
their valuation of the improvements in writing within four
months of the date of the expiration of the licence.
It should be observed that the Act makes very important
concessions to lessees and licensees who hold land under the
12th section and 42nd section of the Amending Land Act, 1865 ;
these respectively are placed by it in a position to obtain Crown
Grants of their holdings, having the amount paid by them as
rents and as fees reckoned as purchase money, the residence
conditions of the leases being waived. The 12th section lessees,
who have fulfilled all the covenants of their lease except that of
residence, may after the expiry of three years from the commence-


ment of the lease, surrender such lease and obtain from the
Governor a lease for seven years, at a rent payable yearly in ad-
vance of two shillings for each acre, and fractional part of an acre
demised ; and upon the payment of the last sum due on account
of rent so reserved, or at any time during the term upon pay-
ment of the difference between the amount of rent paid and the
sum of one pound for each acre and fractional part of an acre,
he or she, their heirs or assigns, are entitled to a Crown Grant
in fee of the lands leased.
It will, therefore, be seen that through successive stages con-
tinual endeavours have been made since the year 1860, to settle
persons hona fide on the land ; that restrictions have been
removed and compromises effected ; and that the present law is
in its design and spirit, opposed to the enactment of regula-
tions that would be oppressive to licensees and hindrances to
settlement. Nearly all the conditions that served hitherto to
thwart the efforts of hona fide settlers, have from time to time
been removed. One penal clause alone, having reference to the
obligations of a selector under the 36th section of the Act of
1862, and of the 7th section of the Amending Act of 1865,
has been enacted, and that clause has hitherto been almost
wholly inoperative. The compilers of it hoped to have added
a sum of £50,000 to the revenue by enacting it, but the revenue
has never been augmented by it to an appreciable extent, whilst
the injury inflicted by the litigation which has arisen, and will
inevitably arise, unless its operation is withdrawn, will come to
be a far greater evil than if the original offence had been by
consent condoned.
One of the worst evils that is presented to view at the present
time, in matters of legislation, is the power that is exercised by
the Executive in framing regulations for carrying out of laws
passed by the Legislature, the general effect of regulations so
framed being to centralize power within the Executive and
virtually to supersede, if not to ignore, the functions of Parlia-
ment. This has been frequently done in respect of laws enacted to
deal with the public lands. The residence and cultivation
licenses, issued under regulations framed during the administra-
tion of Mr. Brooke, were set aside by the decision of the judges
of the Supreme Court, as being beyond the scope of the 68th clause
of the Land Actof 1860. The regulations issued under the auspices
of Mr. Grant, by means of winch several licenses were issued to
one licensee under the 42nd clause of the Amending Land Act
of 1865, provoked the most virulent criticism, and in both the
cases named the respective Ministers defended the course they
adopted on the grounds that they acted for the public good.


It was under the operation of regulations that Mr. McKean
placed restrictions upon free selection antagonistic to the primal
purpose of the Land Act of 1869, and that both he and Mr,
MacPherson wrongfully reserved some of the choicest allotments
of land in the colony from being selected And now, just at
the period when skill and discretion on the part of the adminis-
trator of the land law are qualities greatly needed, there issues
forth a series of regulations of which the mildest language that can
be used respecting some of them is that they appear to overrule
the law of Parliament, and it is probable that they will, if
acted upon, precipitate a crisis of great magnitude, and entail
consequences of a most disastrous kind, not merely to land
selectors, but to the whole community. These observations
apply with peculiar force to schedule 4, chapter 4, section 18,
of the land regulations that came into operation on the 2nd June,
1873. It is the form of application and declaration upon oath
demanded of a licensee, who should within thirty days after the
expiration of his license, apply for a lease or a Crown grant of his
allotment. It reads as follows :
SCHEDULE IY.
Eobm of Application foe Lease oe Ceown G-bant bx Licensee.
Address—
Post Town—
Extent of Land, gju, Date —
a. r- p. Being the holder of a license No. under section 19 of
’ : : The Land Act 1869 to occupy the land specified in the margin
AUotment— hereof, and having occupied the said land for a period
Seciion— of at least two years and a half, and having complied
with the conditions of such license, I hereby apply for a of the said land,
and for the certificate of the Board of Land and Works for the improvements
thereon ; and I send herewith, in support of such application, my declaration
upon oath that I now make the said application in conformity with and not in
violation of any of the provisions of the said Act.
I have the honor to be, Sir, your most obedient servant.
To the Hon. the President of the Board of Land and Works, Melbourne.
Form of Declaration upon Oath hy Licensee.
I, of , being the holder of a license to occupy the above-mentioned
allotment, make oath and declare —
1. That I have paid £ s. d., being all fees due on the said license.
2. That I have not at any time assigned or sublet the said allotment or any
part thereof or transferred my interest or any part of my interest therein.
3. That within two years from the issue of the said license I enclosed the
said allotment with a good and substantial fence, and that during the currency
of the said license I cultivated at least one acre out of every ten in the said
allotment.
4 That within six months from the issue of the said license, and thence-
forward during the continuance thereof, I resided in my own proper person
for a period of not less than two years and a half upon the said allotment.
5. That before the end of the third year from the commencement of the
said license I made upon the said allotment permanent and substantial
improvements of the value of One pound for every acre and fractional part of
an acre contained therein.


6. That I have complied with all the other conditions of the said license.
r 7. That I make this application in conformity with the provisions ot the
Land Act, 1869, and not in violation of any of them.
8. That the statements made by me in reply to the questions hereto sub-
joined are true and correct in every particular.
List of Improvements above referred to. Yalue. £
Dam ...
Well ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Cultivation
Fencing
Clearing ... ... ... ...
Draining ... ... ... ... ...
Building attached to soil, farm or other
Signature—
Occupation —
Address —
Declared upon oath at in the Colony of Victoria,
this day of 187 before me, one of Her >
Majesty’s Justices of the Peace in the said Colony. )
Note. —District Surveyors, Land Officers, and other officers connected with the
Lands Department are directed to assist selectors infilling up this applica-
tion and declaration. No fee is to he offered or accepted for such assistance.
Further particulars to be furnished by licensee when making application for
Crown Grant or Lease under section 20, Land Act, 1869.
_ No. Cost n -
Fencing Description thereof. 0 f Chains. per Chain. £ S. d.
Post and 8-rail, split stuff.
Post and 2-rail, ditto ...
Post, rail, and wire
Post and wire
Stone wall
Stub, or picket
Log
Chock and log
Log and brush
Brush
Have you arranged with occupiers
of adjoining lands for payment of
any portion of the above fences ?
Who are the occupiers of the ad-
joining lands ?
Cultivation
Number of *cres ploughed and cio.-t Nature of Yield pel
cultivated. pe Ac re. Crop. Acre.
Ist year
Buildings
Description, I ’imensiona.
Materials.
Water
Storage.
I 'ascription.
Dimensions, &c.
All other
improve-
ments.
Reservoir
Well ...
Particulars of nature and cost.
Total Cost of Improvements £


How many rooms does your dwelling-house contain ?
Is it permanently attached to the soil of this allotment ?
Have you resided here continuously ?
Have you any other place of abode ? If so, where ?
Where does your family reside ?
Have you or do you follow any other, if so, what business or employment ?
Do you own any land in fee-simple ? If so, state the number of acres, situa-
tion, and purpose to which it has been applied.
Do you hold any land under another license or lease from the Crown P If so,
state the number of acres, situation, and purpose to which it has been
applied.
If in either of the above two last mentioned cases the land has been cultivated,
state the particulars thereof as fully as hereinbefore required, and also
the distance in each case from this allotment.
This was read over to the declarant in my presence this day
of 187 . J.P.
Some of the particulars insisted upon in this form of appli-
cation lie outside of the scope of the Land Act altogether.
It is such a declaration upon oath as ought not to be re-
quired of any licensee, but it having been adopted under
the sanction of law, can only, be set aside by similar sanc-
tion, and not by any communication of lesser force. A mes-
sage emanating from the Assistant Commissioner of Lands
and Survey, whether in the character of a circular or as a foot
note to the prescribed form of application, carries no authority
in law whereby the form itself can be superseded. Neither could
the Board of Land and Works find any justification for issuing
the form of certificate prescribed by chapter 17, schedule 37,
when erasures in the form of declaration made on oath had been
committed. There is but one legal way of dealing with the
document, and that is by revoking it in due course of law, in
order that a form of declaration may be employed wholly con-
sistent with the provisions of the 20ih section ol the Act.
In the forms prescribed for Crown grants and leases
by chapter 17, of these regulations, schedules 28 and
29, there are clauses relating to mining, and to the resumption
of parts of the land leased or granted, that are not warranted by
the language of the 99th section of the Act, and will, if acted
upon, create a large amount of confusion in titles to land. There
is in the regulations a departure from the provisions of the Act
respecting the time when the license fee for the half year’s
occupation is to be deposited with the officer appointed to
receive fees. Following upon these remarks the reader’s atten-
tion is drawn to the contents of the succeeding pages, containing
plain directions how to select and settle on the public lands in
accordance with the prescribed regulations.


GOODWIN’S
SELECTOR’S GJ-XJIIDE,
CONTAINING- PLAIN DIRECTIONS
HOW TO SELECT AND SETTLE ON THE PUBLIC LANDS,
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
PRESCRIBED REGULATIONS, LAND ACT, 1869.
REGULATIONS, JUNE 2nd, 1873.
Intending selectors should not be misled by the supposition
that all is to be sure work and certain success with them when
they enter upon the endeavour to secure an allotment of land.
It is necessary that they should first of all be satisfied that the
land they desire to have is not officially withheld from being
selected, licensed, leased, or sold, by virtue of the 102nd clause
of the Act. Part 2of the Act applies to the alienation of land
by license, lease, and sale, but land within the boundaries of any
city, town, or borough, cannot be taken up under sections 19 and
20 of the Act.
Authorised Surveyors*
The names and postal address of Surveyors, authorised by the
Board of Land and Works to make surveys for selectors, and the
fees they may charge, are from time to time published in the
Government Gazette.
District Surveyors.
The Government Surveyor of every district is to keep a plan
in his office, showing the boundaries of every allotment applied
for within the locality. He is to be a member of the Local Land
Board, and seven days before the sitting of the Board he is to
publish in a local newspaper a list of applications and matters to
be heard at such Board ; and within five days after the sitting of
the Board he is to send to the Minister of Lands the report of
the Board upon the applications.
Every applicant for land is to pay to the District Surveyor a
due proportion of the cost of the publication of the list of appli-
cations.
* For list of Surveyors who have been already duly authorised to effect
surveys, and the fees payable to them, see page 26


Pegging and Application.
Applicants for land under the 19th section of the Act, are
to place at each corner of each parcel or allotment of land applied
for, a conspicuous post or cairn of stones between the hours
of 9 o’clock in the morning and 4 o’clock in the afternoon, with
a notice affixed in writing on each post or cairn of stones, giving
his name and address, the approximate extent of the land applied
for, and that he is an applicant for the land; and he must main-
tain the notice thereupon and thereafter until the license is
granted or refused.
Within seven days after marking out the land, he must deliver
his application in person to the Land Officer of the District, if
the allotment be the whole of a surveyed allotment.
If the allotment be uusurveyed, or be, or include part of a
surveyed allotment, the applicant must, within seven days after
marking out the land, give instruction to some authorised
surveyor to make a survey of the land, and must, within twenty-
one days from the time of marking out the land, deliver his
application, along with the Surveyor’s plan, description and re-
port. The application must be upon the form prescribed in
Schedule No. I.* which can be obtained at \he District Land
Office, and is to be declared to upon oath before a Justice of the
Peace. It must be delivered to the District Land Officer (pre-
sumedly at his office) by the applicant in person, between the
hours of eleven o’clock, a.m., and two o’clock, p.m., on any week
day except Saturday, or on Saturday between the hours of eleven
o’clock, a.m., and twelve o’clock, noon.
Local Land Boards •
Local Land Boards are appointed to investigate publicly the
applications submitted to them by the District Surveyor, and
matters referred to them by the Minister. Persons having
objections to offer, should state them in writing to the District
Surveyor, at least three days before the Board meeting ; but
technical objections as to the time sanctioned by the regulations ;
are not to be regarded as necessarily fatal.
When the Minister of Lands has considered the report of the
Local Land Board, and approves of the issue of a license to an
applicant, such applicant will be notified of the fact, and must
thereupon, within one month of the date of notification, pay to
the officer named in the notification, during office hours, the foes
for occupation, and for preparing of the license, and for survey,
and will receive a receipt from such officer, as in form prescribed
# See page 21.


by schedule No. 2,* which will be authority sufficient to him to
occupy the allotment mentioned therein until the license is
issued. If an application for a whole surveyed allotment is ap-
proved of, the applicant must pay, during office hours, to the
proper officer the sum of one pound, to cover the cost of survey
and of the report upon his application. When an application is
approved upon a survey furnished at the expense of another
applicant, the Minister will direct that no license be issued until
the unsuccessful applicant has been recouped the charges in-
curred for survey.
Every applicant, on being notified of the approval of his appli-
cation, who fails to pay the fees within one month thereafter,
will be deemed to have abandoned his claim, and the allotment
will become available to other applicants.
Licenses will be issued in accordance with schedule 3f of the
regulations, subject to the whole or part of the land being re-
sumed for public or mining purposes.
The half yearly occupation fee must be paid during the
currency of the license, at the same office as the first instalment
was paid, except expressly otherwise directed by the Minister of
Lands.
If the Minister, after considering applications made as before
stated, deems it inexpedient, on account of mining or other
objections, to issue a license under clause 19 of the Act for the
land applied for, and if he approve of the land specified being
otherwise licensed, the person who applied for the land may
obtain to the extent of twenty acres of it, under section 49 of
the Act, without further application. Under section 49 of the
Act, lands not exceeding twenty acres in extent may be taken
up under license in the vicinity of gold-fields, if no valid objec-
tion exists to the occupation of the land applied for, and if it is
not exempted from occupation for reasons set forth in chapter
10 of the regulations.§ And after the expiration of one year
from the date of the license, if the Minister is satisfied that the
laud is not auriferous, and that the conditions of the license
have been fulfilled, he may, at the licensee’s request, cause the
land to be sold at public auction, subject to valuation of the
licensee’s improvements thereon. Schedules 17 and 18J of the
regulations set forth respectively the form of application and the
conditions for occupying land under section 49 of the Act. In
all other respects, except the continuous payment of the license
fee, the same line of procedure is to be adopted as is followed
for selecting land under the 19th section of the Act.
* Page 22 f Page 22. § Page 23. £ Page 2i.


When the licensee, under section 49 of the Act, desires to
continue his right of occupation under the license, he may
have it renewed, if within fourteen days of its expiring he
notify his desire to the Minister, and if required, adduce
evidence that he has complied with the conditions of the license
then in force.
The foregoing licences, under the 49th section of the Act, are
termed “ Residence and Cultivation Licenses.” Under the same
49th section of the Act, “ Residence Area Licenses” may be
obtained by persons who occupy any Crown land on any gold-
field under a miner's right. Only one such license will be issued
to any one applicant, and that for not more than a quarter of an
acre of land; but this will not debar him from occupying
another allotment under a miner's right.
For a “ residence area license ” the annual fee is five shillings,
and the land may be sublet, so that under this kind of license
the licensee may be obtaining a rent for the land comp-ised in it,
while he is himself engaged in mining on another piece of land.
Schedule No. 19* supplies the form of application tobeysed, and
specifies the conditions of the license. There is to be a plan,
description and report of the land furnished Ay an authorised
surveyor, and these with the application are to be delivered to
the District Surveyor. * The license may be renewed yearly,
but no assignment of it will have any effect until it has been
registered by the Minister. Licensees under the 42nd section
o f°the Amending Land Act, 1865, whose applications to pur-
chase their holdings under section 31 of the Land Act, 1869,
have been refused, may obtain renewed licenses under chapter 5
of the regulations, on payment of the following fees :
For a license for an area not exceeding twenty
acres ... • ••• ••• £9 2 6
For every additional twenty acres, or other smaller
area over the first twenty acres included in
the license ... ... ••• ••• 0 2 6
For a license for two or more contiguous areas
consolidated in one license ... ... LOO
The occupation fee will be the same as was payable under the
original license, but when these have altogether reached a sum
equal to the purchase money of the land, the payment of license
fees will cease, excepting a small formal rent, r.s the Board of
Land and Works shall direct.
The regulations further provide for sales of land by auction ;
for the granting of licenses for various specified purposes ; for
* See page 25.
B 2


the cutting of timber; for sites for saw mills; for licenses for
cutting timber, in specified portions of State forests, to the extent
of 1000 acres; for leases of land for roads, tramways, and
crossings; for leases, ranging from seven to twenty-one years,
for divers specified purposes; for licenses to construct water
easements upon private land; for licenses to divert water flowing
upon, through, or bounded by Crown lands, for mill uses; for
the proclaiming and management of commons; for pastoral
licenses and sale of runs at auction; for the resumption of land
for mining purposes; for the fixing of fees payable for Crown
grants and other documents; and for forms to be used for the
various objects set out in the Act and by the regulations.
The several regulations and schedules constitute a voluminous
code, filling over twenty pages of the Government Gazette, as
they appear in an amended form in Gazette, No. 43, May 30th,
1873.
The Act also provides that leases may be granted for the
construction of canals. It also prescribes for the travelling of
sheep and cattle; for the control and management of public
parks and reserves ; for the sale of unbranded wild cattle depas-
turing on Crown lands; for the appointment of Bailiffs of Crown
lands; for the enforcement of penalties; and for an annual re-
port by the Minister to the Legislature of the proceedings taken
under the Act.
Any information required in relation to any part of the Laud
Act or of the Regulations, will be supplied by the Publisher,'
GEORGE AUGUSTUS GOODWIN,
CROWN LANDS, LANDS AND TITLES AGENT,
158 QUEEN STREET NORTH,
MELBOURNE.
31s‘ July, 1873,


SCHEDULE 1.
Application foe License tjndee Paet 11. of “ The Land
Act 1869.”
I of* hereby make application, under Part 11. of The * ere stat ®
Land Act 1869, for the allotment described hereunder; and I a “ )O JJ e e a ||d °tbe
hereby undertake to accept a license subject to a condition occupation of
that should the said land or any part thereof be required for the applicant,
the use of any projected railway, or for mining purposes, I
shall relinquish possession of the land in respect of which such
license may be issued, or any part thereof that may be required
for any such purpose, subject to such conditions regarding com-
pensation as may be prescribed by Regulations.
I, of make oath and declare, that on the day of
187 ,at o’clock, I placed conspicuous posts or
cairns of stones with notices thereon at the corners of the allot-
ment for which I hereby make application,f that the plan, +lf the appli-
description, and report thereof, which are annexed hereto, have r ot ®
leen furnished to me at my request hy A.B. of , an ment, strike out
Authorised Surveyor, and are in the same condition as that in the words in
which I received them from him; that I have not taken up a italioB-
- right; that I have selected under this and pre-
vious Land Acts acres ; that no selection made by me
under this or any previous Land Act or Acts has been forfeited
or cancelled for the evasion of the provisions of any such Land
Act or Acts ; and that the area I desire to obtain would not,
if added to the area already selected by me under this or any
previous Land Act or Acts, exceed 320 acres; that I- am not
under eighteen years of age And that with respect to
this application, I am not an agent, or a servant of, or a trustee as the case ma ’
for any other person ; that I have not entered into any agree- fce] insert the
ment to permit any other person to acquire by purchase or other-
wise the allotment in respect of which this application is made, "that
or any part thereof, or my interest therein, or the usufruct I am a tmrried
' woman, hut have
thereof. obtained a de-
Signature cree 0 f judicial
Occupation — separation.
Address —
Declared on oath, at in the Colony of Victoria
this day of 187 , before me, f
one of Her Majesty’s Justices of the Peace C
in the Colony of Victoria. '
Situation and Area
of Allotment app'ied for,
if previously surveyed.
Description of the Land
applied for, if previ-
ously uusu’ veved, or
forming part only of a
surveyed allotment.
Beport by Land
Officer.
Date and
hour of re- (
ceiptofap- C
plication )
Date ofj
transmis-
Beport bv Dis-
trict urveyor.
Date when
received (
from Land C
Officer )
Report—
sion of ap- !
plication j
to District j
Surveyor J
Land Officer Dis
Sui veyor
Office hours from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m.; Saturdays, 11 a.m. to 12 noon.


SCHEDULE 11.
Form of Book for Ricohd of Application by Land Officer.
Register of Applications for Licenses under Part 11. of The Land Act 1869.
Time. Name in lull. Descripiioit.
— Signature of m
Allotment, } A PP U t
No. Date o Christian Section,or other p j.i Extent 3
L ate h. m Surname Name distinguishing idllsll Chiist n name ®
187 ' mark ak. r. ln fuU - *
Receipt.
No. Office, 187 •
Received ironi the sum of pounds shillings, the same
to be considered as fee for one half-year’s occupation of acres roods
perches in the parish of , under Part II [or section 49] of The
Land Act 1869 ; and pounds shillings pence, being fee for pre-
paration of license and pound for cost of survey.
£ . : Fee for half-year’s occupation.
£ . : Preparation fee.
£ : : Survey fee.
Total.
Receiver and Paymaster.
SCHEDULE 111.
Conditions of License under Section 19, Part 11., of “ The Land Act
1869.
1. The fee for occupation shall be paid in advance by half-yearly payments
of £ : : to at
2. The licensee shall not during the currency of this license assign the
license nor transfer his right, title, and interest therein, or in the allotment
therein described or any part thereof, nor sublet the said allotment or any
part thereof, and the license shall become absolutely void on assignment
thereof, whether by operation of law or otherwise, or upon the said allotment
or any part thereof being sublet.
3. The licensee shall within two years from the issue of this license enclose
the land described therein with a good and substantial fence, and shall during
the currency thereof cultivate at least one acre out of every ten acres held
thereunder.
4. This license shall become null and void in case of non-payment of the
fees, or any of them, in accordance with the conditions herein mentioned, or
in case the licensee shall not within six months after the issue of the license,
and thenceforward during the continuance thereof, occupy the allotment, or in
case substantial and permanent improvements, certified in writing under the
seal of the Board or under the hands of arbitrators to be of the value of One
pound for every acre and fractional part of an acre of the allotment, shall not
have been made on the allotment by the licensee, his executors or adminis-
trators, before the end of the third year from the commencement of this
license, or in case of the breach or non-fulfilment of any of the conditions of
this license, or a violation of any of the provisions of The Land Act, 1869.
5. If the licensee shall during the currency of this license occupy the
allotment for not less than two years and a half, and shall fence and cultivate,


as provided by the said Act, and make the improvements of the nature and
value in the previous condition mentioned on the allotment during the said
period of three years, and shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board (to be
certified under its seal), by such evidence as the Board may require, that he
has complied with the said conditions and with all other conditions of this
license, he shall be entitled at any time within thirty days, after three years
from the commencement of this license, to demand and obtain from the
Governor a Crown grant upon payment of Fourteen shillings for each acre,
or fractional part of an acre, or otherwise he may obtain a lease of the said
allotment; and every such lease shall be for a term of seven years, at a yearly
rent, payable in equal parts half-yearly in advance, of Two shillings for each
acre or fractional part of an acre so demised, and shall contain the usual
covenant for the payment of rent and a condition for re-entry on non-payment
thereof; and upon the payment of the last sum due on account of the rent
so reserved, or at any time during the term upon payment of the difference
between the amount of rent actually paid and the entire sum of One pound
for each acre, the lessee or his representatives shall be entitled to a grant in
fee of the lands leased ; and every such grant shall be subject to such cove-
nants, conditions, exceptions, and reservations as the Governor may direct:
Provided that in the case of the death of the licensee during the currency of
such license it shall not be obligatory on the executors or administrators of
such licensee to comply with the said condition of occupation.
6. If in the opinion of the Board of Land and Works the land in respect
of which this license is issued or any part thereof be required for railways,
roads, telegraph lines, or any other public purpose, the Governor, upon pay-
ment to the licensee of such compensation for the improvements (if any)
effected thereon, and for the license and other fees paid in respect thereof as
may be agreed upon between the Board and such licensee, or in the event of a
disagreement as may be determined by arbitration in the manner prescribed
by Part 11. of The Land Act, 1869, may at any time during the currency of
the license resume the whole or any part of such land, and thereupon the
license shall cease as to such land or to the part resumed.
7. Any holder of a miner’s right may at any time, with the written per-
mission of the Board of Land and Works, enter for mining purposes and
mine upon the land in respect of which this license is issued, or such part
thereof as the Board may by such writing allow, making such compensation
to the licensee for the improvements (if any) effected thereon, and for the
license and other fees paid in respect thereof, as'may be agreed upon between
him and such licensee, or in the event of a disagreement as may be determined
by arbitration in the manner prescribed by Part 11. of The Land Act, 1869,
and if the licensee obstruct any such holder of a miner’s right so entering or
mining as aforesaid the Governor may revoke his license.
Chapter X. —Op Goldfields Licenses.
1. Residence and Cultivation Licenses.
2. Licenses shall not be granted for occupation of lands comprised within
proclaimed reserves, cities, or towns, or within a distance of twenty
chains from sold building lots in boroughs or townships, or within
a distance of twelve miles from the Post Office, Melbourne.
Lands so situated that the occupation thereof would obstruct the holders
of miners’ rights, sawmill licenses, wood or other licenses, in their
access to timber or water.
Lands comprising a greater extent of frontage to a river or creek than
eight chains, measured in a straight line from point to point.
Lands situated on both banks of a river or creek containing permanent
water,


6. The fees to be paid for licenses to occupy land under the 49th section
of the Land Act 1869, for residence or cultivation shall be as follow
For occupation of an allotment situated within a township containing not
more than one hundred and fifty inhabitants, or at greater distance
from the Post Office, Melbourne, than twelve miles, the fees shall
be at the rate of Two shillings per acre, per annum ; unless the area
of such allotment be less than ten acres, in which case the fee shall
be One pound per annum.
For occupation of an allotment situated within a borough or a township
containing more than one hundred and fifty inhabitants, the fees
shall be as follow :
For sites comprising any area not exceeding five acres, Two
pounds per annum.
For sites comprising any area exceeding five acres and not ex-
ceeding ten acres, Two pounds ten shillings per annum.
For sites comprising any area exceeding ten acres and not ex-
ceeding twenty acres, Four pounds per annum.
SCHEDULE XYII.
Form of Application for a License to Occupy Crown Lands on any
' Goldfield or Lands adjacent thereto under the 49th Section
' of “ The Land Act 1869.”
In pursuance of The Land Act 1869,1, the undersigned, being of the full
age of eighteen years, do hereby make application for a license to occupy the
land, a plan, description, and report of which are hereunder given. And I
declare that such plan, description, and report have been furnished to me at
my request by A.B, of ,an Authorised Surveyor, and that they are in
the same condition as that in which they were received by me.
Signature in full —
Occupation —
If owner of the land in fee-simple, state extent—
Address, post town —
Date —
The Honorable the President of the
Board of Land and Works, Melbourne.
SCHEDULE XYIII.
Conditions of Goldfields Residence and Cultivation Licenses.
1. This license only gives to the licensee the right to use the land for the
purposes for which the license has been granted, and for no other purpose
whatsoever.
2. The licensee will not be permitted to assign or sublet the land or any
part thereof, or to part with the possession thereof, or of his interest therein,
without the consent of the Minister first had and obtained.
3. The licensee is required to reside on the land during the continuance of
this license, or within a period of four months from the date hereof to enclose
the same with a good and substantial fence, and cultivate at least one-fifth
portion thereof.
4 If in the opinion of the Responsible Minister administering The Land Act
1869, or any other Act now or hereafter in force relating to the sale of Crown
lands in Victoria, and hereinafter called “ the Minister,” the land in respect
of which this license is issued, or any part thereof, be required for railways,
roads, telegraph lines, dams, reservoirs, races, catchwater drains, pipe tracks,
stone quarries, or any other public purpose, the Governor, upon payment to
the licensee of such compensation, if any, as the Minister thinks fit, may at


any time during the currency of this license resume the whole or any part of
such land, and thereupon the license shall cease as to such land or the part
resumed. • _ , ....
5. Any holder of a miner’s right may at any time, with the written per-
mission of the Minister, enter for mining purposes and mine 'upon the land in
respect of which this license is issued, or such part thereof as the Minister
may by such writing allow, without making any compensation to the licensee,
or, if the Minister so think fit, making such compensation to the licensee and
at such time or times, and in such manner as the Minister may determine.^
6. In case the licensee obstructs any holder of a miner’s right so entering
or mining as aforesaid, this license may be forfeited.
7. Nothing contained in this license shall prevent the person or persons
seised of the right, title, and interest in any claim or claims which were taken
up under miners’ rights prior to the date of this license, from entering upon
any portion of the land the subject of this license, and holding and occupying
the same for mining purposes, without paying any compensation whatsoever,
and all such claimholders and their workmen shall at all times have free
ingress, egress, and regress to, out of, and upon the said land.
8. The license may be forfeited if the licensee commits a breach of or
neglects to comply with any of the above conditions.
9. The publication of a notice in the Government Gazette purporting to
declare that the Governor has annulled or forfeited this license shall be con-
clusive evidence that the license was annulled or forfeited.
SCHEDULE XIX.
Eobm op Application foe Residence Aeea License.
In pursuance of The Land Act 1869, I, the undersigned, being the
occupant for purposes of residence under a miner’s right of the Crown lands
mentioned in the schedule hereto, do hereby make application for a license
to occupy the land, a plan, description, and report of which are hereunder
given. And I declare that such plan, description, and report have been
furnished to me at my request by A. 8., of ,an Authorised Sur-
veyor, and that they are in the same condition as that in which they were
received by me.
Signature in full—
Occupation —
If owner of land in fee-simple, state extent —
Address, post town —
Date—
The Honorable the President of the
Board of Land and Works, Melbourne.
Conditions of Residence Aeea Licenses.
1. This license only gives to the licensee the right to use the land for the
purposes for which the license has been granted, and for no other purpose
whatsoever.
2. The licensee may sublet any part of the land in respect of which this
license is issued, but shall not, without the consent of the Board of Land
and Works first had and obtained, assign such land or any part thereof
or part with the possession thereof or his interest therein.
3. If in the opinion of the Responsible Minister administering The Land
Act 1869, or any Act now or hereinafter in force relating to the sale of
Crown lands in Yictoria, and hereinafter callgd “ the Minister,” the land in
respect of which this license is issued or any part thereof be required for
railways, roads, telegraph lines, dams, reservoirs, races, catchwater drains,


pipe tracks, stone quarries, or any other public purpose, the Governor, upon
payment to the licensee of such compensation, if any, as the Minister thinks
fit, may at any time during the currency of the license resume the whole
or any part of such land, and thereupon the license thall cease as to such land
or the part resumed.
4. Any holder of a miner’s right may at any time, with the written permis-
sion of the Minister, enter for mining purposes and mine upon the land in
respect of which this license is issued, or such part thereof as the Minister may
by such writing allow, without making any compensation to the licensee, or, if
the Minister so think fit, making such compensation to the licensee and at such
time or times and in such manner as the Minister may determine.
5. In case the licensee obstructs any holder of a miner’s right so entering or
mining as aforesaid, this license may be forfeited.
6. The publication of a notice in the Government Gazette purporting to
declare that the Governor has annulled or forfeited this license shall be con-
clusive evidence that the license was annulled or forfeited.
The Fees Chargeable by Authorised Surveyors tor Surveys under
the Regulations.
Marking out an allotment of unsurveyed land, and furnishing
plan, description, and report relative thereto : £ s. d.
Where the area does not exceed 30 acres ... ... ... 2 0 0
» „ 40 „ 2 14 0
60 „ 3 7 0
yy yy
yy yy
80 „ 4 0 0
„ 100 „ 4 10 0
» 120 „ 5 0 0
» 140 „ 5 10 0
„ 160 „ 6 0 0
~ 240 „ 6 10 0
... , » . » 320 „ 7 0 0
Allowance for every mile beyond four miles that the allotment is
distant from the office of the Authorised Surveyor or from his
survey camp ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 2 0
Allowance for every mile beyond four miles if such allotment be
one of two or more allotments surveyed in the same locality
on the same journey ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 10
Subdividing allotments already surveyed, half the fees that would
be payable for marking out unsurveyed land.
For a race not exceeding half a mile in length ... ... ... 400
For a race exceeding half a mile in length, per mile ... ... 70 0
For connection of a race with nearest point of a Government sur-
vey, at per mile ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 200
Authorised Surveyors.
List of Surveyors authorised by the Board of Land and Works to effect
surveys for persons applying to select land under the provisions and regulations
of The Land Act 1869.
Alexandra—Downey, <1 ohn
„ Greig, R. W. S.
Ararat—Compton, E. C.
„ Krause, F. M.
„ Murphy, T. J.
„ Smith, Fred- „ Reeves, W.S. 96 Dovetonst.
Avoca—Griffiths, Jas. ! „ Shaw, J. R., Camp st. •
Bairnsdale—Kempson, H. C.
„ Murray, W. S.
„ Peers, J. G.
Ballarat—Cowan, Thos.
„ Ive, Fred., Lydiard st.
„ Smith, Fred-
„ Simpson, Peter | Beaufort—Smith, Clarence


Beechworth—Davidson, Henry
Belfast —Eawlinson, T. E.
Benalla —Yickery, S. K.
Beveridge —Kelly, J. N.
Brighton—Langtree, A.
Broadford— Fennelly, Richard
Camperdown—Daskein, James
D’Elboux, L. W.
Walker, Horace
Casterton —Gilbert, F. E.
Castlemaine —Bell, T. H.
Chiltern —Arrowsmith, R.
„ Joyce, Edwd.
Colac —Bartlett, J. V.
„ Danaher, Patrick
Coleraine —Farrell, Fred.
Corop—Chapman, James
Daylesford —Yernon, W. S.
Donald —M'Nulty, T. E.
Dunolly—Couchman, W. G.
Eaglehawk —O’Dwyer, J. F.
East Charlton— Angoye, W. H.
Echuca —Byrne, Lewis
Foster—Turner, Thos.
Fryerstown —Amos, Mark
Geelong—English, R., Pakington st.
Pearson, C., Little Malop st.
” Shaw, J. L., Yarra st.
Gisborne —Blackburn, G.
Hamilton—Robson, R. O.
„ Smith, Wm.
„ Thornley, Nathan
Harrow —Crosbie, Wm.
Hawthorn—Brown, Tom, Burke road
Horsham —Johnstone, Easton
„ Stokell, Robt.
Inglewood —Cherry, Walter
„ O’Meally, J. B.
Jamieson —Hughes, T L.
Jung-jung—Tuxen, August
Kewell —Breen, T. J.
Kilmore —Delisser, Alfred
Kyneton —Maxwell, J. R.
„ Murray and Hargreave
Maldon —Walhr, W. H.
Mansfield —Hardy, John
Maryborough—Lightfoot, T. H.
„ O’Leary, D.
Melbourne —Colbert, Edmond, Row-
ena parade, Richmond
„ Irwin, J. C.
„ Lardner, John
„ Whitelaw, Wm.
Penshnrst —Jenkins, J. S.
Port Albert —Hastings, Geo.
„ Lawson, C. W. R.
Portland —Owens, Edwd.
Ray wood —Pelletier, J. W. E,
Rosedale —Jones, G. T.
Rupanyup —Waltham, J. E.
Rushworth —Rowe, S. B.
Sale —Fynmore, J. A.
„ Liddiard, W. W.
„ Pettit, J. H. W.
Sandhurst —Adair, Thomas
„ Fuller, H. W.
„ Harper, E. T.
„ Hawkins, E. J.
„ Maroney, P. C.
„ Nankivell, R., jun.
Shepparton —Leahy, Alfred
„ Nankivell, R.
Smythesdale —Lynch, John
„ White, Andrew
Stawell —Bate, H. C.
St. Arnaud —Davidson, Wm.
„ McNulty, John
„ Pittman, E. F.
Talbot —Smith, Joseph
Taradale —Archdall, Henry
Teesdale —Wilson, 0. A. C.
Walhalla—Walker, A. F.
Wangaratta —Langtree, M. C.
„ Pinniger, Chas.
Woods Point —Ainsworth, A. B.
Wyndham —Le Gould, Louis
Yackandandah —Murphy, James
„ Webster, Cape
„ Wright, Peter
The several official printed forms required for the use of selectors
icill le supplied to them on application at the respective District
Offices throughout the colony.


PROPOSED AMENDING LAND BILL.
The first three years’ existence of “the Land Act 1869 ”
having passed, the practical working of some of its clauses is
now occupying the attention of those most immediately con-
cerned. The object of the Land Act 1869 was to obtain lona fide
settlement upon the lands of the colony, and its conditions made
somewhat stringent, if possible, to secure this result. Residence
by the licensee, in his own proper person, is made one of these.
This condition, however, if insisted upon in its integrity, would have
prevented one of the most bona fide class of selectors from availing
themselves of the benefits otherwise obtained by the Act. I refer
to those persons who at the time of the passing of the Land Act
1869 held land under the 42nd section of the Land Act 1865,
and small holdings under the 12th and 13th sections of that Act.
These licensees, or lessees, found their holdings to be too small,
and, therefore, when the Land Act 1869 was introduced and
became law, they—without staying to consider the conditions to
be observed —applied for and obtained land to the extent
allowed, namely, 320 acres, but having already built their
houses upon their first selections, were unable to comply with the
residence clause of the present land law. A great mistake was
made, that the class of selectors alluded to were not provided for,
and for their sake it becomes needful for an Amending Land Bill
to be immediately passed; for not only must this amendment be
made, but there are many others equally necessary, and I will pro-
ceed to briefly point out some of them. Firstly, the present sys-
tem of making application for land is ruinous to the bona fide
selector, the average time from the date of pegging the land to
the time of lawful possession being six months, in many cases the
selector being kept idle during this time, and his money parting
from him—the very money he ought to be expending in providing
for himself and for improving the land. I could here detail many
annoyances to which the applicant for land is subject, but my
object is more particularly to point out the delay which under the
present system must occur, but which need not exist if a proper
system was introduced, and 1 venture to suggest one.
Let all land in the colony suitable for grazing farms or agricul-
tural purposes be at once correctly surveyed into allotments or
areas, plans of which must be prepared; and in each district, at
the district land office and surveyor’s office, therd should be plans
exhibited for the benefit of the public upon a large scale, wherein
such lands should be set out and defined, so that when an appli-
cant appears at the office he could be requested to point out on
the plan the piece of land he desires, and, if available, there and


then to fill up his application and deposit it with the land officer,
who, immediately upon receiving such application, shall color on
the plan the? allotment applied for, and enter thereon the name of
the applicant—the applicant paying down at the time one half-
year’s rent and survey fee, and receiving a receipt for such pay-
ment ; and within one month from the date of such proceeding
the applicant (if in the meantime no valid objection is made)
should have a license for the land applied for issued to him.
The next important amendment desirable will be to modify the
residence clause, by substituting for residence by the licensee in
his own proper person the residence of his family or agent upon
the land ; and in cases where selectors already are residing upon
land selected under former Acts the residence clause might be
waived entirely, providing the land was improved and devoted to
the use of the licensee; it would, however, be preferable if a con-
dition was imposed compelling the residence of a registered man-
servant on the land. This modification of the clause will enable
tradesmen and artisans to become selectors.
The further amendment required is to extend the area of selec-
tion to 64-0 acres, to enable selectors to combine sheep farming
and grazing with agriculture. I think that even in some districts
grazing licenses might be issued to comprise 1000 acres.
I may also here remark that at the present time the interests of
the state might be largely enhanced by introducing a clause in the
new Bill to foster settlement in thinly settled districts upon the
lands of the colony, by granting sites for townships and farming
settlements to be established through the formation of trust and
co-operative associations.
Refening to the making of improvements, I consider that the
time allowed for the completion of these conditions should be ex-
tended to five years, instead of three, and that the clause should
be framed to meet the case of all those persons who have already
selected land under the existing Act.
These conditions having been fixed upon, it will be needful
that Government inspectors be appointed to furnish reports on
the expiry of each year’s tenancy of the uses to which the land
has been pul by the licensee, and to report the rate of progress
-effected in respect of improvements, residence, and cultivation.
Another needful amendment in the new bill will be a clause to
make provision relating to fencing for the protection of licensees
and other tenants of the Crown. Referring to the 12th section of
the Amending Land Act 1865, it is a fact that a great number
of lessees did not make their improvements as required within the
two years, consequently they are not in the strict letter of the law
entitled to derive the other benefits conferred under its provisions


or obtainable under the Land Act 1869; but as it often happened
that no inspectors on behalf of the Government were sent to re-
port, and rents were accepted, thereby condoning the offence or
waiving the conditions, and according to the decisions of the
Supreme Court are legally in this position, but as the law stands
at present the certificate of improvements must first be issued
before the lessee can claim the benefits conferred under section 33
of the present Act. I purpose therefore that in the Amending
Land Bill a clause be inserted, that in every case where rent was
accepted by the Government from a lessee under section 12 of
the Amending Land Act 1865, after the three years had expired,
that such lessee shall be considered to have fulfilled all conditions
so far as relate to improvements, and that the certificate to that
effect shall be issued to the lessee.
Referring to the Land Act 1862, called Duffy’s Act, I would
in the Amending Land Bill propose a clause to be inserted to
enable the lessees under that Act and the 7th section of the Land
Act 1865, to obtain their titles without payment of ss. per acre
penalty—the principle laid down for following this course being
that considerations of justice and equity suggest it—rents having
been accepted from the lessees after the first twelve months of
occupation, and subsequently, thereby waiving the conditions, A
furthur reason for pursuing this course is because the department
have already issued titles to some lessees who had not fully com-
plied with the law, and having taken this step in various in-
stances it should be extended to all persons similarly situated.
Another very desirable amendment in the present law is to issue
all Crown grants free from obstructive provisions, the purchaser
of land from the state being treated in the same manner as a
person making a purchase privately. There is no doubt that for
the protection of miners and their interests that some law should
be made relative to lands alienated by the Crown ; but I contend
that it should not form part of a land act, but should be by a
distinct and separate act of Parliament; in fact, my experience is
that capitalists will not advance money upon Crown grants
hampered by obstructive conditions.
GEORGE AUGUSTUS GOODWIN.
15S Queen Street North, Melbourne, July, 1873.


The following statement of the results of successful
co-operative farming is a reprint from the Mel-
bourne Leader newspaper of the 28th June,
1873 :
SUCCESSFUL CO-OPERATIVE FARMING.
(FROM CALIFORNIA, BY CHARLES NORDHOFF.)
California has just now several experiments going on in settle-
ment by colonies. The Southern California Colony is near San
Bernardino; the Westminster Colony is near Wilmington, the
port of Los Angeles; there is a Methodist Colony on the plain
which lies between Los Angeles and the sea; I have heard that
another colony is projected on a rancho in Santa Barbara county,
called Lompoc, and belonging to Colonel Hollister. There may
be others, for aught I know. I have seen all that have made a
beginning, and last I saw also Anaheim, which is the only one
which has had time to test fully its plan, and which has achieved
a notable success. Of course, settlement of a new region by
colonies, or by the co-operation of families, is nothing new. In
all our Western States there were in the early days numerous
instances of such settlements; and where the Indian disputed the
white man’s advance, no single family could hold its ground.
But the systematic laying out and planting of a tract of country
upon a plan decided beforehand and faithfully carried out, is, I
think, peculiar as yet to Anaheim, though I wonder much that it
has not had frequent and numerous imitators in California, which
is peculiarly adapted for such experiments. In 1857, fifteen years
ago, several Germans proposed, in San Francisco, to some of their
countrymen to purchase, by a general efiort, a piece of land, lay
it out into small individual farms, plant these with grapes for
wine, and to do all this by one general head or manager, and in
the cheapest and best manner possible. After some discussion,
fifty men joined to buy a tract of 1165 acres of land »outh-w r est
of Los Angeles, They paid for this 2 dols. per acre, and took
care to get for this price also a sufficient water-right for irrigation.
The land was selected and bought by the leader in the enterprise,
Mr. Hansen of Los Angeles, a German who had long lived in
California, and who is a man of culture and ideas, and desired to
see what could be done by co-operation in this direction. He
became, subsequently, so much interested in the success of the
plan he had formed, that he was the manager of the colony in all
its preparatory stages; and as he is an engineer, and a capable,
honest, and patient man, he was, I think, a very valuable person.
The Anaheim Company consisted, you must understand, of
mechanics in the main. There were several carpenters, a gun-
smith, an engraver, three watchmakers, four blacksmiths, a brewer,


a teacher, a shoemaker, a miller, several merchants, a book-binder,
a poet (of course, as they were Germans), four or five musicians,
a hatter, some teamsters, an hotel-keeper, and others; not a
farmer among them them all, pray notice. Moreover, and this I
say with a certain degree of hesitation, there is some reason to
believe that the members of this company were not even
eminently successful in their callings. They were not getting
rich in San Francisco, where most of them lived. Several of
them had money ahead, but most of them, I judge from what I
hear, were men ready enough to better their fortunes, but to whom
it would have been impossible to buy for cash a ready-made farm
of even twenty acres. Well, it was agreed to divide the 1165
acres into fifty twenty-acre lots, and fifty house lots in the village,
leaving some lots for school-houses and other public buildings,
fourteen in number. The first contribution or payment towards
the common stock bought the land. Thereupon Mr Hansen
was, very wisely, chosen resident manager, and the shareholders
quietly went on with their pursuits in San Francisco, taking care
on'y to pay up the calls on their stock as they became due. It
was the manager's duty, meantime, to go on with the improve-
ment of the lots. This he did with hired labour—lndians and
Californians. He dug a main ditch, about seven miles long, to
lead the irrigating water over the whole area, with 450 miles of
subsidiary ditches, and 25 miles of feeders to these. He planted
on each twenty acre lot eight acres in vines (8000 vines), and
some fruit trees. He fenced each lot with willows, making five
and a quarter miles of outside and thirty-five miles of inside
fencing. These willows are now topped for firewood, and as
they grow rapidly they give a very fresh and lovely green to the
aspect of Anaheim. This done, he continued to cultivate, prune,
and keep up the whole place. At the end of three years, in
1860, all the assessments were paid; each stockholder bad paid
120 U dols., and a division of the lots was made. This was done
by a kind of lottery. All the lots were viewed, and assessed at
their relative value, from 1400 to 600 dols., according to
situation, &c. When a lot was drawn, if it was valued over
1200 dols., the drawer paid the difference; if less, he received the
difference. Thus he who drew a 1400 dols. lot would pay 200
dels. : he who drew a 600 dols. lot would receive 600 dols.
additional in cash. When all were drawn, there was a sale of the
effects of the company—tools, horses, &c.; and on balancing the
books it was found that a sum remained on hand which sufficed
for a dividend of over 100 dols. to each shareholder. I believe
the actual cost of the lots was but 1080 dols. For this, each had
20 acres, and a town lot 150 by 200 feet, with 8000 bearing
grape-vines and some fr-uit-trees. Then most of the owners


broke up at San Francisco and came down to take possession.
Lumber for building was bought at wholesale prices for so many
families ; a schoolhouse was quickly erected ; shopkeepers flocked
in and bought the town lots; a newspaper was begun ; mechanics
of different kinds were attracted to the colony, and the colonists
themselves had at once about them all the conveniences for
which, had they settled singly, they would have had to wait many
years. Now it must be remembered that these colonists were not
either farmers or gardeners by trade. Only one had ever made
wine. They began as green hands, and some of them borrowed
money to make their improvements, and had to pay heavy
interest. They had to build their houses, and make their gardens
and support their families. Here is briefly the results of the
experiment;—l. There was a straggle for some years, but in
this early time everybody tells me they all had abundance to eat,
a good school for their children, music and pleasant social
amusements, and they were their own masters. There is no
winter here for the struggling poor man to dread or provide for.
2. Only one of the original settlers has away, and the
sheriff has never issued an execution at Anaheim. 3. The
property which cost 1080 dol. is now worth 5000 to 10,000 dol.,
and I do not believe more than one in ten of the colonists would
have been worth to-day, had they remained at their trades in San
Francisco, any money at all. 4. There are no poor in Anaheim,
5. It is the general testimony that the making of wine and brandy
has not caused drunkenness among the colonists. “ When you
see a drunken man in our town, it will be an Indian/’ said several
people to me. 6. I have not a doubt that the moral standard of
the people has been greatly improved. Their children are well
trained; the men are masters of their own lives; they have
achieved independence, and what to an average New York
mechanic would seem the ideal of a fortunate existence. The
average clear income from their vineyards, which now contain
mostly sixteen acres, is about 1000 dol. per annum. Some few
fall below this, but most of them, I was told, go above. They
have, besides this, of course, their gardens, which here yield
vegetables all the year round; their chickens—in short, the
greater part of their living. They live well; it is a land of
plenty ; and to me, who remembered how painful and unpleasant
is the life of a mechanic in New York, it was a delight to see here
men and women who had redeemed themselves by their own
efforts from this drudgery and slavery. In repeating such an
experiment, naturally some improvements could be made. I think
forty acres would be better than twenty; and this is the opinion
of most of the Anaheim settlers. But forty acres are enough in
this rich country.
C


THE LAND SELECTOR’S
INQUIRY, INFORMATION, INTELLIGENCE,
AND GENERAL AGENCY OFFICE,
158 QXJEE3ST STREET USTOETKC,
MELBOURNE,
OPPOSITE MILLS’ TIMBEE TAED.
The objects intended to be obtained, by the establishment of
which are to afford to country residents the opportunity of
securing the services of an agent at moderate fee, to transact
business in Melbourne connected with the Government Offices or
private transactions or business. To act as General Agent for
selectors under the Land Act 1860, 1862, 1865, and 1869.
Mr. Q. A. GOODWIN, in returning thanks for the extensive
patronage he has received as Agent for executing business in the
Government Departments, desires to inform his friends and the
public generally, that for the more effectually forwarding their
interests he has taken extensive Offices in the immediate proximity
to the Public Lands and Registrar-General’s Departments, and
requests that in future all Telegrams, Messages, Letters of
Instruction, and other communications, as well as Documents,
may be forwarded to his new address, No. 158 Queen-street
North, (formerly Government Treasury), Melbourne.
Mr. G, takes this opportunity to recite some of the various
branches of business which he has undertaken and performed for
clients, and which he will be prepared to discharge in future with
the utmost promptitude, and on the most reasonable terms
At the Office of Public Lands, obtaining and supplying infor-
mation of all lands available for selection, and providing and
forwarding plans and particulars for the guidance of intending
selectors ; preparing applications to the Department upon all
matters connected with the Licensing, Leasing, Surveying,
or Purchase of Land, under whatsoever clauses or acts the
applications are referable to.
Obtaining Certificates of Improvements, and fringing leases
taken up under Section 12 cf the Amending Land Act,
1865, within the provisions of the Land Act of 1869, so as


to secure for the holders extension of their leases, and the
appropriation of the rents paid, as payments towards the
purchase of the land.
Procuring the issue of Crown Grants for selections made under
the Act of 1862 (Duffy’s), or under the 7th, 12th, and 42nd
Sections of the Amending Land Act, 1865.
Mr. Goodwin takes this opportunity of informing his friends
that the Leases held under the provisions of the Land Act, 1865,
will shortly expire by effluxion of time, and must be brought
under the operation of the present law to insure its full benefit to
the Lessees, to which end he is prepared to Advance Money in
payment of the Balance of Purchase Money, or to obtain Ex-
tended Leases.
He is also prepared to effect the assignment of Leases, and the
Loaning of Money upon Licenses, with the consent of the Board
of Land and Works, and the sanction of the President of Lands,
and to make Purchases of Crown Lands at Auction.
In connection with the Registrar-General’s Departments,
Official Forms will be supplied, Titles Perfected, and Properties
brought under the Lands Transfer Statute, and Liens on Stock,
Wool, &c., registered.
Moneys paid to accouut at the Public Treasury, and refund
Accoimts obtained, and the General Business of an Agent on
behalf of Residents in the Country, conducted with the Offices
of Mines, Railways, Public Works, and other Government
Departments.
Improved Farms and other Properties scheduled for sale.
Local Land Boards attended; all necessary forms provided;
Letters Written, Statutory Declarations prepared.
Fire Insurances effected upon the lowest scale of premium.
Hours or Business ... ... •• 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Saturdays ... ... ••• ... 9a.m.to 12p.m.
SPECIAL NOTICE.
To Lessees of Crown Lands held under the Amending Land
Act, 1865.
Lessees of Lands held under the provisions of the “ Land Act
1865,” are informed that their Leases will shortly expire by
effluxion of time. It will therefore be needful for them to procure
new Leases under the Land Act 1869.
G. A. GOODWIN undertakes to obtain for Lessees, Money on
Mortgage for a term of years, at a moderate rate of interest, in
order that they may pay up the balance of their purchase money
and secure the Crown Grant, or he undertakes to exchange the
c 2


old Leases for those under the New Act, in order that Lessees
may extend their Leases and payment of Rent for a longer
term of years, at the end of which the Crown Grant will be
issued.
LETTER AND INQUIRY BRANCH.
Licensees, Lessees, Selectors, and Country Residents, are in-
formed that at the suggestion of a number of clients Mr Goodwin
devotes one branch of his office (called the “ Letter and Inquiry
Branch ”) for the following purpose: Selectors or Licensees
having any subject relative to land business which they wish to
bring under the notice of the Lands Department, upon forwarding
to his office a detailed statement of their case, will receive a
reply containing advice as to their best mode of dealing with it,
and if advisable a letter will be addressed to the Lands Depart-
ment upon the subject, and the answer obtained and client
informed of the nature.
The “ Inquiry Branch ” is for the purpose of making any
inquiry on behalf of Selectors or Licensees of Land either at the
Lands Office or other Government Departments, also to make
inquiry on behalf of Country Residents relative to any matter
upon which they may require information or intelligence.
For transmitting business through the Letter Branch a full
statement of the case must be forwarded, together with a fee of
One Guinea, (£1 Is.)
For the Inquiry Branch a letter must be forwarded containing
full particulars of the information required, and must be
accompanied by a fee of 10s. 6d.
All communications to be addressed—
GEO. A. GOODWIN,
158 Queen Street,
Melbourne.
Mr G. A. GOODWIN particularly devotes his attention to
matters in dispute, which require to be investigated by the
President or by the Board.
Particulars with full instructions should be forwarded to him
prior to the date of appointment for hearing.
Fees —21s. to iSs.
SPECIAL NOTICE.
REDUCTION OF FEES.
Mr G. A. GOODWIN, at the solicitation of many of
clients, who have assured him of the great scarcity of money in the


fanning districts and amongst the Selectors generally, has deter-
mined to reduce his fees to meet the times.
As a rule the tees of the office will be from 10s. 6d. to £2 2s.
SPECIAL CASES AS AGREED UPON.
Mr. G. A. GOODWIN in thus studying the interest of land
holders, hopes that they may place their business in his hands, his
object being to render his services useful by acting as their agent
at as moderate a fee as possible.
Persons desirous of obtaining advice or information relative to
Land business, may do so by forwarding a fee of 10s. 6d. in
stamps or post-office order.
Mr. GEO. A. GOODWIN begs to inform Selectors that he
undertakes to act as their Agent to procure Licenses, Leases,
Certificates of Improvements or Crown grants, and generally to
transact any business connected with the Lands and Titles
Department.
Address—
GEO. A. GOODWIN,
Law Agent, Crown Lands, Titles, Intelligence, and General
Agency Office,
158 QUEEN STRET NORTH,
Opposite Mills’ Timber Yard,
MELBOURNE.
LOOK TO YOUR TITLES.
Ask yourself the question —“ Have I a perfect title ?” If
there is any doubt about the matter, see to it at once. Bring
your land under the provisions of Torrens’ Act, or the Transfer of
Land Statute, and secure a perfect title. None can be better than
the Government title.
For particulars apply to—
G. A. GOODWIN, Titles Agent.
158 Queen Street North, Melbourne.
Opposite Mills’ Timber Yard.
DO YOU WANT MONEY.
Mr. G. A. GOODWIN negotiates Loans from £2O to £lO,OOO
upon Lauds held under the 1862, 1865 Land Acts, or upon any
tangible or freehold security, situated in town or country.


Properties, Farms, &c., sold and bought on commission, and
Sales by Auction managed.
Remember the address—
G. A. GOODWIN,
Lands Titles Agency Office,
ISS QUEER STREET NORTH,
MELBOURNE.
GEO. AUGUSTUS GOODWIN,
LANDS TITLES, CROWN LANDS, AND
GENERAL LAND AGENT,
Begs to inform his friends and the public generally, that facilities
are offered under the “ Transfer of Lands Statute ” for simplifying
the title to, and dealing with, Estates in Land; and that all per-
sons, whether owners, mortgagees, trustees, guardians, and
married women, so dealing, may have the business effected cheaply,
speedily, and accurately, by applying to—
lE. 6. A. GOODWIN,
ESTATE AND AGENCY OFFICES,
158 QUEEN STREET, MELBOURNE.
SPECIAL NOTICE.
Wills , Letters of Administration , Insolvencies , Mortgages , Con-
veyances, Deeds of Partnership.
Mr GEO. A. GOODWIN begs to inform his friends and the
public that he is prepared to act as Legal and Law Agent, and
that matters relating to Wills, Mortgages, Conveyancing, Letters
of Administration, Insolvencies, and general Legal business, will
be transacted by his Solicitor at moderate fees.
The Relatives and Representatives of Selectors or holders of
land, who have died and left wills, or have died intestate, are in-
vited to transact their business through Mr. Goodwin's agency
office.


mm. s©mATT®M 9
SOLICITOR, CONVEYANCER, AND PROCTOR,
(A Commissioner for taking Affidavits in the Supreme
Court of Fiji),
ISQ QUEEIT STREET NORTH,
(Old Treasury Buildings),
OPPOSITE MILLS’ TIMBER YARDS,
MELBOURNE.
Mr. GOODWIN undertakes to buy or sell on Commission,
Agricultural Implements, Farm and other Produce, Manures,
&c., on behalf of Selectors, Storekeepers, and Country Residents.
SPECIAL NOTICE.
THE LAND ACT 1869.
(The Act at present in operation .)
This Act makes provision for the rent paid by licensees under
the 42nd section, or lessees under the 12th section of the
Amending Land Act 1865 to be allowed as purchase money,
and one of the main features and benefits of the Act itself, is
that the selector or licensee under its provisions is allowed the
rent to go as payment of the purchase.
The principal selection clause in this Act is what is known as
the 19th, which clause provides that persons may become
licensees of Crown Lands for three years, after which, if all
conditions have been complied with, the licensee will be entitled
to the benefits conferred by the Act, namely to surrender the
license and procure a lease for seven years, or to pay up the
balance of purchase money and obtain the Crown grant.
SECTION XIX. LAND ACT 1869.
Notice to Selectors.
Licensees who procured land under the above-mentioned Act,
February, 1870, are informed that their licenses will shortly
terminate, and no time should be lost in availing themselves of
the benefits conferred by the Act in conformity with the pro-


visions of section 20, clause 5, Land Act 1869, which provides
that a licensee (having complied with the conditions of his
license duly certified by the Board of Land and Works under its
seal) is entitled at any time within thirty days after three years
from the commencement of the license to pay the Government
the balance of purchase (fourteen shillings per acre) and obtain
Crown grant j or the Licensee may surrender his license, and
obtain a lease for seven years at a yearly rent of two shillings for
each acre, and at the end of the term of lease will be entitled to
Crown grant; or may obtain the grant at any time during the
term of lease by paying the difference between the amount of rent
actually paid and one pound for each acre.
“AMENDING LAND ACT” 1865.
This Act is generally known as “ Grant’s Act,” from the
fact that the Honorable James Macpherson Grant was the
administrator, and under whose careful administration many
thousands of people have been settled upon the lands of Victoria.
The chief clauses under which lands were selected were the
12th and 13th (leasehold) and the 42nd.
The 12th and 13th clauses provided that a person could pro-
cure an allotment of land on a term of lease for a period of seven
years at a rental of 2s, (two shillings) each acre per year, subject
to certain conditions, and the Land Act 1869 provides for the
continuance of such leases for a period of three years (making
ten in all), or for the purchase of the land, the rent paid being
allowed as purchase money,
The 42nd section provided for licenses to be issued to persons
willing to pay license fee, and observe certain conditions set forth
in such license.
Numbers of persons who became licensees under the 42nd
clause have now paid in rents to the amount of one pound per
acre (the present upset price of land), and should therefore obtain
grants of their land.
Azzoppardi, Hildreth & Co., Steam Printers, Melbourne.


C. F. CRESWELL,
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
SEED MBROHA3STT,
37 SWANSTON STREET MELBOURNE,
Invites the attention of Selectors, Squatters and others, to
his Large and selected STOCK of
AGRICULTURAL, VEGETABLE, AND FLOWER SEEDS.
Catalogue of which may be obtained, post free, on application.
All SEEDS sold by the oz. or pkt. forwarded by post. Free of
Charge, to any part of the Colony.
A remittance is expected from unknown Correspondents.
Small amounts may be forwarded in Postage Stamps.
37 SWANSTON STREET, MELBOURNE.
478 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY ; and
MURRAY STREET, HOBART TOWN.
ROBERT STEWART,
MANUFACTURER OF
ORANGE MARMALADE
AND
CANDIED PEEL OF ALL KINDS.
158 QXJEE3ST ST., MELBOTJ-RISrE.


FLINDERS WOOL WAREHOUSE
AND
MARK LANE GRAIN STORE;
FLINDERS LANE, MELBOURNE.
Liberal Advances on all Produce.
CHARGES ON WOOL.
Receiving and Warehousing, one-eighth of a penny (jd) per pound.
Repacking, per bale, five shillings, (ss) - ,
Insurance, per cent, two shillings and sixpence on market value.
Commission on Sales over two hundred pounds, one and a half (l£) per
cent; under that amoupt, two and a half (2£) per cent.
CHARGES ON GRAIN.
Receiving, weighing, delivering, and storing for three months, twopence
(2d) per bag.
Insurance, on market value, two shillings and sixpence per cent.
Commission, two and a half per cent.
Wm. M'CULLOCH & CO. will receive and pay carriage on all goods
consigned to me at the following Railway Stations : —Ballarat, Castlemaine,
Sandhurst, Echuca, Benalla, and Broadford ; also at every Shipping Port, or
other places where they have Agents.
All business entrusted to me will he expeditiously and faithfully performed.
MONCKTON SYNNOT.
MB. SCBATTON,
Solicitor, Conveyancer and Proctor,
(A Commissioner for taking Affidavits in the Supreme Court of Fiji.)
158 QUEEN STREET NORTH
(Old Treasury Buildings),
OPPOSITE MILLS’ TIMBER YARD,
MELBOURNE,
ADVERTISING AGENT
MONET COLLECTOR,
Twenty years experience in Melbourne with periodical visits
over the whole Colony, accompanied by Testimonials from Busi-
ness men of position, offers a sound guarantee that all Business
entrusted to me will be faithfully carried through.
WALTER JENKINSON,
2& Collins-street West, Melbourne.


THOS. HENDERSON & CO.’S
Four-wheeled, Double-speed Mowing and Heaping Machine
(Combined)
Has given unqualified satisfaction for the past three years, and its un-
doubted superiority was fully sustained during the last season, when it was
awardedmore prizes than any other machine exhibited at the various shows
in Victoria, as will be seen by the following list: —
First Prize Best and Cheapest Mower and Reaper, Sandhurst.
First Prize do do Castlemaini
do do Castlemaine.
First Prize do do Newstead,
First Prize do do St. Arnaud
First Prize do do Newbridge
First Prize do do Eddington
First Prize do do Camperdown
Second Prizes at Ballarat, Ararat, and Skipton, and
Judges’ Certificate at the Longford Show, Tasmania.
TWO WHEELED MOWER AND REAPER (Bodington’s Patent),
Unequalled for Lightne s of Draught, Strength, and Simplicity of
Construction,
STRIPPING MACHINES,
With Patent Lever or Fixed Combs, (latest improved), &c., &c.
Full particulars, and illustrated Catalogues post fr,ee.
89 & 91 Elizabeth St. lorth, Melbourne.


TOWN AND COUNTRY.
The Victorian Illustrated Weekly
Newspaper.
24 F A-C3-ES,
Farming
Mining
PRICE,
Politics
Squatting
Sporting
Gardening
The Novelist
The Vineyard
d
All the News of each Week.
This Journal pays especial attention to the Agri-
cultural Interest, and fully reports all Shows, Trials,
Matches, A c., as well as all Improvements in
Agricultural Implements and new methods of Culti-
vation.
OFFICE, 1 FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.


SKIET DISEASES.
Dr. L. L. SMITH has devoted himself for twenty years in the
Colony to the practice of this branch of his Profession. While pre-
viously in England he Avas the pupil of and practised with the
celebrated Dr. E. T. Culverwell, the only Medical Practitioner
who ever exclusively adopted this as a sole branch of his profession.
He advises sufferers to lose no time, to at once arrest the progress
of disease or decay, before more serious evils affect and leave the
unfortunate victim an object of pity.
Dr. L. L. SMITH also warns the public against the quackeries
advertised by non-professional men, and that those who resort to
them must expect to be ruined in pocket and health If the
taker of advertised particular nostrums escape with his life, and
his system be not irreparably undermined by them, he may con-
sider himself a fortunate mortal.
Those men and women who have been the dupes of unprincipled
charlatans frequently seek that recovery, -which, alas, is often
beyond Dr. Smith’s control. When will the public understand
that it is to their interest to Consult a duly qualified medical man,
who has made this his sole study; rather than apply to a number
of ignorant impostors, who merely harp and prey upon their
health and pockets ? Dr. L. D. SMITH has always stated, that
to warn the public of these quicksands is his chief reason for
advertising.
In all cases of nervous debility, lowness of spirits, impaired
memory, pimples on the head, lassitude, etc., Dr. L. L. SMITH
invites sufferers to consult him, as he has no hesitation in stating,
that no medical man, either here or in England, has had the
opportunities of practice and the extraordinary experience which
he has had.
Dr. L. L. SMITH has been applied to by so many unfortunate,
broken-down, young-old men, utterly crushed in spirits, ruined
in body, and filched in pocket, that he deems it his duty to pub-
lish this to the world.
Therefore, those who really desire to be treated by one who is
at the head of his profession in this branch of medical practice,
should lose no time in seeking his advice.
The new Consulting Rooms are at
182 COLLINS STREET EAST.
Opposite the Melbourne Club,
(Late the residence of the Governor).
Private entrance is in Stephen Street south.
CONSULTATION FEE, by letter, £l.
Medicines forwarded to all the Colonies, and so packed as to avoid
observation.


A. G. CORBETT,
AGRICULTURAL AND MINING MACHINERY.
Was awarded at the last Agricultural Exhibitions
The First Prizes for PORTABLE STEAM ENGINES
At Melbourne, Ballarat, Sandhurst, and Kyneton;
And the First Prizes for STEAM THRESHERS
At Ballarat, Sandhurst, Kyneton, and Smeaton.
Mabshalx, Sons & Co.’s Improved Portable Steam Engines, 4 to 20 Horse
power, fitted with Steam Jacketed Cylinders, Patent Variable Expansion
Apparatus, and other fuel-saving appliances, large Fire Boxes for
burning wood, mounted on Wrought-iron Wheels ; specially adapted
. for the Colonies.
E. E. & F. Tuenee’s Improved Portable Steam Engines, fitted with Steam
jacketed Cylinders, Patent Equilibrium Piston Slide Valve, and Vari-
able Expansion Gear, regulated by Patent Governor, Continuous Feed
Pump, large Fire Boxes for burning wood, mounted on Wrought-iron
Wheels.
Eobet & Co.’s Superior Portable Steam Engines.
Euston, Peoctoe & Co.’s Improved Portable Steam Engines.
E. Gaeeett & Son’s Portable Steam Engines.
Treble-Blast Thrashing and Finishing Dressing Machines, improved and
manufactured hy Eansomes, Sims & Head, 4§ and 5 feet Drums, fitted
with Patent Beaters, Patent Adjustable Screen and Improved Caving
Eiddle, mounted on Iron Wheels, and provided with all the latest
improvements, combining the important elements of simplicity,
• economy, durability and efficiency.
Straw Elevators, of improved construction, 21 feet long, with Endless Belt.
Leather Belting, Single and Double, from 3 to 9 inches.
Chaff-Cutters, Horse-poy'er and Crab Winches.
Horizontal Steam Engines, from 6 to 30 Horse-power, New and Second-hand.
Boilers, Cornish Flue and Shell.
Quartz-Crushing Batteries, Wood or Iron Framing,
Pump Workings, Plunger and Drawlift, 6 in. to 8 in.
Centrifugal Pump and Pipes. ,
Winding, Pumping and Puddling Gear.
Trucks, Cages, Boring Eods, Screwjacks.
Mining Plants, New and Second-hand.
Saw, Flour, and Quartz-Crushing, Mil Is, supplied and erected in complete
working order.
Engines, from 4 to 20 Horse-power, for SALE or HIEE.
TERMS MOST LIBERAL.
Machinery Depot: 11 FEAITKLIN STHEET WEST.
