

pern ppvm
fceuiiouu PftM3
Box II
Church 1881.
Abstract of Proceedings
ADDRESS OF THE PRESIDENT
The Right Rev. JAMES MOORHOUSE, D.D.
BISHOP OF MELBOURNE
PRICE SIXPENCE
MELBOURNE
A
CHURCH OF ENGLAND BOOK DEPOT
53 WILLIAM STREET
ISBI
Y il




Wxt Church Jlssemblij, 1881.
Abstract of Proceedings
ADDRESS OF THE PRESIDENT
The Right Rev. JAMES MOORHOUSE, D.D.
BISHOP OF MELBOURNE
PRICE SIXPENCE
MELBOURNE
CHURCH OF ENGLAND BOOK DEPOT
53 WILLIAM STREET




THE CHUHCH ASSEMBLY, 1881.
The Third Session of the Eighth Assembly of the Bishop, the
Clergy, and the Laity of the Church of England within the
Diocese of Melbourne, was held in the Assembly Hall,
William-street, Melbourne, on Tuesday, the 20th September,
and three following" days. The attendance of Clergymen and
Lay Representatives was very large. The Bishop in his
address at the opening of the Assembly said :
My Brethren of the Clergy and op the Laity—
There are not many changes to record in the state of the
Church and of the diocese since last we assembled here to take
counsel together. There has been some excitement, indeed, at
home, and some nearer our own doors, on matters of doctrine
and ecclesiastical discipline. But by God’s mercy we have
been enabled hitherto to live in peace and harmony together.
Peace, however, is not without its dangers—dangers, indeed,
sometimes deadlier than those incurred in war. Still water is
liable to become stagnant, so is ease to degenerate into luxury,
and security into idleness. You especially, my reverend
brethren, must be deeply sensible of this danger. Little fear
is there of slumber in battle, or of sloth in persecution. But
when all goes well with us, when we tread from day to day the
mechanical round of use and wont, handling the Word of God
as a customary duty, without the pressure of strife or danger
to drive us to close dealing with God and ourselves, then in-
deed the eye may become dim, and the heart cold, and then
may people feel, in our harder thoughts and less heart-search-
ing words, that their minister is losing his hold on eternity.
Let us beware, my reverend brethren, of these temptations,
and of the not less subtle peril following always hard after
them, of discontent and discouragement. When is it that we
begin to fret under the burden of our daily duties, or at the
opposition of a hard indifference or an inveterate irreverence ? Is
it not when the fire of Christ’s love burns low in our own
bosom, when we have lost the glory of the heavenly vision,
when we have suffered to slip away from our grasp “ the
powers of the world to come,” and with them the sense of pre-


dominance, the assurance of final victory, the conviction that
“ greater is He that is in us than he that is in the world?”
Oh, brethren, whenever we find ourselves complaining, re-
pining, and desponding, fearing the world or the worldliness of
the human heart, and doubting for the safety of the ark of God,
let us be very sure that we are losing faith in our Master’s
power and promise, and that the need has come for stirring up
the gift which is in us, “which was given us by prophecy and the
laying on of hands.” Sure lam that it would be good for
all of us at certain fixed seasons to read over, as in the sight
of God, that wonderful service by which we were first dedicated
to our sacred office, asking ourselves, as we review each
sacred pledge, “How far have I been faithful to that?”
“ What effort have I made by struggling with sin and weak-
ness, by enlargement of my knowledge, by improvement of my
powers, by ripening of my ministerial experience, to redeem
this vow to Christ?” Not readily shall I forget the tremu-
lously solemn tone in which the occupant of one of the
greatest sees in England said to me on the occasion of my own
consecration, “ How I felt condemned to-day when I thought
of my own life and work in the light of those questions.” And
then there is the thought, my reverend brethren, for us
especially who have passed life’s meridian, of the shortness of
the time which remains to us, if in any measure we would
repair the omissions of the past. We are passing away, and
the men also to whom we address ourselves. How strikingly
is this warning conveyed by the form of a well-known Belgian
pulpit. Rising from the back of it “is a gigantic figure of
death, stretching its gaunt form over the head of the preacher,
and holding in one hand a scythe, while with the other it
presents to him a scroll, on which is inscribed, ‘ Hasten thou
to gather in thy harvest, for I must soon reap mine.’ ” Truly
we preach as dying, unto dying men, and should so labour “as
they who must give an account.”
Let me now turn for a moment from the minister to the
services which he conducts. It is more important for us to
make our services attractive than many seem to realise. If
we want people to go to church we must so arrange our minis-
trations as to make the congregations feel better for having
attended them. I know that the duty of worshipping God
ought to be motive enough to a Churchman for attending his
parish church, and I believe that a very good man may possibly
learn a lesson of patience by listening to a poor sermon. But
all young people are not very good; neither, I fear, are they
always careful to attend to their duty. Besides, we clergy
have no business to put such a strain on the principles of our
people. Why are churches opened but to make worship a


delight, and obedience to duty an irresistible impulse ? Can
any one envy the feelings of the man who, instead of being a
help and comfort to his people, is only a trial to them ? I
know that many complaints are unreasonable. I believe that
the number of clergymen who preach bad sermons is not nearly
so great as that of unreasonable critics ; and I am quite sure
that often, if the critic and the clergyman changed places, it
would neither be to the profit nor satisfaction of the congre-
gation. And yet there must be some foundation for a complaint
which is so loud and general. Let me therefore beseech the
clergy to try with me to make our sermons practical, and of
a moderate length. I do not, of course, suggest the with-
drawal of any of the grand doctrinal motives to a holy life.
To drop Christ out of our sermons, or even to omit the great
dogmatic truths connected with His work and nature, would
be to make our sermons not better or more useful, but poorer
and worse. What I mean is that, when introduced, dogmatic
truths should form the basis and motive of practical effort,
effort to overcome evil dispositions, prevailing vices, or worldly
indifference. The mere adoption of such an aim as this would
lend force and interest to many a dry discourse. I know that
we cannot all be eloquent, and I know, besides, that many an
overworked clergyman, with frail health and overwhelming
pastoral and business cares, has little enough either of time or
energy for the composition of sermons. But we can all
determine to gather honest practical thoughts together, to
express them in clear plain English, and to out our sermons
shorter by a compression which will increase their point and
force. Forgive me, my reverend brethren, if I seem to find
fault. lam conscious of too many faults myself to say such
things without pain ; but out of a great anxiety to make our
ministrations happier and more fruitful, I constrain myself to
say so much.
And then with respect to services, how much might be done
to improve and brighten them. There should be one aim in
them, and one only—to enlist in their celebration the happy
and hearty co-operation of every member of the congregation.
Let no one attempt the more elaborate form of musical
services unless he can raise money enough for the training and
maintenance of a perfect choir. Nothing but the grandest
music, perfectly rendered, can keep the attention or stir the
emotions of a congregation who are only listening. Men
complain that even our concerts are sometimes dreary, that
they listen too often without interest or enthusiasm to the
efforts of our most accomplished musicians and songsters.
That is because they have nothing to do but to listen, and
because those capable of artistic enjoyment are the very few.


How unwise, then, to attempt the task of the concert with
insufficient means. _ I am not saying one word against the
employment of musical aid in our services. On the contrary,
1 think the variety of song, and reading, and prayer is neces-
sary to relieve the mind and sustain attention. But then in
parish churches the chants and hymn tunes should bo so
simple and melodious as to invite the co-operation of every
member of the congregation. Young choirs, like young
preachers, are fond of hard subjects, and imagine that they
succeed in proportion as they astound people by the skill with
winch they escape from difficulties. Alas ! they do not see
the yawning of some, the fidgeting of others, and the scarcely
dissembled anger of all who are compelled to look on at such
displays in unedified helplessness. The choir succeed when
they induce the whole congregation to join them. They fail
when, they reduce to silence all voices but their own. A o-reat
Lnghsh preacher failed at first, and when asked to explain
the secret of his subsequent success, he answered—“ I suc-
ceeded because I determined never to be satisfied till I saw
that the people could not help listening. Let our choirs
resolve so to sing that the people cannot help joining them,
and they will succeed in like manner.
Let me say one word, also, about the importance of perfect
arrangement in conducting the service. Nothing so chills a
congregation, nothing so effectually tempts young eyes and
thoughts to stray in unprofitable directions, as the awful
pauses which come of slovenly preparation. Certainly there
should be no hurrying, but also there should be no fumbling in
the conduct of the service. The lessons should be found, the
hymn list should be at hand—one part of the service should
to low another smoothly and promptly, and then, if care be
taken to keep it of a moderate length, and to have all its parts
good and inviting, I believe that many who now stay at home
would be glad to frequent their parish church, and be all the
better and happier men for doing so.
I turn from our services to our Sunday-schools. You will
remember that last year an Act was passed to call into exist-
ence an organisation for the improvement of these important
institutions. In this colony, as you are aware, the State-
school education is secular. The name of Christ has been
carefully excluded from all text-books. And, if in the reading-
books the sacred name of God be still suffered to remain we
must not forget that its right to a place there has been already
challenged in a Government report; and that, as it only
appears in reading-lessons, the teacher, if he pleases, may pass
it over in silence. It would weary you were I to enter now
into a question with which every one in Victoria, who cares to


think at all, must by this time be familial-, and I only refer to
it here in order to suggest to you the vast importance, under
existing circumstances, of our Sunday-school organisation.
The returns which, after great and unaccountable delays, our
Sunday-school council has received, reveal, I regret to say,
alarming faults and deficiencies. The questions, however,
which we issued were answered so imperfectly, and to my
astonishment, in some cases, so reluctantly, that I fear in
matters of detail they are wholly unreliable. This is a grievous
loss and disappointment. For how can a board be expected
to afford assistance or advice when they know little or nothing
of the case submitted for their consideration ? If, then, in the
remarks which follow, I quote but few figures, it is because I
believe that such as we have (with the exception, perhaps, of
those relating to the most general questions) would only be
misleading. About three-fourths of the population of Victoria
are to be found in the Diocese of Melbourne. Estimating,
therefore, on this basis, the proportion of children of school
age who should belong to the Church of England in this
diocese, we get something like 55,000. Of these, the returns
show that we have on the registers of our Sunday-schools
little more than 20,000, or not much more than one-third
of those who nominally belong to us. These are taught
by 1864 teachers, of whom, however, only 1201 are found
in regular attendance. This gives an average of 11 scholars
to each teacher—a not unmanageable number. I observe,
however, that the number of female teachers is about
double that of the males, a proportion which, although not
unexpected, is far from satisfactory. The teachers appear
generally to be communicants, as, indeed, they should be ; but
I regret to find that more than one-third of them are under 21
years of age. Now, although it is well to encourage the senior
scholars to pass into the ranks of the teachers, and to conduct
the junior classes in our schools, I think that the number of
them at present existing is not absolutely too large, but too
large a proportion of the whole. It seems to imply that
interest in Sunday-school work dies out in many at an
early age, on undertaking, it may be, family cares, or through
drifting into worldly habits. If our teachers remained
with us longer—and there is no reason, surely, why they
should not continue with us to old age—we might be able to
secure and retain some of those children who now altogether
escape from our influence. There would seem to be a great
want of suitable buildings, nearly one-half of our schools
being held in churches, and it is evident that the furniture of
many of the schools which we possess is of the most meagre
and insufficient kind. It would appear that there are 52 of


the schools from which we have got returns in which no
instruction is given in the Church catechism. This is much
to be lamented. For without some systematic instruction in
the elements of_ religion, the knowledge of our children must
be vague, and, it is to be feared, fleeting. Again, we. of the
clei ßy ’ are without blame in this matter, for though many
of us may be prevented through the multiplicity of services
from obeying the Church’s direction to instruct our children
on the Sundays out of the catechism, yet are there none of
us unable to supply in some measure this lack of service by
directing such instruction to be given in the Sunday-school
tj very time we baptise a child we tell its parents that the
Church catechism was set forth for its instruction. They must
think it a strange comment on this declaration that we never
take any pains to carry out our Church’s intention. Some
people, I am told, object to our catechism as an insufficient
statement of doctrine. I don’t know what they mean. The
catechism contains instruction for children, and I affirm, with-
out hesitation, that all the doctrine which a child can know
or need may readily be taught it by such an exposition of
the Apostles’. Creed as is contained in Dr. Vaughan’s Notes
on Confirmation. If any one desires, in addition, to lead forth
ms little ones to the doctrinal battle-ground where theologians
love to wrangle, exercising them in such philosophical subtle-
ties as those connected with divine decrees, the atonement,
the corruption of human nature, justification, personal
assurance, final perseverance, and the like, the Bible lesson
will afford him his opportunity, and St. Paul’s Epistles his
text; but, me judice, he will act more wisely and kindly if he
resell-e such instruction till the child’s mind gains more power
and its life a larger compass. The catechism teaches us what
to renounce believe, and do, and shows us how to seek from
Dod the help which our _ weakness needs. It takes as the
basis of its instruction—in prayer, the Paternoster; in belief,
the Apostles’ Creed; in obedience, the Ten Commandments ;
formulae which are not for an age, but for all time, and back
upon which the greatest minds of the day are falling, as the
only practicable basis of Christian unity. It is not largeness
m-w°i ffneSS mind despises the Church catechism!
While I have no sympathy with the pretentious and low-
minded independence which objects to such statements as that
we are all bound to do our duty in that state of life to which
i shall please God to call us—words grand and noble enough
for the mouth of a king—yet I admit that here and
there may be found antiquated expressions, and perhaps
a tone of old-world feeling not quite in harmony with
our present social condition. But if we refer to such


things in our teaching, what is more natural than that we
should exercise the same right of explanation here as we claim
for ourselves in connection with Holy Scripture ? If only the
instructor will exercise discretion, selecting such portions as
are adapted to the age and capacity of the scholars, and
deferring certain portions, as those on the sacraments, till the
opening mind is ready to apprehend them, I say unhesitatingly
that the man does not live who could produce a manual of
divine instruction more suitable to children. I find that only
68 of the clergy are reported to give any special religious
instruction in school in a regular way. I know that every
excuse is to be made for my clerical brethren in this matter.
Services are numerous in the country districts, and the mere
physical labour of riding is exhausting ; but still, every effort
should be made to spend some time, however short, among the
younger members of our flocks, and to say to them some
words, however few, of instruction and encouragement. At
the annual conference of the English Sunday-school Institute,
the other day, the Archbishop of Canterbury made the fol-
lowing true and weighty observations on this subject: —
“ I believe that nothing will ever compensate for the want, if
it does exist, of the superintendence of the Sunday-schools by
the clergymen of the parish. Nothing can be more useful to
himself ; nothing can give him more complete hold over his
parish than this mode of making his influence felt, through
the Sunday-school teachers, upon those who are gathered
together in the Sunday-schools.” In England, with its multi-
tude of clergy, and its moderate-sized parishes, such words
would have their application in every case, while here, I am
aware, it is sometimes physically impossible for the clergyman
to visit his Sunday-schools regularly. Still, occasional visits
might in all oases be arranged, and these would be better than
none. In every parish, however, the clergyman can and should
gather his Sunday-school teachers together on some week-day
for a mutual study of the Sunday lessons. Thus, even if
unable to be present personally in the schools, he can convey
his thoughts and feelings to the lambs of his flock through
the mediation of the under-shepherds. Another urgent want
in connection with our Sunday-schools is the establishment of
week-night classes of some kind for senior scholars who are
leaving us. We lose hundreds of our younger members year
by year because there is no Bible-class, lecture course, evening
institution, or guild to keep up their interest in sacred things.
Strenuous and persevering efforts ought to be made to estab-
lish such classes or institutions, and to enlist the co-operation
of the more earnest and devout of our lay members. The
leakage which is constantly going on from our Sunday-schools


is, in some places, draining away the life of the Church. I
learn that a minister at Geelong has a weekly class of young
people numbering from 200 to 250. What one has done
another may accomplish, for the grace of God is equally avail-
able for us all.
lou will have laid before you presently a report from the
committee appointed last year to consider the best system for
seeming the superannuation of disabled and ag’ed clergymen.
While aware of the general nature of that report, lam not
acquainted with the precise details of its recommendations,
and I only refer to it now to warn you that it can do no more, at
best, than lay down what may be described as a tentative
system. The matter should have been taken in hand many
years ago, before the majority of the clergy had passed middle
age. Now you must be satisfied if the report of your com-
mittee suggests to you a means of minimising the evils at
present existing, and of introducing a system which, after
some ten or fifteen years, may place things in a solvent and
healthy condition. We have one great advantage in the pos-
session of a Superannuation Fund, amounting to £8678,
bringing in some £oI3 of annual income. The greater part
of this income (not required at present to meet superannua-
tion claims) lias been paid into other funds of the church.
Some think that this course is not expedient, and that the
annual surplus of this fund should be capitalised for superan-
nuation purposes alone. I would ask the Assembly to pause
and reflect before agreeing to any such proposition. Last year
a sum of £236 was paid over to the Bishop of Melbourne’s
Fund, and this year, owing to an increase in the Bishopric En-
dowment Fund, a considerably larger amount might go in the
same direction. And there is, I am sorry to say, a special
reason why it should. Two of the home societies which have
hitherto, between them, made us a grant of £350 in aid of our
home missions, have now' given us notice that these grants can
be expected no more. Now, if, besides this £BSO, you further
withdraw £286 from the Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund, you will
diminish that fund next year by the sum of nearly £630, or
nearly a tenth of the whole, and that at a time when, as I shall
show you presently, the expenditure of that fund threatens
seriously to exceed its income. That would be a very dismal
prospect indeed ; for observe, the loss would fall entirely on
the country clergy and readers. It would possibly mean
a reduction of 10 per cent, on all grants made to them, and
you would thus rob the most needy of the active clergy to
supply the possible future wants of the disabled clergy. We
must not starve the living to remedy past mistakes; rather, I
think, should we take advantage of the favourable circumstances


I hare mentioned to increase the sum paid from the super-
annuation surplus to the Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund, and so
help to meet the deficiency caused by the withdrawal of the
English grants.
I turn next to the needs and position of the Bishop of
Melbourne’s Fund. It was felt soon after I came to this
colony that we were scattering our energies, and distracting
unnecessarily the interest of our friends by supporting several
societies which had objects, if not exactly identical, yet too
nearly allied to be practically separated. In their place, then,
we established one great home-missionary organisation, called
the Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund. At once to simplify our
purpose, and to concentrate that attention on mission work
which its importance demands, we resolved that no charge
should be made on the Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund except for
the aid of those poor students, or those readers and clergy
labouring in poor parishes, who could not prosecute their
work without assistance. So great, indeed, was our anxiety
to set before the Church a simple case, and an imperative
duty, that we made all those offices about which there might
be question among us chargeable on realised funds. Questions
you know have been raised about the propriety of this course,
on the ground that those realised funds should have been
appropriated to the aid of poor parishes. In the interest of
those very parishes, however, I believe that we have done the
wisest thing possible. The aid which we can aftord to the
poorer clergy and readers depends principally on the amount
contributed for that purpose year by year. And obviously
that amount will depend in ton on the popularity of the fund
to which it is paid. What we all desire is to get the largest
possible sum for those of our ministers who need it. And for
realising that desire, I believe it would be impossible to con-
trive a wiser plan than that which is embodied in the Bishop
of Melbourne’s Fund. But now let all the members of our
Church try to remember—first, the vast importance of the
work which this fund sustains ; and, secondly, that as this
work is wholly dependent on the fund, if they give it no help,
then they give nothing, not one penny, to aid those of their
fellow-churchmen who, through no fault of their own, are less
happily circumstanced than their brethren. The importance of
the work can hardly be over-estimated, as one simple considera-
tion will show. Of our country districts, 43 are held by
clergymen in full orders, six by deacons, and 86 by stipendiary
readers. In other words, there are 43 which may be looked
upon as capable of maintaining a clergyman, and 42 as not
yet being able to do so. But now, again, of the 43 country
districts which are served by clergymen, there are no fewer


tlian 31 whiclli receive aid from the Bishop of Melbourne’s
S und, leaving: only 12, out of our 85 country districts, which
can support a (clergymen in full orders without assistance. We
have 43 town iincumbencies, of which eight received assistance
last year, leaviing 35 town incumbencies which maintain clergy
1)1 full orders without aid. It appears, then, that out of a
total of 128 dlistriots, we have only 47 which can support a
clergyman witllrout help. Nor do even these figures, startling
as they are, exjprcss the whole measure of our need. For it
must be owned! that while many of the poorer clergy and
readers need more help than we can furnish, many also of the
larger and pooiver districts are very insufficiently supplied with
services. _ Cases? are continually coming before me, either of
new districts nort yet reached, or of districts so large and poor
that the few services which we can give do but whet that spiri-
tual appetite wffich they fail to satisfy. If only some of our
richer members fflould feel the pang of misery and shame with
which sometimes I have to confess that for want of means we
must let the cameless go unvisited or the hungry unfed, I am
sure that such scandals on our common Christianity would be
of less frequent occurrence.
But perhaps some impatient spirit may be ready here to
exclaim, “ Why (don’t you go on in faith ? Why don’t you take
up the new gromnd, and trust in God to fire the hearts and
open the purses o)f the niggardly and lukewarm ?” Alas! my
friends, we have aalready gone on in faith, up to, and, as some
think, almost beyond the margin of justice and prudence.
Through a determrined advance into the new districts which
are ever opening-, we have been year by year diminishing the
balance with whiclli it is necessary to begin operations. Some
think that even ncow we are in a scarcely solvent position, and
dread lest we may be obliged to straiten the means and chill
the hearts of our faithful labourers by some such reduction as
that which has lately been made in the wealthiest of the neigh-
bouring dioceses. Ido trust, however, that God will avert
from us so terrible 1 a calamity. Do you realise what it would
be to announce to tthe ministers of 81 out of our 128 districts
that they must sulbmit to a reduction of 20 per cent, on the
insufficient aid which we have hitherto afforded them ? The
pecuniary loss would be serious to those who have so little to
lose, but that perhaps would be the least of the mischiefs in-
flicted. It would (announce to all those hard-working men
that the prop on wMch they had leant was failing them; that
the one portion of tlieir income which was not dependant on a
fluctuating popularity was no longer secure; that love was
drying up where wealth most abounded; that the great heart
of the Church beat more feebly, and that henceforth its ex-


tremities must languish more and more. Now observe, my
friends, the supply of all these needs, the averting of all these
perils, depends on the Bishop of Melbourne’s Fund alone. Let
that fund fail, and there would follow a relaxation of energy,
a loss of confidence, an abatement of the happy audacity of
faith from the sea to the Murray. Nor can I hold out to you
any hope that the strain upon this fund will be less severe for
many years to come. Our population is far from stationary.
Now at the mines, now on selections, now at the centres of
manufacturing activity, their migrations continually throw out
our plans, and call for unexpected re-arrangements. Men who
seemed to be settled, and doing well, will suddenly, at the pres-
sure of some temporary strain, or the news of some better
opening, rush away into the plain or the forest, leaving the
old centres weakened, and creating the need for arduous mis-
sionary operations in the new districts over which they have
scattered themselves. We must not be impatient at this.
We must not suffer our hearts to fail, as if our labour were
hopeless and endless—a constant climbing up the ever-climb-
ing wave. We must let the world see, and prove to ourselves,
that the love of souls within us is mightier than the lust of
gain; that if the pursuit of wealth can draw our people into
the forest depths, the love of Christ can urge us to strike tent
and follow them, patiently reconstructing the network of our
spiritual organisation as often as the love of gold breaks
it up. It is a struggle of motives, my friends, which
we see going on. Can the love of Christ reconstruct as
often as the love of gold disintegrates our social and spiritual
organisation ? If it can, then all will be well with Victoria.
But if it cannot —if you and I lose faith and courage, if
unnerved by ease or distracted by petty contests, we suffer
ourselves to be disheartened and beaten ; if, tired of the never-
ceasing strain, we suffer our people to break away into
practical heathenism —then farewell the Christian feeling
which sweetened the Christian principles which steadied our
national life. Oh! let us pray to our Heavenly Father to
deepen our faith, to brighten our hope, to strengthen our
courage, that with something of the self-devotion of our
Divine Master, we may resolve, and keep to it, that, come
what may, the fund on which so much depends, the very
sheet-anchor of our pecuniary fortunes, shall not be suffered
to languish and fail.
I am happy to congratulate the Church on the brightening
fortunes of Trinity College. After the opening of the fine
buildings which bear the name of Mr. Ormond—-a name which
will ever be remembered in Victoria as that of one who
discerned the highest use and the greatest happiness of wealth


—we may say that the collegiate system was firmly and per-
manently established in the Melbourne University. The
success of Trinity College, owing principally to the strenuous
efforts of its accomplished warden, had done no little to brino-
about this result. But then, if that success was to be main-
tained, it was obvious that fresh efforts must be made, both to
attract Church of England students to the college connected
with their Church, and also to find them room when they came.
By Mr. J. Clarke s handsome donation of .£SOOO we are
enabled to enlarge our buildings ; and by the generous gift of
another and an open scholarship, the Hon. W. J. Clarke has
helped us to increase the attractiveness of this most neces-
institution. It will not be forgotten that, besides
furnishing the security of a Christian home, and the
advantage of a hngh-toned society to the lay students of
the University, Tirinity College supplies us also with the
only theological fschool of our diocese. And how im-
portant a service itt renders to the Church in that capacity
may perhaps be suggested by some words of my old
friend, Bishop Thiorold:—“An ignorant clergy,” says he,
left without specisal inspiration in a sceptical age, inevitably
becomes, sooner or later, a fanatical clergy ; and it is a real
cause of anxiety wlhen the weekly sermon, which is in most
cases all which the busy layman can procure in the shape of
religious instruction}, is but a sort of waste-basket of ponderous
common-places, or ar long spasm of emotional rhetoric, which,
if it occasionally toraches the conscience or moves the feelings]
cannot satisfy the understanding or change the life.” A
well-instructed clergjy, especially for town parishes, is nothing
less than a necessity in this stirring, sceptical age, and that
institution, therefore}, should command our deepest sympathy
and most liberal support which affords to us the only school
where such a clergy coan be trained and disciplined.
Suffer me to say m few words to you next on the necessity
of giving us more liberal help towards the completion of the
Cathedral. There were many reasons for undertaking its
erection. First, the sense of fitness. We live in agreatcity,
where the houses of many of our wealthy citizens may almost
be called palaces. It is but fitting, therefore, that there should
be some oongruity between our dwelling-places and our temples.
A i eal faith is wont to express itself, as in other ways, so also
in the form of some outward symbol which shall tell of the
awe and love which dwell in it, something which shall speak
of the love of God in the same outward and impressive
language which utters to us the love of home. It is partly, no
doubt, from this sense of fitness that the various sections of
the Christian Church have built, each for itself, a noble temple


in the heart of Melbourne. The only exception is the Church
of England, the Church of the English people, enriched as it
is with such grand historical associations, such liturgical
treasures, and such noble minsters. With everything, then,
suggesting and demanding a seemly splendour of devotion,
how is it that we alone, of all the principal denominations,
have no city church which any one can be proud of ? Is the
cause of it a Puritanism more bigoted than that of any of
the direct descendants of the Puritans ? Is it want of faith ?
Or is it mere sordidness of mind and feeling ? Anyway,
it is something very astonishing to one who has seen the great
work of church revival and restoration at home, and who
looked for something grand and majestic in this great city to
speak to the eye of the pious love and reverence of the Church
of his fathers. But even if no such reason could have been
assigned, a Cathedral was needed here for merely utilitarian
purposes. Our work is continually suffering for want of
concentration. We have a number of societies hanging
loosely around us, which have no central home in which they
can realise their unity. Where is the church in which we can
fitly hold anniversary or occasional services in connexion with
our missionary societies, our Sunday-school Union, our
association of honorary lay readers, our band of stipendiary
readers, or the friends of our Home Missions ? Take these
societies to a parish church, and immediately they would have
the sense not only of poverty and meanness in the surround-
ings, but also of parochial narrowness. Men are not willing
to aggrandise a particular parish by making it a diocesan
centre ; nor are all the members of any society usually in
harmony with the tone and form of special parochial
services. Such gatherings always have failed at local centres,
and always will fail till we possess a Cathedral-church which
can supply bright and stately services, and is equally the
home of all. How again, without such a building, can we
fitly celebrate those great national events or church obser-
vances which occur from time to time ? It was one reason for
not holding the General Synod of Australia in Melbourne,
that we had no Cathedral-church into which we could have
gathered its members for services befitting the occasion.
Again, so long as we have no Cathedral-church, our organi-
sation of canons and lay canons can never be anything better
than an inconsistency. It is one of those specimens of office
without function, and dignity without task, which more than
anything else tends to bring titles into contempt. The office
of canon is a necessary one in a fully constituted church. But
the first step towards its justification must be the erection of a
Cathedral, in which and from which those who hold it may have


definite work and mission given to them. Once more, I think
yon are hard y doing justice to your Bishop in denying him a
pulpit which has can call his own. He can preach, it is true, when
and where he pleases himself, but he is actually the only beno-
hcod clergyman! in the diocese who cannot ask another of its clergy
to preach without a third person’s consent. For this reason
the Bishop of .Melbourne has positively no power to organise
in his Cathedml city such evening services for working men as
have proved so popular at St. Paul’s and Westminster Abbey
at home lo Ikeep up such services he would have to ask the
co-operation of men of all schools, and it is not possible that
the Bishop shrould subject his nominees to exclusion at the
hands of some parish minister. Ido not like to complain in
a community wlhich always treats me so kindly, but people
seem to be unaware that the Bishop of this diocese is labour-
ing under disabilities which seriously hinder his work. I trust
1 am not impatuent, but at present none but very small con-
tributions are b«mg received—these even not being collected
without great difficulty. If so great a work is to bo.achieved,
some at least of our wealthier people should be willing to give
annual contributions according to their means. I am myself
trying to give £3OO a year to this object, and we have the
promise from tine Hon. W. J. Clarke of £IOOO a year for 10
3 r ears, on the comdition that we spend not less than £SOOO a
year in construction. Is it too much to hope that for the
completion of a design of such great importance and utility,
some of our wealthier citizens will aid us with yearly contri-
butions? feometthmg of this kind must be done, unless we
are to suffer the dlisgrace of a total suspension of the work.
Ihore is one .question more which has been brought so
prominently beforre the minds of Christians in this colony by
recent events, thait it is impossible on an occasion like the
present to ignore; it. I mean, as you will easily guess, the
place and necessity of creeds and articles of faith. This is a
grave question, amd I offer no apology for having to treat it at
some length. I have no hesitation in beginning with the
assertion that hadl it been possible, it would have been better
toi the Church to dispense with such forms altogether. The
nature of God, for- instance, is too vast and incomprehensible
a thing to be comprised within the lines of our intellectual
formulas. When our thoughts on such a theme are most
definite they are oncost human, and when they are most human
they are certainly most inadequate. Do not mistake my
meaning. Ido neat mean that the anthropomorphic thoughts
about God which are met with in the Hew Testament are
nothing better than regulative thoughts—thoughts which it
may be good for ins to entertain, although they have no even


approximate correspondence to the Divine realities at which
they are aimed. I believe the very opposite. I believe that
in a very true sense man’s moral and spiritual nature was
made in the image of God—that man’s understanding, his
moral sense, his power of spiritual apprehension and self-
determination are, taken together, a true though a poor and
broken reflection of the mind and will of God. In this sense,
therefore, the more truly and ideally human our represen-
tations are, the fitter are they to suggest approximately
true conceptions of the nature of our Heavenly Father.
It is in this sense that I discern in Him who alone
realised the loftiest ideal of humanity a true revelation
of the glory of God. But then we must not forget that
humanity, even in its perfection, is no adequate measure
of the Divine. The thing aimed at is so much larger and
better than our greatest and best, that it must still trans-
cend not only our largest thoughts, but also our purest and
loftiest imaginations. Were it not better, then, to leave the
Divine revelation in its necessary iudefiniteness, and to find in
those wavering outlines of the last human limit the suggestions
of something vaster and more glorious than we can conceive ?
Cardinal Newman will not be suspected of undervaluing
dogma, and yet even he says in his Arians of the Fourth
Century, published in 1833—“1f I avow my belief that free-
dom from symbols and articles is abstractedly the highest
state of Christian communion, and the peculiar privilege of
the primitive Church, it is not from any tendency to that proud
impatience of control in which many exult as in a virtue,
but because . . . technicality and formalism are in
their degree inevitable results of public confessions of
faith.” “The rulers of the Church,” he says again, “were
loth to confess that she had grown too old to enjoy the free
and unsuspicious teaching with which her childhood was
blessed, and that her disciples must for the future calculate
and reason before they spoke and acted.” If, then, they felt
indeed this reluctance, as history shows that they did, what
induced them at length to endeavour to compress into the
cramped forms of human thought the free and large spiritual
suggestiveness of scriptural teaching ? In the answer to this
question we find the only, but, as it seems to me, the sufficient,
justification of creeds and confessions of faith. However
willing the Church may have been to leave the revelation of
God in its reverent iudefiniteness, human impatience and
curiosity refused to do so. Christianity came into the world
at a time when heathen philosophers, having lost the fresh
power of their earlier speculations, were all the more confident
that they could solve all the mysteries of earth and heaven.


Whatever, therefore, presented itself to them as an object of
thought must consent to take its place within their own
favourite systems. Vast and unmanageable as the funda-
mental conceptions of Christianity might at first sight appear,
they must be coaxed or forced by some logical legerdemain
into the narrow moulds of contemporary speculation. Hence
the vast and long-continued efforts of the early philosophical
heretics, within and without the Church, to give what appeared
to them some rational account of Christianity. Theory after
theory was put forth about the Christian conception of God
and the world, which the Church saw, and, even more, felt to
be inadequate. What, then, was she to do? Was she to
leave these theories in possession of the field, or make the
attempt, however distasteful to her, to give them a formal and
authoritative contradiction ? The progress of controversy left
her no alternative; and so she made effort after effort, by the con-
struction of ever larger and more elaborate formularies of faith,
not so much to affirm all which was true, as to contradict all
which was false.
This is the purpose of such a creed as that which is known
by the nameof St. Athanasius ; a creed, hymn, or sermon on the
faith, which there is now good reason for believing, as Professor
Swainson has argued, did not attain its complete form, or get
its present designation, till about the ninth century. The
motive of its production is manifest in almost every verse of
it; where opposed to each statement of what the Three
Persons of the Blessed Trinity are, there is an emphatic
declaration of what they are not. So obviously indeed was this
creed composed to exclude error, that it may be safely said’that
no one can properly understand it who is ignorant of the nature
and history of the early heresies. Now, of this exposition of
the faith, I may say at once that I believe it to be the most
adequate contradiction of false thoughts about the Trinity in
existence ; and that thus it is as valuable to us to-day as it
was to Christians in the ninth century. lam heartily
thankful for it, and, so far as its doctrinal part is concerned,
would resist all attempts to alter it. But let no one suppose
that it attempts to explain the inexplicable. Had you, for
instance, asked the framers of it if they understood the mean-
ing of “ persona" as a description of that basis of peculiar
qualities which distinguished severally the three members of
the Godhead, they would have answered at once that they
did not. Absolute identity they saw that there was not
between the three great Names. Distinction of some kind
there assuredly was, and they adopted the word “per-
sona,' ’ necessarily inadequate where all words must be inade-
quate, to mark that distinction. This they felt was vital.


Take away distinction, and how could the Father love the Son?
lake away the Father’s love for the Son, and how is His gift
of that Son a proof of His love to the world ? If there be no
distinction in the Godhead, the gospel loses its motive, Christ’s
life and death their meaning, and man his rejoicing belief that
there is a heart of real love for him in his Heavenly Father.
Dry and technical, therefore, as the words of this creed may
sound ; abstruse and incomprehensible as some of them un-
doubtedly are, they yet shield with their hard, logical denials,
as with ramparts of rock, those tenderest spiritual verities
of the faith on which we nourish and sustain our souls.
But you may urge, if these philosophical denials be so hard
to understand, how is it that their authors dared say that
every one will be lost who refuses to receive them ? Take the
case of an ignorant peasant woman, who never read a book of
theology in her life, who knows no more of the heresies referred
to in the creed than she does of the undulatory theory of light,
and who, when she talks about persons and substances, must
needs be repeating words without sense to her. Do you
venture to say that if such an one as she does not believe every-
thing affirmed in that creed, she will perish everlastingly ?
And if you do say this, what do you mean by it ? Do you mean
that she will perish if she fails to receive with understanding
what she is unable to understand ? Or that she will perish
if she does not say that she believes what she only repeats by
rote like a parrot ? Can any one believe that she is either
better or worse for going through such a process as that, unless
indeed she be made more selfishly superstitious by imagining
that God will reward her for merely saying words without mis-
take or contradiction ? I wish to put the objection as strongly
as I possibly can, because I believe that such objections should
be honestly faced, and not either scouted or evaded. There is
first, then, the answer of Archbishop Seeker, which was the
one commonly given to this objection in my early days. “ The
condemnation,” says the Archbishop, “ contained in two or
three clauses of this creed belongs (as the most zealous
defenders of our faith in the Holy Trinity agree) not to all
who cannot understand or cannot approve every expression
of it, but only to such as deny the ‘ Trinity in Unity,’ or
‘ Three Persons in one God.’ This alone is said to be
the catholic faith. The words that follow after —‘ For
there is one Person of the Father,’ and so on—are designed
only to set this forth more particularly. Our condemnation is
no more hard and uncharitable than our Saviour’s is at
Mark xvi. 16. And neither is so, because both are to be
interpreted with due exceptions and abatements. . . . The
intention of the creed, as w r ell as of our Lord in the gospel, is


only to say that whoever rejects the doctrine of it from pre-
sumptuous self-opinion or wilful negligence, and doth not
afterwards repent of these faults, particularly if he is made
sensible of them ; or if not, at least in general, among his
unknown sins—the case of such an one is desperate. But if
want of information, weakness of apprehension, or even excus-
able wrongness of disposition, should make him doubt or dis-
believe any or the main part of this creed—nay, which is vastly
a worse case, the whole revelation of Christianity—though we
pass judgment on his errors without reserve, and generally on
all who maintain them, yet personally and singly we presume
not to judge of his condition in the next world. To his own
Master he standeth or falleth.” A resolution embodying sub-
stantially these opinions was passed by both Houses of the
Province of Canterbury on the 9th of May, 1873, and pur-
ported to be “ a declaration for the removal of doubts,” &c.
It was not, however, accepted by the Convocation of York,
and so went no further.
It is assumed in such explanations as these that there must
ordinarily be a moral element in the formation of opinion upon
serious questions ; that upon such questions a man is respon-
sible for using all diligence to ascertain the truth, and for
banishing all prejudices which would hinder the fair consider-
ation of the matter before him. And so much all thoughtful
men must allow. If, therefore, it might be said that the creed
only condemns a man as he fails to exhibit the moral qualities
of fairness and diligence, it would obviously affirm no more
than is necessarily true. But then after all Seeker’s hair-
splitting, no one can deny—-the Archbishop does not himself
deny—that the condemnation seeing to relate to a man’s eternal
“ condition in the next world.” And can it be believed that
for not exercising perfect fairness and diligence in coming to
a right conclusion on the mystery of the Trinity, a man absque
dubio, in (sternum peribit ? Now, in answer to that question,
the very latest and most careful investigation of the history of
this creed has revealed a peculiarly ecclesiastical and objective
usage of language in these terribly sounding threats. Thus
Yinoentius, the contemporary of Nestorius, who wrote in the
fifth century, explains St. Paul’s anathema as follows ; —“ Let
him be anathema ; that is, separated, put apart, excluded.”
Here obviously “ anathema” means nothing more than excom-
munication. By the sixth century, however, in the decree of
Justinian, anathematising the followers of Theodorus, the
meaning of the word is enlarged so as to make the stroke of
excommunication reach to the heresiarch himself, who had
been dead more than 100 years. “ Every heretic,” it is declared,
“ persisting in his error to the end of his life, is with justice


subjected to a continuous anatbematism, even after death.”
“ Anathema,” you will observe, still means excommunication,
only the effect of it is extended to the next life. In the latter
part of the seventh century, we find that the word has got still
further enlargement of meaning. It has become in the
Spanish Church (in the Council of Emerita) the equivalent of
eternal condemnation. “ This is our faith,” say the fathers
of the council. . . . “ whosoever shall have departed from
it, or shall be unwilling to be in the faith, shall with the devil
suffer eternal punishment. If any one will not believe, and
confess that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are one in the
Trinity, let him be anathema.” Such changes in the meaning
of words of condemnation admonish us to be careful how we
attach modern significations to the words of ancient documents.
It it thus no surprise to me to find Professor Swainson—far
the most accurate modern investigator of the Athanasian
Creed —holding that (sub voce “ creed” in Smith’s Dictionary
of Biography, fyc.) “ the words at the commencement —‘ Qui-
cunque vult salvus esse, refer not to final salvation (that
is the subject of verse 39), but to the salvation, or state of salva-
tion, into which we are admitted at baptism, so do the words
at verse 26 —‘Qui vult ergo salvus esse,’ and verse 42— ‘ salvus
esse non poterit.’ . . . We are thus led to suppose that
this exposition may have been composed as a preparation for
baptism. It is called ‘Sermo Athanasii de fide ’ in some of the
earliest notices of it.” Those who have observed the objective
cast imparted to the language of St. Paul’s Epistles by the
more accurate rendering of the Revised Version, will be Quite
prepared for such a judgment as this. But how different a
tone is imparted to the admonitory clauses of this creed, when
they are read in the light of this exposition ? If “he cannot
be saved” only means “he cannot be brought into the status
of salvation by baptism,” we shall only see a condition of
baptism, and not of entrance into heaven, in the profession of
a true faith in the Trinity. This is, I believe, a sound inter-
pretation of all the admonitory clauses to which Professor
Swainson applies it.
There still remains, however, one clause (due, I believe, to
the increasing severity of Spanish Christianity)—-clause 2,
“ without doubt he shall perish eternally”—which obstinately
refuses to submit to such an interpretation. If the words ran,
“ he shall be anathema,” the reference would naturally be to
baptism ; but, to say the least, “ in ceternum perihit” cannot
be explained to mean “he shall be cast into the status
of the eternally lost by being refused baptism,” without
much and violent straining of the words. But now, in endea-
vouring to give you a complete view of the present state


of this question, I cannot omit to notice that, by taking a
- somewhat different view of the meaning of the admonitory
clauses, men like Professor Maurice and Canon Kingsley were
able to express their hearty agreement with therm No one
who knew Frederick Maurice or Charles Kingsley could believe
either man capable of paltering with the meaning of words, or
of professing to believe what he doubted. All the more
interesting, therefore, is it to inquire what was their interpre-
tation of the meaning of these clauses. Professor Maurice
gives it to us in Iris Theological Essays. Eternal life means
to him the knowledge of God, and eternal death the opposite.
When, therefore, the creed says that a man who does not know
God as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, will perish eternally, it
only asserts a self-evident truth—that such absence of know-
ledge is eternal death. But then Professor Maurice denies
that this knowledge is a mere intellectual apprehension of pro-
positions, “ For,” says he, “if the creed had meant that the
not holding certain intellectual notions concerning the Trinity
involved the penalty of everlasting death, it would consign to
destruction, not heretics—extreme or moderate—but every
peasant, every child, nearly every woman in every congregation
in which it is read, seeing that these, thank God, have formed no
such intellectual conceptions, that the majority are not capable
of forming them. And the few persons it would count worthy
of eternal life are a set of schoolmen, the best of whom pray,
every day and hour, that they may become as little children.”
“ But,” he continues, “ as there is no alternative between this
utterly monstrous imagination and that which supposes the
creed to affirm the knowledge of God and eternal life to be the
same ; and therefore the denial—not in the letter but the
spirit, not intellectually and outwardly, but morally and
inwardly—of the Father, Son, and Spirit, to be eternal death;
I cannot help thinking that, with all its fierce language, it has
a gentler heart than some of those who get themselves the
credit of toleration by wishing the church well rid of it.”
Now, observe that Maurice and Kingsley had just as much
right to their interpretation of this creed, and could just as
little have been disturbed for setting it forth as Archbishop
Seeker, or anybody else. For it is the words of the creed, and
not any particular interpretation of them, which the Church
calls upon us to hold. Still, while Professor Maurice affirmed
his right to his own interpretation, and professed that the creed
had been of essential service to him, in clearing his view of
things, he was ready, with that admirable spirituality
of feeling which always distinguished him, rather to surrender
it than to make it a cause of offence. “ If,” he says, “it does
cause any of those for whom Christ died to stumble, if it


hinders any from entering into the mystery of God’s- love, I
hope He will not suffer us to retain it. For that which is
meant as a witness to Him must be given up like the brazen
serpent if it ceases to be so, or is made an instrument of turn-
ing men’s eyes from Him.”
FTow, that the Athanasian Creed is a cause of offence to many
I have no doubt. As a parish clergyman I tried as often as
the dread of causing insufferable weariness would permit, to
prove that the creed was kinder than it sounded. But always
I found that at the end of a few weeks people had drifted back
into thinking that it affirmed of every peasant who did not
intelligently receive what it was impossible for him to under-
stand, that he would be cast for ever into a place full of fire
and brimstone —so hard is it to bring back lost meanings of
words, or to fix in the ordinary mind the impression of a new
and juster conception.
What, then, in these circumstances is to be done ? Theo-
logians may be able to satisfy themselves, but what can be
done to relieve those good and pious souls who, after all our
explanations, cannot recite the words of these admonitory
clauses without pain ? Two courses are possible for us —we
may either modify the admonitory clauses, or, leaving them as
they are, we may abolish the rubric directing the Athanasian
Creed to be read on certain days.
For the former of these courses very cogent reasons may be
advanced. Those who cry out against touching a word of
this ancient creed know nothing of its history. Professor
Swainsonhas shown thatitgrewby slow degrees, till at length, in
the ninth century, “ by a forte peccatum, a splendidum menda-
cium, it was assigned to Athanasius.” Traces of this growth
still exist in the various readings of the admonitory clauses.
The three Cambridge divinity professors, Lightfoot, Westcott,
and Swainson, were requested to report on the Athanasian
Creed by the Upper House of Convocation. In their report
they point out:—l. That in the earliest extant manuscript
of the .document clause 42 occurs in a wholly different form,
and runs as follows (for convenience of comparison I give an
English translation of the words) : —“ This is the holy and
Catholic faith, which every man who desires to attain to
eternal life ought to know wholly and to guard faithfully.”
The positive statement, “ if you hold it you will attain to life,”
is obviously very different from the negative one, “ if you fail
to hold it you cannot be saved,” This latter is clearly a later
development. 2. The Cambridge professors notice that the
second and strongest of the admonitory clauses is frequently
passed over by commentators on the creed, who either did not
find it in their copies or held themselves at liberty to disregard


it. 3. “As a .decisive evidence that the admonitory clauses
must be regarded as mere setting of the exposition, we have
the fact that tlhey occur almost word for word in the same
relation to a different exposition of the faith in the Visitatio
Infirmorum of tthe Sarum Manual.” Now, observe what all
this means. Itfc seems that even in the eighth and ninth
centuries the adhnonitory clauses had not yet assumed their
present form. Some of them may not have been in existence,
and others certtainly had a Less negative and condemna-
tory shape. What reason, then, can there be for the cry
that these wordss are too sacred to be touched? Shall we be
guilty of any actt of desecration, for instance, if we go back to
the earlier and siimpler forms of this very confession? For
my own part, I heartily agree with the conclusion of the
Cambridge professors. “ These facts,” they say, “ appear to
us to show deadly that the admonitory clauses may be treated
as separate fromi the exposition itself, and may be modified,
without in any way touching what is declared therein to be the
Catholic faith ; amd we venture to express our opinion that it
is the office of the Church to make such changes in the
forms of words liiy which the faith is commended to believers
as may be requiired for their edification, and for the right
understanding of their own meaning.”
There is, howewer, an alternative course which may be fol-
lowed without tomching the creed at all. Two hundred and
sixteen years ago the Church of England issued a rubric
directing that the/ “ Quicunque Vult ” should be read on certain
days in the place (of the Apostles’ Creed, thus departing from
the universal praortice of antiquity, and the existing usage of
the Churches of Western Europe. Now, if this ill-advised
rubric were repealied, the Athanasian “ Sermon on the Faith”
would be left in orar prayer-book, like the 89 Articles, as an
approved statement of doctrine. In that character theologians
would thoroughly understand it; simple souls would no
more be vexed by being called on to recite it; and, above
all, it would never again be allowed to displace a creed so much
fitter to express tine faith of spiritual worshippers.
I think, my friends, that if at some future time, or even
now, we could agree on a petition to the English Convocations
to take either of the two courses which I have suggested, we
should contribute tto remove the only flagrant scandal caused
by any of the Articles of our faith. I make this statement
advisedly—for as ito other objections which I have heard, I
believe them to be based on nothing better than misunder-
standing. An able and elegant writer, who recently passed
away from us, objected to the 18th Article of our Church, as
condemning all heathens to eternal ruin; and others have


imagined that they find in the 17th Article a declaration that
God appoints some to eternal blessedness, and others to
eternal misery, without any reference to their moral condition.
Both are misapprehensions. The statement of the 18th
Article, that unbelievers cannot be saved by the law or
sect which they profess, is only the affirmation, in another
form, that if God sent His only-begotton Son to be the
Saviour of mankind, then men needed such a Saviour, and
cannot be delivered from sin without Him. But it by no means
follows that the heathen, who have never heard of Christ, may
not be saved and enlightened by that Word of God which
“ lighteth every man that cometh into the world.” Bishop
Burnet long ag - o remarked on this Article, that “ a great
difference is to be observed between the words saved by the law,
and saved in the law. To be saved by a law or sect signifies
that by the viidue of that law or sect such men as follow it
may be saved; whereas, to be saved in a law or sect imports
only that God may extend his compassions to men that are
engaged in false religions.” Nor is this distinction of the good
Bishop shaken by the fact that in the Latin version of the
Articles the words are “in lege ant secta." Por not only have
the English Articles an independent authority, but also the
definite English “ by” must be held to give to the Latin “ in”
its well-known meaning, “in the power of.” There is no
denial, then, in our Article of St. Paul’s doctrine, that in “ the
day when God shall judge the secrets of men,” the standard of
judgment for the heathen shall be “ the law which God has
written on their hearts,” their conscience and their mutual
questionings being the witnesses of that law. If any man be
saved it shall be through the regenerating and enlightening
mediation of Christ; but when the question is asked about any
individual, shall this particular person be deemed to have im-
proved that secret mediation? the answer shall be given by
comparing his life with that law which he knew—whether
this be the Koran, or the Vedas, or the Zend Avesta,
or any other law appealing to the moral sense, and through
the help of the Eternal Word awakening the just answer of
the conscience.
Again, it is to be observed of the 17th Article that it neither
affirms God’s predestination of an individual to be unto death,
nor without reference to his moral condition. Nay, rather, its
very language refers us for an explanation of the ground of
God’s pre-determination to that Bth chapter of the Epistle to
to the Romans, which it almost quotes. And what is the
ground there set forth ? St. Paul has spoken of them that
love God as being “ the called according to His purpose.”
But this is a phrase which might easily be misunderstood.


He therefore proceeds to explain what he means by it. The
‘ called are not chosen arbitrarily, out of mere favour or
caprice. Ho; “ whom he did foreknow ” (as morally respon-
a {dso f° re -° r dained to be conformed to the image
° and tllese are th ®y wh °m he called justified and
glorified. It surely cannot be difficult to understand the pur-
port of this language. A good and wise man predetermines
ins actions, with reference to his knowledge; and according to
the completeness of that knowledge will be the justice and
wisdom of the pre-determinations. Since, therefore, God’s good-
ness is perfect, and His knowledge complete, His pre-ordina-
tions must be unerringly wise and just. Hor is the fact of God’s
omniscience at all inconsistent with the conception of human
freedom. Hay, in order to form any adequate conception of the
meaning of omniscience, it is necessary to assume the freedom
of man as one of the influential factors of history. When men
thought that the sky was a solid blue vault, with perforations in
it tor the inner glory to stream through, the universe appeared to
them so small and mean a thing, that a parcel of glorified
heroes of indifferent character, seated on Mount Olympus,
seemed to them good and great enough to govern the affairs
of it. Increased knowledge of the universe has made such a
conception no longer possible. The task of Providence is now
seen to be so vast, that nothing less than Omnipotence can be
adequate to its performance. So it is with the history of
humanity. Assume that human life is but the outcome of a
cunningly contrived machinery, and then it will need no greater
scope of knowledge to predict the necessarily resulting effects,
than might be required to foresee the products of Babbage’s
calculating machine. Our idea of God’s foreknowledge
would be mean and poor, because we should see that its task
was nought. But assume that a free volition is the principal
factor of human life, and that to foresee its results it is
necessary to know not only the action and re-action of
individual will and its surroundings, but also the subtle inter-
minable inter-action of all wills in all ages, and then because
the task is seen to be so vast, we shall get a worthier idea
of the omniscience which is equal to it. So far from excluding
human freedom, any worthy idea of omniscience implies it.
bmce, therefore, St. Paul makes God’s predestination depend
on His foreknowledge, and since our Article plainly refers us
to bt. Paul for the unexplained ground of the predestination
of which it speaks, we have the right to conclude that our
church nowhere teaches the doctrine of arbitrary decrees.
It is true that, even as stated in our Article, the doctrine
of God s predestination is not without its dangers. While it
may be comforting to one who feels himself led by Christ’s


Spirit to think that his experience must rest on God’s calling
and purpose, it is clearly possible for one who wishes to do
wrong to make this thought an excuse for vicious indulgence.
But neither in this warning is there the faintest suggestion of
arbitrary decrees.
It were an endless task to pass in review all the common
mistakes and misrepresentations about our Articles of Faith.
But, for myself, I cannot conclude these remarks without
expressing my unfeigned thankfulness for the definiteness
which they gave to my thoughts in earlier days, and for the
steadying influence they have exerted on my later speculations.
They are not perfect, nor are they to be held as of co-ordinate
authority with the Word of God The production of men,
fallible, however holy and wise, they can never claim exemp-
tion from criticism, nor even alteration. But not lightly are
they to be called in question, and not precipitately in any
temporary scare or excitement are they to be meddled with.
Consider, my friends, how large a liberty they leave us. They
attempt to impose upon us no theory of inspiration. Affirm-
ing that the Scriptures are inspired, they leave it to each
generation, nay, to each individual, to determine the meaning,
the limits, the conditions of inspiration by a reverent examina-
tion of the Scriptures themselves. Affirming again the fact
of an atonement and propitiation, they utter not a word about
the manner of it, leaving each to determine by a prayerful
study of God’s Word whether the Lord made this atonement
by submitting to an adequate punishment for our sins, or by
returning to God that answer of an utter renunciation of them
which His human experience made necessary, and His human
nature left possible. Affirming once more, that unrepented
sin must lead to misery both here and hereafter, they utter not
a word, nay they have refused to utter a word, in respect to
that hope of redemption which some have discerned in the
world beyond the grave.
Liberty we have of the most absolute kind on every burning
question of the day, and if we find ourselves checked here and
there in that boundless license of speculation which distin-
guishes modern thought, let us remember that without some
such check speculation might easily degenerate into folly, and
liberty into wilfulness. As Christians we are not at liberty
to think as we please about our relation to our Heavenly
Father. The Lord has revealed to us the nature of that
relation in His Word, and we may say of His truth as of
Himself, it is “ the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever.”
When we see, however, on how many and how important sub-
jects thought is left free in our Church, ought we not all to be
ready to show the largest and most charitable toleration of


opinion ? How else can we preserve Christian unity and that
sweetness of hi'otherly love—the very end of our faith—which
is too often lost in the hatred of warring sects, and the jealousy
of conflicting interests !
Arbitrary authority is least of all a secure basis of union—
nay, it is ag’ainst such authority that our race is everywhere
rising up in ■insurrection. The only sufficient and everlasting
bond of union is charity. Let us endeavour to think kindly
of our brethren; let us be patient with what we think their
mistakes, or even their faults. Does it seem to yon that some
of theirs is imperfect, or that some ceremonial is
superstitious ? Do not forget that they, on their part, may
deem your opinion heresy, and think your projected reform
saciilege. In such circumstances denunciation does but beget
hatred, separation, coldness, and distrust. Those were wise
words which were addressed by its moderator to a recent
assembly of the Church of Scotland—“ If Christian ministers
on one side or another cannot realise the possibility that they
may be mistaken, and that those who differ from them have a
right to their opinions and to follow out their own ideals, so
long as they can legally be held in consistency with the
common standards, then there is no alternative but dis-
ruption.”
Remember, too, my friends, that diversities of opinion are
not without their advantages so long as they are tolerated ;so
long as they are not driven out of the Church to form com-
peting sects outside her pale. Tolerated, they often furnish a
needed impulse to advance an improvement. Bishop Thorold,
himself a decided evangelical, says of the discouragement of
any change but such as all are agreed to, “ that it imposes a
fetter on personal liberty which would effectually have
stamped out evangelical innovations fifty years ago.” Let us
cherish, therefore, my brethren, a habit of toleration. Let us
cultivate feelings of brotherly kindness to all who are loyal
members of our Church, remembering the great and important
subjects on which we all agree, and the identity of the object
for which we all profess to be labouring. Let us draw near to
our brethren of every school, and while striving by argument
and persuasion to lead them into what we think the better way,
let us labour with them heartily, strengthening their hands,
comforting their hearts, and thinking of the time when (the
mists of early ignorance left behind) we shall all stand
together before the throne of God and of the Lamb, and look
back with wonder at the earthly narrowness and petulance
which once kept us asunder.
Again, while we are charitable to our brethren let us strive
also to be fair and just to those who may seem to be hostile to


us. Many of us, for instance, regret—some for critical
reasons, and others out of mere horror at their character —the
critical conclusions of many members of the Tubingen school.
But that is no reason why we should decry all historical criti-
cism. It is by means of a sound historical criticism that such
men as Professors Mozley and Westoottand Bishop Lightfoot
have contributed so powerfully in these days to confirm our
faith in the Word of God. Professor Robertson Smith
recently defined the object of historical criticism as follows
“ The critical study of ancient documents means nothing else
than the careful sifting of their origin and meaning in the
light of history. The first principle of criticism is that every
book bears the stamp of the time and circumstances in which
it was produced. An ancient book is, so to speak, a fragment
of ancient life, and to understand it aright we must treat it as
a living thing, as a bit of the life of the author and his time,
which we shall not fully understand without putting ourselves
back into the age in which it was written.” Now, whatever
any of us may think about some of the results arrived at by
Professor Smith, can any of us doubt that this is a method ol
criticism which is lawful and valuable ? It is in point
of fact the only fruitful method of criticism which is pos-
sible. Had it not been for such criticism, I will say
for myself that I should have been to-day, if a believer at
all, a timid and perplexed believer, afraid to open any new
book, or to read any but guaranteed periodicals, lest I might
find something therein to distress my feelings and shake my
faith. As it is, and by the aid of the critical method, I am,
thank God, a fearless and enthusiastic believer. Perceiving
that in the old time God addressed Himself to an ignorant
and backward people, and in so doing He made use of their
actual thoughts, customs, moral perceptions, and spiritual
habitudes, as the vehicle of His revelation to them, I find
in the Old Testament the wise and patient teaching of a
Heavenly Father, and I see, moreover, in God's guidance and
training of his ancient people a pledge and assurance that I
may look for His merciful aid and leading in my own life, in
spite of my sin and ignorance. I heartily accept, therefore,
the method of historical criticism, as in itself true and fruitful,
and as likely, above all others, to enlarge my mind, train my
conscience, and give assurance to my faith.
Suppose, then, that I find some conclusions professedly
reached by this method, which pain and startle me, what am
1 to do? Denounce the method? Nay, rather scrutinise
more closely this particular application of it to see whether it
was right for me to be pained or startled, or whether the
unwelcome results, said to be due to it, were not deduced


precipitately or unfairly. With such a loyal and patient
devotion to the truth we shall never be moved from our
steadfastness. Nothing can be destroyed in the fiery crucible
of criticism hut the wood,_ hay, and stubble of human misap-
prehension. The gold, silver, and precious stones of divine
truth will resist the fire, and shine all the more brightly for
passing through its refining flames. Is this mere theory, or
do not the more striking facts of our modern life abundantly
confirm it? Two eminent men, the one a critic, the other a
philosopher, Arthur Penrhyn Stanley and Clark Maxwell,
whose names are known wherever genius and high character
are held in reverence, have gone to their rest since last we
assembled here. And wdiat kind of ending did they make—
these men who knew all that science and criticism can say on
the great problems of revelation and human life? Shortly
before the death of the great and good Dean of Westminster,
an aged London clergyman asked him if he still held to the
words of his hymns on our Lord’s Resurrection and Ascension.
“ Certainly,” he replied, “ I could say every one of those words
now. Such was the faith that was in him, and when at last
that faith was put to the test, it answered the divine summons
in these words :—“ The end has come as I most desired it
should come ; I could not have controlled it better. lam
perfectly happy, perfectly satisfied ; I have no misgivings.”
Criticism had not swept this man off “the rock of ages.”
Neither had science inflated the understanding or chilled the
heart of Clark Maxwell. “About three weeks ago,” reports
a friend, “ he remarked that he had examined every system of
atheism he could lay his hands on, and had found, quite
independently of any previous knowledge he had had of the
wants of men, that each system implied a God at the bottom
to make it workable. He went on to say that he had been
occupied in trying to gain truth, that it was but little of truth
a man could acquire, but it was something to know ‘on whom
we have believed.’ ” His simple Christian faith gave him a
peace too deep to be ruffled by bodily pain ; and one of his
latest utterances, when in extreme weakness and scarcely able
to say anything, was the quotation of the words—“ Every
good and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down
from the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness,
neither shadow of turning.” So passed to his rest one of the
most profound thinkers and original physical investigators
which this generation has produced. He had lived his life far
away from the madding crowd on the cold and lonely heights
of philosophical speculation. But even there, amid the awful
sights and dreadful echoes of that stern high land, the Divine
Presence was felt to be around him, and the divine whisper


made itself heard to the listening ear—“ Thou are not alone,
because the Father is with thee.”
Unworthy, indeed, are we to compare ourselves with
souls like those. But, yet, if we be diligent, and patient,
and true, resolved to shun no truth, and to believe no
lie, charitable to our brethren, just and kind to our enemies,
faithful to our Saviour, and humble before our God, then
nothing shall harm us or put us to shame. Let thought
go forth on her glorious path of discovery; let science tell
us all she can of the wonders of God’s works in earth and
heaven ; neither, we know full well, can tell us anything which
shall shake our faith in Christ. Is not this, my reverend
brethren, the language of all our hearts, “ I know whom I
have believed ; Him I love and serve ; Him will I preach and
strive to glorify while strength remains to me; and when I can
do no more, on Him will I rest and lean till my change
come ?” And then at length, when the task is finished, and
the burden of sin and toil has been laid down, there await us
beyond these shadows, the eternal home and the brotherhood
of the best and greatest who have gone before, and, above all,
the enrapturing vision, never to be lost again, of “ Him who
loved us, and gave Himself for us.” “ Even so—come, Lord
Jesus.”
PAPKES.
The Registrar laid on the table the following papers:—Report of
the proceedings of the Bishop in Council subsequent to the last
session of the Assembly ; reports of the Sunday-school Association,
of the Superannuation Committee, and of the Bishop in Council on
diocesan expenses; particulars of proposed alteration of boun-
daries of parishes of St. Philip, Collingvvood, and St. Stephen,
Richmond ; proposed boundaries of new parish, to be called St.
Matthias, North Richmond ; statement of receipts and expenditure
re Cathedral Erection Fund ; names of retiring members of the
Council of the Diocese.
THE GEELONG GRAMMAR SCHOOL.
The Registrar moved for leave to bring in a bill to amend an Act
to Provide a Constitution for the Church of England Grammar
School, Geelong.
Mr. E. E. Morris seconded the motion, which was carried unani-
mously.
The bill having been introduced and read the first time,
The Rev. Canon Goodman moved its second reading. In doing
so, he explained that the object of the bill was to enable the board of
management of the school to wipe out a debt of honour contracted at
an early stage of the school’s existence. The success of the school
was now assured, and the present buildings were found inadequate
to accommodate the whole of the pupils. Under these circumstances


the board desired to avail themselves o£ a fund that had accumulated
in their hands to repay the moneys advanced in the less prosperous
days of the school. But they found themselves barred by the word-
ing of the Act of the Church Assembly No. 1, 1861, which provided
that this fund should be devoted exclusively to repairs and the general
expenditure of the school. They therefore wished to amend that Act
in such a manner as to allow them to pay off the debt to which he
had referred.
The Registrar (Mr. T. T. a’Beckett) seconded the motion.
Mr. B. E. Morris had much pleasure in supporting the bill. He
referred in laudatory terms to the large amount of success in educa-
tional matters achieved by the Geelong Grammar School,
The bill was then passed through all its stages without amendment.
CHURCH PROPERTY.
The Rev. E. B. Dickinson moved—“ That in the event of the bill
for ‘ the Better Holding of Church Property,’ now before the Legis-
lative Council, becoming law, the Bishop in Council be requested to
prepare amendments of any Acts of this Assembly which confer powers
upon trustees, so that in every case where there are guardians or a
vestry, the management of church property by the trustees appointed
under the aforenamed bill shall be in accordance with the lawful
directions of such guardians or vestry.’’
On the motion of Mr. a’Beckett the following resolution was also
passed “ That this Assembly recognising as it does the great
importance to the Church of the bill lately introduced in the Legis-
lative Council for securing 1 the Better Holding of Church Property,’
requests the Bishop in Council to take such steps as may be deemed
expedient, by petition or otherwise, to further the passing of such
bill. 0
REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE RE SUPERANNUATION.
The Eev. Canon Vance laid on the table the report of the com-
mittee appointed to consider the question of superannuation and
moved that it be taken into consideration. The committee’s recom-
mendations were as follow ;
“1- Th at Patronage Act, Part V„ be retained in favour of every
clerk, now licensed under its provisions, who shall be forty-five years
of age and upwards at the passing of an amending Act giving effect
to this report, and in favour of all other clerks now licensed under
its provisions who shall, within six months of the passing of such
amending Act, elect to remain under the existing Act.
“2. That Patronage Act, Part V., be amended in view of its
application to—l. Every clerk now licensed in the diocese who at
the passing of the amending Act, shall be under the age of 45 years
and shall elect to come under its operation ; 2. Every clerk who shall
hereafter hold the Bishop’s license, being under the age of 45 years
on the day of issue of such license. J
“3. That, under the amending Act, superannuation allowances be
paid wholly from a fund set apart for the purpose, such fund to be
maintained by— (A) The annual unexpended inoomeof the Capitalised
Superannuation Fund. (b) Annual premiums of 1J per cent, on the
income of every participating clergyman, (c) A levy of 2 per cent,
upon the ordinary revenue of every parish and district. But, in the
case of the superannuation of a clergyman under the existing Act all
the contributions of the parish or district chargeable with his super-
annuation to be refunded, (d) Donations, legacies, &c
“4. The thirty-ninth clause of Patronage Act to be retained as
setting forth the conditions preliminary to retiring.


“5. That allowances be made to all subscribing clergymen upon a
sliding scale (vide schedule) proportioned to the premiums paid by
them, and by the parishes they have served, provided always that
the annual expenditure in no year shall exceed the income of the
year.
“6 That if the annual income should at any time not suffice to pay
superannuation allowances, a,pro-rata reduction be made upon them all,
and the parishes last served by superannuated clergymen to make up
deficiency for the year.
“ 7 That administration of the fund and its entire management be
under the supervision of a board, consisting of three clergymen and
three laymen, to be appointed by the Assembly in like manner to the
elected members of the Council of the Diocese, with the Bishop as ex-
officio chairman.
“ Your committee, after carefully weighing the various schemes
and proposals that have been laid before them, are of opinion that the
plan which they now submit to you is the best that, under existing cir-
cumstances, can be adopted. They desire to leave untouched the
rights conferred by the Patronage Act upon present incumbents,
while offering to clergymen under a certain age the option of ex-
changing those rights for benefits under the new scheme. They are
also of opinion that in framing any Act embodying a new superan-
nuation scheme care should be taken not so to bind the diocese as to
preclude it from accepting any ordinance hereafter to be passed on
this subject by the General Synod of the Dioceses of Australia and
Tasmania.
“ Schedule.
“ Suggested Sliding Scale of Pensions to Clergymen on attaining
the age of sixty-five years. In the event of earlier incapacity the
pension to be proportioned to the number and value of the annual
payments.
“After 40 conjoint contributions of clergymen (U per cent, on in-
come) and parishes (2 per cent, on revenue) which he has served ( i.e
20 plus 20, or more of one and less of the other): —When conjoint
contributions have averaged £5 and under £lO per annum, a pension
of £SO per annum; £lO and under £ls per annum, a pension of
£IOO per annum; £ls and under £2O per annum, a pension of £l5O
per annum; £2O and under £25 per annum, a pension of £2OO per
annum ; £25 and upwards, a pension of £250 per annum. To be
diminished by 5 per cent, per annum for every year’s payment not
made by clergymen or parish he has served after the date of the
passing of the amending Act. (Payments made within the five
years immediately preceding superannuation, in excess of the average
of preceding years, not to be reckoned in computing the average for
the whole period).’’
The committee had been unanimous in desiring the alteration of
the existing law, because, being unworkable in the poorer parishes,
its benefits were practically confined to the clergy who served in town
or suburban churches, and even where its provisions could be complied
with it had proved a fruitful source of complaint and difficulty.
They had originally intended to propose the establishment of a special
fund, to be obtained by taking the Superannuation Fund in existence
as the nucleus, and adding to it from year to year the result of a levy
of 1J per cent, on the income of the clergy, and 2 per cent, on the
revenue of the parishes. All these calculations had been upset by
the discovery that 60 of the clergy now licensed in the diocese are
above forty-five years of age and 19 above sixty years. No fund that
they could hope to establish could bear the superannuation demands


that might in such a state of things be looked for within the next few
years. They felt that all that could be done under the circumstances
was to initiate a scheme that would benefit the clergy now under
forty-five years of age, and work well in the future, and to leave the
elder clergy to the operation, however unsatisfactory, of the present
Act.
Sir William Stawell having been unanimously elected chairman, the
house went into committee on the proposed scheme.
The Rev. Canon Chalmers objected to the principle in the schedule
of superannuation allowances varying according to the income previ-
ously enjoyed by the ministers. He also thought it unreasonable that
the majority of the clergy were left under the old scheme, which had
been pronounced unworkable.
The Very Kev. the Dean read a list of clergy formerly licensed in
the diocese, from which it appeared that a very small proportion
indeed of them ever apply for superannuation, the great majority
either working to the last or leaving the diocese while yet in health.
The Rev. Canon M'Cullagh, T. K. Hall, W. W. Mantell, A. Brasier,
and H. F. Scott supported Canon Chalmers in his opposition to the
report.
The Rev. K. Potter said that he would vote for the committee’s
recommendation. The case of the elder clergy was hopeless, but that
was no reason why they should not legislate for the benefit of the
next generation.
Messrs. A. Woolley and G. W. Eusden supported the report.
Dr. Hearn was of opinion that no superannuation scheme was
feasible. They might do their best for disabled ministers, but the
Church was not in a position to give guarantee. It was as much as
they could do to maintain their working ministers. He thought the
existing system as good as any.
The Rev. J. E. Herring (Kyneton) said the scheme submitted by
the committee was, in the opinion of many members, entirely wrong
in principle, inasmuch as it did not take length of service into
consideration as one of the principal factors in the allotment of
superannuation allowances. On behalf of several who thought with
him, he had drawn up a separate scheme of superannuation that had
length of service for its principal feature. Mr. Herring read the
following scheme, which was ordered to be printed.
“ I. That part V. of the Act intituled ‘ An Act to Consolidate and
Amend the Law for the Constitution of Ecclesiastical Parishes in the
Diocese of Melbourne, the Consecration of Churches, the Appointment
and Superannuation of Clerks, and the Exchange of Cures,’ be and
the same is hereby repealed.
“ 2. That a Superannuation Fund, hereinafter called 1 the fund,’ be
established for the Diocese of Melbourne for the purpose of providing
pensions to clerks in holy orders who shall become superannuated as
hereinafter mentioned. The word ‘ clergyman’ in this Act shall mean
a clerk in holy orders,
“3. That all moneys heretofore collected under and by virtue of the
said Act i., 1878, part V., hereby repealed, and all moneys which may
from time to time have accumulated thereunder, shall from and after
the passing of this Act become part of the fund.
“ That every parish shall annually contribute to the fund an
amount equal to one per cent, on the gross annual income of such
parish, always providing that money collected for the purposes of
building, church furniture, charitable or other special objects, shall
not be included in the gross annual income of such parish for the
purposes of calculating the amount which a parish is hereby required
to contribute, but the words gross annual income shall include seat


rents, offertories, and contributions locally collected for the mainte-
nance of worship and for the stipend of the clergyman.
“5. That every clergyman in the diocese shall annually contribute to
the fund the sum of £3; but any clergyman who shall leave the
diocese before superannuation, as hereinafter provided, shall be
entitled to receive from the fund the gross amount paid by him under
the provisions of this section, or in case he shall die before super-
annuation, then his representatives shall be entitled to receive such
amount.
“6. That any special donations, devises, bequests, or gifts, which
may at any time be made or given to the said fund, shall be added to
the capital of the said fund, and the interest only used for the purpose
of providing pensions as herein provided.
“ 7. That every clergyman who shall reach the age of sixty-five
years may, with the approval of the Pension Board, if he have com-
pleted a service of thirty-two years in the diocese, or as soon after as
he shall have completed such service, be superannuated, and entitled
to receive a pension from the fund to the extent hereinafter provided,
and every clergyman who shall, by a resolution of the Pension Board
hereinafter appointed, be declared superannuated from bodily or
mental infirmity or any other cause, be thereby superannuated, and
entitled to receive a pension to the said extent, provided that he shall
have completed a service of twelve years at the least in the diocese.
“ 8, There shall be a board, consisting of the Bishop of the diocese
and twelve members of the Church Assembly, six of whom shall be
clergymen and six laymen, to be elected as soon as possible after the
passing of this Act by the Church Assembly; and of these twelve
members two clerical and two lay shall retire annually, but be
eligible for re-election. And thereafter, at every annual session of
the Assembly, two clerical and two lay members shall be elected for
the period of three years in the place of the retiring members ; and
every extraordinary vacancy occurring on such board shall be filled
up at the next succeeding session of the Assembly by resolution of
the Assembly, for such a period as the member of the board whose
death, resignation, or other cause has caused such vacancy would
have been a member of such board.
“9. The Bishop of the diocese shall ex officio be chairman of the
Pension Board; and the said board shall have full control over the
fund, and may, upon the complaint of a majority of the church-
wardens and vestry of any parish, that a clergyman is, from mental
or bodily infirmity, or other causes, incapable of discharging his
duties, declare such clergyman superannuated; provided that the
clergyman has completed a service of twelve years in the diocese,
and provided, moreover, that the board can provide the amount of
pension due to such clergyman as hereinafter provided.
“ 10. The amount of pension to which a clergyman shall become
entitled shall be in the case of superannuation by the Pension Board
£5O a year to any clergyman who has completed a service of twelve
years in the diocese, and has paid to the fund all moneys provided by
this Act, and £5 a year for every year of service beyond such period,
but so that the pension to which he shall become entitled shall not
exceed £l5O a year ; and in case of any clergyman who has reached
the age of sixty-five, and has completed a service in the diocese of
thirty-two years, the amount of pension to which he shall become
entitled shall be £l5O a year; provided he shall have paid to the fund
all moneys by this Act provided ; and no clergyman shall be entitled
to any pension who has not completed a service of twelve years at
the least, and paid to the fund all moneys by this Act provided; and
no pension shall exceed £l5O,


*' me * be w^°^e the interest arising from the
capital of the fund, together with the subscriptions of the clergy and
the contributions of parishes, be insufficient to meet the claims upon
the fund, apro-rata reduction shall be made by the Pension Board in
the allowances to the several superannuitants. And all moneys
remaining in excess of claims at the end of each year shall be added
to the capital of the fund.
“1/. No clergyman shall be entitled to receive his pension until he
shall have resigned his position as clergyman of the parish to which
e was last licensed, and no clergyman in the receipt of his pension
shall be debarred from acting as curate, or from occasionally officia-
ting, or from receiving payment for such services.”
These proposals, Mr. Herring remarked, had been drawn up by the
rural deanery of Kyneton, whose members had been engaged in the
close consideration of the superannuation question for a period of
s ® ve " “ on^ s - , The main provision of the bill was that pensions
should be allotted to the clergy on the basis of length of service. If
this fundamental principle was affirmed, he was prepared to make
many concessions in committee, but he had no hesitation in saying
that the existing scheme must be altered, as it was both unjust and
partial in its operation. (Applause.)
The Eev. 0. T. Perks exhorted the committee to seriously consider
tne ettect of the proposed change on the position of those clergymen
who had been superannuated under the existing system.
The Dean of Melbourne said the existing scheme had worked satis-
factorily and well. He felt assured the laity would not allow an
injustice to be done to those clergymen who had an equitable claim
on the present Superannuation Fund.
Canon MaoCullagh said that of the three clergymen superannuated,
one had been incumbent of a rich town parish ; another’s allowance
.V- i O ,. la^ el y supplemented by the Bishop in Council; while the
d ® nved P art of hls superannuation from certain fees.
The Eev, Canon Chalmers called attention to the healthy condition
rn, ‘ u Superannuation Funds of the Wesleyan and Presbyterian
Churches, the former amounting to no less a sum than £lOO,OOO, and
asked why the Church of England could not establish a permanent
fund of a similar character.
Sir William Stawell urged on the clergy the absolute necessity of
bringing the claims of the Superannuation Fund clearly and directly
home to the minds of the people. They should present it in the light
u < ? U s' that must be discharged. There should be no false delicacy
about the matter, for it was a question of pressing and immediate
interest. The parishes generally could not be forced to subscribe a
specified sum towards this end, and he felt thoroughly convinced that
any attempt to enforce equal payments from every parish would result
in complete and disastrous failure. His advice was to keep existing
(Applause a^ve ’ anc *’ aboye a d> to respect vested rights.
The Bishop said it seemed to him that they had to make a choice-
of evils. He did not approve of the principles of either of the
superannuation schemes before the committee. He agreed with Sir
Y' llli , a “ Stawell in the opinion that the matter of superannuation
should be brought more directly before the laity, and that the clergy
should make it distinctly known that, though the enactments of their
Church Assembly might not be recognised in the secular courts, they
were authoritatively binding on every loyal member of the Church.
(Applause.) Placed in this light, he felt confident that no member
of their communion would incur the imputation of disloyalty by
refusing to comply with the provisions of the law enacted for super-


animation purposes. In his opinion, the [present Act embodied full
and ample legislation on the subject; butt a great mistake was made
in not initiating an adequate superanuuatiion scheme thirty years ago.
It was now too late to make provision foir those clergymen who had
neglected to take action at the proper timie, and he appealed to them
to exercise some self-denial, and not stamd in the way of a younger
generation of clergymen establishing a superannuation fund on a
permanent basis. (Applause.)
After some further discussion,
The Rev. R. B. Dickinson moved—“ That the two superannuation
schemes now under discussion be referred to the former committee
for further investigation, and that they ifurnish a report at the next
session of this Assembly.” The names off the Rev. Canon Chalmers,
Rev. J. B. Herring, Rev. H. F. Scott, land Rev. R. B. Dickinson,
having been added to the committee, th® motion was carried.
BISHOP OF MBLBOUEWB’S FUND.
The annual report of the Bishop hf Melbourne’s Fund called
attention to the following facts “1. The slight increase in the
amount of the fund for 1880—it is £4373 12s. 2d., as against
£4243 7s. 3d, for 1879, and £4336 2s. -4d. for 1878. We may say,
looking at the capabilities of the whole (diocese, that there is nothing
to boast of in our total. 2. The decrease in the balance in hand at the
beginning of the current year. We had, to begin the year 1879,
£1917 14s. 5d.; at the commencement oif 1880, £1506 15s. lid. We
begin 1881 with a balance of £1326 Is.. 6d. This would have been
£2OO less had there not been an unexpected surplus from the Consoli-
dated Fund, which, by Act of Assembly No. 9, 1878, is added to the
total of the Bishop of Melbourne’s Fundi. We draw attention to this
steady diminution of our annual balance; as showing that our expendi-
ture exceeds our income. Should this continue to be the case, the
time will soon arrive when we shall be unable to meet the demands
made upon us during the first two qmarters of the year. 3. The
absence of anything like a due proportion! in the amounts contributed by
parishes. Of one thing there can be nodcoubt—viz., that Church people
generally do not contribute. We are a. long way off the desired point
when each shall give, whether large or small, his or her contribution ;
and yet this has to be kept in view, and, with God’s blessing, may
yet be attained. A new feature in our ueport is the contribution from
the Ladies’ Association, set on foot by Miss Hearn, of £77 3s. This
was collected in small sums from young persons. We have reason to
believe that a much larger amount wall come in from this source
during 1881.
THE CHURCH AND THE CHARITABLE INSTITUTIONS.
The Rev. E. O. Spicer moved —“ Thait this Assembly endeavour to
secure some representation for the Clhurches in the management of
those charitable institutions to whiclh contributions are made on
Hospital Sunday.” In bringing forward this proposition he said he
was giving expression to a feeling that was very general at the pre-
sent time. Although Hospital Sunday/ was, in a manner, forced upon
the Churches, yet the latter had no voiioe in the management of the
institutions benefited. It was a well-lknown fact that the Hospital
Sunday collections materially lessened the amounts subscribed to
other objects, such as the Bishop of Melbourne's Fund, the Cathedral
Building Fund, &c., and he thought it; only right and proper that the
Church should derive some substantiial advantages from the large
sums contributed to the charitable institutions. He submitted that
in this respect the various Churches slhould stand on the same footing


as business firms. The latter bad the privilege of nominating life
governors, and recommending patients in proportion to the amount
they contributed, and all he desired was that the Churches should be
invested with the same privileges.
The Rev. H. J. Poole seconded the motion, but was not clear that
any one Church could ask for exceptional privileges.
The Rev. C. T. Perks said he had brought this matter before the
Hospital Sunday Committee, and, owing to the representations he
had made, and for which he was attacked by the press as being only
desirous of making a good bargain for his denomination, obtained a
quantity of tickets for admission to the hospitals. He had always
utilised them for the benefit of their indigent poor.
The Rev. R. Short was one of those who had personal experience
of the evils sought to be remedied by the resolution under discussion.
His parish was very poor, and he could assure the Assembly that
frequently he had to travel long distances, and sometimes even to go
outside his boundaries, to obtain hospital tickets for necessary and
deserving cases. This state of things, he submitted, was simply
scandalous. Why could not the same system be adopted here that
was worked so successfully in Geelong? There every Church, after
sending in the Hospital Sunday collection, received tickets in exact
proportion to the amount subscribed. He sincerely hoped this
common-sense plan would be adopted in Melbourne and suburbs
without delay. (Applause.)
Ihe Bishop suggested that, in consideration of the importance of
the subject, it be referred to the Bishop in Council, in order that the
best means of attaining the object in view might be ascertained and
adopted.
Ihe Bishop’s suggestion was accepted, and the motion passed in the
following form “That the Bishop in Council endeavour to secure
some representation for the Churches on the management of those
charitable institutions to which contributions are made on Hospital
Sunday. ”
THE SUPERANNUATION FUND.
The Rev. H. F. Scott moved—“ That it is desirable the 44th clause
of the Patronage Act be amended thus—that the word ‘ may,’ in the
fourth clause, be excised, for the purpose of introducing the word
shall,’ and the words following down to the word ‘ be,’ in the last
line, be expunged ; the whole clause so amended to read thus — ( So
much of the income of the said fund as, on the 31st day of December
in every year, after payment or making provision for the payment of
the yearly retiring allowances chargeable thereon, calculated up to
that date, remains unexpended shall be reserved for the purposes of
the said fund.” He said that during the last four years £1487 had
been withdrawn from the Superannuation Fund and diverted to other
purposes. If the fund had been capitalised and allowed to accumu-
late, there would now be a sum of £lO,OOO available for the
superannuation of clergymen. It was with the object of conserving
the Superannuation Fund for its legitimate purposes that he moved
the resolution.
The Bishop was of opinion that the effect of the proposed resolution
would be to tax the poorer clergymen for the benefit of the richer.
He also considered that the time was most inopportune to submit such
a proposal, although some alteration might be made at some future
period. He also objected because he did not consider it fair to take
10 per cent, from the incomes of the country clergy for the benefit of
the holders of wealthy incumbencies in the large centres of popu-
lation, for such would be the practical effect of the proposal before the


Assembly. There was one further objeotima—viz,, that already one-
ninth of the whole property of the Church lhad been devoted to super-
annuation purposes.
Mr. G. W. Rusden believed the effect of Ithe resolution would be to
starve the Church, and cause great discouragement to some of their
most earnest workers.
The Rev. Canon Chalmers recommended the addition of the
following words to the resolution “Andl that an Act be founded
on this resolution, to come into operation con Ist January, 1883.”
The Rev. Mr. Scott accepted the addendum to the resolution, and
after some further discussion, the motion, with the additional words
suggested was declared carried.
THE CLERGY WIDOW AND OEIPHANS’ FUND,
On the motion of the Rev, C. T, Perks, the Rev. J. Stanley Low
and Mr. E. Rowlands were appointed directors, and Messrs. J. D.
Gowan and W. Macredie auditors of the above fund for the ensuimr
year.
CATHEDRAL FUND.
At the commencement of business on Flriday afternoon, the Bishop
said he had a gratifying announcement bo make. In response to his
appeal for assistance he had received from Mr. Joseph Clarke a
donation of £lOOO in aid of the Cathedral Building Fund. (Applause.)
A CHURCH CONGBESS.
The standing orders were suspended by consent to enable the Rev.
H. P. Scott to introduce the following resolutions without notice :
“ L That, in the opinion of this Assembly, a Church Congress, on the
model of those held so successfully and with such beneficial results in
England, would conduce to the well-being of the Church in Victoria,
as affording opportunities for the discussion of questions relating to
the spiritual life of the Church, and other topics of vast importance
having a direct or indirect bearing on its usefulness and success. 2.
That, with a view to giving effect to the foregoing resolution, a com-
mittee, consisting of the Very Rev. the Dean of Melbourne, Canons
Dickinson and Handfield, Rev. W. W. Mantell, Mr, A. Deeper, Capt.
Pasco, and Mr. E. E. Morris, be appointed, to draw up a scheme to
submit to the Bishop for his approval and co-operation.” After a
brief discussion both resolutions were affirmed.
STANDING ORDJEES.
A debate took place on a motion off Mr. J. W. Hackett to alter
standing orders 31 and 82 so as to secure the votes of the clergy and
laity being taken separately in Committee of Assembly, and at other
times when demanded by three clerical or three lay members, and
not only as at present on motions for the second reading of Bills and
other important issues. The question was shelved on motion by Mr.
Hopkins for the adjournment of the Hoiuse.
APPOINTMENTS.
The Rev. Canon Goodman was elected clerical representative of
the Diocese of Melbourne at the General Synod, vice the Rev. Canon
Chase, resigned. The election for threee clerical and three lay repre-
sentatives in the Council of the Dioces® resulted in the return of the
Rev. Canons Chalmers and Vance, Hews. C. S. Perry, Messrs, E. E.
Morris, F, R. Godfrey, and R. W. Dickson. The following nominee
members of the Council were re-appoinlted by the Bishop, viz., Canon
Goodman, Rev. R. Potter, and Messrs. W. B. King and J. D. Gowan.
His lordship also intimated that he hmd appointed Mr. H. Henty in
the room of Mr. B. Brett, who had left: the Diocese,


PROROGATION.
The Bishop, in proroguing the Assembly on Friday, 23rd Sep-
tember, said that the session, though short, was by no means
unfruitful. They had taken stock of their weak points, and he
hoped to see much practical good arising out of their deliberations.
In particular, he hoped that the committee to whom the super-
annuation schemes had been referred would bring up a report next
session that would be found generally satisfactory.
The Bishop then pronounced the benediction, and the Assembly
adjourned sine die.
Mason, Firth & M £ Cutcheon, Printers, Melbourne.


