

T
H
E
A
S
I
A
N
L
I
B
R
A
R
Y
THE BUDDHA’S
PATH OF VIRTUE
F. L. WOODWARD




[?]
6 p (S*{QcsS
S S


THE BUDDHA’S PATH
op
VIRTUE


COPYRIGHT
Translation and other rights
reserved by the Publishers


TO
H. S. 0.




THE BUDDHA’S
PATH OF VIRTUE
A TRANSLATION OF THE DHAMMAPADA
BY
F. L. WOODWARD, M.A.
With a Foreword by
SIB PONNAMBALAM ARDNACHALAM, M.A. (Cantab.)
THEOSOPHIGAL PUBLISHING HOUSE
Madras 1921 London




CONTENTS
CHAP. PAGE
Foreword vii
Translator’s Preface .... xxi
I. The Pairs . ■ 1
11. Heedfulness 5
HI. The Mind 8
IY. Flowers 11
V. Fools 14
VI. The Wise 18
VII. The Arahat —The Worthy . . . .21
VIII. The Thousands 23
IX. Evil 27
X. Punishment 29
XI. Old Age 32
XII. The Self 34
XIII. The World 36
XIV. The Awakened One 39
XV. Happiness 42
XVI. Affections 44


CHAP. PAGE
XVII. Anger . . . . . . .47
XVIII - . Impurity 50
XIX The Just , . . . . . .55
XX The Path . . 58
XXI. Divers Verses 62
XXII, The Evil Way 66
XXIII. The Elephant 69
XXIV. Craving . 72
XXV. The Mendicant 79
XXVI. The Brahmana . . .. . .. . §5
Errata and Additions. . . . .97


FOREWORD
The Dhammapada, of which a metrical translation
* /
by Mr. Woodward is here presented, is a precious
Buddhist Scripture Which deserves to be widely
known. The Theosophical Society is to be congratu-
lated on securing so competent and sympathetic a
translator and on publishing it in a popular form.
The Dhammapada is a part of the Khuddaka
Nikaya of the Buddhistic Canon and consists of about
420 stanzas in the sloka metre. Every fully ordained
ihikkhu 1 is expected to know the book by heart, and
its verses are often on the lips of pious laymen. The
1 Usually but erroneously translated “ priest,” ignoring a funda-
mental difference between Buddhism and other religions. Buddhism
recognises no priesthood. By “ priest ” one understands a mediator
between God and man, a vehicle of divine grace, a person with dele-
gated authority from God to administer the sacraments of religion,
to admit into the faith or eject from it, to absolve from sin, etc. Such
an institution can have no place in Buddhism. BhikTchu (literally, a
“ beggar ” and etymologically the same word) is one of a brotherhood
of men trying to live as Buddha lived, to purify and discipline them-
selves, earnest pilgrims on the road reaching unto deliverance
(Nirvana), The layman demands from the bhilelchu no assistance
in heavenly, no interference in worldly, affairs, but only that he
should live as becomes a follower of the great Teacher. The nearest
English equivalent of bhiklehu is “ mendicant friar ”.


beginner of Buddhist studies can have no better
introduction to Buddhism and must go back to it
again and again to enter into the spirit of Buddha
and his apostles.
The Scriptures of the Buddhist Canon are known
collectively as the Ti-pitaka (Sansk. Tri-pit aka), “ the
Three Baskets or Treasuries ”. These divisions
correspond to the two Testaments of' s Ehe Christian
Bible and contain (excluding repetitions) more than
twice as much matter. They are known separately
as the Vinaya pit aka, Sutta pitaka and Abhidhamma
pitaka, the Basket of Discipline, the Basket of Dis-
courses and the Basket of Metaphysics. These
scriptures are regarded with the utmost veneration
by Buddhists as containing the word of Buddha
( Buddha-vacanam ), and are reputed to have been
recited at the first Council held, according to tradi-
tion, at Rajagaha immediately after Buddha’s death
circa 540 b.c.
It seems more probable that they grew up gradual-
ly and did not receive their final shape till about
three centuries later, at the Council held under
the auspices of the Emperor Asoka at Pataliputra
circa 247 b.c. The account given of the First


Council in the closing chapter of the Culla vagga
seems to indicate that the Basket of Metaphysics was
then unknown or unrecognised, and that the
scriptures were then a Dvi-pitaka (Two Baskets)
rather than a Ti-pitaka (Three Baskets).
If the Culla vagga account is accepted, it would
appear that at this Council, expressly held by the
Emperor for the consecrative settlement of the holy
texts, the five Nikayas or divisions which constitute
the second Basket formed the subject of discussion
between the President Kassappa and Buddha’s
favourite pupil Ananda. The Dhammapada is a book
of the fifth Nikaya. The Mahdvansa (Ch. v, 68)
carries it back a few years earlier than the Council,
to the time of the Emperor’s conversion to the Buddhist
faith, for on that occasion his teacher, Nigrodha, is
said to have explained to him the Appamada-vagga,
which is the second chapter of the work. It was
therefore known in the middle or early part of the
third century B.c.
It seems to be an Anthology, prepared for the use of
the faithful, of verses believed to be the real words
of Buddha, short improvisations in which he express-
ed striking thoughts and embellished his preaching.
XI


They were current among the early Buddhists, and
have been culled from the other scriptures as of high
ethical and spiritual value. The importance of the
Dhammapada for a critical study of Buddhism is thus
considerable.
For a thorough understanding of the work and
of the orthodox Buddhist view of it, it should be
studied with the valuable commentary of Buddha-
ghosa. Buddhism owes a profound debt to this great
man, and has recognised it in the name by which
he is known in the Buddhist world. Says the Mahd-
vansa (Ch. xxxvii, 174): “ Because he was as pro-
found in his eloquence ( ghosa ) as Buddha himself, they
conferred on him the appellation of Buddha-ghosa
(the Voice of Buddha), and throughout the world
he became as renowned as Buddha.” He was an
Indian Brahmana and a great Vedic scholar and
apostle. On his conversion to Buddhism he became
a not less ardent champion of the new Faith. He
came to Ceylon from the cradle of Buddhism, “ the
terrace of the great 80-tree ” in Buddha Gaya, in
the beginning of the fifth century, i.e., nearly a
thousand years after Buddha's death. He came in
search of the old commentaries on the Tripitakas.
XII


The commentaries had been brought to Ceylon by
the Emperor Asoka’s son, the apostle Mahinda, and
by him translated into Sinhalese. They continued
to be orally transmitted until reduced to writing,
in the reign of the Ceylon king, Vattagamini
(88 —76 b.c.), at a convocation of learned bhihhhus
at the cave-temple of Alu Vihare in the Matale
district.
The original Pali version having perished in India,
Buddhaghosa, during his residence in the Maha-vihare
at Anuradhapura, re-translated it from Sinhalese to
Pali. His version supplanted the Sinhalese (since
lost) and is now the only record remaining of the
ancient tradition. He also wrote elaborate commen-
taries (Attha hatha)' on almost every part of the Tri-
pitaka and composed the Visuddhi magga, an exten-
sive and systematic treatise on Buddhist doctrine, a
veritable cyclopaedia of Buddhist theology. His
writings are regarded as absolute authorities in the
interpretation of the Buddhist scriptures, and he is
regarded as the second founder of Buddhism in
Ceylon. He is held in high reverence also in
Burma as the founder of Buddhism in that country
1 Sansfc. Artha Katha.


(450 of the Christian era), having taken the Buddhist
scriptures there from Ceylon.
Buddhaghosa’s commentary on the Dhammapada
mentions the occasions on which, and the audiences to
whom, most of the verses were addressed by Buddha
when, as an itinerant preacher, he went with his
followers through the land—mid-Ganges valley and
sub-Himalayan tract in the modern provinces of
Agra, Oude and Behar; his watchwords—not wealth,
fame or dominion, but peace, happiness, deliverance
from the burden of sorrow and death, and his
message : “ Open ye your ears, the deliverance from
death is found.” ;
When he first attained enlightenment under the
Bodhi-tree (at Buddha Gaya), a descendant of
which still flourishes in Anuradhapura, the oldest
historical tree in the world, Buddha is said to
have broken out into a song of triumph which
is included in the anthology of the Dhammapada
' Mahd-vagga, i, 6 —lo seq. The message continues : “ I teach
you, I preach the Law. If ye walk according to my teaching, ye
shall be partakers, in a short time, of that for which noble youths
leave their homes and go into homelessness, the highest end of
religions effort: ye shall even in the present life apprehend the
Truth itself and see it face to face^’


(153 —4) and has been spiritedly rendered by
Mr. Woodward:
Through many a round of birth and death 1 *Un,
Nor found the builder that I sought. Life’s stream
Is birth and death and birth with sorrow filled.
Now house-holder, thou’rt seen! no more shalt build !
Broken are all thy rafters, split thy beam !
All that made up this mortal self is gone ;
Mind hath slain craving. I have crossed the stream !
The way that he claimed to have discovered is
known as the Middle Way (Majjhimd Patipada),
equally removed from an ignoble life of pleasure
and a gloomy life of mortification, and consists in
a realisation of the Four Great Truths (cattdri
ariya saccdni) of suffering, its origin, its end and
the path thereto. All existence, he declares, is suffer-
ing, its origin is desire, its end is the extinction of
desire, to be attained by the Eightfold Path
(i atthangiko maggo ) of right belief, right resolve, right
speech, right act, right occupation, right effort, right
mindfulness, right concentration and tranquillity. 1
The exposition and illustration of the Truths and the
Way fill numerous tomes of the Buddhist scriptures.
1 (1) SammS ditthi, (2) Samma sankappo, (3) Samma vaca,
(4) Samma kammanto, (5) Samma ajivo, (6) Samma vayamo,
(7) Samma sati, (8) Samma samadhi.
XV


It, is these ideals of self-control, self-culture and
heroic endeavour, the graces of wisdom, purity and
love, the eternal law of Karma, or causality and
moral retribution—under which every deed, good or
bad, comes back most to the doer and yields fruit,
helping or marring his progress—that are enshrined
in the Dhammapada in luminous, pithy verse which
lingers in the memory as a fountain of noble
inspiration. They are almost too ethereal for human
nature’s daily food, and it is granted to few to
realise in actual life these counsels of perfection
unaided.
Buddha failed to make allowance for the weakness
of humanity. His stoic agnosticism and self-reliant
courage ignored God, denied the soul, repudiated
worship and prayer and made man the master of his
fate. This line of thought was not new to India,
however stamped with his own personality. But
human needs and aspirations have asserted them-
selves, and Buddhism has been compelled to absorb
elements of doctrine and practice which he con-
demned. This has happened, especially, in the
countries where the doctrine of the Mahayana (the
Great Vehicle) prevails.


In China, Amitabha (Boundless Light), of whom
Gautama Buddha is held to be an incarnation,
and Kwanyin the Goddess of mercy, have laid great
hold on the affections of the Buddhist population,
Kwanyin (Sansk. Kanyd, the Virgin) is the gracious
Sakti (Cosmic Power) of the Hindus,
Mother of millions of world-clusters,
Vet Virgin by the Vedas called.
In Japan, Amitabha is the Eternal one who is the
Light, the Way, and the Life, and took human form
to open the door of salvation to all. Kwanyin shares
with him the sovereignty of Heaven. In Tibet are
worshipped these and other emanations of heavenly
beings—Manju Sri, the personification of wisdom,.
Avalokitesvara, “ the Lord who looketh down ” on the
world with mercy to help and protect, VajrapSna, and
others, with a host of minor deities.
In Ceylon, which claims to belong to the purer
faith, Buddhism is interwoven with the worship of
the popular gods of the Hindus and with animism
and demonology. Under Mahayanist influence Bud-
dha has become a God, greater than others,,
but worshipped less fervently, for (as “Robert
6


Knox 1 found during his twenty years’ residence in the
island in the seventeenth century) the popular mind
looks to Buddha for the soul, to the gods for the
things of this world. His own doctrine remains a
dream of philosophers.
Fifty years ago Buddhism was at one of the lowest
ebbs in its history in the Island. The arrival of
Madame Blavatsky and Colonel Olcott, the founders of
the Theosophical Society, and their zealous propa-
ganda, materially helped the efforts of the saintly
Sri Sumangala to stem the tide, and there arose a
renaissance which has had far-reaching effects.
Colonel Olcott by his speech and writings did
much to remove the prevailing ignorance and in-
difference, and recalled Buddhists to a sense of the
value of their Faith.’ He laid the foundation of that
1 Shipwrecked off Trincomalee in iB6O, he remained an un-
■willing but favoured guest of King Raja Sinha II for twenty years.
Escaping to Europe, he wrote his excellent Historical Relation of
the Island of Ceylon, published 1681.
a It was uphill work for Colonel Olcott, but his magnificent
courage and enthusiasm prevailed over every obstacle. I was then
a Magistrate in the Kalutara district of the Western Province,
and remember that well-known Huddhists, appearing as witnesses,
would not acknowledge their Faith and swore on the Bible rather
than affirm. The Portuguese and Dutch Governments had persecuted
them, and the English Government, though it did not persecute,
-continued for years many disabilities.


educational activity which has filled many parts of the
Island with Buddhist schools and colleges.
Mr. Woodward is one of the noble band of Theo-
sophists who have carried on Colonel Olcott’s mission
in Ceylon, and is perhaps the greatest of them all. Not
being a Theosophist or Buddhist, I can speak of him
more freely. Self-sacrificing zeal and devotion are
commonplace words to use of him. They are often
said of men, good and zealous in their way, who
have had the compensations of good incomes and
creature comforts, congenial friends and efficient
fellow-workers. Mr. Woodward (or, to call him by
his Sanskrit name, Vanapula) was little favoured in
these respects. His was a life of ascetic simplicity
and self-denial and strenuous well-doing. An
English gentleman of the best type, he combined
in a. rare degree the culture of the West and Bast,
combined also the active spirit of the West with
the mysticism of the Bast. He belongs to the roll of
the great apostles of Mahayanist Buddhism who carried
its message and its culture over the mountains and
deserts of Asia to the Pacific Ocean. The Mahinda
College, Galle, of which he was the mainstay for nearly
twenty years, is a shining memorial of him. But who


can estimate the gracious influence of his personal-
ity ? The memory of it will be a cherished possession
to his friends, young and old, and an inspiration to
them all, and their gratitude and good wishes follow
him unstintingly to his Tasmanian home.
PonUar, Cdombo
October, 1921.
P. ARUNACHALM


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE
I made this translation of the Dhammapada, intending
it to be a simple memorial text-book for my pupils, at
intervals some seven or eight years ago, when read-
ing the Pali as a lesson in religion with my senior
class in Ceylon. Its publication has been held up for
several years owing to various causes, and, having
left Ceylon in 1919,1 was unable owing to distance to
correct the proofs. My thanks are due to Mr, Fritz
Kunz, 8.A., of Adyar, Madras, for seeing the book
through the press. The rather long list of alterations
is due to the fact that I saw no proofs till the whole
was printed off, and had meanwhile desired to recast
certain verses. The use of metre of course often
prohibits the exact translation of certain philosoph-
ical and technical terms, but I have kept as close to
the original as was possible. I have followed the
Pali text of Fauaboll (1900), and have been much
helped by Dr. Dines Andersen’s Glossary of the Words


of the Dhammapada. The Pali Text Society’s edi-
tion of the text (by Suriyogoda Sumahgala Thero)
appeared just after I had finished, and I have made
several alterations in accordance with the readings of
that edition.
F. L. Woodward
Chartley, West Tamar,
Tasmania
1921.




Glory to Him, the Blessed Saint,
the All-Enlightened one.
The Buddha’s Path of Virtue.
CHAPTER ONE.
THE PAIRS.
1. All states arising have mind for their causing,
Mind for their master, of mind are the offsprings
He who with foul mind speaks or does action—
Him pain pursues as the wheel dogs the ox-hoof,
2. All states arising have mind for their causing,
Mind for their master, of mind are the offspring..
He who with pure mind speaks or does action—
Him bliss pursues, to him clings like his-
shadow.


3. “ This man abused me : he beat me and con-
quered,
Conquered and plundered.” Wrapped up in
such thoughts,
Never appeased is the hatred of such men.
-4. u This man abused me, he beat me and con-
quered,
Conquered and plundered.” Stripped bare of
such thoughts,
Quickly appeased is the hatred of such men.
5. Never by hatred is hatred appeased
Nay 1 but by kindness; that's the old-time Law. 1
6. Others don't grasp this —“Weraen are mortals”.*
Men who can grasp this, soon end their quarrels.
7. Looking for fair sights, unchecked in his senses,
In food uncontrolled, slack, inert, without vigour,
Death overwhelms him, as winds uproot weak
trees.
1. Dhamtno sanantano (Skt .••sanStana dharma). comm.
porSnako dhammo, the doctrine of the early tradition.
2. See “ Songs of the Brethren,” p. 177, trans. Mrs. C.A Rhys
Davids.
“ People can really never understand
That we are here but for a little spell.”
1 Others ’ means all except the wise.


8. He who lives sense-restrained, heedless of fair
sights,
Who in food keeps the mean, is trusty and
sturdy, '
Death cannot shake him : winds cannot move
mountains.
9-10. Without doffing his faults who would don the
monk’s yellow, 1
Void of truth and of training, deserves not the
monk's robe.
If he doff all his faults and be versed in the
virtues,
In the training and truth firm, he merits the
monk’s robe.
11-12. In the false seeing truth, and in truth seeing
falsehood,
Men touch not the truth, but are fed on illusion.
But in truth seeing truth and falsehood in
falsehood,
Men touch the truth ever, feeding on right
thoughts.
1. A play on words, anakkasSvo (one who has not removed
the Ssava’s , taints of lust, anger, delusion) and kSsavam, the yellow
Cobe.


13-14. As the rain through the roof of a house that is
ill-thatched,
- Lust leaks through the mind not composed by
the training:
As rain never leaks through the roof that is
well-thatched,
So through the mind well-trained lust leaketh
never.
15. Here be grieves and grieves hereafter: doubly
grieves the evil-doer,
Grieves and suffers anguish when he sees the
foulness of his deeds.
16. Happy here, he’s happy after : doing good he's
doubly glad:
Glad, exceeding happy, when he sees the
pureness of his deeds.
17. Here he suffers, suffers alter: doubly suffer
evil-doers:
Thoughts of ill-deeds torture, much more
torture when they enter hell.


18. He rejoices here and after: doing good he's
doubly glad:
Thoughts of good deeds comfort, much more
comfort when they enter heaven.
19. Though reciting many verses, 1 if they do not
what they preach.
Idlers, counting others’ cattle, have no part in
brotherhood.
20. Practising the Law he preaches, though he utter
verses few,
Quit of anger, lust and folly, truly wise, with
thoughts set free,
Caring nought for this or that world, he hath
part in brotherhood.
CHAPTER TWO.
HEEDFULNESS.
21. Heedfulness leads to the Deathless; heedless-
ness leads unto Death 1
Heedful men live on for ever; they who heed
not are as dead.
1. Texts of the sacred books, learned by heart by the
Brahmins.


22. Knowing this full surely, wise men take delight
in heedfulness;
Heedfully they range with joy the pastures of
the Worthy Ones.
23. Meditative, persevering, ever with strong might
endowed,
Wise men reach the Blissful Haven, reach Secu-
rity Supreme. 1
24. Heedful men’s gocd name increaseth, if they
strive with mind subdued
Pure in deed, of guarded notions, well-controlled
of lawful lives.
25. Let the wise man, striving, heedful, well-con-
trolled and temperate,
Make himself an island which the flood shall
never sweep away.
26. Heedlessness the foolish follow, men of small
intelligence;
As the best of treasures wise men guard the
prize of Heedfulness.
1. NibbUna,


27. Cleave not thou to Heedlessness, cleave not thpu
to Passion’s snares;
Strenuous and meditative, wisdom winneth
widespread bliss.
28. Lo! the sage that drives away the cloud oi
sloth by Heedfulness,
Climbing up the heights of wisdom, sorrowless
looks down upon
All the miserable beings, as a hillraan on the
plains.
29. Strenuous amid the heedless, 'mid the sleepers
wide awake,
As a racer beats the weak jade, so the wise out-
strips the fools.
30. Maghavu. by Heedfulness attained the kingship
of the gods; 1
Heedfulness is praised for ever ; Heedlessness is
ever blamed.
31. Monks’ whom Heedfulness delighteth, seeing
fear in Heedlessness,
As the fire blazeth onwards, burn their fetters
great and small.
1. Maghava, a name of Indra, the ‘‘sky.god,” Jupiter. Human
beings by great tapas, will power exercised, can attain this office.
2. ''Monks’’ does not convey the real meaning of bhikkhu, a
mendicant ascetic wearer of the yellow robe.


! 32. Monks whom Heedfulness delighteth, seeing
fear in Heedlessness,
Cannot' fall into destruction; they are near
Nibbana’s shore.
CHAPTER THREE.
THE MIND.
33. The fugitive, flickering mind,
Hard to guard and hard to bind,
The wise men train as they choose,
As a fletcher fashions a shaft to his use.
34. Like a fish flung out on the bank*
Drawn from its watery home in a tank, 1
Flutters this fugitive mind
To leave the realm of Mara behind.*
1. The tank is earthly existence. The watery home is the
■world of desires.
2. Msra —death, the personification of evil, rules the sis
highest desire-heaven-worlds : other great Gods are MahSbtahma
and Sakka (Indra). Yama also, death, is the lord of the under-world.
We may compare the Greek Gods, Zeus, Poseidon, and Pluto, who
divide the rule of the manifested universe.


35. Impalpable, hard to seize,
Eagerly rushing wherever it please,
Good is the taming of mind ;
A mind well-tamed is a treasure to find.
36. Invisible, subtle indeed,
Eagerly rushing its passions to feed,
Let the wise man guard this mind;
A guarded mind is a treasure to find.
37. Wandering, dwelling apart,
Bodiless there in the cave of the heart, 1
They who subdue this mind
Leave all the fetters of Mara behind.
88. If he know not the Doctrine Pure,
If he waver in faith and be not sure,
If his mind be not strong-willed,
The cup of his wisdom is never fulfilled.
39. If his mind be free from desire,
If his thought be free from anger’s fire,
If evil and good he forsake,
There is no fear in the man that's awake.
X. Cp. v. 374, sußHSgSram.


40. u Body's vessel of clay ;
Mind must be made like a fort," if he say,
Let him give battle to Mara, arrayed
In the weapons of wisdom, unafraid
Let him conquer and guard him and passion-
less stay.
41. Soon, ah I soon on the earth
Will this body lie a thing of no worth,
Neglected, void ot the six
Workings of sense, a mere bundle of sticks.
42. Whatever the ill that a foe
Doth a foe, whatever the grudge he may owe.
Greater by far will he find
The ill that is done by an ill-trained mind.
43. Nay, not a father or mother
Could do so much ; not a kinsman or other ;
Greater by far will he find
The good that is done by a well-trained mind.


CHAPTER FOUR.
FLOWERS.
44. Who shall discern this earth aright
And the Realm of Death and the World of
Light?
Who shall choose out the Way
Of righteousness well displayed,
As a skilled hand chooselh a flower gay ?
45. The disciple 1 discerneth this earth aright
And the Realm of Death and the World of Light;.
The disciple chooseth the Way
Of Righteousness well displayed,
As a skilled hand chooseth a flower gay.
46. Seeing this body as like unto foam,
Illusive, by insight of wisdom alone,
Scattering Death's flower-tipp'd shafts.
He shall pass to a realm where Death is-
unknown.
47. Culling life’s blossoms here and there,
With his mind entangled by pleasures’ delay,
Death comes and carries him off,
As a flood sweeps a slumbering village away.
1. “ Disciple,” sekho, one who has entered the Path, but has
not become Ataha:, who is asekho, Master.


48. Culling life’s blossoms here and there,
With his mind entangled by pleasures, delay,
Insatiate in desire,
Death makes him his bondsman and takes him
away.
49. As a bee on the wing flits from flower to flower,
Not harming the scent or the blossom’s hue,
And is gone taking only the taste,
Let the sage his way through the village
pursue.
50. Not with other men's faults and other men's
failings,
Nor the things they have done, nor the things
left undone,
Should the wise man be concerned ;
Let him look to his own things done and
undone.
51. Fair is the flow’r with its hue and its colour;
But if it lack odour its beauty is hollow.
So fair are the words well-spoken.
But how empty the words which deeds do not
follow.


52. Fair is the flow'r with its hue and its colour;
But if it have odour its beauty’s not hollow ;
So fair are the words well-spoken ;
Well-spoken indeed are the words which deeds-
follow.
53. As one from a heap of gathered flowers
Makes many a garland, many a crown;
So by a mortal being
Many a seed of good may be sown.
54: The odour of flowers cannot prevail
'Gainst the wind, nor of sandal and iagara*
fair;
’Gainst the wind goes the odour of saints ;
The odour of saints goeth everywhere.
55. Sweet is the sandal and sweet is the tagara,
And sweet of the lily the odour faint;
But of all sweet-savoured things
Sweetest by far is the scent of the saint.
56. How small a thing is the odour of wood
Or the sandal or jasmine I How poor is their
scent 1
Yet the odour of saints prevails
E'en 'mongst the gods, most excellent.
1, Tagara, an aromatic shrub.


57. Men who live righteously, men who live
heedfully,
Perfect in wisdom, rebirth have transcended :
Though he search for the prints of their feet,
Death cannot find them: 1 their journey is
ended.
58-9. On a heap of dung by the high road hurled,
As a lily may bloom and grow,
Delighting the mind with its fragrance pure :
So, lit by the wisdom of those who know,
A disciple shines out in the darkened world.
CHAPTER FIVE.
FOOLS.
60. Long is the night to him that is waking,
Long is a league to the traveller worn,
Long is the coil of births
For fools that know not the truth of the Law.
1. An Arahat at death leaves no skandhas or basis for
another biith. Death, Mara, is pictured as hunting for a man’s
J 1 rebirth consciousness Cf. The Book of the Kindred Sayings.
p. 152 (Pali Text Translation Series).


61. If one find not a comrade to join him in travel,
Either like unto self or belter than self,
It is safer to push on alone ;
What fellowship can there be with a fool ?
62. “I am father of sons ! I atn owner of wealth I"
Thinks the fool in his folly and thereat is
troubled.
He himself is not owner of self;
Much less is he owner of sons and of wealth,
€3. Wise indeed is he that knoweth his folly ;
Fool indeed is the fool that thinks himself wise.
€4. Tho* a fool i,n his folly sit all his life long
By the side of a wise man, he never gets wiser,
For he knows not the Law and its worth,
As (he spoon never knoweth the taste of the
broth.
65. But a wise man that sits by the wise but a
minute,
Quickly learns of the Law and its worth,
As the tongue quickly savours the taste of the
broth.


66. Fools fare up and down with themselves for
their foe,
And work evil deeds whose fruit will be bitter ;
67. 111-done is the deed that brings sorrow in doing.
Whose fruit they will meet with tears and
annoy;
68. Well done is the deed that brings pleasure in
doing,
Whose fruit they will welcome with gladness,
and joy.
69. “01 how sweet I” thinks the fool, ere his wicked
deed ripens.
When his wicked deed ripens he knows what is
sorrow.
70. Tho ’ month after month with the blade of a
sword-grass 1
The fool eats his rice grain by grain,
Not one fourth of a quarter of good doth he
gain
Such as those who are stablished in Dhamma
obtain.
1, An ascetic way of eating, supposed to be meritorious.


71. Now an ill deed, like milk, doth not change
into curds,
But it burnetii the fool —a live coal ‘neath the
ashes.
72. Since his knowledge is born to a fool all in vain,.
His good luck is lost to him wholly ;
On his own head it falls ;he is crushed by his
folly.
73-4. If a fool long for credit that is not his due,
Chief seats in the monks' hall, 1 respect from
the Order,
And worship from laymen desiring;
“Let the monks and the laymen my deeds hold
in honour
And in all things obey me, whate'er I may-
will—”
If such be the thoughts of the fool,
His pride and his Ipnging increase in him still,
75. “ Success here is one thing, Nibbana another :"
When a monk, the Buddha's disciple, is sure
Of this truth, he delights not in honour, eschews
The ways of the world and lives a recluse.
1. Cf. N. T. “ chief seats in the synagogue."
2


CHAPTER SIX.
THE WISE.
76. If thou see a man of wisdom,
Like a guide to treasure-trove,
Pointing out thy faults and failings.
Follow him ; such company
Brings prosperity, not woe.
7T. He who gives advice and teaching,
And restrains thy feet from wrong,
By the righteous is beloved,
But the wicked love him not.
78. Have no fellowship with evil;
Make no friends among the vile;
Make the virtuous thy companions;
Follow thou the Perfect Men.
79. They who drink the Good Law’s nectar
Live in bliss with tranquil mind;
In the Law by saints expounded
Wise men ever take delight.
80. Irrigators guide the waters,
Fletchers straighten out the shaft,
Carpenters unwarp the timber,
But the wise subdue themselves.


81. As the solid rock for ever
Rests unshaken by the wind,
Wise men rest unwavering,
Troubled not by praise or blame.
82. As a deep clear pool of water
Lies unruffled by the wind,
To the Good Law listening
Wise men reach tranquillity.
83. When the good men go about,
Sensual babble is not theirs ;
They, when touched by pain or pleasure.
Show a calm untroubled face.
81. Not for self and not for others
Do they long for sons or wealth,
Not for rule, nor by injustice
Self-advancement to attain;
Righteous, wise and just are they.
85. Few are they among us mortals
Who have reached the further shore
Over yonder. But we others
On this side fare up and down.


86. They who hold fast to the teaching
Of the Law expounded well
They shall reach the shore and pass
The realm of Death so hard to cross,
87-8. Giving up the state of darkness,
Let the wise embrace the pure;
Giving up home for the homeless
Loneliness, where joys are rare,
Let him long for bliss unbounded
Casting all desire aside,
Owning naught, and, firm in wisdom,
Cleanse his heart from passion's stain,
89. They whose mind is rightly tempered
In the Wisdom’s seven ways, 1
Who have left desire behind them,
Void of clinging, they rejoicing
Passionless and all-resplendent,
Even in this world are freed.*
1, The seven limbs of the Bodhi are •• — Sati, con-
centration ; Dhammavicaya, examination of mental
processes or of nature ; Viriya, energy ; Pitt, zest •,
Passaddhi, calmness ; SamSdhi, mental balance ;
UpekhS, equanimity.
2. ParinibbutS, set free from rebirth by having
attained the state of Nibbßna, “ gone out."


CHAPTER SEVEN.
THE ARAHAT—THE WORTHT.
90. He for whom life's journey’s over, free from
sorow, free from pain
Who has all the knots unfastened, suffering
knows not again.
91. Household life for them no joys hath j striving
and intent in mind
As (he swan deserts the marshes, every home
they leave behind,
92. They who gather up no treasure, feeding on the
food that’s given,
They who range in mind (he Void, the uncondi-
tioned formless Space,
As the bird’s path in the ether, so their ways
are hard to trace.
93. They whose taints are all evanished, indepen-
dent of support,
They who range in mind the Void, the uncondi-
tioned, formless Space,
As the bird’s path in the ether, so their tracks
are hard to trace.


94. He whose senses now are tranquil, like a horse
by trainer tamed
(Pride struck off, the taints 1 evanished), to
the very gods is famed.
95. Like the solid ground unshaken, like the thresh-
old of a door,
Like a pool by mud unsullied, such a saint is
born no more.
96. Calm the mind of such a being, calm his
thoughts and words and deeds,
Set free by the perfect knowledge, liberated
from life’s needs.
97. Self-dependent, self-sufficing, knower of the
Uncreate *
Who hath loosed the bonds of action, from the
chain of births set free,
All desires are fallen from him, noblest of all
beings he.
1. The taints, UsavS’s, are three;— kama t desire; bhava,
love of life; avijja, ignorance. A fourth, ditthi,
the holding of heretical views, is sometimes add-
ed. The gods are supposed to be still bound
by these, and to envy the emancipated man.
2. AkataHßu. The unborn, the eternal, the state of
NibbSna .


98. In the village or the forest, on the water or the-.
ground,
Where the worthy ones are dwelling, there the
earth’s delights are found.
99. Ah I delightful are the forests 1 where the world-
ling finds no joy,
There the passionless find pleasure, whom the
senses do not cloy.
CHAPTER EIGHT.
THE THOUSANDS.
100, Tho' one’s speech be a thousand words,
Vain words all strong together,
Better a single phrase
Which calms the one that hears.
101. Tho’ a song have a thousand words;
Vain words all strung together,
Better a single verse
Which calms the one that hears.


102. Tho' one utter a hundred songs,
Vain words all strung together,
Beter one verse of the Law
Which brings peace to the hearer.
103. Tho' one conquer a thousand times
A thousand men in battle,
Who conquers self alone
Is the best of conquerors.
104. Tis better to conquer self
Than all this multitude ;
If one be self-subdued
And ever self-controlled,
105. Not the gods or demi-sods 1
Nor the Lord of the world below *
Nor the God Supreme * have power
To tindo his victory.
1. Gandhabbo , Skt. gandharva, who preside over
music and attend on the Four Great Kings.
2. Mara, the Pluto of the Greeks, or Death-Lord.
3. Brahma, the Supreme Personal God or Zens of
Buddhism.


106. Tho’ one for a hundred years
Month after month should pray
Wifh a thousand offerings,
Yet if for a moment’s space
He worship the feet of one
Whose self is self-suhdued,
His worship is better far
Than his age-long offerings.
107. Tho* a hundred years in the woods
One tend the sacred fire, 1
Yet if for a moment’s space
He worship the feet of one
Whose self is self-subdued ;
Such worship is better far
Than his age-long offerings
108. Not all the sacrifice
That is offered in all the world
For a year, with a view to gain,
Is worth a single quarter
Of the worship that is paid
To the upright holy man.
1. Aggihutam, Skt. agmhotra.


109. Whoso hath reverence
For those advanced in years,
Four blessings thrive for him.
Life, beauty, bliss and strength.
110. Tho’ one live a hundred years,
Immoral, uncontrolled,
‘Tis better to live for a day,
Moral and well controlled.
111. Tho' one live a hundred years
Foolish and uncontrolled,
'Tis better to live for a day
Wisely and well controlled.
112. Tho' one live a hundred years
Listless and lacking zeal,
‘Tis better to live for a day
While striving manfully.
113. Tho' one live a hundred years
Blind to the rise and fall, 1
‘Tis better to live for a day
Seeing the rise and fall.
1, Udaya-vyayam, the law of anicca, impermanence.


114. Tho’ one live a hundred years
And see not the Deathless State, 1
'Tis better to live for a day
And see the Deathless State.
115. Tho' one live a hundred years
And see not the Law Supreme,
'Tis better to live for a day
And see the Law Supreme.
CHAPTER NINE.
EVIL.
116. Haste to do good; thy thoughts from ill res-
train ;
Sloth in good deeds makes one for evil fain.
117. If thou do ill, cease, and thy sin forgo ;
Take not delight therein ; ill deeds bring woe,
118. If thou do good, thy life in good employ;
Take thou delight therein ; good deeds bring joy.
1. Amatam padam , "the eternal lot,” Nibbana.
27


119. Sinners see bliss while their ill deeds are green;
When the sin ripens, sorrow then is seen.
120. Good men see ill while their good deeds are
green ;
When the good ripens, happiness is seen.
121. Think not of ill: “It cannot be my fate " ;
As drop by drop the water fills the pot,
So slowly good men good accumulate.
122. Think not of good: “It cannot be my fate ”;
As drop by drop the water fills the pot,
So slowly bad men woes accumulate.
183. Just as the lord of some rich caravan,
Whose guard is scanty, fears the highwayman;
As one who loves his life must poison shun,
Be wise and guard 'gainst evil deeds begun.
124 j Thou mayest poison handle if thy palm
Contain no wound ; whole skin no poison fears;
There is no ill for him that doth no harm.
125. Who on a harmless creature worketh pain,
In whom no fault, in whom no ill is found,
Upon that fool his evil deeds rebound
As fine dust cast i’ the wind falls back again.


128. Some men by birth a life on earth attain ;
The wicked go to hell, the good to heaven ;
But holy saints are never born again.
127. Not in the air nor middle of the sea,
Nor entering a mountain cave to hide,
Nor anywhere on earth can'st thou abide
Where from thy ill deeds thou can'st set thee free,
128. Not in the air nor middle of the sea.
Nor entering a mountain cave to hide,
Nor anywhere on earth can’st thou abide
Where death shall not pursue and conquer thee.
CHAPTER TEN.
PUNISHMENT.
129. All beings fear the rod, all fear to die ;
Regard them as thyself; strike not nor slay,
130. All beings fear the rod ; all love their life;
Regard them as thyself; strike not nor slay.
131. Whoso treats pleasure-loving creatures ill,
When he seeks bliss for self he shall not find it.


132. Whoso treats pleasure-loving creatures well,
When he seeks happiness for self shall find it.
133. Use not harsh speech ; when harshly spoken to
Men may retort; painful are quarrellings,
And punishment may follow thy harsh words.
134. If thou can’st keep thy tongue from wagging oft.
Silent as some cracked gong, thou hast thereby
Nibbana won ; no brawling is in thee.
185. As with a stick the herdsman drives his kine,
So death and age compel the lives of men.
136. The fool in doing ill knows not his folly ;
His own deeds, like a fire, the fool consume,
137. He who offends the harmless innocent
Soon reaches one of these ten states of woe ;
138. Sharp pain, disease, or bodily decay,
Grievous disaster, or a mind distraught;
139. Oppression by the king, or calumny,
Loss of relations, loss of all his wealth,
140. His house burned by a thunderbolt or fire; '
At death, poor fool, he finds rebirth in hell.


141. Not nakedness, nor matted hair nor filth,
Not fasting long, nor lying on the ground,
Not dust and dirt, nor squatting on the heels,
Can cleanse (he mortal that is full of doubt.
142. But one that lives a calm and tranquil life,
Though gaily decked, if tamed, restrained, he
live
Walking the holy path in righteousness,
Laying aside all harm to living things,
True mendicant, ascetic, Brahmin he 1
143. Who in this world is so restrained by shame
That, like a thoroughbred flicked by the whip,
He can think lightly of the lash of blame ?
144. By faith and virtue, energy, and mind
In perfect balance, searching of the Law,
Perfect in knowledge and good practices,
Perfect in concentration of your thoughts,
Ye shall strike off this multitude of woes.
145. As cultivators guide the water-course,
As fletchers straighten out the arrow-shaft,
As carpenters warp timber to their needs,
So righteous men subdue and train themselves.


CHAPTER ELEVEN.
OLD AGE.
146. Laugh ye, rejoice ye, when this world is
burning ?
O wrapped in darkness, will ye not seek light ?
147. Behold this body decked, a mass of sores,
Sickly and swayed by multitudinous thoughts,.
Impermanent, unstable, uncomposed I
148. Poor worn-out carcase, home of sicknesses,
Fragile, corrupting mass, mere life in death 1
149. What joy to look upon these bleached bones,
Like useless gourds in autumn thrown asidel—
-150. A township built of bones and plastered o'er
With flesh and blood, the home and dwelling-
place
Of age and death, pride and hypocrisy!
151. Just as a royal chariot gaily decked
Falls to decay, so grows this body old;
But Truth and Law old age cannot assail;
The holy ones indeed know no decay.


152. Just like an ox, the witless man grows old;
His flesh grows, but his wits do not inrcease.
153-4. Thro' many a round of birth and death I ran.
Nor found the builder that I sought. Life's
stream
Is birth and death and birth, with sorrow filled.
Now, householder, thou’rt seen 1 No more shalt
build !
Broken are all thy rafters, split thy beam I
All that made up this mortal self is gone;
Mind hath slain craving; I have crossed the
stream I 1
155. They who in youth have never trod the way
Of righteousness, nor garnered wisdom’s store.
Like herons in a fishless pool decay.
156. They who in youth have never trod the way
Of righteousness, nor garnered wisdom’s store.
Like broken bows, lie weeping their lost day.
1. The triumphant words of the Buddha, when at last
He attained enlightenment, Nibbana, beneath the
80-tree.
3


CHAPTER TWELVE.
THE SELF.
157. Hast thou regard for self ? Then keep thyself
well guarded.
Be wise and keep good watch for one of the
three watches. 1
158. First ground thyself in fitness ; next, another
teach.
Thus shalt thou wisdom gain and suffer no
reproach.
159. First carry out thyself whate’er thou teachest
others.
Self-tamed, thou’lt tame another; but self is
hard to tame.
160. Self is the lord of self ; who else could be the
lord ?
By taming self one gains a lord most hard to
gain.
I. The night is divided into three watches of three
hours each. Some regard this passage as referring
to childhood, youth and age.


161. The evil done by self, self-born and self-
begotten.
Crushes the senseless fool, as a bolt the jar
of stone. 1
162. He who is choked by sins, as a creeper chokes
a tree,
Doth to himself what e’en his foes would have
him do.
163. Easy is ill to do and harmful to oneself ;
• But what is good and wholesome, that is hard
to do.
164. Whose rejects the words of noble righteous
saints
On his own head brings ruin by his perversity,
As bamboo trees put forth their fruit and
die away.
165. By self is evil done ;by self isone defiled ;
111 deeds not done by self to self bring purity ;
Each for himself is pure; each for himself
impure;
Thou can'st not cleanse another man’s impurity..
1. This may be translated, ‘‘ as a diamond crashes
the stony gem”.


166. Mind thy affairs, not others’, however great
they be
Right knowledge of one’s own brings more
prosperity.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN.
THE WORLD.
167. Follow not the way unworthy ;
Live not thou in sluthfulness ;
Let not doctrim s false allure thee ;
Turn thy thoughts from worldliness.
168-9. Stand ! Arise ! Throw sloth away ;
Follow the path of righteousness ;
Happy he who walks aright.
Here and in the world to come.
170. As a bubble on the water,
As a phantom of the sands,
Him who thus the world despiseth.
Death the king* cannot behold.
1. Cf. Bhagavad GJis : “ Better one’s own dharma f
however ill-peifonned, than others’ dharma , well-
performed tho' it be,”
2. MaccurSja.


171. Lo 1 this world in all its splendour,
Like a roval car adorned,
Wherein many a fool is seated, 1
Hath no power to bind the wise,
172. He who formerly was slothful.
But is slothful now no more,
Lighteth up the world with splendour,
As the moon from clouds released.
17:3. He who, having once done evil,
Covers up his ill with good,
Lighteth up the world with splendour,
As the moon from clouds released.
174. All this world is wrapped in darkness ;
• Few be they that are not blind ;
Like the birds that 'scape the fowler,
Few be they that go to heaven.
175. Lo! the swans fly on the sun’s path,*
Fly by magic through the air ;
Wise men from the world departing
Conquer Death and all his hosts.
1. Reading nisidantt for visldanti (“ are immersed ”),
2. Hamsa adicca palhe yanti. In Hiduisai the parantahamsa,
“ the swan,” is the mystic name for the liberated being (Cf. Bhaga-
vad Gita) who goes to the sun (sditya Skt), and is reboi h no more;
also in Chandogya Upanishad, VIII, 7-5, we read; “When mind
ceases to act, he attains the sun. That is the way to the region above.
It is open to the learned, but closed to the ignorant.’’ Those who
are reborn are sain to go on the path of the moon In Buddhism,
the Arahants, Saints, have the power \iddhi) of flying through the
air even physically, by self-levitation. Cf. V. 91.


176. He who by false words transgressing
Breaks one tittle of the Law; 1
He who future life renounceth
Every wicked deed will do.
177. Those who covet reach not heaven ;
Fools care not for charity;
He who charity approveth
Reacheth heavenly joy thereby.
178. Rule on earth and joy in heaven,
Sovreignty of all the worlds —
These are all by him transcended
Who hath entered on the stream.*
1. Cf. N. T.: “ For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and
yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all.”
2. One who has ‘‘entered on the stream’’ is an Initiate,
Sotspanno, and is saved, i.e , after seven more births,'he reaches the
state of Arahat and NibbSna ard is free from birth.


CHAPTER FOURTEEN.
THE AWAKENED ONE.
179. The Awakened One, unconquered Conqueror,
Whose conquest naught in this world can undo,
Who ranges o’er His boundless sphere untraced,
By what tracks can ye lead Him to rebirth 7 1
180. Free from the snares of passion's outspread net.
The Awakened One, whom longing cannot draw,
Who ranges o'er His boundless sphere untraced,
By what tracks can ye lead Him to rebirth ?
181. Those sages who, to meditation given,
Delight in freedom’s bliss, with mind controlled,
Gods envy Them, Those All-Awakened Ones.*
182. To gain a birth as man is hard indeed ;
'Tis hard to get one’s living in the world ;
Hard is the hearing of the doctrine true ;*
Hardest to be an All-Awakened One.
1. Padam, “track, footstep,’’ may here refer to the
khandhSs , basis, or occasions of rebirth, destroyed
by Arahants, cf. vv. 92-3.
2. These verses may refer to any man who is “awakened,"
who has found NibbSna."
3. This might mean, “it is hard to get a hearing of it’’.


183, “ Refrain thyself from every evil deed;
Stablish thyself in good; cleanse thine own
thoughts ”
This is the message of the Awakened Ones.
184>. Long-sufferance is the best austerity;
Nibbana, say the Awakened Ones, is best.
185. “Revile not, harm not, live by rule restrained ;
Of food take little; sleep and sit alone;
In meditation keep thy thoughts controlled”—
This is the message of the Awakened Ones.
186. “ Lust is not sated, tho’ it rain gold coins;
Brief is the pleasure, great the pains of lust"—
Whoso saith this and knows it, he is wise.
187. He finds no pleasure e’en in heaven’s delights;
He finds his joy in slaying all desire,
That follower of the All-Awakened Ones.
188. To many a refuge frightened mortals flee,
Mountains and forests, groves and sacred trees;
189. These are no refuge safe, no sure retreat,
By these we are not from all woe released.


190. He who takes refuge in the Awakened One,
The Doctrine and the Brotherhood, beholds
By right insight the Fourfold Noble Truths,
191. Sorrow and sorrow’s cause and sorrow's ceasing,
The Noble Eightfold Path that leads thereto—
-192. This is (he refuge safe, the sure retreat;
This only from our woes can us release.
193. Hard is that one of noble birth to find;
Not born in every land is He; the race
Wherein that Sage is born is prosperous. 1
194. Blest is the rising of the Awakened Ones ;
Blest is Their teaching of the Doctrine True;
Blest is the union of the Brotherhood ;
And blest to dwell together in unity.
195. The Awakened Ones and they that follow Them,
Worthy to be adored, have conquered all
The hosts of evil, crossed the flood of sorrow.
196. Whoso shall worship Them, the worthy Ones,
In whom desires are quenched and fear allayed,
None can declare the merits of that man.
1, All Buddha’s must be born in India, the sacred land.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN.
HAPPINESS¹.
197. O happily we live
Angerless amid the angry 1
0 happily we spend our days
Amid the angry angerless 1
198. O happily we live
In health amid the sickly ones 1
O happily we spend our days
Amid the sickly ones in health 1
199. O happily we live
Free from greed amid the greedy !
O happily we spend our days
Amid the greedy free from greed I
200. O happily we live
Who have not anything at all 1
Like ever-radiant gods above,
Our food immortal joys shall be.
\
201. Hate follows victory ;
Conquered ones sit sorrowing.
But the calm live blissfully,
Renouncing conquest and defeat..
1. This chapter applies especially to those who have retir-
ed from the world.
42


202. There is no fire like lust;
No sin brings such ill-luck 1 as hate ;
No pains so great as body’s pains ;
No bliss is like the perfect Calm.’
203. Hunger's the greatest plague,
Embodied life the greatest woe ;
Whoso knows this in truth, can say :
“Nibbana is the Bliss Supreme.”
•
204. Health is the greatest gain;
Contentment is the greatest wealth ;
Best kinsman is the trusty friend ;
Nibb&na is the Bliss Supreme.
205. Who tastes the savour sweet
Of solitude, who drinks of calm.
Is free from terror, free from sin,
Draining the nectar of the Law.
206. ‘Tis good to see the saints;
To dwell with them is blessedness;
If he should never fools behold,
A man could dwell in happiness.
1. 111-luck, kali, the unlucky throw in playing dice.
2. NibbSna.
43


207. The company of fools
Ne'er fails to bring distress.
To live with fools brings suffering,
As living with an enemy,
But wise men’s company brings bliss,
As being with dear relatives.
208. If one be good and wise,
Well-versed in lore profound,
Long-suffering, dutiful, a saint,
Righteous and wise ; if such there be,
Follow his footsteps, as the moon
Follows the path of the stars.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN.
AFFECTIONS.
■209. He who applies his mind unworthily,
Neglecting discipline,
Forsakes the goal and clings to things beloved,
Then envies those to meditation given.
210. Join not thyself to things beloved or loathed.
To lack dear company,
To be with those we loathe, brings misery.


211. Seek not for love; things loved or loathed bring
ni;
Both are impermanent.
They have no bonds who dwell indifferent.
212. Sorrow and fear are born of things beloved.
From things beloved set free,
How canst thou sorrow ? fearful how canst be?
213. From things held dear.sorrow and fear are born-
Set free from things held dear,
How canst thou sorrow have ? how canst have
fear ?
214. Sorrow and fear are children born of pleasure.
No longer pleasure's slave,
How canst thou sorrow, fear how canst thou
have ?
215. Sorrow and fear are children of desire.
From all desire set free,
How canst thou sorrow ? fearful how canst be?
216. Sorrow and fear are things of longing born.
From longing if thou part,
Thou hast no fear nor sorrow in thine heart.


317, Upright and Law-abiding, speaking truth,
Who minds his own affair, 1
That is the man whom every one holds dear.
318. In whom is longing for the Nameless * born,
Whose mind It hath enthralled,
Whose thoughts no longer are by passion torn,
That man “ a Climber of the Stream " is
called.*
219. As when a dweller in some far-off land
Safe home returns at last,
Kin, friends and lovers waiting to greet him
stand ;
320. So, when a man on earth good deeds hath done,
When he hath passed beyond,
All his good deeds like kin, await that one.
(1) Attano kamma kubbflnam, as in v. 166. Attends to his
own spiritual progress without dictating to others how they should
forward their evolution.
(2) “ The unborn, nncreate, undeclared" state of NibbZna.
(3) Uddhamsoto. (Skt. Urdhamsrotasj, a name for the
untngHmin “ non-returner.”


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.
ANGER.
221. Conquer anger, banish pride ;
Every fetter cast aside ; x
Clinging not to Name and Form,*
Him who calleth nought his own
Sorrow never shall betide.
222. He who rising wrath restrains,
As one checks a whirling team,
Him a driver (rue I deem ;
Others only hold the reins.
223. Wrath with kindliness allay,
To the stingy freely give ;
Conquer lying words with truth ;
Evil deeds with good repay.
224. Speak the (ruth nor vexed be ;
Give, however scantily.
Following these maxims three,
Thou the blessed gods shalt see.
1. The Fetters, safifiojanSni, are ten. These are cast off
at different stages of the Path, until perfection is reached.
2. Nama-rufa. “abstract and concrete,” thefive constituents
of personality, viz,, mind and its factors with the four, body,
feeling, perception, and mental functions.


225. Sages harm no living thing ;
Self-restiaint accomplishing
Such men reach the Deathless Lot, 1
Where all sorrow is forgot
226. Ever watchful, night and day
Learning wisdom never cease ;
In the one who strives for Peace 1
All the cravings die away. *
227. There is a saying, Atula,
Of old, not of to-day :
“ They blame the man who silent sits,
Or whose tongue wags alway ;
And blame the man who keeps the mean ;
None in the world is blameless seen."
228. There never was, nor will be, sure,
Nor lives now among men,
A being blamed exclusively,
Nor one entirely praised.
1-2 NibbSna,


229-30. But one whom men of wisdom praise,
Watching him day by day,
Of faultless life, of holy ways,
Thoughtful and wise, like Jambu gold, 1
Who to blame such a saint is bold ?
Neither the gods, nor e’en Brahma,
From him their praise withold.
231. ' Gainst angry deeds be on thy guard ;
In body be composed ;
All bodily misdeeds discard ;
With body tread the Way.
232. ’ Gainst angry words be on thy guard ;
In speech be thou composed;
All wrongful ways of speech discard ;
In speech follow the Way.
233. ' Gainst angry thoughts be on thy guard ;
In thought be thou composed ;
All wrongful ways of thought discard ;
In thoughts follow the Way.
1. A precious gold from the Jambu river; others say, like
rose apple in colour.
4


234*. In body sages are controlled ;
In thoughts as w< II as speech ;
And they are Sages truly called
Who are contioiled in each.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.
IMPURITY.
235. L> I Th<>u art now a pale and withered leaf ;
Death's .resseng-trs are close at hand ;
Thuu in he very ga'e of Death dost stand,
And yet hast no povision for (he way.
236. Then make thyself an island of defence ;
Strive quick ; be wise ; when all they taints
Oi dirt ai d oust are blown away, the saints
Shall greet hee entering the Happy Land.
237. Ttiy life has run its course ; thou art come nigh
J he Kmg of Death ;* for thine abode
Thou hast no resting-place upon the road,
/tnd yet hast no provisi n lor (he way.
1, Yama, Pluto.


238. Then make thyself an island of defence ;
Strive quick ; be wise ; blow off the dust
And stains of travel; wipe away the rust;
So shalt thou see no more birth and decay.
239. The wise and thoughtful man attacks his faults
One after other, momently,
In order due, and rubs them all away,
E’en as a smith blows off the silver’s dross*
240. Just as the iron rust accumulates
Self born," and eats itself away ;
So with the man who sinneth ; day by day
His own deeds to destruction lead him on*
241. Texts not repeated oft are soon forgot;
The house neglected soon decays ;
Sloth is the bane of beauty ; heedless ways
Bring ruin unto him that kecpeth watch.
242. The taint of woman is impurity,
And gifts by stinginess are spoiled,
And mortal man by oft transgression soiled
Finds ruin here, loss in the life to come*


243. Yet there’s a taint far worse than any other.
What is that taint ? Mis ignorance. l
Make yourselves free from this, O mendicants I
Wipe off this stain and be ye undefiled.
244. Life seems an easy thing to him that lives
Wanton and shameless as a crow,
A fault-finder, who through this life doth go
Immodest, insolent, ana full of sins.
245. But life's no easy thing for one restrained
By shame, who sees to walk aright,
All unattached, withdrawn from vulgar sight ;
Who liveth purely and hath eyes to see.
246-7. He who fakes life ; whose mouth is full of lies;
Who steals, and fouls another’s wife ;
A slave to drink, he even in this life
The root of his own fortunes undermines.*
248. O man I know this : “ Not easy of control
Are evil ways.” Let not thy greed
And wickedness (of misery the seed)
Become thy masters, lest thou suffer long.
1. Avijj'3, the first of the twelve links of the chain of
causation and the last of the Fetters to be broken.
2. Those are the five Precepts of Buddhism.


249. According to their trust and faith men give.
Whose regards with discontent
And jealousy the food for others meant
Cannot get peace of mind by night or day. 1
250. But whoso disregards what others get,
Whose heart of jealousy is void,
In whom the root of envy is destroyed,
He gaineth peace of mind by night and day.
251. There is no fire that burneth like desire ;
No beast like hatred can devour;
No snare like tolly to entrap hath power ;
No river-flood can carry off like greed.
252. ’Tis easy to perceive another’s faults ;
Hard are one’s own faults to descry ;
A man will scatter others' faults like chaff;
But as the cheating gambler hides the die.
His own faults he conceals right carefully.
253. Whoso is watchful for another’s faults,
Testy and quick to take offence,
In him his passions will increase, and thence
Further is he from cleansing of his sins.
I. Bhikkhus, mendicants, have to beg their daily meal.


254. The sky-palh shows no tracks; no outward
signs
The tTrader of the Path betrav j 1
The multitude in outward shows delay ;
He Who Hath Come and Gone is free
from all,*'
255. The sky-path shows no tracks; no outward
signs
The treader of the Path betray ;
Nought lasts ; all things embodied pass away ;•
Bat nought can shake the All-Awakened Ones.
1. Samano n’atlhi bahiro. This verse is generally trans-
lated, “ There is no true dbciple outside the pale of Buddhism,”
and the commentary (P. T. S. text, vol. 3. p. 378) so translates
these words, which the Buddha spoke to Subhadda just before
His passing away. The context here seems to require the mean-
ing “outward.” cf. v. 92 and vv. 179-80. The perfect leave no
traces. “ 'ky-path," skass, space.
2. Tafhsgato. The epithet of (he Buddha by which He
nsually describes Himself (cf. N. T. “He who was for to come”).
See Sir (now Lord) Robert Chalmer’s valuable pamphlet for the
meaning of this much discussed epithet (J, H. A. S., Jan. 189*).
NibpafaSOt TathSga to, lit, "is free from the delays of human
faillings”,
3. Sankhsvs, all ‘compounds’, entities, personalities.


CHAPTER NINETEEN.
THE JUST.
256. He is not just who arbitral; sby will.
He who by weighing right and wrong decides,
He is a just man called.
257. Not by his will, but with impartial mind
Keeping the Law, thoughtful, who others guides,
He is a just man called.
258. One is not wise because his speech is long.
Long-suffering and harm'ess, free from fear,
He is a wise man called.
259. Not by much talk doth one uphold the Law.
Who sees the Law in action, 1 tho’ he be
Of little learning, strenuous in the Law,
' Tis he upholds the Law.
260. Grey hairs do not a man an elder* make.
Tho’ ripe in vears, if all his age be vain,
He may be dotard called.
1. KSyena , bodily action, miy mean all the faculties com-
bined.
2. Thero, a “ mendicant” of ten years standing in ordination
is so called in the Buddhist 11 church’’.


261. True, virtuous, harmless, moderate, restrained.
Wise and washed clean of all iitapurities,
He is an elder called.
262. Not by mere talk nor beauty of his form,
If he be grudging, greedy, fraudulent,
Is any reverend called.
263. In whom these faults are cut down, rooted out.
Who hath cast off his sins, who meditates,
That man is reverend called.
264. A shaven crown makes not the Samana. 1
If such a one, lying and unrestrained,
Be full of lust and craving, how can he
A Samana be called ?
265. But if he calm his faults, both great and small.
Since he all evil ways hath quieted,
He is a Samana.
1. Samana, “ ascetic," a title originally contemptuously
applied to the Buddha and His disciples by the BrUhmanas. The
word is etymologically derived from V. sam —to tame or quiet.
Hence the reference in v. 266.


266. He is no mendicant who begs his food. 1
Not he who begs but he who keeps th£ Law,
He is a mendicant.
267. He who hath good and evil laid aside,
Who wisely in this world walks righteously,
He is a mendicant.
268. He is no Muni who refrains from speech,*
If he be foolish and have wandering wits.
But he who holds the balance, grasps the real,.
Who's wise to choose the good and leave the
bad,
Who in this world sees both sides, is thereby
A Muni truly called.
270. He is no Worthy One who creatures harms.*
By harmlessness to every living thing
A man is Worthy called.
1. Bhikkhu, “ beggar,” the name given by the Buddha to His
ordained disciples.
2. Muni , “sage, silent one.” The Buddha was called Sakya-
muni—“the sage of the Sakya clan.”
8. Ariya the noble, the worthy.”


371-2 Not by mere goodness nor by ceremonies,
Not by vast knowledge nor by ecstasy,
Nor by a life retired,
Nor sleeping lonely, do I touch the Bliss
Of freedom which no worldly one can know.
By killing all desire, the mendicant, 1
Attaineth confidence.
CHAPTER TWENTY.
THE PATH.
273. Best is the Eightfold Path: of truths, the four;*
Dispassion in the best of states sublime.
Blest is he of human beings, who hath eyes
to see.
1. Reading vissSsant Spadi. This verse is important as show-
ing the Buddhist ideal in a nutshell. Nibbsna is the dying out
of craving, the root of all evil.
2. The Eightfold Path is ; —Right Views. Right Thought, Right
Speech, Right Action, Right Living, Right Effort, Right Concen-
tration, Right Mental Balance.
The Four Noble Truths are : —lll, the cause of 111, the ceasing
of 111, the Path.


274. This is the way; no other way can lead ye
To purjfv the mind and see the truth.
Walk this Way and free ycurselves from Mara's
host of ills.
275. Tread ye this Path, and make an end of sorrow.
Tread ye this Path for I myself have shown it»
Shown it after learning how to pluck away the
thorns. 1
276. Strive ye yourselves; Buddha's but preach
the way
To them that strive. To meditation given
They who walk this Way are free from Mara's
every bond.
277. “ All things compounded are impermanent ”;
Whoso sees this with opened inner eye
Wearies soon of sorrow. 'Tis the Path of
Purity.
278. “All things compounded are of sorrow made”'.
Whoso sees this with opened inner eye,
Wearies soon of sorrow. ’Tis the Path of
Purify.
1. The thorns are the stings and torments of desire.


279. “ All states compounded are oj sorrow made”’, 1
Whoso sees this with opened inner eye,
Wearies soon of sorrow. Tis the Path of
Purity.
280. Whoso strives not when it is time to strive,
Tho’ young and strong, to sloth and folly
prone,
Weak in will and thought, to knowledge never
finds the way.
281. Who guardeth speech and mind, who doth no
wrong
With body, making pure the triple way,*
He shall tread the Path of Wisdom by the
sages shown.
282. Wisdom is born of meditation deep,
But lost by mind's distraction; knowing
these
Two paths of loss and gain, so let him live,
Let him so direct his life that wisdom may
increase.
1. These three dicta are the essence of the Buddha's teaching.
2. The second, third and fourth steps of the Path.


283. Cut down the jungle, 1 not one tree alone ;
For from this jungle fear of danger’s born ;
Cut it down, O mendicants, and from desire be
free 1
284. If but a trace there be, however small,
Of lust of man for woman, as a calf
Cliugeth to its dam, the mind in bondage will
be held.
285. Pluck out the love of self with thine own hand,
Just as the hand an autumn lily plucks ;
Tread the Way of Peace declared by Him who
hath it trod. '
286. “ Here in the rainy season will I dwell ;
And here in heat and cold.” So thinks the
fool,
Little recking of the dangers that may him
befall.
1. The jungle (vano) is a synonym lor the confused state of
the unsubdued man.


287. Care-stricken, with his thoughts of sons and
flocks,
Attached to life, Death comes and seizes
him,
As a sleeping village by a flood is swept away. 1
288. Not all his sons have power to guard that man;
No sire, no kinsman can protect him now ;
How can kinsmen aught avail him in the grasp
of Death ?
289. The wise man, when he sees the truth of this.
Restrained by righteous living in the Law,
Soon will clear the path that leadeth unto
Perfect Bliss.
CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.
DIVERS VERSES.
290. If in giving up slight pleasure
Thou a greater bliss discern,
Leave the lesser gain and wisely
To the greater profit turn.
i. cf. V. 47.


291. He who causeth pain fo others,
Seeking his own selfish bliss,
By the bonds of hate encumbered
Hatred never can dismiss.
292. Those who disregard their duty, 1
Doing what should not be done,
Insolent in evil-doing
More and more corrupt become.
293. They who mounting guard on body,
Ceaseless watch and ward preserve ;
They who others’ things neglecting,
From their duty never swerve ;
They who, self-controlled, aspire,
Concentrate in every nerve.
Reach destruction of desire.
294. Slaying father, slaying mother,
With two kings of warrior fame,
And a realm with all its subjects,*
Brshmana's go free from blame.
1. Kiccam “minding one’s own business.”
2. The Brahmins used to claim that a “ twice-born’’ saint was
blameless, whatever his bodiless actions might be. The Buddha
here speaks mystically. Father is ignorance, Mother , desire ; the
two kings are the great heresies of non-causation and nihilism. The
Kingdom and its subjects are the six organs of sense (mind being
the sixth; and the six objects cf sense (form, sound, sight, smell,
taste, thoughts), conquest of all these brings liberation from em-
bodied existence.


295. Slaying father, slaying mother,
With two kings of saintly name,
And a realm with all its subjects,
Brahmana’s go free from blame.
296. They who, watchful night and day,
On the Buddha meditate,
Are followers of Gotama.
♦
297. They who watchful night and day,
On the Dhamma meditate,
Are followers of Gotama.
298. They who, watchful night and day,
On the Sangha meditate,
Are followers of Gotama.
299. They who, watchful night and day,
On the body meditate,
Are followers of Gotama.
500. They who, watchful night and day.
Take delight in harmlessness,
Are followers of Gotama.


301. They who, watchful night and day,
Take delight in ecstasy,
Are followers of Gotama.
302. O 'tis hard to give the world up,
Yet the lonely life is hard ;
Painful 'tis to dwell in houses
With the uncongenial;
Painful travelling to and fro ;
Cease to be a traveller- 1
Cease to be beset with pain 1
303. Faithful and of good repute,
Full of honour and renown,
He is reverenced and honoured,
Whereso'er he chose to dwell.
304. Holy saints are far-resplendent
Like the peaks Himalayan ;
Like the shaft that flies in darkness,
Wicked men are never seen.
1. A travellen is one who runs up and down the paths o{
rebirth.
6
65


305. Lonely sitting, lying lonely,
Act alone and strenuous ;
Taming self alone, rejoice thee
In the ending of desire.
CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.
THE EVIL WAY
306. The liar reaches hell, and he who says
He did not what he did ;
Both are the same hereafter, men of crooked
ways.
307. And many a one the yellow gown who wears,
Wicked and uncontrolled,
By reason of his evil deeds in hell appears.
308. Better for him who lives unworthily
A red-hot ball to swallow,
Than eat the food the country gives in charity.
309. Four states of ill to reckless men I tell
Who seek the wives of others—
111-luck, a restless bed, an evil name and hell.
1. Niraya, the Evil Path, the downward course to destruction,
duggati, as opposed to su-gati the happy way or state of heaven.
66


310. 111-luck, the Evil Way, short-lived delight
Of fearful man with timid woman spent,
And from the king a grievous punishment—
Let these four evils all adulterers affright.
311. Just as a blade of grass not handled well
Will cut the hand that grasps,
So doth the ascetic’s life ill-handled lead to hell.
312. Deeds done with sluggishness, the broken vow f
The saintly life befouled—
Such evil deeds as these small recompense
bestow.
313. Act thou with eneigy, if act thou must;
The careless mendicant
Doth but stir up a denser cloud of passion's dust,
314. Leave evil deeds which afterwards bring pain ;
Better to do the good ;
For when 'tis done that deed no sorrow brings
again.
315. Just as a frontier town that is guarded well,
Which ramparts well defend on every side,
So guard thyself, let not a moment slide ;
Time-wasters suffer sorrow when consigned
to hell.


316. They who feel shame, where shame there
should be none,
Shameless, where shame should be,
Embracing doctrines false, down the 111 Path
have gone.
317. They who feel fear, where fear there should
be none,
Fearless, when they should fear,
Embracing doctrines false, down the 111 Path
have gone.
318. They who see sin, where sin there can be none.
Who see no harm in sin,
Embracing doctrines false, down the 111 Path
have gone.
319. They who know sin as sin, and right as right,
Embracing doctrines true.
Those beings enter on the Path of True
Delight.


CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.
THE ELEPHANT.
320. As an elephant in battle bears the arrows at
him hurled,
I must bear men's bitter tongues, for very evil
is the world.
321. Tamed, they lead him into battle ; tamed, (he
king his back,ascends ;
Tamed is he the best of beings, whom no
bitter speech offends.
322. Good are well-tamed mules, and good are
Scindian steeds of lineage famed ;
Good indeed the mighty tusker ; best of all the
man self-tamed.
323. Yet such mounts can nought avail us, cannot
be Nibbana’s guide ;
We can only reach The Pathless 1 on the self-
tamed self astride.
1, NibbZna .


324. With the must from temples streaming, mighty
Dhanapalako 1
Captive, tastes no food, but longeth to the
Naga-grove to go.
325. Sluggish, gluttonous and sleepy, wallowing
idly to and fro,
Like a huge and grain-fed hog, a fool again to
birth must go.
326. Once this mind roamed as it listed, as it
pleased a-wandering went.
As the holder of the ankus checks the furious
elephant,
Now with wisdom I’ll restrain it, guide it
wholly to my bent.
327. Take delight in earnestness ; watch thy thoughts
and never tire;
Lift thee from the Path of Evil, like the tusker
sunk in mire.
1. A favourite beast of the Sing of Benares. The elephant,
to the last, typifies wisdom, strength and endurance.
The Buddha is catted Mahs-nSga, “ mighty elephant"; The
nSga-grove is NibbSna, Those who wander in the jungle are those
t till bound by the fetters of re-birth.


328. Hast thou found a fellow-traveller, upright,
firm, intelligent 7 1
Leaving all thy cares behind thee, gladly walk
with him intent.
329. Hast thou found no fellow-traveller, upright,
firm, intelligent ?
As a king deserts his borders, by the enemy
pursued,
Like the tusker in the forest, go thy way in
solitude.
330. Better is the lonely life, for fools companions
cannot be ;
Live alone and do no evil, live alone with
scanty needs,
Lonely, as the mighty tusker in the forest
lonely feeds.
331. Sweet are friends when need ark e th, sweet is
joy whate'er it be ;
Sweet the blessing of life's ending, sweet to be
from sorrow free.
1. Cf. verse 61,


332. Sweet it is to be a mother, sweet the lot of
fatherhood,
Sweet the life of holy hermits, sweet the life of
Brahmans good.
333. Sweet is growing old in goodness, sweet is
faith established,
Sweet to gain the prize of wisdom when desire
for sin is dead.
CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.
CRAVING.
334. Even as a creeper groweth,
Creatures (hat are indolent
Find their craving ever grow ;
Likeft monkey in the forest
Seeking fruit from bough to bough,
So they wander to and fro. 1
1. In the round of rebirth.


335. He who yields to sordid craving
That thro’ all the world doth go,
Like the gadding vine that spreadeth,
That man's sorrows ever grow.
336. He who quiets sordid craving,
Hard in this world to allay,
Like the dewdrop from the lotus,
All his sorrows fall away.
337. Lo Ito all of ye assembled
This the good advice I tell :
“Dig ye up the root of craving,
As men dig the scented grass.
Let not Death so oft assail ye,
Even as the rushing torrent"
O’er the river reeds doth pass."
338. If the root be still uninjured,
Trees cut down will spring again ;
If the root of craving liveth,
Still there is rebirth of pain.


339. - When the six and thirty currents 1
Bring one under pleasure’s sway,
Thoughts, like waves, with passion surging.
Sweep him all confused away.
340. Everywhere those streams are flowing;
Now the creeper of desire
Plants its roots and standeth fast;
Cut it ere it riseth higher,
Cut it with the axe of wisdom,
Root the creeper up at last.
341. Restless, wanton is men’s craving ;
They who wander to and fro
In the restless search for pleasure
Birth and death must undergo.
342. They who in the trap of craving,
Like a hare run to and fro,
By the fetters' bonds entangled,
Long must sorrow undergo.
1. The six sense-organs and the sis objects of sense
(twelve) are affected by three desires of each, gene-
rally taken as Ksmatanhs, RupatanhX, Aiupatanhs r
desire for existence in the wo-Id- of desire, in the
worlds of form, in the worlds of the fortniesa
(abstract), thus making thirty-six varieties.


343. Beings, in the trap of craving
Like a hare run (o and fro :
Mendicanls who hope for freedom
Must their passions all forego.
344. Whoso, free from human passions,
Junglewards to run is fain
Who, from lust emancipated,
To his lust runs back again ;
Lo I the man infatuated
Plunges in»o bonds of pain.
345. Not by ties of wood or iron
Nor of rope (the wise men say)
Are men held in bondage strong ;
But for jewels, wives and children,
They who passionately crave,
They are held in bondage long.
346. But the downward-dragging chain,
Yielding, hard to loose again—
This is bondage real (they say);
Who this chain of craving breaks,
Free from lust, the world forsakes,
1. The jungle of passion.


347. They who yield to their desires
Down the stream of craving swim;
As we see the spider run
In the net himself hath spun.
Wise men cut the net and go
Free from craving, free from woe.
•3tB. Loose all behind, between, before; 1
Cross thou unto the other shore ;*
With thy mind on all sides free
Birth and death no more shalt see.
349. He whose mind is tossed with doubt,
Seeing bliss in passion's surge,
Makes his craving grow the longer,
Rivets all his bonds the stronger.
350. He who juys in calming doubt,
And the loathsome contemplates, 8
Soon will Mai a’s bondage leave,
Every fetter soon will cleave.
1. Past, present and future ties.
2. Cross the stream to Nibbana.
3. One of the meditation exercises, to inspire loathing for
the body and its conupt nature.


351. He who hath attained the goal,
Fearless, free from lust and sin,
Who hath plucked out every thorn, 1
Nevermore will be reborn.
352. Free from lust, to nothing clinging,
Who is skilful to interpret
All the wealth of sacred lore ;
All the mass of letters knowing
(Whether after or bcore),*
This indeed is his last body,
He's a Master of The W sdom,
Mighty Being,
He indeed is born no more.
353. Conqueror of all am I I
Knowing all, from all conditions
Of existence I am free ;
By the slaying of desire
I have ended craving’s fire.
Who could then my teacher be ?
I have now forsaken all,
1 myself, by mine own knowledge.
Whom should 1 my teacher call ? 3
1. Cf. above v. 275.
2. Niiutli pada-kovido : skilled in the true meaning of the
language (Pali) in which the Buddha taught.
3. This was the reply of the Buddha loan ascetic who,.
struck •by the Master’s radiance after attaining
NibbSna, inquired who was His teacher and what
was the cause of His joy.


354. To give The Law all gifts transcends ;
To taste The Law is sweetest far ;
No joy can with its joy compare;
To slay desire all sorrow ends.
355. Wealth harms the fool; not him who runs
To win the goal intent;
By lust of wealth the fool harms self
With harm for others meant.
356. Weeds are the ruin of the fields;
This world by lust is spoiled ;
Then great the fruit of gifts to those
By lust who arc not soiled.
357. Weeds are the ruin of the fields ;
This world is spoiled by hate ;
To those by hatred undefiled *
The fruit of gifts is great.
358. Weeds are the ruin of the fields;
Deluded are mankind ;
Then great the fruit of gifts to those
Whom folly doth not blind.


359, Weeds are the ruin of the fields ;
Craving pollutes the world ;
Then great the fruit of gifts to those
By craving not enthralled. 1
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE.
THE MENDICANT.
360. Good is restraint of eye and ear, of nose and
tongue,
Of body, speech and mind ; restraint is good
In every way ; the mendicant restrained
All sorrow casts away.
361. In hand and foot and speech whoso is self
restrained;
Whoso to ponder inwardly delights,
Who livtth lonely and is well-content,
Him men call mendicant.
1. Bhoga, ruga, dosa, moha, tccha, riches, lust, hate,
delusion, craving, are five of the hindrances to the
saintly life.


362. Whoso controls his lips, and words of wisdom
speaks.
Is not puffed up, who can elucidate
The meaning and the essence of The Law—
Pleasant is he to hear.
368. Who dwelleth in the Law and in the Law
delights.
Who searcheth out and well remembers it—-
Fr ra the True Law that steadfast mendicant
Will never fall away.
364. Let him not think of little worth the alms he
gains.
Nor jealous be of alms (o others given ;
For whoso envies other mendicants
Wins not tranquillity.
365. Though small the part of charity that falls to
him,
Whoso despiseth not the alms he gains,
If he live clean, not given to slothfulness,
E’en by the gods is praised. 1
I. Cf, vv. 229—80.


366. Whoso hath neither part nor lot in Name and
Form 1
(Who sailh not "this is I ” or “ this is mine”)
And grieveth not for what existeth not,
A mendicant is called.
367. Whoso in friendly wise - with all mankind
abides,
Firm in the teaching of the Awakened One;
Reaches the bliss where all conditions cease.
Reaches the State of Peace.
368. O mendicants 1 bale out the water from this
boat 1*
Swift will it go when from this burden freed.
Of passion and of hatred cut the root;
Then shalt thou reach The Peace.
1. NSma rupa, a traditional Vedic term for “ mind and
Matter,’’ the immortal and the perishable, borrowed
by the Buddha to stand for the mental and bodily-
compound in the individual, cf, Buddhist Psychology,
Mrs. C. A. Rbys-Davids, pp. 23-6.
2. The body with its needs and passions (water in the
boat) hampers the progress across the stream.
6


369. Cut off the five ; desert the five; the five
subdue !
That mendicant, who from the fetters five 1
Hath freed himself at last, by men is called
“A Grosser of the Stream".
370. O mendicant! be meditative ; let not sloth,*
Let not thy passions toss thee to and fro ;®
Lest, swallowing the ball, thou burning cry,
“Ah 1 this is suffering 1"
371. Who hath no wisdom cannot ecstasy attain
Who knows not ecstasy, no wisdom gains;
Whoso both ecstasy and wisdom hath,
Unto The Peace is nigh.
1. I. The first 6ve fetters of delusion of self, doubt, cere-
monial observance , lust and ill-will.
11. The second five fetters of desire for form, desire for
the formless, pride, vanity and ignorance.
111. If the verb of the third clause, vuttaribhavaye, be
translated “pay attention to,” as is possible, the
meaning will be, “develop the five good qualities of
faith, zeal, concentration, meditation, wisdom."
IV. This may refer to the second five fetters, by throw-
ing off which one becomes an Arahat.
2. “ Toss thee,” reading kSmaguna bhavimsu (for kcCma-
gune bhamassu) as Prof. Dines Andersen suggests
(p. 192, Glossary to Dhammapada. Pt. 2).
3. Cf. v. 107. One of the tortures in the hells.
4. “ ecstasy, I "jhUna. There are four stages of mystic
meditation leading to rebirth in the higher worlds.


372. The mendicant, whose mind hath gained tran-
quillity,
When he hath entered, on his empty cell, 1
Hath joy beyond man's power to tell, for he
The Truth discerneth well.
373. Soon as he graps the rise and fall of elements,*
Such pleasure and delight thereby he wins
As falls to them that rightly know the state
Of immortality.
374. Let the wise mendicant in this world thus
begin ;
Guard thou thy senses; next, with mind
content,
By discipline restrained, seek noble friends
Who zealous live and pure ;
375. And by the laws of friendship act, live perfectly,
And upright walk according to the Law ;
Then in the fullness of thy joy thou shalt
An end of suffering make.
1. “ Empty cell,” sunnXgHratn, may refer to the meditation
in the “cave of the heart,” when all thought vibra-
tions are stilled, cf. v. 37,
2. “ The rise and fall," reading udayavyayam. cf, v. 113.


376. O mendicants 1 just as the snow-white vassikd,
The jasmine, putting forth fresh blooms
to-day,
Sheds down the withered blooms of yester-
day,
So shed ye lust and hate.
377. Tranquil in body, speech and mind, O mendi-
cants,
Whoso in every way is well-restrained,
Who all this world’s desires hath thrown aside
He is "the tranquil” called.
378. Rouse thou the self by self, by self examine
self;
Thus guarded by the self, and with thy mind
Intent and watchful, thus, O mendicant,
Thou shall live happily.
379. Yea 1 Self is guard of self and refuge takes in
self;
i Just as a dealer trains a thorough-bred,
A noble steed, and breaks him to the rein.
So do thou self restrain.


380. That mendicant, with utter joy and gladness
filled,
Firm in the teaching of the Awakened One,
Reaches the bliss where all conditions cease,
Reaches the State of Peace.
381. Lo ye 1 a mendicant, though young he be, that
strives
To grasp the teaching of the Awakened One,
Lights up the world, as from a cloud released
The moon lights up the night.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX.
THE BRAHMANA.
382. Cut off the stream, O Brahmana, right man-
fully ;
Repel desires; when thou hast known the
end
Of things conditioned, thou shalt be
A knower of the Uncreate.*
1. Cf. V. 178.
2. Akatannii, “unconditioned,’’ Nibbana.


383. When by the twofold law (restraint and ecstasy),
By virtue of the knowledge he hath gained.
The Brahmana hath crossed the stream ;
Then every fetter falls away.
384. Whoso the stream hath crossed and from this
shore hath passed,
Free from all cares, unfettered ; one to whom
This shore and that alike are naught;
Him I deem a Brahmana.
385. Bright shines the sun by day, the moon lights
up the night;
In splendid armour shines the warrior ;
In ecstasy the saint is bright;
The Buddha shineth night and day.
886. “ One who is rid of evil ”is a Brahmana ;
Samapa is one who tranquil hath become ;
“ Gone forth from all impurity” ;
The hermit is pabbajja called. 1
1. Edhita, “removed,” thesupposed etymology of BrShmanai
as samitatta, “ quieted” is here supposed to be that of samana,
ascetie monk. Pabbajje is one who “ goes forth,” takes the robes,
becomes ordained a Buddhist mendicant monk.


387. Let not a Brahmana assail a Brahmana ;
Nor let him with the assailant angry be,
Woe to the striker; greater woe
To him that, stricken, strikes again.
388. No little profit comelh to the Brahmana
Who hath his mind from pleasant things
restrained ;
Soon as the lust to harm is gone
All sorrowing is laid to rest.
389. Whoso offendeth not in thought and word
and deed,
In whom no evil from these three is seen ;
Whoso is in these three controlled ;
Him I deem a Brahmana.
390. If there be one from whom thou canst obtain
the Law
Which He, the All-Awakened One, declared,
Revere him, as a Brahmana
The sacrificial fire reveres.


391. Not matted hair, nor caste, nor noble birth can
make
The Brahraana ; but he that knows the truth
And knows the Law, is blest indeed ;
And him 1 deem a Bn.hraana.
392. Of what avail to thee, O fool, is matted hair ?
And what avails thy garment made of skins?
The outer part thou makcst clean.
But all is ravening within. 1
393. Whoso wears rags from dustheaps picked,
whoso is lean,
With veins o’erspread, who in the jungle
dwells
And meditates in loneliness ;•
Him I deem a Brahmana.
1. Cf. the words of the Christ to the Pharisees: “Now do ye
Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and the platter, but
your inward part is full of ravening and wickedness. 1 ’ The
word used, gahanam, ‘grasping,’ may also mean ‘jungle’.
3. These were the marks of the early and- stricter ascetics;
even to-day the bhikkhu’s of Ceylon have,their robes made of pieces
of cloth sewn together, but these are not picked from the dust-heap.


394. One is not Brahmana because of race or birth;
“ Hail-fellow” is such called, and riches
hath. 1
Possessing naught, free from desire ;
Is one I call a Brflhmana.
395. Whoso hath cut all fetters off and hath no fear
Of what may him befall; whoso from bonds
And all attachments is released ;
Is one 1 call a Brahmana.
896. Whoso hath cut the strap, the leathern thong,
the ropes*
And all thereto pertaining, and the bar
Hath lifted ; him, the Awakened one;
Him I deem a Brahmana.
397. He who endures, tho' innocent of all offence,
Abuse and blows and e’en imprisonment
With patience strong, a host in strength ;
Him I deem a Brahmana.
1. 11 Hail-fellow,’’ bhovsdi, one who uses the disrespectfn-
term of bho, “I say! man". These Brahmins who did not accept
the Buddha as Master would address Him in this way, and of
course they were often wealthy men,
2. The strap is said to be hate; the thong, desire; the ropes,
orthodoxy with Us attendant narrowness; the bar, ignorance that
shuts the door of knowledge.


398. Who hath no anger, who to all his vows is
true,
Upright in life, from passion free, subdued,
No more on earth to be reborn ;
Him I deem a Brahmana.
399. Who like a dew-drop on a lotus-lily leaf,
Or seed of mustard on a needle’s point,
Clings not to any wordly bliss ;
Him I deem a Brahmana.
400. Who knoweth even in this world his sorrow's
end,
Who bath laid down (he burden of desire,
Emancipated from his bonds ;
Him I deem a Brahmana.
401. Whoso is deep in wisdom and intelligence,
Who can with skill discern the right and
wrong,
Who hath attained the highest goal ;
Him I deem a Brahmana.


402. Whoso with householders and wanderers alike
Small dealings hath, who lives the homeless-
life,
A mendicant of scanty needs ;
Him I deem a Brahmana.
403. Whoso witholds the rod of painful punishment
From living creatures, be they weak or
strong,
Who neither strikes nor makes to strike,
Him 1 deem a Brahmana.
404. Whoso forbearance hath to those that hinder
him,
And to the angry showeth gentleness,
Among the greedy without greed;
Him I deem a Brahmana.
405. From whom all anger, hate, hypocrisy and
pride '
Have fall’n away, as from a needle's point
A grain of mustard-seed falls off;
Him I deem a Brahmana.


406. Gentle in ways and apt to teach his fellow-
men,
Whoso will utter truth and naught but truth,
Whoso in speech offendeth not ;
Him 1 deem a Brahmana.
407. He that takes nothing in this world that is not
given.
Whatever it may be, or great or small,
Or long or short or good or bad;
Him I deem a Brahmana.
408. In whom is seen no more the longing of desire
For this world or beyond, who hath no lust,
Who hath no fetters any more ,*
Him I deem a Brahmana.
409. In whom is seen no craving, who, because he
knows,
Asks not in doubt the How or Why, for he
Hath reached Nibbana’s peace profound ;
Him I deem a Brahmana.


410. Whoso on earth hath passed beyond the
opposites
Of good and evil, and is free from grief,
From passion and impurity ;
Him 1 deem a Brahmana.
411. Who, like the moon on high, is stainless, pure
and calm,
Translucent and serene, who hath restrained
The rise of all delightful states ;
Him I deem a Brahmana.
412. Whoso hath trod the hard and muddy road of
births,
Hath crossed delusion, reached the other
shore,
Nor lusts, nor doubts, grasps not, is calm.
Him 1 deem a Brahmana.
413. Who homeless wanders, through this world, a.
mendicant,
Abandoning desires, who hath restrained
The rise of sensual delight;
Him I deem a Brahmana.


414. Who homeless wanders through this world
a mendicant,
Abandoning his lust; who hath restrained
The rise of craving and desire;
Him I deem a Brahmana.
415. Whoso hath left behind all ties that bind on
earth,
And e’en the heavenly world transcended hath;
Whoso from every tie is free ;
Him I deem a Brahmana.
416. Who joy and pain hath left, who from the heat
of life
Is cooled, and hath no basis of rebirth,
Heroic conqueror of the worlds;
Him I deem a Brahmana.
417. Who knows the rise and fall of things in birth
and death,
Who is not of the world, who hath the path
Well trod, who hath become awake;
Him I deem a Brahmana.


418. Whose passage 1 hence the gods themselves
cannot discern,
Nor demigods nor men; a worthy one
In whom the passions are subdued ;
Him I deem a Brahmana.
419. To whom pertaineth naught of past or future
things
Or of the present; one who owneth naught,
Who hath no wish for anything;
Him I deem a Brahmana.
4<io. Dauntless,* pre-eminent, heroic mighty seer,
The conqueror, desireless one, made clean, 8
Whose eyes have opened to the light, 1
Him 1 deem a Brahmana.
-1. Cuti\ gait ; the “ tall” from other worlds into this one, and
the ‘going’ or passage or state of the next birth.
2. Like a bull.
3. Nahntakam, an allusion to the ceremonial bathing of the
Brahrasna after finishing his course of studies.
4. The meaning of Buddha.


421, Who knows his former births, who sees both
heaven and hell, 1
Who now at last hath reached the end of
births;
Perfect in knowledge he who hath done
all things well,
That sage I call a Brahmana.
1. One who knows earth, heaven and hell, and can range
them at will, is called HSnatiloka, “knower of the three worlds”.
Such a one is born no more, as he has learned the lessons of
these worlds.
Thompson & Co., Madras.


ERRATA AND ADDITIONS
Fob ‘ Law ’ read ‘ Norm ’ throughout,
p. 2, v. 3, for * wrapped up in read ‘ cherishing
v. 4, for ‘ stripped bare of read ‘ not having ’«
v. 6,2, remove comma after ‘ this
n. 2, for ‘ Songs ’ read ‘ Psalms
p. 3, n, 1, for anakkasdvo read anikkasdvo, and add
‘ see note to v. 21 re the use of the word
‘ monk V
p. 4, v. 17, add note on ‘ hell ’: ‘ duggatiih, ‘ the evil
path or destiny a purgatorial state of rebirth.
p. 5, v. 19, for ‘ idlers, etc.’, read, * Sluggards, counting
others ’ cattle, Cannot share the Brotherhood
v, 21, add note on ‘ the Deathless ’ —‘ amata-
padath, ‘ the immortal lot or simply ‘ the
Ambrosial ( nibbdna) : the word f immortality ’ in
Buddhism does not imply ‘ a deathless Ego


p, 6, v. 22, add note on ‘ pastures ’: ‘ the sphere or
range, gocara’.
v. 24, for ‘of guarded notion ’ read ‘ with
thoughts well-guarded
p, 7, v. 28, ‘ add note : ‘ literally,’ as one standing on
a mountain looks down on those standing on the
level
n. 1, for Maghava read Maghava.
p. 9, n. 1, for sunudgaram read sunndgdrath.
p. 10, v. 40, read * Body’s a vessel of clay
v. 41, insert comma after ‘ lie
p. 12, v. 48, read ‘ pleasures’ delay
p. 13, v. 56, for ‘ or the sandal ’ read ‘ of the sandal ’.
p. 14, v. 58—9, after ‘ who know ’ insert this line
‘ ’mid those who on the dung-hill grow ’.
n. 1, for Mara read Mara, and add note : ‘ cf.
Shakespeare, Henry V, 1,1, 60.
‘ The strawberry grows underneath the nettle,
And wholesome berries thrive and ripen best,
Neighbour’d by fruit of baser quality ’.
p. 21, v. 92, for ‘ food that’s given ’ read ‘ food that’s
known ', and add note : literally, f whose food


is thoroughly understood (as to its properties,,
qualities and purpose).’
p. 22, v. 94, add note: ‘famed’, literally' by the
gods is envied
n. 1, for avijja read avijjd.
n. 2 should read ‘ akatannu ’, 1 knowing the
Unborn, the Eternal, the state of Nibbana ’, as
in v. 383 :, but possibly here the context re-
quires ‘ ungrateful ’, i.e., not bound by ties of
gratitude to anybody.’
p. 24, v. 102, for ‘ beter ’ read ‘ better ’.
p. 26, n. T, for —vyayam read— vyayam.
p. 27, n. 1, read : amatapadam, ‘ the eternal lot ’,.
Nibbaija : see n. to v. 21.
p. 33, v. 153—4, for ‘householder,;’ read ‘housebuilder’,
p. 37, n. 2,1, for ‘ Hiduism ’ read ‘ Hinduism ’.
p. 45, v. 211, read ‘things loved, when lost, bring
woe ’.
p. 47, n. 2, for nama read ndma.
p. 48, n. I—2, add : ‘ the changeless, accutam ’.
p. 50, v. 236, for ‘ they taints ’ read ‘ the taints ’.
p. 52, v. 245, for ‘ who sees ’ read ‘ who seeks ’.


p. 53, v. 249, for ‘ whose ’ read ‘ whoso
v. 252, for ‘ scatter ’ read ‘ winnow
p. 64, v. 254, 4, read ‘ They who have won the Goal
are free from all ’.
n. 1, for bahiro read hdhiro : for dhasd read
dkdsa,
n. 2, I—s, read ‘ nippapadcd Tathdgatd, lit.
‘are free, etc.’
n. 3, read samhhdrd, ‘ all compounding factors
of entities or persons ’.
p. 58, v. 271—2, omit comma after ‘ mendicant ’.
n. 1, for apadi read dpddi.
p. 60, v. 279, read ‘ All states compounded are with-
out a self ’.
p. 61, v. 283, 3, read ‘ Out down trees and under-
growth and from desire be free 1 ’ and add note
on ‘ desire ’, viz.: ‘ nibband hotha, ‘be ye free
from the jungle (or forest) of desire ( nir-vand ,
a pun on the word nirvana, cf. v. 344,
vanamutto ’.
p. 63, v. 292, read ‘ insolent and negligent ’.
n. 2, read * Mother is craving ’.


p. 64, v. 295, for line 3 read ‘ and a fifth, pre-emi-
nent ’ add note veyyaggha-pancamam, lit. ‘ a
tiger-like man, as a fifth The Commentator
explains this to mean the fifth of the Five
Hindrances (lust, malice, sloth, pride, doubt)
which beset the Path,
p. 65, v. 303, for ‘ chose ’ read ‘ choose ’.
p. 67, v. 315, for ‘ that is ’ read ‘ that’s ’.
p. 70, n. I, read ‘The elephant, to the East, etc.’,
p. 77, n. 2, .for nirutti read nirutti.
p. 78, v. 354, for ‘to slay desire ’ read ‘ who craving
slays ’.
p. 79, verse 360 should read 360—1, therefore sub-
sequent numbers should be increased by one up
to v. 385. Verse 386 has been omitted, therefore
the remaining verse numbers following should
be increased by two up to the end of the book
in order to agree with those of the Pali Text,
p. 82, n. 2, for bhavimsu read bhamiriisu.
p. 83, v. 373 (2), omit comma after ‘ entered ’•
v. 374 (3), add note on ‘immortality’: viz,-
‘ the Ambrosial ’.


p. 85, n. 2, for nibbana read nibbana,
p. 86, v, 386 (omitted) should be
‘ Whoso dwells meditative, passionless.
And, free from all the Taints, his course
hath run.
Whoso hath won the highest Goal—Him I
deem a Brahmaria.
v. 385 (emended number) read ‘ Whoso the
Stream hath crossed and from both shores hath
passed ’, and add note: ‘ lit. one for whom
there exists neither this shore (the stream
being not yet entered) nor that shore (Arahant-
ship being yet unattained) nor both shores (as
he has now attained)’,
p. 89, v. 396 (emended number) omit stop after
‘ desire ’.
n. 1, read ‘ disrespectful term bho ’’
p. 93, v. 415 (emended number) omit comma after
* wanders ’.
p. 95, n. 4, for Buddha read buddha.




KARMA AND REINCARNATION LEGION
OFFICERS:
Head: Weller Van Hook
Secretary: C. Shuddemagen.
Treasurer: Mrs. Clara Jerome
Address for all:
7232 Bond Ave., Chicago, 111.
OBJECT:
To Spread the Knowledge of
Karma and Reincarnation
Karma is the Law of Nature, of universal
validity, called by scientists the Law of Caus-
ation, or the Law of Action and Re-action.
It brings back to every man, unerringly,
at some future time, the results and conse-
quences of all his actions, feelings, thoughts.
Reincarnation means that man is a spiritual
being clothed in bodies made of matter; the
man is the spiritual intelligence, the bodies
are only a garment. This spiritual intelli-
gence, which is to unfold all its powers,
comes to earth many times to gain experience
in order that the divine capacities in him
may thereby be unfolded.


men, a love which inflames every lower ele-
ment in the human constitution, and kills
all higher and richer sentiment. He who would
prepare for himself a happier re-birth, may
begin by making happier the lives of others.
He may respect their rights, consult their
feelings, extend their pleasures, generously
sacrificing himself that they may profit. As
he so does, his own higher nature is mani-
fested, and finer satisfactions greet him with
an unalloyed delight. By a blessed law of
being, he who thus loses his life shall save
it; for he not only tastes richer pleasure
than any possible through selfish effort, but
he molds his character in the grace and .beauty
of true manliness, and he molds, too, that
new incarnation which is to fit the nature
formed in this.
Certainly a principle which quickens the
highest motives in human nature may well
be the regenerator of human life. He who
sees his present as the product of his past
self, who foresees that his future will be
the product of his present, who finds in
Karma the unfailing treasury for every effort
and every toil, who desires that re-birth
shall have less of pain and more of gladness
than he knows of here,' will seek in generous
service to fellow-men the highest happiness
of his highest faculties, and trust for brighter
incarnation to that law which cannot break,
that force which cannot fail.
7
