

F /o,3t(e
“CONJUNCTI TOTAM SUPERABIMUS OrBEm!”
FEDERATION
MAURICE H. HERVEY.
(HEAD-MASTER OF ILLAWARRA COLLEGE, WOLLONGONG.)
PRICE: ONE SHILLING.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.




MAURICE H. HERVEY.
(HEAD-MASTER OF ILLAWARRA COLLEGE, WOLLONGONG.)
PRICE: ONE SHILLING.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
JOHN SANDS, PRINTER, GEORGE STREET.




The Right Honourable William Bede Dalley
P) i i SS j T ta^gs
P.C., Q.C., M.L.C.,
This effort in the cause of Britannic Confederation
IS, BY PERMISSION, DEDICATED.




AUTHOR’S NOTE.
'T'IME is the touchstone of polemical literature. Of the thousands of
-*• pamphlets, brochures, essays, &c., cast annually upon the waters of
Public Opinion, but a very few awaken even a passing interest, nearly all
are forgotten a few months after they appear. The reason of this is
sufficiently obvious ; the vast majority of pamphlets deal merely with emer-
gencies and pass away with the emergency; they are necessarily prophetic,
and polemic prophecy is seldom realised. Thackeray’s advice to authors is
good: “ lock up your manuscript for twelve months, and if at the end of
that time you do not, upon reperusal, burn it, then think about publishing.”
The Genesis of Federation was written more than a year ago. During the
interval that has since elapsed the question of Federation has been pretty
generally discussed throughout the Empire, and no acceptable solution of
the problem has yet been found. The writer has reperused the manuscript
and sees no flaw in the original scheme. He has submitted his work to the
private criticism of many persons, and their verdict has induced him to
follow up Thackeray’s advice and publish.
September, 1887.




HE GENESIS
IMPERIAL FEDERATION
“ Conjunct! totam supeeabimus Oebem ! ” — Hervius.
THE past is the index to the future. Apart from mere story-interest, the
value of history is represented by the lessons which it teaches in
national polity. The most critical study of the chronicles of antiquity can
serve no higher purpose than to enable us to appreciate the influences that
brought about the successive collapses of empires which, even in their ruin,
strike the historic eye with bewildered admiration ; to estimate, from their
successful rise, the essentials to a prosperous national growth ; and, above
all, to learn, from their disastrous fall, the chief causes of national decay.
And although an exhaustive sketch, even of the briefest sort, of by-gone
national greatness would be far too lengthy for the limits of this essay, a
few brief illustrations (“ set down rather significantly than curiously”) can
scarcely be deemed inapt.
Arise, Phoenicia, and tell us of thy legendary cradling upon the eastern
shores of the Mediterranean, Tell us how, as the ages wore on, thy sons
made the seas their dominion ; how, founding their hopes of empire upon
the broad basis of commerce, they spread thy sway far and wide. Tell us
how they braved the unknown perils that lay beyond the Pillars of
Hercules, to establish a profitable trade with distant Britain ; how, knowing
nothing of the compass, guided only by sun and stars, they doubled the
Gape of Good Hope and circumnavigated Africa. Tell us of the colonies
which they founded, of the number, the wealth, the magnificence of the
cities which they built : of Sidon, and of Tyre, and of Carthage. Tell us
how the vaunted “ glories of Solomon ” were but commercial incidents
of his trade with Phoenicia ; how his gold, and his ivory, his apes and his
peacocks, his silver—silver in such abundance that it “ was nothing ac-
counted in the days of Solomon,” except to be “in Jerusalem as stones ”
—all came to the port of Tarshish, from Phoenician cities, in Phoenician
ships manned by Phoenician crews. Tell us how thy fleets brought to thy
marts the products of every soil and of every clime. Tell us, in short, of
thy glory, and a long and glorious tale it is. But tell us, too, of the short-
sightedness and imbecility of thy rulers ; of the servile policy which
entrusted the protection of all this national greatness to hireling bands of
strangers ; of the blind confidence in the eternal power of wealth to pro-
tect wealth because it had, at times, sufficed to keep at bay Babylon and
Persia and Greece. Tell us, too, of the fatal rivalry and jealousy of each
other which debarred thy colonies and cities from uniting against a comm on
foe ; which made it necessary that even commercial conferences should be
held on neutral ground. Tell us (’tis but one instance out of many) how
the colony of Laish fell an easy prey to the invading Danites because “ there
was no deliverer and it was far from Sidon” ; how, one by one, all the fair
provinces and majestic cities of Phoenicia were swept away because, too,


“ there was no deliverer,” and they were far apart, and had no system of
mutual defence. Tell us also of the one tie which, despite distance and
jealousy, ever formed a frail link between thy scattered peoples—Religion.
But tell us not what that religion was, more than that it was a worship of
unspeakable filth and depravity which could only defile the whole moral
tone of the nation. Confess to the black shadow which overcast the
national character for honesty and fair-dealing, and which caused “ Phoeni-
cian,” the once proud equivalent for merchant, to degenerate into “Phoeni-
cian,” a synonym for thief.* And, lastly, tell us how the expiring rays of
thy fading greatness, centering in Carthage, were finally and forever extin-
guished beneath the heel of all-conquering Rome.
Arise, thou heroic Republic, thou mighty empire, and bear witness to
the genius of the great historian (greater, far, than thy Livy and thy
Tacitus) who has thrown such vivid light upon the causes of thy decline
and fall. And these causes, what were they ? The effeminate degeneracy
of thy people? The corruptness of thy rulers? Yes; hut above all, the
want of cohesion, the absence of homogeneous nationality, the ever-widening
gulf that separated thy scattered communities. Thine was an empire
gained by the sword, maintained by the sword, and, finally, destroyed by
the sword ! The Roman was a perfect soldier, a skilful engineer, an able
(if also a corrupt) administrator, but he was no colonist. The countries
which he subdued became “ provinces,” i. e. conquered places, to be gov-
erned primarily for his own benefit. He was no evilly-disposed tyrant; he
worked honestly enough to better the condition of conquered races ; he was,
indeed, the civilising agent of the period. But he was a Roman to the end.
His soul yearned for the banks of Tiber. He viewed the provinces much
as English younger-sons viewed Bengal in the time of Warren Hastings : a
sort of Tom Tiddler’s ground whereon to secure future affluence at the price
of temporary expatriation. The Roman empire, in fact, consisted of a
number of such provinces held upon much the same tenure as we now hold
India. When the day arrived upon which Rome had to defend herself from
the fierce hordes of Northern Europe, she could no longer garrison the
provinces, and they passed away from her control. So also, were we com-
pelled to withdraw our seventy thousand troops from India, we might, at
the same time, erase the name of that populous country from the list of our
possessions. Fortunately, however, for the prospects of our race, we possess
an empire based upon more solid foundations than the number and accuracy
of our breech-loading rifles.
It is an interesting historical memo, to notice that the English race
began its national career, both geographically and chronologically, where
the Roman sway ended. Britain was the most remote Roman possession.
And it was to protect the distant island, which the Romans found them-
selves compelled to abandon, that the Saxons and Angles were called in.
They came, those hardy, yellow-haired warriors. With small trouble they
drove the incursive Scots back to their rocky wilderness. And then they
colonised the land they had delivered, not in the Roman, but in the Anglo-
Saxon fashion. They made the new country their adoptive Fatherland.
There was no looking back : they came, in homely phrase, “for good.”
They sent for their wives, and their friends, and their household-gods. As
Professor Stubbs tersely has it, their occupation of Britain was “ a migration
* av'rjp eidwg (Homer). In fairness to the shade of Phoenicia which
we have invoked, it may, however, be reasonably questioned whether the merchant-princes
of old were really quite so morally crooked as their Greek rivals have painted them. En
revanche is not the term “ Greek ” nowadays synonymous (in France at least) with
‘ swindler ” ? And does not the lively Gaul further quote, with intense approval, Napoleon’s
sneers against the “ Nation of Shopkeepers ” dwelling in “ Perfidious Albion ” ? Still, even
accepting Greek criticism cum grano salis, the Phoenician degeneracy, both moral and
commercial, must be admitted as a chief cause of the Phoenician downfall.


not a conquest. ” Aye, that was the secret : a migration, not a conquest.
As for the previous occupants, the British—they simply disappeared. They
had lived securely and contentedly enough, in a state of semi-serfdom,
under their Roman masters ; they were incapable either of resisting or of
amalgamating with their self-invoked invaders. Some fled to the mountains
of Wales, others to the wilds of Cornwall, where they fathered a race who-e
descendants recovered, in these rugged regions, much of pristine British
courage and manliness. But from the broad lands of Britain proper the
Briton entirely vanished. Our language, that unerring witness of national
development, confirms the fact of their extirpation by retaining but a bare
dozen or so words of their dialect —even if such words as “glen,” “crag,”
“ pool,” were retentions and not introductions of later date. The invaders
were, therefore, colonists in the very fullest sense of the term : fit prototypes
of the modern Englishman, who can plant his hearth upon any vacant spot
on earth and people that spot with his progeny ; worthy founders of a stock
that seems destined to overshadow the Universe.
A certain school of ethnologists loves to speak of the Englishman as the
result of an admixture of half-a-dozen different races, to show how he
derives this good quality from the Roman, this trait from the Briton, this
virtue from the Saxon, this peculiarity from the Norman, and so forth,
exulting the while over the admirable product of the theoretical hotchpotch.
Now, in point of fact, we are not the mongrel race these ingenious gentle-
men would have us to believe. We are English. The Roman-British
element is simply trivial. Angles, Saxons, Danes and Norsemen were
merely scattered clans of the same family, which re-amalgamated, at inter-
vals, in England, as readily and as naturally as the same brew of beer, kept
in different bottles, will blend when poured into a tankard. William the
Norman was of the same race as Harold the Englishman. Normandy was
just a rich province wrested from the French by the cousins-german of the
men who settled in Britain. The notion has somehow become prevalent
(thanks possibly to the jumble-theorists) that the Normans were French.
French, forsooth 1 Why, they were for centuries the natural and bitterest
foes of the French ; their Continental descendants are hardly Gallicised
yet 1 One can pardon a French music-hall singer boastfully chanting—
“ C'etaient les Norinands (d ce que disait ma grand'nitre'),
C'etaient les Normands qui conquirent VAngleter re!"
and trying to persuade himself and his audience that they were Frenchmen.
But one cannot so easily pardon an Englishman who allows himself to fall
into a similar error. The Norman sent to Paris for his coats, just as now-a-
days Mrs. Smith sends to Paris for her bonnets. The Norman gentleman
spoke French, just as Miss Smith stumbles through the Grammaire des
Grammaires. There was supposed to be something courtly, elegant, refined
about French coats and the French tongue, as there still, apparently, is about
French bonnets and French irregular verbs. But fashion cannot alter
nationality. As a nation we are English : one in Race, one in Language,
one in Heart, and lacking but the impulse to become one in Political
Aspect too. The distinction which most persons are fond of drawing
between Englishmen, Scotchmen, Welshmen, and Irishmen is as mischie-
vous as it is inaccurate. The ruling majority, at all events, of all these com-
munities are radically of the same race. Unmixed Celtic descent may be
an article of faith among a few obscure mountaineers ; nay, it may here and
there be a reality—whatever it be worth. But to claim the owners of such
names as Bruce, Napier, Burns, Wellesley, Burke, &c., as specimens of Celtic
excellence, is about on a par with painting Wallace in a Highland kilt.
Cesium non stirpem mutant qui trans mare currunt.
Adopting the convenient term “ Latin” to indicate the descendants of
those peoples most deeply impregnated with the Roman polity, language, and


blood, it is a noteworthy fact that, with the most splendid opportunities,
they have almost invariably turned out to be rather worse colonists than the
Romans themselves. Spaniards, Portuguese, Frenchmen, and to a less ex-
tent, Italians, have, at various times, taken possession of enormous tracts of
territory. Their fleets for centuries ruled the sea. Yet where are their
colonies ? England came late into the field ; she hardly owns a possession at
this day that did not once belong to France, or Spain, or Portugal, Yet her
dominions are now of well-nigh fabulous extent, and are still extending.
To what is this marked difference due I To our superior fighting qualities ?
Partly ; they enabled us to take. But chiefly to our colonising spirit ; that
is the distinctive quality of our race, and enabled us to hold, to increase, to
develop. They one and all either contented themselves with treating
newly-acquired territories as mere sources of revenue, or with despatching
a few shiploads of the scum of their population to die abroad. Had even
this scum been of English race, colonies of some sort or another would have
resulted. But the emigrants of Latin blood either gradually died out or
became inseparably commingled with the aboriginal inhabitants. It is an
open question whether your average modern Mexican be more Spanish or
Indian : anyhow he is an ethnological failure. The spasmodic, ill-directed
efforts made by France to establish a Colonial Empire in North America
were still more abortive, chiefly because the French people, as a people, did
not enter into the scheme. It was purely a Government affair, strangled
with Red Tape from its very birth. Now, Governments can no more make
Colonies to grow than they can by an executive fiat , double the national
trade. They can, indeed, foster, cherish, encourage, protect infant com-
munities ; but they cannot make nations of them —that must result from
inherent powers of growth. Such powers are not inherent in men of Latin
race, and hence, in spite of the encouragements given by their very grand-
motherly Home-governments, no successful Latin colony ever has been or,
probably, ever will be, founded.
England commenced her foreign career upon much the same lines as
Spain and France. At first she, too, viewed outlying possessions chiefly as
convenient sources of revenue. Her statesmen sighed for a share in the
plunder of the New World. Her people applauded the thinly-veiled piracies
of Cavendish and Raleigh. Her Parliaments eagerly voted supplies to fit-
out fleets to pillage the treasure-galleons of the detested Spaniard. There
was rich, apparently inexhaustible, booty to be acquired at the sword’s
point, and the soldier consequently preceded the husbandman. But the
English were a far-seeing, essentially commercial, people. There was,
especially towards the close of the sixteenth century, a. considerable amount
of distress among the labouring-classes, accompanied by a corresponding in-
crease of crime, which a well-meaning but ill-advised administration
attempted in vain to allay by Poor Laws and Vagrant Acts. It soon dawned
upon men’s minds that it would be better policy to transplant a portion of
the redundant population to the New World. This idea first received
definite shape by the establishment of the colony of Virginia by the
merchants of London and Plymouth. Shortly afterwards the persecuted
Puritans followed suit and occupied an extensive territory to which they
gave the name of New England. The Government, be it noticed, was
passive in the matter ; it simply permitted the exodus. The American
colonies were founded not by any encouraging legislative enactments of
the English Parliament, but by the pluck, the muscle, and the enterprise of
the English people. Nay, England subsequently lost these very colonies
through the infatuated blindness of her Parliament in asserting its “ sovereign
right” to tax them “as it might find expedient.” In 1783 Parliament
formally recognized the Independence of the Colonies, after a prolonged,
hard-fought but futile attempt to enforce the “soverign right ” principle at
the sword’s point. In this connection it should be noted that the English


Parliaments of that period did not even approximately represent English
national opinion : the vast majority of the Lords, and the “pocket-borough”
representatives who preponderated in the House of Commons, adhered with
■characteristic obstinacy to “ sovereign right; •” more enlightened statesmen,
like Chatham and Burke, raised their voices on behalf of the colonies, while
the great heart of the English people was with the so-called “rebels”
throughout the struggle, finding an out-let for an expression of its sympathy
by liberal subscriptions of money towards the “ rebel ” cause. The most
■disastrous result of the straggle was to place a gulf between England and
the new Republic, to create hostility and rivalry between two communities
which should have remained one in friendship, in interests, and in policy, to
the end of time. Is it too much to hope that the mischief done may not be
for ever irretrievable 1 That the United States may yet some day return
in brotherly love, to swell the Confederation of the Anglo-Saxon Race ?Or
will they sternly visit the sins of the fathers upon the children beyond the
fourth generation ?
Are the bounds eternal set
To retain us—strangers yet 1
So far from helping, successive English Governments have been regular
stumbling-blocks in the way of colonisation. Apparently somewhat taken
aback by the disastrous results of coercive legislation and “ sovereign right,”
English cabinets next adopted a policy of “ masterly inactivity ” towards
the remaining dependencies, neither encouraging their growth by any
special efforts, nor checking their development by any special tyranny,
.according their peoples, meanwhile, full benefits of English citizenship and
the protection of English fleets; whereby colonial progress was very
materially retarded, grandmotherly neglect being rather more damping in
its effect than grandmotherly repudiation. In return for the very nominal
benefits accruing from the presence of the Union Jack, the colonies afforded
a steadily-increasing market for English manufactures, and a convenient
retreat for English younger sons. Colonial policy (if policy it can be called)
ran in these grooves until within comparatively recent times. Of the origin
and initial progress of the various colonial settlements we need not here speak.
It is more to our purpose to notice that the average Englishman has always
had a sort of vague general belief that the British Empire is one “ upon
which the sun never sets,” just as he has a sort of rooted conviction that
“Britons never shall be slaves.” He has been in the habit of speaking
(especially upon public occasions, and in his intercourse with foreigners)
very magniloquently indeed about this Empire ; but he has only quite
lately commenced to realise what it really means. Taking pencil and
paper he finds that the British possessions in North America still exceed the
United States in area, as do also the Australasian Colonies. He finds other
British colonies and possessions scattered thickly over the surface of the
globe, and aggregating a total area that well-nigh challenges belief. It
dawns upon him that England is, after all, a very small country to under-
take the responsibility of administering, single-handed, so vast an estate—a
responsibility, too, which is yearly increasing by bounds with the unpre-
cedented development of the colonies. The suspicion arises that some day
England may be involved in difficulties which these colonies may not be
disposed to share. The conviction finally settles in his mind that “ something
ought to be done ” to place matters upon a more definite and satisfactory
footing. And, fortunately, when the Englishman makes up his mind that
something ought to be done, something invariably is done.
From the Colonial’s point of view, the necessity for the establishment of
relations with the Mother Country upon a more definite basis, is even more
urgent. At any moment England may be dragged into a European war
upon some, to him personally, unintelligible pretext. To an Australian, for


instance, as an Australian, it matters little or nothing whether Sultan or
Czar rules at Constantinople, although it may matter very much indeed to
Lombard Street. On the other hand, that the French should be suffered to
pollute the Pacific with the scourings of their gaols, matters to him very
considerably, but appears to cause F. O. very slight uneasiness. Why, he
naturally asks, should his shores be contaminated by even the vicinity of
scoundrels deemed too bad to exist within 12,000 miles of their own country?
Simply in order that unplesantness may be avoided with France ? France
be hanged 1 Twelve thousand miles from Paris, what is she 1 Your
Australian is a self-reliant, fightable sort of fellow enough, and would, if
left to his own devices, at the risk of encountering a French fleet, regulate
the Eecidiviste question pretty summarily. “If EAcidivistes are unfit for
Europe, they are unfit for Australasia, and to Australasia they shall not
come ! ” Such would be his ultimatum to France—an ultimatum which,,
unaided, it would be a severe strain to enforce, but which, if it came backed
up by the might of the Britannic Confederation, would be a final settlement
of the question. For which, and for other equally good, reasons the
Australian is eager to make the said Confederation an established fact.
He is loyal to England ;he is proud of her. But he is still more loyal to
Australia, and still prouder of her. He foresees a time when his descendants
shall form a mighty nation, and it is part of the faith that is in him to
hasten the advent of that glorious period by every means in his power. To-
become an important legislating factor in a well-nigh omnipotent Confedera-
tion will abundantly satisfy the cravings of his ambition ; to remain an
inconsiderable geographical expression upon the map of the British Empire
is a condition to which he is not prepared to submit. Confederation, in his
eyes, is the only alternative to total separation, and that within a very few
years —possibly upon the outbreak of the first serious war in which England
may be involved.
Canada is, if possible, still more awkwardly situated, overshadowed as
she is by the towering might of the Great Eepublic. The loyal Canadians
are probably in a considerable majority, but there exists also a very strong
minority avowedly opposed to British rule and in favour of union with the
United States. No American can well view the possibility of thus, at one
stroke, doubling the dominion of the Stars and Stripes, without a quickening
of the pulse ; most Americans, indeed, avowedly regard the ultimate absorp-
tion of Canada as inevitable. Now the one measure which would irresistibly
strengthen the hands of the loyalists, and clip the wings of the ambitious
Bird of Freedom, would be the final and definite reception of Canada as a
state of the Britannic Confederation.
To the numerous smaller dependencies of the Crown such a Confederation
would be equivalent to political birth. To become, at one bound, factors of
the most powerful Confederacy in the world would, indeed, be proud promo-
tion for communities hitherto obscure units in the sum-total of England’s
greatness.
But Federation, to be of any enduring benefit, must be something more
than a mere name : it must be a real political union of all British com-
munities owing allegiance to the Crown. The adoption of half-hearted
proposals, of lukewarm suggestions, of inadequate measures would merely
tend, by engendering local jealousies and arousing petty rivalries, to bring
about disruption of the Empire. No scheme of Federation can prima facie
be entertained which shall not assure to all British communities at least
equal individual, and greater collective, advantages than they at present
enjoy. “ Each for itself : Federation for all,” tersely, if not very elegantly,
formulates the gist of the question. The writer claims in the scheme of
which the remainder of this essay is an analysis, to have something more
than satisfied these requirements.
A reference to any standard work upon geography, and a careful


RITISH EMPIRE (AS IT OUGHT TO
BE).
TIBBIE OB
Dominions, Territories and Strongholds of the 1
mperial Britannic Confederation
Area.
Population.
Trade.
Average
per Head.
Imperial
Funded Na-
tional Debt.
Annual Interest
on Debt.
Representatives
in Imperial
Parliament.
Square miles.
£
£
£
£
51,494
26.613,926
h ■
'l
r 240
7,562
1,360,613
Same as
12
30,100
3.735,573
1 685,986,152
19
H
23,553
3,431,761
t Table A.
30
8,406
1,743,075
1,973,228
)
f.
v 15
101,733
f 9
188,688
1,359,027
/
12
7
20,907
27,174
440,572
321,223
V 43,191,426
11
s
2
2
123,200
135,000
\
biD
i
2.133
108,09!
y
i
40,200
161,389
3,372,692
14
i
85,000
257,473 f
4,321,480
16
W b
• i
213,636
1,122,000 f
12,292,441
4,750,000
20 §
bo p
4
1,063
385,766 f
12 §
1
87.884
991,869
35,252,003
35
17
310,700
980,573
41,078,551
41
§
19
668,497 „
326,916
11,055,840
S 33 j
4
903,690
319,769
12,373,057
37
26,215
133,791
3,131.975
22
s
1
104,403
582.420
14,755,555
24
7
4.193
580,804 f
3,032,697
25 §
1
ICG
171,860 f
2,730,000 -
27 §
>
I, 1
73
88,806
4,000,000
47
A
r
281
54,089
1,000,000
18
341,305
60,000
c/ Canada.
11
•P
665,252
33.000
6'/ Canada.
11
rj
0>
7,562
27,452
555,037
20
O
18,750
424,495 f
3.162,962
§
p
S n
975,824
35,186
926,860
26
<D 3
t-< -I- 3
7,740
1.500
4,756 i
500,000 f
779,866
43,621,752
194»*
90
> 1,192,114,398
4h -+|
ai
1,754
153,128 f
3,949,470
38
-§
600
119,546 f
893,415
7
*2
596
114,000 f
1,020,000
9
«i I
3
5,794
43,521
14,888
323,470
7
41
137,000
9
I
1,377.540
254,000,000
149,075,000
•586
(
25,635
2,768,529
7,792,000
2
30,000
150.000
90,000
•6
O
p
3,584
186,000
591,896
3
rT?
■§
494,000
6,806,381
18,000,000
2
o3 M
*3
2,000,000
( absorbed in' )
i Albertia. )
II
<
o
«
500,000
10,000
. .
d Canada.
11
88,457
o
600
62,580
1,041,136
i?
to
21
14,150
300,000
21
c8
g
16,620
518,000
1,709,529
3
a
1,380
75,270
300,000
4
>
118
156,675
850,000
5
' ‘Oldltfo x»
•75
24,680
1,250,000
52
1
4,645
50,000
12
70
35,165
160,402
6,000
520,000
15
u, S-l
32
30
6,210.000
118,000
37
19
C
Xj , fn c3
1.310
6.310
47
45,000
1,543
5,089
110,000
28,000
" 227
S .2 g i-i -s
01 ® r 1^
O +? -A
ai <T -R
35
500
4,000
J
9,603,650
314,040,095
£1,125,882,597
£21
£1,192,114,398
£46,213,252
416
condition of having required minimum of British inhabitants. f Total populations.—The writer had no means of
and coloured, i British. § Provisional—based on p
robable estimate of British poi
mlations. ** Per head British.
TABLE B.
THE BRITISH EMPIRE (AS IT
States, Protected States,
STATES—
England .. ..
Wales
Scotland.. .. ..
United Provinces ..
Ulster
Ontario ..
Quebec ..
Nova Scotia
New Brunswick
Manitoba
Prince Edward’s Island
Newfoundland
Guiana (British)
Cape Colony ..
Mauritius, &c...
Victoria ...
New South Wales ***
Queensland
Alexandria
South Australia
Tasmania
New Zealand
Jamaica *
Barbados *
PROTECTED STATES—
Channel Islands
Isle of Man
Columbia
Albertia
Honduras (British)
Natal
West Australia
Fiji ..
Straits Settlements
Trinidad
Leeward Islands
Windward Islands
Bahamas
Bermuda
DOMINIONS—
India (British)
Ceylon
North Borneo (British)
Cyprus .-. .. .. *
Egypt.
TERRITORIES—
North-West Territory
ICewatiu..
New Guinea (British)
Sierra Leone ..
Gambia
Gold Coast Colony
Lagos
STRONGHOLDS—
Malta
Gibraltar
Heligoland
Aden
Hongkong
Labuan ..
Socotra ..
Falkland and St. Georgia Islands
St. Helena
Ascension
Grand Totals
* Provisionally classed as States upon condition of having required minimum of British inhabitants. f Total populations.—The writer had no means of
ascertaining numbers of British and coloured. J British. § Provisional —based on probable estimate of British populations. ** Per head British.
*** Australbion ?


w * . “
. ■■ ■ - ■ • ’
.


examination of available statistics, make it possible to tabulate the com-
ponent portions of the Empire, as at present constituted, in a shape
convenient for subsequent comparison.
Analytical Table A, it will be observed i is simply a statistical list of
British possessions, tabulated in geographical sections, but having no other
political connection than a common, ill-defined allegiance to the Crown ; a
vast, scattered Empire, liable to fall to pieces at the first breath of disaster.
Nevertheless the list has these two points of value: it is a very patent
record of present incohesion, and it is an excellent foil to Analytical Table
B, which indicates future cohesion. Of this table the writer would entreat
a critical examination before the remaining sections are gone into. It
expounds the proposed scheme of Federation, in broad outline, at once. So
soon as its substance shall have been mastered, the ensuing propositions will
either strike the mind with the irresistible force of conviction based npon
obvious truth, like Newton’s law of Gravitation, or they will melt away
beneath criticism like the theories of Ptolemy.
POLITICAL SUBDIYISONS.
Style and Title of the Confederation. —All Possessions which
now acknowledge or which hereafter may acknowledge the sovereignty of
the British Crown, shall be joined in a political, legislative, and commercial
Union, under the style and title of States, Protected States, Dominions,
Territories, and Strongholds of the I, B. Confederation.
Style and Title of the Sovereign. —The style and title of Her
Most Gracious Majesty to be Victoria, by the Grace of God, of the
States &c. &c. of the I. B. Confederation, Queen and Empress.
State Basis. —Every community of British race may claim to be
admitted as a State which now possesses, or hereafter may possess the fol-
lowing qualifications, viz. ;
I. Local self-government.
11. A British population of at least 100,000 souls.
111. An Import-Export trade of at least £1,000,000 per annum.
Protected states.— Communities which have not yet attained a growth
fulfilling these conditions, shall be admitted to the Confederation as Pro-
tected States or States-in-Tutelage. Such Protected States being regarded
as immature States, shall enjoy full privileges of British citizenship, together
with such measure of local autonomy as may be consistent with their pros-
perous development.
Dominions. —-Communities which are definitely and essentially of
Alien race shall be admitted to the Confederation as Dominions.
Territories. —The term “ Territories ’’ shall include such British pos-
sessions as, either from disparity between their British population and their
area, or from the probably fixed preponderance of inhabitants of Alien race,
together with marked commercial and moral inferiority, can neither be
ranked with Protected States, nor with Dominions.
Strongholds, —“Strongholds” shall be held to mean those Crown
dependencies whose chief value to the Confederation lies in their importance
as strategic positions or commercial bases.
“ Immergence.” —The principle of “ Immergence ” shall prevail,
whereby a Protected State may, when qualified, merge into a State; a
Territory (essentially British) into a Protected State ; or a Territory of
Alien race into a Dominion. But no Dominion shall merge into a Protected
State or into a State.
“ Emergence.” —Any State may, with the approval of the Imperial
Confederate Parliament, and with the assent of the Crown, resolve itself
into two or more separate States, each enjoying full State privileges. And
any British community having the requisite population and trade units and


inhabiting a Dominion, may, subject to the same supreme authority, be
permitted to enjoy State representation in the Imperial Parliament,
Entering the Confederation. —Existing British communities shall
Toluntarily join the I. B. Confederation, either as States or Protected
States, according to their present status.
Recalcitrant Community.— But any such British community re-
fusing voluntarily so to join, or failing so to have joined at the first meeting
of the I. B, C. Parliament hereinafter described, may, by a vote of the said
Parliament, be pronounced “ recalcitrant.” And if, from geographical
position or other cause, the independent existence of such recalcitrant com-
munity be, by a direct vote of the said I. B. C. Parliament, decided to be a
source of danger to Confederate interests, it may, by a further direct vote of
the said I. B. C. Parliament be adjudged a Renegade State, and be
thereupon treated as a Dominion. Such Renegade State shall further, in
such case, be required to defray the costs of military occupation by I. B,
Confederate forces, in addition to its allotted contribution towards Con-
federate General Revenue.
Withdrawal from Confederation.— No State, Protected State,
Dominion, Territory, or Stronghold shall be allowed to withdraw from the
I. B. Confederation. But any State may, at its own discretion, at any time,
cease to fulfil its legislative Imperial functions, sinking however, by such
laches, to the status of a Renegade State.
This might, at first sight, appear to be the fitting place wherein to in-
troduce some account of the constitution, functions, and powers of the I. B.
Parliament, to which reference has been made in the above definitions.
But these important details are so- intimately interwoven with other
matters that the interests of a coherent, consequent elaboration of the pro-
posed scheme will best be served by dealing with each subject which
figures as a heading upon Table B, in the same order as it thereon appears ;
whereby Parliamentary Representation will be the last of the sections
which remain to be analysed.
THE PARENT STATES.
The proposal to split up the United Kingdom into five distinct States,
each possessing local self-government, may, at first sight, appear a some-
what hazardous measure. Nay, it might even be urged that it is quite in-
consistent to preface union by dismemberment, that it is a step backwards,
not forwards. Whereto, our space being limited, we reply shortly that
Federal Union, not nominal unity is the object to be attained ; that Federal
Union must be worked out of a number of self-governing States (else the
term “ Federal” loses all force) ; and that “ render pour mievx sauter”
is always good policy. The inhabitants of Wales and of Scotland have
as good a moral right to manage their own affairs as the inhabitants of
England, Local wants are ever best understood by local legislatures. And
England runs no risk in allowing this moral right to assume a practical
form, since the inhabitants of Cardiff and of Edinburgh are just as loyal as
the inhabitants of London. Three locally chosen Parliaments would
assuredly achieve more valuable results than the present overtaxed Assembly
at Westminster. Only in the case of Ireland (as usual) does any real diffi-
culty present itself ; and even that difficulty will, if narrowly examined, be
found to be very far indeed from insuperable.
The Irish Problem. —lt is a great pity that Irishmen do not study
past records a little more critically and less vindictively. If the Irish as a
race ever had an independent national existence (using the term in its
civilised sense) it must have been in pre-historic times. Passing over the
pretty fables of early Irish sanctity and learning as quite irrelevant, if
true, and quite in accord with other monkish legends, if false, we only


know definitely that a French bishop named Patricias found them to be
utter barbarians in the year 432, and that an Englishman named Strongbow
found them in exactly a similar state in 1170 when, with a handful of
mailed knights at his back, he annexed the country on behalf of Henry 11.
How, despite the combined blessings of St. Patrick, the learning, the
sanctity, and undisputed Home Eule during seven centuries, the Irish in
1170 still revelled in barbarism, is an anomaly which still calls for explana-
tion. But that Ireland should have continued in a state of more or less pro-
nounced barbarism through succeeding centuries, has been very conveniently
attributed to English misgovernment. The truth lies nearer home. What-
ever the Irish had to endure in the way of severe repressive legislation they
brought upon themselves. Eternally harassing the numerically small
English settlements of the Pale, and as eternally suffering sharp reprisals.
Ever longing to expel the aliens and never, despite their great numerical
superiority, achieving anything more heroic than a surprise and a massacre.
Ever on the move, and never advancing. Ever ready for rebellion, and
ever paying the penalty of failure. Now, espousing the claim of a Flemish
Jew to the throne of England, and getting the rope and Poyning’s Act for
their pains. Now adhering, with obstinate zeal, to a faith which English
law had proscribed as an intolerable tyranny. Now adhering, with equal
obstinacy, to the fortunes of a dynasty whose continuance upon the throne
the English people had declared to be inconsistent with the national
liberties. Throughout the piece, invariably upon the losing side, what could
they expect but persecution ? Englishmen who behaved as they behaved,
fared as they fared. More Englishmen than Irishmen were hanged over
Perkin Warbeck. The penal laws were just as merciless against English, as
against Irish papists. English Eoyalists fared no better at Cromwell’s
hands than Irish Tories. But, whereas Englishmen suffered individually
for their political blunders as they individually committed them, the Irish
suffered as they erred—wholesale. This extraordinary mania (for it really
amounted to mania) for persistently playing a losing game is the most
marked feature in the history of the Irish people, if, indeed, the record of
the resulting disasters can be called history. Bad luck or bad judgment
has been the Irish Nemesis. But one other national characteristic at all
approaches it in intensity : Inconsistency. Irishmen have never yet been
able to formulate clearly, unanimously, intelligibly, what they really want.
They possessed local autonomy ; they parted with it by the Act of Union.
This, we have been assured, ad nauseam, was but a fresh instance of English
tyranny, inasmuch as the English Government bribed and bought over the
Irish Parliament to put an end to its own existence. No doubt bribery was
largely practised. But what are we to say of the people whose elected re-
presentatives allowed themselves to be so bought 1 Can we conceive an
English Parliament selling the liberties of England, or the English nation
tacitly ratifying the sale ? Again, ever since, sale or no sale, the Union
became law, a certain section of the Irish people has been clamouring to
secure its repeal—without even offering to refund the millions of English
gold alleged to have been lavished upon the Irish members who last sat at
College Green ! And, finally, when owing to the unparalleled personal in-
fluence of that giant intellect which, in its decay, and at the risk of shatter-
ing the Empire, has desperately espoused their cause, the question of
Legislative Independence for Ireland has actually been laid before the British
Parliament, we find Northern Ireland prepared to maintain the Union with
cannon and breech-loaders ! Coercion means outrage, murder, lawlessness
of every description. Concession means civil war. Little wonder if poli-
ticians stand aghast at such alternatives, if the “ burning Irish Question ”
appear further off than ever from a definite settlement. And yet it would
seem that Federation offers the simplest possible solution of the difficulty.
The dissatisfied provinces of Ireland want Home Eule. Very well. Give


them full power to deal with their domestic affairs after their own fashion
(consistently always with Imperial interests), and let them call it “ Home
Eule,” if there be any especial charm in the term. Let them become a
State of the Britannic Imperial Confederation, as the “ United Provinces ”
of Ireland. But let loyal Ulster manage her own local affairs also, and
also become a State. Unless the Nationalist mind aims at the establish-
ment of an independent Power, which shall ultimately dictate to Europe
(an experiment to which England, as the first Nation likely to be dictated
to, has reasonable grounds of objection), surely it ought to be satisfied with
the re-establishment of an Irish Parliament at College Green—or Donny-
brook. This much, at all events, seems clear. Upon no other lines can
Ireland be granted even the semblance of autonomy. If the Britannic Im-
perial Confederation is formed, she must join: whether as a State, with the
accompanying privileges of “Home Eule.” or as a Dominion, with an
Imperial Confederate garrison to establish rule of some sort or another, will
depend entirely on herself.
The other states . —Of the other States enumerated, few call for any
special comment. In connection with Queensland, however, it must be re-
membered that the inhabitants of the Northern portion of that huge State
are clamorous for Separation. To this they have an indisputable right.
They can show a population and a trade in excess of any reasonable
standard. There is absolutely no reason why they should not celebrate
their creation as a State and their admission as a State of the Confederation,
upon the same memorable day. In pre-christening the new State, “Alex-
andria,” we merely offer a suggestion which will find an echo in the loyalty
of the Northern Queenslanders to their future Queen.
Jamaica and Barbados are provisionally ranked as States. If, however,
either fail to show the possession of the all-essential British population-unit,
it will temporarily sink to the status of a Protected State.
Protected States. —The definition already given sufficiently indicates
their political position : they are States-in-Tutelage which have not yet
attained to maturity. Some of them will, in the ordinary course of events,
“ immerge ” within a few years. Others may have a long term of tutelage
before them. To most, the great goal of ambition is within measurable
distance to incite them to redoubled efforts in the way of progress. A new
colony has tentatively been proposed as “Albbrtia,” embracing the present
population and settled district of the immense North-west territory,
analogous both in designation and in design to the proposed State of
Alexandria.
Dominions. —Provinces radically alien as regards population. To
these provinces some form of self-government may, in the distant future,
very cautiously be granted, and, as a corollary, some measure of direct re-
presentation in the Confederate Parliament. But as a full State of the
Confederation no alien community can ever be admitted.
Territories may be regarded as belonging to one of two classes :
embryo Protected States such as the N orth-west territory, Kewatin, and,
possibly also. New Guinea, if found suitable for colonisation; or, uncivilised,
inconsiderable dominions occupying the lowest status in the Confederation.
Strongholds must be considered as definitely occupying the strategic
status heretofore tacitly assigned to them. Of their great importance and
value it is needless to speak. Whether from a commercial or from a
military point of view they can scarcely be overrated. The list given is by
no means exhaustive ; many places have doubtless been omitted which it
would be found desirable to include. Indeed, this seems, potentially, the
most expansive subdivision of all.


AREA, POPULATION, AND TRADE.
What position to assign to area as a factor in the political importance of
a State, is a question which has more severely taxed such thinking-power
as the writer possesses than any others, except the Irish problem, and the re-
modelling of the national debt. Finally, after trying standards of Area of
well-nigh every conceivable dimension, with discordant and often ludicrous
results, the conviction forced itself home that Area should have no political
significance whatever. To say that South Australia, for instance, possesses
an area of 900,000 square miles, really means nothing more than that S. A.
possesses territory sufficient, some day, to support a population of, perhaps,
150,000,000 human beings. S. A. consequently starts her career as a State
with the cheering knowledge that she has ample room ; that, in course of
time, her children may found numerous flourishing States. But in the
actual present, South Australia’s importance is limited by her present
population and her present trade. Just as the market value of a man’s
labour is gauged by the work he performs, not by the value of the work he
may be able to do twenty years hence, so also the Federal value of a State
must be gauged by its actual population-trade position, not by what that
position may hereafter become. As large States increase in population and
in trade, their representation in the Confederate Parliament should pro-
portionately increase also. But present worth must be calculated without
any reference to discount.
The vexatious, unmanageable subject of area being put aside, the deter-
mination of a basis or standard whereby the political importance of any
given State in the Confederation may be determined, narrows itself to
population and trade. What population shall be the qualifying
minimum ? What trade ? And, in the case of States which exceed these
minima , upon what principles shall their respective political weights be
estimated ? Obviously the standard, like every other standard from the
sirius-distance to the centimetre, must be an arbitrary one. The standard
units advocated by the writer are 100,000 for Population, and £1,000.,000
yearly for Trade —for no better reasons than that these units are con-
venient, of easy application, and, apparently, adequate. Their adoption is
not essential. The standard may be raised so as to exclude small States, or
it may be lowered to admit smaller ones, without in any way affecting the
proposed scheme. But, whatever basis be chosen, once adopted, it must
remain fixed. And a preliminary step of great importance must be taken.
The exact British populations of those communities, at least, which aspire
to become States must be ascertained. The figures given on the Analytical
Tables, although as nearly correct as the writer could discover, must be
verified by a general census. In many cases they can, at present, be only
approximately correct. The trade returns also must be critically overhauled.
The reason for this anxiety to secure trustworthy statistics will at once
appear.
REPRESENTATION OF STATES IN CON-
FEDERATE PARLIAMENT.
The result of dividing the total trade of any given community by the
population will give the Average Trade per head of that community.
The result of dividing the sum total of the averages of all such com-
munities by the number of communities will give the General Average for
all communities.
This number at once becomes the Trade-unit of Representation. Then,
such States as possess a trade average the same as the general average, will
return One Representative for each population-unit (100,000) in their


population. Such States as show an average in excess of the general
average, will return an additional number of representatives, proportional
to such excess. Such States as have an average less_ than the general
average, will return a diminished number of representatives proportional to
such deficiency. In illustration, let us take three cases from Table B,
The general average is taken at £2l per head, due allowance being made
for doubtful populations. As it happens, no State shows this exact average.
Tasmania nearly does so. She consequently will return one member due to
her one population-unit. New South Wales has a splendid trade average of
£4l, with a population-unit of nearly 10. This gives her nine additional
members, or a total of nineteen. The Canadian States seem financially in
rather a backward condition ; possibly, revised trade returns might improve
their appearance. Upon available figures, however, they suffer heavily.
Thus Ontario, with a population-unit of nearly 19f, loses by the lowness of
her average (10), and emerges from the test with but nine representatives.
It should be remarked that the more prosperous of the Canadian States
may suffer by taking the total trade of the Dominion and dividing by the
total population. If so, more detailed returns will remedy the evil; and
certainly a material addition to Canada’s figures would be a most welcome
outcome of an exact statistical inquiry.
A glance at the last column on Table B will show the number of re-
presentatives with which each State should be accredited upon the above
basis. We may so far anticipate our Parliamentary section as to suggest the
advisability of a quinquennial general census. Neither the general trade
average of all States, nor the respective averages of particular States should,
therefore, be regarded as fixed. A State may wonderfully improve its trade
returns in five years, and such improvement could be marked and recognised
• in no more unmistakable manner than by the return of additional Eepresen-
tatives to the Confederate Parliament. And assuredly the prospect of
securing increased representation in the great National Assembly will not
be the least among the many incentives to national progress.
Although England herself does not emerge scathless from the ordeal,
losihg no less than twenty-six of the Representatives to which, by popula-
tion-unit, taken alone, she would be entitled (a loss, however, which a
revision and localisation of trade returns may considerably modify), she yet
stands accredited with 240 members out of a grand total of 416 representing
all the States of the Confederation. Adverse criticism will, of course, here
be busy. What 1 Is England to have a voice capable of drowning the
voices of all the rest of the States added together ? If so, might not these
other States just as well not be represented at all ? And so forth, and so
forth. The changes will be rung upon the great preponderance of English
votes, in every key known to carping criticism. It is one of the two great
“ Rocks Ahead ”of this scheme. Whether or not the charges of logical
dynamite which it is now proposed to explode beneath this particular Rock,
will result in its disappearance, is a question that must be answered by
others.
First Charge. —Upon no conceivable definite basis (except the utterly
impracticable one of area) can the English vote be otherwise than pre-
ponderating. England has a population at least twenty-six times as great
as New South Wales, the most favoured State (from a representative point of
view) in the Confederation. She ought therefore, upon population basis, to
return twenty-six times as many representatives as New South Wales, or, a
total of 495. She has an individual trade at least twelve times as great as
that of Canada, the least favoured. Upon trade basis alone, therefore, she
ought to return twelve times as many members, or, 264. Torture and twist
the figures how one will, England must emerge with a majority in some
measure proportionate to her individual greatness. Upon this point ( i.e .
definite basis), criticism is absolutely driven to take up its final stand upon


the basis of area. With that amusing factor, most astounding results may,
it is true, be arrived at. Concede to area sufficient weight, and it becomes
an easy problem to place South Australia and Queensland at the top of the
poll. Give mere size of territory sufficient rope, and it becomes evident
that nearly all the states of the Confederation might be hung on to the
skirts of the North-west territory.
Second Charge. —The only possible indefinite basis must necessarily also
be an arbitrary one. Many potential politicians will at once urge that it
is the easiest thing in the world, to allot the numbers fairly all round. Say
500 members. Well, then, England so many. Canada ...so
many. Australasia so many, &c., &c. There is scarcely an argu-
mentative man in the whole Empire who would not undertake to make a
most satisfactory distribution in about ten minutes. The most serious
obstacle to this simple solution is that no two men would be found to agree.
Third Charge. —We are not discussing the possibility of establishing an
English Despotism, but the formation of a British Confederation. The pro-
posed Sovereign is not Alexander, Autocrat of all the Russias, but Victoria,
Constitutional Monarch of the British Empire. England as England will
lose, not gain, in individual authority. The future States, outside the
United Kingdom, are at present merely English possessions. They have no
voice whatever in the Imperial Councils. Their peoples enjoy, by a sort of
courtesy, outside their own territories, the privileges of, and the jealous
protection accorded to, Englishmen all over the world ; and they are pro-
tected at home by English fleets. It is owing solely to the workings of the
same Great Heart driving the same blood through the veins of men of
English race throughout the Empire, that the cry for Federation has arisen
at all. It is felt that Englishmen are Englishmen wherever they may be,
and this feeling engenders the craving for political union. The interests of
all British communities are, in the main, identical. Did the proposed
States believe that England would merely use her temporarily predominant
influence to improve her own condition at their expense, the wide cry for
Federation would never have been heard.
Fourth Charge. —Moreover, powerful as the English vote obviously
would be, it would have to be nearly unanimous to outweigh those of the
other States, and such unanimity is an improbability that may fairly be re-
garded as an impossibility. Finally, the other States will gain at eanh
successive quinquennial census ; the power of their voice will grow with
their growth. The day must come when England will be far more con-
clusively outvoted by her children than she now outvotes them. Yet, can
she face the prospect, confident in the enduring affection of Communities
whose infancy she has nursed. The sturdy Matron who to-day rules the
household knows that her paramount sway will pass from her when her
toddling grandchildren shall have become bearded men. But she also
knows that so long as she may exist, she will enjoy their love and venera-
tion, and that their strong arms and brave hearts will stand between her
and aggression. If England can face the inevitable future of curtailed
supremacy, without misgiving, cannot the Colonies, also without misgiving,
face the inevitable present ?
The Dependencies. —Although the necessity for rigidly accurate
statistical information respecting the Dependencies is not so apparent as in
the case of the States, it nevertheless calls for adjustment upon two strong
grounds : the share to be allotted to each Dependency towards General
Revenue must obviously be gauged by ability to contribute, which in turn
is indicated by local Revenue ; and future claims to the privileges of Im
mergence must primarily be based upon reliable Returns. The interests of
these Dependencies will be watched over by Ministers of the Crown,
specially entrusted with that duty. The Minister for Protected States en-
joying complete or partial self-government, by placing himself in direct


communication with the local Administrations, would have no difficulty in
laying before Parliament the wishes of the Communities placed under his
charge. In the case of Dependencies not yet ripe for any measure of
autonomy, their Imperial Minister might be assisted by a locally appointed
(not chosen) Council of Advice. For India, at least, such a Council would
certainly be found of great value. The Territories furnish abundant material
for a special portfolio. The Minister entrusted with their supervision
would find his duties running mainly in parallel grooves with those of the
Minister for Emigration. The Strongholds fall so naturally within the
province of the Admiralty and War Office, that they need no special Minister.
lI.—REPRESENTATION AND REVENUE.
The power of the purse has ever been the strongest lever used in the
cause of the National liberties. The just principle has, from an early
period, pervaded British Financial Polity that they who contribute the
money shall expend the money. Now, the converse of the proposition is
equally just : that they who expend the money shall contribute the money.
So far, therefore, as the States are concerned we may at once formulate the
doctrine that each State shall contribute to the General Revenue necessary
for Confederate purposes , a sum proportional to its Representative strength
in the Confederate Parliament. It may further be laid down that directly-
unrepresented Dependencies should be taxed in accordance with their ability
to pay, as evidenced by their Revenues.
The General Revenue will thus come from two sources : StATE-Contei-
butions, and Dependency Conteibdtions.
The proportions contribufable by each might be as two-thirds and one-
third respectively of the General Revenue —proportions of course to be
regarded as arbitrary and tentative.
To illustrate the position. Suppose the required General Revenue to b,e
£45,000,000. Of this amount the States would contribute thirty millions,
and the Dependencies, fifteen. To ascertain the share payable by each
State, we need only place the State Representative number over 416, and
observe how many pounds sterling this fraction of thirty millions amounts
to. Thus, while England’s share would be Jfg of £30,000,000, or
£17,307,692, Tasmania’s would be but or £72,115. Ontario might find
consolation for her Representative defeat by New South Wales, in the
circumstance that she would escape with £649,035, whereas her Antipodean
rival would have to pay £1,370,185. Similarly while, among the Depen-
dencies, wealthy India would certainly not get off under seven figures,
Ascension would escape with a mere trifle.
We have now arrived in full view of the second of the Rocks Ahead—the
National Debt. Once more will hostile criticism anticipate argument by a
wail of indignant remonstrance. Once more will the writer be accused of
special pleading for England. Be it so. But hostile criticism must do
something more. It must not only completely refute the justice of the
reasoning advanced, but it must further demonstrate that high rates of
interest are an advantage, and Sinking Funds a hollow fraud.
THE NATIONAL DEBT.
Is England, and England alone to be considered as responsible for the
enormous sum, now and henceforth ? And if not, upon what basis should
her share in the liability be computed ? To the first of these questions, but
one answer can fairly be returned : No. She is prima facie, even as con-
tractress of the Debt, not a whit more liable than Scotland, Wales, and
Ireland, which were co-partners in the transaction. And a very brief
examination of the subject will make it appear that the British National


Liabilites should, in common justice, be shared by all British Communities.
This proposition, which may, at the first blush, look somewhat startling in
Colonial eyes ; nay, which many of the wall-eyed demagogues who profess
to guide Colonial public opinon will not fail to decry as an injustice quite
incompatible with any scheme of Federation, is yet susceptible of the very
plainest demonstration. The Debt itself originated in a flagrant breach of
good faith perpetrated by Charles the Second. It was added to (not very
materially) during the wars that ensued upon the expulsion of the Stuarts,
and the establishment in England of a Protestant succession. During the
last century, Protestant England was at almost continuous war with Catholic
France or Catholic Spain. As an outcome, England acquired a leading voice
in the Polity of Nations, acknowledged maritime superiority, and almost
the whole of her foreign possessions—at a cost of more than £200,000,000.
The wars with Prance between 1793 and 1815 were a struggle for national
existence : had England not crushed Bonaparte, Bonaparte would have
crushed England, as he repeatedly crushed the rest of Europe. She came
forth from the deadly conflict exhausted, but victorious—her heel upon the
neck of prostrate France, the great French Idol her bondsman. In 1815,
England stood paramount among the Powers. In 1815 also her National
Debt had swollen to £840,000,000. And this enormous sum, be it noted,
was spent not upon productive works of mere local benefit, but was lavished
by the mother country, as freely as she lavished the blood of her children,
to save the British race. It was a necessary and a sacred obligation incurred
to avert the unspeakable curse of French supremacy. Say then, men of
British race, no matter to what particular British community ye may belong,
are we not all justly liable for a debt to which we owe our national exis-
tence ? Had there been no wars, had England been contented to sink to
the position of Sweden or Denmark, and allow the Empire of the World to
remain in the hands of boastful France and swaggering Spain, where
would ye he now ? Unborn ; or if born, certainly unborn to the proud
privileges of British citizenship. Ye may indeed, if ye choose, refuse to
acknowledge any share in the Debt; but ye cannot repudiate share in the
liability. It is vain to assert that each separate Community has its own
Debt and is responsible for that alone. There is no analogy whatever
between loans raised to construct a local railway, and loans raised to save
the national existence. Grumble if ye will: that is your recognized privilege.
But acknowledge your just debts : that is your recognized characteristic.
Such acknowledgment will involve no increased payments ; it will, on the
contrary, effect a considerable saving yearly upon the sum actually paid in
interest, besides providing for an adequate Sinking Fund. All that is de-
manded is the assent of all British communities to the doctrine that “ The
National Debt op Great Britain, haying been incurred for the
Common Weal, shall be jointly and severally binding upon all
British subjects until it be paid off.”
If this be agreed to, a very startling result will ensue. It will become
possible to refund the Total Debt of all sections of the Empire upon very
profitable lines. No abstruse principle of finance is involved ; a little re-
flection, and a little simple proportion ; voilA tout. England now pays
interest and expenses, and provides Sinking Fund at an annual cost of
£28,833,673, her debt being £740,400,000. The Public Debts of the rest of
the Empire amount to £451,714,398 (exclusive of all loans contracted since
1884). The interest paid annually comes to £20,281,634. If a Sinking
Fund were added upon the English plan, an additional £11,000,000 yearly
would be required. In plain English, if all British possessions, in addition
to paying interest on their loans, sought further to wipe off the loans them-
selves by a Sinking Fund of an amount proportional to that of England, the
two items would cost over £31,000,000 per annum. Of course the reason
for this great disparity in rates lies in the superior credit of England.


Now, it is evident that England’s credit will improve, not deteriorate,
by her position as Chief State of the Confederation. Therefore, if England
can now finance a debt of 710 millions for 28 millions a year, including
nearly 10 milions for sinking fund, the Britannic Confederation could (at
merely the same rate) provide for a total aggregate debt of £1,192,000,000
for 45 millions a year, also including sinking fund. Leaving England’s
present debt expenses untouched, we arrive at the very satisfactory con-
clusion that the remainder of the Empire would only have to contribute
£l6, 116,327 as their share of the interest, expenses, and sinking fund of
the Refunded Confederate National Debt. Compare this with the 20 millions
and a quarter now paid by them for bare interest, without sinking fund,
and need anything more be said 1
Yes ; one point remains to be noticed. The Sinking Fund will wipe
mot the whole existing Debt (£1,192,000,000) in less than seventy years ,
always supposing, of course, that no Bonapartes crop up to increase it. It
will in any case keep the Debt well within bounds. It is only comparatively
of late years that the intelligent application of a sinking fund has been
mastered. And yet, despite England’s numerous wars (the Crimean business
alone cost £220,000,000 at least'), the English National Debt has been
reduced by one hundred millions since 1815.
LOCAL STATE-LEGISLATURES.
With one very obvious and very important exception, there seems to be
no reason why existing local State-legislatures should not continue to be
filled up exactly as they are at present. Colonial Representative Chambers
work in the main so harmoniously and so effectively, that we cannot do
better than follow the old adage and “ leave well alone,” The obvious ex-
ception is, of course, the United Kingdom.
The necessity for the establishment of five distinct, autonomous States
has already been outlined, but no suggestion has yet been offered as to the
composition of the several Legislatures. Now, there can be no doubt that
“ masterly ” silence upon this point would be the safer policy : enough new
propositions have been already advanced to bring down an avalanche of
criticism upon this little essay. The writer might fairly plead that he has
undertaken to sketch a scheme of Federation, not to remodel the British
Parliament, that even a reference to Westminster is beyond his province.
But, unfortunately, an adjustment of the Home Legislatures is absolutely
indispensable as a preliminary to Imperial Unity ; the most perfect general
plan conceivable by the brain of man can be of no practical use unless it
also particularise how the States of the United Kingdom are to organise
their State Machinery. Certain proposals are therefore offered —under
protest, however, and without prejudice (so far as may be) to other portions
of the Federal scheme.
England, then, must retain for service in the Upper House of her own
Parliament, her own territorial Peers, by which must be understood Peers
whose estates are principally in England ; where their titles come from is
quite, immaterial. Those Peers whose estates lie mainly in Wales, must in
future legislate for that picturesque principality, becoming the Upper House
of the new State of Wales. Peers whose property lies chiefly north of the
Tweed must similarly unite to form the Upper House of the new State of
Scotland. Noble lords with Irish rent-rolls must follow suit, and so not
only restore to Ireland the more distinguished half of her Legislature, but
for ever silence the but too-well-justified outcry against absenteeism. If
there are not enough Peers “ to go round,” more must be created.
This brief settlement of the Upper House portion of the problem contains
a great deal more than meets the eye. The fact is tolerably patent that
public opinion is beginning very seriously to question the expediency of an


hereditary Upper House at all. Few thinking men foresee a very prolonged
existence to the present House of Lords, while it is an open secret that even
moderate English Liberalism views its continuance with bare feelings of
tolerance. The epigramatic query “Mend or End it?” is no mere humorous
utterance ; and it is to be presumed that none know this better than the
Lords themselves. But the really important question for the English
Nation to decide is not, “Shall we abolish the Hereditary Upper-Chamber?”'
but, “ Can we replace it, if abolished, by a more able, a more righteous, a
more dignified Senate ? ” And this question can be answered neither by
popular clamour, nor by inconsequent arguments based upon Natural Right.
The Natural Eight platform is utterly rotten. Modern civilisation is so
distinctly not based upon Natural Eight that the two cannot even exist
side by side. No man has a “natural right,” while he lives, to appropriate
more than his bare individual share of the world’s good things. Still less
has he any “ natural right ” to effect a posthumous assignment of his appro-
priations. Yet even the most out-and-out Radical asserts his individual
ownership of property, and Mr. Joseph Arch will probably not die intestate.
Civilisation is essentially an artificial, as opposed to a natural, state of
existence, and “artificial” means “made by Art,” not by Nature. It is
indeed open to every community to decide whether it shall be governed by
Nature or by Art, whether it will adhere to Natural Eight or adopt Civilisa-
tion ; but it cannot have both. Civilisation once chosen, it becomes a
logical absurdity to judge its requirements by the light of its rejected rival.
If self-styled Social Reformers would be at the pains of committing these
few considerations to memory (for they most assuredly cannot controvert
them), they would find their labours very sensibly lightened. The Hill of
Impossibility is a heartbreaking ascent to breast, even though Natural
Eight be at the summit. Why will they not keep to the level ground of
common sense, and admire their Fetish at a distance, in Campbell’s well-
known line ?
Now, if it be conceded that hereditary right to property is a sound
institution, it is going but a very short step to concede the right to legislate
for that property when inherited. And if this very short step be gone, it
becomes impossible to deny that the only way to ensure this corollary right,
is to make it hereditary too. This is at least a fair deduction from the
premisses. But apart from this, we have the experience of other Nations to
guide us : America, for instance, that very masterpiece of Republicanism,
Will anyone seriously assert that the United States Senate is a “more able,
a more righteous, or a more dignified body ” than the English House of
Lords ? American Senators have often been, and still are, openly accused
by American writers and by American orators of having, amongst other
failings, a decidedly “itching palm.” Has even the breath of scandal
hinted as much about our much-abused Peers ? Would England gain or
lose by exchanging an august Assembly, every member of which has the
strongest possible of interests in the welfare of the Country, for an assem-
blage of professional “ Log-rollers ” ? This is the real question at issue ; a
question which the English people will do well to answer with all care and
deliberation. •
It will hardly be disputed that the other four States would be great-
gainers by the accession of a wealthy and distinguished resident class.
Their chief towns are at present essentially of the Province, provincial.
They will hereafter become capitals, and capitals benefit largely by a leaven
of aristocracy. Moreover the oft-heard complaints concerning Absenteeism,
although like many other grievances (and, in this particular instance, with
justice) more shrilly sounded from across St. George’s Channel, is also well-
founded in Wales and Scotland. So long as London remains
social, and fashionable Capital of the United Kingdom, landlords and their
families will naturally gravitate Londonwards : Peers, because they must,.


M.’s P, because they must, and the rest of the class because it is “ expected
of them.” London receives them with swollen accounts at the banks ; the
Country gets them back depleted and anxious only to economise for the
next Season. These are not trivial remarks ; they are weighty considera-
tions. In the case of Ireland, where Absenteeism is popularly, and properly,
set down as the most ruinous of all the disasters consequent upon the
Union, the permanent restoration of the great money-spending class would
be hailed with national enthusiasm. Upon this point the Irish are perfectly
right. The very worst effect of the Union unquestionably has been to
encourage Absenteeism by making it, in the case of the greatest land-
owners, a political necessity. This fact has hitherto not received a tithe of
the attention which it deserves. Statesmen have for eighty years been
wondering at the constantly-increasing misery of the Irish people, with one
of the most prominent causes beneath their very eyes. Multiply the total
proceeds of Irish rent-rolls which annually find their way to England, by
eighty-six, 0 ye who have access to reliable statistics, and one great cause
of Irish poverty will express itself in startling figures. The writer, though
he claims not to speak ex cathedra , knows what he is speaking about from
many years residence in Ireland. Give Ireland her landlords as well as her
Parliament, and the voice of the Boycotter will be heard no more in the
land. But it is not easy to see how the titled and wealthiest section of these
landlords can be induced to return unless they are called back by the same
voice which now keeps them away—the necessity for their presence in the
Upper Chamber of the Legislature. Once they are so compelled to return,
the untitled aristocracy will follow them hereafter as heretofore. It is
quite upon the cards that the most violent opposition to the establishment
of a titled Upper House will come from the Irish themselves. As has al-
ready been pointed out, the Irish have a natural aptitude for standing in
their own light. If, at first, they cry out against hereditary legislators in
the abstract, they must be coaxed (the word has been but too often misspelt
coerced ) into giving the system a fair trial. There will be no more crying
out when once they begin to feel its beneficial effects upon their languishing
trade and general depression, and when Mr. Parnell takes up his permanent
residence in Fitzwilliam Square.
If this be accepted as a fairly reasonable solution of the problem so far
as the Upper Houses of the Home Legislatures are concerned, the back of
the difficulty is broken. The Lower Houses will be filled precisely as the
House of Commons is filled now—by a general election of Members.
CONSTITUTION AND POWERS OF STATE
LEGISLATURES.
1. The Upper and Lower Houses of all State Legislatures shall be des-
cribed by such distinctive appellations as it shall please Her Majesty to
appoint. The titles borne by the Presidents of either Chamber shall also
be fixed by Eoyal Letters Patent.
This leaves it open to England to preserve the time-hallowed historical
names of her two Houses as well of the Lord Chancellor and Speaker. In
the case of other States, her Majesty’s well-known discrimination will
doubtless induce her to ordain that the convenient designations of “ Legis-
lative Council” for the Upper Chamber and “ Legislative Assembly ” for
the Lower House, with the corresponding dignities of “ President ” and
“ Speaker,” be retained.
2. The theory of Administration shall include a Ministerial party and an
Opposition,
3. Parliamentary proceedings shall be governed by such Regulations
now in force as may be consistent with the concurrent and superior authority
of the Confederate Parliament.


4. Members of either House who may be chosen to serve in the Con-
federate Parliament shall nevertheless not vacate their seats in the State
Legislature until the vacancies created by their transfer shall have been
filled up. To this intent the President and the Speaker shall cause Writs of
Election to issue immediately such choice is made known. This clause shall
not, of course, apply to Hereditary Upper Houses.
5. Payment or non-payment of Members of State Legislatures shall be
adopted or rejected as each State may decide.
6. The assent of both Houses shall be required to all measures not upon
the subject of Finance, which shall be exclusively within the province of
the Lower House.
7. State Legislatures shall enjoy full power to enact such laws and other
measures as to them may seem expedient, subject only to the particular
assent of the Crown, and to the exclusive right of the Confederate Parlia-
ment to legislate upon “Questions of Confederate Polity.” (The main
divisions under which such “ Questions of Confederate Polity” fall, will be
found under the Section which treats of the Jurisdiction of the Confederate
Parliament).
8. The Lower Houses shall have full control over the collection and ex-
penditure of State Revenues, upon which, however, their severally-allotted
contributions towards General Confederate Revenue shall form a first charge,
9. Every State Legislature shall possess full authority over its own Civil
Service, including such force as may be necessary for the maintenance of
Public Order. But all Forces raised in a State for Confederate purposes
shall be under the direct authority of the Confederate Parliament.
Such is the frame-work proposed for local Legislatures. It will be ob-
served that the nine clauses have been cut down to the utmost brevity
consistent with clearness. Their detailed expansion is a matter of little
difficulty, though it would be as much beyond the province as beyond the
limits of this Essay. It may be noted, en passant, that Clause 9, which
will give (inter alia) Ireland control of her own Police and of her own
Customs, will “ excite much comment,” as the phrase goes. Nugae ! What
strange mental warp is it which impels the leaders of public opinion in
England to ignore the substantial cause of Irish disloyalty—Absenteeism
consequent upon the loss of her Parliament; and to shrink at that shadowy
danger, the Irish Constabulary—as loyal a body of men as exists in the
Empire? As for the Customs: let Ireland throw over Free Trade if she
likes (and it is certain that she will like, unless England adopts Protection,
or else the Irish will strangely belie all historical precedent). She has just
as good a right to do so as, say, Victoria ; and will, by-and-by, see the
fallacies of that Dazzling Fraud as Victoria is seeing them now—through
the glasses of Over-production. Moreover, it is inevitable that the Con-
federation will very soon extirpate Protection throughout the world, by
applying the terrible screw of Federal Reciprocity ; alien Nations would
then have to choose between adopting Free Trade or abandoning Foreign
Trade altogether !
CROWN REPRESENTATIVES IN STATES AND
DEPENDENCIES.
10. The royal Authority shall be represented throughout the States and
Dependencies of the Confederation by Deputies appointed by the Crown.
Such Deputies shall, in the case of States, be distinguished by the title of
Viceroy. The title of Governor shall be reserved for Deputies appointed
to the Dependencies, except that the Governor for India shall continue to
be designated Governor-General.
11. Such Viceroys and Governors shall be appointed for a period of five


years or during good behaviour. They shall be responsible for a proper and
legitimate discharge of their high functions to the Parliament of the
Britannic Confederation which may, by a direct vote at any time advise Her
Majesty to their removal.
12. Viceroys and Governors shall enjoy such salaries, &c., as may hereafter
be decided upon. Such salaries, &c., shall be paid from General Confederate
not from State Revenue.
13. During the absence of any Viceroy or Governor, or pending the
arrival of a successor to either, the vice-regal or gubernatorial functions
shall temporarily be discharged by the President of the Upper House as
Acting-Viceroy (in the case of States), and by the Chief Justice as Acting-
Governor (in the case of Dependencies).
Clause 10 is intended to apply to England as well as to the other States.
The necessity for a Viceroy in a State honoured by the residence of the
Sovereign within its limits may not be very apparent, but it is none the less
real. By the Act of Confederation, Her Majesty becomes at once Queen of
all States and Empress of all Dependencies of the Empire. She remains, it
is true, Queen of England, but she becomes, equally, Queen of the twenty-
three other States. Her direct functions as Sovereign become centred upon
the Legislative Union of all the Communities of which she is Queen. She
ceases to be, as heretofore, twenty-three parts Queen of England, and one
part Queen of the other States ; the proportions become reversed. Ob-
viously, therefore, were Her Majesty to take a more direct and marked share
in the Legislature of England than in those of other States, feelings of
jealously would very soon be engendered, if indeed the Confederate Parlia-
ment did not come to be regarded as but an echo of the English State-
Parliament. Is it presuming too far to hint that the Vice-regal functions
would, in the case of England, be adequately and appropriately discharged
by the Heir-Apparent, to whom it would serve as an admirable training
for the more onerous duties he may be, one day, called upon to perform 1
PARLIAMENT OF THE BRITANNIC CON-
FEDERATION.
If it be deemed premature to sketch a Confederate Parliament upon the
lines of a Dual System of Representation, the best defence of the course
adopted will simply be to plead that very prematurity in justification. It
is currently believed that neither the Master-intellects of the Age nor the
“ Sturdy Common-sense,” as it is called, of the Public, have as yet arrived at
definite conclusions upon the subject. If this be so, then the sooner Master-
intellects and Sturdy Common-sense combine to form fixed opinions, the
better. The writer, not having the shadow of a doubt as to which direction
this opinion (when formed) will take, has so far anticipated it as to allot
two Chambers to the proposed Parliament.
14. The Parliament of the Britannic Confederation shall consist of two
Supreme Legislative Houses: the Upper, or Supreme Legislative Council ;
amd the Lower, or Supreme Legislative Assembly.
15. The S.'L. Council shall consist of [provisionally 138] Members re-
presenting the States of the Confederation, shall sit in a separate Chamber,
and shall elect its own President for a term of five years.
16. The S. L. Assembly shall consist of [provisionally 278] Members also
representing the States of the Confederation, and shall also elect its own
Speaker for a term of five years.
17. The election of Members for both Houses shall proceed from the
State Legislatures in the manner hereinafter set forth.
18. Members of the Supreme Legislative Council. —The Upper
House of each State-Legislature shall select from among its own members,


either by mutual consent, or by ballot, or in such other manner as shall be
by them in Session agreed upon, the number of Representatives for the
S. L. Council of the Confederate Parliament to which their State may be
entitled, viz ; One-third of the total Number of Representatives returnable
by that State. Hence no State shall be entitled to a Representative in the
Supreme Legislative Council, which has not a Representative strength of
at least three dn the Confederate Parliament.
Of the number so selected one-half shall be chosen from the Ministerial
and one-half from the Opposition party. Where only one Member is re-
turnable the selection of such Member to be decided by a majority of the
House. Should it, from any cause, be found impracticable to select the
required number in the proportion set forth, then the Crown shall nominate
Representatives from the Chamber to complete such required number, due
regard being still paid to the maintenance of a just proportion between
Ministerial and Opposition candidates. An odd number shall in all cases be
nominated by the Crown.
Members duly chosen or nominated to serve in the S. L. Council shall so
serve for a term of five years. Each Member shall, during this period, be
paid by the State which he represents, the sum of £l,OOO per annum.
Vacancies subsequently caused by the death or retirement of Members
shall at once be filled up by the accrediting State Legislative Council.
19, Members of the Supreme Legislative Assembly. The
Lower House of each State-Legislature shall similarly select from its own
Members in such manner as may be in Session agreed upon, two-thirds of
the total number of Representatives which the State may be entitled to
return to the Confederate Parliament, Where such division of the total
number leaves a remainder, such remainder shall be filled from the Lower
House.
Members so selected shall be chosen in equal numbers from the Minis-
terial and Opposition parties. If this can be effected with the exception of
an odd Member, such odd Member shall be chosen from the Ministerial
party. But if from any cause such selection in the proportion set forth
shall be impracticable, then shall the proceedings be deemed null and void
ab initio and the choice of Representatives to the S. L. Assembly be decided
by a special general election. For such Election, Members of the State
Legislative Assembly shall, without prejudice to their previous election to
that Assembly, be allowed to stand.
Members duly chosen for service in the Supreme Legislative Assembly
shall serve therein for a period of five years, each receiving during that
period the annual sum of £l,OOO from the accrediting Legislature. Vacancies
caused by death or retirement shall at once be filled. Moreover the vote of
a deceased or retired Member shall vest by proxy in the senior Member of
the same party to which such deceased or retired Member belonged, pending
the arrival of his successor.
20.—Vacancies about to be created in the Houses of the State-Legislatures
by the transference of Members to the Confederate Parliament, must at
once be filled, upon writs issued by the President and the Speaker.
JURISDICTION.
21, The jurisdiction of both Houses shall be concurrent, co-equal, and
co-essential, except upon questions of Finance, which shall be within the
exclusive province of the Supreme Legislative Assembly.
22. The authority of the Confederate Parliament shall be supreme upon
all questions of Confederate interest. Imperial taxation, management of
the National Debt, foreign policy, emigration, additions to, alterations in,
or matters in any way relating to, the Possessions of the Confederation ; the
control of the Imperial Confederate Forces by land and sea ; the main-


tenance of proper relations between all States, &c., of the Confederation ;
and Trade, shall, ip sis naturis, be deemed to be of Confederate Interest.
23. But its authority shall not extend to interference with the particular
rights of States, which shall have full control of all legislation upon matters
not included in the above enumeration, and of distinctly local interest.
SESSIONS OF PARLIAMENT.
24. The Sessions of the Parliament of the Britannic Confederation shall
be held in London, at such times, and in such buildings as may be here-
after appointed.
25. A Preliminary Session (Informal) shall be held by either House for
the purposes of electing a President and a Speaker ; of approving a code of
Parliamentary Regulations ; of framing an Oath of Allegiance to the Crown
and Confederation ; and of transacting such other business as may be
deemed necessary to future legislation.
Her Most Gracious Majesty shall appoint a day for the formal opening
of the Parliament of the Britannic Confederation. This day shall, both on
that occasion and on every subsequent Anniversary, be observed as a General
Public Holiday throughout the Empire, and shall be historically known as
“ Federation Day.”
ADMINISTRATION.
26. The Administration of Imperial affairs shall be conducted by
Ministers possessing the confidence of Parliament, and appointed by the
Crown. Minorities shall be regarded as the Constitutional Opposition, and
from their ranks a defeated Ministry shall be replaced.
27. Bills introduced shall be either Ordinary or Urgent. Any Bill
may by a special vote of the House be classed as Urgent. Urgent Bills
shall take precedence of all Ordinary Bills.
28. No Bill shall become Law until it shall have been approved upon its
third reading by a two-thirds majority of the Lower House. (This
Clause very effectually blocks the present radically-rotten system which
allows a bare majority to ride rough-shod over even a strong minority. A
Bill which cannot command a two-thirds majority in an Imperial Legis-
lature placed far beyond the petty party-feelings of State-Legislatures, may
safely be allowed to lapse without injury to Confederate interests. More-
over, the necessity of a substantial majority removes even the semblance of
danger of “ swamping ” from the temporarily preponderating English
votes).
29. Ministers shall be appointed to the following Departments :
I. Finance.
11. Protected States.
HI. Dominions.
IV. Territories,
V. War.
VI. Admiralty.
VII. Foreign Affairs.
VILE. Emigration.
IX. Education and Science.
X. Commerce.
(I.) The Minister for Finance shall necessarily be a Member of the
Lower House. He shall, in a Budget, annually lay before the House an
Estimate of the General Revenue required for the ensuing financial year.
This Budget shall contain, under separate Sections, Items of Departmental
Expenditure, which it shall be the duty of his colleagues in charge of those


Departments, to furnish. He shall, from his own Department, supply
Estimates of Expenditure on account of :
(a) The National Confederate Debt,
(#) The Civil List (Royal Family).
(c) The Civil List (Administration),
The sum-total of all these Estimates will represent the required Con-
federate General Revenue.
It shall further be within the province (clerically) of the Minister for
Finance to distribute two-thirds of this required Revenue among the
States of the Confederation, the share contributable by each State being
determined upon Representative-basis ; and one-third among the Depen-
dencies, the share of each being fixed upon a Revenue-basis. Such allot-
ments or valuations shall, after lying unchallenged or unaltered upon the
Table of the House for three days, then be passed through the House
as a Revenue Distribution Bill ; after which they shall be transmitted to
the Executives of the various States and Dependencies for payment.
Sums voted for the service of any Department must be retained to the
credit of that Department. Should the actual expenses of any Department
exceed the Estimate approved by the House, such deficiency must be met
by asking for a Supplementary Grant rather than by encroaching upon the
resources of other Departments. The doctrine shall be rigidly enforced
that “ money voted by Parliament for one purpose cannot legitimately be
diverted to any other.”
A little reflection will make it plain that the duties of the Minister for
Finance, although perhaps nominally more extensive than those of the
present Chancellor of the Exchequer, will, in reality, be simple enough.
His own Department wiil supply him with the amounts required for the
National Debt and for the Civil Lists ; he merely becomes the recognized
mouthpiece, financially, for the other Departments ; the subsequent partition
and allotment of General Revenue is only clerical work for his Staff. He
ceases to be a harassed Minister driven to his wit’s end to make all ends
meet, cutting down one Department, harrying another. He simply an-
nounces from his place in Parliament the gross amount required for National
purposes and obtains the National sanction thereto. With the actual raising
of that amount, he has nothing to do. The spectacle of the first Financial
Minister of the Crown dodging through Westminster Palace Yard to
escape a mob of irate match-vendors becomes a humorous picture of inchoate
Administration.
F. 0., WAR, and ADMIRALTY.
Pessimists to the contrary, notwithstanding, many of the existing De-
partments are as nearly perfect in their organisation as Statecraft has as
yet rendered possible. The affairs of a great Nation cannot be as easily and
as expeditiously managed as the details of a Stockbroker’s business. Had
Dickens ever tried to hold administrative reins himself, the horrors of a
Circumlocution-office would possibly have been painted in less vivid colours.
Criticism is ever easier than performance. This little Essay, at all events,
shall make no pretence of interfering with Departments which prima facie
are quite worthy in all respects to exchange nominal for real Imperial
functions. To which category most distinctly belong the present Foreign
Office, the War Office, and the Admiralty. With respect, indeed, to the
War Office, it would perhaps be advisable to tighten and define more clearly
its authority over, and relations with the Horse Guards. The Minister for
War and the First Lord of the Admiralty will moreover find the extent of
their jurisdictions materially increased, including (as they will) the whole of
the Forces, by land and by sea, of the Confederation ; while the additional


duty of acting as Parliamentary Representatives of the numerous, important
and continually increasing Strongholds, will very greatly add to the respon-
sibilities of office. Obviously the Administrative and Clerical Staff of both
these Departments will at once need to be considerably augmented.
PROTECTED STATES.
The Minister for Protected States will find plenty of work to do in look-
ing after the interests of the future States of the Confederation. Political
nursing, like every other sort of nursing, is often a sufficiently thankless
task. Aspiring young communities will, of course, be ever on the alert to
secure concessions and otherwise make the life of their Representative
Minister a burden to him. For all that, statesmen will be found patriotic
enough, patient enough, and skilled enough to undertake the responsibilities,
seeking their reward not in the contemporary applause of an admiring
generation, but in the enduring veneration of posterity.
DOMINIONS.
The Minister for Dominions will be the official head of the nearest ap-
proach to autocratic government in the Confederate Polity. The post is
one calling for tact, decision, and administrative ability of the highest order.
India (though its real value has hitherto been considerably overrated at the
expense of far more important Colonial possessions) is a source of national
wealth that will well repay the privilege accorded to it of a place in the
Confederation. The suggestion offered that a Council of Advice, composed
of experienced “ Europeans ” (as Anglo-Indians will call themselves) with
a percentage of the more cultivated Native element, be selected in India,
and despatched to England, in semi-official state, to be at the service of the
English Minister for Dominions, will possibly commend itself to the judg-
ment of those best versed in matters Oriental. The ultimate design of
some day conceding a measure of local self-government to the more loyal
Provinces, though possibly as yet in the dim future, should never be lost
sight of. Our rule will be none the less secure if it be made known to the
keen-witted Asiatics that we are not a nation of autocrats, but a freedom-
loving people, prepared to grant them a share in the government of their
country so soon as they shall prove themselves fit for the task. A Legis-
lative Assembly upon the banks of the Hooghley, would be a more deadly
blow to Russian ambition than a British garrison at Herat. Cederent anna
togae.
The definite classification of Egypt as a British Dominion is perhaps
open to the charge of “ premature gallinaceous computation ” ; but it is
merely, after all, giving expression to an accomplished fact. The most
marked peculiarity discoverable in his countrymen by the writer (after a
somewhat exhaustive course of historical research) is expressed by the state-
ment that there is only one thing harder to do than to exclude Englishmen
from desirable territory, and that is —to get them out of it after they have
once got in ! So far as regards Egypt, our wily diplomatic foes have failed
in the easier portion of the difficulty. They are scarcely u likely to succeed
in the more difficult task.
TERRITORIES.
The Minister for Territories will have a comparatively easy office. His
functions will principally be to procure and collate reliable information
upon the subject of new land suitable for occupation, and to exercise a
fatherly supervision over very young communities until they become old


enough and strong enough to pass into the domain of his colleague, the
Minister for Protected States. This portion of his duties will bring him into
continuous relations with the Emigration Department. He will, in addition,
keep a watchful eye over uncivilised “dusky brethren” in which, doubtless,
he will be much assisted by the Admiralty—and much stimulated by Exeter
Hall.
EMIGRATION.
A new Porfolio, but one of vast importance. In this Department the
political disciples of Smith, Mai thus, Mill, and other prophets of the Dismal
Science, will find an inexhaustible field for their labours. Even to mere
smatterers in Political Economy, it must long ago have become evident that
the present go-if-you-please-stop-away-if-you-like system of relieving the
superabundant home populations has resulted in no sensible relief to over-
crowded misery. The monstrous anomaly of men and women in one British
State crushing one another to death in a struggle for existence, with a con-
tinuous cry for “ More Labour 1 ” pouring in from other British States,
must be put an end to. No more spasmodic despatehings of desperate
starvelings in cranky ships. No more vacillating encouragements, by orna-
mental Agents-General K.C.M.G., of half-hearted, ignorant yokels. No
more debatings of manly poverty and willing labour as to ways and means,
as to whether the sale of the few sticks at home will cover the cost of
“ assisted ” passages for self and wife and bairns ; nor of womanly ditto as to
the future in the distant, unknown land. All this, my brothers, must cease.
The threatening apparition of Socialism which has been raised by human
neglect of the most obvious of all laws—the impossibility of feeding two
persons with the food of one—must be laid by human care and foresight.
The whole question of Emigration must be made a National one, and be
worked upon the same intelligent lines as any other question of National
importance.
EDUCATION AND SCIENCE.
Education and Science must be fitly represented ; adequate provision
must be made that the greatest of all civilising agents shall receive due
attention. Somebody (I forget who) has defined the schoolmaster’s vocation,
to be, “ the most powerful adjunct to Progress.” The Minister for Education
and Science will be apxi-<sisa<r/<aXoe : the Grand-Master of a nobler organisation
for the diffusion of knowledge, of light, and of truth, than aught the World
has yet seen.
COMMERCE.
The limits of this Essay precluding even the barest outline of a Com-
mercial Polity, the Minister for Commerce may be most briefly (and therefore
best) described as a sort of Glorified President of the Board of Trade, the
Commercial Chief of an essentially Commercial Confederation.
POLITICAL WEIGHT OF THE CONFEDERA-
TION.
The political atmosphere is thick. The Nations are watching each other
like gladiators. Each is waiting but for a favourable opportunity to snatch
a few square miles of a neighbour’s territory, at a perfectly unconsidered
sacrifice of human life. But one consideration restrains the less scrupulous,
and that is the difficulty of deciding when such favourable opportunity
really occurs. Firebrand France reckons up her legions and looks longingly
at Blsass. But she has not yet forgotten the lesson of ’7O, and, this time,


she reckons up the German legions too. The respective sums-total, even
with the (in France) admitted superiority of French troops thrown in, seem
scarcely to warrant an attempt to change once more the spelling of that
little word. And, therefore, France bides her time. The Imperial Cabinets
know, from hourly experience, the force of the great Popular Upheaval,
which, under various names, threatens their existence. They know also the
immense convenience of a great war to divert the popular mind from a
too-prolonged contemplation of its own grievances. But they too remember
’7O. They know (as who does not?) that it was for this very reason
Napoleon embarked in the war, which, being unsuccessful, cost him his
Crown. To Socialist-Nihilist threatened Imperial Governments, success in
the field might, nay probably would, mean a reprieve ; but defeat might,
nay, almost certainly would, mean extirpation. The wonder is that the
Emperors have not bethought them of getting up periodical Games of War
(Kriegspiele) with preconcerted results, which, in addition to subjecting
Socialism to a severe course of phlebotomy, might appear to give all parties
a decided victory, and, at the same time, leave territorial demarcations
in statu quo ante fuerunt. Possibly (disrespectful as it may sound in such
exalted connection) they could not trust each other. At all events, the
Powers have very difficult cards to play. How they play them is chiefly
their own affair. Apart from a natural unwillingness to see men butchering
one another wholesale, it is really a matter of secondary importance to us
how, or by whom, the Continent of Europe is governed—with this very
important limitation, that our rights and interests must he respected.
Hitherto, England has invariably taken a hand in the Political Game of
Beggar-my-Neighbour ; she has spent therein an enormous amount of
money ; but she has, upon the whole, come off a very considerable winner.
It is, indeed, perhaps within the bounds of fact to say that she has secured
the larger portion of the stakes, or at least as large a portion as she can well
look after. It is certainly within the bounds of fact to say, that she has,
over and over again, supplied her rivals with the means of playing against
herself. Now, there is an “ Americanism ” not unconnected with gambling
very applicable to the situation ; (it is a pity it cannot be elegantly para-
phrased without losing all point)— “ Scoop the Pool and clear ! ” England
has “ scooped the Pool,” or all she wants of it, and the very best thing she
can do is to “ clear.” Playing for one’s winnings is a very unsatisfactory
process. England’s business henceforth is to keep what she has got; a dis-
tressingly blunt way, no doubt, of stating the position, but intelligible, and
better still, true.
An effective display of Force is the very best guarantee for Peace. And
it will be in the power of the Britannic Confederation to make such a
display as shall very effectually curb foreign aggression. The conscript-
militias of the Continental Powers aggregate (on paper) about nine millions
of men—a vast host indeed, if all were banded against a common foe, but
happily neutralised by international animosities. The total force at
present enrolled under the British colours is very much greater than most
persons are aware of, viz. :
( Regulars... ... ... 193,000
England ? Militia and Volunteers 592,175
( Royal Navy ... ... 56,950
i Active Army 65,000
CANADA | Reserve „ ... ... 655,000
Other Colonies ? ?
Total ... ... 1,562,125 British Troops
146,000 Native Troops (India),
Grand Total ... ... 1,708,125


One million, seven hundred and eight thousand, one hundred and
twenty-five. Not bad for poor “defenceless” England! Certainly not
overstated ; no exact figures, inter alia , being available as regards Colonial
Forces other than Canadian. Now, a vast deal of nonsense is often heard
respecting the alleged quality of these troops. Pessimists (in the throes of
dyspepsia) incessantly croak forth the superiority of foreign militia over
everything we possess, except, possibly, our Regulars. Upon what, in the
name of Nightmare, is this supposed superiority based ? Before 1870,
French troops were held up as models. The victorious Germans, by up-
setting this theory, themselves came to be regarded as types of military
perfection. They certainly proved themselves, in that war, superior to the
French, just as the French, in dozens of previous campaigns, had decisively
proved their superiority over the Germans. But when, O ye Croakers ! did
either Frenchmen or Germans successfully stand up before the British ?
Theory is good—sometimes ; but Theory cannot be advanced against Ex-
perience. Theoretically, and according to the avowed opinion of the
greatest general ever produced upon the Continent, our troops were fairly
“beaten” at Waterloo half a dozen times during those memorable nine
hours ; yet these troops were in Paris a fortnight after the battle. Theore-
tically, how could the picked veterans of France, led by Napoleon’s ablest
Marshals, be pitchforked out of Spain by the half-starved regiments under
Wellington ? Theoretically, in short, what part could a Race inhabiting a
little island half-hidden in Northern mists, be expected to play in the
World’s History ? Yet practically does not that Race rule (including water)
over four-fifths of the Universe ? If any man, calling himself British, ever
allows himself to believe that British troops, Regular or Militia, could be
beaten in fair fight by anything like equal numbers of Foreign conscripts,
that man should be encouraged to change his nationality forthwith. Even
if English military experts do report that foreign troops are steadier on
parade than our non-regulars, one is still free to surmise which would be
steadier in action, where the enemy’s fire is a more urgent consideration
than the drill-sergeant’s stick.
At Sea (though again the Ravens are eager to demonstrate that we have
scarcely a serviceable ship in the Fleet), foreign Nations acknowledge our
superiority. Which means, done into plain English, that we could crush
anything short of a Universal Maritime Coalition against us, in about six
weeks.
The Britannic Confederation will thus start with a Military and Naval
Force behind it which no Nation, or Coalition of Nations, could afford to
make light of. But that is not enough. We must be able to show a Force
so overwhelming as to make it impossible for any quarrelsome nation to
disturb the General Peace. The thing can be done very easily, and ought
to be done very speedily, in the interests, not of our Empire alone, but of
all Mankind. No such fetter upon Freedom as a Conscription is even
hinted at. But it is no fetter upon Freedom to propose that every British
citizen, within certain age-limits, be taught how to handle a rifle and the
rudiments of drill, any more than that he be taught how to handle a pen
and. the rudiments of grammar. No necessity to make even this little,
compulsory. Merely let it be known that it is expected of every British
citizen, within certain ages, that he qualify for a Certificate of Proficiency.
Public Opinion , that mighty engine which foreigners can not understand,
will do the rest. And with a Reserve of five or six millions of such material
to fall back upon, what Nation shall dare to draw the Sword in the teeth of
the Britannic Confederation?


L’ENYOY.
Engineers tell us that the strength of a chain is also the strength of its
weakest link. But they would certainly admit that if a weak link or links
can be discovered and replaced by sound ones, the whole chain may sub-
sequently be regarded as strong. So too, the chain of proposals which we
have attempted to forge for Confederation, may, when narrowly criticised,
be found defective in some of its links. It has to bear the weight of an
Empire, and it has to stand comparison with the products of the Intellectual
Foundries of the World. If it but furnish a few sound links—one sound
link—nay, but the pattern of a sound link —towards British Unity, the
writer’s labour will be more than repaid.




