

THE jubilee festival
( 1850 J
\ J The Australian Board of Missions.
. . Che Commemoration in Sydney .
ILLUSTRATED HANDBOOK
AND
PROGRAMME OF SERVICES AND MEETINGS,
August 19 th to August 26 th inclusive .
Price—SIXPENCE.




THE JUBILEE FESTIVAL
OF THE
The Australian Board of Missions.
. . Che Commemoration in Sijdnetj .
ILLUSTRATED HANDBOOK
AND —■
PROGRAMME OF SERVICES AND MEETINGS,
August ityth to August 26 th inclusive .
(Subnet);
W. A. Peppeeday & Co., 119 a Pitt Street,




JUBILEE SERVICES AND SERMONS
Sunday, August 19th, and Sunday, August 26th, 1900
ST. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL
Sunday, August 19th.
11 a.m.—Bishop of Tokyo.
15 p.m.—Bishop of Riverina
7 p.m. —Bishop Waiapu.
Sunday, August 26th.
11 a.m.—Bishop of Nova Scotia,
15 p.m. —Bishop of Carpentaria.
7 p.m.—Bishop of Melanesia.
Jubilee Services will also be held, and
Sermons preached in a number of
Churches on Sunday, August 19th, and
st. Andrew’s Cathedral.
also on Sunday, August 26th.


Monday, August 20th-
MORNING, 8 a.m. Holy Communion — St. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL.
EVENING, 8 p.m.— MEETING IN TOWN HALL-
MELANESIAN MISSION.
Chairman
HIS EXCELLENCY THE
GOVERNOR.
8 p.m. Hymn No. 6.
Prayers
Deus
Apostles Creed
Chairman’s Address
Hymn No. i
The Right Rev. the Bishop of Melanesia
Mr. W. J. Arundel
Collection
Hymn No. 2.
The Right Rev. the Bishop of Tasmania
Hymn No. 4.
Benediction
TOWN HALL, SYDNEY. In which the Meetings are to be held.


His Excellency Earl Beauchamp
(Photo by Falk.)
His Excellency the Governor recently visited Norfolk Island, and made himself
acquainted with much of the work, which is being carried on in connexion with the
Melanesian Mission.
The Right Reverend Cecil Wilson, Lord Bishop of
Bishop ofJMelanesia.
Melanesia, was consecrated Missionary Bishop on June nth,
1894, in St. Mary’s Pro-Cathedral, Auckland, N.Z. He was
formerly Curate of Patsea from 1886 to 1891, and Vicar of
Moordown Hants, 1891 to 1894.
The Right Henry Hutchinson Montgomery, Lord Bishop of Tasmania, was
consecrated in Westminster Abbey, May Ist, 1889. He was formerly Curate at
Hurstpierpont, 1871 to 1874; Christ Church, Southwark, 187410 1876; St. Margaret,
Westminster, 1876 to 1879; Vicar of St. Mark’s, Kennington, 187910 1889 ; Rural Uean
of Kennington and Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of Rochester, 1887 to 1889.
The Bishop paid a visit to the Islands of the South Seas in connection with Mis-
sionary work, and on his return published an interesting report of the work of the
Bishop of Tasmania.
Melanesian Mission.


Tuesday, August 21st
8 a.m.—Holy Communion—ST. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL.
AFTERNOON at 3 o’clock-TOWN HALL
Opening of the Missionary
By LADY MARY LYGON
o’clock—Prayers.
Te Deum
Lecturette at 4
Rev. J. F. Cullen,
Lecturette at 4.20-
Rev. E. R. Gribble
Lecturette at 4.40
Bishop of Melanesia.
Lecturette at 5
Bishop of New Guinea.
INTERIOR OF TOWN HALL.


TUESDAY, AUGUST 2ist-EVENINQ at 8 o’clock.
. . . . TOWN HALL . . . .
NEW GUINEA MISSION.
Chairman
SIR FREDERICK DARLEY, Chief Justice and
Lieutenant Governor of New South Wales.
8 p.m.—Hymn No.
Prayers
The Right Reverend the Bishop of New Guinea
The Right Reverend the Bishop of South Tokyo
Collection
Dens
Apostles Creed
Hymn No. 12
Chairman’s Address
The Right Reverend the Bishop of Melbourne
Hymn No, 8
Sir Frederick Darley
Hymn No. 14
Benediction
The Right Reverend Montague Stone=Wigg, Lord Bishop of
New Guinea, was consecrated in St. Andrew’s Cathedral, Sydney, on January
25th, 1898. He was formerly Curate of St. Andrew’s, Wells Street, 1884
to 1886 ; London Diocesan Home Missionary for Holy Innocents’ Mission,
Hammersmith, 1886 to 1889; Curate of St. John’s Pro-Cathedral, Brisbane,
1889 to 1891 ; and Canon and Sub-Dean, 1891 to 1898.
The Right Reverend William Awdry, Lord Bishop of South
Tokyo, Japan, was consecrated Bishop Suffragan of Southampton in St.
Paul’s Cathedral on June 29th, 1895 ; in 1897 was translated to the Se e
of Osaka, Japan, and in 1898 appointed to the See of South Tokyo,
Ptehop of New Guinea,
Bishop of Melbourne


W ednesda;
August 22nd
8 a.m.—Holy Communion— ST. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL,
AFTERNOON at i o’clock TOWN HALL
LOAN EXHIBITION.
Lecturette at 3.3o—Mrs. Ivens
Lecturette at 4 —Bishop of Waiapu
I.ecturette at 4.30 —Rev. E. R. Gribble
Lecturette at 5 —Bishop of Melanesia
DICK’S HOUSE AT YARRABAH,


WEDNESDAY EVENING— TOWN HALL-it 8 o’clock.
Aborigines—Bellenden Ker and Elsewhere.
ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY.
Chairman—HlS GRACE THE
The Archbishop of Sydney.
(Photo by J. H. Newman.)
The Right Rev. the Bishop of North Queensland
The Rev. E. R. Gribble
8 p.m.—Hymn No. 3
Prayers
Collection
Ueus
Hymn No. 7
Apostles Creed
The Right Reverend the Bishop of Newcastle
Hymn No. 10 Benediction
Chairman’s Address
Hymn No. 17
The Most Reverend William Saumarez Smith, Metropolitan of tire Province of New South
Wales, and Primate of the Dioceses in Australia and Tasmania “ Bishopscourt,” Randwick. Consecrated
Bishop, June 24th (Test, of Nativ. of St. Jno. Bapt.), 1890, in St. Paul’s Cathl. Archbishop of Sydney 1897.
Formerly C. of St. Paul, Cam., 1859-61 ; Fell, of Trim Cam., 1860-70; Chap, to Bp. of Madr., 1861-65 ; C. of
H. Trim, Cam., 1866; V. of Trumpington, 1867-69; Prim of St. Aid. Coll, and Exam. Chap, to Bp. of Nor.,
1869-90; Hon. Can. of dies., 1880-90; Author, Obstacle* to Missionary Success (Maitland Prize Essay for
1867), 1868; Christian Faith (Five Sermons preached before the Univ. of Cam.), 1869, both Macmillan;
Articles on the Epistles to the Corinthians and the Colossians in the Bth Ed. 0/ the Encyclopaedia Britannica,
1876; Lessons on the Book of Genesis, Church of E. Sunday School Institute, 1879; The Blood of the New
Covenant , Macmillan, 1889.
The Right Reverend George Henry Stanton, was consecrated Bishop of North Queensland on June 24th, 1878, and
translated to the See of Newcastle in 1891. He was formerly Curate of Christ Church, Rotherhithe, 1858 to 1862, All Saints’,
Maidstone, 1862 to 1864, St. Saviour’s, Filzroy Square, 1864 to 1867, and Vicar of Holy Trinity, St. Giles-in-the-Fields, 1867 to
1878.
The Right Reverend Christopher George Barlow was consecrated in St. Andrew’s Cathedral, Sydney, on July 25th,
1891. Pie was formerly Curate of Mackay (Q.), 1881 to 1882; Vicar of St. Paul’s, Charters Towers, 1882 to 1885; Vicar of St.
James’ Pro-Cathedral, Townsville, 1886 to 1891; and Hon. Canon of North Queensland, 1887 to 1891.


Thursday, August 23rd
8 a.m. —Holy Communion — ST. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL.
AFTERNOON at i o'clock- TOWN HALL
Missionary Loan Exhibition.
Lecturette at 3.30 —Rev. J. Hargrave.
Lecturette at 4 - Mrs. Ivens.
Lecturette at 4.30 —Mr. Walker.
Lecturette at 5 —Bishop of Melanesia.


THURSDAY EVENING, AUGUST 23rd— Town. Hall at 8 o’clock—
Chinese —Church Missionary Association.
Chairman-THE RIGHT REVEREND THE LORD BISHOP OE WAIAPU.
The Venerable Henry Archdall Langley, Archdeacon of Melbourne and Geelong, was formerly Curate
of All Saints’ Cathedral, Bathurst, 1865 to 1867 ; Incumbent of Orange, 1867 to 1869; Curate of St. Andrew’s
Cathedral, Sydney, 1870, 1876 and 1877; Incumbent of St. Mary’s, Balmain, 1870 to 1875; St.- Matthew’s,
Windsor, 1877 and 1878; Incumbent of St. Matthew’s, Prahran, 1878 to 1890; and Archdeacon of Gippsland,
1890 to 1894. The Archdeacon is a Trustee and one of the Vice-Presidents of the Church Missionary Association
of Victoria.
The Rev. John Armstrong Cullen, Missionary, in connexion with the Church Missionary Society,
at Bhagulpore, in the Diocese of Calcutta, where he has laboured with great success since 1890. He was formerly
a Missionary at Talighari, Bengal, from ISBB to 1890. Mr. Cullen entered the Church Missionary College,
Islington, in 1886 and, in ISBB, took a First Class in the Preliminary Theological Examination.
Mr. John Kent, Treasurer of the New South Wales Church Missionary Association, a layman who has
always taken deep interest in the Church’s Missionary work.
The Rev. J. F. Cullen
Collection
8 a.m.—Hymn No. 5
Prayers
Hymn No. 15
Mr. John Kent
Hymn No. 2
Benediction
Deus
Apostles Creed
Chairman's Address
Hymn No. 11
Melbourne
The Yen. the Archdeacon of
The Right Reverend William Leonard Williams was consecrated in St. John’s Cathedral, Napier,
N.Z., on January 20th, 1895. He was in charge of the. Church Missionary Society’s Mission, Poverty Bay,
Waiapu, from 1853 to 1894; Archdeacon of Waiapu 1862 to 1894; Principal of the Maori Theological College,
Gisborne, 1883 to 1894; Canon of Waiapu 1889 to 1894. His Enlarged Dictionary of the New Zealand
Language ; and First Lessons in Maori, have been most useful.
Ven. Archdeacon H. A. Langley
The Bishop of Waiapu,


Friday, August 24th (St. Bartholomew’s Day) —10.30 a.m.
ST. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL.
THANKSGIVING SERVICE
Consecration of the Bisho.p of Carpentaria.
The Bishops and Clergy to meet for robing in the Chapter House
at 10 o’clock.
Preacher —The Right Reverend the Lord
Bishop of Newcastle.
At this Service the Jubilee Offerings will be
presented by the Bishops of the Dioceses of
Australia and Tasmania
Interior of St. Andrew’s Cathedral —looking E.


FRIDAY AFTERNOON, AUGUST 24th— Town Hall—
LOAN EXHIBITION— 3 o’clock.
EVENING at 8 o'clock—
United Meeting of Missionary Organizations,
Chairman—HlS GRACE THE ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY.
8 a.m.—Hymn No. i
Prayers
The Right Reverend the Bishop of South Tokyo
Collection
Deus
Hymn No. 2
Apostles Creed
The Right Reverend the Bishop of Waiapu
The Right Reverend the Bishop of Tasmania
Hymn No. 16
Chairman’s Address
Hymn No. 4
The Right Reverend the Bishop of Nova Scotia
Benediction
The Right Reverend Frederick Courtney, Lord Bishop of Nova Scotia, was consecrated in St. Luke’s pro-
Cathedral, Halifax, on April 25th, 1888. His Lordship is Visitor of King’s College, Windsor, N.S., and was formerly
Curate of Hadlow, Kent, 1864 and 1865; Perpetual Curate of Charles’ Chapel, Plymouth, 1865 to 1870; Assistant-
Minister of St. Thomas’, New York, 1876 to 1880; Rector of St. James’, Chicago, 1880 to 1882; St, Paul, Boston,
1882 to 1888.
Other speakers at this Meeting will be the Right Reverends the Lord Bishop of South Tokyo, the
Lord Bishop of Waiapu, and the Lord Bishop of Tasmania.


Saturday, 2sth. — AFTERNOON at 3 o’clock—
LARGE HALL,
Young Men’s Christian Association,
PITT STREET.
AFTERNOON at 3 o’clock—
Meeting for Day and Sunday School Scholars.
Chairman— HlS GRACE THE ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY.
3 p.m.—Hymn No. 3
Prayers
Hymn No. 14
Bishop of Tasmania
Bishop of Rockhampton
Collection
Dens
Apostles Creed
Hymn No. 16
Chairman’s Address
Benediction
Bishop Stretch
Bishop Stretch.
Bishop of Rockhampton


THE AUSTRALIAN BOARD OF MISSIONS 1850.


The Australian Board of Missions.
Wenh the General Synod of the Dioceses in Australia and
Tasmania was conseituted in 1872, it was decided, among
other matters, that the Synod should have power to make
Determinations for “ the promoting of Home and Foreign
Missions in the Church.” It was held that so important a
work should not be left to the zeal of individuals, but, that
in her corporate capacity, the Church should, as far as
practicable, direct and sanction, and whenever possibUj
undertake it through formally appointed authorities. A
Determination was passed by which “ The Bishops forming
the House of Bishops in the General Synod ” were con-
stituted “ The Board of Missions of the Church in the
Dioceses in Australia and Tasmania,” and the work of the
Board oE Missions formed in 1850 was transferred to the
new Board. An Executive Council was elected by the
General Synod, and each Diocese was invited to form a
“Diocesan Corresponding Committee under the presidency
of its Bishop.”
From time to time experience has shown the desirability
of, in some respects, amending the Determination under
which the Board was constituted, and at the Session, 1896,
of the Generol Synod, it was determined that the functions
of the Board should be “ to promote, through its Executive
Council, the Mission work of the Church among the Abori-
gines in Australia, New Guinea, and in Islands adjacent,
and also among the various immigrant heathen races ;
to assist in carrying out the Missions established by the
Church of England through her Missionary Societies ; to
co-operate in supporting the Melanesian Mission, and
other Missions to the heathen; to seek out train, and
support Missionaries to labour in such Missions as the
Board may direct, or may originate; and generally to
further unity of effort in the Missions of the Church.
Provided that the Board shall not interfere with existing
Missionary Institutions, except so far as they may place
themselves under its direction,”
20


GROUP OF BISHOPS (General Synod, 1896).


THE AUSTRALIAN BOARD OF MISSIONS.
His Grace the Archbishop of Sydney
The Right Reverend the Lord
The Right Reverend the Lord
The Right Reverend the Lord
The Right Reverend the Lord
The Right Reverend the Lord
The Right Reverend the Lord
The Right Reverend the Lord
The Right Reverend the Lord
The Right Reverend the Lord
The Right Reverend the Lord
The Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Perth.
The Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Adelaide.
The Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Riverina.
THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL:
President :—The Most Reverend the Primate.
Hon. Treasurer Mr. T. S. Scholepield, 534 George Street, Sydney, N.S.W.
Hon. Secretary: —The Rev. John Dixon, St. Thomas’ Rectory, Balmain West.
The Lord Bishops of Melbourne, Brisbane, Tasmania, Newcastle.
The Yen. Archdeacons W- E. White, J. D. Langley.
The Revs. Canon Corlette, D.D., W. Hough, J. Hargrave, Willoughby Flower,
George Brown.
Messrs. C. R. Walsh, C. A. Pearce, E, H. Rogers.
All Secretaries and Treasurers of Diocesan Corresponding Committees are ex-officio
Members of the Executive Council.
(Primate of Australia and Tasmania)
Bishop of Ballarat.
Bishop of Newcastle.
Bishop of Brisbane.
Bishop of Melbourne.
Bishop of Bathurst.
Bishop of Tasmania.
Bishop of North Queensland.
Bishop of Goulburn.
Bishop of Rockhampton.
Bishop of Grafton and Armidale.
Mr. T. S. Scholefield
(Treasurer A.8.M.)
22


IS-ellcntr.cn tUr IHbsion.
The Bellenden Ker Aboriginal Mission, for which some
£5OO per annum is needed, is under the control of, and the
financial responsibility rests on, the Executive Council of
the Board of Missions.
The Mission Reserve consists of 80 square miles of
country, near Cairns, in North Queensland, comprising
51,200 acres. Work was commenced on the Mission by the
late Rev. J, B. Gribble, “ the blackfellows’ Friend,” on
June 17th, 1892, and after his decease (June 3rd, 1893) has
been most successfully carried on by his eldest son, Rev. E.
R. B. Gribble, the present Superintendent.
The Mission Buildings consist of Church, Schoolhouse,
Dormitory, Missionaries’ Residence, Men’s Huts, etc., etc.
There are some 200 Aboriginals immediately connected
with the Mission Station at Yarrabah, chiefly members of
the Cape Grafton tribe. There are hundreds of others who
live on the Mission Reserve in their wild state, awaiting
the teaching and Christian influence of our Missionaries.
The Mission Improvements consist of gardens, planta-
tions, etc, where rice, coffee, bananas, sweet potatoes,
mangoes, pine apples, etc., etc., are grown by the natives,
under the superintendence of the Missionaries. Among all
the efforts made by our Church to reach and benefit these
poor people, none are more full of promise than the Bellen-
den-Ker Mission.
BELLENDEN KER STAFF.
Clergy :
Rev, E, R. Gribble,
Laymen:
Mr. W. Reeves, Mr. Ferris, Mr. James Edward Webber.
Ladies :
Mrs. E. R. Gribble, Miss Monaghan, Miss Colyer.
S.S.I. Teachers :
W. Ambrym and Andrew.
Cbc lllelanesum Jpsstoir.
UcS.SiL JUmlmvu.
Chairman: Rev. Canon J. C. Corlette, D.D.
Rev. H. Wallace Mort, M.A. Mr. E. H. Rogers.
Rev. W. I. Carr Smith. Mr. H. Trenchard.
Rev. W. Flower, M.A. Captain Gibson, R.N.
Captain Gibson, R.N.
Joint Secretaries and Treasurer for N.S. W. Auxiliary :
Rev. H. Wallace Mort, M.A., All Saints’, Woollahra.
Mr. E. H. Rogers, 16 Spring Street, Sydney.
Secretary of St. Barnabas ’ Association :
Rev. W. I. Carr Smith, St. James’ Rectory, Sydney.
Secretary of the “ Ship” Committee :
Rev. W. J. Cakebread, 8.A., St. John’s, Ashfield,
Assistant Secretary :
Mr. Russell.
23


Staff:
ft. S. Wales (Church |Hissionan; Association
Bishop—The Right Rev. Cecil Wilson, M.A.
(Consecrated St. Barnabas’ Day, 1894.)
Archdeacon—The Yen. J. Palmer, B.D.
In connection with the Church Misionary Society for
Africa and the East.
OFFICE BEARERS.
Trustees :
English Clergy :
The Very Rev. the Dean of Sydney.
Yen. Archdeacon Langley. John Kent, Esq.
Rev. Mervyn Archdall, M.A. C. R. Walsh, Esq.
Rev. R. B Corains.
Rev. T. C. Cull wick
Rev. W. C. O’Ferrall.
Rev. W. Edged.
Rev. H. Welchman, M.R.C S.
Rev. L. P. Robin.
Rev. C. W. Browning, M.A.
Rev. P. Wilson, B.A,
Rev. P, Williams, M.A.
Rev. W. G. Ivens, M.A.
Rev. E. Buchanan, B.A.
Rev. E. S. Wayne.
President:
His Grace the Archbishop of Sydney.
Rev. H. V. Adams.
Rev, P. M. Aldous, M.A.
Vice-Presidents:
(Examining Chaplain).
The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Bathurst.
~ ~ ~ ~ Newcastle.
„ „ „ Goulburn.
Laymen
~ „ ~ Grafton and Armidale,
~ ~ ~ ~ Riverina.
J. Blyth
T. A. Williams.
The Yery Rev. the Dean of Sydney.
~ ~ the Dean of Bathurst.
Native Clergy :
~ ~ the Dean of Goulburn.
Rev. Geo. Sarawia (Priest) Rev. R. Bula (Deacon)
Rev. Henry Tagalad ~ Rev. Wra. Yaget ~
Rev. R. Pantatum (Deacon) Rev. H. Gorovaka ~
Rev. A. Lobu ~ Rev. S. Qalges ~
Rev. Walter Woser ~ Rev. J. Wate ~
Rev. Clement Marau ~
The Yen. Archdeacon Langley.
Committee:
Rev. Canon Moreton.
Rev. W. H. H. Yarrington,
~ A. E. Bellingham, M.A.
„ J. Best.
M.A., LL.B,
W. Crane, Esq.
Dr. Orago. ’/
W. H. Dibley, Esq.
G. R. Harrison, Esq.
Dr. Houison.
~ W. A. Charlton.
~ J. Dixon.
Melanesian Lay Workers, :
404 Teachers. 161 Scho
~ Dixon Hudson
~ H. Martin.
161 Schools.
~ W. Martin, B.A.
~ R. Noake, B.A.
~ J. Yaughan.
J. McKern, Esq.
W 7. E. Shaw, Esq.
J. M. Sandy, Esq. 1
J. Shuttleworth,_Esq
Ladies of the Mission Staff:
Mrs. Wilson, Mrs. Comins, Mrs. Browning, Miss Parr,
Mrs, Oullwick ? Miss Williams, M.A., Mrs. O’Ferrall.


Hon. Treasurer:
John Kent, Esq., The Strand, Sydney.
Hon. Clerical Secretary :
Rev. W. Martin, St. Barnabas’ Parsonage, Glebe.
Hon. Lay Secretary :
C. R. Walsh, Esq., “ Talawera,” Woollahra.
Hon. Medical Referees :
W H. Crago, L.R.C.P., London, M.R.C.S., England.
Andrew Houison, M. 8., Edinburgh, Ch.M., Edinburgh.
Hon, Superintendent Marsden Training Home :
Miss Hassall, Frederic Street, Ashfield.
Hon. Sec. Ladies’ Committee:
Mrs. E. H. Sully, “ Brunyarra,” Strathfield.
The Archbishop of Sydney, the Bishops of Bathurst and
Newcastle, and the Very Rev. the Dean of Sydney, are
Vice-Presidents, C. R. Walsh, Esq., is an Honorary Life
Governor, Miss Hassall and Miss Mary Walsh are Honorary
Life Members of the Church Missionary Society.
The New South Wales Auxiliary of the Church Mis-
sionary Society had existed for more than sixty years ; and
in 1892 a Constitution was framed, with the approval of
the Parent Society, under which the Auxiliary was merged
into the “ New South Wales Church Missionary Associa-
tion, with greatly enlarged powers of action. The
Association is now authorised to select, train, and send
men and women as Missionaries in Australia to C.M.S.
fields. The maintenance of such Missionaries is provided
by the Association, but their location ard oversight in the
Mission field is undertaken by the Parent Committee of the
Church Missionary Society. The Association is also
empowered to engage in Missionary work in fields other
than those occupied by the C.M.S.
The following is a list of the Missionaries who have
gone out, and are still working under the Association :
Miss Helen P. Phillips (Hon.), Dodanduwa, Ceylon ;
the Rev. W. Newby-Fraser and Mrs. Eraser, Allahabad,
India (at present on furlough); Mr. and Mrs. Ernest
W. Doulton, Eastern Equatorial Africa; Miss
Alice Phillips (Hon.), Baghdad (on furlough); Miss Amy
Oxley, Miss Isabel Suttor, Miss S. S. Newton, and Miss
Leila Bibb, Fuh Kien Province, China; Miss Rose Bachlor,
Hongkong, China ; Miss Mary G. Harrison, Gaza, Pales-
tine ; Mr. George Burns, Eastern Equatorial Africa ; Miss
Beatrice Hassall, Palestine.
In 1898 the Australian Board of Missions entrusted to
the care of the Association the Missionary work of the
Board amongst the Chinese in Australia. The following is
a list of the Missionary and Catechists at present working
under the Association amongst the Chinese in New South
Wales : The Rev. Soo Hoo Ten, at Sydney ; Jack Fan, at
Tumut; Ah Young, at Bathurst; and Cheong Lee, at Hay.
A Training Home for Chinese Catechists has been opened
in connexion with St. Luke’s, Wexford Street. A course
of study approved by the Archbishop is pursued. Great
hopes are entertained that the Home will be of great value
in the extension of Church work amongst Chinese.
Miss Hassall superintends a Training Home, which she
generously places at the disposal of the Association for lady
candidates. The Home is situated in Frederick-street,
Ashfield, and is called “ The Marsden Training Home,” in
memory of the devoted and faithful labours of the Rev.
Samuel Marsden for the evangelisation of the Maoris.
Several of the Clergy deliver courses of lectures, and the
candidates attend the evening classes at Moore Theological
College.
25


The Ladies’ Committee of the Association manage the
C.M.A. Depot on the first floor of The Strand, which is
open from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. on each day of the week (ex-
cept Saturday and Sunday) for the sale of Missionary books
and literature, and of any articles sent in for sale on behalf
of the Association. Light refreshments are also obtainable.
A meeting for prayer in connection with the Associa-
tion is held on the second Thursday in each month at the
Chapter House, at 4.30 p.m.
eto ('mined JJftssxmr.
BISHOP.
Right Rev. Montagu John Stone-Wigg, M.A.,
Consecrated on S. Paul’s Day, 1898.
PRIESTS {3):
Abbot, Wilfred Henry, M.A. .. 1898 ... Wanigela.
King, Copland, M.A 1891 ... Mamhare.
Newton. Henry, B.A 1899 ... Dogura.
DEACON
Fernan, Felix Albert 1900 ... Dogura.
LAYMEN (8):
Buchanan, Francis de Sales ... 1899 ... Boianai.
Dakers, Robert Henry 1898 ... Taupota.
Giblin, Eric Lewis .. ... .. 1900 . . Dogura.
Ramsay, Frederick William .. 1900 ... Dogura.
Sage, Charles 1898 .. Dogura.
Smithson, Frederick 1900 ... Dogura.
Stirrat, James Baird ... 1900 .. Dogura.
Tomlinson, Samuel ... ... ... 1891 .. Mukawa.
LADIES (9)
Ch allman, Ella Florence 1900 .. Samarai.
Ker, Annie 1899 ... Wamira.
McLaughlin, Sophia ... 1896 ... Dogura.
Murray, Harrietts Alice 1895 ... On Jurlough.
Oliver, Laura 1999 ... Wedau.
Sully, Sarah ... ~. ... 1898 ... Dogura.
Miss Badham.
Miss Frankland.
Miss Giblin,
Synge, Frances Mary ... ... 1900 ... Samarai.
Thomson, Florence Agnes 1896 ... On fiuio
1896 ... On furlough.
Tomlinson (Mrs.), Elizabeth ... 1891 .. Mulcawa.'
SOUTH SEA ISLANDERS (8)
Bourke, Richard ... ... ... 1897 ... Boianai.
Corrie, Timothy ... 1900 ... Dogura.
Far, Johnson ... 1900 ... Dogura.
Mark, Harry 1893 ... Wamira.
Mussen, Peter 1895 ... Taupota.
Nogar, James ... 1898 ... Wanigela.
Tasso, Robert ... ... ... ... 1895 ••• Awaiama.
Tatu, David ... ... ... ... 1900 ... Dogura.
Assisted by Jive Native Pupil Teachers.
NEW GUINEA MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
President:
His Grace the Archbishop of Sydney.
Vice-Presidents :
Rev. A. Yarnold. HisHonorMr. Justice Walker
Rev. W. I. Carr Smith. Mr. E. R. Deas-Thomson.
Committee
All Clergy who are
Mrs. C. A. Pearce.
Mr. C. W. McEwen.
Members of the Association.
Miss Mort.
Miss Lindsey Thompson.
Miss Carr Smith.
Mr. W. Crane
Mrs. Oliver.
Miss L. Wilkinson.
Miss E. W T hiting.
Miss Bolton.
Mrs. James Mort.
Mrs. Laid ley.
Miss Paidley.
Miss Holder.
Hon. Ti
Mr. W. C.
Treasurer
WTlkinson.
Hon. Secretaries :
Mr, E. H, T. Russell. Miss E, R. Kine.
26


i. Arms of the See. —These were designed by
Canon Walsh, of Waimate North, Auckland, New Zealand,
and executed by Mr. Allan Wyon, Regent Street, London, W.
The description of the blazon is as follows
“Az : A sword in pale point upwards, or; hilt and
pommel or : surmounted by two keys endorsed,
in saltier, that in bend sinister, of the last, that
in bend dexter, of the second; over all an
inescutcheon, gu, thereon a Papuan canoe with
sail spread, ppr.”
Mr. Maclaren dedicated the Mission to S. Peter and
S. Paul (the keys and sword). The canoe, with its sail like
a crab’s claw, is the most distinctive feature in New Guinea
life. In the blazon it emphasises the fact of a Missionary
Diocese.
2. The Mukawa Light. —The following is an
extract from the B.N.G. Government Gazette , of Saturday,
February 10th, 1900 :
Lantern Light on Cape VogeL.
It is notified for general information that a large Lantern Light
(white) has been erected by the Right Rev. the Bishop of New Guinea
at the Anglican Mission Station at Mukawa, on Cape Vogel, North-east
Coast.
The position of the light is in latitude 9 degrees 37 minutes 40
seconds S. ; longitude, 149 degrees 59 minutes 15 seconds E. Height
above high-water mark, 220 feet. A good anchorage in seven fathoms
will be found on the north side of Cape Vogel, with the light bearing
Cape Vogel and Mukawa Mission Station.
(Dog’s Hill, where light has been placed. The first light on Coast of New Guinea.)
E. half N., three-quarter mile distant, and the gap in the ridge over-
looking the sea, with steep bluff on either side, bearing S.E. by S.
quarter S. Fresh water obtainable there.
By Order,
D. Ballantine,
Government Secretary’s Office, Acting Government Secretary.
6th February, 1900.
27


Articles Published in Connexion with the Jubilee
DRAFT SCHEME
(for criticism and improvement)
FOR JUBILEE OF A.B.M. in AUGUST, 1900.
PRINCIPLES FOR WORK.
1. To expect great things and therefore to aim high.
2. To let each Diocese have as much freedom as possible
consistent with the general lines.
3. To work through appointed Secretaries in each
Diocese, and through them only.
4. To give the fullest liberty to help any Church Mission
anywhere, so as to win the co=operation of all.
5. To make the gathering Australasian if possible
6. To meet in Sydney for Prayer, Praise, and Alms=
giving, and for Instruction.
The above principles have been submitted in outline to
all the Bishops, and have received their assent.
The Primate of New Zealand is much interested.
The Bishop of New Guinea intends to come with some
of his natives.
The Bishop of Melanesia will do his best to bring the
“ Southern Cross ” and his Melanesians.
We hope to get a Bishop or strong representative from
England, Africa, Canada, and the United States to
strengthen our hands.
FULLER OUTLINE OF ABOVE SCHEME.
1. Every effort to be made to impress upon Church-
men generally that we wish to end the Century by casting
our bread upon the waters as widely as possible, in order to
show the Faith and Hope that is in us, and the Mission of
the English Church in the world ; knowing that we shall
reap in due season. To this end we wish to make the last
Corporate Meeting of the Church in this Century to be a
great Missionary Meeting—for praise, humiliation, inter-
cession, and teaching.
2. Two Sundays, late in August, to be devoted to the
Jubilee together with the intervening week days, except
Saturday. General Synod to meet in the following week.
3. To make every effort to induce all members of General
Synod to realise that this Jubilee Meeting is really an
integral part of General Synod, that it may be remembered
in years to come that the last Meeting of General Synod in
this Century included nine days of Mission work, surveying
the whole fields and laying our plans for the 20th Century.
To this end, every Bishop should be asked to make all
possible effort to bring his leading Clergy and Laity to
Sydney for the beginning of the Jubilee.
4. That on one day in that Jubilee week (Friday '?) there
be a great Service for the offering of Missionary contribu-
tions, that it be made as stately and impressive as possible,
and that the feature of it be oblation. To this end, the
Service to consist only of Holy Communion, with hymns,
etc., and that special prayers be composed to give expression
28


to the desire of the Church in Australasia to present itself
body and soul to God as a Missionary Church, deploring the
coldness of the past, and asking for grace and strength to
amend and develop. That after the Sermon (Preacher to
be appointed by the Primate, some great Missionary?) the
presenting of the Offertory be made as impressive and
devotional as possible. Each Diocese or Body coming for-
ward individually and presenting alms in the person of the
Bishop or Head, whilst the whole congregation sings
appropriate verses of hymns.
5. That the province of New Zealand be asked to pre-
sent alms also at the same Service, to help us by their
example and to exhibit a united corporate life on the one
question on which we can all unite—the Evangelisation of
the World.
6. Alms.- That every Diocese be urged, through its
organisations, to collect a jubilee offering towards the
Evangelisation of the W r orld, that such offerings be made
by each Diocese for any church mission it desires to aid,
whether within its own borders, or in Australasia, or in any
other part of the world - no limit being put in any way,
except that the object is a Church Mission, or that such
offerings may be presented without being ear-marked, in
which case the A.B M., would allocate it. That all moneys
which are ear-marked be at once disbursed by the Treasurer
of the A.B.M , according to the wishes of the donors. That
the general collection made from the congregation on
that day be for the A.B M. to allocate.
7. That the C.M.A (or any other such Society) be
asked to make offerings at this Service, allocating these
moneys just as they wish
8. In order that a steady Mission fervour should be
created, no time be lost in preparing the minds of all
Churchmen for this Jubilee (a) by articles in all Diocesan
papers ; ( b ) in the public press occasionally; (c) by constant
correspondence with Diocesan Secretaries and with Bishops.
Also that suggestions be asked for from all Secretaries and
others interested how to improve the organisation. By such
correspondence,'and by getting copies of articles in Diocesan
papers struck off for distribution, much expense will be
saved.
9. I have asked Bishops to guarantee expenses of
postage, etc, for the next twelve months or so. They all
promise something, we may look at once for £3O ; this
might be advanced by the A.8.M., and received back 12
months hence, and more could doubtless be obtained.
10. Each Diocese is appointing a Secretary. In a few
days I hope to furnish a complete list.
11. May I advocate the printing of a really good Mis-
sions Almanac for 1901, to begin the Century with it, and
become historical That it should be ready for distribution
during the Jubilee week, so that the Diocesan Secretaries
may take it home ; that the cost be not more'than Id ; and
that it depict every Mission assisted by the Church in
Australia; that steps be taken at once to find out how
many copies each Diocese would take, and meanwhile the
Almanac be put into the hands of two or three capable men
to get it up in outline, with spaces for pictures and the
subject of them ; that the Almanac be printed in Australia,
but the blocks for pictures obtained anywhere (i.e , C. M.S.,
S. P. G. in part.)
12. The Bishop of Grafton and Arrnidale has asked
whether meetings could not be held in other places. I
suggest that a few earnest men and leaders be requested to
visit other Dioceses before the Jubilee in Sydney. lam
prepared to go to two other Dioceses. Could a plan of such
work be made out ?
13. Suggested Programme During Jubilee Week.
Ist Sunday. —Sermons in all the Churches. Could this be
arranged in Melbourne too?
29


Wednesday or Thursday.—Great Mass meeting in Town
Hall.
Friday morning. —Great Service of Holy Communion and
oblation.
The rest of the time to be divided among Missions ;
each Mission working up its meetings for prayer, etc.
(Rew Guinea, Melanesia, and Maoris, Aboriginals and North
Australian Diocese; Chinese and China, India, Africa, etc.).
Every effort being made to get capable Missionaries.
2nd Sunday of Jubilee. —Sermons again, connecting
Missions of the world and General Synod, insisting
that there is no break of thought.
14. That the Primate be requested to issue an open
letter to all, to appear in the April number of all Diocesan
papers, before Easter, with request that it be commented
upon and backed up by Editors, and suggestions asked for.
And that at the same time the first draft of the Scheme be
published
15. That in due time the outcome of the Jubilee be
pressed. Steady increase in giving, and in Missionary zeal,
not a galvanic shock merely.
Practical Questions to be Discussed.
1. Income of the Bishop of New Guinea re-established upon
a good basis.
2. Future of A.B. M. to be considered and settled, and
advance indicated.
3. Missionary Studentships and supply of workers.
4. A Training Home.
H.H. TASMANIA.
ADDITIONAL SUGGESTIONS.
I plead for a Sub-Committee of two or so men who are
in Sydney, who can be approached by wire if necessary,
whose action can be depended upon without any delay ; of
course, this refers to details.
That a strong recommendation be made to the Dioceses
in Australia that offerings be direct gifts to God, and that
all unworthy methods of obtaining money be carefully
avoided.
That a Sub-Committee of the Council be appointed to
carry out details in conjunction with the Bishop of Tas-
mania, so that no time should be lost; the Sub-Committee
reporting, of course, to the Council on every occasion.
That offerings made at the Jubilee of A. B. M. be not
for paying past debts, but for forward work.
Tell the Council, please, that the Bishop of New Guinea
begins collecting for the Jubilee Offering in August next.
Children, natives, etc., will give for forward work of
Church from August next for one year. H. H. T.
Hobart, April 10, 1899.
The above details were passed by the Executive Council
of A.B.M. in March, except that the proposal to restrict
the offerings to “ forward work ” was not agreed to. It is
proposed therefore that there be no such restriction.
The Sub-Committee asked for by the Bishop of Tas-
mania to co-operate with him has been appointed : —The
Rev. John Dixon and Mr. T. S. Scholefield, 534 George-
strcet, Sydney.
The following is the list of Diocesan Secretaries :
Sydney. —The Rev. John Dixon, S. Th -mas Rectory,
Balmain West, N.S.W.
30


Melbourne. — E. Snodgrass, Balwyn, Victoria; Miss
Barrett, Cathedral Buildings, Flinders Lane, Mel-
bourne.
Adelaide. —Rev. P. W. Wise, Crafers, S.A.
Brisbane. —Yen. Archdeacon David, Brisbane.
Perth.. —Rev D. J. Garland, Diocesan Office, Perth
Newcastle. —Yen Archdeacon White.
Ballarat. —Rev. Canon Mercer, Ballarat.
Rockhampton. —Rev. Canon Parker, Rectory, Rockhampton.
Goulburn. —Rev. Canon Spencer, Rectory, Albury, N.S.W.
Bathurst. —Rev. J. Lintott Taylor, Orange, N.S.W.
North Queensland. —Yen. Archdeacon Pritt, Townsville.
Grafton and Armidale. —Yen. Archdeacon Lewis, Tam worth,
N.S.W.
River ina. —
Tasmania.— -Yen. Archdeacon Whitington, New Town,
Tasmania.
New Guinea. —The Bishop, Dogura, New Guinea.
Melanesia —The Rev. H. Wallace Mort, All Saints,
Woollahra.
The Primate is about to issue an open letter to the
Dioceses through the Bishops. This should take precedence
in publication. But there can be no reason why each Dio-
cese should not at once begin to take action.
The course adopted by the Dioceses (in the Self-Denial
Movement, 1894) was that each Bishop met his Council and
launched the movement. Then the Diocesan Secretaries
(with the Committees put at their disposal) arranged for
parochial Secretaries, and formulated their scheme.
(It is the outcome of experience that no one should be
elected as Secretary anywhere, or a member of a Committee
simply because of his position. He (or she) must possess a
real Mission spirit.) All depends , under God , upon the
choice of the first movers in this effort.
N.B.—The Secretaries are asked to keep the Jubilee
before the Dioceses by articles in their Diocesan papers.,
and to send copies of all such articles or of any printed matter
or specimens of cards , without fail, to the Bishop of Tas-
mania, and to the Rev. John Dixon, Secretary of Executive
Council of A.B.M. Hints and suggestions are earnestly
requested.
H.H. TASMANIA.
AUSTRALIAN BOARD OF MISSIONS.
An Invitation and Appeal to all Members and Friends of the
Church of England in Australia and Tasmania.
It has been decided by the Primate and Bishops, who
constitute “ the Australian Board of Missions,” that it is
desirable to hold a Jubilee Missionary Festival; and they
desire to celebrate it in close conjunction with the meeting
of the General Synod which it is to be summoned for next
year, the last year of the nineteenth century.
The principles and general scope of the Festival are
fully expounded in the “Scheme” drawn up by the Bishop
of Tasmania, who has kindly volunteered to act as Organiz-
ing Secretary in regard to preparatory steps to be taken for
holding the Festival. Copies of this “ Scheme ” have been
forwarded to the Bishops and to the Special Corresponding
Secretaries in each Diocese, and I trust that the Scheme
will be carefully considered by all.
It remains for me as President of the Board of Missions,
and as one who most earnestly wishes for a larger develop-
31


ment of Missionary zeal and self-sacrifice among the
members of our Church in these colonies, to invite all
Church people in every Diocese of Australia and Tasmania
to join heartily in the endeavour to make the proposed
Festival successful and effective.
A Board of Missions was constituted in Australia fifty
years ago. At that time it could not aim at, or accomplish
much. The Board was practically re-constituted in the
General Synod of 1872, and although there is much cause
for humiliation in the inadequate efforts which have been
put forth, there are results which call for gratitude and
incite to fresh endeavours.
The more specially “ Australian ” Missions are :
(1.) The Missions to the Aboriginals.
(2.) The Melanesian Mission.
(3.) The Missions to the Chinese.
(4.) The New Guinea Mission.
Whilst I would very earnestly plead for a larger amount
of prayer and support on behalf of these “ adjacent ”
Missions, I desire to point out that no limitation of the
thank-offerings at the proposed Festival will be required
[see section 6of the Scheme]. It is also to be noticed that
the first proposal to restrict the offerings to “ forward work ”
was not agreed to by the Executive Council of the A.8.M.,
and that no limit is to be put in any way, except that the
object be a Church Mission.
The connexion of the Festival with the meeting of the
General Synod, and with the closing year of the century,
has a suggestiveness which should inspire renewed effort
for the future.
Commending the whole matter to your thoughtful
sympathy, and praying that God’s Holy Spirit may direct,
and strengthen all of us, in our endeavour to serve Christ,
and to glorify the Father by bringing forth much fruit,
I am,
Your faithful and affectionate
Brother in Christ,
WM. SZ. SYDNEY,
Sydney, Primate.
April , 1899.
THE ALLOCATION OF FUNDS IN THE
JUBILEE OF 1900.
Before the Dioceses of Australia and Tasmania decide
upon the objects to which they will devote their offerings in
August, 1900, we respectfully ask them to consider certain
points in our own special Mission field. Everyone is free
to give as he wishes, and the question might include the
Church Missions of the world ; but this is too great a flight
at present. We desire to speak only of this hemisphere.
What, at this moment , is worth putting in the forefront I
At once the splendid forward move in New Guinea,
inaugurated by our Bishop there and his workers, fills our
vision. Melanesia also cries out not to be forgotten. She
has not yet touched many an island, and looks to this
Jubilee for means to extend her work. We are too deeply
interested in the welfare of New Guinea and Melanesia to
neglect them, or to forget Bellend* n-Ker. But at this
moment there is a claimant that cries for aid, in order
quickly to step out of the way and follow its own fortunes.
A Diocese awaits formation. North Australia is within a
very little of getting its Bishop. Let the completion of this
work be one main feature of our Jubilee
32


Whnt are the facts ? In 1895 a Committee of Bishops,
with the Primate at its head, visited North Australia,
collected facts, and recommended the formation of the
North Australian Diocese. The Bishop of Adelaide
implored us to relieve him of Port Darwin, which he could
not reach, being 4,000 miles away. North Queensland
confessed that the northen shores of the Continent could
not at present be shepherded. The General Synod
acknowledged all that was said, but postponed the effort till
New Guinea had its Bishop. We are all familiar with the
happy result. The Bishop of New Guinea has no Endow-
ment yet for his income, but is paid by sums guaranteed by
the Dioceses till 1903. In spite of this, New Guinea now
deliberately postpones its Endearment Scheme in order to give
fird place to North Australia, and if such is the unselfish
course adopted by our Missionary Diocese, exhibiting in
this action a true Mission spirit, is it not a call to the
associated Dioceses to complete the North Australian
Diocese ?
Consider its area and circumstances. The Bishop of
North Queensland (now in England pleading) calls it New
Australia; that is, the tropical regions now being filled by
masses of alien races besides the whites. There are
Japanese, Chinese, Melanesians, and, of course, Aboriginal
natives, by thousands. All alike are left by us to grow up
without the ministrations of our religion. “We send
Christian teachers to a heathen country, and when those
same heathen come to our country, we deprive them of
Christian teaching.” Bishop Barlow was lately in a town-
ship in the north where the Roman Church and the Chinese
had built places of worship by the aid of their co-religionists
in their own land; but our people have no church.
What has already been collected, ? The Diocese of
North Queensland has given £5OO. Other Australian
Dioceses have given £5OO jointly; £5,000 more has been
obtained in England chiefly from Societies (Colonial
Bishopric Fund, £2,000; S.P.G., £1,500; 5.P.0.K., £1,000)
The latest list shows £6,207, and £lO,OOO is required.
The Dioceses of Australia and Tasmania are respectfully
requested to consider this appeal. It is not a permanent
charge upon us. It is to put on its feet an infant that can
nearly walk that he may go on his way. We do not expect
aid from Western Australia. There they are determined
to obtain in 1900 an assistant Bishop to do the very work
in the North-west which the proposed new Diocese attempts
in the North. We wish them God-speed, and realise that
the effort there is truly missionary in character. It is
hoped that other Dioceses will all contribute. There is,
indeed, a dream before us which is easily capable of real-
isation, which would make the meeting" in Sydney for ever
memorable.
33


Why should not the first Bishop of North Australia be
consecrated at the conclusion of the Session of General
Synod, and before the Bishops and their people return
home? Let us realise the sequence of events. A nine
day’s Convocation to survey the field (which is the world),
a solemn Session of General Synod, the Consecration of a
Bishop for the new JDiocese after resolutions have been
passed in Synod. Is it a castle in the air? Let us proceed
to put in the material foundations.
There is indeed one word more. No one doubts that
all offerings are extra offerings. Let not the steady, annua!
subscriptions be trenched upon. They were extra offerings
during the Self-Denial Movement of 1894 The Jubilee
offerings must upset no expectations of regular income.
THE DREAM REALIZED.
The Bishop of Carpentaria
To be consecrated in St. Andrew’s Cathedral on Friday (St.
Bartholomew’s Hay) August 24th, 1900.
THE GREAT COMMISSION.
(The plan of this article is based upon Chapter I. in Stock’s
C. M.S. History.
Many in every age have scoffed at Missions. A still
larger number have been lukewarm. Why is it? Surely
it comes from lack of knowledge of the Christian Faith.
What is that Faith? It is a belief not of one part of
us, not intellectual alone, but of the whole heart and mind
and life of a man. The reverent obedience of disciples, the
loyalty of soldiers, the passionate love of brethren, not for
rules or even principles, but for a Living Person —that is
cur Faith. Such strong devotion, were it for an earthly
benefactor, could achieve most things. But our Faith soars
above earth. We hold the Apostles’ Creed, believing that
the love and power of the Eternal Father are revealed and
made effectual for us through the Eternal Son, whose Will
is brought home to us daily by the Holy Ghost.
Let us suppose you knew that the Lord (ere He ascended)
“gave commands to the apostles whom He had chosen,”
and spoke to them “of the things pertaining to the kingdom
of God,” but had as yet heard no details. It would be
hardly possible to exaggerate the intense longing of reverent
disciples, loyal soldiers, and devoted brethren who owed
their life to the Lord, to hear what He had said. Imagine
that you listen to it all for the first time.
What did the Blessed Lord command ?
1. S. Matthew tells us He said, “All authority hath
been given unto Me in heaven and in earth : Go ye there-
fore and make disciples of all the nations.” This is quite
definite; Jesus promised to use His Divine power, so long
ns the world lasted, to aid us in winning all nations , and fo.
this task His own Presence is assured.
34


2. At the end of S. Mark’s Gospel, Jesus says, “Go ye
unto all the world and preach the Gospel to the whole
creation.” We understand by this that no race is in too
low a stage of being if it can understand speech; upon all
such, whether increasing or dying out, Christ has a claim.
3. S. John relates that Jesus spoke as follows on the
first Easter Day:—“ Repentance and remission of sins
should be preached in His name unto all the nations,
beginning from Jerusalem.” Here again it is the univers-
ality of the command which arrests the inquirer. It is
evident there is but one Saviour—one source of power and
love,
4. S. John relates that on the first Easter Day, Jesus
gave them their Commission “as the Father hath sent Me,
even so send I you.” This duty is laid upon them at once
as the thing of transcendent importance.
5. In the Book of the Acts of the Apostles it would
seem as though His last words on earth ere He ascended
were these: “Ye shall be My witnesses both in Jerusalem
and in all Judsea and Samaria, and unto the uttermost part
of the earth.” Never until now have men realised what these
last words meant; for the earth’s surface and whole races
of men have been unknown to Christians. To-day we know
them all: and however diverse and difficult to evangelise,
there is no race which we are permitted to pass by, even if
we would—Jesus’ last words pointed to the corners of the
earth as the only limit to our field. He pointed “to the
uttermost part of the earth.”
The Great Commission is repeated five times.
But it is more than this : Jesus instructed the Apostles
in many things after Resurrection ; but
The Great Commission is the only recorded command.
Once more—you will be surprised how few are the
facts about the Lord which are recorded even four times.
His Sufferings and Death : His Resurrection : and one mir-
acle, the feeding of the five thousand. (Whilst this last is
typical of the Great Commission when taken with the com-
mand, “ Feed my sheep.”) This is all.
There can be no doubt then which is the Supreme
Command, never to be forgotten or put in the second place.
It is to be no afterthought when we have spare cash or idle
moments. It is always to be in hand, and
It is the work for which the Church was specially brought
into existence.
Listen to the present Archbishop of Canterbury :
“Why is it that the Church exists? Granted that th,e
Church exists for those who are already members of the
Church, and that every one of us has his share to take in
that community ; nevertheless, that is not, emphatically not,
the purpose for which the Church was created. The Church
was intended as, and has ever been, the instrument by
which God makes known His Holy Will and marvellous
Love to all the people on the face of the earth.”
The Church in Australia is about to gather up the
whole experience of her life, gained by defeats, losses, sins,
and mistakes, as well as by blessings and victories and pro-
gress. Can there be any question more fitting to ask than
this: How have we carried out the Great Commission? We
have cared for our people, built churches, cathedrals, refuges,
schools —yes, but how have we carried out the Great
Commission ?
True Jesus said—“ Beginning at Jerusalem.” No
words of His have ever had more stress laid upon them.
They have been stretched to breaking point. For centuries
the Prayer Book has almost stayed “in Jerusalem.” It has
not filled our thoughts with “ all nations,” “ all creation,”
“ the uttermost part of the earth.” These words “should
have had tne first place in our thoughts, sympathies, and
35


prayers. They have had the last place, if they can be said
to have had a place at all.”—(Stock.)
God be praised that we have determined to listen as
one Church, in solemn convocation, to the Great Command.
The results afterwards are in the hands of Him Who knows
the races of the earth, their characters and deficiencies, as
well as our characters and deficiencies who are His chosen
instruments. In some lands the Great Architect of the
Kingdom finds for us foundations near the surface, and
results of building are quickly seen. In other lands we have
in our generation just to fill up a vast bog, to throw in
material upon which some future generation may erect a
glorious edifice. Deeply loving disciples care not which it
is to be so long as they can do the beloved Will, and “ take
up the Christian’s Burden.” It is a task nobler far than
that which is given even to the British Empire, because it
is effort without limit for all races in the name of Him Who
so loved the world that He gave His only Begotten Son. ..
The Commission is clear. What remains is to see how
we can best set about it. From month to month we will
study the question; praying to the Blessed Spirit to guide
us aright.
OUR JUBILEE OFFERINGS.
HQW SHALL WE COLLECT THEM?
The facts stated in the last article (“the Great Com-
mission”) are not to be gainsaid. All that remains is to
ask whether. Churchmen through the length and breadth of
Australasia will unite in doing God’s bidding ere this
century closes. Have we sufficient personal devotion to
Him who bade us? Many,, we believe under the stress of
our great scheme will be removed to repair past omissions.
How shall we collect our offerings ?
We do not dictate methods to any Diocese, even if we
could, but we may suggest. Some will use boxes, or
collecting cards, or confine themselves to Church collections,
or organise a self-denial month, or utilise the season of Lent,
or make an Easter offering.
The one special point we wish to suggest to the Dio-
ceses is the power of numbers. The strength of a movement
is in the broad basis of population upon which it rests : not
only a few large sums, but the offerings of a great many, of
men, women, and children—of pennies as well as pounds.
In preparing for our great corporate offering in August,
1900, could we approach every Churchman in our parishes?
No one, of course, dreams of what might become a coercive
mechanism. We do not dream of that because we recoil
from it. Aet without question, if we could so touch the
hearts of our people that they would give willingly, it would
uplift the Church next year to know how many persons had
united to give.
The Diocese is the unit.
Would it be possible at that great service to announce
three facts as each Diocese presents to God its offering?
“So much, from such a Diocese, from so many persons.”
Eo individual offering would be known; but within
the Diocese rich and poor could combine together.
It may be that if our effort were made on such lines as
these, the Clergy and Christian workers might be led to
bring home to many for the first time a deep spiritual
message; it is surely a great opportunity. We believe it
would arrest many, compel them to think, and forthwith to
obey.
But let it be clearly understood that we seek only the
willing offering.
36


To make this clear we ask for one thing more. A coin
is but a dead thing, fraught with evil as well as with good.
It needs holy wings to waft it to the true goal, and those
wings are the wings of fray er.
Let all who give to God pray also. We do not dictate,
but we earnestly suggest to the Dioceses to consider what
we have said, and may God, Who is leading us in our
scheme, grant us a right judgment in all things.
THE SERVICE OF OBLATION.
Let us call up for a moment the scene at the proposed
Service in Sydney Cathedral, in August, 1900
The Heads of the Church will be assembled there, called
to Sydney for the General Synod, laity as well as clergy,
making this earber week a solemn period of preparation.
The offerings of our united Dioceses will then be presented.
Each Diocese, or Society within a Diocese, will in turn, we
believe, advance and offer its gift to God with bowed head
and humble prayer at the hands of chosen representatives.
Only one sum will be known, the total amount of the
Diocesan offering. Surely, if the number who gave it wei’e
also known, it would add force and uplift the Church.
Again, it is not only white people who will offer ,
Melanesian Christians, ordained and lay, headed by their
Bishop, will be there, some from Hew Guinea with their
Bishop, Chinese also, and Aboriginals, and others: and
perhaps we may know the numbers of the coloured races
who have made the offering.
The Bishop of Waiapu will, if God will, represent the
Church of New Zealand.
The Archbishop of Cape Town longs to come if he can,
or if not, to send a delegate. From others we have not yet
heard. But if our organisation grows the inspiring prospect
calls for the prayers of our people that as the months pass
we may have a deepened sense of Mission, and feel the
Presence of the Lord in our work.
Since, without doubt, a great many will be asked for
the first time definitely to obey the Lord’s Command, we
answer one or two objections;
OBJECTION 1.
“It is impossible to convert the world, especially
certain races.”
We answer—“ Impossible for whom? For man, or for
God Who made all nations?” Impossible for us, yes.
Impossible for God in Christ and through us, no.”
We give the following lines:—“Let us recognise at
the outset that God’s commands are always human
impossibilities. We can begin at the beginning. ‘Ye must
be born again.’ Impossible, how can men be born again?
We hear His call, ‘Be ye holy,’ and we say, ‘lmpossible,
who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?’ We hear,
‘Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every
creature,’ and we say, ‘lt cannot be done; it is impossible.’
Yes, all God’s commands are impossibilities. We may
write, and truly write, underneath every one of these three
things. First of all, ‘with men it is impossible.’ Secondly,
‘All things are possible with God.’ Thirdly, ‘All things
are possible to him that believeth.’” (Brooke.)
OBJECTION 2.
“ Our own parish needs all we can give.”
Is your parish sick and weak and drowsy, and always
in difficulty? The reason probably is that it needs a special
medicine which you have never tried fairly. The Lord our
Heavenly Master, the Good Physician, has ordered what
you have not fully attempted to do. The cure for a weak
Church life for being neither cold nor hot, and without
vigour in any true Christian life, is to obey implicitly tho
37


Physician’s orders. Read Article No. 2 and you will see
what that is. The neglect of it is the bane of modern
Church life only too often; it is the evil which dogs settled
Church life in every age. Let every parish in our united
Dioceses try the Divine remedy for dead and feeble parishes.
If we are to live Christ’s life, we must think Christ’s
thoughts. His endless, age-long intercession in heaven is
not for the Anglo-Saxon race alone, but for all nations, for
the “ uttermost parts of the earth.”
IV.
CHURCH WORK AMONG THE MAORIS IN THE
20th CENTURY.
(By the Bishop of W 7 aiapu.)
The Maori population of New Zealand, according tD
the last census, is, in x’ound numbers, 39,800, and is thus
distributed over the several Dioceses :—Auckland, 18,200;
Waiapu, 13,600; Wellington, 5,500; Nelson, 600; Christ-
church, 900; and Dunedin, 1,000. Forty years ago the
great majority (ither were professedly Christian or were
more or less closely attached to one or other of the Missions
which were working among them; but the war of 1860 and
following years wrought a sad change in a large portion of
the North Island. The feeling against the English was
intensely bitter, and though many of those who were in
arms against the Government of the colony probably had
no intention of renouncing their Christianity, the notion
became widely spread in the disaffected parts that the
missionaries had been in reality emissaries of the British
Government, which had always intended, when the oppor-
tunity might come, to overpower them by military force,
and to deprive them of their lands. The missionaries were
consequently regarded with suspicion, and in some districts
they were obliged to leave their stations, their schools were
perforce discontinued, and Christian worship was generally
abandoned During the last 30 years a generation has
grown up in many places in a state differing little, if at all,
from absolute heathenism. In other districts the people
continued, for the most part, firm in their profession of
Christianity, and it is estimated that there are now, in the
North Island, 16,000 in connection with the Church of the
Province of New Zealand, viz., in the Diocese of Auckland,
6,500; in the Diocese of Waiapu, 7,000; and in the Dio-
cese of Wellington 2,500. These form settled congregations,
and are ministered to mainly by clergy of their own race.
Besides these there is a considerable number in connection
with the Wesleyan and Roman Catholic missions. For
some years past there have been Mormon missionaries too
in various places, who claim to have gained about 3,000
adherents. There still remain about 6,000 heathen, chiefly
in the Waikato and Taranaki districts, and another 6,000
vho are followers of Te Kooti’s and other similar systems,
and are known generally by the name of Ringa-tu. These
last mentioned abstain from work on Saturday, by way of
repudiating the practice of the Church in observing the first
day of the week, and hold meetings for the worship of God,
at which certain portions of Scripture and a few prayers
are recited, the object being apparently to satisfy a religious
instinct by a perfunctory observance, without any notion of
any moral or spiritual improvement.
The circumstances of the settled Maori congregations
are such that they will always find a difficulty in providing
adequate maintenance for their clergy without some outside
assistance. There are endowment funds, which have been
raised to a large extent by themselves, and the proceeds of
these have hitherto been supplemented by the New Zealand
Mission Trust Board from funds at its disposal; but even
so the amount received by each is not really sufficient for
38


the support of himself and of those who are dependent upon
him.
Since 1882 the work of the Church Missionary Society
has been conducted by the New Zealand Mission Trust
Board, which consists of the Bishops in the North Island
ex officio, and one clergyman and one layman from each
Diocese, with a secretary. The Board has an income of
about £9OO per annum, in addition to which the Church
Missionary Society makes a gradually diminishing grant for
the general purposes of the Mission, which will cease
absolutely at the end of the year 1902.
In the prospect of the early withdrawal of the Church
Missionary Society, the work among the Maoris, for the
effectual prosecution of which the Church in New Zealand
will have to make provision in the coming century, will be,
(1) The maintenance of the Theological College at
Gisborne for the preparation and training of
Maori clergy and catechists.
(2) The provision of grants in aid of the stipends of
Maori clergy ministering to their own people.
(3) The maintenance of Maori clergy as missionaries
to the Ringa-tu and heathen of their own race.
(4) The maintenance of an English clergyman in
each of the three northern Dioceses at least, with
a good knowledge of the Maori language to assist
the Bishop in the superintendence of the Maori
work.
It will doubtless tend to the greater efficiency of the
work, especially in the three northern Dioceses, if the
Bishops should be able to address the people with freedom
in their own language.
o O
The unequal distribution of the Maori population over
the various Dioceses suggests that the responsibility for this
work should be regarded as attaching to the whole Church
in the Province, rather than to the particular Diocese in which
any portion of it may be situated. The Diocese of Auckland,
for example, has within its boundaries the great majority
of what we have called the heathen population in the
Waikato and Taranaki districts, and it would not be fair
to that Diocese to treat the reclamation of these as a
purely diocesan affair, for which other Dioceses are in no
way responsible.
For the carrying out of such work, the New Zealand
Mission Board is obviously a suitable organisation, but
inasmuch as the maintenance of the college at Gisborne
will absorb the greater portion of its permanent income, it
will require, if it should thus be made use of, to be liberally
supported with money contributions by the Church at large
throughout the Province.
No. Y
THE MISSIONS OF OTHER ANGLO-SAXON
MISSIONARY SOCIETIES.
(a comparison.)
This article attempts, as stated, a comparison. It is
not, distinctly not, for the sake of provoking unworthy
feelings or to advocate low grounds for the prosecution of
our Missions. We hold that nowhere so little as in the
Mission field ought the divisions of Christians to appear.
There we are face to face with ignorance of God in Christ
and are called to teach, first, the simplest facts of the Faith,
in which we trust we are all agreed. Even when we may
note defects in the Missions of other Societies we should
call it a base thing to hold them up to ridicule, or to attract
to them through the public press the scoffs of those who
delight in nothing so much as in the strife of Christians
because they do not wish well to the Faith of Christ.
39


We especially thank God that in this hemisphere and
on this question we have had a noble tradition created for
us; for example, by the elder Selwyn, one of the six
Bishops of 1850. He, a High Churchman, recognised the
common Christianity of all earnest missionaries, and, in the
face of heathenism, bid them all God speed. Far be it
from us ever to alter those traditions. There is room for
all in the regions still unconquered for Christ. Our prayer
is, God bless all Christian Missions everywhere.
But comparisons have their place, in order to provoke
unto love and good works. There is a further reason, too.
We desire to dispel the ignorance of many Churchmen with
regard to the work done at the present day by Anglo-Saxon
Missionary Societies which are not of our communion.
Indeed, we believe the facts about to be given will startle
some; nor shall we regret it if the result be a livelier zeal
for our own Missions.
The figures we give may be accepted as substantially
correct, being taken from an American magazine entitled
“The Missionary ’Review of the World” (Funk and
Wagnall), which has for years utilised the facts collected
by the late Dean Wahl, of Copenhagen, and now continues
the work since the Dean’s death.
We confine our remarks to Anglo-Saxon Mission work,
treating the work of the Church of Rome as foreign, not
British. One word more by way of preface. Self-criticism
is characteristic of the English character, and the ancient
English Church inherits it. Though it is a sign of strength,
it is never rightly understood by foreigners.
We begin with the following statements. Taking the
work of all Anglo-Saxon Missionary Societies (including
America), our own Missions in the world, in volume and
extent, and in money spent upon them, are left far behind.
Let no jealous feeling be aroused by this fact, except such
a godly jealously as is compatible with a warm and generous
recognition of other’s work, coupled with a desire to emulate
those who in any manner have set us an example.
Great Britain —Here, as may be supposed, we are
foremost, judged by such a simple test as the amount of
money we spend. A careful estimate gives for 1898 the
sum of £761,850 as spent on Foreign Missions by us,
whereas other English and Scotch Societies total £567,190.
We refrain from giving other figures, such as adherents or
teachers, because such returns are based on different
systems, and are very hard to compare together.
Has the Church at home done her duty ? Whilst all
our ardent Mission workers at home bewail our coldness
compared to the zeal we desire to manifest, yet a few
reflections are worth making. The Church at home is
responsible for every person in England, and strives to be
in evidence in every locality, however poor and unable to
support its own clergy. Hence the large sums gathered for
home purposes, 71 millions sterling in 1898. Our ancient
endowments too have been steadily diminishing for many
years because of the fall in rent and tithe. Here, at a
distance from the Mother Church, and as those who owe
our life to her, we thank God for the sum that is sent
abroad to enlarge the boundaries of the Church. Shall we
not also thank God that He has so touched the hearts of
earnest Christians, even though they follow not us, that
their contributions approximate to ours 1
America: —As soon as we bring America into com-
parison we fall back ; nor is it hard to find the reason. In
the last century the Church which, however wrongly, was
identified with King George’s public policy met with bitter
resentment, although George Washington was “one of us.”
The branch of the ancient English Church, which is now
expanding so wonderfully in the United States, started
with every disadvantage after the Day of Independence.
Let our readers now ponder the following figures :


The Protestant Episcopal Church in 1898 spent on
Missions £56,200. Canada spent, let us say, and it is a
generous estimate, £20,000. Total, £76,200. Other Mis-
sionary Societies (excluding Rome) spent £1,536,668! So
far behind are we in numbers and wealth at present in the
United States. Included within this total are the following
figures: 5 Methodist Societies, £292,674; 8 Presbyterian
Societies, £256,650; 4 Baptist Societies, £199,271.
If we put English and American figures together we
get the following results :
The Church of England and her daughter Churches,
£837,390. Other Missionary Societies, £2,175,746. Make
every allowance for an error of even £50,000 against our
own Church, and still the balance in favour of “ other
Societies,” if we take the world as our unit, is more than
£1,200,000. If we may not have accounted for Mission
Funds spent in South Africa and Australasia by us, so we
may possibly have omitted like sums collected there by
others.
Let us now turn our attention to two Mission fields
for which we have fairly accurate figures :
Report (1894), comparing 12 American Societies with
the work of the Church of England in India, gives the follow-
ing facts : —Twelve American Societies have in India 186
foreign missionaries, 217 native pastors, 151,430 native
Christians, whereas the Church of the nation to which India
belongs hardly excels the American Societies taken by
themselves—2o3 foreign missionaries, 249 native pastors,
193,363 native Christians. Our readers will not be sur-
prised after this to learn that corrected tables give the
native Christians belonging to the Church of England in
India as 211,967, whereas those of all other Christian bodies
excluding Roman and Syrian, are no less than 459,318,
more than double.
In the South Seas, Churchmen sometimes fancy that
the volume and extent of our Missions is great. Compared
to the work of other societies nothing can be further from
the truth, as the following figures will prove :
The Melanesian and New Guinea Missions have as in-
come about £13,000; their native adherents number about
15,000. Compare this with the extent of the LM S. and
Wesleyan and Scotch Missions in the South Seas. Wesleyan
Missions—lncome, £31,444 ; adherents, 123,437. London
Missionary Society (in the South Seas) —Income, £13,917 ;
adherents, 53,863. Scotch Missions—lncome, £9,574;
adherents, 9,587. The difference between our Missions and
those of other Anglo-Saxon Missionary Societies in the
South Seas is as £13,000 to £36,935, and as 15,000
adherents to 186,887.
The thoughtful readers of these facts will not experience
much difficulty in drawing certain lessons from them.
If “ other Missionary Societies ” of our race are spending
about £1,200,000 a year more than ourselves in the world,
what will be the dominant tone of Anglo-lfaxon Christianity
a century hence, say in the year 2,000? We ask it in no
unfriendly spirit. We hold also that the path of the in-
dividual soul bo God is not dependent necessarily upon any
outward ties or means : as “ there is a path which no fowl
knoweth, and which the vulture’s eye hath not seen,” so
union with God in Christ is limited to no one organisation,
but is a deep spiritual mystery resulting from the meeting
between God and one of His children.
But another question follows upon this, and is of
immense importance in our eyes : the question of the
stability, purity, and permanency of Christianity in the
future. What will be the condition of Anglo-Saxon
Christendom and of her native Churches two centuries
hence? We of “the Holy Catholic Church, especially of
that pure and reformed part of it established in the Queen’s
41


dominions,” put in here with deep conviction our claim to
ensure for future generations that stability, permanence,
and purity. And if our claim be true, then in the spirit of
a godly and loving jealously we should pray for such holy
zeal, that to the utmost extent of our power we may plant
in heathen lands, wherever we may, the Faith as it has
been committed to us, to hand on to others the boon of a
Church life unbroken since apostolic days, yet open to every
new access of truth, brave enough to acknowledge error,
and strong enough to amend it.
Our prayer is that these solemn questions may so sink
into the hearts of our people that every clergyman and every
parish and every household may come to look upon the
carrying out of the Great Commission as an Imperial work,
fraught with issues not only for individual souls still in
darkness, but also, (for the sake of generations yet unborn)
the handing on of the stablest and purest form of the Faith
of which we have any knowledge, and to plant it firmly
among countless races of this earth.
The world lies at our feet. The calls to help those who
are waiting for the Word of Life and without clashing with
the work of other Christians are loud. Our own brethren,
who in our name are doing outpost duty, are pleading with
us for reinforcements. In the name of our King and
Master, ever let us rise up and possess the land.
THE NEW GUINEA MISSION.
(By the Bishop of New Guinea.)
A. What have I to do with New Guinea, or New
Guinea to do with me ?
More perhaps than you think.
1. You are an Australian, or live in one of her colonies.
Well, then, to protect Australia’s northern coast, a
Queensland Premier took action which led to the annexation
of (British) New Guinea to the Empire. Every wise
colonist has long ago endorsed that action. Therefore it
has to do with you.
2. You are a man, and do not refuse the claims of the
school and hospital.
Here is a land annexed by Australia without either
(except so far as Missions are supplying them). Your
fellow-creatures, the same flesh and blood as yourselves, in
no way destitute (when taught) of intelligent appreciation
of knowledge and handicrafts, are living like pigs and dying
like dogs—without physician, nurse, or medicine in sick-
ness ; without a guide—in ignorance and superstition. Are
you content?
2. You are a Christian.
Then your Master has told you His mind on this
matter. He gave special warning against excuses ; He laid
special stress on obedience. Are you in doubt now.
4. You belong to the Church of England, or are in
sympathy with her work.
This Mission was undertaken in 1886 by her repre-
sentative body, in which laity have their place as well as
clergy, viz, General Synod. The Mission is the work of
the Church as a whole, not of a society, or association, or
party. Workers from six Australian Dioceses, with diverse
antecedents, find no difficulty in working together in perfect
harmony.
5. You are proud of the British race.
Well, your own countrymen are in New Guinea. The
Mission in no way overlooks them. If the restraints and
influences of religion are not supplied there the race may
42


find itself implicated in action, which it heartily reprobates
and can hardly think of without a blush.
B. Tell me then what you have done and are doing.
1. God alone knows the “ results ”as a whole We can
only deal with surface effects, yet it is only fair that you
should expect some
outward result from
work and expendi- jr
ture, and that we
should be able to
furnish it.
(a) Along the 150
miles of coast
already dealt
with by the
Mission any
man can land
to - day un-
armed with-
out risk or
danger. This
is not the
case in the
districts be-
yond Mission
influence.
(h) Schools are
held daily in
seven centres,
services on St. Matthew’s Church, Wamira.
Sundays at (Dedicated September 21st, 1899.)
12. The sick
are relieved.
Twenty-three persons (10 men, 8 women, and 5
islanders) are living in one part of New Guinea
with no end or object but the benefit of the inhabi-
tants, 13 of them white, 18 for the mere
necessities of life.
(c) Over 50 boys and girls, ranging in age from 7 to
16, are being trained at the central station at
Dogura in school work and handicrafts, and
in intelli-
gence, disci-
pline, pro-
gress and
good conduct
would corn-
pare favour-
ably with any
boarding
school in
Australia, ac-
count being
taken of past
and present
opportunities.
The 50 are
drawn up
from 11 vil-
lages.
(d) A nursery has
been estab-
lished at Do-
gura, and in-
fants are
being brought
up there who
have been
saved from
the horrible fate of being buried alive with
their dead mothers.
(e) Over 1,000 assemble every Sunday for Divine


service, half of them more than once—others
are reached by open-air services. Many have
been baptised, others are being prepared for
that Sacrament, and over 100 can read the
Gospel in their own tongue. Christians and
catechumens are already being used for
reaching their fellow countrymen; some have
left their homes to work in other villages.
(!) The Gospel according to S. Luke has been
translated into Wedauan : a prayer and hymn
book will soon be issued, and the Acts of the
Apostles is also in hand’
(g) Mat-making has been introduced by the Mission
on to the N.E. coast, and the young women
have taken it up eagerly, and this useful
knowledge will extend from village to village.
An efficient trade instructor is taking the
boys in hand, and the Mission will qualify
them to act as carpenters, boat builders, black-
smiths, cooks, and printers. A printing press
will arrive shortly, as a present from English
friends.
C. What remains to be done 1
1. The Mission has first of all to cover the remaining
150 miles of coast line entrusted to it with stations at
regular intervals up to the river Mambare. Six more
central stations are needed, and will probably be established
on Cape Nelson, at Ketokerua Bay, Cape Sudest, Gona
Bay, Mouth of Ope River, and on the Mambare River.
For this the Mission will require ;
(a) Twenty-five Men
Six clergy, six islanders, and 13 laymen (one to be a
printer). What a small number to ask Australia for on
such an occasion as the Jubilee of the A.B.M. ! How many
young and vigorous Australians would offer if a contingent
were needed to help the Imperial forces in a war against
the Boers 1
(b) An increased income of £1,200.
The white staff are only offered maintainance and £2O
a year, whether clergymen, laymen, or ladies. Men of
capacity and skill have accepted these terms, and are now
working devotedly in the Mission. Such genuine sacrifice
of self should touch those who cannot go themselves, but
can help. Will you give or raise £5O to support your own
missionary 1
(c) Passage money , £3OO.
No outfits are offered, but passages are given from
Sydney to Samarai, where the Mission schooner meets the
bi-monthly steamer from Sydney, and conveys new helpers
to the head station some 80 miles further.
(d) New plant, £2,000.
In the first place, a new vessel will be required for
dealing with so extended a coast line. At the new stations
native buildings will be used, at any rate for some time,
but they will require some simple furniture, utensils, etc.,
and it is hoped the above sum will cover all first year’s ex-
penses, including the labour of fencing and preparing land
for cultivation; only bare necessaries are reckoned in these
estimates.
The Jubilee Extension asks for 25 men and £3,500
It is a very moderate request, when the area (150
miles) is contemplated, and the distance from Australian
ports, the difficulty of conveying plants and stores, the
nature of the country, and other things are taken into
consideration,
44


2. There is the interior, the “hinterland,” of which
comparatively little is known, though it is supposed to
contain large populations. The work is thus only beginning,
but if the commencement of an undertaking is half its
accomplishment, we may feel encouraged to go steadily
forward, keeping the end in view.
D. What are the
chief dangers of the
Mission ;
(a) As regards the
natives.
The destruction of
old beliefs and fears
without faith in the
true Lord of the
earth to take their
place. The destruction
is proceeding by the
march of civilisation
and of trade; the Mis-
sion has to fill . the
chamber left “ empty,
swept, and garnished,”
if worse devils are not
to enter in. Next, the
tendency on the part of
the natives to rest upon
the Mission for support
and to become idle.
The remedy is work , the development of the industrial
side of the Mission. Native Christians must earn
the reputation of being the ablest and best of workers,
the least lazy are the most trustworthy.
The Beginnings of a'Mission Station
Thirdly, the dangers which dog the steps of native
teachers —to ape the white teacher merely outwardly, to be
conceited, to shirk manual work. To prevent this, every
native teacher has to work daily with his hands in the
Mission farm or garden : and his white brother headed by
the Bishop, leads the
. Pra y for the Mis-
A sion that it may cleanse
• *a and defend the works
J from the evils of trail-
-1 '*% sition from heathenism
to the true Faith.
(h) As regards the
Staff of white persons.
Isolation in a trop-
ical climate, with its
temptations to lowered
ideals and danger to
spiritual life when it
is all giving out, with-
out Christian com-
panionship to re-create
the character.
The sense that the
Christian army at home
may forget the outposts
and add the burden of
debt to the load already
borne, or fail to provide reinforcements, or neglect to occupy
new posts as occasion requires.
The soldiers oj the Lord must be in danger. They
recognise this. They trust. Brothers, help ,us.
45


Our Jubilee Offerings—a Reality, Not a Sham.
We have been wondering what would be our Advent
article—Melanesia, Chinese Missions, Bellenden Ker, or
others. They have not come, nor, perhaps, are we surprised.
We know something of the labour needed to produce what
looks to be a very simple article. The compression of the
life and hope of a Mission into three pages is no light task
I. Article Vll.—Our Advent article deals, therefore,
with a subject of the first importance, although the title
seems to be almost offensive. It is not that, reader: the
title is affixed in order to call the attention of all to one of
the commonest and saddest dangers of a special effort.
Will you believe it when we tell you that already some
leaders in our mission fields are asking apprehensively, Will
the Jubilee offering really be an addition to our funds? or is
it to be merely a transfer of offerings from the usual fund to
t,he Jubilee day ?
Let us be forewarned. Let us at this distant date
make up our minds that if any one gives to the Jubilee
offering what he subtracts from the usual yearly fund he is
committing an immoral action, he is helping to make our
movement a sham and a delusion. A moment’s thought
indeed will make Churchmen I’ealise the enormity of the
offence, however unconsciously committed. We announce
to our Missions, our armies on the frontier of our Kingdom
of Christ, that they may make preparations for a bold
advance: more troops are coming, more stores. With joy
these tidings are received ; new stations are mapped out,
and the special gift is sent. But when the new stations
are occupied, a despatch is received from headquarters
regretting that there are no stores or ammunition for the
main body of the array. The special stores already
forwarded had already been taken from the old depots.
But yourself, Christian reader, in the place of a Missionary
Bishop who, from want of calculation, or simple inertia, on
our part, has been placed in so false a position and has been
tempted to speak of a breach of faith. I imagine what his
feelings must be when, following close upon a special effort,
there comes the cry from the treasurers that there is a
heavy overdraft at the bank. It was not the fault of the
Mission leader but our fault. But the shame, and the
pinch, and the anxiety falls upon the army in the field,
which has been deceived, and may have with sorrow to
evacuate posts so joyfully occupied in the name of our
Great Master.
It is worth while, as the Church’s year opens upon
us—this wonderful year, 1900—to make it plain to the
dullest imagination, that our Jubilee offering is really to be
a true gift , no sham, and no delusion.
11. HOW SHALL WE MAKE SURE OP THIS ?
1. Let no earnest Mission worker think of his Jubilee
offering till he has either paid in what he gave in 1899, or
till he has made adequate arrangements to do so.
2. Let no collection be made in churches for the
Jubilee till the sum obtained by the church collection in
1899 has been obtained or faithfully arranged for.
3. Let all collecting boxes and cards be charged first
with the amount received in 1899 for the usual yearly gifts.
4.—Let all who have guaranteed amounts, such as the
stipend of the Bishop of New Guinea, or payment of
scholars’ fees for Melanesia, etc., send in their contributions,
if possible, before August, 1900.
5 Is it necessary to say: “If you deduct from your
subscription towards your clergyman’s stipend, or from your
Church expenses or from any recognised fund—in order to
give to the Jubilee Fund, you are making the Jubilee a
sham 1 ” Above all things let us be real : Let us not have
the Churchwardens and Parish Treasurers ranged against
46


us, and ivith good cause were it likely that we should
disgrace ourselves as indicated.
111. HOW SHALL WE GIVE AFTER THIS TO THE JUBILEE ?
1. Try to double your gift in 1900.
Some of our most earnest workers cannot hope to do
this, for they have given yearly to the utmost of their
ability. In that case, give half as much again, or a quarter.
But a great many have not given up to their ability. May
God Almighty move them, for the sake of the world He
loves so much to double their gift at least.
2. Try to get at least one other person to give for the
first time. But why only one other person ? Try to get
six more.
3. Surely every Church might have at least a Jubilee
collection.
4. We believe that both Hew Guinea and Melanesia
have taken up the suggestion that the Jubilee gift shall be
so much Jrom so many persons. It is believed that the same
plan will be adopted in the Diocese of Tasmania. We have
not heard yet from other Dioceses. But where it is feasible
it is clear that from a great many we shall receive an extra
sum, namely, from those who were never asked to give and
never thought of giving in 1899. To all who give it is
hoped that a prayer written for the purpose will be handed.
It will remind them that we need two things—their money,
and with a prayer to guard the money from evil and carry
it to its true destination.
5. Ought rve to ask careless people, people who seldom,
if ever, worship publicly, who are not communicants, to
help Christ’s cause in the world? It is a question asked by
some We venture to give a definite answer, “ Yes, we
ought.” Some day they will know what a great work they
aided. We must not bar them out from the privilege of
taking some part in the great act of obedience. If we ask
them for a prayer as well, there can be no doubt what our
answer should be,
6. Gifts received specially for the Jubilee from neiv
givers ought to be made annual afterwards. Let all who
obtain the help of new subscribers carry on the good work
so begun by further efforts made in God’s name among
their friends.
IV. HOW SHALL WE MAKE THE JUBILEE EVER TO BE
remembered by all our children and all our young
people especially ?
By the Preparation op a Catechism consisting of
six or eight questions and ordered to be learnt in every
Sunday School and State School in Australasia by our own
children, and introduced into the houses of all our people,
(Is it possible that it might benefit parents 1) Each Diocese,
must, of course, under its own Bishop, take action in this
matter.
WHAT SHALL BE THE SPIRIT OF OUR JUBILEE OFFERING ?
Of course it will be what it is meant to be, and no
sham. But further —we ask thoughtful men to read the
following lines, taken from The Intelligencer of September,
1899:—“We want to teach, to impress, and to practise
those seven divine paradoxes of giving in 2 Cor. viii. and
ix., to which Dr. Pierson has called attention, viz , that
abundance comes from poverty, not riches : that willingness
does not come from ability, but ability from willingness;
that urgency should come from the giver, not from the
collector; that the greatest gift, self, must come first, and
after that, the little gifts, namely, our possessions'; that
nothing with a willing mind amounts to much more than
pounds without it; that increase comes from decrease and
decrease by unlawful increase; that giving is a grace to be
envied, and not an action to be grudged.”
47


V. CAN WE FORM ANY IDEA HOW MUCH OUR MISSIONS
ASK FOR AT JUBILEE TIME AS AN EXTRA GIFT 1 ?
The following facts are not authorative, but are a first
statement:
Melanesia is issuing an appeal for £12,000 for a new
ship and for a double staff.
New Guinea , for a double staff, then numbering 50,
and for five new stations, needs £4,000. Including the
overdraft of £l,lOO in December, 1899, it needs £5,000.
Bellenden Ker needs to double its work. A glance at
the balance-sheet will show what that means.
The Chinese Mission in Australia needs at least £l,OOO
extra.
We have not yet heard officially what is needed as an
extra sum by the C.M.A. for work in Africa, India, and
China.
The sums given above point to the fact that at the
lowest computation we must give £ll,OOO at Jubilee time.
May the Lord of the Advent put it into the hearts of
the leaders in our Dioceses to call upon their people for a
great effort. The minimum Jubilee Offering from each
Diocese ought to be as much again as the usual Mission gift
a double balance-sheet in 1900.
To such an aspiration all who love to obey our Lord
and King will say Amen.
VIII.
THE MELANESIAN MISSION.
“ The Australasian Church ought to support it, and they will
do so We can carry on the Mission very well if we
only do our duty.”—Bishop Patteson in 1865.
“ Our object is to support the Missions here in Australasia,
and to free both the Society (S.P.G.) and also private friends in
England as much as possible from contributing to our aid, that they
may have more to give them that need elsewhere.”—Bishop Patteson
in 1870, the year before his death.
I. THE MISSION, ITS HISTORY.
Melanesia comprises those islands which lie to the
north of New Zealand and north-east of Australia, The
principal groups into which it is divided are the Solomon,
Santa Cruz, Torres, Banks, New Hebrides, and Loyalties
(including New Caledonia). Our own Mission includes
these entire groups with, the exception of New Caledonia;
and in the Hebrides we now hold three islands, the Scotch
Mission working in the rest of the Hebrides. With these
exceptions, we cover Melanesia. The race of natives in
these islands is Papuan, like those of New Guinea. Their
colour varies from light to dark brown. Their languages
are legion, numbering twenty or thirty perhaps in a single
island. Their religion consists in sacrifices to ghosts of
ancestors and spirits. Cannibalism, head-hunting, and
infanticide are common, but the natives show a great
readiness to learn better ways. As learners they are docile
and intelligent, picking up reading and writing with
wonderful quickness.
Wild and notoriously fierce as the South Sea Islanders
are, no one who has been thrown at all with'the same when
they become Christians can doubt their capability to receive
the Gospel of Christ, or their sincerity in holding it.
It was through a clerical error by which the first
Bishop of New Zealand’s Diocese was made to extend to
the 34th degree north latitude instead of south that
Melanesia first came under the notice of the Church. In
addition to this, the same Bishop had received a charge
from Archbishop Howley to extend the Church’s influence
“as a fountain diffusing the streams of salvation over the
islands and coasts of the Pacific, as a luminary to which
48


natives enslaved and debased by barbarous and bloody
superstitions will look for light.” On making a survey of
the islands Bishop G. A. Selwyn found that while the
Eastern Pacific Isles, the Eijis, the Friendly Isles, and
others had received the Gospel, “in Melanesia
not ... a single native Christian was to be found.”
This part of the Pacific he claimed then for the Church to
work in.
In 1849 he began by visiting the Islands in th e
“Undine,” a 20-ton schooner, and returned with five native
boys to New Zealand. These, when trained, were to be the
future teachers of their own people, and it was with such as
these that the Bishop hoped eventually to win the islands
to Christ.
In 1850, largely at the suggestion of Bishop Selwyn,
the Australian Board of Missions was formed, and his plan
for a Mission to Melanesia was accepted, together with those
to the Australian aboriginals, and subsequently to the Aus-
tralian Chinese, and New Guinea. Bishop Tyrrell, of New-
castle, accompanied the Bishop of New Zealand on his voyage
in 1851, to represent the Church of Australia. The union
was nearly sealed in the blood of the two Bishops, for in
Malikula, in the New Hebrides, the little vessel was
attacked, and the party escaped with difficulty. A further
result of the Bishop’s visit to Australia was that a mission
vessel costing ,£1,200 was provided. So long as Bishop
Selwyn had charge of the Mission he had founded he worked
alone, giving it what time he could spare from his own
Diocese. Soon after John Coleridge Patteson joined him,
in 1854, he handed over the work to him, and consecrated
him first Bishop of Melanesia in 1861.
This was followed by years of self-sacrificing labour.
Every island that the little Mission vessel Southern Cross
could reach between the Loyalties and the Solomons was
visited. We read of 66 landings being made in a year, and
33 scholars being carried to New Zealand.
Great caution was needed. “ Generally the shore was
occupied by bands of armed men. If the women and child-
ren were among them there was need of extra caution, and
still more if dark forms were observed hiding behind trees.”
“ As a rule,” we read, “ Bishop Patteson never hesitated
going ashore, and it was real safety to go alone and defence-
less. Visitors with weapons created suspicion; the usual
method of the Missionaries in landing was to leave the boat
a good way off, and then go ashore either wading or
swimming.” The natives in one place believed that
Patteson was Qat, their great spirit, returned. Elsewhere
he was supposed to be Porisris, a man who had died at
Mota, and after a visit to New Zealand where he had under-
gone certain changes, had re-appeared in his own land.
The difficulty of deciding who he was, ghost or man, friend
or enemy, made landing dangerous, but the danger was
fearfully increased by traders, who bought and stole natives
for Queensland, Fiji, and New Caledonia. Outrages on the
natives were every-day occurrences, and retaliation upon
the whites was the actual result. On Saturday, Septem-
ber 20, 1871, Patteson went ashore at Nakapu, near Santa
Cruz, three days after a labour vessel had been there, and
was killed. He had completely won the love of the natives,
•and had established the Mission firmly, although probably
not more than 500 converts had been made. He was
followed by Bishop John Selwyn, under whom the work
was consolidated and carried forward. Florida, a home of
the head-hunters in the Solomons, was completely converted
to Christianity; the Torres Islands were entered upon, and
teachers estabished in Santa Cruz. When maimed and
worn Bishop John retired, after 18 years of splendid labour.
He left behind him 8,000 souls in the native Church of
Melanesia.
11. THE PRESENT STATE OF THE MISSION.
The present Bishop (Right Rev. Cecil Wilson, M.A.)
has with him a staff of 25 clergy (12 of them natives), 6
49


ladies, and 400 native teachers. There are said to be over
12,000 Christians, and many catechumens and hearers.
Every year more than 1,000 are converted and baptized,
Bishop Lightfoot’s saying being amply verified that these
aboriginal races are ready like ripe fruit to fall almost at
the first breath of the Gospel.
The work is carried out upon the old lines, slightly
modified, to meet altered circumstances. The little
Melanesian Mission Ship—“ Southern Cross.”
schooner “Undine,” of 20 tons, has grown into the
“ Southern Cross,” of 205. The next step will be to buy a
yet larger and faster boat The training school has since
1867 been at Norfolk Island instead of New 'Zealand, the
climate being more suitable, and the distance less to travel.
Three times every year voyages are made right through to
the Solomon Islands. In 1899, on one voyage, 90 landings
were made, generally not amongst bands of armed men, but
amongst friends, who welcomed the arrival of their children
come home for holidays, or of new teachers, or perhaps of a
Missionary come to spend some months with them. There
is still the wading ashore to be done, though seldom the
swimming, for willing hands seize the boat’s head on its
arrival and drag it up out of the surf, or as far as possible
on to the reef. There are now 160 Mission Stations, many
of them with stone churches built by the natives.
There are generally 200 scholars going through a course
of eight years’ training at S. Barnabas’, Norfolk Island.
But the demand of teachers is far greater than the supply,
and a second colony of the same kind has been started at
Siota, in Florida, called S. Luke’s. Here 40 small boys are
being trained by Rev. R. B. Comins and Hr. Welchman.
The day’s work at S. Barnabas’ begins at 6 o’clock, when
the first bell of the day rings. At 7 prayers are said in the
Memorial Chapel for the Christians and those who know
the Mota language, and in the old chapel for the
unbaptized “ hearers,” and any who may be in disgrace.
This is followed by breakfast at 7.20. From 8.15 to 9.45
school is held, the lessons being repetition, New Testament
or Prayer Book, and English or arithmetic. From
10-12.40 all hands work in the fields growing the food of
the establishment. At 1 dinner, at 2 writing school, at 3
some drive in and milk the cows, others go after firewood,
others copy out their morning lessons in copy books, and of
course the majority are free, and play cricket in the fields.
At 6 tea, followed by prayers at 6.45. Afterwards school
again—Old Testament, or general information, or music,
until 8, when there is quiet for preparation of lessons for
the following day until 8.45. Lights are rung out at 10.
It will be seen from this that school work at S. Barnabas’
is no'farce. And the same may be said of St. Luke’s, Siota.
Every year the missionaries are finding it more neces-
sary to spend all their time amongst their people, and so it
is coming about that some stay at S. Barnabas, and form a
50


permanent staff of teachers ; others stay in the islands, and
send away their hoys and girls to S. Barnabas’ or S. Luke’s
to be taught for them.
111. THE DREAM OF THE MISSION.
The dream of the Mission is to carry the Gospel to
every island between Pentecost, in the New Hebrides, and
the furthest island in the German Solomons—that is to say,
between the 17th degree and the sth, a distance of 720
miles. It was all the inhabited islands, about 42 in num-
ber, within this sphere that Bishop Selwyn and Bishop
Patteson undertook on behalf of the Church to win. These,
by an unwritten compact with all other Christian bodies,
except Roman Catholics, have been left for us alone with-
out interference. These we must win. These are now
stretching out their hands for the Gospel of Peace, and it is
we who have undertaken to give it to them. The Cross is
now, after 50 years, planted on 26 islands ; there are 16
remaining, including Choiseul and Bougainville in the
Solomons, Yanikoro and Utapua in the Santa Cruz group.
Some of these we have never seen.
IV. —THE NEEDS OF THE MISSION.
The Melanesian Mission has needs now which it did
not feel 20 years ago.
(1) It needs a faster vessel. This will enable it to reach
the whole Diocese from end to end. The present ship
steams now about 4 miles an hour, a very slow rate when
the distance of each of her three voyages is over 3,000
miles. A sum of at least £12,000 is required to buy a
suitable, plain, fairly fast vessel.
(2) It needs 20 more European clergy and laymen. —
As the native Church grows it is found to need more
shepherding rather than less, and so an increased staff of
European missionaries is wanted.
The Mission has now to contend with the Homan
Catholic Mission, and there is need, therefore, of a deter-
mined effort not only to plant the true Faith, as we have
received it, amongst the remaining heathen, but also to
gather in the harvest which has sprung from the sowing of
those who went before.
(3) It needs good women missionaries.
There is abundant scope for these, but the present
vessel without accommodation for ladies blocks the way.
(4) It needs medical missionaries.
One at the present time is particularly wanted to take
sole charge of Solomon Islands Hospital at Siota.
(5) It needs increased support in alms and prayers.
The Church in Australasia, by which Bishop Patteson
believed the Mission would be wholly supported, contributes
a little more than £4,000 a year where £lO,OOO has lately
been required. To support a double staff, women mission-
aries, and the faster “ Southern Cross,” it is probable that
the Mission to Melanesia will shortly cost £15,000 a year.
Without this better equipment of the Mission for its
work, the missionaries themselves say that there is, humanely
speaking, no jorobability of the conversion of the islands in
this generation, or the next.
BELLENDEN-KER MISSION (Yaekabah).
Where is it!
Near Cape Grafton, on the coast of North Queensland,
about fifteen miles by water from the prosperous and rising
town of Cairns, and situated on the northern extremity of
the large reserve granted by the Queensland Government in
1892. This reserve of over 51,000 acres extends southwards
51


along the coast to the noble Bellenden-Ker mountains. On
the shores of a beautiful little bay lies the aboriginal settle
ment now known as Yarrabah. It was here that the
founder, the late Rev. J. B. Gribble, landed on June 17th,
1892, accompanied by Mr. A. Tyson as assistant, Willie
(a South Sea Islander), and an aboriginal lad named Pompo.
It was indeed a “venture of faith.” The blacks them-
selves were suspicious of the missionaries and kept away.
Nothing daunted, however, the missionaries set to work
clearing the scrub and building a small two-roomed cottage,
but in less than three months important changes had taken
place. Mr. Tyson had resigned his position, and the leader
was on his way to Sydney stricken with a serious illness
from which he never recovered, and died after months of
suffering in Sydney at the early age of 45. He lived to
found the work, others have built upon that foundation.
Through many difficulties and privations has the work at
Yarrabah been carried on until to-day it stands a witness
to the almighty power and love of God. Here numbers of
blacks have been gathered in ; here they have heard for the
first time of the Saviour’s love; 85 baptisms have taken
place, 17 have been confirmed by the Bishop of the Diocese;
Christian marriages have taken place; old heathen rites
have given way before Christian teaching; a settlement of
twenty-five buildings has arisen where once there was
nothing but scrub to be seen; land has been brought under
cultivation, and large quantities of tropical fruits, etc., are
grown by the people. Cattle, horses, etc., have been
obtained. Many improvements have been effected, one of
the chief being a good supply of water from the mountain
ranges by means of pipes. The church will seat 200, and
all has been accomplished under God by the missionaries,
assisted by the natives themselves. Nor has this been all;
three of our young men, full of missionary zeal, preach
earnestly to their own people and assist in the services of
the Church,
WHAT HAS BEEN HONE BY THE CHURCH IN AUSTRALIA FOR,
YARRABAH ?
During the first six years of its existence the 14 Dio-
ceses of Australia and Tasmania raised less than £1,600
towards it; and of that amount considerably over £l,OOO
was raised by the Diocese of Sydney. This means that
during a period of six years 13 Dioceses raised for Yarrabah
about £5OO. Is this all the Church in Australia can do for
these poor people whose country we have taken 1
WHAT HAS THE QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT DONE FOR
YARRABAH 1
They granted the reserve, and for some years made a
grant of about £lO per month ; but for some time this grant
did not benefit us, for owing to the apathy, indifference,
and the intense enthusiasm in more distant ventures such
as China, India, and Africa, this Mission was almost
forgotten, and the AB.M. had to reduce their grant by £lO
leaving us in the same trying position as formerly. But
now, thank God, times are changing ; more interest is being
taken in these people by the Church, and also by the Govern-
ment of the Colony. Since the recent visit of the Home
Secretary to Yarrabah, it has been decided to assist by
making a grant towards the school, which is to rank as a
provisional school, and is to be inspected by the Education
Department. A grant of £6O has also been made towards
the purchase of a new vessel.
THE FUTURE.
Are we now to fold our arms, sit still, and say we have
done enough 1 So many people are being cared for and
taught, why trouble about others? No! hundreds, nay
thousands, are still to be reached and gathered in, not only
here but further to the north in the Gulf of Carpentaria,


Western Australia, and the Northern Territory. A few
days ago Dr. Roth stated that a Mission should at once be
started on the southern shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria.
The question is not “can we,” but “are we willing”?
These people have the strongest claim of any upon the
The Girls’ Dormitory at Yarrabah, Belienden Ker Mission.
Church in Australia. Look back at the past with all the
cruelties and ill-treatment that have been showered upon
them; look, too; at the past neglect,, and
apathy of the Church. Bnt all thisjias passed away. The
old idea that it is impossible to uplift this poor down trodden
race has been exploded, and it has been proved that it is
possible. “Is anything too hard for the Lord ; ” Here the
Church is at work, although for long in a half-hearted way.
£5OO per annum is not forthcoming for a work which has
been signally blessed by God. Why, as we
write this, salaries and allowances are months
in arrears. Why? Because of your thought-
lessness, coldness and a lack of that love in
your heart which causes one to do and to give
for the sake of Christ our Master. Oh, that
God would stir up the hearts and minds of
His people that they may be ready and wil-
ling to give, and so to give that not only
may the work now going on be helped for-
ward, but new fields occupied.
THE NEEDS OP YARRABAH.
Though much has been accomplished
during the seven years that the Mission has
been in existence, it is but as a drop in the
ocean compared with what yet remains to
be undertaken. It has been decided by the
Government to recognise the Mission as a
reformatory for aboriginal children. This
means that all the black children in the
districts near Cairns will be sent to us.
There are many scores of these children and
young people in the camps near the different
agricultural and mining settlements. By
frequent journeys, and by the exercise of
much patience and prayer the children
now with us have been gathered in; but
now our work in this department will be made much
easier, and many will be brought here ere long. These
must be cared for, and provision must be made at once to
receive them ; a building similar to the one now used as a
53


girls’ dormitory must be erected as a dormitory for boys.
At present we have 22 who occupy our old store-room.
For this dormitory we will need £IOO. Then a very
pressing need is a building to serve as a hospital. At
present we use a small tent, but the time has come when a
hospital must be built. For this we need £lO. With a
small engine and circular saws we could cut up all our own
timber, and these buildings would then be erected at a much
less cost. Timber we have in large quantities. With a
small donkey engine and gear , the boys’ dormitory could be
built for less than £SO. Then we need more stock. Our
great aim is toward self-support, but we need a start. At
present we have 36 head of cattle and 8 horses, while we
have miles of good grass country well watered and capable
of carrying hundreds of stock. Our men are working with
a will, and all are hlled with the one idea to make the
reserve permanently their own. The sum of £SO to purchase
stock will help towards self-support. We believe that
Yarrabah will have no small share in the spreading of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ to other aboriginal tribes in North
Australia ; we have lads anxious to do Mission work. By
helping Yarrabah during the jubilee year of the A.8.M.,
your help will forward the extension of His kingdom
amongst the blacks of the far north of Australia. Little
enough has been done in the past for them. Let us be up
and doing. We appeal especially for better support in the
future than has been the case in the past, and for the modest
sum of £250 to assist in the development of Yarrabah.
THE WORK OF THE CHURCH MISSIONARY
ASSOCIATIONS IN CHINA.
To Tasmania belongs the honour of sending the first of
the Church Missionary Association Missionaries tp China.
Before the Association was established in 1892, two ladies
had gone from Tasmania and one from Queensland under
the auspices of the Church of England Zenana Missionary
Society, of which the Rev, H. B. Macartney was the
moving spirit in Victoria. Miss Nisbet sailed from Hobart
in 1889, and Miss Stevens in 1891 ; and both are still
labouring faithfully in the province of Fuh-kien. During
the whole of this time they have been maintained by the
Foreign Missions Board of the Young Women’s Christian
Association of Hobart. In 1891 Miss M. A. Gordon, of
Queensland, sailed from Melbourne and worked under the
Rev. R. W. Stewart till called to higher service on the Ist
of August, 1895. Miss Kingsmill, sister of Mr. H.
Kingsmill, of the Observatory, Hobart, is also an honorary
worker, who went to Foo Chow in 1895, and is one of
Archdeacon Wolfe’s trusted workers.
The first Missionaries accepted by the newly formed
C. M. A. of Victoria, in 1892, were the Misses Saunders,
w ho, with their mother, offered themselves for work under
the Rev. R. W. Stewart. After careful training, they were
sent forth and rendered valuable assistance to the Mission
till their death. On the Ist of August, 1895, a band of
Chinese rebels attacked the Mission premises and killed the
Rev. R. W. and Mrs. Stewart and all the ladies working
under the superintendence (with one exception), amongst
whcm were Miss Gordon and the Misses Nellie and Lizzie
Saunders. On the anniversary of their death in the
following year, the Zenana Missionary Society was in-
corporated with the Church Missionary Association of
Victoria; and since that date, all its Missionaries have
worked under the direction of the O. M. A.
Since the amalgamation, one new Missionary, Miss
Minna Searle, has gone from Tasmania, and is now at
Deng Doi; seven have gone from Victoria, five of whom
are in the Fuh-kien province, one at Ningpo, and another
at Canton, During the same period, New South Wales
54


has sent four ladies to 800 Chow and one to Canton; so
that the Australian Associations have now sixteen Mission-
aries in China in addition to Mrs. Saunders, who is un-,
attached, but who is devoting all her energies to the work
in Foo Chow, and the Rev. E. J. and. Mrs. Barnett, who,,
whilst qualifying themselves for work amongst the Chinese
in Victoria, are doing all they can to help Bishop Hoare, of
Hong Kong.
The work carried on by these Missionaries is of. various
kinds. Some are engaged in school work, as, for example,.
Miss Nisbet, who superintends the Foundling schools.-
Others itinerate in the villages, speaking, as they have
opportunity, to women on the roadside and in .the towns
and villages through which they pass. Others deyote theif
time entirely to Zenana work, visiting the Chinese ladies in
their homes, and instructing them in the doctrines of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Others, again, are engaged in training
native Christians for work as Bible-women and teachers.
The younger Missionaries work under the direction of more
experienced ones, and, usually, in companies of two or
more.
Workers in China have many difficulties. Almost
everywhere they are greeted with the epithet “ foreign
devils ”; and, at times the violence of the mob becomes
alarming. This arises chiefly from the weakness of the
Government, which is frequently unable to cope with the
violence of armed bands of rebels. Occasionally these mobs
are instigated by the literati, as, for example, in the recent
disturbances at Kien-ning, Kien Yang, etc. Almost every-
where the surroundings are unpleasant. They have to do
with a people strongly prejudiced against foreigners and
their teachings ; and, although the whole force of Satan’s
kingdom is arrayed against them, they go steadily onward,
assured of victory through their omnipotent Leader.
Those who have gone from these shores bear a high
character for intelligence, industry, spirituality, devotion,
and zeal. Their labours are highly commended by the
Church’s leaders in the field, and their letters are an in-
spiration to their friends at home. But it may be asked,
“ What are these sixteen among the millions of China?”
God’s blessing has rested on them and their fellow-
labourers. In the province of Puh-kien, where most of
them are at work, the returns published in the year 1888,
1893, and 1898, show that the adult baptisms were 167,
520, and 744 respectively. There were 4,630 baptised
Christians in 1888, 6486 in 1893, and 10,539 in 1898.
The total adherents at those periods were 8,131, 12,046,
and 21,995. In the year following the massacre at Ku-
cheng, the native church at Fuh-kien increased 25 per cent.,
and the native subscriptions were nearly double those of
the previous years. The native Christians are full of zeal
and devotion, and are more aggressive than those in India,
Japan, or Africa. A competent witness says, “Inquirers
are being brought in by the score every week by the
converts themselves.”
China has a population of more than 350,000,000, the
great, majority of whom have never yet heard the Gospel.
It, has, in ten of its provinces, 982 great cities of which,
until quite recently, only 74 had Christian teachers, the
remaining 908 being without a single witness for Christ.
In addition to these large cities, there are thousands of
towns and villages in all parts of the empire into which no
servant of Christ has ever entered. It is estimated that at
least a million Chinese die every month without the know-
ledge of Christ. China, with all its sins and sorrows,
infanticide, foot-binding, opium smoking, and idolatry, calls
aloud to Christian lands to come and help her people and
make known to them the unsearchable riches of Christ.
Everywhere there is room for men and women full of faith
and of the Holy Ghost. Who will go in Christ’s Name and
in His strength to the help of their sin-stricken brothers
and sisters in that land ?
55


NORTH AUSTRALIA.
1. Thursday Island. 2. Cape York Peninsula.
3. Northern Territory of South Australia.
1. Thursday Island. How many nationalities ? The
Government Resident furnishes the following figures. The
population of Thursday Island, including the crews of the
boats anchored in the harbour, Ist March, 1899;
Europeans, 574; Japanese, 440; Philippine Islands, 103;
Aborigines, 60; Chinese, 71 ; Malays, 58; South Sea
Islanders, 44; Cingalese, 54; Javanese, 6; other mixed
races, 105.
The Shipping Office supply the following number of
men on shipping articles. (Possibly 5 per cent of the
following appear in the above return): —Japanese, 790 ;
Philippines, 251 ; Malays, 247 ; South Sea Islanders, 208 ;
Torres Strait Islanders, 174; Australian Aborigines, 150;
Europeans, 86; Natives of Rotumah, 67; Javanese, 52;
Cingalese, 19 ; East Indians, 19 ; North American Negroes,
14; Natives of Samoa, 8; of New Zealand, 7; of Africa, 7 ;
South Americans, 6; West Indian Negroes, 6 ; Asiatics,
Arabs, etc., 5 ; Natives of New Guinea, 2 ; of Mauritius, 2 ;
of Hong Kong, 1 ; of China, 1. The population on the
Island, 1 500, and in connection with it, 2,000, amounts to
3,500.
(A) Difficulties and Encouragement in Church
WoßK.—The Torres Strait Islanders are controlled by the
L. M. Society on their islands to our north. The Philip-
pines and some Malays attend the French R.C. Mission
here. The Japanese, a few Chinese, the South Sea Islanders,
Aborigines, North American and African Negroes are more
or less in touch with the Church of England. A small per-
centage only make use of English as a mediate language.
WHAT IS BEING DONE?
(a) South Sea Islanders. —These boys have their
homes on the church grounds. Classes are held in reading,
writing, and arithmetic. They are anxious to learn English
in order to read their Bibles and join in the English service.
Some are baptized, confirmed, and communicants. A
monthly communicants’ class is held. Week-night classes
are maintained by an excellent honorary lady missionary
and lay helpers. The former will probably leave to
continue work elsewhere under her present Bishop. Daily
intercessions are made at the home for their brothers on the
fleets. The better taught act as a controlling influence on
their own boats. Other nationalities are also permitted to
attend the above classes.
(h) The Japanese. —These far outnumber any other
nationality here The building and repair of boats is
exclusively in their hands. They are excellent shipwrights.
They are admitted to be a most intelligent and progressive
people. English is taught in their school on the Church
ground. By this means some are brought to Baptism.
Japanese Testaments and Prayer Books are obtainable.
The catechumens learn the Catechism in Japanese. The
service is read from the American Prayer Book version
printed in English characters according with the Japanese
sound. Great assistance is rendered by a Japanese com-
municant. This honorary assistant acts as interpreter at
the classes, speaks English well, and is respected. He
would make an excellent missionary among his own country-
men.
(B) Another Great Difficulty. —(a) The fleets are
absent sometimes at great distances. Mission work is quite
possible amongst them. On Saturdays the luggers collect
around their respective schooners to renew stores, deliver
shell, etc. It affords them social life and a break in their
monotonous work. The diver’s work is not for a novice to
56


undertake. It is trying, often painful, sometimes fatal.
An adequate apprenticeship is required. The diver must
add a dauntless courage to a strong physique.
The cyclone of March, 1899, was able to destroy 409
lives and £20,000 of property.
(b) The adjoining islands, viz,, Horn, Prince of Wales,
Friday, Goodie, Possession, Booby, and Hammond are
sparsely populated.
(C) A Serious Difficulty. — The Church possesses no
sailing craft to attend the Harbour shipping, the adjoining
Islands, or the scattered fleets. In consequence of an eight-
knot tide and many reefs, a rowing boat or open sailing
boat is dangerous. Compare a country parish with 1,500
people in its centre with no means of communication at
command for the 2,000 outside and no administration
except by chance.
What has been done? One clergyman has been and is
maintained. On the church ground there is the All Souls
(“Quetta”) memorial church, built of concrete and temporary
wood, at a cost of £l,BOO additions to the amount of
£5OO are being added. It is still incomplete. The South
Sea Islanders have erected the Melanesian School and Home
(one building) at their own expense of £9O. The Japanese
school is of iron. The Rectory, built of wood, is in a fair
state of preservation. A small labourer’s cottage also is in
fair repair.
What is Wanted ? 1. A fleet missionary. 2. A lady
missionary to take the place of the present honorary one
(leaving), 3. A lady teacher to take a Church day school
for European children. 4. A Japanese catechist. 5. A
sailing boat not under a cost of £l5O.
ii. Cape York Peninsula.
(A) The East Coast. —The Aborigines here have
come in contact with white people. There is no mission
station from Cooktown to Thursday Island. The Govern-
ment have set apart a suitable reserve for them, and desire
to see a mission station placed there. It is situated 18
miles from Musgrave telegraph station and 60 miles from
Laura railway station. The following is the official report
kindly supplied by Dr Roth :
“Its limits would be, Saltwater River on the west,
Morehead or Basalt River on the east, the telegraph line on
the south, and the small portion of coast line on the north.
[Please note that in the Surveyer-General’s 1897 16 mile to
the inch map, these rivers are wrongly marked, the Hann
River not being identical with the Morehead or Basalt.]
This is splendid country for blacks to live on, being studded
right through with large lily swamps, lakes, and lagoons.
The blacks also manage to get a large quantity of fish and
game, and as the country is well away from all stations, it
makes a splendid reserve for blacks to roam over at will.
“ An important advantage in favour of such a I’eserve
is that it already constitutes the meeting ground of the
Starcke River blacks from the southern coast and of Coen
blacks from the northern, and would thus tend to congregate
only those aboriginals who are, to all intents and purposes,
friendly with each other.”
(B) The West Coast. —From Thursday Island to
Normanton there is a coast line of 400 miles. The natives
all along have had little or no contact with white people.
The only mission stations are at Mapoon and at Embly
River, maintained by Moravians. The Queensland Govern-
ment are desirous of mission stations further south. A
number of aborigines are on the Archer River, navigable
for 17 miles. Good grass and permanent water is on the
57


Edward River. The Coleman, a little further south, rises
near the Musgrave telegraph station aforesaid.
Wellesley Island has 2,000 wild and plundering
blacks; white men fear to land here The present con-
struction of flint spear heads, etc., on the border of South
Australia bears evidence of the stone age.
in. Northern Territory op South Australia.
What is Happening There? Some Facts.
(a) Europeans. —The number of adult Europeans at
Port Darwin is 280 The number in the Northern
Territory is estimated at 1,600. Europeans on cattle and
other stations live south as far as the southern boundary of
the territory. There are two churches at Palmerston. A
movement is on foot to obtain the services of a Church of
England minister. The Church of England has no resident
clergyman in the whole Northern Territory.
(b) Chinese. —Their number is estimated at 2,200.
(c) Japanese. —The number of Japanese and other
alien races is 500.
(d) Aborigines. —From Thursday Island to far down
the coast of Western Australia, with a teeming black
population all the way, not one English Church Mission is
provided. Nothing cheerful is said of these aborigines.
Wherever the tribes have much contact with Europeans
they slowly decrease in numbers. A mission (not our own)
maintained amongst them for nearly 17 years, without any
appreciable success, has just now abandoned the work.
A bill drawn up by the Government Resident for the better
protection of aborigines is now before the Parliament of
South Australia. Little hope is entertained of its becoming
law.
XU.
AN ASSISTANT BISHOPRIC EOR
WEST AUSTRALIA.
It would perhaps be well if we first of all explained
briefly why we decided upon endeavouring to raise an
endowment for an Assistant Bishopric as our missionary
effort for this year. We are aware that some people cannot
see the connection of an Assistant Bishopric with missionary
effort. This mistake has been the cause of partial failure in
many parts of the world. We believe that the first
requisite for missionary effort is a good bishop, who can
gather round himself a faithful band of workers. This, we
are convinced, is the primitive method, and this we are
convinced has been proved by experience, over and over
again, to be the best way of going to work. We believe
that an Assistant Bishop is the great need of this Diocese,
and we further believe that we could not in any better way
celebrate the closing of the century than by making a
united effort to supply this want.
In order to thoroughly understand our great need let
us explain to our readers the particular nature of the
Diocese of Perth.
(1) Its Size, —This is almost impossible to make any-
one appreciate, unless duty has caused him to travel over
its vast area The Diocese is coterminous with the Colony
of West Australia, and is 1,600 miles in length, by about
1,000 in width, and contains 1,000,000 square miles of
territory. The coast line is 3,000 miles The population is
small, but is scattered from Wyndham in the north to
Esperance and Eucla in the south, and at present has
penetrated 500 miles inland. It may help to appreciate the
distance when we tell you that on the visit of the Primate
to this Diocese four years ago our Bishop came down from
the north of the colony to meet him at Albany, and in
58


doing that he travelled a longer distance in his own Diocese
to meet the Primate than the Primate did in coming from
Sydney to Albany.
(2) The varied character of the work. We have a few
large towns in which there are several parishes, but the
majority of our parishes in the older settled parts are rural.
There is a small centre and a large district. The Bishop
has spent three weeks visiting one such parish, and to do so
had to ride 500 miles on horseback.
In the North there are large pastoral areas, where the
squatters live far apart. Hardly anything is done to visit
them. In the North, too, we have thousands of aboriginals
—no one knows how many. The great problem of how to
help them still remains to be solved. Of course, the main
difficulty connected with the work in this Diocese is on the
goldfields, where we have a population, it is said, of 70,000
people scattered over a territory extending from Esperance
to Lake Way, and every month going further away “out
back.” Among this population we have some of the most
delightful people it is possible to meet, and some very good,
earnest Churchpeople. A great number, however, have
lived so long away from any opportunity of attending any
services, and have had such a hard life, that any work
among them is essentially of a missionary character.
In addition to all this, the shifting nature of the
population makes work most difficult. Miners are terrible
wanderers—here to-day, gone to-morrow—near a church
to-day, miles away to-morrow. Everyone knows the
difficulty of supplying the spiritual needs of such a class as
this.
(3) Under conditions such as these, it will not be
wondered at when we state that the present Bishop has to
travel 20,000 miles in his endeavour to do his work in the
Diocese,
•This almost incessant travelling, necessary as it is to
enable the Bishop to visit his people, has the drawback that
it keeps the Bishop too much away from Perth. This
would not matter very much in a firmly established Diocese,
but here, where everything is growing, where difficulties,
legal and otherwise, are always coming to the front, and
where the necessity for organisation requires the personal
superintendence of the Diocesan, it follows that the work
must be hampered by the continual absence of the Bishop.
(4) It will no doubt be interesting to notice the pro-
gress of the colony and Diocese during the last five years,
that is since the present Bishop came out from Home. The
population has increased from 82,072 to 187,000. The
railway mileage open for traffic has increased by about 600
miles. In 1894 the clergy numbered 25. now there are 50.
In 1895 the communicants at Easter numbered 1,267, last
Easter there were 3,012, while the total number of com-
municants has increased by 1,200 in the last two years.
Voluntary contributions last year amounted to £14,000, an
increase of £5,000 in one year.
Since the end of 1894, 45 new churches and mission
halls have been opened, while several parish halls and 17
rectories have been built.
With the work of development increasing at this rate
it will be patent to all that further Episcopal supervision is
necessary.
(5) The benefits we expect as the result of another
Bishop working in the Diocese are, first, that many places
to which the present Bishop finds it impossible to journey
may now be visited. The Assistant Bishop, not having the
business part of the work on his shoulders, can devote him-
self to missionary effort. The Nor’-West will not be
neglected as at present, for the Bishop could spend the
winter months in that part of the Diocese. During a part
of the year he might live on the goldfields, and so by his
59


presence stir up both clergy and people, and give to the
clergy in their isolated positions that personal sympathy and
help which they, of all men engaged in their Master’s
service, so much require.
(6) There is but one other point to which we need refer.
It is this. Why do you want an assistant bishopric in
preference to a subdivision of the Dioceso 1 There is no
doubt that in the future, perhaps before many years have
passed, this vast territory will have to be divided into three
or more Dioceses. Owing to the shifting nature of the
population, to which we have already referred, it is
impossible to predict where the chief centres will be in
five years time. In a few years we shall be able to see
where the divisions should be, at present it is impossible,
Meanwhilo, in order that we may have additional Episcopal
help we propose to have an assistant Bishop. Apart
altogether from it being a mere matter of justice that the
present Bishop should be relieved of some part of his work
so that he may do the rest more efficiently, we believe that
an additional Bishop will tend to give new life to and put
new energy in the hearts of clergy and people, with the
result that the work of God’s Church in this Diocese will
wonderfully increase.
The outline of our scheme for raising the money is
briefly this : We wish it to be the special work of the com-
municants, each of whom will, we hope, give at least 10s. a
year for three years. We believe that few of our
communicants are unable to do this, while many of them
can and will do more, like one generous donor, who has
promised £lOO for five years.
The success of the scheme depends in a great measure
on the sympathy and energy with \\hich it is taken up by
the clergy and their churchwardens. Will our readers pray
when thinking of this Diocese that God will till the hearts
of clergy and laity with that zeal without which little good
js eyer 4one |
XIII.
MISSION TO THE QUEENSLAND ABORIGINES
ON ERASERS ISLAND.
The history of the Frasers Island Settlement is
interesting from the fact that it represents the first serious
attempt made by the Queensland Government to ameliorate
the sad lot of the fast disappearing aboriginal race. The
days of “dispersing,” as the murderous attacks upon blacks’
camps were once called, have long since passed; but where
rifle and revolver have killed their tens, drink and disease
have destroyed their thousands. The “oldest race in the
world ” has also shown itself helpless against the national
vice of the oldest extant civilisation. The sale of opium
among the blacks has been the subject of a legislative
enactment, but it is an open secret that the Act, since the
day that it became law, has been practically if not com-
pletely inoperative. The blacks, therefore, have met with
white and yellow civilisation in Queensland. They
“shuddered at the meeting,” and then quietly and quickly
began to pass into the antechamber of Him who will adjust
the rights and wrongs of weak and strong races.
In 1896 the Government determined to take some of
the wretched people that remained from the neighbourhood
of civilisation and civilised sins, and to place them on a long
sandy stretch of country lying off the coast about 200 miles
north of Brisbane, and called Frasers Island. Little or
nothing was done to develop the natural resources of the
island, which has been made into an “aboriginal reserve,’
but the blacks who were sent there were separated from
drink and opium, and they received rations which they
supplemented with the uncertain results of fishing and
hunting. The men, who are more than usually athletic and
'yell ipade, soon regained their health and vigour, Thq
60


Women wete not so fortunate. Their conditions of life
conduced neither to happiness nor health. Many of them
had been brought up from childhood in the households of
white people, and they found the life on the Settlement
very hard to bear. Apart from the facts referred to above,
the conditions of the Settlement could not be called desir-
able. The blacks remained idle and unsettled. No attempt
had been made to induce them to improve their land—with
the exception of effecting a clearing around the station
and when not “ hunting ” or fashioning weapons they
squatted idly by the shore watching for the smoke of a fire
on Woody Island, which announced that a telegram had
arrived at the lighthouse with a possible summons for one
of them to the mainland. No attempt was made to form a
school, even for the children, and no religious provision was
made for the settlers, many of whom had been brought up
under religious influences. Incredible as it may seem, even
individual Bible reading was severely discouraged. The
actual administration, although under the control of a
resident superintendent, was largely done through the black
troopers, were not likely to err upon the side of
leniency. There was also no provision made for the un-
married girls who were brought to the Settlement, some-
times from white households where they had been brought
up from childhood. They were compelled to go into the
camp, with the result that they were forced into conditions
well-nigh intolerable to them. Two girls, for instance,
appealed to the Home Secretary when he was inspecting
the island in September, 1899, saying that they were forced
to live with men for whom they had no feeling but one of
abhorrence. This fact, together with his experience of
the highly successful methods of dealing with the blacks
on the Mission Stations at Yarrabah and Mapoon, induced
the Honorable J. G. Foxton to make a radical change in
the administration of the Settlement on Frasers Island.
The attempt to reclaim the blacks simply by separating
from whites had not been wholly successful, and it remained
to see how much further Christian influences could go.
On his return to Brisbane, the Home Secretary made
advances to the various religious bodies in the community
with a view to their taking over the whole charge of the
Settlement, the Government being pledged to subsidise the
work by a yearly grant for rations and the salary of a school
teacher. The matter was first discussed by the Executive
Committee of the A.8.M., the Archbishop taking a keen
interest in the opening afforded to the Church for Missionary
work, and subsequently by the Brisbane Diocesan Board of
Missions. As a consequence of a later meeting, two
members of the Board, the Rev. G. H. Frodsham and Mr.
G. Day, went down to the Settlement, and as a result of
their report, the Board determined to take over the charge
of the Settlement if they could find a man sufficiently earnest
and strong to change the existing state of affairs and “to
guide a childlike and yet debauched people aright.” After a
prolonged search throughout Australia, two men, Messrs.
Kitchen and Irwin, of the Church Mission, were sent to
take charge of the island for the Brisbane Diocesan Board
of Missions from February Ist 1900. At the same time an
urgent appeal was sent to the Rev. E. R. Gribble to come
quickly to advise the Board as to the best methods upon
which they should mould the future of the important work
that they had undertaken. Mr. Gribble at once responded
to the call made upon him, and arrived on Frasers Island
at the close of the second week of the new administration.
On his arrival he quickly took the power out of the hands
of the troopers, centring it for the time in himself. He
removed the children from the camp to the Mission House,
started a school, arranged daily services, and commenced a
system of rationing similar to that used at Yarrabah, that
is, giving the rations to the married women, instead of to
batches of people, as heretofore. He described the great
' curse of the Island as idleness; and with characteristic
61


energy commenced to destroy the curse by setting the
people to work at felling trees, splitting palings, building
and painting huts, or otherwise improving the Station
property. Recreation was not neglected, and the whole
Settlement made to live by rule. Mr. Gribble also explored
part of the island, and came to the conclusion that a large
amount of it could be well used for raising cattle and horses
Many of the blacks are experienced station hands, and re-
ported that there was stock upon the island which could be
purchased for a reasonable sum, if the money could be pro-
cured by the Board. He also thought that other industries
could be developed and the position of the people much
improved.
The position of the Frasers Island Mission is as
follows : It is under the sole control of the Brisbane
Diocesan Board of Missions, who are responsible to the
Government for the well-being of the Blacks upon it. The
Government have undertaken to pay £5OO a year for
“rations” of over a hundred people and for a school
teacher’s salary. They have also undertaken to build a
school-house, girls’ and boys’ dormitories, and to repair the
existing buildings. The subsidy represents the cost to the
Government of the old administration, and considerable as
it seems, it must be supplemented by the Church if the
work of the Mission is to be well done and the people
taught to regard the Station as a home in which they
should take the deepest interest and pride. The people are
capable of such development. Mr. Gribble reports:—“l
have heard so much of the badness of the people, and how
they formed a band of the worst criminals in the Colony,
that I was agreeably surprised to find that they were a
people totally different from what I had been led to expect;
they strongly reminded me of the people among whom 1
had lived as a boy on the Warengesda old Mission in New
South Wales.
It now remains for the Church people of Australia to
demonstrate their conviction that those things which cam
not be done without Christ can be done by His help. The
old administration of Frasers Island owed its failure to a
not unnatural mistake of the gentleman who framed it.
He recognised that civilization had brought much more evil
than good to the Queensland blacks, and he thought that
the evil could be eradicated by removing them from contact
with the whites, and encouraging them to live according to
their old laws and customs. He failed to recognise what is
acornmonplice in India, the primitive customs a“nd laws,
when they have been touched by the dissolvent of civilisations
cannot be re-crystallised at will. The blacks have tasted
of the tree of knowledge, and having lost those old sanctions 1
which safe-guarded a mortality much higher than it has
been the custom to allow, could not be rehabilitated in the
social scale without the gift of other sanctions to take the
place of those that have been lost. It is the aim of the
Board of Missions to supply that loss by the gift of the
Gospel. The work on Frasers Island demands the co-
operation of all Queenslanders —the inhabitants of the
Station are drawn from North, South and West—but it
also deserves help from Christians in other parts of
Australia. The ancient people in the land have dis-
appeared from many parts of the continent, not without
blame to the. Australian nation which has taken their place.
Will not some extend their help to Queenslanders who are
trying to do something for Christ, in the persons of the
poor silly blackfellows, for whom He died ?
XIV.
THE CHURCH MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION.
MISSIONS TO THE CHINESE IN NEW SOUTH
WALES AND VICTORIA.
It is estimated that there are 13,000 Chinese residing in
New South Wales, 8,500 in Victoria, with 19,500 more
62


in the other colonies of Australia, and 6,000 in the colonies
of New Zealand and Tasmania, or a total of 46,000 in
Australasia. These come except a half per cent—from
the Kwan-tung Province, where, according to a recent
estimate of the highest authority, there are 30,000,000 in-
habitants. In this Province also, intercourse with foreigners
was first established, and its people are found all over the
Empire, in the neighbouring States, and in the Malayan
Archipelago. If, therefore, the Chinese amongst us were
evangelized, it is evident they would become messengers of
Christ, not oidy to their fellow countrymen in the Province
of Kwan-tung, but also all over China and Eastern Asia.
What is Being Done?
Two years ago the Mission to the Chinese in New
South Wales, which up to that time was under the im-
mediate control of the A B.M , was transferred to the
Church Missionary Association by the Bishops constituting
the Australian Board of Missions. In taking over this
Mission there were difficulties to face, and liabilities which
were at once discharged. There were also urgent calls to
take up w r ork among the Chinese where there was no
Church work being done, and the Church Missionary As-
sociation was able to send a Catechist to Bathurst to work
in that city and district, also one to Turaut in the diocese
Goulburn, and at the same time to continue the work at
Hay. During the past year there have been eleven bap-
tisms, five in Sydney, and six at Bathurst. There are also
other men under instruction for Baptism.
In Victoria the Mission for many years was in charge
of a Society of which the Bishops of Melbourne and
Ballarat were presidents. It was transferred two years ago
to the C.M.A. It has Mission Stations at Bendigo, St!
Arnaud, Maryborough, Daylesford, Blackwood, Melbourne,
and Little Brighton. There are Mission Schools at Little
Brighton, North Road, Elsternwick, Auburn (2), East
Kew, East Melbourne, Essendon, Malvern, South Mel-
bourne, and Eairfield.
What Results are Known?
The direct results obtained by these Missions it is im-
possible to tabulate. A large proportion of those who have
been admitted into the Church by baptism have shown by
their lives that the Gospel of Jesus Christ has been to them
“the power of God unto salvation.” Some have been
employed in Mission work to their countrymen in the
colonies and in China. Recently a Home has been estab-
lished in Sydney, as a residence for Christian Chinese and
for the training of converts suitable for the work of
Catechists. There is also a Training Home in Melbourne,
where Missionary students are carefully taught and pre-
pared, and they are at the same time engaged in regular
and systematic work. It is interesting to find that several
Chinese Christians on their return to their native land, have
witnessed for Christ to their fellow-countrymen, with great
earnestness and gratifying results.
What are the NEEDS?
It is felt that up to the present only the fringe of the
work has been touched. To carry on the work in Sydney
and New South Wales as it should be one Chinese Clergy-
man and three Catechists are quite inadequate, and yet to
maintain this force with the buildings, travelling expenses,
&c.,, costs the Church Missionary Association over £BOO per
year. The special contributions for this work last year
amounted to only £5OO, including £5O each from the
Church Society and St. Philip’s, Glebe.
In Victoria, as in New South Wales, the sphere of
operations has not been co-extensive with the opportunity
presented. Thousands of Chinese in both colonies are not
63


reached by any of the existing agencies of the Chuch.
From Gippsland, the Ovens, the Wimmera and Geelong
where considerable numbers of Chinese reside, from the
City of Melbourne and its suburbs the calls for extension
have been loud and continuous. Many thousands have
come and gone without having heard of the Saviour who
died for them.
Why Should We Help?
In an address delivered some time ago by the Most
Reverend the Primate, he said : “The opportunity given to
us for making Christian disciples among these Chinese who
are at our very doors and thereby qualifying them to bring
the power of Christian truth on their fellow-countrymen is
an opportunity which should be used to the utmost.”
Recently His Grace said, “ This Mission is one of the many
calls which Christ makes for self-denying generosity. Who
will respond 1 ”
The Church Missionary Associations of New South
Wales and Victoria are taking their share in the coming
Jubilee, and the Members of the Church are asked to
remember the Associations and their work among the
Chinese before Almighty God in earnest prayer, that
hearts may be moved at the time of the Jubilee to make
glad and generous offerings for the sustentation and ex-
tension of the Churchs’ work among those sojourners from
the “ Land of the Sinim ” whom God has sent to our very
doors. Our responsibility is great. The call for help is loud
The needs are urgent. Who will help ? Remember “If
thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death and
those that are ready to be slain; if thou sayest behold, we
knew it not, Doth not He that pondereth the heart
consider it, and He that keepth thy soul doth not He know
it, and shall not He render to every man according to his
works 1 ”
The JUBILEE
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN BOARD OF MISSIONS.
The Jubilee week approaches
What are our Special Needs ?
I. The Melanesian Mission.
( a ) This Mission needs a faster vessel. A sum of at
least £12,000 is required.
( b) Twenty more European Clergy and Laymen.
(c) Good Women Missionaries. There are none in
our islands at this time.
(d) Medical Missionaries. There is only one Hos-
pital at present in ail our Mission Field.
The Church in Australia gives at present little more
than £4,000 a year, where £lO,OOO has lately been required.
The Mission will soon cost £15,000 a year.
If it is not supplied, there is little probability of the
conversion of the islands in this generation or the next.
The South Seas are nearly evangelized in all parts.
The great exceptions are islands within our own sphere.
There is need of haste.
11. The New Guinea Mission.
This Mission urgently asks assistance to establish six
new Mission Stations.
64


This means;
(a) Twenty-five men, that is six Clergy, six Islanders
and 13 Laymen (one to be a printer).
( h) An increased income of £1,200 a year.
(c) Passage money, £3OO.
(d) New plant, £2,000.
This means a new vessel to deal with these new
Stations, native buildings, furniture, &c.
The Jubilee Extension then means
25 men and £3,500.
111. Bellenden Ker Mission.
This Mission is to be treated by the Government of
Queensland as
A Reformatory for Aboriginal Children.
That is all black children in that part of Queensland will
be sent to the Mission.
OUR NEEDS.
(а) A new Dormitory, £lOO.
(б) A Hospital, £lO, all labour and tools being given
free.
(c) A small Donkey Engine.
( d) More Stock. (At present we have 36 cattle and
eight horses, and miles of good grass land.) £5O
to purchase more stock.
The moderate sum of £5OO ought surely to be forthcoming.
IV. The Mission to the Chinese.
IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
(a) Five Catechists are needed at once, which means
an increased expenditure of £5OO per annum.
The income should not be less than £1,300 per
year.
(b) The erection of a Training Home on the ground
adjoining St. Luke’s Church, Wexford Street,
which would cost £BOO.
(c) The payment of the debt on St. Luke’s Church
of £l5O.
IN VICTORIA.
( a ) Additional Catechists.
(b) An income of £l,OOO per annum.
(c) The present debt entirely removed.
THE JUBILEE
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN BOARD OF MISSIONS,
What is the Jubilee?
A series of services and meetings in commemoration
of the formation of a Board of Missions.
When will the Jubilee be Celebrated?
On Sundays, August 19 and 26, with the intervening
week days.
What are the Objects of the Jubilee?
(1) Prayer and Humiliation, Praise and Almsgiving,
together with Instruction.
(2) To encourage by association with the last meeting
of the General Synod in this century, and by
brotherly co-operation in the great question of
the Evangelization of the Heathen, a larger
development of Missionary zeal and self-sacrifice.
65


In connexion with the Jubilee will there be an
increase of the Episcopate?
sealed their testimony with their blood, and
there are hundreds who daily exhibit the power
of Divine grace to change the heart and purify
the life
Yes. Already £lO,OOO has been collected for the
Endowment of a Missionary Bishopric for the
Northern Territory but money is yet required
to provide for preliminary expenses and for a
suitable residence for the new Bishop.
The Diocese of Perth is endeavouring to raise an
Endowment, so as to obtain the appointment of
an Assistant-Bishop, and invites the assistance
of Churchmen in Australia and Tasmania.
What is proposed ?
That all non-Christian races may be brought within
the sound of the Gospel.
What is needed ?
More Prayer. —Pray ye the Lord of the Harvest.
Ask Him : Lord what wilt Thou have me to do ?
What existing Missions is it proposed specially
to assist?
More Lahourers.—F&ce the question honestly. Why
should not / go ? »
More Money. —“ They came, everyone whose heart
stirred him up, and every one whom his spirit
made willing, and brought the Lord’s offering
to the work.”— Exod. xxxv. 21.
Our Australian Missions :
To Melanesia.
~ New Guinea.
~ The Chinese in the midst of us.
~ The Aborigines.
How can I help ?
Offerings may also be made for any Church Mission
in Australasia, or in any other part of the world.
Pray for the success of the Jubilee effort,
Seek to interest others in it.
Give. God hath given you the Gospel, and as ye
have received so give.
Do they need the Gospel ?
Not more, nor less, than we do ourselves.
When shall I begin ?
“The Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the
world.”—l John iv. 14.
Now, and watch every opportunity to help forward
the work contemplated by the Jubilee movement.
“ How shall they call on Him in whom they have not
believed ? and how shall they believe in Him
whom have they not heard? and how shall they
hear without a preacher? and how shall they
preach except they be sent.”— Pom. x. 14, 15.
How shall I do it ?
Set aside every week something for Missions, and
early in August hand it to my Clergyman who
will forward it to the Diocesan Treasurer. It
will then be included in the offering to be pre-
sented by our Diocese at the great Thanksgiving
Service, to be held on Friday morning, August
24th next.
Has there been any evidence of success ?
Yes. In connexion with each of the Missions
some have died trusting in Christ, some have


H Y M N S.
ALL hail the power of Jesd’s name !
Let Angels prostrate fall ;
Bring forth the royal diadem,
And crown Him, Lord of all.
Crown Him, ye martyrs of our God,
Who from His altar call;
Extol the stem of Jesse’s rod,
And crown Him, Lord of all.
Ye seed of Israel’s chosen race,
Ye ransomed of the fall,
Hail Him Who saves you by His grace,
And crown Him, Lord of all.
Sinners, whose love can ne’er forget
The wormwood and the gall,
Go spread your trophies at His feet,
And crown Him, Lord of all.
Let every kindred, every tribe,
On this terrestrial ball,
To Him all majesty ascribe,
And crown Him, Lord of all.
Oh that with yonder sacred throng,
We at His feet may fall,
There join the everlasting song,
And crown Him, Lord of all. Amen.
r F'ELL it out, the Lord is King :
[ Tell it out in accents clear,
Message meet for every land,
Message meant for every ear,
Light,, and love, and life to bring ;
Tell it out, the Lord is King !
Tell it out, ’tis God’s desire
Written in His Word of grace ;
Message fit for human need,
Fit for every clime and place,
Light, and love, and life to bring ;
Tell it out, the Lord is King !
Tell it out, proclaim the Christ,
Tell the message far and wide ;
Doors are open, enter them ; .
Messengers be multiplied,
Light, and love, and life to bring ;
Tell it out, the Lord is King !
Everywhere the peoples' yearn
For the mighty, healing word ;
Christians, speed the message forth,
Let it everywhere be heard,
Light, and love, and life to bring ;
Tell it out, the Lord is King !
Spread the Gospel of the King,
Tell it out to all the earth,
You who have it in your heart,
You who know its boundless worth,
Light, and love, and life to bring ;
Tell it out, the Lord is King ! Amen.
JESUS shall reign where’er the sun
Doth his successive journeys run ;
His kingdom stretch from shore to shore
Till moons shall wax and wane no more.
For Him shall endless prayer be made,
And princes throng to crown His head ;
His name, like sweet perfume, shall rise
With every morning sacrifice.
People and realms of every tongue
Dwell on His love with sweetest song ;
And infant voices shall proclaim
Their early blessings on His name.
Blessings abound where’er He reigns ;
The prisoner leaps to lose his chains ;
The weary find eternal rest,
And all the sons of want are blest. .
Let every creature rise and bring
Peculiar honours to our King ;
Angels descend with songs again,
And earth repeat the loud Amen ! Amen.
r PHOU, Whose Almighty Word
1 Chaos and darkness heard,
And took their flight ;
Hear us, we humbly pray,
And, where the Gospel-day
Sheds not its glorious ray,
Let there be light.
67


Thou, who didst come to bring,
On Thy redeeming wing
Healing and sight,
Health to the sick in mind,
Sight to the inly blind,
Oh ! now to all mankind
Let there be light.
Spirit of truth and love,
Life-giving Holy Dove,
Speed forth Thy flight;
Move on the waters’ face,
Bearing the lamp of grace,
And in earth’s darkest place
Let there be light.
Holy and blessed Three,
Glorious Trinity,
Wisdom, Love, Might;
Boundless as ocean’s tide,
Rolling in fullest pride,
Through the world, far and wide,
Let there be light. Amen.
FOR My sake and the Gospel’s, go
And tell Redemption’s story
His heralds answer, “Be it so,
And Thine, Lord, all the glory ! ”
They preach His birth, His life, His cross,
The love of His atonement
For Whom they count the world but loss,
His Easter, His enthronement.
Hark, hark, the trump of Jubilee
Proclaims to every nation,
From pole to pole, by land and sea,
Glad tidings of salvation :
As nearer draws the day of doom,
While still the battle rages,
The heavenly Dayspring through the gloom
Breaks on the night of ages.
Still on and on the anthems spread
Of Hallelujah voices,
In concert with the holy Dead
The warrior Church rejoices ;
Their snow-white robes are washed in blood,
Their golden harps are ringing ;
Earth and the Paradise of God
One triumph-song are singing.
He comes Whose Advent Trumpet drowns
The last of Time’s evangels,
Emmanuel crowned with many crowns,
The Lord of saints and angels :
0 Life, Light Love, the great I AM,
Triune, Who changest never,
The throne of God and of the Lamb
Is Thine, and Thine for ever ! Amen.
OGOD, our help in ages past,
Our hope for years to come,
Our shelter from the stormy blast,
And our eternal home ;
Beneath the shadow of Thy throne
Thy saints have dwelt secure ;
Sufficient is Thine arm alone,
And our defence is sure.
Before the hills in order stood,
Or earth received her frame,
From everlasting Thou art God,
To endless years the same.
A thousand ages in Thy sight
Are like an evening gone,
Short as the watch that ends the night
Before the rising sun.
Time, like an ever-rolling stream,
Bears all its sons away ;
They fly forgotten, as a dream
Dies at the opening day.
0 God, our help in ages past,
Our hope for years to come,
Be thou our guard while life shall
And our eternal home. Amen.
0 BROTHERS, lift your voices,
Triumphant songs to raise,
Till heaven on high rejoices,
And earth is filled with praise ;
Ten thousand hearts are bounding
With holy hopes and free ;
The Gospel-trump is sounding,
The trump of Jubilee.
0 Christian brothers, glorious
Shall be the conflict’s close :
The Cross hath been victorious,
And shall be o’er its foes.
Faith is our battle-token :
Our Leader all controls ;
Our trophies, fetters broken ;
Our captives, ransomed souls.
Not unto us—Lord Jesus,
To Thee all praise be due ;
Whose blood-bought mercy frees us,
Has freed our brethren too.
Not unto us—in glory
The angels catch the strain,
And cast their crowns before Thee
Exultingly again.
Great God of our salvation,
Thy presence we adore :
Praise, glory, adoration
Be Thine for evermore,
Still on in conflict pressing
On Thee Thy people call,
Thee King of Kings confessing,
Thee crowning Lord of all. Amen,


FROM Greenland’s icy mountains,
From India’s coral strand,
Where Afric’s sunny fountains
Roll down their golden sand ;
From many an ancient river,
From many a palmy plain,
They call us to deliver
Their land from error’s chain.
What though the breezes
Blow soft o’er Ceylon’s isle,
Though every prospect pleases,
And only man is vile ;
In vain with lavish kindness
The gifts of God arestrown,
The heathen in his blindness
Bows down to wood and stone.
Can we, whose souls are lighted
With wisdom from on high,
Can we to men benighted,
The lamp of life deny ?
Salvation ! oh, salvation !
The joyful sound proclaim,
Till each remotest nation
Has learnt Messiah’s Name.
Waft, waft ye winds, His story,
And you, ye waters, roll ;
Till, like a sea of glory,
It spreads from pole to pole ;
Till, o’er our ransomed nature,
The Lamb for sinners slain,
Redeemer, King, Creator,
In bliss returns to reign. Amen.
JESUS, Thou joy of loving hearts,
Thou Fount of Life, Thou Light of men,
From the best bliss that earth imparts
We turn unfilled to Thee again.
Thy truth unchanged hath ever stood ;
Thou savest those that on Thee call ;
To them that seek Thee Thou art good ;
To them that find Thee, —All in all.
We taste Thee, 0 Thou living Bread,
And long to feast upon Thee still;
We drink of Thee, the Fountain-head,
And thirst our souls from Thee to fill.
Our restless spirits yearn for Thee,
Where’er our changeful lot is cast,
Glad, when Thy gracious smile we see, —
Blest, when our faith can hold Thee fast.
0 Jesus, ever with us stay ;
Make all our moments calm and bright;
Chase the dark night of sin away ;
Shed o’er the world Thy holy light. Amen.
10.
THOU art coming, 0 my Saviour,
Thou art coming, O my King,
In Thy beauty all-resplendent,
In Thy Glory all-transcendent;
Well may we rejoice and sing !
Coming ! —in the opening east
Herald brightness slowly swells :
Coming ! —O my glorions priest,
Hear we not Thy golden bells ?
Thou art coming, Thou art coming ;
We shall meet Thee on Thy way,
We shall see Thee, we shall know Thee,
We shall bless Thee, we shall show Thee
All our hearts could never say ;
What an anthem that will be,
Ringing out our love to Thee,
Pouring out our rapture sweet
At Thine own all glorious feet !
Thou art coming ; at Thy table
We are witnesses for this ;
While remembering hearts Thou meetest
In communion clearest, sweetest,
Earnest of our coming bliss.
Showing not Thy death alone,
And Thy love exceeding great,
But Thy coming, and Thy throne,
All for which we long and wait.
Oh, the joy to see Thee reigning
There, my own beloved Lord ;
Every tongue Thy name confessing ;
Worship, honour, glory, blessing,
Brought to thee with one accord,
Thee, my Master, and my Friend,
Vindicated and enthroned,
Unto earth’s remotest end,
Glorified, adored, and own’d. Amen.
FROM Christ to learn, for Christ
teach,” —
Our fathers gave the watchword clear
As they the flag unfurled, and each
True heart to-day still holds it dear.
“ From Christ to learn, for Christ to teach,
So through the fields and lanes they press,
And in the busy mart they preach
The Christ, Who died, and lives to bless.
“From Christ to learn, for Christ to teach,”
Then, where their sisters wait in gloom,
In patient love they tell to each
Of that bright hope that lights the tomb.
“ From Christ to learn, for Christ to teach,”
While ’mid the sick, the blind and lame
They stand to heal, and all beseech
To trust the One, the saving Name.
69


! From Christ to learn, for Christ to teach,” —
And some toil on with busy pen,
His scribes who write in other speech
The word of Life and Light do men.
“From Christ to learn, for Christ to teach,” —
May this our watchword ever be,
Until the Day we yearn to reach
Brings near the Face we long to see. Amen.
12.
ARM of the Lord, awake, awake,
Put on Thy strength, the nations shake ;
And let the world adoring see
Triumphs of mercy wrought by Thee.
Say to the heathen from Thy throne,
“I am Jehovah, God alone ; ” ’*
Thy voice their idols shall confound,
And cast their altars to the ground.
Let Zion’s time of favour come ;
O bring the tribes of Israel home ;
And let our wondering eyes behold
Gentiles and Jews in Jesus’ fold.
Almighty God, Thy grace proclaim
In every clime, of every name ;
Let adverse powers before Thee fall,
And crown the Saviour Lord of all. Amen.
THY kingdom come, 0 God,
Thy rule, 0 Christ, begin ;
Break with Thine iron rod
The tyrannies of sin.
Where is Thy reign of peace,
And purity, and love ?
When shall all hatred cease,
As in the realms above ?
When conies the promised time
That war shall be no more,
And lust, oppression, crime
Shall flee Thy face before ?
We pray Thee, Lord, arise,
And come in Thy great might;
Revive our longing eyes,
Which languish for Thy sight.
Men scorn Thy sacred Name,
And wolves devour Thy fold ;
By many deeds of shame
We learn that love grows cold.
O’er heathen lands afar
Thick darkness broodeth yet ;
Arise, 0 morning Star,
Arise, and never set ! Amen.
.14.
''UHROUGH the night of doubt and sorrow
I Onward goes the pilgrim band,
Singing songs of expectation,
Marching to the promised land.
Clear before us through the darkness
Gleams and burns the guiding light ;
Brother clasps the hand of brother,
Stepping fearless through the night.
One the light of God’s own presence
O’er His ransomed people shed,
Chasing far the gloom and terror,
Brightening all the path we tread.
One the object of our journey,
One the faith which never tires,
One the earnest looking forward,
One the hope our God inspires :
One the strain that lips of thousands
Lift as from the heart of one ;
One the conflict, one the peril,
One the march of God begun :
One the gladness of rejoicing
On the far eternal shore,
W hen the one Almighty Father
Reigns in love for evermore.
Onward, therefore, pilgrim brothers,
Onward with the cross our aid ;
Bear its shame, and fight its battle,
Till we rest beneath its shade.
Soon shall come the great awaking,
Soon the rending of the tomb ;
Then the scattering of all shadows,
And the end of toil and gloom. Amen,
ETthe song go round the earth—
Jesus Christ is Lord !
Sound His praises, tell His worth,
Be His name adored ;
Every clime and every tongue
Join the grand, the glorious song !
Let the song go round the earth !
From the eastern sea,
Where the daylight has its birth,
Glad, and bright, and free !
China’s millions join the strains,
Waft them on to India’s plains.
Let the song go round the earth !
Lands where Islam’s sway
Darkly broods o’er home and hearth,
Cast their bonds away !
Let His praise from Afric’s shore
Rise and swell her wide lands o’er !
Lot the song go round the earth !
Where the summer smiles ;
Let the notes of holy mirth
Break from distant isles !
Inland forests, dark and dim,
Snow-bound coasts give back the hymn
70


Let the song go round the earth—
Jesus Christ is King !
With the story of His worth
Let the whole world ring !
Him creation all adore
Evermore and evermore ! Amen.
ONWARD, Christian soldiers,
Marching as to war,
With the Cross of Jesus,
Going on before.
Christ, the Royal Master,
Leads against the foe,
Forward into battle,
See, His banners go.
Onward, Christian soldiers,
Marching as to war,
With the Cross of Jesus,
Going on before.
At the Name of Jesus
Sfttan’s hbst doth flee ;
Oh, then, Christian soldiers,
On to victory !
Hell’s foundation’s quiver
At the shout of. praise :
Brothers, lift your voices,
Loud your anthems raise.
, Onward, &c.
Like a mighty army
Moves the Church of God ;
Brothers, we are treading
Where the saints have trod.
We are not divided,
All one body we,
One in hope and doctrine,
One in charity.
Onward, &c.
Crowns and thrones may perish,
Kingdoms rise and wane ;
But the Church of Jesus
Constant will remain :
Gates of hell can never
’Gainst that Church prevail ;
We have Christ’s own promise,
And that cannot fail.
Onward, &c.
Onward, then, ye people,
Join our happy throng ;
Blend with ours your voices
In the triumph-song ;
Glory, praise, and honour
Unto Christ the King :
This, through countless ages,
Men and angels sing.
Onward, &c. Amen.
/W SPIRIT of the living God,
V / In all Thy plentitude of grace,
Where’er the foot of man hath trod,
Descend on our apostate race.
Give tongues of fire and hearts of love,
To preach the reconciling Word ;
Give power and unction from above,
Whene’er the joyful sound is heard.
Be darkness at Thy coming, light;
Confusion, order in Thy path ;
Souls without strength inspire with might ;
Bid mercy triumph over wrath.
0 Spirit of the Lord, prepare
All the round world her God to meet ;
Breathe Thou abroad, like morning air,
Till hearts of stone begin to beat.
Baptise the nations ; far and nigh
The triumphs of the Cross record ;
The Name of Jesus glorifiy,
Till every kindred call Him Lord. Amen
71


|lnintr for use in reference to the Jubilee ; |flissionarn jfcstibnL
OGOD, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Mercies, and God of all comfort, we pray Thee
to have compassion on our infirmities, and to strengthen us for serving Thee in the proclamation of Thy
Gospel everywhere.
Send Thy special blessing, we beseech Thee, on the Missionary Festival being now held [or, shortly to he
held ] amongst us. Stir our zeal, stimulate our energies, and support our efforts, in behalf of the evangelization
of our own land, of the islands of the sea, and of all the nations of the earth.
We humbly acknowledge our shortcomings, and we desire henceforth to work more earnestly for the glory
of Thy Name, and the extension of Thy Church.
Hear us, O Father, in heaven Thy dwelling-place, and grant that we may have the help and inspiration
of Thy Holy Spirit in all things, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
W. A, Pepperday & Co., General Printers, 119 a Pitt St., Sydney, N.S.W.




