

1884
THE DRY COUNTRY,
BY
GEORGE RANKEN, ESQ.
Special Correspondent to the Sydney Morning Herald.
ALSO
Letters addressed to Mr. Brodribb,
By Gentlemen in the Western Districts of the Colony.




“THE DRY COUNTRY.”
From our Special Correspondents.
Sydney Morning Herald, 12th April.
WILLANDEA BILLABOXG, ApBIL 5.
On crossing the Lachlan at Booligal, 60 miles north of
Hay, the signs of desolation are too manifest to leave room
for doubt. The river itself is hut a shrivelled apology for
the stream at Cowra, showing as a mere gutter almost stag-
nant within naked sun-cracked banks. Plains of grey or
reddish soil, spotted here and there with withered poly-
gonum, and the stumps of what used to be salt-bush and
cotton-bush succeed each other, divided by belts and
patches of box and scrub timber. A few starved and
dying sheep crawl wearily beside the track, vainly trying
to eat the dry and sapless herbage. At times, one stumbles
and falls to rise no more ; and the ever-ready crows gather
over it. _ For 60 miles farther, to Mossgiel, the tale of
famine is written in the skeletons of sheep strewn along
the road. Most of these died last November, when an at-
tempt was made to move them off their runs. There was
this much partial benefit involved, that the sheep remain-
ing on the stations had a better chance of survival, and the
vegetation was allowed an opportunity to recover from the
heavy stocking to which it had been subjected. All this
seems to point to either exceptionally bad seasons, or to an
undue strain upon the natural resources of the country;
perhaps to both.
. The consequences to the different stations have been as
diverse as the conditions of the country and the degrees of
“ management.” Probably the losses have been lightest
on those runs where the sheep have been left much alone ;
and the greatest casualty, there is reason to believe, has
occurred where desperate efforts have been made to travel
them. Away from the main thoroughfares, and on runs
where the herbage has not been trampled out by previous
overstocking, the hardy desert plants provide a scanty but


stimulating diet that will keep the sheep alive as long as
any water stand.
From the Lachlan north-west to the banks of the Darling
there is no natural supply of water whatever. The country
is almost a dead level, consisting partly of saltbush plain,
partly of open scrub. There are no landmarks to be seen,
neither mountain, forest, creek, nor river. You cross for
miles a monotonous stretch of open ground dotted with
scorched-tussocks of herbage, to enter upon in turn a tract
equally uniform in aspect, covered with bushes and shrubs
10 and 12 feet high. This scrub provides the reserve of
food which keeps the stock alive after the grass and her-
bage fail. Near Mossgiel the road passes a depression in
the surface which elsewhere would be called a blind gully.
It can hardly be called a channel, and there is no sign of
water having been in it for long, but this is the Willandra
Billabong, the one remarkable feature of the district. The
Billabong commences on the Lachlan above the town of
Hillston and crosses the country westward for over 100
miles, then turning southerly it becomes less defined and
disappears in the direction of the Lower Murray towards
Wentworth. When the Lachlan comes down in flood from
the Abercrombie Banges, swollen by its tributaries, the
Belubula and Burrowa, then the Billabong is filled with
the surplus waters of the river, and these slowly spreading
fill every hollow, following every undulation, till at last,
weeks after they have left their parent stream two hundred
miles behind, they are absorbed in arid plains or fill mar-
shes fringed with polygonum and dwarf box trees —to be
called “lakes ” if the wet season happen to continue.
The filling of the Billabong is to the people of the dis-
trict like the rising of the Nile. It means food and water
for many hundreds of thousands of sheep for one year, if
not two.
But this casual supply would of itself do little to water
even a portion of the stock kept in the Lower Lachlan.
The chief improvements on all the stations are wells and
tanks. These, on several stations give evidence of great
thought and energy, besides heavy expenditure in their
construction. The wells have been sunk in most cases
under considerable disadvantages, and at times only to yield
brackish or even salt water. In many instances, the pro


Year.
Inches rainfall.
Year.
Inches rainfall.
1872
15-28
1879
15-65
1873
14-77
1880
10-68
1874
14-92
1881
12-54
1873
13-45
1882
9-99
1876
9-70
1883
7-01
1877
12-32
1884 (3 months) 2-11
1878
12-24
portion of saline matter is about one-fourth of that existing
in sea water. Such water can (it is found) be used by
stock without bad results, but it is unfit for almost all other
uses. The tanks again are even more expensive in con-
struction, and it is long before they hold sufficient water.
In a country so level, it is often difficult to find a catch-
ment area in the locality where the water is wanted, and
thereafter the trouble and outlay are much greater than in
securing an equal quantity in such a country as Liverpool
Plains. Here there is no possibility of throwing the water
back for half a mile up a gully with a single embank-
ment.
The structure made necessary by the configuration of
the ground is a solid rectangle of earthwork, presenting a
face of about 100 yards each way, surrounding an exca-
vation some 30 feet deep. The water is collected by drains
cut all over the outside surface, which lead into the tank
through a wooden sluice-box penetrating the embankment.
When the tank is filled up to the level of the ground then
the sluice is stopped, and any water that may be standing
outside is pumped in till full to the top of the bank. It is
doubtful, though, if any tank has yet been filled quite full.
A great proportion of these works have been constructed
within the last three years, which have been the driest
since 1872. The following is the rainfall recorded on a
station centrally situated. It may be taken as a fair
criterion of the district:
• This 12 years’ rainfall shows an average of 12 inches, with
a maximum annual fall of 15-65, and the minimum of last
year 7'ol. For the first eight years the average is 13
inches; for the last four it is but 10. This diminished
supply being coincident -with the stocking of many stations,
accounts for the present privation. But the opinion is held
by those who have observed the country closely for many
years that with the spread of water conservation and


reasonable stocking, the capability of the pasture will
steadily increase ; and unless the vice of over-stocking pre-
vails largely each succeeding dry cycle of seasons will be
more lightly borne. It has been noticed that after a period
like the present the primitive herbs of the more delicate
kind are reduced in number, but the growth of grass is
greater, and the tendency is, on ground fed with sheep,
for the grass to continue thickening.
If this hypothesis is verified it will throw light on changes
which are reported to have taken place in other districts.
In Messrs. Morris and Eanken’s report on the land, on
pages 73 to 76, will be found evidence of the condition of
the country adjoining Deniliquin 40 years ago, then looked
upon as part of the Australian desert, and of the marvellous
change which arose in one life time from occupation with
stock. Hitherto, owing somewhat to the land law, and in
large measure to the speculative character of station hold-
ings, the improvement of the pasture has attracted little
interest. Few owners have worked for ultimate results
until the last two or three years, and almost all the profits
from inland stations have come, not from the returns of
stock and wool, but from making profitable sales of these
properties to the numerous companies and syndicates that
have entered upon pastoral enterprises. At an earlier
period again the practice of run-jobbing stood in the way
of any legitimate use of the pasture. Unstocked country
was held in immense blocks for years by speculators who
had no intention to use it except to enforce a premium for
the man who wanted to get grass for stock. Consequently,
when the legitimate squatter at last entered on his lease-
hold, he was handicapped with a heavy price, and had
moreover to proceed at once to the improvement of country
without water, and probably carrying only six months’
grass. His work has therefore been done piecemeal, and it
must take many years before the country can be watered
and fenced so as to work the stock to the utmost advantage.
As to the improvement of the grass, further, the law of
selection is a nightmare that shadows all such efforts. If,
however, the new law can be framed so as to provide a
tenant-right under a 15-years lease to the extent of one-
half the area on these Lachlan and Darling stations, much
valuable work will follow, and I believe most of the pro


prietors would welcome tlie measure, and would readily
resign the other halves of their leaseholds, of course under
suitable arrangements as to the improvements given up.
The rabbit question is causing much anxiety at present.
From papers that have been shown me, I cannot help
thinking that the operation of the Act is being needlessly
hampered by multiplicity of forms, returns, and red tape.
The stockowners are generally working for the extermina-
tion of the pest, but many of them are tired of official cor-
respondence, and have abandoned all idea of claiming
compensation under the Act. From the papers which I have
seen, I would judge that fully half the time of the local
inspectors must be spent in filling up these returns, and it
seems to me that they are called upon to make positive
statements about things that, even with the utmost activity
and diligence, they cannot possibly know anything what-
ever. 1 observe that the last weekly return from the
department notifies a diminuation of the number of rabbits.
I cannot see how this opinion has been arrived at. The
impression in the district is that they are rapidly spreading
to the north-east from the south-western boundary. If the
whole trouble were confined to an area as large as Moore
Park, no doubt the census of rabbits so made up in Sydney
might have a certain value, but many of the in-
fested measure 40 miles by 30, and it is quite impossible
that the inspector, though he may fill up the form as re-
quired, can know what such a tract of ground contains.
I hear right and left that the work would go on much
better, and that much irritation and annoyance would be
saved, if the rabbits were dealt with simply under the
Noxious Animal Act. I fear that even the best possible
method is hit upon, the disease will run its course until
arrested by some natural law, the extent of the country
affected is so great, and so much of the surface being
covered with undergrowth.
Sydney Morning Herald, 22nd April, 1884.
West op the Daelinq, on Paeoo
Watees, Apeil 11.
My last letter was written on the Willandra Billabong.
I am now 170 miles further north-west. Since I ap-
proached the edge of the country under the pressure of


drought, I have endeavoured to make clear that the pri-
vation and loss arising from the want of grass and water
are by no means uniform over the area affected; and now,
having reached the heart of the dry region, I find that my
powers of observation and discrimination require to be ex-
ercised as much as ever.
I wrote last from a station on which 140,000 sheep had
been kept without loss all through three dry seasons. The
country occupied is in the proportion of six acres to the
sheep. Water conservation has been carried out largely,
but many of the tanks have never been filled. Fresh grass
has not been seen on the run for three years, and now both
grass and herbage have disappeared, while the salt-bush,
blue-bush, and cotton-bush have been, over large patches,
scorched and schrivelled into blackened stumps. The open
scrubs, which cover about one-third of the run, provide the
principal stock of food now. Cutting down these bushes
for the sheep is the principal work of the station, and 30
to 40 men are daily engaged in it.
The value of this vegetation as a reserve supply for dry
years can hardly be over-estimated. It extends all over
the north-western district; and while the ground, naked
and arid, grills under the dry heat, the hardy scrub trees
continue to put forth their green and silvery frondes.
These, tough, hard, and glittering, throw off the sun’s rays,
and absorb moisture from an atmosphere that seems to con-
tain none. About two-thirds of these shrubs are eaten
keenly by the sheep, and some of them are not only cap-
of supporting life, but they are stimulating and fatten-
ing in a high degree. They are in great variety, and are
known by local names such as Mulga, Cherry, Bush, Yar-
ran, Belah, and numerous others; but almost all may be
classed under the two orders of acacia and casuarina. A
small mob of cattle, numbering about 1 -'’(l, is kept in one
of the paddocks. These cattle never see grass, and have
been reared entirely on scrub leaves and branches. They
look fairly well, and make better beef than could be ex-
pected from their hardy diet. I partook of a sirloin this
day week, taken from one of the number, that I thought
much better than any meat to be got from the abattoirs in
Sydney.


Now, this station is not improved up to its full capability.
The further distribution of water and the subdivision of
paddocks have been arrested until the Land Bill is passed.
When the present suspense is terminated these improve-
ments will go on, and probably, when the tenure warrants
the outlay, other works, which cannot be attempted under
the existing law, will be commenced. But, though only
partially watered and fenced, it presents a marked contrast
to other properties in the neighbourhood. One of these,
very sparingly improved, but heavily stocked, was sold at
the end of the “good years,” namely, in 1880, for an
enormous price. When the dry season began the usual
pinch commenced. Large flocks were crowded in to the
few tanks there were, and speedily the pasture was
trampled out; ultimately, when too late, the sheep were
moved off, only to die on the bare roads in thousands, and
out of 200,000 sheep only 10,000 are said to remain. In
another direction there is a small station of some 10 miles
square, quite unimproved, and the natural consequence is
that the sheep are all dying or dead. Along the road to
Wilcannia you can read the same record easily enough.
Where tanks have been made in some proportion to the
area of the ground, where the paddocks are of moderate
size and moderately stocked, and where scrub is being
cut the sheep are alive, and some in very fair condition.
Where reckless speculation has been at work, chancing
the seasons, or equally reckless confidence, based on sloth
and ignorance, there groups of dead sheep lie under the
clumps of scrub, or die stuck in the fences. No one who
has lived in these parts, or who has taken the trouble to
find out the history of the past, can doubt that the wet and
the dry seasons recur in alternate cycles. The number of
years in the cycle it may be difficult to estimate, but I am
convinced that if each stockowner had stocked his run and
provided water on the calculation that these bad seasons
were certain to succeed three good years, we would hear
very little about famine and desolation now. From seeing
the same symptoms again and again, the conviction is
forced upon your mind that the policy which leaves the
great leaseholds under a speculative tenure is a false one.
For every squatter who aims at the thorough improvement
of his run, three aim at selling out when the good seasons


come, and tlien woe betide tbe buyer wben the wheel turns
round again!
For 20 miles round Wilcannia, as is to be expected,
there is little to be seen but a dusty waste marked here and
there with a skeleton, but upon getting beyond this circle
I entered upon albeit of country where there had been a
heavy fall of rain, about inches in the beginning of
March. Mr. Favem, in his graphic description of the Great
Inland Plain, speaks of running down a dry channel for a
long distance, and then all at once coming on a brimming
waterhole with the adjacent ground showing signs of heavy
rain. He also tells of seeing heavy thunder-showers fall-
ing far off across the great level wastes producing oases of
vegetation alternating with dry tracts; and there is little
doubt that the same phenomenon occurs in the Darling and
Paroo country. A man ploughing a track round the race-
course at Wilcannia, close to an empty tank, saw one of
these storms approach him and stop. After work he took
his bullocks to the river of water, a distance of over a mile.
In passing the tank he looked at it, and found it was full.
The waterspout had fairly deluged the ground within three
hundred yards of where he was working. How, something
like this must have happened on ground I went over
yesterday. On a belt of a mile in width and several miles
in length, a shower of this kind had fallen six weeks ago,
and the effect was to be seen in the sprouts of grass and
herbage budding all over the surface. The soil, which out-
side the belt looked dry and lifeless as a cinder-heap, must
have been fairly impregnated with germs of life. ’ Here
was proof at once of what the semi-desert was. The one
shower had stirred the powers of vegetation, and with an-
other shower, or even cool weather and protection from the
sun’s rays, the patch of waste will be like a clover field.
Going on, I began to perceive that the country, though
level, was not the dead level of the eastern side of the
Darling. Features appeared ; miniature gullies and ridges
showed that catchment areas for dams and tanks could be
much more easily got. I passed a well just being bottomed,
and the water, though brackish, was not nearly so saline as
many of the wells in the Willandra. The depth was 140
feet. Near this was a tank being excavated with scoops
drawn by bullock teams. The work, from the shape of the


ground, was much, less expensive than the tanks I saw last
week.
A mile or two further I had an opportunity to see what
the country in its primitive state was like in such a season
as this. A large paddock which had been fenced in for
some time had never been stocked with sheep, and only a
few cattle had been run upon it. This country had not
been reached by the shower I have mentioned. It was
easy to see this, because there was no young vegetation,
hut the ground was covered with good feed, including,
besides the salt-hush and cotton-bush, quantities of porou-
line or pigsface and other herbs. The hollows were full of
cane grass, the fresh stalks and leaves being readily eaten
by the stock, and presently I came upon the best possible
test of the value of country which had never been over-
stocked. A portion was fenced off for a lambing paddock.
Six thousand ewes were in it, and ewes and lambs both
looked well. Through this paddock comes (I cannot call
it the channel, but) the outflow of the Paroo Channel there
is none for a long way up, but when the waters come down
they submerge the flats between the low ridges, forming
endless billabongs, and joining other back-waters in a net-
work of shallow lakes and creeks. The flooded land can
be readily followed by the eye from the dark lines of poly-
gonum and the bunchy cane grass. The shoots of the
polygonum are excellent feed, though always growing on
land that is periodically under water. The growth from
such land would in the, eastern districts be deemed un-
wholesome for sheep, but in these inland regions no sheep
ever suffered from either liver or foot rot. The only
disease that habitually affects the animal is starvation.
On crossing the Paroo I entered a country of a different
character from any I had seen since leaving the head of
the Murrumbidgee. As I ascended the western side of the
valley I came upon a well-defined creek, and I was told that
several of such creeks, sometimes with good standing water-
holes, joined the river to the north.
The capability of this western country for withstanding
drought appears to me to be very remarkable. All that I
have witnessed gives proof of dormant capacities that want
only working the right way to provide wealth and comfort
for the people of New South Wales eventually, and that


should in any case benefit the real occupants and pioneers.
As to the station-mongers and scrip-dealers in runs, I
have not been able to see that their operations hitherto have
produced anything but debt, muddle, and famine.
During the next few days I hope to see the country far-
ther north and west in a radius of about 50 miles and then
I intend to head back by another route.
Wilcannia, Monday.
ihe long-continued drought has served to show the
superiority of wells over open tanks. One well is a corner
of Messrs. Butcher andßrodribb’s Mount Arrowsmith run,
hi this district, has been let to a neighbouring squatter at
£IOO per week, the lessees to pay the expense of raising the
water. This fully shows the severity of the drought and
the high value of water. Only 80 points of rain have
fallen since the beginning of the year. The Eiver Dalimg
is unnavigable throughout, and there are no prospects of a
change. _ A public meeting was held on Saturday, to take
into consideration the high prices and impending scarcity
of provisions. None can be got by the river, and the road
is impassable for teams owing to the scarcity of grass and
water. The small stock of chaff on hand is selling at 255.
a bag; flour, from 70s. to 80s. per bag; potatoes, lOd. per
lb.; and other necessaries, when procurable, in proportion.
The meeting passed resolutions to the effect that telegrams
be sent to Terowie, Port Augustus, and the Burra, South
Australia, giving the ruling prices here, and intimating the
remunerative prices that would be obtained for any of the
necessaries of life. It was also stated that camels would
find no difficulty in accomplishing the journey from South
Australia via the Barrier Ranges. There can be no doubt
that stocks are very low, and it has become a serious matter
to consider how they can be replenished to avert a possible
famine. There is no apprehension with regard to present
requirements, but in a month’s time that will not be the
case unless fresh supplies be brought forward.
Paboo Eiver, April 14.
I have now reached a point 100 miles from the Queens-
land boundary, and about the same distance west from
Bourke. The accounts that reach me of the country north


and east tell of something blacker than what I have passed
through. Whether, if analysed, the facts would appear as
diverse as I have shown to be the case between Booligal
and this I shall not be able to judge. Indeed, I could not
get the means of travelling further, for horseflesh is not
to be had. Meantime, while I write, the heavy moisture
laden clouds are hanging in masses to the north, and I
hope the long looked-for break in the weather is coming;
but, twice already, since I have been on this journey, there
has been the same promise in the sky, only to drift away
southward after shedding a few drops on the scorched
earth, as if in mockery like the torture of Tantalus.
During the last two days I have seen on one side of a
range a small flock of ewes in a large paddock starving
and on the other side, in a paddock of cquel size, a large
flock lambing and looking well. Both paddocks had
abundance of water. The only difference was in the soil—
the one was the rich red loam of the plains, the other
hungry shingle. Twenty miles further on I saw a splendid
lot of weaners, which had kept right till three weeks ago,
dying in paddocks abundantly watered. The soil was
light, and the very mulgah trees, hardy as all acacias are,
were withering in the dry heat. The more I see, the more
I feel the impropriety of attempting to generalise in re-
porting on this drought. It is clear that in the instances I
have mentioned neither the further distribution of water
nor the subdivision of paddocks could save the grass and
herbage from being scorched into dust, nor could prevent
the stock starving. With a few inches of rain this same
light sandy ground would be covered with a mat of luscious
vegetation. There is no averaging the carrying capability
of such land. It will carry a sheep on every three acres
with less than an inch of rain every month. With a rain-
fall of one-half that quantity —the fall of the last 12 months
—it will carry none at all.
There is a special difficulty in grazing country like this.
The fact that a number of the stations west of the Darling
are new, are in fact being made, and have not been able
yet to store water in their tanks, is not to be overlooked
among other causes of the present privation.
The trade of run-dealing, moreover, introduces an ele-
ment which unquestionably hampers bona fide squatting,


and aggravates the evils of seasons like the present. Certain
men devote themselves to picking up vacant blocks by the
map, sometimes, it is said, aided by private official intel-
ligence. They pay £lO a year per block, and hold the
leases as scrip on speculation. If these fail to sell for
£IOOO, or £2OOO each to stockowners seeking runs, they
put on some cull sheep bought for a few shillings per head,
make a few sham improvements, and in a grassy season,
such concerns, often gigantic areas, are offered for sale.
They pass in due course through the recognised channels
into the hands of unwary buyers, and their best policy is
to sell out at a profit while the play is good. But if the
buyer is not a jobber, but a bona fide man meaning work,
he has a hard fight before him. It would have been much
better for him to get a moderate-sized run direct from the
Crown, instead of paying some £20,000 for what is really
bare waterless country; but it so happens that all the un-
stocked country is forstalled in like manner, so he cannot
help himself. The first dry year drives him to his wits end,
and before he can put his station in a condition to meet
drought, his sheep are dying all round him. Squatting, it
is certain, would be all the better if it partook more of the
character of sheep-farming, and less of run jobbing.
It is obvious then, that the starvation and death of stock
may arise from other causes than deliberate overstocking,
speculating on the chance of the seasons, or the wilful ne-
glect of needful precautions, though instances of both,
neither few nor insignificant, may be readily cited.
I observe that in most of the Sydney papers the want of
water is held to be the main cause of distress. In all the
country I have gone over, the want has been not of water
but of grass. The further extension of water supply would
of course on most runs make more grass available in ordi-
nary seasons, but it would do little in a season like this on
light-soiled back blocks where the hardy cotton bush and
salt bush are scorched down to the roots. The sheep that
hold their own lives on scrub, or feed where the stronger
soils have retained some little moisture ; those that suc-
cumb perish, not from want of water, but from want of
food.
The country west of the Darling, so far as I have seen it
has a much larger natural water-supply than the country


to the east. There are several large standing water-holes
in the Paroo creeks, and the surface of the ground is of an
undulating character, affording abundance of catchment
areas ; consequently it is much more favourable for the con-
struction of dams and tanks. In addition, the whole of the
lower country receives the overflow of back water from the
Darling, and, at times, it receives the main stream of the
Paroo. The watershed between the two channels becomes
indistinguishable, and a maze of creeks, swamps, and
shallow lakes running together in a rainy season, spreads
like the Wilandra Billabong, irrigating millions of acres
and providing food for more than one year. It is said
that this took place in 1870 and 1877, and we are now in
1884. If the cycle of seven years holds good, then there
will be the basis for a calculation, and whether the series
should turn out to be four wet seasons and three dry, or
three wet and four dry, those concerned ought to try
whether the key will not unlock the problem. With the
alteration of good and bad years accepted as a recognised
fact in the order of nature, much might be done to make
the excess of the one period supply the wants of the
other.
But here come in the question of tenure; and the opera-
tion of the new Land Bill in connection with the charac-
teristics of the climate will need much consideration.
Sydney Morning Herald, May 2nd, 1884.
Paroo River, April 14.
In reference to the question of tenure as bearing upon
improvements necessary to modify the effects of drought,
if may be said that whatever prompts the squatter to the
permanent improvement of land and stock must be for the
general welfare. The tenure under which he has worked
hitherto has given him no grasp of the soil which could
protect him if he attempted to make the most of his hold-
ing, while it has prompted him in two directions to action
prejudicial to the welfare of the colony. In the first place,
the end of all his efforts is not to make a good property
and work it, but to make a salable property—to cram it
with stock and sell out at a price per head. The buyer
who comes in is overloaded with debt, and he is, as it were


driven to overstock to meet his bills. The whole affair
becomes a financial improglio, worked for the good of
nobody knows who. There is in connection with it neither
local proprietorship nor social life nor responsibility, and
as far as political and national interests are concerned, such
a station might almost as well he a blank on the map.
The locum tenens may he able to kill a beast without tele-
graphing to Melbourne, but he must be cautious if he
attempts to do anything more important.
Now, it is clear that it will be a good thing for the
colony if the new law makes it more for the interest of the
squatter to work his station than to part with it.
The other direction in which he is driven is that the law
of 1861 both compels and helps him to turn his leasehold
into a freehold—first by picking the eyes out of his run,
and afterwards by buying it up bodily. It is needless to
say that these operations have proved equally unsound as
investments as they have been unwholesome for the public
welfare. Even paddocking and water conservation carried
to their utmost possible limits will not give a return on land
bought at the rate of three acres to a sheep.
Those who have been concerned in the large freehold
stations of Eiverina know this.
We may safely say, then, that the new law will he a good
one for the public as well as the lessee if it encourages the
squatter to make the best of his holding without buying up
the land.
But what is the holding to consist of? And now we
come to the division of the runs, a question that raised a
fearful commotion on the banks of the Darling. In Eiverina
proper Sir John Eobertson’s political offspring had been
easily rented or bought up. The squatters of the Edwards
and Yanko soon found out that if their leaseholds were
thrown open to the “ poor man,” it needed only a little
knowledge of the Act, ready money, and a land agent who
was a legislator, to strangle the selectors as fast as they
could come on. Some of the Darling station-owners had
graduated in the same school, and in the arid semi-desert
of the western division they felt no harm whatever for
selectors, and considered their stations their own for ever
—grass, land, and all —as much as Ben Boyd did. So they
protested strongly against two sections of the bill—the


division of the stations, and the institution of 10,000-acre
leaseholds. They wanted no change in the law, and could
protect themselves against all intruders. Other station-
owners made no such extravagant pretensions. They fully
appreciated the advantage of getting a lease, something of
the nature of a tenant-right, of one-half their holdings, and
stipulated only that the resumption should not he capri-
ciously exercised, and that improvements on lands resumed
should he fairly considered. These formed, however, only
an educated minority. The voice of public meetings
declared that the country was ruined, that the sheep were
to he hunted off one side of every run, and the lands made
away with—as if they were to he shipped across the seas.
Now, what would the Act really do for the dry country?
I believe that if the leasehold halves of stations are made
real tenant-rights for a term of 20 years, with compensa-
tion for improvements resumed at an apprised rate, and
the improvements within the leaseholds are made a burden
on the land, the Legislature will have done the best possi-
ble for the thorough development of the western districts.
Under such a tenure many well tested methods will come
into operation, and many experiments will be tried which
cannot be attempted now. On the good soils, which cover
a large part of the country, the distribution of water supply
and the subdivision of paddocks can hardly be carried too
far, and all such doings mean more stock, better stock, and
greater security against drought. On the poor soils it is
not so easy to see what can be done. The present aspect
of some stations would lead one to conclude that the best
policy was to take the sheep off during the dry periods, or
reduce their numbers very considerably; but I have no
doubt that in time better modes of working sandy flats and
stony ridges will be hit upon, as well as the red-soil plains
and forest. If the Act is allowed a fair chance of working,
T think it will appear before long that a tenant-right of
half a station is a better bargain than an insecure weekly
occupancy of the whole. But this result depends entirely
on the squatter concentrating his efforts and resources in
working his leasehold, and keeping his hands oft the re-
sumed portion. The Act proposes that he shall hold the
latter under an annual license, in virtue of which he will
get the full use of the pasture and improvements until the


land is from time to time occupied according to law. When
■any portion is so taken, the dams, tanks, and fences should
he paid for at a fair appraisement. If the eventual settle-
ment of the country is to be recognised as a reality, and
not treated as a farce, it is clear that the squatter can
hardly get a better tenure than that offered him now. But
the Legislature, if its members wish to satisfy the public
•demands, must by needful provisions make the resumed
areas safe from manipulation, and keep them for the
•specific purpose for which they are resumed. Also, if the
squatter wants good treatment he will keep carefully within
the law, and refrain from putting a finger on these resumed
lands, for if he tries to repeat the games played at Denili-
quin and elsewhere, the electors of New South Wales will
make short work of him, as sure as Sir John Eobertson’s
Act is condemned and ordered for execution.
Now comes the question, how are these 10,000-acre
leaseholds to be allotted ? It is necessary to point out that
if these areas can be taken up in the ordinary land-office
way by application, every resumed run will be made away
with on the first land-office day; the intent of the law will
be effectually blocked, and the Act will be a farce. It will
take only 25 forms written out to cover a resumed run of
250,000 acres, and the blackmailers and dummies who will
■crowd the land office will be quite contented if they can
each earn a £SO note by obstructing the Act. It must be
borne in mind that no penalty to be enforced by a court of
law can be relied upon as of any efficacy. The machinery
for preventing abuse must be in the administration itself,
and must not depend upon the doubtful decrees of a court
sitting perhaps six months after the trick has been success-
fully played.
If Parliament can legislate so that these lands can be re-
served for real settlers only, then the Act will be free from
the main difficulty that overshadows the bill, and two good
things will follow : the respectable settler will be able to
get at once the holding the law offers him, and the
squatter’s stock will be moved only to make way for real
settlement. It is well worth some study to shut out the
ring of sham selectors and agrarian blacklegs who are
ready and eager to, make ducks and drakes of the new law.
The question is one often asked, and generally answered in


the negative : Can a man do anything with 10,000 adres
on the Darling? A working family, with say £ISOO, a
flock of 1200 sheep and 100 cattle, would, in my opinion,
do a rash thing if they moved from a smaller holding in
the central country to try it. Still no man can say that it
cannot be done. If there are dry years, there are also-
good years. But before daring to put the stock in, a good
tank of say 12,000 cubic yards would need to be excavated ;
next, the outside fence would need to be erected; and
fodder should be stored from the first, while the grass,
grows, either in a silo-pit or a stackyard. Without such
preparations but one thing can happen to the small sheep-
farmer with 10,000 acres —his stock will all die the first
dry year.
Still, there is no doubt that by means, perhaps not even
guessed at present, the lands will some day be successfully
peopled, and for that reason the 4eld for settlement pro-
vided by the Act should be sacredly preserved, even if a
single soul did not go on it for years.
Sydney Morning Herald, 7th May, 1884.
Lat. 31- S., Long. 143-30 E., April 17.
When I wrote last from a place 40 miles from this, the
northern sky was black with heavy clouds, and all the
afternoon we listened for the first splash of the rain. A
dense shower appeared in the horizon far up the J?aroo,
and another to the south in the direction of Mount Mur-
chison : but not a drop fell within miles, and before the
sun set, the last film of vapour had been swept from the
heavens, and the prospect of a change was as far away as
ever.
The climate of the Australian desert is unquestionably
delightful. The air is dry, light, and exhilirating, and
the sunshine illuminates a landscape, consisting, if you
leave out the bare parched earth, of blue sky and glistening-
foliage. Some of the scrub trees are silvery coloured,
others grey or dark green, and the box-tree, the chief
representative of the eucalyptus family here, is crowned
with a mass of beautiful shining leaves, which seem to
glance, twinkle, and laugh, as if Australia were at the
present time holding general holiday. And, without doubt,


there is much that is wholesome and pleasant in the desert.
If you want to know in what respect, compare it with a
Java swamp or a Malacca jungle, or even with the Norfolk
fens or the Highland moors. Neither man nor heast
sickens here. Sheep, cattle, and horses, while there is
anything to live on, are in perfect health. Fluke and foot-
rot, which haunt the flocks in the tableland, are unknown
on the Darling and Paroo. These are the healthiest of
sheep with undeniable fleeces. Cattle, that as long as they
can get a drink, fatten on twigs and leaves ; and horses,
that with the lightest of feeding can do a sound day’s work
without hurting themselves.
There is only one evil that ever menaces animal life or
human well-being in these regions, and that is drought.
The dread powers of desiccation are now doing their fellest,
and the sights one meets in travelling are harrowing. Two
days ago I carried some beautiful young sheep to place
them under shelter where the crows could not get at them,
for these fiend-like brutes were tearing their eyes out before
they were dead. The sheep did not weigh much more than
the wool upon them. And yet the clear brown eyes, strong
fleeces, and sound limbs of the poor hoggets, showed that
there was nothing wrong with them but the one disease,
the result of the general drying up of vegetable life, —
emptiness, inanition, starvation. If well-fed they would
have weighed 40lb. each of net mutton; as they were,
they consisted only of wool, skin, and bone, a few pounds
of each.
There are other signs of the times and seasons. In my
young days, when I took my first ride north, I travelled
some 600 miles from the Hunter and hardly saw either
I angaroo or emu. The blacks and dingos kept the deni-
zens of the forest within limits, and those which survived
were strong and fleet. Here, the bush is full of emus—
iheir natural enemies are removed, and every new tank
forms the nucleus of a breeding ground. In a day’s
journey you are constantly in sight of groups of 10 and 20,
out they are not the emus of the unstocked wilds. Poor,
iialf-grown starveling effigies, they are hatched only to be
starved, and you find them dead all about the paddocks.
The kangaroos are not in the same proportion, certainly
not one for 20 that are on Liverpool Plains, but few as
they are, they are dying also.


The clay-pans form a marked feature of the Darling and
Paroo country. Level expanses of hard clay, they look
like what they are, namely, dried up ponds. They are
from half an acre in extent to 10 and 20 square miles.
Lake Peri, 40 miles back from the Darling, is one of the
largest size. It measures eight miles by two, about half
the size of Lake George. On its hard-baked surface no
vegetation appears, and water lies only in those rare years
when the floods from the river spread over the low lying
lands. Looking across from the eastern bank, however, I
saw a beautiful sheet of water with the tree tops clearly
reflected, but it needed only a second glance to recognise
ttm mirage which ever haunts these dry wastes. On the
plains this phantasm is constantly appearing, and as sud-
denly disappearing. You travel on toward a level, un-
broken horizon, and all at once an island of tree tops appears
above a line of mist, or a sheet of shining water, where a
minute before there was but the clay surface dotted with
withered stumps. You can hardly count 20, when, as if
by a shake of the kaleidoscope, the imagery has disap-
peared.
But if Lake Peri holds no real water, springs of some
volume break out of the low hills by which it is surrounded.
On the eastern side some dozen well-heads have burst out,
which, bubbling to the surface and carrying quantities of
mud with the water, have formed a series of green knolls,
covering a space of some hundred yards across. From these
knolls the water trickles in slender streams till soaked up
in the parched soil, and all round the sheep camp in num-
bers, contrasting favourably in their appearance with many
flocks in the neighbourhood. The water of the main spring
must be of considerable volume, because below the green
knolls, close to the margin of the dry lake, it appears again
on the surface forming a swamp. My attention was at-
tracted to this by observing the water-fowl collected on the
spot.
The springs and swamp are all within the travelling
stock route, and of course available for drovers ; but, strange
to say, the unknown authorities who construct Government
works have placed an expensive tank close to the supply
which nature has so benefieiently provided. The common-
sense thing to do in the case would have been to clean out


some of the natural basins and place about 100 yards of
troughing, and this could have been done for £2O The
£2OOO tank could then have been excavated in some dry
spot instead of within half a mile of a natural reservoir.
But I shall have something more to say as to this and other
similar official dealings before I have done.
Sydney Morning Herald, B th May, 1884.
Nbab Menindie, Apeil 25.
I wrote the foregoing a week ago, and I have been
travelling constantly since, at times crawling on with weak
horses, so that I have not had leisure to continue my report.
Leaving the Paroo watershed I directed my course west-
ward, and got into country of a different character, passing
through a part of Sturt’s Stony Desert, and stopping at a
station formed on one of the spurs of the Lyall Range.
As the country rises to the westward it gets much poorer.
The outline at first conveys the impression of a good graz-
ing character, hut further scrutiny shows that the soil is
light and shallow, while the surface is covered with iron-
stone pebbles in places, and elsewhere the subsoil looks
like a hard cement. The state of the stock over this tract,
measuring about 40 miles, is most deplorable, and the ac-
counts which I received left me in no doubt that much dis-
appointment had resulted from the occupation of the
country. The land, it seems, is being gradually denuded
of the little alluvium there is. This has been washed away
by the rains of past years, and is now being blown and
drifted into every watercourse and hollow. From this
cause many of the tanks are fast silting up, while the land
is becoming less fit to produce a healthy vegetation. As to
the stony country, it is said that when once the grass and
herbage are eaten off, the land does not recover. If the
country were spelled and the rainfall were certain and
abundant, probably this country would recover; but as
things are it remains bare and the stock die fast. lam
told that this is the character of much of the surface west
and north-west, both towards the barrier Range and to-
wards Mount Browne.


No.
1876
Ins.
1877
Ids.
1878
Ins.
1879
Ins.
1880
Ins. ,
1881
Ins.
1882
Ins.
1883
Ins.
Average
Inches.
I
4-03
12-46
13-64
9-39
12.58
10.64
7-66
9-25=
10
2
5-96
14-33
14-39
10-70
12.36
12-97
8-93
7-35=
10-8
3
...
...
12-
7-41
10-92
9-27
5-63=
9
4
...
..
•9-30 7-96
7-61 =
8.3
Before crossing the Darling again at Wilcannia, I was
through five stations. These were mostly of large size,
and the area examined was about four millions of acres.
The following figures represent the rainfall on four of
these five stations ; the first two since 1876, the third since
1879, and the fourth for the last three years :
All these stations are well improved. On some tanks
have been excavated which have not yet been filled ; but
in all the want is grass, not water. On No. 1 the sheep
are doing very badly. Last shearing there were mustered
only two-thirds of the count of five years before. The loss
since shearing cannot be estimated, but it must be consider-
able. On No. 2 the sheep have held their own : a few
flocks look poorly, but most of the flocks look well. No.
3 did well till within the last six weeks ; now the young
sheep are dying fast. On No. 4 the stock are said to be
no worse than on some stations further westward, but the
accounts that come in from that quarter can hardly be more
melancholy. One other stage, and that a short one, will
make the calamity irretrievable. I have within the last
two days followed the eastern bank of the river down for
60 miles through two stations, and I have seen nothing
more reassuring. The whole tract is one succession of bare
clay flats, with hardly a vestige of vegetation, and the sheep
are in a sad state. On one of these the stock has twice
during the last nine years been reduced to half the number
through drought, and the losses were replaced, not by the
increase bred, but by buying more sheep. After careful
consideration of all that has come before me, I am convinced
that over two-thirds of this country the loss of stock was
going on before the present dry period commenced. Every
thing that enterprise and expenditure could achieve has
been done, in the full conviction of the high character of
the country, and that a harvest was to be reaped when the
seasons became favourable. These expectations have not
been realised, and I think the cause can be explained.


The inferior character of the country, entirely irrespective
of the low rainfall, has surprised and disappointed me. I
fully expected to see a considerable proportion of the
district equal to the Murrumbidgee, or containing lands
such as those of the Castlereagh, or what would be called
good country in Queensland; but I have hardly seen an
acre of such. No doubt the climate and the character of
the vegetation are both favourable to the constitution of
the sheep, but abundant pasture can grow only on the
rich soils which absorb and retain moisture. I am told
that even unstocked country becomes bare of vegetation
in drought. In other parts of Australia bare country
retains grass in fair order in long dry seasons. In
another respect this district proves itself exceptional to
other portions of the continent. Elsewhere it has been
proved again and again that occupation with stock increases
the capability of the ground for holding water. Here, the
result following stocking is that water-holes and tanks fill
up or dry up.
The great floods of 1864, it is told, filled many of the
lakes which are now dry, such as Topar, Inkermann,
Langaweira, and Woytchogga. Many of these had stations
formed upon them, but the improvements are now aban-
doned from the failure of the water. One man with
Queensland experience formed one of these, and insisted to
the last that his sheep trampling and puddling the marging
of the lake would make the water stand; but eventually
he had to clear out and sell the sheep for a trifle.
If there are such difficulties in the way of large stations
being worked to advantage, it follows that the obstacles to
be overcome by small station-owners or 10,000-acre lessees
will be quite as great. There are but few instances of
bona-fide selection here, but none of those who sought to
live on the natural grasses or the cultivation of the soil
have prospered. The solitary small sheep farmer of the
district has twice lost his stock, and after sinking wells,
only to find salt water, has at length abandoned his holding.
The other day I passed about a dozen trial shafts that had
all been sunk on salt water, and from the only well that
was being worked the water obtained was too bitter to
drink. The stock cannot thrive upon it.


I would willingly speak more favourably of this country,
if the facts could warrant any other interpretation. The
improvements are substantial and well designed, far excell-
ing those to be seen in country much superior. Wells with
receiving tanks of solid stonework, and excavated tanks
that look more like public works than the fruits of private
enterprise, are to be seen ; also, stone woolsheds and other
station buildings of a like durable construction.
It would be well if better legislation or better adminis-
tration could be framed that would help those now strugg-
ling unsuccessfully to conquer a pastoral waste; but the
dominant problem is, after all, how to keep sheep and in-
crease their numbers on a poor soil, with an average annual
rainfall of only nine inches.
Joseph Cook & Co., I’rinters, 354, Geoige-strcet, Sydney.




THE
WESTERN DIVISION OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
A Western squatter writes to me on Ist August last, as
follows: —
“ With regard to the western division, the land is in many
places not capable of carrying more than one sheep to ten
acres, even when fenced and watered. The same amount
of fencing and the same number of wells which would suf-
fice for 10,000 sheep of the same county at the back of the
Darling, would suffice for 30,000 sheep in the Murrumbidgee
or “ Yanco ” county ; whilst in the latter district the wool
is of better quality and freer from dirt, and the carriage to
market does not amount to one-third of the rates which
have to be paid in the outlying parts of the country. The
only system which could justify the rents would be that
leases should be of a long term —say 21 years—and inde-
feasible during their currency, and that the lessee should
be guaranteed a reasonable allowance at the end of his lease
for the money which he might have spent in developing the
country leased by him.”
Another gentleman writes as follows :
“ In the third territorial division, except on the frontage
to the Barwan and the Darling Eivers, it is hardly an ex-
aggeration to say that the whole extent of country embraced
is destitute of water, except so far as it is concerved by
tanks or dams.
Tanks are costly and unreliable in any long-continued
drought, and only get replenished after heavy rains. Dams
would only enhance the value of the county within reach
of the fi outage for stock, at present doubtful —even if dams
can be put across a watercourse legally —though a question
of first importance for the lessee. Wells, no doubt, are the
safest and most reliable where water can be got, even by
deep sinking ; but this has yet to be proved.
There will be many failures for every success, with a large
expenditure whether failure or success. The county in-
cluded in the third division has a light average rainfall, with
a high temperature with frequent drought. It is only by


light stocking and a large expenditure for water-supply,
that any exceptionally dry times can be met without a
heavy loss.”
About this time twelve months a friend of mine was about
to visit some of the outer stations in the western division.
I asked him to give me some particulars of the stock and
stations in general. He was absent nearly three months.
He writes as follows:
“ I have lately come in from a three months trip through
the Pastoral districts of this Colony on Stock and Station
business,”
“I visited a large number of stations. Starting from
Dubbo, I traversed the Wellington, Lachlan, Warrego,
Blyth, and Liverpool districts. The country all through
was sutfering more or less from a protracted drought, more
or less for the last eight years. Last year large numbers of
sheep died on the Lachlan. I could name two stations
alone that lost 100,000 sheep each, and this year one station
was employing thirty men skinning starved sheep. I have
also travelled along a creek where it was not possible to get
a drink at any of the water-holes, owing to the dead cattle
in them died from actual starvation. lam now quite satis-
fied it is impossible to make one and the same law for the
whole colony. In my business of stock and station agent,
I ain, as it were, behind the scenes, and know that capital
will not be invested in this part of the country without
long leases.”
Irom a Traveller in the Biverina County with some practi-
cal experience in the Salt Bush Country and Climate.
® u ßS es^orls f° r Consideration from one not personally
interested in Pastoral Pursuits.
Minimum Eent, Crown Lands, 20s. per Sec.—
This is much too high, a great deal of the Lower Darling
district embraces country ot very inferior character, rolling
sand ridges, with dense Mallee and porcupine, wholly
destitute of grass and water, country to be made even
ordinarily available, requires a large expenditure ot Capital,
and even then the results are by no means certain, when
climatic conditions and well known insufficiency of rainfall
are taken into account; it is a fact, well authenticated, that


tanks and dams in this district have been made for periods
of one, two, and even three years, without a single drop of
water running into them ! and even when the conditions
are otherwise more favourable, that is, the tanks fortunately
supplied, and the run (improved) generally in fair order,
the acreage cannot safely be put down at less than one
section to 50 sheep, or in other words, the lessee, after
spending large sums in developing his block, has to pay
within a fraction of sd. per head for his sheep running over
it.
Pooncarrie, on the Darling River.
General Remarks.—
The squatters of the Lower Darling complain that they
have been very much neglected, their district having hitherto
formed a portion of a very large Electorate, with which
other portions they have had few, if any interests
in common, they say, and I think justly, there are
certain specialities of their district requiring special legisla-
tion, that the same laws, with regard to the public lands are
unsuitable to the Darling, that what may appear wise and
just, in other and more favourably placed districts, may be
quite the reverse m this: that, in short, the Darling should
be differently and separately treated, as compared with the
higher and upland districts of the Colony, and their grounds
for seeking this exceptional legislation are not unreason-
able, when we consider the dryness of the climate, the
warmth of the temperature, the scarcity of water (and
consequent immense outlay involved in obtaining it) the
large areas of almost utterly worthless soil, the acreage
necessary to feed a sheep, the working expenses, consequent
upon grazing a comparatively small number of sheep upon
large (because inferior) tracts of country, the want of
facilities of access to many of the back blocks, their remote-
ness in many instances from the centres of population,
markets, &e. And for these reasons they maintain the
district can never become other than a pastoral one, and to
hold their own even at this extensive areas are indispen-
sable. Small holdings simply meaning utter ruin to those
concerned.


Another gentleman from the western division writes as
follows:
“ 1 consider the present outlook very gloomy indeed.
The rent of Id. per acre in this county means absolute
ruin At this rate, the rent on our two places amount to
nearly £3,000. We should protest in every way in our
power against such an iniquitous imposition. I am quite
certain that most of the unimproved country in this district
will be thrown up. It would be simply impossible for us
to beep ours. It means this : for country improved and
stocked, it is equal to Bd. or 12d. per sheep, which possibly
can be borne, though it knocks 10 per cent, off the value
of sheep at once. But for runs like this, half improved, and
consequently only half stocked, it really means Is. 6d. or
2s. per head. Who, in the face of that, will go on improv-
ing where it is so costly ? I place no faith in the proposed
cumbrous expedient for reducing the rents by appeals to
to the local Boards. At one time the squatters were al-
lowed to appeal against the appraisement courts ; this is
simply a sop to disarm opposition. Once it becomes law,
it will be a case of the wolf and the lamb. I hope it will
be opposed tooth and nail in the Council.”
Lachlan, 14 th November, 1879.
Mt Deae Sie,
In reply to your letter of the 10th inst., allow me
to tender you my thanks for the strenuous efforts you have
made and are making, to hinder a gross injustice being per-
petrated on the holders of Back Blocks. I have held my
Blocks for the last seven years. I have expended over
£13,000 on them, and I have been compelled to sell them
for £4,000 of hard-earned savings ; literally, I have to com-
mence afresh to save something for old age, if I am spared
to see it.
I have made permanent water by tanks and dam-making;
I failed in four trial shafts to get water, and concluded that
some expenditure in tanks would be more certain, and
equally sure if good catches were selected, and the tanks
were embanked, and the water pumped over the embank,
ment to water the stock. Of course in a single letter I
cannot go into particulars.
The great drawback to Back Blocks is—


No. 1...
Eent £110'
2...
... .»• ))
94
3...
• •• • • • )j
6G
They were taken
4...
... ... ))
100
up by liobt. Eand,
of Mohonga, at the
5...
)J
100
G...
»
b2
upset rents.
7...
• • • )J
100
8...
100
750
Ist.—Want of water; the cost of making to every 5
square miles might be reckoned at £750, or £3,000 to every
64,000 acres. It is not often that you can find four good
catches in a ten-mile block. I allow each tank to be 10,000
yards with embankment, and this cannot be made with
troughing, &c., for less than £750.
2nd. —The next drawback is, the long time occupied
before you can improve the country to carry stock.
3rd. —From the newness of the country, the soil being
untrodden and friable, the wool is damaged to the extent of
3d. per lb. for years.
4th. —You have to keep a poisoner constantly employed,
besides the expense of the poison, and the sheep to make
baits, and after all for years. When you are not surrounded
by neighbours, you suffer constant loss by dogs and eagle-
hawks, especially by the latter at lambing time.
sth. —You have extra carriage both ways, as well as
higher wages to pay for labour, because you are in the back
country.
6th. —No back blocks should be appraised above ss. per
section for ten years, and double that for the second ten
years, with no right to purchase.
I held on to my blocks because the rent was low, and I
hoped some day to be able to secure water, so that I could
go on improving until my country would graze stock all the
year round. —Tours truly,
J. E. P.
The eight Berawinia Down blocks were advertised for
sale by the Government on the 27th September, 1875, at
the following rents :


Lot I—
-Berawiuia, area 70,000
acres,
Premium Total.
Kent £33, £20, £38
2
„ „ 00,000
a
„ £28, £26, £33
3
„ „ 40,000
a
„ £19, £55, £30
4
„ „ 04,000
„ £30, £20, £35
5
„ „ 64,000
„ £30, £20, £34
6
„ „ 52,000
„ £25, £40, £35
7
„ „ 64,000
„ £30, £20, £35
8
„ „ 64,000
478,000
f
„ £30, £20, £35
£275
Mr. Band held them from September, 1875 to the end
of 1878, and then forfeited them.
The Government put them up to public competition on
the 25th August, 1879, through Messrs. Eichardson and
Wrench —there was not a single hid for any one of them.
The Eents were too high.
The Government put them up a second time on the 11th
November, 1879, with the following results.
Goyeen-ment Sales of Eons,
Sydney, IS th November, 1879.
An important sale of leases of Euns on Tuesday morning
at Messrs. Eichardson and Wrench’s Auction Booms, Pitt-
street. Thirteen Euns were offered and nine were sold.
All those in the Albert district commanding high premiums
on the Eentals fixed by the Government.
These eight Berawinia Blocks were let by Auction on
the 18th November, 1879, by Messrs. Eichardson and
Wrench, containing 478,000 acres, and realised £275, not
quite Bs. per section of 640 acres.
According to the proposed law the rent for the half, viz.,
239,000 acres, at Id. per acre, would amount to £983 6s. 6d.
The resumed half 239,000 acres at £2 per
section on 373 sections of 640 acres each
would amount to 746 0 0
£1,729 6 6
Deduct the present Eents as obtained on the
18th November, 1879, by auction 275 0 0
Thus increasing the Eents to the present
occupants £1,454 6 6


WILC ANUTA HOTEL,
31s£ October, 1883.
William Beodeibb, Esq.
Mi Deae Sie,
The proposed new Land Bill is creating interne
excitement here. All classes appear to have the fullest
convictions that the Bill simply means ruination both to
Pastoralists and to those engaged commercially, besides
crippling labor by throwing thousands out of employment.
The provisions relating to the western division are as unjust
as they are illegal. There is a great difference in the
value of the country on the Murrumbidgee and the Darling
and yet they are both to bear the same rental —or nearly so
this is absurd,as it is well known thatan acre on the Murrum-
bidgee is worth six up here! I have properties in both
localities, so I know the difference. Take the rainfall, and
you will find the central division exceed the western by
several inches. Last year my losses exceeded 20,000 sheep
besides having no lambs, and at this moment, the aspect of
things is no better. If a large rainfall does not soon occur,
desolation will be the result before the Summer is out, I
have tried six acres to the sheep and the country will not
carry them.
In 15 months after so stocking a new paddock, the sheep
commenced to die from sheer want, and if I had not
relieved the paddock they would all have perished. I
estimate the carrying capacity at 12 acres to the sheep, one
season with another, and the sheep, in a run of bad seasons
would then have enough to do to get their daily wants.
The expenditure in improving waterless country is enor-
mous. I purchased Menamurtee Station in 1878, and have
spent in securing water, fencing, etc., upwards of £6O,QUO,
and I can prove that my yearly expenditure has been five
times the annual returns for that period. Again, I pur-
chased Corona Station in 1880 and since have spent
between 030,000 and £±o,ooo in improvements. Let the
Government give me back my expenditure, and they can
have their lease back. Nothing but large amounts of hard
cash can improve waterless country. I can produce
evidence that I spent upwards of £3,000. trying to secure
water in a well in which there is not yet a supply. Can


men of small means such as is proposed to send to these
regions, afford to spend such sums of money ? it would
simply mean their ruin.
Joseph Cook & Co., Printers, 334, George-street, Sydney.


Another gentleman states :
“I consider the present outlook very gloomy indeed, the
rent of Id. per acre on this country means absolute ruin.
At this rate, the rent on our two places will amount to
nearly £3OOO. We should protest in every way in our
power against such an iniquitous imposition, I am quite
certain that most of the unimproved country in this district
will be thrown up, it would be simply impossible for us to
keep ours, it means this —for country improved and stocked,
it is equal to Bd. or 12d. per sheep—which possibly can be
borne, though it knocks 10 per cent off the value of sheep
at once ; but for Runs like this, half improved and conse-
quently only half shocked, it really means Is. 6d. to 2s.
per head ; who, in the face of that, will go on improving
where it is so costly. I place no faith in the proposed
cumbrous expedient for reducing the rents by appeals to
the local Boards. At one time the squatters were allowed
to appeal against the Appraisement Courts, this is simply
a sop to disarm opposition. Once it becomes law, it will
be like a case of the Wolf and the Lamb. I hope it will
be opposed—tooth and nail in the Council.”
Wilcannia Hotel,
31«< October, 1883.
William Brodeibb, Esq.
My Dear Sie,
The proposed new Land Act is creating intense ex-
citement here. All classes appear to have the fullest con-
victions that the Bill simply means ruination both to
Pastoralists and those engaged commercially, besides
•crippling labor by throwing thousands out of employment.
There is no doubt in my mind that the provisions relating
to the Western division are unjust. No one knows more
than I do, relative to the carrying capacity and value of the
country west of the Darling River. To compare the
country on the Murrumbidgee with that just mentioned is
simply ridiculous, and shows the total ignorance of the
framers of the Bill, yet they are both to bear the same


rental or nearly so. It is well known that an acre on the
Murrrmnbidgee is worth half-a-dozen up here. I have
properties in both localities and should know. Take the
rain-fall and you will find the Central Division exceed the
Western by several inches. I must tell you privately that
my losses last year exceeded twenty thousand sheep, and
besides having no lambs; and I can assure you at this
moment the aspect of things is no better. If a large rain-
fall does not soon occur, desolation will be the result before
the summer is out, yet this is the country that is classed as
the same as the Murrumbidgee. I have tried six acres to
the sheep and the country will not carry them. In fifteen
months after so stocking a new paddock, the sheep com-
menced to die from sheer want, and if I had not relieved
the paddock they would all have perished.
I estimate the carrying capacity at twelve acres to the
sheep, one season with another, and the sheep in a run of
bad seasons would then have enough to do to get their
daily wants.
The expenditure in improving waterless country is some-
thing enormous.
I purchased Menamurtee station, near Wilcannia, in
1878, and have spent in securing water, fencing, etc., up-
wards of £60,000 ; and I can prove that my yearly expen-
diture has been five times the annual returns for that
period. What position, I ask, do the Government wish
now to place me in after my enterprise, my labour, and to
the ruin of my health ? They wish to break faith, cancel
my lease, and turn me out to commence the world afresh.
I have not given all my expenditure yet. I purchased
Corona station in 1880, and since have spent between
£30,000 and £40,000 in improvements. Let the Govern-
ment give me back my expenditure and they can have their
lease back. Nothing but large amounts of hard cash can
improve this waterless country. I can produce evidence
that I spent upwards of £3,000 in securing water in a well,
and not yet is there a supply. And can men of small
means, such as is proposed to these regions, afford to spend
such sums of money in'developing country. It would sim-
ply mean ruin to them, and be inducing people to come
here under false pretences. Hoping you will use your in-
fluence to upset this ruinous Act.”


A letter from a gentleman who has been residing in the
Western division for the last three years, and not personally
interested in pastoral pursuits, under date, Sydney, the 4th
August, 1884 :
Dear Sir,
Having had three years experience of the grazing
capabilities of the proposed western division under the new
Land Bill, I have pleasure in giving you the result of my
observations.
During the greater part of the year, stock have to live
upon salt and cotton bush, herbage and mitchell grass only
making their appearance after the winter rains and in the
spring of the year, and the consequence of heavy stocking
is that the bushes become eaten down so close that they
die out. It therefore becomes a matter of the gravest im-
portance to a grazier not to overstock. Ido not think any
part of the western division is capable of carrying more
than one sheep to twenty acres, and not even that unless
ample provision is made for the conservation of water. The
months during which rain may be looked for are February,
May, and October, and the average quantity during my
residence in the western division is 8 J-inches ; but I believe
the last three years have been exceptionally dry. Could a
rain fall of about 12 inches in the year be depended upon,
I consider the grazing capabilities of this portion of the
country would be greatly increased, as the growth of her-
bage and grass is exceedingly rapid during moist weather.
You are aware that I have no interest in any grazing
properties in New South Wales, but have had large expe-
rience among stock in Victoria.
Yours, &c.,
C. W. A. K.
Joseph Cook & Co., Printers, 354, George-street, Sydney.
