

THE LANP LEAGUE, i
WITH AN " PRODUCTION BY
j. b. I£.P. ;
\ j
x ■
* I /
JWelfcourne:




rpm
THE LAND LEAGUE:
A NARRATIVE OF
FOUR YEARS OF IRISH AGITATION;
WITH SKETCHES AND PORTRAITS OF THE
Iftiimpal §w.sl«iwn of flic gag.
BY HUGH MAHON.
JHclttournc:
J, LEWIS, HOT AIR PRINTING WORKS, 200 ELIZABETH STREET
1 8 8 3,




PREFACE.
This little book makes no claim to be considered a complete history of
the recent agitation in Ireland: it is merely a brief review of the
more important events which marked the struggle of the Irish People
for Social and Political Reform. To set that struggle fairly before
Australians—who have lately listened to so much villification and
falsehood concerning it—is the aim of the writer. Accuracy, as to
matters of fact, has been earnestly striven for; and, while no attempt
is made to pander to anti-Irish prejudices, it is hoped that no expres-
sion distasteful to fair-minded men of any Nationality will be found
in the following pages.
Sydney, I2xir May, 1883.




CONTENTS.
Introduction, by J. E. Redmond, M.P.
The Australian Delegates
CHAPTER I.
The Seed of the Land League.
Famine of 1846-51—Its effects on the Population—English Opinion—
Conspiracy v. Open Agitation—Fenianism—lts Results—Land Act
of 1870—How it was Nullified ... ...
CHAPTER 11.
Inception of the Land League.
Another Famine —Apathy of Government—Action of Tenants—Michael
Davitt : His Teaching—First Meeting of the Agitation—Formation
of Land League Proper
CHAPTER 111.
The Leaders.
Men of ’4B and ’Bl—The Object of the Latter—Parnell—Davitt—Dillon—
T. D. Sullivan—M'Carthy—Sexton—Lalor—Biggar, O’Sullivan,
Egan, Brennan, and Kettle—Healy—O’Brien—T, P. O'Connor—
O’Kelly—Harrington—Dr. Kenny, Dr. Cardiff, and others.
CHAPTER IV.
Teaching and Practice of the Land League.
John Bright’s Opinion—Opposition to Land League Doctrine—Failure of
Government Prosecution —The Bishops—The Nationalists—Car-
dinal Principle of Land League—Boycotting—lts Use and Abuse—
Origin of the Word —Griffith’s Valuation —Protection of Tenants...
CHAPTER Y.
The Land League and the Government.
Remarkable Prophecy of Mr. Bright—Government Interference—Arrest
of Davitt —Reason Therefor—His Speeches—Parnell Counsels
Obedience to Law—Sexton’s Opinion and Advice—Lord Beacons-
field’s Remedy—Mr. Trevelyan Approves of the Sword ...
9—19
20—26
27—34


CHAPTER VI.
Coercion and Crime.
Mr. Forster's Coercion Act —Obtained on False Pretences—Piling up the
Agony—Mr. Cowen’s opinion on outrage —Crime in previous
periods of distress—English crime—The “dissolute ruffians”—Their
character, mode of arrest, and treatment—Failure of Coercion and
responsibility for Crime ... ... ... ... ... 36—42
CHAPTER VII.
The Land Act and “No Rent.”
Irish attitude towards Act explained—Nature of Act—Land League plan
of working the Act most feasible—Popular delusion as to “ no rent”
—Neither immoral nor unjust—The struggle after Parnell's arrest—
Excesses by misguided men—Police Brutality—A Terrible Indict-
ment—An American opinion ... ... ... ... ...* 43—47
CHAPTER VIII,
A Great Crime—lts Causes and Consequences.
“ Driving discontent under the surface”—What it led to—The Phoenix
Park murders—Land League denunciation thereof—James Carey on
the efficacy of Constitutional Agitation—Formation of the “ Invinci-
ble Society”-—lts hatred of the Land League—lts Funds—A
Nation’s Fair Fame smirched on the Suspicion of a Murderer—lrish
and Irish-American Feeling—A Magnificent Vindication—English
Vengeance...
48—54
CHAPTER IX.
Repressive and Remedial Legislation.
Character of the Crimes Act—lts Purpose, as explained by the Home
Secretary—lts Application—An Englishman’s Opinion—Composi-
tion of Juries—Dying Testimony of Victims—lmprisoning Editors
—Violence of Police and Bailiffs—Judges setting an example to
Law-breakers—An Eminent Administrator Condemns Coercion
Injustice of the Crimes Act Exposed by a Magistrate—A Peasant’s
Story—Davitt, Healy, and Quinn—The Arrears Act—Design of
Legislature again frustrated ...
55—68
CHAPTER X.
The Irish National League—The Remedy.
A National Parliament—lts Recommendations—Land League Treasurer’s
Statement Justice and Necessity of Reforms Inequality of
Franchise—National Self-Government English Advocacy and
Support of—lmpossibility of Ruling Ireland from London—What
Ireland Wants ... ... ... ... ... Ht
69—74


J. E. EEDMOND, M.P.








THE LATE MISS FANNY PARNELL.


■ - ~m
■ ■
* ’*"■ >ir ■ n


JOHN DILLON, LATE M.P. FOR TIPPER VS Z.




MICHAEL DAYITT.




THE MOST EBY. T. W. CROKE, ARCHBISHOP OF CASHEL.




T. D. SULLIVAN, M.P., EDITOR OF THE “NATION.”




JOSEPH GILL IS MGGAP. M.P. FOP CAVAN.




INTRODUCTION
MR. J. E. REDMOND, M.P.
The great enemy of the Irish cause is ignorance. It confronts us at
home and abroad. At home ignorance has been the source of violence,
when self-restraint was the first essential of success; and abroad it has
been the foundation of a prejudiced opposition which nothing save the
spread of correct ideas on Irish matters can overcome. At home ignor-
ance is fast disappearing. The rising generation of Irishmen are
receiving an education which was out of the reach of their fathers.
They are learning the history of their country, and beginning to
realize the fatal results which have sprung from religious intolerance
and acts of political violence. The proof of this is plain to the most
unobservant. Faction-fighting is a thing of the past in Ireland; and
what are strangely t *rmed “ religious riots” are now of rare occur-
rence. Religious tolerance is rapidly gaining ground, following in
the wake of education. I base my hope for the speedy triumph of
our cause very largely upon these considerations. I wish I could
speak as confidently of the spread of correct information on Irish
matters abroad. Unfortunately the public in England take their ideas
of Ireland from a tainted source, namely, a Press largely controlled by
a class whose interest it is to keep our principles from spreading to
England by misrepresenting them and their advocates. In Australia
things are very much worse. In England there is a large and rapidly
increasing number of men who inquire and act independently upon
Irish matters; and there are some powerful organs of English public


opinion which act with perfect fairness towards us and our demands.
Here, however, things are different. There seems to he a tacit agree-
ment amongst the leading organs of these Colonies to present only one
side of the Irish question to their readers. Everything, culled no
matter from whence, which seems likely to prejudice the public mind
against Ireland, is given with prominence; but the Irish side of the
question is studiously suppressed. Ido not care to inquire into
motives; it is sufficient to point to a fact patent to every-
one who has followed—with even cursory attention—the course
taken by journalists in Australia since my arrival. This
is' a matter of vital importance to Ireland, and also to Irish
colonists in this land. The Irish question is one of world-wide
interest and importance, and the earnest wish of every intelligent man
should be to think and judge it correctly. The simple truth is that
the demands of the Irish people are to-day the reverse of extreme.
They are not only consistent with loyalty to the Throne, but with the
Constitution of the Empire. We ask for the same rights of the fran-
chise as England; we ask for local government, so that those who pay
local rates and taxes may have a voice in their expenditure ;we ask
for an amendment of the recent Land Act, so that the principles which
it embodies may be carried out in practice; and, finally, we ask for
rights of national self-government similar to those enjoyed by various
portions of the Empire without injury to its integrity or strength.
The means we propose to adopt to obtain our demands are those
recognised by the Constitution, namely, popular agitation—speaking
in Parliament through the representatives of the people. Any exhi-
bition of lawlessness, or act of criminal violence, is as much opposed to
our desire and purpose, as it is manifestly injurious to our chances of
success. The number of such offences only reached appalling numbers
when, in 1881, our mouths were closed and our influence destroyed;


and yet, even then, the number, alarming though it was, was not so
great as at other similar periods of distress, suffering, and despair in
the past history of Ireland. In the future, as in the past, our influ-
ence and power will be used to keep the people within the law, and
to guide our forces to a peaceful and bloodless settlement of this
question, which is one of Imperial, and not simply Irish, importance.
The following Pamphlet, written at my suggestion, by one who
has worked and suffered for Ireland, and is qualified, from intimate
knowledge, to speak with authority upon this matter, will, I trust, fulfil
a twofold mission. Amongst the public of Australia, generally, it will, I
venture to hope, do a great and a good work. Prom its pages they
can derive information on the Irish question which otherwise to them
is impossible of access, and the value of the information is enhanced
by the fact that every statement is verified by reference to unquestion-
able sources of information. To the Irish people of Australia it will,
I hope, be of very great value. It will supply them with an answer
to every objection which can be urged by their opponents against
either the principles or the leaders of the National movement at home.
We have no quarrel with Englishmen, or the men of any nationality.
In the words of John Martin, “ Ireland’s right is no man’s wrong.”
Ours is a National movement embracing men of every class and creed.
We ask nothing but fair play—the common fair play of hearing both
sides of the question. The following pages put one side of the
question with force, clearness, and authority, and I wish I could assure
myself that they would reach every man in Australia who opposes our
movement.
In spite of all, Ireland is advancing rapidly on the road to
National prosperity and freedom; and the day is not far distant


"when, by the aid of little Books like this, the truth about our cause
will be known throughout the w r orld.
We court inquiry, and rely for success upon the intrinsic merits
of our demands. To all who desire to understand the Irish question,
in its various aspects, I commend the following pages.
J. E. EEDMOND.
Sydney, May 12, 1883.


THE ATJSTEALIAN DELEGATES.
Mr. J. E. Redmond is the eldest son of the late William Archer
Redmond, J.P., of Ballytrent, County Wexford, for many years the
representative in Parliament of the city of Wexford. Mr. Redmond’s
family has, for a very long time, been identified with the County
Wexford—occupying the position of landlords. In the early part of
the century, John and Walter Redmond, respectively the great-grand-
father and great-grand-uncle of Mr. J. E. Redmond, were amongst
the leaders of the Catholics of Wexford, in their struggles for
7 o o
emancipation. Later on, Wexford city was for some years represented
by Mr. J. E. Redmond, grand-uncle of the present delegate to
Australia, and the author of most of the public works in the district.
This gentleman, to whose menjory a handsome monument has been
erected in his native town, introduced the first railway and the first
steamship to Wexford, and reclaimed, from the sea, several thousand
acres of land, Mr. P. W. Redmond, grand-father of the member for
New Ross, was a Deputy-Lieutenant, and twice occupied the position of
High Sheriff of Wexford County. The present head of the family is
General John Patrick Redmond, who received for his gallantry in the
Indian Mutiny, where he was severely wounded, the distinction of
Commander of the Bath. He is a large landlord in his native
county, and Mr. J. E. Redmond is .his heir. The member for New
Ross is one of the youngest representatives in the House of Commons,
and was educated at the Jesuit College of Clongowes Wood (where he


toot the medal for oratory), and afterwards at Trinitj'- College, Dublin.
He lived for some years in London, and while there contributed to the
press. He is a member of Gray’s Inn, having been admitted in
November, 1880. In August, 1880, on the death of his father, the
people of Wexford invited Mr. Eedmond to stand for that borough;
but, although the nomination was equivalent to election, as the popular
will was supreme, Mr. Eedmond retired in favor of Mr. T. M. Healy,
who was then under prosecution by Government. Mr. Healy was
accordingly elected without opposition. In December, 1880, a vacancy
having arisen in New Loss, through the retirement of its representative,
Mr. J. W. Foley, Mr. Eedmond was invited to accept the position.
A candidate, in the Tory interest, had always contested New Eoss, on
previous occasions; but, owing to the influence of a patriotic priest,
the Eev. P. M. Furlong, and to the enthusiasm which Mr. Eedmond’s
appearance and addresses had aroused, the Conservatives deemed the
struggle hopeless, and offered no opposition. Mr. Eedmond took his
seat in the House, early in February, 1881, and was amongst the Irish
members expelled, by order of the Speaker, on the occasion of Mr.
Davitt’s re-arrest. He has since been suspended twice. On one of
these occasions, having characterised Mr. Forster as a“ dishonest poli-
tician,” Mr. Eedmond was suspended by the presiding officer, who
proceeded to “ name ” the whole of the active Irish Party for obstruc-
tion. They were all expelled, in consequence, although many of
them had taken no part whatever in the debate. It is satisfactory
to note that the author of this high-handed proceeding, Dr. Lyon Play-
fair, has since resigned his position as Chairman of Committees. Mr,
Eedmond criticised the Land and Coercion Acts with great vigour and
ability; and made forcible exposures of the unjust administration of
the latter measure. The barbarous treatment of the “ suspects ” was
considerably relaxed, owing to a debate originated by Mr. Eedmond
a concession literally wrung from the Chief Secretary for Ireland,


The Government Arrears Act is, to a great extent, similar to a Bill
introduced in a previous session by Mr. Redmond. At the request of
Mr. Parnell and his colleagues, Mr. Redmond started for Australia
in December last, arriving in Adelaide early in February. The oppo-
sition given to his mission here has been most stupid and unreason-
able ; he has been treated with discourtesy such as no other lecturer
has had to contend against in these Colonies; and halls, which were
freely given to avowed disturbers of social order, have been refused to
his agents. The shameless injustice of these proceedings has not,
however, damaged the movement advocated by Mr. Redmond. Where-
ever ordinary buildings used for lectures could not be obtained, other
arrangements were speedily made ; and the intolerance of opponents
invariably tended to increase the activity of friends. Mr. Redmond has
been successful beyond his most sanguine expectations. He has
already remitted several thousand pounds to Mr. Alfred Webb, the Trea-
surer of the Irish National League in Dublin.
Mr. Willi aw Redmond is the younger brother of the member
for New Ross, and was educated at Clongowes College, County
Kildare. His family intended that he should adopt his uncle’s
profession, and enter the army. To this end he obtained a commission
in the 3rd Battalion of the 18th Regiment, which he held for some
time, but resigned it immediately the Government imprisoned Mr.
Parnell and suppressed the Land League. Giving up all idea of the
army, Mr. Redmond intends to study law, and practice at the Irish Bar
when he returns home. While looking after some evicted tenants,
in County Kilkenny, in February last year, he was arrested under the
Coercion Act and sent to Monaghan Prison. Afterwards, owing to com-
plaints of cruel treatment in Monaghan, Mr. Redmond was transferred
to Naas jail, in Kildare, and thence to Kilmainham, from which he
was released in May, 1882. Whilst in prison, a message was sent to


Mr. Redmond from the people of Meath, requesting him to stand for
that county ; but the prison authorities refused to deliver the message..
After his release Mr. liedmond accompanied Mr. Davitt to America,
through which he travelled in the interests of the Land Leaguey
returning to Ireland in the winter. He was met in Cork by some
friends; and in response to an address made a speech. His words
were incorrectly reported, notwithstanding which, Q-overnment entered
a prosecution under the Crimes Act, but not for some weeks after Mr.
Redmond had spoken. At this time, being in delicate health, Mr.
liedmond was on the Continent, and about to start for Australia,
He returns to Ireland in a few months, and will then invite Govern-
ment to proceed with the trial. Mr. Redmond was the Parliamentary
correspondent of The Nation during his residence in London.
Mr. J. W. Wai.she is anative of Balia,' County Mayo. The land-
lords of Connaught have long been catalogued amongst the meanest
and raost exacting in Ireland, and Mr. Walshe’s family suffered a
great deal from the rapacity and greediness of the lords of the soil.
These gentry, not content with rackrenting the people, desired to make
them their slaves. They disliked having on their estates an indepen-
dent man—one who would not fawn on them for favours, or cringe be-
fore their threats. As Mr. Walshe and his “predecessors in title”
belonged to this class, they were harassed and persecuted—several evic-
tions marking the progress of events. The Parnellian maxim—“ Keep,
a firm grip on your homesteads,” had been put in practice in Mayo,
even before its promulgation, and the sturdy peasantry of the district
stood manfully by Mr. Walshe in resisting unjust decrees. In late
years, Mr. Walshe has been a commercial traveller; and Mr.
Davitt states that it was the knowledge supplied by Mr. Walshe-
which induced him to take counsel on the condition of the-
Irish tenants. hlr, ~\S alshe attended and spoke at the first meetin o, of


the agitation in Trishtown ; became one of the organisers of the Land
League, and was prosecuted with Mr. Parnell and others for conspi-
racy in the winter of 1880. A few months previously he had stood in
the dock in Cork, with Mr. Healy, M.P., charged with an offence under
the Whiteboy Act, for which flogging was prescribed as punishment.
Mr. Walshe and Mr. Healy were accused by a Mr. Barrett, J.P., of
having intimidated a farmer named Cornelius Manning. The latter,
however, swore that'he had not been intimidated, and the prosecution
broke down. In March, 1881, his health having suffered through
over-exertion, Mr. Walshe sailed for Australia. Of his career in the
colonies it is unnecessary to speak. Victoria, New South Wales,
Queensland, South Australia, and Tasmania have witnessed hi?
labours, the practical result of which has been the transmission of
some £14,000 to Ireland. Mr. Walshe is closely related to Michael
Davitt, for whom he has ever cherished intense devotion.
Portraits of Mr. J. E. Eedmond, M.P., Mr. William Eedmond,
and Mr. J. W. Walshe will be found in this work.


J. W. WALSHE


CHAPTER I.
THE SEED OF THE LAND LEAGUE.
“ The people of England have most culpably connived at a national iniquity
* * * Property ruled with savage and tyrannical sway. It exercised its rights-
with a hand of iron, and renounced its duties with a front of brass. The 1 fat of
the land, the flower of its wheat,’ its ‘ milk and its honey,’ flowed from its shores,,
in tribute to the ruthless absentee, or his less guilty cousin, the usurious lender. It
was all drain and no return. In an integral part of British empire, on the soil
trodden by a British sovereign, the landowner was allowed to sweep away the pro-
duce of the earth without leaving even a gleaning for them that were ready to
perish. And they did perish, year by year, continually from sheer destitution. The
whole Irish people were debased by the spectacle and contact of licensed mendi-
cancy and recognised starvation,” —London Times, February 25th, 1847.
About 1,500,000 persons disappeared from Irish soil between the
years 1846 and 1851. Many of these found homes in foreign countries,
but historians agree that at least a million persons perished from
famine and fever, consequent on famine. (1.) The belief is widely
held that there was a scarcity of food, and that the land was unable
to produce sufficient for the sustenance of its inhabitants. The fact is
quite the reverse. Ireland, during the three years when famine made
greatest havoc—lB46, 1847 and 1848 —was* “ exporting to England
food to the value of fifteen million pounds sterling, and had on her
(1.) See li History of the Great Irish Famine,” by Eev. John O’Rourke, P.P. ;
also “ History of Ireland,” by John Mitchel. ,
‘‘ At the end of six years I can set down these things calmly ; but to see them
might have driven a wise man mad. There is no need to recount how the assistant
barristers and sheriffs, aided by the police, tore down the roof-trees and ploughed
up the hearths of village after village ; * * * how in some hamlets by the sea-
side, most of the inhabitants being already dead, an adventurous traveller would
come upon some family eating a famished ass : how maniac mothers stowed away
their dead children to be devoured at midnight; * * * how families, when all
was eaten and no hope left, took their last look at the sun, built up their cottage
doors that none might see them die or hear their groans, and were found weeks
afterwards skeletons on their own hearth.”— John Mitchel.


■ own soil, at each, harvest, good and ample provision for double her
.own population, notwithstanding the potato blight.” (1.) Leading
Irishmen warned Government in time of the crisis which was immi-
nent, but the warning was treated as “ another device of the agi-
tators.” The Duke of Richmond, at a meeting of the Agricultural
Protection Society, 9th December, 1845, declared that “the cry of
famine was perfectly illusory;” while Mr. Newdegate, on the 31st of
the same month, carried a resolution at Warwick, testifying against
“the fallacy and mischief of the report of a deficient harvest.” Men,
women and children had died in thousands before Government stirred
a finger. Even when roused to a sense of the danger that existed, its
measures were totally inadequate to meet the necessities of the case.
The money voted for relief was spent recklessly and foolishly by in-
competent clerks ; devoid of knowledge or sympathy with the unhappy
people whose lives were in their hands. (2.) Then came the war of
extermination by the the cruel, ghastly details of which
eye-witnesses recall with a shudder to this day. In England, however,
the terrible work was regarded with complacency, and one prominent
newspaper rejoiced that “ Irishmen would soon be as scarce in Ireland
as were Red Indians on the shores of Manhattan.” (3.) John Stuart
Mill thus fittingly expressed the verdict of the world upon the adminis-
tration of the day :
“ When the inhabitants of a country quit the country en masse because its
Government will not make it a place fit for them to live in, that Government is
judged and condemned." (4.)
The condemnation will be more emphatic when we reflect on the
material advantages of Ireland, whose soil has been said to be
“ fruitful as God’s love,”
(1.) “ Jail Journal,” by John Mitchek This assertion is based upon returns
published in “ Thom’s Official Directory.”
(2.) “ Digging holes and filling them up again” is John Mitchel’s description
of the public works of the period.
(3.) Three years after the Famine, the Times said : —“Law has ridden rough-
shod through Ireland ; it has been taught with bayonets, and interpreted with
ruin. Townships levelled with the ground ; straggling columns of exiles, work-
houses multiplied and still crowded, express the determination of the Legislature
to rescue Ireland from its slovenly old barbarism, and to plant the institutions of this
.more civilized land."
(4.) “Principles of Political Economy,” book 2, chap, x, sec. 1, p. 201.


The events which succeeded the Famine—the disbandment of the-
Young Ireland Party—the efforts of the Tenant League—the rise of
the Phoenix Society, in 1858, its suppression and re-appearance muLr
the name of Fenianism, later on—have already found a brilliant chroni-
cler. (1.) It is desirable, nevertheless, to note that secret plotting
ever follows the failure of constitutional agitation in Ireland. Young
Ireland revolted only when O’Connell’s moral force doctrine failed to
impress English statesmen ; the Phoenix and Fenian societies grew out
of the despair created by the abandonment of the Tenant League; and
recent sad occurrences show how vigorously the opportunity caused by
the imprisonment of the leaders of the Irish National Land League-
has been availed of. (2.)
If Fenianism failed to achieve its ultimate object, it succeeded in
drawing the attention, of Englishmen to Irish grievances. Mr. Glad-
stone admits that the “intensity of Fenianism” enabled him to
disestablish the Protestant Church; (3.) and that the explosion at
Clerkenwell (4.) brought the Land Act of 1870 “ within the range of
practical politics.” Just and necessary as both these measures admit-
tedly were, that section of press and public which lately rang with the
iniquities of the Land League, met this proposal with words of fierce-
denunciation. (5.) Up to 1870, the Irish people might be said to have-
(1.) See “New Ireland,” by A. M. Sullivan, M.P.
(2.) The informer Carey, at the Phoenix Park murder trial, swore that he-
became a Fenian only when convinced that Ireland could win no substantial
reform by Constitutional means.
(3.) Up to the disestablishment of the Irish Church, every Roman Catholic-
elected to public position in Ireland might be tendered the following oath “ I do-
hereby disclaim, disavow, and solemnly abjure any intention to subvert the pre-
sent Church Establishment as settled by law within this realm ; and I do solemnly
swear that I never will exercise any privilege to which I am or may become
entitled, to disturb or weaken the Protestant Religion or Protestant Government in
the United Kingdom.”
John Bright, in a letter to the Lord Mayor of Dublin, dated 23rd December,
1864, said the Church was “an evil and odious institution—a wrong which has no-
equal in the character of a national insult in any other civilized and Christian
country in the world.”
(4.) An unsuccessful attempt to release some Fenian prisoners by blowing
down a portion of the wall of Clerkenwell prison.
(5.) The Rev. Mr. O’Flanagan, Chaplain to the Orange body, which so often
parades its loyalty, warned Government, in view of the passage of the Disestablish-
ment Bill, that “the men of Ulster had ere now kicked a crown into the Boyne.”


existed merely by sufferance of the landlords. (1.) They had no rights
whatever in the soil; and, so far as material comfort goes, the lately
emancipated slaves in the Carolinas were better off in their bondage
than were the bulk of the Irish peasantry in their so-called political
freedom. Mr. Gladstone’s Act merely gave the tenant a right to
claim compensation for his own improvements in case of capricious
eviction. This modest proposal was received with shouts of “con-
fiscation,” “robbery,” etc., from the landlords’ camp. Mr. James
Lowther, afterwards Chief Secretary for Ireland, declared that any
proposal calculated to give the Irish tenant security in his holding
was a measure of confiscation and communism. (2.) The Earl of
Leitrim was equally emphatic :
To every part of the Bill he objected. If properly designated, it would be
called “A bill to create disorder in Ireland and to exterminate the small tenantry.”
If His Satanic Majesty had wished to invent a plan for setting people by the ears,
he could not have hit on a better device for the purpose than that measure.”
And Lord Oranmore and Browne had a parting shot at the measure:
The Legislature of Great Britain, by accepting as a basis of legislation principles,
partly communistic and partly socialistic, such as were carried out in this Bill, had
set an example of wrong, the evil effects of which he defied the most far-seeing
statesman to fathom. * ,
The Act of 1870, much as it was abused by the landlords, did not
in practice work them much injury ; and it failed utterly to meet the
requirements of the tenants. By various subtle devices it was rendered
inoperative and valueless. A notable case in point is that of the
tenantry of the Barony of Geashill, in the King’s County, and the
property of Earl Digby, an About the time of the passage
of the Act this gentleman’s agent called on the Geashill tenantry and
offered them the alternative of a “ notice to quit ” in case they refused
to sign an agreement conveying all their improvements to the land-
lord. The tenants signed, of course, and so far as they were con-
cerned, the Legislature had worked in vain.
I have dwelt thus long upon this chapter because I wish the reader
to fully realise the state of affairs which provoked recent agitation, as
well as the character of the men who might be said to have sown the
seed of the Land League.
(1.) “The rents the landlords exacted were all that their selfishness their
avarice, their extravagance and necessities demanded, and that, as a rule amounted
to the last shilling the tenant was able to pay.”— Pastoral of Most Rev Dr Nutfv
Bishop of Meath , Feb. 1881. '
(2.) Quoted by Mr. Mitchell Henry, M.P., in the House of Commons 27th
May, 1879.


CHAPTER 11.
INCEPTION OP THE LAND LEAGUE.
“They banned our faith, they banned our lives, they trod us into earth,
Until our very patience stirred their bitter hearts to mirth ;
Even this great flame that wraps them now, not we, but they, have bred ;
Yes ! this is their own work! and now their work he on their head."
—Sik C, G. Dufft,
The years 1877-78-79 witnessed tlie partial failure of crops, and,
consequent thereon, the existence of great destitution and suffering in
large portions of Ireland. Indeed, in 1879, the yield was so poor as
to render rent-paying, especially in the west, almost impossible.
Observant men saw that, unless due precautions were taken, a famine
of equal magnitude to that of 1847, would burst upon the land. And,
to the shame of, the landlords be it said, evictions kept pace with the
increasing destitution. (1.) Government was appealed to for aid by all
the public bodies of Ireland—Poor Law Boards—Town Commissioners
—grand and petty juries—diocesan meetings of the Catholic clergy—
but, deeming no doubt that it was “ another device of the agitators,’’
Parliament disregarded their representations. The Chief Secretary
for Ireland, Mr. Lowther, declared that “the distress had not been so
acutely felt in Ireland as in other parts of the United Kingdom,”
adding, with cruel sarcasm, that “ Government had no intention to in-
troduce a Bill for the reduction of Irish rents.” (2) The aspect of
affairs so closely resembled that which preceded the great famine
(1.) In 1876, there were 1,269 evictions, when the value of the potato crop was
£12,000,000. In 1877, with the value of the crop fallen to £5,000,000, the evictions
rose to 1,323. In 1878, with a still worse crop, to 1,749 ; and in 1879. when the
potato crop had almost altogether failed, the evictions increased to 2,667. —“ Why
there is an Irish Land Question," by T. M. Healy, M.P.
(2.) The unfeeling nature of this reply is said to have influenced Mr. Parnell
to put himself at the head of the land agitation.


that, as a matter of self preservation, men began to look around to
see what could be done. The first step taken by the tenantry was
to meet together and demand remissions in their rents. These
demands were complied with in a few isolated cases, but the
great body of the landlords took the cue from the Chief Secretary
and denied that any distress whatever existed. (1.) And this at a time
when the charity of the world was being sought to keep alive the
peasantry of the west and south. The Government and aristocracy
having ignored the almost universal cry of suffering that arose from
the land, men of the most moderate views became convinced that the
people had no choice but extinction or resistance. (2.)
“Black ’47,” as it is called, burnt into the minds of many Irish-
men, a bitter but a wholesome lesson. Amongst those who watched
the approach of the ghastly shadow of Famine in 1879, and who re-
solved to employ all their energies in chasing it away, was Michael
Davitt. His infant eyes had gazed on the ruin of his own household,
the death and separation of his family; his childhood was spent in a
fierce contest for existence in an English factory town; and the best
years of his manhood in a dungeon —for Ireland. Prison solitude drove
him to concentrate his powerful mind in the disease which was eating
away the heart of Ireland. His diagnosis may be read in the terse
and manly addresses of four years of agitation, and in his efforts
during that period to improve the status of the Irish peasantry. He
taught from the first the common sense doctrine, “ The husbandman
shall first partake of the fruits.” In 1847, the Irish tenant managed
to scrape the rent together, handed it to “ my Lords ” agent, and then
meekly retired to the ditch to die. Davitt told the people to feed and
(1.) “The condition of Ireland, when the harvest of 1879 lay ruined, was of a
character to dismay men of cool and moderate judgment. When the memory of
facts has become less sharp, it will not be easy to realize by what an accum illation
of old and new misfortunes a country of much natural fertility, inhabited by only
5,362,000 people over a cultivable area of at least 16,000,000 acres, was, towards the
closfe of the nineteenth century, reduced by the mischances of three seasons to
solicit the bread of charity for its people. It was, indeed, a crushing, and we may
hope an altogether exceptional load of disaster, smiting every species of industry
simultaneously. The tiller, the grazier, the commercial man, suffered alike under
the blow. Bad seasons alone had destroyed £20,000,000 of crops within three
years.” —Report of Mansion House Relief Committee.
(2.) One of Mr. Lowther's suggestions, when the distress could be no longer
ignored, was the “sowing of hay-seed.” Famishing wretches had eaten grass during
the previous famine, and this benevolent statesman doubtless thought the present
generation would he “ tamed” by a similar dietary.


clothe their families properly, and give what remained of the profit
from the land to the landlord. In doing this he only followed the
teaching of eminent political economists, (1) hut he was notwith-
standing subjected to a storm of invective and abuse.
The first meeting of the land agitation was held at Irishtown, County
Mayo, on the 28th April, 1879. Ten thousand persons attended ;
resolutions demanding remissions of rent were adopted; and the
principle of “the land for the people” promulgated. (2.) Other
meetings quickly followed at Westport, Milltown, Ballyhaunis,
Balia, Claremorris—all in Mayo. It was at Westport that Parnell and
Davitt first met together on a platform ; and it was here Parnell first
enunciated his now famous adjuration, “Keep a firm grip of your
homesteads.” The movement gradually spread into the adjacent
counties of Galway, Roscommon, and Sligo, and in six months it had
been caught up in the provinces of Leinster and Munster, and, to some
extent, in Ulster. It was not, however, until the 21st October that
the National Land League proper was formed. On thdt day delegates
from all parts of the country met in Dublin and adopted the following
platform as the basis of the new organization : :
First. — To put an end to Rack-renting, Eviction, and Landlord Oppression.
SECOND.— To effect such a radical change in the Land System of Ireland as
will put it in the power of every Irish Farmer to become the owner, on fair terms)
of the land he tills.
(1.) “ Rent is surplus profit—that portion of the profit reaped by farming, after
every expense has been paid —which is in excess of what will satisfy the tenant as
an adequate reward for entering on the business of farming —which will enable him
to get a proper living out of the business .” Prof. Bon AMY Price, in Contemporary
Review, See also “ Principles of Political Economy,” by J. S. Mill.
(2.) The following is Mr. Davitt’s own account of the origin of the first meet-
ing of the land movement :
“ I went into the West of Ireland on my return [from America] and saw the
priests, the farmers, and the local leaders of the Nationalists. I inquired and found
that the seasons of 1877-8 had been poor, and that a famine was expected in 1879.
All the farmers and cottiers were in debt to the landlords and shopkeepers. One
day in Claremorris, County Mayo, in March, 1879. I was in company with John W.
Walshe, of Balia, a cousin of mine, and a commercial traveller. He is now in Aus-
tralia in the interests of the Land League. He knew the circumstances of every
shopkeeper in the West of Ireland—their poverty and debt and the poverty of
the people. He gave me a great deal of valuable information. Everywhere I
heard the same story, and at last I made a proposition that a meeting be called at
Irishtown, to give expression to the grievances of the tenant farmers, and to
demand a reduction of the rent. We were also to urge the abolition of Landlordism.
I promised to have the speakers there, and th y promised to get the audience.”


The means proposed to effect these Objects are :
I. Organization amongst the people and Tenant Farmers for the purpose of
self-defence, and inculcating the absolute necessity of their refusing to take any
Farm from which another may be evicted, or from purchasing any Cattle or Goods
which may be seized on for non-payment of impossible rent.
2.—The cultivation of public opinion by persistent exposure, in the Press and
by Public Meetings, of the monstrous injustice of the present system, and of its
ruinous results.
3.—A resolute demand for the reduction of the excessive rents which have
brought the Irish People to a state of starvation.
4,—Temperate but firm resistance to oppression and injustice.
Charles Stewart Parnell, M.P., was elected President of the
League; J. Gr. Biggar, M.P., W. H. O’Sullivan, M.P., and Patrick
Egan, Treasurers ; and Michael Davitt, Andrew J. Kettle, and Thomas
Brennan, Secretaries. A Committee was also formed, comprising
several Members of Parliament, a dozen Catholic clergymen, and about
*orty of the principal public and professional men in the provinces.
Thus was established, on sound, well-defined, and admittedly
constitutional principles, the National Land League of Ireland—an
organization which in two short years transformed a community of
crouching serfs into an united nation —dignified, independent and
determined to be free.


CHAPTER 111.
THE LEADEES.
“ Though great men, wise men, kingly men cannot be but few, good men and true
need not be so scarce as they are, —men true to their convictions, and prompt in
their country’s need, —not greedy of distinction, but knowing well the hived
sweetness that abides in an unnoticed life, —and yet not shrinking from responsi-
bility, or avoiding danger when the hour of trial comes. It is such men that Ire-
land needs, and not flaunting histrionists, or empty platform patriots. She wants
men who can and will work as well as talk. Men glad to live and yet prepared to
die, ’— T. Wallis.
With the men whose writings made the Nation a "bright star in
the literary firmament, “ a new soul ” is said to have come into Ireland.
Those who are acquainted with the history of the period, with the
lethargy and despair produced by the degrading doctrines of O’Connell-
ism, (1) will not be disposed to question this claim of the Young Ireland
Party. Thirty years had wrought a great change in Ireland ; the soul
and spirit created by the Nation had burned almost to extinction,
while the body suffered proportionately. The task of the leaders of
the Land League was to restore vigour to the debilitated frame, to
strengthen the sinews, to increase the vitality, to rouse the spirit for a
supreme struggle with the hereditary enemy—landlordism. That they
have to some extent succeeded, the English Statute book shows.
The Home Eule movement, led by Mr. Isaac Butt with so much
eubmissiveness to Parliamentary decorum, brought into prominence
a young man whose career is likely to excite the attention of
future historians of the British Empire. Like Mr. Butt, his
leader, Chables Stewabt Pabkell was of the Protestant faith.
His family was one of the few of wealth and position whose
(1) It almost passes comprehension how Irishmen, whose country’s history is
studded with noble exemplars, were induced to subscribe to such a tenet of senility,
as tha tthe freedom of a nation was not worth the shedding of a drop of blood, Ac.


sympathies had ever been with the national aspirations of the
Irish people. In 1800 the grand-uncle and great-grand-uncle of
the present Irish leader stood side by side with Henry Grattan in
resisting the passage of the infamous Act of Union. The hand that
dealt out wealth and title to the traitors who sold the Irish Parliament,
recorded of the Parnells that they were “ incorruptible.” Mr. Parnell
is the son of the late John Henry Parnell and Miss Stewart, daughter
of Commodore Stewart, of the American navy, and he was born at Avon-
dale, County Wicklow, in June, 1846. Having completed his studies
in the University of Cambridge, Mr. Parnell remained abroad for
some years and returned to Ireland in 1871. The judicial murder of
three Irishmen at Manchester in 1867 (1.) drew Mr. Parnell’s attention
to the troubles of his native land, and in 1874 he stood for County
Dublin as a Home Euler. Here he was defeated, but on the death,
in 1875, of John Martin, a sterling Nationalist, Mr. Parnell was
returned for County Meath. (2.) A cry of “obstruction*” was
raised against Mr. Parnell and his colleagues because they
insisted on their right to criticise English measures. Not-
withstanding this, Mr. Parnell succeeded in securing the abolition
of flogging in the army, as well as other minor but much-
needed reforms. In debate Mr. Parnell displayed an acquaintance
with his subject, and a vigor and persistency in-expressing his views
■(!•) A policeman named Brett was accidentally killed during the rescue of two
Fenian prisoners, in Manchester, in 1867. For this three Irishmen—Allen,
Larkin, and O’Brien —were hanged, and on evidence afterwards admitted to be
false. Since this discovery, two other prisoners, Maguire and Condon, undergoing
penal servitude for the same offence, have been set at liberty.
(2.) “The first appearance of Parnell on any stage was when he made his bow
to the Speaker of the House of Commons, in April, 1875, with the return for the
County Meath in his pocket. A tall, thin, fair, studious young man, of nine and
twenty at that time, nobody then suspected in him the future leader of a ; partv
of exasperation * * * Calm, c<jol, bloodless, he is a man whom nothin can
move. O’Connor Power grows savage under the treatment of the Housed and
O’Donnell hisses his words through, his teeth with ill-disguised resentment, but
Parnell remains invariably imperturbable. A contest between him and the House
is a comedy in itself. -Mr. Speaker,’says Parnell, rising to his feet, amid over-
powering cries of ‘Vide! Vide!’ Then comes a lull, in which Parnell edo-es in
the words, ‘ Mr. Speaker, sir.’ Here there is a renewed chorus of voices, on the
subsiding of which Mr. Parnell utters the words ‘I rise,’ which are followed bv
another outburst. In this way he contrives, bit by bit, to proceed with his speech
the House unconsciously serving his purpose by forcing him to pause at every word!
Though a man of this resolute and unbending stamp, he has in personal intercourse
the mildest and most gentle manner conceivable. He is almost womanly, and Sir
Wilfred Lawson has long since noted that he is an inveterate water drinker.”—
London Paper.


wb 1 cl> sorely disconcerted ministers. In the winter of 1879-80, with
Mr. John Dillon, Mr. Parnell proceeded to America, where he visited
the different cities, lecturing and collecting in aid of the distressed in
Ireland. It is recorded that on several occasions, after long lectures,
he himself went amongst the audience to receive their subscriptions.
On the 2nd February, 1880, he delivered an address on Irish griev-
ances, before the Congress of the United States, a£ Washington—an
honour almost unprecedented. Returning to Ireland for the general
election, Mr. Parnell was chosen for three constituencies —Cork City,
and the Counties of Meath and Mayo. (1.) As already noted, although-a
landlord himself, he heartily entered into the land agitation, becoming
President of the Land League. At the re-assembling of Parliament,
he was chosen leader of the Home Rule Party, beating Mr. Shaw, the
successor of Mr. Butt. In October, 1880, with his principal lieutenants,
Mr. Parnell was tried for conspiracy. The prosecution failed, the
jury disagreeing, ten being for acquittal and two for conviction. His
arrest under the Coercion Act, on the 13th October, 1881, placed Mr.
Parnell on the summit of popularity in Ireland, and finding the
policy of imprisonment without trial a failure, the Government
ordered his release in May of the following year. His personal
characteristics are thus described by a colleague, Mr. A. M. Sullivan :
“In everything but convictions and resolutions a more* un-Irish,
that is to say, un-Celtic, man it would be rare to meet. Calm,
reserved, passionless, unmoved alike by praise or blame, by flattery or
by execration, a stranger to personal attachments, careless as to the
reciprocation of personal regard or the recognition of personal devotion,
he is the very antithesis of the emotional and impulsive Celt, whose
heart divides with his head the direction of his movements and the
course of his policy. * * * A rather pale-faced and thoughtful
but handsome and well-built young gentleman ; quiet, unde-
monstrative and refined. In personal appearance, in manners, voice
and accent, he is English, with a tinge of the American. A stranger
would judge him to be a cultivated American who had resided a great
(1) Mr. Parnell retained his seat for Cork City, giving his old constituency,
Meath, to Mr. A. M. Sullivan, and Mayo to the Rev. Isaac Nelson, a Presbyterian
Minister, of Belfast, In the latter county, there was a stiff fight, the Bishops and
priests having used all their influence for Mr. Geo. Browne, a local landlord. The
Rev. Mr. Nelson, however, supported by the Irish leader, and backed by the Mayo
Nationalists, won easily.


deal in England, or a cultivated Englishman who had resided a good deal
in America.” It may be added that Mr. Parnell’s mother and sisters
took a warm interest in the Land League movement. Miss Fanny
Parnell, who died in America last year, and to whom the Irish leader
was much attached, wrote some stirring ballads, in furtherance of the
Land League programme. Another sister, Miss Anna Parnell
established and carried on the Ladies’ Land League, an organisation
which rendered incalculable service to the evicted tenantry.
Next to Mr. Parnell, in the estimation of the people of Ireland,
stands Mr. Michael Davitt, who was born in the little hamlet of
Straide, County Mayo, in 1845. His father was a tenant farmer, and
an eviction scene is one of his earliest recollections. He was but five
years of age when his father and brother and two sisters were turned
out of their home. The family then proceeded to England, the father
settling down as an insurance agent in Haslingden, Lancashire.
Young Davitt first obtained employment in a mill, where, unfortu-
nately, his right arm, catching in the machinery one day, was so
injured that it had to be amputated. “He supplemented his scanty
opportunities of school education by assiduous study, and soon
exhibited considerable intellectual activity and a decided bent for
literature and politics—such politics as might be looked for in
the exiled son of an evicted Irish peasant. When in 1870 Davitt was
arrested in London, charged with being an arms agent, tried, convicted
and sentenced to 15 years’ penal servitude, a painful shock, a keen
sense of wanton severity, went through all who knew him, for they all
loved the frank, fearless, and honourable young Irishman, and wept
for his fate. (1.) For seven years he endured the horrors of penal
servitude in association with criminals of such loathsome character
that he never spoke of them afterwards save with a shudder. In 1878
he was ‘ amnestied,’ the ‘ amnesty’ taking the shape of the ordinary
ticket-of-leave given to murderers and burglars; but this the
Government said was only a matter of form.” (2.) Shortly after
his liberation, Mr. Davitt proceeded to America to visit his
(1.) A touching instance of Davitt’s self-sacrificing nature occurred at his trial.
An Englishman named Wilson was convicted on a charge similar to that preferred
against Davitt. The latter, deeming Wilson innocent, offered to take Wilson’s
sentence with his own. The Judge, while complimenting Davitt, would not accede
to his request.
(2.) “New Ireland,” by A. M. Sullivan, M.P.


mother and sisters, and while there had long consultations on
Irish affairs with prominent exiles. On the Bth December, 1878, he
delivered a lecture in Boston, in which he sketched the plans and
policy afterwards adopted by the Land League. He then returned to
Ireland, went into the west, organised meetings of the tenantry, was
arrested in the winter of IST9, but released on bail, and continued to
watch over the organisation he had founded until the revocation of his
ticket-of-leave by Mr. Forster in February, 1881. Mr. Davitt was
imprisoned in Portland from that date until May, 1882, and during
his incarceration was returned unopposed for County Meath. He was
declared disqualified ; but, in any case, Mr. Davitt would not sit in the
House of Commons. His first step on being released was to write a
manifesto denouncing the murderers of Lord Cavendish and Mr. T. H.
Burke, and calling on the Irish people to aid in their apprehension.
Notwithstanding that Mr. Davitt always exercised his influence to,
preserve the peace, and to prevent outrage, he was prosecuted a few
months since under an obsolete Statute, and ordered to find bail for
his “ good behaviour,” or go to jail for six months. He is at present
confined in Eichmond prison, Dublin, having declined to find
bail to observe laws which he had not violated. (1.)
Mr. John Dillon, M.P., is another of the prominent leaders of the
Land League. He is the son of the late John Blake Dillon, Esq.,
M.P. for Tipperary. He studied for the medical profession, but
owing to the precarious condition of his health, has never practised.
Mr. Dillon was elected for his father’s constituency, Tipperary, at the
general election of 1880. He was arrested under the Coercion Act, in
May, 1881, and detained until the following September. He had
(1.) Upon his recommittal to Portland Prison, the New York Sun, one of tho
leading American dailies, wrote of Mr. Davitt: —


-gone on the Continent for the benefit of his health, but observing that
Mr. Gladstone had at Leeds attempted to disparage Mr. Parnell, by
drawing a false comparison between his public character and that of
Mr. Dillon, the latter returned, made a vigorous speech in reply to the
Prime Minister, was immediately arrested and sent to Kilmainharn. Mr.
Dillon was again released, inMay, ’B2, with Messrs. Parnell, and O’Kelly,
and several of the more prominent “ suspects.” “He has contributed
to Irish public life,” says Mr. A. M. Sullivan, “ a spirit as bold and a
soul as pure as ever served the Irish cause. * * * Tall, slightly
built, with jet-black hair, deeply-set, dark-brown eyes, and dark com-
plexion—his earnest, thoughtful, studious habits seem stamped upon
his countenance.”
One of the earliest as well as one of the most powerful advocates
of the doctrine taught by the Land League, was Mr. T. D. Sullivan,
M.P., editor of the Nation. Mr. Sullivan had watched over the
N ational cause when Parnell was a lad at college, and it is not too
much to say that to the sound teaching of his journals, the Nation and
Weekly Neivs, is due that healthy public opinion which exists in Ireland
:to-day. A poet worthy of the palmiest days of the Nation , a vigorous
prose writer, and an impassioned speaker, Mr, Sullivan ever wielded
his powerful influence for the good of his native land. At the general
•election in 1880 Mr. Sullivan was returned for Westmeath, which,
county he has continued to represent. He is the author of “ God Save
Ireland,” a ballad which has come to be regarded as the Irish National
Anthem. He contributed largely to the literature of the Land League,
and thousands of the peasantry might be heard on a calm Sunday
morning, chorusing his ballads as they marched to the “ monster
meetings.”
Mr Justin McCarthy, who led the Irish Parliamentary Party
during the imprisonment of Mr. Parnell, is a native of Cork. After
leaving college, he proceeded to England and devoted himself entirely
to literary labour. His novels are well known and universally
admired; but it was by his “History of Our Own Times” that he
became known in political circles. At the general election of 1880 he
was put forward for Longford, by Mr. Parnell, and elected without
opposition.


Mr. Thomas Sexton, M.P., who carried on the Land League move-
Lent so ably after the arrest of Mr. Davitt and Mr. Dillon, is a native of
Waterford, and is like the other Irish leaders, a very young man. He
raduated in the Nation office, was chosen for Sligo in preference to
lolonel King-Harman, a powerful Tory landlord, and since entering
he House of Commons has made a reputation for genuine eloquence
ind debating power second only to that of the Prime Minister him-
lelf. (1.) Mr. Sexton was arrested under the Coercion Act, in 1881, but
. consequence of illness', he was released after a few weeks’ imprison- -
.ent.
Mr. Richard Laloe, M.P. for Queen’s County, brought to the
-grarian agitation all the prestige of a great name. His father, Mr.
s atrick Lalor, M.P., had initiated the battle against titles nearly two
;enerations before ; and his brother, Mr. J. P. Lalor, was the teacher
vhose doctrines the Land League were endeavouring to realize., Mr-
jalor was a gentleman farmer, had been president of the Queen’s
lounty Independent Club, for many years, and at the general election
cored a great victory over his opponents. A warrant was issued for
Is arrest in October, 1881, but, being in weakly health, his friends
iersisted in preventing him from proceeding to Ireland to allow
to be executed. Mr. Lalor is exceedingly popular in his native
)unty. He is a brother of the present Speaker of the Victorian
.ssembly.
One of the three gentlemen who acted as treasurers of the Land
jeague, Mr. J. G. Biggar, is member for Cavan; another, Mr. W. H.
) Sullivan, is member for County Limerick. Mr. Biggar is noted
hiefly for his activity in Parliament; but neither Mr. O’Sullivan nor
le have ever distinguished themselves in connection with the Land
jeague. The other treasurer, Mr. Patrick Egan, was the life and
oul of the organisation. Mr. Egan is a Dublin merchant, and the
•ractical knowledge of business which he brought to bear on his-
uties rendered him an exceedingly useful member of the League,
lis honesty and outspokenness raised up man£ enemies, (2.) and
(1.) the estimate of the Times is that Mr. Sexton is Mr. Gladstone’s equal in
le qualities mentioned.
(2.) Notably Mr. Eichard Pigott, whose attempt at blackmail failed This
mtleman. who was owner of the Irishman, demanded £SOO in lieu of the suppression
■ certain damaging information alleged to have been supplied him by Government,
r. Egan refused the demand, and in revenge Mr. Pigott has since been assisting
ady Dixie in the congenial work of slandering the Land League leaders.


-to-day he is perhaps the best abused man in the United Kingdom.
Mr. Thomas Brennan, who was secretary of the League, is a relative
of Mr. Egan. ' Mr. Brennan is a native of Meath, spent his youth in
Mayo, came to Dublin some years before the inception of the agitation,
and soon became an active worker in the movement He is an
earnest, eloquent speaker, and the effectiveness of the League waslargely
due to his activity and energy. He was imprisoned under the Coercion
.Act for more than a year. Mr. Andrew J. Kettle is a County Dublin
farmer; was defeated for Cork in 1880, and imprisoned under the
Coercion Act later on. Mr. Kettle was an extreme advocate of the
moral force doctrine; but on entering Kilmainham he was heard to
say, “ I go in a reformer, I shall come out a rebel.”
In the autumn of 1880, the borough of Wexford elected Mr.
T. M. Healy, who at that time had been known only as Mr. Parnell’s
private secretary. The only recommendation he brought to the electors
was a summons from Government to answer a charge of intimidation.(l)
Mr. Healy is a native of Lismore, County Waterford, and is also a
graduate of the Nation. He has left the impress of his mind upon
the Land Act of 1881, into which he introduced a clause that, had it
been honestly interpreted, would have been of immense advantage to
the tenants. Mr. Healy was again summoned by Government, with
Mr. Davitt, a few months since, and ordered to find bail for his future
conduct. This he refused to do, and is now undergoing a sentence of
six months’ incarceration in Richmond Prison.
Literary men figured very largely in the Irish Parliamentary
party. In addition to Messrs. Sullivan, Sexton, and Healy, Mr.
William O’Brien, the editor of United Ireland, and M.P. for Mallow,
must be mentioned as one who played a prominent and an able part
in the Land League movement. Born in Mallow, within sight .of the
spot where Thomas Davis first saw the light, Mr. O’Brien’s natural
instinct led him to adopt journalism as his profession. He commenced
his career on the Cork Examiner —the leading paper of the South.
His talents, however, were too conspicuous to permit his retention
(1.) At the Cork Assizes of 1880. Mr. T. M. Healy and Mr. J. W, Walshe,
(now in Australia), were charged with intimidating a farmer from occupying the
land of an evicted tenant. The prisoners were acquitted. This was the first
'Government prosecution.


permanently on a provincial newspaper, and about 1877 be was offered
and accepted an engagement on the Dublin Freeman's Journal. Mr.
O’Brien proved to be the right man for the duty which then devolved
upon him. Distress had begun to make itself felt throughout th e
country, and, as the Freeman's special commissioner, Mr. O’Brien
visited the different districts ; obtained, through the aid of the clergy,
an intimate and accurate knowledge of the condition of the people,
and gave his information to the public in letters which were eagerly
read and discussed in every part of the United Kingdom. It was
•evident to every one that the writer was a man who combined power-
ful abilities with a tender and sympathising disposition—one who was
keenly alive to the unutterable wretchedness which everywhere pre-
vailed. On the establishment of United Ireland Mr. O’Brien was
appointed editor, and he had not been long in that position when Mr.
Forster’s attention was attracted to the scathing criticism to which his
administration was subjected in its columns. Shortly after Mr. Parnell's
rrest, Mr- O’Brien was flung into Kilmainham, and detained there
mtil the resignation of the late Chief Secretary. Never very robust,
dr. O’Brien’s health suffered materially while under incarceration.
Che gloom of prison life was heightened by the death of his mother,
rhose last hours were robbed of that solace which the presence of her
mly son would give. The borough of Mallow, to which Mr. O’Brien
las just been chosen representative by an overwhelming majority, was
’ormerly a stronghold of the Castle. The late Attorney-General, Mr.
ohnson, defeated the popular candidate easily in 1880, and Mr.
'’Brien’s recent victory over the present Solicitor-General is as signifi-
ant and sweeping, in its way, as was that of O’Connell in the Clare
dectionof 1828.
Mr. T. P. O’Conkor, M.P., is another pressman, and perhaps one
)f the ablest men amongst the Irish Party. He is a native of Athlone,
aut has lived in London for many years. He is or has been connected
vith some of the leading English journals, but is best known by his
‘'Life of Lord Beaconsfield,” an able and exhaustive, though not a
Mattering, record of that statesman’s career. Mr, O’Connor represents
jralway borough, to which he was elected in 1880. He visited America
recently in the interests of the Land League, and was exceedingly
successful. His sister, Miss Mary O’Connor, was one of the ladies
4-
B


imprisoned under the Statute of Edward 111. She was confined in
Mullingar jail for six months, in default of bail to be of “good
behaviour.’’
A notable recruit —one of the earliest, in fact, whom Mr. Parnell’s
bold course won to the Irish cause—is Mr. J. J. O’Kelly, M.P. for
Roscommon. He, too, is a native of Athlone, and, like Mr. O’Connor,
is a journalist. Mr. O’Kelly went to America at an early age, became
connected with the New York Herald, to which he acted as special
correspondent during the war in Cuba. The insurgents suspecting
him to be a spy, Mr. O’Kelly was imprisoned and afterwards narrowly
escaped execution. In 1877 he went to Ireland to examine into the
condition of the country and report to his newspaper. At the general
election Mr. O’Kelly was elected member for County Roscommon by
a great majority over The O’Conor Don—a large landholder, and the
lineal descendant of the last king of Ireland. Mr. O’Kelly was
arrested under the Coercion Act, with Messrs. Parnell, Dillon, and
Sexton, and shared imprisonment with these gentlemen.
The vacancy recently existing in the representation of Westmeath
has been filled by another journalist —Mr. Timothy Harrixgton, editor
of the Kerry Sentinel. Mr. Harrington, who is a very young man, joins to
the enthusiasm and vigour of youth an ability which would inevitably
bring its possessor into great prominence. Early in 1881, Mr. Har-
rington and several others were arbitrarily, and in defiance of the law,
imprisoned for some weeks in Tralee jail, by order of a local magis-
trate. Very soon after his release Mr. Harrington was arrested under
the Coercion Act and confined in Galway jail until May, 1882.
Recently he has again been arrested for intimidation, and sentenced
to two months’ imprisonment as an ordinary convict. The persons
whom it was alleged Mr. Harrington intimidated have since returned
him as their representative in Parliament. For refusing, on the day
of his election, to perform some odious task, Mr. Harrington under-
went a week’s solitary confinement in an underground cell. He has
recently been released and has taken his seat in the House of
Commons. He is about to be prosecuted again for an article in his
paper reflecting on the Grand Jury of County Kerry.
The medical profession, though it cannot compete with journal-
ism in a numerical sense, has given the Land League some of its


most single-minded and devoted advocates. Such, an one is Dr. Joseph
E. Kenny, of Dublin. It would he difficult to find in any country a
man so thoroughly unselfish, so generous, so tolerant, so large-minded
as Dr. Kenny. At a time when small-pox was making havoc amongst
the Dublin poor, Dr. Kenny risked his life in carrying with his own
hands patients from place to place. When famine fever appeared in
the West, in 1870, Dr. Kenny was there to stem the dreadful visitor,
and to his efforts is undoubtedly due the saving of hundreds of precious
lives. Dr. Kenny proved a genuine friend to the suspects imprisoned
by Mr. Forster, and through his exertions a relaxation was obtained in
the prison rules. All Ireland heard with indignation of Dr. Kenny’s
arrest under the Coercion Act, in October, 1881, and of his dismissal
immediately afterwards by the Local Government Board from his
position as medical officer of the North Dublin Union. A national
testimonial was immediately presented to him, to which persons of all
creeds subscribed. Dr. Kenny was released early in 1882, and restored
to his position—a confession of wrong extorted from Government by
the force of public opinion. Another medical gentleman, who became
a distinguished figure in the movement, and who encountered Govern-
ment wrath, was Dr. J. R. Cahdiff, of Wexford. By instinct, train-
ing, temperament and association, Dr. Cardiff was led into the patriot
ranks. With every parish in his native county there were associated
memories of fearful wrongs, calculated to drive to flame the blood of
an ardent Irishman. Brought up amongst a people who had striven
so nobly and suffered so much, it is little wonder that Dr. Cardiff
should have imbibed, cherished and practised stern ideas of duty
towards his native land. He had long been a prominent member of the
Co. Wexford Home Rule Association, and on the establishment of the
Land League, he became president of the first branch formed in Wex-
ford. Dr. Cardiff was arrested under the Coercion Act, in October,
1881, and detained in Kilmainham until the March following. He
will probably be one of the members for Wexford after the next
election.
Amongst others who took a prominent part in the Land League
agitation were Messrs. J. B. Killeen, 8.L.; J. J. Louden, 8.L.; T.
M'lnerney, 8.L.; Matthew Harris, Ballinasloe ; John O’Connor, T. C.
Cork, J. W. Walshe, Balia; M. M. O’Sullivan, Dublin; P. J. Sheri-
dan, Tubbercurry; M. P. Boyton, Kildare, &c.


CHAPTER IV.
TEACHING AND PRACTICE OE THE LAND
LEAGUE.
“I do not believe in the necessity of widespread and perpetual misery. Ido not
believe we are placed on this island, and on this earth, that one man may be great
and wealthy and revel in every profuse indulgence, and five, six, or ten men shall
suffer the abject misery which we see so commonly in the world. With your soil,,
with your climate, and your active and spirited race, I know not what you might
not do.”—Right Hon. John Bright to the people of Dublin, Nov. 2, 1866.
“Years ago, when I have thought of the condition of Ireland —of its sorrows
and wrongs—of the discredit that its condition has brought upon the English name,
I have thought that if I could be in all other things the same, but by birth an Irish-
man, there is not a town in this island that I would not visit for the purpose of
discussing the great Irish question, and of rousing my countrymen to some great
and united action.”— lbid,
The new Evangel preaclied by the leaders of the Land
did not receive unquestioned acceptance, either at home or amongst the
Irish abroad. To the landlords and the Giovernment it was a “ gospel
of public plundera portion of the Irish Hierarchy thought it.
savoured too much of Communism ; and some of the Nationalists be-
lieved that the enfranchisement of the peasantry would dispel long-
cherished hopes and destroy all incentives to struggle for Legislative
Independence. In the winter of 1880, Government instituted a pro-
secution for conspiracy against Messrs. Parnell, Dillon, Sullivan,.
Sexton, Biggar, Egan, Brennan, Boyton, Walshe, Harris, Sheridan,,
and O’Sullivan, members of the Land League Committee. Two other
persons, Patrick J. Gordon and John W. Nally, were included in the
indictment, but they had no official connection with the League. The
trial lasted nineteen days. The jury disagreed, ten being for acquittal
and two for conviction. Had the Government not abandoned the prin-
cipal count in the indictment, the trial would have continued for
months, as witnesses from ail parts of the country had been obtained


to prove the charges of rent-racking and oppression made against the
landlords. Failing to suppress the movement by means of the ordi-
nary law, Parliament was asked for and granted power to Government
to imprison on suspicion.
Opposition of a more serious kind was given to the movement in
its early stages by some of the Bishops. The Cardinal Archbishop of
Dublin, the Most Rev. Dr. M‘Cabe, the Archbishop of Tuam, the
Most Rev. Dr. M'Hale, and Right Rev. Dr. Moran, Bishop of Ossory,
expressed their disapproval openly. The Archbishop of Tuam had
been for more than half a century the guardian of the popular inter-
ests ;he had watched the struggles of Tone and Emmet; had stood
by the movement for Catholic Emancipation in its infancy; had
written and worked for Repeal; and championed the Home Rule
demand with some of the fervour and enthusiasm of his youth. The
other two Bishops were almost unknown beyond their own Sees, and.
compared to the “Lion of the Fold,” had little influence or following.
The weight of many years had evidently clouded the once powerful
intellect of that venerable and patriotic prelate, and his death having
followed soon after the issue of these letters, it may reasonably be
inferred that he had not appraised the significance of the movement
which he condemned. The Bishop of Ossory had spent the most of
his life at Rome ; lived more in the past than in the present, and pos-
sessed a wider knowledge of Irish archaeology than of Irish politics.
A year after his condemnation of the Land League, his opinion
changed, and he rushed into the other extreme. He actually propose'.’;
that wherever rack-renting could be proved, the landlord should b
compelled to refund to the tenant the amount paid by the latter beyon
what the Court had fixed as a fair rent. Cardinal M‘Cabe had been mov< ■
consistent, but the force of his opposition was broken by the action <
two prelates of almost equal standing in the Church, and far largo;
knowledge of the peasantry and their wants and aspirations. The Mo ‘
Rev. Dr. Croke, Archbishop of Cashel, and the Right Rev. Dr. Nult
Bishop of Meath, warmly vindicated the Land League, defending it ; -
necessary and just. With these examples before them, the youn .
priests all through the country sprang into the ranks of the peopl
guided and controlled them, checking extravagant action and opinio;,
and generally exercising a great influence for good. The rank an:


file of the Nationalist Party, disgusted at the failure of insurrectionary
attempts, and tired of the “ masterly inactivity ” of their chiefs, fell
cordially into the new movement. The greater number unquestionably
believed in the efficacy of open agitation ; a few, no doubt, still held to
old ideas; but it is certain that as long as the leaders were left at
liberty, the original programme was loyally adhered to. With a few
exceptions (1.) the leading Nationalists—those who had figured pro-
minently, either in America or in Ireland, during the Fenian excite-
ment —gave the League all the opposition in their power. James
Stephens, in Chicago, and O’Donovan Rossa, in New York, were san-
guine of the sudden collapse of the League ; John O’Leary wrote from
Paris to the press to say that it was a mistake for “ half-educated and
not over clever young men ” to imagine that they could “regenerate
Ireland,” while Charles Kickham, in Ireland, manifested his disap-
proval in equally emphatic terms. These declarations, however,
seemed only to stimulate the exertions of the leaders of the Land
League.
An Irish novelist has said that “ the land is the life of the Irish
peasant.” The same idea is well expressed by the Hon. John
Bright: (2.) “ Land is the only resource of Irishmen. It is all they
have for their homes, for their comfort, indeed for their bread,
and without it there is nothing before them but poverty, dependance
or emigration.” Earth hunger is indeed a peculiarly Irish disease;
and it has been utilized by the landlords to extract impossible
rents. The leaders of the Land League were wise, therefore, in
making it the cardshial principle of their organization that no
person should take a farm from which a tenant had been evicted
for non-payment of what public opinion deemed to be an unjust
or excessive rent. (3.) Loyal obedience to this “unwritten law,”
(1.) John Devoy was the most prominent Fenian leader to adopt the Land
League programme. Mr, Devoy edits the New York Irish Nation.
(2.) House of Commons, May 2nd, 1879.
(3.) Mr. T. D. Sullivan, M.P., in his “ Lays of the Land League,” embodied thifl
principle in verse :
“ Yes, we shall leave untilled, unsown.
The lands, however fair,
From which an honest man was thrown
XJnon the roadside bare,
As if a curse was on the spot
That saw such hateful deeds ;
We’ll leave the empty house to rot,
The fields to choke with weeds.”


•without resort to other methods, would alone have won the greater
part of that which the League sought to obtain. This principle could
not be carried out, however, unless some means of punishment were
devised for those who might be tempted to violate it. Accordingly,
Mr. Parnell recommended that where a man had shown himself to be
a public enemy by entering into occupation of land from which a
tenant had been unjustly evicted, no intercourse should be held with
him. (1.) “When a man takes a farm from which another has
been unjustly evicted, you should shun him on the roadside,
in the streets of the town, at the shop counter, in the fair, and
in the market place, by leaving him severely alone, by putting
him into a moral Coventry, by isolating him from the rest of his kind,
as if he was a leper of old ; you must show him your detestation of
the crime he has committed ; and you may depend upon it if the popu-
lation of a county in Ireland carry out this doctrine, there will be no
man so full of avarice as to dare the public opinion of all right-think-
ing men, and to transgress your unwritten code of laws.” (2.)
(1.) The Right Rev, Dr. Nulty thus pictures the position of a person who had
outraged public opinion :
“ I know of no state of existence more wretched or unenviable than that of a
man who has merited and received the condemnation of an enlightened public
opinion. Undoubtedly he is free from all fear of violence against his person, his
property, or his family. But then he knows that every man he meets dislikes him,
and fears him, and regards him as guilty of grievous wrong to the public and to
himself personally. Not a hard word is ever heard publicly spoken of him, and
everyone’s demeanor to him is frigidly polite and civil ; but then, as no one is
bound to maintain friendly or familiar relations with him, he will soon find that
everybody will quickly ‘cut him.’ He will then soon be reduced to a state of
social isolation more intolerable than the convict’s cell in his county jail. Many a
convict, during his dreary imprisonment, will have a lighter and happier mind.
You may call the power that created this state of existence intimidation, if you
will, but, then, it is not the intimidation of one section of the community by
another ; it is the nation intimidating its people, and compelling all its members
to observe the laws enacted for its good government.”
(2.) Speech of Mr. Parnell at Ennis, September, 1880.
Boycotting was well understood and practised by the police and military.
In Newbridge, County Kildare, adjacent to Carragh Camp, the establishment of
every shopkeeper who displayed national sympathies was declared “out of
bounds.” Here is what Mr. Henry George, the American Political Economist, was
told in Loughrea : “ The system of Boycotting by the police, of which I have heard
in other parts of Ireland, prevails here. It is a suspicious thing to be seen entering
the shop of a Suspect, and the soldiers, it is stated, are told when they come to
to town what shops they may enter and what not. One woman informed me that
the soldiers said they would get seven days in the cells or twenty-one days’ confine-
ment to barracks if they were found patronising the shop of a Suspect, and when
they did come in, would always hide when they saw anyone approaching who
might inform on them,”


The advice here given has been repeatedly denounced as un-
Christian and inhuman by landlord partisans. It is quoted verbatim
to allow readers to judge for themselves. If Constitutional Government
existed in Ireland—if the will of the people were supreme—such a
recommendation would never have been given by an Irish leader. It may
be pointed out, however, that Mr. Parnell’s advice substantially embodies
the practice of trades unions in England. And it is a thousand times
less inhuman and un-Christian than the course almost universally fol-
lowed by Irish landlords in terrorizing their tenants from giving a
night’s shelter to those whom despotic decrees had rendered outcasts
in a land of plenty. (1.)
The practice of isolation, recommended by the leaders of the
Land League, and which worked so well when used with moderation
and discretion, was more or less abused in certain parts of the country.
The rapidity with which the movement spread—the ignorance and
perhaps the vice of some of those who pushed themselves to the front,
rendered such misfortunes unavoidable. But in every instance where
(1.) If any reader doubts that landlords have terrorized their tenants, as des-
cribed, let him read the following account of an eviction, from the pen of Right
Rev. Dr. Nulty, Bishop of Meath :
The wailing of women—the screams, the terror, the consternation of children
—the speechless agony of honest, industrious men—wrung tears of grief from all
who saw them. I saw the officers and men of a large police force, who were obliged
to attend on the occasion, cry like children on beholding the cruel sufferings of the
very people whom they would be obliged to butcher had they offered the least
resistance. The appearance of men, women, and children, as they emerged from
the ruins of their former homes—saturated with rain, blackened and besmeared
with soot, shivering in every member from cold and misery—presented positively
the most appalling spectacle I 'ever looked at. The landed proprietors in a circle
all around—and for many miles in every direction—warned their tenantry, with
threats of their direst vengeance, against the humanity of extending to any of them
the hospitality of a single night's shelter. After battling in vain with privation and
pestilence, they at last graduated from the workhouse to the tomb ; and, in little
more than three years, nearly a fourth of them lay quietly in their graves. The
eviction which I have thus described, and of which I was an eye-witness, must not
be considered an isolated, exceptional event, which could only occur in a
remote locality, where public opinion could not reach and expose it. The fact is
quite the reverse. Every county, barony, poor-law union, and indeed every parish in
the diocese, is perfectly familiar with evictions that are oftentimes surrounded by cir-
cumstances, and distinguished by traits of darker and more disgusting atrocity


it was discovered that Boycotting (1.) was being used as a weapon of
personal vengeance, the leaders—and especially Mr. Davitt—promptly
interfered, removed the censure from the implicated party, and,
so far as they could, inflicted punishment on the wretch who, to serve
mere selfish ends, misused a weapon devised for the advantage of the
community at large. (2.) The policy which the League pursued
throughout the whole agitation was eminently a defensive policy.
Rents were admittedly too high. The landlords were very indignant
when the tenants everywhere agreed on Griffith’s valuation as a
standard of rent. But Sir Richard Griffith was the Government
valuator, and the tenants, when offering the amount of his estimate as
rent, took up an unassailable position. It afterwards dawned on the
aristocratic intellect that such a standard was not so unfair as was
pretended. But evictions and law proceedings had occurred in the
interval, and that bitter feeling which a genei’ous concession or a
kindly act would have smothered, was aggravated and intensified be-
yond bounds. The insolent taunt, the domineering tone, the cruel
deed, the memory of past wrongs, all combined to create an irreparable
breach between landlord and tenant. Feudalism was doomed.
Evictions had rapidly diminished during the two years of the
(1.) This term originated through the ostracism of a land agent named Boy-
cott, who made himself particularly obnoxious to the people in the vicinity of
Lough Mask, in the West of Ireland. “In addition to robbing the tenant of every
shilling he could extort as rent,” says an American writer, “ Boycott required them
to work for him at his own terms—ls. 6d. per day for the men, and Is. for the
women —and to feed themselves. By a system of petty rules he contrived to reduce
even this beggarly pittance. A man was fined, for instance, so much if he walked
on the grass, and so much more if he wheeled his barrow out of the path. The
Captain was a ruffian in his manner towards the people, addressing them like dogs,
and compelling them to submit to galling personal affronts which poverty and
dependence do not render any easier to human nature. He had repeatedly evicted
the poor and robbed those whom he did not evict, and during seventeen years’
administration of Lord Erne’s estate, had earned the hatred and contempt of all
who had tenant relations with him.” It appears that the term Boycotting was first
used in the New York Tribune. Mr. James Redpath, the special correspondent of
that paper, visited Ireland during the period that Mr. Boycott was in “ Coventry.”
At dinner with the Rev. Father O’Malley, the parish priest of the district. Mr
Redpath said he was “bothered for a word.” “ Ostracism,” said Father O’Malley
“ will not do ; the people would not understand it. How would it do to call it
‘Boycotting?’” Mr. Redpath was delighted with the suggestion ; he adopted the
word ; and it is now almost as well known as any other in the English language.
(2.) A case in point occurred at Mountmellick, in the Queen’s County. A
respectable merchant of that town was ostracised on the strength of a rumour set
afloat by a rival in business. Mr. Davitt went down from Dublin, examined into
the charge, found it to be untrue and unfounded, and removed the censure which
had been unjustly cast upon an honest man.


League’s existence. It met such occurrences in a characteristic
fashion. A hut was erected for the evicted family, if possible within
sight of the home from which they had been driven, and they were
supported out of the funds of the League. The farm generally proved
useless to the owner, as no one could be induced to enter into occupa-
tion; and being powerless against public opinion, the landlord in
nearly every case sought an arrangement an arrangement with
the evicted party. If evictions were threatened a meeting was
held in the vicinity to condemn the conduct of the landlord;
the League defended the tenant in case of unjust prosecution,
and paid his expenses in resisting the enforcement of unfair rent.
For every device of the enemy, the League was prepared with a
remedy—it protected the people’s liberties, watched their interests,
and inspired them with hope for the future —keeping before them, at
times, its ultimate aim —the possession of the soil by the nation.


CHAPTER V.
THE LAND LEAGUE AND THE GOVERNMENT.
“ We’ve wept till our faces are pale and wan—
We’ve knelt to a Throne till our strength is gone ;
We’ve prayed to our masters, but one by one
They laughed to scorn our suffering land ;
And sent forth their minions with cannon and steel,
Swearing, with tierce unholy zeal,
To trample us down with an iron heel
If we dared but to murmur our just demand."
—Lady WILDE.
The Eight Hon. John Bright, speaking in the House of Commons
on the 17th Feb., 1866, on the passage of a Coercion Bill for Ireland
used these words:—“ All history teaches us is that it is not in human
nature that men should be content under any system of legislation and
of institutions such as exist in Ireland. You may pass the Bill—you
may suppress the conspiracy and put down the Insurrection—but the
moment it is suppressed there will remain the germs of this malady,
and from the germs will grow up, as heretofore, another crop of insur-
rection, and another harvest of misfortune. And it may be that those
who sit here eighteen years after this movement will find another
Ministry and another Secretary of State ready to propose to you
another administration of the same ever-failing and ever-poisonous
medicine.” The wonder is not that Mr. Bright’s prophecy was verified
before its time, but that he himself should be found in a Ministry which
resorted to the specific he so heartily condemned. (1.) Mr. Gladstone had
in the session of 1880 asserted that the Compensation for Disturbance
Bill was necessary to preserve the existence of 15,000 people in
Ireland. That bill was rejected in August by the House of Lords by
a vote of 212 to 51, and Parliament was dissolved without having
(1.) Mr. Bright not only remained in the Ministry, but supported, with his
powerful eloquence and great abilities_and name, some of the most obnoxious pro-
ceedings of Government.


taken any steps to save those thousands of people who were under
“sentence of death.” (1.) When the Land League leaders adopted
measures to this end, Mr. Gladstone, as has been seen, had them tried
for conspiracy. This failing, Mr. Davitt was arrested on 3rd February,
1881, and consigned, without charge or trial, to Portland prison, in
England. In this the Government inflicted an injustice on Mr. Davitt
which their Tory predecessors shrank from committing. When the latter
wished to imprison Davitt, they resorted to the ordinary law : Mr
Gladstone’s government were shabby enough to take advantage of the
ticket-of-leave granted to Davitt on his release from penal servitude.
This act, followed by the expulsion of thirty-four Irish members from
the House of Commons, created intense irritation in Ireland. (2.)
How far Davitt’s conduct warranted such action readers may judge by
the following extracts taken from speeches delivered by him shortly
before his arrest. At Ballynamara, near Mallow, County Cork, on the
22nd November, 1880, Mr. Davitt spoke as follows :
Nothing tends to injure our cause with the American people so much as the
occasional acts of violence which injustice prompts men to commit in parts of the
country. The landlord organs, here and in England, take care to colour these occur-
rences so as to represent them as directly resulting from the agitation and teachings
of the Land League. (Cries of “It is false.”) I believe, from my own intercourse
with representative Americans and newspaper men in the United States, that the
Irish landlords could do nothing better to create sympathy for their cause and
obtain a condemnation of ours in America than to shoot a half-dozen of their num-
ber, with a few agents thrown in, to swell the horror, and then charge the deec
upon the Land League and the tenant farmers of Ireland. Let the world see that we
have higher game in sight, and a nobler object in view, than stooping to war on any
miserable individual, while the system that makes him the instrument of tyranny
still stands upon our shores, and frowns down the happiness and prosperity of oui
nation.”
At Sligo, on the 29th November, he said :
Let nothing be done or attempted which can endanger this great movement
and give your enemies the advantage over you. Let false friends and land-grabben
be “Boycotted,” but refrain from any and all acts of violence. If I cared to parade
the wrongs which landlordism has inflicted on me and mine, perhaps there is nc
(1.) Mr. Gladstone defined an eviction as a sentence of starvation.
(2.) The news that Davitt was safe in Portland was received in the House of
Commons with “ cheering, shouts of exultation, and signs of uproarious joy.” A
similar outburst occurred when Mr. Gladstone, at the Guildhall, made the an-
councement that Mr. Parnell had been arrested. These demonstrations are taken
note of in Ireland, as well as by the Irish in America, and it will be a long time
before they are forgotten or forgiven.


man in Ireland to-day who has more cause to harbour feelings of revenge than I
have ; but revenge is an ignoble feeling, the cultivation of which destroys the better
and more manly attributes with which God has endowed men to combat wrong
and vindicate right, and should not be allowed to usurp the mind or direct the
impulse of Christian men. The revenge which we should seek in this great move-
ment is to strike down ignorance by laboring to remove its cause, to see the miser-
able hovels of our people—the blots upon the social life of Ireland as well as upon
its landscape beauty—pulled down and replaced by neat and comfortable dwellings;
plenty and wholesome food substituted for the Indian meal, stirabout, and rotten
potatoes, which have impoverished the physical life of our people ; rags replaced by
respectable raiment, and general prosperity raising victory over national poverty.
Let the victims of the Land League movement be in justice, ignorance, social degra-
dation, and pauperism.
At Blessington, County Wicklow, on December the 14th, Mr.
Davitt said :
I am not here to ask any man to commit any act or any outrage which would be
repudiated or condemned from any platform or pulpit in the land, Ido not re-
quire you, neither does the Land League, to lay a hand upon a single hair of any
man’s head.
At the weekly meeting of the Central Land League in Dublin, on
December 15th, Mr. Davitt spoke as follows:
They were not there-to palliate or to justify in the least any outrage that had
been committed since the land movement commenced, * * * While denounc-
ing these manufactured outrages, he desired it to be understood as not in the least
excusing any of those outrages that had taken place. * * * Threatening letters
are as unnecessary as they are stupidly criminal and unjustifiable, and we feel
assured that no member of our organisation has resorted to such a method in
making just demands, which invites the stigma of cowardice, and clumsily plays
into the hands of the landlords. If a just right cannot fearlessly be demanded by
a victim of landlord power when a powerful organisation is at his back to protect
him, he deserves neither a concession from the landlord nor assistance from the
League in obtaining it. * * * In speaking of the injuries inflicted upon dumb
animals, we cannot for a single instant believe either the numerous reports of these
monstrous outrages which the landlord organs are publishing, or that a single man
within the ranks of Our organisation would be guilty of participating in the few
cases which, we are sorry to say, have been authenticated. No injustice in the
power of Irish landlordism to perpetrate upon the people could justify in the least
degree the unfeeling brutality which inflicts injuries or suffering upon harmless or
defenceless animals in revenge for the wrongs committed by their owners. * * *
A fair and judicious use of the power of combination against the enemies of the
people, traitors to the League, or instruments of unjust eviction, or other
landlord injustice, will work the requirements of our movements in the
present crisis without any resort to means or methods which would offer a pretext
for foul play against the organisation, or estrange the moral support of public
■opinion outside of Ireland form a just and noble cause. * * * He had just one
remark to make in reference to what was know as “Boycotting.” He did not speak


on behalf of the Executive, when he said what might be used as a just and
legitimate weapon when properly directed might degenerate into a means of doing
injury or wrong against those who had committed no offence against the move-
ment. (Hear, hear.) He trusted that the officers of the various branches of the
League throughout the country would endeavor to prevent the name of the Land
League or its influence being used in miserable squabbles between individuals in
parishes or towns throughout the country. When the movement was called into
existence, it was undertaken by men who were desirous of advancing the social
good of the people of Ireland, and none of them who had taken any part in found-
ing that would approve of its being used in the way which it was, he was sorry to
say, being used in some parts of the country. (Hear, hear.)
At Datbcoole, County Dublin, on December the 22nd, he said :
What the Land League proposed—that instead of having one individual tenant
farmer taking the settlement of the Irish land question into his own hands by
resorting to violence against one landlord—was the more efficacious and more sys-
tematic remedy for getting rid of the system. This was by combination and by
loyal action between the tenant farmers and the laborers. There was no necessity
for making this great organisation an engine of tyranny or oppression to any class
throughout the country. He had a few words to say to them on the question of
Boycotting (cheers). It was a weapon that might be put to uses that it never was
intended for, and he was sorry to say that in some instances throughout the
country it had been resorted to against individuals who had never injured this
movement, and who were not the enemies of the League. He hated tyranny. He
hated it whether it came from the landlords or from the ranks of the Irish National
Land League. He had warred against tyranny since he was a boy, and he would
war against it to the end of his days, and as one of the Irish National Land League
he would set his face, and would endeavour to set the organisation, against this
weapon being used against any man in Ireland simply because he refuses to join
the Irish Land League, If they denounced coercion coming from the Government
or injustice coming from the landlords, how could they sanction coercion from their
own ranks? (Hear, hear.) This was a great moral organisation for amoral pur-
pose, and it must be carried on on moral lines. And while the Land League would
never shrink from doing its duty to the tenant farmer it would set its face against
the unjust use of this weapon of Boycotting (hear, hear).
Again, at Kilbrin, near Kanturk, County Cork, January 17,
1881, Mr. Davitt said:—
Despite the efforts that are being made to drive you from a stern, passive attitude
into loose and violent action, adhere to the programme of the League, and repel
every incentive to outrage and every inducement to give your enemies an oppor-
tunity of wiping out this movement in the blood of Irishmen. * * * But
glorious indeed will be our victory, and high in the estimation of mankind will our
grand old fatherland stand, if we can so curb our passions and control our acts in
this struggle for free land as to march to success through provocation and danger
without resorting to the wild justice of revenge, or being guilty of anything which
could sully the character of a brave and Christian people.


It is difficult to believe that a Government which honestly intended
to redress Irish grievances could have consigned to a dungeon the man
who, in a time of national suffering, calmed the people’s passions, and
taught them to look to public opinion for redress. These words of
Davitt will stand for all time a testimony to the nobility and humanity
of his nature and a reproach to the Government which delivered him
to the companionship of hardened malefactors. With Oranmer, he
might justly reprove his accusers :
“ I have laboured
And with no little study that my teaching
And the strong course of my authority
Might go one way and safely ; nor is there living
A man that more detests, more stirs against
Both in his private conscience and in his place
Defacers of the public peace, than I do.”
The language used by the other leaders of the Land League has
often been relied on as an argument for Coercion. Let us see. It is
Mr. Parnell who speaks. Place and time—Balia, County Mayo;
December, 1879. Scene—an eviction :—“ I congratulate you upon
your attitude to-day—calm, self-reliant, determined, but within the
law. In this way we shall teach our rulers that although they may
violate the Constitution, although they may rush into illegal acts, we
are not going to be induced to follow them. * * * I would exhort
you with all the little power or force I possess, to maintain the attitude
that you have maintained up to the present, and not to allow any
provocation to draw you away from your duty. Even if your leaders
are torn from you, let them go ; others will take their places, and by
showing that you understand your rights and the way in which you
can win them, you will reduce the pride of this haughty Government
which, after having beaten the disunited Afghans, and the naked
Zulus, has the temerity to come to Ireland and to place us on a level
with these savages. Bring home with you this lesson, —that a man,
however powerful he may be, respects his fellow-men when they
respect themselves, and that as you have shown you know how to
respect yourselves; so you may expect in the future that your righ tto
the soil of Ireland will be respected by those who attempt to deprive
you of it. Let us, then, not hesitate in our good work. Let us press
forward. Let us recollect that we are the inheritors of a great past,


that our country is a great country, and worth fighting for; that we
in these days have opportunities which were denied to your fathers
when they struggled against tithes, and that the power of no man can
prevail against a self-respecting and self-relying people. Let us then
maintain our dignified attitude. Let us remain within the law, and
within the Constitution, and let us stand, although we have to stand on the
last plank of the Constitution, let us stand until that plank is torn from
under our feet.”
So much for the charge of inflammatory language against Mr.
Parnell. In the House of Commons, on the 7th January, 1881, ha
explained his policy; —“ Our desire was, hy acting on public opinion, to
replace the bad portion of the law of the land. * * * At every
meeting at which I spoke in Ireland, up to the time when the Chief
Secretary sent extra constabulary out to the starving localities of
Galway and Mayo, I took care to reprobate outrage and to point out that
me unshed to act in a peaceful and constitutional manner .”
Mr. Sexton, M.P., is another of the leaders who suffered imprison-
ment. We shall see the justification. On the 17th May, 1881, Mr.
Sexton, at this time being head organiser, told the people that—
“ Our marvellous success is due to the fact that our principles have
been sound, our statements accurate, our objects laudable and neces-
sary for the public good, and the means which we have put forward
for the attainment of those objects such as neither in morality nor
injustice can be questioned.”
Again, on the 31st of the same mourn, he said:—“ The Govern-
ment know that the Land League sprang into existence because of an
imperative necessity. They know it asks nothing but what publio
necessity demands, and they know it proposes no means for the
furtherance of its objects but the means that religion, and conscience
and morality approve.”
On the 7th June, at a meeting of the Central League, Mr.
Sexton said:—“There was a duty now upon every man who had
any influence with the people,—to advise them to self-control, and
every man should feel it his sacred duty to act as if the safety and
welfare of the people depended upon him alone.”


Mr. John Ferguson, of Glasgow, a prominent land reformer, who
Occupied the chair at a meeting of the League in Dublin, 14th June,
1881, said:—“They intended to work this movement out on the
lines of constitutional agitation —by brain and tongue, and by what
had never been tried in Ireland before, the powers which the trades
union organisation gave them.”
And the Eev. James Cantwell, administrator to the Archbishop of
Cashel, in dissolving the Central League, on the 19th October, 1881,
after its suppression by Government, used these words : —“ I appeal and
exhort each one of you, in conclusion, that you yourselves, and, so far
as your influence goes over others, will abstain from using violence of
any sort in the country. Our position is passive resistance. We are an
unarmed people, and every man of sense who loves his country, who
wishes to do nothing to bring disgrace and injury upon it, will do alb
he can to prevent violent action.”
Hundreds of quotations might be given, all of the same tendency;
but there is no use in wearying the reader by heaping proof on proof
of the assertion that the Land League leaders always condemned out-
rage. It is quite true, of course, that early in the agitation a pair of
amateur orators in the West of Ireland took possession of the platforms
after the League leaders had left, and delivered violent harangues.
Fair-minded men will not judge the League by the speeches of
irresponsible persons, but rather by the addresses of its chiefs and the-
published principles of the organization. Measured by this standard,
the Irish National Land League has nothing to fear from comparison
with any association that has ever striven for reform in the United
Kingdom. The language of its responsible leaders has been fully as
moderate as that which was used by such reformers as Cobden, Bright,
and Chamberlain. And certainly none of them have approached the
late Lord Beaconsfield in frankness and force. On the 16th February,
1844, Mr. Disraeli said :
The Irish had a starving population and an alien Church, and in addition
the weakest Executive in the world. That was the Irish question. Well, then,
what would hon. gentlemen say if they were reading of a country in that position t
They would say at once, “ The remedy is revolution .” (I.)
(1.) “Lifeof Lord Beaconsfield,” by T. P. O’Connor, M.P., p. 101.
C


And what Irishman has recommended assassination so eloqneni
This is from Mr. Disraeli’s “ Revolutionary Epick,” part H., Cj
xxiv., p. 127, edition of 1834 :
“ Pharaoh’s doom
Shall cool those chariot wheels now hot with blood ;
And blessed be the hand that dares to wave
The regicidal steel that shall redeem
A nation’s sorrow with a tyrant's blood."
And the present Chief Secretary for Ireland, Mr. George Ot
Trevelyan, in his “Life of Lord Macaulay,” not only favours vide
popular agitation, but approves of organised popular revolt as a mea:
of enforcing legislation. In a chapter on the passing of the Eefoi
Bill, the following interesting passage occurs:—
The old system died hard ; but in 1832 came its final agony. The Refoi
Bill had passed the Commons, and had been read a second time in the Up]
House ; but the facilities which Committee affords for maintaining and delaying
measure of great magnitude and intricacy proved too much for the self-control
the Lords. Earl Grey resigned, and the Duke of Wellington, with a loyalty whi
certainly did not stand in need of such an unlucky proof, came forward to mi
the storm. But its violence was too much even for his courage and constancy,
could not get colleagues to assist him in the Cabinet, or supporters to vote w
him in Parliament, or soldiers to fight for him in the streets ; and it was evid<
that in a few days his position would be such as could only be kept by fightu
The revolution had in truth commenced. At a meeting of the political unions
the slope of Newhall Hill, at Birmingham, a hundred thousand voices had song t
words—
God is our guide—no swords we draw,
We kindle not war’s battle fires,
By union, justice, reason, law,
We claim the birthright of our sires.
But those very men were now binding themselves by a declaration that unless
Bill passed they would pay no taxes, nor purchase property distrained by the t
gatherer. In thus renouncing the first obligation of a citizen they did in effect dr
the sword, and THEY WOULD HAVE BEEN CRAVENS if they left it in the scabba
The crisis lasted just a week. The Bill was read a third time by a majority of £
to one on the 4th of June.


CHAPTER VI.
COERCION AND CRIME.
T a thousand men had been imprisoned without trial in Turkey, there would have
;n anxious appeals to the sacred right of insurrection, and covert incentives to
3llion.”— Mb. Joseph Cowen, M.P.
I E deplore the outrages which accompany revolutions. But the more violent
outrages the more assured we feel that a revolution was necessary. The
lence of those outrages will always he proportioned to the ferocity and ignorance
;he people, and the ferocity and ignorance of the people will be proportioned to
oppression and degradation under which they have been accustomed to live."—
so Macaulay,
State prosecutions having failed, the Chief Secretary for Ireland,
*. W. E. Forster, applied to Parliament for further powers to cope
:h the agitation. And Parliament, of course, complied, for when
,s it known to refuse a Coercion Act for Ireland? (1.) Accordingly,
the 24th January, 1881, Mr. Forster introduced that unlucky, and,
him, fatal measure, —“ A Bill for the Protection of Person and
operty in Ireland.” This was its Parliamentary name ; in Ireland
was known by the less alliterative but more accurate title—a
ircion Act.” This law was to put down the “village tyrants”
i “dissolute ruffians;” it was to “break up the lairs of savage
n,” (2.) and place under lock and key those who were terrorising
) country, and against whom evidence sufficient for conviction was
forthcoming ; but it was not intended and would not be used to
(1.) Fifty-two Coercion Acte have been passed for Ireland since the Union.
(2.) These are Mr, Forster’s own words.


■■36* The Land League : A Narrative of
suppress legitimate agitation. (1.) How Mr. Forster kept his
promises we shall quickly see.
The speeches of the Land Leaguers, as may he noticed in the
chapter, afforded no justification for repressive measures. Some-
thing more being necessary, Mr. Forster instructed the police to pre-
pare a return of the “ outrages” committed in the previous two years.
“ The figures,” says Mr. A. M. Sullivan, (2.) “made an astonishing
■array; hut astonishment gave way to derision, and indeed to anger,
when it was discovered that, to suit the purposes of the return, the
most trumpery offences were set down as outrages by Mr. Forster’s
officials. Nay, in some cases, each such offence was sub-divided into
two or three, so as to swell the total. It was as if Tom Doolan had
.gone to the Widow Mulligan’s house and beaten herstejison for calling
him ‘ names.’ The box on the ear, or stroke of a stick, was set down
as one outrage ; the threat to do it again was set down as another;
the breaking of a pane of glass in the course of the scuffle was a third ;
and the upset of a pail of milk was a fourth. When Mr, Labouchere,
M. 1., first called attention to this stjde of piling up the agony, the
House of Commons could scarcely credit it; but Mr. Forster, in
mysterious and solemn tones, intimated that there was more than met
the eye in these apparently trivial matters of panes of glass and pails
of milk; and he could not answer for the peace of Ireland if such
crimes were underrated by the House.” An English member of Par-
liament, one of the few honest, courageous men in that assembly, who
have been consistent friends of Ireland, thus expresses his opinion on
these so-called outrages:—“l have no desire to apologise for, or
extenuate the excesses, in the Irish agitatiom, but there has been
gross exaggeration concerning it. It is difficult to collect, even upon
the spot and in quiet times, exact reports of what is transpiring. In
•times of excitement, and in distant districts, the difficulty is greatly
increased. lam far from saying that the stories sent to the English
papers are intentionally untrue, but I do say that little pains is taken
(I.) Lord Macaulay says:—“ To punish a man because we infer from the nature
of some doctrine which he holds, or from the conduct of other persons who hold
■flip camo «nfh L in
. ’ ~ V 1-uei pm OV/ilO U liU IIUIU.
the same doctrines with him, that he will commit a crime, is persecution and is
in every case, foolish and wicked.” Yet this is precisely what Mr. Forster has
done, and what has been sanctioned by the Imperial Parliament,
(2.) “ New Ireland revised edition, p. 456.


verify cheir truth before they are sent. Rumours gather as they
They are then caught up and published as facts; and a lie once
it in circulation cannot be caught until it has made the circuit of the
dly press. People see the first report, and never see the correction,
- en if one is ever published. A fictitious public opinion is thus
eated, from which unoffending people suffer. Even Government
turns are not always to be trusted. They have to depend upon the
dice, and the police are sometimes hasty, sometimes unscrupulous,
id never infallible.” (1.) And yet it was upon these uncorroborated
ports, prepared by unscrupulous partisans, that the liberties of the
ish nation w T ere voted away. Anyone who knows anything of Ire-
id knows that distress and criminality go hand in hand. Outrages
llow eviction with the same certainty that day follows night. As a
rtter of fact Ireland was never so peaceful under similar circum-
tnces of distress, as during the two years of the existence of the Land
iague. In 1849 the number of agrarian murders in Ireland was
5 ; in 1879-80, there were only 5. In 1833 the aggregate of crime
s 9,000 ; in the years 1879-80 it is only 3,444. (2.) The process
scribed by Mr. Sullivan was doubtless largely resorted to in swelling
this total. Turning to the j udicial statistics of England for the single
r 1880, (3.) we find that 61 persons were tried for murder, 40 for
jmpts thereat, 328 for shooting, stabbing, and manslaughter, 491
criminal assaults on women and girls, 69 for assaults on the police,
0 for assaults with intent to do bodily harm, 279 for malicious
juries, 181 for riot, &c., and 213 for armed robbery. Besides these we
,ve amongst the summary convictions 2,091 aggravated assaults on
)men and children, 11,985 aggravated assaults on the police, 9,390
relty to animals, 3,866 cases of malicious destruction of walls, crops,
i., and 7,342 cases of deserting families. Of course, these statistics,
(1.) Speech of Mr. Joseph Cowen, Town Hall, Ncwcastle-on-Tyne, January
1881.
(2.) This last estimate is taken from Mr. Forster’s book, “ The Truth about the
nd League.” Much reliance cannot, however, be placed on Mr. Forster’s figures.
: publishes a table in which agrarian outrages are made to follow Land League
ietings in the years 1879-80. Mr. Forster’s list includes at least seven counties in
iich the Land League gained no foothold until late in 1880, and yet he asserts
it meetings took place in these counties in 1879, and that agrarian outrages
lowed. If this be a sample of Mr. Forster’s “facts,” he would do well to alter
i title of his pamphlet.
(3.) Quoted in letter of Mr. Alfred Webb, of Dublin, a member of the Society
Friends, and proprietor of the Ecclesiastical Gazette,


sad and disgraceful as is the story they reveal, form no excuse what-
ever for Irish crime; hut they show, at all events, the injustice of
charging Irishmen with exceptional depravity, and making police
reports the pretext for destroying Irish freedom. (1.)
The Coercion Act having been passed, Mr. Forster proceeded to
put it into operation against the “ dissolute ruffians” and “ village
•tyrants.” The first arrest was Mr. Joseph B. Walsh, a respect-
able merchant of Castlebar, a Poor Law Guardian, and a Town
■Commissioner. The next was Mr. M. P. Boyton, one of the
organizers of the Land League; and then two newspaper proprietors—
Messrs. James Daly ( Castlebar Telegraph), and J. Tally ( Roscommon
Herald). Then followed in quick succession the arrest of Mr. John
Dillon, M.P. for Tipperary; Bev. Eugene Sheehy, a young Limerick
priest; and Mr. Thomas Brennan, the secretary of the Land League.
These latter arrests took place in May, 1881 ; and in September,
Father Sheehy and Mr. Dillon were liberated. Early in October,
warrants were issued against Messrs. C. S. Parnell, M.P., John Dillon,
M.P., Thomas Sexton, M.P., J. J. O’Kelly, M.P., T. M. Healy, M.P.,
Eichard Lalor, M.P., Joseph G. Biggar, M.P., Arthur O’Connor,
M.P., and several others. The four first named were arrested and
lodged in Kilmainham prison, together with J. E. Kenny, M.D., the
medical adviser of the prisoners, Dr. Cardiff, a medical man in
County Wexford, Mr. William O’Brien (now M.P. for Mallow), editor
of United Ireland, several barristers, solicitors, and other professional
men. (2.) The warrant merely specified that the prisoner was
“ reasonably suspected of having, since the 30th September, 1880, been
guilty of a crime punishable by law,” and the gaol officials were
authorised to detain him until 30th September, 1882, unless otherwise
(1.) The following is suspected to be of American origin :
“ Of all the sarce that I can call to mind,
England does make the most onpleasant kind.
’Tis you’re the sinner ollus, she’s the saint,
Wut’s good’s all English, all thet isn’t aint.
She’s all that’s honest, honourable, and fair
And when the vartoos died they made her heir.”
This recipe is from the Glasgow Herald, and was published in vindication of
Mr. Forster’s Coercion Act:—To govern an Irishman you must first get him
down, then you must kick him till he can’t get up, then you must sit on him in case
he comes to."
(2.) Over 1000 men were arrested under Mr. Forster’s warrants, only one of
whom was brought to trial up to the date of the Chief Secretary's resignation.


ordered. This -was all the information a suspect received, and without
any opportunity of facing his accusers, or disproving the charge, he
was detained in the ordinary criminal cells, with little better than a
criminal’s treatment.
The motive of these arrests, and the character of the ‘ suspects,’
will best be understood from the history of a case known to the writer.
A stronger refutation of Mr. Forster’s assertion that none were
arrested but those who had actually committed crime, or who were-
likely to commit crime, could not be given. On the southern coast of
Wexford, near the village of Bannow, lived, and still lives, an extensive-
farmer and shopkeeper named Denis Crosbie. Being well advanced
in years, of a retiring disposition, and comparatively prosperous, Mr.
Crosbie was never more than a passive spectator at meetings of the-
Land League. The tenant of one Captain Boyse called a meeting to
ask for a reduction of rent, and Mr. Crosbie, as the largest landholder,
was called to the chair. Afterwards, Mr. Crosbie, with two others,
waited on the landlord, and placed before him the request of the-
tenants. Captain Boyse stormed, threatened, and even swore at the
deputation; refused the demand ; and said that, unless his rents were
paid by a certain day, he would write to Mr. Forster, and “have the-
ringleaders arrested.” The tenants having declined to pay unless a
remission were given, the Captain carried out his threat; Mr. Crosbie
and the others of the tenants’ deputation were arrested and lodged in
Kilmainham prison, and detained there until the general jail delivery
in May, 1882. The facts were represented fully to Mr. Forster by
influential and impartial persons; it was shown that Crosbie had not
only a young family of his own, but that he was appointed by the-
Courts guardian of certain minors, and that he could not discharge hie
duties while in custody. All efforts were fruitless while the Captain
remained without his rents. Ultimately they were paid, the required
reduction having been granted. Mr. Crosbie was then released, having
been imprisoned for eight months, as one too dangerous to be left at
large. Another noteworthy case is that of Mr. John O’Connor, T.C.,
of Cork, one of the most respected and law-abiding gentlemen in the
south of Ireland. Concerning Mr. O’Connor’s arrest under the
Coercion Act, Mr. Finlayson, a member of the English Democratic
Federation, who visited Ireland in July, 1881, says :— ‘ In Cork I


The Chief Secretary demanded the Coercion Act to put down cr
Hid it succeed ? The following figures will answer. In Connai
and Munster during the first quarter of 1881, when the Ooercio v
was in full working order, the number of reported agrarian outr;
was 568; in the second quarter they had risen to 768 ; in the t
quarter they were 735 ; and in the fourth quarter, when Mr. Par
and the other leaders were in jail, they had swelled to the alam
total of 1,127! Again, there were only 5 agrarian murders in
Ireland from the establishment of the Land League up to its supp
sion in October, 1881. The record of three counties alone—Ke
Limerick, and Clare, during the six months immediately succeed
the imprisonment of Mr. Parnell —present no less than 7 agrai
murders and 22 attempts at murder. (1.) In the other counties of Irel
crime also increased after the suppression of the Land League, but
in the same proportion as in those above given.
Whatever Mr. Forster’s apology may now be for this law, and
bungling, oppressive administration of it, he cannot deny that
received warnings from many friendly sources of what would hapj
if he suppressed the Laud League. Long before the Coercion i
was passed, the Eight Eev. Dr. Nulty, speaking of the tendency
Irishmen to join agrarian combinations, said :
(1)1 take the figures as given in Mr. Forster’s pamphlet., He only gives
returns for Munster and Connaught, the two provinces where the distress
greatest, and where, of course, provocation to commit crime was greater thai
Ulster or Leinster.


It is essentially restive and active, and must give vent to its irrepressible
gies through some outlet or another. It will readily expend its superabundant
ity in public, open, and legal organisations, set on foot for the attainment of
ssary and salutary reforms ; but, failing those, it will infallibly throw off its
ins energies in the first secret combination it may happen to fall in with.
nism or Fenianism are by no means the worst of the secret confederacies
it is prepared heartily to join. It is only when it has shaken off the control
son and religion, and thrown itself enthusiastically into the arms of one of
organisations that we can fully realise the absolute and despotic sway in
hit holds its victims, as it were spell-bound. During a long missionary career,
dally whilst acting chaplain to two jails for seventeen years, it became my
, many and many a time, to remonstrate with men who were literally enslaved
is principle of evil. I warned them that the secret confederation in which
had enrolled themselves stood condemned by reason and by religion; that the
its it had proposed to itself were impracticable, or, if not, they were worthless,
fery often wicked ; that by becoming members of this confederacy they ceased
living members of God’s Church ; that in entering this combination they
d their necks in the halter ; and that they would probably leave it for the
ictship or the gallows-tree ; that, therefore, the very instincts of self-preserva-
imperatively demanded of them at once to quit their connection with it.
2 warnings were at all times acknowledged to be salutary, charitable, and
intentioned ; but invariably they made no practical impression whatever. The
to whom they had been addressed (quite unconsciously to themselves) had
he full use of their reason and the free exercise of their liberty. In the best
, they mistook that blind irrational instinct for a patriotic feeling of the
;st and noblest character, and the strong and generous impulses of their mis-
sd patriotism could not fail to excite one’s admiration as well as one’s pity,
frankly admitted the appalling gravity of the risks they ran, the painful
aces of character, of personal comforts and liberty, they might be called on to
i ; but then, when their country demanded these sacrifices, it would be
hery as well as cowardice to shrink from making them. It would be treason,
to break with the confederations they had joined. Having lost all hope of
; ever able, by lawful means, to redress their country’s wrongs, they felt per-
;d that, through these secret confederacies, they would at least be able to
them terribly. Deeds of violence, of intimidation, of lawlessness, and even
~ then became the ordinary and natural incidents of the desperate war they
.to make—to rid their country of all forms of oppression, particularly of
;d tyranny of landlordism.
is another of those salutary admonitions which Mr. Forster
wisdom and power, treated with contempt. The Rev. Mortimor
>nnor, P.P., of Ballybunion, County Kerry, spoke as follows at a
ing of the Land League, shortly before its suppression : I
jlished a branch of the Land League in my parish and became its
Every householder in the parish—farmer, labourer, and
l—joined it, with the result that the most perfect tranquillit*


prevails and serious crime is altogether unknown. The restraining
influence of the League is clearly visible. The same is the tone of the
surrounding parishes. It also applies in a greater or less extent to all
Munster. Should the Government suppress this organisation, which
walks openly in the light of day, and hides nothing, the population
will be brought face to face with the armed forces of the realm.
Without restraining or controlling influences in their struggle for
existence, our suffering fellow-countrymen will be driven into a course
which reason and religion alike condemn.”
These words, as well as those quoted from Dr. Nulty’s pastoral, are
veritable prophecies. With such warnings before him, will any reader
find it difficult to determine whom should bear the responsibility for
those fearful deeds recently committed in Ireland— Mr, Forster and
his Government, or the leaders of the Land League ? (1.)
(1.) Mr. A, M. Sullivan thus sums up the results of the Forster regime ;—“ He
(Mr. Forster) found Ireland alarmed and disturbed. He left it a volcano of
human passions on one side, a Bastile of Government vengeance and caprice on the
other. The ‘village ruffians,’ and ‘midnight marauders’ went apparently
untouched—nay, multiplied in numbers and increased in insolence of crime ; while
mayors, magistrates, members of Parliament, public representatives of every degree
were seized and flung into jail on mere suspicion, without accusation, evidence,
investigation, or proof The inevitable result appeared. The secret
societies became masters of the situation. Grime grew rampant. ”


CHAPTER VII.
THE LAND ACT AND “NO KENT.”
“The power of the Landlords is gone.”—Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone
The Irish. Land Act became law on the 22nd August, 1881. The
attitude of the people of Ireland towards this measure has been so
widely misrepresented and misunderstood that a review of the facts
must be of service. More than a year previously Mr. Gladstone
declared that the Compensation for Disturbance Bill was necessary to
save the lives of 15,000 persons in Ireland. That Bill was sent to the
Lords and rejected by those “ hereditary and irresponsible legislators”
with every mark of defiance and contempt. Mr. Gladstone calmly
pocketed the insult, and did nothing further towards protecting those
whose lives were admittedly in danger. Then came the arrest of Mr.
Davitt; next, the passage of a galling Coercion Act, in spite of the
protest and resistance of the Irish representation, after which followed
the imprisonment of their trusted leaders, their priests, and some of
the most respected men in the community. The passage of a Coercion
Act prior to the consideration of remedial measures, admittedly neces-
sary, created great indignation throughout the country. In one or two
places, gratitude for the Land Act manifested itself openly, but the
people generally received it in much the same spirit as one might
receive back his property from a highwayman. Like all other reforms
granted by Parliament, the Land Act of 1881 was the outcome of fear,
not of a sense of justice. Towards Mr. Gladstone personally there
was at this time a warm and kindly feeling, because it was understood
that he desired the measure to be as beneficial as possible to the
tenants. (1.) But the men who deserve and who received the thanks
(1.) Mr. A. M. Sullivan says, “I cannot think there was one amongst my
colleagues who did not render secret or open homage to the indomitable spirit, the
unwearied attention and the marvellous grasp of his subject, displayed by the
illustrious statesman whose name was to be for ever associated with the Bill.
“ New Ireland,” p. 459.


The Land League: A Narrative of
and gratitude of Ireland for the measure were those who composed tl
active section of the Irish Parliamentary Party.
Two Conventions were held in Dublin to consider the work <
Parliament. At the first, held in April, 1881, after the introductio
of the Land Bill, the Irish Party were instructed to offer certai
amendments, &c. At the last Convention, held shortly after the Bi
became law, it was resolved to test the Act, as it depended very mud
on the interpretation given to its clauses by the Courts, whether i
would be of any benefit whatever to the tenantry. The Act exclude,
leaseholders, and under it any tenant or landlord might apply to th
Court for the fixing of a fair rent for 15 years. The Court wa
supposed to be constituted of a representative of the landlord interest
a representative of the tenant, and a legal gentleman, who wa
expected to be, the arbiter in case of difference of opinion. Bu
as all the Commissioners were appointed by the Crown, it i
almost unnecessary to point out that the tenants’ “ repre
sentative” was in many instances open to suspicion. Thi
plan proposed by the Land League for the working of the Ac
was simple and feasible and cheap. It decided to bring into Cour
from each district a certain number of cases, to obtain the decision o:
the Commissioners thereon, and, as the basis of these decisions, land
lords and tenants in that locality might come to an arrangement out o:
Court. In this way a large amount of money would be saved to tin
litigants; for if a ease went into Court each party would have to fe(
a solicitor, a barrister, a valuator, as well as several independem
witnesses who had an acquaintance with the quality and value of the
Land. It would also have been a great saving of time and expense
to Government, for if the 600,000 tenant farmers of Ireland applied at
once to the Court to fix a fair rent it was manifest that a block would
ensue. But the proposal of the Land League was shattered by the
imprisonment of the leaders, and the suppression of the organisation.
Had it been adopted, it woiffd not have cost the litigants and the
Government £350,000 to procure decisions in 37,000 cases, resulting in
reductions of £70,000; 60 per cent, of such cases remaining to-day
practically undecided owing to appeals to a superior Court which have
been lodged by the landlords.


It is a common assertion in certain circles that the No Eent Mani-
festo ” was an advice to the people to pursue an immoral and criminal.
course, and that it was the cause of the suppression of the Land.
League. The value of the last statement may be measured by the-
fact that the owner of every name save one attached to that docu-
ment was in prison when the Manifesto was signed ; that the clerks ■
and messengers of the Association were seized on, and that the gentle-
men engaged in selecting test cases for the Courts had to fly the-
country. “ The Government,” said Mr. Sexton afterwards in the
House of Commons, “ with all the truculence of the Russian system of
police, but without any of the Russian frankness, deprived the League,
by the hypocritical method of personal arrests, of the means for carry-
ing out its ordinary transactions.” This is sufficient to show the
absurdity of the statement that it was the Manifesto which brought
about the suppression of the League. The assertion that the Mani-
festo preached absolute “no rent” is contradicted by the very words
of the document itself :
The Executive of the National Land League, forced to abandon the policy of
:esting the Land Act, feels bound to advise the tenant-farmers of Ireland to pay no.
rent until the Government relinquishes the existing system of terrorism, and restores
the constitutional rights of the people,”
After all, rent is no more sacred than any other debt, and if it be
.awful to withhold other liabilities which may be considered im-
noderate or unjust, why should it be criminal to refuse payment of
•ents which have since been proved to be exorbitant ? (1.)
The history of the seven months of Mr. Parnell’s incarceration
presents some deplorable features. Deprived of their leaders, with no
organisation to protect their interests, abandoned to the fury of the
berritorialists, who exacted in many cases a terrible revenge for lost
prestige, the peasantry fell into many regrettable excesses. Peal
mtrages—indefensible crimes—were then committed without doubt,
out they were crimes which only the spirit of despair could prompt
nen to plan and execute. The people saw the jails crowded with the
)est and purest in the land—ladies subjected to criminal treatment
(1.) The Land Courts have reduced Irish rentals, on an average, 25 per cent.


because they obeyed the impulses of charity, (1.) women and childr
butchered in western towns, (2.) policemen ordered to shoot m
down on suspicion, (3.) the press gagged, prosecuted, and its condi
tors imprisoned or driven into exile, and all open expression of opini
stamped out; and they, at last, lent ear to the whispered counsels
dangerous and desperate men. While we condemn and regret wl
followed, we should not ignore the provocation. The action of 1
Government and its agents is thus summarised in an amendment to i
reply to the Queen’s Speech, moved early in February, 1881, by h
Justin McCarthy, M.P.:—
The liberties of members of this House have been outraged and the perfoi
ance of their constitutional duties rendered impossible ; hundreds of Her Majest
subjects in Ireland are detained in prison without trial or the right of Hab*
Corpus, many of them on the alleged suspicion of offences for which even if di
tried and found guilty they could not have been subjected to punishment as sew
as that which they have already undergone ; the lawful organisation of the Ir
tenantry has been arbitrarily suppressed at a most critical moment, when its ma
tenance was essential to the due protection of their legal rights, while the organi
tion of the Irish landlords against those rights has been encouraged and support*
ladies engaged in the work of public charity have been threatened, harrassed, a
imprisoned under obsolete statutes, and on nominal pretexts ; the liberty of t
Press has been illegally interfered with, the right of free speech, of public meetii
and of lawful, constitutional agitation has been abrogated ; innocent persons ha
been killed and wounded by the armed forces of the Crown ; the verdicts of co
ners’ juries incriminating the agents of the Executive have been disregarded ; lai
districts of the country have been placed under a system of quasi-martial la
rewards have been offered by the Government for secret information as to crin
to be committed, tending to the demoralization of the people and the creation
perjured evidence against innocent persons, which action has generally cans
in the minds of the people of Ireland a profound distrust of the execution
the law.
(1.) The ladies connected with the Dublin organization who suffered impris*
ment are—Miss Reynolds, Mrs. Moore, Miss O’Connor, and Miss M‘C
mack. Miss Reynolds and Mrs. Moore received six months’ impris<
ment each, and Miss O’Connor three months. Having refused to give bail,
persons of “ bad character,” they were arrested and committed to gaol. T 1
occupied the ordinary convicts’ cell, lived on prison fare, and were kept in solitj
confinement for 22 hours daily.
(2.) A crowd of children were fired on by the police in Ballina, and se\
mortally wounded. Two women, Ellen M'Donagh and Mrs. Dean, were fal
stabbed at Belmullet, County Mayo.
(8.) Police Inspector Smith, of County Clare, issued instructions to the m
under his command to fire on any person they met on their patrols, if a suspici
crossed their minds that the individual intended anything illegal. The circul
was read in the House of Commons, but the Inspector is still in the force in anotl
county.


Shortly after the suppression of the Land League, an American
•litical economist—a man of moderate views and large sym-
ithies, (1.) visited Ireland. He thus describes the condition of the
untry: —
I doubt if an American, until he comes here, can realize— l am certain that the
,st majority of my countrymen do not begin to realize—the tyranny under which
eland lies to-day. To our notions it does not seem possible that such a state of
lings can exist in an English-speaking community thus late in the 19th century,
ur fathers had a very vivid recollection of British tyranny, and a very thorough
mtempt and hatred for it, but for some time past the common belief of Americans
been that personal liberty is really as secure under British institutions as under
own ; that the English monarchy had, in fact, become a republic in all save the
me. As to England this may be measurably true, but as to Ireland nothing could
more erroneous. There is to-day no country in the world making the slightest
nee to civilization where the fundamental principl es of popular right are so
.ntly outraged, or rather so utterly ignored ; where the government is such a
sckless, conscienceless, irritating tyranny. It is not merely a despotism ; it is a
lespotism sustained by alien force, and wielded in the interests of a privileged
i, who look upon the great masses of the people as intended but to be hewers
if their wood and drawers of their water Imagine all constitutional
ights suspended, and the whole country at the mercy of an absolute dictatorship,
acked by fifty thousand bayonets in the bands of foreign troops—a dictatorship
>r which nothing is too arbitrary and nothing too mean. Imagine elected mem-
ers of the highest legislative body, the trusted leaders of a political party that
mbraces nine-tenths of the people, lying in jail, and treated with indignities to
rhich convicted felons in civilized countries are not subjected. Imagine the most
ipected and public-spirited men in their respective localities dragged oil daily to
son without charge or inquiry, upon lettres de cachet issued by a government
nderling at the suggestion of some landlord or police inspector. Imagine a
ountry where public meetings to discuss public questions cannot be held, where
ven the meetings of ladies are burst in upon and dispersed by policemen ; where
he newspaper editor must scan his proofs closely lest he may find himself the next
ay under lock and key ; where men of the highest standing fear to talk of public
flairs save with bated breath and in secure places ; where they tell you that their
very movement is watched by detectives and their letters opened and read in the
lost-office, and warn you that you are watched as closely. Imagine a country
vhere you hear of magistrates who refuse bail to poor fellows charged with such
leinous crimes as saying, “ To hell with the Queen,” or who send boys to prison for
whistling tunes policemen deem treasonable. Imagine a country where you hear
if constables cutting to pieces with their sword bayonets young girls who are flying
rom them in terror, where the proprietor of such a hotel as the Astor or Metro-
lolitan of New York, or the Lick House of San Francisco will show you the bruises
m his face inflicted in his own house by policemen who rushed in and beat him,
pecause, with an impulse of common humanity, he had exclaimed when he saw
hem kicking a poor boy about the street 1 Let any American, if he can, imagine
, country such as this, and he will get some idea of the condition of Ireland to-day.
i it a reign of terror.
(1.) Mr. Henry George, author of the celebrated work, “ Progress and


CHAPTER VIII.
A GREAT CRIME—ITS CAUSES AND
CONSEQUENCES.
“ The most arch deed of piteous massacre
That ever yet this land was guilty of.”—Shakespeare.
“ Ouk object is to drive discontent under the surface.”—Speech of Earl
Oowper, late Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
Recent revelations have done much to divest the assassination of
Lord Frederick Cavendish and Mr. T. H. Burke of the mystery which
at first surrounded it. This terrible crime—which Ireland from end
to end reprobated and deplored—has been made the pretext for some
hitter aspersions on the character of the Land League and its leaders.
The most common accusations are: 1. That the Land League agitation
provoked the crime by stimulating popular passion. 2. That the
murderers belonged to, or had sympathy, with the Land League. 3.
That the Land League supplied them with funds, and sympathised
with their proceedings.
The best answer to the first charge is the evidence of James
Carey himself, the chief of the gang which planned and perpetrated
the murders. His testimony has been accepted by Q-overnment, and
on it several of the accused have been convicted. If it be reliable
enough to send men to the gallows, it ought surely suffice to exonerate
the Land League. Here is Carey’s evidence, on cross-examination: —
When you became a member of the Order of the Invincibles was it with the
object of serving your country that you joined 1 Well, yes.
And at that time, when you joined with the object of serving your country, in
what state was Ireland ? In a very bad state.
A famine, I think, was just passing over her? Yes.
The Coercion Bill was in force and the popular leaders were in prison ? Some
of them were.


Parnell, Dillon, and others ; the right of public speech was prevented ? Yes.
Any man might be arrested without warning and thrown into prison ? Yes.
And was it because you despaired of any constitutional means of serving Ireland
you joined the Society of Invincibles ? I believe so. There would not he so many
recruits only for that.
Comment would but weaken the force of this damning admission,
which throws the whole responsibility for the existence of this In-
vincible organization, and the crimes it committed, on the shoulders
of those who suppressed the constitutional movement. The reader will
note that it was not until November 1881 (1.) —the month immediately
following the imprisonment of Mr. Parnell and the proclamation of the
Land League—that the Invincible Society was formed. Its projectors
knew well it could not co-exist with the Land League, the leaders of
which would not tolerate its diabolical designs. Their imprisonment
left Mr. Carey and his friends full scope for operations, and they used
their opportunities with terrible vigor!
As to the second charge, “that the murderers belonged to, or had
sympathy with, the Land League,” it is a well-known fact that not one
of them was ever a member of that organization. Nay, more, there was
not one of them who had the remotest connection with the land—not
one of them had the slightest interest in the reforms which the Land
League was established to obtain. Here are the names and occupa-
tions not only of those charged with the murders in the Phoenix
Park, but also of those accused of connection with the conspiracy to
murder: —
James Carey, builder
James Mullett, grocer
Joseph Brady, stonecutter
Henry Bowles, gunsmith
Thomas Martin, compositor
Timothy Kelly, coachbuilder
Peter Carey, mason
Edward M‘Caffrey, van driver
Edward O’Brien, shoemaker
Joseph Hanlon, carpenter
Laurence Hanlon, carpenter
Peter Doyle, coachbuilder
William Moroney, laborer
John Dwyer, laborer
Daniel Delaney, bricklayer
Joseph Mullett, clerk
Daniel Curley, carpenter
George Smith, clerk
Michael Fegan, laborer
Patrick Delaney, laborer
James Fitzharris, car driver
Thomas Doyle, laborer
Thomas Caffrey, laborer
Joseph Smith, laborer
Eobert Farrell, tailor
Michael Kavanagh, jarvey.
(1.) On his direct examination, Carey swore that, in November 1881, Edward
M‘Caffrey brought to his (Carey’s) house a Mr. Walsh, who came over from
England “to establish a society that would make history.” Walsh swore Carey in
as a member of the Irish Invincibles, and mentioned three other persons who were
to be the heads of the society in Dublin.—Dublin Freeman's Journal report,


The organisation to which these men belonged was equally
hostile to the Land League as to the Government of England. It
comprised men who would look on the “removal” of Parnell and
Davitt with as little compunction as they did on the murder of Caven-
dish and Burke. As a matter of fact, a plot was on foot in Dublin to
assassinate Davitt. He was saved only through the treachery of one
of those told off to “ remove” him. (1.)
The third, and most serious charge of all is, “ That the Land
League supplied the murderers with funds and sympathised with their
proceedings.”
Certain journalists in Australia grasped at the cabled reports
of Carey’s evidence as corroborating the charge. That evidence is
now before them in full. As will be seen it by no means bears out
such an accusation. Yet, these individuals have not had the justice
or the manliness to retract the scandalous falsehood. So much for
their impartiality. Here is Carey’s testimony—all of it that relates to
the question of funds. The report is that of the Dublin Freeman's
Journal, 19th February :
What kind of man was “ No. I”—was he military or civilian in appearance f
He was a respectable looking man.
Did he tell you anything about his own position ? Oh, no ; but I inferred by
his military remarks that he was a military man.
He gave you money, I think you said ? Yes.
t 1 ■
In what sums? I think only three sums, two £2O and a £4O.
Did he say anything about what money could be had, or what was your limit t
He said there was no limit.
What did he say with reference to that ? He said—“ If you required £l,OOO
you could have it.”
Mullett, Curley, and you, did you ever talk amongst yourselves as to where the
money came from ? We often did.
Now, tell me, where did you say it came from ? Well we were divided in
opinion as to that, but we talked of it.
Who used you say supplied the money—where did you say it came from ? We
were divided in opinion.
Well, what used you say ?
Dr. Webb —This is a doubly vicious question ; it is open to objection. We ha\<
a narrative given unconnected with the exigencies of the alleged conspiracy, and
with reference to matter of opinion.
See letter of Mr. Henry George, in New York World, of May, 1881


Mr. Murphy—lt is just as much a matter o£ evidence to show where the
“ sinews of war” were supplied from as to prove the arms, the knives, and other
matters.
Dr. Webb—The witness has already stated that they did not know where the
money came from.
Mr. Murphy—They had no certainty, but I submit the witness may be asked
what they said.
Mr. Keys—Anything they said I think may be used as evidence against
them.
Mr. Murphy—Where was it considered the expenses came from t We could
not tell where the money came from.
But according to your opinion ?
Dr. Webb—ls that admissible ? His worship will juet decide the matter, and
then it is all right.
Mr, Keys—Well, I know, whatever they said is evidence against them.
Mr. Murphy —What was the opinion amongst some of them as to where the
money came from ? Well, there were different ideas; some said it came from
Ainerica. I said I did not believe that it came from America,
Mr. Murphy—Where did you say you believed it came from 1 I said I did not
think from America. I think I expressed myself ; but I know between the four of
us it was repeatedly said, “ Perhaps they are getting it from the Land League.”
Some of them suggested that, and some said, “ Perhaps from America.”
It will be observed that Carey first said be “could not tell where
the money came from but, on being pressed, acknowledged having
a suspicion that it came from the Land League. (1.) This, then— the
suspicion of an informer and a murderer —is the basis on which so many
slanders on the Irish name and the Irish race have been uttered in
these Colonies; this is the groundwork for those positive and sensa-
tional statements implicating the Land League in the most atrocious
crime of the age. Australians, if they desire to avoid having their
feelings needlessly excited against their Irish fellow-citizens, should
note the infamous part which a section of the press has performed in
this transaction, and discount, in future, all derogatory charges against
Irishmen ejnanating from prejudiced sources.
That the Land League had no sympathy with the assassins of
Lord Cavendish and Mr. Burke, it needed not a manifesto from the
(1.) A correspondent of the London Times recently (26th February) visited
Carey in Kilmainham. The informer said, “He wished to modify what he said in
reference to the Land League having supplied the Invincibles with funds. He
spoke in haste when pressed for his opinion at the trial. There was more made of
these few words than they were worth.” The Colonial press have not been able to
find space for this disclaimer.


Executive to prove. There is not a hamlet in Ireland—from Cork to
Donegal—in which the people did not meet and express their abhor-
rence of the crime. (1.) Even the much-abused Irish in America
denounced it; and branches of the Land League, in Boston and San
Francisco, offered rewards for the detection of the perpetrators. (2.]
So far from giving countenance to the deed, Messrs. Parnell, Dillon,
and Davitt denounced it in words so bitter and strong that few,
even in England, doubted their sincerity. (3.) The following is the
manifesto of the League, issued 12 hours after the murder was com-
mitted :
“TO THE PEOPLE OF IRELAND.
“ On the eve of what seemed, a bright future for our country, that evil destiny
which has apparently pursued us for centuries has struck at our hopes another
blow which cannot be exaggerated in its disastrous consequences. In this hour of
sorrowful gloom we venture to give expression to our profound sympathy with the
people of Ireland in the calamity that has befallen our cause through this horrible
deed, and with those who determined at the last hour that the policy of concilia-
tion should supplant that of terrorism and mutual distrust. We earnestly hope
that the attitude and action of the Irish people will show to the world that an
assassination such as has startled us almost to the abandbnment of hope of our
country’s future, is deeply and religiously abhorrent to their every feeling and
instinct. We appeal to you to show by every manner of expression that, amidst
the universal feeling of horcor which the assassination has excited, no people feel
so deep a detestation of its atrocity, or so deep a sympathy with those whose hearts
must be seared by it, as the nation upon whose prosperity and reviving hopes it
may entail consequences more ruinous than those that have fallen to the lot of
(1.) The following is the ©pinion of the brother of one of the murdered
gentlemen—Dr. Burke, of Lafayette, America: —“ I know that his death
will be speedily avenged. I know that no Land League in Ireland, and
no Land League here, had a hand in this cowardly deed. Ireland and England
are on the verge of a true reconciliation, and no true patriot, no true Irishman,
ever committed the fearful and dastardly deed.”
(2.) Mr. James Mooney, president of the American Land League, issued, on
behalf of that body, the following address :—“ The execrable and cowardly assassi-
nation of Lord Frederick Cavendish and Mr. T. H. Burke has horrified the world,
and is especially painful and abhorrent to every true friend of Ireland, We
denounce the awful crime, and exhort our brethren in Ireland to every effort
to bring its perpetrators to justice, and show their detestation of the fiendish act,
which only an arch enemy of our race, or some irresponsible idiot, could have con-
ceived or executed.”
(3.) Mr. Davitt, replying to comments of the London Standard, on May loth,
placed the responsibility of all the crime after his arrest on Mr. Forster’s shoulders,
and added ; “ Had I been permitted to continue my crusade against outrage—to
have levelled all the influence of the Land League against the commission of
murder and the mutilation of cattle, I could have prevented numbers of crimes
that now stain the name of Ireland and have averted the horrible deed of Saturday
last.”


unhappy Ireland during the present generation. We feel ffhat no act has ever
been perpetrated in our country during the exciting straggles of the past 50 years
which has so stained the name of hospitable Ireland as this cowardly and
unprovoked assassination of a friendly stranger, and that until the murderers of
Lord Cavendish and Mr. Burke are brought to justice that stain will sully our
country’s cause.
“ Charles Stewart Parnell,
“ John Dillon,
“ Michael Davitt.
“ London, 7th May, 1882.”
A great deal of capital, too, has been made out of the alleged fact
that some of the prisoners accused of the Phoenix Park murders were
supplied with money by the Ladies’ Land League while imprisoned as
“ suspects.” The truth of this statement has also been denied;
but, were it otherwise, it could not be a matter of reproach
or of blame. And, for this reason—A certain fund ware subscribed by
the Irish people for the support of the “ suspects” imprisoned under
Mr. Forster’s Coercion Act. That fund was given over to the Ladies’
Land League for dispensation to each individual to pay the expense
of his maintenance in prison. The ladies had no option but to disburse
the money to those for whom it was subscribed. Every man in
prison, according to English law, must be considered innocent until
he is convicted, and the result proved that only annere fraction of
the “suspects” had any connection with crime. How could the
ladies do that which Mr. Forster failed to do? How could they
determine who was guilty and who was innocent ? And are they to
be considered abettors of assassination because a half-dozen crime-
stained wretches obtained from them the price of a few weeks’ main-
tenance in prison ?
The Invincibles, according to Carey, did not number more than
50. Now, even supposing their objects to have been the objects of
the Land League, it is manifestly unfair to hold that organisation
accountable for their conduct. No organisation has ever yet been
formed in which bad men and dangerous men did not Sad a place. (1.)
“ A party,” says Lord Macaulay, “ has its sutlers and camp-followers,
(1.) The London Tablet says ; —“ It is only a savage and criminal exaggeration
that would make the Irish people responsible for, or accomplices in, this system of
wholesale assassination. The whole of the evidence hitherto given places a gulf,
wide and deep, between those outrages and the land agitation .”


as well as its soldiers. In its progress it collects aronnd it a vast
retinue, composed of people who thrive by its custom or are amused
by its display; who may be sometimes reckoned, in an ostentatious
enumeration, as forming a part of it, but who give no aid to its opera-
tions, and take but a languid interest in its success; who relax its
discipline and dishonour its flag by their irregularities ; and who, after
a disaster, are perfectly ready to cut the throats and rifle the baggage
of their companions.”
Despite the proof which Parliament had that these assassinations
were the work of a small band of desperadoes, despite the denuncia-
tion of the leaders, the abhorrence of the people, and the deep-seated
desire that summary punishment should overtake the murderers,
another Coercion Act was introduced and passed into law. English
statesmen thus forfeited such an opportunity of conciliating public
feeling, of winning Irish devotion and Irish love, as may not occur
again for centuries. (1.) They chose to yield to the blind, senseless
cry for revenge —revenge on a nation for the deed of a clique—to
enter on the same well-worn path over which so many of their prede-
cessors had passed with direful results to both countries. Ireland
to-day groans under a despotism whose ferocity eclipses that of Neapo-
litan tyrants, and is only paralleled by the savagery of the Czar, Her
oppressors do not even possess the justification put forward by the
Russian despot. He wars with a widespread secret organisation
amongst those of his own race, devised, not to effect social reforms,
but to overthrow his dynasty. The English tyrant battles against the
honest demands of a people to whom he is a foreigner—demands
sought by peaceful and constitutional means —and the granting of
which will but strengthen the union he is so anxious to preserve.
The history of 700 years has not taught him that the Irish spirit was
never tamed by tyranny nor cowed by coercion. He has “ learned
nothing and forgotten nothing,” and future generations will reap the
harvest of hate sown by his headstrong stupidity to-day.
(1.) Mr. A. M. Sullivan, describing public feeling after the murders in the
Phoenix Park, says :—“ What the sword of conquest or the severity of power could
not accomplish, what the boons of reparative legislation had never wholly gained,
seemed to have been purchased in the sacrifice of innocent blood. Ireland knelt
by the side of that friendly stranger’s bier, and reached out her hand to England
as it had never been reached out before, over the head of the man who represented
a policy of reconciliation and justice. The tears and the heart of two peoples
mingled, who had long warred in anger and in hate.” —New Ireland, p. 462.


CHAPTER IX.
REPRESSIVE AND REMEDIAL LEGISLATION.
“Genbbous England, whose newspaper press and whose public meetings raise such
a clamour every time a slave is sold on the coast of Africa, or a Jew usurer is liayed
in Russia, herself holds down, battered and bloody under her relentless knee, the
most amiable, the most courageous, and the most virtuous people in Europe. The
whole world knows the story of that heroic little nation, tried by lire and sword,
ravaged and ruined by repeated laws, corrupt and ferocious without parallel in the
history of the world, persecuted for centuries, and even in our own days devastated
by periodical famines. * * * * Finally, it is the English Government which,
forced by a formidable agitation and by the voice of Europe to give Ireland some
rights and some justice to-day, governs that country only by 50,000 soldiers, 12,000
police, and we know not how many parks of artillery. And let us note here that
the people thus treated are that Irish people, that Christian people, whose charac-
ter, wit, and religious fidelity all Europe is acquainted with and admires. Poor
ish 1 Why are you not Jews ?”— M. Louis Veuillot, in Paris Univers.
the 2nd May, 1882, the Parliamentary “ suspects” were released
“rom Kilmainham, and on the same day Mr. Forster’s resignation was
lotified in the House of Commons. The Park assassinations occurred
m the 6th, and on the 11th Sir William Vernon Harcourt introduced
the Prevention of Crimes Bill. This measure created numerous new
offences, constituted a jest between neighbours an act of intimidation,
punishable by six months’ imprisonment with hard labour ; legalised
interference with the freedom of the Press, extended the power of
search, abolished trial by jury; and, for all practical purposes, estab-
ished martial law in Ireland. The Bill proposed to make lawful
everything which Mr. Forster had been doing illegally, and much
more. The pretext put forward to justify such a sweeping enact-
ment—a law which “ left no place for men who believed in Consti-
itional agitation” was that secret societies should be put down. “No


man is unjust enough.” said Sir William llarcourt, “to doubt the
sincerity of the indignation which the Irish people have expressed at
the crime which has sullied their soil. * * * That the heart of
the mass of the Irish people is sound, the voice that comes to us now
from every province of that land amply testifies. Though the body
of Ireland is sound, there is a fearful plague spot upon it, and I firmly
believe that the Irish, no less than the English nation, desire that
the plague spot should be removed. There is a cancerous sore in
Ireland. It is a sore which springs from the baneful existence of secret
societies and unlawful combinations. To that foul disease it is necessary
that the surgeon’s knife should be applied. We have to cauterize
and extirpate it; and it is to that serious subject that I have to ask
the attention of the House. It is not necessary that I should attempt
any elaborate proof of the existence of this pernicious evil. The
poison that courses through the veins of the Irish social system is
revealed in its effects. It breaks out into deeds which are alien alto-
gether to the nature and genius of the Irish people—a people gener-
ous, warm-hearted, impulsive ; excitable, perhaps, but not barbarous,
nor cruel, nor savage in their nature. If that be so, what is the
history of these midnight outrages, and these daylight assassinations ?
—these murders of undefended women, and noble men ? That is not
the work of the mass oj the Irish nation. They shrink from such deeds
with horror, with dismay, and even with terror. The felon and mis-
creant deeds are the work of secret gangs of nocturnal conspirators, of hired
assassins. It is with these foul excrescences upon the Irish nation,
which, like the mildewed ear, blasts its wholesome life, that we have
to deal, and to them I have to call the attention of the House to-night.”
Head by the light of recent events —by the uses and abuses of
the Crimes Act—this metaphorical-pathological dissertation is simply
a savage satire. One could understand the necessity of extending the
powers of search —of doubling patrols —of putting enormous fines on
“ disturbed” districts —of tampering with the jury laws —in order that
outrage might be stamped out, or somebody brought to the gallows;
but it is simply outrageous to suppress newspapers —to proclaim public
meetings—to prevent members of Parliament from addressing their
constituents —under the guise of repressing secret societies. It cer-
tainly is difficult —for an Irishman, at least —to discover the connection
between the public press and secret combination. So far as the latter


is concerned, ilie Act has been almost a failure. Earl Spencer could
have done as well without it as with it, always providing that he
pursued his present policy of holding out a rope in one hand and a bag
of gold in the other to those who fell into his clutches. Self-preserva-
tion dictates the choice, and the consciousness that a packed jury is at
hand to convict, whether innocent or guilty, acts as a healthy stimulant
to the “ suspect.” The Crimes Act may have enabled Earl Spencer to
grasp the strings of the Dublin conspiracy, but the real, potent factor
—the instrument which shattered the organisation and revealed its
inner workings, is, without doubt, the desperate alternative put before
the victims. Beyond this isolated case, the Act, so embittering to
every constitutionalist, has effected nothing against secret societies,
to crush which, according to Sir William Yernon Harcourt, was its
sole aim. (1.) On the contrary, if we are to believe the testimony of
“ An Englishman, totally unconnected with any Irish interest, whether
landlord, farming, or trading, and only a settler in the country for the
sake of economy,” who writes in a recent issue of the St. James Gazette,
the Crimes Act has had a reverse effect to that intended. This English-
man, who is understood to be a retired officer, says : —“ The Grimes
Act was said to be aimed chiefly at the secret societies. It may have
struck them one or two puny blows. It may have deprived them of
some of their agents and tools. It may have made them more cautious
in their working—postponing some of their operations to await a more
convenient season, and more complete precautions against failure or
detection. But, per contra, it has in six short months recruited the
ranks of secret and irreconcilable associations to the extent of fully a
thousand per cent. If it continues to be worked on the lines adopted
within the last few weeks, at the end of another three months not an
honourable or patriotic young fellow outside of Ulster will remain un-
compromised, while a really earnest and actively hostile movement on
a scale of such magnitude as will then be practicable will speedily
find itself backed to some purpose by the inexhaustible resources of
Irish America, and in a position to at least attempt considerably more
formidable enterprises than the murder of an ill-tempered judge or the
(1.) It will be remembered that in the Maamtrasna and Lough Mask murder
cases, the witnesses gave evidence without any compulsion, having freely tendered
their information to the authorities. This circumstance should be remembered by
those who are ever defaming the Irish peasantry.


extermination—a mere question of time—of a packed and (reputedly)
forsworn jury. The prospect —to an Englishman—is the more sadden-
ing because opportunities that have rarely occurred in Irish history,
and that are unlikely to recur, have been recklessly and completely
thrown away.”
Having noted its attempts to cope with secret societies, we may
now turn to that field in which the Act has been more successful—the
open field of constitutional agitation. Before proceeding to record its
minor achievements herein, it will be interesting to recall some facts
concerning the capital convictions obtained. The following from the
London Daily Telegraph will give an idea of the means employed :
“ The transfer of cases to Dublin, the wholesale challenging of jurors, and the
reserved power of trial by judges alone, together with the tight hand held over the
Press, have already produced good fruit. We must not, however, be led into a
fools’>paradise, or believe that the convictions in Dublin illustrate a new feeling in
Ireland in favour of the law. The trials are not ‘trials by jury" in the ordinary
English sense of the term. We are forced to rule Ireland by devices quite as con-
tradictory to ‘ Liberal principles’ and the ‘ rights of man' as Mr, Forster’s gentle
imprisonment of untried suspects. We must, to convict murderers, secure by hook
or by crook, by laic or challenge , metropolitan, Protestant, and loyal juries, and we
must, to save society, prohibit midnight walks, impose enormous fines on suspected
localities, suppress newspapers, and send editors to jail.”
The naked brutality of this shocks one’s sensibility, but it advises
nothing which Government have not since performed under a law
obtained to put down secret societies. We know already, on unim-
peachable testimony—the affidavits of Mr. William O’Brien, M.P., and
several others—that the jury in the case of Francis Hynes spent the
night before their verdict was handed in, in a drunken carouse. It
will throw some light and give a large share of credibility to the
declarations which follow, especially when we reflect that all of the
condemned men were unquestioning Catholics, who believed
implicitly that if they died with a lie on their lips they were stepping
into an eternity of torment:—
“ I declare solemnly before my God and my Judge I did not murder Browne,
I had no hand in the murder, and don’t know who did it. I d never anything to
do with murder or outrage. I never injured a hair in a man’s head. God forgive
those who swore away our lives. I forgive them, and I hope God will forgive me
my sins.”— James Barrett on the scaffold, January 22nd, IBS3. “I am now
going to die. lam going to appear before my God and my Judge ; and I declare
most solemnly in His presence, and before Heaven and earth, that lam innocent
of the murder of Thomas Browne, and of any other murder or outrage. I had


nothing to do with the murder of Browne. I don’t know who did it. I forgive
all those who brought me to this. I hope God will forgive them, and have mercy-
on my soul, and provide for my poor family, God help them.”— Sylvester Pope
on the scaffold, January 22nd, 1883. (1.) “I am going before my God. lam innocent
as the child in the cradle. ’’—Michael Joyce on the scaffold, Dec. loth, 1882.
“I am going now to my doom—going before my Maker. I have to declare my
innocence of the murder.”— Patrick Walsh on the scaffold, Sept. 22nd, 1882.
A special reporter of a Dublin daily paper thus describes the
execution of the last-named prisoner:—
“ Galway, September 22nd.
This morning, at a few minutes after 8 o’clock, Patrick Walsh was executed in
Galway Jail, for the murder of Martin Leyden, in April, 1881. The history of this
case is now familar to the public. It was surrounded by circumstances that lent
to it elements inducing, as the day of fyis execution drew near, a widespread feeling,
first of doubt as to his guilt, and, as a consequence, of sympathy for him. The fact
that he—as will be further on specifically described—to the very last moment of
his life, proclaimed his innocence, cannot but impress everyone who has a heart to
feel : and it is a striking circumstance, and one that ought to be made public, that
everyone who since his conviction has seen or spoken to him has been moved to
pity. His bearing, his amazing fortitude and self-possession, without a trace of
braggadocia, the kind words spoken of him by the priest, his youth and sensibility, and
above all his final words, marked him as a man on whom it were most difficult to believe
the guilt of murder lay. I feel that every individual whose melancholy duty, like
mine, it was to be present at his last moments, left the prison precincts with a sigh
of sorrow for the fate of Patrick Walsh, and with a firm belief in the truth
of his last and most impressive words. Just as he reached the scaffold, and as
Marwood stepped forward, touched the rope, and quickly scanned the trap-
door beneath, Walsh turned gently round. Father Greaven beckoned to the
governor and to the representatives of the Press, and Walsh, whose face bore an
expression of placidity and gentleness, said in a clear, firm tone—“ lam going
now to my doom. Going before my Maker. I have to declare ray innnocence of
the murder. Certainly I never committed the murder. I was not there at all.
Witnesses came and swore falsely against me.” He then turned his face ao-ain
towards the scaffold. Marwood pinioned his extremities, and placed the rope
(1.) The special correspondent of the Freeman’s Journal, who was an eye-
witness of the execution of Poflf and Barrett, in Tralee Jail, on the 22nd Januarv
gives the following additional particulars :
The process of pinioning having been gone through bv Marwood. the pro-
cession commenced to move a few minutes before eight." The governor and the
sub-sheriff came first, followed by Poff, who was accompanied"by the Rev Mr
O’Riordan. Barrett came next, with the Hev. Mr. O’Callnghan by his side. Both
men devoutly repeated the prayers for the dying. They "exhibited no sign what-
ever of faltering or fear, and walked with erect head and a firm step. When they
entered the hall which intervenes between the cells and the yard in which the
scaffold was put up the procession halted, and Poflf, speaking in a clear voice, said—
“l am g° lD ? before my God now, and all I have to say is that I never killed
Browne, nor do I know who killed him. I forgive those who brought me here, and
I hope God will forgive them and me.” Barrett also made a statement of the
same emphatic kind, adding that he was never concerned in any outrage whatever.


around Walsh’s neck, the priest continuing the prayers, and Walsh still speaking
the responses. His head is now covered with a white cap ; the words, ‘ Jesus have
mercy,’ are heard, a bolt is drawn, and all is over. The few spectators, with bowed
heads and sorrowful faces, leave the yard as the black flag is hoisted, and a wail
comes from outside the prison walls. That wail is fhe agonising cry of his widowed
mother, now doubly bereaved, who, with his sorrow-stricken sister, seated outside
the prison wall, before and after the execution, wrung the hearts of all hearing her
by the piteousness of her lament over her boy. About two hours afterwards the
inquest was held. The usual formal evidence was given, Dr, Lynam testifying to
the cause of death. I had an interview to-day with the Rev. Father Greaven, P.P.,
chaplain of the prison, and he told me that he seldom, if ever, met a more single-
minded, truthful man than poor Walsh ; that he believes implicitly in Walsh's inno-
cence, that his conduct during the time he had been confined here was most
exemplary, his piety and devotion remarkable, and his whole bearing one of resig-
nation and fortitude. This morning, when' he entered his cell, he found him
praying fervently, and learned from him that he had slept well and soundly during
the night. I may add here that the condemned man had written several letters to
his friends, in all of which he asserted that he was guiltless. He also wrote to the
Lord Lieutenant a letter, in which he reiterated his protestations of innocence.
His widowed mother was with him every day. She and her daughter stood outside
the prison doors during the execution, and I cannot trust myself to describe their
pitiable, heartbroken condition when all was finished.”
It should be observed that Walsh and the three other men whose
dying declarations are given above were convicted by “ metropolitan,
Protestant, and loyal juries,” from which not only persons of the
Catholic faith were excluded, but every Protestant who was suspected
of cherishing popular sympathies. And here are some more protesta-
tions from men convicted by these precious tribunals—those “ hook
or crook” juries :
“ On my oath, I never fired a shot at John Huddy nor Joseph Huddy, nor any
other man since the day I was born, yet Kerrigan and his family have sworn
falsely.”— Thomas Higgins (Tom), on being sentenced to death, Dec. 16, 1882.
“ I can solemnly swear that I am as clear of that deed as any man who ever drew
breath. This is a slaughtering house. lam as glad to go to my God as to my
home and family.”— Michael Flynn, on being sentenced to death, Dec. 29, 1882.
“ I don’t deserve it. There is no claim against me. The day will come when,
sooner or later, you shall account for my innocent life.”— Michael Walsh, on
being sentenced to death, Sept, 29th, 1882. “He left it to God and the Virgin
that he never left hand, or foot, or back, or anything else on the man, and he left
it to the Court to do what they liked with him.”— Patrick Higgins (Long), on
being sentenced to death, December 13th, 1882.
Already one Irish journalist has been fined £SOO, and sentenced
to six months’ imprisonment, for giving publication to the letter of a
person whose bedroom door was burst in at midnight by the members


of one of these drunken juries; and another has stood his trial for
suggesting that the men whose names have been given were not tried
by a jury of their peers! It may, however, have been deemed neces-
sary to hang a few individuals, without being too scrupulous as to the
means employed or the proof offered, so as to terrify members of secret
societies. But what justification is there for the following ?
“ At New Ross Petty Sessions, Mr. Edward Walsh, Mayor of Wexford, the
proprietor of the Wexford People and New Boss Standard, was brought before
Messrs. Bodkin, R.M., Waterford (chairman) ; Thynne, R.M., Kilkenny ; Edmund
A. Byrne, and Joseph Acheson, J’s.P., on a charge of having, at New Ross, on the
25th November, wrongfully and without legal authority used intimidation towards
John Murphy, John Gill, and Nicholas Gill, by publishing and selling a certain
newspaper known as the New Boss Standard, containing the following words,
which occurred in a report of a meeting of a Ladies’ Land League :—‘ That we are
sorry to say that John Murphy, of Rathnageer, still holds the grabbed lands from
which Evoy was evicted 12 months ago, and other land-grabbers, John and Nick
Gill, of Ballyclumack.’ The magistrates convicted Mr. Walsh, and sentenced him
to five weeks’ imprisonment, with hard labour, in Wexford jail.”
The editor of the Tuam Herald, Mr. MThilpin, re-published some
letters which had appeared in an American paper. He was charged
before the local court with attempting to intimidate certain landlords,
and sentenced to two months’ imprisonment with hard labour, and
denied the right of appeal. In the same district, four reporters at-
tended a proscribed meeting, to watch the course of events. They are
arrested, and here is what follows: —
Messrs. T. Cunningham, E. J. Barrett, N. J. Barrett, and J. M'Dermott were
each sentenced to one month’s imprisonment, with hard labour, in Galway jail,
almost evey case the policemen and resident magistrates admitted the people
left the ground after the reading of the proclamation. It was elicited on cross-
examination that the reporters went among the young men who formed a
prominent part of the crowd, and requested them to disperse and give over their
cheering. The prisoners were locked up last night in the bridewell in two filthy
rooms, without ventilation or even a bed. They had in consequence to sit up all
night, some 15 or more in each room. Mr. Cunningham, after sentence this even-
ing, protested against the treatment to which they were subjected. All the
prisoners were sent to-night to Galway, a distance of 20 Irish miles, on outside cars.
The prisoners were on the following day dressed in convict garb, manacled and
marched through Galway, from which they were conveyed to Mullingar jail.
And at Mulligar Petty Sessions, on the 17th January, Mr. Timothy


Harrington was convicted and sentenced to two months’ imprisonment
for having made use of the following w 7 ords:— (1.)
Now, I would ask the tenant-farmers to come forward generously and give the
labourers a fair day’s wages for a fair day’s work. If not, the agitation which has
been carried on in their behalf will be turned against them—if they do not come
forward and assist the labourers now in their hour of need.
At Monasterevan seven or eight young men have been arrested
and imprisoned for groaning the Lord Lieutenant, while two persons
were detained in Dublin several days on a charge of “ looking at Judge
O’Brien.” (2.) Here is the record of one day’s proceedings : —A man of
78 years was sent to jail, at Oarrick-on-Shannon, for three weeks, for
intimidating a policeman from buying hay—the magistrate, Mr.
Turner, said that only the man was “ suffering from great infir-
mity ”he would get six months with hard labour. At Abbeyleix, a
boy was sentenced to a month, and hard labour, for calling a girl
“an Emergency man’s daughter.” At the same Court a man named
Lawrence was charged by a man named Johnson with having intimi-
dated him. On cross-examination Johnson admitted that “he knew
Lawrence well, that he was a most respectable man, and that he was
in no way intimidated either then or now.” Notwithstanding this
complete revocation, we read that “ the magistrate sentenced the
accused to one month’s imprisonment with hard labour,” and on the
accused’s solicitor asking that the sentence be increased to even one
day over a month, in order to give the right of appeal, the magistrates
peremptorily refused. This will provoke a smile:—
(1.) Soon after the passing of the Act, United Ireland uttered this warning,
which was, of course, disregarded: —“ If Lord Spencer does not want respect for
the Law in Ireland to get its coup de grace , he should look to his country magis-
trates. The manner in which the Crimes Act is being administered by these gentry
is a scandal of the first magnitude. When the Irish members represented the Irish
landlords as a bloodthirsty vehmgericht waiting for the Crimes Act as its infernal
machine, and when they drew a picture of an atmosphere poisoned in all directions
by miniature Star Chambers, where Calibans in council levied revenge in wild
licence off the people who had almost wrested their clubs from them, they were
jeered out of court as suborners of assassination, ready to lie to any length to avert
a threatening Nemesis. If they could have stretched their imaginations twice as
far, they would not have drawn a more lurid picture of rampant injustice than the
facts, as they have since been accomplished, supply.”
(2.) Their names are John Leslie and Edward Clarke. The prisoners were
arrested by Constable Henders, 67 B, who testified that “ they gated into Judge
O’Brien’s face, and passed to the other side of the street.” Evidence of character
having been given, the prisoners were discharged.”— Freeman's Journal.


At the Armagh Petty Sessions, James M'Cluskey was charged, at the suit of
Sub-Inspector Edward Bailie, with “ having on several occasions during the past
six months, on the public streets and roads at Armagh, put out his tongue in a
threatening manner and grinned at complainant.” Ultimately the charge was
withdrawn.
And this a very different sensation;—
Mr. Thomas Walshe, who was secretary to the Pallaskenry (county Limerick)
Branch of the late Land League, writes as follows to the Munster News in refer-
ence to the “ attention ” which he continues to receive at the hands of the
constabulary stationed in that village—A few Sundays since a constable of police
entered my house at 11 o’clock in the night, quite alone, darted upstairs, and, with
great impropriety, rushed into my daughters’ bedroom without knocking or giving
them an opportunity of withdrawing from the offensive and intrusive presence of
the military hero in full regimentals.
Unlike many of Mr. Forster’s “outrages,” these occurrences are
not gems from the imagination of a police constable, a newspaper
reporter, or a garrulous, meddlesome female ; (1.) names of places and
persons are given; and the facts verified by Mr. F. H. O’Donnell,
M.P., in a letter to the Times, A few instances of the insolence and
contempt for the people which this measure has engendered amongst
the officers of the law may be appropriately given here ;
On Sunday evening Mrs. Kavanagh, of Michael-street, Waterford, was sitting
in her shop reading the last issue of United Ireland. A policeman rushed in, ran
behind the counter, and, in order to secure the newspaper, actually knocked Mrs.
Kavanagh down and knelt upon her chest. He then searched her in a grossly
insulting manner. Leaving the lady (who had been ill for the past twelve months)
almost half dead with terror, he turned to her daughter, who received similar ill-
treatment.
This case was subsequently brought under the notice of the
House of Commons by Mr. Leamy, M.P., but no satisfaction was
obtained.
On Thursday last, a mountainous district known as Boultypatrick, Steeagap-
pog, near Glenties, was the scene of a murder, the victim being a poor wotnan
named M'Cormack, and the perpetrator a process-server or bailiff named Dominick
Tummoney. As far as can be ascertained, it appears that on Thursday afternoon
Tummoney, with his brother, proceeded to the house of Condy M'Cormack for the
purpose of executing a decree obtained against him. When the bailiffs arrived at
the place, Condy M'Cormack was from home, no person but his wife (deceased)
and their small family being about the place. Tummoney had made a seizure of
(1.) A few weeks ago the world was horrified by the story of the attempt on
the life of Lady Florence Dixie, recorded with great minuteness of detail by her
Ladyship. The police authorities examined the locality and the people, and con-
cluded that Lady Dixie was hoaxing the public. The story was read with laughter
in the House of Commons.


two head of cattle, when Mrs. M'Cormack attempted to rescne them before they
were driven from the place, and ere she could summon assistance, Tummoney drew
a revolver from his breast and shot the unfortunate women, who at the time was
enceinte. She lingered for a short time, but soon after succumbed, and died in
great agony. Intelligence having been conveyed to the police authorities, Tum-
money was arrested and brought to Lifford jail, where he will remain till Thursday,
upon which day a magisterial investigation will be held in Glenties. Deceased
was buried yesterday.”
This brave bailiff has since been discharged “without a stain on
his character.’' Here is the valorous achievement of another
bailiff :
“ On Tuesday night the son of a spirit dealer (Mrs. Hannah Hawe, of Cork-
road, Fermoy) was fired at and badly wounded, by an Emergency caretaker
named William Turpin, who was caring a farm at Britway, about seven miles from
the town, for a Mr. Sherlock, of Bandon, and from which a farmer named Colman
Kidney was recently evicted. It appears that Turpin spent portion of the day
drinking at Mrs. Hawes, and at about 10.30 p.m., when he was nearly intoxicated,
he presented the revolver at her son David, aged 14 years, and fired, the charge
taking effect beneath the ribs, over the left hip. Turpin then turned on others
who were in the shop at the time, and had the muzzle of the revolver to Joseph
Leary’s breast, when he was clutched by Leary and a young man named Hughes,
and the weapon wrested from him. Leary then undertook to take him to the
police barrack, a quarter of a mile distant, and, being assisted by a young man
named Robert Hannon, he was lodged in custody. Dr. Roche and Dr. Sisk were
called in to the wounded boy. One bullet was extracted, but it is thought that
another remains in the body. Grave doubts are entertained of the lad’s recovery..
Mr. C. J. Furlong, J.P., held an inquiry into the circumstances at midnight, when
Turpin was released .”
These are a few of hundreds of cases, with circumstances equally
outrageous, which have occurred since the passing of the Crimes Act,
the details of which may be found in the newspapers. Irishmen have
often been reproached for lawlessness. How can they respect law
administered as it has been in Ireland ? How can Irishmen revere
the law when her Majesty’s Judges themselves set an example in
ignoring it ? The following is a report of a discussion in the Court
of Queen’s Bench on an application for a writ of habeas corpus in the
case of Miss Mary Power O’Connor, imprisoned in Mullingar Jail, under
an obsolete Statute. Miss O’Connor had been engaged superintending
the erection of huts for evicted tenants. She was arrested as a
“person of evil fame,” and committed to prison for six months, in
default of giving bail to be of “ good behaviour” —her evil behaviour
being the sheltering of outcast tenants. The commitment was made


by two magistrates only. The Statute provided that at least four
should he present, and her counsel therefore contended that Miss
O’Connor had been illegally committed. The liberty of a young lady
of delicate health and stainless repute was at stake, and it was no-
more than reasonable to hope that if a point could not be strained in
her favour, she would, at all events, receive strict justice. But here
is the report: —
The Chief Justice —Have you any authority for your proposition ?
Mr. Nicolls —I have the authority of the Act of Parliament and the words of
the commission under which the justices act. This is the very best authority I could
have.
Judge Barry—lf you look at the books you will find those orders have been for
hundreds of years made by single magistrates.
Mr. Nicolls—l only rely on the express words of the Act of Parliament, and I
say those cases in which orders were made by a single magistrate are not under the
Act at all.
The Chief Justice —Have you a shred of authority, Mr. Nicolls, for the
doctrine that there must be four magistrates in a proceeding brought under that
Statute 7
Mr. Nicolls—l repeat, my lord, that I rely on the express words of the Statute
itself, which says that four shall be the least.
Chief Justice May—We decline to go back to the words of the Statute,
Mr. Nicolls—Then, my lord, will you allow me to read the words of the
commission.
Chief Justice May—l ask you have you any authority, any decided case, that
there must be four magistrates in a case of this kind 7
Mr. Nicolls —I have the express words of the Act of Parliament and of the
commission.
Chief Justice May—ln other words, you admit you have no authority.
Mr. Nicolls—lt is at all events well to have your lordship’s decision that the
words of the Statute are not to be looked at in a case which is admittedly brought
under its provisions.
Nothing save complete success could justify a measure so destruc-
tive of all liberty as the Crimes Act. It must be asked, Has it
succeeded in stamping out secret societies and diminishing agrarian
outrages ? To the first portion of the question, it is impossible just
now to give a complete answer. It is only time that can test this
claim with effect. But if by the history of the past we may judge the
future, then coercion will have a different result in respect to secret
organisations to that intended by its authors. As to the Crimes Act
having diminished outrages, Sir John Pope Hennessy is a good wit-
mm-..


ness'; and, speaking before the Social Science Congress a few months
since, he said;—“ He could hardly conclude the opening address of
that section without saying a word on that which had recently occupied
so much Parliamentary and public attention —the repression of crime
in Ireland. He had just come from Ireland, where he had seen the
clearest evidence that in endeavouring to repress crime, crime had been in-
creased. Here, again, it was the old story; the history of penffl. laws
was the history of centuries of State-created crime. Last year, hundreds
of men ‘ suspected ’ by the Executive were arrested; most of them
were politicians, some of them were actually the persons of greatest
influence in certain districts in repressing outrages. As the arrests
increased in numbers the number of outrages increased also. Whether
it be ten thousand miles away or nearer to the heart of the Empire,
one general principle seemed to hold good—that the machinery for the
repression of crime was cheaper and more effective where prudent
government had secured, on the side of the law, the sympathy and sup-
port of the people.”
Concerning the administration of the Crimes Act, Major Bond,
formerly Chief of the Birmingham police, and late Resident Magistrate
for the districts of Ballinrobe, Cong, and Clonbur, in the West of Ire-
land, writes as follows to the London Standard :—
It was only last week that I was converging with a tenant farmer, whom I
met in the village near where the Joyce family lived, close to the mountain villages
of Cloughbrack. in one of which the Huddys met their death. Our conversation
turned on the blood-money which the townland would have to pay, in consequence
of all these outrages, and his reply was given in true peasant fashion—“ Well, your
honour, I have 13 acres of land up there in Cloughbrack, and I have one cow, and
they can take that if they like, but I have not the money to pay, and I cannot pay.
The cow is for my children and an old father and mother. We paid up all our
rents, except these eight or nine men that the Huddys were after ; and why should
I have to suffer now when I was forty miles away 7 Who is to look after the old
people if I emigrate ? How can I tell who killed them 7 Why don’t the police
find them out 7”
The man was in a dangerous mood, very firm, and feeling intensely wronged.
Here was an instance, and one that is felt through the length and breadth of the
land, in consequence of the Crimes Bill. And do we hope to smooth matters down
after this fashion, making the innocent suffer with the guilty 7 A thousand times,
No 1 Can we find no better legislation than going back to the barbarous times of
William the Conqueror for a curfew law and a blood tax 1 There are deep wrongs
et being suffered by the Irish, and if we will only treat them as we treat our own
people here in happy England—not by exceptional measures, not by treading under


foot the principles of good government for the sake of expediency, but by having
the self-same laws, and insisting on those laws being fairly carried out —we shall
gain the love of the people and counteract the insidious workings of Secret Societies
by which the country is now held in thraldom.
Major Bond, having described the disturbed state of the district
of which he had charge, and recounted the various terrible deeds com-
mitted therein, continues:
I took up my residence in the centre of the districts of which I had charge, in
the midst of this terrorism and tragedy, and thus lived amongst the people them-
- elves withoutipolice protection, without having received a single threatening letter,
or a rude word or sign.
The recent imprisonment of Messrs. Davitt, Healy, M.P., and
Quinn, though not effected under the Crimes Act, was designed by its
administrators. They have committed no offence against the law of
the land; their offence has been to warn Government of the critical
condition of the agricultural community. Reference has already been
made to Messrs. Healy and Davitt, but it may be added here that they
are two of the ablest, and, in a sense, the most moderate men amongst
the Irish leaders. Both are now confined as criminals in an Irish
prison, and Mr. Healy’s constituents are disfranchised. Shortly before
the recent prosecution, Mr. Davitt, who has already undergone nearly
10 years’ penal servitude, used these words :
If in the hot blood of early manhood, smarting under the cruelties and indigni-
ties perpetrated on my country, I saw in an appeal to force the only means of
succoring her, there has dawned upon my graver thought, in the bitter solitude of a
felon’s cell, a noble vision—a dream of the fraternisation and enfranchisement of
peoples —of the conquering of hate by justice. I have suffered by their power, and,
as I believe, by their ignorance and prejudice, hut there is in my heart to-day no
sentiment of bitterness towards the English people.
On the passing of the Land Act in August, 1881, Mr. Gladstone
declared that the Irish Land question was finally settled. (1.) The
Irish members expressed doubt, but Mr. Gladstone would not hear
of any further legislation. However, on the 15th May, 1882, the
matter was re-opened and a bill introduced for the relief of tenants in
arrear. It provided that where a tenant could prove to the satisfac-
tion of the Court his inability to discharge arrears through bad
harvests or any other uncontrollable cause, and had satisfied his land-
(1.) He made a similar assertion in 1870. It took 10 years to convince Mr.
Gladstone that he was in error in respect to the law of 1870 ; it took him less than
10 months to discover that the Act of 1881 was defective. Perhaps the Land
League quickened his perception.


lord for the rent of the year 1881, the State would pay out of the
Church Surplus one-half of the remaining arrears (not exceeding neo
year’s rent); the landlord to forfeit the other half. This was a well-
intentioned and even a generous measure ; (1.) but, as in the case of
its predecessor, the Courts in various ways frustrated the design of the
legislature. The rents paid in 1881 were held by the Court nofc to
have been legal tenders for 1881, but for the previous year, and, con-
sequently, not a fulfilment of the terms of the Act. Thus thousands
of tenants who had striven through all the distress and turmoil of the
previous year, to promptly discharge their obligations, were shut out
from the benefits of a law passed ostensibly for their relief. They
were, in short, punished for being honest and industrious.
(1.) Some of its clauses are copied verbatim et literatim from those of a Bill
introduced by Mr. J. E. Redmond —in the early part of the session.


CHAPTER X.
THE IRISH NATIONAL LEAGUE—THE
REMEDY.
“ Before Ireland goes into her title, let us hear the title of England ; for the
question is not whether Ireland has a right to be free, but whether Great Britain
has a right to enslave her. When the latter country asks, What right have the
Irish to make laws for themselves ? Ireland will not answer, but demands, what
right has England to make laws for Ireland ? From Nature she has none. Nature
has not given any one nation a right over another. Has she that right from cove-
nant 1 Let her show the covenant. In what history is it recorded 1 There is no
such thing in legislation,”— Henry Grattan.
“It is not a gambling fortune, made at Imperial play, Ireland wants ; it is
the pious and stern cultivation of her faculties and her virtues, the acquisition of
faithful and exact habits, and the self-respect that rewards a dutiful and sincere
life. To get her peasants into snug homesteads, with well-tilled fields and placid
hearths —to develop the ingenuity of her artists, and the docile industry of her
artizans—to make for her own instruction a literature wherein our climate,
history, and passions shall breathe —to gain conscious strength and integrity, and
the high post of holy freedom —these are Ireland’s wants.”— Thomas Davis.
On the 17th October, 1882, another National Convention was held
in Dublin, with the object of forming an organisation in which might
be merged the different societies already existing. It assembled in
the Ancient Concert Eooms, and proved to be one of the most repre.
sentative conferences yet held in Ireland. Out of this meeting grew
the Irish National League, whose programme comprises five distinct
objects: National self-government, Land Law reform, Local self-
government, Extension of the Parliamentary and Municipal franchises,
and the Development and encouragement of the labour and industrial
interests of Ireland. It was pointed out ‘'that the landlord combina-


tion, for the purpose of breaking the spirit of the Irish tenant, the
dismay which the present scale of judicial rents has created among
applicants to the Land Courts, and the confiscation of tenant’s property
-that is being effected, wherever disorganisation has crept in, render it
more necessary now than ever that the Irish tenantry should be re-
united in vigilant and lawful association, for the purpose of protecting
themselves from injustice, and for seeking that full measure of land
law reform which alone can secure them against the perils of halting
legislation.” In addition to this, the chief function of the organisation
which Government had suppressed, the National League desired to
“transfer all local power and patronage from privileged strangers
into the hands of the people, and so fortify them for the work of
National self-government, which is the inspiration of all our struggles.”
This was a programme in which it was hoped Irishmen of every shade
of opinion might find an opportunity to be of service to their country.
During the session of the Convention, a letter was read from Mr.
Patrick Egan, the treasurer of the Land League, giving a balance-
sheet of the receipts and expenditure of that body. As Mr. Egan’s
character has been assailed, it may be well to give his own words; and
to state that the accounts have since been audited by Messrs. John
Dillon, M.P., Justin McCarthy, M.P., Eev. Father Sheehy, and Mr.
Matthew Harris, and found correct. Mr. Egan writes as follows :
90 Avenue de Yilliers, Paris,
14th October, 1882.
Dear Mr, Parnell, view of the fact that a new national organisation
is likely to spring from the conference to be held on the 17th inst., and as it is not
possible for me to longer absent myself from my business in Dublin, I must earnestly
beg of you and my other friends of the Land League to make such arrangements
as will relieve me from the duties of treasurership.
Since I undertook the position in October, 1879, there has passed through my
hands in all a sum of £244,B2o—(applause) —made up as follows :
Relief Fund ... ... ... ... ... £59,178 14 3
Land League Fund ... ... ... ... ... 30,825 0 7
Defence Fund ... ... ... ... ... 21,077 8 6
Received since my arrival in Paris, 3rd February, 1881 ... 129 907 0 0
Amount coupons on investments ... ... ... 2,582 0 0
Profit realised on sale of U.S. Four per Cent. Bonds ... 1,250 0 0
Of this sum about £50,000 (I have not the exact figures at the moment, as
the books are in Dublin) was disbursed in the relief of distress in 1879 and ’BO, as
,per accounts already published; over £15,000 was spent on the State trials


of December, ’BO, and January, ’Bl. Nearly £148,000 has been expended through
the general Land League and the Ladies’ Land League in support of evicted
tenants, providing wooden houses, law costs, sheriff’s sales, defence against eject-
ments, various local law proceedings, and upon the general expenses of organisa-
tion ; and I have now on hand the balance of £31,900 to turn over to whoever
shall be duly authorised to take charge of it.
It may be added that Mr, Egan’s statement and services were
considered so satisfactory as to merit a unanimous vote of thanks from
the Conference, which represented those mainly interested in the
application of the funds.
The necessity of the reforms demanded by the Irish National-
League admit of little controversy; their justice few, who give the
matter impartial examination, will be disposed to deny. All parties
admit that the development of Irish trade would be a good thing for
Ireland, while the present Government have promised a bill to remove
the inequality between the franchise as it exists in Ireland and in
England. (1.) The principles of local self-government and land law
reform have also been admitted ; and in these matters the demands of
the National League are most moderate. With the first, Mr. Glad-
stone has already promised to deal (2.); the House of Lords have
practically accepted the second. When peasant proprietary was first
broached, their Lordships denounced it as Communism; at present
they demand that the whole of the purchase-money shall be advanced
to tenants to enable them to become owners of their holdings. As
some time must elapse before this can be accomplished, the National
League will endeavour to prevent the imposition of rent on improve-
ments made by the tenant, which is now being done; and to secure
for leaseholders the advantages of the Land Act of 1881. The distress
which now exists, consequent on the failure of last year’s crops, is a
(1.) The valuation for the county franchise is nominally the same in both
countries, but in reality it is one-third higher in Ireland, because the Irish tenant’s
rental is invariably higher than the valuation. The law as to the borough fran-
chise is even more unjust. In England al2 months’ occupant of any dwelling-
house possesses the franchise ; in Ireland he must be rated at more than £4 per
year. Thus Liskeard, which contains only 6,576 inhabitants, has 868 voters ;
while New Ross, with a population of 6,738, has but 242 voters. The same
inequality may be observed in the counties. The population of Gloucestershire is
251,414 ; voters, 20,791 ; the population of County Down is 263,762 ; the number of
voters only 11,468.
(2.) Mr. Gladstone recently said : —“ There was not a subject that he could
name on which personally felt a more profound anxiety than on the establishment
of local self-government in Ireland, and local self-government upon a liberal and
effective basis.”


matter which has been receiving the deepest attention from the
National League, and over £l,OOO per week has been voted for its
alleviation. (1.)
But the one great right demanded by the Irish people, without
which all other concessions will be valueless, is the right of National
Self-Government—the right of managing their own affairs in a Parlia-
ment elected by themselves. Though this demand was scouted and
sneered at by almost every journalist and public man in Great Britain
a few years ago, it is now being considered, discussed, and advocated
by many fair-minded Englishmen. This is surely a bright omen of
success. It is a happy and a significant sign of better things that the
(1.) The following picture of Ireland of to-day is drawn by an American
writer :—“ Ireland is again face to face with famine. Often as the spectre has
visited her, it now comes in a new shape. It comes, so to say, under Government
protection, with an army of Land Bills, Arrears Bills, Repression Bills at its back.
So far from exorcising the ghost, Mr. Gladstone’s legislation has armed it with
novel terrors. Father Gallagher’s appeals have been read by all. He is the parish
priest of Glencolumbkille, a parish in the far northwest of Donegal. All the
storms from the Atlantic ravage it, and last October there came a tempest through
the mountain passes which blew down houses, nipped the stalks of the potatoes,
and scattered the corn and hay for miles around. A peasantry which was noted
for its industry, its thrift, its order, was threatened with starvation. The trying
months of winter have come, and the threat has been fulfilled. For a little time
there was milk to be had and Indian meal and a scanty supply of potatoes. One
by one these luxuries disappeared, and the seaweed, on which the pigs had grown
lean, became the staple food of the parish. There was no chance of relief. The
snow was thick on the ground. There was neither boats nor deep-sea fishing. So
Father Gallagher sent out his call for assistance, and with the small fund which he
received from America set to work to improve the parish chapel, ‘ in order,’ as he
told a correspondent, ‘to keep the people alive,’ There is something very touching
in the picture of this good priest, the last hope of a starving community, support-
ing 700 families, never flagging, never daunted, and only once moved to utter the
warning to the British Government which those in it who have ears may do well
to hear. It is not a solitary picture. Very sorrowful stories come from Mayo,
Galway, and Clare, To recite them is to repeat the tales of 1880, the memory of
which is not yet lost. The potato crop has everywhere failed. Employment is
not to be had, Relief works have been discontinued. Eviction goes on as briskly
as ever, and Land League huts dot the roads. There is a prevalent conviction that
it will be impossible now to fall back on the charity of the world. A new crisis
has come, and it must be met unaided. Mr. Gladstone’s measures, it will be
remembered, were to show their full remedial force in just such a moment as this.
Mr. Gladstone will be surprised to learn that instead of preventing the famine his
bills are, in a large degree, the cause of it. When the Arrears Act was passed it
was a tempting bait to the tenant farmers. The parish priest explained to them
its provisions, told them that if they would pay an additional year’s rent the
Government would contribute an equal sum, and they would be free. Since this
was known they have made extraordinary exertions to gather the necessary
amount. They have sold their sheep, their cattle, even their pigs. Those who
had looked on rent-paying as an obsolete practice have been stinting themselves
in the hope of having a share in the new boon. The landlords have pocketed the
instalment with avidity, and when the pinch of famine comes, the tenants are
penniless.”


eon of the Prime Minister of England is bold enough to tell an audi-
ence of his countrymen that “ The history of the English (government
in Ireland was a complete catalogue of political blunders, to use no
harsher word;” that “ The system of Government at present existing
in Ireland was the worst in Europe and that “ The principle should
be adopted of giving the Irish people their legitimate influence and of
trusting instead of suspecting them ; and, by endowing them with the
consciousness of trust and responsibility, to educate them to a correct
performance of the duties devolving upon them; by a broad, thorough
development of local self-government to bring them to believe, at last,
in the true friendliness of the English people, and to raise that pride
and enthusiasm in the direct administration of the world-wide affairs
of the great empire which their countrymen had done so much to
create.” Finally, Mr. Herbert Gladstone said in reference to Home Pule
(regarding which his sentiments have been misrepresented in the
Colonial Press): —“ The mere mention, however, of an Irish Parlia-
ment or Home Pule aroused wild cries of disintegration of the empire.
Yet, as we had given a Parliament to all our great colonies, with the
most beneficial results, and as we have lost America through withhold-
ing elementary political rights in the abstract, there were strong reasons
for its adoption. But it was said that by granting Home Pule they
would play into the hands of the Nationalists, and that the Irish were
hopelessly disloyal. He did not grant the latter ; but, assuming it to
be so, he did not think a Parliament in Dublin would endanger the
Queen’s authority in Ireland.”
Mr. Joseph Chamberlain, Mr. Cowen, and several other English
members of the House of Commons, have expressed, in similarly
emphatic terms, views favourable to Home Pule.
It would be bootless to offer proof of how impossible it is that
Ireland should be satisfactorily ruled by Englishmen and Scotchmen
in a Parliament sitting in London. (1.) The history of the last 82
years, with its famines and insurrections; its agitations and Coercion
(1.) CoMen thus speaks of the action of Parliament towards Ireland:—“A
-policy savouring more of the mean and sordid tyranny of the individual huckster
over his poorer rival than of any nobler oppression that is wont to characterize the
acts of a victorious nation.” —Quoted by|Lord Oranmore and Browne, House of
Lords, July Bth, 1876.


Acts; (1.) its agrarian murders and “ special commissions,” ought to
convince every reasonable man that foreign rule is a failure in
Ireland. Passing over the means by which Ireland’s Parliament
was destroyed—overlooking the anomaly of a nation supposed
io be under constitutional rule, being governed in direct
opposition to the constitutionally-expressed will of its people
—lot Englishmen think, for a moment, on the results of their policy in
Ireland, and say could anything more dreadful happen had the Irish
been left to themselves ? (2.) And this is the argument of common-
sense—“ England has failed to rule Ireland either to the satisfaction of
the English or Irish; she should give up the impossible task, and
allow the Irish to rule their own country.” Truer words than those
which follow—the opinion of the leading journal of America, the New
York Herald —have never been written :
It is not by emigration that Ireland’s ills can be cured. Her population is
already sparse enough. Her pleasant valleys lie waste ; her fertile acres have none
to till them. And it is not by relief works that famine can be averted. There is a
limit to the bogs which can be reclaimed, the chapels which can be built, the rail
roads which can be constructed. Nor will the nation consent to lie for ever at the
gate of the world, tattered, full of sores, waiting for a dole. No I What Ireland
needs is entire change of air. She needs to be withdrawn from the blight of an
alien rule. She needs to have her interests guarded by men of her own race, men
who are concerned to see that her miseries shall not be a constant reproach to the
civilisation of our time. Until that course is followed Parliaments may legislate,
philanthropists may babble, agitators may rave. Ireland will still remain the one
spot where, in a proud and prosperous empire, men, women, and children die
almost hourly of hunger.
(1.) Fifty-two Coercion Acts have been passed for Ireland since 1800.
Mr. John Bright, at Dublin, October 80th, 1866, spoke as follows ;
“ Some say that there is some radical defect in the Irish character which prevents
the condition of Ireland being so satisfactory as the condition of England and
Scotland. Now, lam inclined to believe that whatever there is that is defective
in any portion of the Irish people comes, not from their race but from their history
and from the conditions to which they have been subjected. * * * I say that
it would be much more probable that the defect lies in the Government an&in the
law."
(2.) Speaking of the Union, Mr. Lecky says : —“ The sacrifioe of nationality
was extorted by the most enormous corruption in the history of representative
institutions. It was demanded by no considerable section of the Irish people. It
was accompanied by no signal political or material benefit that could mitigate or
counteract its unpopularity, and it was effected without a dissolution, in opposition
to the votes of the immense majority of the representatives of counties and con-
siderable towns, and to innumerable remonstances addressed from every part of
they.”


FITZGERALD BROTHERS
IMPORTERS,
General Drapers and Silk Mercers,.
Haberdashers, and Outfitters.
Have always in their Immense Stock a Grand
Selection of Every Line in the Trade, at
PRICES UNEQUALLED,
And Not to be Surpassed in tbe Colony for
VALUE AND QUALITY.
Wedding and Mourning Orders Promptly Executed.
J Country Orders Attended to with Dispatch.
27, 29, 31 ; and 33 Errol-st,
North Melbourne;
AND AT
Bridge Street, Ballarat East;
Sturt Street, Ballarat West.


CROWN HOTEL,
CORNER of QUEEN & LONSDALE STREETS,
MELBOURNE,
CLOSE TO THE LAW COURTS.
Superior Accommodation for Country Visitors.
INES & SPIRITS OF THE BEST QUALITY.
CHARGES MODERATE.
THOMAS HAYES, Proprietor.
STEPHEN STAPLETON,
HARP OF ERIN HOTEL,
114 QUEEN STREET,
MELBOURNE.
GOOD ACCOMMODATION FOR VISITORS,
BE ST WINES AND SPIRITS.


D. O’CALLAGHAN’S
TOWN HALL HOTEL,
Errol Street, Hotham.
WINES AND SPIRITS OF THE BEST QUALITY.
Good Accommodation f®r Boarders and Country
Visitors.
Terms Moderate Baths.


The “ADVOCATi
AN IRISH WEEKLY and Victorian CATHOLIC JOURNAL
Contains each week a reliable account of the
IRISH NATIONAL LEAGUE '
AGITATION
The Advocate will give a full report of
Mr. Redmond’s Mission in Victoria.
The following is the tribute which the great Temperance Missionary,
Father Hennebery, paid to the journal :
“• The* Advocate’ is worthy of all we can do for it, and the Catholics
ought to appreciate the fact and have it bound and preserved for future
use. It will be an enduring treasure of great value ; generations yet
unborn will read it with interest ; it will quicken their faith, and instruct
them in their political, social, and religious duties. The good examples
of the edifying Catholics of the present age, and their struggles for the
promotion of education and all good, of which the Advocate will perserve i
the remembrance, will stimulate their descendants to actions glorious to
jdigion and humanity, and- worthy of their faithful predecessors. Put f
away trivial objections, and resolve at once to take and have that excellent
journal, the ‘ Advocate.’ God’s blessing and mine be with all who shall |
take and read it.”
Subscriptions to the Advocate, 7s. per Quarter in Victoria, and
7s, (Id. in any of the Australian Colonies
Office, 25 Lonsdale-st. East, MePLJ
