

The Foundations of Toe H.
THE PRINCE OF WALES writes:—
“I would like all my friends to have the chance of sharing in this
wonderful fellowship. You will meet many fine men on your journeys,
and I feel sure that some of them will receive the torch that you carry.
I shall often think of you and hope for your success.”—
—EDWARD P.
To understand the gospel of Toe H you must go right back in your memory
to the bitter fighting around the Chateau of Hooge, due east of Ypres, in July,
1915. There, on July 30, a devilment, meant to succeed where the gas had only just
failed three months before, was suddenly launched upon the Allies. This was liquid
fire, and it fell for the first time in the early dawn of July 30 on a battalion of the
Rifle Brigade, who found themselves a few moments later standing in a bath of
flame. A whole company perished in the next ten minutes, and among them such
young leaders as “Rivvy” Grenfell and Keith Rae, who already stood for much
that was better than war, and were leaders of the first calibre. In the afternoon,
a futile counter attack was made, and in the forlorn endeavour there fell a youngster
whose life might have meant even more to the world of to-day and to-morrow. His
name was Gilbert Talbot, of Christ Church, Oxford, the youngest and most brilliant
son of the Bishop of Winchester. A week later his body was recovered by his
brother, now Bishop of Pretoria, who crawled out between the lines to find it.
Later, Gilbert was given burial in Sanctuary Wood, the most pitiful parody of a
wood or a sanctuary in Europe. Soon after, the grave vanished and the ground
resembled nothing so much as the surface of the moon under a strong telescope.
It had been Gilbert’s ambition to be a great Christian statesman, a product none
too common; and he was already well-equipped for the task. Both Lord Balfour
and Mr. Lloyd George knew him and loved his early promise. By now he would
have been on the threshold of the Cabinet.
Some months later, in December, 1915, a house bearing his name was opened
in Popperinghe, the little border town which served the feverish life of the devoted
troops who held the Ypres salient at an average wastage (offensives apart) of 230
a day for four years. The Rev. P. B. Clayton, a chaplain of the Sixth Division,
was detached from his brigade and given the quaint parish of Popperinghe-cum-
Ypres with Talbot House as his headquarters. From the day of its opening until
the end of the war, the house and its chaplain stood as almost the sole permanencies
amid the moving tide of war, which receded in 1917 towards Passchendaele, and in
the spring of 1918 flooded back overwhelmingly to the very outskirts of Popperinghe;
until in the autumn it turned finally eastward; and British, French, Belgians and
Americans broke the doomed semi-circle of Ypres for ever.
Through all these vicissitudes Talbot House (called then and since then Toe H,
an abbreviation which any signaller will explain to you) grew in fame and influence
until it became a household word along the Allied line. It was not a Y.M.C.A., but
an entirely peculiar growth concerned confessedly with two ideals—the reconciliation
of man with God and no less of man with his fellow man.
Over the door ran a motto, which the lesser and more self-assertive Red Tabs
looked askance at, but which the highest understood and gladly obeyed: “All Rank
abandon ye who enter here.” Under its aegis strange things happened; and the
English yokel, the “Aussie,” the “Canuck,” the “Doughboy” and the officers in high
command made friends. Lord Cavan (now vice-president of Toe H), who was
then in command of the Corps area, loved the house and its spirit; and a young
Grenadier officer on his staff—the Prince of Wales—then began that friendship
for it which makes him the never-failing patron of Toe H to-day. Within its ever-
open doors, more than half a million officers and men found better things to think
of than the war without; and in its Upper Room (an old hoploft) more than one
hundred thousand worshipped, of whom hundreds were Australians.


So much—perhaps too much—for the past. For the glory of the achievement
since is, to the discerning eye, far greater. After the Armistice, the surviving
fellowship of Toe H was drawn by a common compulsion of ideals into the outset
of a great and permanent task. It declined all thought of becoming merely a
veterans’ organisation, and set itself to interpret what it had learned, and to build
anew. In the few years since Toe H has grown, and grown more rapidly and
tnore deeply in the stubborn clay of England than any other unselfish thing.
Beginning with scarcely a score of men and about as many pounds, it has laid
the true foundations of a national movement of youth, the value of which has already
been recognised by the grant of a Royal Charter. It has beyond this certain
endowed chaplaincies that guarantee its permanence for centuries to come. It
has raised its money not by loud advertisement, but by the sacrifice of members and
families to whom its work is sacred. It has spent it, not in propaganda, but on the
opening of Houses across the Empire, which focus in certain cities the peculiar
work with which it holds itself entrusted by “the spirits of just men made perfect.”
Its membership continues to increase steadily, in spite (or perhaps because) of the
fact that a careful selection among the candidates is made. It has now over one
hundred branches in the larger cities and towns and a number of aspiring groups
in other places and in the leading schools and universities, with a parallel recruitment
among the younger men in offices, mills, and factories. Those who know England
best will realise most deeply the significance of this drawing together of youngsters
hitherto alienated in sympathy and understanding by every prejudice of caste and
inherited conviction. And in Canada a beginning, full of hope, has been made; the
first House is open already in Winnipeg, and the second at Toronto. There are
promising beginnings in U.S.A., and a first House in South America at Buenos
Ayres. Toe H has roots deep down to have done so much already.
But what is it that Toe H does? What is its program? Its method? Its
inspiration? These things are rather difficult to summarise. It will perhaps be
simplest to go on board one of its houses and inspect its working. First the
House is purchased or given outright. This is essential, if it is to serve its purpose,
and be able to pick its crew and clientele from every class, and undersell, where
need be, the dingiest and most disastrous lodgings. These houses breathe a Christian
atmosphere, but it is not that, of conventional Christianity. They stand not merely
to serve the conveniences of the individual, but to enlist him in the service of his
fellows. Each house is run by a carefully-selected group of resident members, about
twenty in number, in each case, who work as a picked team and hold the house in
trusteeship for the work in the area it covers, and for the big diversity of visiting
membership as a whole. The houses are on the big side; well but simply equipped,
and full at every turn of things that make you think. In each, beyond the twenty
beds for the team, there are spare rooms, for members coming and going on their
lawful occas’ons.
The team which runs a house is selected on a scale which, while elastic, conforms
in outline to the following plan:—
First Group—Seniors. Ages 25-40. A lawyer, a doctor, a business man, an
actor, a journalist.
Second Group—lntermediate. Ages 20-25. For fellows on the lower rungs of
the business ladder. Bank officers, clerks, assistant secretaries, junior civil servants,
etc.
Third Group—Students. Ages 19 and upwards, e.g.—A theologian, a medical,
an art, and an engineering student.
Fourth Group—lndustrial. Ages 19 and upwards, e.g.—A printer, a railway-
man, a shop assistant, a mechanic.
Fifth Group—Called in Toe H “the nursery.” Ages 16-19. For youngsters
lately from school, and beginning life as apprentices at various trades and callings.
But what is the work, and how is it performed? First, for the internal life
of the team. Each House has a Warden, a Deputy Warden, a Secretary. All these
positions are honorary. The Warden is appointed by the executive of Toe H. He
appoints his own deputy; the Secretary is elected by the team.


The house, once purchased and furnished, pays its own way. The members of
the team contribute their weekly quota on a sliding scale in accordance with their
earnings. They receive the same food, but the seniors have their own rooms, and
“the nursery” a floor to itself. Every room is identified with the Christian name or
surname of a man whose example is thus commemorated, e.g., the “Secil Spring-Rice
Room”; the “W. G. C. Gladstone Room”; or more simply, “Basil’s Room,” “Henry’s
Room,” or again, “The Rifle Brigade Club Room,” “The Green Howard’s Room,”
etc. These rooms have each their character and significance illustrated by the
pictures, the letters, the books from which those now using them learn that the real
need of a war-broken world is not merely money reparations, but more good men.
Every house has its chapel, and every group of houses its visiting or resident
chaplain. Of the first twelve Chaplains appointed ten are Anglicans, one is
Congregationalist, and one Presbyterian. Plainly Toe H must steer a straight course,
or an even keel, over this troubled sea of denominational Differences. Regio, religio,
is the rule it contemplates; for it would be obviously wrong to have other than a
Presbyterian chaplain in Glasgow. But to play for safety by having no chaplain
at all would be for the Christian Church once more to delegate in despair to
secularisation a Movement essentially spiritual and a task it has too long neglected.
Organised religion has only itself to thank if those in the young prime of life are
alienated from its sympathies. It must henceforth set aside men, and its best men,
too, to specialise on such tasks as these and to be free from the enslaving necessity
of filling superabundant Churches with tepid half-believers. The Christianity of the
Gospels was mainly a Young Men’s Movement, because its Founder set Himself
to win not merelv discipleship, but apostleship from among such as these. John,
the student, would never have met Matthew, the civil-servant, or Peter, the fisher-
man, had not He brought them together. Even then they would not have learned
to work in harness, had He not taught them that nothing less than their
transcendant unity could illustrate and set forward the Brotherhood which He
chose as the living shrine of His Spirit and Teaching. Is it incredible that the most
Christlike men of the war would prefer the growth of such a Brotherhood as that
of Toe H to the unveiling of many cenotaphs? The only true corollary to the
common empty tomb is the full life in common among those men upon whom is
fallen the mantle of their will for anew spirit between man and man.
Incidentally, we have no Sunday services in Toe H, which thus avoids competi-
tion with Church and Chapel, but the group instinct is in favor of going to family
prayers each night, taken by one of themselves, and for those who wish there
is a week-day Celebration in every house, which becomes a corporate act at the
heart of family life, not the detached and isolated individualism of a set pilgrimage
to some adjoining steeple. But it is to week-day religion only that Toq H attempts
to minister, for it is the contract between religion and life that Toe H is out to
amend. As for exhortation, it is rarely ventured upon, since the fourth of the Toe
H laws (known as the Four Points of the Compass) demands that members should
“spread the gospel without preaching it.” Here we are back again at the Christian
aspect of all this, but it penetrates the whole instinct of Toe H so naturally that we
must be forgiven and, after all, the trouble (as most men see t) is not that there
is “too much religion” in a thing, though they may phrase their objection thus.
What they mean is that too little happens as the result and fruit of the religious
dynamic. The bystander, whose opinion the disciple is continually bidden to respect,
is concerned gruffly and crudely to see and measure the worth of our principles by
their products.
Let us turn back to the details which practical minds require. The houses
are staffed by one full-time man and his wife, with what adventitious outside help
may be required in the wielding of brooms and the making of beds. The team does
a good deal for itself, as indeed it should learn to do, for it is merely relaxing for
youngsters to have no home duties whatever. They will be more careful of their
clothes if they learn to keep them tidy, and of their rooms if they learn to take
a pride in them; they will like their guests better if they wait on them, and their
rheals if they sometimes cook them, and their place of prayer if they allow no paid
hand to do what their shy reverence would like to see done.


What then does one of these houses produce ? At its least, it solves the problem
of existence in big cities for successive groups of men. It holds their interest; it
inspires their allegiance; it renders them useful, and involves them in a tradition
which sets service above pleasure. Each resident is bound to give (apart from times
of special stress, at his own work) one evening a week to the guest-night of his
house, and one further evening to some form of service which Toe H is pledged
to supply with personnel. Beyond this again, if the right groups are chosen (and
the field of choice is practically as big as the lodgings-population of the city
concerned) a nucleus is formed with real powers of attraction in a great variety
of directions. Each member is not merely representative of an absentee body; he
is a live contact whereby others in that body are enlisted into service and fellowship
—the two watchwords of Toe H. Note the order; real fellowship is the fruit of a
united effort at service. The cry of the International Labour Movement is, “Workers
unite!” There is at least this to be said for it, only workers can unite. No fellow-
ship can long survive as a fellowship; fellowship is the fruit of a constant and
common endeavour to some great end, unattainable by any one group without the
equal effort of all. Men that are men can only learn one another’s worth by linking
hands uphill.
While, therefore, Toe H would teach men to love more widely than within the
rut of their caste or class, it does not tell them to do so. This would be fatuous.
It sets a goal to be achieved which will bring the combination about naturally. This
goal is, in many varied forms, the welfare of the young. The significance of the
name of Gilbert Talbot is to Toe H the fact—so often how obscured—that the real
loss of the war was not merely financial. It is that the world is desperately short of
leadership, of prophecy, of vision. There are not left enough good men to go
round. Therefore, those that are average must at least bestir themselves, and see
that the poorest materials of good manhood are made the most of. To do this
effectually, we must act not with sentiment only, but with understanding also.
Toe H, therefore, creates a series of amusing and instructive human “zoos,” and
he who enters as a visitor becomes at once an enriching item in a jocund menagerie
of men. The contagion of service affects him. He finds himself carried off to dish
out buns and benevolence at a Boys’ Club, in a place where taxis are unknown
commodities. He sits far into the night, picking crumbs of new learning concerning
other people’s business, or threads of thought from the aftermath of some unlooked-
for argument. He shares a bedroom for the first time in his life with a chaffeur
or an actor, and falls asleep (a difficult thing to do) over his first perusal of Scouting
for Boys. Here is anew world, a strange adventure, an attempt at what the greatest
of American philosophers predicted was most needed: “A Christianity which
provides the moral equivalent of war.” It would be good news indeed that we
could find it in us to help so spiritual a thing, in the midst of the many necessities
thrust upon us daily. It would be the greatest help of all that we should, among
our own younger men, find those to whom the story of Toe H is as a fragment
of the living Gospel.
The astonishing growth of Toe H is indicated by the fact that its assets grew
from_£l6o in 1920 to £90,956 in 1924. Contributions at British Headquarters in 1924
included 150 from anonymous persons, one of £5,000.
It is now worldwide, having Groups and Branches throughout the British
Empire, and also in U.S.A. It has 20 Marks or Houses, 300 Branches and Groups,
and about 50,000 active members.
For further information address:—
THE REVEREND T. G. PAUL, Toe H Padre for N.S.W.,
5 Hamilton Street, Sydney. Telephone: B 1270.
