

“THE WARNING VOICE;”
A SERMON
FOR THE NEW YEAR;
DELIVERED ON BOARD
HIS MAJESTY’S SHIP, BRITANNIA,
ON SUNDAY, JANUARY 1, 1,804.
BY LAURENCE HALLORAN, D. D.
CHAPLAIN.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR W. N. GARDINER, PALL-MALL;
BY W. BULMER AND CO. CLEVELAND-ROW,
ST. JAMES’S.
1804.
Price One Shilling and Sixpence.


TO THE
EIGHT HONOURABLE
WILLIAM EARL OF NORTHESK,*
BEAR ADMIRAL OF THE WHITE,
LATE CAPTAIN OF HIS MAJESTY’S SHIP, BRITANNIA,
THE
OFFICERS, SEAMEN, AND MARINES
OF THAT SHIP,
THIS DISCOURSE,
DELIVERED BEFORE THEM ON SUNDAY, JAN. 1, 1804,
IS VERY RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED,
BY THEIR AFFECTIONATE FRIEND,
THE AUTHOR.
* The character of this amiable man, and humane commander,
cannot be more truly or correctly delineated, than by the application
of the following lines by the Author of the Shipwreck, descriptive of
the captain of “ his Britannia
“ Though train’d in boist’rous elements, his mind
“ Was yet by soft humanity refined;
“ Each joy of wedded love at home he knew ;
“ Abroad , confess’d the father of his crew;
u Brave, liberal, just;—the calm domestic scene,
“ Had o’er his temper breathed a gay serene!”


A SERMON.
** Set thy House in order ; for thou shall die , and not
“ live!” — lsaiah, c. xxxviii, y. i.
Such was the awful warning sent from God to Heze-
kiah, king of Judah: and the denunciation (as the
sacred historian informs us in the lesson of this day)
filled his mind with such grief and terror, C£ that he
“ turned his face to the wall, and wept sore!”
Though we, my brethren, are not thus forewarned
by the inspired voice of a prophet, of the precise
time, at which we shall be called out of existence,
by the will of our Creator; yet daily experience
teaches us, both “ the certainty of death, and the un-
<e certainty of the day, and the hour!” And if the
prospect of its near approach could so forcibly affect
with sorrow and dread, the mind of a righteous and
good man; how much more terrible must prove “ the
“ hour of visitation ” to the sinner , whose crimes
preclude hope, and whose heart is hardened against
repentance.
B


It has pleased the Almighty, of his goodness, to
prolong the existence of all here present to the com-
mencement of another year. How many of us may
be preserved to see its termination, is a secret known
only to himself. Thousands, and ten thousands, who
with us hailed the opening of the late year, were in
its progress precipitated to the grave, and are now
silent and forgotten: and thousands, who witness
with joy the dawning of this new aera, will as cer-
tainly, in its course, be arrested by the hand of death,
and consigned to equal oblivion. Among my pre-
sent hearers, many, it is more than probable, will
never reach the period of the year, which now opens
upon us ; —but who shall be the devoted victims,
providence has wisely concealed from human fore-
sight. The awful uncertainty, however, which hangs
over the fate of all men (if reason and religion were
allowed to influence their conduct) would assuredly
incline their hearts to vigilance and virtue , and would
incessantly bring to their ears, the impressive warn-
ing of the Prophet, 44 Set thine house in order, for
c< thou shalt die, and not live.”
The meaning of the expression “ set thine house
“in order,’’may be considered two-fold, —as referring
to the arrangement of temporal concerns ; and to


that spiritual preparation for the hour of death, which
is the best support of a departing Christian at that
dreadful crisis. To the latter, as infinitely the more
important, I shall confine your present attention.
It is a just, and generally admitted principle, 44 that
44 men die, as they have lived that an happy death
usually closes a life of virtue ; and that a career of
vice as commonly terminates in misery and perdi-
tion. The very few exceptions from this axiom,
which human experience .can produce, form no just
ground of refutation of its certainty and truth . It is
farther a universally received sentiment, and con-
firmed by the whole weight of observation, through
a series of ages, 44 that early formed habits, and early
44 imbibed principles, give a colour to the subsequent
4 6 opinions and conduct, through the whole term of
44 existence.” Hence results the necessity of exertion
in the first stages of life, 44 to resist bad impressions,
44 and to acquire the best:” for by thusgiving to virtue
the pre-occupancy of the mind, it becomes gradually
weaned from those evil propensities, to which our
nature is too prone; and strengthened in the prac-
tice of those virtues, which dignify and exalt huma-
nity. And thus the important business of 44 setting
44 our house inorder,” becomes, by habitual preparation


through life, easy and familiar, at the period of its
close. On the other hand* if the morning of life
be devoted to evil pursuits ; —if vices be allowed to
acquire an ascendency over the immature reason ;
practice will assuredly form those vices into invete-
rate habits, which will grow by indulgence into a
second nature, and of which we shall vainly struggle
to divest ourselves, when warned, too late , by sick-
ness, and approaching mortality, “ to set our house in
“ order.” It becomes therefore equally the interest,
and the duty of every man, to make each day of his
life a preparation for death ; and so to order his con-
duct, “ that at whatever hour his Lord cometh, he
“ may find him watching”
To you, my brethren, who, from the nature of your
calling, are continually beset with difficulties and
dangers, this vigilance appears more peculiarly neces-
sary. The greater and more imminent the hazards,
which your situation calls upon you to encounter, the
more earnest should be your exertions to make due
preparation for that death , which you must sooner
or later undergo, and whose ministers incessantly
hover around you in the various forms of diseases,
incident to a sea life ; in the voice of the tempest,
and in the dreadful din of battle ! But do not mistake


me: —the preparation, I mean, and which religion
requires from you, is not merely that hardiness of
mini, that contempt of danger and death, which mark
the character of British seamen (for these may proceed
from familiarity with such scenes, or constitutional
courage); but that Christian fortitude, that evenness
and tranquillity of mind, which is the only true, and
rational courage; and which a good conscience alone
can supply. To acquire these is not only a precept,
but a duty; without them, no man has set his house
in order, or can be prepared to die ; and with them
death can never find you unprepared for his attack.
“ That death is certain and inevitable” is a truth,
which, confirmed by daily experience, no man is so
hardy to deny: yet most men , though witr/essing the
fall of numbers on every side, are still so blindly
confident of their own security, as to flatter them-
selves, “ their turn is remote ;” and deceived by this
delusion, they defer to “ set their house in order,”
from time to time, till at length they are surprised
by death without preparation, and hurried into the
grave, with all their imperfections on their head,
unrepented, and unatoned ; equally unfitted to leave
this world, and to enter, upon the next. Were our
existence indeed bounded by bur continuance in this


world ; were the soul of man perishable as his body,
and his dissolution followed by eternal sleep, or total
annihilation ; —little previous preparation, beyond
the arrangement of his temporal concerns, would be
necessary, at his approaching departure ; but if his
soul be immortal, and if he be an accountable crea-
ture for his use, or abuse of its faculties ; —df his pre-
sent existence-must be succeeded by an eternal state
of happiness or misery (as reason, religion, and the
general assent of all nations in all ages unanswerably
teach), then the security of that happiness, the sal-
ration of his soul, must be considered “ the one thing
“ needful;” and the admonition “ to set his house
“ in order,” to prepare himself for that important
change, cannot be too frequently, or too strongly
impressed on his attention.
Perhaps many of you, my present hearers, have
possessed few opportunities, and little inclination,
to become acquainted with the sublime truths of
the Christian religion; with that Gospel, “ which
“ brought life and immortality to light.” Yet born,
and educated in a Christian country, you have un-
doubtedly heard, and, I trust, firmly believe, the first
grand principles of religion,<—the being of a God,
—the immortality of the soul of man, —-and the


certainty of a future life of reward or punishment,
accordingly as ye have done good or evil in this pro-
bationary state.
Do ye indeed believe these great truths P Do ye
then consider, that the God, whom ye believe, is
Almighty,—a God of infinite knowledge, and inflex-
ible justice;—that he is every where present |though
invisible by human sight), and that he , who witnesses
all your present thoughts, words, and actions, with-
out the possibility of being deceived, will hereafter
be the Judge , who must decide your future eternal
lot, for kappi7iess or misery? Do ye ever seriously re-
flect, my brethren, on these awful but certain truths ?
Or, if hitherto they have made little impression on
your minds, oh ! now at least awaken from your fatal
lethargy of sin and insensibility ; begin with the new
year (perhaps the last , that will be granted for repen-
tance) “ to set your house in order,” and to prepare
for that death, which is every moment rapidly,
though imperceptibly, hastening towards you! Let
this warning voice, “ thou shalt die, and not live,”
sink deep into your ears, and your heart; and let it
so forcibly persuade you to reform your sinful habits,
and begin with the year, a new life ; “ that when
“ the certain hour of dissolution overtakes you, you
“ may not die eternally.”


When I look abroad into the world, and coatem-
plate the various pursuits of men ; when I behold
the greater part of the human race engaged in schemes
of avarice, luxury, and ambition ; when I view the
aged, not less than the young, eagerly absorbed in
gratifying their predominant passion;—the first idea,
arising from such contemplation, naturally is, “ that
the beings, whom I behold so engaged, must be
“ either immortal, or irrational creatures.” Ifnotim-
mortal, certainly most irrational, to sport on the margin
of the grave, and unmindful of a future state, t 6 devote
their whole attention to pursuits, which, both reason
and religion teach, are only “ vanity , and vexation of
“ spirit ßut, when reflection assures me, that these
beings are frail sons of mortality, mere creatures of a
day, sent into this transitory life, solely as a short
preparatory probation for mother and a better; and
when I see the invaluable ; loments allotted for such
preparation, devoted to vain or vicious pursuits, I
cannot but weep, that the godlike attribute of reason
should be so madly, so brutishly sacrificed on the
altar of passion .
When from the extended theatre of human life, I
withdraw my observation to this lesser world, —this
more limited sphere of action, to which my humble
cares and duties are confined ; when I see here also


the general and unrestrained prevalence of vice and
immorality; when I behold the “ image of the
“ Creator,” degraded by the indulgence of unworthy
passions, to the very level of “ the brutes that perish —
when, in short, I see men living “ without God in the
** world” without exhibiting the least sense of the
uncertainty of this life, or making any preparation
for the next l am filled with grief and astonishment
at their perversity and blindness ; —I tremble for
them and for myself; and I feel, deeply feel, the ne-
cessity of continually sounding in their ears this awful
monition, “ Set thy house in order, for thou shalt die r
“ and not live!”
At the present moment, when health and strength
invigorate your frame, and buoy the spirits, the voice
of truth, the solemn dictates of religion, will perhaps
be little attended ; or, if they make a momentary im-
pression, it will be erased by the quick succeeding
scenes of accustomed mirth and indulgence 1 You will
allow, no doubt, (for their truth must force your
assent,) “ the justice of the observations you hear:”
you will admit the existence, the power, and the jus-
tice of God, the certainty of death, the necessity of
preparation for it, and the terrors of eternity ; but you
will soon banish the recollection of unwelcome truths,
c


relapse into your usual excesses and ill habits, and
return, like a dog, to the vomit of sin and impiety!
But remember, my brethren, I conjure you, remem-
ber, that at the great and awful day of account, among
the dreadful charges which shall appear against you,
your neglect or contempt of the “ warning voice”
which would now awaken you to repentance and
reformation, will form an added offence to swell the
catalogue. Remember, “ that your abuse of the mercy
“ of God, in granting you this prolonged season of
“ penitence and amendment, will, at that great day,
“ increase the terrors of his justice, and enhance the
“ misery and weight of your punishment, through the
“ endless ages of eternity !”
Be not you then, I exhort you, among the “ fools
“ who make a mock of sin neither scoff at the solemn
warning, which my duty and zeal for your eternal
welfare have called from me this day ; and which,
though never out of season , more particularly accords
with this newly-commenced year of your existence!
Alas! if present health, and the full flow of spirits
should now elevate your minds against the necessary
attention to “ things eternal—yet think, “ that the
“ hour must come , (and how soon God alone can tell,)
“ when all temporal possessions and enjoyments will


“ lose their value, and fade from your view when
approaching dissolution will sadly change your esti-
mate of them; and when the “ still small voice of
“ conscience,” so long stifled amid the din of dissi-
pation and riotous excesses, will at length be heard,
“ repeating this present warning, and ratifying your
“ condemnation !” To prevent the terrors of this self-
conviction, this anticipation of the dreadful sentence
of your judge,—oh ! now begin, I implore you, with
this renewed season, to “ set your house in order;”
and to obtain, by contrition and reformation, the
pardon of your offended Maker, while yet the day of
mercy is not closed, “ ere yet the night come, when
<e no man can work!”
And, as a first step toward this desirable reformation*
let me earnestly warn you, to endeavour to acquire an
habitual sense of the presence of God, at all times and
in all places; for he fills the immensity of space with
his essence, and in Him you live > and move , and have
your being. This habitual sense of his presence, the
conviction, that he is about your path, and about
“ your bed, and spieth out all your ways,” will gra-
dually beget a reverence for his sacred name , and
banish from among you those impious oaths, and
execrations, the use of which so generally prevails


among mariners, and which, from habit and tolerance,
appear to have become as much a part of their lan-
guage, as the technical terms of their profession !
“ Articles of War ' do indeed exist for punishing this
use of profane oaths among you ; and neither the
generality of this disgraceful practice, nor the “ slum-
“ her of those laws'' can form (be assured) any pallia-
tion of the crime in the eyes of that Being, whom you
blaspheme ; and whose present forbearance to over-
whelm you in the very act of your impiety, will
augment the severity of your punishment, in a ten-
fold degree, at the great day of retribution ! Be
ashamed, seamen ! of the practice of this odious, this
unprofitable, and unmanly vice ! Exert that reason
which you possess, for conquering so shameful an
habit; and be not examples (as ye now are) of swelling
even the puny voices of children with blasphemous
execrations; for whose corruption of morals, and
seduction by such pernicious example, you shall one
day be severely accountable !
And you, young men ! who, inspired by a noble
and patriotic desire Co serve your native country in
the useful and honourable profession of seamen, have
entered her navy at this eventful crisis, forget not, I
exhort you, the principles of honour, and virtue, and


piety, in which you have been educated I Know,
“ that your first duty is to God ;” and that the charac-
ters of a good Christian and a gallant officer are by no
means incompatible, as we have many splendid in-
stances among the illustrious commanders of the pre-
sent day ! Be not seduced by the ill example of any
among your seniors, to sacrifice the purity and recti-
tude of your minds ! Despise the filthy and unmanly
participation of indecent and obscene discourse, or
even the approaches to it; for be assured, “ such
“ communication, and the usual accompaniment of
“ oaths and blasphemy, invariably characterise a
i 4 weak understanding, base inclinations, and a vitiated
“ heart!" Show a noble disdain of customs, “ more
“honoured in the breach, than the observance;”
dare to be uniformly correct in word and action, in
defiance of the shameful prevalence of bad example ;
and thus, by perseverance in a line of virtuous and
honourable conduct, “ set your house in order,”
against the awful hour of dissolution, which, young
as you are, may nip your blooming age in its spring,
and precipitate you to an unexpected and untimely
tomb!
It remains for me, lastly, to address the superior
order of this our community, and to solicit from them,


in the name of our common Lord, “ the assistance of
“ their example and authority, for giving effect to
“ the reformation of morals among those committed
“ to their charge,” which has been the subject of this
day’s exhortation ; for, without their support, little
fruit can be expected from our well-intended labours!
As the heads of this Society, it is their indispensible
duty to see, “ that vice and immorality receive not
“ encouragement from toleration and not only “to
set each one his own house in order,” but by every
reasonable exertion of advice, authority, and coercion,
to oblige those who are subjected to their influence,
“ to set their houses also in order that at whatever
hour their visitation by death shall occur, they may
not be found unprepared for his attack! Neither
can they render, they may be certified, a more essen-
tial service to God or their country, than by encou-
raging virtue, and repressing vice : to God , to whom
must ever be acceptable the recovery of a sinner from
the evil of his ways ; to their country , inasmuch as it
is an indubitable truth, “ that a vicious character can
“ never be a true patriot;” —“ that piety exalteth a
“ nation but “ that the growth of impiety and irre-
“ ligion infallibly saps, though by slow degrees, the
“ foundation of kingdoms —I will only add, “ that


ce no possible expedient can so effectually tend to ac-
“ complish the desired reform/" as their own prudent
“ circumspection and correct example.”
And now, my brethren, I shall conclude by seri-
ously exhorting you all, in your several situations,
“to take heed to your ways to exert your respec-
tive talents for the good of your country, and your
especial care for the salvation of your own immortal
souls ; —“ to set your house in order” against the certain
* I take this occasion to repeat, in the strongest terms, my protest
against the use of oaths, and of indecent and obscene language ; prac-
tices, which I regret to observe, too prevalent even in societies, whose
members, by rank, are officers, and ought to be gentlemen ! Such
conversations, too, commonly occur at table , in the presence of the ser-
vants (who are mostly boys), and whose judgment is thus early per-
verted, and their morals corrupted, by the opinions and example of
their superiors 1 Nor does the evil rest here: the sentiments and ex-
pressions heard in the ward-room are repeated and rapidly circulated
by these attendants among the ship’s company, and the extent of the
consequent mischief becomes incalculable. I have taken, and shall
continue (however ineffectually) to take, every opportunity, public or
private, in season or out of season, to reprobate practices so unmanly
and pernicious; the more especially, as I have heard a very worthy
man and an excellent officer, with whom I formerly served, declare
his conviction, “ that the unguarded conversation of some among his
officers, on political topics, and on public men and measures, retailed
to the ship’s company through the medium above mentioned, operated
as a powerful incentive to certain disgaceful proceedings, which after-
wards occurred in his ship,—“ Sat verbum


and rapidly advancing hour, “ which shall consign
et your bodies to the dust, and your souls to God, who
“ gave them and zealously to employ this, and every
succeeding year, which your Creator may add to the
term of your existence, in the due and faithful dis-
charge of the duties of your situations, and in earnest
endeavours “ to make your calling and election sure /”
And when it shall please that good Being to summon
you from this world of sin and sorrow, may your
spirits revive in his eternal kingdom, “ to a new
“ and endless year of everlasting life, and joy, and
“ blessedness!”
Now to God, the Father, kc .
■ v % *■ Vi v -xvx n ' 'l* Z■' * T ' '.f
v -'• w- i ■ • • • -VJ -*?f -■ -• v -
V .
F I iKi s.
Printed by W. Bulmer and Co.
Cleveland-row, St. James's.
