

THE
CUZCO CHRONICLE
Conducted by
W. G. ROBERTS & EDWIN QUAYLE.
Portsmonth:
Published by H. Lewis, Machine Printer, 114, High Street.
Published by request




Date
Latitude
Longitude
Distance
May
5th
35°
19'
S
137°
29'
E
59
6th ...
35°
23'
S
131°
36'
E
288
7th
85°
30'
s
125°
34'
E
295
8th
35°
54'
s
119°
19'
E
305
9th
31°
4'
s
114°
17'
E
262
10 th
31°
58'
s
111°
4'
E
234
11th
29°
20'
s
107°
7'
E
258
32th
26°
39'
s
102°
CO
CO
E
291
The Cuzco Chronicle.
Conducted by
W. G. ROBEERTS and EDWIN QUAYLE.
No. 1] s. S. CUZCO. [Mat 13th, 1882.
Abstract of Log.
We are indebted to Mr. Daly, 4th Officer, for the above abstract.
will be generally conceded that, in order to make a
gji*3 voyage, such as the one upon which we are now
embarked, as pleasant and agreeable as possible, it is
necessary that each of the voyagers should, as far as in him lies,
contribute to the general amusement and well-being.
We therefore trust that no one will fail to remember, that
his duty as well as his pleasure should be to assist his fellow
B 2


voyagers to while away the tedium of the journey, not only by
giving his heartiest co-operation in any entertainment that may
he got up, hut also in endeavouring to devise new amusements
and occupations, in which the major portion of the passengers
can take part.
And at this the outset of our voyage, we would earnestly
impress upon our readers the value of unanimity; recommending
at the same time a spirit of tolerance and kindly indulgence. Let
carping criticism and dissatisfaction find no place amongst us,
hut let each one, while doing the best he can for the general
weal, view the efforts of his neighbour with the favour they
merit,
Lor ourselves and the conduct of this paper we may be
permitted to say a few words. In the first place it will be our
earnest endeavour to avoid all personalities, and if it should
unfortunately happen that any remarks made in this journal
seem to savour too much of a personal character, we beg at once
to assure our readers that it is very far from our intention to give
pain or annoyance to any one. We desire to make this journal
a record, in which will be set forth in as an agreeable manner
as possible the various events and gossip of the week. With
this end in view, we shall be pleased to receive communications
from each and all, so that no circumstance of any note may be
overlooked. We shall on all occasions do our utmost to promote
the happiness and well-being of our fellow passengers, and give
our warmest assistance to any effort tending to instruct or
amuse.
We crave our readers’ kindest indulgence for any faults
which may from time to time appear; assuring them also that
suggestions for the better conduct of the paper will always meet
with our earnest consideration.
With this terse enunciation of the principles upon which
the paper will be conducted, we start our little venture upon
the somewhat uncertain waters of public opinion; hoping for a
favourable reception and a prosperous voyage.


The Editors' Gossip.
We are pleased to notice that during the week a Committee
of Amusements has been formed to carry out and arrange
the various concerts and entertainments, which we all
look forward to with such great pleasure. We congratulate the
Committee on the success of their efforts, and wish them every
prosperity in their undertaking.
» * * *
Owing to the boisterous state of the weather, no doubt,
deck amusements have not been in favor during the past week.
We trust however that the fine weather will result in a general
turn out, when we may expect to hear of Quoits, Cricket,
Athletic Sports, Tugs of War, &c.
* * * *
By the way, if anyone on board is the happy possessor of
an air-pistol or gun, it would not be a bad idea to start a Shooting
Gallery. It is great fun, and the motion of the vessel only adds
to the uncertainty and excitement of the affair.
* * * *
Some little excitement, and a considerable amount of
curiosity was caused on Thursday week by the “ Orient ” heaving
in sight, as we were nearing Adelaide. Tine vessel as she
undoubtedly is, she evidently felt the effect of the sea more than
our own vessel, for she rolled and pitched in a most unpleasant
manner. The “ Orient,” however, made a very quick and
successful run of 38 days, from Plymouth to Adelaide.
* * * *
Talking of Adelaide reminds us that it is rumoured that
the Orient S. N. Go’s, vessels in future will not call there. The
reason assigned is, that the South Australian Government having
refused to subsidize the line, the Company feel compelled to
adopt this course.
» * * *
It was proposed to call this paper the “ Cuzco Lyre,” but as
the latter portion of the title might have been taken in an
invidious sense, it was deemed best to be on the safe side, and
call it the “ Chronicle.”


It is unfortunate that head winds have so long prevailed :
in spite of them, however, a glance at the log will show that we
have had fairly good runs ; and favoured now by the Southerly
trades, we may safely hope to reach Diego Garcia, on or about
the 17th inst. If the day is fine, it is hoped we may call there,
and as we are given to understand that the Island is an
exceedingly pretty one, an hour’s run ashore would be a very
pleasant break in the voyage.
* * * *
The Concert advertised to take place to-night promises to
be a very excellent one ; and favoured with fine weather, we
feel sure a most enjoyable evening will be the result. We .would
suggest to the Committee, that a Christy Minstrel Entertainment
should next be got up, as doubtless the necessary talent would
be forthcoming.
Glossary of Nautical Terms.
Taking pity on the lamentable ignorance displayed by
landsmen as to the meaning of the various expressions
made use of at sea, the Chief Cook who, we are given to
understand, is also the chief nautical authority on hoard ship,
has kindly consented to supply us with a Glossary :
Binnacle. —The highest rank to which a sailor can aspire,
he has then reached the Binnacle of Fame.
Skipper. —A professional dancer, kept on hoard for the
amusement of the crew.
Anchor. —A heavy iron spike which sailors throw over-
hoard when they want to stop and get out.
Lee or Lea. —Opinions differ as to the meaning of this term.
The general idea, however, is that it is a corruption of the word
sea. The poet says for instance, ‘ the wind blows o’er the lea ’;
and again 1 a sail was on the lee ’; then there is Mr. Lee, our
worthy Chief Officer, and Lea and Perrin’s Worcester Sauce,
and so on. It is immaterial which view you take.


Cuddy. —A small boy, who cleans the knives and blacks
the sailors’ shoes.
What the Cat saw.
The “ awful example ” tumbling down the saloon stairs, general
consternation, and a rush of stewards to pick him up. Daily
vow now registered, in favour of hydropathy.
A few happy couples gazing into the sea, presumably
admiring the phosphoresence.
“ His Majesty ” shouting champagne for the sharks.
An absolute necessity for a Ladies' smoking room.
Dangerous juggling feats at the dinner-table.
A Eope suddenly let go, a lurch of the ship, and a vision of
arms and legs in the scuppers.
Market Report.
(By Private Wire.)
We have to note heavy transactions in Champagne, Heidsick’s
dry Monopole moving freely, (some over the Starboard side,)
but stocks in first hands are getting low, and if none in
warehouse at Diego Garcia, this line will command a high figure
ere long. Australian Wines and Drench Clarets, Lemonades,
and Sodas, holding their own, and are being steadily absorbed.
In Beers, Foster’s Ale is the “Boss”—we mean Bass Brand,
and goes down in large quantities, at full rates. There is some
demand for Lager Beer on German account, and stocks are
diminishing. There are also enquiries for Limberg Cheese from
the same quarter, but (happily) there is none in stock, or Fayne’s
Disinfectant would go to a premium. Spirits are high, Brandy
and Gin being neglected in favour of Whiskey, which is
going into consumption more and more. Some take it in bulk
parcels, and we hear of the introduction of the “ Eeal Kentucky
Bourbon,” but as the whole shipment is in private hands, and


mostly used for own consumption, we cannot speak from personal
trial as to its quality, which we should very much like to do.
A sample Gallon would, we need hardly say, prove acceptable.
Peovisions. —Coffee and Teas moving freely, (especially
over the side of the ship,) during the late stormy weather.
Peeight. — A few days ago there was a large demand for
tonnage for Freemantle, King George’s Sound, or any other
port (in a storm) and long rates were then obtainable ; hut no
vessels were offering. With the return of fine weather the
demand has quite ceased.
On the whole the outgoings during this week were larger,
hut mostly either in private chambers or over the ship’s side;
the attendance at the open hoards (at 8,9, 1, and 6 p.m.) being
very meagre.
Police Court.
(By our Special Peripatetic Reporter.)
Bella Cuzco, a well known character, was brought before the
Bench, (consisting of Mr. Muff, P.M. and Messrs. Patrick
Duffer, and A Land Lubber, J.P.s) charged with being drunk
and disorderly, and behaving in a riotous manner to the danger
of the passengers. Policeman xxx stated that upon information
received, he proceeded to Lat. 85° Long. 141° and there saw
the accused reeling from side to side. He believed she had
three sheets in the wind. Mr. Neptune, Solicitor, who appeared
for the prisoner, said that his client would plead guilty to the
charge of being a little under the weather, but she was proceeding
quietly on her course and was well able to take care of herself.
The Bench however considered the case proved, and sentenced
her, (as the police said she was an old offender,) to pay a fine of
£lO, or be imprisoned for 40 days. The prisoner said she would
take the 40 days and go to—Plymouth, or some other cool place.
Medical.
The Doctor reports the state of health of the ship as
excellent. There are one or two cases of incipient heart


disease, for which he recommends Lip Salve. He also
recommends the use of Palm Oil to some of the attentive
stewards at the end of the voyage, some of whom are suffering
from tightness of the chest.
The Riddler.
Why is the Cuzco like a young lady on parlour skates ?
Because she is moving on “ Eollers.”
Why was last Wednesday night aboard the “ Cuzco ” like a
bird of song ?
Because it was a Night-in-gale.
The Week's Doings.
May sth —Left Adelaide at 7.14 a.m. Signalled, Barque
“ Glanperis ” for Adelaide. Light wind and fine clear weather.
At 5.45 passed Neptune Island—last land.
May 6th —Fresh breeze in the morning, and overcast.
Wind shifted to S.W. Cloudy weather.
May 7th —Fine weather; unsettled appearance, slight
flashes of lightning visible. Muster of crew, for inspection on
quarter deck. Divine service conducted by Captain Eidler, in
Ist Saloon, at 11 a.m.
May Bth —Moderate breeze and rain throughout the day.
Sighted land near Albany, on Starboard side.
May 9th — Strong head wind and squally, with rain. Ship
rolling. General Meeting held to form a Committee of
Amusement. Dr. Thompson voted to the chair, Messrs.
Hamburger, Plum, Jack, Colnell, Yeunel and Hanking, elected
as Committee.
May 10th —Heavy sea and cloudy weather ; ship taking
good sprays on hoard. Strong Gale with heavy squalls. General
Meeting to consider the advisability of starting a newspaper.
Messrs. Eoberts and Quayle unanimously chosen joint Editors.
May 11th —Steady breeze and fine weather, some rolling
still going on. Light winds and overcast. Successful rehearsal


for the Concert on Saturday evening, Quoits, etc., coming into
favour.
May 12 —Light unsteady wind and overcast. Baggage day.
Amusements.
An Entertainment will be given (weather permitting) in the 2nd
Saloon, this evening. Appended is the PEOGEAMME:
Pianoforte Solo ... Mr. Holder
Ballad (Gallants of England) Mr. Davies
Duet Gipsy Countess | m”'Ctotto
Violin Solo ... Mr. Muller
Song Wrecked & Saved Mr. Hawkins
Song Ever of thee Mrs. Sambell
Kecit. Bridge of Sighs Mr. Barker
Comic Song Johnny Schmoker
Mr, Grattan
Duet Polaski’s Banner {
Banjo Solo ... Mr. Juifield
Song The Midshipmite Mr. Knowlea
Solo with Yiolin > Miss A. Plum
& Piano Acoomp. j Mr. C. Plum
Song ... Mr. Kowe
Song The Outlaw Mr. Marris
Comic Song & Chorus The Red Nose
Mr. Hamburger
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.


Date
Latitude
Longitude
Miles
May 13th
23° 49'
97° 57'
302
„ Uth
21° 1'
93° 41'
290
„ 15th
18° 18'
89° 12'
302
„ 16th
15° 20'
84° 48'
308
„ 17th
12° 33'
80° 27'
303
„ 18th
9° 4.5'
76° 10'
300
„ 19th
7° 14'
72° 20'
285
THE Cuzco Chronicle.
Conducted by
W. G. ROBERTS and EDWIN QUAYLE.
No. 2. S. S. CUZCO. Mat 20th, 1882.
Abstract of Log.
§.N issuing this the second number of the Cuzco Chronicle
we have to tender our sincere and cordial thanks for
the very kindly reception which the first issue has on
1 all hands met with.
The difficulties in getting up the issue at two days’
notice were somewhat great; but feeling sure of the indulgence
of our fellow passengers, we had no hesitation in placing No. 1,
with all its imperfections “ thick upon it ” before them. We
desire to thank those gentlemen who have so kindly assisted us


both in the matter of contributions and also in devoting their
time to writing the copies ; and cannot but express our regret
that up to the present time the contributions have been so few.
Feeling as we do that this is not from lack of talent on
board, but is entirely owing to the fact that the magnificent
advantages offered to contributors to this -paper are not fully
known, it affords us great pleasure to briefly place before our
readers the facilities which the Cuzco Chronicle offers them to go
down in a blaze of glory —and printers’ ink—to all posterity. In
our capacious columns will be found Saws for the Serious—
Themes for the Thoughtful—lnformation for the Inquiring—
Conundrums for the Curious—Jokes for the Jovial—Mirth for
the Merry—Fun for the Facetious—and plenty of provender for
people of peculiarities not pictured in the preceding paragraphs.
The Editors' Gossip
In spite of one or two little drawbacks the Concert last
Saturday Evening may be pronounced a decided success; not
altogether from an artistic point of view, perhaps, but as the
great majority of the audience seemed thoroughly pleased and
satisfied, it would be idle and at the same time ungracious to
indulge in minute criticism.
* * * *
Apropos of the above, how is it that individuals are always
to be found who, with execrably bad taste, make disparaging
remarks aloud, evidently for the benefit, (and we fear mortifica-
tion) of the performer. Should anything of this kind come under
our notice in future w T e shall have particular pleasure in
publishing verbatim the remarks made on other occasions by the
same individuals. Verb. Sap.
* * * *
We beg to tender our warmest thanks to the munificent
gentleman who dropped a copper into the Editor’s box last
week. And we have all the more pleasure in making this


acknowledgment, as we are given to understand that “ pennies ”
are a consideration to the gentleman in question.
* * * *
The winners of Prizes in the Eaffle for model boats, are as
follows:
Ist Prize ... ... Mr. Haddon
2nd „ .. ... Mrs. Lister
3rd „ ... ... Miss Plum
* * * »
We heg to call attention to the “ Great Cuzco C. C. C.
Concert Company,” the prospectus of which appears in our
advertisement column. We need hardly say, that we consider
this a sound investment.
* * * *
The important cable dispatch, published in another column,
re the Egyptian troubles, caused immense excitement in this
place. As a precautionary measure, General Steward Cunning-
ham will issue “ Pocket Pistols,” to all who apply for them
at the Commissariat Stores, in First and Second Saloons. As
there is reason to fear Fenian emissaries, it has been thought
best to have the Pistols filled with Scotch Whiskey.
* * * »
We understand that a performance of “ H.M.S. Pinafore ”
will be given, probably next Saturday, when we trust that
everybody with his sisters, (or somebody else’s sisters,) and his
cousins, and his aunts, will have a very enjoyable evening.
# * * *
We beg to call the attention of the gentlemen who were
amusing themselves by tossing for coppers and making bets, on
Sunday last, to the fact that however harmless it may have
seemed to them, it was nevertheless offensive to their fellow-
passengers. We feel sure they would not willingly cause
annoyance, so we have no hesitation in mentioning the matter.
» * * *
While the engines were stopped at noon last Saturday, our
worthy Doctor endeavoured to take some photos, of our Officers
and passengers. Owing to the subjects moving however, the


attempt was only partially successful. On some future occasion
we trust our Medico will he more fortunate, as the photos, would
he very pleasing mementos.
* * * *
We regret to learn that the Christy Minstrel Entertainment
promised for this evening will not take place. A Concert
has however been substituted, and we are informed that another
effort will he made to carry out the proposed "Nigger Entertain-
ment next week.
Glossary of Nautical Terms.
Bosun. —The chief officer of the Starboard watch. It is
considered the thing at sea, to make up to this individual, as he
is the most influential of the officers. Any person lucky enough
to secure his friendship, is termed “ the bosun’s mate,” and
envied accordingly.
Cat. —This is a sort of cat peculiar to sea life. It has nine
tails, and a split bullet on the end of each tail. Sailors do not
like this sort of cat. (The Editors wish it to he distinctly
understood, that our special reporter, the author of “ what the
cat saw,” has no connection with the above.)
Davit. —The iron support that sustains the life boat.
There are several of these on hoard. The most important is the
after one. The most solemn affirmation a sailor can make is to
deposit his after or “ asa ” davit.
Scoop. —The fore-part of the ship. An important point of
observation. When the ship’s officers have a big night on shore
with their friends, they are said to he “ on the scoop.”
Political.
(Cablegram by the Davis patent Telephone.)
London, May 19th, 13 a.m.
Perfect understanding arrived at hy the Three great Powers
on the Egyptian question. Commander Eiddler of the “ Cuzco ”
ordered to force the passage of the Suez Canal. He will be
joined at Port Said hy H.M.S. Pinafore, with Pirst Lord of the


Admiralty, Sir Joseph Porter, on board, who will take command
of the Pleet. A landing of the Prench and German troops will
be effected at Naples, to compel Italy to ratify the Tunisian
Treaty. Commander Ridler and Captain Corcoran ordered to
cover the disembarkation with their guns.
Cromner' Quest.
A jury was yesterday empannelled by the Coroner of the
Cuzco to investigate the case of a correspondent of this paper who
was charged with wilfully, feloniously, and with malice afore-
thought murdering the Queen’s English by committing a most
revolting, atrocious, and dastardly pun in calling Poster’s Ale the
P>oss ” Ale of the ship. The accused, who conducted his own
defence, set up a plea of justification, as he had to commit 'the
deed in self defence in order to avoid making a worse pun. The
jury ultimately acquitted the prisoner, the Coroner remarking
that he left the Court without a stain on his grammar.
The Concert.
A Concert took place on Saturday last, as announced, in the
Second Saloon, which had been tastefully decorated for the
occasion. The introduction on the piano was excellently played
by a gentleman, who at all times contributes to the musical
enjoyment of his friends. “ The Outlaw ” was given in such a
manner as to awake considerable applause, and so was the old
Duet, “ The Gipsy Countess.” Another Duet during the
evening was also tastefully rendered. We are sorry to say “The
Midshipmite ” was not as successful as it might have been,
attributable, we believe, to the singer having faced the piano
instead of the audience. “ The Gallants of England,” by the
popular entrepreneur of the concert, was re-demanded, and as a
substitute, “ Will o’ the Wisp ” was given in this gentleman’s
best style. A song of affection to the Old Country was sung by
a gentleman in very good style. “ You naughty, naughty,
Girls,” introduced to us a gentleman of the light Comedy
School. Justice was done to the song, and on its being encored.


a medley song well known in the colonies, (“ yclept Johnny
Schmoker ”) was substituted, the latter evoking considerable
laughter and applause. A descriptive song, “Wrecked and
Saved,” a very difficult song to sing with good effect, was given
in capital style, and in response to well merited applause the
last verse was repeated. What shall we say of the Violin and
Banjo solos?—the less perhaps the better. “Ever of Thee,” an
old, though at all times pleasing ballad, was very nicely sung by
a lady, whose voice was perhaps a trifle too strong for the
limited size of the saloon. The Scena, with Pianoforte and
Violin accompaniment, was very smartly rendered, and throughout
was executed with excellent taste. A comic song, “ The jolly
Bed Nose,” was the concluding item on the programme. It was
inimitably rendered, and provoked great laughter and applause-
The National Anthem, and a cordial vote of thanks to the
numerous ladies and gentlemen who had kindly contributed to
the evening’s enjoyment, brought a very successful entertainment
to a close.
Stray Notes by Squib.
The Nigger performance has fallen through, I am sorry to hear,
how is this 1 I thought there was no chance of a had start as all
seemed so well together—perhaps the weather is too warm.
* * * *
I do believe the recent rehabilitation of Black Diamonds has
been productive of more bad language in No. 2 than anything
else in the ship ; if we except a portly Captain falling over the
ash plank on a dark evening.
• * * •
The hot weather has brought out much of our drinkitite,
Speaking of self and 'Friends it is better than eatitite. Our bar-
man Talbot has his hands full, and, wonderful to relate, has no
time to read his “ Ned Kelly ” ; at which no one rejoices more
than the Boss. I should like to buy out that No. 2 Bar. I like
a Bar—that is, it’s contents; this weather makes it the only
institution on board.


Apropos of comfort, has not No. 2 delightful sitting
accommodation \ and where are the Forms that were to be of
Adelaide birth ? Beautiful accommodation, as I hear a friend of
mine remark with Sarkasim. But then he has no chair and
relied upon something better en Voyage.
* * * *
My friend Mr. D’s Telephone was a success at last, and it
was very naughty of Boyles to suggest a slit, which however was
ultimately perpetrated.
Poet's Corner.
Margarine ! sweet Margarine !
Who art thou ? someone’s bosom Queen ?
My heart is in a flutter;
Imagining thy bright eyes’ sheen,
Thy breath like fragrant Floriline,
As thy soft name I utter.
No Margarine! sweet Margarine !
Weareth no human form I ween,
Idle that name to mutter.
Sweet, fresh, and French is Margarine,
’Xis Beef Fat, minus Stearine,
And substitute for Butter.
(On making enquiries we find that an excessive use of the
ship’s butter is the cause of the Poet indulging in the above
effusion.—Eds. 0. C.)
M. C. kissed me when we met,
Jumping from the chair she sat on,
Time you thief who loves to get
Sweets into his list, put that in.
Say I’m weary, say I’m sad,
Say that health and wealth have missed me,
Say I’m growing old, but add
M. C. kissed me!
Da{i)ly the officer
Puffed his cigar,
As he came sauntering
Up from the Bar.
Singing “ From off the Bridge
“ Hither I come,
“ Now duty’s over,
“ To talk to Miss P » * m.”
C


The Riddler.
Why are our Stewards at Breakfast-time like Racehorses ?
Because they are always running for cups, plates, and steaks.
Why is the S.S. Cuzco like Darwin’s Evolution theory 1
Because it has much tail-in’t (talent).
If the author of the above' will kindly call on us he will
have the pleasure of seeing our new double-barrelled, hair-trigger
shot gun in action. (Do call.)
What would lead us to suppose that this ship is filled with
prisoners ?
Because all the passengers are in Cuzeody.
Letter From Puss.
Dear Editors,
I can this week only scratch down a few lines
as I am busily engaged in arranging for the great moonlight
Concert, in connection with Mr. Thomas Cat, to come off in about
a fortnight. I have very little to chronicle anyhow, and am
unwilling to repeat all I know, as people are beginning to have
an eye on me, because I let the “ cat out of the bag on a former
occasion. If I wanted to tell all, I should at least be a cat of
nine tails, (if not more.) I was shocked to see such a lot of
gambling and betting going on, on Sunday last during day time,
and any amount of gambolling in the evening on deck. Sports
seem to become popular. Quoits are quoite fashionable, although
it is no Hughes to try and beat that gentleman at this game.
Cricket has the drawback of there being so many overs. There is
some talk about a“go as you please ” walking match. We hope
Mr. Lister will enter the lists. Other musical and dramatic
entertainments are also on the tapis. (I shall do my best to a-
mew-se passengers with my jottings.) After taking off a goodly
number of our passengers on Saturday last, our good Dr. was
taken in himself with a Dummy Camera, and a Bogus Lady
Customer. By the way, is it quite the cheese, if a young lady
kisses “ His Majesty ” on the quarter deck after luncheon ? I
should imagine the cheese at that luncheon was quite the cheese,


but as to the kissing, it reminded me very much of that novel
“ Bread and Cheese, and Kisses.” Several tiffs have occurred
during the week amongst some of the loving couples, but all is
serene again; there is a special relish in reconciliation and its
accompaniments. Sapiente sat. Being out at all hours, I have
noticed some very festive parties, unable to retire to the comforts
which their cabins command, before 5 a.m. I will paw-se here
with my gossip, as I might become too personal.
Yours truly,
PUSS.
Market Report.
(By Private Wire.)
Candles. —Supply very small, as may be inferred from the
dark condition of the upper deck after 6 p.m. We understand
there is a “ corner ” in this article (no doubt a very dark one) got
up by some of the younger members of the community who
evidently wish to ‘ keep it dark.’
Ironmongery, Metals, &c. —We hear only of enquiry for
spades (for Euchre, the other party holding the two Bowers and
Ace.) Spoons are also much looked after.
Drapery. —Some mercantile gentlemen have made large
investments in “ Soft Goods,” which may turn out well if they
do not meet with a ‘ check.’ Wrappers are much enquired for,
the best brand being now “ young men’s left arm.” These are
carried around the waist and very pleasing to the wearer.
Cigars, &c. —Large stocks, but first class brands scarce and
not obtainable. Cigarettes going freely (from the pockets of
liberal donors to the mouths of their best friends.)
Fruits are getting low ; with the exception of a good supply
of Plums, there is hardly any in stock. Apples, although re-
ported sold out, are yet in stock, as we have heard the
quotation (not in the market however) ‘ Thou art the apple of
mine eye.’
Spirits. —Eeferring to our last report on the spirit market,
we would say that some Eum fellows are getting very cordial
upon la(r)ger acquaintance.
C 2


Advertisements.
PEOSPECTUS of the “ GREAT CUZCO CO-OPEKATIVE
CONSOLIDATED COMICAL COMEDY AND CONCERT
COMPANY (LIMITED).” To be registered under the Companies’ Act,
Vic., vxl.
This Company is started to develop and work the nearly inexhaustible
Mine of Fun, Mimicry, Vocal power, and clever handedness on the Keysor long
bow; together with any other precious germs of social usefulness that may be
discovered on the Company’s property.
The property of the Company comprises a vast area, commencing at “Bow-
Point ” and running back to the “ Stem,” County of Cuzco in the Oriental Empire,
and partly in the land of Fiction, County of Fancy, and Parish of Belle-Air.
The property has been examined by competent scientists from whose re-
ports the following extracts are taken.
Prof. Wilkinson, f.r.g.s., and t.r.u.m., says—“ From borings and
soundings taken in the neighbourhood of Erard’s and Collard’s Pianos, from speci-
mens from the Smoking-Room, and from surface indications all along the line of
claim on the Upper Deck there is no doubt that the materials contain from 100
to 190 per cent, of “ Pure Fun.”
The Rev. Scipio Hendeson Africanus Reports.—“ Dis yeah
property am ob de greatest possibdist valyuah ; it will go shuah 7 stone 10 avoah
de pic to de barrow.”
William Schneider, Esq., D(ouble) D(utch) Remarks.—“Dereish
no doubt soundings is de madder of dat mines dem vellars must be bound to strike
ile I dinks so neither,”
There is no liability incurred beyond taking an active or passive share in the
Company; the only parties liable to a call (before the curtain) will be the success-
ful active and acting shareholders.
Ladies and Gentlemen wishing to take shares in this undoubtedly genuine,
promising (and performing) venture, will please make application at once, as the
list will be closed immediately (if not sooner) and shares or parts allotted, when a
meeting will be called.
S.S. Cuzco,
May 18th, 1882.
A Few Notes about Diego Garcia by One of
those who saw it.
Left the “ Cuzco ” at 12.50. p.m. for the island, fully victualled
for a three hours’ cruise. All went well for a quarter of an
hour, when it was discovered that no matches had been brought.
This occasioned some signs of mutiny, which were promptly and
effectually quelled by the officer in command, promising all
hands a box full each on arrival in London, and showing how


easily a light may be obtained, by rubbing two heads, or another
hard dry substance together. (We have seen sparks and stars
ourselves, the effect of a sharp blow immediately after contact.)
Diego Garcia is a coral island, at no place more than 6 feet
above the level of the sea. There are said to be one million
cocoa nut trees on the island ; but the Doctor proved this to be
a false statement, as he counted them, and made three more than
that number.
Our crew of 18 hands all told did their duties manfully,
and pulled for hours under a blazing sun, against wind and
waves that threatened to engulph our frail craft every moment.
But though thus surrounded by dangers, not one of them was
seen to quail. Their duty was to deliver the heavy mail, and
for the sake of the females, who might have written to the
males, and whose glad tidings of love and trust, they might be
conveying ; and also supported by the knowledge that there was
a life belt for each man in the boat, and the Victoria Cross with
a hot dinner, when they got back, the brave fellows strove with
the elements. At last! a startling cry from the bowman
“ Steam launch ahead! ” we hoisted our blood red banner—
Buckingham A. B.s (no connection with Pulaski’s and the
Moravian Nuns, though quite as useful as theirs to a man with a
cold) and altered our course. Joy ! joy ! seen and saved ! The
“ Austral ” bore down upon us, and took us in tow. On over-
hauling our stores, only 6 41b. tins of Preserved Mutton, a Wilts
Cheese, a bag of Biscuit, 4 breakers of water, a bottle of Whiskey
and 6 quarts of Ale were to be found. These were served out in
equal parts to the sufferers, and were sufficient to sustain life.
To such desperate straits were we reduced, that one man ate a
whole bottle of pickles, and kept the bottle as a souvenir of the
feat.
On landing, the first thing we saw was “ Jumbo,” dragging
a cart load of cocoa nuts for the “ Cuzco,” which, however, failed
to reach their destination, on account of some spirit shewed by
this faithful animal, who vowed that he would not drag another


cursed cocoa nut in the Chagos Archipelago, and begged the
Purser to take him home to Alice immediately. The Purser
explained, that as already there was one of the species on board,
it was impossible. “Jumbo” having listened civilly, cleared
out, and was last seen at East Point climbing a cocoa nut tree,
to look out for the “ Great Bear.”
The island looked very attractive five miles away, and the
natives, at that distance, were very kind and hospitable.
The Week'e Doings.
Saturday, May 13th—Light breeze and overcast. Ship’s
company exercised at Boat Stations, and Fire drill. A very
successful Concert, in the 2nd Saloon, in the evening.
Sunday, May 14th—Moderately light breeze and clear fine
weather. Muster of the crew on the quarter deck. Divine
service conducted by Captain Eidler, at 10.30 a.m.
Monday, May 15th—Fresh trade winds. Canvas all set.
Meeting of the Amusement Committee, at which it was decided
to give a “ Minstrel ” Entertainment, on Saturday next.
Tuesday, May 16th —Moderate steady breeze and cloudy,
increasing to a strong breeze. First rehearsal for Saturday
evening. Not altogether a success, owing to the noise made by
the coals being shifted.
Wednesday, May 17th —Fresh trade winds with clear fine
weather. Coal shifting still going on, and everyone in a very
uncomfortable state in consequence. Decided to abandon the
Christy Minstrel performance for the present, and substitute a
Concert on Saturday evening.
Thursday, May 18th—Moderate steady trade and fine
clear weather. Very hot and uncomfortable. Quoits, etc., in
great favour. Choir practice in the evening.
Friday, May 19th—Moderate trade and fine clear weather.
Sighted Diego Garcia. At 12 noon arrived off Lagoon Entrance.
Stopped and sent boat ashore with mails, etc. Ship’s boat
returned with steam launch. Proceeded at 3.30 p.m.


Facetice.
It was rather a little “ too-too ” on the part of the tall and
lovely young lady with auburn hair to sing “ 0 Roberts (s)
Roberts (s) toi que j’aime ” within ear-shot of one of our genial
and urbane editors. He would no doubt have liked to accompany
her, hut not on the piano, that not being his forte.
* * * »
Of all nautical expressions, our fellow passengers seem to
take the most kindly to “ Splicing the main-brace,” and “ Hard-
a-port.”
* * * *
In reply to the correspondent signing himself" Inquisitive,”
we have much pleasure in giving the required information.
After making enquiries in several quarters, we fell back on “ our
own nautical authority”—the chief cook—and he informs us
that the “ Dog-watch ” is so called, because it is cur-tailed !
* * * ♦
Strange but true. Our lovely maidens, promenading the
deck “ when evening brings the sunlight low,” with their male
chaperons, all take to the “ star ’’-board side, while the old buffers
and “ crusty ” bachelors prefer Port! Why is this thus ?
• * * *
Mr. Hed-hitter,
i ave herd some passengers say their is
a eavy swel on board to day, who do they meen. A reply in
your paper will henliten a stranger, i remain, Mr. Hed-hitter
yours,
THE ONLY J.
Amusements.
A Concert will he given at
Quarter deck. Appended is the
1. Overture ... Mr. Holder ]
2. Song ... Mr. Aitchinsou
3. Song ... Miss Clinton
4. Comic Recitation Mr. Marris
5. Song ... Mrs. Sambell
6. Song “No my courage” Mr. Hawking
7. Song “ Some Day ” Miss Plum
8. Comic Song ... Mr. Grattan
8 o’clock this evening on the
PROGRAMME
9. Selection on Piano Miss Pike
10. Song ... Mr. Morgan
11. Violin Solo ... Herr Muller
12. Song .. Mr. Davis
_ ~, I Misses Plum & Clinton
13. Quartett | Messrs. Daly & Plum
14. Reading ... Mr. Barber
15. Comic Song & Chorus —
Herr Hamburger
GOD SAYE THE QUEEN.


Date
Latitude
Longitude
Miles
May
20th
6°
26' S
68°
59' E
247
21st
3°
13'
65°
42'
275
22nd
0°
2'
62°
20'
278
23rd
3°
8' N
59°
4'
273
24th
6°
6'
59°
48'
264
25th
9°
45'
52°
41'
287
it
26th
12°
29'
49°
12'
284
The Cuzco Chronicle.
Conducted by
W. G. ROBERTS and EDWIN QUAYLE.
tfo. 3. S. S. CUZCO. Mat 27th, 1882.
Abstract of Log.
The largest circulation in the World!
■E are now in the third epoch of our public life. We
have passed through the critical period of extreme
youth, and the dangerous period of juvenescense.
We are now in our prime; to use a simile, in quite another
genre, we have survived our salad days and are now as the
hearty oak ; a vegetable growth not at all adapted to salad, it is
true, hut perhaps not less useful on that account to our readers.
Our Boots are planted in truth: the steadfast Trunk of our


convictions supports the Branches of opinion ; while from amid
the Leaves of our fancy, those Acorns peep forth, from which
posterity may derive its happiest inspirations. For we are in
fkuxt, and well pleased with ourselves.
Observe all things are relative ; nothing is absolutely. Thus
solid as our present habitation appears to he, it will he plain to
the least reflection, as soon as pointed out to them, that never-
theless this, a ship absolutely is not, except in relation to water.
And so it is with the circulation of a newspaper.
Such a literary production may he a palladium of
truth, an segis of wisdom, an encyclopaedia of knowledge, an
arachnoid tissue of light and airy fancy; yet without a
circulation, it is less than nothing, and circulation exists only in
relation to readers. We address a public of about two hundred
and we have the happiness to he read by all of them. In virtue
of this fact, which could easily be made to support the assertion,
that we are perused by more than all our public, for we are re-
read by about half of them; our circulation may be fairly
reckoned at three hundred, or fifty per cent, more than our total
population,—we claim for ourselves, the largest circulation in
the world. The “ London Daily Lyre,” which has hitherto
claimed this proud position, must now consider itself “ camped,”
(to borrow an expression from the political vocabulary of our
Australian brothers) —and “camped” by us. In fact, judging
of it by the only actional standard, the standard with which
for our own part we court comparison, that journal never
had any circulation worth speaking of. It addresses a popu-
lation of 38,000,000, through a daily issue of (say) a quarter of
a million ; this estimate we are aware, is far beyond the mark,
but we would be generous. Its circulation is thus at the most,
not more than one per cent, of the population addressed.
But if this sluggish stream can be called a “ circulation ” at all,
by what name can our triumphant hundred and fifty per cent,
be intelligibly designated ? Yes, we are well pleased with our-
selves ; and we repeat this sentence with which our first


paragraph concludes, confident of what may then have seemed a
piece of gratuitous arrogance, now appears to he the only logical
outcome of a clear statement of facts. But indeed, what Editor
could contemplate without pride his public eagerly feeding upon
the congenial pabulum provided by his paper—his intellectual
Oak ? Pabulum, which it would be a mere compliment, nay,
more, an empty mockery, to profess to wish were Pearls instead
of Acoms.
Editor's Gossip.
We were greatly amused a few evenings since at overhearing the
following loving little dialogue : —Fair young lady (loquiter) to
Ist Saloon “ Gent.”— Mr. So and So please tell me the time 1
Ist Saloon “ Gent”—Ask the Chief Officer !
We presume that the Ist S. G. considered that as the Ist
officer has two watches in twenty-four hours he was in a better
position to know “ the time of day.” Still it did sound a little
odd, and it was hardly polite ; was it 1
* * * *
Yet another conversation, evidently like the former, pro hono
publico:—Amiable young gentleman in conversation with Lady
—Buttons in the distance. “ I’ll clear out and sleep, shall 11”
To which came the killing reply, “ Die if you like ! ”
# * ♦ *
It is always a source of pleasure to us to observe a gentle-
manly feeling towards one another displayed amongst all classes,
and it is with none the less gratification that we recount the
following trait of that feeling which was witnessed by a gentle-
man passing through the 2nd Saloon, where he tells us he saw
the “ Bishop ” surrounded by his satellites and addressing them
in his own grave and dignified manner in the following terms: —
“ Gentlemen ! I am pleased to tell you I have found my pipe.”
Our informant adds, that it is to be hoped a similar feeling may
be displayed by' the Stewards towards the passengers.


We have pleasure in publishing the result of the collection
on hoard on Sunday last on behalf of the various Seamen’s
Charities, as we think that, taking into consideration the com-
paratively small number of passengers, it was a very fair one.
The amount collected was £27 : 12s. 6d., and this sum has since
been augmented to £3O.
* * * *
The Concert announced to take place last Saturday, and
postponed on account of the inclemency of the weather, was held
on Monday evening on the Quarter Deck, which was very prettily
decorated for the occasion.
The Entertainment appeared to give general satisfaction and
passed off without a hitch.
« * » *
Apropos of the Concert: we should very much like to know
what really was in that glass provided for the use of the Chair-
man. It certainly looked like water, hut judging from the great
gusto with which our “ Feline Reporter ” was seen to take several
copious draughts of it, and knowing that individual’s weakness
for “ Old Tom,” we have serious doubts on the subject.
The following is the result of the draw for the “ Derby
Sweep,” the prizes for which are as under: —
Ist Prize, £4; 2nd Prize, £1; 3rd Prize, 10s.
Mr. Affleck ... Scotch Whiskey
„ Akhurst ... Nellie
„ Brady ... Bruce
~ Capel ... Goldengate
„ Daly ... Dutch Oven
„ Danby ... Harden
Mrs. Devlin ... The Field
Mr. Heathcote ... Inchcape
„ James ... IJnic
~ Jones ... Kingdom
James ... Gerald
Mr. Lister ... Southampton
„ Harris ... Kermesse
~ Mills ... Geheimness
„ Mortlock ... Troll
„ Offer ... Pursebearer
~ Roberts ... Little Sister
Miss Stone ... Highlander
Mr. Stone ... Margaret
„ ... Shotover
Dr. Thompson ... Shrewsbury
Mr. Williamson Hygeia, Colt


Passing the Line
H.M. King Neptune having wired through Davis’ Submarine
Telephone, that previous engagements would prevent his
presence on hoard the Cuzco on the 22nd inst., the festivities
arranged for that day did not come off, and instead of an outside
Baptism, the candidates for equatorial honors and their numerous
friends, took a copious inside “ wet ” at Cunningham’s. At
11.30 a.m. on the above date, the man in the “Crow’s nest”
sang out “ Line in sight on the Port Bow,” upon which, word for
the Chief Cook was passed aft at once. This official appeared
on the forecastle in less time than you can say Jack Eohinson
(or Sir Henry Parkes, for that matter,) and took supreme
command of operations. All the Cooks and Scullerymen
were placed in the chains forward, with Fenders and Gridirons ;
the Stewards manned all the Port-holes with Boat hooks and
Harpoons, to pass the line under the keel and out astern, as
soon as it should come within reach of their Grappling-irons.
The Barber wa,s stationed astern, with orders to watch the Line
coming up, and prevent its getting entangled with the Rudder,
(for which emergency, he was armed with one of “ Heiffer’s
hollow-ground Navy Razors,” ground especially sharp for the
occasion) and cut it, if necessity should arise. The Lamp
trimmer, Laundryman, and Boots were also placed aft, one
on each of the Screw-hlades, armed with bottles of Dr.
Thompson’s “Collision Preventive,” and everything was ready
for action. At 12h. 10m. 40s. mean Greenwich time, exactly, the
first contact took place. Only a slight shock was felt, the disc
of the Line being fully visible to the naked eye, (the sky being
perfectly clear) and at 12h. 11m. 10|s. the penumbra of the Line
had passed safely astern. There was not the slightest hitch, but
as the Barber remarked, “it was a close shave.” It was very
unfortunate that the Doctor could not take a photo, of the
phenomenon, which would have been a valuable gain to science.
The passengers and Ship’s Company, grateful that everything
had passed off so successfully, held a meeting in the Cockpit,


when a hearty vote of thanks was passed to the Chief Cook, for
his intelligent and circumspect superintendence of the operation.
The Chief Cook rising to respond amid deafening cheers said,
—“ Gentlemen, I am most grateful for the flattering testimonial
of your confidence in my nautical abilities. But I must remark
that you have to thank science more than my weak efforts.
Since the days of Noah, Christopher Columbus, Davy Jones,
and Andrew Jackson, rapid progress has been made in everything
pertaining to navigation, and certain laws have been fixed, by
which all these phenomena are guided. At present there are four
different lines known of crossing the equator, (or the “ line ”
vulgarly called.)
“(1.) The A. Line. This was discovered in the reign of
Queen Anne. It is also called Aniline, but as many people
have dyed from it, it is now out of use.
“(2.) The B. Line. This, the Bee line, is the shortest and
straightest, but the most dangerous. This line is liable to snap,
on account of the great tension of the earth’s axles which act
directly, and bearings get easily heated.
“ (3.) The C. Line. This line is only used in the Western
Hemisphere. This was invented and patented by General U.S.
Grant, who remarked then, “ I will fight it out on this line, if
it takes me all summer ” ; which, as we are due in London on
June loth, would not suit us at all.
“(4.) The D. Line, or Diagonal line. This is the safest, for
as the Equator is crossed on the bias, so to say, no shock is
felt. This is the line we have taken, and I may say with perfect
success; everything is mathematically nicely calculated, done
brown to a T, professionally speaking. You all know that by
magnetic observation, through glasses filled with colored alcoholic
substance, certain saccharine dissolutions are dissolved, and
subsequently gyratory evolutions are evolved from the observers,
upon the maxim, that ‘ The attraction of the gravitation
suspended from an aerial position, draws down the circumference
of the compass, and knocks everything into a Cocked Hat in less
than 5 min. 40 sec.! ’ This gentleman covers the whole ground.


Finally, Gentlemen, let me thank the whole of the Stereoscopic
Corps of the ship for their intelligent co-operation, and allow me
to drink to all your good healths.” This was responded to with
3 times 3, and a tiger, and the meeting broke up amidst the
greatest hilarity.
Try ’ton,
NAVAL REPORTER
The Concert.
The Concert announced for Saturday evening last, and postponed
in consequence of the unfavorable weather, took place on the
Quarter-deck on Monday evening, and was a very pronounced
success. Two or three of the performers it is true, were somewhat
out of their element, but as the audience was a very forbearing
one everything passed off pleasantly.
The Overture was played by Mr. Holder in a very artistic
manner, and deserved even heartier applause than it was greeted
with. The next item on the programme “ The Bridge,” if meant
as a serio-comic effort, was eminently successful. Contrasting
with the last Song, “ Carissima” was very correctly and pleasingly
sung by Miss Clinton, who would have done even better had the
acoustic properties of the proscenium been more favorable. The
Sermon preached from the text “ Little Jack Horner, &c.,” evoked
roars of laughter, and was one of the successes of the evening.
Mrs. SambelTs “ Song of Love and Death ” was very well rendered,
and was greeted with considerable applause.
The next song “No my Courage,” from Maritana, was given
by Mr. Hawkins, and although some of this gentleman’s notes
are somewhat defective, his efforts were justly rewarded by a
bis ; his second song, “ The Village Blacksmith,” in which he was
heard to rather better advantage than in the first. “ Some Day ”
was very charmingly sung by Miss Anita Plum, as was also
“ No, Sir,” given in response to a cordial and unanimous encore.
The last song of Part Ist was “ The Jolly Miller,” a comic song
given in character by Mr. Grattan. So well pleased were the


audience that the artist was compelled to reappear and bow his
acknowledgments.
After an interval of ten minutes Mr. Morgan sang “ Nil
Desperandum ” in such a style as to evoke an enthusiastic recall,
when “ Our Jack’s come home from Sea ” was rendered in even
better style than the first song. Mr. Morgan possesses a capital
voice, which, with training, will doubtless improve. The next
item, “ Home, Sweet Home ” by Mr. Davis was well received,
hut we have heard this gentleman to better advantage on a former
occasion. It is to be regretted that Mr. Daly was not in better
voice, as his song, “ In the Gloaming,” was not at all up to his
usual standard.
A comic song and chorus by Mr. Hamburger brought the
Programme to an end.
A vote of thanks to Mr. Heathcote, the Chairman, and a
similar compliment to the performers, terminated a very pleasant
evening.
Elegy .
Written on the Quarter-deck of the “ Cuzco,” (with apologies to
the late Mr. Gray).
The knell of eight bells has just died away,
A few have gone below to have some tea :
The “ Cuzco ” onward ploughs her homeward way,
And leaves the Stern to darkness and to me.
Now shines the glittering lantern on my sight,
And all the air a gentle stillness holds,
Save where the booby wheels his screaming flight,
Or idly flapping, hang the mainsail’s folds.
Save that from yonder cane-backed lounging chair,
A startled pair do to the Moon complain,
Of such as wandering near their secret lair,
Disturbed their conversation’s pleasing strain,
Beneath those masts and shrouds, that awning’s shade,
Fond couples lounge in many a curious heap,
On others’ shoulders some their heads have laid,
And many seem as though they were asleep.


A peaceful scene ! and as I lie and gaze,
What various thoughts come crowding on my brain
The voyage o’er they’ll go their several ways,
And many I may ne’er behold again.
Yet oft in future, whers’er I may be,
When in the gloaming I shall sit and think,
In fancy then again this sight I’ll see,
And to those absent friends “ Good Health ” I’ll drink.
Something about Stars.
There are Stars on earth as well as in the Heavens. We our-
selves have seen that bright particular star, Miss Pomeroy at the
“Eoyal,” Sydney. Besides we have often from personal ex-
perience noticed the constellation, called “ Three Stars,” but in
order to appreciate this fully, glasses are required. Although
Astronomers have pretty well ascertained the movements of some
of the Planets, they are quite in the dark about others. Some
“ Star Eoutes,” the American Astronomers state, are incalculable.
We are glad to see several of our passengers taking such an
interest in astronomical matters, and contemplating the beautiful
galaxy visible since we passed the line of Capricorn (and
“ smoking hot corn it is,” the member from the U.S. observes).
We purpose giving, as well as our limited acquaintance with the
subject will allow, a few of the Planets now exhibiting every
evening, (weather permitting), under the great canopy of Heaven.
In the first place there are the O’Eyans (Orions ?J of Irish
descent, and related to the famous O’Honoghues. One of them,
by the name of Beatrix, is certainly a “ Beauty.” Then there
are some “ Dog Stars,” in the firmament. (N.B. This is not a
joke but serious (Sirius). There are also the Greek Twins, Castor
and Pollux. (“ So there are, by Gemini,” again observes the
gentleman from the U.S.) Then there is the Company of Stars
called the Southern Cross Co., (Limited) the best known and most
popular Brand in the Southern Hemisphere. There is also a
constellation called “ The Sisters,” but of these we have a dupli-
cate on board, as all the young men call them the “ Heavenly
Bodies." Then there are the Great Bear and Small Bear, (the


Kids are not visible, probably because the “ Old Coves ” won’t
let them be out so late at night). Then there is that young swell
called Alf Ecca (Alphecca) who is one of the Coroners (Coronas)
for the district. We must not omit to notice A. C. Thurus for
he is a Beauty, (Bootie). And last but not least Ann Tares,
(Antarrs) who has many admirers.
Space does not permit us to notice other Star performers, but
we think these few lines will be sufficient to draw crowds to the
Exhibition. There will be a change of programme in a little
time, when the enterprising managers will introduce the " Great
Northern Constellation,” whose members are all “ star actors.”
In all the performances Galileo’s new patent revolving telescope
will be applied.
The management is in the hands of Newton Hirschel and Co.
a guarantee in itself for the excellence of the show.
Nautical Items.
People following the track of the Cuzco in their Maps, ought to
be specially careful, as one gentleman by the slip of his pencil,
ran our good old ship right amongst the breakers at Cape Gardafui.
The Marine Board sought to enquire into this case, for even if
no actual damage was done, the party or his certificate, ought to
be suspended for 6 months at least.
* * « *
Some of our passengers feel all right during the stormy
part of our passage; they are good sailors, and must be classed as
A.B.’s while others who are down in the mouth look decidedly
C.D. (seedy.)
* « * *
The sea is “ going down,” joyously remarked Mr. A st
as he comfortably settled himself down to lunch on Thursday
last. The sea did go down that moment, into his soup plate.
The soup was salted of course, and the weatherwise gentleman
peppered all over.
D


The Riddler.
Why was the S.S. Cuzco when leaving Melbourne, like a young
lady of the period ? Because she steered clear of the B(u)oys,
and left the Swells behind her.
« * * *
Why does the S.S. Cuzco remind one of travelling in the
Bush ? Because of the never ending Scrub.
« * * ♦
Which was the pleasantest part of the voyage for the nice
young men on hoard ? When they were between Victoria and
Adelaide.
* * * *
Which boat would Messrs. Hamburger and Grattan save
themselves in, in case of Shipwreck ? Why the jolly boat of
course.
* * * *
And which part would be the best for those naughty hoys
and girls on board ? The Spanker.
Market Report.
(By Private Wire.)
There is little doing 'at present, although provisions are going
into consumption at a rapid rate. Steward Cunningham says
that if the Land League troubles, were referred to a Committee
of the Cuzco passengers, there would soon he an end of the
“ Irish Stew.”
Haberdashery. —No stock of Pins on hoard, except belay-
ing Pins. Needles are also scarce; we only saw one (in the
compass.) Buttons are in great demand; especially the gilt
ones on the Officers’ Jackets. Hooks and Eyes. —Only kind
obtainable, Fish Hooks, and Dead Eyes.
Trimmings. —Nothing done in this article since we left port,
the last transaction was the trimming of coals. Thread —Any
amount of Yarns about. Eibbons. —The long streamers called
“ Follow me lads ! ” are very fashionable, as are also Bows (Beaux)
of all kinds.
Hose. —There is some investment in this line every
morning, between 6 and 7, on upper deck.


Stays. —Except Main and Bob-stays, we know of none in
the market.
Braces. —A variety in stock, large transactions in Fore and
Main-braces, and also Em-braces; the latter more especially
when " evening brings the sunlight low.” These transactions
are not generally made public.
The watered dresses so fashionable a fortnight ago during
the high seas-on, are completely gone out now, and pajamas are
coming in.
In Millinery, the fashion has also changed, as the Sprays
(of sea water) to be observed previously have quite disappeared.
Flowers are not used, except Cauli-flowers, at 6 p.m.,
Bushes, however, (for the dinner table) are now in vogue.
Fruits. —Dates are now out of date, and Figs, although
repeatedly offered at Dinner, are evidently not wanted, no one
seeming to care a fig for this article.
Bananas. —Although not in the market, the Fiji variety,
“ Ladie’s Fingers,” are of course on hand, and very sweet and
delicate some of them are. We can speak from close inspection,
we are happy to say.
Flowers and Trees. —Nearly all out of season. The only
ones in request are Tulips (Two-lips) and Cross-trees.
Advertisement Column.
BY A LADY.—WANTED after 8 p.m., on the Lee side of
Quarter Deck, an officer who will be expected to bring his own chair, as
disappointed suitors object to his using theirs.
WANTED. —A competent party to fix up a good “Hair”
ventilator to Grumbleton Square. For particulars apply to the
Stewardess, about 7 a,m.
LOST. —Supposed to have been dropped on the Quarter Deck
during the Concert last Monday evening, a long string of H’s. Finder will
receive the thanks of the community on returning them to the owner.
D 2


FOE SALE.—A fine corner allotment at Cape Gardafui
suitable for a Public House. Great traffic passing both ways. No opposi-
tion, a very healthy and airy locality. Tramway from Mocha will soon be laid to
the waters of the Red Sea, from whence Excursion Steamers could be laid on, and
make this a desirable pleasure Garden and Coffee Saloon. Ice Creams would also
sell well, and as the summer season lasts about 13 months during the year, it
would be a good spec.—Apply to Sheik Abdel Kader, Somali, P. 0., Egypt.
Rent moderate to a good and permanent tenant.
Some people persist in calling Cape Gardafui, Cape Garda-fie! on account
of the nasty weather, Give a dog a bad name, See.
Answers to Correspondents.
To X. Y. Z.— Eatlines, you will find them in “ Buffer’s
»
Natural History.”
Catsheads under that head in the same work.
Boathooks you will get in any first class Drapery Establish-
ment, where they keep all kinds of Hooks, as Tricoting Hooks,
Hooks and Eyes, Tenter Hooks, Crochet Hooks, &c.
* * * *
To A. 0., Auckland.
“ Hoohing it ” is not a nautical term, although often occuring
on board of fast steamers like the Cuzco. The only remedy
for the evil is “ Darby’s Iron Tonic.” It prevents further pro-
gress of the malady and the persons affected. We may also add
that it is applied by a warranted process.
* * * *
In reply to the gentleman who favoured us with the tract
entitled “ Would death be gain to you ? ” We have to reply that
it all depends on whose death our contributor refers to. If he
means his own we can unhesitatingly answer to the query—
“ Certainly.”
♦
Captain Marryat, Junior.
We duly received your nautical novel entitled “ Midshipman
Greasy,” and would gladly have published it in our columns, but
we are afraid that your knowledge of nautical matters is not
quite on a par with that of your illustrious namesake. For
instance, you say in Chap. V. ‘ The Ship’s Cutter boarded the
Schooner.’ You ought to know that the person to hoard vessels


is the Carpenter. The Cutter is the sailtnaker’s assistant, who
cuts all the sails and also the men’s clothing. You can always
tell a sailor by “ the cut of his jib.” Then again in Chap. YIII
you say “ they looked up the yard.” Now you must know there
are no yards on board ships; in fact there is not an inch of room
for a yard. In Chap. XXIY. you write— ‘ The “ Estette ” was
riding at anchor.’ No ship rides, the Horse Marines are the only
Cavalry troops in the “ Queen’s Navee.” We strongly recommend
you to read up our Glossary of “ Nautical Terms,” so that you
may be able in time to write without committing such glaring
errors.
The Week's Doings.
Satueday, May 20th.—Fine clear weather. Every possible
sail set. Baggage day. Showers of rain all afternoon. Concert
postponed till first fine evening.
Sunday, May 21st.—Unsettled weather and overcast.
Steady breeze. Usual muster of crew, for inspection. Divine
Service held on Quarter deck, at 10.30. Collection on behalf
of Seamen’s Charities, by which £3O was realized.
Monday, May 22nd.—Unsteady wind: Commencement of
S.W. monsoon. Took in square sails, and set fore and aft sails.
Concert on Quarter deck, at 8 p.m, largely attended and very
successful.
Tuesday, May 23rd. —Steady monsoon gradually freshening.
Set every possible sail. Passed a steamer steering S.W.
Threatening appearance to N.W. Crossed the Equator. Light-
ning at night.
Wednesday, May 24th.—Strong monsoon, overcast and
squally. Several people feeling the effects of the rough sea.
Queen’s Birthday.
Thuksday, May 25th,—Strong monsoon and squally.
Heavy beam sea, and vessel labouring heavily, taking heavy
sprays on board. Cleared up in afternoon and became quite
calm. Consequent disappearance of mal-de-mer. Sighted Cape
Gardafui.


Eeiday, May 26th.—Moderate to light breeze. Clear fine
weather. Passed two Ducal Line Steamers, one hound as our-
selves. Decided to hold Athletic Sports on Tuesday next.
Weather very hot and oppressive.
Lacetice.
A Valued Correspondent enquires :—Where was the Cat when
one of our Editors ran his nose full tilt against the RatVme 1
Of Of * *
A Paradox! In Australia, there are numbers of Eivers with
Bars at their mouths ; while here, we see numbers of mouths at
the Bars all day (and night) long.
Of Of Of Of
Apropos of Bars, we would remind some of the sprouting
legal luminaries on hoard, that it is illegal for them to practise at
the Bar (as we regret to say we frequently see them do) before
they are properly admitted.
Of * Of *
We have been asked if a sailor who goes out on the Boom,
can he fairly called a “ Boomer.” We think not, but he is at
at any rate a very forward fellow.
* * Of *
The Orient Co. has apparently got into straightened
circumstances, seeing that they try to “ raise the wind ” (by
Punkahs) in the Ist Saloon.
Of * Of *
Our funny man asks, could not some of the Eum-pusses
which the Cat saw last week, be caEed Catastrophes.
Athletic Sports.
The following is the Programme of Events to be competed for
on Tuesday next: —
No.
1 Tug of War, Ist and 2nd Saloon.
2 Potatoe and Spoon Race.
3 Sack Race.
4 Hop, Step and Jump.
5 Sandbag, (heaving the)
6 Obstruction Race
I Tug of War, Passengers v,
• | Officers.
No.
8 Long Chalk.
9 Horizontal Bar.
10 Three-legged Race.
11 Potatoe Race, Four Competitors
12 Wheelbarrow Race.
13 Cock Fight.


Date
Latitude
Longitude
Distance
May 27th
12° 33' N
44° 43' E
263
„ 28th
15° 3'
42° S'
250
„ 29th
18“ 59'
39° 36'
275
„ 30th
22° 44'
37° 22'
267
u 31st
26° 35'
34° 48'
270
June 1st
5.40 p.m., made fast in
Canal, 72 miles from
Port Said
240
June 2nd
Fast all day
The Cuzco Chronicle.
Conducted by
W. G. ROBERTS and EDWIN QUAYLE.
No. 4] S. S. CUZCO. [June 3ed, 1882.
Abstract of Log.
The Cuzco.
■HE S.S. Cuzco (pronounced Coosco,) and so named after
a burning mountain in South America, was originally
the property of the Pacific Steam Navigation Co.,
and traded between Liverpool and Callao. She was bought by
the Orient Steam Navigation Co. in 1879, and since that time
has been engaged in her present trade, i.e., carrying passengers
and cargo between England and Australia; London and
Plymouth being the ports of arrival and departure in England,


1st Saloon
32
2nd „
74
3rd Class and Steerage
174
Total 280
and Adelaide, Melbourne, and Sydney in Australia. The Cuzco
is 384 feet long, with 42 feet beam,' and her registered tonnage
is 2439 tons, but she is capable of carrying upwards of 4000
tons of cargo and coals. She is barque rigged, and is said to be
one of the best sea boats in the fleet. Her sailing capabilities
were amply proved in 1878, when, her shaft being broken 1700
miles from land, the whole distance was safely and speedily
accomplished under sail. She carries a crew of 128 hands all
told, under the able command of Captain Eiddler, who is assisted
in his onerous duties by Mr. Lee, chief officer, Mr. Marris, Mr.
Brady, and Mr. Daly, second, third, and fourth officers respect-
ively. In Mr. Heathcote, our worthy purser, the Company
possess a very able officer, and the passengers may be congrat-
ulated on having their comfort so well cared for by this gentleman,
whose courteous and obliging demeanour is worthy of all praise.
The Engines are 550 nominal horse-power, capable of
working up to 3000 horse-power, and are of the compound
surface-condensing type. Length of stroke 4 feet, diameter of
low pressure cylinder 102 - 5 inches, pitch of screw (four bladed,)
27 feet 6 inches, diameter of screw 19 feet. The Engines are
fitted with Durham’s patent marine governor, which effectually
prevents them from racing. The machinery is under the skilful
management of Mr. Duncan Williamson, chief engineer, who is
ably assisted by Messrs. Anderson, Whitby, Kingsbury, Moncur,
and Mew, in the duties of the department. Under favourable
circumstances, the Cuzco is able to steam 16 knots per hour
and her average consumption of coal, is about 47 tons per diem.
The victualling department is efficiently superintended by
Mr. Cunningham, the chief steward, whose urbanity and
attentiveness is the theme of general comment.
This voyage the ship is conveying to Naples, Plymouth,
and London, the following passengers:


We make these few remarks on the good ship Cuzco,
as we think all the passengers would like to have some lasting
idea of the ship which is carrying them from the Antipodes to
‘ Dear old England.’
The Editors' Gossip.
We regret that owing to an oversight in our Concert report last
week, the name of Miss Pike, who played the Pianoforte Solo
so charmingly in Part 11., was omitted. We must also apologize
to Mr. Barber and Herr Muller for omitting their names.
* * * *
Passing “ The Brothers ” in the Bed Sea on Wednesday
last, an inquisitive gentleman, who wanted to know, you know,
enquired whether they were part of the mainland, or detached ?
“Of course ‘ The Brothers ’ must be detached ” said a wag,
“ otherwise they would be ‘ Siamese Twins.’ ”
* * * »
As most of our readers are aware, it has been decided to
have the Cuzco Chronicle printed, upon our arrival in London, so
that all may have a souvenir of the voyage. We are pleased to say
that upwards of 160 copies were subscribed for in two days, and
as a few more than that number have since been applied for, we
have decided to issue in all 200 copies, so that any one desiring
to have more than they have already subscribed for, can do so
on making application.
* * * *
W T hile waiting our turn in the Canal, a considerable number
of our passengers took the opportunity of visiting the Austral, the
finest and newest of the O.S.K Go’s Steamers. To say that they
returned, from that magnificent vessel, both delighted and
surprised, is to put very mildly the raptures indulged in.
* * * *
A great amount of bartering took place with the Arabs
before we entered the Canal, and a number of people were
congratulating themselves on the excellent bargains they had
made. But from the smile of each Arab Merchant—a smile at


once “ childlike and bland ” —as he climbed over the ship’s side,
we came to the conclusion, that there are often two sides to a
bargain.
» « * *
We certainly think a Concert might have been got up to
while away an evening this week, but everyone has seemed to
be too much absorbed in hanging over the ship’s side for the last
two days, to care much about any other amusement.
• * * *
Several passengers, we understand, intended leaving us at
Suez and going to Cairo, to see the sights there, afterwards
catching us up at Port Said. In consequence however, of the
disturbance in Cairo, the scheme was abandoned.
* * * *
Dancing has been indulged in on the Quarter deck for a
few evenings during the week, and we understand it is a matter
of regret to the 2nd Saloon passengers, that the limited deck
room at their command, makes dancing out of the question for
them.
* * * »
On AVednesday evening, Miss Anita Plum, attended by a
large and fashionable suite, decorated all the brave and athletic
fellows who had so greatly distinguished themselves the previous
day. The medals were very prettily and tastefully got up, and
the ceremony passed off with some little eclat; Mr. Aitchison’s
speech, or rather what was heard of it, being greeted with loud
applause. The graceful manner in which Messrs. Mew and
Moncure, representing the engineering department, “ bowed low ”
as the medals were fastened on their manly breasts, was greatly
admired.
Athletic Sports.
A very successful and enjoyable meeting took place on Thursday
afternoon, the Quarter deck being specially prepared for the
occasion. Owing to the length of the Programme, some of the
events were postponed till Wednesday afternoon. The following
were the competitions, with the results :


Tug of War. — Ist Saloon v. 2nd Saloon. The following
gentlemen composed the teams. Ist Saloon: Messrs. Stone,
Affleck, Plum, Jr., Hamburger, Capel, and Hughes. 2nd Saloon:
Messrs. Hartopp, Gadd, Murray, Martin, Morgan, and Senior.
The first Tug which lasted 23 seconds, resulted in a victory for
the 2nd Saloon. A change of ends being effected, the 2nd Tug
came off, but as one of the 2nd Saloon team pulled hand over
hand, the judges declared the Tug void. Another attempt was
then made which, after a very even and obstinate contest, resulted
in the 2nd Saloon being again the victors, the time being 20 secs.
Two successes thus standing to their credit, the 2nd Saloon were
duly declared the winners, the prize money amounting to 18s.
2. Spoon and Potaxoe Eace. —This was run in two heats
and caused great amusement. In Heat 1, all 3 competitors
dropped their potatoes, and were consequently disqualified.
There were 4 competitors in Heat 2, Mr. Davis winning easily.
As all were disqualified in Heat 1, the result of Heat 2 was
final. The prize money amounted to 9s.
3. Sack Eace. —This race was a very exciting one, there
being no less than 8 competitors ; the events being run off in 3
Heats, and a final, the winners being as under :
Heat 1 .. ... Mr. Marris
„ 2 ... ... Mr. Affleck
„ 3 ... ... Mr. Mortlock
Pinal ... ... Mr. Marris
4. Hop Step and Jump. —ln this event there were 5
competitors, the finish between Messrs. Smith and Plum, being
a very close one; the former, however, being declared the victor.
5. Obstacle Eace.— There were 6 competitors in this
race, the obstacles being chairs, capstan bars, coil of rope
windsail, &c., it being particularly amusing to see the several
competitors wriggling through the coil of rope and windsail.
Each competitor was started off alone, the time being very
accurately marked by Mr. James. The following is the list of
competitors, and their times :


1. Mr. Plum, 45 secs. 4. Mr. AitcMnson, 28| secs.
2. „ Mills, 47 secs. 5. „ Savage, 29 secs.
3. „ Haddon, 29-} „ 6. „ Affleck, 301 secs.
As will be seen from the above, the race between the last
four was a very close one, half a second covering three of them.
In justice to the first two competitors however, we must say
that we consider they acted more in the true spirit of an obstacle
race in the manner in which they “ negotiated ” the windsail.
6. The Long Chalk. —5 competitors, Mr. Moncure being
the winner. Mr, Heathcote 2nd. Distance 6 feet 9 inches.
7. Three Legged Race. — This race resulted as follows :
Heat 1 ... Messrs. Haddon & Smith
„ 2 ... „ Davis & Marden
Pinal ... „ Haddon & Smith
8. Potatoe Race. —The result being as under :
Heat 1 ... Mr. Colnell
„ 2 ... Mr. Haddon
Both competitors being thoroughly “ baked,” a division of
the prize money was agreed upon.
9. Tug of War. —Officers v. Passengers, the teams being
—Officers : Messrs. Williamson, Brady, Heathcote, Whitby,
Moncure, and Mew. Passengers ; Messrs. Stone, Plum Senr.,
Plum Jr., Affleck, Hughes, and Capel. The first Tug resulted
in an easy victory for the passengers, the time being only 15 secs.
The second however was the best contested of the day, the pull
being long and obstinate, but finally resulted in the passengers
being once more victorious. Time 34 secs. (We are indebted
to Mr. James for his careful timing in both Tugs of War.) Dr.
Thompson, and Mr; Lister acted as judges, Mr. Plum as Umpire,
Mr. Akhurst as Hon. Sec., and Mr. Mortlock as Starter.
In the High Jump contest which took place on Wednesday
there were 5 competitors, Mr. Mew winning easily, with a jump
of 4 feet. Mr. Whitby was unfortunately incapacitated, by reason
of a slight sprain, or a closer contest would no doubt have
resulted.


Seamen's Charities
The generous way in which our passengers responded to the
call for subscriptions, in aid of the various Seamen’s Charities
last Sunday week, was a pleasing evidence of the kindly
sympathy they feel for those hardy toilers of the sea, who devote
their energies and risk their lives, for the welfare of their fellow
men.
None know better the value of substantial aid in the hour
of need, than the early settlers of a far distant young Colony,
and that no people are more ready to share their good fortune
with those in distress, has been proved by their liberal action on
the present occasion. We shall never know what good service
our mite may do; hut the following true story will suffice to
show, how at times we may have reason to he thankful, that we
did what we could for a good cause, in a way least expected.
The Steamship “ City of Eichmond ” was on a voyage to
the United States in the fall of’79, and during the Sunday service,
our chief officer, an energetic seaman and amiable gentleman,
made the usual appeal to the passengers for contributions to the
fund in aid of the widows and orphans of unfortunate seamen,
and in the course of his remarks he said : “ I, like many of my
companions, have a wife and children who, were it my fate to
be made a cripple, or to lose my life in the performance of my
duty, hut for this excellent institution, would he thrown on
the charity of a cold world. I need only say that the thought
would be a source of constant anxiety to me. Thanks, however,
to this humane and noble charity, I am relieved from all
uneasiness on that score, and can go about my duties fully
satisfied that, were I at any time to be suddenly taken away j
they would not be uncared for.” The result was worthy of his
eloquence.
On the termination of the voyage the passengers as usual
scattered to the four winds, and were soon absorbed in the
various vocations of life, probably never bestowing another
thought on the charity so freely given. The ship returned to


her native Port, and the telegraph flashed hack her safe arrival,
after a perilous voyage, during which our brave chief officer had
been washed overboard while in the execution of his duty.
Doubtless his last moments were less bitter than they would
otherwise have been, owing to the existence of that institution,
which he knew would keep from want those dear ones he was
never to see again on earth.
L.P.
Passing Cape Gardafui.
On the night of the 25th ult, at 12.30 a.m., our ship was just
abreast of this Cape, the first point of land on the other side of
the big pond we have just safely crossed. The moon was up
and fairly rested on the Cape like a beacon light as we passed
It was a regular ‘ Arabian Night,’ and there were a lot of our
company admiring the beautiful tableau spread before them.
I am not of a sentimental turn of mind, and my business is
with hard facts, so I button-holed the chief cook, and pumped
the following statistical information out of him. The Cape is a
very old Establishment, being formed about 5600 and odd years
ago, about the same time as Adam’s-town. There is plenty of
through traffic, but very little local trade except in provisions,
such as Shipwrecked Mariners in the half shell, &c. In case of
wrecks, “ baggage smashing ” is carried on to a great extent.
There is also a bank there the “ Sand Bank of Gardafui,” but it is
hardly paying expenses; the last transaction was with the
“ Garonne,” who got a check there five years ago. The circu-
lation of water on this Bank is very large. What we saw of
them, the Inhabitants seemed to be very peaceably disposed.
They kept quiet enough during our passage, although they are
reputed to be quite a ferocious tribe. After this, as it was
nearly one o’clock, the company went below, singing—
There is a happy land,
Three miles away,
Plenty of stones and sand,
Hot night and day.


Black fellows at you grin,
You go ashore,
And we see you again,
Never no more.
Niggers will eat you raw,
Roasted or fried,
Gins at your bones will gnaw,
All day and night.
Literary Notice.
“ Encyclopedia of Nautical Teems,” by Captain Jinks,
late of the Eoyal Horse Marines.— Publishers: John Doe, and
Eichard Doe, Patagonia, Strand.
We are in receipt of the advance sheets of this work by the
above well known authority on Naval Matters. It will be found
a convenient Book of Eeference by those not in the habit of
“ going down to the sea in ships,” in a concise form ; we give
a few extracts below.
Donkey Engines. —There is an erroneous impression abroad
about these ; Donkeys have as little to do with them, as Monkeys
with Monkey-Jackets.
Ship’s Braces are not suspenders.
Sky Sails are not fastened to the sky; but at the point of
the ship nearest to that locality.
Ship’s Watches go only four hours. They are not wound
up, but piped up by the Boatswain’s whistle.
Bells. —When Mariners speak about seven or eight bells
they exaggerate, as they never keep more than one or two of
them in stock. The Cuzco makes an exception, there being more
than a dozen Belles on board.
Taking in a Eeef is a most satisfactory operation; some
are not easily taken in, but often take the ship in by making it
run upon them. In this case the skipper is glad to get off
“ scot-free.”
Taking the Sun. —The Captain’s duty every noon. The
young first to fourth Mates, Engineers and Purser included
would mostly prefer taking the Daughter.


Cock-pit is not the roosting place of Mother Carey’s
chickens; nor do these lay in the Hatchways.
Jib, in a horse a vice, is about the reverse in a ship.
Boxing the Compass is not a fistic encounter between the
officer on the Bridge and this instrument.
The Needles in the compass have no eyes, which it is
perhaps needless to remark.
The Bow. —A graceful movement of the ship upon meeting
with an acquaintance ; if it is only a slight one it will be only a
distant how. (Ships are very polite and always advance with
a how)
The Sheet Anchor is made of wrought iron, and not of
Horrock’s, or Wamsutta Long Cloth, as ladies erroneously
suppose.
The Log. —This is generally made of lead, and does not
consist of Bed Gum, or Ironbark as in Australia; and has no
connection whatever with the Yule Log, so much in vogue in
England about Xmas time. Of course when the Log is on deck
and the ship rolls, there is some “ Log Rolling,” generally taking
the direction, from the wind to the lee side. [On large steam-
ships like the Guzco, there are fresh rolls (for breakfast) every
morning.]
Poet is not the beverage composed of logwood and other
healthy ingredients known by that name, (although one might
he led to think that Port is made of Log wood,) hut in nautical
parlance, it means the left hand side of the ship looking from the
stern forward. Ships and passengers having too much cargo on
hoard, often show a “ List to Port.” In both cases it is best to
have then “ berthed ” at the earliest moment, until their heads
are level again. (These lists are never published for obvious
reasons.)
(To he continued in our next.)


The Poet's Corner.
Our Editors sat in their chairs Of state.
The weather was hot and the hour was late ;
Nothing to put in the paper they’d got,
But sundry few things they found out to be rot.
What should they do ? there for hours they sat,
And they first thought of this thing and then of that;
They really were in a most horrible stew,
First Q. looked at R. then R. looked at Q.
At last an idea to one of them came :
Says he, “ think of Dante, let us do the same.”
The thing was settled, away they went,
And some raw pork chops to their cabins were sent.
Then they went to sleep and began to dream,
And now and again you would hear them scream.
If to find out what they dreamt of you’d seek,
Look over the paper they published last week.
[The above is a little severe on us. We can, however, take
as well as give, hut we certainly think in a case of this sort, that
“It is more blessed to give than to receive.” Eds. C.C.]
One evening in the month of May,
An impudent kitten found its way,
On to the platform, where bland and meek,
Heathcote the Purser at times did speak.
A Violin Solo was being “ killed,”
A melody low, and awful, and “ skilled; ”
The opposition was so fearfully bad
That it made young Tom feel faint and sad.
At length, in the distance it espied,
A glass to which it stealthily hied;
And when it had finished it looked so warm,
That I’m sure it must have found “ old Tom.”
It then lay down as if to die,
With a horrible grin and an awful sigh ;
But I could swear these words it spake,
“ If this is a dream, then let me awake.”
E


Acrostic.
0 autious and conscientious,
A Iways unpretentious,
P elite manners, urbane bow,
T o the high as well as low,
A nd when weather threatens most,
1 n himself he is a host,
N ever leaving danger’s post.
R eady to take ev’ry measure
| n amusement and in pleasure,
D eadly “ ennui ” to dispel,
[_ oving mirth and sport as well.
E ver after may he thrive,
R ich in joys and years of life!
M. HAMBURGER.
While heaving the lead a few evenings since, a champagne
hottle which had somehow got entangled in the line was hauled
aboard with it. The bottle was securely sealed, and covered
with barnacles. The Captain, to whom it was at once handed,
expressed his conviction that there had been another disaster at
sea, and on opening the bottle his fears were confirmed by the
enclosed document, the only thing contained in it—
“ At Parting ”
To Miss .
The morning rose that untouched stands,
Armed -with its briars how sweetly smells,
But plucked and strained through ruder hands,
Its sweet no longer with it dwells.
The scent and beauty both are gone,
And leaves fall from it one by one.
Such fate ere long will thee betide
When thou hast handled been a while,
Like sere leaves to be cast aside,
But I will weep though some may smile,
To see thy love for more than one
Hath brought thee to be loved by none.
Lat. o°. Long. 181°.
GEORGE PLATO WEATHERSIDE.


Correspondence.
To the Editors C.C.
Gentlemen,
The inhabitants of the Australian Colonies
have a common origin from which they are not far removed.
Very few native families are at a greater distance from their
British progenitors than three generations. By far the largest
number still include among their older members the original
immigrants, whose education and habits, were formed before they
left Great Britain, and whose influence, it may be supposed, is
still traceable in the manners, habits, and thoughts, of their
native-born descendants.
From this consideration alone, it appears likely that the
inhabitants of the various colonies would resemble each other
pretty closely ; and when the large number of immigrants fresh
from the same source, with whom the natives are mixed is
remembered, it seems hopeless to attempt to distinguish them
from each other by traits which, by any stretch of imagination
can be called characteristic.
And yet there are differences between them which, if not
exactly characteristic, are constant. How is it that any New
South Welshman who stops to pass the time of day with a friend
instantly sinks down on his heels, surveys the surrounding
prospect with vague glances, and pensively chews blades of grass
until the familiar “ So long ” leaves him at liberty to pursue his
way ? And how is it that while he can maintain this position
for an unlimited time without showing any signs of cramp, his
acquaintance (from any other colony) not only cannot take it up
at all, but does not show the least inclination to attempt it ? How
is it that Queensland is free-and-easy; New South Wales self-
satisfied; Victoria self-asserting and aggressive; New Zealand
self-conscious and touchy ? Why does Tasmania pride itself
upon being “so English ” —a comparison the writer would never
think of making, if it were not for the large number of brick and
£ 2


stone houses found there ? And why—oh—w%is it so consumedly
dull ? How is it that morals are at a premium in South Australia,
and at a discount in—in—which neighbouring colony is it ? How
is it that Victorians dress with more propriety than any others ?
And why are Victorian ladies the only people on that side of the
globe who recognize the fact, that a neat chaussure is essential
to a lady’s dress, and act accordingly ? On the other hand, why
will Victorians spit when they smoke, and to such an extent
that the railway cars are provided with spittoons, mops, and
other ingenious appliances for abating the nuisance ? And how,
in the name of—of everything, is it that South Australia (in other
respects a most gentlemanly colony, most gentlemanly) is the
only other place south of the line, afflicted with the same excess
of moisture in its people ?
These observations and many others like them, have
troubled your correspondent to explain, and to reconcile with
the conditions referred to at first. Can any of your readers
account for them, and relieve the perplexities of
Sir,
Your obedient humble Servant,
SMELFUNGUS.
Facetice.
On approaching and passing Suez, some most atrocious puns were
made by several habitual offenders in this line. Says wag No. 1,
“ Why every schoolboy ought to know the hills on our port side
as soon as he looks at them. Because they are A.B.C. inian
mountains.” Wag No. 2 remarked “He was quite sure this
was the coast of Abyssinia and not Arabia, as he could see no
Arable land on that side.” One of the passengers thirsting after
knowledge wanted to ascertain from that profound official—the
chief Gastronomer what the high elevated point on the west coast
was; and was duly informed that it was the oldest of the pyra-
mids, namely the pyramid of ch(e)ops, whereupon another wit
said, this would suit Charles Lamb, as he would find his chops
there,”


Incredible ! And yet we heard the conversation the other
morning, after two gentlemen had finished their bath under the
hose. A. The tut of the morning to you. B. “Go to Bath.”
A. The douche take it, Sir, be civil. B. Then don’t shower
down those vile puns. A. Its phosphorescent light. B. Hay,
its a farthing dip. A. Attribute it kindly to Hose on!
(ozone)!!! A. Had to “ shout a split.” B. Is in the doctor’s
hands.
A correspondent sends us the following toast—we thank
him much —“ The Press—lt expresses truth, represses error,
impresses knowledge, suppresses evil, and oppresses no one.”
The Riddler.
CHARADE 1.
My first is very much used in the Emerald Isle of the sea.
My second wields a mighty power o’er those on land and sea.
My third the final is of an ancient Eoman name.
That is found in many counties in England’s fair domain.
My whole is now upon this ship, and very useful can be
To passengers and owners and all the ship’s company.
2.
My first is often thought of by those upon the sea.
My second it is found where dwells humanity.
My third, beheaded, a necessity is, (expressed in a foreign language).
And my whole is very useful to those who make a voyage.
3.
My whole is a well known vessel that sails o’er the deep blue sea;
To help you to guess my name, pray listen awhile to me.
My first consists of two letters often used to express a number.
My second, with the aid of a vowel, of the body is a member.
My third it is a Latin word denoting the happiest condition
That my last, when used as a noun, can see in all creation.


4.
My first is in ... Cuzco,
next - - ... Austral,
- - ... Orient,
- - ... Garonne,
- - - ... Cotopaxi,
- - ... Lustiana,
- - ... Liguria,
- - ... John Elder,
- - ... Sorata,
- - ... Chimborazo.
If you are any hand at this game, a letter take from each ship’s
name.
Place them aright, the same as me,
A well known person’s name —on board you’ll see.
Solutions of the above, will be received up to Thursday next.
The Week's Doings.
Saturday, May 27th—Light breeze, hazy weather, observed
Jebel Hasan and other Islands on Starboard side; also passed
through Perim Straits at 7 p.m.
Sunday, May 28th—Stopped and sounded, approaching
Abu Ail Island. Moderate breeze and fine weather. Sighted,
the adjacent Islands.
Monday, May 29th—Pine weather and fresh head wind.
Passed several Steamers.
Tuesday, May 30th—Presh head wind and fine weather.
Passed St. John’s Island at 7 p.m.
Wednesday, May 31st—Wind still the same. 1.35 a.m.
passed Daedalus Light House. Passed the Brother’s Islands at
10.50 a.m. Passed Shadman Island at 6.30 p.m. Entered Gulf
of Suez.
Thursday, June Ist Strong head breeze; anchored off
Suez at 10.30. ‘Austral ”in port. Entered the Canal at 2.15 p.m.
Friday, June 2nd—Light wind, fine weather. Vessel
aground ahead. East all day.


Date
Latitude
Longitude
Miles
June 5th
32° 48' N
29° 23' E
183
„ 6th
34° 43' N
24° 17' E
278
36° 47' N
18° 50' E
294
„ 8th
39° 43' N
14° 49' E
287
„ 9th
40° 13' N
13° 0' E
70
„ 10th
38° 30' N
7° 30' E
276
„ 11th
37° 15' N
1° 10' E
309
„ 12th
36° 12' N
5° 6' W
310
„ ISth
38“ 11' N
9° 20' W
272
„ 14th
42° 4' N
9° 31' W
236
„ 15th
45° 63' N
7° 29' W
261
THE Cuzco Chronicle.
Conducted by
W. G. ROBERTS and EDWIN QUAYLE.
•No. 5.] S. S. CUZCO. [June 13th, 1882.
Abstract of Log.
We desire to tender our hearty thanks to Mr. Daly, for his kindness in furnishing us
with the weekly abstracts.
Naledictory Address.
SUE journey is now approaching its end. Some of our
fellow-passengers have already left us, and in three
or four days more each one will have gone his or
her several ways, never perhaps to meet again.
Many there are among us who are returning, after
various periods of absence to the dear Old Country
—the “ Home ”of our Colonial brothers, —while


others again are for the first time visiting the land they have
heard so much of —and so affectionately spoken of—by their
parents and friends. To each one and all we address our few
words of farewell.
In concluding our task of editing the Cuzco Chronicle, we
may say that for us it has been a labour of love, serving greatly
to relieve the tedium of a long sea voyage; and that while we
have endeavoured to give every piece of news and information,
and at the same time by light and playful articles to amuse our
readers, we have invariably striven to avoid giving offence, or
causing any of our fellow-passengers the smallest annoyance.
Our earnest hope in this particular, as in the various other ones
spoken of in our first issue, is that we have not been altogether
unsuccessful.
We wish to thank the Captain and Officers of the ship for
their unvarying kindness and courtesy towards us; and we desire
also to express our sense of the consideration and cordiality with
which our poor efforts have ever been received by our fellow-
passengers. To the following gentlemen we tender our warmest
thanks, for the assistance they have in various ways given us,
wishing it at the same time to be known, that but for their ever
ready aid, the paper would not have been the success it has
been; —Messrs. Daly, Mills, Heathcote, Akhurst, Hamburger,
Holder, Mortlock. and, last but not least, Dr. Thompson.
In conclusion, while cordially wishing our fellow-passengers
all the success they could themselves wish, we desire to express
the regret we feel that the time has at length arrived when our
pleasant company must be broken up, and we, in our editorial
capacity, have to wish our readers “ God Speed.”
W. G. ROBERTS.
EDWIN QUAYLE.
The Editors' Gossip.
On passing Ismailia, a friend gave us the whole history of Said
Pasha, the Ex-Viceroy of Egypt, his arbitrary doings, his exten


sive female establishment, &c., &c. “ Yes,” said Mr. Phunnyman,
“ he was a very Harem- scare-em fellow ! ”
♦ * * *
When a small caravan was seen wending its way along the
sandy beach, the same individual remarked “ This reminds me of
Scotland:—The Oam(pb)ells are coming ! ”
* * * #
Altogether these ‘ ships of the desert ’ don’t stem to be
the docile, quiet animals they are described, as we saw at least
one that had “ got its back up.”
* # * #
There were some queer doings on the part of the “ unco
guid ” passengers of this ship upon landing at Port Said on
Sunday last. Instead of looking for the nearest Sunday School
we saw some of them drinking ‘the Lager/ and listening
to the pious Offenbach’s music, discoursed by fair sinners. One
of our friends actually tried to find his way behind the footlights
(probably, as we charitably suppose, to distribute some tracts,
or to try by personal exhortations to induce these Magdalenes
to mend their evil ways.) We do not think his success was very
marked; because his gait was very unsteady when he returned
on board, and he sank (overwhelmed with grief, we should
imagine,) senseless upon his berth. Whether it was from the
Horrors he saw, or from the Horrors he had we know not;
anyhow he did not turn up until Tuesday morning. We sympa-
thize with you, good, pious man, your troubles are only beginning.
What will you say to the Alhambra and Mabille ?
• * * M
A farewell dance took place on the Quarter deck on Tuesday
evening, but owing to an unfortunate misunderstanding, few or
none of the 2nd Saloon passengers were present; and the number
of ladies in the Ist Saloon being so limited, the affair was not
so great a success as it might otherwise have been.
* * • *
With the exception of our short stay at Naples, the week
has been a very quiet and uneventful one, no one seeming to
care to go in for any sort of amusement, This is greatly to be


regretted, as we have the talent on board, and all that is required
is an energetic individual, with plenty of time on his hands, who
would take the trouble to organize some sort of an Entertainment.
* « * *
One of the events of the week has been Mr. Marris leaving
us at Naples to join the S.S. Chimborazo as Chief Officer. We
congratulate our late 2nd Officer on his promotion, and heartily
welcome his successor, Mr. Anderson, late 3rd Officer of the
Chimborazo.
« * ♦ #
At Naples eighteen Ist Saloon, and three 2nd Saloon
passengers left us, and in their place eleven Ist Saloon, and two
2nd Saloon joined us for London. The loss of our American
friends is irreparable, and the absence of Mr. Hamburger leaves
a gap not easily filled.
* * » *
It was a matter for almost universal regret, that our arrival
in Naples so late in the evening prevented the great majority
from going ashore. It was hoped that we might possibly remain
a few hours on Friday morning, but alas for human hopes ! we
sailed at daylight, and many have thus lost perhaps the only
opportunity they may ever have of seeing this far-famed city, of
which it has been said—“ See Naples and die ! ”
* » » *
A few gentlemen went ashore, and returned during the
small hours of the morning ; but the accounts they give are so
confused that we are inclined to credit the gentleman who on
being condoled with, on his “ seedy ” appearance on Friday
morning explained that “ there must have been something in the
air.” We are inclined to believe there had been something in
the wind —three sheets perhaps!
■* * * *
In order that our fellow-passengers who were unable to go
ashore might have a “ full, true, and particular account of
Naples, we sent our “ Special ” on shore, and stood all his
expenses. He returned at 3.45 a.ni., with a very big cigar in his
mouth, and his eye—we say his ‘ eye ’ advisedly, only one being


visible —in a “ fine frenzy rolling.” Two hours later he brought
us 21 yards cf undecipherable copy. We had every faith in him
till then.
* * * *
The Bay and Town of Naples presented an exceedingly
pretty sight early on Thursday evening; but the scene was a
much more picturesque one later on, when the twinkling lights
fringed the Bay up all round, and half lit up the hills, while
“ Vulcan’s forge ” with its fitful bursts, lent a wierd and romantic
shade and colouring to the gloom of the background.
* * * »
The result of the Derby Sweep was as follows;
Ist Shotover ... ... Mr. Stone
2nd Quicklime ... ... Mrs. Devlin •
3rd Sacham ... ... Mrs. Devlin
* * * *
We feel humiliated. Last week in the pride of editorial
knowledge, we informed our readers that ‘ Cuzco ’ should be
pronounced ‘ Coosco.’ We know better now, for that nice young
man with the gloves and umbrella, who thpeakths the pureth
Cathtilian, and “ ought to know, you know,” says that * Cuzco ’
should be pronounced ‘ Coothco ’ 1 We thank thee much,' 0
most worthy Philologist! and on bended knees cry “ Peoca-
vimus ”!
"Bêche-de-Mer."
The medium of communication between white men and
‘ Kanakas ’ throughout the South Seas is a kind of pigeon
English known under the name of ‘ bcche-de-mer.’ It is neither
so copious nor so nearly a dialect as Chinese ‘ pigeon; ’ it rather
resembles Australian ‘ pigeon ’ in its general character; but it
contains fewer native words and fewer occult periphrases. In
fact it is little more than a very limited vocabulary of very
broken English, which deserves notice chiefly on account of its
usefulness ; for as it is the language used by whites in speaking
to islanders from different groups, so it is the language used by


natives who do not understand each other’s tongues, and even
by Europeans of different countries too. Nevertheless ‘ Beche-
de-mer ’ —or as it is more commonly pronounced by the careless
‘beach-combers,’ ‘beach der mar’—has some turns of phrase
which are quaint enough to be amusing, and far fetched enough
to he puzzling to a new chum. ‘ House-belong-grog ’ scarcely
requires explanation ; but probably it is not obvious that ‘ grass-
belong-garden ’ is the equivalent of ‘ vegetables.’ ‘ Ki-ki ’ is a
native word understood throughout Melanesia. It means food,
any meat, to eat, to be eaten. This known, it is easy to guess
that ‘ house belong ki-ki’ means kitchen ; but it is not so easy to
remember that ‘ public-house,’ ‘ vegetables/ ‘ kitchen,’ are simply
unintelligible sounds to the amiable cannibal in writing. ‘ What
name ’ % is one of the commonest phrases. It means no more
than ‘ what ? ’ primitively; but it is seldom used in this sense.
Pronounced with sufficient energy it means ‘ How dare you ? ’
or ‘ What the deuce do you mean by that ? ’ and is generally
followed by ‘ You look out; bimeby me fight you plenty.’ ‘ What
name you speak’— ‘ what do you say.’ ‘ what name you make’—
‘ what are you doing.’ Only scarcely any Melanesian can either
say or understand ‘speak’, —or ‘spoon’ or ‘glass.’ They say
‘ ser-poon,’ ‘ ser-peak,’ ‘ ger-lass,’ and expect to hear it said too.
However if a Kanaka does speak a little English, he dislikes to
be addressed in bcche-de-mer; a trait impressed upon me by
disastrous experience. Two boys—a Lifu man and an Aoba man
—were carrying a box for me which contained glass. I said to
the Lifu man, ‘ You look out ‘ spose he go down he no good;
he ger-lass.’ He repeated with an air of the greatest contempt
‘ ger-lass! ’ by which he let me know that he could understand
and pronounce ‘ glass ’in the English manner; a pardonable vanity,
but expressed in away which could not be overlooked. Nowit is
much better to laugh at a Lifu man than to be angry with him ;
so after saying to him sharply ‘ wha’ name ’ You no savvee
gerlass ? ’ I turned to the Aoba man, and said ironically, ‘He allee
same white fella! which so tickled the latter, and so aggravated the


cheeky Lifu boy, that between uproarious laughter and despite the
box was dropped after all, and some of the glass broken. It will be
guessed from this illustration that one great difficulty in under-
standing and in readily speaking this kind of ‘ pigeon’ consists
in filling up the gaps of a sentence, which are inevitable where
the words at command are very few in number. Bring me
that directly’— ‘ take him he come quick; ’ ‘ give me some
water ’ —‘ give water; ’ ‘ dinner is ready’—‘ki-ki, he ser-top (stop.’)
‘ Clean these boots well or nicely’— ‘ You make him too much cer-
lean belong boot.’ Eo ingenuity is sufficient to improvise an in-
telligible phrase; for although there is nothing about ‘ beche-de-
mer’ which can be described as dialect, its arbitrary expressions are
fixed. I went to a house one day where I was sure that an acquain-
tance lived, but whom I had never visited there. I asked the
Kanaka at the gate ‘ Missa Smith he sertop V, to which he replied
‘ He no sertop.’ But I wanted to know if he lived there as well as
whether he were at home. To this end I asked ‘He sertop allee
time ?’ ‘ Iss’ said the boy. ‘He no sertop V (He is not at home
now, however i) ‘ Iss.’ The last answer again would be most
puzzling to the uninitiated. (He did not mean yes he is at home)
according to English construction ; but yes (you are right in
saying he is not at home,) which is according to Melanesian
construction. It is singular that in islands occupied by the
French, beche-de-mer is still the language used by the natives,
who for the most part learn French with difficulty ; although if
they speak the latter at all it is with tolerable correctness. So
that many French people who cannot speak English can yet
speak ' beche-de-rner,’ which they have been obliged to learn in
order to communicate with their boys. Thus I once heard the
following conversation between a little French girl aged seven
named Emilie, her brother Frederic aged four, and their coloured
nurse who was carrying a baby, while travelling in a little
inter-island steamer whose saloon was not large enough for
two noisy children in addition to other passengers. Emilie
Jenne, Chinois! Frederic. J’ai soif, Emilie. E—Serpeak give


water please. F. give water please. E. Allez ! You come. F. (while
going) Bimeby me come. E. Allez ! you serpeak good my bon hoy.
Nurse. Emilie! you us serpeak big fella (loud) alleesame, baby he
serleap. (After giving the water Emilie begins to tease a little
dog which is there.) Nurse. You look out, belong dog—
finish. E. Dog belong who ? Nurse. You look out, bimeby he
ki-ki you. E. (holding the dog up by a string round its neck.)
Ha! ha! ha! Le voila qui dause! Nurse. Finish .' whereafter
addressing Emily in English, she was puzzled ; but when I said
ah-h! You no savvee make two man serpeak (you only speak
your own language.) She answered in French, but according to
Melanesian construction, ‘ Oui M’sieur,’ and then being frightened
at a stranger added with an air of formality which was pretty
enough ‘ Je vous souhaite le bon soir M’sieur’, and retired behind
the—tattooed legs of her nurse.
Literary Notice.
Encyclopedia of Nautical Terms, By Captain Jinks, late of
the Royal Horse Marines. —Publishers: John Doe, and Kichard
Doe, Patagonia, Strand.
PART 11.
Ship’s Combings are of wood, and not of hair; and we have
never seen it advertised yet, that these combings could be made
up into Hair-work, as is the case with the other kind.
Painter is a rival to the boatswain, as he is always attached
to his boats. Any one who knows “ the ropes ” will know what
a painter is. Although some artists can paint boats, they cannot
be called boat’s painters.
Companion Ladders are a misnomer, as they are generally
hardly broad enough for two.
Flushing the Decks has nothing to do with a flush in
poker.
Stay Sails are not manufactured by corset makers.
Blue Peter is not one of the “ Boys in Blue.”
Hoisting the Ensign is not the cruel thing a landsman
supposes; as the ensign is not alive, or else it might be a hanging
matter.


Barometers, on board ships are made extra stout, as they
are often falling, without hurting themselves.
Steering Wheels. —The one on board the Cuzco at the
stern is a double one; they are both alike, and may be called
felloes ; it tires even a sailor to be 24 hours at the wheel. The
man at the wheel ought not to be spoke to, nor should
any questions be axe’d of him. It is no wonder that these wheels
go very well as they go on C. (sea) springs.
Divine Service is generally held on Sunday by the
Captain, at 5 bells; the sailors generally prefer the service at 8
bells, when they are served with Plum Duff, &c.
Davy Jones’ Locker is a tight compartment below the
water-line. Sailors dislike going there.
These few quotations will be sufficient to show the intrinsic
value of this publication, and we prognosticate that this book
will sell (any one who purchases it.) It will be printed on fool’s-
cap paper— a most appropriate and convenient shape we opine—
and bound in sheepskin.
CRITICUS.
The Straits of Messina.
Everybody, with his sisters, and his cousins, and his aunts, was
on the ‘ qui vive ’ last Thursday night to witness the passage of
the Messina Straits. The majority turned out only at 3.30 a.m.,
too late to get a look at Mount Etna, hut they were in time to
take a “ rise ” out of old Sol, who put in an appearance at a later
hour. While some admired the beautiful scenery as far as it
was visible in the dim twilight, others felt rather disappointed;
one enthusiastic young man exclaimed “ I always adored Cecily ”
(Sicily.)—“ That is not my taste,” replied a young lady from
Yankee-land, “I was always so fond of Candy-ah !” (Candia.)
At 4 a.m., a gun was fired and coloured lights burnt; the
“ awful young man ” of our company, who had not quite slept off
last night’s libation in a cane lounge on deck, was so frightened
by the loud report, and the smell of sulphur, that he imagined


his last hour had come, and crouched behind the ash-shoot,
where the crew turned him out with the hose on washing decks
a wetter and we hope a better man.
Poet's Corner.
“PORT SAID.”
Two bells had gone when to Port Said
We’d got, and fast at anchor we were made;
Then quickly we a boat did hire,
And to the town approached soon nigher.
Such a Babylon of forms and cries
Ne’er before addressed our eyes ;
But “ backsheesh ” was their foremost word,
Meaning “money ” please with “ bon accord.”
How’er our money’s not so lavish
To give to all however slavish.
First into a cafe chantant,
Where there was music tres piquant,
Played by ladies of beauteous mien,
We went to see and to be seen.
With cafe noir and French cognac
Together with same Turque tabac
We sat us down, altho’ ’twas Sunday,
Not caring what said Mrs. Grundy.
From out the cafs next we went,
With Arab guide, to that place of scent,
Commonly termed the Arab town,
Where all is “ fez ” and Arab gown.
Many a curious sight we saw there,
Sights and scenes uncommonly “rare,”
With asses small and asses great,
Arabs don’t pay a water rate;
But that’s not hard to find out,
Seeing so many a savage rout
Made by a lady in husband’s hair '
To catch the gentry who’re dwelling there.
Returning to the “ ville Francaise,”
Where life is seen in many a phase,
And, passing thro’ the Place Lesseps,
Back to the ship with hurried steps
We went ; for our time ’twas up,
Being the hour that the “ Second ” sup.


THE CUZCO BELLES.
Adapted with(out) the kind permission of the late Thomas Moore, Esq.
Those Cuzco Belles ! Those Cuzco Belles!
How many a tale about them tells
The “ Chronicle,” from time to time,
When passing through a warmer clime.
Those joyous hours have passed away,
And many a heart that then was gay
On Britain’s icy shores soon dwells,
And sees no more those Cuzco Belles.
And so t’will be when I am gone !
Their games they still will carry on,
While I roam through Italian dells,
And sing your praises, sweet Cuzco Belles !
June 6th, 1822.
Lines written on Mr. Harris receiving news of his promotion.
The Andersons of London, by the nine gods they swore
That Harris, (known as “Jumbo,”) should suffer wrong no more.
By the nine gods they swore it, and on a certain day
They bade the correspondent clerk write unto him straightway.
The letter being posted, to the East it travelled fast,
And safe unto the agent at Port Said it came at last ;
And when the “ Cuzco ” reached there, on that balmy 4th of June,
The letter to its owner was delivered about noon.
With pleasure then, if not with pride, he read the news it bore,
Altho’ we trust he felt a pang at leaving friends of yore.
At Naples we shall lose him, as the interval’s but brief,
Ere he must sail from England as the “ Chimborazo’s ” chief.
We wish him all the happiness that health and fortune lends ;
But trust that midst new faces he will not forget old friends.
And oft in future voyages, long shall the tale be told,
How Harris paced the “ Cuzco’s ” bridge, in the good old days of old.
June 6th, 1882.
Money Market.
Since leaving Naples the course of the market has been unevent-
ful. Currency has been in fair supply, rather unevenly
distributed, freely offered (for drinks) and as freely taken.
Saturday last was settling day, and though accounts were
F


somewhat heavy, we understand they were (except in one or two
cases) well met. Coppers are plentiful, silver in moderate supply,
and gold kept in reserve.
We are requested to intimate that Messrs. Cunningham
and Co. will receive bonds, payable in drinks, to be redeemed,
weekly in hard cash. Particulars and forms of bond on appli-
cation at the Ist Saloon bar.
Facetice.
Asks Mark Twain Junior—“ Why is Port Said like the letter
S? ” Answers Artemus Ward No. 2. “ Because it is the end of
our troubles.” “ But why,” enquires M. T. Jr. again, “is our
arrival at Port Said like a discharged coachman putting up his
horses for the last time ? ” “ Because it is the last of his (and
our) whoas (woes) ! ” promptly answered A. W. No. 2. “ And
again, why was the Cuzco's passage through the canal like a
drunkard’s career ? ” quizzes M. T. again. “ Give it up 1” Because
she was often tied ! (tight.)
If it had not been for the intervention of Nicodemus
Johnson, the Quarter-master, the passengers would have tarred
and feathered poor M. T. He was ultimately let off, upon
promising “ to go and sin no more.”
* * * *
An exciting game of ship’s quoits was played on board
during the week. One gentleman distinguished himself by
heaving a quoit down one of the ventilators. The grace, the
neatness, and the delicacy, with which he performed this remark-
able feat, brought down rounds of applause.
* * * *
The same subjects from different points of view :
Saccharissa. —Yes, my dear, I’m the honey-pot, and all
these men are the flies buzzing around it.
* * * *
Stern Philosopher (contemplating the Quarter-deck from
the Main-top.) Aye, aye. Where the carcase is, there will the
eagles be gathered together.


Correspondence.
Gentlemen,
The Colla (a nation) dwelt on Lake
Titicaca when they were conquered by the Yuca-Peruvians;
viz., just before the first Spanish discovery of South America.
But their first abode was in Cuzco. Their language was a
Ouichua dialect; and ‘ Cuzco ’is to be pronounced in a manner
which accords with the rules, governing the pronunciation of
Ouichua dialects. The learned Philologist in our midst, although
(as he has never heard of Cuzco,) he is probably unacquainted
with Colla, may he able to give the enquiring student some hints
from any knowledge of Cara or even Peruvian which he may
have ; but Spanish will scarcely help the former to pronounce a
word in quite another language.
I am, etc.,
A SCHOOLBOY.
The Week's Doings.
Saturday, June 3rd. —Fine Weather. Passed through
Lake Ismalia. Exchanged Pilots. Made fast 80 miles from
Port Said.
Sunday, June 4th.—Pine weather, fresh breeze. Arrived
at Port Said at 1.15 p.m., commenced coaling at 1.30 and finished
at 5.30 p.m. Left at 6.18. Discharged Pilot at 6.35.
Monday, June sth.—Vessel pitching heavily, decreasing
breeze; smooth sea towards evening.
Tuesday, June 6th.—Light wind and fine. Signalled
Austrian Barque. Gardo Island passed distant about 3 miles,
also Crete, or Candia.
Wednesday, June 7th.—Unsteady wind, fine weather
throughout. Passed Cape Spartivento about midnight.
Thursday, June Bth.—Passed Messina at 3.55 a.m. Fired
gun, etc., as signals. Passed Stromholi. Set square-sail. Fresh
breeze. 4.10 p.m. Capri in sight. Anchored at Naples at 6.43.
Disembarked passengers.


Friday, June 9th.—4.0 a.m. Full speed ahead. Heavy
head-sea and squally, increasing wind.
Satueday, June 10th. —Cape Spartivento abeam at 6.15
Passed several vessels. Light breeze and fine weather.
Sunday, June 11th. —Freshening breeze, clear fine weather
Set all sail. 10.0 a.m., muster of crew for inspection on Quarter
deck. 10.30, Divine Service held on deck, conducted by Capt.
Eidler. Sermon by the Eev. James Brandon. 11.45, Mesa
de Eoldan abeam.
Monday, June 12th.—Sailing along Spanish coast. Fresh to
moderate breeze. 1.46 p.m., Europa Point abeam; signaEed the
vessel 5.10, passed Cape Trafalgar.
Tuesday, June 13th.-—Moderate head-wind and hazy.
Eeported ship at Sagres. 5.48, passed St. Vincent. 8.0 p.m.,
passed Barling’s Island.
Wednesday, June 14th.—Moderate head-wind, clear fine
weather. 4.46 p.m., passed Cape Finisterre.
Thursday, June 15th.—Fresh to moderate breeze ahead.
Hazy weather.
Friday, June 16th.—Passed Ushant at 4.0 a.m. Fine
weather and light breeze. Sighted Eddy stone at noon, arrived
at Plymouth 2.30 p.m., left at 4.0 p.m.
Saturday, June 17th. —Fine weather; passed Dover at
noon, dropped anchor at Gravesend at 6.15 p.m.
Answers to Correspondents.
Miss Darling is respectfully informed that Canvas Duck has no
feathers, it not being a bird at all. But for feather—we beg
pardon —further particulars apply to the sail-maker.
* * * *
To Tom Bowling:—
In answer to your enquiries, we wish to state explicitly
that the lines “My hark is on the sea ” were not composed by
the Stowaway Dog which was discovered on the Cuzco, after
clearing Sydney Heads.


Answers to Charades
In No. 4.
No. 1 ... ... ... Car-pen-ter
No. 2 ... ... ... Port-man-teau
No. 8 ... ... ... Co-to-pax-i
No. 4 ... ... ... Cunningham
Passenger List.
EEOM SYDNEY TO NAPLES.
Ist Saloon —Mr. C. M. Plum, Misses Plum (2), Messrs 0,
M. Plum Jr., C. Kern, Hamburger, James, J. Offer, D. and E.
Capel, Mr., Mrs. and Miss Hirschman, Mr. and Mrs. Hughes.
2nd Saloon —Messrs. A. Colwell, and Morgan.
EEOM MELBOUENE TO NAPLES.
Ist Saloon —Messrs. Jouve, and C. Howitt.
EEOM ADELAIDE TO NAPLES.
Ist Saloon —Mr. Akhurst.
2nd Saloon—Mr. Aitchinson.
EEOM SYDNEY TO LONDON.
Ist Saloon— Mr. and Miss Stone, Mr. and Mrs. J. P. Lister,
Messrs. H. Jones, H. Mortlock, H. H. Mills, W. G. Eoberts.
2nd Saloon —Mrs. and Miss Pike, Messrs. W. J. Hamilton,
E. Haddon, E. Gratton, H. Savage, C. E. Scanlan, W. Cox, D.
Jack, Edwin Quayle, and Mr. and Mrs. Hicks.
EEOM MELBOUENE TO LONDON.
Ist Saloon —Mrs. and Miss Devlin, Miss Clinton.
2nd Saloon —Mr. and Mrs. Eobertson and family, Mr. and
Mias Eowe, Mr. and Mrs. Smith, Mr. and Miss George, Mr. and
Miss Baxter, Mr. and Mrs. Hubbard, Mr. and Mrs. Oal, Mrs.
Miss, and P. Hursh, Mrs. Sambell, Mrs. Curry, Mrs. Wilkinson,
Miss Haddon, Miss Mary Meyer, Miss Thornley, Miss Schwan,
Eev. James Brandon, Messrs. Cooper, Mitchell, T.E. Knowles, W.
B. Gadd, Charles Gadd, J. H. A. Hagerman, J. Senior, J. Daniels,
L. E. Wilson, A. Smorfitt.


FEOM ADELAIDE TO LONDON.
Ist Saloon —Messrs. G. and E. P. A. Danby.
2nd Saloon —Mr. and Mrs. (2) Eeynolds, Mr. and Mrs.
Palmer, Mr. and Mrs. Brown, Mrs. Winch. Messrs. Holder, Miles,
A. Mitchell, L. Charlton, E. T. Murray, Marden.
FEOM NEW ZEALAND TO LONDON.
Ist Saloon —Mr. F. W. Burnley.
2nd Saloon —Mr. and Mrs. Harrison, Messrs. W. Murray,
F. Smith, Lewis, Hottop, A. Lecoy, A. Lelu.
FEOM NAPLES TO LONDON.
Ist Saloon —Mr., Mrs. and Misses (2) Eawson, Miss
Denniston, Miss Hastings, Miss Luke, Eev. J. E, Smith, Messrs.
W. Long, Boreham, E. Smith, E. J. Collins.
2nd Saloon —Mrs. A. C. Jameson, Mr. J. Eeynolds.
The Editors beg to inform subscribers that the printed copies of
the “ Cuzco Chronicle ” will probably be posted to the various
addresses, in three weeks from the date of our arrival in London.
Mr Eoberts is acting as trustee for the Ist Saloon passengers,
and Mr. Quayle is acting in the same capacity for the 2nd
Saloon. All communications must therefore be addressed to :
Mr. W. G. Eoberts, Bellrise, Prince’s Park, Liverpool, or Mr.
Edwin Quayle, Glentrammon, Eamsey, Isle of Man.
List of Suscribers.
Ten Copies each —Messrs. Jones and Jack.
Six Copies—Mr. Williamson.
Five Copies each —Messrs. Eoberts, James, Danby, Plum,
Lister, Quayle,
Four Copies each— Messrs. Mills, Affleck, Stone.
Three Copies each —Messrs. Capel, Thompson, Haddon.
Two Copies each —Messrs. Akhurst, Jouve, Capel, Kern,
Hughes, Hamburger, Brady, Bishop, Holder, Cox, Eowe,
Hubbard, Whitby, Kingsbury, Mew, Savage, Moncur, Smorfitt,


Ce.
£
s. d. !
De. £ s.
d.
163 Copies, at 2s. per copy
- 16
6 0
To cost of Printing 200 copies,
and binding the same - 14 0
0
Postage (Continental & Colonial) 1 14
0
Carriage, and sundry expenses 0 12
0
£16
6 0
£16 6
0
Mitchell, Knowles, Wormull, Hicks, Baxter, Anderson, and
Mesdames Develin and Sambell.
One Copy each —Messrs. Mortlock, Howitt, Hirschmann,
Lee, Marris, Lelu, Grattan, Harrison, Davis, Scanlan, Cunning-
ham, Morgan, Senior, Gadd, Colwell, Eohertson, Lecoy, Mitchell,
Charlton, Marden, Cooper, Smith, Murray, Hottop, Eeynolds,
Aitchison, Oal, The Express, Blenheim, N.Z., The Times,
Blenheim, H.Z.; Mesdames Pike, Curry, Winch; Misses Haddon
and George.
Total number of Copies subscribed for, 163.
Balance Sheet.
The above estimate for postage and carriage having to be prepared beforehand, it
is possible a small balance may remain after all Subscribers have received their copies,
in which case the Trustees will hand over any such sum to the Seamens’ Hospital,
Greenwich.
