

THE OLD FAITHS OF INDIA
AND
CHRISTIANITY:
AN ADDRESS,
READ BEFORE THE
QUEENSLAND UNION,
OCTOBER 19, 1886.
BY GEO. WIGHT.
BRISBANE: GORDON & GOTCH, PUBLISHERS,
MDCCCLXXXVI.
PRICE SIXPENCE.




NOTE.
In the following Address care has been taken to furnish a fair,
though of necessity, a very brief statement of facts and principles
drawn from the ablest authorities within reach of the speaker.
The endeavour has been to record faithfully, and with the least
possible prejudice, the impressions produced by a calm and candid
study of the dogmas taught, the moral precepts inculcated, the
ritual and worship observed, alike by the Christian system and
the old Faiths of India ; noting, at the same time, their effects on
the morality, the development, the social and com-
mercial progress of « ; peoples that have been and are still sub-
jected to their influence and sway. The conclusions arrived at
may possibly be called in question by some as being too favourable
to the Indian Faiths, by others, as being too severe ; but unless the
speaker is greatly deceived, one thing is certain, whatever the
conclusions may be, they have been honestly reached, and will
hardly be called in question by the person who has studied with
reasonable care the Religions of the East (including the Christian
system), and has noted accurately the effects produced on the
nations where they have respectively prevailed.
The speaker is aware that, notwithstanding this, no statement
of facts, however unimpeachable, no argument or inference how-
ever legitimate and conclusive, will ever convince a man against
his will. The blindest persons are those who, for some reason or
other, do not wish to see. He is also aware that the most sacred
matters may be burlesqued, ridiculed, and made the butt of ribald
jesting, when the conscience becomes faithless to its functions,
and audacity has usurped the place of modesty.
Notwithstanding, a dispassionate statement of the claims of the
Christian system, in its divine simplicity, though briefly put, may
possibly arrest some enquiring and candid minds, especially among
the young, before they have been induced to part with the faith


of their fathers, and plunge headlong into the seething sea of un-
belief, without chart, without pilot, and having no haven of
shelter, “ when the stormy winds do blow.” This, in truth, is
the practical object of the Address; for it is, when all is said, and
the laugh of ridicule has died away, a sad spectacle to see men
with fine mental powers, with quick sensibilities, with boundless
capacity for high enjoyment, with unimagined future possibilities
—men in whom are “ the potency and the promise ” of young
ingenuous manhoodit is a sad sight, gainsay it who may, to
see such men abandon their faith, become withered and shrivelled
in their better natures under moral and spiritual blight, and be
doomed by their own thoughtless action, to pass the remainder
of their days “ without God and without hope in the world.” A
sadder sight than this the sun does not shine upon. In the Address
it is stated that every man has the right to think, judge, and act
for himself in all matters of faith. Just so ; but then men should
think for themselves, and judge candidly, and not allow themselves
to be rushed to spiritual ruin under the impulse of unhealthy
excitement.
Toowoomba.
G. W.


ADDRESS.
Members op the Congregational Union,
and Christian Friends, —
I have been very unexpectedly appointed, by your over-partial
kindness, to occupy the President’s chair of the Union for the
current year. It need scarcely be said that the honour conferred
upon me is highly appreciated j and that it shall be my endeavour
to conserve and advance the interests of the Institution in every
way I can, under the guidance and with the help of a wise
Providence.
I have been led to choose, as the subject of Address, a some-
what out of the way theme; but, it is a matter which is every
day becoming of more vital importance to professors of the Christian
faith. In the defence and propagation of Christianity, we must,
of necessity, take into impartial consideration the character and
the influence of the ancient Religions of the World. Consequently,
I have ventured to ask your thoughtful attention, this evening,
to the
“ Old Faiths of India and Christianity.”
Let it be distinctly understood, that, for the opinions and
sentiments expressed in this Address, the speaker alone is re-
sponsible ; and that the liberty of thought and expression, which
he so largely uses, is freely allowed to others, whose opinions may
differ from his own.
In the discussion of this large subject, we accept the Vedas as
constituting the sacred books of the Indo-Aryan Tribes \ and, as
a matter of course, it is assumed that the Bible is a communication
containing the revealed will of Cod to man, both as to what he is
to believe, and what he is to do. The speciality of the Bible re-
velation, however, does not. by any means imply that the Divine
Being may not hold communication with men at other times, in
other circumstances, and by other methods, if it should so please
the Creator and Father of all.


The principles and precepts, the simple ritual and worship, which
able exegetes have fairly deduced from the New Testament
Scriptures, are received as constituting Christianity. The Christ-
ianity, therefore, in which we believe, the truth of which is now
taken for granted, is that which is built upon the person, the
words, the doings of Christ, together with the teachings and
practices of the inspired Apostles of the Lord.
Every existing Christian church is more or less Christian ; but,
no church in existence can be received as an equivalent for Christ-
ianity—least of all that church which always, and everywhere
makes the claim. The consequences of such an admission may be
seen in the work entitled “ The conflict between Religion and
Science, by Dr. Draper. The Roman Catholic church is there
taken as an equivalent for Christianity; and as that system is
easily proved to be in conflict with science, the conclusion is readily
drawn that Bible Christianity is placed in the same predicament.
Now, this is not only not true, it is the reverse of the truth.
Every one knows, who knows anything about the subject, that
the spirit and teaching of Christ and his Apostles are embodied
in the exhortation of Paul—“ Prove all things ; hold fast that
which is good.” In comparing or contrasting Science with Religion,
candour and fair-play demand that the comparison or contrast
should be made with Christianity as embodied in the teaching and
doings of its Divine Founder, and not with any existing church,
however ancient or self-asserting. The time is coming when the
words of the Great Teacher shall find their fulfilment: —“ Every
plant which my heavenly Father planted not, shall be rooted up.”
One may not believe that the Christian system is evolved out of
the old Faiths of the world, and yet be prepared to admit—nay,
not only to admit, but also to maintain—that relations of vital
importance existed, and do still exist, between ancient religious
systems and Christianity. The Holy scriptures seem to teach that
the life, the light, the purity, the goodness that were in the world,
previous to the incarnation of Christ, proceeded from the Logos—
the Divine Word He was, and is “The Light of the world”;
and though, in old times, unrecognised by men, was nevertheless,
from the beginning, in the world which He had made. (John I, 1-14.)
Christianity, therefore, reveals the Supreme Being as Life, as
Light, as Love; and we claim for it the right to be recognised as
the culmination of all that is true and pure in the religions of the
world—their fitting complement and full satisfaction. Christianity,


in its essential principles, is not a thing of to-day, or of yesterday,
or even of centuries ; it is a spiritual light for guidance, and a
moral remedy for healing of mankind, throughout all time. It is
retrospective as well as prospective. In the beginning the Eternal
Word was in the world ; He is in the world still ; and He will
abide in the world, according to His promise, till the human race
shall have been restored to its forfeited inheritance.
It is the vague belief of many persons that the Christian scrip-
tures are of more recent date than the sacred books of India. It
is a matter of fact that the Indian sacred books are of various
dates, and some of them had no existence till several centuries
after the death of Christ. The date of the Rig-Veda the oldest of
all these books known to exist, is about 1500 before Christ; that
is, about 400 years after the call of Abraham. The vedas, when
first met with, were not written in books, but lived in the memories
of the people ; thus their origin, though untraceable further back,
may fairly be allowed to have an earlier date. But this much is
certain—light from heaven shone on the Syrian plains prior to
the times when the Indo-Aryans formed their first settlement by
the sources of the Indus and Granges ; and it is by no means im-
possible that some faint reflection of this divine light may have
reached the plains of the Punjab ; for it is certain that, in early
times, communication existed between Syria and the nations of the
East.
Some of the books, assumed to be ancient, are of more recent
date than the canonical books of the New Testament, as is abund-
antly proved by the ablest Sanskrit scholars. “Itis an ascertained
fact,” says a recent writer, “ that Christianity was known to the Brah-
mans before the time that the cult of Krishna, as supreme deity, can
be established with certainty to have existed. Of course Mr. Telang,
as a Hindu pandit, endeavours to prove the pre-christian existence of
the cult and of our poem (The Song Celestial); but we have the
authority of the greatest living writer on Sanskrit literature,
Weber of Berlin, that ‘ historical Krishnaism is modelled on the
religion of Christ.’ Mr. Davies, in his appendix and notes, proves
the same at considerable length ; and even Mr. Edwin Arnold,
who will not be suspected of undue bias in favour of Christianity,
sums up thus : —‘ The weight of evidence, however, tends to place
the composition (The Song Celestial) at about the third century
after Christ; and perhaps there are really echoes in this Brahmatic
poem of the lessons of Galilee and the Syrian incarnation,
(Tablet, June 26, 1886.)


You need have no fear that Christianity is superseded and
become effete, because in some of the faiths of the world moral
precepts are found similar to those embodied in the teaching of
Christ. If the idea of God being in the world from the beginning
be correct, this is just what might have been expected, and is proof
irrefragable that the Christian revelation is divine. The Great
Teacher gathers up, as it were, the results of past human effort
after the knowledge of God and moral well-doing, binds them
into his system and makes them, in the language of Henry Ward
Beecher, “ authentic under dramatic circumstances that would
impress the mind and imagination of future days and future
generations.” (Evolution, p. 316.)
Hear what Professor Huxley says of the character andGnfluenc*
of the Book. —“Take the Bible as a whole ; make the severest de-
ductions which fair criticism can dictate for shortcomings and posh
tive errors ; eliminate . . . .all that is not desirable for child-
ren to occupy themselves with, and there still remains in this old
literature a vast residium of moral beauty and grandeur. And
then consider the great historical fact that, for three centuries, this
book has been woven into the life of all that is best and noblest in
English history; that it has become the national epic of Britain,
and is as familiar to noble and simple, from John-O’-Groat’s house
to Land’s End, as Dante and Tasso once were to the Italians ; that
it is written in the noblest and purest English, and abounds in ex-
quisite beauties of mere literary form ; and, finally, that it forbids
the veriest hind who never left his village to be ignorant of the
existence of other countries and other civilisations, and of a great
past, stretching back to the furthest limits of the oldest nations of
the world. By the study of what other book could children be so
much humanised ? ” etc., etc. (Critiques and Addresses, p. 51.) Of
teaching children to read the Bible, he adds, “I, individually,
could with no shadow of consistency oppose the teaching of the
children of other people to do that which my own children are
taught to do.”
Christianity contains many elements of truth which the Indian
sages were never able to reach ; it throws clear light on problems
of the deepest concern to men, which baffled all their attempts at
solution ; it presents the only perfect ideal of humanity in the
person of Christ which the world has ever seen. The old systems
of religion, however, have served a great purpose—a double
purpose. First, they adumbrate Christianity; for whatever of
good is found in them is the shadow of better things to come—


the promise and the foretaste of a nobler Faith and a purer worship
for the Lord our God “ keepeth truth forever.” Secondly , in
them are seen manifest preparatory processes for the ultimate
reception of Christianity, for when great powers both of penetra-
tion and reasoning exercised over a period of from three to four
thousand years, have failed to solve the problems of the world
and of God, men may be supposed to be more willing to listen to
the exposition of a more excellent way. Thus they become u school-
masters ” to bring men to Christ.
In our view, the good elements in the ancient faiths aie but
the early fitful streaks of dawn—the first faint quivering blushes
of coming day—on the dark mountains of ignorance and sensuality ,
while Christianity, stripped of all human accretions, pure and
simple as it came from the hand of the Divine Revealer, is wel-
comed as the effulgence of the perfect day. By acknowledging
the good in these systems we do not thereby homologate the evil;
and in acting thus we are only following the example of the
divine Master and the great Apostle of the Gentiles. The
spiritual enlightenment and moral renovation of the world, like
all the works of God, are slow, silent, and sure. Men may
marvel at the divine method of working, and some may possibly
querulously question the procedure but, it may well be asked,
if even the wisest of men are in any sense qualified to pass judg-
ment on matters so transcendently beyond their comprehension.
From the side of Archaeology, as well as from the side of Science,
heavy assaults are being made on the book of our faith. They
may possibly do some damage ; they will certainly raise clouds of
dust, much to the detriment of some whose mental vision may
lack either strength, or penetration, or both. Faint-hearted and
poorly equipped defenders may be driven for a time from the out-
works ; but, if Christian men will carefully examine the dogmas,
the ritual and worship, the morality and social results of the non-
christian religions—if they will quietly allow men of science to
deal honestly by facts within their own sphere—especially, if they
will study and expound the Bible in the light of history, and with
the legitimate help of science—all such assaults, from whatever
quarter they may come, and however damaging they may at first
appear, will eventually prove harmless as directed against the
citadel of our faith.


The candid study of ancient religions in the works of ac-
knowleged authorities magnifies immensely the truth and the
morality of the Christian system ; and the welcome discoveries of
science will help to purge the sacred book of human notions and
glosses, the accumulation of ages, that have often obscured
and not seldom distorted its meaning. Thus purged and un-
fettered, Christianity will ere long come forth in all her pristine
spirituality and loving power ; and, having accepted science and
philosophy as her trusty allies, she will be joyfully welcomed by
men as the Regenerator of the world, the satisfaction and con-
solation of all nations, the recognised complement and consum-
mation of all the spiritual and moral good, alike in the present
age, and in all the past ages of the world.
I.—VEDISM.
When history first lifts the curtain of legend and romance from
he continent of Asia, some fifteen centuries before the Christian
era, we find a noble race of men in possession of the Punjab, “ the
land of the seven rivers,” pursuing peacefully, and with success,
their pastoral and agricultural operations. These Indo Aryan
tribes, it is believed, had come in successive migrations from the
mountainous regions beyond the far Himalayas, where the head
waters of the Oxus take their rise; but at what date, and in
what circumstances these early migrations took place, history
makes no mention. It may have been some centuries previous to
the above date, and would thus correspond with the time when
Abraham was called “ to leave his kindred and his country ” to
sojourn in a strange land—the land which God had given to him
in promise.
It is interesting to remark that the great Indo-Aryan move-
ment, and the rise of the Jewish nation may have taken place
about the same time. The mental efforts and moral instincts of
the one people have originated and built up, as we shall see, a
religion of Nature worship—in later times developed into the
monstrous system of Hinduism; while, under clearer light, and
safer guidance than mind and instinct can of themselves furnish,
there has been evolved by the other people the noblest theology
and the purest worship that this world has yet known.


The tribes that now inhabited the country, where the Indus and
the Ganges take their rise, were, in many respects, an interesting
people ; and to us they should be specially interesting, as we claim
descent from the Germano-Aryans, a people of the same noble
stock, who, probably about the same time, left their mountain
homes and migrated westwards.
These bold intruders from the north-west, who ultimately be-
came the masters of India, were a people of simple habits, with a
fine physical development. Their white skins and open counten-
ances contrasted favourably with the Mongolian hue and features
of the aboriginal inhabitants. They had brought with them, from
their highland homes, or had unfolded since their settlement on
these fertile plains, an advanced civilisation ; and they observed
a primitive, but singularly pure form of religion. Their free an
simple modes of worship remind the reader of the Bible o
patriarchal times, with this immense difference, the Indo-Aryan
had no conception whatever of the nature of sin, or of a pure,
spiritual, and personal God like the God of the Hebrew Patriarchs.
Tliey knew enough of the art of war to enable them to extend
their conquests, and to protect themselves and their property,
from the attacks of hostile tribes. They were familiar with many
of the useful arts, and had learned to utilise minerals and metals.
Like their compeers in Babylonia, they had made considerable
progress in the study of the heavens as is proved by the existence
of an astronomical “ calendar ; ” and the mysteries of astrology
seem to have had powerful attractions for many. Poetry and
music, especially poetry, as is evidenced by their hymns, were culti-
vated by them with success, as fitly became a people cradled and
nursed, as some believe, amid the sublime scenery of the in u
Kush.
But the most interesting fact connected with this primitive
people, was their being in possession of an unique literature, com-
prising more than one thousand hymns, invocations, and prayers,
arranged in ten thousand verses. These were the tribal sacred
books, not printed nor in manuscript, but stored up in the memories
of the chief men, held in profound veneration by the people, though
not reckoned of divine origin, and collectivity called \ t eda, that is—
“ The storehouse of knowledge.” In some respects, the veda was
to the Indo-Aryan what the Bible is to the Christian, but, thoug
it contains some beautiful poetry and some commendable moral
precepts, yet no possible comparison can be drawn between these
sacred books and the Christian scriptures.


The earliest hymns, usually called Rig-Veda, though presenting
on the surface nothing very objectionable, are generally believed
to have held, wrapped up within them, the prolific germs of the
marvellous system of Hindu religion, known first in its purest
form, as Vedism ; next as Brahmanism , with the episode of
Buddhism ; and lastly as Hinduism, the religion of a large portion
of the Indian people for many generations.
It shall now be my endeavour to place before you, with what
brevity and clearness I may be able to command, the principles
and worship of the oldest Indian Faith of which we possess any
certain knowledge It is true that some recent discoveries point
to some form of worship as having existed prior to the vedic ;
but of the sacred books of that remote time, if such there were,
not a scrap, so far as is known, has escaped the tooth of time.
In respect of morality the vedas are comparitively pure, but it
is generally of a negative character, not positive, like the grand
precepts of the Bible. It is good not to injure one’s neighbour ;
but it is a much higher good to love your neighbour as you love
yourself. The idea of human brotherhood appears in these early
vedas, though but partially developed ; but, there is no reference to,
there is no place for, the Fatherhood of God, as they had no idea
of God as a personal being. There is nothing in all these sacred
books that approaches the central law of the Gospel:—“ Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul .... and thy neighbour as thyself.” (Luke 10, 27.)
The objects of veneration, and in a sense of worship, among the
Indo Aryans of the Punjab, were numerous and varied, as were the
physical phenomena among which they lived. Man, in the morn-
ing of his existence, was a worshipping being as he is still. It
will not, therefore, surprise you to know, that the dawn, the
gloaming, and the sky, the sun, fire, and lightning, the heavenly
bodies and products of earth, the winds, thunder and desolating
storms, the all-prevading light, and the glorious vault of heaven
were all deified, or considered symbols of mysterious powers, who
might work weal or disaster, as they were propitiated by offerings,
or treated with neglect. In a very literal sense, these primitive
worshippers appear to have judged their imaginary deities by thtm
selves. In process of time their religious notions assumed a
somewhatmore systematic form ; butthey neverrose above material-
istic conceptions. One hymn represents the sky as a principal
object of worship, and ascribes to it attributes in virtue of which
t was supposed to rule among men, penetrate secrets, detect
crimes, and perform such like services.


The early vedas assume the separate existence of numerous
objects of worship, each god working good or harm in his own
sphere j whilst some are represented as counteracting the influence
and action of each other—especially the evil doings of the demon
deities. At this time, the character, the position, the sphere of
action, of the gods were by no means fixed; and worship seems
to have been very much a matter of caprice.
The sacred books recognise, and gradually develop the idea of
a trinity of gods, consisting of Indra, the deity supposed to yield
the dew and the rain ; Agni , the god of fire; Surya, the sun.
These three constitute the vedic chief triad of gods. (Williams’
Hinduism, 24.) The fire-god, as well as the rain-god, was sup-
posed to have a peculiar affinity with the earth and mundane
matters, and was consequently largely patronised. With men he
was always present in the fire that cooked their food and warmed
their hearths, and, according to some, in the sun that vivified the
seed and brought their crops to maturity. His favourite dwelling-
place was the sacred fig-tree, whence he could be drawn foith, at
the will of the worshipper, by friction. Many worshippers of the
fire-god supposed him to be the medium of communication with
the heavenly powers, and believed that in himself theie was-
stored up an exhaustless creative energy which rendered him in
dependent of his celestial peers. The propensity to increase the
number of deities had, in process of time, evolved at least thirty-
three out of those above-named —rain, fire, and sun. One-third
of these had their abode in heaven, one-third resided on the earth,
and the remaining third dwelt “ in glory in mid-air.”
Classification of opinions or dogmas, in the earliest vedas, there
is none. The floating fragmentary religious thoughts had not yet
crystallised into system. There are occasional references to “ ritual,”
but the “ rules ” must have been of the simplest kind, as it is hard
to discover, in the earliest books, either its character or its scope.
The worship of the devas —personifications of natural phenomena
was free and unrestrained by ritualistic forms. The father.
performed most of the priestly duties required by the household
Women were treated with respect, and wives appear to have
shared authority with their husbands in family rule. Marriage
was sacred ; and the burning of widows was a thing unknown.
Neither had idolatry, at this early time, raised its hydra-head
among this noble people ; suttee and idol-worship are the products
of a later and degenerate age.


The vedic notion of sacrifice was three-fold : 1. Thank offerings
of material substances, such as rice, clarified butter, and the juice
of the Soma-plant, which they believed nourished and gratified
the gods. 2. Expiation for the sins both of gods and men, by the
offering of goats, and apparently human victims sometimes.
Substitutes for the last were accepted, in course of time, under
whimsical conditions, in horses, oxen, and sheep. The idea en-
tertained was quite different from that of Christian expiation ; foi
“ sin ” in their estimation was not a moral offence against the
gods. The evils which they recognised, and for the removal of
which they sought to propitiate the gods, were altogether of a
material nature, such as unfavourable seasons, defective crops,
disease among their flocks and herds, disastrous storms, personal
injuries, and such like. They seem to have reasoned thus : “All
men are influenced by gifts : the gods are like men, better or
worse ; therefore, the more costly the offering, the more likely are
they to be induced to grant our requests.” 3. Sacrifice was
supposed, besides securing other benefits, to confer on the offerer
supernatural powers, possessed of which he might wrest from the
gods themselves any wished for boon, either in heaven above or
on the earth beneath.
It is supposed by some that the leaders of the migrations
gradually assumed the priestly functions, and thus laid the found-
ation of the Brahmanical Caste. But it would appear that, at
this early time, no priestly class was generally recognised: only,
on occasions of “ large ” thank offerings, persons of repute were
engaged to chant the hymns and prayers for the delectation of the
gods. Like the gospel narratives, these early records are singu-
larly free from Sacerdotalism. Before the close of the vedic
period, however, people and priests are found feasting together
under the exhilarating influence of the soma-juice; and, on such
jovial occasions, the gods themselves were supposed to leave, for
the nonce, their secret abodes, and become the willing guests of
men. The soma-juice was believed to be alike acceptable to men
and to gods, and was supposed to confer on the offerer health
and immortality, and in a general way to act as the vivifying sap
of the world. Ultimately the soma or moon-plant was itself deified,
and in later times was widely worshipped as the Indian Bacchus.


The early vedas know nothing of the transmigration of souls,
or of the “ Births ” of Buddhism : these are the Brahmanical in-
ventions of later and degenerate times. The vedic religion was a
comparatively simple and pure form of “ Nature-worship a kind
of mild Pantheism. This was the religion of the mass of the
people ; but indications are not wanting of some minds having
risen above the symbolic and fantastic personations of natural
phenomena, to the dim perception of something like a vague
personality, of which they were the faint adumbration. Man has
never, as of himself, even in the most favourable circumstances,
reached a worthy conception of the Supreme Being, or constructed
a worship becoming His Greatness, His Goodness, and His Purity.
lI._BRAHMANISM.
Brahmanism is the legitimate development of the “ Nature-wor-
ship, ”j ust briefly described, with many additions; and it has been well
remarked by Sir Monier Williams, that these two phases of
Indian religious thought cannot be separated by a hard and fast
line. The Brahmanical system spread rapidly and extensively, till
at last, under the general name of Hinduism, it became the nati-
onal religion in many Asiatic countries.
The early vedas, always considered sacred, were now held to be
of divine origin, having been received, it was asserted, by the
priests direct from the gods ; and they were largely supplemented.
The supplementary writings were the work of the all-powerful
Brahmans, and were designed to support their arrogant pretensions.
The early, and much purer forms of vidic worship, were now over-
laid, and absorbed by the popular and prevailing Brahmanism.
In its simplest form, Brahmanism may be said to represent the
mysterious and all-pervading power, which was supposed to per-
vade and vivify all material phenomena, as a spiritual reality.
This spiritual reality, which men had long been in quest of, but
had not hitherto found, was now believed to be discovered, and
was denominated Brahma— “ a pure essence filling all space,” and
“ creating every inanimate, and every living thing in all the world.”
«i t i Sj ” says Williams, “a creed based on an original, simple, pan-
theistic doctrine, but branching out into an endless variety of
polytheistic superstitions.” “ The root dogma is lost in an exn


berant out-growth of monstrous mythology.” (Williams’ Hindu-
ism, p. 11.) “Brahmanism is a religion which may be described as all
theology, for it makes God everything, and everything god” (74).
The leading dogma is : —“There is but one being, no second.
Nothing really exists but the one universal spirit called Brahman,
and whatever appears to exist separately from that spirit is mere
illusion.”
About the time when the learned Brahmans were formulating
their shadowy religious system, on the banks of the Ganges, the
Temple at Jerusalem, dedicated to the one Living and True God,
was completed. “ And Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord,
in the presence of all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth
his hands towards heaven, and said, —Lord God of Israel, there is
no God like thee in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keepest
covenant and mercy with thy servants, that walk before thee with
all their heart.” (I. Kings, 8, 22-23.)
Pause for a moment and note the contrast between the two
systems, from whose sacred books these extracts are taken. The
teaching of Brahmanism, both as regards man and God, is vague,
uncertain, contradictory, under a comparison 6f passages; the
teaching of the Bible on these points, on the other hand, is direct
explicit, consistent. The Jewish worshipper was a real man, and
to him God was no shadowy, uncertain, changeable being, but the
“Lord God of Israel,” who had no equal “in heaven above,” or
“ on the earth beneath ;” and who, unlike the vacillating, capricious,
unsympathetic Hindu deities, was faithful and true, keeping cove-
nant and mercy with his servants that walked before him with all
their hearts.
The system speedily became complex—so complex, indeed, that
the study and elucidation of its elaborate ritual, its transcendental
philosophy, and the monstrosities of its worship, would require
something like a life time. Brief therefore—very brief—must be
the observations now offered, with diffidence, on this stupendous
system of man-made religion.
The Brahmanical sacred books present three or four distinguish-
able phases which we can do little more than name. 1. The rit-
ualistic phase which sets forth, in minute detail, the whole sacrifi-
cial system. Sacrifice, not however in the chi’istian sense of the
term, permeated and saturated the whole religious system of the
Hindus. In comparison with sacrifice, all other acts of devotion


and religious service were esteemed as of small importance by the
priestly caste “No sooner was a man born than oblations of
some kind were offered in fire, and the burning of the body at
death was held to be the last sacrificial act of all.” (Williams.)
The highest conception of sacrifice is that of expiation, the shed-
ding of blood for the atonement of sin ; but this idea, though
apparently entertained to some extent, at times, never seems “ to
have taken a firm hold of the Hindu mind.” (Dr. Hunter.)
2. The philosophical phase suggests a recoiling of men of intel-
lect from the oppressive ritualistic ceremonies rigorously enforced
by the priesthood. Sacerdotalism had overshot the mark, as it has
often done since. Assuming the name of the great spirit, constit-
uting their class as the only medium of communication with the
gods, and assuming to be the sole directors and performers of re-
ligious rites, the Brahmans ruled with iron severity, alike the
bodies and the souls of men. Their arrogance was checked for a
time by the appearance of the Buddha ; but their ascendency was
never seriously affected. Prompt and crafty compromise preserved
and consolidated their power ; and ever since, the nations that
accepted the Hindu religion, have been “ the close preserves ” of
the Brahmanical caste. Sacerdotalism is the curse of India.
The nature of spirit and of matter, and their mutual relations,
were the great problems of the day, on which men exerted then-
powers, not so much, it is alleged, to arrive at truth, as to know
how “ to deliver the soul of man from the bondage of material ex-
istence,” that it might enjoy reunion with the Supreme Spirit.
The great spirit and the souls of men were believed to be eternal;
and by some, matter was supposed to be eternal also, but eter-
nally separate from soul; thus establishing a dual principle. This
dual principle, in the exuberance of their mystical speculations,
seems to have given rise to the Hindu conception of <£ the mar-
riage between heaven and earth,” the result of which union, it is
asserted by some, was the production “ of all creatures, of all men,
and of all gods.” The germ of this idea is of great antiquity, and
the development of it resulted in the wide establishment of the
indescribable system of phalic worship, which, however innocent
in its original conception, before long unspeakably polluted and
debased, and still pollutes and debases the national Hindu reli-
gion. (Ancient Symbolic Worship.) The underlying stratum of
Hindu philosophy seems to be largely composed of contradictions
and absurdities —at least, so it appears to the European mind.


3. The mythological phase : Brahma, the creator, becomes asso-
ciated in the Hindu mythology, with Vishnu th e preserver, and
Siva the destroyer and reproducer ; and these constitute the trinity
of gods, which is a special characteristic of mythological Brahman-
ism. These three gods sustain many characters, are subject to
many changes, and are interchangeably worshipped by the great
mass of the Indian people, in gorgeous temples, accompanied gen-
erally by the powerful attractions of a sensuous and grossly
sensual ritual. The worship of Siva and his consorts is simply
indescribable ; and this is the worship which is,at the present day,
most extensively patronised by the people. Vishnu is represented
with four arms, symbolical of his protecting and preserving powers.
“Portions of his essence,” it is said, “have descended in various
incarnations, to deliver the earth in times of danger and emergency.”
Of many incarnations, Krishna and Rama were believed to be the
most important and the most powerful. Siva has no incarnations,
and was supposed to look with indifference on a perishing world ;
but, when demons had effected its destruction, he was supposed to
busy himself in the work of re-ereation. It was probably under
this phase of Brahmanism that the Buddha made his appearance.
4. The fourth phase has been called Nomistic, because it repre-
sents the period when the social condition of the people had be-
come so relaxed, so utterly rotten, that stringent laws must be
established, so that the fabric of society might not altogether
collapse. The principal of the codes established was that of Manu ,
a remarkable work, alike in its literary and moral character. It
was probably wiitten, or compiled, about 500 years before Christ,
near to the time when the prophet Ezekiel was receiving and re-
cording the wonderful visions which he saw by the banks of the
river Chebar. The Law of Moses had been promulgated to the
Jewish nation at least one thousand years before the existence of
the famous code of Manu.
These Indian law books show, in a striking manner, the com-
mingling of social and political affair's, with religion and religious
ordinances ; and they embody many moral precepts, approaching
in excellence the precepts of Christianity. The object contem-
plated seems to have been, to render the religious system more ac-
ceptable and permanent, by a stricter enforcement of a reformed
ritual, and a more decorous observance of religious ordinances.
Permanent the system has remained for more than two thousand
years ; but as for reformation in its practical working, that is quite
another question. The system cannot be reformed —all attempts


hitherto have failed. The only conceivable remedy, in a case so
desperate, is to place before the people a better and more attractive
system of religion and morals.
Sacerdotalism, most subtle and most powerful, has settled down
upon the nations of India, like a horrible nightmare, which the
down-trodden miserable masses have the power neither to shake, oil
nor to bear. The dwarfing of both body and mind by the iron
hand of caste —the obscene and loathsome worship of many of their
gods—the grossest idolatry all but universal among the people
these sad facts, the scandal of the Hinduism of to-day, prove to the
dullest capacity that the system has undergone no substantial
change. There are, however, occasionally, some rays of light that
pierce the gloom; men of powerful intellect, and pure character,
rise, at intervals, above the low level of Hindu religious society ,
but these fitful sparks only serve to make the darkness the moie
palpable.
lII—BUDDHISM.
In some respects Buddhism may be regarded as a re-action
against the gross extravagances and arrogant pretentions of Brah-
manism. This system encouraged the noblest and purest minds
to return to “ a religion of abstraction,” and “ a morality of re-
nunciation.” (Principal Caird.) It is a marked improvement on
the popular form of religion, and a further advance in the develop-
ment of Indian Religious Thought. The Buddha ignored the
priestly class in most of its functions, and dispensed with cosily
and cumbersome sacrificial ceremonies.
Much mystery, and therefore uncertainty, surrounds the story of
the origin and rapid spread of Buddhism ; but when the number-
less, fantastic, and utterly impossible legends have been brushed
aside, there is quite enough of what is believed to be trustworthy
information available on the question, to make it a profoundly
interesting study to the Christian student. It may well seem
strange that the existence of a religious system, which ministers to
the spiritual wants of about a third of the human race, should
scarcely have been known in Europe fifty years ago. Of all the
ancient Faiths with whose dogma, ritual, and worship, we have
become acquainted, this is the purest and the most spiritual. The
Buddhist devotee, after a long life of austerities, and unshrinking
repression of all natural feelings and worldy desires, was believed


to raise himself above all mundane things and influences. At the
commencement, the substance of Buddhist teaching was the sad
refrain of the Preacher, “ vanity of vanities, all is vanity.” Ex-
istence, burdened with suffering and sorrow, was evil, and a thing
to be got rid of. Life was not worth living ; the most desirable
thing was perfect self-abnegation, and absolute renunciation of the
world, and all that belonged to it. By this process, it was be-
lieved, the spirit would become so etherealised—so thoroughly
emancipated from all earthly influences and natural desires—that,
in the words of the author of “ The Light of Asia ”
“ The aching craze to live ends, and life glides—
Lifeless—to nameless quiet, nameless joy,
Blessed Nirvana —sinless, stirless rest—
That change which never changes. ” (Light of Asia, p. 176.)
“ The Light of Asia ” is unquestionably a beautiful poem ; and
the poet, by casting a glamour over the ancient system of Budd-
hism, has perhaps done more than all other writers together, to
partially revive its popularity. That system was all very well in
the days, and in the hands of Prince G-autama its founder ; but, in
the present time when knowledge goes to-and-fro, when light
everywhere abounds, when the utter impotence of Buddhism to re-
deem men from sin, suffering, and sorrow, has been abundantly
proved,—not even Mr. Arnold’s efforts and eloquence shall secure
for it general recognition and permanency. The author tells us
that he has drawn his material mainly from “ Hardy’s Manual of
Buddhism.” Buddhism, as pictured in Mr. Arnold’s poem, is like
the sweet, sparkling hillside spring ; Buddhism, as faithfully por-
trayed by Hardy, and, as it exists to-day in Ceylon, China, and
Tibet, presents the severest contrast, and is comparable to nothing
more apt than the sluggish, foul, fever-breeding sewer of the
crowded city.
Some of the ablest writers on the doctrines of Buddhism be-
lieve that “ blessed Nirvana ” is nothing more than a euphonious
equivalent for blank annihilation ; but others think, with Max
Muller, that Nirvana is not annihilation, but an indefinable state
of deliverance from all worldly trials and sorrows, and longings—
a state of calm unconscious repose —enjoyed by the highly “ en-
lightened,” previous to the dissolution of the body. Be this as it
may, Buddhism—“ The Light of Asia ” —with its astounding
“ Esoteric philosophy, and its admitted moral excellencies, is but
a dubious and uncertain guide for man, through the perplexities,
the trials, and the sorrows of this life. There is a light, not for Asia


only, but for the whole world—the Sun of Righteousness —under
whose genial and invigorating influences, the humblest believer
shall be guided safely through this world, too often dark and
dreary, upwards to “ the Eternal Light, through the Eternal
Love.”
Five or six hundred years before Christ, when the famous laws
of Manu were being codified, the son and heir of a powerful
Indian Chief became disgusted with the world, and meditated
much and deeply over the suffering and the misery that every,
where abounded. Disregarding the comforts and luxuries of home,
and breaking through the barriers by which it was sought to re-
tain his person and restrain his zeal, he left father, wife, and son,
and “ the sweet ambition of power,” and betook himself to a
wandering religious life. He scanned closely the social and re-
ligious condition of the people, and pondered deeply and long on
the evils of life. The sufferings of the masses, witnessed on all
sides, profoundly affected the sympathetic mendicant, and he could
find no rest for his troubled spirit. According to concurrent
opinion he was a man of powerful intellect, of a profoundly
sympathetic nature, and of spotless moral character. The wretch-
ed state of matters by which he was constantly and everywhere
confronted, constrained him to devote himself in seclusion to the
study of the great problems of life, the world, the soul, and God,
if perchance he might discover a remedy for the miseries of
humanity. In his search for light and rest, he had erewhile com-
muned with wise Brahmans, and practiced the severest austerities,
but all to no purpose. At last, when greatly discouraged, and
all but hopeless, he abandoned himself to meditation and prayer.
When thus engaged under the shade of the 80-tree —since called the
tree of wisdom—“light broke in upon his mind, and his spirit
received liberty and peace.” He believed that the secret of the
world’s regeneration was now disclosed to him ; and that it con-
sisted in absolute self-abnegation, and the suppression of all selfish
desires, and passions, and pleasures.
Before he assumed the mendicant’s garb and “ bowl, ’ lie was
known as “ the prince Gautama; ” but after the alleged re-
velations received under the 80-tree, he assumed to himself, or
received from others, the distinguished title of Buddha —“ the
enlightened.”
The message of the new prophet was that of a high and hitherto
unknown morality, confronting the unspeakable grossness and
corruption of the times \ but the undeniable results, after the


experience of many generations, compel us to say that this
gospel of Buddlia, so belauded in our day, lacked the power to
succes fully cope with and destroy the principle of evil in the
human heart. It was not long before human desires became as
exacting, and human passions raged as imperiously, as they had
been, and done, under the Brahmanical system. So true is the
teaching of the Christian scriptures, that no power save the loving
hand of the Great Father can arrest, subdue, and renovate the
human spirit.
Born under the shadow of the snowcapped Himalayas, Buddha
is said by some writers to have commenced the propagation of the
new doctrines in the sacred city of Benares on the Ganges.
Some zealous friends assisted in the propagandised; but, most of
all, the purity of life, the gentleness, the “ consuming pity.” the
wisdom and eloquence, that characterised the prophet, carried con-
viction to the hearts of men. He taught men to be merciful to
the weak and helpless, to be kind to all creatures, and to treat
each other as brothers. The new doctrine was received by
multitudes, and spread rapidly over many countries, like a mighty
tire-wave, consuming in its course much moral and ceremonial
rubbish ; but, all too soon, its power to renovate and ennoble
became enfeebled, and at length exhausted, under the skilful
unscrupulous manipulation of the Brahmanical priesthood. The
nominal adherents of this system, much changed since the time of
Gautama, number about 300 millions at the present time. The
island of Ceylon early became the stronghold of the Buddhist religion;
but the centre where the “ Adepts ” the mysterious “ Brothers” —
the Illuminati —carry on their operations is Tibet. “ The fact is
that Ceylon is saturated with exoteric, and Tibet with esoteric
Buddhism. Ceylon concerns itself merely or mainly with the
morals, Tibet or rather the Adepts of Tibet, with the science of
Buddhism.” (Sinnett’s Esoteric Buddhism, p. 184.)
Time forbids the offering of any remarks on such a compre-
hensive, complicated, mystical, imaginative, credulous system, as
that which is set forth in Mr. Bin nett’s work, with much ability,
and in most commendable spirit. The “ science ” apart, therefore,
it is frankly admitted that the moral precepts of Buddhism are
many of them good ; but, there is no high motive power by which
they are enforced. A system that does not a- knowledge a per-
manent, personal Supreme Being, but teaches, on the contrary,
that Karma —that is, the personal accumulation of merit, good or
bad, during the various “ births ” through which men are supposed


to have passed—is “ the supreme controlling power ” m the world,
is not likely to stem the current of evil and work the regeneration
of the human race.
The following brief extracts, from standard works, give some
idea of the doctrines taught by this system, on sin, the soul, and
God: —
Si n .— U The disciple of Buddha is not taught to abhor crime,
because of its exceeding sinfulness ; but because its commission
will be to him a personal injury, There is no moral pollution in
sin ; it is merely a calamity to be deprecated, or a misfortune to
be shunned. (Hardy’s Manual of Buddhism, p. 0O1 .)
God and Soul. —“ Inasmuch as Buddhism declares Karma to be
the supreme controlling power of the universe, it is an atheistic
system. It ignores the existence of an intelligent and personal
Deity. It acknowledges that there is a moral government of the
world ; but it honours the statute-book instead of the law giver,
and adores the sceptre instead of the king.” (Hardy, 599.)
“ Buddhism does not attempt to solve the problem of the primary
origin of all things .... it takes as its ultimate fact the existence
of the material world and of conscious beings living within it; and
it holds that everything is subject to the law of cause and effect,
and that everything is constantly though imperceptibly changing.
There is no place where this law does not operate ; no heaven or
hell in the ordinary sense. There are worlds where devas live,
whose existence is more or less material, according as their pre-
vious lives were more or le s good ] but the devas die, and the
worlds they inhabit pass away.” (David’s Buddhism, p. 88.)
Hear the verdict of Professor Monier Williams '“ Buddhism is
no religion at all, and certainly no theology, but rather a system
of duty, without real deity, prayer, or priest. The name Buddha
is simply an epithet meaning the perfectly enlightened one, or
rather one who, by perfect knowledge of the truth, is liberated
from all existence, and who, before his own attainment of Nirvana,
or extinction of worldly existence, reveals to the world the method
of obtaining it.” (Williams’ Hinduism, p. 74.)
The conclusions arrived at by these able men are consistent
with each other ; and they are not discredited, in the least, by the
elaborate, but credulous exposition of “ Esoteric Buddhism,” by
Mr. Sinnett.


The following letter from Dr. Geo. Wyld, contrasting Budd-
hism and Christianity, is taken from a recent number of the London
Spectator :—
‘‘ As you allude to Buddhism in connection with Theosophy, perhaps you
will permit me, as one who occupied the position of President of the British
Theosophical Society for some years, to offer a few remarks on the subject.
I joined the Theosophical Society on the understanding that it was a
Theistic Society, founded for the purpose of “ Investigating the Nature and
Power of the Human Soul on the Ground of its Divine Sonship -to the Great
First Intelligent Cause.” The founders of the Society, however, in India
identified themselves as Buddhists of the Southern, or Atheistic, school of
Buddhism, and the lady founder of the Society openly declared herself to be
an Atheist. I then at once retired from the Society, because a Theosophic
Society without a God was, of course, an absurdity.
So far as one can comprehend the teaching of the so-called Theosophists
of the Atheistic Buddhist school, they are, that the soul and spirit are
evolutions from matter, and that the supreme knowledge which saves the
soul can. only be acquired by the innermost self-introspection, and herein
lies the great contrast between this form of Buddhism and Theism and
Christianity. In this form of Buddhism there are no such words or thoughts
as “Lead me to the rock which is higher than I; ” or, “ Father, into thy
hands I commend my spirit; ” or, “ Our Father, who art in heaven ; ” or,
indeed, any belief in any intelligence higher than the highest celestial man.
The moral teachings of Gautama Buddha and of Jesus Christ are closely
allied as to purity, love, and self-denial; but on the other side, while there
is no allusion by Buddha to a supreme intelligent First Cause, the continual
teaching of Jesus is the personality and fatherhood of God ; and hence I
conceive it is that while Buddhism, having no external elevating force as
its attraction upwards, has more and more become degraded into the lowest
superstition and formalism, while Christianity, having, in direct communi-
cation with its centre, the attractive force of a Divine love from above,
must for ever be drawn upwards,and thus develop by evolution those nations
in the direct ratio of their living belief.
The great interest at present taken in Buddhism has arisen out of the
recent researches of Oriental scholars, and more immediately from the in-
fluence of that beautifnl poem “ The Light of Asia.” A large proportion of
thoughtful people have become dissatisfied with the conventionality and
formality of much Christian teaching, and Buddhism has been presented to
these minds in a philosophical form, and by the poem in a lovely form ;
and the consequence has been that many who were indifferent or agnostical
have found iii Buddhism so presented a vague form of faith which has
pleased their imaginations. But the Buddhism of “ The Light of Asia” has
no resemblance to the practical Buddhism of Tibet, China, or Japan, where
it has, as I have said, become degraded into the lowest forms of superstition
and formality, as, for instance, in the praying-wheels of individuals and of
communities. It is not denied that Christianity in the Middle Ages also
descended to the lowest depths of superstition and formality ; but in the
midst of the vilest periods of the Christian Church, arose men like Michael
Angelo, liaft'aele, and Dante ; while this very degradation of the Church
was the cause of the rebound to a higher order of things under Luther.


Buddhism, however, having no internal or external force of reaction, has
not and cannot even arise out of its ashes ; and it is very noteworthy that
beyond Gautama himself, out of Buddhism during the last 2,400 years has
arisen no prophet, no poet, no artist, no musician, no man of science, no
discoverer, and not even one warrior of renown.
Buddhism becomes transcendent in “ The Light of Asia ; ” but Jesus has
always been in the Sermon on the Mount, “ The Light of the World ; and
even a Shakespeare, had he attempted to turn into an epic the words of
the Divine and miraculous Son of Man, could have attempted no more than
“to gild refined gold.”
The friends of Christianity should wish for nothing more
earnestly than the systematic and searching study and ex-
position of the old religions of the world, by competent scholars ;
for we have the utmost confidence that, as the final result of the
sifting process, their own system will suffer by comparison neithei
in historic accuracy, nor in grand spiritual conceptions, nor in
lofty principles, nor in purity of motive and high moral precept,
nor in regard for the good of men, and the honour of the Supreme
Being.
CONCLUSION.
The philosophical schools of Brahmanism,though disclosing much
mental acuteness and power,nevertheless abound in transcendental
nonsense, of no possible service to men. The mythological system is
simply hideous and loathsome—concealing, not revealing the Su-
preme Being. The ritual and worship are characterised by gross
materialism, and debasing superstitions, with small tendency to-
wards spirituality j while the effect of the presence everywhere of
a powerful priestly caste, is to quench all legitimate ambition, and
to deprive the people of all mental liberty and independence.
During the Yedic and Buddhist periods, especially in their ear-
lier stages, we gladly admit that there was not a little simplicity
of worship, natural morality, and independence of thought, together
with an honest desire to seek after the unknown God. But after
all, what did they discover ? —what light did they obtain on the
problems of the world, of the soul, and of God ?
In regard to "Vedism, the result of the utmost human effoi t,
under favourable conditions, was, that they came to have a vague
and wavering belief that some superior being, or beings, existed
somewhere in or behind all natural phenomena; but, of the true
character and nature of these mysterious beings they had been able
to discover nothing. Their religion never rose above a simple
pantheism.


As it regards Buddhism, the Prince Gautama, the great religious
reformer, cleared away, for a time, much moral and ritualistic rub*
bish from the prevailing Brahmauism j but the sum of the know-
ledge to which even he attained—the fundamental principles of the
reformed system—amounted to nothing more than this :—That
life was not worth living—that the chief duty of man consisted in
the repression of all natural feelings and desires—that the soul
was a doubtful spiritual substance proceeding from Brahma, or
from some other source —and that its highest attainment and
crowning happiness was to be absorbed finally in the divine essence.
It taught “ Nirvana,” which, if not blank annihilating, is the ob-
literation of all human personality and consciousness.
Do we despise these early seekers after God, and smile at the
meagre results of their speculations ? No ! It would, indeed, ill
become those who claim descent from the same noble Aryan race,
and who are themselves blessed with the light of revelation, to
treat with contempt the honest efforts God ward on the part of
the kinsfolk of their fathers. No! They did well according to
their lights ; and whilst we cannot applaud their theology, we ac-
knowledge, with gratitude, their comparatively pure worship, and
the moral tendency of much of their teaching. Their failure is
proof of the impossibility of human reason ever attaining,unhelped,
to the true idea of God, or reaching an adequate conception of the
spiritual worship which He demands.
It is long before men put aside the delusion, that they can, by
the rush-light of reason, read the spiritual mysteries of heaven and
of earth ; and even where the Christian revelation is generally re-
ceived, some men are slow to open their minds to the light from
heaven, by whose aid alone human reason shall be able to solve
these mysteries, even in part. Whatever be the conception of the
Supreme Being which we may have adopted, it is surrounded by
many difficulties. Pantheism, in its simplest phase, seems to be
the first, and, so to speak, the easiest conception of deity ; but in
all phases—rude as in the vedic worship, philosophical as in Brah-
manism—it is beset with insuperable objections; and, moreover
can yield no support, no encouragement, no consolation to strug-
ling and suffering humanity. The God of the Bible, who thinks,
feels, and loves —loves as a Father —is much more likely to meet
the case of man, —to guide his steps, to supply his wants, to satisfy
his longings —than any other conceivable deity.


The human mind has been anxiously exercised on the problems
of Life, God, and Man, from the remotest time, as we have seen,
with comparatively small results ; and they fui’nish to the scien-
tist, the philosopher,and the Christian student, the burning ques-
tions of to-day. What help, if any,may we expect to receive from
the Christian scriptures for the solution—or at least the partial
solution —of these problems ?
The Bible statement regarding the origin of the human creature
is direct and clear—“ God created man in his own image.” He
is from God, and his nature is spiritual like God. The Book in-
forms us that man has become disobedient; and the moral con-
dition of all tribes and peoples on the face of the earth is the
standing proof. The Book further informs us that a remedy is
provided for man’s moral malady; and the conscious experience
of millions, who have accepted the remedy, proves its healing
power. “ For God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son that whosoever believeth on him should not
perish but have eternal life.” The origin of man is not more
clearly announced than is his character and destiny.
The problem of Life includes a vast deal more than the genesis
of man. The Bible doctrine is, that everything in the world
that hath life owes its life-germ to Jehovah the Living and Life-
giving One. With the method of the Divine working in creation
we have at present nothing to do—simply with the fact. “ The
God that made the world and all things therein, He being Lord
of heaven and earth .. . .Spake and it was done; He commanded,
and it stood fast.” On the authority of the greatest names in
science, we are assured that every effort to explain the origin of
life, on scientific lines, has hitherto failed. The link that joins the
non-living to the living cannot be found in all the sciences. The
Bible solves the problem; it supplies the link:—“ln the be-
ginning God created the heaven and the earth.”
The idea which the Bible gives of Deity is that of an Infinite
Spiritual Being. This Infinite Spiritual Being is only knowable
in part by man, for man’s knowing faculties are finite. “ Canst
thou by searching find out God ? Canst thou find out the
Almighty unto perfection ? ” God only can know God. The
Jewish law-giver said—“ Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one
Lord.” The Christ, the Revealer of the Father said—“ God is a
spirit; and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit
and truth.”


In the Bible God is uniformly represented as a person, not a
law or a system of laws. Nevertheless he is the great law-giver.
Law is the expression of his will. He speaks and acts as a person.
He possesses personal attributes ; he is great, powerful, wise, and
holy, and good. “ God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.”
“ God is love.” He is the fountainhead of all holy emotion. He
is the centre-orb whence radiate the beams of love that touch and
move the human heart to active benevolence ; —that originate and
nourish the genial feelings of friendship ; —that infuse into the
domestic circle an atmosphere radiant of heaven, and a blessedness
more to be desired than “ Nirvana.”
The God in whom we believe is not a person , as man is a
person, bounded on all sides by limitations. He is infinite, and
in no sense limited. It is quite consistent with infinitude, and it
is conceivable for the Supreme Being to manifest moral qualities
and intellectual attributes, without, in the slightest degree, or in any
sense whatever, affecting his infinitude; and corresponding qualities
in man are only used as helps, “so far as, and no further than
the little can help the great, to enable our finite capacities, in some
small measure, to comprehend and appreciate the Divine Being.
The Jews were warned against considering Jehovah t£ to be such
an one as themselves ; ” and intelligent Christians are careful to
avoid this error.
But, to us children of a day, pilgrims and strangers in a world
in which perplexities, trials, and sorrows make up such a large
portion of our experience, the most attractive, ennobling, encourag-
ing, endearing representation of the Divine Being which the
Bible furnishes, is that of Father. The divine Teacher
hath taught us to say :—“ Abba, Father.” We are not then
orphans in a godless world. The Eternal Father cares for
his children, provides for them, guides them through life, and,
when his purposes in regard to them have been accomplished on
earth, they are taken home into everlasting habitations. Does
any other known Keligion furnish a guide so trustworthy, point to
a future so bright, and hold up to men a Hope so glorious ?
PRINTED BV A. CLEGHORN, ADELAIDE STREET, BRISBANE.


