

Hfiil ISi
K i‘. I •’
Mk .■ -
. J '-V‘ I 1$®®pi || ’*C’v.'" r " P fe5» r*z~r ■ * I |||p | - ]''J~- Ife! l\ 4\ J^Xk^-^T
11 , t >' •. i; * " — '' s> B _ I : ' : ’t^pi r. > rf‘’\*' f ''':^- v ‘'“ u^: :^i?'-*- ‘ ; -
I
I ».Al;i x:./ ;1j J|
I |n|-V' ; ,- ' ■,
Hk mBBHh||||BBBBm^|B^
I
i f!) SvTTiTI iMf ■Trn b’T 7 ! fT^P
I ■ fe y»T» y*fl||
I Bp Sb Jgp il
R| t' ;■








The ::
Official Civic Record of South Australia
Centenary Year, J 936
Published by
THE UNIVERSAL PUBLICITY COMPANY
Suite One, Second Floor,
C.B.S, Building, 88a, King William Street
Adelaide.
Phone Central 3340.
Printed by
Shipping Newspapers (S.A.) Ltd.
Currie Street, Adelaide
1936.
Copyright £A£o. 27278.
Jill Rights Reserved


Index of Official Civic Record of South Australia
Page
Foreword 7
Preface 8
Succession of Governors 11-26
South Australia 27-29
The City of Adelaide 32-45
Mayors of Adelaide 47-75
Local Government of South Australia (Municipal) 77-79
Local Government (Councils) 80
Adelaide City Council 82-108
City of Port Adelaide 109-122
Corporation of the City of Prospect 125-135
The City of Unley 137-163
The Corporation of Brighton 165-175
Corporation of Burra 177-182
Municipality of Burnside 183-200
Corporation and District Council of Clare 201-211
Colonel Light Gardens 213-216
Corporation of Edithburgh 217-219
Corporation of Gawler 221-230
Corporation of the Town of Glenelg 231-246
Corporation of Henley and Grange 247-259
Corporation of Hindmarsh 261-270
Corporation of Jamestown 271-273
Corporation and District Council of Kadina 275-282
Corporation and District Council of Kapunda 283-284
The Town of Kensington and Norwood 285-294
Corporation of the Town of Maitland 295-302
Corporation of Moonta 303-305
Corporation of Mount Gambier 307-311
Corporation of Murray Bridge 313-321
Corporation of Naracoorte 323-332
Corporation of Peterborough 333-352
Corporation of Port Augusta 353-363
Corporation of Port Lincoln 365-372
Corporation of Port Pirie 373-388
Corporation of Quorn 389-398
Corporation of the Town of Renmark 399-407
Page
Corporation of St. Peters 408-421
Corporation and District Council of Strathalbyn 423-425
Corporation of Thebarton 427-435
Corporation of Victor Harbour 437-439
Corporation of Wallaroo 441-448
Corporation of Woodville 449-451
District Council of Angastcn 463-453
District Council of Balaklava 469-472
District Council of Barossa 473-474
District Council of Beachport 475-479
District Council of Berri . 480-483
District Council of Blyth 485-490
District Council of Brown’s Well 491-492
District Council of Burra Burra 493-498
District Council of Bute 499-505
District Council of Campbelltown 507-5 il
District Council of Carrieton 513-516
District Council of Cleve 517-51°
District Council of Clinton 521-524
District Council of Cobdogla 525-529
District Council of Crystal Brook 531-539
District Council of Dudley 541-543
District Council of East Murray 545-54 c
District Council of East Torrens 551-556
District Council of Elliston 557-553
District Council of Encounter Bay 559-560
District Council of Enfield 561-571
District Council of Eudunda 573-578
District Council of Franklin Harbour 579-584
District Council of Freeling 585-590
District Council of Georgetown 591-592
District Council of Gladstone 593-602
District Council of Gumeracha 603-608
District Council of Hallett 609-610
District Council of Hawker 611-612
District Council of Kanyaka 6 3-615
District Council of Karoonda 6 7-618
2


Page
District Council of Keyneton and Swan Reach 619-623
District Council of Kimba 625-628
District Council of Kingscote 629-632
District Council of Lacepede 633-635
District Council of Lameroc . . 637-641
District Council of Laura ... 643-646
District Council cf Le Hunte . 647-648
District Council of Light 649-651
District Council of Lincoln . 653-654
District Council of Loxton 655-658
District Council of Lucindale . 659-663
District Council of Mannum 661-662
District Council of Marion . 663-674
District Council of Marne 675-630
District Council cf Meadows 681-684
District Council of Meningie 685-687
District Council of Millicent 689-695
District Council of Minlaton 697-699
District Council of Mitcham . 701-718
District Council of Mobilong 719-725
District Council of Morgan 727-729
District Council cf Mount Barker 731-732
District Council of Mount Pleasant 733-737
District Council of Mudla Wirra 739-747
District Council cf Munno Para East 749-750
District Council of Murat Bay 751-752
District Council cf Noarlunga 753-755
District Council of Onkaparinga . 757-762
District Council of Orroroo 763-767
District Council cf Owen 769-774
District Council of Paringa 775-776
District Council of Payneham 777-782
District Council of Peake 783-787
District Council of Penola 789-797
, . 1 0D5T3 Page
District Council of Pinnaroo 799-803
District Council of Pirie * . i n "n 805-809
District Council of Port Broughton A** .* y 3/. 811-816
District Council of Port Elliot , . . 817-821
District Council of Port Germein 823-824
District Council of Port MacDonnell 825-827
District Council of Port Wakefield 829-830
District Council of Redhill 831-832
Renmark Irrigation Trust, No. 1. 833-837
District Council of Riverton 839-842
District Council of Robe 843-845
District Council of Robertstown 847-850
District Council of Saddlewortb 851-863
District Council of Salisbury 861-864
District Council of Snowtown 865-866
District Council of Spalding . . . 867-868
District Council of Stirling 869-870
District Council of Streaky Bay 871-877
District Council of Tantanoola 879-883
District Council of Tanunda 885-888
District Council cf Tatiara 889-893
District Council of Teatree Gully . . . 895-899
District Council of Truro 900-901
District Council of Tumby Bay 903-910
District Council of Upper Wakefield 911-917
District Council of Waikerie . . . 919-924
District Council of Walkerville . 925-931
District Council of Warooka 933-934
District Council of West Torrens 935-945
District Council of Willunga 947-949
District Council of Wilmington 951-952
District Council of Yankalilla 953-954
District Council of Yorke Peninsula 955-958
District Council of Yorketown 959-962


PIONEER FIRMS
Page
Elder, Smith & Co., Ltd 46
Cooper & Sons, Limited 123-124
S. R. Delmont 260
Page
Goldsbrough, Mort & Company, Limited 6:>6
South Australian Farmers’ Co-operative Union Ltd. 652
W. Menz & Company, Limited
’JpHE Pilgrim Fathers of South Australia have nearly all disappeared. In the fullness of time they have passed out of existence, but not of memory.
Any history of South Australia would be incomplete without the names of pioneer firms of the State who fought and struggled undauntedly,
though with small return at first. While memory and history perpetuate their names, their children remain to maintain the position won by these
Pioneers and makers of the Province.
The pioneer firms mentioned above have not only helped to build our State, but have given their assistance in making possible a Record
which, together with its biographical sketches, will form a valuable edition to the chronicles, and will be of ever-increasing importance, as time goes on.
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Page
His Majesty the King 5
Colonel Light 9-10
Old Gum Tree, Glenelg 28
Royal Review, Victoria Park Racecourse, 1901 30
Prince Albert Victor, Prince George Frederick, 1881 . . . . 31
Queen Adelaide 32
Night Scene, North 1 errace, 1927 32
Rundle Street, 1845 and 1936 33
Adelaide from West End. 1849 34
Grenfell Street, 1936 35
Adelaide from West End, 1936 35
Days of Horse Trams 35
Hindley Street, 1845 and 1936 36
North Terrace, looking west, 1845 and 1936 37
Government Offices, 1842 and 1936 38
Ball at Opening of Adelaide Town Hall, 1866 39
G.P.0., Adelaide, 1839 and 1936 40
Page
First Wesleyan Chapel, 1838 41
Gawler Place, Adelaide, 1936 41
North Terrace, looking east, 1845 and 1936 42
Congregational Chapel, North Terrace, 1837 44
Old Queen’s Theatre, 1841 45
Menu Card used at Banquet tendered to Duke of Edinburgh,
1867 54
Old Dock, Port Adelaide 109
Old Toll House, Glen Osmond 185
H.M.S. "Galatea,” at Glenelg, 1867 231
Tent at Glenelg, Where Proclamation Was Read, 28th Dec.,
1836 239
Adam Lindsay Gordon’s Heme, Dingley Dell 308
First Load of Ore From Broken Hill to Port Pirie by Road,
1885 378
Colonel Light’s Cottage 427
The Old Pie Cart, Port Broughton 813
The publisher's thanks are due to the following photographers who are responsible for the photos in this volume—Messrs Hammer & Co.,
La Fayette Studios, Alastair Rocklyn, Mora Studios, Dickinson-Monteath Studios, F. Casson, Malcolm Gray; also Mr. S. R. Delmont, who has
given us much valuable assistance in the production of all blocks used.


' If'
f:.
/: ' : :ki JFl
fl| n . ; "\ JH|
gm-'Llm V • •■« '
I '*
mmmg
‘ * "mT
■ •■ •• I £ -]*. A * ’
I .Jr
# ' r I ■/
|L' 1 *y t,
‘■p * - * yy I
His Majesty King Edward VIII.
IT was on the morning of a mid-year day in 1920 that
Adelaide, bright with colourful decorations ; its streets
lined with immense crowds; mounted police keeping
clear a narrow ribbon of road; a growing volume of
cheering; a motor car bearing four persons, one of them
a slim young man in uniform, who saluted gravely as he
passed along—thus was the setting that we had our first
glimpse of His Majesty, at that time H.R.H. the Prince of
Wales. Before recording the programme of events that
followed, this article would not be complete without a
brief mention of the “human side” of His Majesty. To the
American he is known as a “reg’lar fellar;” to the English-
man he is a “good sport”; and to the Australian he is just
“dinkum.” (This name was given him in France by mem-
bers of the A.1.F.)
It was during the World War that we in Australia
began to hear quite a lot of His Majesty. Diggers return-
ing home brought tales of this modest young Prince
H.R.H. AS AIDE-DE-CAMP.
It was in 1914, that as the Prince of Wales, he went
to France, as Aide-de-camp to Sir John French; his deter-
mination to be just an ordinary staff officer, and to be able
to be near the troops in the front line resulted in the
following incident: —
“One afternoon, much to the chagrin of General Head-
quarters, Lieut. Edward of Wales was found to be missing.
Uneasiness turned to dismay, for it was learnt that the
Prince had borrowed a motor cycle from a despatch rider
and had ridden off in the direction of the front line. Power-
ful motor cars roared off, anxious drivers accelerated in
hope of overtaking the truant. Night had fallen, and a
staff officer seeing a dim light on the roadside, stopped to
inquire if the Prince was seen to pass that way. Imagine
the suipiise of the astonished officer when he discovered
His Royal Highness covered with mud, sitting playing
cauls with a party of hiench troops ; a very much broken
motor cycle laying at the bottom of a nearby shell hole
HIS MAJESTY KING EDWARD VIII.


which the Prince had run into. From then the Prince was
known as ‘Dynamite Wales’ —he was at any moment liable
to ‘go off’.”
It was not to be assumed, however, that His Majesty
was in France for no other purpose than being looked at,
or for ceremonial inspection of troops. During the dark
months of 1917 he acted as liaison officer in the region of
Boesinghe-Langeinaich, between the 14th British Army
Corps and the first French Army. His duties brought him
into close proximity to the front line, and it was at Hoult-
hurst Forrest that he had a narrow escape from shell-fire,
only gaining the shelter of a German pillbox by seconds to
see the ground that he had run over being torn and lifted
by shell explosions.
Soon after the strenuous days of the war, His Majesy
devoted his attention to the labour and housing of ex-
service men. His efforts to assist the aims of various
Housing Committees are well-known. Through his efforts
many of the slum houses have been demolished, and in
their places have been erected comfortable and well-
planned dwellings.
His periodical visits to the industrial districts of Eng-
land (always resulting in some effort to make happier the
lives of the working people in those districts), and his
determination to see things as they are and not “dressed
up” for his benefit, has resulted in a bond of affection be-
tween himself and the people. The bond not only exists
in England, but it encircles the whole British Empire. The
human side of His Majesty is being constantly revealed;
it was during his first visit to Canada that after laying the
corner-stone of the new Parliament buildings, he finished
the day by taking a leading part in the Labour Da\
Procession.
On Sunday, 11th July, 1920, His Majesty arrived at
Port Augusta, and was welcomed by the Premier (Hon.
H. N. Harwell, M.P.), and the Mayor and citizens of that
town. He also met the returned soldiers, sailors, and
nurses. Thence on to Quorn, Peterborough, Terowie, and
Mt. Bryan, where he stayed that night.
Leaving Mt. Bryan at 7.25 next morning, with a brief
stay at Gawler at 10 a.m., he reached Adelaide at 11 o clock.
He was met by His Excellency the Governor, Sir Archibald
Weigall, who presented Sir G. J. R. Murray, K.C.M.G., the
Honourable the Premier (H. N. Barwell), and his Ministers.
After the reception a colourful procession wended its way
through the crowded streets to the Town Hall, where the
civic address was presented, thence on to Government
House.
There followed four days in which His Majesty was
borne in a whirl from one function to another, there being
no less than 27 engagements to fulfil during his stay in
South Australia.
On Friday, 16th July, he embarked on H.M.S. Renown,
and sailed at 5 p.m. for Tasmania.
His farewell message to Australia indicated the im-
pression which he received on his great tour; it was full of
earnest appreciation of his visit.


FOREWORD
the Minister for Local Government
TLiE PIONEERS who began the work of development
in the Province of South Australia nearly a hundred
years ago brought with them from the Homeland
memories of the extent to which local affairs were
controlled and administered by elected representatives of
the townspeople. Only a few years before had seen the
passing in England of the Municipal Corporations Reform
Act, which had swept away many abuses of long standing
and placed local government on a sound and representative
basis. The need of some such organisation was soon felt
in the infant colony, and within four years of the proclama-
tion, the Executive Council, presided over by Governor
Gawler, had passed the Municipal Corporations Act of
1840, under which Adelaide became the first incorporated
town in Australia. As settlement spread out into the
country, the need became apparent of some local system
of government in the farm areas, and to meet this want
an Act was passed in 1852 for the establishment of District
Councils. This was quickly availed of, and in reponse to
petitions, a number of new districts were formed, of which
Mitcham was the first. The framework then completed
of municipal corporations for the larger towns, and district
councils for the agricultural areas, has been the basis of
all subsequent legislation in this State.
In the early days when bullock waggon or spring cart
limited the extent of travelling, the areas of the local
authorities were necessarily small, but as all work was
carried out by manual labour this was of little disadvan-
tage. In later times, with improved means of transport
and more modern means of carrying out works, new dis-
tricts proclaimed in areas where settlement has extended
have embraced much more territory. It also became ap-
parent that in some of the early divisions of areas, the
territory assigned had in the light of developments become
too small for economical working, and at the instance of
the local governing organisations a Commission was ap-
pointed in 1930, on which Municipal Corporations and Dis-
trict Councils were both represented, to investigate the
whole position and submit recommendations for so re-
arranging the areas as to provide for a maximum of
efficient and economical administration. The result of
these recommendations has been the reduction in the
number of local governing areas from 196 to 142. Initial
difficulties incidental to the changes are being quickly
overcome, and the Councils of the larger areas created are
actively facing their increased responsibilities.
An important milestone in the history of local govern-
ment in South Australia was the passing of the Local
Government Act of 1934, which provided a common code
for both Municipal Corporations and District Councils, and
involved the repeal of not less than 54 Acts.
During the last few years Councils, in common with
other bodies, have experienced difficult times, but, as a
result of conserved resources and careful management, the
leeway lost is being steadily regained.
I commend this volume to all those interested in civic
affairs, as a record of sane and solid achievements in giving
to the people of this country a system of local govern-
ment, the benchts of which accrue to every member of the
community, and I should like to add a word of appreciation
of the splendid services rendered by councillors and their
executive officers, in all parts of the State —men who have
given of their best for the benefit of the community they
serve, and from whom they often do not receive the recog-
nition that is their due. From their ranks have come many
able men to conspicuously serve the State in the wider
fields of Legislature.
(Signed) A. P. BLESING
Minister for Local Government.


iiiliP iHHHk
i|||||| m|!»f^^jaapi-. j s^^Mg
fln M iiffifflfflMMpifl
BL I X JH
IH I8L ■**'*”’
j^ : |li
I I '. i:
PREFACE.
IT was due to the non-existence of any previous proper
and up-to-date history of South Australia's civic
representatives, both past and present, that I decided
to produce this volume. After much patient research
and reading, "The South Australian Centenary Official
Civic Record" has been made possible, and will relate the
early endeavours and per-
severance by those pio-
neer administrators of
the Local Government
Acts during South Aus-
tralia’s first hundred
years, and bring to South
Australians a clearer ap-
preciation of the achieve-
ments of these civic
founders.
I wish to offer my
apologies to subscribers
for the time that has
elapsed since their sup-
port was promised to
this huge undertaking,
but the delay has been
unavoidable through cir-
cumstances over which I
had no control. I desire
to acknowledge my obli-
gations to the Board of Governors of the Public Library,
Museum and Art Gallery, for the loan of photos and prints
for reproduction, access to documents in the Archives, and
especially to the Archivist (Mr. G. H. Pitt) for his expert
assistance.
1 wish also to thank all those affording means for
procuring, as well as in giving information and assisting
in the compilation of this volume, particularly all Muni-
cipalities and District Councils whose whole-hearted sup-
port has made this work possible.
In conclusion I would like to state my appreciation of
the Staff which has given very satisfactory service during
the past twelve months in which this work has been
completed.


COLONEL LIGHT
The First Surveyor General of South Australia
COLONEL LIGHT, the first Surveyor-General of
South Australia, was born in Malacca, 1785, his
father, Captain Francis Light, being then Governor
there. His mother was the Princess Martina
Rezelles, daughter of King Queddah, of the Malacca Ter-
ritory, Malay Peninsula. The Princess was given as a
dowry the Island of Penang, or Prince of Wales Island,
and her son William subsequently derived a considerable
income from its revenues. He was sent to England in
his early youth, received a high-class education, and was
often a guest at Carlton House.
In 1830 he went to Egypt and entered the service of
the Pasha Mehemet Ali. While there he made the acquain-
tance of Captain John Hindmarsh, R.N., who afterwards
became first Governor here.
Through the influence of Colonel Napier and the Duke
of Wellington, Colonel Light was appointed Surveyor-
General for the State of South Australia, and with the
Deputy-Surveyor, Mr. (subsequently Sir George) King-
ston, sailed in the Rapid for Australia, May L 1836. After
inspecting various sites on which to found the capital city
of South Australia he finally selected the one on which the
garden city of Australia stands—a lasting monument to his
choice- —and, writing to England about it, he said: —“Ade-
laide is on the banks of a beautiful stream, with thousands
of acres of the richest land I ever saw around it. Alto-
gether a more beautiful spot can hardly be imagined,
resembling some of the lovely park scenery of England.”
The city was called “Adelaide” out of compliment to the


Consort of William the Fourth, then King of England, the
Queen being generally known in England as good Queen
Adelaide.
Colonel Light started his survey on the 11th January,
1837, and finished it on the 10th March following. One
of the few of Light’s writings of value dealing with South
Australia still in existence, so far as is known, is his Jour-
nal, a brief record of his proceedings as Surveyor-General,
with some remarks on objections taken to such proceed-
ings in certain quarters amongst the early colonists and
officials. Nearly all his other papers were destroyed by
a fire in January, 1839, and he died in the following
October.
In Colonel Light’s Journal the following will be found:
—“From this time (3rd January, 1837) to the 11th January
I was employed in looking repeatedly over the ground,
and devising in my own mind the best method of laying
out the town according to the course of the river and
the nature of the ground. This being fixed. I commenced
with Mr. Kingston (Deputy-Surveyor-General) and Mr.
Neale (Assistant Surveyor) only. It was generally sup-
posed that planning and measuring out a thousand acres
for a capital city was so easy a job that it would be com-
pleted in a few days —and the disgrace heaped upon me
again became warm. I leave this matter to be judged of
by experienced surveyors in England, remarking at the
same time that they must bear in mind that we were in a
country perfectly in a state of nature, and the obstructions
for this work were greater on this particular spot than
any other part of the plain. It may be asked, then, ‘Why
choose it?’ I answer, ‘Because it was on a beautiful and
gently rising ground, and formed altogether a better con-
nection with the river than any other place.' ’
Colonel Light received much opposition in the site of
the city, but “stuck to his guns,” and would not change
it. Colonel Light, unfortunately, did not long survive the
founding of the beautiful city. The privations of his
early life and his strenuous military training had impaired
his health, and the opposition to his designs and wishes so
preyed upon his supersensitive mind that he died on sth
October, 1839.
His dying wish was that “he should be known to pos-
terity as the founder of Adelaide.” He was buried in
Light Square. An obelisk was erected to his memory.
This has been replaced by a new one, unveiled 1905, and
a splendid bronze statue in Victoria Square was unveiled
27th November. 1906, which shows that, though lost to
sight, the founder of Adelaide, the gallant and brave officer
and first Surveyor-General, Colonel William Light, “is still
to memory dear”; and the good he did truly lives after
him.


j|
rC .
Succession
of
Governors
of
South Australia
15


/ li8Wr> lemzMMmm
REAR-ADMIRAL SIR JOHN
HINDMARSH, K.H.R.N.
The first Governor of South Aus-
tralia. Born in 1786, died in 1859. He
arrived in the Buffalo, landed at
Glenelg, December 28, 1836, and read
the proclamation creating South Aus-
tralia a British Colony under an old
gum tree still shown at that thriving
watering-place. After about fourteen
months he was recalled, and the sole
authority given to Governor Gawler,
who took office July 16, 1838. Lie was
a strong advocate for the opening up
of, and the navigation of, the River
Murray —our great transpontine high-
way. He foresaw that South Aus-
tralia was likely in the future to be-
come a rich and prosperous country,
and his legislation was of a character
calculated to develop its latent
resources.
As a lad he distinguished himself
greatly at the battle of Trafalgar,
under Lord Nelson. He first went
into action when only twelve years
old, in what is known in English his-
tory as Lord Howe’s glorious June
the first, 1794, and his earliest dis-
tinction was won at the battle of the
Nile, in 1799, when seventeen years
old. His vessel, the “Bellerophon,”
was in the thickest of the fight, and
he, for some time, was the only officer
alive on the deck ; he received a wound
in the eye, which finally deprived him
of his sight. The opposing vessel, the
“L Orient,” caught fire and sank. Lord
Nelson publicly thanked the young
hero. He was knighted in 1851, and
obtained the rank of Rear-Admiral in
1856.
So the first Governor and the first
Surveyor of South Australia had the
honour of distinguishing themselves
under two of the greatest warriors of
England, the Duke of Wellington and
Lord Nelson.
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL GEORGE
GAWLER, K.H.
The second Governor of South Aus-
tralia. Born in England in 1796.
He was appointed Governor of
South Australia in 18.38, and arrived
in the ship "Pestonjee Bomanjee" on
the 12th October in that year. The
town of Gawler derives its name from
him, his portrait is still to be seen in
its Institute, and the Corporation have
adopted his coat-of-arms as their
insignia. Colonel Gawler's portrait
also hangs in the Council Chamber of
the Adelaide Corporation with that of
Colonel Light and John MacDouall
Stuart.
When Colonel Gawler arrived in
October, 1838, he delivered a suitable
address at the humble building then
known as Government House to a
concourse of settlers and aborigines,
who welcomed him warmly. In
specially addressing the natives, with
the assistance of an interpreter, he
told them that he came from the great
white Queen, who loved her black
people, and that they must also love
her white people. When he waved his
cocked hat with its white feather, and
ordered a supply of food to be given
them, one blackfellow, who was
perched upon the bough of a tree,
cried, "Plenty tucker, berry good
cockatoo, Gubenor." They had soon
mastered a bit of the English lan-
guage, as they generally do when the
conversation relates to the inner man.
When the first settlers came the


*
aborigines could not seem to under-
stand their white faces, but when they
overcame their fear of them they
approached closely, and placed their
fingers on their faces to see if any
pigment came off, examined their hats
and garments, and opened their waist-
coats and shirt-fronts to see if they
were white all over.
In one instance a party of white
men who had been out in the bush
were followed into Adelaide by a
number of naked blacks. 1 he Gover-
nor was greatly shocked at this, and
ordered the Government storekeeper
to supply them with clothing, which,
when brought out. was put on them
by the marines, not without some
struemdes, no doubt. The blackfellows
oo ’
disliked such apparel, however, and
took it ofif as fast as it was put on,
so the clothes were then exchanged
for blankets.
From his acquaintance with the
mechanical and physical sciences, and
the attention he gave to the prin-
ciples of government and political
economy, he seemed peculiarly fitted
to call forth the resources of a new
colony, while his character for calm
determination and temperate vigour
appeared especially adapted to ex-
tinguish dissensions of party feuds and
bring all colonists to act together
under the banner of mutual confi-
dence. Colonel Gawler was recalled
by Lord John Russell in 1841.
During his term of office Governor
Gawler found on arrival many settlers
really destitute, and to relieve these
he commenced a number of Govern-
ment works. He constructed a good
road between Adelaide and Port Ade-
laide, formed wharves, built a Customs
House, warehouses, and the present
Government House, the latter building
costing £20,000. To benefit the colony
Colonel Gawler spent his own private
fortune in paying the wages of those
employed, and tried to persuade Eng-
lish merchants to send out provisions
and clothing for the famished people.
The only means he had of payment
for these was by drafts on the British
Treasury, amounting to about
£300,000, which were dishonoured by
the Government, and the colony thus
became insolvent, with a national debt
of £400,000.
His summary dismissal from office
was anything but creditable to the
British Government. He left for Eng-
land in May, 1841, and died at South-
sea in May, 1869, aged 73 years.
SIR GEORGE GREY, K.C.B.
Born at Lisbon, Portugal, in 1812,
he died in England in 1898, and, as one
of the great Empire-builders of the
nation, was buried in St. Paul’s
Cathedral.
Named to the Governorship of
South Australia in 1841, aged 29, he
held it until 1845, and during that
period rescued the colony from a state
of chaos, setting it on the high road
to prosperity.
His character was marked by pru-
dence, firmness, and decision, traits
which he subsequently exhibited when
at the Cape and in New Zealand. On
taking office he at once began the
policy of retrenchment, cut down the
wages of the labourers, and persued
a course entirely different to his pre-
decessor. An improvement was
speedily shown in various directions,
more especially in the cultivation of
land for wheat, natural resources
were rapidly developed, and the basis
of that prosperity since assured were
founded.
During the administration of Cap-
tain Grey, the Burra Burra, Kapunda,
and other rich copper mines were
opened.
Captain Grey was appointed Gover-
nor of New Zealand in 1845, and had
the proud satisfaction of leaving the
colony of South Australia in a more
prosperous state than he found it. He
was knighted in 1848, and also made
a D.C.L. of the Oxford University.
He assumed the reins of Govern-
ment on May 10th, 1841, and left the
colony on October 25th, 1845.


% Jit
\ jr ■
%% A**:,..
"% x m
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL FREDERICK
HOLT ROBE.
Governor from October 25th, 1845.
to August 2nd, 1848.
He was a military man of the old
school, an honourable and upright
English Tory. The most important
events of his administration were an
unsuccessful attempt he made, with-
out the sanction of the Legislative
Council, to impose a royalty on
copper, and granting of State aid to
religious bodies, this last innovation
upon the principles on which the
colony was founded arousing great
opposition, which lasted till the system
was abolished in 1851 by the newly-
created mixed nominee and elective
Legislative Council in its first session.
The town Robe was so named in
honour of this Governor.
In exploratory work the chief
interest centred in the return of Cap-
tain Sturt after his memorable expe-
dition, which was the last he under-
took. The reception of Sturt and
the remnant of his party in January,
1846, was most cordial, though the
condition of the party, the state of the
equipment, and, most of all. the be-
haviour of the few sheep which fol-
lowed as quietly and regularly as a
rearguard, eloquently testified to the
severe struggle that had been en-
dured. There was also an expedition
to the north led by Mr. Harrocks, of
Penwortham—noteworthy because it
was the first instance of a camel being
employed in such work. Its object
was frustrated by an unfortunate gun
accident, as a result of which the
leader lost his life. Mayor Robe him-
self undertook an expedition down the
south-east coastline, which extended
as far as Portland Bay in Victoria.
A large increase of population took
place as the result of success in prov-
ing the resources of the State. Prize
wheat had been exhibited at the Lon-
don Corn Exchange, where they were
considered of extraordinary quality,
and samples of barley were pro-
nounced to be of the finest quality of
any that had ever been seen at the
London Corn Exchange. At the same
time the output of the copper mines
began to produce a great impression.
In 1843 copper of the value of £127
appeared in the list of exports, and
the next year it was £6,436. in 1845
rose to £19.020, and in 1846 leaped up
to £143,231. In that year, for the first
time, minerals took the highest place
in the export trade, the value of wool
being £106,510.
4 he question of steam communica-
tion with the mother country was
discussed by the Legislative Council
at a special session in November, 1847,
and the same month the first over-
seas steamer arrived.
Among other indications of pros-
perity during this period was the
establishment of the Savings Bank,
and it was mainly due to Governor
Robe that South Australia at that
time became prominent in the eyes
of the rest of the world.
SIR HENRY EDWARD FOX YOUNG,
Kt., C.B.
He was born in 1810. and held office
in the West Indies j was appointed
Governor of South Australia in 1848.
lie ailived on August Ist in an immi-
grant ship, the "Forfarshire," and left
the colony, December 20th, 1854.


On November 25th, 1852, an Act
was passed to appoint district councils,
and to define the powers thereof. This
measure gave to the various districts
power to tax themselves for the main-
tenance and management of their own
roads, bridges, and public buildings, to
grant licences of various kinds, and
accordingly established the principle of
self-government in local affairs over
a very wide area.
One of the most important events
of his time was the passing of the
Bullion Act. establishing a new cur-
rency, consisting of gold cast into
small bars, or ingots. This step was
necessitated in consequence of the
great rush of South Australians to the
Victorian goldfields, as they took with
them nearly all the coin of the colony.
Although the Home Government
considered Sir Henry had exceeded his
powers, they admitted he had acted
rightly. The River Murray, which
until this period had not been turned
to useful account, is now navigable
for nearly 2,000 miles, though the out-
let to the Southern Ocean is dan-
gerous and impracticable to large
vessels. Sir Henry tried hard to
establish a port at Port Elliot, near
the entrance to the river, and ex-
pended over £20,000 on what proved
a fruitless attempt and waste of
capital.
There was naturally great anxiety
to discover a counter-attraction to
the Victorian diggings, and liberal
offers were made to encourage pros-
pectors, but although no South Aus-
tralian Forest Creek or Mount Alex-
ander was ever found, wealth poured
in upon the colony from various
sources, independently of the large
amount of the yellow metal that found
its way into various departments of
trade and industry, and production of
all kinds was greatly stimulated. The
majority of the diggers, whether suc-
cessful or otherwise, returned to their
homes and avocations.
Many of them invested their earnings
in lands, and there was in consequence
rapid expansion in agricultural settle-
ment. At the same time pastoral
interests received a powerful impetus
by the enhanced prices of stock.
In 1851 the population was 66,538,
but five years later it was 104 708. In
the former year the imports were
£690,777 in value, and the exports
£602,087, but in 1856 they had risen
to £1,366,529 and £1,665,740 respec-
tively; that is to say, that the popula-
tion had increased by nearly two-
thirds. and the import trade more than
doubled, and the exports increased by
a hundred and fifty per cent.
When opening the session of 1850,
Sir Henry drew attention to the
obstacle interposed by the bar at the
Murray Mouth, and suggested the
construction of a railway from Goolwa
to Port Elliot. The tramway was
built in due course, and this was the
inauguration of rail communication in
Australia. The weakest place in the
whole scheme was the harbour, which
was shallow, dangerous, and liable to
be silted up. About £20,000 was spent
in the construction of a breakwater,
and shipping was attracted by the
prospect of freight, and a good deal
of wool and other produce came down
the river for transhipment at Goolwa,
but Port Elliot soon acquired the
reputation of a life-trap, and was
shunned accordingly. In 1853 the
construction of a railway between
Adelaide and Port Adelaide was begun,
so we have many things from which
we are now benefiting to thank Sir
Henry for.
SIR RICHARD GRAVES MacDONNELL,
Kt., C.B.
Assumed office June Bth, 1855, to
March 4th, 1862. He was born in 1815,
and died in England, February 6th,
1881. Sir Richard was considered by
the colonists, whose confidence he en-
joyed in the highest degree, one of the
best of South Australian Governors.
The most important events of his
administration were the establishment
of Constitutional Government with
two branches of Legislature (both
elective), the extension of railways
and telegraph communication, the
opening up of valuable copper mines


/ \ \
/ \
'0* ’ \
— I
on Yorke’s Peninsula, the steady
progress of agricultural and pastoral
pursuits, and, in short, of everything
calculated to advance the colony. Port
MacDonnell received its name in
honour of this popular Governor.
\\ hen Sir Richard landed in 1855
there was a mile of railway opened
in the colony, but when he left in 1862
there were fifty-seven miles in use,
over which annually rolled a traffic
of more than 150,000 tons and 320,000
passengers. Also the coasts had been
lit with three additional first-class
lig'hts, and three additional harbours
had come into extensive use. The
population had grown from 84,000 to
130,000, while exports of colonial pro-
duce had risen from £631.000 to
£1,808,000.
There were only sixty miles of made
road in the colony, whereas in 1862
there were over two hundred miles.
SIR DOMINICK DALY, Kt.
Was born at Ardfry, County Galway,
Ireland, in the year 1798. He assumed
the Governorship of South Australia
in March, 1862, and retained it until
his death, February 19th, 1868. In
1867, on the visit of R.H.R. Prince
Alfred to the Australian Colonies, Sir
D. Daly had the honour of being the
first Governor to entertain His Royal
Highness, which he did in a manner
that procured him the thanks of the
Prince. Sir D. Daly was a man of a
genial, kindly disposition, a thorough
Irish gentleman, who, during his
term of office, endeared himself to the
people of South Australia by his
courtesy and affability, and by the
great interest he always manifested
in everything affecting the welfare of
the colony. He died universally re-
gretted.
In May, 1863, the foundation-stone
of the Town Hall was laid by the
Governor. The building cost origin-
ally about £25,000. The opening cere-
mony took place in June, 1865, and at
that time Adelaide was able to boast
of possessing the largest and finest
town hall in the Southern Hemisphere.
In 1866 a dam was erected across
the River Torrens at a cost of £4,122,
but heavy timber, brought down by a
flood in September, 1867, smote it into
mere ruin.
In September, 1863. the Home Gov-
ernment placed the Northern Terri-
tory under the charge of South Aus-
tralia. Sir 13. Daly left a widow, two
sons, and two daughters. His daugh-
ters settled in South Australia, the
elder being- married to Mr. John
Souttar, manager of the Bank of
Adelaide, and the second to Mr. H. H.
Turton, manager of the Savings Bank
of South Australia.
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE SIR JAMES
FERGUSSON, Bart., K.C.M.G.
Was born at Edinburgh, March 18,
1832, and was Governor of South Aus-
tralia from February 16th, 1869, to
Apiil 18th, 1873, out of which time he
was away on leave of absence from
December 6th. 1872. to April 18th
1873.
During his term of office in South
Austi aha he was free and open-
handed in his expenditure, and liberal
in his personal dealings with the
colony. He possessed considerable
ability, was a profound thinker, and


r -
a d
%■. A
an intelligent and high-minded gentle-
man, who maintained the dignity of
his responsible position, and creditably
represented Her Majesty.
During his administration tele-
graphic communication between Aus-
tralia and Europe was established. His
efforts in the accomplishment of this
great work were fully recognised, and
he was, shortly after its completion,
promoted by Mr. Gladstone to the
Government of New Zealand.
Much the most important event of
Sir James Fergusson’s Governorship
was the construction of the telegraph
line through the heart of the con-
tinent, from Adelaide to Port Darwin.
In 1871 a Bill was introduced into
Parliament, of which the following
were the principal features. It pro-
vided for the establishment of a new
Educational Board to consist of nine
members, with enlarged powers. Under
the supervision of this Board, three
classes of schools were to be estab-
lished—normal, national, and district —
which were to provide sound secular
instruction, based on Christian re-
ligion, but without reference to any
sectarian or controversial questions.
There was to be no denominational
teaching or influence, but the school
houses might be used for religious
instruction before or after school
hours,
A University was also established in
Adelaide, to which Mr. (afterwards
Sir) W. W. Hughes presented
£20,000. Sir James was killed at
Kingston, Jamaica, during the earth-
quake of January, 1907.
Lady Fergusson, a daughter of the
Marquis of Dalhousie, was active in
many ways and highly popular. Her
health failed, however, and her death,
which occurred in October, 1872,
elicited deep sympathy with the be-
reaved Governor.
Sir James paid South Australia a
high compliment shortly before he
left by becoming engaged to marry
one of its daughters, Miss Olive Rich-
man, daughter of Mr. John Richman,
a well-known pastoralist, and sister-
in-law to Sir W. W. Hughes. The
marriage took place in the following
March. At the close of a successful
term in New Zealand, Sir James Fer-
gusson was transferred to Bombay,
where he was exceedingly popular.
SIR ANTHONY MUSGRAVE, K.C.M.G.
Governor from June 9th, 1873, to
January 29th, 1877, and may be con-
sidered as having been very popular
with the colonists. It was perhaps a
fortunate circumstance that his arrival
occurred during a period of general
prosperity. Production was increas-
ing, and the output of the leading
staples—wheat, wool, and copper—
brought in an enlarging stream of
national wealth. One visible result
was activity in every branch of local
industry, the abundance of remunera-
tive employment being such that the
chairman of the Adelaide Destitute
Board declared that there was not a
single able-bodied pauper in the
colony. At the same time the demand
for labour was being met by the
arrival of immigrants, for whom
places were so speedily found that
they were no burden to the State.
The crossing of the continent from
the telegraph line westward by War-
burton, who for the first time em-
ployed a train of camels for transport,
was a wonderful teat of heroic deter-
mination and endurance.
On November 7th, 1873, His Excel-
lency laid the foundation-stone for a
bridge across the River Murray at a
site which had been selected, called
Edward Crossing. In the North a be-
ginning was made in the construction
of the railway system, by which
access is now afforded from the great
agricultural areas to the seaboard. The
Port Pirie and Gladstone line was
commenced in November, 1874. and
pushed on as rapidly as,possible. The
transcontinental telegraph line, which
connected Adelaide "and Perth, and
thus brought the Western Australian
system into contact with those of the
other Colonies, as well as Europe, was
a great national undertak ing. The
total cost of the line was £68.205. and
it was completed in a year and eleven


months. The experience gained in the
construction of the transcontinental
telegraph to Port Darwin was of
much service, though the greatest
difficulties were of other kinds.
Sir Anthony was born in 1828, made
C.M.G. in 1871, K.C.M.G. in 1875. He
died in Queensland in October, 1888.
He was twice married.
SIR WILLIAM FRANCIS DRUMMOND
JERVOIS, G.C.M.G., C.8., R E.
Sir William Jervois was born in
September, 1821. He received a mili-
tary training in early life, and saw
much service in South Africa among
Boers and Kaffirs; he became Secre-
tary to the Permanent Committee on
the Defence of the Empire in 1857.
At this juncture Sir William Jervois
and Colonel Scratchley were sent out
to enquire and report on Colonial
defences, and much satisfaction was
felt when it became known that the
former had been appointed Governor
of South Australia. The selection was
felt to be a compliment to the Colony,
and at the same time an advantage to
the whole of Australia, ensuring the
presence of an officer of high standing
and ability in case of any emergency.
He assumed office on October 2nd,
1877.
Early in 1878 he proceeded to Eng-
land for a few months, and at this
time was created a Grand Cross of
the Order of St. Michael and St.
George. Accompanied by Lady Jer-
vois and family, he returned hither on
August 15th, 1878, and both he and
they received the warmest welcome
from the people. It may interest many
to know that Sir William descended
from a very old Irish family, and that
Lady Jervois was the daughter of the
late Mr. Nos worthy, of England.
His Excellency’s son, Lieutenant J.
Jervois. R.E., was appointed to the
post of Deputy Assistant Adjutant-
General of the Volunteer Military
Force of South Australia in 1882, in
succession to Major J. A. Fergusson.
The purchase of a warship was re-
solved upon, and the “Protector” ob-
tained, said to the most powerfully
armed vessel of its tonnage afloat.
Pleavy guns, rifles, and ammunition
were obtained from England. The
Largs Fort was erected at a cost of
about £16,000 on the plans of Colonel
Scratchley, and a permanent Defence
Force authorised and established.
1882 witnessed the settling of the
University in the handsome building
which had been erected for its accom-
modation at a cost of £31,000. and as
formally opened by Sir William Jer-
vois in a stirring speech full of hearty
congratulation.
Sir William Jervois, on his depar-
ture, was described as a successful
Governor in every sense of the word,
and not a little of the progress
achieved during his regime was
attributed to the influence of his
courageous spirit.
He urged the importance of estab-
lishing and fostering new industries,
such as fruit preserving and dairy
farming, mentioning that the Colony
was importing £50,000 worth of dairy
produce, all of which it should raise
for itself.
During his term of office 625 miles
of railway had been constructed, and
276 more were to be added imme-
diately. In 1880 a Rill was carried
for the extension of the line from
Nairne, to which town it had been
sanctioned in 1878 to the \ ictorian
border. A branch line, via Mt. Barker
and Strathalbyn, through Goolwa to
Victor Harbour, followed in due
course.
The Northern railway had been
carried to Terowie, and then a deter-
mination was arrived at to push on
the construction of light lines on the
narrow gauge.
On May 17th. 1882, His Excellency
formally opened a section of the Great
Northern Railway, from Port Augusta
to Farina, 200 miles inland. The first
through train from Adelaide to Port
Augusta ran on the previous day, and
there was a great banquet and public
demonstration at Ouorn Junction in
honour of the occasion.
There was rapid expansion in the


F
mg t '
If '
WL .
r
im.
residential suburbs, which supplied
occasion for, and was also promoted
by, the establishment of a tramway
service.
At that time Adelaide had un-
doubtedly the best tramway service of
any city in Australia. Another metro-
politan improvement was the installa-
tion of a deep-drainage system.
During the month of June, 1881, the
grandsons of Her Majesty the Queen,
Prince Albert Victor and Prince
George, reached Adelaide, and were
accorded a warm welcome.
As evidence of the popularity in
which Sir William was held, on. it be-
ing understood that he wished to pos-
sess a residence at Marble Hdl on the
Mount Lofty range, 13 miles from
Adelaide, the money for its erection
(viz., £21,300) was voted without
opposition by the Parliament. On
January 9, 1883, Sir William was trans-
ferred to New Zealand, and as Gover-
nor of the island colony had a most
successful term.
Sir William died on August 16th,
1897, from the effects of a carriage
accident, and was buried at Virginia
Water.
SIR WILLIAM CLEAVER FRANCIS
ROBINSON, K.C.M.G.
Was born at Rosemeath, County
Westmeath, in 1834. In 1862 he mar-
ried Olivia, daughter of Dr. Townsend,
the Bishop of Meath. In November.
1874, was appointed Governor of
Western Australia, and, in 1877, Gover-
nor of the Straits Settlement. From
there he returned to Western Aus-
tralia, and on February 19th, 1883,
came to South Australia as Governor.
He was transferred to Victoria, March
sth, 1889. His Excellency made him-
self popular almost at once by mani-
festing a large amount of interest in
the several institutions of the city and
suburbs.
His Excellency was a musician and
a composer. A song of his, “Unfurl
the Flag,” was sung at his swearing-
in as a compliment, and achieved con-
siderable popularity. He showed in a
practical way his interest in the divine
art by his efforts connected with the
endowment of a Chair of Music at the
University, the first in that branch of
education in any Australian Univer-
sity.
The traditional gum tree, under
which the proclamation by Governor
Hindmarsh was read, showed token of
decay, and in the enclosure surround-
ing it successors had been planted. I he
custom of the annual pilgrimage to
Glenelg was regularly observed by
thousands of families, and there were
always a few of those who witnessed
the scene in 1836 to share in the re-
union. The number, however, was
diminishing, and some of the early
settlers were in needy circumstances.
Under the auspices of Sir E. T.
Smith, on July Ist. 1885, a public
meeting was held in the Town Hall,
and as its result a committee was ap-
pointed to formulate a scheme for
holding, in the year 1887, an Exhibi-
tion of Arts, Agriculture, and Manu-
factures, in commemoration of the
fiftieth anniversary of the founda-
tion of the province. The Ade-
laide Exhibition was opened by His
Excellency on June Ist, 1887 —the
jubilee of Queen Victoria’s Accession
Day—and closed on January 7th, 1888,
between which dates it was visited by
three-quarters of a million persons.
Nothing that occurred during the
administration of Sir William Robin-
son had nearly so much effect on the
fortunes of the Colony as the discovery
and development of the magnificent
silver mines of the Barrier Range.
Though, politically, the region belongs
to New South Wales, geographically
and commercially it is part of South
Australia. The distance from Broken
Hill to the seaboard at Port Pirie —
the nearest port —is 253 miles; from
Adelaide it is 333 miles (in both cases
by rail) ; but from Sydney it is about
600 miles in a direct line, part of the
way lying through an arid and almost
uninhabited waste.
Broken Hill was pegged out in the
year of His Excellency’s arrival, and.


/ Jr \
its value having been demonstrated,
the railway was opened before his
departure. A well-sinker, appro-
priately named Nickel, found veins of
galena while sinking a well on
Thackeringa Station, and pegged
out a 400-acre claim in 1875.
The following year Umberumberka
was the scene of fresh discoveries, and
others followed. In the early eighties
Silverton had become a place of some
importance and more promise ; but in
1883, Mr. Charles Rasp, a boundary-
rider on Mount Gipps Station,
observed indications in the “Broken
Llill paddock,” which led to the for-
mation of a syndicate, which was
merged into the Broken Llill Proprie-
tary Company, to work what proved
to be the richest deposit of silver ore
in any part of the world. The impulse
that was thereby given to South Aus-
tralian trade and industry, the splen-
did returns that were received by
fortunate investors, and the aug-
mentation of both public and private
revenue in consequence have con-
tinued to operate ever since, apart
from the artificial prosperity and re-
action thereupon, connected with the
silver boom and stock exchange specu-
lations.
Sir William died on May 2nd. 1897.
at his residence, South Kensington.
THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF
KINTORE, P.C., G.C.M.G.
The Right Honourable Algernon
Hawkins Thomond Keith-Falconer,
ninth Earl of Kintore, was born in
1852, and was Governor of South Aus-
tralia from April 11th. 1889, until
April 10th, 1895.
In 1873 he married Lady Sydney
Charlotte Montagu, third daughter of
the Duke of Manchester. He suc-
ceeded to the title of Earl of Kintore
on the death of his father in 1880, and
also held the title of Lord Falconer of
Halkerton and Lord Keith of
Inverurie, besides which he was
G.C.M.G. In 1886 he was Captain of
Her Majesty’s Bodyguard, and was
sworn in as a member of the Privy
Council.
Throughout the whole of Lord Kin-
tore’s regime he manifested deep
interest in colonial affairs. He
travelled extensively to familiarize
himself with them, and identified him-
self with important social movements.
In 1891 he voyaged to Port Darwin,
and returned overland via the line of
telegraph, accomplishing a feat no
other Governor has attempted—that
of crossing the continent from sea to
sea.
Lord Kintore saw many reverse
times during his six years in South
Australia, including the Miners’ Strike
of 1890 at Moonta, and the great mari-
time strike which affected the whole
of Australasia, following which came
the wave of financial embarrassment
which swept over South Australia in
1893, in which year twelve banks
closed their doors either for re-
construction or liquidation. The Bank
of Adelaide, however, was one of the
few that weathered the storm with-
out resorting to any such measure.
In 1893 Mr. Kingston succeeded in
forming what was called a “Ministry
of all the talents.” It included three
former Premiers—Playford, Cockburn,
and Holder —the latter of whom was
Treasurer, and held office continuously,
with one week’s interval, for eight
years.
Among the more important mea-
sures that were passed was the ex-
tension of political rights to women,
placing them, in that respect, on an
equality with men.
During Lord Kintore's term of
office the Federal movement assumed
a definite form, and advanced to an
interesting stage.


/ ////^^
SIR THOMAS POWELL BUXTON,
Bart., K.C.M.G. (and G.C.M.G., 1899).
Was Governor of South Australia
from October 29th, 1895, until March
29th, 1899. .
He was born in 1837, and succeeded
to the baronetcy in 1858. He was a
grandson of Sir Thomas Fowell
Buxton, the first baronet, who was the
associate of Wilberforce and others
in the great crusade for the abolition
of slavery throughout the British
Dominion, and who also rendered
signal service in the reform of the
Penal Code. In 1862 he married Lady
Victoria, daughter of the Earl of
Gainsborough, by whom he had a
numerous family, but during the whole
of their stay in South Australia her
ladyship was a semi-invalid.
Sir Thomas entered the House of
Commons in 1865 as member for
King’s Lynn, which constituency he
represented for three years. In 1876
he was appointed High Sheriff of Nor-
folk. He had been a partner in the
firm of Truman, Hanbury & Co., and
thus had experience of both political
and business life prior to his appoint-
ment.
The years 1896 and 1897 were dis-
tinguished by several important events.
In the former the first election took
place in which women took part as
voters, and in the latter the Federal
Convention was opened in Adelaide.
The State Advances Act was brought
into operation, and the State Bank
established. The ill-fated Calvert
expedition was dispatched to explore
the country north-westward, two of
the members of which subsequently
perished of thirst. The rapid exten-
sion of Adelaide and the suburbs had
necessitated an increased water supply,
and the Happy Valley scheme, which
involved tunnelling for five miles
through two ranges of hills, had been
entered upon some years previously.
From that source an ample supply for
present and prospective needs was
obtainable. The entire cost was half
a million, and the works were
formally opened by the Governor on
August 7th, 1896.
In September, 1898, Sir Fowell
Buxton and family left for England,
with the announced intention of being
absent six months, but in December
of that year His Excellency decided
not to return to the colony, and ten-
tered his resignation. It was under-
stood that the state of Lady Buxton’s
health was the cause of the decision,
and much sympathy with the afflicted
lady was expressed.
The Governor had ingratiated him-
self with all classes by his free,
natural, and unostentatious manner,
but the circumstances prevented any
public demonstration in the nature of
a farewell.
Sir Thomas died at Cromer on 28th
October, 1915.
THE RIGHT HON. HALLAM BARON
TENNYSON, G.C.M.G., LL.D., D.C.L.
The eldest son of Alfred Lord
Tennyson, Poet Laureate, whose name
is familiar wherever the English lan-
guage is read or spoken. He was born
on August 11th, 1852, and succeeded
to the title on the death of his father
in 1892. Was Governor of South Aus-
tralia from April 10th, 1899, until July
17th, 1902. Died December 2nd, 1928.
On his arrival in Adelaide on April
9th, 1809, he received a genuine and


I?/:P . *. -
- -■"■ 1 1 x — * x -^
popular welcome. Both Lady Tenny-
son and himself speedily showed the
faculty of adaption to new condi-
tions. They entered heartily into the
social life of the community, and took
great interest in existing institutes,
and initiated new philanthropic
schemes of much importance. Two
subjects were evidently prominent in
His Excellency’s thoughts, and were
frequently referred to at suitable
opportunities in his public addresses —
the moral training of the juvenile por-
tion of the community and the duty
of the colonists to the aborigines.
Lord Tennyson’s term of office was
distinguished by events in which
South Australia shared with other
colonies and more distant parts of the
Empire, rather than by exclusively
local affairs. The South African War,
with its development of patriotism and
military ardour, was one of these. The
Commonwealth celebrations, accom-
panying the birth of a new nation,
coincidently with the beginning of a
new century, followed. Then came the
lamented death of Queen Victoria,
and the accession of King Edward.
The series may be said to have closed
by the festivities in connection with
the Royal visit, when the Duke and
Duchess of York were received with
every demonstration of popular enthu-
siasm. His Excellency’s connection
with South Australia was exceedingly
happy, and all too brief, for in July,
1902, in consequence of the resigna-
tion of Lord Hopetoun, he was ap-
pointed Acting Governor-General of
the Commonwealth.
In 1903 Lord Tennyson was
appointed Governor-General, but could
not be induced to retain his position
for more than a year. In the wider
sphere and higher office he became as
popular as he had been while Governor
of South Australia, and there was
universal regret that he was unable
to prolong his sojourn under the
Southern Cross. The South Austra-
lian Bushmen’s Corps was equipped
solely from funds raised for that pur-
pose, the total of the subscriptions
amounting to over i 7,000.
It was felt that the men who had
served and suffered were worthy to
be kept in remembrance, and of this
consciousness the noble equestrian
statue on North Terrace was the out-
come.
V\ hen Lord Tennyson became Act-
ing Governor-General of the Com-
monwealth the duty of administering
South Australian affairs once more
develoved on the Lieutenant-Governor,
Sir Samuel J. Way.
SIR GEORGE RUTHVEN LE HUNTE,
K.C.M.G.
Sir George Ruthven Le Hunte,
K.C.M.G., was a popular Governor of
South Australia, and is a descendant
of an ancient Irish family, his ances-
tors having been settled at Atramont,
in the County of Wexford, for more
than two centuries and a half.
Sir George was born at Atramont
on August 20th, 1852. He was edu-
cated at Eton and afterwards entered
Trinity College, Cambridge.
He assumed the Governorship of
South Australia on July Ist, 1903, and
was cordially welcomed by the citi-
zens of Adelaide. From the com-
mencement. Sir George Le Hunte
thoroughly identified himself with
every department of the national life.
He entered with evident enjoyment
and appreciation into the popular
sports and recreations. The various
industries had been subjected by him,
not merely to a superficial observation,
but to keen, interested and intelligent
inspection. At agricultural, manufac-
turing, floral, and other exhibitions he
had always shown his perception of
the causes that make for material pro-
gress. While popular with all classes
and all ages, he was most of all a
favourite with the boys and girls.
With the work of such institutions as
the Boys’ Brigade and Our Boys’
Institute he had made himself entirely
familiar.
In 1884 Sir George was married to
Caroline Rachel, daughter of John
C lowes, Esq., D.L., of Bunton Court,
Herefordshire, England, and the


BBMI
family consisted of one son and one
daughter.
When Sir George Le Hunte reached
Adelaide the Jenkins Ministry was in
office, but a reconstruction took place
when the Premier accepted the office
of Agent-General in London. Mr.
Jenkins was succeeded by Mr. Butler,
but in the session of 1905 an alliance
was formed between the Liberal and
Labour parties, which resulted in the
defeat of the Ministry on a motion by
a Labour member, Mr. Thomas Price.
In 1906, a general election having
taken place, the first session of the
new Parliament was opened on No-
vember 30th, especially to deal with
the Council franchise. As before,
however, the Chamber failed to come
to an agreement, and the Parliament
was prorogued at the end of three
weeks. Though the session was short,
and, in respect of its specific object,
abortive, it was not unfruitful. An
Amending Factories Act was carried,
and also an Act sanctioning the pur-
chase of the Adelaide tramways by
the Government, preparatory to their
being converted into electric trams,
and operated by a special trust.
The holiday season of 1906 was an
exceptionally joyous time. The public
finances were so satisfactory that an
accrued deficiency of over £200,000 had
been paid off, principally out of
revenue. The railway income was ex-
panding by leaps and bounds. The
pastoral interests were so prosperous
that not long before the world’s record
one-day sale of wool had been held in
Adelaide. The high prices ruling in
the metal market were causing the
copper, silver, and lead production to
boom. Splendid rains fell in Novem-
ber, and there was an assured pros-
pect of a bountiful harvest. On
December 28 there was the usual
immense gathering at Glenelg to cele-
brate “Commemoration Day.” Among
them were a few who remembered the
landing of Governor Hindmarsh on
the same date in 1836, and it was the
universal opinion that the position and
prospects of South Australia were
never brighter or better than the
close of its seventieth year.
Sir George Le Hunte left Australia
at the end of 1908 to take the Gover-
norship of Trinidad and Tobago—a
position in which his administrative
talents and knowledge of tropical con-
ditions had more play than at Adelaide.
He retired from the public service at
the beginning of 1916.
ADMIRAL SIR DAY BOSANQUER
G.C.V.0., K.C.B.
Was born at Rock Hall, near Aln-
wick, in Northumberland on March
22nd, 1843; entered the Royal Navy
in 1857 (lieutenant, 1863; commander,
1874; captain, 1882; rear-admiral,
1897; vice-admiral, 1902; admiral,
1905). He was commander-in-chief of
the East Indies Squadron (1899-1902)
and the North American Squadron
(1904-1907), and then for a year com-
manded the Portsmouth station.
In 1909 he was made Governor of
South Australia, and held that position
till 1914. While his work was mainly
of the routine class, it brought him
Swedish and Prussian decorations, as
well as British orders, enumerated
(K.C.8., 1905; G.C.V.0., 1907;
G.C.M.G., 1914). He died on June
28th, 1923.
In 1881 he married Mary, daughter
of the late Colonel Thomas Bromhead
Butt, of the 79th Queen’s Own
Cameron Highlanders, and the family
comprised one son and two daughters.
The regard with which Sir Day and
Lady Bosanquet were held found
eloquent expression upon many occa-
sions. At the citizens’ farewell in
Adelaide on February 19th. 1914. the
Mayor (Mr. A. A. Simpson, C.M.G.)
said the meeting had been con-
vened to give expression to the univer-
sal admiration and respect which were
the result of five years’ capable and
efficient government—five years of
tenacious devotion to work, to duty,
and to service. With characteristic
thoroughness, Sir Day had travelled
over every mile of our railways and
beyond them. He had chosen "to ex-
perience the rough life of the pioneers


y '
■ II >
I ' I
p:
J. * t f fcv
2 j | mJ 1
J|||? 4 JL |H|
on the confines of the settlement.
Foremost in every good work, he and
his family had interested themselves
in everything calculated to become of
benefit to the community. He
specially reminded the citizens how
Lady Bosanquet and His Excellency
had held exhibitions at Government
House for the encouragement and
cultivation of a taste for those handi-
crafts and arts which, being dependent
on the growth of an esthetic sense,
must necessarily be slow of develop-
ment in a new country, and therefore
required all the more to be encouraged.
The Governor had also undertaken a
personal investigation of the work of
every Government Department of the
State, and so thoroughly, according to
one high authority, as to have quali-
fied himself for nearly every port-
folio in his Cabinet. Nor could his
acquaintance with the local details of
the defence forces be any less. He
had acquired an intimate knowledge
of their commerce, resources, and in-
dustries, and visited every large
school and every considerable factory
in the State —in all. an almost en-
cyclopedic amount of information
about this great country, with no other
object, apparently, than to satisfy his
own fine ideals of service, and his own
conceptions of the duty of a constitu-
tional Governor.
Sir Day’s only son, Captain Bosan-
quet, killed in the Great War.
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL SIR HENRY
GALWAY, K.C.M.G., D.S.O.
Sir Henry was Governor of South
Australia from April 18th, 1914, till
April 30th, 1920.
He was a son of the late Lieutenant-
General Sir T. L. Gallwey, K.C.M.G.,
R.E., and assumed the present sur-
name in place of Gallwey in 1911. In
1913 he married Marie Carola, daugh-
ter of the late Right Hon. Sir Rowland
Blennerhasset, and widow of Baron
Raphael D'Erlanger. He was educated
at Cheltenham and Sandhurst, and
joined the 30th Regiment in 1878;
A.D.C. and Private Secretary to Com-
mander-in-Chief and Governor, Ber-
micola, 1882-89; Deputy Commissioner
and Vice-Consul, Oil Rivers Protec-
torate, 1891; Acting Consul-General,
1896-98; Acting High Commissioner,
S. Nigeria, 1900; concluded treaty
with King of Benin at Benin City,
1892; in command of Haussa Force,
under Sir Frederick Bedford, at attack
on and capture of Nimbe, and during
further operations against Brass
chiefs, 1895 (despatches, D.S. medal
with clasp) ; attached to Sir H. Raw-
son's intelligence staff, and also in
command of Haussa company during
operations in Benin country, including
capture of Benin City, 1897 (des-
patches, brevet of Major clasp) ; chief
political officer, Aro expedition, 1901-
1902 (despatches, medal and clasp) ;
present in several minor operations
against natives in Protectorate, 1891 -
1902; late Divisional Commissioner,
Southern Nigeria; Governor of St.
Helena, 1902-11; of the Gambia, 1911-
14.
LIEUTENANT-COLONEL SIR WILLIAM
ERNEST GEORGE ARCHIBALD
WEIGALL, K.C.M.G.
Governor of South Australia from
June 9th, 1920, until May 30th, 1922.
He is the son of the late Henrv


Bbwb^B
faB8SajBi«BpF TlBSaMli-
'j£jgr * 4 ■ ’ -•/ ; V v^4v
W ; v'|
||k myg iral
Ills? »||. ,1.;
V>£*'‘ -„
Weigall, and was born on December
Bth, 1874. In 1910 he married Baroness
von Eekhardstein, Grace Emily, only
child and heir of Sir Blundell Maple,
first and last Bart.; was educated at
Wellington College, Royal Agricul-
tural College (gold medalist) (Major
retired) ; 3rd Battalion Northants
Regiment; served in South Africa,
1902; M.P. for Horncastle Division,
Lincolnshire, 1911-20; Captain of Lin-
colnshire Yeomanry, and Lieutenant-
Colonel and Inspector Quartermaster-
General, Services Northern Com-
mand, 1914 to August, 1917; Sur-
veyor Good Consumption, Public Ser-
vices, and Chairman Food Survey
Board; Ministry of Food; Member of
National Salvage Council; Deputy
Chairman Surplus Government Pro-
perty Disposal Board; Member of
Select Committee on National Ex-
penditure; Member (Representative)
National Agricultural Council; Presi-
dent Agricultural Organisation So-
society, 1919; Deputy Chairman Fede-
ration of County Agricultural Com-
mittee; Territorial Army Reserve;
General List Yeomanry; a Member of
the Council of the Royal Agricultural
Society; Chairman of the Royal Em-
pire Society (formerly the Royal
Colonial Institute) ; President Land
Agents' Society, 1934.
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL SIR GEORGE
TOM MOLESWORTH BRIDGES, K.C.8.,
K.C.M.G., D.S.O.
Governor of South Australia from
December 4th, 1922, until December
4th, 1927. Colonel sth Inniskilling
Dragoon Guards, 9th Light Horse, and
43rd Australian Infantry; Commander,
Legion of Honour, Order of Leopold,
Danncbrog, Croix de Guerre, Order la
Couronne, American Distinguished
Service Medal.
Born August 20th, 1871, and mar-
ried, in 1907, Janet Florence, widow
of Major W. Marshall, Grenadier
Guards. Served in South Africa with
Imperial Light Horse, and in com-
mand of Western Australian Mounted
Infantry, 1899-1910 (severely wounded,
despatches twice, brevet of Major,
Queen’s medal, six clasps) ; Somali-
land, 1902-4, raised and commanded
the Tribal Horse (severely wounded,
special mention, D.5.0.) ; European
War, 1914-18 (despatches seven times,
K.C.M.G., C.8., C.M.G., wounded three
times, promoted Major-General) ; head
of Military Mission with Belgian
Field Army; Commanded 19th Div.;
Militarv Member of Mr. Balfour’s
Mission to U.S.A., 1917; head of Bri-
tish War Mission in U.S.A., 1918; head
of British Mission Allied Armies of
the Orient, 1918-20; late Military
Attache at the Hague, Brussels,
Copenhagen, and Christiana; retired
pay, 1922.
BRIGADIER-GENERAL HON. SIR
ALEXANDER GORE ARKWRIGHT
HORE-RUTHVEN.
V.C, 1899; K.C.M.G., 1928: C.8.,
1919; C.M.G., 1918; D.5.0.. 1916;
Governor of New South Wales, 1935;
Governor-General, 1936.
Born at Windsor, July 6th, 1872,
Second son of eighth Baron Rnthven


Wm
V
Z* ' r *
Married in 1908, Zara, daughter of the
late John Pollock of Lismany, County
Galway; one son.
Educated at Eton; joined 3rd
Battalion Highland Light Infantry,
1891 ; attached to Egyptian Army,
Soudan, 1898: commanded Camel
Corps Detachment at Battle of Geda-
ref and subsequent operations (V.C.,
4-th Class Osmanich, English and
Egyptian medals with clasps, three
despatches) ; White Nile, 1899 (des-
patches) ; gazetted to Cameron High-
landers. 1899: Special Service Officer,
Somaliland. 1903-1904; Military Secre-
tary. Viceroy of Ireland. 1905-1906, to
first Dragoon Guards, 1908, to Welsh
Guards, 1915; Military Secretary,
Governor-General of Commonwealth
of Australia, 1908; served European
War, 1914-1915, and 1916-1918, France
and Gallipoli (severely wounded,
D.S.O. and bar, C.8., C.M.G., des-
patches five times) ; temporary Briga-
dier-General, 1917-18: commanded the
Welsh Guards, 1920-24; commanded
Ist Infantry Brigade (Guards),
Aldershot, 1924-28 ; Governor of South
Australia. 1928-34; Knight of Grace;
Order of St. John of Jerusalem.
As Lord Gowrie he was sworn in as
Governor-General of Australia on
24th January, 1936.
MAJOR-GENERAL SIR WINSTON
DUGAN, K.C M.G. (1934), C.B. (1929),
C.M.G. (1918), D.S.O. (1915).
Governor of South Australia; Adjt.
Lincolnshire Regt., 1901-3, and Wor-
cestershire Regt., 1907-9; Garrison
Adjt., Irish Command, 1901-14;
D.A.Q.M.G., E. Anglian Division, 1914;
commanded 2nd Royal Irish Regt.,
1915- Brigade Commander 8.E.F.,
1916- Assistant Inspector-Gen. of
Training, 8.E.F., 1918; Col. Worces-
tershire Regt., 1919: Brigade Com-
mander 10th Infantry Brigade, 1919-
23; A.A.G. Southern Command, 1926-
30: A.D.C. to King. 1928; Major-
General, 1930; Commander 56th Ist
London Div. Territorial. 1931-34;
appointed Governor of South Aus-
tralia, 1934; K.G., St. J.; served in
South African War, 1899-1902; and in
Great War, 1914-19 (wounded, des-
patches six times, brevet Lt.Cob).
Born Bth May, 1877. Son of late
Charles Winston Dugan, M.A., of
Oxerantown Mall, Birr., Ireland. Mar-
ried. 17th January, 1912, Ruby Lilian,
daughter of late Charles Abbott and
Mrs. Applethwaite-Abbott, 11 Cum-
berland Terrace. Regents Park.
Address: Government House, Ade-
laide, S.A.; United Service Club.


M South Australia
1936
South Australia
1836- 1936


SOUTH AUSTRALIA
SOUTH Australia, the great central State of the
Commonwealth, has an area of 243,244,800 acres, or
380,070 square miles, which is nearly three times that
of the United Kingdom, or more than one and a half
times that of France. Proclaimed a Province under the
British Crown on December 28th, 1836, it was granted self-
government in 1857. By virtue of its unique geographical
position, it possesses many advantages, and it borders four
of the other five States of the Commonwealth, as well as
the Northern Territory. Within its limits is the junction
of the East-West Transcontinental Railway and the pro-
posed North-South Transcontinental line from Darwin in
the Northern Territory. Official records show that the
south coast of Australia was discovered in 1627 by Pieter
Nuyts, a Dutch captain, who followed the coast of the Great
Australian Bight for hundreds of miles, and whose name is
perpetuated in Nuyts’ Archipelago. D’Entrecasteaux, a
French officer, visited the same region in 1792; and Lieut.
Grant, on December 3rd, 1800, when bound for Botany
Bay in the “Lady Nelson,” 60 tons, discovered and named
Cape Banks, Cape Northumberland, Mount Gambler, and
Mount Schanck. Captain Matthew Flinders, who arrived
at Cape Leuwin at the end of 1801, sailed along the coast
of the Great Australian Bight, and among the names that
mark his journey are Fowler’s, Smoky, and Streaky Bays,
Port Lincoln. Cape Catastrophe, Spencer’s Gulf, Investi-
gator Strait. Kangaroo Island, Nepean Bay, and St. Vincent
Gulf, from which he saw a range of mountains, the highest
point of which he named Mount Lofty. Having explored
the Gulf, Flinders passed and named Cape Jervis. In
Encounter Bay he met the French exploring ship “Le
Geographe.” commanded by Captain Baudin. It is probable,
therefore, that, but for Flinders, the southern portion of
Australia would now belong to France.
Captain Charles Sturt and his party, after travelling
down the Murrav, reached the lakes at the outlet of the
river on February 9th, 1830, the journey having occupied
33 days. Their return upstream to their starting-place is
one of the finest incidents in the history of the exploration
in Australia.
The foundation of the State was due to the South Aus-
tralian Association, formed in England of 29 gentlemen,
18 of whom were members of Parliament. Among the
leaders in this colonisation movement were Edward Gibbon
Wakefield, Colonel Torrens, and George Fife Angas.
In 1836 nine immigrant ships arrived, the last being
H.M.S. “Buffalo," carrying 174 passengers, including Cap-
tain (afterwards Sir John) Hindmarsh. R.N., first Governor
of South Australia. The Pilgrim Fathers of the new Pro-
vince landed at Holdfast Bay on December 28th. gathered
under a gum tree (which, much bent, still exists), and the
Colony was proclaimed.
In South Australia the principle of Local Government,
which now prevails throughout the Commonwealth, was


originated in 1840. and in the same year Adelaide, the
capital, the first municipality in Australia, was incorporated.
The system of voting by ballot, which was first introduced
b\ the late Sheriff, Mr. \\ . R. Boothby, has been adopted
by most civilised countries.
Adelaide was also the first city in Australia to adopt
horse tiams, which, in keeping with the march of progress,
were duly replaced by a modern electric system. " The
population of South Australia was only 200,000 when, on
August 21st, 1872, the people of the young settlement com-
pleted a telegraph line 1,975 miles across the continent
from Adelaide to Darwin, Northern I erritorv, thus mak-
mg the capital the first city in Australia to be connected
by this means with London and the rest of the civilised
world.
The illustrations appearing in these pages show the
comparison between to-day and the early eighties of por-
tions of our Capital City.
The earliest design of a tank offered in the Great
War was the invention of a South Australian, Mr. L. E.
de Mole, C.8.E., whose services in this respect were recog-
nised and rewarded by the War Office. Sir Ross and Sir
Keith Smith, after a magnificent career in the Aviation
Corps, made the first and historic successful flight from
England to the Commonwealth, their fine exploit conclud-
ing in their native State, South Australia.
BANK OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, NORTH TERRACE, 1839.
Although located on this site (where the South Australian Hotel
now stands) at an earlier date, this was not the first building
occupied by the Bank, its first business being transacted in a
tent; hut in March, 1837, the Bank moved into a small weather-
board structure on North Terrace, about 100 yards east of King
William Street. Soon afterwards the building shown in the
illustration was erected and occupied by the Bank.


~ &*%& “« , p ’-// i||p%. 'p'%'; m£M^^MmW^¥' A W4fMW^M^L^
I? .<..
4PWW*p ji V$-
By Courtesy of the Archives.
ROYAL REVIEW AT VICTORIA PARK RACECOURSE, 13th JULY, 1901.
The arrival of the Duchess of Cornwall and York (our present Queen), together with
Lord and Lady Tennyson and suite. His Royal Highness Duke of Cornwall and York
(our late King) arrived later on horseback, when he inspected the South African Returned
Soldiers and the South Australian Defence Forces. After the inspection he presented
the long service and South African War medals.


%
Prince Albert Victor and Prince George Frederick (our late King)
visited South Australia in the year 1881 as midshipmen in the H.M.S.
"Bacchante" 011 cruise with the combined channel and reserve
squadrons. This was the first visit of His late Majesty to Australia.


'
PMp
; ' III
' ' I * 4;: ' "
w
A XIGHT SCENE ON NORTH TERRACE DURING THE VISIT OF T.H.R. THE DUKE AND DUCHESS OF YORK IN 1927.
The City of Adelaide
THE natives knew the site of Adelaide as ‘Tan-
darnya,’ but no meaning of the word has been
handed down.” states Mr. Rodney Cockburn in
“Nomenclature of South Australia.” In the
glossary to some verse written in the early days by “Link
Luckhurst” regarding a legend of the aboriginal tribes
which inhabited the district around the capital, it is ex-
plained that “Tandarnyungga” was the name of the tribal
district east of Cowandilla (a suburb in the territory
administered by the West Torrens District Council, south
of the River Torrens).
According to Mr. Cockburn, “Yatala” was the name
applied by the Weera tribe of aborigines to the country
north of the Torrens, extending from Port Adelaide to
Teatree Gully, which was subdivided into five smaller dis-
tricts from the Torrens to the Little Para.
It would appear, therefore, that North Adelaide is
Yatala and South Adelaide is Tandarnya, or Tandarn-
yungga.
“Yatala” is preserved in the names of a suburb situated
within the boundaries of the City of Port Adelaide and of


I
RUNDLE STREET, LOOKING EAST, 1845.
This shows one of our present-day business houses, Messrs. F. El.
Faulding & Co., Ltd., who, at that time, carried on business as
chemists a few doors from King William Street. Looking east,
on the northern side, the two-storey building without the verandah
was practically on the same site as where the Myer Emporium
now stands.
two districts —Yatala North and Yatala South-—to the
north of the City of Adelaide. The same is not the case in
regard to “Tandarnya.” There is, however, employed at
Port Adelaide a tugboat named “Tandanya.”
ADELAIDE’S BIRTH CERTIFICATE.
Letter from Sir H. Taylor, communication to the first
Governor of South Australia (Captain Hindmarsh, R.N.).
Die command of King William IV that the capital of South
Australia should be named after his Consort, Queen
Adelaide.
St. James’ Palace,
July 13th, 1837.
My dear Sir,
I have not delayed to submit to the King your wish
to give to the principal town or capital of South Australia
the name of His Majesty or the Queen, and I beg to
acquaint you that His Majesty received the communication
very kindly, and desired that the capital might be named
Adelaide.
Believe me to be, my dear Sir,
Yours very faithfully,
H. TAYLOR.
Captain Hindmarsh, R.N.
The original letter is in the possession of the Adelaide
City Corporation. Queen Adelaide, who was the eldest
child of the Duke of Saxc-Meiningen, was born at
Meiningen on 13th August, 1792. She married, on 18th
April, 1818, the Duke of Clarence, third son of George HI.
The Duke (as King William IV) succeeded to the throne
in 1790 and reigned until 1837. Queen Adelaide’s death
occurred on 22nd December, 1849. The Council has a num-
ber of mementoes and relics of the late Queen. Many of
these have been presented by Her Majesty Queen Mary.
RUNDLE STREET, LOOKING EAST, 1936.
The advancement made during the past 90 years is clearly shown
in the above photo.
The six Wards into which the City is divided are
Hindmarsh, Gawler, Grey, Young, Robe, and MacDonnell.
each returning two Councillors, The Wards are named


„ * jgi
"rk ' dm « - « j? ■■
* •* Y ; 1 ' , *3
ADELAIDE FROM THE WEST END OF BINDLEY STREET, 1849.
(From an Old Engraving.)
Reading from the extreme left the buildings are : —Trinity Church,
North Terrace, and directly behind that is the Collegiate School;
the building next to the church is the parsonage, the parson then
being Dean Farrell; the small building with smoking chimney was
an iron foundry; just above that are the Council Chambers and
Government House, the flagstaff at Government House being quite
prominent; to the right of this is the Bank of South Australia and
the G.P.0., while just below, with the round iron roof, is the Iron
Store (at that time owned by J. B. Graham). Just a little above this
the building, with what appears to he windows on the side, is the
Exchange Building, while the taller building next to it is the Old
Exchange Hotel, which at that time was named Coppin's Royal
Exchange Hotel.
Beginning from the eastern end on the opposite side, the first
tall budding was Waterhouse's grocery store, the chimney to the
right of that being Cook's steam mill; while directly to the right of
that again, and on the side of the hill, is the Mount Barker Road;
the tall building directly below the chimney is the store of A. L
Elder & Co., and in a direct line to the right of Elder's (with the
gable roof) is the Scotch Kirk; the building with the load of hay in
front of it is situated 011 the corner of Morphett Street.


HINDLEY STREET FROM WEST END, 1936, which compared with the picture on previous page shows 87 years' progress.
THE DAYS OE THE OLD HORSE TRAM,
cene in Grenfell Street, showing a school picnic leaving for the
beach.
GRENFELL STREET, 1936.
The horse replaced by electricity and motor power. Portion of
the T. & G, Building on the corner.


11 n t ■ i*
U~J„ I mm € ... i
m
. %
&
''
after the first six Governors of South Australia. The Lord
Mayor, six Aldermen, and two Auditors are elected by the
whole of the ratepayers.
HINDLEY STREET, LOOKING WEST, 1845.
The above illustration
shows Hindley Street in
the good old days of bul-
lock wagons and before
bituminous roads were
even dreamed of. On the
left, a few doors from the
corner of K : ng William
and Hindley Streets, is the
old “Observer” Office;
opposite was the Exchange
Building. The old Ex
change Hotel, which now
stands, was adjoining that
building.
SITE OF ADELAIDE.
The site of Adelaide was finally decided upon by
Colonel William Light, the first Surveyor-General of South
Australia, on 31st December, 1836.
The founder of Adelaide, in the preface of his brief
journal, published in 1839, wrote:—“ The reasons that led
me to fix Adelaide where it is I do not expect to be
generally understood or calmly judged of at present. My
enemies, however, by disputing their validity in every par-
ticular, have done me the good service of fixing the whole
of the responsibility upon me. I am perfectly willing to
HINDLEY STREET, LOOKING WEST, 1936.
that of the “Observer”
Office in the old illustra-
tion, shows the progress
during the past hundred
years.
The illustration at left
shows the vast difference
from the previous illustra-
tion. The new CALL.
Building, which is now
built on the same site as
hear it, and I leave it to posterity, and not to them, to
decide whether I am entitled to praise or blame.”
The city was first lit with oil lamps. Gas lamps were
introduced in June, 1867. The first electric lamps—in King
William Street and Road and O’Connell Street—were lit
on 4th January, 1900. The contract for the lighting of all
streets by electricity began on Ist September, 1922,


"WWW**
.f*-'
J 1
I. f f
NORTH TERRACE, LOOKING WEST FROM KING WILLIAM
STREET, 1845
(after a drawing by S. T. Gill).
On the extreme left is the Bank of South Australia, and directly
opposite is the Council Chambers. The tower which can be seen
in the distance is Trinity Church, and the small building this side
of it and a little to the right is the Police Station.
Adelaide is the oldest municipality in Australasia, and
the metropolitan area has the third largest population in
the centres of Australia and New Zealand. The city was
first incorporated in 1840.
The system of voting by ballot, which is now in vogue
nearly all over the world, was first introduced in Adelaide
by the late Mr. W. R. Boothby, Sheriff of South Australia.
By the completion on the 21st August, 1872, of a tele-
graph line across the continent from Adelaide to Port
Darwin, Northern Territory, the city was the first in Aus-
tralia to be connected by this means with London, and
thus with the rest of the civilised world.
The State, of which Adelaide is the capital, was the
first in Australia to grant the Parliamentary franchise to
women, an Act, in that behalf, having been passed as long
ago as 1894.
In 1856 the first State-owned steam in the
British Empire became operative between Adelaide and
Port Adelaide.
The Australian ethnological collection at the Adelaide
Museum is said to be the finest in the world.
Adelaide was the first city in Australia to have a com-
plete system of tramcars. These vehicles, which were
horse-drawn, were superseded by the existing electric
tramways.
The perfect sewerage which the city employs was the
first system of deep drainage to be established in Aus-
tralia.
Adelaide had the first properly constructed crema-
torium in Australia.
The Council of the city was the first in Australia to
appoint a trained nurse to its health staff.
Adelaide is said to possess the largest individual hard-
ware, sheet-metal, and motor body building business in
Australia.
TOWN HALL.
The foundation-stone of the Town Hall was laid on
Monday, 4th May. 1863, by the then Governor of South Aus-
tralia (Sir Dominic Daly).
37


I | A
“ j 1 * * * ♦** * ,B mm \ J&
GOVERNMENT OFFICES, 1842.
4 lie first portion of these offices were erected on the corner of
King Wilham Street and Flinders Street in 1839.
It was not until three years later, however, that the build-
ing was completed. The opening ceremony took place on the
20th June, 1866. The picture on page 39 shows the Opening
Ball in progress on the night of 22nd June. The guests
included Sir Dominic Daly (Governor of South Australia at
that time), William Townsend, Esq. (Mayor), and Sir
James Hurtle Fisher (President of the Legislative Council).
His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh visited Ade-
laide some sixteen months after the opening of the Town
Hall.
The ground floor is occupied by the Lord Mayor’s,
Lady Mayoress’s, and Aldermen and Councillors’ room,
Council Chamber and Town Clerk’s Department. The
Council Chamber, which is 43 feet by 23 feet 8 inches, is
elaborate in design and well furnished. The walls are
adorned with portraits of former Mayors of Adelaide and
other notabilities, including Colonel William Light, Founder
of the City, whose memory is toasted in solemn silence
after the first meeting of the City Council in each muni-
cipal year. The silver bowl used at the ceremony was pre-
sented to the Corporation on 31st January, 1859, by several
gentlemen in England interested in the foundation of the
Colony. The marks on the vessel indicate that it was made
in 1766 by a very well-known silversmith named William
Grundy, who was entered at Goldsmith’s Hall in 1743.
LORD MAYOR’S CHAIN.
The chain is composed of 28 links, the central one
being in the form of a fine gold plate, on which is engraved
in relief a representation of the facade of the Town Hall.
From this central link depends the badge of office —an oval
medallion of solid gold, five and a half inches long by three
and a half inches wide. The outer rim carries the words,
“City of Adelaide, incorporated A.D. 1849,” in gold letters
on a ground of white enamel. In the centre of the medal-
lion is placed the Adelaide arms, the colours of which are
represented in enamels. The arms are enclosed with
wreaths of the vine and olive. The chain or collar consists
of links of the shape of the letter S (set two together)*
and alternated with links, which carry the emblems of
England, Ireland, and Scotland —the rose, shamrock, and
thistle —and the Sturt pea symbolizing Australia. The
whole is executed in solid South Australian gold, and
weighs 40 oz. 5 dwt. The workmanship is excellent and
the design beautiful.
The medallion, on which are engraved the Arms of the
City, was presented by Sir Edwin Smith. Pendant from
the centre of the chain it is a work of art, as well in the
PRESENT GOVERNMENT OFFICES ON SAME SITE, 1936.


(By courtesy of Public Library


I I - v
I' <■
■ YT 'V
mL|"
All ' f
■
GENERAL POST OFFICE, 1839.
Situated on the eastern corner of North Terrace and King William
Street, 1838-48. The Bank of New South Wales now stands on
the same site. This was the third post office in Adelaide; the first
one was Thomas Gilbert’s hut, situated in the parklands, between
the River Torrens and the corner of West and North Terraces.
From there it was removed in June, 1838, to Gilles Arcade, Currie
Street, where business was transacted until it was transferred,
six months after, to the building in above illustration.
correct arrangement of the colours of the Arms as in the
manner in which the enamelled work has been executed.
*Sir William Sowden, formerly Editor of “The
Register.“ Adelaide, wrote to the Lord Mayor from London
under date 7th October, 1924:—“ When the late Sir Edwin
Smith originated the Mayor’s chain, many years ago, it
was thought that the ‘S’ links were adapted in relation
to his surname, and there was a controversy over the
matter. The accompanying, from ‘The Times’ today,
deals effectively with the cpiestion. and T thought you
might like to keep a record of it: —‘The Collar of SS. To
the Editor of “The Times.’’ Sir—Some months ago you
published a number of interesting letters about the origin
of the medieval decoration the Collar SS, but I think none
of your correspondents was able to write a very confident
opinion. Today I chanced on a report in the “Archaeo-
logical Journal” (Vol. LXVIT., page 382), of a meeting of
the Royal Archaeological Institute in Broughton Church,
Oxfordshire, at which I was present. In the chancel of
the church there is an elaborate tomb with effigies of
Sir Thomas Wykeham and his wife Elizabeth. Round the
lady’s neck is the collar of SS. The late Sir William St.
John Hope, who was there, explained that the Collar SS.
was a Lancastrian Order, and that the S was the initial
letter of “Souverain,” the favourite motto of Henry IV.
This had, he said, often been guessed at, but he was for-
tunate enough to find in the Record Office a half-burnt bill
for making a certain number of collars formed of letters
of S, each pounced with the word “Souverayne.” That
seems to be conclusive.’ ”
In the vestibule of the building is a handsome roll of
GENERAL POST OFFICE, ADELAIDE, 1936.


K
■»
m
WESLEYAN CHAPEL. GAWLER PLACE.
Erected in 1838-9.
This chapel was situated building superseded the
on the western side, a little first Wesleyan Church
north of Grenfell Street. erected in Hindley Street
The architect was G. S. in 1837. The warehouse of
Kingston, afterwards Sir D. &W. Murray Ltd. now
George S. Kingston. This stands on this site.
honour of officials and employees of the Corporation who
fouerht in the late Great War, while at the head of the
main stairs is another board on which are the names of the
ladies of the State who served as nurses.
WATERWORKS.
The water supply for the city and suburbs is obtained
from the rain that falls on the watersheds of the Torrens
and Onkaparinga Rivers, the catchment areas of which
comprise about 305 square miles. Selected water only
is taken from the catchment areas and stored in the three
reservoirs that supply the metropolitan area.
Thorndon Park was the first reservoir from which
the city was supplied. It was constructed in the year
1857, has a holding capacity of 139 million gallons, and
the water is obtained from the Torrens River. In the
year 1872 Hope Valley reservoir was constructed to hold
746 million gallons.
Hope Valley reservoir was started in 1891, and the new
water supply brought into operation in 1896. It holds
2,949 million gallons. It is filled from the Onkaparinga
River, and the water is fed to the city and suburbs by
gravitation.
GAWLER PLACE, 1936.
Showing the present buildings on the same site.
The total cost of work to date for the Adelaide and
suburban water supply amounts to £2,172,518, and the net


V '%
———
1 ** «s«i» if a - ' *T ?! *5-5
f.y '** /
—From a drawing by S. T. Gill.
NORTH TERRACE, LOOKING EAST, FROM KING
WILLIAM STREET, 1845.
On the left may be seen the Guard House. At the entrance to
Government House grounds and a little to the right are the
offices of the South Australian Company, a two-storey building
with a one-storev wing at each side. At the extreme right is a
throng of people waiting for the mail delivery at the G.P.O.
The Bank of New South Wales now occupies that site.
revenue for the year ended 30th June, 1930, was 4.33 per
cent, on capital cost.
A Bill was passed through the Legislature in 1912
for the construction and maintenance of a reservoir at Mill-
brook to augment the supply of the Adelaide water dis-
trict. This is now completed, and has a holding capacity
of 3.650 million gallons.
S.A. Waterworks. —Revenue, 1934-35, £644,821; main-
tenance expenditure, 1934-35, £146,207; construction expen-
diture. 1934-35, £496,823.
SEWERS.
An Act of Parliament was passed in the year 1870
making provision for the necessary expenditure for the
introduction of the water carriage system of drainage for
the city and suburbs. The construction of the main
sewers was immediately commenced, and also the prepara-
tion of land at the Sewerage Farm for the disposal of
sewerage. The first lot was treated in 1881, and the work
has been successfully carried out ever since.
Adelaide was the first city in Australia for which a
complete sewerage system, combined with a farm for the
disposal of sewerage, was adopted, and may fairly lay claim
to be one of the best drained cities in the world.
NORTH TERRACE, LOOKING EAST, 1936.


Office.
Name. Salary
Judge
Sir John William Jeffcott
£500
Advocate-General and Crown
300
Solicitor
Charles Mann
Naval Officer and Harbour Master
Thomas Lipson, R.N
200
Governor's Secretary and Clerk
200
of the Council
George Stevenson
Colonial Treasurer, Collector of
Revenue, and Accountant-
General
Osmond Gilles
300
Commissioner of Immigration and
John Brown
250
Auditor-General
Surveyor-General
Colonel William Light
400
Deputy Surveyor
George Strickland Kingston
200
Colonial Storekeeper
Thomas Gilbert
100
Colonial Surgeon
Dr. Cotter
100
Colonial Chaplain
Rev. C. B. Howard
250
The South Australian Company
The South Australian Company projected by Mr.
Angas was constituted ou 22nd January, 1836. The capital
was set down at £500,000, with power to increase it to
£1,000,000. Operations, however, could be begun when the
subscriptions amounted to £200,000, and this sum was
obtained principally through the energy and enthusiasm
of Air. Angas, who had to overcome opposition and con-
tempt from the public press and from people who were
largely interested in the colonies of New South Wales,
Van Diemen’s Land, and Western Australia. The name of
“The South Australian Company” was taken. The original
Directors were George Fife Angas (chairman), Raikes
Currie, Charles Hindley, M.P., James Hyde, Henry Kings-
cote, Alderman John Pirie, Christopher Rawson, John
Rundle, M.P., Thomas Smith, James Rudell, and Henry
Waymouth.
In the plan of operations the Company proposed, when
South Australia was reached, to erect wharves, warehouses,
and dwelling-houses upon their town land, and to let them
to colonists, or to otherwise dispose of them, to improve
and cultivate their country land, and to lease or sell part
of it if expedient; to lay out farms, erect buildings upon
them, and to let them to industrious tenants, with the right
of purchase before the expiration of the leases ; to grow
wool for European markets; to embark in whale, seal, and
other fisheries in the waters adjacent to the Province, and
to cure and salt fish for exportation; to salt and cure beef
and pork for export or for the provisioning of ships; and
to establish a bank or banks, which should advance on the
security of land, and undertake such banking operations as
the Directors might deem expedient.
The Directors of the South Australian Company and
the Board of Commissioners, when all the requirements
of the Act had been obeyed, rapidly arranged for the settle-
ment of South Australia. A month after the formation of
the Company, the Directors, with all the vigour of a com-
mercial house, had engaged a secretary and a staff of
clerks for the London office, a manager (Mr. S. Stephens)
to take charge of its agricultural affairs in the Province,
and overseers for each department. A ship, “The John
Pirie,” was under weigh with goods, live stock, and 23
adult passengers. By February 24th, 1836, anothei r esse ,
“The Duke of York,” was freighted with whaling stores,
was boarded by 38 passengers, including Mr. Stephens
and other officers of the Company, and was ready to sail.
The two pioneer ships at once put out. In March and April
the ships, “Lady Alary Pelham” and “Emma,” followed the
pioneers, carrying stores and 51 passenger^-
The salary of the first Governor of South Austiaha
was fixed at £BOO per annum, and a preliminary allowance
was made of £5OO for outfit. The colonising Commissioners
were to be represented in the Province by a Resident Com-
missioner, and Air. James Hurtle Fisher was appointed to
this position. The Governor represented the dignity and
authority of the Crown : the Resident Commissioner was
invested with administrative power of great importance
to the Province. Air. Robert Gouger, who had worked so
hard to have the Colony established, was appointed Colonial
Secretary.
It may be of interest to insert here the names of those
gentlemen, their offices and salaries, who were appointed
to officially found South Australia. Besides Governor
Hindmarsh, Resident Commissioner and Registrar Fisher
(£400), and Colonial Secretary Gouger (£400), there were:


On March 24th the “Cygnet,” with a division of the
survey party and other passengers on board, left England
for South Australia, and on May 4th the brig “Rapid,” 161
tons, sailed with Colonel Light. Captain Hindmarsh, Resi-
dent Commissioner Fisher, and 175 passengers followed on
July 30th on H.M.S. “Buffalo.” The “Africaine,” with Mr.
Gouger and Mr. Brown, the Emigration Agent, also set
sail. Thus the courageous men and their families, who
were to become the founders of a new province, the fathers
of another offshoot of a famous race, went forth to the
country in the Southern Hemisphere, which was lying as
one not yet awakened from a long and tranquil sleep.
On the 19th August, 1840, the first Colonial Municipal
Act was passed by Colonel Gawler and his Executive
Council. The preamble recited that the Colonization Com-
missioners had recommended to the Secretary of State for
the Colonies that it was expedient to give to the towns
which had been, and were about to be, established in South
Australia, as soon as they respectively acquired a popula-
tion of 2,000 inhabitants, elective municipal institutions, on
certain principles which had been adopted, that the Secre-
tary of State had recommended His Excellency the
Governor that an Act embracing those principles should be
passed, and that as Adelaide had attained a population
exceeding the requisite number, the said City should acquire
an elective institution. The Act provided for the election
of a Council, and for the levying of rates. The Council was
to consist of nineteen common Councihnen, of whom one
should be Mayor and three Aldermen. The qualifications
to vote were extended to every male person of full age,
who, at the date of his enrolment, should have resided six
months in the Province and was proprietor or tenant of
any land, house, warehouse, counting-house or shop within
the city valued at £2O per annum, and who lived within
seven miles thereof.
The election of the first Common Council took place on
the 31st October. 1840, the members being as follows: —
Aldermen—J. H. Fisher, A. H. Davis, M. Smillie, and
G. Stevenson.
Councillors —N. Hailes, Jno. Brown, C. Mann, J. Hal-
lett, W. Blyth, W. G. Lambert, H. Watson, T. Wilson,
CONGREGATIONAL CHAPEL.
This was the first chapel in South Australia. Erected in 1837 on
North Terrace, about half-way between Morphett Street and
West Terrace, by the Rev. T. Q. Stow.
REV. THOMAS QUINTON STOW.
The Rev. T. Q. Stow, the founder of the Congregational Church,
was the second pastor to arrive in South x\ustralia. His story is as
useful as the preceding, in showing of what sterling material the
early ministers of religion were made. Arriving in Adelaide on
October 16th, 1837, he was as zealous a pioneer as the Rev. C. B.
Howard. It was a matter of surprise to early settlers that one so
talented and so popular as a preacher should have been induced to
leave England, and the explanation is probably to be found in the
religious enthusiasm of the man, whom neither toil nor privation
could daunt. Though supported by the Colonial Missionary Society
as well as by free-will offerings, Mr. Stow, rather than encroach on
the former, was compelled, by the want of money, to go out of the
usual grooves. Thus Mr. J. W. Bull mentions that for years he
educated a few private pupils, and “afterwards engaged in farming
until the times of struggling and depression in the Colony had passed
away, and the pioneer Independent Church and congregation became
self-supporting.” To get a building for a church was no easy matter.
The first structure was composed of pines and reeds, and Mr. Stow
worked “with the laborers and the carter in cutting reeds and pines
and loading them.” Previous to that he conducted service in a large
marquee, or field-officer’s tent, which he had brought with him.
Mr. Stow instilled a self-reliant spirit in his flock; he became a
prominent Colonist, and was one of the most capable opponents of
the principle of State aid to religion introduced by Governor Robe.
He died in 1862, and Stow Memorial Church in Flinders Street is a
monument to his zeal.


L. Rowlands. E. W. Andrews, J. Frew, W. H. Neale, S. East,
W. Sanders, and J. Y. Wakeham.
The Council selected Alderman (afterwards Sir) James
Hurtle Fisher to be first Mayor of the City.
The first regular meeting took place on the 4th
November, 1840, when an address to the Governor
(Lieutenant-Colonel George Gawler, K.H.) was adopted.
This may be regarded as the inaugural act of the Cor-
poration. In his reply the Governor designated the Mayoi
“The Right Worshipful,” and the Aldermen “The Wor-
shipful."
Shortly after it came into existence the Council
obtained possession of Town Acre No. 203 (the site of the
present Town Hall) for the sum of twelve shillings. It
is noteworthy that the unimproved value of this acre at
the present time is approximately £115,550. No buildings
were erected upon this acre for some years afterwards,
and the Council in its early days was content with hiring a
room in Hindley Street in which to hold its meetings.
In June. 1843, matters came to a crisis when the mem-
bers of the Council were called together by Mayor
because the furniture belonging to the Corporation had
been seized for rent and publically offered for sale.
In September, 1843, the Corporation became legally
defunct.
The city affairs were managed by the Government
from 1843-49.
The question of reviving the City Corporation was
brought forward in February, 1849, and in that year an
Act was passed transferring the Government of the City
to a Commission of five members, called the City Com-
missioners, and nominated by the Government.
The City Commissioners met for the first time in Sep-
tember, 1849. They were Captain A. FI. Freeling, R.E.
(afterwards Colonel Sir Arthur Freeling, Bart.) and
Messrs. S. Davenport, F. R. Dutton (afterwards Agent-
THE OLD QUEEN'S THEATRE.
Opened in January, 1841. Portion of this building is still standing,
and being occupied in Currie Street as a motor park.
General for South Australia), W. Blyth, and F. R. Newland.
The Commissioners, with some slight changes in per-
sonnel, controlled city affairs until June, 1852.
The City Corporation was re-established in June, 1852,
by an Act of Parliament of 1849.
The Chief Magistracy was raised to the dignity of
a Lord Mayoralty by Royal Letters Patent, dated the 22nd
November, 1919. As intimated in a dispatch of 26th March,
1927, from the Right Honourable the Secretary of State for
the Dominions, His Majesty the King conferred upon the
Lord Mayor the right to be styled “The Right Honourable."
together with the privilege of being addressed during his
tenure of office, in instruments under the Royal Sign
Manual, as “Our Right Trusty and Well Beloved.” By
virtue of the Local Government Act, 1934, the Lord Mayor
is (ex officio) a Magistrate of the State of South Australia.


OFFICES IN 1839.
ELDER, SMITH & CO.,
LIMITED.
Founded in 1839 as A. L. Elder & Co. by Alexander Lang
Elder, second son of George Elder, a merchant and ship-
owner, of Kirkcaldy, Scotland, the venture has advanced to a
conspicuous position in the front rank of Australia’s pastoral
companies. The house of A. L. Elder & Co. was one of the
few mercantile firms which did not succumb to the pressure
of circumstances during the severe depression in the Colony
in 1841 and 1842, and which was removed by the discovery
of the Burra Burra copper mines in 1843.
In 1853 the firm comprised the following members: —
George Elder, Snr. (Kirkcaldy), Alexander Lang Elder, Cap-
tain William Elder, Thomas Elder, and George Elder, Jnr.
In 1856 the firm was reconstituted as Elder, Stirling and
Co., the partners being Thomas Elder, Robert Barr Smith,
Edward Stirling, and John Taylor. In 1863 the partnership
was dissolved, Thomas Elder and Robert Barr Smith remain-
ing: as the onlv members of the new firm of Elder, Smith and
o
Co.
In 1882 the wool and produce section was taken over by
Elder’s Wool and Produce Company, Limited, which, six years
later, was re-united with the parent firm, which then became
Elder, Smith & Co., Limited, with an authorised capital of
£1,000,000, which has been increased from time to time, and
now stands at £5,000.000.
The State of South Australia as a whole, and the Univer-
sity of Adelaide in particular, have benefited greatly by the
PROPOSED BUILDING TO BE COM-
PLETED IN 1939.
generosity of Sir Thomas Elder, Mr. Robert Barr Smith, and
Mr. Peter Waite, who throughout their lives directed the
affairs of the Company.
The Yearbook of South Australia (1906) referred to the
Company as follows : “The names of Elder and Smith have
become synonymous with the commercial history and pro-
gress of South Australia, and to the energy and enterprise,
combined with integrity and trustworthiness, of the founders
of the great firm, much of the national advancement of the
State is unquestionably due.”
Elder, Smith & Co., Limited, have branches throughout
the States of South Australia and Western Australia, as well
as in Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane, and London. Eighty-five
per cent, of its shares are owned by South Australians/ The
growth of the Company has been parallel with the develop-
ment of South Australia.
PRESENT OFFICES, ERECTED 1888.


' " 47
MAYORS OF
ADELAIDE
1840 , 1936.


SIR JAMES HURTLE FISHER, Knt.
Sir James Hurtle Fisher, Knt., the first Mayor of
Adelaide, was born at Little Bowden, Northampton-
shire, England, on Ist May, 1790, being the son of
James Fisher, a London architect. He adopted the
profession of the law, and practised as a solicitor
in London. On the foundation of the Province of
South Australia, he was appointed Resident Com-
missioner, and arrived here in H.M.S. Buffalo with
the first Governor (Captain John Hindmarsh, R.N.)
in December, 1836. He retained the Resident
Commissionership until 1838, in which year he
became President of the School Society, and for
many years he maintained a lively interest in the
cause of education. He was a member of the first
Adelaide Council, elected on 30th October, 1840. and
his colleagues chose him to be Mayor. A year later
he was re-elected to the chair, which he continued
to occupy until October, 1842. The Corporation
became insolvent and defunct in September, 1843,
and the city was managed as a Government Depart-
ment until September, 1849. It was then placed
under the control of City Commissioners, who
administered its affairs until the re-establishment
of the Corporation on Ist June, 1852, when Mr.
Fisher (as he was then) was elected Mayor, and
continued in office until 1854. He was thus chosen
as Chief Magistrate on five occasions. In 1853 he
became a member of the Legislative Council, and
on Ist November was elected Speaker of that body,
which passed the Constitutional Act, 1855-6. He
was President of the Legislative Council under re-
sponsible government from 1857-65, when he re-
tired from Parliament. In 1860 he was created a
Knight Bachelor. For many years Sir James was
Leader of the South Australian Bar. From an
early period he was a patron and ardent promoter
of sport, especially of racing, and was for a number
of years President of the Jockey Club. For many
years he held with honour the position of Chairman
of the Bench of Magistrates, and commanded
universal respect by his urbanity and impartiality.
In 1851 he was presented with a handsome service
of plate in recognition of his valuable services to
the Colony. Sir James died at Adelaide on 28th
January, 1875, and was buried at West Terrace
Cemetery. The suburb of Bowden, in the Muni-
cipality of Hindmarsh, was named by him after his
birth-place. A life-size painting of Sir James
adorns the walls of the Legislative Council
Chamber, and there is also a portrait of him in the
City Council Chamber.


MR. THOMAS WILSON.
The second occupant of the Mayoral Chair, Mr.
Thomas Wilson (1842-3), was the son of George
Wilson, surgeon and physician, and was born in
England in 1787. He was partly educated in Ger-
many, where he acquired extensive knowledge of
the classics and acquaintance with several modern
languages. It was there also that he cultivated his
natural taste for fine arts. On his return to Eng-
land he was articled to Messrs. Bartlett and Bed-
dome, solicitors, and he afterwards became partner
in the firm of Messrs. Wilson and Curtis. He acted
as solicitor to Lord Portman.
On Mr. Wilson’s departure for South Australia,
where he arrived in 1838, the house and grounds
were purchased by Mr. Phillips, Sheriff of the
County of Radnor. After his arrival in South Aus-
tralia, he was for many years a partner in the firm
of Messrs. Smart & Wilson, solicitors, and at the
time of his death held the position of Clerk of the
Court of Appeals, being then the oldest member
of the legal profession in the Province. Mr. \\ ilson
was a councillor in the first Adelaide Council
elected on 30th October, 1840. A year later he
became an Alderman, and in October, 1842, he was
elected to the Mayoral Chair, which he occupied
until September, 1843, when the Corporation be-
came insolvent and defunct until its re-establish-
ment in 1852. He married Miss Martha Greened,
whose sister, Mrs. Wallace, was the mother of
Alfred Russell Wallace, the eminent scientist. He
died on 31st March, 1863, at the residence of his
son, Mr. C. A. Wilson. Cwm Hir, Kensington, and
was buried in the North Road Cemetery. A por-
trait of Mr. Wilson hangs in the City Council
Chambers.
MR. JOSEPH HALL,
There are, unfortunately, very few particulars
available regarding Mr. Joseph Hall, who was the
third person to fill the Chief Magistracy. He was
first returned to the City Council on 12th October,
1852, as Alderman for Robe Ward, and in 1854 was
elected Mayor. He occupied the Chair for a year,
and afterwards continued in the Office of Alder-
man until 10th February, 1857, when his death
occurred. It is known that at the time of his
demise he conducted the business of a broker m an
office situated in what is now known as W ater-
house Chambers at the corner of King William and
Rundle Streets, and that his private residence was
on Pennington Terrace, North Adelaide. He was
buried at West Terrace Cemetery. Mr. Hall's
age appears in the cemetery records as 54 years,
while on the tombstone it is given at 51 years.
MR. JOHN LAZAR.
The fourth person to occupy the Mayoral Chair
was Mr. John Lazar, who was born at Edinburgh,
Scotland, on Ist December, 1801. He was married
in London on 2nd November, 1825, and left Eng


land for Sydney, New South Wales, by the ship
Lady McNaughton in 1836. During the voyage
fever broke out in the vessel, and 123 deaths
resulted. Mr. Lazar lost three of his children by
fever. Three others had previously died in Eng-
land. Four survived —Abraham, Samuel, Rachel,
and Victoria. On arrival in Sydney he was engaged
in the theatrical profession, and from 1836 to 1851
leased and managed various theatres in Australia,
including the old Victoria Theatre in Gilles Arcade,
ofif Currie Street. As an actor he played with the
late Mr. George Coppin, who afterwards became a
member of the Melbourne City Council. On leaving
the stage he went into the jewellery business in
Hindley Street in a shop situated where Messrs.
Clutterbuck Bros.' premises now stand. In 1853
he was elected an Alderman in the Adelaide City
Council, and continued to hold that office until 1855,
when he was selected to occupy the Mayoral Chair
by his colleagues. He was again returned to the
Chief Magistracy in 1856 and 1857, and in the fol-
lowing year became an Alderman once more. His
retirement from the City Council occurred in 1859.
After a residence in South Australia of 24 years Mr.
Lazar left in 1863 for New Zealand.
MR. WILLIAM THOMPSON SABBEN.
Meagre details are available with respect to Mr.
Sabben, the fifth person to occupy the Mayoral
Chair. "The Register," of 24th March, 1849, re-
ports that he, with others, had been admitted to
practice by the Supreme Court of South Australia.
In such report he is described as "late of Mel-
bourne, N.S.W." (Victoria at that time had not
been constituted a separate colony). Mr. Sabben
always practised law alone, never having been a
partner in any firm of solicitors and barristers.
On the restoration of the City Corporation in 1852,
he was appointed Town Clerk, and continued in
that position until February, 1856. Later in the
same year he was elected a Councillor for Hind-
marsh Ward. On 9th December, 1858, he was
selected by his colleagues as Mayor, but his resig-
nation, both as Mayor and Councillor, was received
on 17th January, 1859. In 1871 he was managing'
clerk for H. C. Palmer, solicitor. His death oc-
curred at Queen's Own Town, in the district of
Strathalbyn, on 3rd May, 1890, his age being 78
years.
MR. EDMUND WILLIAM WRIGHT.
The sixth gentleman to fill the office of Mayor
was Mr. Wright, who was born on 4th April, 1824.
His father was head of the Ordnance Department
of the Tower of London, and a descendant of the
celebrated Peltro William Tomkins, of Wales, pro-
fessor of painting to the princesses of the court
of George 111., who had been a student of Bar-
tolozzi, of Florence. Later Professor Tomkins,
with Longman and others, founded a studio in Bond
Street, London, for the development of art in all
its forms.
In London, Mr. Wright received a training as
a civil engineer and architect. Later he visited
various parts of Europe, America, and Canada, and
was twice in the Bermudas, where he revelled in
the delights of the mild climate and the beautiful
blue lagoons, after having, while bridge-building in
Canada, suffered from exposure which affected him
for the remainder of his life. About 1850 he fol-
lowed his brother, Edward Amand, to South Aus-
tralia. There they had a cottage at Lockleys,
where they were looked after by Mr. and Mrs.
Rowell, and later by a widowed cousin, Mrs.
Gretton (nee LeMessurier). Lured by the attrac-
tion of the goldfields, he and his brother Arthur
tried their fortune. Edmund, however, preferred
to practise his profession of architect and returned
to Adelaide.
Edmund, among his multifarious activities, long
held the agency in South Australia for the com-
pany, occupying the building known as Imperial
Chambers, now a part of the premises of the
National Bank of Australasia, the architecture of
which structures are based somewhat on the
French Renaissance or Romanesque, and are evi-
dently the children of his brain. On Ist December.


1857, Mr. Wright was elected to the Adelaide City
Council as Alderman for Robe Ward, and on 24th
January, 1859, his colleagues selected him to suc-
ceed Mr. Sabben as Mayor. The year was one of
financial stress, and it was found necessary to make
stringent economies. A debt of £9,000 was reduced
to £3,200. During Mr. Wright’s term the silver
bowl presented by some of the founders of South
Australia for the purpose of keeping green the
memory of Colonel Light, arrived from England,
as also did the seal of the Corporation. At the
end of the year he retired from the Council.
Mr. Wright was keen on writing prize essays,
and was most successful in various subjects. In
Canada he was awarded a prize on the subject
of road-making. He also won many competitions
for bridge-making, and in Adelaide for the Town
Hall Building, the Houses of Parliament, and the
present Lnion Bank in King William Street, at that
time the Bank of South Australia. The Town
Hall was built from his designs, which were modi-
fied to meet financial exigencies. The style of
the building and the facade in King William Street,
with its carved faces, worked in the Italian style
of which Philbert Delorme was past master, is
reminiscent of structures in Genoa and Florence.
Of the sculptured heads on the Town Hall building
the centre one represents the Prince Consort, who
had not long been dead. Others in all probability
represent Michalenagelo Buonarroti, Donatellor,
Brunelleschi, Goujon. Delrome, or other great
creative minds of the fifteenth centuries, after
whose ideals he modelled much of his work.
He was engineer-surveyor for the original horse
tramways of Adelaide. While in Canada he helped
in the construction of the magnificent tubular
bridge over the St. Lawrence at Montreal. Mr.
Wright collected a few fine paintings and books
of exquisite bindings, especially the poets, in all
of which he delighted. He was related to quite
a number of distinguished persons who have been
makers of history.
He married the widow of Mr. Stuckey, and
resided at Palmer Place, North Adelaide.
Mr. Wright died on sth August, 1888, at North
Adelaide, being 64 years old. He is buried in the
Church of England Cemetery, North Road.
MR. EDWARD BOOTLE WILBRAHAM GLANDFIELD.
Particulars of the early life of Mr. Glandfield,
the seventh gentleman to hold the Mayoralty, have
not been ascertained. It is known, however, that
he was born in 1823, and was a passenger to Ade-
laide from London by the ship Gratitude, which
arrived on 15th August, 1848. On board the same
vessel was Miss Elizabeth Ann Hawkes, late of
Newcastle, England, whose marriage to Mr. Gland-
field was recorded in the register on 16th Septem-
ber. The bridegroom is described as late of Liver-
pool. He established a grocery business in Rundle
Street, near Gawler Place, soon after arrival. In
1852 on the re-establishment of the City Corpora-
tion Mr. Glandfield was elected a Councillor, and
two years later became an Alderman. He con-
tinued in this office until December, 1859, when
he was elected Mayor. A year later his col-
leagues re-elected him to the chair, and he was
returned for a third term at the end of 1861, this
time by the citizens instead of the Council. He
thus enjoyed the distinction of being the first
Mayor elected under the system at present in
vogue. His retirement from the Council occurred
in April, 1862, after which he did' not bestow much
attention on public affairs. Mr. Glandfield carried
on his grocery business for years, but later fol-
lowed the occupation of a commercial broker. He
died at his residence, Grenfell Street, Adelaide, on
13th January, 1880, from blood poisoning super-
vening the running of a nail into his foot. Mr.
Glandfield was 56 years old. He was buried in
the West Terrace Cemetery. Mrs. Glandfield (who
was a daughter of the late Mr. Robert Hawkes)
survived him, but there were no children. The
Council does not possess a portrait of Mr. Gland-
field.


’ ■ .
~ £m ■''■ Jzr’
"% & m
iisiiip ■mm&j& #
it' : ' JPBKdHftr?> *■
SSmSSmP
mmM Mi''
.
■ Ik. JH
PRb j<gBiiapS
'U,f; : J ". ../ ■ -'S3| ■
THE HON. THOMAS ENGLISH, M.L.C.
The eighth occupant of the Mayoral Chair, Hon.
T. English, was born 9th July, 1820, at Mary-
port, in the County of Cumberland, England. He
arrived in South Australia on 11th January, 1850,
in the barque Richardson. Capt. James English,
his elder brother, was in command, and Mrs.
English and her brother, Mr. Henry Brown, were
also passengers. Mr. English many times men-
tioned that the only presentable building in Ade-
laide on his arrival was that known as Waterhouse
Corner. Not long after his arrival he and Mr.
Brown entered into business as contractors and
timber merchants, thus founding the well-known
firm of English & Brown. At the time of the
gold rush Mr. Brown went to Victoria, while
Mr. English remained to keep together the busi-
ness. He was a member of the firm for sixteen
years, during which time some of the most im-
portant buildings were erected by the firm. Among
these may be mentioned Parliament House, the
National Bank, Chalmers Church (which Mr.
English designed), the Adelaide Town Hall, Flin-
ders Street Baptist Church, St. Francis Xavier’s
Cathedral, the General Post Office, Government
House, and Stow Memorial Church.
It was 1861 that he first entered the Council as
Councillor for Gawler Ward. In April of the fol-
lowing year he was elected Mayor, in place of
Mr. Glandfield, and at the end of the year was
returned to office for another term. He was one
of the principal advocates for the erection of a
Town Hall. After a keen struggle the question
was put to the citizens, and resulted in a vote
in favour of the undertaking. The Town Hall
was opened in June, 1866.
MR. SAMUEL GOODE.
Mr. Samuel Goode was the ninth gentleman to
occupy the Chief Magistracy of the City, and was
born at Hampton Charles, Herefordshire, England,
in 1819. He first worked with his father at his
birthplace, and later engaged in farming pursuits
on his own account until 1850, when he came to
South Australia and started in the drapery trade.
In 1865 he returned to England, and took a farm
near Leominster with good grazing ground. About
this time there was a great demand in America
for pedigree Hereford cattle. Mr. Goode made
a speciality of this class of stock, and with care-
ful management he realized splendid prices. He
was very successful, and in 1889 he sold out and
took another trip to Australia, residing in North
Adelaide for five years. Then he paid another
visit to the Mother Country, where he remained
for twelve months.
Mr. Goode always evinced a practical interest
in public affairs. He was first elected to the Ade-
laide City Council as Councillor for Robe Ward in
December, 1856, and served for two years. In


* jrV ' 1 jik
I ■■ -I $(L V m^
t
\Sr;'' *v V —** '
m 1 ?- 'mB|r
* < - — ..
■■■*-".:■ 7 ••,. ,'.v -<e«**^^
*• A ■ -
December, 1861, he was returned as Councillor for
Hindmarsh Ward, and two years later he became
Mayor for one year, retiring at the end of 1864.
Mr. Goode also had municipal experiences in
England. He was in the Leominster Town Coun-
cil for seven years, and was also Mayor of the
Borough.
He filled the position of President of the Royal
Agricultural and Horticultural Society, and was
a member of the Agricultural Bureau fiom its
inception.
Mr. Goode’s death occurred on 26th July, 1901,
and he was buried in the North Road Cemeteiy.
MR. WILLIAM TOWNSEND.
The tenth occupant of the Mayoral Chair, Mr,
William Townsend, was born in London in 1821,
and arrived in South Australia by the ship Fop
Smit in August, 1844. He was first a shoemaker,
then a salesman, and finally an auctioneer. He
established the firm of Townsend, Botting & Kay,
auctioneers and valuators.
From 1857 (the first Parliament) until his death
he was a member of the House of Assembly,
first for Onkaparinga and afterwards for Sturt,
the district he lived in until his death. He was
Commissioner of Public Works in Mr. Dutton’s
Ministry of 1863, and Commissioner of Crown
Lands in Mr. Hart’s Ministry of 1868 and Mr.
Blyth’s Ministry of 1871-2. From June, 1876, to
his decease he was Chairman of Committees.
In December, 1864, Mr. Townsend was elected
Mayor of Adelaide, and served for two terms. To
commemorate the opening of the Town Hall on
20th June, 1866, he gave a banquet to a large num-
ber of citizens, and next evening gave a large ball.
On 25th May, 1867, he was presented with a
gold watch and chain, silver claret jug, and 300
sovereigns, and Mrs. Townsend received a silver
tea and coffee service.
Mr. Townsend personally collected the money
for and founded the Blind, Deaf, and Dumb Insti-
tute, and was associated with many public activi-
ties. In aid of institutes and charities he delivered
in many parts of the State his popular lecture,
“Lights and Shades of London Life.’'
He filled the Mayoral Chair at Unley in 1879-80
and 1880-1. He lived at “Pellatt Villa,” Lower
Mitcham, named after Mr. Apsley Pellatt, a gen-
tleman who had taken an interest in him.
Mr. Townsend died on 25th October, 1882, aged
61, and was buried in West Terrace Cemetery.


• f
F r V-;.T 8 4 — I
m m*m m m »i« m i
" iuM* H. > 'a •<". U Sm • **« t '
• H
III D I N N K K ,. $g|
S , 1
3 <*%/ Is
|S %*L Wh'&y. 4-*&- ***** **&■' %»*/*** ||||
™ $&&$. &*** y*** *■& S
Sjjhe**,, y £%tU' 'Mrd %&
g|| %.***y*t&. $4<p**S : S i-
W IK
mSb- %*&y 3tsmb£ *£■ •$**£*# |pp
A facsimile of the Menu Card used on the occasion
q of the Civic Banquet tendered to His Royal Highness q
Duke of Edinburgh at the Adelaide Town Hall, 9th
November. 1867.


V '" JF- til
1 ' . -
\- Wb iBF
MR. HENRY ROBERT FULLER.
Mr. Henry Robert Fuller was the eldest son
of Mr. H. P. Fuller, surgeon, of Hackney Road,
London, and rvas born at Cambridge Heath on
22nd January, 1825. For some years he attended
Mr. E. Duke's Academy, "Belle Vue," at Ball's
Pond, near Highbury, and subsequently went to
Mr. Burn's School, Kennington Common. He
joined the service of the P. & O. Steam Naviga-
tion Co., and in a comparatively few years became
second mate, serving on board the vessels Tagus,
Iberia, Liverpool, Braganza, and Royal Tar. He
arrived in South Australia in 1845, and was at first
employed on the Port Road. Afterwards for
nearly eleven years he contracted for the convey-
ance of merchandise between Adelaide and its port.
In 1856 the S.A. Railways were opened, and with
Mr. Geo. Mills and Henry Hill as co-partners, he
obtained the contract for the management of the
goods traffic over the railways. Later he took
over the coaching business of Cobb & Co., and with
Mr. John Hill formed the firm of John Hill and
Co., which for many years controlled practically
all the coaching and mail business from the city
to the hills towns.
In 1865 he entered Parliament as a representative
for West Adelaide, and in the following year nc
beat Mr. W. Townsend in a contest for the Mayoral
office. He was re-elected in 1867 and 1868. In
November, 1867, His Royal Highness the Duke of
Edinburgh visited the colony, and Mr. Fuller had
the honour of being the first civic dignitary who
entertained royalty in Australia. His entertain-
ment of the royal visitor was on a most lavish
scale.
Mr. Fuller was a Councillor for Hindmarsh Ward
in 1876-7 and 1877-8, and in 1882 was elected
Mayor, holding office for one year. He again
became a Councillor for Hindmarsh Ward in 1885,
and remained so until 1887. In 1888 he was
elected Alderman, and continued in that office until
1890. For a year he was out of the Council,
but at the end of 1891 returned as Alderman, which
office he held until December, 1900.
His death occurred on 27th August, 1905, and
he was buried at the North Road Cemeter}^
HON. JUDAH MOSS SOLOMON.
The Hon. Judah Moss Solomon was born in
London on 21st December, 1818. He came out to
Sydney at the age of 13, and was educated at
the Sydney College (afterwards the University).
After completion of his studies he was employed
as supercargo of the barque Strathila. He arrived
in this vessel in South Australia in October, 1839,
with a cargo of ponies from Timor. He then
settled in Sydney, and in the year 1842 went to
Moreton Bay (now Brisbane). He was appointed
Government Auctioneer, and sold the township
allotments of Brisbane, which he left in .1846, and


settled in Adelaide as an auctioneer. He con-
ducted the largest business of that character in
those days. In 1852 he was elected as Alderman
for the City Council. He left for London in 1854,
and returned to Adelaide in 1857. In September,
1858, he was elected to the House of Assembly as
member for the City of Adelaide. In March, 1861,
he was elected as a member of the Legislative
Council for five years. In 1872 he represented
West Adelaide in the House of Assembly.
In December, 1869, he was elected Mayor of
Adelaide, and was returned unopposed the follow-
ing year. The Victoria Bridge was opened dur-
ing his term of office. On the retirement of Mr.
R. Tngleby he acted as Coroner. He was the first
President of the Adelaide Hebrew Congregation,
and subsequently often filled the same position.
In March, 1877, he became Chairman of the Desti-
tute Board, which position he held until his death
on 29th August, 1880. He was a great advocate
of the boarding-out system, and no part of his
duties gave him more pleasure than seeing that
the foster-parents had proper regard for the wel-
fare of the children.
During his term of office as Mayor he originated
the conference composed of the Mayors of various
municipalities and chairmen of district councils,
who sat to consider the best means of dealing
with nuisances over which the municipalities had
no control. The outcome was the Public Health
Act now in force.
MR. ADOLPH HEINRICH FRIEDRICH BARTELS.
Mr. A. H. F. Bartels was born at Gilton, in the
Kingdom of Hanover, on 29th July, 1819, and in his
early years followed the trade of a cigarmaker
at Hamburg. Thence he went to Breslau, where
he met the father of Mr. B. Seppelt, with whom
he came, via Melbourne, to South Australia about
1848. He became a naturalized British subject
on the 29th November. 1852, having then been
two years and ten months in South Australia.
After a visit to the Victorian goldfields he returned
to Adelaide, and opened a tobacconist's shop on
his own account. After the death of Mr. Uhlen-
dorf, licensee of the King of Hanover Hotel, Mr.
Bartels married his widow, and carried on the busi-
ness from 1855 until the end of 1865, when he
entered into partnership with Mr. G. H. S. Meyer
as general agents and grain merchants, a connection
which existed up till the time of his death. In De-
cember, 1866, Mr. Bartels was chosen by the rate-
payers of Hindmarsh Ward to represent them in
the Adelaide City Council, a position he retained for
four years. The manner in which he discharged his
functions gave so much satisfaction that after a
year's absence from the Council he was in Decem-
ber, 1871, elected Mayor of the City. The fol-
lowing year he was returned to office unopposed.
He was a member of the Destitute Board. His


first wife having died, he was married to Miss
Weidenbach, of Glen Osmond, who survived him
with six children. Rv his previous wife he had
one daughter. His death occurred on 9th Novem-
ber, 1878, at the age of 58. Mr. Bartels was buried
in the West Terrace Cemetery.
MR WILLIAM DIXON ALLOTT.
Mr. William Dixon Allott was born on Ist May,
1817, in Walsall, Staffordshire, England, and was
the son of a popular Congregational minister of
that town. He was apprenticed to the druggist
business in Sheffield, and was for some time in
business in Birmingham. Mr. Allott was a mem-
her of the Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain.
He arrived in South Australia in 1854, and carried
on the business of a chemist and druggist first
in Leigh Street and then in Rundle Street, for nearly
forty years, during which time he acquired a reputa-
tion for skill in dealing with drugs. He entered
the Adelaide City Council at the annual elections
of 1869 as a representative for Hindmarsh Ward.
Mr. Allott sat for four years, and at the close of
1873 was elected Mayor of the City, in succession
to the late Mr. A. H. F. Bartels. He offered him-
self for election for the Mayoralty the following
year, but was defeated by Sir John Colton. During
his term of office the expedition led by the late
Lord Forrest from Western Australia made its
triumphal march into the City, a spectacle the
memory of which can never be effaced from the
minds of those who witnessed this remarkable
demonstration, and the subsequent proceedings,
when popular enthusiasm was roused to the ut-
most. In the same year Mr. Allott signed an
address from the City Council to the Queen on the
occasion of the marriage of the Duke of Edinburgh
and the Grand Duchess of Russia. On his decease
on 18th November, 1892, the press eulogium of him
was "a man without an enemy, universally
respected." His death occurred at the residence of
his daughter, Mrs. H. F. Peacock, Knightsbridge,
and he was interred at the West Terrace Cemeterv.
HON. SIR JOHN COLTON, K.C.M.G
Born at his father’s farm, Stonehills, Harben-
clen Ford, Devonshire, England, in 1823, Sir John
Colton arrived in Adelaide with his father. Mr.
William Colton, in 1839.
In 1859 he was elected an Alderman of the City,
and, on the abolition of that office in 1861, became
a Councillor for Gawler Ward, retiring from the
Council at the end of 1863. In that year he was
returned at the head of the poll as a member of
the House of Assembly for Noarlunga, which dis-
trict he represented, with short intervals, through-
out his Parliamentary career.


After the lapse of one Parliament, however, he
was again chosen by his old constituents at a time
when he was also Mayor of Adelaide, to which
office he had been elected in December, 1874, hold-
ing- it for one year. Back in the House, he
joined the Boucaut Ministry as Treasurer. In
March, 1876, he resigned his portfolio, but three
months later he formed an Administration, which
he conducted until October, 1877, when the Bou-
caut Ministry came into power. In August of the
following year Mr. Colton became ill, resigned his
seat, and regained his health by rest from official
worry and by travel. He re-entered the Assembly
in the new Parliament in 1881.
A little short of three years later—having in the
meantime revisited England—Mr. Colton carried a
motion of no confidence in the Bray Cabinet, and
then he formed another Ministry. In June, 1885,
the Colton Government was forced out of office
for entirely personal reasons, which had no relation
to Mr. Colton himself.
He manifested a lively interest in the welfare
°i _ quite a number of organisations, having-
religious, philanthropic, and temperance aims. In
private life he was specially noted for his bene-
factions to the poor and needy. He was created
a Knight Commander of the Most Distinguished
Order of St. Michael and St. George on Ist January,
1892. Sir John Colton died at Hackney on 6th
February, 1902, and was buried at West Terrace
Cemetery.
MR. CALEB PEACOCK.
Mr. Caleb Peacock was born in Adelaide in 1841,
and was the youngest son of the Hon. W. Peacock,
M.L.C., a pioneer of this State and founder of the
firm of Messrs. W. Peacock & Son, tanners and
wool scourers. . He was educated at the Adelaide
Educational Institution, conducted by the late Mr.
J. L. Young, and on leaving school entered the
firm of Messrs. Beely & Dunstan, millers, of Gren-
fell Street, subsequently establishing himself as
an agent at Blanchetown on the River Murray.
When his brother Joseph died he came to town to
take control of the business of the firm, which
he continued to manage till the time of his death.
He entered public life in December, 1875, when
he was elected Mayor of the City, being the first
native-born to be elected to the civic chair. He
was re-elected in 1876. During his two years
term of office many improvements of a substantial
and permanent character were effected. It was
while Mr. Peacock was Mayor that the City Coun-
cil discussed the scheme for improving the sani-
tary conditions of Adelaide by a complete system
of deep drainage. Among other things, the Ade-
laide and Suburban Tramways were begun, and
the Adelaide Bridge over the Torrens completed.
Mr. Peacock's period of service in the Legislative
Council was much shorter than either that of his
father or brother. He sat in the ninth Parliament
as member for North Adelaide, being returned
at a by-election on 16th December, 1878. He served
through the Parliament, but did not seek re-
election. He was a Justice of the Peace, a director
of the National Bank of Australasia, and chair-
man of the SA. Board of directors of the Mutual
Assurance Society of Victoria. He was also keenly
interested in sports of all kinds, was Vice-President
of the Adelaide Rowing Club. He was a life mem-
ber of the Adelaide Children's Hospital and a
member of the Committee of the S.A. Institution
for the Blind, Deaf, and Dumb, and a member of
the Council of the Zoological Society. He was
also a keen Freemason, being the founder of the
Lodge St. Alban, of which he was second Master.
He died on 17th February, 1896, and was buried in
the West Terrace Cemetery.
MR. HENRY SCOTT.
Mr. Henry Scott, who was born in May, 1836,
was a son of Thomas Scott, of Boode House, near
Braunton, Devon. Although born in England, his
ancestors were Scots, who crossed the border as
followers of the Stuarts, between 1640-45. They
remained in Devon County until 1845, when the
family removed to Bristol, where Mr. Scott was


educated. When 18 years of age he came to
South Australia, and was engaged for about 12
years in the office of his brother, Mr. Abraham
Scott, who conducted a woolbroking establish-
ment. In 1688 the business was transferred to
himself, and he soon demonstrated that he pos-
sessed all the essential qualities of a shrewd and
capable merchant. Three years previously he had
interested himself in sheep farming, and afterwards
continued the pursuit with that of the direction
of the large mercantile trade. In 1877 he was
elected Mayor of Adelaide, and performed his civic
duties with such tact and ability that he won the
dee]) respect and regard of all citizens. It was
largely owing to the energy and determination
which he brought to bear on the important pro-
blem that the deep drainage system was inaugu-
rated with such conspicuous success. The fol-
lowing year he was chosen as a member of the
Legislative Council —-that was prior to the sub-
division of the Province into electoral districts —
and retained his seat until 1891.
Mr. Scott, who was married on Bth March, 1861,
to Emily, daughter of Mr. Charles Gooch, of Ade-
laide, died at his residence, Boode House, Mount
Lofty, on 16th December, 1913, in his seventy-
eighth year, and was interred in the Stirling East
Cemetery.
MR. WILLIAM CHRISTIE BUIK.
Mr. William Christie Buik was born at Dundee,
Scotland, on 3rd May, 1824, and came to South
Australia by the ship Coromandel in April, 1849.
He began business in Hindley Street as a partner
and representative of Mr. Robert Whyte, hardware
merchant, under the style of Messrs. R. A hvte
and Co. Mr. Buik afterwards removed to Rundle
Street, where he carried on business on his own
account. He took an active interest in public
affairs in the early days, especially in connection
with the first elections held after the Constitution
Act come into operation. He entered the Ade-
laide Corporation as Councillor for Hindmarsh
Ward in 1863, and served the citizens in that
capacity for two years. From 1866-68 he was
Mayor of Kensington and Norwood. For three
years, from 1867-70, he was Captain of the Scot-
tish Volunteer Rifle Club. When the Duke of
Edinburgh visited South Australia His Royal High-
ness was so pleased with the discipline and mili-
tary appearance of the Scottish Rifle Corps that
he permitted the company to adopt the title of the
''Duke of Edinburgh's Own." In 1871 Mr. Buik
visited England, and acquired much valuable infor-
mation and experience regarding the working of
the tramway systems in the old country. He had
previously advocated the construction of tramways
in Adelaide. Indeed, it is said that he was one of


the first to suggest this method of locomotion.
Soon after he returned to South Australia he took
a leading part in the establishment of the Ade-
laide and Suburban Tramway Company, which was
the first of the kind formed in Australia. At the
inaugural meeting of the directors Mr. Buik was
chosen Chairman, a position he held up to the time
of his death. Tn 1878 the citizens of Adelaide
conferred upon him the highest honour in their
power by electing him Mayor. He filled the Chief
Magistracy for a year, and afterwards occupied
a seat in the Council as Councillor for Hindmarsh
W r ard from 1879-81, and as Alderman from the
latter year until 1884. He was again returned as
Alderman in 1892, and retired in 1895. Mr. Buik
served in Parliament for several years. In 1881
he secured a seat in the Legislative Council as
one of the representatives of the Province (which
then formed a single constituency), and served the
electors until 1888. He was a member of the
Adelaide Licensing Bench for many years, and had
a seat on the boards of public companies and some
charitable institutions. Mr. Buik took an active
interest in religious work. He was a prominent
member of the Congregational Church, and for
many years prior to his death had been a deacon
of the Hindmarsh Scpiare Church. He also held
a seat on the Council of the Congregational Union.
His death occurred at his residence, "Rosemont,"
Kensington Road, Norwood, on 6th February, 1903,
in his seventy-ninth year. He was buried in the
West Terrace Cemetery.
SIR EDWIN THOMAS SMITH, K.C.M.G.
Sir Edwin Thomas Smith, K.C.M.G., was born
at Walsall, Staffordshire, England, on 6th April,
1830, and served an apprenticeship in his native
town with an uncle who was in business with a
large exporting connection with Australia. Many
of his former schoolfellows, attracted by the news
of the gold discoveries in the southern continent,
emigrated to Victoria, and Mr. Smith (as he was
then), against the wishes of his uncle and friends,
decided to follow them to Australia. In 1853 he
secured letters of recommendation to prominent
men in South Australia, and came to Adelaide. The
prospects of business induced him to remain, and
he soon set up for himself as an importer, build-
ing premises in Bank Street. Subsequently he
turned his attention to the brewing industry, with
which he was actively connected for 35 years,
and he was afterwards a member of the Board of
the Australian Mutual Provident Society and a
trustee of the Savings Bank of South Australia.
In the 'sixties Mr. Smith began to take an active
interest in public affairs by associating himself
with municipal enterprise. He was Mayor of Ken-
sington and Norwood from November, 1867, to


I_l
"' *t' -
.--..'■yp
March, 1870, and from 1871 to 1873. In December.
1879, he was elected Mayor of Adelaide, and was
re-elected in 1880 and 1881. In 1886, the year
prior to the holding of the Exhibition in connection
with the Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria’s reign,
of which he was chief promoter, he was returned
unopposed to the Chief Magistracy, and again in
1887.
Sir Edwin Smith’s death occurred on Christmas
Day, 1919, and he was buried in the family vault
in the private cemetery attached to his place of
worship, Clayton Church, Norwood, situated not
far from his residence at “The Acacias,” Marryat-
ville.
Sir Edwin was married twice —first to Miss
Florence Stock (daughter of the late Mr. Robert
Stock, of Clifton, England), who died in 1862, and
seven years later to Miss Elizabeth Spicer (daugh-
ter of the late Mr. Edward Spicer, an Adelaide mer-
chant), who died in 1911. There were two chil-
dren of the first marriage—Mr. S. Talbot Smith,
M.A., LL.B. (who is President of the Board of
Governors of the Public Library, Museum and Art
Gallery of S.A.), and Mrs. G. PI. Dean, M.B.E. (wife
of Brigadier-General G. H. Dean).
MR. WILLIAM BUNDEY.
Mr. William Bundey was born on 26th January,
1826, at Beaulieu, in New Forest, Hampshire, Eng-
land, where he spent his early boyhood. Mr.
Bundey went to London and served his appren-


ticeship as a carpenter and builder. Soon after
completing his term of service he left for South
Australia, where he arrived on 19th November,
1848. He worked at his trade for a few years.
The stories of the extraordinary richness of the
\ ictorian goldfields induced him to try his luck as
a digger. He was fairly successful, but after a
short experience of the life returned to Adelaide,
where he began business as a master builder, and
soon made his mark. From his first connection
with the City he took an active interest in its
affairs, and in December, 1861, was elected to repre-
sent Robe Ward in the City Council. As one of
the City Fathers he did good work, and was twice
re-elected for the Ward, the residents of which
came more in contact with Mr. Bundey than those
in any other part of the City. In 1868, after
seven years' service, he did not seek re-election,
but retired from active service in civic affairs for
13 years. In 1881 he again entered the Council
as one of the six Aldermen when that section of
the Corporation was revived. There were no less
than 13 candidates for the new honours, and Mr.
Bundey was returned third on the poll, after the
Hon. W. C. Buik and Mr. F. Hagedorn. After two
years' service as an Alderman he consented, in 1883,
to contest for election for the Mayoralty with Mr.
H. R. Fuller. The result was a decisive victory
for Mr. Bundey by 2,495 votes against 1,618. In
1884 he was opposed by Mr. John Rounsevell,
whom he defeated by 1,991 votes to 1,650. At the
end of November, 1886, he vacated the Chief Magis-
trate's Chair, and afterwards took no active in-
terest in public affairs. Strangely enough, he
concerned himself only with civic and not with
general political movements. He was often
strongly urged to stand for Parliament, especially
by citizens of North Adelaide, but would never
consent. Mr. Bundey was a prominent member
of the Independent Order of Oddfellows, Man-
chester Unity, and so early as 1856 was Grand
Master of the Lodge in South Australia. Pie was
also (me of the founders in 1867 of the City Per-
manent Building Society, and was elected Chairman
at the time, a position he held for many years.
In private life Mr. Bundey, by his upright dealings,
gained the esteem of a host of friends. He was of
a genial disposition, and was always exceedingly
affable. Mr. Bundey was not an orator, but his
earnest speeches on municipal affairs always gained
listeners. The deceased gentleman was a pro-
minent advocate of total abstinence principles, and
was the leader of many Bands of Hopes and other
similar organisations. His death occurred sud-
denly on 2nd April. 1889, at a wedding gathering
in the North Adelaide Institute, and he was buried
in the Walkerville Cemetery, from his residence,
Mackinnon Parade, North Adelaide. He left a
widow, a son, and a daughter. The son was Mr.
George Bundey, manager of the Bank of Eudunda.
MR. JAMES SHAW.
Mr. James Shaw was born at Belfast, Ireland,
in the year 1846. and was a son of Mr. Hugh Shaw,
an engineer of that city, where the gentleman
under notice received his education. When 18
years of age he left his native land for New Zea-
land, arriving in Auckland in the year 1864. Being
possessed of considerable enterprise, he. in an in-
credibly short time, established himself in a lead-
ing position as a contractor, and many substantial
houses in the North Island were erected by him.
Opportunity was given to him of proving his
mettle during one of the attempts of the Maoris
to overthrow British rule. For his courage and
soldierly qualities he was awarded a service medal.
Mr. Shaw remained in New Zealand for four vears
after this war, which occurred in 1866. and in 1871
came to South Australia.
Mr. Shaw interested himself in the general wel-
fare of the city during this period. He entered
the Adelaide City Council as Councillor for Young-
Ward in 1881, became an Alderman in 1883, and
in December, 1888, was invested with the Mayoral
honours. He discharged the duties of this im-
portant post with much liberality and dignity for
one year. He made a close study of municipal


matters, and did much good work for the Cor-
poration, but the pressure of sustained labours
resulted in failure of health, and he was forced to
relinquish his civic offices in order to visit the sul-
phur springs of New Zealand.
Returning from New Zealand, Mr. Shaw settled
down to a retired life in Adelaide, where, as also
at Coolgardie, he was well known for his charit-
able deeds and practical help to many different
classes of the needy.
Mr. Shaw died on 17th September, 1910.
SIR LEWIS COHEN.
Sir Lewis Cohen, who Was a son of the late Mr.
Henry Cohen, was born at Liverpool, England, on
23rd December, 1849, and arrived in Sydney,
N.S.W., three years later. His education began
in Sydney, and in 1863 his parents sent him to
London to complete it. Afterwards he spent some
years in Fiji, and came to Adelaide in 1870.
He entered the City Council in December, 1886,
as Councillor for MacDonnell Ward, served in that
capacity for three years, and on Ist December,
1889, was elected Mayor. This office he held for
two years, at the end of which time he retired
from the Council. In December, 1901, Mr. Cohen
(as he was then) was again elected Mayor, and
occupied the position until December, 1904, when
he became an Alderman. After two years’ ser-
vice in the latter office he retired from the Council
once more. Re-elected to the Mayoralty in Decem-
ber, 1909, he served for two years. In December,
1911, he was elected an Alderman, and continued
the position until December, 1921, when he became
Lord Mayor, having been returned unopposed. He
was again elected civic head of the City without
opposition in December, 1922. The last was,
therefore, Sir Lewis Cohen’s ninth term as Chief
Magistrate—a record for the City. From Decem-
ber, 1923. to December, 1927, he represented Gawler
Ward.
In 1911 he was delegated by the Council to pro-
ceed to Fondon officially to represent the City
at the Coronation of King George V. and at the
same time to appeal to the British Government
to grant a Lord Mayoralty to Adelaide. Although
at the time unsuccessful, the honour was subse-
quently conferred on the City. Prior to his depar-
ture for London a representative Committee
selected by the citizens accorded him a public ban-
quet in the Town Hall, at which over 300 persons
attended.
On the death of King Edward VII, Mr. Cohen
organised a public subscription for the purpose of
erecting a national statue to perpetuate the


Wm
*
J&9F ; jj3K,
memory of the late Sovereign, and the most pleas-
ing feature in connection with the appeal was the
splendid response of the children of the State and
private schools. The statue was unveiled by H.R.H.
the Prince of Wales during his visit to South Aus-
tralia in July, 1920.
During his long service as a civic representative,
Sir Lewis, who was created a Knight Bachelor on
Ist January, 1924, took a prominent part in the
establishment of many of the utilities of the City,
the most notable of which were the paving in
woodblocks of King William Street and in mineral
asphalt of Bundle and Hindley Streets.
Sir Lewis Cohen died in June, 1933.
MR. F. W. BULLOCK.
Mr. Frederick William Bullock, who was born in
Adelaide on 7th August, 1851, is a son of the late
Mr. John Bullock, one of the earliest arrivals in
South Australia from Great Britain, having landed
here in 1839. Mr. Bullock received his academic
instruction at the educational institute of the late
Mr. John L. Young. Soon after leaving school
he was sent to Great Britain, where he remained
for thirteen months, and was accorded the choice
of studying for a profession. Fie elected, how-
ever, to return to Adelaide and join his father in
the conduct of the business, which had then been
firmly established. His aptitude for the calling
which he had decided upon was from the first ap-
parent. He made excellent progress in the office,
and obtained a thorough training in every branch
of the steadily increasing concern. Long before
the decease of his father on Bth March, 1879, he
had attained a position of responsibility and im-
portance, so that when the sad event mentioned
occurred it was with perfect confidence that he
took entire charge of the direction of affairs, and,
under the title of F. W. Bullock, continued the
business with such energy that today it stands
among the first of its class in the State. In the
year 1885 Mr. Bullock was joined in partnership
by the late Mr. J. Viner Smith, the firm's name
being altered to F. W. Bullock & Co., and subse-
quently, Mr. R. G. Bullock and Mr. C. Angel became
partners. The ramifications of the firm extend all
over the State, while it has also many interstate
clients, and holds powers of attorney from absen-
tees in Great Britain and elsewhere. As trustees
for estates the firm is prominently known in South
Australian commercial and legal circles.
Mr. Bullock, too. is well remembered in the
municipal history of Adelaide. On 6th November,
1884, he complied with the request of a large and
influential deputation to become a candidate for
the representation of Gawler Ward in the Adelaide


r —
♦ - m' •
v r ’J* *, > ?♦ ;
B|9 > IBL *W *y , ' 4 :
;: . JL :mtk
City Council, and was elected with a large majority.
As Councillor he served for one year, and was
then elected to the office of Alderman, serving two
terms of three years each in that capacity. It is
on public record that his utterances in the Coun-
cil Chamber always carried great weight, and that
he was regarded as a man of sound principle. In
1891 Mr. Bullock had bestowed on him the office
of Chief Magistrate of the City. During his year
of Mayoralty the death of the Duke of Clarence
occurred, whilst the period was likewise notable for
the visit of Dr. W. G. Grace (the world-renowned
cricketer) to South Australia, the opening of the
National Park, Belair, and the new Fire Brigade
Station in Wakefield Street. When the term for
which Mr. Bullock was elected to the City Council
expired, he was pressed to offer himself for re-
election, but was obliged to decline the honour.
Mr. Bullock was married in Adelaide, in 1873, to
Harriet, eldest daughter of the late Mr. R. G.
Bowen, a retired wheat and grain merchant, and
has had a family of five sons and three daughters,
but at present only four children survive, two sons
and two daughters, the younger son carrying on
pastoral pursuits in Western Australia.
MR. CHARLES WILLCOX.
The late Mr. Charles Willcox was born at
Boroughbridge, on the Parreth, a tributary of the
Severn, in Somersetshire, on 15th September, 1843,
and, after education at a neighbouring private
school, worked as a young man on his father's
farm. His imagination, however, had been stirred
by the doings of those who had journeyed to South
Australia, and setting sail for South Australia at
the age of 18 he arrived there during the year 1863.
Desirous of once more seeing his parents and his
native home, he returned to England, but he had
felt the call of Australia, and was back within
twelve months. With some of his savings he
bought a few blocks of land in North Adelaide, on
which he erected several houses. This Mr.
Willcox's first financial venture. In 1873, having
foreseen the development of the agriculutural in-
dustry, he entered into partnership with the late
Mr. W. Gilbert, and together they built up a suc-
cessful business as hay and corn merchants. Their
association continued for eleven years, after which
period Mr. Willcox purchased Mr. Gilbert’s in-
terests. In 1884 he made another visit to England.
Of the various enterprises with which Mr. Will-
cox was connected, he came into closer touch with
the public by his interest in portions of Adelaide's
horse-tram system. In conjunction with the late
Hon. W. Everard he purchased in 1886 the Pay-
neham and Paradise Tramway Co. After three


jSBkT /
W w /
/
I <*k„
\iB I* /
\ *1 Vi j
v^HP!r
years partnership Mr. Everard sold his rights, and
Mr. \\ illcox became sole proprietor. He then
decided to extend the service to St. Peters and
College Park, but before starting operations the
consent of Parliament was necessary. This was
obtained, and The Adelaide, Payneham, and Para-
dise Tramways Act, 1882, Amendment, and Tram-
ways Extension Act, 1889, gave him the authority
he required. Inasmuch as the Act, beside being
a private one, conferred power on an individual,
it was to Mr. \\ illcox’s knowledge unique. En-
couraged by the success of his undertaking, he pur-
chased the Goodwood and Clarence Park Tram-
way Co. in 1896. The working of this line, together
with the others under his control, was continued
until 1907, when the whole of the citv and subur-
ban tramways were purchased by the State Gov-
ernment, and the Municipal Tramways Trust in-
augurated the present electric service.
His first experience of municipal life was his
election in December, 1886, for Robe Ward, in the
City Council. After having sat in the Council
until 1889 as Councillor and from then as Aider-
man, the ratepayers showed their appreciation of
his services by returning him as Mayor in Decem-
ber, 1892. This office he again held in the fol-
lowing year. During his term as occupant of the
Civic Chair, much useful and beneficial legislation
was enacted. The City was also considerably im-
proved and beautified. Mr. Willcox, acting on
behalf of the Council, secured the rights over some
vacant land between Rundle Street and North
Terrace, which was owned by the late Mr. H. L.
\ osz, and thus made possible the joining up of
those two important parts. The connecting road-
way is well-known to the citizens as Charles
Street,
MR. CHARLES TUCKER
The late Mr. Charles Tucker was born at Wal-
kerville, South Australia, in 1857. His parents
arrived in the Province in 1836, the year of foun-
dation. Mr. Unwin, of Walkerville, was entrusted
with the early school training of Mr. Tucker, whose
education, thus begun, was continued at Mr. J. L.
Young’s School, and completed under private
tuition. Mr. Tucker, with his parents, then re-
paired to the Encounter Bay district. There the
family resided for several years.
Mr. Tucker, with his brother-in-law, Mr. Thomas
Brown, was the proprietor of the Nullarbor (tree-
less) Plains Sheep Station —one of the largest pas-
toral properties in South Australia, with a full


complement of stock. He was also interested in
other ventures.
The year 1889 was the first in which Mr. Tucker
appeared in public life. He stood as candidate
for the councillorship of the East Ward of Port
Adelaide, and was returned. He remained in this
capacity for fifteen months. On the expiry of that
time he was elected Mayor, a position he filled for
three consecutive years. He was elected Aider-
man of the Adelaide City Council in December,
1893. After a year’s service he stood for the
Mayoralty, and was elected. He gained the dis-
tinction of being returned for the Mayoralty in the
next three successive years—lB96, 1897, and 1898.
Afterwards he retained his membership of the City
Council, having been returned as Alderman by
a large majority. In this office he remained until
April, 1907.
Mr. Tucker warmly espoused the cause of the
Australian Natives’ Association for many years,
and was appointed first President of the Port
Adelaide branch. When, at a later period, the
Intercolonial Conference of this Association was
held in Melbourne, he was chosen as a delegate to
represent South Australia at this gathering. He
was Vice-President of the Municipal Association in
1891, and in 1894 became its President.
Mr. Tucker repeatedly displayed enthusiasm for
sport and athletic exercise. He was president,
patron, and supporter of many sporting clubs.
During Mr. Tucker’s term of office as Mayor the
financial position of the Corporation greatly im-
proved. He was a Past Worshipful Master of
the United Lodge of Freemasons, a member of the
Grand Lodge of South Australia, Past Arch of the
Acorn Lodge of Druids, a Mark Mason, and a
Royal Arch Mason.
Mr. Tucker died at the North Adelaide Private
Hospital on sth December, 1928, and was buried at
the North Road Cemetery.
MR. A. W. WARE, C.M.G.
The late Mr. Arthur Wellington Ware, C.M.G.,
was born at Burra, South Australia, on 25th Feb-
ruary, 1861. He was a son of the late Mr. C. J.
Ware, owner of the World's End Station, Kooringa,
and later proprietor of the Exchange Hotel, Hind-
ley Street, Adelaide. Mr. Ware received his edu-
cation at Mr. J. L. Young's School and Whinham
College. After a period spent in the Government
Locomotive Works and as an employee of Messrs.
Harrold Brothers, he and his brother, the late Mr.


: • 4Smfjfgki
■, ’rMSjts A —ifc “
i> '• • • ' 't
. .aSBHwBM
Jl Pljl
SHHHf JS ' jir
mm •• £«•
■\ : ’ Jt \ * *Jj|j a
T. L. Ware, founded the Torrenside Brewery,
which, from a small beginning, grew to a large
concern, and was amalgamated with three other
breweries, under the name of the Walkerville Co-
operative Brewing Company. Mr. Ware carried
on a large stud and agricultural farm, Craiglee,
Manoora, in connection with his brothers, Messrs.
George J. and Charles B. Ware. He enjoyed seve-
ral years’ experience of municipal life. Having
entered the City Council in December, 1890, he
served for two years as Councillor for Gawler
Ward. In December, 1895, he was returned as
Alderman, and three years later was chosen Mayor,
being re-elected in 18*99 and 1900. During the visit
to Australia of Their Royal Highnesses the Duke
and Duchess of Cornwall and York in connection
with the opening in Melbourne of the Parliament
of the Commonwealth, the chief Magistrates of
the capital cities of the various States were in-
cluded in the list of honours conferred in celebra-
tion of the event. Mr. Ware was made a Com-
panion of the Order of St. Michael and St. George.
Like his brothers (Messrs. G. J. and C. B. Ware)
he was always a keen sportsman, and was a life
member of the Adelaide Racing Club. In this con-
nection Mr. Ware first entered the Adelaide City
Council in order to provide a majority for granting
a twenty-one years’ lease of the Victoria Park
Racecourse to the Club. He was a member of
Tattersall’s Club Committee for many years, and
Chairman for five years. For a period of ten
or twelve years he served on the Council of the
Royal Agricultural and Horticultural Society, and
represented Medindie Ward in the District Coun-
cil of Walkerville for a period. He was a member
of the Masonic Order. Mr. Ware always took an
active interest in the health of the community
and in charitable institutions, and was a Life
Governor of the Adelaide Children’s Hospital.
After having managed the Exchange Hotel, Hind-
ley Street, for a time he conducted licensed pre-
mises at Wondi, Queensland, where he died on 29th
January, 1927. His wife had predeceased him.
Mr. Ware left two daughters and two sons.
HON. THEODORE BRUCE, M.L.C.
Mr. Bruce was born near Leeds, Yorkshire. Eng-
land, in 1847. His father was the son of a Con-
gregational minister in the old town of Wakefield,
and carried on business as a woollen manufacturer
at Leeds. He was a merchant in Adelaide from
1852 to 1863, at Davenport Chambers, in Currie
Street. He retired from business in 1863. went
to England in 1876, and died at Ilkley, near Leeds,
in 1893. at the age of 96 years.
At the age of five years the Hon. T. Bruce, with


##»A 3* jr^-
(jPNP* ■
'JL - j^-
mSm^
I ;
? ‘$®Si %:
Ip • ~Jpj[ k
his family, arrived in this State, and for several
years attended school at Mr. J. L. Young’s Aca-
demy. He completed his education at St. Peter’s
College.
In 1880 he went into business as an auctioneer
with his brother-in-law, Mr. G. S. Aldridge, under
the style of Aldridge & Bruce. During the firm’s
existence they established a brewery at Broken
Hill, which was carried on for a time as a limited
liability company, with Mr. Bruce as Managing-
Director.
His first experience of civic affairs was with the
I nley Council, in which he sat for two years as
Councillor for Goodwood Ward. He was elevated
to the Mayoralty in 1897, and retained the office
for two years. During this period he was also a
member of the Adelaide City Council, having been
elected Councillor for Hindmarsh Ward in 1849.
He represented that division for six years, and, on
the death of the Hon. S. Tomkinson, M.L.C., was
elected Alderman. He was chosen Mayor of the
City in December, 1904, and occupied the Chair
for three years.
Ihe death of Mr. Brnce occurred at his home,
St. Ann’s, Mount Lofty, on Ist July, 1911. Of tall,
commanding personality, the respect which he won
for himself was gained by his fearless utterances
on the passing questions of the hour. His wide
range of knowledge, his business ability, his easy,
dignified bearing, and his qualifications as a public
speaker, combined with a sympathetic and kindly
feeling, enabled him to fill the many offices to
which he was elected with distinction to himself
and advantage to the State. Mr. Bruce will be
long remembered for his fine administration of
civic affairs.
He left a widow, three sons, and two daughters.
His remains were cremated and laid to rest in the
West Terrace Cemetery.
MR. FRANK JOHNSON.
Mr. Frank Johnson was born in 1855 in Hindley
Street, Adelaide. His father was the late Mr.
Thomas Johnson, who for four years represented
East and West Adelaide in the early House of
Assembly, and also entered the Adelaide City Coun-
cil. Mr. Frank Johnson was educated at Mr. J.
L. Young's educational academy, through which
many of the leading men of the city passed as
pupils, and later joined his father in the boot manu-
facturing business, which had been established
some time previously. In 1884 he launched out


’ %?■
for himself in the auctioneering business in King
Will iam Street, which became so well-known.
The son inherited from his father an interest in
public affairs, and in 1891 he was elected for Gawler
Ward in the Adelaide City Council —a seat his
parent had previously occupied—and held the office
until 1895. In the following year he became an
Alderman, and in that capacity retained the con-
fidence of the ratepayers for eleven years. At the
end of that period he was elected to the Mayoral
Chair. He had, as Alderman, been greatly in-
terested in proposals to electrify the tramway
systems of the metropolitan area, and in the second
year of his Mayoralty he had the honour of taking
part in the opening of the following electrified
routes under the Municipal Tramways Trust—
Norwood and Kensington, North Adelaide,
Payneham and Maylands, Hyde Park, Marryatville,
Unley and Parkside. He was also officially con-
nected with the establishment of the Metropolitan
Abattoirs and the Refuse Destructor. He actively
participated in the movement to provide Adelaide
with improved pavements, and he laid the first
wood block in the City roadways in front of the
Town Hall in 1909.
In his early life Mr. Johnson, as an elocutionist,
was a popular performer on the concert platform,
and was an ardent admirer of drama. He was a
Past Master of the Masonic Order, his mother
lodge being Leopold, No. 31, S.A.C. Mr. Johnson’s
kind-heartedness and warm and loyal friendship
were highly valued. His ready assistance could
always be counted upon for any worthy object.
He never married, and his nearest surviving
relative in this State is his sister, Mrs. J. Craven.
Another sister, Mrs. E. A. Mayfield (who acted as
Mayoress when her brother was Chief Magistrate),
has passed away. Mr. Johnson died on 25th April,
1921, and was buried at the North Road Cemetery.
SIR JOHN LAVINGTON BONYTHON.
He is the son of the Hon. Sir Langdon Bonython,
K.C.M.G., and was born in Adelaide in 1876.
He was first elected to the Adelaide Council in
1901 as a representative for Gawler Ward, and in
1907 became an Alderman, a dignity he relinquished
upon his election as Mayor in 1911. He was re-
elected Chief Magistrate of the City in 1912, and
retired from the Council at the conclusion of his
Mayoral term in 1913.
Sir Lavington was Chairman of the Finance
Committee of the Council in 1910, and occupied in
1911-13 the chair of the Board of the Metropolitan
Abattoirs, which were opened by him in 1913. He
has also been a member of the Municipal Tram-
ways Trust, Fire Brigades Board, Adelaide Hos-
pital Board, and Licensing Bench.


' ' ' \-*Wm
&$:, .4-;■ ;■'•■' ■' v ' '"’■ |j&-• ''^<^^|yg|
-Ifc JBHI
'wUnW I^IH
j4 ,-*•' .$£' ■; i
jmMM Sp
Apart from municipal matters, Sir Lavington
has interested himself in many public movements,
and he was Chairman of the Adelaide School Board
from 1907-10.
MR. A. A. SIMPSON, C.M.G., C.B.E.
Mr. Alfred Allen Simpson was born at Kent
Town, South Australia, on 15th April, 1875. He
is a son of the late Mr. A. M. Simpson, donor of
the Coronation window in the Council Chamber —
a former Legislative Councillor (who had the
unique distinction of refusing to accept a Parlia-
mentary salary)—and a grandson of Mr. Alfred
Simpson, who came to South Australia in 1849, and
in 1853 began the manufacturing business of A.
Simpson & Son, Ltd.
Mr. A. A. Simpson was educated at Prince Alfred
College, and subsequently at the University of Ade-
laide.
He was elected Councillor for Hindmarsh Ward
in 1901, and three years later was returned as
Alderman.
For a number of years also he was a represen-
tative of the Adelaide City Council on the Municipal
Association of South Australia.
In 1905 he visited the Continent as Commissioner
(unpaid) on behalf of the South Australian Govern-
ment to report on the German system of Old Age
Pensions, and, while in England, was chosen as
Australian representative on the British Commit-
tee which was visiting Belgium and Germanv to
enquire into municipal institutions in those coun-
tries.
In December, 1913, after having held the office
of Alderman for nine years, he became Mayor of
Adelaide, and remained in office until the end of
1915.
At the beginning of the Great War there was,
both in this State and at Broken Hill, a general
cessation of mining operations, which, with the
record drought of 1914, created unprecedented un-
employment. To lessen this, Mr. Simpson hurried
on much needed works, which had previously been
approved by the Council, and personally under-
took the arrangements for financing these—the
profitable extensions of the City Market and addi-
tional office buildings to the Town Hall.
In 1915 he initiated the South Australian Sol-
diers’ Fund, the largest institution of the kind in
Australasia, which through the magnitude of the
subscriptions gave the dependents of South Aus-
tralian soldiers greater benefits than those received
by beneficiaries from any similar fund in the
Empire.
In 1924, to perpetuate the memory of the two


Mb?'* ■'
'3 * ■ V
a ' » 3 W.. »x*v-t'
' — ( ■
MkHS .*#&*■, ,
KionP'' 11 , jmL «g% _ *. ' VSJR. “
ladies, he distributed over £40,000 from the estates
of the late Mrs. A. M. Simpson and her sister,
Miss Keith Sheridan, for various public purposes
in different parts of the State. In the City the
L niversity was the principal recipient, but there
are also the Keith Sheridan Kiosk at the Adelaide
Hospital, the Keith Sheridan Building at the Ade-
laide Children’s Hospital, the Keith Sheridan
Kindergartens at North and South Adelaide, and
the Simpson and Keith Sheridan Almhouses of the
Adelaide Benevolent Society.
In later years he has been actively associated
with many business enterprises. He is Chairman
of his own family company and of several others,
and is also a Director of the Bank of Adelaide.
In March, 1931, he was elected Treasurer of the.
Associated Chambers of Commerce of Australia at
the Annual Conference in Melbourne, and in April
last became the Vice-President of the Adelaide
Chamber.
He was created C.M.G. in 1919, C.B.E. in 1923,
and in 1930 the Duke of Connaught, with the King’s
sanction, conferred on him the untitled dignity of
a Knight of Grace of the Order of the Hospital of
St. John of Jerusalem.
ALDERMAN I. ISAACS
Alderman Isaac Isaacs was a native of Victoria, in
which State he was born on Ist July, 1858. When
he was a child his parents moved to Dunedin, New
Zealand.
After about 25 years’ residence in New Zealand,
he returned to Victoria, and was elected treasurer
by the combined friendly societies and other asso-
ciations for the demonstration held to celebrate the
late Queen Victoria’s Jubilee in 1887.
For a period of two years (1908-9) he was
President of the Justices’ Association of South
Australia, an office which he occupied again in
1931-2. Mr. Isaacs was a Justice of the Peace for
all States,
In the municipal life of Adelaide he established
an excellent record. Elected to the Council for
Gawler Ward in 1902, he was returned in 1907 un-
opposed as an Alderman. Mr. Isaacs retained this
office until December, 1915, when he was elected
Mayor of Adelaide. After two years in the Chief
Magistracy of the City, he was elected unopposed
as an Alderman.
His labours as representative of the Council on
the Municipal Tramways Trust, and his official
connection with a wide circle of public and semi-
public organisations, makes a lengthy catalogue,
and while it discloses a fine capacity for work—
most of it of a purely honorary character-—it shows
also a catholicity of taste and tolerance of judg-
ment that is altogether praiseworthy.
For a number of years he was representative of
the City and Suburban Local Boards of Health on
the Central Board of Health, and has also been
a representative of the Adelaide Local Board of
Health on the Metropolitan County Board under
the Food and Drugs Act, and on the Metropolitan
Infectious Diseases Hospital Board.
It was in 1903 that Mr. Isaacs was initiated


into Craft Masonry, in St. Andrew’s Lodge, and
in the year following was elected a lodge steward.
He filled various offices with success, and in due
course was installed Worshipful Master of the
lodge. He was also a foundation member and
Past Master of Southern Cross Masonic Lodge, in
the progress of which he took a live interest.
Alderman Isaacs died on 16th January, 1935.
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE MR. CHARLES
RICHMOND JOHN GLOVER, J.P.
The Right Honourable Mr. C. R. J. Glover, J.P.,
was born at Richmond, Surrey, England, on 3rd
May, 1870. He arrived in Australia in 1872 with
his parents, the late Mr. and Mrs. Charles P.
Glover, and had resided continuously in the .State,
with the exception of three visits to the Mother
Country —in 1891, 1904, and 1921. Mr. Glover was
educated at Prince Alfred College from 1882-87
inclusive. On leaving school he was apprenticed
to the drug trade with Messrs. F. H. Paulding
and Co., and was a pharmaceutical chemist for
some years. Subsequently he became associated
with the Stock Exchange (1898-1904).
He has been actively engaged in Masonic circles
since 1893. In 1909 he was chosen for the respon-
sible position of Grand Secretary of the Order in
South Australia, which office he still holds.
He was elected Councillor for Young Ward in
August, 1906, and in December. 1909, as Aider-
man, which position he retained until December,
1917, when he was elected without opposition
Mayor of Adelaide, and again returned unopposed
for" the same office twelve months later. He
became first Lord Mayor of Adelaide in November,
1919, and on his retirement from the Chair in
December of the same year was elected a Coun-
cillor for Gawler Ward. Continuing in the latter
position until December, 1923, he was again re-
turned unopposed as Lord Mayor. After two
years in the Chief Magistracy, Mr. Glover was
elected as a Councillor for MacDonnell Ward, and
remained as such until December, 1930, when he
once more became Lord Mayor without opposition.
A year later he was again returned to the office
unopposed, and in December last was elected for
another term of twelve months.
Mr. Glover has been the donor of three Chil-
dren’s Playgrounds in the City—at South, East, and
Lefevre Terraces. He instituted the War Memorial
Drive on the northern bank of the Torrens Lake
in 1919, and defrayed half the cost of the first
section.
He is the author of “The History of Freemasonry
in S.A. from 1834-84“ and “A Brief History of St.
John’s Church, Adelaide, 1839-1909.”
SIR WALLACE BRUCE.
Sir Wallace Bruce is a son of the late Mr. John
Albert Bruce, born at Kapunda, South Australia,
on 3rd August, 1879, and educated at Prince Alfred
College.
Sir Wallace was elected to the Adelaide City
Council in December, 1916, as a Councillor for
MacDonnell Ward, which he represented con-
tinuously until the end of 1925, when he was re-
turned without opposition to the Chief Magistracy.
In November, 1926, he was again re-elected unop-
posed as Lord Mayor. For a period he ably
represented the Council on the Municipal Tram-
ways Trust, and as the result of a visit to Europe
iu 1922, furnished a valuable report to the Govern-
ment on tramway matters. He was President of
the Adelaide Chamber of Commerce, to which office
he was elected on 29th April, 1925, and also Vice-
President of the Associated Chambers of Com-
merce of the Commonwealth of Australia. In
1923 Sir Wallace succeeded the late Mr. Thomas
Gill, C.M.G., 1.5.0., as a member of the Board of
Trustees of the Savings Bank, and in July of the
same year he was appointed President of the Tax-
payers' Association, which organisation progressed
rapidly under his leadership. He resigned from
the chair in June, 1925. Sir Wallace is President


Hr ’-SB
$ SB* t * ,r MSmSak.
: -' / ' jgg :
_
jg§| I QIHB /4^*ujy
bSr ■ r '%%sSm
"’ W
ifftZ 3 & !i;5;i«r * * Wm j
!■ .
of the Dental Board, and for over twenty years has
been a member of the Ground and Finance Com-
mittee of the South Australian Cricket Association.
At school Sir Wallace Bruce gained a love of
sport, which has since remained with him. His
principal attention has been directed to cricket, and
for a time he was an active member and Secretary
of the North Adelaide senior team. His energy and
business knowledge made him a valuable asset to
the club.
He is a member of the firm of Messrs. Wallace
Bruce & Co., Insurance Brokers and Secretaries,
as well as a Director of several financial, manu-
facturing, and commercial companies.
THE LATE SIR FRANK BEAUMONT MOULDEN, Kt.
Born at in Adelaide in 1879, educated at St. Peter's
College and Adelaide University, the late Sir Frank
Moulden was elected to the Adelaide City Council
as a Councillor in 1904. Nine years later he was
elected Alderman. He was Lord Mayor in 1919-21,
and during the visit of the Prince of Wales. He
was knighted in January, 1922. In 1919 he was ap-
pointed Consular Agent for France in South Aus-
tralia. The French Government conferred on him
the distinction of Officer DAcademie de la Repub-
lique Francaise, and he was also awarded a diploma
of honour and bronze medal by the Lique Martime
et Caloniale Francaise. In 1929 he was made an


> i 'ff i ->
B«j|l < i£jM
H M ''- B
!::f I &s| *»V ' - ■ *„" .•
officer of the Order of the Hospital of St. John of
Jerusalem. The late Sir Frank B. Moulden died
at Brougham Place, North Adelaide, on the Bth
April, 1932.
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD MAYOR,
MR. JONATHAN ROBERT CAIN, J.P.
Mr. Jonathan Robert Cain, J.P., is a son of the
late Mr. John Cain, and was born at Leamington
Spa, Warwickshire, England. He arrived at Ade-
laide with his parents in 1877, and attended the
Tynte Street Model School at its opening. - Ur
the headmastership of Mr. Geo. Gill; He was a
choir boy at St. Peter’s Cathedral under the direc-
tion of Mr, Arthur Boult, organist and choirmaster,
and Mr. J. M. Dunn, assistant organist and choir-
master.
On leaving school Mr. Cain was employed in his
father’s art furniture workshop, and has been in
business in Adelaide all his life. Years ago he
joined the Pirie Street Literary Society, of which
the present Commissioner of Public Works (Hon.
H. S. Hudd) was the President. Mr. Cain was
the last President of this body, which was in exis-
tence for fifty years. He was also a member of
the Literary Society’s Union Parliament, in which
he occupied the offices of Chief Secretary, Leader
of the Opposition, and Acting Premier, which last
position he filled when the society went into recess
in the war years. He was a member of the Pirie
Street Debating Club, which won the last competi-
tion arranged on the eve of the Great War, and was
successful in the competition for prepared speeches
at the Literary Society gathering in the Adelaide
Co-operative Society’s Hall just after war was de-
clared, when Dr. R. S. Rogers was President.
Mr. Cain entered the City Council in January,
1916, having been elected as a Councillor for Hind-
marsh Ward. He served in this capacity until
October, 1929, when he was returned as an Aider-
man, which office he filled until his election as Lord
Mayor in December, 1933. To the end of last
year, therefore, he had 17 years’ municipal service
to his credit.
His Lordship was for ten years a representative
of the Adelaide City Council on the Fire Brigades
Board. He is also a Past President of the South
Park Bowling Club, and a former member of the
Boy Scouts’ Council. He is a representative of
the Adelaide City Council on the Municipal Tram-
ways Trust and Council of the School of Arts and
Crafts, and is ex-officio President of the Municipal
Association, Chairman of the Metropolitan Infec-
tious Diseases’ Hospital Board, President of the
Municipal Community Singing, a Commissioner of


the National Park, a member of the Botanic
Gardens Board, and a member of the Council of
the S.A. Zoological and Acclimatization Society.
He is also a representative of the Adelaide Local
Board of Health on the Metropolitan County Board
under the Food and Drugs Act, of which he has
been elected Chairman. Until its reconstitution
the Lord Mayor was also ex-officio Chairman of
the Metropolitan Abattoirs Board (now the Metro-
politan and Export Abattoirs Board).


Local Government in South Australia
Municipal
South Australia originated Local Government in Aus-
tralia by passing in 1840 —four years after the Proclama-
tion of the Province —the first Australian Municipal Act,
which was a partial transcript of the English Statute
of 1835, greatly modified to meet the conditions of a
people who had made the experiment of founding a new
State in an almost uninhabitated country. On 31st Octo-
ber, 1840, the Adelaide Council was elected. Sydney, New
South Wales, the oldest Australian city, followed two
years later.
Municipalities generally were first established under
the Municipal Corporations Act of 1861, which, after pro-
viding for the extension of the powers and duties of the
Corporation of the City of Adelaide, authorized the
Governor, on petition of a majority of not less than two-
thirds of the property owners, to incorporate any town,
district, or place within the province a municipality. This
Act and its amendments were consolidated in the Munici-
pal Corporations Act of 1880, which was amended from
time to time until it was repealed and its provisions con-
solidated by the Municipal Corporations Act of 1890. This
was in turn amended in various years, and the Acts con-
solidated in 1923. Various amendments of this Act fol-
lowed, and then in 1934 Parliament passed the Local
Government Act, which both consolidated and amended
the Municipal Corporations Acts, and the District Coun-
cils Acts, as well as a large number of other Acts dealing
with I .ocal Government. This Act provided for a com-
mon financial year, ending on 30th June, of all local govern-
ing authorities, and in connection therewith provided that
all Mayors, Aldermen, and Councillors of municipalities
due to" retire on Ist December, 1934, should hold office
until the conclusion of the annual elections, to be held
on the first Saturday in July, 1935.
Each municipal council consists of a Mayor and of
two Councillors for each ward, while provision is also
made for the election of not more than six nor less than
three Aldermen (representing the citizens all the
wards), where a poll of citizens has declared in favour of
the creation of Aldermen. A candidate for Councillor
must be a citizen of the municipality in which he seeks
election, while candidates for the positions of Mayor oi
Aldermen, besides possessing the foregoing qualifications,
must have served at least one year in some municipal
council in South Australia. All persons of full age, if
British subjects, who are either owners or occupiers of
any rateable property within a muncipality, are entitled to
be enrolled on the voters’ roll and to vote at the election
of Mayor, Aldermen, and Councillors.
The establishment of a Local Government Depart-
ment was notified by the Public Service Commissioner on
14th June, 1917. The province of the department is to
maintain relations between the State Government and the
local governing bodies, to give efifect to the policy of the
Government with respect to all matters pertaining to aids
to local bodies by grants, loan of roadmaking machinery,
and advice as to road works or administration, as also to
co-ordinate the road work of the department with that
of the local authorities. The Ministerial head of the
Department is the Honourable the Commissioner of Crown
Lands.
In addition to 34 municipalities, there are in South
Australia 108 district councils, covering a combined area
of over 52,000 square miles. The above figures show a
reduction in the number of local governing bodies from
those previously given. This has been brought about
as the result of the findings of the Local Government
Commission, which is inquiring into the recision of council
boundaries, to secure greater efficiency and economy.
Various Acts relating to local government and roads
are administered by the Minister of Local Government,
who exercises his functions through the Highways and


Local Government Department, the head of which is Mr.
D. \. hleming (Commissioner of Highways and Director
ot Local Government). The province of this depart-
ment is to maintain relations between the State Govern-
ment and the local governing bodies, to give effect to the
policy of the Government, to carry out the provisions of
the Highways Acts, 1926-32, and of the Federal Aid Roads
Amending Agreements, 1931.
L nder the Highways Act, the Commissioner is given
general control of main roads, funds being provided by
a Parliamentary vote. Local governing authorities are
required to make an annual contribution towards main-
tenance ot main roads, and these bodies carry out much
of the work, in which they receive the advice and assist-
ance of the central authority.
The Commissioner also controls the expenditure of an
annual vote for roads in newly settled areas.
Under the Federal Aid Roads Act, 1931, the Common-
wealth Government undertook to pay South Australia for
road purposes a fixed proportion of customs and excise
duties on motor spirit. The amount received at present
is about £255,000 per annum.
Neither of the last-mentioned Acts applied to the
City of Adelaide, the Council of which provides for all
road works within its area from town funds. Apart
from road grants the Highways and Local Government
Department distributes each year among local governing
bodies for general purposes a grant in aid of rates col-
lected. For 1929-30 the amount so distributed Avas
£148,999, of which the Adelaide Corporation received
£19,395. Since that year the amount available for distri-
bution has been materially reduced. The proportion re-
ceived by the Corporation for 1933-34 was only £1,370.


Hjr -
l|k -i
****
# ||I^ a ' «
THE HON. A. P. BLESING, M.L.C.
Minister of Local Government and
Agriculture.
Mr. Blesing was born at Hamilton,
S.A., 9th September, 1879, and edu-
cated at the Laura Public School. He
is a grazier and farmer at Bangor, SA.
Lirst elected to Parliament 15th April,
1924, for the Northern District, Legis-
lative Council; appointed Minister of
Local Government and Agricul-
ture, 18th April. 1933. He is
Chairman and Director of “Coun-
try News” newspaper, Director of the
South Australian Voluntary Wheat
Pools, Ltd. Associated for many years
as an officer and member of the Laura
Bowling and Racing Clubs; President
of the Youth Model Aeroplane Asso-
ciation. Associated with the Youth
Occupational Scheme and SCL Boys’
Club.
DANIEL VICTOR FLEMING,
Commissioner of Highways and Director of
Local Government.
Born at Avoca, Victoria, 23th Sep-
tember, 1884. Educated at Ballarat
School of Mines. Business, Commis-
sioner of Highways and Director of
Local Government. Member of the
Public Service, Masonic Lodge. Sports,
tennis. Home address, 124, Watson
Avenue, Toorak.


Local Government
Councils
As the term implies, this is the management of local
affairs by councils on the spot. The requirements of
communities, such as roads, sanitation, lighting, and other
common needs, are best attended to under local authority.
Hence we have transplanted into this State municipal
institutions on the lines of those in England. We have
34 municipalities, comprising the principal towns, and 108
district councils, embracing the settled area outside muni-
cipalities and inside the fringe between the settled and
pastoral areas.
The functions of the two bodies are similar; their
main duties are providing and maintaining public highways
and health. To this end they may take land for road-
ways where required, make and maintain these, and also
do all things necessary to preserve the public health.
They hold reserves for recreation, water, cemetery, and
other purposes. They may purchase or construct water,
gas, and electric works and manage them, and supply to
customers.
Councils may procure and work quarries, and
machinery for road work, and for treatment of refuse.
They may construct and work tramways. They may pro-
vide" pleasure grounds, libraries, museums, places of public
resort and recreation, baths, wash-houses, and sanitary
conveniences. Municipal corporations have, in addition,
conservancy of rivers and watercourses within their areas,
and may make dams and reservoirs. They may have boat-
houses "and other buildings and landing stages on waters
impounded. District councils may improve water and
other reserves, converting them into beauty spots for
picnic parties and passers-by.
Other duties of local authorities are the establishment
of manufacturing areas, regulation and suppression of
noxious trades, licensing and regulating noisy trades, the
establishment of hospitals and public pounds, management
of Crown lands for certain purposes, the granting of
licenses for slaughter-houses and regulation of same. The}
may arrange for the erection of abattoirs, and for the
lighting of streets, and the numbering of houses in streets.
They may drain water from roadways into adjoining
lands, and execute work on private lands to prevent over-
flow of water on to a road—a most useful provision and
essential to the preservation of the roadways.
They may allow vermin-proof fencing across roads in
vermin-infested areas. They may plant trees on roads,
pave footways, sell or lease closed roads, lay down bicycle
tracks, destroy dangerous buildings, require landholders
to destroy bushes on half-width of roads abutting on such
lands, plant grass, shrubs, or trees on roads to prevent
sand drift, and require the owner or occupier of land ad-
joining to do likewise.
The councils may make alignments of streets, regulate
traffic, and may require owners of land in townships to pay
half cost of making streets adjoining their property. They
may appoint stands for and regulate the use of streets
by street hawkers. The councils may, in certain cases,
take charge of and maintain open spaces for the benefit
of the public, and may charge admission fees to same,
the amount so raised to be used for planting and main-
taining the grounds. Important duties also devolve on
district councils under the Bush Fires Act. Four or
more district councils, whose districts include or abut
upon a continuous portion of the same main road, may
form a board for joint management of said road.
Councils are also charged with the enforcement of
Health, Dog Registration, Noxious Weeds, and Width
of Tyres Acts. They may make by-laws for carrying-
out all the functions with which they are clothed. They
have great powers for good conferred by the Legisla-
ture, and with the vim and enterprise of Britishers they
are carrying on and conserving the best interests of the
areas over which they have sway.


" ‘ „ •-
s * JBF /^
' I
. -
HON. R. L. BUTLER, M P.
Premier, Treasurer, and Minister of
Immigration.
Mr. Butler was born at Yattalunga
Station, One Tree Hill, 31st March,
1885. After being educated at the
Mallala Public School and the Ade-
laide Agricultural College, he took up
farming and pastoral pursuits. First
elected to Parliament as a member
for Wooroora in 1915. He succeeded
Sir Henry Barwell as Leader of the
Parliamentary Liberal Party in 1925.
Premier and Treasurer of South Aus-
tralia, 1927-30, and from 1933 to date.
He represented South Australia at the
Empire Parliamentary Conference
and the Jubilee Celebrations in Eng-
land in 1935. Is President of the
Executive Committee of the South
Australian Centenary.
HON. SIR GEORGE RITCHIE, K.C.M.G.,
M.L.C.
Elected for District of Alexandra to
House of Assembly, 1902; member
until 1922; resigned to contest Fede-
ral seat, Angas, South Australia.
Commissioner of Public Works and
Minister of Water Supply, 1914-15;
Commissioner of Crown Lands and
Minister of Railways. 1919-20; Trea-
surer, 1920-22; member of Legisla-
tive Council, South Australia, for
Northern District, since 1924. Has oc-
cupied some time or other every Port-
folio in the Government. Mayor of
Goolwa from 1901 to 1903; Alderman
of the Adelaide City Council from 1932
to 1934; at present Chief Secretary,
Minister of Health, and Minister of
Mines.


ADELAIDE CITY COUNCIL
/ 935-6.
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD MAYOR.
Jonathan Robert Cain, J.P.
ALDERMEN.
Sir John Lavington Bonython, K.C.M G
J-P-
Ethelbert Bendall, J.P.
Robert Homburg, J.P.
Hon. George Henry Prosser, J.P.
Edward Wheewall Holden, B.Sc., J.P.
Arden Seymour Hawker, M.C., J.P.
COUNCILLORS.
Hindmarsh Ward.
Arnold Wight Bayley, J.P.
Joseph Anthony Harper, J.P.
Gawler Ward.
James Campbell Irwin, A.R.A.I.A
John Stace Rees, J.P.
Grey Ward.
Ernest William James Peet, J.P,
Albert Charles Myers, J.P.
Young Ward.
Arthur Campbell Rymill.
Reginald John Pelham.
Robe Ward.
Arthur George Barrett.
Horace Gilbert Willcox, J.P.
McDonnell Ward.
Charles John Glover, A.R.A.I.A.
Arnold Meredith Moulden. O 8.E., LL.B


4
*S
Af* 1 iiyy < ,.ft%: JL r ’lltiB»l? j:>,^|
'BK* /' T
■. • i w ; $8&S? ’, .;•' ■•••'■'I' I JmtmHb% i
!■ iixl . dBB
3 :B0r SMB :^? V
m M
THE RIGHT HON. THE LORD MAYOR OF ADELAIDE,
JONATHAN ROBERT CAIN, J.P.
The Right Hon. the Lord Mayor of Adelaide, Jonathan
Robert Cain, J.P., is a son of the late Mr. John Cain, and
was born at Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, England.
He arrived at Adelaide with his parents in 1877, and
attended the, Tynte Street Model School at its opening,
under the headmastership of Mr. George Gill. He was
a choir boy at St. Peter’s Cathedral under the direction
of Mr. Arthur Boult (organist and choirmaster), and Mr.
J. M. Dunn, assistant organist and choirmaster, who
is now organist and choirmaster. On leaving school
Mr. Cain was employed in his father’s art furniture
workshop, and has been in business in Adelaide all his life.
Years ago he joined the Pirie Street Literary Society, of
which the present Commissioner of Public Works (Hon.
H. S. Hudd) was the President. Mr. Cain was the last Presi-
dent of this body, which was in existence for fifty years.
He was also a member of the Literary Societies’ Union
Parliament, in which he occupied the offices of Chief Sec-
retary, Leader of the Opposition, and Acting Premier,
which last position he filled when the society went into
recess in the years of the Great War. He was a member
of the Pirie Street debating team which won the last com-
petition arranged on the eve of the war, and was suc-
cessful in the competition for prepared speeches at the
Literary Societies’ Union gathering in the Adelaide Co-
operative Society’s Hall just after war was declared, when
Dr. R. S. Rogers was President.
Mr. Cain entered the City Council in January, 1916,
having been elected as a Councillor for Hindmarsh Ward.
He served in this capacity until October, 1929, when he
was returned as an Alderman, which office he filled until
his election as Lord Mayor in December, 1933. In July,
1935, Mr. Cain was returned unopposed for a further term
as Chief Magistrate. To the end of June of this year,
therefore, he had nineteen and a half years municipal ser-
vice to his credit.
His Lordship was for ten years a representative of
the Adelaide City Council on the Fire Brigades Board.
He is also a Past President of the South Park Bowling
Club and a former member of the Boy Scouts’ Council.
He is a representative of the Adelaide City Council on
the Municipal Tramways Trust and Council of the School
of Arts and Crafts, and is ex-officio President of the Muni-
cipal Association, Chairman of the Metropolitan Infectious
Hospital Board, President of the Municipal Community
Singing, a Commissioner of the National Park, a member
of the Botanic Garden Board, and a member of the Coun-
cil of the S.A. Zoological and Acclimatization Society.
He is also a representative of the Adelaide Local Board
of Health on the Metropolitan County Board under the
Food and Drugs Act. of which he has been elected Chair-
man. Until its reconstitution the Lord Mayor was also
ex-officio Chairman of the Metropolitan Abattoirs Board
(now the Metropolitan and Export Abattoirs Board). The
Lord Mayor resides at 138, Park Terrace, Wayville.


\ /dm
WjL
:JF
THE LATE SIR FRANK BEAUMONT MOULDEN, Kt
(Late Lord Mayor, City of Adelaide.)
Born at Adelaide 1879; educated at St. Peter’s College
and Adelaide University. The late Sir Frank was elected
to the Adelaide City Council as a Councillor in 1904. Nine
years later he was elected Alderman. He was Lord Mayor
in 1919-21, and during the visit of the Prince of Wales.
He was knighted January, 1922. In 1919 he was appointed
Consular Agent for France in South Australia. The French
Government conferred on him the distinction of officer
D’Academie de la Republique Francaise, and he was also
awarded a diploma of honour and bronze medal by the
Lique Maritime et Caloniale Francaise. In 1929 he was
made an officer of the Order of the Hospital of St. John
of Jerusalem. The late Sir Frank B. Moulden died at
Brougham Place, North Adelaide, on the Bth April, 1932.
EX-LORD MAYOR SIR WALLACE BRUCE, Kt., J.P
Born at Kapunda, South Australia, 3rd August, 1879;
educated at Prince Alfred College, Adelaide. Sir Wallace
Bruce served 15 years as Councillor, representing MacDon-
nell Ward and Robe Ward, and was Lord Mayor of Ade-
laide, 1925-27. He has occupied the following positions :
—President of the Taxpayers' Association of South Aus-
tralia, 1924-25, and President of the Adelaide Chamber of
Commerce, 1925-27, and of Associated Chambers of Com-
merce of Australia, 1927-28 ; trustee Savings Bank of South
Australia, Chairman of Harbors Board of South Australia
director of various commercial and industrial companies,
Chairman of New South Wales Coal Commission. 1929;
Chairman of the Commonwealth Industrial Conference.
1928-29; Chairman Commonwealth Government Commit-
tee to survey the economic problem, 1932. He was knighted
1927; senior partner of Wallace Bruce & Co., Insurance
brokers, Adelaide. His sport is tennis.


. ■ ,
■
THE LATE HON. THEODORE BRUCE, M.L.C
(Ex-Mayor of Adelaide.)
Born at Leeds, Yorkshire, England, 1847; educated J.
L. Young’s School and St. Peter’s College. He arrived
in South Australia as a boy five years of age. In 1897
he was elected Mayor of Unley; 1900 elected Alderman,
City of Adelaide, after excellent services in that capacity
was elected Mayor of Adelaide. In 1909 was elected a
member of the Legislative Council, representing the
central district. Mr. Bruce resided in Adelaide for nearly
60 years, and for more than half that period was a
prominent figure in business, municipal, Parliamentary,
and social circles. He took a foremost part in the muni-
cipalisation of the tramways system, and was the first
representative of the City Council on the Trust; was also
one of the chief members in the establishment of the
Metropolitan Abattoirs. He was the first President of
the Yorkshire Society in South Australia. Mr. Bruce
died on the Ist July, 1911, in his sixty-fifth year.
CHARLES RICHMOND JOHN GLOVER.
(First Lord Mayor of Adelaide.)
Born at Richmond, Surrey, England, 3rd May, 1870.
Arrived in South Australia, March, 1872. Educated, 1882-7,
Prince Alfred College, Kent Town, South Australia. Ser-
vice in Adelaide Council, August, 1906, to December. 1933.
Mayor of Adelaide, 1917-19; first Lord Mayor of Adelaide,
1919; Lord Mayor of Adelaide, 1923-25, 1*930-33. Grand
Secretary Grand Lodge of Freemasons of South Australia,
1909; Chairman of James Brown Trust, including Kalyra
Sanatorium at Belair, and Estcourt House for crippled
children at the Grange; Chairman of the Adelaide (Elder’s)
Workmen’s Homes, Chairman of the Wyatt Benevolent
Trust, President of the Adelaide Children’s Hospital, 1925-
34; on the Board of Management of the Public Library,
Museum and Art Gallery, President of the Adelaide
Orpheus Society, Director of the South Australian Gas
Company, Chairman of the National Park Commissioners,
Director of the Bank of Adelaide, Director of the United
Insurance Company, Chairman of Directors of the Im-
perial Building Society.


ill *
■ :
THE LATE MAYOR OF ADELAIDE, ISAAC ISAACS
(Adelaide City Council.)
Was born at Melbourne, Victoria, Ist July, 1858; edu-
cated at Dunedin. N.Z. Died at North Adelaide. 16th
January, 1935. He served 33 years in the Adelaide City
Council, and was a resident of North Adelaide for 35 years.
Councillor, Alderman, and Mayor of Adelaide, 1915-17.
The late Mayor held the undermentioned positions :—Pre-
sident of the Justices’ Association of South Australia,
1908-9, 1931-32; Chairman of the Liberal Federation, 1913;
Representative of Council on the undermentioned bodies ;
—Municipal Tramways Trust, City and Suburban Local
Board of Health. Adelaide Board of Health on Metropoli-
tan County Board, Metropolitan Infectious Diseases Hos-
pital Board, Past Grand President of U.A.O. Druids, Past
Master St. Andrews and Southern Cross Masonic Lodges,
Chief President Australian Natives’ Association, Past Pre-
sident of Adelaide Jewish Philanthropic Society. He was
a football enthusiast.
THE HON. SIR JOHN COLTON, K.C.M.G.
(Ex-Mayor, Adelaide City Council.)
Born at his father’s farm, Stonehills, Harbenden Ford,
Devonshire, England, in 1823, Sir John Colton arrived in
Adelaide with his father (Mr. William Colton) in 1839.
In 1859 he was elected as Alderman of the City, and on
the abolition of that office in 1861 became a Councillor
for Gawler Ward, retiring from the Council at the end
of 1863. In that year he was returned at the head of
the poll as a member of the House of Assembly for Noar-
lunga, which district he represented, with short intervals,
throughout his Parliamentary career. After a lapse of
one Parliament, however, he was again chosen by his old
constituents at a time when he was also Mayor of Ade-
laide, to which office he had been elected in December,
1874, holding it for one year. Back in the House, he
joined the Boucaut Ministry as Treasurer. In March,
1876, he resigned his portfolio, but three months later he
formed an administration, which he conducted until Octo-
ber, 1877, when the Boucaut Ministry came into power.
In August of the following year Mr. Colton became


Z' ■
, o.mwM* - aBH
snu
ill, resigned his seat, and regained his health by rest from
official worry and by travel. He re-entered the Assembly
in the new Parliament of 1881. A little short of three
vears later —having in the meantime revisited England—
Air. Colton carried a motion of no-confidence in the Bray
Cabinet, and then he formed another Ministry. In June,
1885, the Colton Government was forced out of office for
mtirclv personal reasons, which had no relation to Mr.
Colton himself. He manifested a lively interest in the
THE LATE FREDERICK GEORGE
DOWNS, EX-ALDERMAN.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at North Adelaide, 18th July,
1851; educated at Whinham College,
North Adelaide. The late Alderman
Downs had 36 years continuous service
in the Adelaide City Council —he was
for 7 years a Councillor and 29 years
an Alderman. He was a Justice of
the Peace for many years. He was
a resident of North Adelaide for the
whole of his lifetime. The late Mr.
Downs was asked to contest the seat
for North Adelaide in the House of
Assembly on several occasions, but he
would not consent. He was a member
of the Oddfellows, Loresters, Recha-
bites, and Masonic Lodges, holding the
position of P.G.M. in the Oddfellows
Lodge and Past Chief Ranger of the
Loresters Lodge. He was a member
of Christ Church, North Adelaide, all
his life, and held several offices con-
nected with the church, including 33
years as verger.
PAST ALDERMAN GEORGE McEWIN.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Was born at Congregational Manse,
Hindmarsh, 19th December, 1873, and
educated at Whinham College and
Adelaide University. Mr. McEwin
served 20 years in the Adelaide City
Council as Councillor and Alderman,
and also as Acting Lord Mayor dur-
ing the absence of the Lord Mayor
from the State. Representative of the
Adelaide City Council on the Metropo-
litan Abattoirs Board for 12 years, 3
years Chief S.A. Caledonian Society,
Vice-President of the Cheer-Up
welfare of quite a number of organisations, having re-
ligious, philanthropic, and temperance aims. In private
life he was specially noted for his benefactions to the
poor and needy. He was created a Knight Commandei
of the Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and St.
George on Ist January, 1892. Sir John Colton died at
Hackney on 6th February, 1902, and was buried at A est
Terrace Cemetery.
Society from its inception, 8 years
Chairman of the Canteen Funds and
Blinded Soldiers' Association, Presi-
dent of the English Speaking Union
for 2 years, first President of the Ade-
laide Rotary Club, original member
Adelaide Scottish Corps, formed 1900,
with the rank of Colour Sergeant.
Business, solicitor. Member of the St.
Alban Masonic Lodge. Fifty years a
resident of the North Adelaide district.
His sports are rowing and golf.


f f • itMi
t .
V , 4
m - J
\ * »l it ''
HBII *
WMaSpag ;;
I r
%
THE LATE CLEMENT WELLS, J.P. V.D.,
EX-ALDERMAN.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Sydney, 30th June, 1845, and
arrived in South Australia in the same
year. For 30 years he was a member
of the Adelaide City Council, and was
Acting Mayor on numerous occasions.
Was Chairman of the Adelaide School
Board of Advice, also Chairman and
Trustee of Justices’ Association for
two years. Twice District Chief
Ranger of Forester’s Lodge and Chair-
man of Trustees, visiting Justice to
Yatala Labour Prison for 30 years.
He was also Chairman of Trustees of
St. Luke’s Church of England, Whit-
more Scpiare, for ,30 years. He re-
ceived the Volunteer Decoration
Medal for long servdce in the old Ade-
laide Rifle Club. The late Alderman
Wells always resided in the district of
West Adelaide.
THE LATE ALDERMAN THOMAS
FLINT.
(Adelaide City Council.)
The late Mr. Flint was born at Kent
Town, South Australia, and died on
the 12th May, 1934, in his 69th year.
He was educated at Mr. Thomas
Caterer’s School, Norwood. He repre-
sented Gawler Ward in the Adelaide
City Council for 6 years, and shortly
before his death was elected Aider-
man. He was chairman of directors
of W. T. Flint & Sons, Ltd., hardware
merchants, Hindley Street, Adelaide
He was a member of the M.U. Odd-
fellows Lodge. Mr. Flint had always
taken a great interest in his home
garden.
THE LATE ALDERMAN, HON.
SAMUEL TOMKINSON, J.P., M.L.C.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Wrexham, Denbeighshire,
North Wales, 25th April, 1816. Was
educated privately in the same county.
He commenced his business career in
the office of an East Indian merchant
in Liverpool. He arrived in Australia
in 1851. He was associated with John
Bright and Richard Cobden for the
agitation for the repeal of the Corn
Laws. Upon arrival in Sydney he took
over the duties of an Inspector of the
Bank of Australasia. Shortly after-
wards he was transferred to the Ade-
laide oranch as manager, succeeding
the late Mr. Marshall MacDermott
In 18/9 he retired, and the director.'-
recognised his Stirling services by ;
liberal pension and he was appointee


'^1
' yf. ‘
/■ ; m*** %
* mm
HOKf
|bHb lli> jn|
local director. He took an active
iterest in local political affairs, and
as elected a member for Gumeracha
the House of Assembly in the early
yhties. Later he was a member for
, Je Southern District in the Legisla-
i e Council, and he had also repre-
ented the Central District. Other
ositions held: Chairman of the
icensing Bench for 20 years. Acting
leriff in the S.E. Circuit, President
the Effective Voting League,
rustee and Synodsman of the Trinity
lurch, Adelaide. Mr. Tomkinson
1 a thorough knowledge of Parlia-
ntary procedure. A voluminous
ter to the press, he always
ned his own name. He joined the
litia in the early volunteer days,
fusing a Commission. He was a
nan of very independent views, and
as never afraid to express them. He
would never allow himself to he de-
lected from what he thought was
ight. He died on the 30th August,
1900, in his 84th year. The Adelaide
Observer” expressed itself thus: —
The whole community mourns the
death of a man deeply respected for
unimpeachable integrity, and was the
very soul of honour."
THE LATE ALDERMAN WALTER
WEECH FORWOOD.
(Adelaide City Council.)
He was born at London, 18th Jan-
uary, 1846, and arrived in Australia,
1853. Educated at Rev. P. Mercer’s
Private School, Port Adelaide. The
late Alderman Forwood served 16
years in the Adelaide City Council—•
8 years as Councillor and 8 as Aider-
man ;• and for 10 years was Chairman
of the Works and Highways Commit-
tee, a member of the Coal Board and
State War Council, President of the
S.A. Chamber of Manufactures, and
President of the Associated Chamber
of Manufactures. He has represented
Adelaide City Council on Municipal
Tramways Trust, and he was on the
Council of the Royal Agricultural
Society, also Employers’ Federation.
Pie founded the firm of Forwood,
Down, & Co., Ltd., in 1873. Lodge,
Duke of Leinster.
THE LATE SENATOR JOSEPH
VARDON, J.P., EX-ALDERMAN.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Hindmarsh, 27th July, 1843.
The late Senator Vardon held the fol-
lowing positions : —Mayor and Coun-
cillor, Town of Hindmarsh; Alderman.
City of Unley; and Alderman, City o!
Adelaide. The late Senator Vardon
was formerly a member of the Legis-
lative Council in the State Parliament,
occupying the position of Chief Secre-
tary in the Jenkins Ministry and Com-
missioner of Public Works in Sir
Richard Butler's Ministry. Later,
Senator Vardon was elected a member
of the Federal Senate, Commonwealth
Government, in 1906, and held the
position until his decease in 1913. Lie
was a member of the Masonic, Recha-
bite, and Oddfellows' Lodges. His
sport was bowls. Senator Vardon
died on the 20th July, 1913.


■' " ’ ♦ :- >4 %; ■.
I 'l||p|&
MHB-
.jff
Mm Jm d&: \
t 8
''-4p > ; .
EX-ALDERMAN THE HON. EDWARD
WHEEWALL HOLDEN, M.L.C., B.Sc.,
M.I.E. (Aus.).
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Adelaide, 14th August, 1885;
educated at Prince Alfred College and
University of Adelaide. Three years
service in Council as Councillor and
Alderman. Chairman of Directors,
General Motors, Holdens, Ltd.; Direc-
tor Bank of Adelaide. Mr. Holden
was elected a member of the Legisla-
tive Council, December, 1935. Sports :
Tennis and golf. Lodge, “Emulation.”
SIR JOHN LAVINGTON BONYTHON,
K.C.M.G., ALDERMAN.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Son of the Hon. Sir John Langdon
Bonython, K.C.M.G., was born at Acle-
laide on the 10th September, 1875, and
educated at Prince Alfred College,
Adelaide. Sir Lavington, an Alder-
man of the City of Adelaide, has
had a long and honoured career
in the civic life of the capital
of the State. He first entered the
City Council at the beginning of
the century, and is still associated
with it. Sir Lavington has occupied
every position available, from Coun-
cillor to Lord Mayor. At the conclu-
sion of one of his terms of the Mayoral
Chair he was presented by the citi-
zens with a fine oil painting of himself,
which now hangs in the Council Cham-
ber. Councillor, City of Adelaide,
1901-07, 1933-35; Alderman, 1907-11-
35; Acting Mayor, 1911: Mayor, 1912-
13; Lord Mayor, 1927-30; Chairman
of Finance Committee of City Conn-
cil, 1910; of Adelaide School Board.
1907-10; of Metropolitan Abattoirs
Board, 1911-12-13, 1928-29-30; of
Municipal Association, 1912-13, 1928-
29-30; member of Adelaide Hospital
Board, Licensing Bench, Botanic Gar-
dens Board, Municipal Tramways
Trust; President of Australian
Natives' Association, 1901 ; member of
Metropolitan Fire Brigades Board,
1905-06; President of Chamber of
Commerce, Chairman of Industrial Sta-
bility Committee, Chairman of Metro-
politan Infectious Diseases Hospital,
Chairman of Youth Occupational Com-
mittee, Chairman of the S.A. State
Committee of the Australian Com-
monwealth Association for Simplified
Practice, 1930; President Minda Home
(Inc.), President of the Royal Society
of St. George; Vice-President S.A.
Institution for the Blind and Deaf and
Dumb (Inc.) ; was associated with his
father on " The Advertiser," and is now
a director of Advertiser Newspapers,
Ltd.; member of Board of Executor.
Trustee, and Agency Co. of S.A., Ltd.;
member of Board of Scottish Union
and National Insurance Company.
Address: "St. Corantyn," Adelaide:
"Eurilla," Mount Lofty. Club: Ade-
laide.
ALDERMAN ETHELBERT BENDALL.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Prospect, South Australia;
educated at Prince Alfred College.
Service in Adelaide Council, 24 years
as Councillor. Elected Alderman.
Adelaide, July, 1935; 11 years’ service
Unley City Council (5 years Council-


*
‘ -! 1|§|'" ‘ ' -*'' *
i||
|||* Wm mW J8HSl% * ?$ «f«v J&
■“ mmmmmmmtmm ———————mmmmmmm—mmm—
]( 4 years Alderman, and 2 years as
A ivor). Chairman of Finance Com-
n Bee, Adelaide City Council, and re-
pi esents the Council on the Metro-
politan Infectious Diseases Hospital
Board, also member Metropolitan
County Board. Chairman W ayville
Institute ; President of Unley Orches-
tra. Business, chartered accountant
(Aus.). Lodges: Past Grand Officer,
Freemasons’ Grand Lodge; Past
Grand Officer, Royal Arch Chapter;
Preceptor Knight Templar, Earl of
Euston; First General, Rose Croix;
P.G.M. Independent Order of Oddfel-
lows. His sports are cricket, football,
lacrosse, bowls, and golf.
ALDERMAN THE HON. GEORGE
HENRY PROSSER.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Gawler River, South Aus-
tralia, 1867; educated at public schools.
Alderman in the Adelaide City Council
for the past 22 years; 12 years a
member of the Legislative Council; 10
years American Consular Agent; 5
years Mayor of Kensington and Nor-
wood; 34 years a director of Wilkin-
son & Co., Ltd., Chairman of the Wal-
laroo and Mount Lyell Fertiliser Co.,
Ltd., and Adelaide Cement Co., Ltd.
He is a Past President of the Ade-
laide Chamber of Commerce. Alder-
man Prosser received the consent of
His late Majesty the King to retain
the title of Honourable for services
rendered to the State during the
period that he was a member of the
Legislative Council. Sports : Bowls
and billiards. Business address,
Brookman Buildings, Grenfell Street.
ALDERMAN ROBERT HOMBURG.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Norwood, South Australia,
1876; educated at Prince Alfred Col-
lege, Kent Town. Business, solicitor.
Member of the firm Homburg, Mel-
rose, & Homburg. Sport: Tennis and
gardening. Has represented South
Australia at cricket and tennis. Home
address, “The Avenues,” Medindie,
South Australia.
ALDERMAN ARDEN SEYMOUR
HAWKER, M.C., J.P.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born on board P. & O. R.M.S. Ban-
galore, just outside Sydney Heads in
the Tasman Sea. Educated in South
Australia, England, France, Germany,
and U.S.A. Service in Council; 5 years
Councillor for MacDonnell Ward and


JEm* s
%
%Jk ** **
M
f'0 Mm nil ® J? - *
Jmf I JBttr
1 year Alderman. One of the repre-
sentatives of the City Council on the
Municipal Tramways Trust. For some
years he was a warden of St. Peter's
Cathedral. Commanding officer of the
3rd Light Horse Regiment, C.M.F.,
for 4 years. Member of the commit-
tee of the North Adelaide Branch of
the Liberal Union. Business, farmer
and grazier. He is a member of the
St. Alban and Grand Lodge of S.A.,
the Grand Chapter of South Austra-
lia, and Knights Templar Rose Croix,
Masonic Lodges. War service: served
with the 50th Battalion in France with
the A.1.F., and awarded the M.C.
Sports: Fishing and big game shoot-
ing. Home address, "Duncraig," Stir-
ling West.
ALDERMAN TOM HADFIELD GRUNDY.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Park Terrace, Eastwood,
6th October, 1902, and educated at
Pulteney Grammar School and St.
Peter’s College, Adelaide. Ser-
vice in Council: Councillor for
Young Ward, 9th September, 1931, to
30th June, 1935. Was one of the in-
stigators of the reduction in rates in
1934, and also assisted with the re-
vision of the traffic and signs by-laws.
Mr. Grundy is a son of the late Mr.
George Grundy of the Church Office,
Adelaide. His present occupation is a
manufacturers’ agent. Mr. Grundy
received his business training and
general commercial experience with
Elder Smith & Co., Limited, the Muni-
cipal Tramways Trust, and the Shell
Company of Australia. He is hon.
secretary of the Adelaide District
Committee, also of the Glen Osmond
and Eastwood Branch of the Liberal
and Country League. A delegate to
the East Torrens District Committee,
member of the Central Executive, or-
ganising and publicity committees of
the Liberal and Country League,
member of the Synod and standing
committees of the Church of England,
committeeman of the Adelaide Dioce-
san Layreaders' Association, founda-
tion member of the Constitutional
Club of S.A.
THE LATE WILLIAM BIRKINSHAW
WILKINSON, EX-COUNCILLOR.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Manchester, England. 23rc
May, 1854; educated at the Man-
chester Church of England Grammar


■
mHBS MliMlij^M
SC 001. Arrived in Australia, 7th
e, 1875. Councillor for Robe Ward
i he Adelaide City Council from De-
c iber, 1907-11. Chairman of the
S cial Committee for Parks and
G dens, 1908-1909. He was for many
v rs resident of North Adelaide.
I itions held: Fellow of the Royal
G Society and President of
South Australian Branch; Presi-
d t of the General Employers'
I on; President and a founder of the
L ensed Landbrokers and Auc-
t leers’ Association (now Real Estate
I titute of S.A., Inc.) ; President and
a ounder of the North Adelaide
E anch of the Liberal Union ; member
o the Board of Governors of the
P die Library, Museum, and Art Gal-
le ■; Chairman and Trustee of the
K dergarten Union; member of the
E icutive and Past Chairman of St.
JcCn’s Ambulance Association; past
President and one of the founders of
the Commonwealth Club; member of
the Executive and Hon. Treasurer of
the Queen’s Home; a founder and
member of the Executive of the Town
Pj inning Association. Business : Late
Chairman of Directors of Wilkinson,
Sando & Wyles Ltd., real estate agents,
auctioneers, and valuers, and formerly
a member of the Stock Exchange of
Adelaide; Lodge St. Alban, No, 38,
S.A.C. War service: President of the
North Adelaide Circle of the Austra-
lian Division (Men’s Section) of the
British Red Cross Society, and Presi-
dent of the Men’s Tobacco Auxiliary
(S.A. Division) of the Australian Com-
fort Funds. His two sons served with
A.I.F.—Mr. Keith Wilkinson with the
50th Battalion in France and Mr. Ross
WiiVinson with the Light Horse at
Gallipoli, Egypt, and Palestine. His
son-in-law, Mr. A. Seymour Hawker,
served with the 50th Battalion in
France. He married Miss E. J. M.
Peterswald, a daughter of the late Mr.
W. J. Peterswald, who was for many
years Commissioner of Police in S.A.
He died on the 14th January, 1927.
THE LATE LIEUT.-COL. THOMAS
HYLAND SMEATON.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Glasgow, Scotland, 15th
July, 1857, and educated at Free
Church Normal Seminary and Ander-
sonian University, Glasgow. Arrived
in Australia, 1879. In 1883 he com-
menced practice in Adelaide as an ar-
chitect. Elected as Councillor for
Young Ward in the Adelaide City
Council, 1892-1896. Elected to the
House of Assembly in 1905, represent-
ing the District of Sturt, and con-
tinued to hold his seat for 9 years.
In 1921 was appointed Secretary to
the S.A. Public Teachers' Association,
and held office until his death, which
occurred on 17th October, 1927. He
also held the following positions:
Chairman of the Fire Brigades Board,
President of the Tramway Employees
Union, member of the Council of the
School of Mines, foundation member
of the Adelaide Literary Society and
the Union Parliament. He did much
in Parliament for temperance legisla-
tion, and was officially associated with
the temperance movement in S.A. for
35 years, being Treasurer, President,
and Vice-President of the S.A.
Alliance. He joined the militia in
1900, being one of the first officers
and a foundation member of the Ade-
laide Scottish Corps. In 1916 was ap-
pointed Chief Censor Officer in S.A.,
holding that position during the Great
War, 1914-1918. He retired from the
military when he held the position of
Lieutenant-Colonel.
THE LATE COUNCILLOR T. J.
MATTERS.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Was born at Devonshire, England,
arrived in South Australia at the age
of 3 years; educated at Whinham Col-
lege, and on the death of his father
entered on his business career at the
age of 13 years. The late Mr. Matters
began his association with real estate
business at Port Adelaide in 1880.
Later both he and his brother (Mr.
J. L. Matters) joined Messrs. C. H.
Matters and j. P. Roberts, who had
established a land business in Adelaide.


\
SB; f ,'/'
Jm * JrJBH*>
m ■Jm
c^ii
■
The new firm was styled C. H. Mat-
ters & Co. When partnership was dis-
solved Mr. T. J. Matters continued
the business opposite the Town Hall,
under the name of Matters & Co. Sub-
sequently the present premises in
Waymouth Street were secured. He
was a member of the Adelaide City
Council for 16 years, first represent-
ing Young and then Hindmarsh Wards.
Mr. Matters held many prominent
presidential positions. He was for 17
years President of the Adelaide S.F.B.
Society. He was a life long member
of the Methodist Church. His chief
hobby was gardening. He died at his
home. High Street, Unley Park, 18th
October, 1933, in his 85th year.
THE LATE WILLIAM PULLIN, J.P.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Wiltshire, England, 21st
December, 1849, and arrived in Aus-
tralia 1859. Was educated in England
and at Mr. Mitten’s Private School,
Adelaide. The late Mr. Pullin served
26 years, representing Robe V ard in
the Adelaide City Council. He was
on the Fire Brigades Board, Park
Lands Committee, and Metropolitan
Milk Board. He was a member of the
Mostyn Lodge, Freemasons, a mem-
ber of the Rechabite Order. The late
Mr. Pullin was a resident of North
Adelaide, prior to his decease, for 70
years, and was in business as a but-
cher in North Adelaide for many
vears.
THE LATE MR. JOSEPH
BARTHOLOMEW SIEBERT,
EX-COUNCILLOR.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Leinefelde in Eichsfeld,
Brovinz, Hanover, Germany. The
late Mr. Siebert resided in the district
for many years. He was always a
keen horseman, often taking part in
match races from Glenelg, where he
resided, to Adelaide. He was always
fond of music. The late Mr. J. B.
Siebert's widow resides with her son,
Mr. Frank J. Siebert, Wakefield
Street, Adelaide.
THE LATE MR. WALTER HUNTER
STEVENSON, EX-COUNCILLOR.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Carlton, Victoria, sth July,
1855. The late Mr. Stevenson repre-
sented Robe Ward in the Adelaide City
Council from 1884 to 1886, and was a
resident of the district for 52 years.
He served on the Finance, Town Hall
and By-laws, and Salary Committees.
Late Governing Director of Steven-
son Bros., Ltd., jewellers, Rundle
Street, Adelaide. The late Mr. Stev-


Hr W|P
■
8® &&*m-*.*.. MMJmSm
H c ip|j™ **
Hb '^% ?
Hk
k ’■'
* %
“ "ng. ,
'
||| ■
' * * •§&
f^jSr
en m travelled extensively abroad,
an throughout Australia. He was
Pr sident of the South Australian
R ail Jewellers’ Association, and Pre-
sident of the Federated Retail Jewel-
Association of Australia. Mem-
ber of the Board of the Y.M.C.A. and
the Adelaide Benevolent Society. Was
also actively associated with the early
development of the Royal Institute
for the Blind, North Adelaide. Vice-
President of the Adelaide Orpheus
Society; member of the Choral
Society; founder of Stevenson Bros.,
jewellers, 20. Bundle Street, Adelaide;
and in 1929 the late Mr. Stevenson
published an autobiography under the
title of “Stepping Stones —a Jeweller’s
Journeyings.” In sports he was fond
of cricket, football, tennis, bowls,
and golf. Golf was his favourite
pastime. He was a member of the
Royal Adelaide and Mount Osmond
Golf Clubs. The late Mr. Steven-
son's two sons served abroad 011 active
service with A.I.F.
EX-COUNCILLOR PATRICK FRANCIS
KILEY, J.P.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Adelaide, 11th December,
1872; educated at Christian Brothers'
College, Adelaide. Represented Young
Ward as Councillor for 4 years in the
Adelaide City Council. Has resided at
Lnley, Adelaide, and Glenelg for 20
years. Positions held: District Sec-
retary Hibernian-Australasian Catho-
lic Benefit Society (29 years), General
Secretary United Licensed Victuallers’
Association (9 years), and L.V. Rac-
ing Club Ltd. (9 years). Justice of the
Peace. Mr, Kiley was appointed to
the position of secretary of the South
Australian Branch of the United
Licensed Victuallers' Association of
Australia in succession to the late Mr.
F. B. Keogh on the 26th August, 1927.
Mr. Kiley is a well-known figure in
business and sporting circles through-
out South Australia, and his appoint-
ment met with general approval. Mr.
Kiley is a man of many parts. He is
an able debater and is, what can be
termed, a "strong man" in defence
when the rights of the trade are as-
sailed. He is always ready to in-
terest himself in any movement that
tends to the advancement and pros-
perity of his native State. Lodge
H.A.C.B.S. since boyhood. Sports :
Cricket, football, athletics, member
all metropolitan racing clubs.
EX-COUNCILLOR E. McDONNELL.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Payntynoss, County Down,
Ireland, on the 20th May, 1894.
Arrived in Australia, 1908. Educated
at Christian Brothers’ College, Oving-
ham, and Royal Australian Navy. Mr.
McDonnell was elected Councillor for
Gawler Ward in the Adelaide City
Council, 1930-32, having served 2
years in the Council he contested the
Adelaide seat for the House of Assem-
bly in 1933. Although defeated. Mr.
McDonnell polled well. He was Pre-
sident of the Adelaide Electorate
Committee in Labour interest from
1930-33, and still occupies the position
of V ice-President. He is a member of
R.S. and 5.1.L., and a member of the
Naval Association, also a life member
of the West Adelaide Football Club.
Mr. McDonnell joined the Royal Aus-
tralian Navy in 1910 and was sent to


I / , # /
ojsi
mii.
jjj
J|| -.Jr' ; i|fe
||p®'
2
r .,
: . * J”" |H
raBK ***
MmBSm
-' Jk- . Jl SSmmmWmk
Wfgrrr JiliiiW
Lt* #9* |l|
~ - *//■
MBIpiui& - ->fam*~- 'v '■ -
jBESafe, ' W*~ .>! Wm
WL v JS
Bfe
%*&r
pPyp. i ’
the Portsmouth Signal School in Eng-
land for a special course. In 1913 he
commissioned to H.M.A.S. Australia,
and returned to Australia in that ship
after a trip around the world. He
had many thrilling experiences on
board the above battleship, which took
part in the capture of German colonies
in the Pacific during the Great War,
1914-18. He resigned from the Navy
in June, 1919, and entered the hotel
business, becoming licensee of the
Edinburgh Castle Hotel, Currie Street,
and is still in the above hotel Sports,
football.
PAST COUNCILLOR H. GILL
WILLIAMS, L.D.S., R.C.S., Eng.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Unley on 4th April, 1874;
educated Hahndorf College and Uni-
versity College: 5 years a Councillor
Adelaide City Council; 15 years a
Councillor Walkerville District Coun-
cil ; 35 years a resident of Gilberton,
Walkerville district. He is in business
as a dental surgeon. In command
Dental Reserve during the Great War.
His sports are bowls and fishing.
THE LATE COUNCILLOR C. W.
JONES.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Who for 20 years represented Caw-
ler Ward in the Adelaide City Coun-
cil died 30th April, 1934, at the age
of 75 years. The late Councillor
Jones was born on 27th July, 1858. He
attended Caterer’s School, and when
the family went to England he con-
tinued his education at Ardingley Col,
Surrey. He returned to Adelaide and
was employed by W. & T. Rhodes in
the ironmongery trade. In 1885 he
went into business as a chaff and pro-
duce merchant, and remained in that
business until 19 years ago. Ihe late
Councillor Jones was a member of the
School Board of Advice for 12 years.
He founded and was the first Chair-
man of the Chaff Merchants' Associa-
tion in South Australia, and was for
some time prominent in Freemasonry.
He also served on the executive of the
Congregational Union, and was a
member of the City Mission Board.
He was also a staunch member of the
Liberal Union.
EX-COUNCILLOR THE HON. STANLEY
R. WHITFORD, J.P., M.L.C.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Moonta, sth June, 1878
educated at a public school and Schoo
of Mines. Two years' service in Conn
cil. representing Young Ward. Mem


Wtj IS
■ B
SQhBH ,1;.., iiH ;
V r :g^p
; . 7 % iJP^
J^ v
111 * 'B
; ’f x
" pF
■BHH^feff, * w VV**
; * V i & -
tV'i 7'" 1|M * 3 JP
& v* 14
4 > : *;. -J| ■
SF . J \
IK
w y lOlSfe.
her of Duke of Edinburgh Masonic
Lodge, Moonta; 1.0.0. F., M.U.,
Albion, Adelaide; Buffalo Lodge,
Largs Bay. His various occupations
were —blacksmith, miner, navvy, rail-
way employee, assistant secretary and
organiser of the S.A. branch A.R.U.,
organiser A.W.U., member of Parlia-
ment, North Adelaide, 1920-27,
storekeeper and costing clerk. Ade-
laide Cement Co., 1929, member of
the Legislative Council, Chief Secre-
tary, Minister of Agriculture, 1930-33.
At present member of the Legislative
Council, Central District, No. 1. Pre-
sident Plympton Coursing Club. His
sports are horse racing, trotting, and
coursing.
THE LATE EDWARD FRINSDORF, J.P.
Lx-Councillor Adelaide City Council)
Born at Enfield. 15th September,
1858; educated at Mr. Unwin's School,
Walkerville. The late Mr. Frinsdorf
served as a Councillor for 12 years,
representing MacDonnell Ward. He
was Chairman of the Fire Brigades
Board for 24 years, a member of the
Adelaide Hospital Board for several
years, 6 years a Councillor in the
Glenelg Corporation; for several years
he was Deputy Inspector for the
Grand Lodge of Freemasons of South
Australia. He was also a member of
the Stock Exchange of Adelaide for
40 years. Was a keen rowing enthu-
siast and a member of several racing
clubs. For several years was auditor
and a keen follower of the North
Adelaide Football Club. He died on
6th November, 1932.
THE LATE COUNCILLOR
FREDERICK JAMES WOODS, J.P.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Was born at Willaston, near Gawler,
on 25th February, 1864. and educated
at Mr. L. S. Burton’s School, Gawler.
As a Councillor in the Young Ward he
was highly esteemed, and his seven
years of faithful services were greatly
appreciated. He earned similar tri-
butes from the Justices’ Association,
Inc., of which body he became a mem-
ber in the year 1926. Even in his
hours of pleasant relaxation, as a
member of the Parksi.de Bowling
Club, he endeared himself to the hearts
of all with whom he associated. He
found pleasure in everything he did,
especially in the service of others.


■■:' . ; ■ ' ■■: ‘ V 'V. ‘ ' ■
_ ; *
I*
■Ml m . ... ■ r[ w-
Wt •jfptvi-. 1 *
- . I'
ife
.
.
rtf- ••« & l / *. s»
* 2|||m ' .^K
4 ‘ '' % " - r- ’’ m$W&*aK *
THE LATE ERNEST CHRISTIAN
KNABE, EX-COUNCILLOR.
(Adelaide City Council.)
The late Mr. Knabe was born at
Adelaide on the Bth of December, 1870,
and was educated at Sturt Street Pub-
lic School and Prince Alfred College,
Kent Town. He served 4 years as
Councillor in the Adelaide City Coun-
cil, representing Young Ward from
1031 to 1934. The late Mr. Knabe
was a member of the Masonic, Druids,
and Manchester Unity Oddfellows
Lodges, and at the time of his decease,
which took place on the 3rd of June,
1936, was in business as an undertaker
and funeral director at 210 Bundle
Street, Adelaide,
THE LATE JOHN WYLES, J,P.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Kirkcaldy, Scotland, 26th
June, 1855; arrived in Australia, 1879.
He served as a Councillor in the Ade-
laide City Council, 1899-1900; 20 years’
service in the St. Peters Corporation ;
was Mayor of St. Peters in 1897; was
the founder of the real estate firm of
Messrs. John Wyles & Co., Pirie
Street, Adelaide. He was an enthu-
siastic municipalist and prime mover
in furthering the formation of the
Municipal Tramways Trust. He was
also chief of the S.A. Caledonian
Society from 1897-99. The late Mr.
Wyles died on the 9th March, 1903.
THE LATE FRANCIS HARDY
FAULDING, EX-COUNCILLOR.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Yorkshire, England, and ar-
rived in South Australia shortly after
the foundation of the Province in 1836.
He resided in Rundle Street and Clar-
ence Place, Adelaide. The late Mr.
Faulding served as a Councillor in the
Adelaide City Council from 1861 to
1863. He was one of the first Direc-
tors of the Bank of Adelaide, and also
a Trustee of the Savings Bank of
South Australia. The late Mr. Fauld-
ing was the founder of the firm of F.
H. Faulding & Co., Ltd., wholesale
druggists, of this State. He went to
England in 1864 and secured the
chimes at present in the clock tower
of the Adelaide Town Hall, known as
the Albert Bells. The late Mr.
Faulding died at Glen Osmond in 1868.
EX-COUNCILLOR CHARLES LEWIS
JESSOP.
(Adelaide City Council.)
W as born at Adelaide and educated


|
V ',. ■ jf ;
« f:> if ■?
IB --v.
JR
BBJEr £%*** !&&%&' "
r yJtMmsaSfa MM
g- ✓ J&jl
&fe -
mtM%S%&J mHh' . ■' ■tV
at Queen’s School. Geelong Grammar
School, Victoria, and Adelaide Univer-
sity. Mr. Jessop was a Councillor for
MacDonnell Ward, City of Adelaide,
from 1926-32, and represented that
body on the Municipal Tramways
Trust. He has always taken a keen
interest in traffic control and regula-
tion, and as a member of one traffic
committee of the City Council did a
tremendous amount of work in the in-
terest of motorists. He was Chair-
man of one Walkerville District Coun-
cil from 1923-26. Mr. Jessop played
league football with the North Ade-
laide Football Club for 10 years, and
represented the South Australian
Football League on the Australasian
Football Council and also represented
the State in interstate matches. He
has been President of the club for
manv vears.
THE LATE EDWIN SAWLE
HUGHES, J.P.
(Ex-Councillor Adelaide City Council)
Born at North Adelaide, 26th Feb-
ruary, 1850: educated at Whinham
College, North Adelaide, and J. L.
Young’s School, Parkside. He was a
Councillor for Young Ward, 1893-
1895. He was one of the founders of
the Literary Societies’ Union Parlia-
ment, Speaker of Unley City Parlia-
ment, a member of the Field Natural-
ists’ section of the Royal Society, one
time President of the Adelaide Branch
A.N.A. He always had the greatest
admiration for the City of Adelaide,
and had always its interest at heart.
He was a Justice of the Peace, and
an original member of the Y.M.C.A.
He was secretary for the C. L.
3 oung s Scholarship, and was a mem-
her of the Independent Order of Odd-
fellows. He carried on the business
of an auctioneer for many years. He
died on 22nd October, 1926.
THE LATE JOSEPH HADFIELD
GRUNDY.
(Ex-Councillor Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Salford, Manchester, Eng-
land, sth November, 1855; educated at
English Public Schools. He arrived
in Australia in 1877 as South Austra-
lian representative of P. Falk & Co.,
wholesale jewellers. Councillor for
Young Ward, Adelaide City Council,
1889-90 ; Alderman, City of Unley, and
Mayor of Brighton. The late Mr.
Grundy was one of the instigators of
the movement to connect Goodwood
and Brighton by railway. He estab-
lished in 1880 the business of Grundv


,
v Ik*
Jllpl
4 \ \
Bros., manufacturing jewellers and
importers. He was a lay reader of the
Church of England for 50 years; a
former President of the justices' As-
sociation. He also took a prominent
part in St. John's Young Men's Society
in the early days ; was a committeeman
of Brighton Institute for many years,
and took a keen interest in the Boy
Scouts' Association. Mr. Grundy died
on 10th March, 1934.
THE LATE HERMAN BRICE.
(Ex-Councillor Adelaide City Council)
Was born at Blackberry Farm,
Devonshire, England; educated at
Exeter, England. The late Mr. Brice
arrived in Sydney, 9th September,
1841, and came to Adelaide in 1845.
He served as a Councillor in the Ade-
laide City Council from 1860-63, re-
presenting Gawler Ward. He was a
resident of the Adelaide district from
1845-55, when he left with his family
for a visit to England, and returned
again to Adelaide in 1856. The late
Mr. Brice purchased land in the Nar-
ridy district about 1869, and estab-
lished two farms, which he named
"Landscape" and "Emmadale." He
served for many years in the Narridy
District Council as a Councillor. The
late Mr. Brice. was a pioneer of the
Narridy district, and was closely con-
nected with the principals of the firm
of A. A. Brice & Co., wholesale mer-
chants. The late Mr. Brice died in
the Crystal Brook Hospital on 27th
December, 1896, in his 79th year.
THE HON. WILLIAM JOSEPH
DENNY, M.C.
(Ex-Councillor Adelaide City Council)
Born at Adelaide, 6th December,
1872; educated Christian Brothers'
College and Adelaide University. Ser-
vice in Council, 1 year and 6 months ;
40 years a resident of the district.
Positions held: City Councillor, Ade-
laide City Council; Attorney-General
in 3 Ministries. Profession, solicitor,
Unity Chambers, Currie Street. Mem-
ber of the H.A.C.B. Society. Sports,
cricket, walking and riding. War ser-
vice, 3i| years abroad on active ser-
vice with the A.I.F. Author of the
''Diggers" and "A Digger Abroad."
Home address, Osmond Terrace, Nor-
wood.
THE LATE COUNCILLOR WILLIAM
COX.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at King William Street, Ade-
laide ; educated at Whinham College;


| ■
■ : , . i *
■‘
'
W *
4 years' service as Councillor. The
late Mr. Cox also served as a Council-
lor in the Walkerville District Coun-
cil. and on the School Board of Advice,
North Adelaide Public School. He was
many years a deacon in the North
Adelaide Baptist Church, and a mem-
ber of the Oddfellows' and Masonic
Lodges. Mr. Cox died in 1905.
THE LATE WILLIAM ANDERSON
CAWTHORNE.
(Ex-Councillor Adelaide City Council)
Born at London. 25th September,
1825: arrived in Australia, 1841. Mr.
Cawthorne was intimately associated
with Kangaroo Island. His father,
Captain W. C. Cawthorne, late of the
India Co. service, was the first light-
house keeper at Cape Willoughby.
He was induced by the Trinity Board
to take the position. He established
the National Building Society, and
had great interests in the district of
Goodwood and Southwark. He laid
out and built many houses in these
districts. Ada and Florence Streets
were named after two of his daugh-
ters. Cawthorne Street, Southwark,
was named after his eldest son. Mr.
W. A. Cawthorne spent many years
among the aboriginals of South Aus-
tralia, and was very conversant with
their language and also wrote several
books dealing with this subject—" Ihe
Red Kangaroo," "Menge," " The
Mineralogist," and "The Islanders."
The latter book was first published in
1854 and reprinted in 1926 under the
title of "The Kangaroo Islanders."
The late Mr. Cawthorne took great in-
terest in church work, especially the
Trinity Church in the early days, and
was married there in 1849. Charles
Cawthorne, his eldest son. established
Cawthorne's Music Warehouse in 1870
at Franklin Street. Adelaide, where
the telephone department is now sit-
uated. This was formerly used as Hill
and Co.'s old coach booking office.
The late Mr. Cawthorne died on 23rd
November, 1897.
THE LATE COUNCILLOR WILLIAM
BICKFORD, J.P.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Adelaide 19th November,
1841; educated at J. L. Young’s Aca-
demy. He engaged in pioneering the
pastoral industry on the Darling
country after leaving school, but after
a short while he joined the National
Bank of Australasia. In 1864 Mr.
Bickford relinquished his position at
the bank and joined in the business
carried on by his mother (Ann Mar-
garet Bickford) and brother (Harry
Bickford) as chemists in Hindley
Street. He represented Gawler \\ ard
in the Council, 1876-77. He interested
himself largely in the drainage for the
City question, and on his' advice Sir
William Clark, the eminent expert,
was brought to Adelaide. As a result
important alterations were made to
the plan in connection with the in-
stallation of the underground system.
He was Chairman of Committee in
charge of the installation of the Town
Hall organ in 1877. In 1885 he was
elected the Mayor of Brighton, and
held that office for 6 years. He was
President and later committeeman of
the Chamber of Commerce. In 1903
the firm of A. M. Bickford & Sons
was floated into a limited company,


' ■pi"'*' .
JbhH
% M jf
jam- mr~
' SST iSm*.
Mi. Win. Bickford being appointed
managing director. He was president
of the Justices' Association in 1903.
Mi. Win. Bickford purchased a large
tract of country between Narracoorte
and h i ancis in 1885 and successfully
giew fine wool Merino sheep on the
property, known as "Burnside Sta-
tion." He died in 1919 in his 78th
year.
THE LATE JOHN ALBERT
PACKER, EX-COUNCILLOR
(Adelaide City Council.)
W as born at sea on the ship Lysan-
der, 1840, and educated at Mr. Sher-
i idan s I rivate School, MacKinnon
Parade, Aorth Adelaide, and he served
m the Council for a period of 22 years
and lived in the district of Adelaide
pi actically for the whole of his life.
On leaving the Adelaide City Coun-
cil he was presented with *an en-
larged photograph of himself. Whilst
a Councillor for the Adelaide City
Council he was invited to the Mel-
bourne Exhibition. He was also one
of the first Councillors of the first
Prospect District Council, and while
resident on Yorke Peninsula he
formed the Council at Dowlingville.
He was a member of the Oddfellows
and Foresters Lodges.
JOSEPH ANTHONY HARPER, J.P.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Woodstock, Oxfordshire,
England, 23rd November, 1867. Ar-
rived in Australia in January, 1875.
Educated in Queensland. Two years
Councillor of the Adelaide City Coun-
cil. Mayor of the Burnside Corpora-
tion, 1936, being the first Mayor ap-
pointed. Has served the Burnside
Corporation for 24 years. Chairman,
1918 to 1935. President of the Cham-
ber of Manufactures of South Aus-
tralia, and Associated Chamber of
Manufactures of Australia; Vice-Pre-
sident Employers' Federation. Mr.
Harper was President of the Parkside
and Toorak Bowling Clubs. He
played cricket when a younger man,
and was Captain of the Wallaby Club
for 15 years. Plays bowls occasion-
ally, and won Parkside Championship
besides pairs. In business he is a
warehouseman. Home address, Glen
Osmond.
COUNCILLOR JAMES CAMPBELL
IRWIN, A.R.A.I.A.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at North Adelaide in 1906 and
educated at Queen’s School, St.
Peter’s College and Mark’s College,
and the University of Adelaide. He
has served one year as Councillor in
the Adelaide City Council, having been
elected in 1935. Chairman of Town
Hall Improvements Committee. Busi-
ness, architect. Mr. Irwin is a mem-
ber of the firm Woods, Bagot, Lay-
hourne-Smith, & Irwin. His sports
are lacrosse, golf, and tennis. Coun-
cillor Irwin holds a commission in the
Field Artillery attached to the 49th
Battery, A.F.A.
COUNCILLOR JOHN STACE REES.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Hindmarsh, South Austra-
lia, and educated at Queen’s College,
North Adelaide. Twenty years’ ser-
vice in Council (10 as Alderman and
10 as Councillor). Chairman of Traf-


jife
lir Jr
!
m 'iR
/&* | ' ' JWfc^i
*
™ %5S
fic and Health Committees and of New
City Bridge, Early Adelaide Special
Committee. Business, insurance un-
derwriter and managing agent and
attorney for South Australia for the
Commercial of Australia Insurance
Company, Ltd. A member of the City
Council State Centenary Special Com-
mittee. Ten years Consul for Bel-
gium in South Australia. Director of
the Liberal Club, ex-President Libe-
ral Union, North Adelaide (Men s)
Branch. Inaugurated the movements
to erect the new City Bridge and es-
tablish the Municipal Golf Links.
Represented the Adelaide City Council
on the Municipal Tramways Trust for
six years. Twice contested Lord
Mayoralty of Adelaide, but unsuccess-
fully. Member of the Royal Society
of St. George and foundation member
of the Pioneers' Association of South
Australia. Sports : Has represented
South Australia in both cricket and
football. A member of the Mount
Osmond Golf Club.
COUNCILLOR ARNOLD WIGHT
BAYLEY SIMS, J.P.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Adelaide, 22nd September,
1888, and educated at Flinders Street
Public School. Service in Council, 2J
years. Mr. Sims has been a resident
of Adelaide for 26 years. Business,
manufacturer, 232-234, Pirie Street,
Adelaide. Mr. Sims is a member of the
Finance, Traffic, and Markets and
Parks Committees. He is a member
of the Council of the Chamber of
Manufacturers, Employers’ Federa-
tion, Mutual Insurance Co., Ltd., and
of the Australian Natives’ Association.
His sports are tennis, cricket, swim-
ming, and motoring. Home address,
4, Giles Avenue, Glenelg.
COUNCILLOR HORACE GILBERT
WILLCOX, Esq., J.P.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Wellington Square, North
Adelaide, 2nd July, 1881; educated at
Queen’s School, Way and Hahndorf
Colleges; 55 years a resident of the
district. Mr. Willcox has served 7\
years in the Adelaide City Council to
June, 1936. Elected Councillor for
Robe Ward in 1929. Represented
Nailsworth Ward as Councillor in the
Prospect District Council for 2 years,
1907 to 1909. At present he is also
representing Medindie Ward as Coun-
cillor in the District Council of Wal-
kerville ; elected in 1925. Positions


I
J||jf
gtm
**mm $Sm
': WW \
I
held: \ ice-Chairman of the Council
Royal Agricultural and Horticultural
Society of South Australia, and a
member of the Council for 30 years.
A lover of all sport, particularly those
associated with horses; a keen gar-
dener. Home address, 15, Robe Ter-
race. Medindie.
COUNCILLOR ARNOLD MEREDITH
MOULDEN, 0.8. E., LL.B.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Semaphore, South Austra-
lia, 21st June, 1893; educated at
Queen’s School, North Adelaide, and
St. Peter’s College. Three years’ ser-
vice in Council; 38 years a resident
of the district. Business, solicitor.
Member of the St. Alban Lodge,
Masonic. His sports are tennis and
golf. Served in the Great War, 1915-
1918; awarded the 0.8. E. (Military
Division), and was twice mentioned
in despatches for meritorious work
on active service.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES JOHN GLOVER,
A.R.A.I.A.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Adelaide, 30th August, 1902,
and educated at Prince Alfred and St.
Mark’s Colleges, and the University
of Adelaide. Mr, Glover has served
in the Adelaide City Council, repre-
senting the MacDonnell Ward for
several months.
COUNCILLOR ARTHUR GEORGE
BARRETT.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Geelong, Victoria, 1895:
educated at Melbourne Church of
England Grammar School Service in
Council: Elected Councillor for Robe
Ward, 1931. Business, maltster. Was
the City Council's representative on
the Metropolitan County Board for a
period. War service: on active ser-
vice abroad 1916-19 with the A.I.F.
Artillery and Australian Flying Corps.
Held commission and mentioned in
despatches. His sports are tennis and
golf. Home address, 195. Stanley
Street, North Adelaide.
COUNCILLOR ERNEST WILLIAM
JAMES PEET, J.P.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born North Melbourne, Victoria,
26th October, 1883; educated, Mat-
tingly’s, North Melbourne. Four
years’ service as Councillor Adelaide
City Council. Twenty-six years a re-
sident of the district. Member of the


■'4
4*te .-ST* j|
, 1 3|p
**«? JPMiIm
I • JK/BSeSm
I J^^m4
I A. M'jftkM
Fire Brigades Board, member of the
Committee of the S.A. Deaf and Dumb
Institution, auditor S.A. District
Trained Nurses’ Association, Chair-
man finance commitee Morialta Home.
Business, picture framer. Member of
the Lewis Lodge of Faith, Masonic.
V ice-President of the Adelaide Har-
riers’ Club and Goodwood Baseball
Club. Patron New Adelaide Cricket
Association; Justice of the Peace,
1920: Secretary of the Central
Traders’ Association, New Adelaide.
COUNCILLOR ALBERT CHARLES
MYERS.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Conger Street, Adelaide,
22nd April, 1887, and educated at Grote
Street Public School, Way and Muir-
len Colleges. Mr. Myers has served
in the Adelaide City Council for four
years as Councillor, and he has been
a resident of the district the whole
of his life. He is Chairman of Mar-
kets and Parks Committee, Adelaide
City Council, and he is in business as
a financier, 69, Gouger Street, Ade-
laide. Mr. Myers is an ex-member of
the Masonic Lodge of Truth and a
member of the Tranmere Masonic
Lodge. He is a patron and president
of practically every sporting club
throughout the western portion of the
city.
COUNCILLOR REGINALD JOHN
PELHAM, J.P., F.R.E.I.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Port Pirie, 23rd June, 1900,
and educated at Gilles Street Public
School, Adelaide High School, and
Prince Alfred College. He was
elected Councillor on the 6th of July,
1935, and has been a resident of Ade-
laide for 28 years. Business, licensed
land broker. Mr. Pelham is a member
of the Avicultural Society of South
Australia and Real Estate Institute of
Australia. He is Chairman of the
Gilles Street School Committee, a
member of the Masonic Lodge, a
member of the Royal South Australian
Yacht Squadron, and acts as Treas-
urer for that body. He is also keen
on fishing. Home address, 93, Fergu-
son Avenue, Myrtlebank.
COUNCILLOR ARTHUR CAMPBELL
RYMILL.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at North Adelaide, Bth Decem-
ber, 1907, and educated at Queen’s
School, St. Peter’s College, ami Uni-


j£' \ |i&
/ iKv& % y i
tmk'A. l&jmsSxy JKmmt m
Mmww<v ,>f " mWM : '’ m
■ : >5 ? • fi
iS||il ||S v: mf^'-''
ff % * %, I ™
versity of Adelaide. Councillor repre-
senting Young Ward. Elected, De-
cember, 1933. Business, barrister
and solicitor. Director of Bennett
and Fisher, Limited. His sports are
polo, yachting, and tennis. Held speed
Boat Championship of Australasia,
1933-1934.
THE LATE TORRINGTQN GEORGE
ELLERY.
(Adelaide City Council.)
The late Mr. Torrington George
Ellery, Town Clerk of Adelaide for 16
years, 1899-1915, was appointed to the
position when both he and the City of
Adelaide were comparatively young.
He commenced his career, therefore,
with the stimulus of his early enthusi-
asm in a municipal sphere where
there was unlimited scope for his ad-
ministrative powers. Born in Mount
Gambier he came to maturity with a
love of literature, a fancy for thought-
ful speculation, a lucid gift of expres-
sion, and an unquenchable thirst for
knowledge. From the very outset of
his career he bent all his energies to
the municipal expansion of the South
Australian capital. His main interest
lay in horticulture and in health. The
present parks and gardens of Adelaide
remain as a monument to his interest
in beautifying the city, while his work-
in connection with municipal health
matters was recognised abroad and re-
warded by a well-merited election to
the Fellowship of the Royal Sanitary
Institute (London). City planning
took another prominent place in his in-
terests, for he believed and taught that
a city adequately planned made better
citizens of its inhabitants, invoked a
sense of patriotism and civic pride,
r ossessing one of the finest private
libraries in the State, he had a well
stocked and cultivated mind, lit with
an idealism and fed with an indefatig-
able courage which continually gave
inspiration to his friends and to those
with whom he worked for the city's
good.
THE LATE FRANCIS WALTER LUNDIE.
(Adelaide City Council.)
The late Councillor Lundie was born
at Port Adelaide, Ist March, 1866, and
died 13th July, 1933. He was edu-
cated at Port Adelaide and Morgan
I üblic Schools, and for 22 years was
Councillor for Crey Ward in the Ade-
laide City Council. Previously he
served for 7 years as Councillor in the
Port Adelaide Council. For 35 } r ears
he was Secretary of the Australian
Workers’ Union (Adelaide Branch),
and executive officer of the A.W.U.
for 40 years. He was associated with
the A.W.U. since 1886, being one of
the first members. He was a member
of the Board of Directors of the Ade-
laide Hospital for many years, a trus-
tee of the Independent Order of
Rechabites (Albert Park Section), of
which body he was a member for 40
years. He was also a member of the
Pastoral Commission held some 8
years ago to inquire into pastoral
leases, etc. Mr. Lundie s life was
given to the cause of the workers,
v\ horn he was able to assist in many
ways, and always did to the best of
his ability.


um |[ fiS; '
H I?' 'v/ •"■
' i
m * JmT
m 't&r pr i
THE LATE ROBERT HUGH
CRAWFORD, J.P.
(Past Councillor, Adelaide City Council)
The late Robert H. Crawford
was born in Adelaide on 20th January,
1853. He was the only son of the late
Hugh Archibald Crawford, who owned
“Kirkala” Station, near Streaky Bay.
He had his early education on the
station, and at the age of sixteen
rears (when the property was disposed
of) he came to Adelaide and attended
the private school, conducted by Mr.
Hosking, at Gouger Street. Mr. Craw-
ford owned and carried on, up to the
time of his death, the well-known and
very successful grocery business of
Crawford & Co., Ltd. He was elected
a member of the Adelaide C ity Coun-
cil, as Councillor for Gawler Ward in
May, 1907, and occupied that position
until December, 1912, when he retired
and did not seek re-election. He was
Chairman of the Finance Committee.
Mr. Crawford was on the Horse Com-
mittee, and a member of the Council
of the Royal Agricultural and Horti-
cultural Society of S.A. for over 40
years, and was President of the Society
for six years —1913 to 1918. It was
mainly due to his efforts and vision
that the Society acquired the beautiful
grounds of 57 acres at \\ ayville, and
the “Showgrounds Act of 1913” was
passed during his Presidency. Mr.
Crawford was on the Board of Man-
agement of the Royal Institution for
the Blind ; was a Commissioner of the
National Park, Belair, and on the
Board of the Botanic Gardens.
CITY MEDICAL OFFICER AND EX-
COUNCILLOR, EDWARD ANGAS
JOHNSON, M.D., CH.D.M.B.,
8.5.M.R.C.5., L.R.C.P., J.P.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Lindsay Villa, Angaston,
South Australia, 1873, and educated at
Whinham and St. Peter’s Colleges,
Adelaide, Melbourne, Gottingen and
Berlin Universities, and Strasburg.
Pasteur Institute, Paris, France.
Councillor of Adelaide City Council,
1903 to 1924. Chairman of Adelaide
Board of Health, Medical Officer of
Health. Dr. Johnson was a member of
the Metropolitan County Board and
Metropolitan Abattoirs Board, Con-
sulting Physician to the Adelaide
Hospital, Government representative
on Central Board of Health, and many
other important positions, and Chair-
man of the Botanical Garden Board of
Governors, Adelaide. Served durin°-
the war with the rank of Major, Army
Medical Corps. His recreation is
gardening.


M..
if
> "JIl W ' JJp|i
x
PAST MAYOR, ALFRED ALLEN
SIMPSON, C.M.G., C.8.E., F.R.G.S.
(England)
(Adelaide City Council)
Born at Kent Town, South Aus-
tralia, 1875, and educated at Prince
Alfred College arid University of Ade-
laide. Mr. Simpson was Mayor of
Adelaide from 1913-15: Chairman of
Metropolitan County Board, 1908-10;
President of the Royal Geographical
Society of Australia, 1925-30; and a
Director of the Bank of Adelaide;
Chairman of A. Simpson & Son, Ltd.,
S.A. Soldiers’ Fund, and other com-
panies ; President of the Adelaide
Chamber of Commerce; Vice-Presi-
dent of the Associated Chambers of
Commerce of Australia, 1935-36. In
1932 the Commonwealth Government
named 28,000 square miles of Central
Australia after Mr. Simpson in recog-
nition of his support of Dr. Madigan’s
aerial exploration of that region.
HORACE PERCY BEAVER, TOWN
CLERK.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Croydon, England, March,
1868. Joined the Corporation’s ser-
vice, March, 1904. as City Accountant;
appointed Town Clerk, 1915. Home
address, 65, Alexander Avenue,
Toorak.


City of Port Adelaide.
PORT ADELAIDE, 1845—THE OLD DOCK.


Port Adelaide History.
On an April morning, just 105 years ago, a white man
stood upon the summit of Mount Lofty. Beneath him the
plains, abundantly timbered, stretched away to the gulf.
To the south-east rose another peak, which was later to
bear his name.
But his attention that April morning was particularly
engaged by the appearance of an unsuspected inlet of the
sea bearing north-east from where he stood. In the last
l"ew_ days he had sailed past its outlet to the gulf without
having seen it.
At that time the outlet of the Murray into the sea was
one of the most important unsolved problems of the con-
tinent. \\ halers had already reported that there was no
outlet, and Sturt, in his famous expedition down the river,
had described the Encounter Bay outlet in terms that re-
flected the disappointment he felt when he discovered how
unsuitable it was for the purposes of navigation.
In England, however, the idea of colonising the
southern part of Australia was already afoot, and an im-
portant group of men were waiting impatiently for solu-
tion of the Murray problem. If it could be shown that the
Murray Mouth was practicable for navigation, then
obviously the mouth was the place for the capital of the
new province.
Retracing their footsteps through the primeval silence
of the land they had visited, the men who had stood on the
summit of Mount Lofty returned to their ship. On the
way they had met two soldiers, whom they had left on the
estuary of a creek, known then as the Ponkiparinga.
Once on board again, all haste was made to move up
the gulf to the mouth of the newly discovered inlet. It
was found to extend some 10 or 12 miles inland.
Thus and in such circumstances came Capt. Collett
Barker, of the 39th, to discover the Port Adelaide River.
Other white men had probably seen the inlet from the same
point before him, but, if so, they were whalers and run-
aways, for whose lawless activities along the coast Barker
himself was shortly to pay the penalty. But the discovery
had never been reported, and Barker had high hopes when
he rejoined his ship, the Isabella, that the inlet would
prove of oustanding value.
After investigating, however. Barker took the Isabella
down the coast towards the Murray Mouth, reported by
Sturt. Somewhere—the evidence seems to indicate either
Rapid Bay or Yankalilla —he left the vessel, and, with the
same companions who had accompanied him to Mount
Lofty, he set off overland toward Goolwa.
Arriving at the Goolwa channel, Barker camped for
the night, and the following day decided to swim the
channel in an attempt to find some better outlet. As he
was the only one of the party who could swim, he went
alone. His companions saw him swim safely across with
a compass tied on his head and disappear among the sand-
hills on the other side.
Barker was never seen again, either dead or alive.
Years later, after the foundation of the Colony of South
Australia, a punitive expedition was sent down to the dis-
trict to investigate the massacre by natives of the pas-
sengers and crew of the brig Maria. Evidence they col-
lected appears to refer to the tragedy of Barker’s dis-
appearance, and to indicate that he was speared by natives.
To-day, in the hands of a Port Adelaide craftsman, a
model of the Isabella is taking shape, designed as a memo-
rial to the man who, on the deck of the original, first
entered the Port River after sighting it from Mount
Lofty. With sails of beaten copper and hull of teak, the
model will recall for many years to come the memory of
a man whose death in the cause of Australian exploration
is one of the romantic tragedies of history.


PORT ADELAIDE, 1884.


Further History of Port Adelaide
Port Adelaide is practically the only place in South
Australia where one may buy a paper on the Douglas
Social Credit System, a 2/6 shirt, a carved jade ornament,
or a fight, with equal facility. It is certainly the only place
in the State where one can see, almost in the same
glance, a copy of the painting, "Venus and Adonis,” an old
man crying his pies in the street, the original figurehead
of the pallid Scottish lass from the barque Gathneill, and
the shining portholes of the modern liner, like so many
blase eyes behind gold-rimmed monocles.
Also, it may be the only town in the wide world that
owns a figure of Justice holding lop-sided scales. Some
individual, soured by injustice, has climbed the white figure
that stands outside the police station, and removed one
side of the scales she holds outstretched, thus destroying
forever her symbol of blind equality !
Getting the story of Port Adelaide into a single article
is something akin to the problem of the fabled fisherman,
who attempted to get the genii back into the magic bottle.
The history is as widespread, as tortuous, as rambling
as the town itself. A volume could be written about it,
a volume of superficialities, for the spirit of this town is
as wide and as boundless as the blue waters that lick its
main streets.
In an official report, dated February, 1837, Colonel
William Light, to whom the State is indebted for the site
of its capital and chief port, wrote of Port Adelaide : —"I
have no hesitation in saying that, with the entrance buoyed,
ships drawing 16 ft. of water may go in with ease, and
when in there is no safer or more commodious harbour in
the world for merchant ships.”
The present port must not be confounded with the first
settlement established farther up the river, near what is
now known as Queenstown. The old Port, dubbed “Port
Misery” by some of the pioneers, was situated about a mile
above Jervois Bridge, and almost opposite Buck’s Flat. It
was selected, as it ofifered greater facilities of access to the
river than any other spot in the immediate neighbourhood.
"Here/’ says a contemporary report airily, "the interven-
ing belt of mangroves was scarcely 400 yards through.”
Across this the early pioneers cut a ditch 30 ft. wide
by 5 ft. deep to the foot of the sandhills. This was piled
at the end with pine poles, capped with quartering, and
hacked with ti-tree bush to prevent the sand falling in.
The silt dug out formed an embankment.
This creek was available for small craft of light
draught only, and at low water it was dry. There were no
mechanical appliances for landing heavy goods on this
primitive wharf, and delays and disputes among captains,
sailors, and the shipping fraternity were by no means rare.
1 he trade of the Colony, at that time carried on by means
of small sailing craft, was principally of an inter-colonial
character. 1 he damage to cargo by exposure on the wharf
and high tides was considerable. When £3 a ton for
cartage by bullock wagon to Adelaide had been added, it
was not surprising that the cost to the consumer was con-
siderable.
It was not until May 25, 1839, that Governor Gawler,
by digging the first spade of earth, approved of the for-
mation of the road which was to connect the Port River
with the solid ground near Alberton. The road was 92
chains long, 35 ft. wide on the surface, and was formed
by excavating the ground on either side and raising, what
was virtually an embankment, one foot above the highest
tide, which had occurred after the establishment of the
Colony. This was the first step taken in the formation
of the new Port. Small wonder that the old Port was soon
to be only an unpleasant memory.
The real work on the road was begun about the middle
of June the same year, and it was expected to be finished
within six months. The opening of the road, which cost
about £14,000 to construct, was timed for Januanry 22. 1840,
but as a wharf had to be built for the landing of car«-o,
it was not until October of that year that the scheme
was completed. The work was carried out by the South
Australian Company, which brought metal in its own


pfT** ~ '*** . ■ ■
■'"*■■.* ' • -
• -'_*’ \' . ~** ‘ •“
PORT ADELAIDE, 1934.


vessels from Kangaroo Island to ballast the new roadway.
Although the Colony was but four years old, a proces-
sion of 450 vehicles and 600 riders accompanied the
Governor to the new Port. On arrival a Royal salute was
fired by the sappers and miners, and replied to by the
vessels in the river. The Governor was then conducted
by Mr. D. McLaren, manager of the South Australian Com-
pany, to the new wharf, and pronounced the landing open
as part of the new Port, giving the wharf the name of
McLaren Wharf. A portion of one of the piles of this old
wharf may still be seen in the Port Adelaide Museum.
A small barque, the “Guiana,” was lying alongside,
and two boxes of tea and spices were hauled up from the
hold and deposited on the wharf amid great applause. The
Governor’s flag was struck, the Union Jack run up, a
salute fired by the sappers. With this mixture of the
exotic and the patriotic. Port Adelaide’s location, as we
now know it, came into being.
The building up of Port Adelaide proceeded rapidly.
The boundaries in the ’forties were on the north, North
Parade; on the south, St. Vincent Street; on the west,
Mnndy Street, and on the east, Commercial Road. Exca-
vating for the construction of these embankments caused
the Port to be surrounded on three sides by ditches, and,
as on the fourth there was the river, it was possible for a
boat to almost sail around these embankments. A wooden
bridge in the vicinity of North Parade spanned the creek
that ran up Commercial Road, and the buildings were
mostly grouped at the north-eastern corner of the town
and along St. Vincent Street. As land within the restricted
area became valuable, outside districts sprung up.
Few, if any, landmarks remain in Port Adelaide to
show the original street levels. The low-lying land was
considerable, and one winter lagoon measured 350 by 180
feet. Steady advancement was made with the work of
reclamation, and so much attention was paid to the rais-
ing of the streets that for many years little could be done
toward the improvement of the surface.
Space makes it necessary to skim over the early
colourful history of Port Adelaide, with its two-wheeled
traps, called “Port-carts,” which carried travellers to Ade-
laide, its four-wheeled coach that charged 5/- a seat, the
disastrous fire that swept the new settlement in 1846, the
unusually high tide of 1886 that swamped most of the
houses, and the early vessels to arrive at the Port —the
Rapid, the William Hutt, the Mary Ann, and the Tam
o’ Shanter, which later ran aground in the Port River,
and leaves its name perpetuated in a creek that runs off the
river opposite Glanville.
These were the days when fresh water was at a pre-
mium, the chief source of supply being a well sunk by the
South Australian Company near what is now known as
Birkenhead. The water was taken across the river in
casks by means of a flat pontoon, and. in the absence
of horse-power, the casks were rolled to the customers.
Port Adelaide, like other suburbs, had its water carter,
and his cry was'heard where now echoes the clatter of
cargo winches and the scream of the factory whistle.
Passing to the subject of local government, we find
that, in those early days, the Port was largely controlled
by one man. This was Captain Lipson, R.N., who was
harbour-master, magistrate, collector of Customs, and
almost Governor of that early settlement.
“Pie was very much looked up to by the people,” a
contemporary writer points out, “because not only did he
occupy the best house in the place, but he also possessed
a small garden and a piano.”
But Port Adelaide was growing too fast to be con-
trolled by one individual. Following a petition by the
residents, it was proclaimed a corporate town, and from
December, 1855, it was officially announced that the
“inhabitants of the town and their successors were to con-
stitute a body corporate and politic, by name mayor, aider-
men, councillors, and burgesses.” A meeting of public
citizens entitled to vote was held in the Ship Inn, North
Parade, on January 8, 1856, Mr. William James presiding.
Capt. E. French was elected first Mayor of Port Adelaide
with the “large” total of 21 votes.
The early meetings of the Corporation were held in
the Ship Inn. A move was afterwards made to the court
house and later to a small two-story building, pulled down
some 30 years ago to make room for the present Bank of
Australasia. It was at this last place that a fire destroyed
the valuable early records of the Council. Open voting
was the vogue in those days, and fights were freer than
opinions. There is a record of one man being hurled bodih


Year.
Assessment.
Buildings
1911
£1,140,965
5,525
1930
£2,103,958
7,636
1933
£1,627,369
7,646
1935
£1,620.275
8,419
through a glass window —“even carrying part of the sash
with him,” says the early writer, obviously a stickler for
accuracy.
Port Adelaide may be justly proud of its first institute,
formally opened on 31st July. 1851, after much agitation
on the part of the citizens. It weathered financial difficul-
ties, a disastrous fire in 1857 which destroyed records and
books and part of the building, and lack of enthusiasm.
It was not until 1859 that success began to smile on the
Portonians who had worked so hard to give their city a
touch of culture. The present building on Commercial
Road was only achieved after years of hard fighting,
hut when Mr. David Bower laid the foundation stone of
that structure on 31st October, 1874, the band of hardy
stragglers knew that their dreams had at last materialised.
Now the museum associated with the institute holds
one of the most interesting collections of shipping relics
and curios in South Australia, and the building also houses
a business college, an art gallery, and a lending library
having 801 subscribers and 35,000 volumes.
With the proclaiming of Port Adelaide as a town came
the laying of the railway line in 1855. The line was com-
pleted the following year. Mr. Babbage was the first
chief engineer. Fares in those early days were 2/6 first
class, 1/6 second, and 1/ third. Goods were charged at
the rate of 4/6 a ton. But even when the railway started
the people of Port Adelaide were cut off from the main city
after dark, since trains did not run after 6 o’clock in the
evening. To overcome this difficulty a Mr. Henry Fames
started a night coach. It was not until 1876 that a “boon”
train was run at 9.30 from Adelaide, returning from the
port at 10 p.m.
The first trains were apparently no Flying Scotsmen.
Many old-timers at the port can still recollect one well-
known citizen whose dog insisted on accompanying the
train on its journey, and was frequently found waiting for
its master on the Adelaide station when the train pulled
in. The Semaphore branch of the line was opened early
in 1878. Through passengers had to take the front car-
riages at Adelaide, and on reaching the Port these were un-
coupled and taken on by another engine. Considerable
inconvenience was experienced because of the delays in
opening the swing bridge crossing the river.
On account of its cosmopolitan floating population
Port Adelaide has already had to maintain a firm admini-
stration of the law. Records tell us that Inspector
Alexander Tolmer and Sergeant Lorimer were the first
officers in charge of the local police. The police station
and cells were in those days situated at the rear of the
present post and telegraph offices. It is interesting to
recall that in 1857 the strength of the Port Adelaide police
was as follows:—Two sergeants, one corporal, and fifteen
constables. Contrast this with to-day’s quota of 42 police-
men. This department alone cost Port Adelaide Council
£4,946 in 1933 in moiety paid to the Government.
Some idea of the growth of Port Adelaide over the
past twenty years can be gained from the following
figures :
Of this last assessment £324,938, for wharf and similar
properties, is practically non-ratable through the Harbors
Act, which came into force on January Ist, 1917. In
addition to this the Council has a balance of £150,000 of
assets over liabilities.
Like Unley, the Port Adelaide Council purchased a
quarry near Golden Grove to furnish metal for its exten-
sive road work. Unlike Unley, the quarry proved to be a
millstone about its neck. The original cost of the quarry,
purchased in 1911, was £15,670, and over a period of nine
years the Council lost an additional £12,905 on it. It
was given up in 1920, a costly “white elephant” that had
drained the Council’s resources of £2B 575.
Because of its extensive working population this Coun-
cil has felt the depression keenly. This is reflected in
the large quota of people on the rations. However, the
Town Clerk (Mr. E. Bradwell) was able to show figures
proving a drop of 74 per cent.
The number of people receiving Government relief in
Port Adelaide in July, 1931, was 17,300 —for the month of
April this year the number had fallen to 4,500. Fifty years
ago, with a population of some hundreds, the rates of the
town did not amount to much more than £250. With a


population of 29,136 people the rates for last year exceeded
£37,000.
Idle present Mayor of Port Adelaide is Mr. Harry W.
Bray. With Aldermen J. H. (Houston, R. Wright, C. H.
Dicker, and T. C. Davey, and Councillors H. Guthrie, A. R.
Clare, R. C. Smith, G. J. H. Pudney, E. E. Sutton, T. J.
Coughlin, H. Munn, E. T. Gryst. A. J. W. Lewis, A. O. R.
Tapp, they comprise an energetic and optimistic body.
Looking through the records of this interesting City
one catches glimpses of tragedy, such as the burning of
the ill-fated steamer City of Singapore 10 years ago, or
of glamour reflected in the great vessels with sails ablow
coming from the far corners of the earth. One sees that
Port Adelaide, back in 1880, possessed a Pickwick Club,
a Parlimentary debating society, and a collection of well-
known citizens who styled themselves "The Patriarchs of
the Port." It even had, at one time, a spiritualistic circle!
Port Adelaide might well be called the Venice of South
Australia. In just the same manner as the early pioneers
built up tracts of solid land out of swampy area flooded
by the sea, so the present townsfolk are continuing to
build their city, slowly but surely, into a splendid promi-
nence that will make it well worthy of the name of the
Gateway of the State.


jJnni 18Pi$ m.
M/KSt*
■HhL
? JgHran
$| j
■Uhl j^gll*
" v,, : . dMIPlMM
%:-m . Jp^.: •
|\
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF
PORT ADELAIDE, HARRY WILLIAM
BRAY.
Born at Glanville West, 15th May,
1883, and educated at private schools
conducted by Misses Davis and Gar-
naut, also later at LeFevre’s Penin-
sula Public School, and at the age of
19 years at Westrhauderfehn, Ger-
many. He occupied the following
positions in the Woodville and Port
Adelaide Corporations : —SJ years as a
Councillor of the Woodville Corpora-
tion. and is still a Councillor for Albert
Park Ward; 3 years a Councillor for
the South Ward, Port Adelaide City
Council; 2 years as Mayor of Port
Adelaide, and still occupies that posi-
tion. Mr. Bray is a keen municipalist,
and has given great assistance to the
Port Adelaide City Council and the
Corporation of Woodville, both as
Mayor and Councillor. He is Past
Master in the Lewis Lodge of Hope,
S.A.C., No. 102, Masonic, and also
patron or president of 30 sports clubs
of the district. In business Mr. Bray
is a company director.
PAST MAYOR FRANCIS JOHN BROWN,
J.P.
(Port Adelaide Corporation.)
Born at Albert Park, South Austra-
lia, 14th October, 1881, and educated
at Port Adelaide Public School. Past
Mayor of Port Adelaide Corporation ;
also served 2 years as Alderman, 16 as
Councillor; Chairman of Finance Com-
mittee; delegate to County Board, re-
presentative of Port Adelaide Council
on State arbitration case in Sydney.
Visited England and Scotland in
honorary capacity to report oil muni-
cipal matters, latest methods in road
construction, etc. W a.s instrumental
during period whilst Mayor of Port
Adelaide in collecting of approxi-
mately £3,000 for relief of distressed
during depression. A Justice of the
Peace for many years.
PAST MAYOR JOSEPH HARVEY
CLOUSTON.
(Port Adelaide Corporation.)
Born at Birkenhead, 2nd August,
1870, and educated at the Port Ade-
laide Public School. Entered Port
Adelaide City Council, 6th December,
1899; 66 years a resident of the dis-
trict. Positions held; Councillor,
Alderman, and Mayor. Business, re-
tired Government servant. Sport,
rowing. President of Rowing and
Tennis Clubs. Home address, 18
Fletcher Road, Birkenhead.
ALDERMAN CHARLES HERBERT
DICKER, J.P.
(Port Adelaide Corporation.)
Born at White Hut, near Clare, 12th
June, 1874, and educated at Wattsville
Public School. Nine years' service in
Council, six as Councillor, three as
Alderman. Delegate Suburban Muni-
cipal and District Councils’ Associa-
tion ; Chairman of Playgrounds Com-
mittee ; 18 years a Justice of the
Peace ; Past President and 18 years a
member of Council Workers’ Educa-
tional Association; 16 years Treasurer
of Alberton School Committee; Trea-
surer of S.A. Rifle Association, and a
member of Council of Associates;
member of Australia Day Executive
and other Committees; Past President


■Bp NH
SSIl !«■
' f s ■. !■■
dBi%-!r- \ ». >Jli
HHHf All
y ISt s’M
••jijf ,-f
■pf
Mg
- ! si - ’-' .
of Port Adelaide Branch A.N.A. and
Past Chief President of same; Past
Chief Ruler of Hand and Heart Tent
of Rechabite Lodge; a member of
Freemasons' Lodge; Steward and
Trustee of Alberton Methodist
Church; 12 years leader Alberton
Methodist Young Men's Class. Sports:
Four years President Metropolitan
District Rifle Club; Past Captain
Port Adelaide Rifle Club; present
Treasurer of Port Adelaide Rifle
Club: ex-Chairman A.N.A. Miniature
Rifle Club; three years a President
Metropolitan Miniature Rifle Union;
Patron Alberton Methodist Cricket
Club; Vice-President Alberton Metho-
dist Tennis Club; Vice-President Port
Adelaide Church Cricket Association;
\ ice-President Port Adelaide Table
Tennis Association. Business: Port
Adelaide Manager of International
Harvester Company.
ALDERMAN RALPH WRIGHT.
(Port Adelaide Corporation.)
Born at Tissington, Derbyshire,
England, Ist July, 1878. Educated at
the same place. Arrived in Australia,
January 28th, 1911. Twenty years’
service in Council, and a resident of
the district for 24 years. Business:
Coachbuilder, Port' Road. Albe rton.
Member of the Foresters’ Lodge.
Fond of all sports. During the war
Councillor Wright took an active
interest in connection with the sol-
diers.
ALDERMAN THOMAS CHARLES
DAVEY.
(Port Adelaide Corporation.)
Born at Happy Valley on 3rd Feb-
ruary, 1878. and educated at Happ}
\ alley Public School. Aldermai
Davey has served 13 years as Conn
cillor and Alderman, and has given tin
Ratepayers excellent service, beim
keen to further the interests of th
City of Port Adelaide and surround
ing districts. Alderman Davey is r
foreman employed at Wallaroo-Mt
Lyell Fertilizers Ltd., Birkenhead,
member of the Acorn Lodge, U.A.O.E
lie follows cricket and football.


lip ”
:?
JBflF' JMH|^H
1! g j£
! ■ '
■Hplr M \
mm*
%&£& | \
/
ill H ■' itta ■■BMHl
THE LATE FRANCIS WALTER LUNDIE.
(Port Adelaide Corporation.)
The late Councillor Lnndie was born
at Port Adelaide, Ist March, 1866, and
died 13th July, 1933. He was edu-
cated at Port Adelaide and Morgan
Public Schools, and for 22 years was
Councillor for Grey Ward in the Ade-
laide City Council. Previously he
served for 7 years as Councillor in the
Port Adelaide Council. For 35 years
he was Secretary of the Australian
Workers’ Union (Adelaide Branch),
and executive officer of the A.W.U.
for 40 years. He was associated with
the A.W.U. since 1886, being one of
the first members. He was a member
of the Board of Directors of the Ade-
laide Hospital for many years, a trus-
tee of the Independent Order of
Rechabites (Albert Park Section), of
which body he was a member for 40
years. He was also a member of the
Pastoral Commission held some 8
years ago to inquire into pastoral
leases, etc. Mr. Lundie’s life was given
to the cause of the workers, whom he
was able to assist in many ways, and
always did to the best of his ability.
(For photo of F. W. Lundie, see Adelaide
City Council, page 106).
PAST COUNCILLOR THE LATE
HAROLD OSBORNE JONES.
(Port Adelaide City Council)
Was born at Woodville, Ist May,
1881, and educated at the Port Ade-
laide Public School. He served in the
Council for five years, and until his
decease, resided in the Port Adelaide
district. The late Mr. Jones was form-
erly in business as a Licensed Vic-
tualler, and was a member of the
Masonic and Buffalo Lodges. He died
in 1932.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE JAMES HENRY
PUDNEY.
(Port Adelaide Corporation.)
Born at Portland Estate, 14th April,
1862, and educated at Leslie’s and
Martin’s Grammar Schools, Port Ade-
laide. Councillor Pudney has a splen-
did record of 51 years of Municipal
service. He was a member of the
Queenstown and Alberton District
Council for eight years and Chairman
for two years; a member of the
Woodville District Council for 26
years and Chairman for two years, and
Port Adelaide Corporation for 16
years. Councillor Pudney has resided
in the district for 73 years. Sixty
years a member of the Independent


0*\
'I' <
if y
%
■r \
"V jm
" 4 „;;
Order of Rechabites and a past offi-
cer; 60 years a member of the
Loresters' Lodge and Past Chief Ruler,
and 30 years a sick-pay officer and
Treasurer of the Ancient Order of
Foresters' Lodge. He has also been
a member of the Masonic Lodge for
50 years. Mr. Pudney is in business
as a painter and decorator.
COUNCILLOR ERIC ERSKINE
SUTTON.
(Port Adelaide Corporation.)
Born at Junction Road, Rosewater,
16th July, 1900; educated at Port Ade-
laide Public School and Woodville
High School; 5 years service in Coun-
cil. A resident of the district for 36
years. Business, grocer. Secretary
and treasurer Rosewater Methodist
Church. Member of Duke of Leinster
Masonic Lodge, 363, L.C., and Recha-
bite Northern Star, No. 1 Lodge.
Hobby, gardening.
COUNCILLOR ALEXANDER ROY
CLARE.
(Port Adelaide Corporation.)
Born at Henley Beach, 12th March,
1897. Educated Public School, Grange,
and S.A. School of Mines. Four years’
service in Council. A resident of the
district for eight years. Chairman of
Finance Committee and Acting Chair-
man Public Works Committee. He is
a civil servant, and is Chairman Largs
Bay Public School Committee and
Largs Bay Lifesaving Club; President
Largs Bay Dinghy Club and Largs
Bay District Carnival Committee.
During the war period, from 1915,
served as staff instructor to A.M.F.
and A.I.F. Home address:
Esplanade, Largs Bay.
COUNCILLOR EDWARD FISHER
GRYST.
(Port Adelaide Corporation.)
Born at Bristol, England, May 27th,
1877. Arrived in Australia (sailing
ship “Hesperus”) about 1878. Six
years’ service in Council. A resident
of the district 36 years. Business,
chemist. Past President of the under-
mentioned; Australian and New Zea-
land Pharmaceutical Conference,
Pharmacy Board of S.A., Pharmaceu-
tical Society of S.A. Late lecturer to
the Pharmaceutical Society’s Students
at Adelaide University; Examiner for
the Pharmacy Board, S.A.: Fellow of
the College of Pharmacy of Victoria :
Chairman of the Alaster Chemists’
Association of Port Adelaide; a mem-
ber of the Pharmacy Board of S.A.
for the last 30 years ; member of the
Adelaide Rotary Club ; member of the
Karl of Chester and Semaphore Lewis
Masonic Lodge. War service, lieuten-
ant dispenser, Keswick Hospital.
Sport, tennis.
COUNCILLOR ARTHUR JOHNSON
WILLIAM LEWIS.
(Port Adelaide Corporation.)
Born at Forest Hill, Kent, England,
26th October, 18/0, and educated at
(ii ot e Road Board School, England.
He arrived in Australia, 10th Novem-
ber, 1883, and has had 22 years’ service
in the Council. First elected Decent-
her. 1908. Four years Chairman of Fin-
ance Committee. Mayor, 1930 to 1932
A member of the Fire Brigade Board
President of Suburban Municipal Dis-


-■$'-.'-'•'•irit 6 jjjjigp”
tjjv? Ji
5" • * *
A ,.;•: * '• '.^V JB r
%
r #
JaBk.
let Councils’ Association, 1928 to
134. Foundation member of Metro-
ditan County Board. During the 22
ears’ service that Mr. Lewis has
iven to the ratepayers, and the City
f Port Adelaide, he has done remark-
able work in the interest of the City
and District as Councillor, Alderman,
and Mayor. Councillor Lewis is an
auctioneer and land agent. A member
of the Independent Order of Recha-
hites (and has held all available
offices).
COUNCILLOR HERBERT GUTHRIE.
(Port Adelaide Corporation.)
Born 2nd December, 1889, at Largs
Bay, South Australia. Educated Le
Acre’s Peninsula School. Service in
Council, 9 years; resident in district,
■' years; position held. Councillor, and
is Secretary Largs Bay School Com-
mittee. Councillor Guthrie is out of
business.
COUNCILLOR THOMAS JAMES
CUNNINGHAM.
(Port Adelaide Corporation.)
Born at Williamstown, Victoria. 4th
March, 1873. Educated at the Port
Adelaide Public School. Mr. Cun-
ningham has been a Councillor for six
years, and 59 years a resident of the
district. He is in business as a grocer.
A member of the Rechabite Order,
and also a member of the State Coun-
cil Boy Scouts’ Association. Mr.
Cunningham has had a varied experi-
ence on goldfields, and with a Russian
mate pushed a wheelbarrow along the
camel pad in the north-eastern fields,
but did not meet with much success.
He has been for many years Trustee
of the Port Adelaide Methodist Cen-
tral Mission, and is also a member of
the S.A. Field Naturalists and the
Poetry Society.
COUNCILLOR ROBERT CARNEGIE
SMITH.
(Port Adelaide Corporation.)
Born at Port Adelaide, 1869, of Scot-
tish parents, was educated at Port
Grammar School for nine months,
leaving at the age of eight years to
commence work, and later learnt the
trade of plumber and sheet metal
worker. Has always taken an active
interest in the affairs of the city.
During the Great War was secretarv
of many of the patriotic funds being-
responsible for the first badge or but-
ton day in South Australia, this being-
in March. 1915, also the first floral
day, when flowers were sold in the
streets in aid of the Belgian Relief


* »■
p^. ■ • ••*
ispil
I -' fn ; ' ■- -i-MMtfmM
' '>**’ >Jf , •■
of
-* j .
#* Si| - 4% %■
“**««®sa il *if Ji
pf ~™mm<
WPP . : % y : 'A^M///-
Wr m - ,■
V#-< 'Mfklih % % .<«HHWHBBBBMi
i ..j: : %&& T
Fund; was one of the committee of
three responsible for supplying and
making 12,000 sandbags for the front
free of charge. During the home-
coming of the troops he organised 90
concerts at the Outer Harbour for the
entertainment of the troops while
their ships were in port. Also organ-
ised the entertainment at the ship's
side for the officers and men of H.M.S.
Renown during the Royal visit, for
which he received the personal thanks
of the Prince of Wales (now our pre-
sent King). Also organised the en-
tertainment for the officers and the
men of the British fleet during their
Empire cruise, and for the H.M.S. Sus-
sex during the recent visit of H.R.H.
Duke of Gloucester; is at present
chairman of the local branch of the
District Trained Nurses' Society, vice-
chairman of the Port Adelaide Sea-
men's Mission, a life long Rechabite,
holding many offices in the society.
Councillor for South Ward for 3 years.
Sports, bowls.
COUNCILLOR HARRY MUNN.
(Port Adelaide Corporation.)
Born at Maidstone, Kent, England,
15th June, 1869. Arrived in Australia,
1873. Educated at Port Adelaide Pub-
lic School. Five years Councillor for
Port Pirie Council; 2 years Council-
lor Port Adelaide Corporation. A
resident of the district for 50 years.
He has retired from business. Chair-
man Foreshore Improvements Com-
mittee. Fond of all sports.
WILLIAM WATKINS TAPP.
City Engineer.
(Port Adelaide Corporation.)
Born at Alberton, South Australia.
Educated at Port Adelaide Public
School and King's School. Fifty-four
years' service in the Port Adelaide
Council. A resident of the district for
50 years. He was appointed valuator
to District Council of Queenstown and
Alberton, 1881; Clerk and Surveyor
District Council of Queenstown and
Alberton, 1884, City Engineer and Sur-
veyor, Corporation of Port Adelaide,
1909. He is a Justice of the Peace. Full
member of the following: The Institu-
tion of Municipal and County Engi-
neers and Institute of Public Adminis-
tration ; member of the Masonic Ade-
laide Lodge, No. 2, and A.O. Foresters
Court, Australia's Pride. Home
address: 143 Esplanade, Largs Bay.


COOPER & SONS, LIMITED.
The well-known family business of Cooper & Sons
td., Brewers, Upper Kensington, was founded by the late
homas Cooper in the year 1862 at George Street. Nor-
mod. He was born in Yorkshire, and came to South Aus-
ralia in 1851. He took a keen interest in public affairs,
nd was a well-known lay preacher.
The venture from its inception was a success, and
)t many years passed before larger premises had to be
htained. In 1881 the 1 mewery was removed to its present
ite at Upper Kensington. At this stage the founder intro-
duced two sons, John and Christopher, into the business,
and the partnership became known as Thos. Cooper and
Sons. A few years later two more sons, Samuel and
Stanley, were taken into the firm. In 1897 the founder
died, and for many years the business was carried on, with
John as principal, by the sons. Of these latter, Stanley is
the only one living to-day.
The actual process of brewing has always been
attended to by members of the family, the formula and
methods of procedure being handed on as required. To
ensure continuity in this respect, four grandsons have been
added to the firm at different times during the past twenty-
five years.
For many years trading was done direct with the con-
sumer, and this laid a very firm foundation for the busi-
but later on, through popular demand, consumers
were supplied by means of hotels as well. In recent years
it was found policy to discontinue the direct trade, and
this was done with very great reluctance.
Until 1923 the business was run as a partnership, but
at that time it was thought unwise to continue as such,
and a private limited company was formed, Messrs. S. R.
and J. T. Cooper being the first Directors.
The plant and buildings have been extended.* 1 altered,
and modernised on numerous occasions. In 1881 the
capacity of the plant was 600 gallons weekly; to-day it is
nearer 15,000 gallons.
Employment is given directly to an average number
of 50 men, although at peak periods this has been increased
to more than 100. Indirectly work is found for a much
greater number, who produce the Australian malt, hops,
and sugar used in the industry.




Corporation of the City
of Prospect


Date of
Square
Total
Population
Corporation or
Incorpora-
Area in
Popula-
Per sq.
Improved
Dwcl-
District Council
tion
Miles
tion
Mile
Value
lings
Citv of Unley
1871
5l
4C4CS
7vS40
9.930.700
10,121
Corporation of Brighton
1858
3
5,462
1.650
1,858.780
1,21 T
Corporation of Glenelg
1853
1 T /3
9,816
7.418
4,284.200
2,356
Corporation of Henley and Grange . . .
WPS
2
5.047
2,5:23
1,555.000
1.062
Corporation of Hindmarsh
1874
1 4/5
13.671
7433
2.070,000
3.175
Corporation of Kensington & Norwood
1853
14
15.59 1
10.308
3,477,920
3v59
Corporation of St. Peters
1883
1 2 /5
1 D775
8,166
2,408,180
2,858
Corporation of Thebarton
1883
if
14.543
8.969
2.762,557
3.546
District of Prospect
1872
3
20.107
6,604
4.741,400
5.000
District of Burnside
1:856
Qi
2 3>3 2 9
2,461
7,848,200
5.418
District of C ampbelltown
1856
9
3.679
4 2 3
1,424.060
870
District of Marion
1853
21 T/3
6,927
340
2,553,660
C555
District of Mitcham
1853
26f
1 7457
648
5.205.460
5.986
District of Payneham
1867
2 4
7,622
2,773
2.057.120
1 .924
District of Walkerville
• 1855
L 5/l6
4.734
5.051
1,702,780
I.IOT
District of West Torrens
1853
T2 T /3
16,728
1 <353
4T55'66o
3,947
District of Woodville
1853
1 Si
26.671
1.688
6,590,200
6.040
District of Yatala South
1868
184
4.979
2 73
1.597,460
1,014
HISTORY OF PROSPECT.
\\ hilst, from a statistical point of view, Prospect became
a d ity on April 25th, 1935, when its population passed the
requisite total of 20,000, owing to a legislative anomaly, it was
for the time being prevented from obtaining legal recognition
of the higher status. With the passage of the Local Govern-
ment Areas (Re-arrangement) Act, these difficulties have been
overcome, and a proclamation under that Act, published in the
Government Gazette, announces that as from Ist December,
J 933' Prospect will become a municipality.
Such an occasion is naturally one for reminiscences and
the story of the gradual development of the district of Prospect
from an uninhabited stretch of scrub country to its present
thickly populated condition is one that presents a wealth of
interesting features, of which this article will attempt to present
but a few fragments.
1 he Prospect district originally formed part of the areas
within the jurisdiction of the old District Council of Yatala.
It is recorded that, in the early days of South Australian
settlement, as the land in the vicinity of the Capital was taken
up the need for local government was soon recognised and, in
conformity with the general movement, on the 14th June, 1853.
a proclamation was issued constituting the District Council of
A atala. comprising the northern areas which were later to be
divided into the Districts of Prospect, \ atala South. \ atala
North, and Walkerville.
Walkerville was separated from the other districts on sth
|uly, 1855, Yatala North on June 18th, 1868, and Yatala South
and Prospect divided the remaining territory on Ist August,
1872. Incidentally Prospect was the last of the Metropolitan
areas to be proclaimed a District Council. All local governing
bodies since established have gained the added status of a
Corporate Town from their inception. Prospect, however, in
spite of its rapid development in the last 23 years, and the fact
that its population far outnumbered that of any of the other
Corporations, with the exception of Adelaide itself. Port Ade-
laide and Unley, was compelled until now to remain a district, as
there was no adequate provision under the previously existing
laws for the conversion of a District Council into a Corpora-
tion.
In a circular issued to the ratepayers of Prospect, con
cerning the proposal to obtain municipal status, the Counci
submitted a considerable amount of interesting information
and among it figures relating to the various suburban towns and
districts. These are set out below as they are informative fron
a number of points of view.


In regard to Prospect special note will be made of the fact that whilst its population is exceeded by the Districts of Burn-
side and Woodville, the latter contain a far greater area. It will be observed that the relative figures of population per square
mile are —Prospect, 6,604; Burnside, 2,461; and Woodville, 1,688. The figures are for 1930 and have been taken from the Statis-
tical Register of South Australia.
THE FIRST SETTLERS.
But now let us leave the Prospect of to-day, with its clean,
veil-made streets lined with solid homes and its busy shopping
entres, and go back 95 years to the time when the early
rrivals in the new colony wandered through the scrub and
mber and found on the northern side of the Torrens a place
Inch was particularly pleasing in its outlook, and named it
'inspect.
It was not long before the land was surveyed and opened
or settlement. Records indicate that the first land was
icquired in 1841 by a syndicate called the Mechanics Co., with
fohn Bradford as chairman, who obtained six of the southern
ections available, three of which faced the Main North Road
nd three the Lower North Road, the rear of the sections meet-
ng along the line on which Prospect Road was later opened.
The total area of these sections was 480 acres, each of the
sections being divided into 10 blocks of eight acres. The
members of the syndicate received their titles on the payment
of £lO for each eight-acre block. The progress of the settle-
ment at first was slow. There was no water nearer than the
Torrens, and the laborious task of carting this with the aid of
bullocks did not give much encouragement to those who had
hoped to convert their blocks into gardens. The land grew excel-
lent early grass, however, and became a favorite resort of cattle
from adjoining settlements, much to the annoyance of those who
were endeavouring to work their land. Lack of convenient trans-
port furnished another obstacle to progress. The heavy bullock
waggons cut the unmade North Road to pieces, and when
heavy rain fell, the Park Lands lying between Prospect and
North Adelaide were converted into a lake, where, incidentally,
it is reported excellent duck shooting was to be enjoyed. With
the exception of the blocks known as “Little Adelaide,” no
attempt was made at laying out the “Village,” as it was called,
beyond taking 16J ft. from the rear of the sections in order
to form the original 33 ft. Prospect Road.
For the planning of Little Adelaide a man named 'hilly was
esponsible. He was a North Adelaide notability, who had lost
one arm and, whilst laying out the blocks, lived in a dug-out
on the allotment at the extreme south-western corner, opposite
Stone Hall. For many years a large square hole marked the
spot where he camped. After a few years it was found that
there was no direct road into North Adelaide, and that the
Prospect Road terminated, not on the Park Lands as supposed,
but at the piece of land which was afterwards known as the
Green Slips (now Fitzroy). In order to reach North Adelaide
with a vehicle it was necessary to turn eastward and pass
down through Little Adelaide into the main North Road.
Prospect Road became a bone of contention right from
the outset. Soon after it was first opened and Highbury Street
was laid out a man claimed part of it as his private property,
fenced it and forbade trespassing. Mr. James Harrington,
Senr., and others removed the fence and in the subsequent
legal fight won the day, although the cost of victory ran to
something like £3OO.
SIXTY YEARS AGO.
Round about 1870 communications with Adelaide, while
still incomplete, where much more comfortable. The days
of bullock waggons had gone, and transport was mainly by
cabs and other horse-drawn vehicles. On the piece of land
on which the Caledonian Hotel was later built (the nearest
point of North Adelaide to Prospect) lived a family of Sulli-
vans who maintained a service of cabs between North Ade-
laide and the city. Roth the Prospect Road and the Main
North Road commenced at this point, the former ending at
Alpha Road and the latter going right through to Gawler and
other northern towns, including Kadina and Wallaroo. A
coach with four or five horses made the journey to the north
each week day, and its passage through the district was one of
the principal events of the day.
At that time there were only about 15 houses and a
Methodist Sunday School on the Prospect Road, whilst on the
Main North Road from Robe Terrace to the Northern Hotel,
there were about 25 houses and the Windmill Hotel. The


land between the two roads was nearly all divided up into
small farms, and between Robe Terrace and Alpha Road the
only connecting link was Highbury Street —still little more
than a track. Carter Street was not then made.
FARMS AND LIME KILNS.
Flic atmosphere was distinctly rural for at this time few of
the people went to the city to work, the major portion being
occupied on the farms or at the lime kilns, which flourished in
the district. There were five of the latter —Harrington’s (near
the Prospect Road, Davies’. Harvey’s, and Milner and Lewis’ at
Nails worth, and Darling Bros’., on a block facing the corner
of Robe Terrace (part of Thorngate to-day)
Among the interesting features of the district in those days
was Graham’s Castle, situated on the Lower North Road,
which became the “haunted" house of the district. An hotel
named " The Hart in Hand" stood at what is now the corner
of Myrtle Street. At the corner of Boyle Street was the cot-
tage of Mr. William Btirrage, and here of an evening the
sporting spirits of the district gathered for a game of skittles!
At the corner of the North Road, facing Nottage Ter-
race. Mr. John Williams, who had a blacksmith’s shop next
door, opened the first general store and post office, his daughter,
Miss M. ]. A illiams, being the first postmistress. Later Mr.
Williams transferred the postal duties to Mr. ). Nottage.
Mails were delivered twice daily from a waggonette which
carried, in addition, about ten passengers, and plied between
the city and the Stockade. In addition to his other activities,
Mr. Williams carried on an extensive business in reaping
machines. Next door was Mr. Sloman’s winnowing machine
factory, from which machines were sent all over the State.
At that time the Methodist Church, situated on Prospect
Road, between “Stone Hall" (the home of Mr. J. Harrington)
and Mr. Braund’s residence, was the only place of worship,
with seating accommodation for about 100 people. The dis-
trict had only one day school, kept by Mrs. Fuller in a small
private house on the North Road, and this was only for the
younger children. Older boys went to Whinham’s at North
Adelaide, or to Mr. Unwin’s at Walkerville, whilst some of
the girls attended a ladies’ school in Cover Street, North
Adelaide.
SPORTS AND RECREATIONS.
Outside of the schools little sport was engaged in by the
younger generation. As a general rule they were expected
to spend most of their available time assisting with the work,
either at home or at some neighbour’s. In the early eighties,
however, things began to alter in this respect. Ihe boys from
a number of families established in the district were growing
up —the Harringtons, Braunds, Boyketts, Brockmans, Lewises,
Cants, Locks, Willsmores, and others —and they were looking
for sport.
Round about 1882 the Prospect Cricket Club was formed
with Phin Botten (Captain), Bob Lewis (Secretary), and jack
Boykett, Junr. (Treasurer). All three later became mem-
bers of the District Council, the last two doing a lion's share
in the formation of the Prospect Oval. The first grounds in
Hawker’s Paddock, Medindie, where Tennyson Street was
later made, were made freely available by the late Hon.
G. C. Hawker, who was also a generous supporter of the club
in other directions. Meetings were usually held in the Boyke t
home and annual dinners at the Windmill Hotel.
The Prospect Football Club came into existence three ( r
four years later, and amongst its earliest members and
strongest players were Tom and Joe Lewis, father and mice
respectively, of Percy Lewis, the North Adelaide coach. Since
those days the sporting facilities of the district have grow 1
beyond recognition. Back in 1597 an area of i 6£ acres hr 1
been secured, and for many years provided a home groin 1
for second grade teams. In 1921 a fine pavilion was erecte 1.
and the arena improved. Thereafter the “Recreation Grounc "
became the Prospect Oval, and subsequently the home groin d
of the North Adelaide League Football Team. Association
cricket matches are played on the oval, and other improv -
ments include bowling green and croquet lawn, tennis coin s
and a fine children's playground, the principal being the Broa -
view Oval with a area of 14 acres, which was handed to tie
Council in 1920.
PROGRESS OF LAND VALUES.
Land values are an excellent index to progress, and V e
extent of Prospect’s development may be readily observed n
a comparison of prices paid in recent years with the £io p ;r
eight acres paid by the first settlers. In 1885 there are recor Is
of land sales at up to £4O per acre, whilst round 1914 sites n
Prospect Road were worth about £3 per foot.
Prospect, however, shared in the rapid advancement if
land values, which followed the war, and in recent vears as


much as £2O per foot was paid for land in Fitzroy terrace,
facing the Park Lands.
Back in 1880 the total District Council assessment was
£9,790. producing in rates £490, and representing a capital
value of £195.980. Ten years later the capital value had
jumped to £380.300, with the assessment at £19.015 and the
rates, £1.029. Steady progress was maintained during the
subsequent years, and by 1930 the Council’s figures presented
a very striking contrast with those fifty years earlier. In
that year the capital values reached £4,741,400. the assess-
ment £237.070, and the rates £23,707.
The last few years have, of course, told their depressing
tale in Prospect as elsewhere, but there are brighter days
ahead, and with the commencement once more of the upward
trend towards prosperity, the people of Prospect look to
still greater advancement, and with the development of their
growing spirit of civic pride, will find ample means of pro-
moting the welfare of their district. Towards this advance-
ment they will have an added incentive in the new rank
which is now to be conferred upon them, and in that healthy
spirit of rivalry between the various suburban towns and
cities, Prospect will be found to be, in the future, a very serious
competitor for supremacy.


.«•
r mttsSm
-&
■ • ' ■ ‘ < * r'
IWM ; 'lil JSKm >■'•••■
mm
i ®WtM m '-i^'WWaf
. / ‘ " . :. 'v
•/ : £ v '.-'.?. . .* : , '1 "■'■* • ' x:; :' *• ** . v -
Bfe
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF
PROSPECT.
ELDER GEORGE WHITTLE.
Born at Bowden-on-Hill, Bth January,
1886. Educated at North Adelaide Pub-
lic School. Fourteen years' service in
Council, and for 26 years a resident of
the district. He was for 10 years Coun-
cillor for Fitzroy Ward, Mayor four
years, and chairman of District Council
11 years. In business he is an auctioneer.
He is a member of the Municipal Tram-
way Trust, Vice-President of the Sub-
urban Municipal and District Councils'
Association, Vice-Patron of the North
Adelaide Football Club, Vice-President
of the Prospect Cricket Club, President
of the D.T.N.S., President of the
Mothers' and Babies' Health Association,
Member of the State Council Boy Scouts'
Association, member of the Thorngate
Masonic Lodge, also Sons of Temperance
Lodge. His sport is bowls.
THE LATE SAMUEL BRAUND, J.P.
(First Chairman, Prospect District Council.)
War born at Devonshire, England in
1826. He left England in 1853 and
arrived in South Australia in February,
1854. and became manager for Mr. E. J.
E. Crawford of a large farming property
at Hindmarsh. The crops in those days
were generally large, and the prices were
such as would delight the present day
farmer of our State. After four years
had passed, the late Mr. Braund began
farming on his own account in the Hun-
dreds of Grace and Port Gawler, and
was very successful. He became one of
the largest producers in the State at that
time. After 12 years at Port Gawler he
let his land on lease and retired from
active business, taking up his residence at
Prospect. Almost immediately after his
removal to Prospect the residents of that
part agitated for separation from the dis-
trict of Yatala. The late Mr. Braund
entered heartily into the movement, and
when a District Council for Prospect was
constituted as the result of this movement,
he was chosen as its first Chairman. For
22 years he was a member of that Coun-
cil, for several of which he filled the chair.
During that period lie actively promoted
the development of the suburb, and its
general satisfactory condition to-day is
largely owing to his exertion. He was
frequently asked to stand for Parliament,
but lie always declined these requests.
He was a Justice of the Peace. The late
Mr. Praund was a quiet builder of the
State, a man of upright principle and
earnest purpose—one of the class which
formed the best side of the national
character. The late Mr. Braund died on
the 2nd December, 1912, in his 87th year.
PAST COUNCILLOR ALFRED HUBERT
GERARD.
(Corporation of Prospect.)
Born at Salisbury, 14th March, 1903.


■KHF
*■ Mm
•**■■
ufejfe .«■—'> 4®!$
Fducated Nailsworth Public School, Ade-
laide High School and School of Mines.
Served as Councillor one and a half years.
Twenty-five years resident in district.
Business, Company Director and Electri-
cal Engineer. He is a past president of
the Electrical Contractors' Association of
S.A., Inc., Vice-President Adelaide and
Suburban Methodist Lawn Tennis Asso-
ciation; member of Masonic Prospect
Lodge, No. 60, S.A.C., and Albert Dis-
tric, No. 83. S.U. Rechabite Lodge. Mr.
Gerard's sports are tennis, golf and swim-
ming.
THE LATE RICHARD ANGWIN, SENR.,
PAST COUNCILLOR.
(District Council of Prospect.)
Born at Cornwall, England, 15th July,
1850. Arrived in Australia, 1875. The
late Councillor Angwin served the rate-
payers of Kingston Ward for a period of
six years, and he was a resident of the
district for forty years. He was in busi-
ness as a Builder and Contractor and was
a Freemason. He was the father of the
present councillor, R. Angwin, J.P., who
represents St. John's Wood Ward in the
Prospect City Council.
COUNCILLOR ALEXANDER
STAINTHORPE HORNE.
(Corporation of Prospect.)
Born at Sheep Hills, Victoria, 31st
March, 1897. Educated at Warrack-
nabeal and Beulah, Victoria. Seven years'
service in Council, and 13 years a resident
of the Prospect district. He is in business
as a manufacturer. He is past master
of Thorngate Lodge of Freemasons,
Prospect, past president of the Prospect
Sub-Branch Returned Soldiers’ League,
past chairman Tubercular Soldiers’ Aid
Society of South Australia. His sports
are football, tennis and swimming. \\ ar
service, five years 24th Battalion A.I.E.
President address, 98 Prospect Road,
Prospect.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM HENRY
VERCO.
(Corporation of Prospect.)
Born at Climes, Victoria, 28th May,
1877. Educated at Prince Alfred Col-
lege, Adelaide. Mr. Verco has served
in the Council for 20 years, occupying
the position of Chairman for seven vears,
and Councillor for 13 years. He is a
keen municipalise In business he is a
Federal Government official. He is a
member of the Duke of Leinster Lodge,
U.A.0.D., and a past Arch Druid. Mr.
Verco is a cricket and football enthusiast.
Present address, 46 Gloucester Street,
Prospect.


I
K>
11 nfffir" 1^
M
COUNCILLOR ALEXANDER BALD.
(Corporation of Prospect.)
Born at Linwood, 12th September,
1874, and educated at Linwood Public
School. Mr. Bald has served in the
Council for 11 years, one year of which
he was Chairman, and has been 15
years a resident of the District. He
is a member of the Freemasons’
Lodge, and his sports are cricket and
bowls. Business : Farmer and Grazier.
Private address: 61 Barker Street,
Prospect.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM THOMAS
SMITH.
(Corporation of Prospect.)
Born at Mildnra, Victoria, 27th May,
1902, and educated at Sacred Heart Col-
lege, Glenelg, South Australia. He has
served three years in the Council as Coun-
cillor, and has been a resident of the
District for the past ten years. President
of the Prospect A.L.P., Secretary of the
Prospect Centennial Committee; a mem-
ber of the Australian Natives' Associa-
tion and Rechabite Lodges. He is a
fitter by occupation, and his sports are
cricket, football and bowls. Mr. Smith's
present address is 121 Davenport Ter-
race, Prospect.
COUNCILLOR RICHARD ANGWIN, J.P.
(Corporation of Prospect.)
Born at Ward Street, North Adelaide,
24th November, 1878. and educated at
North Adelaide Public School. Mr.
Angwin has served 15 years in the Coun-
cil with one year as Chairman. He is a
representative of the Suburban and Muni-
cipal District Councils’ Association, also
a member of the Municipal and District
Council Wages Board for 14 years. He
is a carpenter and contractor by trade,
and a member of the Freemason and Sons
of Temperance Lodges; he is Secretary
of the Sons of Temperance Lodges,
both Metropolitan and Prospect, and has
been a Justice of the Peace for 20 years.
Mr. Angwin has given splendid service
for Prospect Council during the 15 years
that he has been a member. His sport
is bowls, being a past president of the
Prospect Bowling Club.
COUNCILLOR CLIFFORD
BETTSWORTH HARDY, J.P.
(Corporation of Prospect.)
Was born at Port Adelaide on 28th
February, 1893. Educated at Port Ade-
laide Public School. He has been seven
years a Councillor, representing Nails-
worth Ward, and a resident of the district
for 14 years. He is a delegate to the Muni-
cipal Association; representative of D.
Group, Infectious Diseases Hospital


p jflft *■•
J^i
• |||||
flk * *** Ifr"
j ;•’' Ipiri
jM
HR Jp ■
mmmm jb bhhbb ;
mm '
Mr *"
fv **
; Jk Jl
S' J|
V ■ s^H >; ;
* ■ W». /MbHe^SS
WV >M«|
F « icl v
t Sf' -■ ’ m
Board; President of the Broadview Insti-
tute and Circulating Library; member of
the Broadview Oval Committee; Justice
of the Peace for South Australia; mem-
ber of the Lewis Lodge of Hope, No. 102,
S.A.C.. and Thorngate Lodge of Prospect,
No. 118, S.A.C. Councillor Hardy served
two and a half years on active service
abroad, returning as a commissioned
officer of the 10th Battalion, A.I.L. He
has been very much interested in returned
soldiers and their welfare, having in re-
cent years held the following positions—
Active Secretary, Committeeman, Vice-
President and President of the Prospect
Sub-Branch of the Returned Soldiers’
League, Councillor for North Adelaide
District to the League for several years,
and has represented Prospect at numerous
Sub-Branch Conferences. He takes a
keen interest in all matters appertaining
to Local Government. Present address,
French Street, Broadview, South Aus-
tralia.
COUNCILLOR RICHARD GURR.
(Corporation of Prospect.)
Was born at Adelaide on the 22nd of
December, 1884, and educated at the
North Adelaide Public School. He has
served six years as Councillor in the
Council, and has been a resident of the
district for 23 years. Lie is a member
of the Australian Natives' Association,
and his sports are football, cricket and
tennis. His present address is 4 Bosan-
quet Avenue, Prospect.
COUNCILLOR LIONEL EDWARD
WARK.
(Corporation of Prospect.)
Born at Reeves Plains, 3rd January,
1884. Educated at Unley and Malvern
Grammar Schools. Air. Wark has eight
years' service in the Council, and has
resided in the district for the past 14
years. Air. Wark is Hon. Secretary of
various charitable affairs, particularly
Prospect Horses in Action Society, which
held its 20th annual show on the 26th
October, 1935, the proceeds from which
are devoted to the unemployed of the
district. Councillor Wark played cricket
for some years, and is now a prominem
member of the Prospect Bowling Club.
His present address is 7 Flora Terrace,
Prospect.
COUNCILLOR L. A. DAY, J.P.
(Corporation of Prospect.)
Was born at Golden Grove on 25th
June, 1900, and educated at Two Wells.
He has been a Councillor in the service
of the ratepayers for four years, and a


* IB
■ i^H
r i
WBHHnpra
IH
., | jMg
T fiLMWiZ
r - {JkJiA
W
mm % w&k
W fS
■ ||sp»
BL
resident of the district for the past 14
years. Mr. Day is in business as a
garage proprietor. He is a Justice of the
Peace, past Chairman of the S.A. Cham-
ber of Automobile Services, and was
seconder of the motion to proclaim Pros-
pect a Municipality. He is a member of
the Thorngate Masonic Lodge, 118
(Prospect Mark) and Independent Order
of Oddfellows, Enfield. Mr. Day is fond
of bowls, tennis, golf, shooting and fish-
ing.
COUNCILLOR CAPTAIN DUNCAN
MENZIES, J.P.
(Corporation of Prospect.)
Was born at Casterton, Victoria, 4th
April, 1880, and educated at the S.A.
Education Department and Adelaide Uni-
versity. He represents Fitzroy Ward
and has been a resident of the District for
eight years. President of Prospect Re-
turned Soldiers’ Sub-Branch; a member
of Prospect School Committee; Commit-
teeman Prospect Horses-in-Action So-
ciety; Past Master Clare Masonic
Lodge, No. 12, S.A.C.; Past Master
Clare Mark Lodge; member of Man-
chester Unity of Oddfellows; founda-
tion member of Legacy Club; Director
of S.A. Caledonian Society. Councillor
Menzies obtained A.I.F. Commission
with 3rd Light Horse and served in
France with 48th Battalion A.1.F.; was
wounded twice and promoted to the
rank of captain in the Field.
He was two years House Master
at Roseworthy Agricultural College,
and two years a member of the
State Board of the Returned Sol-
diers’ and Sailors’ Imperial League.
Councillor Menzies is a Solicitor and
Barrister by profession.
DOUGLAS GLADSTONE FERGUSSON,
J.P., ASSISTANT TOWN CLERK.
(Corporation of Prospect.)
Born at Gladstone, 13th December,
1883, an d educated at Gawler. Mr. Fer-
gusson has served for 13 years with the
Corporation as Inspector, Overseer and
Assistant Town Clerk. He is a Justice of
the Peace, past Secretary and President
of the Prospect Bowling Club, and a
member of the Royal Sanitary Institute.
Mr. Fergusson is a past Master of the
Thorngate Lodge of Freemasons. His
sport is bowls.


■
Iffi
Sfw Jtt.
JBlto .; M
—
■
\
>#■ mm
* ■ A
CHARLES CANE, TOWN CLERK AND
SURVEYOR.
(Corporation of Prospect.)
Born at Maitland, South Australia, 2nd
February, 1884, and educated at Public
Schools and School of Mines. He has
served continuously for a period of 36
years, and is at present the Town Clerk.
Mr. Cane has been a resident of the dis-
trict for 44 years. He is a member of
the Independent Order of Rechabites.
His sport is bowls.
H. W. Broadstock
S. Braund
J. Wiliams, Senr.
J. Harrington, Senr.
A. J. Packer
W. Morrish
J. Harris
W. Pybus
J. Harrington, Junr.
H. L. Wilke
R. Bur don
I). Davies
J. Osborn
J. Williams, Junr.
R. J. Plart
J. Cann'ng
R. Mathews
C. J. Sanders
T. Trathen
P. Botten
W. Boyle
C. Johns
S. Moss
W. Milner
J. W. Parsons
R. Lewis
E. G. S. Uren
T. Rawson
W. H. Cotton
C. E. Jeffries
J. H. Boykett
F. J. Cheffers
J. G. Rogers
F. Cox
L. H. Crosby
LIST OF PAST MEMBERS OF THE
COUNCIL.
J. G. Dawc
A. W. Shillabeer
J. J. Nettle
T. M. Chettle
A. C. Sanders
L. G. Johnson
W. H. Crapp
E. J. Clark
N. S. Laffer
J. Minney
G. H, Boykctt
H. G. Willcox
H. F. A. Thiele
A. Mclnnes
B. Simcock
G. W. Ward
R. Angwin, Senr.
G. T. Rolfe
A. T. Gray
A. W. Poyzer
P. Sandery
W. S. Morton
A. J. Pritchard
A. C. Crapp
R. H. Stracey
W. Currie
F. W. Cox
F. Murdoch
W. C. Holland
J. H. Hill
J. A. Murdoch
A. A. Brown
H. G. Tossell
L. Allchurch
JAMES PETCHER.
(First Clerk of Prospect, 1872-1879.)
A. H. Gerard
PRESENT MEMBERS OF CORPORATION.
E. G. Whittle (Mayor)
L. A. Day
C. B. Hardy
R. Gurr
L. E. Wark
W. H. Verco
A. S. Horne
W. T. Smith
D. Menzies
R. Angwin
A. Bald




THE CITY OF UNLEY
MEMORIAL GARDENS, UNLEY.


CITY OF UNLEY
A Short History—its development from small villages to
an Important and Progressive City.
By John B. Miller, Town Clerk, Unley.
INCORPORATION.
The Municipal Corporation of the City of Unley covers
an area of about five and a quarter square miles, and is
bounded on the north by the City of Adelaide, on the south
by the Mitcham District Council, on the north-east b} r
the Municipality of Burnside, on the north-west by the
West Torrens District Council, and on the west by the
Marion District Council.
Originally the whole of the Municipality constituted
the northern portion of the Mitcham District Council, but
in 1871 the inhabitants, then numbering only about 2,000,
and who were undoubtedly of a particularly enterprising
disposition, petitioned the Government for a severance
from Mitcham. The petition was granted, and on June
15th, 1871, a proclamation was published in the “South
Australian Gazette” giving to Unley and its surrounding
townships the title of a corporate town. The houses and
other buildings then aggregated 282, and the assessment
£9,866, based on annual values.
PROGRESS FROM TOWN TO CITY.
The Corporation made remarkable progress, and 35
years after incorporation it was proclaimed a city, then
having 21,500 inhabitants. This was authenticated by a
census taken on September 15th, 1906, and the proclama-
tion issued on November Bth, 1906.
Rapid progress continued, and in 1936 the population
had reached approximately 43,000, whilst buildings totalled
over 11,000, nearly all of which are residences. The assess-
ment is £470,000, giving a rate revenue of £51,000. In 1871
the revenue from rates was less than £5OO.
Probably but few cities in the States of the Common-
wealth can show such remarkable and wonderful growth.
ANTICIPATING A CITY.
John O’Connell. Mayor of Unley in 1890, and for
several years prior thereto a Councillor, visualised the
making of a City. He was indefatigable in his efforts for
the advancement of the Town of Unley, and generally in
matters affecting local government.
He said: “From small beginnings, step by step, we
have progressed, until we have attained a proud position
amongst suburban corporations, ranking next to the City
of Adelaide in position, importance, and influence. The
situation and surroundings of our future “City of Unley'
is well worth all the labour and trouble it has cost.
Though not a prophet, nor the son of one, I predict a
glorious future for Unley and its suburbs.”
EARLY HISTORY.
The earliest reference to the Village of Unley appears
to be in the year 1843, when there were about 20 residents,
pioneers who were principally engaged in wheatgrowing,
gardening, also in breeding cattle and pigs. From 1855
to 1865 the village made hardly any headway. The house-
holders then totalled about 100. Evidently these statistics
relate to Unley only. There is little recorded in respect
to the inhabitants of the villages of Parkside, Fullarton,
and Goodwood, or their occupations, but doubtless the con-
ditions were similar to those in the village of Unley, which
was the centre of the various rural pursuits.
Reference to Unley and its environments a few years
before incorporation is especially interesting. “The South
Australian Gazetteer,” published in 1866, defined the severa 1
villages as follows :
“UNLEY. —A postal village suburban to Adelaide, in
the electoral district of Sturt, and under the control of


the Mitcham District Council, situated on the Brownhill
Creek, which flows through the village and through Unley
Park, the Mount Lotty Ranges being' about 3 miles distant
in an easterly direction. The district is an agricultural
one, the population (exclusive of gentlemen having busi-
places is by omnibuses. The hotels are the Unley and
Cremorne. Unley has a post office, several stores and
tradesmen's workshops and numerous well-built residences.
The surrounding country is flat, and the soil alluvial and
of good quality, there being abundance of water near the
PRESENT TOWN HALL, UNLEY.
ness in the metropolis and residing in this picturesque and
salubrious suburb) consisting principally of persons en-
gaged in farming or gardening pursuits. Corn, hay, veget-
ables, and hay of excellent quality are grown, together
with fruit of various kinds. The nearest places are Ful-
larton, Goodwood Park, Lower Mitcham, Unley Park,
Goodwood, and Parkside. The whole of these places are
tudded with suburban residences, and are rapidly improv-
ing. They are all included in the Mitcham district, arc
picturesquely and healthily situated, and are surrounded
by vineyards and gardens. The communication with these
surface.”
“PARKSIDE. —A small postal residential suburb of
Adelaide. It is a favourite place of residence for mer-
chants and others whose business lies in the metropolis.
Parkside lies in the midst of a flourishing and rapidly im-
proving agricultural neighbourhood, and has numerous fine
orchards and vineyards. The suburb of Unley lies one
mile distant. There is one hotel—The Turf. The
resident magistrates are C. Bouncy, G. Young, and W. A.
Wearing. Parkside is celebrated for the excellence of


the tiuits grown and the jams and pickles manufactured
there by Mrs. L. A. Chance.”
FULLARI ON. —A small agricultural village, lying one
mile E.N.E. of the suburb of Unley and to the E. of Mit-
cham. The land is taken up by the residences of persons
that cultivation and production, as also cattle breeding,
was indeed on a limited scale. For instance, one settler
had seven acres of wheat, one head of cattle, one pig, and
three goats. In all about 44 acres were under cultiva-
tion, also, there were 31 head of cattle, 6 horses, 2 ponies,
RECREATION GROUND, GLEN OSMOND.
having' business in Adelaide or by small farmers and gar-
deners.
“GOODWOOD. —A small residential suburb of Adelaide,
lying one mile W. of Unley, on the Brownhill Creek. It
is 3 miles from Adelaide, with which place there is a com-
munication by ’bus throughout the day’’
The late Rev. John Blacket in his history of Unley and
Goodwood refers to an old almanack, published about the
year 1843, in which some further particulars concerning a
census of the village of Unley are given. This indicates
/ goats, and 16 pigs. No doubt this dismal record, mainlv,
is for Unley only, that is, the portion laid out by Thomas
\\ histler. In later years there was a different story of
prosperity and production, intense cultivation and prolific
growth obtained. Practically the greater portion of the
areas or sections now known as Fullarton Estate, Mvrtle
Bank, Highgate, Malvern, Parkside South, New Parkside,
North Unley, Wavville, Unley Park, King's Park, Mills-
wood Estate, Claience Park, and Black b or est Estate were


either wheat growing or grazing lands, or under fruit trees
and vines.
GIANT EUCALYPTUS.
The site of what may be termed Unley proper,''as it
existed when it was the happy hunting ground of the Tan-
places in the locality of the Brownhill Creek and elsewhere
(see illustrations).
What must Black Forest, in the Goodwood district, have
looked like in the pioneering days. It is recorded that
this forest was a dense mass of gums and undergrowth
HEYWARD PARK.
danya and Cowandilla tribes of aborigines—that is, at the
time that Adelaide was founded—must have presented a
wonderful woodland picture of almost primeval days. Even
today a number of excellent specimens of ancient and lofty
gum trees still exist in the city, standing in silent evidence
of the majesty of the big timber growth before the pioneers
brought the axe to bear. Some of these gums and eucalyp-
tus escaped destruction, and are growing in a fairly healthy
condition at Ridge Park, also Heywood Park, and other
extending for miles back from the Bay Road, now Anzac
Highway. Few of the trees of Black Forest remain. The
settler and the home builder had no compunction or com-
passion. They were deaf to the call, "Woodman, spare
that tree," and the mighty giants of the forest were felled
with the march of settlement and the development of the
future City of Unley.
It is further recorded that Black Forest was the haunt
of cattle stealers or cattle "duffers," as they were some-


times called.. The stolen beasts of the settlers were driven
into this forest and killed for the value of their hides.
A RESIDENTIAL AND GARDEN CITY.
The City of Unley as a whole is purely residential,
with, of course, the necessary shopping and business
centres established on the principal thoroughfares—i.e.,
Unley, Goodwood, King William, and Glen Osmond Roads.
Factories, also noxious and noisy trades, are practically
non-existent. The few carrying on were established many
years before the Council was empowered by legislation,
under the Building and other Acts, to prohibit the same.
The dwellings are substantial structures of stone,
brick, or reinforced concrete. Past and present Councils
have always maintained an attitude distinctly adverse to
the erection of houses constructed wholly or partly of
wood or galvanized iron.
The Municipality is noted for beautiful gardens that
abound throughout the area ; in fact, nearly every dwelling
has its garden, which, no doubt, is due largely to the fact
that nearly every building has sufficient land enabling the
occupants to spend their leisure time in the cultivation of
flowering plants, shrubs, and fruit trees. In most in-
stances building blocks have an area of 50 ft. x 150 ft.
Many are of greater area, but few have much less. The
smaller blocks are situated in sub-divisions, which were
laid out prior to the coming into operation of the Town
Planning Act and other legislation, fixing areas for resi-
dences, also the minimum width of streets.
ORIGIN OF THE NAMING OF UNLEY AND ITS
FOUNDER.
According to tradition Thomas Whistler gave Unley its
name. He was the original owner of preliminary sections,
situated west of Unley Road, which were apportioned him,
together with certain city acres in Adelaide, at the sale of
Crown lands, following the foundation of the Colony. He
subdivided his land, laying out large sized blocks, but un-
fortunately provided very narrow streets. It is recorded
that he named “Unley” after his wife’s maiden name, and
the streets called “Mary,” “Arthur,” and “Thomas” were
the names of his children.
However, in later years considerable doubt has arisen
as to the derivation of Unley’s name, as also the naming
of the streets referred to. Some historians, after care-
ful research, contend that Whistler named Unley after
some English association, probably an old English village
or hamlet, and that the streets derived their names after
himself (Thomas), whilst Mary and Arthur were a brother
and sister.
Who can tell but what Whistler endeavoured to give
the phonetic spelling of some aboriginal name, and so spelt
it Unley, which was as near as he could get to the pro-
nunciation. It is said that Whistler was a doctor, and
thus being an educated man he is unlikely to have made an
error in his selection of the name of Unley.
Some time after taking up his sections he settled on
the bank of the Brownhill Creek near to Heywood Park.
He evidently lived in a hut, and spent a lonely existence
for a few years, without the company of kith or kin. Fol-
lowing the disposal of his holdings, no doubt profitably,
he returned to his home in England.
A WORTHY PIONEER.
Mention could be made of many noteworthy pioneers
who gave wholeheartedly and worked strenuously in the
development of the town and its contemporary suburbs, but
in this short history space allows only a brief reference.
However, the name of Edmund I. Trimmer should not
be overlooked. He was indeed a pioneer town-planner
and public benefactor, as evidenced by the laying out of
New Parkside, with the Unley Oval as the centre of the
subdivision. He was the owner of the section comprising
New Parkside, which he subdivided into building blocks
in 1881. All the streets are of good width. Edmund
Trimmer dedicated the Unley Oval to the people for recrea-
tion purposes. He also gave a portion of the land now
occupied by the City Hall and St. Augustine’s Church build-
ings, and owned the section now known as Malvern.
This subdivision is further evidence of his town-planning
methods; all the streets are of sufficient width, whilst
rights-of-ways or lanes are non-existent. Trimmer ob-
served the fallacy of laying out narrow streets, such as
those provided by Whistler.
THE FIRST AND THE PRESENT COUNCIL.
In the year 1871 the first Council following incorpora-
tion consisted of the following:—
J. H. Barrow, M.L.C., Mayor.


1871.
1936.
Area
5 4 sq. miles
—
Population
... 1,300
42,800
Buildings
282
11,343
Mileage of streets
—
miles
Assessment
... £9,866
£470,251
Unimproved capital value of
ratable property
... £197,320
£9,405,020
Voters' Roll
344
15,984
Councillors for Unley Ward—Luther Scammell and H.
Todd (who was the second Mayor).
Councillors for Parkside Ward —Thomas English, M.L.C.,
and G. Pearce.
Councillors for Fullarton Ward —W. B. Casher and G.
Church.
Councillors for Goodwood Ward—W. Hamilton and F.
Wurm.
Some years after Aldermen were selected, and later
Goodwood Ward was divided, thus providing two wards by
the inclusion of Goodwood South Ward. This gave a
Council of 15 members —i.e., Mayor, four Aldermen, and
ten Councillors.
The present Council (1936) is constituted as follows:
Mayor—John McLeay.
Aldermen—N. Anquetil, C. R. Dunnage, S. I. Kneebone and
J. M. Soutar.
Councillors.—Unley Ward—W. M. Harrell and W. F. P.
Hutton. Parkside \\ ard- —H. S. Dunks, M.P., and J.
Emlyn Robinson. Fullarton Ward —K. T. A. Bentzen
and F. V. Fearn. Goodwood Ward—S. Gild and G.
\\ . Illingworth. Goodwood South Ward —F. W. Linn
and C. F. Page.
CREMORNE GARDENS—ITS ZOO AND
ELEPHANT.
Prior to incorporation Unley had a zoo at the old
Cremorne Hotel, also a well laid out garden. The zoo
consisted of birds and animals, but the chief attraction
was an elephant, probably the first one brought to South
Australia. The elephant, when not on exhibition, was
put to work in drawing the plough in the sections now
known as New Parkside and Malvern. Subsequently it
was sent to Gepp's Cross, and used in ploughing the wheat
fields. It is recorded that this elephant ended his days
whilst working on a farm at Cherry Gardens.
STATISTICS.
The assessment is based on the capital or rental value.
The Corporation Quarry supplies all materials for road
making—that is, crushed metal and screenings. House
refuse is incinerated at the Adelaide Destructor Works.
Until recently the Corporation had its own destructor at
Springbank.
Ovals and Recreation Grounds cover an area of about
50 acres, including the Unley and Goodwood Ovals, and
the Ridge Park and Heywood Park Recreation Grounds.
The bonded debt of the Corporation is only i 6,349.
There are seven lines of electric tramways serving
the Municipality and southern suburbs, viz.—Glen Osmond,
Fullarton, Parkside, Kingswood, Unley, Hyde Park, Good-
wood, Clarence Park, and Keswick. Also the electric
tramway to Glenelg, via Goodwood.
Four circulating libraries and reading rooms are estab-
lished—that is, at Unley, Parkside, Goodwood, and Clar-
ence Park. The three lastnamed are controlled by the
Corporation under the Institutes Act.
Post offices are situated at Parkside, Unley, and Good-
wood.
Police stations, with resident officers, are at Parkside,
Unley, and Goodwood.
The water supply is from the Adelaide waterworks
district.
The meat supply is controlled by the Metropolitan
Abattoirs and Export Board.
Food and drugs and the milk supply are under the
jurisdiction of the Metropolitan County Board.
The whole of the City is connected with the Adelaide
deep drainage area by underground sewers.
The Unley Fire Brigade Station is a sub-station of the
Metropolitan Fire Brigade Station.


The South Australian Ambulance Brigade has a branch
station and division at Unley.
The Showgrounds of the S.A. Horticultural and Flori-
cultural Society, also the Centennial Hall, and the Keswick
Military Barracks and grounds are situated at Wayville,
within the Unley Municipality.
Savings Banks are at Parkside, Unley, and Goodwood,
also Trading Banks.
The principal charitable institutions are the Home for
Incurables, District Trained Nursing Society, School for
Mothers, and Baby Health Centre.
The Returned Soldiers’ League has branches at Unley,
Parkside, and Goodwood.
The principal and well-known townships include the
following:-—Eullarton, Fullarton Estate, Myrtle Bank,
Highgate, Parkside South, Parkside. New Parkside, Mal-
vern, Unley Park, Hyde Park, Unley, North Unley, Way-
ville, Goodwood Park, King’s Park, Clarence Park. Good-
wood, Forestville, and Black Forest Estate.
Within the area of the Municipality there are 11,898
assessable and ratable properties.
PAST AND PRESENT MEMBERS OF COUNCIL AT
11th DECEMBER, 1935.
MAYORS.
*J. H. Barrow
*L. Scammell
*H. Codd
*J. H. Bagster
*Wm. Townsend
*J. S. Greer
*G. Howell
*W. A. Hubble
*J. G. Jenkins
*Wm, Shierlaw
*J. O’Connell
*J. Viner Smith
*C. G. Gurr
*Thos. Smith
*Thos. C. Holland
*Wm. Bring
*Theodore Bruce
* Archibald Mackie
*John Henry Chinner
John Herbert Cooke
*Alfred Samuel Lewis
Walter Dollman
Thomas Elliott Yelland
William Norman Parsons
William Harold Langham
Herbert Clarence Richards
Alfred Ernest Morris
Ethelbert Bendall
Geo. Walter Illingworth
Benjamin John Sellick
Charles Mayo Reid
Frederick James Barrett
John McLeay
*T. English
*G. Pearce
*J. K. Hawthorne
*J. Hill
ALDERMEN.
*Joseph Vardon
*Archibald Mackie
*William Bring
*William Neville
*C. G. Gurr
*J. H. Grundy
* James Duncan
Brown
*Vivian Lewis
*Wm. Henry Pengilly
Samuel Lewis
Alfred Richman Fuller
*Caleb Macklin
John Herbert Cooke
Walter Dollman
*Frederick Charles Coombs
Edward James Thomas
Frederick Pearson
\\ illiam Norman Parsons
*Robert Palmer
COUNCILLORS FOR UNLEY WARD.
*L. Scammell
*H. Codd
*J. H. Bagster
*W. Shierlaw
*J. S. Greer
*R. Williams
*G. Howell
*G. J. Comley
*T. Stephens
*W. Burford
*J. T. Lapidge
*G. E. Gray
*J. Yates
*T. C. Holland
*B, J. Jones
*H. Trathan
COUNCILLORS FOR PARKSIDE WARD.
William Harold Langham
Thomas Elliott Yelland
*William John Hill
Herbert Clarence Richards
*Charles Williams
Alfred Ernest Morris
Ethelbert Bendall
Geo. Walker Illingworth
Benjamin John Sellick
Charles Mayo Reid
Robert Barron
Solomon Alfred Myers
Frederick James Barrett
*Edward Ruben Lloyd
John McLeay
Charles Frederick Hancock
James McGregor Soutar
Colin Roslyn Dunnage
Stanley John Kneebone
Norman Anquetil
*F. Tomlinson
*J. C. Hamp
I. R. Killicoat
*Theo. J. C. Hantke
*R. Palmer
T. E. Yelland
*J. T. R. Hall
H. C. Richards
C. M. Reid
O. V. Mann
W. E. Chase
William Morris Harrell
Charles Wheatley Reeves
William Frederick Percy
Hutton
*J. McGregor
*A. Kauffman
*G. Palmer
*D. Tweedie


T. W. Macklin
[. C. Bailey
*F. Smith
*J. Viner Smith
*W. A. Hubble
>;: J. G. Jenkins
A. Mackie
*George Jas. Moule
*Ceo. McGowan
*M. J. W. Andresen
A. R. Fuller
*J. Couche
*\dvian Lewis
J. H. Cooke
W. Dollman
A. F. Pearson
COUNCILLORS FOR FULLARTON WARD.
W. B. Casher
G. Church
*W. Dearman
W. Froggat
*B. Good
*W. Crossman
*C. White
T. Fairbrother
*R. Nation
*C. Macklin
*H. Dean
*S. J. Gallary
*A. A. Scott
*H. Hampson
*G. Viney
*C. G. Gurr
*W. Bring
*W. Whitehalld
*T. G. Hall
*W. Neville
*G. Nixon
COUNCILLORS FOR GOODWOOD WARD.
*T. Weller
*J. H. Bagster
*l. S. Evans
*J. Roberts
*W. Hamilton
*F. Wurm
*P. Mitchell
*G. Rogers
*Owen Crompton
*J. W. Shannon
H. R. Gelston
W. H. Langham
Frederick Walsh
Thomas Ryan
Marcus Gowrie Shannon
Benjamin John Sellick
Frederick Hugh Lindow
Robert Barron
John McLeay
*Charles Williams
H. O. Jolly
Colin Roslyn Dunnage
H. S. Dunks, M.P.
J. E. Robinson
*J. H. Chinner
*A. Brown
*W. H. Pengilly
*Geo. Prout
J. E. Robinson
E. J. Thomas
H. Eicke
Frederick Bricknell
M. H. Coombe
T. F. Fairbrother
E. H. Thomas
B. A. A. Tucker
C. Williams
A. E. Morris
Frank Edgar Stratton
Walter Henry fames
Welch
Chas. Frederick Hancock
Keith Thorbold Bentzen
Frederick Vinrace Fearn
*W. Bishop
*j. O’Connell
*W. H. Goodenough
*Theo. Bruce
*J. Morris
*A. Hendry
*R. O. Fox
*J. Harris
W. M. Hicks
*J. Crocker
E. Tweedale
W. E. Ellis
*A, S. Lewis
*Caleb Macklin
John James Clark
*C. Young
*C. Day
*T. Overbury
*W. Sheppard
*J. H. Bagster
*J. S. Greer
James
*J. N. Taylor
G. T. Fane
*J. C. Bailey
*S. J. Whitmore
*C. G. Gurr
*H. Potter
*J. Waterman, 1871 to 1875
*J. C. Bailey, 1876 to 1879
*John Miller, Aug., 1879, to
Sept., 1903
Thos. H. Orchard
William Norman Parsons
F. J. W. Ashton
A. H. A. Clarke
*D. W. Bartlett
E. Ben dal 1
George Walker Illingworth
Solomon Alfred Myers
James Alexander Gibson
Frederick James Barrett
Stanley John Kneebone
Richard William Ernest
Turner
Samuel Gild
COUNCILLORS FOR GOODWOOD SOUTH WARD.
"Edward Reuben Floyd
James McGregor Soutar
Norman Anquetil
Claude Frederick Page
William Frederick Finn
*W. J. Hill
E. R. Hicks
E. J. W. Ashton
Samuel Lewis
James Thomas Hobbs
William Sibery Croft
AUDITORS.
*C. C. Gooden
W. Brindal
*G. R. Bradley
*W. Guthrie
Walter Dollman
R. Annells
R. G. Lillywhite
F. S. Mann
*R. H. Tapley
A. G. Prince
*George Gardner Colebatch
Allan Buchanan
*W. Shierlaw
TOWN CLERKS.
John B. Miller, Oct., 1903
to date.


|||i ' X |||^^
ippp’ i^ipfir^
fe jl.»~ ■ Jtt...Jt- ■ Jijt' j/F V -.«at
-«-* fir k JS^Wmm
DEPUTY OFFICERS OF HEALTH.
OFFICERS OF HEALTH
!
*Dr. James O’Connell
*Dr. H. H. Wigg
*Dr. A. E. J. Russell, 1900
to 1904
*Dr. D. T. Harbison, May,
1904, to Oct, 1906
Dr. H. IT. Ernest Russell,
Oct., 1906, to date.
*Dr. D. T. Harbison
*Dr. W. H. Harbison
*Dr. F. Steele Scott
deceased.
years 1919 and 1920. He has been a
resident of Unley for 38 years. Presi-
dent of the Public Library, Museum,
and Art Gallery of South Australia.
Business, Fellow of the Common-
wealth Institute of Valuers. Over a
period of years Mr. Langham was Pre-
sident of Sturt Cricket Club, the body
controlling the Unley Oval. He was
instrumental in securing Hey wood
Park and started the Leicester Street
Play Ground. He has a weakness for
literature, and is a well known collec-
tor of books.
Street, Adelaide, and Past Master of
St. Andrew's Masonic Lodge, S.A.C.
Mr. McLeay served 4J years with the
A.I.F. in the Great War as a stretcher
bearer, and was decorated with the
Military Medal for conspicuous brav-
ery in the field at Villers Bretonneux.
THE LATE ALFRED SAMUEL
LEWIS, J.P., PAST MAYOR.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Adelaide, October 31st, 1856.
The late Mr. Lewis was Mayor of
Unley for two years (1908 and 1909).
after having served for 6 years as
Councillor of Goodwood Ward and 2
years as Alderman. After retiring
from the Mayoralty he again served
as Alderman for 6 years, thus having
rendered invaluable service to the
Council and city for a total period of
16 years. During his connection with
the Council he rendered yeoman ser-
vice in many ways, notably as Chair-
man of the Town Hall Building Com-
mittee, when the new Town Hall was
being erected. His work in healtl
and financial matters was warmly ap
predated and recognised, and the* sue
cess of his efiforts in the former lec
to his appointment as a member of
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF
UNLEY, JOHN McLEAY.
Born at Port Clinton, Y.P., in 1893,
and educated at Port Clinton, Unley
Central, and Muirden College. Mr.
McLeay has served in the Unley City
Council for 10 years, and he was the
first returned soldier elected to the
Council, and also the first returned
soldier to be Mayor of Unley. He is
a Director of the S.A. Caledonian
Society, Past President of the Ade-
laide Legacy Club, Chairman of Direc-
tors of McLeay Bros., Ltd., Grenfell
PAST MAYOR, WILLIAM HAROLD
LANGHAM.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Glen Osmond, 30th August,
1881. Mr. Langham served in the
Unley Council as Mayor during the


« ||k
'•% .*
" ■
■*jk f' k %
.■Hp Jaw; 'i ?j
te Central Board of Health. Mr.
,ewis was a printer by profession, and
;as held in high esteem by his friendly
ompetitors, so much so that on seve-
ral occasions he was called in by them
as arbitrator in making readjustments
aid settlements. Outside of his busi-
ness he had three outstanding inter-
ests —municipal work, Freemasonry,
and music—in all of which he was con-
spicuously successful, and has left an
honoured and respected name in those
three spheres of activity. The de-
ceased gentleman died on November
7th, 1929. He was educated at Prince
Alfred College, where he was the
cond scholar on the roll. In Free-
masonry he was a member of both
Holdfast and United Tradesmen’s
Lodges, and was also a member of
Holdfast Mark Lodge and United Col-
ms’ Royal Arch Chapter. In
musical circles he was also well
known, having been organist at
Draper Memorial Church for 16 years,
and other churches for lesser periods.
In connection with his brother (Mr. E.
Lewis) he founded the business of A.
and E. Lewis, printers, in 1891.
HERBERT CLARENCE RICHARDS,
M.P., PAST MAYOR.
(Unley City Council.)
Mr. H. C. Richards, son of Mr. T.
J. Richards, was born at Gawler, 1876,
and educated at Mitcham and Unley
Schools. He founded the firm of H. C.
Richards, Ltd., and is now Governing-
Director, Chairman of Directors of T.
J. Richards & Sons, Ltd., and Director
of other companies. He was the first
President of the S.A. Aero Club, and
is now a life member. During his
presidency he welcomed Sir Ross and
Sir Keith Smith, Harry Butler,
Amy Johnson, and Sir Kingsford Smith
and party. Mr. Richards has
been a Councillor, Alderman, and
Mayor of the City of Unley, a repre-
sentative of the Suburban Municipali-
ties on the Tramways Trust, President
of the Federal Council of Motor
Traders, Vice-President of the Cham-
ber of Motor Industries, and Vice-Pre-
sident of the Employers’ Federation.
He is a member of the Royal Agri-
cultural and Horticultural Society’s
Executive. Past President South Park
Bowling Club, Patron Sturt Football
Club, Vice-President Sturt Cricket
Club and Unley Oval, and holds other
offices in many sporting bodies. Mr.
Richards has made two trips around
the world and has had the privilege
of being received by the late King
and Queen at Buckingham Palace. He
was a guest at one of the Lord Mayor
of London’s Easter banquets, and was
also a guest at the Duke of York’s
wedding. He is Past Grand Master,
T.0.0.F., and a member of the Board of
Trustees, 1.0.0. F.
PAST MAYOR ALFRED ERNEST
MORRIS.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Goodwood, in September.
1882, and educated at Sturt Street
School and Professor Bircher’s School.
Mr. Morris has served in the Unley
City Council for 12 years, 4 years of
which he was Councillor, (1 years Al-
derman. and 2 years Mayor.' He has
resided in the district for the whole
of his lifetime. Business, Motor Bodv
Builder, Currie Street. Adelaide. Mr
Morris was Chairman of the Metro-


*®*wwm
mm~ '*» wKk
:> • W^T
w mf’
*r y
/
*' M
politan County Board for 4 years, was
also instrumental in erecting the
Unley Oval Pavilion, and with Mrs.
Morris laid the foundation stone of the
Soldiers' Memorial Garden of Honour
at Unley. After leaving school he was
employed in the office of Messrs. C.
M. & J. B. Muirhead for 2 years, and
then with Mr. Villeneuve Smith for 2
years, whom he left to enter the coach
building business of his father and
grandfather. Mr. Morris was connected
with the Military Force in this State
for 31 years, and was adjutant to the
74th Infantry Battalion Home Service.
He has also received the Long Service
Medal. During the Great War he
volunteered for active service on three
occasions, but was rejected in the
years 1914, 1915, and 1917. Mr. Morris
has captained and pitched for Sturt
Baseball Club for 8 years, and also
played interstate baseball in Mel-
bourne and Sydney in 1914. He won
the Sturt Bowling' Club Championship
in 1915. He was Choir Master of the
Hig-hgate Congregational Church from
1932-1935.
THE HON. JOHN HERBERT COOKE,
J.P., F.A.1.P.A., PAST MAYOR.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Payneham, South Australia,
in 1867. Youngest surviving son of
late Ebenezer Cooke, formerly a mem-
ber of the S.A. Parliament and for
many years Commissioner of Audit
for State of S.A. Mr. Cooke was edu-
cated principally at Glenelg Grammar
School, Norwood Grammar School,
and St. Peter’s College, in which he
was Science Prizeman in 1883. Upon
leaving school he entered the en-
gineering works of the S.A. Govt.
Railways Dept. as the preliminary por-
tion of a practical engineering train-
ing. In 1889 he joined the engineers'
staff of William Lund's Blue Anchor
line of steamers, serving on s.s. Mur-
rumbidgee and s.s. Bungaree. Upon
returning to Adelaide he was put in
charge of the engineering business of
the late Mr. R. A. White, C.E., and
subsequently started in practice for
himself as a Consulting Engineer. He
studied Patent Law and became a Fel-
low of the Australasian Institute of
Patent Agents, Inc., of which he was
subsequently elected President. De-
voting his private time to municipal
work, he was elected a Councillor of
the L T nlev Corporation, where after 4
years' service he was elected to the
Mayoralty, and occupied that office
for 3 years in succession, followed by
6 years' service as Alderman. M \
Cooke holds the unique position of
having been the last Mayor of tie
Town of Unley and the first Mayor
of the City, the citizenship havii g
been proclaimed on Bth November,
1906, and the foundation stone of t: e
new City Hall was laid by the Mayo -
ess (Mrs. J. H. Cooke) on 9th Marc i,
1907. In 1915 Mr. Cooke was elect d
a member of the S.A. Legislative
Council, representing Central Distri t
No. 2. He served on the Public Wor s
Committee, the Railways Standii g
Committee, and several Royal Coi i-
missions, and also filled the position
of Hon. Sec. and Whip to the Libe al
Party in the Legislative Council, k r.
Cooke's service in the Legislati e
Council covered a period of 18 yea s.
and in 1934 the permanent title of
Hon. was conferred on him by Lis
Late Majesty. He is President of the


Ilk M
l -4 - j^. W ‘ *V^
v’ '
School of Arts and Crafts and has
Seen President of the Soldiers’ Home,
. Ivrtle Bank, for over 20 years. On
sth December, 1898, he married Har-
t. daughter of late David Williams,
Adelaide. Sports, bowls. He be-
mgs to the Rotary Club. Present
ddress, 174, Cross Roads, Malvern.
PAST MAYOR FREDERICK JAMES
BARRETT, J.P.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Francis Street, Clarence
Park, 4th May, 1888. Educated at
Goodwood Public School and Muir-
den’s College. Service in Council, 11
rears. Positions held in Council ;
Councillor, Alderman, and Mayor; 46
years a resident of the district. A
>er of the Rechabite Lodge, S.A.
District. Business, Barrett & Barrett,
Licensed Land Brokers, Auctioneers,
and Valuers. Home address, 38, Le
Hunte Street, Wayville.
PAST MAYOR, COLONEL WALTER
DOLLMAN, V.D.
(Unley City Council.)
Born Adelaide, 1873, son of Walter
Dollman. Home address, George
Street. Unley Park. Educated at Pul-
teney Street Grammar and Unley Pub-
lic Schools. Entered military service,
1889; Commissioned, 1900; Major on
District Headquarters as D.A. Q.M.G.
for 6 years; promoted Lieut.-Col. and
to command 27th Bn., A.1.F., 1915;
embarked, May 31. Served Gallipoli,
Egypt, France. Invalided and re-
turned to Australia, 1916. Com-
manded Mitcham A.I.F. Camp till 1918.
Col. on retired list, 1920. Elected
Unley City Council, 1900. Served as
Auditor, Councillor, Alderman; was
Mayor at outbreak of war. Justice of
the Peace, 1906. Joined R.S.L., 1916.
Served as President Renmark 2 years
and Unley 7 years. State President
R.S. and 5.1.L.A., 1930. Now occupies
the position of Vice-President. Pre-
sident of Pulteney Old Scholars' Asso-
ciation. Commandant of Legion of
Frontiersmen. Editor of "Rising Sun."
Joined staff of "Advertiser," 1895,
serving in commercial and literary de-
partments. Published several stories,
and joint author with Mr. Skinner of
the 27th Battalion's official war his-
tory, "The Blue and Brown Diamond."
THE LATE J. H. CHINNER, PAST
MAYOR.
(Unlcy City Council.)
The late Mr. Chinner died suddenly
early on the 15th December, 1933, at


■ 1
|||Hp
*| ft J|g|||g|
IF m Jlpfe
i -'. liailSIS
!»•' g ■• *.?;&■
■Bk. iBjSlk mI
I ll
his home in Foster Street, Parkside,
at the age of 68. He was born at
Brighton, and educated at Prince Al-
fred College, of which he later became
secretary. Upon leaving school he en-
tered the insurance business with the
late Mr. L. A. Jessop. For 31 years
he was the Adelaide Manager of the
Atlas Assurance Co., and on his retire-
ment in February, 1925, received manv
congratulations and good wishes from
local underwriters at a representative
gathering. Mr. Chinner had a gift for
drawing, and many of his cartoons and
sketches appeared in Adelaide publica-
tions as Well as in the "Bulletin" and
"London Punch." He was a promi-
nent churchman and for 40 years was
a leader of the Parkside Methodist
Sunday School. On August Ist, 1926,
he retired from the position of super-
intendent, which he held for 32 years.
Mr. Chinner was a member of the
L nley Council for 10 years, and was
Mayor on 5 occasions. When the
Sturt Bowling Club was established
about 25 years ago Mr. Chinner be-
came a foundation member, and was
connected with it for 15 years. He
was one of the outstanding Austra-
lian skippers, and his name appears
among the winners of the Sturt Club
Championship. He resigned from the
Sturt Club about 1923 and joined the
Parkside Bowling Club. Mrs. Chin-
ner survives. There are 4 children—
Messrs. John Chinner (Yorketown).
and Harry Chinner (Toorak), and
Mesdames R. H. Davidson (Rose
Park) and J. M. Maugham
THOMAS ELLIOT YELLAND, J.P.,
PAST MAYOR.
(Unley City Council.)
Mr. Yelland is the eldest son of the
late J. H. Yelland, of Point Sturt,
who arrived in this State in 1848. He
was educated at Glenelg Grammar
School and the Rose worthy Agricul-
tural College. For over 20 years he
was Secretary to the S.A. Farmers’
Co-operative Union, Ltd., and is now a
director. For 15 years he served in
the Unley City Council, being Mayor
during the war in 1915 and 1916, and
was Councillor for 5 years and Aider-
man for 8 years. For 6 years he re-
presented the Council on the Abattoirs
Board. Mr. Yelland was Chairman of
the Unley branch of the District
Trained Nurses’ Society, and Presi-
dent of the Unley Orchestra for a
number of years, and is still President
of the Unley High School Council am
Chairman of the Unley Central School
Committee. He is a member of the
Chamber of Manufactures Council and
the Centennial Exhibition Committee,
and was President of the Churches of
Christ Conference for 2 years. He is
a lustice of the Peace for South Aus-
tralia and Victoria, and a Fellow of
the Institute of Secretaries' Society.
B. J. SELLICK, J P., PAST MAYOR
(Unley City Council.)
Born in Adelaide and received is
early education at the Hindmar T
School (being one of the fi st
scholars), also the Grote Street
School, under Dr. Torr, and later at
\\ hinham College, conducted by ite
late C. G. Newman, B.A. Mr. Sell :k


: ;S
Wf *'•*£ C^T" '^ r^ t f JH
ll //J**'”' flj
. imenced his municipal career about
years ago at Hindmarsh. In more
cent years he was a member of the
iley City Council for 14 years, the
:ter 2 years being Mayor of Unley.
nher activities include a term of 7
ears on the Metropolitan Abattoirs
march 4 years a member of the
ietropolitan County Board, 4 years a
lember of the Municipal Association
d 5 years a member of the Unley
gh School Council. Mr. Sellick was
so at one time Chairman of the
orth Adelaide School Board of
Ivice. A great interest in sport has
en one of his characteristics. In his
ung days he was a prominent run-
r for South Australia, and played
icket for Adelaide and Suburban
sociations. Latterly his sporting
tivities have been confined to bowls,
id he is a Past President of the Sturt
Bawling Club. Another office held by
r. Sellick was Vice-President of the
art Cricket Club. His enthusiasm
for sport has an interesting and unique
equel. His four sons are members of
the one cricket club (Colebrook).
PAST MAYOR, CHAS. MAYO REID,
J.P.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Trinity Church Parsonage,
North Terrace, Adelaide, 17th Jan-
uary, 1881. Mr. Reid has served in
the Unley City Council for 15 years
and has been 30 years a resident of
the district. Positions held in Coun-
cil ; Councillor, Alderman, and Mayor,
and he is in business as Secretary and
Librarian of the Adelaide Circulating
Library. He has been representative
of the Corporation on the Municipal
Tramways Trust for 7 years, and 10
years a member of the Board of
Governors of the Public Library, Mu-
seum, and Art Gallery of South Aus-
tralia. Mr. Reid is also a member of
the Children’s Welfare and Public
Relief Committee.
PAST MAYOR, WILLIAM NORMAN
PARSONS.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Prospect, March Ist, 1884,
and educated at Sturt Street School
and Prince Alfred College. Service in
Council, 13 years; 46 years a resident
of the district. Mr. Parsons has held
the positions of Councillor, Alderman,
and Mayor, and has also been the
Council’s representative on the Abat-
toirs Board and the Metropolitan
County Board. In business he is a Real
Estate Auctioneer and Land Agent (F.
E. & W. N. Parsons, 91, King William
Street). His sports are tennis and
golf, and he has taken a prominent
part in the Pirie Street Literary
Society. Mr. Parsons is also a Fel-
low of the Commonwealth Institute of
Valuers.
THE LATE HON. THEODORE BRUCE,
M.L.C.
(Past Mayor, Unley City Council.)
Born at Leeds, Yorkshire, England,
1847; educated J. L. Young’s School
and St. Peter’s College. He arrived in
South Australia as a boy five years of
age. In 1897 he was elected Mayor of
Unley; 1900 elected Alderman, City of


*■'
'' V/‘
■% ; # ’ j
JL f '
| j|Pr*
a
H ,f; ./.');;;•
RSnSH
■■ * V /
>
I fj_ A
Adelaide, after excellent services in
that capacity was elected Mayor of
Adelaide. In 1909 was elected a member
of the Legislative Council, represent-
ing the Central District. Mr. Bruce re-
sided in Adelaide for nearly 60 years,
and for more than half that period was
a prominent figure in business, muni-
cipal, Parliamentary, and social
circles. He took a foremost part in
the municipalisation of the tramways
system, and was the first representa-
tive of the City Council on the Trust;
was also one of the chief members in
the establishment of the Metropolitan
Abattoirs. He was the first President
of the Yorkshire .Society in South
Australia. Mr. Bruce died on the Ist
July, 1911, in his sixty-fifth year.
PAST ALDERMAN ROBERT BARRON.
(Uriley City Council.)
Born at Adelaide, 1876. Educated at
Unley Public School. Ten years’ ser-
vice in Council. A resident of the Dis-
trict for 50 years. Positions held in
Council: Councillor and Alderman.
Business : Contractor. Member of the
Masonic Lodge. Sports: Football,
cricket, baseball, and bowls, and inte-
rested in anything healthful. Mr.
Barron, in his younger days, was a
prominent player and member of the
Sturt Football Club. Home address:
23 Fairford Street, Unley.
PAST ALDERMAN EDWARD JAMES
THOMAS.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Unley, 12th November,
1869, and educated at Unley and Grote
Street Public Schools. Mr. Thomas
has served in the Unley City Council
as Councillor and Alderman, and his
been a resident of the District all 1 is
life. He was an Accountant at W. C.
Rigby’s and Rigby Ltd., Manager of
the "Daily Herald’’ Newspaper, and a
State member of the Licensing Con t.
and later Superintendent of Licens d
Premises. He is now retired from
business. A member of the Tndepe i-
dent Order of Rechabites, and is
sports are cricket, football, tennis, a id
bowls. Home address: 28 Wat le
Street, Fullarton Estate.
PAST ALDERMAN CHARLES
FREDERICK HANCOCK.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Castle Street, Parkside.
April 20th. 1885, and educated at
Parkside Public School. Service in
Council: hive years as Councillor and


||
y- I, ‘
VM
JmS W
iipr lilll
jgjP* £&
¥y &*!f Mm^
m **■•*•*, ■ j® ■ ■
;o years as Alderman. Mr. Hancock
h ,s served as Chairman and a member
many important committees dur-
ing those years: Vice-President
Suburban Municipal and District Coun-
cils Association, and Secretary and
Treasurer Parkside School Committee.
Business: Builder and Contractor. He
is a member of the Free Gardeners’
Friendly Society, and is Past Grand
Master, Grand Treasurer, and holds
the present position of Secretary.
THE LATE JOSEPH HADFIELD
GRUNDY.
(Past Alderman Unley City Council.)
Born at Salford. Manchester, Eng-
land, sth November, 1855 ; educated at
English Public Schools. He arrived
in Australia in 1877 as South Austra-
lian representative of P. Falk & Co.,
wholesale jewellers. Councillor for
Young Ward, Adelaide City Council,
1889-90; Alderman, City of Unley, and
Mayor of Brighton. The late Mr.
Grundy was one of the instigators of
the movement to connect Goodwood
and Brighton by railway. He estab-
lished in 1880 the business of Grundy
Bros., manufacturing jewellers and
importers. He was a lay reader of the
Church of England for 50 years; a
former President of the Justices’ As-
sociation. He also took a prominent
part in St. John’s Young Men’s Society
in the early days ; was a committeeman
of Brighton Institute for many years,
and took a keen interest in the Boy
Scouts’ Association. Mr. Grundy died
on 10th March, 1934.
PAST ALDERMAN ALFRED RICHMAN
FULLER.
(Unley City’’ Council.)
Born at Adelaide, 13th April, 1860,
and educated at North Adelaide
Grammar School, and Prince Alfred
College. Mr. Fuller served in the
Unley City Council as a Councillor
from 1897 to 1902, and Alderman from
1906 till 1907. He has been a resident
of the District for 51 years, and is at
present retired. He was in business
as an Importer, Shipping and Insur-
ance Agent, and subsequent to 1916
was Accountant, etc., to a large im-
porting and manufacturing company in
Adelaide until 1931. Address: 15 Com-
mercial Road, Unley.


'
THE LATE CHARLES WILLIAMS,
Past Alderman.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Adelaide, sth March, 1872,
and educated at the Unley Public
School. Mr. Williams was a resident
of Unley for 49 years, arid was first
elected for the Unley City Council to
represent Fullarton Ward in 1912. In
1917 he was elected Alderman, and he
served at different periods as Chair-
man of the Town Hall, Works, Fin-
ance, Health, Quarry, and Recreation
Grounds Committees, and succeeded
Mr. H. C. Richards as a Council re-
presentative on the Tramways Trust.
The late Mr. Williams was a member
of the Masonic and Oddfellows’
Lodges. He died at Parkside on Feb-
ruary 26th, 1927.
ALDERMAN JAMES McGREGOR
SOUTAR, J.P.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Dundee, Scotland, 13th Feb-
ruary, 1887, and educated at Morgan
Academy, Dundee. Arrived in Aus-
tralia in April, 1912. Service in Coun-
cil, 10 years; 15 years a resident of the
District. Mr. Soutar represents the
Council on the Metropolitan County
Board, Chairman of Finance Commit-
tee, also a representative on the
Municipal Councils’ Association. He
is Past President of the Goodwood
Institute and Goodwood Recreation
Grounds Association, President of the
Clarence Park Institute, President
Clarence Park Sub-branch R.S.A., and
Vice-President of the Amateur Ath-
letic Association. Business: Master
French Polisher. A member of the
Caledonian Society and Masonic Mac-
Donell Mark Lodge. Mr. Soutar was a
successful athlete. He won the Lord
Londonderry Cup for the ten-mile
championship of North of Ireland, and
the Bannerman Shield for the seven-
mile championship of West of Scot-
land. In addition to being captain of
the winning team, he won the three-
mile track and seven-mile cross-
country amateur championship of
South Australia in 1912 and 13. He
also won the 5 and 10-mile champion-
ships for South Australia. War Ser-
vice : Five years' active service abroad,
A.I.F. Home address : Cowper Road,
Black Forest.
ALDERMAN COLIN ROSLYN
DUNNAGE, J.P.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Fullarton, 1896, and edu-
cated at Parkside Public School and
Unley High School. Mr. Dunnage lit
served in the Unley City Council f<
eight years, and is Chairman (
various Committees in connection wi
the Council. He is a representatr
of the Unley City Council on ti
Metropolitan County Board, and Civ
lian Trustee of the Unley Sub-branc
Returned Soldiers' League. M
Dunnage is also a member of t
Masonic and Rechabite Lodges,
foundation member of the Unit
Rotary Club, and his sports are foo
ball and tennis. In business he is
newsagent. Home address: 57 Unl<
Road, Unley.
ALDERMAN STANLEY JOHN
KNEEBONE, B.V.Sc.
(Unley City Council.)
Mr. Kneebone was born in Me
bourne, Victoria, 1897, and educated r


• ' “'wn Ht
MHhk * ■
! ;€:-v '*
; ? #|y i|8
A I
H J8S
,’esley College, Melbourne, and Mcl-
! time University. Nine years’ service
i Council, seven of which he served
Councillor, and two years as
Alderman. He represented the Unley
City Council on the Metropolitan
County Board, and is now the Coun-
cil s representative on the Metro-
politan Infectious Diseases Hospital
Board in the Municipal Association of
South Australia. He was attached to
the 6th Cavalry Brigade, Veterinary
Section, with the rank of Major. Pro-
fession: \ eterinary Surgeon, Anzac
Highway, Everard Park. Alderman
Kneebone has gained the Australian
Efficiency Decoration.
ALDERMAN NORMAN ANQUETIL
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Castlemaine, Victoria,
March 9th, 1877. and educated at Mel-
bourne, Victoria. Mr. Anquetil came to
South Australia in 1902, and has been a
resident of Unley for 28 years. He
has served in the Unley City Council
for six years, at present holding the
position of Alderman. He has been
Chairman of various committees, and
is a representative of the Council to
the Suburban Municipal and District
Councils Association. Pie is \ ice-
President of the Unley Bowling Club,
a member of the Government
Aborigines' Advisory Council, Trea-
surer of the United Aborigines' Mis-
sion in South Australia, a member of
the Board and Treasurer of Our Boys
Institute, and a member of the Aus-
tralian Natives' Association. Mr.
Anquetil is Local Director of Griffiths
Bros. Ltd., and his sports are tennis
and bowls. Private address : 3 Cedar
Avenue, Millswood.
PAST COUNCILLOR FRANK EDGAR
STRATTON.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Melbourne, 13th June,
1887, and educated at the Unley Pub-
lic School. He served in the Unley City
Council from 1920-25, and has been a
resident of the District for 45 years.
In business he is a builder. He has
been five years Secretary of the High-
gate Public School Committee, and a
member of the Committee which suc-
cessfully agitated for more open
spaces for Unley. Mr. Stratton is also
Vice-President and a playing member
of Sturt Imperial Cricket and Foot-
ball teams.
PAST COUNCILLOR ERNEST HERBERT
THOMAS.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Adelaide, 21st November,


.
■■k mrT ' 4 *Jj
%
■■■;. #
•|piir». .,
, \
1^
1867, and educated at Stanley Gram-
mar School, Watervale. Mr. Thomas
has served in the Unley City Council
for two years as Councillor, represent-
ing Fullarton Ward, and has been 38
years a resident of the District. He
is Treasurer of the Parkside and
Eastwood Institute, Treasurer of the
Perseverance Lodge of Druids, Direc-
tor of Adelaide Co-operative Society,
and was for 27 years Departmental
Manager of Dalgetv & Co. At present
he is retired from business. His
sports are golf and bowls, and his
home address is 26 Eynesbury Ave.,
Mite ham.
PAST COUNCILLOR ETHELBERT
BENDALL.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Prospect, South Australia;
educated at Prince Alfred College.
Service in Adelaide Council, 2\ years
as Councillor. Elected Alderman,
Adelaide, July, 1935; 11 years' service
Unley City Council (5 years Council-
lor, 4 years Alderman, and 2 years as
Mayor). Chairman of Finance Com-
mittee, Adelaide City Council, and re-
presents the Council on the Metro-
politan Infectious Diseases Hospital
Board, also member Metropolitan
County Board. Chairman Wayville
Institute ; President of Unley Orches-
tra. Business, chartered accountant
(Aus.). Lodges: Past Grand Officer,
Freemasons' Grand Lodge; Past
Grand Officer, Royal Arch Chapter;
Preceptor Knight Templar, Earl of
Euston; First General, Rose Croix;
P.G.M. Independent Order of Oddfel-
lows. His sports are cricket, football,
lacrosse, bowls, and golf.
PAST COUNCILLOR WALTER EDW N
CHASE, J.P.
(Unley City r Council.)
Born at Wright Street, Adelaide,
28th November, 1871, and educated at
North Adelaide and Nailsworth Pul ic
Schools, also by private tutors lor
Accountancy and Bookkeeping. 2r.
Chase was a Councillor for eight yet rs
for Unley Ward in the Unley Cty
Council, and has been a resident of the
District for 19 years. He was Chair-
man of quarry and other Committ es
in the Unley City Council, and as
also had considerable experience on
the Bench of the Adelaide Police
Court. In business he is in the travel-
wear department of G. & R. Wills and
Co. Mr. Chase is a member of he


I . / ,
'
mason Lodge of I ruth. No. 8,
C, and has been a member of the
of Temperance Lodge for 45
rs. During the Great War he was
honed in the Pay Office, Adelaide,
two years, and after the Armis-
he was an instructor for the Voca-
mal Training School for returned
.I.F. soldiers. He is a Justice of the
■ice for South Australia and N.S.W.,
id has been Hon. Treasurer of the
lev District Trained Nurses’ .Society
10 years. Mr. Chase has been Musi-
: Conductor. Choirmaster, and Or-
list at the following churches: —
rth Prospect, Enfield, and Walker-
le Methodist Churches, and he has
fined the Halifax Street Mission,
aley Methodist, Goodwood Baptist,
lodwood Presbyterian, and West-
! )urne Park Baptist Schools. Fie has
so had considerable experience and
success as a concert singer. His
>rts are cricket and baseball, for
v. hich he umpires, and is a member
of the South Park Bowling Club.
PAST COUNCILLOR ARTHUR HENRY
ARNOLD CLARKE, J.P.
(Unley City Council.)
Born 6th October, 1860, at McLaren
Vale, South Australia. Educated at
McLaren Vale and Willunga. Mr.
Clarke was Councillor for two years,
representing Goodwood Ward; was
Treasurer of the D.T.N.S., Unley
Branch, for 10 years; Secretary of the
Goodwood Democratic Club for 10
years; member of several Literary
Societies, viz., Adelaide Young Men’s
Club, King William Road: Union
Model Pari iament, and others. He is
a Committeeman of the Congrega-
tional Church Union at Glenelg. Mem-
ber of the M.U. Oddfellows since 1879.
Fie has occupied all the chairs, and in
1928 was Chairman of Trustees, Hope
Lodge. He is interested in cricket and
football. Home address: 12 Fourth
Avenue, Flelmsdale. Founder of the
Centenary Lodge of Past Grand M.U.,
founded in January, 1911.
PAST COUNCILLOR JOHN JAMES
CLARK, J.P.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at North Gumeracha, 1860, and
educated at the North Gumeracha
State School. Two years’ service in
the Unley City Council as Councillor.
A resident in the Unley District for
about 35 years. President of the Ed-
wardstown Institute for several years.
Mr. Clarke took an active and keen in-
terest in'promoting healthy recreation
for the Mitcham Camp Troops during
the war years. He was also a Council-
lor for three years in the St. Peters
Corporation, and five years Chairman
and two years Councillor in the
Marion District Council. Sport, cricket.
PAST COUNCILLOR B. A. TUCKER.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Adelaide, December Ist,
1879. Educated at Norwood Public
School. He served as Councillor for
Fullarton Ward in the Unley City
Council from 1912-14, and was for 33
years a resident of the District. In
business he is a Master Plumber and
Contractor. For 40 years he has been
a member of the Grand United Order
of Oddfellows, and a Past President.


■HIP
j^h
HH ' ■ |||P®J |$||||
«pi« jfJ'jM
:V~^
v . W|
* •" v^i
\ v;-}J;
He joined the Masonic Lodge in 1907,
and has been connected with the Blue
Mark, Royal Arch Chapter, Knight
Templar, Rose Croix Chapter, and the
Provincial Priory of Knights Templars.
In 1890 he was a member of C Battery
Garrison Artillery. Mr. Tucker served
in the South African War with the
sth Imperial Bushmen's Corps, Com-
manding Officers being Major Scriven
and Capt. Watts. He is one of the
foundation members of the South
African War Veterans' Association,
and has been Assistant Secretary for
12 years. On resigning he was made
a full life member for services ren-
dered to the Association.
PAST COUNCILLOR WALTER ERSKINE
ELLIS.
(Unley City Council.)
Mr. Ellis was born in England in
1868, and arrived in Australia in 1879.
He served in the Council for six years
(1910 to 1916), and has been a resident
in the District for 35 years. He is out
of business. A member of the Masonic
and Rechabite Lodges, and his sports
are bowls and cricket.
PAST COUNCILLOR FREDERICK
WALSH.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Bolton. Lancashire, Eng-
land, 6th June, 1867, and educated at
private schools. Arrived in Australia
in 1881. Four years’ service in Coun-
cil and 25 years a resident of the
District. Mr. Walsh is Vice-President
of the Employers’ Federation and L fe
Vice-President of the Clothing E t-
ployers’ Federation. He has been or
50 years a Methodist local preach r.
He is a member of the Masonic Ord r,
and is in business as a tailor, 33a Ki ig
William Street. Flis sport is crick d.
Home address: 87 Cambridge Terra :e,
Malvern.
PAST COUNCILLOR WILLIAM MA (
HICKS, J.P.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Scilly Islands, off Corny 11.
England, January 30th. 1862. Educa ed
at Scilly Island Public School. And ed
in Australia, October, 1879. Five ye rs
Councillor Unley City Council, die
year Councillor Glenelg Corporation,


|||| J
JH :«. -■"'" 4
j
K "wii
anfl six rears Councillor and Chairman
Ma ion District Council. A Justice of
tlx [Race since 1888.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM MORRIS
HARRELL, J.P.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Crystal Brook, 20th April,
1894, and educated at Snowtown
Public School, Adelaide School of
Mines, Hayward’s Academy, and Mel-
bourne Technical College. Mr. Har-
rell has represented Unley Ward in
the Unley City Council for nine years,
and has been a resident of the Dis-
trict for 25 years. He is Chairman,
or Acting Chairman, of a large num-
ber of Committees on the Unley
Council: has been 12 years Treasurer
of the 3rd Light Horse Regt. Club,
16 years Captain of the League
of Frontiersmen Rifle Team, Vice-
President of Sturt B Football Club,
and Unley City Orchestra. He is the
officer commanding Adelaide Squadron
Legion of Frontiersmen, ex-President
of the Unley Sub-branch of the R.S.
and 5.1.L.A., and a Past Arch of the
U.A.O. Druids’ Lodge. Mr. Harrell
served abroad with the 3rd Light
Horse Regiment during the Great War,
and has had 20 years’ Military Ser-
vice, reaching the rank of qualified
Lieut.-Colonel. Address : 35 Edmund
Avenue, Unley.
COUNCILLOR KEITH THORVALD
ALEXANDER BENTZEN.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Gulgong, N.S.W., 7th
November, 1896, and educated at Gul-
gong and Sydney, N.S.W. Mr. Bent-
zen has served in the Unley City
Council for five years, and has been
10 years a resident of the District.
He arrived in Adelaide in August,
1926, on appointment as Manager of
the Western Assurance Co. for South
Australia. He is a representative of
the Unley City Council on the Park-
side and Eastwood Institute Com-
mittee, Vice-Chairman of Fire and
Accident Underwriters' Association of
South Australia from 1935-6, and was
President of the Legacy Club in 1932,
and a Worshipful Master of Masonic
Lodge, St. David, in 1934. He is a
member of the undermentioned Clubs:
Legacy, Stock Exchange, Common-
wealth, Returned Soldiers' Imperial
League, and Royal Adelaide Golf
Club. Mr. Bentzen served in the
Great War with the first Infantry
Battalion. His sports are golf, swim-
ming, and fishing. Present address: 8
Jenkins Avenue, Myrtle Bank.


.4tfSfr. ■>
tBL
$£&¥'' V'V’;
jHH
\t $L ''" '*•
iIhF *
HppB| ■
— Mmkr mm
■ - *■- i
iMk \ A „ Bll
I &/#<
?%,- ■
ip - J»l Mam*
'- *dk
COUNCILLOR HENRY STEPHEN
DUNKS, M.P.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Hartford, England, and edu-
cated at Dookie, Victoria. Five years
service in Council as Councillor for
Parkside Ward and 25 years a resi-
dent of the district. Mr. Dunks is in
business as director of several com-
panies, and also a Member of Parlia-
ment (House of Assembly). His sport
is golf.
COUNCILLOR FREDERICK VINRACE
FEARN.
(Unley City Council.)
Mr. Fearn is the oldest son of Thomas
Edward Fearn. of Burnside. Fie was
born in Victoria, and educated at Kyre
College. At present he is serving his
second term as Councillor for Ful-
larton Ward in the Unley City Coun-
cil, having been a resident of Fullar-
ton practically all his life. In busi-
ness Mr. Fearn is a merchant, repre-
senting the Neuchatel Asphalte Co.,
Ltd., of London. He is a Freemason,
being a member of Lodge St. David,
and his sporting interests cover
cricket, football, and tennis.
COUNCILLOR CLAUDE FREDERICK
PAGE, J.P.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Adelaide on 6th November,
1894, and educated at Grote Street
Public School. Mr. Page was elected
Councillor for Goodwood South Ward,
Unley City Council, in November,
1932, and has been a resident in the
District for 16 years. He is Secretary
of the Local Branch of the Lord
Mayor’s Relief Fund, Secretary
of the \ .0.C., Secretary of the Good-
wood South Progress Association, and
President of the A.R.U. Business:
Yard Overseer, Railway Workshc s,
Islington. A member of Masonic aid
Druids’ Lodges. Five years’ A.M C.
War Service in Australia, and enlisted
in 1914, but was rejected for act’re
service. Mr. Page was Sergeant in
charge of Surgical Wards, Kesw':k
Military Hospital, and also opened the
No. 6 Infectious Diseases Hospital in
1916. He was Officer in Charge m il
1917. Hi s sport is cricket.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM FREDERIC £
PERCY HUTTON.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Mintaro, 2nd October.
1877, and educated at public scho> Is.
I hree and a half years’ service in
Council, and a resident of the Dist ct
lor 34 years. Business: Grain broker.


* i H
«® \jmm :
& f '«|f:
■
\ '
\ ■■■
.
Wk 45i flj
*V v*r 4jBfl|
A member of the A.N.A. Lodge,
Goodwood. Sports: Cricket, rifle
shooting, golf in the winter months,
and is a successful competitive player
of bowls, being a member of the South
Park Bowling Club.
COUNCILLOR SAMUEL GILD.
(Unley City Council.)
Was born at North Croydon, 23rd
October. 1891, and educated at Grote
Street Public School, A.S. and B.T.
Academy, and S.A. School of Mines.
First elected as Councillor for Good-
wood Ward, January, 1933. Re-
elected July, 1935, for a further 2
years. Chairman of Parliamentary
and By-laws Committee, and served on
all other Committees. Represents
Unley City Council on Goodwood Re-
creation Grounds Association, also
Wavville Institute. Chairman Parents’
Committee 2nd Unley Group of Boy
Scouts and Cubs since 1932. Mem-
ber of the Executive Committee of
the Adelaide Hebrew Congregation
since 1931 Councillor Gild served
abroad with 32nd Infantry Battalion
from January, 1916, to August, 1919.
Business, Engineering Surveyor, En-
gineer and Water Supply Depart-
ment. A member of Freemasons
Lodge of Faith, No. 9, and Irene
Lodge, 1.0.0. F. Member of the Way-
ville Vigilance Committee and Good-
wood West Progressive Association.
He his fond of tennis.
COUNCILLOR GEO. W. ILLINGWORTH,
J.P.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Shipley, Yorkshire, Eng-
land, 27th February, 1877. Arrived at
Sydney in 1893, and Adelaide in 1898,
under engagement as Secretary to
"The Critic" Proprietary Limited,
which position he held for over 25
years. For 15 years he has repre-
sented Goodwood Ward as Councillor,
four years as Alderman, and Mayor
of the City from 1925 to 1927. A
Justice of the Peace for 35 years. A
Fellow of the Australian Institute of
Secretaries. He is President of the
Master Process Engravers of South
Australia. On the Executive and
member of the Council of the Boy
Scouts' Association. Mr. Ulingworth
is Vice-President of the Unley Branch
D.T.N.S., Managing Director A. and
S. Advertising Company, and a mem-
ber of various lodges. He is President
and Vice-President of several sport-
ing bodies, and has unsuccessfully
contested seats for State and Federal
Parliaments as an Independent.


~'%. «'w
■ . . i
.-•: * ’ - , • I
• *"* a»Mp.3
PHSHBH /|E^
■-c , s V*
JK SR|. *v\* *
lii
m - ■ I
/ ; JT '
I1 #. \
SBmg; v . m§ m f Jfc£\w »h®' : -1
m I / J iff
M I * j™ / *
COUNCILLOR FREDERICK WILLIAM
LINN.
(Unley City Council.)
Born at Meningie, Lake Albert, 1880,
and educated at Meningie and Strath-
albyn Public Schools. Mr. Linn has
served in the Unley City Council for
one year, and has been a resident of
the District for 25 years. In business
he is a Storeman, S.A. Tobacco Co.,
Ltd. He is a member of the Recha-
bite Lodge, and his home address is
18 George Street, Clarence Park.
COUNCILLOR JAMES EMLYN
ROBINSON.
(Unley City Council.)
Mr. Robinson was born at New
Jersey, U.S.A., on March 28th, 1864,
and educated at Donnughmore, County
Wicklow, Ireland. Arrived in Austra-
lia in October, 1878. He served in the
Unley City Council for two years
when Unley was proclaimed a city, and
is now serving" his second term. In
business he is Secretary of Master
Butchers, Ltd. Lodges : A member of
the Loyal Albion Lodge, 1.0.0.F.M.U.,
P.N.A.; Rose of Adelaide ; Sons of
Temperance; Chairman of Grand
Trustees, Duke of Leinster Lodge,
363, 1.G., P.M., P.K.; Royal Arch
Chapter, P.S.A.P.G.L. of Ireland; Pre-
ceptor Knight Templar and NAV.
Rose Croix, 180. A life member of the
Methodist Church, a foundation mem-
ber of the Parkside West Church,
Sunday School, C.E. Society. Local
preacher since 1890. Filled all lay-
man s offices in church, and at present
a circuit steward. He is a Fellow of
the Australasian Institute of Secre-
taries, and a member of the Licensed
Land Brokers and Auctioneers' Asso-
ciation, Incorporated.
JOHN BARROWCLIFF MILLER,
Town Clerk.
(Unley City Council.)
Mr. Miller is the present Town
Clerk and Secretary of the Local
Board of Health for the City of Unley.
He was born at Fullarton, in the Cor-
poration of Unley, on December 23rd,
1866. He was educated at public
schools in Adelaide, Glen Osmond, and
Burnside, and at Pulteney Street
School. In December, 1880, a vacancy
lot a junior occurred in the office of
the Unley Corporation, and he was
appointed to the position. He filled
various posts until he was promoted
Assistant Town Clerk, which position
he occupied until the death of his
father, who held the position of Town
Clerk and Surveyor of Unley for 25
years. On October 12th, 1903, he was
appointed Town Clerk, etc. Mr.


& *Br ■ I
'ikm
9
%fli -iSm* ' i ■■•'
iffo'
■ F MW* 'tli ' Ik
j ; '
1
*S9Khv 1 itjv 1 *
pl : b
\v|
*.lt \
Miller has been through the chairs of
the G.U.0.0.F., being a Past Grand
Master of the Order. In his eighteenth
vear he joined the Infantry Corps,
S.A. Militia Forces, was Colour Ser-
geant of a company for several years,
and soon became a crack rifle shot.
After eleven years’ service with the
Infantry he received his discharge, and
joined the Field Artillery, but resigned
on obtaining the rank of Corporal,
owing to pressure of official duties.
He was Secretary and librarian of
the Unley Institute for some time
after its establishment. Mr. Miller is
the President of the Focal Govern-
ment Officers’ Association.
DR. HERBERT HENRY ERNEST
RUSSELL, 0.8. E., V.D., M.D.
(Adel.), F.R.C.P. (Edin.).
Medical Officer of Health for the City of
Unley.
Son of the late James Thomas Rus-
sell, of Unley. Born at Adelaide. 28th
October, 1875. Thirty-five years a
resident of Unley. Thirty years Medi-
cal Officer of Health. Dr. Russell was
educated at Prince Alfred College,
Adelaide, and Melbourne and Adelaide
Universities. He was Colonel in the
Army Medical Corps, and a principal
Medical Officer during the Great War.
He recieved the distinctions of 0.8. E.,
and V.D. He is B.M.A. Representative
the Medical Board of South Aus-
tralia, B.M.A. Representative on the
Metropolitan Infectious Diseases Hos-
pital Board, and District Surgeon of
St. John's Ambulance Brigade (over-
seas), State Controller of Voluntary
Aid Detachments of S.A., and Consul-
ting Obstetrician to Queen's Home,
Rose Park, Past President of the
British Medical Association, and Presi-
dent of the Royal British Nurses' As-
sociation, South Australia. Home ad-
dress : Unley Road, Unley.
THE LATE DR. ALFRED EDWARD
JAMES RUSSELL, M.8., Ch.B., Adel.
Dr. A. E. J. Russell was the eldest
son of the late James Thomas Russell,
of Unley. He was born at Adelaide,
15th February, 1870, and educated at
St. Peter's College and Adelaide Uni-
versity. He graduated in the first
class in the final year for the degree
of M.8., Ch.B. He was House Sur-
geon at the Adelaide Hospital in 1894,
Medical Superintendent in 1895, and
Officer of Health for the City of
Unley from 1900-03. Dr. Russell cap-
tained the South Australian Inter-
state Lacrosse team in 1893 and 1894,
and captained the Adelaide University
team for many years. Dr. Russell
died in 1903 in his 33rd year.




The Corporation of Brighton
HISTORIC PINES, SEACLIFF.


The History of Brighton.
Ihe written history of Brighton begins about 1837,
when Colonel Fight, in examining the country round about
where our town now stands, recorded that its fine, dry
situation, with a plentiful supply of good water obtainable
at a shallow depth, eminently fitted it as a site for a con-
siderable town. The unwritten history of the locality,
however, goes back to far distant times. In all the lime-
stone cliffs south of Brighton are to be found a great
variety of fossil shells, pointing to the great changes that
have taken place in the bed of the sea. The rocks on
the hillsides above the cliffs near Hallett’s Cove were
found by Professor Tate some 50 years ago to bear unmis-
takable evidence of the great glaciers that ages ago slowlv
made their way from the mountains to the sea.
In the course of time the climate improved, and the
country gradually came to be the happy hunting ground
of aborigines; and in the hills south of Marino are to
be found flints fashioned by the natives for preparing
their weapons, opening shell fish, and the many other ser-
vices for which a sharp flint served the purpose of a knife.
\\ hen Colonel Light explored the Adelaide plains
southward to the foothills, now known as Marino, he
found excellent pasture land dotted over with gum trees,
sheoak, clumps of wattle, and occasional patches of bush.
The trees were the homes of cockatoos and parrots,
through the high grass hopped wallabies, and in the water-
holes wild geese and black swans found a happy retreat.
To the pioneers it called up memories of an old English
park, and to some of them one of the most charming places
of all was where the plains gradually rose up to the rolling
hills which came down to meet the curving coastline of
Marino,
The land about Brighton was surveyed in 1838 and
allotted in 1839. In the following year several sections
were surveyed into allotments and named Brighton by
Matthew Smith, and the Colonial Secretary’s return that
year shows two dwellings in old Brighton, and an inn,
hotel, and fashionable bathing establishment at Marino.
Of interest among the early homesteads is the former
residence of George S. Kingston, a prominent legislator,
who was afterwards knighted. The old-time vineyard and
wine cellar have disappeared, but much of the original
building and its fireplaces can be traced in the “Kingston
Park Hostel” of to-day. Another interesting old home
is “Seacombe,” built by Edward Stephens, South Australia’s
first banker. The beautiful old cedar doors were destroyed
by fire some years ago, but the greater part of the old
cedar fittings and an ancient sun-dial remain. Another
notable home was that of Michael Featherstone, until re-
cently owjned by members of the Hackett family. In order
that he might be buried within the sound of the sea, Air.
Featherstone had a vault built on the sandhills near the
sea frontage of his property, and after nearly a century
the marble tablets on the vault are still decipherable. One
of the outbuildings of the Blind, Deaf, and Dumb Institu-
tion was in days gone by the Grace Darling Hotel, from
where coaches daily left for Adelaide.
In the early forties two of Brighton’s industries were
whaling and smuggling. The smuggling chiefly comprised
tobacco and spirits, which were landed by American whal-
ing ships at Kangaroo Island, and when a suitable oppor-
tunity offered, transferred to some of the bays along the
coast from Glenelg to the mouth of the Onkaparinga.
In the “Southern Australian,” of 8/10/1841, the follow-
ing news item appears :
“One night last week a cargo of smuggled spirits, etc.,
was landed on the beach near Brighton. Mr. John
Anthony, the Officer of Customs at Glenelg, obtained in-
formation of the circumstances, and was on the alert, but
having no boat’s crew he could not succeed in seizing the
property, or preventing it being landed. A search was
made in the various houses in the district next morn-
ing, but without effect. In our opinion, nothing is more
urgently required than a good boat’s crew and a fast sail-
ing cutter being stationed at Glenelg to protect the revenue,
as well as to take the mails out of vessels coming up the


- ■ - ■ —
gulf, and prevent runaways leaving the Colony, as they
do at present, there being no means to prevent them."
Captain Tolmer, in his reminiscences, mentions hunt-
ing down smugglers in 1843-1844, and gives an account of
getting the Customs boat out from Glenelg with its crew,
Phillip Levi, to chase down a whaleboat re-
ported to be running contraband; but after they had pulled
to Hallett's Cove they concluded they were "a day behind
the fair."
mill, for sea breezes were regular, and the best of water
obtainable at a shallow depth.
Another early settler was Edward Stephens, who, in
1844, was living in the fine old house known as “Sea-
combe.” Stephens came by the “Coromandel” in 1837, in
the capacity of cashier and accountant to the South Aus-
tralian Company’s Bank, bringing with him a portable
banking house and iron chests containing the capital of
the bank, amounting to £lO.OOO. He and his wife first lived
FORESHORE, SEACLIFF.
There is a very old building close to Jetty Road, on
property now owned by Mrs. Bridgland, which old resi-
dents claim was used by the smugglers of those early
days. Of old Brighton identities in the early forties,
Adams, old John Beer, and Nat. Thomas were well known
whalers. A few bones are still preserved in Mr. Grundy’s
garden of two large whales that were stranded on Brigh-
ton beach in “the earlies.”
With the changing times, farming became general
Tom the seashore to the foothills. Harvesting was a busy
time round Brighton and Marion, and many excellent crops
were grown. Nearly every farmhouse soon had its wind-
in a tent at Holdfast Bay, and the story is told that when
he was away in Adelaide his wife used to sit in fear and
trembling on the chest containing the capital of the bank.
When, a few years later, the company's bank became the
South Australian Banking Co., Edward Stephens became
its manager. In the critical days of 1841-4 he showed
marked ability in regard to finance. He became a mem-
ber of the Legislative Council, and subsequently returned
to England in 1855.
Of the early settlers, Henry Highet was one of the
first. He, with his wife and nine children, arrived in the
"Lady Lelford" in 1839, and took up land at Brighton.


T
, I J- j|
| *«p -|l | »
•? *® ..J|l- '*5^8
After farming ac other localities for a few years, he re-
turned to Brighton, where he died in 1893 at the' age of
nmet}. 1 1 ior to his death the family was represented by
five generations. Mr. Highet built "The Thatched Cot-
tage 111 1847. It consisted of three or four rooms, and
was built of "piesse," a method of utilising compressed
down. It was afterwards rebuilt, and with many altera-
tions and improvements became "The Thatched House
Tavern." Early this year it was rebuilt and a second storey
added by the present owner, Mrs. M. Leahy. The hotel is
now known as the Hotel Brighton. A second hotel, Ihe
Australia, was recently opened by Mr. Jim Handby.
FORESHORE, BRIGHTON.
friable earth invented by Mr. Piesse, an early colonist.
When finished, a licence was granted Mr. Highet on March
17, 1847, who held it until 29/3/1848, w,hen Thomas Jelf
became the landlord. He in turn was succeeded by Wil-
liam Voules Brown on 19/3/1851, who rebuilt it as a two-
storey house on the old site, calling it "The Thatched
House." Under Mr. Brown's capable management the
house greatly prospered, but on 14/3/1857 it was burnt
Anglican church services were first held in “The
I hatched Cottage.” On 16th December, 1885, Lady Fox
\ oung laid the foundation stone of the present church.
Wesleyan services were first held in a dug-out roofed with
an upturned boat. Later on a change was made to a house
of mud and thatch, and in 1848 a shingle-roofed chapel was
built on Sturt Road, of which no trace remains.
In the late seventies a railway line was built from


Glenelg to Marino, which for much of the distance followed
the beach. Shifting sand led to accidents and constant
expense, and the scheme was abandoned. Remains of the
old station at Marino can still be traced on the flat a little
south of the two large pine trees known as “Charlie” and
“Paddy.”
With the opening of the new railway line from Good-
wood to Willunga, Brighton began to change slowly from
an old-world hamlet to a modern seaside resort, but still
retaining, owing to its favoured situation, an unusual share
of natural scenic beauty.
Several transport services have been in operation to
connect the town with the city. In addition to the coast
railway the Somerton transport served the northern por-
tion of the town and Glenelg, and the Brighton Tram-
way ran from Miller’s Corner, Glenelg, to the Broad-
way at Brighton. In 1913 the railway from Brighton
to Adelaide was opened, and this commenced a new era
in the Town’s history. Land sales and building imme-
diately began to boom, but this was checked during the
period of the Great War. Since 1919 the Town has pro-
gressed beyond all recognition. Many valuable residences
have been erected. Very fine roadways have been con-
structed, including the drive along the sea front over a
distance of two miles.
The population of the Town is approximately 6,000,
while there are 1,350 dwellings, besides public buildings
and institutions. The assessed value of ratable property
is £86,000, the capital value of which would be £1,750.000.
DELIGHTFUL WALKS.
Within easy distance, the rising hills beyond the golf
links at Marino provide entrancing views of coastal and
inland scenery. For those who like climbing over rocks
the coast can be followed right around to Black Point,
where the cliffs fall away to form Hallett’s Cove. An
easier way is to follow the train line to Hallett’s Cove
station, or take the train to that point, and then follow a
diagonal track to the beach. On the sea side of Black
Point is the Smuggler’s Cave, which had its hectic days
in the early forties. In the high ground above many fos-
sils may be found in the limestone layers. About half a
mile on the Brighton side of the Point is the celebrated
“Tate Rock,” while lower down, the pink cliffs have many
interesting geological features.
Other places of interest within easy walking distance
are the Brighton Cement Works, with the aerial rope-
way: the limestone quarries at Marino, the vineyards and
fruit gardens of Sturt and Marion, the old camping ground
of the Light Horse at Oaklands, with its fine old gum
trees, and the Sturt Gorge, with its picturesque moun-
tain stream.
In regard to local government, the District Council
of Brighton was one of the earliest, having been proclaimed
on 3/11/1853. It practically comprised the present areas
of the Municipality of Brighton and the District Council
of Marion. Major Thomas Shuldham O’Halloran was the
first chairman, and Francis Pearce the first District Clerk.
The Corporation of Brighton was proclaimed on
25/11/1858. Mr. F. C. Singleton held the Mayoral Chair
for the first two years, and was succeeded by Mr. G. W.
Chinner in 1860 and Mr. Jas. Counsell in 1861. The Council
Chamber has been the scene of many strenuous debates,
for the village fathers have sometimes not all been of the
same mind.
Many of the gleanings from records and reminiscences
serve to show that the country in and around Brighton
has. since the foundation of the Colony, played its small
part in the general progress of South Australia. Prior to
1836, on these plains, the native lived his primitive life
hunting the kangaroo and the wallaby. Then in pioneer
days came the cattle men to graze their stock on the long
grass, to be quickly followed by the farmers, who, in their
turn, have had gradually to make way for the fruit gar-
deners and the expanding needs of a growing seaside town.
A street of modern houses, with trim front gardens, has
its value: but of far more human interest are the old-
time homesteads. The farmhouse may have been con-
structed of mud and thatch and the windmill may have
been rather rickety, but there was much of romance in
making a home in the wilderness, and seed time and harvest
was a very different matter from what it is on a modern
farm to-day.


wm ;/; :
'■- ’^Kt*
■
W%&
• 3F , %:
••■ jk
Members of the present Council are :
His Worship the Mayor, Francis John Brown, J.P.
Aldermen—W . E. Hobbs, H. H. Handby, and C. Giltrap.
Councillors.—North Ward —R. H. Niehuus and K. B
Hewish.
Councillors.—Central Ward —M. Bruce and N. Opie.
Councillors.—South Ward—A. T. Greenshields and W.
Deer.
The Town Clerk (Mr. Albert Henry Sanders) is the
twelfth Town Clerk, and has held the office since the 13th
of April, 1916.
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF
BRIGHTON, FRANCIS JOHN
BROWN, Esq., J.P.
Born at Albert Park, South Aus-
tralia, 14th October, 1881, and educated
at Port Adelaide Public School. Ser-
vice in Council: Four years as Alder-
man and elected Mayor, July, 1936.
A resident of the District for four and
a half years, and has retired from busi-
ness. A member of Duke of Lein-
ster Freemasons' Lodge, No. 363,
1.C., and Independent Order of For-
esters. His sports are football,
cricket, shooting, and swimming, and
he is President of Brighton Swimming
Club. Mr. Brown is a Past Mayor of
Port Adelaide Corporation, and served
two years as Alderman and 16 years
as Councillor there, and was Chairman
of the Finance Committee, Port Ade-
laide Council; Delegate to Metropoli-
tan County Board; Representative of
Port Adelaide Council on State Arbi-
tration case in Sydney. He visited
England and Scotland in an honorary
capacity to report on Municipal mat-
ters and latest methods in road con-
struction. He has been a Justice of
the Peace for many years.
PAST MAYOR OF BRIGHTON, THE
LATE JAMES WALTER BALFOUR.
He was born at Young, N.S.W., on
12th December. 1875, and educated at
private and public schools, Alexander
Hamilton Business Institute, and the
International Correspondence School.
Five years’ service in the Council. He
was a resident of the district for 8
years prior to his death, and he occu-
pied the following positions in the
Council: —Councillor, Alderman, and
Mayor. He was a partner in the busi-
ness of C. A. Smith & Co., Consulting-
Mechanical and Electrical Engineers,
which was established in 1860. He was
for 35 years a member of the Masonic
Lodge and for 40 years a member of
the Rechabite Order; a member of the
International University Society; re-
presentative to Municipal and Dis-
trict Councils Association. He was
an orig'inal member of the committee
controlling technical education of Ap-
prentices of Engineering section for 16
years ; a foundation member of South
Australian Bands' Association; a
conductor of Adelaide Temperance
Brass Band, also Port Adelaide Tem-
perance Brass Band; played at Balla-
rat for cornet championship of Aus-
tralia; pupil of the late T. H. Jones,
Mus. Bac., Professor Elder Conserva-


* yr
■■-; Hr
>*^*^^ ? iJI
jm^jm
Hum. Mr. Balfour died at Brighton
mi 22nd January of this year after a
lort illness, and his death was greatly
mented by a large circle of friends
id the residents of Brighton.
PAST MAYOR IBRAHIM HAJJ
QURBAN.
(Brighton Corporation.)
Born at “El Shweir,” Mount Leba-
non, on 22nd January, 1869; educated
at Free Church of Scotland High
School, Mount Lebanon, and Ameri-
can University, Beyrouth. Arrived in
Australia, 4th April, 1892. Service in
Council: 3 years as Councillor, 5 years
as Alderman, and 1 year as Mayor of
Brighton Corporation. Eighteen years
a resident of Brighton. Business, Op-
tician. Lodges: An active member of
the Independent Order of Oddfellows
for 36 years, and he has attained the
positions of Grand Master and Grand
Patriarch of the Order, and Grand
Trustee for the last 15 years, 3 years
of which as Chairman he was respon-
sible for the purchase of Gresham
Hotel and Claridge House for the
society, which resulted in a very pro-
fitable investment. Mr. Ourban was
instrumental in widening streets in
Seaclifif by being the first to volun-
tarily give the necessary land as a gift
from several allotments of his for
that purpose. The Rotunda at Sea-
clifif was built according to his design,
and was constructed from parts of
Glenelg breakwater at his expense and
given as a gift to the Brighton rate-
payers.
THE LATE JOSEPH HADFIELD
GRUNDY.
(Brighton Corporation.)
Born at Salford, Manchester, Eng-
land, sth November, 1855 ; educated at
English Public Schools. He arrived
in Australia in 1877 as South Austra-
lian representative of P. Falk & Co.,
wholesale jewellers. Councillor for
Young Ward, Adelaide City Council,
1889-90; Alderman, City of Unley, and
Mayor of Brighton. The late Mr.
Grundy was one of the instigators of
the movement to connect Goodwood
and Brighton by railway. He estab-
lished in 1880 the business of Grundy
Bros., manufacturing jewellers and
importers. He was a lay reader of the
Church of England for 50 years; a
former President of the Justices’ As-
sociation. Pie also took a prominent
part in St. John’s Young Men’s Society
in the early days; was a committeeman
of Brighton Institute for many years,
and took a keen interest in the Boy
Scouts Association. Mr. Grundv died
on 10th March. 1934.
PAST MAYOR CHARLES JAMES
COVENTRY.
(Brighton Corporation.)
Born at Port Augusta, 25th May,
1879; educated at the Port Augusta
Public School and by private tuition.
Service in Council: Councillor, Decent-
bei, 1928-30; Alderman. December,
1930-31; Mayor. December, 1931-35.
He resigned office to accept a Magis-
tracy, and has resided in the district
for 17 years. He practised as ac-
countant and company secretary,
1900-5; was admitted to' Bar in 1911
and practised as Barrister and Solicitor


Sf®
HH %|: >.
k
'
jj|
m. I '
r,' %*i
Jr
till September, 1935, when he was
appointed Stipendiary Magistrate for
northern districts, S.A. He is fond of
tennis, swimming and shooting, but his
chief recreation is outdoor sketching.
Mr. Coventry is interest in the Youth
Employment Problem, and was 2 years
President of Young People's Employ-
ment Council, and is a member of the
Youth Occupation Council. Mr.
Coventry is also interested in litera-
ture and arts, and was for some years
President of the United Arts Club, and
is a frequent exhibitor of oils, water
colours, and pen drawings. Private
address, 18 Sea View Terrace, Brigh-
ton.
PAST MAYOR, THE LATE HORACE
GEORGE YOUNG.
(Past Mayor, Brighton Corporation.)
Born at Edwardstown, July 12th,
1888: educated at St. Peter's College
and Adelaide University. The late Mr.
Voting served 3-J years in the Brighton
Corporation as Councillor and Mayor.
His sports were athletics, horse rac-
ing", and rifle shooting. For many
years he was considered one of South
Australia's best athletes, and was a
son of the late Mr. PI. H. Young of
Edwardstown. The late Mr. Horace
Young was a man of leisure and de-
voted considerable time to sport in all
branches, of which he was held in high
esteem. He was especially prominent
in racing circles, and owned many
winners. He was a fine shot with a
rifle, and was a great bird lover. He
was President of the South Austra-
lian Athletic League for many years,
and he also proved himself to lie. an
enthusiastic and progressive munici
palist.
PAST MAYOR JOHN C. COMLEY, J.F
(Brighton Corporation.)
Born at Delamere. 15th June, 1866
educated at Glenelg Public Schoo
He has been Councillor, Aldermai
and Mayor, and sixty years a res.
dent of Glenelg. Business, Maste
Plumber. Member of the McDonne
Lodge, S.A.C., and Temple of Peact
M.U. Mr. Comley has frequently sa
on the Bench in Adelaide, Glenelg, ai
Brighton Police Courts. Home ac
dress, 2, John Street, New Glenelg.


:;- HBF
»® JBSi®
MM* BBk w -
' 4
'*&BP*-
ffj
III JB . - :>;
ALDERMAN HERBERT HARRY (JIM)
HANDBY.
(Brighton Corporation.)
Born at Adelaide, Ist September,
903; educated at Victor Harbour High
School. He has served in Council; 4
years as Councillor. 1 year as Alder-
nan, and has been a resident of the
listrict for 13 years. Business, Hotel
Proprietor. He is a member of St.
Leonard’s Masonic Lodge, President of
Seacliff Improvement Society, built
Seacliff’s largest guest home and cafe,
now a licensed residential hotel:
Chairman of Finance Committee,
Brighton Corporation. His sports are
football, cricket, tennis, and golf, and
' Vice-President of several sport-
ing bodies.
ALDERMAN WILLIAM EDWARD
HOBBS.
(Brighton Corporation.)
Born at Port Adelaide, 23rd April,
1888, and educated at Port Adelaide
and Broken Hill Technical College.
Service in Council: 2\ years Council-
lor, 2 years Alderman. A resident of
the district for 15 years. Business,
Branch Manager. A member of the
Oddfellows’ Lodge, Broken Hill. His
sport is tennis, and he played football
with various clubs at Broken Hill.
Ex-member of Glenelg School Com-
mittee. Private address, Byre Ave-
nue, Paringa Park, Brighton.
PAST COUNCILLOR DR. CLEMENT
VICTOR WELLS, J.P., M.8.,
BS.L.R.C.P. (Edin.).
(Brighton Corporation.)
Born at Adelaide, March 21st, 1877;
educated at Way College. Dr. Wells
was the Medical Officer of Health for
West Torrens District Council for 10
years, and Medical Superintendent at
the Adelaide Hospital for 3 years, 1908-
1911. He has practised at Laura,
Jamestown, and Yorketown, and held
all the medical positions in connection
with those bodies. He was a Sur-
geon Captain in the A.A.M.C. for many
years. In 1918 Dr. Wells embarked
as surgeon on the troopship "Takada."
His sports were cricket and football,
and he played with the Adelaide A
Grade Cricket Club. Private address,
289 South Terrace, Adelaide.
COUNCILLOR KENNETH BRUCE
HE WISH.
(Brighton Corporation.)
Was born at Oodnadatta, 31st July,
1900, and educated at Nailsworth Pub-
lic School and Adelaide High School.
He has served 1 year in the Council and
been 9 years resident in the district.
Business : Clerk, General Traffic Mana-


Hk «■
iiiiliH * jwi&^'Slaitjs
|j|
Bl ~*
E ~~
IL Jki
WBo| Jk%SK
||»- jfjm Mt ■
Hr w I jjH H
ger's Department, S.A. Railways.
Lodge, U.A.O.D. Delegate to Munici-
pal Association. His sport is tennis.
Private address, Parry Avenue, East
Glenelg.
COUNCILLOR ALEXANDER THIEM
GREENS HIELDS.
(Brighton Corporation.)
Was born at Kapunda, 26th Janu-
ary, 1897, and educated at St. Peter’s
College, Adelaide. Service in Coun-
cil, one year. A resident in the dis-
trict for 10 years. His business is a
Surveyor. He is a member of the
Brighton Masonic Lodge, No. 108,
S.A.C., and Independent Order of Odd-
fellows. His sport is tennis. He is
choirmaster of the Brighton Baptist
Church; a member of the Board of
Examiners for Surveyors. War ser
vice, 12 months General Reinforce
ments.
ALBERT HENRY SANDERS, J.P
(Town Clerk, Brighton Corporation.)
Born at Hawthorn, South Austra-
lia, 26th August, 1885, and educated
at Parkside Public School, Agricul-
tural School, School of Mines and
School of Design, Adelaide. Ten years
building practice, 5 years City Sur-
veyor’s Department, Unley City Cor-
poration. Twenty years Town Clerk
of Brighton. A resident of the dis-
trict for 20 years. Mr. Sanders is a
member of the Brighton Masonic
Lodge, No. 108, S.A.C., and Rechabite
Lodge. A Justice of the Peace for
South Australia for 16 years. Secre
tary of the Brighton Baptist Church
His sports are tennis and football.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM DEER.
(Brighton Corporation.)
Was born at Happy Valley on 9tl
December, 1878, and educated at Mis:
Lockwood’s O’Halloran Hill School
He has been a resident of the distric
for 40 years, and he is in business as t
Dairyman. He is a member of Seaclit
Lodge, U.A.0.D., Royal Arch Chapter
His sports are yachting and swimming
Mr. Deer is a member of 32nd Batta
lion Club, and member of Brighton Sub


*
• 4 BH
IB ||||
'**•***
■ >- ty|$jJ&l ■ *4r |
Jll
V iSpi 11
' ■ i ' tCm mS/M?? ' |ijfl
S i& &/w f -JM
V 13ft m •# H
■s f Ht r «#wifl'
jwbbpi ■-- - • *»w
m* ft*^
,.. • — x
branch of Returned Soldiers’ Club.
Served 3 years abroad with 32nd Bat-
talion in France and Belgium.
COUNCILLOR MONTAGUE BRUCE.
(Brighton Corporation.)
Born at Bridgewater, sth February,
1878, and educated at Bridgewater.
Three years' service in Council. A re-
sident of the district for 20 years.
Business, Clerk, G.P.0., Adelaide. A
member of the Rechabite Lodge.
Vice-President of the Brighton Insti-
tute, Chairman of By-Laws Committee
in the Council. Private address, 4,
Murray Street, Brighton.
COUNCILLOR RICHARD HARRY
NIEHUUS.
(Brighton Corporation.)
Born at Point Pass, 30th March,
1882, and educated at Pulteney Gram-
mar School. Service in Council,
years. Business, Licensed Valuer,
Land and Estate Agent. Member
of Masonic Lodge. His sports are
cricket, tennis, and bowls.




Corporation of Burra


Burra of the Five Hills
The Town of Burra, or rather, the five towns known by
that name, were founded in 1845, when the Burra mine began
operations. The five towns designated by the common name
are: Kooringa, Aberdeen, Redruth, Copperhouse, and Hamp-
ton. The name means “Great great.” It is one of the most
picturesque places in the middle north, lying about 102 miles
north of Adelaide. Kooringa is the largest and most populous
centre; it is about one and a half miles from the railway
station, which is in Aberdeen. As the traveller drives along
this road he sees many signs of the old mining industry. He
passes the old mine store with a residence attached, and where
the track leads off the main road up to the mine there is still
to be seen the ruins of workshops, miners’ cottages, and the
“open cut” where men toiled for treasures of the sod. On
the left there still stands the old smelter chimney, the silent
sentinel, bearing witness of fiery days long since gone. It
requires but little imagination to see huge columns of black
smoke belching forth from this stack, and the great black slag
dump, the scene of hot and incessant activity. But those
days are gone, and as the traveller enters the town along the
crescent-shaped street, he realizes that a great transformation
has taken place, and that the Bnrra is no longer a large and
prosperous mining district, but the centre of a thriving pastoral
and business enterprise. Opposite the Town Hall there is a
suspension bridge 186 feet long, over which troops of school
children scamper with reckless haste, causing it to swing and
heave ominously, but it is perfectly safe. Walking over the
derelict mine, one sees many objects of absorbing interest.
The “open cut,” which was once the metal heart of the mine,
is now a beautiful lake of emerald green 100 yards long. On
the top of the western bank there are deserted ruins—yonder
is the old engine house with the miner on the poppet-head with
pick and gad in hand, and the lamp on his cap. In another
direction there are the remains of the workshop, an old swing
crane, and the block where the blacksmith’s anvil stood. If
these things could talk, what strange tales they would tell!
It was in 1845 that the Secretary of the newly-formed
South Australian Mining Association (Mr. H. Ayers) adver-
tised for information respecting newly discovered mineral land.
A shepherd named Strear was in possession of a valuable
specimen which he discovered on land at the northern end of
Mr. F. H. Button's "Princess Royal" sheep run. Others,
however, were to share the honour of so rich a discovery
A bullock driver named Thomas Picket located an outcrop
of rich oxide of copper close to where Strear had made his
discovery. Immediately the Association got to work, and a
survey of 20,000 acres was made, and on September 20th, 1845,
the northern moiety— 10,000 acres—was granted to the com-
pany. The work began immediately. The great mass of red
ore was blasted out, loaded on to "bullock drays, and carried
to Port Adelaide, shipped to England, and when ass; yed
it was found to yield 30 per cent. Bullock teams were mobi zed
for transport purposes. \\ hen the mining industry was at
its height, as many as 600 teamsters would be punching along
6,000 to 7,000 bullocks. Later 011 hundreds of mules r ere
imported, and Spaniards to drive them, and most of the ore
was then carried to Port Wakefield. But this method of ti ans-
port, and the shipping of the ore to England for sme :ing
purposes, was slow and expensive. So it came about that in
1849 f atent Copper Company established a smelting works
in the vicinity of the mine. The families of some of the ge ltle-
men who came out under agreement with the Smelting C un-
pany aie still resident 111 the Burra. Mr. John Edwards the
father of Mrs. A. Baker, of Aberdeen), Mr. W. Woollacott
(whose family are well known), Mr. Henry Pinch (the f; her
of Mrs. Josiah I homas). 1 hese all arrived about the s tme
time. The advent of the Smelting Company much increased
the mine's wealth and productiveness, by handling the or 011
the spot, and also making possible the handling at a profit of
low ci gi ade 01 e. bor thiity-two years the mine was a scene
of gi eat activity, and did much to save the State 111 a tin. ■ of
great depression. The total ore product registered 23. ,648
tons, and it is said that it averaged 23 to 24 per cent., an 1 its
value was £4</49'-34- Upwards of 1,400 men were employed
011 the mine. The discovery of gold in \ ictoria caused a


npede of men from the Burra, and this made it very difficult
the mining company.
In 1877 the mine was getting down to a great depth, and
expense of bringing the ore to the surface was much
reased; this, with the decline of values in copper, caused
cessation of operations. Experts were in favour of
mg Morphett’s shaft, of 600 feet, in working order and
arting operations. It is the general opinion even now in
e Burra that unexplored treasure still lies beneath the sod,
( | w ill some day yield much wealth as a reward to man’s
:tivity and enterprise, but although the closing of the mine
r the towns very hard, they soon recovered. Men went on
the land, bred great flocks of sheep and cattle, and in a
v short time the Burra Sheep Market became one of the
ggest and busiest out of Adelaide.
It is the opinion of many sheep-owners that the Burra
strict stands alone in Australia for breeding the best Merino
s : :ep from a commercial point of view.
THE HIGHEST VALUE OF ALL.
Whilst it may be a fact that all the treasure has not been
c .lined from beneath the sod, and that the surface is produc-
ing vast wealth, these are by no means the chief value. I he
Burra has produced inestimable wealth in its manhood. Mr.
Philip Lane lived there in a time when leaders and men of
vision and strength were much needed, and all too rare. Lie
“stood in” to almost innumerable tasks of responsibility and
leadership, and the impress of his character and work is felt
in the town to this day.
He was the first Mayor, the first Chairman of the Hos-
pital Committee, and the first Chairman of the School Com-
mittee. His memory is revered and respected by all who knew
him.
Mr. Frederick Holder lived here for many years as the
proprietor of the local newspaper. A gentleman through and
through. As a statesman and leader he excelled. Later he
entered the Federal House, and became Speaker of the House
of Representatives.
Old residents of the Burra are fond of telling of the days
when the Burra Creek was a veritable burrow, where the
miners of the early days scooped out their homes in its banks
and dwelt there in comfort and even luxury with their families.
When the great rush took place in 1845 there was not sufficient
residential accommodation for the hundreds of miners who
flocked to the town. The clayey banks of the creek, 12 feet
high, offered a way out of the difficulty, and a way in to the
bosom of mother earth. Cave huts were dug out to as many
as six and eight rooms. It is said that the first two of these
were dug by the late Messrs. John and Robert Collins.
Others soon followed their example, and these subterranean
dwellings lined the bank of the creek for more than a mile.
Upwards of 2,000 people found a solution of the housing
problem in this primitive way. But in 1851 heavy rain fell,
and the creek came down a banker, and the cave dwellings
were flooded out and their contents washed away. After that
unceremonial and relentless eviction, the mining authonties
provided homes on the surface, and many of these are still
standing, and inhabited.
The whole of the Burra, including the five towns, was at
that time under the control of a District Council. Now the
three towns of Kooringa, Aberdeen, and Redruth are included
in the Burra Corporation.
The first meeting for the purpose of constituting the Town
Council was held on July 10, 1876. Those present were:
Philip Lane, George Sara, August Bartholomaeus, Robert
Sanders, Edward Lipsett, Joseph Roberts, and John Snell.
Mr. Lipsett acted as Clerk. The first minute passed by the
Council reads as follows:
“The Proclamation given under the hand of His Excel-
lency the Governor, Sir Arthur Musgrave, and Public
Seal of the Province at Adelaide on the 28th day of June,
1876, and published in the Gazette of Thursday, the 29th
day of June now last, Whereby (amongst other things)
it is proclaimed and declared that from date thereof the
several provisions of the Act No. 16 of 1861, as in such
proclamation are mentioned, shall extend and have legal
force and effect within the boundaries of the town of
Burra, set forth in the schedule thereof. That the in-
habitants of the said town shall constitute a body cor-
porate and politic by the name of ‘The Corporation of
the Town of Burra.’ That the said Town be divided into
three wards, viz., North Ward, Middle Ward, and South
Ward, according to the boundaries set forth in the schedule
aforesaid. That the said Philip Lane be the first Mayor
of the said Corporation. George Sara and August Bar-
tholomaeus be the first Councillors for North Ward,


Robert Saunders and Edward Lipsett be the first Conn-
lors for Middle Ward, and Joseph Roberts and John
Snell be the first Councillors for South Ward. That
Messrs. John Armstrong and George Woerner be the
first Auditors for the said Town.”
Mr. bhas Lowe was appointed first Town Clerk.
I he following list of Mayors will be of interest to many :
18/6-77 . . Philip Lane
■ . Edward Lipsett
- Dr. W. P. Nesbitt
1880—81 .. I’hilip Lane
1882-83 • • E. E. Lockyer
1884 • . Dr. Brummitt
j BB5 . . jno. Dunstan
J BB6 . . D. S. Packard
1887 . . F. W. Holder
1888-89 • • P. L. Killicoat
i B9° • • T. W. Wilkinson
1891-92 . . W. West
j 893 • • W. T. Rabbich
i 894 • • T. L. Killicoat
i 895~97 • • Dr. Brummitt
1898-99 . . Jno. Sampson
1900-02 . . E. W. Crewes
Mr. Alex Harris was elected Mayor in 1901, but unfortu-
nately he died before the first meeting.
1 9°3 • • Jno. Sampson
1904-05 • • J. E. H. Winnall
1906 . . Jno. Drew
1907-08 . . Dr. Sangster
1910 . . S. Burns
1911-13 .. Jno. McLaren
1914-19 . . E. W. Crewes
1920 . . S. M. Lane
1921-22 . . E. W. Crewes
1923-28 . . M. Collins
1929-30 . . A. B. Riggs
1931 to date . . T. H. Woollacott
Frequently, and especially on market days, one meets
people from Mt. Bryan, Iron Mine, Booborowie, World's
End, Black Springs, Hanson, and Farrell’s Flat, all gathered
to transact business in the Town. The chief business centre
(Kooringa) has a rather attractive appearance, by reascn
of what is known as “Market Square," a large open space with
several objects of interest in it. There is what in the ear y
days was known as “ I he A illage Pump,” a place for quenchi g
the thirst of animals; the owners of the animals would doubt-
less prefer a pump of another kind. The Square is also bea 1-
tified by a pretty little rotunda and a stately War Memorial
statue. The rotunda was erected as a memorial to the he
King Edward \ 11 after a meeting of townspeople had decid d
in favour of it on July 26th, 1910. It was opened on Februs y
3rd, 1911, by the ex-Mayor, Mr. S. Burns.


A JB J||»F Jig
4l ( 1
B
I f --
y ' %: I
% , JL ]
• - #
* lly!
3 WORSHIP THE MAYOR, THOMAS
HENRY WOOLLACOTT.
(Corporation of Burra.)
Born at Nelsontown, Burra, Ist Oc-
tober. 1882; educated at the Burra
Public School. Mr. Woollacott has
ved 14 years in the Burra Corpora-
tion, 7 years as Councillor and 7 years
as Mayor, and has been a resident of
the district for 48 years. He takes a
very keen interest in all matters in
connection with the welfare of the
town, many improvements being car-
ried out during his term of office. He is
a member of the Burra Institute Com-
mittee, Hospital and High School Boards,
Chairman of the Burra Centenary Com-
mittee, member of the Independent
Order of Oddfellows' Manchester Unity
Lodge, and takes an interest in all sports
that are of benefit to the town.
PAST COUNCILLOR W. C. SAMPSON.
COUNCILLOR GRAHAM HARRY DOW.
(Corporation of Burra.)
Born at Burra, 2nd January, 1894,
and educated at the State School and
St. Peter’s College, Adelaide. He has
lived in the district for 24 years, and
has been Councillor for West \\ ard in
the Burra Corporation for 3 years, and
is Chairman of the Finance Commit-
tee. A member of the Burra High
School Council, Hon. Secretary of the
Burra Sub-branch of R.S.S.I. League.
Inc., for 12 years. People’s \\ arden
of St. Mary’s Church, and organist for
14 years. Business, Public Account-
ant. Sports, tennis and golf. Mr.
Dow enlisted with the original 3rd
Light Horse Regiment, A.1.F., in
August, 1914, served on Gallipoli,
was wounded and invalided to England
and returned to the regiment and took
part in the suppression of the Senuisi
Rebellion in Epper Egypt. Served
throughout the campaign in Sinai and
Palestine and was discharged in I" eb-
ruary 1919. Home address, Kooringa.
COUNCILLOR JOHN ARTHUR RIGGS.
(Corporation of Burra.)
Born at Gawler, 22nd November,
1877; educated at the Burra Public
School. Six years’ service in Council;
56 years a resident of the district.
Business, Grazier. He is a member of
the Oddfellows’ Lodge, M.U., and of
the Burra Rifle Club. Home address,
Kooringa.


■y
' <' ' ' |
'
j&Sm
£tmx -r <1
COUNCILLOR HORTON JOSEPH
BARRACLOUGH JENNISON.
(Burra Corporation.)
Born at Fiji, 30th January, 1898:
educated in Fiji. Tasmania, and Vic-
toria. Arrived in Australia, 1908.
Five years’ service in Council: 17 years
a resident of the district. He is a Jus-
tice of the Peace. Past President
R.S.S.I.L.A. (Burra Sub-branch), past
member of the Burra Hospital Board,
member of the Show Committee,
steward of the Redruth Methodist
Church. Business, Tyre Specialist.
Lodges: Worshipful Master, Kooringa
Masonic Lodge, No. 6: J.O. Kooringa
Mark Lodge, No. 17, Ist Aus. S.
Kooringa Royal Arch, No. 9; member
of the Burra Bowling Club. He had
three years’ active service with the
50th Battalion, A.1.F., in Egypt and
France. Home address, St. Just
Street. Aberdeen.
COUNCILLOR ROY JOSEPH JEFFREY.
(Corporation of Burra.)
Born at Copperhouse, via Burra,
28th March, 1897: educated at Boo-
boorowie Public School. Three years’
service in Council; 39 years a resident
of the district. Business, Master But-
cher. Member of the Masonic and
M.U. Oddfellows’ Lodges. Sports,
football, golf, and horse riding. He has
won many prizes at the Adelaide Royal
and country shows. Home address,
Kooringa.
COUNCILLOR STANLEY KELLAWAY.
(Corporation of Burra.)
Born at Kooringa. 11th August,
1885; educated at the Burra Burra
Public School. Fifteen years’ service
in Council; 42 years a resident of the
district. Chairman of Public Works
Committee, Chairman of the Cycle
Club, member of the High School
Council, and Primary School Boa d.
Burra Hospital Board, Secretary of
the Relief Council. Business, Agent
of the S.A.F.U., member of the M A
Oddfellows’ Lodg'e. He played fo t-
ball for 10 years, was 20 years a fo t-
ball umpire, a cricketer, and now plays
bowls. Private address, Kooringa.
EDWARD JAMES DAVEY,
Town Clerk.
(Corporation of Burra.)
Born at Kooringa, 1869: educated at
Burra Public School. Twenty-fve
years service as Town Clerk. He las
been Town Clerk, Inspector Local
Board of Health, Secretary of ae
Ancient Order of Foresters’ Lode.
and Chairman Board of Mana e-
ment Burra Hospital. Sports, hot Is.
Mr. Davey’s son was killed at he
Great War in 1916,


' -
V ‘ ; _ ■ * *
Vlumcipality of Burnside
BURNSIDE TOWN HALL AND MUNICIPAL OFFICES, 1936


HISTORY OF BURNSIDE
Burnside was proclaimed a District on 14th August.
1856. The first Council comprised the following:—Dr. C. R.
Penfold, Chairman, Messrs. Wm. Milne, Daniel Ferguson,
John Townsend, and J. B. Austin, Jr. (records show
that J. B. Austin, Jr., never occupied a seat in the Council).
1 he hrst meeting was held at the Green Gate Inn, Green-
hill Road, Tusmore (now Linden Gardens), on 19th August
1856. ’
The boundaries of the District have been altered from
time to time, more particularly in the neighbourhood of
Kent Town, Waterfall Gully, and Greenhill Road. Kent
Town, now portion of the Town of Kensington and Nor-
wood, was taken out of the District in 1861, but since 1892,
when the last major alteration took place, the area has
included most of the South-Eastern suburbs of Adelaide,
being bounded on the North by Magill Road (formerly
spelt Mack Gill), on the West by the Park Lands (now
Victoria Park Racecourse), on the South by Glen Osmond
and Mount Barker Roads, and on the East by Waterfall
Gully and the lower slopes of the foothills.
Most of the District was included in Colonel Light’s
first survey of Adelaide, and several of his Trig, stations
were situated on prominent landmarks, such as Green Hill
and Mount Osmond.
It is on record that on December 28th, 1836, Colonel
Light spent the whole day on the slopes of Green Hill
sketching the Adelaide plains, and from there he watched
the “Buffalo,” with Governor Hindmarsh on board, coming-
up the Gulf.
It was this day’s work and observation which finally
decided him to select the site which he did for the City of
Adelaide.
Incidentally, it is interesting to note that Colonel
Light named the three prominent streams which flow
through the District —Green Hill Rivulet, Hallet Rivulet,
and Todd Rivulet. These names have fallen into disuse,
to be displaced by the much less euphonious titles, First
Creek, Second Creek, and Third Creek. Some of the earlv
landowners’ and settlers’ names are, however, perpetuated
in the naming of the streets and suburbs, such as Knox\ ille,
Frewville, Prescott Terrace, Penfold's Road, Ferguson
Square, Hallett’s Road, Davenport Avenue, Wyatt’s Road,
C leland Avenue, Hay Road, Barnes Avenue, Sandford
Street, Cowan Street, Goldsack Street, Newlands Road,
Fowler’s Road, Gilles Road, and Dunstan Avenue.
Some of the early homes built are as follows :
Sunnyside,” built by the late Sir A illiam Milne, in the
early fifties, now occupied by Mr. Ross Thie n.
Finnis Brook,” built by Dr. A yatt, in the forties, and now
occupied by Mr. Percy Ifould.
“Erindale,” now occupied by Mr. Alex. White.
Undelcarra,’ built by Mr, Simpson Newland, and now
occupied by Mr. A. A. Simpson.
Clifton, now occupied by Dr. M. Schneider.
“Tower House," now occupied by Mr. Tweedie.
A ooton Lea, built by Mr. F. H. Faulding and enk ged
by Mr. G. S. Fowler, now occupied bv Pn sbv-
terian Girls’ College.
Linden, built by Sir Alexander Hay, now occupie bv
Mr. Gilbert Wood.
“Romaic,” built by Mr. Longbottom in the fifties, now
occupied by Mr. Frank Young.
“Tusmore,” built by Mr. Richman, now occupied by Mr.
Norman Jackson.
Rename, built by Am. Bickford and rebuilt bv hos.
Graves, now occupied by Major Lance Lewis
“Glenholme,” built by the late C. L. Meyer in 1850 and
now occupied by Miss E, M. Meyer.


rrawee,” built by Mr. Malcolm, and now occupied by
His Worship the Mayor (J. A. Harper, Esq.),
medley,” built by the late Osmond Gillies in 1844, and
now occupied by Prof. C. H. Hicks.
>ver House,”
‘ illow Bank,”
ae Wattles,”
early days of the District, but which have since gone out
of existence, are the Wheal Watkins, Wheal Gawler, and
Glen Osmond Mines, at Glen Osmond; Hill’s Piggery, at
Knoxville; Slaughter Yards, at Tusmore; Ferguson’s farm,
at Toorak Gardens, and a Mill at Burnside, driven by a
water wheel on First Creek.
Farming, grazing, fruitgrowing, and other agricultural
OLD TOLL HOUSE.
Some of the old-established businesses which are still
in existence are :
Prescott’s Chaff Mills, established 1840.
Penfold’s Wines, Ltd., established 1844 by Dr. Penfold.
Stonyfell Vineyards, established 1858.
Cooper’s Brewery, established 1862, by Thos. Cooper.
Dunstan’s Quarries, established 1867 by Mr. H. Dun-
stan.
Davenport’s Olive Oil Works.
Stonyfell Olive Oil Co., established 1872.
Bennett’s Potteries, established 1888.
Among the industries which were prominent in the
pursuits were formerly carried on extensively, with which
are associated many well-known names, such as Prescott
Ferguson, Hill, Goldsack, Martin, Crompton, Davenport,
Treacy, Crane, Milne, and Gilles.
It is on record that in 1865, nine years after the
District was first proclaimed, 1,966 acres out of a total of
6,400 acres was under vines, wheat, or other agricultural
product.
The South Australian Company originally owned
Sections 262, 274, 275, 290, 291, 298, 299, 319, 320* 292, and
296, and took a prominent part in the early development
of the District and the subsequent laying out of such
suburbs as Rose Park, Dulwich, Toorak, Toorak Gardens,


Year.
Houses
Population
1865
215
1,472
1901
1,531
7,773
1911
1,839
9,416
1921
3,672
16,410
1933
5,957
23,685
1935
6,147
24,069
Y ear.
Assessment.
Rate Revenue
£
£ s. d.
1865
9,642
482 0 0
1880
14,085
707 5 6
1901
48,946
2,815 3 8
1911
60,093
3,915 15 8
1921
160,662
14,057 18 6
1935
340,535
31,585 13 6
Tusmore, Linden, Unden Park, Erindale, Leabrook, Upper
Kensington, and Knightsbridge.
These and other suburbs came into prominence as
residential areas rather late, in comparison with other parts
of Adelaide, and the remarkable development in suburban
home building has practically all occurred since the year
1900. The following population figures illustrate this very
clearly.
The assessment of property in the District has shown
a marked increase in the 80 years of its existence, as the
following figures reveal:
The latest assessment shows Burnside, following the
City of Adelaide and the City of Unley, to be the third
Municipality of the State.
Its destinies have been guided by the following Council
chairmen :
Dr. C. R. Penfold—l9th August, 1856, to 24th February,
1857.
Alexander Ferguson—2nd March, 1857, to Bth March,
1858.
Daniel Ferguson, 29th March, 1858, to 29th June, 1863.
C. R. Debney—2lst July, 1863, to 28th June, 1869.
George Soward —12th July, 1869, to 26th June, 18D.
James Smith, 31st July, 1871, to 27th May, 1872.
Henry Hughes—loth June, 1872, to 15th June, 1874.
E. W. Wright, 13th July, 1874, to 26th June, 1876.
Ebenezer Birkin—loth July, 1876, to 30th June, 1879.
Mark Goldsack— l4th July, 1879, to 27th June. 1881.
Geo. W. F. Cleland—llth July, 1881, to 25th June, 1883.
Edward Markey— 9th July, 1883. to 29th June, 1885.
Geo. W. F. Cleland—l3th July, 1885, to 26th June, 1894.
Joseph Rowe Osborn- —16th July, 1894, to 4th Septem >er,
1913.
Peter Wood —4th September, 1913, to 25th June, id s
Joseph Anthony Harper —Bth July, 1918, to 1935.
On the 16th May, 1935, the District was proclaimed a
Municipality, and the sitting Councillors elected Mr.
Joseph Anthony Harper (the then C hair man) to be the
first Mayor of'the Municipality. Aldermen were first
appointed in July, 1936.
The present members of the Corporation are (193 ( -i ) ■
A. W. F. Webb (Mayor), R. Walker, W. C. N. Waite.
W. J. Barker (Aldermen), J. A. Harper, W. C. Bennett,
W. E. Hardy, F. L. Parsons, J. R. Russell, P. A. Ohlstrom,
T. R. Mellor, S. A. Fisk, P. R. Claridge, A. R. Burnell
(Councillors).
The Council Clerks who have held office are a?
follows: —
Thomas Barnes —29th August, 1856, to 25th Ao\e ber,
1878.
John Miller—2sth November, 1878, to 30th September,
1879.
James Dominic Woods—3oth September, 1879, to 29th
September, 1913.
Ricardo Horace Steele—29th September, 1913, to 31st
March, 1934.
Henry Eoin Sydney Melbourne, Ist April, 1934, to late
In August, 1869, the Council built an office and Cc-inch
Chamber on Burnside Road, Burnside, which seme the
needs of the District until March, 1928, when the pi isent
premises at Greenhill Road, Tusmore, were first occ pic
There are now 120 miles of surveyed roads in the area,
about 90 of which are formed and metalled, practically all
of them being surfaced with bitumen.
There are 12,000 trees in the streets of the Municipality,
most of them having been planted in the last ten ears
The Council has land and building property valm dat
£25,000, and plant valued at £3,000, and there ar nov
71 employees on the staff. There are in the area nun erous
reserves, parks and gardens, mostly under the control f the
Council, the more important being Kensington Oval
Waterfall Gully Reserve, Hazelwood Park, Tusmore Park,
and Kensington Gardens.
Kensington Oval is situated on Halton Terrace.


ensington Park. The Oval was originally purchased by
e Kensington, Cricket, Football, and Athletic Association,
d held by five trustees. The land was purchased in 187-1,
ie purchase price being £6OO. The Oval was held by the
rustees until January, 1888, and during that period many
n provements, including a pavilion, well and windmill, etc.,
vas erected. In that year, at a public meeting of rate-
pavers of the District, held on the 7th January, the District
ments have been effected.
WATERFALL GULLY RESERVE.
This Reserve is situated at the head of Waterfall Gully
and contains many scenic attractions. The rugged beauty
of the area has been enhanced by the planting of trees, the
construction of walks and the erection of a picturesque
kiosk. This is one of the National Pleasure Resorts con-
FERGUSON SQUARE, TOORAK GARDENS, 1936.
Council of Burnside was authorised to negotiate for a loan
of £2,000, secured on the rates, for the purchase of the
Kensington Oval. At a further meeting of ratepayers, held
on the 21st August, the Council was authorised to declare
a special rate of IJd. on the assessment of the District, as
a security for the loan for the purchase of land known as
the Kensington Park Oval. The arrangements for the
purchase of the Oval were completed in December, 1888,
and the Council then decided to lay down an asphalt bicycle
track, which, when completed, was the largest of its kind
in Australia. The Oval is now held on lease by the
Kensington Cricket Club, and many additional improve-
trolled by the Tourist Bureau, and is a very popular picnic
and pleasure ground,
HAZELWOOD PARK, BURNSIDE.
This Park was purchased by the Government as a
National Pleasure Resort, and is maintained in its native
state, as an example of the early Adelaide plains.
TUSMORE PARK.
This area was purchased by the Council in 1923, and
has been improved by the construction of Tennis Courts,
Croquet Lawns, and Children’s Playground.


KENSINGTON GARDENS.
This area was formerly controlled by the Municipal
Tramways Trust, and was established in 1917, when
Kensington Gardens suburb was laid out. 1 he Burnside
Council took over the area in 1932.
Other small parks and reserves bring the total area of
public open spaces to 218 acres.
GLEN OSMOND INSTITUTE.
Mr. Arthur Hardy, owner of Birksgate, erected a room
on his property facing Mount Barker Road, opposite the
toll bar house, for use as an Institute, and at a meeting of
residents of Glen Osmond, held on the 12th August, 1854,
the officers of the Committee of Management were elected,
Mr. Hardy being first President.
The foundations of the present Institute Building, on
Glen Osmond Road, were commenced on the 14th October,
1876, by a novel competition between five quarrymen and
ten quilldrivers, and the foundation-stone was laid on the
9th June, 1877, by Miss E. L. Boothby.
The building was added to later by the erection of a
Reading Room and Library.
An Act for the Making and Maintaining of the Great
Eastern Road was assented to on- the 15th July, 1841. 1 lie
roadway (now portion of the Prince’s Highway, known as
Mount Barker Road) was constructed by the issue of bon is
on the security of the toll collected. The Toll Bar shown on
these pages was erected on the roadway; a hexagonal
building (still standing) was used as a residence by the
toll bar keeper. This arrangement continued until . h
September, 1844, when the road was placed under the c< i
trol of the Surveyor-General. The mortgage existing on
bonds at this time was £984. The practice of collect! ig
tolls continued until the end of November, 1847. It was
reported in the Legislative Council, when it was decided to
discontinue the collection of tolls, that the total expen li-
ture on the roadway at that date was £3,739.
On the 15th May, 1882, the summit of the Chimney
Hill, which had previously been laid out as residential si v,
was offered for sale as the Township of Mount Osmo d.
The sale was not successful, and in 1923 it was again s b-
divided, and a metal roadway constructed to the top of be
hill from Mount Barker Road. This venture was asn
unsuccessful. The property was subsequently purcha c<-
by the Mount Osmond Country Club, and an up-to-date [. olf
course has now been laid out on the site and an impos ng
Club House erected.


w :f; „ fr :>:^
III m
■r 9m
i Jt s
*
/
/
;is WORSHIP THE MAYOR, AMOS
WILLIAM FRANK WEBB.
(Corporation of Burnside.)
Born at Willunga, 16th July, 1886;
educated at Sturt Street Public School.
Eleven years’ service in Council, and a
resident of the district for 20 years.
He was Councillor for Eastwood and
Glen Osmond Ward in the Burnside
Corporation, representative on the
East Torrens Destructor Board and
the Municipal and District Councils
Association. Member of the Rose
Park Freemasons’ Lodge and Oddfel-
Manchester Unity Lodge;
Deacon and Trustee of Knightsbridge
Baptist Church. He is a member of
South Adelaide Football and
Cricket Clubs. Home address, 48 Kyle
Street, Knoxville.
JOSEPH ANTHONY HARPER, J.P.
Past Mayor and Present Councillor.
(Corporation of Burnside.)
Born at Woodstock, Oxfordshire,
England, 23rd November. 1867. Ar-
rived in Australia, January, 1875.
Educated in Queensland. Ser-
vice in Council: 24 years; Chair-
man 1918-1935, Mayor 1936, being the
first Mayor of the Burnside Corpora-
tion. Mr. Harper is also a Councillor
in the Adelaide City Council. He is
a Past President of the Chamber of
Manufactures, S.A., and Associated
Chamber of Manufactures of Austra-
lia; Vice-President of Employers’
Federation. Mr. Harper was Presi-
dent of the Parkside and Toorak
Bowling Club. He played cricket
when a younger man, and was captain
of the Wallaby Club for 15 years. He
now plays bowls occasionally, and won
the Parksicle Championship, besides
pairs. In business he is a Warehouse-
man. Home address, Glen Osmond.
THE LATE GEORGE FULLERTON
CLELAND.
(Past Chairman, District Council of
Burnside.)
Born at Taunton, Somerset, Eng-
land, 24th January, 1852, and arrived
in Australia in that year. Educated by
private tuition. He served 15 years as
Councillor in the District Council of
Burnside, twelve years of which he
was Chairman. He also served live
years in the Stirling' East District
Council as Councillor. He was first
President of the District Councils
Association of South Australia; was
President of the Vignerons’ Associa-
tion ; Member of the Government


• . ■ ? V ' ' ;v $*****
I
■ ‘ .v' I
; |i
M—————■———— —y *
I
Board of Agriculture; Member of the
Council of the Royal Agricultural
Society; Member and President of the
Chamber of Manufactures. He was a
member of the Emulation Lodge of
Norwood and Sir Samuel Way. of
Stirling, Masonic Lodges. The late
Mr. Cleland was held in great esteem
by the members of the Burnside Dis-
trict Council, and upon retiring (after
15 years' service) was presented with
an illuminated address by the Council
for his sterling services on behalf of
the ratepayers. He founded the firm
of Messrs. G. L. Cleland & Sons Ltd.,
Wine and Spirit Merchants, of Ade-
laide. The late Mr. Cleland died on
10th July, 1931.
THE LATE HENRY HUGHES, J.P
(Past Chairman, District Council of
Burnside.)
Born in Bedfordshire, England, 23rd
July, 1839, and arrived at Port Ade-
laide in the “Lord Stanley” on the
11th February, 1850. Educated at Mr.
E. W. Wickes’ School, North Adelaide,
who was afterwards Secretary to the
first Board of Education in this State.
The late Mr. Hughes was elected to
the Burnside Council on the 17th
July, 1871, representing Kensington
Ward. He was Chairman from 1872
to 1874. He also served the town of
Kensington and Norwood as Alder-
man and Mayor for a term, lie was
handicapper to the racing clubs of
South Australia for over forty years,
when his son, Mr. W. C. Hughes, was
appointed to the position rendered
vacant by his father, and Mr. W. C.
Hughes resigned in 1917 from the
position. The late Mr. Hughes was a
member of the Oddfellows and h©Tes-
ters’ Lodges, and he died on the 2nd
July, 1924, leaving three sons, Messrs.
H. A. Hughes, W. C. Hughes, and G.
E. Hughes; also two daughters, Mrs.
A. P. Birks, of Clare, and Mrs. F. S.
Bleechmore, of Rose Park.
THE LATE DANIEL FERGUSON,
J.P.
(Past Chairman, District Council of
Burnside.)
The late Mr. Daniel Ferguson,
accompanied by his wife, Helen, and
young family, arrived in South Austra-
lia on December Ist, 1838, from Scot-
land, bv the barque “Catherine Jame-
son.’’ He immediately took up farming
on the Gawler River, and in 1847 he
removed to Glenunga, where he had
“Glenunga House” built, and planted
the garden adjoining the residence,
which was occupied by members of the
family until 1919. He was the irst
Councillor for Glen Osmond \\ ar of
the District Council of East Torrens.
and subsequently Chairman of the
District Council of Burnside. The ate
Mr. Ferguson built a flour mill at ark
Terrace, Parkside, opposite the urt
Hotel, on the site of the resid nee
which is now known as Dr. Sweet-
apple's. He was chosen to go to ng-
land to select draught horses, ant re-
turned to South Australia per the sail-
ing ship "Time and Truth," with
Clvdesdale horses and brood m res.
on fulv 30th, 1855. He was founder
and first President of the Fan ers
Club; was President, and for a ong
time b ice-President, of the Agricul-
tural and Horticultural Society. He
was Elective Member of the Ce itral
Road Board from 1861 to the tin e of
his death. Mr. Ferguson was a ke-


[
J$ '* W
Jspf ' *
■■ *||Sfc3fe
.'iar
jr ' - _^/
H| jSjlP '% itlMljr
. ygK ® >.,
HK jr- - '
contributor to the “ Farm and
len.” In 1856 he obtained the first
for wheat grown on the plains.
President of the Glen Osmond
ute, and was given a public din-
on 2nd July, 1863. The late Mr.
vguson was born at Muirkirk on the
th of February, 1796, and he died at
enunga, South Australia, on the 26th
ay, 1864.
THE LATE DR. CHRISTOPHER
RAWSON PENFOLD, M.D.
(First Chairman, District Council of
Burnside.)
\\ as elected Chairman at the first
Council meeting of the Burnside Coun-
cil, held at the Green Gate Inn, Green
Hill Road, on August 10th, 1856. The
above gentleman was born in England
in 1812, and educated at English public
schools. The late Dr. Penfold was a
Doctor of Medicine with viticultural
hobby, and was the founder of the
present wine firm known as Penfold's
Wines, Ltd. Fie was a man of strong
personality, and was considered to be
one of England's best-looking men.
His sporting activities were riding,
fishing, and shooting. The late Dr.
Penfold Avas the grandfather of Mr. L.
Penfold-Hyland, of Penfold's Wines,
Ltd., Magill.
THE LATE MARK GOLDSACK.
(Past Chairman, District Council of
Burnside.)
Born at Glen Osmond in 1846, and
had been intimately connected with all
that concerned the welfare of Glen
Osmond. He represented Glen Os-
mond Ward in the Burnside District
Council for many years, for five of
which he was Chairman, and on retir-
ing was tendered a banquet by the
ratepayers in recognition of efficient
service. A most active member of the
Glen Osmond Institute for 53 years,
and for 23 years he was President. He
has been a trustee of the Institute, of
St. Saviour's Church, and chairman of
trustees of the Loyal Glen Osmond
Lodge, and vice-president of the Glen
Osmond Boys' Institute, and chairman
of the Ridge Park Recreation Com-
mittee from its inception until his
death, and an active worker in all
details.
THE LATE PETER WOOD.
(Past Chairman, District Council of
Burnside.)
Born at Angus Street, Adelaide, un


; ’ ■«%&&$&*
wbBB
JP®I 'llli? 1 ’'X
®| 5»
om | jpiB
M| -
• * BiiiiS
$£ IlM
MHBHM^' ,^r ‘'j^c
®K-Si_ * IP
1 '" J||| < ,|
I JfkL " . I
"'
I
I» . J|
w^BgSSwA
.*"■ v
;' : , - JS
I \ Mp
Slirsiiik' -* •
Wsr g
a '•! W i ’ ’■• I
Hi M S --
|U 'Jf , y
MS' - s 1 < f . .f*^-’ »&*
I; l lWBi i
22nd June, 1854. Educated at J. E.
Young's College, Adelaide, and Prince
Alfred College, Kent Town. The late
Mr. Wood was the eldest son of the
late Mr. Gilbert Wood, who founded,
the business of G. Wood, Son, & Co.,
wholesale grocers. Mr. P. Wood was
senior partner in the business on the
death of his father, and when the busi-
ness was later a limited company Mr.
Wood was chairman of directors. The
company established branches in
Western Australia and Broken Hill.
The late Mr. P. Wood served in the
Burnside District Council as Council-
lor from 1894 to 1918. He was for 42
years a resident of the district, and
was president of the 0.8.1., and was
also connected with the Y.M.C.A. and
the Boys' Brigade, and was on the
council of the Boy Scouts' Associa-
tion, a member of the Chamber of
Commerce Council, and also very
closely associated with Clayton Church,
Norwood, where he was a Deacon for
many years. One of the late Mr.
Wood's chief hobbies was the breed-
ing of Jersev cattle, and he had one of
the finest Jersey herds in S.A. He was
a member of the Masonic Order. The
late Mr. Wood died on the 21st
December, 1921, in his 67th vear.
ALDERMAN WILLIAM CHARLES
NIGHTINGALE WAITE, D.5.0., M.C., V.D.
(Corporation of Burnside.)
Born at Adelaide, Bth September,
1880; educated St. Bartholomew’s
Church of England School and Prince
Alfred College. Ten years’ service in
Council. Chairman of Town Hall
Committee. Business, Auctioneer and
Valuer, Trustee Building, Grenfell
Street. Fellow of Commonwealth In-
stitute of Valuers. Member of Real
Estate Institute. Member of the
Naval and Military Club. His sport
is tennis, and he is a member of the
Kensington Gardens Bowling and Ten-
nis Clubs. He served for 2\ years at
the Boer War, Ist S.A. Contingent,
with rank of Corporal, and the 6th
Contingent Imperial Bushmen Corps,
rank of Lieutenant; served 4 years at
the Great War, 3rd and 11th Field Ar-
tillery Brigades, A.I.F. He was
awarded D.S.O. and Military Cross,
and was three times mentioned in dis-
patches. Awarded voluntary officers
decoration for long service in Austra-
lian Military Forces.
ALDERMAN WILLIAM JOHNSTON
BARKER.
(Corporation of Burnside.)
Born at St. Arnaud, Victoria, 9th
November, 1876; educated at Cr swicl
Grammar School, Victoria. Ser ice ir
Council: 14 years. Seventeen y ;ars:
resident of the district. Chain an oi
Finance Committee, Burnside C >rpor-
ation, and various charitable odies
Business, Managing Director Hor-
wood, Bagshaw, Ltd., Eng neers
Member of the Masonic Lodge. Sport
bowls. Home address, 129. Grant
Avenue, Toorak.
ALDERMAN REGINALD WALK R, JP
(Corporation of Burnside.)
Born at Ararat, Victoria, - ugust
1878; educated at Pulteney Street
School and Sydney Church of E tglanc
Grammar School. Seven yeai V ser-
vice in Council. Chairman of the Park;
and Reserves Committee, and as re-
presented Council on various c mniit-
tees, associations, and school c uncils


HHp N '■ iT&.cff
x ■ ’
||I|l
jg
m/j;
>\ "V* Kl
afe *, BsS^^S
He is President of the Commonwealth
Club, Adelaide, and a Justice of the
Peace. For 22 years he has been a
resident of the district. Past Master
St. Alban and First Principal Royal
Arch Chapter Masonic Lodges. Mem-
ber of the Adelaide Oval and Kensing-
ton Gardens Bowling Clubs, leading
racing clubs, and S.A. Cricket Asso-
ciation and of many other clubs in
Adelaide. Pfe has visited a great
many foreign countries during his ex-
tensive tours overseas. Home address,
Kensington Gardens.
PAST COUNCILLOR EDWARD ALFRED
ANSTEY.
(District Council of Burnside.)
Born at Port Elliott, 6th July, 1858;
educated at Port Elliott Public School.
.Service in Council: 6 years; also 2\
years Councillor on the Kensington
and Norwood Corporation. Several
years a resident of Norwood; 20 years
a resident of Kensington Park and 21
years at Prospect. Twelve years a
Member of Parliament. Commis-
sioner of Crown Lands and Minister
of Repatriation in the Peake Govern-
ment. Business, Secretary Minda
Home, Incorporated. Member of the
School of Mines Council; Chairman of
Prospect Institute. Mr. Anstey is a
strong supporter of social welfare and
all organisations with a philanthropic
object. Member of Masonic Lodge
and also Friendly Society Lodge.
Sports: Cricket in younger days;
bowls at present time. Home ad-
dress, Flora Terrace, Prospect.
PAST COUNCILLOR WALTER
LANGDON PARSONS, J.P.
(District Council of Burnside.)
Born at North Adelaide, 16th
August, 1881 ; educated at Queen's and
Whinham Colleges, North Adelaide.
Six months' service in Council, and
resigned owing to election to Federal
Parliament, 1925. Fifteen years a resi-
dent of the district. Positions held : 4
years Auditor ; Councillor West Ward,
1911-14; Mayor, 1914-16, of Gladstone
Corporation; Chairman of Belgian
Relief Fund and Australia Day Com-
mittee and Gladstone Recruiting Com-
mittee, 1914-16; member for Angas,
Federal Parliament, 10th and 11th Par-
liaments, 1925-29; member of the
Printing Committee; ex-Synodsman
Adelaide and Willochra Dioceses;
original member Willochra Synod
Standing Committee and Financial
Board and Custodian of the Synod
Seal; 30 years a lay reader of the
Church of England; Justice of the
Peace for 25 years. He was the first


raj | .
■ -I
' ' ' ''
\
Secretary Kensington Gardens Men's
and Women's Branch Liberal Federa-
tion. Member of the Delphic Masonic
Lodge. Sports, cricket, lacrosse, and
tennis. War Service: Enlisted for
active service, but did not embark ow-
ing to cessation of hostilities; dis-
charged May, 1919. Home address,
"Coonarrie," Orange Grove, Halton
Gardens.
THE LATE CHARLES HENRY
FRANKLIN, PAST COUNCILLOR
(District Council of Burnside.)
Born at Gloucester Street, Holborn,
London, England, 20th March, 1845.
Arrived in Australia, 4th July, 1849.
Educated at North Adelaide. A resi-
dent of the district from 1912 to 1928
on his decease. He was for 60 years
associated with the Oddfellows’ and
Foresters’ Lodges, and was for 60
years an active worker of the Uni-
tarian Church. The late Mr. Franklin
was for 70 years employed on "The
Register" newspaper, and was for 30
years a Committeeman of the Nor-
wood Institute and served as a Coun-
cillor in the District Council of Burn-
side from 1917-21. He died in 1928.
PAST COUNCILLOR WILLIAM HENRY
COLLETT.
(District Council of Burnside.)
Born at Glen Osmond, 1863; edu-
cated at Glen Osmond Public School.
Service in Council : 13 years. Has re-
sided in the district for the whole of
his life. Business, retired. For 40
years was an officer in the Mental
Hospital. A member of the G.U.O.
Oddfellows (Grand Master 4 times).
Sport, cricket. Was a playing mem-
ber for Norwood and South Adelaide
senior cricket teams about the year
1880. Mr. Collett had three sons at
the Great War, and was an active re-
cruiting advocate. Mr. Collett for
many years was a worker at St.
Saviour’s Church, Glen Osmond. Pri-
vate address, 24. Elizabeth Street.
Eastwood.
PAST COUNCILLOR, THE LATE JOHt>
HENRY WILES.
(District Council of Burnside.)
Born March 22nd, 1830, at the Vicar
age, Hitchin, Herts. England; educate(
at home by his father. Rev. H. Wiles
M.A. Arrived in Australia by th
“Prince Regent” in 1851. A residen
of the district of Glen Osmond froi
1860 to 1927. Manager of Glen Os
mond quarries for Mr. Arthur Hard}


IIP
■"Agassi
ii #
M
' ■' , fjv
M"X W y.,-;" f r - tiS
'■■ , ■ m
-> . ' Jk >3Bj
;•• / • .. Jk
■BBH
BhBBBb is\
Wmm ... o\ i9HHH|
*»* dmS*-
»i0--
V ' -I
A ■■ * %-• \
;,lv-,\ .4,
_ _ '*w . v lSp|
I
M.P., and five years before that was
with Mr. Alfred Hardy and had the
wersight of making Anstey’s Hill
Road. After the quarries were closed
up he was with the Burnside District
Council as Inspector and Surveyor for
a number of years. He was a mem-
ber of the Manchester Unity 1.0.0. F.,
and Rose of Sharon Lodge. The late
Mr. Wiles died 2nd April, 1927.
PAST COUNCILLOR J. SANKEY
ROBINSON.
(District Council of Burnside.)
Born at Manchester, England. Ar-
rived in Australia, 1898. Eight years
represented Beaumont Ward, and a re-
sident of the district for 22 years. A
member of the Finance Committee for
rears. Vice-President Municipal
and District Council Association.
Business, Iron, Steel and Hardware
Merchant. Twenty-five years in busi-
ness in Adelaide. Business education,
years with Baxendale & Co., Man-
chester, England, 11 years manager of
Brooks, Robinson & Co., Melbourne.
Sports: In his youth, swimming and
water polo. Home address, Finniss
Brook, Beaumont, Burnside.
PAST COUNCILLOR JOHN HOWARD
VAUGHAN, C.8.E., LL.B.
(District Council of Burnside.)
Born at Norwood, South Australia,
14th November, 1879; educated at Nor-
wood State School, Prince Alfred Col-
lege, and University of Adelaide. Ser-
vice in Council: 6 years as Councillor,
1922-28. Member of the Legislative
Council, 1912-18; Attorney-General,
1915-17. Business, Solicitor. Consul
for Czecho-Slovakia, 1931-36. War
Service: Served in France with 10th
Battalion, A.1.F., 1917-18. Sports, golf
and tennis. Home address, Fnllarton
Road, Netherby.
PAST COUNCILLOR, ALFRED JAMES
WHITROW.
(District Council of Burnside.)
Born at London, 1852: arrived in
Australia, 1855 ; educated in Victoria.
Service in Council: 10 years. Fifty
years a resident of the district. Was
a member of the Finance Committee
in the Council. Has been a keen
Methodist Church worker. He is a
member of the Oddfellows’ Lodge and
has held all officers’ positions. Sports :
Has always been fond of all clean
sport. Two sons served in the Great
War and one son-in-law, who died for
his country.


J . U ; s Jr
'jJ~ « * > jjanlkr^
iS i
:*hBl jfex.
Vt^^ v I ;>;^
/ $
PAST COUNCILLOR EDWARD ARSON
PEMBERTON.
(District Council of Burnside.)
Born at Lancashire, England, 1856
Arrived in Australia. 1893. Served 2
years as Councillor and resided 12
years in the district. Mr. Pemberton
was in business before his decease as
a builder and contractor. He was
also a member of the Masonic Lodge
(Warren Lodge, Seacombe, Eng.). His
son (Mr. H. A. D. Pemberton) occu-
pies the position as health and muni-
cipal inspector of the Corporation.
THE LATE COUNCILLOR HENRY
SAVAGE.
(District Council of Burnside.)
Born at Leamington, Warwickshire,
England, 14th February, 1858. Arrived
in Adelaide with his widowed mother
towards the end of 1876. and entered
the employ of Messrs. G. Wood, Son,
and Co. Later he took part in a drap-
ery business in Bundle Street, known
as Hall & Savage, but this partnership
was dissolved in 1902, and in this year
he established a softgoods wholesale
firm, now known as Henry Savage and
Co. For 14 years the late Mr. Savage
was a member of the Burnside Dis-
trict Council, and for a considerable
time was Secretary of the Finance
Committee of the Council. He was a
resident of the district for 42 years.
Mr. Savage Was also a member of the
Emulation Masonic Lodge, a member
of the Y.M.C.A., and a foundation
member of the Rose Park Congrega-
tional Church. He was Superinten-
dent of the Rose Park Congregational
Sunday School for 37 years, and as re-
cognition of his long term of service
the church appointed him to the office
of life deacon. Twice he was Chair-
man of the Congregational Union, and
he held various offices from time to
time in connection with the London
Missionary Society, and paid visits to
the Mission Fields in Papua and
Samoa. The late Mr. Savage died on
October 4th, 1934, in his 77th year.
PAST COUNCILLOR FRANK
FREDERICK BUTTERY.
(District Council of Burnside.)
Born at Clyde Street, Kensingtoi
30th May, 1879; educated at Stal
Public Schools. Service in Counc
from June 1916-1924. Thirty-fiv
years a resident of the district. Bus
ness, Furniture Manufacturer. Horn
address, 49, Myall Avenue, Reusing
ton Gardens.


«l
B. '^HB|
<- H
IMK3MK
*£*** m
■ ' j : _
R. *T?^
** -. ■■■■j c ->~--- -■** -aMii^HH
- . ;' ■ £ ,'; > ■- : i^'V.
COUNCILLOR PHILIP RUPERT
CLARIDGE
(Corporation of Burnside.)
Born at Crystal Brook, 13th June,
1884, and educated at Prince Alfred
College, and S.A. School of Mines. Mr.
Claridge was elected Councillor on the
4th July, 1936, He is President of the
S.A. Chamber of Building Industries,
and Past President of the undermen-
tioned —’Royal Australian Institute of
Architects, S.A. Institute of Architects
and Prince Alfred Old Collegians’ As-
sociation. He is a fellow of the Royal
Institute of British Architects, and
Royal Australian Institute of Archi-
tects. A member of the council of Prince
Alfred College, the Board of the Girton
School for Girls, and the Young Men’s
Christian Association. Business, Archi-
tect. Mr. Claridge is also a member of
Prince Alfred Old Collegians
Masonic Lodge, and his sports are
golf, tennis, and bowls. Private
address, 112 Grant Avenue, Toorak.
COUNCILLOR THOMAS REGINALD
MELLOR.
(Corporation of Burnside)
Born at Semaphore, loth January,
1893, and educated at Prince Alfred
College, and the University of Ade-
laide. Mr. Mellor was elected Coun-
cillor on the 4th of July, 1936, repre-
senting North Kensington, and Ken-
sington Park Ward. He is a Knight
Templar, Rose Croix and Past Master
of the Masonic Lodge. His sport is
golf. During the war Mr. Mellor
served from 1915 to 1919 with the
Field Artillery A.1.F., in Egypt, Bel-
gium, and France, was twice men-
tioned in despatches, and was awarded
the Officer of British Empire Decora-
tion, his rank was Lieutenant Colonel.
He is Chairman of the Board of Direc-
tors, Kings College, Kensington Park,
Treasurer and Past President of the
Baptist Union of South Australia, and
is a solicitor by profession. Private
address, Bedford Street, Kensington
Park.
COUNCILLOR FRANK LANCELOT
PARSONS, A.M.I.E. (Aust.).
(Corporation of Burnside.)
Born at North Adelaide. sth April,
1887; educated St. Peter’s College,
Adelaide, S.A. School of Mines and In-
dustries, Adelaide University. Coun-
cillor Parsons was apprenticed for 5
years to Forwood. Down, & Co., Ltd.,
Adelaide. Joined Municipal Tramways
Trust, and was Constructional
Draughtsman and Assistant Super-


■r 4
i>- *f“B
; : ;|g
»»».«»,. JpB -v
hBBL /«-».■
BWHI • m MH||
Mreg|| ..x^J
fill i»pt
imI • jn h ||
9| /
vising" Engineer of Power Station at
Port Adelaide, S.A., for 2\ years. Re-
signed and established the present
business of Messrs. Parsons and
Robertson, Mechanical and Electrical
Engineers and Importers, Pulteney
Street, Adelaide. He has been a
member of Burnside Corporation since
1928, and is a member of the following
clubs: —Rotary (Vice-President), East
Torrens Lacrosse. St. Peter's Old
Collegians' Committee, Chairman of
Committee S.A. Lacrosse Association,
Chairman St. Peter's Collegiate Asso-
ciation, member of the Board of the
Municipal Tramways Trust, Adelaide,
Senior Vice-Chairman Institute of En-
gineers Aust. (Adelaide Division),
President S.A. Refrigeration Associa-
tion. Appointed Hon. Consul for
Japan in S.A., 10th October, 1921. A
member of the S.A. Liberal Union.
Recreation, motoring, gardening, ten-
nis, golf. Home address, 45, Godfrey
Terrace, Leabrook, S.A.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM EVAN HARDY,
J.P.
(Corporation of Burnside.)
Born at Glenelg, 19th October, 1879;
educated at Glenelg Grammar School
and Whinham College. Service in
Council, 6 years ; 18 years a resident
of the district. Delegate to Municipal
and District Councils Association,
member of the Metropolitan County
Board. East Torrens Board of Ffealth.
Previously a member of technical staff
of Eastern Extension Cable Co. Vice-
President and for many years Secre-
tary and Treasurer Rose Park Men’s
Branch of Liberal Federation. Four
years a member of Noarlunga District
Council. Connected with all activities
for the furtherance or improvement
of the district. Mr. Hardy has retired.
Member of the Rose Park Masonic
Lodge, 105. Sport, cricket, swimming,
and gardening. Private address,
"Eumarrah," 11 Dulwich Avenue, Dul-
wich.
COUNCILLOR JAMES RICHMOND
RUSSELL, J.P.
(Corporation of Burnside.)
Son of the late J. G. Russell, Com-
missioner of Taxes and Insolvency.
Born at Park Terrace, Parkside ; edu-
cated at St. Peter’s College, and is an
Associate of Adelaide School of Mines
in Mining and Metallurgy. Elected to
Burnside Council in 1932. Partner
in firm of Jacob & Russell, Account-
ants and Estate Agents. Attached to
Bth Field Engineers, A.I.F. Consider-
able experience in reclaiming scrub
lands, and served as a member of Dis
trict Council of Encounter Bay. Eel
low of the Commonwealth Institute o
Valuers, and a member of the Coun
cil of the Real Estate Institute of S.A
Appointed a Justice of the Peace it
1913. Active member of Nationa
Roads Association during its existence
Member of the Legacy Club, Adelaide
COUNCILLOR SAMUEL A. FISK.
(Corporation of Burnside.)
Born at Port Adelaide. 2nd Octobe
1880, and educated at Port Adelaid
Public School and Way College. Fiv
years’ service in Council, 2 year
Chairman of Finance Committe<
Business. Director and Manager W. I
and H. O. Wills (Australia), Limite>
Adelaide Branch. Past Master Trai
mere Lodge, No. 119 (Masonic). H


Jjmi
* St %.
mmmmm
\m
mm Wi$&
j» sEw?...
i ms**.*** %
■»« mm
mmj -
flfllfc
4
k.'., S|l > /
i i — ■"■ —■ '
Of • mm^M
sport is bowls, and he is a regular
player at the Marryatville Bowling
Club. Private address, 9, Gurr’s Road.
Beulah Park.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM CHARLES
BENNETT.
(Corporation of Burnside.)
Born at Magill, 26th April, 1871, and
educated at Magill Public School. Mr.
Bennett has served in the Burnside
Corporation for 5 years, and has been
a resident of the district for 65 years.
He is a member of the Magill Metho-
dist Church, Chairman of the Magill
Cemetery Trust, and is a member of
the Town Hall and Parks and Gar-
dens Committees. He is also a mem-
ber of the Delphic Masonic Lodge, and
has held various other offices for many
years, Mr. Bennett is in business as
a Pottery Manufacturer, and his sport
is bowls, being a member of the Ken-
sington Gardens Bowling Club. Home
address, Chapel Street, Magill.
COUNCILLOR ARTHUR ROY BURNELL.
(Corporation of Burnside.)
Born at Hindmarsh, 7th November,
1886, and educated at a State School
and Adelaide Shorthand and Business
Training Academy. Mr. Burnell is a
Councillor in the Burnside Corpora-
ton, and has been a resident of the
district for 17 years. He is Manag-
ing Director of the Co-operative Build-
ing Society of South Australia, 88a,
King William Street, Adelade. He is
also President of the S.A. division of
the Commonwealth Institute of Ac-
countants. During the Great War Mr.
Burnell served abroad with the A.I.F.
on active service from 1915 to 1918.
He is Vice-President of the Kensing-
ton Gardens Bowling and Tennis
Clubs,
COUNCILLOR PATRICK ANDREAS
OHLSTROM.
(Corporation of Burnside.)
Born at Warooka, Yorke Peninsula,
16th December, 1890, and educated at
Edithburgh Public School and Univer-
sity of Adelaide. Has served in Coun-
cil since Ist July, 1935. A resident of
the district for 10 years. Positions
held: President of the Glen Osmond
Institute, Vice-President of Glen Os-
mond and Eastwood Branch of the
Liberal and Country League, President
of S.A. Baseball League, Past Presi-
dent of Parkside Branch of the Re-
turned Soldiers’ and Sailors’ League.
Member of the Naval and Military


i&« / w?
■ *• i
£ ' V tV-aH :i {jflpjraK
w**- I m
-j N 1 *y/;.
n ■r- jp ISjm
Hk ••' p[
J /..; *A Jp‘ p
I-. .
if;
iHf 4 I
$ MiW Jk . .
V : .| #Jk - '/ k M*
P - ■ : Wi0Mmf
F mt‘ i '
Club, Stock Exchange Club, and the
Amateur Sports Association. Busi-
ness, Solicitor. A member of the firm
Edmunds, Jessop, Ward & Ohlstrom,
Epworth Building, Pirie Street. His
sports are cricket, baseball, golf,
tennis, yachting, and swimming.
Councillor Ohlstrom served in the
Great War from June, 1915, to June,
1919.
HAROLD ARSON DESBIEF
PEMBERTON, C.E.R.T.R.S.T. (London).
Health and Municipal Inspector.
(Corporation of Burnside.)
Born at Kensington, 9th August,
1898; educated at the North Norwood
School and Adelaide School of Arts
and Crafts. Service in Council, 7
years ; 38 years a resident of the dis-
trict. Positions held in Council:
Councillor and member of the Metro-
politan County Board and East Tor-
rens County Board. Present occupa-
tion, Health and Municipal Inspector,
Burnside Municipality. Lodge, mem-
ber of the Royal Oak Lodge, No. 16,
U.A.O.D. Mr. Pemberton entered the
Council at the age of 26 years, then
being the youngest Councillor in the
Burnside Corporation. Served with
the 16th Battery, Australian Field Ar-
tillery in France and Belgium. Pri-
vate address, "St. Helens," 19 Union
Street, North Kensington.
HENRY EOIN SYDNEY MELBOURNE
8.E., A.M.I.E. (Aust.), ENGINEER and
TOWN CLERK.
(Corporation of Burnside.)
Born at Malvern, S.A., 25th May.
1893: educated at Adelaide High
School and University of Adelaide.
Nine years' service with Council; 2
years Engineer and Town Clerk: 7
years Licensed Surveyor in Surveyor-
General’s and Irrigation Departments :
2 years Lecturer in Surveying at
Melbourne University. Eleven years
resident of the district. Mr. Mel-
bourne graduated as Bachelor of En-
gineering Adelaide University, 1920.
War Service : years 11th Field Com-
pany, Engineers, A.1.F., with rank
of Lieutenant. Private address, 19
Barker Grove, Toorak.


■•I
. '** • ■ ■' • a ,,
Corporation and District Council
of Clare
DISTRICT COUNCIL CHAMBERS, CLARE


History of Corporation and District Council of Clare
This picturesque mid-northern town dates from 1843,
about which time aborigines were fairly numerous, their
main camp being on what is now the cricket oval.
Clare is surrounded by fertile hills and valleys, and
skirted by the River Hutt, and is noted throughout the
State for its ideal and healthy climate.
The Hill and Wakefield Rivers also pass through the
district, the latter being adjacent to Mintaro, a very old
town in the history of the State, as it was here that the
teamsters rested their mules in the early days on their
way to and from the Burra mines, on account of the fer-
tility of the district.
The district was proclaimed a district council area on
20th July, 1853, and it is interesting to note that it then
included the township and district around Mintaro, which
was proclaimed as a separate district council area in 1868,
hut was again amalgamated with Clare on 24th May,
1932.
The township of Clare was proclaimed a Municipality in
1868, and is the hub of a large and prosperous district.
In the very earlv days communication with Adelaide was
by road via Kapunda, which latter town was then the
railhead. Various methods of mail and passenger ser-
vice were tried until the railway constructed in 1918 from
Riverton to Clare solved the problem of transport. The
train service is now twice daily to and from Adelaide.
Road transport is catered for by a bitumen road from
Adelaide to Clare.
The capital value of ratable property over which the
Corporation has control is £344.220, the assessment value
of which is £17,211. The total rate which is struck is
2/3 in the £, producing annually £1,936. It is interesting
to note the comparison between the Corporation and Dis-
trict, which latter has a capital value of £999,640 and as-
sessment value of £49,982. whilst a rate of 1/5 in the £
yields £3,540 yearly.
Included iu the Municipality and District areas there
is a population of approximately 5,800 persons, who are
accommodated in 907 dwellings. Ihe approximate area of
the Corporation is 500 acres and the District 162,000 acres.
Immediately adjoining the Municipality are the set-
tlements of Donnybrook on the south, Armagh on the
north-west, Stanley Flat on the north, and W bite Hut on
the north-east, all being closely settled, and the three
latter places are noted for their fruit gardens and vine-
yards. Currants and other drying fruits are largely
grown, also wine grapes, which supply the Stanley Wine
Co. and Clarevale Co-operative Winery, which have exten-
sive and up-to-date wine cellars in the Municipality.
Other townships in the district are Mintaro, Penwor-
tham, Sevenhills, and Hilltown.
Mintaro is particularly noted for the slate which conies
from the Mintaro slate and flagstone quarries. Penwor-
tham has the distinction of having James Ainsworth Hor
rocks, the noted explorer, buried in the Church of Eng-
land churchyard, while the Catholic Church and College at
Sevenhills are among the oldest in the State.
Besides the industries quoted above, the district h
particularly suitable for pasture land, stud sheep and cattk
being extensively reared, and very good crops are growr
on the farming land.
The towns and district are served in the matter of ligh
and power by the Mid-North Electricity Co., Ltd., whose
powerhouse is situated in the Clare township.
An energetic Parks Committee attends to the plant
ing and preservation of ornamental trees within the town-
ship, viz.: Burton Street Reserve, the Old Scholars
Memorial Plots, and avenues of trees which help to en
hance the natural beauty of Clare, also. Christison Park (2
acres), a natural beauty spot 2 miles south of the towr
available for picnics and campers.
Clare is also widely known throughout the State fc
its beautifully situated and picturesque Bowling Greer,
Croquet Lawn, and Tennis Courts, which are all together
at the northern end of the town.
Centrally situated is the Oval, or recreation sr round,
* o


edicated as a soldiers’ memorial park, consisting of ap-
roximately 10 or 12 acres. The Oval is controlled and
managed by a trust. At the entrance to the ground an
imposing memorial arch has been erected in memory of
alien soldiers. A soldiers’ memorial hall has also been
built at Stanley Flat, and it is here that the fine race-
course of the Clare Racing Club, Ltd., is situated.
Besides the amalgamation of territory above men-
tioned. the District Council of Clare also absorbed the
Young, Thomas Bowley, Edward Smith, William Lennon
(Town Clerk). Edward Burton Gleeson, Mayor 1868-
1869; Edward Beckmann, Councillor 1868-6 Q ; Le Feuvre,
Councillor 1868-1869; William Roscrow, Councillor
1868-1869; Andrew Young, Councillor 1868-1869, Mayor
1870-1871, 1883-1884; Thomas Bowley, Councillor
1868-1870, 1888-1890; Edward Smith, Councillor 1868-1870;
William Paterson, Councillor 1869-1870; Dr. Charles
Houlton Webb, Mayor 1869-1870; Joseph Fels,
MAIN STREET OF CLARE.
■ kindred of Milne from the District Council of Hutt and
Dill Rivers on Ist May, 1935.
1 he following is a list, as far as can he ascertained,
ji the past and present members of the Corporation, the
District Council of Clare, and the District Council of
Stanley:—
CORPORATION OF CLARK.
hirst Council.—Edward Burton Gleeson (Mayor), Ed-
ward Beckmann, Le Feuvre, William Roscrow, Andrew
Councillor 1869-1871; Thomas William Powell, Councillor
1869-71; W alter Treleaven, Councillor 1869-1875; William
Kelly, Councillor 1870-1887, 1892-1894, Mayor 1887-1892,
1894-1896, 1900-1906; Henry Crabb. Councillor 1870-1872,
Mayor 1876-1878; Robert George Harmer, Councillor 1870-
1874, 1884-1886; Charles Kimber, Mayor 1871-1873: 1879-
1880; Isaac Roach, Councillor 1871-1872; John McDougall,
Councillor 1871-1873; Hermann Weinrich, Councillor 1872-
1873; John Peter Christian Harder, Councillor 1872-1874;
Thomas Henry Hosier, Mayor 1873-1876, John Milne Smith,


Councillor 1873-1875; William Edward Lunn, Councillor
1873-1876; Louis Victorsen, Councillor 1874-1876, 1889-
1891; Frederick Cooper Gray, Councillor 1874-1876, Mayor
1880-1882; James Work, Councillor 1875-1883; Alfred Til-
brook, Councillor 1875-1879, 1886-1894; Charles Shane,
Councillor 1876-1877; Edward Cecil Rix, Councillor 1876-
1878, 1880-1884, 1889-1890; Stephen Trestrail, Councillor
1876-1880; Alexander McDonald, Councillor 1877-1878;
Alfred Palmer, Mayor 1878-1879 ; Frederick Hahn, Council-
lor 1878-1880; Thomas Sheppard Stacy, Councillor, 1878-
1882, Mayor 1898-1900; Thomas Ninnes, Councillor 1879-
1888; Benjamin Jacobs. Councillor 1879-1883; Thomas
Robert Bright, Mayor 1882-1883; John Treleaven, Council-
lor 1882-1884; John Christison, Councillor 1883-1884, Mayor
1884-1887; Blakeney Carter, Councillor 1883-1889; Robert
Graham, Councillor 1884-1888: Frederick Lane, Councillor
1885-1887; George Lloyd, Councillor 1887-1889; Peter Paul
Gillen, Councillor 188/-1893 ; Charles Holder, Councillor
1888-1889; Jonathan Durrant, Councillor 1889-1895; Wil-
liam Hosking, Councillor 1890-1898; Alfred James Davey,
Councillor 1890-1894; Magnus Badger, Councillor 1891-1892,
Mayor 1892-1894; James Bentley, Councillor 1893-1895;
Andrew Thomas Wals h. Councillor 1894-1900; Thomas
Reed, Councillor 1894-1896, Mayor 1896-1898: Thomas
Donoughue, Councillor 1894-1897; James Bunnett, Coun-
cillor 1895-1897; George Spratt, Councillor 1895-1897;
Reginald Henry Tilbrook, Councillor 1896-1906, Mayor
1906-1909; Solomon Williams, Councillor 1897-1901; Wil-
liam Henry Blight, Councillor 1897-1901, 1907-1909;
Thomas Francis Fitzsimmons, Councillor 1897-1899:
Thomas Francis Pink, Councillor 1898-1908; Thomas Phil-
lip Gillen, Councillor 1899-1905. Mayor 1909-1912; Peter
McDougall, Councillor 1900-1904, 1914-1915; George Henry
Bryant, Councillor 1901-1907: George John Harmer, Coun-
cillor 1901-1905, Mayor 1917-1918; William George Bernard
Lewcock, Councillor 1904-1908, Mayor 1912-1914; William
Thomas Taylor, Councillor 1905-1911; James Scales, Coun-
cillor 1905-1913; James Drennan Gilchrist, Councillor 1906-
1908, Mayor 1915-1917; Edward John Scott, Councillor
1908-1915; John Henry Bowley, Councillor 1908-1913;
Charles Henry Ballinger, Councillor 1908-1910, 1923-1925;
Henry Arthur French, Councillor 1909-1913; Florence
McCarthy, Councillor 1910-1914; John Henry William Ohl-
meyer. Councillor 1911-1913, Mayor 1914-1915: Llewelyn
Albert Davies, Councillor 1913-1915, Mayor 1918-1921, 1932
to date; Francis Pink. Councillor 1913-1917: William James
Kelly, Councillor 1913-1919; Joseph Hermann Knappstein,
Councillor 1913-1915; John Bails, Councillor 1914-1916,
Mayor 1927-1929; Alfred James Pearce, Councillor 1915-
1917; Arthur Leonard Stacy, Councillor 1915-1918; Alfred
John Bowley, Councillor 1915-1921. Mayor 1929-1932;
Thomas Henry Symons, Councillor 1916-1922; William
Gladstone Harold Paterson, Councillor 1917-1918, 1919-
1922; Julius Victorsen, Councillor 1917-1919; Arthur John
Thompson, Councillor 1918-1919; Duncan Menzies, Coun-
cillor 1918-1920, 1921-1922. Mayor 1923-1925; Harold Ryan
Smith, Councillor 1919-1921 ; Ira Stanley Scott, Councillor
1919-1925, Mayor 1925-1927: Dr. Otto Wien Smith. Coun-
cillor 1920-1921, Mayor 1921-1923: Henry August Paetke.
Councillor 1921-1923; Walter John Sharpen, Councillor
1921-1923; Alfred Chenhalls Jeffrey, Councillor 1922-1930
Ernest Havelock Kelly, Councillor 1922-1926; Thomas Wil
Ham Coward, Councillor 1922-1926: Hermann Phillip
Knappstein, Councillor 1923-1927; Percy Tobias Brebner
Councillor 1925-1932; Frederick William Knappstein,
Councillor 1925-1931 : Frank Levenson Sanders, Councillor
1926-1933; Albert Edward Smith. Councillor 1926-1928
Frederick William Forsaith, Councillor 1927-1931 : Godfrey
Vincent Tilbrook, Councillor 1928-1932; Reginald Edwar
Masters, Councillor 1930-1933; Leslie William Butler, Cour
cillor 1931-1933; Edward Campbell Deland, Councillor 193
to date ; William Paul Ness, Councillor 1932 to date ; Charle
Pink. Councillor 1932 to date; Frederick James Barrett
Councillor, 1933 to date ; Keith Alexander Laught, Counci
lor 1933 to date; Alexander Loudon Knappstein. Councillo
1933 to date: William Lennon, Town Clerk 1868-1894; Joh
Luckhurst Smith. Town Clerk 1894-1918; John Henry Wi
Ham Ohlmeyer, Town Clerk 1918-1919; Arthur Joh
Thompson, Town Clerk 1919-1924; Arthur Whitemai
Town Clerk 1924 to date.
DISTRICT COUNCIL OF CLARE.
First Council. —Edward Burton Gleeson, William
Slater, Dr. Charles Houlten Webb. Anton Sotolowsk ,
Patrick Butler. William Lennon (Clerk). Edward Burton
Gleeson. Chairman 1853-1857; William Slater, Councillor
1853; Dr. Charles Houlten Webb, Councillor 1853-185, .
1859-1862, Chairman 1857-1859, 1865-1867; Anton Sot -


' owsky, Councillor 1853; Patrick Butler, Councillor 1853-
859, 1867-1869, 1870-1871, Chairman 1859-1861; Archibald
McDiarmid, Councillor 1857; Jacob, Councillor
1858; March, Councillor 1858; John Hope, Coun-
cillor 1858: James Wright, Councillor 1858; John Ninnes,
Councillor 1859; August Beckmann, Councillor 1859-1861;
Brady, Councillor 1859-1861 ; Fredrick Hannaford,
Councillor, 1861-1864; Thomas Ninnes, Councillor 1872-
1875, Chairman 1861-1865, 1868; William Moyses, Councillor
1862-1864; William Ashby, Councillor 1862, 1865-1866; John
W. Gleeson, Councillor 1862-1864, Chairman 1868-1870;
Paul Roach, Councillor 1863-1864; Arthur Brady, Coun-
cillor 1864-1865; Thompson Priest, Councillor 1864-1865,
1866-1868; Thomas Roberts, Councillor 1864-1867, 1878-
1879; Patrick Howley, Councillor 1865-1866; John Chap-
man, Councillor 1865-1867, Chairman 1867-1868; Thomas
Pascoe, Councillor. 1866-1867; Charles Kimber, Councillor
1867-1868, Chairman 1868; Albert Trilling, Councillor 1867-
1869; Edward Hunter, Councillor, 1868-1870; William
Hitchcox, Councillor, 1869-1870; Samuel Bray, Councillor
1869-1870; Ernst Bradtke, Councillor 1869-1872; John
Emery, Councillor 1872-1877, Chairman 1870-1872, 1877;
Joseph Ninnes, Councillor 1870-1871, 1885-1887, 1890-1892;
Francis Trezise, Councillor, 1870-1872, Chairman 1872-
1873; John Trestrail, Councillor 1871-1872, 1892; John
Eiffe, Councillor 1871-1873; Frederick Cooper Gray, Coun-
cillor 1872-1873; Michael Ruciak, Councillor 1873-1877,
1880-1883, 1887-1889, Chairman 1877-1878, 1883-1885;
Phomas William Powell, Councillor, Chairman 1873-1877;
William Chapman, Councillor 1873-1874; Thomas Ashby,
Councillor 1874-1878, 1881-1882, Chairman 1878-1881 ;
Albert Jacobi, Councillor, 1875-1876; Carl Kozlowski,
Councillor 1876-1884, 1900-1905; Robert Elliot, Councillor
1877-1878; William Thomas, Councillor 1877-1881, Chair-
man 1881-1883; John Prest, Councillor, 1878-1880; Pharoh
Robert Rogers Pike, Councillor 1879-1881; Henry Long-
mire, Councillor 1881-1882; John Carter, Councillor 1882-
1889, Chairman 1886: Richard Buzacott, Councillor 1882-
1892; Thomas Nicholson Grierson, Councillor 1883-1885,
Chairman 1885-1886; Emil Hoffmann, Councillor 1884-1885;
Alfred Ragless, Councillor 1885-1887; George Lloyd, Coun-
cillor 1886, Chairman 1886-1906; Martin Kenny,
Councillor 1887-1890; James Hill, Councillor 1889-1891,
18 : >2-1901; Thomas James Jenner, Councillor 1889-1890;
Martin Mahon, Councillor 1890-1900; John Christison,
Councillor 1891-1892; William Pattullo, Councillor, 1892-
1906, 1912-1913, Chairman 1906-1912, 1913-1915, 1919-1923;
Edward Penna, Councillor 1892-1907; Francis Caley Brink-
worth, Councillor 1901-1912, 1913-1915, Chairman 1912-1913,
1915-1919; Jesse Humphrys, Councillor 1905-1906; Robert
Edward Herbert Hope, Councillor 1906-1908; Charles
James McCarthy, Councillor 1906-1910; Charles Henry
Beaumont, Councillor 1907; Aloysius William Ahle, Coun-
cillor, 1907-1910, 1921-1927, Chairman 1927;- Hubert Bow-
man, Councillor 1908-1911, 1913-1914; Joseph Hermann
Knappstein, Councillor 1910-1919; Frank Waymen, Coun-
cillor 1910-1913; Donald Forbes, Councillor, 1911-1912:
Tom M. Chambers, Councillor 1912-1913; Samuel
Christopher Bray, Councillor 1913-1914; Francis
Blight, Councillor 1914-1918; Alfred Thomas Duke, Coun-
cillor 1914-1921; Thomas Robinson, Councillor 1915-1919;
Thomas Patrick Donnellan, Councillor 1918-1923, Chairman
1923-1926; Robert Otto Knappstein, Councillor, 1919-1926;
James Scales, Councillor 1919-1926, Chairman 1926-1927:
Charles Neate, Councillor 1923-1927, Chairman 1927 to date :
Dudley Thyer Angas, Councillor 1926-1928; Sydney Samuel
Lloyd, Councillor 1926-1928; Alan Hugh Tilbrook, Coun-
cillor 1927-1932; Frederick Harold Neate, Councillor 1927-
1929; Samuel Pink, Councillor 1928 to date; James Have-
lock Richardson, Councillor, 1928 to date; Cassimir Stanis-
laus Wyman, Councillor 1929-1932; Alexander John
Melrose, Councillor 1932 to date (from D.C. of Stanley) ;
Albert Edward Crossing, Councillor 1932 to date (from
D.C. of Stanley) ; Daniel Horgan. Councillor 1932-1933
(from D.C. of Stanley) ; Sidney Hurtle Ayers, Councillor
1933-1935; Percival Coombe jacka. Councillor 1933 to
date; Leonard John Harvey, Councillor 1935 to date (from
D.C. of Hutt and Hill Rivers) ; Thomas Edward Richardson,
Councillor 1935 to date (from D.C. of Hutt and Hill
Rivers) ; George John Harmer, Councillor 1936 to date.
William Lennon, Clerk 1853-1860; Charles H. Webb, Clerk
1860; H. March, Clerk 1860-1861; Thomas Ownsworth,
Acting Clerk, 1861; Isaac Roach, Clerk 1861-1867; J. A.
Goodfellow, Clerk 1867-1868; John Luckhurst Smith. Clerk
1868-1911; James Berridge, Clerk 1911-1926; Robert R.
Carmichael, Clerk 1926-1929; George Borwick Martin,
Clerk 1929 to date.


District Council of Stanley amalgamated with Clare,
24th May, 1932.
Hundred of Milne absorbed by Clare from the Dis-
trict Council of Hutt and Hill Rivers, Ist May, 1935.
DISTRICT COUNCIL OF STANLEY.
First Councillors. —A. Melville, J.P. (Chairman),
George Faulkner, Daniel Brady, Henry Jolly, Patrick
Dowd, William Edward Giles (Clerk). A. Melville, Chair-
man 1868-1869; George Faulkner, Councillor 1868, 1870-
1901: Daniel Brady, Councillor 1868; Henry Jolly. Coun-
cillor, 1868, 1870-18*72; Patrick Dowd, Councillor 1868-1870;
Michael J. Meany, Councillor 1868-1870; James Brown,
Councillor 1868-1870, 1873-1875; Thompson Priest, Coun-
cillor 1868-1869, Chairman 1869-1873, 1874-1888: William
Bowman, Councillor 1869-1873, Chairman 1873-1874; Peter
Smith, Councillor, 1870-1871, 1872-1873; Garrett Smith,
Councillor 1871-1872; Michael Brown, Councillor 1872-1874 ;
Thomas Horgan (Horigan), Councillor 1873-1898; Thomas
Niemitz, Councillor 1874-1875; John Nykiel, Councillor
1875-1880, 1882-1898, 1900-1907, Chairman 1898-1900;
Edward Tralaggan, Councillor 1875-1888, Chairman 1888-
1898; Lukas Malycha, Councillor 1880-1882; George
McLeish, Councillor 1888-1894; William Scott Gordon,
Councillor (from Black Springs D.C.), 1888-1890; William
Carter, Councillor (from Black Springs D.C.), 1888-1890;
John Jackett, Councillor, 1894-1895 ; Edmund Girdlestone
Priest, Councillor 1895-1896: James Henry Brown, Coun-
cillor 1896-1901 ; Frederick Henry Weston, Councillor 1898-
1899; Michael McMahon, Councillor 1898-1900; Arthur
Percy Brown, Councillor 1899-1900, 1902-1904, 1909-1912,
Chairman 1900-1902; Jeremiah Joseph Kelly, Councillor
1900-1902, 1905-1906, Chairman 1902-1905; Arthur Crush
Councillor 1901-1903; Sydney Torr, Councillor 1901-1905
1909-1913, Chairman 1905-1909; Philip Smith, Councillor
1903-1911; Joseph Nathaniel Tickle, Councillor 1904-1909
Michael Aloysius Kelly, Councillor 1906-1909, 1914-19P
Chairman 1909-1914; John Fhomas, Councillor 1907-191.'
1918-1919; Eugene Patrick Faulkner, Councillor 1911-191?
Michael Leo Giles, Councillor 1912-1914. Chairman 191-1
1916: Ivor Blyth Roberts, Councillor 1913-1916, Chairman
1916-1920; John Tickle, Councillor 1913-1917; Thoma
Dunn, Councillor 1915-1929; Ivern Anthony Jacobs, Coun-
cillor 1916-1918; John Primrose Malcolm, Councillor,
elected 1916, but did not sit; Charles Joseph Harvey
Wright, Councillor 1916-1920; Frederick Walter Jacka.
Councillor 1917; Richard Honey Hall, Councillor 1917-192:
Alexander John Melrose, Councillor 1919-1920: Chairma
1920-1932; Daniel Horgan, Councillor 1920-1932; Osca
Esselbach, Councillor 1920-1924; Albert Edward Crossing.
Councillor 1924-1927, 1929-1932; Walter Ernest Blatch-
ford, Councillor 1925-1932; Leslie Arthur Gill, Councillor
1927-1932; W. E. Giles, Clerk 1868-1908; Archibald Ha-.
Clerk 1908-1917: Frederick Walter Jacka, Clerk 1917-193: :
Norman Cook, Acting Clerk 1931-1932.
First meeting, sth May, 1868.
District Council of Black Springs absorbed 23rd
January, 1888.
District Council of Black Springs severed and annexe 1
to Waterloo. June, 1890.
District Council of Stanley amalgamated with Clar *.
24th May, 1932.


39Hf
3
■H
' Wrn —*. :.v. ■,"■>.•
Bp s
W W'
n > <■—
•mm > fe**
; NsBk
■ m
WppWwyTBMfc JKg .
r / J^/ji
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR,
LLEWELYN ALBERT DAVIES.
(Corporation of Clare.)
Born at Prospect. 4th January, 1873.
Educated at King Edward VIII Gram-
mar School. England, also Whinham
College, Adelaide. Service in Council:
Nine years. Thirty-seven years a resi-
dent of the District. Positions held in
Council: Councillor and Mayor. Busi-
ness : Chemist. Member of the
Masonic and Oddfellows’ M.U. Sports :
Tennis and golf. War service: Served
abroad. Gallipoli, Egypt, and France,
with the 27th and 50th Battalions,
VI.F, Home address: Clare.
PAST MAYOR DUNCAN MENZIES, J.P.
(Corporation of Clare.)
Was born at Casterton, Victoria, 4th
April, 1880, and educated at S.A. Edu-
cational Department and Adelaide
University. Three years Councillor,
two years Mayor. Chief, Caledonian
Society; Chairman of School Com-
mittee ; President of Returned .Sol-
diers' Sub-branch, Clare; Chairman of
Agricultural Bureau; Secretary Clare
Show; President Clare Institute;
Past Master Clare, No.. 12, Masonic
Lodge; Past Master Clare Mark
Lodge; a member of Oddfellows'
Lodge, Manchester Unity. Mr. Men-
zies obtained A.I.F. Commission with
3rd Light Horse, and served abroad
with 48th Battalion, A.1.F.; was
wounded twice, and promoted to rank
of Captain in the Field. For 10 years
was a teacher in the S.A. Education
Department, and two years House
Master at Roseworthy Agricultural
College. In business at Clare as Auc-
tioneer and General Stock Agent.
THE LATE FLORENCE McCARTHY.
(Past Councillor Clare Corporation.)
Was born at Cork, Ireland. Edu-
cated in his home town as an engineer.
Arrived in Australia as a young man,
and w|as engaged as an engine-driver
on the Broken Hill Mines. In 1897 he
went into the hotel business, and re-
mained a licensee up to the time of his
death in 1917. He was a resident of
Clare for over 20 years, very keen on
coursing and hunting, and a member
of the H.A.C.B.S. A relative, the late
Lawrie McCarthy, 16th Batt., A.1.F.,
won the V.C. in 1918. A son, Capt.
J. C. McCarthy, served on Gallipoli,
Western Egypt, and France. The late
Councillor died at the Globe Hotel,
Clare, on April Bth, 1917. in his 54th
year.


0^ ~
w - K >
COUNCILLOR KEITH ALEXANDER
LAUGHT.
(Corporation of Clare.)
Born at Mitcham, 2nd January.
1907. Educated at Unley High School,
Scotch College, and University of
Adelaide. Two years’ service in
Council. Six years a resident of the
District. Business: Solicitor. Mem-
ber of the Masonic Lodge. Sports:
Tennis and golf. Home address:
Clare.
COUNCILLOR EDWARD CAMPBELL
DELAND.
(Corporation of Clare.)
Born at Gawler, Bth June, 1871.
Educated at St. George’s School, Gaw-
ler, Hahndorf, and Whinham Colleges.
Five years’ service in Council. Four-
teen years a resident of the District.
Member of the High School Council.
President of the Clare Branch Liberal
Federation. Business: Company Sec-
retary. Past Master Clare Masonic,
No. 12, Clare Mark and Snowtown
Royal Arch Lodges. Has always taken
a keen interest in public matters of
all kinds, and has held many promi-
nent positions while a president at
Blyth and Clare. Sports: Bowls.
Home address; Clare, S.A.
COUNCILLOR FREDERICK JAMES
BARRETT.
(Corporation of Clare.)
Born at Mt. Gambler, 24th March,
1880. Educated at Norwood Public
School. Three years’ service in Coun-
cil. A resident of the District for 10
years. President of the Clare Sub-
branch R.S.A-., Chairman of the Clare
Primary School Committee, member
of the Soldiers’ Memorial Park Trust.
Business: Representative A.M.P. So-
ciety, Clare. Lodges ; Member of the
Clare Masonic and A.O. Forresters.
War service : Three years’ active ser-
vice, A.1.F., abroad. Home address:
Clare.
COUNCILLOR ALEXANDER LOUDON
KNAPPSTEIN.
(Corporation of Clare.)
Born at London, England, 22nd
November, 1906. Arrived in Australia,
August, 1907. Educated at Clare.
Two years’ service in Council. He
has been 28 years a resident of the
District. Business: Auctioneer and
Land Agent. Member of the
1.0.0. M.U. Sports: Bowls and ten-
nis. Home address: Clare.
MR. ARTHUR WHITEMAN, TOWN
CLERK.
(Corporation of Clare.)
He was born at London, England
17th July, 1882, and educated a
Mortlake, England. He arrived it
Australia, September Bth, 1908. Elevei
years’ service in Council. He was r
resident of the district for 28 years
He is Secretary to the Independen
Order of Rechabite Lodge. His spor
is bowls. He served abroad with th
50th Battalion, A.1.F., on active set
vice. Home address, Clare.


i|l'
■ !■ .
.., - > iipy^Miili
PAST MAYOR GEORGE JOHN
HARMER.
(District Council of Clare.)
Born at Clare, 24th Match, 1871 ,
educated at Clare State School and
Canon Webb’s Grammar School.
Positions held in Council; Mayor of
Clare, 1917-1918; six years as Coun-
cillor; re-elected. December, 1935.
Business, Butcher. Past President
Clare A. and H. Society, Clare Racing
Club, past member of the Clare Hos-
pital Board, present member and
Director Mid-Northern Klectricity Co.,
member of the Free Planting Com-
■ and Vic. Benevolent Society,
Past Chairman of the Institute Com-
mittee, Past Master Masonic Mark
and Blue Lodge, Clare; Past N.G. of
Oddfellows, M.U., Lodge, and present
Chairman of Trustees. Supporter of
all snorts. Home address, Clare.
ALEXANDER JOHN MELROSE,
M.P., J.P.
(Past Chairman of the District Council of
Stanley.)
Born at Kooringa, Burra. 18th
March, 1889; educated at St. Peter’s
Collegiate School. Service in Council.
District Council of Stanley, 1919-32;
Chairman, 1921-32; Chairman Distiict
Council of Clare. 1932-36. A Justice
of the Peace. Member of the House
of Assembly for Burra Burra since
1933. Member of the Parliamentary
Joint House Committee. Vice-Presi-
dent of Liberal and Country League,
Chairman of Primary Producers’
Committee of L.C.L., Chairman of
Directors Mintaro Slate and Flagstone
Co., member of Board of Manage-
ment Clare and District Hospital since
1924, Chairman since 1933. Member
of Council of Stockowners Associa-
tion. Business, Sheep Farmer. Mr.
Melrose introduced Percheron Horses
into S.A.; now oWns leading stud of
Percheron Horses in Australia. Home
address, Mintaro.
CHAIRMAN, CHARLES NEATE.
(District Council of Clare.)
Born at Caltowie, 23rd August, 1881.
He was educated at Caltowie Public
School. Twelve and a half years’ ser-
vice in Council; 8J years as Chair-
man. He has been for 26 years a re-
sident of the district. For 15 years
he was Committeeman. Clare A. and
H. Society; 6 years a Director of Stan-
ley Fruits’ Association; 3 years
an Inspector of Dried Fruits. Busi-
ness, Gardener and Vigneron. He is a
member of the Independent Order of
Oddfellows’ Lodge, M.U. He is
President of the Stanley Football
Association, President of the Stanley
Flat Football Club, and Committeeman
of the Clare Rifle Club. Mr. Neate,
after leaving school, was employed on
his father's farm and then proceeded
to Eyre's Peninsula, taking up land in
the Hundred of Shannon. He was one
of the original pioneers where Yee-
lanna now stands, but after three
years disposed of his interest and set-
tled at Clare. Home address, Stan-
ley Flat, Clare.
COUNCILLOR PERCIVAL COOMBE
JACKA.
(District Council of Clare.)
Born at Mount Remarkable, Mel-
rose, S.A.. 22nd February, 1890; edu-
cated at Melrose and Clare Public
Schools. Two and a half years’ ser-


nf‘ f
'**'
1 jt WB
fflLxV » < 4 M
B& ljHI
4 . v vjyP
Blj&V '-'m. ‘
i ii J8
IR : M i^MWB^WMBK^^
vice in Council. He has been a resi-
dent of the district for 21 years. He
has frequently acted as Clerk and
Overseer to District Council of Stan-
ley, is Joint Secretary of Wirrilla
Cricket and Sporting Clubs, and Presi-
dent of Mintaro Progress Association.
Business, Farmer and Grazier. Sports,
cricket and swimming. War Service :
Volunteered three times and was re-
jected. Home address, Mintaro.
COUNCILLOR ALBERT EDWARD
CROSSING.
(District Council of Clare.)
Born at Silverton, N.S.W., Ist May,
1891; educated at Adelaide. Ten
years’ service in Council. Fifteen
years a resident of the district. Busi-
ness, Farmer. War Service: Ist
Squadron Australian Flying Corps,
A.I.F. Home address, "Bernowne "
Farrell's Flat.
COUNCILLOR LEONARD JOHN
HARVEY.
(District Council of Clare.)
Born at Moonta. 30th December.
1897; educated at Moonta. Six years’
service in Council. Fifteen years a
resident of the district. Senior Vice-
President Clare Returned Soldiers’
Association. Member of the Show
Committee. Business, farmer. Mem-
ber of the Clare Masonic Lodge and
1.0.0.F.M.U., Clare. Councillor Har-
vey is a son of the late Hon W H
Harvey, M.L.C. War Service; Fn-
listed Bth February, 1916: discharged
June, 1919. Present address. Hilltown
S.A.
COUNCILLOR SAMUEL PINK
(District Council of Clare.)
Born at Clare, 7th December. 891.
He was educated at Clare. I ight
years’ service in the Council. He was
I i esident of the Dudley Branch
cultuial Bureau. His busines is
Farming - , and he was three wars
abroad on active service with the 13rd
Battalion, A.I.F. Home address, ( are.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES PINK
(District Council of Clare.)
Born at Clare, 9th July, 1888 He
was educated at Clare Public School.
three years' service in Council. He
was for 48 years a resident of the
cis net. Business, General Merc .ant
and Financier. He was a member of
the Masonic and Rechabite Lo o- eS .
His sport is bowls. Home address,
Clare.


■
I iJHH
, /■;■ ’" M
4 j*
l- * °
'
M * -ii “-’i « .' \*iV v
;JHp8fi
WmM* mWBsam
J .-,„ 0^)%
* mt
IliliiiilB —
: t WiME
COUNCILLOR THOMAS EDWARD
RICHARDSON.
(District Council of Clare.)
Born at Seven Hills, 17th July, 1878.
He was educated at Seven Hills Pub-
School. Two years’ service in the
’’ouncil. He has been for 58 years a
esident of the district. His business
is Farming. Member of the Loyal
Clare Lodge, No. 40, 1.0.0.F.M.U. His
sport is cricket. Home address, Hill-
town, Clare.
COUNCILLOR JAMES HAVELOCK
RICHARDSON.
(District Council of Clare.)
Born at Seven Hills, 26th March,
1881; educated at Seven Hills Pub-
lic School. Eight years’ service in
Council. Fifty-four years a resident
of the district. Positions held: Coun-
cillor, President of the Stanley Cricket
Association, Vice-President of the
Clare A. and H. Society. Business,
Farmer. Member of the 1.0.0. F.
Lodge. Sport, cricket and golf. Home
address, Seven Hills.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM PAUL NESS.
(District Council of Clare.)
Born at Port Augusta, 11th August,
1886. He was educated at Pandappa
and Clare Public Schools. Three
years’ service in Council. He has been
a resident of the district for 38 years.
Past Chief Clare Caledonian Society,
Elder Presbyterian Church. Business,
Cordial Maker, Clare Mineral Waters
Co. Member of the Independent
Order of Rechabites. His sport is
bowls. Home address, Clare.
GEORGE BORWICK MARTIN.
(District Clerk of District Council of Clare.)
Born at Laura, 15th August, 1894;
educated at Unley Public School and
Adelaide High School. Nine years’
service in Council as District Clerk.
Sixteen years a resident of the dis-
trict. Positions held: Treasurer Clare
Agricultural and Horticultural So-
ciety, member of Executive of Local
Gov. Officers’ Association, Director of
Stanley Dried Fruits Association and
Clare Vale Co-op. Winery. Member
of the Clare Masonic Lodge, No. 12.
He is a Committeeman Clare Bowling
Club. War Service : Enlisted Septem-
ber. 1916; served with Ist Division Sig.
Co. and Ist Division Artillery, H.O.
Home address, Clare.




v, ' : - -1 . .*? '^p*'
- "'- - ; v -’ " 1 ' :-> ; ■
■■■■-jT^^ : '« T t T-'~ ■" ■,..■■•-■;■ . f
■ il J ”-' SIS ■ -
¥*:#»% ' - , -.N' ; ,,-■ -, ■-
%#JI v\
\&g»- X • — — —— ——
Colonel Light Gardens
COLONEL LIGHT GARDENS, ONCE THE SITE OF MITCHAM A.I.F. CAMP


- ; • '
■ -
History of Colonel Light Gardens
The Gaiclen Suburb, known as Colonel Light Gardens
(named after Colonel Light, South Australia's first
Surveyoi-General), comprises an area of nearly 400 acres
and is situated at the foothills of Mitcham, a distance of
Failure to do this in the older countries, during the
early stages of the industrial revolution, following the
invention of the steam engine, led to the overcrowding of
houses and factories, with the fearful consequences of
Colonel Light Gardens, Once the Site of Mitcham A.I.F. Camp.
three and a half miles from the City of Adelaide G.P.O.
Before its development as a suburb the site was used as
a camp for training troops for the Great War, nearly 50,000
A.I.F. troops being prepared there for service overseas dur-
ing the years 1915-1918.
With the growth of secondary industries in Australia,
the subject of town planning and housing began to claim
attention. The concentration of large populations in the
cities emphasised the need of arranging the layout of
•shopping, manufacturing, and residential localities.
ciime, disease, and social unrest. Expensive scheme for
housing, widening loads, and providing public facilitie. for
industry are being carried out in an" attempt to rei edv
these evils.
Thanks to the foresight of the founders of this 5 ate.
and because until recent years secondary industry was
comparatively unimportant, the worst of the evils at aid-
ing unregulated growth of large cities was avoided.
Nevertheless, the need for keeping abreast of me deni
lequirements induced the Government, just prior to the


W r o take steps to educate public opinion in town plan-
nir and housing.
olonel Light Gardens was designed and developed to
la a garden suburb to house city workers in healthy,
al. and convenient circumstances. It has a popula-
,f 5,000, the capital value of ratable property is
■,OOO. assessment of land values £139,460, and the
lives of the Garden Suburb Act of 1919 have been
eved in so far as there isi
) Planned location of residential areas and business
centres.
b) A limitation of the number of houses to the acre.
c) Ample provision of open spaces and playgrounds.
d) Active encouragement of welfare, social, and
sporting organisations.
(e) Beautification of surroundings by tree planting in
streets and open spaces.
(f) Allocation of sites for churches, halls, schools,
theatre and hospitals.
The great majority of the residents own or are pur-
chasing their own homes, and whereas many families were
previously living in cramped and unhealthy conditions, they
are now' enjoying healthy, convenient, and beautiful sur-
roundings.
The administration is somewhat unique. Instead of
an elected Council, a Commissioner, who is directly under
the control of the Government, carries out the normal
duties of a Corporation constructing and maintaining the
roads, administering the Health Acts, and all Acts apper-
taining to Local Government, developing and controlling
recreation reserves, and exercising the official functions
of a Mayor and Corporation.


A ‘ t ; : -
E
-
***' ’ "iijiw
SbBHHh ||
* mF' JESii
g|| r -- k ' S .# „ ; ' Wm
BMBk
Mi
|||L . |v
Hp t "#•••••** JPiPiil
TOM COLLINGS STEPHENS, A.M.I.E.
(Aust.), A.R,San.I. (London), J.P.
(The Garden Suburb Commissioner Colonel
Light Gardens.)
Mr. Stephens was born at Hereford,
England, and educated at “Blue Coat"
School, Hereford. Articled to the
Borough Engineer, Ludlow. Arrived
in Australia, November, 1909. Fifteen
years’ service in Council administra-
tion. A resident of the district for 12
years. As Garden Suburb Commis-
sioner his service to the suburb has
been marked by his efficient adminis-
tration, straightforward manner, un-
failing courtesy, and tact. His pres-
ence is welcomed by all charitable and
social bodies in the suburb. He is a
member of the R.S. & S.I.L.A. Served
with the Engineers in France, and after
his return joined the C.M.F. for a fur-
ther ten years. He retired with the
rank of Major. His sports are golf,
bowls, and swimming. Present address,
18 Salisbury Crescent, Colonel Light
Gardens.
PAST COMMISSIONER CHARLES
DAVENPORT HARRIS.
(Colonel Light Gardens Suburb.)
Born at Norwood, 27th December.
1861, and educated at Hosking’s
Academy, Gouger Street, and Nesbit’s
Grammar College, North Adelaide.
Service as Garden Suburb Commis-
sioner, Ist March, 1921, to 31st Decem-
ber. 1927, and during Mr. Harris’ term
as Commissioner many splendid im-
provements were made to the Colonel
Light Gardens Suburb. During the
time that Mr. Harris was in office
Colonel Light Gardens was surveyed
and developed. Past Master, Lodge of
Harmony (Masonic). Sports: Past
Patron of Reade Park Tennis Club,
now a member of Adelaide Bowling
Club. Present address: 17 Churcher
Street, Thorngate.
C. B. HARRIS, J.P.
(The Town Clerk and Secretary to G rdei
Suburb Commissioner, Colonel Lie t
Gardens.)
Born at Melbourne, 26th Jan ary
1903. Educated at Broken Hi!
High School and Adelaide S iiool
of Mines. Ten years’ service in ( nun
cil as Clerk, Town Clerk, and f ere
tary to Garden Suburb Commiss mer.
Mr. Harris is a nephew of the late
Commissioner, Mr. C. D. Harris He
was four years mine surveyin. at
Broken Hill, and four years ar cled
pupil and licensed surveyor in \de-
laide. His sports are tennis and s mi-
ming. He is very keen on scot ing.
being actively connected with the Boy
Scouts’ Movement in South Aus "alia
for the past eight years, prior to that
in Broken Hill. Lie holds posith i of
Assistant Headquarters Commiss ■ >ncr
for Wolf Cubs. Present address; 25
Westall Street, Hyde Park.


Corporation of Edithburgh


History of Edithburgh
Edithburgh derives its name from Lady Edith Ferguson,
wife of Sir James Ferguson, who was Governor of South
Australia when the town came into existence, Edith and
Blanche Streets being named in honour of the Governor’s
daughters. Ihe distance from Adelaide is 571 miles west,
and communication is established bv steamers twice
weekly.
Edithburgh was proclaimed a corporate town on
January 12th, 1882, and the first meeting of the Town
Council was held on January 23rd, 1882, there being present
■ Messrs. A\ . Goldsmith, O. G. Rechner, C. S. Robert, and
F. Vorwerk, Mr. James Day being elected to the chair and
Mr. J. Gottschalck was appointed Clerk. The assessment
for that year amounted to £1,847 10/-, the rating being
1/- in the £l. The assessment for 1923 is £3,951, and
the rating is 1/6 in the £l.
1 he area of the Corporation is 1,470 acres, divided into
two wards, named North and South respectively. The
total mileage of roads within the boundaries of the corpora-
tion is approximately ten miles. A steel track is laid from
the town to the outside district for a distance of seven
miles, and is used for the heavy salt traffic.
Salt is the principal product of this town. In addition
to salt, large quantities of gypsum, grain, lime, produce, and
livestock pass over the jetty outwardly, while coming
inwardly one finds goods of all description, including
machinery, motor cars, etc.
In 1887 the population was 242 persons, while at the
last census, taken in 1921, the population had increased to
797 persons. The dwellings number 171, and other build-
ings, including stores, shops, churches, etc., number 47.
The town is surrounded by park lands, of which nine
acres are specially reserved as a recreation ground, and a
large area has in recent years been reserved for golf.
Edithburgh is one of the best known and most attractive
resorts for tourists. It is a recognised feature on a public
holiday, as well as at other times, to have excursions from
Port Adelaide, and during the holiday season a large
number of visitors avail themselves of the opportunity of a
trip across the wa.er, The climate is mild and salubrious,
and, generally speaking, even after the hottest dav, there
is a cool southerly breeze in the evening. Troubridge
Island, with a lighthouse thereon, lies about five miles a wav
in the Gulf, and is a great attrac ion for visitors from the
mainland.
i he following is a list of the past and present members
of the Corporation: Messrs. A. H. Wallace, J. M. Lines. W.
Baker, B. Rose, R. Bramley, E. J. Matthews, A. J. . sser,
G. H. Hart. G. \\ . Jones, A. J. B. Stanton, H. T. Bad ams.
W. J. Smelt, G. Dunn. H. L. Rattley, W. J. Hart, G. dart,
J. Day, E. Boord, C. S. Robert, \V. V. Cornish, .T.
Gluyas, G. F. Benson, H. J. Middleton, O. G. Rechn r, F.
Vorwerk, T. Oliver, S. J. Bennett, E. Tomsett, J. C. loin,
j. j. Beaumont, 1. Clifford, C. Farrington, W. H. )are,
E. C. Johncock. C. D. Stephens, C. Batten. H. A . J.
Shellard, G. F. D. Stoneham, W. W. Cotterell, AA r . Sock
ings, J. M. Henschke, J. Oldland, A. E. Butt, J. M. I ines,
\V . J. Smelt, A. H. Miller, R. j. Arthur, P. S. Richar son
J. H. Richardson, E. J. Braund, J. C. Bartram, f. ose,
H. E. Aldenhoven, K. Smitham (Clerk), G. E. A bott
(Clerk), J. O’Leary, W. M. Robert, W. J. Bramley, .L.
Sayer (present Town Clerk).
Returned Soldier members of Council arc; ohn
O Leary (Mayor, 1930-1), lb S. Richardson (M vor,
1927-8-9), J. H. Richardson (Mayor, 1931-2-3-4-5-6), T J.
Arthur (Councillor), F. L. Sayer (Town Clerk from 1928
to date).
Returned soldiers take a prominent part in affai s of
the town, the following positions being held by ex-Sc vice
men: Head School Teacher, Postmaster, Police Cons able.
Town Clerk, Mayor.
There are two tine hotels in the town, and hot are
leased by returned soldiers, who specially cater for vis' ors,
and know how to do it.


if a
’
S WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF
TITHBURGH, JOHN HARTLEY
RICHARDSON.
;n at Port Lincoln on the 17th
, 1897, and educated at Port Lin-
Public School. Adelaide High
01, and Ouelta Military College,
served five years as Councillor
Mayor in the Edithburgh Council,
has been a resident of the district
fourteen years. Mr. Richardson is
usiness as an agent, and is a mem-
of the Melville No. 36 Masonic
ee. He served two years abroad
active service with the A.I.E. dur-
the Great War, and was for five
rs an officer in the Indian Army,
sports are football, tennis, and
s mming.
PAST MAYOR PHILIP STUART
RICHARDSON.
(Corporation of Edithburgh.)
Born at Willowie, 22nd January,
1890. Educated at the Adelaide High
hool and Roseworthy College. Has
served nine years in the Council,
seven years as Councillor and two
years as Mayor, and has resided in the
district for seventeen years. He is in
business as an agent. A member of
the Melville No. 36 Masonic Lodge.
War service; Four years with the
A.T.F., 18th Battery. His sports are
football and tennis.
PAST MAYOR GEORGE HORACE
HART, J.P.
(Corporation of Edithburgh.)
Born at Yorketown, 17th April, 1878.
Educated at Yorketown. Positions
held : Councillor and Mayor of Edith-
burgh for four years; Councillor and
Chairman, District Council of Mel-
ville. Business: Farmer and pas-
toralist, and company director. Past
Grand of the M.Lk1.0.0.F. Home ad
dress; Edithburgh.
COUNCILLOR JAMES ROSE, J.P.
(Corporation of Edithburgh.)
Councillor Rose was born at Edith
burgh on the 10:h April, 1877, and
has resided in the district all his life
He has had eight years’ service in the
Council, and has always placed the
welfare of his district foremost. Coun-
cillor Rose is in business as an agent.
FRANK LEONARD SAYER, J.P.
(Town Clerk, Corporation of Edithburgh.)
Born at Bush Hill Park, Enfield,
England, 12th July, 1892. Arrived in
Australia, December, 1912. Educated
at Cromer High School, Norfolk,
England. Has served in the Council
since 10th May, 1928. Nine years a
resident of the district. Business:
Radio engineer. Sports: Golf and
rifle shooting. Positions held in Coun-
cil: Town Clerk and Secretary of the
Local Board of Health. War service:
Enlisted November, 1914, with the 9th
Light Llorse; served in Egypt and
Gallipoli; wounded at Gallipoli. In
hospital at Malta and London; dis-
charged March, 1916, unfit for further
service. Mr. Saver's parents reside in
Kent, England. Father and four bro-
thers served in the Great War. Mr.
Sayer studied the dairying industry
with H. W. Morphett and Co., 1910
and 1917, and then took up dairy farm-
ing at Neeta (Ponde), River Murray .
till 1926.




ygr :
lOCOMOTlYE Manufactured
JL J« 4 I ‘
Corporation of Gawler
THIS ENGINE WAS DRIVEN UP MURRAY STREET, GAWLER, BY LORD
KINTORE (THEN GOVERNOR OF S.A.).


HISTORY OF GAWLER
Gawler, titled in the early days “The Colonial Athens,”
and regarded as the second town in the Colony, has had,
within the century, a most varied experience. It is situated
near the junction of the North and South Para Rivers
with the River Gawler, and is 26 miles north of Adelaide
at the foot of the Barossa Ranges, which contain mineral
wealth that has not yet been sufficiently prospected to
prove a payable working proposition.
The first representative of the great white race to
arrive is not recorded. The coming of the new man was
probably in the year 1837. The first authentic account we
have of the presence of white men is that given by Dr.
Nott. He states that in 1837 an exploring party sent out
by Messrs. Light and Finnis, returning from the neigh-
bourhood of the Barossa Ranges, fell in with a wanderer
in the scrub, worn out with exhaustion, hunger, and thirst.
After relieving his wants and lifting him into their dray,
they carried him as far as the ford on the South Para River,
when, on attempting to rouse him, they found him dead.
Having no implements wherewith to dig a grave they
placed his body upright in the hollow of a tree by the
riverside, and covered it decently with bark and sticks. A
short time afterwards it was discovered by another ex-
ploring party and properly interred near the spot. The
place of burial to this day retains the name of the Dead
Man’s Pass, and is now the ford crossing the South Para
River at the southern extremity of Murray Street (main
business thoroughfare), Gawler. At this time the ford
itself and all the surrounding district was occupied by
Mr. Horrocks as a sheep station. It would seem that prior
to the advent of these explorers at least Mr. Horrocks
or his representatives must have visited the neighbour-
hood, and the fact that the party came across the unfor-
tunate wanderer is an indication that they had been pre-
ceded in their exploration of the district.
It was early in 1839 that Gawler Special Survey was
made. Mr. Henry Dundas Murray, Mr. John Reid, and
others acted on the recommendation of Colonel Light, who
regarded the site as the key to the North, and applied for
a special survey of 4,000 acres. This was subsequently
called “Gawler” after the Governor. The date of the
original grant of the land is October 4th, 1839, and was
made to Henry Dundas Murray and John Reid. The - ,000
acres comprised 1,578 acres purchased in England and
2,422 acres purchased in South Australia. There were
seven preliminary land orders of 134 acres each and eight
of 80 acres each. The first settler in this locality was Mr.
John Reid. who. with his family, came at the beginning of
1839. They established a homestead on the northern ank
of the North Para River in line with the eastern portion
of what is now Murray Street, and named the spot “( on-
lea.” To-day not a sign of the building is visible, am the
land is owned by Mrs. M. Lynch, of Gawler, still reta ring
the original name.
In 1842 copper deposits were discovered at Kapi nda.
and led to a large carrying trade between that town and
Port Adelaide. Gawler became the stopping-place, both
ways, and rapidly grew into an important centre. A rost
office was established and a stage coach—or spring c rt—
service was inaugurated with Adelaide. By 1846 the
through traffic had swollen to large dimensions, owii g to
the discovery and development of the Burra copper n nes,
and on occasions there were assembled over 200 teai s in
the town.
On 14th June, 1848, Mr. Jas. Martin arrived am laid
the foundation of an industry which made Gawler fa ions
throughout the Commonwealth, and which played a grater
part in the extension of the town than any' other f tor.
Mr. Martin began as a maker of bullock drays, then ven-
tured to manufacture agricultural implements; afterwards
his enterprise led him to undertake the constructic i of
mining machinery and finally his establishment pro( need
railway locomotives.
A severe setback to progress was received in 185k
when the Victorian diggings were discovered. Tin lust
for gold made eveiwbody anxious to go, and at Chri mas


■ * 1 p I' s §
Fii ■ I ■| : :J$|| SS^P^
of tl year only five adult males were left in the town.
One m sold his cottage for £5 to enable him to go. On
their eturn the town received a new lease of life.
R. J. TURNER, S.M., First Mayor of Gawler.
1857 saw the foundation of the Gawler Institute and
Town Hall well and truly laid. In the same year the rail-
way to the town was opened and telegraphic communica-
tion was established, banking facilities were provided, and
the printing press made its appearance.
The Eagle Foundry was started in March, 1870, by the
late Air David Thomson, and is now carried on by his son,
Mr. J. J. Thomson. It is the oldest continuous business of
its kind in Gawler.
1878-1887.—1n these ten years further substantial
advance was made. The manufacture of mining machinery
and general engineering requisites grew to a large dimen-
sion in the works of Messrs. Jas. Martin & Co., over-
shadowing to some extent even the large business in
agricultural machinery. Contracts for the construction of
railway trucks for the South Australian Government were
also undertaken. This decade saw the dissolution of part-
nership of Messrs. Martin & Co. so far as Mr. Fred. May
was concerned, and he, with his brother, Mr. Alfred May,
commenced to manufacture on their own account at Gaw-
ler West. This enterprise rapidly grew to larger propor-
tions. Mr. fas. Robinson also started his Britannia
Foundry.
In 1901 the Barossa water scheme was made available;
the same period saw the erection of the Exhibition Build-
ing' and the enclosing of the Recreation Ground.
1911.—The town installed its own electric light plant,
and managed it until 1923, when it was taken over by the
Adelaide Electric Supply Co. Ltd.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN GAWLER.
In 1857 Gawler attained the dignity of Municipal
Government, the proclamation of the incorporation of the
town appearing in the “Government Gazette” of 9th July,
1857, and the first Council meeting being held on 4th
September in that year. The Council appointed by the
Government was :
South Ward—-Alderman [as. Martin, Councillors
R. J. Turner and B. Cotter.
North Ward —Alderman Geo. Warren, Councillors
T. Willcox and T. O. Jones.
East Ward —Alderman F. F. Turner, Councillors
J. Fotheringham and J. H. Harrison.
There were three assessors, one for each ward, viz.,
M essrs. Jas. Harris, W. L. Bathurst, and G. Gozzard.
Mr. R. J. Turner was elected by his fellow-members
of the Council to be the first Mayor; Mr. John Rudall,
Town Clerk.
1861. —The Act abolished the position of Alderman and
conferred upon the ratepayers the privilege of electing
their Mayor.


:
' t"T
DESTRICT COUNCILS.
Gawler South. —The larger portion of the neighbour-
hood of the South Para, on the south side, including Gawler
West, Bassett Town, Evanston, and portion of Gawler
South, was for many years locally governed by the Dis-
trict Council of Munno Para West. To be controlled by
a body which had its centre at Penh eld, about 10 miles
distant, was against the grain of many residents of Gawler
South, and several moves were made with the view of
separating from the district, and in 1899 the desire of the
ratepayers was consummated. On 14th September, 1899, the
district of Gawler South was proclaimed. The first Council
comprised:—East Ward, Messrs. D. McMillan (Chairman)
and G. L. Bywaters; North Ward, jas. Jones and John
Crosbie ; West Ward, Win, Bassett, Snr., and Jas. Crump.
District Clerk, Chas. Ayling.
9 • CEORCES CHURCH, GAWLER l&fS*
District Council of Mudla Wirra adjoins the nuni-
cipality on the northern and north-western boundai es.
District Council of Munno Para East. A small mtion
of its northern boundary abuts the municipality a the
neighbourhood of the Dead Man’s Pass.
Barossa District Council abuts on the eastern boi idary.
h reeling District joins the municipality on its iorth-
eastern boundary and includes Clonlea.
GREATER GAWLER.
The amalgamation of the Gawler Municipali v and
Gawler South District Council with the residentia areas
of the various beforementioned districts was procla red in
EARLY MAYORS OF GAWLER.


933, raising the area of the municipality from 570 acres
3 approximately 2.270, the assessment from £25,000 to
43,000, capital value on ratable property £860,000, and
lie population from 1,800 to approximately 7,000. The
new Council has six wards, twelve Councillors, and a
Mayor elected by the ratepayers. The sitting members
it present being: Mayor, Wm. Rice; Barossa Ward, Coun-
illors Antwis and J. A. E. Duldig; Central Ward, Crs. L.
Ey and Quarton; Church Hill Ward, Crs. G. McLean and
P. F Filsell; Evanston Ward, Crs. Allwood and W. D.
Noack; Gawler South Ward, Crs. Pannan and Deuter;
Willaston Ward, Crs. Dwver and A. D. Thomson. F. J.
Richards, Town Clerk and Surveyor; Assistant, Miss D. E
Morrell.
List of Mayors.—Turner, R. J.; Loutit, T. F.; Jones
John; Wilkinson, J. C.: Lucas, Sir E.; Bight, Ceorge:
Temby, F. D.; Connor, D. C.; Martin. Jas.; Jones, T. O.:
Dawson, James; Barton, L. S.; Harris, F. D.; Fergusson
Jas.; Marsh, H. L.; Nott, G.: Clements, E.: Bright, J. E.;
Deland, B. E.; Thomson, R. K.: Smith, A.; Busbridge,
J., Jnr.; Mitchell, J.: Wincey, W. F.: Dean, H.: Cox. W. H.;
Rebbeck, C. G.; Dawkins, Win.: Lynch, M.
Greater Gawler. —Cox, W.H., and Rice, W in.


* 0 x oH
f?' "* g
?-n
• .- mMi-" : ■■•■--
M: * ■ Mafe. g
J
■Kr «!■
-iBs^wMSi
a :g
mm K : WSk
ft x mm | ,Jfjf J|p '1mm
hHHrk
H mt I
ffilr /■'f ; ' ip
m
\ I 4? w ■ B
JL _ i -
v
I^B
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF THE
CORPORATION OF GAWLER, WILLIAM
RICE, LP.
Born at Dutton, 16th March, 1867,
and educated at the Dutton Public
School. Service in Council: 2 years as
Councillor, 2\ years as Mayor.
Twenty-eight years a resident of the
district. Mr. Rice is a Justice of the
Peace, and has retired from business.
Sport, bowls. Home address, Blanche
Street, Gawler.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM ANTWIS
(Corporation of Gawlcr.)
Born at Williamstown, 20th Decem-
ber, 1869, and educated at Williams-
town and Broken Hill. Service in
Council : 25 years. Fifty years a resi-
dent of the district. Business. Saddler.
Worshipful Master of the Lodge of
Fidelity, No. 5, Masonic, and present
Treasurer. A Past Chief Ruler of the
Court Bushman's Pride, Foresters'
Lodge, Gawler, and the Secretary and
Treasurer of the Court Williamstown
Lodge for 36 years. Past District
Chief Ruler of the Adelaide District
Ancient Order of Foresters' Lodge.
Sports, bowls. Home address, Gawler.
COUNCILLOR LOUIS EY.
(Corporation of Gawlcr.)
Born at Wallaroo, 11th October,
1882, and educated at Gawler. Ser-
vice in Council :2\ years. Forty-eight
years a resident of the district. Pre-
sident of the Gawler Club, Treasurer
of the Gawler Bowling Club, and
Chairman of the Gawler Oval Board.
Business, Grain Merchant. A mem-
ber of the Ancient Order of Foresters’
Lodge and Masonic Fidelity. Sports
bowls and interested in football
Home address, Gawler.
COUNCILLOR VICTOR HUGO
DEUTER, J.P.
(Corporation of Gawler.)
Born at Gawler, 31st July, 1873
educated at Walloway Public School
Service in Council: 4 years Council
lor in the Gawler South District Coun
cil and 1 year in the Gawler Corpora
tion. Thirty years a resident of tin
district. Positions held: Councillo
and a Justice of the Peace. Business
Ice Cream Manufacturer. A membe
of the United Ancient Order of Druids
Lodge, and a Past Arch Druid. Mr
Deuter has done a considerabl
amount of travelling within the State
and has a thorougdi knowledge o


Im i
'*M ■ -M
' w * * ***ya
*
xsH
i Ap»a
1^111
iW^S
I f
|| W if: I
- *%* Mr I
M f
- ‘ : <: » / • - -i
ii ■*> I
'glC jjSg
«\ ii?- • t ;
m. Wm\A k
IsL
Ml
WL
* ' m&aL »a H :^S$S^
ft r - : m
:any districts as regards their public
ervices. Home address, 25, Fourth
Street, Gawler South.
COUNCILLOR PERCY JOHN FILSELL.
(Corporation of Gawler.)
Born at Thebarton, 18th April, 1885,
and educated at Currie Street and The-
barton Public Schools. Service in
Council: 2\ years. Six years a resi-
dent of the district. Business, Sawyer
A member of the United Order of
Druids’ Lodge. Sports, football,
cricket, running, boxing, swimming,
and fishing. He is a member of the
South Australian Anglers’ Association.
Mr. Filsell served two years abroad in
Egypt and Gallipoli with the 3rd Light
Horse Regiment, A.I.F. Home
address, 17 King Street, Gawler.
COUNCILLOR EDWIN HERBERT
QUARTON.
(Corporation of Gawlcr.)
Born at Godmaiichester, Hunting-
ton, England, in the year 1873. Ar-
rived in Australia in 1876; and edu-
cated at Gawler Private and Public
Schools. Service in Council: 2 years.
Fifty-nine years a resident of the dis-
trict. Pie was Foreman of Fit-
ting and Erecting Shops, James Mar-
tin and Perry & Co., loco, engineers.
Present Business, Garage Proprietor.
A member of the Rechabite Lodge and
the Amalgamated Engineers. Home
address, Gawler East.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE A. W. McLEAN.
(Corporation of Gawlcr.)
Born at Gawler. sth August, 1896,
.nd educated at Gawler Public School.
Service in Council: 7 years. Forty
years a resident of the district. Sec-
retary of the Gawler Rechabite Lodge
and District Chief Ruler. Vice-Pre-
sident of the Gawler A. H. and F.
Society. Business, Veterinary Sur-


llll
* • 0
j| \ .
\ fi
I , s: v. I X '
'
geon and Undertaker. Sports, bowls.
Home address, Jacob Street, Gawler.
COUNCILLOR EDWARD PHILLIP
ALL WOOD.
(Corporation of Gawlcr.)
Born at Rosewater, Port Adelaide,
20th May, 1889, and educated at Marist
Bros.’ School. Service in Council: 10
years. Twenty-six years a resident of
the district. Business, Garage Pro-
prietor. A member of the Indepen-
dent Order of Oddfellows' Lodge,
American Order. Home address,
Eighth Street, Gawler South.
COUNCILLOR ALEXANDER DAVID
THOMSON.
(Corporation of Gawlcr.)
Born at Gawler, 23rd June, 1872, ai 1
educated at the Gawler Public Schor,
Mr. Thomson was Councillor f r
2 years on the Mudla Wirra Soul i
District Council, and three monti s
Councillor on the Gawler Corporatio .
Sixty-four years a resident of the di -
trict. A member of the Ancient Order
of Foresters’ Lodge. Sports, crick.t
and football. Home address. Will?. •
ton.


*5* *
:.
A *. jjp&.
$W f 1 ■' §f : ;^S
HjHk i
■ * ,. . . • V
' r<: *\ '
ML- .7:
, : <\ mmw *5 ir v
j| n Ml Ji
In Mf .lagff
4* , .,JSSB /Jk ,
iia,i
I ! i
* p«J
J?
OUNCILLOR CORNELIUS DONALD
DWYER.
(Corporation of Gawler.)
Born at Gawler in the year 1870 and
e ncated at Gawler. Service in Coun-
:il: 3 years. Sixty-six years a resi-
dent of the district. Ex-Chairman of
the Gawler Oval Board, and ex-Chair-
man of the Gawler Progressive Asso-
ciation. Business, Lime Merchant. A
member of the Grand United Order of
Oddfellows’ Lodge. Home address,
Willaston.
COUNCILLOR JOHANN ALFRED
EDWIN DULDIG.
(Corporation of Gawler.)
Born at Peter’s Hill, near Riverton.
27th June, 1884, and educated at
World’s End Public School and Con-
cordia College, Adelaide. Service in
Council: 12 months. Eighteen years a
resident of the district. Business, Fib-
rous Paster Manufacturer; formerly a
Lutheran School Teacher until the
schools were closed in 1916. Sport,
cricket. Home address, East Terrace,
Gawler.
COUNCILLOR ARTHUR BAWDEN
PANNAN.
(Corporation of Gawler.)
Born at Kaclina, 24th May, 1877:
educated at the Kadina Public School.
Service in Council; 7 years. Thirty
years a resident of the district. Home
address, 33, Fourth Street, Gawler
South.
FREDERICK JAMES RICHARDS, TOWN
CLERK AND SURVEYOR.
(Corporation of Gawler.)
Born at Kadina and educated at
Kadina and Wallaroo Mines Public
Schools and the Moonta School of
Mines. Service in Council: 13 years,
and 13 years a resident of the dis-
trict. Positions held : A Surveyor and
Draftsman for the Wallaroo-Moonta
Mining Company, a teacher of the
South Australian Technical School.


' s tv-. v, -■ *$|||||
'
r ivj
>*
iis
«■
Present business, Town Clerk and Sur-
veyor. A member of the Duke of
Leinster Masonic Lodge, No. 363, and
United Ancient Order of Druids'
Lodge. Sports, bowls. Home address,
3, Warren Street, Gawler.
COUNCILLOR W. D. NOACK.
(Corporation of Gawler.)
Born at Dutton, February Bth, 1881 ;
educated at Neal’s Flat. Service in
Council: 2 years. Eighteen years a
resident of the district. Business,
Chaff Merchant. Home address, Gaw-
ler Railway.
MISS DOROTHY EILEEN MORREL
(Assistant Clerk, Corporation of Gawler )
Born at Peake, South Australia, at cl
educated at Birdwood and Peake Pub-
lic Schools. Nailsworth Central Scho 1,
Business College and Gawler Techi i-
cal School. Service in Council: 3 yea s.
Six and a half years a resident f
the district. A member of the G rl
Guides and Gawler Church of Chri t.
Sports, tennis and basket ball. Ho e
address, Gawler South.


■ : , . v -\ - \ / X '
* * . \/ \
III \ jL %->• \
•;• % \ :i. , ■> i
x * * • \ yy*
» ' jjp
Mt „ ,®- r 'S~S; : ' , ■ §
Corporation of the Town of Glenelg
H.M.S. “GALATEA” AT GLENELG, 31st OCTOBER, 1867.
His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh, K.G., with several of his officers and crew on
the main deck of the H.M.S. “Galatea.” His Royal Highness is seen fifth from the right,
and is wearing two medals. The “Galatea” arrived at Glenelg on 30th October, 1867, having-
sailed direct to South Australia from Simon’s Bay, South Africa.


{
History of Glenelg.
THE LANDING SITE AT GLENELG, 1836.
Glenelg was named after Lord Glenelg, who was Secre-
tary for the Colonies when the State was founded in 1836.
Two or three hundred people congregated at Holdfast
Bay, and the camp comprised about 40 huts and tents
scattered here and there without any regularity. As it was
reckoned that Governor Hindmarsh would reach his des-
tination any time in December, his arrival was eagerly
awaited. Colonel Light despatched the “Cygnet” with
Captain Lipson, the Harbour-master, to Port Lincoln, there
to await the arrival of the H.M.S. “Buffalo.” Each day the
people on the beach looked out over the Bay for the first
glimpse of the sails of the man-of-war, and an amusing
incident is told of the prevailing excitement: “One Sunday
morning, when Mr. Kingston was reading prayers with
Mr. Gilbert, his clerk, a whisper went round that an Eng-
lish vessel was in sight. Those nearest the door began to
quietly move out, followed by others, until at last the offi-
ciating' minister was left alone with his assistant, when the
former threw down the book, saying, ‘Come, Gilbert, it’s
no use our staying here,’ and the two went forth to join the
throng.”
Meanwhile, the “Buffalo” was in sight of South Aus-
tralian territory. She stood off Port Lincoln, and on
December 24th sighted the “Cygnet” in Spalding Cove.
Captain Lipson presented a letter from Colonel Light t ■
the Governor, and after a rapid examination of the delight-
ful scenery so charmingly portrayed by W estall, Captain
Hindmarsh set sail for Holdfast Bay, the “Cygnet acting
as consort to the “Buffalo.”
The early risers among the people at Holdfast Bay
were greatly excited on the morning of December 28th to
observe the sails of these two vessels cutting the horizon
in the Gulf. Soon all the people then in camp congregate I
on the beach and watched the ships anchor in the roa< -
stead. At 2 o'clock the following day, with their familie .
the Governor (Captain Hindmarsh), Mr. J. H. Fighter
(Resident Commissioner), Mr. George Stevenson (tie
SCENE OF THE LANDING SITE, 1936.


MOSELEY SQUARE, GLENELG, 1875.
Governor's Private Secretary), Mr. Osmond Gilles (the
Colonial Treasurer), and the Rev. C. B. Howard (the
Golonial Chaplain) left the ship in three boats. Y\ hen the
vice-regal party reached the beach a cordial welcome was
offered them by the band of pioneers, headed by Messrs.
iouger (Colonial Secretary), Brown (Emigration Agent),
filbert (Storekeeper), Kingston (Deputy Surveyor), John
Morphett, and Robert I homas.
The officials and principal people then adjourned to
fir. Gouger's tent, followed by nearly all the inhabitants,
where certain necessary formalities were observed. dhe
Governor read the orders in Council, constituting South
Australia a British Province, and appointing the Civil
Officers; the commission of Captain Hindmarsh was read,
and the oaths were administered to the officers present.
Then Mr. Stevenson (the Private Secretary) read, in the
hearing of all the people, the proclamation constituting
South Australia a Province of the British Empire. I his
historical ceremony was performed beneath a rugged gum-
tree, and as the species is typical of the country, no more
appropriate situation could have been chosen. !he reverend
eucalypt still exists, though torn and bent by the weight
of years. It is encircled by a fence, and upon it is a plate
inscribed with its history.
The Province of South Australia was in this manner
officially proclaimed on the 28th December, 1836, amid the
rejoicing of the little band of hardy men and women, who
were prepared and anxious to enter upon the work of its
development. Each year at the anniversary of that date at
Glenelg the birth of the Province is commemorated, and
honour done to the men and women who inaugurated its
career.
Glenelg is certainly South Australia’s chief watering-
place, interesting not only for its historic recollections, but
for its progression, beauty, salubrity, and peacefulness.
What matters to the present generation if at one time the
shore re-echoed with the wild shouts of the natives engaged
in tribal warfare, or their weird songs and strange cor-
roborees to celebrate death and victory in the wild bush
near to the shell beach. Now splendid residences grace the
seaside, imposing public halls and streets, while trams run
frequently; In 1856 the first means of public locomotion
to the Bay, as it is now usually called, came into use to
take people for pleasure and balmy breezes to the seaside.
It was a Colonial-built omnibus, called “The Red Rover,’
and it left the Royal Admiral yards every Sunday. The
fare was 3/- return; it was such a treat for the people,
and the rush for “The Red Rover” became so great that
a “Blue Rover” was soon in the running as well, and later
MOSELEY SQUARE, GLENELG, 1936.


f VN J I f I
TENT AND HUT AT GLENELG, S.A.
In this tent on December 28th, 1836, the Orders in Council con-
stituting the Province of South Australia, and the Commission
appointing Captain John Hindmarsh as Governor, were read, and the
oaths of office were administered to the Governor and members of
the Council. Later on the same day the Commission and Governor
Hindmarsh's Proclamation to the Colonists were read to about 200
settlers assembled in the vicinity.
(Drawn by J. M. Skipper.)
"The V ave" started daily journeys. In those days coach
proprietors were warm rivals. One, being of a pious turn
of mind, advertised thus: “This coach will start daily
(D.V.) at 10 a.m., returning at 4 p.m.” The other pro-
prietor, being somewhat illiterate and non-religious, was
puzzled over the D.V., and imagined it had something to
do with the weather. He accordingly put up a notice,
which ran : “This coach will run daily to Glenelg and back,
D. or not D.V.”
Now, on holidays and Sundays, the beach is crowded
with picnic parties, and very picturesque effects are seen
with the numbers of pretty tents dotted about the shore,
for, as the Londoner carries his campstool when going
pleasuring, so does the South Australian often take his
little tent when going picnicing.
The district of Glenelg is now in the capable hands of
an excellent Council under the guidance of the Mayor,
Mr. William Fisk, J.P. The other sitting members are-
Aldermen, Messrs. J. E. Lawton, P. Fox. W. Allen, and
E. W. Percival; Councillors, Messrs. A. E. J. Johnson, W. F.
Buttrose, E. Graham, C. C. L. Rogers, P. J. Williams, and
F. H. Keen; Town Clerk, Mr. F. A. Lewis: Assistant Town
Clerk, Mr. S. R. Osborn.
The unimproved assessment of land value is £912,117.
and the capital ratable property is £4,177,335. The total
length of roads under Council control is 374 miles.
Glenelg is situated six miles from Adelaide, and has an
excellent bituminous road. It was established a Corpora-
tion in 1855.
In the following pages will be found photos nd
biographies of past and present members of the Glenelg
Corporation.


; . 1^'
v' ! Kjffi
"'*“ • & A JM
ftmri ~ Jpl
■ A ,
,< T&ijM-ir >&*VaK "i <* •' • *" ”’
'
. . ■■ • - ■
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF
GLENELG, WILLIAM FISK, J.P.
Born at Adelaide, 17th July, 1871;
educated at Whinham College, North
Adelaide. Service in Council: 1 year
as Councillor, 4 years as Mayor. Dur-
ing the five years that Mr. Fisk has
been connected with the Glenelg Cor-
poration many fine improvements have
been made to the town. He has been
most zealous to further the interests
of Glenelg in every respect, and it has
been due to him as Mayor of the
town that these fine improvements
have been carried out, and the Town
of Glenelg has well earned the name
of the premier watering place of South
Australia. Mr. Fisk has been a resi-
dent of the town for 48 years, and is
in business as a chemist and dentist.
He is a member of the Centenary Exe-
cutive and Chairman of the following:
Marion and Glenelg Abattoirs Board,
Commemoration Day Sports x\ssocia-
tion, Glenelg Lifesaving Club, Glenelg
Branch of St. John Ambulance
Society, D.T.N. Society; President
of the Optimist Society and
Glenelg Golf Club; and Patron of the
undermentioned clubs : Holdfast
Bowling Club, Glenelg Cricket Club,
Glenelg Football Club, Glenelg Tennis
Association. His sports are cricket
and lacrosse.


s^pllll
A * V '^%#
a
.. —
Ill
M* mk
i^^^®w f ':|''' y * . ,, VHHh
J
i I'‘^'V.jsRHjl|HB
FRANK SMITH, PAST MAYOR.
(Glenelg Corporation)
Born at Glenelg. 3rd May, 1888;
educated at Glenelg Grammar School.
Six years’ service in Council as Coun-
cillor, Alderman, and Mayor. Busi-
ness, Managing Director of James
Smith. Ltd., Hindley Street, Adelaide.
President of B Grade Football Club of
Glenelg. His sport is tennis. Address,
38. Broadway, Glenelg.
THE LATE HENRY SAMUEL
RUGLESS J.P.
(Past Mayor of Glenelg.)
Born at Plympton on the 19th June,
1863, and educated at Glenelg. The
late Mr. Rugless served 20 years in the
Glenelg Council as Councillor, Alder-
man, and Mayor, and before his death
was a resident of the district for 70
years. He was formerly a railway
employee, and later a wood and fod-
der merchant at Glenelg. A trustee
1.0.0. F. Manchester Unity Lodge, pat-
ron of Glenelg Football Club, and
vice-president of other sporting bodies
in the district.
THE LATE RICHARD SMITH, J.P.
(Past Mayor of Glenelg.)
Was born at Westerham, Kent,
England, on July 27th. 1839, and ar-
rived in Australia in the year 1862.
The late Mr. Smith was a partner and
Chairman of Directors of George P.
Harris. Scarfe, & Co.. Ltd., until his
decease. Also a Director of Mutual
Life and Citizens’ Insurance Co. of
Australasia and Executor, Trustee
and Agency Co. Was a foun-
dation and life member of the South
Australian Commercial Travellers’ and
Warehousemen’s Association. The late
Mr. Smith served 3 years in the Gk
elg Council as Mayor. His sport v
bowls.
JAMES WILLIAM SUTHERLAND.
(Past Mayor of Glenelg.)
Born at Brighton, South Austral
August 17th, 1880: educated at Gle
elg Public School and Glenelg G
legiate School. Service in Council:
years. F'ifty-three years a resident
the district. Positions held in Counc
Councillor, Alderman, and Man
Chairman of Works and Foreshc
Committee. Delegate to Munich
Association, delegate representi
Council on Glenelg and Marion Ah;
toirs Board. Business. Contract
Past Master McDonnell M asoi
Lodge, Glenelg McDonnell Ma
member of McDonnell Royal At
Chapter, also Trustee Temple
Peace. 1.0.0.F.M.U. Sports, bow


f |||L t V #?' .'* '
Bafc-
Wl , J
JKBfe
| j| ' l#f ife
.
IB
IIl x :■!
jd@ air j^nSjERHISB
uring Mr. Sutherland’s term of office
; Mayor the electric tram service be-
veen Adelaide and Glenelg was
ypened and also the foreshore im-
provements were completed and de-
clared opened. He is a member of
the Glenelg Bowling Club, Past Presi-
ent S.A. Builders and Contractors’
Association, also member of Appren-
ices’ Advisory Board; member of the
Caledonian Society. Southerland Play-
ground. Bath Street. Glenelg, was
named after Mr. J. W. Sutherland.
Address, Gower Street, Dunleath.
PAST MAYOR, THE HON. HENRY
TASSIE, M.L.C.
(Glenelg Corporation)
Was born at South Terrace, Ade-
laide, on the Bth June, 1863, and was
educated at Pulteney Street School
and St. Peter’s College. Service in
Council: 4 years Councillor, 2 years
Alderman, and 2 years as Mayor.
Thirty years a resident of the Town
of Glenelg. His business, Chartered
Accountant (Aust.). Member of the
Legislative Council, Central District
No. 2, since 1918. Chief Secretary and
Minister for Mines and Marine, 1927
to 1930. His sport is bowls. Address,
48. Partridge Street, Glenelg.
THE LATE HUGH JOHN PEARCE.
(Past Mayor Glenelg Corporation.)
Born at Kent, England. Ist May,
1854; arrived in Australia, 1873. The
late Mr. Pearce was Mayor of Glen-
elg 1903-05, and had resided in the
Town of Glenelg for 30 years. He
was Managing Director of the Fede-
ral Boot Co., Ltd., Chairman of Di-
rectors Enterprise Shoe Co., Ltd., and
Peacock’s Tannery, Adelaide; Director
of Marshall’s Shoe Co., Melbourne.
He was a member of the Masonic
Lodge and a member of the Seaton
Golf Club. The late Mr. Pearce at
the termination of his term as Mayor
of Glenelg in 1905 was presented with
a handsome tea and coffee service with
a tray by the residents of Glenelg for
services rendered to the town. The
late Mr. Pearce died on 3rd Novem-
ber, 1919.
PAST MAYOR, WILLIAM PATTERSON,
J.P.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
was born at Glucovitt, County
Donegal, Ireland, and educated at
Londonderry Academical Institution
and Dublin University. He arrived in
Australia, 1881. Councillor, 1907 to
1909; Mayor, 1909 to 1911; and Al-
derman, 1920 to 1922. A resident of
the district for d-0 years. Business


»
' 5 ’■ > ■ ■* *~ ,jHB*i$w
j ■■
W .^S
»■ ff| JE|
|8Efl9^H3|
\
Pharmaceutical Chemist. A member
of Masonic Lodge MacDonnell. No. 10,
MacDonnell Mark, MacDonnell Arch,
No. 22. A Justice of the Peace for
S.A. His sports are cricket and bowls.
Address : Osmond Street, Glenelg.
PAST MAYOR G. K. SOWARD.
(Glcnelg Corporation)
Was Mayor of Glenelg for 3 years
for the period 1896 to 1898. Member
of Parliament for District of Torrens,
1902 to 1904. Director of Old Glenelg
Railway Company, Chairman Commis-
sioners of Charitable Funds. Awarded
a King’s Jubilee Medal, 1935. One of
the founders of Glenelg Oval. Busi-
ness, Architect. Home address, 62,
Moseley Street, Glenelg.
PAST ALDERMAN MALCOLM
RICHARD PICKUP, F.A.I.S.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Born at Glenelg on 3rd April, 1882.
Educated at Glenelg and Adelaide.
Service in Council: Two years as
Councillor, two years as Alderman.
Fifty-four years a resident of the Dis-
trict. Secretary of the Castle Salt
Co-op. Company, Adelaide ; Secretary
and subsequently Chairman of Athletic
Committee of Glenelg Commemora-
tion Day Sports Association; Hon.
Secretary Glenelg Branch Liberal
Federation and Glenelg Cricket Club;
member of Executive S.A. Bowling
Association: Hon. Secretary Glenelg
Bowling Club. Present business : Salt
Refining and Distributing. Member
M.U. Oddfellews, P.P.G.M. of Adelaide
District. Mr. Pickup is the eldest son
of the late Thomas Pickup, who for
11 years represented St. Leonards
Ward in the Glenelg Council. Sports:
Cricket, lacrosse, and bowls. Address:
“Oriana,” 58 Partridge Street, Glenelg.
PAST ALDERMAN P. G. KNEEBONE.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Born at Bowden, 27th July, 1881,
and educated at Whinham College,
North Adelaide. Five years’ service
in Council as Councillor and Aider-
man. A resident of the District for
25 years. Member of LkA.O. Druids’
Lodge. Life member of Glenelg Foot-
ball Club and Glenelg Oval. His
sports are cricket, football, and ath-
letics. Address: Pasquin Street, St.
Leonards.
PAST ALDERMAN W. J. McINTOS i.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Born at Carlton, Victoria, on 30th
July, 1883. Educated at Carlton P.b-


m lir '5
0m ' '
m 4u
.
|^B : A S * I
' &-*mm*. A m
1 j*S58i wf* *■
,
l
He School, Victoria. Ten years' ser-
vice in Council and Chairman of all
Committees. Positions held in Coun-
cil: Alderman and Councillor. Twenty-
five years a resident of the District.
Six years Chairman of the Glenelg
Football Club and a Life Member, also
of St. Leonards Football Club and
Glenelg Oval. Member Commemora-
tion Day Sports, Football Delegate to
League, Handicapper to Amateur
Athletic League. Address: Mack
Street, St. Leonards.
PAST ALDERMAN WILLIAM HENRY
BIRCH.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Was born at Glenelg on 7th April,
1882, and educated St. Leonards
Grammar School. Six years’ service
in Council, 1914 to 1920. Resident of
the District for 45 years. Councillor,
four years; Alderman, two years.
Business; Manufacturers’ Agent.
Member of the Macdonnell Lodge, No.
10, Masonic. Sports: Lacrosse,
cricket, bowls, and yachting. Home
address: Northgate Street, Millswood
President of Millswood Bowling Club.
Visited England and the Continent,
1924, on a buying trip for Goode, Dur-
rant 8z Co., Ltd.
PAST ALDERMAN RICHARD WILLIAM
THOMAS.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Born at Cardiff, Wales, England,
4th November, 1874. Arrived in Aus-
tralia on 6th April, 1876. Six years’
service in Council. A resident of the
District for 50 years. Served four
years as Councillor, two years as
Alderman. Antique business is his
occupation. Temple of Peace M.U.
Oddfellows' Lodge, and a past Grand
Master of Lodge for 35 years. Mem-
ber of the Executive Committee
D.T.N. Society for 20 years. Six
years a member of South African
Soldiers' Rifle Club. Two years
Executive Officer of the Club. During
the Great War active worker for all
funds in connection with the soldiers
at Glenelg. A military reject. Address :
20 Penzance Street, Glenelg.
ALDERMAN WILLIAM ALLEN.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Born at Quorn, South Australia,
26th May, 1882; educated at Prince
Alfred College. Service in Council: 1
year. Thirteen years a resident of the
district. Business, Licensed Victualler,
Mr. Allen has held important posi-
tions in various other States. At one


I ’ **v
i " *■ "“mA jbsh
-. /
time he was the manager of the West
Australian "Sunday Times" at Kal-
goorlie. After holding offices in other
organisations came to South Austra-
lia and started business on Henley
Beach Road. Later he took over the
Lady Daly Hotel, Hindmarsh. He re-
presented Musgrave Ward in the The-
barton Corporation for 4 years, also
Chairman of the Finance Committee.
Elected Auditor for Thebarton Cor-
poration for 2 years. A member of
the Executive of South Australian
LA .A. and representative on the
Brewers' Association. Foundation
member of the Licensed Victuallers'
Racing Club Committee, also Totaliza-
tor Steward of the club. Mr. Allen
is a member of all metropolitan rac-
ing clubs and has raced several good
horses, both in Adelaide and in "Mel-
bourne. He has been very successful
with these, and one in particular (Glen-
anton) holds two records at Caulfield
and Elemington. He has held the posi-
tion of joint secretary to South Aus-
tralian Licensed Victuallers' Charity
Carnival for a period of 10 years, and
during that time over £6,000 has been
raised for charity. Mr. Allen's daugh-
ter (Miss Marjorie Allen) was nomi-
nated in the beach girl contest to raise
funds for the Lord Mayor's Relief
Fund, and a sum of £6BO was raised.
Miss Allen received more votes than
all the other candidates combined. Al-
derman Allen is at the present time
on the Works, Foreshore, Oval, and
Building Committees of the Glenelg
Council, and also representative on the
Suburban Municipal and District
Councils Association, a member of
Glenelg Commemoration Day Sports
Committee, a member of the Execu-
tive of the Centenary Committee. An
outstanding feature during his short
duration of municipal affairs in Glen-
elg was the handling of the toast of
Australia at the last Old Colonists'
Dinner on Commemoration Day, when
his speech was broadcast throughout
Australia.
ALDERMAN ERNEST WILLIAM
PERCIVAL.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Born at Summertown, 2nd April,
1871; educated at Uraidla Public
School and Prince Alfred College. Six
months Alderman of Glenelg- Corpora-
tion; 11 years Councillor Crafers Dis-
trict Council. A resident of Glenelg
district for 15 years. Retired from
business. Vice-President of the Glen-
elg Bowling Club. Mr. Percival is a
son of the late T. B. Percival. who re-
presented the Glenelg Corporation for
17 years as Councillor and Alderman,
Home address, 20, Maturin Road,
Glenelg".
ALDERMAN PATRICK FOX.
(Glenclg Corporation.)
Born at County Cavan, Ireland, and
educated at a private school. Arrived
m Australia, 18/9. Alderman, present
term, Glenelg Corporation; 8 years
Councillor, Eurelia District Council; 4
years Mount Barker District Council
Sixteen years a resident of the dis-
trict. Retii ed from business. A mem-
ber of the S.A. Jockey Club and Tat
tei sails Club. His hobby is gardening'
Address, Partridge Street, Glenelg.


'•■■’•——^—- — ■ 1 ■■
' '
A JOHN ELEY LAWTON.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Was born at Gawler, Ist July, 1867,
and educated at Whinham College,
Norm Adelaide. Fifteen years' service
in Council: Councillor for 6 years, Ai-
der! an 9 years. Business, Manufac-
ture His home address is 76. Mose-
ley Street. Glenelg. His sports are
rowing and rifle shooting. A mem-
ber at one time of the S.A. Volunteer
Forces. A resident of the district for
15 vears.
THE LATE JOHN WESTON.
(Past Councillor, Glenelg Corporation.)
Mr. Weston was born at Stockwell,
South \ustralia, on Ist February, 1862,
and educated at Williamstown. He
served 6 years as Councillor in the
Glenelg" Council and was a resident of
Glenelg for 52 years, and was in busi-
ness as a Contractor. Mr. Weston
died at Glenelg on the 13th February,
1935. His sport was tennis.
THE LATE THOMAS BONYTHON
PERCIVAL.
COUNCILLOR AND ALDERMAN.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Born at Bundle Street, Adelaide,
February, 1846; 17 years Councillor
and Alderman of Glenelg Corporation.
Served for a number of years as Coun-
cillor in East Torrens District Coun-
cil. Son of the late William Percival,
who arrived in the Peston de Bornar-
yee in 1837 as a servant to the late
Governor Gawler.
THE LATE EDWARD FRINSDORF, J.P.
(Ex-Councillor Glenelg City Council.)
Born at Enfield, 15th September,
1858; educated at Mr. Unwin’s School.
Walkerville. The late Mr. Frinsdorf
served as a Councillor for 12 years,
representing MacDonnell Ward. He
was Chairman of the Fire Brigades
Board for 24 years, a member of the
Adelaide Hospital Board for several
years, 6 years a Councillor in the
Glenelg Corporation; for several years
he was Deputy Inspector for the
Grand Lodge of Freemasons of South
Australia. He was also a member of


WgmgS »|||p|Br
IgB
gyjmgk SBtdjjz,
ggjy" -f^BB
"w J^KSBBwB^f
a y Wmrt MfM % TlmMMiMm
*'4' ' {■>
■Br
’*/'■ ■
:S|§i I,
; ■• p ., - * /'■
\
SSE jiFf\ I * if l|r|
t - A, :iu-Adl^w^M^WHBi
Vc- ,
.MuMm&m. jHHm* . *
| -&Sm JhBIt
- ml fafe &/ -*t. 'At. 14 kt
!•• • : ®f Jlf ,£•&?* "iJt'y^'g
•.. ■ .& , - *sf - £< r MjUL gfjfc
i *. jy H!* ;||Ls ■
the Stock Exchange of Adelaide for
40 years. Was a keen rowing enthu-
siast and a member of several racing-
o
clubs. For several years was auditor
and a keen follower of the North
Adelaide Football Club. He died on
6th November, 1932.
PAST COUNCILLOR, EDWIN JAMES
THOMAS.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Mr. Thomas was born at Glenelg'
on the 3rd May, 1879, and educated
at St. Peter’s Church Day School.
Glenelg. He served as Councillor for
St. Leonard’s Ward from 1925 to 1928,
and has been a resident of Glenelg for
45 years. A Council employee is his
occupation, and his sport is cricket.
During the war Mr. Thomas served
abroad on active service for 3 years
and 11 months. His private address
is 6, Pasquin Street, St. Leonards,
Glenelg.
PAST COUNCILLOR WILLIAM LEVY.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Was born at Buenos Aires, South
America, 18th June, 1874, and edu-
cated at Cape Town Institute and
Christian Brothers’ College, Adelaide.
Arrived in Australia, 21st January.
1885. Service in Council: 2 years and
7 months. A resident of the Town of
Glenelg for 22J years. He is in busi-
ness as a Journalist. Nine years Pre-
sident of S.A. Bands Association and
President of Adelaide Competitions for
a similar period, a member of the
Committee. Established and con-
ducted "Glenelg Guardian" frei
Weekly paper for 15 years; advocatef
a policy of "Progress" in the town
assisted in all patriotic movem nts a
Glenelg during war period. \\ ent ti
Broken Hill in January, 1888. learn
trade of compositor, and was i Bro
ken Hill for 224 years. Went t( West
ern Australia in 1896 and wor :ed or
newspapers at Coolgardie, ouldei
City, and Perth. Returned to iroker
Hill in 1899 and came to Gle elg ir
1913. His sports are bowls, ishing
and baseball. Address, No. 3. murtl
Avenue, Helmsdale.
PAST COUNCILLOR A. H. CO KER
(Glenelg Corporation.)
\\ as born at Plymouth, E gland,
22nd May, 1867, and educated a Public
School, Plymouth. Arrived in Austra-


>
n '
I
m
R, sip.
v* i# > ' iw^y^
«S&. sfc %&»— '.'. , ;
i' •■ '9KKS/Hk
■ .
" C~*
V ; ' V- ; '«- ‘
27th February, 1882. sailing ship
)0, after a pleasant voyage of 94
da s. Service in Council: 6 years. A
resident of the district for 52 years.
of business (retired). A mem-
be ' of the Ancient Order of Foresters
and R.A.0.8. Lodges. His sports are
racing and bowls. Address, 7, Anzac
Highway, Glenelg.
PAST COUNCILLOR PATRICK BURNS.
(Corporation of Glenelg.)
Air. Burns was born at Glasgow,
Scotland, 9th May, 1871, and arrived
in Australia in Alarch. 1879, and was
educated at Christian Brothers’ Col-
lege, Adelaide. He has been a resident
of the district for 40 years, and during
his service in the Council served 2
years as Alderman and 4 years as
Councillor. During that time he re-
presented the Metropolitan County
Board for 5 years. He is a Past Dis-
trict President of the H.A.C.B. Society.
Mr. Burns is now retired, and was pre-
viously Sales Manager of the Dairy
Produce Department, S.A. Farmers'
Co-op. Union. He is now keenly
interested in bowls, and is a member
of the Glenelg Club. His home
address is 27 Sturt Street, Glenelg.
PAST COUNCILLOR, CLARENCE
CARLYLE JONES.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Was born at North Adelaide in 1885,
and educated at Pulteney Street
Grammar School. Mr. Jones served
as Councillor for New Glenelg Ward
in the Glenelg Council from 1916 to
1920. and has been a resident of the
district for 25 years. In business he
is a Land and Estate Agent, being
the first to open an office for this class
of business in the town. Mr. Jones
was the first Secretary of the Glenelg
Repatriation Committee. He is a son
of the late Thomas Henry Jones, Mus.
Bac., formerly City Organist of Ade-
laide, and he devotes his leisure to
violin cello. His sport is tennis, and
his present address Brighton Road,
Glenelg.
PAST COUNCILLOR WILLIAM MAY
HICKS, Esq., J.P.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Born at Scilly Islands, off Cornwall,
England, January 30th. 1862;. edu-
cated at Scilly Islands Public School.
Arrived in Australia, October, 1879.
One year Councillor Glenelg Corpora-
tion; 5 years Councillor Unlev Citv


«wp|y
a&s?® i^r
||w /** r I 1PB
J9
■——- - V ’ " ; I
ffCjM .J5h
tii t m * 1\
m J M
MgBL JmrjxZv.'. 'Mm
;;, -ISmBs • ■
■ I B
.*¥*&% Im
j^g^y
% f 1 ipif* jr j ; i
1 I.
* jBKL } <-f'*N
i \ /
11^*’kn£\ A V. .v'
FT’ \ \ ,-tf*
\ ; r -.m **"** \ .,-;
: i; , I «BL
* ! ia .>* j|||
B Je -jj
%T‘ jk
* % llp> v *•.» .-<$»
Council; 6 years Councillor and Chair-
man Marion District Council. Justice
of the Peace, 1888.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES CLARENCE
LESLIE ROGERS.
Was born at Southwark, S.A., 17th
August, 1894. and educated at Rich-
mond Public School and Muirden Col-
lege. At present first term as Coun-
cillor of Glenelg Corporation; 2 years
Councillor for West Torrens District
Council. Chairman of Works Com-
mittee for 12 months. A resident of
the district for 8 years. Business,
Commonwealth Public Servant. A
member of Executive Committee for
Holdfast Bay Tennis Association. His
sports are swimming and tennis. Ad-
dress, 5, Lady Street, Golflands, Glen-
elg.
COUNCILLOR FRANCIS HENRY KEEN.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Born at Adelaide, 22nd November,
1892; educated at Pulteney Grammar
School. Service in Council: 4 years.
A resident of the district for 10 years.
Representative of Glenelg Council on
the Metropolitan County Board. Busi-
ness, Optician. Vice-President of
Adelaide Rifle Club, Chairman S.A.
Athletic League, member of Koo-
yonga Golf Club, member of the Coun-
cil of Institute of Optometrists,
member of the MacDonnell Lodge. No.
10, S.A.C., Masonic. Address, 3, Fifth
Avenue. Helmsdale. Sports, cricket,
football, golf, foot running, bowls am
rifle shooting.
COUNCILLOR ERNEST GRAHAM J.P
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Born at Tanunda, sth July, 886:
educated at public schools. Four
years’ service in Council. A resident
of the district for 10 years. Council-
lor of New Glenelg Ward; Chai man
of Works Committee. Bus less.
Financier. Member of the Ma onic
Oidei. President of the Holdfas Bay
Model Band; Vice-President o the
Glenelg Optimist Society and E LX.
Society, also of the Glenelg Sailing
Club; Hon. Treasurer of the G1 uelg
Commemoration Day Sports: Past
President of the Glenelg Life S; . ers’
Club: member of the Glenelg isti-


-* . , ■ r>A *4;
'
V J0to* «g| ';
JmL*
| .
I A *
4 p,# V
«
liiito, wtf&S
m^mgmw WF
Committee; Chairman of the
G1 lg Centenary Funds Appeal Com-
mit e. He is fond of all sports. Ad-
dress, 17a, Pier Street, Glenelg.
COUNCILLOR ALLAN EDGAR JOHN
JOHNSON.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Was born at Alberton, 1891, and
educated at Alberton Public School.
A resident of the district for
14 years. Business, Proprietor of
Adelaide Drug Company, 25, Chesser
Street. Adelaide. Vice-President of
Glenelg Bowling Club. His sports are
bowls, tennis, and golf. Reached semi-
finals in Bowls Championship of S.A.,
1934. Address, 62, Brighton Road,
Glenelg.
COUNCILLOR PERCIVAL JOHN
WILLIAMS.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Born at Adelaide, 13th April, 1888,
and educated at Christian Brothers'
College. Councillor from 3rd August,
1935. A resident of the district for
12 years. He is in business as a Rail-
way Officer. A member of the
U.A.O.D. and Masonic Lodges. His
sports are cricket, football, and yacht-
ing". Address, 1, Russell Street, Glen-
o
pi cr
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM FREDERICK
BUTTROSE, J.P.
(Glenelg Corporation.)
Born at North Adelaide and edu-
cated at Whinham College, North
Adelaide, and Springfield College,
Mass., U.S.A. Service in Council; 113
years at 30th June, 1936: 26 years resi-
dent of the district. Councillor of New
Glenelg Ward. Lodges : Masonic and
1.0. Oddfellows. His sports are ten-
nis, cricket, lacrosse, and rowing.
Nineteen years on S.A. Amateur Ath-


.
I -;v' I
I * I
*'V ** * •
; * *
■ \ %. 1
yiy
■ w A M
’ — ~
L-ic Council. Hon. Secretary of Glen-
elg Commemoration Day Sports Asso-
ciation. Address, 2, Ramsgate Street
Glenelg.
FRANCIS ARTHUR LEWIS, J.P.
(Town Clerk, Glenelg Corporation.)
Born at Queenstown, S.A., January
14th, 1895; educated at Sturt Street
Public School and Adelaide High
School. Twelve years’ service in the
Council. A resident of the district for
12 years. Business, Town Clerk and
Surveyor. A member of Lodge of
Remembrance (Masonic). Member of
the Legacy Club. Past President of
Glenelg Sub-Branch Returned Sol-
diers' and Sailors' Imperial League.
Member of the Public Library Com-
mittee. Secretary of the Glenelg Oval.
Past President of Local Government
Officers' Association of S.A. Justice
of the Peace of S.A. for 12 years.
Served 3-| vears abroad with the 43rd
Battalion. A.I.F. (Lieut.). His sports
are tennis and golf. Address, Town
Hall, Glenelg.
S. R. OSBORN.
(Assistant Town Clerk, Glenelg Corporation.)


. -jf.-- ‘ ™" '•
JL 'it
orporation of Henley and Grange
HENLEY BEACH TOWN HALL.


History of Henley and Grange
Although the Municipality of Henley and Grange is
of comparatively recent origin—it was proclaimed only in
1915, the major portion being severed from Woodville
District Council and a smaller area from West Torrens —
the locality is closely connected with the earliest days of
South Australia.
Its atmosphere is redolent of the romance and adven-
ture of that exploring and pioneering period which laid the
Henley Beach, 1900, Showing the Old Horse Tram.
foundation upon which was built the great Commonwealth,
which, in the war, proved itself capable of taking a foremost
place among the nations of the world, and has since been
admitted into their inmost councils —truly an amazing
achievement in the short space of less than a century, and
one which is without a parallel in history.
Henley was named in the early days after Henley, in
England, the site of the famous water carnival on the
Thames, which South Australia has copied in Henley-on-
Torrens, and Victoria in Henley-on-Yarra.
In those far-off days it was a popular training course
for racehorses, having been used by Messrs. Fisher,
Blackler, Coglin, Scott, and others. Mr. Fisher became
known throughout the length and breadth of Australia, and
the C. B. Fisher Plate, in Victoria, and the Fisher Stakes
(now Handicap), in South Australia, were named in his
honour.
The Blackler family, too, took a prominent part in
building up racing in South Australia, both as breeders md
owners of horses. Members were connected with the sport
from the earliest days to a comparatively recent date.
The town of Henley Beach was laid out by a synch ate
consisting of Messrs. Bucknell, Harvey, and George, on
land purchased from Mr. \V. Barclay. According to Mr.
Rodney Cockburn’s “Nomenclature of South Australia, an
hotel (the Henley) was the only building there for s me
years.
Even up to 1883 the population in the distric t was ' ery
meagre. The South Australian Directory of that ear
states that in Henley, then a part of Woodville, there \ ere
at that time 134 persons, 61 of whom were males an 73
females, and that they were accommodated in 24 hot >es.
Grange, which is another word for granarv or 1 irn,
takes its name from that of the house—“ The Grang
built in the locality by Captain Charles Sturt, the fan ous
explorer, in 1842, and occupied by him when he was re> ing
after his explorations. He had 500 acres there, inclu ing
an 80 acre section of good pasture, presented bv the Vo-
vince of South Australia.
“To build, to plant, to beautify Grange,, Sturt fron his
first year in Adelaide had fondly devoted a scanty leis 'e,"
wrote Mrs. N. G. Sturt, in her “Life of Sturt.” “D -ap-
pointment might check, but could not quell his ardour .. ■
Old friends still remember the leafy shade, the cl nee
fruits and flowers, which, under Sturt's devoted care, nee
adorned this chosen spot.
“This little paradise was people by a variety of frit idh
beasts and birds. Here the kangaroo lav down witl the
dog, and the cockerel with the household cat. C; ttle.


ijii| V . , '
ry, and bees were carefully tended; to Mrs. Sturt the
d 'vas a source of pride, if not of profit. Among the
In 'S were veterans of the Central Australian Expedition.”
nfortunately, the “little paradise” did not last. Mrs.
relates that “year by year the floods—at longer inter-
ocusts —wrought havoc. The task of cultivation must
)een tough, for in late years the salt floods driven up
examine the stately buildings interspersed among the trim
villas, he would have cause for wonder that such progress
could be made in considerably less than a century.
On its proclamation in 1915, the town of Henley and
Grange was divided into four wards —-the first Mayor being
Mr. J. Fl. Sinclair, S.M.—and that division was retained
until October 20th, 1932. when the number was reduced to
Henley With a More Modern Means of Transport, 1936.
eek by the encroaching sea, have killed the noble trees
and wrecked the beauty of the place. The ungrateful soil
now defies labour, and Grange lies desolate."
That is a saddening picture, but, fortunately, it is no
longer true. If Sturt could see now the prosperous seaside
resort which has grown up on and around the site of his
old home, and could witness the gay throngs to be seen
on the well-cared-for beach every sunny day, and could
three, and the members of the Council from twelve to nine.
At the same time, an additional area was taken over from
Woodville District Council. I his was in accordance with
the decision of the Local Government Areas Commission.
This addition contained 80 houses, giving a total for the
municipality of 1,060. 59 being shops and business dwellings.
This is in strong contrast to the 24 houses in 1883, and it
provides conclusive evidence of the steady progress of the


district and the care with which its affairs have been
managed.
1 he two jetties are controlled by the Harbours Board,
and it is interesting to learn from the report of the opera-
tions of the Council at the end of its first year in office that
the Henley Jetty was then unlit. “During this period,”
states the report, “a difficulty occurred through the
Harbours Board refusing to light the Henley Beach (etty,
but after some correspondence and various interviews, a
conference was arranged by the Minister of Marine, when
the railway and tramway authorities were represented, and
the cost of lighting was arranged by the Corporation paying
Seaview Road, Henley Beach.
£3 per annum, while the Government and other authorities
agreed to pay £5 each."
It seems a far cry to those days, but in reality only 17
years have elapsed since then, and in that short period
extensive improvements have been made on the foreshore —
the children's playground, the bandstand, and the dressing
conveniences, among others.
In the early days, transport to and from Adelaide
constituted a major difficulty. Grange was first served by
a railway in the eighties of last century, the line being
controlled by the Grange Railway and Investment Co.,
Ltd. An agitation for a better service led to the Govern-
ment taking over the line on April 29th, 1891, and working
it under a guarantee from influential residents. The firs,
year’s operations showed working costs at £7lB and
receipts at £424, and the guarantors were required to pay
£127, leaving a deficiency of £167.
For some time there was a danger that the service
would be discontinued, but after considerable bargaining
the line was eventually taken over and included in the
South Australian system, later being extended to Henley.
Up till about 1898, Henley was dependent on a two-
horse cab, operated by Mr. George Hurcomb, for direct
communication with Adelaide, but in that year the lin • for
the old horse trams was opened for traffic, and when the
Municipal Tramways Trust was formed it was taken over
with the other services and electrified about 1908.
At the present time the area under the control o the
Council is approximately four and a half square miles and
in that area is a population of 6,000. The annual assess-
ment value is £82,100. The improved value of ra able
property is £1,600,000. The total length of roads i nder
the control of the Council is 37 miles 31 chains.
There is excellent accommodation for bathing, in lad-
ing a new concrete swimming pool, which has been built
up to Olympic standard, available for night swimming The
beach itself is noted as being one of the cleanest alon the
foreshores of this State. Much money has been spe tto
make it more attractive to visitors.
MUNICIPALITY OF HENLEY AND GRANGE.
MEMBERS OF PRESENT COUNCIL.
A 1 ay or, E. A . Mitton. Aldermen; G. T. Gurncq Y
Harvey, A. E. Northey. Councillors: A. W. Ken- rick.
J- R - Lawrie, R. H. Hall, C. L. Alexander, W. H. R gers.
I). A. Randall. Town Clerk, A. A’. A inwood • Ass start
Clerk, R. C. Cocker.


'
jffi
St
WORSHIP THE MAYOR, EWART
WILFRED MITTON, J.P.
Henley and Grange Corporation)
rn at Hindmarsh. 7th June, 1878;
educated Hindmarsh and Sturt Street
Public Schools. Served 8 years in the
Council, and has resided 13 years in
the district. Mr. Mitton has been
Mayor of Henley and Grange for four
terms, and Councillor and Alderman
for a number of years. In business he
is a Company Director. Member of
Henley Masonic Lodge. Patron,
President or Vice-President of many
of the Henley and Grange Clubs and
Associations. His sports are golf,
tennis, and bowls. Mr. Mitton’s eldest
son (Dr. Ronald G. Mitton) was the
1927 Rhodes Scholar for South Aus-
tralia. Private address, High Street,
Granne.
THE LATE HERMANN GAETJENS.
(Past Mayor of Henley and Grange
Corporation)
Born at Wakefield Street. Adelaide,
on 16th August. 1868; educated at
Whinham College. Mr. Gaetjens was
a Councillor representing the Town of
Henley and Grange in the Woodville
District Council before the Corpora-
tion of Henley and Grange. Council-
lor of Henley and Grange Corporation,
1921 to 1922. Mayor of Henley and
Grange, 1924-1915. A resident of the
district for 24 years. Thirteen years
President and 11 years Patron of Hen-
ley and Grange Sailing Club. Presi-
dent of Grange Bowling Club. Chair-
man various Regatta Committees. Ex-
Grand President of Grand United
United Order of Oddfellows, Past
Master Henley Masonic Lodge. Chair-
man of Australian Dinghy Union,
member of Land Tax Appeal Board,
member of Executive Minda Home,
President Henley and Grange
Branch Liberal Union, Chairman
of South Australian Dinghy Coun-
cil. Mr. Gaetjens was employed
by Harris, Scarf e, and Company
for four years, and later at A. Bartels
and Myer, Land Agents, etc., estab-
lished in 1866. In 1906 he purchased the
firm name of Mr. C. Myer, the sur-
viving partner. He was interested in
all sports, particularly yachting and
bowls. He died 19th March, 1935.
PAST MAYOR, CYRIL CHAMBERS.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Born at Torrensville, 28th February,
1897; educated at St. John the Bap-
tist Brothers, Theharton. Twenty
years a resident of the Henley district.
He has served 10 years as Councillor,


'
■
«u
4|<i >: ; ;iii|< .,,. v . •:,,,...:,i?-^--' :
.••-*•• ' v . ✓ fliB
pfilS:. I III
, v ; JH
: ****** , Jl J
t ■£.- -:'.*v
I
4 .> k - • J|
, * 4 . J , . n, j.
Alderman, and Mayor in the Corpora-
tion of Henley and Grange. Mr.
Chambers has done a vast amount of
work to further the interests of the
town, and is also connected with many
sporting associations in the district,
being President of the Henley Life
Saving, Swimming", Football, and Sail-
ing Clubs. He was made a life mem-
ber of the Life Saving, Swimming, and
Football Clubs, and is Vice-President
of the Australian Labor Party (S A.
Branch), and has done a great deal
of good work for the party in South
Australia. Mr. Chambers by profes-
sion is a Dentist. His sporting activi-
ties are swimming, boxing, and foot-
ball. Address, Esplanade, Henley
Beach.
PAST MAYOR MICHAEL KERRISON,
J.P.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Born at Mount Barker, 31st Octo-
ber, 1860; educated at Mo onta Public
School. He was a member of the
Council for 12 years, and a resident of
the district for 18 years. Positions
held in Council: Councillor, Alderman,
and Mayor. Business, retired. Mem-
ber of the Masonic Lodge. President
of the S.A. Dinghy Council, Henley
and Grange Bowls and Cricket Clubs,
He was a member of the Henley and
Grange Town Hall Building Com-
mittee, Grange Club House, and Re-
claimed Recreation Reserve. During
the 1918 flood at Henley and Grange
Mr. Kerrison supervised pumping
operations for two months, in clearing
people’s homes of water, and through
his prompt action saved an epidemic,
hundreds of bags of unslacked lime
being spread in the residents' yards.
He was also instrumental in having
built a wall at the back of High Street
to prevent further flood waters en-
croaching 011 the residents' property.
Address, 74 Prospect Road, Prospect.
PAST ALDERMAN J. T. V. VIVIAN.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Was born at Noarlunga in 1876, and
educated at the Moonta Public School.
Has served the Council as Councillor,
Alderman, and Acting Mayor for 7
years. During that time he proved
himself most capable, and gave the
ratepayers every satisfaction, many
improvements being made in the town
during the time he occupied these \ osi-
tions in the Council. Mr. Vivian is a
Printer in the Government Prii ing
Office, and a member of the Ma rnic
and Oddfellows' Lodges. Add ess,
Swan Street, Grange.
THE LATE MELVILLE G. SMIT I
(Past Alderman Henley and Grang
Corporation)
Was born at O’Halloran Hill. S.A.,
11th September, 1878, and educat d at
Glenelg. The late Mr. Smith sc ved
two years in the Council as Cor icil-
lor and Alderman, and before hi de-
cease on March 29th. 1934, was re-


■E
WoTS Jf? M
Hr -If &S - : S
W M f IV ■ Jr ' t*l
f : #. j A / /|i
1*1 a I /„* .- # '
1 - JJi
>~
|p|r | ’' r-;
■--, -I;’ ;-2JSp
JJ&
< a. / v j| w ,jw
4 ♦ Jk J[j ■'? lfiW||| *
si* ; of the district for 6 years. His
spc * was horses and coursing.
.LDERMAN VERNON HARVEY.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Born at East Adelaide. 4th October,
1884; educated at Pulteney Street
School and St. Peter’s College. Ser-
vice in Council: 9 years (7-| years
Chairman of Finance Committee). Al-
derman Harvey has been a resident of
the district for 36 years. During the
9 years that he has been connected
with the Council he has shown much
interest in the Town of Henley and
Grange, being Secretary of Grange In-
stitute for 12 years, Secretary of the
Grange Oval, and Secretary of Grange
and Kircaldy Progressive Association.
A member of the Masonic Order, St.
Peter’s Old Scholars. No. 57, and Elen-
ley Lodge, No. 79. He served 4 years
with 27th Battalion at Gallipoli, Egypt,
and France. Alderman Harvey's
grandfather was one of the founders
of the Grange Railway and Invest-
ment Company that subdivided the
Grange and built the first railway and
the marine residences. Sports are:
Bowls, cricket, and golf. Address, 65
High Street, Grange.
ALDERMAN GEORGE THOMAS
GURNER.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Was born at Kensington, S.A., sth
August, 1886, and educated Marryat-
ville Public and Pulteney Grammar
Schools. Alderman Gurner has 9
years’ service in the Council —3 years
as Councillor, 6 years as Alderman,
and has proved himself a keen muni-
cipalist, always taking a very lively
interest in all Town matters, being
Chairman of the Foreshore Committee
for some years, Hon. Secretary of
Henley and Grange Carnival, Com-
mitteeman of Grange and Kirkcaldy
Progressive Association, and Hen-
ley Advancement Association. He is
in business as Land and Estate Agent,
is a member of Rechabite and Buffalo
Lodges, and has been a resident of the
district for 17 years. Alderman
Gurner is interested in all sport in the
town, having been a keen cricketer
and footballer in the past. Address,
Esplanade, Henley Beach.
ALDERMAN ALBERT EDWIN
NORTHEY.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Born at Hindmarsh, 30th May, 1892,
and educated at Kilkenny and Currie


3|| * M
j| rHfr —mT"
jjs' :
' If
' S
- <^|||
*<■
* - ♦...,,,■
% ■ ■- , ' < "^% f
I f
Street Public Schools and Kvre Col-
lege. He has served 11 years in the
Council —4 years as Councillor and 7
as Alderman. He has shown much
interest in connection with the ad-
vancement of the Town of Henley
and Grange, always taking a great in-
terest in all matters of improvement
to the town. Alderman Northey has
been a resident of the district for the
past 26 years; a Committeeman for
Grange School for 10 years —2 years
Chairman and years as Treasurer;
13 years on Board of Trustees, Grange
Recreation Reserve (7 years as Secre-
tary) ; Vice-President Henley and
Grange Literary Society; Vice-Presi-
dent of the Grange and Kirkcaldy Pro-
gressive Association ; a Committeeman
of the Grange Bowling Club; Secre-
tary of Henley Beach Congregational
Church; a member of Henley Masonic
Lodge ; Past Arch Henley and Grange
Oak Lodge, U.A.O.D. He has the
longest length of service in the Coun-
cil.. He is in business as a Builder and
Contractor. Sport, bowls. Address,
34 Swanwick Street, Kirkcaldy.
THE LATE JOHN EWEN PRESGRAVE
(Past Councillor Henley and Grange
Corporation)
Born at Pulteney Street, Adelaide,
February 20th, 1855 ; educated Young’s
School, North Terrace, and Pulteney
Street School. Four years’ service in
Henley and Grange Council, and was
a resident of the district for 17 years.
A member of the Foresters’ Lodge.
PAST COUNCILLOR JOHN FLAVEL.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Born at Tea Tree Gully, 17th Feb-
ruary, 1854, and educated there. Mr.
Flavel served 4 years as Counci ior,
and was Chairman of the Sub-Com-
mittee during that time. He ga- e a
great deal of his time in the interests
of the town, many improvem nts
being carried out during his terr as
Councillor. Mr. Flavel was on the
land for some years before he became
a merchant. Fifty-two years ago he
established a small business opposite
the East End Market in Rundle St eet,
his wife being at first his only as ist-
ant. They bought and sold diffe ent
classes of goods, taking advantage of
whatever opportunity came their ay.
From such small beginnings came the
business of Flavel & Sons, Ltd., of 211-
215, Rundle Street. In 1914 the re-
sent company was registered. itli
Mr. Flavel as Governing Director, and
with him on the directorate are his
wife and two sons. A hard worke: all
his life, Mr. Flavel still takes an active


IB iF^
! ji ,„.,
Jft I * « jBI ** 4 v rSj&i. owB
HH „ *\j. If 4a J
■■ - *mm»m0 f ‘
iT^.
inten in the business, and still puts
in an pearance every day. He is a
mem of the Masonic and Free Gar-
.edges. Gardening is his only
bobb Address, Seaview Road. Hen-
ley Be ch.
PAST COUNCILLOR WILLIAM JAMES
TRIPP.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Was born at Moonta Mines, 18th
March, 1903, and educated at the
Moonta Mines Public School. Mr.
Tripp has been a resident of the dis-
trict for 10 years, and served as a
Councillor for 3d years, and is a con-
sistent supporter of local affairs. In
business he is a Shopwalker. His
sports are bowls, yachting, golf, and
tennis. Address, East Terrace, Henley
Beach.
PAST COUNCILLOR WALTER EILLIS
PRESGRAVE.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Born at Finniss Street, North Ade-
laide, 20th December, 1885; educated
at North Adelaide and Sturt Street
Public Schools. Service in Council;
years as Councillor. Fifteen years a
resident of the district. Business,
Decorator. A member of the Druids’
Lodge. Home address, 8, York Street,
Henlev Beach.
PAST COUNCILLOR CECIL CHARLES
CRUMP, 8.A., L.L.B.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Born at Nyngan, New South Wales,
and received his education at State
schools, at Prince Alfred College on
Government scholarship, and at the
University of Adelaide on the Sir
Thomas Elder Scholarship. At the
University he won the David Murray
Scholarship in Jurisprudence. Mr.
Crump served 2 years as a Council-
lor, and during his term of office did
excellent work, being Chairman of By-
Laws Committee and Chairman of a
Special Committee to gain extra ter-
ritory. Mr. Crump is a Barrister and
Solicitor by profession, and a resident
of the district for 15 years. He is an
interstate and international debater;
a local preacher of the Methodist
Church, has held the position of Lec-
turer in Public Speaking for the
Workers' Educational Association of
South Australia, and is an acting
member of the Adelaide Repertory
Theatre. His sports are tennis and
golf. Address, Henley Beach.


' V"
B* ** K
; - >-;_ Hr iiiMM^^
IMip * -
ill
ill jB
- 0tm /'m
- IlipK WrWyr y J#
M \ II
% 'fM&*
I !■■
J§/^'
% 4 li|P r Asnfrf
v m! * ‘ w^Mw
.jm/K&M? - %i5t;
r W9Sr^
#;.,"■ mm Jh-iK 1^.
I I . ||| /
/*
f ■ iMBF J
Iv IhF s - v *A ■
PAST COUNCILLOR HAROLD G. FITCH.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Born at McKinnon Parade, North
Adelaide, January 31st, 1877; educated
at St. Peter’s College. Served 6 years
as Councillor for Henley South Ward,
and a resident of the district for 25
years. Present business, Manufac-
turers’ Representative. He is a
member of the Lewis Lodge of Faith
No. 81. S.A.C., Ma sonic Lodge, and
Secretary and Treasurer Henley and
Grange Soldiers’ Memorial Hall Com-
mittee. Address, 286 Seaview Road,
Henley Beach South.
PAST COUNCILLOR JOHN ARNOLD
ROY EYRE.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Was born at Owen, S.A., 6th July,
1888, and educated at public school.
Air. Eyre served as a Councillor for
4 years, and during his term of office
did excellent work to further the im-
provements in the Town of Henley
and Grange, many being made while
he was chairman of Town Hall Com-
mittee and a member of the Finance
Committee. He has been a resident of
the town for 12 years. During Mr.
Eyre's term as Councillor he was for
3 years Secretary and Treasurer of
Henley and Grange Regatta and Car-
nival and 4 years Secretary of Hen-
ley and Grange Unemployed Relief
Fund. Mr. Eyre is a clerk in the S.A.
Railways. His sport is bowls, being
Secretary to S.A. Railways Bowling
Club. Address, "Dudro," No. 5, Ches-
ter Street, Henley Beach.
PAST COUNCILLOR LEONARD
ROBERT NORTHEY.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Was born at West Croydon in 1897.
and educated at Hindmarsh Higl
School. He served as Councillc 193.
and 1933, and has been a resid nt ol
the district for 16 years. He is ir
business as an Amusement Pro} ietor
Mr. Northey is particularly k( m or
all clean and healthy sports, es} cialh
swimming and sailing. Addre; . Es-
planade, Henley Beach.
PAST COUNCILLOR CHARLES I ZNRY
MARSHALL.
and Grange Corporatio )
Was born at Adelaide, 2nd S Mem-
ber, 1875, and educated at public
schools in Adelaide. Air. A 1 rshall
served 6 years as a Councillo'. and
gave excellent service to the to\ n and
ratepayers, many improvement? being
made in the town and distric dur-
ing his 6 } T ears’ term of office as Coun-
cillor. Mr. Marshall is Radiog apher


''
1-0 ''m
■K *
IjB
p <31 I?*®' lj ;,
’ ' # Mmmmm
W}JtjfSy\ ;f, : , ,■■ :■ , ; . ": m
Ji » -1) '•':/<■■ ' ■■' ■
,
the Adelaide Hospital. He is a
ember of the Masonic Lodge. Sport,
f. Address, Jetty Street, Grange.
PAST COUNCILLOR WILLIAM ROBERT
BADENOCH.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Born at Carey’s Gully; educated at
Port Pirie. Mr. Badenoch served in
the Council for 4 years, and has been
20 years a resident of the district.
Business, Baker and Confectioner, 414
Sea View Road, Henley Beach. He is
a member of the Master Bakers
Council and member of the Henley
Carnival Committee.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES LEONARD
ALEXANDER.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Was born at Gawler, sth January,
1901, and educated at Gawler District
High School and Gawler Technical
High School. Elected to Council, 23rd
November, 1935. Councillor Henley
Ward and a member of the Works
Committee. Business, Licensed Sur-
veyor. A member of the Masonic
Lodge. Joint Hon. Secretary Henley
and Grange Bigger and Better 1936
Carnival. Treasurer South Australian
Institute of Surveyors; member of
Board of Examiners for Surveyors;
Secretary Henley and Grange Branch
L.C.L. Committee; member of Liberal
Men's Educational Association; forty-
sixth Premier of Union Model Parlia-
ment. His sport is tennis. Address,
2, North Street, Henley Beach.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM HENRY
ROGERS.
(Henley and Grange Corporation.)
Born at North Adelaide, 4th May,
1877, and educated at the Thebarton
Public School. Councillor Rogers has
served 3J years in the Corporation,
and has given the town valuable work
to further its interests. He has
been a resident of the district for 15
years. A member of the Masonic
Lodge, also a member of the Grange
Bowling Club. Councillor Rogers is in
business as a Picture Framer and Art


* '
j
JKmk
Iwwmflr ,^®BSSHK^®fe^
H ''";• 1
m»Em» jl§g
/. m *m *~ m . s ;*
, ■Xj,.-.< - ■
vW W iWl
W i
m f iiB| ' Bp
i iM
Dealer. Address, Reedie Street, Kirk-
caldy.
COUNCILLOR JEPHTHAH ROBERT
LAWRIE.
(Corporation of Henley and Grange.)
Born at Alma in 1878, and educated
at the Pinery Public School. Mr.
Lawrie was elected to the Council on
4th July, 1936. He is a Past Arch
of the Druids’ Lodge (Port Pirie
Branch), Director of Amscol Ltd., Past
President of the Two Wells Liberal
Lhiion, and a member of the Church
of Christ. He is in business as a
Farmer and Dairyman, and his sports
are bowls, cricket, and tennis. Pri-
vate address, 70 East Terrace, Henley
Beach.
COUNCILLOR ROBERT HENDERSON
HALL.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Born at Jamestown, 19th April, 1873,
and educated at various public schools.
Mr. Hall has served as a Councillor
for the past 2 years in the Corpora-
tion, and is closely associated with
various matters pertaining to the wel-
fare and progress of the town. A
resident of the district for 20 years,
he is in business as a Printer. A
member of the Cosmopolitan Lodge.
His sport is rifle shooting. Mr. Hall
has been Secretary of Miniature Rifle
Union, Adelaide Rifle Club, and Me-
tropolitan District Union, and was a
member of the Council S.A. Rifle Asso-
ciation for several years. Represented
Australia at Bisley, England, in 1924.
and has been a member of State Com-
monwealth team to all Australian
States. Address, 142, Military Road.
Henley Beach.
COUNCILLOR BRUCE ALBERT
RANDALL.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Born at Lyncloch, 20th July, 1890
educated at Lyndoch Public School
Has served in Council since 6th Julv
1935. Eight years a resident of the
district. His business is an Under-
taker. Member of the Prince Edward
Masonic Lodge, holding office as f.D.
King Edward Royal Arch and King
Edward Mark Lodges, also a member


-I#; **«r' m,
, s -
*> . , Il ~i>n^
■ iLm
.jk \
" Irfv 't •' ' • *Yy- “"
$j0' ilB
||JN
lip P, ;#yipM| Ji||
mi?^* > ' , date
MHW
■■ JH
:JW ; ;
' ' WWB
fe M *> jaBSaii
SBcV > • «
HBk •■ vUtfc #'”;JM |g&
Chester Unity, 1.0.0. F. His
ts are golf and bowls. Address,
Grange,
: OUNCILLOR ARTHUR WILLIAM
KENWRICK, J.P.
(Henley and Grange Corporation)
Born at Goodwood, S.A., April 27th,
1882; educated at Christian Brothers
College. Three and a half years’ ser-
vice in Council. A resident of the dis-
trict for 10 years. Business, Manu-
facturing Jeweller. Member of the
Torrensville Lewis Masonic Lodge.
Steward S.A. Trotting Association.
Sports, yachting, swimming and trot-
ting. Address, Seaview Road, Henley
South.
WILLIAM WESTON WINWOOD, 8.E.,
F.S.A.S.M., A.M.1.E., (Australia),
A.M.l.Struc.E., J.P.
(Town Clerk, Henley and Grange
Corporation)
Born at Hyde Park, 1902, and edu-
cated at Unley High School and Ade-
laide University. Appointed to his
present position in 1931. Formerly
Assistant City Engineer, Port Ade-
laide for 7 years. He is also Engineer,
Building Surveyor, and Secretary of
the Local Board of Health, and a
member of Henley Masonic Lodge.
His sports are tennis, golf, and rifle
shooting, and he is District Commis-
sioner of Boy Scouts' Association.
Address, 239 Esplanade, Henley Beach
South.


X
f
m i
s. r. DSLmonr
enGRRVCR I LLUJ'TRfiTOR
w
ft
A Staff of artists that is
qualified to prepare high-
class Sketches and
Suggestions for every
purpose of reproduction.
Hi
I ■
Hi
Hm
~ 4
J’TRSGT, (opp. Gflj compfinv) ft D€ LflilD
fInJTGR
The best equipped Studios in
South Australia for the pro-
duction of Color, Half-tone,
Line and Gravure Plates
for Advertising matter,
Magazines, Newspapers,
Folders, Cartons, Labels,
etc.
m


Corporation of Hindmarsh


History of Hmdmarsh
1838 —Ninety-eighth Anniversary—l 936.
Hindmarsh will celebrate its 98th anniversary this
year. Ihe section which composes Hindmarsh proper be-
longed to the first Governor of this Province and his wife,
whose names are thus commemorated. The section, which
is almost an equilateral triangle, lying between the Port
Road and the River Torrens, was sold to a syndicate of
shareholders, who owned shares equal in number to the
allotments surveyed. As more people desired shares than
there were blocks, the committee solved the difficulty by
dividing very allotment in two. thus drawing twice the
number of shares at first desired. Each share was the
same price, and when all the shares were disposed of, the
land was allotted by ballot. Some shareholders held more
than one share, and they received blocks not always ad-
joining each other. Some shares were owned by more than
one person, and their land was divided in a very weird
manner in some instances. The planning of the town was
on good lines, considering the times. Practically every
allotment was 165 ft. deep, the roads were wide and
straight, and right in the centre was left a spacious re-
serve. When the syndicate at first planned the subdivision
this reserve was intended to be used as a cemetery; but
almost the first public meeting of landholders altered that
intention, and dedicated the central reserve to the good of
the living, and turned the intended market-place, on the
river bank, into the cemetery instead. Names of the com-
mittee are remembered in the names of the streets. Adams,
Roberts, Chapman, and Holden are names of some of them,
while Orsmond reminds one of Thomas Orsmond. Lindsay
Circus (Hindmarsh Oval), Milner Street, bring back old
names. The wives of these pioneers also claimed recogni-
tion in Mary, Ann, Susan, and Jane Streets. Nile Street
was named after a ship, and Hindmarsh Place after the
vendor.
Having decided the ownership of the various plots
and the deeds being ready, the committee took them and
a load of turf round to the various owners, handing each
the parchment and a block of turf.
The town is divided into wards. Three of them-
Bowden, Brompton, and Croydon—have English proto-
types, but Hindmarsh itself has no community in Eng-
land of the same name. When Bowden was laid out the
streets were narrow and the allotments small, only about
105 feet in depth, but the royal metals were reserved to the
vendors. Brompton, on the contrary, has wide roads and
deep allotments, while Croydon is a modern “layout.
Gold was discovered in Hindmarsh when sinking a well,
but an offer to buy Hindmarsh gold at £2O an ounce was
not taken. At one time copper ore was smelted in the
town, and fiddle strings were manufactured.
Sir John Hindmarsh and his wife were the origiral
owners of the town of Hindmarsh, represented by pre-
liminary section 353, with an area of 134 acres. He p; id
11/- an acre for it. and when it was re-surveyed later it
was found that a mistake had been made in the origiral
allotment to the extent of nine acres in favour of tre
Governor, although the distinguished owner was qu te
ignorant of the fact. In May, 1838, a rumour was circu-
lated that Hindmarsh proposed to sell the section to a
capitalist for £l,OOO. Thereupon a number of working men
waited upon His Excellency, and obtained from him n
engagement to hand over the property to a syndicate of
their own formation for the sum mentioned. A pul ic
meeting was held in the Tradesmen’s Stores, Currie Stre t.
and the upshot was that the section passed to 200 p: o-
prietors, who got half an acre each, the remaining 34 ac es
being reserved for streets and other public purposes. Af .er
all expenses of purchase, survey, transfer, and advertis ig
had been paid, the half-acre allotments cost the new p o-
prietors £6/12/- each. Arthur Fydell Lindsay, one of ic
surveyors, went around to each of them and* delivered to
him his deed, together with a spadeful of earth. Then ic
owners took a ballot to decide upon a name for the s b-
division, with the following result: —Hindmarsh, 162 vot s;
Victoria. 33; Wakefield, 4: Dawlish, 1. Subsequently he
streets and squares were vested in a trust, and later a com-
mittee Was appointed to ensure the preservation of he


' tuber on the public lands. Such, in brief, is the early his-
ory of the first town formed in South Australia after the
election of the capital site. For a long period Hindmarsh
emained a centre of primary production. In 1844 it
masted of 279 cattle, 140 sheep, 251 pigs, 19 goats, and 8
mrses, besides areas of wheat and barley.
TOWN OF HINDMARSH.
Hindmarsh was originally a District Council, which
icluded all that is now known as the Woodville District
Council, Henley and Grange Corporation, and a section
lorth of the Torrens Road, which a few years ago was
transferred to the Yatala South District Council, so it
would seem that in electing to be proclaimed a Municipal
Corporation, Hindmarsh relinquished a large territory to
become self-contained and self-governed. It was divided
■ nto three wards —Hindmarsh, Bowden, and Brompton. In
1911 a poll was held on the proposition that Brompton
Ward be divided and a new ward, called Croydon \\ ard,
be established. The proposition was carried.
The Town of Hindmarsh was proclaimed a Corporation
on the Ist day of October, 1874. The first Mayor was the
late Mr. Benjamin Taylor, J.P. The first Councillors
were Messrs. J. Mitton, C. W. F. Trapman, E. Gould, R.
Havley, W. Shearing, and J. Weeks. The Town Clerk
was Mr. Thomas Frost. Assessment of annual values,
£14,590. The present assessment is: —Land values,
£417,865: capital property value, £2,070,000. The popula-
tion is approximately 13,000. The road mileage is about
37 and footpaths 70. The Council meetings were first held
in two small rooms belonging to the old Hindmarsh
Mechanics’ Institute, which then stood on the site now
occupied by the present Town Hall Offices. The history of
the Institute and the Corporation has been closely inter-
woven ever since the incorporation of the town took place.
The Town Hall was built in 1881 by the Institute
Committee, and went by the name of the Institute Hall
until the Institute was transferred to the Corporation in
the year 1891. The front part of the Town Hall building
was not erected until 1885. and this also was built by the
Institute Committee.
The Corporation to-day is a very different place from
the Hindmarsh of sixty years ago, according to a state-
ment made recently by an old ratepayer :
“When first I was a ratepayer I paid £2/10/- a > car.
Fifty years ag'o I moved into the house I occupy now, and
1 paid just 50/- to the Town Hall.” he said. “But when
I go up to pay my rates next I shall get just ninepence
change from £7. That’s how r the rating has changed.
“Hindmarsh has altered, too. Seventy-five years ago,
when I was a boy, there w T as a big gully near the present
Hindmarsh Oval, a permanent pool of water flooded the
other part of the district, and from Hindmarsh you could
look clear down to the sea through the open country."
An “old-timer” is the former Town Clerk. Mr. F. J.
Bishop, who retired 10 years ago after 42 years sei \ ice.
Among its pioneers Hindmarsh boasts the late John
Ridley, inventor of a reaping machine. Among its institu-
tions are Hindmarsh Municipal Band, which has been
active for many years; the Preachers’ Fraternal, an
organisation of ministers of various denominations; the
Hindmarsh Institute; Bowden Free Kindergarten; the
Town Mission, founded by George F. Angas: and many
sporting bodies. The Baby Health Centre is well sup-
ported, and so is the local branch of the District Trained
Nursing Society.
An interesting institution is the Cottage Homes
foundation at Croydon and Brompton. Public donations
have been the means of providing comfortable homes for
aged residents of the district. The first of these, erected
in 1897, had its beginning in a movement to celebrate the
diamond jubilee of Queen Victoria.
Present Council. —Mayor, John Mclnnes, M.P.:
Aldermen. S. A. T. Jones, G. R. Mcßurnie, A. \ . King. J. M.
Scott-Todd: Councillors, Hindmarsh Ward. W. G. Bourn
and W. H. Stratton; Bowden Ward. C. H. Trembath and
H. W. Humphrys; Brompton Ward, F. K. Nieass and W.
Wood; Croydon Ward, J. T. Wood and P. Harrison:
Engineer and Town Clerk, G. D. Mudie, B.E.
HINDMARSH AS A MANUFACTURING TOWN.
It has often been stated that Hindmarsh is a manu-
facturing town, but this is quite distinct from being
declared a manufacturing district under Act of Parliament
and by Proclamation. This has never been done, although
a great many people are under that impression. Industry
has flourished from the first. Numerous industries have


• ■■
HINDMARSH, 1884-FIRST HAND-REEL.
The Hindmarsh Volunteer Fire Brigade is an important adjunct and
a distinct asset to the town. From a small beginning, as illustrated
above, it has grown to a large and well-organised fire-fighting body
of zealous and enthusiastic workers.
been established, but the chief industry has been brick
manufacture, and its associated trades of earthenware
pipes, tiles, etc. Not only the buildings in the town, but
thousands of erections in the city and suburbs have been
and are being built with Hindmarsh bricks. Other indus-
tries include wool scouring, tanning, fellmongering, and
the manufacture of acetylene gas.
Mayoral Roll. —B. Taylor, C. W. F. Trapman, J. Mitton,
F. E. Bucknall, Dr. Rees, P. B. Coglin, E. Gould, J. Vardon,
T. H, Brooker, J. Jones, B. Gould, A. W. Ralph, C. R.
Flocking, W. Blight, J. F. King, G. Wright, W. H. H. Bring,
J. D. Brown, W. Wood, J. F. King, G. A. Noble, W. E.
Dennis, F. W. Dinnis, F. K. Nieass, J. E. Bateup.
FIFTY YEARS OF FIRE-FIGHTING.
From the humble beginning, 52 years ago, of eight
members, a hand reel, and a few yards of hose, the
Hindmarsh Volunteer Fire Brigade has marched with the
times, and to-day has an organisation of 33 members and
a modern fire-fighting plant, worth £3,000, housed i
buildings worth about £2,000. This organisation has bee
established mainly by local donations and the honorar
services of public-spirited citizens. In the 52 years of it
existence, the Brigade has turned out 150 fully traine
firemen, who have saved one of the principal manufacturin
towns of the State from many devastating fires.
Realising the danger from fire which threatened th
town, with its numerous tanneries, soap works, wo<
scouring and fellmongering establishments, timber yard<
and the huge coal stacks of the South Australian Ga
Company’s Works, eight public-spirited men called
meeting at the Hindmarsh Town Hall on November 36tl
1884. The then Mayor of the town (Dr. Rees) preside*
over an assemblage of thirty men, who decided to form an
support a Fire Brigade. Fifteen volunteered for activ
service, and eight were accepted. The original Brigad
comprised J. M. Reid (captain), J. Duncan (lieutenant
Arthur Burnell, John Reid, James McDonald, John
George Coulthard, and Robert Scarce. James Duncan, c
West Hindmarsh, now eighty years old, is the only survive
of this number.
Stories of hair-raising escapes when the roofs c
buildings and walls came crashing down round the fireme
HINDMARSH VOLUNTEER FIRE BRIGADE, 1934.


ibe told by Mr. Duncan. The Hindmarsh firemen had
ieir baptism of fire in the conflagration which nearly wiped
it Tamblyn & Coombe’s ropeworks at Croydon in 1885.
remen had to be athletes in those days, and frequently
d a Marathon run with the hand reel to the seat of the
fire.
Included among many of the bigger fires attended by
is Brigade are: Rurford’s (one of the most spectacular
izes in the history of the State). Academy of Music,
oposite the old Globe Hotel, now the site of Myer’s
nporium; on this occasion two firemen, Gardiner and
Parke, were killed, and a drinking fountain has been
acted in their memory at Elder Park. On Christmas Eve,
<O7. another big fire broke out at Burford’s Soap Works,
indmarsh, and on this occasion eighteen firemen remained
i duty for sixteen hours without rest.
The saving by the Hindmarsh Brigade of Reid and
on’s tannery, on July 10th, 1919, is recorded by the Fire
nderwriters’ Association of South Australia as the
reatest save from fire in the of the State. The
rge timber yard of T. King & Sons, adjoining the tannery,
as an inferno of flame. Seeing that it was impossible to
vpe with the timber yard blaze, the Brigade concentrated
on protecting the tannery, and by its efforts a property an'd
flant valued at £25,000, which was licked by flames on two
.ides, received no more damage than a scorching. In the
timber yard, however, £lO,OOO worth of property was lost.
May, 1912, saw another big fire at Michell & Sons
wool scouring works and although property to the value of
£lOO,OOO was in danger, the fire was so effectively dealt
with the damage did not exceed £lO,OOO. A very
dangerous fire attended by this Brigade was that of the
Crystal Ice Company, at Thebarton, on April 16th, 1910.
Drums of liquid ammonia were expected to blow up at
any minute, but the firemen faced the risk, and confined
damage to £5OO on a property with £25,000. Another
big fire was that of the Adelaide Rope and Xail A orks,
when a save of £60,000 was made. Many other instances
of valuable saves by the Brigade are recorded, which show
that £45,000 worth of property in the town has been
destroyed by fire, £295,000 was in danger, and £250,000
worth saved.
Chief officers since the inception of the Brigade have
been: J. M. Reid, 1884-1900; J. Duncan, 1900-1912; G. J.
Plenty, 1912 to date.
The annual expenditure of the Brigade, including
provident fund, insurance, payments for attendance at
entertainments and station duty, is less than £350.
Speaking at the jubilee of the Brigade, the Governor
(Sir Winston Dugan), after presenting medals to Superin-
tendent Duncan and 33 members, expressed amazement
that such a fine organisation could have been built up by-
voluntary labour and public sbscription.


■Bk : ~“”l
PP^v^
■ §mmmm m‘l ,, : - ■ . * '
IHp _ - x aBBp
- ■ 0.
'• • 7'
i
SBBgir ! iK' v :
& . *1 M
B> ■-• M
■ 'mk > jH^kSv
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF
HINDMARSH, JOHN McINNES,
M.P.
Was born in Scotland. 1878, and
arrived in Australia, 1884. Educated
at Unley Public School. Four and a
half years' service in Hindmarsh Cor-
poration (two and a half years as
Mayor). A resident of the District
for 35 years. A Member of Parlia-
ment for 19 years; two and a half
years Speaker of House of Assembly;
four years Minister of Industry; four
years Commissioner of Public Works;
three years member of Public Works
Committee; a member of the Cosmo-
politan Friendly Benefit Society. His
sports are football and cricket.
JOHN ERNEST BATEUP.
(Past Mayor, Corporation of Hindmarsh.)
Born at Balaklava, 1879. Ten years'
service in Council. A resident of the
District for 28 years. Positions held
in Council: Councillor, Alderman, and
Mayor. Business : Motor I rader, 118
Grote Street, Adelaide. Member of
Masonic, Edward VII, Hindmarsh
Lodge. Sport: Bowls. During the
ten years in which Mr. Bateup was
connected with the Hindmarsh Coun-
cil he did a vast amount of good work
in connection with the town. Many
improvements were carried out to the
satisfaction of the ratepayers.
Address: 22 Elizabeth Street, Croy-
don.
WILLIAM WOOD.
(Past Mayor, Corporation of Hindmarsh.)
Born at Newcastle-on-Tyne, Eng-
land, 16th February, 1875. Arrived in
Australia. September, 1876. Eighteen
years' service in Council. Resident in
the District for 60 years. Positions
held in Council : Councillor, two years;
Alderman, 10 years; Mayor, two
years. Business: Assurance Super-
intendent. Member of King Edward
VII Masonic Lodge, President District
Trained Nurses' Association, and Com-
mitteeman of the Town Mission.
Home address : 79 Government Road,
Croydon.
ALDERMAN ARTHUR VERNON KING
(Corporation of Hindmarsh.)
Mr. King is a well-known identity
of Hindmarsh, having resided in the
District for the past 42 years. He is
a consistent supporter of local public
affairs, having served in Council for
the past 11 years. Born at Hind-
marsh on December Ist, 1888. He was
educated at Prince Alfred College, and
is now a partner of James King and


* ‘
V w ? si
■k - mwi v.
*■ l||l >*'•%■ •
*' x
Si - 4
M||i .v|.v
aftWt —■.----
&'•;.■;« S M
jgMMTOg^^l
j- jMyMk&
■'■ ■ ■- > ’ ,;■ ‘ ...' _
8f - f -jf|i8
mk
Builders and Contractors. Mr.
is also a director of Commercial
it or Vehicles Co.. Imperial Gold
n nes Ltd., S.A. Builders Insurance
, and a partner in Kingston Pas-
toral Co., also Trustee of Oddfellows
Ige. His chief sport is bowls, and
he is a member of King Edward and
Prince Alfred Old Collegians’ Masonic
Lodge. Private address: 52 Mills
Terrace, North Adelaide.
ALDERMAN JOSEPH MAFEKING
SCOTT-TODD.
(Corporation of Hindmarsh.)
lorn at Melbourne, 4th May, 1900.
Educated at Port Adelaide, Broken
Hill, and Streaky Bay. Service in
Council, five years. Nine years a resi-
dent of the District. Positions held
in Council: Two years as Councillor,
three years as Alderman. Business:
Lines and Cables Staff, Electrical En-
gineers Branch, P.M.G. Department.
Member of the West Croydon Druids
Lodge. Sports : Fishing and shooting.
War service: One year 177 days on
active service abroad, A.I.F. Mr.
Scott-Todd enlisted at the age of 17
years. Home address: 85 Tait Street,
Croydon.
PAST COUNCILLOR GEORGE JAMES
PLENTY.
(Corporation of Hindmarsh.)
Born at Hindmarsh, 1875. Educated
at Pulteney Grammar School. Mr.
Plenty served four years as a Coun-
cillor in the Council, and during - that
period he did splendid service in the
interests of the Town of Hindmarsh
and the ratepayers in general. He
has been a resident of the District for
46 years, and is in business as a Master
Tailor at Port Road, Hindmarsh. He
is a member of the Rechabite and
Druid Lodges; Chief Officer of the
Hindmarsh Volunteer Fire Brigade,
and has been a member for 38 years,
having joined in 1898. He is also
Chief Officer of the S.A. Ambulance
Transport Inc., having 15 years' ser-
vice. Mr. Plenty is a life member of
the West Torrens Football Club, and
was for 16 years a committeeman of
same. He is also a foundation mem-
ber of the Hindmarsh Bowling Club.
His sports are bowls and football.
Home address: 642 Sea View Road,
Grange.
COUNCILLOR HERBERT JOHN
HUMPHRYS.
(Corporation of Hindmarsh.)
Born at Brompton, 7th February,
1899. Educated at Brompton Public
School. Mr. Humphrys has been a


#W|
«| &
JH|
lllll JS|t J|ii||
,\.('
”; f > -^^‘9vw
f «S|p r
resident of the District for 31 years,
and has a service of three years as
Councillor in the Corporation, during
which he has given the ratepayers
every satisfaction. He is a Trustee
and a Past Arch Druid in the Albert
Lodge, U.A.O.D. His sport is indoor
bowls. Private address: 119 Gibson
Street, Hindmarsh.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM HENRY
STRATTON, J.P.
(Corporation of Hindmarsh.)
Born at North Adelaide, Ist July,
1881, and educated at Norwood Public
School. He ha s served in the Council
since July, 1935, and has been a resi-
dent of the District for five years.
Mr. Stratton was eight years a Coun-
cillor of Campbelltown District Coun-
cil. two years of which he was Chair-
man. He is in business as a Land
Agent. He is a member of Masonic,
Druids', and Buffalo Lodges. His
sports are football and racing. Private
address : Port Road. Hindmarsh.
COUNCILLOR FRANK KEEN NIEASS.
(Corporation of Hindmarsh.)
Born at Hindmarsh, 25th October,
1886. Educated at Brompton School
and privately by Mr. J. Hunn.
He has served in the Council since
1911 as Councillor, Alderman, and
Mayor, and has done yeoman service
during this long period for the town
of Hindmarsh. Councillor Nieass has
been a resident of the District for 50
years, and has held the following
positions: Secretary and President
Bowden Literary Society. President
and Vice-President West Torrens
Literary Society, Past Chief Ruler
Juvenile and Adult Rechabite Lodges,
member of the Brompton School
Committee for 20 years (10 years of
which he was Chairman). Chairman
of the Hindmarsh District Combined
School Committee, Patron of the 1
Bowden Group of Scouts for the pa t
ten years, President of the Excelsicr
Football Club, Vice-President of the
Excelsior Cricket Club. His busine -
is General Secretary Australian Go -
eminent Workers’ Association. Pr -
vate address : 52 East Street. Bronp -
ton.
COUNCILLOR PATRICK HARRISON
(Corporation of Hindmarsh.)
Born at Georgetown, 4th April, 1853.
Service in Council, two years. Twelve
years a resident of the District. Bus
ness ; Moulder. A member of Turnii £
of the Tide Independent Order of
Rechabites, Semaphore. War Servic :
Served with 43rd Battalion, A.1.F., 9m
June, 1916, to 28th March. 1919.


' t i
III ' -*■
II Is- iBBr
'%_ 'lp>% I
* * .* ifcfe. .-^3
HHHH Jjra
a . mf&.
hounded at Messines. Sports : Ruli-
ng, cycling, and gardening. Edu-
cated at Georgetown Public School,
lome address: 76 Tait Street, North
Croydon.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES HENRY
TREMBATH, J.P.
(Corporation of Hindmarsh.)
Horn at Moonta, sth February, 1885.
Educated at Moonta Mines Public
School. Twelve years’ service in
Council. A resident of the District
•29 years. Business ; Railway Em-
ployee. Member of the U.A.O. Druids’
Lodge. Councillor Trembath takes a
prominent part in church work, being
an elder in the Robert Street Church
of Christ, Hindmarsh. Sport; Bowls.
Private address: 93 Gibson Street,
Bowden.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM WOOD.
(Corporation of Hindmarsh.)
Born at Brompton, 6th December,
1878. Educated at Public School,
Preston, Victoria. Seven years Coun-
cillor and Alderman, Hindmarsh Cor-
poration. Six years Port Elliot Cor-
poration as Councillor and Mayor.
Thirty-three years a resident of the
Town of Hindmarsh. Business: Brick
maker. Lodges: Past Chief Ruler,
Independent Order of Rechabites.
Foundation member and President of
the Foreshore Improvement Com-
mittee, Port Elliot, for six years.
Sports: Bowls and football. Home
address : 90 Coglin Street, Brompton.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM GEORGE
BOURN.
(Corporation of Hindmarsh.)
Born Faversham, Kent, England.
July 14th. 1872. Arrived in Australia,
June 16th, 1883. Educated at Faver-
sham, Kent, England, and Hindmarsh
Public School. Service in Council,
eight years. Fifty-three years a resi-
dent of the District. Business : Carrier
and Contractor. Past Master King
Edward VII Masonic Lodge. Mr.
Bourn arrived on the ship “Dundee.”
June 16th, 1883, with the late Hon.


SBBHBi
p
■ %
* ;l
ji
■
j*** HL
aw .. -jP Jr |
-r • ' ■ j
Tom Price. He is fond of all sports.
Home address: 26 Arlington Terrace,
W elland.
COUNCILLOR JOHN THOMAS WOOD.
(Corporation of Hindmarsh.)
Born at Bowden, 12th March, 1879,
and educated at Hindmarsh Public
School. Five years’ service as Coun-
cillor for Croydon Ward. A resident
of the District for 57 years. During
Councillor Wood’s five years’ term as
Councillor he has shown much interest
in the improvements of the Town of
Hindmarsh, particularly in Croydon
Ward. Business : Boot and Shoe Store
Proprietor. A member of Masonic,
Rechabite, and Free Gardeners'
Lodges. His sport is bowls. He is
Secretary of S.A. Homing Pigeon
Association. Private address: 35
Government Road. Croydon.
GEORGE DEMPSTER MUDIE,
ENGINEER AND TOWN CLERK.
(Corporation of Hindmarsh.)
Born at Malvern, 4th July, 1895, and
educated at Kyre College. Mr. Mi die
has served the Corporation of Hi td-
marsh for the past nine years v. ith
distinction as Engineer and Tc.vn
Clerk. The improvements that have
been made in the town are the re: ult
of Mr. Mudie's practical work. fe
has held the position of Assist nt
Engineer, Engineer -in - Chief's
partment ; Engineering Assistant, City
Engineer's Department, Adela de,
where he also did a vast amount of
good work before taking up his du ies
at Hindmarsh. He is a member of
the S.A. Caledonian Society, and is
fond of tennis and gardening"
o $5 •


Corporation of Jamestown


History of Jamestown.
Jamestown was so called after Sir James Ferguson,
who was Governor of South Australia at the time the town
\\ as surveyed. 1 he principal street, Ayr Street, was named
after his birthplace, and others after localities adjacent to
the town of Ayr, in Scotland.
It is situated in the I lundred of Belalie, one of the best
agricultural districts in this State. It was surveyed in the
seventies, and is 152 miles north from Adelaide, via Blyth.
by rail, and via Terowie, 176 miles. Mail communication
is twice daily each way.
The Corporation was proclaimed in the year 1878, the
first Mayor being Dr. J. A. Cockburn, M.D., and the first
Councillors were Messrs. T. Carter, E. Humphries, L.
Levine, R. Hill, J. Coombe, E. V\ . O’Halloran, J. Moore,
and T. Thomas. The auditors were Messrs. J. Wilkinson
(now of Murray Bridge; only survivor) and G. H. Lake;
Mr. G. B. Yeates was Town Clerk.
Ihe first Council undertook an extensive scheme of
tree planting, both in the centre of the wide street and on
the surrounding park lands. These trees have grown
remarkably well, and add very greatly to the beauty and
comfort of the place. I he town has a population of over
1.500 ; the dwellings number 361; and there are 106 business
places. The assessed value of property in 1878 was £6,491;
in 1907, £7,057; in 1923, £17,467; peak, 1928, £19,146!
These latter figures show the rapid growth of Jamestown
during the last sixteen years, and which increase has been
brought about chiefly by the subdivision of the large
pastoral holdings of Yongala, Canowie, Bundaleer, and part
of Booyoolee, and the number of retired farmers building
in the town which they have been connected with for so
many years. The Institute is a fine and commodious
building, and other public edifices include five churches,
post office, State and high schools, hospital, and courthouse.
The Belalie Agricultural Society is a flourishing insti-
tution, and has a large showground on the town park lands.
off the road leading to Spalding. The pleasures and
pastimes of the inhabitants are well catered for, and include
bowls, croquet, golf, cricket, football, tennis, and a swim-
ming pool. All sections have appointments rigdit up to the
most modern requirements. The Jamestown Racing Club,
Ltd., has also a very up-to-date course adjacent to the
town. An electric light plant was running for some years,
but has been supplanted by an extension of the Adelaide
Electric Supply Company’s mains, which supplies over 400
consumers with electric energy, the streets also being well
lit by electricity.
A War Memorial Park has been established, with
Rotunda and Playground, in which is also erected
memorial arch to 222 enrolments, of whom 49 paid th
supreme sacrifice.
Ihe following is a list of past and present Councillor
from 1878 until the present day: J. A. Cockburn (Mayor;.
S. Carter, E. Humphries, L. Levine, R. Hill, J. Coombe.
E. W. O’Halloran, J. Moore, T. Thomas, J. Hall, J. Wilkii
son, H. Boucaut, W. A. Dempsey, W. Treleaven, E
Moseley, A . Haslam, j. A. Clarke, R. C. Sandland,
DeCoque, E. G. Beevor, R. Mavne, jun., A, Naismith, A.
Minich, J. F. Deeney, S. E. Evans, C. F. Field, T. Brigh
J. Haskard, G. H. Stanton, B. Sutherland, E. Bower, (
Butler, J. W. Stephens, B. T. Evans, E. Hugo, T. P. Axf’on
A. Laing, J. Tomlinson, G. Eaton, B. Vohr, S. Lamb,
Dickson. C. J. Reade, J. H. Touched, E. J. Wills, R. Rowe
J. Cameron, T. Trevena, F. Farrington, (. F. Humphris,
Irvine, W. B. Aitken, S. M. Turner, J. Moyle, T. Sain
D. C. Connor, F. W. Hockey, F. McFarling,' W. E. Sane
land, G. Chellew, W. O. Mitchell, W. Wilson. F A
Humphris. H. A. Davis. A. L. Lowe. C. Grosser. Ah
Quigley, J. A. Ogilvie, R. E. Humphris, T. Brooks'
Goodes, J. Coles, Ah Stacey, R. Snodgrass, L. C Charm
ness, O. Hunter, D. J. Harfield, Ah Palmer A F
Bartholomeaus, j. Tnglis, Ah C. Glasson, R. Mitchell
O’Leary, G. H. Boucaut, J. L. Russell, L. M. W Ridel


Lee, D. W. Gordon, A. Baldwin, W. A. Hawke, J. \Y.
s, J. S. Stephens, J. J. Brookes, S. Wenham, M.
"allum, J. R. Rosie, M. S. McLeod, J. C. Skurry, C. H.
d, F. Opie, N. Haynes, F. N. Haese, B. ). Moy, T.
gett, J. Bampton, T. J. Kelly, J. R. G. Thomas, P. J.
McCarthy, J. D. Jeffs, J. Hehir, H. C. Stanton, E. T. Daly
G. W. Blaskett, H. D. Wilkins, C. S. I). Gibbs. R
McLennan, H. McDonald, 1). Boucaut, li. D. Pelton, S. N
Haskard, C. L. Hewett, A. S. Gordon, P. F. Noonan, R O
Wehrmann.
SIDNEY BARKLA CASTINE.
(Past Town Clerk, Jamestown Corporation.)
Born at Auburn, and educated at
Riverton Public School and Prince
Alfred College. Mr. Castine was 3
years Town Clerk at Jamestown, and
is now District Clerk of Kimba. Pre-
viously he served 12 years at Auburn,
Sports, cricket, golf, and football. He
enlisted for active service, but was re-
jected and appointed Secretary to the
Repatriation Committee. When re-
siding at Auburn he was President of
Auburn Institute, Recruiting Officer
and President Agricultural Bureau,
etc.
DISTRICT COUNCIL OF BELALIE.
Belalie was laid out in 1871, but the then Governor
(Sir fames Ferguson) caused this name to give way to
Jamestown, although it was retained as regards an appella-
tion of a District Council. Belalie North railway station
is the highest in South Australia, being 2,024 feet above
sea-level.
Belalie is situated 168 miles north of Adelaide, and has
an area of 124,629 acres, which are throughout pastoral and
agricultural; the wheat yield being uniformly above the
average of the State. Within a few miles of the township
the Government Forest Reserve of several thousand acres
is situated, where the growth of thousands of trees indicate
the suitability of the soil for agriculture.
The population of the district numbers 1,184 persons,
of whom 292 are ratepayers, and the dwellings total 259.
The capita] value of ratable property is £455,560, and the
assessment value £22,879. A rate of 1/6 in the £1 yields
annually £1,715 18/6.
The following is a list of past Councillors; Messrs. T.
Williams, G. E. Maslin, H. J. Richardson, T. Goodes, P. F.
Noonan, A. W. Jamieson, T. Symonds, E. T. Daly, F.
Cummins, W. L. Ereebairn, W. Gilfillan, J. Travers, H. K.
Moore, H. J. Porter, J. Irwin, E. Hoffman, M. Coleman,
and R. Rowe (Clerk).




Corporation and District Council of Kadina.


History of Kadma
Kadina is a corporate town with two civic organisa-
tions—one for the town and the other for the district. Like
Moonta. being long established and prosperous, Kadina has
a substantial and compact appearance. It is, indeed, one
of the smartest and most up-to-date townships in South
Australia, and the volume of business done, when the mines
were in full swing, being more than double any ordinary
township of its size, few of which exist in the State.
The town is exceedingly well laid out, and the
municipality covers a square mile. There are extensive
parks, exhibition and recreation grounds, bowling greens,
tennis courts, etc., and the plantation of ornamental trees
has added to and improved the general appearance. There
are several miles of hne bituminous sealed roads and
footways throughout the town ; most of the footways arc
neatly finished with continuous cement concrete kerbing,
and the town presents an extremely clean appearance.
Electric lighting has been in vogue here for many
years, and the town was the first in the State to adopt the
principle of municipal owned lighting and power works.
The prices for electric current are amongst the lowest in
the Commonwealth. The charges are : House lighting, 6d
per unit; power, 2Jd. per unit; and shop window lighting,
3d. per unit.
Besides its fine electric power works, it has stone
crushing, concrete mixing, and road sealing plants. It
also controls the local cemetery.
A good water supply is obtained from the AHrren and
Bundaleer Reservoirs.
There is a large number of public and private buildings,
with distinctive architecture. The Town Hall, with its
high steeple and clock inset, towers above, and is imme-
diately opposite the Soldiers’ Memorial Gardens. The
District Council Chamber is a freehold property of the
District Council, and is on the opposite corner to the Town
Hall.
The farming industry of the surrounding district has
grown from practically nothing until to-day its importance
is a factor that has, to a very large extent, established
secondary industries which would surely have otherwise
collapsed through stoppage of mining operations in times
of industrial turmoil, and when copper could not be
marketed at a price to compete with foreign markets.
The area of the Corporation of Kadina is 1,080 acres,
whilst that of the district is 155,200 acres. The capital
value of each is £542,880 and £606,580 respectively, the
assessment value of the former being £27,144 and the latter
£44,200. The Corporation rates total 2/- in the £l, nd
yield £2,787, and those of the district 1/- in the 41.
yielding £2,130.
The population of the town and district is estimated
at 9,748 persons, and the dwellings number 2,570.
Following are members and ex-members of Ka( na
Corporation;— Mayors: Messrs. T. H. Hall, F. W. Gur er,
J. Gaskell, R. Hazelgrove, R. W. Bawden, J. J. Christr as.
j. Martin, R. J. Nobes, T. M. Rendell. A. France. \V.
Blackney, P. Jackson, H. A. Powell, J. Mitchell, J. A.
Southwood, J. Tonkin, C. A. E. Hall, L. H. H. She] ey.
J. B. K. Dunstone, P. Roach, C. E. C. Wilson, A C.
'Hallam, R. L. Spry, H. Bruce, E. H. C. Hall, W. E. Pin ell.
Councillors: Messrs. R. S. Haddy, A. Restall. T. Corr'sh.
D. Brown, W. Harris, J. Tonkin, J. Julian, T. Tregov th.
J. Bundle, J. Lang, AY. Symons, S. Edyvean, E. Par ell.
J. M. Rosenberg, T. Beattie, J. Gosse, T. C. Bleakley R.
Dawe, P. Cundy, A. Scott, T. H. Rodda, A. J. Sextor T.
Horwood, N. Rosewarne, D. Brown, C. Barnett, M. Ha ris
M. J. Ward, S. Barnett. J. Mitchell, Ah J. Curti I
Fargher, F. Potter, G. Rule, T. Horwood, J. H. Penge ey.
D. Dunn, A. H. Gurner, J. AHtters, J. Stvles J.
Andrewartha, C. Matthews, A. France, Ah H. Eddv, J H.
Mitchell, R. Truscott, A. H. Middleton, J. Johns, C A'
Saxe. F. S. Tippett, C. ATitbread, T. Mitchell, R. C Id.
G. Langdon, J. M. Tnglis, J. Cornelius, P. Jackson, F A.
Ham, G. Shaw. H. I. Beck, T. H. Warren, F. Harv >od.
E. T. Fames, H. A. Powell, A. C. Frick, J. Johns, T. F. S.
Short, A . Opie, A . Greenslade, A . Crowden A H.


;ers, C. P. Rendell, J. Darling, W. B. Mitchell, A. [.
m, G. McFarling, H. McDonald, T. R. Bawden, J.
W. H. Rogers, j. M. Inglis, E. A. Beare, B. Treloar
Train, P. Roach, E. A. Hodges, H. W. Pell, E. Bow-
R. Grigg, J. Jenkin, C. A. E. Hall, j. Daniel, E. W. E.
v, S. Chynoweth, A. j. Page,
1. J. Mason, \\ . J. Harwood, F. G. W. Payze, S.
ton, A. S. Window, W. H. Bullock, L. H. FI. S hep ley,
. Stevens, J. B. K. Dunstone, F. D. Taylor, O. T.
ia, J. H. Thomas, A. W. Ayles, j. 1. Meddle* O. G.
an. J. G. Gale, \\ . H. Donaldson, R. L. Spry, H.
e, E. H. C. Hall, S. Roberts, C. Rotchford, W. C.
an, Mb F. Taylor, C. E. C. Wilson, H. F. March, K. R.
rts, A. J. Busbridge, J. Willis, A. Pearce, H. Measday,
Icßeath, \\ . R. Hedger, j. A. Coles, A. Langdon, P. R.
:a, V M. Pearson, H. B. Holthouse, V . L. Pinnell,
Tinstone, J. H. \\ hite, Dr. S. E. Holder, G. Langdon,
aull, T. J. Davies, G. D. A. Favilla, C. E. Earcombe,
Robertson, W. T. Venning,
hotographer—H. W. Pell.
The following are the sitting members of this Council
1 Corporation of the Town of Kadina—viz.:—Mayor.
L. Pinnell. Councillors: C. E. Earcombe, G. D. A.
Fa villa, C. Pauli, T. J. Davies, S. E. Holder, J. H. White,
H. B. Holthouse, C. J. Dunstone, E. H. C. Hall, J. A.
Robertson, K. R, Roberts, W. T. Venning, K. H.
Warmington. Town Clerk, F. W. Harris.
DISTRICT COUNCIL OF KADINA.
Following are members and ex-members District Council
of Kadina: —Chairmen: Messrs. P. Allen, D. Taylor, J.
Wearne, H. Fuss, P. Roach, j. Malcolm, P. Roach. A. Rodda.
Councillors: Messrs W. L. Belling, G. Harrop, F. S. Smith,
H. R. Hancock, R. j. Nobes, J. A. H. Thiem, A. Goodall,
G. Chatfield, T. Cowley, B. Crosby, W. Marshall, J. Ried,
J. Symons, J. Allen, T. Price, T. Tait, W. H. Wilkinson,
H. Johnson, W. T. Andrewartha, E. P. Putland, C.
Tremberth, J. Malcolm, W. B. Stacey, J. T. Harris, E.
Major, R. Gorrell, T. H. Rodda, A. Trezise, W. B. Butler,
W. J. Bripkworth, J. Shields, R. W. Kitto, jum, G.
Lamshed, A. J. Sexton, R. C. Kitto, A. Paterson, J. N.
Pedlar, J. Atkinson, R. Petherick, and R. J. Rodda (Clerk).
The following are the sitting members of the Kadina
I Hstrict Council: The Chairman (A. Rodda). Councillors:
J. N. Pedler, M.P., R. Petherick, H. Williamson, R. f.
Daddow, J. C. Price, W. J. Cross, H. C. McCauley, C. T.
Chapman, L. J. Tremelling. District Clerk, R. J. Rodda.


■
**s , .
.
l , *• JIPIB»
W* 1 " mtm —
*
■
, .«*•
■
l@k
'Mm.
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR, WILLIAM
LAKELAND PINNELL, J.P.
(Corporation of Kadina)
Born at Ballarat, Victoria, sth of
November, 1871 ; educated at Balla-
rat, Victoria, and Hobart. Tasmania.
Service in Council: 5 years (2 years
as Councillor, 3 years as Mayor).
Twenty-nine years a resident of the
district. Positions held : Chairman of
Directors Peninsula Entertainments,
Ltd., President of the Kadina Benevo-
lent Society. Mr. Pinnell was for-
merly a bank official for 21 years in
V ictoria, New South Wales, and South
Australia. Present business, General
Commission Agent. Sports, tennis,
golf and bowls. Honorary Secretary
of the Yorke Peninsula Tennis Asso-
ciation. and he is an ex-President of
Kadina Tennis, Golf and Bowling
Clubs. Home address, Kadina.
PAST MAYOR EDWIN HAROLD
CLARENCE HALL.
(Corporation of Kadina)
Born at Lucindale, 22nd April, 1883.
educated at Lucindale, Caterer and
Macklin’s Schools. Service in Coun-
cil : 12 years. Three years Mayor of
Kadina Corporation. Thirty-two years
a resident of the district. Business,
Tailor and Mercer. Past Master of
the Union Masonic Lodge and Walla-
roo Mark Lodge, P.Z. Kadina Royal
Arch Chapter. Home address, Kadina.
COUNCILLOR JOHN H. WHITE.
(Corporation of Kadina)
Born at Tarcowie, 10th May, 1886:
educated at Kadina Public School and
Stanley Grammar School, Watervale.
Service in Council: 6 years, represent-
ing' Stirling- Ward. Thirty-five years
a resident of the district. Business,
Manager of Charles Moore & (v,
Kadina Branch, for 20 years. 1 n
years Honorary Secretary of the 1 a-
dina Benevolent Society and a me n-
ber of the Kadina Technical Sch ol
Committee. Lodges: Member of ie
Oddfellows’ Manchester Unity iid
Druids’ Lodges. Home address. 0.
Taylor Street, Kadina.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM THOMA
VENNING.
(Corporation of Kadina)
Born at Crystal Brook, 28th ]\ y
1875; educated at Way College, A e-
laide. Service in Council: 6 ye rs.
Twenty-eight years a resident of ae
district. Mr. Venning spent the st
years of his life on his father’s ( ite
Mr. W. J. Venning) farm, Cry tal
Brook, after which he joined the 7 is-
tralian Implement Company, when lie


'%■ ' i '
!V.
,
* '****» I
ser 20 years as a travelling expert
and salesman. Since then he founded
the veil-known firm of Venning’s Ser-
vice cation, Kadina. Business, Iron-
mom ir, Agricultural, Electrical and
Radio Engineer. Member of the In-
dependent Order of Oddfellows’
Lodge. Interested in sports of all
kinds. Home address, Graves Street,
Kadina.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES PAULL.
(Corporation of Kaclina)
Born at Moonta, 7th May, 1872;
educated at Moonta and Kapunda Pub-
lic Schools. Service in Council: 5
years. Fifty-seven years a resident of
the district. Business, Storekeeper.
A member of the Rechabite Lodge.
Sports, football and cricket. Home
address, Goyder Street, Kadina.
COUNCILLOR THOMAS JOHN DAVIES.
(Corporation of Kadina)
Born at Wallaroo, 27th May, 1884;
educated at Wallaroo Public School.
A resident of the district all his life.
Service in Council: 3 years. Posi-
tions held: Accountant to Charles
Moore & So., Kadina, Secretary of the
Kadina Private Hospital and Penin-
sula Entertainments, Ltd. Present
business, Public Accountant, Licensed
Auditor and Liquidator, and Regis-
tered Trustee in Bankruptcy. Lodges:
Past Master Masonic Union Lodge.
No. 13, Kadina: at present Organist
to Union Lodge; also Royal Arch
Chapter. Mr. Davies has for 22 years
occupied the position of Organist to
Victoria Square (Kadina) Methodist
Church. Sports: Secretary of the
Yorke Peninsula Football Association
and a member of the Kadina Bowling
Club. Home address, 85. Taylor
Street, Kadina.
COUNCILLOR K. R. ROBERTS.
(Corporation of Kadina)
Born at Parkside, 7th October, 1890,
and educated at St. Peter’s College.
Mr. Roberts has served in the Cor-
poration for 12 years, and has been a
resident of the district for 22 years.
He was formerly Branch Manager of
Bagot. Shakes, & Lewis, and his pre-
sent business is Branch Manager and
Auctioneer of Goldsbrough. Mort. and
Co. He has been committeeman of
the Kadina and Wallaroo Jockey Club
for many years, and is a Past Pre-


■ I
» ■■ - vp'
f
><
-
v ■
j * s
I m
sident of the Kadina Golf and Tennis
Clubs. Mr. Roberts is a Past Com-
mitteeman of the Kadina High School
Council, and past captain of the Ka-
dina and Federal Rover Football Club.
His sports are cricket, swimming, ten-
nis, football, and long distance run-
ning'. Home address, Kadina.
COUNCILLOR G. D. A. FAVILLA.
(Corporation of Kaclina.)
Born at Kaclina, 29th December,
1882; educated at Christian Bros.’ Col-
lege, Adelaide. Service in Council; 4
years, representing Elder Ward.
Member of the Kaclina Technical and
Kaclina High School Councils, and a
member of Committee of Kaclina
Benevolent Society. Business, Draper
Mercer, and Clothier. Trustee of the
Kaclina Druids’ Lodge. Member of
Committee of the Kadina and Walla-
roo Jockey Club. Home address,
Kadina.
COUNCILLOR HARRY BRADGATE
HOLTHOUSE.
(Corporation of Kaclina)
Born at Riverton, 19th January,
1880; educated at Prince Alfred Col-
lege, Adelaide. Service in Council: 9
years. Sixteen years a resident of the
district. Business, District Manager
of the A.M.P. Society. Mr. Holthouse
is Chairman of Works, Kaclina Cor-
poration. Sports, bowls and yachting.
Member of the Royal S.A. Yacht
Squadron. President of Kaclina Bowl-
ing- Club and President of the Yorke
O
Peninsula Bowling Association. I ome
address, Kadina.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES E. LARCO IBE
(Corporation of Kaclina)
Born at Kaclina, 25th March, 891.
and educated at the Kaclina T blic
School. Mr. Larkin has served in the
Kaclina Corporation for one year and
has been a resident of the clistric the
whole of his life. Business, G ocer
and Ironmonger. He is a memb r of
the Independent Order of Rechabites
and the Kadina Masonic Lodge No.
13, and is Past Master. He is con-
ductor of the Kadina Male Voice ( hoir.
a member of the Kadina Chum of
Christ, and has held the folic ring
positions ; —Deacon, Treasurer, and
Choirmaster for 23 years, and S. per-


v
\
rap* ' . ■ I
■■pF* /■ i
Pr 11 I
*|WMM j£r
'■ «... • •
Wi , W 'Wt «k % ’
•;
t- \ t > s
in .dent of the Sunday School for 12
rs. He is also Secretary of the
norial Park Tennis Club for 12
years. Home address, Taylor Street,
Kadina.
;OUNCILLOR CLIFFORD JAMES
DUNSTONE.
(Corporation of Kadina.)
Born at Port Pirie, 23rd April, 1892,
and educated at Port Pirie Public
School. Mr. Dunstone has served in
the Kadina Corporation for 2\ years,
and he has been a resident of the dis-
trict for 16 years. Business, Grain,
Produce, and General Commission
Agent He is a member of the Masonic
and Oddfellows’ Manchester Unity
Lodges, and his sports are tennis,
bowls, and golf. He served abroad
with the A.I.F. with the 10th and 50th
Battalions for four years during the
Great War. Home address, Kadina.
COUNCILLOR JAMES ALEXANDER
ROBERTSON.
(Corporation of Kadina)
Mr. Robertson has served for 11
years as Councillor in the Kadina Cor-
poration, and 7 years as Chairman of
the Finance Committee. He has been
a resident of the district for 22 years.
Business, Draper and Mercer. Home
address, Kadina.
DR. SYDNEY ERNEST HOLDER.
Medical Officer of Health.
(Corporation of Kadina)
Born at Kooringa, 22nd February,
1890: and educated at Prince Alfred
College, Adelaide. Dr. Holder has
served in the Kadina Corporation for
8 years, and has been a resident of the
district for 21 years. He is Medical
Officer of Health for the Kadina Cor-
poration and Kadina District Council,
and Honorary Medical Officer for the
Wallaroo Hospital. He is also a
member of the P.A.C. Old Collegians’,
No. 52, S.A.C., and Union, No. 13,
S.A.C., Masonic Lodges. His sports
are golf, tennis, cricket, and bowls.
Dr. Holder served in Australia for


seven months with the A.I.F. camps,
one year with the 3rd Light Horse
Ambulance, and years with the
R.M.0., 12th A.L.H. Regiment. Home
address, Kadina.
FREDERICK WRIGHT HARRIS.
(Town Clerk, Corporation of Kadina.)
Born at Kadina and educated at the
Kadina Public School. Mr. Harris has
occupied the position of Town ( lerk
for 26 years, and is also Secretary of
the Kadina Local Board of Health and
Curator of the Kadina Cemetery. He
has been a resident of the district all
his life. He has held the following
positions : Late honorary secretary to
various cricket, football, and tennis
clubs, late Secretary of the South Aus-
tralian League of Wheelmen, Kadina
Bicycle Club for over 10 years, Kadina
District Trained Nursing Society 4
years, Kadina Children’s Playgr unds
and Kadina Horticultural and dori-
cultural Society, Past Secreta y of
Australian Natives’ Association (Ka-
dina Branch) for 15 years, and p esent
trustee. Sports, cricket, footba and
tennis. Home address, 14 C >yder
Street, Kadina.


'orporation and District Council of Kapunda


History of Kapunda
Kapunda was at the outset a very prosperous mining
town, a copper mine, which proved to be very productive,
being discovered in the vicinity by a Mr. Bagot in 1842,
and in a very few years extensive operations were in full
swing. Some of the best copper in Australia came from
the Kapunda mines, and for many years the company paid
good dividends, but owing to the subsequent low price
of copper and other causes, the mine was eventually
closed. Old miners say that copper may still be obtained
in payable quantities, and some of them are successfully
working the old shafts. However, owing to the shortage
of water their operations are confined to the surface and
a few feet below.
Kapunda was proclaimed a corporate town in 1863,
and is situated 48 miles from Adelaide, communication with
which is by rail twice daily.
The town is now the centre of a very prosperous agri-
cultural and pastoral district, with a large dairying indus-
try. Phosphate rock had also been discovered in large
quantities, and the chief products of the area are wool,
wheat, dairy produce, and phosphate rock.
Kapunda also possesses up-to-date engineering works,
where many large contracts have been carried out for both
the Commonwealth and State Governments. The town
has many miles of good roads and footpaths, and also its
own lighting scheme, having purchased many years ago the
local gas works from the South Australian Gas Company.
From Gundry’s Hill a good view of the town, agri-
cultural lands, phosphate rocks, and fine marble quarries
may be seen. There is a substantially-built and well-
organised Hospital, towards the construction of which the
late Mr. F. H. Dutton gave £5,000. Mr. Dutton also sub-
scribed £5OO to raise a fund for a public recreation ground,
and the beautiful Dutton Park, with its pretty pavilion,
is now a lasting memorial to that gentleman.
Mr. H. T. Morris is another who did much good
for the town to which he belonged. He arrived in the
“Buffalo” on 28th December, 1836, with his uncle,
Captain (afterwards Admiral) Sir John Hindmarsh, and
was one of those present when the Province was pro-
claimed. With the rest of the early settlers Mr. Morris
went through some pretty rough times.
The Corporation has an area of 566 acres, and the area
of the district is 67,840 acres. The former has a capital
value of £230,020 and an assessment value of £11,501, which
with a rate of 2/1 in the £ yields £1,198 yearly. The is-
trict has a capital value of £270,000 and an assessment
value of £11,734, yielding £587 on a rate of 1/ in the
The population of both areas is estimated at £ 'OO
persons, and buildings, which include various business
premises, number 725.
Following is a list of past members of the Corp ra-
tion and Council: —Messrs. H. J. Truscott, A. R. W. A gt,
J. P. Travers, J. P. Orchard. H. Plush, E. James, T. G H.
Vogt, G. T. Abbott, P. Kerin, M. Dermody, H. N. Mo dy,
M. Burke, F. Schmidt. S. March, F. H. Rineke, J. Ryan M.
Shannon, S. B. Scott, J. C. R. Schmidt. P. J. Kerin, 1 H.
Skull, T. Davis, T. A. T. Howard, A. A. Williams, J. J G.
Kernick, R. Hawke, J. H. Pascoe, W. J. Thomas, an S.
Thomas.
PRESENT MEMBERS OF COUNCIL.
W. L. Shannon (Chairman), Councillors F. H. Gen A.
W. Parham, J. J. White, R. H. Hughes, E. J. Helbk D.
Hines, W. T. Truscott, R. Hawke, E. H. Doecke, P.
O’Shea (District Clerk).


ae Town of Kensington and Nor wood.


History of Kensington and Norwood
The Town consists of Kensington (Section 289),
Marryatville and Heathpool (Section 290), Norwood (Sec
lions 260, 261, 276, 277), and Kent Town (Section 255).
Both Kensington and Norwood received their appella-
tions from towns of similar names near London, those
responsible for the names being evidently desirous, as far
as possible, of preserving the associations of the old home.
Kensington, the first eastern suburb, was named after
Kensington, the town in England in which Queen A ictoria
was born. Kensington was surveyed in 1838, and allot-
ments first sold in 1839.
The village of Marryatville was established by Mr.
George Brunskill, who employed a good many hands in
brickmaking in the forties.
The Town of Norwood was laid out in 1847.
Kent Town was originally the property of Dr. Kent,
who lived there, and after whom it was named when it
was cut up and sold in the early fifties.
The whole of this district was originally very heavily
timbered with giant eucalypti, and many of the early
settlers obtained sufficient from the timber growing on
them to pay for their blocks.
Kensington and Norwood were the first suburban
townships to receive the boon of separate municipal
government. The Corporation was established by pro-
clamation in the Government Gazette of the 7th July, 1853.
over the name of the Hon. B. T. Finniss, Colonial Secretary.
His Excellency the then Governor (Sir Henry Edward
Fox Young) extended to the villages of Kensington, Nor-
wood. and Marryatville the provisions of “An ordinance to
constitute a Municipal Corporation No. 11 of 1849,” and
therebv constituted the inhabitants of the said villages a
body corporate and politic by the names of Mayor, Aider-
men, Councillors, and Burgesses. The first Council was
composed of the Mayor (Mr. Charles Bonney), Aldermen
George Soward and Joseph Yates Ashton, and Councillors
George Aldridge, Henry Whittle, Augustus G. Boddily,
George Ernest Hamilton, George Birrell, and John Ross
Smith. In 1856, Kent Town was included in the corpora!
town by proclamation, Alderman F. B. Carlin and Corn
cillor j’ Skelton being added to the Council.
The first resident of Kensington was a Mr. Marshal ,
and among other very early residents were Colonel A. 1 .
Freeling, Surveyor-General, Right Reverend Augusti
Short, D.D. (first Bishop of Adelaide), Justice F. ! .
Gwynne, Justice W. A. Wearing.
A Mr. Watts was one of the first to put up a teneme-
in Norwood, and one of the earliest residents was the Ho .
Charles Bonney, then Commissioner of Crown Lands, ai 1
afterwards the first Mayor of the town.
The total area of the town is 970 acres, and its bon
daries are as follows: —
Dequetteville Terrace, Kensington Road, Por.ru h
Road, southern and eastern boundaries of Section 2? 1
Shipster’s Road, East Parade, Kensington Terrace, Mag 1
Road, and North Terrace, Kent Town.
It is divided into four wards, viz.: —
Kensington Ward— Sections 289 and 290.
East Norwood Ward —Sections 276 and 277.
West Norwood Ward —Sections 260 and 261.
Kent Ward —Section 255.
The principal business street is the Parade, Norwoc 1,
which is a mile in length, and has a width of 99 feet, w h
handsome, and up-to-date shops and business premfi s
lining both sides. Other prominent business streets ; e
Magill Road, Kensington Road, and High Street. P -
minent residential streets include Dequetteville Terra 3,
abutting on the eastern Park Lands, and Osmond Terra e,
Norwood, a fine street of 162 feet in width, lined each s' ie
with large shade trees, and with a handsome plantati n
35 feet wide running along its centre. Tree planting h d
for many years formed an important portion of tie
Council’s policy, with the result that at present verv ma y
streets are lined with handsome and shaciv trees.


Acres.
Rds.
Pis
X' . wood Oval
rv
i
0
0
dwin Avenue Plantation ....
2
0
16
(. len Avenue Plantation
0
2
16
Osmond Terrace Plantation
3
0
32
Total area
12
3
24
re are, at present, exclusive of those now in course
of e .ion :
Dwelling-houses 3,867
Other buildings 456
4,323
:al length of roads is 35 miles 51 chains, of which
ormed and made, with the exception of one mile,
w is private streets not yet taken over by the
tion. The approximate value of these roads, with
otpaths, etc., is about £200,000-£250,000.
ng is under the Rental or Capital Value System.
first assessment, 1854, was £13,051, and the
as 1/- in the £l, yielding total rates of £602 11/-.
cal receipts for that year were £1,442, and expendi-
tir 1,351.
e assessment for 1934-5 was £156,491, and the total
, 2in the £l, yielding £16,953. The present capital
va f the ratable property in the town is £3,129,620,
an e value of the Corporation freehold and other
pr< ies is £47,242.
he Corporation owns and maintains the following
rest e and plantations:—
In the Osmond Terrace Plantation, just south of the
Parade, is the very handsome War Memorial, erected by
the town, built of Harcourt granite, bearing the names on
bronze tablets, of 183 residents of the town who made the
supreme sacrifice in the Great War, 1914-19.
The first Town Hall and Council Offices were erected
in 1819, and demolished in 1897. The present Town Hall
and Council Offices were built in 1882, and extensive
additions in 1914, making the present main hall probably
the finest suburban town hall in the Commonwealth. The
foundation-stone bears the following inscription :
This stone was laid by Thomas Caterer, J.P., Mayor
Kensington and Norwood, on the 28th September.
1882.”
A supplementary stone bears the names of the
members of the Council and Town Clerk.
On the foundation-stone of the additions, in 1914,
appear: —
“This stone was laid by Mrs. H. J. Holden, Mayoress,
on November 7th, 1914.”
The earliest means of communication with the city,
from about 1850, was a spring cart, followed shortly after-
wards by cabs and buses, about thir y or forty cabs making
trips regularly.
The Adelaide and Suburban Tram Company was
formed in 1877, and the first horse tram ran to Kensington
in June, 1878. Horse trams continued to run until the
electrification of the tramway system, under the Municipal
Tramways Trust, and this town again had the honour of
having the first tram under the new system, the opening
run of the electric trams taking place on the Kensington
route in March, 1908.
The Council meets on each alternate Monday, and the
various committees on each alternate Thursday.
The population of the town, as recorded in the census
taken in each of the years given, is as follows :
1855, 2,553; 1861, 3,386; 1871, 5,132; 1881, 10,087; 1891.
11,747; 1901, 12,568; 1911, 13,892; 1921, 15,010; 1933, 14,406.
List of ex-Mayors :
Hy. Hughes
D. Packham
K. St. B. Miller
F. H. Wiggs
Thomas Gepp
Thos. White
Alfred Binks
W. H. Story
G. H. Prosser
E. H. lumbert
P. Gannoni
N. Solomons
W. Esserv
J. J. Woods
D. P. Thomas
Charles Bonney
F. N. Scarfe
U. Fisher
E. T. Smith
S. D. Clyde
Thos. Caterer
J. Bennetts
G. E. C. Stevens
fas. Hall
R. K. Threlfall
J. H. Mattingly
H. J, Holden
F. B. Carlin
T. Taylor
W. C. Buik
M. Kingsborough


Aldermen. —Between 1853 and 1861, the following were
the Aldermen: —Messrs. Bonney, Soward, Ashton, Carlin,
Greenway, Perry, Gray, Holdsworth, and Scarfe.
Under the Act of 1861, the elections for aldermanic
offices were abolished, and it was 39 years before the
practice was resumed. In 1900, a vote of the ratepayers
was taken to decide whether the elections of aldermen
should be undertaken under the new Act, which was agreed
to, and, at the ensuing election, Messrs. R. Phillips, G.
Dankel, A. Binks, and T. White were returned in the order
named. Since then the following have also served as
Aldermen; Messrs, j. H. Mattinglv, W. Essery, H, ].
Holden, J. Hooper, W. G. Auld, T. A. Buttery, W. S.
Hanson, N. Solomons, W. P. Hughes, J. J. Woods, J. 1 .
Mitchell, H. B. Dankel, !). Green, and D. P. Thomas.
Past members of the Council from 1854 to the present:
Conrad N. Wornum, Alfred Greenway, John Ham-
bridge, F. N. Scarfe, W. Holdsworth, F. B. Carlin, A . H.
Fittle, A. Woolley, C. A. Perry, J. Saunders, J. M. Focke,
G. Gray, G. Pulford, W. Waldie, G. Wadham, G. W. D. le
Poer Beresford, M. Messenger, H. Skelton, G. F. George,
S. Allen, J. Roberts, P. Wells, J. Mattingly, J. Moore, W,
Hughes, J. S. Scott, G. Gooden, C. White, M. Burman,
J. Thomas, B. Morey, H. Neinaber, J. Howell, W. Starnes,
A. H. Hudson, D. Packham, J. Crank, F. G. Hails, H.
Hughes, J. F. Lawson, G. Birrell, jun., 1. W . A. Heath
G. A. Outlaw, S. Heanes, H. Dew, Thomas Wood, 1). S
Glyde, S. Taylor, R. H. Wigg, T. Bayler, J. N. Lugg, R
Knowles, T. Caterer, R. H. Humbley, J. Pappin, A. Benson,
J. Bennett, T. Born, R. K. Threlfall, K. St. Barbe M her,
J. Sprod, C. Lyons, F. C. Beaumont, L. D. Carter, T.
Mildren, G. Mills, D. E. C. Stevens, J. W. Carr, F. H.
Wigg, T. White, T. Gepp, G. Fimis'.er, J. Hall, W C.
Calder, J. H. Craigie, T. Jude, H. Frazer, T. Williams, A.
Binks, P. Gannoni, J. C. Sando, E. A. Anstey, A. Hender-
son. W. H. Colliver, J. H. Mattingly, C. Eldridge, C. E.
Hall, J. H. Watson, W. Packham, J. Moss Solomon, V, . A
Schnabell, R. Phillips, C. C. Ford, J. Hooper, D. Dankel.
W. P. Weller, H. j. Holden, W. S. Essery, F. Bailey. W.
Bluet, A. A. Feeder, F. C. G. Hales, R. Lowen, W. G. aid,
G. H. Prosser, E. I. Harvey, W. S. Hanson, J. J. Woods,
T. E. Silver, T. B. Atkins, j. E. Thomas, H. B. A. Dankel,
F. F. Burmeister, J. J. F. Flaherty, T. A. Buttery, , L.
Hill, A. G. Packham, E. H. Limbert, W. P. Hughes, \P.
Thomas, N. Solomons, E. A. Tassie, N. J. Hargre, ves,
J. T. Mitchell, W. Robertson, A. Lengnick, F. G. E. oss,
W. Basse, J. R. Grant, C. H. Green, D. Green, A. V . G.
Martens, W. H. Noal, E. J. B. Davis, C. T. Hass A.
Mc Arthur, J. A. Townley, G. H. Cooling, A. M. W. oily,
S. W. Dickson, W. Essery, jun., E. Younger.


It' I ' i H.' J ' Iff - E ' I
||| wjmt
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR, COLONEL
WILLIAM SPEAKMAN HANSON.
(Kensington and Norwood Corporation)
Was born at Yokohama, Japan, 30th
December, 1875, arrived in Australia
in 1879, and was educated at Pulteney
Street Grammar School and St. Peter’s
College. He has a service of 25 years
n the Council, and has been a resident
of the district for 33 years. Positions
held in Council: Councillor, Alderman,
and Mayor. He is in business as a Pub-
: Accountant, is a member of United
Service, No. 37, S.A.C., Masonic Lodge,
Lj.A.D. Druids and A.O. Foresters’
Lodges. Sport, tennis. War Service ;
D.A.Q.M.G., 4th District Base (medic-
ally unfit for active service) during the
Great War. Address, Heathpool, Mar-
ryatville.
THE LATE DAVID PETER THOMAS.
(Past Mayor, Kensington and Norwood
Corporation)
Born at Stirling, near Port Augusta,
1867; educated at Yongala State
School. He served in the Council for
17 years, and resided in the district
for' 29 years. Mr. Thomas died
at Norwood, 20th November, 1933.
He entered business at Norwood
in 1904 as a grocer and store-
keeper, and was soon prominently
identified with commercial and muni-
cipal life. He was for many years
on the Council of the Retail Grocers'
Association, and for a term filled the
position of President. On retiring
from business Mr. Thomas was elec-
ted a life member. The offices held
by him during his busy lifetime include
that of Mayor, Alderman, and Coun-
cillor of Kensington and Norwood.
Vice-President of the Municipal Asso-
ciation, President of the Norwood
Chamber of Commerce and of the Dis-
trict Councils Association, Chairman
of the Norwood Central School Com-
mittee, and member of the Nor-
wood High School Council. In Ma-
sonic circles Mr. Thomas was 1 Y\ .M.
of Lodge of Unity and companion of
Emulation Chapter, No. 3, and held
high offices in other branches of Free-
masonry. Prominently identified with
St. Bartholomew’s Anglican Chuich a,t
Norwood, Mr. Thomas held the posi-
tion of church warden for 23 years.
The deceased gentleman was highly
esteemed in commercial and church
circles, and left a widow, one daugh-
ter (Miss C. A. Thomas), and two sons
(Dave and Bruce). He was a Direc-
tor of the S.A. Fruitgrowers’ Co-op.
Society, also Chairman of the Nor-
wood Branch of the Church of Eng-
land Men’s Society.
ALDERMAN THE HON. GEORGE
HENRY PROSSER.
(Adelaide City Council.)
Born at Gawler River, South Aus-
tralia, 1867; educated at public schools.
Alderman in the Adelaide City Council
for the past 22 years; 12 years a
member of the Legislative Council; 10
years American Consular Agent; 5
years Mayor of Kensington and Nor-
wood : 34 years a director of Wilkin-
son & Co., Ltd., Chairman of the Wal-
laroo and Mount Lyell Fertiliser Co.,
Ltd., and Adelaide Cement Co.. Ltd.
He is a Past President of the Ade-
laide Chamber of Commerce. Aider-
man Prosser received the consent of
His late Majesty the King to retain
the title of Honourable for services
rendered to the State during the
period that he was a member of the


i, ■j-it---^ "***- mUm
■■< a«SSw^%K¥SS^^
Sm<M$ f4
i
‘ - - BPf ||IK <#5
! r /
hpL , 1 "
■imBi k
Legislative Council. Sports : Bowls
and billiards. Business address,
Brookman Buildings, Grenfell Street.
THE LATE HENRY HUGHES, J.P.
(Past Councillor, Kensington and Norwood
Corporation.)
Born in Bedfordshire, England, 23rd
July, 1839, and arrived at Port Ade-
laide in the “Lord Stanley” on the
11th February, 1850. Educated at Mr.
E. W. Wickes’ School, North Adelaide,
who was afterwards Secretary to the
first Board of Education in this State.
The late Mr. Hughes was elected to
the Burnside Council on the 17th
July, 1871, representing Kensington
Ward. He was Chairman from 1872
to 1874. He also served the town of
Kensington and Norwood as Aider-
man and Mayor for a term. He was
handicapper to the racing clubs of
South Australia for over forty years,
when his son, Mr. W. C. Hughes, was
appointed to the position rendered
vacant by his father, and Mr. W. C.
Hughes resigned in 1917 from the
position. The late Mr. Hughes was a
member of the Oddfellows’ and Fores-
ters’ Lodges, and he died on the 2nd
July, 1924, leaving three sons, Messrs.
H. A. Hughes, W. C. Hughes, and C.
E. Hughes; also two daughters, Mrs.
A. P. Birks, of Clare, and Mrs. F. S.
Bleechmore, of Rose Park.
PAST ALDERMAN JAMES THOMAS
MITCHELL, J.P.
(Kensington and Norwood Corporation)
Born at Camden, England, 4th Feb-
ruary, 1876. He arrived in Australia
in 1878, and was educated at Moonta
Public School. Mr. Mitchell served as
Alderman and Councillor for 104 years,
and has resided in the district for 30
years. In business he is a Consulting
Electrical Engineer, and is a member
of Freemasons, 926, Scotch Constitu-
tion, Western Australia; Orange and
Oddfellows' Lodges. He is Past
President of Electrical Trades Union
of S.A., has been a church choirmaster
for 40 years, a composer of Christmas
carols, and 17 years a Justice of
the Peace. Sports, football and
cricket. Address, 27, Parade, Nor-
wood.
PAST ALDERMAN NATHANIEL JOHN
HARGRAVE, LL.B. (Adelaide).
(Kensington and Norwood Corporation)
Born at North Adelaide, 17th June
1882; educated at St. John's Gram


JNiHH
pH!
ikTr Jm
s
nBH|
«hb
S V p JM I
Wm-Wmr *■■-■ & %_ <*■ -"- issmkWm
• -,-*j <*> - y- :
mm -MW£
HUB fjH
|||mb ■• m/mmm
Jf J mar MW mKMMBWmm
& jy § jmt J%m
wS M 1
School, St. Peter's College, and
University of Adelaide. Service m
Council: Councillor representing Kent
1918-24; West Norwood
Ward, 1926-28; Alderman, 1928-
31 • St. Peters Corporation, 1932-35.
Positions held in Council: Represen-
tative on Suburban Oval Association,
Municipal Association, Metropolitan
County Board, Chairman of various
committees. Business, Solicitoi.
Home address, Marlborough Street,
College Park.
ALDERMAN JOHN JOSEPH WOODS.
(Kensington and Norwood Corporation)
Born at Strangways Terrace, North
Adelaide, on the sth October, 1865;
educated at Thomas Caterer’s Com-
mercial College, Norwood. Twenty-
eight years’ service in Council. A
resident of the district since 1871.
Positions held in Council; 3 years as
Mayor (1925 to 1928), Alderman and
Councillor (25 years). Chairman of
Works; at present Chairman of
Health Committee. He has retired
from business, and is a member
of U.A.O.D. Lodge (Grand Presi-
dent) ; 5 years Grand Lodge Officer;
20 years Hon. Treasurer D.T.N.S. for
Eastern Suburbs; 2 years Chairman
East Torrens Destructor Trust;
Deputy Vice-Chairman S.A.N. Football
League; 4 years Chairman Australian
Football Council. His sports are
cricket, football, baseball, and lacrosse.
President of Norwood Bowling Club:
Vice-President of Norwood Cricket
Club. Address, 5 Rose Street, Nor-
wood.
ALDERMAN THOMAS ARTHUR
BUTTERY, J.P.
(Kensington and Norwood Corporation)
Born at Norwood, March, 18/1, and
educated at Norwood Public School.
Has served 15 years in the Council,
and has been a resident of the district
for 52 years. Positions held in Coun-
cil : Councillor and Alderman. Busi-
ness : Furniture Manufacturer. He is
Past District Chief Ruler 1.0.0.
Rechabites, and Past District Super-
intendent of Juveniles, Chairman of
Council Finance Committee, and has
been 22 years a Justice of the Peace
for South Australia. Sports, bowls.
Address, 96 William Street, Norwood.
PAST COUNCILLOR LOUIS BAILEY.
(Kensington and Norwood Corporation)
Born at Port Adelaide, 7th March.
1862, and educated at Unwin’s Board-
ing' School. Walkcrville, and Hosking’s
Conger Street Academy, Adelaide.
Mr. Bailey was Councillor, represent-


: '/ ' # s ''1 jflHB
,M
jgg jj Jg»
'
| \'\s. \ v \ >
JH '' x
BR *
ing \\ est Norwood Ward in the Cor-
poration, and Chairman of various
committees connected therewith until
his removal from the town. He has
been in practice in Adelaide as a
Licensed Land and Mining Surveyor
for 48 years, and has been engaged by
local governing bodies in the deter-
mination of new road routes and other
corporation and district council re-
quirements, boundary plans, assess-
ments, etc. He is a member of the
Council of the S.A. Institute of Sur-
veyors since 1887. Address, Kensing-
ton Gardens.
PAST COUNCILLOR ALFRED EDWARD
LENGNICK.
(Kensington and Norwood Corporation)
Was born at Norwood and educated
at Flinders Street Public School, - a
resident of the district for 50 years.
Chairman of Oval and Town Hall and
Tree Planting- Committees. Business,
Grocer. Lodges: Freemason and
Rechabite. Home address, 15
McKenna Street, North Kensington
Park.
PAST COUNCILLOR EDWARD
ALFRED ANSTEY.
(Kensington and Norwood Corporation)
Born at Port Elliott, 6th July, 1858;
educated at Port Elliot Public School.
Two and a half years Councillor Ken-
sington and Norwood Corporation; 6
years Councillor Burnside District
Council. Several years a resident of
Norwood: 20 years a resident of Ken-
sington Park, and 21 years a resident
of Prospect. Twelve years a member
of Parliament, Commissioner of
Crown Lands, and Minister of Rep? >
nation in the Peake Government.
Business, Secretary Minda Home, In-
corporated. Member of the School of
Mines Council, Chairman of the Pros-
pect Institute. Mr. Anstey is a stroi g
supporter of social welfare and all or-
ganisations with a philanthropic ob-
ject. Member of the Masonic Lode
and also Friendly Societ} r Lod: e.
Sports, cricket in younger days, bov s
at present time. Home address, Flo a
Terrace, Prospect.
COUNCILLOR EDWARD JOSEPH
BONNER DAVIS.
(Kensington and Norwood Corporation
Was born at Norwood, 28 h
Januai y, 1902, and educated at N r-
wood School, Norwood High Scht T
and A 1 tut den College. Service in
Council. 9 months. A resident of ie


, fc. J
1 '\ % \Ak %.$® g " f * " v „ l
■ii"
HHn : WM
W ‘'HuBKMj
Bv- %~ ■, ' n 0SS^^^
w ? Pfi ~" i / T •
■I m v •*
i 1 : .;:^aK
r jg^
|| A - BRfe«g|v. '^%r
HI :• MBMwS
■H' . jt _ aa* t
s'; • ■ j# , ' $fsZ--
sgai 4 '..
■k> ,.p 7
*
trict for 33 years. Business, Hotel
nager. Lodges: Freemason and
v.0.8. Member Committee
L .V.A.; Chairman of Kensington
Hall Committee; Chairman and Pat-
. of several suburban sports clubs.
War Service: Censor Staff, Adelaide.
His sports are boxing, cricket, and
tennis. Address, Robin Hood Hotel,
Norwood.
COUNCILLOR TREVOR HASSE.
(Kensington and Norwood Corporation)
Born at New Thebarton, 15th Jan-
uary, 1892; educated at Thebarton
Public School. Mr. Hasse has been a
member for one year and a resident
of the district for 20 years. Business,
Commercial Traveller. Five years
Hon. Secretary East Torrens Elec-
torate A.L.P. Member of the Buffalo
Lodge. Sports : Played B Grade foot-
ball for 6 years ; field umpire 4 years.
He has always taken an active part in
sport and a keen interest in pub-
lic life. Has been senior Vice-Presi-
dent of the Australian Labor Party for
the past two years. At present Coun-
cillor for West Norwood Ward in the
Council. Address, Gwynne Street,
Firle.
COUNCILLOR PETER GANNONI, J.P.
(Kensington and Norwood Corporation)
Born at Adelaide, 13th June, 1862;
educated at Baigent’s School, Kensing-
ton. Thirty-one years’ service in
Council —23 years as Councillor, 6
years Alderman, 2 years Mayor, and a
resident of the district for 73 years
Business, Carpenter and Undertaker.
Twenty-four years a Justice of the
Peace. Member 1.0. Rechabite and
U.A.O.D. Lodges. Past District Chief
Ruler of 1.0. Rechabites, and served
4 years on the Board. Address, 21,
High Street, Kensington.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM HENRY
NOAL, J.P.
(Kensington and Norwood Corporation)
Born at Norwood. 2nd Decem-
ber, 1868: educated Norwood Public
School and Christian Brothers' Col-
lege, Adelaide. Ten years’ service in
Council. Chairman of all committees.
Forty years a resident of the district.
Present business, Carpenter and Un-
dertaker. Lodge, A.O. Foresters (past
trustee). Fourteen years a Justice of
the Peace. Instructor of Carpentry at
Adelaide School of Mines for 14 years.
President Norwood Bowling Club and
Norwood High School: Vice-President


■
■ :::> Jig
K W 3m
fit jfiSnE
11 fit J|j
'ff*- ffl
- r< '-
| Jm
J : p ; # |P*«- ! R
V ■
I Hi
I I 5*
I • «**►
- \ ’-*%
v ’ SmZMsmm
** mmA
-
Norwood Mission Band. Councillor
Noal is fond of all sports. Address,
227, Parade, Norwood.
Address, Dequetteville Terrace, Kent
Town.
Chairman of Trustees Druids’ Lodge.
Address, 30 Ballville Street, Prospect.
ALDERMAN JOHN ROY GRANT.
(Kensington and Norwood Corporation)
Born at Broken Hill, 3rd January,
1897, and educated at public schools,
Broken Hill and Adelaide. Four years’
service in Council. . A resident of the
district for 6 years. Business, Petrol
Reseller. Lodges: Freemason, Royal
Arch Mark, and Arch Mariners.
Sports, football and bowls. War Ser-
vice: Enlisted November, 1914, re-
turned 1916. On Committee of Nor-
wood Bowling Club. Member of
the Returned Soldiers’ Association.
COUNCILLOR ALBERT WILLIAM
GEORGE MARTENS, J.P.
(Kensington and Norwood Corporation)
Born at Adelaide, 2nd February,
1876, and educated at Pulteney Gram-
mar School. Service in Council: 10
years. Forty years a resident of the
district. Business, Master Plumber.
Lodges: Freemason and Druids. His
sports are football, cricket, cycling,
yachting, and bowls. Secretary of
Norwood Cycling Club for 18 years;
President 2 years. Committeeman of
Holdfast Bay Yacht Club; 25 years
ERNEST OSWALD GOODEN.
(Town Clerk of Kensington and Norwood
Corporation)
Was born at Norwood, 31st Janu-
ary, 1878, and educated at Norwood
Public School and St. Peter’s College.
Thirty years' service in the Corpora-
tion. Mr. Gooden has been a reside ;t
of the district for the past 54 yea s.
Business, Town Clerk and Secretary of
Local Board of Health. Address. 21,
Queen Street, Norwood.


Corporation of the Town of Maitland
ROBERT STREET, MAITLAND.


History of Maitland
En\ n, the centre of a very prosperous farming
Vi a Vr VaS - P ro I claimed and incorporated in the year 1883.
Ie Municipality occupies a space of some 900 acres, the
s mounding land being under the control of the District
ouncil ot \orke Peninsula. Robert Street is the prin-
cipal thoroughfare, and dwellings and business houses in
anh r?n n r ber 17a There are two Wards, viz., North
L \ <)atl ' )nt a petition is now in hand to have an addi-
a /( pr ° C ! aimed - The rati ng E under the annual
vie d ' mi Started by >' ieldin §' *B7. Th e present
] ,y s y hoo. The town has a very fine Institute, and a
low mg pieen has been recently put down, and a very
court I™ 86 r reCtecb There are six public tennis
courts and a cycling track. Cricket, golf, football, hockey
and croquet grounds have also been laid out in the Recrea-
-IQn ark and the parklands. The parklands practically
surround the town. y
1 he first Mayor was Mr. J. O. Tiddy (deceased). The
present Mayor is Mr. Joseph S. Honner. J.P., and the
Councillors are Messrs. C. H. King, M. J. Timmens, E. B.
Sc hr ape 1, and H. H. Lamshed. Mr. V. F. Schultz is Town
Clerk.
Maitland is served by rail from Adelaide to Moonta
and from Adelaide to Paskeville, thence by motor: also
per steamer from Port Adelaide to Ardrossan. Two motor
services run daily from Adelaide to Maitland and return.
The Agricultural Society’s Annual Show is held at
Maitland, and is one of the most important in the State
outside Adelaide.
Clydesdale stock, owned by Messrs. Francis Bros., is
considered the best in the Commonwealth, and the Loudon
Stud, owned by these gentlemen, has visitors from all
parts of the world.
There has been much building activity in the Town
recently, and in the last 12 months two additional shops
have been constructed and 10 dwelling places erected.
MAITLAND PAST AND PRESENT COUNCILLORS.
J. O. Tiddy, A. J. Jarrett, H. H. Lamshed, J. W. Warn,
J. T. King, James Pearce, A. Short, N. W. Wilson. E. H.
F. Lehmann, D. Stephens, J. Swann, R. J. Dickson, W.
Thomas, J. Ellery, A. C. Muller, J. Harper, A. C. Frick,
F. A. Cane, E. J. Lattorfif, C. Willshire, F. J. Dawe, J.
Hayles, W. T. McCarthy, W. J. Noble. W. Milhinch. t.
J. Greenbank, E. A. Wundersitz, A. N. Dickinson, J. O.
Tiddy, Junr., J. W. Shannon, H. Bawden, C. A. Campbell.
W. A ills, G. G. Nicholls, A. T. Mullner, H. G. Altus, O.
E. C. Klaebe, W. F. Adair, E. H. Smith. L. O. Betts. A.
L. A atson, H. Thomas, H. B. Whitham, H. T. Harris, W.
J. Harris, T. E. Ash, S. J. Thomson, F. G. Thomas, F. H.
Fischer, W. Schirmer, E. F. Homier, Baden Pattinson, F.
S. Pearce, C. H. King, B. A. Klaebe, K. W. Ford, R. A.
Symons, J. B. R. Harrison, J. S. Homier, E. B. Schranel
M. J. Timmens.


■2a> .*■*>
\ W' :
/ lV ; r WuSSL : « &\
I ■' :
- g-
f \ '
*
■ 171
■ W | IwlH >,
||| I aM
»v i
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF
MAITLAND, JOSEPH S. HONNER, J.P.
Mr. Homier was born at Second
Valley, near Rapid Bay, on 12th No-
vember. 1873, and educated at Public
Schools. He has served in the Mait-
land Corporation for 4 years, 3 years
of which he has been Mayor, and has
been a resident of the district for 47
years. Mr. Homier is President of the
following bodies: —The Y.P. Councils’
Association, the Maitland Bowling
Club, St. Patrick’s Racing Club, Mait-
land Branch A.N.A., Maitland Centen-
ary Committee, A. H. & F. Society
Show, also Jubilee Show, the Repat-
riation Association, and President and
Adjudicator of the Yorke Valley Foot-
hall Association. He is also Chairman
of the Maitland Hospital Board and
a member of the Manchester Unity
of Oddfellows' Lodge. His sports are
bowls, football, and racing. Private
address, Box 48, Maitland, \ orke
Peninsula.
THOMAS EDWARD ASH.
(Past Mayor. Corporation of Maitland.)
Born at Somerset, England, Sep-
tember 19th. 1890. and educated at
South Petherton, England. Arrived
in Australia on February 16th, 1909.
Mr. Ash has served in the Corpora-
tion for 1 year as Mayor and 6 years
as Councillor; 20 years a resident of
the district. \ ice-President of Mait-
land A. H. and F. Society, Bowling
Club, and Golf Club. Trustee of Mait-
land Methodist Church. Past Master
of the York Valley, No. 69, Masonic
Lodge. Mr. Ash was previously pro-
prietor of a bakery and greengrocery
business at Maitland for 9 years, and
at present he is farming. Sports, golf,
cricket, football, tennis, and bowls.
Home address, Maitland.
JOHN THOMAS KING.
(Past Mayor, Corporation of Maitland.)
Mr. King was born at Nairne, Ist
February, 1855, and educated at Nairne
State School. He has been 58 years
a resident of the district, and in busi-
ness he is a Saddler. He is a member
of the 1.0.0. F., M.U., and Foresters’
Lodges, and a life member of the
A.N.A. In his early days Mr. Kino-
was interested in politics, and acted
on many committees. He was one
of the first Mayors of the Maitland
Corporation. Home address, Mait-
land.


Ip&
* IIP
«afc* X
Mr"* ***■■
pi fix la
MV ’wX
it, s 9 §
1 p|| v
’
I;'' x^%
I V VWfvV C3fef* s - 4 .‘’
1
3$9®mt Xmkl I * IxT* * *
, * ?
HARRY THOMAS HARRIS.
(Past Mayor of Maitland.)
Born at Melrose, 4th March, 1878,
and educated at Port Augusta West:
30 years a resident of the district.
Mr. Harris was Councillor of Mait-
land Corporation for 4 years and
Mayor for 2 years. In business he is
a Coach Builder and Engineer. He is
a member of the Masonic and Odd-
fellows’ Lodges, and his sports are
golf, bowls, football, cricket, and
swimming. Home address, Maitland.
JAMES OXENBERRY TIDDY, Snr., J.P.
(First Mayor of Corporation of Maitland.)
Mr. James Oxenberry Ticlcly, Mer-
chant, of Maitland, and head of the
firm of Messrs. J. O. Tiddy & Co.,
Merchants and Importers, was born
at St. Mawes, Cornwall, England, on
January 22nd, 1845, and received his
education at Hart College, Tregony.
in the same County. He served his
apprenticeship to the drapery trade
with Parkyn & Reed, drapers, of
Truro, Cornwall, with whom he
served for five years. Proceeding to
London he entered the well-known
firm ot Cook, Son, & Co., of that city,
for a time, and subsequently spent 12
months at Camborne, Cornwall, in the
employ of Messrs. Budge & May as
manager of the drapery department of
the business. Mr. Tiddy, Sen., came
to South Australia by the ship Sussex,
first landing in Melbourne in [une,
1867. He came to Adelaide the fol-
lowing September, and became identi-
fied with the business conducted by
the late Mr. Skelton, which afterwards
merged into the firm of Carter, Tyas,
and Co., Gresham Street, Adelaide. He
acted as representative on behalf of
this firm in the mining towns of Yorke
Peninsula, and in 1870 established him-
self as a draper at Moonta. After
about 3 years he came to Maitland and
opened the present stores, some years
later he took into partnership his two
sons, Mr. J. O. Tiddy, Jun., Mr. M. T.
1 iddy, and Mr. A. T. Mullner, his son-
in-law, these gentlemen having ob-
tained their experience both in Ade-
laide houses and in connection with
the present business. Mr. Tiddy,
Sen., has taken a very great interest
in the advancement of the Town of
Maitland. He was the first Mayor,
holding the office for 2J years, and ha
since held the position for a furthe
8 years in succession. He was Pre
sident of the Local Institute and Sec
retary of the Agricultural SocieL
and one of the Trustees of the loca
Methodist Church. He is a Pas
Master of the Moonta Lodge of Free
masons, and for a lengthy period hac
exei cised a commission of Justice o
the Peace. On March 14th, 1867, he
was married to Miss M. A. M. Kith
daughter of John Ivitto, of Redrut
Highway, Cornwall, a descendant of
family of miners. His family com
prises three sons and four daughters
PAST MAYOR JAMES OXENBERRY
TIDDY, J.P.
(Corporation of Maitland.)
Born at Moonta, 18th March, 187
and educated at the Maitland Publ
School and Prince Alfred College. M
biddy has served in the Maitland Cot
poration for 11 years, during whic
period he was Mayor for 5 years. E
has been a resident of the district ft.


\ |9|B
, ill liiiiik
* ' . C k;~Mr >
:>
P .
years. In business Mr. Tiddy has
been for 21 years Chairman of Direc-
s of J. O. Tiddy & Co.. Ltd.. Gene-
ral Merchants. He is a Past Master
ot the Yorke Valley Masonic Lodge,
and also a member of the Moonta
Mark and Oddfellows’ Lodges. He
has been Chairman of the Maitland
Hospital Board of Management for 12
years, and a Trustee, life member, and
Committeeman for 25 years of the
Maitland Institute. Mr. Tiddy is also
Trustee of the Maitland Methodist
Church; has been Secretary of the
Church Choir for 21 years, and has for
19 years trained the Sunday School
scholars for their anniversary. He
is a member and Committeeman of the
Maitland A. H. and F. Society, Pre-
sident of the Maitland Boy Scouts’
Association; has been Secretary for 17
years of the Maitland School Board
of Advice and School Committee, and
is a patron of the Maitland Tennis
Club. Mr. Tiddy was also President
of the Maitland Soldiers' Memorial
Committee, and was instrumental in
collecting a large sum of money for
the Memorial. He was President of
the Maitland Band for several years,
a member of the Repatriation Com-
mittee. and a life member and Pre-
sident of the Maitland Football Club,
also Vice-President of the Yorke Val-
ley Football Association for many
years. He was a local representative
of the Royal College of Music, now
the Royal School of Music, for 12
years; has been a Justice of the Peace
since 1920, and was formerly local
Chairman of the University Committee
for 19 years. Mr. Tiddy has always
taken a keen interest in football, ten-
nis, and golf. Home address, Mait-
land.
CLAUDE H. KING.
(Past Mayor, Corporation of Maitland.)
Born at Maitland, 10th October,
1884, and educated at Maitland Pub-
lic School and Muirden and Howard
Colleges. Forty years a resident of
Maitland. Positions held: Councillor
for 7 years and Mayor of Maitland for
two terms. Chairman of the Maitland
High Primary School, Committeeman
for many years on Executive of the
Maitland A. H. and F. Society, Mait-
land Centenary Committee and seve-
ral other organisations in the Town
of Maitland. Mr. King has always
taken an active part for the well-
being of the town and district, of
which he is proud. Business, Mer-
chant, Storekeeper, and General
Agent. He is a member of the Yorke
Valley Masonic Lodge, and an active
playing member and Vice-President of
the Maitland Bowling Club. Home
address, Maitland.
H. H. LAMSHED
(Past Mayor, Corporation of Maitland.)
Born at Strathalbyn, 18th Septem-
ber, 1865, and educated at Maitland
Public School: 16 years’ service in
Council, and during that period Mr.
Lamshed occupied the position of
Mayor for one year and for 12 years
was Chairman of the Works Commit-
tee. He has been a resident of the dis-
trict of Maitland for 64 years, and has
occupied the undermentioned positions :
—36 years a member of the Maitland
Institute and President on 4 occasions;
4 years a member of the Maitland


i S: ' %f j|fciPilSraL&*
r-s5 : *' •■ - v'.'ff rRs'"'
*■ i, -
'•.
■ “ tBIi
f 4 -. »
r
v , r ill
jf|aH
«E iffl'
mnfJml *
JH| JBk nHHK
Hospital Board; 50 years a member
of the Maitland Methodist Church;
and 35 years a trustee. FTe has been
40 years a member of the Maitland
A. H. and F. Society, and President
four times. He was appointed a J.P.
28th August, 1924. Mr. Lamshed has
been 43 years a member of the Odd-
fellows' Lodge and 9 years Chairman
of Trustees. He has played cricket,
football, and tennis, and is still a keen
follower of these games. Home ad-
dress, Maitland.
PAST COUNCILLOR E. F. HONNER, J.P.
(Corporation of Maitland)
Mr. Honner was born at Second Val-
ley, 3rd January, 1864. and educated
at Yankalilla and Brentwood Public
Schools. He has been ,36 years a re-
sident of the district. Positions held :
Councillor in the Corporation of Mait-
land for 4 years, 2 years a member of
the Maitland Hospital Board, and 1
year President of the Maitland A. H.
and F. Society. Mr. Honner played
cricket and football in his younger
days, and now takes a keen interest
in golf and bowls. He is a retired
farmer, and has been a Justice of the
Peace since 1930.
PAST COUNCILLOR JOHN B. R.
HARRISON.
(Corporation of Maitland)
Mr. Harrison was born at Tungkillo,
11th January, 1887, and educated at
Tungkillo and Palmer Public Schools
and the School of Mines, Adelaide.
He served in the Corporation of Mait-
land for 2 years, and has been a re-
sident of the district for 16 years. Mr.
Harrison has been connected with the
Motor Business ever since the adv nt
of motor cars and cycles, and as
been a most successful dealer or
many years. He is a pioneer sal s-
man of Yorke Peninsula, and at \ s-
sent is a Garage Proprietor. is
sport is bowls. Home address, Mr t-
land.
PAST COUNCILLOR FREDERICK
GORDON THOMAS.
(Corporation of Maitland)
Born at Maitland, sth Februa y,
1892, and educated at the Maitl: id
Public School. Mr. Thomas serve 8
years as Councillor in the Maitl id
Cot poration, and was a resident of lie
district for 34 years. He is a m m-
bei of the \ orke Valiev, No. 67, nd
Enfield, No. 145, Masonic Lodges. In
business he is a Butcher, 214, Prosi act
Road, Prospect.


R 0S* . ( ■ » •
I : jii- / * v
\ST COUNCILLOR ARCHIE LEWIS
WATSON.
(Corporation of Maitland)
Born at Rose Park in 1882, and edit-
'd at Norwood and Moonta Pub-
Schools. Mr. Watson was a mem-
of the Council for 8 years, and
Bed in the district for 20 years,
was a member of the Works Com-
ee, and in business is a Carpenter,
is P.M. of the Yorke Valley Lodge.
67. S.A.C., Maitland, and is a pro-
jient member of the Hawthorn
jwling Club, being Champion in 1931-
Home address, 59 Carlisle Road,
estbourne Park.
COUNCILLOR E. B. SCHRAPEL.
(Corporation of Maitland.)
Mr. Schrapel was born at South Kil-
kerran, Bth February, 1880, and edu-
cated at Kilkerran and Yorketown
Public Schools. He has served in the
Corporation for 2\ years, and has re-
sided in the district all his life. He
is a retired farmer. Sports, tennis,
golf, and bowls. Home address, Mait-
land.
PAST COUNCILLOR REGINALD
ALBERT SYMONS, LL.B.
(Corporation of Maitland)
Born at Moonta, 7th June, 1903, and
educated at Moonta Public School.
Prince Alfred College, and the Uni-
versity of Adelaide. Mr. Symons has
been 7 years a resident of the district,
and served as a Councillor in the
Maitland Corporation from 1932-33.
By profession he is Barrister and Soli-
citor, and is a member of the Vorke
Valley, No. 67, Masonic Lodge. Home
address, Maitland.
V. F. SCHULTZ
(Town Clerk, Corporation of Maitland.)
Born at Auburn, 9th December. 1900,
and educated at Kapunda Public
School. Mr. Schultz was appointed
Town Clerk in August, 1928, practis-
ing as Accountant, Secretary, and
Auditor in conjunction with the same.
He has been 8 years a resident of the
district, and his sports are football,
tennis, and golf. Home address, Mait-
land.
HEINRICH GOTTLIEB ALTUS.
(Overseer. Corporation of Maitland.)
Was born at Bethel, near Kapunda,
23rd December, 1873, and educated at
the Lutheran Day School. Roherts-
town. Service in Council: 20 } r ears
as Councillor, 2 years as Mayor, 3
years as Overseer; 37 years a resi-
dent of the district. Mr. Altus is a
member of the undermentioned Com-


. ’ * ' /: ■ ' j
IH&JB . / *fA
|||r
9k * n *S
mittees : —Maitland School, Institute,
A. H. and F. Society, and the Hospi-
tal Board. In business he is a Build-
ing Contractor. He represented the
A.N.A. Lodge at Maitland for 25 years
with the following positions—Presi-
dent, Secretary, and Treasurer. He
has been for 13 years Secretary of the
Maitland Coursing Club, and plays
bowls. Mr. Alt us has always taken a
keen interest in any movement for the
progress and welfare of the Town of
Maitland. Home address, Maitland.


Corporation of Moonta


History of Moonta
Moonta and its mines arc famous throughout the world,
and its relations are closely connected with the industrial
affairs of Kadina, a sister township ten miles distant.
1 he story is simple and interesting. About sixty years
ago, over a wide expanse of country leased by Sir Walter
W. Hughes, there existed a sheep run. the only landmark
being a lonely shepherd’s hut. The surrounding country
was then lightly timbered and covered with scrub, and the
mineral wealth hidden beneath was not discovered by man,
but by a kangaroo rat, who, in excavating for purely
domestic purposes, brought up and dumped above the
ground beautiful specimens of rich copper ore, which were
observed by a shepherd, named James Boor, who was
instrumental in bringing the matter under the notice of the
lessee, who, in turn, obtained miners and commenced
operations which marked the starting-point of develop-
ments at both Kadina and Moonta with such astounding
results.
In the early days deposits of copper were found near
the surface at Wallaroo Mines, but of later years it has
been found necessary to follow it down below the surface
a depth of over 3,000 feet. The ore deposits at Moonta
Mines have proved to be richer than those at Wallaroo
Mines.
Moonta township is situated between the mines and
the coast, a distance of 100 miles by road from Adelaide.
The municipality, including park lands, has an area of 323
acres, was proclaimed in 1872, and the first Mayor was Mr
Charles Drew. The capital value of ratable property is
set down at £300,000, and the assessment on unimproved
land values, £30,984. The rates total 9d. in the £l. and
yield £1,162.
Names of past members of the Moonta Corporation:—
Mayors: Messrs. C. Drew, 1.. L. Turner, E. Elphick, J. J.
Pearce, R. K. Archer, T. James, H. Y. Martin, J. Symons
W. H. Wilkinson, j. M. Symons, 11. \\ . Uffindel, C. Emer
son, T. H. Cock, W. H. Goldsworthy, Jno. Snell, Wm
Cowling, E. Nankevell, S. Hill, E. Major, T. H. Hooper
R. Learmond, J. J. Beare. Councillors: Messrs. A. C
Rossiter, W. N. Beaglehole, D. Buzza, J. Harris, J. Bennett
T. Hague, J. Asheton, N. Thomas, J. Hill, C. A. Moody
J. O. Tiddy, J. Lauder, H. H. Jackson, P. O. Jacka, T. P
xTxford, S. H. Rowe, J. Goldsworthy, W. Chappel, E
Witford, E. Major, T. Berriman, R. Rodda, G. Vercoe, S
Jewell, J. H. Hender, T. Butson, G. Emerson, J. Martin, AY
Richards, J. McClask, J. Williams, J. Prisk, J. Roberts, H
Banfield, j. Beaglehole, R. Phillips, S. Paynter, H. Y
Martin, P. N. Nicks, R. Martin, Jno. Symons, [. M. Symons.
E. Ouintrell, H. Manheims, A. Grummett, W. H. Wilkin-
son, S. Hill, A. Marshall, G. T. Cruchett, J. P. Yerco, H
Uffindel, D. Archibald, W. F. Goldsworthy, C. Rendell, \\
R. Whitford, S. R. Page, J. H. Thomas, W. Moore, H
Keightly, J. Snell, F. Bourne, R. N. Penrose, W. Schwan
T. Roberts, W. Chappell, J. H. Bennett, T. H. Roach, R
Watson, J. J. Warren, A. J. Janett, W. J. Trathan, W. J
Harris, Wm. Jones, R. H. Northw ay, E. F. Gurner, E.
Craigie, S. Davey, Wm. Marshall, L. C. Bertram, T. N
Bawden, H. N. Blaylock, F. J. Trenery, J. J. Rickard. J.
Tregona, E. E. Curnow, Les. Bennett, J. G. Sweeney,' P.
Bowden, T. Prisk, P. L. Sullivan, P. D. Learmond H
Watts, N. F. Farrell, H. J. Thomas, A. R. Clayton. V. C
Crutchett, G. H. Cook, R. J. Hughes, E. H. Martin! T. E
Marshall, R. Learmond.
Present members of the Corporation; R. J. Blughe
(Mayor), Councillors W. V. Cowling, N. E. Goldsworth)
E. H. Martin, C. T. Chapman, W. T. Bowden, A. W. I
Frick, A. T. Harbison, T. C. Prisk, C. H. Martin, I
Roberts, T. P. Couch (Town Clerk), G. Bridgman (Engi-
neer), A. Jones (Overseer).


ALDERMAN HORACE WATTS.
(Corporation of Moonta.)
Born at Moonta, South Australia, in
the year 1889, and educated at Moonta
Public School. Mr. Watts has served
in the Port Pirie Corporation for 4
years, and has been a resident of the
district for 11 years. He is a membei
of the Masonic, Druids’, and Buffalo
Lodges, is a patron of the Port Pirie
Motor Cycle Club, and the Solomon-
town Athletic Club. Mr. Watts was
formerly a Councillor for 2 years in
the Moonta Corporation. Home ad-
dress, 18, Main Road, Solomontown.




Corporation of Mount Gambler
BLUE LAKE, MOUNT GAMBIER.


'
||'x-
History of Mount Gambier
Mount Gambier is situated in the south-eastern pot
tion of South Australia, 305 miles from Adelaide, and was
discovered by Lieutenant Grant on December 3rd, 1800.
His first discovery in this vicinity was Cape Northumber-
land, and it was inland from this rocky headland that he
sighted two clearly defined summits rising out of the plains.
He named them respectively Mount Gambier and Mount
Schank, the native name of the former being Mount
"Erengbalam."
LEG OF MUTTON LAKE, MOUNT GAMBIER.
Owing to an unfavourable geographical position the
primary industries of Mount Gambier have been seriously
handicapped, but, despite this fact, steady progress has
been made, and the Mount is now recognised as the “hub”
of the south-east.
The Corporation was established in 1876, and controls
an area of 2,000 acres, with a capital value of £862,400. 4he
population of this area is estimated at 4,200 persons, who
are accommodated in 860 dwellings. The assessment value
“Dingley Dell,” Mount Gambler.
“In the Spring, when the wattle gold trembles
’Twixt shadow and shine,
When each dew-laden air draught resembles
A long draught of wine,
When the skyline’s blue burnisht resistance
Makes deeper the dreamiest distance,
Some song in all hearts hath existence—
Such songs have been mine.” ‘
—Adam Lindsay Gordon
Many years have passed since these lines were written, but the
charm and appeal that inspired Gordon to write them still e ists
in the golden wattle groves about Dingley Dell, near Mount Gan icr.
of ratable property is £235,240, and a total rate of 44c in
the £1 yields £4.472 per annum.
Apart from the Corporation there are two Dis ict
Councils, namely, Mt. Gambier East and Mt. Gam ier
West, the combined population of which is approxima ely
5,150. Both these Councils were formed in 1864 as the
result of a petition of ratepayers. The western dis ict
has an area of 119,023 acres, with a capital value of rat ble
property of £989,780, whilst a rate of 1/- in the £1 y Ids
£2,474 annually. Mount Gambier East controls 14 440
acres, and the capital value of ratable property is £BB4 00.
the assessment value is £36,672, with a rate of 1/3 ir the
£l, producing a revenue of £2,292 per annum.


n 1900 a commemoration tower was erected on the
:st point of Mount Gambier, and is built of red dolo-
The tower is 30 feet in height, with a balcony mid-
and a platform top. From this conspicuous landmark
:an look down into the heart of the mountains.
Some idea of the size of the town of Mount Gambier
be gauged from the following: There are approxi-
the Commonwealth. The Blue Lake, with an area of 165
acres, is enclosed by almost vertical walls, and is the result
of ancient volcanic eruptions. Ihe lake is nearly circular
in appearance, and the depth at one point is 67a feet. To
the westward is another extinct crater, curiously shaped
like a leg of mutton, and is aptly named the "Leg of Mutton
Lake."
BAY ROAD, LOOKING SOUTH, MOUNT GAMBIER
inately 150 business places, including several banks, first-
class hotels, court house, etc. There are 16 miles of streets
and footpaths, and three spacious reserves, which are used
for recreation purposes, and which have a total area of
42 acres. The famous Blue Lake provides an abundant
water supply, which is distributed by gravitation.
The lakes of Mount Gambler are known throughout
To the south-west, beyond these lakes, the external
wall of these craters rises to a sharp, rocky peak, and
within this wall are subsidiary craters, which do not
descend to the water level, and which have been given the
name of “The Punchbowl.” etc.
Surrounding the lakes is a forest of pines, which
greatly enhances the picturesque beauty of the landscape.


■ // " ~ -V
' '%■ ' ''' |^V
In a few words one can truly say: “Mount Gambler
is, indeed, the tourists’ paradise.”
INTERESTING DATES.
The first National Bank was opened in April, 1861.
On May 10th, 1861, a flour mill was opened by Mr. W. N.
Burcham. In May, 1861, the residents were much con-
cerned regarding their separation from South Australia,
and were anxious to link up with Victoria. The first
won the steeplechase on "Vanguard. In January, 1862, a
Government grant of £l,OOO was voted to encourage
steamers to call at the south-east ports. In January
of the same year the two ships which had previously been
wrecked, namely the "Alma" and the "Livingston," were
sold—the "Alma" brought £l9O and the "Livingston" £l6O.
The latter had £BOO worth of copper and wool valued at
£38,000.
GLENELG RIVER, MOUNT GAMBIER.
public meeting was held in June, 1861, with the object of
forming an Agricultural and Horticultural Society. The
separation from South Australia in 1861 was very much
in evidence, and consignments of wheat were being sent
from Port MacDonnell to Sydney. In September, 1861, a
petrified blackfellow, which was stolen from the Nara-
coorte Cave, was recovered. In October of the same
year the first authentic race meeting was held at Port
MacDonnell, when Adam Lindsay Gordon, the noted poet.
Adam Lindsay Gordon again won a steeplechas in
January, 1862, on "Vanguard." In February, 1862, the al-
ms left Port MacDonnell for Kingston, but was r ver
heard of again. In 1862 Cobb & Co. began runni g a
line of mail coaches to Melbourne from Penola, the rip
occupying two days—the late Thomas Cawker the
driver. In March, 1863, the mail coach between 2 ra-
coorte and Stewart's Range was held up and robbed. hi
December, 1863, Mr. John Raunseville (later Sir ohn


g aun eville) started a team of coaches running between
\d le and Port MacDonnell. In 1864 the soundings
Blue Lake were taken by a private party to 261
f ee The first auction sale held in Mount Gambier was
ed by Mr. James Cock (afterwards M.P.) on 20th
Apr 1 861.
allowing is a list of names of past members of the
L. A. DeGARIS.
(M ayor, Mt. Gambier.)
Corporation and of the East and West District Councils
Corporation.—Messrs. C. C. Mac Donald, H. Cossons, J.
Keegan, G. E. Truman, G. B. Renfrey, J. F. Palamountain,
F. Foote, C. L. Spehr, E. Warren, H. Knight. T. J. Dodd,
J. Shaughnessy, T. O. Williams, E. A. Gerloff, K. Mclntosh,
A. Haig. M. Dugan, C. C. McDonald, J. Nicholas, T. G.
Wright, W. B. Chester, J. Bigham, J. S. Millhouse, A. C. F.
Rook, F. Webster, R. M. Haig, H. J. Wilson, E. F. Harbison,
S. H. McMillan, C. Laurence, C. N. McKenzie, L. A.
DeGaris, and W. Hay.
East District Council. —Messrs. J. P. L. Schinckel, C.
R. Patzel, A. A. Kilsby, T. Preece, C. O. Spehr, J. G.
Nitschke, J. Harfull, W. H. Kennedy, A. W. Beokefeld, M.
Kenny, W. E. McDonald, J. T. Kerin, and J. McCall.
West District Council. —Messrs. W. Paltridge, J. Mit-
chell. C. Fidler, G. D. Wyatt, W. Wehl, A. W. McGregor,
G. Avey, A. K. Varley, R. Anderson, J. Watson, J. Powell,
T. Williams, J. Cock, R. Peters, W. Sinclair, W. Sutton.
R. D. Renfrey, T. Honan, C. Holloway, A. Fartch, T. R.
Walters, G. Sim, J. Barrett, W. J. Masson. J. McArthur,
S. Holding, N. C. Phillips, J. Laird. T. Vause, J. S. Hayes,
j. Jagger, j. Hay, T. Millhouse, E. J. Locke, C. J. White,
F. W. Pegler, J. Underwood, J. P. Kennedy, R. Blackall,
T. Yates, J. Medhurst, C. H. Mann, E. F. Crouch, J. Bigham,
F. R. Sassanowsky, W. Noolan, A. N. Mitchell, R. J. Staf-
ford, K. Mclntosh, S. J. Norris, J. Shaughnessy, F. R.
O’Dea, W. N. Burcham, C. Bors, C. H. Gaden, F. Holloway,
j. Medhurst, W. Noolan, Jnr., A. F. Sutton, W. J. Sutton.
J. Tyler, G. D. Wylie, R. F. White, J. E. Trevorrow, Drs.
Whel and Graham, and Mr. G. Ellard.
Members of the present Council are:—Mr. L. A.
DeGaris (Mayor), Aldermen C. L. Spehr, R. M. Haig. D.
J. Fraser, Councillors J. D. F. Harbison, E. J. Bodey, J.
H. Marks, H. Lawrence. W. E. Pyne, and R. J. R. Watson.
Mr. O. J. Barry, Town Clerk.




corporation of Murray
Bridge


History of Murray Bridge
Murray Bridge is situated on the River Murray, and
is on the main railway line from Melbourne to Adelaide,
the distance from Adelaide by road being 52 miles.
The Town of Murray Bridge was proclaimed a Muni-
cipality in February, 1924, and the area comprising the
corporate town was formerly the Town Ward of the Dis-
trict Council of Mobilong, which Local Governing body
had been in existence since 1884.
44ie first members of the Town Council were : —Mayor,
Mr. M. W. Parish; Councillors, C. H. Watts, F. E. Hanna-
ford, H. G. Mangelsdorf, J. Porteous, J. Homburg, R. S.
Bell, H. L. Binney, and A. W. Scott, representing North,
South, East, and West Wards respectively. Mr. P. W.
Annells was Town Clerk; Mr. T. N. R. Davey, Electrical
Engineer; Dr. El. F. Wickens, Officer of Health; and Mr.
F. Robertson, Inspector. During the twelve years of its
existence four persons only have filled the office of Mayor,
namely, Messrs. M. W. Parish for seven years in all, John
Homburg for three years, Keir C. E. McLean (the present
Mayor) for about eighteen months, and B. W. Leach for
nine months.
The Council as at present constituted is as follows :
Mayor. Keir C. E. McLean; Councillors, F. B. Butterworth
and H. H. Hefford (North Ward), A. A. V. Wells and F.
Lehmann (South Ward), J. T. Cassidy and R. C. Came
(East Ward), E. Leishman and H. Champion (West Ward).
Mr. F. Lehmann holds the office of Chairman of Works,
and the Officers are:—Town Clerk. A. C. Weller; Electrical
Engineer, T. N. R. Davey; Assistant Clerk, L. D. Paige;
Overseer of Works, E. F. Dodd; Officer of Health, Dr.
H. F. Wickens ; and Inspector, F. Robertson.
Since the incorporation of the town an up-to-date road-
making plant has been purchased, and much valuable work
has been done; the roads as a whole are a credit to the
Council, and there are few towns in the State, if any, can
boast of better roads than Murray Bridge. All the Council’s
attention, however, has not been given to road-making,
and the reclamation of portion of the foreshore —with the
construction of safe enclosed swimming baths, dressing and
shelter sheds, and many other improvements on this aa—
has proved of inestimable value to the residents ol and
visitors to the town. As a camping resort, Stmt Re ne
—as this area is now named —is very widely known, not
only throughout South Australia, but also by icsiden sof
all the other States; in fact, many visitors from o\ cmo
have availed themselves of the many facilities prowled,
including electric light for campers, and all have expo ssed
themselves as highly pleased with the beauty and con-
venience of this riverside recreation park.
Another favourite recreation reserve under the control
of the Corporation is Long Island, situated about ; mile
downstream in the centre of the river. I his island one
mile long and of varying breadth, and, being t ickh
wooded, forms an ideal locality for a camping holiday.
The two bridges across the Murray are of interest to
visitors. The “old” bridge, which is now reserved olely
for vehicle and pedestrian traffic, was opened for ise in
1879. This bridge is 1.879 feet in length and cost £l3O 76 in
all. Although originally built for traffic, it was I>r 39
years (1886 to 1925) also used as a railway bridge. The
new bridge is used solely for railway purposes; it F 1.880
feet long, and cost £222,134. The erection of this ridge
in the locality chosen necessitated the constructioi of a
tunnel under the main street (Bridge Street) at the orner
by the Bridgeport Hotel.
The educational facilities available at Murray ridge
comprise an up-to-date Infant School, a Primary 5 drool,
and a High School, which, by the way, is devoted to agri-
cultural as well as general subjects. There is also a Date
school conducted by the Sisters of St. Joseph, and a Tech-
nical School for those over school-going age. Murray
Bridge is the centre of a large dairying district, hiefly
conducted on the reclaimed swamp lands, of whicl there
are over 10,000 acres within 15 miles of the town.
The domestic water supply of Murray Bridge ai d Dis-
trict is derived from the River Murray. The water is


pun ;d through 12-inch pipes to a large storage tank on
\Vh Hill, about four miles out of the town. The tank
has capacity of 500,000 gallons, and mains lead right
thrc h the town, and for many miles throughout the dis-
trk u the western side of the river.
array Bridge is fortunate in having an efficient sys-
tei i electricity supply. The power house is owned and
op :d by a private company under the expert care of Mr.
Xoltenius as secretary and Mr. J. G. Kowald as
en ;er. All the energy for the supply to consumers is
t the switchboard of the power house by the Murray
Corporation, who retain the sole rights of supply,
are about 650 consumers and well over 100 street
in the town, and the mains are under the capable
of Mr. T. N. R. Davey, the Electrical Engineer, to
wi together with the Company’s engineer, must be
gi die credit for the fine service rendered and the
re; freedom from breakdown.
few facts about the river might not be amiss in a
ret. such as this. The Murray was discovered and
named by Captain Charles Sturt in 1830, and there is an
obelisk erected on Sturt Reserve to commemorate the
centenary of his discovery. This river is remarkable tor
many reasons, one of the most important being the fact
that, together with its tributaries, it is navigable for a dis-
tance of 3,212 miles, made up as follows: —The Murray
from Albury, 1,366 miles; the Darling, 1,180 miles: and the
Murrumbidgee, 666 miles. The catchment of the river and
its tributaries extend over a vast area, including portion
of Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, and South
Australia.
The source of the Murray is in the Snowy Ranges,
near Mt. Koscuisko. Besides the Darling and the Murrum-
bidgee, the tributaries include the Lachlan, Mitta, Goul-
burn, Ovens, Keiwa, Campaspe, and Loddon. The Murray
is the fourth longest navigable river in the world. Its
width at Murray Bridge is about 600 ffiet and the depth
60 feet. The distance by river from Murray Bridge to
Lake Alexandrina is 25 miles, and to the mouth about 70
miles.


xs liii
■■ »■ jb|||b
I |H
....... ;
/ , mStL
/JEll *A
/HI ?&
IIP #w
W» i WSMm
Jj|
«mm
Jpa .iMSSBam
; ' ■-# """ m m/m
■ 'lL
... .
-
BKj .. Bp
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF
MURRAY BRIDGE, KEIR CAIRNS
ELLIOTT McLEAN, J.P.
Born Balwyn, Victoria, July 21st,
1899, and educated in Victoria. Mr.
McLean has been a resident of Mur-
ray Bridge for 5 years, being Mayor
for 2 years and Councillor for a like
period. He is a Director of Millers
Produce Co. of S.A., Ltd., Adelaide,
Manager of Noske Bros. Pty., Ltd.,
Murray Bridge, a member of the Mur-
ray Bridge Hospital Board and House
Committee, the Murray Bridge Insti-
tute Committee and High School
Council, and President of the Murray
Bridge Centenary Celebration Com-
mittee, the Tourist Association, and a
member of the Murray Bridge Masonic
Lodge, No. 44. Sports, tennis and golf.
Home address, Murray Bridge.
PAST MAYOR BASIL WOOD LEACH.
(Corporation of Murray Bridge.)
Born and educated at Melbourne,
Victoria, and served in the Corporation
of Murray Bridge for 2 years as Coun-
cillor and 8 months as Mayor. Mr.
Leach was for several years Chairman
of the Murray Bridge Hospital Board,
and in business he was a Dental Sur-
geon. He is a member of the Masonic
Lodge, and his sport is tennis. He re-
tired from active Municipal work in
August. 1935. Present address, Tor-
onto, Canada.
PAST MAYOR MAURICE WILLIA I
PARISH.
(Corporation of Murray Bridge.)
Born at East Brighton, Melbou re,
29th December, 1890, and educate; at
Murray Bridge Public School. Ir.
Parish gave 9 years’ service in he
Murray Bridge District Council. of
which he was a Chairman and 8 y ars
in the Corporation of Murray Bri ge.
7 of which he was Mayor. He tas
been 42 years a resident of the is-
trict, and Mr. Parish has eld
the following positions : —Presidei of
the Hospital Board, Vice-Presider of
the Murray Bridge Rowing Club and
Bowling Club, and a member of ve-
ral other committees. He retired oni
active Municipal wtork in November,
1933. Business, Auctioneer and
Licensed Land Broker and News] per
Proprietor. He is P.M. of Mi ray


y*-
m * *m T
. % 1
I 'y*
i : j|||^
»|s $ . jphk'
B je Lodge, No. 44, S.A.C., P.G. Pre-
si of Druids’ Order in South Aus-
. and Secretary of Oak of Bridge-
po Druids’ Lodge for 18 years. His
is howls and rifle shooting, and
; represented the State on two
:ons. Home address, Adelaide
Murray Bridge.
3T MAYOR JOHN HOMBURG
Cl rporation of Murray Bridge.)
Homburg served for 4 years in
District Council of Mobilong, 3
of which he was chairman. He
or 8J years a Councillor repre-
ng East Ward in the Murray
; Corporation and 3 years Mayor,
as Chairman of the Institute
nittee, and a Committeeman of
■furray Bridge Agricultural and
icultural Society. In business he
solicitor, and his sports are tennis
golf. Mr. Homburg retired from
acti e municipal work in June, 1935.
Home address, Murray Bridge.
COUNCILLOR JOHN THOMAS
CASSIDY.
( Corporation of Murray Bridge.)
Born at Apsley, Victoria. 26th April,
1882. and educated at Bringalbert
South State School ; 2 years’ service in
Council; 17 years a resident of the dis-
trict. Occupation, employee Murray
Bridge Hotel, Ltd. A member of the
Oddfellows’ Manchester Unity Lodge.
Councillor Cassidy is a son of the late
Mr. V F. Cassid y, who was among
the pioneers of the district. Home
address, Murray Bridge.
COUNCILLOR EDWARD LEISHMAN.
(Corporation of Murray Bridge.)
Born at the Regimental Barracks,
Formoy, Ireland, 25th January, 1865,
and arrived in Australia 11th October,
1883. Mr. Leishman was educated at
107 th Bengal Fusiliers, Madras, India,
on the H.M.S. Cumberland, a Clyde
Training Shi]). Four years’ service in
Council and 23 years a resident of the
district. Fie was for some years in
S.A. and Victorian Railways, and is
now a retired Railway Station Master.
He is a member of the Masonic Lodge
and Past Chief Ruler 1.0.0. Recha-
bites, a life member of the Murray
Bridge Agricultural Bureau, Elder in
the Murray Bridge Presbyterian
Church, and Superintendent of the
Murray Bridge Sunday School. Home
address, Murray Bridge.
COUNCILLOR FREDERICK BROAD-
BENT BUTTERWORTH.
(Corporation of Murray Bridge.)
Mr. Butterworth was born at Yan-
kalilla and educated at Yankalilla and
Norwood Public Schools. He has
served in the Corporation for 2 years,
and has been a resident of the dis-
trict for 27 years. He is a Locomo-
tive Enginedriver for the South Aus-
tralian Railways, and a member of the
Ancient Order of Foresters’ Lodge.
He is fond of all sport. Mr. Butter-
worth is a son of the late Mr. E. But-


I* S'v\
*
' 1 , I
terworth, of Yankalilla, who built and
conducted one of the first steam-
driven flour mills in South Australia.
Home address, Murray Bridge.
COUNCILLOR HERBERT HOWARD
HEFFORD.
(Corporation of Murray Bridge.)
Born at Woodchester, South Aus-
tralia, 15th March, 1898, and educated
at Woodchester and Strathalbyn
Public Schools. One year and 6
months’ service in Council; 13 years
a resident of the district. Business,
Primary Producer. Home address,
Murray Bridge.
COUNCILLOR FRITZ LEHMANN.
(Corporation of Murray Bridge.)
Mr. Lehmann was born at Calling-
ton, 9th November, 1867, and educated
at Salem, South Australia: he has
served in the Council for 3 years and
been 7 years a resident of the district.
Business, Farmer. He was for 43
years a member of the Agricultural
Bureau, was Councillor for Callington
Ward in the District Council of
Monarto, and occupied the position of
Chairman. He is at present a Coun-
cillor for South Ward in the Murray
Bridge Corporation and Chairmai of
Works Committee. Home address,
Murray Bridge.
COUNCILLOR CLARENCE ARTH R
WATTS.
(Corporation of Murray Bridge.)
Born at Daw'esley (near Xai te).
Ist March, 1887, and educated at N ive
Valley Public School. Mr. Wat sis
Managing Director of Watts ros.
Ltd., Bacon Curers, Murray Bi Ige.
He is a member of the Freema ons’
Lodge, and is on the committee c the
Murray Bridge Racing Club. 1 onic
address, Murray Bridge.


JO* 11
COUNCILLOR ARTHUR ALBERT
VERNON WELLS.
Corporation of Murray Bridge.)
Born at Kapunda, Ist March. 1869,
and educated at Kadina Public School.
Mr. Wells has been a Councillor for 3
years, and for 30 years a resident of
the district. Business, Gardener. He
is President of the Fathers’ Associa-
tion and Agricultural League at Mur-
ray Bridge. Home address, Murray
Bridge.
COUNCILLOR RALPH CAREY CARNE.
(Corporation of Murray Bridge.)
Born at Samoa, 24th March, 1886.
Arrived in Australia in 1895 and edit-
cated in South Australia. Twelve
months’ service in Council, represent-
ing East Ward; 28 years a resident of
the district. Business, Garage Pro-
prietor. A member of the Freema-
sons’ and Druids’ Lodges. Home ad-
dress, Murray Bridge.
COUNCILLOR HARRY CHAMPION.
(Corporation of Murray Bridge.)
was born in England, 28th March,
1876, and arrived in Australia in 1879.
Educated in South Australia. He was
elected to the Council in December.
1935, and has been 14 years a resident
of the district. He was formerly 6
years a Councillor of Echunga Dis-
trict Council. Business, Contractor
and Quarry Owner. Mr. Champion
served in the South African War with
Imperial Bushman's Corps. Home
address, Murray Bridge.
COUNCILLOR ARTHUR THOMAS
POTTER, J.P.
(Corporation of Murray Bridge.)
Mr. Potter was born at Hans-
borough, 7th May, 1873, and educated
at Whyte-Yarcowie. He was elected
to represent South Ward in the
Council in 1927, and is a Past Master


Jr* 3
'$mr * iiiia
.
||^
f f %
of the Masonic and Past Arch of the
Druids' Lodges. Mr. Potter entered
the S.A. Railways in 1888, and is now
an Engine Driver. Appointed a Jus-
tice of the Peace in 1916. His present
address is Standen Street, Murray
Bridge.
COUNCILLOR REGINALD WALTER
REED.
(Corporation of Murray Bridge.)
Mr. Reed was born at Croydon in
January, 1910, and educated at the
Croydon Public School and Muirden
College. Adelaide. He is a Past Grand
of the Olive Branch of Independent
Order of Oddfellows’ Lodge. His
sport is tennis, and he is also Hon.
Secretary of the River Murray Foot-
ball Association. In business, Mr.
Reed is an Accountant. Home
address, Murray Bridge.
EDWARD FRANK DODD.
(Overseer of Works, Corporation of
Murray Bridge.)
Born at Kadina, South Australia, 3rd
September, 1884. and educated at Ka-
dina Public School: 9 years a resident
of the district. He was formerly a
Councillor and Chairman of Works for
the Peterborough Corporation for over
9 years, and was also a Conductor of
the Church choir and Peterborough
Brass Band. At present Mr. Dodd is
the conductor of the Murray Bridge
Methodist Church Choir, and a
member of the United Ancient Order
of Druids. His sports are c icket,
football, tennis, and bowls. Tome
address, Murray Bridge.
THOMAS NINNES ROACH D, /EY.
(Electrical Engineer. Corporation ot hurray
Bridge.)
Born at Clare, 18th June, 1 8, and
educated at Clare State School School
of Mines, Adelaide, Moonta, \Valla-
roo and Wallaroo Mines. A] ointed
to Mobilong District Council Decem-
ber, 1933, and transferred to t e Cor-
poration of Murray Bridge i 1924
when Murray Bridge became incor-
porated with the Mobilong District
Council. Twelve years a res ent of
the district. Mr. Davey was C erk to
T. Reed & Co., Auctioneers, a Clare.


, 1
■ | ■' if:
t
for 2 years ; 15 years Electrician Wal-
laroo and Moonta Mining and Smelt-
ing Co., 1 year an Electrician for Un-
behaun & Johnstone, Ltd., Adelaide.
He is a member of the Masonic and
Oddfellows' Manchester Unity Lodges,
and has played football, cricket,
lacrosse, tennis, golf, and bowls. Mr.
Davey is the son of the late A. -J.
Davey, J.P., Auctioneer, Clare. Home
address, Verdun Road, Murray Bridge.
ALEXANDER CLAUDE WELLER
(Town Clerk, Corporation of Murray
Bridge.)
Mr. Weller was born at Norwood,
South Australia, and educated at Ade-
laide. He has served 10 years in the
Corporation as Town Clerk, and has
been 13 years a resident of the dis-
trict. Home address, Murray Bridge.




liii -V'
- - : - ■ ■ . ; *.
Corporation of Naracoorte
NARACOORTE TOWN HALL.


'
History of Naracoorte
Naracoorte is one of the oldest townships in the South-
East, it having been founded in 1848 by the late Mr. William
Macintosh. It is the principal town in the central part
of the South-East, and occupies an important position
in being the centie of the narrow-gauge system of rail-
\\ a} s in this part of the State. The re-purchase and
substantial show buildings. The Naracoorte Racing Club,
Ltd., own a commodius racecourse, situated on the Caves
Road, with £2,500 improvements. In 1913 a Masonic
Temple was erected at a cost of £500; a fine Town Hall,
costing about £4,C00; and in the same year a handsome
and commodious High School. During the past few
NARACOORTE HOSPITAL.
allotment by the Government in 1903 of the Naracoorte
Estate, the re-purchase in 1905, for the same purpose, of
Kybybolite Estate, and of the Binnum, Hynam, and part
of the Struan Estates subsequently, has had a considerable
effect in increasing the prosperity of the Town and Dis-
trict. Among the most important public institutions of
Naracoorte are the Institute, the Naracoorte Hospital (In-
corporated), the Pastoral and Agricultural Society, which
possesses a large and well improved show ground with
months many buildings have been erected in the to n-
ship, consisting of business and private houses, and inc ld-
ing the Austral Iheatre, built on modern lines and ell
equipped. Ihe Naracoorte Tennis Club has eight s; en-
did courts, and stages an Easter Tournament, whilst the
golf course is one of the finest in the State, and a ew
Club House was recently erected. Splendid swimr ing
baths have also been built by Mr. Geo. Wotton, of the
Naracoorte Hotel. The population of Naracoorte in ne,


'
ii i 5
, |Pp|- Im ■ Ira;';
i |l pifiteiL*
sB r| |8 9 -9 j
■&. -i &!«filly 8 i 8sS| lllilsHlnn
# # H ,';
-^" r - ~ J| - s - t ‘.^1, --■i -
] was: —Town of Naracoorte, 1,554; District, 1,828; or
,al of 3,375 : an increase of 587 since the previous census.
To tourists and travellers the attraction of the neigh-
lood is the celebrated Caves, situated in the ranges
THE SHOWER (VICTORIA CAVE).
about six miles to the south-east of the township, and to
which a good road has been made for the whole distance.
Naracoorte is fortunate in having three first-class hotels
for the accommodation of visitors, the present proprietors
being Mrs. E. C. Wotton (Naracoorte Hotel), James Pin-
kerton (Commercial Hotel), and Mrs. J. White (Hotel
Kincraig).
The District Council of Naracoorte has control over
the Hundreds of Naracoorte (except the Township), Bin-
num, Clenroy, Hynam, Jessie, Joanna, Lochaber, and
Robertson —an area of 886 square miles. The assessment
of the district for the year ended June 30. 1936, is £71,321.
The Corporation of Naracoorte, which was carved out
of the District Council area and proclaimed in February,
1924, has control of the town area, and its assessment
LAURIE'S GROTTO (VICTORIA CAVE).
to June 30, 1936, is £21,028. Naracoorte is distant from
Adelaide 240 miles by rail; from Mount Gambier, 64 miles;
from Penola, 32 miles ; from Kingston, 52 miles ; from Bor-
dertown, 57? miles; and from Melbourne, 250 miles.
PRESENT CONSTITUTION.
Naracoorte District Council.—Councillors : Robertson
Ward —B. A. Hood and H. C. Mclnnes. Hynam Ward—
A. S. Kidman (Chairman) and J. B. Nolan. Kybybolite
Ward —E. C. H. Schinckel. Frances Ward —A. M* Heroic!.


■ *%%
I
v .
Lochaber V ard —M. E. \\ ardle and W. R. Major, District
Clerk—A. Humphris.
Corporation of the Town of Naracoorte. —Mayor, A.
C. DeGaris. Councillors: Kincraig Ward —N. V. Wallace,
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF
NARACOORTE, ALBERT CLEMENT
DeGARIS.
(Corporation of Naracoorte)
Born at Naracoorte. 30th July, 1887;
educated at Naracoorte School and
Prince Alfred College. Adelaide. Mr.
DeGaris was the first Mayor of the
Naracoorte Corporation from 1924 to
1927: he was then a Councillor until
1935, and is at present serving as
Mayor for his third term. He has
been a resident of the district all his
life. Mr. DeGaris is Chairman of the
Naracoorte Hospital, President of the
Naracoorte P. and A. Society, Chair-
man of the Naracoorte School Com-
mittee, a member of the Naracoorte
High School Council, and Secretary
of the University Local Centre. Busi-
ness, Director of DeGaris, Sons, & Co.,
Ltd., Live Stock Agents and Auction-
eers. He is a member of the Masonic
Lodge. Home address, Naracoorte.
THE LATE WILLIAM PLATT, J.P.
(Past Mayor of Naracoote)
Born at Naracoorte on the 13th
March, 1869, and educated at the Nara-
coorte Public School. The late Mr.
W. Piatt. Caves Ward —A. E. Price, Les. C. Bates.
Mcintosh Ward—L. R. DeGaris, W. Nicholson. Naracoorte
Ward—J. L. Davison, E. S. Vine. Town Clerk—A. Hum-
phris.
Platt served 12 years in the Corpora-
tion. and was a resident of the district
all his life. He was Mayor of the town
in the years 1929, 1930, and 1931, and
was an original member of the
Corporation. He was a Justice
of the Peace for twenty-five years.
As Mayor Mr. Platt entertained
Lord and Lady Gowrie when
they visited Naracoorte, and as Presi-
dent of the first local sheep show he
received Sir Winston Dugan on his fir t
country visit in South Australia. He
was President of the Naracoorte
and A. Society in the years 1925, 192 >.
and 1927: a Past Master of tie
Naracoorte Masonic Lodge,
years Chairman of Trustees of t.
Oddfellows’ Manchester Unity Lode ,
President of the Naracoorte B r
Scouts’ Committee. South-Easte i
Cricket Association, and the Nar -
coorte Hunt and Riding Club,
late Mr. Platt was an old interstr e
rifle shot, and was a member of t .e
S.A. team in 1906 and 1907. He v s
Business Manager of Platt Bros., O -
penters and Builders. The late 2*.
Platt died suddenly on the 18th f
May, 1936, after a brief illness. e
was one of the best known public n n
in the South East, and has left a s: n
(William), aged 16.
COUNCILLOR NORMAN VERSCHN
WALLACE.
(Corporation of Naracoorte.)
Born at Naracoorte, 13th Novemb r,
1897, and educated at the Naracoo te


Hr %
>y
*
m
si
Flic School and High School, Scotch
ollege, Melbourne, and the Adelaide
I liversity. Mr. Wallace has served
in the Corporation of Naracoorte since
its inception in 1924, and has been a re-
sident of the district all his life. He
has been Mayor of Naracoorte for four
terms, and is on numerous local com-
mittees. Vice-President of the Nara-
coorte Branch R.5.5.1.L.A., and was
President of the Naracoorte Golf Club
in 1935. In business he is a Solicitor.
He is a Past Master of the Naracoorte
Masonic Lodge, and his sports are golf
and tennis. During the war Mr. Wal-
lace served abroad with the A.1.F.,
48th Battalion. Home address, Nara-
coorte.
CHAIRMAN, ALEXANDER SACKVILLE
KIDMAN, J.P.
(District Council of Naracoorte)
Born at Naracoorte, 27th Septem-
ber, 1885, and educated at the Nara-
coorte Public School. Service in
Council, 19 years (9 years as Chair-
man). A resident of the district all
his life. He is a Justice of the Peace, a
member of the Naracoorte Hospital
Board, and Vice-President of the
South-East District Councils Associa-
tion, and a member of the Naracoorte
Masonic Lodge. Mr. Kidman is Presi-
dent of the Naracoorte Cricket Club
and patron of the Racing and Tennis
Clubs. He served abroad for 12
months with A.I.F. Home address,
Tarkeeth, Hynam.
COUNCILLOR ADOLPH MAX HEROLD.
(District Council of Naraccortc)
Born in Saxony, 22nd January, 1877.
Arrived in Australia in June, 1881, and
was educated in Victoria. Mr. Herold
has served in the Council for 11 years,
and resided in the district for 54 years.
He is Chairman of Frances Institute
Committee, Frances School Commit-
tee, and Secretary of the Frances Con-
gregational Church. His sports are
tennis, rifle shooting, cricket, and foot-
ball. Home address, Frances. South
East.
COUNCILLOR MICHAEL ERNEST
WARDLE.
(District Council of Naracoorte)
Born at Orroroo, 3rd January, 1886
and educated at Burnside, Naracoorte
327


|
X rt»' I
/*
■ki^|
> y * W--t ■' * >&£aak
. m .VHfc *J||^nB|K»
|r.
W 1 <*?*.
•if t
If*-
fc„ xk '
A ,_
b&e # >v > ihi
«M - /
j|Hk *g| s
mmmmm - n& 2<^B
i $ f
S8B ini
■&*$ ■“">,« / X
(SSfttf / '•• ikaSl
Service in Council, 12 years. Forty-
seven years a resident of the district.
A member of Naracoorte Hospital
Board, and the Independent Order of
Oddfellows', Manchester Unity, Mos-
quito Plains Lodge. Occupation, Far-
mer and Grazier. Home address,
Naracoorte.
COUNCILLOR JAMES BARTHOLOMEW
NOLAN.
(District Council of Naracoorte)
Born at Harrogate, South Australia,
in 1879, and educated at Harrogate
Public School. Mr. Nolan has served
in the Council for 12 years, and been
27 years a resident of the district. He
is Chairman of Hynam School Com-
mittee, and a member of the Odd-
fellows' Lodge. Occupation, Farmer
and Grazier. Sports, cricket, bowls,
and racing. Home address, Hynam.
COUNCILLOR HUGH CAMERON
McINNES.
(District Council of Naracoorte.)
Born at Naracoorte, 17th November,
1884, and educated at Naracoorte. Mr.
Mclnnes has served in the District
Council of Naracoorte for 12 years,
and has been 51 years a resident of
the district. Occupation, Grazier. He
has a sound knowledge of sheep,
being a judge at South-Eastern
and other shows. His sports are rac-
ing and trotting. Home addre
Naracoorte.
COUNCILLOR ARTHUR ERNEST PRI E
(Corporation of Naracooite)
Born at Hindmarsh Island, 4th S' )-
tember, 1884, and educated at Gool - a
Public School. Mr. Price has sen cl
in the Corporation for 6 years and is
been 33 years a resident of the d s-
trict. By occupation he is a fan er
and grazier, and his sports are rac ig
and rifle shooting. During the var
Mr. Price enlisted for active sen ce
on 7th August, 1915, and served \ th


1
:
>^ESSSSSSSSS|S|SS^S^SSSf 1
II
0^' '
A.I.F. in Egypt until 1917. Home
a Cress, Naracoorte.
and cricket. He was President of
the Naracoorte Golf Club, 1933 to 1934.
Home address, Kybybolite.
Licensed Land Broker. His sport is
tennis. Home address. Naracoorte.
JOUNCILLOR EDWARD CHARLES
HENRY SCHINCKEL.
(District Council of Naracoorte)
Horn at Goroke, \ ictoria, 30th June,
1889, and educated at Naracoorte Pub-
lic School. Mr. Schinckel has been a
member of the Council for 10 years,
and 25 years a resident of the district.
He is a member of the Naracoorte
Hospital Board and the Naracoorte
Masonic Lodge, No. 42, S.A.C. Occu-
pation, Sheep Farmer. Sports, golf
COUNCILLOR LEO ROY DeGARIS, J.P.
(Corporation of Naracoorte)
Born at Naracoorte, 23rd June, 1893,
and educated at Prince Alfred College,
Adelaide. Mr. DeGaris has served in
the Corporation for 2 years, and has
been a resident of the district all his
life, with the exception of 2 years
spent with the A.I.F. in Egypt. He is
President of the Naracoorte Branch
R.5.5.1.L.A., a Fellow of Common-
wealth Institute of Valuers, and in
business he is an Auctioneer and
COUNCILLOR JOHN LIONEL DAVISON.
(Corporation of Naracoorte)
Born at Robe, South Australia. July
Ist, 1861, and educated at Rohe Public
School. Mr. Davison served for 10
years as Councillor for the Naracoorte
Corporation, and previously 10 years
for the District Council. He has been
33 years a resident of the district, and
has been twice Past Grand Master
Independent Order of Oddfellows’


:
Mfly 1 ; •...
£
III
H
iifliMi'ciBC'' " wmmm
f iHH|
4*
*, * ”: "* 'Hi'
&■ ” ’ * :
y ||i|
•—•-
Lodge, M.U. Mr. Davison is a retired
bootmaker, and his sports are ath-
letics. Home address, Naracoorte.
and Chairman of the 800 l Lagoon
Sports Club. Home address, 800 l
Lagoon.
Board and the Oddfellows’ Lodg
Occupation, Grazier. His sport
bowls. Home address, Naracoorte.
COUNCILLOR BERTRAM ARON HOOD.
(District Council of Naracoorte)
Born at Naracoorte, 21st October,
1880, and educated at the Hundred of
Joanna School, near Naracoorte. Mr.
Hood has served in the District Coun-
cil of Naracoorte for 12 years, and has
been a resident of the district all his
life. Occupation, Farmer and Grazier.
He is a member of the Masonic Lodge
COUNCILLOR WALTER ROBERT
MAJOR.
(District Council of Naracoorte)
Born at Milliceut, Ist September,
1879, and educated at Milliceut Pub-
lic School. Mr. Major has served in
the Council for 10 years, and resided
in the district for 32 years. He is a
member of the Naracoorte Hospital
COUNCILLOR ERWIN SILVERTON
VINE.
(Corporation of Naracoorte)
Born at Adelaide, 31st March, 18t
and educated at East Adelaide Pub'
School and T. C. Hayward’s Acadeni
He has been a member of the Corpor
tion for 12 months, and a resident
the district for 10 years. Busine
Postal Clerk. Member of the Masor


*
■
*.****■>■ »■""«» mmmmmmm
% , m .„ """■ 1
-«-*"«**• I .
k- ft •-*•>—* - •—•-«»
dgc. Sports, cricket, tennis, foot-
1, and bowls. Home address, Nara-
coorte.
GEORGE RAMSAY JOHNSTONE
MATHER.
Overseer of Works and Town Inspector.
(Corporation of Naracoorte)
Born at Mount Gambier, 21st Octo-
ber, 1863, and educated at the Mount
Gambier and Naracoorte Public
Schools. He has served in Corporation
12 t ears, and been 60 years a resident
of the district. Sports, football and
racing. Pie is an athletic handicapper
and coursing judge. Home address,
Naracoorte.
ARCHIE HUMPHRIS, TOWN CLERK
(Corporation of Naracoorte.)
Born at Orroroo, South Australia,
26th January, 1885, and educated at
Port Augusta and Melrose Public
Schools. Mr. Humphris has served
for 29 years as. Clerk to the District
Council of Naracoorte and Clerk of
the Corporation since its inception in
1924. He has been 29 years a resi-
dent of the district, and is a member
of the Oddfellows’ M.U. and Masonic
Lodges. Mr. Humphris has been 20
years Secretary of the Naracoorte
Racing Club and holds many other
public positions. He is also Secretary
of the Naracoorte Bowling Club.
Home address, Naracoorte.
JOHN HENRY McMURTRIE
OVERSEER OF WORKS.
(District Council of Naracoorte)
Born at Robe, 31st October, 1880,
and educated at Magill State School
and Old College. Norwood. Mr.
McMurtrie has served in the Council
for 12 years and has been 12 years a


%
mk 0
;
/
resident of the district. He is a mem-
ber of the Norwood Emulation
Masonic Lodge, and his sport is
cricket. Home address, Naracoorte.


— r
' J
r-— °*s H
— y zl : " • ■ $
\ <
, ••■• •-*••:• . ****' «sm» . y<Wm
Corporation of Peterborough
PETERBOROUGH TOWN HALL.


,
n I I
History of Peterborough
i eterborough (formerly known as Petersburg) was
originally intended as a railway siding between Terowie
and Ouorn, but has long since developed into a large
railway town and the centre of an extensive farming-
district. Owing to the development of the Broken Hill
Mines and the extension of the railway, it became the prin-
north side of the town for himself, at 20/6 per acre, am!
took possession on 14th August. Mr. Peter Doecke could
not live here on account of the severity of the climate, and
the land passed to Mr. j. H. Koch, who came to reside here
in July, 1876.
1876: The early days were characterised by many
BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF PORTION OF PETERBOROUGH.
cipal junction of the Northern District, the lines branching
from this centre to Port Augusta, Broken Hill, Port Pirie,
and Adelaide. Ihe railway traffic is very large, and as
many as seventy trains arrive and depart daily.
1875: Peterborough had its beginning in the Adelaide
auction room on 18th July, 1875, when Mr. H. H. Rohde
bought Section 218 for his father-in-law, Mr. Peter Doecke,
at 24/- per acre, and the next day purchased land on the
hardships and few pleasures, and the first harvest in 1 6
was almost a total failure, but our two pioneers, y
perseverance and hard toil, managed to keep the wolf fr 11
the door. Water was a great difficulty in these early da s.
In 1887, Peterborough was formed into a municipali y,
and from that time the town has made good progress, e
population having increased during that period from a f w
hundred to over 4,000.


TST OF MAYORS AND DURATION
OF OFFICE
W. Threadg'old 1880 to 1889
H. Howard 1889 ,,
1891
E. Palmer 1891
1892
W. Heithersay 1892 ,,
1893
E. j. Elliott 1894
1895
I. W. Alford 1895
1890
E. Palmer 1890 ,
1898
IP Roenfeldt 1898
1899
T. H. Chinner 1899
, 1900
G. W. Halcombe 1900
1902
j. W. Powering 1902 ,
, 1905
\V. A. Casley 1905
, 1900
S. \V. Dickson 1900
, 1908
W. Butterworth 1908 ,
1912
Dr. M. Birks Dec. 1912
, Mav 1913
I. C. Todd May 1913
, Dec. 1914
A. lamieson 1914
1917
S. D. loncs 1911
1920
H. P. Shakes 1920
1924
Dr. C. H. Clarke 1921
,, Sept. 1922
G. Phillips Sept. 1922
„ 1924
1. \V. Clair 1924
„ 1925
W. C. I4eed 1925
„ 1820
E. Hoile 1920
„ 1927
S. D. Jones 1927
„ 1931
Stock sales are held by various Adelaide firms, and are
tended by cattle and sheep buyers from all parts of the
ite, the Peterborough market being the most important
tside of Adelaide.
The Corporation has installed a large electric lighting
mt. and supplies over 800 private consumers with
PORTION OF MAIN STREET, PETERBOROUGH.
electricity for lighting and offier purposes, light and
lower for the Railway workshop and station. I he capital
value of ratable property is £131,700, having an assessment
value of £69,727. A total rate of lid. in the £1 yields an
annual revenue of £3,195.
The chief industries are the loco, workshops, butter
factorv, cyanide works, motor garages, and fieezing works.
Vmongst the handsome buildings in the town are the Town
Hall, Post Office, Bishop’s Palace, five churches, and a
large number of business places and hotels.
The recent railway reorganisation has done much for
Peterborough, and this town has become the centre of the
northern districts. Considerable building activity is in
evidence, and prospects arc indeed pleasing for the progress
of the town.
A very fine Soldiers’ Memorial Hospital has also been
completed at a cost of over £20,000, and is fitted with the
most up-to-date appliances and conveniences. The Soldiers’
Memorial Garden is situated on the main road.
Peterborough has an altitude of 1,700 feet abo\e sej-
level, and the climate is excellent, especially during the
summer months.
Following is a list of the present members of the
Corporation: S. D. Jones (Mayor), G. H. Boase, A. K.
Harris, 1). N. Powering, G. S. H. Oliver, R. J. Bowden, J. C.
Telford, J. G. Hefferan, W. C. J. Purdie, and E. A. House
(Town Clerk).
FOUNDATION OF THE TOWN.
The founding of a town of the size and importance of
Peterborough, which constituted an outstanding milestone


in the progress of this State, is naturally of historic import-
ance. Ihe “history’ of the great Northern Railway
Junction will recall important incidents connected with
early Peterborough, and refresh the minds of the surviving
pioneers of the town, and it will be equally informative to
later residents.
FARM LANDS, IN THE HUNDRED OF YONGALA,
THAT BECAME TOWN SITES.
Selected under credit agreements to purchase from the
LAYING FOUNDATION-STONE OF NEW TOWN HALL
BY OLDEST RESIDENT, J. H. KOCH, Esq., IN 1927.
Crown in 1875, Peter Doecke selected Section 216, contain-
ing 493 acres, which was first managed by and later
transferred to Johann Heinrich Koch, who purchased the
freehold in 1880. In 1875, Herman Heinrich Rohde
selected Section 218, containing 5814 acres, and purchased
the freehold in 1880. In 1875, Thomas kiddy selected
Section 217, containing 627 acres, which he transferred to
Sampson Torr, jun., who sold it to Richard Cheffirs, who
obtained the freehold in 1880. In 1875, John Morrissy
selected Section 209 and 184E, containing 640 acres, which
he sold to Richard Cochrane, who obtained the freehold in
1881. It is portion of these sections that comprise
Peterborough.
HOW IT ORIGINATED.
Following the discovery of silver by P. Green in 1876,
beyond the border of this State, near the Umberumberka
C reek, in N.S.W., the town of Silverton came into exist-
ence, the rapid growth of which was phenomenal. Supplies
for that town and mines were carried by horses and bulk k
teams, first from Burra, then from Hallett, and later fr m
Terowie, as each became the nearest railway station. This
traffic became so great to warrant our Government making
trial surveys to connect existing railway lines to the border
near Silverton. The first survey located Lancelot, in the
1 lundred of Gumbowie, as a junction of the lines from
Adelaide, Port Pirie, and Port Augusta.
In 1879 our Government made another survey, this
time fixing Section 246, Hundred of Yongala, as the
junction of four intended lines, and Bills were passed
through Parliament authorising their construction. Thus
these were the deciding factors giving birth to and founding
the town now known as Peterborough.
FIRST THREE SURVEYS OF TOWNSHIP LOTS.
It is of historic importance to recall the fact that the
first survey was that of J. H. Koch, being portion of 1 is
Section 216, the plan of which is dated 12 h May, 1880, a d
therein named by him “Petersburgh,” after Peter Doecl e,
a relative of his, the original selector of the section, r it
“Petersburg.” as many people suppose. The second sun v
was Id. H. Rohde’s of portion of his Section 218, the pi n
being dated 2nd September, 1880, and naming it Pete
burgh North. The third survey was that of R. Cheffirs f
portion of his Section 217, the plan of which is dated 1 h
September, 1880, and named Petersburgh West. Of th< e
plans, the first to be deposited in the Lands Titles Off c
was H. H. Rohde’s, No. 858. 1 he second was that of b
Cheffirs, No. 971, and the third J. H. Koch’s, No. 980.
SUBSEQUENT SURVEYS UP TO 1918.
H. H. Rohde, Petersburgh North Extension a d
others. J. H. Koch, Petersburgh South, Petersburgh Soi h
Extension, and others.
R. Cockrane, 1891, of portion of his, Section 209, wh h
he named Petersburg. The latter was the first survey o
spelled, and the name of the town at the time.
RAILWAYS.
In July, 1880, J. H. Koch transferred to the Gove i-
ment, for railway purposes, 30 acres 38 perches, for wh h


—• “ ' 0 , s <<; ; px
he "ceived £230 7/(5. This transfer included the land
no comprising the railway station, etc., post office, and
mi cipal buildings.
When the contracts for connecting the railway with
Be Tsburg were let, the nearest stations were Jamestown
ant Terowie. The first line completed was from James-
tot , which was opened for traffic on 17th January, 1881.
T1 next was from Terowie, opened for traffic on 11th May,
188 and to Ouorn. connecting Port Augusta, opened
for raffic on the 22nd May, 1882. In 1883, Charles Rasp
MR. AND MRS. J. H. KOCH.
Founders of Peterborough.
discovered silver at Willyama. the alpha of Broken Hill
Mines. The richness and immensity of the line of lode,
and rapid growth of that town, marks an epoch in the
history of Australia.
FIRST BUILDING.
Apart from the farmhouses, etc., of Messrs. Koch,
Rohde, and Cheffirs, the first building was erected in 1879
on .Section 218. This building still stands, and is situated
at the rear of Mr. R. F. Cox’s shop, Main Street, imme-
diately opposite the station. It was the outcome of a
meeting of farmers, held at the farmhouse of Mr, 11. 11.
Rohde, when it was decided to erect a stone building to
be used as a school on weekdays and a place of religious
worship on Sundays by any denomination. Mr. Rohde
donated the land, and subscriptions were raised to pay for
the masonry, timber, and iron. The stone, sand, and hme
were supplied free by the residents, also the labour f<u
putting on the roof and laying the floor, which was done
under the working supervision of J. W. G. Alford and
several willing assistants, I his was completed in 18 oh
before there was any knowledge of a railway to the locality.
CORPORATION OF PETERBOROUGH.
The town of Petersburg was declared a municipality
in 1886, the first Mayor being Mr. Wm. Threadgold, who
was elected in September of that year. Ihe first Council-
lors were Messrs. W. Howard, P. A. CallaryJ. W •
Wright, H. T. Rabbish, T. Hosking, and W. Heithersay.
The first Town Clerk was Mr. J. R. Hill, who, on his
death, was succeeded in turn by Messrs. J. H. Touchell, F.
Elude, and S. Keally, the latter being appointed in 1889
and retired in 1923, when Mr. F. E. Sharley took office
In 1928, Mr. Sharley resigned to take up a similar position
in the ever-growing Port Lincoln, and the present Clerk
(Mr. E. A. House) was appointed.
PETERBOROUGH MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC SUPPLY
One of the most important municipal activities in the
past history of Peterborough was the adoption of the
scheme to provide the town with electric light and power.
On June 13, 1913, His Excellency Admiral Sir Day Hort
Bosanquet, G.C.V.0., K.C.8., performed the ceremony of
laying the foundation-stone of the power house in connec-
tion with the electric lighting scheme. The cost of the
scheme was between £6,000 and £7,000. In concluding a
lengthy reply, His Excellency said; ‘Those who desire to
understand the future development of Petersburg should
study the map —the largest map they can find—where they
will see, not only the junction of four lines of railway here,
but also that the town stands out like a bastion or a
buttress to the north-west angle of the most fertile and
populous district in South Australia. We have much to
thank the Council of 1913 for its work in pioneering the
electric light scheme for the town. Since its inauguration the
undertaking has been profitable as well as serviceable, and


I ..
< s' „
, . >*c ,V'>
f ■ viagi^att
W
k. ‘ # A ... JS&E ; > ,
i
■ * ‘ . i
L ■ * v »’,
jjf . k : «
m mt
V £4 /> y «
Jyf J|v fc -.4 ■!&■
j|k
' - - Illy ' I' m' s
Jr *jp|p •-SaL
. >•. ■ 111
|: '• .« gE
& ,,
J? - *, .* ;> ■■
sjlf w * W* * «P : |K
§M vr '^Im^t^S’
Wft ■ << <- <*<■- H* - x ' *^
J v M *
fr ' iMii t tS*$ &U % *1 -
1 j JT/
_ art
I. mk4a***, Jt: I
wjp 4k _
>N %.
" ■■' /
/
•yk iHr v
we now have a powerhouse building covering three times
the floor space of the original station, and the total horse-
power of the present engines is five times as great as when
the plant was erected. This fact in itself speaks of the
progress made in this department of the town’s municipal
activities. One cannot here let the opportunity pass with-
out mention of the valued services of Mr. M. T. Groves,
who was electrical engineer from 1918-29, and who con-
ducted most of the alterations to the building and plant.
His ability and sound judgment proved invaluable to the
Council.”
The present Electrical Engineer (Mr. C. A. Hill) took
charge of the powerhouse in 193 d, and has thoroughly
overhauled the whole of the plant, made many additions
and improvements, until to-day the Peterborough Municipal
electrical supply is the most up-to-date plant outside the
city, with the exception of Port Pirie. It consists of a 300
h.p. Ruston engine, 200 h.p. Blackstone, 110 h.p. Blackstone,
and a 55 h.p. Ruston (all crude oil fuel). The present total
capital value of the scheme is estimated at £32,000, and
the annual revenue £7,825. lhe output last year was
463,884 units. The scheme carries a reserve account of
£3,000. At present the loans, which are disappearing
annually, are £5,300, and the whole position is most satis-
factory,' bearing out to the fullest extent the prediction of
the pioneers of the scheme.
MR. W. THREADGOLD.
First Mayor. —1886 to 1889.
MR. J. R. HILL.
First Town Clerk.
MR. E. PALMER.
2nd and 7th Mayor.—lBB9 to Fd,
1896 to 1898.


C 5 ,
iliaK x i v. < : TOiliili^®
iBi w» »>■ Tin
K'k JR
" *| ‘ V s ' A, -'; *
lip *••«•
'A - *'J
'v I ,
«
i i i i iii ii^iijlTfriB
■■■■■■■
”'.; ”7 - “ -, T ~ ■: • r -
*
_/ • »V v v ' '
- ' A -
: 5
• •
5=X * " I
Ifti i*T * m*\i9%Z
't
W .$C:
-
* ... • ;•: ■■■
' . ‘ t
■HF - , ~^*if
'S/f
1 A *
V. : : U ,
MR. WM. HEITHERSAY.
4th Mayor.—lB92 to 1893.
DR. E. J. ELLIOT.
sth Mayor.—lB94 to 1895.
MR. B. ROENNFELDT.
Bth Mayor.—lB9B to 1899.
MR. T. H. CHINNER.
9th Mayor.—lB99 to 1900.
MR. W. A. L. CASLEY.
12th Mayor.—l9os to 1906.
MR. W. BUTTERWORTH.
14th Mayor.—l9oB to 1912.
339


Jf
I I
- I,
IP';?}
*«fnHj| k r '
wSBSSSSBSSSB^I^^^^^^^^BSSSSSSSSS^SBSSKBBBr
■■■■■
. - : : ; . :. ■:;■■> > , I.: . x ; ;
HHHi B
.-
• \. ':. ■'
■j JP z iiUiffiiJsjst
F' f 1*6
■Is; , ■Ktv
IfejM
m ■* «-, I
P 4, ..■■■' '
v k
p ; jg
rat
■■ *0 -4' , ■
Scs
■k H
DR. M. BIRKS.
15th Mayor.—December, 1912, to May, 1913.
MR. J. C. TODD.
16th Mayor.—May, 1913, to December, 1911.
MR. ALEX JAMIESON.
17th Mayor.—l9l4 to 1917.
MR. H. P. SHAKES.
19th Mayor.—l92o to 1921.
DR. LOWTHER CLARKE.
20th Mayor.—l92l to September, 192 .
MR. GEO. PHILLIPS.
21st Mayor.—l 922 to 1924.


' \
\
jF * jgtmtuiL
;, % |
.a-ag#^-
i8|||
-
MR. W. C. REED.
23rd Mayor.—l92s to 1926.
lIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF
PETERBOROUGH, SAMUEL
DANIEL JONES, J.P.
Born at Wallaroo, 19th June, 1875,
and educated at the Primary School,
Wallaroo, and Stanley Grammar
School. Watervale. Service in Coun-
cil 12 years as Auditor, 12 years as
Councillor, and 12 years as Mayor, nine
of which he has served continuously.
Forty-five years a resident of the dis-
trict. Mr. Jones is returning officer
of the State and Federal Elections.
Business, Secretary and Auditor. He
is a member of the Masonic, Druids,
Rechabites and Buffalo Lodges, a
member of the Peterborough Hospital
Board, President of the Peterborough
High School Council, a Justice of the
Peace, and Secretary to the Druids'
Lodge. Home address, 5, Moscow
Street, Peterborough.
S. W. DICKSON.
(Past Mayor of Peterborough.)
Mr. Dickson was elected to the
Peterborough Council as a represen-
tative for East Ward in 1902, and con-
tinued as Councillor for the same
Ward for 18 years, although his seat
was challenged on several occasions
by Labour candidates. In 1906 he was
elected to the position of Mayor un-
opposed, and continued until 1908.
Upon being pressed to accept another
year of office he declined on account
of indifferent health, but continued to
serve the Council as Chairman of the
Finance Committee until his retire-
ment in 1920. During Mr. Dickson’s
term in the Council many im-
provements in the town were
instituted, such as the day pan system
of sanitation, improved method of con-
structing roads and footpaths, and last,
but not least, the Municipal Electric
Lighting System, in all of which he
took a prominent and leading part.
From the Town Council of Peterbo-
rough he was elected to the State Par-
liament as one of the representatives
for the Burra Burra Electorate, being
the first member of the Council to be
so honoured. During the time he was
in Parliament many matters pertain-
ing to the future welfare of Peter-
borough were brought prominently
before the Government. The present
water scheme was outlined, and the
Government placed £20,000 on the esti-
mates for its completion. A sum of
£3,000 was also expended in clearing


i
: IKl A ~
V |L ** *
p:-> -
i Sm-
■Hftfe. 8
k
/
l\j- fr*w" *
m j I " X.
fl ■ / m* \
,v>V-
, .-.w V '"W&t
: \
the watercourse of properties that im-
peded the get-away of the hood
waters. This has been a great boon
to the town.
JOHN WILLIAM CLAIR.
(Past Mayor of Peterborough.)
Born in Western Australia in 1887.
Mr. Clair served 4 years as a Coun-
cillor for West Ward in the Peterbo-
rough Corporation, and Mayor from
1924-5. He resided in the district for
10 years, and is a member of the
Buffalo and Oddfellows’ Lodges. While
a member of the Council, Mr. Clair
took a great interest in the welfare
of the Town of Peterborough. During
the war he served abroad with the
A.I.F. in Egypt, 1915-19. His present
address is Pygery, W.A.
JOSEPH WILLIAM GILBERT ALFORD,
J.P.
(Past Mayor of Peterborough.)
Born at Woodside, 6th January,
1858, and educated at the Woodside
School; his teachers were Messrs. J.
G. Howard and Disher. After having
served as a Councillor for some years
at Peterborough (then Petersburg)
Mr. Alford was elected Mayor. He
was an Auctioneer, Wheat Buyer and
Land Agent, and established the first
monthly stock market there. Lor
some years he was on the Commit-
tee of the Local Show, and for a
period secretary, during which the
present show ground was purchased.
He took an active part in all matters
for the advancement of the town. He
contributed himself and collec ed a
considerable amount of money tor arcls
tree planting. Amongst other local
affairs Mr. Alford was on the om-
mittee of the Railway Sports, \ igi-
lant, Literary and Dramatic Associa-
tion. In sport cricket and athletics
were his chief pastimes. In 189/ Mr.
Alford removed to Adelaide, where he
carried on auctioneering, and in 1903
took a business trip to America. Some
time after his return he established
his present business, Weighbridge.
Scale, and Oxy-Welding, now located
at Light Square. He is a member of
A.O. P'oresters’ Court Homely Retreat
Lodge. His residential address is 13,
Third Avenue, St. Peters.
EDWARD HOILE, J.P.
(Past Mayor of Peterborough.
Burn at Sandwich, Kent, Ei. damL


* JH
Jgk
' ■ | ' |
6th September, 1862, and arrived in
Aus ilia in 1873. Educated at Sand-
wic Kent, England, and North Ade-
laid South Australia. Service in
Cor cil: 2 years Councillor and 1 year
Ma r. Forty-five years a resident of
the listrict. Business, Pharmacist.
Hoi address, Peterborough.
HERMAN HEINRICH ROHDE.
(Past Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at Peterborough, 7th March,
1877, and educated at the Peterborough
Public School. He was a Councillor
during 1924-5. a resident of the district
for 50 years, and Vice-President of
the Peterborough Show Society.
Sport: Bowls. Home address: Henley
Beach Road, Lockleys.
JAMES PATRICK KEANE.
(Past Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at Mintaro, 6th June, 1882. and
educated at the Mintaro Public School.
Two years’ service in Council. Forty
years a resident of the District. Mr.
Keane was a railway employe for 25
years and later proprietor of the
Federal Hotel, Peterborough, for 13
years. He is President of the Peter-
borough Racing Club, and has raced
horses for 25 years. Home address:
Federal Hotel, Peterborough.
HAROLD BURNABY WOOD, J.P.
(Past Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at Adelaide, July 11th, 1887.
and educated at Currie Street and
Peterborough Public Schools. Mr.
Wood served in the Council as Coun-
cillor of Yongala Ward from 1922 to
1928, and has been a resident of the
District from 1898 to 1904, and from
1921 to 1936. Occupation: Train Con-
trol Official, S.A.R. Home address:
Peterborough.
JOHN OWEN CRITCHLEY, J.P.
(Past Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at Callington, 18th April, 1892,
and educated at Gumbowie, Sunny
Brae, and the Peterborough State
Schools. Mr. Critchley served in the
Council for two terms, and was for 25
years a resident of the District. Busi-
ness : Civil Servant. His sports are
cricket, football, and horse racing.
During the war he served three years
abroad with the 10th Infantry Batta-
lion. A.I.F. Mr. Critchley is the eldest
and only surviving son of Patrick and
Julia Critchley, of Mile Hnd (formerly


'M
jRjcv
IPi
Mfi;
A
of Peterborough). The only other
members of the family, two brothers.
M. F. and H. P.. were killed in .action in
the Great War. In addition to Mr.
Critchley being a member of the Town
Council, he was a member of the
Board of Management of the Soldiers'
Memorial Hospital at Peterborough.
He was also a prominent official in the
Peterborough Sub-branch of the Re-
turned Soldiers' League, and in the
realms of football was much in evi-
dence as a central umpire in the
northern part of the State. He also
represented the District of Burra
Burra in the South Australian Parlia-
ment from 1930 to 1933. He is a Jus-
tice of the Peace for the State of
South Australia. Mr. Critchley mar-
ried Miss Alice Cane, of Peter-
borough, and they have a family of
three daughters. Home address; 10
Mathias Avenue. Cabra.
CHARLES VALENTINE HOILE.
(Past Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at Laura, 26th February, 1890,
and educated at Peterborough and
Glenelg Grammar Schools. Four
years' service in the Council. Forty-
six years a resident of the District.
Chairman of the Finance Committee,
and a member of the Masonic and Odd-
fellows’ Lodges. Business: Pharma-
cist. His sports are tennis and golf.
Mr. Hoile served for three years
abroad with the A.I.F. Home address,
Peterborough.
ROBERT WALTER GOUDIE, J.P.
(Past Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at Edgbaston, Birmingham.
England, 4th August, 1864, and edit-
cated at Bishop \ esey's Grai mar
School, Sutton Coldfield, Eng and.
Arrived in Australia. 26th Ai fust,
1883. Mr. Goudie served in the ( oun-
cil for six years, from 1921-27. an has
been 43 years a resident of the Dis-
trict. He was Chairman of the Fin-
ance Committee, Works and E ctric
Supply Committee. He is a mem tof
the Great Northern Masonic 1 >dge.
and Star of the North Druids' 1 dge.
Business : Aerated Waters Mai ufac-
turer. His sport is golf. He is resi-
dent of the Peterborough Ins tute.
and Chairman of the Peterbc ough
Soldiers' Memorial Hospital. He
joined the S.A. Military Forces ii 1894.
and was gazetted Lieutenant ii 1896,
was the first Area Officer at Peter-
borough, and is now on the reti: 1 list
as a Captain and Hon. Major. ionic
address : "Traquair," Peterborou, h.


jHgj
HERBERT ROY MILDREN.
Past Councillor of Peterborough.)
urn at Peterborough, 6th Septem
be 1893, and educated at the Peter-
be ugh Public School. Two years’
se ice in Council. Forty years a resi-
de of the District. A member of the
El i School Council and the Masonic
Le ;e. Business: Confectioner.
S] t: Bowls. Home address: Good-
w( 1 Road. Colonel Light Gardens.
JAMES ARTHUR HODGSON.
(Past Councillor of Peterborough.)
Mr. Hodgson was born in Kendal,
Westmorelandshire, England, on the
26th November, 1885. He left school
at the age of 13, and his first work
was that of drying sand for use on
steam locomotive engines. On the
2nd December, 1910, Mr. Hodgson left
England on the s.s. “Somerset” for
Australia, and landed at the Queen's
Wharf, Port Adelaide, on the 11th
of January, 1911, where he found
employment with Messrs. S. Perry
and Co., Hindley Street. Adelaide, and
later was offered work in the Railway
Service as a cleaner, and commenced
his new duties on the 27th February.
1911. He is still employed in the Rail-
way Department as a fireman and
spare driver. At Morgan Mr. Hodg-
son joined the Labor Party very early,
and was its first local Secretary for
four years. He was very enthusiastic,
and worked for the return of many
of its candidates. After some years
of membership he realised the damag-
ing' effect the policy of protection was
having on our National and Inter-
national life, so he severed his con-
nection with that party and became a
student of, and a worker for, the gos-
pel of industrial righteousness, as pro-
pounded by Henry George in his many
works, including his masterpiece,
“Progress and Poverty.” After many
years of work amongst the people
preaching the Georgean Gospel, in 1931
he contested a Parliamentary seat in
the Division of Grey in the Federal
Parliament. He was unsuccessful in
his fight, but received about 4,000
votes. During 25 years’ service in the
Railways he has been searching for a
means of preventing the issue of
smoke and cinders from the chimnev
jf the present coal-burning steam
locomotive engine, and has succeeded.
This costly nuisance can now be
avoided, and at the same time increase
the efficiency of the engine and re-
duce the quantity of coal consumed.
During Mr. Hodgson’s residence in
Peterborough he sat in Council for two
years, from the elections in 1930 until
the elections in 1932. During' his term
in Council he was a loyal supporter of
the principle of raising the rates from
unimproved land values and an im-
proved and cheaper sanitary system.
Mr. Hodgson was married on the 23rd
of December, 1911, to Cora Annie, the
eldest daughter of Captain and Mrs.
Manson, of Liverpool, England.
THE LATE JOHN JAMES TAYLOR.
(Past Councillor of Peterborough.)
Was born at Dublin, Ireland, Feb-
ruary 3rd, 1854, and educated at Cam-
bridge, England. Arrived in Australia,
3rd December, 1878. The late Mr.
Taylor served in the Council for eight
years, and was a resident of the Dis-
trict for 22 years. He was Chairman


| ijL
mm «. % i
■HHBI *
11 -
of the Town Hall, Finance and Works
Committees, and a member of the
Loyal Orange Lodge. The late Mr.
Taylor's four sons served in the Great
\\ ar, and one made the supreme sac-
rifice on Gallipoli.
THOMAS HUNTER.
(Past Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at Middlesborongh, Yorkshire,
England, on August 21st, 1887, and
educated at Felling-on-Tyne Public
School, County of Durham, England.
Mr. Hunter arrived in Australia on
October 28th, 1908. He served in the
Council for four years, and was a resi-
dent of the District for 22 years. He
held the position of Chairman of the
Peterborough Electric Supply. He was
a prominent member of the Recha-
bite Lodge of Peterborough, and was
for 20 years a member of the Peter-
borough Methodist Church and a local
preacher for many years. Occupation :
Train Examiner, S.A.R. Sport: Soccer.
Home address: 2 Wainhouse Street,
Torrensville.
DR. WILLIAM ROSSLYN CHARLES
MORRIS.
(Past Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at Woodville, 23rd July, 1901,
and educated at Woodville Primary
School, Prince Alfred College, Ade-
laide University, and London Hospital.
Service in Council from November,
1933, to July, 1935. Six years a resi-
dent of the District. Profession;
Medical Practitioner. A member of
the Masonic Lodge, President of the
Peterborough Y.M.C.A., and a Medi-
cal Officer at the Peterborough Sol-
biers’ Memorial Hospital. Sports:
Tennis and golf. Home address: 18
Jervois Street, Peterborough.
DAVID NORMAN BOWERIT i.
(Councillor of Peterborough.
Born at Peterborough, 18th Cb tober,
1895, and educated at Peterlx rough
Public and High Schools: 44 years
service in Council; a resident f the
district all his life. Mr. Bowe ng is
Chairman of the Works Com httee.
A member of the Great Northern
Lodge of Freemasons and Indep ndent
Order of Rechabites, and his sort is
tennis, and he is the Secretary )f the
Peterborough Public Library. Busi-
ness, Builder. Home address, Peter-
borough.


PM t
Hip. 1
i
—. . I
- ■ i . .. *i
■f;
4 i;: - x |
: *
RICHARD JOHN BOWDEN.
(Councillor of Peterborough.)
B n at Hazleton. Lucerne County,
in t; State of Pennsylvania, U.S.A.,
24th November, 1875, and arrived in
Australia in July, 1877. Educated at
the North Adelaide Primary School.
Mr. Bowden served in the Quorn
Council for 12 years and Peterborough
for 3 years. He was a resident of
the Quorn district for 26 years and
Peterborough for 10 years. He is a
member of the Works and Electric
Committees and Chairman of the Fin-
ance Committee. Business, Foreman
of the S.A. Railways. He has been
Secretary of the Quorn Branch, Rail-
way Association, for 10 years, and 15
years Secretary for Newcastle Elec-
torate Committee. Secretary of the
Protector Lodge, No. 31. 1.0.0. E., for
13 years, and the Quorn School Com-
mittee for 8 years. A member of the
Quorn High School Council and 8
years secretary of the Peterborough
School Committee. He is also a mem-
ber of the Junction Lodge, 1.0.0. F.,
No. 36, Peterborough. Sport, bowls.
Home address, 9, Lloyd Street, Peter-
borough.
GEORGE STEPHEN HENDRY OLIVER.
(Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at Peterborough, 23rd Novem-
ber, 1896, and educated at the Thebar-
ton Public School. Service in Coun-
cil, 2 years; 10 years a resident of
the district. Occupation, Rail Car
Driver, S.A.R. A member of the
R.A.0.8. Lodge (G.L.E.). Sports,
rowing, cricket, and football. Home
address, Peterborough.
LEWIS JOHN BILLS.
(Councillor of Peterborough.)
Mr. Bills was born at Orroroo, 9th
March, 1888, and educated at the Or-
roroo Public School, Muirden College,
Adelaide School of Mines and the L ni-
versity. He has served in the Council
for 2 years, and has been 26 years a
resident of the district. He is Pre-
sident of the Cricket, Tennis, and Golf
Clubs, and twice President of the Nor-
thern District Baptist Association.
Business, Dentist. He H a member
of the Druids’ Lodge, Captain of the
Peterborough Tennis, Golf, and Fede-
ral Cricket Clubs, and has been golf
champion for several years. Mr. Bills
was a Dental Examining Officer for
the North during the Great War. He
is deeply interested in philanthropic
and religious life of the district. He
has been 20 years President of the


' '''' V ' " "
.#WNW*^
0HB*/
|k ■ _
■ ****.•** M
t • j- I
~, Jiff 1
Sj. . / 'm:
\ %-^F"
tEl’ jjffljl'wf*
- Jr ■ y ■ ,
j
j ill 11
Men's Bible Class, from which the
local b .M.C.A. developed, and is also
a member of the church orchestra.
Home address, Collins Street, Peter-
borough.
HAROLD YOUNG PORTER.
(Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at Peterborough, 1887, and
educated at the Peterborough Public
School. Service in Council, 4 years;
45 years a resident of the district.
A member of the Finance and Works
Committee. Business, Watchmaker
and Jeweller. Sport, tennis. Home
address, Peterborough.
ROBERT PERCIVAL WILLIAM
SUMMERTON.
(Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at Church Hill. Gawler, Octo-
ber 10th, 1877, and educated at S. L.
Burton's Grammar School. Service in
Council, 2 years ; 23 years a resident
of the district. Mr. Summerton has
been for several years Branch Secre-
tary of the United Labour Party, and
is a member of the Concord, No. 27,
U.A.O.D. Lodge, Terowie. He was a
playing member of the Gawler South
and Carlton B Victoria Football Clubs.
Occupation, Fitter, S.A.R., Peterbo-
rough. Mr. Summerton has taken a
leading part in the presentation of a
wireless set to the Peterborough Sol-
diers' Hospital. This scheme was in-
augurated by the Peterborough
Branch of the S.A.R. Employes' Hos-
pital Fund, of which Mr. Summerton
is Secretary. He is also a member of
the Peterborough High School Coun-
cil. Home address, 50 South Terrace,
Peterborough.
G. HEINRICH KOCH.
(Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at Peterborough, 12th October.
1888, and educated at the Peterbor igh
Public School. Mr. Koch has se ved
in the Council for two years, anc has
been a resident in the District al his
life. He is Chairman of the M rks
Committee, and the Council’s r. me-
sentative on the Institute Comm tee.
He has been 20 years a member c the
Peterborough Show Society : is a i em-
ber of the Musical Competitions om-
mittee: 10 years a member of the
Primary School Committee, six ?ars
as Chairman: a member of the ugh
School Council; Chairman of the ligh
School Parents’ Association ; Dir ctor
of the Peterborough Y.M.C.A.; r. rd a
member of the Peterborough and
Committee. Business: Farmer. I ome
address : Peterborough.


IjaSy
fly /
n ' I
"”' •'***»**
~ : : : —r _ 11 •
wBMSiSr
HERBERT GILLES BOASE.
(Councillor of Peterborough.)
I rn at Adelaide, January 23rd,
1887, and educated at Ballarat, Vic-
toria. Three years’ service in Coun-
cil. Nine years a resident of the Dis-
trict. Chairman of the Electric Sup-
ply President of the Peterborough
Library. Business : Officer in Charge
of the Water Supply Department. Mr.
Boase is a member of the Masonic
Lodge and the Peterborough Golf
Club. Home address : Victoria Street.
Peterborough.
ARCHIBALD KENNETH HARRIS.
(Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at Peterborough, 14th Septem-
ber, ISPS and educated at the Peter-
borough Public School. Mr. Harris
has served in the Council from July,
1935, and has been 35 years a resident
of the district. Occupation, Fitter.
S.A.R. He is President of the Peter-
borough Sub-Branch, R.S.A., and a
member of the Masonic and Recha-
bite Lodges. During the war he
served abroad with the A.I.F. from
18th June, 1915, to 3rd May, 1919, and
was awarded the Military Medal. He
is interested in all sports. Home
address, Peterborough.
THE LATE MATTHEW ROSS BOTH.
(Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at Burra, 19th January, 1885,
and educated at Burra and Caltowie
Public Schools. Mr. Both served in
the Council from 1921 and was 30
years a resident of the district. He
had been President of the Peterbo-
rough Show and the Tennis and Foot-
ball Clubs, and Vice-President of the
Peterborough Racing and Cricket
Clubs. Business, Produce Merchant
and Tee Manufacturer. A member of
the A.0.0. Foresters' Lodge, and his
sport was tennis. Mr. Both died at
Peterborough on August 11th, 1936.
WILLIAM CLARENCE JOSEPH
PURDIE.
(Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at One Tree Hill. 27th October.
1893, and educated at One Tree Hill.
Mr. Purdie has served in the Council
from February, 1929. to December,
1932, and December, 1933, to 1936.
He is Chairman of Works and other
Committees, and has resided in the dis-
trict for 9 years, being a guard on the
S.A.R. He is a member of the Druids’
Lodge; Secretary of the Australian
Labor Party, Peterborough Branch;
Chairman of the Burra Burra Elec-


Pk M
WL w |yp
A. %*.
£BSPP& ''■
; jflP|||£
Jb
p
- i
torate Committee, A.L.P.; a member
of the Peterborough High School
Council from 1931-34; and Secretary
of the Peterborough Railway Picnic
Committee. He was a member of
Gawler South District Council in
1925, and is interested in all general
sports. Home address: 121 Wright
Street, Peterborough West.
JOHN GERALD HEFFERAN, J.P.
(Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at Marrabel, South Australia.
12th February, 1873, and educated at
the Marrabel Public School; 13 years’
service in the Council, and 43 years
a resident of the district. Mr. Hef-
feran is Chairman of the Finance
Committee and Hon. Secretary of the
Burra Burra Electoral Committee,
A.L.P., a position he occupied for 20
years. Occupation, Shift Foreman,
S.A.R. He is interested in all sport.
Home address, 112 Main Street.
Peterborough.
JAMES CLARNE TELFORD.
(Councillor of Peterborough.)
Born at Mannanarie, South Austra-
lia. 11th July, 1896, and educated at
Yongala Public School. Mr. Telford
has served for 3 years in the Council
and has been 20 years a resident of
the district. Occupation, P.M.G. Em-
ploye. He is Secretary of the Peter-
borough Sub-Branch R.S. and 5.1.L.A.,
and is interested in all general sports.
He served for 3 years in the 3rd
A.L.H. Regt. on active service abroad
during the Great War. Home address,
31, Moscow Street, Peterborough .
CLAUDE A. HILL.
(Electrical Engineer in Charge El trie
Supply of Peterborough.)
Born at Melbourne, Victor) . Ist
July, 1896, and educated at publ : and
technical schools, Victoria; 2 ears'
service in Council and 2 year resi-
dent in the district. A mem' tv of
the Association of Charge Engineers,
the Australian Institute Marii and
Power Engineers, and the M sonic
Lodge. During the war he served on


wn , a Bp
'. j££'
■ w S lilliP-
< ** W ~
4j£w*- »?&■ ' -
H.M ,S. Woolgar from 1917-18.
Horn address, 9, Collins Street, Peter-
borough.
EDGAR ATHELSTONE HOUSE, J.P.
(Town Clerk and Engineer of Peterborough.)
Born at Newstead, Victoria, 27th
July, 1879, and educated at Lan-
don State School and Newstead
Grammar School, \ ictoria; eight
years a resident of the district. Mr.
House is Secretary and Inspector of
the Local Board of Health, a member
of the Flinders and Grand Northern
Lodge of Freemasons and the A.N.A.
Lodge. He is a Justice of the Peace,
member of the Peterborough High
School Council, Public Library Com-
mittee, and Secretary of the Soldiers’
Memorial Gardens Committee. Mr.
House was Town Clerk and Overseei
at Davenport, Port Augusta, previous
to taking office at Peterborough. His
father (James Charles House), a
licensed surveyor, now deceased, was
one of the early pioneers of \ ictoria,
having filled the office of Shire Secre-
tary and Engineer to the Shire of
Newstead, in Victoria. He was a Jus-
tice of the Peace and a leader in all
public matters in the district. He
was a past Senior Grand Warden of
the Grand Lodge of Freemasons in
Victoria and a member of the Board
of General Purposes. His duties as
Shire Secretary and Engineer at New-
stead were taken over by Mr. E. A.
House until he decided to follow pas-
toral pursuits, and coming to reside in
South Australia in 1923 and accepting
the position of Town Clerk and Over-
seer at Davenport, Port Augusta.
His sports are bowls, tennis, cricket,
and shooting. Home address, 60,
South Terrace, Peterborough.
MAX. FRED. LIENERT.
(Overseer and Assistant Health Inspector of
Peterborough.)
Born at Gawler, 29th August, 1902,
and educated at Athelstone Public
School; 5 years’ service in Council 5
years a resident of the district. A
member of the United Ancient Order
of Druids’ Lodge. Sports, tennis and
shooting. Home address, 1, Kitchener
Street, Peterborough.
CYRIL HENRY GODFREY.
(Assistant Town Clerk of Peterborough.)
Born at Peterborough, Bth July,
1911, and educated at the Peterbo-
rough Public and District High
Schools. A resident of the district all


... ,
5
r
s l%>.,
, , ■ ,* ■■
his life. Mr. Godfrey has served in
the Council from 29th of July, 1928,
and has held the positions of Meter
Reader. Junior Clerk, Senior Clerk,
and Assistant Town Clerk. He is a
member of the United Ancient Order
of Druids, and is a Past Arch of the
Lodge. His sports are tennis and in-
door bowls. Home address, 84. Vic-
toria Street, Peterborough.
LAWRENCE JOHN LEWIS
(Junior Clerk of Peterborough.)
Born at Peterborough, 2nd June,
1918, and educated at the Peterbo-
rough Primary and High Schools. He
joined the staff of the Peterborough
Corporation on December 11th, 1934,
and has been a resident of the district
for 18 years. He is a member of the
United Ancient Order of Druids’
Lodge, and his sports are cricket, golf,
and football. Home address, 90, Rail
way Terrace, Peterborough.


Corporation of Port Augusta


History of Port Augusta
Port Augusta, the nearest port to the centre of Aus-
tralia and shipping outport for the great pastoral industry
of South Australia, takes its name from Lady Augusta
\ oung, wife of one of South Australia’s early Governors.
The town was surveyed in 1854, and in the same year
sites were sold for £8 each, and water frontages realised
£l5.
The district had a checkered history—boon times and
lean years—until 1912, when construction of the Trans-
Australian Railway was commenced. Since the building
of this line and the establishment of workshops and
administrative offices for the Trans-Australian and Central
Australian Railways, Port Augusta’s history has been one
of steady progress, until to-day it is the fourth town in
the State. In this, the Centenary year of South Australia,
which also marks the Diamond Jubilee of the incorporation
of the town itself, the District expects further progress
as a result of the construction of a new line to Port Pirie
and Redhill, and necessary increase in railway activity
incidental thereto. The port is the main shipping port
for all railway requirements.
The town is built on a convenient site about eight
miles south of the head of Spencer’s Gulf, at a narrow
point resembling the estuary of a river, and is remark-
ably safe for shipping. With a deep channel and exten-
sive wharves and jetties, large ocean-going steamers can
trade without undue inconvenience. The Great Western
Bridge across the Gulf at Port Augusta is the outlet for
all West Coast and Westralian overland traffic. A rail-
way bridge towards the head of the Gulf provides the
crossing for the East-West Express.
The overland telegraph line to Port Darwin was com-
menced from Port Augusta, and the local Post Office
includes a repeating station for cable messages from
Europe and elsewhere.
The port serves the two railways referred to; the agri-
cultural districts of Quorn, Wilmington, Hammond,
Hawker; the mineral areas of the north-west, and the
whole of the pastoral lands.
The distance from Adelaide by rail is 259J miles
(north) or by road 212 miles. The area under contn
of the Corporation is 7 square miles, with a capital vah
of £536,260, and is assessed for rating purposes at £26,81
The rate struck is 2/10 in the £l, annual value, inclusive
of fire brigade, hospital, lighting, sanitary, town hall, and
all special rates. The population is estimated at just
under 4,000 persons, and the shops and dwellings numbe
800.
The streets of Port Augusta are well paved (largely
with emulsified bitumen) and the public and private buil
ings (especially the Town Hall, Railway Station, Institu
and Court House) are spoken of as being some of tl
finest in the State. One of the first public buildings
erected was the Court House, built of Kapunda mark
in 1884, nine years after the first Corporation was pr
claimed.
There are two town squares (Gladstone and Disraeli
The former contains Croquet Lawns, Memorial Bai
Rotunda, War Cannon and lawns, garden square, and
splendidly equipped Children s Playground. Disra< i
Square contains one concrete, rubberised, and two coi
tennis courts, Girl Guides’ Hall, and Bowling Greens.
Port Augusta and district was served by three Cc
porations until 1932, when the ex-Corporations of Dave
port and Port Augusta West were amalgamated with t
Corporation of Port Augusta.
The following is a list of past and present inembe
of the Councils :
CORPORATION OF THE TOWN OF PORT AUGUST ..
MAYORS.
John Crouch Knipe, 1884-86; Villeneuve Francis Smi i,
1886; David Drysdalc, 1886-87; John George Bice, 185 3
89; Charles Edward Robertson, 1889 to 1895: Noel Augi
tin Webb, 1895 to 1897; Thomas Young, 1897 to 19C b
Thomas Hewitson, 1900 to 1907.


Port Augusta.—Anthony Edward Carrig, 1909-10;
■omas Hewitson, 1910-11-12; Joseph Roberts, 1912 to
'; John Gilbert Partridge. 1917-18; Joseph Roberts,
18-19; William Allen Burke Litchfield, 1919-21; John
bert Partridge, 1921-22; Joseph Roberts, 1922-24;
liam Allen Burke Litchfield, 1924-25; Keith Henderson
nter, 1925 to 1932.
Davenport.—Nicholas Mulhall, 1920-21; Sidney James
viand Bidgood, 1921-22; Emmanuel James Holder,
i 2-23: Herbert Richard Holds, 1923 to 1932.
Port Augusta West. —Michael John Cleary, 1920-21;
I d Vance Herbert Dighton, 1921; Thomas Charles Chin-
n y, 1921 to 1924; Lindsay Mallett Sanderson, 1924 to
7; James Michael Beerworth, 1927 to 1930: Thomas
( rles Chinnery, 1930-32.
Amalgamated Council.—James Michael Beerworth
19 2 to 1936.
COUNCILLORS.
Port Augusta.-—Charles John Reynolds, 1884-86;
I id Drysdale, 1884-86; William Joseph 'Pappin, 1884-86;
J n George Bice, 1884-86; John Leonard Matters,
18 4-85; Abraham P. Scott, 1885-87; Thomas Young,
J 1885-87; Villeneuve Francis Smith, 1885-87; Charles
Jc in Pound, 1885-87; Nicholas Rogers, 1886; Thomas
Fi ncis Wigley, 1886-87; George John B. Bromley, 1886-87;
odes John Reynolds, 1886-88; Nicholas Rogers, 1886-88;
William Joseph Pappin, 1886 to 1888; John George Bill,
to 1888; John Barker, 1887-88; Alfred Martin. 1887;
Thomas Young, Jnr., 1887 to 1889; Charles John Pound,
to 1889; Arthur E. Smith, 1887 to 1889; Villeneuve
Francis Smith. 1887 to 1889; Thomas Young Jnr., 1888-89;
Charles John Reynolds, 1888; John George Bice, 1888; Wil-
Hem Joseph Gladwin, 1888 to 1889; Solomon Israel, 1888;
Patrick Moran, 1888-89; James Fox, 1888-89; Alfred
Martin, 1888; Charles Edward Robertson, 1888-89; Arthur
Ernest Smith, 1888 to 1890: George Farr, 1888 to 1890;
Henry Samuel Ash, 1888 to 1890; Alfred Martin, 1888 to
1890; William P. Scott, 1889 to 1891 : Solomon Israel, 1889
to 1891; James Fox, 1889 to 1891; Patrick Moran, 1889
to 1891; Charles Wedderburn Mudie, 1890 to 1892; Ralph
Fawcett, 1890 to 1892; Henry Samuel Ash, 1890 to 1892;
Alfred Martin, 1890 to 1892; William P. Scott, 1891 to 1893;
JoHn Shepley Part, 1891 to 1893; James Fox, 1891 to 1893;
Alexander Walker, 1891 to 1893; John Brennan, 1892-93;
Charles Wedderburn Mudie, 1892 to 1894; Ralph bawcett,
1892 to 1894; Horace S. Snell, 1892 to 1894; Samuel S.
Bice, 1892 to 1894; Edward Henry King Messenger, 1893;
John Brennan, 1893 to 1895; William Henry Drew Pol-
glaise, 1893 to 1895; Noel Augustin Webb, 1893 to 1895 ;
Edward Henry King Messenger, 1893 to 1895 ; Theo. \\ il-
liam Alexander, 1894-95; William Harden, 1894 to 1896;
George Lewis, 1894 to 1896; Thomas Young, Jnr., 1894 to
1896; Theodore Kittel, 1894 to 1896; Charles Edward
Robertson, 1895 to 1897 ; Samuel Sandoes Bice, 1895 to 1897;
William Henry Drew Polglaise, 1895 to 1897; Theo. V illiam
Alexander, 1895 to 1897; Ralph Fawcett, 1896-97; William
Harden, 1896 to 1898; David Drysdale, 1896 to 1898;
Thomas Young, 1896-1898; Christopher H. Hakendorf, 1896
to 1898; John Brennan, 1897-98; Thomas McDowell, 1897
to 1899; Samuel Sandoes Bice, 1897 to 1899; Ralph Faw-
cett, 1897 to 1899; George Benjamin Bryan, 1897 to 1899;
Wdliam Harden, 1898 to 1900; David Drysdale, 1898 to
1900; Thomas Hewitson, 1898 to 1900; Christopher H.
Hakendorf, 1898 to 1900; William Symons, 1899; John
Brennan, 1899 to 1901 ; Samuel Sandoes Bice, 1899 to 1901 ;
William Symons, 1899 to 1901 ; George B. Bryant, 1899 to
1901; William Harden, 1900 to 1902 -/ David Drysdale, 1900
to 1902; Thomas Young, Jnr., 1900 to 1902; Joseph Roberts,
1900 to 1902; John Brennan, 1901 to 1903; William Symons,
1901 to 1903; George B. Bryant, 1901 to 1903; William
Harden, 1902 to 1904; Anthony E. Carrig, 1902 to 1904;
Thomas Young, 1902 to 1904; F. I. W. E. Smith, 1902 to
1904; William Patrick Mullen, 1902-03; John Brennan, 1903
to 1905; Arthur James McGrath, 1903 to 1905; Joseph
Roberts, 1903 to 1905; William Patrick Mullen, 1903 to
1905; Frederick Albert May, 1904-5; William Harden, 1904
to 1906; Anthony Edward Carrig, 1904 to 1906; Thomas
Young, 1904 to 1906; Albert Austin, 1904 to 1906; Alen Le
Breton McLaughton, 1905-6; John Brennan, 1905 to 1907;
Frederick Albert May, 1905 to 1907; Joseph Roberts, 1905
to 1907; William Patrick Mullan, 1905 to 1907; Samuel
Sandoes Bice, 1905-6; William Harden, 1906 to 1908;
Anthony Edward Carrig, 1906 to 1908; Thomas Young,
1906 to 1908; Samuel Sandoes Bice, 1906 to 1908
Tom Tottman, 1907 to 1909; Frederick Albert May,
1907 to 1909; Joseph Roberts, 1907 to 1909; Carl
August Neindorf, 1907 to 1909; William Harden, 1908
to 1910; William George limes, 1908 to 1910; Thomas


\ oung, 1908 to 1910; Aquila William Gosden, 1908 to 1910;
Tom Tottman, 1909 to 1911; Frederick Albert May, 1909
to 1911; Joseph Roberts, 1909 to 1911; Thomas Hunter,
1909 to 1911; William Harden, 1910 to 1912; William
George Innes, 1910 to 1912; Thomas Young, 1910 to 1912;
Aquila William Gosden, 1910 to 1912; Tom Tottman, 1911
to 1913; Frederick Albert May, 1911 to 1913; Joseph
Roberts, 1911 to 1913; Thomas Hunter, 1911 to 1913; Wil-
liam Harden, 1912-1914; Reginald Lewsbe Abbott, 1912 to
1914; Christopher Sharam, 1912 to 1914; Aquila William
Gosden, 1912 to 1914; Robert Disdon Omond, 1912-13; Tom
Tottman, 1913 to 1915 ; Frederick Albert May, 1913 to 1915 ;
William Allen Burke Litchfield, 1913 to 1914; Robert Dis-
bon Omond, 1913 to 1915; Thomas Hunter, 1913 to 1915;
William Harden, 1914 to 1916; William Allen Burke Litch-
field, 1914 to 1916; Christopher Sharam, 1914 to 1916;
Aquila William Gosden, 1914 to 1916; William Alfred Hes-
sion, 1915 to 1917; Frederick Albert May, 1915 to 1917;
Henry Parkinson, 1915 to 1917; Thomas Hunter, 1915 to
1917; William Harden, 1916 to 1918; Anthony Edward
Carrig, 1916 to 1918; Christopher Sharam, 1916 to 1918;
Aquila William Gosden, 1916 to 1918; Tom Tott-
man, 1917 to 1919; Herbert Loudon Young, 1917
to 1919; Leonard James Pellow, 1917 to 1919; Sydney
Allen Wills, 1917 to 1919; Thomas Hallo, 1918 to 1920;
Harold Clarence George Roberts, 1918 to 1920; John Gil-
bert Partridge, 1918-19; Christopher Sharam, 1918 to 1920;
John William Fullerton, 1918 to 1920; Frank Wallace Cop-
ley, 1919 to 1921 ; Michael Leo Edwards, 1919 to 1921 ;
Walter Thomas Mauger, 1919 to 1921 ; Joseph Roberts,
1919 to 1921; James Kirkham, 1920-21; Thomas Hallo, 1920
to 1922; Ernest Miller, 1920 to 1922; Christopher Sharam,
1920 to 1922; William Harden, Junr., 1920 to 1922; James
Kirkham, 1921 to 1923; Harold Hill, 1921 to 1923; Sydney
Allen Wills, 1921 to 1923; John William Fullerton, 1921 to
1923; Keith Henderson Hunter, 1922 to 1924; Ernest Mil-
ler, 1922 to 1924; Alfred Ernest Watkin, 1922 to 1924;
William Harden, Junr., 1922-23; James Kirkham, 1923 to
1925; Harold Hill, 1923 to 1925; Albert John Daddow, 1923
to 1925; Andrew McKnight, 1923 to 1925; Keith Henderson
Hunter, 1924 to 1926; Harold Roy Laycock, 1924-25; Wil-
liam Truss, 1924-26; George Ernest Haddy, 1924 to 1926;
Charles Kealley, 1924 to 1926; Ernest Miller, 1925-26;
James Kirkham, 1925 to 1927; Walter Thomas Mauger,
1925 to 1927: John William Fullerton, 1925 to 1927; Harold
Roy Laycock, 1925 to 1927; Tom Tottman, 1926 to 1928;
Ernest Miller. 1926 to 1928; Guy Lawson, 1926 to 1928;
Bertram Mortlock, 1926 to 1928: James Kirkham. 1927 to
1929; Albert John Daddow, 1927 to 1929: Frederick Gled-
ville Jackson, 1927 to 1929; John William Shinnick, 1927
to 1929; Howard Clarence Reiss, 1927-28: Tom Fottman,
1928 to 1930; Ernest Miller, 1928 to 1930; John George
Nowak. 1928 to 1930; Bertram Mortlock, 1928 to 1930;
William Augustine Bollmeyer, 1929 to 1931 ; Vivian Osmond
William Whiting, 1929 to 1931 ; Frederick Holmes Patter-
son, 1929 to 1931 ; Lindsay Gordon Riches, 1929-30;
Samuel Henry Bolitho, 1929 to 1931 : William Walter
George Allanson, 1930; Harry Grantham, 1930 to 1932;
James Kirkham, 1930 to 1932; Lindsay Gordon Riches, 1930
to 1932; George Ernest Haddy, 1930 to 1932.
Davenport.—Emmanuel James Holder, 1920 to 1922;
George Sutherland Smith McAuley, 1920 to 1922; George
Francis, 1920 to 1922: Herbert Richard Holds. 1920 to
1922; William Donald Maclean, 1921 to 1923; Georg'e r leg-
gett, 1920 to 1923; Thomas Henry Thomas. 1922 to 1924:
Edward Mulhall, 1922 to 1924; George Sutherland Smith
McAuley, 1922 to 1924; Norman Evan Jones, 1923 to *25;
William Bowman, 1923 to 1925; William Donald Maclean,
1923 to 1925; George Sutherland Smith McAuley, 19 4 to
1926; James Liverton Burton, 1924 to 1926; Henry J mes
Everingham Parkinson, 1924 to 1926; Norman Evan J mes,
1925 to 1927; William Donald Maclean, 1925 to 1927; ohn
James Snow, 1925 to 1927; Henry James Everington °ar-
kinson, 1926 to 1928: James Leverton Burton, 1926 to 928:
George Sutherland Smith McAuley, 1926 to 1928: C iver
James Young, 1927 to 1929; Alfred Ernest Watkin, 1927
to 1929; Norman Evan Jones, 1927 to 1929; George Si her-
land Smith McAuley, 1928 to 1930; James Liverton Bur-
ton, 1928 to 1930: Henry James Everingham Park ison,
1928 to 1930: Norman Evan Jones, 1929 to 1931 : Arc] bald
Sydney Hobby, 1929 to 1931 ; Matthew Gaunt. 1929 to 931;
Edgar Torrens Clair Higginson. 1930 to 1932; M diael
Arthur Gardiner. 1930 to 1932; George Sutherland Smith
McAuley, 1930 to 1932; Archibald Sydney Hobby, 1971-32;
Mathew Gaunt, 1931-32; Norman Evan Jones, 1931- 2.
Port Augusta West—Thomas Charles Chinnerv 1920
to 1922; L}de Vance Herbert Dighton, 1920 to 1922; imes
Thompson Tansell, 1920 to 1922; Warren Back 1921-22;


V iam Stirling Craddock, 1921 to 1923; Henry James
9 I'eath. 1921 to 1923: Edward Ernest Hanrahan, 1921
1923; Y. S. L. Sanderson, 1922 to 1924; Duncan McSpor-
ra . 1922 to 1924; \ . S. L. Sanderson, 1922 to 1924; Warren
I ck, 1922 to 1924; Sidney James Ivirwan, 1923; Howden
C ence Reiss, 1923 to 1925; Sidney James Kirwan, 1923
tc 925: Alexander Frederick Sanderson. 1923 to 1925;
V ren Back. 1924 to 1926; Duncan McSporran, 1924 to
19 5: E. V. Lethbridge, 1924 to 1926; Alexander Frederick
Sa lerson, 1925 to 1927; Sidney James Kirwan, 1925 to
1 ; Frederick Collin Dighton, 1925 to 1927: Warren Back,
19 to 1928: James Michael Beerworth. 1926 to 1928; Wil-
Brett, 1926 to 1928; Alexander Frederick Sanderson.
to 1929; Frederick Collin Dighton, 1927 to 1929; Sid-
ne James Kirwan, 1927 to 1929; Albert Harris, 1928 to
19 Lindsay Mallett Sanderson, 1928 to 1930; Warren
Bj . 1928 to 1930; Sidney James Kirwan, 1929 to 1931;
F crick Collin Dighton, 1929 to 1931 ; Alexander Frede-
rick Sanderson, 1929 to 1931 : Leslie Ruston Barber. 1930
to 1932; Timothy Patrick Mclnerney, 1930 to 1932; Warren
Back, 1930 to 1932; Joseph William Parker, 1930 to 1931;
Sidney John Seerv, 1931 ; Alexander Frederick Sanderson,
1931.
Amalgamated Councils. —Oliver James Young. 1932 to
1934; Lindsay Gordon Riches, 1932 to 1934; Lindsay Mal-
lett Sanderson, 1932 to 1934: Archibald Sydney Ruston
Hobby, 1932 to 1934; George Sutherland Smith McAulev.
1932 to 1934: William Harden, 1933 to 1935: Lucas Barkla
Coats, 1933 to 1935; Warren Back. 1933 to 1935; John Wil-
liam Fullerton, 1933 to 1935: Michael Arthur Gardiner, 1933
to 1935 ; George Ernest Haddy, 1935 to 1937: Lindsay Gor-
don Riches, 1935 to 1937; Thomas Charles Chinnery, 1935
to 1937; Archibald Sydney Ruston Hobby, 1935 to 1937:
George Sutherland Smith McAulev, 1935 to 1937: William
Barrett Holdsworth, 1936.


" ■; *11 ■'■•'.■■'.■
1 |||
; VJa ,_..
%'A ~ s V .
r— ——*—-—MM HHa^HM "
♦
4 ■' ■ %
*
't • ■• «
r «■■ -’
| ■,
*“ - ; 44ft
'
,^-
,J ? |f
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF PORT
AUGUSTA, JAMES MICHAEL BEER-
WORTH, M.P., J.P.
Born at Peterborough, 12th April,
1884, and educated at Boolcunda East
and Carrieton Public Schools. Mr.
Beerworth has given good service in
the municipality, having been Council-
lor Port Augusta West (1926), Mayor
Port Augusta West (1927 to 1929),
Mayor of Port Augusta (1932 to
1936), and 22 years a resident of
the district. He is a member of
Parliament, representing Newcastle
District, House of Assembly, a mem-
ber of the Port Augusta Hospital
Board, Patron of Quorn Jockey Club,
a member of the Committee of L.V.A.
and the H.A.C.B. Society. Business,
Licensed Victualler. Home address,
Pastoral Hotel, Port Augusta.
HERBERT RICHARD HOLDS.
(Past Mayor of Davenport.)
Born at Brierley Hill, South Staf-
fordshire, England, 12th April, 1882,
and educated at Bent Street Board
School, Brierley Hill. Mr. Holds ar-
rived in Australia on 23rd December,
1907. He served in the Davenport
Municipal Council for 104 years, 2
years of which he was Councillor and
84 years Mayor. He has been 21
years a resident of the district. Mr.
Holds is Chairman of the Davenport
Fallen Soldiers’ Memorial Hall Com-
mittee, Founder and Chairman of the
Northern Areas Vigilance Committee,
and a member of the Freemason and
R.A.0.8. Lodges. He is a Car Builder
for the Commonwealth Railways, and
his sports are football and cricket.
During Mr. Holds’ service in Council
the Electric Light Scheme for the
Town of Port Augusta was inaugu-
rated, the Wilmington Bituminous
road made, a Maternity Wing was
erected at the Hospital, Public Tele-
phones were installed, funds were
raised for the building of the Daven-
port Memorial Hall, and the foot-
paths were kerbed. Home address,
Carlton Parade, Port Augusta.
JOSEPH ROBERTS.
(Past Mayor of Port Augusta.)
Mr. Roberts served as Council!* in
the Port Augusta Corporation f om
1900 to 1911 and as Mayor of Port
Augusta from 1912 to 1924.


r
1^
_ 4MHHK
i! i»* ■ I
v ; '
. ifetr.- w ■'- - i *’~ ,i fi
'**1 i
... •
15
V ill % A-...#
■ m r*W
~ liL ' « f
j|||yyi^
iit&W i"'
* /» SP^-m^^l
t
AST COUNCILLOR A. F. SANDERSON.
(Corporation of Port Augusta.)
Mr. Sanderson was a Councillor in
ic Port Augusta West Corporation
rom 1923 to‘l 932.
J AST COUNCILLOR SYDNEY ALLEN
WILLS.
(Corporation of Port Augusta.)
W as born at Port Pirie, 25th Janu-
ary, 1880, and educated at Whinham
College, North Adelaide. He has eight
tears' service in Council, and was
twelve years a resident of Port
Vugusta. At one time Mr. W ills was
in business as an Auctioneer at Port
Augusta, and at the present time is
Manager of the Earl of Zetland Hotel,
Flinders Street, Adelaide. He is a
member of the Buffalo and Masonic
Lodges, and is a racing enthusiast
COUNCILLOR THOMAS CHARLES
CHINNERY, J.P.
(Corporation of Port Augusta.)
Born at Hindmarsh, 22nd November,
1880, and educated at Magill Public
School. Mr. Chinnery has served for
1 year in the Port Augusta Corpora-
tion, and previously was 44 years
Mayor of Port Augusta West,
and also two years Councillor.
He has been 21 years a resident of
the district. Occupation, Conductor
and Goods Checker, Commonwealth
Railways. A member of the Ancient
Order of Foresters’ Lodge, and his
sports are cricket and football. He is
ex-President of the Port Augusta
F'ootball Association and President of
Port Augusta West Cricket and Foot-
ball Clubs, and the Port Augusta West
Memorial Gardens. Home address,
Port Augusta W r est.
COUNCILLOR LINDSAY GORDON
RICHES, M P.
(Corporation of Port Augusta.)
Born at Mundalla, 18th February,
1904, and educated at Bordertown
Public School. Mr. Riches served for
7 years in Port Augusta Corporation,
and has been 12 years a resident of
the district. He is Secretary of the
Water Commission, a member of
the House of Assembly, editor of
the “Trans-Continental" Newspaper,
Committeeman on the Local Centen-
ary Celebrations Committee, and he is
also a Methodist local preacher. Busi-
ness, Newspaper Proprietor. He is a


■ ■ ■
w
*ill * "
Ipl’
member of the Masonic Lodge, and his
sports are football and tennis. Home
address, Port Augusta.
COUNCILLIOR MICHAEL ARTHUR
GARDINER.
(Corporation of Port Augusta.)
Born at Melbourne, Victoria, 6th
September, 1899, and educated at St.
Patrick’s College, East Melbourne.
Mr. Gardiner was Councillor for 2
years in the Davenport Corporation
and for 2| years in the Port Augusta
Corporation; 16 years a resident of
the district. Business, Railway Offi-
cer, Commonwealth Railway Depart-
ment. He is Secretary of the Com-
monwealth Public Service Clerical As-
sociation, Commonwealth Railways
Section. Present address, Port
Augusta.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE ERNEST
HADDY.
(Corporation of Port Augusta.)
Born at Exeter, South Australia, Ist
August, 1884, and educated at
LeFevre’s Peninsula and Alberton
Schools. Service in Council, 15
months; 20 years a resident of the
district. He was president of the Port
Augusta Sub-Branch, R.S.A., 1924-
1925, Secretary of the Port Augusta
Progress Association, 1923 to 1925:
Councillor for Newcastle on State
Council, R.S.A., 1927 to 1929: and a
member of the Port Augusta Hospital
Board from 1935 to 1936. Business,
Licensed Land Estate and General
Commission Agent. Sports, gyninas-
ium instructor, cricket, football, a id
tennis. Mr. Haddy served with the
43rd Battalion, A.1.F., abroad from
3/4/16 to 23/11/17 during the Great
War. Home address, Chappie Stre t,
Port Augusta.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM HARDEN, . r.
(Corporation of Port Augusta.)
Born at Port Augusta, 11th Mar h.
1887, and educated at Port Augusta
Public School and St. Peter’s Colie e.
Mr. Harden has served in the Coir :il
for 7 years, and been 49 years a rt si-
dent of the district. He was Chaim in
of Finance Committee for 4 ye: ‘S.
Business, Grocer. Pic is a Past Cl ef


m
jm ■"
■ 4ik> \<
,.**► ~ : -- ■■*“*■•
Ruler, Ancient Order of Foresters’
Lodge, and Secretary of the Port
Vugusta Ride Club. Home address,
Port Augusta.
North Foresters' Lodge. Home
address, Port Augusta.
Commonwealth Railways. Home ad-
dress, Port Augusta,
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM HARDEN, Snr.
(Corporation of Port Augusta.)
Born at Somerset, England, 25th
January, 1862, and educated at Bridge-
water, England. Arrived in Austra-
lia on the 11th January, 1884. Mr.
Harden has served in the Corporation
from 1894 to 1936, and has been 52
years a resident of the district. He is
a member of the Court Pride of the
COUNCILLOR ARCHIBALD SYDNEY
RUSHTON HOBBY.
(Corporation of Port Augusta.)
Mr. Hobby was Councillor of the
Devonport Corporation from 1929 to
1932, and Councillor of the Port
Augusta Corporation from 1932 to
1936. He has been 20 years a resident
of the district. Occupation, Porter,
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM THOMAS
PATRICK HILL.
(Corporation of Port Augusta.)
Mr. Hill has served in the Port
Augusta Corporation for 2 years as
Councillor and has been 20 years a
resident of the district. By occupa-
tion he is a Power House Attendant,
and his sports are running, cricket,


> . ♦
B H |8 HSU
■k
Jjgf
*iP
. Jf
f" ’
##►' ,
' i#
,g/ , JmT MSj&a.
J’ JBgto|p
JKlPii:.... ■
I r
I m
■' -•<'■ * jp* JS>“i;,' -3^HHKi.
and football. Home address, Port
Augusta.
Leading Fitter. Commonwealth Rail-
ways. Home address, Port Augusta.
sports are football and athletics. Hor
address, Port Augusta.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE SUTHERLAND
SMITH McAULEY.
(Corporation of Port Augusta.)
Mr. McAuley was Councillor for the
Devonport Corporation from 1920 to
1932, and has been Councillor for the
Port Augusta Corporation from 1932
to 1936. He has been 20 years a re-
sident of the district. Occupation,
WILLIAM HENDRIE KEER.
(Electrical Engineer, Corporation of Port
Augusta.)
Born at Glasgow, Scotland, 13th
August, 1884, and educated at Hamil-
ton Grammar School and Hamilton
Academy, N.B. Arrived in Australia,
23rd June, 1913. Mr. Keer has served
in the Port Augusta Corporation for
12 years, and was previously Council-
lor for the Brighton Council for 4
years. He has been 12 years a resident
of the district. He is a member of
the Masonic Lodge, Secretary of the
Port Augusta Swimming Club, and his
LLOYD WILLIAM ABERNETHY.
(Town Clerk, Corporation of Port August '
Born at Port Augusta West. 2:
March, 1896. and educated at Pc
Augusta West Public School. Serv
in Council, 8 years: 25 years a re
dent of the district. Mr. Abe
nethy occupied the position
Town Clerk of the Davenport Co
poration from 1928 to 1932 and 1 s
been Town Clerk of Port Angus i
since the amalgamation of these two
Corporations in 1932. He is a »


,
I / -•
I 4
> :
a member of the Port Augusta Hos-
pital Board. Home address, Port
Augusta.
F. C. V. SANDERSON.
(First Town Clerk, Corporation of Port
Augusta West.)
Mr. Sanderson was the first I own
Clerk for Port Augusta West Corpora-
tion. and held office for about 24 years.




Corporation of Port Lincoln


History of Port Lincoln
Port Lincoln was discovered in 1802 by Captain
Matthew Flinders, who named it in memory of his native
county in England—Lincoln.
Port Lincoln is the principal seaport town of Eyre
Peninsula. It has a magnificent harbour on the western
side of Boston Bay, and guarded from the ocean by Boston
Island. It is a favourite holiday resort, and there is direct
steamship communication with I 3 ort Adelaide. On Stam-
ford Hill, which overlooks the town, there is an obelisk
erected by I>ady Franklin to the memory of her husband,
Sir John Franklin, the Arctic explorer, and Captain
Flinders, who was his captain, he then being a midshipman
on the “Investigator” when that ship first came to Aus-
tralian waters. No one ever goes to Port Lincoln without
inspecting this memorial or seeing the Flinders plate,
placed under a large, bushy tree at Memory Cove, com-
memorating the Cove as the place where," through the
unfortunate wreck of the cutter, the very sad calamity
occurred of the loss of the mate, Mr. Thistle, who, with
Captain Flinders, had previously explored many unknown
regions. One of the midshipmen, Mr. Taylor, and six
sailors of the “Investigator” also lost their lives.
During recent years Port Lincoln has become a very
important town in this State, on account of its commercial
progress and its numerous attractions for tourists.
Port Lincoln was proclaimed a municipality in 1921:
since then the town assessment has grown from £11.381
to £107,000. The population is now 3,200.
The town has a first-class water supply from the Tod
Reservoir. The Tod has a capacity of 2,500,000,000 gallons.
Water from this reservoir is reticulated extensively over
Eyre Peninsula, there being 915 miles of trunk and subsi-
diary mains.
This port is really the commercial pivot for the whole
of Eyre Peninsula, which has an area of 15,000,000 acres.
Only a small portion of the land suitable for cultivation
has so far been cleared; but even now this peninsula pro-
duces one-third of the wheat grown in South Australia.
The chief agricultural pursuits are wheat, wool, butter,
eggs, barley, lambs, pigs. In 1931-32, 10,530,842 bushels
of wheat were grown, and in 1933-34 the Peninsula pro-
duced 8,874,004 pounds of wool.
1 he agricultural and commercial requirements of Evre
Peninsula are maintained by local industries in Port
Lincoln, which, briefly, are as under.
RAILWAYS.
Ihe Eyre Peninsula system is a 3 ft. 6 in. gauge; it
has 476 miles 16 chains of line, and employs 360 men, and
is controlled by the the Divisional Superintendent at Port
Lincoln,
THE WESTERN WATER DISTRICT (THE TO
SCHEME)
Is controlled by the Engineer at Port Lincoln. r us
scheme is considered to be the largest of its kind in he
Southern Hemisphere.
THE POSTAL DEPARTMENT.
The Poit Lincoln Post Office Staff handles appr xi-
mate 1 \ 84,000 bags of mail and 10,400 private bags >er
year. In 1925, there were two mails each way to Adel de
per week. Now there are eight mails each way.
CRESCO FERTILIZERS LIMITED.
This progressive firm established local works in 1
and business increased to such an extent that the w ks
were extended in 1928, and again in 1930.
This industry has been of great importance to he
farming areas of Eyre Peninsula, and reduced the cos of
super to the farmers. The works have also been of on-
siderable value to Port Lincoln itself.
PORT LINCOLN FREEZING WORKS.
These works were established in 1924, at a cost of
£BO,OOO, but for various reasons the company which lilt
the works went into liquidation in 1927. "in 1929 he
Government 1 loduce Department took over the works.
In 1930, 5,107 lambs were frozen for export, bu in


1935 the figures had improved to 51,393.
The works also handles pigs, ice, fish curing, by-
products and small goods, manure, eic, and also supplies
Port Lincoln with electric light and power.
Cold storage is also available at the works, which
are in continuous operation for 24 hours per day.
LIST OF MAYORS, COUNCILLORS, Etc., AS AT
JANUARY, 193 G.
MAYORS.
S. Shepherd—August 3, 1921, to November, 1923.
V. Leech —December, 1923, to November, 1928.
). O. W bait —December, 1928, to November, 1933.
R. F. Poole—December, 1933, to present.
COUNCILLORS.
F. D. Swaffer —Tod Ward, Aug. 3, 1921, to Nov., 1922.
A R. Walter —Tod Ward, Aug. 3, 1921, to Nov., 1923.
\ Garrett —Boston Ward, Aug. 3, 1921, to Nov., 1923.
\. G. Laidlaw —Boston Ward, Aug. 3, 1921, to Nov., 1922.
W. Hartley—Flinders Ward, Aug. 3, 1921, to Nov., 1922.
D. R. Mvers —Flinders Ward, Aug. 3, 1921, to Nov., 1923.
\. Leech —Kirton \\ ard, Aug. 3, 1921, to Nov., 1923.
j. H. Dennis —Kirton Ward, Aug. 3, 1921, to Nov., 1932.
H. Dennis —Flinders W'ard, Dec., 1922, to Nov., 192 G.
H. P. Taylor—Tod W'ard, Dec. 1922, to Nov., 1925.
S. J. Dollard —Boston Ward, Dec., 1922, to Nov., 1926.
S. J. Dollard —Boston Ward, Dec., 1928, to July, 1932.
F. j. Peters —Kirton Ward, Dec., 1922, to Nov., 1924.
H. L. Van Heythuson —Tod Ward, Dec., 1923, to March,
1924.
D. O. Whait —Boston W'ard, Dec., 1923, to Nov.. 1925.
D. C. Dearman —Flinders Ward, Dec., 1923, to Nova, 1924.
R. E. Shaw —Kirton Ward, Dec., 1923, to Nov., 1925.
Thos. Burke—Tod WAard, March, 1924, to Nov., 1927.
F. B. Puckridge-—Flinders Ward, Dec., 1924, to Feb., 1929.
J. D. Ettridge—Kirton Ward, Dec., 1924, to Nov., 1928.
W. E. T. Leighton—Tod Ward, Dec., 1925, to Nov., 192G
T. B. Aveling—Boston Ward, Dec., 1925, to March, 1927.
T. B. Aveling—Flinders Ward, Feb., 1929, to present,
j. WA Mundy—Kirton Ward, Dec., 1925, to July, 1926.
i I. H. Shepherd—Kirton Ward, July, 1926, to Nov., 1927.
C. T. WA Bartlett —Tod Ward, Dec., 1926, to Nov., 1930.
H. WA ]Mercy—Boston Ward, Dec., 1926, to Nov., 1928.
WA F. B. Basford —Flinders Ward, Dec., 1926, to Nov.,
1928.
F. Shiphard—Boston Ward, March, 1927, to Nov., 192 i.
H. D. Ikin—Tod Ward, Dec, 1927, to Nov, 1929.
A. E. H. Trudgeon —Boston Ward, Dec, 1927, to beb,
1929.
A. S. Crawford —Kirton W'ard, Dec, 1927, to Nov, 1929.
N. E. Oswald—Flinders Ward, Dec, 1928, to Nov, 1930.
R. F. Poole —Kirton Ward, Dec, 1928, to Nov, 1931.
R. F. Poole —Boston Ward, July, 1932, to Nov, 1932.
M. A. Cronin —Boston Ward, Feb, 1929, to May, 1930.
A. E. J. Ridgway —Tod Ward, Dec, 1929, to present.
P. M. Mclntosh- —Kirton Ward, Dec, 1929, to Oct, 1930.
P. C. L. Wilkinson —Boston Ward, May, 1930, to Nov.,
1933.
E. A. Broadbent —Tod Ward, Dec, 1930, to Nov, 1933.
WA L. G. Hill—Flinders Ward, Dec, 1930, to Nov, 1932.
WA C. Stagg—Kirton Ward, Dec, 1930, to Nov, 1932.
A. T. Green —Kirton Ward, Dec, 1931, to Nov, 1933.
WA K. Robertson —Boston Ward, Dec, 1932, to June, 1935
V. R. Mitton —-Flinders Ward, Dec, 1932, to present.
F. WA R. Fill —Kirton Ward, Dec, 1932, to June, 1935.
F. G. WA Payze —Tod Ward, Dec, 1933, to present.
WA A. Trigg—Boston Ward, Dec, 1933, to present.
J. W. Goulter —Kirton Ward, Dec, 1933, to July, 1935.
W. A. Brown —Boston Ward, July 1, 1935, to July 12, 1935.
P. ]. Gibson —-Kirton Ward, July, 1935, to present.
H. H. Bascombe —Boston Ward, Aug, 1935, to present.
F. WA Modra —Kirton Ward, Aug, 1935, to present.
LIST OF TOW'N CLERKS.
A. E. Hassell —Aug. 3rd, 1921, to Oct. Ist, 1922.
R. J. Mills—Oct. Ist, 1922, to May, 1928.
F. E. Sharley—June, 1928, to present.
LIST OF AUDITORS.
D. St. J. Seddon —Aug. 3rd, 1921, to Nov, 1922.
H. P. Taylor—Aug. 3rd, 1921, to Nov, 1922.
N. V. Jacobs —Dec, 1922, to Nov, 1928.
A. H. Taylor—Dec, 1922, to Nov, 1928.
N. V. Jacobs —Dec, 1928, to present.


* ' ■
•<‘ I I
I '
t ?.
■
?
fr5i
mv ■msar %*. j ■9M
*. i(
Jfn
*%<■"■. 4 ' -m.
m
| -f R
■
I
■»• * IE #jWL
j£t, ,» . , .
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR, RICHARD
FRANCIS POOLE.
(Corporation of Port Lincoln.)
Born at Melbourne, 19th August,
1886, and educated at Millicent S.A.;
6 years’ service in Council; 9 years
a resident of the district. Mr. Poole
has been Chairman of the Port Lincoln
Centenary Committee, Patron of the
Cycle Club, and President of the Life
Saving and Yacht Clubs. Business,
Motor Garage Proprietor. He is a
member of the Masonic and Buffalo
Lodges, and his sports are fishing,
boating, football, and bowls. Home
address, Queen Street, Port Lincoln.
COUNCILLOR FREDERICK GEORGE
WALTER PAYZE.
(Corporation of Port Lincoln.)
Born at Eastwood, Bth January,
1884, and educated Sturt Street, Park-
side, and Pulteney Street Schools. Mr.
Payze was 2 years a Councillor for
Kadina Corporation, has been 2-J years
in Pt. Lincoln Corporation, and 5 years
a resident of Port Lincoln. Business,
Managing Director, Lincoln Springs
Spa Waters Co., Ltd. Secretary of
O. T. Rodda, Kadina, 1915-20; Mana-
ger Ecks (S.A.) Ltd., 1920-24; Sec-
retary Rodda Stevens, Ltd., 1924-27;
Secretary McMillan Motors, 1927-
30; Hon. Secretary Port Lincoln Boys'
Club. Member of the Masonic Lodge.
Sports, bowls. Vice-President of the
Port Lincoln Life Saving Club, and
Port Lincoln Cycling and Yacht Clubs.
Home address, Port Lincoln.
COUNCILLOR HERBERT H.
BASCOMBE.
(Corporation of Port Lincoln.)
Born at Port Lincoln, 12th Decem-
ber, 1892, and educated at Port L n-
coln Primary School; 40 years a resi-
dent of the district. He was secret rv
of the Waterside Workers' Un n,
1920-23, Secretary of the Port Lincoln
Boy Scouts' Association, and a buil el-
and contractor, 1918-32. Present b si-
ness, Ironworker, S.A. Railways. le
pioneered the erection of rain w; ter
catchment sheds on Eyre's Peninsula,
commencing at Yaninee in 1913.
Mr. Bascombe assisted in the con-
struction of the following hotel
Port Lincoln, Pier, Great Northern,
Grand, and hotels at Tumby Bav, A-no
Bay, Franklin Harbour, Cumn ns,
Yeelana, North Shields, Wangary,
War row, and Elliston. He is a men >er
of the Buffalo and Oddfellows' Lod./es.
Sports, cricket, football, and swim-
ming. Home address, Port Lince n.


■ Site.. >x
’■'X* jfe
' % J|
J * %> - ' l|jL^
,*Zy \
I .j|| x sJ||
1 \ ,
|p jiff I || i| il||fig
; v S' i ;^^» +
% o >» xx ;Jii|ipy|
I
I
I
i x^J|
c rUNCILLOR ALBERT E. J. RIDGWAY.
(Corporation of Port Lincoln.)
Born at Salter’s Springs, 1870, and
educated at Port Lincoln Public School
ml Prince Alfred College. Service in
Council, 7 years ; 30 years a resident of
the district. Mr. Ridgway was em-
ployed on S.A. Railways for 10 years,
Manager of the Port Lincoln Chaff and
Grain Mill, and for the past 14 years
has been with the S.A. Farmers’ Co-
operative I nion. Sports, 8 years
starter and 10 years judge for the
Port Lincoln Racing Club, 8 years Sec-
retary of the Football Association, and
associated with other sporting bodies
in the town. Home address, Port Lin-
coln.
COUNCILLOR W. ARTHUR TRIGG.
(Corporation of Port Lincoln.)
Born at Strathalbyn, 12th March,
1882, and educated at Broken Hill.
Mr. Trigg has served in the Council
for 3 years and been a resident of Port
Lincoln for 6 years. Previously he
resided in the Cummins district for
16 years. He is Vice-President of
Port Lincoln Life Savers, commis-
sioner Football Disputes Committee,
Methodist Local Preacher, Bandsman,
Town Band, member of several Coun-
cil Committees, and the Primary
School Committee. Business, Carpen-
ter, S.A. Railways; 38 years a member
of the Rechabite Lodge. His sports
are football, cricket, and tennis.
Home address, Port Lincoln.
COUNCILLOR TOM BERTRAND
AVELING.
(Corporation of Port Lincoln.)
Born at North Adelaide. July, 1880,
and educated at the East Adelaide.
Ouorn, Norwood, and Glenelg Public
Schools. He has been 9 years Council-
lor of the Port Lincoln Corporation
and 5 years of the Quorn Corporation,
and 12 years a resident of the district
Business, Engine Fitter, S.A. Rail-
ways. Thirty years a member of the
U.A.O.D. Lodge. Sports, bowls. Mr.
Aveling served 4 years abroad with
the A.I.F. Home address. Port Lincoln.
COUNCILLOR VICTOR ROBERT
MITTON.
(Corporation of Port Lincoln.)
Born at Coburg, Victoria, 18th De
cember, 1889, and educated at Nor


‘ BlBI
War
Iill
’ a V
I
wood Public School, S.A. School of
Mines, and University of Adelaide ; 5
years' service in Council; Chairman of
the Finance Committee ; 9 years a resi-
dent of the district. He is Secretary of
the Port Lincoln Primary School Com-
mittee, Vice-President of the Boy
Scouts' Society, Port Lincoln Branch,
Secretary of the Baptist Church.
Business, Works Manager, Cresco
Fertilizers, Ltd. Member of the Inde-
pendent Order of Rechabites, also Past
Chief Ruler and Trustee. His sport
is tennis. Councillor Mitton is
keenly interested in town development.
He considers extensive tree planting
is essential. He was connected with
the building of three public halls at
Port Lincoln. He assisted to establish
a new industry in the Town of Port
Lincoln in the erection and manage-
merit of superphosphate works. Home
address, Port Lincoln.
COUNCILLOR PERCIVAL JOHN
GIBSON.
(Corporation of Port Lincoln.)
Born at Adelaide, 10th February,
1902, and educated at Kadina Primary
School and Wallaroo School of Mines.
He was elected to the Council
in July, 1935; and has been 13
years a resident of the dis-
trict. He is Captain of the Life Saving'
Club, Vice-President of Port Lincoln
Band, Foreman of the Auxiliary Fire
Brigade, Town Bandsman, past Secre-
tary Kirton Point Progressive Asso-
ciation, past Secretary of the Cycling
Club, and Auditor of the Port Lincoln
Homing Club. Business, Electrical
Engineer. He is a member of the
Masonic Lodge, No. 45, S.A.C. Sports
swimming and homing pigeons. Home
address, Port Lincoln.
COUNCILLOR FREDRICK W. I )DRA
(Corporation of Port Lincoln
Was born at Sheoak Log, S. . Sep-
tember, 1893, and educated the e. He
has 8 months’ service in Conn 1, and
has been 8 years a resident af the
district. Business, Wharf ai Jettv
Builder. His sports are cyclin , foot-
ball, and chess. He is Hon. Se retarv
A olunteer Ambulance and of th Chess
Club, Handicapper to the local vcling
Club and Committeeman. H ne ad-
dress, Port Lincoln.
TOWN CLERK, FRANK ERL ST
SHARLEY.
(Corporation of Port Lincol )
Born at Prospect, 25th Apr 1896,


fS
*WW
}M:- j£J»
I KsaMlMBFi
an educated at Peterborough Primary
and High Schools. Mr. Sharley has
been Town Clerk for 8 years, pre-
vic sly being for 3J years District
Clerk and Overseer, Terowie District
Council, and 3J years Town Clerk,
Peterborough Corporation. He is a
member of the Rechabite Lodge, Sec-
retary of the Port Lincoln Tourists'
Committee, Treasurer of the Port Lin-
coln Centenary Celebrations, Vice-
President of the Port Lincoln Sub-
Branch R.S.A., and a member of the
Board of Management. Plis sports are
cricket, football, tennis, and golf. Pie
is Captain of the Kirton Point Tennis
Club and served for four years abroad
with the 11th Light Horse Reg., A.I.F.
ASSISTANT TOWN CLERK, RAYMOND
ROBERT MURRAY.
(Corporation of Port Lincoln.)
Born at Poonindie, sth October,
1913, and educated at Poonindie, Port
Lincoln, and Cowandilla Primary
Schools, and Port Lincoln High School.
Mr. Murray has served in the Port
Lincoln Corporation for 5 years, and
has been a resident of the district for
15 years. In the year 1931 he was
Head Prefect, and Captain of the
School Eleven, Port Lincoln High
School. His sports are tennis, golf,
and swimming. Home address is
Liverpool Street, Port Lincoln.
COUNCILLOR ALBERT KENT
MULLNER.
(Corporation of Port Lincoln.)
Mr. Milliner was born at Maitland.
25th October, 1898, and educated at
the Maitland Public School and Prince
Alfred College. He was elected Coun-
cillor on 4th July, 1936, and in busi-
ness is a Storekeeper. He is a member
of the Freemasons' Lodge, and his
sports are cricket, tennis, golf, bowls,
and football. His home address is
Tasman Terrace, Port Lincoln.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM SIMES.
(Corporation of Port Lincoln.)
Mr. Simes was born at Port Lincoln,
14th June, 1866. and educated at the
Port Lincoln Private Roman Catholic
School. He was elected Councillor for
the Corporation on 4th July, 1936, and
was previously a member of the Dis-
trict Council of Lincoln for 12 years.
Mr. Simes was a member of the Big-
Swamp Agricultural Bureau for 20
years, 3 of which he was Chairman,
a member of the Port Lincoln Show
Committee for 6 years, and the Race


Club for 8 years, and also Chairman
of the Big Swamp Red Cross Com-
mittee during* the war. He was
farming in and around the district of
Port Lincoln for over 40 years, and is
now retired. His sports are bowls and
racing, and his home address is New
West Road, Port Lincoln.


jfe £ , II * m yh *
IP ,/|w * v i i £ j J
..„y “ < ' y
Corporation of Port Pine
TOWN HALL, PORT PIRIE.


4 '• t&'Ji l ' ' % ,f
miamm* yy *&,. if# »»- fc. i IKS 1 ***- / *VS
ISBP *j* : k ’ .#■■.•£ Ja -»<►- / X I .. ' JB
'**•JI5* 1 r * S "*B|
. _ fB5Q lw*£ FjSBM
History of Port Pirie
The Corporation of the Town of Port Pirie celebrates
its Diamond Jubilee in September, 1936, having been pro-
claimed a municipality on September 28th, 1876, just 40
creek for this purpose —the "John Pirie" (Captain Thomp-
son). The "John Pirie" was a schooner of 120 tons and
was the third vessel to arrive at Kangaroo Island under
PIONEERS OF PORT PIRIE, 1874.
Capt. R. B. Williams, F. Grey, W. Wood, J. Wood, M. McEwen, N. Simons, S. Wills, A. Callaway
G. Milbank, W. H. Rose.
years after the birth of the State of South Australia.
Over 30 years before, however, the creek which now
provides berths for deep-sea ships, was used for shipping
sheep and wool from surrounding sheep stations, and the
town derived it name from the first vessel to enter the
charter to the South Australian Company. She v s for-
merly owned by Mr. John Pirie, an alderman of the ondon
Corporation (afterwards Sir John), who was a i ember
of the original board of directors to the South Au ralian
Company, which did so much to colonize South Australia.


- —■ « <n i i 1
||P
Pre ire of work compelled him to resign his seat when
he > s elected Lord Mayor of London. The schooner
"] Pirie" left England on February 22nd, 1836, having
or ard besides the officers and crew 28 labouring men,
a" 1 head of live stock, and general stores and provisions.
SI 1 not arrive in South Australian waters until the
MR. HENRY WARREN.
(First Mayor of Port Pirie, 1876.)
middle of the following August, and some years later ran
ashore three miles from Victor Harbour.
For many years after its discovery the place remained
one of the most primitive spots on the South Australian
coast, and its present status was achieved only by the
big expenditure of public money in dredging the harbour
and reclaiming the land abutting on the creek. So trouble-
some was the tidal inundation in the early days that the
original buildings were constructed on piles, and residents
were frequently compelled to boat from place to place.
The first dwelling was a hut occupied by a man who
acted as caretaker of three wool stores erected by pioneer
pastoralists—the Bowman Bros. (Crystal Brook run), Mr.
H. B. Hughes (Booyoolee Station, near Gladstone), and
the Reicl Bros. (Beetaloo Station). The wool was lightered
to sailing vessels lying eight miles outside the creek bv
a ten-ton cutter (Captain Denman) from a primitive three-
plank jetty.
MR. W. G. WILSON.
(Town Clerk, 1884-1915.)
The first steamer to enter the creek was the little
Euro, which was afterwards wrecked, and which must not
be confounded with the tug Euro which did duty in the
port at a later date. At times the jetty referred to was
completely submerged by exceptionally high tides, and the
late Mrs. G. W. Cameron, of Murray town, told how she
and others had to be carried ashore by sailors when she
visited Port Pirie in 1852 in the “Lady Harvey.”
The late Mr. Nicholas Simons was one of the earliest
pioneers, and when he went there to build a store, and a
boatman showed him the site for the building by jabbing
an oar down at a spot covered by 2 ft. of water, he was
bewildered.


I
'
_,.A* ' .-v,v;^W
ELLEN STREET LOOKING NORTH, 1877.
The natural features of the place were so discouraging
that when, in 1873, the Railway Bill was before Parlia-
ment the terminus of the line was left an open question,
and the measure was entitled: —"A line of railway to Port
Pirie or Mount Ferguson." A Select Committee in-
vestigated the question, and among those who gave evi-
dence were Messrs. Henry Warren (Pirie's first Mayor)
and Oliver Horner (a prominent business man of the day).
The elimination of Mount Ferguson from the title of the
Bill was secured on its third reading in the Legislative
Council. Gladstone was decided upon as the connecting-
link. The difficulty of procuring the passage of the Bill
in its altered form was no doubt due to the fact that the
land about Mount Ferguson had been eagerly bought up
by speculators in anticipation of the railway going there.
The original site of the township of Port Pirie is where
Solomontown now stands. Before Messrs. Bowman Bros,
purchased the Crystal Brook sheep station it was owned
by William Younghusband and Peter Ferguson, after
whom, it is understood, Mount Ferguson was named. In
1848 they sold 85 acres of their run in the neighbourhood
of the Pirie Creek to Messrs. Matthew Smith, S.M., and
Emmanuel Solomon, for £B5. That was Section 2, and it
was surveyed by Mr. J, Young on May 23, 1848. In
the same year, on November 6, Nathaniel Hailes sold a
big slice of the new township at his auction mart, Ade-
laide, the price paid being an average of £lO per acre.
Solomontown was named after Emmanuel Solomon, who
came to Adelaide from Sydney in 1837, and was one of the
former’s most successful merchants. He reserved a piece
of land in the centre of Solomontown —it is now owned
by the Methodist Church, and is known as the “( hurch
Circle” —for the erection of a Jewish synagogue, but it
was never claimed for that sect, and on his death it was
found that his will offered the land to the first religious
body which desired to erect a church on it. Advantage
was taken of the provision by the Bide Christians, who
had an old church of theirs removed from another coun-
try centre to the site. Later, with the fusion of the
denominations, it became the property of the Methodist
Church.
In 1873 Mr. H. M. Addison re-surveyed Solomontown
into allotments, which were offered by auction on the 18th
June, 1873.
THE GOVERNMENT SURVEY.
The Government Town of Port Pirie was sun yed in
December, 1871. and gazetted in 1872, the first la d sale
being held in August of that year. It was laid oton a
ELLEN STREET LOOKING NORTH, 1936.


i
BARRIER WHARF IN THE EIGHTIES.
novel design—curved streets —by Charles Hope Harris, and
the main thoroughfares were named after the family of
Mr. .W. Goyder, Surveyor-General.
The town was incorporated on September 28th, 1876,
and. as before stated, Mr. Henry Warren (who came to
Port Pirie to manage Magarey’s Mill, corner Ellen and
George Streets) was the town’s first Mayor.
SUCCESSIVE MAYORS.
Mr. Warren held the position of Chief Magistrate until
1879, and was followed by Mr. William Wood (1880-1).
The succeeding Mayors, up till the present time (1936),
have been: —Messrs. William Goode, 1882-3: J. L. Coombe,
1883-4; Fred Grey, 1885 ; J. C. Harris, 1886; Thomas Magor,
1887: J. Gordon, June, 1888: T. C. Simpson, 1888-9-90; A.
A. Pearce, 1891-2; Charles Geddes, 1893-4; J. C. Haslam,
1895-6-7; G. F. Claridge, 1898-9: L. J. Wilcher, 1900-1;
Fred Grey, 1902-3: L. J. Wilcher, 1904; M. L. Warren,
1905; M. C. Copinger, 1906-7; M. L. Warren, 1908-9; W.
Morrow, 1910-11: H. C. Afford, 1912-13; C. A. Degenhardt,
1913-14; J. S. Geddes, 1915-16; A. B. Forgan, 1917-18, up
to April, 1919: M. E. Goode, May, 1919: J. S. Geddes, 1919-
20; J. Firmin Jenkins, 1920-2; j. C. Fitzgerald, 1922-4; J.
S. Geddes, 1924-5; J. C. Fitzgerald, 1925-6; C. A. Degen
hardt, 1928-9; M. M. B. Middleton, 1930-1 ; W. H. Thread-
gold, 1932-6. The municipality, when first established,
consisted of two Wards, with two Councillors for each
Ward. The personnel of the first Council was Messrs. R.
Cell, J. McDonald, T. U. Scrutton, and William Wood. Mr.
Richard Prentice was appointed Town Clerk in Januaiy,
1877, but he died in 1879, and Mr. Edwin Goodall was ap-
pointed in his place. In 1884 the late Mr. W. (j. Wilson
rook over the duties, and continued to occupy the posi-
tion up till the appointment (in 1915) of Mr. E. E. Garrett,
who at present holds the office.
It is thus fitting that the town should combine the
commemoration of its own Diamond Jubilee with the
Centenary Celebrations of the State.
To-day Port Pirie is a shipping port known the world
over. Its situation in the northern portion of that fine
extension of the Southern Ocean, Spencer’s Gulf, extend-
ing some 300 miles into the interior of Australia, and thus
becoming the natural port for all the Broken Hill exports
and imports has ensured its progress during the sixty years
of its history. It now becomes a break of gauge station
on the East to West Transcontinental line by the complet-
BARRIER WHARF, 1936.


? —-ri
»
tion of the Red Hill-Port Augusta section, so that we may
look for further progress in the future.
_ Like most country centres, the Public Hall in Port
i 1 i e was built portion at a time as the town grew—
renovation was re-openecl as the Town Hall and Municipal
Offices. The Institute Library, which had previously occu-
pied a large portion of the building, was housed next door
in a fine new building on land procured from the Harbours
FIRST LOAD OF ORE FROM BROKEN HILL BY ROAD, 1885.
under the administration of the Institute Committee, and
until four years ag'o the buildings remained the property
of that body, although the Town Council administered the
building fund as trustees of same and occupied a room as a
combined office and Council Chamber.
After some years of negotiation agreement was
reached in 1932, when the whole block was purchased by
the Corporation, and after extensive improvement and
Board for the purpose, at a cost of over £5,000.
The purchase money provided by the Council (i >proxi-
mately £lO,OOO cash) was obtained from a fund milt up
from the profits of the Council's Electricity Work in the
form of a sinking fund, which was thus used to nay to
the ratepayers of the town former lighting rates sed as
capital in the trading concern.
PORT PIRIE AND GLADSTONE RAILWAY—TURNING THE FIRST SOD THE FIRST ENGINF
WAS RUN OVER THE LINE IN 1876.


! n
I
-' , -"-■“—•.— ; -t z:.. " ■-*■?.— _ .’-■ ~'^~~~r rz ~"' rX ' - ** *
„^ >i ; , ~ . _ .,,,...,*
-. — ■ . ~.r,r .^y^*
MEMORABLE INCIDENTS,
a 1876 the first Sunday School was opened by the late
Mr. • B. Baldock, and the first weekly newspaper, the
“Po Pirie Gazette and Areas News,” was published.
he first vestry book shows that the Rev. Hartley
1876, it was announced that service would be conducted at
the "usual place" on the following Sunday (April 16th,
1876), and Mr. Baldock stated that the "usual place" re-
ferred to Was the bottling department of a wine store. A
beer barrel, covered with a cloth, served as a table, and
PORT PIRIE HARBOR AND ELLEN STREET FROM EAST SIDE OF RIVER, 1876
Williams took his first services at Port Pine on June 27th.
1875, and that there were eleven communicants. The Rev.
gentleman was known as the “Areas Missionary, and
visited the town once every three months. His residence
was at Melrose.
By advertisement in the local Gazette of April 14th,
gin cases were used as seats.
The first annual Easter Vestry meeting of St. Paul's
Church was held on Sunday, April 16th, 1876. The Yen.
Archdeacon F. T. Whitington, of Hobart, was rector of St.
Paul's front 1877 to 1880. He stated that at that time,
owing to tidal inundations, dengue fever was a frequent


! tjjj C mm d@B
visitant, and recalled an occasion when the Magistrate of
the town, the doctor, and the parsons were laid aside with
the malady.
The population of the town on April 1, 1876, was 947,
made up as follows : —Port Pirie proper, 605 ; Port Pirie
West, 210; Solomontown, 132. To-day the population is
12,000.
PIRIE’S PART IN THE GREAT WAR.
Any history of the town would be incomplete were
mention omitted of the splendid part the community played
provided with munitions. And when the French Mission
visited Port Pirie in 1918 General Pan, the leader of the
Mission, in an eloquent address, complimented the men of
Port Pirie on the manner in which they had worked, and
on the quantity of metals they had produced for the use
of the armies in the field, and he thanked them on behalf
of his Government for their efforts. And in memory
of those who fell monuments have been reared; the sub-
and prepossessing structure at the entrance to the
Memorial Oval is one, which, together with the Memorial
MEMORIAL GATES.
in the Great War —her ladies in Red Cross work, Comforts
Fund, and other activities; her sons (2,500 of the enlist-
ments were at Port Pirie) on the battlefields of the various
countries. Her sacrifices were great, her losses heavy;
230 of her brave boys laid down their lives for their coun-
try. One of our oldest and most respected residents
(Lieut.-Col. A. A. Pearce, V.D.) lost three of his sons—
Max, Sid, and Alec. Again, in regard to munitions manu-
facture, it is to the infinite credit of the town's industrial
section that not for one hour during those dark days did
the employees of yonder Smelting Works relax effort day
or night so that the Empire and its Allies might he amply
Grandstand, makes a very fine memorial indeed. Anc ler
is that placed in the Memorial Park by the local Foresters'
Lodge; while yet a third is that wreath-croWned obeusk
erected to the memory of the fallen by the women of Port
Pirie. The Local Board of the R.S.S.I.L.A. has used the
Memorial Grandstand for its monthly meetings since ! 27,
but has now acquired a lease of suitable rooms at the T wn
Hall as headquarters.
Ihe Port Pirie Hospital is a very fine institu on,
situated in the very heart of the town, with a his ory
covering forty-five years, commencing under the superin-
tendency of Dr. Stewart in 189E Although the vai ous


/ • v 'l
bu dings have been added from time to time according to
ret drements without any previous layout, the whole group
to, ther Avith up-to-date equipment provides excellent ac-
co modation for both patients and nursing staff. Dr. L.
G. assie is the present Superintendent, and has held the
pc ion for many years.
Port Pirie had a most unique and unenviable ex-
j nee in August, 1934, when a large section of the town
me flooded by a tidal wave that overfloAA r ed the pro-
t ng embankments and did an immense amount of dam-
FORMER MEMBERS OF PORT PIRIE
CORPORATION.
MAYORS.
H. Warren, 1876-7-8-9; W. Wood, 1880-1; W. Goode,
1882-3; J. L. Coombe, 1883-4; F. Grey, 1885; J. C. Harris,
1886; T. Magor, 1887; J. Gordon, 1888 (June) ; T. C. Simp-
son, 1888-9-90; A. A. Pearce, 1891-2; C. Geddes, 1893-4;
J. C. Haslam, 1895-6-7; G. F. Claridge, 1898-9; L. J. Wilcher,
1901, 1904; F. Grey, 1902-3; M. L. Warren, 1905, 1908, 1908;
FEDERAL WHARF, PORT PIRIE—SHIPPING.
age to property, leaving many families homeless. Unfor-
tunately, the lives of two children Avere lost as a result of
hurried exit from the flooded homes in the darkness.
It was a terrible experience for all concerned, but the
circumstances A\ r ere greatly relieved by the wonderful
response to the appeal made for assistance for the unfoi-
tunate families. The whole of the State and many from
outside the State responded nobly, and provided a fund of
over £20,000, which was paid to those affected to assist
in restoring their homes. In addition, the Federal and
State Governments provided £6,000, which has enabled the
Council to rebuild and enlarge the embankments and thus
prevent a recurrence of such a disaster.
M. C. Copinger, 1906-7; W. Morrow, 1910-11 ; H. C. Afford,
1912-13; C. A. Degenhardt, 1913-14; J. S. Geddes, 1915-16;
A. B. Forgan, 1917-18 (April, 1919); M. E. Goode, 1919
(May); J. S. Geddes, 1919-20: J. F. Jenkins, 1921; J. C.
Fitzgerald, 1922-3; J. S. Geddes, 1924; J. C. Fitzgerald,
1925-6-7; C. A. Degenhardt, 1928-9; M. M. B. Middleton,
1930-1 ; W. H. Threadgold, 1932-6.
ALDERMEN.
C. A. Degenhardt, S. Cockburn, D. R. Gummow, \\ .
Robinette, E. J. Pavlich, H. W. Goode, W. Munro, F. C.
Daws, H. W. Threadgold, R. O. Bottrall, J. C. Fitzgerald,
C. L. Davis, H. Watts.


MwiwrWWft TSBj
COUNCILLORS.
North Ward.—T. U. Scrutton, R. Cell, A. Dungey, T.
Magor, J. Mansom, J. B. Warren, M. Walsh, W. H. Skewes,
W. H. Campbell, M. M. B. Middleton, W. L. Blight, W. H.
Ede, W. Stuart, C. Herbert, W. Morrow, M. L. Warren,
A. B. Forgan, A. G. Palmer. J. R. Amery, W. B. McDonald,
W. Goode, R. J. Walsh, G. Bushell, J. F. Millhouse, F. T.
West Ward. —T. C. S. Anthony, R. Slater, J. Whitelaw
S. G. Pearce, J. C. Fitzgerald, A. E. South, R. G. Symonds
H. C. Warren, E. J. Pavlich, C. Fort, J. Gordon, J. Forsaith
G. Radford, S. Targett, J. Bunny, M. L. Warren, W
Symonds, S. Cockburn, W. Robinette, F. C. Crocker, W
Besanko, J. G. Lewis, J. Kerison, A. E. Roberts, A. J,
Parker, S. Mcßeath, F. Grey, T. R. Taylor, A. W. Lacev,
COUNCIL CHAMBER, PORT PIRIE.
Bond, M. E. Goode, J. F. Jenkins, H. C. Afford, J. S. Geddes,
k. C. Daws, G. H. Sharpe, A. Sjostrom, L. W. Whittard, A.
W. Lacey, A. E. Matters.
South Ward R. McDonald, W. Wood, T. Coombe,
W. James, J. C. Harris, R. G. Symonds, W. F. Wells, H.
C- Afford, H. W. Goode, G. Dey, R. O. Bottrall, W. Clark,
h. C. Crooker, H. Brest, J. Weidenbach, A. E. Brett, W.
Goode, W. T. Gunnell, D. Mclntyre, j. S. Geddes, M. L.
Warren, F. Grey, C. D. Manner, T. B. Newbold, J. G. Lewis,
L. J. Wilcher, M. C. Copinger, J. E. Millhouse, T. Y. Free-
man, LI. M. Pimlott, E. J. Francis, H. j. Cattle, A. H. L.
Goode, A. K. Jeanes.
D. R. Gummow, W. P. Coffey, E. Tapp, P. A. Malon .R.
N. Lewis, D. E. Johnson.
Solomontown Ward. —T. U. Scrutton, K. W. D can,
C. Geddes, T. Conley, J. S. Campbell, D. A. Cror . J.
Ramsey, C. A. Degenhardt, W. P. Coffey, T. C. Sir >son.
W. H. Threadgolcl, W. Munro, W. Little. E. J. Had rick,
A. J. Edmunds, F. T. Bond, F. F. DeSilver, H. Ja :son,
T. Y. Freeman, A. L. Munro, L. A. Hopkins, W. .P-
Nicholas, G. Coleman, E. Roebuck, A. R. Ewens, A. R ssell,
D. L. Forgan, W. Cottle, J. G. White. A. C. Jeffre , M.
L. Warren, J. Murphy, J. S. Geddes, E. L. Mitche , H.
Munn, T. P. Coles, R. L. Forgan. C. L. Davis, J. McC rter,
H. H. Atwell, J. H. Reid.


y *' y.!'
jM BBfe^
*■ | : U • * '•* I
■V; «H|
HH ;
\ ln|HH
M
A :y
HIS /ORSHIP THE MAYOR OF PORT
PIRIE, WILLIAM HERBERT
THREADGOLD.
n at O'Halloran Hill in Decem-
ber, 885. and educated at Sturt Pub-
lic Scuool. Air. Threadgold has served
in t e Port Pirie Corporation for 15
years, 8 years of which he was Coun-
cillor, 3 years Alderman, and 4 years
Mayor. He has been a resident of the
district for 29 years, and is C hairman
of the Port Pirie High School Coun-
cil, Port Pirie Centenary Committee,
Port Pirie Playground Committee,
Port Pirie B. Grade Football Associa-
tion, the Solomontown Swimming
Club, and the Port Pirie Local Board
of Health. He is a patron of the
Port Pirie A. Grade Football Associa-
tion, Secretary of the Port Pirie
Branch Australian Railways Union for
19 years, a member of the Port Pirie
Technical School Board. Mr. Fhread-
gold has previously held the following
positions ; —Secretary of the Solomon-
town School, the Labour Day Picnic,
and St. Patrick’s Day Committees,
Chairman of the Solomontown Cricket
Club and the Port Pirie Cricket As-
sociation, and he was also Secretary
of the Australian Labour Party, Port
Pirie. Occupation, Railway Signal-
man. A member of the Druids’ and
Buffalo Lodges. Home address, 10.
Burt Street, Solomontown.
JOHN CHRISTOPHER FITZGERALD,
M.P.
(Past Mayor, Corporation of Port Pirie.)
Born at Wallaroo, 7th October, 1864,
and educated at Wallaroo and Port
Pirie. Mr. Fitzgerald served in the
Port Pirie Corporation for 11 years, 5
years of which he was Mayor, 4 years
Alderman, and 2 years Councillor, and
has been a resident of the district for
62 years. He has been a Member of
Parliament for 18 years in the House
of Assembly, and is a Past President
and life member of the Waterside
Workers' Federation. He is also a
member of the Australian Labour
Party. His sports are football, row-
ing, and running. Mr. Fitzgerald
served in the South African War
from January 16th, 1901, to May
sth, 1902. In the late eighties
he did considerable prospecting in
the Barrier Ranges, and shipped
the first load of silver and lead ore
through Port Pirie in the year 1885.
Home address, 40, Beach Road, Solo-
montown.
ALDERMAN CHARLES LEONARD
DAVIS.
(Corporation of Port Pirie.)
Born at Adelaide, February 14th,
1884, and educated at the Port Pirie
Public School. Mr. Davis has served
in the Port Pirie Corporation for 7
years, and has been a resident of the
district for 52 years. He is Presi-
dent of the Port Pirie Trades and
Labour Council, Port Pirie Labour
Party Electoral Committee, Port Pirie
Labour Day Celebration Committee,
and Northern District Labour Party
Election Committee. Past President
of the Australian Workers’ Union
(Port Pirie Section), Vice-President of
the Australian Workers’ Union (Ade-
laide Branch), and Past President of
the Federated Enginedrivers’ and
Firemen’s Association (Port Pirie
Branch). He is also a member of the
Port Pirie Hospital Board and the


'
Port Pirie High School Council. He
is a Miners' Inspector for Smelter
Employees, and his present business is
Organiser of the Australian Workers'
Union. A member of the Buffalo
Lodge, his sports are running, football,
and cricket. Home address, 163 Main
Road, Solomontown.
ALDERMAN EDWIN JAMES PAVLICH.
(Corporation of Port Pirie.)
Born at Port Adelaide, 27th July.
1863. and educated at Port Pirie Pub-
lic School. Mr. Pavlich has served
in the Port Pirie Corporation for 8
years as Councillor and 9 years as Al-
derman, and has been a resident of
the district for 62 years. He is a foun-
dation member of the first Trades
Union in Port Pirie, founded in the
year 1885, a foundation member of
Enginedrivers’ and Firemen’s Union
since 1908, and he has been President
of same several times. Mr. Pavlich
was also Federal Council Representa-
tive for 2 years, and 1 year on the
Federal Executive and a representative
of the Union in the Federal Arbitra-
tion Court in the year 1911, Past Pre-
sident of the Port Pirie Trades and
Labour Council in 1912, and the Port
Pirie Pioneers' Association. He has
retired, after 43 years' service with the
Broken Hill Proprietary Co. and
B.H.A. Smelters Pty. Co., Port Pirie.
Mr. Pavlich is a past officer in both
the Druids' and Foresters' Lodges,
and he has been a member for 53 years,
being Chairman of Trustees for 47
years in the Druids' Lodge. He has
also taken an active part in football,
cricket, baseball, and rowing in his
younger days. Home address, 40,
Young Street, Solomontown.
ALDERMAN HORACE WAT S
(Corporation of Port Pirie.)
Born at Moonta, South Austr, lia, in
the year 1889, and educated at oonta
Public School. Mr. Watts has erved
in the Port Pirie Corporation tor 4
years, and has been a resident >f the
district for 11 years. He is a i mber
of the Masonic, Druids’, and uffalo
Lodges, is a patron of the Pot Pirie
Motor Cycle Club, and the Soomon-
town Athletic Club. Mr. Wat - was
formerly a Councillor for 2 v ars in
the Moonta Corporation. Ho e ad-
dress, 18, Main Road, Solomon’ wn.
THE LATE JOHN GEORGE W LTER
KNAPMAN.
(Past Councillor, Corporation of Po Pirie. 1
The late Mr. Knapman was orn at
Port Adelaide, 19th May, 18( . and


,m -m-. . JP
| .jmmp
\ 4 '
*
I
iBliSik.
J ||k
Jpr - • ’SW^^
> Wmm%m
, 4| #»■ »
' r
*'
ucated at Whinham College North
. delaide. He served the Port Pirie
Council for many years, and was a
member of the Masonic and Buffalo
Lodges. His sport was football.
COUNCILLOR CORNELIUS JAMES
HOWLEY.
(Corporation of Port Pirie.)
Born at Orroroo, sth April, 1882, and
educated at the Orroroo Public School.
Air. Howley has served in the Port
Pirie Corporation for 2 years, and has
been a resident of the district for 33
years. He has been connected with
various sporting bodies for a number
ol years, and is a Past President and
a Committeeman of the Port Pirie
Trotting Club, also St. Patrick’s Day
Sports. Home address, Port Pirie
West.
COUNCILLOR LEONARD HAROLD
DAVIS.
(Corporation of Port Pirie.)
Born at Port Pirie, 19th January,
1907, and educated at Port Pirie High
School. Mr. Davis has served in the
Port Pirie Corporation for 12 months,
and has been a resident of the district
the whole of his life. He is Vice-
President of the Port Pirie Trades and
Labour Council, Trustee of the Aus-
tralian Labour Party (Port Pirie
Branch), and Secretary of the Port
Pirie High School Council. He is
also a member of the Manchester
Unity Oddfellows’ and Buffalo
Lodges. Mr. Davis is the youngest
Councillor to hold a seat in the Port
Pirie Council. In business he is a hit-
ter and Turner, and his sports are
football and tennis. Home address,
20, Laureat Street, Port Pirie West.
COUNCILLOR HUBERT HENRY
ATWELL.
(Corporation of Port Pirie.)
Born at Moonta, 9th September,
1890, and educated at Moonta Public
and School of Mines. Mr. Atwell has
served in the Port Pirie Corporation
for four years, and has been a resi-
dent of the District for 23 years. He
is Chairman of the Electorate Com-
mittee and School Committee, and a
member of the Technical School
Council, and the Ancient Order of


I
i m r ■
. . .
/
m > /
Foresters' Lodge. Business: Public
Servant. Home address: 3 Chain
Road, Solomontown.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE DAY
(Corporation of Port Pirie.)
Born at Mosgiel, New Zealand. 30th
September, 1882, and educated at
Otago High School and the Otago Uni-
versity, Dunedin, New Zealand. Ar-
rived in Australia in 1904. Mr. Day
has served in the Port Pirie Corpora-
tion for 11 years, and has been a resi-
dent of the district for 30 years. He
is Vice-President of the Solomontown
Beach Committee, District Officer of
the Port Pirie St. John Ambulance
Brigade. President of the B.H.A.S. Ex-
celsior Band, Port Pirie Institute,
Port Pirie Mission to Seamen, and
Chairman of the Solomontown School
Committee. Business, the Industrial
Hygiene, and Safety Officer of the
B.H.A.S. Company, Port Pirie. His
sports are rowing and bowls. Mr. Day
served abroad with the 27th Battalion,
A.1.F., on active service, attached to B
Company with the rank of Captain,
during the Great War. Home ad-
dress, Balmoral Road. Port Pirie.
COUNCILLOR ALFRED KEITH
JEANES.
(Corporation of Port Pirie.)
Born at Largs Bay, 16th June, 1901,
and educated at Port Adelaide. Mr.
Jeanes has served in the Port Pirie
Corporation for 4 years, and has been
a resident of the district for 13 years.
He is a member of the Port Pirie Hos-
pital Board, President of the Port
Pirie Boy Scouts’ Association, a (us-
tice of the Peace, an Associate o the
Federal Institute of Accountants, and
he is the General Manager of Ch rles
Geddes & Co., Timber and Ge eral
Hardware Merchants, also Manag r of
W. J. Pimlott, Ltd., Furniture and
Joinery Manufacturers. Ame her
of the Masonic Lodge, his sorts
are tennis and golf. Home acl ess,
103, Balmoral Road, Risdon Park Art
Pirie.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM P. COF £Y.
(Corporation of Port Pirie.)
Born at Owen, sth August. 188- and
educated at Owen and Moonta F iblic
Schools. Mr. Coffey has heen a resi-
dent of Port Pirie for 38 years, an has
served in the Port Pirie Corpo ition
for 12 years. He is President c the
Labour Day Sports and the Port Pirie


; ~
i •
|
-
' f IBsPit p
11^.\ i|| JjHBk.
JI
P* JP ihP
Australian Labour Party Electorate
Committees, and Vice-President and
trustee of the Waterside Workers'
Federation. Business, Shipping Fore-
man. He is fond of all sports. Home
address, 39 York Road, Port Pirie
West.
COUNCILLOR IVAN BERRIDGE.
(Corporation of Port Pirie.)
Born at Clare. 4th November, 1890,
and educated at the Clare Public
School. Mr. Berridge has served in
the Port Pirie Corporation for 3 years,
and has been a resident of the district
for 10 years. He is President of the
Australian Railways Union. Port Pirie
Sub-Branch, and Minute Secretary of
the Australian Labour Party, Port
I’irie Branch. A member of the
Druids’ Lodge, and Trustee and Past
Arch of that body. Occupation, Rail-
way Employee. His sport is football.
Home address, 24 Wilcher Street, Port
Pirie West.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM REID.
(Corporation of Port Pirie.)
Born at Melbourne, \ ictoria, 3rd
July, 1888, and educated at Kalgoorlie,
W.A. Mr. Reid has served in the
Port Pirie Corporation for 3 years, and
has been a resident of the district for
30 years. He is Vice-President of the
Port Pirie Labour Day Committee,
and Chairman of the Federated En-
gine Drivers’ Union. Occupation,
greaser of the Coal Gantries. Broken
Hill Associated Smelters, Port Pirie,
He is a member of the Buffalo Lodge,
and his sports are football and cricket.
Plome address. Angle Street, Solomon-
town.


>1
E. E. GARRETT.
(Town Clerk.)
Mr. Garrett has held the position of
Town Clerk of the Corporation of Port
Pirie since 1915.


Corporation of Quorn
QUORN TOWN HALL AND COUNCIL CHAMBERS.


History of Quorn
Quorn is situated 2341 miles north of Adelaide, on the
Main North Railway Line. It is the commencing point of
Commonwealth Railways to Port Augusta and Alice
Springs, and is 25 miles from Port Augusta.
Quorn was named after Quorn, a town in Leicester-
shire, England, famous for its hunting pack.
The Hundred of Pichi Richi was gazetted on 24th
January. 1878, and the Town of Quorn was surveyed by
Godfrey Walsh early in the year 1878.
The district surveys were as under :
Hundred of Pichi Richi. 1877-1885. gazetted 1878-1879.
Hundred of Yarrah, 1880-1890, gazetted 1881.
Hundred of Wyacca, 1885-1888, gazetted 1885.
Hundred of Kanyaka, 1876-1880, gazetted 1878.
Hundred of Boolcunda, 1876-1882, gazetted 1878-1882.
Hundred of Cudlamudla, 1878-1880, gazetted 1879.
Hundred of Moockra, 1879-1880, gazetted 1880.
Hundred of Woolundunga, 1889-1890, gazetted 1890.
Hundred of Willochra, i 875. gazetted 1875.
Hundred of Palmer, 1876-1879, gazetted 1877.
Quorn is claimed to be one of the prettiest towns in
South Australia, situated as it is at the foot of the Flin-
ders Range, with charming surroundings and many objects
of interest in the vicinity. Mount Brown (3,012 feet),
situated nine miles south, is one of the State’s highest
mounts : while the Devil’s Peak, four miles south-west, is
an ancient landmark ; and the Dutchman’s Stern, four miles
west, resembles the stern of a ship. All along the Flinders
Range there are sights worth while visiting.
Quorn itself is 961 feet above sea level, and has a most
salubrious climate. It has been described in one of the
British Medical Journals as being an ideal spot for a sani-
torium. Its bracing atmosphere is a treat to enjoy, and
the place holds one so much in its spell that after having
once stayed there one cannot help the desire to return
and revel in the glorious sunshine, particularly in the
ordinary springtime, when all Nature has its brightest
adornment.
The industries supporting Quorn are principally farm-
ing, grazing, and dairying.
Before Iron Knob was secured by Broken Hill Pro-
prietary Company large quantities of ironstone ore were
secured from Quorn for Port Pirie Smelters.
In addition to these avenues of revenue, the town
derives benefit from the support of workmen employed by
the Commonwealth Railway Department for the running
of trains and general repairs to and upkeep of engines and
plant. The Locomotive Department employs a fair num-
ber of permanent men.
Quorn was incorporated and proclaimed a town on
Octber 25th, 1883.
Mayor—William C. Barton.
Councillor- —James Short.
Councillor —Thomas Lees.
Councillor—Samuel C. Cottle.
Councillor—James Gordon.
Town Clerk —G. J. Miller.
Auditor—John Dunstan.
Auditor-—-J. Campbell.
In December, 1884, the following were added :
Councillor —John Baker.
Councillor—John Fitzgerald.
Councillor —John Charles worth.
Councillor- —Horatio Plant.
The Mayors of Quorn are as follows :
1882-4—-William Charles Barton.
1884- —William Charles Barton.
1885- —Edward Manton.
1886- —James Mansom.
1887- —James Mansom.
1888- John Lord
1889- —John Lord (retired Ist June, 1890).
1890- Hon. R. W. Foster.
1890- Hon. R. W. Foster.
1891- Hon. R. W. Foster.
1892- John Rock.
1893- —John Rock.
1894- —Robert Thompson.


1899-1900-01-02—LI. Matthews.
1902-3-4-5-6-7-8-9-10 —Robert Thompson.
1910-11-12-13-1-1 —John C. Turner.
1914-15-16-1718-19-20-21-22-23-24-25-26-27-28
Robert Thompson.
1928-29-30-31-32— S. C. Chennell.
1932-33-34-35-36- —D. Hammond.
TOWN CLERKS.
June, 1931-36— J. T. MacDiarmid.
The following have served as Councillors in addition
to first Council: —
Thos. Lees, 1885-7; James Short. 1885-7; John Cahill,
1885- James Gordon, 1885-7; Robert Thompson, 1885-6,
1886- William Gunter, 1886-87; James Short, John Lord.
W. C. Barton, 1886-88; R. W. Foster, 1887-89; F. P. Knight.
1887- T. Hewitson, 1887-89; W. Gunter, 1887-89; V. Tan-
GROUP PHOTO, QUORN CORPORATION, 1886.
Standing—H. Plant, Thos. Lees, and J. Fitzgerad. Sitting—H. Miller (Clerk), W. Gunter, I
Manton (Mayor), and Robt. Thompson.
1884- F. J. McKeown.
1885- G. J. Miller.
1887-1889 —H. B. Walkington.
1889-1906—John Cottrell.
1506-1918—A. M. Jafifrey.
1918 to May, 1928— W. R. Thompson.
May, 1928,'t0 1931—C. E. Whyte.
ner, 1889-90; H. E. Gibbs, 1888-90; Edward Beevor, 1888-90;
R. Hotchin, 1888-90; G. J. Shepherd. J. Mason, 1889-90;
Thos Jack, 1889: G. Veale, 1889-91; R. W. Foster, 1889-90;
M. C. Coppinger, 1889-91; H. F. Adams, 1889-91 ; J. Rick,
1890; R. Cameron, 1890-91; A. M. Jaffrey, 1890-91': H. E.
Gills, 1890-92; John Conway, 1890-92; John Rick, 1890-92;
W. A. Jones, 1890-92; Alex. Jack, 1891-93; B. Treloar,


1891-93; A. A. Arnold, 1891-93; G. E. Veale, 1891-93; R. AV.
Foster, 1892-94; W. Gunter, 1892-94; J. Conway, 1892-94;
R. Cameron, 1892-94; E. Buchanan, 1893; R. Thompson,
1893-94; W. L. Hudson, 1893-94; E. Buchanan, 1893; F.
A. Wurm, 1893-95; S. A. Parson, 1893-95; Alex. Jack,
1893-95; John Rick, 1894-96; W. Gunter, 1894-96; J. A.
Coles. 1894-96; W. L. Hudson, 1894-96; J. Ah Hughes,
1895-97; A. A. Arnold, 1895-97; E. Buchanan, 1895-97; A.
Butter, 1895-97; S. W. Osborne, 1896-97; H. Rose, 1896-98;
W. Gunter, 1896-98; G. J. Shepherd, 1896-97; A A L Plud-
son. 1896-98; L. W. G. Dunn, 1897-98; H. Matthews,
1897-99; A. A. Arnold, 1897-99; E. Buchanan, 1897-99; J.
Nettle, 1897-99; A. F. Noll. 1898-1900; G. J. Shepherd,
1898-1900; W. L. Hudson, 1898-1900; R. Hotchin, 1898-1900;
R. Thompson, 1899-1901; G. R. Cobbin, 1899-1901; A. A.
Arnold, 1899-1901; E. Buchanan, 1899-1901; H. S. Hep-
worth, 1900-01; C. A. Niendorf, 1900-02; A. F. Noll,
1900-02. (j. J. Shepherd, 1900-02; H. S. Shepherd, 1900-
1902 ; \A. L. Hudson, 1900-02; R. Thompson, 1901-03; G.
R. Cobbin, 1901-03; H. S. ITepworth, 1901-03; J. Gluyas,
1901-03; H. Matthews, 1902-04; A. F. Noll, 1902-04; G. J.
Shepherd, 1902-04; W. L. Hudson, 1902-04; Thos. White,
1903-05; G. R. Cobbin, 1903-05; j. W. Galvin, 1903-05; C.
E. Dench, 1903-05 ; J. Foster, 1904-05 ; G. J. Shepherd, 1904-
06; H. Matthews, 1904-06; J. J. Dalgleish, 1904-06; W. L.
Hudson, 1904-06; O. Bockelberg, 1905-07; J. W. Galvin,
1905-07; C. E. Dench, 1905-07; W. O. Mahnke, 1905-07; J.
Hobbs, 1905-06; H. Matthews, 1906-08; G. J. Shepherd, 1906-
08; J. J. Dalgleish, 1906-08; W. L. Hudson, 1906-08; J. W.
Galvin, 1906-07; O. Bockelberg, 1907-09; J. W. Galvin,
1907-09; C. E. Dench, 1907-09; H. J. Newitt, 1907-09; G.
J. Shepherd, 1908-10; H. Matthews, 1908-10; W. L. Hud-
son, 1908-10; J. Dalgleish, 1908-10; J. W. Galvin, 1909-11;
C. E. Dench, 1909-11; O. Bockelberg-; 1911-13; J. C. Turner,
1909-11; J. J. Dalgleish, 1910-12; G. J. Shepherd, 1910-12;
M. Dienhofif, 1910-12; FI. Matthews, 1910-12; A. J. Millard,
1910-11; C. E. Dench, 1911-13; O. Bockelberg,
1911-13; A. J. Millard, 1911-13; W. Reid, 1911-13; F. D.
Young, 1912; J. J. Dalgleish, 1912-14; G. J. Shepherd,
1912-14; A. F. Noll, 1912-14; W. Buckerfield; 1912-14; R.
J. Bowden, 1913; O. Bockelberg, 1913-15; W. Reid,
1913-15; R. J. Bowden, 1913-15; E. Sprague, 1913-15; A.
J. Millard, 1914-15; A. Hunter, 1914; A. F. Noll, 1914-16;
A. Hunter, 1914-16; J. Willoughby, 1914-16; W. Bucker-
field, 1914-16; M. B. Ryan, 1915-17; T. B. Aveling, 1915-17;
R. J. Bowden, 1915-17; O. Bockelberg, 1915-17; A. F. Noll,
1916-18; A. Hunter, 1916-18; G. R. Russell, 1916-17, J.
Willoughby, 1916-18; W. Buckerfield, 1916-18, A. J. A.
Roberts, 1917-18; W. L. Hudson, 1918-20; R. MacLachlan,
1918- D. Hammond, 1918-20: T. J. Nicholls, 1918-20;
C. Padget, 1918-19; R. J. Bowden, 1919-21; C, I dcl get,
1919- Thos. White, 1919-21; John Nettle. 1919-21; W.
L. Hudson, 1920-22; D. Hammond, 1920-22; T. B. Aveling,
1920- H. Waters. 1920-23; J. Nettle. 1921-23; T. White,
1921- S. James, 1921-23; R. J. Bowden, 1921-23; M. B.
Ryan, 1922-24: T. B. Aveling, 1922-24; J. Brewster, 1922-24;
H. Waters, 1922-24; R. MacLachlan, 1923-25; S. James.
1923- F. W. M. Roepke, 1923-25; S. C. Chennell, 1923-25;
R. J. Bowden, 1924-25; D. Hammond, 1924-26; B. Jericho,
1924- G. N. Woods, 1924-25; N. Ireland, 1924-25; F. A.
Smith, 1925-26; S. C. Chennell, 1925-27: J. L. Pope, 1025- 7;
C. F. W. Mattner, 1925-27: A. F. Stokes, 1925-27; E.
McMahon, 1926; E. McMahon, 1926-28: F. H. Lehmann,
1926- B. Jericho, 1926-28; F. A. Smith, 1926-28: D. Ham-
mond, 1927-28; C. F. W. Mattner, 1927-29; A. F. Stokes,
1927- S. C. Chennell, 1927-32; H. Waters, 1928-31: F.
H. Lehmann, 1929-31 ; E. McMahon, 1929-32; C. A. F.
Mattner. 1929-33; J. Stothers, 1929-30; C. J. Easther,
1929-36; F. A. Smith. 1929-30. 1933-36; R. A. P. Willis, 19 1-
32; W. Twilley, 1930-3; L. B. Adams. 1929-31, 1933-6: T H.
Bury, 1932-5: J. McColive, 1932-6; J. L. Pope. 1931-6: D.
Hammond, 1931-6: A. C. Thompson, 1936; C. H. Hare n,
1933-36; G. L. Stirling, 1935-36; C. T. Dighton, 1936; F A.
Smith, 1936; C. J. Easther, 1936.
The pioneers have left much work behind them, she v-
ing that they served their town well, and it is plea- ig
to know that there are some of them still with us to look
hack upon their work.
At one time Quorn was part of a sheep station, id
many and varied are the stories that can be told of ie
pioneering days, when to live meant to work, and v rk
hard, for the obstacles were many and the convenier :es
few; and here and there about the district may be seen
little mounds that cover the remains of some of those woo
knew what life in those days meant.
The town itself is laid out in squares with wide stre 4s.
Railway Terrace, First Street, and Sixth Street being 00
feet wide. Spacious parklands surround the town. ;nd


divide the Corporation from the District Council of Kan-
Xhe present population of Quorn itself is 1,080, and
the distiict, 2,500.
The Town Hall was erected in 1891. The foundation
tone was laid by Mrs. R. W. Foster.
The area controlled by the Corporation is 425 acres,
nd dwellings number 173, not including shops.
Practically all the footpaths have been kerbed with
[intaro slate.
The Capowie and Pichi Richi Creeks flow through the
irporation area. The creeks abound with huge gum ti ees,
v hich give a splendid appearance.
Water is supplied to the town from the reservoir, which
when filled contains 40.000,000 gallons, equal to nine
nonths’ supply without replenishing. It js situated four
niles north-west of the town, and is reticulated from a
6-in, main. Two bores were put down in the North Park-
inds, and since January, 1926, a splendid supply of 5,000
villons of water per hour has been available, sufficient for
domestic purposes and stock when the reservoir is empty.
The average rainfall for 44 years was 14J in., but of late
ears 6.69 in., 9.45 in., and 6.14 in. has been the order, with
lisastrous results. A new drain, tapping a much larger
catchment area, was constructed in 1934, and this is ex-
pected to keep the reservoir full.
When Mr. W. R. Thompson took office as Town Clerk
one of his pet schemes was the establishing of a Muni-
cipal Electric Power Station. This has long been an
accomplished fact, and the power plant and installation is
a C redit to the town. Mr. H. Rhodes (Engineer) has been
in charge for the last few years, and rapid progress has
been made with the number of units produced.
The principal buildings of Quorn are constructed of
local freestone, which is obtained within a mile of the
town. The stone is of excellent quality. Public build-
ings consist of Town Hall, Post Office, Police Station,
Court House, Railway Station, High School, and Primary
School. The majority of residences are of freestone con-
struction, and compare favourably with those in many of
the larger towns in the State.
Churches represented are the Methodist, Anglican, Sal-
vation Army, Roman Catholic, and Lutheran denomina-
tions.
Education is well catered for in Quorn. The Primary
School has an average attendance of about 300 children,
while the Sisters of St. Joseph are in charge of about 50
more. Secondary education is provided by the High School,
which is attended by about 70 students.
The Soldiers’ Memorial, situated in a garden plot
adjoining the railway station, opposite Sixth Street, was
erected wholly and solely by returned soldiers of the town
and district, in memory of the 42 comrades in the late war.
The base consists of cobblestones and concrete, surmounted
by a substantial rough-hewn granite cross.
The Rifle Club, one of the oldest in the State, has a
large number of enthusiastic shots, and one of the veterans
—Mr. B. Treloar—was successful in winning the Veterans’
Match in Port Adelaide in 1926. There are a number of
excellent shots among the members, and competitions are
keenly contested.


%•
"***<% ' '
Maw
/ dH : . '
/ Jjg 7 \
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR QUORN
CORPORATION, DAVID HAMMOND,
Born at Wanbra, Victoria, April
26th. 1882. He has 18 years' service
in the Council, and has been a resident
of the district for 23 years. Positions
held in the Council by Mr. Hammond
are Mayor for 33 years and Chairman
of the Finance Committee. He is a
Commission Agent and Past Master
of the Quorn Masonic Lodge, Presi-
dent of the Quorn Football Associa-
tion, Secretary of the Quorn Bowling
Club, and Secretary of the Quorn
Jockey Club.
PAST MAYOR THE LATE ROBERT
THOMPSON.
(Corporation of Quorn.)
Mr. Robert Thompson, known as
the “Grand old man of Quorn,” died
at Quorn on April 4, 1936, at the age
of 77. Born at Dunfermline, Scot-
land, he came to Australia on Decem-
ber 10, 1878, and worked at Adelaide
for Mr. N. W. Trudgeon. In March,
1879, he settled at Quorn, and five
years later began business as a car-
penter and ironmonger. He was
elected to the Quorn Council in 1886,
and in 1890 was elected Mayor, an
office he held for 27 terms, which is
claimed as a world's record. He was
appointed a Justice of the Peace in
1896. As Mayor, Mr. Thompson offi-
cially welcomed many distinguished
visitors, including the present King,
Lord Gowrie (then Sir Alexander
Hore-Ruthven), and several Gover-
nors-General. He was a favourite
among the children of Quorn, for
whom for many years he organised
an annual day's outing to Port
Augusta. Flis energy and good ser-
vices contributed much to the pro-
gress of Quorn, and he was an en-
thusiatic supporter of the scheme for
the erection of the Quorn High
School. Mr. Thompson's funeral was
the largest ever seen in Quorn. Chil-
dren of the High and Primary Schools
formed a guard of honour through
which the procession passed on its
way to the cemetery.
COUNCILLOR LEONARD B. AD MS.
(Corporation of Quorn.)
Mr. Adams was born at Quorn 20th
March, 1890, and educated at C torn
Public School. He has served i the
Quoin Corporation for 44 years and
been a resident of the district the
\\ hole of his life. He is a Ge teral
Stoi ekeeper, and his sports are ten-
nis and bowls. Home address, Quorn.


\
y *
\£l J
COUNCILLOR JOHN McCOLIVE.
(Corporation of Quorn.)
He was born at Quorn, 29th Octo-
er, 1894. and educated at the Quorn
Public School. Mr. McColive has
served in the Quorn Corporation for
3] years, and has been a resident of
the district the whole of his life. He
is a farmer, and member of the
H.A.C.B.S. Lodge, the Quorn Show
Committee, and the Quorn Racing
Club. Home address, Quorn-
COUNCILLOR CHARLES HENRY
HARDEN.
(Corporation of Quorn.)
He was born at Port Augusta. 26th
July, 1895, and educated at the Port
Augusta Public School and the Quorn
High School. Mr. Harden has served
the Quorn Corporation for 21 years,
and has been a resident of the dis-
trict for 6J years. He is Superinten-
dent of the Vacuum Oil Co., Quorn, a
member of the Foresters' Lodge, and
his sports are tennis, bowls, and rifle
shooting. Mr. Harden served abroad
with the 18th Battery from the 20th of
July, 1915, to the Ist August, 1919,
during the Great War. Home address.
Quorn.
COUNCILLOR C. J. EASTHER.
(Corporation of Quorn.)
Mr. Easther is the President of the
Quorn Bowling Club, Great Northern
Juvenile Athletic and Schools’ Exhi-
bition Association, Quorn Sub-Branch
Returned Soldiers’ Association, .Secre-
tary of the Quorn Primary School
Committee, member of Quorn High
School Council and Quorn Oval Trust,
and Chairman of the Quorn Corpora-
tion Works Committee.
COUNCILLOR JOHN LESLEY POPE.
(Corporation of Quorn.)
Mr. Pope was born at Broken Hill,
12th April, 1896, and educated at
Unley Public School and Broken Hill
High School. Hs has served in the
Quorn Corporation for 7 years, and
has been a resident of the district
for 17 years. He is Chairman of the
Finance Committee of the Quorn Cor
poration and a member of the Exe-
cutive of the Great Northern Juve-
nile Athletic and Schools Exhibition
Association, a member of the Quorn
Masonic Lodge, No. 59. and his sport
is bowls. He was Bowls Country


i i * /
\ v %, j I
Champion during- the years 1934 and
1935. Home address, Quorn.
COUNCILLOR FRED ANDERSON
SMITH.
(Corporation of Quorn.)
He was born at Orroroo, 17th Feb-
ruary, 1891. and educated at John-
burgh Public School. Mr. Smith has
served in the Quorn Corporation for
years, and has been a resident of the
district for 16 years. He is President
of the Quorn Coursing Club, a mem-
ber of the Executive of the Great
Northern Juvenile Athletic and School
Exhibition Association, and Steward
of the Quorn Jockey Club. Mr. Smith
is Branch Manager of Goldsbrough.
Mort, & Co., Ltd., and in sport fol-
lows bowls, golf, and coursing. Home
address, Ouorn.
COUNCILLOR ALFRED CLAUDE
THOMPSON.
(Corporation of Quorn.)
He was born at Quorn, 24th Sep-
tember, 1894, and educated there. Mr.
Thompson has served in the Quorn
Corporation for years, and ha^been
a resident of the district the whole of
his life. He is Secretary of the Great
Northern Schools Exhibition, Quorn
Athletic Club, Quorn and Port
Augusta Football Association, and
Quorn Foresters’ and Rechabite
Lodges, and a member of the Quorn
High School Council and the Onorn
Institute Committee. Home address,
Quorn.
COUNCILLOR REGINALD CHANNO
LEWIS, J.P.
(Corporation of Quorn.)
Hr. Lewis was born at Queenstown
Port Adelaide, 9th March, 1898. a d
educated at Alberton Public School a d
LeFevre’s Peninsula High Sch. 4
He is Secretary of the Quorn Brar i
of the Returned Soldiers' League, a
member of the Freemason and Recha-
Lodges, and the Manager of t c
Savings Bank of South Austra a
(Quorn Branch). His sports are tor
ms. table tennis, and football; twice
he was champion singles player of t e
JoU Adelaide and Districts Lawn


T, !. -5“
\
.
Tennis Association. During the war
he served abroad with the 3rd Light
Horse Regiment. Home address, The
Savings Bank of South Australia,
Quorn.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE LEONARD
STIRLING, J.P.
(Corporation of Quorn.)
He was born at Bunbury, W.A., sth
September, 1895. Mr. Stirling has
served in the Quorn Corporation for
12 months, and has been a resident of
Quorn for 10 years. He is a Justice
of the Peace, and is an employee in
the Locomotive Department of the
Commonwealth Railways, a member
of the Quorn Masonic Lodge, and his
sport is tennis. Mr. Stirling served
three years abroad with the A.I.F.
attached to the 113 th Company, Royal
Engineers. Home address, Quorn.
COUNCILLOR FREDERICK COLIN
DIGHTON.
(Corporation of Quorn.)
Born at Port Augusta West, 19th
July, 1896, and educated at Port
Augusta West Public School. Mr.
Dighton is a member of the Foresters’
Lodge, and carries on business as a
Stock Agent. His sports are cricket
and bowls. Home address, Quorn.
JOHN TENNANT MacDIARMID.
(Town Clerk, Corporation of Quorn.)
He was born at Glasgow, Scotland,
25th March, 1891, and educated at
Largs College and the University of
Adelaide. Mr. MacDiarmid arrived in
Australia in 1907, and has served in
the Quorn Corporation as Town Clerk
for 5 years. He is Secretary of the
Quorn Water Trust, Quorn Oval
Trust, High School Council, Local
Board of Health, and Centenary Com-
mittee. He is Manager of the Quorn
Corporation Electric Supply, a mem-
ber of the Quorn Institute Commit-
tee, Conductor of the Quorn Or-


•i ... 'A
y 0t\ • '
I
Mlk
IJP vli^:||^^^p^ s
chestra and Choir, and a member of
the Quorn Freemasons Lodge. Mr.
MacDiarmid has taken an active part
in the musical world, being org'anist
to several churches, and a member of
the late Mendelssohn and Mostyn Male
Quartettes. During the war he was
connected with the Intelligence De-
partment on special service. His
sports are tennis and bowls. Home
address, Quorn.
RICHARD JOHN BOWDEN.
(Corporation of Quorn.)
Born at Hazleton, Lucerne County,
in the State of Pennsylvania, U.S.A.,
24th November, 1875, and arrived in
Australia in July, 1877. Educated at
the North Adelaide Primary School.
Mr. Bowden served in the Quorn
Council for 12 years and Peterborough
for 3 years. He was a resident of
the Quorn district for 26 years and
Peterborough for 10 years. He is a
member of the Works and Electric
Committees and Chairman of the Fin-
ance Committee. Business, Foreman
of the S.A. Railways. He has been
Secretary of the Quorn Branch, Rail-
way Association, for 10 years, and 15
years Secretary for Newcastle Elec-
torate Committee, Secretary of the
Protector Lodge, No. 31, 1.0.0. F., for
13 years, and the Quorn School Com-
mittee for 8 years. A member of the
Quorn High School Council and 8
years secretary of the Peterborough
School Committee. He is also a mem-
her of the Junction Lodge, 1.0.0. F.,
No. 36, Peterborough. Sport, bowls.
Home address, 9, Lloyd Street, Peter-
borough.
COUNCILLOR TOM BERTRAND
AVELING.
(Corporation of Quorn.)
Born at North Adelaide, July, 1880,
and educated at the East Adelaide,
Quorn, Norwood, and Glenelg Frolic
Schools. He has been 9 years Council-
lor of the Port Lincoln Corporation
and 5 years of the Quorn Corporation,
and 12 years a resident of the district.
Business, Engine Fitter, S.A. Rail-
ways. Thirty years a member of the
U.A.O.D. Lodge. Sports, bowls. Mr.
Aveling served 4 years abroad with
the A.I.F. Home address, Port Lincoln.


.■ '
Corporation of the Town of Renmark
THE MEMORIAL HALL, RENMARK.


History of Renmark
Renmark was established in 1887, concurrently
with the much larger settlement of Mildura in Victoria, by
Messrs. George and W. B. Chafifey under the terms of the
"Chafifey Bros. Irrigation Act." The Government set aside
250,000 acres and in 1888 issued a licence for the occu-
The area at present irrigated amounts to 7.780 acres,
of which well over a thousand acres are held by soldier
settlers. With the exception of the returned soldier hold-
ings, which are held from the Government on perpetual
lease, the land is freehold. The Trust is elected (half of its
FIRST POST OFFICE, RENMARK.
The driver in the above picture is Mr. Fred Plush, who is now 75 years of
age. Mr. Plush was driving a coach for Cobb & Co. for 3i years, and
is still a capable driver.
pation of 30,000 acres, subject to certain specified condi-
tions. In July, 1888, the Messrs. Chafifey transferred their
concession to "ChafTey Bros., Renmark, Limited," and irri-
gation works were constructed by this company, which
was succeeded in January, 1889, by "The Renmark Irriga-
tion Coy. Ltd." In 1893 the Re nmark Irrigation Trust,
No. 1, was formed, and since then the afTairs of the settle-
ment have been administered by this body. Crown grants
actually made to the Messrs. Chafifey amounted to 13,248.
acres.
members annually) by the ratepayers of the irrigated ( s-
trict, voting on the basis of one vote for each irrigated
acre. In addition to attending to the pumping and re-
tribution of water, the Trust acts also as a Dist ct
Council for the settlement. Water is distributed L a
series of lifts from the river. The Trust's ass ts
(machinery, works, etc.) are valued at £52.000, and ie
annual revenue is over £20,000. Present annual wr er
rates, £2/10/- per acre for four irrigations. Areas un er
fruit: Sultanas, 2,441 acres; currants, 1,335 acres; Gor as


(mrvcatels), 922 acres; Doradillas and other vines, 404
acres; citrus, 438 acres; pears, 155 acres; peaches and nec-
tari res, 109 acres; apricots, 292 acres; prunes, 7 acres ;
aip 'S. 8 acres; fig's, 11 acres ; olives, 39 acres; and other
frui ■!, 16 acres. A fair aggregate acreage is also devoted
•erne. The production for the 1935 harvest was
. Cmately 7,000 tons of dried fruit and 7,000 tons of
;rapes, several hundred tons of pears shipped to Ade-
-1; cannaries and 5,000 cases of oranges. The present
p ition of the town and settlement is about 5,000.
in co-operation with the Renmark Hotel Committee and
the Irrigation Trust, have spent hundreds of pounds dur-
ing recent years in developing public reserves on the river
bank, and this esplanade includes tennis courts, bowling
greens, and a croquet green. Renmark and Murray
Avenues have been laid out with ornamental trees, shrubs,
and rockeries, and each year a programme of street tree-
planting is undertaken.
There is an 18-hole golf course situated about four
miles from the town, and this is available to visitors, as are
RENMARK POST OFFICE, 1936.
The Town of Renmark is situated on the banks of the
River Murray, and is the business centre for the irrigation
settlements, as well as farming and pastoral areas adja-
cent. The town itself is controlled by the Municipal Coun-
cil, and this body also controls the electric light under-
taking for the town, and has under consideration the con-
struction of a sewerage scheme for the town proper.
In addition to the natural charm of this magnificent
river, and the unique situation of the town on its banks,
Renmark enjoys a superb climate during the winter
months. In order to exploit these natural advantages to
advertise the district as a tourist centre, the Town Council,
other forms of sport, such as boating, fishing, and shoot-
ing.
The distance by road from Adelaide is approximately
160 miles, and the route passes through the Barossa Valley.
Renmark is the first port of call for Interstate tourists
from Victoria and New South Wales.
CIVIC ACTIVITIES.
During the war there were 600 enlistments at Renmark
out of a population of 3,000. This constituted a record for
Australia. The Soldiers’ Memorial Hall is the finest in the
State. The Renmark District Hospital is one of the best
appointed country institutions (possibly the best of its


I I
j
- - .* £&; r :. * 1 • ■ ._
THE FIRST HOTEL, RENMARK.
kind) in South Australia. Renmark can boast also of the
finest country hotel (which is community owned) in the
State, a comfortable and well-appointed club with garden
and bowling green, and the finest earth tennis courts in
Australia, on which the hardcourt championship of the
State are played. The “Murray Pioneer,” printed at Ren-
mark and published at several of the river centres, is the
largest country paper in South Australia, and by general
consent the best rural weekly in the Commonwealth. The
packing shed operated by the Renmark Fruitgrowers’ Co-
operated Limited receives and processes a larger quantity
of dried fruit than any other single shed in South Aus-
tralia. The local co-operative winery and distillery, Ren-
mark Growers’ Distillery Limited, the second largest of its
kind in Australia, has been for many years one of the
largest and most successful exporters of wine to Great
Britain.
THE COMMUNITY HOTEL.
The Renmark Hotel deserves a special paragraph as
the first public trust hotel in the British Empire. Renmark
was started as a no-licence district, but sly-grog selling-
developed to such an extent that in 1896 the South Aus-
tralian Licensed Victuallers’ Act was amended to permit
of the establishment of a licensed house at Renmark. This
was made contingent on the presentation of a petition to
the Licensing Court, signed by a majority of the local resi-
dents, praying for the granting of a licence and setting
forth the purpose to which it was proposed to apply any
profits derived from the business, nominating the first
members of the Committee of Management, and stating
the mode of appointing subsequent members of the com-
mittee.
The hotel was established under conditions which pro-
vided that it should be managed by a committee elected
by the House of Assembly electors entitled to vote at Ren-
mark—that is to say, all natural-born or naturalised resi-
dents, male or female, of the full age of 21. No one asso-
ciated with the management is permitted to have any
interest in the sale of liquor, and profits are to be used for
the encouragement of “art, literature, and science,” and
for such other purposes as are annually approved by the
State Treasurer. In all other respects the hotel is subject
to the ordinary licensing laws of the State. It is frequent!}
spoken of as a “Gothenburg" hotel, but the managemeir
possesses no such powers for the regulation of the sale of
liquor as characterise the Gothenburg system. The dis-
association of any private profit from the bar receipts has,
however, exercised a healthy influence as compared vit i
THE PRESENT HOTEL, RENMARK.


the -onduct of many privately-owned hotels. The first
ch nan of the committee was a clergyman (the late
Pa Wyllie, son of a former Military Secretary to the
Gc or of India), and prominent Rechabites have also
held s position. The place is under the control of a
• appointed by the committee, who is also the
lie I.- . As it is the only licensed house in the district, the
Renm: k Hotel possesses the largest bar in Australia. The
amounts to over £6,000 during the last six years, including
the current year’s allocations. £17,700 has been distributed
for the benefit of the district in the promotion and en-
couragement of literature, science and art, or for charitable
purposes. This money has been allocated to the following
b<)dies :
Tree planting, parks, gardens, etc.
Donations, District Hospital.
RIVER MURRAY AND HOTEL GARDENS.
management is prouder, however, of the many testimonials
from t 'imists to the excellence of the accommodation and
service provided for the travelling public.
There are few rivers in the world that offer the tourist
a more pleasant journey than is afforded by a trip on
the Australian Nile from Murray Bridge to Mildura or
Swan Mill during the spring and autumn months.
As the hotel was started with no capital other than
the licence, and Denmark for years after 1896 was a small
but growing place, profits for many years were absorbed
in building expenses. The hotel property is now valued at
over £69,000, and is unencumbered. The net annual profit
Donations, Denmark Town Council.
Encouragement of education.
Sport, providing ovals and assisting clubs.
Public buildings (Memorial Hall, Institute, etc.) and
Show Grounds.
Denmark Citizens’ Silver Band.
The Baby Welfare Association is also given £lOO per
year, and this year’s allocations provide for a preliminary
donation of £lOO towards a Boy Scouts’ Hall, £2O for the
Girl Guides, and £lOO for dried fruits advertising.


'' ' ' ' ■' v;
— ' , , '- - ' ' , -
Present members of the Corporation are as follows:
Mayor—S. A. James.
Councillors—Messrs. S. V. Hagley, j. J. Nixon, J. C
Reiners, and E. L. G. Williss.
Town Clerk and Engineer—E. E. Jarrett
SAIES, LTD., RENMARK.


HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF
RENMARK
STANLEY ARTHUR JAMES, J.P.
Mr. James was born at Alberton,
31st March, 1896, and educated at
Mount Barker High School. He has
been a resident of Renmark for 12
years, and a member of the Council
for 7 years. Mr. James is the first
Mayor of the Municipality of Ren-
mark, and was previously Chairman
of the Renmark District Council for
6 years. He is a Past Master of the
Renmark Masonic Lodge, and his
sports are tennis and golf. Home
address, Murrav Avenue, Renmark.
THE LATE HARRY SAMUEL TAYLOR
rPast Councillor, Corporation of the Town
of Renmark)
Jhe late Mr. Taylor was born at
North Adelaide, 13th January, 1873,
and educated at Prince Alfred College,
Adelaide. He was a resident of Ren-
mark for 27 years, and was proprietor
and editor of the "Murray Pioneer"
Newspaper. Mr. Taylor was a member
of the Masonic Lodge. After return-
ing from the ill-fated "New Australia"
experiment in Paraguay, while still in
his twenties, he commenced his long
association with the River Murray
irrigation areas, purchasing a fruit
property at Mildura. Being a wide
reader and a deep-thinker, Mr. Tay-
lor soon took a lively interest in the
dried fruits and allied industries, and
became the Secretary for a time of
the Mildura Dried Fruit Trust—the
forerunner of the Australian Dried
Fruits Association, in whose cause he
figured as an outstanding advocate in
after life. He came to Renmark in
1905 and secured the local newspaper,
"The Renmark Pioneer" —later "1 he
Murray Pioneer" —which he con-
trolled and edited until his death. A
gifted speaker as well as writer, Mr.
Taylor showed a remarkably keen in-
terest in all matters for the common
good, and there is scarcely a public
body in Renmark town and settlement
on which he did not serve, or whose
interests he did not champion through
the columns of his paper. He served
various periods on the Town District
Council, and was also for many years
a prominent member of the Hospital
Committee, Show Society, and Insti-
tute Committee. He was unsparing
in his efforts for the man on the land,
and besides his work for the A.D.F.A.
he took a leading part in supporting
the Agricultural Bureau (he was River
representative on the Central Bureau)
and in assisting the returned soldier
settlers. The late Mr. Taylor died at
Renmark on 13th Februarv, 1932.
PAST COUNCILLOR GEORGE JOSEPH
DIX.
(Corporation of the Town of Renmark.)
Mr. Dix was born at Redbanks, near
Mallala, 30th December, 1865, and edu-
cated at Redbanks and Reeves Plains
Public Schools. He was a resident of
Renmark for 40 years, a member of
the Council for 4 years, and the Ren-
mark Irrigation Trust for 10 years
Mr. Dix was a member of the Ren-
mark Primary School for 10 vears,
Committeeman of the Renmark Com-
munity Hotel for 4 years, and a mem-
ber of the High School Council. He
was also President and Vice-President
of the Renmark Literary Society,


I ' . j
I \ I
I
\
■ ■, V :
Wgff /, 'r t ■■.
; / " v&
iff " iSSil
* *
Vice-President of the Show Society
for 10 years, a member of the Repat-
riation Committee, the Congregational
Church Choir for 30 years, and on the
Board of the Murtho village settle-
ment for 4 years, being sole manager
for 2 years. Mr. Dix was an original
partner of Messrs. Dix & Sons, fruit-
growers and packers, now a large en-
gineering firm of Renmark. He was
Captain of the Renmark Rifle Club for
5 years, and is a member of the Ren-
mark and Brighton Bowling Clubs.
He is also a member of the Renmark
Masonic Lodge, S.A.C., 55, and the
R.A.0.8. Lodge. His present address
is 179 Brighton Road, Brighton.
COUNCILLOR JOHANN CLEMENS
REINERS.
(Corporation of the Town of Renmark)
Mi. Reiners was born at Hanovana,
Bth September, 1867. and educated at
Hanovaria, and at Liverpool, England.
He arrived in Australia, 9th January,
1895. Mr. Reiners has been a resident
of Renmark for 41 years, and a mem-
ber of the Council for 7 years. He
is a Retired Artist and Photographer,
and his only son served in the Great
War in Egypt and France with the
A.T.F. Home address, Renmark.
COUNCILLOR JOHN JOSEPH NIXON
(Corporation of the Town of Renmark)
Mr. Nixon was born at South Kil-
more, Victoria, 22nd July, 1884, and
educated at Long Gully Public School,
Bendigo, Victoria. He has been 26
years a resident of the district, and a
member of the Council for 7 years.
Mr. Nixon is a Shop Assistant at Saies
Ltd., and has been for 6 years Sccrc-
tary of the Upper Murray Football
Association, and is also fond of
cricket and running". Home ad ress,
15th Street. Renmark.
COUNCILLOR SYDNEY VINCENT
HAGLEY
(Corporation of the Town of Remix :')
Mr. Hagdey was born at Florieton.
7th May, 1904, and educated a 1 the
Renmark School and the Adt aide
University. He has been a resident of
the district for 24 years, and a .em-
ber of the Council for 2 years Mr.
Hagley was Secretary of the Adelaide
University Pharmaceutical Students’
Association for one year. President for
one year, and also President .4 the
I harmacy Assistants’ Association ol
South Australia for two years. He is


.'
: 4.
■ k
Chemist, and his hobbies are avicul-
e and gardening. Home address,
] enmark.
COUNCILLOR EDGAR LINDLEY
GARFIELD WILLISS
(Corporation of the Town of Renmark)
dr. Williss was born at Warooka,
;ke Peninsula. 3rd June, 1886, and
cated at Warooka and Wauraltie
i He Schools. He has been a resi-
t of Renmark for 10 years, and a
nber of the Council for 5 years,
is a Grain and Fodder Merchant,
his home address is 15th Street,
R enmark.
THE LATE S. J. DRIDAN
' i.st District Clerk, Corporation of the
Town of Renmark.)
The late Mr. Dridan was born at
/ Tide, 14th March, 1872, where por-
t a of the Adelaide Railway Yards
now stand, and was educated at the
Sturt Street Public School. After
leaving school the late Mr. Dridan held
an appointment in the Railway Com-
missioner’s Office for 16 years, and
upon resigning his position he went
to Renmark on a health cure, settling
in that town in 1908. He was the
second District Clerk, following Mr.
W. E. Johns, of the Renmark District
Council, and in that capacity he began
drainage of Renmark town.
He personally set out the first enclo-
sures in Ral Ral and Renmark
Avenues, established the first town
lights, and he fought for the town re-
serves, particularly keeping the water
tower out of the main town of Ren-
mark. Mr. Dridan helped to secure
river frontage from Pyap and Tolarno
Streets for the people, and prevented
buildings from being erected. As
hotel committeeman he helped in
securing garden frontage for the Ren-
mark Hotel, and he was also Secretary
of the Committee that raised £6,000 to
complete the Soldiers' Memorial Hall
frontage. Mr. Dridan was Secretary
of the Repatriation Committee, assist-
ing" 700 soldiers, Secretary of the Ren-
mark Show Society from 1909 to 1932,
and was one of the founders of the
Renmark District Hospital, and also
Secretary for many years. With Air.
H. S. Taylor he was the main mover to
establish the Renmark High School,
and was on the Council of same for
several years. He also was Chairman
of the Town Hall C ommittee for 8
years, and 5 years of the Renmark
Institute Committee. He was also a
Councillor and Chairman of the Ren-
mark Hotel Committee at various
time's. Probably Air. Dridan's greatest
work for the district was as Secretary
to the Railway Committee ; he worked
untiringly to procure the bridge at
Paringa, and the railway line into Ren-
mark, and ultimately brought these
plans to fruition.
ERNEST EDWARD JARRETT, A.M.I.E.
(Aust.)
(Town Clerk and Engineer, Corporation of
the Town of Renmark)
Mr. Jarrett was born at Woodville,
28th January, 1889, and educated at
Kilkenny Public School and the School
of Mines, Adelaide. He has been in
the service of the Renmark Corpora-
tion for 21 years, and a resident of the
district for the same period. His
home address is Renmark,


Corporation of St. Peters
ST. PETERS COUNCIL CHAMBERS.


History of St. Peters
Although St. Peters is a large residential suburb it
p >sses various business establishments, such has a large
rving factory, two distilleries, and many other works
Mr. N. \Y. Trudgeon, who, in 1887, served the Corporation
as Mayor.
The well-known St. Peter's College is situated near
ST. PETERS FIRST COUNCIL CHAMBERS
of a smaller character.
Ihe large and commodious Town Hall is one of the
most distinguishing features of St. Peters, and was erected
in 1885 at a cost of approximately £3,000. In front of
the hall stands a fountain, which was built in memory of
the western boundary, and not only suggests appellations
of the certain townships, but gave the name to the town,
and the Corporation Seal includes a picture of the college.
The foundation stone was laid by Bishop Short, first
Bishop of Adelaide, on May 24th, 1849.


In the south-west angle (formed by the junction of
Hackney Road and North Terrace, Kent Town), on land
which is now almost entirely built upon, there was formed
nearly 87 years ago an extensive garden. It was planted
and laid out by Mr. John Bailey, who arrived in Australia
in 1839, and was later appointed by Governor Gawler to
the office of the first Colonial Botanist in South Australia
at a salary of £BO per annum. He was a skilful and
untiring horticulturist, and “Bailey’s Gardens” for a long-
time constituted a favourite show place, and palms, fruit
trees, and other plants were eagerly sought after.
St. Peters is one of the youngest of the suburban cor-
porations, having been proclaimed a corporate town on
August 2nd, 1883. The town has an area of 904 acres and
the population numbers 11,206 persons, of whom 4,226 are
ratepayers.
The capital value of rateable property for 1923 was
£1,816,600 and the assessment value £489,533 (land values),
whilst a rate of 4|d. yields a revenue of £8,668.
The following is a list of those who have served the
Corporation since its inception:—Mayors—Messrs. J. Ber-
tram, T. E. Gamean, J. C. Bailey, W. H. Hammer, J. Wyles,
G. H. Glover, H. W. Fangsford, N. W. Trudgeon, J. B.
Champion. B. A. Moulden, A. S. Cheadle, R. J. Coombs, W.
Brown. H. T. S. Stacey, j. H. Thompson, R. V. Wilson,
J. Snell, A. T. Sutton, R. Cruickshank, J. Ford, G. N. Twelf-
tree, T. Miller, A. T. Sutton, F. H. Hannaford, F. H. Stacey,
F. T. Parry, J. Ford, J.P. Aldermen and Councillors—
Messrs. J. Jackman, W. R. Sando, W. J. H. Farrant, T. F.
Seabrook, R. Knowles, E. W. O’Halloran, T. Wood. J.
Church, J. G. G. Hales, E. Shephard, A. Wells, F. Muller,
J. Carrol, O. Esselhach, T. Harry, J. J. Powell, T. Symon,
J. C. Sando, H. Finde, R. Newberry, J. A. Sando, F. Grif-
fith. C. Fodge, D. McDougall, H. J. Bailey, A. T. Cheadle,
J. J. Clarke, N. McShane, C. Perrott, T. Kind, H. A. Ames,
P. Hutchison, E. J. Ball, S. Miller, A. E. Davey, W. H.
Hewson. M. J. McDonough, J. W. Colligan, J. W. Fangs-
ford, W. H. Bradley, C. H. J. Potthast, J. C. Myhilfi T.
Godlee, S. Medlow, D. H. Harrold, F. C. Coombs, C. C.
Mathews, R. Cruickshank, D. J. Wellington, C. Degenhardt,
F. J. Anthony, W. A. Drage, j. P. Crowley, C. Frith, A. E.
Stennett, R. Lowen, O. H. Duhst, A. Ferguson, P. N.
Gaylor, J. F. Kennealy, A. Buttery, T. J. D. Barker, A. T.
Sutton, R. Lewis, R. Breeze. H. E. Potter, T. Goodenough.
T. W. E. Hall, F. Brannan, J. Frith, F. Charlton, J. G,
Bugler, E. H. Hannaford, J. Cheffirs, F. T. Perry, A. 0.
Thomas, F. H. Stacey, G. B. Otto, F. Charlton, F. H. Han-
naford, G. F. Sunter, F. W. Crisp, R. Breeze, H. I ingey,
C. A. E. Sullivan, F.C.A. (Aus.), S. R. Applebee, F. W.
Symons, B. E. Fergusson.
The names of the first Mayor and Councillors, the suc-
ceeding Mayors, and members of the present Council are
given as a record and acknowledgement of the services
which they have so freely given to their fellow-citizens.
In the course of 53 years of municipal government
many citizens of St. Peters have served as Mayor, Aider-
man, or Councillor in an earnest endeavour to create a
town not lacking in the comforts and refinements of sur-
roundings which are the ideals of municipalists., Ihe
record of their achievements is of a very high order, and
the citizens of to-day owe them a deep debt of gratitude.
As time goes on the services of past members of ic
Council will be more fully recognised than perhaps tl ey
are today.
In 1883 a petition was presented to His Excellency he
Governor, Sir William Cleaver Francis Robinson, K.C.M G.,
asking that the petitioners he severed from the District
Council of Stepney, and incorporated under the Munici-
pal Corporations Act, No. 190, of 1880, under the sty] of
“The Corporation of St. Peters.” The bounds of he
proposed corporation were described, and it was a ed
that the Town be divided into four wards, to he na ed
respectively—Stepney, Maylands, Hackney, and Fast . e-
laide. The petition was signed by 426 persons.
On Ist August, 1883, a Proclamation was issued >y
His Excellency proclaiming the new Municipality as e-
quested by the petitioners, and this Proclamation appea: 'd
in the “South Australian Government Gazette” of 2nd
August, 1883. It directed that “Joseph Bertram shai be
the first Mayor of the Corporation, Joseph Jackman
and William Robert Sando, Councillors for Stepney d,
Thomas Gamean and William John Hillary Farrant C in-
cillors for Maylands Ward, Thomas Seabrook, M.D, aid
Robert Knowles Councillors for Hackney Ward, Ed ird
White O'Halloran and Thomas Wood Councillors for ast
Adelaide Ward. Auditors. David Hugh Harrison Weir nd
John Thomas Foale.”
The first meeting of the new Council was held a the


Hackney Ward
East Adelaide Ward
£12,138
10.062
Rates
Rates
(1/D
(1/1)
£657
545
9
0
6
6
Stepney W A ard
7.212
Rates
(1/D
390
13
0
Maylands Ward
6,407
Rates
(1/1)
347
0
11
£35,819
£1.940
3
11
Rental
Assessment
Rates.
Values.
Hackney Ward
... £140,292
£2,338 4
0
£23,011
East Adelaide Ward ...
... 252.182
4,203 0
8
43.821
Stepney Ward
... 106,941
1.782 7
0
20,678
May lands Ward
... 162,717
2,7H 19
0
31,737
£662.132
£11,035 10
8
£119,247
]■ k’s Head Hotel (now the Avenues Hotel), on the Pay-
u a m Road, on 7th August, 1883, when the Proclamation
o' die Governor was read, and the Mayor and Council-
1, (with the exception of Mr. Robert Knowles) were
s - >rn in before Messrs. James Scott and Henry Kelly,
justices of the Peace. At this meeting Mr. W. H. Goss
appointed Town Clerk. Surveyor, Valuator, and Regis-
of Dogs. At the following meeting (10th August,
) Mr. Robert Knowles was sworn in as Councillor for
cney Ward.
\t a meeting of the Council on 16th February, 1885,
I ay or reported that at a meeting of ratepayers a reso-
on had been carried by a large majority in favour of
owing the sum of £2,500 for building a Town Hall
Municipal Offices. A poll had been demanded, and
; be held on the 17th inst. At a special meeting-
on 23rd February, 1885, the Mayor further reported
the proposal had been carried by a majority of 100
e, -avers, representing 390 votes. Competitive designs
the proposed building were called for, and that of
Rowland Rees. C.E.. marked “to be or not to be,” was
accepted. On 13th April the tender of Mr. Frank George
was accepted for the Town Hall buildings at £2,374. At
the same meeting a resolution was carried to borrow the
sum of £2,500, on the security of the rates of the town,
for the erection of the building.
The Foundation Stone was laid on 25th May, 188 a, by
Joseph Bertram, J.P., the first Mayor of the Town, and
it is further inscribed with the names of Rowland Rees,
C.E., Architect; Frank George, Builder; and William H.
Goss, Town Clerk.
The amount of assessment (annual values) for the
first year (1883-4) was:—
The assessment, on unimproved land values and rates
at 4d. in the £ for the current year (1936), are as follows ;


£00^*'
||| RL |
IBS * gL ,\ | w
mgm
I w^'
*
JF|| mKnf
jy.y r s £>'*■’- > ,i« jp \ < *Xk^0r
gg ;j . c
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF ST.
PETERS, JOHN FORD, J.P.
Born at Moonta, South Australia,
16th April, 1872, and educated at the
Norwood Public School. Mr. Ford has
served in the St. Peters Corporation
as Councillor for 15 years, Alderman 8
years, and has occupied the Mayoral
Chair for a period of 5 years and 7
months when he completes his present
term in 1937, having served from De-
cember, 1914, to 1916 and 1934 to 1937.
He is Chairman of the Local Board
of Health, and has acted as Chairman
on the following Committees:—Fin-
ance, Works, Town Hall, Building,
Town Planning, Reserve and Flood
Waters. At present Mr. Ford repre-
sents the Council on the East Torrens
Municipal Destructor Trust, the Muni-
cipal Association of South Australia,
and the Suburban, Municipal, and the
District Councils Association. He is
a member of the Lord Mayor of Ade-
laide Relief Fund Committee, Presi-
dent of the St. Peters Benevolent So-
ciety, Inc., a Patron of St. Peters and
Payneham Branch District Trained
Nursing Society, and has been 50 years
a resident of the district. President
of the Master Bootmakers' and Re-
pairers' Association of S.A., and Past
Chairman of the Wellington Road
Public School Committee. Business,
Surgical Bootmaker, in the firm of
John Ford & Sons, Foot-fitting Spe-
cialists. A member of the Payneham
Masonic Lodge and the Oddfellows'
Manchester Unity, and ex-Central
Field Umpire for South Australian
Football Association. President of the
Torrens Valley Rifle Club and the
Payneham Swimming Club. War ser-
vices, Chairman of the Local Recruit-
ing Committee in the years 1915 to
1916. Home address, 46 Morris St.,
Evandale, St. Peters.
JOSEPH HENRY THOMPSON.
(Past Mayor of St. Peters)
One of Adelaide’s best known busi-
ness men is Mr. J. H. Thompson, South
Australian Manager of the Singer
Sewing Machine Company. Mr.
Thompson was born at Jarrow-on-
Tyne, England, and as a boy came with
his parents to Australia. He received
his education at the Balmain Public
School, and when he had finished his
studies he obtained a position with
the Singer Co. That was in January,
1886, and he has remained in the ser-
vice of that Corporation up to the pre-
sent time. Mr. Thompson’s name has
for many years been identified with
the work of the Commercial Travel-
lers’ Association in this State, and it
is 32 years since he became a mem-
ber. He joined in 1904, and la er on
became a Committeeman. I was
next elected a Vice-President, id in
1914 his fellow members showee their
appreciation of his worth by using
him to the position of State ’resi-
dent. Municipal matters have claimed
a good deal of Mr. Th ompsoi s at-
tention, and for 5 years he as a
member of St. Peters Corporation. He
was Mayor in 1914, the sam year
that he was President of the Com-
mercial Travellers’ Associatio and
the incident that stands out me 4 pro-
minently in connection with hi term
of office was when he was calk , upon
to announce the declaration of war
with Germany. Masonic wo k has
also appealed to him, and he has de-


. — I
- -
II
f
iilllk Mm
9Hk .. Jk >JJ
vott a considerable amount of time
to 1 He has held various offices, and
is a Past Master of the Commercial
Lode as well as being a Past Master
of tie Adelaide Mark Lodge. Fie is
also Past Preceptor of the Earl of
Eus n Preceptory, and a Past Provin-
cial : Lib-Prior of Knight Templars of
S.A Mr. Thompson has always taken
an five interest in all manly sports,
par ( ilarly cricket, hor 17 consecu-
tiv ears since he has resided in S.A.
he v is captain of the Commercial
Tr Hers’ Association Cricket Team,
an nee retiring from active play
has several occasions managed the
local earn. "Joe” Thompson, as he is
poj . irly known, contents himself
nowadays with watching the game,
but he takes as keen an interest in it
as ever, and, if he has a hobby, it lies
in the work of the Commercial
Travellers’ Association, which has al-
wavs been dear to him.
HENRY WOOD LANGSFORD, J.P.
(Past Mayor of St. Peters)
Born at Norwood, S.A., 29th August,
1853, and educated at Mr. W. S.
Moore’s School, Pulteney Street. Mr.
Langsford served for 1 year as Coun-
cillor and 5 years as Mayor in the St.
Peters Corporation, and has been 40
years a resident of the district. He
has been a Justice of the Peace for 35
years, Secretary of S.A. Builders and
Contractors’ Association for 28 years,
is a Past Master and foundation mem-
ber of St. Peters Masonic Lodge, and a
member of the Rose of Sharon Odd-
fellows' Lodge. He is also a founda-
tion member and President of St.
Peters Bowling Club. Mrs. Langsford
has been President for 25 years of the
St. Peters Red Cross Society and has
for 30 years been \ ice-President of
the District Trained Nurses' Society.
During the Great War Mr. Langsford
was instrumental in making 10.000
sand bags which were forwarded to
the front. Home address, 32, Third
Avenue, St. Peters.
FRED HURTLE STACEY, M.H.R., J.P.
(Past Mayor of St. Peters)
Born at Carey’s Gully, 6th August,
1879, and educated at Uraidla Public
School. Mr. Stacey served for 2 years
as Councillor, 3 years as Alderman,
and 4 years as Mayor in the St. Peters
Corporation. He is a Justice of the
Peace, a member of the House of Re-
presentatives, in the Federal Parlia-
ment, and a member of the Masonic
Lodge. In business he was a Timber
and Construction Contractor for 20
vears, employing several hundred men.
His sports are golf and bowls. Home
address, 8, Nora Street, Maylands.
FRANK TENNYSON PERRY, M.P.
(Past Mayor of St. Peters)
Born at Gawler, 4th February, 1887,
and educated at State Schools and
Prince Alfred College. Mr. Perry
served as Councillor and Alderman
from 1923-33 and was Mayor during
1933. He has been 16 years a resi-
dent of the district. He was the first
Chairman of the East Torrens De-
structor Trust, Chairman of the Works
and Finance Committees, a member
of the House of Assembly for East
Torrens, and is Chairman and Manag-
ing Director of Perry Engineering Co.,


■#" OT ** ,^ljH
*1
M "
;v>, •-
gi4 * H
|||
” I J
’ J isi
J
/ I * I
m x $ 'flBHHHB
gV «fe j| j||
wiWp- S -^^Bm
?HV jI 'W f ', v>;s
JK jpr JlMiMBKB
■
■'''■V, ’• M
ggg
/*' f, , ‘/ ■r - -' - 'C*; ?
Ltd. He is a member of the Masonic
Lodge and his sports are tennis and
golf. Home address, 2, College Street.
College Park.
ALBERT THOMAS SUTTON, J.P., M.P.
(Past Mayor of St. Peters)
Born at Moonta, 11th December,
1874, and educated at Prince Alfred
College, Kent Town. Mr. Sutton has
held the positions of Councillor, Al-
derman, and Mayor in the St. Peters
Corporation. He is a member of Par-
liament, representing East Torrens in
the House of Assembly, was a mem-
ber of the Metropolitan Abattoirs
Board, is a Justice of the Peace, a
member of the Memorial Hospital
Board and Prince Alfred College Coun-
cil. Business, Silk Merchant. Sport,
bowls. Home address, Stannington
Avenue, Toorak.
HERBERT THOMAS SHEPPARD
STACEY, J.P.
(Past Mayor of St. Peters)
Born at Gawler Place, Adelaide, in
1860, and educated at Whinham Col-
lege. Mr. Stacey served for 16 years
in the Council, and was the first
Alderman elected. Pie has been
a resident of the district for 46
years. Business, General Agency.
Owing to his keenness on bowls the
St. Peters Bowling Club was formed
26 years ago and he is a cricket en-
thusiast. Mr. Stacey was a leading-
advocate in the building of the St.
Peters Institute. Home acl Tress,
Third avenue, St. Peters.
THOMAS MILLER, J.P
(Past Mayor of St. Peters)
Born at Wick, Scotland, 29th 3 arch,
1859, and educated at Wick and A bin-
ham College, North Adelaide. He
erected the first store in Hawk for
Mr. Stokes before the advent o the
railway. His next position was to
drive cattle for Grant & Stok , of
Kanato Station, to Cooper’s Cr ; k in
the far north. Mr. Miller was t the
first meeting in the Buck’s Head lotel
in 1883 to arrange petition t the
Governor, asking severance from the
District Council of Stepney and icon-
porated under the Municipal Co 'ora-
tion Act, No. 190 of 1880. unde the
style of "The Corporation c St.


* "jjSi
PWf
■L % V mt
ml J|
Hk | ■
'I
:|i : :- . ||| - :
j IP ■
p> **■ v
’ MI J., ,, V* |
* jk ■
11 . JMM&
\aM
ers.” In 1891 he went to Southern
nss, Western Australia, for D. & V\ .
Murray. David Tweedie and John Gor-
i in connection with Fraser’s Gold
line, and was on the field when Bailey
and Ford first discovered Coolgardie,
He went from Coolgardie to Hannans
and pegged out the Hidden Treasure
Mine. He has travelled all through
Central Australia and the north-west
of Western Australia. In 1909 he went
to Fiji and did exploration work and
gold mining. During his active muni-
cipal life of 23 years he has served
as Councillor, Alderman, and Mayor.
Mr. Miller has entertained lavishly at
his residence “Millgolen,” Hackney.
He took a great interest in the Cri-
mean veterans of South Australia, and
in 1904, on the jubilee of the Battle of
Inkerman, they presented him with a
unique souvenir in the form of the
roll call of that body. The Caledonian
Society and its activities he always
greatly supported. For several years
past Mr. Miller has spent three to four
months of each year at his Robe resi-
dence in the South-East fishing. He
has been a resident of St. Peters for
over 60 years. Home address, “Mill-
golen,” Botanic Street, Hackney.
PAST ALDERMAN NATHANIEL JOHN
HARGRAVE, Ll.B. (Adel.).
(Corporation of St. Peters)
Mr. Hargrave was born at North
Adelaide, 17th June, 1882, and edu-
cated at St. John’s Grammar School,
St. Peter’s College, and the Univer-
sity of Adelaide. Pie served in St.
Peters Corporation from 1928-31 and
1932-35, and in the Kensington and
Norwood Corporation from 1918-24
and 1926-28. He has been 9 years a
resident of tire district, and was for
17 years a resident of the Norwood
district. Business, Solicitor. Home
address, Marlborough Street, College
Park.
ALDERMAN TOM GOODENOUGH, J.P.
(Corporation of St. Peters.)
Born at sea (2 days from Austra-
lia). sth July, 1853, and educated at
Sheridan’s School. North Adelaide, and
Unwin’s School. Walkerville. Mr.
Goodenough has been Councillor and
Alderman in the Corporation, and Past
Chairman of the Works Committee.
He has been a resident of the district
for 25 years, and in business is a
Builder and Contractor. He has been
for 64 years a member of the Recha-
bite Lodge, and fishing is his chief


? z %
fe ,. t ,
■
.. U \y% s|i'.i m
sport. Home address, corner of 10th
Avenue and Walkerville Road, St.
Peters.
ALDERMAN GEORGE BERNHARD
OTTO, J.P.
(Corporation of St. Peters.)
Born at Stone well. 2nd April, 1894,
and educated at Marananga Public
School and Private School. Mr. Otto
has served in the St. Peters Corpora-
tion for 8 years, 7 years of which he
was Councillor and 1 year Alderman,
and he has been Chairman of the Build-
ing and Town Planning Committee
for 6 years, taking a keen interest in
same, and has been a resident of the
district since 1918. He is a member
of the Norwood High School Coun-
cil, Chairman of the Reserves Com-
mittee, was St. Peters representative
of the Municipal Areas Association
for several years, and was also on the
Executive of that body. Mr. Otto is
Builder and Merchant Principal of the
firm Otto & Co., and is Chairman of
Australian I imbers, Ltd. He is also a
member of the Masonic Lodge, Presi-
dent of the German Club, and a mem-
ber -of the German-Australian Centen-
ary Committee. During the summer
months his sport is tennis, and in win-
ter lacrosse, for which he is referee.
In the years 1922 and 1923 Mr. Otto
toured the world for experience. He
studied the Pelman course, in which
he took a keen interest, and was a
student until he was 27 vears of age
During the Great War he served with
the A.M.F. Home Service for 6 years.
Home address, 103, Magill Road,
Stepney.
ALDERMAN ERNEST HAYLER
HANNAFORD, M.P.
(Corporation of St. Peters.)
Born at Mannahill, 21st June, 1879,
and educated at Private Schools. Mr.
Hannaford was for 10 years Councillor
of Talunga District Council and 7
years Chairman. He has served in the
St. Peters Corporation for 10 years,
occupying all offices, including 2 years
as Mayor, and has been 16 years a re-
sident of the district. He has been a
Member of Parliament for 3 years, re-
presenting the District of Murray.
Business, Apiarist. Mr. Hannaford is
a local preacher, and has for 10 years
been superintendent of the Spicer
Memorial Sunday School, St. Peters
His sport is cricket. Home a Iress
"Talunga," 8, College Stree j St
Peters.
ALDERMAN FRANK CHARLTO J.P.
(Corporation of St. Peters.)
Born at Magill, South An ralia,
26th August, 1886, and educa d in
N.S.W. and South Australia. Mr.
Charlton has served in the St, eters
Corporation for 8 years, 2 ye rs of
which lie was Councillor and rears
Alderman ; 39 years a resident of the
district. Business. Manager f the
Adelaide Safe Deposit. He is : nem-
ber of the Masonic Lodge, a d has
been 26 years a member of St. eter's


, .... J
mt
«&<*? ' ? I fmmwmmi
*V£ 3pp
I
mtBt ■ - 1 B
| , •'"»** jjP
■*
r
College Chapel Choir. Sports, boxing
and tennis. Home address, 23, Janet
Street, Maylands.
PAST COUNCILLOR WILLIAM JOHN
HILLERY FARRANT.
(Corporation of St. Peters.)
Born at Guernsey, England, 20th
May, 1846, and educated at Foulgers,
England, Rev. Moore’s School, and the
Society of Arts by Mr. C. Hill. He ar-
rived in Australia in October, 1854.
Mr. Farrant was one who advocated
and obtained corporate powers for
the district of St. Peters, S.A., and was
appointed one of the first Councillors
of the Corporation. He is now the
only one living. Mr. Farrant claims to
have been a very active member of the
State from his boyhood. He assisted
Ins late father in his business, and later
on his own account became an Archi-
tect and Builder. \\ ith his father he
built Maughan Church, Franklin
Street, Wakefield Hotel, many post
offices and schools, the Ozone Hotel,
Kangaroo Island, and many private
residences, and also generally contri-
buted to the progress of the beauti-
ful City of Adelaide. He is
a member of St. Andrew's Masonic
Lodge, and is at present retired. Home
address, "St. Pierre," 16, Payneham
Road, Joslin, S.A.
MRS. A. K. GOODE
(Past Councillor of St. Peters Corporation)
Mrs. Goode has held many honorary
positions in South Australia, and was
the first woman J.P. in the British
Empire to preside in a Court of jus-
tice. She was instrumental in gain-
ing - many reforms in law in the inte-
rest of women and children, and was
for 17 years on the Executive of the
Liberal Union, being Chairwoman of
the Adelaide branch for 10 years, Sec-
retary of the Liberal Women's Educa-
tion Association for 6 years, and Pre-
sident of the Women's Educational As-
sociation. Mrs. Goode retired from
party politics in 1926. The undermen-
tioned are a few of the honorary posi-
tions held by her : —-Vice-President of
Women's State Recruiting Committee
and State Children's Council since
1917, Censor of Cinematographs since
1917, and she has been a Justice of
the Peace for South Australia since
1917, New South Wales 1926, and Vic-
toria since 1931. Mrs. Goode was an
Official Visitor to the Mental Hospital
from 1919 to 1925, a Visiting Justice
to the Adelaide Gaol and the Institu-
tion for Inebriates from 1923 to 1930.
She was Municipal Councillor for


~~~ I
Hackney Ward, St. Peters Corpora-
tion, from 1925 to 1935, a member of
Metropolitan County Board from
1- 31 to 1930, and a member of the
Council for Promotion of Local In-
dustries (Minister of Industry) from
A 1933. She is also a member
ot the Executive of the Free Kinder-
garten Union of South Australia, the
irst President of the Housewives' As-
sociation of South Australia, and an
honorary Vice-President for life.
PAST COUNCILLOR HECTOR GEORGE
BRADLEY, B.A. (Trinity College, Dublin),
J.P.
(Corporation of St. Peters.)
Born in Ireland, 15th July, 1853, and
educated at the public school, Church
School and Trinity College, Dublin.
Arrived in Australia in December,
1855. Mr. Bradley served in the
Council for 20 years, 8 years of which
he was Councillor and 12 years
Alderman. He was employed
ior years by James Marshall
and Co., now the Myer Emporium. He
is a life member of St. Peters Model
Parliament and Literary Society, Vice-
President of St. Peters Benevolent So-
ciety, and a member of the Duke of
Leinster Masonic Lodge. Sports, row-
ing and shooting. Mr. Bradley is now
in his 84th year. Home address, May-
lands, St. Peters.
PAST COUNCILLOR JOHN JAMES
CLARK, J.P.
(Corporation of St. Peters)
Born at North Gumeracha, 1860, and
educated at North Gumeracha State
School. Business, retired. A member
of the H.A.C.B.S. Lodge, holding the
position of Grand President for two
terms. Sport, cricket. Mr. Clark
served for 3 years in the St. Peters
Corporation, and is also a Past Coun-
cillor of the Unley City Council and
Past Chairman of the Marion District
Council.
PAST COUNCILLOR JOHN FRITH, J.P.
(Corporation of St. Peters.)
Born at Kapunda, 10th March, 1869,
and educated at Ballarat, Victoria.
Four years’ service in Council; a resi-
dent of the district for 40 years. A
past member of the Finance. Work,
and Town Hall Committees, a mem-
ber of the Masonic, Oddfellows’ and
Druids’ Lodges, and 40 years a Jus-
tice of the Peace. Business, Mai i
facturer. Sport, rifle shooting. Home
address, 36, Harrow Road, St. Pete s.
COUNCILLOR HENRY CHARLES
AUSTIN, J.P.
(Corporation of St. Peters.)
Born at Athelstone, 15th July, IS 0,
and educated at Athelstone and P;
neham Public Schools. Service n
Council, 10 years; 22 years a resid it
of the district. President of
Wholesole Merchants of S.A., Cha r-
man of Directors of several co i-
panies. Produce Merchant and SB t
ping Provider and Fruit Exporter to
all parts of the world. Mr. Austir is
a Past Grandmaster and Trustee of
the Foresters’ Lodge. Past Grand
Director of the Freemasons’ Lodge,
and a foundation Master of the Tom ns
\ alley Masonic Lodge. His sports are
cy cling, football, tennis, and crici ct;
played for Norwood Football Club in
the least Torrens Association fo 8


IHBHHhhI
& ju ilSlIIKW ■
;
■'
■0W
years. Mr. Austin has had a success
ful career, has made a lot of friends,
and believes in trying to do something
to help those less fortunate than him-
self.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM ALFRED
BRETT, J.P.
(Corporation of St. Peters.)
Born at Oatlands Park. Weybridge,
Surrey, England, in 1884. and educated
at Oatlands Park School. Arrived in
Australia on April 13th, 1908. Four
years’ service in Council. Chairman
of the Building Committee, a member
of the Finance, Works, and Town Hall
Committees, the Price Memorial Choir
(soloist), and St. Peters Model Par-
liament. Nine years a resident of the
district. Business, Storekeeper. Mr.
Brett is a member of the Oddfellows’
and Buffalo Lodges, and his sports are
soccer and tennis. He was a keen or-
ganiser of the Red Cross during the
war years. Home address, 19, Fourth
Avenue, St. Peters.
COUNCILLOR GORDON EDWARD
SUNTER, F.F.I.A. (S.A.).
(Corporation of St. Peters.)
Born at Norwood, 29th October,
1882, and educated at Prince Alfred
College, Kent Town. A member of
the Stock Exchange, Adelaide, Presi-
dent of the Taxpayers’ Association of
S.A. from 1933-34. Vice-Chairman of
the S.A. division of the Federal Insti-
tute of Accountants, a member of the
Executive of the S.A. Orchestra, and
the Adelaide Club. Business, Stock-
broker. Sports, walking and motor-
ing. Private address, St. Helens, Pem-
broke Street, Pt. Peters.
COUNCILLOR HORACE EDGAR DUN-
STONE, M.8., 8.5., J.P.
(Corporation of St. Peters.)
Born at Beetaloo, S.A., 7th May,
1890, and educated at LeFevre’s Penin-
sula and Victor Harbour Schools, also
Largs Bay College and the Adelaide
University. Dr. Dunstone has been 4
years a Councillor for Maylands Ward
in the St. Peters Corporation, and also
Chairman of the Mayor’s Parlour. He
was appointed a Justice of the Peace
in 1919. He is a Medical Practitioner
by profession, and is a member of the
Masonic, Oddfellows, M.U., Oddfel-
lows’ Triple Link, Foresters’, Druids’.
Rechabites, and Free Gardeners’
Lodges. Dr. Dunstone is Surgeon to


ppspwfc
'■ n :■'*(
'':vs|«.
' 'f ■
S nB||
the Port Adelaide Football Club and
Honorary Surgeon to the East Tor-
rens Cricket, Baseball, and Lacrosse
Clubs, and also the Football Associa-
tion. Flying is his chief hobby. He
was trained at Parafield, and has seve-
ral fine feats to his record, including
a Pilot's Certificate. Private address,
124, Pavneham Road, St. Peters.
COUNCILLOR LESLIE WALTER
CRISP.
(Corporation of St. Peters.)
Born at Collingwood, Victoria, 1884.
Mr. Crisp was elected in 1935 to repre-
sent Hackney Ward. St. Peters Cor-
poration. He is a well known figure
in the Leather and Sporting trade cir-
cles throughout the Commonwealth.
In business he is the Manager of the
firm Julius Cohn & Co., Leigh Street,
Adelaide. Home address, 11, Marlbo-
rough Street, St. Peters.
COUNCILLOR HARRY TINGEY, J.P.
(Corporation of St. Peters.)
Born at Adelaide, 3rd July, 1888, and
educated at East Adelaide and Grote
Street Public Schools. Service in
Council from July, 1935; 38 years a
resident of the district. Secretary of
the Limbless Soldiers’ Association,
President of the 32nd Battalion, A.1.F.,
Past President of St. Peters Sub-
Branch R.S.A., secretary of C.T.A.
Diggers’ Club, and President of the
East Torrens Baseball Club. During
the war Mr. Tingey served abroad
with the 32nd Battalion, A.J.F., from
1915-17. Home address, 19, Wheaton
Road, St. Peters.
COUNCILLOR REGINALD CHARI S
FERGUSON.
(Corporation of St. Peters)
Born at North Kensington, )th
April, 1898, and educated at the or-
wood Public School. Mr. Ferg son
was elected Councillor, 4th July, B(J,
and he is a compositor by occup; don.
A member of the Masonic, and ! ast
Master of the Grand United Ord : of
Free Gardeners’ Lodges. He is the
youngest member of the Council. His
sport is cricket, being an umpire i he
United C. hurch and New Adt aide
Cricket Associations. Mr. Fenius nis


M
*' I f
IIP' *$s*
/Hj|
a .-ward of the Spicer Memorial
Methodist Church, and his private ad-
dress is 52 Eighth Avenue, St. Peters.
STANLEY RONALD APPELBEE.
(Town Clerk, Corporation of St. Peters.)
Born at Kensington, 18th August,
1904, and educated at Marryatville
Public School and Norwood District
Iligh School. Mr. Appelbee has served
in the Corporation for 13 years, 11
years of which he was Assistant Town
Clerk and 2 years Town Clerk. He is
Secretary of the Local Board of Health
and a member of the Royal Oak
Druids' Lodge. Mr. Appelbee is at
present studying public administra-
tion at the University of Adelaide.
He played A grade football with the
Norwood League team from 1926 to
1930, and has also played B grade
cricket with the Kensington District
Cricket Club. Home address, 16,
Primrose Terrace, Rosslyn Park.




Corporation and District Council of
Strathalbyn


History of Strathalbyn
vrord Strathalbyn” is of Scottish derivation—
Strath meaning' valley, and “albyn” meaning “white”—
the name being given by early Scottish settlers in memory
of a white valley.
Sti athalbyn was in the early days the chief meeting
and camping place of at least two tribes of aboriginals prior
to and for some time after the settlement. It was pro-
claimed a District Council in 1860 and incorporated eight
years later.
1 he area of the Corporation is approximately 750 acres,
and was originally laid out on Section 2600. Hundred of
Strathalhyn, County of Hindmarsh.
i here are 11 miles of streets and roads and 260 houses,
together with a large number of business places.
The capital value of ratable property is £236,380. and
the assessment value is £11.819. A rate of 2/6 in the £
yields a revenue of £1,477.
The River Angas flows through the township, the
wards of which are connected by 11 bridges. The town-
ship of Strathalhyn is centrally situated in the district,
v Inch lattei has an area of 210,000 acres, and the capital
value of which is £860,000 and the assessment value £43,000.
The total district rate is 1/ in the £, producing the sum
of £2.150.
The population of the town is 1,200 persons.
The District Council controls the district around
Strathalhyn, and takes in the townships of Milang, Wood-
chester, and Langhorne’s Creek, the newly amalgamated
area, which extends right to the lakes.
The Municipality is beautified with its “Peninsula
Memorial Park,” having an area of nearly three acres, on
which is erected a handsome granite monument to the
memory of local soldiers who were killed during the Great
War.
The “Children’s Bridge” (a gift by the late Mr. Wil-
liam Richardson in memory of his wife) connects the Park
to Commercial Road. Adjacent to the Peninsula and
near the camping ground a spacious swimming area is
provided on the River Angas.
An electric lighting scheme, owned and controlled by
the Corporation, has proved to be a profitable investment,
and the convenience is greatly appreciated by the 260 con-
sumers and by the residents generally.
The following is a list of the past members of the
Corporation:—Messrs. E. J. Tucker. J. Bell. R. M. Tucker,
J. T. Kerslake, J. J. Raggatt, F. Woolfitt, Dr. H. H.
Formby, J. J. Brown, J. W. Elliott. A. J. Pool. A. Semple,
and A. Burgess.
Corporation of Strathalbyn.—Present Council con-
stituted as follows; —Mr. J. S. Richardson (the Mayor),
Councillors G. D. Jones, C. S. Woolfitt, W. H. Gilbert, and
C. L. A. Wyatt, and W. E. Adams (Town Clerk).
District Council.—Past members—Messrs. J. Richard-
son, H. Dunn, G. Watt, senr.. E. L. Tucker, F. Abbott,
Collett, E. W. Tucker, G. Stacey, S. Rogers, B. T. Binner,
E. Hocking-Pilkington, Sir Lancelot Stirling, Messrs.
W. G. E. Tucker, W . B. Gemmell, W. Manion, W. G. Wa ,
T. Bottrill.
District Council of Strathalbyn.—-Present Council con-
stituted as follows; — Messrs. H. C. Dunn (Chairman), A 5.
S. Day, A. H. Howard, W. S. Yelland, H. Harvey, A. A.
B. Jaensch, R. Walsh, T. Wenzel, P. R. Dodd, R. G. Mont-
gomery (District Clerk), and E. E. Newell (Overseer).


t
H. C. DUNN.
(Chairman, District Council of Strathalbyn.)
Mr. H. C. Dunn has been engaged in
Agricultural pursuits all his life, and
has been a most successful farmer and
pastoralist. He owns a farm on the
Finnis River, Strathalbyn.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE DONALD
JONES.
(District Council of Strathalbyn.)
Mr. Jones was born at Strathalbyn
on the 21st February, 1887, and has
resided in the District all his life. He
is Councillor for West Ward, which
he has represented for nine years. Fie
is in business as a General Printer ; has
been Secretary of the Strathalbyn
Racing Club for a number of years, and
for 14 years of the Rechabite Lodge,
and Committeeman of the Strathalbyn
A. &H. Society. Mr. Jones has taken
an active interest in all sports in the
District, and was Secretary of the
Rifle Club for some years, and won
the S.A. Small Bore Championship
two years in succession. His score has
never been beaten. Mr. Jones has
done a great deal of good work to fur-
ther the improvements in the Town of
Strathalbyn during his term in the
Council.




< &
S f .v ,
Corporation of fhebarton
Colonel Light's Cottage, built on the corner of Winwood and
Cawthorne Streets, Southwark,


History of Thebarton
COMPILED BY C. E. WYETT, TOWN CLERK
niHW > to n w as formerly part of the West Torrens
rnte 5 Councl '- years ago Thebarton only had a
tPn Vnm m,e u° i/H ' V tha P°P ulati °n of probably less
an 1,000, whereas today the rate revenue is £l5 593 and
population 15 000 What is now known as the Old Town
Hall was built in 1885, only two years after the Town was
pine aime and it still stands as a monument to the enter-
-1 T the V iti^ nSj and the s pl en did workmanship
pi ll C Gr ' T le New Town Hall, Assembly Hall, and
Office Block were constructed in 1928. These buildings
aie i ecognised as the most up-to-date and best equipped
m " m^P al buildin £ s in the suburbs of Adelaide.
i . • ?, Thebarton Oval is also recognised as one of the
best m the State, the playing area being the second largest
Adjoining the oval is a very fine building known as the
Thebarton I echmcal High School, at which boys are taught
many useful trades.
Thebarton also has the proud distinction of having had
among its citizens the late Colonel Light, who for some
} ears resided in the town, while he planned and laid out the
City of Adelaide. The Council erected a Memorial Tablet
at the site where his home was built. Governor Hind-
marsh also lived in Reid Street, Southwark.
The Bakewell Bridge makes an imposing entrance to
the town. _ The bridge was erected and is maintained bv
the Municipal J ram ways Trust, and much credit must be
given to them for their broad outlook.
The general progress of the Town is too apparent to
need comment, other than to say that the best thanks of
the citizens are due to past and present members of the
Council for their co-ordination of effort which has resulted
m a Town replete with good roads and footways, together
with the many other comforts of a modern town
Too much praise cannot be given to those societies
who, year in and year out, give their services to assist the
poor and needy, and also assist and advise mothers in the
care and proper feeding of babies. The societies arc-
r[ he District Trained Nursing Society, the Women’s Ser-
vice Association, and the Mothers’ and Babies’ Health
Association. Other societies do good work in many
directions.
A large portion of what was known as Torrensville
and Mile End was in the early forties the first racecourse
in Adelaide, and several streets have been named after
famous racehorses in those days, including Falcon Avenue,
Norma Street, Ebor Avenue, Lurline Street, and Cowra
Stieet. Adam Lindsay Gordon frequently rode on the old
lacecourse. Portion of the course is now covered bv the
New Town Hall.
Another interesting feature is that in the early fifties
and dining the exodus to the Victorian goldfields only
one man was left in Thebarton.
The first Council of the Town of Thebarton (1883)
consisted of the following;—
Mayor—B. Taylor.
TV Pritchard J. Vardon
E. C. Hemmingway \y Pepper
J. Stephenson j VI an n i
J. Broderick R. Wilson*
PROCLAIMED FEBRUARY 7th, 1883.
The following gentlemen have occupied the Ma\ ral
position during the past fifty years in the order in w ich
their names appear:—Mr. Benjamin Taylor, J.P., Mr. J.
Roland, J.I ~ Mr. B. J. McCarthy, J.P., Mr. James Mam dig,
J.P.. Mr. Hemingway, J.P., Mr. R. Burns Cuming. TL
Mr. W. Weber, J.P., Mr. C. B. Ware. J.P., Mr. W. H Good-
enough, J.P., Mr. A. W. Styles, J.P., Vlr. A. A. Cot ns.
J.P., Vlr. Thompson Green, J.P., Vlr. A. W Lemon P
Mr. A. J. Blackwell. J.P., Vlr. J. L. Leal, J.P., Mr. A h!
Pretty, J.P., Mr. E. T. Isley, J.P., Mr. H. S. Hatwell ~ P
Mr. M. Watson, J.P., Mr. J. Langdon, J.P. ' '
STATISTICS, 1933
Length of streets. 25 miles.
Main roads, 3 miles 613 chains.
Mam roads paved with wood blocks, 5L| chains.
Vlain roads paved with bituminous concrete, 122 chains.


Total assessment for 1933, £748,496.
Total rates declared sd. in the £, yielding £15,593/13/4.
Thebarton comprises the subdivisions of Torrensville,
Mile End, Southwark, West Thebarton, Hemington, Fre-
manton, and Torrenside. The area is 1,098 acres, and
the population estimated at 14,844; number of houses,
V 761; capital value, £2,500,000.
Industries. —Brewery, engineering works, battery
;orks, soap factory, brick yards, cooperages, pickle works,
. itillery, foundries, blanket factory, wool scouring works,
isiery mill, boot and other polish works, tanneries, manu-
acturing chemists, ice and ice cream factory, cereal mills,
dumbing works, chemical works, paint factory, fibrous
plaster works, olive oil manufacturing company, dyers and
furriers.
Institutions.—Technical School, Institute and Library,
Central School and two private schools, four private hos-
pitals, new Town Hall, office block and Assembly Hall (built
1927 at cost of £32,000), recreation ground of 14 acres.
MEMBERS OF THE THEBARTON TOWN COUNCIL,
1935-1936.
Mayor —J. Langdon, J.P.
Aldermen J. L. Leal, J.P., J. Sandow, J.P., H. S. Hat-
well, J.P., F. Worrell, Councillors J. Mason, F. G. Phelps.
E. T. Isley, J.P., M. Watson, J.P., T. Green, J.P., W. H. D.
James, A. A. House, and W. H. Edmonds, J.P.


.V ' t^^pv ; v
* I I
■P* »*■»«.. 9 I
> M
f I
' 'M&
.
,
1%; - ”3n \ 8iii£iil
i .. j&., r .
> il&\* * j ‘||X' i
* h ' ,y '
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF
THEBARTON, JULES LANGDON.
Mr. Langdon was born on 31st May,
1871, at Kapunda, and educated at the
State School there. He has served
5 years as Councillor and 4 years as
Mayor of Thebarton. He is President
of the D.T.N. Society, and is a life
member of the S.A. Ambulance Trans-
port and closely associated with many
local activities of a social, charitable,
and sporting nature. He is a mem-
ber of the Masonic Lodge and his
sports are bowls and motoring. He has
retired from business, and his present
address is Huntriss Street, Torrens-
ville.
ALDERMAN JAMES L. LEAL.
(Corporation of Thebarton.)
Born at Bnrslem, Staffordshire,
England, and educated at Caterer’s
Commercial College, Norwood. Mr.
Leal is an ex-Mayor of Thebarton, and
during his Mayoral term Mrs. Leal
founded the Thebarton Women's Ser-
vice Association, which is now widely
spread. She received the King's Jubi-
lee Medal, and in 1935 was decorated
with an Order of the British Empire.
Mr. Leal is Director of Whillas and
Ormiston, Printers and Stationers,
President of Thebarton Boy Scouts'
Association, a member of the Tram-
ways Trust, and he is also on the State
Council of the D.T.N.S. He is con-
nected with many other organisations,
and with Mrs. Leal received the King's
Jubilee Medal.
ALDERMAN FRANK WORRELL.
(Corporation of Thebarton.)
Mr. Worrell was born at Kadina on
September 9th, 1876, and was edit-
cated there. He has been a Coun-
cillor and Alderman for the past 15
years in the Corporation, and has
done yeoman service for the town.
He is a member of the Independent
Order of Rechabites. In sport he fd-
lows bowls and cricket.
PAST MAYOR EDWIN THOMAS
ISLEY.
(Corporation of Thebarton.)
He was born at Sydney, N.S.W., ith
November, 1862, and educated at the
Church of England Denominational
School, Braidwood, N.S.W. He served
in the Council for 18 years and has
been 34 years a resident of the dis-
tich Positions he held in the Coun-
cil are Councillor, Alderman, and
Mayor, and at present is a Coun-
cillor. He is a builder and contrac or,


* 4*‘ ' *
H gfT ‘
'S Jj|l /.'■/ :
\
• I
■V •
and Past Master of the Torrensville
Masonic Lodge. Mr. Isley has been
connected with all philanthropic insti-
tutions during the 34 years he has
resided in Thebarton. He has been
Chairman of Thebarton Junior Tech-
nical School Council since its incep-
tion in 1914. Mr. Isley and his wife
have been connected with the District
Trained Nursing Society for many
years. Mrs. Isley in an honorary
capacity was a collector for the society
for 25 years. Mr. Isley had two sons
who served in the Great War and
both returned.
COUNCILLOR HARRY SUMNER
HATWELL, J.P.
(Corporation of Thebarton.)
tie was born at Terowie, 21st Sep-
tember, 1880, and educated at Nara-
coorte and Kingston Public Schools.
He has 20J years' service in the Coun-
cil. Mr. Hatwell has been a resident
of the district for 23 years, and has
held the positions of Councillor, Al-
derman, and Mayor. He is in busi-
ness is a master painter, and is a mem-
ber of the Torrensville Masonic Lodge,
No. 58, the Rotary Club and Central
Board of Health, President of the
Suburban, Municipal and District
Councils Association, member of two
Wages Boards, Hon. Secretary of the
Master Painters' Association, and a
Director of the Adelaide Co-op. So-
ciety. His sports are angling, bowls,
and tennis.
COUNCILLOR FREDERICK GEORGE
PHELPS.
(Corporation of Thebarton.)
He was born at Newtown, N.S.W.,
Bth September, 1887, and educated at
Hindmarsh Public School. He has 4
years' service as Councillor and 2
years as Chairman of the Thebarton
Oval Committee. Business, Engineer.
He is a member of the U.A.O.D. Al-
bert Lodge. Bowden. His sports are
cricket and tennis.
COUNCILLOR ARTHUR AVALON
HOUSE.
(Thebarton Corporation.)
Mr. House was born at Adelaide
on 7th May, 1896, and educated at
Flinders Street Public School and Ade-
laide High School. He has served in
the Council for the past 12 years, and
is a consistent supporter of local
public affairs and has served the rate-
payers well. Mr. House has been a
resident of the district for 27 years.
In business he is Deputy Public Trus-


,
1||; ' N >,\" f
BBbbB ,
Mm
, ; ■ —th, J^-.»§
I ;., /V;..
• > ' v '’ i, ' tff< -‘- '■
■
* ; .■■/ i «■■■ —*» ■ '
. w ** c
V
$M*0 -.r ■ ■
B v
■ JKm
• "''Jmm M Ss* 11
'■■mgMM v i 5 j
h*. f
BwSa23« ?4iSs**4. ii^HBM
tee. He is a member of the Indepen-
dent Order of Oddfellows, and is a
bowls enthusiast.
COUNCILLOR WALTER H. D. JAMES.
(Corporation of Thebarton.)
He was born at Minlaton, Y.P., 12th
December, 1879, and educated at Sis-
ters of St. Joseph School, Adelaide.
Mr. James has served 15 years in the
Corporation as Councillor and Aider-
man, and has always given his best
to the ratepayers and the town, and
his work has been much appreciated.
He is a member of Torrensville Ma-
sonic Lodge, No. 58. and Foresters’
Court Homely Retreat. He is a foun-
dation member of the Thebarton Pro-
gress Association, and was 2 years
Chairman and 6 years Treasurer. He
is a member of the Thebarton Band
Committee, the Boy Scouts' As-
sociation Committee, and Trustee of
the Holder Memorial Church. He is
a Commercial Traveller, and is Vice-
President of the Holder Memorial
Football and Cricket Clubs.
COUNCILLOR JOSEPH SANDOW.
(Corporation of Thebarton.)
Born at Burra, South Australia, 9th
February, 1858, and educated there.
Mr. Sandow has a record of 21
years’ service in the Corporation,
both as Councillor and Alderman, and
has done great work for the Town
of Thebarton, and the ratepayers in
particular. He is at present retired
from business. Mr. Sandow is a fol-
lower of cricket.
COUNCILLOR THOMPSON GREEN
(Corporation of Thebarton.)
Mr. Green was born in Scotland. 6lh
January, 1861, and educated at pulV’c
schools, and arrived in Australia i
1886. He was Mayor of Thebartc i
from 1914 to 1916, and has also serv d
the ratepayers as Alderman and Cot
cillor, and is at present occupying the
position of Councillor. He has giv n
splendid service to the ratepayers if
Thebarton Corporation, many i i
provements having been carried out A
his suggestion and foresight. 2r.
Green is retired from business. I : s
sport is bowls.


\ 'filly :
■BP :
jg.
I *
ALDERMAN WILLIAM ALLEN.
(Corporation of Thebarton.)
Born at Quorn, South Australia,
26th May, 1882; educated at Prince
Alfred College. Service in Council; 1
year. Thirteen years a resident of the
district. Business, Licensed Victualler.
Mr. Allen has held important posi-
tions in various other States. At one
time he was the manager of the West
Australian “Sunday Times” at Kal-
goorlie. After holding offices in other
organisations came to South Austra-
lia and started business on Henley
Beach Road. Later he took over the
Lady Daly Hotel. Hindmarsh. He re-
presented Musgrave Ward in the The-
barton Corporation for 4 years, also
Chairman of the Finance Committee.
Elected Auditor for Thebarton Cor-
poration for 2 years. A member of
the Executive of South Australian
L.V.A. and representative on the
Brewers' Association. Foundation
member of the Licensed Victuallers'
Racing Club Committee, also Totaliza-
tor Steward of the club. Mr. Allen
is a member of all metropolitan rac-
ing clubs and has raced several good
horses, both in Adelaide and in Mel-
bourne. He has been very successful
with these, and one in particular (Glen-
anton) holds two records at Caulfield
and Flemington. He has held the posi-
tion of joint secretary to South Aus-
tralian Licensed Victuallers' Charity
Carnival for a period of 10 years, and
during that time over £6,009 has been
raised for charity. Mr. Allen's daugh-
ter (Miss Marjorie Allen) was nomi-
nated in the beach girl contest to raise
funds for the Lord Mayor's Relief
Fund, and a sum of £6BO was raised.
Miss Allen received more votes than
all the other candidates combined. Al-
derman Allen is at the present time
on the Works, Foreshore, Oval, and
Building Committees of the Glenelg
Council, and also representative on the
Suburban Municipal and District
Councils Association, a member of
Glenelg Commemoration Day Sports
Committee, a member of the Execu-
tive of the Centenary Committee. An
outstanding feature during his short
duration of municipal affairs in Glen-
elg was the handling of the toast of
Australia at the last Old Colonists'
Dinner on Commemoration Day, when
Australia.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM HAROLD
EDMONDS.
(Corporation of Thebarton.)
Born at Peterborough, 3rd Novem-
-433
ber, 1893, and educated at Adelaide
High School, Muirden College, and
Adelaide University. Mr. Edmonds
has served in the Council for 5 years,
and for 30 years been a resident of
the district. He is a member of the
1.0.0. F. Manchester Unity Lodge,
Hindmarsh, and the South Australian
Rowing Association. He was cer-
geant with 18th Battery, A.1.E., 1915
to 1918. His sport is rowing.
COUNCILLOR OLIVER R. TURNER,
J.P.
(Corporation of Thebarton.)
Born in Victoria, 21st May, 1896, and
educated at the Christian Brothers’
Colleges, Victoria and South Austra-
lia. Mr. Turner was elected to the
Council on 4th July, 1936, and has
been 26 years a resident of the dis-
trict. He is a member of the Fin-


gj|* * £*j -li
'
ance and Health Committee and Com-
mittee of the Thebarton Municipal
Band, President of the Thebarton
Progress Association, and a Justice of
the Peace. He is a distinguished
Freemason, holding important Grand
Lodge Office. He is a Dental Surgeon
by profession, and his sports are
yachting, motoring, and fishing. Pri-
vate address, "De Verde," Parker
Street, Mile End.
COUNCILLOR M. WATSON.
(Corporation of Thebarton.)
Born at Preston. Victoria, 13th Jan-
uary, 1875, and educated at Melbourne.
Ele arrived in South Australia Ist
April, 1914, and has served in the
Council for 15 years as Councillor,
Alderman, and Mayor. In business he
is an Engineer. Mr. Watson has been
45 years a member of Manchester
Unity 1.0.0. F. He was a Past Grand
in Victoria, also P.G. in South Aus-
tralia, and a Trustee. P.M. King Ed-
ward VIP Masonic Lodge, No. 61,
S.A.C., President of the Thebarton
Municipal Band, Committeeman of the
Thebarton District Trained Nursing
Society and Boy Scouts' Association,
\ ice-President Thebarton Choral
Society, and Patron of the Western
Districts Amateur Athletic Associa-
tion. His sport is football.
COUNCILLOR JOSEPH MASON.
(Corporation of Thebarton.)
Mr. Joseph Mason, who now resides
at 36, De Laine Avenue, Edwardstown.
was born at Birmingham, England, on
20th November, 1865, and received his
education at that city. On 2nd June,
1911, he arrived in Australia, and en-
terecl the South Australian Public Ser-
vice (fromy which he has now ret ed)
His chief sport is bowls. He is now
a Councillor of the Thebarton Cor-
poration.
CHARLES EDMUND WYETT, TOWN
CLERK AND SURVEYOR.
(Corporation of Thebarton.)
Born 18th November, 1875, at Fos-
ter, Victoria. Air. Wyett has been 22
years Town Clerk and Survey( r at
Thebarton. He was educated a the
Launceston Grammar School. Tas-
mania. For some years he was lon.
Secretary of the Suburban Mun ipal
earn! District Councils Association He
is a member of the Druids’ Lodge and


«yisi
«£ *'*7*.
in sport favours tennis and bowls. His
present address is 3, Shipster Street,
Torrensville.




Corporation of Victor Harbour


History of Victor Harbour
V hen the surf, granite rocks, snowy beaches, and
other attractions of the \ ictor Harbour district lure
holidaymakers to that popular resort, few of the visitors
lealise the fascinating historical background that the south
coast owns. The capital of South Australia might have
been located at Encounter Bay but for the strenuous
opposition of Colonel \\ illiam Light and his supporters,
v hile whalers used the towering Bluff as a lookout to sight
their prey.
\ ictor Harbour as a busy seaport, shipping overseas
v 00l and wheat of the inland, and geological records
graven on the rocks that tell of great glaciers irresistibly
moving down from mountains that disappeared millions
of years ago, are other phases of the fascinating past of
this playground of our people.
HALS. \ ictor anchored in the lee of Granite Island
in 1837, and her commander, Captain Crozier, named the
harbour after his ship. The proximity of the port to the
Kir er Murray caused many colonists to favour its selection
as the site of South Australia's capital.
Governor Hindmarsh. who had acquired property on
the north bank of the Hindmarsh near the mouth, was
protagonist of this move, but the supporters of Adelaide
won the day.
WHALER'S LOOKOUT.
The Bluff, or Rosetta Head —its correct title —served
as a lookout for the whalers who had established their
boiling down works in the bay to the north-east of that
headland. When a whale was sighted spouting out at sea,
the lookout man would hoist a signal, and the boats would
swiftly put out. The South Australian Company was
interested in this fishery, and Captain Blenkinsop con-
ducted another close to the present site of Victor Har-
bour town. This was in 1837. Some whalebone is still to
be seen near the shore end of the jetty, while a huge pot
used to boil down blubber is preserved in a garden in the
district.
Many years before the steam railway linked Victor
with Adelaide, the southern port had a horse tramway
connecting’ it with Goolwa. In 1852 this line, the first
railway laid in Australia, was completed from the Murray
at Goolwa to Port Elliot, and used to transport wool and
other products brought down the river to the port, where
it was loaded into deepwater ships. Port Elliot proved
unsafe, however, and several wrecks there caused the
authorities to condemn it as a harbour, and extend the
tramway to Victor. This was done in 1864.
To bring down wheat for shipment, this line was later
extended to Finniss and Strathalbyn. Passengers from
Adelaide then travelled to Strathalbyn by coach, and com-
pleted the journey to Victor Harbour by horse tram.
Years later the railway linked Adelaide and Stratha wn,
and the first through train to Victor ran in 1885.
In the meantime Victor Harbour had become a msy
port, visited by ships and steamers that loaded for Britain
and elsewhere. Wool and wheat, outward, and supplies
for sheep stations and towns up the river as fa: as
Echuca comprised most of the cargo handled, and the t ade
called for better harbour facilities.
BREAKWATER BUILT.
The breakwater and screw-pile jetty were comp 1 ted
in 1882. but the money expended on it was wasted, for
trade languished as a result of Government action. he
railway to Morgan, opened in 1878, tapped the Murra; at
Xorth-West Bend, and cargo that formerly went to Victor
was diverted to Port Adelaide, and has gone there ver
since, so the costly harbour works on Granite Island to-
day only shelter fishing and pleasure boats.
The geologist finds much to interest him near Victor,
for there is ample evidence that millions of vears ago a
great mountain range existed to the south, and a mighty
glacier moved northward to Hallett’s Cove and bevond.
The dome of the Bluff was shaped by ice action, M unt
Breckan hill contains glacial debris, while in the In nan
Wiley are to be seen rock pavements that were polished
and scored by stones borne slowly across them by the ice.


But the mountains sank into the sea aeons ago, and the ice
has long since melted.
Proud of its varied past, some residents of Victor still
ho e that it will one day become a seaport of importance
again, thriving on the trade of the Murray and Darling
Rivers. This would be possible if a canal, planned many
years ago, were dug from Goolwa. It would enable river
steamers and barges to go alongside deepsea ships moored
ctor Harbour, and tranship cargo direct, for water-
borne transport is more economical than by land.
ITost people, however, see a bright future for Victor
Hr hour in its present popular role of one of South Aus-
tin. ,’s most delightful playgrounds.
CORPORATION OF VICTOR HARBOUR.
Victor Harbour is situated on the south coast of South
Australia, 81 miles from Adelaide by rail and 54 miles by
road. It is the principal town of a large area, and is one
of the most beautiful and popular seaside resorts in Aus-
tralia —it is, indeed, a holidaymaker’s paradise.
The town has an excellent water service, reticulated
the Hindmarsh Valley Reservoir, which has a capa-
city of a hundred million gallons, and which was completed
in 1917. Victor Harbour is lit by a continuous electric
lighting scheme from a new and complete plant just
installed. It has a fine Town Hall and an Institute well
stocked with books.
The foreshore is a beautiful stretch of ground, which
has been improved in later years very extensively, and is
considered one of the show places of the State. On it has
been built a most convenient clubhouse, with an eight-rink
bowling green, six asphalt tennis courts, and a ladies’
croquet lawn.
The Soldiers’ Memorial Garden is very beautiful, and
is much admired by everyone. Facing the Southern Ocean
and immediately opposite these gardens is the onder-
view Theatre,” built by National Pictures Limited at a
cost of £IO,OOO, and is said to be one of the prettiest and
most replete theatres in the Commonwealth. In addition,
there are other superb lawns, flower beds, very large and
convenient shelter sheds, and children’s swings, etc., etc.,
all of which are protected from the ocean by a seawall
and promenade.
Granite Island is connected with the shore by an over-
way jetty half a mile in length, carrying a tram service,
and on the island are more gardens, seats, swings, and a
modern kiosk. This is a favourite place for visitors watch-
ing the mighty rollers from the boundless Southern Ocean
splash and shiver the frothy spray on the giant rocks of
the breakwater and island.
Other decided attractions in the vicinity of Victor
Harbour are the Bluff, King’s Beach, with its inspiring cliffs
and the fertile Hindmarsh and the Inman Valleys, with
their rich orange groves and roads lined with trees. In
Inman Valley the geologist finds evidences of the interest-
ing glacier period.
The Hindmarsh River is navigable for two miles for
rowing boats, and is a very popular and much-used water-
way.
Previous to 1914, Victor Harbour formed part of the
District Council of Encounter Bay. In that year it was
formed a corporation with an assessment of £6,200.
Following is a list of past members who have served
the Corporation since 1914: —Messrs. O. A. Beaner, A. H.
Dennis, W. Northey, P. R. Cudmore, M. W. Whiting, J. C.
Joy, G. H. Griffin, A. T. Grosvenor, R. Cameron, J. Malt-
house, W. Henderson, A. j. Humberstone. H. J. Myer,
W. F. Connell. L. J. Tardrew. F. Field, J. J. Maloney, and
W. Warland.




ip, -- .-,,-w
Corporation of Wallaroo
THE TOWN HALL, WALLAROO.


History of Wallaroo
First Council.—Mayor, Mr. Thomas Davies, RP.;
Councillors, Messrs. T. R. Heath. C. Coltman, T. Thorn,
T. Smedley; Town Clerk, Mr. W. Allison.
List of Mayors.—Messrs. Thomas Davies, E. Warming-
ton. D. Rews, William Phillips, James Malcolm, John
THE LATE MRS. CARLETON.
Evans, W. Richardson, E. A. Beare, G. Chatfield, J. D.
Phillips, Jas. Brenton, J. F. Herbert, W. Price, T. E. Ash-
ton, W. F. Errington, W. H. Harbison, A. A. Chandler, D.
F. Warmington, W. J. Williams.
Council in office during the year 1924 (Wallaroo Cor-
poration Jubilee, 1874 to 1924). —Mayor, Dr. W. H. Har-
bison, J.P.; Councillors, Messrs. W. Seeley, W. J. Williams
W. H. Prior, R. J. Milne, H. A. Hagedorn, A. A. Chandler
P. A. Edwards and D. Moore; Town Clerk, Mr. J. F Her-
bert. J.P.
A BRIEF HISTORY AND SOME RECORDS.
Wallaroo owes its origin chiefly to the discovery in
1860 of the famous copper mines. It was originally a
sheep run, owned by the late Sir Walter Watson Hughes.
The erection of the smelting works brought many immi-
grants to Wallaroo, and a thriving township soon came
into existence. The pioneers were noted for pluck and
endurance, and it is owing to the splendid characteristics
of these sturdy men and women that the town made such
progress. The area of the municipality is about two
and three-quarter square miles, and within its bound ries
the population has grown to over 4,000. In the early
days of the town a number of the pioneers took up and
in the district, and, in spite of hardships, and obstacles,
battled on. Many of the farmers in the district todav
ai e reaping the reward of the labours of these pioneers.
I he movement to form a Corporation was slow, and
met with much opposition, but in 1874 the advocates suc-
ceeded in a petition to the Government, and the Cor-
p< nation came into existence with the personnel as stated
above.
Wallaioo soon became a great smelting centre and
well tiamed smelters, chiefly from AA ales, were specially
engaged under an agreement. The quality of the cooper
produced became famous, and secured first place i the
oi Id s mai kets. 332,600 tons of fine copper has been
produced at Wallaroo, valued at £20.365,000. In addition,
large quantities of ore were shipped to Hunter River Cop-
per Works and overseas. Years ago Wallaroo was
destined to become the principal centre for smelting of


|ppp * *■ ~
* :jJHR I
nriferous and argentiferous ores from all parts of Ans-
-1 alia. Silver-lead ores from the Broken Hill mines were
also treated. The manufacture of sulphate of copper was
other important branch of the smelting, and it com-
a tided a ready sale in the Commonwealth. Sulphuric
id is manufactured in large quantities, and the pos-
lities of great expansion arc apparent. The smelting
■ aches are out of commission at present, and the future,
igh uncertain, is full of hope. After a wonderful
cord extending over 60 years the local mining and smelt-
ag company is now in liquidation. Mr. W. E. Slee is the
chief officer.
As a shipping centre the port has made remarkable pro-
ess, and is one of the principal export centres in the
nmonwealth. The original jetty, built about 1865, to
commodate wooden vessels of a small tonnage, gave
ce to a modern structure. This was ultimately ex-
uded to cope with the increased trade. The present
:v is over 2,000 feet in length. Oversea vessels, carry-
up to 15,000 tons, with a draught of up to 30 feet,
ve berthed and left the jetty unaided with ease and
rfect safety. In one year over four million bags of
heat were shipped. The port is known all over the
Aping world, and its potentialities have earned for it a
ugh reputation amongst master mariners and shipping
magnates.
Since the cessation of smelting operations in 1923 the
Wallaroo-Mount Lyell Fertilisers Company, Ltd., has be-
come its principal industry. It provides for a large dis-
trict, and is equipped with the latest and modern ap-
pliances to supply all practicable requirements in high-
class fertilisers. Messrs. W. H. May & Sons’ brass and
iron foundry is an old and well established industry, em-
ploying skilled tradesmen. High-class workmanship is
guaranteed, and agricultural implements command first
place.
Wallaroo contributed its share in the Great World
War. About 300 of the residents enlisted for service.
Many honours were won, and 50 made the supreme sacri-
More than £IO,OOO was contributed in cash and
kind to the various patriotic funds.
Wallaroo is 100 miles from Adelaide by road. There
is an excellent bitumen road all the way. The port is
well served by railway.
Headed by the Mayor (Dr. W. H. Harbison) the Town
Council leaves no stone unturned for the welfare of the
municipality. All are progressive men imbued with plenty
of civic pride.
MRS. CAROLINE CARLETON MEMORIAL, WALLAROO.
Present Council during the State Centenary (1936) ;
Mayor, Dr. W. H. Harbison, and Councillors Dr. T. C.
Kohler, G. H. Seeley, M. H. Williams, J. Stanyer, R. T.
Favilla, P. A. J. Chynoweth, L. F. Jones, and E. Prosser.
Mr. J. F. Herbert (Town Clerk) and Mr. H. Davies
(Acting Town Clerk).
The name Wallaroo represents a drastic distortion of


a native name, according to the late Mr. Rodney Cock-
bums Nomenclature of South Australia.”
The natives called the town Wadla-waru, the “d” being-
pi onounced very softly. 1 he aboriginal meaning was
something to do with the wallaby. From Wadla-waru
the name afterwards became \\ allawaroo. That was when
Captain (afterwards Sir) W. W. Hughes held the country
in the locality for pastoral purposes.
W allawaroo was considered too long a word for stamp-
ing on wool bales, and so the word was clipped to Wal-
laro.
The copper mines were discovered on Captain Hughes’
run in 1860, and within a few months of opening the mines
attracted many people, and the population grew from mem-
bers of Captain Hughes’ family and a few shepherds to
hundreds.
In the hope of finding minerals on the run Captain
Hughes had instructed his shepherds to bring any promis-
ing- stones they found to him.
The country was covered with a limestone crust and
there were no noticeable mineral outcrops. Wallabies
used to burrow into the limestone to make their holes,
and in doing so threw up minute pieces of rock.
COPPER DISCOVERY.
One day one of Captain Hughes’ shepherds, a man
named James Boor, found close to a wallaby’s hole a small
green stone about the size of a pea. That was in Decem-
ber. 1859, or early in 1860.
Boor took the stone to Captain Hughes, who pro-
nounced it to be carbonate of copper. Mineral leases
were at once taken up, and a company formed, and Hughes
had a shaft sunk on the spot.
A few feet below the surface they came upon a tine
lode of copper, but it was many months before the pro-
prietors felt confident of success, and £BO,OOO was spent
before any rich discovery was made. However, neither
the Moonta nor the Wallaroo mines cost the proprietors
a penny.
Through the success of the discovery it was possible
to erect smelters and develop the find out of profits. At
one time 1,000 people were employed. There was no coal
available for fuel, and the problem was either to bring
the coal to the ore or take the ore to the coal.
Finally a smelter was built at either end—at Port
Wallaroo and Newcastle —and full loads were taken each
way. Ore was taken to Newcastle, and on its way hack
the vessel brought coal.
In 1891 the Wallaroo and Moonta Mines were amal-
gamated. The Wallaroo Mine had then paid nearly
£500,000 in dividends.
The Corporation is carrying on with commendable
zeal. Footpaths, new streets, and good roads are b ing
made, and there are 29 miles of streets and roads in the
Municipality to maintain. Tree planting has been success-
fully carried out during recent years with gratifying uc-
cess. There are over 800 acres of parklands under the
control of the Corporation. It would have been p rti-
cularly interesting to compile a list of the Councillors ho
have served the town, but the fire at the Town fall
destroyed these records. Hope is the motto of the or-
poration, and its seal bears the impress “SPES.”


lllj
i mmm..
09m
I » J I
:
%;
i \
!
lIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF
WALLAROO, DR. WILLIAM
HENRY HARRISON.
Dr. Harbison served in the Walla-
roo Corporation for 3 years as Coun-
cillor, and held the position of Mayor
during the Jubilee Celebrations of the
Corporation of Wallaroo in 1924, and
also during the Centenary Celebra-
tions, and his total service as Mayor
in the Corporation is years. He is
a Medical Officer of the Wallaroo Hos-
pital, and his sports are tennis, golf,
and bowls. Home address, Lydia Ter-
race, Wallaroo.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE HOWES
SEELEY.
(Corporation of Wallaroo.)
Mr. Seeley was educated at the
Wallaroo Public School, and has
served 2 years as Councillor for the
Corporation of Wallaroo, and is at pre-
sent Chairman of the Finance Com-
mittee of that body. He has been a
resident of the district for 30 years,
and is the son of the late \\ illiam
Seeley, who was Councillor of the Cor-
poration of Wallaroo for 17 years. He
is a member of the United Ancient
Order of Foresters' Lodge, and in
business he is an Undertaker. Sports,
bowls and swimming. Home address,
Wallaroo.
COUNCILLOR JOHN STANYER.
(Corporation of Wallaroo.)
Born at Adelaide and educated at
North Walkerville. Mr. Stanyer has
served 1 year as Councillor in the Cor-
poration of Wallaroo, and has been
a resident of the district for 20 years,
and is an employee of the S.A. Rail-
ways. He is a member of the United
Ancient Order of Druids' Lodge, and
he held the position of organiser in
connection with the recent \\ allaroo
Centenary Celebrations. Sports, foot-
ball and swimming, and he is Secre-
tary of the Wallaroo Rifle Club.
Home address, Wallaroo.
COUNCILLOR RALPH THOMAS
FAVILLA.
(Corporation of Wallaroo.)
Born at Kadina, 18th April, 1902.
and educated at the Wallaroo Mines
High School and privately. Mr.
Favilla was elected to the position of
Councillor for the Corporation of Wal-


q—l
% mk
4 v -
■r ■ -.. .«
■ '•■ »> f V- .Ijb
W m *':
,2'
|
laroo on the 22nd of February, 1936,
and he has been a resident of the dis-
trict for 18 years. Business, Shipping
Agent. He is a grandson of the late
Thomas Davies, who was the first
Mayor for the Town of Wallaroo. His
sports are tennis, golf, and swimming.
Home address, Lydia Terrace, Wal-
laroo.
COUNCILLOR MARK HENRY
WILLIAMS.
(Corporation of Wallaroo.)
Born at Walkerville, S.A., and edu-
cated at Prince Alfred College. Ade-
laide. Mr. \\ illiams has served in the
\\ allaroo Corporation for 2 years, and
has been a resident of the district for
16 years. He is a Draper and Mercer,
a member of the Princess Royal Ma-
sonic Lodge, and Past Master, and his
sport is tennis. Mr. Williams served
34 years with the British Expedition-
ary Forces with the King's Own R.L.
Regiment during the Great War.
Home address, Wallaroo.
COUNCILLOR EDWARD PROSSER.
(Corporation of Wallaroo.)
Born at Adamstown. N.S.W., 16th
September, 1888, and educated at the
Wallaroo Public School. Mr. Prosser
has served 7 years as Councillor for
the Corporation of Wallaroo, and has
been a resident of the district for 42
years. He is an employee of Wal-
laroo-Mount Lyell Fertilizers, Ltd,
and a member of the United Ancient
Order of Foresters' and Orange
Lodges and Lloyd Memorial Congre-
gational Church and choir. His sort
is football. Home address, Wallaroo.
COUNCILLOR LEYSHON FRANC S
JONES.
(Corporation of Wallaroo.)
Mr. Jones was educated at the ' al-
laroo Public School, and he has served
1 year as Councillor in the Cor] ora-
tion of Wallaroo. He is an emp vee
of the Mount Lyell Fertilisers, td.,
a member of the Indepei lent
Order of Rechabites and Or age
Lodges, and Secretary of the Lloyd


: V '
: -
I
it "W ww- *
‘
norial Congregational Church and
iday School. His sports are cricket
and football. Home address, Wallaroo.
sent address is Lydia Terrace, Walla
roo.
Australian Labour Party. Home ad-
dress, Wallaroo.
COUNCILLOR DR. THEODORE CARL
KOHLER.
(Corporation of Wallaroo.)
Dr. Kohler has served 5| years as
Councillor in the Corporation of Wal-
laroo, and has been a resident of the
district for 6 years. His profession
is a Medical Practitioner, and his prc-
COUNCILLOR PERCIVAL ALFRED
JAMES CHYNOWETH.
(Corporation of Wallaroo.)
Mr. Chynoweth was educated at the
Wallaroo Public School and has served
1 year as Councillor for the Corpora-
tion of Wallaroo. He has been a resi-
dent of the district for 43 years, and
is an employee of Wallaroo-Mount
Lyell Fertilisers, Ltd. He is an Exe-
cutive Officer of the Wallaroo Branch
JOHN FREDERICK HERBERT.
(Town Clerk, Corporation of Wallaroo.)
Born at Wallaroo, 17th September,
1868, and educated at the Wallaroo
Public School. Mr. Herbert has
served in the Wallaroo Corporation
for 8 years as Councillor, 2 years as
Mayor, and 17 t ears as Town Clerk.
He has been a resident of the dis-
trict for 50 years. He is Secretary of
the Wallaroo Manchester Unity Odd-
fellows’ Lodge, and he has been a
member for the District of Wallaroo


''
, *
1
' ’ y
in the House of Assembly for 6 years.
His sports are cricket, football, swim-
ming-, and rowing - . Home address,
Stirling Street, Wallaroo.
HENRY DAVIES.
(Acting Town Clerk, Corporation of
Wallaroo.)
Born at Wallaroo, 24th August,
1892, and educated at the Wallaroo
Public School. Mr. Davies has served
in the Wallaroo Corporation for 9
months as Acting Town Clerk, and
has been a resident of the district for
43 years. His sports are swimming
and football. Home address, Charles
Terrace, Wallaroo.


jgK.- vmmmjr' . '
<**wi«r»8iijy.«ii...»iMiJ’y ••■"'■ ■ ■ ..-, ■■ v. >
Corporation of Woodville
WOODVILLE TOWN HALL, CORPORATION OFFICES, AND COUNCIL CHAMBERS.


History of Woodville
b I*olll verdant pastures and waving* cornfields to a
well-laid-out municipality—the third largest in the State,
apart from Adelaide—is, very briefly, the story of the
growth and development of Woodville.
Many stories can be told of the early days of the dis-
tric trams, motor cars, and buses over well-made wood-
blocked, bituminised and macadamised roads, citizens have
much to be thankful for in the foresight and ability of the
civic fathers and unselfish energy of settlers during the past
generations.
FIRST COUNCIL CHAMBERS.
ti ict, when travelling was done in bullock drays by the
majority, and in horse-drawn carriages by the more fortu-
nate, over dirt tracks that wound through the picturesque
and stately gum trees that formed such a magnificent set-
ting for the township or village of yesteryear.
Compared with the transport of to-day by trains, eiec-
Woodville, from its earliest history, has been known
as the town of trees, and it is probable that the name
Woodville was derived from the fact that the original
plans, made before the sections had been surveved. showed
quite a belt of trees through the localitv.
As far back as 1849 an advertisement appeared in the


n
r
v v |^P^
'LjSLuk: % 4.
press offering “splendid villa sites and building allotments
in the new and delightfully situated township of Wood-
\ lie. on the Port Road." The notice goes on to describe
the district, and reads, "Section 405. on the Port Road,
( 'posite Riseley’s Halfway House, will be offered for
auction. The section possesses unusual advantages and
attractions as a township, commands every varied prospect
the imagination can desire of mountain scenery, and is
LATE CAPT. J. W. SMITH.
(First Chairman of Woodville District
Council.)
surrounded by productive farms; the soil itself equally
productive, is richly wooded, and will at all times yield an
endless supply of the purest spring water, with the most
luxuriant growth of timber, being the source from which
the Port has been supplied with pure water for years.
“As the township of ‘Woodville’ has many eligible sites,
there is little doubt that a railway station will he formed
in the immediate locality, where fresh water is so easily
attainable, which will eventually reduce the distance to
about 10 minutes' ride to the city, and afford to speculators
a first-rate opportunity of realising a fortune by establish-
ing a railway tavern.
“A road has also been laid out through the centre of the
township, which communicates direct with the North Arm
Road, and saves a distance of three miles in the passage
to the Para and other districts.
“The allotments vary from a quarter of an acre to a
block of five acres, which places it within the attainment
of moderate capitalists. The terms are liberal.”
The various Councils have wisely continued a policy
H. SLADE, Esq.
(First Mayor of Corporation.)
of treeplanting throughout the district, and with its wide
streets and avenues of stately trees Woodville has been
recognised for many years as one of the most desirable
residential areas in the suburbs.
The seal and emblem of the Council, which adorns the
glass entrance doors to the Corporation Offices, all official
paper, documents and envelopes, also hears in the centre
a leafy tree, under which the motto, “Floreat Civitas
Nostra" ("May our town and people flourish”), is
inscribed.
That these words have proved true may be gauged
from the fact that in the year 1874 the amount of assess-


ment was £8,900, compared with £299,681 to-day. The
value of property has grown from £178,000 to £5,993,620,
the population increased from 1,100 to 27,264, and the
number of dwellings and shops from 211 to 6,964. There
is now an average of four persons to every dwelling and
shop.
Thus the old adage that ‘‘large oaks from little acorns
grow" has been symbolical of the growth of Woodville.
EARLY SELECTIONS.
Woodville has not always been a separate local govern-
ing body. For many years it was portion of the old Dis-
trict Council of Hindmarsh. It was during that period that
some of the earliest sections were taken up and subdivided.
According to the original plan. Section 405 was
selected for Captain Lipson by Osmond Gillies. 1 his was
the original Township of Woodville, previously mentioned.
Section 406 was selected for Mrs. Fooks. This is now a
portion of Bower’s Estate, and also takes in Holden’s
Motor Body Building Works. Mr. J. W right obtained
Section 407, which was purchased by Mr. R. R. Torrens,
who built his home. “St. Clair," on it in 1842. This house
was the original “St. Clair," since demolished, and not the
premises now occupied by Messrs. C. G. and E. M. Toll.
Section 398, or Woodville Park, was selected in 1838
by j. Crowther, and in 1876 it was owned by W. H.
Maturin, late of the Treasury and Commissariat, Adelaide.
This section, less the portion taken for the railway, was
sold to Mr. E. P. Nesbit. father of the late Mr. Paris Nesbit,
K.C., to a syndicate of Philip Levi, his sons, and Captain
Henry Simpson, for £3O an acre. The syndicate put the
land into the hands of Mr. J. C. Lovely to cut up, and Mr.
Lovely, a volunteer enthusiast, named many of the streets
after British volunteer officers. The portion between the
Port Road and the railway was first cut up and sold for
as low as 5/- a foot. The remainder of Section 398 was
cut up as the demand arose.
Other early subdivisions were Section 413 ( Mechanics
Town), which is now portion of the Enfield District Coun-
cil, subdivided by Edward C. Gwynne, Henry Giles, and
George Alston, about 1839; Section 394, “Township of
York,” presumed to be subdivided by Harriett Fisher about
1840; Section 395, “Township of Beverley,” laid out by
Edward Stephens in 1850; Section 388, “Township of Kil-
kenny,” subdivided by Robert Miller, W. A. Bryden, W.
Paxton, and Henry Collier about 1850.
OLD AND NEW COUNCIL BUILDINGS.
The old Council Chamber, situated on the corner of
Port Road and Jones Street, which did service for so many
years, is now occupied as a private residence.
On June 10th, 1903, these old premises were vacated,
and the Council headquarters moved to the site ol the
present offices, on Woodville Road, near the Station. he
new building was opened by the Chairman, Mr. A. Aids-
more, and served the purposes of the Council for twenty-
four years.
The present Council Chamber and new Woodville Hall
were opened on April 12th, 1927, and, without egoism, it
can be justly and proudly claimed to be one of the finest
municipal structures in the metropolitan area. Mr. \\ E.
Young, who was chairman at the time, laid the foundation
stone, and also performed the opening ceremony.
Owing to the successful financing by the Council, the
hall is not costing the ratepayers one penny, the rents
received paying principal and interest.
The Council Chamber and parlour are imposing rooms,
and the cost of their comfortable and elaborate furnish-
ings was met by donations collected by the Clerk 1 ir.
Ralph).
THE BIRTH OF WOODVILLE.
For more than 81 years Woodville has been under 1 cal
government rule, but it was not until April 21st, 1853, iat
a petition was presented to His Excellency Sir Hr ry
Edward Fox Young, Lieutenant-Governor of South . is-
tralia, signed by Robert R. Torrens, John Packham, Lewis
Hanson, S. R. Shillabeer, Francis Hunwick, John Picker ag,
Enoch Teakle, and 116 other owners and occupiers of nd
in Hindmarsh, Bowden, Brompton, and adjacent la Is,
asking for the proclamation of a District, within the me n-
ing of the District Councils Act, to be called the Disk ict
of Hindmarsh.
On June 2nd. 1853, the request of the petitioners as
granted, and Thomas Magarey, James Gibson, John Re ly,
John Packham, and Robert R. Torrens were appointee to
be the first Council for the District of Hindmarsh.
In October, 1874, a portion of the Hindmarsh Disk ict.
namely, Hindmarsh, Bowden, and Brompton Wards, were


f ne d into a Corporation of Hindmarsh, and the remain-
i, portion, named the District of Hindmarsh, was divided
into six wards, namely, Kilkenny, Woodville, York, Findon,
Reedbeds South, and Reedbeds North. This name, District
of Hindmarsh, was subsequently altered by proclamation
to the District of Woodville, at the request of seventy
i tinners, among whom were M. Minihan, George Spider
•ight, H. D. Dale, David Bower, G. Hammond, and James
Howard, “to distinguish it more fully from the corporate
i of Hindmarsh.” Thus was the birth of Woodville,
■ \ h. as this history will show, has made remarkable
pi ress during its 61 years' existence.
It has now reached the status of a Corporate Town,
g been proclaimed a Municipality on the recommenda-
of the Local Government Areas Commission on
j, .ary 2nd, 1933.
CHANGES OF BOUNDARIES.
)n March 19th, 1885, the Governor, Sir William C. F.
binson, granted the severance of Section 412, Hundred
i atala, from the Rosewater District, and its annexation
the Woodville District. The District was re-subdivided
into eight wards on June 7th, 1888, Woodville Park and
Davenport Wards being added. In 1901 South Reedbeds
Ward was divided into three wards, namely, Henley Beach,
Grange, and Reedbeds, while the name of North Reedbeds
was altered to Albert Park Ward. From time to time
various severances and annexations to the District have
taken place. In 1915 Henley and Grange Wards were
severed from the Woodville District, and included in the
corporate Town of Henley and Grange. The following-
year Section 413 (Osborne Park) and Part Section 441
(Little Queenstown) were cut off from the Port Adelaide
District and added to the Woodville District, while in 1908
Sections 64 and 65, near Glansville, were similarly trans-
ferred. Yatala East and Athol Farm Estate have since
been added to Woodville. The total area of the Muni-
cipality of Woodville now exceeds sixteen square miles.
COMPARISON OF ASSESSMENTS.
The first assessment for the District of Woodville
(originally named the District of Hindmarsh), made in
1853, was" £17,424. The District then comprised the town-
ships of Hindmarsh, Bowden, Brompton, Kilkenny, Wood-
ville, Cheltenham, Findon, York, Beverley, Tenterden,
Caversham, and Reedbeds. Phese were divided into six
wards, which were Hindmarsh, Brompton, Woodville,
Findon, and Reedbeds.
In the year 1874-5 the assessment of the Hindmarsh
District Council, which comprised most of the present
Woodville District, was £22,493. When Woodville com-
menced its separate entity in the same yeai it had the
modest assessment of £8,900.
How prosperity has developed may be indicated by the
following assessment figures: 1874-5, £8,900; 1900, £31,249;
1910, £44,909; 1915, £96,740; 1916, £78,975; 1922, £140,509;
1924-5, £179,350; and 1936, £299.681.
The apparent depreciation following 1915 was due to
the secession of Henley and Grange \\ ards, but building
activities and increased settlement have resulted in the
assessment being brought up to £299,681, or nearly 300
per cent, greater than it was nineteen years ago, and
nearly 33 2-3 rd times as much as when the District was
first severed from Hindmarsh.
IMPORTANT INDUSTRIES.
Principal among the important industries in W oodville
is that of General Motors-Holden’s Motor Body Buildeis,
which works have considerably helped the progress of the
District in recent years. At present 4,358 men are engaged
there.
Kilkenny and York have developed into large manu-
facturing areas, where glass and bottle works, iron
foundries, and agricultural machinery works are estab-
lished. Some of the largest brick and tile kilns and pottery
works in the State are situated at Welland South, Caver-
sham, and Beverley, in the south-eastern corner of the
District.
At Findon gravel and sand are obtained in large quali-
ties, and the greater part of the gravel used in the con-
crete foundations of the woodblocked Port Road was
secured at Findon.
Many market gardeners and lucerne growers, as well
as large poultry farms are also established in the Findon
district.
Gas and electricity supplies are available throughout
most portions of the town.
CAPTAIN H. D. DALE.
The history of the District of Woodville would not be
complete without mention of the exceptionally long and


faithful service rendered to the community from its infant
stage until it was well on the way to maturity of Captain
H. B. Dale.
For 26 years (from 1880 to 1906) Captain Dale was
District Clerk, and to him much credit is due to the sturdy
growth of the District. He lived in a brick house
on the Torrens Road from about 1865 for 50 years. This
cottage, which stands east of the High School, originally
belonged to Captain Woodward, who commanded several
vessels between Adelaide and London in the early days, and
was a favourite shipmaster.
OPENING OR KIRCALDY BRIDGE.
An extract from “The Register” of September 13th,
1858, states :
“The proprietors of the land and the inhabitants of
the neighbourhood of the main line of road from Adelaide
to the Reedbeds in this district had been a very long time
desirous of having a bridge erected over the creek which
runs across the road half a mile from the beach, and on
Friday, the 10th inst., had the pleasure of seeing their
efforts crowned with success. A sum was collected and
supplemented by the Government enabling a wooden struc-
ture to be built. It was erected by the District Council,
and Mr. Wharton, of Croydon, was the contractor. The
price was £142. Miss Lines declared the bridge open,
and named it Kirkcaldy Bridge, a compliment to Mr. J.
Reedie, who intends to form a marine township on his sec-
tion near it, of that name, in remembrance of the neigh-
bourhood from whence he came in the old country.”
PAST AND PRESENT MEMBERS OF THE
WOODVILLE CORPORATION.
Ratepayers have been served by many able represen-
tatives in the Council. This is proved by the long periods
for which a number of Councillors retained their seats.
The late Mr. E. J. Mclnnes held the record for the greatest
number of years of uninterrupted service. He represented
what was formerly known as Davenport Ward for nearly
28 years, and was Chairman of the District Council for
the years 1906-8.
Next in length of office is that of Mr. H. Slade, who
gave 22-| years continuously to Council work. He was
Chairman in 1914-16 and also appointed by proclamation
the first Mayor of the Municipality in 1932. Mr. Slade
retired from municipal life at the end of his term, Novem-
ber, 1933
Almost as long in office was Mr. G. J. H. Pudney, who
looked after the welfare of Albert Park Ward for 22 years,
from 1903 to 1925. He occupied the position of Chairman
in 1912-14.
Mr. R. O. Evans, who was Chairman in 1918-20, comes
next with 18 years’ service, having served Findon rate-
payers from 1909 to 1927.
The Past Mayor, Mr. Wm. Tulloch, who represented
Woodville Park Ward from 1916 to 1930, again entered
civic life at the elections in 1933, when he was successful
in being chosen by the ratepayers to preside over the Coun-
cil. At the end of the } r ear 1936 Mr. Tulloch will have
given 17 years to Council work. He was Chairman during
the years 1920-22.
For 11 years Mr. W. F. Young was elected by York
Ward citizens as their Councillor, having served them from
1922 to 1933. In 1926-8 lie was Chairman of the Council.
Mr. Watson Jeanes has given 10 years’ service alto-
gether. From 1898 to 1907 he was a Councillor for Kil-
kenny Ward and in 1914-15 represented Grange Ward. Air.
Jeanes presided over the Council in 1903-4.
FORMER MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIF.
Former members of the Council and the years in which
they served as Councillors are as follows; —T. Hubbard,
1891-5; W. Jeanes, 1898-1907 and 1914-15; A. H. E. Hanson,
1900-3; H. M. Kemp, 1903-8; G. J. H. Pudney, 1903-25; R.
W. Webb, 1906-14; T. Montgomery, 1909-15; J. Jelle} r ,
1909-11 ; R. O. Evans, 1909-27; 1. Burford, 1911-18; H. Gaet-
jens, 1914-15; Wm. Tulloch. 1916-30, and Mayor 1933-36:
W. J. Cox. 1920-28; W. E. Young, 1922-33; F. H. Jessup,
1921-26; W. Stanford, 1926-30; H. Slade, 1911-33; A. H.
Harris, 1925-33; V. H. Scott. 1927-33; C. C. Cooke, 1926-34;
E. W. Kelsey, 1928-1934.
CHAIRMEN OF COUNCIL.
The following have been Chairmen of the Council since
its formation:—lB74-5. Capt. ). W. Smith; 1875-7, D.
Bower; 1877-8, J. Lawrence; 1878-80, M. Minihan; 1880-1,
C. Downer; 1881-2, J. Jeanes; 1882-7, D. Pyne; 1887-92, J.
1. McLean; 1892-3, J. F. Mellor; 1894-7, R. Woolnough;
1897-8, C. E. Lawton; 1898-1903, A. Willsmore ; 1903-4. W.
Jeanes; 1904-6, A. W. Ralph; 1906-8, E. J. Mclnnes; 1908-


Z. H. Jones; 1910-12, R. W. Webb; 1912-14, G. J. H.
Pudnev; 1914-16, H. Slade; 1916-18. I. Burford; 1918-20,
R. 0. Evans; 1920-22. W. Tulloch; 1922-24, W. J. Cox;
1924-6, F. Jessup: 1926-8, W. E. Young; 1928-30, A. H.
Harris’; 1930-32, C. C. Cooke.
MAYORS.
1932-3, H. Slade; 1933-6, Wm. Tulloch; 1936, j. S. Butler.
STATE’S FIRST RAILWAY.
The opening of the first railway line in the State, on
Monday, April 21, 1856, was an auspicious occasion for
oodville. The line was laid from Adelaide to the Old
k Station at St. Vincent Street, Port Adelaide, and
c Woodville accessible to the travelling public, as well
as inducing settlement there.
i'he railway runs through sections 405, 406, and 407,
of Woodville, and the land for that portion which went
through the estate of Mr. John Bristow Hughes was given
by him to the Government for that purpose.
It was at first intended to leave Woodville without a
station, but upon the petition of the inhabitants, combined
with the generosity of Mr. Hughes, who offered to build
the station at his own expense, a stopping place for trains
was granted.
Woodville Station was constructed ready for the open-
ing of the line. At that time (1856) this was the only rail-
way station between Bowden and Alberton. There was
onlv a single line between Adelaide and the Port, and the
turnout to allow trains to pass was at Woodville. Till
about 1870 the trains were mixed ones, and started with a
series of jerks. At each station was a spar about ,30 ft.
long, standing on end on a pivot, on which it could be
turned about a quarter of a circle by a short lever fixed
into it about 4 ft. from the ground. On top of the spar
was a large wooden disc, and at right angles to the disc was
a piece of wood about 6 ft. long and 6 in. wide. No train
might come into the station if the disc was not edge on to
the incoming train and was not at right angles to the line.
No collisions were heard of, as trains were infrequent,
and two trains were not on the line at the same time.
No smoking was allowed, unless the would-be smoker
bought a first-class ticket and a smoking ticket as well.
There were first, second, and third class carriages. The
last-named had roofs, but no glass windows; the sides were
open, and there there only benches to sit upon There
were no continuous brakes, only a hand-screw brake on
the engine and another in the guard’s van.
About 1880 many trains did not stop at Woodville, but
a deputation to the late Mr. H. E. Bright, then Commis-
sioner of Public Works, asked that the trains should stop
there and that a bell should be installed and rung five
minutes before each train started. Mr. Bright gave the
bell, but said it cost 5/ to stop each train, so he could
not agree to that proposal. Till a few years ago there
were large bells hung on tall erections at Adelaide and
Port Adelaide Stations, and were rung five minutes before
the departure of each train.
On the day on which the line was opened there were
32 passengers from Woodville to other stations, and on
the following day the number was 65, making a total of
97 for the two days. The amount taken was £l/8/8.
There were also 83 passengers booked to Woodville, mak-
ing on the whole 180 passengers arriving and departing on
the two days.
OFFICIAL OPENING OF THE LINE.
A report (greatly abridged) of the official function
held in connection with the opening of the line, states ;
“A special train conveying His Excellency the Cover-
nor-in-Chief and suite and a large fashionable company,
left Adelaide a few minutes after 1 o’clock on Saturday,
April 19th, 1856. and arrived at the Port terminus, hav-
ing occupied 22 minutes on the journey.”
At the banquet to celebrate the inaugural train trip
and opening of the railway the Governor said : —“I feel that
upon this first day that the iron horse has been sent
through the land on its unwearying and useful mission, a
new era has commenced. South Australia had now taken
her place among the civilised nations of the world. . . . The
Government has had nothing to do with the construction of
the railway; the task was imposed by the representatives
of the people upon certain gentlemen over whom the Gov-
ernment could exercise no control except to call on them
occassionally for a statement of their accounts. They had
constructed the 7\ miles of railway at a cost of £21.000
a mile. . . .”
Mr. C. H. Hare responded on behalf of the Under-
takers (the name then used in lieu of Railway Commis-
sioners). He said: —‘‘The operation of the railway would


relieve the Port Road, which required an outlay of £6,000
a, year to keep in repair.”
The Colonial Secretary said the railway had been
completed within 20 years of the foundation of the Colony
lime would never allow the name of Mr. Babbage, who
constructed the railway, to be forgotten,
Mr J. B. Hughes, M.L.C., returned thanks to Mr Giles
tor the feehng manner in which he had proposed the toast
ot Lady MacDonnell, and the Ladies of the State.”
GRANGE AND HENLEY LINES.
The first line between Woodville and Grange did not
belong to the Government, but was controlled by the
G Tq7o Railway and Co., Ltd. It was opened
m 18/9. The service was apparently lax, and it is stated
that much dissatisfaction was caused through the action
ot the driver and fireman in putting pleasure before busi-
ness, insomuch that during the hot weather they would
leave the engine and avail themselves of a swim, to the dis-
location of the timetable.
.An agitation for better service led to the Government
taking over the line on April 29th. 1891, and working it
under a guarantee from influential residents. The first
year’s operations showed working cost at £7 lB and receipts
at £424. The guarantors were required to pay £127, leav-
ing a deficiency of £167.
For some time there was a danger that the service
would he discontinued, but after considerable bargaining
the line was eventually purchased by the Government in
1893, and included in the South Australian system. Thir-
teen months later (February Ist, 1894) the Grange to Hen-
ley section of the line was opened.
For some years steam trams plied on the line between
Woodville and Henley. The length of line between Wood-
ville and Grange is 3 miles 41 chains, and from Grange to
Henley Beach 1 mile 19 chains.
The following are the dates on which the various
railway stations within the boundaries of Woodville were
opened :
Woodville (opening of Port Line), April 21. 1856;
Kilkenny, 1883; Grange, 1894. (This was not the original
station built by the private company, but the one erected
by the Government.) Cheltenham. 1907; and West Croy-
don, December 21, 1915.


i &
j & ■ >
I . SL £$$$>*- ' «
a| f!" a, M
IMP***'
l».
■| : $p : JS&
■ i; : t '0'
y. Avt*#' w P
HIS WORSHIP THE MAYOR OF
WOODVILLE, JAMES SPENCER
BUTLER.
Mr. Butler was born at Alberton
29th April, 1890, and educated at Port
Adelaide Model School and the Sema-
phore Collegiate School. He has
served in the Corporation for 4 years,
and has been 30 years a resident of the
district. He is Chairman of the Fin-
ance Committee, and a member of the
Executive of the Suburban Municipal
and District Councils Association. He
is Past Master of the Woodville
Masonic Lodge, No. 125, and Fast
President of the Woodville Bowling
Club. Mr. Butler is a Customs and
Shipping Agent. He served in France
with the 37th Battery, A.F.A., during
the Great War. Private address, 38,
Aberfeldy Avenue, Woodville,
WILLIAM TULLOCH, J.P.
(Past Mayor of Woodville)
Mr. Tulloch was born at Glen Os-
mond on the 21st May, 1867, and edu-
cated at the Grote Street Public
School. He was a member of the
Council from July, 1916, to June, 1930,
and the Corporation from December,
1933, until July, 1936. He has done
exceedingly good work to further im-
provements of the Town of Woodville,
and has been a resident of the dis-
trict for 52 years. He is now retired
from business, and is a member of the
Woodville Masonic and Oddfellows’
Manchester Unity Lodges. His sport-
ing activities are bowls and rowing.
PAST CHAIRMAN W. E. YOUNG, J.P.
(District Council of Woodville.)
Born at Hindmarsh in 1880 and was
educated at the Hindmarsh Public
School. He commenced work at the
age of 13 years, and was employed for
18 months on Carunna, Ivolinda and
Arcoona Stations, on the west side
of Port Augusta. Mr. Young went to
Western Australia in 1901, upon re-
turning in 1907 he was employed by the
firm of Charles Bourn & Son, brick-
makers, for 3 years. Afterwards he
commenced business on his own ac-
count as a manufacturer. He was re-
turned unopposed as Councillor for
York Ward in the District Council of
Woodville in 1922. Contested and was
elected in 1923 for the same Ward.
Chairman of the Council from 1926 to
1928. He laid/ the foundation stone of
the new Town Hall and officially de-
clared the building open on the 12th
April, 1927. As Chairman of the Coun-
cil he formally welcomed the Duke


, -.
BT' >•■■
■■
IP*
fc i
i"
s i \
, ; *
I mm '**" **•»%.
* jjj|.
1 ' ■>' \- •
*4 0: ,fe : ; J||||-
* aWMsil
$ - * <-
|
and Duchess of York to the town in
1928, and during his term as Council-
lor the town progressed rapidly, and
to-day is the fourth largest town in
the State. He has been a member of
the Woodville Bowling Club for 11
years, and is a keen bowler, being a
player in the State Rink Champion-
ship. He was defeated at the elections
in 1933 on the issue of the Proclama-
tion of the Municipality of the Town,
and may again offer his services to the
town and citizens.
PAST CHAIRMAN, THE LATE
MICHAEL MINIHAN, J.P.
(District Council of Woodvillc.)
Was horn at County Limerick, Ire-
land, 29th September, 1844, arrived
in Australia in 1853, and was edu-
cated at Dallason’s School, Port Adc-
laide. The late Mr. Minihan served
26 years in the Council and was for
58 years a resident of the district. He
held the position of Chairman of the
Council for 2 years. He was for 50
years a member of the Independent
Order of Oddfellows' Manchester
Unity, formerly a Committeeman of
the Port Adelaide Racing Club, and a
Justice of the Peace for many years.
PAST COUNCILLOR VICTOR HENRY
SCOTT, J.P.
(Corporation of Woodvillc.)
Born at Port Road. Woodvillc, 27th
December, 1893, and educated at the
Woodvillc Public School. Mr. Scott
was elected a member of the Wood-
vine District Council in 1927, and re-
tired after 64 years’ service, during
which period Woodvillc was pro-
claimed a corporate town. He was
39 years a resident of the Woodvillc
district and 3 years a resident of Owen.
In 1925 he was elected a 1 ustice ol
the Peace for South Australia. Busi-
ness, a partner in the firm of S. C.
and V. H. Scott. Fuel and Fodder
Merchants, Port Road, Woodvillc. He
is a foundation member of the Wood-
ville Bowling Club, a foundation mem-
ber and Secretary of the Woodvillc
Masonic Lodge, No. 125, Worshipful
Master in the year 1932, and also a
member of the Semaphore Masonic
Lodge, No. 78. His sports are bowls
and football, being a former President
of the Owen Football Club. Home
address, 2 Findon Road. Woodvillc
West.
COUNCILLOR JOSEPH HENRY
RICHARDS, J.P.
(Corporation of Woodville.)
Born at Liverpool, England, 3rd De-
cember, 1891, and educated at Gras-


’
' ■ y^' as '.S
•sSE^sBbS
• % \ '%/%ix ■ -
" ***
fE9l
ji jl^ljl^l
’. jjP« / Jy Jga^BjL^^P^i-
sendale Higher Grade School and the
Teachers’ Training College. He ar-
ced in Australia in 1908. Mr. Rich-
ards has served in the Council for 2\
wars, and has been 17 years a resi-
dent of the district. He is Chairman
; the Rates Investigation Committee,
member of the Finance Committee,
nd a representative of the Suburban
Municipal and District Councils Asso-
iation. He has been a Justice of the
‘eace for South Australia since 1920
1 Victoria since 1933. Mr. Richards
a member of the Masonic and
chabite Lodges, and has been Pre-
'iding Justice of the Port Adelaide
Hindmarsh Police Courts for 12
wars. Business, Chartered Account-
ant and Coach: and his sport is bowls.
Private address, Kingsley Avenue.
West Croydon.
COUNCILLOR HARRY WILLIAM BRAY.
(Corporation of Woodville)
Born at Glanville West, 15th May,
1883, and educated at private schools
conducted by Misses Davis and Gar-
naut, also later at LeFevre’s Penin-
sula Public School, and at the age of
19 years at Westrhauderfehn, Ger-
many. He occupied the following
positions in the Woodville and Port
Adelaide Corporations;—s-J years as a
Councillor of the Woodville Corpora-
tion, and is still a Councillor for Albert
Park Ward: 3 years a Councillor for
the South Ward, Port Adelaide City
Council; 2 years as Mayor of Port
Adelaide, and still occupies that posi-
tion. Mr. Bray is a keen municipalise
and has given great assistance to the
Port Adelaide City Council and the
Corporation of Woodville, both as
Mayor and Councillor. He is Past
Master in the Lewis Lodge of Hope,
S.A.C., No. 102, Masonic, and also
patron or president of 30 sports clubs
of the district. In business Mr. Bray
is a company director.
COUNCILLOR JOHN JAMES
CHENOWETH WILLIAMS.
(Corporation of Woodville.)
Born at Hindmarsh, January 27th,
1894, and educated at Hindmarsh Pub-
lic School. Mr. Williams, who is a car-
rying contractor, has been a member of
the Corporation since 1935, and has re-
sided in the district for 18 years. He
is a member of the Masonic Lodge
of Faith, No. 9, Independent Order
of Rechabites Lodge, and has been a
member of Welland School Committee
for 8 years.
COUNCILLOR PERCY FOX GREEN.
(Corporation of Woodville.)
Born at Brompton on 16th Decem-
ber, 1893. He was educated at Hind-
marsh Public School and lias been a
Councillor of the Woodville Corpora-
tion since July 6th. 1935, and a resident
of the district for 15 years. Councillor
Green is a Business Manager. He is
a member of the Peace Lodge, U.A.O.
Druids, foundation member of Pat-
riotic Football Association during the
war, a present Committeeman of the
West Torrens Football Club with 5
years service, member Woodville Pri-
mary School Committee for 8 years
(4 years as Hon. Sec.), Organiser and


lb m*
Hit
; • JHP
'wS
I . *1
n 1 / V
a JH
■y JfflmS
m *‘‘
mmm Hl
"***<*&. «... , t «: •* 4 s 1 * aBsaBB.'.yl
.&■&-V* w ► » ■
fT : lM \ i wW^s»’
Secretary of Children's Day for Dia-
mond Jubilee Celebrations of Wood-
ville. He takes a keen interest in
cricket.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM ANTHONEY
COLE, J.P.
(Corporation of Woodville.)
Born at Southwark, 20th October,
1886, and educated at Stirling Pub-
lic School. He has served 2 years as
Councillor, and has been a resident
of the district for 21 years. Mr. Cole
is a member of Welland District Pro-
gressive Association, and Welland
School Committee, and a member In-
dependent Order of Rechabites. Busi-
ness, Gardener and Poultry Breeder.
Although Councillor Cole has not
taken part in any sport, he is an ardent
supported of the West Torrens Foot-
ball Club.
COUNCILLOR FREDERICK ALLEN BOX,
J.P., M.I.M.E. (London), A.I.M.E. (Aust.).
(Corporation of Woodville.)
Born at Port Wakefield. 13th Jan-
uary, 1886, and educated at Rose Park
Public School, School of Mines, Ade-
laide, and the London School of Tech-
nology. Mr. Box has served 6 years
as Councillor with the Woodville Cor-
poration, and has resided in the dis-
trict for 14 years. A member of the
Finance Committee, Chairman Public
Works Committee; he is also Secre-
tary Australian Institute of Marine
and Power Engineers; Past Master of
Croydon Masonic Lodge, and served in
the Maritime Service during the war.
He is fond of cricket. Councillor Fox
is also keenly interested in the study
of Economics and social questions, and
has travelled extensively to all parts
of the world. He is a Justice of the
Peace and a member of the Wood-
ville Higdi School Council. Present
address, 26, Ranelagh Street, Wood-
ville.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES ERNEST SA E
(Corporation of Woodville)
Born at Port Pirie, 22nd April, 1 4,
and educated at Lefevre Peninsula
School. Mr. Sage was elected Co t-
ciUor on 4th July. 1936, and has been
a resident of the district for 14 ye; rs.
He was 3 years Secretary of the Set a-
phore and Port Adelaide Sub-Brai ch
I\.S. A 5.1.L.A., and at prevent
he holds the position of Preside it.


*
w*i*m
a
y. ij' jf
He is Trustee of the Soldiers' Memo-
rial Hall, Semaphore, and his business
is Shipping Clerk. He is a member of
Court Concord Foresters' Lodge,
and his sports are football and tennis.
He is a foundation member of the
Semaphore Swimming Club. During
the war Mr. Sage served abroad witn
the Royal Australian -Navy from
1916 to 1919. Private address, 8 Har-
vey Street, Woodville.
COUNCILLOR FRANK SCOTT
ROBERTSON, J.P.
(Corporation of Woodville.)
Born at Semaphore, 21st January,
1893, and educated at Alberton and
Sturt Street Public Schools. Mr.
Robertson was elected Councillor on
4th July, 1936, and he has been a re-
sident of the district for 16 years.
He is Treasurer of West Croydon and
Kilkenny Sub-Branch R.S. and S.I.
League, and his business is Depart-
mental Accountant, S.A. Farmers
Union. Pie is a member of the Leo-
pold Masonic Lodge, and Past Chief
Ruler of the Ancient Order of
Foresters' Lodge. His sports are
wrestling, football, yachting, and
rowing. During the war Mr. Robert-
son served abroad from 1915-19 with
the Light Horse and Imperial Camel
Corps. Private address, 47, Rowell
Crescent, Kilkenny.
GEORGE A. M. RALPH, TOWN CLERK.
(Woodville Corporation)
Mr. Ralph was appointed Junior
Clerk to the Woodville District Coun-
cil on July 9th. 1906, and in 1911 was
promoted to Health Inspector under
the various Acts. Still further pro-
motion came his way in 1915, when he
was appointed District Clerk, Sur-
veyor, Building Surveyor, and Secre-
tary of the Local Board of Health. In
1919 he was appointed by the Acting
Solicitor-General for the Common-
wealth to be a Commissioner under the
Statutory Declarations Act, and the
following year became a Justice of the
Peace. When the district became a
Corporation he was raised to the
status of Town Clerk. In all, Mr.
Ralph has given 30 years' service to
the Council. Mr. Ralph's father served
the Hindmarsh Corporation for some
years, and at one time was Mayor of
the town. He was also a member
of the Woodville Council, and elected
Chairman during the years 1904-6,
prior to his son entering local govern-
ment work. Mr. Ralph is also a mem-
ber of the Institute of Public Ad-
ministration, Past President of the
Woodville Bowling Club, and was the
first Secretary to the Henley and
Grange Sailing Club.




District Council of Angaston
DISTRICT COUNCIL OFFICES, ANGASTON,


' * ■ * aB ' * i9H ili
A ft. ||»|Hn^^B
" --|
History of Angaston
The little town of Angaston is surrounded by prolific
\\ heatfields, orchards, and vineyards, and noted as being
near the last home of that grand pioneer, the late George
Fife Angas—from whom the place takes its name—and his
son, the late John Howard Angas; also the country resi-
in a most delightful spot. A pretty stream runs through
it, and the grassy lawns are shadowed by leafy trees, under
which are swings and other delightful playthings which
delight the youthful heart. The children of Angaston are
indeed fortunate to have such a lovely playground.
ANGASTON DISTRICT COUNCIL, 1935-36.
Back Row (left to right)—Cr. P. Sporn (North Ward), Cr. W. H. Thorn (South Ward), Cr B T Hettner
(Stockwell Ward), Cr. G. R. Schilling (Mocuita Ward), E. T. Odgers (Clerk).
Front Row—Cr. A. E. Lange (Nuriootpa Ward), Cr. John Dallwitz (South Ward), Cr G W Chinner
(Chairman), Cr. William Coulthard (Nuriootpa Ward), Cr. H. P. Zander (Flaxman's Valley Ward)
dence of his grandson, Mr. Charles Angas.
Angaston has a population of 3,513 inhabitants accord-
ing to the 1935 census, with the usual banks, hotels,
churches, and an extra good library in the fine institute,
mostly built of the splendid stone for which Angaston is
noted. There is a fine park, show ground, recreation
ground, up-to-date tennis courts, and what one does not
often see, a special and beautiful playground for children
Proclaimed a District Council on 20th June, 1853, the
fiist Councillors were:—Messrs. Horace Dean (Chairmar .
William Salter, George Fife Angas, Capt. Richard Rode z
and William Coulthard. At the inception the services
of a Clerk could not he secured, as the salary of £lO i
annum offered did not prove tempting enough. The cle
cal work A\as, therefore, undertaken by the Councillors,
In March, 1854, after the rate had been declared, Mr.


' ' ' ■""" •'"*“ '’ " " . * ” ' ■* ' ' ;. , .- -•-<*•,!» ' -'>■»•»•■<’ I
q lT i on Bertouch was appointed to the position of Clerk
arC Collector at a salary of £l2O per annum.
he district has an area of 95 square miles, and the
lav is used for various purposes. A considerable area
in re Moculta and Stockwell Wards is used for agricul-
ttr ■ the wheat being of high quality, so that the flour
a is eagerly sought after. Nuriootpa is a fruit grow-
ing centre.
round Angaston there are more orchards, and the
peaches, pears, apricots, plums, prunes, and currants
can boast of the three colours of marble —red. white, and
blue.
The name of the principal street is Murray Street.
Angaston possesses a number of very fine public build-
ings, including an Institute. The present number of houses
in the district is 715, and there are also two very fine hos-
pitals—the Angaston District Hospital in Angaston and
the Willows Hospital at Nuriootpa, owned by Messrs.
Scholz & Son, where the lame and halt receive every assist-
ance with massage and electric baths, etc.
ANGASTON DISTRICT COUNCIL, 1936-37.
Back Row (left to right)—Cr. F. P. Sporn (North Ward), Cr. B. T. Hettner (Stockwell Ward), Cr. B. J. S.
Ninnes (South Ward), Cr. G. R. Schilling (Moculta Ward), E. T. Odgers (Clerk).
Front Row—Cr. W H. Thorn (South Ward), Cr. A. E. Lange (Nuriootpa Ward), Cr. John Dallwitz
(Chairman), Cr. William Coulthard (Nuriootpa Ward), Cr. H. P. Zander (Flaxman's Valley Ward).
grown without irrigation are of excellent quality, and a b%
export trade is carried on. Angaston is tie lome o
Yalumba wines, and has its factories for canning fruit and
its packing sheds for dried products. To the south tit
Angaston much of the land is still timbeied and used pun
cipally for grazing.
Angaston is also noted for its marble quarries, and
Angaston is the largest town in the district, and is
increasing in size yearly. Wonderful headway has been
made at Nuriootpa, and since the advent of the railway
that town has grown with rapidity. Nuriootpa is also
served with the Warren Water Scheme.
The other towns in the Council area are Stockwell,
Moculta (farming areas), Light’s Pass, and Mount McKen-
zie. The population at the last census was 3,513 (males


1,768 and females 1,745).
The rating is under the Land Values, and the first rate
declaied was 1/- in the £, which produced an annual income
ot £270. 1 he fee simple value of the land amounted to
£IOB,OOO on the first assessment. 1 he assessment of the
fee simple for the year ending June 30th, 1936, amounted
to £ 1,0a8,400, and the rate of 1/6 declared produced an
annual revenue of £3,969 from rates.
Angaston was presented by Mr. John Howard Angas,
son of Mr. George Fife Angas, with about 12 acres of land
light in the heart of the town as a recreation park, which
is known as Angas Recreation Park. Mr. Angas also g'ave
se\ eial hundreds of pounds towards developing this park.
1 he residents planted it with pines, an oval was prepared,
a pavilion erected, and the Agricultural Show Society
erected a large show hall. fhe various sports bodies
ha\e theii grounds, and it is one of the beautv spots of
the State.
I he Angaston War Memorial is a life-size bronze
statue of St. Michael. It was designed by Mr. C. H.
Angas, and the work was done in England by Andrea Carlo
Leicchesi, the celebrated sculptor. It is mounted on
Angaston marble and is considered to be one of the finest
of its kind in Australia.
The present Council Chamber is a new building, built
of Angaston marble and brick, and is a very fine struc-
ture. The foundation stone bears the following inscrip-
tion ; —“This stone was laid by G. W. Chinner, Esq., Chair-
man District Council of Angaston. August Bth, 1922.”
Angaston is served by the railway with two trains
daily, the best passenger service being the train leaving
Angaston in the morning and returning at night. Strange
to say, that although Angaston is only about 50 miles
from Adelaide, and is a town over 70 years of age, it was
only connected with Adelaide by train service in 1911, due
to the various townships not agreeing as to the best route.
Prior to 1911 the service was by coach to Freeling, a dis-
tance of 18 miles.
The present Council is constituted as follows :—Chair-
man, John Dallwitz, Angaston. Councillors:—South
Angaston Ward-—W. H. Thorn, R. J. S. Ninnes. North
Angaston Ward—F. P. Sporn. Nuriootpa Ward—W.
Coulthard, A. E. Lange. Moculta Ward—G. R. Schilling.
Stockwell Ward—B. T. Hettner. Flaxman’s Valley Ward—
H. P. Zander.
List of past Councillors who have previously served the
ratepayers for various terms :-—W. Hague, F. O. Thorn, J.
Rundle, G. A. Henwick, E. H. Plumstead, S. O. Smith, J.
F. Strange, H. Rohrlach, E. Davey, H. E. Olafsen, J. H.
Mansfield, J. P. Heggie, H. P. Zander, P. R. Evans, W.
Sibley, J. E. Swann, C. E. Stephens, E. R. Heyne, A. F.
Salter, C. H. Angas, A. Johnston, J. H. Scholz, J. C. Seigele,
W. Kruschel, Hatch. J. G. Klemm, C. J. Koch. C. A.
Schilling, C. E. Seelander, C. Weckert, J. G. Jungfer, E. R.
Martin, J. G. Hahn, R. Player, A. Shannon. James Heggie.
sen., A. Vorwerk, S. Smith, C. Pohlner, W. Clark. H. H.
IF Peppered, F. W. Linke, J. Trescowthick, J. Coulthard,
H. Kreig, W. B. Holmes, J. Rice, H. B. Peppered, F. J.
Ludlow, W. Patching. Joseph Hatch. F. C. Linke. W. H.
Linke, C. W. Schilling, W. H. Batten.


COUNCILLOR JOHN DALLWITZ.
(Chairman, District Council of Angaston.)
Born at Fbenezer, near Stockwell.
7th March, 1874, and educated at
Fbenezer and Tanunda Pnblic Schools.
He was elected to the Council, July,
1931, and was District Clerk from
3-1920. He is a member of the
Board of Management Angaston Dis-
Hospital. Councillor Dallwitz
, taken a very keen interest in the
welfare of the town and district, and
built a Tourist Hostel and very
imposing offices in Murray Street, be-
sides a very fine residence. In busi-
ness he is a Land and Estate Agent.
He is a member of the Barossa Lodge,
No. 49, S.A.C., Masonic. Sport,
bowls. He is an ex-President of the
Angaston Bowling Club and a mem-
ber of the Stockwell Hunt Club. Pri-
vate address, Angaston.
GEORGE WILLIAM CHINNER.
(Past Chairman, District Council of
Angaston.)
Born at Angaston, 10th May, 1878,
and educated at Angaston Public
School. He was elected to the Coun-
cil, July, 1919, and has been a resi-
dent of the district the whole of his
life. He has been Chairman of the
District Council and Chairman of the
Angaston Fruitgrowers’ Co-operative
Society, Ltd., and also of the Angas-
ton Institute for several years and the
Angaston Bowling Club. He is a
member of the Board of Management
Angaston District Hospital, and takes
a keen interest in all town matters.
Business, Orchadist. A member of
the Rechabite Lodge, he is a bowls
enthusiast and was a prominent foot-
baller and cricketer for many years.
Home address, Angaston.
COUNCILLOR BERTHOLD THEODOR
HETTNER.
(District Council of Angaston.)
Born at Moculta, 2nd January, 1891,
and educated at Moculta and Stock-
well Public Schools. Mr. Hettner was
elected to the Council, July, 1924, and
has been a resident of the district for
the whole of his life. Business, Farmer.
Home address, Stockwell.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM COULTHARD.
(District Council of Angaston.)
Born at Nuriootpa, 13th July, 1873,
and educated there. He was elected
to the Council 1912, and has been a
resident of the district practically all
his life. He is Chairman of the Nuri-
ootpa Institute, and Director of Tarae
Manufacturing Co., Pty., Ltd. Mr.
Coulthard is the most prominent
townsman in Nuriootpa. and has been
most generous in assisting all public
bodies. He gave the land for the new
Institute, Bowling Club and Croquet
Lawns. He has also given liberally
to the Band Rotunda, and has made a
liberal offer towards a new park, and
in conjunction with his two sisters
is building a new Methodist Church.
Business, Grazier. His sport is bowls,
and he is an ex-President and founder
of the Nuriootpa Bowling Club.
COUNCILLOR GUSTAV RHEINHALD
SCHILLING.
(District Council of Angaston.)
Born at Moculta, 28th June, 1871,
and educated at Moculta. He was
elected Councillor in July, 1932, and
has been a resident of the district the
whole of his life. He is a lay reader
of the Lutheran Church. Moculta. Mr.
Schilling is a Farmer, and his present
address is Mocnlta.
COUNCILLOR ERWIN ARTHUR
LANGE.
(District Council of Angaston.)
Born 31st October, 1887, at Nuri-
ootpa and educated there. In July,
1924, he was elected to the Council,
and has been a resident of the dis-
trict for the whole of his life. He
is Chairman Nuriootpa Recreation
Park. Business. Vigneron. His sport
is tennis. Address, Nuriootpa.
COUNCILLOR FRIEDRICH PAUL
SPORN.
(District Council of Angaston.)
Born at Light’s Pass, 20th April,
1875, and educated there. Elected to
Council, July, 1928. He has been a
resident of the district for the whole
of his life. Business, Farmer. Home
address, Light’s Pass.


COUNCILLOR HERMAN PAUL
ZANDER.
(District Council of Angaston.)
Born in Germany, 18th March, 1876,
and educated at Stockwell, S.A. He
arrived in Australia in 1878. Mr. Zan-
der has served the Council for 8 years
as a representative of Stockwell Ward
and 11 } eai s representing Flaxman’s
\ alle\ Ward, and has been a resident
of the district nearly all his life. He
is a member of the Wilton School
Committee, an Orchardist and Apiar-
ist. and a member of the Stockwell
Hunt Club. Home address, Angaston.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM HAROLD
THORN.
(District Council of Angaston.)
Born at Angaston, 19th December,
1888, and educated at his native town.
He has served the Council for 9 years,
and has been a resident of the dis-
trict for the whole of his life. He is
a member of Wilton School Commit-
tee, and an Orchardist and Grazier.
During the war he served for years
\\ ith the 9th Light Horse Regiment,
A.Lb. Present address, Angaston.
EDWARD THOMAS ODGERS.
(District Clerk, District Council of
Angaston.)
Born at Virginia, 22nd September.
1876, and educated at Virginia Public
School and Way College, Adelaide. He
has been District Clerk from Ist Jan-
uary, 1920, and a resident of the dis-
trict 1 1 oin August, 1912. Air. Odgers
is Secretary of the Angaston District
Hospital, and P.M., Barossa Lodge,
No. 49, Oddfellows’ M.U. Present
address, Angaston.


District Council of Balaklava


History of Balaklava
\\ ith regard to rapid progress, very few country towns
can compare with Balaklava. The district has an area of
13,240 acres, and is bounded on the north by the District
of Snowtown, on the west by Port Wakefield, by Dublin
on the south, and the eastern boundary is made by the
districts of Dalkey and Hall.
The first section to be surveyed was No. 1, on which
now stands a portion of the town of Balaklava, along
the north of which is the River Wakefield. The township
is served by rail, and is the junction of Moonta and Port
Pirie lines.
On November 14th. 1878, Balaklava was proclaimed
a District Council of five Wards, viz., Avon, Whitwarta,
Watchman, Frith, and Balaklava, the lastnamed Ward
being served by two Councillors. The present Council
Chambers were built in 1883, and the first Council of Bala-
klava consisted of Mr. j. Yerco (Chairman), and Coun-
cillors D. Virgo, C. Heard, J. Saint, G. Hicks, and T. Chat-
field.
There are ten miles of streets, the principal ones being-
George, Howe, and Wallace Streets. The length of roads
in the whole district is 400 miles. The dwelling houses
total 320, and there are 54 business places.
In the centre of the Town of Balaklava are two park-
lands of some 20 acres. One portion is used as a recrea-
tion ground, on which has been erected a pavilion, cricket
and football being the most popular sports. A bowling-
green and several tennis and croquet courts are on the
other portion of the ground.
East of the township is a fine Memorial Hospital,
which was opened tree of debt, and with about £2,000 on
hand, the buildings and furniture costing approximately
£15,000.
An up-to-date electric light and power station, which
is owned by the District Council, was established in 1916.
Most of the dwelling houses and all the business places
have both heating and lighting installations.
1 hose who have held office in the District Council
from its inception until the present time are:—Messrs. J.
Verco, R. F. Ware, G. Hicks. W. Thompson, T. Chatfield,
J. Saint, F. Bohnsack. D. Virgo, A. Manley, j. Kelly. G.
Lavis, C. Kuchenmeister, W. T. S. Haines'. J. C James,
J. H. Frost. W. T. Sires, F. A. Belling. A. R. Parker, W.
Underwood, P. F. Kieley, W. H. Sires, H. Virgo. W. Blake.
S. Alderman. A. Winter, C. Heard. C. L. Reuter. L. Dellow.
K. Fraser, J. Kirkland, H. Smith. E. Fisher, W. ]. Verco,
D. M. Peake, G. S. Grey, W. Smith, R. Veitch.'j. R. F,
1 leai d, I . Underwood, F. W . Foader, R. H. Chamber'-, J.
E. A. Baum. J. Thompson, G. Belling, H. Curtis, W. Tiller.
W. H. Manley, H. Masters, W. H. Hurst, R. J. Finlay son.
I). W. Leitch, J. P. L. Hoepner, P. F. A. Warhurst.
PRESENT MEMBERS OF COUNCIL.
Chairman, W. A. Tiller; Councillors C. H. Clark. F.
Newmann. J. M. Smith. J. Spillane, F. W. Wilson; District
Clerk, P. F. A. Warhurst.


: Jg^
Ml ■ '
■B ppR| ■ j
. IBBb
y? JteJB MKm
WILLIAM ARCHIE TILLER
Chairman, District Council of Balaklava.)
Air. Tiller was born at Balaklava,
2nd July, 1890, and educated at Cava-
naghville and Woodlands Public
Schools. He has served in the Coun-
cil for 8 years, 3 years of which he
has been Chairman, and has been a
resident of the district all his life. He
is a member of the Masonic Lodge
and the Balaklava Bowling Club.
During the war Mr. Tiller served
abroad with the A.I.F. for 3 years.
Home address, Balaklava.
COUNCILLOR JAMES SPILLANE.
(District Council of Balakdava.)
Mr. Spillane was born at Alma,
South Australia, on 3rd October, 1879,
and educated at the Cavanaghville
Public School. He has served in the
Balaklava Council for 7 years, and has
been a resident of the district for 51
years. He is President of the Bala-
klava and Dalkey Agricultural Show
Society, a Life Member of the Agri-
cultural Bureau, Chairman of the
Cavanaghville School Committee for
12 years, and Chairman of Directors
of the Balaklava Co-operative Sheep
Dipping and Shearing and Motor
Repair Co., Ltd. He is a Past-
President of the Wakefield Football
Association, and has been handicapper
and judge for sporting bodies for 34
years. He is a farmer by occupation.
Home address, Balaklava.
COUNCILLAR EDGAR W. WILSON.
(District Council of Balaklava.)
Mr. Wilson was born at Whitwarta,
Ist September, 1895, and educated at
Grant's Hill Public School. He has
served in the Council for 2 years, and
has been a resident of the district all
his life. He is Chairman of the School
Committee, President of the Tennis
Club, and a member of the Masonic
Lodge. He is a Farmer by occupa-
tion, and his sports are tennis and
coursing. He sometimes judges at
coursing meetings. Home address,
Whit wart a.
PERCY FRANK ALLISON
WARHURST, J.P.
(District Clerk and Engineer, District
Council of Balaklava.)
Mr. Warhurst was born at Unley
on the 22nd December, 1886, and edu-
cated at Pulteney Street, Grammar
School. Pie has served the Balaklava


l ' • /
District Council for 13 years. He is
a member of the Masonic Lodge, and
his sport is bowls. Home address,
Balaklava.


District Council of Barossa


History of Bar ossa
The District Council of Barossa is situated on the
north-eastern side of the town of Gawler. Its western and
southern boundaries are bounded by the Para Rivers; it
stretches northerly towards Tannnda and easterly towards
Springton, Mount Pleasant, and Gumeracha.
The district was surveyed by Colonel Light and pro-
claimed in the year 1854.
The District Councils Districts of Barossa East and
West were amalgamated in the year 1887, and in 1935 the
District Councils District of Mount Crawford was also
amalgamated, and the Council still functions under its
original name of Barossa.
Colonel Light named the District Barossa after
Barossa in Spain, and its principal town (Lyndoch) after
Lord Lyndoch, who, as a junior officer, fought in Spain
under the Colonel.
Lyndoch is situated nine miles from Gawler on the
main thoroughfare to the River Murray, and is served
with a bitumen road.
A large number of its most fertile sections were in the
early days held by the South Australian Company, and
early German settlers leased these sections at as high an
annual rental of £1 per acre.
The beautiful Lyndoch Valley comprises some of the
most fertile country in South Australia, and vineyards
abound everywhere, local grapes being valued very highly
by winemakers.
Giant red gum trees grow, and thousands of sleepers
for railway purposes have been taken from the district.
Water is supplied by Warren and Barossa Reservoirs,
which are situated within its area, and at Mount Craw-
ford the Government has planted some 10,000 acres with
pines in connection with the Forestry Department.
The area of the district is about 95,000 acres ; popula-
tion, 3,500: assessment, £30,980.
The Council as at present constituted is :—Mr. G. K.
G. Warren (Chairman), J. K. Barritt, W. Gilbert, D. P.
Gordon, H. F. Mugge, A. F. Thomas (Councillors), and
C. A. Fergusson (District Clerk).


District Council of Beachport


History of Beachport
Beachport, in the South-East was named by Sir Samuel
Way on May 23rd, 1878, after Sir Michael Hicks-Beach,
Secretary of State for the Colonies. In the language
of the Booandik tribe of aborigines the name was “Wir-
malngrang,” literally “The Owl’s Cave.”
Beachport is situated 3561 miles south-east of Adelaide,
and is the terminus of the railway, via Mount Gambier, and
necessarily draws to itself a large proportion of the ship-
ping trade of the South-East, for which provision is made
by means of large wool and produce stores and their usual
accessories.
The town is admirably situated for the purpose of a
summer resort, and viewed from any elevation has a pretty
appearance, there being much of interest in its surround-
ings. The jetty furnishes a good promenade, and is 2,100
feet long', and shows 16J feet of water at low tide. There
is good fishing and boating in the bay. An attractive
feature of the place is the Pool of Siloam, a nearly circular
lake, many acres in extent, and is situated in a hollow
of the sandhills, about half a mile from the town. It is
absolutely secluded, being enclosed by scrub-covered hills
on every side. A good road has been made for the con-
venience of visitors, and dressing houses have been erected.
The water is very much more saline than the sea, and is
said to have the property of curing rheumatism and other
complaints.
The town is situated at the northern end of Rivoli
Bay, has an automatic lighthouse on Penguin Island, and
is well sheltered from north and westerly winds. Owing
to sea erosion there was grave danger of Beachport being-
wiped out several years ago. but a contract has recently
been completed for sheet piling the foreshore, 44 chains
in length, and it is now safe for all time.
Special cheap excursion trains are run from Mount
Gambier to Beachport each Sunday during summer months,
and are well patronised, more particularly by people from
Tantanoola, Millicent, and Rendlesham. The Woods and
Forests Department have planted many thousands of acres
of pines in Beachport Council area, principally in the Hun-
dred of Riddoch, and the Mount Burr sawmill, the most
up-to-date sawmill in the Southern Hemisphere, is situated
in this district. The mill employees are housed in well-
built houses, built of timber grown and milled in the
district, and are a very progressive community. There is
a Mount Burr Progressive Association, and they have
erected a spacious hall, swimming pool, tennis courts,
cricket grounds, etc. \ here is also a public school and
general store on the mill property.
“Nora Creina Bay,” 16 miles north of Beachport. and
the south end of Rivoli Bay, known as “South End, 12
miles south of Beachport. are also favourite seaside resorts,
and are becoming more popular with tourists each year.
These places are both in Beachport Council area.
For the shipping of wool, grain, and general mer-
chandise Beachport is a safe harbour in all weather. Most
of the district is grazing country. Beachport is head-
quarters of the S.E. Drainage Board in the South-East, and
has offices and plant there. There is an Institute, two
churches (Anglican and Methodist), children’s park nd
playgrounds, and visitors’ camping grounds. It is recog-
nised by tourists to be a most beautiful seaside resort, .nd
is becoming more popular each year. There is a variety
of charming and changing seascape and lake seer ry.
There is good fishing in the sea and Lake George, the latter
having an outlet into the sea in connection with the E.
drainage scheme has become stocked with fish in great
abundance, principally mullet and Jack salmon. i\ ny
anglers from all parts of Australia go to Beachport or
the salmon fishing. This lake and other sheets of w ter
near Beachport abound with wild fowl and afford i. od
sport to shooters. Salt Lake, adjacent to the town, is me
of the finest natural bathing pools in the State, and pos-
sesses valuable curative properties.
Beachport has an area of 375,000 acres, and the popu-
lation numbers 570 persons. A rate of 1/ in the £ y Ids
an annual revenue of £347, and the capital value of rat ole
propertv amounts to £362,520, the assessment value L mg
£18,126.


IHIITMWIW rn liliigiUT... 1TM«-I.n ■iiiw.m«»w»».
;,
1
I
■
I i
■ •• ». ■ j
I
tecr i
IB|jg *, # i
‘ -■' , >„ . Iliiiiiiliiii
■ '
■ jiafcp^-™-
i m - • >0 \Z m .
Jk *W & % -i 41
■R : P--P<- J&Sk. Mil
w
M
■. ;;*«gmraB . M * i
The following is a list of past and present Council-
—Messrs. M. White, T. Gifford, C. Corigliano, J. H,
:key, J. H. Chant, E. J. Brooks, W. J. McArthur, J.
herland, J. Humphris, M. S. McDonald, G. H. Clifford,
I. H. Carthew.
Present Council: —Messrs. A. N. McArthur, J.P.
(Chairman), V. T. Bateman, C. P. Kealy, W. C. Pretty,
J as. Sutherland, S. S. M. Smith, E. H. Attiwill (Clerk and
Overseer of Works, service 22 years), A. Crawe (Ranger
and Inspector, 10 years), and C. R. Wallis (Ranger and
Inspector, 7 years).
ARCHIBALD NEIL McARTHUR.
(Chairman, District Council of Beachport.)
Born at Millicent, 7th September,
1877, and educated at the Millicent
Public School. Mr. McArthur has
been a member of the Council for 4
years and a resident of the district
the whole of his life. He has been
President of the Millicent Branch
R.S.S.I.L.A. and of the Millicent Rac-
ing- Club. Business, farmer and grazier.
He is a member of the Masonic Lodge
and served 3 years during the Great
War with the 32nd Battalion, A.I.F.
Home address, Millicent.
WALTER CHARLES PRETTY, J.P
(Past Chairman, District Council of
Beachport.)
Born at Mount Gambler. 19th Feb-
ruary, 1873, and educated at the
Beachport Public School. He has
been a member of the Council for 12
years and been 53 years a resident of
the district. For 2 years he was
Chairman of the Council and Chair-
man of the Beachport Children's Park
Committee. In business he is a But-
cher, and is a member of the Beach-
port Regatta Committee. Mr. Pretty
served abroad for two years with the
A.I.F. Home address, Beachport.
COUNCILLOR JAMES SUTHERLAND.
(District Council of Beachport.)
Born at Millicent, 14th May. 1889.
and educated at the Millicent Public


■ " v
%
rj
J 5 <J| : ;
, ' r If ' ' *
.School and Scotch College, Melbourne.
Mr. Sutherland has been a member of
the Council for 20 years, and for 46
years a resident of the district.
He is a grazier, a member of the
Masonic Lodge and his sport is
racing, being a Committeeman of
the Millicent Racing Club. Home ad-
dress, "Lossie," Millicent.
COUNCILLOR SYDNEY STEWART
MENZIES SMITH.
(District Council of Beachport.)
Born at Robe, 29th April, 1890. and
educated at Beachport, Millicent, and
Mount Gambler Public Schools. He
has been a member of the Council for
2 years and 40 years a resident of
the district. He is Honorary Secre-
tary Rendelsham School Committee
and President of the Rendelsham In-
stitute Committee. He is a member
of the Masonic Lodge. Mr. Smith
had 4 years’ active service abroad with
the A.1.F., and held the rank of War-
rant Officer. Home address, Rcndel-
sham.
COUNCILLOR CORNELIUS PATRICK
KEALY.
(District Council of Beachport.)
Born at Millicent, 15th March, 1878,
and educated at the Millicent Public
School. He has served in the Council
for 6 years, and been 58 rears a resi
dent of the district. Business, Farmer
and Grazier. Mr. Kealv is Honorary
Secretary of the Millicent St. Pat-
rick’s Da\ r Racing Club. Home ad-
dress, Millicent.
COUNCILLOR VALENTINE THOMAS
BATEMAN.
(District Council of Beachport.)
Born at Hatherleigh, 22nd uly.
1890, and educated at Hather eig'h
Public School. Mr. Bateman has '>een
a member of the Council for 17 years
and a resident of the district for 45
years. Business. Grazier. He is a
member of the Masonic and Oc; Ifel-
lows’ Lodges. Sports, racing and
football. He served abroad with the
A.1.F., 1914-1916. Home address.
Millicent.


-
' wSm* |Rt'* N \
I
if#
\ i JBm
: t
j|P* /
i
'
- -%
A CRAWE.
Ranger and Inspector of District for over
10 years.)
E. A. ATTIWILL.
(Present Clerk and Overseer of Works; has
had over 22 years’ service in Council.)
G. R. WALLIS.
(Ranger and Inspector for over 7 years.)




Distrid Council of Bern
VAUGHAN TERRACE, BERRI, 1936—SHOWING STATE BANK,
DR. JOYNT'S NEW SURGERY, NATIONAL BANK, ETC.


5 flftt ■ 1 tmm
Jk. 11 fW I L^as-
s —j jv- <' ( n
bgSgQ £■ \ --laati
k* j >.z< ‘,7 a) \^ : i: jt • ■' jl/ / -Ihi
§e| ..-x-« f m, „| v*<SbB* •- iJHM|Bfj ** y |||
H £?* ***i>£jR V * 5, T3BBnl |*p 5 &
1 Ji : \ ' ; 1 M k i ,|r I
ft ilsNi i :Jig.- JLmaJi ., f rf UV /T 1
■B i|-' .v €£ w a . ■ t 1 i —
■%£L ' *4" i - dm*T r^'SS . 34 *jmK 'A dS ' *&
£&&'- V /\ \ / “'‘1’ ,w w
i ; c
History of Berri
1' out teen years ago Berri was a dense scrub, but in
1922 was proclaimed a District Council. To-day it has a
population of 3,000 people, with 700 dwelling- houses. The
RERRI DISTRICT COUNCIL,
i he first Berri Council, formed in 1922, and appointed by the Governor
of that period.
Back Row (left to right)— Councillors H. S. Coombe, Dr. Hayward
(Officer of Health), L. A. Bills (Auditor), Councillors D. Jury, W.
T. Strahan, S. C. Kay (Auditor).
Seated—Councillors L. C. Tucker, N. Dyer, F. W. Loader (District
Clerk and Surveyor), Councillors M. A. Guy (First Chairman), James
Norman, and L. W. Peacock.
district comprises the Berri Irrigation Area, and was for-
merly part of the Cobdogla Sheep Station.
Berri has an area of about 23,400 acres, and is situated
on the River Murray, about 14 miles below Denmark and
63 miles above Morgan.
The townships of Berri, Monash, and Glossop are
within the district, and are served by boat and service
motor cars. In the early days the service consisted of
NEW METHODIST CHURCH, BERRI
boats and stage coaches.
J he rating is under the 5 per cent, on the fee simple
value, the present amount of the assessment is £44.008.
yielding a general rate of £2,567/2/8 and a special rate of
£174/18/8.
The following is a list of past Councillors of the Dis-
trict Council of Berri:—Messrs. H. S. Coombe (Chairman).
O. E. B. Kunoth. C. W. Harris, R. Curren. D. Juv . A.
Hunt, N. Dyer, L. \\ . A. Peacock, j. Norman, L. C. Tucker,
M. A. Guy, and W. T. Strahan.
4 he present Councillors are;—L. S. Trenaman (Chair-


man. appointed July, 1935), O. E. B. Kunoth (Chairman
for 8 years), j. McKay, W. H. Chilton, J. L. Wishart, J.
h Brown, W. J. Rowan, D. Jury, A. J. Slaven, and F. G.
Worth.
Mr. F. W. Loader, ex-Clerk and Surveyor of the Dis-
trict Council of Balaklava, was appointed to a similar office
in the District Council of Berri, and still holds the position.
FREDERICK WILLIAM LOADER.
(District Clerk and Surveyor, District
Council of Berri.)
Born at Normanville, 19th April,
1868, and educated at Thebarton Pub-
lic School. Mr. Loader has served in
the Balaklava District Council as
Clerk for 18 years, and in the Berri
District Council, and been a resident
of the Berri District for 14 years.
He has been a member of the Masonic
Lodge for 25 years, and 45 years a
member of the Druids’ Lodge. Home
address, Berri.




Distrid Council of Blyth


History of Blyth
Ihe District was named after Sir Arthur Blyth,
L. 1877, and C.B. 1886. who was born at Birming-
ham, England, March 19th, 1823, and arrived in South
Australia in 1839. He was actively engaged in trade pur-
suits and devoted a considerable portion of his time to
public affairs.
In 1855 he was elected as a Member of Parliament and
held the position, with the exception of a brief period
in 1868-9, until 1877. At different periods he held the
offices of Chief Secretary, Treasurer, Commissioner of Pub-
lic A orks, and Commissioner of Crown Lands, being three
times Premier and five times Treasurer. He was Agent-
(jeneral from 1877 to 1891. and died at Bournemouth,
December 7th, 1891.
Until April 30th, 1935. the District consisted of the
Hundred of Blyth only, containing about 112 square miles.
Consequent upon the findings of the Local Government
Areas Commission the District has been considerably en-
larged by the addition of that portion of the Hundred of
Llart, east of the railway line, containing 77 square miles,
and which previously constituted Hart Ward, in the late
District Council of Hutt and Hill Rivers. The remaining
Wards (Bungaree and Hill River) being absorbed by the
District Councils of Clare and Spalding. The Hoyleton
and Woodlands \\ ards, of the late District Council of
Hall, containing 50 square miles of the Hundred of Hall,
have also been added, the balance of the Hundred being
annexed to the District Council of Balaklava. The District
now comprises 239 square miles, and is divided into six
Wards, each represented by one Councillor. That por-
tion of the Hundred of Hart comprises Anama Ward, re-
presented by Councillor Alexander Maitland; and Hart
Ward, represented by Councillor Hon. A. L. McEwin,
M. both of whom previously represented that area in
the District Council of Hutt and Hill Rivers. Hundred of
Blyth comprises of Blyth Ward, represented by Councillor
J. S. McEwin; Central Ward, represented by Councillor
James Drennan, J.P.; and Kybunga Ward, represented by
Councillor H. T. Chapman. Hoyleton and Woodlands
Wards in the Hundred of Hall have now been merged as
Hoyleton Ward, represented by Councillor E. Dunstan, who
was previously a member of the District Council of Haii.
The present Chairman is Mr. J. S. McEwin, who has
occupied the position since July 6th, 1923. The present
Clerk is Mr. A. Dunstone, who has held the position
for 16 years, and is the younger son of the late Thomas
Dunstone, who also served the District as Clerk for 38
years.
From Adelaide the distance is 92J miles by rail, and is
served by two trains daily.
The district was proclaimed in 1872, and the first meet
ing, at which Messrs. T. Roberts, J. Shepherd, H. Long-
mire, E. Lawson, and G. Semmens were elected Council-
lors, was held at White Well on January 29th, 1872. Mr.
T. Roberts was elected Chairman.
In 1875 the first Council Chamber was built on the
south-west corner of Section 137, where meetings were
held until 1887, when an allotment was acquired in the
Town of Blyth and a Council Chamber erected there. T1
had been enlarged from time to time, and is now known
as the District Hall. In 1933 that building was trans-
ferred to the Institute Committee in consideration for the
present offices, which were erected by the Institute Con:
mittee, who have also enlarged the Hall, nearly doubling
the seating accommodation, also installing a Motion Pic
tnre Sound Equipment, which is operated by the Cor
mittee for the benefit of the Institute.
A portion of the stock reserve is under the control
of the Council for recreation and depasturing purposes.
Portion of the Recreation Grounds are leased to the Bow -
ing, Croquet, and Tennis Clubs, and the balance, consist
ing of the Recreation and Show Grounds, are vested in
the Oval Trust Committee.
A Cottage Hospital was established in 1910, and in
1911 a subsidised Public Hospital was built. This w; ;
enlarged in 1921, and can now accommodate 18 to 20
patients. Since that period new nurses’ quarters wen
erected, also the Lovelock Memorial Isolation Block, which


was made possible through a gift of £3OO by Mr. S. G.
Lovelock to commemorate his late mother.
The first assessment of 4cl. in the pound for the year
ding June 30th, 1873, yielded £ll6/9/10, and for the year
1 35 £2,631/6/3 from a rate of 1/3 in the pound on an
sessment of £42,101. The acreage is 152,358 and fee
inple value £841.886. The Water Supply for the town-
hip and the portion of the district west of the railway
is obtained from the Bundaleer Water Scheme, and
a the eastern side of the line a plentiful supply of stock
ater is obtained from bores and wells.
The town is well lighted with electric light, as the
ielaide Electric Ligirt Supply Company’s mains pass
through. Current was first available in 1926.
Practically the whole area of the district is agricul-
ral land and is used for mixed farming. Large qiian-
vies of wheat are railed from the six railway stations
wing the district, viz.—Boucaut, Brinkworth, Hart,
yth, Hoyleton, and Kybunga. The north-east corner of
district is good pastoral land and comprises portion
; the well-known Bungaree Merino Stud ; Mr. J. Mait-
land s Anama Clydesdale Stud is also situated at Hart.
The population of the present district is approximately
1,650; the dwellings number 387.
I he following are the names of past Councillors as far
as can be ascertained from records:—Messrs. John Shep-
herd, Edward Lawson, H. Treloar, C. Clark, Hiram Long-
mire, Stephen Neville, G. Hall, J. H. Spinkstone, A. Lamond,
TV. J. Ninnes, E. A. Johnston, R. Wyatt, W. H. Best, W.
Walton, John Parry, Fred Trestrail, F. T. Pedler, S. R.
Neville, M. Rucciak, Thomas Roberts, G. Semmens, T. Wil-
liams, J. C. Lawson, Isaac Nottle, James Sampson, W.
Eime, T. C. Best, J. Ladyman, R. S. Best, F. Luclwig, J.
Downing. J. G. Wundke, W. F. Reinke, J. J. Clarke, E. B.
Roberts, S. G. Shepherd, H. R. Steinhardt, Henry Long-
mire, W . Eldredge, R. Roberts, Alex. Smith, John Young,
J. C. Manson, C. Boeckmann, A. McCracken, John Curtis,
R. D. Haines, Joe Trestrail, H. R. Mugge, W. Mitchell.
N. Williams, E. C. Deland, J. T. Harmer, S. H. Tiller, M.
G. E. Best, James Williams, D. Eldredge. W. Pratt, W. H.
Longmire, E. A. Jericho, L. A. Cornish.


.- -
* •■
' ' fie
,
'
- 1 ' X
■f
9%th'M : f WWk
JAMES STEWART McEWIN.
(Chairman, District Council of Blyth.)
Born at “Mallee Brae,” Hart. 26th
September, 1889, and educated at Halt
Provisional School and Prince Alfred
College. A resident of the district the
whole of his life. Service in Council ;
First elected to the Blyth Disti ict
Council in July, 1916, and has been a
member continuously, and Chairman
for nearly 13 years. In March, 1928,
was appointed member Executive
Local Government Association to fill
the vacancy of his father, the late A.
L. McEwin, of Calton Hill, Hart. He
was elected Vice-President in 1930 and
President in 1932, relinquishing that
office in September, 1935. He has been
a resident of the district the whole
of his life. Mr. McEwin has been a
member of the Employment Promo-
tion Council, Blyth Flospital Board,
Chairman of the Blyth Centenary
Committee, Vice-President Blyth A.
and H. Society, Trustee Blyth Insti-
tute and President of the local branch
Liberal Country League and a repre-
sentative Elder in Hart Presbyterian
Church. He follows Agricultural and
Pastoral pursuits, and is a Past
Master of Clare and Blyth Masonic
Lodges, S.W . of Clare Mark Lodge,
and a member of United Collegians'
R.A.C., Secretary of the Blyth Rifle
Club, and Past President of the Blyth
Bowling Club. Home address, Vu-
meena," Blyth.
COUNCILLOR ALEXANDER LYELL
McEWIN, M.L.C.
(District Council of Blyth.)
Born at Blyth, 29th May, 1897. and
educated at Hart School and Prince
Alfred College. He served 3 years as
Councillor for Hart Ward in Hutt and
Hill Rivers District Council before tl
amalgamation with Blyth District
Council in May, 1935, and at present
occupies the position of Councillor re
presenting Hart Ward m the Blyth
District Council. He is a membei
for Northern District of the Legisl
tive Council. Chairman of the Sou 1
Australian Advisory Board of Agi
culture, member of the Blyth Hosj i-
tal Board. Chairman of the Blyth
Agricultural Bureau, Committeem. -
of the Blyth A. and H. Society, Presi-
dent of the Blyth Veterinary Lodge,
member of Council and Executi t
South Australian Rifle Association,
also served as a member of Agricul-
tural Settlement Committee, ap-
pointed to report to the Governme
on the agricultural industry in 19.
and of the Debt Adjustment Commit
tee of 1933. Business, Farmer. Won
shipful Master of Clare Masonic
Lodge from October, 1935. Captain
of the Blyth Rifle Club, foundation
member and past Secretary Bly h
Bowling Club. Home address, "Wy i-
dora," Hart.
COUNCILLOR ALEXANDER
MAITLAND.
(District Council of Blyth.)
Born at Anama, Rochester, Decern
her 20th, 1874, and educated at Clao
Public School and Clare High Schou.
He had 17 years’ service in Hutt a 1
Hill Rivers District Council and 1 s
been a member of the Blyth Disti ct
Council since amalgamation in 19
He has been a resident of Rochester
for 61 years, and is a Farmer and
Grazier.


' 'liar '
mamr s
/- : f-
t : ■ eg & “ -• -i,%~! -y- .y „ •■ y > • ,y
lie is a member of Clare Racing and
Polo Clubs, and of the Liberal and
Country Party. Home address, “Ren-
frew,” Rochester.
Dux of Prince Alfred College, 1923.
Mr. Chapman contested Wooroora
By-election, September, 1935, for the
House of Assembly. Home address,
Kybunga.
Bowling Club. He is a Farmer and a
Committeeman Blyth Sports Club.
Home address, Blyth.
COUNCILLOR HEDLEY THOMAS
CHAPMAN.
(District Council of Blyth.)
Born at Hoyleton, Bth November.
1905, and educated at Hoyleton Pub-
lic School and Prince Alfred College,
Kent Town. Mr. Chapman has been
a resident of the district for 9 years,
and he is a member of the Kybunga
Hall Committee. Business, Farmer.
He is a member of the Blyth Masonic
Lodge, No. 157. His sports are
cricket, football, and tennis. He was
COUNCILLOR JAMES DRENNAN.
(District Council of Blyth.)
Born at Greenock, Scotland, 26th
February, 1864, and educated at High-
landers’ Academy, Greenock, Scotland.
He arrived in Australia, September,
1881, per s.s. Corona, and has had 8
years’ service in Council. A resident
of the district for 45 years. Mr.
Drennan was for 2 years President of
the Blyth Show and 2 years the Blyth
COUNCILLOR ERNEST DUNSTAN.
(District Council of Blyth.)
Born at Burra, 24th October, 1883,
and educated at Watervale Public
School. Mr. Dunstan has been a mem-
ber of the Council 4 years, and a resi-
dent of the district 11 years. He is


a Farmer and member of the Auburn
Foresters' Lodge. Sports, football
and coursing. Home address, Hoyle-
ton.


District Council of Brown's Well


History of Browns Well
Brown's Well was proclaimed a Council on the 16th
November, 1916, and was named after the old Brown’s Well
Sheep Station, Brown’s Well being only three and a quar-
ter miles north of Paruna.
The Council office is situated at Paruna. and the first
meeting of the Council was held in January, 1917, there
being present: —Councillors C. H. E. Stone (Chairman),
Cameron, Hollard, Lloyd, L. V. Shannon, and W. E. Jones.
The total area under Council jurisdiction is 340,800
acres, in the Hundreds of Allen, Kekwick, and McGorrery.
The three Hundreds were allotted in 1914, and the district
was originally part of the Loxton district.
Fifty thousand acres of good mallee country still re-
mained unallotted along the southern portion of the dis-
trict on account of the roads not being constructed. How-
ever, splendid headway is now being made to remedy this
defect in consequence of the Federal grant of £3,000 in
1922 and a further amount of £6,900 in 1923-24. with the
result that 11 miles are now constructed.
The District Council of Brown's \\ ell is divided into
six Wards—North-East, South-East, North, South, South-
West, North-West.
The assessment of the district is £7.356/15/, and a rate
of 1/7 in the £ produces £582/8/3.
The district includes the townships of Alawoona ( ic
junction of the Loxton and Paringa lines). Paruna, Mai is,
Meribah. Cobera, and \ eitch.
The following is a list of Past Councillors: —Messrs.
E. C. Hoi lard, P.' Harrip, W. Pauli. C. A. Paterson. J S.
Crouch, G. Flavel, C. G. Ebert, and S. A. Pocock.
Present members of Council ; —Chairman. Mr. A.
Cameron; Councillors, Messrs. S. A. Pocock, \\ . Paul C.
A. Paterson, J. S. Crouch, C. F. H. Ortloff, A. J. Coo cr,
H. E. Furniss ; District Clerk, Mr. W. L. Ryan.


Districft Council of Burra Burra


History of Burra Burra
It is maintained by some authorities that the name
is of aboriginal derivation, meaning “Big," and by others
that it emanated from the Hindustani and was so named
by Indian native coolies in the employ of a Mr. Steen, which
translation would be "Great." The district, which is one
of the principal in the mid-north, surrounding the town-
ships of Kooringa. Aberdeen, Farrell’s Flat, Davies, Boo-
borowie, and Mount Bryan, and contains the Hundreds of
Kooringa, Baldina, King, Hanson, Ayers, Kingston, Mon-
golata, Rees, all of which, with the exception of the cor-
porate town of Burra, is under the jurisdiction of the
newly amalgamated District Council of Burra Burra, which
combines the old District Councils of Burra, Booborowie,
Hanson, and Mount Bryan, and is divided into eight Wards.
The District Council rate yields an annual revenue of £3,250.
Kooringa was originally a large copper mining centre, and
is now a very important town. The District of Burra
Burra having great pastoral interests to the east, where
the Mongolata goldfields exist, and which may prove to
be a wonderful asset to the State in the future, and splen-
did agricultural lands on the west. Burra was proclaimed
a corporate town in 1876, the first Mayor being Mr. Phillip
Lane. All the streets and parks are planted with orna-
mental trees, and the drainage of the town is excellent,
being emptied into the large Burra Creek. A splendid
lighting system is supplied by the Burra Electric Supply
Co., Ltd., and serves the towns of Kooringa. Aberdeen, and
Redruth. The population of the corporate town is 1,800
persons. The population of the district is 2,076, and dwell-
ings number approximately 530. There are 106 miles
of main road. All towns within the district have excel-
lent recreation grounds, with tennis courts, croquet lawns,
racecourse, golf links, and in addition to these Kooringa
has a splendid bowling green, etc., and Leighton a polo
ground.
Members of the District Council of Burra Burra;—
Chairman, Mr. I. J. Warnes; District Clerk, Mr. Geo.
Powell. Councillors —Messrs. H. C. Atkins, J.P., J. Kel-
lock. H. A. Edwards, F. G. Scholz, J.P., E. Finch, A. Donald
McDonald, M.P., and G. j. (Ted) Wedding.
OLD BURRA BURRA.
MEMORIES OF THE SIXTIES.
Air. E. J. Birbeck, who was born in Kooringa in the
hi ties, supplies the following reminiscences of life in Burra
Burra over 60 years ago.
Loads of wood were carted to the top of the Burra
Mine Hill by bullock teams. The Wood was stacked, and
empty tar barrels were brought from the Burra Mine. A
hrestick was put to the lot. What a large fire it made, and
w hat a sight it was to see the flaming tar barrels roll down
the hill. On another occasion a bullock was hoisted on
a derrick and roasted whole near Timmy Lamb’s Burra
Hotel.
W'hat is the cause of the dust rising on the road and
what is the noise." It is not the toot of the motor horn,
but the hoot of the Russian Finn driving his huge mule
team. He is carting the copper ore from the Burra Burra
Mine to Port Wakefield or Port Adelaide.
PLEASURE RESORTS.
Oh, yes, we had them ! Porter’s Lagoon for duck
shooting, Diprose’s for watercress and rabbits, Flagstaff
and Sugar Loaf Hill for gum picking, and Burra Creek
for cray-fishing.
Princess Royal Station was the homestead of Mr. A.
McCulloch. I remember visiting it way back in the six
ties, when the masons were building the mansion. Th
boA s of the Bui i a used to say that the magpie;
aftei hearing the continual ciy of IMortar, more mortar
learnt to call “Mort-Mort.” and thereby fooled the hod
carriers. George Morris’ magpie used to say, “Mother,
get a cup of tea, George is coming!” Langmaid’s magpie
used to say, “ .” (It should have been arrested for
the language.)
Candlestick extinguisher and snuffers Were verv use
ful articles in the home in the sixties. Query, bovs an


gir’s to-day. "What are snuffers and what were they
used for?” The boys and girls may answer that it was
a small implement, contrivance, or apparatus which men
and women used away back in the sixties, when the using
snuff was very common. They would take their “im-
plement” or “snuffers” and insert a pinch of snuff up the
n trils of their nasal organ.
“No, no, the answer is wrong.”
t was the tallow candle we used back in the sixties,
they needed “snuffing.” We need the “candlestick”
extinguisher to-day when the electric light fails, but
no* the snuffers.
Daylight, moonlight, starlight and the “Israelite” are
lent, and are to be seen to-day. Candlelight was the
uminator” for the home and church in the sixties. Lamp
t came into use in the early sixties in some churches.
Candles were home-made, and they often wanted “snuf-
fing.”
MAKING FIRE.
I remember the flint and steel and “touch paper” for
the making ol a fire, I said when mentioning the huge
bonfire that a firestick was put to the stacked wood and
tar barrels. Oh, yes, we had “matches” in the sixties—
Hell & Blacks (12 matches in a box). They were square
and almost as thick as a lead pencil. “Post and rails”
the\ wei e called. d hen we had the tandsticker matches
(sixpence per box). Evil smelling things. There are more
“cigarettes” to-day than there were matches back in the
sixties. When men lit their pipes for a smoke they used
paper lights—pieces of the weekly newspaper used rolled
up and kept in a goblet on the mantelpiece for lightino-
pipe, cigar, or candle.


1
4jl y
,-„" ' , - ** V
„#» <»*-•
■ • f •*' Y W ''
* i a
I. J. WARNES.
(Chairman of the District Council of Burra
Burra.)
Mr. I. j. Warnes, who has always
taken a keen interest in public affairs,
is Chairman of the District Council
of Burra Burra. He is the third sur-
viving son of the late Mr. Thomas
Warnes, and was born in 1871. After
having completed his education at the
Burra and at Adelaide, he undertook
pastoral work under his father, and
became an acknowledged authority on
sheep and wool. In 1900 Mr. Warnes
married Mary, daughter of the late
Thomas Fairbrother, of Fullarton,
who came to South Australia from
Leicester, England, in the ship Irene
in 1857, and died in 1913. The late
Thomas Warnes, his father, was born
in 1838 in Norfolk, England, and saw
service at the Crimea before settling
in South Australia. By dint of un-
remitting labour and thrift he grad-
ually acquired the lease, the Royal,
which gave him his start in 1862. All
was not plain sailing, but once estab-
lished he met with good fortune. No
small measure of credit was due to
his wlife, a daughter of Mr. I. Flower,
of Bristol. In later years Mr. Warnes
owned a good horse or two, which
did well at the annual picnics, and he
became a leading identity at the Burra.
He also was a devotee of yachting
as a member of the Old Austral and
Holdfast Bay Clubs. He died on the
15th July, 1896, at the age of 58 years.
COUNCILLOR T. J. (TED) WEDDING.
(District Council of Burra Burra.)
Born at Pinkerton Plains, 25th
August, 1882, and educated at Pinker-
ton Plains School, near Hamley
Bridge. He is the eldest son of the
late Mr. J. F. Wedding and Mrs. Wed-
ding, of Jamestown. Mr. Wedding has
represented Booborowie Ward in the
District Council of Burra Burra, and
for 7 years he has acted as Chairman.
He has been 24 years a resident of the
district and is a Farmer. He is a keen
follower of all sports. Home address,
Mount Brian.
COUNCILLOR EDWIN FINCH.
(District Council of Burra Burra.)
Born at Burra, 16th December,
1884, and educated at the Burra Pub-
lic School. He has served in the Coun-
cil for 15 years, and been a resident
of the district the whole of his life.
He is a member of the Burra Show
Committee, Hanson Agricultural
Bureau, and of the Stock Owners' As-
sociation. He is a Farmer and Grazier
and a member of the Burra Masonic
and Foresters' Lodges. His sport is
bowls. Home address, "Wandeillali,"
Kooringa.
COUNCILLOR HAROLD CARTE
ATKINS, J.P.
(District Council of Burra Burra.)
Born at Bocconoc Park, Clare, th
September, 1879. He was for 9 y irs
Councillor Hanson District Comic
years Chairman and 1 year Comic lor
for the Burra Burra District Council.
He has been 37 years a resident oi die
district, and positions held by him in-
clude President of Cavendale Te nis
Association, President of Porter’s


#| . *•
\ I
m^ ——^m __
L goon Boat Club, Farrell’s Flat Colt
Cmb, Farrell’s Flat Vigilance Com-
mittee, 3 years Chairman of Wheete-
land School Committee, two years
Secretary of the Farrell’s Flat
School Committee and 2 years Pre-
sident of the Farrell’s Flat Horse
Show. He is a Farmer and Grazier
and his sports are tennis and golf.
Home address, “Stoneleigh,” Farrell’s
Flat.
COUNCILLOR JOHN KELLOCK.
(District Council of Burra Burra.)
Born at Burra, 18th September,
1881, and educated at the Burra Pub-
lic School. A resident of the district
the whole of his life. He has served
2 years as Councillor, Burra Corpora-
tion, and 20 years with the District
Council of Burra Burra. He has been
13 years Trustee of the Kooringa
Methodist Church and 14 years a
member of the Burra Hospital Board.
Mr. Kellock is a member of the Ma-
sonic and Rechabite Lodges, and is a
Pastoralist and Farmer. He has been
a member of the Burra Rifle Club for
18 years and is fond of cricket. Home
address, Burra.
COUNCILLOR HORACE AMBROSE
EDWARDS.
(District Council of Burra Burra.)
Born at Kooringa, 11th February,
1900, and educated at Mount Bryan
Public School. He has served in the
Council for 3 years and been a resi-
dent of the district the whole of his
life. He is Steward and Superinten-
dent of the Mount Bryan Methodist
Church. Mr. Edwards is a Farmer.
His sports are cricket, football, and
tennis. Home address, Mount Bryan.
COUNCILLOR ARCHIBALD DONALD
MCDONALD, M P.
(District Council of Burra Burra.)
Born at Leighton in 1872 and edu-
cated at the Leighton Public School
and Roseworthy College. Mr.
McDonald has served for 10 years as
a representative of Booborowie Dis-
trict Council, and has been a resident
of Leighton all his life. He was a
member of the S.A. Wheat Board
from 1918 to 1922, Chairman of the
Leighton Agricultural Bureau, Dis-
trict President of the Leighton Coun-
try Party in 1932, and represents


* * |
\ \\ "
I * ♦ I
$&. M ' m ..■■■_ A y. ?. *1
»* m&mm
IBE
■ "**'** j|
■ Ip i9 s8|
Burra Burra in the present Parlia-
ment. He is a member of the Masonic
Lodg'e and takes an interest in rifle
shooting and golf. He is a Farmer
and Grazier.
COUNCILLOR FREDERICK GUSTAV
SCHOLZ, J.P.
(District Council of Burra Burra.)
Born at Marrabel, September 24th,
1864, and educated at Marrabel Pub-
lic School. Service in Council, 12 years
Coglin District Council, 10 years Han-
son District Council, and 1 year Burra
Burra District Council; 3 years Chair-
man District Council of Coglin, and 3
years Chairman District Council of
Hanson. Secretary of Leighton School
Committee. He is a Farmer, and fol-
lows cricket and tennis. He is Presi-
dent of the Leighton Tennis Club-
Home address, Kooringa.
GEORGE POWELL.
(District Clerk, District Council of Burra
Burra.)
Born at Adelaide, 1866, and educated
at Dixon’s and Currie Street Schools
and the Adelaide School of Mines. He
has served 8 years with the District
Council of Hanson, and 1 year with
Burra Burra, and has been 28 years
a resident of the district. He is Pre-
sident of the Farrell’s Flat Branch
Returned Soldiers’ League, and for 8
years was President of the Clare Hos
pital Board and is a member of the
Druids’ Lodge. Mr. Powell served
abroad on active service with the 9th
Light Horse. Military, cricket, and
football are his pastimes. Home
address, Kooringa, Burra.


District Council of Bute


History of Bute
1 he District Council of Ninnes was amalgamated with
the District Council of Kulpara in 1932 and the name
altered to the District Council of Bute.
The I ownship of Bute is the chief one in the district,
and was established in 1885, other towns being Kulpara,
Melton, Mona, 1 ickera, Alford. In the early days of the dis-
trict practically the whole of the land was one dense mallee
and pine scrub. The 15-mile camp (now called Mona)
was the first siding in the Hundred, and later there was
rivalry between that centre and 18-mile siding (Bute) as
to which was to be the business centre. In 1886 prac-
tically the whole of the business was transferred to Bute,
as the church and school had been located there and an
application for a licence for an hotel granted. Water was
one of the chief troubles of the early settlers —4/ per 400-
gallon tank was charged, and purchasers had to pump
the water themselves with a hand pump. In 1885 the
District Council of Ninnes (recently changed to the Dis-
trict Council of Bute) was proclaimed a District Council
District, the first Councillors being William Henry Pater-
son. Henry Dunkin OTlalloran, George France Mills, Wil-
liam Agincourt Stevens, George Francis Ormsby.
In 1882 the land in the Hundred of Wiltunga was
offered by the Government at auction, the upset price
being £1 per acre, the land mostly brought £l/0/6 per
acre, but the best lots brought £l/2/6. The Township
of Bute was named after the Marquis of Bute. In 1887
the Hundreds of Wiltunga and Tickera were added to the
District of Ninnes (Bute).
The district is a prosperous mixed farming one, with
an assured rainfall, has never had a crop failure, and in
the big drought in 1914 grew a considerable quantity of hay,
much of which was sold to farmers in less favoured dis-
tricts. The Council is a progressive one and has taken
time by the forelock, and half a mile from the town one of
the best aerodromes in the State has been put down. It is
100 acres in extent and practically level throughout. he
North-Western Aero Club has its headquarters there, and
undertakes the tuition of young airmen who desire to take
up aviation. Aeroplane pageants are held periodically, and
on September 28th, 1935, one of the finest aerial displays
ever held in South Australia was staged. Seven military
planes flew from Melbourne to Bute and five planes of the
S.A. Aero Club took part, besides a number of private
planes. The occasion was one of the fixtures to celebrate
the Jubilee of the District.
The present Councillors are:—W. N. Trengove (Bute),
E. W. Bettess (Bute), A. H. Bruce (Brucefield), H.
Paterson (Bute), W. J. Butler (Kadina), J. P. Millard ( ul-
para), C. E. Bundle (Kulpara), E. J. Daniel (Nim s).
Officers —R. W. hangman, District Clerk ; Dr. C. T. 1 ier,
Officer of Health; W. Worral, Overseer and Inspector
Bute is situated 87 miles from Adelaide, with : ood
roads all the way, and has a population of 1,920 an an
area of 387 square miles. The capital value of the ra ble
property is £753,900 and the assessment £37,695. The tal
length of roads under Council control is 4654 miles,
industries are wheat and barley growing and mixed
ing.
The Council from its inception has jealously gur led
the natural timber growing along the roads, and kes
immediate action against anybody cutting same. he
result is that the district is noted for the amount of t her
growing on the roads right throughout. Some of tl old
residents attribute the fertility of the district to th< fact
that the natural timber has been left wherever possibl and
which in their estimation helps to make the rainfal aore
reliable.


I
1 a
M
ILLIAM NATHANIEL TRENGOVE.
Chairman, District Council of Bute.)
Born at Kadina, May Bth, 1881, and
educated at Way College, Adelaide.
Mr. Trengove has served in the
Council for 16 years and has been a
resident of the district for 54 years.
He is Chairman of Bute Hospital
Board, a member of the Masonic
Lodge, and his sports are cricket,
football, tennis, rowing, rifle shooting,
golf, and bowls. He is a Farmer and
Grazier by occupation. Home ad-
dress, Bute.
PAST COUNCILLOR WILLIAM
ALEXANDER YOUNG.
(District Council of Bute.)
Born at Shetland Island. Scotland,
20th January, 1848. He was Council-
lor in the first Council for the District
of Kulpara and Councillor original
Council, District of Bute. Mr. Young,
in company with Mr. B. G. Axford,
was appointed to select the site of the
Bute Town Hall when the plan of Bute
was prepared.
PAST COUNCILLOR JOHN WILFRED
ROLAND WALTON.
(District Council of Bute.)
Born at Blyth, Ist December, 1896,
and educated at the Blyth and Bar-
unga Public Schools. Mr. Walton has
served in the Council for 3 years and
has for 26 years been a resident of
the district. He is a Past Master of
the Royal Arch and Mark Masonic
Lodges, and his sports are cricket,
tennis, and he is President of the Wha-
runda Football Club. Home address,
Wharaunda, West Coast
COUNCILLOR ALEXANDER JOHN
MCDONALD, J.P.
(District Council of Bute.)
Born at Wallaroo, Bth December.
1877, and educated by private tuition,
He represented Tickera Ward in the
Ninnes Council, 1921-32, was elected for
the same Ward 1933, and retired from
Port Broughton Council 1935. He has
been 50 years a resident of the dis-
trict, and President of the West-
ern District Coursing Club, Captain
of the Kanaka Rifle Club, Secretary


t i
Kfl
I ■**
of the Tickera Oddfellows' Lodge for
6 years, and a member of the Port
Broughton Rifle Club. His sports are
pigeon shooting and coursing. When
Mr. McDonald's late father, Mr. A.
D. McDonald, left the district he was
elected unopposed in Tickera Ward,
which position he held until the al-
teration of the Council Boundary. Mr.
McDonald was appointed a J.P., De-
cember 21st, 1933. Home address,
Kadina.
Public School. He has 5 years' ser-
vice in the Council and is Secretary of
Willamulka Cricket Club and Trea-
surer of Willamulka Methodist Trust.
Mr. Butler is a Farmer and a member
of the Masonic Lodges of Bute and
Moonta. He resided in the Bute dis-
trict until 1902, the Clinton district un-
til March, 1921 ; since when has has
lived in the Wiltunga district.
the district for 57 years. He is Trus-
tee Willamulka Methodist Church,
President Bute Football Club and
Cricket Club, Committeeman to the
Bute Hospital, and a member of he
Masonic Lodge. His sports are
cricket and football. Councillor Pat-
erson and his father (the late Mr. VC
H. Paterson) have held the seat of
Councillor for Ninnes Ward in he
Bute District Council continuously
since 1885.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM JAMES
BUTLER.
(District Council of Bute.)
Born at Wallaroo Mines, 4th De-
cember, 1882, and educated at Alford
COUNCILLOR ALLAN HENRY
PATERSON.
(District Council of Bute.)
Born at Barunga, December 19th,
1878, and educated at Willamulka Pub-
lic School. He has 22 years’ service in
the Council and been a resident of
COUNCILLOR ALBERT HENRY BRUCE
(District Council of Bute.)
Born at Wallaroo, October I tli.
1870, and educated at Bruccfield I ib-
lic School. He has served in the Coun-
cil for 32 years, and been a resident


v ' v >mgKr **•£**. ,
By* J^B
* M*~-
‘1 dc i
X f J>.
_
I '.?■***
of the district for 56 years. Business,
Farmer and Grazier. Present address
Brucefield.
COUNCILLOR JOHN PERCY MILLARD
(District Council of Bute.)
Born at Kulpara, 17th January, 1881,
and educated at Kulpara Public
School. He has 15 years’ service in
the Council and been a resident of the
district for the whole of his lifetime.
He is President of the North West-
ern Football Association and Kulpara
Football Club. Mr. Millard is a farmer
and Grazier. He is a member of the
Oddfellow's’ Lodge, and his sports are
cricket and football. Councillor Mil-
lard, his father (the late Mr. J. Mil-
lard), and his brother (Mr. T. C. Mil-
lard) have held the seat of Councillor
for Kulpara Ward in the District
Council of Kulpara and District Coun-
cil of Bute since 1885.
COUNCILLOR WALTER GARDNER.
(District Council of Bute.)
Born at Yankalilla, 25th December,
1870. He was educated at Yankalilla
Public School and has 4 years’ ser-
vice in Council, and been 27 years a
resident of the district. He is a mem-
ber of the M.U., No. 1, Adelaide Lodge.
Mr. Gardner served with the sth Im-
perial Bushmen's Corps, South Afri-
can War. He has acted as judge at
horse shows at several districts on
the West Coast and Yorke Peninsula.
Home address, Ninnes.
COUNCILLOR EDMUND JOHN
DANIEL.
(District Council of Bute.)
Born at Kulpara, 31st July, 1882,
and educated at the Kulpara Public
School and Stanley Grammar School,
Watervale. Mr. Daniel has been a
member of the Council for 8 years, and
for 52 years has been a resident of


r '
v "
I* '
the district. He is a member of the
Oddfellows' Lodge and his sport is
racing. Home address, Ninnes.
COUNCILLOR ERNEST WILLIAM
BETTESS.
(District Council of Bute.)
Born at Dublin, S.A., August 10,
1881, and educated at Bute Public
School. He has been a member of the
Council for 6 years and a resident of
the district for 52 years. He was
President of Bute Bowling Club
1925-30 and Chairman of Board Bute
Memorial Hospital. He is a Farmer
and Commission Agent, and Past
Grand Master Masonic Lodge. His
sport is bowls.
DR. CYRIL THOMAS PIPER.
(Medical Officer of Health, District Council
of Bute.)
Born at Kent Town, 15th Septem-
ber, 1902, and educated at Prince Al-
fred College, Adelaide University, and
London Hospital. A resident of the
district since 1929. He plays golf,
tennis, and cricket. Home address,
Bute.
COUNCILLOR CLAUDE ERIC RUN LE.
(District Council of Bute.)
Born at Kulpara, 14th January. 96,
and educated at Kulpara. He has een
a member of the Council 4 years and
40 years a resident of the district. \lr.
Bundle is President St. Vincent’s Ten-
nis Association and Captain Ku )ara
Tennis Club. He is a Farmer and
Grazier. Sports, tennis, golf and
football. Home address, Kulpan
DISTRICT CLERK ROY WILS N
LANGMAN, F.C.1.V., F.A.1.5., AS )-
CIATE ROYAL SANITARY IP
STITUTE, LONDON, J.P.
(District Council of Bute.)
Born at Hindmarsh, 22nd ful v. -86.
and educated at Hindmarsh F Hie
School and Muirden College. He
has had 2 years’ service in the C .in-
ch. Previously he was Assistant


I mt
"m TW
Town Clerk, Hindmarsh Corporation,
1906-1911, and District Clerk and Sur-
veyor to District Council of Payne-
ham from 1911 to 1924. He repre-
sented Felixstowe Ward, Payneham
District Council, from 1925 to 1932.
He is a Fellow of Commonwealth In-
stitute of Valuers, Fellow Australian
Institute of Secretaries, Associate of
the Royal Sanitary Institute, London,
and Justice of the Peace. Mr. Hang-
man is Secretary of the following:—
Northern Yorke Peninsula Field Trial
and Show Society, Bute Branch Agri-
cultural Bureau of South Australia,
Board of Management of Commons
Memorial Hospital, Bute, and Bute
School Committee. He is a member
of the Masonic and Oddfellows'
Lodges, and is interested in tennis,
bowls, and golf. Home address, Bute.




Distrid Council of Campbelltown


History of Campbelltown
Campbelltown, so called by Mr. Charles J. F. Camp-
bell, u ho at one time owned a greater portion of that
aiea. I he district is situated five and a half miles north-
east of Adelaide, and is bounded by the River Torrens on
the north-west, on the east by a portion of the Mount
Lofty Ranges, and by Magill Road on the south. The area
of Campbelltown is 5,760 acres, which are chiefly used
foi agiicultuial and market gardening purposes, many of
the farmers grazing cattle.
To give some idea of the growth of the district, in 1869
the population numbered 160 persons and to-day there are
4,300 residents, of whom 1,130 are ratepayers.
The capital value of ratable property in the district
amounts to £798,640, and the assessment value to £39,932,
whilst the rate of 1/6 in the £ yields yearly £2,995.
The district is noted for its fruit and vegetables. !he
Torrens Valley A. and H. Society hold an Annual Show
at Glen Roy Park.
There is approximately 45 miles of made roads under
the control of the Campbelltown District Council.
The following is a list of past members of the Camp-
belltown District Council Messrs. W. D. Cosgrove
(Chairman), M. J. Daly, j. Hockley, N. McShane, J. C.
Lumbers, J. C. Munchenberg, I. Simcock, P. Foley, D.
Addison, E. Packer, S. Pitt, J. W. Smith, and Brooks,
Present Council: —Messrs. M. J. Daly, A. Chinnery J.
C. Munchenberg, W. G. Amos, R. G. Bradbrook, P. Wil m
(District Clerk), J. H. Heading, and S. W. Mozley.


' v " 4HBaB
i|p M ~
jjli ■^w'^^-^lki
*•**
* |p % Jr MS^^m^gBt
MICHAEL JOSEPH DALY, J.P.
iirman, District Council of Campbell-
town.)
rn at North Adelaide, 3rd Sep-
tember, 1872. and educated at St.
Joseph’s School, Hectorville. Air.
Dab, has served in the Council from
July, 1913. and has been 55 years a
resident of the district. For 2 years
he represented the Council on the
East Torrens County Board, and
at present represents the Council
on the Aletropolitan County
Board. He has been periodically
Chairman of the District Council for
12 years. He is a member of St. Ig-
natius’ Branch, H.A.C.8.5., Norwood,
also a Past President and Chairman
of r \ rustees of same. Air. Daly was
for 20 years Secretary of the Glynde
Cricket Club. During the period that
he has been a member of the Council
Mr. Daly has been absent on only two
occasions from the Council meetings.
He was connected with the old tram-
car service for 20 years, and for 4
years was a motorman in the service
of the Municipal Tramways Trust. He
joined the service in 1886 and resigned
in 1911 to take up gardening pursuits,
and he is a foundation member of the
Torrens Valley A. and H. Society.
Home address, "Clairville," Hector-
ville.
PAST CHAIRMAN NICHOLAS
McSHANE, J.P.
(District Council of Campbelltown.)
Born at Campbelltown, 10th June,
1861, and educated at Campbelltown
Public School. Mr. McShane has for
34 years served in the Council as
Chairman and Councillor, and has been
for 74 years a resident of the dis-
trict. He has been for 20 years a Jus-
tice of the Peace, and for 4 years a
representative on the County Board of
Health. He is a member of the Oak of
Payneham Druids' Lodge and has for
26 years been Trustee. Mr. McShane
has been judge of the vegetable sec-
tion of the Torrens Valley Show since
its inception. Home address, Camp-
bell town.
PAST CHAIRMAN WILLIAM HENRY
STRATTON, J.P.
(District Council of Campbelltown.)
Born at North Adelaide, Ist July,
1881, and educated at Norwood
Public School. Air. Stratton has 8
years' service in the Campbelltown
District Council, 6 years as Councillor.


/': v *
BBT' "! •?'' v ■■■ ■
I
i * * * I
I • mB ; ~ r; > ■ h -'"" !PSEy .%y
-i^
k
'ipP •§*'
BBBBB: A -llWI^^gl
'*“ ;
w IB v $
Mm * > I, ■ -
• KA f •' -A ...
JpPP|k : |
ii»
2 years as Chairman, and during that
period has served the ratepayers with
every satisfaction, many improve-
ing Mr. Stratton's service in the Coun-
ments being made in the district dur-
cil. He is also a member of the Hind-
marsh Corporation, being elected a
Councillor in July, 1935. His business,
Land Agent. Member Matsonic,
Druids', and Buffalo Lodges. His
sports are football and racing.
COUNCILLOR SAMUEL WAGSTAFF
MOZLEY.
(District Council of Campbclltown.)
Mr. Mozley was horn at Derby,
England, in December, 1879, and edu-
cated at his native town; arrived in
Australia in 1908. He was elected
Councillor, 4th July, 19.36, and is a re-
tired engineer. He is a member of the
Masonic Lodge, and his sports are
football and cricket. He is a Past
President of the Port Adelaide Soc-
cer Club and a Past Vice-President
of the Soccer Association. His pri-
vate address is Reid Avenue, Mag'ill.
COUNCILLOR JOHN CHARLES
MUNCHENBERG, J.P.
(District Council of Campbclltown.)
Born at Angaston, 28th March, 1868,
and educated at North Rhynie Luthe-
ran School. Mr. Munchcnberg has
been a member of the Council for 15
years, representing Newton Ward, and
has been 38 years a resident of the
district. He has been a Justice of the
Peace since 1925. He has been the
Council’s representative on the East
Torrens County Board of Health since
1926. Mr. Munchcnberg is a son of
the late Mr. W. Munchcnberg, of
North Rhynie, who came to the State
in the early pioneering days. His
father came out to South Australia at
17 years of age with Geo. Fife Angas
with the first German settlers. His
father was coachman and gardener to
a daughter of Mr. Angas at Kyneton.
Councillor Munchenberg is a member
of the Campbclltown Agricultural and
Horticultural Society and of the local
branch of the Fruitgrowers’ Associa-
tion, and he also served for several
years in the Adelaide Military Forces
prior to the Boer War in C Company,
3rd Regiment.
COUNCILLOR RICHARD JOHN
BRADBROOK.
(District Council of Campbclltown )
Born at Paradise. sth September,


% jJl
.<% | JSmH
•'■I jdB|S|
.ftffcX#*-*-** § ; ■. *•
'$ t ||||W v. %j|il
#v 'VjHK
S.j. * . •., $ t, *■ -#; < >Mr.#€
..«,
HPWjjif I " ifl<^jBi^^^; .
,. .„ ;,i ,,
- ?t-
;■
ISM, and educated at Payneham and
Campbelltown Public Schools. Mr.
Bradbrook has served in the Council
for 6 vears, and has been a resident
of the district all his life. He is a
member of the Paradise Lodge of
[fellows’, M.U., and has been Sec-
irv of the Athelstone Football
for 14 years and the Cricket Club
ftu 10 years. Private address. Gorge
IF ad, Athelstone.
COUNCILLOR ARCHIBALD GEORGE
CHINNERY, J.P.
(District Council of Campbelltown.)
Born at Magill, 7th August, 1884,
and educated at Magill F’nblic School
and the School of Mines, Adelaide.
Mr. Chinnery has served in the Camp-
belltown Council for 7 years, and has
been a resident of the district all his
life. PTe is a Justice of the Peace for
South Australia, and is in business as
a Vigneron. His sports are football
and cricket. Home address, Central
Avenue, Magill.
COUNCILLOR JOSEPH HENRY
HEADING.
(District Council of Campbelltown.)
Born at Campbelltown, 15th Decem-
ber, 1882, and educated at the Camp-
belltown Public School. Mr. Heading
was elected Councillor on 4th July,
1936, and his occupation is Market
Gardening. He is a member of the
United Ancient Order of Druids’
Lodge, and his sports are football and
cricket. He is ex-President of the
Gaza Institute and the Strathalbyn
Agricultural Bureau, and ex-\ ice-
President of the Milang Agricultural
Bureau. Mr. Heading is a Past Coun-
cillor of the Yatala South District
Council. Private address, Hill Street,
Campbelltown.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM GEORGE
AMOS.
(District Council of Campbelltown.)
Born at Angle Vale, 23rd February,
1877, and educated at Salisbury. Mr.
Amos has served in the Council from
July, 1935, and has been 6 years a
resident of the district. He is a mem-
ber of the Manchester Unit}' Oddfel-
lows’ Lodge, and was for ID years a
farmer and grazier. Home address,
Avenue Road, Paradise.




District Council of Carrieton


History of Carrieton
Carrieton is the central and principal township of a
laige agricultural and grazing district.
_ It lies 199 miles distant from Adelaide, with which city
it is connected by a daily railway service.
In pioneer days direct communication existed by road
to and irom the Burra. \anyarrie Station, situated seven
miles north of_ Carrieton, was then a stopping place for
tle coaches of Cobb & Company, the well-known mail
contractors, running between the Burra and Blinman.
I he district was proclaimed on January sth, 1888, and
was given the name of Carrieton. At the first meeting of
tre Council, \\ hich was held in that year, there were
present: Messrs. P. McNamara, W. H. Bverlie, N.
ravers T. Reed, J. B. Kerr, D. Fyfe, and James O'Dris-
coll Mr. P. McNamara was duly elected to the chair
and Mr. \\ . Hall was appointed first Clerk.
The Council controls an area of 491.200 acres, sub-
cm ided into six Wards, which were proclaimed on June
4 ji 1 ES follows: —Eurelia Ward, Yanyarrie Ward,
Bendleby Y\ ard. LYoonda Ward, and O'Laddie Ward. It is
33 miles m length, with a breadth of 26 miles, and em-
braces eight Hundreds, viz.—Eurelia, O'Laddie, Yalpara.
\ anyarrie, Uroonda, Bendleby, Eurilpa, and McCulloch.
The area includes the Townships of Eurelia, Carrieton
Johnburgh, and Belton.
Carrieton has a population of 847, including the resi-
dents of the township, which number 107.
The first assessment was made by Mr. P. Leo in 1888
and a suitable rate adopted. In 1922 the assessment was
£ 10.391 and the rate was fixed at 1/3 in the £, producing
a revenue of £648/8/9.
In the eai 1\ clays the district was wholly agricultural,
and m 1889 120,000 bags of wheat were delivered at the
Carrieton Railway Station. The output dwindled to 8,000
hags in 1923, and the area is now being almost wholly
devoted to grazing and dairying purposes.
The total mileage of main roads constructed by the
Council is 87, and district roads approximately 500 miles.
The Council Chamber, situated in the Township of Car-
rieton, was erected in 1892. On August 10th, 1920, the
offices were completely burnt down, and all records from
the inception of the Council were totally destroyed.
Among the improvement works executed by the Coun-
cil a notable feature has been the planting of ornamental
trees in the streets for the beautification of the town.
Another feature of interest is the Bronze Shield, pre-
sented to the Council by the Government of Australia to
commemorate the subscription by this district of double
its allotted quota towards the 1919 Peace Loan. Aca
tuied German machine gun has also been presented by t
military authorities.
List of Councillors who have served the ratepave
for various terms Messrs. A. R. Axford, W. Travers,
Ruddock, J. B. Kerr. G. H. Dunn, L. Chalmers, P. A. Molloy,
I. F. Fisher, W. J. Gleeson, T. Ryan, Russell, W. J. Bock
W. H. Heaslip, M. P. Daly, W. H. Byerlie, T. M. Willia
T. P. Mclnerney, T. Reed. F. W. Whyte, P. J. Rvan. R. S.
Sampson, P. Fox, J. Brady, E. Meers, J. Ormiston,
W . F. Canny.
Present Council:—Chairman, Councillor T. M. Wil-
liams, J.P. (Councillor for Yanyarrie Ward), Councillors B.
A. Hombsch (O'Laddie Ward), E. P. Wall (Eurelia Ward),
H. Geo Hardy (Eurilpa Ward), H. A. Fisher (Bendleby
Ward), R. R. Fisher (Uroonda Ward); District Clerk-
Overseer, W. F. Canny, J.P.


jjWl* — %
itealBk* %» ..»
:
1|B
• : • 7'•!• ••'•:■• • .:... fc. I
'
•*£ " < x ‘
( . ‘ .MWBI
ysg§s ,< jf ■ K,
ipH;"- p|||Srara
j^9
\
fl y> _
STEPHEN BENEDICT MANNING.
(Past Chairman, District Council of
Carrieton.)
Born at Saddleworth, 18th Decem-
ber, 1867, and educated at the Saddle-
worth Public School. Mr. Manning
has served in the Council for 10 years,
4 years of which he was Chairman,
and has been 50 years a resident of
the district. Business, Grazier. His
sports are horse racing, tennis, and
cricket. Home address, Eurelia.
COUNCILLOR EDMUND PATRICK
WALL.
(District Council of Carrieton.)
Born at Adelaide, 4th March, 1891,
and educated at Eurelia West Public
School. Mr. Wall has served in the
Council for 2 years and has been a
resident of the district all his life. He
is a member of the Eurelia Branch of
the Agricultural Bureau, which was
formed 19 years ago, being one of the
foundation members, and Secretary
for 15 years. He has been a very
successful exhibitor at country shows,
taking numerous prizes in the agri-
cultural, dairy produce, and vegetable
sections, and he has won a number of
valuable trophies. He has been Secre-
tary of the Eurelia Tennis Club for 16
years, is interested in all local picnics,
and has assisted as handicapper and
starter in the various athletic and
horse events. Every movement to
benefit the district always claims
his attention. Home address, Eurelia.
COUNCILLOR HERBERT ANDREW
FISHER.
(District Council of Carrieton.)
Born at Hundred of Yanyarrie, 24th
August, 1889, and educated at Yanyar-
rie Public School. Mr. Fisher has been
a member of the Council for 6 years
and a resident of the district all his
life. He is Chairman of the Glenroy
School Committee and a member of
the Yanyarrie Rifle Club. Home ad-
dress, Carrieton.
COUNCILLOR BERNARD ALFRED
HOMBSCH.
(District Council of Carrieton.)
Born at Johnburgh, November 22nd,
1896, and educated at the Johnburgh


Public School. Mr. Hombsch has
served in the Council for 5 years and
has been for 39 years a resident of
the district. Occupation, mixed farm-
ing". Home address, Johnburgh.
COUNCILLOR RAYMOND ROBERT
FISHER.
(District Council of Carrieton.)
Born at Uroonda, 20th September,
1900, and educated at the Boolcunda
East School. Mr. Fisher has served in
the Council for 5 years and has been
a resident of Uroonda all his life. By
occupation he is a Farmer and Grazier
and his sports are rifle shooting and
tennis. Postal address, Carrieton.
WILLIAM F. CANNY, J.P.
(District Clerk and Overseer, District Council
of Carrieton.)
Born at Pekina, 15th September,
1886, and educated at Cradock Public
School. Mr. Canny has served the
Council for 15 years and has been a
resident of the district since his ap-
pointment. His sport is cricket.
Home address, Carrieton.


District Council of Cleve
INSTITUTE HALL.


k. -
History of Cleve
■/
The name is derived from the seat of the Snow family
at Old Cleve, Devon, England, the head of which, at the
time the township was proclaimed in 1879, was a cousin
of Sir William Jervois, Governor of South Australia.
Cle\ e is a large and prosperous district, with an area
of 1.200.000 acres, divided into four Wards. It was sepa-
MAIN STREET.
i ated fi om Franklin Harbour in 1911, the first Councillors
being Messrs. Sims, Rayson, Edwards, Pearce, and Wild-
man.
Cleve is noted for general farming, wheat, wool, lamb
raising for export, has one seaport (Arno Bay) and nine
railway sidings. 1 he district is watered by Tod River
and Yeldulknie Reservoirs. Cleve is the' main town
situated at the foothills of the Cleve Range, 17 miles from
the seaport, and 13 miles from the nearest raihvay. The
district includes the towns of Arno Bay, Rudall, Kialpa.
Darke’s Peak (named after the explorer Darke) and
Caralue.
The population of the entire district totals 2,400 per-
sons, and dwellings number 298. In 1911 the rates
amounted to £470/2/, and the present assessment is £25,500,
capital value of ratable property being £520,000.
Part of the Hundreds of Mann, Boothby, Roberts, and
Verran, and the Township of Bligh are supplied with water
from the 0 eldulknie Reservoir. However, the Town c
Cleve and the great western portion of the district is with-
STATE BANK BUILDING.
out pei manent water supply, and the residents have to
rely upon surface and roof catchments.
Communication with Adelaide is by steamer to W 1-
laioo, thence by rail; or from Arno Bay by steamer. 1a
f 01 1 Lincoln. T he western portion is served by rail once
weekly from Port Lincoln.
An up-to-date Hospital has been erected, the funds r
Inch w tie laised by debentures, the whole issue being - st id
locally. It has been completely furnished and equipped
by voluntary subscription, and is ideally situated on in
eminence overlooking the town.
In Clerc a wai memorial has been erected, represent-
ing, on a base of rough granite, a soldier in full uniform,
carved in Australian marble, and at Arno Bay there is a
memorial in the form of a monolith of polished granite,


''
II Sll f milV * '111111111
I WwZ&Bl -"'■fmm
I - y <*& mtm
m ?||p|s - aillgl' ■ ? -. aji8p|||p
■ -,ML \ ? s
both being inscribed with the names of those residents who
made the supreme sacrifice during the Great War.
Past members of the Council are : —Messrs. Smalla-
combe, T. Sims, J. J. Deer, C. A. Noble, G. Martin, F.
asters, C. Hamilton, j. E. Henderson, E. M. Mitchell,
H. Pearce, D. C. McCallum, J. T. Whyte, J. Penna, J. Id.
bum, P. 1- Smallacombe, I. Rayson, J. R. Edwards, j.
EDWIN M. MITCHELL.
Chairman, District Council of Cleve.)
Born at Caltowie, 28th April, 1879,
d educated at Jamestown Public
hook Mr. Mitchell has been a resi-
dent of the district for 30 years. He is
Secretary of the Roberts School Com-
dttee, Chief Ruler of Arno’s Hope
L >dge, and Superintendent of the
Pride of Arno, 1.0. R., Lodge. He is
atron of Arno Sports and Vice-Pre-
ident of the Football Club. Mr. Mit-
red has been returned unopposed for
10 years to the Cleve District Coun-
cil. and has been a member for a total
period of 14 years. Home address,
Arno Bay.
COUNCILLOR FRANK HILTON
PEARCE.
(District Council of Cleve.)
Born at Moonta, 31st August, 1888.
and educated at Thomas Plains Pro-
visional School. Mr. Pearce has served
in the Cleve District Council for 5
years and has been a resident of the
district for 28 years. He is President
and Secretary of the local Progress
Association, President of the Rudall
Cricket and Football Clubs, President
and Secretary of the Rudall Centre
School Committee, and Layman of the
Rudall Methodist Church- Business,
Farmer and Grazier. Sports, football
and cricket. Home address, Rudall,
Eyre Peninsula.
PHILLIP GEORGE FITZGERALD.
(District Clerk, District Council of Cleve.)
Born at Burra, S.A., 14th March,
1886, and educated at the Burra Pub-
lic School. Mr. Fitzgerald has served
the Council for 10 years and has been
for 26 years a resident of the district.
Wildman, S. J. Pearce, O. Forbes, R. F. Jones, R. J. lii
mouth, and F. G. Houschild.
The members of the present Council are : —Councillors
F. J. Brooks (Chairman), F. H. Gillings, J. J. Leonard,
E. M. Mitchell, J. H. Dunn, F. H. Pearce, and P. G. Fitz-
gerald (District Clerk).
He is Secretary of the Cleve Local
Board of Health and Hospital, Direc-
tor of the Cleve Doctor's Residence
Company, a member of the local Re-
patriation Committee and the Masonic
Lodge. Mr. Fitzgerald was formerly
in business as a Farmer and Butcher.
He is Secretary of the Cleve Cricket
Association and President of the Foot-
ball Association. Home address, Cleve,
West Coast.




■——■■■■■■II . .,11 !.!■ M
* ,. ■ if
e:.v.
I | Ife,. iMmmm -■§=#■ ll|iip W . J
■
ll%, Tr'^V-1 4 '\ “k
District Council of Clinton
L. B. LAMSHED’S 18-FURROW PLOUGH.


History of Clinton
1 his District Council formerly comprised of the Hun-
ch ed of Clinton only. Council meeting's were held monthly
in a neat little building on Section 540, built with the
object of accommodating- the Council, and this was utilised
for the purpose until the year 188/, when the Hon. Thomas
Pla} ford carried a 34i1l in the House of Assembly for a re-
distribution of the boundaries of District Councils. In
that year the Hundreds of Clinton and Tuparra were amal-
gamated, the two constituting what is now known as the
Clinton District Council. The position of the Council
Chamber was then found to be inconveniently situated.
The new Council, numbering 10 members, decided upon a
site in the Township of Arthurton, where the meetings
have since been held.
4he township stands upon an eminence—one of the
most elevated in Yorke Peninsula —with a good rainfall
and the soil very fertile.
The district was divided into five Wards, and under
the new regime the Councillors were Messrs. W. H. Hawke,
R. K. Kitto, J. P. Pontifex, J. Lewis, L. Crosby (Chairman),
T. B. \\ icks, J. Barton, \\ . Walker, H. Freeman, J.
McLeay (Clerk and Overseer).
There are three other townships within the boundaries
of the district, viz., Port Price, Port Clinton, and Howe—
the two former being centres where wheat and other pro-
duce is received for shipment to Port Adelaide for exporta-
tion overseas. Large quantities of malting barley, as web
as oats and dairy produce, are also raised.
The district being situated within Goyder’s Line has
an average annual rainfall of from 15 to 16 inches. Until
the introduction of the Beetaloo water system settlers were
compelled to make provision for watering their stock and
for domestic purposes by sinking tanks and dams.
The first discovery of phosphate rock of commercial
value suitable for the manufacture of artificial fertilizers
was made on Yarraroo Estate, in the Hundred of Clinton,
by Mr. James Barton, of Port Clinton, and who received a
substantial bonus offered by the South Australian Govern-
ment to the discoverer. Besides phosphate rock, it has
been proved by tests made by the Government boring plant
that large deposits of brown coal exist in the vicinity await-
ing development.
The remains of a jetty at Port Clinton may be seen.
This jetty, prior to the construction of the Adelaide to
Wallaroo and Moonta railway, was the means of access
whereby the necessary requirements of the wants of the
settlers and miners of the Peninsula copper mines were
taken across by road to Wallaroo and Moonta after their
arrival by water from Adelaide.
The population of the entire district is estimated at
1,400 persons. Clinton is one of the largest districts in
the State, extending as it does from the Gulf of St. Vin-
vent to Spencer Gulf, and one of the peculiar features of
this part is the frequency of rocky formations, of a cal ■
culose nature, which crops up, nearing the surface, with
a very limited amount of earth covering. This class of
soil, in a remarkable manner, responds to the application
of superphosphates for the production of wheat whic 1
gives such good results in the district.
The present capital value of ratable property
£1,060,220, and the assessment value £53,011, whilst a'rate
of 1/ m the £ yields annually £2,650/11/.
Lhe following is a list of past and present member
of the District Council:—Messrs. C. Foley, C. L. Palm. I
K. Kitto, A . H. \\ icks, W. H. Nagel, L. Bayliss, J. Bartoi
S. 4 . Lamshed, T. Kenny, G. Sawyer, J. Rooney, E. Nan
kivelle, J. Arthur, J. Francis, H. Freeman, L. Crosbv.
McLeay, W. R. Stephenson, F. Baker, T. H. Hooper. G
Bull, M. j. Maloney, J. Welch, W. Walker, A. W. Wear
ing, C. Donaldson, J. H. Colliver, J. Sharrad, A. B. Fer
guson, C. H. Martin, C. Z. Williams, W. f. Crowell I
Pontifex, and W. M. Brown. ' *
The present members are Messrs. J. T. Henschk
(Chairman) J A. Kelly, S. Pontifex, AO H. Bagshaw, C
H. Mart'n, O D. Jericho, C. W. Bowden, W. E. Lamshed
J. A. Phelps W. J Crowell, and C. H. Garden (Clerk and
Overseer of Works).


««-
m C
■ •■ . ; ;v:. :
> %jBy If V I®«=® '
CHAIRMAN JOHN JOSEPH
HENSCHKE.
(District Council of Clinton.)
Born at Hookina, 23rd September,
IS9O, and educated at Hundred of
Woolyana Public School. Mr.
Henschke has served in the Council
; ir 12 years, 3 years of which he has
een Chairman, and he has also been
ir 16 years a resident of the district,
i business he is a Postmaster and
omrnission Ag'ent. He is a life mem-
ber of the Agricultural Bureau of S.A.,
resident of the local branch for 10
rears, and Chairman of the School
ommittee. Home address, Arthur-
ton.
THE LATE SAMUEL THOMAS
LAMSHED, J.P.
(Past Chairman, District Council of Clinton.)
Born at Brighton, 29th December,
1858, and some years later removed to
Maitland. On the 18th November,
1885, the late Mr. Lamshed was mar-
ried to Miss Sabina Cornish, of that
town, and they made their home at
Sunny Vale, in the Hundred of
Tiparra. In July, 1896, the late Mr.
Lamshed was elected a member of the
Clinton District Council, and at the
time of his death was its Chair-
man, an office he conducted with
praiseworthy and conspicuous ability.
During his 20 years' connection with
the Council he was absent on only
three occasions. He was a member
of the Duke of Edinburgh Lodge of
Freemasons. The late Mr. Lamshed
was always anxious to do his best for
the benefit of the ratepayers in the
Clinton district. Mrs. Lamshed, five
sons and one daughter survive, namely,
Messrs. W. E. Lamshed (Cunlifife), A.
E. Lamshed (Sunny Vale), H. R. Lam-
shed (Arthurton), L. B. Lamshed
(Sunny Vale), L. M. Lamshed (Haw-
thorn), and Miss E. Lamshed (Haw-
thorn). Mr. W. E. Lamshed, the
eldest son, is at present a Councillor
in the Clinton District Council, having
served for a period of 10 years.
COUNCILLOR OTTO DANIEL
JERICHO.
(District Council of Clinton.)
Mr. Jericho was born at Tiparra,
12th February, 1898. and educated at
Little Kalkabury. He has been a
member of the Council for 6 years and
a resident of the district for 38 years.
In business he is a Farmer, and is fond
of all sports. Home address, Paske-
ville.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM HENRY
BAGSHAW.
(District Council of Clinton)
Born at Urania, 9th March, 1884.
and educated at Urania Public School.
Mr. Bagshaw has been for 30 years a
resident of the district, and has been
a member of Clinton Council for 5
years. He is a Farmer by occupation,
and fond of all sports.
COUNCILLOR STEPNEY PONTIFEX.
(District Council of Clinton.)
Mr. Pontifex was horn at Adelaide,
2nd April, 1894, and educated at Mel-
ton, 4 .I 5 . He has been a member of
the Council for 5 years and for 40
years a resident of the district. Busi-
ness. Farmer. Home address, Melton
Y.P.


JK
||k
HJto, -S—■ »*' I
»iifcs:. /*%
*
COUNCILLOR JAMES ANTHONY
KELLY.
(District Council of Clinton.)
Born at Kapunda, 14th October,
1876, and educated at Windsor Public
School. Mr. Kelly has been a member
of the Council for 7 years and for 40
years a resident of the district. He
is a member of the Druids’ Lodge and
fond of all general sports. Home ad-
dress, Melton.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM ERNEST
LAMSHED.
(District Council of Clinton.)
Born at Maitland, 9th May, 1877.
and educated at Sunny Vale Public
School. Mr. Vanished has been a
member of the Council for 10 years
and has been a resident of the district
all his life. He is a farmer and
a member of the Freemasons’ Lodge
and is fond of all general sports.
Home address, Cunliffe, via Kaclina.


District Council of Cobdogla
LAKE BONNEY, BARMERA.


/ ~' " - f
History of Cobdogla
FIRST COUNCIL CHAMBER, COBDOGLA.
The District of Cobdogla is a direct outcome of the
Great War, and is primarily a Soldiers’ Settlement area.
Ex-service men on their return from the war had to be
repatriated, and the Government in undertaking - this duty
realised that the land surrounding Lake Bonney was very
suitable for the purpose, with the result that it was set
aside for settlement. Hundreds of returned soldiers were
employed in the preparation of the land for this purpose,
and thousands of persons were employed in the primarv
stages and a large number of engineers, surveyors, and
officials were required to supervise.
Water was supplied originally from Lake Bonney, a
wonderful sheet of water along which the district has been
built. Later the pumping station at Lake Bonney was
abandoned, and a supply was secured from the river.
There are three main irrigable districts in the Cob-
dogla Irrigation Area, viz., Loveday, Nookamka, and Cob-
dogla, and water for each of them is now being supplied
from Cobdogla per medium of the Humphry Pump, the
largest pumping unit in the Southern Hemisphere.
1 he Local Government of the area was originally car-
ried out by the Lands Department, but in 1923 it was
decided that the settlers should undertake this responsi-
bility themselves.
In the first year there were 345 assessments, valued
at £10,275, producing in rates £685. The number of assess-
ments in 1936 was 1,050, with a valuation on land values
of £12,518, producing £1,562/18/11. This increase having
occurred over a period of but 12 years.
The district has developed into two Wards, viz., the
Baimeia Ward with representation of five Councillors and
Cobdogla Ward with two Councillors.
The representation being as follows for Barmera:-—-
Councdlors A. H. Kelly, fruitgrower j L. R. Appleton, pic-
PRESENT DISTRICT COUNCIL CHAMBER AND TOWN HALi


• • .
: ire theatre proprietor; C. C. M. Chabrel, fruitgrower; R
\. Forde, draper; R. Williams, fruitgrower.
there are greatly sought after by wine merchants from
even as far afield as the Barossa district.
BARMERA—SHOWING LAKE BONNEY.
The Cobdogla representatives being:—A. G. Ireland,
fruit merchant; R. H. Shueard, fruitgrower.
The main products of the district are dried fruits, sul-
tanas, currants, and lexias of superlative quality being pro-
duced. Wine is also a staple product, and muscatels grown
The Berri Winery, which is the largest of its kind in
the Southern Hemisphere, however, consumes most of the
wine grapes produced in the area. This winery is midway
between Barmera and Berri.


'% C^
* ,:r *\ o
h|
J .JSb* nB
7^*.
IJBmt Jill
"mm ~
J
CHAIRMAN ALAN HARCOURT KELLY.
(District Council of Cobdogla.)
Born at Adelaide, 3rd December,
1894, and educated at Adelaide. Air.
Kelly was first elected to the Council
at a by-election in December, 1926, and
was elected Chairman on July 16th,
1928, and has held that position ever
since. He has during his tenure of
office been responsible for the arrange-
ments when the Governor-General,
several Governors, and numerous im-
portant delegations and oversea visi-
tors have been officially welcomed to
the town. He has been a resident
of the district for 14 years, and he is a
Fruitgrower by occupation. Sport,
golf. Air. Kelly served 2 years abroad
on active service with the 3rd Light
Horse, A.I.F. Home address, Love-
day.
THE LATE CHARLES JESSE PANTER
BRUCE.
(First Chairman, District Council of
Cobdogla.)
The late Air. Bruce was the first
Chairman of the Cobdogla District
Council, and was appointed to repre-
sent Barmera Ward as its original
member. He resigned his position in
October, 1924, in consequence of leav-
ing the district.
COUNCILLOR ROBERT HURTLE
SHUEARD.
(District Council of Cobdogla.)
Born at Carey’s Gully, ,30th January,
1884, and educated at Uraidla Public
School. Air. Shueard has served in the
Council for 7 years, and has been a
resident of the district for 15 years.
He has been Secretary of the C
dogla Institute for 13 years, and S
retary of the School Committee
8 years. By occupation he is a f
and vegetable grower. Mr. Sliue,
has been a member of the Urai
Oddfellows' Lodge, M.U., for 43 ye;
and he is also a member of the C
dogla Buffalo Lodge. His sports
running, cricket, and log choppi
Home address, Cobdogla, River M
ray.
REUBEN JAMES.
(District Clerk, District Council of
Cobdogla.)
Born at Hyde Park, 22nd Dece
her, 1887, and educated at Unley Pi
He School and the Adelaide School
Alines. Air. James has served on t
Cobdogla District Council since its :


* 1 1
I §
ception in 1924, and has been a resi-
dent of the district for 14 years. He
is also Secretary and Inspector of the
Local Board of Health, and Curator
of the Cemetery. Mr. James was one
of the original members of the Com-
mittee formed to consider the forma-
tion of the Council, and acted as Sec-
retary, afterwards being appointed
District Clerk. Home address, Bar-
mera.




pfe®
j|HH **wQRB& ' ’ :^'
District Council of Crystal Brook
E. J. EYRE
(Discoverer of Crystal Brook.)
Mr. Edward John Eyre, who in 1833 came to New
South Wales from Yorkshire, and for several years suc-
cessfully engaged in pastoral pursuits—sheep farming and
cattle transportation —was among the earliest of the o\ rer-
landers" who brought sheep and cattle from New South
Wales to South Australia. He has the distinguished
honour as an explorer of being the first white man to tra-
verse the Australian Continent from east to west—from
Port Jackson to King George's Sound. It was during an
exploration trip in 1839 that Rocky River, which runs
through the Hundreds of Appila, Booyoolie, Narridy, and
Crystal Brook, was discovered and named by him.
On June 18th, 1840, with a small party, he left Govern-
ment House, Adelaide, with the object in view of ascer-
taining whether, from the centre of the continent, a line
of country could he met which could he followed west-
ward to the West Australian settlements. Under date of
June 27th, 1840, he wrote in his diary:—“ About three
o’clock we came in front of a watercourse which on a
former journey we had named Rocky River, from the
rugged character of its bed where we had struck it.” On
the following day a further entry was made in the diary
of the trip: —“ This morning we passed through country
of an inferior description, making a short stage to a water-
course which we named the Crystal Brook.”


History of Crystal Brook
Crystal Brook was proclaimed a District Council in
1893, prior to which it was part of another district, which
included Port Pirie, Wandearah, Napperby, Howe, and Wir-
rabara Forest Reserve.
flows from Beetaloo Hills, in Flinders Range, to the River
Broughton.
Crystal Brook is a very progressive and up-to-date
township, and is surrounded by large areas of good wheat-
BEETALOO RESERVOIR, CRYSTAL BROOK.
Waterworks for the North on a large scale began in December, 1885,
when work started on Beetaloo Reservoir, under Mr. C. Johnson,
who completed it in 1890. This reservoir is of concrete, arch type,
and is over 100 feet high.
Its name was derived from a chance remark of the
explorer Mr. Edward John Eyre, who, having quenched
his thirst at the creek which traverses the district, re-
marked, "What a beautiful crystal brook." The stream
growing and dairying country, through which runs re
Rivers Broughton and Rocky. It possesses a fine e-
creation reserve, called Adelaide Square, on a portion of
which stands a memorial rotunda erected in honour of 1c :d


SsM. * I 4 *, iAkd *y|^-
■■•■^r^^firafcMI-' 1 vs 3f IS &‘ Ewfl Pll
■ 1 11 ft | s .f
oldiers, the estimated cost of which was £1.200.
In the very early days communication was by coach,
\ia Clare, but the town is now served by rail from Adc
aide, via Snowtown, a distance of 151J miles.
The capital value of the property in the district is
97,140, and the assessment value £19,857, with a total
te of 1/3 and 1/ in the £ yielding £1,241.
for selection at the upset price of 40/ per acre. Ihe total
area was 21,397 acres, and the land taken up amounted to
about 6,000 acres, the aggregate price agreed to be paid
being" £12,004/17/6. Among the purchasers were Messrs.
John Marshall, Henry Dennis, James Tomkin, W. Bowden,
G. R. Muller, J. L. Watson, J. O'Shaughnessy, W. H.
Binney, j. Mcßae, F. Coulter, S. Inglis, Jos. Barrow,
RAILWAY YARDS, CRYSTAL BROOK, 1875.
The population is estimated at 1,475 persons, of whom
4:2 are ratepayers.
Cnder the provisions of the "Strangways" Act, so
named because it was introduced by the then Commis-
sioner of Crown Lands (Hon. J. B. Strang way), the Hun-
dred of Crystal Brook, held under pastoral lease by the
Messrs. Bowman Bros., was thrown open for agricultural
land in the Hundred of Crystal Brook was thrown open
settlement. On Monday, March 3rd, 1873, a large area of
Edward Saint, W. J. C. Kuchenmeister, Thomas Smith.
Donald Dean, Donald McDonald, Jas. Molan, Thos. Fovnes,
S. Crouch, A. Ingdis, John Robertson, G. L. Debney, Jas.
Rowe, J. Barrow, Jas. Rocke, H. Nicholls, E. Wake, Gerald
O’Hara, Jas. Magor.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACTIVITIES.
Prior to the formation of the District Council of Cry-
stal Brook, a Local Board of Main Roads for the North


Midland District had been established at Gladstone. At
its inception in 1874 there were 154 miles of metalled road
in its area. In 1887 this Board ceased to function, hav-
ing constructed 140 miles of main road at a cost of
£168,000. I he District Council of Crystal Brook —procla-
mation in Government Gazette” of November 11th, 1882
comprised territory not previously in any local govern-
ment ing area. The district originally comprised of Town-
ship of Crystal Brook and suburban sections. Sixty-two
signed the petition for the district to be constituted, and
the first meeting of the Council was held on November
13th, 1882. The persons who signed the petition were :■ —-
Messrs. C. Linniss, V\ . Hall, Theo. Kneese, P. H. Claridge,
L Patterson, F. Saver, W. Carman, C. A. Horn, J. W.
Kennett, James Pritchard, Henry Buxton, James Parks,
J. H. R. Hopkin. William Abell, Georg'e Jolley, Henry
Scotcher, E. W. Scotcher, A. J. Prescott, J. L. McMurdo,
M. Thorne. James Gilbert, C. B. Tucker, I. G. Young, S.
Crispin* W . M. d ucker, G. W . Strudewick, A. Ferguson,
Thos. Kealley, W. A. Allen. E. L. Behrndt, E. Cox, G.
Schultz, B. G. Sinclair, L. Husser. C. T. Mole, T. Wilson,
T. J. Jaques, F. Flavel, E. Crisp, P. M. Neville, H. Barker’
W. Kennett, P. Sullivan, T. Rowan, M. Smith. T. Beck.
A. (i. Canie, F. Morgan, J. W. Jeisman, T. B. Turner. J.
Forgan, sen., R. Forgan. J. Forgan, W. Forgan, J. Forgan,
jun., E. H. Hewitt, F. G. Johnson, W. Gordon, G. Meill,
J. Bartrum, and H. McGargill.
THE FIRST COUNCIL.
Councillors Edwin Prescott (Chairman), Philip Henry
Claridge, Charles Blythwood Tucker. James Gilbert, and
William Carman.
Councillor P. H. Claridge was appointed Acting Clerk.
Little except formal business was transacted at the first
meeting. At the second meeting it was reported that an
advance of £lOO, to meet preliminary expenses, had been
made by the Government. In April, 1883, the first assess-
ment was adopted, the value being fixed at £4,531. and a
general rate of a shilling in the pound declared.
ADDITIONS AND SEVERANCES.
The District Councils Act of 1887 enlarged the district
by adding thereto the Hundreds of Napperby and Wan-
dearah, also those portions of the Hundred of Port Pirie
and Crystal Brook not included in the Corporate Town
of Port Pirie, or the District Council of Crystal Brook,
and that portion of the Wirrabara Forest Reserve in the
County of \ ictoria. The district, as enlarged, was divided
into four Wards on June 7th, 1888. By proclamation pub-
lished in the “Government Gazette” of June 16th, 1892. an
area comprising the whole of the Hundred of Wandearah,
that portion of the Hundred of Pirie not included in the
Corporate Town of Port Pirie, and the northern portions
of the Hundred of Napperby and Howe were severed from
the District of Crystal Brook and constituted the District
of Pirie.
The present assessment is £25,242, and the general
rate is one shilling in the pound.
COUNCILLORS IN ORDER OF ELECTION.
Messrs. Edwin Prescott, P. H. Claridge, Chas. Tucker,
A\ . Carman, J. Gilbert, G. Tolley, R. Forgan, R. Watson,
C. H. Darbon, Dr. J. F. Parkinson, C. F. Mole, P. M.
Neville, A. Ferguson, J. C. Harry, W. Hamlyn, J.
Symons, G. Lovelock, Jas. Forgan, W. Morrish, E. H.
Eagle, E. J. Hector, W. C. Hawkins, H. H. Butler. T, ’>.
turner, G. Fitzgerald, W. H. Binney, I. Kuril, G. Hannan,
W. Lambert, T. Forrestal, T. Johns, S. Kuril, P. I. WaMi,
E. Frith. H. E. Hewitt, J. Pilkington. M. J. B. Wake, i
M • Klopper, J. C. Symons, F. G. Johnson, A. H. Bennett.
G. Davidson, G. E. Wood, B. Weston. Jas, Forgan. R.
Dennis, E. W. Scotcher, R. Heaslip, A. McDonald, G. W L
Gale, C. C. Buttfield, W. J. Lines, P. S. y,
M . \\ . Robinson, J. Saint. H. H. Paw, Geo. Sargent.
J. Deer, G. E. Gum, E. D. Melville, and H. J. Crouch.
CHAIRMEN.
The Chairman of the District Council of Crystal Bro k,
ith their respective vears of office, have been :—E Pr
cott, 1882-5; P. H. Claridge, 1885-6. 1887-8: C. F. M e.
1886-7; E. H. Eagle, 1889-1892; M. J. B. Wake. 1892 3:
W. H. Binney, 1898-1906; G. Davidson. 1906-1921, 1923 1:
R. M. Dennis, 1922-23; A. McDonald, 1924-29- W
Robinston, 1929-32-36.
CLERKS.
E. S. Lilly white was the first District Clerk, holding
office fi om 1882 to 1885. C. H. Darbon succeeded and held
the office until 1906. J. C. Symons was appointed m
1906. R. Townsend occupied the position from 1919 to
1925, being succeeded by P. H. Giles, the present Clerk.


l^l
ISy**
in
W
it ■■■
■•ft* lllllll
■:■ # £fl|
'\ : -MPife'- H <*y . 3als &•
I
councillors who have filled the office of Chairman since
the Council was proclaimed are:—Messrs. E. Prescott, P.
H. Claridge, C. F. Mole. E. H. Eagle, M. J. B. Wake, W.
H. Binney, George Davidson, R. M. Dennis, A. McDonald,
V V. Robinson (present Chairman).
Clerks have been:—Messrs. E. S. Lillywhite,
C. H. Darbon, J. C. Symons, R. Townsend, P. H. Giles
(present Clerk).
Present Council: —W. W. Robinson, J.P. (Chairman),
Messrs. P. S. O’Shaughnessy, W. J. Lines, H. J. Frith, A.
McDonald, and Geo. Sargent. District Clerk, Philip H.
Giles, J.P.
PAST CHAIRMEN, DISTRICT COUNCIL CRYSTAL BROOK.
E. PRESCOTT
(1882-5).
P. H. CLARIDGE
(1885-6-7-8).
C. F. MOLE
(1886-7).


Hr
S 21 I
%.* jp : -
-‘
-
|p^ ; \ BBl i i %M
K* * #<ii
|Hr / jS
11 ;2%S|B
SmW m
■■■ ■
XL ***
.mh
.
«yH
** *' »
( Vy
E. H. EAGLE
(1889-92).
THE LATE M. J. B. WAKE
(Past Chairman, District Council of Crystal
Brook.)
Born at Bath, Somerset, England,
25th September, 1848. The late Mr.
Wake served for a period of 6 years in
the Council. He was formerly a
farmer, hotel keeper, and contractor.
He was farming at Darke’s Peak on
the West Coast for many years. He
died on March 3rd, 1924, and is buried
at Cleve, West Coast.
THE LATE W. H. BINNEY
(Past Chairman, District Council of Crystal
Brook.)
Born at Willunga, 12th October,
1841, and educated at Willunga Public
School. The late Mr. W. H. Binney,
of the Junction Farm, Rocky River,
Merriton, who died on July 17th, 1909,
had only on the previous day been to
visit the school in his capacity of
Chairman of the Board of Advice.
This was the last act of public ser-
vice of a man who had devoted much
of his best efforts to public duties for
a period of over 30 years. He was
a member of the Crystal Brook Board
of Advice for 20 years, and for many
years its Chairman. Till 1906 he re-
presented the West Ward on he
Crystal Brook Council, and was for
many years Chairman of that 1 ly.
His best work, and that for whit he
will be longest remembered was lat
done quietly and unostentatiousl in
the cause of religion. A warm ind
ardent supporter of the Meth ist
Church, he spared neither time, n ey
nor himself in trying to make his
church an influence for good. nly
on the Wednesday before his ith
the quarterly meeting of the Re ill-
Merriton Circuit was held at his i se,
and on Thursday evening he att
a trustees' meeting in the Me t>n
Church, and there received the t iks
of the trustees for the work h ael
done in supervising the erectio of
the new lecture hall. Mainly o ng
to his efforts the hall has been .
pleted entirely free of debt. Xo . ler


, ...
::
b:/
mm :M ?^8Hg
■i
3 B :•#
|*\ vf f
. . ; ■ ' ’ -. ; . . '
m^mWm
i
' " iR :0fsT i?
; 4m Hr
ti te could lie given than that ex-
pr ted by a gentleman who had been
his tear neighbour over 35 years : —"A
be r neighbour and truer friend no
m could desire." He took up land
at erriton in 1873. Mr. Binney had
ii lildren of his own, but adopted
and when they had grown up,
t\ more. The late Mr. Binney was
f many years a staunch Rechabite,
ai for his sport was very much in-
ti sted in cricket.
GEORGE DAVIDSON, J.P
(Past Chairman, District Council of Crystal
Brook.)
Born at Carlisle, Cumberland, Eng-
land, 12th December, 1854. Arrived
in ustralia s.s. Shaftsbery, 1858. Mr.
Davidson has 27 years’ service in the
Council and has been 44 years a resi-
dent of the district. He is a letired
farmer and grazier, and was a breeder
of light horses, hacks, and carriage
horses. Sport, cricket. He has been
31 years a Justice of the Peace. Home
address. Crystal Brook.
RICHARD MAYFIELD DENNIS, J.P.
(Past Chairman, District Council of Crystal
Brook.)
Born at Bald Hills, Yankalilla, 7th
June, 1861, and educated at 3 ankahlla
Public School. He has 17 years’ ser-
vice in the Council. Mr. Dennis has
been a resident of Crystal Brook for
43 years, and is the eldest son of the
late Mr. R. Dennis, who arrived in
Australia from Suffolk, England, in
the year 1841. Mr. Dennis has had
long association with Council matters
having represented West Ward for
years' as Councillor, the latter 2 years
(>f which period he acted in the capa-
city of Chairman. He is ex- President
of "the following organisations :—Mer-
riton Institute, Agricultural Society,
and the local branch of the Liberal
Union. He was also prominently con
nected with the Merriton Methodist
Church, of which he is still a Trustee.
Mr. Dennis was created a Justice of
the Peace in 1913. He is a member
of the 1.0.0. F., Port Pirie branch, and
enjoys cricket and football. His pre-
sent address is 6, Maturin Road, Glen-
elg. He has retired from business.
a. McDonald
(1924-29).


fl
Hr ' JSS ■■.
Mbfc. M: ; : : >;..|w, :
» v £
ft K
Hr B" ■ , J
•r‘ ! jw'•"'" !
I * | "
' r#| -df
WILLIAM W. ROBINSON.
(Chairman, District Council of Crystal
Brook.)
Born at Mannanarie, 23rd June,
1888; 12 years’ service in Council ; 34
years a resident of the district and
7 years District Council Chairman.
He is a Farmer and Grazier. Mr.
Robinson is President of the Crystal
Brook Institute. Agricultural Show
Society, Agricultural Bureau, Bowling
Club, Literary Society, and Liberal
Union Branch; leader of Debating
Team, winner of Northern Areas
Literary Societies’ Union; leader of
Young Men’s Debating Club. He is
Past Master of Masonic and Odd-
fellows’ Lodges. Sports, bowls; 10
years Captain of the Crystal Brook
Rifle Club and 3 years champion of
club. Mr. Robinson has spared no
efforts to advance the interests of the
town and district.
COUNCILLOR HARRY HUTTON PAVY.
(District Council of Crystal Brook.)
He was horn at Milang, 6th April,
1860, and educated at Milang Public
School, and has given 2 years’ service
in the Council. Business, General
Storekeeper. He is a member of the
Masonic Lodge, and his sports are
cricket, football, rifle shooting, and
bowls. Councillor Pavy has been a re-
sident of Crystal Brook since 1895,
and apart from Messrs. J. & R. For-
gan’s foundry and Gilbert Bros.,
blacksmiths, Mr. Pavy’s business is the
oldest in the town of Crystal Brook.
When he arrived there in the year
1895 good farm land could be bought
for £2/10/- per acre. The same land
later brought £l5 and £l6 per acre.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE SARGENT.
(District Council of Crystal Brool )
Born at Saddleworth, Bth May, 1863,
and educated at the Saddleworth Pub-
lic School. He has served 1 year and
6 months in the Council and has keen
a resident of the district for 30 years.
He is a Farmer by occupation ; a i em-
ber of Masonic and Rechabite Lo ges.
His sports are bowls and draught
COUNCILLOR PETER SINCLAI
O’SHAUGHNESSY.
(District Council of Crystal Brook
Born at Crystal Brook, May Ith,
1876, and educated at Wandearah ast
and Crystal Brook Public Schools A
resident of the district for the tv ole
of his lifetime. Chairman Cn stal
Brook Hospital Board, Past President
of the Crystal Brook Show and B; wl-


iSSr v (i
wmm
JK . rjpii
1 .|P|B;: ::-^!M®||-':'S%^?^
in«r Clubs, and Treasurer Wandearah
Institute are positions Mr. O’Shaugh-
nessy has held. He has been a Coun-
cillor for 12 years, and his sports are
bowls and racing.
COUNCILLOR HENRY JONES FRITH.
(District Council of Crystal Brook.)
Born at Currency Creek, April 1,
1877, and educated at Robe, Koolunga,
and Crystal Brook Public Schools. He
has been a member of the Council for
1 year, and 47 years a resident of the
district. Mr. Frith is President of
Crystal Brook Show, Bowling and
Coursing Clubs, Chairman of School
Board, and a member of the Masonic
and Oddfellows’ Fodges. He is a
Farmer, and his sports are football,
golf, and bowls.
COUNCILLOR THOMAS ANDREW
ANGLEY, J.P.
(District Council of Crystal Brook.)
Mr. Angley was born at Red Hill,
South Australia, 30th July, 1882, and
educated at Crystal Brook Public
School. He was elected to the Coun-
cil on the 4th July, 1936, and is a Past
President of the Crystal Brook Show
Committee and a member of the local
Hospital Board. Mr. Angley is a re-
tiree! farmer. Home address, Crystal
Brook.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM JOHN LINES.
(District Council of Crystal Brook.)
Born at Port Pirie, 11th April, 1890,
and educated at Pirie East School.
He has served 3 years in the Council
and has been a resident of the dis-
trict for 32 years. He is a Farmer and
Timber Merchant. He was Captain
of the Crystal Brook Rifle Club for
12 years.
PHILIP HENRY GILES.
(District Clerk, District Council of Crystal
Brook.)
Born at Leighton, 19th January,
1875, and educated at the Burra (Koo-
ringa), he has served 10 years in the
present Council. He was formerly
connected with the Port Lincoln. Or-
roroo, and Jamestown District Coun-
cils for 20 years. Apart from District
Clerk for 30 years, Mr. Giles for 9
years was a mounted constable, serv-
ing 5J years in the Northern Terri-
tory. He is a member of the Masonic
and Independent Order of Oddfellows’
Lodges. He is fond of bowls and golf.




District Council of Dudley
PENNESHAW, KANGAROO ISLAND.


History of Dudley
One of the first settlers on Kangaroo Island was a
Mrs. Seymour, a lady who bravely “went farming” on her
own account in those difficult days. She called her hold-
ing “Dudley,” and, so far as can be ascertained, the district
itself was in due course of time named after it.
The township, Penneshaw, has a name formed by
composition from two personal names, viz., “Pennefather”
and “Shaw,” these being the names of two early mis-
sionaries who laboured in this region in the earliest days of
settlement by white people.
Hog Bay is the principal port, and was so called
because of the great numbers of wild pigs found in the
locality. It is the first port of call on Kangaroo Island
for the steamer from Port Adelaide, which carries mail
on Saturdays and Wednesdays, returning to Port
Adelaide on Mondays and Thursdays. The distance by sea
from Port Adelaide is about 70 miles ; by road and sea, a
daily service, 80 miles ; and is a favourite trip with a great
many people. Hog Bay is situated on the eastern end of
the island. 18 miles from Cape Willoughby, which is the
extreme eastern limit of the same.
Kangaroo Island was discovered by Captain Matthew
Flinders in 1803, and Christmas Cove was named by him
on Christmas Day of that year.
The district was “proclaimed” on June 6th, 1888. The
first Council meeting was held on June 23rd following,
there being present Councillors T. Willson, Snr., J.P.,
William Buick, and Thomas Willson, Jnr. The first-named
was elected Chairman. Mr. J. H. Tretheway was the first
District Clerk.
The division line between the districts of Dudley and
Kingscote is from the south-west corner of Section 44 and
the south coast to the north-west corner of Section 215 on
the north coast, near the Red Banks, embracing American
River and the Hundred of Haines. The total area of
Dudley is 120,000 acres.
The length of “main” roads in the district is 50 miles,
and “district” roads run into about 64 miles.
The population is 342, of which the township num >ers
110. There are 100 dwellings in all.
The principal industries in the place are barley-grow-
ing and wool, with yacca gum, a quantity of which is used
in the manufacture of the well-known colouring, hzy-
wurk.”
The Government subsidy of £4OO, which was granted
to the Dudley District Council 1919 for the purpose of
employing returned soldiers, was used for the purposes of
constructing a recreation ground in the township, and
which, with the aid of several “working bees,” has been
completed.
During 1921 a new Council Chamber was built; the
old one is used as a District Nursing Home, which is sub-
sidised by the Government.
On North Terrace there is a Memorial in the form of
an obelisk, erected to perpetuate the memory of those
men who enlisted in the district and gave their lives in the
Great War. An ornamental fence is around the Memorial,
which is a very great improvement to Penneshaw. Many
efforts have been made at various times by the Council
to cultviate trees of an ornamental nature about the t wn.
but, so far, Norfolk Island pines are the only ones that
seem to thrive well.
As some guide to the progress of things general , it
may be noted that the first assessment (in 1888) was on
£924, which yielded £46 odd; that for 1935 was on £5 34.
Capital value of ratable property, £118.680.
Past members of the District Council are:—Messrs.
E. S. Bates, Murray, Clarke, C. D. Willson. L. Willson, H.
Davies, S. F. Neave, W. H. Davey, W. Johnson, R. Join mn.
J. Barr, G. Barr, W. Howard, R. Clark. C. W. Hughes, G.
Clark, C. T. McKinlay, T. Lashmar, A. Stirling. W. Bi ck,
C. W. Hughes, E. A. Wilson, F. N. Trethewav, am A.
Rumball (Clerk).
Present Council: —Cr. E. L. Bates (Chairman), Messrs.
R. A. Howard, Chas. Lierich, F. W. Neave, and T C.
Willson.


||j|r J
K8hI| ■- -‘‘$kM I
EDWARD LAWRENCE BATES, J.P.
(Chairman, District Council of Dudley.)
Born at Penneshaw, Kangaroo
Island, 25th May, 1883, and educated
at Penneshaw Public School. Mr.
Bates has served in the Council for 4
years, 2 years as Chairman. Business.
Grazier. He has been 52 years a resi-
dent of the district, and is President of
the Penneshaw Institute Committee,
Liberal and Country League (Penne-
shaw Branch), and Penneshaw Cen-
tennial Committee, Vice-President of
the Penneshaw Agricultural and Hor-
ticultural Society, Chairman of the
Dudley District Council, Trustee of the
Penneshaw Institute and Penneshaw
Methodist Church, Secretary of the
Penneshaw School Committee, 4 years
Secretary of the Penneshaw Cheer Up
Society, and is a Justice of the Peace.
He is a strong advocate for better
communication between the Island and
the mainland. Daily services in mails
have been established. He is also an
advocate for better roads between
towns on the island, and much has
been accomplished. He has great faith
in the district as a future producer
of wool and fat lambs in much greater
volume, with the aid of top-dressing
with superphosphate. Home address,
Penneshaw.
COUNCILLOR SAMUEL FRANCIS
NEAVE.
(District Council of Dudley.)
Born at Suffolk, England, 3rd No-
vember, 1867, and educated at Sied-
bury, England. Arrived in Australia
in September, 1881. Councillor for
various periods since 1897. He has
been 54 years a resident of the dis-
trict. Sports, President of the Golf
Club, Recreation and Cricket Clubs.
Mr. Neave's three sons enlisted in the
A.1.F., and were on active service. Two
of them made the supreme sacrifice.
Home address, Penneshaw, Kangaroo
Island.




Distrid Council of East Murray


History of East Murray
On Mai ch 29th, 1923, the District was proclaimed a
District Council District, and named the District Council
ot East Murray. The area of the district was about 500
squat e miles, and comprised the Hundreds of Bandon,
Chesson, Mindarie, and the northern portions of the Hun-
(Chesson Ward), Chairman; J. E. Hood (North McPher-
son); J. S. Grigg (Bandon) ; W. Willoughby (North Wil-
son); and J. E. McCabe (Mindarie). Messrs. L. S. Nor-
man and L. A. von Doussa were proclaimed the first
Auditors for the Council.
THE FIRST COUNCILLORS OF THE DISTRICT COUNCIL OF
EAST MURRAY.
Proclaimed a Council, 1923.
Top: Crs. W. Willoughby, J. E. McCabe, J. S. Grigg.
Bottom: J. M. Braithwaite, Clerk (deceased), Crs. F. Dillon (Chair-
man), and J. E. Hood.
dreds of McPherson and Wilson. The district was divided
into five Wards, the Wards being named after the Hun-
dreds, and each \\ ard was represented by one Councillor.
The first Councillors proclaimed were Messrs. F. Dillon
At the first meeting of the Council, dulv held on April
25th, 1923, Mr. J. M. Braithwaite was appointed District
C lei k and Overseer of Works. In October of the same
\ eat Alt. Liaithwaite resigned from his position and the


ollowing month Mr. F. Gascoigne was appointed in his
place. Mr. Gascoigne has creditably filled these offices
from that time until the present. In 1924 Councillor J. E.
McCabe retired, and Councillor T. M. G. Vowles entered
the Council in his stead. Messrs. L. S. Norman and L. A.
you Doussa (Auditors) also retired in 1924, and Messrs. O.
Vndrae and John Dillon were duly elected Auditors.
In 1925 Councillors F. Dillon (who had been Chairman
from the inception of the Council) and W. Willoughby re-
moved from the district. Councillor J. E. Hood, after
erving from the inception of the Council in North Mc-
’herson Ward, was elected representative of the North
Wilson Ward in succession to Councillor \\ illoughby. I he
dier vacancies in the Council were filled by Messrs. L. S.
Norman and L. A. von Doussa, who were elected to the
North McPherson and Chesson Wards respectively. Coun-
cillor J. S. Grigg was elected Chairman in succession to
Councillor F. Dillon. Mr. John Dillon (Auditor) also left
the district in 1925, and Mr. C. H. Russell was appointed
in his stead.
At the elections in 1927 Councillor L. A. von Doussa
was defeated by Mr. J. E. Fullston in the Chesson Ward.
At the close of the 1927 year Councillor J. S. Grigg, who
had been Chairman for the past three years, resigned, and
Mr. N. J. Good was elected Councillor in his stead for
Bandon Ward, while Councillor L. S. Norman was elected
Chairman of the Council. In the beginning of the 1928-29
year the Hundred of Auld was added to the Council Dis-
trict as a separate Ward, and the proclaimed Councillor was
Mr. A. H. Bell, who, at subsequent annual elections follow-
ing. has been re-elected. During the year 1928-29 arrange-
ments were made to divide the Bandon Ward into two
Wards —North Bandon and South Bandon —and at the elec-
tions in 1929 Councillor N. J. Good was elected to the
South Bandon Ward, and Mr. J. F. Andriske was pro-
claimed Councillor for the North Bandon Ward. The re-
sult of the 1927 elections for Chesson Ward was reversed
this year, and Mr. L. A. von Doussa defeated Councillor
J. E. Fullston. Councillor Vowles was elected Chairman
of the Council in this year. After serving as Auditors for
five years and four years respectively, Messrs. Andrae
and Russell retired in 1929 as the result of amendments
to the District Council Act, and their place was taken by
Mr. A. V. Pugh, of Murray Bridge, who still remains the
Council Auditor.
In July of 1933, as the result of the recommendations
of the Local Government Areas Commission, a large area
of country was severed from the district of the District
Council of Swan Reach, and annexed to this district as a
new Ward, called Mantling Ward. Mr. H. E. Andriske
was proclaimed the first Councillor for the Ward, and has
been re-elected to the Council at each succeeding election.
The addition of the Mantling Ward brought the numbers
of Wards in the Council now to eight, with a total area
of something like 800 square miles, and an assessment
value of £141,151 (unimproved). In 1933 Councillor L. S.
Norman was elected the second time as Chairman of the
Council, and still retains the position. In 1933 a new
Council Chamber was erected, and was declared open by
the Commissioner of Highways on 9th January, 1934. The
building consists of two rooms, Clerks' office and Council
Chamber, commodiusly built of local limestone, at a cost of
£375.
The personnel of the Council has remained the same
since 1933, and the present members are: —Councillors L. S.
Norman, Chairman (North McPherson Ward); J. E. Hood
(the only one 1e 11 in office of the originally proclaimed
Councillors) (North Wilson Ward) : T. M. G. Vowles (Min-
darie Ward) : A. FI. Bell (Auld Ward) ; N. J. Good (South
Bandon Ward); L. A. von Doussa (Chesson Ward); J. F.
Andriske (North Bandon Ward) ; and H. E. Andriske
(Mantling Ward). District Clerk and Overseer of Works,
Mr. F. Gascoigne.


liHjP ■
Hi '#&*'■■ H||
''X V
Bf jH
L 4|
5i
A' ; f * A*' >s$''
m- v* * V *
,<* i wr "
-<ip
\ ' ■«„ £j||
.; jaBb
LIONEL S. NORMAN.
(Chairman, District Council of East Murray.)
Mr. Norman was born at Melbourne,
\ ictoria, 22nd September, 1894, and
educated at public schools in South
Australia and Prince Alfred Col-
lege, Kent Town, Adelaide. He
served the Council as Auditor from
its inception until 1925, Councillor
from 1925-36 and Chairman 1928-9, also
from 1933 to the present time. He
has been for 14 years a resident of
the district. In business Mr. Norman
is a General Storekeeper and Commis-
sion Agent, and his sports are rifle
shooting and tennis. He is Treasurer
of the Sandalwood Defence Rifle Club,
Chief Executive Officer of the Guild of
Watchmen of Australia, and a life
member of the Prince Alfred Col-
legians’ Association. Home address,
Sandalwood, South Australia.
COUNCILLOR LOUIS ALFRED VON
DOUSSA.
(District Council of East Murray.)
Mr. von Doussa was born at Hahn-
dorf, and educated at Hahndorf and
St. Peter’s Colleges. He has served
the Council as Auditor from March,
1923, to July, 1924, and Councillor from
1925-27, also from 1929 to the present
date. For 24 years he has been a re-
sident of the district. Mr. von Doussa
has been Chairman of the Halidon In-
stitute Committee for 24 years, and is
also a Trustee. His lodges are
R.A.0.8. and Druids’. He takes an
active interest in all sports, including
football, golf, and tennis, and is Hon.
Secretary of the Mindarie-Halidon
Racing Club. His home address is
Halidon.
COUNCILLOR THOMAS GREEN
VOWLES.
(District Council of East Murray.)
Mr. Vowles was born at Prospect,
11th April, 1894, and educated at Chris
tian Brothers’ College. Adelaide. I
has been a resident of the district for
17 years, and is a Farmer and Grazic *.
Home address, Wanbi, S.A.
COUNCILLOR JOHANN FRIEDRICH
ANDRISKE, J.P.
(District Council of East Murray.)
Born at Angaston, 14th August,
1881, and educated at a private schoo
at Rhine V ilia (now known as Can
brai) ; 7 years’ service in Council and
548


; |r
B
;|SbK ■^ NMis^
r- ■■' v
- |Hv
jK ..SK& M JS
Hr ,, °
iff |||;
S*'
mk* 4 *% fl|
I iri JL. BHplf >
mMtSSt&amt .***#s*m$m>-*~** gmsmmkmBMm
uKF\ \ b J\-- t .
v I
iIBmI % w; \y^ y f' mSSm
nb “ I
. wsk m
“ ML*
%£jm > J 4 ;^Sk
■' ifr
29 years a resident of the district. His
occupation is Farming. Home ad-
dress, Galga.
COUNCILLOR JAMES EDWARD HOOD
(District Council of East Murray.)
Born at Naracoorte, 2nd September,
1879, and educated at Mundalla Pub-
lic School. Mr. Hood has served the
Council for 12 years and has been for
20 years a resident of the district. His
sports are cricket, football, and rifle
shooting, and in business he is a
Farmer. Home address, Sandalwood.
COUNCILLOR N. J. GOOD, J.P.
(District Council of East Murray.)
Born at Long Plains, sth September,
1888, and educated at Long Plains
Public School. Mr. Good has served
the Council for 7 years, and has been
for 9 years a resident of the district.
He is a Justice of the Peace and Pre-
sident of the Cricket, Tennis, and
Football Clubs. In business he is a
Farmer and Grazier. Home address,
Kunlara.
COUNCILLOR HEINRICH ERNST
ANDRISKE.
(District Council of East Murray.)
Born at Cambrai, 7th February,
1887, and educated at Black Hill Pub-
lic School; 3 years’ service in Council;
26 years a resident of the district. By
occupation Mr. Andriske is a Farmer.
He represented Mantling Ward in
Swan Reach District Council from
1925-9. Home address, Galga.
FRANK GASCOIGNE.
(District Clerk and Overseer of Works,
District Council of East Murray.)
Born at Wakefield, Yorkshire, ling-
land, 24th February. 1885. and edu-
cated at St. John’s Public School,
Wakefield; Grammar School, Wake-
field; and Leeds University. Arrived
in Australia, 25th May, 1912; 12 years'
service in the Council: 194 years a re-
sident of the district. His sport is rifle
shooting. Home address, Halidon.




District Council of East Torrens
DISTRICT COUNCIL CHAMBERS, EAST TORRENS.


History of East Torrens
A NOTED GARDENS DISTRICT.
1 he Council District of East Torrens includes some of
the most beautiful and picturesque areas in the Mount
Lofty Ranges, and its hills roads are patronised daily by
hundreds of tourists and pleasure-seekers, besides carrying
on the way to market much of the finest fruit and vege-
table products of the State. The District Council is one
of the oldest in South Australia. It was gazetted on May
26th. 1853, under proclamation by His Excellency Sir Henry
Edward Fox Young, and by command of the then Colonial
Secretary, Mr. (afterwards the Hon.) B. T. Finnics.
Messrs. James Cobbledick, Daniel Fergusson, George
Muller. Charles Bouncy, and David \\ ark were appointed
as the first Council for the District, and held their first
meeting at the World’s End Hotel, Magill. on June 13th.
1853, when all the newly appointed Councillors were pre-
sent. and Mr. Wark was unanimously elected Chairman.
The original boundaries of the District included the
present Corporation of St. Peters, the District Councils of
Payneham, Campbelltown, and Burnside, portion of
Crafers, Onkaparinga, and Talunga. Its present boundaries
are;—On the west, along the foothills from the River
Torrens to the Greenhill Road ; on the east, through Forest
Range to Kangaroo Creek ; and on the north, along Kan-
garoo Creek and the River Torrens to Athelstone at the
entrance to the Torrens Gorge. The total area is about
30.000 acres, practically all mountain country, portion of
the Mount Lofty Ranges.
WELL-KNOWN LANDMARKS.
Included in the district are the vice-regal residence
at Marble Hill; the Morialta Falls Reserve; the Boys’
Reformatory, Magill ; Rostrevor, originally owned by the
late Mr. Ross Reid, now by the Christian Brothers’ College;
Auldana Vineyard, established by the late Mr. Patrick
Auld, who was a Chairman of the Council in the early
days; Morialta. originally owned by the late Hon. John
Baker, now of Mount Lofty. Many years ago, when the
late Mr. Allan Baker was Master of the Adelaide Hunt
Club, he kept the hounds at Morialta. 1 his property is
now the Federal Protestant Children’s Home.
AREA OF PRIVATE ENTERPRISE.
Although one of the earliest districts settled and
situated so close to the city, Fast Torrens has very few
public utilities. There are no railways, no water laid on,
and it has no tramways. The district has been developed
almost entirely by private enterprise, the only assistance
secured from Governments being for roads and maintenance
and public schools. The population is about 3,750, and
these as a community are the most independent of Govern-
ment assistance of any section in the State. The assessed
value is £25,018, and a general rate of 1/7 in the pound
produces £1,980 revenue. The Council controls 31 mi es
of main roads and 90 miles of district roads, which are
maintained in fair condition.
HISTORICAL.
Since the first District Council was appointed in 1853,
there have been 70 Councillors elected by the ratepa} rs.
some of whom served the district for many years,
late Hon. Thomas Play ford (at one time Premier of South
Australia) was Chairman of the Council for 20 years,
late Mr. W. Merchant, of Cherryville, was Chairman or
11 years. The late Mr. G. Story, of Norton’s Summit, was
clerk of the Council for 43 years, from 1863-1906.
Council since its inception has held its meetings successively
in the following places:—World’s End Hotel, Magill: die
Green Gate, Tusmore; the Maid and Magpie: the Fast
Torrens Hotel (now Tower Hotel, Magill). from 1853 T;
the Rock Tavern Hotel, Third Creek (1859-79) : the Sc nic
Hotel. Norton’s Summit (1879-1902); St. John's School-
room (1902-3). In 1903 the Council built its own district
office at Norton s Summit, which is still its headquarters.
The office occupies a position at the top of the hill, at which
point nine roads meet —the only place in the State wh re
so many roads converge. The Council is divided into four
wards—Marble Hill Ward. Greenhill Ward. Woods I ill


Ward, and Fifth Creek Ward, Marble Hill Ward returning
two Councillors and the others only one.
The origin of Norton’s Summit dates back to the late
forties. There were two pioneers, first settlers, Robert
Norton and William Sutton. For a while there was a dis-
pute whether the name of the district should be Norton
Sutton Summit. The latter prevailed, but the name of
' rton’s Summit gradually won the day. Robert Norton’s
1 home, built of logs and clay, and having a huge fire-
ace, with stools around the walls, and a pothook on
inch to hang the camp oven, is still in good preservation,
a 1 has a tenant. The place was called Grassy Flat. Nearby
s built in the 'fifties the Grassy Flat Baptist Chapel,
wed by the late Rev. Thomas Playford, of Mitcham,
her of the Hon. Thomas Playford. The chapel has dis-
ipeared, and only two graves now mark its site.
East Torrens is practically a fruit and vegetable-
owing district, the latter being raised in the rich gullies
nd flats, and fruit on the hillsides. Fruit grown for the
Vdelaide markets comprise cherries, apples, pears, plums,
quinces, strawberries, raspberries, and gooseberries.
In honour of those residents who enlisted and lost their
lives in the Great War. a memorial of Angaston marble
has been erected at Norton’s Summit.
The following is a list of names of past and present
Councillors from 1853: —D. Wark (first Chairman), D.
Fergusson, G. Mullen, J. Cobbledick, C. Bonney, J. Town-
send, E. Nurse, A. S. Clark, E. J. Crawford. J. Mitchell,
P. Auld, J. Brooks, W. H. Bays, W. H. Sutton, R. Norton,
O. Jennins, R. Cook, T. Coon, Hon. T. Playford, J. Pascoe,
W. Merchant, J. Cussins, A. Sinclair, T. Terrell, W. Wotton,
W. Moulds, G. Gameau, J. Curnow, W. J. Cobbledick, J.
Moulds, R. Cobbledick, S. Bungey, W. Cock. R. Sharp, R.
Ackland, E. Collins, A. J. Trebilcock, G. Channing, —.
Hacklin, T. Greene, F. Pollard, T. Giles, T. Playford, Jnr.,
T. B. Percival, A. Smith, C. H. Bishop. S. Smith, G. A.
Dunn, J. T. Playford. J. Jarrett, T. J. Day, R. C. Sutton.
J. Sparnon, S. Smith, Jnr., T. T. Trebilcock, L. R. Gepp,
F. J. Hutchinson, W. T. Crammond, J. Watkins, A. R.
Trebilcock. E. Wadlan, E. W. Adlam.
Present Councillors. —W. J. Bishop, A. Bungay, C.
Grigg, E. R. Hart, G. Prentice. F. V. Batchelor, j. H.
Cowling (District Clerk), C. W. Giles (three years Chair-
man). Mr. John Watkins was Councillor for 37 years con-
tinuously. Mr. J. H. Cowling served in the following
positions:-—Auditor, 1901-2; Councillor, 1902-6; three and
a half years as Chairman: Clerk, 1906-36.


f'^n ; u : jBHr
' ■»««' "-ml : «Bfe
jH
Iran 1 /K,
m
ill* «^g
HBM %|s| * *
I .
B» *’*>’" Jg|
CHAIRMAN CHARLES WILLIAM
GILES.
(District Council of East Torrens.)
Mr. Giles was born at Grove Hill,
Norton’s Summit. 18th August, 1869,
and educated at Glenelg Grammar
School and Prince Alfred College. Fie
has served the Council for 22 years and
has been a resident of the district all
his life. He is a member of the Recha-
bite Lodge, and his sport is cricket.
Home address. Grove Hill. Norton’s
Summit.
THE LATE DANIEL FERGUSON,
J.P.
(Past Councillor for District Council of
East Torrens.)
The late Mr. Daniel Ferguson,
accompanied by his wife, Helen, and
young family, arrived in South Austra-
lia on December Ist, 1838, from Scot-
land, bv the barque “Catherine fame
son.” He immediately took up farming
on the Gawler River, and in 1847 he
removed to Glenunga, where he had
“Glenunga House” built, and planted
the garden adjoining the residence,
which was occupied by members of the
family until 1919. He was the first
Councillor for Glen Osmond Ward of
the-District Council of East Torrens,
and subsequently Chairman of the
District Council of Burnside. The late
Mr. Ferguson built a flour mill at Park
Terrace, Parkside, opposite the Turf
Hotel, on the site of the residence
which is now known as Dr. Sweet-
apple’s. He was chosen to go to Eng-
land to select draught horses, and re-
turned to South Australia per the sail-
ing ship “Time and Truth.” with
Clydesdale horses and brood mares,
on July 30th, 1855. He was founder
and first President of the Farmers'
Club; was President, and for a long
time Vice-President, of the Agricul-
tural and Horticultural Society. Me
was Elective Member of the Central
Road Board from 1861 to the time of
his death. Mr. Ferguson was a fre-
quent contributor to the “ Farm and
Garden.” In 1856 he obtained the first
prize for wheat grown on the plains.
Was President of the Glen Osmond
Institute, and was given a public din-
ner on 2nd July, 1863. The late Mr.
Ferguson was born at Muirkirk on the
17th of February, 1796, and he died at
Glenunga, South Australia, on the 26th
May, 1864.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM JAMES
BISHOP.
( District Council of East Torrens.)
Born at Basket Range, S.A., 15th


' '
H r
J^H
|Sk Jpiw< *-\''V£
a v.
■September, 1893, and educated at
Basket Range Public School; 3 years’
ervice in Council ; a resident of the
district all his life. President of the
Basket Range Literary Society, mem-
-1 r of the Basket Range School Com-
mittee. Business, Fruitgrower. P.M.
Producers’ Fellowship, No. 138, S.A.C..
Masonic Lodge. Sports, tennis and
:olf. Home address, Basket Range.
COUNCILLOR F. V. BATCHELOR.
(District Council of East Torrens.)
Born at Adelaide, Bth August, 1863,
and educated at Enfield. Mr. Batche-
lor has served the East Torrens Dis-
trict Council for 4 years, and has been
a resident of the district for 36 years.
In business he is a Gardener. Home
address, Athelstone.
A BUNGAY.
(District Council of East Torrens.)
COUNCILLOR EDGAR ROBERT
HART.
(District Council of East Torrens.)
Born at Carey’s Gully, 24th August,
1894, and educated at the Uraidla
Public School. Mr. Hart was a mem-
ber of the Crafers District Council for
17 years and has served 1 year in the
East Torrens District Council. He has
been a resident of the district all his
life, and is President of the Uraidla
Show Committee, Literary Society,
and Agricultural Bureau. His business
is Gardening. Mr. Hart is Past Chief
Ruler of the Independent Order of
Rechabites, Divisional Superintendent
of the Juveniles, and a member of
various local sporting committees.
Home address, L T raidla.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES GRIGG.
(District Council of East Torrens.)
Born at Mitcham, 29th January,
1896, and educated at Uraidla Public
School. Mr. Grigg has been a member
of the Council for 2 years and a resi-
dent of the district for 36 years. lie
is a member of the Druids’ Lodge, and
his sport is football. During the war


HH Jul
!%■ 9b i ■ *w 5 £j
A < ; |t vJB yi| Mmit:
mm^h'
lie served in Egypt and France with
the 50th Battalion, A.1.F., and was
wounded at Noreuil in 1917. Home
address, Uraidla.
JAMES HENRY COWLING.
(District Clerk, District Council of East
Torrens.)
Mr. Cowling - was born at Moonta,
13th January, 1868, and educated at
Prince Alfred College. He has served
the Council for 35 years—as Auditor
1 year, Councillor 4 years, and District
Clerk 30 years. During his 4 terms
as Councillor he occupied the Chair
for 3J years. He is Secretary of the
Bethlehem Tent, No. 351, O.R. Lodge,
and his sports are tennis, cricket, and
howls. Home address, Norton’s Sum-
mit,


District Council of Elliston


History of Elliston
1 he District ol Elliston is far removed from the hub
of this State, being 2933 miles west of Adelaide, and
situated on Eyre’s Peninsula. The first Council meeting
was held on the 25th February, 1888.
The Township of Elliston is located on Waterloo Bay,
the latter appropriately named on account of the sad
stories, so numerous in this part of the State, of the out-
rages by aboriginals and reprisals by white settlers.
The area of the district is 2,300 square miles. Mixed
farming is carried on successfully. The district is noted
for the quality of its wool, and some of the best wheat
on Eyre Peninsula is grown there. The coastal scenery
and unique “Bar” across the entrance to the harbour also
claim attention. Limestone is procurable in large quanti-
ties, and is the principal material used in road making and
building construction. Sheoak thrives in the district and
provdes excellent fodder for stock.
The Township of Flinders (Streaky Bay) is 79 miles
north-west of Elliston, and occupies an ideal position on
the southern portion of the bay, sheltered by what is known
as Gibson Peninsula. The township, like other West
Coast towns, is substantially built of limestone, and ranks
second in size to Port Lincoln.
General farming is carried on successfully, and of
recent years has become more profitable and congenial
through the introduction of superphosphates and the con-
struction of vermin-proof fences. The District Council
of Elliston controls an area of 2,300 square miles, which
is the largest in South Australia, and is closely followed
by Port Germein, Cleve, and Lincoln, in the order men-
tioned. The rainfall averages 16J inches.
The capita] value of ratable property within the Dis-
trict of Elliston is set down at £21.808 15*/, with an assess-
ment value of £17,447, whilst that of Streaky Bay is
£443,100 and £22.125 respectively.
A rate of 2/ in the £ yields the Elliston Council
£1,744 14/, and the rate struck at Streaky Bay is 2/ in
the £, yielding £2,212 10/.
The population of Streaky Bay is estimated at 1,547
persons, and of Elliston 1,238 persons (last census).
Elliston has an up-to-date district hospital, and
annually ships 2,500 to 3,000 bales of wool, and in good
seasons 61 bags of wheat. The coastal scenery is equal
to anything in South Australia. 1 here is good fishing,
splendid beaches, duck shooting in season, safe swimming;
in fact, it is an ideal spot for a summer holiday,
eighteen hours run from Port Adelaide by boat to Port
Lincoln, thence motor service. There is a fortnightly
service direct from Port Adelaide.
Names of past and present members of the Streak}
Bay Council are found in the following list;— Messrs. K.
A. Horn, J. A. Freeman, C. L. Colley, W. T. S. Hewitson,
E. B. Bockelberg, H. Mudge, R. D. Anderson, W. H. Betts,
J. R. Montgomerie, W. M. Montgomerie, T. Mudge,
Herreen, J. Lamb, G. Pearce, A. B. Smith, D. C. Drever,
J. Speed, W. H. Wharff, J. Thomas, D. P. Thomas, C. ! .
Godlee, J. H. Cotton, C. Schlink, F. Campbell, F. Barnes,
T. M. Herreen, H. A. Betts. W. A. Thompson (present
Chairman), P. C. Anderson, T. Mudge, P. C. Roberts, V' .
L. Schulz, W. J. Williams, R. Fleming, J. Dinnison,
W. Laidlaw, A. Baird, W. A. Barns, J. Ness, D. R. Myers.
T. C. McDonald. D. C. Dearman, J. Telfer, R. Hull, d
Scott, J. Mcßeath, N. W. Gunn, A. j. Inkster, P. A. Thom
son. L. Cummings, A. E. Enright, C. H. Inkster, J. N
Hood, William Gunn, Alfred Day, J. Speed, j. Ford, G.
Myers, J. L. Higgins. A. Robinson, S. Harris, T. Colbert,
C. Heyward, John Barcomb, J. M. Dennison. W. E. Hawke,
B. Green, W. H. Robinson, Gunn-Owcn. and William Scot:.
Present Council: —A. J. Inkster, J.P. (Chairman), P
A. Thomson, J.P., J. N. Hood, J.P., D. H. Dearman, J.
P. J. Sampson, J.P., A. E. Owen, J.P. (District Clerk),
D. O’Donnell (Overseer of Works).


)istrict Council of Encounter Bay


HISTORY OF ENCOUNTER BAY
In 1802 Captain Matthew Flinders in the LT.M.S.
“Investigator,’ and Captain Nicholas Baudin in the “Le
Geographic,” met off the Bluff and cleared decks for action,
England and France at that time being at war. However,
wiser counsels prevailed between the two captains, and
Flinders named the place Encounter Bay.
One hundred years later, on April Bth, 1902, by a fit-
ting ceremony, the Royal Geographical Society of South
Australia placed a tablet on top of the Bluff, on which is
written: —
“In commemoration of the meeting near this Bluff be-
tween H.M.S. ‘lnvestigator,’ Matthew Flinders, who ex-
plored the coast of South Australia, and M.F. ‘Le
Geographe,’ Nicholas Baudin, April Bth, 1802. On board
the ‘lnvestigator’ was John Franklin, the Arctic discoverer.
These English and French explorers held friendly inter-
course, and Flinders named the place of meeting Encounter
Bay.
“Unveiled by His Excellency Lord Tennyson, April
Bth, 1902.”
Victor Harbour was the principal town within the
boundary of the District Council of Encounter Bay until
1914, when it separated and became a corporate town.
There is now no town of any size, but Victor Harbour is
recognised as the place of business for the district.
The first meeting of the District Council of Encounter
Bay was held at the “Fountain Inn,” Encounter Bay, on
April 12th, 1856.
The first Council was : —Rev. R. W. Newland (Chair-
man) and Messrs. Thomas Mayfield, Richard Dennis,
Edward Harvey, and William Whitridge; and the first
meeting of the District Council of Encounter Bay after its
official proclamation was held in the “Fountain Inn,”
Encounter Bay, on March 7th, 1856.
The first Chairman appointed was the Rev. R. W.
Newland. the pioneer pastor of the south, and father of
Mr. Simpson Newland, C.M.G., who has identified himself
very largely in advocating the claims of the district, prin-
cipally as a Murray port.
The area of the district is 103,630 acres.
In the early days, from the forties to the seventies,
whaling was carried on extensively. The district then
also produced wheat in comparatively large quantities-
In the seventies and eighties Victor Harbour was a busy
port, from which large quantities of river-borne wool was
exported, and heavy shipments of merchandise sent up
the river.
In 1888 the Government completed extensive harbour
improvements in the nature of a breakwater 1,000 feet
long and a jetty and causeway. Shortly after the Morgan
line was completed, which induced river-borne goods to
go to Adelaide, and shipping declined until it has now
ceased in Victor Harbour.
Most of the land in the district is of a light, sandy
nature, covered with scrub. It has proved that this class
of land can be worked to advantage for the rearing of
early lambs for market. Latter years have proved the
great fertility of the valleys of the Inman and Hindmarsh
Rivers for citrus culture, and a big future for that industry
is assured. The district produces excellent wool, wattle
bark, fruit, all branches of dairying produce, and hone; .
Victor Harbour and Encounter Bay are probably best
known as holiday resorts, to which thousands of pe pie
visit every year. Their great natural beauty and tem-
perate climate induce the weak and the strong to visit it
for recuperating and pleasure. As a holiday resort the
district is making rapid strides.
The district, owing to its geographical position, is
destined to become one of the most important in the State,
as the produce of the Murray River and the Pinnaroo lis-
trict will yet be shipped from the nearest seaport —Vi tor
Harbour or Goolwa.
Names of past and present Councillors: —Messrs. E.
Robinson, W. Nosworthy, J. M. Clark, J. Bradbun
Lush, D. Jones, E. Lovelock, W. Hawkins. H. Prosser,
Dodson, T. Higgins, A. F. Lindsay, J. Gibson. Stims n
Maslin, Graham, A. J. Grimble, T. Polkinghorne. R
Jagger, R. Thompson. J. Crossman, P. Perrier, E. Wa
land, Prosser, J. Hutchinson, R. Thompson, J. J. Gros-
man, H. Grosvenor, A. Battye, A. H. Dennis, T. Parse s,
J. Harding, R. Martin. H. McDougall, L. Y. Tite, J. T'g-
well, O. B. Hutchinson, R. T. Sweetman, H. D. Grosve’or,
H. Gray, E. R. Bolger, Sen.. S. Trestrail, O. A. Baaier.
H. B. Welch. J. Swain, J. Millard. E. H. Taylor, 1 R.
Russell, G. Battye, H. Welch, H. C. Mayfield, J. Tugv Tl,
Jun., A. H. Warland, P. R. Cudmore, and H. M. Parses.


t - ■ - • .-.a. :
District Council of Enfield


History of Enfield
Enfield was originally known as “Poor Alan’s Section”
for a reason that is rather interesting. In the early days,
when South Australia was severely afflicted with a finan-
cial depression, employment became very difficult to obtain,
and many settlers were compelled to obtain Government
relief. Instead of applying to the Government for rations,
a small band of industrious men exerted their spirits of
independence by taking up a section of land about four
miles north of Adelaide. The district at this time was
thick with native pines, and the land was considered to be
particularly good. The men lived in dug-outs and obtained
casual employment from Charles French Folland, senr.,
Edmund Bowman, and John Ragless, senr.
One of the proprietors of “Poor Man’s Section” was
Air. AT Hecose, a vendor of cordials in Adelaide, and the
name of the section was later changed to Enfield, after
the birth-place of Air. Hecose. a small town near London.
The Angmering Section (Enfield Park) was taken up
by John Ragless, senr., and his seven sons in 1839, and in
1840 “Angmering House,” the first house north of Ade-
laide, was built on the Great North Road. This road, now
known as the Main North Road, from the River Torrens
to Enfield, was blazed mainly by the Ragless family.
Air. Ragless, sen., a pitsawyer, was born on July 14th.
1791, at Angmering, a small country town in Sussex, and
arrived in the barque “Eden” on June 24th, 1838. Having-
brought his pitsaws with him, he supplied timber for the
early buildings in Adelaide, and in fact he cut timber from
this section for over forty years. Some of the timber used
in the construction of the first Government House was
taken from this section.
His eldest son, John Ragless, junr., built a flour mill
at Gepps Cross in 1846, and he supplied the district for over
twelve years and sent large quantities of flour to Victoria
during the gold rush. It was while at Gepps Cross that
John Ragless, junr., gave Ridley valuable assistance in the
designing of the first reaping machine. Ridley was elected
to the District Council of Yatala in 1862.
Ragless, junr., was a member of the first District
Council of Yatala, and was the second ( hairman of the
Council. In 1875 he rebuilt Angmering House, which is
situated on the Main North Road and adjoins the Council
property on the north side. The house is at present occu-
pied by a son of John Ragless.
The land on which the Enfield Institute is built was
presented to the Institute Trust by John Ragless. In 1932
the Council changed the name of First Avenue, Enfield
Park, to “Ragless” Avenue in honour of the Ragless family.
Charles French Holland, senr., arrived in South Aus-
tralia in January, 1839, from Devonshire, and after living
for three years at Pennington Terrace, North Adelaide, he
moved to Pine Forest, Enfield. It was from this property
that the first piles used in the Port River were obtained.
Mr. Folland was a member of the Council for several years,
and was Chairman in 1864.
Mr. C. F. Folland, junr., a son, who now owns the Pine
Forest homestead, was also a member of the Council tor
many years and held the office of Chairman during 1903-
1904"
Mr. Edmund Bowman started sheep-farming in Tas
mania in 1835, and came to South Australia in 1839, takirg
up land at Enfield and Dry Creek. The fine Bowman
homestead. “Barton Vale,” built many years later, is nc w
owned by the Salvation Army and is known as the “Barton
Vale Girls’ Home.”
Mr. George Brandis was one of the earliest settlers ’■
the district, having arrived in South Australia in 1838 lw
the ship “Eden.” He lived near Gepps Cross, and was well
known as the producer of the Brandis almond.
Collins Street, Enfield, formerly known as “Well Lane”
and the entrance to Poor Man’s Section, was the origin. 1
thoroughfare to the well sunk by the villagers at the
western end.
The first village homes were unique, and comprised a
row, along the “Well Lane,” of comfortable, one-room dug
outs, each with fireplace one end, steps the other, and
covered by a gable roof of reed-thatch. Some of the cot


tages that replaced them still stand. Collins Street takes
its name from a family of pioneers.
The Enfield Cemetery, situated on the Main North
Road, was established by the residents of “Poor Man’s
Section,” and is the last resting-place of many of the early
lers, including the Bowmans of Barton Vale. The re-
mains of the Bowmans have since been re-interred in the
North Road Cemetery.
An interesting link with the early days is Olive Farm,
formerly owned by the late Charles Rake. This farm is
believed to be the first farm on which superphosphate was
used in South Australia. Mr. Thomas Rake, a son of
Charles Rake, still resides in the old homestead, but the
farm has long since been re-subdivided. Rakes Road was
named after Charles Rake.
The Enfield Rechabite Hall was built by the Methodist
ist about eighty-two years ago. Mrs. Leane, a daughter
Air. William Short, the founder of the church, was the
first scholar in the Sunday School, and is the mother of the
present Commissioner of Police. It is also interesting to
recall that the late Mr. Peterswald, late Commissioner of
Police, was born and lived at Enfield on the “Highgate
Estate," now known as “Meyerhoffs,” and was previously
the home of Mr. John Chamberlain, the first Chairman of
the District of Yatala.
It may also be of interest to recall that the late Mr.
0 H. Stephens, formerly Commonwealth Electoral Officer,
and Councillor Batchelor, of the Mitcham District Council,
were born and lived in Enfield for many years.
Sudholz Farm, now owned by Mr. Jack Lindo at Gilles
Plains, was one of the first farms in South Australia, and
during the severe financial depression in the early davs.
many of the unemployed obtained work from the owner,
Mr. G. W. W. Sudholz, who was the first Chairman of the
District of Yatala South. Mr. Sudholz was fairly wealthy,
and at a later date saved the Council from great embarrass-
ment by his generosity in lending sufficient money to
enable the Council to pay its way.
“Blair Athol,” the home of the Magareys, also has an
interesting history, and the estate is now subdivided into
building allotments and many fine homes are erected there
The old village “smithy” was erected by Mr. Emanuel
Young in 1850, and still stands. It is now owned and
occupied by Mr. J. Turner, a son of Thomas Turner who
was a member of the Council for several years and was
Chairman in 1867-68. the last year of the existence of the
old Yatala Council.
The late Mr. Ferdinand Thiele, father of Mr. A. Thiele,
the present Chairman of the District Council of Walker-
ville, was a member of the Council from 1878 to 1889.
The late Mr. James Nottage, who was Clerk of the
Walkerville Council for many years, occupied the position
of Auditor to the Council in 1884. A son, Mr. Tnomas R.
Nottage, is the Overseer of Works for the Walkerville
Council at the present time.
Mr. Archer Russell (author of “Sunlit Trails”), speak-
ing of old Australian roads, and mentioning the Main
North Road, the main road through Enfield, says:
“Leading up through the granary of the central State
is one of the most historic roads in all Australia. It is the
main northern road of South Australia, the highway, I like
to call it, that led men to the inland. Here, along the
dusty wilderness track of ‘the earlies,’ went Eyre, to per-
form some of the most amazing feats in the annals of Aus-
tralian exploration and discovery; here, too, rode McDouall
Stuart on his perilous journey across the continent; and
here, by the same road, in 1846, returned Sturt, blinded
and bafifled, from the gibber steppes and sand wastes of the
Cooper. But there was one who did not return ; Poole, who
had ridden that road with Sturt on his outward way, lay
dead at Rocky Glen, a victim to the horrors of that march,
and one of the first of the martyrs —who were soon to
number so many —in the cause of Australian exploration
and research.
“Nor, if we are the true memoir hunter, will we be
satisfied with the harvest of associations we have alreadv
gathered. We will wish to delve deeper. And so we learn
later that it was along this road that John McKinlay led
his relief expedition in his search for the ill-fated Burke
and Wills party; that the equally ill-fated Ludwig Leich-
hardt, in one of his earlier journeys, had also travelled it;
and that Colonel Light, the founder of Adelaide, had ridden
it on many a journey. Indeed, it was Light who blazed
the track, which he did in company with Finniss in 1838-9.
thus pointing a way to the inland, and, incidentally, open-
ing up to occupation the regions of the ‘Lower' North.’
which were so soon to become one of the greatest Gran-
aries of the Commonwealth.


“Other thing's I discovered of the road. Of the days
when, following' the discovery of the Burra Burra copper
mines in 1845, the track would often be lined with trains
ol pack mules brought here to carry the ore to the ports
and attended by their Spanish muleteers from old Iberia.
1 hirty or forty pack mules tinkling their bells as they
moved along through the sheoak trees of an Austral scrub.
And at night, when the camp tires gleamed on the mule
camps, there would come the soft strumming of a guitar
and the wild strains of an Andalusian song would float
across the plains. It was said that the mine owners, at
whose instigation the mules and their attendants had been
brought from Spain, made little profit of this venture; but
of the picturesque and romantic touch they gave to the
roads there can never be any doubt.”
The picturesque village appearance of the suburb still
remains in many parts, but is fast giving way to the
demands of modern conditions. Enfield will always be pic-
turesque because of its hills and hollows, but modern
streets will never replace the beauty of old natural scenes.
The business premises were in the early days a cordial
factory, a butcher’s shop, and a combined post office, store,
and private school. To-day there are modern business
premises of all kinds. And so the quiet old-time village
and its estates give way to population and progress.
THE ORIGIN OF THE DISTRICT OF ENFIELD.
South Australia originated local government in Aus-
tralia by passing in 1840, four years after the proclama-
tion of the Province, the first Australian Municipal Act,
which was a partial transcript of the English Statute of
1835, greatly modified to meet the conditions of a people
who had made the experiment of founding a new state
in an almost uninhabited country.
The District Council of Yatala was constituted on June
16th, 1853, and the Proclamation appearing in the Govern-
ment Gazette of that date was as follows:
“Proclamation
By His Excellency Sir Henry Edward Fox Young, Knight,
Lieutenant-Governor of Her Majesty’s Province of South
Australia, and Vice-Admiral of the same, etc., etc.
Whereas by an Act of the Governor and Legislative
Council of the Province of South Australia, entitled ‘An
Act to appoint District Councils, and to define the powers
thereof,' it was amongst other things enacted, that it should
be lawful for the Governor, by Proclamation in the South
Australian Government Gazette, to designate and consti-
tute Districts, and to define the boundaries thereoi ; And
whereas such petition duly signed as by the said Act is
required hath been presented to me, the said Lieutenant-
Governor, praying that such Proclamation may issue in re-
spect of the district hereinafter defined, and the same peti-
tion hath been duly published in the South Australian
Government Gazette: Now, therefore, I, the Lieutenant-
Governor aforesaid, by and with the consent of the Execu-
tive Council, do hereby, by this my Proclamation, designate
and constitute the 'District of Yatala' to be a District
within the meaning and for the purposes of the said Act:
And I do hereby define the boundaries of such District
as follows, that is to say —Commencing at the points of
intersection of the centre of the Little Para River, and the
centre of the road between 2136 and 2144; thence, along
centres of said road, to the south-east angle of 3045;
thence, southerly, to the north-east angle of 3002; thence,
east, by a straight line, to the east boundary of 1566 at its
point of intersection with the Dry Creek; thence, along
the said Creek, to its intersection with the east boundary
of section 313; thence, southerly, in a straight line, t the
south-east boundary of 504; thence, across the road;
thence, along the northern boundary of 508, easterly, to its
north-east angle; thence, south, along the east side of the
said section, to the centre of the River Torrens; thence,
westerly, by the centre of the said River Torrens, t its
point of intersection with the eastern boundary of the Park
Lands; thence, northerly, following the Park Lands'
boundary to the point of intersection of that boundarv and
the north-east side of preliminary section 354 produced;
thence, by the north-eastern boundary of the District of
Hindmarsh, to the north-west corner of section 421 ; th ice,
by the west side of section 2072; thence, across the road,
to the southern boundary of 1188; thence, westerlv. y a
straight line, to the south-west corner of section 1190:
thence, northerly, by a straight line, to the north-west
corner of 1183; thence, to the north-west corner of ' 80;
thence, due north, to the creek running between sections
2018 and 2019; thence, by the west side of the said creek,
to a point due west of the south-west corner of section
3502, Hundred of Port Adelaide; thence, by the northern


side of the said road, south of sections .3502, 3501 and 3055
to the Little Para River; thence, easterly by the centre of
the said river to the point of commencement. And I do
herebv appoint Thomas Abbott, of the Little Para; Daniel
Brady, of the Dry Creek; John Chamberlain, of the Pine
est: John Harvey, of the North Para; and John Rag-
the younger, of the Great North Road, ratepayers
v hin the said District of Yatala, to be the first District
C aiicil of the said District of Yatala.
“Given under my hand and the public seal of the Pro-
vince, at Adelaide, this fifteenth day of June, in the year
our Lord, one thousand eight hundred and fifty-three,
a. in the sixteenth year of Her Majesty’s reign.
By command,
B. T. FINNISS,
Colonial Secretary.
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN!”
HE DISTRICTS OF YATALA NORTH AND YATALA
SOUTH.
On June 18th, 1868, by Proclamation, the northern
portion of the district was severed and named the District
Yatala North, while the remaining portion of the dis-
trict, comprising 11,685 acres, was named the District of
Yatala South.
The Proclamation appointed five new Councillors for
Yatala North, but made no alterations to the members of
the old Yatala District, and as a result Messrs. T. Turner
and W. Walden, who did not retire by effluxion of time,
continued to serve on the new Yatala South Council. An
election was held on July 15th to fill the three remaining
vacancies, and Messrs. I. W. Sudholz, J. Rosser, and James
Pitcher were successful. All members were present at the
first meeting, held at Gepps Cross on July 20th, 1868, and
Cr. I. W. Sudholz was elected Chairman, and Mr. J. J.
O’Sullivan was appointed Clerk at a salary of £4O.
Considerable trouble was experienced by both Councils
in arriving at an equitable basis for the apportionment of
the realisable assets of the old Yatala Council. Yatala
North claimed that the Council Chamber at Gepps Cross
should be disposed of, and the proceeds, together with other
assets, be equally divided between the two Councils.
Yatala South strongly objected to this suggestion and
obtained a legal opinion from Mr. John (later Sir John)
Downer, on the matter. The opinion stated that as the
Council Chamber was situated within the District of Yata a
South after the division was made, the 3 atala North Coun-
cil had no claim whatever on the Gepps Cross propei t\.
The opinion also stated that Yatala South had no claim on
a piece of land formerly owned by the District Council of
Yatala and now within the boundaries of 3 atala North,
situated opposite the Lass O’Gowrie (an old hotel at or
near Salisbury). It was eventually agreed that \ atala
South should receive two-thirds of the remaining assets,
including a bank credit balance of £B6. and 3 atala North
one-third. The records show that the other assets included
a few special constable batons and handcuffs, office furni-
ture, and one road roller. The actual record referring to
the roller states that “the miscalled road roller is valued
at £5 and will not realise expenses if offered for sale by
auction.” On February Bth, 1869, 3 atala North was paid
£35 5/2 in full settlement of its claim, certainly not a large
amount to establish a District Council of the area of Yatala
North (now Salisbury).
In this, the first year of the new Council, Mr. C. F.
Folland made the new assessment of the district. There
were 567 individual assessments, and the annual value was
£12,551, and a rate of 6d. in the £1 was levied. Records
show that only about fifty per cent, of the rates levied were
collected, and the Council suffered serious financial diffi-
culties. Only the generosity of the Chairman (Cr. I. \V.
Sudholz) saved the Council from great embarrassment, and
that was by his action in placing £7O to the credit of the
Council at the South Australian Bank, when it was entirely
without funds and unable to obtain an overdraft. This
money was refunded to the Chairman on June 7th, 1869, and
the Council shortly afterwards transferred its account to
the Bank of Adelaide on the understanding that an over-
draft could be obtained on the security of the Government
Rate subsidy.
THE DISTRICT COUNCIL OF ENFIELD.
The Council, early in 1935, petitioned the Governor to
change the name of the district to Enfield, and on July
11th, 1935, a Proclamation was accordingly published in the
Government Gazette.


The Council met for the first time under the name of
Enfield on July 15th, 1935, and all the members were pre-
sent, and Cr. T. K. Shutter, the Chairman of the old
Council, was elected Chairman.
The Assessment of the District for the year 1935-6 was
£74,661, and the capital value, exclusive of all Government
buildings, was £1,493,220. It was estimated that the unim-
proved value was £360,000. There are 1,227 buildings and
the number of assessments, 5,567, exactly 5,000 greater
than the number in 1868-9.
Inclusive of main roads (on which the Council pays
an annual levy of £799) the lengths of roads made are as
follows: —Bituminous concrete, 17f miles; bituminous
penetration, 4 miles; tar-paved and others, 31J miles; total,
53 miles.
PAST CHAIRMEN.
1853-1855 John Chamberlain
1855-1858 John Ragless, Junr.
1858- R. K. Spotswood
1859- Joseph Broadstock
1862 William Turvey
1862- Joseph Grundy
1863- A. M. Goodhall
1864 C. F. Folland, Senr.
1864- A. M. Goodhall
1865- C. F. Beaumont
1866 Thomas Dayman
1866- G. W. W. Sudholz
1867- Thomas Turner
1868- G. W. W. Sudholz
1876-1885 John Williams
1885- J. L. Thompson
1886- George Morris
1889-1893 Robert Emery
1893-1895 John Francis
1895- John Duncanson
1896- James R. Musson
1897- Andrew W. Shillabeer
1899-1901 James R. Musson
1901-1903 George D. Thompson
1903- Chas. F. Folland. Junr
1904- William Duthie
1905- John Williams
1908-1922 Andrew W. Shillabeer
1922-1926 David Rowe
1926-1930 Richard Thompson
1930 1931 Albert E. Walter-
-1931-1935 Thomas K. Shutter
PAST CLERKS.
1853- W. A. Hughes
1854- J. J. O'Sullivan
1884-1886 J. A. Williams
1886-1905 John Williams
1905-1913 S. J. Beasley
1913-1933 J. A. Tolcher
1933 R. A. Foote
Present Council. —T. K. Shutter
(Chairman), R. A. Foote (District
Clerk), Councillors T. W. Chesson, D.
Fraser, A. G. B. Bray, J. P. McArthur,
T. Reece, G. W. Wilson, D. W. Rad-
cliffe, C. W, Carroll, W. H, Breynarcl.


' £ "\ Bn^H
/! S'jSbfe j&jBm^
iS rt® ' m
CHAIRMAN THOMAS KEITH
SHUTTER, J.P.
(District Council of Enfield.)
Born at Angle \ ale, Ist October,
1889, and educated at Salisbury and
Nailsworth Public Schools. He has
been a member of the Council for 8
years, 3 years as Councillor and 5 years
as Chairman, and has been a resident
of the district for 38 years. In busi-
ness he is a Tailor and is a P.M. of
Prospect Masonic Lodge, present
W.M. of Enfield Masonic Lodge, 145,
P.M. Prospect Mark Lodge, and Sec-
retary for 5 years Thorngate Lodge of
Prospect, Chairman Y.0.C., Enfield.
Chairman North Adelaide B Grade
Football Club for 6 years, 4 years a
Committeeman of North Adelaide A
Grade Football Club, and was a keen
follower of football for many years.
He now plays bowls with Walkerville
Bowling Club and is also fond of golf
and fishing. Home address, 21, May
Street, Sefton Park.
COUNCILLOR JOSEPH HENRY
HEADING.
(District Council of Enfield.)
Born at Campbelltown. 15th Decem-
ber, 1882. and educated at the Camp-
belltown Public School. Mr. Heading'
was elected Councillor on 4th July,
1936, and his occupation is Market
Gardening. He is a member of the
United Ancient Order of Druids’
Lodge, and his sports are football and
cricket. He is ex-President of the
Gaza Institute and the Strathalbyn
Agricultural Bureau, and ex-Vice-
President of the Milang Agricultural
Bureau. Mr. Heading is a Past Coun-
cillor of the Yatala South District
Council. Private address, Hill Street,
Campbelltown.
COUNCILLOR COLEMAN WILFRED
CARROLL.
(District Council of Enfield.)
Born at Freeling. 23rd September,
1867, and educated at Kapunda Public
School. Mr. Carroll has been a mem-
ber for 6 years and a resident of the
district for 25 years. He has retired
from business and is a member of
A.N.A. Lodge. He served abroad with
the A.I.F. for 3 years. Home address,
Lower North Road, Ivilburn.


Sb
COUNCILLOR ARTHUR G. O. GRAY, J.P.
(District Council of Enfield.)
Born at Adelaide, 4th June, 1896, and
educated at East Adelaide School and
Prince Alfred College. Five years’
service in Council. Business, Manag-
ing Director Sanctuary Park Com-
pany. President Northfield Sub-
Branch R.S.A. for 4 years. War ser-
vice, 31st August, 1916, to Ist Novem-
ber, 1918, with sth A.A.S.P., A.I.E.
Dicharged through wounds received
on active service France and Belgium.
He was appointed Justice of the Peace
in 1932. Sports, cricket and bowls.
Home address. Northfield.
COUNCILLOR ALEXANDER HAROLD
NELSON, V.D.
(District Council of Enfield.)
Born at Port Adelaide, 18th Decem-
ber, 1884, and educated at Port Ade-
laide Public School. He has had 4
years' service in the Council and been
30 years a resident of the district.
During the Great War he served 44
years abroad with the 9th Light Horse
Regt., A.1.E., on active service, and
joined the Commonwealth Military
Forces in February, 1908, and is still
serving in command of the 3rd Light
Horse Regt. During the war he
served on Gallipoli, Egypt, Palestine,
Syria, and during the Palestine cam-
paign was appointed Administrative
Commandant of Jericho. After the
war he returned to Australia, and was
one of the officers that formed the
18th Light Horse Regt. He was pro-
moted Major on the 26th November,
1924, and was appointed to the com-
mand of the regiment with the rank
of Lieut.-Col. From the 31st March,
1931, was appointed to the command
of the 3rd Light Horse Regt,
which he is still serving. Awarded the
Colonial Auxiliary Forces Volunteer
Officers’ Decoration. The undermen-
tioned are the decorations received by
him: —1914-15 Star, General Service
Medal, Victory Medal. King’s Jubilee
Medal, Volunteer Officers’ Decoration,
Long Service Medal. Home address,
Rippleside, Modbury.
COUNCILLOR T. W. CHESSON
(District Council of En field.)
Born at Edwardstown, 3rd Agril,
1900; 33 years’ service in Council.
Business, Lucerne Grower. Home ad-
dress, Day’s Road, Islington.


? i«M
W»i«P|. PP* H
V
|ra»t % <j8pP
■ %' j^™
fe
. ®-^»-
COUNCILLOR THOMAS REECE
(District Council of Enfield.)
Born at Ballarat, Victoria, 1888, and
educated at Kureka Street School, Bal-
larat East. Five years’ service in
Council. Business, Dairy Produce
Alerchant. Member 1.0.0. F. Lodge.
Home address, Walkerville Avenue,
Walkerville.
COUNCILLOR DOUGLAS WARE
RADCLIFFE.
(District Council of Enfield.)
Air. Radcliffe was horn at North
Adelaide, 11th March, 1897, and edu-
cated at the Norwood Public School
and Prince Alfred College. Pie was
elected a member of the Council on
4th July, 1936, and is President of the
Theosophical Society. For 23 years
he was connected with the Boy Scouts’
Association. On leaving College, Mr.
Radcliffe served an apprenticeship
with a leading Adelaide architect, and
then entered the Civil Service as an
Engineering Surveyor. His private
address is 4th Avenue, Klemzig.
COUNCILLOR DUNCAN FRASER.
(District Council of Enfield.)
Born at Adelaide, 21st February.
1889, and educated at Public School,
School of Mines and Muirden College.
Served in Council for 2 years. He is
a member of the Metropolitan County
Board. In business he is a Director
of W. H. Burford & Sons, Ltd. P.M.
No. 30. Holdfast Masonic Lodge,
S.A.C. War service, 1916 to 1920,
Warrant Officer A.A.O.C. Sports,
cricket and tennis. Home address,
Burford Gardens, Drv Creek.
COUNCILLOR JACOB SIMCOCK.
(District Council of Enfield.)
Born at Kanmantoo. 2nd August,
1871, and educated at Kanmantoo Pub-
lic School. He has had 12 years' ser-
vice in the Council and been 31 years
a resident of the district. Mr. Sim-
cock is a member of the Hampstead
Heath Druids’ Lodge. Councillor Sim-
cock was a resident of Moonta for 5


n\
/■. - j|
x ' V|| a
*
m
. W ® *
jfei ■•*'•''
1 ■ V#. ‘
\ *''**
/
years and was for 4 years on the
\\ estern Australian goldfields. Home
address, Third Avenue, Gaza.
Mr. Walter has served in the Council
for 16 years and has been 45 years a
resident of One Tree Hill and 12 years
a resident of Kilkenny. He was Chair-
man for 1 year and Councillor for 15
years. Business, Dairyman. Sport,
bowls. Home address. Day’s Road,
Kilkenny.
ruary, 1885. and educated at Hawker
Public School. He has been a mem-
ber of the Council for 11 years ami is
a member of the Enfield Lodge, 45,
S.A.C., Past Grand, T.0.0.F. X< 1
Lodge. He is fond of all sports. H nie
address, lan Street, Broadview.
PAST COUNCILLOR ALBERT ERNEST
WALTER, J.P.
(District Council of Enfield.)
Born at One Tree Hill, 17th July,
1877, and educated at Unley School.
COUNCILLOR JAMES PRICE
McARTHUR.
(District Council of Enfield.)
Born at Hawker, S.A., on 28th Feb-
-570
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM H. BREYN; RD
(District Council of Enfield.)
Horn at Hindmarsh, Ist lime, 1886.


Hr H
H
I •■• jjm
K ..VtJ *.
MiSm ' i- 111
“•*»»■>. jjafl
Six years’ service in Council. Occupa-
tion, Railway Employee. Sports, foot-
ball and cricket. Home address,
Lower North Road. Kilburn.
COUNCILLOR GARNET W. WILSON.
(District Council of Enfield.)
Born in West Croydon, 16th March,
1894, and educated at Kilkenny Public
School. One year's service in Council.
Business, Dairy Farmer. Home ad-
dress. Day’s Road, Kilkenny.
DISTRICT CLERK ROY A. FOOTE.
(District Council of Enfield.)
Born at Birdwood, 10th December,
1910, and educated at Birdwood Public
School and Rostrevor College. Ten
years’ service in Council. Junior Clerk
until February, 1933, when he was ap-
pointed District Clerk and Overseer of
Works. Sports, cricket, tennis, and
football. Home address, 4. Rake's
Road, Enfield Park.




District Council of Eudunda


History of Eudunda
Climbing one of the surrounding hills and looking
down at the thriving town of Eudunda, with its well-kept
public buildings and business places, its neat private dwel-
and pretty gardens, one finds it difficult to realise
that 75 years ago on the spot where the town now stands
blackfellows frequently made their camp and kangaroos
and wild cattle roamed at will. What a transformation
since that time ! The story of the founding of the town
and its progress through the years is indeed an interesting
one.
In the early sixties selectors coming from Angaston,
Light s Pass, Steinau, and other places began to take up
land along the range. I he nearest town being Kapunda,
the pioneers had to convey their produce to that town,
whence they also obtained all their supplies. The fact
that the roads leading to Neale’s Flat, Morgan, Point Pass,
and Robertstown join at the corner, at present occupied
by the Eudunda Hotel, led to the erection of the first
building in Eudunda —a pine hut, in which Mr. Watson, a
Quaker, opened a wine shop.
As far as can be ascertained the founding of Eudunda
took place in 1870. The founder of Eudunda was Mr.
John Hannan (since deceased), who in 1870 had part of
his farm subdivided into building blocks, and who in the
same year erected a small hotel, the Eudunda Hotel, on
the site formerly occupied by the wine shop. Mr. Han-
nan, it is believed, named the town. In the same year
Mr. A. Neumann established a small flour mill on one of
the eastern blocks.
In 1870, Mr. C. F. W. Pfitzner, of Tarnma, then known
as Friedrichsvalde. bought the land on the western side
of the main road, and later had part of his land subdivided
into building allotments.
The first store was opened in 1874 by Mr. E. (I. E.
Appelt, who was also the first postmaster, the mails being-
conveyed on horseback to and from Kapunda by Mr. Tom
Nicholls. The establishment of other businesses soon fol-
lowed. Mr. Sporn, of Light’s Pass, erected the first
blacksmith shop; Mr. J. Burch was the first baker; and
Mr. G. A. Withorf was the first butcher.
A most important factor in the development of the
town was the opening of the railway, September 23rd, 1878.
In the first survey of the railway to Morgan, Eudunda was
left out, it being alleged that no level could be found for
a station nearer than three miles to the east —at Deep
Creek. However, a deputation of five prominent residents
of Eudunda, headed by Mr. James Shannon (later H P.),
succeeded in convincing the railway authorities that by
making a deviation of about half a mile a g'ood level was
to be had on the site where the present railway station
now stands, and the plans were altered accordingly. Mr.
Pfitzner donated part of the land required for the deviation.
With the coming of the railway, Eudunda quickly grew
in size and importance.
During the building of the railway the first police
officer was stationed at Eudunda, and later the present
police station and local court were erected next to the post
and telegraph office. Before the erection of this huh ling
the police station was situated near the present home of
Mr. J. B. Weis. As this police station did not possess
any cells, the constable at times chained prisoners to posts,
A doctor also had been invited to begin practice, a syndicate
of Eudunda residents having built a house for him. which
he afterwards purchased. The first medical practitioner
was Dr. Feige.
As Eudunda was now the centre of a large and glow-
ing district, there being as yet no railway to Robertstown,
and as more land was being taken up, cleared, and tilled
by the sturdy pioneers, more businesses were established.
Messrs. Davey & Son built a new flour mill, which was
afterwards destroyed by fire, but again rebuilt and brought
up to its present standard by Mr. A. C. Boer, who is still
the proprietor of the same. Messrs. Wiesner and Eilbig
established a large foundry, which specialised in the manu-
facture of strippers and farm machinery, afterwards pur-
chased by Messrs. Jensen Bros. This foundry, employing


over thirty men, was for many years a hive of industry.
A similar and thriving business was established by Mr.
\\ E. Krummel. This business is still being carried on
In his son, Mr. G. J. Krummel. Another hotel was erected
at what is commonly known as “the bottom end" of the
town. The first proprietor was Mr. Potter. A later
proprietor was Mr. F. W. Paech, who was for many years
Member of Parliament for the electorate of Wooroora.
The National Bank was established as early as 2nd March,
1877, under the management of Mr. Percy Fieldwick, in
a small room attached to Mr. F. G. E. Appelt’s store.
This bank later carried on business in a building erected
for this purpose by Mr. Hannan on the western side of
the store. Another old business identity, Mr. Tom
Nicholls, for many years Chairman of the District Council,
opened a saddlery business in 1881.
The pioneers of the surrounding district, a hardy,
industrious, and thrifty type of men, had for many years
a hard struggle with drought, red rust, smut, locusts, and
rabbits. The lastnamed caused especial hardship, as they
swarmed in from the surrounding sheep stations and de-
stroyed the growing crops. Entile efforts to check this
pest were made by all available persons combining and
walking about all night making a din with cattle bells,
kerosene tins, etc., to drive them back, but the grazing
lands, being eaten bare, hunger drove the rabbit into the
farmers’ crops. Appeals to the Government for help were
made in vain until at last things became so serious that
in 1875 or 1876 a deputation of seventy-three residents
went to interview the Playford Government, with the
result that the first Rabbit Bill was passed compelling
squatters and all other landholders to exterminate the pest
by making war against them simultaneously. This had
the desired effect.
Judging by present standards, farming methods in the
early days were primitive. At first only the single-furrow
plough was used. Mr. C. F. W. Pfitzner was the first man
to use a three-furrow plough, and also the stripper, which
he purchased in Kapunda for £75. The first houses put
up by the pioneers were mostly built of pine slabs and
daubed with clay. These dwellings, with their straw roofs
and whitewashed walls, were indeed picturesque. Here
and there in the district one may still see some of these
relics of bygone days. With the introduction of artificial
manures, the seed-drill, the stripper, the binder, and the
stump-jump plough began a more prosperous era, and,
wheat and farming giving a good return, the pioneers began
at last to reap the fruits of their industry.
Of great importance in the further development of the
town was the subdivision into farms of the Anlaby Estate,
commonly known as “Dutton’s Run.” So also was the
reticulation of the town with water from the Warren
Reservoir. Another step forward in the progress of the
town was the installation of electric light by the Mid-
North Electricity Co. of Clare. This added greatly to the
general comfort of the householders of Eudunda.
May the future of Eudunda continue to be one of
steady progress and solid growth.
DISTRICT COUNCIL OF EUDUNDA.
The District Council of Eudunda is an amalgamation
of the Julia and Neales District Councils. The amalga-
mation took place on July, 1. 1932. Before that the Dis-
trict Council of Neales had jurisdiction over the town of
Eudunda and the surrounding district. After the Hundred
of Neales was proclaimed a District on August 15, 1878,
the District Council of Neales was formed. The first meet-
ing was held on August 29 of the same year at the Eudunda
Hotel. Present were:—Messrs. A. Kluske, C. F. Fueuer-
herdt, W. Luhrs, J. Hunter, and E. C. Pfitzner. Mr. J.
Hunter was elected Chairman and acted in that capacity
for only one meeting. He then resigned, stating that he
was too far out of the town to attend to the duties involved
in that office. Mr. W. Hooper was the Acting Clerk.
After the resignation of Mr. Hunter, Mr. E. C. Pfitzner was
appointed Chairman, and held that office until July 20, 1880.
Mr. Hooper was only acting as Clerk, and at the first
meeting of the newly-formed Council it was decided to
call tenders for a Clerk by advertising in the “Government
Gazette.” It is amusing to relate that the Government
Printer would not insert the necessary advertisement in
the “Gazette” without having first received payment, and
consequently no applications were received. Mr. Edwin
Hopkins was duly appointed Clerk and Overseer from
October Ist. 1878, at a salary of £5O, plus 5 per cent, on all
rates collected. He held the office for a number of years
and then retired. Mr. Schaesche, of Greenock, was'then
appointed, and held the position for a few years. He was


followed by Air. (deling, who was in office for only a short
time. Air. A. J. Foster was then appointed Clerk and
Overseer. During his term the Council decided that the
\\ 01 k would have to be distributed, and called applications
f Ol position of Overseer. Air. Orrock was the suc-
cessful applicant, and Air. Foster resigned on account of
his business as a solicitor. Air. A. P. Severin was appointed
Cleik on September 1, 1893, and held the office until June
30, 1933. Air. N. B. Ellis then obtained the dual position
ol Clerk and Overseer in the amalgamated Neales and
Julia District Councils, and held the office for five months,
when Air. F. A . Elliott, the present Clerk and Overseer,
was appointed in his stead.
During Air. Hopkins’ term as Clerk the District was
divided into three \\ ards, viz., Eudunda, South, and North
Wards. At the beginning of 1884 a portion of the Hun-
dred of Dutton was annexed to the District of Neales,
and thereafter each Ward was represented by two Coun-
cillors.
After A/Ir. E. C. Plitzner retired from the position of
Chairman in 1880. Air. F. G. E. Appelt held the position
until 1882; then Air. F. W. Wagner until 1884, after which
r - T. G. P. Sieher was elected. Unfortunately the
Council books from 1884 until 1896 are unobtainable, and
during that period it is impossible to ascertain who held
the position of Chairman. Air. J. F. G. Kernich was Chair-
man in 1896 until 1902. After this Mr. Tom Nicholls
was appointed, and held the office for the lengthy period
of 21 years. In 1923 Mr. A. B. Thiele was elected and
carried on until 1925, when Air. W. P. Eckerman took the
office. Mr. W. P. Eckerman carried out the duties of
Chairman until 1927, when Mr. A. G. Wiesner was ap-
pointed to take his place. Mr. Wiesner was the first
Chairman of the amalgamated Julia and Neales Councils,
and continued to hold the position until he resigned in
1933, after which the present Chairman, Air. H. D. Michael,
was elected.
In perusing the available records it is noticeable the
big increase in business which the Council has had during
the last 57 years. For several years the minutes of the
monthly meeting each occupied approximately two pages
of a minute book. The meetings must have lasted about
90 minutes, if that. Now the Council has to sit all day.
and a tremendous amount of business is disposed of. In
the old days the main occupation of the Councillors was
to accept tenders for grubbing and clearing roads, whilst
the present Council is making every endeavour to have
the highways bitumenised.
The present Council is comprised of Councillor H. D.
Michael (Chairman), Councillors J. A. ]. Pfitzner, W. G.
Holding, O. B. Pfitzner (Julia Ward), C. A. Mann, PI. 0.
Leditschke (Eudunda Ward), A. F. Schmidt. P. R. Sch er
( Brownlow Ward), F. C. A. Sander and Chairman (Nea es
Ward).


CHAIRMAN HERBERT DONOVAN
MICHAEL.
(District Council of Eudunda.)
Mr. Michael was born at Hundred
of Booleroo, August 13th. 1890, and
educated at Booleroo Public School
and Kyre College. He has served the
Council for 84 years, 2\ years of which
he has been Chairman, and has been
foi 10 years a resident of the district.
He is "a member of the Eudunda
Masonic Lodge, and during the war
served 4 years with the A.I.F. in
Egvpt, Gallipoli, Belgium, and France,
and was awarded French “Croix de
Guerre.” Home address, Eudunda.
PAST COUNCILLOR THE LATE TOM
NICHOLLS.
(District Council of Eudunda.)
Born at Kapunda, 25th October,
The late Mr. Nicholls was a
Councillor for 25 years and was for
21 years Chairman of the District
Council of Neales, and was a resident
of the district practically for the whole
of his life, and was in business as a
Saddler. He was also a member of
the Eudunda Masonic Lodge and the
Manchester Unity of Oddfellows. The
late Mr. Nicholls was very widely
known in the district, and was a very
energetic worker in the early days of
Eudunda.
COUNCILLOR FRIEDRICK C. A.
SANDER.
(District Council of Eudunda.)
Born at Peep Hill, March Bth. 1887.
and educated at Peep Hill Public
School. He has served in the Coun-
cil for 10 years, and been 48 years a
resident of the district. Mr. Sander
has been Chairman of Peep Hill School
Committee for 12 years, and is a
Farmer. Home address, Eudunda.
COUNCILLOR AUGUST FRIEDRICH
SCHMIDT.
(District Council of Eudunda.)
Born at Neale’s Elat, Ist August,
1873, and educated at Neale’s Elat Pub-
lic School. He has been a member of
the Council for 23 years and a resi-
dent of the district the whole of his
life. For 20 years he has been Chair-
man of Brownlow School Committee.
Home address, Brownlow.
COUNCILLOR PAUL REINHOLD
SCHILLER.
(District Council of Eudunda.)
Born at Neale’s Elat, 19th March,
1882, and educated at Sutherlands Pub-
lic School. He has served in the Coun-
cil for 4 years, and been a resident of
the district the whole of his life. He
is a Farmer, a member of the Suther-
lands School Committee. also
Treasurer, Trustee, and Lay Reader
of the Sutherlands St. John’s Luthe-
ran Church. Home address, Suther-
lands.
COUNCILLOR JULIUS A. J. PFITZNER.
(District Council of Eudunda.)
Born at Julia Creek, 14th October,
1874, and educated at Point Pass Pub-
lie School. He has served in the Conn
cil for 32 years, including 4 years as
Chairman of the District Council of
Julia, and been a resident of the dis-
trict the whole of his life. He has
been Chairman of numerous bodies
and Trustee of St. John's Lutheran
Church, Eudunda. He is a Mixed
Farmer, and proprietor of the famous
Hampden Jersey Stud, and winner of
many prizes at the Adelaide Royal
Show. Home address, Hampden.
COUNCILLOR OSCAR BERNHARD
PFITZNER.
(District Council of Eudunda.)
Born at Julia Creek. 11th December,
1875, and educated at Point Pass Pub-
lic School. He has served in the Coun-
cil for 30 years and been a resident
of the district the whole of his life.
He is Councillor for Julia Ward (now
Eudunda Ward), and is a Farmer. Mr.
Pfitzner is Trustee of St. Petris
Church. Point Pass, and a member of
Julia Repatriation Committee. Home
address, Ngalpa.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM GEORGE
HOLDING.
(District Council of Eudunda.)
Mr. Holding was born at Point Pass,
11th January, 1883, and educated at
Hansborough Public School. He has
been a member of the Council for 17
years, and for 46 years a resident of
the district. He has been Chairman of
the Eudunda School Committee for 6
years, and his present business is
Farming. Home address, Eudunda,


COUNCILLOR CLARENCE ALBERT
MANN.
(District Council of Eudunda.)
Mr. Mann was born at Eudunda in
1896. and educated at Eudunda Pub-
lic School. He has been a member of
the Council for 5 years and a resi-
dent of the district practically all his
life. He is President of the Eudunda
h ootball and Cricket Clubs, a mem-
ber of the Eudunda Masonic Lodge,
and his sports are cricket and tennis.
During the war he served abroad with
the A.I.F. for 5 years. Air. Mann is
an active worker for the progress of
the town. Home address, Eudunda.
COUNCILLOR HERMANN OSKAR
LEDITSCHKE.
(District Council of Eudunda.)
Born at Point Pass, June 10, 1900,
and educated at Point Pass Public
and Unley High Schools and the
School of Mines, Adelaide. Mr.
Leditschke has been a member of the
Council for 24 years, and for 17 years
a resident of the district. In busi-
ness he is a Motor Garage Proprie-
tor, and his sports are tennis, foot-
ball, bowls, and cricket. Home ad-
dress, Eudunda.
FRANK VINCENT ELLIOTT.
(District Clerk and Overseer, District
Council of Eudunda.)
Born at Riverton, 15th May, 1899,
and educated at Riverton Public and
District High Schools. Mr. Elliott has
occupied his present position in the
Council for 2\ years and has been a
resident of the district for 9 years.
He was relieving station master, em-
ployed by the S.A.R., prior to taking
up business in Eudunda, and later he
was appointed to his present position.
He was Secretary of the very success-
ful Back to Eudunda Carnival, and
takes a very keen interest in all mat-
ters in connection with the welfare
of the Town of Eudunda. He is Pre-
sident of the Eudunda Tennis Club
and of the Eudunda and Districts Ten-
nis Association. Mr. Eliott is a mem-
ber of the Eudunda Masonic and Odd-
fellows’ Lodges, and his sports are ten-
nis and golf ; previously he was asso-
ciated with Murray Bridge Rowing
Club. Home address, Eudunda.
THE LATE ALBERT PAUL SEVERIN.
(Past District Clerk, District Council of
Eudunda.)
The late Mr. Severin was for nearly
40 years Clerk of the District Coun-
cil of Eudunda, and was a resident
of the district practically the whole
of his life. He was also in business
as a Carpenter, and was a member of
the Eudunda Masonic Lodge and Man-
chester Unity of Oddfellows.


)istrid Council of Franklin Harbour


History of Franklin Harbour
Named after the famous explorer. Sir John Franklin,
the harbour itself, situated on the western side of Spencer’s
Gulf, is safe and commodious, containing 25 square miles,
although apart from a wide natural channel (as yet unused),
which runs from the entrance across to the mainland, and
a dredged channel from the entrance to the jetty, the water
is mostly shallow, and affords an excellent fishing ground,
the weekly export of fish being of considerable value. As
Eyre’s Peninsula develops this Harbour will speedily come
into its rightful place as the front door to this vast tract
of country. The port possesses good facilities for shipping,
there being two jetties, stock yards, spacious storage sheds
and large wheat sheds.
Th e main township is Cowell, so named by one of South
Australia’s early Governors after a friend. It is a well-
built and up-to-date town, containing many fine buildings,
and a large hospital with complete administrative quarters
and an up-to-date X-ray plant. The town also has its own
efficient electric light service.
The average output trom the district is 9,000 bags of
wheat and 3,500 bales of wool, 2,500 gallons cream, 46,000
dozen eggs, and 8,000 lbs. butter annually.
Land was originally sold by auction, and the pioneers
taking up land then had many difficulties to face. To-day
the district is in a comparatively good financial position.
The District Council was proclaimed in 1888, the first
meeting being held on February 15th, 1888, there being pre-
sent Messrs. Watson, Melrose, Russell. Deer. Wake, and
Turnbull. The Council then controlled 2,400 square miles,
comprised mainly of pastoral leases. It was subdivided into
four Wards, and in June, 1911, it was again divided, and
the District Council of Cleve came into existence. The
present area is approximately 780,000 acres, comprising the
following Hundreds: —Playford. Wilton, Warren, Char-
leston, McGregor, Glynn, Minbrie, Miltalie, James, Fleg-
gaton, Manga!o. and Hawker.
The population has varied very much, the present
figures showing a total of 1.362 persons, of whom 500 are
ratepayers.
The first assessment was made on May 20th, 1888, and
a rate levied of 6d. in the £, producing approximately £140:
in 1923 the rate was 1/4 in the £. producing £1,408 11 4.
The 1935-36 assessment was made on Bth October, 1935,
producing £1,291 19/4 at 1/7 in the £.
The capital value of rateable property is £319,500.
There is permanent water in several places in the dis-
trict. and this is supplemented by Government reservoirs,
of which there are five, besides several large underground
tanks. The water from the reservoirs is reticulated
throughout a part of the district.
In the Main Street, close to the Institute, is an impos-
ing Memorial in granite, inscribed with the names of fallen
heroes of the district. Franklin Harbour has the distinc-
tion of sending one of the largest contributions (compared
with the population) of men to take part in the Great
War.
Following is a complete list of past and present Coun-
cillors:- —Messrs. D. McKenzie, T. R. White. A. Turnbull,
H. Evans, P. Leonard, P. McCarthy, W. H. W escoinF ,
W. Jacobs. H. S. Robinson, W. Ashford, J. E.
W. Pike, G. Wheeler, J. Cleave. Thomas, E. Bradley, R
Hissev, J. Mcßeath, W. Forbes. E. W. Speed. T. Simms,
A. Fairbank, F. J. Brooks. G. T. Way, H. T. Dunn. R.
H. Hornhardt, H. T. Styles, J. E. Wakelin, J. T. Whyte,
M. Searle, I. Rayson, W. Jacobs, Jnr., J. N. McCallnn,
W. T. Cooper. G. A. Nicolson, A. Venning, W. Ogilvie,
Rehn, J. H. Mitchell, J. F. Warnes, T. A. Wilson, A
Dawkins, A. O. Chilman, R. W. Searle, A. E. Tuck, H. S.
Mackley, J. P. Story, F. L. Williams, Francis Jacobs,
P. Smith, K. W. GWynne, J. T. Forth, A. Russell, J.
Watson, and E. Wake.
At this date Mr. j. E. Watson is the only survivim
member of the first Council.
The following is a complete list of Clerks that have
held office in the Council : —Messrs. J. R. Pillephent. <
T. Way, J. F. Brooks, J. P. McCarthy. W. A. Rowe, I.
R. Jemison, T. A. Wilson, and J. L. Rehn.


i %
* \
|
The following is a complete list of Overseers that
have held office in the Council: —P. McCarthy, Snr., J. F.
Warnes, j. H. Cleave. W. Jacobs. G. D. Rowe, and j. L.
Rehn.
Mr. J. R. Pillephent was the first Clerk of the Council,
and )ii the 6th March, 1889, was drowned as a result of a
boat accident, which occurred at the entrance of the Har-
bour.
During 1934 (October and November) the district
experienced a severe plague of grasshoppers—the worst
I 1 igue of this description ever experienced in the history
of the district. Various methods of destruction were em-
ployed. the chief method being poison bait (a mixture of
bran, molasses, water and arsenate of soda) ; but the plague
could not be controlled, despite the fact that the method
of destruction was very effective. Ihe District Count.!
purchased and supplied the poison to residents, besides
doing valuable work endevouring to combat the pest
throughout the town. The plague, however, resulted in
a disaster for the whole district. The wheat harvest was
reduced by half and feed for stock was exceptionally
scarce.
CHAIRMAN ERNEST PERRY SMITH,
J.P.
(District Council of Franklin Harbour.)
Mr. Smith was born at St. Kits,
Truro, June 26th, 1886, and educated
at Table Lands School. He has been
a member of the Council since July,
1925, and a resident of the district
since 1905. He has held the follow-
ing positions : —Chairman of the Hos-
pital Board and Board of Health, and
is Provisional Director of the Port
Lincoln Freezing Works. Business,
Grazier. Mr. Smith was appointed a
justice of the Peace in 1922 and re-
ceived the King’s Medal in 1935.
Home address, Calcookara. Vest
Coast.
PAST COUNCILLOR FREDERICK
ANDREW SIMMONS, J.P.
(District Council of Franklin Harbour.)
Born at Port Lincoln, 13th Decem-
ber, 1869, and educated at Port Lin-
coln. He has been 10 years Secretary
Jervois County Hospital. Cowell, and
10 years Secretary Vermin Board of
Franklin Harbour, and 37 years a resi-
dent of the district. Business, Store
Manager, Auctioneer, Shipping Agent,
Wheat Buyer and Grazier. Mr. Sim-
mons has been 45 years a member of
the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows
and 25 years a Justice of the Peace,
and has resided all his life on Eyre's
Peninsula. Home address, Cowell.


1
I I’ ’*' S »
. I 4
1 k J|| ) A,
«ii <$>kilim
■
. ** * J
PAST COUNCILLOR THOMAS ALLEN
WILSON, J.P.
(District Council of Franklin Harbour.)
Born at Pewsey Vale, S.A., in 1862,
and received his education at Whinham
College, North Adelaide. Mr. Wilson
has during his residence on Eyre’s
Peninsula shown a marked interest in
the public advancement of the district.
For 16 years he served the District
Council of Franklin Harbour as Clerk
and Assistant Clerk, and for a further
period of 4 years served the Council
as Councillor for the Miltalie Ward.
He has been Secretary of the Jervois
County Hospital. British Boys’ Wel-
fare Committee, and of the local Re-
patriation Committee, and has been
Trustee of the Miltalie School and of
the Cowell Methodist Church.
COUNCILLOR FRANCIS JACOBS, J.P.
(District Council of Franklin Harbour.)
Born at Wandearah Fast, July 25th.
1882, and has served continuously in
the Council since July, 1925. He has
been a resident of the district for 42
years. He is a past Chairman of the
District Council, Chairman Hospital
Board, Miltalie Agricultural Bureau,
Vice-President of the Franklin Har-
bour A.N.S. Society, Trustee of Cool-
anie Methodist Church, Chairman Mil-
talie and Coolanie School Committee,
Trustee of Cowell Methodist Manse,
and has assisted in every public move-
ment in the district for the past 30
years. Idas held the position of Jus-
tice of the Peace for 8 years, and is
a member of the Franklin Harbour
Masonic Lodge. Home address,
Mount Ghearthy Station, via Cowell
COUNCILLOR JOHN PELLOW STORY,
J.P.
(District Council of Franklin Harbour
Mr. Story was born at Wandearah.
7th May, 1882, and educated at Milt; He
School. He has served in the Co
cil continuously for 12 years and J
been a resident of the district for 53
years. Mr. Story has been acquaii
with the Agricultural Bureau foi .27
years, and is President of the A. I.
and F. Society. He has also h n
President of the Football Club for 15
years, is a member of the Jerv is
County Hospital Board, and a Justice
of the Peace. He is a Farmer by oc-
cupation, and his sports are foot' ill,
rifle shooting, and tennis. Home ad-
dress, Miltalie.


' V#|
" Jm
'
COUNCILLOR JOHN TAYLOR FORTH.
(District Council of Franklin Harbour.)
Mr. Forth was born at Orroroo, 27th
October, 1886, and educated at Orroroo
Public School. He has been a mem-
ber of the Council for 5 years and a
resident of the district for 28 years.
He is a member of the Franklin Har-
bour Hospital Board, Board of Health,
and a Committeeman and Past Pre-
sident of the Show Society. Mr. Forth
has been a member of the Franklin
Harbour Institute for 17 years and is
now President. He has also been a
member of the Masonic Lodge for 18
years and the Oddfellows’ Lodge for
28 years, and is Past President of the
Franklin Harbour Racing, Regatta,
and Golf Clubs, and the Football As-
sociation. Mr. Forth has taken an in-
terest in all matters pertaining to the
good and welfare of the town and dis-
trict for 20 years. In business he is
a Timber and Iron Merchant and
House Furnisher and Hardware Store-
keeper. Home address, Cowell.
COUNCILLOR KENNETH WILLIAM
GWYNNE, J.P.
(District Council of Franklin Harbour.)
Born at Hammond, May 24th, 1879,
and educated at Eurelia Public School.
Mr. Gwynne has been a member of the
Council for 4 years and a resident of
the district for 36 years. He is a
member of the Jervois County Flos-
pital Board, Vice-President of the
Show Committee, Chairman Mitchell-
ville Public Hall Trust for 26 years,
and has been a Justice of the Peace
since 1912. He is a Farmer and
Grazier, and his sports are rifle shoot-
ing, tennis, cricket, football, and golf.
Councillor Gwynne has taken an in-
terest in all public matters connected
with the district.
DR. ROBERT OWEN FOX.
(Medical Officer of Health. District Council
of Franklin Harbour.)
Dr. Fox was born at Angaston, 15th
March, 1900, and educated at Prince
Alfred College and Adelaide Univer-
sity. For 9 years he has been a resi-
dent in the district. By profession he
is a Medical Practitioner, and is Officer
of Health on the Local Board of
Health. His sports are tennis, foot-
ball, cricket, and golf. Home address,
Cowell.


9p : tpprs.^
It >. F3l, -I
' if
I
JOSEPH LAURENCE REHN.
(Clerk and Overseer of Works, District
Council of Franklin Harbour.)
Mr. Rehn was born at Houghton,
S.A., 24th July, 1884, and educated at
Cowell. He has served in the Coun-
cil for 7 years and has been a resi-
dent of the district for 51 years. He
was a Committeeman of the Institute
for 4 years, President of the Frank-
lin Harbour Football Association, and
Secretary of the Cowell Branch R.S.A.
for 15 years. Mr. Rehn is also a mem-
ber of the Oddfellows’ Lodge, a Com-
mitteeman of the A. H. and F. Society,
a Local Preacher, and Sunday School
Superintendent. During the war he
served with the A.I.F. on active ser-
vice for 2 years. Home address,
Cowell.
LYNDON LLOYD McKENZIE.
(Assistant Clerk, District Council of
Franklin Harbour.)
Born at Cowell, 11th May, 1915, and
educated at the Cowell School and
Woodville District High School. Mr.
McKenzie has been a resident of the
district for 19 years and was appointed
Assistant District Clerk, September
Ist, 1935. He is Secretary to the
Cowell Electric Supply Co., Ltd., Hon.
Secretary Franklin Harbour Centen-
ary Committee, and member of the
Tennis and Football Committees. He
is Captain of the Cowell football and
tennis teams. Home address, Cowell.


District Council of Freehng


History of Freeling
Freeling was named after Sir Arthur Freeling, Bart.,
who was appointed Surveyor-General and Colonial En-
gineer as successor to Colonel Frome, and was one of the
five paid Commissioners charged with the management of
City affairs.
The first Council meeting was held on 14th December,
1867, and was established on 28th November of that year
as the District Council of Nuriootpa. In 1892 portion
of the Hundred of Light was added, and later the name
was changed to the District Council of Freeling.
Situated on a high plain, 374 miles north of Adelaide,
Freeling is on the main line of road between Adelaide and
Kapunda, and the site of the town is ample for consider-
able extension, and its geographical position has secured
a large amount of business. Good hotels, several churches,
large wheat stores and various other establishments bear
witness to the rapid progress of the town and district,
machinery works and agricultural pursuits being a feature
of the general industrial outlook.
The district has an area of 132 square miles, and the
population is estimated at 2,000 persons.
The capital value of ratable property is £786,34'),
and the assessment value £39.317, whilst a rate of 1/3 in
the £ yields an annual revenue of £2,457. The total length
of roads under Council control is 352 miles.
The following is a list of the names of those gentle-
men who have for various periods held office in the Dis-
trict Council: —Members of original Council (1867) R.
Holland (Chairman). Messrs. Lawson, Kruger, Allen, and
Brock ; first District Clerk, F. O. Windscheid. Other Mem
hers—S. Nairn. J. F. C. Mattiske, A- C. Heinze. F. W.
Mattner, C. C. Heinjus, G. H. Bammann, J. A. Lesk?, and
P. G. T. Kernick.
The present Council consists of —Messrs. H. F. Wehr
(Chairman), T. W. Roennfeldt, J. E. Neldner, T. Shana
han, E. R. Hentschke, A. E. Sissman, G. T. Pattulo (Dis-
trict Clerk), H. H. Mattschoss (Overseer of Works).


//!
r Jt ualaMB
. I
A ,
BBL's dKhjmmS*. &SF a <j;*>-■’ 'S 'iWm
CHAIRMAN HERMANN FRIEDRICH
WEHR.
(District Council of Freeling.)
Born near Daveyston, 20th August,
1872, and educated at the Daveyston
Public School. He has been a mem-
ber of the Council from July, 1915, to
1929, and July, 1930, to' 1936, being
Chairman for 16 years. Mr. Wehr
has resided in the district for 63 years
and is a retired farmer. He is a mem-
ber of the Manchester Unity (Oddfel-
lows’ Lodge, and his sports are cricket,
football, tennis, golf, bowls, and rifle
shooting. He has carried on mixed
farming on the farm near Daveyston,
which was purchased from the Crown
about 78 years ago by his late father,
Mr. E. W. Wehr, who also acted as
Councillor in the early seventies.
Home address, Freeling.
PAST CHAIRMAN JOHANNES
EDWARD NELDNER, J.P.
(District Council of Freeling.)
Born at Sheaoak Log, near Freel-
ing, on January Ist, 1873, and edu-
cated at Sheoak Log and Rosedale
Public Schools. His service in the
Council totals 20 years, 4 years of
which he was Chairman. He has been
46 years a resident of the district. Mr.
Neldner is Trustee of the Freeling In-
stitute, a Justice of the Peace since
1914, and a member and delegate of
the District Liberal Country League.
In business he is a Chaff Merchant,
Farmer, and Grazier. He is a Patron
of affiliated clubs, and is a life mem-
ber of the Freeling Brass Band. Mr.
Neldner was 15 years of age when his
father died, and he continued to assist
his mother on the farm for about 5
years, when he commenced operations
on his own account on a small hold-
ing near Freeling. The position which
he has now attained reflects great
credit upon him, as he has achieved
excellent results by dint of unremit-
ting hard work, perseverance, and
good management. In 1907 he erected
a chaff mill adjacent to the railway
station, and carried on an extensive
local and export trade, and is now
noted as the largest cutter in South
Australia. He has made a close study
of agricultural farming, and has been
successful on several properties which
he is farming for grain outside of
Goyder's line of rainfall. Mr. Neldner
has interested himself in the advance-
ment of the town and district, and to
his example is due the building of the
first houses in Freeling.
COUNCILLOR THEODOR WILLIAM
ROENNFELDT.
(District Council of Freeling.)
Mr. Roennfeldt was born at “Glen-
dale," Nuriootpa, 19th May. 1885. He
is the youngest son of the late Coun-
cillor Franz L. Roennfeldt, who, with
his late father, Mr. C. H. Roennfeldt,
were amongst the first settlers in the
district. The present estate was taken
up direct from the Crown, and has
since heen sub-divided among his sons
or sold to neighbours.
Mr. Theodor Roennfeldt received his
education at Nuriootpa Private
School, and later kept in close touch
with Roseworthy College, and studied
the latest progress in agricultural and
viticultural science, lie has been a
resident of the district all his life, with
the exception of two years spent in


Bj ■ *^-
vJP”' I
m^ : # jr / g, * jp
Victoria, New South Wales, and
Queensland furthering his agricultural
knowledge. He is a keen botanist,
and all his spare time is spent in gar-
dening and reading. He is a sub-
scriber of journals, magazines, books,
and papers published in Australia and
other parts of the world ; therefore, is
well informed of the world's progress
and interests. He is a member of the
Angaston, Tanunda, and Freeling
A.H. & F. Societies ; Past President of
the Light's Pass and Greenock Agri-
cultural Bureau, of which he has been
an active member since 1912; Past
President of the Greenock Liberal
Union, and also Country Party Union ;
a member of Manchester Unity of
Oddfellows of the Greenock Lodge
since 1910. In business Mr. Roenn-
feldt is a stud breeder, agriculturist,
viticulturist, and grazier of export
lambs. He is the holder of numerous
valuable trophies won in the Central
Crop Competition, being runner-up for
2 years, 1928-29, and winning first
prize in 1930; runner-up in the State
Championship Crop Competition, 1930:
winner of the Improved Pasture Com-
petition, 1928: runner-up of the Fallow
Competition, 1928; and his Jersey herd
won a prize of £2O, being runner-up
in the Meggitt’s Competition as
highest producing herd in the State.
Mr. Roennfeldt was elected as one of
the foundation members of Nuriootpa
High School Council in 1935, and is
taking an active interest to further
the education of the district, and hopes
in the near future to see a new, up-to-
date District High School on the 10
acres which the Government has pur-
chased with a view at a later date to
include an Agricultural High School.
He is also a member of the St. Petri
Lutheran Church at Nuriootpa, which
his father and a few others built in
the early days, but which has since
been re-built and a tower added. Mr.
Roennfeldt has always evinced a high
interest in all matters pertaining to
the welfare, progress, and beautifica-
tion of the district. Home address,
“Glendale,” Nuriootpa. .
COUNCILLOR THOMAS SHANAHAN
(District Council of Freeling.)
Born at Freeling, 12th August, 1897,
and educated at the Freeling Public
School and Christian Brothers’ Co
lege, Adelaide. Mr. Shanahan has
been a member of the Council for
years and has been a resident of the
district the whole of his life. He is
President of Freeling A. H. and
Society and Past President an I
Captain of the Freeling Football Clu
Home address, Freeling.
COUNCILLOR ALBERT ERNEST
SISSMAN.
(District Council of Freeling.)
Born at Little Para, in July, 1879.


■>■! I ■' 1 ■“
1 mm
f *
# * JSi ;',-j&
■L JH
S*
w Hg I J
and educated at St. George’s Private
School, Gawler. Mr. Sissman has
served in the Freeling District Council
for 5 years and has been a resident of
the district the whole of his life. Busi-
ness, Farmer. Home address, Rose-
worthy,
COUNCILLOR H. B. BRAUNACK.
(District Council of Freeling.)
Born at Greenock, 16th August,
1896, and educated at Marananga Pub-
lic School. Mr. Braunack has served
in the Council for 3 years and 8 months
and has resided in the district for 31
years. Business, Farmer. Home ad-
dress, Greenock.
COUNCILLOR ERNST RICHARD
HENTSCHKE.
(District Council of Frecling.)
Born at Gomersal, 30th January,
1883, and educated at New Mecklen-
burg Public School. Mr. Hentschke
has been a member of the Council for
6 years and 8 months. Business,
Farmer and Gardener. Home address,
Gomersal.
GEORGE T. PATTULLO.
(District Clerk, District Council of Freeling.)
Born at Clare. 30th March, 1900,
and educated at Stanley Flat Public
School. He has been in the service
of the Council for 1 year and 6 months.
Before coming to Freeling Mr. Pat-
tullo held the position of District Clerk
and Overseer to the District Council
of Hanson for 8 years. He was also
the Secretary of the Hanson Soldiers’


—
■ '
■: "
Memorial Institute, and is at present
Secretary of the Freeling Hospital.
He is a member of the Manchester
Unity Oddfellows' and Clare Masonic
Lodges. His. sport is bowls. Home
address, Freeling.
HUGO HERMAN MATTSCHOSS.
(Overseer of Works, District Council of
Freeling.)
Born at Daveyston, 2nd November.
1899, and educated at Daveyston Pub-
lic School. He has been 36 years a
resident of the district and his sport
is golf. Home address, Freeling.


District Council of Georgetown


History of Georgetown
Georgetown is the principal centre of population in a
big wheat-producing district, embracing some of the finest
cereal-growing areas in South Australia. Its name was
bestowed as a mark of loyalty to the reigning house of
Great Britain and her Dominions.
In the early days Georgetown was one of the most
important changing places on the mail route between Ade-
laide and Port Augusta. It is now connected by a daily
train service with the metropolis, from which it lies dis-
tant by rail 129 miles.
The Council controls a total area of 260 square miles,
which is intersected by 32 miles of main road and by
district roads extending over a total mileage of 360. A
good water supply is obtained from the Bundaleer Reser-
voir, which is situated within the boundaries of the dis-
trict.
Georgetown was first proclaimed a district in 1876,
at which early period only the Hundred of Bundaleer came
under the Council’s administration. Messrs. J. D. Wilt-
shire, Geo. Inglis, T. Hynes, J. Murphy, and H. W. Brink-
worth were appointed the first Councillors, and at the
initial meeting of the Council in April of that year Coun-
cillor Geo. Inglis was elected Chairman.
In 1888 the District of Narridy and the Hundred of
Yackamoorundie were amalgamated with the District of
Georgetown, under the latter name. From that date the
Council controlled the whole area, subdivided into three
Wards. This subdivision continued until the year 1921,
when portions of Bundaleer and Yackamoorundie were
formed into a new Ward, and the names underwent some
alteration, the district now comprising the four Wards of
Georgetown, Gulnare, Narridy, and Yacka.
The population of Georgetown consists of 350 persons,
and that of the town and district combined 1.572. About
370 dwelling houses have been erected.
The first assessment of the amalgamated territory
amounted to £23,743, which, at a rate of sd. in the £, pn>
duced revenue £494 12/6. In 1893 the rating was fixed
at 1/4 in the £ on the assessment of £29.822, yielding
£1.988 2/8.
The Council has turned its attention to the beautify-
ing of the town areas, and plantations of gum trees at
Georgetown and 6 acka add considerably to the atti acti n'
ness of the approach. At Georgetown a War Memorial
has taken the form of a notable addition to the Public
Hall in the shape of a convenient supper room and culinary
offices, a tablet inscribed with the names of the soldiers
who enlisted from this centre being placed in the hall.
At Yacka a handsome marble life-size statue of a soldier
has been erected on a pedestal in the principal thorough-
fare.
The following is a complete list, so far as can be
ascertained from past records, of past Councillors
Messrs. J. D. Wiltshire. G. Inglis, T. Hynes. J. Murphy.
H. W. Brinkworth. A. Hiskey, P. j. Noonan, J. Noonan,
P. Murrie, C. Read, M. Smallacombe, P. R. Smallacombe,
C. A. Smallacombe, E. Story, R. Harvey, P. J. Harvey. H.
Harvey, J. Rundle, J. B. White, J. J. Browne, J. Fogarty.
J. Maslin, F. Maslin, W. A. Hill. J. C. Wyatt, D. F. Allen,
J. T. Burgess, J. Freeman, W. G. A. Thomas, M. I.
McAuley, T. Creer. P. Freebairn. J. Freeman. J. King.
Present:—J. Darley (Chairman), P. G. Thomas. J I.
Teakle, W. Clark, J. Hay, J. Atkinson, T. Wyatt, and J A.
Lyons.
Present members of Council: —Chairman (John A.
Lyons), Councillors P. M. O’Loghlin, E. Smart. A. G.
Thomas, W. F. Tilbrook, A. E. Tilbrook, W. G. John-
cock. W. G. A. Thomas; District Clerk. R. G. Odgers.


■
\ lllp
% #
III? ! ->■<« A ®s
asm* * W %, , m.
jfy# •#' $. %Fm j
■"i &&& >v $’ «•*,•*■ ■ ■ *■ / 4*
: .
' m ' jM 1 '9&r .-
jlyA / ' 1^^ltefe
District Council of Gladstone
LORD GLADSTONE OF HAWARDEN.
RIGHT HON. W. E. GLADSTONE.


glff •» » jHTPlr. >** ***- : z::zz:z:z~.
\ Mar \ * i rn \ Pv ieiiis > S& A" '■ •■-»>x^x« v< ,..,
% ; ’•■/ J|i|p J£J|k MM \ <— ' * i * I A It v I |\ ■ $ M .&' -': *■ $ > v «
y }'*m 1 j VM / i '■ iP"-.: '■■<-— <.
|B* '.I >
./ M^ > y'“~ l*~ - *•' ‘
History of Gladstone
The Town of Gladstone, in the State of South Aus-
tralia, situated 131 miles north of the City of Adelaide,
stands 011 ground which in 1870 formed portion of the
Booyoolee Instate, a sheep station, owned by Messrs. H. B.
Booyoolee and other runs were resumed and declared open
for selection, and these agricultural lands became known
as "The Northern Areas." Sections 32 and 33 in the
Yangya area, now on the eastern side of railway in Glad-
THE OLD TOWN COUNCIL.
and B. H. Hughes. The holding consisted of 200 square
miles and embraced what is now Laura in the north,
Georgetown in the south, Mount Lock in the east, and
Crystal Brook in the west. The lease was granted to the
above-named brothers in 1851. 111 1868 portions of the
stone, were purchased by Messrs. Oliver Horner and Wash-
ington Moorehouse, and* in 1871 a portion of this land was
sui ve} ed and laid out as a township, which was named
after the late Rt. Hon. W. E. Gladstone, then at the zenith
of his cai eei. It \\ as found, soon after the opening of


i r Jk 'rjl Mil M**
' v? . ?■* ’* ; yfo > s||| ||||||i *.; ■ i>MM
• J9Hr A ' M * M " * 1 *H ; «* , : r.‘^v ; V ’ Ife'
4” *fHE aSgmtti* ?.=■ ■'' x ■ •■ -A xJISBr''/- JBBbL*
: * : Tj3jpP!i
the northern areas for agriculture, that a port of ship-
mere. would he required as an outlet for the produce,
which far exceeded all expectations. The Government,
therefore, constructed a line of railway from Port Pirie,
thei in its infancy, to Gladstone. This line was opened
for traffic in 1877. Immense quantities of wheat were
Extension North (by Mr, Moy). In 1880 the Gladstone
Gaol was erected at a cost of about £25,000. Circuit Court,
Local Insolvency Courts were opened in 1881. The first
section of a line to extend northward, that to Laura, seven
miles distant, was built and opened in 1884. Water con-
servation rapidly became an important consideration with
PRESENT DISTRICT COUNCIL OF GLADSTONE.
BACK—C. H. Lines, G. M. Black, M. H. Page.
FRONT—J. R. Potter, W. S. Bennett, C. Budge.
then brought to Gladstone from long distances, both north
and south. About this time the land on the west side of
the railway was resumed and laid out to constitute a new
township, which was named Booyoolee. Other private
townships sprang into existence, viz., North Gladstone
(laid out by Mr. Martin) and Moy town or Gladstone
the northern settlers, and as the result of numerous re-
presentations the Beetaloo Reservoir was constructed, and
in 1889 the pipes connecting Gladstone with the scheme
were laid.
From its inception until 1883 the local governing dis-
trict was known first as the District Council of Yangya,


and later, when enlarged, as the District Council of Boo-
yoolee; hut the pogress made by the town during the
period mentioned had been so rapid that the townspeople
petitioned, with the result the town was proclaimed a
Municipality in March, 1883.
Ornamental shade trees adorn the main streets, and
add to the general beauty of the town, through which
passes the Pisant Creek on its winding course to the Rocky
River. There is an abundant supply of good water from
the Beetaloo Reservoir, twelve miles distant, and the soil
and climate are suitable for most agricultural purposes.
There are many successful farmers in and around the dis-
trict. whose untiring efforts have in a large measure con-
tributed to the present prosperous outlook.
THE FIRST COUNCIL.
The first Council consisted of Messrs. Oliver Horner
(Mayor), J. Shepherd. J. Neil. H. Warren, J. I. Dixon,
W. E. Goodlifife, and R. Tilley. At the first meeting of
the Council Messrs. Warren, Tilley, and Shepherd resigned,
and Messrs. G. Weste, B. J. Knight, and P. N. Crutchett
were elected to fill the vacancies. Mr. W. Gardner was
appointed Town Clerk pro tern., and held the office from
March 12th to July 16th. 1883, followed by Mr. C. Provis
from July, 1883, to July, 1886; P. Murray from February,
1886 to December 31st, 1889; C. Budge from January,
1890, to December Ist, 1899; A. F. Cornelius from January,
1900, to February, 1905, when Mr. Budge again resumed
the position, which he has held up to the present date.
PAST COUNCILLORS.
Messrs. J. C. Adams, A. W. Adams, R. Adderley, S.
Altschuler, C. Budge, N. Browne, J. Brogan, T. T. Builder,
W. H. Bradley, E. B. Barclay, C. O. Bennett, H. C. Bennett,
J. R. Creber, Senr., A. C. Catt, E. Coe, C. A. Coe, H. Crabb,
P. N. Crutchett, J. Cheek, Dr. C. Chancellor, J. R. Creber,
Junr., J. I. Dixon, W. H. Deeble, J. Eley, W. L. Evans,
O. J. Fewster, G. Fisher, P. Fergusson, A. M. Flynn, W.
F. Goodlifife, E. H. Grafe, C. Goode, J. Growden, F. Grow-
den, F. C. Grubb, E. A. Gale, J. S. Goold, J. A. Gallasch,
S. Horner, F. Hussey, W. Hancock, W. G. Hudson,
M. D. Hann, G. Howard, R. A. Humphris, H. T.
Harslett, T. Hawke, L. G. Harris, F. T. Jefifery, R. James.
L. Jones, B. J. Knight, R. E. Lines, P. R. Lee, A. Leo,
H. W. A. Muller, Dr. R. McDougall, J. Milne, P. Murrie,
J. Myatt, J. W. McNamee, J. Neil, J. V. O’Loughlin, W.
Odgers, H. Osman, J. S. J. Pengelley, K. Polglase, \\. L.
Parsons, J. Quinlan. G. Rippin, F. Read, R. Sampson, j.
H. Sargent. R. Stewart, W. H. Stephenson, j. Shepherd,
W. J. Sims, J. Swift, T. H. Smallacombe, J. Tucker. W.
G. A. Thomas, R. Tilley, H. Twigg, T. von Bertouch, T.
Wainwright, W. Wauchope, G. Weste, H. Warren, T.
Wynes, W. Ward.
Present Council: —W. S. Bennett, J.P. (Chairman),
Messrs. J. R. Potter, M. H. Page, G. M. Black, C. H. Lines,
J. F. O’Neill, A. Leo, and C. Budge (District Clerk).
MAYORS OF GLADSTONE.
Messrs. O. Horner, 1883-1884; J. J. Bonnar, 1884-1885;
Dr. C. W. Hamilton, 1885-1886; B. J. Knight, 1886-1889:
Dr. R. McDougall, 1889-1891; A. C. Catt, 1891-1895: H.
Crabb, 1895-1896: D. Coe, 1896-1897: W. Hancock. 1897-
1902; J. R. Creber. 1902-1904; C. Budge, 1904-1905; P.
R. Lee, 1905: W. Odgers, 1906-1909; Dr. C. PL Chancellor,
1909-1910; J. H. Sargent, 1910-1912; ]. A. Gallasch, 1912-
1913; J. Eley, 1913-14; W. L. Parsons, 1914-1916: F. C.
Grubb, 1916-1917; E. A. Gale, 1917-1920; R. E. Lines.
1920-1921; E. A. Gale, 1921-1923; W. Odgers, 1923-1924;
C. O. Bennett. 1924-1927: H. T. Harslett, 1927-1929: J. W.
McNamee. 1929-1932; F. C. Grubb, 1932; W. S. Bennett.
J.P., 1936.
Two events of great importance to the town and dis-
trict took place in 1890, viz., the opening of the railway
from Snowtown and Blyth by the Earl of Kintore and
the construction of the sheep and cattle yards. The twn
having been built on an alluvial flat, surrounded by hills,
was subject to floods which caused great damage to pro-
perty and some loss of life, but the trouble was at last
overcome by the construction of a drain, to the cost of
which the Government contributed £6OO. This necessit ted
later the building of three bridges where the creek crossed
the streets. In 1908 the Municipality celebrated its silver
jubilee, and in response to a request to the late Viscount
Gladstone for a portrait of his illustrious father, the fol-
lowing letter was received together with the portrait,
which was unveiled by the late Mr. Seigmund Winkler,
the oldest resident.
Dear Sir —“I thank you for your letter of November
24th. Please convey to the Town Council my sincere
appreciation of their kindness in sending the album of


views of the town. It is very interesting, and I attach
ti ; t particular value because of its direct association
v s my father’s name. I shall watch with much hi-
re .st the development of your town. God speed it. I
will gladly send you a good photograph of my father.”
The Gladstone High School was opened in 1908.
Pro inent amongst the many well-known citizens who
h av e received their educational training there are Mr. R.
R. Chamberlain (Crown Prosecutor) and Mr. A. P. Sulh-
van vho was awarded the Victoria Cross during the Great
\y : Mr. G. Oswald, who was once headmaster of the
High School, also distinguished himself before he made
the supreme sacrifice.
The town is justly proud of its war record. Over
one hundred of its most promising young men volunteered
for active service, and of whom seventeen paid the supreme
sacrifice.
The construction of a new line from Salisbury to
Red Hill necessitated the conversion of the western narrow
gauge system to the broad, and this resulted in Gladstone
becoming a break-of-gauge station with the 5 ft. 3 in. gauge
line running to Adelaide and the 3 ft. 6 in. gauge line to
Port Pirie in the west. Broken Hill in the east, and Wil-
mington in the'north.
The present assessment is £26,194. Rates (general),
1/1 in the £ and special, 1/3 (town only). Total of £1,974.
Length of roads under Council control 27 miles; area of
parklands 190 acres. Capital value of ratable property
£522,900.
For many years the Town Council considered various
schemes for lighting the town, but none were considered
satisfactory. The problem was solved and a highly effi-
cient light and power supply provided when the Adelaide
Electric Supply Co., Ltd., extended its mains into the north
in 1926.
The first settlers in Gladstone district were public-
spirited enough to erect a public school by subscription,
which was later taken over and added to by the Education
Department when the old school became obsolete and a
new primary school built on modern lines was erected
in 1929 on the north parklands, presented to the Educa-
tion Department by the Town Council.
The foundation stone of the Institute was laid by the
late Mrs. Alfred Catt on October 18th, 1877, and the open-
ing ceremony was performed by the Postmaster-General
(Chas. Todd, Escp, C.M.G.).
It is interesting to note that the old Bible Christian
Church is now the Temple of the Freemasons.
Among well-known South Australians who formerly
resided at Gladstone are included Mr. C. J. Dennis, author
of “The Sentimental Bloke” and other famous publica-
tions, who spent some of his boyhood years in Gladstone.
Elis father was proprietor of the Gladstone Hotel. “Ernie
Jones, the “demon bowler,” was also once in the employ
of the “Areas Express” office. Bishop Moyes, of Armi-
dale, N.S.W., whose father was headmaster of the public
school, was resident for some years, as also were Sir Frede-
rick Young (subsequently Agent-General and Member of
the House of Commons), Hons. A. Catt, J. V. O'Loughlin,
Senator A. J. McLachlan, W. L. Parsons, M.H.R., Hon.
A. P. Blesing, C. Goode, and B. J. Kearney, Ms.P.


£ | f% y f'?A's //,*
O. HORNER. DR. C. W. HAMILTON. HENR~CRABB. W. HANCOCK.
(1883-84.) (1885-86.) (1895-96.) (1897-1902.)
•*••*• BONNAR ' W KNIGHT i c J. R CREBER
(1884-5.; ' (1886-89.) (.: 896-97.) (1902-04.)


R. LEE. , C. H. CHANCELLOR. J A. GAL LASCH. W. L. PA^
(1905.) (19C9-10.) (1912-13.) (1914-16.)
. mMs MsSk Jlb& * ' $ »ii HS&
W. ODGERS. J. H. SARGENT. J - ELEY. F. C. GRUBB.
(1906-09, 1923-24.) (1910-12.) _ (1913-14.) (1910-17, 1932-o3.)


E. A. GALE. R. E. LINES. C. O. BENNETT
(1917-20, 1921-23.) (1920-21.) (1924-27.)
( V ! ; ■
(1927-29.) (1929-32.)


«gps : ' ■ J
S .v.. ,^,
'|||j|
VC|P£S M
IIm
I 2rk ■ M
mm jmhbi ■*’ ! ,.
mm
-gm . Jfr
JL \
II ?&4>" MB
%x|l w
■■ ,4w.- I
j
■^0/:
ms^
CHAIRMAN W. S. BENNETT, J.P.
(District Council of Gladstone.)
Born at Tarcowie, 27th July, 1885,
and educated at the Tarcowie Pub-
lic School. Mr. Bennett has served in
the Gladstone District Council for 10
veai'. 8 of which he was Chairman,
and he has been a resident of the dis-
trict for 19 years. He is President of
the Caltowie Institute, the Caltowie
Football and Tennis Clubs, and Chair-
man of the School Committee. Busi-
ness. Farmer. He is a member of the
Masonic Lodge, and his sports are
howls. Home address, Caltowie.
PAST MAYOR JOHN WILLIAM
McNAMEE.
(District Council of Gladstone.)
Born at Kapunda, 20th June, 1876,
and educated at Christian Brothers'
College, Adelaide. Service in Council,
11 years, having" served 8 years as
Councillor and 3 years as Mayor. For
15 years he resided in the Gladstone
district, and is a retired railway offi-
cer, having" served for 30 years. He
is Past President of the Gladstone
Football and Cricket Clubs, and is also
a past member of the Gladstone High
School Council. Private address, Cross
Roads, Clarence Park.
PAST MAYOR THE LATE COLONEL A.
C. CATT, J.P.
(District Council of Gladstone.)
Born at Strathalbyn and educated
at the Strathalbyn Public School and
later at Prince Alfred College. When
19 years of age the late Mr. Catt en-
tered the employ of his father, who
was a storekeeper at Gladstone. In
1884 he took over the business on his
own account. In 1894 he commenced
business as an auctioneer and estate
agent at Gladstone. Farlv in his
career he took an interest in militaiv
affairs. In 1885 he received a com-
mission and was promoted to captain
in 1886, major in 1892, and lieutenant-
colonel in 1897. He retired from the
military in 1903 with the rank of
colonel. For 14 years he was a mem-
ber of the Gladstone District Coun-
cil, during which period he occupied
the Mayoral Chair for 4 years. In
1884 he was appointed a Justice of
the Peace. In 1916 lie began business
in Pirie Street as an auctioneer and
estate agent, and with his son (Mr. C.
S. Catt) and a son-in-law (Mr. C. R.
Sutton) built one of the leading auc-
tioneering, land, estate, and insurance
businesses in Adelaide- During the
war he acted as assistant censor in
the 4th Military District. The late
Colonel Catt was a Past President of
the Real Fstate Institute of South
Australia. He died at his home,
Church Road, Mitcham, 3rd October,
1930.
PAST COUNCILLOR H. WILLIAMS.
(District Council of Gladstone.)
Born at Belair, S.A., 1856, and edu-
cated at Coromandel Valley School.
He was a Councillor in the Gladstone
District Council for 15 years and for
20 years resided in the district. Mr.
Williams was formerly a farmer and
grazier, but is now retired. Home
address, 74, Fergusson Avenue, Myrtle
Bank.


COUNCILLOR G. M. BLACK.
COUNCILLOR A. LEO.
(District Council of Gladstone.)
Born at Burnside, 28th May, 1884,
and educated at the Rose Park Public
School. Mr. Black has served in the
Gladstone District Council for 13 years
and has been a resident of the dis-
trict for 30 years. Business, Farmer.
Home address, Gladstone.
COUNCILLOR J. R. POTTER
(District Council of Gladstone.)
Born at Caltowie, 26th October.
1881, and educated at Caltowie Pub-
lic School. Mr. Potter has served in
the Gladstone District Council for 14
years and has been a resident of the
district all his life. Business, Farmer.
He is a member of the Masonic and
Foresters’ Lodges. Home address.
Gladstone.
COUNCILLOR J. F. O'NEILL.
(District Council of Gladstone.)
Born at Mount Barker, 3rd August,
1895, and educated at the Mount Bar-
ker Public School. Mr. O’Neill has
served in the Gladstone District Coun-
cil for 1 year and has been a resident
of the district for 11 years. Occupa-
tion, Railway Employee. He is a
member of the Independent Order of
Oddfellows, Manchester Unity. Home
address, Gladstone.
(District Council of Gladstone.)
Born at Gladstone, 7th February,
1890, and educated at Gladstone Pub-
lic School. Mr. Leo has been a resi-
dent of Gladstone all his life, and is
in business as a Butcher. He is a
member of the Independent Order of
Oddfellows’ Manchester Unity Lodge,
and his sports are football, racing, and
bowls. Home address, Gladstone.
COUNCILLOR C. H. LINES.
(District Council of Gladstone.)
Born at Port Pirie. 4th August, 1883,
and educated at the Pirie West School.
Mr. Lines has served in the Gladstone
District Council for 11 years, and has
been a resident of the district for 17
years. Business, Farmer. Home ad-
dress, Gladstone.
COUNCILLOR M. H. PAGE.
(District Council of Gladstone.)
Born at Gladstone, 30th August,
1867, and educated at the Gladstone
Public School. Mr. Page has served
in the Gladstone District Council for
6 years and has been a resident of
the district all his life. Business,
Farmer. His sports are football, rac-
ing, and bowls. Home address, George-
town.
C. BUDGE, J.P.
(District Clerk, District Council of
Gladstone.)
Born at Plymouth, Devon, England,
26th May, 1861. and educated at the
National School, England: arrived in
Australia on the 20th September, 1883.
Mr. Budge has served in the Gladstone
District Council for 43 years and he
has been a resident of the district
for 50 years. Positions held: Town
Clerk, District Clerk, Councillor, and
Mayor. He is a member of the
Masonic, Independent Order of O ld-
fellows’, Manchester Unity, and An-
cient Order of Foresters’ Lodges, and
he has been President of the Nor-
thern Areas Football Association for
21 years, and was the first President
of the Gladstone Bowling C üb.
Home address, Gladstone.


*
District Council of Gumeracha
GUMERACHA HALL AND COUNCIL CHAMBERS.


oigL HI
its * * IV' , *j3 j9&Q
*‘ .- » W V...... w: •. * •• • ;
••■ • -
History of Gumeracha
This district was formed in 1935, by direction of the
Government Commission on Local Government areas, and
now comprises the whole of the old District Council area
of Talunga and the major portion of the old District Coun-
grain crops for hay with dairying were the principal
means of agriculture; of later years hay growing, except-
ing meadow hay, is not followed to any extent. Horti-
culture, however, has made much headway, and the
GUMERACHA WAR MEMORIAL AND HOSPITAL.
cil area of Para Wirra. The District Council Office is
situated at Gumeracha, 25 miles north-east of Adelaide,
and the District Council of Gumeracha has an area of
75,720 acres. The improved value of ratable property
within the district is £593,040, and the total annual value
of all rateable property is £35,582. The population of
the district at the last census was 3,084, and occupied
755 dwellings.
In the early days of the district cereal growing and
district produces large quantities of fruit and vegetables
for the local market, with a very marked advance in the
production of apples for export. The buyers of London
have a preference for apples produced in the district.
Mining is still carried on, and the Deloraine Mine is being
profitably operated.
The old days of coaching are history of the past, and
to-dav the district has an excellent up-to-date motor ser-
vice connecting it with Adelaide. Nearly all the main


'
M A vll
yjr f ' «.
- : ;;..S::' * :^*3
roads within the district are bitumized and give good facili-
ties for visitors to tour the district and see its wonder-
VICTORIA STREET, GUMERACHA..
ful scenery and magnificent gum trees.
A large portion of the old Para \\ irra district has
been taken over by the Government Waterworks Depart-
ment, and the whole area of the Millbrook Reservoir, which
covers approximately 11 square miles of countiy, and when
full contains 3,647,000.000 gallons, is in the distiict.
The following are the names of the men who helped to
pioneer the district and were representatives of the old
District Council of Talunga and Para \\ irra up to the time
when it was merged into the District Council of Gume-
racha :
TALUNGA.
Messrs. J. Cooke, R. Redman. W. Kelly, F. Kowald, J.
Bushell. T. Kuchel, H. Giles, W. Phillis, A. Neumann, L.
Prescott. H. P. Hein. H. Dawson, Senr. (5 years Chair-
man), J. Moore, J. Dunn, Win. Graff, J. Thyer, J. Kowald.
S. Allnutt, R. Gillard, C. R. Hoffman, A. Forrest (3 years
Chairman), F. Schneider. B. Walker, G. Hausler, W. Cor-
nish (4 years Chairman), S. Randell, W. Eglinson, F. Han-
naford (8 years Chairman). G. Dunn, A. Packer, J. Harvey,
J. Bramlis, T. Roberts, W. Hausler, L. Knight, T. O Dea,
R. Hanna. W. Fawcett, H. Rathjen, H. Martin. J. S. Ben-
nett, H. Chilcot, J. Mitton, J. Hooper. W. Turner, W. Hae-
veker, G. Kennings, Hanna Dawson (4 years Chairman),
G. B. O’Kethaway. W. Rathjen, S. Ridler. W. Jamieson (5
years Chairman), J. Morris, P. Mullins, F. Pflaum (3 years
Chairman), E. Hannaford, S. Hannaford, J. Monfries (5
years Chairman), W. Banks, G. H. Bennett (4 years Chair-
man), J. Gregory. W. Redden, W. James, T. Pflaum (3
years Chairman), R. Pool, A. F. Rathjen, F. H. Hannaford
(6 years Chairman), J. Porter, F. D. Lloyd (3 years Chair-
man), W. H. Cornish, F. W- Tippett, W. T. Sinkinson, G.
Lemmey, W. J. Hannaford, A. Pontt, V. A. Lee. T. J.
Hannam (4 years Chairman), J. J. Stephenson (3 years
Chairman), A. G. Kowald, W. Edgerley, R. W. Kerber.
PARA WIRRA.
Messrs. J. Coleman, J. Bowden, G. Harvey, T. Cole-
man, J. Jones, H. H. Blackham, T. Kent, A. Shillabeer
R. Rigand, A. Mclntyre, S. Farmer, J. Giddings, G. Logan
J. Levett, T. Williams, J. Lithgow, J. Wheaton, J. Hardy
W. Scott, J. Tippett, J. Caust, J. Trestraill, W. Ledgan. J
Johnston, W. Penna, R. Jolly, W. Bowman, J. Wilson, J
Woods, W. Featherstonehaugh, O. Philp, J. Telfer, \V
Hooper, F. Bowman, D. Powell. J. Symons. T. Flinn, E
A. Johnston. J. Alcorn. B. Mitchell. R. Powell, F. A
Thomas. J. J. O’Mahoney, E. J. Powell. F. Tippett, J
Joyce, J. Tregilgas, J. M. Fullston, D. H. Parker, H. H.
Colebatch, F. Buderick, F. Hoad, 1). H. Koster, G. J. Full-


stem (8 years Chairman), J. C. Symonds, H. Dillon, J. T.
Osborn, E. S. Stephenson (8 years Chairman), R. J. Pit-
man, G. V. Newman, M. F. Bags haw, E. E. Chapman,
T. W. Scott, E. Nobes, lb Ross, and H. H. Milar.
1 alnnga was proclaimed in September, 1853, and Para
Wirra in June, 1854.
The present Councillors are representing the District
Council of Gumeracha: —J. J. Stephenson (Chairman), R.
W. Kerber, G. Lemmey, j. Osborn, E. Pool, W. J. Redden,
and E. S. Stephenson. District Clerk, H, W. Norsworthy.


IjHpBjl
.i\ ®|
hmmKBF i
■ I
—
Mr-} f Wffil
»§&■.■ *
** &3PlLV \ : Ipppl;
■k: • mk$> ‘ *,
| ; I /** |M|
CHAIRMAN JOHN JAMES
STEPHENSON.
(District Council of Gumeracha.)
Born at Forreston, 12th May, 1883,
and educated at the Forreston Public
School. Service in Council. 9 years,
and 32 years a resident of the dis-
trict. Business, Orchardist. Mr. Ste-
phenson is a member of the Masonic
and Kersbrook Rechabite Lodges,
having held all offices in the latter
lodge, and has been Secretary of the
Forreston School Committee for 10
vears. Home address, Forreston.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM JOHN
REDDEN.
(District Council of Gumeracha.)
Born at Cudlee Creek, 26th January,
18/2, and educated at Millbrook Public
School. Service in Council. 12 years;
64 years a resident of the district.
Business, Fruitgrower. Home address,
Cudlee Creek.
COUNCILLOR EDWARD POOL
(District Council of Gumeracha.)
Born at Cudlee Creek, 18th Novem-
ber, 1884, and educated at the Mill-
brook Public School. He has served
the Council for 1 year and has been
a resident of the district all his life.
Mr. Pool is an Inspector of the Un-
employment Relief Council, and for
many years was a keen football and
cricket player. Home address, Bird-
wood.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE LEMMEY.
(District Council of Gumeracha.)
Born at Gumeracha, 25th December,
1880, and educated at Forreston Pub-
lic School. Mr. Lemrney has served
in the Gumeracha District Council for
5 years and has been a resident of the
district for 56 years. He is in busi-
ness as a Gardener and is a member
of the Independent Order of Rechabite
Lodge. His sport is rifle shooting.
Home address, Gumeracha.
COUNCILLOR REINHOLD WILHELM
KERBER.
(District Council of Gumeracha.)
Born at Springhead, near Mount
Torrens, on 18th September, 1877, and
educated at Springhead Public School.
Mr. Kerber served in the Onkapa-
ringa District Council for 14 years as
Councillor, being Chairman for 2 vears,
and he has also been in the District
Council of Talunga (now Gumeracha)


:
Ii il " K iWm
♦ ;
|pr-~ '.► • ;• •*'., *■
/
■iL »; sSB • , t
■ -: - $-*■' X €B / . ' X v1 |
I / m
9 t 1 |BhF ;^jrj*8|
IP JB i JE» • :aM^WS
K . m*M jgt. '}'s.>.Jl
'life’
IS I M|
f Jnri ppm 5
1 | Jf ■
, JL
t’-
■Bl $£%
for 4 years. He has resided in the
district all his life. Mr. Kerber has
been a lifelong' member of the Luthe-
ran Church. Home address. Mount
Tor r ens.
COUNCILLOR JAMES THOMAS
OSBORN.
(District Council of Gumeracha.)
Born at Kersbrook, 28th December,
1872, and educated at the Kersbrook
Public School. Mr. Osborn has served
the Gumeracha District Council for 20
years; he formerly represented the
Para Wirra District Council, which has
now amalgamated with the Gumeracha
District Council. He has been a resi-
dent of the district all his life. Busi-
ness, Orchardist. Mr. Osborn takes a
keen interest in Local Government
matters, and also horticultural polli-
nation of various fruit trees, which
he claims to be one of the first to ex-
periment in with success. Home ad-
dress, Kersbrook.
COUNCILLOR EDWARD SETH
STEPHENSON.
(District Council of Gumeracha.)
Born at Kersbrook, 28th July, 1887,
and educated at Forreston Public
School. Service in Council, 7 years in
the Para Wirra District Council, 6 of
which he was Chairman, and 1 year in
the Gumeracha District Council; 36
years a resident of the district. Chap-
man and Committeeman of Kersbrook
Institute and School Committees, offi-
cer of the Methodist Church Sunday
School, and member and Secretary of
the Soldiers’ Memorial Committee.
Mr. Stephenson has been a member of
the Kersbrook Rechabite Lodge for 40
years, holding the secretaryship for 12
years. Home address, Kersbrook,
HARRY WRIGHT NORSWORTHY, J.P.
(District Clerk, District Council of
Gumeracha.)
Born at Adelaide, 2nd January, 1866,
and educated at the Gumeracha Public
School. Mr. Norsworthy has been
District Clerk of the Talunga Dist ict
Council for 26 years, and since he
amalgamation he has served 1 yea as
the District f lerk of Gumeracha. le
has been a resident of the district all
his life, and is Chairman of he
Gumeracha Hall Committee. He has
been Secretary for many years of he
Gumeracha Independent Order of de-
chabites and 3 years District Offi er.
Mr. Norsworthy is interested in he
production and exportation of ap, ies
and pears to Great Britain and Ger-
many. Lie is interested in cricket.
Home address, Gumeracha,


District Council of Hallett


History of Hallett
The District Council of Hallett was named after Mr.
Alfred Hallett, who, at one time, was owner of the Wan-
diHa Station, north of Kooringa. The native name for the
place is "Willogoleeche."
Hallett is situated 120 miles by road and 117 miles
by rail north of Adelaide, and includes a fine stretch of
pastoral country, the total area of the district being 300
square miles or 193,280 acres.
The railway station is said to be one of the highest in
the State, and is 1,973 feet above sea level.
In 1906 there were 250 residents, and to-day there are
484, of whom 150 are ratepayers. Ihe capital value of
rateable property is £lBO,OOO and the assessment value is
£7,088, whilst a rate of 1/6 in the £ produces £532.
In the following list are the names of past members
of the District Council : —Messrs. C. W. Bowman, J. Mel-
rose, A. E. Webber, B. W. Pearce, J. Thomas, C. W. Gare,
G. S. liver, J. Collins, T. E. Richards, J. Wilks, A. Blight,
and J. Harris.
Present members of Council;— Chairman (C. W. Gare),
Councillors W. S. Murray, Sir John Melrose, E. M. Jen-
kins, A. J. Molony, J. J. L. Smith, E. R. Davies; District
Clerk, J. R. Clark.


District Council of Hawker


History of Hawker
Situated in the County of Blackford, 275\ miles north
of Adelaide, and named after the late Mr, T. C Hawker
M.P.
Hawker was proclaimed a District Council in 1888, and
has an altitude of 1,033 feet above sea level. An ample
water supply, under the control of the Conservator of
A aters, meets all domestic requirements, but the average
rainfall is light.
The district, which has an area of 300 square miles, is
divided into five Wards, as follows: —The Hundreds of
Arkaba, Barndioota, Wonoka, Wirreanda, and Yednalue.
The population is estimated at 975 persons, and the
dwellings number approximately 190. Hawker possesses a
number of fine buildings, and a War Memorial Hospital has
been erected in honour of local fallen soldiers.
Hawker is forty miles from Quorn and possesses a
somewhat warm climate. It is situated on the Alice Springs
Railway line, and its main industry is wool growing. At
one time a great deal of wheat was grown in the district,
but now most of the country is taken up by pastoral pur-
suits, mainly sheep raising.
The following is a list of past members of the District
Council: —Messrs. W. J. Pyman, P. Gillick, C. F. Hirsch,
M. B. Woods, G. Harris, G. R. Sanders, E. Clark. T. W.
Barnes, M. J. McAuley, T. Fitzgerald, B. Manson, J. Barnes,
W. King.
The following are present members: —Messrs. J. M.
Gillick, C. W. Hirsch, T. Ryan, C. A. Battersby. S. Stone,
and H. C. Pyman (District Clerk).


District Council of Kanyaka


M^A^r^iMk^ . . *- n * | ' *m w fM**&*
- , .a.~~ J iSl^^*5%|^ i^ li \ ; KrMmamisia,
* *7.i, : '..- , *jK- \%* ' ~S .•'«"*.:./ JT - clrX — I ”* .""■ * ■'.•’’*?••"'
*r» " it' *•* ■ j 1 '•• r '' j
i, / -. (K^tfaV jLu ' / . ‘^1%.
. t H a M I IppK
, * \ I *."' ’’t* V !*-'
History of Kanyaka
MEMBERS OF KANYAKA DISTRICT COUNCIL.


The District Council of Kanyaka adjoins the Corpora-
tion of Quorn, and the town of North Quorn is within its
ndaries. This is one of the most northerly' district
councils, and is situated 200 miles from Adelaide. It has
a train service daily from the city. In the early times
this locality was a camping depot for teams carting from
Port Augusta to Blinman mines.
The total area of this Council’s jurisdiction is about
70 000 acres, subdivided into seven wards, viz.:—Pichi
Ric i, Suburban, Palmer, Boolcunda, Kanyaka, Mundallio,
an Yarrah, The total road mileage is about 700. The
population is approximately 1.000.
The first assessment was made in 1887 at the rate of
in the pound. Mr. W. Scott was the first Chairman
an Mr. W. Meincke the District Council Clerk.
Running through the district is the Willochra Creek,
which empties into Lake Torrens. The Flinders Range
here has beautiful pleasure resorts, which are numerous
and well worth visiting during the months of spring.
Past members of Kanyaka District Council are:—
Messrs. S. B. Hobbs, J. H. Lehmann, H. H. Hilder, A. F.
Stokes, J. Read, T. Carling, P. Kelly, G. Easther, F. W.
Haeusler, J. Finlay, E. N. Twopenny, J. A. Francis, J. N.
Williams, O. O. Noll, O. McHugh. H. J. Matthews, F. W.
Hannan, J. E. Schnell, M. L. Cobiac, J. F. Reid.
The present Council is as follows; —Messrs. D. W.
Stokes (Chairman), E. N. Twopenny, J. H. French, H. W.
Wright, T. B. Trader, J. Sullivan, J. H. Chapman, M. G.
Williams (Clerk).




District Council of Karoonda


History of Karoonda
Ihe District Council of Karoonda was established in
1922. Other centres under its control are Borrika,
Wynarka, Marama, Perponda. There are 12 schools and
7 institutes in the district, also 7 ovals and recreation
grounds, 6 churches, 2 banks, and a resident doctor. The
distance by rail and road from Adelaide is 98 miles.
The main industry of the district is general mixed
farming. Karoonda has its own football, golf, and ten-
nis clubs, and is the centre of a railway system for districts
east of the Murray, lines branching to Peebinga, Wai-
kerie, Renmark. Loxton. and Tailem Bend. There is a
continuous telephone service throughout the district.
The assessment on unimproved land values (1936) was
£252,225.
Past members of the Council who have sat during its
existence are: —Messrs. W. S. Gray, J. E. Maycock, A.
W. C. Nelson, C. A. Male, J. Roachock, J.P, T. E. S.
Rockier, P. R. Gluyas, and A. Walker, J.P.
Members of the present Council are ;—Messrs. H. S.
Green (Chairman), A. Hood, J.P., E. C. Tilly, A. B. Dohnt,
C. L. Bruce, J.P., V. A. Luhrs, 1. J. Mickan, E. R. Miell,
J.P. (District Clerk).


District Council of Keyneton and
Swan Reach


History of Keyneton and Swan Reach
This district was proclaimed in September, 1933, under
the Local Government (Re-arrangements) Act, and com-
prises the original District of Keyneton and the greater
portion of the now dissolved District of Swan Reach.
The original District of Keyneton was named after the
late Mr. Keynes, who founded the district, and the old
District of Swan Reach was originally known as the Dis-
trict of Blanchetown.
Townships within this newly proclaimed district are;
—Keyneton, Sedan, Swan Reach, Towitta, and Nildottie,
and the district comprises the whole of the Hundreds of
Jellicoe, Bagot, Fisher, and Nildottie. There are three
Council Chambers within the district, and the central office
is situated at Sedan, which is a railway terminus and is
situated at the foot of the Barossa Ranges about 65 miles
from Adelaide. Keyneton, which is on the main Loxton-
Angaston-Adelaide road, nestles between the ranges, and
is about 55 miles from Adelaide by road. Swan Reach, on
the River Murray, is well known for its sporting and fish-
ing: attractions, and is about 80 miles from Adelaide.
c>
The original District of Keyneton first met in Decem-
ber, 1873, when Mr. J. Keynes was elected Chairman and
Mr. H. A. Fiebiger, Clerk.
The present Council is divided into four Wards,
namely:—Keyneton, Sedan, Towitta, and Swan Reach.
The population of the district is 1,150, and the ap-
proximate area 700 square miles.
Main roads within the district total 65 miles and dis-
trict roads 270 miles.
The improved capital value of ratable property within
the district in 1934-35 was £387,400.
The district is well watered by the River Murray,
bores and natural springs.
There are 320 dwellings and 705 ratable properties.
The first assessment made by the old District of Keyneton
was on £5,224 at 6d. in the £, which yielded £l3O. In 1934
a rate of 1/ in the £ was declared on an annual value of
£19,267, which yielded £963, whilst in 1935 a rate of 1/1
in the £ produced £1,048, on £19,359 annual value.
An unlimited supply of water is available at Sedan,
where a bore was put down by the Council some years ago.
The present Clerk is Mr. H. A. Zadow and the Assist-
ant Officer Mr. Harold L. Zadow.
Councillors of the former District Council of North
Rhine (changed to Keyneton) were: —Messrs. J. Keynes,
R. Graetz, W. Shannon, R. R. Keynes E. J. P. Kaesler, .
Heath, F. W. Rothe, H. A. Blenkiron, J. C. Graetz, F. W.
Hoffmann, G. A. Payne, F. W. Schultz, A. G. Tucker, and
T. Millyard. Past Councillors of the District Council of
Swan Reach at the time of its dissolution were :—Messrs.
E. W. Rog'ers, J. C. A. Kroehn, F. W. Zadow, V. Redman,
Herrmann, and Andriske.
Present Councillors of the District Council of Kevne-
ton and Swan Reach are:—Messrs. A. H. Evans (Chair-
man), H. G. Lillecrapp, H. A. Graetz. A. S. Mullighan, F,
H. Schultz, P. H. Zimmermann, and J. F. W. Horstmann.


HP >^ rMl IBPi * •
f X'H
; • l JHh|
* 4 ' jH&flj
;»./:•• I • -I
'
CHAIRMAN ARTHUR HENRY EVANS.
(District Council of Keyneton and Swan
Reach.)
Born at Keyneton, 3rd April, 1871,
and educated at Glenelg Grammar
School. He has served the Council
from July, 1920, and for the past 12
years has been Chairman. He has
been a resident of the district all his
life. Mr. Evans is Patron of the A.
H. and F. Society, Angaston, Keyne-
ton Cricket Club, Treasurer of the
Keyneton Congregational Church for
32 years, and President of the Key-
neton Golf Club. His business is Hor-
ticulture, and his hobby is floriculture.
Home address, “Range View,” Keyne-
ton.
PAST COUNCILLOR HEINRICH ERNST
ANDRISKE.
(District Council of Keyneton and Swan
Reach.)
Born at Cambrai, 7th February,
1887, and educated at Black Hill Pub-
lic School; 3 years’ service in Council;
26 > r ears a resident of the district. By
occupation Mr. Andriske is a Farmer.
He represented Mantling Ward in
Swan Reach District Council from
1925-9. Home address, Galga.
COUNCILLOR HEINRICH ALBERT
GRAETZ.
(District Council of Keyneton and Swan
Reach.)
Born at Sedan, 18th March, 1882,
and educated at Sedan Private School.
He has been a member of the Council
for 20 years, and a resident of the dis-
trict all his life, and has taken a pro-
minent part in all local affairs. Mr.
Graetz is a Trustee and Guarantor of
Keyneton and Swan Reach Institute,
and has for 10 years been a Commit-
teeman of the Finke Mission Board.
He is a very successful Farmer and
Grazier. Home address, Sedan.
COUNCILLOR ALBERT STUART
MULLIGHAN.
(District Council of Keyneton and Swan
Reach.)
Born at Keyneton, 10th June, 1868,
and educated at Towitta and Training-
College, Grote Street, Adelaide. He
has served 12 years as Councillor and
has resided in the district all his life.
Pie has very ably represented the rate-


I
I *' •
•' ■■ - . '' ’
> " -I™-'
pavers of the district, taking an active
part in all prominent matters. Flis
business is Farming and Grazing. For
a number of years he was a Commit-
teeman in connection with the Towitta
Sports. Home address, Towitta.
COUNCILLOR EDWARD HEINRICH
SCHULTZ.
(District Council of Keyneton and Swan
Reach.)
Born at Sedan, 22nd July, 1888, and
educated at Sedan Lutheran and Pine
Hut Public Schools ; 12 years’ service
in Council. He was for 48 years a re-
sident of the district. Mr. Schultz is
ably representing the ratepayers and
taking an active part in all vital ques-
tions. He is a Trustee and Commit-
teeman of the Sedan Institute. His
business is Farming". Mr. Schultz
takes a prominent interest in all local
sports and acts as judge. Home ad-
dress, Sedan.
COUNCILLOR J. F. W. HORSTMANN
(District Council of Keyneton and Swan
Reach.)
Born at Lobethal, 17th May, 1878,
and educated at that town. He has
been a resident of the district for 28
years and has been a member of the
Council since 1934. Mr. Horstmann
is a Committeeman of the Netherleigh
Hall, Chairman of Netherleigh School
Committee, a Trustee, Guarantor and
Committeeman for Swan Reach Insti-
tute, Councillor for Nildottie Ward in
the District Council. Business, Farmer
and Grazier. His sports are racing,
tennis, and cricket. Home address,
Netherleigh.
COUNCILLOR PAUL HERRMANN
ZIMMERMANN.
(District Council of Keyneton and Swan
Reach.)
Born at Monarto, 11th April, 188
and educated at Murray Bridge. He
has served 3 years in the Council, and
has been a resident of the district for
30 years. He is in business as a Gene-
ral Storekeeper, and his sports are
cycling and football. Home address
Swan Reach.
HEINRICH ADOLPH ZADOW, J.P.
(District Clerk, District Council of Keyneton
and Swan Reach.)
Born at Palmer, 11th January, 187 ,
and educated at Palmer, Hahndor;
and Adelaide. He has been District


■ft '^Hfe;;
■
l;i :
;
''' '''
Clerk for 34 years, and a resident of
the district for 36 years. Mr. Zadow
was also Clerk of the former Blanche-
town District Council for a period of
133: years. He very strongly advocated
the local telephone service and water
supply, and acted as Secretary for 18
years in connection with Sedan rail-
way facilities, and also held responsible
positions in various public organisa-
tions. He was appointed a Justice of
the Peace in 1902, and a Commissioner
for taking affidavits in the Supreme
Court in 1903. Home address, Sedan.
HAROLD L. ZADOW, F.A.8.1., J.P.
(Assistant District Clerk, District Council of
Keyneton and Swan Reach.)
Born at Angaston, 6th March, 1904,
and educated at Adelaide Higdi School
and University of Adelaide. Mr.
Zadow has 4 years’ service in Coun-
cil to his credit, and has been for 32
years a resident of the district. His
sports are tennis, cricket, and football.
He is Secretary of the Cricket, Motor
Cycle, and Football Clubs at Sedan,
also Secretary and Treasurer of Sedan
Recreation Park and Sports Commit-
tee. He was appointed a Justice of
the Peace in 1932. Home address,
Sedan.




Distnd Council of Kimba


History of Kimba
The District Council of Kimba was established in 1925,
and is situated 300 miles from Adelaide. The roads are
good to Perth and far West Coast.
The total length of roads under Council control run
into hundreds of miles. The area of Kimba District
Council is 900 square miles, and the population is 2,500.
. The capital \ alue of ratable propertv, including un-
improved land value, is £147.205. The malice lands were
opened in 1914 and the railway from Port Lincoln was
built the same year.
The main industry is wheat growing, and many
faimers have met with success. The average rainfall for
the past twelve years is about 12 inches. Kimba has a
wonderful winter climate, and there are some beautiful
drives through undulating country, also every facility for
good sport, including shooting. It is only one day’s
motor trip from Adelaide.
The buildings include Hall, Post Office. Banks, Stores,
etc. Kimba boasts of some very fine flower and vegetable
gardens.
The Council at present consists of the following gen-
tlemen —Messrs. F. R. Ferry (Chairman). C. G. Cant, 0.
F. Carlow, C. Freeth, A. C. Frick. H. R. Hogan, A. L.
O'Connor, J. A. Sampson, S. L. Wohling, Sid. B. Castine
(District Clerk), and B. Taylor (Overseer).


I III: I
||p
\ :/
I
CHAIRMAN FRANK ROY FERRY.
(District Council of Kimba.)
Mr. Ferry was born at Caltowie, 3rd
February, 1891. and educated at Cal-
towie, Balaklava, and Moonta Public
Schools. He has been a member of
the Council for 12 years and Chairman
since 1930, and has been for 19 years
a resident of the district. He is a
member of the Institute Committee,
the Hospital Board, and Chairman of
the Institute Building Committee.
Mr. Ferry is a pioneer settler in the
Kimba district. His sports are tennis,
cricket, and golf. Home address,
Kimba.
COUNCILLOR CLARENCE FREETH.
(District Council of Kimba.)
Born at Richmond, 16th May, 1892,
and educated at Sturt Street and Rich-
mond Public Schools. Mr. Freeth has
served in the Council for 8 years and
has been for 22 years a resident of the
district. He is a member of the Frank-
lin Harbour and Kimba Masonic
Lodges and his sports are cricket,
football, and tennis. Home address,
Kimba.
COUNCILLOR ARTHUR LOUIS
O'CONNOR.
(District Council of Kimba.)
Born at Kadina, 20th June, 1879, and
educated at his native town. Mr.
O’Connor has been a member of the
Council for 11 years and has been a
resident of the district for 23 years.
He is a pioneer of the Kimba district,
having resided at Kimba before the
surrounding land was open for selec-
tion. His sports are horse racing,
football, and athletics. He served in
the Boer War for 1J years.
COUNCILLOR HERBERT RALPH
HOGAN.
(District Council of Kimba.)
Mr. Hogan was born 17th June, 1888,
at Mallala, and educated at Port
Augusta West School. He has served
in the Council for 3J years and has
been for 25 years a resident of the dis-
trict. In business he is a Commission
Agent and he is a member of the
Masonic Lodge. Home address,
Kimba.
COUNCILLOR SYDNEY LEONARD
WOHLING.
(District Council of Kimba.)
Mr. Wohling was born at Gawler,
17th August, 1897, and educated at
Morgan Public School. He has served
in the Council for 10 years and has
been for 15 years a resident of the
district. He is a Farmer, and was one
of the early settlers in the Balumbah
district. His sports are cricket, foot-
ball, and rifle shooting. Home address,
Balumbah.
COUNCILLOR JAMES ALEXANDER
SAMPSON.
(District Council of Kimba.)
Mr. Sampson was born at Yanka-
-1 ilia, 7th March, 1884, and educated at
Myponga Jetty School. He has been
a member of the Council for 12 years,
6 of which he was Chairman, and for
20 years a resident of the district. Mr.
Sampson was one of the first residents
in the district, and the first Chairman
of the Council. His sports are racing
and rifle shooting, and in business he
is a Farmer. Home address, Kimba.


COUNCILLOR ALFRED CHARLES
FRICK.
(District Council of Kimba.)
Mr. Frick was born at Ouorn, 7th
May, 1879, and educated at Wilming-
ton. He has been a member of the
Council for 2 years and a resident of
the district for 18 years, being a
pioneer settler. He is also President
of the Progress Association of Buck-
leboo and in business is a Farmer.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES GRIFFIN
CANT.
(District Council of Kimba.)
Mr. Cant was born at Yankalilla,
sth October, 1885, and educated at
Delamere. He has served in the Coun-
cil for 3 years and has been for 25
years a resident of the district, being a
pioneer settler. In business he is a
Farmer, and his sport is racing.
COUNCILLOR OSWALD ERNEST
CARLA W.
(District Council of Kimba.)
Mr. Carlaw was born at Port Vic-
toria, Y.P., 10th April, 1887, and edu-
cated at Invercargill, N.Z. He has
served in the Council for 12 years and
has been for 22 years a resident of
the district. He is a member of the
Hospital Board and President of the
Kimba Institute. Mr. Carlaw is one
of the pioneer farmers of the district.
His sports are golf, cricket, and foot-
ball.
SIDNEY BARKLA CASTINE.
(District Clerk, District Council of Kimba.)
Mr. Castine was born at Auburn and
educated at Riverton Public School
and Prince Alfred College. He served
in the Auburn Council for 12 years, in
the Jamestown Council as Town Clerk
for 3 years, and 1 year at Kimba. His
sports are cricket, golf, and football,
and he enlisted for active service, but
was rejected and appointed Secretary
to the Repatriation Committee. When
residing at Auburn he was President
of Auburn Institute, Recruiting Officer
and President of the Agricultural
Bureau.
BENJAMIN TAYLOR.
(Overseer, District Council of Kimba.)
Mr. Taylor was born at Willunga,
10th April, 1876, and educated at Rey-
nella and Willunga Public Schools. He
served in the Minlaton District Coun-
cil for 3|- years, 8 years in the Port
Germein Council, and 3 years in the
Kimba District Council, and has been a
resident of the district for 3 years.
Mr. Taylor is a member of the Buffalo
and Oddfellows’ Lodges, and was for
25 years employed at the Wallaroo-
Moonta Mining Co. as Miner, Machin-
ery Attendant, and Contractor. He is
interested in most sports. Home ad-
dress, Kimba.


District Council of Kingscote


History of Kingscote
The District of Kingscote was proclaimed in 1888 and
forms part of Kangaroo Island (so named on account of
the numerus herds of kangaroos which inhabited the
island) Kangaroo Island was discovered by Captain Mat-
thew blinders during the voyage in which he traced the
southern coastline of Australia, from King George’s Sound
to Port Jackson.
• i en^s w hi°h led to the discovery and naming of the
island have been of great historical interest to Australia.
Ihe strait through which Flinders sailed was named “In-
vestigator Strait” after his vessel, and that which formed
his outlet was named Backstairs Passage.
A notable landmark on the island is Frenchman’s Rock,
and within the district of Kingscote there still remains the
o d cemetery (the first in South Australia) and the his-
torical mulberry tree, which was planted by the first
immigrants.
Kingscote was named after Mr. H. Kingscote a
dilector of the South Australian Company, in 1835. and
the township was the landing place of the first settlers in
South Australia on July 27th, 1836, and therefore con-
stituted the first township in the State.
The district has an area of 745,600 acres, with a capital
value ot £260.180, the assessment value being £l3 009 which
yields a revenue of £975 13/6 on a rate of 1/6 in the £.
he estimated population is 851 persons, who are accom-
modated m 183 dwellings. The total length of main roads
is 85 miles and district roads measure 150 miles.
Kingscote is situated approximately 85 miles from
Adelaide, communication with which is by steamer service
twice weekly.
On the Island there are no rabbits to worry the pas-
torahst and wheat farmer, no fox to raid the poultry yards,
and no wild dingo to make raids upon the sheep. Eucalyp-
tus oil has now a world-wide reputation, and the Eucalyp-
tus encorifolia narrow leaf tree —which grows in quan-
tities on the Island, contains 70 per cent, more eucalyptol
than those which grow in other parts of the State.’ A
manufactory for the distillation of the valuable oil has
been at work for some years. A native grass-tree, “the
yacca,” also flourishes well inland. Salt lakes are abun-
dant, and works have been established to carry on the
salt industry. The salt is of high standard.
The ornithologist finds the Island a happy hunting
ground, and parties of a dozen or more frequently go
specimen hunting and picnicking. They usually camp
for about a fortnight in the summer time, taking tents
with them. Some of the members study botany, con-
chology, and all the other “ologies” that are embodied in
the curriculum.
It is probable that some splendid gardens will soon
be seen, as the land is rich, deep, fertile loam, and as
Kangaroo Island is blessed with an almost perfect climate,
it will, no doubt, in a few years be a Paradise, and classed
as one of the fortunate isles.
The following is a list of past and present members
of the District Council: —Messrs. W. Jones, G. J. Bates,
A. T. Whittle, J. B. Anderson, T. Northcott, A. Reeves,
R. Chapman, G. A. Mitchell. J. B. Florance, A. Daw, G.
Gobell, J. H. Bates, A. C. Burgess, J. Turner, J. H. Carter,
R. Snell ing, J. Olds, J. N. Davies, V. H. F. Cooke. G. D.
Buick, A. Stirling, W. H. Strawbridge, D. C. Murray, E.
Burgess, W. L. Ayliffe, R. J. Loader, A. H. Anderson, .
S. Sheerlock, J. W. Daw, H. Partridge. W. H. Saunders,
P. T. Bell, H. Kinch. R. Wheaton, F. J. Wakelin, R. W.
Chapman, H. T. Noske. C. J. Bell, G. G. Ayliffe (Clerk)’
M. Smith (present Chairman), G. R. Ireland, F. G. Kase-
hagen, and John Hartley Daw.
EARLY HISTORY OF KANGAROO ISLAND.
The founders of South Australia began their enter
prise by invoking the blessing of Almighty God. Eight
\ essels wei e en route for this country in a strag'gling
procession at the same time, and the first to arrive was
the Duke of York, commanded by Captain Morgan, which
anchored in Nepean Bay, Kangaroo Island, on July 27,
1836, three days before Governor Hindmarsh left England.


There were on board Mr. Samuel Stephens, the agricul-
tural manager for the South Australian Company, 29
labourers, and eight passengers of independent means. A
magnificent rainbow appeared in the heavens, and was
taken as a good omen. At 2 p.m, the passengers were
landed, preceded by Mr. Stephens, who was the first of the
pioneer immigrant party to actually set his foot on the
shores of the Province they had come to establish. Then
all re\ rently joined in reading the Church of England ser-
vice, and Captain Morgen offered an extempore prayer
of thanksgiving for the prosperous voyage. No more
beautiful beginning could be recorded.
0 the same day that Captain Hindmarsh sailed an-
othei essel, the Lady Mary Pelham joined the pioneer
ship the island bay. The John Pirie did not arrive
until August 16th. There lived on Kangaroo Island at
this time a few sealers, whalers and convicts. Mr. Stephens
erected, where he landed in Kingscote Harbour (named
after a director of the company), a mud fort, mounted a
battery, and hoisted the Union Jack.
The Rapid, bearing Colonel Light (the Surveyor-
General) and his officers, arrived in Nepean Bay on August
20th. On board, besides the Colonel, were Lieutenant
Field, R.N., J. S. Pullen (afterwards Vice-Admiral), W.
Hill, Wm. Jacob, and G. Cloughton (surveyors), and Dr.
Woodforde. Next to come was the Cygnet, bringing
Mr. G. S. (afterwards Sir George) Kingston. Mr. B. T.
Finniss (assistant-surveyor), Captain Lipson, R.N. (har-
bour master), Mr. Edward Wright (surgeon), Mr. John
(afterwards Sir John) Morphett, and Mr. Powys.
Immediately upon his arrival at Kangaroo Island,
although in ill health, Colonel Light proceeded upon his
work of inspection with the thoroughness that was con-
sistent with his character. He applied to his duty as
pioneer the same comprehensive and penetrating judgment
that he had used in the army. He examined the locality
on the island chosen by Mr. Stephens, and quickly decided
that it was unsuitable to the purposes of the original and
central settlement. He sailed over to and named Rapid
Bay on the mainland, and then examined the east coast
of the Gulf St. Vincent, studying its local features, and
catching occasional glimpses of promising inland country.
But as Colonel Light and his officers always dipped
up salt water they considered, although they had found
an island, that they had not yet come upon Captain Jones’s
discovery.
Colonel Light now went further north, still searching
for Captain Jones’s river and harbour. Then he turned
back and met Mr. Samuel Stephens and Mr. Morphett,
with whom he proceeded into Rapid Bay. The Cygnet
had meanwhile reached Nepean Bay, and as its passengers
and stores had been landed at Kingscote Harbour, Colonel
Light gave instructions that they must be reshipped. He
had determined to use a part of the coast a few miles
south of Port Adelaide as a temporary depot until a site
more promising and offering superior advantages for a
harbour might be discovered. After the passengers and
stores were reshipped, the Cygnet moved up the coast and
anchored in a roadstead, which w T as named Holdfast Bav.
CHAIRMAN MERVYN SMITH.
(District Council of Kingscotc.)
Born at Sydney, N.S.W., 21st June,
1877, and educated at Sydney. Four
years’ service in Council and a resi-
dent of the district for 30 years.
Chairman of the Kingscote School
Committee, Progress Association, and
District Council, Secretary of the
Kingscote Institute, Island Masonic
Lodge, W.M., P.G.S., and Assistant
Returning Officer for State and Lede-
ral Elections, District of Kingscote.
for many years. In business he is a
Land Agent, Auctioneer, and General
Commission Agent. Mr. Smith takes
an active interest in all sports, and is
Secretary of the Kangaroo Island
Racing and Athletic Clubs. Home ad-
dress, Kingscote.


I . fPipife.
% jB|B
I m ■- ' hH|
I? r : -
. + li||||
;-. . ’ : . ...
PAST CHAIRMAN VINCENT HERBERT
FULLER COOK, J.P.
(District Council of Kingscote.)
Mr. Cook was born at Marden, April
2nd. 1867, and educated at Pulteney
Street Grammar School, under the late
Rev. William Moore. He has been a
member of the Council for 25 years
and a resident of the district for over
40 years. Mr. Cook was presented by
the Kingscote District Council with
the Chair he occupied for over a quar-
ter of a century as Chairman, the chair
being suitably inscribed with a silver
plate. He is a Justice of the Peace
and Registrar of Marriages. As a
Blacksmith he built the first buggy
and first scarifier and other farm im-
plements at Kingscote. He is a mem-
ber of the Island Masonic Lodge, a
Past Master and life member. He was
one of the founders of the Kanga-
roo Island Agricultural Society and
President for some years, and was
also made a life member of the society.
Mr. Cook, with the late Mr. J. Tume,
J.P., and Mr. P. T. Bell, was the first
to introduce Subterannean Clover to
the Island from Mount Barker, and to
have the first experimental plot on his
property at Kingscote. Home address,
Kingscote, Kangaroo Island.
PAST COUNCILLOR RICHARD
WILLIAM CHAPMAN.
(District Council of Kingscote.)
Mr. Chapman was born at Kings-
cote, Kangaroo Island, 21st March,
1880. and educated at Kingscote Pub-
lic School. He has been a resident of
the district for 55 years, and is a
Farmer and Grazier. He is fond of
all sports. Home address, Kingscote,
Kangaroo Island.
COUNCILLOR FRANK EDWARD
ROBERT KASEHAGEN.
(District Council of Kingscote.)
Born at Halifax Street, Adelaide, on
June 4th, 1894, and educated at Rich-
mond and Sturt Street Public Schools.
Mr. Kasehagen has served in the
Kingscote District Council for 2 years
and has been a resident of the district
for 16 years. He has been Secre-
tary for 11 years of the Kangaroo
Island A. and H. Society and 16 vears
Secretary of the Returned Soldiers’
League, Kangaroo Island Sub-Branch.
He is a member of the Island Lodge,
No. 54. S.A.C., Masonic, and of the
R.A.0.8., No. 138. During the Great
War Mr. Kasehagen served with the
12th Australian Infantry Battalion
with the A.I.F. "C" Company, and was
awarded the Military Medal. Home
address, Kingscote.
COUNCILLOR R. IRELAND.
(District Council of Kingscote.)
Born at North Adelaide, 21st May,
1903, and educated at Adelaide. Mr.
Ireland was elected a member of the
District Council in July, 1935, and has
been a resident of the district for 61-
years. In business he is a General
Commission Agent, and his sport is
cricket. Home address, Kingscote.
GERALD GLEESON AYLIFFE.
(District Clerk, District Council of
Kingscote.)
Mr. Ayliffe was born at Unley, 27th
October, 1873. and educated at State
School and T. C. Hayward’s School.
He was a Councillor from 1904 to 1 06
and from 1918 to the present date tas
been District Clerk and Overseer, de
has been a resident of the district
for 34 years. Mr. Ayliffe is a l ast
Master of the Island Masonic Lo ge.
and his sports are racing- and ifle
shooting. He served in the Boer War
as a Lieutenant with the sth Imperial
Bushmen s Corps. Home address,
Kingscote, Kangaroo Island.


District Council of Lacepede


History of Lacepede
Kingston is situated at Maria Creek, in the Lacepede
iiay District, m the south-eastern portion of the State
State.
Maria Cieek was so named after the vessel of that
name, which in the early days of the colony struck the
reet which is situated about five miles from the shore and
upon which now stands the Cape Jafifa Lighthouse—placed
theie to warn all vessels. After striking this reef the
Hana was beached on the shore of Lacepede Bay. Early
histoi y i ecords that the natives treated the wrecked crew
very kindly by conducting them to the then nearest set-
tlement, viz., the whaling station at the Bluff (or Rosetta
Head), situated about three miles south of what is now
T 01 1 \ ictor, one of the finest pleasure resorts in South
Australia.
In accoid with native tribal law's, these natives refused
to conduct the ship-wrecked crew further than their tribal
boundary on the Coprong; thereupon an altercation ensued,
resulting in the natives murdering the whole of the whites.
The leaders of these natives were subsequently strung up
m the Coorong by Major O’Halloran and his party. This
action, although condemned at the time, proved to have a
decided good moral effect upon the natives, for thereafter
all other travellers in those parts were unmolested.
Kingston was named after Sir George Strickland
Kingston, who was the father of the Hon. Charles Came-
ron Kingston, one of the foremost politicians of his day.
Messrs. Kingston and Cooke owned considerable areas of
land, and each of them had townships sites surveyed. The
Township of Kingston became a very busy place, for it was
then the main shipping port for the whole of the south-
eastern part of South Australia, including that of Tatiara
and the Wimmera districts across the Victorian border.
It was then predicted that Kingston would in time become
the Liverpool of South Australia.
The advent of the completion of the overland line
from Adelaide to Melbourne has for the time shattered
that prediction, and Kingston has suffered a depression
for many years. However, it is generally thought that
the day is not far distant when the town and district will
come into their natural rights as an overseas port. The
rapid extension and development of the River Murrav
irrigation areas, together with the completion of the drain-
age scheme for this part of South Australia, the immense
area which will then be available for extensive cultiva-
tion will be capable of carrying a very large population
The principal buildings in Kingston are Post Office,
Court House, School, Institute, Council Chamber, and I cal
banks, and in honour of the local fallen heroes a hand-
some Soldiers’ Memorial has been erected adjoining the
Council Offices.
Lacepede District Council controls an area of
zoF£n^L mately 1,165 sc l uare miles > with a capital value of
£218,960, and the assessment value is £10,948. The esti-
mated population of the town and district is 850 persons
of whom 270 are ratepayers.
~ Fallowing is a list of past and present members of
tLe District Council —Messrs. J. Gall, T. Redman. R. Flint,
H. \\ . Morris, H. A. Morris, A. Kelly, J. A Kelly I I
Jarman F. W Barnett, Joseph Gall, J. Winter. D. Cla A
T* a a/t V J a /* son ’ Ryder, P- J- Patterson,
T. A McCu lock W. F. Tapfield, E. D. Goode, T. J. Go. le,
H. Ihredgold, W. Martin.
Present Council-Messrs. T. J. Goode (Chairman),
L. D. Goode, H. C. Flint, A. Smith. B. F. Clarke. C F.
W I nn tt V J’i , Doyle ’ W - England, R. O. Lloyd, and P.
W. Flint (Clerk).


WP
; ' | :
'ly® ..
mk *
-mi gS&^j$c.
,|| '!$M-
W jfc:
;
CHAIRMAN THOMAS JOHNSTON
GOODE.
.District Council of Lacepede.)
Mr Goode was born at Kingston,
September sth, 1887, and educated at
Kingston and Adelaide. He has been
a member of the Council for 8 years, 4
rears of which he has been Chairman,
and a resident of the district all his
life. Home address, “Wangolina,”
Kingston.
COUNCILLOR EDWARD DOUGLAS
GOODE.
(D.strict Council of Lacepecle.)
Mr. Goode was born at Kingston,
18th August, 1885, and educated at
Kingston Public School and Way Col-
lege, Adelaide. He has been a mem-
her of the Council for 5 years and for
50 years a resident of the district. Mr.
Goode has held various public posi-
tions, and has followed grazing pur-
suits all his life in the South-East and
Lower North. During the war he
served for 3J years with the A.T.F.
in Egypt and France. Private address,
“The Snuggery,” Kingston, South-
East.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES FREDERICK
BARNETT.
(ILstrict Council of Lacepecle.)
Mr. Barnett was born at Kingston,
6th July, 1882, and educated at Reedy
Creek Public School. He has been a
member of the Council for years
and a resident of the district all his
life. He is President of the Kingston
A.P. and H. Society and the Kingston
Sub-Branch R.S.A. Mr. Barnett is a
Sheep Farmer and has taken part in
all local sports in the district. Dur-
ing the war he served for 44 years
with the Australian Light Horse on
active service at Gallipoli, Egypt, and
Palestine. Home address, Bunker's
Hill, Reedy Creek.
COUNCILLOR RICHARD OLIVER
LLOYD.
(District Council of Lacepede.)
Mr. Lloyd was born at Mount Ben-
son. 22nd January, 1870, and educated
at Lowrie’s Hill School. He has
served in the Council for 7 years and
has been for 66 years a resident of
the district. In business he is a Bark
Grower. His present address is “Bar-
ooka,” Kingston.
J. M. LAWRIE.
(Overseer of Works, District Council of
Lacepede.)
Mr. Lawrie was born at Millicent,
23rd September, 1878, and educated at
Kingston Public School. He has
served in the Council for 8 years, and
has been for 48 years a resident of
the district. Home address, Kingston.


Goldsbrough Mort and Company Limited
OUR HISTORY
’"THE rise of the great pastoral industry of Australia has been the
subject of historians and novelists for a number of years, and the
new medium of talking pictures has also turned to it for inspiration.
It is a magnificent story of a century of romantic endeavour, and
the part played in it by the great wool broking houses of the
Commonwealth cannot be overlooked. One of the greatest of these
houses, viz., our Company, began almost as soon as the pastoral
industry itself.
Thomas Sutcliffe Mort, who statue is in Macquarie Place, was
born in England in 1816, arrived in Australia in 1838, and died in
1878. He was a pioneer of Australian resources, a founder of Aus-
tralian industries, and established our wool market in Sydney in
1841. It is fitting, therefore, tha,t his statue should stand, as it does,
overlooking the Sj r dney Wool Exchange, and in such close proximity
to the office of our Company in which his name has figured so
prominently since the year 1888.
Richard Goldsbrough was the pioneer of the sale of wool by
auction in Victoria. Arriving from England, he began business in
a little building at the corner of William Street and Flinders Lane,
Melbourne, in 1848.
Richard Goldsbrough had to contend with strenuous opposition
from London wool selling firms, which were reluctant to see a wool
selling firm start in the new colony. But Richard Goldsbrough
persisted, and the large wool clips of the early fifties placed the
little business on a firm footing. In 1853 a new building was
erected at the corner of Market and Flinders Streets, and, with a
view to the expansion of activities, an amalgamation took place
between Goldsbrough, Row and Kirk.
The London wool brokers continued to oppose the new firm,
but it still grew, and its influence was manifested in the improve-
ment in the Victorian flocks through the importation of the famous
French Imperial Stud and Rambouillet Merino Rams. Richard
Goldsbrough saw, in his generation, that constant flock improve-
ment was a necessity, hence he supported those early “ram
schemes” to the best of his undoubted ability. So far had the firm
progressed by 1867-68 season that it sold 40,000 bales of the total
Victorian clip of 113,469 bales that year.
In 1886 Richard Goldsbrough died, but the Company he had
created carried on, and two years later purchased the whole of the
freehold and leasehold premises, goodwill and plant of Mort and
Company, Limited, Sydney, the firm issuing new capital and becom-
ing Goldsbrough, Mort and Company, Limited.
In 1922 Harrison, Jones and Devlin, Limited, of Sydney, was
purchased, and two years later Bagot, Shakes and Lewis, Limited,
of Adelaide, one of the oldest stock, station and woolbroking com-
panies in South Australia was also acquired; the latter Company
had in 1922 purchased the business of Luxmoore, Chapman & Co.,
wool and skin brokers. Bagot, Shakes and Lewis, Limited, was
commenced with the firm of Liston & Shakes, situated at Kapunda,
South Australia. John Lewis—afterwards Hon. John Lewis, C.M.G.
joined the firm of Liston & Shakes in 1876, who then became
known as Liston, Shakes and Lewis, carrying on business at Bui a,
South Australia. In 1885 Mr. Liston resigned. Mr. Lewis and
Mr. Shakes carried on the business until 1888, when the old estah
fished firm of E. M. Bagot & Company was taken over by the
formation of the Company, known as Bagot, Shakes and Lewis,
Limited, with a capital of £65,000. In 1906 Luxmoore, Dowling and
Jeffrey, Limited, amalgamated with the Company (they handled
17,296 bales of wool that year, compared with 74,312 handled in
1935/6 season in South Australia), and subsequently they purchased
the old Savings Bank premises in King William Street and converted
them into offices, and built an up-to-date wool store at Port Adelaide
and a hide and skin store at Light Square.
To-day Goldsbrough, Mort and Company, Limited operates
throughout all the mainland States of the Commonwealth, act g
as pastoral financiers, wool and produce brokers, stock and station
agents, and merchandise salesmen. It has also extensive pastoral
interests in Queensland and New South Wales. In 1862 the mass e
blue stone premises, now so well known in Bourke Street, Meibom : e,
were erected, and have been occupied as the Head Office of the
Company ever since. The Company also owns very extensive i re-
mises in Sydney, Perth, Brisbane, and Adelaide.
Goldsbi ough, Mort and Company, Limited is an Australian Com-
pany with a subscribed capital of £'2,400,000 registered and controlled
in Australia, where most of the shareholders reside, and the position
the Company occupies to-day has been built up by untiring efforts
during the ninety odd years of its existence to render service to
the man on the land, and clients and pastoralists generally are
invited to freely avail themselves of this service.


District Council of Lameroo


History of Lameroo
Lameroo, in the Pinnaroo District, was adopted as the
name of the township at a meeting of the early settlers
in 1904. It was suggested by an inspector of post offices,
who had spent some time in the Northern Territory, where
there is a fine beach named Lameroo. After the town
had been gazetted it was unfortunately discovered that
the word was associated with an unpleasant meaning,
although the fact was unknown to anyone concerned in
its adoption in the newly settled colony.
The District Council of Lameroo is situated 1384
miles from Adelaide, and has an area of 417.280 acres. The
number of residents in the district totals 1,527, of whom
408 are ratepayers.
A total rate of 1/1 in the £ for Bews Ward, Cotton
and Price Wards 1/-, and Township of Lameroo 2/-, yields
an annual revenue of £2,335, and the capital value of rat-
able property in the district is £884.140; the assessment
value amounts to £44,207.
The District Council of Lameroo, named District Coun-
cil of Pinnaroo till 1919, and the original Council of the
Pinnaroo District, was proclaimed 28th October, 1908.
First Council: —J. F. C. Kernick (Chairman), Coun-
cillors M. McCabe, F. H. Edwards, P. M. M. Shannon, W.
Needs, F. W. Eime, W. Mitchell, D. Leahy, W. W. Spicer,
and A. Townsend (Clerk and Overseer).
The following have occupied the Chair : —F. J. G. Ker-
nick. 1908 to 1910; F. W. Eime, 1910 to 1912; W. Mitchell,
1912 to 1914; W. W. Spicer, 1914 to 1915; W. Mitchell,
1915 to 1916; D. F. Bowman, 1916 to 1922; W. J. Mitchell,
1922 to 1925; R. F. Harding, 1925 to 1929; C. W. Bundle,
1929 to 1930; R. C. Pocock, 1930 to 1936.
Following is a list of the names of past and present
Councillors : —J. J. Watkins, W. J. Webb, J. Gray, W. H.
Kelly, D. F. Bowman, J. Gilfillan, J. Docking, A. J. Beelitz,
J. B. G. White, F. L. Matthias, W. R. Goldsworthy, W.
Spencer, J. F. G. Kernick, W. Needs, P. M. M. Shannon,
W. H. Bowman, F. W. Eime, W. J. Mitchell, D. Fern, W.
L. McDonald, M. A. O’Donohue, A. J. McAvanev, A. H.
Wilkins, R. C. Whittlesea, C. W. Bundle, J. H. Cockshell,
J. H. C. Lillecrapp, R. F. Harding, G. W. Prizibilla, D.
A. Orwell, H. J. French, A. G. Ellis, J. L. McCann, F. G.
Brinkworth, W. T. Polkinghorne, A. D. Brooker, R. C.
Pocock, F. R. Koch, W. D. Hammond, H. H. Perrin (Clerk).


1^
JL /
■■ (W /
Wwi
j
CHAIRMAN ROY CECIL POCOCK.
(District Council of Lameroo.)
Born at Morphett Vale, Bth May,
1887, and educated at Reynella Public
School, Adelaide Agricultural High
School, and Roseworthy College. Mr.
Pocock was elected as a Councillor for
the Lameroo District Council in 1929,
and appointed Chairman in 1930. He
took over virgin land in Lameroo in
1909, and has carried on business as
a Farmer in the district from that date.
He was a gold medallist and diploma
holder of Roseworthy Agricultural
College in 1906. In 1917 Mr. Pocock
married Miss Euphemia Thomson, of
Clover Hill, Georgetown. He is a Past
Master of the Lameroo Masonic
Lodge, and a member of the Indepen-
dent Order of Oddfellows, Manchester
Lnity. Home address, Lameroo.
COUNCILLOR F. R. KOCH.
(District Council of Lameroo.)
Mr. Koch is the youngest son of Mr.
John Koch, J.P., and was born at Kain-
ton, Yorke Peninsula. His grand-
parents were old pioneers of South
Australia, arriving here in the year
1850 and settling at Hope Valley, and
finally at Sheoak Log, near Freeling.
His father was one of the original
pioneers of Cunningham, Yorke Penin-
sula, and subsequently moved to Kain-
ton. When the Lameroo area was sur-
veyed he took up land there, retiring
in Adelaide. When Mr. Koch finished
his schooling at Walkerville he re-
turned to Lameroo to assist his
brothers, who were pioneering that
country. He also attended the Rose-
worthy Agricultural College to further
his knowledge of agriculture, and on
his return from abroad after the Great
War acquired land at \\ ilkawatt, Hun-
dred of Cotton, and is still actively en-
gaged in agricultural pursuits in that
district. During the Great War he
served with the A.F.A. in France. Mr.
Koch has represented the southern
half of the Hundred of Cotton for the
past 4 years in the District Council
of Lameroo. Home address, Wilka-
watt.
COUNCILLOR ADOLPH JOHANNES
BEELITZ, J.P.
(District Council of Lameroo.)
Born at Freeling, 23rd November,
1880, and educated at the Freeling
Public School. Mr. Beelitz has served
in the Lameroo Council during the
years 1911 to 1913, and from 1929 to
1936, and has been a resident of the
district for 30 years. He was ap-


■
LsWK* •
*J| -‘*^
WL St ' wSs:
fm H v:
1
%>■ I
/ f^J:
—^ijSSSSSiSSSSSiSSSSSSS^
HSm * *
ll, «***. *■■ ■
j£
' IRBnp
Ift miff
■Hml Bi &
pointed a Justice of the Peace in 1925,
is Secretary and Trustee of Parrakie
Institute, and Trustee of the Parra-
kie Sports Ground. His sports are
tennis and bowls. Home address, Par-
rakie.
COUNCILLOR CYRIL WENTWORTH
RUNDLE.
(District Council of Lameroo.)
Mr. Rundle was born at Tanunda,
9th July, 1884, and educated at the
Tanunda Public School and Hahndorf
College. He is a pioneer of the Lame-
roo district, being a resident since
1908. Mr. Rundle was Chairman of the
Lameroo District Council for 2 years,
and has been a member for 16 years.
He follows agricultural pursuits, and
has great faith in the Lameroo dis-
trict as a wheat-growing country.
Home address, Hundred of Allenby,
Lameroo.
COUNCILLOR DAVID ALFRED
ORWELL, J.P.
(District Council of Lamcroo.)
Mr. Orwell was born at Kadina, 24th
June, 1870, and educated at Moonta
and Port Augusta West Public
Schools. He has been a member of
the Council, for 12 years and a resi-
dent of the district for 28 years. He
is a member of the Grand United Order
of Oddfellows' Lodge, and in business
is a Farmer. Home address, Box 40,
Lameroo.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM DAVID
HAMMOND.
(District Council of Lameroo.)
Born at Balaklava, 31st July, 1883,
and educated at Owen Public School.
Mr. Hammond has served in the Lame-
roo District Council for 2 years md
has been a resident of the district
for 29 years. He is Secretary of
Geranium School Committee, and a
member of the Geranium Institute
Committee. He is a member o. the
Freemasons’ Lodge and in business is
a Farmer, Home address, Geranium.


t • * *
*
i * /
A
HERBERT HENRY PERRIN, J.P.
(District Clerk, District Council of Lameroo.)
Born at Berta, N.S.W., 14th March,
1882, and educated at Watervale Pub-
lic School and Stanley Grammar
School. Mr. Perrin has served in the
Lameroo Council for 17 years and has
been a resident of the district for 20
years. He is Secretary of the Lame-
roo Hospital, Chairman of the School
Committee, and President of the In-
stitute. He was appointed a Justice
of the Peace in 1921. Mr. Perrin is
a Past Master of the Lameroo Masonic
Lodge, and his sport is bowls. During
the Great War he served abroad with
the A.I.F. from 1916-1918. Home ad-
dress, Lameroo.




District Council of Laura


History of Laura
. Laura was made a Corporate Town in the year 1882.
On May Ist, 1932, the Corporation of Laura and the Dis-
trict Council of Booyoolie amalgamated, and is now known
as the District Council of Laura, and named after
Mrs. Laura Hughes, wife of the owner of Booyoolie
Station. It is situated 144 miles from Adelaide, and is
acknowledged to be one of the most pleasant
and beautiful places in the North. Having a
good rainfall and climate, the fertile soils yield a boun-
tiful harvest to farmer, squatter, and horticulturist. The
Booyoolie Estate which adjoins Laura on the south, and
through most of which the Rocky River wends its way,
is composed of beautiful lucerne flats. Right through this
country are grand old gum trees, and these combine with
the lucerne and grass paddocks to make the scenery very
enchanting. In the Flinders Range, on the west, the
Beetaloo Reservoir lies, and the water therefrom is dis-
tributed for many miles, even down to Yorke’s Peninsula.
To the east and north-east the Caltowie and Apilla coun-
try extends, practically the whole of which is fine wheat
land. Five and a half miles north one comes to Stone Hut,
which was one of the earliest stopping places in the coach-
ing days. At Beetaloo, in the Flinders Range, and also
adjacent to Laura itself, there are many fine gardens and
fruit plantations, and the opportunities for further intense
cultivation are almost unlimited. For scenic beauty and
soil fertility combined, it would be hard to find a better
stretch of country in this State.
The township itself, largely due to far-sighted policy
in its early days, is plentifully supplied with fine trees and
parklands. A portion is set aside as a sports ground,
where cricket, football, tennis, croquet, and hockey are en-
joyed by their respective votaries. The public buildings
consist of Town Hall, Masonic Hall, Court House, State
School, and five churches. Two banks are represented,
viz., the Union and the F.S. and A. The former premises
have been lately remodelled, and is probably one of the
finest banking premises in the North. The District Coun-
cil of Laura also has its Council Chambers in Laura, this
being the centre of the district. The travelling public
find eood accommodation at the two local hotels.
The industries consist of an up-to-date ice works, flour
and chafif mill (in which is installed the very latest
machinery), a printing office (exceptionally well equipped
with the latest types of machines), and an electric light
and power house which supplies the town with these
modern conveniences. In the Main Street has been erected
a very handsome broken marble column to the memory
of those men who went from this town and district and
gave their lives in the Great European War. The Govern-
ment Tourist Bureau have recently inaugurated a Northern
Tourist Trip, in which Laura and the Booyoolie district
are included as specially worth visiting by people from
other States.
The area of the district consists of the whole of the
Hundred of Booyoolie, and the population is estimated at
1,062 persons.
The names of present members of District Council are:
—Councillor John Leo Kennedy (Chairman), Councillors
George Edwin Cleggett, Sylvester Joseph Condon. August
Johannes Knauerhase, Victor Walter Blesing, Charles
Amey, Reginald H. Bristow-Smith (District Clerk).
THE FIRST BRIDGE.
The first bridge over the drain was officially opened on
May 17th, 1905, the southern portion being in the area
under the jurisdiction of the Laura Town Council, and the
northern in that of the District Council of Booyoolie. which
local government bodies were merged under the name o
District Council of Laura in 1932. Mr. W. J. C. Cole,
editor “Laura Standard” at the time, and later Membe
for Stanley in the House of Assembly, who still retains an
interest in the town and district’s welfare, was at the
time Mayor of Laura, and declaring the bridge open
for traffic was performed by the Mayoress (Mrs. W.
C. Cole), since deceased.
Mr. V illiam Wilson, who in January, 1890, was elected
Chairman of the District Council of Booyoolie, an office
he filled for 22 years, was Chairman on the occasion of
the opening of the bridge.


Mr. W. H. Campbell, when the bridge was opened,
filled the offices of Clerk and Overseer of the Laura Town
Council and District Council of Booyoolie.
Mr. W. J. C. Cole, J.P., has courteously supplied the
following “write up of the opening ceremony of May
17th. 1905:
'At the end of the first year (1892) I resided in
ira (after taking over the business and editorship of
the Laura Standard’) there were severe floods, which did
considerable damage to properties all over the town.
Provision was made against further trouble of this kind,
hut the town was not immune to accumulation of flood
waters at different periods. During his last year of office
as Mayor the late Mr. G. I. Bilks, J.P., took advantage of
isit by the late Hon. A. Catt to Laura to impress him
h the necessity of a new bridge at North Laura. Mr.
interviewed the Government, and stated that the
ira Corporation and Booyoolie District Council were
each prepared to bear a quarter of the cost. This weighed
considerably with the Government, and they decided to
construct a new bridge. The tender of Mr. T. C. Bailie
was accepted, during my first year as Mayor, in Decem-
ber, 1904, for £3BB 8/2. The proportion of the cost to
the Laura Corporation and the Booyoolie District Council
was each £B3 10/. The bridge was to be 50 feet long in
two spans. It was afterwards felt that the bridge should
be longer. Meetings of ratepayers were held, and it was
decided to approach the Government for an extension of
25 feet, the Laura Corporation agreeing to pay half the
cost. As a result of my interviews, the Government
agreed to this—the extension costing £166, the Corpora-
tion’s share being £B3. The Government agreed to my
later suggestion that the latter sum (£B3) should be
deducted out of the Main Road Grants for two years.
“The bridge was opened on May 17th, 1505. Mrs. W.
Wilson (wife of the Chairman of Booyoolie District Coun-
cil) performed the ceremony of naming the bridge (Vic-
toria Bridge), in honour of our lamented Queen Victoria,
and the Mayoress (Mrs. W. J. C. Cole) declared it open
for traffic. Others who took part in the proceedings were
the Mayor (Mr. W. J. C. Cole, J.P.), and Messrs. G. I.
Bills, J.P., G. H. Walter, W. Bills, and the Chairman of
the District Council (Mr. W. Wilson, J.P.). The Laura
School sang ‘The Song of Australia.’ ”


' 'i" ; ** .^B|-
/sBr-
W. '# - *
% jjf ’••• ;' IT
# | jjgMiL '
PAST MAYOR WILLIAM JAMES
COOPER-COLE J.P.
(Corporation of Laura.)
Mr. Cole was born on the 14th
October, 1858, at Williamstown, S.A.,
and educated at J. H. Potter’s Classi-
cal and Commercial School, Kapunda.
He served in the Laura Corporation
for 8 years. 6 years of which he was
Mayor, and from 1910 to 1918 was a
member of the House of Assembly in
the South Australian Parliament for
the districts of Stanley and Port Pirie.
Mr. Cole has been for 68 years a mem-
ber of the Rechabite Lodge, and is
P.D.C.R. of the South Australian Dis-
trict. He is also a Past Master of
Areas Masonic Lodge, Laura, and has
been a local preacher of the Metho-
dist Church for over 60 years. While
in Parliament he was a member of
the Royal Wharves Repurchase Com-
mission, Main Roads Commission, and
Second Railways Committee. He has
also been a Justice of the Peace for
about 30 years. In sport he is very
fond of cricket, and his present address
is 71 Richmond Road,- Westbourne
Park.
COUNCILLOR SYLVESTER JOSEPH
CONDON, J.P.
(Uistrict Council of Laura.)
Mr. Condon was born at Port Pirie,
22nd February, 1895. and educated at
St. Mark’s Catholic School, Port Pirie.
He has served in the Corporation and
District Council of Laura for 5 years
and has been a resident of the dis-
trict for 8 years. In business he is a
Hotel Manager, and Chairman of
Directors of W. H. Moyle & Co., cor-
dial manufacturers, butter exporters,
and ice and ice cream merchants Port
Pirie. He is President of the Laura
Commemoration Day Sports, Secre-
tary of the Laura Coursing Club, and
during the war served abroad for 4
years with the A.I.F. Home address,
Laura.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE W. SMITH
(District Council of Laura.)
Born at Laura, 27th January, 1889,
and educated at Laura Public School.
Mr. Smith has served for 12 months
as Councillor, representing White Cliff
\\ ard. in the Laura District Council,
and has been a resident of the district
for 33 years. He is a member of the
Masonic and Rechabite Lodges, and
has been Captain of the Laura Foot-
ball team for 5 years. Mr. Smith
served with the 11th Ligdit Horse
Regiment on active service abroad
during the years 1915 to 1919, and he
was mentioned in despatches. Private
address, “Ravenscraig,” Laura.
REGINALD HOWARD BRISTOW-
SMITH, J.P.
(Distiict Clerk, District Council of Laura.)
Mr. Bristow-Smith was born at
Laura, in July, 1903, and educated at
Laura Public School, Gladstone High
School, and the School of Mines, AC..
laide. He was formerly Town Clerk
of the Corporation of Laura from
January Ist to May Ist, 1932. and was
then appointed District Clerk of the
District Council. Mr. Bristow-Smith
is a member of the Masonic Lodge.
Home address, Laura.


District Council of LeHunte


History of LeHunte
The District Council of LeHunte was proclaimed in
1925 as “The District Council of Minnipa.” The members
of the first Council were ; —Messrs. E. J. Turley, Minnipa
Ward (Chairman), 1925-31 ; C. C. Rowen, Carina Ward,
1925-29: A. W. Christian, Yaninee Ward, 1925-29; E. B.
Smith, Pygery Ward, 1925-27; Thos. Knight, Wudinna
Ward, 1925-27: William Mitchell. Kyancutta Ward, 1925-
32: E. j. D. Oswald. Warramboo Ward, 1925-29.
Mr. E. B. Smith was also Acting District Clerk until
August, 1925, when Mr. L. W. Vawser was appointed Dis-
trict Clerk and Overseer of Works, which position he held
until June, 1929.
Other gentlemen who have served in the office of
Councillor are : —Messrs. E. A. Watson, Carina Ward, from
1929 to 1931 ; G. P. Roe, Yaninee Ward, from 1929 to
November. 1934: J. L. McMahon, Wudinna Ward, from
1927 to October, 1933; W. R. Bedford, Kyancutta Ward,
1932-34; R. Redford, Kyancutta Ward, 1934-35; H. A.
Hampel. Warramboo Ward, 1929-31.
In 1931 the name of the district was altered on the
petition of the Council from “Minnipa” to its present name
of “LeHunte.”
The District Office is situated at Wudinna, which town
is on the railway line, 135 miles from Port Lincoln, and
mid-way between the latter town and Thevenard. The
district contains 16 Hundreds and portion of the Hundreds
of Koongawa and Cootra were added by the Local Govern-
ment Areas Commission in 1935. The total area is approxi-
mately 2,000 square miles, the greater portion of which is
in progress of full development.
The chief industries are wheat and wool, while the fat
lamb trade and by-products of the farm are handled at
Port Lincoln, the market for which is steadily increasing.
The population of the district is estimated at 3,000,
and unimproved land value for the year 1934-35 was
assessed at £232,891.
The distance from Adelaide by rail and sea is 310
miles and by road, via Port Augusta, 390 miles. The roads
are mostly graded and brattenised, and travelling is good.
There is 1,390 miles of road under Council control.
LeHunte for the greater part of the year has an ideal
climate. Mount Wudinna. Pygery Rocks, Ucontitchie
Hill, and Techarculda Rock offer natural beauty in the
granite outcrops, and the geologist can always find matter
of absorbing interest.
At Kyancutta a museum has been established by Mr.
R. Bedford, and is recognised as the best of its kind outside
of Adelaide, and probably unequalled in any but capital
cities in the Commonwealth.
The motorist, also the sportsman, will find plenty of
scope at LeHunte to indulge in their pastimes.
The present members of the Council are : —Messrs. E.
H. Edmonds (Chairman), elected 1927; John Mcßea h,
Carina Ward, elected 1931 : W. J. Black, Minnipa Ward,
elected 1931 ; T. L. Nottle, Yaninee Ward, elected 1934 A.
W. H. Barns, Wudinna Ward, elected 1933; D. T. Samp-
son, Warramboo Ward, elected 1931 ; H. J. McKenna,
Kyancutta Ward, elected 1935. District Clerk and Over-
seer of Works, Mr. H. H. Tyler, appointed June, 1929.
Assistant District Clerk, Miss D. E. Garrett, appointed
June, 1931.


District Council of Light


''?WiM» : rg y, r " ~<*<V$ti*i r ,
fHuar ■uHKS> (£■%»<)( % . >>- iStaSSr » »' wg!|p, *m » *l*Z 4 w’Z*i
3 £ A> v.
■■'
, ■ '■ ■ , *- ■ - .
'J*'* -t *.„ a * ■ - v ' .* ".r *• ‘ f >^*
/ - --V .. .. - v ~ ■ ■ - - - -- ■■ • —
HISTORY OF LIGHT
235.000 acres, or approximately 310 square miles, which
constitutes one of the largest areas in the State.
The District Council of Light was formed in May,
1935, by the amalgamation of the District Councils of Port
GROUP OF LIGHT DISTRICT COUNCIL (PRESENT MEMBERS):
STANDING —P. Huxtable (Curator), Councillor J. W. Good, L. H. Dawkins (Overseer), Councillor S. R. Good, Councillor L. L.
Wasley, D. W. Driscoll (Junior Clerk), Councillor S. R. Irish.
SITTING—A. L. Driscoll (District Clerk), Councillors E. P. Pitt, E. A. Brooks (Chairman), A. D. Prime, A. H. Loller.
Gawler, Grace and Dublin. Of these bodies the Dublin
area was largest, comprising 93,000 acres, Port Gawler
87,000, and Grace 55,000. This gives the new district
The District Council of Grace was formed in 18 T
Dublin at about the same period, and Port Gawler a few
years earlier. Men prominently connected with the Grace


Council from the time of its inception to the date of the
amalgamation were the late George Marshman, who was
a member for 32 years, 22 of which he was Chairman; a
son (Arthur H. Marshman) was a member for 18 years
and Chairman for 12 years; the late James Nairn, 15 years
as Councillor and 8 as Chairman. The late Thomas Irish
was a member for over 20 years, and his son (Sydney R.
Irish who is in the present Council, has sat continuously
for i years. The late P. J. Murphy was District Clerk
for 33 years.
fn the defunct District Council of Dublin the late L.
H. White was for many years a Councillor and Chairman.
The late Herbert Young held similar offices for a long
peri d. Others actively associated with the Council were
A. I Prime (Chairman for 15 years), H. A. Judd, P. J.
McL ughney, G. M. Hallion, and A. H. Johnson. The
late \\ . J. Dunlop and C. Lindsay each had long service
as District Clerk.
Fn Port Gawler the Wasley family was actively con-
nected with the Council for nearly 50 years. The late
W. 1. Wasley was followed in turn by his sons H. J., S,
A., and L. L. Wasley, all of whom (excepting L. L. Wasley)
had terms as Chairman. Others were the late Henry Wil-
son, the late H. Secombe, J. Hayman, W. B. Cowan, E. A.
Brooks, and T. W. Day. As Clerk, L. H. Dawkins held
the office for 21 years up to the amalgamation. Previous
officers included the late J. Kingdon (13 years) and the
jate W. McCord (20 years).
The District Office of the Council of Light is at Mal-
lala, and the Chairman, who represents the Two Wells
Ward, is Mr. E. A. Brooks, of Buckland Park. Other
members are;—L. L. Wasley (Light Ward), A. H. Loller
(Red Banks Ward), A. D. Prime (Dublin Ward), S. R.
Good (Grace Ward), S. R. Irish (Mallala Ward), E. P.
Pitt (Barabba Ward), and J. W. Good (Long Plains Ward).
The assessment of the district for the year ending June
30th, 1936, was £53,081. The Council has two complete
tractor-functioned road-making plants, including rollers
and motor lorries. Members of the present staff are ; —•
Andrew Driscoll (District Clerk and Overseer), D. W.
Driscoll (Junior Clerk), S. T. Wait and L. H. Dawkins
(Works Foremen), and P. Huxtable (Curator).


The South Australian Farmers’ Co-operative Union, Limited.
In 1886, when South Australia was celebrating its Jubilee,
farmers were in a somewhat despondent mood. Crops had been
poor —an average of 5.58 bushels per acre was garnered for the
quinquennium ending with the 1885/86 harvest —and the price
had slumped seriously. Northern farmers were convinced that they
were being victimised by business interests, particularly through
dockages imposed on wheat shipped from Wallaroo and ocher out-
ports. Right through the agricultural areas, harassed farmers can-
vassed ways of improving their lot. Then came news from New
Zealand of a successful farmers’ co-operative movement. The idea
proved attractive to primary producers; and in 1888 one hundred
farmers pledged themselves to purchase 1,000 shares in an organisa-
tion to be known as The South Australian Farmers’ Co-operative
Union Limited. The growth of this puny co-operative infant of
1888 to the lusty manhood of 1936 is one of the romances of
South Australian mercantile history.
In the early stages the main energies of the Union were con-
centrated upon wheat and the handling and marketing of this
cereal has been regarded of primary importance ever since. Busi-
ness in cornsacks, produce, superphosphates, wool, skins and hides,
and agricultural machinery was undertaken before the nineteenth
century drew to its close. Merchandise, land and estate, motor
cars, livestock departments and country stores were added before the
out-break of the Great War. Tremendous advances were made during
the War period by the Farmers’ LJnion, whose expertness in handling
wheat especially was fully appreciated during these strenuous years.
In 1919 a dairy produce business was purchased, and this department
has grown to such an extent that it is now one of the most important
sections. A pleasing feature has been the extraordinary success achieved
in competitions, due tc the erection of modern factories and the installation
of up-to-date machinery. The winning of the blue riband for butter in the
Adelaide Royal Centenary Show, 1936, marked its twelfth successive
triumph. Innumerable prizes have been secured for butter, cheese, and
pig products. Farmers’ Union butter holds pride of place in the Ade-
laide market and the Union has shipped overseas enormous quantities of
cheese, butter, eggs and hcney. The Union has an important fluid milk
connection, and in 1934 entered the condensed milk business by the estab-
lishment of a Condensery at Murray Bridge.
Fine office and store premises in Adelaide; spacious milk product fac-
tories at Mile End and Murray Bridge; commodious wool, wheat, hard-
ware and machinery stores at Port Adelaide; a large skins and poultry
depot and motor repairing shops in Adelaide, are among the more note-
worthy of the Union’s possessions, while valuable office and store premises,
dairy produce factories and depots, and wheat sheds, are to he found
throughout the widespread agricultural areas of the State.
A valuable overseas connection is maintained by the Union’s active
participation in the affairs of the Australian Producers’ Wholesale Co-
operative Federation Pty. Ltd., with which is linked the Overseas Farmers’
Co-operative Federations Ltd., London. To give the farming commu: ity
comprehensive service, the Union has associated itself with the Co-operative
Insurance Co. of Australia Ltd., The Producers and Citizens’ Co-operative
Assurance Co. Ltd., and the Farmers’ Co-operative Executors and Trustees
Ltd. The Union also played an important part in the establishment of
the South Australian Co-operative Wheat Pools Ltd.
From the small beginning in 1886, the Farmers’ Union has progressed
until it now comprises over 14,000 shareholders, possesses a capita! of
£600,000, operates twelve departments, and has over 40 representatives in
the country to serve its large clientele.


District Council of Lincoln


History of Lincoln
The Council now controls 14 Hundreds (approximately
1,300,000 acres), subdivided into five Wards, namely—Lin-
coln, Louth, Mitchell, Mortlock, and Warrow.
The name of the District Council is taken from the
principal township and most important seaport of Eyre’s
Peninsula. It is one of the many names Captain Flinders
took from his native shire (Lincoln) and gave to parts of
the coastline.
Communication with Adelaide is by steamer from
Port Lincoln twice a week; communication inland by a
weekly train service from Port Lincoln to Thevenard, with
a branch line from Cummins to Kimba.
The district was proclaimed in 1888 and named Lin-
coln. Mr. John Anderson was elected Chairman, and the
first Councillors were —Messrs. C. B. Evan, D. M. McFar-
lane, E. P. G. Oswald, J. St. G. Puckridge. G. Dorward
and W. Haigh.
The area of the district has twice been reduced. In
1906 four Hundreds were annexed by the Tumby Bay Dis-
trict Council, and in 1921 the Town of Port Lincoln was
proclaimed a Municipality and separated from the District
Council.
The population of the district is estimated at 1,486
persons, and the dwellings number 484. The total mileage
of main roads is 140, the West Main Road being 74
miles long, and was, until recently, the longest main road
in South Australia ; it is now the second longest.
In memory of local fallen soldiers a Memorial Hall
and Institute was erected within the township, and the
foundation stone was laid by Mr. J. G. Mosely on August
29th, 1923. The Soldiers’ Memorial Hall was burned
down early in 1935, and a new hall is in course of erection
by the Corporation, and a new Institute and Library has
been erected by the Institute Committee adjoining the site
of the hall.
The following is a list (as far as is known) of past
and present Councillors:—Messrs. J. Telfer, W. E. Goode,
J. D. Bruce, R. Puckridge, A. Scott, R. M. McFarlane,
E. Radford, W. Mitchell, E J. Barraud, W. Hartley, A.
Palm, J. H. Secombe, R. E. Sullivan, A. G. Laidlaw, J.
Shepherd, W. Dutton, A. G. Brice, E. E. Garrett. J. A.
McGuire, Jas. O’Shannahan, W. Simes, O. A. Hall’, S. A.
Puckridge, W. G. Morgan, C. H. Swatter, E. D. Swaffer,
E- P. G. Oswald, J. Venning, G. T. Parker, W. Forbes,
J. C. Harder, James Dondbe, and C. K. Ritchie.
District Clerks :—Messrs. Charles Hammond, William
Leane, F. W. Rose. H. H. Miller, P. Giles, E. E. Garrett,
I. O. Jacobs, Miss E. El. Beckwith, and Mr. A. H. Taylor.


District Council of Loxton


History of Loxton
Loxton, a town on the River Murray, was christened
by the State Governor, Sir George Le Hunte, in 1907,
and was named after Mr. Loxton, an old settler on the
banks of the Murray between Pyap and Renmark. Since
then the town and district has made rapid strides, and
has now three banks, a busy flour mill, an extensive water
scheme, two petrol depots, an electric lighting plant, an
up-to-date hotel, four monthly stock markets, a district
hospital (costing £14,000), and one of the finest churches
outside of Adelaide, and many other modern business
premises. As much as 2\ million bushels of wheat were
produced in the Loxton district in one year.
About 40 years ago the district was used for grazing
only, but has since been surveyed into smaller holdings
and wheat growing is now the principal product, but
many farmers are now going for growing wool as well.
There are cpiite a number of fruit-growing areas within
the district, principally at Moorook, Kingston-on-Murray,
Pyap, Media, and Sherwood. Loxton is 144 miles by fairly
good roads from Adelaide.
The District Council has an area of approximately
683,680 acres, and the population numbers 4,580, who are
accommodated in 900 dwellings. The capital value of
ratable property is £1,657,928. the unimproved assessment
value being £462,376, a rate of 2d. in the £ producing a
revenue of £3,850.
Present members of the Council are as follows: —Mr.
Francis J. Fetch (Chairman), Messrs. H. A. Klingberg,
B. C. Watson, L. W. Wormald, C. A. Hondow, F. A.
Hondow, C. E. M. Tonkin, L. R. Christie, F. T. Obst. and
C. A. Muller. Overseer of Works, Mr. H. A. Rothe; Dis-
trict Clerk. Mr. A. M. Hilbig; and Assistant Clerk, Mr. E.
FI. Klingberg.
Others who have held office are :—Messrs. A. W. R.
Drabsch, E. F. Pflaum, A. G. Cameron, W. J. Hammond,
S. J. Rundle, W. F. Farley, H. Leaker, J. H. C. Quast, R.
F. Mayfield, R. S. Best, W. H. Mengersen, F. W. Hamdorf,
H. R. Thiele, T. G. A. Wachtel. H. J. Reynolds, G. J.
Witcomb, N. Fuller, 17. T. C. Smith. J. C. Scott-Todd, C.
G. T. Richtsteig, P. A. H. Thiele, A. G. Henschke, G. W.
Beverley, C. W. T. Tschirpig, F. Drogemuller, J. S. Nicholls,
P. T. Drabsch, J. F. Thiele, R. Stoeckel, E. G. Rothe, V. V.
Crase, F. W. Hamdorf, A. P. Phillips, E. G. L. Williss,
A. McCourt, A. D. Williams, G. J. Jenkins, J. Cass, R.
Rounsevell, B. H. Laffer, and A. C. Shepherd, and District
Clerks (H. T. Eime and John Angus).


Mm MB
. bl • ' S
$K. MfeciBift
i t ! S\ if k K ‘^%
l&V ;;® V \ m
%»% v# % |^i
.„ I ->
k lfa-i ~ _jf| |V
*8?" % 1
$|» .\r s K WKgaL * J|
FRANCIS JOHN PETCH, J.P.
(Chairman, District Council of Loxton.)
Born at Hotham, East Yorks, Eng-
land, on December 18th, 1883, and edu-
cated at St. Cuthbert’s College, Work-
sop, England. Arrived in Australia in
June, 1913. Mr. Fetch has served in
the Loxton District Council for 13
years and has been a resident of the
district for 22 years. He is Chairman
of the Loxton Hospital Board, and is
interested in all sport, particularly
cricket. Home address, Moorook.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES EARL
MURDAY TONKIN.
(District Council of Loxton.)
Mr. Tonkin has served in the Lox-
ton District Council for 4 years, re-
presenting Pyap Ward. In business he
is a Horticulturist, and his sports are
bowls and cricket. Home address,
Pyap.
COUNCILLOR ALWIN MARTIN
HILBIG.
(District Clerk, District Council of Loxton.)
Born at Eudunda, 23rd September,
1882, and educated at Eudunda Public
School. Mr. Hilbig has served in the
Loxton District Council for 15 years
and has been a resident of the dis-
trict for 29 years. He is Secretary
of the Loxton District Hospital, a
member of the Pride of Eudunda
Druids’ Lodge, No. 67, and his sports
are tennis and cricket. During the
Great War he served 2 years abroad
with the A.I.F. Home address, Lox-
ton.
COUNCILLOR FREDERICK ALBERT
HONDOW.
(District Council of Loxton.)
Mr. Hondow has served in the Lox-
ton District Council for 16 years, re-
presenting Central Ward. He is a
Farmer, and is also Secretary of the
Brown’s Well A. and H. Show Society.
Home address, Panina.
COUNCILLOR LESLIE ROY CHRISTIE.
(District Council of Loxton.)
Born at Second Valley, 12th April,
1890, and educated at Reynella Pub-
lic School. Mr. Christie has served in
the Loxton District Council, represent-
ing Pyap Ward, for 9 years, and has
been a resident of the district for 22
years. He is Worshipful Master of
the Masonic No. 116 Lodge, and his
sport is bowls. Home address, Pata.


COUNCILLOR CARL AUGUST
HONDOW.
(District Council of Loxton.)
Born at Saddleworth, 26th July,
1887, and educated at Peter’s Hill
School, via Riverton. Mr. Hondow
has served in the Loxton District
Council, representing East Ward, for
4 years, and has been a resident of
the district for 25 years. In business
he is a Farmer, and his sports are
cricket and tennis. Mr. Hondow
served abroad with the A.I.F. for 2\
years during the Great War. Home
address, Nangari.
HEINRICH ALBERT KLINGBERG.
(Deputy Chairman and Councillor, District
Council of Loxton.)
Born at Quorn, 29th May, 1883, and
educated at Quorn Public School. Mr.
Klingberg has served in the Loxton
District Council for 8 years and has
been a resident of the district for 2 7
years. He is Chairman of the Ad-
ministrative Sub-Committee of the
Loxton Hospital. In business he is a
Saddler, and his sport is bowls. Home
address, Loxton.
COUNCILLOR CARL ALFRED
MULLER.
(District Council of Loxton.)
Mr. Midi er has served in the Loxton
District Council, representing Central
Ward, for 16 years.
COUNCILLOR FRIEDRICH THEODORE
OBST.
(District Council of Loxton.)
Born at Neal’s Flat, 24th March,
1894, and educated at Neal’s Flat Pri-
vate School. Mr. Obst has represented
Last Ward in the Loxton District
Council for 1 year. In business he is
a Farmer. Home address, Taplan.
COUNCILLOR BENJAMIN CHARLES
WATSON.
(District Council of Loxton.)
Mr. Watson has represented Town
Ward in the Loxton District Council
for 6 years. He is a member of the
Masonic Lodge and in business is an
Agent. Home Address, Loxton.
COUNCILLOR LLOYD WELLINGTON
WORMALD.
(District Council of Loxton.)
Mr. Wormald has represented West
Ward in the District Council of Lox-
ton for 8 years. In business he is a
Farmer. Home address, Caliph.
HEINRICH ALBERT ROTHE.
(Overseer of Works, District Council of
Loxton.)
Born at Angaston, Bth July, 1885,
and educated at Truro and Frankton
Public Schools. Mr. Rothe has served
in the Loxton District Council for 16
years. His sport is bowls, and during
the Great War he served 3 years
abroad on active service with the
A.I.F. Home Address, Loxton.


District Council of Lucindale


History of Lucindale
Lucindale, in the Hundred of Joyce, is situated on the
Kingston and Naracoorte railway line, 21 miles from Nara-
coorte, and is the centre of a large area of pastoral and
agricultural country. The township contains, besides the
railway station buildings, several business places, an Insti-
tute, a State School, a Council Chamber, Police Station,
three churches, and a Soldiers’ Park, with ornamental
trees and flowers, and containing a marble memorial to
fallen soldiers. It possesses a show ground, enclosed and
otherwise improved, and a show is held annually. Grazing
is the chief pursuit of the people.
The District Council of Lucindale has control over
approximately 92a square miles, comprising the whole of
the Hundreds of Joyce, Spence, Conmurra, Townsend,
Coles, and box. The assessment of the district for 1935-36
was £ 12,054, and the revenue for the year ended June 30,
1934, amounted to £1,277 17/3. The capital value of rat-
able property is £301,340. The population of the District
of Lucindale at June 30, 1936, was 532, and the number
of dwellings was 128.
Lucindale is 2614 miles (by rail) from Adelaide, 31|
miles from Kingston, 21 miles from Naracoorte. 85 miles
from Mount Gambier, 50 miles from Millicent, and about
350 miles from Melbourne.
The district was proclaimed in February, 1878, and its
area has been enlarged on several occasions since.
The first meeting of the Council was held in March,
1878, when Mr. J. McCullum was elected Chairman. The
Councillors were:—Messrs. L. Mclnnes, J. D. Coad, G.
Copping, and I. Abbs. A Council Office was built in 1880,
and a new one in 1905. In the same year the Council also
took over the Institute Hall and erected the present read-
ing room and Clerk’s offices in front. It is now a valu-
able property and free of debt. The old office is let for
residential purposes. The first assessment annual value
was £ 2,789.
The names of the Chairmen up to date are as follows;
—Messrs. J. McCallum, G. Copping, A. Robson, E. Hall,
S. Tavender. J.P., Col. E. Feuerheerdt, Col. D. Findlater,
P. J. Burke, and the present Chairman is Mr. A. Grieve,
a returned soldier, who was Councillor for two years, and
is said to be the youngest Councillor and Chairman in this
State.
The present Councillors are as follows: —Messrs.
Richard John Legoe, William M. Seeker, J.P., C. L. Wil-
liams, F. C. Copping, E. H. Gould, H. G. Nos worthy. W,
O. Smith has been District Clerk since 1924.
Names of ex-Councillors in addition to above are:—
Messrs. T. Hamlyn, T. Bourne, R. Campbell, E. Chaplin,
D. Madern, J. B. Bull, A. McFarlane, A. Miles, F. Prior,
A. Matherson, A. Carmichael, W. Natt, G. D. Nosworthy,
McLeod, W. G. Williams, P. W. Dow, I. Shannon, E.
Dutton, Hack, A. Logan, T. B. Johnson, D. A. Fullerton,
E. Gould, P. J. Robson, G. C. Newman, I. Stewart, H. Fang-
berg, A. Barber, G. Copping, L. Mclnnes, T. W. G. Seeker,
W. T. Natt, G. Irving, E. L. Findlater, H. J. Martin, S.
E. Tavender, W. E. Seeker, J. Mclnnes, John Mclnnes. W.
Robson, T. J. Eergusson, Z. Rivett. D. Findlater. A. Dow,
J. Nilan, Geo. Chapman, and B. J. Mcßain.


District Council of Mannum


History of Mannum
Ihe name of this town and district is a corruption
of the native name "Manyump." The Council was pro-
claimed in 1877, and has a total area of 176 square miles.
Its boundaries are the Hundreds of Finniss, Younghus-
band, and a portion of Burdett, and there are five Wards,
viz., Central, North, South. East, and West. The first
settlement was £3,288 (assessed value), and the present
capital value is assessed at over £24,000. In the earlv days
Mannum had only a horseback mail from Tungkillo twice
a \\ eek , then a two-horse buggy mail from Palmer ; later
on two coaches daily took passengers and mails to and
from Adelaide. Mannum is now served by motor vehicles
to and from the city twice daily, and by steamboats to
Murray Bridge four days a week.
The River Murray, which is of considerable width
here, flows through the centre of this district—the town
being on the west side, i.e., the side nearer Adelaide.
The present Council Chamber was built in 1896, and
the foundation stone bears the following - inscription:—
1 his stone was laid by Mrs. C. F. Wanke, on November
21st. 1896.”
The following is a list of past Councillors of Man-
num:—Messrs. J. W. Walker, J.P. (first Chairman), D.
Shearer, J. G. Loechel, F. Horstmann, W. Quast, B. Baseby,
G. W. Schuetze, C. F. Wanke, I. G. Preiss, I. Shearer, F.
W. Busch, A. Faehrmann, J. R. Baseby, A. G. Bolto (pre-
sent Chairman), E. R. Baseby, G. H. Mann, J. A. McLaugh-
lin, J. Buckley, J. H. Hein, C. L. Groth, R. H. Ruge,‘ A.
Pilmore, I. E. Clarke, and F. S. Wright (Clerk).
Present members of Council; — Mr. A. G. Bolto (Chair-
man), Councillors C. H. Y\ ills, E. F. Horstmann, H. B.
Scheer, L. D. Marshall, O. R. Schache, C. B. Hofifmann,
B. R. W. Lindner; District Clerk, A. M, Richardson: Over-
seer of Works, J. R. Morris.


. ■
District Council of Marion
By Courtesy Mr. J. H. Wright
THe Old Flagstaff Hotel, Darlington.


History of Marion
This district was originally proclaimed on the 3rd
November. 1853, under the name of The District Coun-
cil of Brighton.
The Proclamation, issued by His Excellency Sir Henry
Edward Fox A oung, appointed Messrs. T. S. O’Halloran,
Da\id Sutherland, I homas Wilson, Samuel Kearne, and
Robert Smith to be the members of the new district so
formed.
On 23rd August. 1855, a portion was taken from the
district to form the Corporate Town of Glenelg, and on
the 25th November, 1858, a further portion was taken
to form the Corporate Town of Brighton.
It was on the 2nd September, 1886, that the name of
the District Council was gazetted as “Marion” follow-
ing upon a proposal and vote by the ratepayers, the Hon.
John Crozier being the first Chairman.
The provisions of the Police Act were extended to
the district on the Bth May, 1873.
On the 15th January, 1903. a portion (north of rail-
i\ay). i\as taken from the district and was added to the
District Council of West Torrens.
The district was divided into three Wards—North
Waid, South Ward, and Central Ward—on the 13th fune,
1912. It was from then on that the district gained status,
as the Building Act was applied on the 11th December,
1913, the Health Act on the 10th August, 1916, the Im-
pounding Act on the 30th October, 1919, and the Scaffold-
ing Inspection Act in 1925.
On the 28th July, 1927, the district was re-subdivided
into four Wards, No. 1, 2. 3, and 4, with two Councillors
to represent each Ward.
The following list of townships was declared within
the district on the 11th April, 1929: —Glandore, Black
Forest. Black Forest WTst, Rotheville, Plympton, Ed-
ardstow n, Alexandra Park, A ermont, Forbes, Hammer-
smith, Harcourt Gardens, Alexandria, Ascot Park. Wood-
lands Park, St. Marys West, Mirreen. Mitchell Park,
Clovelly Park, South Road Park, South Road Gardens'
Plympton Park, Bay Road Park, Brayville, Park Holme,
Oaklands, Marion, Elmwood, Warradale Park, Da Costa
Park, Dunleath Gardens, East Glenelg, Glenelg East Exten-
sion, St. Annes, Paringa Park, Dunrobin, Ballara Park,
Seacombe Gardens, Sturt, Darlington, Sea View Downs,
Seaclifif Park, Dover Gardens, Dover Heights, Brighton
Park, Seacombe Heights, Kingston Park, Bessington,
Brighton Gardens East, Marino, Hallett’s Cove, Morphett-
ville Park, Oaklands Park.
Owing to the recent Re-arrangement Act some of the
above sub-divisions are now within the boundaries of the
Municipalities of Glenelg and Brighton.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE DISTRICT.
The original area of the district was 20 square miles
or 12,800 acres. By various gazettals of additions and
severances the area at present is 13.429 acres.
1 he population has steadily increased, until to-day the
estimated population stands at 7,000, accommodated in
2.400 houses.
Twenty-six miles of macadamized roads have been
constructed and 8 miles 67 chains of main roads are within
the boundaries of the district, which extends from Black
Forest along the South Road to Reynella, thence wester;v
to the sea coast, thence generally northerly along the sea
coast and the eastern boundaries of the Municipalities of
Brighton and Glenelg to the Glenelg Tramway, and thence
following the Tramway in a north-easterly direction to the
point of commencement.
In addition, there are parks and reserves totalling
263 acres and a fine War Memorial stands in a prominent
position in the recreation grounds.
The District Hall, which is a substantial stone bin 1-
ing and a valuable asset to the district, was built in IS 5.
I hroughout the district ample provision has been made
for all branches of sport, there being numerous ovals and
recreation and play grounds, in addition to the Morphctt-
ville Racecourse. Hallett’s Cove and Marino South are
popular seaside resorts within the district. Moreover, all


business facilities are provided for the residents, there
being numerous Post Offices, Police Stations, etc., through-
out the district.
Within the boundaries of the district is some of the
most fertile vineyard and garden land south of Adelaide.
DISTRICT COUNCIL OF MARION.
COUNCILLORS (1921-2).
T. D. Davidson (Chairman) R. G. Thiselton
R. W. Wade A. Brook
Bowers F. H. Trott
COUNCILLORS (1922-3).
T. D. Davidson (Chairman) A. Brook
R. W. Wade F. H. Trott
F. H. Edwards Bowers
COUNCILLORS (1923-4).
T. D. Davidson (Chairman) A. Brook
F. H. Edwards E. T. Wrav
R. W. Wade F. H. Trott
COUNCILLORS (1924-5).
T. D. Davidson (Chairman) E. T. Wray
R. W. Wade A. Brook
F. 14. Edwards F. H. Trott
COUNCILLORS (1925-6).
F. 14. Edwards (Chairman) A. Brook
T. 1). Davidson E. T. Wray
F. H. Trott R. W. Wade
COUNCILLORS (1926-7).
T. 1). Davidson (Chairman) T. G. Mitchell
A. Hiscock A. C. Pocock
E. T. Wray W. M. Hicks
COUNCILLORS (1927-8).
Up to this date Council was comprised of three Wards
only. Two Councillors for each.
T. D. Davidson T. G. Mitchell
W. M. Hicks E. T. Wray
A. Hiscock A. C. Pocock
COUNCILLORS (1928-9).
T, D. Davidson (Chairman) A. E. Hann
Albert Brook F. H. Trott
A. C. Pocock H. W. S. Frith
E. T. Wray \V. M. Flicks
COUNCILLORS (1929-30).
E. T. Wray (Chairman) G. H. Parsons
A. Walker A. E. Kami
H. W. S. Frith (deceased) R. G. Smith (deceased)
W. M. Hicks F. H. Trott
COUNCILLORS (1930-1).
E. T. Wray (Chairman) G. H. Parsons
Alexander Walker A. Hiscock
R. P. McGhee F. H. Trott
W. M. Hicks E. G. Butler
COUNCILLORS (1931-2).
Arthur Hiscock (Chairman) G. H. Parsons
E. T. Wray F. H. Trott
W. J. Clarke E. G. Butler
R. P. McGhee
COUNCILLORS (1932-3).
W. M. Hicks (Chairman) G. H. Parsons
W. J. Clarke H. C. W. Ellis
E. J. Mesecke F. H. Trott
R. P. McGhee E. A. Gibson
COUNCILLORS (1933-4).
George H. Parsons (Chair- R. P. McGhee
man) E. A. Gibson
E. J. Mesecke S. H. Hamilton
A. R. Vincent V. M. Hicks (resigned dur
H. C. W. Ellis ing this year)
F. H. Trott
COUNCILLORS (1934-5).
George LI. Parsons (Chair- S. H. Hamilton
man). H. A. Laffer
Arthur Hill (deceased) A. E. Sheidow
A. R. Vincent F, H. Trott
A. C. G. Hammond


■ | : St
* .A J>.
I
*
COUNCILLORS (1935-6).
George H. Parsons (Chairman), Marion.
L. j. Western, Marion.
A. R. Vincent, 22, Wattle Avenue, Brighton.
A. C. G. Hammond, Cliff Street, East Glenelg
• o
S. H. Hamilton, Hamilton’s Ewell Vineyards, Ltd., Glenelg,
H. A. Laffer, South Road, Sturt.
A. E. Sheidow', O’Halloran Hill.
F. H. Trott, O’Halloran Hill.
CHAIRMAN GEORGE HENRY
PARSONS.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Parsons was born at Darling-
ton, Sturt, S.A., in 1875, and educated
at Sturt Public School. He has been
a member of the Council for 7 years,
Superintendent of the Methodist Sun-
day School, Marion, for 20 years, and
is also Trustee of the Sturt Recrea-
tion Ground, and President of the
Brighton Bowling Club. Mr. Parsons
has been in the employ of Messrs. G.
Western & Sons for 46 years, 30 years
of which he has been chief fruit sales-
man. He is also a member of the
Masonic and Rechabite Lodges, and his
sports are bowls, cricket, and foot-
ball. Home address, Marion.
PAST CHAIRMAN ARTHUR HISCOCK.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Hiscock was born at Angaston
in August. 1863, and educated at An-
gaston, Moonta, and Roseworthy. He
was a member of the Marion District
Council for 4 years, 1 year of which
he was Chairman, and has been for 25
years a resident of the district. Mr.
Hiscock was an officer in the Public
Service State and Commonwealth for
50 years, and most of that time was
employed as a chief telegraph officer
in Adelaide. He retired 8 years ago,
and is now a Vigneron and Farmer.
Home address, Warradale.
PAST CHAIRMAN FRANK HENR
EDWARDS, J.P.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Edwards was born at Fulham,
S.A., 9th August, 1874, and educated
at public schools and the Glenelg
Grammar School. He has been a re-
sident of the district for 45 years and
was a member of the Council for 4
years. Mr. Edwards is a Past Presi-
dent of the Sturt Branch Liberal
Union, the Brighton Bowling Club, ind
the Sturt and Marion Horticultural
Show. He is also a member of the
Sturt and Marion Recreation Commit-
tee, the Blackwood Masonic Lodge,
\ ice-President of the Vigilance Com-
mittee, and was the first Chairman
of the Sturt School Committee. Ir.
Edwards is a Fruitgrower, and also
Secretary of the Adelaide Fruit and


H «IH
' ||k|v#| v '||j^R^f&ra9Smi
||T|r .. J;
| ;JVjK
W^ak
I Vm
I *T y jfc. • a
■ I -‘'^t^-^’ 7
I W a
** ., •% -
II , JL jSBBmSmwI
Produce Exchange Co., Ltd. He takes
a keen interest in all sports, and plays
bowls for Brighton. Private address,
"Zante Grove," Ascot Park.
THE LATE GEORGE WESTERN
(Past Chairman, District Council of Marion)
The late Mr. Western, horticulturist
and vigneron, of the well-known Mus-
catel Vineyards of Marion, was a son
of the late Mr. W. J. Western of
Devonshire, England, and was born at
Marion, South Australia, in 1866. He
received his education at Caterer’s
Glenelg Grammar School, and then as-
sisted his father in the management
of his estate. During his lifetime he
was always interested in district
sports, and was a very keen member
of the Brighton Bowling Club. For
23 years he was a member of the Dis-
trict Council of Marion, and during
that period was Chairman for many
successive years. The late Mr. Wes-
tern was associated with the McDon-
nell of Freemasons and the
Ancient Order of Druids. In 1902 he
received a commission as justice of
the Peace, and twenty-years’ service
was terminated at his decease in
January, 1926.
PAST CHAIRMAN JOHN JAMES
CLARK, J.P.
(District Council of Marion.)
Born at North Gumeracha, 1860, and
educated at North Gumeracha State
School. He is a member of the
H.A.C.B.S. Lodge, having held the
position of Grand President for two
terms. Sport, cricket. Mr. Clark
served for 3 years in the St. Peters
Corporation, is a Past Councillor of the
Unley City Council, and was Chair-
man of the Marion District Council for
five vears.
PAST CHAIRMAN WILLIAM MAY
HICKS, J.P.
(District Council of Marion.)
Born at Scilly Islands, off Cornwall,
England, January 30th, 1862; edu-
cated at Scilly Islands Public School.
Arrived in Australia, October, 1879.
One year Councillor Glenelg Corpora-
tion ; 5 years Councillor Un lev City


f|t|r
J J|ISp |
' '
Mi#** **'
f n\
> ’>•««'“
#
** #■
ip ;
jjfci njwm»iiiiiW 8Tr "^‘
I jgHk M I W
1 & I
Council; 6 years Councillor and
Chairman Marion District Council.
Justice of the Peace, 1888.
PAST COUNCILLOR ROBERT PENDER-
GAST McGHEE, J.P.
(District Council of Marion.)
Air. McGhee was born at West Alel-
bourne, Victoria, 12th June, 1898, and
educated at Dorcas Street State
School, South Melbourne, West Alel-
bourne Technical School, the Working
Men’s College, and Tough’s Engineer-
ing School. He has been a resident of
the district for 12 years and was a
member of the Council for 4 years and
also Chairman of the Council Finance
Committee. In business he is
draughtsman for the Engineering and
Water SuppH Department of the S.A.
Government. Mr. McGhee is a mem-
ber of the Masonic and Oddfellows’
Lodges, and during the war served for
3 years abroad with the 3rd Austra-
lian Pioneer Battalion. Private ad-
dress, 6, Clements Street, Plympton
Park.
PAST COUNCILLOR EDWARD JOHN
MESECKE.
(District Council of Marion.)
Air. Mesecke was born at Adelaide,
26th June, 1895, and educated at Ade-
laide and Plympton Public Schools.
He was a member of the Marion Dis-
trict Council for 2 years. During - the
war Air. Alesecke was a sergeant at
Keswick Alilitary Hospital, and served
with the 3rd Division, Field Artillery,
in France and Belgium. In business
he is a Butcher. Home address,
Marion Road, South Plympton.
PAST COUNCILLOR THOMAS GRAHAM
MITCHELL.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Mitchell was born at Castle-
maine, Victoria, sth March, 1887 and
educated at Castlemaine Grammar
School, the Melbourne University and
the Melbourne College of Pharmacy.
He has been a resident of the district
for 15 years, and was a member of
the Council for 2 years. He was also
dispenser to the Repatriation Hospital.
Keswick, for 11 years, and during the
war was in the B.E.F. as Major of the
Royal Scotch Fusiliers, attached to the


J
3rd Indian Division. Mr. Mitchell is
one of the founders and trustee of the
Black Forest Presbyterian Church. In
business he is a Pharmacist at Glan-
dore and Black Forest. Private ad-
dress, 20, South Road, Black Forest.
PAST COUNCILLOR THE LATE
ARTHUR HILL.
(District Council of Marion.)
The late Mr. Hill was born at Pirie
Street, Adelaide, 28th May, 1871, and
educated at Prince Alfred College. He
served in the Council from July, 1934,
until his decease in 1936. He was
manager of A. Pengelley & Co., Fur-
niture Manufacturers, from 1898 until
1936. The late Mr. Hill played Inter-
state cricket from 1890-1893, and was
also interested in bowls.
PAST COUNCILLOR ALBERT BROOKS,
J.P.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Brooks was born at Woodches-
ter, 17th January, 1865, and educated
at Woodchester Public School. He
has been for 33 years a resident of the
district, and was a member of the
Council for 8 years. He is also Presi-
dent and Trustee of the Institute and
Recreation Ground, and a member of
the Rechabite Lodge. He takes an in-
terest in racing and trotting, and in
business is a Gardener. Private ad-
dress, 216 South Road, Edwardstown.
PAST COUNCILLOR ERIC AMBROSE
GIBSON, A.1.C.A., A.U.A., A.A.I.S.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Gibson was born at Adelaide,
14th April, 1904, and educated at Unley
High School and the Adelaide Univer-
sity. He was a member of the Marion
Council from 1932 to 1934, of the Me-
tropolitan County Board for 3 years,
an accountant to Parsons & Robert-
son, Ltd., Adelaide, for 8 years, and
is a member of the Holdfast Lewis


— y _W * », V*
'pm|
,
■ :: ■
■H '
p » .
BK M
■ * Jp
&' |? : ifSii||fe, '*•
Masonic Lodge. He is also a Council-
lor of the Local Division of the Aus-
tralian Institute of Secretaries. In
business he is a Public Accountant,
and his sports are tennis and football.
Mr. Gibson travelled abroad to Europe,
Great Britain and the United States
of America in 1931. Home address,
Fisher Street, Fullarton Estate.
PAST COUNCILLOR H. C. W. ELLIS.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Ellis was born at Port Augusta,
20th May, 1898. and educated at Port
Augusta. Pie was a member of the
Marion Council for 2 years, and in
business is a cattle dealer. His sports
are football, swimming, and running.
Home address, 21 South Road, Black
Forest.
PAST COUNCILLOR ERNEST GEORGE
BUTLER, J.P.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Butler was born at Sydney,
N.S.W., Ist June, 1864, and educated
at Cleveland Street and Fort Street
Schools. He was a resident of Marion
for 7 years, and a member of the Coun-
cil for 2 years, serving as Council-
lor, and Chairman of the Finance Com-
mittee. He went to Western Austra-
lia in 1893, and after auctioneering in
Perth for some time was appointed
manager of the Hill End Gold Mine
in the district of Broad Arrow. Upon
the mine closing down he was ap-
pointed Government Auctioneer for
Broad Arrow, and he was also Mayor
of the town for two years. Mr. Butler
was acting- Resident Magistrate and
Coroner, and also represented the Pub-
lic Trustee, the Education and Abori-
gines Departments, and Was Curator
of Intestate Estates. In 1900 he built
the Trafalgar Hotel on the Golden
Mile, and three years later, after sell-
ing the hotel, opened a business at
Northam as an auctioneer and stock
salesman. He came to South Austra-
lia in 1909 and continued his auc-
tioneering career. In 1916 Mr. But er
formed the Farmers and Settlers’ As-
sociation, afterwards known as the
Country Party. He stood for Parlia-
ment foi the Albert District and was
defeated by 12 votes by one of the sit-
ting members. He takes a keen in-
teiest in boxing, rowing, and racing,
and his present address is 129, Ken-
sington Road, Norwood.


«L -'.: .
. /
,Mm
V if *
i&- ->$|Br
PAST COUNCILLOR ALEXANDER
WALKER.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr Walker was born at Brighton,
England, in 1874. and educated at
Brio'll! on College and also in Paris and
Berlin He arrived in Australia in
1907. He has been a resident of the
district for 10 years and was a mem-
ber the Council for 2 years. He
serv in the South African War in
1900. Private address, Aberfeldy Ave-
nue, i dwardstown.
PAST COUNCILLOR ROBERT WILLIAM
WADE.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Wade was born at Blackwood
in 1882, and educated at Coromandel
Public School. He has been a resident
of the district for 25 years, and was a
member of the Council for 12 years. He
is President of the Sturt Football Club
and interested in all general sports in
the Marion District. In business,
Mr. Wade is a Gardener and Brick-
maker, and he is also a member of the
United Ancient Order of Druids'
Lodge. Home address, 49 Brighton
Road, Glenelg.
COUNCILLOR LESLIE JOHN
WESTERN.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Western was born at Marion,
26th January, 1897, and educated at
Sturt Public School and Adelaide High
School. He was elected unopposed to
the Council, 4th July, 1936. He is in
business as a fruitgrower, and has
been a resident of the district all his
life. During the war Mr. Western
served abroad with the 32nd Battalion
for four years in Egypt and France.
He is fond of all sport. Home address,
Marion.
COUNCILLOR FREDERICK HENSON
TROTT.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Trott was born at Happy Val-
ley, 22nd August, 1877, and educated
at Glenelg Grammar School and Way
College, Adelaide. He has served in
the Council for 18 years, and is Chair-
man of the Works Committee. Coun-
cillor Trott has always been eager to
further the interest of the district, and
many improvements have been carried
out at his suggestion. He is a farmer
and grazier, and has been a member
of the Horse Committee of the Royal
Adelaide Show for 10 years. He has


BmSSm /h|
;£» *Ap? f JPI
I jHH
***«»*- , J|8«^
* *s. ,
* •&*.. ■HHi
' ’■
m
also been a member of the A.M.F. for
21 years. Mr. James Trott, his father,
was a member of the Marion District
Council for 21 years before the elec-
tion of his son. Home address,
O'Halloran Hill.
COUNCILLOR ALLAN EDWARD
SHEIDOW.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Sheidow was born at Clarendon,
27th December, 1883. He has been a
member of the Council for 2 years, and
in business is a farmer and grazier.
He is also a member of Masonic Lodge.
His sports are golf, racing, and tennis.
Present address, “Perry Barr,”
O’Halloran Hill.
PAST COUNCILLOR ALBERT
EDWARD HANN.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Hann was born at Meadows in
1890, and educated at Meadows and
Strathalbyn Public Schools. He has
been a resident of the district for 11
•years, and was a member of the Coun-
cil for 2 years, being its representative
on the Abattoirs Board. Mr. Hann is
a gardener, and has been a keen show
exhibitor in flowers and vegetables.
His sport is cricket. Home address,
1 hotnas Street, New Darlington.
COUNCILLOR ALBERT CLINTON
GEORGE HAMMOND.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Hammond was born at Nor-
wood in 1891, and educated at Welling-
ton Road School, North Norwood. He
has served in the Council for 2 years
and is a member of the Metropolitan
County Board. Mr. Hammond has ■
Dairy and Milk distributing business
and is also interested in farming. He s
a member of Masonic and Druid
Lodges, a Committeeman of the Gler
elg “A” Grade Lootball Club, and ha?
represented several junior clubs
various ways.
COUNCILLOR ALLAN ROY VINCEN
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Vincent was born at Brighton
3rd March, 1884, and educated at
Brighton Public School, and with t ie
exception of 8 years at Edwardstown
has lived at Brighton all his life. lie
has been a member of the Council or
years, and is Chairman of the Fi-
ance Committee. Mr. Vincent has for
30 years been in the employ of VC


Wh ‘ I?V
wag
r : m IE* *
‘ : “ Jf'
m—
/f SI x
P - : i*?Z, Jj
Ackland, chaff and grain merchants.
Edwardstown, and has for 25 years
been manager. He is a member of the
Brighton Masonic Lodge, the Mac-
Donnell Mark Lodge and MacDonnell
Royal Arch Chapter. His sports are
motoring and gardening. Private
address, 22 Wattle Avenue, Brighton.
COUNCILLOR HENRY ALBERT
LAFFER.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Laffer was born at “Fairford,”
Sturt, S.A., in 1898, and educated at
St. Peter’s College. He is a member
of various committees in the Council,
and has served for a total period of
U years. In business he is a gardener,
and during the war he served with the
3rd Light Horse Regiment in Pales-
tine from 1916-1919. His sport is
game shooting. Home address, South
Road, Sturt.
COUNCILLOR SYDNEY HOLMES
HAMILTON.
(District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Hamilton was born at Glenelg
in 1898, and educated at St. Peter's
College. He is a member of Hamil-
ton’s Ewell Vineyards Ltd., Glenelg.
and has served in the Marion District
Council for 2 years. Home address,
Glenelg.
ELMSLEY ST. GEORGE SHAKESPEARE
(District Clerk, District Council of Marion.)
Mr. Shakespeare was born at Wood-
ville, 3rd April, 1906, and educated at
St. Peter’s College. He has served in
the Council for 10 years, 63 years of
which he was Assistant District Clerk,
and 33 years District Clerk and Over-
seer of Works. He is Honorary Sec-
retary and Treasurer of St. Peter’s
Old Collegians’ Football Club, Vice-
President of the Sturt Cricket Club,
and his sports are tennis, rowing, and
football. Home address. Cross Roads,
Edwardstown.


* W
Hjjjj^.
sKyi -
RONALD R. SCHAPEL.
(Assistant Clerk, District Council of Marion.)
Born at Edwardstown, 13th October,
1914, and educated at Black Forest
Public School and Muirden College,
Adelaide. Mr. Schapel has served as
Assistant Clerk in the District Council
of Marion for 4 years, and has been a
resident of the district for 21 years.
His sports are football and tennis.
Private address, 15 Castle Street,
Edwardstown.


Distnd Council of Marne


History of Marne
The District Council of Marne was originally the Dis-
trict Council of Caurnamont, but an amalgamation took
place in May, 1935. Caurnamont is an aboriginal term
signifying “high cliffs,’’ for which this part of the Murray
River is noted.
The name was given to the place by the late Mr.
Robert Thomson, the first settler in the district, where for
many years he engaged in pastoral pursuits.
I he district was proclaimed in 1885, the first meeting
of the Council being held on July 10th of that year. There
were present: —Councillors G. Gilmour, W. Day, C. A.
Preiss, J. Bottroff, C. Rutland, and H. Rutland (Clerk).
Mr. G. Gilmour was elected Chairman, and held that
office until the following year, when he left the district.
The district contains a total area of 4163 square miles,
and is divided into six Wards, viz.. Caurnamont, Walker’s
Flat, and Devon Downs in the Hundred of Ridley, Forster
and Scrubby Flat in the Hundred of Forster, Bowhill in the
Hundred of Bowhill.
The first section to be surveyed was the Hundred of
Ridley. The Hundred of Forster was added to the dis-
trict in 1888 and that of Bowhill in 1894.
The first assessment was made in September, 1885,
and amounted to £8,193, the rating for that year being
1/6 in the £, yielding a total of £614 9/6.
The present Council Chamber, built in the year 1896,
is situated at Walker’s Flat, which occupies a central posi-
tion in the district. Prior to its erection Council meet-
ings were held each month at the residence of the late Mr.
Robert Thomson, at Caurnamont.
Considerable attention has been given to road con-
struction, resulting in a total length of main roads 51
miles and of district roads 740 miles.
The River Murray runs through the centre of the dis-
trict. which is connected with Mannum by steamboat ser-
vice.
Ferries are provided at Purnong and W alker’s Flat
for the convenience of the public. 4 hese ferries are under
the supervision of the Council.
At Forster a Memorial Column has been erected to
the memory of fallen soldiers who enlisted from the dis-
trict, and at Black Hill a captured machine gun has been
installed in the public hall as a trophy of the Great War.
Following is a list of the names of past Councillors: —
Messrs. G. Gilmour, W. Day, C. A. Preiss, J. T. Bottroff,
C. Rutland, W. Paterson, J. MacCullum, T. Batten, R.
Thomson, J. B. Hughes, C. Bolt, 13. O’Dea, J. Zadow, \V.
Thomson, T. H. Plummer, H. W. Bates, F. Towill, T. j.
Coon, W. Roy, J. Sears, T. Edson, F. W. Preiss, W. Brophy,
D. Thomson, 13. Hutchinson, H. Rutland, J. G. W hitfield,
W. H. Day, 13. Swann, J. Pannach, E. P. W e yland, J. C. -
Kroehn, L. S. Hughes, J. Childs, J. A. E. Schencher, j
Searle, j. Phelps, j. Burton, C. Pobke, S. Johnson, P. A
Nelson, J. Johns, C. Evans, N. P. Norman. W. Bolt, A
E. Gower, H. E. Scheer, W. J. Sears, E. A. Kubank, I
G. Halliday, F. J. Weyland, E. A. Groth, E. D. Brophy,
J. B. Haby, R. Bolt, and A. W. Richardson (Clerk).
The present members of the Council are : —G. A. Seidel
(Chairman), Councillors E. D. Brophy, J. B. Haby, H. !
Hoad, J. A. Pannach, John Phelps, and C. H. A. Peitsch;
B. H. Mickan (Clerk).
The first meeting of the District Council of Marne
was held on May Ist, 1935, the late District Councils of
Caurnamont and Angas being amalgamated.
The first members were: —G. A. Seidel (Chairman/,
Councillors E. 13. Brophy, J. B. Haby, E. A. Groth, 3
E. Towill, H. Mickan, C. H. A. Pietsch, J. A. Pannach,
13. McGorman, John Miller, and John Phelps. These
Councillors held office from May Ist, 1935, to June 30th,
1935.
Mr. A. M. Richardson was appointed District Clerk
on August 11th, 1923, and held office until April 13th, 193e,
when he resigned his position and was elected District
Clerk of Mannum. Dr. W. A. Grote is Officer of Health,


m T mmm\\\mmmmmmmmmm ,
fill?- ■
' - .
x *
flag M %Hi i
■ ?™
■ .. •
'&» ,!
■ 3 4
.
jll|py
A F qffet Al
; jpL « 'f y
. .
"
/; . * Jagg 'jflft
■
¥
I ■ ' JB||K *
w
f
% I-
Jl' ,
V'f
.T ■
Wll'M_>,, /#*' sq
u. Je
■TlKt;: . *a m
JfflB I : .
DISTRICT COUNCIL OF ANGAS.
The first meeting of the District Council of Angas
was held on September 26th, 1885, and the first members
W ew :—F. W. Drogemuller (Chairman), Councillors G. A.
Pa ne, J. Chinner, W. Fergusson, H. Pietsch, and J. Jack-
son Clerk). These men held office until October Ist, 1888.
The following are past District Clerks : —M. Krantz,
from October Ist, 1888, to June 30th, 1904; G. A. Stuit,
from July 10th, 1904, to June 30th, 1909; F. E. Hecker,
from July 27th, 1909, to July 31st, 1924; B. H. Mickan,
from July 31st, 1924, to May Ist, 1935. He was then ap-
pointed District Clerk of Marne.
Mr. J. Evans was appointed Chairman on the 10th
July, 1893, and held office until 30th June, 1910.
CHAIRMAN HEINRICH MICKAN, J.P
(District Council of Marne.)
Born at Stockwell, 2nd May, 1866,
and educated at Stockwell Public
School. He has served 39 years in the
Council and been 50 years a resident
of the district; 15 years Chairman of
Council, 10 years Chairman of Board
of Advice, Chairman Building Com-
mittee, Cambrai Institute; 4 years
Chairman and 2 years Secretary of the
School Committee, 20 years Presiding
Officer at State and Federal elections,
and Justice of the Peace since 1901.
Business, Blacksmith. Home address,
Cambrai.
PAST CHAIRMAN GUSTAV ALBERT
SEIDEL.
(District Council of Marne.)
Born at Mount Pleasant, 17th De-
cember, 1879, and educated at Angas-
ton and Oakbank Public Schools. He
has had 20 years' service in the Council
and been 27 years a resident of the dis-
trict. Business, Farmer. Home ad-
dress, Bowhill.
COUNCILLOR JOHN PHELPS.
(District Council of Marne.)
Born at Templers, 3rd June, 1867,
and educated at Templers. He has
served in the Council for 20 years and


I m
I * JH
K
My
.->• |D|H||
'Mt
mm
* jffx ,f frfi : .
jxMbp'
HHr Tnsf&i': ", '
||||i “ t
been a resident of the district for 41
years. Postal address, Private Bag,
Swan Reach.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM ERNEST
TOWILL, J.P.
(District Council of Marne.)
Born at Barabba, near Hamley
Bridge, February 2nd, 1882, and edu-
cated at the Lower Alma Public
School. He was Councillor 4 years in
the Caurnamont District Council, and
has been a resident of the district for
45 years. He is Postmaster and Jus-
tice of the Peace. Sports, football and
cricket. Mr. Towill is a pioneer of
Claypans, Secretary and Treasurer of
Claypans Church and School Building,
Secretary and Treasurer for several
years of the Claypans Cricket and
Football Clubs. Home address, Clay-
pans.
COUNCILLOR JAMES DENNIS
McGORMAN.
(District Council of Marne.)
Born at Mount Pleasant, 28th Feb-
ruary, 1877, and educated at Mount
Pleasant Public School. Mr. McGor-
man has served in the Council for 23
years and been a resident of the dis-
trict for 33 years. He is a member of
the Sanderston School Committee and
the Cambrai Sports Club, Home ad-
dress, Sanderston.
COUNCILLOR JOHN MILLER.
(District Council of Marne.)
Born at Springton, 24th January,
1880, and educated at Springton and
Mount Pleasant Public Schools. He
had 2 years’ service in Angas District
Council, and has been 23 years a resi-
dent of the district. Mr. Miller is a
farmer, and is Chairman of the Dis-
trict W heat Pool, and has been Pre-
siding Officer at State and Federal
elections for 17 years. Home address.
Sanderston.
COUNCILLOR CHRISTIAN HEINRICH
ALFRED PIETSCH.
(District Council of Marne.)
Born at Cambrai, 21st September,
1885, and educated at Cambrai. He


I ' 'X
I # . •
mmj , m
j£%y &;
*
'
m * •■• "*“** j?’ 4 ' -
\pL |
A J|
JK f Jl :
has served in the Council for 1 year
and resided in the district for 50 years.
Home address. Black Hill.
COUNCILLOR HARRY ERNEST
HOAD.
(District Council of Marne.)
Born at Manntim, Ist May, 1894, and
educated at Adelaide. He has been a
member of the Council 1 year and a
resident of the district for 13 years.
Business, Grazier. His sport is tennis.
War service, 2 years with 10th Bat-
talion, A.T.F. Home address, San-
derston.
COUNCILLOR JOHANNES ALFRED
PANNACH.
(District Council of Marne.)
Born at Stockwell, 6th April, 1882.
and educated at Dim church. He has
served in the Council for 1 year and
has been 33 years a resident of the
district. Mr. Pannach was Secretary of
Cambrai Institute for 4 years. Home
address, Kongolia.
COUNCILLOR JOHANN BERTHOLD
HABY.
(District Council of Marne.)
Born at Manntim, 21st November,
1887, and educated at Mannum. He
has been a member of the Council for
14 years and 21 years a resident of
the district. Home address, Claypans,
River Murray.
COUNCILLOR EDWARD DENNIS
BROPHY.
(District Council of Marne.)
Born at Palmer, 27th March, 1883,
and educated at Palmer. Mr. Brophy


'
I
has been a member of the Council for
1 year and is a Farmer. Home ad-
dress, Mannum.
BERTHOLD HEINRICH MICKAN.
(District Clerk, District Council of Marne.)
Born at Cambrai, 27th April, 1895,
and educated at Cambrai. He was a
member of the Angas District Council
for 11 years and has been 40 years a
resident of the district. Business,
Agent. Mr. Mickan is Secretary of
the Cambrai School Committee, Sec-
retary Cambrai Sports Club, and Presi-
dent of the Cambrai Institute. Sports,
tennis and football. Home address,
Cambrai.


Distnd Council of Meadows


District Council of Kondoparinga
(Now District Council of Meadows.)
Fins district was proclaimed in 1853, and is situated in
country more or less hilly, about 25 miles south of Ade-
laide. It has an area of 92 square miles (divided into live
Wards), and was bound on the north by the District Coun-
cil of Echunga, on the south by the District Council of
Port Elliot, by the District Councils of Macclesfield and
Strathalbyn on the east, and by Willunga and Clarendon on
the west.
The district roads measured 79 miles and the main
roads 26 miles, the principal road being Bull’s Creek Road,
which traverses the district for 21| miles. It was opened
in 1864, and is the main thoroughfare for vehicles from
Adelaide to Victor Harbour.
Rating was on the improved land values system. The
first assessment was made by Mr. Robert Burley and
amounted to £3,185, on which a rate of 1/6 in the £ was
declared.
A substantial W T ar Memorial was erected in 1919 at
Meadows, the post town of the District of Kondoparinga,
and is constructed of marble quarried at Macclesfield, six
miles distant.
There was a daily motor service from Blackwood to
Meadows, and a char-a-banc ran three days weekly from
Meadows to Adelaide. In the earlier days the district was
served by the horse-drawn coaches of Hill & Co.
The Township of Meadows and the surrounding coun-
try are of pleasant and picturesque character, and many
tourists find their way to the district in constant succession
all the year round. It is generally acknowledged that the
round trip from Adelaide to Clarendon, Kangarilla, Dash-
wood’s Gully, Meadows, Echunga, Mount Lofty, and back
to Adelaide, cannot be surpassed for good roads and beau-
tiful scenery.
Within the District of Meadows is situated the Kuitpo
Forest, comprising approximately 13,000 acres, of which
1,400 acres have been planted with trees of various kinds,
principally pines.
This digest would not be complete without brief men
tion of the late Mr. Charles Nottage, who for 50 yeais
was connected with the Kondoparinga Council two yeais
as Councillor and for 48 years consecutively held the posi-
tion of District Clerk. This was considered a record loi
the State at that time.
Following is a list of the names of past Councillors
of Kondoparinga:—Messrs. R. Burley, R. Hollamby, V-
Kirkham, A. Wearing, J. Nicol, Senr., J. Catt, W. Latta,
M. England, W. Pearson, A. Clatworthy, J. R. Morris. V
Tucker, S. Kirkham, S. Dawson, G. H. Vickery, C. Thorpe.
R. Paris, W. Rogers, G. Tucker, J. Nottage, T. McDonald,
W. Hay, R. Haines, J. S. Keeling, T. O’Loughlin. J. McNa
mara, J. Oaklev, G. J. Maidment, P. O’Loughlin, D. Came-
ron, R. Latta, J. Carr, J. Lucas, A. L. Lymburnei,
G. Sissons, Senr., A. Stevens, C. Nottage, W. Hill, J. Clat-
worthy, F. W. Vickery, J. T. Scown, J. Kirkham, M. Hiller,
G. T. Griggs, G. Usher, A. L. Ellis, C. S. Keeling, W. Ellis,
R. Fox, P. Murrie, J. Oakley, J. McTaggart, G. Dunn,
Jones, D. Tester, W. J. Maidment, T. Brooks, J. Stone,
Senr., W. Threadgold, J. Stone, L. E. L. Dunn, J. Nicol. A .
Stone, F. Wright, W. Collins, and F. Nottage (Clerk).
Unfortunatelly, at the time of going to press a his-
tory of the District Council of Meadows was not ava -
able ; therefore, the old District Council of Kondoparinga
has been substituted. The following gentlemen whos'
photos and biographies appear in this section were mem-
bers of the old Council.


M /9 |k #> ; ::||rj|^B
*■''/
' xv *
■F
hL\\ <00*^
,'- k Hk sP'
' * N *\ ■■
Bf
■ I
* a
MBB&. J3&BtM
, %.,
K * * _ |
CHAIRMAN SAMUEL HOWARD ROSS.
(Kondoparinga District Council, now known
as the District Council of Meadows.)
Born at Macclesfield, 22nd Decem-
ber. 1870, and educated at Macclesfield
Public School. He has served in the
Council for 18 years, 10 years as Chair-
man, and been 50 years a resident of
the district. Mr. Ross is Chairman
of the Macclesfield Institute and Pro-
gress Association. In business he is
a Mason, and is a member of the In-
dependent Order of Rechabites, in
which he has filled all offices, and was
Secretary of the Macclesfield Picnic
Committee for a number of years,
Chairman of Macclesfield School Com-
mittee, Librarian of Macclesfield In-
stitute and 30 years Warden of St.
John’s Church of England, Maccles-
field. Home address, Macclesfield.
PAST CHAIRMAN JAMES NICOL.
(District Council of Meadows.)
Born at Bull’s Creek, in June, 1875,
and educated at Bull’s Creek Public
School. For 26 years Mr. Nicol repre-
sented Kondoparinga No. 3 Ward,
Upper Bull’s Creek, 7 years as Chair-
man. He has been a resident of the
district for 60 years, and Trustee of
Bull’s Creek Hall and Bull’s Creek
Methodist Church. also church
steward. Mr. Nicol is a member of
the Rechabite Lodge and is interested
in all sports. He is a son of the late
John Nicol, who was born at Bowden
in the year 1840, and whose parents
came out from Scotland, being old
pioneers. Home address, Bull’s Creek.
PAST COUNCILLOR WALTER STONE.
(District Council of Meadows.)
Born at McHarg’s Creek, 17th Oc-
tober, 1866. and educated at Ashbourne
Public School; 18 years’ service in the
Council. He represented the Lower
Bull’s Creek Ward for 8 years, and
10 years Ashbourne Ward. He has
been 70 years a resident of the dis-
trict. Mr. Stone is a member of the
Agricultural Society, and is interested
in mining and is considered to have a
good geographical knowledge of the
district. His advice is often obtained
concerning mines in the locality. He
was a very active worker and assisted
in patriotic work during the Great
V\ ar. He is interested in all sport.
Home address, Mount Magnificent,
Nangkita.


’ •"•'• 3:|p|: ' ••
I
* >•< ..>■' *J|F Sl
afe.
■-' ■■■'• \ J> %
;
COUNCILLOR ARNOLD LANCELOT
ELLIS.
(District Council of Meadows.)
Born at Meadows, 11th July, 1884,
and educated at Meadows Public
School. Mr. Ellis has been a member
of the Council for 25 years and a resi-
dent of the district for 52 years. He
is a member of the Manchester Unity
Oddfellows’ Lodge, Committeeman of
all sports in connection with the town,
and ex-Secretary of the Meadows
Agricultural Society. Mr. Ellis carries
on business as a Dairy Farmer at
Meadows.


District Council of Meningie


History of Meningie
I hei e ai e few motorists in South Australia who do
not know of Meningie. The township is the last on the
road to the South-East before the Coorong is reached,
through the Coorong to Kingston, the next stage, is a
distance of about 90 miles, and owing to the swampy,
and in some parts sandy, nature of the country the road
problem has indeed been a difficult one; but is'now over-
come, and it is now possible for motors to get through
at any time of the year.
The Coorong was at one time the sportsman’s para-
dise, and even now good shooting can be obtained, as the
p ace still aoounds with wild birds, etc., of all descriptions
and rabbits are plentiful.
The District of Meningie has an area of 676,320 acres,
and the township is situated on Lake Albert, 1023 miles
by rail from Adelaide. The native meaning of the name is
“mud” no doubt appropriately given by some tribe on
account of this part of the country being of a low-lvin"
and swampy nature. ' 43
Tailem Bend Township is situated within the district;
this is a railway junction.
The capital value of ratable property (1921) in the
district is set down at £334,890, and the assessment value
£8,097; a total rate of 1/9 in the £ yields £1,031. The
population is estimated at 2,100 persons, of whom 575 are
ratepayers, and the dwellings total 530. Present assess-
ment, £44,908; capital value, £898,160.
Following is a list of names of past members of
the Meningie District Council: —Messrs. A. McFar-
lane, Senr., F. G. Ayres, j. Knight, J. F. Dodd, G. G.
Hacket, A. P. Bowman, J. Williams, K. D. Bowman, J. i).
Lovegrove, J. H. Brown, W. j. Richards, A. Thornley, 7
E. Bundey, R. Bolt, F. E. Hyde. P. Peterson, J. Gall, M.
Finn, A. B. Fawson, D. Gooch, and J. W. McNicol.
Present Council:—Messrs. B. B. Jaensch, C. J. Far-
rell, R. H. Gambling, R. J. Williams, T. Anderson, G. R.
Goode, A. McFarlane, Junr., T. McCallum, F. W. Jaensch


j= j j n .■
I
JV I ■
I'^B
” 5 55 —
' $
%
>''"' .. II ■ 'Wmt ■*-■•■
Hi? JR
$ *
j
COUNCILLOR FREDERICK WILLIAM
JAENSCH, J.P.
(District Council of Meningie.)
Mr. Jaensch was born at Callington
in the year 1875, and educated at Mur-
ray Bridge. He has been for 35 years
a resident of the district and a mem-
ber of the Council for 22 years, repre-
senting Alexandrina Ward. He is also
a member of the United Ancient Order
of Druids’ Lodge, and in business is a
Grazier. Home address, Tailem Bend.
COUNCILLOR THOMAS ANDERSON,
J.P.
(District Council of Meningie.)
Mr. Anderson was born at Cook’s
Plains, 21st June, 1873, and educated
at Milang Public School. He has been
a resident of the district all his life,
and a member of the Council for 9
years, representing Alexandrina Ward.
In business he is a Grazier. Home
address, Cook’s Plains.
WILLIAM JAMES WALTERS, F.A.C.A.,
J.P.
(District Clerk and Overseer, District
Council of Meningie.)
Mr. Walters was born in South Aus-
tralia in the year 1893, and educated
at the Pulteney Grammar School, Ade-
laide. He has been a resident of the
district and District Clerk for 16 years.
Mr. Walters is also a Fellow Associate
of Cost Accountants, and is President
of the Tailem Bend Bowling' Club.
During the war he was Lieutenant of
the Administration Branch from 1915
to 1919. Home address, Meningie.




I ' CouncilChambers /
•• - .
District Council of Millicent
MILLICENT COUNCIL CHAMBERS.


History of Millicent
Millicent is prettily situated in the centre of what
originally was a vast swamp area. It perpetuates the
name of Millicent Short, a daughter of Bishop Short, the
first Bishop of Adelaide. She afterwards became the wife
of Mr. Geo. Glen, who settled in Millicent in 1846 and who
was the owner of the well-known Mayurra Station.
length,of roadways in the district is 359, and the Council
also controls about 400 miles of main and subsidiary drains.
The Council has an up-to-date Electric Lighting Plant,
which supplies 220 consumers with electric light and power
-—the scheme commenced in April, 1920.
An attractive feature of the town is the Soldiers'
SOLDIERS' MEMORIAL GARDEN, MILLICENT.
Millicent is situated 334f miles by rail and 292 miles
by road from Adelaide: The district was proclaimed on
4th June, 1914, when the District Councils of Mayurra
and Mount Muirhead amalgamated and became the District
Council of Millicent.
The Council controls an area of 1973 square miles
subdivided into five Wards, viz.—Central, Mount Muirhead,
Mayurra, Nangula, and Rendelsham. The district com-
prises the following Hundreds:—Mount Muirhead, May-
urra, and portions of the Hundreds of Hindmarsh and
Rivoli Bay.
The population of the district is 2,500. The total
Memorial Garden, and the adjacent parks and gardens are
noted for their beauty and are popular resorts both for the
residents and the many, tourists who visit the town.
The town has a number of fine institutions, among
which are the Institute, Primary and High Schools, three
banks, six Churches, a number of up-to-date stores, and
three commodious Hotels. The A. H. and P. Society is
prosperous, and has a well-equipped showground, and its
Caledonian Society and Racing Club are equal to anything
in the South-East. The Thyne Memorial Hospital claims
to be one of the best equipped hospitals in the South-East,


x * Arf 'SB& Mi *. Mr
-■ II®* I*** w
iV: ,^'. ‘; . . . ■ ••'■ ■: .v^^^^;.-;..
having a modern operating theatre equipped with shadow-
less lighting and Xray plant.
The Government Sawmill at Mount Burr, near Midi-
cent, is the largest of its kind in the Southern Hemisphere,
while the thousands of acres of pine plantations make a
wonderful sight and never fail to attract tourists.
' dee Bonney, six miles south of Millicent, into which
farming, dairying, and stock raising. It is noted for its
barley, potatoes, wool, fat lambs, and well-bred horses and
cattle.
The present Council consists of Councillors J. Grigg,
J.P. (Chairman), J. A. Sullivan, F. T. Clifford, E. Fensom,
D. S. McCord, W. T. Inns, E. F. R. Boneham, H. W. Hol-
land, A. G. Nitschke, and M. W. Scanlon, and H. H. White-
MAIN DRAIN AT MILLICENT, ADJACENT TO MAIN
BRIDGE AT ENTRANCE TO TOWN.
water from the reclaimed areas is drained, is a fine stretch
of fresh water 25 miles in length with an average width
of from four to five miles. It was discovered by Charles
Bonney on his overland trip with stock in 1839. Millicent
is a striking example of the success of the efficient drain-
age of the South-East, for it is now the centre of a rich
and prosperous district with ever-extending resources in
head (District Clerk).
Past members:—J. W. Williams, J. B. Mitchell, F. J.
McLaughlin, R. E. Bowering, J. Malone, J. J. Malone, J. J.
Mull ins, W. J. Lester, LI. A. Agnew, D. McCallum, W. R.
Foster, J. Alleyn, C. C. Nitschke, W. J. Dean, A. Mcßostie,
Alex Mcßostie, F. A. Edwards, R. C. Mowbray, A. A. P.
Cassels, W. Downs, W. E. Williams.


'C' 1 -' ' - ,f “ '*r?)£SS
f
CHAIRMAN JOSIAH GRIGG.
(District Council of Millicent.)
Mr. Grigg was born at Ouorn. 2nd
November, 1878, and educated at
Quorn public School. He has been a
resident of Millicent for 33 years and
9 years a member of the Council. 4
of which he has been Chairman. He
is also ex-Treasurer of the Millicent
Institute Committee, a member of the
Ma sonic and Rechabite Lodges, and an
ex-Committeeman of the Millicent
Drainage Area Football Association.
Mr. Grigg has been for 25 years a
playing member of the Millicent Brass
Band. Home address, Millicent.
COUNCILLOR JOHN ANDREW
SULLIVAN.
(District Council of Millicent.)
Mr. Sullivan was born at Mount
Gambier, 19th November, 1897, and
educated at the Mount Gambier Gram-
mar School and Millicent Convent. He
was elected Councillor in July, 1935,
and has been for 30 years a resident
of the district. He is Secretary of
the Millicent Branch R.S.A., a member
of the R.A.0.8., H.A.C.8.5., and A.N.A.
Lodges, and his sports are football,
cricket, tennis, and golf. In business
he is a Tailor. During the war Mr.
Sullivan served abroad with the Ist
Signal Troop in the A.L.H. Brigade.
COUNCILLOR DONALD SPENCE
McCORD.
(District Council of Millicent.)
Mr. McCord was born and educated
at Reeves Plains. He was elected
Councillor for the Millicent District
Council in July, 1935, and has been a
resident of the district for 7 years.
He is a member of the Millicent School
Committee, and in business is a
Farmer. His sport is tennis. During
the war Mr. McCord served abroad
with the A.I.F. for 4 years. Home ad-
dress, Millicent.
COUNCILLOR AUGUST GOTTFRIED
NITSCHKE.
(District Council of Millicent.)
Mr. Nitschke was born at Millicent,
25th March, 1884, and educated at
Nangula Public School, near Mill ent.
He has been a resident of the district
for 51 years and a member of the
Council for 23 } r ears. He is Trea urer
ol the Nangula Soldiers’ Memorial
llall and ex-Chairman of the Nai gula
School Committee. Councillor Nitschke
is a son of the late j. C. A. Nitschke,


— '
ip
J|| ..
, l?l
who settled in the Millicent district
about 1860. In business he is a Farmer
and Grazier.
COUNCILLOR EBENEZER FRANK
RIVETT BONEHAM.
(District Council of Millicent.)
Mr. Boneham was born at Kalanga-
cloo, S.A., 10th September, 1866, and
is a son of the late Mr. Ebenezer Bone-
ham, who settled at Kalangadoo about
1857. He was educated at Pompoon
Public School, and has been a resident
of the district for 66 years. Mr. Bone-
ham spent two years in N.S.W. cattle
and sheep droving, and two years on
the Western Australian goldfields
(1894-1896). He has been a member
of the Millicent Council for 25 years,
is a Past Chairman of the Pompoon
School Committee, Committeeman of
the Millicent A. H. and P. Society and
the Hospital Board, and also a member
of the Oddfellows' Lodge. In business
he is a Farmer and Grazier.
COUNCILLOR FREDERICK THOMAS
CLIFFORD.
(District Council of Millicent.)
Mr. Clifford was born at MacDon-
nell Bay, S.A., 20th December, 1873,
and is a son of the late Thomas Clif-
ford, who was one of the first set-
tlers in the Millicent district. He was
educated at Hatherleigh Public School,
near Millicent. He has been a resident
of the district for 60 years and a mem-
ber of the Council for 12 years. Mr.
Clifford is President of the S.E. Drain-
age Area Cricket Association and
Hatherleigh Cricket Club, and is a
member of the Millicent A. H. and P.
Society. In business he is a Grazier,
and his sports are cricket and bowls
Home address, Millicent.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM THOMAS
INNS.
(District Council of Millicent.)
Mr. Inns was born at Robe, 9th May,
1871, and educated at Millicent Public
School. He has been a member of
the Council for 6 years and is a mem-
ber of the Oddfellows’ Lodge, and a
Past Chairman of the St. Clair School


1
\ o I * ,
, ML*. 1
■*** #rv
I* *
|j
/ Ms j
" '‘JBhl''. s
Committee. He is a son of the late
Mr. Peter Inns, who settled in the
Millicent district in 1874. Mr. Inns is
a Farmer at Millicent,
licent A. H. and P. Society, and has
had 10 years' service in the Council.
His sport is bowls and he is a Farmer
at Millicent.
licent district in 1871. Mr. Fensom is
a Farmer and Grazier and his sports
are shooting and angling. Home ad-
dress, Millicent.
COUNCILLOR HERBERT WILLIS
HOLLAND.
(District Council of Millicent.)
Mr. Holland was born at Millicent,
13th December, 1897, and is a son of
the late D. C. Holland, who in 1860 was
one of the first settlers in the district.
He was educated at the Millicent Pub-
lic School and has been a resident of
the district all his life. He is a mem-
ber and ex-Chairman of the Millicent
School Committee, member of the Mil-
COUNCILLOR EDMUND FENSOM.
(District Council of Millicent.)
Mr. Fensom was born at Millicent.
19th March, 1887, and educated at
Sebastopol Public School, near Milli-
cent. He has been a resident of the
district all his life and was elected
Councillor in July, 1935. He has been
for 4 years President and 8 years Sec-
retary of the Sebastopol School Com-
mittee. Councillor Fensom is a son
of the late G. E. Fensom, who was one
of the first settlers in the Millicent
district. He arrived in Mount Gam-
bier about 1858, and settled in the Mil-
COUNCILLOR MICHAEL WILLIAM
SCANLON.
(District Council of Millicent.)
Mr. Scanlon was born at Mount
Gambler, 25th March, 1874. and edu-
cated at Nangula Public School, near
Millicent. He has served in the Coun-
cil for 7 years arid has been for 61
years a resident of the district. He is
a past member of the Nangula Sc 00l
Committee, and in business is a
Farmer. Councillor Scanlon is a son


.T*
,
-V
I
I
* I
f
'
of the late P. Scanlon, who was one
of the first settlers in the Millicent
district. His home address is Milli-
cent.
HAROLD HOWORTH WHITEHEAD.
(District Clerk, District Council of Millieent.)
Mr. Whitehead was born at Ashton-
under-Lyne. Lancashire, England, 16th
July, 1899. He was educated at Christ
Church Central School, Ashton-under-
Lyne, the S.A. School of Mines and
Muirden College, Adelaide, and arrived
in Australia in June, 1912. He has
been District Clerk of Millicent since
September, 1920, and was previously
junior clerk at Unley for 2 years and
assistant district clerk at Walkerville
for 3J years. He has been a resident
of the district since 1920. Mr. White-
head is Secretary of the Local Board
of Health, the Millicent School, Hospi-
tal, and Repatriation Committees. He
is also a member and ex-Secretary of
the Millieent High School Council, an
ex-member and Auditor of the Insti-
tute Committee, and ex-Secretary of
the Millieent A. H. and P. Society.
He is a Past Master of the Millieent
Masonic Lodge and was Secretary of
the Football and Central Cricket Clubs
for several years.
COUNCILLOR G. MILLHOUSE.
(District Council of Millieent.)




District Council of Minlaton


History of Minlaton
The locality was known at first as Gum Flat, on
account of the huge gums near the township of Minlaton,
as it is now called, and which is the centre of an important
and industrious farming area.
The district was proclaimed in 1888, and has an area
of 229,028 acres, subdivided into five Wards, viz., Curra-
mulka, Koolywurtie, Minlacowie, Ramsay, and Minlaton
Town. Under Council jurisdiction there are 65 miles of
main roads and 680 miles of district roads.
The town has electric light installed and the streets
are planted with ornamental trees, which are a great im-
provement and comfort to the place. In the main street
a life-size War Memorial has been erected, having a large
base and the super-imposed figure of a soldier carved
from beautiful Italian marble. Minlaton Institute has a
library of over 4,000 volumes, and a Public Hall seating
approximately 800 persons. Minlaton also possesses a
fine Public Hospital, well equipped, and with accommoda-
tion for 15 patients. The population of the town and dis-
trict numbers 2,200 persons, and the dwellings total 500.
Within the area controlled by the District Council
of Minlaton there are two other towns —Curramulka and
Port Vincent.
The firstnamed, situated about nine miles north-east
of Minlaton, is the centre of a prosperous farming area.
The town is compact with residences of a high standard
—-electric light installed. There is an Institute for recrea-
tion purposes, and a well laid out Garden Reserve with
Monument as a War Memorial.
Port Vincent is situated on St. Vincent’s Gulf, about
16 miles east of Minlaton. It is a very popular summei
resort.
The first assessment of 6d. in the £ on £10,19/ pi oduced
£225, and the present figures are 1/1 in the £ on £61.385,
yielding £3,332.
The following is a list of those who have serve the
Council in various capacities since its inception :
Past Councillors.—Messrs. John Anderson, E. j. An
derson, T. J. Bickers, Jos. Bennett, 4 hos. Brown, J. Cud-
more, Thos. W. Correll. Ed. Correll, F. H. Correll. R. S.
Correll, S. C. Crawford, R. A. Dodd, G. L. Dodd, 1 H.
Evans, E. Evans, John Ford, C. P. Giles. F. Gregor. S.
G. Germein, H. Grundy. J. C. Gersch, J. J. Homier. G. F.
Hoyle. Fred. Herring, S. F. Hoyle, Win. Kendall, !’. C.
King, Stanley King, F. WC Luxmore, W in. Long, k. Mahar,
H. W. Martin. Alf. Mahar, Jas. Martin, H. Mum ford.
Wm. McDonald, D. McPharlin. A. McKenzie, Jas. McKen-
zie, E. A. McDonald, j. Parsons, J. J. Parsons, W m. I’oin-
ton, R. O. Page, Geo. Porker, S. W. Pointon, WC H. Reade,
A. E. C. Russ, C. Smith, J. M. Stone. F. E. Swincer, G.
J. Short, J. C. Tonkin, F. A. Tiechelmann. M. Twartz, D.
G. Tiechelmann, Simon Vanstone, R. F. Wilson, John
W atters.
District Clerks. —F. A. Tiechelmann. F. C. Baker, H.
Pointon. Jos. Williams (32 years).
Overseers. —J. Beti (29 years), Jas. McKenzie, D.
Horn, R. Taylor, Ernest R. Crocker.
Present Councillors.—Messrs. L. R. Watters, S F.
Tucker, H. Bennett (Chairman), E. F. Mahar, E. ! M.
Twartz, J. H. Boundy, WC Petersen. F. Austin, F R.
Crocker (District Clerk).


CHAIRMAN HERBERT BENNETT, J.P.
(District Council of Minlaton.)
Born at Yorketown, 18th August,
1887. and educated at Minlaton Public
School. He has served the Council for
4 years and has been a resident of the
district all his life. Mr. Bennett is
Chairman of the District Hospital
Board and is a keen follower of all
local sporting bodies. He is a Farmer
and razier at Minlaton.
COUNCILLOR STANLEY FRANCIS
TUCKER, J.P.
(District Council of Minlaton.)
B nn at Curramulka, 24th Novem-
ber. 1883, and educated at Curramulka
Public School. Mr. Tucker has been a
member of the Council for 9 years and
53 vears a resident of the district. He
is a member of the Minlaton Hospital
Board, Curramulka Institute and Re-
creation Committees, President of
Curramulka Hospital Board, Curra-
mulka Tennis Club, and Secretary of
the Institute for the past 20 years.
Mr. Tucker is associated with the In-
dependent Order of Oddfellows’ Lodge,
and is in business as a Blacksmith
and i iarage Proprietor at Curramulka.
COUNCILLOR FRANK AUSTIN.
(District Council of Minlaton.)
Born in South Australia, 16th Sep-
tember. 1884, and educated at Ade-
laide. Mr. Austin has served the
Council for 2 years and has, been a
resident of the district for 27 years.
He is Secretary of the Port Vincent
Institute, and is connected with all
sporting activities in the district. His
home address is Port Vincent.
COUNCILLOR JOHN H. BOUNDY, J.P.
(District Council of Minlaton.)
Born at Yorketown, 22nd October,
1901, and educated at Moonta District
High School, South Australia, and
Wesley College, Melbourne. Mr.
Boundy is President of the Central
Yorke Peninsula Agricultural Society,
a member of the Brentwood Recrea-
tion and Institute Committees, and of
the Minlaton Hospital Board. He is
serving his second term as Councillor
on the Minlaton Council, and is an
Agent and Farmer at Brentwood.
COUNCILLOR LLOYD RANDEL
WATTERS.
(District Council of Minlaton.)
Born at Curramulka, October 25th,
1883, and educated at Curramulka Pub-
lic School. Mr. Watters has served
in the Council for 6 years, and has
been a resident of the district all his
life. He is a member of the Minlaton
Hospital Board, Curramulka Institute
Committee, and the Curramulka Hos-
pital Board. In business he is a
Farmer at Curramulka.
COUNCILLOR EDWARD FRANCIS
MAHAR, J.P.
(District Council of Minlaton.)
Born at Minlaton, 4th November,
1904, and educated at Christian Bro-
thers’ College, Adelaide. He has
served in the Council for 3 years and
has been a resident of the district all
his life. Mr. Mahar is a member of
the Minlaton Hospital Board, the Cen-
tral Yorke Peninsula Agricultural
Society, and his sport is golf. He is a
Farmer at Minlaton.
COUNCILLOR EWALD E, M. TWARTZ.
(District Council of Minlaton.)
Born at Brentwood, 10th October,
1895, and educated at Brentwood Pub-
lic School. Mr. Twartz has been a
member of the Council for 13 years
and a resident of the district all his
life. He is a member of the Minla-
ton Hospital Board, the Brentwood
Institute and Recreation Committees,
and the Central Yorke Peninsula Agri-
cultural Society. He is a Faimei at
Minlaton.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM PETERSON,
J.P.
(District Council of Minlaton.)
Mr. Peterson was born in 1883, and
has been a member of the Council for
34 years. He has resided in the dis-
trict for 35 years and is a member
of the Minlaton District Hospital
Board. Mr. Peterson is a Storekeeper
at Minlaton.
ERNEST ROY CROCKER, A.F.1.A.,
A.A.1.5., J.P.
(District Clerk of the District Council of
Minlaton.)
Born at Broken Hill, 19th April,
1895, and educated at the Silverton
Public School. Mr. Crocker has re-
sided in the district for 11 years, dur-
ing which time he has occupied the
position of District Clerk and Over-
seer of Works. He is Secretary of
the Minlaton District Hospital Incor-
porated, and President of the Minla-
ton Institute Committee. During the
war Mr. Crocker served with the A.I.F.
in Egypt, Gallipoli, France, and Bel-
gium, and was awarded the Military
Medal.




;
gJJJJ8llllllJ8J81IHHIIIll8888llllllll888l^^® :
District Council of Mitcham
MITCHAM COUNCIL CHAMBERS.


MITCHAM RESERVE.
History of Mitcham
Mitcham was so named by Mr. William Giles, Manager
of the South Australian Company, after Mitcham, in Sur-
rey, England. The locality was once a sheep run named
Brown Hill Creek. In Pastor Finlayson's recollections are
the following notes : —Being very beautifully situated on
the slope of the Hills with the creek or brook running-
o
is four and a half miles distant from Adelaide. However,
the Mitcham trams and hills railway provide adequate com-
munication with Adelaide.
A LARGE DISTRICT.
The district has an area of 27 square miles, or 17,223
through, it was after a short time surveyed into acre
blocks as a village, and named Mitcham. ' Some of the
acre blocks were sold at £2O, and later have been subdivided
and sold at £75 to £2OO, and later re-subdivided into allot-
ments, realising up to £lO per foot.
MITCHAM COMMUNICATION WITH CITY.
Mitcham is in the electoral district of Sturt, and part
of the Commonwealth Electoral Division of Boothby, and
acres, and is by far the largest District Council in the
metropolitan area. The population totals over 17,000 per-
sons. The capital value of ratable property is £4,342,080.
and the assessment value is £217,104; the total revenue
for 1935 was £25,616.
THE FIRST DISTRICT COUNCIL.
The District Council of Mitcham, the first District
Council in the State, was proclaimed on the 7th May. 1853,


Year.
Assessment.
Dwelling
£
1881
21,156
450
1891
27,562
634
1901
29,965
651
1911
41.481
1,032
1921
85,590
2,275
the first Chairman being Mr. Benjamin Hirschel Babbage.
The first assessment book of the district w r as confirmed
on the sth December, 1853, being made by the first Dis-
trict Clerk (Mr. Richard Carlington). This assessment
book is at present in the hands of the District Clerk, and
upon perusal many familiar names can be found, whose
descendants are still ratepayers in the district. The original
District Council of Mitcham w'as much larger in area than
it is to-day; comprising then the present district, the
whole of the present City of Unley, and a portion of the
District Councils of Marion and Stirling. In 1920 a fur-
ther 370 acres w'as severed to form what is known as the
Garden Suburb.
UNLEY SEVERED FROM MITCHAM.
The first assessment amounted to £22.562, and the
rate was 1/ in the £. There Avas at that time 477 dwellings,
with a population of under 2,000 persons. In the year 1871,
what is now the City of Unley, w r as severed from the Dis-
trict of Mitcham, and in that year Mitcham’s assessment
amounted to £14.150, with 377 dwellings.
PROGRESS OF DISTRICT.
To give the reader an idea of the growth of the dis-
trict the following table, showing the assessment and num-
ber of dwellings at ten-year intervals, is interesting, viz.: —
It will be seen from the foregoing that the progress
up to 1911 was slow, and in the following ten years the
increase was over 100 per cent. The figures for the fol-
lowing ten years, however, are amazing, and tend to show
how the district has gained popularity during that period.
The assessment for 19,31 being £267,593, dwellings 4,424.
The assessment for 1935 totals £220,032 and dwellings
total 4,540.
During the past twenty years there has been 150 land
subdivisions, throwing open 70 miles of new roads. The
total length of district roads is 160 miles and main loads
21 miles.
The District Council of Mitcham comprises many
townships, in which are included Mitcham, Hawthorn,
Kingswood, Westbourne Park, Redfern, Cabra, Edwards
town. Cumberland, Springbank, Clapham, West Mitcham,
Eden, Belair, Blackwood, Coromandel Valley, Upper Sturt.
Brown Hill Creek, Glen Osmond, Reade Park Gardens, and
Hollywood. The district contains many open spaces,
parks, ovals and reserves to the extent of 2,500 aci es, in
eluding the National Park (the State’s premier pleasure
resort), the Brown Hill Creek Reserve, also the Uirbrae
Estate of 300 acres (given to the University of Adelaide
by the late Mr. Peter Waite). Another 114 acres of the
same estate was given to the Government for the establish-
ment of an Agricultural College.
There are also many private and public institutions
within the district, amongst which are Scotch College, St.
Andrews’ College, Wykeham College, Waite Agricultural
Research Institute, Cabra Convent, Bedford Park Sana-
torium, Kalyra Sanatorium, Andrew’s Cottage Homes,
Church of England Orphan Home, and Minda Home, Black-
wood. There are also eleven schools (public and pri-
vate), twenty churches of all denominations, five post
offices, three police stations, and three institutes.
Without washing to make distinctions, it may not be
out of place to mention a few' names of prominent men in
the State’s progress wdrose home w'as within Mitcham s
bounds, viz.—Einlayson, Tolmer. Fiveash, Robert Torrens
(founder of Real Property Act), Sir Win. Morgan, Sir
Arthur Blythe, Sir Thomas Elder, Robert Barr-Smith,
Thomas Price, and many others.
LIST OF PAST COUNCILLORS.
Babbage, Benj. Herschel 1853 First Chairman
Burton, Dr. R. F. 1862 Chairman
Murray, 1862
Burfield, 1862
Armour, Amos 1862
Mills, SamT, Jun. 1862
Homersham, Edw. Collett 1863
Laffer, Phillip F; 1863
Trenouth, George 1864


Badman, Sylvester 1864
Hoffman. J. G. 1865
Easther, A\ m. 1866 Chairman
Mitchell, Paul 1866
Thomson, John 1866
Howard, J. 1867
Shepley, J. 1867
Prince, John, Jr. 1867
Mosley, H., Sr. 1868
Robinson, Henry 1869
Kentish, Jas., Jr. 1870 Chairman
Anderson, Charles 1870 Chairman
Gooch, Geo. C. 1871 Chairman
Lloyd, John V. 1871
Bartlett. Samuel 1872
Townsend. Fredck. 1872
Buchanan, Robt. 1873
Playford, John 1874
Finn, S. G. 1874
Deans, David 1875 Chairman
Macgeorge (J.P.), Alex. 1876 Chairman
Shephard, W. T. 1877
Williams (J.P.), John 1878
Melville, Wm. 1879
Welbourne, T. P. 1880
Bagshaw, J. A. 1880 Chairman
Fiveash, J. L. R. 1881 Chairman
Horn, Richd. Austin 1881
Murray, Alex. 1881 Chairman
Grimes, Rupert J. 1882
McDonald, Alex. 1884
Ralph, J. T. 1887
Hewett. Daniel J. 1887 Chairman
Nisbet, W. 1889
Merkel, P. M. 1889
Shobbrook, Thos. 1890
Mills, Chas. R. 1893
Edwards, Geo. 1894
Bradey, Wm. 1895 Chairman
Gngg, Geo. 1897
Mattingly, Edw. 1898
Winn, W. W. 1899 Chairman
Hennessy, John 1901 Chairman
Laffer, Geo. R. 1901 Chairman
Curtis, Win. F. 1902
Weymss, Robt. 1904
Lawson, John 1906
McDonald, R. 1908
Wrighton, John 1908
Penno, Arthur J. 1910 Present Chairman
Hosking, Edwin J. 1910
Everett, Geo. V. 1910 Chairman
Hewett, Robt. H. 1911
Dynon, Jas. 1911
Sissons, Geo. 1912
Martin, J. S. L. C. 1912
Bennie, Andrew 1912
Thomas, W. J. 1912
Stephens, Arthur 1913
Hopkins, Wm. A. 1914
Duncan, Robt. 1914 Chairman
Slee, Jas. 1914 Chairman
Downer, Chas. J. 1918
Shephert, Jos. S. 1918
Treliving, Edgar 1918
Nieass, Arthur W. 1918
Creek, Geo. 1919
Walters, John H. 1920
Lester, Leonard V. 1920
Norman, Wm. Ashley 1921 Present Cr.
Hill, Arthur A. 1922
Wauchope, A. R. 1923
Tidemann, Geo. 1923
Jones, Wm. A. 1923 Present Cr.
Sorrell, Herbert W. 1924
Bradey, Harold F. 1925
Catt, Col. A. C. 1925
Blyth. David 1926
Sutton, Chas. R. 1927 Present Cr.
West, Cecil A. M. 1928
Dring, John Robt. 1929 Present Cr.
Eime, Hugo T. 1930 Present Cr.
Harper, A. F. L. 193Q
Batchelor, Henry E. 1932 Present Cr.
King, Sidney Wm. 1935
James, Wm. J. 1935 Present Cr.
Jones, Frederic G. 1935 Present Cr.
Daly, Evelyn 1936 Present Cr.


Jp£ jjjWP 1 * 1 -r . :: .
* Mir
■'
iffi
■ V >- : '
?. / ji, ■;
“ <■*
'• I
. :. i , ,. ■'Sfv;
CHAIRMAN ARTHUR JAMES PENNO,
J.P.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Mr. Penno was born at Wallaroo,
25th May, 1870, and educated at the
Wallaroo State School. He was
elected Councillor for Upper Sturt
Ward, and has served continuously as
Chairman in the Council for 21 years.
Mr. Penno has been President for 7
years of the Local Government Asso-
ciation and a Council representative on
County, Central Town Planning, Muni-
cipal Wages, Abbatoirs, and Infectious
Diseases Hospital Boards. In busi-
ness he is a Chaff and Grain Mer-
chant at Blackwood, and is also a
member of the Blackwood Masonic and
Independent Order of Rechabite
Lodges. His sports are football and
cricket. Home address, Blackwood.
THE LATE WILLIAM BRADEY
(Past Chairman, District Council of
Mitcham.)
The late Mr. Bradey was born at
Adelaide, 21st December, 1858, and
educated at the Mitcham Public
School. Pie died on December 24th,
1920 and was buried at the Mitcham
Church of England Cemetery. The
late Mr. Bradey served in the
Mitcham Council for twenty five and a
half years, being elected Councillor for
Mitcham Ward in 1894; his term was
continuous except for a brief space of
about four months, and on his return
he represented Glen Osmond Ward.
He was Chairman for two years, and
was for 54 years a resident of the
Mitcham District. Bradey Street
Mitcham, of which he was a resident
was named after him. He was Presi-
dent of the Mitcham Institute and
Library, and also President and one
of the founders of the Mitcham boys
Club. He was a member of the Odd-
fellows M.U. Lodge, and took a very
keen interest in cricket. Two of Mr.
Bradey's sons enlisted in the Great
War, and both made the Supreme
Sacrifice.
THE LATE ALEXANDER MURRAY.
(Past Chairman, District Council of
Mitcham.)
Born at Glasgow, Scotland, 1836.
Arrived in South Australia, 1840. The
late Mr. Murray was elected for Cora-
mandel Ward of the District Council
of Mitcham on August 19th, 1881, and
he was the sole representative of the
Ward for over 17 years. On 9th July,
1889, he was elected Chairman of the
Council, and the Mitcham Local Board
of Health. He discharged his duty


'./?>’» ;v--
ipf^
- ■* >’■ * ** l ‘ «■
JHHH
■• vm V*/ Jm w
" 4 f |„
I _ „
U M
■HP : ■ %
w \ m
|v \ XjttP9fti
-Kb '•
mjk %
MKLd V % «lp
«« *”(#' - »* • .* *
' J
nobly, and without hesitation did re-
gardless of consequences, what he
thought was right. Mr. Murray died
in December, 1898 as a result of an
accident 011 the Belair Road, when he
was returning home after a meeting
of the Mitcham Council. The late
Mr. Murray's father represented the
district of Sturt for a number of years
in the House of Assembly. The late
Mr. Murray resided at Coromandel
\ alley the whole of his life with the
exception of four years, when he ac-
companied his late father in 1852 to
the Bendigo Gold hields, but owing
to meeting with little success, returned
to South Australia. The late Mr. Mur-
ray was fond of all sport, and had
taken a keen interest in the formation
of the Norwood Cycling Club, and at
one time was President and Vice-
President. He left three sons, Albciny,
of V . Menz & Co., biscuit manufac-
turers, Adelaide, A. 8., of Craiglee,
Coromandel Valley, J. G., of Kalgoor-
lie, W.A., and one daughter, Mrs.
McTaggart of Coromandel Valley.
THE LATE GEORGE RICHARD LAFFER.
(Past Chairman, District Council of
Mitcham.)
Born at Belair, December Ist, 1866,
and educated at Prince Alfred College,
Adelaide. The late Mr. Laffer was a
member of the Mitcham District
Council, the Advisory Board of Agri-
culture and a Life Member of the
Agricultural Bureau. He was also a
Member of Parliament for Alexandra
from 1913 until his decease, being
Minister for Lands in the Barwell
Government, and Speaker of the
House of Assembly. The late Mr.
Laffer was a resident of the district
all his life. He was a member of the
Druids Lodge and was fond of cricket,
football and shooting. He died in
December, 1933.
THE LATE DANIEL JOHN HEWETT.
(Past Chairman of the District Council of
Mitcham.)
Born at Adelaide, 19th October,
1842, on the site where Parliament
House now stands. Mr. Hewett
served in the Mitcham District Coun-
cil from 1887-1901, being Chairman
during most of that period. The late
Mr. Hewett resided at Blackwood
from 1882 until the date of his death,
11th August, 1924. He was in business
as a builder and contractor at
Clarendon and Blackwood, and was a
member of the Clarendon Oddfellows
Lodge. His father was one of the
early pioneers of the State having
camped under the Old Gum Tree at
Glenelg, and his marriage was the
first celebrated at Trinity Church,
North Terrace, in 1837.
THE LATE B. H. BABBAGE.
(First Chairman of the District Council of
Mitcham in the year 1853.)
Mr. Babbage was born in England
in the year 1815 and died at St. Mar s,
South Road, South Australia, on the
22nd October, 1878. The late .' r.
Babbage was educated as an engine r,
and for a considerable time was <u-
gaged in his profession in Europe; lie
was employed as assistant engineer at
the Bristol end of the Great Northern
Railway for about 4 years, and for
about 2 years was engaged between


f**
4li ?SC I
*%
3| ?ml »||«IIMBg^ * *
-«* jl^Miii^
Chippenham and Winden 011 the same
railway. Later he was engaged in
superintending the construction of the
Bristol end of the Bristol and Glouces-
ter Railway, and shortly afterwards
laid out a railway across the
Appeninnes from Genoa to Milan, lie
was commissioned by the Government
of Piedmont to report on a line across
the Alps by way of Monte Cenio. He
was then engaged by an English com-
pany, and was appointed engineer-in-
chief in laying out and constructing a
railway from Florence to Pistoja.
Upon returning to England he was
appointed an engineering inspector
under the General Board of Health,
and was engaged in the capacity, re-
porting on water, sewerage, and sani-
tary conditions of towns in England.
Mr. Babbage arrived in South Aus-
tralia in November, 1851, on the ship
"Hydaspes." In the following year he
was appointed commissioner to issue
gold licences, a Geological and
Mineralogical Surveyor, Government
Assayer, and a Justice of the Peace.
He was the first engineer of the Port
Adelaide Railway, which was the first
line constructed in South Australia.
Mr. Babbage was also an explorer of
note, discovering the Mac Donald
River, St. Mary's Pool, Blanchwater,
and the surrounding country. After
returning he was elected to the first
Parliament under the new constitution,
representing Encounter Bay in the
House of Assembly with the late Mr.
A. F. Lindsay. He resigned after 9
months, and was appointed to take
charge of a northern exploring expe-
dition in 1857. On completion of this
task he did not appear much in public
life. He announced himself as a can-
didate at the election shortly before
his death. His characteristic and
straightforward address to the elec-
tors is well worth reproducing here:
"I beg," he wrote, "to ofifer myself as
a candidate for one of the existing
vacancies in the Council, but at the
same time I beg respectfully to in-
form you that it is not my intention
either to canvass or in any way to
solicit your votes. I consider these
matters to be your duties and not my
business. If my services are worth
having, it is surely worth your while
to secure them by taking the trouble
of electing me." Mr. Babbage did not
go to the poll, however, as a large
number of candidates offered them-
selves, and he decided to withdraw.
"The Roserie," the name of his resi-
dence at Marion, otherwise known as
"The Castle" of recent years, is now
demolished. His grandson, Mr. F. H.
Clare, still occupies a portion of the
old estate by carrying on business as a
dairy farmer
THE LATE PHILIP FREDERICK
LAFFER.
(Past Chairman, District Council of
Mitcham.)
Mr. Laffer was born at Tallang,
Cornwall, England, July, 1834, and
arrived in Australia in July, 1840. He
was educated at Adelaide. The late
Mr. Laffer went to the Victorian
Gold Fields in 1852, and on his return
started fruit growing at Belair, and
he sent one of the first shipments of
Australian apples to London, in 1888.
He was a resident of the district from
1854 until his decease in 1912,


'JM‘ tH‘ '"§0
*■
- A -
THE LATE JOHN PLAYFORD.
(Past Councillor, District Council of
Mitcham.)
Born at London, October 22nd, 1842.
Arrived in Australia 1884. Educated
Thomas Lugg’s School, Mitcham and
resided in the Mitcham District during
the whole of his life-time. Mr. Play-
ford was instrumental with the aid of
Councillor Chas. Anderson in building
the present stone bridge over the
Brown Hill Creek on the Blythwood
Road, Mitcham. He was a member of
the Independent Order of Oddfellows,
M.U. Lodge. He died in June, 1920.
THE LATE ALEXANDER McDONALD,
M.P.
(Past Councillor, District Council of
Mitcham.)
Was born at Kirkwall, Orkney Is-
lands, on the 6th February, 1849, and
arrived in Australia, 1851. He served
in the Mitcham District Council from
1884-87, and resided in the district
(Blackwood) from 1883-1921. He was
a Storekeeper at Baker's Gully, Kan-
garilla and Blackwood. The late Mr.
McDonald was a member of Parlia-
ment from the 19th March, 1887 to the
17th May, 1915, representing the dis-
trict of Alexandra. He voluntarily
vacated his seat in Parliament as a
member for Alexandra in order that
his old chief, the late Hon. A. LI.
Pealce might contest it, which he did
successfully. Mr. McDonald's public
spirit was commended for his willing-
ness to resign his seat in Parliament.
He was a member of the Clarendon
Rechabite Lodge, and his sports were
cricket and bowls.
THE LATE HAROLD FRANCIS BRADEY.
(Past Councillor, District Council of
Mitcham.)
Born at Bradey Street, Mitcham, in
1890, and educated at Coramendal
Valley and St. Michael Schools. !
late Mr. Bradey served 2 years as
councillor in the Mitcham District
Council, and died at Mitcham in July,
1932, in his 42nd year. His father,
the late Mr. W. M. Bradey also served
as Councillor in the Council. He v s
fond of football and cricket as sports.
PAST COUNCILLOR EDGAR
TRELIVING.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at London, England, 20th Sc p-
tember, 1878, and educated at Cran-
leigh School, Surrey, and King’s Col-
lege, England. Mr. Treliving arrb ed


•Ih * K
jy
'. ?ai|p
in ustralia in 1912, and served in the
Council for three years. He has been
for 20 years a resident of the distric',
and has been Chairman of the \\ est-
bourne Park School Committee for
several years, and w T as a keen advo-
cate for tree-planting and placing men
on the land. Mr. Treliving is a Foun-
dation Associate Member of the Insti-
tute of Engineers of Australia, and
in business he is an Engineer and im-
porter, Light Square, Adelaide. He
is a Member of the Masonic Friend-
ship Lodge No. 1, and his sport is
bowls. Home address, 36 Carlyle
Road, Westbourne Park.
PAST COUNCILLOR THE LATE
ARTHUR FRANCIS LYNSAY
HARPER.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Horn at Clarendon, 1890, and edu-
cated at Clarendon I üblic School. The
Late Councillor Harper served 2 years
in the Council, and was a resident of
the district for G years. He was a
member of the Masonic and Recha-
bite Lodges. He was rejected for
active service on 15 occasions, and was
Camp Adjutant at Morphettville, Ascot
Park and Mitcham from 1914-18. The
Late Councillor Harper died on the
26th March, 1932. Tn business he was
an Auctioneer and Land Agent.
THE LATE JOHN LAWSON.
(Past Councillor, District Council of
Mitcham.)
Was born at Leeds, England, and
arrived at Port Adelaide in October,
1876. In the following year his wife
and family were brought to South
Australia. Mr. Lawson erected the
first mining machinery on the Barrier
at the Umberumberka mine. Fie took
an active interest in friendly societies,
and a Past Grand Master of the
1.0.0. F. of South Australia, also Past
Deputy Grand Sire of the Grand
Lodge of Australasia. He was a mem-
ber of Lodge 408, Adelaide Free-
masons, from 1884 and was a Justice
of the. Peace from 1914. He served as
a member of the Mitcham District
Council, representing Mitcham and
Westbourne Park Wards. He was
also a member of the first Eight-
Hours Day Committee in October,
1878. Mr. Lawson died at his resi-
dence, Edward Street, Edwardstown
on the sth October, 1929, in his 81st
year.


SBHi ? &aM
; ; w||
|||
■’" ;? *%' ? evil' '
jB w.^
,
■Hp ■PtL 9k
<%*v
'" ' ' ... .£—
THE LATE COLONEL A. C. CATT, J.P.
(Past Councillor, District Council of
Mitcham.)
Born at Strathalbyn, and educated
at the Strathalbyn Public School, and
later at Prince Alfred College. When
19 years of age the late Mr. Catt
entered the employ of his father, who
was a Storekeeper at Gladstone, but in
the year 1894 he commenced business
as an Auctioneer and Estate Agent at
Gladstone, on his own account. Early
in his career , he took an interest in
Military affairs, receiving Commission
in 1885, and being promoted to Cap-
tain in 1886, and Major in 1892. In
1897 he was made Lieutenant Colonel;
he retired from the Military in 1903,
with the rank of Colonel. In July,
1925, the late Mr. Catt was appointed
Councillor for Clapham Ward in the
Mitcham District Council and at the
time of his death was Chairman of the
Finance Committee. For several
years he was Mayor of Gladstone, and
was also President of the Prince
Alfred Old Scholars’ Association for
two and of the Adelaide Oval
Bowling Club. He was Superinten-
dent of the United Methodist Sunday
School for several years, and Presi-
dent of the Mitcham Institute. In
1884 he was appointed a Justice of the
Peace for South Australia. The late
Colonel Catt died on 3rd of October,
1930, at his home at Church Road,
Mitcham.
PAST COUNCILLOR HUGO THEODOR
EIME, J.P.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Morgan, Ist June, 1884, and
educated at Public School, Morgan,
and Concordia College, Murton, Vic-
toria. Mr. Einie had six years’ ser-
vice in Council, and was a Member of
the Finance Committee. In business
he is an Hotel Keeper, and at present
his sport is bowls. In his earlier days,
he played football. He was for seven
years a teacher in the S.A. Education
Department, and was appointed a
Justice of the Peace in 1910. Home
address, Smithfield Hotel, Smithfield.
PAST COUNCILLOR THE LATE
THOMAS SHOBBROOK.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Davenport, England, 18 0.
Arrived at Port Adelaide in 1851, a
educated at Moore’s, Pultenev Street
School. He served five years as Cou
cillor. Ihe late Mr. Shobbrook was
keenly interested in the Methodist
Church, Goodwood Road, and was
Secretary and I reasurer of the Sunday
School for 25 years. He was a keen


''■v>V-.^
1;- *1 **
'<* i
,~ Mk *
Jl *
*
■ I
£ : V- ' v :-/;.
and very successful Show Competitor
with his ponies throughout South
Australia, and interested in all clean,
good sports. Mr. Shobbrook died on
the 28th July, 1921, in his 71st year.
PAST COUNCILLOR ROBERT WEMYSS,
J.P.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Kirkcaldy, Fife, Scotland,
Ist December, 1856. Educated at
Kirkcaldy, Burntisland and Edinburgh.
Mr. Wemyss arrived in Australia Ist
September, 1879. He represented
Glen Osmond Ward July, 1904 to June,
1906, Hawthorn Ward July, 1908 to
June, 1910, in the District Council of
Mitcham. He was a resident of the
district for 24 years. He is a Justice
of the Peace for S.A., a Pastoralist,
Director of several Gold Mining Com-
panies, Chairman and Managing
Director of Cumberland Gold Mining
Company, Chairman of Standard Salt
and Alkali Ltd., Chief of the S.A.
Caledonian Society, President of the
Royal Institution for the Blind, North
Adelaide, on the Board of Governors,
Scotch College, Mitcham, and member
of the Board of Clarkson's Ltd., Ade-
laide. In earlier years, Mr. \\ emvss
was keen on yachting, golf, cricket,
rifle shooting and hurling. Home ad-
dress, 49 Hackney Road, Hackney.
PAST COUNCILLOR HERBERT
WALTER SORRELL.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Port Adelaide, 1895, and
educated at Port Adelaide Public
School. Mr. Sorrell was a member of
the Council for 10 years, and has been
associated with the Mitcham Institute
since its inception, being Vice Presi-
dent of same for four years, also
Chairman and Secretary of the
Mitcham Progress Association for five
years. He is a member of the A.N.A.
and Buffalo Lodges. During the War
Mr. Sorrell served with the 18th
Battery, A.F.A., in France, Belgium,
and Egypt. His sports are tennis and
bowls. Home address, 24 Kent Road,
Keswick.
PAST COUNCILLOR LATE GEORGE
TIDEMANN.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Grenfell Street, Adelaide.
6th April, 1872, and educated Peek's
Academy, Grote Street, Adelaide. The
late Councillor Tidemann served in the
Mitcham District Council, representing
Westbourne Park Ward 1920-30. He
was Council’s Delegate to the Munici-
pal and Suburban District Councils As-


/ a# : ; \
jf*
*S -. *HSS|
V i • jf JHH^i
■f 4 . s Jf w
* , : ' jk jK|. jj» #
f J» ./* • :
sociation. Member of the Unley High
School Committee, President of the
\\ cstbourne Park Branch Liberal
Federation, also on Committees of
Kuitpo Industrial Colony and Price
Memorial Oval, Hawihorn. He was
a member of the Hawthorn Masonic
Lodge. In business he was stationed
for 18 years with Burns, Philp and
Co., Ltd. in Townsville, North
Queensland, and for the last 18 years
of his life with George Wills & Co.,
Ltd. in Adelaide. He was a well-
known member of the C.T.A. As-
sociation. Mr. Tidemann died 28th
July, 1930. His sports were cycling,
cricke and bowls, being a member of
the Hawthorn Bowling Club.
PAST COUNCILLOR THE LATE PETER
MARTIN MERKEL.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Mr. Merkel was born at Wedel,
Holstein, 17th October, 1829, and
educated at Wedel. Lie arrived in
Australia in September, 1857. He
served in the Council from July Ist,
1889 to June 30th, 1893, and was a
resident of the district from 1862 to
1904. The late Mr. Merkel was in
business as a market gardener; he
served in the Prusso-Danish War, and
died at Brown Hill Creek, Mitcham,
30th April, 1904.
PAST COUNCILLOR ARTHUR
STEPHENS.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Willunga, 6th October,
1871. Educated at Willunga Public
School. For seven years Councillor,
representing Hope Ward, and 29 years
a resident of the district. Business,
Blacksmith. Member of the Oddfel-
lows Lodge, joined the Australian
Light Horse in 1900, Home Service
for 19 years.
PAST COUNCILLOR JOHN HENR'
WALTERS.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Auburn, South Australia.
July 31st, 1872, and educated at G n
Osmond Public School. Mr. Walters
served in the Council 4J years, and 1 s
been 41 years a resident of the district.
He was for 26 years District Com il
Works Foreman, and is now Foreman
Colonel Fight Gardens. He is a Mem-
ber of the Masonic and Oddfellows
Fodges. Home address, 47 Wst
Parkway, Colonel Fight Gardens.


IB # i jp
, ™ 1| ■.
W^ifW
Jfo- H • 9HI
.jm
IjflillilC' ffiy>Tjwla4k , ,. jjSBM3MR
■ • 3
||!|m i!L, ■
PAST COUNCILLOR GEORGE GRIGG.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Brown Hill Creek, Mi chant
1872, and educated at Public Schools
and Pulteney Street School, Adelaide.
He represented Glen Osmond Ward
for four years in the Mitcham Dis-
trict Council, and has been a resident
of the district for the whole of his
life. Mr. Grigg is a retired Market
Gardener, and has been for 46 years a
Member of the Oddfellows Lodge,
M.U. and at present is a Trustee.
Home address, 5 Barr-Elder Road,
Torrens Park.
PAST COUNCILLOR EDWIN JOHN
HOSKING.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Adelaide, 22nd July, 1870,
and educated at the Riverton Public
School. Mr. Hosking was councillor
for Hawthorn Ward for four years
and represented the Mitcham District
Council on the Metropolitan County
Board. He keenly advocated the
Hawthorn Oval project and was Sec-
retarv of the West Adelaide Branch
of the Labour Party for four years,
fie also represented the Stanley Dis-
trict on the Labour Council. Mr.
Hosking has been a resident of the
district for 35 years, and is a member
of the Rechabite Lodge. During the
years 1912-17 he was engaged in real
estate business in conjunction with
Mr. Tom Rvan. His home address is
281 Unley Road, Unley.
THE LATE ROBERT HENRY HEWETT.
(Past Councillor, District Council of
Mitcham.)
Born at Ft. Elliot, 20th February,
18G6, and educated at Clarendon Pub-
lic School. He served in Council from
July, 1911 to December, 1917. The
late Mr. Hewett was for 37 years a
resident of the district, and he was in
business as a builder. He was a mem-
ber of the 1.0.0.F.M.U. and Fores-
ters' Lodges, and he had taken an
active part in all local organisations
and public matters. He died on the
21st December, 1917.
PAST COUNCILLOR EVELYN DALY,
J.P.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Mr. Daly was born at Appila, 24th
June, 1886, and educated at the Appila
Public School and Christian Brothers’
College, Adelaide. He was elected
Councillor representing Hawthorn
Ward in April, 1936, and has been for


11
1 X N v lilL
jjl
'■ _
13 years a resident of the district. In
business, he is a Jute Merchant and
Grocer, and also Director of Messrs.
Springfield Limited. His sport is
tennis. Home address, 22 William
Street, Hawthorn.
THE LATE WALTER WILLIAM
WINN.
(Past Councillor, District Council of
Mitcham.)
Born at Coromandel Valley, 12th
Septmeber, 1868. The late Mr. Winn
served 13 years in the Council and
during that time he acted as Chairman
and Councillor. Mr. Winn was a resi-
dent of the District for 70 years, and
before his decease, which occurred on
26th November. 1931, was in business
as a master baker. He was a member
of the Masonic, Rechabite, and Odd-
fellows Lodges. His sport was
cricket.
PAST COUNCILLOR GEORGE
STRATTON DAY, J.P.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Portland, Victoria, 81st
August, 1895, and educated in Victoria.
Service in Council: three years as
Councillor, representing Mope Ward,
and 10 years a resident of the district.
He was a Member of the Works Com-
mittee. Business: Manager in South
Australia for the Employers Liability
Assurance Corporation, Ltd., Epworth
Buildings, Pirie Street, Adelaide. He
has been connected with the Insurance
Profession in Victoria, Tasmania, and
South Australia, and has held the
present position as Manager of his
Company for 8| years, and is a member
of the United Tradesman's Lodge No.
4, Masonic. Mr. Day served for four
years with the 12th Field Artillery
Brigade, A.1.F., and was wounded and
gassed in France. Home address, 63
Avenue Road, Avenue Park.
PAST COUNCILLOR GEORGE CREEK.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at West Mitcham, 1859, and
educated at Miss Townsend’s Private
School, West Mi'cham. He had 12
years’ service in Council, and has been
a resident of the district all his life.
His occupation is Foreman Ouarrv-
man. Mr. Creek is a Member of the
Oddfellows Lodge, and Trustee of the
West Mitcham Methodist Church, and
his sports are cricket and football.
Home address, 62 Brook Street, W esl
Mitcham.
PAST COUNCILLOR GEORGE VICTOR
EVERETT, J.P.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at London, England, 2nd
December, 1867, and educated at
“Friends” College, Safron, Walden
Essex, England. Mr. Everett ar-
rived in Australia 12th May, 1886, and
has resided in the district for 15 years.
He served in the Council 5 years, ai I
was C hairman 1918-14. For hve years
he was a member of the Metropolitai
County Board, and seven years Sec-
retary, Edwardstown Branch Labour
Party. Secretary to the Edwardstown
Baptist Church, and was appointed a
Justice of the Peace in 1918. A member
Emulation Lodge, Freemasons, and
his sports are football and cricket.
Home address, a Rozells Avenue,
Colonel Light Gardens.
714


1 dBIfe ||SpL
''''' * -^' x
Wgm' : " : *'' r ’ i|% HnH
■ I
■
! - • *&.
» «||g 0W^(
>jm
iS3|i|i I I
■ ® JV
ilib'
JSWbr
/
I z
■ Jm„
m^H|. m-wM:
ImL Sk T
— »• T *"
Hr
M &' ji ■■ '• J
- ,: * JjjjE * ' '’**’ ; X Al
PAST COUNCILLOR JOHN HENNESSY,
J.P.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Norwood, 1804, and edit-
! at Sisters of St. Joseph, and
Norwood Public Schools. Mr. Hen-
nessy served in the Council, 0 years
as Councillor, and 2 years as Chair-
man. He represented Mitcham Coun-
cil m the Electrification of the Muni-
Tramways, and resided in
Mitcham from 1894 to 1908, when he
was appointed a Justice of the Peace.
In business he is a Builder and Con-
tractor, and is a Member of the Druids
Lodge, and his sport is bowls. Home
address, 50 Arthur Street, Unley.
COUNCILLOR FREDERICK GEORGE
JONES.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Virginia, South Australia,
1871, and educated at Wild Horse
Plains Public School and Way Col-
lege, Adelaide. Mr. Jones is a retired
farmer and grazier, and for many
years resided in the Wimmera District
of Victoria. He established the well-
known Cottesloe Stud of Friesian
cattle in South Australia. His sport
is cricket and bowls, and he is a mem -
ber of the Unley Bowling Club. Home
address, Brainar Road, Mitcham.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM JOHN
JAMES, J.P.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Gawler, 26th April, 1871, and
educated at Grote and Sturt Streets
Public Schools. Mr. James has served
one year in the Council, and has been
a resident of the district for 9 years.
He is Past Senior Grand Warden of
the Masonic Lodge, South Australia,
and a Past Master of the Leopold
Lodge. He is also connected with the
Independent Order of Oddfellows. Mr.
James is President of the Reade Park
Bowling Club, and is associated with
the majority of sporting clubs in the
district. In business he is proprietor
of the Economic Drapery Store, Good-
wood Road, Colonel Light Gardens.
COUNCILLOR HENRY EDMUND
BATCHELOR.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Mr. Batchelor was born at Glenclg,
30th January. 1867, and educated at
North Adelaide Public School. He
has served in the Council for four
years, is a member of the Works
Committee, and is a retired Public
Servant. He was the first apprentice
of Sir Langdon Bonython after he be-
came the sole proprietor of “The


i|«i :
Kv. ■■*"■ •****,•— *> *«*^|
p mit0 //
wSfu-- MQ$ %
W
I t/fy
. . . .* .
I X J|
1 %■ 1 ''
, 1 1
\
' ;■€*.: «£l|l «t 1m H
II
Advertiser.” After completion of his
indenture as a compositor he joined
the Hansard staff of the “Advertiser.”
Mr. Batchelor went to reside in W.A.
in 1901, and joined the literary staff
of the “West Australian.” He re-
turned to S.A. in 1911, and entered
Government Service as Publicity
Officer of the Tourist Bureau, and
Editor of the “Agricutural Journal.”
Subsequently he was transferred to
the Hansard staff where he remained
until his retirement in 1932.
Lie is a member of the Hawthorn
Bowling Club and a Past Master of
the Public Service Masonic Lodge.
Mr. Batchelor is a brother of the late
Hon. E. L. Batchelor, who was
minister in both State and Federal
Governments.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES RONALD
SUTTON.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Adelaide, 30th January,
1893, and educated at Prince Alfred
College. For 9 years Councillor Mit-
cham District Council, and a resident
in the district for 12 years. Business,
Managing Director of Charles R.
Sutton, Limited, Real Estate Agents
and Auctioneers ; Hon. General Secre-
tary Legacy Club of Adelaide; Past
President of Mitcham Sub-branch of
Returned Soldiers and Sailors’ Im-
perial League; a member of Prince
Alfred Old Collegians’ Masonic Lodge.
Lieutenant of 10th Infantry Batta-
lion, A.I.F. Served in Egypt and
France.
COUNCILLOR AINSLEY REGINALD
WAUCHOPE.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Port Germein, 29th Novem-
ber, 1895, and educated at Public
Schools and the Adelaide University.
Mr. Wauchope has served in the Mit-
cham District Council for 2 years, in
which he is a Councillor and a mem-
ber of the Building and Works Com-
mittee. He has been a resident of the
district for 4 years, and is in business
as a Timber Merchant, being a mem-
ber of the firm of Freeman, Wauchope
Ltd. Mr. Wauchope was one of the
founders, and is a life member of the
South-Western District Institute,
Westbourne Park. He is a member
of the North Adelaide Cycling Club,
Vice-President of the North Adelaide
Football Club, and his sports are
cricket, football, motoring, and fish-
ing. During the Great War he served
on active service for 4 years with the
A.1.F., and is now a member of the
Prospect Sub-branch R.S.S.I.L \.
Home address, 19 Avenel Gardens
Road, Medindie.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM ASHLEY
NORMAN, LL.B.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Mr. Norman was born at GleneL,
20th January 1883. and educated at
Way College. He has been a mend r
of the Council for 13 years and a
resident of the district for 20 years.
He is Chairman of the Finance Coi -


.. .
■Wf I i fji ~$P
I ■
i: )
■S^L
Wk i %
■UP /■ ; . %
/
|||||I1 BBlHH
mittee and has represented the Coun-
cil on the Municipal Tramways Trust
from 1929 to 1934. In business, he
is a solicitor at 23 Grenfell .Street,
Adelaide. Home address, Fullarton
Road, Mitcham.
Mitcham Druids' Lodge. He is a
member of the Masonic, Oddfellows,
M.U., and Druids' Lodges. His occu-
pation is Sales Manager, and his sport
is bowls. Home address, 34 Kyre
Avenue, Kingswood.
Metropolitan and Export Abattoirs
Board. Mr. Jones has taken part, and
is still interested in, the local football
and cricket clubs.
COUNCILLOR JOHN ROBERT DRING.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Hindmarsh, 31st October,
1883, and educated at Whinham Col-
lege, North Adelaide. _ Mr. Bring has
been for 25 years a resident of the dis-
trict, and has been a Councillor since
1930. He is Chairman Kingswood
Recreation Ground, President of Haw-
thorn Bowling Club, Member of the
Hawthorn Oval 1 rust, and 4 rustee
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM ARCHIBALD
JONES.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Coromandel Valley, May
3rd. 1881, and educated at Coromandel
Valley Public School. Mr. Jones has
been a member of the Council since
1923, and is a member of the Druids’
Lodge. He is a butcher at Blackwood
and a member of the Board of the
Master Butchers Ltd., also of the
COUNCILLOR ALFRED WILLIAM
NIEASS.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Salisbury, 12th January,
1861, and educated at Salisbury State
School. Mr. Nieass was elected Coun-
cillor for Edwardstown Ward, July,
1918, and has been a resident of the
district for 40 years. He is Chair-
man of the Works Committee, and is
also a member of the Oddfellows’


. .. ■
lEAi i i£i|| ||: . &. a|
ki * £S v. v"1 * JK-‘* p
• *_uS ..?#> .M&x S .'$j? ..mi
JsLji Jjm |raJ|
■ ■ m
jjjjiMi w jmbb
av *
|MML if ~ w :
f » * MmwHBB
HKTM , iH^^H
,Hk ; ., f \ /
J|| JR*-* ir :t4; • -
rla **. *
Jfl •* Jp
|£/f&v %&& * wra?
M.U. Lodge. Mr. Nieass is a retired
Stone Mason, and his sport is cricket.
Home address, 11 Price Street,
Edwardstown.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE GIBBONS
COLEBATCH.
(District Council of Mitcham.)
Born at Magill, 7th August, 1894,
and educated at North Broken Hill
Public School. Mr. Colebatch was
elected to the Council on the 4th July,
1936. He is a Clerk in the Finance
Branch of the Defence Department, a
member of the United Ancient Order
of Druids' Lodge, and his sports are
cricket, lacrosse, and tennis. During
the Great War Mr. Colebatch served
abroad with the A.I.F. on active ser-
vice from 1917 to 1919. Private ad-
dress, 60 Price Avenue, Torrens Park
West.
LAWRENCE DALLEY BOORMAN.
(District Clerk, District Council of Mitcham.)
Mr. Boorman was born at High
Street, Mitcham, Bth October, 1886,
and educated at St. Michael’s Private
School, the Mitcham Public School,
and Hogg’s Commercial College. He
was appointed Junior Clerk, 2nd Janu-
ary, 1902, and promoted to District
Clerk, 2nd January, 1913. Mr. Boorman
was President and Secretary of the
Mitcham Institute, has been for
years a member of St. Michael -
Church Choir, Mitcham, and is a mem-
ber of Torrens Park Masonic Lodg .
He takes an interest in cricket and
football, and plays bowls for the
Hawthorn Club.


District Council of Mobilong


History of Mobilong
The District Council of Mobilong was proclaimed on
the 26th June, 1884, the first meeting of the Council taking
place on 12th July of that year.
The Hundred of Mobilong, from which the Council
derives its name, was proclaimed in the year 1860. The
Township of Mobilong, now known as Murray Bridge,
was laid out in the year 1883.
The first members of the Council were Messrs. A.
Prosser (Chairman), C. Kuchel, H. Thiele, G. Liebelt, and
\\ . Wray. Mr. J. F. Zimmermann was the first Clerk.
The first assessment of the district amounted to £4,115,
and the first rate declared was 1/ in the £.
In 1924 the Murray Bridge Ward of the district was
severed from the District Council and proclaimed a Muni-
cipality.
Further changes took place in May, 1935, when, in
accordance with the recommendations of the Royal Com-
mission on Local Government Areas, the District of Mobi-
long was greatly enlarged by the addition of the Districts
of Monarto and Brinkley and portions of the Districts of
Onaunga and Mannum.
The first Council of the enlarged district met on the
10th May, 1935, at which meeting Mr. J. L. Cowan was
elected Chairman and Mr. G. E. Abbott elected Clerk and
Overseer of Works.
The district now includes the whole of the Hundreds
of Mobilong, Monarto, Brinkley, Ettrick, the major portion
of the Hundred of Burdett, and portion of the Hundred of
Freeling.
The district is noted for its dairying industry, its citrus
fruits grown at Mypolonga, and for its sheep and wool.
Some of the State’s best sheep and wool are grown within
the district.
The Woods Point irrigation area, which previously
possessed the largest dairy herd in the State, has diverted
its activities to sheep raising, and this property is capable
of carrying more sheep per acre than any other part of
the State.
The majority of the irrigation settlements on the River
Murray from Wellington to Wall are within the boundaries
of the district. They are Jervois, Woods Point, River
Glen, Monteith, Long Flat, Swanport, Burdett, Mobilong,
Glen Lossie, Mypolonga, and a portion of Wall.
These reclaimed areas from the River Murray are con-
sidered to be the most fertile in the State.
During the past few years great improvements have
been made to the roads of the district by the adoption of
the brattenising process.
The present Council, the first elected for the enlarged
district, comprises:—Messrs. J. L. Cowan (Chairman). R.
B. Talbot, J.P., J. McKerlie, O. L. Jaensch, P. J. Bailey,
R. W. Rollond, W. C. Mills, P. B. Frahn, and P. Doceff,
MOBILONG DISTRICT COUNCILLORS.
The following gentlemen have served the District of
Mobilong as Councillors during the past 50 years. The
figure in brackets indicates the number of years in office
Appleton, A. (1) Hoad, J. E. (1)
Binney, H. L. (2) Homburg, J. (4)
Bradford, F. J. (5) Ide, H. (6)'
Cowan, John (18) Jaensch, A. E. (4)
Cowan, J. L. (7) Jaensch, B. F. E. (6)
Christian, A. F. (3) Jaensch, B. T. E. (6)
Critchley, J. (1) Jaensch, F. W. (5)
Fallon, A. (2) Jaensch, J. A. (1)
Farnham, W. (2J) Jaensch, J. G. (2)
Forster, J. G. (1) Keane, M. W. (8)
Garber, W. (2) Kittlety, A. (2)
Gerloff, W. A. (2) Kuchel, C. (1)
Gruhl, G. B. (6) Kuchel, H. B. (4)
Hannaford, W. G. (4) Kuchel, J. C. (3)
Hartmann, G. A. (6) Kuchel, P. R (2)
Harvey, E. J. (6) Kutzer, A. G. (2)
Hein, J. A. (24) Lehm aim. W (3)
StA bb (4) Legg ’ J - ( 2 )
Hill, H. (8) Ley 5 .' R. (2)


Liebelt, G. (3)
McKerlie, J. (8-|)
Mcßae, J. (1)
Man esdorf, H. G. (14)
Mann, H. S. (2)
Martin, A. S. (7)
Mum >, G. D. (4)
Munvo, J. G. (1)
Nolan, T. (1)
Opie P. E. (2)
Pari di, M. W. (10)
Parish, T. (1)
Patterson, H. R. (1)
Pea -on, E. W. (8)
Port us, J. (5)
Potter, J. (2)
Pro- er, A. (2)
Provis, F. H. (3)
Pym, S. (3)
Sabben, C. V. (7)
Schenscher, J. A. (2)
Schultz, J. W. (2)
Smith. S. C. G. (1)
Stecker, J. J. A. (2)
Talbot, R. B. (5)
Thiele, H. (1)
Thiele, J. A. (3)
Thiele, J. C. (1)
Thiele, J. H. (9)
Wilson, A. (2)
Wray, J. (2)
Wray, W. (14)
Wundersitz, W. F. (2)
Zimmermann, J. F. (3)
The district is divided into nine Wards, with one
Councillor for each.
The District Council Office is situated within the
Municipality of Murray Bridge.
The present assessment of the district is £55,730, repre-
senting a capital value of £1,114,600, which is considered to
be a very conservative valuation.
The present District Clerk has been in office _ since
July Ist. 1931. having previously seen service in a similar
capacity with the former District Council of Echunga,
prior to that he filled the office of Town Clerk for the Coi-
poration of Edithburgh.
The Health Inspector (Mr. F. Robertson) has been
associated with the Council in that capacity for a period
of twenty years.


» - \
'*• ’ j’h.^tk^-
HmI s r 3*1
I I tM
Cv
'■
., #*-
~— fcggn m
i ‘
1 •"'* **
y-
1||L;
■ ~- _ r~' '~ ~
JOHN LANCELOT COWAN.
(Chairman, District Council of Mobilong.)
Mr. Cowan was born at Murray
Bridge, August 14th, 1893, and edu-
cated at Murray Bridge Public School
and Prince Alfred College, Adelaide.
He has been a member of the Council
for 9 years, 4 years of which he has
been Chairman, and a resident of the
district all his life. Mr. Cowan is a
Past Master of the Sincerity and Mur-
ray Bridge Mark Lodges, and P.Z. of
the Murray Bridne Royal Arch Chap-
ter. During the war he served for 3
years abroad with the 9th L.H. Regi-
ment, A.I.F. in Palestine. Home
address, Murray Bridge.
COUNCILLOR PERCY JOHN BAILY.
(District Council of Mobilong.)
Mr. Baily was born at Norwood,
hebruary 2nd, 1881, and educated at
Prince Alfred College, Adelaide. He
has been a member of the Council for
10 years, and 27 years a resident of
the district. Mr. Baily was previously
Chairman of the District Council of
Brinkley. In business he is a Grazier,
and his sports are hunting and racing.
Home address, Wood’s Point, River
Murray.
COUNCILLOR PAUL BERNHARD
FRAHN.
(District Council of Mobilong.)
Mr. Frahn was born at Monarto,
11th January, 1884, and educated at
Monarto Primary School. He was
formerly a member of the Monarto
Council for 14 years, and has serve
for one year in the Mobilong- Counc
to which Monarto Council has bet
annexed. He has been a resident
the district all his life, and is a Farme
Home address, Monarto.
COUNCILLOR THEODORE OSCAR
JAENSCH.
(District Council of Mobilong.)
Mr. Jaensch was born at Murray
Bridge, April 19th, 1892, and educated
at the Mobilong Public School and the
A.S. and B.T. Academy, Adelaide. He
has been a member of the Council for
one year, and for 42 years a resident
of the district. Mr.’ Jaensch is
Breeder of Stud Shorthorns, and


*
if ■ j*m m ,"
\%
—
1
Dairvman. He was judge of the
Dairy Shorthorns at the Melbourne
Centenary Royal Show. Home address,
Murray Bridge.
COUNCILLOR RICHARD WILLIAM
ROLLOND.
(District Council of Mobilong.)
Mr. Rollond was born at Mt.
Pleasant July 13th, 1888, and educated
at Tunkillo Public School. He was
elected Councillor for Monarto District
Council in 1933, and for the Mobilong
District Council in 1935, He is a Past
Secretary of Bonleigh Bureau and Sec-
retarv and Chairman of the Blackheath
Agricultural Bureau. Home address,
o
Rockleigh.
COUNCILLOR JAMES McKERLIE.
(District Council of Mobilong.)
Mr. McKerlie was born at Scotland,
22nd August, 1876, educated at
Montacute, and arrived in Australia in
1880. He has been a member of the
Council for 11 years, and a resident
of the district for 20 years. In busi-
ness he is a Fruitgrower. Home ad-
dress, Mypolonga.
COUNCILLOR RICHARD BRISTER
TALBOT, J.P.
(District Council of Mobilong.)
Mr. Talbot was born at Tungkillo
11th July, 1878, and educated at Tung-
killo Public School. He has been ;
member of the Council for seven years


'
I
I /
\ V
</>*& '!
and a resident of the district for 22
vears. He is a Justice of the Peace,
and in business is a farmer. Home
address, Naturi.
GEORGE ERNEST ABBOTT, J.P.
(District Clerk, District Council of
Mobilong.)
Mr. Abbott was born at Plumstead,
London, January 10th. 1888. Edu-
cated at Ancona Road Public School,
England, and arrived in Australia,
April Bth, 1911. He has served in
the Council for 5 years, and has been
a resident of the district for 5 years.
Mr. Abbott is a member of the Board
A. PROSSER
(First Chairman, District Council of
Mobilong.)
of Management, Murray Bridge Sol-
diers’ Memorial Hospital, Secretary of
the Lodge of Sincerity, Xo. 120 S.A.C.,
and the Murray Bridge Town Band.
He was previously District Clerk of
the District Council of Echunga, dur-
ing which period he organised the Fire
Fighting Association. At Edithbur h,
Mr. Abbott was associated with all
institutions providing for the welfare
of the town. Home address, Mur ay
Bridge.


* IBp. j* s<^^&^f
m «3
# ,
’ntf
■ ;?•::
w§- 1m " : f f
COUNCILLOR W. C. MILLS.
COUNCILLOR P. DOCEFF.


■“'Iso 1
I
I^»-?pra<r^rcrr^,-—:c=b^ I '-^ r -- -irr ...{.:&■ _ .--an rrwi him m
W. Menz &- Company
Limited.
THIS well-known South Australian firm was founded in 1850 by the
grandfather cf the present directors, and is, therefore, one of the oldest
family concerns in South Australia. The business was originally started
by Mr. John Menz and his wife as a small grocery store, and later
was developed into a manufacturing business, making bread and small
goods, and, later still, biscuits and sweets. In 1880 machinery was in-
stalled and biscuit-making, in conjunction with the manufacture of con-
fectionery, was seriously commenced. The firm was unfortunate in having
a fire in 1894, which destroyed the plant, but this was replaced next
year with new machinery, and the Company progressed until in 1910 a
plant was installed for the manufacture of chocolates. To-day the Com-
pany’s factory occupies 95,000 square feet of floor space, and is the
largest of its kind in South Australia.
In 1909 Mr. H. V. Menz spent three years in England and on the
Continent of Europe, studying the manufacture of biscuits and choco-
late and confectionery in various factories. In consequence of his tour
abroad, new machinery was installed. Mr. H. V. Menz again visited
the Continent in 1926, and in 1930, Mr. W. O. Menz, another director,
visited England and the Continent on a special mission of investigation
and research. In this way both directors acquired a very extensive know-
ledge of overseas manufacturing methods.
To-day, throughout South Australia, "MENZ” Biscuits are a
household word, and the high-class chocolate products prepared under
the name "MENZONA” bear comparison with any manufactured in
Australia, and are marketed on a large scale in all parts of the Common-
wealth.
Some little time ago the factory of W. MENZ & CO. LTD, was
enlarged, and at present over 200 people are employed, manufacturing
52 varieties of biscuits as well as hundreds of lines of chocolate and
general confectionery. All the materials used in the manufacture of
MENZONA ’ products are, whenever possible, of Australian origin and
the whole of the wrappers, printing and boxes are locally executed A
reature cf the Company’s factory is its cleanliness, and all the rooms are
large, well lit and perfectly ventilated.
From the foregoing it will be appreciated that from a small beg ming
the firm has worked itself up to its present high position in the co :mer-
cial world. Its products are favourably known throughout Australia,
and it employs distributing agents in every State of the Commonwc 1 1th.


District Council of Morgan


History of Morgan
Alorgan, situated within a few miles from the north-
w cst bend of the River Alurray, is one of the chief South
Australian river ports on that noted stream. It was
named after Sir William Morgan, a former Premier of this
tate, and m the early days it was the site of a sheep
station owned by Sir W. W. Hughes.
The District Council was proclaimed in 1887. It con-
sisted of the following HundredsEba, Lindley, Hav
nchauff (now Beatty), Schomburgh (now Maude)!
)i own low, Stuart, and Cadell, having an area of 553 440
acres and was divided into four wards—Nos. 1, 2, 3, and
A 7 c / h m Capit i al t Value ° f ratable P ro perty at that time was
£l/5,600, and the rating was on rental values, being 2/
m the £. > s /
Alorgan is well served by both rail and by the Murrav
steamers, and is a place well worthy of a visit by persons
wishing to see something of the life on the Murray. The
township is also within easy reach of many other settle-
ments on the river, such as Cadell, New Era, ere.
Fishing and shooting on the river and the usual sports
are in u ged in. There was a very active boating club,
but when all the young men left for service at the wai-
ns came to an end, and a flood carried away and destroyed
most ot the boats.
In 1918 the Cadell Irrigation Area was surveyed and
planted for soldier settlement. At present there are S3
settlers making a living on this area, the principal product
being dried fruits.
J he present population of the district is about 1,050.
TV/r Following is a list of past and present Councillors:—
Messrs. T. H. Pearce. G. H. Roebuck, J. Bradley, R J
Hepner C. F. H, Fettke, E. French, J. Symons. H. Flinn,
\ r m W ' Dreck °w, H. A. Doecke. W. G. Moll,
Th ,)unb ’ F. Williams, F, Guiney, G. Thamm, J. B Gibbs'
j. Bruce, R. Wheeling, H. Jericho, T. Treloar, A. Berndt.’
F. W. Lindner and V. R. Lindner, H. von Rieben, S. N. D.
Bettison, J. N. Weiss, J. W. Lindner, S. R. Morphett, Id.
S. Crabb, H. R. Ziegler, M. A. Young (present Chairman),
and L. B. Dean ; L. S. Watts (District Clerk).
Air. John Symons, who is at present living in retire-
ment at Cl eland Avenue, Dulwich, was the first Chairman
of the Council. Mr. W. H. Chester was the first Clerk,
being succeeded by the following:—Mr. H. Paddon in
1891, Mr. M. O’Callahan in 1905, Mr. T. W. Tapp in 1916,
who held office until the time of his death in June, 1924.
when Air. A. S. Dunk was appointed, and who was suc-
ceeded by Air. L. S. Watts in June, 1935.
Owing to a fire, which destroyed the Council premises
and all records, in 1894, it is not possible to obtain par-
ticulars of the early revenue of the Council. The present
premises, consisting of a hall 45 ft. x 25 ft., and an office
were built in 1895, and are situated in Fourth Street,
Adorgan. The capital value of ratable property at the
time of making the last assessment was £243.420, and the
revenue last year was about £2,000. The present a: >a
of the Council is the same as when first proclaimed. There
are now five Wards, the Cadell Irrigation Area being de-
clared a separate Ward in 1925.
ROADS.
4he Council has under its control 74 miles of main
loads and about 40/ miles of district roads, about halt if
which aie in regular use and all being* in fair order. During
lecent \eais the Council has purchased an up-to-date road
Plant, which has enabled it to keep the roads in decent
order with a minimum of expense. Owing to the extreme
di} w eat he i experienced during the past three years repair
w ork has been rendered extremely difficult. However, the
Council is hopeful of being able to show a general h i-
provement on all roads before the end of the current
financial year.


**^|L V * >-■ *?
COUNCILLOR J. W. LINDNER.
(District Council of Morgan.)
He was born in the Hundred of
Lindl y, now Morgan, 12th June, 1896,
and educated at Bindley Public and
Australia Plain Private Schools, and
has served in the Council from July,
1934 Mr. Lindner has for 39 years
been a resident of the district. Busi-
ness, Grazier. He is interested in all
sport-. Private address, Morgan.
COUNCILLOR H. R. ZIEGLER
(District Council of Morgan.)
Born at Eudunda, 15th February,
1895. and educated at Mervco. Mr.
Ziegler has had 24 years’ service in
the Council and been a resident of the
district for 26 years. Business, Wheat
Farmer. Home address, Morgan.
COUNCILLOR MOSTYN ANDREW
YOUNG.
(District Council of Morgan.)
Born at Clare in 1894, he has 8
years’ service in Council and has been
18 years a resident of the district.
Business, Fruitgrower. Sports, tennis
and golf. He was 34 years on active
service abroad with Signal Company.
Private address, Cadell, River Murray.
COUNCILLOR J. N. WEISS.
(District Council of Morgan.)
He was born at Rosedale, 18th Sep-
tember, 1890, and educated at Bower
Public School. Mr. Weiss has been a
member of the Council for 12 years
and a resident of the district for 38
years. Business, Farmer. Home ad-
dress, Mount Mary.
COUNCILLOR STEPHEN NORTHEY
DUNSTAN BETTISON.
(District Council of Morgan.)
Born at Kapunda, 10th August. 1890,
and educated at Kapunda and Mount
Mary State Schools. Mr. Bettison has
had 104 years’ service in the Council
and been for 35 years a resident of the
district. He is Presiding Officer for
State and Federal elections. His
business is Farming and Grazing. He
is a member of the Foresters’ Lodge.
Sports, cricket and tennis. Private
address, Mount Mary.




district Council of Mount Barker


History of Mount Barker
The township and district was so named after the late
Captain Collet Barker, of HAI. 39th Regiment of Foot,
who discovered the district in the very early days. He
as killed by the blacks while endeavouring to ascertain
the communication between Lake Alexandrina and Encoun-
tei Bay, and a marble tablet to his memory stands in
the centre of the town.
Mount Barker is situated 22 miles from Adelaide, on
the eastern watershed of the Mount Lofty Ranges. It is
one of the most picturesque and beautiful country towns in
this State, and is planted with English Oak, American Ash.
Plane, Remarkable Pine, and other ornamental trees. It
is the centre of a large primary producing district, which
was awarded the gold medal for wheat at the World’s
Shows in London in 1851 and 1862; also the Gold Medal for
wheat at the Paris Exhibition about 1865.
The District Council was proclaimed in 1858, and has
an area of 35 square miles of 22.400 acres. The popula-
tion numbers 2,199 persons, of whom 650 are ratepayers.
The capital value of the ratable property is £353,480
and the assessment value is £20,000, with a rate of 1/7
in the £, yielding £1,583 yearly.
The district roads measure 35 miles and the main roads
19 miles. The streets of Mount Barker and the neigh-
bouring township of Littlehampton are lit by electricity,
the current being supplied from Messrs. Jacob Bros.’ Bacon
Factory and distributed by the Mount Barker Electric
Lighting Company, Limited.
A War Memorial, a life-size figure of an Australian
soldier carved from Italian marble, has been erected in
a fine position in the main street.
The first District High School in South Australia was
established at Mount Barker in 1909, and an agricultural
class has since been commenced in connection therewith.
The district possesses a large tannery, two bacon fac-
tories, a butter factory, and other allied industries.
Following is a list of names of past Councillors: —
Messrs. F. Davison, R. Davenport, E. Stirling, Rankine,
T. Lambert, L. MacFarlan, L. May, T. Donoghue, J. Dunn,
B. Gray, J. Frame, Little, Shepherdson, Wedd, Bell,
Cleggett, Manton, Good, Pearce. J. Paltridge, Baker, J. G.
Ramsay, Paterson, W. Walker. R. Bufifham, M. Wraight R.
Cornelius, W. Chapman, J. Blight, L. Watts, T. Paltridge,
A. C. Daw, J. T. Williams, T. H. Stephenson, R. Pope, J.
Rundle, R. Murray, H. A. Monks, C. M. R. Dumas, A. Cam-
pion, E. F. Stevens, A. Cleggett, J. France. A. C, Liebelt,
and Dr. Wunderly.
Present members of Council:—E. W. Nitschke (Chair-
man), Councillors A. B. Fry, H. C. Hunt, J. Frame A.
Mills, G. G. Walkem, T. Hawthorne, G. G. E. Nitschke,
P. J. A. Braendler, S. J. M. Dunstan (District Clerk).


)istrict Council of Mount Pleasant


History of Mount Pleasant
the District Council of Mount Pleasant was pro-
claimed on the Ist May, 1935, being formed by the amal-
gamation of the former Districts of Springton and Tung-
killo with one section added from the District Council of
Mannum (Hd. of Finniss) and two sections from the Dis-
Council of Mobilong (Hd. of Mobilong).
1 he Council Office is situated in the Main Street,
Mount Pleasant, and meetings are held on the second Tues-
day in each month.
The total area would be approximately 155,500 acres,
comprising agricultural, grazing, and vineyard lands.
There are five Wards, viz.—Eden Valley, Springton,
Mount Pleasant, Tungkillo, and Palmer, each represented
by one Councillor.
The District Council district comprises the whole of
the Hundreds of Jutland and Tungkillo, and portions of
the Hundreds of Moororoo, Talunga, Finniss (one section),
and Mobilong (two sections).
The former District of Tungkillo was proclaimed on
June 14th, 185 a, by the Governor (His Excellency Sir
Richard Graves McDonnell), and the first Councillors were
Messrs. A. B. Murray, C. Harvey, W. Beck, G. Burton,
and M. Forster.
The former District of Springton was (before the war)
known as the District of South Rhine, but under the
Nomenclature Act it was altered to Springton.
The Township of Mount Pleasant (35 miles from Ade-
laide), Springton (40 miles), and Eden Valley (45 miles)
are situated on the Main North-East Road; bitumen as
far as Mount Pleasant.
In earlier days these townships were served by mail
coach from Adelaide. Now, however, A. E. Good’s motor
service runs daily from Eden Valley to Adelaide, and a
large portion of the district is also served by the Balkan-
nah and Mount Pleasant railway and the northern portion
by the Angaston railway.
The Townships of Tungkillo (or South Petherton) and
Palmer are situated on the Adelaide-Mannum main road
(bitumen). Tungkillo is 37 miles from Adelaide by road
and Palmer 43 miles.
These towns, too, were served at one time by the coach
services run by Hill & Co., but in later years these gave
way to the modern motor services, the present mail con-
tractors being Cosgrove’s Motor Services. They give a
morning and afternoon service each way.
Palmer at one time was the scene of much activity
as the result of the working of the Reedy Creek Kitti-
coola Mines, but of late years work has been carried on
only spasmodically. About two miles east of Palmer is
the railway station of Apamurra, on the Monarto South to
Sedan line, but on account of being so far from the town
it has no beneficial efifect on the town ; in fact, the opposite.
Approximately 16,000 acres of land was repurchased by
the Government after the war from the Rosbank and Gil-
bert's Estates, and this land was subdivided for Repatria-
tion and Closer Settlement purposes.
Mount Pleasant has a very fine Soldiers’ Memorial
Hall and the people of Eden Valley and Springton have
erected Soldiers’ Memorials.
I he residents in and around Palmer have erected a
Memorial Column and Kiosk, situated in a little garden
plot, whilst at Tungkillo a Memorial Park has been planted.
On this two tennis courts have been prepared and a memo-
rial column erected. Certain trees have also been planted
in memory of local heroes who made the supreme sacrifice,
and bear plates to that efifect.
In Mount Pleasant there is also a District Hosf tal
controlled by Trustees and a Board of Management.
The River Torrens has its source between the Town
ships of Mount Pleasant and Springton.
The present Councillors are :—Messrs. A. L. Starkev
(Chairman), Tungkillo Ward; J. S. Herriot, Mount Pleas-
ant Ward; A. W. Lillecrapp, Eden Valley Ward; C. F, A.
Boensch, Palmer Ward; P. T. Miller. Springton Ward;
and W. Ross Smith, District Clerk.


MT
* ** -
- 1
m 0't * v* -*
rW\ f ». • ' >•, *$>y.
K - i -
i| .MiM)g| 3# I®
I I ■ I sfe ~ MM
i ■ **m, _
"- ,,..;J| jtljjpWllil ] i'
■:;■ : 9
JSi V
m. «if
fiplfPl
Sr v * * f <9'&> .. 3
HHsmB MibWaWM
pm
Sliplii %
£ I
ARTHUR LEWIS STARKEY, J.P.
(Chairman, District Council of Mount
Pleasant.)
Born at Mount Pleasant, Bth No-
vember, 1891, and educated at Tung-
killo Public School. Mr. Starkey was
formerly Chairman of the District
Council of Tungkillo, and has been
Chairman of the District Council of
Mount Pleasant since their amalgama-
tion on Ist May, 1935. He has been
a resident of the district all his life.
He is Trustee and Committeeman of
the Tungkillo Methodist Church,
President of the Tungkillo Tennis
Club, Vice-President of the Mount
Pleasant Branch of the Horticultural
Bureau, Vice-President and Com-
mitteeman of the A.H. & F. Society,
and a member of the Board of
Management of the District Hospital.
He is a grazier, and his sport is tennis.
Home address, Mount Pleasant.
COUNCILLOR JAMES CHARLES
HERRIOT, J.P.
(District Council of Mount Pleasant.)
Born at Alberton, 19th March, 1874,
and educated at Kapnnda and Norwood
Public Schools. Mr. Herriot has served
in the Council for 18 years, and has
been a resident of the district for 25
years. He is a Justice of the Peace.
ex-Chairman of Springton District
Council, ex-President of the Mount
Pleasant Institute and Soldiers’
Memorial Hall, and Trustee of
Talunga Park. Mr. Herriot is also a
foundation member and Past Master
of Talunga Masonic Lodge, and takes
a general interest in all healthy sports.
In business he is a General Store-
keeper. Home address, Mount Plea-
sant.
COUNCILLOR P. T. MILLER, J.P.
(District Council of Mount Pleasant.)
Councillor Peter Trail Miller be-
longs to a pioneer family, who came
from the Orkney Islands when South
Australia was young. He is a native
of South Australia, born at Springton.
12th March, 1870. His father was 8
years of age when he came to South
Australia in 1852; he died in his 83rd
year. Mr. Miller was brought up on
strict Presbyterian lines, and is now
prone to contrast the morals and
teachings of his boyhood days, especi-
ally as to Sabbath observance and
Church customs with those of the pre-
sent time. W hen he was one year
old his parents moved to a farm rented


4 , v
'' v/ \Wjj!L
■
from the late Mr. John Murray, of
Mount Crawford, known as Craggy
Lea. and that property is now held as
a freehold by Mr. Miller. While still a
youth his father took up a farm in the
Hundred of Morgan, 10 miles from
Peterborough, and worked it in con-
junction with the farm at Springton,
travelling back and forth with a team.
On the death of Mr. John Murray, Mr.
Miller s father purchased the farm at
Springton, having borrowed money at
a high rate of interest. Father and
son, with the characteristic determina-
tion of the Scot, engaged on contract
work on roads, etc., in order to earn
enough to live and pay their interest.
It will be seen that Mr. Miller grew
up in a hard school. About 37 years
ago the family leased a farm on the
Murray Flats, and since then crops
and prices have improved until both
places have paid for themselves. Mr.
Miller has several times been asked to
contest plebiscites for the selection of
Parliamentary and district candidates,
but until the last District Council elec-
tion had consistently declined. Politi-
cally, he has always advocated the
claims of the producers. The Miller
family are breeders of draught horses
and consistent exhibitors at the Mount
Pleasant Show. He was President for
three years, and is now Vice-Presi-
dent of the Mount Pleasant A.H. &
F. Society. He was formerlv Vice-
President of the Mount Pleasant
Hospital Building Committee, and
presided at the first meeting held
in connection with the project. He
has associated himself with every for-
ward movement of the district, and
has been a Justice of the Peace for
27 years.
COUNCILLOR CARL F. A. BAENSCH.
(District Council of Mount Pleasant.)
Air. Baensch Avas born at Summer-
held, 4th October, 1877, and educated
at Summerfield Public School. He
has been a member of the Mount
I leasant Council for 3 years, and in
business is a Farmer and Grazier.
Home address, Tepko.
W. ROSS-SMITH, J.P.
(District Clerk, District Council of Mount
Pleasant.)
Mr, Ross-Smith was born at Yanka-
-1 ilia, 9th June, 1890. He was formerly
District Clerk of Tuugkillo District
Council from the Ist of January, 1920,
to the 30th of April, 1935, and also the
District Clerk of Monarto from the
Ist July, 1921, to the 30th April, 1935.
He has been District Clerk of Mount
Pleasant from the Ist of May. 1935,
and for 25 years a resident of the dis-
trict. Mr. Ross-Smith was appointed
a Justice of the Peace, 24th August,
1921 ; is President of the Mount Pie ,
sant Institute Committee, a mem er
and Past Chairman of the Mount
Pleasant Hospital Board of Manas
ment, Secretary of the Mount Pleas; t
Presbyterian Church, and a member of
the Board of Management. He is a o
Trustee of Talunga Park, and Vice-
President and Committeeman of the
Mount Pleasant A.H. & F. Society.
Mr. Smith is a Past Master of lie
Talunga Masonic Lodge, No. 115, id
has been President of the Mount Plea-
sant Football Club for 17 years. D r-
ing the war he served abroad on
active service with the 50th Battai on
and sth Australian Machine Gun Coins,
A.I.F. Home address, Mount Plea-
sant.


COUNCILLOR ALBERT WILLIAM
LILLECRAPP, J.P.
(District Council of Mount Pleasant.)
Born at Eden Valley in the year
1882, and educated at Eden Valley
Public School and Way College. Mr.
Lillecrapp served for 20 years in the
Springton District Council, 5 years of
which he was Chairman, and has been
a member of the Mount Pleasant Dis-
trict Council for one year. He has been
for 53 years a resident of the district.
He was a foundation member of the
Eden Valley Institute, and Secretary
for 13 years, and for 15 } r ears Chair-
man of the Eden Valley School Com-
mittee. Mr. Lillecrapp is a founda-
tion member and was the first Chair-
man of the Mount Pleasant District
Hospital. He is a member of the
Barossa Lodge of Freemasons, a
patron of the Eden Valley Golf Club,
and is associated with all local sport-
ing- bodies. Home address, Marine
Parade, Seacliff.




District Council of Mudla Wirra


History of Mudla Wirra
The District of Mudla Wirra was proclaimed on
Januaiy 18th, 1854. The district, comprising the whole
of the Hundred of Mudla Wirra and portion of the Hun-
di ed of Grace, is situated 26 miles north of Adelaide. The
native derivation of the name Mudla Wirra is “Muddy
Waters.”
The first meeting of the Council was held at the resi-
dence of Otto Schomburgh on January 24th. 1854. The
first Council comprised:—Otto Schomburgh (Chairman),
Robt. McCord, John Wilkinson, John Dawkins; District
Clerk. M. Gameau.
4 he first public pound was erected on Section 169,
Hundred of Port Gawler, on February 13th. 1854. C. J.
Donaldson, Poundkeeper; W in. McCord, Ranger.
The elections were held in January of each year until
1859. 4 he date was then altered to the first week in
July.
On October 28th, 1867, the district was divided into
two parts, comprising the District of Mudla Wirra North
and District of Mudla Wirra South.
The first Council of Mudla Wirra North comprised:
G. Thomson (Chairman), John Barrow, Jettner. William
Forrest, Thomas Coffee; District Clerk. R. Marshall.
The first Council of Mudla Wirra South comprised :
J. Patterson (Chairman), R. Barnfield, J. Everett, H. E
Bright, F. Winckel; District Clerk, J. R. Wake.
These districts continued for 66 years, and on July
Ist, 1933, the two districts were again amalgamated under
the name of the District of Mudla Wirra. Willaston Ward
(portion of the District of Mudla Wirra South) being
severed and attached to the Corporation of Gawler. The
Councillors then in office in each district carried on until
September 2nd, when an election was held. The district
was divided into eight Wards, viz.—Wychunga, Pinkerton,
Forrest, Ashwell, Wasleys, Roseworthy, Kangaroo Flat,'
and Gawler River.
The first elected members of the amalgamated dis-
trict were: —E. W. Day (Chairman), Wasleys: A. P. Bell,
Wychunga; J. W. Kain. Pinkerton; James Jarmyn, For-
rest; E. H. Roennfeldt, Ashwell; B. F. Kerr, Roseworthy;
W. E. Leak, Kangaroo Flat; A. M. Dawkins, Gawler River.
District Clerk, P. W. C. Beadnall.
dhe members of the present Council are:—E. H.
Roennfeldt (Chairman), E. W. Day, A. P. Bell, J. W. Kain,
James Jarmyn, R. A. Dahlitz, W. F. Leak, A. M. Dawkins.
The district is purely a rural one, consisting of farms
of moderate size. The soil is of good quality and most
suitable for mixed farming. It is interesting to note
that the original survey plans describe a large portion of
this district as totally unsuitable for agricultural purposes,
but with the aid of artificial manures the same land is
producing excellent crops. The Roseworthy Agricultural
College is situated in this district, and has been a great
asset to the farming community of this State.
MULLENISING OF SCRUB LAND ORIGINATED IN
THIS DISTRICT.
In about the year 1868 Mr. Charles Mullen took up
land at W asleys. The land was covered with dense mallee
scrub. The custom then was to cut the trees and grub
the stumps, a very slow and laborious process. As there
was a demand for firewood at Gawler, and on the railway
line, then in course of construction between Roseworthy
and Burra, Mr. Mullen cut down a considerable area of
sci ub and sold the wood. Impressed with the ric
and friable nature of the soil, it occurred to him that '
ci op of wheat mig'ht be grown amongst the stumps if i
could be put in. This he proceeded to do bv first work
ing the land with a single-furrow plough wherever pos
sible between the stumps. 4aking a \ -shaped log, he
dime long spikes through it and hitched a team of horses
on the pointed end of the V and dragg*ed the home-made
implement over the stump-covered field and planted the
seed In hand. The crop yielded a good return. The e
was no difficulty in working a reaping machine over the
stumps and stripping the grain. This system of farming
m sci ub country was thus termed “Mullenising,” a system


commonly used in many parts of Australia. With the
passage of time, the system was greatly improved, hence
the scrub-roller and stump-jump implements of to-day.
LIST OF COUNCILLORS.
|gss—Chairman, Walter Duffield; Councillors Robt.
McCord, John McEwin, Henry Hornhardt, John
Wilkinson.
1355 —Chairman, Robt. McCord; Councillors John McEwin,
Win. McCord, John Barrow, Charles Scown.
1357 -Chairman, Win. Mallyon; Councillors John Barrow,
fames Bickford, Richard Schomhurgh, James Spar-
shott.
1858 — Chairman, James Bickford; Councillors W. H. Gar-
trell, W. Campbell, James Sparshott, John McEwin.
1859 — Chairman. James Bickford; Councillors Win. Camp-
bell, R. McCord, James Sparshott.
Date of Election altered to first week in July.
1859 — (July), Chairman. R. McCord; Councillors W. Camp-
bell. J. W. Sawle, R. Schomhurgh, C. T. Scown.
1860 — Chairman, R. Schomhurgh; Councillors J. Webb, J.
W. Sawle, J. Woods, C. T. Scown.
1861 — Chairman. C. T. Scown; Councillors J. Webb, J.
Woods, J. W. Sawle, Pengilly.
1862 — Chairman, C. T. Scown; Councillors J. Webb, John
Dawkins, Pederick, Thomson.
1863 — Chairman, J. Webb; Councillors Cheney, Thomson,
McCord, Pederick.
1864 — Chairman, H. E. Bright; Councillors J. Davis, J. A.
Sawle, J. Webb, R. McCord.
1865 Chairman. H. E. Bright; Councillors C. T. Scown, R.
Barnfield, J. W. Sawle, J. Dingle.
1866 — Chairman, C. T. Scown; Councillors J. Dingle, W.
Delaney, J. Patterson. R. Barnfield.
1867 Chairman, J. Patterson; Councillors W. Delaney,
R. Barnfield, T. Kneese, J. Dingle.
1867—Chairman, J. Patterson; Councillors H. E. Bright,
R. Barnfield, O. Adcock, F. W inckel.
(District of Mudla Wirra divided into two Councils
on October 28th, 1867.)
First Councillors of District Council of
MUDLA WIRRA SOUTH.
1867—Chairman, J. Patterson; Councillors R. Barnfield, J.
Everett, H. E. Bright, F. Winckel.
1868 —Chairman, F. Winckel; Councillors H. E. Bright, S.
L. Dawkins, J. Everett. R. Ebsary.
Igs9—Chairman, F. Winckel; Councillors S. L. Dawkins.
R. Ebsary, J. Dingle. J. Woods. r
1370 —Chairman, F. Winckel; Councillors J. Woods, R.
Ebsary, J. Dingle, S. L. Dawkins.
1371 Chairman, F. Winckel; Councillors J. Woods, R.
Ebsary, H. Roediger, W. Wallage.
1872 — Chairman, F. Winckel; Councillors J. Bright, R.
Hogben, H. Roediger, W. Wallage.
1873 — Chairman, F. Winckel; Councillors H. Roediger, R.
Hogben, J. Bright, J. Everett.
(District divided into five Wards on September
Bth, 1873.)
F. E. Winckel represented Wasleys A ard until
the end of the present term.
1873 — Chairman, R. Hogben; J. Bright, J. Everett, H.
Roediger, J. T. Williams.
1874 — Chairman, R. Hogben; J. Bright, I). Kerr, J. T.
Williams, J. Pederick.
1875 — Chairman, F. Winckel; J. Pederick. F. Konzag, J.
Folland, M. Angley.
1876 Chairman, F. Winckel; Councillors S. L. Dawkins,
J. Clarke, J. Folland, M. Angley.
1877 — Chairman, S. L. Dawkins; Councillors J. Woods, J.
Clarke, J. Folland, R. Ebsary.
1878 — Chairman, S. L. Dawkins; Councillors J. Woods, J.
Clarke, O. Ragless, R. George.
1879 — Chairman, S. L. Dawkins; Councillors Win. Ayling,
A. Belton, O. Ragless, R. George.
1880— Chairman. R. Hogben; Councillors W. Ayling. J.
Jackson, H. Roediger, P. Grainger.
1381 —Chairman, R. Hogben; Councillors T. Hodgson, M.
A r ake, H. Roediger. P. Grainger.
1882 — Chairman, H. Roediger; Councillors D. James, AT
A r ake, J. G. Folland, J. Bowhey.
1883— Chairman. H. Roediger; Councillors T. Drury, J.
Bowhey, Wm. Steed, J. G. Folland.
1.884 —Chairman, H. Roediger: Councillors E. Gartrell, Wm.
Steed, J. G. Folland, G. Both.
1885— Chairman, H. Roediger; Councillors E. Gartrell. F.
A. Konzag. J. G. Folland, A. G. Both.
1886— Chairman, H. Roediger; Councillors W. T. Drury
Wm. Steed, J. G. Folland, A. G. Roth.


1887—Chairman, J. G. Folland; Councillors W. T. Drury,
iqoo Steecl S " L - Dawki ns, A. G. Both.
1008 Chairman, J. G. Folland; Councillors W. T. Drury,
J. Dingle. S. L. Dawkins, A. G. Both.
889 Chairman, J. G. Folland; Councillors E. S. Mat-
ron t! ? ews ' J' Din §' le ' R - Pederick, A. G. Both.
Chairman, j. G. Folland; Councillors E. S. Matthews,
J. Dingle, R. Pederick, H. Day.
1891 Chairman, J. G. Folland; Councillors E. S. Matthews,
J. Dingle, J. Bray, FT. Day.
1892—Chairman, J. Bray; Councillors E. S. Matthews T
Dingle, B. Worrall, H. Day.
1893—Chairman. J. Bray; Councillors W. H. Robinson T
Dingle, J. Billing, H. Day.
1894—Chairman, J. Bray ; Councillors W. H. Robinson T.
Dingle, P. Parker, Wm. Day.
1895—Chairman, W. H. Robinson; Councillors J. Dingle,
S. L. Dawkins, J. S. McLean, Wm. Day.
1896 Chairman, W. H. Robinson; Councillors S. L. Daw-
k"lS ' P°th, A. J. Mortimer, Wm. Day.
1897—Chairman. Wm. Day; Councillors A. Harris, A. G.
B ° th ' A ' J' Mortimei ", S. L. Dawkins.
1898—Chairman, A. G. Both ; Councillors A. Harris, S. L.
Dawkins, A. J. Mortimer, Wm. Day.
1899—Chairman, A. G. Both; Councillors A. Harris, S. L.
Dawkins, A. j. Dawkins, Wm. Day.
1900—Chairman, S. L. Dawkins ; Councillors A. Harris, A.
G. Both, A. J. Mortimer, W . H. Georg'e.
1901 Chairman, W. H. George; Councillors T. Coombe A.
G. Both, A. J. Mortimer, H. Roediger.
1902—Chairman, W. H. George; Councillors T. Coombe T.
Dingle, A. J. Mortimer, H. Roediger.
1903—Chairman, H. Roediger ; Councillors T. Coombe T.
Dingle, A. J. Mortimer, H. Day.
1904—Chairman, H. Roediger; Councillors T. Coombe T.
Dingle, A. J. Mortimer, H. Day.
1905—Chairman, H. Roediger; Councillors T. Coombe T.
Dingle, A. J. Mortimer, H. Day.
1906—Chairman, H. Roediger; Councillors T. Coombe, T.
Dingle, A. J. Mortimer, H. Day.
1907—Chairman, T. Coombe; Councillors A. M. Dawkins,
J. Dingle, A. J. Mortimer, H. Day.
1908—Chairman, T. Coombe; Councillors A M Dawkins
J. B. Dingle, A. J. Mortimer, H. Day.
1909—Chairman, T. Coombe; Councillors A. J. Bray, J. B
Dingle, A. J. Mortimer, H. Day.
1910—Chairman, H. Day; Councillors A. J. Bray, J. Dingle,
A. J. Mortimer, T. Coombe.
1911—Chairman, H. Day; Councillors A. J. Bray, J. B.
Dingle, A. J. Davis, T. Coombe.
1912—Chairman, A. J. Bray; Councillors T. Coombe, J.
B. Dingle, A. J. Davis, H. Day.
1913—Chairman, A. J. Bray; Councillors T. Coombe, J. B.
Dingle, W. F. Leak, FI. Day.
1914—Chairman, A. j. Bray ; Councillors T. Coombe, J. B.
Dingle, W. F. Leak, H. Day.
1915 Chairman, T. Coombe; Councillors J. H. Dawkins,
J. B. Dingle, W. F. Leak, W. H. George.
1916 —Chairman, T. Coombe; Councillors J. H. Dawkins,
J. B. Dingle, W. F. Leak, W. H. George.
1917 Chairman, W. k. Leak ; Councillors R. J. Clements,
J. B. Dingle, J. H. Dawkins, W. H. George.
1918 —Chairman, J. H. Dawkins; Councillors R. J. Clements,
J. B. Dingle, W. F. Leak, W. H. George.
1919—Chairman, J. H. Dawkins; Councillors R. J. Clements,
j. B. Dingle, W. F. Leak, W. H. George.
1920 Chairman, J. H. Dawkins; Councillors R. J. Clements,
B. F. Kerr, \\ . F. Leak, \\ . H. George.
1921—Chairman, W. F. Leak; Councillors R. J. Clements,
B. F. Kerr, J. H. Dawkins, W. H. George.
1922—Chairman, R. J. Clements; Councillors J. H. Daw-
kins, B. k. Ivei 1, \\ . F. Leak, W. H. George.
1923—Chairman, B. F. Kerr; Councillors A. D. Thomson.
W. H. George, W. F. Leak, F. W. Roediger
1924—Chairman, B. F. Kerr; Councillors A. D. Thomson
E. W . Day, \\ . F. Leak, k. W . Roediger
1925—Chairman, B. F. Kerr; Councillors G. Higo-ins
W. Day, A. J. Mortimer, F. W. Roediger.^
1926 Chairman, E. W. Day; Councillors G. Higo-i ns , B.
Kerr, A. J. Mortimer, A. M. Dawkins.
1927 Chairman, E. W. Day; Councillors W. H. Wait
F. Kerr, A. J. Mortimer, A. M. Dawkins.
1928 Chairman, B. F. Kerr; Councillors W H Wait
W. Day, W. F. Leak, A. M. Dawkins. ' '
1929—Chairman, A. M. Dawkins; Councillors E. Gwvnne,
E. W. Day, W. F. Leak, B. F. Kerr.
1930 Chairman, A. M. Dawkins; Councillors A M Twartz
E. W. Day, W. F. Leak, B. F. Kerr.


1931 — Chairman, A. M. Dawkins, Councillors A. M. Twartz,
E. W. Day, W. F. Leak, B. F. Kerr.
1932 — Chairman, A. M. Dawkins : Councillors A. M. 4 wartz,
F. W. Day. W. F. Leak, B. F. Kerr.
COUNCILLORS DISTRICT COUNCIL OF MUDLA
WIRRA NORTH.
—Chairman, John Barrow; Councillors Jettner, Wm.
Forrest, T. Coffee. G. Thomson.
186 —Chairman. John Barrow; Councillors Jettner, Wm.
Forrest, T. Coffee, G. Thomson,
1869 — Chairman, J. Barrow; Councillors jettner, John
Boutill, T. Coffee.
1870 — Chairman, P. J. Callier; Councillors A. Colleypriest,
J. Patterson, E. Benger, J. Barrow.
1871 — Chairman, P. J. Callier; Councillors Wm. Forrest,
H. Riches, C. F. W. Priess, J. Barrow.
1872 — Chairman, Wm. Forrest; Councillors C. F. Priess, H.
Riches, T. Easterbrook, 11.I 1 . Murphy.
1873 — Chairman, T. Easterbrook ; Councillors R. Oliver, A.
F. Noll, T. McFllister, P. Murphy.
1874 — Chairman, T. Easterbrook; A. Colleypriest, T.
McFllister, A. F. Noll, P. Murphy.
1875 — Chairman, T. Easterbrook; A. Colleypriest, L
McFllister, R. Marshall, J. Jordan.
1876 — Chairman, R. Marshall: R. Wait, T. McFllister, J.
Pilgrim. T. Coffee.
1877 Chairman, R. Marshall; J. Patterson, T. McFllister,
J. Pilgrim, T. Coffee.
1878 — Chairman, R. Marshall; J. Patterson. J. McDonnell,
H. Everett. T. Coffee.
1879 — Chairman, R. Marshall ; J. Patterson. J. McDonnell,
H. Everett, J. Jordan.
1880 — Chairman, J. Patterson; J. Carrigg, H. Klan, J. Bar-
row, T. Coffee.
1881 — Chairman, T. McFllister; G. Forrest. H. Klan, J.
Barrow, T. Coffee.
1882— Chairman, T. McFllister; J. Carrigg, G. Forrest, J.
Barrow, T. Coffee.
1883— Chairman, J. Barrow; G. Forrest. Ebert, J. Patter-
son, T. Ryan.
1884— Chairman, J. Barrow; G. Forrest, Ebert, J. Patter-
son, T. Ryan.
1885— Chairman, J. Barrow; R. Oliver, J. Patterson, Att-
well, P. Ronan.
1886— Chairman, J. Barrow; R. Oliver, G. Everett, Attwell,
P. Ronan.
1887 — Chairman, J. Barrow; H. Babe, A. Kruger, R. Mar-
shall, P. Ronan.
1888 — Chairman, J. Barrow; H. Babe, J. Carrigg, A. Sie-
bert, P. Ronan.
1889— Chairman, J. Barrow; H. Babe, J. Carrigg, A.
Schulze, P. Ronan.
1890— Chairman, J. Barrow; H. Bahr. J. McDonnell, A.
Schulze, T. Ryan.
1891 — Chairman, J. Barrow; W. Cawrse, J. McDonnell, \\ .
Attenborough, T. Ryan.
1892 Chairman, J. Barrow; W. Cawrse. J. McDonnell, A.
Schulze, T. Ryan.
1893 Chairman, J. Barrow; J. Alexander, T. Murphy, F.
T. James, T. Ryan.
1894 — Chairman. F. T. James; J. Alexander, T. Murphy, J.
P. Dyer, M. Kain.
1895 — Chairman, J. Alexander; J. A. Kruger, A. Schulze,
J. P. Dyer, M. Kain.
1896 Chairman, J. P. Dyer; E. Hancock, J. A. Kruger, H.
Roennfeldt, T. Ryan.
1897 — Chairman, T. Ryan; R. Marshall, J. A. Kruger, A.
Schulze, A. Robinson.
1898— Chairman, A. Schulze; R. H. Oliver. J. A. Kruger, R.
Marshall. T. Ryan.
1899 — Chairman, A. Schulze ;R. H. Oliver. J. A. Kruger, A.
Robinson, J. Hartnett.
1900— Chairman, A. Schulze; A. A. Bahr. J. A. Kruger, A.
Marshall, j. Hartnett.
1901— Chairman, J. Hartnett; A. A. Bahr, j. A. Kruger. E.
H. Siebert, A. Marshall.
1902 — Chairman, J. Hartnett; A. A. Bahr. W. F. Neindorf,
E. H. Siebert, A. Marshall.
1903 — Chairman, J. Hartnett; H. F. Koch, W. F. Neindorf,
E. H. Siebert, T. H. South.
1904 — Chairman, J. Hartnett; H. F. Koch. W. F. Neindorf,
E. H. Siebert, T. H. South.
1905 Chairman, E. H. Siebert; H. F. Koch, W. F. Nein-
dorf, T. H. South, J. Hartnett.
1906 — Chairman. E. H. Siebert; H. F. Koch, W. F. Neindorf,
O. G. Marshall, J. Hartnett.


1907—Chairman, J. Hartnett; H. F. Koch, W F Nem-
dorf, E. H. Siebert. O. G. Marshall.
1 408 Chairman, j. Hartnett; H. F. Koch, F. G. Wedding,
E. H. Siebert, \ . S. Barrow.
1909—Chairman, j. Hartnett; H. F. Koch. F. G. Wedding.
E„ H. Siebert, V. S. Barrow.
!910 Chairman, J. Hartnett; H. F. Koch, F. G. Wedding.
H. J. Speck, E. H. Siebert.
1911— Chairman, J. Hartnett; H. F. Koch, F. G. Wedding,
H. J. Speck, E. H. Siebert.
1912 Chairman, E. H. Siebert : H. F. Koch, F. G. Wedding,
H. Fagg, J. Hartnett.
1913 Chairman, J. Hartnett; H. F. Koch, F. G. Wedding,
H. Fagg. E. H. Siebert.
1914 Chairman, H. F. Koch; J. P. Reimann, E. H. Siebert,
H. Fagg, J. Hartnett.
1915 Chairman, H. Fagg; R. H. Oliver, J. P. Reimann. E.
H. Siebert, J. Hartnett.
1916 Chairman, R. H. Oliver; E. McEllister, J. Smith. H.
Fagg, T. Hookings.
1917 Chairman. R. H. Oliver; E. McEllister, W. R. Mar-
shall, H. Fagg, T. Hookings.
1918 — Chairman, R. H. Oliver; E. McEllister, W. R. Mar-
shall, H. Fagg, M. Coffee.
1919 Chairman, W. R. Marshall; R. H. Oliver, E. McEllis-
ter, H. Fagg, M Coffee.
1920 Chairman, W. R. Marshall; R. H. Oliver, E. McEllis
ter, H. Fagg, M. Coffee.
1921 Chairman, H. Fagg; R. H. Oliver, E. McEllister, W
R. Marshall, M. Coffee.
1922 Chairman, FI. Fagg; R. Oliver, E. McEllister, W. R
Marshall, M. Coffee.
1923 Chairman, R. H. Oliver; H. O. Schwerdt, W. R. Mar
shall, H. Fagg, A. P. Bell.
1924 —Chairman, R. H. Oliver: H. O. Schwerdt, W. R. Mar
shall, H. Fagg, A. P. Bell.
1925 Chairman, R. H. Oliver; H. O. Schwerdt, F. W. Sires,
H. Fagg, A. P. Bell.
1926 Chairman, A. P. Bell; R. H. Oliver. H. O. Schwerdt,
T. Carmichael, F. W. Sires.
1927 Chairman. A. P. Bell; W. T. Sires, H. O. Schwerdt,
F. W. Sires, T. Carmichael.
1928 Chairman. A. P. Bell; W. T. Sires, H. O. Schwerdt.
F. W. Sires. T. Carmichael.
1929 Chairman, A. P. Bell ; J. Jarmyn, H. O. Schwerdt,
F. W. Sires, T. Carmichael.
1930 Chairman, A. P. Bell; J. Jarmyn, J. W. Kain. T. Car-
michael, F. W. Sires.
1931 Chairman, A. P. Bell; J. Jarmyn, J. W. Kain, E. H.
Roennfeldt, T. Carmichael.
1932 Chairman, A. P. Bell; J. Jarmyn, J. W. Kain. E. H
Roennfeldt, W. C. Toll.


-
>
J
Mpypr . jp
f' ■ iJB Ijpfk
fiH # x /*
\T
THE LATE JAMES BRAY
(Past Chairman, District Council of Mudla
Wirra.)
The late Mr. Bray served 4 years on
the Mudla Wirra District Council. 3
years of which he was Chairman.
THE LATE WILLIAM DAY.
(Past Chairman, District Council of Mudla
Wirra.)
The late Mr. Day served in the
Mudla Wirra District Council for 5
years, and for one year he was Chair-
man.
THE LATE S. L. DAWKINS.
(Past Chairman, District Council of Mudla
Wirra.)
The late Mr. Dawkins served in the
Mudla Wirra District Council for 15
years, 4 years of which he was Chair-
man.


I V' M I'
J*9 •
/
. F
l|f| A&mSF *' tfcjSF |
THE LATE W. H. ROBINSON.
(Past Chairman, District Council of Mudla
Wirra.)
The late Mr. Robinson served in the
Mudla Wirra District Council for 8
years, 4 years of which he acted as
Chairman.
THE LATE H. ROEDIGER.
(Past Chairman, District Council of Mudla
Wirra.)
The late Mr. Roediger served in the
Mudla Wirra District Council for 1/
years, 9 years of which he was Chair
man.
THE LATE J. G. FOLLAND.
(Past Chairman, District Council of Mudla
Wirra.)
The late Mr. Folland served in the
Mudla Wirra District Council for 13
years, 5 years of which he was Chair-
man.


_____
f £1
I
.
jpHr
i|||yg a®^^
THE LATE R. HOGBEN.
(Past Chairman, District Council of Mudla
Wirra.)
The late Mr. Hogben served in the
Mudla Wirra District Council for 6
years, 4 years of which he was Chair-
man.
WILLIAM HENRY GEORGE, J.P.
(Past Chairman, District Council of Mudla
Wirra.)
Born at Willaston, near Gawler, in
1861. Educated at Willaston and Kan-
garoo Flat Public Schools. Service in
Council; 12 years, 2 years as Chair-
man. A resident of the district for
75 years. Positions held: Chairman of
Wasleys Recreation Park and Chair-
man of Wasleys Institute. Business,
Grain and Chaff Merchant. He has
been 60 years a member of the Sons
of Temperance Lodge. Sports, cricket,
football, coursing, and bowls. Mr.
George still takes a very keen inte-
rest in all matters concerning the wel-
fare of the district. Home address,
Wasleys.
THE LATE A. G. BOTH.
(Past Chairman, District Council of Mudla
Wirra.)
The late Mr. Both served 6 years in
the District Council of Mudla Wirra,
2 years of which he acted as Chair-
man.




District Council of Munno Para East


History of Munno Para East
The Munno Para Fast district was proclaimed in 1854.
A small portion of its northern boundary abuts the Muni-
cipality of Gawler, in the neighbourhood of Dead Man’s
Pass. The Council Office is at Uley, near One Tree Hill.
In 1860 the Council was comprised of Councillors W. J.
Petersw aid (who afterwards became Commissioner of
Police), R. J. Turner, E. L. Ifonld. J. Purdie, and H.
McLean.
The Disti ict of Munno Para East, the western boun-
dar\ of which is the Main North Road, extends from
Gawler light to the Little Para, near Salisbury, and, having
the rivers as a boundary, runs easterly nearly through to
Kersbrook, taking in One Tree Hill, part of Smithfield,
\attalunga, Gawler Hills, Humbug Scrub, and Sampson’s
Flat, and a small portion of Gawler South, and contains
over 39,500 acres, comprising gome of the finest agricul-
tural and pastoral country in Australia.
The Lady Alice Gold Mine, which created such a furore
at one time and disgorged £20,000 worth of gold, is within
its boundary, and Mr. T. H. Bedchambers has founded and
established his fauna reserve near the workings of the old
mine.
The natural beauty of the district is becoming more
widely known, and tourists from the city travel through
the hills for a holiday outing. The road from Gawler
through to One I ree Hill is particularly picturesque, and
the view of the plains with the sea as a background, as
seen from Yattalunga, is one of the finest in the State.
The district took a prominent part in all patriotic
movements during the war, and raised its quota to nearly
all the war and peace loans, receiving the Flag and Tablet
issued by the Commonwealth Government.
The capital value of local ratable property is £20,220,
assessment value £10,346, and a rate of 1/6 in the £ pro-
duces £776. The population is 554 persons,
who are accommodated in 135 dwellings.
The names of past Councillors are contained in the
following list; Messrs. H. J. Riggs, M. G. Smith, H.
\\ hitford, H. H. Blackham, E. A. Thomas, J. Hogarth.
P. D. Taylor, A. Shillabeer, W. Smith, G. Bald, W. Willi-
son, R. A. Jenkins, G. Bowman, and A. H. Riggs.
Present members of Council:—A. H. Riggs (Char-
man), Councillors J. J. T. Farrow, J. C. Stevens, J
Harvey, L. K. McGilp, H. H. Blackham, A. Milne (District
Clerk).


)istnct Council of Murat Bay


History of Murat Bay
Murat Bay was named by the French navigator
Baudin in 1802, after Murat, who married Caroline, the
sister of Napoleon. Murat was the son of an innkeeper of
Cahors.
Ceduna was surveyed in 1901, and named after a water
in the district. The District Council of Murat Bay was
established in 1925, and has an area of approximately 1,700
square miles and a population of 3,000.
The pioneer families arrived about forty years ago, the
centre then being Denial Bay. Farming was the general
industry. The arrival of the railway during the Great
War and the establishment of the deep-sea port at Theve-
nard and gypsum factories made Ceduna and Thevenard (2
miles apart) important centres. Water is brought to
Thevenard from the Todd Reservoir, which is nearly 300
miles away. The total length of roads under Council
control is 1.127 miles.
The distance from Adelaide is as follows :—By land
520 miles, by sea 385, and by air 350. There is a regular
train, steamer, motor, and aeroplane service.
Wheat is the primary industry of the district, with
wool next. A formerly flourishing gypsum industry has
been in abeyance for the past six years. Fishing is car-
ried on in a large scale at Ceduna and Thevenard, there
being nearly 200 licensed fishermen, who own a fleet of
boats. Fish is trucked twice weekly to Adelaide over-
land, besides being- transported by rail and steamer. There
is a well-found Institute and Library at Ceduna, also the
Memorial Hall, four churches, Post Office with continuous
telephone service.
The Commonwealth Aerodrome is situated one and a
half miles from Ceduna, and is a regular stop on the East-
West air route.
Visitors to Ceduna, Thevenard, or Denial Bay are
assured of an enjoyable trip, as there are many places
of interest to visit, including the Islands of Nuyt’s Arche-
pelago, and it is also the jumping-off place for expeditions
to the Nullarbor Plain, where the caves are chief among
the scenic wonders. The hotel accommodation is excel-
lent at each of these towns. Ceduna is the town of the
District Council of Murat Bay and Thevenard the shipping
port. Ihe unimproved land value is £232,268.
Past members of the Council are as follow:—Messrs.
H. A. F. Betts, J. T. Mason, E. A. Hasting, C. A. Tonkin.
C. J. W. Bergmann, L. B. Hughes, J. W. Blumson, A. E.
Gregor, C. H. Kuhlmann.
I resent Council. Messrs. G. O. Lovelock (Chairman),
E. A. Hoffrichter, E. A. Payne, J. B. Talbot, T. D, Drever,
G. G. Cranna, W. J. Tucker.


District Council of Noarlunga


History of Noarlunga
he present District Council of Noarlunga was formed
~>> t le amalgamation of the original Noarlunga and Mor-
P a^e district Councils, together with some recent
additions from the area previously under the District Coun-
cil of Clarendon.
Noarlunga was proclaimed a District Council in 1856,
a !3 c i at lat t^me th e assessed value of the property was
£5,822 and rates £291 2/-. *
Mor P hett Vale was proclaimed a District Council in
853, and the value of the property and the rates derived
\\ ere comparable with Noarlunga.
The present assessment of the district is £42,293, and
the rates amount to just over £3,500, the total revenue of
the district being in the vicinity of £4,500.
The chief products of the district are wine, dried fruits,
wheat, barley, hay and peas, and there are also several
barytes mines, and at times an ochre deposit is worked.
There are twelve wine cellars in the district, and
almost all types of wine are produced. The Reynella
vineyards are some of the oldest in South Australia.
About 1,000 tons of dried fruits (apricots, peaches,
peai s, currants, sultanas, prunes, etc.) are produced in the
district annually.
The district has become a popular holiday and tourist
resort, and about £4,000 has been spent during the last few
years on improvements to beaches and foreshores, includ-
ing Port Noarlunga, Moana, and Christie's Beach.'
Good sandy beaches, which give safe bathing and at
times good surfing, within 22 miles of Adelaide, have proved
an attraction, and at times at Moana, where vehicles may
be driven on to and along the beach for over three miles,
there have been up to 1,000 cars present.
Fishing and boating on the River Onkaparinga, which
flows through the district, is another attraction for many.
Accommodation in boarding houses and the up-to-
date hotel at Port Noarlunga has led many people to spend
their holidays there.
All stages of development can be seen from the older
vmeyaid country at Reynella, through vineyards and graz-
ing country to Morphett Yale and the little village of Hack-
ham with its olive and almond trees, to Noarlunga built
m a horseshoe-like bend of the river, and which used to
be a changing station for the Hill & Co. coaches, through
the thriving township of McLaren Vale to the newly
developing country behind McLaren Flat.
The diversified scenery, comprising hills, river flats
seascapes, cliffs, and the varied cultivation of vineyards
and other types of agricultural produce, interspersed with
grazing and scrub country, and the fact that good main
roads traverse the district, make a visit to this district an
enjoyable and interesting one.
The present Council consists of the following gentle-
men: Chairman, F. R. Bruce (McLaren Flat & Ward)-
Councillors W C Taylor (Morphett Vale), A. R. Cress
Noarlunga), W. H. Parham (Port Noarlunga). G. Cox
(Reynella), G. E. Morton (Hackham), W. E. Ha
(Christie), O. K. Thomas (Sea View), F. M. Higgins (St
Vincent). N. Deß. Cocks, District Clerk


i< ** i vBr
IHHr Wmm
Bn.
!««■
| "'*****&* 1^4-.,- *. .
m ~ W
j;
■&** 1r(l JP^|W|.
■PF" v tj h|^
i pilMWl;:Ml..
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM EVANS
HARDY, J.P.
(District Council of Noarlunga)
Born at Glen el g, 19th October,
1879, and educated at Glenelg Gram-
mar School and Whinham College.
Mr. Hardy has served four years as
Councillor, and is connected with all
activities for the furtherance or im-
provement of the district. Home
address, “Eumurrah,” 11 Dulwich
Avenue, Dulwich.




District Council of Onkaparinga


History of Onkapannga
-yr T 1 , 16 ?, borig ! nal name of this district is said to mean
\ , lK c O D ater in reference to the well-known stream
v Inch flows through it. The boundary originally was the
water shed of that river, but subsequently 21 sections of
the water shed of the Bremer River were added from the
District Council of Nairne.
Woodside, situated about the centre of the district, is
the seat of the local District Council, and is the chief poll
place tor the Electoral District of Murray. The town-
s up has three churches, Institute, two first-class hotels,
o ice Station and Court House, bank, two milk factories,
with bacon and small goods units and a number of modern
shops _ The power plant of the Onkaparinga Electricity
Co., which supplies electric current to the greater part of
the district, is also situated here. The town is con-
nected v ith Adelaide by 23 miles of bituminous road as
vel a, B by railway. Most of the wealth produced from
the fertile valleys of the River Onkaparinga and its tribu-
tanes finds its way into Woodside, the chief productions
being milk, butter, bacon, potatoes, fruit, wool, lambs
clover seed. etc.
During lecent years irrigation of crops with water
trom bore-holes has greatly increased the productivity of
the land, and present land values are as high as any in
the State.
The Township of Lobethal, three miles distant from
J. ° od f l ? e I cA S th £ lar " est in the district, with a popula-
tion ot 1.100. 1 he principal industry is that of the Onka-
paringa Woollen Mills, which cover an area of three acres
and employ 300 hands. The public buildings are similar
to those of Woodside, and in recent years a considerable
number of modern homes have been erected. This is a
very flourishing town, having, in addition to the industry
mentioned, a cricket bat factory, and considerable support
trom the neighbouring farm and orchard land.
Oakbank, about two and a half miles from Woodside.
is adjacent to the famous Oakbank Racecourse. The pub-
lic buildings comprise church. Memorial Hall, and School
Ihe most important industry is that of the breweries,
of which there are two.
Balhannah is 18 miles by road from Adelaide, and is
the junction of the interstate and Mount Pleasant railways.
Ihe principal production of this part of the district —to
which may be added Lenswood and Forest Range—is from
the orchards that surround the townships mentioned.
It is claimed that the best apple gardens of the State
are in this locality, and from which the bulk of South
Australian export fruit is produced. There are two cold
storage factories and a timber mill operating continuously.
Charleston is three and a half miles north-east of
Woodside and is near the head of the River Onkaparinga.
Although the township is small there is considerable wealth
produced from the rich grazing and dairying land surround-
ing and near at hand.
The following persons held office as Councillors for
various periods since the first meeting in 1853:—Messrs.
A. Brakenridge, J. Thomson, T. Pugh, W. Priess, J. Brown,
H. Kerr, J. Weidenhofer, W. Paech, J. Spender, C. Bom,
F. Weyland, W. Dube, J. Shepherd, F. H. Sonneman, {
Bradley, H. A. Waldt, T. Hutchens, G. Dunn, J. Edwards,
J. C. A. Kerber, J. Hutchins, J. C. Jenkins, [. Caldwell
J. David, W. T. Shephard, A. D. Johnston, G. Johnston.
W. H. Pike, C. A. Paech. J. G. Rogers, W. Muller, J.
Hughes, J. Musson, T. Grivell, F. Driffield, H. Kellv. !
Kay, J. C. F. Lauterbach. E. Prescott, R. Perkins, W
Grasby, I. Inglis, C. Newman, W. Fucker, R. Drummond.
C. Dunn, W. F. Hughes, R. Caldwell, M. Topham. f. Wi
Hams, J. Moore, H. Spoehr, H. Newman, and C. W. Fowk •
(Clerk).
The first settlers came to these parts in 1837. and the
district was proclaimed a District Council in 1853. the find
Council consisting of Messrs. Alexander Lorimer, F. A .
Kleinschmidt, W. Kelly, J. Johnston, and J. Weinart. and
a vote of £250 being obtained from the Government for
preliminary expenses.
The first assessment in 1854 was on £15,020, and the rate


1 in the £. The present assessment is £37,967; 1/6 in
the £ yields a revenue of £2,847 10/6.
In the year 1854 the following gentlemen were nomi-
nated by the Council to form part of the Central Road
Board, viz.:—Messrs. John Baker. C. H. Babidge, W. Giles,
and S. Davenport. In July, 1862, the district was divided
into five Wards, with one Councillor each —Hahndorf,
Lobethal, Charleston. Oakbank, and Woodside. In 1888
part of Hahndorf (now Ambleside) and some sections were
ceded to the District Council of Echunga, and the remain-
ing portion named Balhannah. In 1910 the number of
Wards was increased to six. Forest Range Ward being
added.
From time to time gold mining has been carried on
in the district, and it is said that gold to the value of
£20,000 was produced at Forest Range, about six miles west
from Woodside, during a period of eight years, and £70.000
from the Woodside group of mines.
In the early forties several flour mills were erected,
the first being a windmill, set up by Mr. John Dunn, near
Hay Valley. The remains of this old mill may still be seen.
The area of the district is 81 square miles (52,480
acres). The main roads measure 384 miles and district
roads 160 miles. The total number of dwellings is approxi-
mately 1,000 and the population 4.300 persons.
The present Chairman is Mr. H. A. Spoehr, and the
Councillors Messrs. R. K. Kidman, R. W. Kerber. R. A.
M. Mitchell. J. G. Schapel, and M. J. Vickers. The District
Clerk is Mr. H. G. Tolmer.


' ll> IT
y jBir *5 - i *
M | . - jT
**' J* r/ “ *
I ’“mm
'
VUHHH
# M ;Ml
m I 5 mM
I m mm
mJmwm I
HERMAN AUGUST SPOEHR, J.P.
(Chairman, District Council of Onkaparinga.)
Born at Balhannah, 24th January,
1879. Educated at the Balhannah
Public School. Service in Council, 11
years, two years as Chairman. A
resident of the district the whole of
his life. Mr. Spoehr has been Chair-
man of the District Council of
Onkanaringa, a Justice of the Peace,
President of the Balhannah Centenary
Committee, President of the Balhan-
nah Cycle Club, and Vice-President of
the Balhannah Liberal and Country
League. Member of the Druids
Lodge. Sports, Patron of the
Balhannah Tennis Club, Vice-Presi-
dent of the Onkaparinga Football
club. Home address, Balhannah,
MR. REINHOLD WILHELM KERBER.
(Past Chairman, District Council of
Onkaparinga.)
Born at Spring Head, near Mt. Tor-
rens, 18th September, 1877. Educated
at Spring Head School. Service in
Council, 14 years. He has represented
Charleston, Mount Torrens and
Talunga Wards, and was Chairman
for two years. Business, farmer.
Mr. Kerber has been associated with
the Lutheran Church the whole of his
life. Home address, Mount Torrens.
COUNCILLOR MAXWELL JOHN
VICKERS.
(District Council of Onkaparinga.)
Born at Lenswood, 7th July, 1894.
Educated at the Forest School. Ser-
vice in the Council, six years. Chair-
man of Directors, Lenswood Cold
Stores, Vice-Chairman Onkaparinga
Branch R.5.5.1.L.A., President of the
Lenswood Tennis Ciub, Past Presi-
dent of the Lenswood Agricultural
Bureau. Business, Orchardist. S.D.
Producers Fellowship Masonic Lodge.
Sports, tennis and bowls. War ser-
vice, served four and three quarter
years on active service abroad with
the 25th Company, A.A.S.C. Enlisted
in July, 1915. Mr. Vickers has tra-
velled extensively through America,
Canada, China, Japan, Java, Mala a,
and New r Zealand, studying
methods of fruit production and distri-
bution, and in 1936 again visited the
United Kingdom and the Continent
for the purpose of further study. Hone
address, Lureland Orchard, Lens-
wood.


b||b
Jj \ ij&Ss& '■
.-. '?% ki '* 1
r~ " -
* ' ■ •
P.; *",' Mb
tv-:'- •
I Hj
1L ’ 4
1: • %
/ JP*
Ij
fc f */J /
% . |JL; 11 £ 'M $y-§>\'
‘WflmSimSSHHSB*
mMMm w
If —
■ fjlH
I#* JB»
Hk
SI'fV ,\ ; . Hi .4:
■ • iiESi
IP
COUNCILLOR ROBERT ANDREW
MURDOCH MITCHELL.
(District Council of Onkaparinga.)
Born at Woodside, 31st December,
1883. Educated at the Woodside and
Xairne Public Schools. Fie has served
in Council two years, and been a resi-
dent of the district the whole of his
life. Business, Mixed Farming. He is
a Member of the Woodside Rechabite
Lodge. Sport, bowls and cricket,
being Secretary of the Murdoch Hill
Cricket Club. Mr. Mitchell has also
been Secretary of the Murdoch Hill
Hall Trust from its inception and he
is Chairman of the Murdoch Hill
School Committee and Trustee of the
W oodside Institute. His great grand-
parents were among the first settlers
in the Woodside District. Home
address, Woodside.
COUNCILLOR JOHANN GUSTAV
SCHAPEL.
(District Council of Onkaparinga.)
Born at Robertstown, 7th May, 18G7,
and educated at Manoora. Service in
Council, nine years ; 45 years a resident
of the district. Business, Storekeeper.
Sports—Chairman of the Lobethal
Cricket and Tennis Clubs, and Presi-
dent of the Lobethal Football C lub.
Home address, Lobethal.
COUNCILLOR KEITH KIDMAN, M.C.
(District Council of Onkaparinga.)
Born at Naracoorte, sth February,
1893. Service in Council, seven years
and nine years a resident of the
district. Mr. Kidman has been Presi-
dent of the Onkaparinga Sheep Dog
Field Trial Society, President of the
Onkaparinga Sub-branch R.5.5.1.L.A..
Business, Grazier. He is a member of
the Hore-Ruthven Masonic Lodge,
Woodside. Sports, cricket, golf, and
bowls. War Service, served with the
Light Horse Regiment, A.1.F., on
active service in Egypt and Palestine,
and awarded the Military Cross.
Home address, Oakbank.
H. G. TOLMER.
(District Clerk, District Council of
Onkaparinga.)
Born at Port Lincoln, 1873. Edu-
cated at Whinham College, North
Adelaide. He has held his present
position for 15 years and been 25 years
a resident of the district. Positions
held: President of the Woodside Show
Society and Institute, S.A. Sheep Dog
Trial Society. Committeeman of the


v yfSsff
W& w&sM&k
■ *
. ;- 4 v- %
Jfejr
t jjk
*
» wm. jt jr
Onkaparinga Racing Club and various
others. Sports, hunting and cricket.
Mr. Tolmer has had considerable ex-
perience in the bush in his younger
days. Home address, Woodside.


District Council of Orroroo


History of Orroroo
The name Orroroo appears to have three meanings
—(1) name of creek with rapid current, meaning moving
quickly; (2) native imitation of the sound of wind; (3)
name of native girl.
cillors Aitchison, McDougall, Daly, Jamieson, Cordon,
McCann, Kelly, Growden, and Addison. The lastnamed
was duly appointed Chairman, and in the same year was
elected as a representative of the Northern District in the
PRESENT DISTRICT COUNCIL OF ORROROO.
1 he District of Orroroo has an area of 322,880 acres
and a population of some 2,000 persons, 700 of whom
reside in the Township of Orroroo, which is situated in
the centre of the district.
The first meeting of the District Council was held in
Orroroo on January 28th, 1888, there being present Coun-
Legislative Council.
The total area of 500 square miles under the control
of the District Council is comprised of the Hundreds of
Walloway, Coomooroo, Pekina, Black Rock Plains, and
Erskine, and is bounded by the Districts of Carrieton,
Jamestown, Port Germein, Wilmington, and Peterborough.


0 roroo has been reticulated throughout with an
almost unlimited supply of spring water. These water-
works. being known as Orroroo Water District, are leased
by the Council.
The Council has an up-to-date electric lighting plant,
which greatly benefits the residents by giving them addi-
tional comfort and convenience, which is a step in the right
direct! n of local public advancement and modernity.
Sin' 1 the early days the Council has carried out a plan
of tr e planting, and ornamental trees adorn the streets
of all the townships within the district, the ornamental gar-
dens n the centre of the main shopping thoroughfare in
Orro oo greatly add to the pleasing aspect of the town-
ship.
•'rroroo has a modern hospital, with a well-fitted ope-
ratin theatre, etc., built on rising ground above the town-
ship, from where a splendid view may be obtained. The
hospital can accommodate 30 cases, and is a subsidised
one.
n embankment on the puddled earthen core system
has been placed across the Pekina Creek approximately
one mile from Orroroo, water in the reservoir being over
two miles in length, and when constructed, the water was
48 feet deep at the embankment; the water is used for
growing lucerne on the open channel flooding system of
the Pekina Irrigation area situated on the Walloway
Plains.
The following is a list of the past and present mem-
bers of the District Council: —Messrs. J. Aitchison, W.
Cordon, McCann, W. Kelly, J. McDougall, J. Daly, Grow-
den, A. Forrest, Jettner, Kinnane, M. Kenny, R. Brown,
P. McNamara, J. McCarthy W. Mannion, Paecly Craig,
J. McGlashan, J. Crocker, W. Brooks, R. Coulter, Cock-
rane, T. Symes, A. White, K. T. Kuerschner, T. Hancock,
Gilfillan, R. J. Hutchens. W. Pascoe, M. Duflfy, L. B. Addi-
son, W. H. Shillabeer, T. Chapman, J. Travers, J. Bills, W.
Arthur, W. Zanker, J. W. Gray, T. Avery, J. Reilly, J.
Hehir, T. Arthur, H. S. Lillecrapp, J. Orrock, A. Haynes.
M. J. Neylan, F. A. Kupke, G. Harding, J. M. Cadzow, C.
Halliday, W. Robertson, M. Smith, F. P. Keats, J. F.
Burns, F. A. Forbes, A. H. Cooke, C. E. Pearce, J. Marron,
J. Jamieson, W. Too]), E. Copley, M. Redden, A. R. Addi-
son. C. T. Kuerschner, H. A. Brooks, E. W. Copley, F.
Knight, A. J. S. Ballantyne, E. G. Ballantyne, J. G. Crocker,
W. T. Thompson, H. Chapman, W. L. Hortin, L. Haynes,
L. G. Toop, A. L. Brice, and S. R. Wilkinson.
The Chairmen have been;— Hon. A. R. Addison, J.
Jamieson, J. McCarthy J. Marron, W. Toop, F. P. Keats,
E. Copley, M. Redden, C. Halliday, A. L. Brice, J. G.
Crocker, and L. G. Toop.
The Clerks have been: —A. T. Beck. A. L. Tait, R. J.
Hutchens, M. Shannon, P. H. Giles, and C. V. Hennessy.
The names and addresses of the present Councillors are
as follows: —L. G. Too]), Chairman, Orroroo; A. L. Brice.
Councillor, Orroroo; C. Halliday, Councillor, Morchard: H.
Chapman, Councillor, Walloway; J. G. Crocker, Councillor,
Wepowie ; W. L. Hortin, Councillor, Tarcowie; M. Redden,
Councillor, Pekina; C. T. Kuerschner, Councillor, Black
Rock; L. Haynes, Councillor, Orroroo; S. R. Wilkinson,
Councillor, Orroroo.


Jj j** ||
•,v ;
j:
PAST CHAIRMAN JAMES G. CROCKER,
J.P.
(District Council of Orroroo.)
Born at Pekina, 12th January, 1900,
and educated at A\ ynflete Public
School and Peterborough High School.
He has served in Council for 11 years
and 6 months, and was Chairman one
year. He is also Chairman Wepowie
School Committee, and a Justice of the
Peace. Business, Farmer. Member
of the Hibernian Lodge. Sports, ten-
nis and racing. Home address,
Wepowie.
PAST CHAIRMAN MARTIN REDDEN
(District Council of Orroroo.)
Born at Pekina, 22nd May, 1876, and
educated at St. Joseph’s School,
Pekina, and Christian Brothers’ Col-
lege, Adelaide. He has had 25 years’
service in Council, 9 years as Chair-
man, and resided in the district for the
whole of his life. President of various
clubs and local committees. Mr.
Redden patented several improve-
ments in Harvesting Machinery and
Rabbit Destructors. Home address,
Pekina.
PAST CHAIRMAN ARTHUR LEWIS
BRICE.
(District Council of Orroroo.)
Born at Orroroo, 27th August, 1885,
and educated at Prince Alfred College.
He has served in Council, 5 years as
Councillor, and one year as Chairman.
He is a member of the Electric Eight
Committee, and the Water Board. 50
years a resident of the district. Mr.
Brice occupied the following posi-
lions: President Orroroo Agricultural
Society, 2 years; Orroroo Agricultural
Bureau, 2 years; Chairman Orroroo
District Council, 1 year; Captain
Orroroo Rifle Club, 2 years, and Sec-
retary, 9 years; Secretary and Treas-
urer Orroroo School Committee, 6
years; President Walloway Plains
Sports Committee, 2 years; Secretary
Walloway Plains Sports Committee, 2
years; Member of Hospital Committee,
1 year; Member of Institute Commit-
tee, 4 years. Present positions held
are Secretary and Treasurer Far
Northern Rifle Club Union, 13 years.
Treasurer Orroroo Baptist Church, 7
years. Secretary Walloway Plains
Tennis Club. Member of the Indepen-
dant Order of Oddfellows M.Lk
Life member Prince Alfred Old Col-
legians’ Association. He won the
King’s Badge for rifle shooting in 1923,
and gained second place in Inter-
collegiate Gymnasium Championship,
1901 (Princes and St. Peters College).
Business, Grazier. Home address,
Orroroo.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES TRAUGOTT
KUERSCHNER.
(District Council of Orroroo.)
Born at Black Rock, February 9th,
1888, and educated at Black Rock Pub-
lic School. Service in Council, 6 years.
A resident of the district all his life.
Positions held: Chairman of the Black
Rock School Committee, President of
the Black Rock Branch of the Agricul-
tural Bureau, and President of the
Black Rock Cricket Club. Business,
Farmer. Member of the H.A.C.B.S.
Lodge. Sports, cricket football and
tennis. Home address, Black Rock.
COUNCILLOR LANCE HAYNES.
(District Council of Orroroo.)
Born at Middleton, 2nd May, 1884,
and educated at North Walloway
School. He has had five years’ ser-
vice in Council, and he has been a resi-
dent of the district for the whole of
his lifetime. Business, Commission
Agent. Member of the Masonic and
Oddfellows Lodges. A keen sports-
man. Home address, Orroroo.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM LAWRENCI
HORTIN.
(District Council of Orroroo.)
Born at Tarcowie, February 241 .
1886, and educated at Bully Acre Pub
lie School, late Hd. of Pekina. Set
vice in Council, 0 years, representing
Pekina Ward. Pie has been 50 years
a resident of the district. Trustee and
Secretary to Trust of Tarcowie Insti-


tute, 14 years Chairman Bully Acre
School Committee. A Trustee of
Tarcowie Methodist Church, and a
Trustee Methodist Manse at Caltowie.
Several years was a member of the
Agricultural Bureau at Tarcowie, 26
' o
years Superintendent of Methodist
Sunday School at Tarcowie, also a
local preacher for 27 years; several
years a Circuit Steward of the Cal-
towie Methodist Circuit, and often
represented the Circuit at the Annual
Methodist Conference. Mr, Hortin
has always taken a keen interest in
the spiritual and moral welfare of the
community. Business, Farmer. Sports,
although not a player, Mr. Hortin is
interested in tennis, and was for two
years 'resident of the Bully Acre
Tennis Club. Home address, Tarcowie.
COUNCILLOR HARRY CHAPMAN.
(District Council of Orroroo.)
Born at Oladdie, March dth. 1883,
and educated at Rye Public School.
He has six years’ service in Council,
and has been a resident of the district
for 52 years, and represents Coomoo-
roo Ward. Business, Farmer. Mem-
ber of the 1.0.0. F. Lodge. Home
address, Walloway.
LEWIS GEORGE TOOP, J.P.
(Chairman, District Council of Orroroo.)
Born at Morchard, 12th February,
1895, and educated at Morchard Public
School. He has served in Council for
7 years, and been 38 years a resident
of the district. Positions held : Chair-
man Orroroo District Council, Chair-
man Water Board, Local Board of
Health, Orroroo Electric Light Board,
member of the Hospital Control Board,
member and officer of Methodist
Church. A Justice of the Peace. He
is keenly interested in all sports, ride
shooting being his main hobby. Busi-
ness, Motor Garage Proprietor. Home
address, Orroroo.
CLEM. V. HENNESSY.
(District Clerk, District Council of
Orroroo.)
Born at Orroroo, 2Gth March, 1896,
and educated there. He has been 40
years a resident of the district, 16
years as District Clerk of Orroroo
Council. A keen sportsman and has
held verious executive positions in
football and cricket. War service, 3
years and 90 days A.I.F. Served in
France with Australian Field Artillery
and divisional Engineers. Home ad-
dress, Orroroo.
GEORGE BORTON.
(Overseer of Works, District Council of
Orroroo.)
Horn at Rcynella, 25th June, 1888,
and educated at Reynella Public
School. He has been 20 years a resi-
dent of the district, has been over-
seer for nine years, and is keen on all
sports. Home address, Orroroo.




District Council of Owen


History of Owen
The District Council of Owen was formed in May,
1932, by combining' the Districts of Alma Plains and Dalkey.
The two principal towns are Hamley Bridge and Owen,
other smaller centres being Alma, Pinery, Woods, Ridgway,
Stockyard Creek, and Salter’s Springs. The centre of the
district is approximately 55 miles north of Adelaide, and
the total population, according to 1933 census, is 1,810
persons.
The district comprises 120,960 acres, assessed at £36,291,
on a capital value of £725,820, which yields rates, at 1/2
in the £, totalling £2,193. There is a lighting rate of 3d.
on the township areas. Rainfall over the district ranges
from about 14 inches in the western mallee to 18 inches
in the eastern hills. Generally the district is a typical
mixed farming one, being noted more especially for heavy
wheat yields. Farms are assessed at values ranging from
£3 10/ per acre to £6, and with a fourteen penny rate occu-
pants cannot complain of being unduly burdened. About
twopence of this rate is a contribution towards subsidised
hospitals at Riverton and Balaklava, where every modern
convenience is available to patients.
The Council is now modernising its plant, toward'
which end a large track type tractor was purchased last
year. Costs of works since constructed have been more
than halved. At this juncture it appears that amalgama-
tion has been a step in the right direction.
Early history shows that the old Dalkey Council first
met at the residence of one Mr. Traeger at 4 p.m. on April
7th, 1875, there being present Messrs. Traeger, J. Fisher,
Hill, Gibbs, J.P., and R. K. Spotswood. The lastnamed
was elected Chairman. An election was then arranged
by public meeting in July. There were eight candidates,
and a choice was made by show of hands. However, the
selection was annulled by a motion being carried to the
effect that a poll was desirable. Later in the month the
subsequent ballot resulted in some variation of the initial
voting, Messrs. I. Hutton, J. Fisher, and J. Dow being-
elected. Mr. Spotswood continued as Chairman. The
Government made available in the Port Wakefield bank
the sum of £3O as a grant-in-aid. Mr. h. A. Klaehn was
appointed Clerk at £4O per annum, and the rate of 6d. in
the £ yielded £lsl. Sect. 312 (604 ac.) on the Nine Mile
paid 15/2 in rates! As work appears to have been let
at £9 per chain progress was surely slow —if at all sure.
In 1876 the assessment book showed a value of £6,041
with a 6d. rate. In 1928 the value was £24,636 and the
rate 1/7. Past members of the Dalkey Council, in addition
to the above appear to have been Messrs. S. Fisher, H.
W r ood, Geo. Reid, R. H. Stewart, Geo. Thompson, Arthur
Miller, Jas. Adams, Allan Young, Senr., Jas. Lawrie, Vivian,
Jas. McLachlan, John Hall, W. G. Campbell, F. H. Han-
cock, P. E. Wood, J. Barker, A. Hannam, W. A. T. Bird.
A. E. March, J. D. Hogan, P. H. Laffer, W. J. Marshman,
J. and F. Dillon, John Harkness, O. Reid, W. Sorrell.
The old district of Alma Plains was bounded on the
south by the River Light and on the north by the River
W r akefield. Hamley Bridge, the principal town, was on the
extreme end. It was one of the first country townships
to instal electric light, an agreement with Mr. J. G. Trae-
ger being ratified in Council on June 14th, 1913.
An assessment made in 1874 gave a value of £9,111, and
with a rate of 6d. yielded £229. Signed James Day (Chair-
man) and W. PI. Hope (Clerk). After gradually rising,
reverses to the State’s fortunes found the assessment re-
duced in 1895 to £7,650. when the rate was 9d., having
fluctuated between 6d. and 9d. in the meantime. The last
assessments were in the vicinity of £IB,OOO.
Some of the past members have been: —James Day,
Senr., John Doyle, Jas. Doyle, D. Smyth, Thos. Freebairn.
Senr., H. C. Kelly, Joseph Kelly, W. T. Humphrys, N. D
Smyth, W. E. Harris, G. J. and F. J. Hill, P. Paterson.
H. J. Charlton, Aitchison, Howard. Ayliffe, A. {. Ridgway.
C. W. Cant, J. T. Quinn, S. Lake, T. L. Doyle, A. E. J.
Smyth, James Freebairn, T. A. Freebairn. E. J. Branson.


‘JF " ; ' N
,> : **" JIMM
Jr ,•>?!* i* 1
&' I
Hp
\V. H. R- and H. J. E. Branson, A. J. and T. Y. Free-
bairn C. E. Woods, J. H. G. Black, R. Uppill, John Bar-
clay. .H. Bell, J. T. Gregory, and A. Harkness.
" Present Council: —R. C. M. Smyth (Chairman), Coun-
cillors J. L. C. Freebairn, A. N. Freebairn, G. E. Reid, H.
J. R. Adams, J. P. Carrigg, F. H. Baker, H. Bowyer, O.
Reid, J. Flail. District Clerk and Overseer, A. G. Bowyer.
ROBERT CECIL McLENNAN SMYTH.
(Chairman, District Council of Owen)
Born at Salter’s Springs, 28th
December, 1897, and educated at
Prince Alfred College. He has given
4 years’ service in the Owen District
Council and 3 years’ in the Alma Dis-
trict Council; was appointed Chair-
man Owen District Council July, 1934,
and has been a resident in the district
for the whole of his life. Business,
farmer and grazier. He is a member
of the Hamley Masonic Lodge, is fond
of all general sports, and served
abroad 011 active service with the
A.I.F. in Egypt and Palestine. Home
address, Salter's Springs.
COUNCILLOR HENRY BOWYER
(District Council of Owen)
Born at Yankalilla, 28th May, 1872,
and educated at Wattle Flat Public
School. Mr. Bowyer has served 4 years
in Dalkey District Council, and 4 years
in the Owen District Council, and
been 16 years a resident of the district.
He was the last Chairman of Dalkey,
and first Chairman of Owen District
Council, President of the Owen In-
stitute, Vice-President of the Bala-
klava Show Society, Trustee and
Treasurer of Loveday Bay Hall, 14
years Treasurer for combined school
picnics, Owen, member of Loveday
Bay and Owen School Committees,
and is a life member of Agricultural
Bureau, S.A. Councillor Bowyer left
Yankalilla at the age of 34 years and
went to reside for 13 years at Narrung
Estate as one of the first set lers, sheep
and dairy farming being his occupation.
In 1920 he removed to the Owen Dis-
trict and engaged in wheat farming
and lamb raising with his two sons
on the old Dalkeith farm. Home ad-
dress, Owen.
COUNCILLOR JOHN HALL.
(District Council of Owen)
Mr. Hall was born at Two Wells
69 years ago, and as a child transferred
with his parents to the Owen District,
being educated at the Dalkey Public
School. His first recollection of the
district was one of a huge expanse of
timbered country, without roads, water
services, railways, or any semblance of
a township. He has been a most suc-
cessful wheat grower, and is even to-
day, in spite of his age, a regular
driver of his implements. Mr. Hall
is a member of the Freemasons’
Lodge, is interested in all sports, and


PjB^^ ;
■Ml \ Jilk
IIW v . i >- S
M .., / ■ . :'.. % . * ■'; ' , i
BwP ; -fe
. AlMhWsL, fc B
fMPrapI 1111
< * JH^ig
KBas
'■;'. fr#
ml. I ’% :
\ /#
i || V |v
I I
W §/ I : . '. !
a v .. .1
has for 40 years been a member of the
Balaklava Show Committee. He has
spent 20 years as a member of the
former District Council of Dalkey
(now merged into the District Coun-
cil of Owen) and for 8 years was
Chairman.
COUNCILLOR OLIVER REID.
(District Council of Owen)
Born at Woods, 10th July, 1894, and
educated at Woods and Dalkey Pub-
lic Schools, and Roseworthy College.
Mr. Reid has served in the Council
for two years, and been a resident of
the district the whole of his life. He
is a member of the R.5.5.1.L.A., also
the School Committee and Agricul-
tural Society. Business, Wheat Far-
mer. He is fond of tennis and all
sports, being captain of Owen Football
Club, and also Cricket Club, and
President of the Dalkey Tennis Club.
He served with the 27th and 32nd
Battalions, A.T.F., abroad for four
years. Home address, Woods.
COUNCILLOR ARCHIBALD NEIL
FREEBAIRN.
(District Council of Owen)
Born at Alma Plains, 11th October,
1898, and educated at Alma North
Public School and Prince Alfred Col-
lege. He has served in Council from
July Ist, 1934, and been 38 years a
resident of the district. He is Presi-
dent of the Owen Branch Agricultural
Bureau. Business, Sheep and Wheat
Farmer. He is Past Grand Master
Hamley Masonic Lodge No. 80.
Councillor Freebairn followed his
father, the bite Archibald Freebairn
and his Grandfather the late John
Youl Freebairn, in the occupation of
sheep and wheat farming, part of the
land worked by him being that owned
by his late Grandfather. In 1927 he
visited the British Isles and the Con
tinent for 8 months and combined
business with pleasure by studying
methods of agriculture there. He alse
visited Panama and New Zealand.
Whilst in England he was a guest at
Baltic House. While visiting Italy lie
studied the methods of unloading and
handling Australian wheat. Sports,
hunting, he is a member of the Salis-
bury Hunt Club. Home address,
Owen.


'
IBI B ■* «
I
H
' ' f * I
.,. ’ •■"■■■
||B8SB
L ,..-.-" Mtf\SZ > i' iiiifc'
BpC |pi8ig^»
| JBeIL V
V S
fy fv;, V j|B > 4
-» ,.„ ;J/," /
COUNCILLOR HOWARD J. R. ADAMS.
(District Council of Owen)
Born at Pinery, 26th March, 1887,
and educated a Pinery Public School.
He has had 4 years’ service in Coun-
cil, and has been a resident of the
district for the whole of his life. Busi-
ness, farmer and stud cattle breeder.
He is fond of all general sports. Home
address, Pinerv, via Owen.
COUNCILLOR FRANCIS HENRY
BAKER.
(District Council of Owen)
Born at Alma Plains, February 25th,
1869, and educated at Barabba Public
School. Mr. Baker has served 4 years
in the Alma Council, and 2 years in
the Owen District Council, and been
for 55 years a resident of the district.
Business, farmer. He has been 50
years a member of the Independent
Order of Rechabites. Sport, bowls.
Home address, Hamley Bridge.
COUNCILLOR JAMES LAWRENCE
CARRUTHERS FREEBAIRN.
(District Council of Owen)
Born at Alma Plains, 24th January,
1904, and educated at Alma North
School and Prince Alfred College. He
has 3 years’ service in Council, and has
resided in the district for the whole
of his life. Business, farmer. He is
Past Master Owen Masonic Lodge,
Vice-President Alma Hall Committee,
and takes an interest in all general
sport. Home address, Alma.


| " ! ' •
B ;-••
IF? I
mm | |
,
.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE EDGAR REID
(District Council of Owen)
Born at Dalkey, 2nd October, 1886,
and educated at Dalkey Public School.
Mr. Reid has given 7 years’ service
in the Council, and been a resident of
the district for 50 years. He is Vice-
President of the Balaklava and Dalkey
Agricultural Society, and was captain
of the cricket club for 15 years. Home
address, Balaklava.
COUNCILLOR JAMES PATRICK
CARRIGG, J.P.
(District Council of Owen.)
Born at Pinkerton Plains, sth Janu-
ary, 1877, and educated at private and
public schools, Plamley Bridge. Pic
has two years’ service in the Council.
Business, farmer. Pie won the State
Wheat Crop Competition 1932-33 har-
vest. Pie is President of the Plamley
Bridge Coursing Club. Home address,
Hamley Bridge.
ANDREW GEORGE BOWYER.
District Clerk and Overseer.
(District Council of Owen)
Born at Yankalilla, 7th December
1906, and educated at Adelaide Higl
School. He has held the position foi
4-J years, and been a resident of tin
district for 16 years. He is keenb
interested in local public activities
holding various Secretaryships. Hi
sport is tennis. Home address, Owen


District Council of Pannga


History of Paringa
The aboriginal name ‘Paringa” is taken from an old
s ieep station of that name which formerly existed in this
l>ai t of the country. Sheep and cattle raising was car-
i ied on extensively up to the nineties, but it was found
that rabbits and wild dogs were getting the upper hand,
and therefore squatters were not disappointed when the
Government of the day decided to take over the land
and cut it up into sections of two or five thousand acres
each for wheat and sheep farming purposes. These indus-
tries have been carried on successfully ever since, but
vermin-proof fences have had to be erected and continual
poisoning done in order to eradicate the above-mentioned
pests.
About the year 1894 the Murtho \ illag'e Settlement was
established with a view to fruit raising, this being the first
section surveyed, but the settlement turned out a failure
and is now defunct, operations ceasing in the year 1897.
An old station homestead, known as Paringa blouse,
stands on an elevated position overlooking the River
Murray, and it was near this point that the river was
ciossed in the early days on the overland route from
Sydney to Adelaide. A railway was made to Brown’s
W ell in 1913, but as a result of the persistent agitation
of the settlers at Renmark and Paringa it was brought
on to Paringa. A bridge over the Murray to connect
Paringa with Renmark is now constructed, and the rail-
■\\ ar continued on to Renmark, then on to Barmera, and
a mile down the river from Paringa No. 5 Lock is also
constructed.
Paringa was proclaimed a District Council in 1916,
and the total area of the district is now 174.184 acres,'
bounded on the north and west by the River Murray,
by the Victorian border on the east, and the south by
Gordon Road in the Hundred of Gordon. Prior to Novem-
ber of that year Paringa was a portion of the Loxton
District.
4he total length of main roads under Council con-
trol measure 45 miles and district roads 102 miles, the
principal routes being from Renmark to Loxton (via
Paringa) and Renmark to Mildura.
The subdivisions of the district are the Hundreds of
Murtho, Lyrup, and Paringa and Lyrup Extension, and the
population is estimated at 940 persons, accommodated in
198 dwellings.
The first assessment totalled £5.628 and yielded £2Bl.
The present assessment is £9,192, and a rate of 1/ in the £
produces £459.
Following is a list of names of past and present Coun-
cillors ; Messrs. J. W ilkinson, D. Thayne, T. Nolan. R.
Stoeckel, A. Wilkinson, F. W. Frahn. Sen., G. A. Frahn.
A. Pomroy, A. G. Day, R. G. Stoeckel, L. A. Stoeckel. L
Thayne, J. T. Heitmann. T. A. Hughes (present Chair-
man). A. J. Gallary, A. E. Kernich, O. B. Walter, O.
Stoeckel, C. E. Frahn, and W. Dridan (present Clerk).
Capital value of ratable property, £52,255.
Distance from Adelaide by rail 212 miles. Paringa
connects up with Mildura (90 miles) on the Murray Valley
route, an all-weather road.
At Lyrup is situated an up-to-date fruit-packing fac-
tory, known as the Moray Park.
The distiict is ideal foi shooting, fishing', and picnic
parties.


District Council of Payneham


History of Payneham
The District was named after the late Mr. Samuel
Payne, who came to Australia in 1838 in the ship “Ford
Goderich.” Mr. Payne was the original owner of the Ade-
laide Town Acre on which the Exchange Hotel now stands,
as well as other city and suburban property. Shares were
sold by him at £lO each in the "Village of Payneham”
during the year 1838.
Originally Payneham formed a portion of the old
District of East Tor rens, which extended from the City
Boundary to Forest Range In 1856 the western por-
tion, comprising the present Districts of Campbelltown,
St. Peters, and Payneham were severed and formed into
the District Council of Payneham. In 1868 the District
of Campbelltown was severed, and the remainder described
as the District Council of Stepney. In 1883 the Munici-
pality of St. Peters was severed, and the remainder (being
the District of Payneham as at present constituted) was
proclaimed on August 13 of the same year
The first members of the Council were Messrs. Charles
Pitt (Chairman), Bennett Johns, Jacob Hoader, David
West Barnes, and William Sketheway.
The area of the district is 1,760 acres, and the popu-
lation (1933 census) 7,781.
There are 48| miles of roads, a very large percentage
being bitumen surfaced, approximately 3J miles of which
are main roads.
Capital value of all ratable property in the district
is estimated at £1,647,120 on an assessment of £82,356.
In the old days Payneham was noted as a fruit grow-
ing and market gardening area, and these activities are
still carried on in the portions wliicli have not yet been
subdivided. Other industries comprise Elliott’s Garage
and Cycle Factory, Roster’s Pottery, and small Aerated
Water Factories, also gravel crushing and sand washing
plants on the River Torrens frontages.
Roster’s Pottery was founded in 1880 by the late Mr.
J. C. Koster, who was Chairman of the Council in 1897-8.
Since his death in 1912 the business has been carried on
by his family. Owing to extensions, installation of up-
to-date machinery and employment of additional hands it
is estimated that the present day output is at least three
times greater than in 1912. Quite a large interstate
trade is carried on in addition to supplying a strong local
demand.
Public or semi-public buildings in the district include
the District Institute (containing the Council Office),
Masonic Hall. Coo-ee Club, Eastern Districts and Rechabite
Halls.
Reserves and recreation grounds total 14J acres, the
largest being the Payneham Oval, which contains a turf
cricket pitch and practice wickets, football ground and
banked cycling track, the latter being floodlit for night
events.
I he following is a list of past and present members,
in addition to those comprising the first Council, viz.;—
Councillors Castle. H. Church, Bottrell, C. Wood, B. Gild-
ing, Wilkie, O. Higginbottom, Quilty, Jas. Beasley, J. C.
Koster, Quick, E. Lapthorne, Wooley, Hipwell. T. Mcßos-
tie, Pascoe, T. Kemp, H. E. Pitt, J. J. Ryan, J.P., J. Kelly,
A. E. Pitt, H. H. Schultze, F. C. Siekmann, R. Tavlor, C.
T. Fisher, J. Griggs. J. R. Smith, R. W. W. Elliott, E. C.
Gwynne, B. E. Gilding*, \\ . James, A. Dillon, G. A. Turner,
R. Ci. A. Martin, J.P. (Chairman), E. W. Hunt. J. R.
Smallacombe, R. j. Shape, G. D. Wright, R. H. Llovd, J,
B. Richards, R. W. Hangman, T. McCormack, C. L. Abbott.
G. R. Breaker, J.P., D. S. W. Humble. H. R. Cox, R. J. W
Hodgetts, C. LeR. Spicer. J.P., H. Loniman, L. A. Borgelt,
H. Eaile, A. \\ .G. Pitt, M. H. Rogers, F. W. S. Humphrys,
M. Blanden. R. M. Buik, and F. X. Drage.
District Clerks:—Robert Taylor, 1883-1910: R. W.
Hangman, 1910-1923; C. P. Stubbs, 1924 to date.'
Present Council of Payneham:—Messrs. J. J. Rvan.
J.P., G. A. Turner, R. G. A. Martin. J.P. (Chairman), J. B*
Richards, G. R. Breaker, J.P., C. HeR. Spicer, J.P., E. W. S.
Humphrys, M. Blanden, R. M. Buik, and F. N. Drage.


, ■■' xxik> .
JBBI
* , -:
■.i : "0$0
HBBSr 1
CHAIRMAN RICHARD GEORGE
ALBERT MARTIN, J.P.
(District Council of Payneham.)
Air. Martin was born at North Ade-
laide, 18th September. 1880, and edu-
cated at the Payneham Public School.
He has been for 53 years a resident
of the district, and a member of the
Council for 16 years, 8 of which he
has been Chairman. Mr. Martin is a
member of the Independent Order of
Foresters’ Lodge, the East Torrens
County Board of Health, representing
Payneham District Council, and
Aletropolitan County Board, is also
Chairman of the Quarries Board, and
has been a Justice of the Peace for
12 years. His sports are fishing and
shooting. Home address, Marion
Road, Glynde.
PAST COUNCILLOR ALBERT
WILLIAM GEORGE PITT.
(District Council of Payneham.)
Mr. Pitt was born at “Willow Bank,”
Marden, Payneham, June 22nd, 1875,
and educated at Prince Alfred College.
Mr. Pitt has resided at “Willow
Bank,” Payneham since his birth,
and was a member of the Coun-
cil for 4 years. He is Manag-
ing Director of Messrs. Pitt, Ltd., the
Adelaide Cement Co., Ltd., the Aus-
tral Plaster Co., Ltd., and Chairman
of Directors of the Federal Lime Co.,
Ltd. He is also a member of the
Executive, SA. Employers’ Federa-
tion, the Council of the S.A. Chamber
of Manufactures, and has been for 20
years President of the S.A. Lime Mer-
chants and Fibrous Plaster Associa-
tions. Mr. Pitt is the founder of
Messrs. Pitt, Ltd., and has been
Managing Director for 23 years. He
was the first manufacturer of fibrous
plaster in S.A., and responsible for
three of the large Yorke Peninsula
lime, cement, and plaster of paris
industries.
COUNCILLOR MILTON BLANDEN.
(District Council of Payneham.)
Mr. Blanden was born at Dunedin,
New Zealand, 10th December, 1876.
educated at Dunedin, and arrived in
Australia in 1889. He has been a resi-
dent of the District for 40 years, and
a member of the Council for one year.
He is also a member of the Free-
masons' and U.A.O.D. Lodges, and in
business is a Painter and Decorator.
Home address, Royston Park.


, , - I'
'4ft IQfe -
>r
l»
■b
BUi
COUNCILLOR GEORGE ALEXANDER
TURNER.
(District Council of Payneham.)
Mr. Turner was born at Payneham
in 1881, and educated at the Payneham
Public School. He has served in the
Council for 17 years, and has been a
resident of the district for 54 years.
He has been for 2 years Captain of the
Payneham Volunteer Fire Brigade, is
a member of the Independent Order
of Foresters’ Lodge, the Payneham
Oval Improvement Committee, and the
Cycling and Swimming Clubs. In
business he is a Gardener. Private
address, Marden Road, Payneham.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE RANSOM
BREAKER.
(District Council of Payneham.)
Mr. Breaker was born at Reusing-
ton, 4th September, 1886, and edu-
cated at Marryatville Public School.
He has been a resident of the district
for 16 years, and a member of the
Council for 11 years, 4 of which he
was Chairman. He is a Commercial
I raveller, Chairman of the Payneham
Oval Improvement Committee and
Amateur Swimming Club. Mr.
Breaker has also represented the
Payneham Council on the Board of the
Last Torrens Municipal Destructor
1 rust since its inauguration, is Presi-
dent of the Payneham Football Club,
a life member of the East Torrens
Football Association, and a member of
the Oddfellows' and Masonic Lodges.
During the war he served for 3 years
abroad with the A.1.F., and his sports
are cricket, football, cycling, and fish-
ing. Mr. Breaker's grand parent,
John James Breaker, arrived in the
"Buffalo" at Glenelg, 28th December
1836. Home address, Marion Road
Payneham.
COUNCILLOR JAMES BOTTEN
RICHARDS.
(District Council of Payneham.)
Mr. Richards was born at Goolwa,
7th March, 1875, and educated at the
Goolwa State School and Hayward
School, Pulteney Street. He has been
a member of the Council for 6 year -,
and for 16 years a resident of the dis-
trict. Mr. Richards is also a memb r
of the Independent Order of Recha-
bite Lodge, Past President of the
Payneham Cricket Club, and Vice-
President and Patron of the Payne-
ham Football Club. In business he is
a Customs Officer.


Ih i
I
V; 1 ,
\ .'•■■ ■■]
xi\^' SS4. / ■H^-’i
wW5w
1: V
COUNCILLOR FRANCIS WILLIAM
HUMPHRYS.
(District Council of Payneham.)
Mr. Humphrys was born at Payne-
ham, 7th August, 1897, and educated
at Brompton Public School. He has
been a resident of the district for 15
years, and a member of the Council
for 2 years. He is also Grand Guardian
of the United Ancient Order of
Druids’ Lodge, a Past Master of the
Royal May lands Lodge of Free Gar-
deners, and a member of the Payne-
ham Amateur Swimming Club. Pri-
vate address, 161 Wellington Road,
P cl vii ch cl in.
COUNCILLOR JAMES JOSEPH
RYAN.
(District Council of Payneham.)
Mr. Ryan was born at Glenelg, 16tb
December, 1873, and educated at St.
Joseph’s School, Hectorville. He has
keen a member of the Council for 24
years, and has resided in the district
all his life. Mr. Ryan is a Market
Gardener and Fruitgrower, and has
represented Payneham District Coun-
cil on the East Torrens County Board
of Health for 18 years, also the Subur-
ban Municipal and District Councils
Association for 8 years. He is a mem-
ber of the Norwood Branch H.A.C.B.S.
Lodge, and his sports are cricket and
swimming.
COUNCILLOR FRED NORMAN
DRAGE.
(District Council of Payneham.)
Born at Payneham in 1889, and edu-
cated at the Payneham Public School.
Mi Drage was elected to the Conn-
cil on the 4th July, 1936. He is a
member of the Druids' Lodge, the
Committee of the Torrens Valley
Agricultural Society, and is a Stew'ard
for the S.A. Trotting Association. In
business he is a Fruitgrower. Private
address, Felixstowe Road, Harden.
COUNCILLOR COLIN LEROY SPICER,
J.P.
(District Council of Payneham.)
Mr. Spicer was born at St. Peters,
17th May, 1896, and educated at East
Adelaide Public School. He has been
a resident of Payneham for 9 years
and a member of the Council for 6
years. He represents the Council on
the Suburban, Municipal and District
Councils Association, is a member of


" ' I”
n- v ' •
'■ w rWmm
* *vB hmu. JBIMBp
- 4 -. ,# Pi—M
JliSilSl
HP;. ,
Hi “ *
'*!'
* S-. ; ■ v '■■
the Norwood District High School
Council, President of the Holmesdale
Memorial Tennis Club, and a member
of the Payneham Masonic Lodge, No.
87, S.A.C. Mr. Spicer is a Salesman
for the Neptune Oil Company. His
sports are tennis and swimming.
CHARLES PERCY STUBBS.
(District Clerk, District Council of
Payneham.)
Mr. Stubbs was born at Over
Cheshire, England, 9th April, 1891,
arrived in Australia in March, 1923,
and educated at Leeds Central High
School and Streatham Grammar
School, England. He has served in
the Council for 12 years, and has been
for 12 years and 6 months a resident
of the district. During the war Mr.
Stubbs served for 4 years and 5
months in Great Britain, France, and
Belgium. Private address, Seventh
Avenue, Royston Park.
HAROLD THOMAS BARBOUR.
(Assistant District Clerk, District Council of
Payneham.)
Born at Hyde Park, 9th January,
1909, and educated at Wellington Road
Public School, North Norwood, and
School of Mines, Adelaide. Mr. Bar-
bour has served in the Council for 13
years. He is a member of the United
Ancient Order of Druids’ Lodge, and
his sports are football, tennis, and
motor cycling. His private address is
33 Devitt Avenue. Pavneham South.


District Council of Peake


History of Peake
The District Council of Peake was named after the
Hon. A. H. Peake, who at the time of his death was Premier
of South Australia.
The district has an area of 562 square miles (359,680
acres), and its boundaries are as follows:—North, Hun-
dreds of Hooper and Marmon Jabuk; south, Hundred of
Kirkpatrick; east. Hundred of Price; and in the west by
the Hundred of Seymour. Within its boundaries are the
townships of Sherlock, Peake, Jabuk, Moorlands, Buc-
cleuch, Coomandook, and Ki Ki.
Peake was proclaimed a District Council in the year
1912, and the subdivisions of the district are Peake, Sher-
lock, Roby, and Livingston.
The district is served by rail, the Pinnaroo line run-
ning through the Hundreds of Peake and Sherlock, and
the Melbourne line running through Roby and Livingston.
At the first meeting of the Council held on March 19th,
1912, the following gentlemen attended; —Messrs. W. G.
Wilson (Chairman), J. B. Coombe, G. S. Ridge, W. R.
Peake, C. M. Wilkin, A. Chidlow, and A. Bald. '
The present Council meets on the third Monday in each
month, and the names of the present Councillors are: —
G. D. Goodale (Chairman), Councillors A. W. G. Bald, E.
T. Cooley, R. V. Piggott, P. H. Noack, J. F. Pannach. L.
A. Williams; N. B. McArdle (District Clerk and Overseer).
B. A. McArdle (Assistant Clerk).
Past members of the Council; —W. G. Wilson, J. B.
Coombe, G. S. Ridge, W. R. Peake, C. M. Wilkin, A.
Chidlow, A. Bald, Alex. Williams, J. T. Brown, N. H.
Wood, A. Kentish. W. T. LeGallez, T. Millard. E. H.
Pomeroy, F. G. Ridge, R. A. Brokensha, P. Potter, E.
A. Lubcke, A. Titley, A. W. Lower, L. A. Spurr.


M
I?;"
,
■
P&L •-,
\
%ntr~ ’*~ #
CHAIRMAN GEORGE DANIEL
GOODALE.
(District Council of Peake.)
Mr. Goodale was born at Norwood,
sth July, 1887, and educated at Rose
Park Public School. He has been a
resident of the district for 16 years,
and a member of the Council for 14
years, 8 years of which he has been
Chairman. During his term of office
he has done a vast amount of good
work for the welfare of the district.
Mr. Goodale is a farmer, and, his
sports are football, cricket, and tennis.
During the wat he served for 3J years
abroad on active service with the
A.I.F. Home address, Coomandook.
PAST COUNCILLOR EDMUND
THOMAS COOLEY, J.P.
(District Council of Peake.)
Mr. Cooley was born at Angle Vale,
22nd luly, 1869, and educated at
Tumby Bay. He was a resident of
Peake for 24 years, and a member of
the Council for 15 years. He was also
Chairman of the School Committee,
and is a Justice of the Peace. Mr.
Cooley is a retired farmer, and his
sport is cricket. Present address, 44
Chief Street, Brompton.
COUNCILLOR JOHANN FRIEDRICH
PANNACH.
(District Council of Peake.)
Mr. Pannach was born at Cambrai,
29th February, 1884, and educated at
Cambrai Public School. He was
elected Councillor in July, 1935, and
has been for 9 years a resident of the
district. Mr. j. F. Pannach is a son
of Mr. J. E. Pannach, who held office
in the Cambrai District Council for
23 years. Mr. J. F. Pannach has held
various offices in connection with the
nrogress of the Peake District, having
been Chairman for four years of the
.Sherlock School Committee, Chairman,
Secretary, Treasurer and Trustee of
the Sherlock Public Hall. He is also
Chairman of the Sherlock Tennis
Club, a member of the Sherlock
Sports and Football Committees, and
of the Wheat Growers' Association.
In business he is a farmer. Home
address, Sherlock.
COUNCILLOR PAUL HERBERT
NOACK.
(District Council of Peake.)
Mr. N.oack was born at St. Kitts,
sth April, 1892, and educated at St.
Kitt’s Public School. He has been a


■«% jl
By’ sjf JES
.flj
****rn swr , W-
resident of the district for 16 years,
and a member of the Council for 8
years. Mr. Noack is a farmer and
grazier, and is fond of football. Home
address, Jabi.k.
COUNCILLOR ALBERT WILLIAM
GEORGE BALD.
(District Council of Peake.)
Mr. Bald was born at Hamley
Bridge, 22nd June, 1904, and educated
at Netherton Public School. He has
been a resident of the district for 28
years, and a member of the Council for
7 years. Mr. Bald is a farmer, and
his sports are cricket and football.
Home address, Peake.
COUNCILLOR LESLIE ALICK
WILLIAMS.
(District Council of Peake.)
Mr. Williams was born at Good-
wood Bth November, 1890, and edu-
cated at Goodwood and Payneham
Public Schools. He has been a
resident of the district for 28
years, and a member of the
Council for 16 years. Mr. Williams is
a farmer and grazier, and his snorts
are tennis, football and cricket. Dur-
ing the war he served for 3 years and
8 months abroad on active service with
the A.I.F. Home address, Cooman-
dook.
COUNCILLOR ROBERT VERNON
PIGGOTT.
(District Council of Peake.)
Mr. Piggott was born at Morchard,
9th October, 1898, and educated at
Hundred of Willowie Public School
and Strathalbyri High School. He has


“■■■■“■■■ mmmmmam “
been a resident of the district for 10
years, and a member of the Council
"for 9 years. Mr. Piggott is a farmer,
and is fond of tennis. Home address,
"Illowia," Moorlands.
NORMAN REGINALD BRUCE
McARDLE, J.P.
(District Clerk, District Council of Peake.)
Mr. McArdle was born at Stockport,
21st September, 1886, and educated at
Watervale and Wild Horse Plains
Public Schools. He has been a resi-
dent of the district for 17 years, and
District Clerk for 10 years. He is
also Chairman and Secretary of the
Institute Pastime Club, and his sports
are athletics, riflle shooting and tennis.
Home address, Coomandook.




District Council of Penola


History of Penola
Penola is one of the oldest towns in the South-East,
“d* as founded by the late Mr. Alexander Cameron in
844. Ihe name was adopted from the name of the sheep
station ( Penola Station), owned by the former gentle-
man, and is a corruption of the native name for Penola
Swamp, “Peenaoorla,” meaning “big water.”
I enola is situated 32 miles from Mount Gambier and
the same distance from Naracoorte and Millicent, and is
veil suited naturally to be an important agricultural centre,
but its progress has been somewhat retarded by the fact
that a gieater portion of the land in the district is held
and used as sheep runs. The soil and climate are also
suitable for fruit growing, including grapes, figs, oranges,
lemons, peaches, apricots, prunes, etc., all of which give
profitable returns. Tobacco also thrives well in this
vicinity.
Coonawarra, six miles north of Penola Township, is
almost entirely devoted to fruit production. The land
here was sold by the late Mr. John Riddoch in small blocks
in the year 1890, and they are now extensively planted
with vines and fruit trees. In 1896 Mr. Riddoch erected
wine cellars at Coonawarra, and these cellars now have a
storage capacity of 300,000 gallons.
The District Council of Penola was proclaimed in Feb-
ruary, 1869, and has an area of 384,000 acres, embracing
the Hundreds of Penola, Monbulla, Grey, Killanoola,
Comaum, and Nangwarry, divided into four Wards, viz.,
Penola, Central, North, and South.
The Council Chamber is centrally situated, and is built
on land donated by the late Mr. W. McPherson. A fine
roll of honour has been fitted on one of the windows, and
contains about 180 names of men who enlisted from this
district for service during the Great World War.
Penola possesses several important public institutions,
of which the principal are the Institute and the Pastoral.
Agricultural, and Horticultural Society. The Institute is
a commodious building, possessing a large hall, and con-
tains an up-to-date library for subscribers, and a public
reading room. In the township are Anglican. Presbv-
tei ian, Roman Catholic, and Seventh Day Adventist
Churches. A new railway station, which cost over £2,000,
was completed in 1010. A handsome monument was
erected to the memory of the fallen soldiers in 1927.
Electric light has been installed throughout the town.
In wet years Penola has suffered from an excess of
water, but the District Council and the Government have
done a great deal in the way of drainage, which has re-
ed the district of much of the surplus fluid, and the
town is now comparatively dry. The population of Penola
Council district on June 30th, 1935, was 1,700, the total
length of roads under Council control is 458 miles, and
the capital value of ratable property is £865,860.
The Monbulla Caves are situated seven miles to the
south-west of the Township of Penola, and in natural
beauty are equal to any in South Australia. The police
barracks are of historic interest, and Adam Lindsay Gordon
v as quartered here as a trooper. There are two excellent
poll" links of nine holes each and numerous tennis courts.
Game is abundant, and facilities for all sports are avail-
able. The staple industry is wool and fat lambs for export
Extensive Government Pine Forests are distant only seven
miles south of Penola, also vineyards and orchards at
Coonawarra, six miles to the north of Penola. Penola i;
half-way between Mount Gambier and Naracoorte.
1 Following is a list of the names of some past mem-
oers of the District Council Messrs, J. Riddoch.
Claike, J. Ralston, H. Law, J. C. Hunter, H. Remington,
K. McClure, A. Kerr, R. H. Ralston, C. Aubrey, W. Go -
decke, A. D. Handyside, M. McKenzie, A. Whiteford.
McKay, W. Neilson. W. McPherson. C. Sharam I) Bal-
naves, J. H. Mack, J. Darwent, J. Reilly, J. Boneham, i.
1 Morns T. D. Seymour, W. A. Crouch, A. Gardner, A.
McDonald, H. W . Morris, ]. McConchie, J F Gordon,
R. Balnaves, P. Lang, O. H. Morris, J. A. Riddoch, W.
Patterson, J. Mitchell, J. Laird, D. McKay, D. Skene, R.
Rymill, 1. T. Williams, J. Britt, D. A. Fullerton, L. A.


"X
I
■*&' iilil
■
'
I W
.s
' I Jlik
• m. I*
ffir 6 #* Wmm I ~
IIIIIP
f^ v j.' 2 L^
DeGaris, W. J. Hemmings, Senr., G. A. Bennett, P. H.
Kilsby, I J- Lynn, J. Black, J. S. Neilson, J. Clayfield,
H. B. Simson, D. McCorquindale, J. Land, S. McWaters,
J. Boyce, L PL Morris, M. Geraghty, J. Davidson, and W.
Marcus.
The present members of the Council (year endiirn
30/6/36) ire: —Councillor F. j. Kidman (Chairman), and
Councillors R. R. Rymill, B. J. Magarey, H. B. H. Richard-
son. D. ’ . Tucker, W. J. Hemmings, Junr., C. W. Flint,
T. J. Marcus, and E. Kidman.
The following is a list of persons who have acted as
District Clerks: —T. H. Artaud, 1869 to 1877; TV. E. Dal
rymple, 1877 to 1897; L. W. Peake, 1880 to 1915; L. R.
Peake, 1916 to 1933; and the present Clerk, Mr. A. W.
Pearson, A F.1.A., L.Th., from 30/6/33.
Mr. Riddoch was the first Chairman of the Council.
Mr. Joseph Darwent was Chairman for 30 years (between
1883 and 1923), and Mr. Stewart McWaters was Chairman
for 11 years, from 1924 to 1935. The present Chairman
is Mr. Frederick J. Kidman.
Mr. W. FI. Marshall is Overseer of Works and Mr.
H. G. Davidson is Ranger and Inspector.
THE LATE HON. JOHN RIDDOCH.
(First Chairman, District Council of Penola.)
He was a member of the Council
from 1869 to 1871, and 1889 to 1891,
also 1894.
PAST CHAIRMAN W. MacPHERSON.
(District Council of Penola.)
Mr. MacPherson was Chairman of
the District Council of Penola from
1877 to 1879, and in the year 1882 he
donated the land to the Council on
which the Council Chambers are now
built.
PAST CHAIRMAN A. GARDINER.
(District Council of Penola.)
Mr. Gardiner was Chairman of the
District Council of Penola during por-
tions of the years 1895 and 1896.


I “ *■ ' ’ \
I
I
r K
F r
■ i
# . & f |? •
I fek J||
«i' Hr i jmBS
yfe 1
/ ff
/
# 1 .5
/ 1 /3
% '
I* «>,
i % /-
I
PAST CHAIRMAN JOSEPH DARVVENT.
(District Council of Penola.)
Mr. Darwent was Chairman of the
Penola District Council for about 30
years, having served from 1883 to
1888, 1891 to 1908, and 1915 to 1923
PAST CHAIRMAN R. BALNAVES.
(District Council of Penola.)
Mr. Balnaves was Chairman of the
District Council of Penola from 1908
to 1910.
PAST CHAIRMAN STEWART
McWATERS.
(District Council of Penola.)
Mr. McWaters served in the Penola
District Council as Chairman 1 mi
1924 to 1935.


jff^
■
J H|
/ j
|nuni
PAST CHAIRMAN I. T. WILLIAMS.
(District Council of Pcnola.)
Mr. Williams Avas Chairman of the
District Council of Pcnola from 1913
to 1914.
PAST CHAIRMAN J. D. LYNN.
(District Council of Pcnola.)
Mr. Lynn was Chairman of the Dis-
trict Council of Pcnola from 1923 to
1924.


•Sfr *%► -V , 1
J*V' i"‘
W v . ■ ,*
■.-
.-, k W %.*o
■■ ■■ #k
M. JjS .Jj'> . <
*'
I ipilir wF
-Tk / i
JSSS^SSSSSSSSSSSSS^S^
FREDERICK JOHN KIDMAN.
(Chairman, District Council of Penola.)
Mr. Kidman was born at Naracoorte,
3rd January, 1888, and educated at
Struan State School. He has been a
resident of the district for 48 years,
and a member of the Council for 13
years. He is also President of the
Penola Racing and Gun Clubs, and the
Agricultural Bureau. Mr. Kidman is
a Grazier, and his sports are cricket,
golf, football, and athletic sports.
Home address, Penola.
DEPUTY CHAIRMAN R. R. RYMILL,
8.A., M.A.
(District Council of Penola.)
Mr. Rymill was born at Adelaide,
on the 25th April, 1904, and educated
at the Church of England Grammar
School, Melbourne, and Pembroke Col-
lege, Cambridge, England. He has
served in the Council since July 1935,
and has resided in the district inter-
mittently since 1904. He is a Pastora-
list, and in sports won his half blues
for service and match rifle shooting,
and his first colours for revolver,
miniature rifle, and rapid and snap,
at Cambridge. He was a member of
the All Comers revolver team, Bisley
in 1932 and 1934, and won the Foster
and Association Cups for Service
Rifle Shooting, Bisley in 1934. He
was also a finalist for the King’s Prize,
Bisley in 1932, and won the South
Eastern District Rifle Championship
in 1934-35.
COUNCILLOR BERTRAM JAMES
MAGAREY.
(District Council of Penola.)
Mr. Magarey was born at Enfield,
S.A. in 1890, and educated at Prince
Alfred and Roseworthy Agricultural
Colleges. He has been a resident of
the district for 24 years, and a member
of the Council for 14 years. In busi-
ness Mr. Magarey is a Grazier, and his
sport is cricket. Home address, (llen-
roy, Penola.
COUNCILLOR HAROLD BOURBON
HENDRIE RICHARDSON.
(District Council of Penola.)
Mr. Richardson was born at Sema-
phore, 13th October, 1880. and edu-
cated at Whinham and Roseworihy
Agricultural Colleges. He has been
a resident of the district for 35 years,
and a member of the Council for 9
years. Mr. Richardson is also Presi-
dent oij the Coonawarra Show Society,
the School Committee, Chairman of
794


the Coonawarra and Penola Agricul-
tural Bureau, and Secretary of the
Penola Branch of the Liberal and
Country League. He is a Vigneron,
Fruitgrower and Grazier, and his
sports are tennis, cricket and football.
Home address, Coonawarra, S.A.
COUNCILLOR THOMAS JAMES
MARCUS.
(District Council of Penola.)
Mr. Marcus was born at Penola,
17th October, 1884, and educated at
Penola Public School. He has been
a resident of the district for 51 years,
and a member of the Council for 10
years. He is also President of the
Penola Branch Agricultural Bureau of
S.A., and a member of the Foresters
Lodge. Lie is a Farmer and Grazier,
and his sports are cricket and football.
Home address, Penola.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM JAMES
HEMMINGS, Jnr., J.P.
(District Council of Penola.)
Mr. Hemmings was born at Penola,
3rd March, 1885. He served in the
Council for 2| years, representing
South Ward, and has been for 51 years
a resident of the district. He is Presi-
dent of the Institute at Kalangadoo,
the Racing Club, the P.A. & H. Society
and the South East Potato Growers’
Association, also a representative for
S.A. on the Federal Potato Advisory
Committee. Mr. Hemmings is a Sheep
Farmer, and his sport is cricket. Home
address, Kalangadoo.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES WALTER
FLINT.
(District Council of Penola.)
Mr. Flint was born at North Ade-
laide, 25th April, 1874, and educated
at Christian Brothers’ College, Ade-
laide. He has been a resident of the
district for 58 years, and a member of
the Council for 4 years. He is also
Director of the Penola Racing Club,


...
* W
im m
vff i JBnRBNk
...^ g**
‘V . ,-' , - - “:, / "
Inc. In business he is a grazier, and
a member of the Foresters’ Lodge.
His sport is racing. Private address,
Robe Street, Penola.
COUNCILLOR ERIC KIDMAN.
(District Council of Penola.)
Mr. Kidman was born at Alberton,
10th December, 1894, and educated at
Xaracoorte High School. He has been
for 16 years a resident of the district,
and one year a member of the Coun-
cil. He is also Secretary of the Local
Branch and the Victoria District
Liberal Country. Leagues, President of
the Local Agricultural Bureau and the
Local A.H. &F. Society. Mr. Kid-
man is a grazier and his sport is
cricket. During the war he served 4J
years with the A.I.F. in Egypt, Galli-
poli and France, and gained a Military
Medal at Bullecourt in May, 1917.
Home address, Penola.
COUNCILLOR DAVID WILLIAM
TUCKER, J.P.
(District Council of Penola.)
Mr. Tucker was born at Mt. Gam-
bier, 11th June, 1873, and educated at
his home town. He has been a resi-
dent of the district for 44 years, and
a member of the Council, representing
South Ward for 8 years. He has also
been for 21 years Secretary of the
Liberal Federation. Councillor Tucker
is a Grazier, and has always taken a
keen interest in the improvement of
pastures. He won the first prize foi
the most improved natural pasture in
the South East. His sports arc tennis
and football. Private address, Strath -
Vale, Kalangadoo.
A. W. PEARSON, F.I.A.
(District Clerk, District Council of Penola. ;
Mr. Pearson was born at Kadin
sth June, 1899, and educated at tl
Kadina Public School, Wallaroo Mini s
High School, Prince Alfred Collet:'
and the Adelaide University. He h; -
served in the Council from the Ist of
July, 1C33. His sports are tern s,


..- ’
gkJt I jj
♦ #»n pp .
I*.
"♦
cricket and golf. Mr. Pearson is a
member of the Federal Institute of
Accountants, and during the Great
War he served as a Corporal in the
32nd Battalion, A.I.F. Home address,
Penola.
L. W. PEAKE
(Past District Clerk, District Council of
Penola.)
Mr. Peake was District Clerk of the
Penola District Council from the year
1880 to 1915.




District Council of Pinnaroo


History of Pinnaroo
The word '‘Pinnaroo” is an aboriginal term used to
express big man,” and is the name given to express a
large district of approximately 290.000 acres, which is
situated approximately 163 miles east of Adelaide, and
consists ot the Hundreds of Pinnaroo and Parilla and nor-
ti.ons ot the Hundreds of Kingsford and Peebinga. The
district is bounded on the eastern side by the State of
\ ictona, on the west by the Hundred of Lews, on the
north by the area_ controlled by the District Council of
rm\ n s W ell, i\ hile to the south lies a good percentage
ot desert country. s
i In tl ? e first surve y party went over this country,
and in 1892 the matter of building a railway line was dis-
cussed m Parliament. Ten years later the Bill was passed
granting this, and in September. 1906, the new line was
opened.
About 32 years ago the country was first opened for
settlement, and since then the township has sprung up with
mushroom-like growth, and at the present time possesses
three banks, two hotels, approximately 350 houses, and the
usual ,uitcher, baker, and general stores. Situated within
the township are a modern hospital, erected at a cost of
approximately £7,500, and an institute, which was built
at a cost of approximately £B,OOO. Electricity is installed
throughout the houses and streets of Pinnaroo, the sup-
pliers being the Quick Service Garage. Water is also
reticulated throughout the township from the Government
Bore.
Noted for its wonderful wheat growing capacity, 1910
saw the peak reached when approximately 250,000 bag's
were delivered in the Pinnaroo wheat yards.
The first Council of the District of Pinnaroo comprised
Messrs. J. F. G. Kernich (Chairman), F. H. Edwards, M.
McCabe, P. M. Shannon, W. Needs, W. Spicer, D. Leahy,
F. W. Eime, W. Mitchell, W. Webb, and A. Townsend
(Clerk). Meetings at that time were held in Lameroo.
In 1913 the Hundreds of Pinnaroo and Parilla were severed
from the Lameroo district and proclaimed a separate dis-
trict with meetings at Pinnaroo and Parilla. Mr. W. H.
Kelly was the first Chairman of the new Council. He
served in that capacity until 1917, and was succeeded by
Mr. John Gray (1917-22), J. W. Johnston (1922-24) C.
A. E. Schiller (1924-26), J. E. Symonds (1926-28), C. A E.
Schiller (1928-30), J. S. Ferguson (1930-31), C. A. E.
Schiller (1931-32), J. S. Ferguson (1932-35), and the ] re-
sent Chairman, Councillor H. G. Johnston.
4he Council controls 75 miles of main roads and 20
miles of district roads. The amount of the present assess-
ment is £40,604. which with a general rate of 1/ yield a
revenue of £2,030.
The present members of the Council are:—Counci or
H. G. Johnston, J.P. (Chairman), Councillors H. f. V li-
ning (Deputy Chairman), W. H. R. Godrich, A. H. Nichcds,
R. L. McKenzie, L. J. T. Foale. H. F. Johnson, C. O. Sc u-
macher, D. Freeman, and H. G. R. Gauld and F. S. E e,
J.P. (District Clerk and Overseer of Works). Mr. R’ L.
McKenzie was the first settler in the Hundred of T i-
naroo. Two of the foremost pioneers of the district re
the Hons. R. W. Foster and L. O’Loughlin.


I ' I
9> v . i
,”'’ ”^ : >‘'-<*aaraa, '*4$'' • T< * ■'^ffj^sjt
.y^fh
H4RROLD JASPER JOHN VENNING
(Chairman, District Council of Pinnaroo)
Mr. Venning was born at Quorn,
M: 11th, 1894, and educated at Pichi
Pic hi School. He has been a resident
of the district for 29 years, and a mcm-
be of the Council for 3 years. Mr.
\h ming has also been President of
th Pinnaroo Sub Branch R.S.A. for
2 ears, and is a member of the S.M
Hospital Board. He is a farmer, and
during the war served for 3 years
abroad with the A.I.F. Home
address, Pinnaroo.
THE LATE HERBERT GEORGE
JOHNSTON
(Past Chairman, District Council of Pinnaroo)
The late Mr. Johnston was born at
Red Hill, S.A., 2nd August, 1877, and
educated at the Red Hill and Con-
dowie Public Schools. He served in
the Pinnaroo District Council from
1921-28 and from 1931 to the time of
his decease on the 7th February, 1936.
He was a resident of the district for
26 years, and held the following posi-
tions: —Committeeman, President and
Secretary to the Pinnaroo Institute, a
life member of the Agricultural
Bureau, Chairman of the School Com-
mittee and Cricket Club. No man has
played a more prominent part in the
public life of the Pinnaroo district
than Mr. Johnston. His main activi-
ties were in the Parilla district, being
no organisation in that locality with
which he was not connected at some
time or other during his 28 years resi-
dence. He was truly the “The Father
of Parilla.” The late Mr. Johnston
spent his younger days on his father’s
farms in the Snowtown and Blyth
districts before taking up land in the
Parilla district in 1909. He retired
from active farming in 1926. He was
a member of the Lameroo Masonic
Lodge, formed in 1913, and Worship-
ful Master in 1920. The late Mr.
Johnston toured the world in 1928,
visiting Europe, Canada, U.S.A. and
Hawaii in the Pacific Ocean. He also
made a motor tour through the North
Island of New Zealand. His death
was greatly lamented by a large cir-
cle of friends in the Pinnaroo and
Parilla districts.
PAST COUNCILLOR W. H. KELLY.
(District Council of Pinnaroo.)
COUNCILLOR RICHARD LAWRENCE
McKENZIE, J.P.
(District Council of Pinnaroo)
Mr. McKenzie was born at River-
ton, Bth January, 1888, and educated
at the Riverton Public School. He
has been a resident of Pinnaroo for
32 years, and a member of the Council
for 4 years. Mr. McKenzie is a mem-
ber of the Pinnaroo School Committee,
has been Chairman of the School
Board for 4 years, and Chairman and
Committeeman of every public move-
ment for the welfare of the town. He
was also the prime mover for the
Pinnaroo Town Hall, District Hospi-
tal, Electric Light and Water
Schemes, and Ladies’ Rest Rooms,


$&SaSr
vgSBr \th
'/
IB
MBWaL ’Hfe*..;',
— f *#
Mi" -::jf jjjk *V^i
| ; fl| /. ' ‘* ;' *
QWwR' t K
SI * if &
■ft ./ |k
I. j . •?:;/ '■
\
in -*1
. •• ~'g~]
Jb *»*w iH
'* • Xx X. ;
mSlm I
~ S &<■■■
f I I '•^J
i %|*l "'■■•> V X ■ **
■ -■,1 A -
;-V-M|Kjsas 4r ‘dB'■<** Si -* , ' -I
etc. Mr. McKenzie also grew the
first wheat in the Hundred of Pinna-
roo, for which he holds the Hon. R.
Y\ . Foster's Medal, and he is the
pioneer settler of the Pinnaroo dis-
trict. He cut up and sold McKenzie
Town, which was portion of his farm.
He was the founder of the Australian
Wheat Growers' Federation, prime
mover for the Commonwealth Wheat
Commission, and he stood for Parlia-
mentary honours twice. He is now
advocating an interstate bituminous
road through Pinnaroo as a shortest
route to Melbourne. Mr. McKenzie
commenced farming at Pinnaroo at
the age of 21 years without capital,
and to-day he and his family own four
farms in the district, and he is the
only pioneer farmer who is still on
the land. He has been for 40 vears a
member of Foresters Lodge, and his
sports are horse racing, football, and
all athletic sports. Home address,
Pinnaroo.
COUNCILLOR LESLIE J. T. FOALE
(District Council of Pinnaroo)
Mr. Foale was born at Adelaide,
22nd December, 1892, and educated at
C hristian Brothers’ College, Adelaide.
He has been a resident of the district
for 29 years, and a member of the
Council for 7 years. He is also a
member of the Pinnaroo Soldiers’
Memorial Hospital Board. In busi-
ness he is a farmer, and his sports
are football, cricket, tennis, and rifle
shooting. Home address, Parilla.
COUNCILLOR HECTOR GEORGE
RUTHERFORD GAULD
(District Council of Pinnaroo)
Mr. Gauld was born at Wimbledon,
England, 31st July, 1907, and arrived
in Australia 17th December, 1923. He
has been a resident of the district for
12 years, and a member of the Coun-
cil for one year. In business he is a
farmer. Home address, Karte.
COUNCILLOR ARNOLD HOWARD
NICHOLLS.
(District Council of Pinnaroo)
Mr. Nicholls was born at Burnside,
vS.A., January 28th, 1905, and educated
at LeFevre s Public School and Wood-
ville High School. He has been a
resident of the district for 6 years, and
a member of the Council for one year.


n V
Ur
BH:
■H|yS$v
|||^
In business he is a garage proprietor,
and his sport is tennis. Home address,
Pinnaroo.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES OTTO
SCHUMACHER
(District Council of Pinnaroo)
Mr. Schumacher was born in the
Hundred of Bright, S.A., 14th July,
1900, and educated at Lameroo Public
School. He has been a president of the
Pinnaroo District for 27 years, and a
member of the Council for 10 yeats,
representing Parilla South Ward. He
is a farmer and grazier. Home address,
Parilla.
COUNCILLOR HENRY FRANCIS
JOHNSON
(District Council of Pinnaroo)
Mr. Johnson was born at Hundred
of Dublin, March, Ist, 1881, and edu-
cated at Windsor Public School. He
has been a resident of the district foi
9 years, and a member of the Council
for 4 years. He has also been Chair-
man of the Claypan Bore School Com-
mittee for (> years. In business he is
a farmer. Home address, Parilla.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM HARRY
RAINEY GODRICH
(District Council of Pinnaroo)
Mr. Godrich was born in England,
September 2nd. 1895, and educated in
England. He arrived in Australia in
1921. He has been a resident of Pin-
naroo for 7 years, and a member of
the Council for one year. He is a
member of Pinnaroo Masonic Lodge,
and his sports are tennis and golf.
Mr. Godrich is a telephone mechanic,
and served with the B.E.F. from 1914-
19 during the Great War. Home
address, Pinnaroo.
COUNCILLOR DAVID FREEMAN
(District Council of Pinnaroo)
Mr. Freeman was born at Auburn,
9th February, 1874, and educa ed at
Yacka and Koolunga Public Schools.
He has been a resident of the district
for 25 years, and a member of the
Council for 3 years. He is also Presi-
dent of the Karte Vigilance Commit-
tee, and a Patron of the Peebinga
Football Association. In business he
is a farmer. Home address, Pinnaroo.
FRANK STRATFORD EYRE, J.P.
(District Clerk and Overseer of Works,
District Council of Pinnaroo)
Mr. Eyre was born at Salisbury,
3rd June, 1912, and educated at Wal-
laroo Public School and Kadina High
School. He has been a resident of
Pinnaroo for 8 years, and is Secietai}
of the Pinnaroo Soldiers’ Memorial
Park Committee, a Justice of the
Peace, and a member of the Pinnaroo
Masonic Lodge. He is also a playing
member of the Ramblers Cricket
Club and the Pinnaroo Golf Club.




—3k . rB
« #% /~M
SSfcr iff-
*' . ' *&Jri
District Council of Pine
PRESENT COUNCIL CHAMBERS.


History of Pine
One of the earliest friends of South Australia was John
Pirie, and after him was named one of the first three ves-
sels to leave England for the new dependency. The John
Pirie was subsequently lost in Encounter Bay, but the name
survives in Pirie Street. Adelaide, and in Port Pirie.
There is a good Institute and Reading Room at Port
IMrie. with over 35,018 volumes in circulation and over
12,000 newspapers and magazines. The townspeople are
fairly musical, and the Excelsior Brass Band is in the proud
position of having travelled something like 6.000 miles to
compete against bands holding high reputations in the
sister States, and winning many competitions. They own
£3OO worth of instruments and proudly state “all paid for.”
Further reference to Port Pirie will be found in the
Corporation .Section.
Outside of the corporate area the district is under
the jurisdiction of a District Council, which controls the
whole of the Hundred of Wandearah, the Hundred of Pirie
(with the exception of that part included in the Corpora-
tion), and part of the Hundreds of Napperby and Howe.
The total area is 248,000 acres, which is divided into three
Wards, and has a capital value of £618,140 and an assess-
ment value of £30,907. The population is estimated at
2,100 persons, of whom 616 are ratepayers. £1,674 is pro-
duced annually by a rate of 1/1 in the £.
Situated within the district is the Beetaloo Reser-
voir, with a capacity of eight hundred million gallons of
water, which serves both the town and district.
The following is a list of past Councillors as far as
can be ascertained from records:—Messrs. E. H. Eagle, f.
Kuril, T. Forrestel. H. H. Butler, P. J. Walsh, N. E. Hewett.
W. S. Fidge, W. Williams, C. W. Matthews, W. Mundav, F.
Jacobs, J. Featherston, A. J. Dennis, W. Smith. I. Milnes,
T. Johns, W. R. Wright. A. H. Davies. F. Y oune, G. Ferme,
R. D. McEwin, D. L. McEwin, L. Stanley, G. M. Davis. G.
Hannan, A. A. Button, J. H. Clothier, IT B. Welsh, N.
Stephens, T. Angel, A. M. Laurie, and E. E. Davis (Clerk).
Deceased. W. Vanstone.
Present Council: —Chairman, E. B. Welch; District
Clerk, E. R. Glasson; Councillors, Messrs. H. F. Welch. F
N. Young. A. M. Lawrie, and S. J. M. Goode.


I
■LflB
j/ t****~*'"
; ?
EDWIN B. WELCH.
(Chairman, District Council of Pirie.)
Mr. Welch was born at Hd. of Pirie,
March 12th, 1879, and educated at
Pirie East School and the Clare Ad-
vanced School. He has been a member
of the Council for 22 years, 7 of which
he has been Chairman, and a resident
of the district all his life. Mr. Welch
is also Secretary of the Pirie East Con-
gregational Church, a member of the
N.W. Agricultural Society and the
Port Pirie Racing Club. He is a farmer
and grazier, and a supporter of all local
sports. Private address, Box 145, Port
Pirie.
COUNCILLOR HAROLD FULTON
WELCH.
(District Council of Pirie.)
Mr. Welch was born at Hd. of Pirie,
July 6th, 1882, and educated at Hd. of
Pirie Public School. He has been a
resident of the district all his life, and
a member of the Council for 8 years.
Mr. Welch was President of the Port
Pirie District Trotting Club for one
year, and 12 years a committeeman,
and also committeeman of the A.S.
Bowling Club. He is a farmer and
grazier, and his sports are bowls and
trotting. Home address, Port Pirie.
COUNCILLOR FRANCIS NORMAN
YOUNG.
(District Council of Pirie.)
Mr. Young was born at Warnertown,
December 9th, 1894, and educated at
Warnertown and Crystal Brook Public
Schools. He has been for 40 years a
resident of the district, and for 3 years
a member of the Council. Mr. Young
is also President of the \\ arnertown
Institute and School Committees, and
a member of the Oddfellows, Free-
masons, and Royal Arch Chapter,
No. 4, Lodges. He is a farmer, and
fond of all sports. Home address,
Warnertown.
COUNCILLOR WALTER VANSTONE.
(District Council of Pirie.)
Mr. Vanstone was born at \\ illunga,
16th December, 1875, and educated at
Wandearah East Public School. He
has been a resident of the district for
50 years, and a member of the Council
for 12 years. He has also been for 2
years Chairman of Wandearah School
Committee and 2 years Secretary, 23
years a member of the Crystal Brook
Masonic Lodge, No. 70, and 36 years
a member of the Oddfellows’ Lodge.


jpsiNi^
% V* I
s - $
JH J
S M jf' ■ ■■*"£ # . V
.< ilii
V*
raL | jL 3Sl%SI
f. \ Ik
j, . r"
HV
I 1 ->'"#»» ; ’ M JS
Mr. A anstone is the youngest son of
the late Mr. John Vanstone, who
reached the age of 105 years. He is a
farmer, and his home address is Wan-
dearah, East.
also Chairman of the local Branch of
the S.A. Farmers' Union Vigilance
Committee, and a member of the Pirie
Masonic Lodge, No. 24. Home ad-
dress, Nelshabv.
of the Buffalo Lodge. He served with
the sth Imperial Bushman's Corps in
the South African War. Home address,
Wandearah West.
COUNCILLOR ANDREW MARTIN
LAWRIE.
(District Council of Pirie.)
Mr. Lawrie was born at Nelshaby,
April 2Gth, 1888, and educated at
Napperby Public School. He has been
a resident of the district for 48 years,
and a member of the Council for 14
years. Mr. Lawrie has been for 6 years
Chairman of the Nelshaby School
Committee, 22 years Secretary of the
local Agricultural Bureau, and is now
President and a life member. He is
COUNCILLOR SAMUEL JAMES
MORTIMER GOODE, J.P.
(District Council of Pirie.)
Mr. Goode was born at Saddleworth,
March 3rd, 1879, and educated at
Saddleworth Public School and Stan-
ley Grammar School, Watervale. He
has been a resident of the district for
3 years, and a member of the Council
for one year. Mr. Goode was a mem-
ber and Chairman of the Mt. Young-
Vermin Board, and is also a member
EDWIN RULE GLASSON.
(District Clerk and Overseer, District
Council of Pirie.)
Mr. Glasson was born at Hd. of
Baroota, February 2nd, 1884, and edu-
cated at the Baroota Public School and
Whinham College, North Adelaide. He
has been a resident of the district all
his life, and in the service of the Conn
cil for 8 years. He has also been Chair-
man of the Telowie South School Com-
mittee for 2 years, 3 years Chairman


“ 'I
f* I
II Ik..»% %
of the Baroota School Committee,
and 3 years a member of the
Port Pirie High School Council. Mr.
Glasson is a member of the Pirie
Masonic Lodge, No. 24, and the Pirie
Royal Arch Chapter, No. 4. He is fond
of all sports. Private address, 397
The Terrace, Port Pirie.




District Council of Port Broughton
PORT BROUGHTON INSTITUTE.
(The building of which was completed in 1899.)


IPf ygii
History of Port Broughton
PORT BROUGHTON WAR MEMORIAL AND PORTION
OF HOTEL BROUGHTON.
Port Broughton is a picturesque seaport town on Spen-
cer's Gulf, and is availed of extensively as a health resort,
and during the holiday seasons the accommodation is taxed
to the utmost. In this respect it is commonly referred
to as the Victor Harbour of the North.
From Adelaide the distance is 120 miles, and there is
daily communication by train and motor service, via Col-
-1 ins field. The distance per road used by motor traffic is
108 miles.
The district was proclaimed in 1892, and was named
Mundoora, which was, however, changed in 1917 to Port
Broughton. The first meeting of the Council was held
in 1892, there being present —Messrs. T. Barker (Chair-
man), J. Harris, E. Dalby, and G. E. Pattingale.
The Council controls a total area of about 250 square
miles, subdivided into two Wards, as follows:—The Hun-
dreds of Mundoora and Wokurna. In 1933 a portion of
the Hundred of Tickera was added to the district and an-
nexed to the Wokurna Ward.
The total mileage of main roads is 45 miles, and the
district roads measure 185 miles. The township has a
population of 280 persons, and the town and district a total
of 1,340 persons.
4die first assessment was made in 1892, and the rate
fixed at 1 sixpence in the £, producing a revenue of £251 0/1
The present assessment was made on 14th September, 1935,
totalling £20,113, and the rate fixed at one shilling in the
£, yielding, together with a health rate of one penny in
the £ and a hospital rate of one penny in the £, a total
of £1,173 5/2.
The water supply is derived from the Bundaleer Water-
works. and a constant supply is available.
In September, 1926, an electric lighting system was
installed in the township, which greatly adds to the con
PORT BROUGHTON JETTY, MAIN PORTION OF TOWN,
AND BOATS AT ANCHOR.


venience and comfort of residents and visitors. Ornamen-
tal trees have also been planted in and around the town-
shi] which considerably enhance the general beauty and
attractiveness of Port Broughton.
The principal industry is the growing of wheat and
other cereals, and the district is recognized as a safe one.
Affectionately known and remembered as the “Pie Cart,” which for
over 30 years conveyed mails and passengers daily from Port
Broughton to Mundoora, the first section of the journey to Brink-
worth, at which station mails and passengers entrained. In 1925 a
Railway Motor Service was opened from Collinsfield to Port
Broughton.
The Hotel Broughton is a fine one, and with the Coffee
Palace, provides excellent accommodation for tourists.
Baths, golf links, tennis courts, etc., are also provided, and
are used extensively by visitors and residents.
The Centenary Committee has recently added to the
existing bathing facilities an additional up-to-date bathing
house for ladies, and ample accommodation is provided for
both sexes of visitors and residents. In connection with
Centenary efforts the Council has recently erected an addi-
tional shelter shed, and has had planted 50 additional trees
on the foreshore. Excellent tennis courts and golf links
are also provided, and a first-class croquet court is avail-
able for ladies. Boating can be indulged in at all times
in this well sheltered seaport, and excellent fishing is avail-
able, the whiting grounds being equal to the best in the
Commonwealth. Fish from these grounds are sent weekly
to the Eastern States.
In the main street a War Memorial has been erected,
constructed of granite and marble. The names of those
who served in the World War are carved upon the pedestal,
which is capped by a life-sized figure of a soldier, carved
from beautiful Angaston marble.
Following is a list of past Councillors of Port Brough-
ton Messrs. T. Barker, J. Harris, E. Dalby, G. E. Pattin-
gale, C. R. Brown, A. Kirk, J. Barclay, J. G. Dolling, T.
Baulderstone, H. M. Peel. B. Thompson, J. Blake, H. Ed-
wards, W. Tonkin, F. Richards, H. Allchurch, Jos. Stringer,
W. H. Gray. W. Aitchison, F. J. Mildren, A. Carman, A.
G. A. Dolling, R. Storr, I. Edwards, I. B. Clothier, W. G.
Kirk, J. H. Fletcher, F. S. Loveridge, J. M. Aitchison, and
A. J. McDonald.
Members of present Council; —George Horace Rout-
ley (Chairman), Councillors Joseph Stephen James
Stringer, Sidney Catford Daniel, Charles Edward Norman
Dalling, John Sarsfield Casey, John William Barnes.


9H > _ 1
p?*- i
■It
"’ Wife
*jA-k i i*6*6w,SWS<
f . fl/.3p ® v
. : / ■
j| .p-
»~' m * i a . .
GEORGE HORACE ROUTLEY
(Chairman, Dristrict Council of Port
Broughton)
Born at Port Broughton, 11th Sep-
tember, 1890, and educated at the
Port Broughton Higher Primary
School. Mr. Routley has served in the
Council for 15 years, and has been a
resident of the district the whole of his
life. He has been Chairman of the
Council for 6 years, a member of the
Port Broughton Hospital Committee,
Local Branch of the R.S.S.I.L.A. and
Port Broughton Centenary Committee,
and Secretary to the Trustees of the
Port Broughton Methodist Church.
He is a farmer, a member of the
Rechabite Lodge, and is a keen fol-
lower of all sports, especially foo.ball
and rifle shooting. He served for 3]
years in France with the A.I.F. on
Active Service. Home address, Port
Proughton.
CHARLES EDWARD NORMAN
DALLING, J.P.
(Past Chairman of District Council of Port
Broughton)
Born at Mt. Torrens, 19th March,
1857. Mr. Bailing has served in the
Council for 26 years, 7 years as Chair-
man, and has been a resident of the
district for 46 years. He is Chair-
man of the Farmers’ and Producers'
Political Union, Trustee of Mundoora
Methodist Church and Recreation
Ground, and President of the Mun-
doora Institute, and has retired from
business. He is a keen follower and
supporter of football. Home address,
Port Broughton.
COUNCILLOR JOHN WILLIAM BARNES
(District Council of Port Broughton)
Born at Bungaree, March 4th, 1865.
and educated at Bungaree State
School. Mr. Barnes has been a mem-
ber of the Council for 9 years, and a
resident of the district for 52 years
and is a retired farmer. He is a mem-
ber of the Port Broughton Masonic
Lodge, No. 82, and supporter of foot-
ball and tennis. Present address.
Clement’s Gap.
COUNCILLOR SIDNEY CATFORD
DANIEL
(District Council of Port Broughton)
Born at Kulpara, 28th ] annum
1886, and educated at Kulpara Publu
School and Stanley Grammar School.
He has served in the Council for 1


W f ■ Poll
r ' ■ ■ ■ jhihS
v*V -f. :
‘ ' "
I * SSaSm
£ ■■: *■■'''
V / ’>■
■BKiK ,. 4j:
:• m. '.
pi | ""• -
« \y< ,^|i
months, and been a resident of the
listrict for 30 years. Mr. Daniel is a
member of Ward’s Hill Methodist
Church Trust and Port Broughton
Hospital Committee. He is a farmer,
and keen supporter of cricket and
tennis. Home address, Port Broughton.
COUNCILLOR JOSEPH STEVEN JAMES
STRINGER,
(District Council of Port Broughton)
Born at Port Broughton, 27th May,
1890, and educated at the Mundoora
and Garfield Public Schools. He has
served in the Council for 5 yeais, and
been a resident of the district for 45
vears. Mr. Stringer is a membei of
the Garfield School Committee, and of
the Masonic Lodge. He is an en hu-
siastic supporter of football. Home
address, Port Broughton.
COUNCILLOR SARSFIELD CASEY
(District Council of Port Broughton)
Born at Bute, 3rd June, 1894, and
educated at Bute Public School. He
has served in the Council 8 years, and
been 15 years a resident of the district.
Mr. Casey is Chairman of the Mun-
doora School Committee, President of
the Local Branch of the R.5.5.1.L.A.,
Trustee of the Cemetery and Ex-
delegate of the Football Club. Busi-
ness, farmer. He is a member of
the Oddfellows’ Lodge, and a member
and keen supporter of the local boot-
ball and Rifle Clubs. He served
abroad with the 43rd Battalion, A.I.F.
Home address, Port Broughton.
ROBERT EDGAR MILDREN, J.P.
(District Clerk, District Council of Port
Broughton)
Born at Auburn, sth April, 1870,
educated at North Adelaide Public
School and Caterer’s Grammar School.
He has been District Clerk for 43
years, and a resident of the district for
46 years. Secretary of the Local
Board of Health and Local Repatria-
tion Committee, Ex Vice-President of
the Port Broughton Institute and Ex-
Delegate of the Port Broughton Foot-
ball Club. Mr. Mildren is a member
of the Rechabite Lodge, and a keen


I ■ ■ 1| -.J
* * ill
"■■ 4 § M
■a *v* Ji
|L > - ,;;
# Tf-1 --itf*'
follower and supporter of all local
sports. For several years he captained
the Port Broughton Football and
Cricket Clubs. Home address, Port
Broughton.


District Council of Port Elliot


History of Port Elliot
I his District Council was constituted in 1862, prior to
which it was known as Piess’s Nob, and it is well portrayed
in the book “Paving the Way.” It is situated 54 miles
from Adelaide and has a total area of 108,000 acres, which
extend from the sea to Mount Compass north-west and to
the Finnis River north-east.
The principal streets in the township are the Strand,
North Terrace. Murray Terrace, Minilli Place, and Rosetta
Ter race. The district contains some hundreds of miles
of roads and about 200 houses.
Port Elliot is a well-known and favourite seaside
resort, and affords admirable facilities for bathing, fishing,
and shooting. It is also noted for its famous rocks and
the fishermen’s beach, which is considered by many travel-
lers to provide the best surf-bathing in the State.
In the early days the township was served by a horse
team from Strathalbyn and by Cobb & Co.’s coaches from
Willunga. There is now a daily train service, via Mount
Barker and Strathalbyn, and there are also motors plying
to and from Adelaide daily. The town possesses an up-
to-date post office, telephone service, and also has a good
water supply.
The Obelisk is a noted landmark, and is supposed to
mark the spot of the first survey peg in the south.
It is at Port Elliot that the great granite frontiers
of the State seem to hold supreme command and withstand
with gloomy greatness the sometimes fierce buffetings of
the waves of the great Southern Ocean. The view from
a rocky eminence of the white stretches of beach to Port
Victor and the peculiar promontory of Rosetta Head and
other rugged headlands is very grand; while the waves,
which even on a calm day at Port Elliot break with telling
eloquence on the cliffs, and on a stormy day spray dancing
around, are a sight magnificent in the extreme.
Port Elliot and Port Victor are situated in Encounter
Bay, so named by Captain Flinders on the occasion of his
meeting there with the captain of the French ship “Le
Geographe,” which was then cruising around what was then
called “New Holland.” It is stated that later on Captain
Baudin, of the French Government, on his behalf, quietly
appropriated all of the charts prepared by Flinders, who
for years languished as a prisoner of war in the Island of
Mauritius. Captain Flinders discovered and named Spen-
cer’s Gulf, by a few days only forestalling the Frenchman.
Port Victor is the premier watering place of the State.
It is a beautiful little seaport town, lying rather low cer-
tainly, but with charming surroundings. The drive to the
Hindmarsh River and Valley can hardly be excelled, and a
row on the picturesque river, with a picnic tea on the banks,
is a pleasure. Also another drive around Encounter Bay
to Rosetta Head, which is a bold, rounded bluff like a
gigantic head. This promontory was a whaling station
before the foundation of South Australia, large whales
being frequently captured.
The town is protected from the strong winds of the
Southern Ocean by Granite Island, which, although only
half a mile long and a quarter of a mile wide, is a great
protection. A splendid jetty a mile in length connects
the town with the island, and in summer months a horse
tram plies to the island for the convenience of visitors,
although many prefer to walk along the jetty and over
to the famous Blowhole. At one corner of the island
there is a breakwater running out for a thousand feet,
which affords shelter to sailing vessels and large steamers.
A very pleasant day can be spent on Granite Island to stand
on the rocks and see the deep roll of the waves.
The two river entrances to the sea and the natural
beauties of the scrub and rivers call forth many exclama-
tions of surprise from the visitors, who are well cater d
for by the townspeople in regard to good hotels, reason-
able boarding houses, boating, fishing, shooting, driving,
and river excursions, swimming, lawn tennis, and any other
amusement it is possible to give them.
The Council Chamber was built in 1879, and the Coun-
cil holds its meetings on the first Friday in every month
The following is a list of past and present Councillors


as far as can he ascertained:—R. Sunman (first Chair-
man), H. Welch, S. Collett. E. Golding, W. Stewart, R. J.
Ness, T. Adams, F. Rouse, P. T. Heggarton, C. Sandland
(Clerk), H. Handby, W. Newell, F. A. Haynes, A. E.
Henley. E. B. Rankin, R. Peters, C. W. H. Basham, D. J.
Ritchie, G. Stone, Richard Peters, J.P.
CORPORATION OF GOOLWA.
Goolwa is one of the oldest towns in South Australia,
and was surveyed by Colonel Light in 1839. The popula-
tion now numbers 563 persons, of whom 340 are ratepayers.
There are 141 buildings in the town, and just off the main
street is a well-kept Soldiers’ Memorial Park, and also a
memorial in the form of a soldier carved in Italian marble.
In 1932 the Goolwa Corporation was amalgamated with
the Port Elliot District Council, its representatives in that
body being H. A. Armfield and D. J. Ritchie.
Goolwa is situated 7Of miles from Adelaide by rail
and 54 miles by road.
In 1830 Captain Sturt, the great explorer, made an
intrepid passage down the Murray in an open boat, and
was probably the first white man to stand on the site of
Goolwa. He and Sir George McLeay were also the first
to navigate the Murrumbidgee.
In 1853 Captain F. Cadell in the steamer “Lady
Augusta” steamed up the Murray River from Goolwa for
the first time. Captain William Randell in the “Mary Ann”
also navigated the great stream, and thus was opened the
Murray River trading business, which has grown con-
tinually since, with the many new settlements along the
stream. To-day there is a project to either cut a canal to
Victor Harbour or to cut straight through to the sea from
Goolwa. This is a natural sequence to the extensive
scheme of locks now being carried out on the river.
An old time tragedy must also be recorded. Early
in 1837, when Sir J. Jefficott, the first judge in South
Australia, and Captain Blenkinsopp, of the HALS.
“Buffalo,” with Messrs. J. Wright and H. Brooks, were
attempting to make the passage from the Murray to the
sea, the boat capsized and they were all drowned.
Goolwa is about 74 miles from the Murray Mouth,
and opposite is the fertile expanse of Hindmarsh Island.
A motor ferry connects the two.
The Mount Lofty Ranges are away to the west and
within a short distance of Goolwa, to the south, can be
heard the continuous roar of the mighty Southern Ocean.
Many river steamers have been built in the township,
and some of those which were constructed 50 years ago
are still in commission.
Gentlemen who have served the Council in various
capacities are: —J. Ritchie (Clerk), D. J. Ritchie (Mayor),
Messrs. R. Graham, A. J. Henley, E. L. Steer. E. Byrnes,
E. H. Dodd, H. A. Armfield, W. Sumner, J. J. Spencer, H.
Sweetman, W. F. Newell. P. M. Corcoran, W. Rogers, L.
Hodgson, D. J. Gordon. W. Tugwell, E. W. Neighbour. G.
Ritchie, J. B. Packer, H. D. Goode, T. West, F. White, T.
Goode, W. Osborne, S. Chrystal, J. Ritchie, A. Graham,
J. Barker, J. Varcoe, T. Dowland, T. R. Sumner, F. A.
Dowland, J. Sweetman, J. Wright, T. Henley, H. Mayfield,
H. Chaplin, H. A. Spencer, P. Kerr, J. T. Underwood,
C. Smith, C. J. Dodd, D. McLean, and T. Goode, Senr.


i ~
Em
ljl
' iMHlh, Wm' '
| ■ »/• -Jp" 1 «■{£.
-'SBSsL --■—>*»!** JjH
I® »1
PAST MAYOR WILLIAM WOOD.
(District Council of Port Elliot.)
Born at Brompton, Gth December,
1878, and educated at Public Schools
Preston, Victoria. He has served 6
years in the Pt. Elliot District Coun-
cil as Councillor and Mayor, and 7
years in Hindmarsh Corporation as
Councillor and Alderman. Business,
brickmaker. He is Past Chief Ruler
Independent Order of Rechabites, and
in sport favours bowls and football.
Mr. Wood is a foundation member,
and has been President of Foreshore
Improvement Committee, Port Elliot
for 6 years.
COUNCILLOR RICHARD PETERS, J.P.
(District Council of Port Elliot)
Born at Cornwall, England, 8 th
September, 1857. Arrived in Austra-
lia in September, 1879, and educated
at Camborne, Cornwall. He has
served in the Council for 10 years, 3
years as Chairman, and has been 38
years a resident of the district, and a
Justice of the Peace since 1901. Mr.
Peters is Chairman of Trustees of
Mount Compass Public Hall, Mount
Compass School Committee, Show and
Agricultural Bureau. He is a mem-
ber of the Masonic Lodge of Peace,
Victor Harbour, the Pride of the Hills
Druids Lodge, and a I ast Arch of the
Order. Home address, Mount Com-
pass,
COUNCILLOR EDWARD BEEVOR
RANKINE
(District Council of Port Elliot)
Mr. Rankine is the son of the Hon.
fames Rankine, and was born at
Strathalbyn in 1881. He was educatec
at Goolwa Public School and Si
Peters College, and he entered th
Port Elliot District Council in 1921
and was Chairman for 12 years. 1 !
is in business as a grazier at Hind
marsh Island on the old famil
property, and has considerable bus:
ness association in Goolwa and on th
riyer Barrages.
COUNCILLOR DAVID JOHNSTONE
RITCHIE
(District Council of Port Elliot)
Born at Echuca, Victoria, 19t
October. 1874, and educated at Goolw
Public School and Prince Alfred Co
leg'e. He was 4 years Mayor an
Councillor of the Goolwa Corporatioi
and is now Councillor in the Port E
liot District Council. He has been


■ ■— 1^—— ————■—
■k % * / jr
IHk. % # gf . JR ®.
: P 9^ I V- a /■
% #
g - \m s.
resident of the district for 40 years.
Business, boatowner. Mr. Ritchie is
a member of the Corinthian Masonic
Lodge, President of Goolwa Football
Club, Past President of Goolwa
Cricket Club, and Past President
Goolwa Institute and Regatta Club.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE STONE
(District Council of Port Elliot)
Born at Mount Magnificent, 15th
July, 1870, and educated at Ashbourne
Public School. Mr. Stone has repre-
sented Nangkita Ward for 7 years,
and has resided in the district the
whole of his life. He has been Pre-
siding Officer State Elections for 23
years. Business, dairyman and
farmer. Home address, Nangkita.




[ istrict Council of Port Germein


History of Port Germem
Port Germein is a pretty harbour, surrounded by some
of the finest scenery in South Australia. The pier is the
longest in the State, being one mile long. The F J ort is a
favourite place for Pirie folks on holiday times, as they
like to get away from their own smoky town, and steamers
frequently bring six or seven hundred people to picnic on
the pretty beach and enjoy the charms surrounding the
place. The little township is quiet but prosperous. The
Port is the outlet of an important farming district.
This Council controls an area of 517,760 acres, and is
said to be one of the largest in South Australia. It
extends from the eastern shore of Spencer’s Gulf across
the Flinders Fxange to the plains beyond, and Melrose, the
post town, is over 25 miles inland from the Port.
The jetty at Port Germein is 5,500 feet in length, at
the end of which is a lighthouse, whose light is visible
ten miles out in the Gulf. Extending from the further-
most end of the jetty and continuing through the main
street to the wheat sheds, etc., is a tram line, which greatly
expedites the transport of wheat, wool, etc*.
From the outer end of the jetty one gets a splendid
view of the surrounding country. Flinders Range forms a
notable background, and a wide breadth of land is under
cultivation at the base. A cleft through the ranges is
known as ‘‘The Gorge,” and is practically the only con-
necting link between the Port and the vast agricultural
area which lies beyond.
From Adelaide to Melrose the distance is 168 miles,
and the population of the town and district is estimated at
5,343 persons, of whom 1,200 are ratepayers. The capital
value of ratable property is set down at £1,457,360, and is
assessed for rating purposes at £72.868. A total of 1 1
in the £ yields £3,947. There are approximately 1,300
dwellings and business places within the area.
Following is a list of the names of gentlemen who
as Councillors have served the Council for various periods:
—Messrs. H. J. Aikin, J. Arthur, J. J. Arthur, J. Bews,
J. Binney, R. Barrie, S. J. Broadbear, C. G. Borgas. T. S.
Bishop, S. Challinger, W. Dunstan, J. K. Deer. A. Fox. J.
Forbes, W. P. Foulis, D. Greig, S. S. E. Gum, N. S. Giles,
C. W. H. Hirsch, R. H. Henderson, P. Hillam, J. Hannagan,
A. P. Hillam, J. H. Holman. F. W. Jacka, F. T. Jettner,
W. H. Jettner. H. C. Jaeschke, J. C. W. Keller, J. H. Klemm,
J. Lommon, J. Milne, G. Mahood, F. McMartin, G. W.
Moran, H. McColl. D. McCallum, G. H. A. Mahood, L.
O’Loughlin, F. G. Rqocke, G. Stone, I. Saunders, T. Spratt,
S. G. Stone, B. Starr, B. G. Williams, F. J. Whitby, FI.
Williams, G. S. Wurst, and T. W. Willington.
The present Councillors are:—Messrs. W. P. Foulis
(Chairman), S. G. Stone, H. C. Jaeschke, C. G. Borgas,
F. G. Roocke, N. S. Giles, T. S. Bishop, and S. M. McHugh


" ~ - "^" ■ ' ? ' ■' ' ■ --y —» A- j - < * — .
__ — -: ! *v:, , - ■ -
~~f~ - "****- -
g^ajp-
District Council of Port M acDonnell
SHELLY BEACH, PORT McDONNELL.


History of Port MacDonnell
Port McDonnell is in the County of Grey, and is one
of the chief trading ports in the South-East. It was
opened as a shipping place in the year 1861, and was named
after Sir Richard Graves McDonnell, who was Governor
of South Australia from 1855 to 1862. The native name
of the locality is “Ngaranga.”
It is the most southerly port of the State, and was
founded in 1859. Its business is of the miscellaneous
character derived from an agricultural and pastoral com-
munity. 1 he revival of trade with Melbourne and the
introduction of regular steamship service did much for the
port, but this service was interrupted for about a year,
because of labour troubles in 1914. Unsuccessful efforts
were made to re-establish it. The town is substantially
built, and the port is a favourite summer resort for many
inland residents. A Progress Association has been formed,
and is carrying out various improvements on the fore-
shore and at beauty spots of the district. Situated 18
miles from Mount Gambier, the place has become increas-
ingly popular as a seaside resort. Surfing at Orwell Rocks
is becoming popular, and there is every facility for tennis,
golf, and bathing. Electric lighting has been installed
throughout the town.
A fine golf course has been established on the Recrea-
tion Reserve, an added attraction to visitors. A fine bitu-
minous highway has been constructed to Mount Gambier
by the Government. In keeping with the progress of the
town a fine limestone Institute Hall was erected in 1931.
the foundation stone being laid by His Excellency the
Governor-General of Australia (Lord Stonehaven).
The District Council of Port McDonnell comprises
most of the Hundreds of MacDonnell and Kongorong,
and the greater portion of Benara and Caroline, an area
of 352 square miles. The amount of the assessment for
1935-36 was £32,442. The population of the district of
Port MacDonnell at June 30th. 1933, was 1,097, and the
number of houses about 350.
Port McDonnell may he termed the seaport of Mount
Gambler, the relationship being much the same as Port
Adelaide is to Adelaide.
A jetty, 1,060 feet long', runs out into dee]) water, and
there is a lifeboat station and a rocket apparatus. The
industries are mainly connected with the shipping trade,
but the district also possesses a tannery and bone-crushing
works, fell mongery and wool-scouring works.
The public buildings include the Government establish-
ments, several churches, Friendly Society's Hall, School
House, District Council Office, etc.
The Benara district has an area of 124,800 acres, and
the population is estimated at 890 persons, who are accom-
modated in 170 dwellings. The chief industry is farming
and grazing.
Following is a list of the names of past Councillors
Port McDonnell.—Messrs. W. H. Pascoe, G. F. Made-
ley, F. Edwards, R. Wilke, C. Carlin, G. Holloway, E. Earle,
P. McCabe. J. E. Perryman, R. Wallace. M. O’Dwyer, F.
W. Ploenger, M. E. Taylor, R. C. Hayman. H. Pick, W.
M. Laslett, J. W. Kemp, A. J. Cain. C. C. Griffen, A. S.
Dayman.
Benara.—Messrs. F. E. Edwards, J. Botterill, S. Mit
chell, T. Dowling, J. P. L. Schinckel, R. Wallace, W.
Aslin, P. T. Spehr, W. Morris, A. J. Ashby, N. J. Houston,
W. Greenwood, W. Edkins, A. Clark.
Names of Councillors at present in office: —William
Edkins (Chairman), Benara Ward; William Crowe, Kon-
gorong Ward: Thomas F. Gratwick. West Ward; Henry
I ick, Caroline Ward; Keith Macrow, Mount Schaick
Ward: John W. Kemp, Allandale Ward; W. Harry Pascoe,
MacDonnell Ward; E. A. Millstead (District Clerk).


.=
14
*\:S- -Jhm
mmSMSSm
n
\ ' ft f y flj
■f m
*> •■ -•■
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM CROWE
(District Council of Port MacDonnell.)
Born at Strathdownie, Victoria, 16th
August, 1891, and educated at Strath-
downie. Mr. Crowe has been a mem-
ber of the Council for 41 years, and
resident of the district for 8 years,
le was previously a member of
denara District Council prior to its
amalgamation with the Port MacDon-
nell District Council. Business,
farmer and grazier. Home address,
Kongorong.
E. A. MILSTEAD
(District Clerk, District Council of Port
MacDonnell.)
Air. Milstead was born at Mount
Gambier on the 22nd of June, 1906,
and was educated at the Public School,
Ft. MacDonnell, and the Unley High
School. He was appointed to the
posit,on of District Clerk on the death
<)f his father _ (he , ate Mr E H Mil _
ste ad in January, 1928. Home address,
p ort MacDonnell.
JOHN WATSON.
(First Mayor of Mount Gambier, 1876.)
Unfortunately, Mr. Watson’s picture was omitted
from the Mount Gambier section. Realising that Port
MacDonnell is a near municipality, and he is known
throughout the district, the publishers have taken the
liberty to include him in this section. This was un-
avoidable, the Mount Gambier section having gone to
press.




District Council oi Port Wakefield


History of Port Wakefield
This port came into existence commercial!) in 1850,
and takes its name from the River Wakefield, which was
discovered by Mr. \\ illiam Hall, and named by him after
Mr. Edward Gibbon Wakefield, one of the founders of the
State.
The Township of Port W akefield is on the Hamley
Bridge and Kadina railway line, and is in the Electoral
District of Stanley. It stands at the head of St. Vincent’s
Gulf on the eastern side, and is the port from whence the
wool and other products from the pastoral countrv of the
Counties of Stanley, Daly and Gawler are shipped.
The area is 934 acres, and the population of 565 persons
are accommodated in 151 dwellings.
The Hundreds of Goyder and Inkerman and part
of the Hundred of Clinton comprise the District Council
(120,320 acres), the population of which is 568 persons,
of whom 178 are ratepayers. The capital value of rat-
able property is £237,160 and the assessment value
£11,858. A general total rate of 1/3 in the £ yields £741.
There is daily communication with Adelaide by rail.
The nearest townships on the line are Balaklava (15 miles
distant) and Hoyleton (30 miles)-
The country in this part is flat and somewhat dry.
The land is fairly good for agricultural purposes, but better
for grazing.
List of past Corporation members:—Messrs. J. J.
Johnston, W. J. Shearer, A. M. Tapley, J. W. Humphreys,
j. W. Forest, H. H. Coombe, W. A. Hewett, C. H. Graham.
G. T. Buttery, F. J. Woodgate, J. J. Thomas, P. A. Gosling,
H. B. Loveday, j. Squire, J. Lovell, E. G. Hubble, J. B,
Sugars, J. Brewer, H. P. Shakes, W. D. Evans, A. Thomas,
W. J. Spells, H. L. Black, W. G. Eatts, L. Warland, G.
Peter, G. J. Witcombe, J. Peter, R. Drake, J. W. Dali.
A. Tozer, R. Tiller. F. McArdle, and F. W. McCabe (Clerk).
District Council:—Messrs. W. Underwood, W. Board,
J. Sampson. W. Fraser, W. A. Hamdorf, J. Nicholls, A. E.
Smith, H. Shepherd. W. W. Mugford, C. E. Daniel. H.
Bundle, R. E. S. Gale, \\ . G. Angel, W. J. Forrest, J. Prime,
H. A. Lyons, and C. W. Morrell.
Present members of Council:—R. E. S. Gale (Chair-
man), Councillors A. W. Peter. T. Dickson. F. H. Smith, T.
Fitzpatrick, R. M. Drake, T. McCabe (District Clerk).


District Council of Redhill


History of Redhill
Redhill is a town situated on the River Broughton.
It is nicely laid out on a hill overlooking the river, and
which, like all the land in that vicinity, is of a tinge
decidedly red, so that it is appropriately named. About
seven miles further up the river is Koolunga, and Snow-
town is about seventeen miles away in a southerly direc-
tion. The whole of the surrounding country was at one
time naturally well timbered, and was an excellent place
for shooting, all kinds of birds being very plentiful. It is
now, and for many years has been, a very prosperous farm-
ing district, the land being excellent for wheat growing
and for the rearing of sheep, cattle, and horses.
ddie area controlled by the District Council is 122,240
acres, the population numbers 1,037 persons, the ratepayers
300, and the dwelling houses 254. The capital value of
ratable property is £351,660, and the assessment value
£25,000. The general rate is 1/4 in the £.
Redhill possesses a commodious Institute, Post Office,
and State School, and there are churches belonging to the
Anglicans, Methodist, and Roman Catholics. It is very
well provided for with stores of various kinds, and there
is one hotel and boarding house. It is the dead end of the
5 feet 3 inch gauge.
As far as can be ascertained from previous records
the following are names of those who have served the Dis-
trict Council since its inception until the present time: —
Messrs. L. Wake, R. Lithgow, J. Cocks, P. Pilkington, F.
Freeman, P. H. Wheaton, A. W. Brown. W. J. Stringer.
T. Cocks, T. Smart, R. Harris, W. G. Perrin, J. H. Button,
John Vivian, T. H. Treloar, J. J. Hayes, E. Fuller, D. J. B.
Cooper, H. A. Spencer (Chairman), R. H. Palmer, M. FI.
Coffey, Geo. A. Button, A. P. Kirtchner, and A. N. Harris
(District Clerk).


Renmark Irrigation Trust, No. 1
THE RENMARK IRRIGATION TRUST OFFICES.


Renmark Irrigation Trust, No. 1
The 01 igin of the name Renmark, ' like many of the
softest and sweetest names of our towns, is derived from
the natives. It means "Red Mud." Around Renmark
and its environs hovers a special attraction as the pioneer
with the result that in the post-war years the repatriation
of ex-soldiers was carried out on a large scale along the
fertile banks of our great National Waterway. Thus
immense areas of unproductive soil have been changed to
ONE OF THE MAIN IRRIGATION CHANNELS, RENMARK.
centre of irrigation enterprise in South Australia. The
success of this great venture heralded a new era in land
settlement in this .State. It revealed in a striking manner
the commercial value and national utility of the Murray
waters when applied scientifically to otherwise arid lands.
Its possibilities fired the imagination of our Governments,
prolific productivity and the "desert now blossoms as the
rose !"
Renmaik was established in 188/ by IVlessrs. George
and W. B. Chaffey under authority of the "Chaft'ey Bros.'
Irrigation Act." The Government set aside 250,000 acres,
and in 1888 issued a licence for the occupation of 30,000


■ ■■■- ■, s
acres. In July, 1888, the Messrs. Chaffey transferred their
concession to "Chaffey Bros. Renmark, Ltd." by whom
irrigation works were constructed. In 1889 this company
was succeeded by "The Renmark Irrigation Coy., Ltd.,"
and in 1893 the "Renmark Irrigation Trust, No. 1," was
incorporated by special Act of Parliament. Since its in-
corporation the Trust has successfully administered the
affairs of the Renmark Irrigation District, with statutory
power to rate growers for water supply and general ad-
Trust's assets now exceeds £lOO,OOO and the annual revenue
is over £20,000. The present annual water rate, cover-
ing four general irrigations, is £2 per acre. The area under
fruit culture comprises : —Sultanas, 2,440 acres ; Currants,
1,335 acres; Gordos (muscatels), 925 acres; Doradillos and
other vines, 400 acres (approx.) ; Citrus, 440 acres; Pears,
155 acres ; Apricots, 290 acres ; Prunes, 7 acres ; Peaches and
Nectarines, 110 acres; Apples, Figs, Olives, and other
varieties, 75 acres. There is also a considerable area in
THE RENMARK PACKING SHED.
ministrative purposes. The Trust is elected by its rate-
payers, four of its seven members retiring annually. In
1900 the Trust was by a further special Enactment vested
with all the powers, duties, privileges and functions of a
District Council within the irrigation district, since when
it has been the controlling authority both for Irrigation
and Local Government. These dual functions have blended
very successfully, producing an efficient and economic
administration.
The area at present irrigated by the 1 rust totals ap-
proximately 8,000 acres, of which over 1,000 acres are occu-
pied by soldier settlers. With the exception of these
ex-soldiers' holdings (which are held from the Government
under Agreement to Purchase) the land is freehold. Water
is distributed by a series of lifts from the river by electric
pumping plants, the power for which is generated by the
Trust at its central power house, the alternators aggre-
gating over 1,200 horsepower. Ihe book value of the
the aggregate devoted to lucerne for fodder purposes. The
production for 1935 harvest was approximately 6,200 tons
of dried fruits, 7,000 tons of wine and spirit grapes, and
several hundred tons of pears sent to canneries. The esti-
mated Citrus yield for the year is 70,000 bushels. The
well-famed "Renmark Navel" would account for a large
proportion of this fruit.
The present population of the Irrigation District at
Renmark is about 4,000. This figure excludes the town
area. The total length of irrigation channels is approxi-
mately 78 miles and of road 98 miles. The Trust has
been concentrating on the cement lining of its channels and
the metalling of its roads for some years, with the result
that the end of this important developmental work is in
sight.
The assessment of the Trust's district for Local
Government rating (on improved capital values) is £604,000,
which at 5 per cent, produces an assessment value of


, '
L._ _ ---■
£30,200. A general rate of 2/3 in the £ (which includes 3d.
for Hospital contribution) produces £3,398.
The latest development by the Trust is the complete
electrification of its district for domestic and industrial
purposes, employing modern 3-phase 50-cycle alternating
current at 415 and 240 volts. This service brings the faci-
lities and comforts of electric light and power within reach
of the home and property of every grower, and is probably
without parallel in Australian rural areas. This supply
With its remarkable winter climate, Renmark offers
outstanding inducements as a tourist centre. The now
famous Community-owned Hotel—the first of its kind in
Australia —is a three-storey building of modern design, pro-
viding facilities unsurpassed in any country centre in Aus-
tralia. The profits are distributed for the benefit of the
district. The Town of Renmark, which is the business
and social centre of the irrigation areas, is one of the first
country towns in the State for size and prosperity. The
THE RENMARK GROWERS’ DISTILLERY.
also serves the large industrial concerns associated with
the industry, such as the Packing Sheds and Distilleries.
It was undertaken as a Centennial work and to mark the
Golden Jubilee of the founding of Renmark, to be cele-
brated next year.
Situated in the Trust’s District is the largest and most
up-to-date fruit packing shed in the State, which is co-
operatively owned. There is also a large and up-to-date
co-operative distillery : also several privately owned pack-
ing sheds and one privately owned distillery.
Residents are served by a fleet of Passenger Buses
plying between various points in the Settlement and the
Town.
town area, however, is at present administered by a sepa-
rate Council, and is described fully under the heading of the
Corporation of the Town of Renmark.
Past Chairmen of the Trust are: —Messrs. R. Turner,
Col. Morant, H. Showed, j. M, Smith, E. R. Olorenshaw,
M. S. T. Woodward, W. R. Woodham.
The present Board is comprised of: —Messrs. C. H.
Katekar, J.P. (Chairman since 1925), F. J. Olorenshaw
(Vice-Chairman), F. H. Basey, A. Jones, G. R. Kubank, M.
Pethick, and H. Waters, Mr. H. Dridan is Secretary, and
the Chief Engineer is Mr. John S. Tolley, A.M.I.E. (Aust.),
L.S.


....
ill ' Ip
%!JBk JS r]
?| #*»*** .<■•*>»*- |
CHARLES HENRY KATEKAR
(Chairman, Renmark Irrigation Trust, No. 1)
Mr. Katekar was born at Overland
Corner, 13th November, 1886, and edu-
cated at Renmark. He has been for
Id y-ears a member of the Renmark
Irrigation Trust, No. 1, 13 of which,
he has been Chairman. He is also
Director of the Renmark Growers’
Distillery Ltd., the Renmark Fruit
Growers’ Co-operative Ltd., and
Chairman of the Renmark Citrus As-
sociation and the Show Society, lie
has held office on many other minor
committees. Mr. Katekar is a Horti-
culturalist, and his sport is bowls.
Home address, Renmark.
REGINALD CLAUDE PENHALL
(Past Secretary of the Renmark Irrigation
Trust, No. 1)
Mr. Ren hall was born at Moonta
Mines, 81st August, 1900, and educated
at the Moonta Mines Public School,
the Adelaide Technical School and
Hemingway & Robertson’s Account-
tancy College. He was a resident of
Renmark for 13 years, and Secretary
of the Renmark Irrigation Trust for
10 years. Prior to his entering the
Irrigation Trust, Mr. Penhall was Ac-
countant, and later Manager of the
Renmark Branch Army and Navy-
Stores, Ltd., and also Secretary of
Saies Ltd. for a, short period. He is a
member of the Renmark Masonic and
Royal Arch Chapter, and the Berri
Mark Lodge of Freemasons, holding
office in each. His sport is tennis.
JOHN S. TOLLEY, L.S., A M.I.E.
(Chief Engineer of the Renmark Irrigation
Trust, No. 1)
Mr. Toilet' was born at Mildura,
10th January, 1895, and educated at
Haileybury College, Melbourne. He
has been a resident of Renmark and
in the service of the Irrrigation Trust
for 9J years. Mr. Tolley is a Licensed
Surveyor, and an Associate Member
of the Institute of Engineers. He is
a member of the Masonic Lodge, and
his sports are cricket, golf, and tennis.
His private address is 10th Street,
Renmark.




District Council of Riverton


History of Riverton
District Council of Riverton is an amalgamation
of Rhynie, Gilbert, and Stockport District Councils, which
took place in 1932.
In covering the history of this Council, the following
are. as far as present records show, complete.
RHYNIE.
Rhynie is situated about nine miles from Riverton, in
the Hundred of Alma, and is approximately 70 miles north
of Adelaide by road. The district produces a great deal of
■wheat, and is suitable for farming and pastoral purposes
generally. It is traversed by Springs’ Creek, and is slightly
hilly and undulating, d he portions which are not cul-
tivated for corn-growing are richly grassed and well tim-
bered. There is also an abundance of good building stone
and road metal.
The Council was gazetted in 1859, and had an area of
29,120 acres. The population then totalled 280 persons, of
whom 65 were ratepayers, and the dwellings numbered 56.
The capital value of ratable property was £118,380, and the
assessment value £5,919, on which a general rate of 1/- in
the £ produced £296.
Following is a list of the names of past members of this
District Council : —Messrs. J. W. Kelly, J. Kirk, S. E. Wait,
A. G. Kemp, D. Kirk, D. Plew, G. Wait. W. Kemp, J. J.
Ellery, and E. A. Gray (Clerk).
GILBERT.
The district of Gilbert, of which Riverton is the prin-
cipal town, was proclaimed in the year 1866. The Council
was formed of Messrs. Edward Prescott (who received
election to the chair). Frederick Fleming, James Milne,
James Kelly, and James Shearer. Mr. John Taylor was
appointed Clerk, and continued to discharge the duties until
1872, being succeeded by Mr. James Scholefield, who re-
tained the office from that date for the lengthy period of
47 years, until his death in 1920. Mr. E. A. Gray then
accepted the appointment.
The district was divided into six wards, with repre-
sentation of one Councillor from each ward.
The first assessment was made in 1866, and amounted
to £13,840. A rate of 1/ - in the £ was declared, which pro-
duced a revenue of £692. The most recent assessment —
that of 1922-23 —showed value £21.487. which, at a rate ol
1/3 in the £, produces revenue of £1,342 18/9.
The town of Riverton is situated 61 miles from Ade-
laide by rail, and lies in the midst of a very fertile district,
which is devoted to the various purposes of wheatgrow-
ing, hay-producing, dairying, and stock-raising. The
failure of crops is unknown in this area, which is recog-
nised as one of the most successful producing portions of
the State. The population of the district is estimated at
about 1,900 persons.
Riverton has achieved some reputation as an educa-
tional centre, having a large public primary school, which
is attended by over 200 scholars. In addition, the Educa-
tion Department has erected a fine building adjacent to the
railway station for the purposes of a High School. These
schools are attended by a large number of boys and girls
from other towns along the railway line.
A feature of predominating interest is the District
Soldiers’ Memorial Hospital, which has been built on a
magnificent site overlooking the whole town, at a cost of
£lO,OOO. This humane institution serves a wide area, and
is proving a great boon to the inhabitants. It is controlled
by a local committee.
Various religious denominations are represented, the
pi incipal church buildings being the Anglican, Methodist,
and Roman Catholic. The town also possesses the great
advantage of a very fine oval for recreation purposes, the
spoits chiefly indulged in being cricket, football, tennis,
croquet, and basketball.
Names of past members of the Gilbert District Council
ate—ilessrs. G. Bailey, J. Mitchell. W. Hannaford, C
Duldig, H. A. B. Davis. J. J. Schultz, W. Legoe, W. A
Clarke, W . H. Davis, R. J. James, T. F. Flavel, and E. A
Gray (Clerk).


STOCKPORT.
Stockport was given its name by early pioneers, who
came from Stockport in England.
This district is essentially a farming area ; the farmers
arc fortunate and prosperous, as, so far, a total failure has
never been experienced.
The boundary line commenced on the south-east corner
at the Linwood Bridge on the Main North Road, and con-
tinued north through the township of Tarlee, where, still
following the main road, it took in Giles s Corner, from
whence it proceeded in a westerly direction to the top ol
the range, joining up with the Districts of Rhynie and Alma
Plains : the line then ran due south across the main road
near Hamley Bridge to the 'River Light, which river was
the boundary on the southern side until the Linwood
Bridge was reached again.
Council meetings were always held at Stockport, which
was situated centrally in the district; within a 50 miles
radius of the capital, and served by two passenger and
mail trains daily each way : in the early days Stockport was
a stopping place for teamsters, etc., to and from the Buira
Mines and other northern centres.
The district was proclaimed more than 70 years ago.
The Council controlled a comparatively small area as
Councils go; at the commencement the assessment was
under £1,000; but increased the assessed value of the dis-
trict to approximately £lO,OOO.
The length of main roads totalled about 11 miles, and
district roads about 120 miles. The population was about
800, whilst the dwelling houses numbered 160.
As a war memento a Memorial Park was established
at Stockport and trees planted in memory of the fallen men,
also a pavilion erected, which is a credit to such a small
community.
So far as can be ascertained, the earliest Councillors
were Messrs. J. Watts, E. Manuel, O’Dea, and J. Young,
with Mr. T. H. Ayliffe as Clerk, Mr. Watts being the Chair-
man.
Since then the following gentlemen have held office:—
R. Rankine, J. G. Kelly, T. Arthur, J. O’Leary, Jer. Watts,
P. Couch, Haddy, D. G. Stribling, S. W. Smith. E. F.
O’Sullivan, J. Smith, E. G. Stribling, B. McArdle, W.
Boetcher, H. Long, G. Wilson, T. Watts, J. Mclnerney,
). T. Godfree, A. C. Branson, H. T. Gray, R. Whitelaw,
}. Howard. G. S. G. Thomas, T. C. Hookings, W. G. Branson.
F. O. Watts, D. L. Clarke, and C. J. M. Murray (Clerk).


n&. gwa: ,j «s»? . -:. -Hg
:-r
■■HP
f
I
THE LATE SAMUEL WILLIS.
(Past Councillor, District Council of
Riverton.)
Mr. Willis was born at Cranford,
Northamptonshire, England, in 1811.
He arrived in this State with his wife
and family in the ship “Constance” in
1850, and first settled at Findon, but
soon afterwards purchased land at
Tarlee when that area was first opened
for selection. Mr. Willis was one of
the early Councillors for the District
Council of Stockport, now merged into
the District Council of Riverton, and
he resided on his original holding until
his death in 1898. His sons still occupy
the homestead, and are graziers and
wheat farmers.
THE LATE JOHN ROBBINS
(Past Councillor, District Council of
Riverton.)
The late Mr. Robbins was born at
Cranford, Northampton, England,
17th November, 1833. He arrived in
Australia in January, 1849, on the ship
“Rajah.” The late Mr. Robbins was a
Councillor for many years in the Dis-
trict Council of Stockport, now known
as the District Council of Riverton,
and resided in the district for most of
his life, being one of the first settlers.
He was interested in all clean sports
in the district. The late Mr. Robbins
died in 1922.


i
" * '** ~ * ' " ■ „....■ i
I.—**-.- % ., : - ,. ■ »- I
,«_ -■ - --'■ *'■£% ■&&' *r- !MmSaP r JH
iwwir - :
District Council of Robe
DOORWAY ISLAND, ROBE.


History of Robe
Robe is one of the oldest towns in South Australia,
its history dating back to the early forties, and its actual
survey taking place in 1846. It was at one time a seaport
of considerable activity in the South-East, and was also
the third seaport in the State ; but in recent years the ship-
ping trade has been killed in the transport struggle.
The place was named after Colonel Robe, who was
one of the first Governors of South Australia. The
Governors of the early days made Robe their summer
resort. It is reputed to have the coolest climate in summer
in the State, and would doubtless have many more visitors
for that reason if it were more accessible.
Robe has an area of 272,640 acres, and from time to
time the boundaries have extended, until they now
include the Hundreds of Waterhouse, Ross, Smith, and
Bray, which are divided into six Wards.
Robe is prettily situated on the south side of Guichen
Bay, and is made a summer resort by persons from all
parts of the State. The bay, inside the reef off Cape
Cannes and Baudin’s Rocks, has an indentation in the coast-
line of three miles by about four miles. It is somewhat
elliptical in shape, and closed, except to the west, where
the two entrances, respectively north and south of Snewin
Rock, give a clear passage way of 7,750 feet and 8,500
feet, and an average depth of ten fathoms. The bay inside
has a fairly uniform depth of six fathoms to quite near
the shore, and affords a secure anchorage to vessels of
large tonnage in all average weather. The shore front-
ing the township has a succession of small rocky points,
caves, sandy coves, and a series of flat rocks above water
at low tide. These flat rocks extend all down the back
coastline, and afford splendid sport to anglers. The reefs
and the Baudin’s rocks are ideal spots for those who have
a fondness for boat fishing. Robe is acknowledged one of
the prettiest seaside resorts we have, and records give it
the coolest temperature. It has, too, historical interest
in its old time associations, some relics still to be seen
recalling more prosperous days.
Perhaps Robe’s chief asset now is its charm and eve
increasing popularity as a tourist resort. 1 he work of
the Robe Progress Association, a young body, has been
brought to the notice of the public particularly during 192;
and it has done much for Robe in improving its natural
advantages and providing tourists with facilities for camp-
ing. A camping ground has been established with every
convenience. The reconstruction of the local hotel and
the addition of many rooms will provide more and better
accommodation at Robe than has hitherto existed.
The district is chiefly pastoral, but farming is carried
on to some extent. The settlement of the adjacent coun-
try has not proceeded to that extent which the possession
of such a harbour would warrant, but with increased set-
tlement and development in the South-East it is certain
that Robe must come into its own.
That a large area of the land near Robe could be made
more productive by closer settlement was made known by
the Royal Commission on Rural Settlement, which visited
the district and reported thereon in 1925, and probably this
district will be affected by the suggested legislation by the
State Government.
The District Council has control over about 400 square
miles, including the Hundreds of Waterhouse, Bray, Ross,
and Smith, divided into six Wards. The assessment for
the year 1935-36 was about £10,705, and the capital value
of ratable property is £205,000, whilst a rate of 1/6 in
the £ yields annually £BOO. The population of the district
at June 30, 1933, was given as 548, and it contains 143
dwellings.
A monument has been erected in Robe in honour of
local fallen soldiers, and is surrounded by an exceeding!}
picturesque garden, which is a credit to such a small com-
munity. The town also possesses a fine Institute, which
has a library of 4,000 volumes.
The District Council was proclaimed in the year 1869,
and the first Chairman was Mr. J. T. Williams. The tota
length, of roads controlled by the Council is main roads


48 miles, district roads 60 miles constructed, and there are
also three miles of made streets.
Robe is situated from Adelaide (by rail and road, via
Kingston), 212 miles; 97 miles from Mount Gambier, 33
miles from Beachport; 65 miles from Penola ; 27 miles from
Kingston; and 75 miles from Naracoorte.
Following is a list of the names of past and present
members of the District Council; —Messrs. J. T. Williams,
W. McLean, C. Cell, J. Law, H. Wylie, A. D. Banks, W.
H. Young, A. Pickett, H. Giles, C. Savage, A. Banks, A.
Munro, L. Cooper, T. Bridgland, S. Fletcher, A. Robson,
B. Dening, J. Ekers, H. M. Stephens, R. Stockdale, J. M.
Mustarde, W. Savage, M. McDonald, O. Dopking, A. Kerr,
J. McKay, J. Woolley, W. Dawson, S. Reid, D. Grose, L.
N. Sager, T. Pickett, D. McPherson, C. Savage, J. E. Smith,
W. Wilson, H. Stockdale, J. D. Chambers, D. Mcßam, C.
Goddard, R. Foster, W. G. Moule, W. H. Lea, H. W. Morris
J. Brown, G. Gibson, G. Hayes, P. Mclntyre, R. Jackson,
C. Smith, J. Nunan, G. Nunan, S. J. Mclntyre, R. Jackson,
C. Smith, G. Domaschenz, H. J. McConville, H. Hudson,
J. J. Elliott, J. Watson, W. Warren, C. Gell, E. S. \\ ight,
T. G. Brown, J. E. Sneath, A. C. Mclntyre, E. J. Banks, H.
D. Flint, L. D. Niehus, G. Mcßain, B. Mcßain, and R. K.
Stuart. District Clerk, Thomas G. Brown.
JAMES NUNAN.
(Chairman, District Council of Robe.)
Mr. Nunan was born at Pompiers,
June 20th, 1857, and educated at Free-
ling and Templers Schools. He has
served in the District Council of
Robe continuously from 1897, and has
been Chairman from 1900 to 1913, and
from 1933 until the present date. He
has been a resident of the district for
52 years. Mr. Nunan is a farmer and
grazier, and is a Past Grand Master
of the Mount Gambier Masonic Lodge,
and a member of the Independent
Order of Oddfellows Lodge. Home
address, Wattlebank, Robe.




District Council of Robertstown


'
—~—nBBTSE
j W-V' ■ q |
History of Robertstown
Ihe District of Robertstown was proclaimed in May,
1932, when the District Council Districts of Apoinga and
English were amalgamated. The district has a population
of 2,100 and an area of 550 square miles, and comprises the
Hundreds of Apoinga, Bower, Bright, Bundey and English,
the chief town being Robertstown, which is the terminal
point of the railway. The town was named after Mr.
John Roberts, the pioneer storekeeper of the locality, and
his son, Mr. William Roberts, was the first Chairman of
the Council. The district produces wheat, wool, dairy
produce, magnasite and asbestos, and has a large trade with
WALTER LEWIS NOSKE.
(.Chairman, District Council of Robertstown.)
Mr. Noske was born at Lyndoch,
S.A., 23rd October, 1894, and educated
at Lyndoch Public School. He has
been a resident of Robertstown for 16
years, and a member of the Council
for 8 years, 3 of which he has been
Chairman. Mr. Noske has been Chair-
man of the Geranium Plain School
Committee for 11 years and the Sports
Committee for 14 years. He is a far-
mer, and his address is Box 2, Roberts-
town.
PAST CHAIRMAN JOHANNES ALWIN
HEINRICH.
(District Council of Robertstown.)
Mr. Heinrich was born at World’s
End, near Burra, 17th April, 1884, and
educated at World’s End School and
Point Pass College. He has been a
resident of the district for 36 years,
and a member of the Council for 9
years. He was also a member of the
Apoinga District Council for 5 years,
two years of which he was Chairman,
and since the amalgamation of the
District Councils of Apoinga and
Adelaide in firewood. The improved value of the property
within the district is £710,160, the general rate of 1/ in the
£on the assessment producing £1,775. The area of parks
and reserves is 1,886 acres, and the total length of roads is
495 miles, of which 33 miles are occupied by main roads.
The Council meets on the third Saturday in each month
at the District Office, Peace Hall, Robertstown.
The present Councillors are: —W. L. Noske (Chair-
man), J. A. Heinrich, E. G. Schmidt, A. W. Farley, J. A.
W. Banner, P. G. Mosey, Wm. Roberts, G. H. Menz, and
A. R. Wittwer.
English he has served in the District:
Council of Robertstown for 4 years.
In May, 1932, he was elected Chairman
of the amalgamated Council, and was
thus the last Chairman of the District


I* 7J
f mm p
j*r m
?|fc # "*’ f r :
' y| *^-
m
: | * & » 44* S
r “ *
I 1 1
% JHHf
III
M^^q^K^ K ' r^v % I
Council of Apoinga and the first Chair-
man of the District Council of Roberts-
town. His present business is farming
and grazing. Mr. Heinrich is Presi-
dent of the Apoinga Football Club,
and has been Secretary of the Black
Springs Football Club for 7 years. He
has also been for several years Chair-
man. of the Black Springs Agricultural
Bureau, Secretary of the Liberal
Federation, and since 1922 Secretary of
the Apoinga School C ommittee. Mr.
Heinrich has been a member of the
Board of Management of the Burra
Burra Hospital for 4 years, and Trea-
surer and Warden of the North Anlaby
Lutheran Church for 16 years. Home
address, Apoinga.
COUNCILLOR ERNST GUSTAV
SCHMIDT.
(District Council of Robertstown.)
Born at Neale’s Flat, Bth May, 18/9,
and educated at the Lutheran J ri\ ate
School. Mr. Schmidt has served for
17 years in the English District Coun-
cil,' and 4 years in the Robertstown
District Council, and has been a tesi-
dent of the district for 25 years. He
was formerly Chairman of the late
District Council of English, and is now
Chairman of the Point Pass School.
Recreation Park, Veterinary Lodge,
and Hall Committees. He is also Lay
Reader and Trustee of the Evangelical
Lutheran Church, Point Pass. Home
address, Point Pass.
COUNCILLOR JULIUS AUGUST
WILHELM LAUNER.
(District Council of Robertstown.)
Born at Stockwell, Ist February,
1866, and educated at the Lutheran
School, Stockwell. Mr. Banner has
been a Councillor for 19 years in
Apoinga District Council, and for 4
years in the Robertstown District
Council, representing Bright Ward.
He has been a farmer in the district
for 57 years, and he is Treasurer of the
Lutheran Church, \\ orld's End. Mr.
Launer's father arrived in Australia
in the year 1852, and was a pioneer of
the Stockwell district. Home address,
World's End.
COUNCILLOR GUSTAV HERMANN
MENZ.
(District Council of Robertstown.)
Born at Sutherlands, 25th Decem-
ber, 1888, and educated at Sutherlands
Public School. Mr. Menz served for
2 years in the English District Coun-
cil, and has been in the Robertstown
Council for 4 years. He has been a


I %• • mi
- % * ,’ v ' m
*r / ,, '«» IL
jr*
mmKr ■*%*, - ||
&
M ‘St
« Jiiir i^R¥, "» #»
# “
«. % % #€?■
!*► &
* £
■ 4
( %
M % »
y €
resident of the district for 47 years.
Mr. Menz is also Secretary of the
Bower School, Sports, and Cricket
Club Committees, and Trustee of the
Bower Institute. In business he is a
farmer and wood merchant. Home
address, Bower.


■
I , ()i sm
District Council of Saddleworth
DISTRICT COUNCIL OFFICE, SADDLEWORTH (CLERK’S
OFFICE).
851


" ■ ■ ~ — ]
History of Saddleworth
l he District Council of Saddleworth as at present con-
stituted contains the following towns: —Saddleworth,
Manoora, Marrabel, Waterloo, and Black Springs, all of
which are noted for their wheat and wool productions.
Saddleworth is situated some 65 miles north of Ade-
laide, in the centre of one of the most reliable wheat-
District Councils of Waterloo, Black Springs, Saddleworth,
and portion of the old District Council of Hamilton. In
the year 1868, under the Governor's Proclamation, the
Waterloo, Black Springs, Saddleworth, and Hamilton Dis-
tricts were inaugurated, and in 1890 the Black Springs area
was amalgamated with Waterloo. The various bodies car-
FIRST COUNCIL AFTER AMALGAMATION.
growing centres in South Australia, and is surrounded on
all sides by good reliable wheat-growing land.
The name Saddleworth was copied from the well-
known Saddleworth Lodge of Lancashire, England, prob-
ably because of the similarity of its situation. The area
of the District Council is in the vicinity of 140,000 acres.
The area covered represents what once comprised the
ried on with satisfactory results, until in May, 1932, .
further amalgamating scheme was introduced, with the
result that Waterloo and Saddleworth were combined
wholly, and the greater portion of Hamilton, to form
what is now known as the District Council of the Distric
of Saddleworth.
It will be interesting to mention the foundation mem
hers of each area, and they were as follows :


f ”“ “I
€* |
f W
::/zxz:
, % Jpf& *• ‘ £
v 4 n w *v
Waterloo. —Messrs. G. T. Parish, G. C. Gooch, F. Dnr-
wald, Samuel Dawson, and R. Davison, Junr.
Black Springs.—Messrs. R. Roberts, J. Williams, T. S.
Porter, J. Pascoe, and R. T. Glasson.
Saddleworth. —Messrs. Thomas McEwen, John Cook,
M. Manning*, H. Richardson, and E. Siekmann.
SADDLEWORTH SOLDIERS' MEMORIAL.
Hamilton.— Messrs. H. T. Morris, J. Downing, John
Dart, George Mugg, and William Pfitzner.
An interesting personality in the history of this district
is Air. Henry Montague Parken, who was for 41 years
Clerk and Overseer of Works for the District Council of
Waterloo, and during that term he attended every Council
meeting which was held. He was at one time Clerk of
the three districts —Apoinga, Waterloo, and Black Springs.
Mr. H. G. Parken, a son of the above, followed m his
father's footsteps as Clerk and Overseer in the Waterloo
Council, and continued in office until the amalgamation in
1932. He was then appointed Overseer of Works for the
DISTRICT COUNCIL OFFICE SITUATED AT WATERLOO
new district, and is still acting in that capacity at the
present time.
In the year 1932, when the amalgamation took place,
the following were elected to office: —Messrs. H. j. Dunn
(Chairman), J. H. Frost, A. J. Marrett, If. J. Williams.
W. H. Milde, H. E. Gray, B. H. Richardson, D. J. Slattery.


At the present time the members are : —Messrs. H. J. Dunn
(Chairman), J. H. Frost, A. J. Marrett, W. H. Milde, D. J.
Mattery, E. A. Noske, R. Roebuck. E. J. Williams.
The meetings of the Council are held on the fourth
Monde l n each m nth at Waterloo in the Chambers which
‘ "tM as a War Memo; >l at a cost of £360, £250
ui wu was granted by the Commonwealth Go erement.
The business office of the Council is situated in the Main
Stieet, Saddleworth, and as most of the farmers visit this
town for stock markets twice a month it has proved very
convenient.
The road work is carried out with the aid of three
complete plants, comprising tractors, rollers, graders, etc.,
one being stationed at Waterloo, one at Marrabel, and
the third at Saddleworth, and in this way unnecess n ry tra-
velling is dispensed with and the work evenly distributed.
The area of the district is 140,000 acres, with a capital
value of £627,660. and the assessment value £31,383, which,
with a general rate of 1/4 in the £, produces in the vicinity
of £2,000 annually.
Names of past members of the three Councils now
amalgamated, viz., Waterloo, Saddleworth. and Hamilton,
are:—Messrs. S. Dawson, W. Harris. G. J. I’Anson, W.
Duncan, W. Carter, C. Martin, F. L. Matthias, C. Miller,
T. W. Harvey, J. O'Brien, R. Murphy, W. Harris, IT.
Eckermann, F. Hogby, T. Kilderry, J. McNamara, J. Parr,
G. Behn, W. Aughey, R. Phillips, J. Olley, W. Kahl, C
Eckermann, B. Watts, C. Schmidt, T. Hodkins, J. White.
W. Watson, F. Wiech, J. Leaney, R. Roberts, C. Hentschke,
G. Williamson, A. W. Dunn, G. E. Maslin, I. Williams, E.
Evans, G. Benger, F. Schmidt, F. H. Rissen, E. Knowling,
jnr., W. Turner, B. Cockshell, W. Schmidt, E. Williams, H.
Schroeder, J. Slattery, E. D. Bowman, A. E. White, C. E.
Wiech, T. FAnson, F. Wiech, Jnr., W. Juers, P. O'Brien,
F. C. Schumacher, R. F. Hidlebrandt, E. Benger, C. Edgloe,
C. E. Siegert, C. A. Heinrich, H. J. G. Benger, G. F. Arbon,
E. H. Leaney, W. T. Frost, R. F. Kelly, A. J. Berriman, W.
Lindsay, J. C. Zeuner, F. Coleman, R. G. Townsend, Henry
Richardson, W. H. Bee, John Caskey, A. J. Caskey, August
Huppatz, John Fischer, J. H. Eckermann, J. W. Crawford,
D. H. Power, C. W. Gray, H. E. Gray, J. Jamieson, Jnr.,
F.-S. hatchen, A. R. Bagshaw, H. Morris, J. Dart, J. Winde-
bank, A. Stief, J. Marlow, T. Ryan, W. Pfitzner, G. Poys-
den, J. J. O'Dea, J. Hyde, E. Wurst, R. Maxwell, R. Mar-
low, C. N. Lucas, P. O'Brien, C. E. Duldig, T. Michalannev.
J. G. Wurst, W. Eckermann, T. Marlow, R. Ellis, H.
Rowett, B. H. Richardson.


4 jmg
m lr .
FREDERICK COLEMAN, J.P.
(Chairman, District Council of Saddlcworth)
Born at “Hazeleigh,” near Saddle-
worth, 12th July, 1865. Educated at
Friends Schools at Croydon, Ackworth
and York, England, and two years at
Adelaide University (science course).
Mr. Coleman has served in the Coun-
cil for 5 years, being Chairman for 4
\ ears, and has been a resident of the
district for 43 years. He is an in-
augural member of the Midland Agri-
cultural Society, and one of the hist
Presidents; first Secretary of Local
Agricultural Bureau, and a life mem-
ber; Chairman for several years of the
School Board of Advice, and a Justice
of the Peace for 30 tears. He was
President of the Saddlcworth Institute,
and is a present Trustee; a member
of the Saddlcworth Repatriation,
Recreation Ground and Centenary
Celebration Committees; member and
twice Chairman of the Advisory Board
of Agriculture and member of the
Agricultural Settlement Committee of
1930. He was for many years a mem-
ber of the Council of the Royal Agri-
cultural Society, and a member
of the Governing Council Rose-
worthy Agricultural College. In
business he is a farmer, wheat
grower, and breeder of Jersey cattle.
Mr. Coleman is a son of the late
Arthur Coleman, J.P., who came out
to Australia in the barque “Winches-
ter” in 1838, and settled at Saddle-
worth in 1856 at “Hazeleigh,” and of
Lucy his wife (nee May) who came
out to Australia with her parents in
the ship “Anna Robertson” in 1839,
and settled at Mt. Barker, the May
family hemp- one of the earliest set-
tlers in that district. The late Mr.
Arthur Coleman died in 1867, and the
late Mrs. Coleman died in 1926 in her
93rd year. Mr. Coleman married Miss
Helen G. Robson, of Hectorville, and
has-a family of six, two sons and four
daughters. The two sons both hold
diplomas at Roseworthy College, and
are working on the farm at Tuela,
Saddlcworth. Mr. Coleman has two
daughters certificated nurses, one a
teacher and one managing the dairy on
the farm. Home address, “Tuela,”
Saddlcworth.
CHAIRMAN H. J. DUNN.
(District Council of Saddlcworth.)
Born at Barton Hill, Black Springs,
October 10th, 1872, and educated at
Black Springs Public School. Mr.
Dunn has served in the Council for
33 years, and has only been absent
from Council meetings on five oc-
casions during this period. He has
been a resident of the district for 64
years, and for 26 years was Chairman
Waterloo District Council, and 4 years
Chairman of Saddlcworth District
Council since amalgamation. He is
an agricuturalist and grazier, and
member of the Oddfellows’ Lodge.
Mr. Dunn is the proprietor of Barton
Hill Stud Merino Elock, which was
founded in 1925; President and
Treasurer of Black Springs Hall since
the erection in 1912 ; 25 years Trustee
of Black Springs Methodist Church;
and member of the Riverton District
Soldiers’ Memorial Hospital since its
inception. Home address, Barton Hill,
Black, Springs.


: I
\
jJBy 'Jp
g. f - j|^
■Kg
ROBERT GEORGE TOWNSEND
(Past Chairman, District Council of
Saddleworth)
Born at Coghill’s Creek, near Sad-
dleworth, 22nd July, 1868, and edu-
cated at Saddleworth Public School.
Mr. Townsend served for a term in
the Council, and was Chairman for one
year. He has been a resident of the
district practically the whole of his
life, several years President of the
Saddleworth Branch Liberal Union,
member of the Agricultural Bureau
and a member of the Committee of
the Midland Agricultural Society. He
is a farmer, and a member of the
Oddfellows’ Manchester Unity Lodge.
He plays bowls. Home address, Sad-
dleworth.
PAST COUNCILLOR ALBERT RICHARD
BAGSHAW.
(District Council of Saddleworth.)
Born at Urania. May 13th, 1887, and
educated at Urania Public School. Mr.
Bagshaw served in the Council 4
years, 1928-32, and has resided in the
district 9 years. He is a farmer, mem-
ber of the Rechabite Lodge, President
of the Midland Agricultural Society,
an office he has held for six years,
member of the Riverton Hospital’
Board and Director of the Electric
Light Co., \A oodside. Mr. Bagshaw
produces approximately 6,000 bags or
wheat annually off his farm at
“Hazeleigh,” Saddleworth, and has
been keenly interested in shows for
many years, and has owned hunters
prominent amongst whom were Select,
Huntsmen, Monoplane, Peace Loan,'
and Wait and See, all prize takers' at
the Adelaide Royal Show. He is a
keen cricketer, and was Captain of
Saddleworth Cricket Club for 5 years.
He has played football for Pt. Vic-
toria and Urania. Home address,
“Hazeleigh,” Saddleworth.
PAST COUNCILLOR THOMAS PLESTED
PANSON.
(District Council of Saddleworth.)
Born at One Tree Hill, May 22nd
1855. Mr. TAnson was a member oi
Waterloo District Council for 19 years,
and on several occasions represented
that body at Local Government Meet
ings. He was a keen advocate fo
local telephone service, railway facili-
ties, bridges, etc. Mr. FAnson supplied
remounts for India, which were bred
on his property. Business, farmer.
He is also closely allied with the


/ . * N '' I
j, " - •
■Ik ,•?**•
Methodist Church, having been Cir-
cuit Steward, Treasurer, Trustee, and
local Preacher for many years, and he
has been a resident of the district for
16 years. Home address, Steclton.
COUNCILLOR WILHELM HEINRICH
MILDE
(District Council of Saddleworth)
Born at Steel ton, 4th September,
1871, and educated at Carlsruhe Pri-
vate School. He has served in the
Council for 13 years, and been a tesi-
dent of the district for the whole of
his life. Business, farmer. Mr. Milde
is one of the district’s most thorough
and successful wheat farmers. Home
address, Steelton.
COUNCILLOR ARTHUR JAMES
MARRETT
(District Council of Saddleworth)
Born at Salisbury, January 7th,
1897, and educated at Modbury and
Northfield Public Schools. Mr. Mar-
rett has been a member of the Coun-
cil for 4 years, and a resident of the
district for fl years. He is a keen
cricketer, and served 3J years on active
service with the A.I.F. Mr. Marrett
is one of the State’s foremost Jersey
cattle breeders, and has taken many
first prizes at the Adelaide Royal
Show. Home address, Saddleworth.
PAST COUNCILLOR THE LATE JOSEPH
HENRY FROST, J.P.
(District Council of Saddleworth.)
Born at Park Hill, Manoora, 20th
October, 1856, and educated at Man-
oora. Mr. Frost gave long service in
District Council duties, having been
a member of Saddleworth Council for
31 years, Chairman for 19 years, and a
member of Balaklava Council for 1
vears, and Chairman for 2 years.
He was a resident of the dis-
trict for GO years, 32 years a member
of Midland Agricultural Society.
President for 14 years, 40 years a
Justice of the Peace, 10 years a mem-
ber of the Executive of the Local
Government Association, and a mem-
ber of the United Ancient Order of
Druids Lodge. During Mr. Frost's 31
years' service in the Council, he did
a vast amount of work for the welfare
of the district. His sports were
cricket and all athletic sports.


"* ' * !
■ -v I' ! |pi P® ' $11
iL,
COUNCILLOR RAMSDEN ROEBUCK
(District Council of Saddleworth)
Born at Mt. Mary, 2nd July, 1887, and
educated at Mt. Mary Public School.
Mr. Roebuck has served in the Coun-
cil for 4 years, and been 27 years a
resident of the district. He is Chair-
man of the Buchanan School Commit-
tee, interested in all matters for the
benefit of the town, and fond of all
sport, particularly tennis and foot-
ball. Home address, Buchanan, via
Eudunda.
COUNCILLOR DANIEL JOHN
SLATTERY, J.P.
(District Council of Saddleworth.)
Born at Fords, 24th June, 1886, and
educated at Waterloo Public School
and Christian Brothers' College, Ade-
laide. Mr. Slattery has represented
Waterloo \\ ard in the Council for 20
years, and has been a resident of the
district for the past 46 years. He has
been Chairman of the Waterloo School
Committee for 20 years. Councillor
Slattery has taken a keen interest in
the welfare of the town and district.
In his younger days he was a brilliant
athlete, and has won over 15 gold
medals for running, winning 4 times
the 100 yards championship. I4e
played football for West Adelaide
League Team 1911 and 1912, also
played at Kapunda, Terowie, and
Manoora. He is a great coursing
enthusiast.
COUNCILLOR ERNST ALBERT NOSKE
(District Council of Saddleworth.)
Born at Lyndoch,' 24th March, 1891,
and educated at Lyndoch Public
School. Service in Council, 2 years. 1-
years a resident of the district. Busi
ness, wheat and sheep farmer. Hi
sport is the racing- of jumping horses
and he has been connected with brass
bands for 30 years. Mr. Noske is ;
prosperous farmer in Manoora, and k
interested in all local matters for the
welfare of the district.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE FRIEBE
(District Council of Saddleworth)
Born at Saddleworth, 18th Decern
her, 1883, and educated at Saddlewortl
Public School. Mr. Friebe has beet
a member of the Council for one year
and a resident of the district the whok
of his life. He is a baker, and was ;
keen footballer in his early days, bu
now plays bowls. He is interested it
town. Home address, Saddleworth.


BBjSylli* ,« I V , ial
|Bf If m*
1/
*
? *5W, i
f
COUNCILLOR EDWARD JOHN
WILLIAMS
(District Council of Saddleworth)
Born at Marrabcl, 11th August,
1876, and educated at Rice’s Creek,
Tothill’s Belt and Tothill’s Creek
Public Schools. Mr. Williams has
served in the Council for 35 years, and
has been a resident of the district for
the whole of his life. Business, far-
mer. He is Secretary of the Mairabel
Sports, and is keenly interested in
coursing, and won the Derby and
Oaks in 1911, and other good stakes.
Mr. Williams is a prominent farmer at
Tothill’s Creek, and is highly respected
in that area. He was a member of the
deputation that waited on the Gov-
ernment with reference to the railway
siding at Brennan. Home address,
Tothill’s Creek.
THE LATE HENRY MONTAGUE
PARKEN
(Past District Clerk, District Council of
Waterloo)
Born at Belhurbet, Ireland, Mr.
Barken came out to Melbourne in
1852, and after a two years’ sojourn
returned to England, only to come
back to South Australia in 1855.
Shortly after his arrival he went to
the Steelton district, where, for some
years, he was in charge of a school,
and when the District Council of
Waterloo was proclaimed in 1868, he
was appointed Clerk. In 1871 he was
appointed Clerk of the adjoining Dis-
trict of Apoinga, and for one year he
filled the position of Clerk to three
Councils: the above two, and Black
Springs District Council, and the lat-
ter was amalgamated with the Water-
loo District Council. At his retire-
ment in 1009, Mr. Parken had served
the Waterloo District Council for 41
years, and the Apoinga 1 )istrict Coun-
cil for 32 years. At the time of his
retirement both Councils gave practi-
cal proof of their appreciation of the
services which he had rendered, and
the Chairman of the Apoinga District
Council, Mr. W. G. Hawkes, referred
with feeling terms the loss the Coun-
cil had sustained. Tie stated that the
late Clerk had served the Council with
all that was best in a public servant;
his unerring efficiency in his duties,
his uniform courtesy, urbanity, and
modesty, and his wide range of ex-
perience and knowledge of District
Council work had won for him the es-
teem of the Council.
GEORGE CRAWFORD
(District Clerk, District Council of
Saddleworth)
Mr. Crawford was appointed to
office in the old District Council of
Saddleworth in 1930, and at the time
of the amalgamation was re-appointed
for the new district. He has been a
resident of the Saddleworth district
for almost 60 years, and has taken a
keen interest in the welfare of the
town and district, having been for
many years a Committeeman for the
Local Institute, and a member of the
Board of Management of the Riverton
District Soldiers’ Memorial Hospital
since its inception. He has also taken
a keen interest in all sports in, the dis-
trict, having been Secretary to the
local Football Club for several vears,


■is#:, j’ .^B(hW^5^T, . *
s ''
WBL ■ 11
BMWBBb ■■ i'-^^^m
HpHHK ■
Jf
m m
and President of the Cricket Club. He
is, now a very keen bowler, and is also
interested in the welfare of the Mid-
land Agricultural Society.
GEORGE ALFRED CRAWFORD
(Assistant District Clerk, District Council of
Saddleworth)
Pie is a son of the present Clerk,
Mr. Geo. Crawford, and has since the
amalgamation in 1932, assisted in the
discharge of the Council duties, acting
in the capacity of Assistant Clerk.
Born at Saddleworth on the 26th day
of March, 1912, he received his early
education at the Saddleworth Public
School, after which he attended the
Riverton High School for a period of
d years. At the age of 18 years, he
was elected Secretary to the Midland
Agricultural Society, and claims that
he holds the record for being the
youngest Show Secretary. He still
holds that office. He is a very keen
sportsman, and has rendered valuable
service to the Saddleworth Tennis and
Football Clubs, having been Captain
of both at different times.
HENRY GOMPERTZ PARKEN
(Overseer of Roads, District Council of
Saddleworth)
Mr. Parken is the son of the late
Mr. H. M. Parken, former Clerk of
the District Council of Waterloo. He
was born at the school residence,
Steelton, where his father was teach-
ing-, and obtained his education at
Karlsruhe and AA aterloo Schools. Bv
association with his father in the af-
fairs of the Council, he subsequently,
on the retirement of his father in 190!),
was found competent to carry on the
duties of Clerk and Overseer to the
District Council of \A aterloo. These
positions he filled until the araalga
mation of the A\ aterloo, Saddleworth.
and part of the Hamilton District
Councils in the year 1932, when he
was appointed Overseer of Roads to
the District Council of Saddleworth,
which position he still holds.
860


District Council of Salisbury


History of Salisbury
Under the Local Government Re-Arrangement Act,
1929-1931, the District Council of Salisbury came into
existence on July Ist. 1933, by the union of practically the
w hole of the District of \ atala North, about three-fifths
of Munno Para West, and a small portion of Teatree Gully
District.
Its area is approximately 130 square miles; its bounda-
ries extend from the Dry Creek Abattoirs railway on the
south, along the coastline from the North Arm to Port
Gawler, thence along the Gawler River in an easterly direc-
tion for about 12 miles, and then in a south-easterly direc-
tion, striking the Main North Road just a little below
Smithfield ; from there the boundary continues along this
highway until it reaches the Little Para River, and here
the district widens, and the boundary extends to the top
of the Para Hills towards Modbury, with the exception of
this small part all the rest is on what is known as part of
the Adelaide Plains. The district is principally agricultural
and horticultural; the central town of the district bears
the same name as the District, and is only 12J miles from
Adelaide, and was named after Salisbury, the capital of
Wiltshire in England.
Salisbury is a junction station linking up the Red Hill
line and the Main North line. The Little Para River
emerges from the hills about three miles east, and winds
its way in the bed of an old-time river toward the sea.
On the rich alluvial flats below ordinary land level, and
protected from the wind, thrive the orange groves, which
have made Salisbury noted, for the luscious fruit from this
locality is nowhere excelled.
The Parafield Aerodrome, one of the finest in
the Commonwealth, is within the district, and the
level and well-drained areas make it perfect for
landing and taking off. At the extreme southern
end of the district are the Metropolitan and Export
Abattoirs and the principal sheep and cattle markets
of the State. The coastline on the west is chiefly man-
grove swamp, but this otherwise useless area is now found
to be ideal for solar evaporation of sea water, and the
Imperial Chemical Industries of Australia and New Zea-
land Ltd. are constructing' huge basins extending for
about eight miles, in connection with their alkali works.
St. Hilda is the only part of the coastline used as a pleasure
resort, and is noted for its crabbing grounds.
The Council at present consists of eight wards with
nine Councillors as follows:—John Henry Koehne, Salis-
bury Ward; Gordon Stanley Jenkins, Salisbury Ward:
Andrew Thomas Goodall, East Ward; John William Ship
ton. Pooraka Ward; Harold Lockheart Martin, West
Ward; Arnold Godfrey Jenkins, St. Hilda Ward (Chair
man); Albert John Taylor, Virginia Ward; John Henry
Winter Griffiths, Penfield Ward; Harold James White,
North Salisbury Ward. Ernest J. Brown is' District Clerk,
and William Allen Hunter, M.8.. Officer of Health.


’- Hll
■aK%SNy. , -v , *mt¥? '• * ‘W
B ■.
I
J$t#y >
'
Mllll l>; : JKHB|
' :■ ' " /'■ ' ; ' >;,
THE LATE FREDERICK HEINRICH
KUHLMANN.
(Ex-chairman, Salisbury District Council)
Born at Kingsford, near Gawler, 4th
October, 1870, and educated at the
Saddleworth Public School. The late
Air. Kuhlmann was elected to the Dis-
trict Council of Yatala North in 1908,
and continued for 7 years, was elected
Chairman in 1910-12, and was for 27
years a resident of the district. He
was a horticulturist, hotelkeeper, “Old
Spot” Hotel, Little Para, and proprie-
tor of Little Para Nursery and
Orangery. He was also the instigator
of the recreation reserve at Salisbury.
He was for 44 years a member of the
Kapunda Oddfellows’ Lodge, 33 years
a member of the Salisbury Odd-
fellows’ Lodge and a foundation mem-
ber, 39 years a member of the Com-
mercial Lodge, and for a number of
years of the Salisbury Freemasons'
and Gawler Mark Lodges. He was a
keen Municipalist and was always
eager to further the interest of the
district that he represented.
PAST COUNCILLOR FREDERICK
CHARLES FLEET.
(Salisbury District Council.)
Born at Littlehampton, S.A., and
educated at the Mt. Barker Public
School. Mr. Fleet held office in Salis-
bury Council for one year, was Chair-
man of Yatala North Council from
1914-19, and a member for six years.
He has been a resident of the district
for 24 years, and is a Committeeman
of the Salisbury Institute, Recreation
Park, Literary Society, Agricultural
Bureau, Cricket, Football and Rifle
Clubs, also a member of the School
Committee. Business, Nurseryman.
He is a member of the Rechabite
Lodge and Superintendent of , the
Juvenile Tent. He volunteered for
active service and was rejected five
times. Mr. Fleet commenced work
when 11 years of age at Mt. Barker
Springs and later went to Crystal
Brook and to Hopetoun, \ ictoria, in
1893, and was a pioneer in opening up
the mallee country at Lascelles. After
about 20 years in that district he sold
his farm and came to reside in Salis-
bury in 1911.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM ALEXANDER
TOUGH, J.P.
(District Council of Salisbury)
Born at Hawthorn, Glenferrie, Vic.
4th March, 1906, and educated at Abat


iHRL JP 1 * %
• IJfrJ ...
wj? VEUr % *
toirs Public School, Adelaide High
School, and School of Mines. Mr.
Tough arrived in South Australia, 13th
April, 1911. He has served in the
Council for 7 years, and resided in the
district for 25 years, and was first
Treasurer and later President of
Pooraka Institute. He is a civil ser-
vant and member of the Sir William
Robinson, No. 21, U.A.O.D. In sport
he likes fishing, shooting, motoring,
golf, and tennis. He introduced Cac-
toblastis Cactorum and Indian Cochi-
neal (Dactylopius Indicus) into South
Australia from Queensland for the
purpose of the biological control of
prickly-pear on his farm “Culgoa” at
Pooraka. Home address, Bridge Road,
Pooraka.
COUNCILLOR A. G. JENKINS
(District Council of Salisbury)


District Council of Snowtown


History of Snowtown
Snowtown was named after a Mr. Snow, who was
Private Secretary to the Governor of South Australia in
1887, in which year the district was proclaimed. It is
situated 90 miles from Adelaide and is on the route selected
for the broad-gauge railway from Salisbury to Port
Augusta. This railway is complete as far as Snowtown,
and there is a good daily service to and from Adelaide.
In addition, the railway from Brinkworth to Wallaroo
passes through the district, which Was amongst the first
settled in the lower north, and which has an area of 466
square miles, divided into five Wards, namely—Barunga,
Boucaut, Cameron, Everard, and Snowtown.
Snowtown is the centre of a large and productive area
of country. During 1921 the Hummocks Station was pur-
chased by the Government, and settled under the Returned
Soldiers’ Land Settlement Act. This brought about 20,000
acres of good wheat land under cultivation.
The salt industry is an important one, and is established
on Lake Bumbunga and Lake Curtis. Quantities of salt
are harvested every year, supplying employment for a large
number of men. The wheat and salt carting involves
heavy wear on the roads, the upkeep of which is becom-
ing a more difficult problem every year.
During the past ten years the district revenue has in-
creased from £2,870 to £6,916. The present capital value
(as far as can be ascertained) of ratable property is
£881,200, and the assessment value £44,060.
Following is a list of past members of the District
Council: —Messrs. W. Smith, J. Welke, C. S. R. Lovelock,
D. A. Nottle, W. E. Nicholls, W. R. Michael, J. T. Jamieson,
W. H. Hall, G. Adams, R. Uppill, J. Atkinson, M. M. Coffey,
G. Hill, G. Freebairn, S. Sleep, J. B. Coulthard, J. T. Brink-
ley, J. Haske, T. H. Coombe, P. H. Ottens, W. C. Jamieson,
H. Eyre, H. Craig, J. Hill, J. Ladyman, J. H. Nicholls, W.
Walton, F. Richards, I. Crawford, H. A. Stevens, R. P.
Uppill, J. W. Forrest, H. C. Graham, M. T. Newland, C.
Allen, Matheson, J. Green, E. Auburn, W. Higgs, J. R.
Dolling, Gravestocks, and C. A. Lamond.
Present members of Council: —J. H. Nicholls (Chair-
man), Councillors R. F. Brinkley, R. J. E. Cummins, G.
Adams, J. Hewitt, E. B. W. Gehan, J. B. Kirchner, L. R.
Clifford, A. E. Michael, T. W. Lee, C. H. Eyre (District
Clerk).


District Council of Spalding


■
•■■a., Jp
HISTORY OF SPALDING
i n C Uat ? 111 the Count y and Electoral District of Stan-
ley, lzs miles north from Adelaide, midway between Clare
and Jamestown, Spalding is one of the most prosperous
districts m the State, and occupies an area of 240 square
miles, the major portion of which is devoted to the growth
ot cereals. Much of this region is watered by the Hutt
and Hill Rivers, and the township is situated not far from
their junction with the River Broughton.
rheie aie a number of fine public and private build-
ings within the township, among which are the Institute
District Hall. Police Station. Public School, and several
churches. The private dwellings number 214.
The capital value of ratable property is £537,000 and
the assessment value £26,850. A rate'of 1/6 in the £
Gelds £2,011 5/4. The population of the entire district is
estimated at 900 persons, 275 of whom are ratepayers.
The following gentlemen have served the Council for
COUNCILLOR ROBERT LITHGOW
CANNON
(District Council of Spalding)
Born at Lanark, Scotland, 21st
April, 1900, and educated at Dalray
Higher Grade School, Scotland. Mr.
Cannon arrived in Australia, 20th Janu-
ary, 1921, and has served in the Coun-
cil for one year. He is a minister of
religion, and has resided in the dis-
trict for 2J years. His sports are golf
and tennis, and he served two years
in the Royal Navy during the war.
Home address, Spalding.
various periods since its inception until the present time:—
Messrs. H. McCallum, D. J. Campbell, D. J. Shane, W
Hinze, D. Work, D. A. Campbell, A. McAskill, P. Fahey, J
Hennessy, C. W. Smith, J. Maslin, J. Smith, W. Sommer-
ville, T. Sommerville, H. Page, T. J. Priess, J. Marron,
A. Brown, A. Low, 1). J. Low, E. E. Gill, R. F. Hughes
J. Davies, H. A. Parker, W. H. Pollard, J. O’Halloran, F.
Trengrove, A. Pluckrose (Clerk), J. Marron (Clerk),
W. Campbell (Clerk), O. V. Roberts, S. Trengrove, J,
McAskill, J. Sommerville, A. Dowd, P. M. Bunfield, A. Col-
lins, P. A. Hewish, W. Rankine, H. Page. F. Thorne, John
Gale, Senr., W. Stockmann.
The present Council consists of the following;—J. S.
Davies, “Munduney,” Spalding (Chairman), R. L. Cannon,
Spalding; F. F. Chomley, “North Dungaree,” Andrews; P.
W. Donnellan, Spalding; D. Pryde, Spalding; G. C. Siegert,
Spalding; M. Sommerville, Hilltown; and N. Cook (District
Clerk).'


District Council of Stirling


History of Stirling
I his district was proclaimed in 1883 and called Stirling.
Ihe first meeting of the Council was held on Saturday,
November 3rd, 1883. the Councillors present being:—
Messrs T. Brown, F. J. Atkinson, J. Halliday, W. Radford,
and Di. L. C. Stirling; Mr. Thomas Whibley being ap-
pointed Clerk. Dr. Stirling (afterwards Sir E.'C. Stirling)
was elected to the chair.
The Council controls an area of 19,840 acres. The
total length of main roads through the district is 17 miles
and disti ict roads 120 miles, the nearest point to Adelaide
being seven miles by road.
The first assessment to the end of June, 1884, was
fixed at 1/ in the £, yielding a revenue of~£3ol 17/. The
rating in 1922 was 1/3 in the £, yielding £2,270 4/. The
district has since been divided into three Wards.
The principal places within the district are Stirling
West, Aldgate, Bridgewater, and Mylor. There are several
large freestone quarries in the district, and the Kaolin Com-
pany have erected a large plant to treat the valuable “clay"
known to exist.
The following is a list, as far as can be ascertained
from the records, of past Councillors, in addition to those
mentioned above:—Messrs. C. N. Collison, C. Lewis, W. H.
Milford, P. Flannigan, W. Pole, D. Evans, W. Measday,
G. Rudd, W. Marchant, T. Brown, W. Tilling, H. J. Pink.
G. Rogers, W. Nichols, G. F. Cleland. H. W. Clark, F. C.
Andrewartha, O. E. K. Peterson, G. J. Smith. G. Brown, j.
H. Saunders, J. Nelson, W. P. Woolcock, H. S. Jamieson,
I. H. White, W. Chaplin, R. B. Williams, G. Pink, G
S. Williams, W. E. Halliday, W. Nicholls, D. Evans, R. H.
A. Lewis, F. R. Schumacher, and J. T. Train (Clerk).
Present members of Council : —W. Nicholls (Chair
man), Councillors P. G. Theodore, G. S. Williams, A. M
Ackland, M. F. Moran, P. G. Wescombe, R. H. A. Lewis,
L. A. Gore, H. S. Bennett (District Clerk), T. Oliver (Over-
seer) .
WILLIAM NICHOLLS.
(Chairman, District Council of Stirling.)
Born at the Burra, 6th April, 1867,
Mr. Nicholls has served in the Stirling
District Council for 40 years, and has
been a resident of the district for 42
years. He was for 10 years District
Clerk, 30 years Councillor, and 12 years
Chairman. In business he is a partner
of W. Nicholls & Son, Merchants and
Grinding Mills, Longwood. Mr.
Nicholls has been President of the
Longwood Institute since its inception
in 1903, and has been a life member of
the Agricultural Bureau of South Aus-
tralia since 1917. He is Past Master
of Sir Samuel Way Masonic Lodge,
No. 48, Stirling West, also a member
of the Rechabite Lodge. His sports
are cricket and bowls. His home
address is Longwood.


District Council of Streaky Bay
DISTRICT COUNCIL OFFICE.


«•«* F
"* f
m a, 2m. **SK* &hwKKtKW n
History of Streaky Bay
DISTRICT COUNCIL OF STREAKY BAY GROUP, 1926.
Top Row (left to right).—Councillors W. L. Schultz, C. P. Roberts, Miss J. C.
Fleming (Assistant Clerk), Councillor P. C. Roberts, Mr. C. C. Neale (Press Represent-
tative).
Bottom Row.—Councillors W. J. Williams, Thos. Mudge, W. A. Thompson (Chair-
an), Robt. Fleming (Clerk), and Councillor P. C. Anderson.


'r- ”
| , ; sf ''
f ■ l| | | I
JHP'flpji Sm ,, fflHMr'4 A JBrmk^
l&dPg >g%af** f f **l£&, fff 1R *V W< . . \ '
* i aL . B?'-- ■ i : - *-C - -
The District of Streaky Bay, which was established in
1888, was for many years the farthest outpost of Local
Bay. The District of Streaky Bay is situated on Eyre's
Peninsula, being about 475 road miles and 360 sea miles
GROUP OF STREAKY BAY COUNCIL, 1906.
Top Row (left to right).—Ex-Councillors Fred Barns, A. B. Smith, A. E. Lovegrove
Bottom Row.—R. Fleming (Clerk), John Speed (Chairman), Thos. Mudge.
Government in South Australia, and this distinction is now
enjoyed by its neighbour, the District Council of Murat
west of Adelaide. It was named Streaky Bay by Captain
Matthew Flinders on account of the streaky appearance of


its surface.
The seat of Local Government for the district is at
Flinders (Streaky Bay), which is 79 miles north-westerly
from Elliston and 184 miles north-westerly from Port Lin-
coln, and occupies an ideal position on the southern shores
of the inner harbour of Streaky Bay, known as Blanche
Port, and is sheltered from all northern and western gales
and rough seas by Gibson’s Peninsula, which separates
the harbour from the Southern Ocean. It was first sur-
veyed about 1868. The township is well laid out, and
commands a fine view over the waters of the harbour,
and like many other Eyre Peninsula towns is substantially
built of limestone, possesses many imposing public build-
ings and residences, and ranks second in size to Port Lin-
coln.
Other towns in the district are Wirrulla, Yantanabie,
Cungena, Capietha, Poochera, and Karcultaby, situated on
the railway line from Port Lincoln to Thevenard, Ceduna,
and Penong. There are also the towns of Yanera, situated
on the southern extremity of Sceales Bay, and Haslam, an
important shipping centre situated on the shores of Streaky
Bay, about twenty-seven miles northerly from Flinders.
General mixed farming, wool growing, sheep and cattle
raising, and dairying are carried on successfully through-
out the district, and these industries have become more
profitable and the conditions more congenial during recent
years through the introduction of superphosphates, im-
proved methods of cultivation, the provision of vermin-
proof fencing, the opening up of hundreds of miles of
roads, and better transport facilities generally.
The District Council of Streaky Bay controls an area
of 1.613,240 acres, which is the largest Local Government
area in the State of South Australia.
The capital value of the ratable property within the
district is set down at £1.054,745, with an annual assess-
ment value of £47,858.
A rate of 1/3 in the £. together with a lighting rate
of 3d. in the £ for the town of Flinders, yields £3,181 10/3
per annum.
The population of the District of Streaky Bay is
estimated at 2,240.
Names of past and present members of the District
Council of Streaky Bay are found in the following list:—
First Councillors appointed by the Government in 1888.
—Messrs. F. B. Bockelberg (first Chairman), J. A. hree-
man, R. A. Horn. C. L. Colley, C. T. Cotton. Messrs. Col-
ley and Cotton did not serve on the Council, so Messrs.
R. D. Anderson and W. T. S. Hewitson were appointed
in their stead.
The elected members of the Council following on the
first appointed Councillors were as follows : —Messrs. F.
B. Bockelberg, R. D. Anderson, John Lamb, D. C. Drever,
J. D. Murphy, J. R. Montgomerie, W. H. Betts, W. M.
Montgomerie, Thos. Mudge, Jas. Herreen, Geo. H. Pearce,
A. B. Smith, John Speed, Chas. Schlink, J. H. Wharfif. Hy.
Edwards, Jas. H. Cotton, John Thomas, Chas. B. Godlee,
D. P. Thomas, F. W. Campbell, Fred. Barns, T. M. Her-
reen, A. E. Lovegrove, W. A. Thompson, R. M. Lewis, P.
C. Anderson, W. L. Schulz, W. J. Williams, P. C. Roberts,
H. A. F. Betts, F. J. McEvoy, C. O. J. Boldin. G. P.
Roberts, C. L. Bagley, T. T. Talbot, H. J. Chewings, O. M.
Willcock. and A. P. Kenny.
The present Council consists of Messrs. P. C. Ander-
son (Chairman), W. J. Williams, P. C. Roberts, G. P.
Roberts, H. J. Chewings, O. M. Willcock, and A. P. Kenny,
representing Colley, Malangarie, Calca, Wirrulla, Chandada,
Flinders, and Perlubie Wards of the district respectively.
District Clerk, R. Fleming.
The past and present Chairmen and their periods of
chairmanship are as follows: —Messrs. F. B. Bockelberg,
1888-1889 and 1896-1897; W. H. Betts, 1890 to 1895: John
Speed, 1898 to 1918; A. B. Smith, 1919; H. A. F. Betts, i 920;
W. A. Thompson, 1921 to 1926; P. C. Anderson (present
Chairman), 1927 to 1936.
The District Clerks and their respective periods of
office are as follows: —H. W. Darby, 1888 to 1891; John
Mclnerney, 1891-1892; A. B. John, 1892 to 1894; W. t. S.
Hewitson, 1894 to 1897; John Thomas, 1897 to 1905; Robt.
Fleming (present Clerk), 1905 to 1936.


I
r ** s. ~
.# „ j *
* - v
\
THE LATE FEDOR BARON VON
BOCKELBERG.
(First Chairman of the District Council of
Streaky Bay.)
Born on the 9th March, 1832, in the
Fortress of Peisse, Silesia, and edu-
cated at the Military College at Pots-
dam. The late Mr. von Bockelberg
arrived in Australia in 1860, and was
appointed by the Government in 1888
as first Chairman of the Streaky Bay
District Council, and served until 1903.
He resided in the district for approxi-
mately 40 years, and was one of the
district’s first storekeepers and farm-
ers, He carried on until 1910,
when he retired from business activi-
ties. Early he took out naturalisation
papers, and was made a Justice of the
Peace for S.A. Prior to coming to
Australia Mr. von Bockelberg served
in the army. He rose to the rank of
Major in the Cavalry; he fought in the
Crimean War, and, after his arrival in
Australia, spent much of his early life
in the goldfields of Victoria. Lie died
at Fligh Cliff on 20th November, 1917,
at the age of 85 years.
PETER C. ANDERSON, J.P.
(Chairman, District Council of Streaky Bay.)
Born at Port Adelaide, 20th Feb-
ruary, 1890, Mr. Anderson was edu-
cated at Streaky Bay Public School
and Kyre College. He has had 16
years’ service in Council, being Chair-
man for 9 years. A resident of the dis-
trict for 30 years. Mr, Anderson is
also a Justice of the Peace and a mem-
iter of the Vermin Board. Business,
farmer and grazier. Member of the
Masonic Lodge. Sports, racing, ath-
letics, cricket, and local show events.
Mr. Anderson’s father settled in the
Streaky Bay district 70 years ago.
Home address, Yandra Station,
Streaky Bay.
PAST COUNCILLOR ROLAND MURRAY
LEWIS.
(District Council of Streaky Bay.)
Born at Gawler, 12th Septembei,
1875, and educated at Colton Public
School. Service in Council, 3 years.
Mr. Lewis has been a resident of the
district for 50 years. Business, farmer
Home address, Mortana.
COUNCILLOR AUSTIN PATRICK
KENNY.
(District Council of Streaky Bay.)
Mr. Kenny was born at Glen Kenny.
Colton, July 3rd, 1892, and educated
at Korkula School and Christian
Bros’. College. Service in Council


PBHMHMjff j|l *Q i
I I £1 I p pi
I
\
from July, 1935. lie has been 43 years
a resident of the district. Business,
Farmer. In 1875, Mr. Kenny's father
was the first man to select land in the
Hundred of Colton, and when the Hd.
of Scott was opened for selection in
1891 he came to reside in the Streaky
Bay district. Home address, Cool-
grana, Streaky Bay.
COUNCILLOR PERCY CUTHBERT
ROBERTS.
(District Council of Streaky Bay.)
Mr. Roberts was born at Adelaide,
October 19th, 1881, and educated at
Calca Public School. He has devoted
15 years’ service in Council, and been
49 years a resident of the district.
Business, farmer and grazier. Mr.
Roberts is interested in all general
sports. Home address, Calca.
W. A. THOMPSON.
(Past Councillor, District Council of Streaky
Bay.)
COUNCILLOR GORDON PATRICK
ROBERTS.
(District Council of Streaky Bay.)
Mr. Roberts was born at Streaky
Bay, Ist June, 1886, and educated at
Maryvale Private School and at home.
He has had II years’ service in Coun-
cil, and has been 49 years a resident
of the district. Business, Farmer and
Grazier. His sports are cricket, foot-
ball, golf, tennis, rifle shooting, and
racing. Home address, Petina, via
Streaky Bay.
H. A. BETTS.
(Past Councillor, District Council of Streaky
Bay.)
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM JOHN
WILLIAMS.
(District Council of Streaky Bay.)
Born at Curramulka, Y.P., 2nd July,
1878. Mr. A\ illiams was educated at
Curramulka Public School, and has
been 41 years a resident of the district.
Tie is President of the Progress Asso-
ciation and President of the Streaky
Bay Agricultural Association. Busi-
ness, Farmer and Grazier. Mr. Wil-
liams is a member of the Masonic and
horesters’ Lodges, and is interested in
all general sports. Home address.
Streaky Bay.


' J|'' ‘fcv-
b|L* Sm
• Jl IB 1
W. H. BETTS.
(Past Councillor, District Council of Streaky
Bay.)
COUNCILLOR HENRY JAMES
CHEWINGS.
(District Council of Streaky Bay.)
Born at Semaphore, 17th July, 1890,
and educated at Norwood Public and
High Schools. Mr. Chewings has had
3 years’ service in Council, he has been
8 years a resident of the district, and
is at present Secretary of Chandada
Branch, Agricultural Bureau. Busi-
ness, farmer. Sports, cricket and golf.
Mr. Chewings served 4 years with the
A.I.F. abroad on active service. Home
address, Chandada.
ROBERT FLEMING.
(Clerk and Overseer, District Council of
Streaky Bay.)
Born at Strathalbyn, 4th July, 187 5,
Mr. Fleming was educated at Glenelg.
Sturt Street, and Port Adelaide Public
Schools. Pie has 31 years’ service in
Council, and has been 43 years a resi-
dent of the district. Positions held:
District Clerk and Overseer, Sec-
retary of the Vermin Board, Secretary
of the Streaky Bay Hospital, President
of the Streaky Bay Institute and
Racing Club, P.M. Streaky Bay
Masonic Lodge, P.M. Streaky Bay
Mark Lodge, and P.Z. Streaky Bay
Royal Arch Chapter. Sports: In his
younger days he played cricket and
tennis. Home address, Streaky Bay.
JOHN LAMB.
(Past Councillor, District Council of Streaky
Bay.)




District Council of Tantanoola


History of Tantanoola
The township of this district is situated in the Hun-
dred of Hindmarsh, 325f miles south-east of Adelaide, and
was once a portion of Mayura Station. It is the second
TANTANOOLA CAVES.
Tantanoola Beauty Spot; well worth seeing; discovered about 5 years
ago; situated about 3 miles from Township of Tantanoola.
town of importance on the Mount Gambier to Beachport
line.
The locality was named after one of the three water-
courses which carried the flood waters towards the range
on the south side, from whence they found their way into
Lake Bonney, before reaching the sea. The name "Tan-
tanoola" is rather euphonious, and old residents affirm that
it is the native name for the peewit or magpie lark, but the
late Mr. Duncan Stewart, who was an authority on native
nomenclature, put the word as meaning "a place of meet-
ing," i.e., a sort of Caledonian gathering of the tribes,
where a general interchange of wives took place.
One of the first settlers of the township was the late
Mr. Aaron Lane, who built the first portion of the Tan-
tanoola Hotel, upon which is surmounted the famous
(mythical) Tantanoola tiger, which for many years was
the bane of hysterical women and native children, and gave
the locality a prominence which made it figure as an im-
portant place in South Australia.
Tantanoola, like many other of the south-eastern
drained lands, failed at first to come up to expectations,
and credit is due to the early pioneers, for this has been
overcome and the land is suitable for most agricultural
purposes. After 40 years of perseverance the district is
one of the most solid and prosperous of the sectional area
of the drained lands, and there are those who are optimistic
enough to think that the time is not far distant when the
place will become much more important.
The area of the entire district is 158 square miles, and
the capital value of ratable property is £379,360, assess-
ments value (1934-35) £18,968, which, with a rate of 1/6
in the £, yields £1,422 12/.
Amount of drainage assessment (1934-35) £2,164,
which, with a drainage rate of 1/ in the £, yields £lOB 4/.
The population of the town and district is estimated
at 1,154 persons, of whom 378 are ratepayers, and the
dwellings number 302.
Following is a list of past and present members of
the Council:—Messrs. J. Telfer, J. Mcßostie, J. Hay, J. A.
Hogan, J. Laird, J. Leslie, J. Corcoran, A. Talbot, A. F.
Telfer, W. Wehl, W. Johns, W. Wilson, H. Korner, H. E.
Hann, R. Kennedy, S. W. Hann, D. Kiely, D. F. Beaton,


J
\ . A. - ■
'** ***** ' ?.
#
*h ‘ v
* ■ ‘
\ H. Lane, C. Kiely, T. Kiely, T. Holloway, E. J. F.
\ltschwager, M. Hogan, F. W. Pegler, F. A. Telfer, G.
lodey, G. F. Ferguson. N. A. Cameron, T. Kennedy, G. E.
Tipping, W. R. Warren, J. P. Burchard, B. Bell, H. A.
\gnew, W. J. Goodes, A. Lane, and J. A. Lane.
Present members: —S. A. Dow (Chairman), H. R.
Hutchesson, F. Childs, K. W. Agnew, J. J. A. Altschwager,
and D. P. McNamee and James Corcoran (Clerk and Over-
seer of Works).
STANLEY ALEXANDER DOW
(Chairman, District Council of Tantanoola)
Mr. Dow was born at Naracooric,
April 27th, 1896, and educated at
Glencoe West Public School. He has
been a resident of the district for 33
vears, and a member of the Council for
5 years. Mr. Dow is also Director of
Glencoe District Co., Vice-President
of the Glencoe Branch R.S.A., and a
member of the School Committee. He
is a farmer, and his sports arc angling
and shooting. During the War he
served for 3d years on active service
with the A.I.F. in Egypt and France.
Home address, Glencoe West.
COUNCILLOR FRANK CHILDS
(District Council of Tantanoola)
Mr. Childs was born at Balhannah,
May 4th, 1888, and educated at Bal-
hannah Public School. He has been a
resident of the district for 33 years,
and a member of the Council for 2
years. He is also Managing Director
of Glencoe Co-operative Cheese and
Butter Co. Ltd., and Chairman of the
Glencoe School Committee and Pro-
ject Club. Mr. Childs at the age of
13 years moved with his parents to
the dairy farm of the late Hon. George
Riddoch of Koorine, and two years
later went to reside at Glencoe. In
1910 he purchased land at Glencoe,
where he has since successfully carried
on farming and dairying pursuits.
Home address, Glencoe.
PAST COUNCILLOR WILLIAM JOHN
BEATON.
(District Council of Tantanoola)
Born at Mt. Gambier, 10th August,
1869, and educated at Mt. Gambier
Public School. Mr. Beaton has had
41 years’ service with the Council,
during which period he has been Dis-
trict Clerk for 20 years, Councillor and
Chairman. He was the first President
of the Tantanoola Institute, and the
first Chairman, and afterwards Secre-
tary to the Tantanoola Butter, Cheese
and Produce Co., Ltd. Mr. Beaton
was also Secretary to the Tantanoola
Cricket, Football, and Athletic Clubs,
the Literary Society, and the Liberal
Union (then the F. & P.P. Union).
He has been Presiding Officer for
Commonwealth Elections ever since
Federation, Presiding Officer of State
Elections, and a member of the P.A.


■ ■ ■ '
, ,^v
• ■
wm S|piF -1
||»V *
gL. ■ -
‘ - H ■
JK v
«B|r 1i|||j '
■ W 40mm****>,
& : ' : ' S* * *■■ :: 4S s |p
’
and H. Society since its formation 50
years ago. He is a farmer, and is fond
of all sports, mainly cricket and foot-
ball. Home address, Tantanoola.
COUNCILLOR J. J. A. ALTSCHWAGER
(District Council of Tantanoola)
Mr. Altschwager was born at Tan-
tanoola, 7th June, 1891, and educated
at German Flat and Millicent Public
Schools. He has been a resident of
the district all his life, and a member
of the Council for 12 years. He is
also President of the Show Society,
the Tantanoola Institute Local Pro-
ject Club, and Tennis Club. Mr.
Alstschwager has been associated with
farming and grazing all his life, and
his sport is tennis. Home address,
Tantanoola.
COUNCILLOR KEITH WARLAND
AGNEW
(District Council of Tantanoola).
Mr. Agnew was born at Millicent,
December sth, 1897, and educated at
Glencoe Public School. He has been
a resident of the district for 30 years,
and a member of the Council for 5
years, including one year in defunct
Council of Mt. Gambier West. Mr.
Agnew is also President of the Glen-
coe Sub-branch R.S. and 5.1.L.A.,
Committeeman of the Glencoe Public
Hall, Incorp., and Hon. Secretary and
Committeeman of the Glencoe Sol-
diers’ Memorial. He is a farmer, and
during the War served from March
20th, 1916 to September 23rd, 1919,
with the 43rd Battalion, A.I.F. Home
address, Glencoe,
COUNCILLOR HAROLD REX
HUTCHESSON, J.P.
(District Council of Tantanoola)
Mr. Hutchesson was born at Milli
cent, June 30th, 1902, and educated at
Glencoe State School and Prince A 1
fred College. He has been a member
of Benara District Council for 8 years,
and the District Council of Tantanool;
for 4 years, and 15 years a resident of
the district. He has also been a jus
tice of the Peace and a member of the


<•> * :
JSIfr* ' •''
M :.|;v
n : "
' '^ m
Thyne Memorial Hospital Board. In
business he is a grazier. Home address,
Tantanoola.
JAMES CORCORAN
(District Clerk, District Council of
Tantanoola)
Mr. Corcoran was born at Mt.
Gambier, Ist October, 1885, and edu-
cated at Burrungull State School and
Mt. Gambier Grammar School. He
has been a resident of the district for
21 years, and in the service of the
Council for 13 years. He is also
President of the Tantanoola Pastoral,
Agricultural and Horticultural Society,
Vice-President of the Millicent Sub-
branch R.S. and 5.1. P.A.,.A., and of vari-
ous other local Societies. During the
War Mr. Corcoran served for 34 years
abroad with the 27th battalion, A.1.1S
in Egypt and France. Home address,
Tantanoola.
JOSEPH CARTHEW
(Ranger and Inspector, District Council of
Tantanoola.)
Born at Tantanoola, 9th February,
1884, and educated at the Tantanoola
Public School. Mr. Garth ew has
served in the Council for 12 years, and
has been a resident of the district for
49 years. He is Secretary of the Tan-
tanoola P.A. & H. Society, and his
home address is Tantanoola.




District Council of Tanunda


History of Tanunda
Tanunda is one of the most important districts in
the State, vine-growing being extensively carried on within
a small area. There are nearly 20 wineries producing
millions of gallons of wine annually. The township of
Tanunda ranks with the best in South Australia. There
are many line residences in the town, and the Councillors
have for many years adopted a vigorous policy of tree
daily.
The population—mostly of German origin—numbers
2,300 persons, and the unmistakable evidence of prosperity
which exists is characteristic of the race. The area of the
district is 36 square miles, and embraces the settlements
of Bethany (one of the first in the State), Krondorf,
Langmeil, Vinevale, and Hallet’s Valiev.
TANUNDA STREET VIEW, 1860.
planting in the streets. As a Centenary drive a committee
of townspeople has decided to beautify the southern
approach to the town by converting a long earth cutting
into a rockery, which is to be planted with suitable shrubs
and rockery plants. It is estimated that the cost will be
in the vicinity of £3OO.
The District Council was proclaimed in 1856, and the
township is well situated on the North Para River,
approximately 17 miles from Gawler, and 43 miles from'
Adelaide. Communication from Adelaide is by rail twice
The capital value of ratable property in the district
is £544,920. and assessment value, £27,246! Under Council
jurisdiction there are approximately eight and a half miles
of main road, and 65 miles of district roads.
The township has its own electric light plant, and
water is obtained from the Warren Reservoir. A recrea-
tion park occupies an extensive area, and contains a well-
graded oval, sown with couch grass, a tarred cycle track,
grand stand, show hall, tennis courts, bowling green of
seven rinks, hockey lawn, and club house.


■ ' ——
The Tanunda Club Hall, together with equipment, was
purchased by the residents for £2,750, and is now known
as the Tanunda Institute Memorial Hall.
The district is well known as a tourists' resort, and
has many places of interest, which are visited periodically
W. Graetz, J. E. Juttner, H. j. E. Grossman A H. Micolai,
H. G. Auricht, C. F. W. T. Tschirfig, H. J Goers P D.
Kaesler, J. A. Falkenberg, E. E. Schrapel, F. W. Grocke,
G F. B. Nettleback, F. W. Habich, W. Guisansky, J. G.
Auricht, A. G. Mitschke, F. E. Schwarz, H. Rossack, J. A.
by visitors from various parts of the Commonwealth.
" The following is a list of names of gentlemen who
have served the' Tanunda District Council for various
periods from its inception until the present time Messrs.
E E. Kleemann, C. Hoffmann, L. E. Hellmg, J. Basedow,
W. A. Ohlmyer, J. H. Walden, J. T. Stiller, R. H. Goerecke,
COUNCILLOR HERMANN ALFRED
JANTKE.
(District Council of Tanunda.)
Mr. Jantke was born at Light’s
Pass, near Nuriootpa, 16th February,
1880, and educated at Light’s Pass and
Bethany Schools. He has been a mem-
ber of the Tanunda Council since 1927,
and is Secretary to the Vine Vale
School Committee. By occupation,
Mr. Jantke is a Gardener.
Pfeiffer, A. Schultz, C. W. H. Lake, J. H. A. Schultz, and
W. H. Altmann. n . .
The present Council is Messrs. F. Hombuig (Chair
man), B. H. Teusner, H. W. Hoffmann, H. A. Jantke, H. B.
Lindner, and C. Goers (District Clerk).
COUNCILLOR HEINRICH BENJAMIN
LINDNER.
(District Council of ianunda.)
Mr. Lindner was born at 1 anunda,
15th April, 1882, and educated there.
He has served in the Council for 16
years, and has been a resident of the
district all his life. Mr. Lindner is a
Gardener by occupation.
STREET SCENE, TANUNDA, 1936.


+% :: -
CHAIRMAN FRITZ HOMBURG.
(District Council of Tanunda.)
Mr. Homburg was born at Dulwich
in 1888, and is a son of the late Mr.
Justice R. Homburg, who in the early
pioneer days came to South Australia
from Germany, and later represented
the district of Murray in the House of
Assembly for over 20 years, until his
appointment to a Judicial position in
the Supreme Court of South Australia.
Mr. Homburg has been a resident of
the Tanunda district for 21 years. Lie
has been Chairman of the District
Council for 18 years, and other posi-
tions held by him are President of the
Institute, Secretary of the Tanunda
Band Competition, Conductor of the
Tanunda Liedertafel, and a member of
the Show Committee. His present busi-
ness is Auctioneer and Estate Agent.
Mr. Homburg has always taken a keen
interest in all sport. He came from a
musical family, and for many years
studied the 'cello under Mr. H.
Kugelberg, winning the Elder Scholar-
ship at the Conservatorium of Music,
Adelaide. About 1924 he formed the
present Tanunda Liedertafel, which, in
addition to giving a number of public
performances, has done extensive
broadcasting, both over South Austra-
lian and National Stations.
COUNCILLOR BERTHOLD HERBERT
TEUSNER LL.B.
(District Council of Tanunda.)
Mr. Tcusner was born at Rosedale,
South Australia, 16th May, 1907, and
educated at Tanunda School, Gawler
High School, Immanuel College, and
the Adelaide University. Mr. Teusner
was elected a member of the Tanunda
District Council in 1936. He is also
Hon. Secretary of the Tanunda Insti-
tute, Tanunda Philatelic Society, and
Immanuel College and Seminary Incor-
porated. In business he is a Solicitor,
and in sport is Secretary of the
Tanunda Gymnasium Club.
COUNCILLOR HERBERT WALTER
HOFFMANN.
(District Council of Tanunda.)
Mr. Hoffmann was born at Tanunda,
28th September, 1896, and educated
there. He has been a member of the
Tanunda District Council for 6 years,
and a resident of the district all his
life. Mr. Hoffmann is interested in
growing fruit trees, vines, and flowers,
and also in manufacturing artificial
manure. His sport is golf.
DISTRICT CLERK AND OVERSEER,
C. GOERS.
(District Council of Tanunda.)
Mr. Goers has been a resident o
Tanunda for 63 years, and has hek
the position of Clerk of the Distric
Council for 24 years. Until recent!}
he was also Manager of the Baross.
News Ltd. For 2/ years he has beei
Secretary of Tanunda ATI. & ]•
Society, and Secretary of tin,
S.A.G.LhO.O.F. Loyal Tanunda Lodge
No. 1564 since 190/. He was Gram
Master of the Order for the State ii
1915. Mr. Goers has at all time:-
actively interested himself in am
movement for the welfare of tin
distiict. He is a very keen bowler
and has been President of the Tanund.
Bowling Club since 1932.


District Council of Tatiara


History of Tatiara
Ten years prior to the formation of this District
Council, that is to say, in the year 1877. there existed two
separate Councils, namely, the District Council of Tatiara
and the District Council of Wirrega. These two were
amalgamated and carried on under the style of the District
Council of Tatiara, and now comprises the following Hun-
dreds ; —Tatiara, Wirrega, Stirling, Pendleton, Laffer,
Parsons, Cannawigra, Senior, Beeamma, Geegeela, being
portion of the County of Buckingham, with a total area
of 1.800 square miles, the capital value of which is
£1,390,420, and the assessment value £69,521. A total rate
of 1/- in the £ yields annually £3,476.
The principal and post town of the district is Border-
town, established in 1852, and is situated on the Interstate
railway, 183 miles from Adelaide. Bordertown was at one
time supposed to be located on the border dividing Victoria
from South Australia, and was the stopping place of
Tolmer’s gold escort party carrying gold from the famous
Victorian goldfields—-the derivation of the name is there-
fore obvious.
The other towns within the district are Mundalla, six
miles west of Bordertown, in a large agricultural centre,
and which was established in 1872; Wolseley. nine miles
east of Bordertown, is the railway transhipping station for
the south-eastern narrow gauge system; and Keith, 28
miles north-west of Bordertown, on the Interstate rail-
way.
A tract of country running through the centre of the
district from east to west containing about 200 square miles
of first-class soil, which produces, under modern systems
of farming, up to 50 bushels of wheat per acre, and is most
profitably used for mixed farming.
The rest of the area is occupied for pastoral purposes,
principally for sheep, and produces excellent wool.
The district is a very safe one, a drought being prac-
tically unknown, and the climate is delightfully clear and
healthy, and is enjoyed by a population of 3.500 persons.
Plantations have been established in honour of sol-
diers at each town; memorial pedestals have been erected
at Mundalla, Wolseley, and Keith; and a Soldiers’ Memo-
rial Hospital has been built at Bordertown. which was
opened free of debt in 1924.
The Council has one of the most up-to-date and com-
plete road-making plants in the State, and the modern
system of road-making is being carried out successfully,
and the Councillors and officers are keenly interested in
their work.
Following is a list of past and present members of
the District Council: —
Past.—Messrs. A. L. Fry, J. R. Hutchinson, J. Kennedy.
H. P. Knight, W. Ballinger, G. Milne, J. Hay, G. Steer,
D. Makin, L. L. Daenke, T. Stanton, J. E. Staude, G.
Butler, T. J. Makin, R. R. Penny, A. A. Fisher, J.
Cowan, R. W. R. Hunt, A. J. C. Assheton, T. J. Makin.
j. B. Makin. C. H. W. Weise, D. Stoddart, W. H. Hunt,
j. C. Guy, J. A. Rankine, W. Butler, P. Marshall, F. R.
Dinning, C. J. Klar, G. Martlew, W. J. Thomson. J. 1
Ryan, and A. W. Shannon.
Present.—J. C. Haynes (Chairman), J. J. Heffernan, 1
Hunt, H. F. A. Ross, E. H Fisher, G. A. Dinning, L. 1
Densley, B. J. D. Mcßain, E. J. Jarrett, and T. H. Tin]
Officers. —U. B. Patterson (District Clerk), E. W. Venn
(Overseer of Works), J. Sabey (Inspector), Dr. E. 1
Broadbent (Health Officer).


#' jKii
\iiM ' ' -’*r'
"*j|» '
*'■- 9|i:
1 * - ' l«p ■ J \$k,
* ■* - I
■
mk
i \
I
» , #*»«" f _
V ,. „>
* # /
, . L
4 /k
JAMES CROFTS HAYNES
(Chairman, District Council of latiara)
Mr. Haynes was born at Border-
town, 7th September, 1881, and edu-
cated at Pooginnigoric and Border-
town Public Schools. He has been a
resident of the district for 55 years,
and a member of the Council for 14
years. He is also a member of die
Tatiara Masonic Lodge, No. 68. Mr.
Haynes is a farmer, and is interested
in all sports. Home address, Border-
town.
COUNCILLOR JOHN JOSEPH
HEFFERNAN.
(District Council of Tatiara)
Mr. Heffernan was born at Tailem
Bend, 18th May, 1890, and educated
at Christian Brothers’ College, Ade-
laide. He has been a resident of the
district for 25 years, and a member
of the Council for one year, represent-
ing Bordertown Ward. He is a Patron
of the Bordertown Football and
Cricket Clubs, and Secretary of the
Tatiara Branch R.S.S.I.L.A. Mr.
Heffernan is a Licenced Victualler,
and during the \yar served for three
years abroad with the 10th Battalion,
A.1.F., and was awarded the Military
Medal. Home address, Bordertown.
COUNCILOR THOMAS HENRY TINK
(District Council of Tatiara)
Mr. Tink was born at Bletchley,
24th February, 1879, and educated at
Miriam, Victoria. He has been a resi-
dent of the district for 54 years, and
a member of the Council for one year,
representing Wolseley Ward. Mr.
Tink is also President of the Service-
ton Branch Victorian Farmers’ Union,
and Chairman of the Serviceton North
School Committee. He is a farmer
and grazier, and his sport is racing,
Home address, Serviceton.
COUNCILLOR BENJAMIN JOHN
DAVIDSON McBAIN
(District Council of Tatiara)
Mr. Mcßain was born at Robe, 16th
May, 1886, and educated at Mt. Ben-
son and Robe Public Schools. He has
been a resident of the district for 8
years, and a member of the Council
for 2 years, representing Stirling
Ward. Mr. Mcßain is also a member
of the Tatiara Masonic Lodge, No. 68,


V
Ji| Mp
|f jl
i 1 I WW» /» . I
I *■• t * £
1 A-i 1
•» •»■--.
5'?’o : •-- "* M ' i' |J
I
'% x |pF «wy«
I
( ,,r y j
1 ? *?-i '. .4
• v Lj
J > * ■ < jPL ' <&nH|
-A|f- ml
and is fond of all sports. In business
he is a pastoralist, and his home ad-
dress is Mount Monster, Keith, S.E.
COUNCILLOR ALLAN H. F. ROSS.
(District Council of Tatiara)
Mr. Ross was born at Naracoorte,
15th May, 1893, and educated at Mum
dalla Public School. He has been a
Councillor for Mundalla Ward in the
District Council of Tatiara for 2 years.
Mr. Ross is also Secretary of the Mun-
dalla Branch Agricultural Bureau,
President of the Soldier’s Park, Vice-
President of the Golf Club, Secretary
of the Gun Club, Past President of
the Mundalla A.H. & F. Show Society,
and a Committeeman of the Institute.
He is a farmer, and his sports are
shooting and golf. Home address,
Mundalla.
COUNCILLOR LESLIE HAROLD
DENSLEY
(District Council of Tatiara)
Mr. Densley was born at Wood-
ville, 14th September, 1894, and edu-
cated at the Woodville Public School.
He has been a resident of the district
for 21 years, and a member of the
Council for 6 years, representing Stir-
ling Ward. In business he is a farmer
and grazier, and his sport is tennis.
Mr. Densley volunteered for active
service during the Great War, but was
rejected. Home address, Keith.
COUNCILLOR EDWARD JOHN
JARRETT
(District Council of Tatiara)
Mr. Jarrett was born at Coleraine,
Victoria, 25th May, 1874, and educated
at Coleraine Public School. He has
been a resident of the district for 2(i
years, and a member of the Council
for 3 years, representing Wolsele}
Ward. He is also a member of the
R.A.0.8., G.L.E. Lodge, and his
sports are football, cricket and golf.
In business Mr. Jarrett is a Contractor
and Grocer. Home address, Wolseley.
COUNCILLOR GEORGE ARTHUR
DINNING
(District Council of Tatiara)
Mr. Dinning was born at Padthway,
S.A., June, 1875, and educated at Pad-
thway and Leeor, Victoria, Public
Schools. He has been a member of
the Tatiara District Council, repre-
senting Parsons Ward for 17 years.
He is also Chairman of the Nalang
School Committee. Mr. Dinning- is a
grazier, and is fond of all sports.
Home address, Bordertown.


- - J ,vv,v. SW 'X^<v. > »X
*
COUNCILLOR EDWARD HOWARD
FISHER
(District Council of tatiara)
Mr. Fisher was born at Uraidla, 29th
January, 1880, and educated at Uraidla
and Bordertown Public Schools. He
has been a resident of the district foi
47 years, and a member of the Council
for one year, representing Mundalla
Ward. He is also Past President of
the Tatiara P.A. & H. Society and the
Border Hunt Club. Mr. Fisher is a
farmer and grazier, and his sport is
racing. Home address, Bordertown.
COUNCILLOR EDWARD HUNT
(District Council of Tatiara)
Mr. Hun: was born at East Wel-
lington in 1878, and educated at Cook s
Plain and Pooginnigoric Public
Schools. He has been a resident of
the district for 50 years, and a member
of the Council for 18 years, represent-
ing Buckingham Ward. In Business
he is a grazier, and is interested in all
sports. Home address, Mundalla.
UPTON BUXTON PATTERSON
(District Clerk, District Council of Tatiara)
Mr. Patterson was born at Border-
town, 24th July, 1890, and educated
at Bordertown and Naracoorte Public
Schools. He has been a resident of
the district for 40 years, and in the
service of the Council for 10 years.
Mr. Patterson is president of the Bor-
dertown Institute, Commissioner of
the Tatiara Football Association tri-
bunal, and a member of the A.N.A.
Lodge. He takes an interest in all
sports, particularly hunting. Home
address, Bordertown.




District Council of Teatree Gully


History of Teatree Gully
leatiee (iully was so named in the early days because
of a 1 aige quantity of teatree which grew in the then ever-
tunning; rivulet that took its rise in a dense teatree scrub,
now known as Hannaford’s Garden.
The district is situated twelve miles north of Adelaide,
u ith an area of 50 square miles, and is a fine tract of agri-
cultural land in a high state of cultivation, the growth of
u heat and culture of the vine being particularly attended
to, whilst a few sheep and cattle are kept by various
farmers.
Teatree Creek— a small stream of fine water—flows
through the bottom of the gully and past the township
of Stevenson, which lies within the district.
There are 2.200 residents in the district. £589,360 is
the capital value of ratable property, and £29.468 the
assessment value.
This district was first proclaimed the District of
Highercombe in the year 1853, the first Councillors being:—
Messrs. Joseph Ind, Robert Milne, George McEwin, John
Gollop, Henry Klapper. In the year 1858 Highercombe and
Teatree Gully became two separate districts, the first
Councillors for Teatree Gully being:—Messrs. Charles
V\ atson. Robert Smythe, John Goodall, Wm. Hains, Jnr.,
and George Dickerson. In 1935 the two districts were
once more united under the name of the District Council
of Teatree Gully, the first Councillors being;— Messrs.
William H. Ind, J.P. (Chairman), Herbert Hancock, Wm.
Hannaford, Norman K. Gogler, John H. Tilley, Andrew T.
Wakefield, and Allan Hall, with Victor S. Bowen, J.P., as
District Clerk.
Some of the names of Councillors who have helped in
the progress of the district are: —Charles Hill, Frederick
Hodges, J. W. Newman, John Parry, L. J. Tolley, F.
Brealey, Wm. Packer, J. Stephenson, B. L. Hill. M.
Maugham J. McEwin, A. D. N. Robertson. S. G. Harris,
A. O’Leary. R. Coleman, S. A. Milne, A. H. Kelly, H.
Wright, P. Maxwell, S. M. Manly, J. F. Farrow, F. Warner,
F. C. Newman, A. Harper, D. Dunn, W. Haines, W. J.
Rehn.
The district takes in several townships, such as Mod-
bury, Golden Grove, Hope Valley, Houghton, Inglewood,
Paracombe, with Teatree Gully in the centre, where the
district offices are situated. Teatree Cully is attractively
situated at the foot of the hills, and gives a splendid view
of the city.
The main industries of the district are fruitgrowing,
vineyards, dairying, and hay. There are two wine cellars
in the district—Angove & Sons Ltd. at Teatree Gully and
D. Tolley Prop. Ltd., Hope Valley; also two nurseries
and a jam factory.
Teatree Gully is only 12 miles from Adelaide, and has
a good bitumen road all the way. The total length of road.-
under Council control is 110 miles.


pPpppppp
v, ji
Sk&ffiwL *\k ««l-g. ifel
|| ’■
ipSliiii
* 1
I Jf "9
ir \ • 'Jl
1 J*** %r "
\ r
I ~ 4T ;Vi : ':'S
I „ yfl m
■
, i ...
sill
-i
M 4 , T Ik s
k r - V * MW he J
r *’• ' ff;\ *
WILLIAM HENRY IND, J.P
(Chairman D : strict Council of lea 1 ree
Gully)
Mr. Ind was born at Paradise, May
22nd, 1872, and educated at Prince
Alfred College. He has been a resident
of the district all his life, and a mem-
ber of the Council for 20 years. He
is also TVesidcnt of the S.A. Fruit-
orowers’ Association and an acti\ t
member of the Oddfellows Lodge.
Mr. Ind has taken a prominent part
in public affairs in the district, and is
a grandson of one of the first Coun-
cillors of the Tea Tree Gully District
Council. In business he is a Fruit-
grower. and his sport is cricket. Home
address, Paradise.
JOHN HENRY TILLEY
(Past Chairman of District Council of Tea
Tree Gully)
Mr. Tilley was born at Golden
Grove, May 21st, 1876. and educated at
Golden Grove and Modbury Public
Schools. He has been a resident of
the district for 60 years, and served
in the Council for 14 years, holding
the positions of Councillor, Chairman,
Auditor, and Clerk. He is also Chaii-
man of the Yatala Vale Show Com-
mitte, a member of the Hope Valley
Oddfellows’ Lodge, and has held offices
in the local sports clubs. He is a
Farmer and Grazier. Home address.
Golden Grove.
COUNCILLOR ANDREW THOMAS
WAKEFIELD
(District Council of Tea Tree Gully)
Mr. Wakefield was born at Para
combe, January 18th, 1867, and edu-
cated at Millbrook Public Shook
He has been a resident of the
district for 30 years, and a member
of the Council for 17 years. He
is also a member of the Oddfellows
Lodge and a Committeeman of the
Houghton Sports. In business he is a
Gardener, and his sport is cricket.
Home address, Paracombe.
COUNCILLOR ALLAN HALL
(District Council of Tea Tree Gully)
Mr. Hall was born at Hope V alley,
July 9th, 1891, and educated at the
Hope Valley Public School. He has
been a resident of the district all his
life, and a member of the Council for
6 years. He is an officer of the Foot-
ball Club, and in business is a Con-
tractor. Home address, Highbury
East.


||
:Wr
' *
-■■ j&im • -
ml M m
? j|j|iigp^^
Er|
ilMr $ m
% J||
Bh
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM HANNAFORD
(District Council of Tea Tree Gully)
Mr. Hannaford was born at Tea
Tree Gully, August 26th, 1883, and
educated at Houghton Public School.
He has been a resident of the district
for 52 years, and a member of the
Council for 16 years. He is also Chair-
man of the Tea Tree Gully Fire Fight-
ing Association and Secretary of the
Hermitage Cricket Club. Mr. Hanna-
ford has taken an active part in all
public affairs in connection with the
district, and in business is a Gardener.
Present address, Hermitage.
COUNCILLOR HERBERT HANCOCK
(District Council of Tea Tree Gully.)
Mr. Hancock was born at Tea Tree
Gully, January 21st, 1870, and edu-
cated at the Tea Tree Gully Public
School. He has been a resident of the
district for 66 years, and a member of
the Council for 9 years. He has also
been for 28 years Secretary of the Tea
Tree Gully Institute, Secretary of the
Liberal Union, the Baptist Church, and
the Oddfellows’ Lodge, Manchester
Unity. Mr. Hancock has been Super-
intendent of the Sunday School for
many years, and in business is a Gar-
dener. Home address, Tea Tree
Gully.
COUNCILLOR NORMAN KEITH
GOGLER
(District Council of Tea Tree Gully)
Mr. Gogler was born at Mavlands,
December 23rd, 1908, and educated at
Marryatville Public School and Pul-
teney Grammar School. He has been
a resident of the district for 6 years,
and a member of the Council for 2
years. He is also a member of the
Rechabite Lodge, and in business is a
Dairyman. Home address, Yatala
Vale, Modbury.
VICTOR SPURGEON BOWEN, J.P.
(District Clerk, District Council of Tea Tree
Gully)
Mr. Bowen was born at Maylands,
January 23rd, 1892, and educated at
the Norwood Public School and Ade-
laide High School. He has served in
the Council for 10 years as Auditor,
Councillor, Chairman and Clerk, and
has been for 23 years a resident of the
district. He is also President of the
Tea Tree Gully Institute. During the
war Mr. Bowen served with the 43rd


' ■•.’ft igi
f f Jlpiir? apil
|y| as/ j-. &j8&i|
Mt .-• S Ik*.
Battalion, A.1.F., on active service,
from 1916 to 1919, and was awarded
the Military Medal. He has taken an
active part in church work, school
committees, and all sporting bodies in
the district. Home address, Tea Tree
Gully.




District Council of Truro


History of Truro
The township was named after Truro, in Cornwall,
England, by pioneer Cornish miners, who worked the Bar-
ton Copper Mines in the early ’sixties. The place developed
into a considerable business centre, as it is on the best
track up from the Murray Flats, leading from the Riverina
to Adelaide.
The district, which comprises the Hundreds of Anna
and of Skurray, the southern portion of the Hundred of
Dutton, and the northern portion of the Hundred of
Jellicoe, has a total area of 190,382 acres, and was pro-
claimed in the Government Gazette on August 17th, 1876.
The Hundred of Skurray was annexed to the area on 18th
September, 1933.
There are 250 houses in the district, and the population
numbers 892 persons. Under Council jurisdiction, there are
434 miles of district roads, and 30 miles of main roads.
The present assessment capital value is £292,360, with a
general rate of 1/1 in the £, yielding an annual revenue of
£791/16/2.
In the year 1874 the Truro Institute was opened.
I here is also a very fine recreation park and a memorial
park in honour of local fallen soldiers. A memorial statue
has been erected, a roll of honour, and grouped photo-
graphs have also been placed in the Institute.
The members of the first Council were:—Messrs. J.
Miller (Chairman), L. Judell, P. M. Murray, T. Irvine, and
F. Denhol m.
Others who have held office are:—Messrs. T. Scott. W.
Miller. S. Park, A. Habel, C. R. Liebig, A. P. Habel, T.
Kalisch, W. Ullrich, C. Grieve. J. D. Jay, T. H. Viney, C. F.
Schilling, C. A. Linke, ]. A. Fairey, W. Scott, A. H/Marks,
J. Park, E. H. Hahn, F. W. Linke, L. Miller, ]. Miller.
J. M. Dee, J. H. Herrmann, P. S. Klemm, J. A. Frost, and
W. G. Treloar (present Clerk).


District Council of Tumby Bay


History of Tumby Bay
Pumby Bay takes its name from a parish in Fincoln-
shiie, on the River Bain, and is situated on the west coast
of Spencer’s Gulf, 30 miles north of Port Fincoln and 288
miles west of Adelaide, communication with which is by
steamer once a week, and by mail twice weekly from
Port Fincoln, and once weekly by overland service car via
Port Augusta.
The district is chiefly agricultural. The surrounding
country is varied, there being several ranges of low hills
and large areas of undulating country, mainly utilised for
the growth of cereals and mixed farming. Also in the
eaily days several copper mines were worked in the dis-
trict, but of later years this industry has ceased entirely,
the only active mine at present being worked for talc, which
is shipped overseas.
i he area of the district is approximately 655,000 acres,
and of the 2,600 residents 610 are ratepayers.
The capital value of ratable property is £795,200 and
the assessment value is £39,760, a general rate of 1/9 in
the £, producing yearly an amount of £3,479.
The names of past members and officers of the District
Council are as follows:—Messrs. E. J. Barraud, S. M.
Bawden, G. B. Gardiner, G. Provis, H. Dutton, W. R.
Butler, F. O. Olston, W. J. M. Cowley, T. Butterfield, W. T.
Roberts, O. Treasure, f. Nankivell, A. H. Pfitzner, H. J.
Blacker. A. B. Wishart, H. T. Pedler. A. V. Teakle, J.
Greenshields (District Clerk), S. F. Potter, F. A. Brock,
E. H. Smith, C. M. Octoman, H. B. Tilly, R. Bratten (Over-
seer).
The present Council consists of the following members
and officers: —J. K. Schramm (Chairman), G. Young, C. A.
Darling, P. D. S. Cooper, W. O. Treasure, C. B. Tilbrook,
F. E. C larkson, E. W. Price, and Norman C. Holliday
(District Clerk and Overseer).


.
'"'. d&r mm^
M
M „ j0
* Jr «r S^v3li
wSBBBBSSm
M feadfflp |||||
EDWIN JAMES BARRAUD.
(Chairman, District Council of Tumby Bay.)
Mr. Barraud was born at South
Rhine, 17th March, 1863, and educated
at the Port Lincoln Public School and
privately. He served for four years in
the Port Lincoln Council, and has been
for 53 years a resident of the Tumby
Bay district. Mr. Barraud assisted in
the formation of the I umby Bay Dis-
trict Council, and has been Chairman
for 11 years. He also assisted in
building the Tumby Bay Hospital, and
was for 10 vears Chairman of the
Board. He was first Secretary and
then President of the Great Flinders
A. V H. Society, first Secretary and
then Chairman of the Lipson Agricul-
tural Bureau, Chairman of the Board
of Advice and local School Committee.
He assisted in building the Lipson
Institute, and was the first Secretary
and then President of the Committee
Mr. Barraud was previously Chairman
of Directors of Eyre's Peninsula
Freezing" Works, which is now taken
over by the S.A. Government Produce
Department. He was the first Presi-
dent of the Liberal Union District
Committee, and later the first Chair-
man of the Flinders Country Party
Association. He is also a member of
the Manchester Unity of Oddfellows
Lodge. Mr. Barraud is a farmer and
grazier, and his sport is cricket. ! lonic
address, Lipson.
PAST CHAIRMAN THE LATE S. M
BAWDEN, J.P.
(District Council of Tumby Bay.)
Born at Kadina, Bth June, 1864, and
educated at Kadina and Watervale
Grammar Schools. Ihe late Mr. haw-
den served in the Tumby Bay District
Council from its formation in 1906 un
til his decease in 1919. He resided in
the district for 113 years. He was a
Justice of the Peace, a member of the
Tumby Bay Hospital Board from its
formation, a member of the Tumby
Bay School Beard, Institute and Aus-
tralia Day Committees, and also
Chairman < f the Tumby Bay Agricul-
tural Bureau. The la re Mr. L av/den
died in 1919.
PAST COUNCILLOR W. J. M. COWLEY.
(District Council of Tumby Bay.)
Born at Reynella, 16th June, 1858,
and educated at Happy Valley. Hr.
Cowley served in the Tumby Bay
District Council for several years, and
was a resident of the district for 22
years. He is now living in retirement,
but was in business as a farmer, con-


, - '■ ■
\
■
ti actor and Post Master in the early
days. His present address is 224
Wattle Street, Unley.
PAST COUNCILLOR THE LATE FRANK
S. POTTER.
(District Council of Tumby Bay.)
Born at Adelaide, 16th June, 1868,
and educated at Adelaide. Mr. Potter
was a resident of the Tumby Bay
District for over sixty years, and
served for several years in the Council.
He was a Life Member and President
of the Agricultural Bureau, Vice-
Chairman of the Great Flinders
A. & H. Society, also a member of the
Freemason’s Lodge. He enlisted for
War Service in 1915, and served in
Egypt and France in the Remount
Unit and Army Veterinary Corps for
4 years.
PAST COUNCILLOR THE LATE
OLIVER TREASURE.
(District Council of Tumby Bay.)
1 he late Mr. Treasure was born at
Somersetshire England, in the vear
1856, and arrived in Australia in 1862,
with his parents in the “Star of
Burnswick.” His father took up land
at Yankalilla, where he was educated
and resided for 14 years. The late Mr.
Oliver treasure first bought land on
his own account at Muloowurtie, and
in 1892 purchased land at Yorke Val-
ley, near Maitland, where he resided
for 16 years. In 1908 he sold his pro-
perty and bought a farm near Ungarra
on Eyre’s Peninsula. The late Mr.
Treasure had always taken a keen
interest in public matters, and in 1910
he contested a Seat for the State
Parliament. He was a member of the
Baptist Church at Yorke Peninsula,
and when he went to reside at Ungarra
he joined the Church of Christ, being
one of the foundation members. He
served for a term of 4 years in the
District Council of Tumby Bay as a
Councillor, and he was a resident of
the district for 24 years. He was a
member of the Orange Lodge, and his
sport was Cricket.
PAST COUNCILLOR THE LATE
WILLIAM ROWE BUTLER.
(District Council of Tumby Bay.)
Born at Burra, 15th July, 1861, and
educated at Kadina. "The late Mr.
Butler served for 8 years in the Tumby
Bay District Council, and before his
decease was farming at Alford, Wes-
tern Australia, Agery, and Tumby
Bay, on the West Coast. He was a
member of the Masonic Lodge, and
his sport was Cricket.


f
aJBf , 4 ' .. ■ *y, \
1 'mr 1 23
\ '.*1
' * *
\ JKitefc.* -** .
, t w
j
'£M&*> t ;ig|
dmSwBUk ' wfc*~ ■ • '''MPBBR
l»||fe a •
% t&
HB|
pM? ' l||»
■Mi ; . lPH||
& Ht *** * /* aH
1 1 Jl
: fm
i , * /,
* \ JBf - *
BMpSI | jm r*
7 M JEW jr ' W
PAST COUNCILLOR THE LATE
G. PROVIS.
(District Council of Fumby Bay.)
Born at Echunga, 11th June, 1854,
and educated at Port Lincoln Public
School. The late Mr. Provis served
for 3 years in the Council, and was
for 74 years a resident of the district.
He was also one of the founders of
the Central Eyre’s Peninsula Agri-
cultural and Horticultural Society.
He was a member of the Independent
Order of Oddfellows Hodge.
COUNCILLOR P. D. S. COOPER.
(District Council of Tumby Bay.)
Mr. Cooper was born at Rochester,
27th September, 1882, and educated at
Koolunga. He has been a resident of
the Tumby Bay District for 0 years,
and a member' of the Council for 4
vears. Mr. Cooper was a pioneer of
the Cummins District, having opened
a Store and Agency Business there, in.
1907. He bought the first load of
wheat for Messrs. George \\ ills and
Co., and was a resident in that town
for 21 years. Mr. Cooper served with
the Ist Australian Bushmen’s Corps,
in South Africa, in the years 1901 and
1902. His sport is Rifle Shooting and
he is a District Representative of the
South Australian Rifle Association
Council. He is also a member of the
Rechabite Lodge, and in business is a
Storekeeper and Agent. Home ad-
dress, Port Neill.
COUNCILLOR H. T. PEDLER
(District Council of Tumby Bay.)
Mr, Pedler was born at Paskeville,
20th November, 1874; and educated
at the Paskeville Public School. He
has been a resident of the 1 umby Bav
District for 30 years, and a membei of
the Council for 4 years. Mr. Pedler is
a pioneer resident of the Ungarra
District, and has seen it develop into
a fine wheat and wool producing
country. He took an active interest
in the district's water supply scheme,
and also in procuring a railway
through the country, being a membei
on various deputations in connection
with same. He is a farmer and his
home address is Ungarra.
COUNCILLOR L. E. CLARKSON.
(District Council of Tumby Bay.)
Mr. Clarkson was born at Kent
Town, 3rd May, 1903, and educated
at Prince Alfred College, Adelaide.
He has been a resident of the Tumby
Bay District for 7 years, and a member
of the Council for 6 vears. Mr. Clark-


1
—Sfr
% J* f
■■
■'■'[i.- • • .;■ , ' ..^Kr
I
vwjjaBmfi fa I vL
BaBipi m§. 'if
son is Chairman of the Agricultural
Bureau, and in business is a farmer.
Home address, \ eelanna.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES A. DARLING.
(District Council of Tumby Bay.)
Mr. Darling was born at Port Lin-
coln in 1882, and educated at Tumby
Bay. He has been for 53 years a
resident of the district, and a member
of the Council for 2 years. He is a
farmer and grazier, and takes an
interest in all general sports, particu-
larly racing. His home address is
Ethla Station, Tumby Bay.
COUNCILLOR HERBERT JAMES
BLACKER.
(District Council of Tumby Bay.)
Mr. Blacker was born at Willunga,
28th February, 1879, and educated at
Willunga Public School. He has been
for 31 years a resident of the Tumby
Ray District, and prior to his appoint-
ment in the Tumby Bay District
Council was a member of the Port
Lincoln District Council. He is a
farmer and grazier, and has been a
member of the Foresters' Lodge for
40 years and the Masonic Lodge for 15
years. Home address is Cummins.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES M. OCTOMAN
(District Council of Tumby Bay.)
Mr. Octoman was born at Gawler.
dOth November, 1870 ; and educated at
the Norwood Public School. He has
been a resident of the Tumby Ray
District for 36 years, and a member of
the Council for 6 years. Mr. Octoman
is a Patron of the Lipson Cricket Club,
and in business is a farmer. Home
address, Lipson.
COUNCILLOR C. B. TILBROOK.
(District Council of Tumby Bay.)
Mr. rilbrook was born at Minlaton.
Ist September, 1898, and educated at
the Minlaton Public School. He has
been a member of the Tumby Bay
District Council, representing the Hd.
of Stokes for 6 years, and a resident
of the district for 9 years. Mr.
rilbrook is also a member of the
Yorke Valley Masonic Lodge, No. 67,
and has been President and Trustee
of the Ungarra Hall since its erection
in 1929. He played League Football
for 3 years, and was Captain of the
Ungarra Football Club. Mr. Tilbrook
served on active service with the A.I.F.


■-' * r *-.: ■’
HwhSe <** ’*&*'■& *•
. • *aSr miS^SKk
• •• v v-T -; ,
,«|tf /PWr ,
■■ hmhf
■%
Mi;
* „ -'*■
■ViX * „,. %
in France at the age of 1G years, and
was decorated with the Military Medal
when 17 years of age. He was
severely wounded and returned to
Australia before he was 18 years of
age. In business he is a farmer, and
Ins home address is Ungarra, West
Coast.
COUNCILLOR WILLIAM THOMAS
ROBERTS.
(District Council of 1 umby Bay.)
Mr. Roberts was born at Peachey
Belt, near Gawler, in 1863 and educated
at Whinham College, North Adelaide,
lie has been a resident of the Tumby
Bay District for 33 years, and a mem-
ber of the Council for 3 years. Mr.
Roberts has also been for 4 years,
Chairman of the Koppio School Board,
5 years Chairman of the Koppio
Literary Society, and 4 years Chair
man of the Agricultural Bureau. He
is a member of the Masonic Lodge,
and in business is a farmer. Home
address, Yallunda Flats.
COUNCILLOR W. O. E. TREASURE.
(District Council of Tumby Bay.)
Mr. Treasure was born at Muloo-
wurtie, Yorke Peninsula, in 1890, and
educated at the Maitland Public
School. He has been a resident of the
Tumby Bay District for 28 years, and
a member of the Council for 1 year.
Mr. Treasure is the son of the late Mr.
Oliver Treasure, who came to reside
at Eyre's Peninsula in 1908, and took
up land in the Head, ol 5 aranyacha,
where Mr. W. Treasure still resides.
He has alwavs taken a keen interest
in social and political affairs, proving
a good citizen for all public advance-
ment. He has been associated with
the Agricultural Bureau, and has been
President of the Butler and Ungarra
Literary and Debating Societies. Mr.
Treasure was elected President of
the Ungarra Wheat Growers Associa-
tion when that organisation was esta-
blished some years ago, and he has
been elected President of the Confer-
ence of the Eyre's Peninsula Churches
of Christ twice, and still holds the
position. He was elected to represent
Lipson Ward in the Tumby Bay Dis-
trict Council in July, 1935. His home
address is LTngarra, Eyre's Peninsula.
COUNCILLOR A. H. PFITZNER.
(District Council of Tumby Ray.)
Mr. Pfitzner, was born at Eudunda,
3rd September, 1881, and educated


I
near Eudunda. He has been a resident
of the 1 umby Bay district for 20 years,
and a member of the Council for 8
years. He is also Chairman of the
Butler Tanks Agricultural Bureau, and
Butler Banks School Committee, and
Lay Reader of the Lutheran Church.
He is a farmer and Wheat Agent and
his home address is Butler Tanks.
ROBERT BRATTEN.
(Past District Clerk and Overseer, District
Council of Tumby Bay.)
Mr. Bratten was born at County
Louth, Ireland, 24th January, 1862,
and educated at the Educational
Institution, Dundalk. He has been a
resident of Lumby Bay for 40 years,
and was in the service of the Council
for 20 years, being Overseer from
1906—1913 and 1916 to 1926, and
District Clerk from 1913 to 1916.
NORMAN CHESTER HOLLIDAY.
(District Clerk and Overseer, District Council
of Tumby Bay.)
Born at Norwood, 29th April, 1899,
and educated at Goodwood, Unley, and
Kingswood High Schools. Mr. Holli-
day served for 12J years in the City
of Unley Corporation, 1 year for the
City of Port Adelaide, and 94 years
for the 1 umby Bay District Council.
He been for 9J years a resident of
the district. He was Assistant
Inspector and Building Surveyor for
the Unley City Council, Assistant
Valuator and Rate Collector, for the
Port Adelaide Corporation, and is
District Clerk and Overseer of the
Tumby Bay District Council. His
sports are Football, Tennis and Golf.


District Council of Upper Wakefield


History of Upper Wakefield
1 lie District Council or Upper Wakefield was con-
stituted iu 1856, but in 1887 an alteration was made as
regards its boundaries, and the area now under control of
the Council is 58,872 acres, with a population of 1.189.
The distance by rad from Adelaide is 68 miles, and
along an extremely picturesque route of 15 miles to Clare
there aie the villages of Lessington, Watervale, Penwor-
tham, and Seven Hills.
Ihe rainfall in the district is rather good and assists
considerably towards the cultivation of wine grapes, cur-
rants, and practically all other fruits, which are success-
fully grown throughout the year. A considerable wheat
area and a number of wineries make a combination of
industries which are of great value to the State.
The capital value of ratable property is £400,920 and
the assessment value £20,286.
LIST OF PAST AND PRESENT COUNCILLORS
FROM 1921.
1921.
Garrett, D. (Chairman)
Kench, J.
Parker, G. W.
Hillebrand, R.
McLeod, F. J.
1922.
Parker, G. W. (Chairman)
Kirkbright, A. E. F.
Schober, E. FI.
Roberts, B. H.
Bennett, C. L.
1923.
Parker, G. W. (Chairman)
Kirkbright, A. E. F.
Schober, E. FI.
Roberts, B. H.
Catford, T. J.
1924.
Roberts, B. H. (Chairman)
Kirkbright, A. E. F.
Schober, E. H.
Castine, E. W.
Catford, T. J.
1925.
Roberts, B. H. (Chairman)
Kirkbright, A. E. F.
Schober, E. H.
Castine, E. W.
Catford, T. J.
1926.
Roberts, B. H. (Chairman)
Kirkbright, A. E. F.
Schober, E. FI.
Castine, E. W.
Catford, T. J.
1935.
Williams, G. \V. (Chairman
Kirkbright, A. E. F.
Kench, H. D.
Ryan, D.
Thomas, F. W. R.
CLERKS.
1920 to 1927.
Barnes, F. H.
1927 to 1935.
Maddern, E. H.
OVERSEER.
1922 to 1935.
Whitehead, W, F.
Present CouncilG. W. Williams (Chairman), Messrs.
A. E. F. Kirkbright, D. Ryan, H. O. Kench, F. W. R.
Thomas; E. H. Maddern (District Clerk); W. F. White-
head (Overseer).
The post town for this district, situated some 70
miles north of Adelaide, and lying in the valley of the
River V akefield, is the pretty little town of Auburn. The
site was granted to Thomas Henry Williams, known as
"Piebald Williams," as far back as October, 1849. He
was at one time manager of the Burra Smelting Works
and co-operated with Mr. J. E. Bleechmore in & 1856 in
cutting up the section into township blocks.
The very name of the township, associated as it is with
Goldsmith's description of his "Sweet Auburn," as the love-
liest village of the plain, where health and plenty cheered
the labouring swain, induced many to believe that thev
would find it a veritable home where health and plenty
were the dominant features.
Nestling between two low-lying hills, with the River
W akefield coursing through from north to south it is cer
tainly an ideal situation for a town with such an' historical
and rhythmic name.
Many years ago a satirical paper, when describing
Auburn and its vicinity, including the residents, remarked*:
1927, 1928, 1929, 1930, 1931,
1932, 1933.
Roberts, B. H. (Chairman)
Kirkbright, A. E. F.
Schober, E. H.
Williams, G. W.
Catford, T. J.
1934.
Williams, G. W. (Chairman)
Kirkbright, A. E. F.
Kench, H. O.
Giles, L. H.
Catford, T. J.


“If you are of a marriage age, and a member of the male
sex. stay away from Auburn; for the ladies there aie so
charming and most obliging that almost assuredly one w
be caught." _ 4 „
COURT IN A STABLE.
As far back as 1857 it is on record that Auburn con-
sisted of an hotel, a store, and a blacksmith s shop. At
the rear of the hotel were stables with a capacious ia\
loft overhead. In the latter dances were occasionally he c,
and it was likewise untilised as a police court room and
post and telegraph office. .
About that time the Burra Burra copper mines an e
being fully developed, and the copper ore had to be car tec
from the mine through Auburn to Port Wakefield, the
nearest shipping port. Balaklava was then n.on-exnstent
and the route to Port Wakefield rvas via V\ hitwai < .
teams, drawn chiefly by bullocks and mules had a camping
ground at Auburn close to a waterhole on the River Wake-
Bleechmore 0t ' of the and
beSt ThUtownsWp ‘gkwFapidly and all social activities
o-rew apace with it. In 1859 an unpretentious hbraiy and
institute were established, and it was said to be the twenty-
fifth branch of the parent institution m Adelaide. Foi
some time Gavin D. Young, of Watervale, was its I lesi-
('eiltln 1860 the Postmaster-General (Mr. Charles Todd)
visited the town and delivered a lecture on -Telegraphy
Shortly after the Government erected a substantially built
post and telegraph office. About the same time a court
house and police station and a public school were erected.
TOWN HALL OPENED.
In 1866 an imposing Town Hall was erected at a cost
n+ over £2 000. A limited liability company was formed to
raise the funds in 800 shares of £2 10/ per share Amongst
he shareholders were Sir W W. Hughes. Sir G.S. K.ng-
ston H E. Bright, J. W. Gleeson, Thomas Neill, Aithin
King J E. and Wm. Bleechmore, N. Sowton and many
The foundation of the building was laid by die
Chairman of Directors (Arthur King) on January 1, 1866,
amid much enthusiasm, and with Masonic honours mem-
bers of the Clare Lodge of Freemasons attended for the
purpose. The Auburn Lodge of Oddfellows also took
part. For some time the venture proved highly satisfac-
tory. Subsequently it was not a financial success, and the
building was sold to Francis Treloar, of Watervale. c
afterwards resold to the Auburn Institute and Library, who
are its present owners.
GAS IN THE SEVENTIES.
In 1871, for the first time north of Kapunda., gas
was successfully produced, and the Town Hall brilliantly
illuminated.
PLOUGHING CONTESTS.
As far back as 1857 ploughing matches were season-
able occurrences. On the open section, now known as the
Town of New Auburn, these matches were held. It was
also here that horse races were frequently run. The rail-
way from Riverton to Spalding now passes through the
course. In 1857 the Northern Agricultural Society was
established. The first secretary was Mi. J. E. Bleech-
more. Shows were first held alternately at Auburn, Clare,
Watervale, and Mintaro, and, when in 1872 Clare decided
to run a show separate from the parent society, Saddle-
worth for a time filled the place rendered vacant.
WHEAT FIRST SOWN BY MACHINE.
In all agricultural commitments, Auburn appears to
have taken a prominent part. It is worthy of record
that it was the first place in South Australia where wheat
was sown by broadcasting machine. Local machinists, in
co-operation with a local resident, partly copying and im-
proving upon an American invention, made the machine.
In broadcasting the seed it covered some twenty-five yards,
and so successful was the first trial that H. B. Hawke and
Co., of Kapunda, made and sold hundreds during the fol-
lowing two or three years. Later on A. W ; Uobbie, of
Adelaide, improved upon “Hawke’s Seedsower, and to-day
there are many machines in use made upon a similar design.
This system of wheat sowing very soon superseded
the old-fashioned seedlip, and the annual returns were
largely increased. It is recorded that the wheat returns
in Ts6B were only 440 bushels. In that year red rust was
responsible for some 55,000 acres not being reaped. Since
then returns have been persistently on the up-grade, and
the term “bag” has been substituted for “bushel" when
estimating the yield, possibly due to the use of super-
phosphates.


ELECTORAL DISTRICTS.
, > ears gone by there was no electoral district of
ooroora - Auburn was within the district known as
/Burra and Clare.” Sir G. S. Kingston, K.C.M.G., was
its representative in the House of Assembly. As far back
as 185/ he occupied the position of Speaker. He died at
sea in 1881.
With the re-arrangements of the electoral divisions
and the new district of Y\ ooroora formed, a lively dis-
cussion arose as to where the chief polling place should
Both Auburn and Riverton fought for the pride of
place. A deputation from Auburn waited upon the then
Attorney-General (G. J. W. Stevenson), being introduced
by Sir G. S. Kingston.
Auburn was not successful; Riverton received the
honour, but an Auburn resident (Mr. J. E. Bleechmore)
received the appointment of Chief Returning Officer for
the new district with its attached emoluments. In those
days deputations to the Government were of frequent
occun ence, and considered of great importance in direct-
ing the course of legislation. It is recorded that one of
the members of this deputation had a frock coat specially
made in Adelaide so that he might appear before the
Attorney-General fittingly dressed.
NATIVE COOKING.
There were many natives in and around the district
in the early days. One of their favourite camping places
was on the hill close to East Auburn, amid of clump of
trees.
It may mtei est many to know the modus operandi.
Their pecuhai mode of cooking wallaby, opossums and
birds was novel and interesting. A circular hole about a
foot deep and 12 inches in diameter made. At the
bottom were laid flat stones. These were then covered
with hot wood ashes. After a time the ashes were re-
moved. and the game, with its skin, fur, or feathers still
attached, and bodies unopened, placed on the heated stones.
A covering waas then made of more flat stone, previously
heated, and the whole covered with the hot wood ashes.
In a remarkably short time the roasting was completed,
and the animals or birds most easily cleaned and prepared
for eating.
In days gone by opossums were plentiful, and on a
moonlight night it no uncommon thing to bag 20 or 30
within a few hours. Their splendid woolly skins were,
however, worth only a few pence, in contradistinction to
the prices given for them to-day.
The natives were generally of a most harmless nature,
although at times they were guilty of terrible crimes.
AUBURN FORD.
At times the River Wakefield, named after Edward
Gibbon Wakefield, became a wide and rapid stream, and the
two crossings at Auburn were both dangerous and at times
impassible. On one such occasion two men attempted to
cross the higher ford contrary to the advice of onlookers,
and they with their horse and cart were swept down the
stream. One of the men was drowned and his body not
recovered until a week later. Another incident occurred
at this crossing. One summer’s day a man and his wife
were driving into Auburn in a spring cart. Halting to
give the horse a drink, and getting too near the upper edge
of the ford, horse, cart and occupants were precipitated
into the waterhole. In answer to cries for help several
went to the rescue, for both the man and his wife were
up to their armpits in the water, and the horse and cart
close by them. A change of clothes was necessary, an
eas 7 thing for the man, but the lady was of generous pro-
poi tions, tall and robust, and the largest outer garments
obtainable were far too small for her. Binder twine had
to be used to keep the bodice in place.
BUSHRANGING AND HORSE STEALING.
Bushranging and horse stealing in the sixties were
not uncommon, both in South Australia and other parts
of the continent. It is recorded that on one occasion
some horses had been stolen not far from Auburn, and
it was conjectured that the thief was in hiding in the
then dense scrub between Auburn and Port Wakefield. A
trooper stationed at Auburn was sent in search of the man.
. For some time no success was achieved. But one day
noticing smoke arising out of the scrub some distance away,
he made for the spot on foot, having tied up his horse to
a tiee. Armed with a revolver, he caught sight of the
supposed thief, who was about to prepare a morning meal.
I he trooper accosted him in a threatening manner. The
man surrendered, was arrested, and eventually convicted
The trooper admitted afterwards that he'had omitted
to load his gun, but did not discover the mistake until too
late to do so. So he relied upon his authoritative de


meanour to secure an arrest. . .
Between 1865 and 1868 the district was visited by a
grasshopper plague. It caused great destruction amongst
the grass lands and wheat fields. Red rust was likewise
an unwelcome visitor in 1868. Ihe farmers were gi ea
sufferers. Subsequent experience, however, proved that
as good a sample of wheat could be grown from shrivelled
o-rain as from the plump grain not affected by rust. tor
milling purposes, however, the gram was of little use.
INDUSTRIES.
An industry on an extensive scale was established some
three miles distant south of Auburn, known as the Koo-
nowla Wine and Dairying Estate,” owned by Messrs. Sharp
and Tothill, and personally managed by the entei prism
partner, Mr. J. B. Tothill. A fine herd of dairy cattle
was kept. The two industries of wine and butter mak-
ing were eminently successful for a time, but eventually the
cattle were sold and the wine-making industry ceased
1 “Koonowla” was originally owned by Captain V\ ilham
Barkla, who in the early fifties was, with his family,
brought from England to captain the then famous Kapunda
copper mines. 'in 1862 he purchased this property and
went to reside there. It was for many years known as
the “Rose Hill” property. Subsequently it was named
“Koonowla,” this being a native name, indicating the home
‘About*'three miles north-east of Auburn is a well-
developed homestead, named St. Andrews where Messrs.
Christison and Lyall for many years cultivated the me,
and from their capacious wine cellars exported high-class
wines. The property until lately was held by one of the
original owners, Mr. D. J. Lyall, a well-known lesident
the district. . . r
The copper teams, previously referred to, 011 their w <.3
from the Burra to Port Wakefield had to pass over some
particularly bad country. One place is well rememberec
as the "Devil's Garden." Another special spot the team-
sters named "Hellfire Creek." Pine trees were cut from
the dense scrub nearby and laid lengthway across that par
of the roadway, making what was termed a 'corduroy
road" crossing. It was very effective, and old residents
take pleasure in pointing out the exact spot of the cioss
ing. To-day the roads in this part are especially good.
Speaking of this corduroy road, it may be of interest
to mention that the following, from Alec. Cameron, Wal-
laroo, appeared in the daily paper of 23rd June, 1933 : The
recent Back to Balaklava recalled memories of my youth
in the early eighties, when large areas of scrubland were
taken up by the selectors, north of the present town, em-
bracing an area known as 'The Devil's Garden. From
some miles above Halbury a corduroy track ran thiough
the scrub. I have vivid memories of several teams bogged
and almost embedded for some days. The lurid language,
added to the persistent crack of the whip as it re-echoed
through the dense mallee, impressed upon my young mind
the conviction that the area w T as aptly named. Those
Burra bullockies were linguists, equalling, if not excelling,
those that I afterwards met in the outback, including Boer
or Kaffir or Arab camelier. To-day (79 years later) pros-
perous farms (and overtaxed farmers) would resent the
suggestion that the site of their homesteads was ever
known as 'His Satanic Majesty's Playground'."


1
i *—*»JI 1 I »'
r$
i , - 1^8|bBB
,.r 4 > /“
GLANVILLE WAKEFIELD WILLIAMS.
(Chairman, District Council of Upper
Wakefield.)
Mr. Williams was born at Skilly,
S.A., 4th January, 1899, and educated
at Auburn and Grange Public Schools
and Prince Alfred College, Adelaide.
He has been a member of the Council
for 9 years, and 29 years a resident of
the district. He is President of
the Institute, Northern Agricultural
Society, and Recreation Park, member
of Wooroora and Wooroora Mark
Freemasons’ Lodges, past President of
Auburn Bowling Club, and captain of
Auburn Golf Club. Mr. Williams is
the third generation to reside at
Auburn. His grandfather, Richard
\\ illiams, selected and worked land in
the Auburn district in 1849. Home
address, Greenwood Park, Auburn.
COUNCILLOR FREDERICK WILLIAM
REYNOLDS THOMAS, J.P.
(District Council of Upper Wakefield.)
Born at Gulnare, 6th May, 1889, and
educated at Gulnare and Auburn
Public Schools. Mr. Thomas has been
a member of the Council from fuly,
1935, and a resident of the district for
35 years. Hs is in business as a grazier
at Auburn. His sports are football,
tennis, golf, bowls, and rifle shooting.
COUNCILLOR A. E. F. KIRKBRIGHT.
(District Council of Upper Wakefield.)
Born at Auburn, 19th August, 1861,
and educated at Undalva. Thirteen
3 r ears’ service in Council, and a resi-
dent of the district all his life. Mr.
Kirkbright is a member of the Free-
masons’ and Foresters’ Lodges, and is
a farmer at Auburn.
COUNCILLOR DANIEL RYAN.
(District Council of Upper Wakefield.)
Born at Williamstown, 1871, and
educated at AA illiamstown Public
School. Mr. Ryan has been a member
of the Council for one year, and a resi-
dent of the district for 48 years. He is
a farmer and grazier at Auburn.
WILLIAM FRANK WHITEHEAD.
(Overseer of Works, District Council of
Upper Wakefield.)
Mr. \\ hitehead was born at Auburn,
LSth January, 188?, and educated at
Auburn 1 üblic School. Fie has been
attached to the Council for 14 years,
and a resident of the district for 49
years. Ileis a member of the Indepen-
dent Oi der of Oddfellows, Manchester
Unity, Lodge, and his sport is football.
Home address, Auburn.


EDWIN HARRIS MADDERN.
District Clerk, District Council of Upper
Wakefield.)
Mr. Maddern was born at Auburn,
27th September, 1887, and was edu-
cated at Auburn Public School, he
has been District Clerk for 9 years
and a resident of the district for 49
years. He is Secretary of the Court
Auburn A.0.F., No. 4578, past Secre
tary, Auburn Football C lub, and mem-
ber of the Bowling Club. Mr. Maddern
is also the Local Representative of the
S.A. Farmers’ Union Ltd. Home
address, Auburn.




I ■ 1 ' 1 - ~ " : . "
■HSp ’ .
• ■ — *
District Council of Waikene
WAIKERIE SOLDIERS' MEMORIAL HALL,


Wailcpn’p ImoafiAM D, 1 ama ' ■ —■—"■——— —
History of Waikerie
The District Council of Waikerie was established in
r ebiuary, 1914, but previous to that, in 1904, was a com-
munistic village settlement. Later, on August 10th, 1910,
it was taken over by the Irrigation and Reclamation Works
as an Irrigation Settlement, and has proved a progressive
district up to the present time.
The name of Waikerie is believed to be an aboriginal
u orcl for "much mallee."
Council, including grant-in-aid and miscellaneous receipts
amounts to over £4,000 per annum.
The population of the district is estimated at 2 916
The number of ratepayers is 707, and the number
of dwellings and shops 647.
There is a very fine Soldiers’ Memorial Hall in the
town.
The business places include the hotel, cofifee palace.
Waikerie Irrigation P„ mp House and Distillery-SKowlng Distillery Partly Submerged
Mood lime, 1931.
546 Ofif) 1 ' Council °f Waikerie has an area of
r ' ■ acres > and the principal industry is fruitgrowing
coZrifint" W A Z " ,? ' W irri § :able under cultivation!
comprising Waikerie, Ramco, and Holder is 3,148 acres
p?ooertv non Tb- Iga ? ' 291 - aCreS ' The Ca P ital valne of the
£461000 n a irrigation area is approximately
£461 000 while the capital value of ratable property in the
who e of the district is £752.720, and, based on an assess
ment value of £37,631, produces, with a total rate of 1/3 in
the pound, £2,425 per annum; the total revenue of the
hospital, and a number of well-built shops and offices.
I here are two large fruit packing sheds, one at Ramco and
one at Waikerie. There is also a large distillerv at
Waikerie, Hardy's distillery on the Blanchetown Road
and a distillery at Murray View. Waikerie possesses a fine
swimming pool, and nice camping site along the river
frontage, with plenty of fishing and shooting. Waikerie
is a comparatively new township of steady growth and
situated on the high level off the river bank," and forms the
hub of what is one of the best fruitgrowing areas in the


... .. . ■
if
>
State. Ihe orchards are irrigated by modern system of
pumping and water reticulated in open channels to orchards
from three to four miles distant. With the new area re-
cently annexed to this Council District the area is very
nearly doubled, and the extent of the area is 40 miles by
24 miles.
The value of the livestock in the irrigation area is
£5,666, comprises horses, cows, sheep, pigs, and fowls.
The distance from Adelaide to Waikerie, via Morgan,
thence by motor service along the Murray banks, is 130
miles, or by rail through Tailem Bend and Karoonda the
distance is 179 miles, or by motor car through Truro and
JOHN HANDCOCK STRANGMAN, J.P
(Chairman, District Council of Waikerie.)
Born at Orroroo, S.A., 7th May, 1895,
and educated at Kyre College. Mr.
Strangman, who is managing director
and secretary, Holder, Ltd., has served
in the Council for 18 years and resided
in the district for 21 years. Pie is a
member of the Masonic Lodge, No. BG,
and the \\ aikerie Mark Lodge, No. 3G.
Lome address, Waikerie, S.A.
LEONARD WILFRED ANDREW
Chairman, District Council of
Waikerie.)
Born at Rhyme, S.A., 3rd March,
1887, and educated at Maitland Public
School. Mr. Andrew has been a resi-
Blanchetown the distance is 115 miles.
The following is a list of Past Councillors: —Messrs.
A. E. Ross (ex-Chairman), G. A. Edwards (ex-Chairman),
J. A. Luxton, R. Stanley, J. L. Smith, E. R. Curtis, G. Bell,
J. C. Rowe, E. Basshorn, T. H. Dunstan, L. B. Pope, J. R.
Jemison, T. Spencer, W. Francis, F. W. \ ater, R. W •
Wheatland.
Present Councillors :—Messrs. J. H. Strangman (Chair-
man), L. W. Andrew, E. M. Rowe, R. O. J. Dunning, F. G.
Hartwig, T. H. Eustice, D. Sargent, W. H. Cates, F. W.
Zadow, and District Clerk (P. W. Annells).
dent of the district for 16 years, and
for 6 years a member of the Council.
ITe is an orchardist, member of the
Rechabite Lodge, Chairman of the
Waikerie School Committee, and a
member of the Waikerie District
Hospital Board.
COUNCILLOR ERNEST MORRELL
ROWE, J.P.
(District Council of Waikerie.)
Born at Adelaide, 20th April, 1879,
and educated at Adelaide. Mr. Rowe
has served in the Council for 3 years,
a resident for 15 years, and has owned
an orchard for 32 years. He is Presi-
dent of Waikerie Commercial Associa-
tion, Secretary of the Waikerie Show
Society, and a justice of the Peace.
In business he is an Agent and
orchardist, and is a member of the


* K
IF *1 -
(
■
dM I , I
'* I *
|K-
Waikerie Masonic Lodge, No. 86.
In sport he now favours bowls and in
his younger days played football.
He was lieutenant, 12th Battalion.
Home address, Waikerie.
days and camped in Victoria Square,
and both his parents were born in
Australia. Home address, Naidia, S.A.
member of the Council for 8 years and
a resident of the district for 41 years.
He is a football enthusiast. Home
address Blanchetown.
COUNCILLOR DOUGAL SARGENT.
(District Council of Waikerie.)
Born at Marrabel, 6th March, 1876,
and educated at Gladstone. Mr. Sar-
gent has been a resident of the district
for 11 years, and a Councillor for 1J
years. He is a farmer, and a member
of the Ancient Order of Foresters’
Lodge. He likes cricket. His ances-
tors came to Australia in the early
COUNCILLOR FREIDERICK WILHELM
ZADOW.
(District Council of Waikerie.)
Born at Blumberg, 20th November,
1870, and educated at Palmer. Mr.
Zadow, who is a farmer, has been a
COUNCILLOR FREDERICH GOTTHOLT
HARTWIG.
(District Council of Waikerie.)
Born at Towitta, 22nd July, 1885,
and educated at Sedan. He has served
in the Council for 3J years, and resided
in the district for 33 years. He is a


j^
f id^
% —
' 1
farmer, and his sports are Tennis and
Cricket. Present address, Private
Bag, Morgan.
COUNCILLOR THOMAS HENRY
EUSTICE.
(District Council of Waikerie.)
Born at Burra, 19th July, 1877, and
educated at Burra. He has served in
the Council for 3 years, and resided in
the district for 12 years. Business,
sheep farmer. Home address,
Maggea,
COUNCILLOR RAYDEN OSMOND JOHN
DUNNING, J.P.
(District Council of Waikerie.)
Born at Mt. Gambler, 22nd Decem-
ber, 1876, and educated at High
School, Mt. Gambier. He has given
6 years service in the Council, and
been 20 years a resident of the district.
He is Chairman of Ramco Co-op. Co.
Ltd., and Dried Fruit Packing Co., and
an orchardist. Home address, Ramco.


JIH : '
L
,i ate*-'
COUNCILLOR WALLACE HAMILTON
CATES.
(District Council of Waikerie.)
Born at St. Kilda, Vic., 31st Octo-
ber, 1882, and educated at Xavier
College, Kew, Vic. He has served
in the Council for six years and resided
in the district 23 years. Mr. Cates is
a member of the Waikerie Insitute and
Hospital Committees, has been secre-
tary or president of the Waikerie
Football Club for 16 years, and is a
member of the Waikerie Masonic
Lodge. Home address, Waikerie, S.A.
PERCY WEBB ANNELLS.
(District Clerk, District Council of Waikerie.)
Born at Adelaide, 18th June, 1883,
educated at Broken Hill High School.
Mr. Annells has It el cl the position for
10 years, and is a member of the
Waikerie Masonic, No. 80, and the
Waikerie Mark, No. 36, Lodges.
Sport, Bowls. War Service, on Head-
quarters Staff, Keswick Barracks.
GEORGE A. EDWARDS.
(Overseer and ex-Chairman, District Council
of Waikerie.)
Born at McLaren Vale, 7th January,
1872, and educated at McLaren Vale
Public School. Mr. Edwards has
given the Council service for 22 years,
and has resided in the district for 38
years. Tde combines farming with his
position as overseer. Sport, Cricket.
Home address, Qualco, S.A.


District Council of Walkerville


History of Walkerville
W alkerville is situated on a section which originally
belonged to Governor Hindmarsh, from whom a syndicate
purchased it for £l,lOO. In 1838 Messrs. Hindmarsh and
Hindsay, surveyors, laid it out as a village in 100 allot-
ments of one acre each. An early announcement reads :
It was proposed and carried that the name Walkerville
should he given to the village in compliment to an excel-
lent Colonist, Captain Walker. R.N.” (Captain Walker
was a merchant, wdio carried on business in Hindlev
Street.) J
A\ alkerville is the smallest in area of any of the
suburban districts, and is perhaps one of the most thickly
populated, the ai ea of tne district being 600 acres and the
population numbering 5,186 persons (1936 census).
As lar back as 1842 there is a record of a church being
established o\ the Methodists and a Sunday School opened,
which had an attendance of approximately 24 scholars. St.
Andrew’s, the present Anglican Church, is an imposing
landmark, and its tower is said to contain the only peal
of church bells in the State. The adjoining wards (Medin-
die, North Walkerville, and Gilberton), on account of the
magnificent views of the hills and intervening plains, have
been selected by many business men as their places of
abode, and a large number of beautiful private residences
have been erected.
The capital value of ratable property in the district is
£1,457,640, and the assessment value is £74,882, a rate of
2/- in the £, producing an annual revenue of £7,488/4/-.
The following gentlemen have served on the Council: —
Messrs. C. L. Jessop, W. Angus. W. Hobba, R. E. B. Pil-
kington, L. H. Muecke, A. E. Knuckey, A. Thiele, H. Gill
Williams, T. R. Nottage (Clerk), C. White, S. Goode, Snr.,
J. H. Swann, J. D. Woods, J. Campbell, G. Clarke. W. C.
Belt, J. Cherry, T. Randle. E. Smith, H. C. E. Muecke,
B. Nash, W. Mofiflin, Sir C. Brookman, Messrs. W. H.
Wadey, L. Conrad, R. B. Cox, G. Laughton, W. Cox,
J. Bickle, J. T. Mellor, E. W. van Senden, A. E. Shepherd,
J. C. Crawford, T. Crase, and J. S. Colquhoun.
Present members, District Council of Walkerville :
Chairman—David Waterhouse.
Councillors—Walkerville Ward, John Cresw r ell and G. D.
Shaw; North Walkerville Ward, David Waterhouse
and F. D. Wilson; Medindie Ward, H. G. Willcox and
L. E. Moyle; Gilbert Ward, H. Gill Williams and A.
Thiele.
District Clerk —B. I. Woods.
Overseer—T. R. Nottage.


/ M
S\
/
■Bggfe \-^
, /
Mr ‘ J
Hlv /
■nr ? i
VUIIHMKUMMM m »,«
' ""^ik
' vS. 1^
1
■ ,\
IP®
' 'jjkjm
#/rtl
8 rfbljE % I
- M&
■ Sw w
x
V '
THE LATE JAMES TAYLOR MELLOR.
(Past Chairman, District Council of
Walkerville.)
Born at Adelaide, August, 1865, and
educated at Prince Alfred College and
the University of Adelaide. The late
Mr. Mellor occupied the position of
Chairman of the Woodville District
Council from 1892 to 1893, and the
Walkerville District Council from 1903
to 1910. In business he was a Solici-
tor. The late Mr. Mellor died at
Medindie in April, 1914.
PAST CHAIRMAN CHARLES LEWIS
JESSOP.
(District Council of Walkerville.)
Was born at Adelaide and educated
at Queen’s School, Geelong Grammar
School, Victoria, and Adelaide Univer-
sity. Mr. Jessop was a Councillor for
MacDonnell Ward, City of Adelaide,
from 1926-32, and represented that
body on the Municipal Tramways
Trust. He has always taken a keen
interest in traffic control and regula-
tion, and as a member of one traffic
committee of the City Council did a
tremendous amount of work in the in-
terest of motorists. He was Chair-
man of the Walkerville District Coun-
cil from 1923-26. Mr. Jessop played
league football with the North Ade-
laide Football Club for 10 years, and
represented the South Australian
Football League on the Australasian
Football Council and also represented
the State in interstate matches. He
has been President of the club for
many years.
THE LATE WILLIAM COX.
(Past Councillor, District Council of
Walkerville.)
Born at King William Street, Ade-
laide; educated at Whinham College;
4 years' service as Councillor. The
late Mr. Cox also served as a Council-
lor in the Walkerville District Coun-
cil, and on the School Board of Advice,
North Adelaide Public School. He was
many years a deacon in the North
Adelaide Baptist Church, and a mem-
ber of the Oddfellows' and Masonic
Lodges. Mr. Cox died in 1905.
EDWIN ISAAC BARNETT.
(Past Councillor, District Council of
Walkerville.)
Born at St. Kilda, Victoria, 16th
January, 1852, and educated at Rev.
Moore’s Pulteney Street School, Ade-
laide. Mr. Barnett served 3 years in
the Walkerville District Council, and
during his term of office many
improvements were made in the Wal-
027


~
Mwe i JHH
ri-i* w j ■
BfEte*
Pv .4
HP
■
**% ;
**•> * "•
-
' x # r
I - \ * { /rj
.: '
Jy : ff'
‘I!
III
#•*«*-*« | >
iiii
JsS,’ / .,.
-flr- lg§\i®L-r
BHHbHhHI
L - — — — ■
kerville district. He was a keen
municipalist. and before his retirement
from business was a builder and con-
tractor. He is a member of the Loyal
Albion Lodge of Oddellows. Home
address, 74 Gloucester Street, Pros-
pect.
THE LATE JOHANN CARL BOTHE.
(Past Councillor, District Council of
Walkerville.)
Born at Hope Valley, 12th February,
1864, and educated at Hope Valley.
The late Mr. Bothe was a member of
the Council from July, 1894 to 1900,
and a resident of the district for 60
years. When North Walkerville was
declared a Municipal Ward he was
appointed by the Govenor, Sir William
Robinson, to represent that Ward,
which he did for 6 years. He was
always interested in Local Govern-
ment and was a member of the Com-
mittee which worked hard to have the
Walkerville tram extended to its pre-
sent terminus. For 53 years he
carried on business as a coach builder
at North Walkerville, and was a mem-
ber of the United Ancient Order of
Druids and Court Forester's Retreat
Lodges. Mr. Bothe died on 3rd May,
1935.
THE LATE EDWARD T. GROSE.
(Past Councillor, District Council of
Walkerville.)
Born at Townsville, Queensland,
24th January, 1874, and educated at
the Brisbane Grammar School. The
late Councillor Grose served for a
period of two years in the Council, and
was a Councillor at the time of his
decease. He was associated with the
New Zealand Insurance Company for
40 years, and was manager of branches
at Townsville, Maryborough, and
Charters Towers, in Queensland, be-
fore he was transferred to Adelaide.
The late Mr. Grose was manager in
Adelaide for 19 years, before his re-
tirement in 1934. He was a member
and Secretary of the Walkerville Bowl-
ing Club. He died ai his home in
Burlington Street, North Walkerville,
on the 6th May, 1936. The late Mr.
Grose left a widow, three sons, and a
married daughter.
COUNCILLOR HORACE GILBERT
WILLCOX, J P.
(District Council of Walkerville.)
Born at Wellington Square, North
Adelaide, 2nd July, 1881 ; educated at


I
M
' ; r
• * ■ -•. v
■
r* 1
ill I , •mMBm.'.'m
' J
l H J
Queen's School, Way and Hahndorf
Colleges; 55 years a resident of the
district. Mr. Willcox has served 7\
years in the Adelaide City Council to
June, 1936. Elected Councillor for
Robe Ward in 1929. Represented
Nailsworth Ward as Councillor in the
Prospect District Council for 2 years,
1907 to 1909. At present he is also
representing Medindie Ward as Coun-
cillor in the District Council of Wal-
kerville; elected in 1925. Positions
held: Vice-Chairman of the Council
Royal Agricultural and Horticultural
Society of South Australia, and a
member of the Council for 30 years.
A lover of all sport, particularly those
associated with horses; a keen gar-
dener. Home address, 15, Robe Ter-
race, Medindie.
COUNCILLOR H. GILL WILLIAMS,
L.D.S., R.C.S., Eng.
(District Council of Walkerville.)
Born at Unley on 4th April, 1874;
educated Hahndorf College and Uni-
versity College; 5 years a Councillor
Adelaide City Council; 15 years a
Councillor Walkerville District Coun-
cil : 35 years a resident of Gilberton,
Walkerville district. He is in business
as a dental surgeon. In command
Dental Reserve during the Great War.
His sports are bowls and fishing.
COUNCILLOR FRANK DAVIES
WILSON, J.P.
(District Council of Walkerville.)
Born at Prospect, 23rd January,
1887, and educated at North Adelaide
and Jamestown Pubhc Schools. Mr.
Wilson was elected a Councillor on
July 4th, 1936. In business he is a
Service Station Proprietor, and served
as President for 2 years of the S.A.
Chamber of Automobile Services. He
is a member of the Masonic Podge of
Truth, No. 8, and his sports are cricket,
tennis, and lacrosse. During the war,
Mr. Wilson served 3 years and 2
months abroad on active service in
Egypt and France with the 27th Bat-
talion and 7th Machine Gun Company.
His private address is 8G North East
Road, Walkerville.
COUNCILLOR JOHN CRESWELL.
(District Council of Walkerville.)
Mr. Creswell was born at Upper
Kensington, S.Aus., 12th June, 1891.
and educated at St. Peter’s College.
He has been a member of the Council
for 4 years, and a resident of the dis-
trict for 10 years. Mr. Creswell is in


M '‘\jk
m 1
\ i 'ft-
I
, I
ICf
i '
Btek.
iSk: ‘ mm
‘ JIPs Wm
rf * ’ "ife ; * J||£ , H . %»'
business as an Insurance Broker and
Secretary. He is a member of St
Peters Collegiate, No. 53, Masonic
Lodge, and his sports are cricket, ten-
nis, golf, and badminton. Mr. Cress-
well served with the A.I.F. for 4 years
in Egypt and France. Home address
11a Church Terrace, Walkerville.
LIEUT.-COLONEL G. D. SHAW.
(Councillor of the District Council of
Walkerville.)
Lieut.-Colonel Shaw was born at
Hindmarsh, sth July, 1883, and edu-
cated at Whinham College and South
Australian School of Mines. He has
had 3 years’ service in the Walkerville
Council, and has been a resident of the
district for 16 years. He is a member
of the Metropolitan County Board,
Recreation Ground and Distress Com-
mittees. In business he is an Analy-
tical Chemist, being a Fellow of the
Australian Chemical Institute, and an
Associate of the South Australian
School of Mines. He is a past Presi-
dent of the Australian Chemical Insti-
tute, S.A. Branch. His sports are
tennis and golf, and he is a member of
the Repertory Theatre and the Ade-
laide Dual Club. During the war he
served with the 10th Battalion, A.1.F.,
in Egypt, Gallipoli, France, and Bel-
gium. Home address, 10 Warwick
Street, Walkerville.
COUNCILLOR LEONARD ERNEST
MOYLE.
(District Council of Walkerville.)
Born at North Adelaide, and edu-
cated at Sturt Street Public School.
He has been a member of the Council
for 8 years and a resident of the dis-
trict for 25 years. Mr. Moyle is a
member of the North Adelaide Foot-
ball Club, the Prospect Horses in
Action Society, Vice-President of
Gilberton Swimming Club, and Chair-
man of the Recreation Ground Com-
mittee. Home address, Nottage Ter-
race, Medindie.
THOMAS ROBERT NOTTAGE, J.P.,
(Clerk of Works, Surveyor, Sanitary
Inspector, etc., District Council of
Walkerville.)
Born at Prospect, sth May, 1884,
and educated at Whinham College,
North Adelaide. Mr. Nottage has
been attached to the Council for 36
years. Hs was appointed Assistant
Clerk in 1900, and District Clerk in
1917, in succession to his father, who


' % '■» ■
* ■ > . '*r|
4&:ll . •*JI
Held such position from 1876 to the
date of his death in 1917. Mr. Nottage
relinquished the position of District
Clerk in 1929, and was appointed to his
present position. He is a Past Presi-
dent of the Walkerville Bowling Club,
and held the position of Hon. Secre-
tary and Treasurer for 5 years. Mr.
Nottage is a member of the Masonic
Foresters', and Buffalo Lodges, hav-
ing held all the highest offices in the
latter, including Grand Primo of Aus-
tralia in 1920. Home address, 12
Wilsden Street, North Walkerville.
BRUCE lAN WOODS
(District Clerk, District Council of Walker-
ville.)
Born at Hamley Bridge, 20th August,
1902, and educated at Hamley Bridge
and Balaklava Public Schools and
Gawler District High School. He
served as Assistant District Clerk from
Ist October, 1920, to 18th March, 1929.
From thence on he has been Dis-
trict Clerk of Walkerville District
Council and Secretary of the Local
Board of Health. He has been a resi-
dent in the district since 1917. Prior
to 1920 he was employed in the
Government service. At the present
time he is Worshipful Master of
Walkerville Masonic Lodge, No. 111,
S.A.C., of which he was Secretary for
4 years. He is the Secretary of the
Walkerville District Cricket Club.




District Council of Warooka


History of Warooka
\\ arooka is situated on the southern end of Yorke
Peninsula, having the sea on three sides— east, west, and
south-therefore the climate is almost free from hot winds.
Ihe total area is 564 square miles, divided into five
Hundreds, viz., Moorowie. Para Wurlie, Carribie, Warren-
ben, and Coonarie.
. The first Council, which was held in 1888, consisted
of T. Robertson (Chairman), C. Day, W. Gold-
smith, J. Young, and J. B. Williss.
V\ arooka is considered a good district for sheep farm-
ing and horse breeding, and various parts are excellent for
wheat growing, 70,000 bags of wheat being shipped in a
year. Good promise of further development in indicated,
as new areas of land are each year being cleared ready
for the plough.
Point Turton, six miles from the town, is the shipping
port for W arooka, whilst at Cape Spencer, 48 miles sou tin
a very important industry has been established by the
Permasite Plaster Company Pty. Ltd., for the manufacture
of plaster. An up-to-date factory has been erected, and
good stone houses have been built as residences for the
employees. Large shipments of the super-fine plaster are
constantly being exported to the adjoining States, New
Zealand, and other markets.
From Marion Bay immense quantities of crude gypsum
are regularly shipped, and the district also produces quanti-
ties of timber of various kinds.
The roads are fairly good, and the length totals 672
miles. Ihe local institute is under the control of the
Council, which body intends to build a Council Chamber,
one which will be more commodius and which will include
a soldiers' memorial.
I he capital value of ratable property in the district has
been £200,660, and the assessment value £10,033, with a
rate of 1/- in the £. producing £502.
The entire population of the district is 656 persons,
who are accommodated in 160 dwellings.
Following is a list of the names of past and present
members of the District Council; — Messrs. T. Day, S.
Goode, J. Vigar, A. Treasure, D. Ramsay, J. Day. G. T.
Player, E. Tehany, C. Newbold, L. G. Phillips, G. Phillips,
S. G. Cigar, j. \ . Barclay, J. A. McKenzie, G. L. Crozier,
E- T. Barlow, h. J. Johnson, W. Mclntyre, J. Anderson,
A. Murdoch, G. Brook, F. C. Croser, C. N. Boundy, C. N.
Player, E. J. Caldwell, R. McKenzie, K. Barrett, and T. H.
Murdoch.
PRESENT MEMBERS, DISTRICT COUNCIL OF
WAROOKA.
Chairman—S. G. Vigar.
Councillors—|. A. McKenzie, E. PL Murdoch, J. Y. Barclay,
S. L. Goode.
District Clerk—j. Id. Penhall.


' ' ' '
District Council of West Torrens
OLD COUNCIL CHAMBERS.


'mf
I W£/T io&fW
1 d’/twct council ; >.
History of West Torrens
On Good Friday, the 25th March, 1853, a number of
residents met at the Hilton Hotel—then known, it is
understood, as The Seven Stars Hotel —for the purpose of
discussing the advisability or otherwise of approaching the
Governor with the request that the District lie formed into
a District Council. As a result of this meeting it was
villages of Thebarton, Hilton, Cowandilla, Richmond, Reed-
beds, St. Leonards, Plympton, and neighbouring districts
was presented to His Excellency the Governor. It was
proposed that Messrs. George Dew, John Foreman, A. H.
Davis, C. S. Hare, and John Hector should be the first
Council. The residents, however, were apparently not in
NEW COUNCIL CHAMBERS.
decided to approach His Excellency Sir Henry Edward
Fox-Young, who was Governor of the State at this time,
with the request that that portion of the State bounded
on the east by the West Park Lands, on the west by the
sea, on the north by the River Torrens, and on the south by
the Bay Road, should be constituted a District Council, to
be designated "The District Council of West Torrens,'
and in due course a petition signed by 115 residents in the
complete agreement with the proposal, for almost imme-
diately a counter-petition, signed by 55 of the inhabitants,
was presented, protesting that the meeting held on the
Good Friday was very hurriedly arranged, only twelve
hours' notice having been given, that the district was too
sparsely settled, the administrative expenses would be too
high, and that labour conditions were so unsettled and it
wa,s so difficult to obtain sufficient men to attend to the


ordinary wants of the community without having to find
men to carry out the work of a District Council, that the
time was not ripe for the formation of the District into a
District Council.
The Governor and his advisers, however, apparently
thought otherwise, for on the 7th July, 1853. the prayer
of the petitioners was granted, and the District proclaimed
as “The District Council of West Torrens.”
The establishment of the District was assisted finan-
cially by a grant from the Treasurer, and the revenue for
the first year, based on a rate of 1/- in the pound upon the
assessment, was £1,098/0/3. The expenditure for that
year was £1,040/11/2, and the year finished with a credit
balance of £57/9/1.
At its inception the District included what is now the
Thebarton Corporation, but in February, 1883, this portion
of the District was severed and the Thebarton Corporation
came into being. During the intervening thirty years, be-
tween the foundation of the District and the severance of
what is now the Corporation of Thebarton, the revenue
of the District from all sources had increased from £1,098
to only £1,629, and that year the Council finished with a
bank overdraft of £B2B/3/-, being more than one-half of
the full year’s revenue. In March. 1888, a Council
Chamber on the Marion Road was built at an approximate
cost of £4OO, and the Council has now built a new Council
Chamber and offices at the junction of Brooker Terrace and
Rowland Road, Hilton, at an approximate cost of £5,000.
In 1888 the total revenue of the Council was £1,252, whilst
at the present moment it is approximately £26,000.
The District Council of West Torrens is second oldest
District Council in the State. Local Government originated
in South Australia in 1840, four years after the Proclama-
tion of the Province, and the first local governing body
was the Adelaide City Council, which came into being on
the 31st October, 1840. The first District Council was
Mitcham, which came into being only a few months before
the District of West Torrens.
The township of Hilton, in which the new Council
Chamber is situate, is one of the oldest townships in the
District, being laid out about 90 years ago.
The present value of ratable property is £4,752,800, and
the assessment value £237,640.
Members of the present Council are as follows
Messrs. A. F. Scott (Chairman), A. Burt, A. McLean,
H. H. Norman, C. W. Lloyd, A. Chambers, E. L. Osborn,
Vernon S. Shepherd (District Clerk).


life Balm
S I ," ; v ; ., , •■
’ •*',
|g
_£. -—,.JI
CHAIRMAN ALEXANDER FERRIS-
SCOTT, J.P., A.F.1.A., A.C.A.A
(District Council of West Torrens.)
Mr. Ferris-Scott was born at Car-
noustie, Scotland, 14th February, 188G,
and educated at Cliftonville College.
England, and St. Francis Xavier’s Col-
lege, Bruges, Belgium. He arrived in
Australia 23rd March, 1909. He has
been a resident of the West Torrens
District for 10 years, and a member of
the Council for 3 years, being Chair-
man since 1935. Mr. Ferris-Scott is a
member of the Associated Federal
Institute of Accountants, and of the
Associated Cost Accountants, of Aus-
tralasia. He is also a member of the
Torrensville Masonic Lewis Lodge,
No. 104, was Secretary and later Presi-
dent of the Thebarton Sub-Branch,
Returned Soldiers’ League, and during
the war he served from 17th August,
19]4, to 31st January, 1919, being at-
tached to the 2nd L.H. Regiment,
Queensland, until May, 1916, and with
the 2nd Field Artillery, 4th F.A.8.,
164 Howitzer Battery, until January,
1919. lie held the rank of Battery
Q.M.S. His sport is bowls, being a
member of the Underdale Bowling
C lub, and in business he is a Federal
Public Servant. His private address
is 10 Lipsett I errace, Brooklyn Park.
PAST CHAIRMAN GORDON JAMES
ROWELL.
(District Council of West Torrens.)
Mr. Rowell was born at Locklevs,
13th August, 1885, and educated at Ful-
ham and Currie Street Public Schools
and the Adelaide Shorthand and Busi-
ness Training Academy. He has been
a member of the West Torrens District
Council, representing Underdale Ward
for G years, 2 of which he was Chair-
man, and he has been a resident of the
district for 51 years. In business, Mr.
Rowell is assistant manager for
Messrs. Mcllwraith, McEacharn, Ltd.
He was hon. secretary of the Fulham
C ricket Club for several years, and has
been hon. secretary of the Adelaide
and Suburban Cricket Association
and Lockleys Bowling Club for
4 years. He was also President
for 2 years of the latter. Mr.
Rowell was joint secretary of the
Lockleys Cheer-Up Society during the
war period, and has been hon. secre
tary of the Lockleys Soldiers' Memo-
rial Hall since its inception in 1922.
He has also been a member of the
Executive of the S.A. Bowling Asso-
ciation since 1932, and is a member of
the new Thebarton Branch, U.O.A.D.
Lodge. His private address is Main
Street, Lockleys.
PAST CHAIRMAN AUGUSTUS JOHN
LEWIS WILSON.
(District Council of West Torrens.)
Mr. A ilson was born at Clement’s
Gap, loth June, 1888, and educated at
various public schools. He has been a
resident of the West Torrens District
for the past 18 years, and was a mem-
her of the Council for 8 years, during
which he was Chairman for 24 years.
-Mi. Wilson has done exceedmgdv
good v ork for the district during his
term of office, making a number of im-
provements. He is a Secretarv bv


vm m
W.H
|Hii.
M
*
Iv!fiKBli
|f ' f
jfjy * »-
I
SH&
,«| .~
JggjB ::
profession, and is a member of the
Masonic Order. His private address is
13 Bagot Street, Hilton.
Mr. Streeter is a retired cabinetmaker,
and is interested in cricket. His private
address is Streeter’s Road, Plympton.
and his sport is football. In business
he is a master baker. His home address
is 27 Nottingham Avenue, Keswick.
PAST CHAIRMAN RICHARD
STREETER.
(District Council of West Torrens.)
Mr. Streeter was born at Plympton,
Ist April, 1853, and educated at
Plympton Public School. He was a
member of the West Torrens District
Council for 17 years, and has been a
resident in the district all his life. He
has also been for 64 years a member
of the Independent Order of Recha-
bites, and has been a working member
in church and social life for 50 yeais.
PAST CHAIRMAN FREDERICK
WILLIAM INGERSON.
(District Council of West Torrens.)
Mr. Ingerson was born at Red 11 ilk
27th March, 1878, and educated at
Sturt Street and Flinders Street Public
Schools. He has been a resident of the
AVest Torrens district for 30 years, and
a member of the Council for 5 years.
Mr. Ingerson is also a member of the
Freemasons and Oddfellow’s Lodges,
PAST CHAIRMAN CLIFFORD
STANFORD.
(District Council of West Torrens.)
Mr. Stanford was born at Brighton,
17th April, 1887, and educated at the
Fulham Public School. He was a mem-
ber of the West Torrens District
Council for 6 years, one year of which
he was Chairman, and 2 years Chair-
man of the Works Committee. Mr.
Stanford is a foundation member of
the Lockleys Memorial Hall, and is
chairman of trustees and the commit-
tee of management. In business he is a


8B «ji
;-’c'' Silk
yr9
■Hr
x :
9H P$|f
■nf^»
flHK ,4,
mk 1,4 . iyl
K M
j , JHH
; --4»s [ ''if
A ML, J..V ||,
HEHl 1*Rl
fll'; "S^W%,
glasshouse tomato grower, and his
sports are bowls and golf. His home
address is 7 Elston Street, Lockdeys.
mental manager, and his sport is
bowls. His home address is Henley
Beach Road, Lockleys.
sports are swimming and tennis. Ad-
dress, 5, Lady Street, Golflands, Glen-
elg.
PAST CHAIRMAN TERLIUS ALEXAN
DER POWELL.
(District Council of West Torrens.)
Mr. Powell was born at Perth, W.A.,
27th August, 1884, and educated at the
State School. He was a member of the
West Torrens Council for 8 years, 2 of
which he was Chairman, and has been
a resident of the district for 22 years.
In business Mr. Powell is a depart-
COUNCILLOR CHARLES CLARENCE
LESLIE ROGERS.
(District Council of West Torrens.)
Was born at Southwark, S.A., 17th
August, 1894. and educated at Rich-
mond Public School and Muirden Col-
lege. At present first term as Coun-
cillor of Glenelg Corporation ; 2 years
Councillor for West Torrens District
Council. Chairman of Works Com-
mittee for 12 months. A resident of
the district for 8 years. Business,
Commonwealth Public Servant. A
member of Executive Committee for
Holdfast Bay Tennis Association. His
PAST COUNCILLOR COLIN CAMPBELL
LEITCH.
(District Council of West Torrens.)
Mr. Eeitch was born at Greenock,
Scotland, 27 th January, 1884, and
educated at St.' Andrew’s School.
Greenock. He arrived in Australia in
July, 1910. He was a member of the
West Torrens District Council for G
years, and has been a resident of the
district for 10 years. Mr. Leitch was
also chairman of the Finance Com-
mittee, chairman and trustee of the
Weigall Oval Committee, secretary of
the Keswick Sports Club and the Pro-
gress Association. He was a member


wHHk *. »»,
•‘I l Mmt
W
paL ]■!;..'•<
1|
P "1
WtiST oh| — --
MM:
m
of the Advisory Board for Tree Plant-
ing, and supervised the planting of
pine trees 011 Anzac Highway. He is
also a life member of St. John's
Masonic Lodge, No. 175, S.C.,
Greenock, and a Past Master of Kes-
wick Lodge, No. 146, S.A.C. Mr.
Leitch is a founder of the Keswick
Bowling Club, and was for some time
secretary. At present he is a member
of the Stirling Bowling Club at Mount
Lofty. In business he is a merchant,
and his private address is "Hillcrest,'
Crafers.
PAST COUNCILLOR ALBERT SPENCER
(District Council of West Torrens.)
Mr. Spencer, who was for four years
a member of the West Torrens District
Council, was born at Mount Lofty on
18th July, 1862, and educated at Nara-
coorte. He was at one time manager
of the Lillimur Butter Factory, and
later was employed by Mr. Charles
Wilcox for 24 vears.
DONALD ROY POTTER, A.F.1.A., A.A.I.S ,
A.C.A.A., J.P.
(Past Councillor, District Council of West
Torrens)
Born at Peterborough 14th Decem-
ber, 1902, and educated at Peter-
borough High School and Adelaide
University. Service in Council, 4
years, and for 7 years was a resident
of the district: 4 years a member of
the Finance Committee, 3 years of
which he was chairman; 3 years a
representative on the Metropolitan
County Board; member of Metropoli-
tan County Board Finance Committee
for 2 years. Business, Secretary. Mr.
Potter qualified as an Associate of the
Federal Institute of Accountants, 1923;
Associate, Australasian Institute of
Secretaries, 1925, gaining first place in
South Australia; Associate, Cost
Accountants, Australia, 1927. Ap-
pointed Justice of the Peace in 1933.
Mr. Potter is interested in civic reform
and was secretary of the Glandore and
Grassmere Progress Association before
entering the Council. He take§ a keen
interest in politics. While in the Coun-
cil, Mr. Potter watched the financial
position of Hayhurst Ward, which had
an overdraft of £2,600, and when he
left the Ward showed a credit of
£4OO. His present address is Mount
Gambier.


'
H
• V : . • ' • , f
|
g|||||
HK ■^ fe >- am.«!#*
,, **•
r.
J» -t' v
fif / MMM ■» > -
mi ; '* s£Hf\ ?v
PAST COUNCILLOR THE LATE
HENRY SHERRIFF, J.P.
(District Council of West Torrens.)
The late Mr. Sherriff was born at
I ayneham, S.A., May 15th, 1861 and
educated at Fulham, S.A. He was for
21 years a member of the West Tor-
rens District Council, 6 years of which
he was chairman. He' was also for
se\ eral years a member of the County
and Tramways Boards, and was a resi-
dent of the district for 64 years. Mr.
Sheriff was a member of the Man-
chester Unity of Oddfellows' Lodge,
and his sport was bowls.
PAST COUNCILLOR HARRY WATSON.
(District Council of West Torrens.)
Mr. Watson was born at Adelaide,
19th April, 1862, and educated at R. C.
ATitton’s School and Prince Alfred Col-
lege. Ife has been a resident of the
West Torrens district for 48 years, and
was a member of the Council for seve-
ral years. Mr. \\ atson was an officer
in the \\ aterworks and Sewers De-
partment for about 50 years, and was
also a Revenue Recovery Officer until
31st March, 1930. He is now retired.
e is a member of the Masonic and
Druids' Lodges, was chairman of the
\\ est Torrens Repatriation Commit-
tee, foimed to raise funds to rehabili-
tate the returned soldies in the district,
and was a member and chairman of
the Plympton School Committee in the
early days. Mr. Watson is also a
foundation member of the Plympton
Institute and Library, and was chair-
man of the Weigall Oval Trustees
Committee. His private address is
Martin Avenue, Plympton.
COUNCILLOR ALFRED BURT,
(District Council of West Torrens.)
Born at Cardiff, South Wales,
England, 12th July, 1887, and edu-
cated at Gladstone School, Cardiff.
Ali. Curt arrived in Australia sth
November, 1924. He was first
elected Councillor for the West Tor-
rens District Council in 1932, and
te-elected in 1935. He has been chair-
man of the Works Committee since
1934, and was president of the S.A.
Painters’ and Decorators’ Union in
1926. Air. Burt is also a Past Grand
Master of the 1.0.0. F. Lodge, and a
member of the Hilton Tent Rechabite
Lodge. He has been for 11 years a
resident of the Hilton district, and in
business is a house decorator. Durim>-
the war he served for 3 years as a
sapper with the Royal ' Engineers,
B.E.L. Councillor Burt has alwavs


-■> «j |(P| ||||
M
mam
'' ' r '
taken a keen and active interest in
local affairs, particularly in the build-
ing of the Hilton Memorial Hall, being
vice-president of the committee and a
member of the Hilton Sub-Branch,
Returned Soldiers' Association. He
was made a life member of the Hilton
and Cowandilla Boys' and Girls' Gym-
nasium Club Committee in recognition
of services rendered. He is a great
advocate of recreation grounds for
children, and his sports are rugby
football and cricket.
COUNCILLOR CHARLES W. LLOYD, J.P.
(District Council of West Torrens.)
Mr. Lloyd was born at Bordertown
in 1889, and educated in Victoria. He
has been a member of the West Tor-
rens District Council for seveial years,
representing Keswick Ward. Mi.
Lloyd has travelled extensively, and
was appointed by the S.A. and Com-
monwealth National Roads' Associa-
tion to represent them in Europe and
U.S.A. in 1928 and 1929. He also held
an honorary commission from the S.A.
Government and the Prime Minister
to make enquiries and report 011 road,
rail, and municipal matters. His in-
terest in municipal affairs is shown by
his service as Councillor in the
Thebarton Corporation for a number
of years. He acted as hon. secretary
of the Thebarton School Committee,
and is also vice-president of the West
Torrens Cricket Club. Mr. Lloyd is a
master builder and a licensed valuator
by profession, and is connected with
the firm of Matters & Co., 12 A ay-
mouth Street, Adelaide. His sport is
bowls.
COUNCILLOR ARTHUR McLEAN.
(District Council of West Torrens.)
Mr. McLean was born at Semaphore
in 1882, and educated at the North
Adelaide Public School. He has been
a resident of the West Torrens Dis-
trict for 14 years, and a member of the
Council for 2 years. He is also a mem-
ber of the Masonic and Oddfellows’
Lodges, and a representative of the
Council on the Finance Committee.
Mr. McLean was for three years an
engineer on a coastal steamer, and
later a mining engineer at Kalgoorlie,
W.A. He commenced an engineering
business on his own account 15 years
ago, and now has his sons as partners.
His sports are tennis, golf, fishing and
shooting, and his home address is
Mooringa Avenue, Plympton.
COUNCILLOR AMBROSE CHAMBERS.
(District Council of West Torrens.)
Mr. Chambers was born at Torrens-
ville, September 20th, 1898, and edu-
cated at the Christian Brothers’ Col-
lege. He has been a member of the
West Torrens District Council from
July, 1935, and a resident of the dis-
trict for 12 years. He is a past secre-
tary of the Glandore and Grassmere
Progressive Association, and a mem-
ber of the Hibernian-Australian Catho-


♦ ♦♦* ; v h j i * ■. mBH||^P
r. 'iH
*'4 * * *3
W 9
am t
■a 5- ,_i
Tfl
.> ,, 4
I j M *
lie Benefit Society. Mr. Chambers is a
Civil Servant, and his sports are tennis
and golf. His home address is 9 Wel-
lington Street, Glandore.
on the staff of the 7th A.G. Hospital,
Keswick. His home address is George
Street, Camden.
member of the Institute of Public Ad-
ministration. His sports are golf and
tennis, and his private address is
White Park, Lockleys.
COUNCILLOR EGBERT LAURENCE
OSBORN.
(District Council of West Torrens.)
Mr. Osborn was born at South
Yarra, Vic., 9th October, 1866, and
educated at the Jesuit College, Mel-
bourne. He has been a resident of the
West Torrens District for 25 years,
and a member of the Council for 8
years. In business, Mr. Osborn is an
Egg Inspector for the S.A.F.U., and
during the war he served for 4 years
VERNON STANLEY SHEPHARD, J.P.
(District Clerk, District Council of West
Torrens.)
Mr. Shephard was born at Brighton,
12 th March, 1893, and educated at
Glenelg and Brighton Public Schools,
and the School of Mines, Adelaide. He
has been in the service of the West
Torrens Council since January, 1909,
and under his capable administration
the district has been vastly improved.
He is a Justice of the Peace and a


IPlpP^
JOHN TAGGART LEANEY.
(Cert. R. 5.1., London.)
(Assistant Clerk, Health and Building In-
spector, District Council of West Torrens.)
Born at Hindmarsh, sth January,
1901, and educated at Christian Bro-
thers’ College, Adelaide. He has been
attached to the Council for 19 years,
and has been a resident of the district
for 9 years, Mr. Leaney holds the cer-
tificate of the Royal Sanitary Institute,
London. His sports are tennis und
swimming. Home address, A\ hite
Park, Lockleys.




District Council of Willunga


History of Willunga
The word Willunga is derived from the aboriginal
W ilia-1 nga, meaning locality of green trees.
W iHunga is one of the oldest districts in South Aus-
tralia, being visited by Colonel Light with a guard of
marines from the H.M.S. “Buffalo” as far back as 1837.
The district is situated on the main road between Adelaide
and \ ictor Harbour. The two sections which comprise
the township were purchased from the Crown by Mr. E.
Morre, and in 1840 were surveyed as a township. The
sti eets and terraces were named (with two exceptions)
after saints.
The primary industries of the district are the slate
quarries, wheat and hay growing, and stock raising. Hay
growing, however, has for many years been in excess of
the wheat.
The agricultural land, especially on the Willunga
Plains, is acknowledged to be some of the best in the State,
its average price for many years being £2O per acre.
On the east and south sides of the district there are
thousands of acres of growing timber suitable for piles,
telegraph poles, fencing, and firewood, but up to the advent
of the railway this was used only for local requirements.
Owing to the facilities offered by the railway, the timber
has become a valuable asset, not only to its owners, but to
the residents and others, many of whom are kept con-
tinuously employed in felling the timber and carting it to
the railway.
From about 1840 to 1853 the Hundred of Willunga,
which embraced Willunga, Aldinga, McLaren Vale, Noar-
lunga, Lower Meadows, and part of Myponga, was under
control of a District Roads Board, consisting of five com-
missioners, the first, as far as can be ascertained, being
Messrs. C. T. Hewett, P. Hollins, G. Lovelock, R. Logan,
and T. Atkinson.
In 1853, owing to the passing of a District Councils
Act, the Board of Commissioners lapsed, and five Coun-
cillors were elected by the ratepayers, in conformity with
the new Act. Those being elected were Messrs. R. Bos-
worth, J.P. (Chairman), and Councillors J. V. James, J.
Norman, T. S. Reid, and T. Atkinson. The assessment for
that year was £ll,Bll, and the total general rate of 1/- in
the £, produced £590/11/-.
\\ ithin a few years a severance was made from the
Willunga District by both Noarlunga and Aldinga having
their own Councils. On readjustment the District of Wil-
lunga consisted of three wards—Willunga, McLaren Vale,
and Lower Meadows. The latter was later named “Dinga-
baldinga,” a native name meaning “water, water every-
where." About 40 years ago a portion of Myponga was
added to Willunga Ward.
The present area of the district is 43,520 acres—popu-
lation, 1,169 persons, of whom 372 were ratepayers.
Willunga is the proud possessor of a splendid recreation
ground close to the township, used many times each
year by picnickers from Adelaide and its suburbs. In
1915 a railway communication was established between
Adelaide and Willunga, and since then the district has made
rapid progress. A motor service also carries the mails
every day. Several passenger motor cars also run between
Adelaide and Victor Harbour daily.
McLaren Vale was named after the first colonial
manager of the South Australian Company, and has during
the last 30 years, owing to the cultivation of vineyards,
changed from a quiet, easy-going little township to probably
one of the most energetic and prosperous in the State.
Willunga overlooks the Gulf, and is within four and a
half miles from the Port Willunga beach, which is a
favourite resort for city and other folk.
There are 19f miles of main roads within the district.
The Council Chamber, which was formerly “Buckland
House Academy,” was built in 1864.
The following is a list, as far as can be ascertained, of
the names of past and present Councillors :—Messrs. T. C.
Hewett, R. Hill, T. Atkinson, T. S. Kell, J. Allen, T. Martin.
W. McMurtie, R. J. Nicol, J. McMurtie, F. DeCaux, R. F.
Atkinson, L. I. Jacobs, S. S. Brown, C. E. Pridmore, W. H.


Brown, J. Binney, M. Goode, S. Strout, j. Thomas, A. C.
Johnston, A. H. Fraser, J. G. Kelly, F. Powell, G. Malpas,
G. Hailstone. J. S. Malpas, H. J. Norman, J. Bigg, J. T.
Rowland, A. DeCaux, A. Longbottom, \\. J. Binney, R.
Russell. T. Martin, F. Bassett, D. Tolle, W. Semmens,
W. O. Nottage, F. L. Aldam, B. R. Hyde, H. Allen, N.
Brookman, j. T. Powell, and C. Lipson.
Present Council. —Councillors F. B. V ilson. J.P
(Chairman), McLaren hlat ; F. R. Martin, \\ illunga; A. G
Hunt, McLaren Vale; B. St. J. Proctor, Yundi; M. C
Lovelock, Aldinga; T. W. Stone, J.P., Aldinga ; H. D. B.
Stanfield, Aldinga; B. G. Dunstan (District Clerk).




District Council of Wilmington


History of Wilmington
1 he District Council of Wilmington is an amalgama-
tion of the Old Districts of Hammond and Woolundunga.
The following histories of these two places will give a fairly
accurate one of W ilmington and surrounding districts, and
is the only one available on going to press.
The District Council of Woolundunga was situated five
miles from Port Augusta, and the principal township
within the district was Stirling North, which was laid out
83 } eai s ago by Messrs. Elder and Stirling. The main
roads to Quorn, Wilmington, nad secondary road to Port
Pine branch off at Stirling North.
\Voolundunga was established in November, 1887. as
the District Council of Davenport, and consisted of the
Hundreds of W'inninowie, parts of Woolundunga, Daven-
port, Ciozier, h anah, and W yacca. A few years after the
district was formed the name was changed from Davenport
to Woolundunga, and the area was approximately 212,000
acres, consisting of the Hundred of W'inninowie and part
each of Davenport and W oolundunga.
The district, from being a wheat area, has, during the
past 20 years, gone over almost entirely to sheep and
general depasturing.
A number of roadways were originally constructed
of metal from Spear Creek, and are a monument to the
memory of old-time road-makers.
Under Council jurisdiction there were 32 miles of main
roads. The population of the entire district was estimated
at 472 persons, who were accommodated in 200 dwellings.
The capital value of ratable property was £142.280;
assessment value, £7,114; and a rate of 1/- in the £ pro-
duced a revenue of £351.
The following is a list of past members of the District
Council of Woolundunga as far as can be ascertained:—
Messrs. J. Grieg, J. E. Drennan, J. Grunike, B. Willoughby,
J. H. Michael, Prosser (2), J. G. Moseley, M.P., W. G.
Pryor, S. M. Aldenhoven, W. Smoker, A. Barrett, Mont-
gomery, J. Green, F. H. Lehman, G. Fitzgerald, L. O. Der-
rington (Chairman), J. W. Herde, O. J. Young, A. Smoker,
A. Brook, S. Jones, and G. F. Bock (Clerk).
THE DISTRICT COUNCIL OF HAMMOND.
Hammond was so named by Governor Jervois after his
eldest son, Henry Hammond Jervois. The township of
the same name lies north of Adelaide, a distance of 213 A
miles. The district, which is used chiefly for farming and
grazing purposes, has an area of 214,400 acres. Owing to
the long dry spells common to districts in the far north,
Hammond has not progressed to any great extent, although
the advent of superphosphates has greatly minimised the
chances of poor crops and subsequent loss and hardships.
The capital value of ratable property under control of
the Council was £145,840, and was assessed for rating pur-
poses at £13,441. The rate was fixed at 1/- in the £ and
yielded £667. In 1921 the population was estimated at 732
persons, of whom 250 were ratepayers; the dwellings num-
bered 156.
Hammond possesses a number of fine public and pri-
vate business places, in addition to a large oval, tennis
courts, recreation reserve, and bowling green.
The names of past members of the District Council
of Hammond (as far as can be ascertained) are contained
in the following list:—Messrs. J. Scott Robertson (Chair-
man), J. H. Lehman, H. Wallace. R. Schiller, F. O. Brooks,
P. J. Goodenough, B. Barker (Clerk), A. Crisp. J. Gum, J.
McNamara, J. B. Cormack, W. Rodgers, R. Cole, L. R.
Phillis, T. Ward, F. Bunfield, J. G. Fraser. A. Abbott, J. H.
Wright, W. T. Carter, T. O’Donohue, M. Ryan, and R.
Brown.
The members of the present District Council of Wil-
mington are as follow:—Messrs. G. H. Voigt (Chairman),
R. Schiller, J. T. Maloney, J. J. Hannagan. C. Michael. S. J.
Bartlett, and O. B. Barker (District Clerk).


District Council of Yankalilla


HISTORY OF YANKALILLA
Ihe word 3 ankalilla is of undoubtedly aboriginal
meaning, but so far all efforts to trace its origin have
been in vain, and the name has been given to a tract of
land situated 50 miles south of Adelaide on the Bungala
River.
Pastoral pursuits are largely followed by the residents
°f the district, improved pastures being in the fertile val-
le> s of the localit}". Ihe surrounding district is moun-
tainous, and the intervening valleys are mostly taken up
by an industrious class of small farmers, who fatten sheep
and market dairy produce, honey, and wattle bark.
The area of the district is 103,630 acres, and the popu-
lation is estimated at 1,300 persons, who are accommodated
in 371 dwellings.
The capital value of ratable property is £481,400. and
the assessment value is £24.070, whilst a rate of 1/3 in
the £ yields yearly £1,649/11/-.
The following is a list of the names of the past mem-
bers of the District Council Messrs. G. A. Taverner
(Chairman), F. Newman, A. Wise, C. Symonds, G. McCoy,
G. A. Stacey, G. Hunt, H. A. Pengilley, F. W. Clayton, H. J.
Jagger, H. J. Dennis, C. Sampson, W. H. Sampson, M.
McGuiness, G. Rowley, C. Forrest, F. J. Stock, A. E. Stock,
R. B. Clark, C. Muller, E. E. Tonkin, T. Stacey, T. Eatt,
O. Rogers, T. Millard, C. S. Sanders, and J. J. James.,
Present members of the Council are: —J. M.
Mitchell (Chairman), G. A. Stacey, W. F. Roads, C. W.
Eats, A. McArthur, A. M. Richardson, B. G. Willis, Jnr.,
and G. F. Back (Clerk and Overseer).
About three years ago the old Council area was amal-
gamated with that of Rapid Bay Council, and the combined
area became the present District of Yankalilla.
GEORGE FREDERICK BACK.
(District Clerk and Overseer, District
Council of Yankalilla.)
Mr. Back was born at Port Augusta
West, Bth March, 1887, and educated
at Port Augusta West and Port
Augusta Public Schools and Way
College, Adelaide. He has been in the
service of the Yankalilla District
Council for 2 years, and was previously
District Clerk and Overseer of the Dis-
trict of Woolundunga, near Port
Augusta, for 10 years, Town Clerk of
Port Augusta West for 3 years, and
Acting Town Clerk of the amalga-
mated Council of Port Augusta for
three months. Mr. Back worked on
pastoral properties west of Port
Augusta for some years, and was
farming in the mallee near Borrika for
a short time. He passed the local
Government Auditors’ examination
when instituted, qualifying by private
study. Mr. Back is interested in
journalism and politics.
954


Distrid Council of Yorke Peninsula


<*& '-& )■ -m*r l,->: - || —-
**" ' jtf^ 1 k ' -<JI^^If **
DISTRICT COUNCIL OF YORKE PENINSULA.
BACK—L. G. Rowe, F. H. Koch, H. H. Davey, C. J. Newbold, L. S. Andrew, D. E. Brown.
SITTING—R. W. Arrowsmith (Clerk), C. B. Hasting, H. R. Hosking, C. G. R. Cane, P. R. Kennedy (Overseer). One member,
F. B. Smith, missing.


History of Yorke Peninsula
Yorke Peninsula obviously derives its name from the
geographical situation. It was constituted a district by
Act of Parliament in 1887, and dates from Jannuary sth,
1888. The total area of the district is approximately 600
square miles, bounded on the north by the district of
Fiparra, from the west to about six miles from the eastern
extremity, where it is bounded by the district of Clinton,
on the south by the district of Minlaton, from the western
extremity halfway, and the remainder to the east by the
district of Curramulka, on the east by the Gulf of St. Vin-
cent, and on the west of Spencer’s Gulf. The subdivisions
of the district are as follows :—Hundreds of Cunningham,
Kilkerran, Maitland, Muloowurtie, and Wauraltee.
The population numbers 3,400 persons, and the number
of houses is approximately 500. The length of main roads
under Council jurisdiction is 96 miles, and district roads
650 miles.
Assessment. —The assessment is based on the annual
value of property, and the rating started from 4d. in the
£ in 1888, yielding a revenue of £2BB/5/5. I he present
capital value is assessed at £1,640,120, 1935 assessment.
Transport Service. —The district is well served for
travelling as follows: —Motor coach services run daily to
and from Adelaide, thence to Port Victoria and Minlaton ;
Royal Mail connects daily with railway at Paskeville.
Ardrossan is served by steamer, bi-weekly, from Port Ade-
laide, and daily by motor coach and mail connecting with
railway at Melton.
The present Council Chamber was built in 1908, and
the Council meets on the Monday on or before the date
on which the moon is full.
List of present Councillors: —Messrs. H. R. Hosking
(Chairman), C. B. Hasting. F. H. Koch. C. G. R. Cane, D. E.
Brown, F. B. Smith, L. G. Rowe, H. H. Davey, C. J. Lew-
bold, L. S. Andrew, R. W. Arrowsmith (Clerk), and P. R.
Kennedy (Overseer).
Other gentlemen who have served in the Council for
various periods are: —Messrs. J. O. Tiddy, W. Earle,
Leonard. H. B. Moody, A. Hoffrichter, D. Sinclair, H. F.
Koch, J. Kelly, F. G. Idasting, J. Toller, J. V\ . Shannon, J.
Richards, E. A. Hasting, E. W. Moody, W. Bowey, J.
McDonald. A. H. Jericho, J. N. Smith, H. Bowden, J.
Sanders, G. Illman, T. Bowman. C. J. Freeman, \\ . Kanaley,
H. G. Tossell, Endersby, H. Lamshed, H. A. Montgomery,
R. Kitto, J. Hill, E. Fox, J. H. Wehr, F. Miller, W. G.
Rowntree, S. H. Kelly, O. W. Thompson, R. Willing, H. H.
Mitchell. J. N. A. Smith, F. P. Wundersitz, C. Illman, A. J.
Sanders, J. C. E. Hempel, S. G. Germein. D. J. Redding,
R. G. Newbold, F. Greenslade, C. F. G. Heinrich, \A . A.
Lodge, C. E. Heinrich.


.
THE LATE HENRY LAMSHED.
(Past Councillor, District Council of Yorke
Peninsula.)
Born at Devonshire, England, 11th
April, 1836, and arrived in Australia in
the year 1854. The late Mr. Lamshed
served 12 years in the Yorke Peninsula
District Council, and was a resident of
the district for 46 years. He served in
the State Parliament for 3 years, being-
elected in 1892, and was for 50 years a
Justice of the Peace. He was con-
nected with the Methodist Church
from boyhood, and was also a local
preacher. The late Mr. Lamshed was
a member of the A.H. & F. Society for
many years, and was one of the first to
select land in the Maitland district.
He died at the age of 82 years.
DISTRICT CLERK ROBERT WILLIAM
ARROWSMITH.
(District Council of Yorke Peninsula.)
Mr. Arrowsmith was born at Sun-
derland, County of Durham, England,
26th September, 1868, and educated at
the Grange School, England. He
arrived in Australia, 31st August, 1913.
Mr. Arrowsmith has served in the
Council from 1916-19, and from 1922
to the present date. He has been a
resident of the district for 23 years.
He is also a member of the Edward
VII. Masonic Lodge, E.C., and Yorke
Valley Lodge, S.A.C., and is Master-
Elect. In England, Mr. Arrowsmith
was accountant for 31 years at the
Sunderland and South Shields Water
Co.; his last position before coming to
Australia. He was Town Clerk of
Maitland for 5 years, and is now Dis-
trict Clerk of the Yorke Peninsula
District Council. He has been Secre-
tary of the Maitland Hospital for 5
years, and an Associate of the Char-
tered Institute of Secretaries, London,
since 1901. He was a foundation mem-
ber of Maitland Golf Club, and a mem-
ber of the Bowling Club. Home ad-
dress, Maitland.


District Council of Yorketown


■:■/.. / • ' '
pF Jjgg
History of Yorketown
By virtue of the Local Government Areas (Re-Arrange-
ment) Acts of 1929 and 1931, the District Council of Yorke-
town was brought into being on the 23rd of May 1932
It comprises the area (200,322 acres) formerly controlled
by the Corporation of Yorketown and the District Councils
of Melville and Dalrymple, and has an assessment of
was proclaimed a Municipality on February 6th, 1879.
The late Mr. Edward Jacobs was the pioneer and first
Mayor of Yorketown, and with him in the first Council
were the following Councillors: —Messrs. R. R. Palmer,
M. J. P. Tucker, A. Vonnida, H. A. Frost, H. Steinke, and
F. A. Homburg.
STANDiNC a M ?^ B E RS DISTRICT COUNCIL OF YORKETOWN.
E Ha't'tZ, 'l y M Ll S ovl' ,Di«Mc, ctk) D ' A ' A "'°" i0 ' '■ W ' Chi "" e ''' JA ' R ' To " ki "
SITTING Messrs. J. A. Bridges, G. H. Hart, E. H. Giles (Chairman), S. G. Goldsworthy, B. Lloyd.
£37.700, with a population of about 3,000.
tornier District Council of Dalrymple (comprising
83,Z06 acres) was proclaimed on October 18th, 1875 with
Mr. Geo. Sherriff as the first Chairman; Melville (com-
prising 116,876 acres) in 1875, with Mr. Thos. Corlett as
Chairman; and the Corporation of Yorketown (190 acres)
Ihe 1 ollowing' gentlemen have also occupied the
Mayoral chair: Messrs. S. Woods, J. W. Flood, H. A. Frost
A. Vonnida, F. Homburg, C. T. Lahrmann, M. Marcus, W.
Fi ichan, H. A. B. Davis, R. T. MacFarlane, J. S, K.
Maclennon, W . H. Russell, and (. Ferguson.
Othei s who have held office in the Corporation are:—-


' ' : ■■
' t>
A
Messrs. R. Wilkinson, W. R. Kelly, V. E. G. Brown, B. H.
Farrow, R. McKenzie, W. J. Daley, W. B. Goldsworthy,
L. \\ oods, W. Kirsch, C. E. Klem, O. Young, and E. E.
Lloyd (present District Clerk).
The first Council of the District Council of Yorketown
comprised the following gentlemen:—E. El. Giles, J.P.
(Chairman), S. H. Davies, J.P., G. H. Hart, J.P., E. W.
Eichner, J. A. Bridges, D. A. Agnew, J.P., C. J. Hoare, S. G.
Goldsworthy, R. Newbold, J.P., with E. E. Lloyd as Dis-
trict Clerk and J. A. R. Tonkin as Overseer of Works.
The Council meets on the second Monday in each
month, with its headquarters at Yorketown, 10 miles inland
from Edithburgh.
Situated at the south end of Yorke Peninsula, the
district is well known for the production of barley and
wheat, also its high quality sheep. Other industries which
are carried on are the cement works at Klein’s Point,
lime burning, salt, and gypsum.
EDWARD HOLLINGWORTH GILES.
(Chairman, District Council of Yorketown.)
Mr. Giles was born at Yorketown,
sth April, 1882, and educated at his
home town. The Local Government
appointed him Clerk of the District
Council of Melville early in 1902, when
19 years of age, and he held the posi-
tion for 18J years. Two years after
retiring from the position of District
Clerk, he was elected Councillor for
Salt Creek Ward in the same Council,
and later Chairman. Mr. Giles held
these positions until the formation of
the District Council of Yorketown in
1932. He was the first Chairman of
this body, and still occupies the posi-
tion. He was also auditor for the
District Council of Dalrymple from
1904 to 1932, for the Corporation of
Yorketown from 1908 to 1932, and
Edithburgh from 1929 to the present
day. Mr. Giles was political secretary
of the Yorketown Branch, Liberal
LTnion and Federation, from 1913 to
1926, and is President of the Liberal
and Country League, and has also been
President of the Yorke Peninsula Dis-
trict Committee from 1914 to 1923, and
frdm August, 1935, to the present date.
He represented Yorke Peninsula in the
House of Assembly from January,
1926, to April, 1933, has been People’s
Warden in the St. George’s Anglican
Church, Yorketown, since 1912, and
Lay Reader since 1929. Mr. Giles is also
is a Past Master of the Melville
Masonic Lodge and Past Grand of the
Independent Order of Oddfellows
M.U. Lodge, lie has been for 10 years
secretary of the Yorketown Cricket
Club and for some time captain, and
several years secretary of the S.Y.P.
Cricket Association (now president).
He was the first president of the Coun-
try Carnival Cricket Association,
formed in 1927, and still holds the
position. His home address is Yorke-
town.
COUNCILLOR JOHN WALLACE
CHINNER, J.P.
(District Council of Yorketown.)
Mr. Chinner was born at Unley, sth
March, 1900, and educated at Prince
Alfred College. He has been a resi-
dent of Yorketown for 8 years and a
member of the Council for 3 years.
He is also a member of the Hospital
Board, the Library Committee, and
president of the Yorketown Tennis
Club. Mr. Chinner is a General Com-
mission Agent, and a member of the
Melville Masonic Lodge. His home
address is Yorketown,
COUNCILLOR GEORGE HORACE
HART, J.P.
(District Council of Yorketown.)
Mr. Hart was horn at Yorketown,
17th April, 1874, and educated at
Edithburgh. He was previously Coun-


cillor and Mayor of Edithburgh for 4
_\ears, and has been Councillor and
Chairman of the District Council of
MeLille. He has been a resident of
the district all his life. In business
All. Hart is a farmer and pastoralist,
and also company director. He is a
Past Grand of the M.U., 1.0.0. E.
His home address is Edithburg-h
COUNCILLOR ERNEST WILLIAM
EICHNER.
(District Council of Yorketown.)
Air. Eichner was born at Yorketown,
18th August, 1888, and educated at
Yorketown. He is President of the
Aoi ketown Show Society, a member
of the Hospital Board and the Melville
Alasonic Lodge. He has been a resi-
dent of Yorketown from birth, with
the exception of 10 years which were
spent in A ictoria, and a member of the
Council for 13 years Air. Eichner is a
farmer, and his home address is
Pickering.
COUNCILLOR SPENCER GORDON
GOLDSWORTHY, J.P.
(District Council of Yorketown.)
Mr. Goldsworthy was born at
Aloonta, 20th June, 1888, and educated
at the University of Adelaide. He has
been a resident of Yorketown for 30
years, and a member of the Council for
6 years. He is also President of the
Yorketown Institute, a member of the
Yorketown Hospital Board, and a Jus-
tice of the Peace. Mr. Goldsworthy is
a Barrister and Solicitor, and is fond
of all sports. His home address is
Yorketown.
COUNCILLOR BENJAMIN LLOYD, J.P.
(District Council of Yorketown.)
Air. Lloyd was born at Maitland,
18th March, 1875, and educated at
Yorketown Public School. He has
been a member of the Yorketown Dis-
trict Council from June, 1908-32, and
was previously Chairman for 12
years of the District Council of
Dalrymple. He has been for 54 years
a resident of the district. Mr. Lloyd
is also a member of the Hospital
Board, Chairman of the Lake Sunday
School Committee, and a member of
the Melville Masonic and Independent
Order of Rechabite Lodges. In busi-
ness he is a farmer, and his sports are
fishing and shooting. Home address,
Yorketown,
COUNCILLOR DAVID ARCHIBALD
ANTONIO.
(District Council of Yorketown.)
ATr. Antonio was born' at Prospect,
38th September, 1888, and educated at
Stansbury Public School. He has been
a resident of the Yorketown district
for 40 years, and a member of the
Council for 6 years. Mr. Antonio is a
farmer, and is captain of the Croquet
Club. His home address is Stansbury.












