





THE
VICTIMS OF WHIGGERY;
BEING
A STATEMENT
OF THE
PERSECUTIONS EXPERIENCED
BY THE
DORCHESTER LABOURERS;
THEIR TRIAL, BANISHMENT, &C. &C.
ALSO
REFLECTIONS
UPON THE
PRESENT SYSTEM OF TRANSPORTATION;
WITH AN
ACCOUNT OF VAN PIEMAN’S LAND,
ITS CUSTOMS, LAWS, CLIMATE, PRODUCE, AND INHABITANTS.
DEDICATED (WITHOUT PERMISSION) TO LORDS MELBOURNE, GREY, RUSSELL,
BROUGHAM, AND JUDGE WILLIAMS.
BY GEORGE LOVELESS,
ONE OF THE DORCHESTER LABOURERS.
ANY PROFITS RESULTING FROM THE SALE OF THIS PAMPHLET WILL BE DEVOTED TO THE
GENERAL FUND FOR THE RELIEF OF THE FAMILIES OF THE DORCHESTER LABOURERS.
LONDON;
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE CENTRAL DORCHESTER
COMMITTEE,
BY EFFINGHAM WILSON, 88, ROYAL EXCHANGE ;
H. HETHERINGTON, 126, STRAND;
CLEAVE, 1, SHOE LANE ; STRANGE, 21, PATERNOSTER ROW,
AND TO BE HAD OF ALL BOOKSELLERS.
Second Edition . Price Four pence.




TO THE PUBLIC.
Fellow Countrymen,
The Dorchester Committee having been of opinion, that it would be
highly desirable for an authenticated statement of the persecutions
of the Dorchester Labourers to be laid before the Public, which,
while serving as a memento of Whig hypocrisy and tyranny, might
also be made beneficial in aiding that Fund which is now raising to
confer some recompense upon these ill-used men on their return, and
from which their families are supported during their exile, suggested
to George Loveless, on his arrival in June last, the propriety of his
writing such a statement. Concurring with this suggestion, and
fortunately having kept a diary of his sufferings, he furnished the
Committee with the following statement, which they now present to
the world, trusting it will answer the objects above alluded to.
In so doing, however, the Committee feel it necessary to remind
the Public generally, but especially the labouring classes, that it is
a duty they owe to themselves and their order, never to forget who
were the authors and abettors of this cruel violation of the laws of
humanity—of this unparalleled outrage upon the rights of industry.
It was the Whig Government —the Reform Ministry of William
IV., under the auspices of Lords Grey, Melbourne, Russell, and
Brougham !—it was these men who carried into execution, with an
haste as unfrequent as it was indecent, the cruel sentence of a Whig
Judge (Baron John Williams), created by themselves but a short
time previous, and who was then making his first circuit. Truly this
man has earned an ignoble fame! Yes, Fellow-countrymen, it re-
mained for these men, carried into office and supported by the mass
of the population; who had had their political life bflsathed into them
by the power and energy of the working millions; whose constant
cry was (and still is) of the great affection they felt for the people,
in contradistinction to the hatred of their colleagues in political
profligacy—the Tories : it remained for these men, to turn round
upon the industrious and confiding working men of England, and
in an obscure village, seize upon and transport six of their honest
and industrious brethren—men guiltless of any crime against society
—in defiance of the prayers, entreaties, and remonstrances of the
people, from all parts of the country.
Monstrous hypocrites ! to tear six of their unoffending country-
men from their native land, from the partners of their bosom, and
from the arms of their young and helpless families, leaving them
exposed to all the temptations consequent upon the want of a pro-
tector ; to doom them to a species of punishment, which they
themselves had boasted to have made worse than death ; to keep
them in the colonies (or, at least, look on with indifference, while their
b 2


subalterns ?o act), after they have granted a free pardon, reluctantly
wrung from them, to screen the Duke of Cumberland and his Orange
confederates from that punishment which public opinion was about
to pronoupce should be inflicted upon them; and, after doing all
this, still to talk of liberty —of their love for the people, and call on
the working classes for support! Whenever a mere Whig utter
these sophistries in an assemblage of working men, they should raise
such a cry of “ Dorchester” as would shame him into silence, or
drive him into obscurity.
The Tories had their jubilee in the transportation of the Scotch
martyrs, Muir, Palmer, &c.; but their atrocity was uncondemned
by the mass of the people, whose minds were then enslaved by
priestcraft, and the cries of “ Church and King,” and “ No Popery.”
The Whigs have had their jubilee in transporting the Dorchester
Labourers, Loveless, Standfield, &c.; but their outrage was loudly
condemned by all excepting their own parasites, and yet they
persevered. Can there be any doubt, considering the difference in
the times, and in the principles professed by the two factions, as to
which of them are most deserving of public execration ?
The observations on transportation, with the account of Van
Dieman’s Land, contained in these pages, the Committee consider of
great importance to their fellow-workmen, and they call for the exer-
tions of their friends to render the sale of this pamphlet equal to their
expectations.
Respectfully yours,
ROBERT HARTWELL,
Hon. Sec. to the Central Dorchester Committee.
London, Sept. 4th, 1837.
Committee Room, Turk's Head, King Street, Holborn.
The following is a list of those Persons who pre-eminently distin-
guished themselves in the Trial and Banishment of the Dorchester
Labourers, Feb. 1834. :
Committing Magistrates Messrs. FRAMPTON, W OOLLASTON,
DAVIS, and CHURCHILL.
Foreman of Grand Jury—lion. W. F. S. PONSONBY, M.P. for
Dorset. (Whig.)
Judge —Baron JOHN WILLIAMS. (Whig.)
Juru—i. MORGAN, J. TUCKER, M. GALPIN, E. BENNETI,
S. HARRIS, J. CASE, E. DUFFETT, T. COX, W. BOOBY, J. L. 11.
BRYANT, G. TULK, W. BULLEN. (Farmers and Millers).
Witnesses of Prosecution —J. LOCK, E. LECG.
Members of the Government who, in defiance of the Petitions of the People
from even/ part of the Kingdom, carried the unjust Sentence into immediate
execution EARL GREY! LORD ALTHORP! ! LORD JOHN
RUSSELL! ' 1 LORD MELBOURNE!!!! LORD PALMER-
STON !!!!! LORD HOLLAND!!! J! LORD BROUGHAM !!!!!!!
(All WHIGS, and all Professed Friends of the People 1)


A STATEMENT, &c. &c.
In drawing up a brief statement concerning those persecutions-
which have subjected us to all the punishments, afflictions, and mise-
ries connected with the present system of Transportation (which is far
worse than death), I shall not attempt to give the subject an unfair
colouring, but simply narrate the facts, just as they took place; men-
tioning sometimes the reflections of my own mind at the time those
facts occurred. But it will first be necessary to mention what
led me to become a member of that society which, by the idle and
wealthy, has been branded with infamy; but which then, as now,
appeared to me to be established on just and upright principles, and
to have for its rule the universal law of equity, “ as ye would that men
should do unto you, do ye even so to them.”
About the years 1831-2, when there was a general movement of the
working classes for an increase of wages, the labouring men in the
parish where I lived (Tolpuddle) gathered together, and met their
employers, to ask them for an advance of wages, and they came
to a mutual agreement, the masters in Tolpuddle promising to give
the men as much for their labour as the other masters in the
district. The whole of the men then went] to their work, and the
time that was spent in this affair did not exceed two hours. No lan-
guage of intimidation or threatening was used on the occasion. Shortly
after we learnt that, in almost every place around us, the masters
were giving their men money, or money’s worth, to the amount of
ten shillings per week—we expected to be entitled to as much —but
no—nine shillings must be our portion. After some months we were
reduced to eight shillings per week. This caused great dissatis-
faction, and all the labouring men in the village, with the exception
of two or three invalids, made application to a neighbouring magis-
trate, namely, William Morden Pitt, Esq. of Kingston House, and
asked his advice; he told us that if the labourers would appoint
two or three, and come to the County-hall the following Saturday, he
would apprize the chief magistrate, James Frampton, Esq. (whose
name I shall not soon forget,) and at the same time our employers
should be sent for to settle the subject. I was one nominated to
appear, and when there we were told that we must work for what our
employers thought fit to give us, as there was no law to compel masters


to give any fixed sum of money to their servants. In vain we remon-
strated that an agreement was made, and that the minister of the
parish (Dr. Warren) was witness between the masters and the men;
for this hireling parson, who at that time said, of his own accord,
“ I am witness between you men and your masters, that if you will go
quietly to your work, you shall receive for your labour as much as
any men in the district; and if your masters should attempt to run
from their word, I will undertake to see you righted, so help me God!”
—so soon as reference was made to him, denied having a knowledge of
any such thing.
From this time we were reduced to seven shillings per week, and
shortly after our employers told us they must lower us to six shil-
lings per week. The labouring men consulted together what had bet-
ter be done, as they knew it was impossible to live honestly on such
scanty means. I had seen at different times accounts of Trade Socie-
ties ; I told them of this, and they willingly consented to form a
friendly society among the labourers, having sufficiently learnt that it
would be vain to seek redress either of employers, magistrates, or par-
sons. I inquired of a brother to get information how to proceed, and
shortly after, two delegates from a Trade Society paid us a visit, formed
a Friendly Society among the labourers, and gave us directions how to
proceed. This was about the latter end of October, 1833. On the
9th of December, 1833, in the evening, Edward Legg (a labourer),
who was witness against us on our trial, came and desired to be ad-
mitted into the Society; by what means he was introduced there I
cannot say; but well do I know that James Hammett, one of the six
that he swore to, was not there.
Nothing particular occurred from this time to the 21st of February,
1834, when placards were posted up at the most conspicuous places,
purporting to be cautions from the magistrates, threatening to punish
with seven years’ transportation any man who should join the Union.
This was the first time that I heard of any law being in existence to
forbid such societies. I met with a copy, read it, and put it into my
pocket. February the 24th, at daybreak, I arose to go to my usual
labour, and had just left my house, when Mr. James Brine, constable
of the parish, met me and said, “ I have a warrant for vou, from the
magistrates.” “ What is its contents, Sir?” “ Take* it yourself,”
said he, “ you can read it as well as 1 can.” I did so. He asked,
“ Are you willing to go to the magistrates with me ?” I answered, “To
any place wherever you wish me.” Accordingly I and rny companions
walked in company with the constable to Dorchester, about seven
miles distant, and was taken into the house of a Mr. Woolaston,
magistrate, who, with his half brother, James Frampton, and Edward
Legg, were ready to receive us. After asking us several questions,
to which I answered, by saying, “ We are not aware that we have
violated any law, if so, we must be amenable, I suppose, to that law,”
Legg was called upon to swear to us, and we were instantly sent to
prison. As soon as we got within the prison doors, our clothes were
stripped off and searched, and in my pocket was found a copy of the
above placard, a note from a friend, and a small key. After our heads
were shorn, we were locked up together in a room, where we re


mained, day and night, till the following Saturday, when we were
called before a bench of magistrates in another part of the prison.
Legg again swore to us, differing considerably from the first statement.
We were then fully committed to take our trial at the next assizes.
Directly after we were put back, a Mr. Young, an attorney employed
on our behalf, called me into the conversation room, and, among other
things, inquired if I would promise the magistrates to have no more
to do with the Union if they would let me go home to my wife and
family? I said, “ I do not understand you.”—' “ Why,” said he,
“ give them information concerning the Union, who else belongs to it,
and promise you will have no more to do with it.” —“ Do you mean
to say I am to betray my companions, and promise I will have nothing
more to do with them ?”—“ That is just it,” said he. “ No; I would
rather undergo any punishment.”
The same day we were sent to the high jail, where we continued
until the assizes. I had never seen the inside of a jail before, but now
I began to feel it —disagreeable company, close confinement, bad bread,
and, what was worse, hard and cold lodging—a small straw bed on
the flags, or else an iron bedstead—“ and this,” said Ito my com-
panions, “is our fare for striving to live honest.” In this situation
the chaplain of the prison paid us a visit, to pour a volley of instruction
into our ears ; but, as it was mixed up in the cup of abuse, it did not
exactly relish with me. After upbraiding and taunting us with being
discontented and idle, and wishing to ruin our masters, he proceeded
to tell us that we were better off than our masters, and that govern-
ment had made use of every possible means for economy and retrench-
ment to make all comfortable. He inquired if I could point out any
thing more that might be done to increase the comfort of the labourer.
I told him I thought I could, and began to assure him our object was
not to ruin the master, but that, for a long time, we had been looking
for the head to begin, and relieve the various members down to the
feet; but finding it was of no avail, we were thinking of making ap-
plication to our masters, and for them to make application to their
masters, and so up to the head; and as to their being worse off than
ourselves, I could not believe it, while I saw them keep such a number
of horses for no other purpose than to chase the hare and the fox.
I had been thinking, that if a number of those useless animals were
got rid of there would be a two-fold advantage; first, the owner would
possess some ready money; and secondly, the expence of keeping
them would be saved, to enable him to give a liltle more for labour:
and, besides, I thought gentlemen wearing the clerical livery, like him-
self, might do with a little less salary, and that ajso would assist with
the rest. “Is that how you mean to do it ?” said he. “ That is one
way I have been thinking of, Sir,”—“ I hope the Court will favour
you, but I think they will not; for I believe they mean to make an
example of you.” And saying this he left us.
On the 15th of March, we were taken to the County-hall to await
our trial; and as soon as we arrived there we were ushered down some
steps into a miserable dungeon, opened but twice a year, with only a
glimmering light; and to make it more disagreeable, some wet and
green brush-wood was served for firing. The smoke of this place,


together with its natural dampness, amounted to nearly suffocation ;
and in this most dreadful situation we passed three whole days. As
to the trial, I need not mention but little; the cowardice and dastardly
conduct throughout are better known by all that were present than
could be by any description that I can give of it: suffice it to say,
the most unfair and unjust means were resorted to in order to frame
an indictment against us; the grand jury appeared to ransack heaven
and earth to get some clue against us, but in vain; our characters
were investigated from our infancy to the then present moment; our
masters were inquired of to know if we were not idle, or attended
public houses, or some other fault in us; and much as they were op-
posed to us, they had common honesty enough to declare that we
were good labouring servants, and that they never heard of any com-
plaint against us; and when nothing whatever could be raked to-
gether, the unjust and cruel judge, Williams, ordered us to be tried
for mutiny and conspiracy, under an act 37 Geo. 111., cap. 123, for
the suppression of mutiny amongst the marines and seamen, a number
of years ago, at the Nore. The greater part of the evidence against
ns, on our trial, was put into the months of the witnesses by the judge;
and when he evidently wished them to say any particular thing, and
the witness would say, “ I cannot remember,” he would say, “ Now
think; I will give you another minute to considerand he would
then repeat over the words, and ask, “ Cannot you remember ?”
Sometimes, by charging them to be careful what they said, by way of
intimidation, they would merely answer, “ yes;” the judge would set
it down as the witness’s words. I shall not soon forget the address of
the judge to the jury, in summing up the evidence ; among other
things, he told them, that if such Societies were allowed to ejdst, it
would ruin masters, cause a stagnation in trade, destroy property, —
and if they should not find us guilty , he teas certain they would
forfeit the opinion of the grand jury. I thought to myself, there
is no danger but we shall be found guilty, as we have a special jury
for the purpose, selected from among those who are most unfriendly
towards us—the grand jury, landowners, the petty jury, land-renters.
Under such a charge, from such a quarter, self-interest alone would
induce them to say, “ Guilty.” The judge then inquired if we had
anything to say. I instantly forwarded the following short defence,
in writing, to him; —“ My Lord, if we have violated any law, it was
not done intentionally : we have injured no man’s reputation, charac-
ter, person, or property : we were uniting together to preserve our-
selves, our wives, and our children, from utter degradation and starva-
tion. We challenge any man, or number of men, to prove that we
have acted, or intend to act, different from the above statement.
The judge asked if I wished it to be read in Court. I answered,
11 Yes.” It was then mumbled over to a part of the jury, in such an
inaudible manner, that although I knew what was there, I could not
comprehend it. And here one of the counsel prevented sentence being
passed, by declaring that not one charge brought against any of the
prisoners at the bar was proved, and that if we were found guilty a
great number of persons would be dissatisfied ; “ and I shall for one*
said he.


Two days after this we were again placed at the bar to receive sen-
tence, when the judge told us, “ that not for any thing that we had
done, or, as he could prove,'we intended 1o do, but for an example to
others, he considered it his duty to pass the sentence of seven years’
transportation across his Majesty’s high seas upon each and every one
of us.” Five of us were at the lodge at the time that Legg and Lock
swore to our being present; but one, namely, James Hammett, was
not there. As soon as the sentence was passed, I got a pencil and a
scrap of paper, and wrote the following lines :
“ God is our guide! from field, from wave,
From plough, from anvil, and from loom ;
We come, our country’s rights to save,
And speak a tyrant faction’s doom :
We raise the watch-word liberty ;
We will, we will, we will be free!
God is our guide! no swords we draw,
We kindle not war’s battle fires ;
By reason, union, justice, law,
We claim the birth-right of our sires :
We raise the watch-word, liberty,
We will, we will, we will be free!!!”
While we were being guarded back to prison, our hands locked to-
gether, I tossed the above lines to some people that we passed; the
guard, however, seizing hold of them, they were instantly carried back
to the judge; and by some this was considered a crime of no less
magnitude than high treason.
Almost instantly after this I was taken ill, occasioned by being kept
in the dungeon already spoken of, and two days after getting worse, I
requested to be allowed to see the doctor, and consequently was taken
to the hospital. As soon as I entered I had to cope with a new anta-
gonist, Dr. Arden, surgeon of the hospital. I told him I was too ill for
conversation, and requested him to allow me to go to bed ; but he ap-
peared so angry as not to regard what I said. At length, I threw
myself on a bed and answered his questions, until he was very mild,,
and ever after this he manifested the greatest possible kindness and
attention towards me until I left Dorchester Castle. I told him they
could hang me with as much justice as transport me for what I
had done.
On Wednesday, April the 2nd., Mr. Woolaston, magistrate, paid me
a visit, and inquiring how I did, I thanked him, and told him I was.
much better. He said, “ I am sorry, Loveless, to sec a man like
you in such a situation, but it is your own fault, you are now suffering
for your own stubbornness and obstinacy ; you have such a proud
spirit, you would not pay attention to the cautions of the magistrates;
but would rather hearken to idle fellows that were going about the
country, who now have deceived you.”—l told him I had not been
deceived by any, for I knew of no such persons as he had been de-
scribing.—“ Yes, you do, for you have hearkened to them rather than
pay attention to the magistrate’s cautions; for I am certain you saw
them, one of them being found on your person when you went to pri-
son.”—“ Is Mr. Woolaston in his right mind?” said I. —“ What do


you mean ?”—“ Why, you tell me that I would not listen to the
advice and cautions put out by the magistrates, but a copy of those
cautions being found in ray pocket when taken to gaol, does it not
prove that I did pay attention to them, or should I have taken so much
care to preserve it in my pocket; and, besides, the circumstance con-
cerning which the witnesses swore against us, took place on the 9th of
December, and the magistrate’s cautions did not appear till the 21st
of February, following ; so that we have been tried for what took place
at least nine weeks before the cautions had existence; and yet you say
I paid no attention to the magistrates, but listened to idle fellows going
about the country; within three days after the cautions appeared I
was in the body of the gaol.”—“ Ah,” said he, “ it is of no use talk-
ing to you.”—“ No, Sir, unless you talk more reasonable.”
I intreated the doctor to allow me to be sent away, as I had just
heard that my companions were gone. I did this with a view to over-
take them; and on Saturday, April the sth, early in the morning, I
was called, to prepare for a journey to Portsmouth ; and after getting
irons on my legs, and locked on the coach, we proceeded to Salisbury,
amd at*the entrance of the town, a Mr. Glinister, clerk of the prison,
'wfio’ accompanied me, offered to take the irons oft my legs. I inquired
if he meant to put them on again on leaving Salisbury, he said “ Yes,”
but, as I should have to walk through some part of the town, I had
better have them taken off, as the rattling of the chain would cause
people to be looking after us. I told him I did not wish for any such
thing, as I was not ashamed to wear the chain, conscious of my
innocence.
' We arrived at Portsmouth about nine o’clock at night, and I was
given up in charge to the officers of the York Hulk. When I went
on board I was struck with astonishment at the sight of the place, the
clinking of the chains, and of so many men being stripped. When or-
dered to put on the hulk livery, and called upon to attend on the smith
to have the fetters rivetted on my legs, for a moment I began to sink
down, until the first mate, a Mr. Nicholson, told me I was to go into
Nor 9 ward, middle deck, one of the best and quietest wards in the
ship, and that I was to go there by the captain’s order, in consequence
of a good character he had received with me from the prison. And
after all the striving and struggling by my adversaries, to discover
some foul .blot against my reputation, without effect, so cruel and
feckless for revenge was some party, as to say that I and my brother
sere rioters; now, to prove the fallacy of such an assertion, I would
just refer to the period already alluded to, when we asked our employ-
ers to advance our wages, no threats or intimidation were made use
of by any of the labourers; and, at the time when so much
* incendiarism was prevailing in many parts of the kingdom, a watch
was set in our parish for the protection of property in the night, and I
dnd my brother, among others, was chosen to watch such property.
Will any reasonable man believe, if we had been rioters, that we should
have been so chosen ? Again, I and my brother were reported to have
'been regular smugglers and poachers. But all this reporting, stab-
bing, and slandering men was in the dark, behind the back, out of
Sight; and well did the party know that there was no foundation for


such foul and black assertions, and if [there ever was an instance
known in the space of thirty-seven years, which was my age when
these vile slanders went abroad ; I say, if ever, in any one instance, I
stand chargeable for any misdemeanor or crime, I call upon James
Frarapton, Esq., or his satellites, or anyone else, to standout and de-
clare it. Again, I challenge them to come forth and do it in a public
manner, that the world may judge the case, and acquit me if innocent,
or not let me escape with impunity if guilty. But the secret is this; I
am from principle, a Dissenter, and by some, in Tolpuddle, it is con-
sidered as the sin of witchcraft; nay, there is no forgiveness for it in
this world nor that which is to come ; the years 1824-5 are not forgotten,
and many a curious tale might be told of men that were persecuted,
banished, and not allowed to have employ if they entered the Wes-
leyan Chapel at Tolpuddle. But enough of this subject, it is still on
record.
Monday, April the 7th, I was called upon to go to work with the
gun wharf party, and in this employment I continued the whole of tlie
time I was at Portsmouth, being just six weeks. On the 17th of May,
in the morning, I was called upon to prepare for a voyage to Botany
Bay. One hundred and twenty were draughted from Portsmouth, to
join one hundred and twenty that the ship brought down from Wool-
wich, and after having stripped off every thing, and putting a new suit
on for sea, irons as well, we went on board the “ William Metcalfe,”
lying at Spithead, where we remained till the 25th of May. In the
afternoon we weighed anchor, and the next evening bid farewell to
England, having passed the Land’s End. I now began to think I had
seen and heard but very little. Two hundred and forty men, shut
down together and locked in a prison, the greater part of them such
monsters as I never expected to see, and whose conduct I am not ca-
pable of describing. A small bed, pillow, and blanket was allowed for
each man, which would have contributed greatly to our comfort, had
there been room sufficient to have laid on them, but we could not. A
birth about five feet six inches square, was all that was allowed for six
men to occupy day and night, with the exception of four hours we
were allowed daily on deck, two hours in the forenoon, and two hours
in the afternoon for air. For nearly ten weeks out of fourteen I was
not able to lie down at length to take rest. But what then ? I was a
prisoner, and there is none to pity. “ You have no business here, so
you must take it as it comes, for better for worse,” is the consolation
you get when you complain.
On the 4th of September we cast anchor before Hobart Town, Van
Dieman’s Land, and as we had sailed nearly thirty miles already up
the river Derwent, between the land, several came to me and asked
if I did not think it a delightful country, I spoke the real sentiments of
my mind when I gave them the following answer : “ I think we are
come to the wrong end of the world.” Tuesday, September 9th, the
magistrates came on board, as is usual to take dimensions, &c., of the
prisoners, and one by one was called into the cabin as their names
stood arranged on the alphabetical list, or rather as the towns stood
from whence they were convicted. When I was called in, after ask-
ing me a number of questions about my father, mother, brothers, sis-


ters, wife, children, &c., the following conversation took place between
a Mr. Thomas Mason, and myself: “ What is all this about these
Unions ? you think of doing great things I suppose ; now tell me
what you meant.”-—“ We meant nothing more, Sir, than uniting to-
gether to keep up the price of labour, and to support each other in
time of need.” —“ Now, I know this is false ; there is some secret de-
sign of conspiracy at the bottom, is there not ?”—“ No, Sir, quite the
reverse of that, for every man that is a member of the Union is under
an obligation not to violate the laws.” —“ Yes ; surely, I know you
mean they are bound not to break any of their laws.”—“ I mean they
are under an obligation not to violate the laws of their country.”—“ I
do not believe any thing you say about it, for there is so much secrecy
belonging to it. Now what is that secret sign or signal by which the
Unions knew when to meet all over England at the same time.”—“ I
do not know of what you are talking, Sir.” —“ Y"ou daring fellow, will
you tell me so again ; do not you know that they did meet all over the
kingdom at once ?”—“ I know of no such thing as their having secret
signs or signals to know when to meet; I never heard of such a thing
before.”—“Where were you when they made such a noise then ? will
you be so false as to tell me you know nothing about it, now I am certain
you know all about it. Be careful in what you say.” —“ I understood
the Union had public meetings at different places, but I was at the
York hulk, Portsmouth, at the time.”—“ It is no matter where you
were, you are one of them, and you know all about it, and if you do not
tell me here and now all and everything about them, I will report you
to the governor, you shall be taken on shore, and we will give you a
second trial, and you shall be severely punished ; now, what are those
secrets you are so backward in revealing.”—“ I have none to tell, Sir.”
—“ Now, you pretend from a scrupulous conscience you cannot re-
veal the secret to me ; let me tell you that you ought to tell all that
you know about them ; and if you have taken an oath not to reveal,
you are sinning against God and man, until you break that oath , and
if you still refuse to tell me you shall be severely punished.” —“ lam in
your hands, and am ready and willing to undergo any suffering you
shall think proper to inflict upon me, rather than say I know any thing,
when in reality Ido not.”—“ That will do, I will report you to the
governor, and you shall be punished.’
Friday, September 12, at day-break, we were landed, and con-
ducted to the prisoner’s barracks. The same day we were marshalled
in the yard for the inspection of the governor, who examines every
man, and when he came to me, I was pointed out by the abovenamed
magistrate, as being one of the Trades’ Union, and very backward to
say any thing about them, he therefore (that is Mason), thought it ad-
visable to give me a second examination. What the governor replied
I could not then comprehend ; however, he began to talk to me on the
subject; the following is a part of what passed :—“ What a fool you
must have been for having any thing to do with such things ; what ob-
ject had you in view for doing so ?”—“ The motives by which we were
influenced were to prevent our wives and families from being utterly
degraded and starved.” —“ Poh, poh, no such thing; what? cannot
labouring men live by their labour 7 ” —“ Not always now, Sir.”—“ I


mean good labouring men. Surely they can live comfortable ?”—“ No,
Sir, times have been in England when labour was well rewarded, but it
is not so now—there is many a good and willing workman that cannot
get employed at all, and others get so little for their labour, that it is
impossible for them to live if they have families.” —“ But you know
that you did very wrong, do you not?” —“ I had no idea whatever that
I was violating any law.”—“ But you must know that you have broken
the laws, or how came you here?”—“ By some means or other I was
sent here ; but I cannot see how a man can break a law before he
knows that such law is in existence.”—“ You might as well say I have
done very wrong, I acknowledge it, and am sorry for it.”—“ I cannot
do this until I see it.”
September 13th, a constable came for me to go to the police-office ;
and when there I was introduced to Mr. Mason, in a private room,
who calling a young man that acted as clerk for him, he asked if I
could remember the conversation we had the other day. I answered
in the affirmative, he bid me repeat it; I did, the young man looking
at a paper he held in his hand, to see if I deviated or not; he again
urged me to reveal the secret to him; I told him that I had told him
already as far as I knew. “ But,” said he, “ think, now, is there not
something you have not told yet ?”—“ I have told you, Sir, all I can ;it
appears that you know more about it than I do.”—“ Well, I have to tell
you that you was ordered for severer punishment; you were to work in
irons on the roads; but in consequence of the conversation you had
with the governor yesterday, his mind is disposed in your favour; he
wont allow you to go where you was assigned to ; he intends to take
you to work on his farm.”
I now began to feel the effects of transportation. I worked on the
roads with the chain-gang in the day, and slept in the barracks at
night, without a bed, or covering ; whether any was allowed for me I
cannot say, I had none. On the 22d September I was sent to the
government domain farm, New Town, and here for a longtime I found
it very little better than at the barracks. Eight men, with only five
beds, so of course the new comer must go without, and this was my
portion, until some of the older hands unfortunately got into trouble,
and I was entitled to a bed, having been longer on the farm than
others. Our hut was none of the best: in fine weather we could lie in
bed and view the stars, in foul weather feel the wind and rain; and
this added more than a little to increase those rheumatic pains which
were first brought on by cold irons round the legs and hard laying;
and which, in all probability, will be my companions until I reach the
tomb.
The weekly allowance of provisions I will now mention, and this I do
to answer some objections to a letter I sent home to my wife, dated
December, 1834, wherein I stated “our weekly allowance is eight
pounds of flour and seven pounds of meat, short allowance for men
that work as convicts are obliged to do.” I said nothing about the
quality, it may not be improper to do so now, recollect it is not of the
first-rate quality—we have four pounds of wheat, and four pounds of
maize, or Indian corn, or something worse, ground together. Twelve
per cent. I believe, is allowed to be taken out as “ sharps,” by the


storekeeper. The beef, or mutton, is of inferior quality also. What
would be thought of sheep being killed if they would only weigh
sixty pounds, and yet very few that I saw killed for prisoners exceeded
twenty-five pounds, and many not twenty pounds; hold it up to the
light, and it is no great trouble to see through it. But it has been
asked cannot you offer complaints and seek recompense ? I answer
yes ; you can complain to the commissary, and he will inquire of the
storekeeper, and in all probability, the storekeeper receives “ an allow-
ance from the contractor and declares that the provisions are storable,
and that there is no room at all for complaining. What, then, is the*
recompense you get for complaining ? Why, to use a colonial phrase,
you “ get married to the three sisters,” or, in other words, you are tied
to the triangles, and your flesh flogged from the bones for being dis-
contented. Since I sent home the above statement, the scale of pro-
visions has been altered, but not till some of the men at the road
parties died through actual want; and others at the barracks were
found cooking and eating of cats, &c. Each man had when I left
the country, ten and a half pounds of flour, five and a quarter pounds
of meat, and three and a half pounds of vegetables weekly, and yet
I say it is short allowance for men that work as convicts, and for those
who think differently I only wish they had a twelve months trial at it,
and I am certain, after that, they would join in the general cry.
At the government farm I continued until I was exempted from
government labour: once during that time, I wrote to the governor,
hoping I might be allowed to be assigned off to a master, but received
no answer. Sometime in the month of November, 1835, my character
was inquired after by the governor, and this was repeated at different
times for two months, as the overseer on the farm told me, and the
last time his Excellency made the following inquiry, “Is there no
fauit whatever to be found with Loveless ? does he never reply when
you bid him do a thing ? does he never neglect any part of his work ?”
&c,, &c., which was answered in the negative. In the beginning of
December, 1835, 1 was taken to the police office, charged with neglect
of duty. W. Gun, Esq. was the sitting magistrate at the time.
Well, said the magistrate, “ what have you brought this man here
for ?”—“ For neglect of duty, Sir,” said the overseer. “In what
manner has he neglected his duty ; what is the man ?” “ The man is
shepherd and stock-keeper to the governor on the domain farm, and
all the cattle, tame and wild, are put into his care : he is expected to
see them all every day ; nine of the wild cattle were taken to the public
pound yesterday, and he did not miss them until this mox-ning,” “ I
have not heard a clearer charge of neglect of duty for a long time ;
what have you to say, my man, in answer to this charge?” “It is
true, I said, I have the charge of all the cattle, and lam expected
to see the wild cattle in the bush once every twenty-four hours. I rise
in the morning at sunrise, or before, and take the sheep to the bush
to feed , I then return to the farm and milk nine cows and suckle as
many calves; lam requested to follow the sheep and not lose sight
of them for fear of dogs which often get among and worry them ; I
am ordered to search for the wild cattle to see that none of them are
missing; I had justebeen weaning the lambs, and the ewes being very


restless, I was afraid of leaving them; and this, Sir, was the reason the
cattle were taken to the pound and I did not miss them.”—“ Is all
this the truth that the man has been telling me ?” said the magistrate.
“Yes, Sir.”—“How long have you known this man?”—“Nine
months.”—“Did youeverknow him neglect his duty before?”—“No,
Sir; never.”—“ Then you do not think that he went away from his duty
now, but that, as he says, he was with the sheep in consequence of
having weaned the lambs ?”—“ Yes, Sir, I think what he has told you
is true; but then he has neglected his duty in losing the cattle,”—
“ But do not you think that the man has more duty than he can per-
form ? I really think it is a great pity you should have brought the
man here. I shall return you to your duty, go to your duty my man.”
—“ I thank you, Sir,” said I, for I went in full Expectation of getting
fifty lashes.
December 29th—I went to the police office to answer a note my
overseer received from the magistrate to know if my wife should
be sent out to join me in the colony, and when I entered his pre-
sence the following conversation took place :—“ I have sent for
you, Loveless,” said Mr. Spode, the magistrate, “ to know if you wish
your wife and family to be sent over to join you in this colony, if
government will grant them the facility.”—“ I hope you will allow me
to ask a question before I say any thing about my wife and children,”
said I, “ What is that ?”—“ Am I about to obtain my liberty ?”
“ Liberty ! what do you mean?—“ Is there a prospect of my obtain-
ing my free pardon ?”—“ Not that I know ; that depends upon the
ministry at home.”—“ Then, Sir, I can have nothing at all to say on
the subject while lam a prisoner.”—“ You audacious rascal, will you
come to insult me thus, after I have been at the pains of writing and
sending for you, and all for your own advantage.”—“ I beg your par-
don, Sir, 1 did not mean to insult you.”—“ You lie, you rascal, you
did ; and do you mean to continue that, obstinate fellow?” Here I
was silent, knowing what the cruel system would have exposed me to;
if I had simply answered “ yes,” I should have been charged with
insolence, and' punished accordingly. “ But,” continued he. “go to
your work.”—“ I will go, Sir.”—“ Go instantly, or I will give you a
d d good flogging.”
January 7th., 1836.—1 was again sent for by Mr. Spode, and
when I got to the police office he began, “ Well, Loveless, I have sent
for you once more.”—•“ Yes, sir, and here I am.”—“ I want to know
if you have any objection that, your wife and family should be sent
over to you, and let me tell you, before you answer me, it is intended
for your advantage.”—“ Nothing could give me so much satisfaction
as to join my wife and children had I my liberty, but I do not want
them here while I am a prisoner.”—“ You want to be above the
government, and tell them what they must do.”—“ No, Sir, Ido not
want to be above the government, nor tell them what they must
do, but I tell you, rather than be the instrument of bringing my wife
and children into the distress and misery of this colony, such as I
feel it, I will remain as lam as long as I live.” He then ordered me
back.
January the 24th, 1836, his Excellency the governor, came out to


the farm where I was living, and, walking with me into the field, he
asked me if I had any objection that government should send over
my wife and family to me, as they had ottered to do it free of expense.
I told him I had objections. “ I should like to know your objec-
tions,” said he. “ I should be sorry to send for my wife and children
to come into misery.”—“ Misery! what do you mean ?”■—“ Why,
Sir, I have seen nothing but misery ever since I came into this coun-
try.”—“ How long have you been in the country?”—“ Above seven-
teen months,”—“And how is it that you have seen nothing but
misery?”—“Because the food and clothing allowed to government
men only renders them miserable. It is no better than slavery.”—
“ Oh, no, there are no slaves under the British dominions ; you are
only prisoners.” —“ You may call it by what name you please, Sir, I
call it slavery, and that of the worst description,”—“ But are you
willing that your wife should come over? don’t you think that you
could do very well together here?” —“ Ido not know that I could,”—
“ How is it you don’t know? you are a good farming man, and you
are a good shepherd, are you not?”—“ As to that, other people are
the best judges. I know nothing of what the colony can afford.”—
How is it that you know nothing of what the colony can afford ?
you say that you have been seventeen months here, and yet you know
nothing about it.”—“ Why, Sir, 1 have, as it were, been shut up in a
cloister; since I came to this farm I have scarce ever put my feet
from it; I know no person, and, comparatively speaking, no person
knows me.”—“ Well, I think you could do well with your wife in this
country ; she would do very well here.”—“ Sir, I should be a monster
to send for my wife to come over here, and see no way of supporting
her; what could Ido with my wife while lam a prisoner ?” “ Lhave
no doubt but you will have your liberty as soon as your wife arrives;
I would gladly give you indulgence myself, but that I dare not, in
consequence of an act of parliament passed that no seven years’ man
is to obtain a ticket of leave till he has been four years in the colony.
Government has sent out to know how you have conducted yourself
since you have been here, and I have sent home an excellent character
of you to them. How would you support your wife and family in
England?” —“ By my labour, Sir,”—“ And why cannot you support
them by your labour here?”—“ I consider, while they are in England
they are surrounded with friends; if they were here it might be other-
wise,”.—“ Ah, talk about friends, every one has enough to do to mind
themselves now. Well, consider of it, and let me know in the
course of t\yo or three days.” I did so ; and I considered what I had
often been told, and what I had good authority to believe, that if a
man opposes the authorities, he soon becomes a marked man, and
parties are looking out to get a case against him to entangle him.
Van Dieman’s Land will long bear witness to the numbers that have
thus fallen victims to revenge, to the utter deprivation of their reputa-
tion, property, and liberties. See Hobart Town newspapers, for 1835
and 1836.
January the 27th, I wrote a letter to my wife, requesting her to
come to Van Dieman’s Land; and sent it, unsealed, to the governor.
Eebruary the sth, my superintendant sent to me, saying, “ George


Loveless, I am requested, by a note from the magistrate, to send you
to the police office without delay; you had better, therefore, repair
thither as soon as possible.” I went, and when there, Mr. Spode
gave me a ticket; the following is a copy;—“ lam directed by his
Excellency the governor, in accordance with the wish of his Majesty’s
government, to give George Loveless (848, per William Metcalfe) a
ticket, exempting him from government labour, to employ himself to
his own advantage, until further orders. Principal Superintendant’s
Office, Josiah Spode, February the sth, 1836.” I was not allowed to
receive the above ticket until I gave them some place I called my
home, which was registered in their books, that no inconvenience
might arise in finding me if required.
I now had my liberty to prove what the colony could afford ; and I
soon found, to my sorrow, the force of the observation I made to the
governor a few days before, that I knew no one, and no one knew-
me. I was a stranger in the colony, without money, without clothes,
without friends, and without a home. In this situation I travelled the
country, seeking employment; and I have walked fifty miles without
Freaking my fast. I returned to Hobart Town, more strongly con-
firmed in my opinion that I had come to the wrong end of the world.
After a week or two I got employment; and as soon as possible I ad-
vertised for a situation, and found a master, in whose service I re-
mained until I left the country. This gentleman gave me the privilege
of reading his newspapers in regular succession. Early in the month
of September, he brought me the London Dispatch, dated, I believe,
April the 2nd. It contained a speech of Sir W. Molesworth, in refer-
ence to Orange Lodges, the conduct of the Duke of Cumberland, Lord
Kenyon, and the Bishop of Salisbury. It stated, that shortly after
the above speech was delivered, Lord J. Russell gave notice, “ that
orders were forwarded that the Dorchester Unionists were not only to
be set at liberty, but also to be sent back to England, free of expense,
and with every necessary comfort.” I instantly copied the paragraph.
September the 16th, the Hobart Town Tasmanian mentioned the
above statement, as from the London newspapers, the editor remark-
ing at the time (for it was when the whole colony, with a few excep-
tions, was raising the cry against Governor Arthur’s mal-administra-
tion, and the editor of the Tasmanian was one of those exceptions),
in vindication of Governor Arthur’s humane conduct, “ He had no
doubt, the gentlemanly spirit and humanity of Colonel Arthur had
sent the whole ol the men back before that time.” And, as a proof
that Governor Arthur was a man of the above description, he observed,
“ that orders were sent from the home government to work the
Dorchester Unionists in irons on the roads! but that or&er had not
been put into execution by the governor, thereby relieving the Secre-
tary of State the trouble of retracting from what he had declared in
the House of Commons, that the men had not been subjected to any
extraordinary punishment.”
I waited three weeks, and supposing that sufficient time had elapsed,
I resolved to address the governor to inquire if he knew any thing about
it. But, fearing that a private letter might be lost, I addressed the
following to R. L. Murray, Esq., editor of the Tasmanian :—“ Sir,
c


Of late frequent mention has been made in the Tasmanian of the men
known as the Dorchester Unionists, and of the home government in
reference to them. Last week you mentioned the subject again, and
observed, * no doubt that Colonel Arthur has sent the whole of the
men home before this time.’ Ido not know whether Governor Arthur
has received orders from home; I should like to know. If his Excel-
lency has received intelligence to that effect, I hope he will have the
goodness to communicate that knowledge to me before he leaves these
shores. I hereby offer you my sincere thanks for the sympathy you
manifest towards the fate of some half-dozen humble individuals, who,
in 1834, were transported to these colonies for unwillingly and igno-
rantly giving offence. Few can imagine—experience alone teach—
what it is to be bereaved of, and torn from, those who are dear to us;
and who are still dearer to me than could possibly be all the treasures
of the world—wife and children. A Dorchester Unionist.”
Shortly after the above was published in the Tasmanian , my master
received a letter from the governor, to inquire if George Loveless was
living with him, and if so, to tell him that the governor wished to see
him at Hobart Town. My master told me that the governor wished
to know if I was living with him, but did not tell me that my presence
was wanted at Hobart Town. So I replied, by assuring the governor
that I was living in the service of Major de Gillern, at Glenayr, near
Richmond. I received the following in answer. “ October the 6th,
1836, Principal Superintendant’s Office. With reference to the letter
from me to Major de Gillern, a few days since, requesting you would
call upon me at this office, I have now to inform you that the reason
of his Excellency wishing to see you, is in consequence of the Secretary
of State, when he sent the order for your free pardon, having authorized
his Excellency to give you a free passage to England, and he therefore
wishes to be informed whether you are willing to go back; in that case
his Excellency will give you a passage by the Elphinstone, Return me
an answer by the bearer. Josiah Spode.” I wrote the following
answer. ° I highly appreciate the kind offer of his Excellency the
governor, in giving me a passage to England by the Elphinstone. I
would most gladly embark, as I have a strong wish to go back ; but
consider that I have placed myself in a very awkward situation. His
Excellency knows that I have been persuaded to send for my wife, and
for aught I know she now may be on the water, it being nine months
since the invitation left this colony. It would be a dreadful thing for
me to leave before I have heard from my wife, to know if she intends
coming or not —for her to find, when she arrives at Hobart lown, I
had gone to London. I hope I may be allowed to remain until I hear
from her, and if she is not coming, to claim a free passage to
England.” In answer to the above I received the following:
“ George Loveless, in answer to your note, wishing to know if you
could be allowed a passage to England in a few months, I have to
inform you, that unless you go by the present opportunity, the govern-
ment will not be able to give you a free passage. Josiah Spode, the
Bth of October, 1836.”
About eight or ten days after I went to Hobart Town, and called at
the Colonial Secretary’s Office, to speak with him on the subject, when
the following conversation passed.—“ I have called, Sir, to know if I


can be allowed to stop in the colony until I shall receive a communi-
cation from my wife.”—“ You have been told what can be done; you
was sent for to see the governor some time ago, but you seem to pay
no attention to the authorities ; nothing more can be done for you.”—
“ I think, Sir, mine is a hard case ; I was urged by the governor to send
for my wife and family, and I know not but they are coming, and yet
I must be forced to leave before sufficient time has been allowed me to
ascertain whether they will come or not.” —“ Well, why did not you
obev the governor when he sent for you ; it appears you altogether
treat the authorities with disrespect.”—“ I have no wish to disobey
those in authority, but the reason I did not proceed to Hobart Town,
in compliance with the first request, I was not told that I was wanted,
my master only told me the governor wanted to know if I was living
in his service ; and lately I could not come in consequence of my
master’s illness, he having been for sometime at Hobart Town, under
the doctor’s care.”—“ Well, but the governor has an order to send
you back by the first ship.”—“ I think, Sir, you have had a free par-
don for me in your office, some considerable time longer before I
knew any thing about it, than I have delayed in coming since I
have known it.” —“ Yes, my good fellow, but the reason of that was,
we did not know where to send to you.” —“ I beg your pardon. Sir,
that could not be the reason, as the place I called my home was
registered in the police office, by order of the governor .”—•“ The
order is you are to be sent home immediately.”—“ You say, Sir, the
king’s pardon for me is in your office, and yet I am to be sent home
as a prisoner. I was sent out a prisoner, contrary to my wishes, and
with a free pardon I am to be sent back a prisoner, contrary to my
wishes. I hope Mr. Montague will place himself in my situation a few
minutes; I know he is a husband and a father.”—“ Well, Loveless,
what do you want ?”—“ I want a promise from the governor, that I shall
be indulged with the privilege of stopping a few months until I shall
receive a letter from my wife, and if she is not coming to Van Dieman’s
Land, to have something to show that I may claim a free passage to
England.” —“ I will draw up a memorandum myself, and see what can
be done for you, and you shall know the result in a few days.
The following letter was afterwards sent to me : “ Principal Super-
intendant’s Office, 24th October, 1836. Memorandum, with refer-
ence to a former notification addressed to you from this office, relative
to a free pardort-having been ordered for you from England, I am now
to inform you that his Excellency, the lieutenant-governor, is pleased
to approve of that indulgence being issued to you immediately ; and I
am further to acquaint you, in consequence of your having expressed
your disinclination to embark for England, by the Elphinstone, from
having written some months ago to your wife, to join you with your
three children in this colony, and that you are therefore anxious to
await the result of that communication, that, in the event of your ex-
pectation not being fulfilled, as it regards the arrival of your family,
and which an interval of three or four months may determine; his
Excellency has been pleased to direct that a free passage is to be then
offered you by the government that you may return to England.—
Josiah Spode.”
c 2


December 23rd, I received a letter from my wife, sent through the
Secretary of State’s Office, assuring me she did not intend coming
to Van Diernan’s Land, and wishing me to return as soon as pos-
sible. I instantly wrote the following to the Colonial Secretary:—
“ Honorable J. Montague, this will inform you that George Loveless,
(848, per William Metcalfe) has received a letter from his wife, through
the Home Office, refusing the offer to join him in this colony, and as
through your kind interference a promise was made him by the govern-
ment, of granting him a free passage to England, on receiving infor-
mation that his wife was not coming, he therefore earnestly entreats and
humbly demands of his Majesty’s government in this colony, to provide
for him a free passage to England; relying on your goodness, he offers
you his warmest gratitude and acknowledgment, and subscribes him-
self your humble and obliged servant, George Loveless.”
On the 20th of January, 1837, I resolved to go to Hobart Town, as
I had received no answer, and when I got to the police office I was
informed that a letter had that morning been sent to me at Major de
Gillern’s. I give it as follows ;—“ In reference to your request, that a
passage may be provided for you to England, agreeably to the promise
made you by the government, I am to inform you, that you can be
allowed one by the ship Eveline, Captain Jameison, in the forecastle,,
with steerage passenger’s allowance, provided you are satisfied with
the accommodation; as this vessel will sail in the course of the month,,
you had better proceed to Hobart Town immediately, and satisfy your-
self respecting it, and inform me of your decision.—Josiah Spode.”
I instantly went on board and agreed with the captain, who told me
that the ship would sail on Sunday, January the 29th. I returned
and told the superintendant, Mr. Spode, that I had seen the captain,
and was satisfied with the promised accommodations, and the same night
returned to my master’s. Saturday, the 28th, I proceeded to Hobart
Town, and went on boaid the ship, and Monday, the 30th, at nine
o’clock at night, we drew anchor and embarked for London, where 1
arrived June 13, 1837.*
I now feel it a duty I owe my fellow-labourers, to offer a few re-
marks respecting the system of transportation, as practised at present
on prisoners after leaving England. Fain would Ibe silent, but that
truth, justice, and humanity, demands that something of its nature
should be unfolded.
When a ship leaves England with prisoners, she generally takes in
as many as possible, men of all ages, and as many different dispo-
sitions as there are countenances, stowed down together in a prison,
with about twelve square inches for each man to eat, drink, and sleep;
* Janies Loveless, John and Thomas Standfield, James Hammett, and
James Brine, were sent to Sydney in the ship Surrey, where they arrived in
August, 1834, and were immediately assigned off to masters in different parts-
Very little has been heard from them : they appear, however, to have been
similarly treated with George Loveless. Shortly before he left Hobart 3 own
he received a letter from T. Standfield, at which period they knew nothing
of their free pardon and passage home having been granted. He sent a letter
hack informing them of it, and how to proceed, but is afraid it has been inter-
cepted, as all the letters (but one) sent from England were.


at least, so it was in the ship that took me out. Besides the compli-
cation of fatal diseases which is incident in consequence of such a
number of men being crammed so close together for so long a time,
there is the liability to accident by the ship being wrecked, which
would prove almost certain destruction to the lives of the prisoners,
even if they were in sight of land. For a proof, look at the unfortu-
nate vessel, the George the Third, which struck on the Actean Rock,
a few miles only from Van Dieman’s Land, April the 13th, 1835. A
young man who was sent out a prisoner in the George the Third, and
was one of those that just escaped with his life, gave me the following
information respecting that dreadful catastrophe. “ When the ship
struck on the rock, the prisoners were all locked below immediately.
The bottom of the ship was fast filling with water; they called aloud
to have the hatches opened, but to no purpose; and when they were
up to their middles in water, they rushed forward and burst open the
hatches, and endeavoured to ascend the ladder; the soldiers, however,
at the top fired on them and killed many; others had their throats
cut with cutlasses. The man," said he, “ who was going up the
ladder by my side, was shot, but I escaped. When the soldiers, with
their wives, got into the boat, two boys (convicts) jumped from the
ship into the boat; one of the boys was thrown overboard by the sol-
diers, the other, a soldier’s wife hid under her petticoats, and be was
carried safe on shore. Only eighty-one of the whole ship-load was
taken on shore alive, and a great number of them were so emaciated
and crippled, that they were obliged to carry them to the hospital."
The man who gave me the above statement was stationed at the govern-
ment domain garden. Here, then, we see the poor unfortunate fellows
trying to save themselves from a watery grave, but to be slaughtered by
the bullet and bayonet, and yet, perhaps, fortunate thus to meet death
in sight of their destination, and so escape what is worse, had they
been brought safe to land.
When landed they are sent to different parts of the country, not
sold to masters, as many suppose; but, I think, let out on loan, as
government can call them in at any time. However, government has
the first choice of the best workmen ; government officers next, their
friends next, and the residue are distributed generally. A seven years’
man has to serve four years from the time he arrives in the colony, with
good conduct, before he is entitled to the least indulgence, such as a
ticket of leave; —fourteen years’man,six years; —and those who are sen-
tenced for life, eight years. This I think unjust, forbad the same men
remained at the hulks in England, on the same conditions, they would
be altogether free at the periods specified. There, then, we see them
at their destinations, serving their various employers, working for their
food and clothing, such as it is, for masters are not allowed to give
them more were they so disposed. Some few get kind masters, who
consider that prisoners are men, and are possessed of natural feelings
similar to other men, and treat them accordingly. But the greater
part are so situated that, bad as government usage is, they are far
worse off; treated like dogs, worked from the dawn of the morning till
the close of day, often half naked, and all but starved. If men have
any stirring spirit left in them they cannot lie down and die; no, they
abscond—they run away —they are reported as absentees—two pounds


reward is offered to any man for their apprehension, by the govern-
ment. Few escape; they are taken, sentenced to be flogged, and
sent back to their masters ; and I have seen men thus punished, before
they have received as many as twenty lashes, their flesh fly from the
back into the air. They are treated, if possible, worse than before.
They again abscond, are taken, punished, and sent back, with no
better treatment, most probably are sentenced to work in irons at a
road-party, from one to three years. Here a number of them begin
to think that life is a misery ; they either steal to satisfy hunger, or
run away; in either case, they are next sent to a penal settlement; and
here their punishment is amazingly augmented : they work from light
till dark, up to their middle in mud and water; they have no changes;
they lie down at night wet and miserable ; in the morning they put on
their wet clothes, and proceed to their dreadful work again, are abused
and flogged until numbers of them, worn down by exhaustion, expire.
Others, who are more hardy, wish for death but cannot find it, and at
length resolve to commit some foul deed for the purpose of getting
hung, to end, as they suppose, their wretched misery. In more than
one instance, during my stay in Van Dieman’s Land, has it been
known that men so wretched and weary of life, have taken an axe and
murdered their companions for the sole purpose, as they have declared,
of being hung, to end their present wretchedness.
These are not mere fictions, but real facts, and the tenth part is not
told. I lived twelve months with a man, by name James Pocock, who
as soon as he arrived in the colony, was assigned to a Mr. George
Woodward, and in Woodward he found a bad master. I here give
Pocock’s own tale. “He promised when I went to him, that if I
would work well, he would reward me, and I used to work all I could,
to try to please him, but let me do as much as ever I could,'he was
never satisfied ; he was always abusing me; he did not give me above
half food enough to eat. One day he told me, if I did not do more
work he would take me to Hobart Town, and get me flogged ; this I
dreaded, and that day I worked until I could work no longer through
weakness. My master, as usual, said I had done nothing, and
swore he would get me punished in the morning. I did not know
what to do; I walked away from the house; my master took up a
loaded gun and followed me, and swore he would shoot me, if I did
not come back. I still went on, for I did not at that time care whether
he shot me or not. The next day I was reported as absent, and after
remaining four days in the bush, and nothing to eat, I was taken by a
constable. When before the magistrates, my master said how well
he had behaved to me, and what an idle fellow I was; so that the
magistrate would not believe a word I had to say, and sentenced me
to receive fifty lashes. I was punished, and sent back, and my master
put me to carry logs of wood on my back, which I could not endure.
I ran away again, and gave myself up to a constable, and was again
sentenced to fifty lashes, and sent back. My master was more cruel
than ever.
“ I then determined I would not stop with him if they hung me. I went
away three times more, and got fifty lashes each time. I then told the
magistrates that I could not live with my master, and that I hoped he
would not send me back again. But Mr. Mason said he would see


who would be master, either lor they, and I was sent back. I instantly
started, was taken, and sentenced to fifty lashes more; to go to Bridge-
water chain-gang for three months, and then return to my master.
When I was tied to the triangles this time, my back was in such a
dreadful state the doctor ordered that I was to be flogged over the
breech. After I came back from the chain-gang my master seemed a
little better to me for a week or two, and then began as bad as ever.
Often when he and I have been out in the night shooting opossums,
I have levelled the gun, and put my finger to the trigger. I hardly
knew which to shoot, the opossum or my master. I used to think 1
should not mind being hung for him, but I should not like to go to hell
for him, and this prevented me shooting him.” Pocock was a willing,
able, and good workman.
The above is not a solitary instance of cruelty, but one out of many
that could easily be enumerated if required ; I would just refer to the
u wretched Greenwood,” a fine, aspiring, strong young man as any one
would wish to set eyes upon. In the year 1834 he absconded from a bad
master, was absent a few days at the time of the horse-racing at New
Town ; he was seen on the course, was surrounded by constables, and
in attempting to make his escape drew his knife, and struck a con-
stable, which drew blood from his bosom. He was sentenced to re-
ceive one hundred lashes for absconding, the magistrate telling him at
the time he should turn him over to the criminal court, and no doubt
he would be hanged. One hundred lashes as given to prisoners is
equal to five hundred in the army. Greenwood took his trial a week
or two afterwards at the Supreme Court, was found guilty of cutting
and maiming, sentenced to death, and suffered accordingly, as is
generally reported, while the maggots were crawling in the wounds in-
flicted by the lash.
At one period, prisoners could soon make themselves com-
fortable ; they were expected to do a certain quantity of work every
day, and when they had done it to work for themselves, if they could
find a master. Now no task-work is given. Formerly first class
prisoners were allowed Saturday for themselves, and others, Saturday
afternoon, to wash their shirts, &c., not so now; they must do it, but
no time is allowed them to do it, and if any should be found working
they are liable to be punished, and the person that sets them to work
to a heavy fine. If you inquire the reason of this, you are told it is
“ an order from home for the punishment of convicts.”
In all that has been said, I had almost forgotten that hell upon earth,
“ Norfolk Island.” Whoever goes there they are no longer prisoners
of hope. In every other place, however dreadful and melancholy, there
is a hope springs up in the mind that some day may bring deliverance,
and that at a future period, however remote that period may be, you
will be restored again to your friends. Not so at Norfolk Island ; for
all that are sent thither are sentenced for their natural lives ; so that
every hope is cut off of ever obtaining deliverance, or of enjoying any
other society, or seeing any other but their miserable companions in
infamy, wretchedness, and woe. Thus they are left to drag on their
miserable existence, until they sink to rise no more. I have seen and
conversed with men that have been at all places of punishment except


Norfolk Island, but I never saw one returned from thence. If all were
guilty of the crime laid to their charge, their punishment is dreadful;
but there is a number that are not guilty of the charges brought against
them, at least so they have declared to me; and lam the more easily
led to believe the truth of this when I consider the circumstances con-
nected with my own trial and sentence. I will just mention one. Wil-
liam Osborne, nicknamed Roper, was taken, and stood his trial for
breaking into a poultry-house. Two men came into the house before
the thieves had perpetrated their intended deed ; it being dark they
rushed out, and one of them called “ Roper.” This circumstance led
to the apprehension of Osborne, he was sworn to by the evidence, and
transported for life. He has often declared to me that he knew no-
thing whatever of the circumstance, though he has for a long time been
suffering for it. He is nearly due for a ticket of leave, but what is
against him to prevent it, is, he is a good, serviceable, honest, trusty
man, and this too often entices the masters of Van Diemen’s Land, a
little before prisoners are entitled to receive their indulgence, to entrap
them by some means or other to get them punished, that they, the
masters, may not lose their services. It has been asked, is there no
alternative for the prisoners—is there no way for them to seek recom-
pense ? Yes, they have a chance of making complaints to the magis-
trates, but the masters’ word generally is taken in preference. If the
magistrates acted without partiality, prisoners would have fair play,
but this is seldom found.
Female prisoners I can say but little about. After they are
landed they are assigned off to fill different situations, and if they of-
fend their masters by being insolent, neglectful of their duty, &c. &c.,
they are taken and charged before the magistrates, who sentences them,
not to be flogged, but to have their heads shorn, and to be sent to the
factory from one month to three years, to work at the wash tub, ac-
cording to the nature of the offence. I have been told that a practice
once prevailed, if the woman committed a misdemeanour after they
were in the factory, to put iron collars round their necks, with spikes
in them, to increase their punishment. This horrid practice, I believe,
is not in existence now ; but they have lately built a treadmill for them.
Were I to state the multitude of offences, mistakes, or errors, to which
the prisoner is frequently liable, and for which a charge would be
brought against him, and subject him to so many degrees of punish-
ment, it would tire the patience and disgust the feelings ; but charges
are often brought against them without any foundation whatever ; and
rather than be defeated, I have heard those monsters say, “ It this
won’t do, I will say what will do.”
I freely acknowledge there ought to be laws made for the protec-
tion, as well as for the security, of life and property ; but, at the same
time, I must confess that there ought to be laws made to give every man
a chance to live honestly. Now it happens that laws are enacted
which compel men either to steal or starve, and no reasonable man will
suppose that the latter will be adopted in a land of plenty. Under the
present system of misgovernment, men are driven to violate the laws,
and then transported and sent to perpetual bondage and slavery
for doing what they were compelled to do; this is dreadful, and yet


too true. Certainly there are numbers transported that never would
work while they could lay hold of their neighbour’s property. But
are there not thousands sent to the end of the earth, and suffering
tortures ten times worse than death, that never would have been there
if they could have supported their families by their honest industry ? I
would assure my Lord Stanley, who boasted a few years since, that he
would make transportation worse than death, that his ciuel and
■diabolical purpose is more than accomplished ; for it would be doing
such unfortunate men a kindness —a favour; it would be granting
them an unspeakable privilege to hang them in England, and so pre-
vent their exposure to the cruelties, miseries, and wretchedness con-
nected with the present system of transportation to the Australian
colonies.
But I have been told it is done “ for the good of society, and to
uphold our most holy religion !” Good God, what hypocrisy and de-
ceit is here manifested ! the most cruel, the most unjust, the most
atrocious deeds are committed and carried on under the cloak of re-
ligion ! If I had not learnt what religion meant, such practices would
make me detest and abhor the very name. And yet, strange as it may
appear, those hypocrites who pretend to be so scrupulous, that rather
than submit to have their most holy religion endangered, they would
starve hard-working, honest husbands and fathers, and who have
solemnly pronounced, “ What God hath joined together, let no man.
put asunder,” are some of the first to separate man and wife, to send
some to banishment, and others to the Poor-law prisons; to oppress
the fatherless and widow. From all such religion as this, “ Good Lord
deliver us!” But, again, we are told it is intended to lead to a re-
formation of their characters, and to make them useful members of
society. I much question whether the present system is calculated to
have such an effect on the moral conduct of men in general; as far as
I have had an opportunity of observing, it has the contrary effect.
Nothing’ can be more absurd than to suppose that you can keep down
the conquered for any length of time, by pouring out upon them judge-
ment without mercy. When I was at Portsmouth, before I left Eng-
land, although I was not allowed to have conversation with any one,
they could not stop my ears from hearing others ; one day as I was in
the gun-wharf, assisting in weighing some old iron, I overheard two
gentlemen, that were standing by, talking. One said to the other, that
“ O’Connor had done all he could for the Trades’ Unions, but govern-
ment was determined to transport them, and so they ought, for they
are a set of idle, lazy fellows, and should all be sent out of the country,
and then they would be rendered useful members of society. Now,
I assure that gentleman, that although I was sent out of the country,
and have been subjected to privations, to distress, and wretchedness,
transportation has not had the intended effect on me, but, after all, I
am returned from my bondage with my views and principles strengthened.
It is indelibly fixed in my mind, that labour is ill-rewarded in con-
sequence of a few tyrannizing over the millions ; and that through their
oppression thousands are now working in chains on the roads, abused
by the overseers, sentenced by the comitants, and punished by the
flagellator; young, and once strong, able men, now emaciated and worn
almost to skeletons. Is this the plan to reform men ? I say no ; if they


were bad before, they are tenfold more the children of hell now. It
has a tendency to harden the heart, stultify the feelings, make them
careless, and regardless of consequences ; and they rush forward,
plunging headlong into an abyss from which they are not able to
extricate themselves : the groans and cries of the labourers ere long
will bring down vengeance on the heads of those who have been, and
are still, the authors of so much misery. I believe that nothing will ever
be done to relieve the distress of the working classes, unless they take
it into their own hands : with these views I left England, and with these
views I am returned ; notwithstanding all that I have seen and felt my
sentiments on the subject are unchanged. Nothing but union will or
can ever accomplish the great and important object, namely, the sal-
vation of the world. Let the producers of wealth firmly and peaceably
unite their energies, and what can withstand them ? The power and
influence of the non-producers would sink into insignificance —the con-
quest is won—the victory is certain.
Union shall flourish; truth shall own,
The glorious conquests she hath won. •
Nor is Van Dieman’s Land the garden of Eden for emigrants that
the deluded people of England imagine. I would just mention a few
words in reference to the young females that are sent to this part of
the world. About two ships arrived yearly, with young women, while I
was staying in the country. Those that arrived by the ship Boadicia,
in the month of February, 1836,1 speak more particularly in reference
to, as I have had opportunities of talking with several of them. But
what is said of them, may, with propriety, be said of others also. In
their passage out, I was told, they had not the best usage given them.
When they arrived they were put into a house provided by the govern-
ment; advertisements were circulated throughout the colony, giving
notice of their arrival, and requesting all who were in want of servants
to make early application for them. Applications being made, a
number of them were soon scattered over the colony; others for a
long time could not get situations, and above fifty were found to be
under fifteen years of age. The principal inhabitants of Hobart Town
were talking, when I left for the interior, of making a subscription to
send them home again ; but whether they succeeded or not I do not
know. Soon, however, many of those who had situations lost them ;
for a number of the young women that emigrate to that country have
not been bred to hard work ; others who have been accustomed to it
find it something worse there. Dissatisfaction arises between them
and their employers —they talk of leaving. “ You may go,” is the reply;
“we can get plenty of government servants without paying them
wages.” They leave and try for new situations, but few of them can
obtain any for want of recommendations from their last employers.
They are destitute, and none are found to pity them. They wander,
without friends and without a home, until they are driven, by dire ne-
cessity (a greater part of them) upon the town. I have conversed
with several of them, who have wept and lamented over their folly, in
having listened to the flattering and enticing offers of the emigration
agents; and decoyed from home and all that was dear to them, to be
rendered miserable in a distant land, where there is none to protect


nor shelter them. I have heard some of them offering gentlemen at
Hobart Town, or rather their ladies, to come into their house and do
anything required for their food, rather than follow the general
example; and wishing they could enter the service of some gentle-
man’s family going to England, and serve them for only a little food
on the voyage. But they are there, and must remain ; and while
some few of them get comfortably situated, the far greater part are
wretched and miserable.
Nor are the women alone thus deceived. A number of free men
soon find out their mistake after they arrive: unless they are the
bearers of letters signed by some right honourable or right reverend
name, they may wander long enough before they can get situations.
And how many, under an idea of bettering their condition, give up
what little they possessed in England, in hopes of turning it to some
advantage in the colonies; have purchased commodities in Lon-
don, and after having paid freightage, &c. to Van Dieman’s Land,
have been under the necessity of putting their goods into the auction
marts, and selling them for less than prime cost. A gentleman that
left England in August, 1836, in the ship Fairlie, was one of those
speculators. He arrived at Hobart Town about three weeks before I
left, and after lamenting his foolishness in bringing his family there,
told me he must sell his goods as above described, and go into the
interior to purchase a little farm, in order to support his family. This
a man may do, provided he has got plenty of money, but not else;
for a man with a few pounds would have no chance of buying land,
as land cannot easily be obtained. Although there are millions of
acres of land, that might be cultivated with advantage to individuals
as well as to the colony at large, still lying in its wild, rough, natural
state ; and thousands of people would be glad to purchase it for
cultivation; such is the system of management, that it is next
to impossible to purchase a few acres. It was formerly the custom
for people wanting to purchase land, to be allowed to have it by pay-
ing a minimum price for it; but now 7 , the great landowners —and
great they are, for some possess no less than thirty to forty thousand
acres—have it in their power to prevent others from purchasing. All
lands are now sold by auction, and as soon as allotments are adver-
tised for sale, they, the wealthy, attend the auctions, and will bid three
times the value of it, in order “ to keep off intruders,” and so join it
to their almost endless sheep runs ; and through such means the poor
man has no chance of becoming independent. The land remains the
same as ever, covered with rocks and trees, yielding nothing that may
be said to be useful to the colony ; and here is one grand reason why
so much distress and misery prevails among the inhabitants of Van
Dieman’s Land—with the numbers that are daily emigrating to that
part of the world, besides the vast quantities that are yearly transported,
and few of them ever returning. Some are continually becoming free
through servitude, others again obtain tickets of leave, and thus ser-
vants are increasing in number almost daily ; but there is no increase
of masters to employ them. I need not mention the natural result of
this; but I will confidently affirm, that there are many hundreds in
Hobart Town who cannot get sufficient bread to satisfy the wants of
nature; and out of upwards of two hundred thousand that have been


transported to the Australian colonies, I ask, can fifty thousand now
be found ? The answer is, no. Then, where are they ? The mind
recoils, and fills with horror, when reflecting- on the various tortures
and sufferings through which multitudes of them have had to pass
before paying the debt we owe to nature. Often has the silent wish
heaved within my bosom that I should not die in this country, when
I have seen the mortal remains of men, unfortunate men, taken fiom
the hospital and put into the ground, one on the other, without any
ceremony being performed over them, or friend to pity^them.
Free people are a sort of prisoners in Aan Dieman s Land. Con-
stables are set in all directions to watch and preserve peace and order.
These constables are selected from among the prisoners; and those
generallv are chosen to fill such offices as have been the most expert
in their roguery, and are long-sentence men. This rule, I expect, is
founded on the old saying, “ Set a rogue to catch a rogue and you are
sure to have him,” But how annoying to free people is it, when
walking, to be taken in charge by these faithful servants of the govern-
ment, on suspicion of being runaway convicts, to take a night’s lodg-
ing in the watch-house, to be brought the next day to the police office,
and examined before the magistrates; and if you can clear yourself,
most likely you will get rewarded with a reprimand for not being more
careful to have something to shew that you are free. Often charged
with being found, by them, drunk, and, whether guilty or not, to be
fined five shillings to the king. The liability, also, that those
janizaries, for the sake of some favour or indulgence, will bring
charges against people that will cause them to be sentenced to trans-
portation and death, while innocent. For instance, Robert
Esq., who was sentenced to die, for cattle stealing, on the evidence of
two convict constables, and is now in chains at Port Arthur, after the
public have again and again declared his innocence. A short
time since, the king’s attorney-general, Alfred Stephen, Esq., de-
clared in the open court at Hobart Town, “ That for five shillings
he could get a case brought against any man in the colony that would
hang him !” Under such circumstances, and others too numerous to
mention, I ask, a<e not all that are thus exposed, prisoners ? Van
Dieman’s Land is a prison house—a jail on a large scale. Many
rush forward from one degree of wretchedness to another, until
death, in various ways, terminate their present misery. Others, who
went freely, of their own accord, find it to be different to their expec-
tations ; get into idle company, and, as is the custom of the country,
drown their troubles and senses in rum drinking. But, though this
is the general rule, there are some few exceptions among both bond
and free, who get comfortably situated, and go through life easy.
One thing only, however, prevents them from coming home again, and
that is the means; for numbers of them have told me they would
return home directly, could they in any manner provide themselves
with a passage to England.
But a question has been put to me, “ How is it that so many send
home good accounts of the country, and how well they are doing
there?” To which I answer, as far as I have had a personal know-
ledge. While in the colony I wrote numbers of letters for different men
to their friends in England, and they all directed me to say that they


were doing well. I inquired their motive for so sending; “ for,” said
I, “ I am confident you are as miserable as myself, and if I say you
are comfortable I know I shall write falsehoods.” They told me they
did not wish to increase the trouble of their friends on their account,
and that they should be ashamed to acknowledge they were so bad off.
Notwithstanding all this,Van Dieman’s Land is a fine-looking coun-
try. As you come up the Derwent river from the west, hills rise in
regular succession above each other, covered with trees of various
descriptions, such as the stringy bark, honeysuckle, box, lightwood,
cherry, black, brown, and silver wattle, blue, red, and white gum,
oak, peppermint, pine, cedar, &c., &c.; and all of them evergreen.
A number of them shed their bark annually. As you anchor before
Hobart Town, its appearance is not very inviting; for a considerable
part of it seems to be lost in a flat betwixt the harbour and Mount
Wellington, whose summit is covered with snow eight months out of
the twelve. The town, however, is rising in importance and grandeur,
and is of considerable extent. The streets are wide, and several of
them Macadamized; and many of the lately-built houses and shops,
in Elizabeth and Liverpool streets, are not far inferior to many in Lon-
don. It contains at present about from sixteen to seventeen thousand
inhabitants. There are three churches, one Wesleyan chapel, an Inde-
pendent chapel, a Scotch church, and a Roman Catholic chapel, a
soldiers’ barracks, and the prisoners’ barracks, which will contain up-
wards of a thousand men ; a jail, court house, police office, custom
house, storehouses, &c., &c., all conspicuous places; and about a
mile from the town, at the foot of Mount Wellington, is the factory or
jail for the female prisoners. On the top of the mount is a fine
lagoon, that issues out its waters in different directions, and sends a
rich supply to the inhabitants of Hobart Town, and the country round
for several miles.
As you proceed to the interior, the country every way has a wild and
romantic appearance; a regular, unbounded, unbroken forest, excepting
here and there a few acres of cultivated land adjoining the settlers’ dwell-
ings, which are “ few and far between mountains, hills, and plains,
are covered with lofty trees and shrubs; and, fur from the habitations
of men, you may travel over the mountains, descend between the hills,
be surrounded with gloomy horrors, walk through the dreadful shade,
but never find the way to fertile vales and dewy meads,
Where peaceful rivers, soft and slow,
Amid the verdant landscape flow.
You may, perchance, see some rich and elegant looking flowers, fall
in with numbers of beautiful-plumage birds ; but, as though Provi-
dence had designed that nature should add and contribute to the
gloom and dreariness of the country, the trees are without fruit, the
birds without song, and the flowers without smell! The climate
differs considerably from England ; the winters are much more mild ;
'severe frost is never known. The hardest frost that I ever saw in that
country did not exceed some that I have seen in April and May in
England. Very strong winds are prevalent there especially in
summer. Hot winds prevail, which commence about Christmas,
and generally blow very strong from the north west; so hot, often


times, as to cause a difficulty of breathing, and are very hurtful to
the wheat crop, burning it quite black when just in bloom, rendering
it useless but for hay. The weather is very changeable, especially in
summer, one day being very hot, and the following day cold. The
rainy season sets in about the middle of June, and continues the whole
of the winter and part of spring, up till the latter part of October, or
some time in November, when the drought generally commences, and
so scorching, that frequently in two or three weeks the green herbage
is burnt up; nor can you expect any quantity of wet before the follow-
ing June. The principal months of harvest are January and February,
although sometimes it will hold out to the end of March. The soil is
good in many places, especially in the low lands, and it will grow
almost any thing that grows in England. English fruit trees planted
there will bear abundantly. Peaches grow in orchards, like apples
at home; grapes in beds; geraniums and sweetbrier will form quick
hedges. Wheat is equal in quality to, and weighs on an average 4 lbs.
per bushel more than, the English wheat.
Van Dieman’s Land might be made a fine agricultural country;
and, under a wise and judicious government, produce ten times as
much food as the wants of the inhabitants require; but now wheat
and flour are carried to them from Dantzic and America, and thou-
sands of cattle are annually exported to thence from Sydney and Port
Philip. Farmers in the interior only aim at growing as much grain
as will serve for domestic use; if they grew more it would be of no
service to them, as they could not take it to market for want of pass-
able roads.
The colony is divided into districts; and houses, cottages, and huts
are scattered here and there, though not one fiftieth part of the land
is yet cultivated; and even where it is, there is no regular system of
management followed; they plough and sow over and over, without
attempting to manure, until it is wore entirely out, and then bieak up
new land. A great portion of the land I consider to be perfectly
useless: it can never be penetrated by the ploughshare. There are
also a number of townships formed throughout the country, and if no
other buildings should happen to be there, you may generally find a
church and a jail! I have often thought that these edifices may
prove beneficial to many, some day ; the one, where the ignorant wil
be instructed to know the law, and the other, where the law will be
executed or finished upon them. The greatest possible ignorance pre-
vails, and many things are practised which are a disgrace to human
nature. They prepare their bread in the following manner ; put water
and flour together and mix it into dough, make it into a thick cake,
put it in an oven and cover it over with hot ashes, and when baked it
is called “ damper.” This practice prevails throughout the country,
and is seen in the highways, on the mountains, the bush, and the hut.
A number do not know the difference of one day from another, but by
counting or numbering them, and with many that abstain from their
usual work on Sunday, the day is occupied in washing and mending
their clothes, baking of bread, &c., or hunting the Kangaroo.
The country abounds with various animals, such as the forester and
brush kangaroo, tigers, wild cats, bandicoots, ringtail, black and grey
opossums; these last subsists on the leaves of the peppermint trees,


and was part of the food that the aborigines or native inhabitants used
to eat. Their manner of feeding, or taking their food, is not unworthy
of notice; they are completely naked, and go in companies; when
they eat, the men seat themselves on the.ground, and form a circle;
the women, or jins, as they are called, crouch behind the men’s backs,
and eagerly fix their eye on the top of their shoulder, reminding one
of animals that are waiting to pounce upon their prey. In this posi-
tion they remain until the men have taken according to their will, then,
without the slightest notice or turn of the body whatever, they toss it
over the shoulder, and instantly it is seized by the women who are in
waiting and ready to devour it. These unhappy, uncivilized human
beings are nearly all taken and transported across the water to Flin-
der’s Island; and, according to reports, from some means or other,
numbers of them die like rotten sheep, and, in all probability, a few
years more and their race will be entirely extinct.
England has for many years been lifting her voice against the abomi-
nable practice of negro slavery ; numbers of her great men have talked,
have laboured, have struggled, until at length emancipation has been
granted to her black slaves in the West Indies. When will they
dream of advocating the cause of England’s white slaves ? How long
will it be, ere they will cease to grind to the dust, trample under foot,
and tread down as the mire of the streets, the hard-working and indus-
trious labourer ? How long will it be ere they will cease to “ join house
to house, and field to field, until there is no placeto oppress the
hireling in his wages, and to keep back by fraud that to which he is
so justly entitled? When will they attempt to raise the working man
to that scale in society to which he can lay claim from his utility ?
Never—no never, will (with a few honourable exceptions) the rich
and the great devise means to alleviate the distress, and remove the
misery felt by the working men of England. What then is to
be done ? Why, the labouring classes must do it themselves, or it will
for ever be left undone ; the laws of reason and justice demands their
doing it. Labour is the poor man’s property, from which all protec-
tion is withheld. Has not then the working man as much right to
preserve and protect his labour as the rich man has his capital ?
But I am told that the working man ought to remain still and let
their cause work its way —“ that God in his good time will bring it
about for him.” However this is not my creed; I believe that God
works by means and men, and that he expects every man who feels
an interest in the subject to take an active part in bringing about and
hastening on so important a period. Under such an impression, I
would call upon every working man in England, and especially the
agricultural labourers, who appear to be the lowest, degraded, and the
least active, to shake off that supineness and indifference to their
interests, which leaves them in the situation of slaves, for no longer
can they live by the sweat of their brow; let no one expect that
another will do it for him. Let every working man come forward, from
east to west, and from north to south; unite firmly but peaceably
together as the heart of one man ; let them be determined to have a
voice in, and form a part of, the British nation ; then no longer would
the interest of the millions be sacrificed for the gain of a few, but the
blessings resulting from such a change would be felt by us, our pos


terity, even to generations yet unborn. Such a measure lam well
aware, would be dreaded, reviled, and reprobated by the monied part
of the nation ; they Avould devise all those schemes, stratagems, and
policy that the art and cunning of man can invent to thwart and
retard it. But let the working classes of Britain, seeing the necessity
of acting upon such a principle, remembering that union is power,,
listen to nothing that might be presented before them to draw their
attention from the subject, alike despising and conquering party dis-
putes and personal bickerings ; and they will accomplish their own sal-
vation and that of the world. Arise, men of Britain and take your
stand ! rally round the standard of Liberty, or for ever lay prostrate
under the iron hand of your land and money-mongering taskmasters!
Tolpuddle, August, 1837. George Loveless.
Minority of 82 on Mr. Wakley’s Motion in the House of Commons, June 25,
1835, “ For an Address to his Majesty praying him to grant a free pardon to
the Six Dorchester Labourers.”
Aglionby, H. A.
Ainsworth, P. (W’hig)
Attwood, Thomas
Baines, Edward
Baldwin, Dr.
Barnard, E. G.
Beau clerk, Major
Bish, Thos.
Blake, M. J.
Bodkin, J. J.
Bowring, Dr.
Brady, D. C.
Bridgman, H.
J. (W’hig)
Brotherton, Jas.
Buckingham, J. S.
Buller, Charles.
Bulwer, 11. L.
Butler, Hon. Col.
Cayley, E. S. (Whig)
Collier, J. .
Crawford, S.
Dennistoun, Alex.
Dobbin, Leonard
Duncombe. Hn. W.(T.)
Duncombe, Thomas
Dundas,Hon. J. C.(W.)
Blphinstone, Howard
Euston, Lord (Tory)
Ewart, Wm.
Fergus, J.
Fielden, John.
Finn, W. Fras.
Forster, C. (Tory)
Gully, John
Harvey, D. W T .
Hawes, Benj.
Hector, C. J.
Hindley, Chas.
Hodges, Thos. L.
Hutt, W.
Kemp, T. R.
Lawson, A. (Tory)
Lister, E. C. (Whig)
Lowther, Hn. J. H. (T.)
M‘Cance, J.
M'Namara, Major
Marsland, Henry
Maxwell, John (Tory)
Molesworth, Sir W'.
Musgrave, Sir R.
O’Brien, C.
O’Brien, VV. S.
O’Connell, Daniel
O'Connell, Maurice
Power, Patrick
Phillips, Mark (W’hig)
Phillips, March (Tory)
Richards, John (Tory)
Rippon, Cuthbert
Roebuck, J. A.
Bundle, John
Ruthven, E.
Ruthven, E. S.
Scholefield, J,
Sinclair, George (Tory)
Speirs, A. G.
Strickland, Sir G.(W,)
Thompson, Col. P.
Thorneley, T.
Tooke, William
Trelawny, Sir Wm.
Trevor Hon. A. (Tory)
Tulk, C. A.
Wall, C. Baring (Tory)
Wallace, Robert
Waller, John (Tory)
W’arburton, Henry
Wason, Rigby
Whalley, Sir S.
Wilks, John
Williams, Wm.
TELLERS.
Hume, Joseph
Wakley, 'I homas
N. B.— lt will be seen from the above, that in a full house, consisting of 390
Members, only seven Whigs could be fotrhd voting for tins act of meicy; while
there were twelve Tories; the bulk of the division consisting of Radicals and.
Independent Liberals, something more than W’higs.
Hartwell, Printer, 33, Duke Street, Stamford Street, iUackfriars Road,




