

- ■ ' ' '' : : - :
; |® „ . 'f;:;;
i:
; : . ■ : .. ' ■ ■■ : \
: . ' ■' :
■■'■J ; ■ ■ . ■ - ■ : . ■ /■
v
: ■ ■ •
. ■■■;!:-■ : ■ ; : : ' V"*-'-.
■ ■ ■ ■ ; . ■ " ■ ■ : ■ : ■
■ '• - • ■" ■ f ' " ; . :■■ ■ • : ■
' ' :: : : ■ ' ■ : ' . ■ ■■
. : : ; ; : , . . : ''V - ; .. .'
' - "" ■ . ■ ' ' ' ■ ' ' ' . • < : \
. ■: ' : '
' ■ ■.^;■..1::^:''f : ■ V -v r
2- ■:"? ■ ' . " " . ■■■ ' . . ' .:■£ . ,„ O'^;§|
" . : ' ;''
. ■ . ■ ; . ; . ; ' ' . ' '
■ ; '/ ■ - . ■ . -
alu 4 pfttttT tit tin 4 Jlnrrh
Painted by HERBERT BEECROFT
After AXEL ENDER
®iwrtfai?fa fan Ifai' iSru. 5. lE. IRitth
ONE SHILLING


GAZETTE SSBL
WFF
|| RATIONAL LIBRARY" J|j
I
.
■ ' B ' I ' lH i ' II'- |I| I'
• |
fl


prturr in % fhirrfj
fitt §>tmt (EoKgregattmml <ftf|urr!j
dgititeg
Painted by HERBERT BEECROFT,
After AXEL ENDER
Described by the
REV. T. E. RUTH
Easter Evening, 1926
BOOK ROOM,
264 Pitt Street,
SYDNEY.


\
L


N a non-sacramentarian Church so situated as to be a sort of
|Sb| I H Community Cathedral, designed to be a House of Prayer
IfPjjpgafl and Praise for all people, there must needs be some strong,
simple symbolism. When the symbol stands for something
vital, something instinct with reality, when through the symbol reality
can be easily reached, when the symbol is so suggestive that the
spiritual significance can scarcely be missed, then the symbol is the
servant of the soul.
Over the central door of this renovated Church, the Cross, empty
but luminous, the symbol of our common faith, sends its divine
message into the night, the only distinctly Christian witness in
Sydney's Great White Way.
In the vestibule, Mr. Beecroft's striking copy of Axel Ender's
masterpiece tells its sublime story of the empty tomb, the defeat of
death, the triumph of life, the victory of love, the angel vision of
the women of the dawn.
In the Church we are in the presence of the Living Christ. Ail
our ministry is concerned with Him. He is our contemporary.
He cares supremely for the , personal character of men and for the
character of the community. And He is available to everybody. The
communion rail has been removed. The Lord's Table is not fenced
round. There are no barriers between the soul and the Lord of life.
The luminous cross; the empty tomb; the Living Christ.
*To-night we are concerned with a consideration of
THE PICTURE IN THE PORCH.
The story on the Sydney side of it is simple and soon told. Mr.
Herbert Beecroft, an English artist, for some time resident in Sydney,
was looking at some photographs which a friend had brought from
Norway, and a photograph with a small colored representation of
Axel Ender's famous picture in the little Lutheran Church at Molde
made an instant appeal to his imagination, and claimed the ministry
of his artistic genius. With that capacity for taking pains which is
the driving force of genius, Mr, Beecroft has produced a copy which
is infinitely more than a copy. It is essentially creative and stamped
with personality. He put himself into it. He says: "It seemed
to me during the war, that prevented from active service, I might
yet do something to comfort the mourners." He has done a great
deal to inspire us all. Mrs. Beecroft has lent the picture to the
Church for an indefinite period, but for at least a year, and we share
the artist's hope that it may occupy the niche we have built for it
for a hundred years.
* Easter Evening, 1926.


On the Norwegian side of it not much can be said. No published
account is available. The picture is famous and commands the
constant attention of tourists. And reproductions of it are almost
as prolific as those of Holman Hunt's "Light of the World," It
is said that the Church Council at Molde wanted to commission an
Italian artist to paint the picture. But Axel Ender's presentation of
"The Morning of the Resurrection" was ultimately preferred. The
face of the angel is the face of the artist's fiancee, who died of
consumption. That adds pathos to the picture. And more than
pathos. The artist perpetuates the memory of his beloved. In part,
the picture is prophetic of her ministry. It is suggestive of the ascent
of life. Always the risen remind us of the resurrection and point to
Him Who is the Lord of life, Who was dead, Who has abolished death
and Who is alive for evermore.
{BELIEVE Axel Ender's title for the picture is "The Morning of
the Resurrection." It really needs no title. It speaks for
itself. You can almost hear the angel saying, "He is not here.
He is risen." The grave is empty but for the angel. It always
is. A cemetery is the emptiest place in the world. The picture is
a study of the angel and the women of the dawn.
Here are three women. The first is the figure of Johanna, wife of
Chuza, Herod's steward, robed appropriately to her husband's
position. Next her is Mary, the mother of James. And, at the
entrance, daring not to approach, Mary Magdalene, who had come to
anoint the dear dead body.
And these women of the dawn present in figure and pose, and
in facial expression, a rare study in conflicting emotions. And you
find yourself where merely philosophic and scientific canons of
interpretation fail you. You have fellowship with their fear and with
their feelings of perplexity and wonder and triumph.
You look at this picture and you become one with the changing
mood of these dawn women.
This is not an isolated company of mourners, a little historic
group, a little band of three lonely souls facing a grave in the garden
of death. They are utterly typical of a great multitude no man can
number, symbolic of a sorrow-stricken world, prophetic of a revelation
radiant with the reality of triumphant life.
YOU have known, or you will know, that mood of grief, of gloom,
of mystery, of misgiving, that almost-paralysing
PERPLEXITY
with which these women were familiar as they came to the tomb to
touch with their ministering hands the marred body of their Beloved


Master and Friend, as they came asking "Who shall roll us away the
atone?"
We march to our own tombs with many mighty questions
in our minds. We are for ever interrogating ourselves, our minds
and hearts and one another and the universe and the great God with
unanswered questions. So many of our problems cannot be thought
through. They have to be lived through. That we bristle with
questions, some infinitely painful questions, is the price we pay for
being human. It is the condition of our being. The stone at the
door of the tomb asks no question, doesn't argue about anything,
doesn't care about anything, isn't sufficiently alive to care whose grave
it guards, doesn't even know the difference between a stone and a
star, doesn't know it is a stone and a stumbling block to sorrowful
women walking in the twilight toward the tomb before the Easter day
dawned. Those women were in a mood of tremendous perplexity.
And we face our own tombs in like temper. We ask such questions
as—
What is death? Whence comes this sudden stillness upon the
face of the newly dead? But a moment ago some dear spirit looked
through those eyes. Those eyes were windows of the soul. Now
the windows are closed, the blinds are drawn. Everything is dark,
blank, black. Just now he took my hand and gripped it as though he
would never let it go. Now there is no response. lam touching
something icy cold. What was he saying just now? Why will he
not reply to me? Will he be silent now for ever? His flesh
quivered with life an hour ago. He was laughing. Now in his
frame nothing is alive. No one seems to live here any more. What
is death ? What is this dread power that ejected him from the house
of dust he leased from life? What is death?
What is life? That is a greater question. If 1 knew precisely
what it is that comes through the gate of birth I should know what
passes through the portal of death. It is only on the surface of
things that death seems to outwit, to out-manoeuvre life. In sober
reality death is but the servant of life. Things die but to live again.
Life goes to death's utmost margin, and when death vanishes life
leaps into new skies. "He that believeth in Me though he die, yet
shall he live." There are no dead.
"How are the dead raised?" The question asked in the
Christian community of ancient Corinth is asked in every community
in the twentieth century. To say God is the God of the living, not
of the dead, and all live unto Him, gives us a vision of what is on
the other side of sleep.
And "with what body do they come?" It is a natural and a


reasonable question. The only life we know signals to us through
bodies, flashes through eyes, fingers, speech. Humans have a human
body, must have. Are there, can there be, any disembodied spirits?
Is it reasonable to think the physical the only plane? Can we grow
another body? I once took a little girl through the tunnel under
the Mersey. When 1 told her we were under that mighty river
she looked up at the ceiling of the railway carriage and said, "I don't
believe it, uncle." Many of us are childishly intellectual sub-way
passengers.
The perplexity of Johanna, of Mary,, of Mary Magdalene, do we
not know it?. This questioning mood born of sorrow and gloom,
this "who shall roll us away the stone?" this fearful facing of facts
in the grey morning, are we not familiar with it? Well, we certainly
do ask great questions. Socrates hoped that in the world to which
the hemlock-sent him they would not put a man to death for asking
questions. We certainly do face great problems. -We also face
great solutions. God works unceasingly on both sides of the veil.
Life is the sphere of the unslumbering toiler. Death is no more
perplexing than life. The physical is but the shadow of the spiritual.
The spiritual is the forth-flashing splendour of life and love.
IN THE FACES of these women of the dawn, perplexity is
passing, and
WONDER
is written---wonder, which Aristotle held to be the beginning of
knowledge. See the surprise in the eyes of Johanna. Watch the
wonder dawning on the face of Mary. "And they were saying
among themselves who shall roll us away the stone .... and
looking up, they see that the stone is rolled back." They came,
expecting to find a great stone locking the tomb; a dead Christ; a grave
of gloom. Instead, they found an unsealed sepulchre, an empty
tomb, and the assurance that Christ was risen. ■ No obstructing
stone; no unlit gloom; no victorious death. And. there came to them
the beginning of that wonder that would presently
"Greet the unseen with a cheer,"
We share their wonder.
Death is not a terminus. Death is a thoroughfare; a door; a
gate; a means of passing through, passing on;- an exit; an entrance;
a decease to be accomplished; a method of ascension.
"Looking up, they see the stone rolled away." Lifeless matter
is not an obstacle to deathless spirit. Expecting an impenetrable
wall, they wonder to find a magnificent aperture, an immeasurable
expanse, a depth .of glory, with angels further in and in.


Some One has been there before them, silently working at the
centre of things. So that doors are open where yesterday they were
closed, bolted and barred. Yesterday was a day of gloom, and
love was crucified. Their Saviour was slain. Their hope was
buried. Now yesterday's blackness begins to shine with celestial
radiance. The skies of unyielding iron melt into loving embrace.
The rain of ruin is changed to tears of joy. They find not a dead
body, but the assurance that their Lord has triumphed over death.
Isn't that the very meaning, the very design of life? Hasn't
One gone before us in everything?
These wondering women of the dawn find the tomb the birthplace
of unaging youth. The record has it "a young man." The artist gives
the angel the face of his beloved. It is artistic licence, consistent
with the triumph of life over sex. The angel speaks of life, ageless,
deathless life, points to a sphere of eternal youth. The angel might
have said: 1 was one of the choristers who sang at the foundation
of the world. lam youth. You came expecting to find death
and decay. There isn't any on the other side of things. The oldest
angels are the youngest. You find life. You find youth. And
He whom you think dead is not dead. He is risen.
So these women of the dawn find their wonder fed. They see
this angel-occupied tomb, not a sepulchre of sorrow and gloom, but a
sanctuary of bloom and beauty, a sanctuary of splendour, ablaze with
dazzling white. The angel is white—the colours of the rainbow
would be inadequate here. The angel walks in behind the rainbow,
and from the loom of ageless life and light weaves the garment of
mother-white, out of which all colours are born.
Why do we persist in making the tomb the rendezvous of gloom ?
Why do we take our funeral colours from scraps of midnight, instead
of the stars of the morning?
Heaven floats its predominant colour over its battlements.
White, mother-white is the everlasting style. The redeemed walk in
white. Those who have come out of great tribulation are robed
in white. The throne is the great white throne. White is the
colour of victory.
VICTORY!
THAT is the ultimate mood. See it written over the whole
picture. There is Mary Magdalene. She doesn't need to
use those spices to anoint the dead body of her Saviour. He
isn't dead. In the faces of Mary and Johanna the look of triumph
comes to banish their perplexity and to crown their wonder. That
is the crowning truth. Triumph. The word written over the


canvas is Victory, utter and complete. Calvary's crimson has been
changed into something whiter than snow. Death itself is dead.
That is the testimony of the empty tomb. Death, the arch-
deceiver, is at last discovered and demolished. Death has kept men
in bondage, made children in the home afraid, and the monarch on
the throne afraid, darkened the rich man's gold, set limits to the
philosopher's knowledge, the lovers' hope and the believer's faith.
But the tomb is empty—the sting of death is not in the tomb, nor
its victory in the grave. For One has been in the tomb Who fought
death and hell on their own ground, and captured their gloom and
destroyed their doom.
The empty tomb is a fact, a universal reality, an everlasting truth.
This fact has given us our historic faith, our radiant, redeeming,
comforting, conquering faith.
The picture in the porch preaches this triumphant gospel. It
tells out this truth, not only that the tomb is empty, but that Christ
is risen. It tells the sorrowing women, it tells every discouraged
Peter, every doubting Thomas, every modern disciple that He has
triumphed over death, that He transforms the universe into an infinite
Galilee, that He keeps His appointments, that His promises are Yea
and Amen.
The cross is shining. The tomb is empty. The Christ is
risen. This is the Church of the Cross. This is the Church of the
Empty Tomb. This is the Church of the Risen Lord.
This is the Church, this is the Commonwealth, this is the
century of the Living Christ. And He is alive for evermore. In
His hands not merely the print of the nails, but the problems of our
time. In His heart not the problems of a past Palestine, but the
affairs of the whole world. Go ye into all the world and preach the
Gospel to every creature. He is risen. And all life rises with Him.


'
w


A. K. MURRAY 8C CO.
PRINTERS & PUBLISHERS
58 SUTHERLAND STREET
HADDINGTON
