

Tflfl Habits os' the Lyre Bird
By R J. Williams,,
[Read before the Field Naturalists’ Club of Victoria, 14th February, 1881.]
In my previous papers 1 have given the result of my observations
on the habits and characteristics of the Platypus,, as also the Marsu-
pials of Australia. On the present occasion I propose to bring under
your notice such particulars as have come under my observation relat-
ing to the Lyre Bird.
The Lyre Bird (Menura superha) —native name, Bullan-bullan—-
is now so well known, and has been so often described, that I shall
simply give my personal experience of the habits of the bird during
the time I have collected specimens of them, which I have done
occasionally for about thirty years. Williams and Leadbeater exhi-
bited a case containing both male and female, together with the egg,
at the first Exhibition held in Melbourne in the year 1854; and the
late Dr. Becker described the egg, and the peculiar construction of
the nest, in a paper read before the Philosophical Society) of which the
following report appeared in the Argus :
“ THE MENURA SUPEEBA.
“ Until lately the egg of the lyre-bird was unknown in Europe, but during the Mel-
bourne Exhibition in 1854 Messrs Williams and Leadbeater exhibited a case containing
stuffed lyre-birds and an egg of the same. By permission of the owners of the egg,
Dr. Becker made a drawing of it, and sent the sketch to Dr. Kaup, the celebrated Ger-
man professor of natural history, who presented it for publication to Dr. Cobanis, of
Berlin. From this time the egg of the “Menura superba” has in some measure
become known at home. The fact of the well-known French naturalist, Jules Verr-
caux, requesting that the original drawing might be forwarded to him proved the
great interest taken in the subject. The nest and egg exhibited by Dr. Becker was
brought to Melbourne by an aboriginal of the Yarra Tribe. The name given to the
bird by the natives is Bullan Bullan, the word having some similarity to the gurg-
ling note which the bird at times is heard to emit. The nest is ten inches in dia-
meter and five inches high, closely woven from fine but strong roots, the inside being
lined with the softer feathers of the bird. The bird surrounds this inner nest with
a sort of exterior wall of sticks and pieces of wood, grass, moss, and leaves, in such
a manner that it projects over the genuine nest, affording the sitting bird a shelter
from above. An opening in the side serves as an entrance, through which the
female enters backwards with her tail laid over her back. The female lays one egg
a-year of the size of a duck’s egg. The colour is a light ash grey, with darker spots
slightly tinted with brown. The young exhibited by Dr. Becker dropped out from
the egg, which was accidentally broken, and is, to naturalists, an object of great
interest. The period of incubation is believed to begin in the first week in August,
and the young ones break through the shell in the beginning of September.”
In the month of June the birds begin to pair, and build their nest,
or repair an old one, and generally lay their egg in the beginning of
July or August. I once found an egg, with the young half formed in
it, on the 16th of June, 1870: this was at Starvation Creek, Upper
Yarra. When the one is hatched it is without feathers, and
covered with a soft blackish down; the mother feeds it in the nest for
about four to six weeks, and it is able to fly in about three months ;
therefore in this respect it very much resembles the English Black-
bird, or Thrush. Its food consists of worms, beetles, and insects j the


mother will scratch for this food similarly to the barn-door fowl.
The locality in which they generally live abounds with worms, scor-
pions, and small land-crabs, and also shells which contain a kind of
snail: these they break by knocking them against a stone, or some
other hard substance, and extract the snail, which they eat with great
relish. They build but once in the year, and only lay one egg, although
I have repeatedly counted as many as 40 eggs in the ovary of the female
bird. I believe they live for many years, but cannot say how many ;
nor am I competent to state whether they live long enough to bring
to maturity the number of eggs stated above, at the rate of one in
each year. I believe, if the egg is destroyed early in the season,
that they will lay another one, but I have never found more than one
in the nest. I have been acquainted with nearly all the native blacks
on the Yarra and the Groulbomm for 30 years, and I have frequently
questioned them on this subject —and they all state that the Lyre
Bird breeds only once a-year, and never lays more than one egg in a
nest each year. The young are very delicate, and difficult to rear ; yet
if kept in a warm place (as they cannot stand the cold when young) and
carefully fed, a little at a time and often, they will thrive well and soon
get very tame—so much so that they will follow you about and eat out of
your hands, and seem to have no fear or dread, —unlike what they are in
their native state, being then the most timid and shy of all birds. Their
sight and hearing being very keen, it is seldom you can get a view of
them, although there may be hundreds of them in the country you
pass through. When the female is sitting she will always defend her
nest, losing all the shyness or timidity which is her chief charac-
teristic at other times; and she will fly from tree to tree in order to
attract you from her nest, and should you happen to go near to it she
will return screeching, fearless of danger. The male bird seldom
makes his appearance but to be off again at the slightest noise or
sign of danger. They do not obtain their full plumage until the third
year: during the second year the plumage of the male and female
are very much the same —so much so, that only a person of experience
can discern the difference, as they seldom fly, and then only from high
to low ground, choosing rather to use their legs to escape danger.
They run very swiftly on the ground, and will hop from log to log,
from one low tree to another, with amazing agility. The male is
much more shy than the female, therefore more difficult to shoot. The
best time for shooting them is in the pairing season, when the male
birds will chase each other; but this is now wisely prohibited by law.
I have shot as many as six male birds without moving from behind a
log, but this is not a common occurrence. When the female is sitting
the male bird is seldom far off: he scrapes together a lot of loose earth
and makes a hill about three feet across, elevated in the middle. This
is generally made in some secluded spot amongst low He
visits it in the morning about 10 o’clock, and again about 3 in the
afternoon, remaining each time about an hour : he jumps about on the
top of the mound, going through all sorts of antics, and imitating
all other birds or animals he has ever heard: hence he is called the
“Australian Mocking Bird.” I have shot more male birds when
whistling and singing on their hills than anywhere else; but great
ycare is required, as they are always on the watch, and at the slightest
Vj


strange noise they disappear as though by magic, when it would be
useless to look further after them, until they again return to their
hill, which they will do when they suppose all danger to be past.
They seldom use the hills after the breeding season: they may occa-
sionally remain to sing a few r notes and be off again. The female will
use the same nest for years, and the cock the same hill. At night
they generally make down to the creek to roost, choosing a secluded spot
sheltered from the wind, and mostly in a low tree. They commence
to sing at the first dawn of day, even before they leave their roost:
they then gradually make their way up the highest hill, feeding as
they go, occasionally singing, chattering, and mocking. Such are a
few of my observations on the habits of the Lyre Bird.
PROCEEDINGS OF SOCIETIES.
THE EOYAL SOCIETY OP VICTORIA.
SPECIAL MEETING.
A special meeting of the Royal Society of Victoria was held on
Wednesday evening, 6th April. The members of the Microscopical
Society of Victoria, and of the Field Naturalists’ Club, being present
by invitation. Mr. R. L. J. Ellery, F.R.S., occupied the chair, and
intimated that the meeting was called for the purpose of meeting
Baron Miklouho Maclay and considering a proposal for the establish-
ment of a Zoological Station at Port Jackson. The chairman then
introduced the visitor to the meeting.
Baron Maclay briefly returned thanks for the kind reception
accorded him, and stated that Professor McCoy would indicate to the
meeting the objects to be attained by the use of a station such as that
proposed.
Professor McCoy briefly stated some of the many advantages to
be derived from the establishment of a Zoological Station in the
Southern Seas: in fact, such a station had now become one of the
necessities of science, particularly as a large amount of recent inter-
esting researches in Europe and elsewhere had tended to show that
development or animal change depended on embryonic change. Many
able men in past years had given considerable attention to the study
of living objects at the sea-side: among whom might be mentioned
Professor Agazzis, who, favorably located for making such observa-
tions, had filled many volumes, describing the life-history of a great
variety of animals in their natural habitat the sea. Even before this,
our distinguished visitor Baron Maclay had, in conjunction with Dr.
Dohrn, conceived the idea of establishing a sea-side laboratory to
enable observers to make their researches continuously, where natur-
alists might set up their microscopes, arrange their growing cells, live
cells, and other similar contrivances, and study the objects of their
enquiries uninterruptedly, and with the fullest confidence that, when
absent for a brief period, they would on their return find everything
