

THE SKIN;
ITS DISFIGUREMENTS, DISEASES
AND THEIR CURE,
WITH NOTES ON BATHS AND BATHING.
DR. ALFRED NEALE,
Formerly Physician to the Hospital for Skin, Cancer and Scrofula,
Manchester.
Author of “Eczema,” “Facts about the Skin,” “ Scrofida,”
“Common Sense about Skin Diseases,” " Consumption—Its Prevention
and Cure.”
—■*
SECOND EDITION.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
Sydney:
Turner and Henderson, Printers and Publishers.




THE SKIN;
ITS DISFIGUREMENTS, DISEASES
AND THEIR CURE,
WITH NOTES ON BATHS AND BATHING.
DR. ALFRED NEALE,
Formerly Physician to the Hospital for Skin, Cancer and Scrofula,
Manchester.
Author of “Eczema,” “Facts about the Skin,” “Scrofula,”
“Common Sense about Skin Diseases,” "Consumption—Its Prevention
and Cure.”
SECOND EDITION.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
Sydney:
Turner and Henderson, Printers and Publishers.


BY SAME AUTHOR:
CONSUMPTION Its Prevention and Cure by
Climatic and Open = air Treatment.


PREFACE.
The modern growth of interest in the structure and
mechanism of the body has been largely fostered by the
courses of lectures initiated by St. John’s Ambulance
Association. These, begun as a means of simple instruction
in first aid to the injured, have now been elaborated into
popular discourses on hygiene personal and public, wherein,
by a judicious system of “ boiling down,” practical points are
presented in such a manner as to be grasped by the non-
technical student. In the present paper I have endeavoured
to follow the same lines, while confining myself to a single
organ and its troubles, some of which are often regarded as
too insignificant for medical help. The notes on Scrofula
and Syphilis I should have liked to enlarge, but in consist-
ence with the scope of the pamphlet have limited to their
bearing on the skin.
I hope the time will come when all the broad facts of
anatomy and the functions of the body, including even
those of the reproductive organs, will be common school
knowledge; whose acquisition, in my opinion, will be
conducive not only to the physical advance of the race, but,
as a necessary sequence, to its morality.
ALFRED NEALE, M.D.
1 Lyons Terrace, Sydney.
O - NOV 1992 «


Introduction -
-
-
-
-
- 3
I. The Skin in Health
-
-
-
-
- 5
CONTENTS.
CHAP. PAGE
Acne —Anus, Itching of —Baldness —Birthmarks —Black-
heads—Blemishes —Chilblains —Contagious Diseases—
Eczema—Freckles —Hair, Falling—Hair, Superfluous—
Itching—Lupus—Lice—Moles —Nettlerash —Pimples—
Piles — Psoriasis — Red Noses — Ringworm—Scrofula
' —Sun Burn —Sweating—Syphilis—Varicose Veins —
Warts.
11. Disfigurements and Diseases of the Skin
111. Care of the Skin 40


CHAPTER I.
THE SKIN IN HEALTH.
To have a clear and healthy skin is a source
of satisfaction to everyone. A complexion,
good or bad, prejudices the minds of others for
or against the individual before further acquaint-
ance is made, so that a blotchy pimply face
harms a man in his business capacity as much
as it harms a woman from a matrimonial point
of view. Who does not admire the beauty of
the heroine’s skin as depicted by the novelist ?
its delicate transparency, smooth and fine,
showing the faint bluish outlines of the veins
beneath, itself contrasted by the scarlet thread
of the lips. In health, whether the race
is black, brown or white, the complexion may
still be lovely. Far different is it when it
exhibits the ravages of disease —the yellow
dulness of jaundice, the fiery glare of the
alcoholic, the unwashed aspect presented by
numerous “ blackheads,” or the more active
destruction of lupus. The skin is familiarly
relied upon as an indicator of deeper disease,
whether it evokes the maternal anxiety by sores
round the infant’s mouth, or surrenders itself to
the depiction of the exanthemata (measles,


'flL 6 The Skin
* small pox, &c.). It is regarded, and justly, as
v ( y\n index to the state of the blood, although in
V itself a sufficiently independent organ to be
affected by disease quite irrespective of any
V other portion of the body.
The influence which it exercises over the
different organs is utilised in the treatment of
their diseases ; 'when, as in the case of lung
troubles, neuralgias, abdominal pains, etc.,
measures are adopted for relief, at the expense
of the skin, by the application of irritant plasters
and blisters; or advantage is taken of its
absorbent tendency when we spread on its sur-
face some soothing paint or ointment to allay
the pain beneath. The decorative value of the
skin, in which it may be compared to the bind-
ing of a book imparting a finish to the work of
art it conceals, is not its sole object of being.
As much an organ of the body as the heart,
liver, lungs, it has special functions to perform,
and is as essential to life as any of these ; while
its situation exposes it to the brunt of every
danger from without, whether from atmospheric
changes, violent blows, or the more insidious
attacks of parasites, both animal and vegetable.
Thus, care for its health is no new outgrowth of
sanitary science, but an imperative need early
forced upon humanity ; while care for its beauty
has been a feature of all civilised races.
The furrows and lines of the skin are not
without interest. The larger and deeper wrinkles
of the face have a place in the appreciation
of physiognomy. They are mainly produced


by muscular action, and we have grown td
associate them with certain mental character-’ **
istics. Again, the spiral markings on the finger
ends lend themselves as a means of identifica-
tion. The lines of the hands, whose study is
by palmists considered in the light of a science,
have at any rate helped a few to make a
livelihood, and are a regular source of amuse-
ment, mixed with superstition.
BLEMISHES OF THE SKIN.
Apart from disfigurements on exposed portions
there are few people whose skin is free from
blemish. When of the nature of moles or
birthmarks, clothing renders them insignificant.
Blemishes, more important than these, occur
freely, exciting no attention unless they enlarge
or irritate. But all such blemishes ought to be
removed where possible. The simple wart is
apt, with advancing age, to become a form of
cancer ; a small protrusion of the skin is ready
to develop into a tumor ; a patch of eczema on
the wrist or the bend of the elbow is as seed
ready to fertilize the whole skin at the prompting
of such slight changes as are supplied by
climate or altered diet. Brown patches on the
chest or back (Pityriasis Versicolor) spread
slowly but steadily, imitating the appearance of
syphilis. It is astonishing how people look
upon these things as natural to them, giving
them only a moment’s consideration on the eve
of marriage when another person has to share
their confidence.


Three years since a gentleman showed me a
patch on his body no bigger than a shilling.
Being out of sight and not being irritable, the
blemish had never given him any anxiety.
Enquiry disclosed the fact that his wife, after
six pregnancies, had never borne a living child.
Steps taken, as an outcome of the knowledge
revealed by the* blemish, resulted in the wife
giving birth to a healthy child.
Neglect of abnormal marks on the skin is as
often shared by the doctor as the patient. To
be told that some apparently slight skin
disfigurement is of no account, or that it will
disappear in time, is a common experience of
patients who are thus discouraged to seek means
of relief, or thrown back on the advice of
empirics. When disease absolutely exists, I
have found patients who refused to have it
cured on the ground that some adviser has
told them that the cure of the skin will result
in internal disease. Fallacies of this kind easily
arise when the adviser is incompetent to cure.
Take the case of the disfiguring pimples which
attack the faces of young men at puberty.
Rarely is anything done for them. In many
instances they after a time disappear with-
out leaving a mark, frequently they persist
and permanently disfigure. In all cases,
some care will entirely prevent disfigurement.
These remarks will, I trust, emphasize the
importance of neglecting no skin disfigurement
until it is positively known that it is innocuous
or incurable.


THE USES OF THE SKIN.
The main functions of the skin are four in
number.
i. It is a protective organ to the soft parts
which it covers.
2. It acts as a regulator of the body tempera-
ture.
3. It removes waste material from the body.
4. It acts as a medium of communication
between ourselves and the external world,
whereby it receives impressions of sensation
and touch, transferring them to the brain.
1. Protection. —Beneath the skin lie the
muscles arranged in their respective layers';
about them and between them are the various
branches of arteries, veins, and nerves. The
skin, by its elasticity, toughness, and movability
saves these from many an external injury, either
of pressure or blows. In this it is aided by the
presence of fat which forms a padding varying
in thickness with its locality. The outer coat
of the skin, known as the epidermis or scarf
skin, serves to keep irritating material from
entering the system, and getting into the blood
channels. As long as the skin is whole there
is little danger of what we call blood poisons
entering the body by that passage. A cut, or
even an abrasion of the skin will, if neglected,
readily illustrate the value of keeping it intact.
Instead of healing straight on as it will if kept
clean and covered, it may assume a purulent
action, becoming a suitable place for the


development of floating germs.: Poisoned
fingers will arise in this way, as a consequence
of the skin being abraded, cut or punctured.
The latter commonly results when a thorn from
green wood is not entirely extracted, and the
hand swells up, and an abscess forms, giving
rise to nights of agony until it is emptied and
cleaned out. The washing of dishes and
plates, greasy with food, and the washing of
soiled linen, innocuous enough when the skin is
whole, are, when there are little cuts on the skin
not seldom responsible for poisoned hands.
3. A Regulator of the Body Temper -
ature. —The temperature of the body in health
has an average of deg. Fahr., known on
the ordinary thermometers as “ blood heat.” As
the temperature of the surrounding air in most
climates is much less than this, it follows that
the body heat would rapidly sink to that of the
atmosphere were there not a constant reproduc-
tion of heat within the body, and also means
adopted for preventing its loss. Heat in the
body is the outcome of chemical action follow-
ing the ingestion of food. The horny cells of
the outer layer of the skin are bad conductors
of heat, and thereby save its waste. Further,
the capillaries or smallest blood vessels of the
skin contain an enormous amount of blood
spread under its whole surface, and these tiny
channels, controlled by the action of the
nervous system, are capable of changing their
calibre, dilating and contracting, so that less or
more blood may circulate in the skin according


to the state of lhe ! outside temperature,’ and the
needs of' the body. Thus in cold weather the
capillary blood vessels contract, diminishing the
blood supply to the skin, and retarding perspira-
tion, a larger supply of 1 blood circulating
through the internal organs. In warm weather
the reverse occurs ; the capillary vessels dilate,
a large quantity of blood is brought near to
the external air, the sweat glands increase in
action, and a greater loss of heat results., The
mechanism of the control is most delicate, as is
evinced by the very slight variation in the body
temperature during great atmospheric varia-
tions. A healthy tone of the capillaries, s.o
that they may contract or expand freely is best
acquired by the habit of cold sponging the body
daily, particularly if a warm bath has just been
taken. Certain drugs possess the action of
dilating the capillaries through the nervous
system. These are known as diaphoretics, or
sweat producers, and include such things as
ipecacuanha and ammonia. Alcohol also ranks
as a diaphoretic probably acting primarily by
increasing the action of the heart ; the warmth
which it gives to the skin is not permanent, the
heart soon slows down, slower than previously
to taking the alcohol, and leaving the skin
colder than before. For this reason alcohol is
no longer regarded as an essential but rather
detrimental to polar expeditions. The same
may be taken as its effect prior to a cold drive;
a short increase, and then a prolonged decrease
in the rate of circulation. ' Taken before a


cold walk, or going to bed, the primary action
is secured and the secondary avoided ; as, by
the time the initial stage has subsided, one
continues the warmth, either by exercise or
the blankets. Local dilation of capillaries
constitute what is known as a blush.
3. The Removal of Waste Secretion
from the Body. —A healthy man is calculated
to lose in 24 hours one sixty-seventh of his
body weight through the skin. Most of this is
water, a small portion carbonic acid. This
comes by way of the pores or sweat glands,
which are constantly in action ; not perceptibly
so to ourselves, unless we are very warm, and
the sweat soaks into the garments. At such a
stage a diminution is noticed in the quantity of
water passed off from the kidneys. Another
set of glands in the skin, the sebaceous glands,
are connected with the insertion of the hair and
down ; they secrete an oily material which
keeps the skin soft and pliant. Under the arm
pit and elsewhere the secretion has a strong
odour, unpleasant enough in some people to
amount to a diseased condition.
4. The Reception of Impressions from
Without. —The abundant presence of nerve
endings in the skin render it an organ of special
sense, capable of receiving impressions from the
world around us as important and exact as those
of the eye and ear. Occupying a large surface,
all parts of it are sensitive, though not to an
equal degree. Thus the pulps of the fingers are


better supplied with touch nerves than the back
of the hand, as with these we judge of the size,
shape and density of things. So the soles of
the feet tell the brain at once what kind of
ground we tread, grass, gravel, stone, or wood
being recognised without sight or even sound.
Heat and cold are felt by all parts of the skin,
with more certainty by those parts which are
not so highly developed to the sense of touch ;
the face is more sensitive to warmth than the
fingers, not merely because the facial skin is
thinner, but primarily because its situation
renders it more useful for that purpose. Thick-
ness of the skin on the pulp of the fingers does
not prevent the pulp from being the finest
discriminator of touch. In this place the
pointed ends of a compass can be felt as two
distinct impressions at a distance of only
2.2 m.m. (Weber’s tables), while over the
cheekbone the points at the same distance will
not be recognised as two points, but be
confounded as one ; there the points must, be
apart 15 m.m. to be individually detected, and
on the back as wide apart at 66 m.m.
The senses of sight and hearing are confined
to small organs, which, if injured, may involve
complete loss of the sense.
The senses of touch and feeling are spread
over the extensive surface of the skin, whose
complete destruction would be followed by loss
of life. If a portion of the skin be destroyed,
then the sensation of that part is gone, but there
is so much left elsewhere that the sense organ,


as a whole, is not much affected. It is in cases
of sensory paralysis that we come to understand
the value of The organ that is gone. Conceive
a deprivation of the nerves of touch and feel-
ing—an abolition of common sensation.
Pressure, pain, tickling,, irritation would be
unfelt. Flies could picnic undisturbed on any
part of the body', unless discovered by the sense
of sight. The hand would not retreat from
scalding fluid nor hot cinders, remaining un-
conscious that it was undergoing injury. The
cut of a knife would be unrecognised until the
flow of blood drew attention to it. In the dark
there would be no means of feeling the way.
The soles would give no indication whether we
trod on solid ground or a feather bed. In
short, alertness to avoidance of external injury
would be dependent on eye and ear, whose
ability, under such a strain, would be insufficient
for the preservation of safety, or, eventually, of
life itself.
Any machine for which is claimed a number
of uses must necessarily be complicated in build.
The same necessity is imposed on a bodily
organ. The skin, then, is a most complex
Structure, yet all its parts so beautifully
arranged, so admirably distributed, there is no
disorder. In every part can be recognised the
original cell, the beginning of organised life.
There must be toughness, and the cells lengthen
and become as network. There must be elas-
ticity, and in the network elastic fibres develop.
Blood must freely circulate, and the cells arrange


themselves in tubular walls as capillaries;
blood must not come too near the surface, and
there the cells are flattened out like a pavement,
and become less supple and horny. Openings
must exist for the sweat, and from the sweat
glands, which are situated in the deeper part of
the skin —long, narrow tortuous channels pass
to the surface, and there exude their secretion.
The hair needs nourishment and support, so,
deep within the skin each hair grows in its own
flower-pot or follicle, and attached to the side
of each follicle is a little oil-producing apparatus,
which attends to the lubrication of the skin in
general, and its own hair in particular. All
this is revealed by the microscope, whose aid
brings us nearer to the laboratories of nature.
Structure of the Skin.— The skin varies
in thickness in different parts of the body.
A picture of it is obtained by taking the thinnest
possible shaving off the edge of a piece of skin,
and then laying it flat under the microscope.
i. First comes the epidermis, or covering of
the skin proper —the part which is exposed
directly to the air. Its thickness is a mere
trifle, yet it contains innumerable divisions. It
consists of minute cells, each looking like a tiny
plate, closely packed and fitting between each
other. Each cell or plate is dry and transpar-
ent, and has very little evidence of life, enough,
in fact, only to keep it from decomposition.
Single cells may easily be seen with a micro-
scope bv rubbing the finger over any part of
the skin; and catching the dust on a glass slide.


As the layer gets away from the surface, the
cells alter in shape, swell out, and become
rounder. Where they lie on the true skin or
corium they are arranged on end like a row of
palisades.
It is in the deeper part of the epidermis that
the colouring matter of the skin is secreted.
In fair skinned'races the cells always contain
some pigment of a yellowish brown tint, par-
ticularly in the armpit, around the nipple and
elsewhere, the amount distinguishing the blonde
and brunette. In the dark skinned much is
found. Differences in racial colour arising from
the pigment in these cells. Freckles and moles
exhibit it largely, and in certain diseases the
deposit of pigment materially increases. In the
disease known as Leucoderma the pigment
cells of the epidermis are the only portion affected,
although the aspect of the patient might lead to
the suspicion of serious organic changes. Even
in the skin the nerves, glands, and blood
vessels remain unaffected, fulfilling their regular
functions. Localisation of pigment is altered.
Pigment deserts some spot, which then appears
white ; it accumulates more densely in other
spots, which, by their deepening colour, enhance
the whiteness between, giving a curious, vari-
gated look to the affected parts. The same
when occurring in a negro has more marked
effects, as he is rendered piebald, and his
distress is only mitigated by the object of
search which he becomes to the enterprising
showman.


2. Next comes the corium or true skin, a
part abundantly supplied with blood, in which
it differs from the epidermis. This consists of
a dense network of fibres running parallel with
the surface, strengthened by bundles of fibres
in the opposite direction. Interlaced with them
is a second network of elastic fibres, and be-
tween them again the blood vessels and nerves
are distributed, and the glands and hairs push
their way to emerge on the surface. Where
the true skin joins the epidermis it is arranged
somewhat like the teeth of a saw in a multitude
of prolongations, the epidermis dipping down to
fill up the intervening spaces.
3. The subcutaneous layer which, with the
epidermis, packs in the true skin like a sand-
wich, consists of a coarser network of fibres,
and contains larger blood vessels, from which
the smaller ones to the corium arise. In it are
also fat cells arranged in clusters, and it is these
which impart plumpness to the skin and the
tension which avoids wrinkles. Here, too, he
the sweat glands in coils, each with a long
drawn out tube passing up to the surface of the
skin. Each gland is made up of cells disposed
in the form of a channel, the channel winds in
and out upon itself, and is brought in contact
with the thinnest blood channels so closely that
the gland can draw from the blood into its walls
what fluid it requires for its own secretions.
The more the blood channels dilate, the faster
the gland works, pouring out on the surface of
the skin the product of its labour, which we call


sweat. Over 2,000 have been calculated to the
square inch in the palm of the hand.
The hairs and the sebaceous glands are found
always in partnership. The hairs dip down
through the skin as far as the fat cells, each
hair having a tube or sack to lie in. At the side
of the hair tube, and opening into it, is the
sebaceous gland, a little bag-shaped structure,
whose office is to secrete the fatty, oily material,
which lubricates the hair and keeps the skin
supple. Where the hairs are thick and strong
the sebaceous glands are small in proportion,
but where the hair is small and thin, in fact,
simply down, then the gland is much larger.
The chief practical interest these glands have
for us I shall consider first in my description of
disfigurements of the skin.


CHAPTER 11.
DISFIGUREMENTS AND DISEASES OFTHE SKIN.
Acne, Milium, Comedos. —These include
the common “ pimples,” whether single or
multiple, the black spots so frequent on the face,
called “ blackheads,” and small, shining, whitish
growths often seen around the eyes and else-
where. They all result from alterations in the
sebaceous glands. “ Blackheads ” are the
result of the natural secretion of the gland
becoming hardened. The secretion then forms
a solid plug which thickens as the gland still
goes on adding to it. So the gland becomes
overstretched —its mouth is wide open and
shows an unsightly black spot on the skin.
The best way to remove them is to take a
watch key, press its open end firmly round, the
black point, and so squeeze it out. The face
can be cleared very rapidly, after which the use
of a strong potash soap will generally prevent
re-formation. Milium results when, instead of
the gland mouth remaining open, the epidermis
grows over it; the sebum then becomes rolled
into a ball and shines through the walls of the
gland which is bodily raised from its bed in the
skin —a projection on the surface. Milium
resists the action of any ointment, it must be
treated after the fashion of a tumor : opened,


its contents pressed out, when it will heal with-
out a scar.
An ordinary pimple is an inflamed sebaceous
gland. In its early stage of reddening it may
be repressed by the application of collodion.
After matter has formed the simplest way is to
puncture the .spot with a sharp lancet and
extract the pus. The habit of pricking with a
fine needle and squeezing often results in a
scar being left. Acne is popularly regarded as
a symptom of the “ blood being out of order.”
There is no question that pimples do occur as a
result of constipation, when the blood is
continually having to get rid of poisonous
elements thrown into its stream ; but they may
equally be the consequence of disturbed sexual
conditions in both men and women. Further,
in many cases, they are purely local, the disease
being in the glands themselves without any
reference to the blood. I am quite satisfied
that pimples are inoculable, that people subject
to them spread them on their own faces without
knowing it. If any one doubts this let him
squeeze the matter out of a pimple, then rub it
into the skin of the nose and watch the effect.
Self-inoculation results when the matter pressed
out is not destroyed, and the fingers are not
thoroughly washed afterwards. Acne, when
local, cannot be cured by any blood medicines, it
needs local treatment only, and a cure may
always be expected.
A Red Nose is at first a mere local con-
gestion ; neglected, lines of red or purple blood


vessels appear, the tissue thickens, pimples
form, and a full blown “groggy nose” results.
In the early stage a cure can be effected with
vaseline, containing 20 grains of sulphur to the
ounce. Later on, the condition requires a
physician’s close attention usually with good
results. The cause is not as is usually supposed,
alcohol, but includes heart disease, dyspepsia,
and simple exposure.
Freckles. —Freckles are popularly supposed
to be due to the action of the sun, which they
are not. They are certainly darkened in the
summer, and less marked in winter, although
people subject to them can always discover
freckles in covered parts where the sun could
have no effect; they are generally situated
round the mouth of glands. They are not seen
in infants, and seldom before the age of six
years, notwithstanding that children run about,
taking no trouble to avoid exposure. The cause
is an excessive deposit of pigment in the skin.
Improvement can be effected by the use of
various cosmetics, which induce a faint branny
desquamation of the skin ; one of the best is,
perhaps, that known as Oriental Water. In
the larger freckles, success may be gained by
lightly touching with pure carbolic acid, and
immediately blotting it up.
Sunburn. —Sunburn differs from freckles in
its cause, also in being uniformly distributed on
the part attacked. It is not usual in people
in a bad state of health, and unless irritable
and inflamed, it is better left alone, As a


preventative, veils, blue, green, or yellow in
tint, are better than white or black. A simple
innocuous wash may be made as follows, and
used twice daily :
Oatmeal water, half-a-pint.
Carbonate of soda, one ounce.
Milk, half-pint.
Moles. —Moles are dark patches of pigment
present at birth. Unless very unsightly, it is
not advisable to interfere with them. The hairy
moles can be much improved by electrolysis.
Chloasma is a pigment patch or stain of
varying size, usually acquired in adult life; it
may appear on the forehead, more usually on the
trunk. It may be the outcome of the use of
certain drugs, or of changes in the sexual
organs, or the result of some general diseases.
The treatment demands the use of remedies,
too powerful to be applied except by a phy-
sician.
Warts may come singly or in battalions.
In them there is an excessive growth, not only
of the horny layer of the skin, but also of the
true skin, so that they may bleed easily on cut-
ting. The best way is to destroy them with a
strong acid. The warts which occur on elderly
people are very apt to degenerate into cancer of
the skin, known as epithelioma, and in such a
case, their early destruction may avoid much
misery at a later date.
Birthmarks are not, strictly speaking,
diseases. They are abnormalities of develop-
ment. Throughout the skin, blood vessels


spread as a network of fine meshes, thus im-
parting the natural pinkish tint. In a birth-
mark the vessels are over-dilated, the network,
though close, is coarse, and the blood shows
plainly through the skin. There is no evidence
that their fantastic shapes are due to maternal
impressions before birth. Usually the birth-
mark is not raised. At times the contrary is
seen, especially on the head, when the mark
consists of a raised, projecting tumor, which
pulsates to the touch. These it is advisable to
remove in early childhood. The flattened
birthmark is not very amenable to treatment,
although successes are recorded, both by a
system of “ mincing ” with a fine lancet, when
the vessels have been successfully destroyed
with but little remaining scar, and by caustics.
Chilblains. —These are local congestions,
due to exposure to prolonged cold. They are
more frequent in those whose circulation is slow,
who take little exercise, and alternately let their
hands and feet get cold, and then heat them up
at the fire. Regular exercise and warm baths,
followed by a smart cold shower and rubbing,
are the best preventatives. For cure, stimula-
ting, evaporating lotions form the best treat-
ment, such as turpentine, white of egg and
vinegar in equal parts. If they are actually in-
flamed, and tend to ulcerate, then the part must
be protected from all pressure, bread poultices
applied, and a mild creosote ointment used.
Baldness and Falling Hair is fostered
by the fashion of wearing tight hats, and by


working in badly lighted offices, where the head
is exposed to the heat of gas. If the follicles in
which the hairs are produced are not destroyed,
then there are various remedies which will
stimulate the growth of hair. When the follicles
are gone, applications are quite useless.
Women treat their hair less badly than men,
and suffer less from baldness. In them hair-
falling usually results from seborrhoea sicca of
the scalp, brought about by ill-health or injurious
applications, and requires treatment adapted to
each case. Hard brushes and spirituous lotions
must be avoided.
Superfluous Hairs are a source of great
worry to some ladies. Their removal can be
effected in two ways: either by depilatories or
the process of electrolysis. The first can be
procured at any chemist; one of the best is a
mixture of Sulphide of Barium, two drachms,
with Oxide of Zinc, half an ounce. It is made
into a thick paste with water freshly each time
it is wanted, and smeared on the part thickly.
In from five to ten minutes there is some slight
smarting of the skin. Then take off the paste
with the blunt edge of a knife, wash and oil, and
the skin is left hairless and clean. Keep the
paste out of the eyes and mouth, as Barium is a
poison. No ill-effects will ensue if the directions
are adhered to. Electrolysis aims at complete
destruction of the hairs in their follicles. A
fine needle is inserted right into the hair root,
and connected with the battery. In a few


seconds the hair will come out painlessly, with
the slightest pull, nor will it grow again. The
pain of the current is not severe, and decreases
with each hair extracted. There is some
tenderness and swelling in each wound for a
few days, when it goes down and no scar
remains. Exceptionally, in very tender skins, I
have seen much inflammation occur. Of course
it is a lengthy process, and very trying to the
eyes of the operator who must see that the
needle goes into the follicle and nowhere else,
or unnecessary pain and soreness is left. About
fifteen hairs can be removed at a sitting.
Electrolysis destroys the hairs that are present,
it cannot prevent others coming to the front,
nevertheless it is considered by patients and
operators the best method of treatment. It is
most effectual in the case of hairy moles.
Many persons whose acquaintance with the
structure of the skin is nil, profess to practise
electrolysis of hairs. They dab the needle in
the skin without any discretion, pull out hairs
by force where roots are not destroyed, and are
quite unaware when the needle penetrates the
wall of the follicle, and waste its action on other
tissues.
Sweating is a natural process. It becomes
greatly increased by unusual exercise, lessening
again as the exercise becomes regular.
Sweating without exercise constitutes a disease,
and is, when confined to local spots, very
unpleasant. The feet and hands and under the
arm pits are the selected sites. The medical


treatment is bound to vary with each case, and
cannot be gone into fully here. Palliative
measures consist in frequently changing the
clothing (socks only, if the feet), washing nightly
with Carbolic Acid lotion, and applying an
astringent dusting powder, such as Oxide of
Zinc and Maizena —two drachms of the Zinc to
the ounce of Maizena.
Eczema is the most frequent disease which
disfigures the skin. Its appearance is very
varied, in accordance with its stage, its severity
and the length of time it has persisted. _ The
parts it peculiarly affects are the hands, inside
the elbow, back of the knees, behind the ears,
the scalp, and the genital organs. It is not
limited to these parts, but may occur anywhere,
involving only a small patch, or most of the
body. It is an intensely itching or irritating
eruption, the itching being characterised by
patients as worse than pain. Its features are
redness, followed by thickening of the true skin,
and the production of tiny vesicles, which break
and discharge a watery, sticky fluid, drying up
in yellow crusts. At times the eruption is
mostly one of itching papules (pimples) without
discharge, but even in such cases there is nearly
always a history of vesicles having been present
in the past. In fact all stages may be seen on
the same body. When chronic, there is less
tendency to watery exudation ; then the skin is
thickened and scaly, and large cracks form
where the natural folds are placed. In the
hand may be seen cracks wide and deep enough


to lay a slate pencil in. The patches are not
regularly shaped. Often they occur in the
same position on each side of the body.
The causes of eczema may be local or con-
stitutional. Local irritation may be the result
of piles, varicose veins, the use of a rough
handled stick, irritation of soaps and alkalies
used in washing clothes, with various occupa-
tions ; or it may follow in the wake of other
skin diseases. Generally, it may be taken for
granted that local irritants will not produce
eczema unless there is a predisposition to it in
the constitution. The scrofulous constitution
and the rheumatic constitution are very prone
to outbreaks of eczema. The liver, kidneys,
lymphatic glands, the blood vessels are all apt
to be starting points for irritation of the skin,
and once a patch of eczema is initiated it
spreads locally. More than that, after the
constitutional irritation has subsided the eczema
is still apt to be kept up as a purely local con-
dition. Those are the cases which yield best
to caustic applications. The common idea that
eczema is incurable, is founded on erroneous
ideas of the nature of the complaint, and its
requisite treatment. Seldom it happens that
the cure for one is entirely suitable for another,
each patient having to be separately studied.
All cases improve readily under appropriate
remedies, and nearly all are capable of perma-
nent cure, the incurable cases (so called) are
those in which an over anxiety to be considered
well induces a too early disuse of the remedies.


The disease starts afresh before the last relics
are quite eradicated, and gains a footing which
resists anything but a prolonged treatment,
whose length is measured by the period of
neglect. Children are very subject to attacks of
acute eczema at the time of teething and after
vaccination.
Repetition of the attacks which are often left
to subside without treatment are liable to result
in a permanently chronic condition. In the
acute cases, the use of baths, especially of salt
baths, is to aggravate the attack. In more
chronic cases, the opposite casually obtains, less
so where the baths are taken at home than
when they are had in health resorts, where the
accompanying conditions of change and fresh
air are to be taken into consideration.
Psoriasis. —This is an eruption character-
ised by the formation of flat, silvery-looking
scales on a reddened surface. Tearing off the
deeper scales results in bleeding. The patches
are mostly circular, and always dry. They itch
a good deal. They affect any part of the body,
even the tongue, but, like eczema, have their
favourite spots, which, in this case, is the front
of the knees and the back of the elbows.
Psoriasis used to be called Lepra, hence some
supposed it to be similar to Leprosy, with
which it has no relation. It is not contagious,
although often hereditary, Syphilis being
frequently responsible for its origin. Psoriasis
is a most troublesome complaint to treat, being
so very recurrent, and capable of being in full


bloom when the general state of health is very
good. The use of strong soft soap in baths
makes a good preliminary to the application of
any ointments, as it disposes of the scales, and
enables remedies to be applied directly to the
diseased parts.
Ringworm is the growth of a vegetable
fungus first on, then in the skin. On the head
of children the first appearance is of minute red
raised spots; afterwards is formed a whitish
bald ring, where the hairs are brittle and stubby ;
further, it may proceed to inflammation, and
accumulation of thick, yellow crusts.
In the beard, where it usually results from a
foul shave from a barber, it begins as small
reddened spots, which spread at the edge and
heal towards the middle, destroying the hair by
the production of pustules.
On the body, it begins with the same tiny r
reddened, raised spots, which advance in a ring,
healing towards the middle, but gradually en-
larging, _ V
The disease is contagious; easily so to
children, less to adults. Children acquire it by
wearing the hats, and handling the hair and
body of others who have it. Ringworm in the
beard is apt to infect the wrist by the contact of
rubbing. Precautionary measures are —to
regularly wash the heads of children, and
instruct them to avoid the hats of others.
Shaving is only safe when done personally; if
by a barber, a razor, brush, and soap should be
kept apart for the man who wants to be secure


against contagion. Never lend nor borrow a
razor or shaving brush any more than a tooth-
brush. In an early stage ringworm is cured by
such simple applications as common ink, or
strong salt water. Later, its cure demands
considerable experience and some patience.
Itching may be general or local. When not
the symptom of a visible disease the only marks
seen will be those made by the nails. When
general it may be the outcome of dyspepsia, of
irritants or purely hyper-sensitiveness of the
nerves. Relief is obtained by baths of bran,
sulphur, vinegar, or carbonate of soda. Cure is
often very troublesome, various remedies having
to be tried before success comes. Local itching
at. the seat (anus) is caused mainly by the
presence of worms or piles or an abrasion made
by rough toilet paper. Itching at the nose is
generally a symptom of worms.
Syphilis is that venereal disease for whose
prevention the Contagious Diseases Acts have
been passed. It is characterised by a long
series of symptoms which, while mainly affect-
ing the skin, are also indicative of disease in
other organs. It is acquired b)' the absorption
of a specific poison through an abrasion of the
skin after contact with a person previously
affected. The contagion, usually communicated
by the sexual organs, can be passed on in
various ways. Its stages are divided into—
I. Primary when the initial hard sore appears
at the point of inoculation at any date within 10
to 50 days after exposure to contagion.


2. Secondary symptoms appear from the
third week to the sixth month, and comprise a
varied series of eruptions running through the
scale from red spots, raised pimples, watery
blisters, to pustules and ulcerations.
3. Tertiary eruptions present themselves at
any period after six months for many years. In
the primary and secondary stages, syphilis is
hereditary, and marriage during that time may
involve the most serious consequence to the
offspring.
Infection of syphilis by other means than
sexual intercourse may be brought about, by
kissing a person with an infected lip, the sore
being so small as to be practically unnoticeable
by the unwary affectionate friend. Borrowed
pipes have carried the disease. Surgeons have
acquired the primary sore on their fingers ; so
with midwives. Nurses have been infected by
syphilitic infants, and vice versa. A case
recorded by Dr. McCall Anderson tells how, a
man having a black eye, a friend who had
syphilitic sores in his mouth endeavoured to cure
it by puncturing the part and sucking it, with
the result that in three weeks a hard chancre
appeared at the site of puncture, followed by
syphilitic eruptions on the skin. Abortion and
still-born children are a frequent result of
syphilitic infection.
The treatment of syphilis has reached a
higher development within the last few years,
so that, except in the early stages or in
neglected cases, specific blood poisoning is not


so fertile a source of skin affections as it
formerly was. Still, many persons having had
constitutional or acquired syphilis, afterwards
become the subject of skin diseases which may
arise quite independently of the syphilis, but
remain incurable until the aid of specific
remedies is brought in, just as many rheumatic
persons may have an eczema whose cure cannot
be obtained by ordinary eczematous remedies
until anti-rheumatics have also been added. As
regards “neglected cases ” of syphilis they are
not uncommon. No one with any sense
neglects to get prompt treatment when he
acquires the disease, but, now and again,
women, unaware of the source of their
complaint, or ashamed to reveal their symptoms
to their family doctor, allow the disease to
develope itself for months unchecked. In such
cases skin eruptions are of frequent occurrence,
but fortunately soon yield when the origin is
grasped and the proper remedies applied.
Scrofula is a constitutional habit of body,
inherited not acquired, indicating weakness,
debility or degeneracy, tending to develope
diseases in certain lines, and also stamping its
peculiar character on diseases which are not
special to itself but common to mankind. It js
chiefly manifest in enlargement of the lymphatic
glands, which can be seen and felt under the
jaws in the neck, the groin, the arm pit, and
deeper parts. There is also a tendency to
chronic enlargement of the tonsils, to catarrh
of the nose, inflammation of the eyelids,


discharge from the ears, and affections of the
bones which may last for years. In extreme
cases of scrofulous children all these things may
exist at the same time. In all cases where no
actual disease is present, there are recognisable
indications that the constitution is present;
latent, perhaps for years, it will, under the
stimulus of external irritation develope disease
in these directions. Scrofulous persons lack
vigour in recovery, their diseases are not violent,
always run a slow course, and their systems get
so habituated to a low tone of vitality that
frequently they will bear the brunt of a lingering,
exhausting disease, and recover when a healthier
body would succumb.
Scrofula is intimately allied with consumption,
possibly because that habit of body furnishes a
suitable soil for the development of tubercle,
more probably on account of the interference
with nutrition which arises from impairment of
the lymphatic glands. The origin of scrofula is
believed by many competent observers to lie in
syphilis, not as a direct outcome, not as a
continuation of the syphilitic fever, but as an
inherited feebleness of system from a progenitor,
in whose tissues the struggle with the syphilitic
poison had left the former a victor, but ex-
hausted.
Scrofulous babies do not always look un-
healthy at birth. Many really appear fat and
plump until the softness of their flesh is
noticed. It is when some external irritation


arises that the trouble comes. These are the
babies that “ are never well after vaccination; *•
Their teething worries are often accompanied
by an attack of eczema on the head or ears.
When they take cold the discharge is pretty
sure to produce sores about the nose and
mouth, or running at the ears, and their flesh
is slow to heal. The slightest cold brings
about some enlargement of the glands of the
neck, which can be felt by pressing the fingers
in beneath the jaws between the chin and the
ears, and often as a chain of little knots down
the sides of the neck. At first the enlargements
are only temporary, but with every access of
irritation, whether of catarrh or of teething, they
get bigger, and become persistent. Then per-
haps an abscess may form, or, instead, they get
hard, and remain as a permanent disfigurement.
The skin diseases affecting this constitution
are known as scrofulides, and their recovery is
hastened, far more than other skin diseases, by
internal remedies, which improve the constitu-
tion, among which Cod Liver Oil ranks very
high. On the bringing up of a scrofulous child
depends his health throughout life. Provided
he is well looked after in early life, the older
he grows the stronger he is likely to become.
The points to be attended to are those of
general hygiene, carried out in detail. Light,
sunbaths, pure air and water, proper food,
cleanliness, regular exercise of all the bodily
functions, postponement of vaccination, and
more than ordinary care in sickness to avoid


that chronicity which is so apt to ensue on
slight ailments in the scrofulous.
Varicose Veins are so frequently a starting
point for skin diseases that they deserve
mention here. Veins are present all over the
body, those under the skin are visible as long
blue branching lines, of varying breadth.
Varicosity is a permanent dilatation of veins
due to a loss of elasticity in their walls. The
veins swell, and are liable to burst, when an
ulcer or open sore results. Owing to backward
pressure of the blood, watery fluid escapes from
the capillaries, and the varicose limb becomes
swollen, and pits on pressure by the finger.
Next, the skin, which is irritated by the
increasing pressure from within, becomes
thinned and insufficiently supplied with blood,,
and in a short time attacked with eczema.
This is its typical course in a varicose leg.
Varicose veins about the seat are known as
PILES, and on the nose and cheeks they increase
the disfigurement of acne rosacea, generally
known as brandy face, although teetotallers are
just as frequently sufferers as alcoholics. In
the leg the cure of the varicose veins must
precede the cure of any skin disease arising
from them. Apart from operative treatment of
cutting or tying the veins, great relief can be
obtained by giving support to the skin.
The routine treatment is to give a lotion or
an ointment, to be applied once or twice a day,
accompanied by instructions to “rest the leg.”
If a person cannot rest his leg, in other words.


lay up, he is told he cannot be cured. But
there are other ways of resting the leg besides
laying it flat. When the vessels are gorged
with blood, and the skin is swollen with fluid
pressing upon it from within, artificial rest can
be obtained by proper bandaging, which gives
firm equable pressure all round, strengthens the
skin to resist' the tension within, supports
the blood vessels, and gives a fixed point for
the muscles to work against, in their efforts to
stimulate the lymphatics, to remove the over-
flow of fluid lying in the meshes. Bandaging a
leg, where skin is healthy, can be best done by
the aid of a plain rubber bandage, 10 feet long
and 3 inches wide, but when the skin is in-
flamed, the rubber only irritates it all the more.
The elastic stocking is a delusion. It fits at
first very neatly and gives real support, only,
after a few months, it becomes stretched quietly
and silently, and while still appearing to do
good, has degenerated into a mere ornament.
The ordinary bandages sold by chemists are
either too thin, or else contract in their width
and get too thick, making the leg hot and un-
comfortable. The best and cheapest bandage
is common and unbleached calico, worth about
4d. a yard, of which a piece six yards long can
be torn into twelve strips, and rolled up with
the rough edge on to make twelve good
bandages, which will wash many times over.
To put on such a bandage, with its requisite
twists and nice adjustment requires the ex-
penditure of a little time at first, but a few days’


experience will allow it to be rolled on very
rapidly. The comfort is immense, while the
result" of this addition to the usual lotion or
ointment is marvellous. I am quite prepared
for a reader to say —I have used such a
bandage, and it did me no good. To this I may
re ply —You do not know how to bandage. Get
a lesson from a skilled nurse or your doctor, and
see that you carry out the instructions to the
letter, and the reward will come. The bandage
must begin at the foot, must accurately fit the
leg at both edges, and when, by doing so, it
goes out of its course in ascending from the
narrow ankle to the wider calf, it must not be
dragged back, but be firmly held in position
with one hand, while with the other it is turned
down back upon itself and pulled tight, repeat-
ing the same manoeuvre as often as necessary,
until the narrower point just below the knee is
reached, when it can be torn in two ends and
tied, or else fixed with a pin.
In this way equally good results can be
effected without the patient having to cease
from his occupation. Standing is bad, but
walking is of positive benefit.
Nettle Rash.— The complaint receives its
name from its obvious resemblance to the sting
of a nettle. The agency of the nettle is by no
means necessary to its onset, which mostly is a
nervous derangement, the outcome of indi-
gestion, mental emotion, and uterine diseases.
The simplest stomachic disturbance in children
may originate the eruption, while eating mussels,.


oysters, and other shell fish will promptly bring
it out in .many adults.; -It- consists in the
appearance of suddenly-formed, violently-itching
pimples, blotches, and wheals : worse at night,
often disappearing in the day to return at a
corresponding hour next evening.' 1 In severe
cases the face, fingers, and toes may* swell in
the most alarming I have seen it
produced by handling hairy caterpillars, by the
bites of mosquitoes and other insects, and even
in some persons, with delicate skins, by washing
in warm water.
Animal Parasites—Lice.— The parasites
affecting the skin include the flea, bug, crab
louse, itch mite, and common louse. The first
only need mention, the last two are of more
importance.
The itch mite is very contagious, being
acquired by sleeping with persons who have it,
or in the beds they have occupied, by personal
contact with the hands, and from cats and other
animals. The female mite is larger than the
male. It has a rounded body, a head, jaws,
and eight legs of which the four front ones are
provided with suckers. Getting on the body it
will in half-an-hour burrow into the skin, and
proceed to lay eggs, afterwards dying. The
eggs ripen, the young emerge, and go
through the same course. The male mite
runs about the surface of the skin. The
irritation produces intolerable itching, fol-
lowed by scratching, when there is a good
-chance of the eggs getting under the finger


nails and being transported elsewhere, Itching
is worse at night when the skin is warm in bed.
In children large mattery pustules often form,
otherwise the eruption is mainly one of
scratching. The cure lies in the complete
destruction of the mite, which can usually be
effected with hot baths, soap, and sulphur
ointment, and in thorough cleansing of the
bedding and linen.
The louse which affects the hair differs in
size from that frequenting the non-hairy parts
of the body. The latter hides itself in the
clothing where it also lays its eggs, only
travelling over the skin in search of food, so
that with a naked patient the pest may be over-
looked. The head louse crawls about the scalp
especially behind the ears, and lays its eggs or
nits on the hair, carefully fixed with a bit of
glue. Scratching produces a terrible mess, as
the serum discharged mats the hairs together
with dry crusts, and may produce a true eczema.
If the eruption on the head is only moderate, a
cure may be gained by washing the hair in
spirit which loosens the nits, and then applying
a lotion of Carbolic Acid. In more serious
cases the delicacy of treatment needs trained
knowledge, or worse effects may ensue.
On the body the Sulphur Ointment will
rapidly destroy lice. The main thing to be
attended to is their eradication from the clothing.
Before the clothes are washed they should
either be immersed in boiling water or baked in
the oven.


CHAPTER 111.
CARE OF THE SKIN.
Care of the Skin. —General care of the
skin is promoted chiefly by the proper use of
baths, aided by rubbing. Bathing in warm
water dilates the blood vessels of the skin,
and renders the flow equable, so removing any
tendency to local congestions. It provides for
the removal of withered scales of outer skin,
whose presence tends to block the glands, and
prevent their otherwise effective working. It
removes deposits of sweat, which, if in any
excess is responsible for the unpleasant odour
of the unwashed. Where there is irritability of
the skin, either in the direction of pain or
itching, nerve endings are soothed, and a com-
plete sense of comfort is brought about. If
prolonged, a sensation of lassitude creeps on,
induced by the presence of too much blood in
the skin to the loss of the internal organs, so
that even fainting may ensue. Cold bathing,
on the other hand, while it does not cleanse the
body so effectually, not being so well fitted as
warm water for diminishing the oily secretions
of the skin, has at first a highly stimulating
action on the blood vessels. They rapidly


contract, less blood is contained in the skin,
more in the brain and other organs, and a feeling
of exhilaration occurs. This, too, if prolonged,
has its reverse side. What blood still circulates
in the skin is rapidly cooled down, while the
passages through which it flows being reduced
to their narrowest condition, local obstruction
comes on, evincing itself by blueness of the
extremities, the parts in which the blood is
always propelled with greater difficulty. The
use of prolonged cold baths, whether in the tub,
the river, or sea, is only for the most vigorous,
and is commonly pushed to extremes by those
who indulge in them. The hours which some
men spend in swimming point only to their
capacity of endurance and length of training,
and in the interests of health is by no means a
feat to be envied.
The proper use of a cold bath is to consider
it in the light of a stimulant (unless used under
medical directions to reduce temperature) and
to take it as most men take other stimulants, in
small doses and not too often. For the sea or
river ten minutes is quite long enough for a
bathe, five minutes will do more good unless
the day is particularly hot. For its hygienic
action on the skin a daily wash all over the body
is necessary. It is best done by thoroughly
soaping the body with warm water, and then
taking a rapid dip in a cold bath, or standing
under a cold shower for a few seconds. Drying
ought to be a smart process; a rough towel
quickly applied brings a generous warmth to


the skin. If the reactionary glow comes at
once, then there is no need to be too particular
in rubbing off all the water, except on parts
liable to friction. The back and chest are
immaterial, but under the arms, and between
the legs should be quite dry. People do not
take a chill on account of being half dried.
The cold daily shower is a wonderful help
against contracting catarrh in the respiratory
passages. It accustoms the skin vessels to
react rapidly to changes of temperature, and to
pass with impunity through draughts that a
skin accustomed only to warm bathing cannot
face without danger. Still there are some
people who really cannot bear the application of
the cold shower or plunge, even for a moment,
and to push on them the advice to harden
themselves all at once would be simply cruel.
In their case, as in that of children, perhaps
simply sponging with cold water after washing
in warm may be endurable, or tepid water
can be used, so that at any rate there should
be a distinct difference in the temperature of
the water used for washing and that used for
sponging afterwards.
In studying the complexion, do not be afraid
of the soap to the face. It is no uncommon
thing in a skin practice to find a lady troubled
with a coarse skin say that she never uses soap
to the face. A coarse skin will stand unlimited
soap with advantage; a more delicate com-
plexion cannot do without it, at any rate, in a
town. But, in drying the face, it is best to


avoid much friction with the towel. It should,,
unlike the body, being exposed, be always
thoroughly dried, not, however, by rubbing, but
by dabbing.
If left too much reddened after washing, there
is no harm in using a mild astringent applica-
tion or an innocuous powder. The use of pow-
ders and lotions 'without soap inevitably spoils
the skin. Next to soap in its cleansing
property comes coarse oatmeal, which I am
commonly in the habit of prescribing where the
face is very tender or actually inflamed. The
sticky feeling it leaves behind is no objection to
its use.
Baths in Skin Disease. —Where the skin
is subject to some affection, then baths must be
used with some caution. Natural mineral baths
form a very valuable ad]unct in the treatment
of some skin diseases, whether they affect only
a small patch locally, or are scattered generally
over the body. It is impossible to indicate
here every kind of skin affection that is
benefited by baths, as the suitability of the
bath depends not only on the skin affection, but
on the stage it happens to be in, as well as upon
the personal peculiarity of the patient. As an
instance of indiscrimination used in the choice
of baths, I have seen patients subjects of sub-acute
eczema, sent to reside at mineral spas, with the
certain effect of rapidly becoming worse on each
occasion of taking a bath. Similarly, I have
had patients for whom sea water has been
recommended, witl an equally disappointing


result. In more chronic stages of eczema, the
bath, which previously failed to be of service,
MAY now come in useful. lam particularly led
to mention this, as the Government Medical
Report on the Thermal Springs of Rotorua, New
Zealand, falls into the error of claiming “ great
success in the treatment of ‘general’ eczema.”
Eczema, while being general in the sense of
distribution in numerous areas of the body, may
be in the acute stage exhibiting the character-
istic breaking down of vesicles, known as
weeping. After an experience of some 8,000
cases of skin affection yearly, I have no
hesitation in saying that the treatment of such
a condition of eczema by any mineral baths
would be decidedly wrong. Eczema which has
subsided into the chronic condition, or has never
shown acute symptoms, I am prepared to admit
may be benefited by some mineral baths
Evidently this is the class of case which, “after
resisting treatment for years,” is generally cured
in 6to 13 weeks. But such statements that
“general” eczema is so successfully treated are
open to misconstruction. A proper discrimina-
tion of cases should be observed, or the risk
taken of injuring the reputation of the baths by
exciting false hopes. It is superfluous to say
that many cases of eczema —of eczema chronic,
not acute —have derived no benefit at all from
the bath of Rotorua, but were amenable to
other treatment.
The same strictures are applicable to the
European baths, less so now than formerly, as


where baths are so varied that they embrace
curative properties for several diseases, a
specialist for each complaint finds it worth his
while to reside there. At Harrogate some men
confine their treatment entirely to the skin,
others to the rheumatic affection, and so on.
At a place like Rotorua, where the variety of
baths is so unique, there is no occasion to use
such general terms of description that unsuitable
cases are likely to be invited.
The selection of a mineral bath which is really
suited to a skin complaint requires the most
experienced judgment. The eczema of the
scrofulous require different treatment from that
of the gouty, and each of them treatment
adapted to their particular stages.
The balneologist Braun in his book on the
curative effects of baths observes : —“ Practical
physicians who are acquainted with the current
literature on skin diseases, and who are not
unfamiliar with their treatment, must read with
astonishment in special Balneological works the
recommendations for all existing baths for forms
of eczema.”
“ Latent syphilis is alleged to be rendered
manifest by the use of sulphur baths ; but there is
probably no further foundation for this supposed
effect than the fact that whatever lowers the
general health of a person affected with syphilis
is apt to arouse the latent disease, and that the
injudicious or exaggerated use of hot baths may
have the same effect.”


Mineral baths have no utility in the pre-
servation of the complexion or to the healthy
skin, and they require only a few words as to
their use in skin diseases. Taking as an
example what is known as a Sool Bath. This
is the commonest kind of mineral bath,
occurring naturally at Weisbaden, Homburg,
Kissingen, and a'hundred other places. They
consist mainly of chloride of sodium (good com-
mon salt) with smaller proportions of chloride of
lime, magnesia, and other salts. They can be
made artificially—a process which is often
practised in order to concentrate them in their
natural homes, and their effects are to stimulate
the skin and produce increase of tissue change,
and are of most value in scrofula and rheumat-
ism. Their effect on the scrofulous skin is rather
preventative than curative. On a tender skin
the effect is injurious.
Water containing a large preponderance of
soda in the form of carbonate, warm, as at
Vichy, Neuenahr, Rotorua, cold, as at Salz-
brunn, has a softening effect upon the skin in
proportion as it exercises a solvent action upon
the scales of the scarf skin and the secretions.
The soda baths are therefore to be regarded as
accentuated hot water baths, or, when cold, as
nearly approximately the effect of an ordinary
hot water bath, and are useful in combination
with medical treatment.
Sulphur waters have a reputation dating from
remote times as being efficacious in skin affec-
tions, and sulphur in washes is still sold to improve


the complexion. In neither form do they deserve
the popularity they enjoy. Hebra, whose
authority on the skin is undisputed, says —“ In
spite of such an accredited and ancient medi-
cine, there are still many old and uncured cases
of eczema to be met year after year at the most
fashionable sulphur springs,” and with the
exception of itch, the same may be said of sul-
phur baths in most skin diseases.
The moral to be drawn from the whole is—if
you have a strong, healthy skin, you may take
any mineral bath in ordinary use without
detriment, and without benefit. If the skin is
specially tender and delicate, let mineral baths
alone. If there’s actual disease, only take
mineral baths after a personal consultation with
your medical adviser. Run no risk of indis-
criminate choice unless you are prepared to
practise experiments upon yourself.
Turkish Baths. —ln these baths the essen-
tial element is hot dry air. A heated chamber
supplies the warmth, and the introduction
of dry air increases the perspiration of the body
by causing evaporation as fast as excretion goes
on. The application of cold water, rubbing,
and slowly cooling concludes the bath. For the
ordinary enjoyment of health they are not
needed. They are a powerful method of treat-
ment in certain diseases, and should only be
adopted under required circumstances. They
are applicable in some skin affections.
Vapour Baths differ from Turkish in that
the air is kept moist. They raise the heat of


the body and keep it up, as evaporation is
retarded in the saturated atmosphere. In the
Russian vapour baths, the vapour is produced
by pouring cold water on hot plates, the body
being afterwards douched with cold water.
They also are to be regarded as purely
medicinal. They are valuable in recent and
chronic cases of rheumatism, neuralgia and
sciatica, but as regards the skin, their promis-
ing reputation has been lost.
Turner ami Henderson, Printers, 254 George Street, Sydney—24o4B.




