

"FOR CHRIST AND THE CHURCH”
The CHRISTIAN
ENDEAVOUR
SOCIETY
What It Is! How It Works!
By Rev. FRANCIS E. CLARK, D.D., LL.D.,
Founder of the Christian Endeavour Movement.
Publication
A National
PRICE 3d.
1936
Published by
THE NATIONAL CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOUR UNION
OF AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND.




FOREWORD
I very earnestly commend this first National Union
edition of "What It Is—How It Works’’ not only to
Christian Endeavourers who are desirous of acquiring
a little working knowledge of our principles and
methods, but also to leaders of youth generally who
may be interested in exploring the merits of Christian
Endeavour as a positive agency in nurturing and
training young people for Christian living and service.
The contents of this booklet are drawn from the pen
of our revered Founder (the late Rev. Francis E. Clark,
D.D., LL.D.), and depict in simple terms the cardinal
principles of Christian Endeavour as well as ways and
means whereby every high and legitimate need of
youth may be supplied.
GEO. H. NELSON,
National President.


The
Society of Christian Endeavour
What It Is I How It Works I
PART I.
THE YOUNG PEOPLE’S SOCIETY
r "pHIS little pamphlet is prepared for the information of
those who desire to have before .them the principles and
the practice of the Society of Christian Endeavour, There is
need for a tract which shall condense into a few words the
vital principles of the Society, and serve as a convenient reply
to inquiries as to what the Young People’s Society of Christian
Endeavour is, and how it works.
Organised Effort.
The Young 1 People’s Society of Christian Endeavour is simply
an organised effort to lead the young people to Christ and into
His Church, to establish them firmly in the faith, and to set
them at work in the Lord’s Vineyard. The main point upon
which the Constitution insists is the regular prayer meeting,
which each active member is pledged to attend and to partici-
pate in (unless prevented by some conscientious reason).
See Article 7, page 17. Alsu pages 24, :-SU, 34.
Once each month a special meeting is held, at which each
active member renews his consecration vows to Jesus Christ.
The Society may, and, as an actual fact, usually does, branch
off into various departments of Christian effort, adapting itself
to the local needs of each Church, but the rules concerning
the prayer meeting are imperative; without them there cannot
be a true Society of Christian Endeavour.
See page 7.
It cannot bo too strongly emphasised that the Society of
Christian Endeavour is first and last and always a Religious


Society. It has social, literary and other features, but it is
neither a social nor a literary society.
In the Platform of Principles set forth by the President of
the United Society when he accepted the position, and since
very generally endorsed by the Societies and adopted by their
conventions, is the following;—
“The Purely Religious Features of the organisation shall
always be paramount. The Society of Christian Endeavour
centres about the prayer meeting. The strict prayer meeting
pledge, honestly interpreted, is essential to the continued
success of a Society of Christian Endeavour.”
Sc?e fiapros 158 and 3!>,
A Half-way House to the Church.
A Society thus organised among the young people has
proved itself to he a Half-way House to the Church,
Into this Society, Christians, however young or feeble they
may be, may come at once. Here they may at once be recog-
nised as Christians, may at once have the opportunity and
be encouraged to acknowledge their Saviour, and be at once
set to work for Him. To use another figure, this Society
bridges the dangerous gap between conversion and Church
membership, which is often a long one in the case of young
disciples, an interval when many stray away and are lost for
ever to the Church and the cause of Christ.
See pape <5.
A Training School in the Church.
The Society is also a Training School in the Church.
It gives young Christians something to do at once.
It accustoms them to the sound of their own voice in the
prayer meeting.
It causes them to understand that they, as well as older
Christians, have a part to perform in the activities of the
Church. It sends them upon a hundred errands for Christ.
Very soon they learn that they have duties in the general
Church prayer meetings, and they become naturally and easily
the pastor’s trusted helpers. Wc are speaking from actual
experience in this matter, and not merely theorising.
A generation of Christians trained from early boyhood and
girlhood in this way, trained patiently, persistently', kindly,
would be a generation of working Christians.
Sec pape* 8. 10. 22, and 3S.


Watchtower for the Church.
The Society is also a Watch-Tower for the Church.
The minister ought always, if possible, to attend the prayer
meetings and the social gatherings, and, unseen, keep his
hands on the reins of the organisation. If he does so. wisely
and constantly, he cannot help knowing how the young converts
are progressing in the Christian life. If they are faithful lo
their voluntary vows, he knows it, and can mark with joy their
growth in grace. If they are negligent, he knows that, and
can at once look after and reclaim the unfaithful ones.
See pages 8 and SB.
No month need ever go by without the minister knowing
the religious status of each of his young people.
The Committee System.
The Committee System is an outstanding feature of
Christian Endeavour. Its purpose is twofold, viz.-
(1) To ensure all-round efficiency in the work for which the
Society exists, by the division of that work into Sections;
and
(2) To train members to bear responsibility by placing each
Section in the hands of a separate Committee, and encour-
aging individual members to shoulder a share—however
small at first—of the responsibility attaching to the
Section in charge of the Committee of which they are
members.
It will be readily understood how this method provides a
congenial sphere of service and training for new converts,
and for those who are unconscious of the possession of more
than one talent, and, therefore, arc too diffident to accept any
ordinary church office.
See pages 14-17, 111. anil liS.
The Look-out Committee.
With faithful, earnest, intelligent Committees the work can
hardly fail to succeed. Perhaps the most important is the
Look-out Committee. This Committee has, as part of its work,
to introduce new members to the Society, and it should take
great pains that only those who have begun the Christian life
are introduced as active members. But its most delicate, and,
at the same time, important, duty is the reclamation of those
who have grown lax, and indifferent to their vows. If any
active member is away from the monthly Consecration Meeting,
the Look-out Committee should know it, and should find nut
the reason for the absence. The very fact that this Committee
is OD the “look-out” will prove a salutary restraint upon many.


Thare are but few young people who stay away who cannot be
reclaimed and brought back to their allegiance by a wise and
faithful Look-out Committee.
See pa me ]•!.
The other Committees, especially the Prayer Meeting, Mis-
sionary, Sunshine and Social Committees, are scarcely less
important, but their duties are easily understood as defined
in the Constitution, and are more fully described in various
published pamphlets on the work of the Committees, so that
we need not here dwell upon their work.
See pages 15*17.
Every one of the Committees, according to its zeal and
devotion, can make much or little of its office, and each affords
a grand opportunity for efficient service.
Age Limit.
Should there be an age limit? This is a question which is
often asked. Where the Young People’s is the only Christian
Endeavour Society in the Church we are not in favour of a
strict age limit, since youth and age are such variable terms.
Many a man is old at twenty-five; many at fifty are still
young. This matter can usually be left to the sanctified
common sense of Christian men and women.
See pages 2 6 and 32 (Ju n ioH . pane -'2 j J nU;i medial cl. and luij'Y 1 if; Faded
Christian ’Kndoa.vrmrJ .
The Participation Clause.
It is hard to overestimate the value and importance of what
is called “The Participation Clause of the Active Members’
Pledge.”
The casual observer or critic may see in it merely a novel
method of ensuring a programme for every meeting; but this
is a shallow and misleading conception of what is found, in
experience, to be, in reality, a vital part of Christian Endea-
vour.
For the root idea underlying this part of the pledge is
Consecration— to God first, and then to one another. No
pledge is necessary to induce people to participate in profits,
or share the fruit of others’ labours, but this is participation
in giving. It is the division among members of the responsi-
bility for the good meeting each expects—the responsibility
not merely of providing sufficient to engage members’ attention
during the meeting, but of creating the very atmosphere in
which that meeting shall be held. It almost amounts to a
joint guarantee that all who come for blessing may receive it,
and realise the presence of God.
See paves 10. 12, 15. 1 7, 24, 30, 34 nn.l US.


This implies (1) A conviction that God is willing to use
not leaders only, but every member of the rank and file, to
bear His messages to others; (2) that each one so pledged has
yielded to God every known talent to be so used, if required,
and is willing to take the necessary time and opportunity to
receive such messages in prayer and Bible study, and to make
any necessary preparation, that God, through them, may supply
another’s need.
This privilege of being used may be shared even by
inexperienced members, conscious more of their own need
than of any ability to help others. Going straight from the
place of secret prayer at home to the Christian Endeavour
meeting, the prayer-spirit they carry soon tells on others; and,
though their only audible part of the meeting be the expression
of their great outreaching toward Jesus, in a brief, but earnest,
sentence-prayer, they may have honoured Christ by this touch
of faith, and led older members to realise that they are nearer
than they thought to their Divine Helper.
A further justification (if such were needed) for the
presence in the pledge of this participation clause, is to be
found in the training and development of inexperienced indi-
vidual members which follow its faithful observance. For this
covenant with God and fellow-members has the effect of
developing the tiniest seed-thoughts of humble beginners that,
in other environments, would probably perish unused. In any
Christian Endeavour devotional meeting worthy of the name
these seed-thoughts are provided with the moisture of Christian
sympathy necessary for germination and with room and oppor-
tunity to grow to fruition and multiply, with the result that
the timid member, whose participation at first consisted merely
of reading a verse of Scripture, develops into an efficient helper,
whose presence in any devotional meeting counts for a real
spiritual uplift.
But the chief importance of this clause lies in the fact that
the Society’s success and influence depend, very largely, on
the conception, by members generally, of their obligations in
this respect. For the Society, in regard to spiritual tone,
development of workers and actual output of effective work,
will be just what, in their interpretation of the Constitution,
the Minister and his young people make it; not the Minister
alone, nor the young people left to themselves, but both, in
heartiest co-operation.
Where the principles of the movement are rightly under-
stood, and the Minister knows the value of his Society as a
bank for the profitable investment of hjs very best (of
sympathy and kindly leading), and uses it as such, and where
the members are sincere and loyal—be they of only moderate
attainments— -regular, intelligent and progressive participation


will become so natural that members will no more think of
coming to their meeting empty-hearted than to a pound-night
social or basket picnic empty-handed; but each will bring his
definite contribution to the spiritual feast expected by all; so
that an Associate member or a visitor at a meeting where, say,
ten Active members are present, should be able to count on
that number of distinct helpful influences, whether in the
form of remarks on the topic, or through prayer or song, or
simply by that reverent demeanour which betokens a real sense
of the Divine Presence.
Such meetings cannot possibly be fruitless; but it must be
remembered by those at the head, that the confidence essential
to the achievement of such results is inspired only by Christian
sympathy and wise leadership.
The Consecration Meeting.
The Consecration Meeting is of great importance. It may
be called by various names: “Consecration,” “Experience,"
“Progress,” or simply the “Monthly Meeting”; but, by what-
ever name it is called, it should and may be a real power. At
this meeting, in some way, some expression of renewed loyalty
to Christ should be obtained from every active member. When
the roll is called it should be made a very serious matter, and
the mere response to the name should be considered a renewal
of consecration. Members may respond to their names with a
prayer, or a word of testimony, or a passage of Scripture.
See pages 17, 19, 26. 31 (Art. 7), and 34.
The Associate Members.
The duties of the active members are plain enough—humble
Christian living, constant attendance at the meetings and
regular participation. The duties of the Associate Members
are less easily defined. These are the young people who, while
they are not willing to avow themselves active Christians,
are willing to put themselves under Christian influences
and to be the subject of the prayers of the Active
Members. That they owe something to the Society is plain.
Habitual attendance at the meetings should be required from
the Associate Members, but not regular participation therein.
At the Consecration Meeting the roll of Associate Members
may be called, but merely for the purpose of recording their
attendance. Every good influence should be kept around such
members, and every effort made to bring them to Christ. The
invitation to the prayer meetings should be of the broadest
and most cordial character, to embrace not only the members,
but ail the young people of the community.
Sec pages 11, 13, 22, 24, and 30.


The Relation of the Society to the Minister and to the
Church.
The Society is a part of the Church. One of its principal
objects is to bring all the young people into the work of the
Church. In this respect it differs from all other organisations.
Its motto is, “For Christ and the Church.” Each Society should
be connected with some one individual Church and direct its
efforts to its upbuilding. Interdenominational Societies are
permissible only in localities which cannot support separate
denominational Societies, and then only when the respective
Church authorities concur. The active work done by members
of such Societies must be done for their own Church. The
Platform of Principles before alluded to says: “The Society
of Christian Endeavour is not, and is not to be an organisation
independent of the Church. It is the Church at work for and
with the young, and the young people at work for and with
the Church.” Testimonies from hundreds of prominent pastors
relate how this Society has brought: back their young people
from desultory and unproductive work outside of the Church,
and has concentrated their efforts in Church channels. In the
Church prayer meeting, the Sunday School, the musical
services, the social life and missionary efforts of the Church,
the young people thus organised can be of untold usefulness.
Seepages 3, 13, IS. ‘.Vi, .'!S.
The Minister stands in the same relationship to the Society
as to other departments of the Church’s work, such as the
Sunday School. lie is, by virtue of his office, the authoritative
head of the Society. He should, if possible, attend all its
meetings, aid its efforts, and show himself in fullest and most
hearty sympathy with the young life of his Church; otherwise
he cannot hope for large success.
-See pujrros 13, 1P T ;md 3(3.
The Society Interdenominational, not Undenominational.
The Society is interdenominational, not undenominational,
and the best proof of this is found in the fact that it exists in
all evangelical denominations, and is equally useful in all. In
respect of the number of Societies, Presbyterians lead in the
United States, Baptists and Congregationalists in England,
and Methodists in Australia.
The basis of the union of Societies is one of common loyalty
to Christ, common methods of service for Him, and mutual
Christian affection, rather than a doctrinal and ecclesiastical
basis. In such a union all evangelical Christians can unite
without repudiating or being disloyal to any denominational
custom or tenet.


The blessing that has already eventuated from interdenomi-
national fellowship in Christian Endeavour has undoubtedly
been very far-reaching, and fully justifies the hope expressed
by Dr. Clark in the fifth plank of the Platform of Principles
(see page 38), in regard to the real unity of all Christ's
disciples. Endeavourera are counselled, however, to definitely
guard against excessive attendance at Society Anniversaries
and Rallies, particularly outside their own district (excepting,
of course, State and National gatherings), as there is a danger
in this respect of reducing their dependability and general
usefulness in the service of Christ in their own Church and
locality.
Business Features.
The business features of the Society should not be accorded
over much prominence. Sharp parliamentary practice and
long or heated discussion should be discouraged. The Society
of Christian Endeavour is not a debating society. If questions
requiring debate are brought only before the Executive Com-
mittee (as provided in Article VI., Clause 5, page 15) and
reported favourably or otherwise by this Committee to the
Society for adoption, much trouble will be avoided. But little
money is required for the Society, and that can be raised by
a monthly consecration offering, or by an unobjectionable
entertainment of which the Church shall approve, or in any
other simple way.
See Paget' 17. 19, 31,
How to Form a Society.
To form a Society, begin with as many earnest, active young
Christians as are available. Do not be anxious for numbers.
Think more of quality than quantity. Half a score of those
who are earnest and consecrated are worth ten score of half-
hearted ones. A very few young people of the right kind can
make a strong Society of Christian Endeavour. If the Society
begins right, it is Certain to grow. Do not lower the standard
or cater for the worldly iaxness of the average Christian by
making the way in easy. The great danger is just at this
point—that many will rush in at first who have no proper
conception of their obligations, and who will prove a positive
source of weakness to the Society. Make sure that everyone
who joins fully understands his duties and obligations, and is
willing in Christ’s strength to undertake them. Call together
the earnest young Christians who are thus willing to pledge
themselves; let them adopt and sign the Constitution —which
will pledge them to a performance of those duties —and choose
their Officers and Committees. The Society thus formed is
ready to go forward with its work.
See pages 22, 27, 33.


Keep It Constitutional.
If it be necessary, at the formation of a new Society, thni
each intending' member should read the Constitution, and this
or a similar explanatory booklet, it is equally essential in
established Societies—if they are to retain their original fresh-
ness, maintain the spiritual tone and vitality which marked
their earlier meetings, and be noted for the same efficiency in
service—that all candidates for membership should acquire
their knowledge of C.E, Principles and Methods direct from
the literature of the movement. In other words, the ideals of
the Society are to be sought in the Constitution itself, rather
than in personal representation of it, which must necessarily
vary with the environment, ability and experience of the
young people of the Society. Look-out Committees are there-
fore strongly advised to keep on hand a few copies of this
booklet for the use of intending members and other inquirers.
See page 12, Art. H. Clause 5 ; pape 20. Clause 7 : also juices 24, HO. and Hi
Training Class Lectures.
With this object in view, the National C.E. Union of Aus-
tralia and New Zealand and State Unions have made provision
for Endeavourers to acquire a thorough knowledge of C.E.
principles and methods, by means of training class lectures and
correspondence courses. Diplomas are awarded by the National
Union to those reaching the required standard of efficiency, in
the full course covering a period of three years. AH Endea-
vourers are urged to take at least the first course of study, so
that every Society may, as far as possible, represent to the
Church and the world Standard Christian Endeavour.
Summary.
To summarise, then, the essential features of the Young
People’s Society of Christian Endeavour are; —
Pledged and constant attendance at the regular prayer
meetings;
Pledged and constant participation therein by every Active
member;
Pledged and constant work for others through the Com-
mittees and in any way which may be suggested.
A few living up to those pledges faithfully will, with the
blessing of God, soon become a powerful host in any Church,
There is no danger that the rules will be too strictly enforced.
There is a great danger that they will be regarded too loosely.
The Society that looks to God for all blessing, and the members
of which strictly observe their voluntary vows, cannot fail


THE MODEL CONSTITUTION.
This Constitution, which ia substantially the same as that adopted by the
first society in Portland, U.S.A., 2nd February, 1881, baa been prepared with
great care. It is practically identical with the Constitution revised and
approved by the Trustees of the United Society (now the International
Society) at a meeting hold October, ISB7.
It is not necessarily binding upon any local Society, but is to be regarded in
the light of a recommendation, especially for the guidance of new organisa-
tions and those unacnuaini ed with the work of the Society of Christian
Endeavour, It is hoped, however, for the sake of uniformity, i hat the
Constitution, which deals only with main principles, may he generally
adopted, and that such changes as may bo needed to adapt the Society to
local needs will be made in the By-laws. Even if the language of the
Conaii'ulion of some local Societies should vary from this Model Constitution,
it should be borne in mind t hat only those Societies that adhere to the prayer
meeting idea, as embodied in Article VII., and the main features of committee
work, can properly claim the name of Christian Endeavour Societies.
See page 1 y.
The specimen By-laws appended hereto embrace suggestions for the govern-
ment of the Society which have been found successful in many place*.
Article I. Name.
This Society shall be called the
(This blank to be filled with the name of place and denomination.)
Young People’s Society of Christian Endeavour.
See page 34 (Senior Society 1.
Article H. Obj ect.
The object of this Society shall be to promote an earnest
Christian life anions its members, increase their mutual
acquaintance and make them more useful in the service of God-
See puge.-i 33 and 39.
Article 111. —Membership,
1. The members shall consist of three classes —Active,
Associate, and Affiliated or Honorary.
2. Active Members. The Active members of this Society
shall consist of young persons who believe themselves to be
Christians, and who sincerely desire to accomplish the objects
specified. Voting power shall be vested only in the Active
members.
Clauses a, 3, ami 5 apply also to the Intermediate Society. See page 30.
3. Associate Members. All young persons of worthy charac-
ter who are not at present willing to be considered decided


Christians may become Associate members of this Society. They
shall have the special prayers and sympathy of the Active
members, but shall be excused from taking part in the prayer
meeting. It is expected that Associate members will habitually
attend the prayer meetings, and that they will in time become
Active members, and the Society will work to this end.
Young 1 persons who can be either Active or Associate members should in
no case be accepted as Honorary Members See page IR.
4. Affiliated or Honorary Members. All persons who, though
no longer young, are still interested in the Society and wish
to have some connection with it, though they cannot regularly
attend the meetings, may become Affiliated members. Their
names shall be kept upon the list under the appropriate
heading, but shall not be called at the roll-call meeting. It is
understood that the Society may look to the Affiliated members
for financial and moral support in all worthy efforts. (For
special class of Honorary members, see Article IX.)
5. Election to Membership. These different persons shall
become members upon election by the Society, and upon
signing their names to the Constitution, after carefully examin-
ing it, thereby pledging themselves to live up to its require-
ments. All candidates for active membership shall sign the
following Active Member’s Fledge.
ACTIVE MEMBER’S PLEDGE.
The following is the Active Member’s Pledge as endorsed
by the National Council at Brisbane, 1935:
Trusting in the Lord Jesus Christ for strength, f promise
Him that I will strive to do whatever He would hare we
do; that 1 will make it the rule of mg life to prog awl
read the Bible every day, to support the work and worship of
my own Church in every possible way, and that, so far ns I
know how, throughout mg whole life, 1 will endeavour in
lead a Christian life. Us an Active Member I promise to
be true to all my duties; to be present at, and take some
part, aside from singing, in every Christian Cndeavour
Meeting unless hindered by some reason which 7 can
conscientiously give to my Lord, and Master, Jesus Christ.
If obliged to be absent from the monthly consecration
'meeting, I will, if possible,send at least a, verse of Scripture
to be read in response to my name at the roll rail.
Signature. ...


Associate Members are expected to sign tbe following
ASSOCIATE MEMBER’S PLEDGE.
As an Associate Member I promise to attend the meetings
of the Society regularly, and declare my willingness to do
what I may be called upon to do as an Associate Member
to advance the interests of the Society,
Signature
Article IV.—Officers and Committees.
1. The Minister is ex-offlcio head of the Society, Chairman
of the Executive Committee, and a member of every Com-
mittee. He has a place in the deliberations of every business
meeting, and the right to direct. He should be consulted on
all matters of importance.
2. The Officers of this Society shall be a President, Vice-
President, Secretary (or Secretaries) and Treasurer, and such
others as the Society deems necessary, who shall be chosen
from among the Active members of the Society.
in the larger Societies the Secretarial office is sometimes divided between a
Recording Secretary and a Corresponding Secretary-
3. There shall be a Look-out Committee, a Prayer Meeting
Committee, and such other Committees (each consisting of
Active members) as the needs of the Society may require.
There shall also be an Executive Committee, as provided under
Article VI.
Each Committee —except the Executive—shall regularly
report in writing to the Society concerning its work. These
reports should preferably be rendered at the monthly business
meetings of the Society. They are to be submitted by the
Conveners of the respective Committees after the regular
monthly Committee meetings; and, when read, handed to the
Secretary, who will file them for annual report purposes. The
use of manifold books for these reports will enable the Con-
vener to retain the originals for reference, and will conduce
to regularity in reporting.
Article V.—Duties of Officers.
1. President. The President of the Society shall perform
the duties usually pertaining to that office. He shall especially
watch over the interests of the Society, and it shall be his care
to see that the various Committees perform the duties devolving
upon them.
See paves 25, 3!. and 34.


2. Vice-President. The Vice-President shall discharge the
duties usually pertaining to that office and such other duties
as may be allotted to him by the President,
3. Recording Secretary. The Recording Secretary shall keep
a correct record of the members of the Society, their atten-
dances at the meetings, the Committees on which they serve,
the offices they occupy, and such other information as is needful
or advisable. He shall obtain the signature of each newly-
elected member to the Constitution, and, when so instructed
by the Executive Committee, write to absent members and
inform them of their standing- in the Society; he shall keep
correct minutes of all business meetings and a brief record of
all other meetings of the Society, notify all persons elected to
office or to Committees, in writing if necessary, and perform
any duty not otherwise specified which usually pertains to his
office.
4. Corresponding Secretary. The Corresponding Secretary
shall keep the Society in communication with the State
Christian Endeavour Union, the District Christian Endeavour
Union, and other local Societies. He shall promptly submit to
the Society all correspondence received from those Unions or
Societies, or from any other authorised source, for the Society's
consideration or information, and shall reply thereto in the
terms determined upon by the Society or the Executive. The
name and address of the person occupying this office shall be
forwarded to the Unions referred to.
5. Treasurer. It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to
safely keep all moneys belonging to the Society, and pay out
only such sums as may be voted by the Society or Executive,
Clauses 3,4, and 5 apply also to the Intermediate Society.
Article Vl.—Duties of Committees.
1. Look-out Committee. This Committee shall seek to
encourage timid members; affectionately look after and
reclaim any who seem indifferent to their duties as outlined
in the pledge; and promote fidelity to pledge obligations.
The introduction of new 7 members to the Society shall be a
duty of this Committee, the members of which will first assure
themselves by personal investigation of the fitness of young-
persons to become members and see that they fully understand
the pledge and the step they are taking. .Names of proposed
members shall first be brought before the Executive by the
Look-out Committee, and, if there approved, submitted to the
Society at least one week before election to membership. The
Look-out Committee shall also aim to lead Associates into
Active membership of the Society. This Committee will find
it an advantage to co-operate with the Social Committee in
welcoming new-comers and visitors to the Church.


2. Prayer Meeting Committee. This Committee shall have
charge of the prayer meeting; it will see that a topic is assigned
and a leader appointed for every meeting, and do what it can
to secure faithfulness to the prayer meeting pledge by promot-
ing hearty participation and preventing unnecessary pauses.
It will also sec that the various meetings are properly
announced, that ruts are avoided, and that variety and fresh-
ness are imparted to the meetings.
3. Missionary Committee. This Committee shall pro-
vide for occasional Missionary Meetings in the Society,
interest members in missionary topics, spread missionary infor-
mation and circulate missionary literature. It should also aim
at the early formation of a missionary library, promote
systematic giving to the cause of missions, encourage daily
prayer on behalf of missionaries, and aid in every practicable
way, in Church, Sunday School and Society, both Horae and
Foreign Missions.
4. Citizenship Committee, This Committee shall emphasise
the duties of Christian citizenship, and promote a clear under-
standing’ of the same amongst the members of the Society,
especially in regard to Lord’s Day observance, temperance, the
suppression of gambling in all its forms, and other vital social
questions. The Committee shall particularly advance tem-
perance principles and sentiment among the members of the
Society, disseminate temperance facts and information, and
advocate the taking of pledges of abstinence from alcoholic
liquors.
5. Executive Committee. This Committee shall consist of
the Minister, Officers of the Society, and Conveners of Com-
mittees, All matters of business requiring debate shall first
be brought before this Committee, and by it reported either
favourably or adversely to the Society. All discussion of
proposed measures shall take place before this Committee,
and not before the Society. Recommendations concerning the
finances of the Society shall also originate with this Committee.
The object of this Committee is to prevent waste of time in the regular
of the Society by needless debate, which is always harmful to the
spirit of a prayer meeting-
6. Flo wer Committee. This Committee is to provide flowers
for the Church Services and Endeavour Meetings, It may also
provide flowers for, and distribute them to, the sick and the
poor.
7. Good Literature Committee. This Committee shall do its
utmost to promote the reading of good hooks and papers. It
shall do what it can to circulate the C.E. monthly paper among
the members of the Society, and obtain subscribers for the
denominational papers or magazines among the families of


the congregation as the Minister ant) the Church may desire.
It may also distribute tracts and religious leaflets amongst the
homes in the neighbourhood, circulate clean and wholesome
periodicals in all waiting rooms and other public places, collect
and distribute among charitable institutions magazines and
books of healthy tone, start a C.E. workers' library, and in
any other suitable way introduce good reading matter wherever
practicable.
Clauses 1 to 7 apply :iho tn tlie Intermediate Society. Sec piijrc 31.
8. Junior Committee. This Committee shall establish a
Junior Society as a branch of the Young People's Society; il
shall watch over and promote the interests of the same, and
induce eligible Juniors to graduate to either the Intermediate
or the Young People's Society. The Superintendent of the
Junior Society shall be the Convener of this Committee.
Sec page? 25, 51, 55-
9. Intermediate Committee. This Committee shall establish
and safeguard the interests of an Intermediate Society, and
induce in due course the graduation of its members to the Y.P.
Society, The Superintendent of the Intermediate Society shall
be the Convener of this Committee.
See pape 5 5.
10. Music Committee, This Committee shall provide for the
singing at the Society’s Meetings, and shall also turn the
musical ability of the Society to account, when desirable, at
public religious meetings, cottage prayer meetings and in the
homes of the poor, the infirm, and the sick.
11. Social Committee. This Committee shall seek to advance
the social interests of the Society by welcoming strangers tn
the meetings, promoting the mutual acquaintance of the mem-
bers, and providing pure Christian recreation and sociability by
socials or appropriate entertainments approved by the Church.
It shall also be the duty of this Committee to welcome new-
comers and visitors to the Church.
12. Sunday School Committee. This Committee shall endea-
vour to bring into the Sunday’ School those who do not attend
elsewhere, help the teachers in visiting and caring for
absentees, supply substitute teachers to fill vacancies, act as a
Look-out Committee in the School, and generally co-operate
■with the Superintendent, officers and teachers in any way’ they
may suggest for the benefit of the School.
13. Sunshine Committee, This Committee shall endeavour
to do what it can to cheer and aid (if possible and necessary
by materia] comforts) the sick and destitute among the young
people of the Church and Sunday School, and the infirm and
aged who cannot attend Church. It shall seek also to work


among the poor and needy and the sick people of the neigh-
bourhood and in hospitals and benevolent institutions, and hy
bright sympathy lighten all cases of suffering. The Committee
may also obtain gifts of money, food and other necessaries
for the relief of the sick and the needy.
14. Visiting Committee. This Committee shall have a special
care for those among the young people or newcomers to the
neighbourhood who may not feel at home in the Church. They
may also remind others where calls may be made.
Ht tci 11 apply c-tNn in the iTittniurdiat-C Society.
Article VII. Society Meetings.
1. All the Active members shall be present at every meeting
unless detained by some absolute necessity, and each Active
member shall take some part, however slight, in every meeting.
To the above all the Active members shall pledge" themselves,
understanding by “absolute necessity” some reason for absence
which can conscientiously be given to their Master, Jesus
Christ, The meeting's yhall be belt? Tor one hour, and at the
close some lime may he taken fur introduction and social inter-
course, or Committee Conference, if desired.
2. Once each month a Consecration Meeting shall be hold,
at which each Active member may speak concerning bis
progress in the Christian life, and shall renew his vows of
consecration.
See pagre 7.
3. At each Consecration Meeting the roll shall be called,
and the responses of the Active members who are present
shall be considered as a renewed expression of allegiance to
Christ. It is expected that, if any member is obliged to be
absent from this meeting, he will send to the Society, by
another member, a request to be excused and a verse to be
read in response to his name at the roll-call, or a greeting.
4. If any Active member of this Society is absent without
sending a greeting, or request to be excused, from three con-
secutive monthly Consecration Meetings, he shall forthwith
cease to he a member of the Society. The Look-out Committee
is expected to take the name of any Active member who is
absent from the monthly Consecration Meeting without excuse
or ffreetinp, and in a kind and brotherly spirit remind him of
his pledge.
1 Ic* I iioply :ilti> u> llic fnl !‘rm t i din t e Society, Hcc p.-ijrr
5. Regular Business Meetings shall he held as determined
hy the Society. Special business meetings may he held at the
close of any ordinary Endeavour meeting, or at any other time,
by direction of the President.
♦For foriri of Pledge sec Article 111.


Article Vlll.—Elections.
An election of officers and Conveners of Committees shall
be held not less than once in twelve months. Such officers
and Conveners may be proposed by a Nominating Committee
appointed by the Society or by the Minister.
Article IX.—Relation to the Church.
This Society, being a part of the Church, the Minister,
Deacons (or Elders or Stewards) and the Sunday School
Superintendents shall be ex-officio honorary members.
Article X,—Withdrawals.
Any member who desires to withdraw from Membership of
the Society should state in writing to the Look-out Committee
the reason for withdrawal.
Article XI. —Expansion.
Any other Committees may be added and duties assumed
by this Society as circumstances demand.
Article Xll.—The Church Prayer Meeting.
(The following amendment was proposed by "Rev. F. E, Clark, and recom-
mended to the Societies by vote of the National Conference held in Chicago,
&th-Sth July, 1888.)
Since it would in the end defeat the very object of our
organisation if the older Active members, who have been
trained in the Society for usefulness in the Church, should
remain content with fulfilling their pledge to the Society only,
it is expected that when it shall become impossible for them
to attend two weekly prayer meeting's they shall be transferred
to the honorary membership of the Society, if previously
faithful to their vows as active members. This transfer, how-
ever, shall be made with the understanding that the obligation
for faithful service shall still be binding upon them in the
regular Church prayer meeting. It shall be left to the Look-
out Committee, in conjunction with the Minister, to see that
this transfer of membership is made as occasion requires.
Special pains shall also be taken to see that a share of the
duties and responsibilities, both of the prayer meeting and
general work of the Society, shall be borne by the younger
members.
tjee page 33.


SPECIMEN BY LAWS
(Given as Hints for the Regulation of Local Societies)
If it be thought that these rules and regulations are unnecessarily long, it
should be distinctly borne in mind that they are simply suggestions. It is
not essentia] that they be adopted as a whole, as in the case of the Model
Constitution, for all of them are not needful, perhaps, to any one Society,
but from them all valuable hints may be derived for the government of local
organisations. The fundamental principles of tbe Society are exceedingly
simple, and only so many of By-laws need be adopted as seem necessary
to the easy working of this plan for Christian nurture. Undue attention to
rides and parliamentary law in the Society of Christian Endeavour is depre-
cated, and the fundamental fact that the object of this Society is solely
Christian work and growth should never be lost sight of.
BY-LAWS*
I.
This Society shall hold a prayer meeting on
evening of each week.
11.
The Consecration Meeting.
The - regular prayer meeting of the month shall
be a Consecration Meeting, at which the roll shall be called.
(The roll may be called by the leader at any time during the meeting. After
the opening exercises the names of five or more may be called, and then a hymn
sung or a prayer offered. Thus with singing and prayer interspersed, the
entire roll may be called. With a view to avoiding formality, it is advisable
to vary as much and as frequently as possible the method of Roll Call.)
111.
Business Meetings.
This Society shall hold its regular business meeting in
connection with the - . regular meeting in the month
—special business meetings at the call of the President.
IV.
Elections.
The election of Officers and Committees shall be held at the
first business meeting in the month of


Nominating Committee.
A Nominating Committee shall be appointed by the Minister
or the Society, of which Committee the Minister shall be a
member ex officio.
[The following statement may he read to the Society before
each election of officers;—
Whilst the various offices of this Society should be distributed
among the members as evenly as the best good of the Society
will warrant, they should not be considered places of honour
to be striven for, but simply opportunities for increased useful-
ness, and any ill-feeling or jealousy springing from this cause
shall be deemed unworthy a member of the Society of Christian
Endeavour. When a member has been elected to office it is
expected that he will consider it a sacred trust, to be conscien-
tiously accepted, and never to be declined except for most
urgent and valid reasons.]
V.
Any member who cannot accept the office to which he may
have been elected shall notify the President in writing before
the next business meeting, at which the vacancy shall be filled.
VI.
The names of proposed new members of the Society shall
first be submitted by the Look-out Committee at an Executive
Meeting, and, if approved by the Executive, they shall be
voted on by the Society at the first meeting- thereafter. Candi-
dates so approved by the Society shall be publicly received at
the next Consecration Meeting-
VII.
New members shall sign the Constitution and By-laws at
the Consecration Meeting at which they are received into the
Society.
VIII.
Readmission to membership may be granted by a two-thirds
vote of the members present at any regular business meeting,
and on the recommendation of the Minister and the Look-out
Committee.
IX.
Any member who removes to another town or district, or
desires to transfer his membership to another Society in the
same locality, is expected to apply for a Letter of Introduction
within six months of leaving, or furnish a satisfactory reason
for further delay.
Such letters shall be given only to members in good standing,
and on the vote of the Executive.


X.
Any member temporarily leaving the district, or removing
to a locality where no Society exists, or who, for any other
sufficient reason, cannot meet with this Society for a time,
may be granted leave of absence on the recommendation of
the Minister and Look-out Committee. The name of such
member shall be retained on an “absent” list for the period for
which leave of absence has been granted. It is expected that
whenever possible a member on leave shall forward a response
to the monthly roll-call.
XI.
These By-laws may be amended by a two-thirds vote of the
members present at any duly constituted meeting, provided that
notice of such amendment shall have been given in writing to
the Secretary, and read at a meeting of the Society at least
one week before it is discussed.


PART II.
THE JUNIOR SOCIETY
By A. W. ROBERTS,
Ey-Jnnior Superintendent Victorian C.E. Union.
The first Y.P. S.C.E. in the world was barely three years old
when it was discovered that there existed, among the children
of the Church, a need similar to that which called the main
Society into being, also that a modification of the Young’
People's Society would supply that need.
See page 35.
The experiment of a Junior Society was tried with such
success that the idea was copied to an ever-increasing extent,
until to-day the church without a Junior Society from which
to draw trained members is regarded as incomplete. It is
hoped that the leaders of any such society will soon recognise
the value of this training school for beginners.
Active Membership.
It is freely admitted that, so soon as children are able to
appreciate the love of Jesus to them, they are able to love
Him in return, and are not too young to be encouraged to
express their love by promising to serve Him, to find out more
about His wishes, and to meet together to help each other in
these things. And what is this but the standard of Active
Membership?
It is not necessary, however, to defer the formation of a
Junior Society in any Church until a certain number of
children are prepared to sign the Active Member’s Pledge.
Many Societies have consisted, at first, of Associate or Trial
members only, who have been gently led, rather than urged,
to take this important stop after a period of trial, and after
the Superintendent has been satisfied that they clearly under-
stood the nature of their promises.
Training for Service.
The difference in value between raw recruits and trained
workers is so well known that, while all new members are
welcomed, the preference of Y.P. Societies for Junior gradu-
ates can be readily understood; for it is recognised now that
the Juniors are capable of the same kinds of service and
influence as are the more developed Endeavourers (though in
a lesser degree perhaps, and in a more limited sphere), just


as roses are roses while yet buds, with their beauty and
perfume in the making.
He is a happy pastor who recognises this, hears the charge—
“ Feed My lambs,” and plans for some trusted under-shepherd
to feed them and lead them in their first organisation for
work, in which their desire to do things shall be grati-
fied, and their talents multiplied because put to use.
See pape G.
The Committees.
The Committees most generally found in Junior Societies
are the Look-out, Missionary, and Sunshine. Their duties are
those of the corresponding Committees in the Young People’s
Society, modified to harmonise with the environment of the
Juniors.
See pages 14 to 17.
In forming committees it is most important to remember
that— (l) No stated number of committees is necessary; (2)
no stated output of work can be regarded as essential; but (3)
that the committees are formed rather for the value of the
training that individual members receive than for the total
quantity of work done. Only so many committees should be
formed, therefore, as are necessary to provide work and
training for all the members, having due regard, of course, to
local conditions and the kinds of work that need doing. There
are other committees than those named above, which provide
valuable training, and which Superintendents are recommended
to form as the need for them is felt, and as the existing
membership grows. These are the Prayer, Birthday, Tem-
perance, Social, Music, Bible and Hymn Book, Order, What-
soever, etc. Particulars of the work of these committees may
be found in the booklet, “Junior Society of Christian
Endeavour” and other Junior C.E. literature.
The following Constitution is printed for the guidance of
those desirous of forming Junior Societies:—
CONSTITUTION.
Article I,—Name.
This Society shall be called “The
Junior Society of Christian Endeavour,”


Article II. —Objects.
The object* of this Society shall be to promote an earnest
Christian life among boys and girls who shall become members,
and to prepare them for the active service of Christ.
Article 111.—Membership.
Members shall consist of two classes—Active and Associate
(or Trial),
Active Members.
Any boy or girl, approved by the Superintendent, may
become an Active Member of the Society by taking the follow-
ing pledge:—
Trusting in the Lord Jesus Christ for strength. I promise
Him that I will strive to do whatever He would like to have
me. do; that I will pray and read the Bible every day; and
so far as I Mow haw, I will try to lead a Christian life. I
will be present at every meeting of the Society, when I eon,
and will fake some part in ■ every meeting when asked to
do so.
Signature-
If thought desirable, the parent’s signature may be obtained
to the following clause, which is usually printed at the bottom
of the pledge card: —
“I am willing that should sign
this pledge, and will do all I can to help
keep it.”
Parent's Signature
Residence
Associate (or Trial) Members,
Any boy or girl, approved by the Superintendent, who
desires to join without undertaking tho responsibilities of
Active membership may become an Associate or Trial member
of the Society by taking the following pledge:—
"I promise la attend the meetings of tin Society as
regularly as 7 can, and to be i/viet and reverent during the
meeting. ’’
Note. — It should be the constant aim of the Superin-
tendent so to lead tho Associate members that, while still
in the Junior Society, they may make the definite choice
of Jesus as Saviour and Master, and become Active
members.


Article IV.—Officers.
The officers of the Society shall be a Superintendent, and
(if required) Assistant Superintendents appointed" by and from
the Young People’s Society (if one exists), otherwise by the
Minister; and a President, Vice-President, Secretary, and
Treasurer, nominated by the Superintendent, and elected by
the Society.
Article V.- —Duties of Officers.
1. The Superintendent, or, in his or her absence, the Assis-
tant Superintendent, shall have full control of the Society.
Note.—lt is advisable, generally, for the Superinten-
dent and Assistant Superintendent to associate with them-
selves several other members of the Young People's or
Intermediate Society, in the form of a '‘Junior Com-
mittee,” each member of which would take the oversight
of a committee of Juniors, training the little conveners,
providing suggestions for their committee work when
theirs are used up, guiding them in planning their work,
working their plan and reporting their progress, and
generally shepherding and helping them in their Christian
life.
See pages 1G and S 3.
2. The President, or, in his absence, the Vice-President,
shall conduct the business meetings, under the direction of
the Superintendent.
3. The Secretary shall take the minutes of the meetings,
mark the roll, and perform the duties usually pertaining to
the office.
4. The Treasurer shall receive the offerings, enter the
amounts in the account book, and hand the money to the
Superintendent; also enter expenditure as directed by the
Superintendent.
Article Vl.—Committees.
The Committees shall be:—Look-out, Missionary, Sunshine,
Prayer, Birthday, Music, Temperance, Social, Bible and Hymn
Book, Order, Whatsoever, or such of these and others as are
deemed expedient.
Article VII. Committee.
The Executive Committee shall consist of Ihe Minister,
Officers and Conveners of the various Committees.
Article Vlll,—Meetings.
The meetings of the Society shall be held weekly, lasting
for about an hour, and shall be varied as much as possible.
Each meeting shall include Bible study, prayer, praise and
Christian talk.


Article IX,—Consecration Meeting.
Once a month the meeting shall take the form of a Conse-
cration or Pledge Meeting, at which the pledge shall be repeated
and the roll called. The responses of the members shall bo
considered a renewal of the pledge of the Society. Written
reports from the various Committees, giving an account of
the month’s work, shall be read at this meeting.
Article X.—Relationship.
The relationship of this Society to the Intermediate, Young
People’s and Senior Societies shall be that of members of one
family, or that of one grade in a day school to the higher
grades. It is expected that at about the age of 12 to 14 (or
such other age as may be deemed desirable) the Juniors will
graduate into the Intermediate (or Young People’s) Society,
to further develop and use their abilities for Christ and the
Church.
See papres 32 and 3C.
Article XI. Amendment.
Any amendment required in this Constitution shall be made
by the Young People’s Society in the manner provided for
amendments of the Constitution of that Society.


PART III.
THE INTERMEDIATE SOCIETY
By A. W. ROBERTS.
Natural Development.
Christian Endeavour had been thriving in Australia about
20 years before there was any serious call for the Intermediate
Society. This was due partly to the fact that the Young
People’s and Junior Societies were made to cover the ground,
and partly to a disinclination to increase, without very good
reason, the number of meetings for young church members, or
to add to the already heavy strain upon the too few willing
workers available.
The position has undergone a gradual process of change,
however, and the Intermediate Society has come—but as a
natural development rather than the pet idea of an enthusiast
for a third Society. And this is as it should be, if the new
Society is to justify its existence. The process has been
quite simple. Some members of Young People’s Societies who
joined them in the early days of Christian Endeavour and
were young people then, have remained for as long as 20
years in the one Society, with the inevitable result—though in
some eases they remained young in heart—that the average age
of members steadily rose; and thus, though perhaps imper-
ceptibly, the gap between the Young People’s and Junior
Societies gradually became wider.
See page 35 (Graded Christian Endeavour 1 !.
The natural effect of this on Juniors was to influence them
to stay in their own Societies longer than they otherwise would
have done, thereby extending the range of age in that Society,
till Superintendents found themselves face to face with the
problem of providing, in the same meeting, for the needs of
members up to 18 years of age, and beginners of six and seven,
as well as planning suitable work for them.
The solution of this problem has been found in the Inter-
mediate Society, provided, of course, that there has been a
sufficient number of Juniors of suitable age to warrant the
formation of the third Society.
See page 16.
The Superintendent.
It has frequently happened, even after the need of an
Intermediate Society has been acknowledged, that its actual
formation has been deferred owing to the lack of workers.


But, just as in Junior Endeavour experience, the search for
the ideal Superintendent has usually ended in the acceptance,
as such, of the one nearest the ideal among those available, so
has it been in the quest for Intermediate leaders. In both
instances actual experience is one of the main factors in the
development of the worker; and it is unwise, when otherwise
ready, to long delay the formation, of a Society because the
best available leader is not in all respects ideal. Often, the
coming Superintendent is nearer at hand than appears to be
the case, and the opinion has been formed, and is growing
stronger, that the ideal Intermediate Superintendent is an
ardent Endeavourer not many years older than the Inter-
mediates themselves; and the Young People's Society which
sacrifices on the Intermediate altar the worker it cannot spare,
finds the sacrifice to be, in reality, an investment soon to yield
a return unhoped for, in the form of trained graduates to
replace the member set apart for this new service.
The Age Limit.
In the formation of an Intermediate Society the adoption of
an age limit for the membership is a very important matter.
There should be a recognised age at which Juniors are expected
to graduate into it, and another at which they are to move
further upward into the Young People’s Society. The varying
circumstances in different localities preclude the laying down
of a hard and fast rule for universal application; but it will
generally be found convenient for graduation into the Inter-
mediate Society to take place at the age of 12 to 14, and to
the Young People’s Society at IS or 19. Whatever be the age
limits decided upon by the Young People’s Society, they
should be adhered to with sincerity, so that young Endea-
vourers will come to regard this step upward as natural a move
as passing to the next size in shoes.
See papre 1 6.
Graduation.
(a) To the Intermediate Society.
Superintendents themselves are sometimes reluctant to
graduate Juniors at the proper time, on the ground that the
older Juniors are the best, and the Society cannot afford to
lose them. Nor is there any reason why it should, for the
Junior Society need not suffer appreciably if the best graduates
are placed on the Junior Committee (the Junior Superinten-
dent’s helpers), each one being behind the plans, and over-
seeing the work, of a separate Committee of Juniors, training
the conveners and helping members generally. So that gradua-
tion is really more likely to help the Junior Society than to
injure it.
See paste 26.


And not only so, but it will prove beneficial to the graduates
personally. For it will widen their sphere of usefulness in
Committee work so as to embrace both Societies, thus enrich-
ing their experience. And still further blessing awaits them
in the Intermediate Society in the form of suitable spiritual
food-more easily provided there than in the Junior Society
containing very young members—and facilities also for regular
participation in meetings with those of their own ago, involving
definite expression of their allegiance to Christ and readiness
to serve one another, by being the bearers of God’s messages
received during Bible study and prayer. These things com-
bined cannot but result in the development of Christian
character and the production of trained workers willing to
shoulder responsibility in the voluntary service of Christ and
the Church.
See 35 {Graded Christian Kndeuvuiir 1,
(b) To the Young People’s Society.
But graduation from the Intermediate Society at a uniform
age is,_ if anything, more important than graduation to it.
There is no other method of keeping the Intermediate Society
constitutionally sound, or in accord with the principles on
which it is based; no other way of maintaining the freshness
of this stream of young life, so that all the good things said
of it may continue to be true, than by restricting the mem-
bership to the ages for which the Society was formed.
If members are allowed to remain in it after they have
passed the maximum age the freshness of the adolescent period
will go; the facilities for, and encouragements to, participation
will decrease; and the average age will rise, till in a very few
years the Intermediate Society will have become, in fact,
exactly what the Young People’s Society was at its inception.
In other words, there will be, practically, two Young People’s
Societies in the same church, the one living at the expense of
the other. For the Young People’s Society, with its natural
intake from the Intermediate stream intercepted, cannot be
expected to retain that quality of tone which it had been
deriving from the buoyancy and enthusiasm of youth, but will
naturally deteriorate in this respect, just as a lake, under like
conditions, tends to become, first stagnant, then salt; and some
uncandid critic will come along and quote this Society as a
proof that Christian Endeavour is on the wane, instead of
being honest enough to admit that he has discovered another
instance of the danger of departing from the constitution which
is as sound and good to-day as it ever was, and the only
efficient safeguard against such declension and unfair criticism.
See pa (re s 32 and 3 5 ( Graded Christian Ktidpavour) .


CONSTITUTION..
Article I.—Name.
This Society shall be called “The
Intermediate Society of Christian Endeavour.”
Article ll.—-Object.
See Constitution of Y.P. Society, Article 11., page 11.
Article lll.—Membership.
The members shall consist of two classes. See Constitution
of Y.P. Society, Article 3 (Clauses 2 and 3), page 11.
ACTIVE MEMBER’S PLEDGE.
As endorsed by the National Council at Brisbane, 1935.
Trusting in the Lord Jesus Christ for strength, J promise
Him that I will strive to do whatever He would have me
do; that I will make it the rule of my life to pray and read
the Bible every day, to support the work and worship of
my own Church in every possible way; and that, so far as I
know how, throughout my whole life, I will endeavour to
lead a Christian life. As an Active Member, I promise to he
true to all my duties and to regularly attend the Meetings
of the Society, taking part, aside from singing, when asked
to do so.
Signature - -
ASSOCIATE MEMBER’S PLEDGE.
As an Associate Member, I promise to attend the Prayer
Meetings of the Society regularly, and declare my willing-
ness to do what I may be called upon io do as an Associate
Member to advance the interests of the Society.
Signature
Article IV.—Officers and Committees.
1. The Officers of the Society shall be a Superintendent,
and (if required) Assistant Superintendents, appointed by and
from the Young People’s Society (if one exists) otherwise by


the Minister; and a President, Vice-President, Secretary (or
Secretaries) and Treasurer, elected by the Intermediate Society
from among its active members as provided in Article 8 here-
under.
2, There shall be a Look-out Committee, a Prayer Meeting
Committee, a Social Committee, and such other Committees as
the local needs of the Society may require. There shall also
be an Executive Committee consisting of the Minister, Officers
and Conveners of Committees, Each Committee—except the
Executive—shall regularly report in writing to the Society,
monthly, if possible, concerning its work.
See also page 13-
Article V. —Duties of Officers.
1. Superintendent. —The Superintendent shall have special
watch over the interests of the Society, and it shall be his or
her care to see that the Officers and Committees perform the
duties devolving upon them, also to keep the Society in touch
with the Young People's Society, other Intermediate Societies,
the Local District C.E. Union, and the State C.E. Union.
2. President. —The President, or in his absence the Vice-
President, shall (under the guidance of the Superintendent)
conduct the business meetings of the Society,
3. Secretary. —See Constitution of Y.P, Society, Clauses 3
and 4 of Article 5, page 14.
4. Treasurer. —See Constitution of Y.P. Society, Article 5,
Clause 5, page 14.
Article VI,- —Duties of Commiltees-
-1 to 7. See Constitution of Y.P. Society, Article 6, Clauses
1 to 7, pages 14, 15.
8. Junior Committee. —This Committee shall assist in the
oversight of the work of the Committees of the Junior Society,
and shall work as one with the like Committee of the Young
People’s Society, the Superintendent of the Junior Society
being the Convener. It shall endeavour to encourage gradua-
tion as referred to in Article 10. See also page 34.
9 to 13. See Constitution of Y.P. Society, Article S, Clauses
10 to 14, pages 16 and 17.
Article VII. —Society Meetings.
1 to 4. See Constitution of Y.P. Society, Article 7, Clauses
1 to 4, page 17.
5. Business meetings may be held at the close of the
ordinary meeting, or at any other time at the call of the
Superintendent.


Article Vlll.—Elections.
See Constitution of Y.P. Society. Article 8, pane 18.
Article IX.—Relation to the Church.
This Society, being' a part of the Church, shall carry on its
work in harmony with the wishes of the governing Board of
the Church.
Article X. —Relation to the Junior and Young People’s
Societies.
This Society being, as its name implies, a connecting link
between the Junior and Young People’s Societies, it is expected
that as a rule Juniors attaining the age of 12 to 14 will
graduate into this Society, and that Intermediates, at the age
of 18 or 19, will graduate to the Young People’s Society. In
order to facilitate such graduation, the Executive Committees
of the respective Societies may arrange for occasional joint
meetings, and the reading of reports of one Society at the
business meeting of the others; and may adopt any other means
likely to promote the object in view.
See pages 1 fi miti (Cruder! Christian Kndeavout’).
Article XI. —Withdrawals.
See Constitution of Y.F. Society, Article 10, page 18.
Article Xll.—Expansion.
See Constitution of Y.P. Society, Article 11, page 18.
Article XIII.—By-laws.
See By-laws for the Young 1 People’s Society, pages 19-21.


PART IV.
THE SENIOR SOCIETY AND GRADED
CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOUR
By A. W. ROBERTS.
First Senior Society and Senior C.E. in Australia.
The first Senior Society in America was formed at Williston
Church, Portland, Maine, after Dr. Clark’s original Y.P. Society
had been in existence for some 20 years. In Australia progress
was slower still. The action of the Council of the National
C.E. Union of Australia and New Zealand at “Perth, 1928,”
however, in advocating- the formation of Senior Societies, and
appointing a Departmental Superintendent for this purpose,
inaugurated a new development in C.E. under the Southern
Cross.
It is beyond question that the absence of this Society has
had the effect of modifying the character of many Young
People’s Societies, so-called. The advisability of the formation
of Senior Societies is suggested to prudent pastors who desire
the maximum degree of efficiency in their churches. It would
enable them to keep the three existing Societies distinctively,
Junior, Intermediate, and Young People’s, and, in addition, to
vitalise, organise and utilise the continually increasing latent
forces of the elder section of the Church membership, which
are probably as great now as were those of the younger section
when Dr. Francis E. Clark received the inspiration to turn
them to account by inaugurating ihe first Young People’s
Society of Christian Endeavour.
See rases 5, IS and (Graded Christian Kndeavnnri
The Senior Society (to quote Mr. \\ r . Ncagle, first National
Senior Superintendent of Australia and New Zealand) may
be described as the mature fruit of the C.E. tree. In the
Junior stage it put forth green leaves of promise; in the Inter-
mediate stage, blossoms; in the Y'.P. stage, fruit; and in the
Senior stage, much fruit, mature fruit.
Formation of Senior Societies.
If only a few members can be spared from the Y.P. Society
to inaugurate the Senior Society in a Church, it will be found,
in most eases, that they, with their Pastor, will be able to
attract others who have had C.E. experience, but whose increas-
ing age, or business, or home duties have severed them from
the Y.P.S. Under wise pastoral leadership, the Senior members
will find ample scope for their activities without clashing with
those of the young people.


CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS.
The Constitution and By-laws of the Y.P. Society, as far as
applicable, may be adopted for Senior Societies, but some
clauses may require adjustment to fit in with the circumstances
of the older folk. Their weekly devotional meeting will
naturally be the Pastor’s existing prayer or fellowship meeting
or preaching service. If so, provision could doubtless be ma.de
for one of these to take the form of the Monthly Consecration
Meeting. In this connection, the adaptability of Christian
Endeavour to varying conditions will be realised and appre-
ciated. Provided this meeting and the Active Member's Pledge
be retained, any variations necessary to fit in with church
organisation and the business or home duties of members will
only help to meet the needs of the Church, and thus realise
the C.E. objective.
See pages 11 to 21.
Active Member’s Pledge.
The following is the Active Member’s Pledge of the Senior
C.E. Society, as endorsed by the National Council: —
Trusting in the Lord Jesus Christ for strength, I
promise Him that 1 will strive to do -whatever He would
have me do.
Recognising my responsibility as a Christian for sup-
porting the work and stated services of the Church, I
promise :
(1) To make it the ride of my life to attend the mid-
week prayer meeting of the Church, and to participate
therein, unless otherwise prevented by a reason which I
can conscientiously give to the Master;
(2) To co-operate with the minister in promoting the
Sunday sendees and, in other ways for the welfare of the
Church as he may desire; and
(3) To sympathise with, and aid as I may have oppor-
tunity, the younger Christian Endeavour Societies of the
Church.
Signature


GRADED CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOUR.
Development of the C.E. Movement.
The value of the Y.P.S.C.E., as delivered to the Church by
Dr. Francis E. Clark (on 2nd February, 1881), according to
the pattern showed him in the mount of prayer, has been
incalculable. The same may be said of the Junior Society,
which appeared some three years later, and which, in addition
to the sum total of effective service performed by the Juniors
while little children, has proved the main recruiting ground for
the Young People's Society.
The process of natural development during tho next few
years produced (in 1891) the Intermediate Society, also
invaluable, because, besides furnishing the Church and the
world with a renaissance of buoyant Christian enthusiasm, it
relieved both Junior and Y.P. Societies of a burden each was
carrying. The continually increasing average age in the latter
Society not only reduced the freshness of youth, which charac-
terised this Society during its first decades, hut also widened
the gap between it and the Junior Society, thus hindering
graduation.
With the formation of Senior Societies (the value of which
it would be difficult to estimate) the last bar to graduation
should be removed, and Y.P, members step up to the Senior
grade quite naturally, and the movement generally show
increased efficiency.
See page 33.
Graduation Services.
Forms of Service.
Annual Graduations, at regular Church services, should
soon become a feature of our Church life. Several special
services for this purpose have been published by the National
C.E, Union, and found in use to bo very impressive and very
helpful to all concerned. The use of some such service is
strongly recommended, after experience. They may be obtained
at the offices of the State Union in one pamphlet, entitled
“Christian Endeavour Graduation” (price Id.). Societies are
advised to choose the service regarded as most suitable for
local conditions, and keep a supply of pamphlets on hand for
these annual occasions.
In order to encourage graduation without injury to the
Society loft by graduates, each Y.P. Society should have an
Intermediate Committee, and each Intermediate Society a
Junior Committee, with the respective Superintendents as
convenors, to assist with the oversight of the Committees of


the younger Society. With regard to graduation frorn the
Y.P.S., our limited experience in Australia seems to indicate
that this should be effected not on account of age only, but
with due regard to the best interests of both Societies. In one
case age may be the determining factor; in another, home or
business duties; in others, the special needs at the time of
one or other of the Societies in question.
See pages 3G, 25, and Si.
For example, the graduation of a prominent Y.P. worker in
one church may deprive the other members of a valued leader
at a time when leaders are scarce, while, in another case, it
may prove just what is necessary to enable the other young
people to develop their own abilities and resources.
The Graded Society.
In a Church in which the graduation principle is thus work-
ing, the C.E. Movement will be seen to have produced Young
People’s, Junior, Intermediate, and Senior Societies of Christian
Endeavour, each with its separate constitution, following a
development in that Church. All, however, being built to one
pattern, form one Society, of four grades, just as they, with
other organisations, form but one Church. This truth is gradu-
ally being recognised, to an increasing extent, to the advantage
of each section, the Graded Society, the whole Church, and
the kingdom of Christ.
See pages 2, 22, 27. 3S.
If this he illustrated by regarding Christian Endeavour as
the hand of Christ— to do what He would have us do—lf will
at once be apparent how Dr. Clark’s ideal may be realised, viz,,
the pastor always in touch with all his people. For, as in the
human hand the blood is one, the controlling will is one, the
fingers— designed for united service— bend toward the thumb,
act with it, and all bend toward the palm, suggesting unity
and co-operation, so the several grades of the C.E. Society,
having but one Source of Life, exist for the same purpose, bend
toward the pastor (if constitutional), and they and he are
moved by one will -the will of Christ, Whose hand they are.
Each grade may be used, apart from the others, in touch
with pastor, or all may act in combination. Each has its plans
for realising, in its own sphere, the aims of Christ and the
Church, for which also the pastor stands; but all are firmly
based on the one platform of principles, and produce not the
results of rival organisations, hut a cumulative impact on the
forces opposing the kingdom of Christ.
Similarly, the hand may serve to illustrate Dr. Clark’s idea
of C.E. as the Pastor's Aid Society, the thumb representing the


pastor-president and each finger a committee. Again, it may
represent the C.E, Committee idea, the thumb being the
convener, and each finger a member.
In each case the representation implies life— expressed in
service, concerted action —for one purpose, and it helps us to
understand our interdependence. No member, no committee,
no grade, liveth to one’s self, but eacb for tbe others, and all
for Christ.
See pHffefi 3 ami \
Pastor’s Council.
To maintain this spirit of unity, the Senior and Young
People’s Vice-Presidents, with Intermediate and Junior Super-
intendents, might Constitute a Pastor’s Council, for advice and
co-ordination, but not to direct their respective members, who
should remain free to work out their respective plans with the
talents given them of God, and the enthusiasm imparted by
the Holy Spirit, in pursuance of His purpose— the exaltation
of tbeir Lord and Master, Jesus Christ.
CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOUR ALUMNI
FELLOWSHIP
Many Endeavourerg, having passed through the C.E. Society
into more or less responsible positions in the Church, or in
public life generally, have felt a desire to continue in some
form of fellowship which would enable them to retain, even to
a limited extent, their connection with the Movement which
counted for so much in the days when their characters were
being formed.
To this end the Christian Endeavour Alumni Fellowship was
established, with the specific object of “uniting in fellowship
those who are no longer Active Members of Endeavour Socie-
ties, but who desire to align themselves with those who are in
the work, and to stand behind the programme of Christian
Endeavour, to provide means for acquaintance and continued
friendship for those who have, in many cases, worked together
in former years, to maintain among the Alumni an interest in
the present programme of Christian Endeavour throughout
their National and State Unions; to acquaint the members of
the fellowship with the world-wide interests of the movement.”
Further information in regard to this fellowship of C.E. gradu-
ates will gladly he given by secretaries of National and State
C.E. Unions.


The Society of Christian Endeavour.
PLATFORM OF PRINCIPLES
First. —Persona I devotion to our Divine Lord and Saviour,
Jesus Christ, and acceptance of the Bible, the inspired Word
of God, as the only rule of faith and practice.
Second. —The covenant obligation embodied in the prayer
meeting- pledge, without which there can be no true Society of
Christian Endeavour.
Third. — Constant religious training for all kinds of service
involved in the various Committees, which—as many of them
as are needed—are. equally with the prayer meeting, essential
to a Society of Christian Endeavour.
Fourth. — Loyalty to the local Church and denomination
with which each Society is connected. This loyalty is plainly
expressed in the pledge; it underlies the whole idea of the
movement, and, as statistics prove and ministers testify, is very
generally exemplified in the lives of the active members.
Fifth.— interdenominational fellowship, through which vve
hope, with increasing confidence, not for organic unity, but for
the fulfilment of our Lord’s prayer —“That they all may he
one.”
Sixth. —Christian citizenship. Christian Endeavour stands
always and everywhere for temperance, for law, for order, for
a pure political atmosphere—in a word, for righteousness. And
this it does, not by allying itself with a political party', but by
attempting, through the quick consciousness of its individual
members, to permeate and influence all parties and all com-
munities.
Seventh. —Lord's Day observance. The Society' of Christian
Endeavour stands always and everywhere for the preservation
of the Lord’s Day, and is unalterably opposed to all forms of
its desecration.
Eighth. Loyalty to Denominational Missions- That all
moneys gathered by a Society of Christian Endeavour for the
cause of missions be sent to the missionary department of
the denomination to which the particular Society' belongs.
Ninth. —That financial appeals to Christian Endeavour
officers and societies should come through their ministers and


the officers of their Churches. Also, that the causes to which
the Societies give should be thus approved by the denominations
to which the Societies respectively belong.
Tenth.—The ultimate aim of Christian Endeavour is the
evangelisation of the world for Christ. Hence it is an organisa-
tion intensely evangelistic and missionary in its spirit, and
desires to do all it may, under the direction of the Church and
missionary societies, for missionary extension the world around.
Eleventh. The Christian Endeavour Unions National,
State, and District—have no legislative functions and levy no
taxes, preferring rather to depend, for their income, on the
voluntary offerings of Societies and friends of Christian Endea-
vour. They confine themselves to promoting inspiration and
fellowship, and disseminating information, recognising that
Societies should be under the untrammelled control of their
Churches.


National Publications
By the Publications Department of the National C.E.
Union of Australia and New Zealand.
Available from State C.E. Offices.
The National Handbook (Standard Text Book
for Efficiency Classes) 6d.
What It Is and How It Works (Dr. F. E. Clark) 3d.
Intermediate Leadership (E. H. Beaney) 2d.
Junior Society of C.E. (Miss E. M. Loader) 2d.
The Tenth Legion (R. Kitchen) 2d.
World Youth and C.E. (Melvin) 3d.
Youth on the March (Dr. Dan. Poling) 2d.
Modern Youth and the Church (Rev. Lionel
Fletcher) 2d.
Aims and Objects of C.E. 3/!
Senior Society of C.E.
Quiet Hour Catechism
C.E. the Training Ground
Tenth Legion Leaflets and Pledge j
Cards
Anti-Gambling Leaflets and Pledge
Cards J
On Application


Spectator Publishing Cos., Printers
134 a Little Collins St., Melbourne
