

'TU^Wg^^'J
tek
THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE
N.S.W. TRAFFIC ROUTE LIGHTING SUBSIDY SCHEME
H.J. Turner B.Sc. M.E. MIEE.
School of Traffic Engineering, University of New South Wales
j
This is the subject of a paper presented at the National
Road Safety Symposium, Canberra, March 1972.
What follows sets down some of the main points from
that paper. It outlines the results of a study of
accidents on roads which have been relighted under
the provisions of the Subsidy Scheme. It indicates a
29 per cent reduction in night time casualty accidents.
Cost-benefit estimates suggest a ratio of 3: 1 or more
between the cost of accidents saved and the cost of
lighting.


THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE N.S.W.
TRAFFIC ROUTE LIGHTING SUBSIDY SCHEME
H.J. Turner B.Sc. M.E. MIEE.
School of Traffic Engineering University of New South Wales
Public Lighting as an Amenity
Expenditure on public lighting is for the
purpose of providing an amenity for a com-
munity which wishes to be out and about after
dark. By "amenity" is meant safety as well as
comfort and pleasantness in the environment.
Safety includes discouragement of the robber
and the footpad; but, most important, it includes
safety for road traffic.
The Subsidy Scheme
From 1964, the N.S.W. Government has
subsidised Local Government Councils for the
lighting of principal roads in urban areas. At the
time of this writing about 600 miles of lighting
are operative under the Scheme and a further
200 miles are approved for installation. Plans
for the immediate future are in preparation.
The Scheme is administered by the
Electricity Authority of N.S.W.; its technical
basis is "The S.A.A. Streetlighting Code" pub-
lished by the Standards Association of Australia
in 1964.
Lighting schemes requested by Local
Government Councils are prepared by Electricity
County Councils. These are examined in detail
by the Technical staff of the Electricity
Authority and overviewed by a committee com-
prised of senior officers of that Authority and
advisers from outside.
A valuable by-product of the operation of
the Scheme is the technical interchange of infor-
mation between the Authority and County
Councils. From the start, the specialists of the
metropolitan County Councils have made im-
portant contributions; expertise has now built
up among the engineers of other Councils for
whom lighting is but one of their responsibilities.
Measures of Effectiveness of Public Lighting
That the objective of providing a public
amenity, in its broad sense, is being achieved, is
becoming evident to those who walk or drive on
the principal thoroughfares of the cities and
towns of New South Wales.
But it is not possible to "measure" these
general benefits in any conventional way. How-
ever, the unfortunate events we know as road
traffic accidents may be counted and classified
and analysis of this information gives a basis
upon which benefits of safety may be measured.
Road Accident Data and Lighting
It is well established that night accident
rates, taking into account road usage, are at least
double those for the daytime. Thus it is to be
expected that improvements in road lighting will
give a pay-off.
The purpose of the study to be described
was to investigate whether the joint enterprise
between the State and Local Government
Councils the N.S.W. Traffic Route Lighting
Subsidy Scheme has produced the pay-off
which was expected when it was first proposed
in the early 1960'5.
To examine the benefits of public lighting,
treated as an accident countermeasure, it is
necessary to obtain accident numbers for roads
with improved lighting. The numbers in a two-
year period before the relighting are compared
with the numbers in a two-year period after. Be-
cause of the changes in traffic that will occur in
four years it is necessary to apply control data.
For this purpose the corresponding numbers of
accidents in daytime are used. Thus the actual
comparison made is between the ratios of: night
accidents/day accidents in the "before" and the
"after" two-year periods.
It is necessary to apply statistical tests to
the information to ensure that the observed
changes in night accident rates did not occur
merely by chance. These tests showed that the
likelihood of this being so was very small indeed.
Thus it is possible to assert with a high degree of
confidence that the numbers of accidents that
would have occurred without the lighting im-
provements is greater than the numbers which
actually did occur. Hence "reductions" in acci-
dent numbers resulting from the installation of
the lighting may be established.
Analysis of accident data relating to
sections of particular roads is an expensive and
time-consuming exercise. It is necessary to
use large numbers of accidents and to select suit-
able roads but without biassing the selection
in the direction of a hoped-for result. For these
reasons the study was confined to 64 miles of
relighted roads in the Sydney area.-data of 5,448
night accidents and 10,425 day accidents were
examined.


Reductions in Night Accident Rates
Analysis of the accident information makes
it possible to state confidently that the improve-
ments in lighting following the introduction of
the Subsidy Scheme are responsible for the
reductions in night accident rates tabulated
below.
Class of Accidents Percentage Reduction
All reported accidents 21
Accidents which
resulted in one or more
people being injured or
killed 29
Accidents which
resulted in one or more
people being injured
or killed but ex-
cluding pedestrians 21
Accidents resulting
in injuries or fatalities
to one or more
pedestrians 57
As explained, these figures are derived from
information about accidents in the Sydney area.
It is reasonable to suppose, however, that they
will be generally applicable, since the habits of
drivers, the effects of lighting on them, the
nature of roads and vehicles and the accident
risks involved, are much the same everywhere.
This is borne out by the fact that the results
bear a marked similarity to those obtained from
comparable studies carried out in Britain and
other countries overseas.
The Costs
Assessments have been made of the cost of
road accidents to a community. Using a recent
Australian study of accident costs carried out by
A.J. Thorpe, Member, Country Roads Board,
Victoria, it is estimated that the cost of the acci-
dents "saved" in the present study would be
$1.89 million over a two-year period.
The total of the annual charges payable for
the new lighting of the roads included in the
study are estimated as $0,503 million over a
two-year period. If this total annual charge
figure may be regarded as a "community cost"
of lighting, it may be set against a "community
cost saving" of $1.89 million on accidents.
The accident cost figures are actually
understated. Many would doubt that a money
value can be placed on pain and suffering; never-
theless courts and insurers attempt to do this. If
the payments made under this heading are
added, the accident cost figure increases by over
14 per cent. Furthermore, the accident cost data
are based on combined totals of night and day
accidents, whereas it is known that night acci-
dents are more severe and so more costly than
day accidents. If taken into account, these two
factors would further increase the stated $1.89
million saving on accidents.
It is tempting to continue with a calculat-
ion of the "return on investment" in public
lighting. However, the writer prefers to look
upon the "return" from public funds invested in
this way, not in terms of monetary gain, but in
terms of a better and safer environment for
night-time living this cannot be measured in
dollars.
The elected representative in Local Govern-
ment may reasonably ask: "We invest a certain
amount each year in public lighting; what is the
return for my community?" The return to his
particular Local Government area cannot be
segregated. In these times the public works of
any one community are of benefit to everyone;
the motor car has made neighbours of us all.
Acknowledgements
Studies like this one cannot be made without
much help from others. The Author is grateful for the
assistance of colleagues at the University of New South
Wales, from the Department of Motor Transport N.S.W.,
the Sydney, Prospect and St. George County Councils
and from his fellow members of the Public Lighting
Committee of the Electricity Authority of N.S.W.


Published in the public interest by
The Electricity Authority Of New South Wales
C. 2428
KE
