

THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
PETHERICK COLLECTION.
No. 4 of 1911.
An Act relating to the Petherick Collection >
[Assented to 26th October, 1911.]
WHEREAS by the Petherick Agreement a library of books,
pamphlets, plates, maps, and manuscripts illustrative of
the geography and history of the Australian States New Zealand
and other island groups of the South Seas and known as the
“ Petherick Collection’" was transferred to the Commonwealth upon
the terms and conditions therein set out :
And whereas the Petherick Collection is now deposited in
the Library of the Parliament of the Commonwealth and the
said agreement is deposited with the Librarian of the said
Parliament :
And whereas by the said agreement it is provided that the agree-
ment shall not be binding until approved of by the Parliament of
the Commonwealth by resolution or otherwise :
And whereas it is desirable to approve of the said agreement:
Be it therefore enacted by the King’s Most Excellent Majesty, the
Senate, and the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of
Australia, as follows ;
1. This Act may be cited as the Petherick Collection Act 1911. 1
2. In this Act, the Petherick Agreement means the two
Indentures of Agreement relating to the Petherick Collection which
are described in the Schedule.
3, The Petherick Agreement is hereby approved.
THE SCHEDULE.
>'.16440


THE SCHEDULE.
An Indenture of Agreement dated the fourth day of November, One thousand
nine hundred and nine, between Edward Augustus Petherick. late of Streatham, in
the County of London, Colonial Literary Agent, residing in Melbourne, in the State
of Victoria, in the Commonwealth of Australia, and Mary Agatha Petherick, of
Melbourne, aforesaid, wife of the said Edward Augustus Petherick, of the one part,
and the Honorable Sir Albert John Gould, President of the Senate and Chairman
of the Library Committee of the Parliament of the Commonwealth, in the agree-
ment acting for and on behalf of and with the intent to bind the Commonwealth
and not so as to incur or come under any personal liability, of the other part.
An Indenture of Agreement dated the ninth day of November, One thousand
nine hundred and nine, between the said Edward Augustus Petherick and the said
Mary Agatha Petherick of the first part, the said Sir Albert John Gould of the
second part, and the Honorable Patrick McMahon Glynn, Attorney-General of
the Commonwealth of Australia for and on behalf of the said Commonwealth, of the
third part.
3


This Indenture made the fourth day of November One thousand nine hundred
and nine between Edward Augustus Pbthbrick late of Streatham in the
County of London Colonial Literary Agent now residing in Melbourne in the
State of Victoria in the Commonwealth of Australia and Mary Agatha
Pbthbrick of Melbourne aforesaid wife of the said Edward Augustus
Petherick of the one part and The Honorable Sir Albert John Gould
President of the Senate of the Parliament of the said Commonwealth of
Australia and Chairman of the Library Committee of the said Parliament
(herein acting for and on behalf of and with the intent to bind the said
Commonwealth of Australia and not so as to incur or come under any
personal liability in respect of these presents) of the other part:
Whereas the said Edward Augustus Petherick has during many years acquired
from time to time and brought together a large number of books pamphlets plates
maps and manuscripts illustrative of the geography and history of the Australian
States New Zealand and other island gi’oups of the South Seas forming the library
known as the “ Petherick Collection ” which said collection is now deposited in the
Parliament House at Melbourne aforesaid and includes all the papers and articles
so deposited in the said Parliament House
And Whereas the said Mary Agatha Petherick has assisted the said Edward
Augustus Petherick in preserving the said Collection and bringing the same to
Melbourne
And Whereas the said Edward Augustus Petherick and Mary Agatha
Petherick are desirous that the said Collection shall not be dispersed but shall be
and remain available for the use of the people of the Commonwealth for
purposes of reference especially by students and scholars and shall form portion of
an Historical Museum of Australasia and Polynesia
And Whereas the said Edward Augustus Petherick is further desirous of being
employed by the said Library Committee upon or in connexion with the said
Collection and such other duties and responsibilities as the Library Committee shall
direct
Now this Indenture Witnesskth that the said Edward Augustus Petherick
and Mary Agatha Petherick in consideration of the premises and for the con-
siderations hereinafter appearing do and each of them doth hereby assign transfer and
convey to the Commonwealth of Australia all the right title or interest which they
or either of them may have or possess or be entitled to in each and all of the said
books pamphlets plates maps and manuscripts and other articles now deposited as
aforesaid in the Parliament House at Melbourne and forming the said “Petherick
Collection ” to hold the same unto the Commonwealth of Australia absolutely
And this Indenture Further Witnesseth that the said Edward Augustus
Petherick doth hereby covenant and agree with and to the said Commonwealth
of Australia that the said Edward Augustus Petherick shall and will at all times
hereafter unless prevented therefrom by physical or mental incapacity perform
such duties and accept such responsibilities upon or in connexion with the said
“Petherick Collection” or the Library of the Parliament as the said Library
Committee shall from time to time direct and that they the said Edward Augustus
Petherick and Mary Agatha Petherick have good right and title to assign
transfer and convey the said collection to the Commonwealth free of all claims
and charges
And this Indenture Further Witnesseth that in consideration of the
premises the said Sir Albert John Gould doth hereby for and on bohalf of the
Commonwealth of Australia as aforesaid covenant and agree with the said Edward
Augustus Petherick and the said Mary Agatha Petherick that the said the Com-
monwealth of Australia shall so long as the said Edward Augustus Petherick shall
be physically and mentally capable and shall faithfully perform the duties allotted
to him by the said Library Committee employ the said Edward Augustus
Petherick upon or in connexion with the said “Petherick Collection ’ or the
Library of the Parliament with the title of Archivist
And this Indenture Further Witnesseth that in consideration of the
assignment hereinbefore contained and of any services which may be performed by
the said Edward Augustus Petherick (if any) the said Sir Albert John Gould
doth hereby for and on behalf of the said Commonwealth covenant and agree with
the said Edward Augustus Petherick that the said Commonwealth of Australia
shall from and after the first day of June One thousand nine hundred and nine
pay to the said Edward Augustus Petherick during the life of the said
Edwahp
No. 4.
Petherick Collection.
1911.


Edward Augustus Petherick an annuity or yearly sum of Five hundred pounds
(£500) payable by equal monthly payments on or about the last day of each month
the first three.of such monthly payments having been paid in advance to the said
Edward Augustus Petherick on the eleventh day of June One thousand nine
hundred and nine and the next monthly payment hereunder being due on or about
the thirtieth day of September One thousand nine hundred and nine and such
annuity shall be payable whether the said Edward Augustus Petherick continues
capable of performing the duties mentioned or not
And this Indenture Lastly Witnesskth and it is hereby agreed and declared
between the parties hereto :
(1) That although the said “ Petherick Collection ”is hereby transferred to the
Commonwealth to form portion of an Historical Museum of Australasia and
Polynesia, the said “ Petherick Collection ” is and shall be the property of
the Commonwealth absolutely and may be dealt with as the Commonwealth
by its Executive Council may from time to time think fit.
(2) That this agreement shall not be binding until approved of by the Parliament
of the Commonwealth by resolution or otherwise.
In Witness Whereof the parties hereto have hereunto set their hands and seals
the day and year first above-mentioned.
Signed Sealed and Delivered by the said!
Edward Augustus Petherick in the
presence of—
Henry G. Turner, J.P.,
St. Kilda. j
Signed Sealed and Delivered by the said
Mary Agatha Petherick in the presence
of-
Jacob Mark, J.P.,
450 Little Collins-street, Melbourne. j
Signed Sealed and Delivered by the said i
Sir Albert John Gould in the presence
of—
Arthur Wadsworth,
Librarian, Federal Parliament,
(Sgd.)
EDWARD AUGUSTUS
PETHERICK. {us.)
(iSgd.)
MARY AGATHA PETHERICK.
(L.S.)
(Sgd,) A. J. GOULD, (1.5.)
This Indenture made the ninth day of November One thousand nine hundred and
nine between Edward Augustus Petherick late of Streatham in the County
of London Colonial Literary Agent now residing in Melbourne in the State of
Victoria in the Commonwealth of Australia and Mary Agatha Petherick of
Melbourne aforesaid wife of the said Edward Augustus Petherick of the first
part The Honorable Sir Albert John Gould President of the Senate of the
Parliament of the said Commonwealth of Australia and Chairman of the
Library Committee of the said Parliament of the second part and the Honor-
able Patrick McMahon Glynn Attorney-General of the Commonwealth of
Australia for and on behalf of the said Commonwealth of the third part
Whereas it was agreed by the parties hereto of the first and second parts that
certain books pamphlets plates maps and manuscripts illustrative of the geography
and history of the Australian States New Zealand and other island groups of the
South Seas forming the Library known as the Petherick Collection” should be
assigned transferred and conveyed by the said parties of the first part to the
Commonwealth of Australia upon the terms and conditions and for the considerations
more particularly set forth in an Indenture made the fourth day of November One
thousand nine hundred and nine between the said parties of the first and second
parts (hereinafter called the said Indenture)
And Whereas before the execution of the said Indenture by the parties of the
first part a certain Deed Poll (hereinafter called the said Deed of Gift) entitled
“ Deed of Gift to the Commonwealth of Australia of an Australasian and Polynesian
Library” and purporting to convey the said Petherick Collection as a gift to the said
The Honorable Sir Albert John Gould K.B. V.D. for ever for the use of the people
of the Commonwealth was inadvertently executed by the said Edward Augustus
Petherick
And
191 L
Petherick Collection.
No. 4,


And Whereas the said The Honorable Sir Albert John Gould has so far as he
lawfully can disclaimed repudiated and refused to accept the gift purporting to be
contained in the said Deed of Gift
And Whereas the parties hereto are desirous of preventing any doubts ai'ising as
to the ownership of the said Petherick Collection or the terms upon which the said
Petherick Collection is acquired and held by the Commonwealth
Now This Indenture Witnesseth that the said parties hereto of the first and
second parts do and each of them doth hereby confirm the said Indenture and declare
that the terms and conditions upon which it was agreed that the said Petherick
Collection should be conveyed by the parties of the first part and acquired by the
Commonwealth of Australia are contained in the said Indenture and not in the said
Deed of Gift and that it was at all material times intended by the said parties of the
first and second parts that the said Indenture should be the operative instrument by
which the property in the said Petherick Collection should pass from the parties of
the first part
And This Indenture Further Witnesseth that the said The Honorable Sir
Albert John Gould doth hereby assign transfer and convey to the Commonwealth of
Australia all right title or interest in the said Petherick Collection (if any) which he
may have acquired in the said Petherick Collection by reason of the execution by
the said Edward Augustus Petherick of the said Deed of Gift in the manner
aforesaid.
In Witness Whereoe the parties hereto have hereunto set their hands and seals
the day and year first above-mentioned.
Signed Sealed and Delivered by the said
Edward Augustus Petherick in the
presence of—
A. H. Collis,
Officer of Parliament, Melbourne.
Signed Sealed and Delivered by the said
Mary Agatha Petherick in the presence
of-
A. H. Collis,
Officer of Parliament, Melbourne.
Signed Sealed and Delivered by the said
The Honorable Sir Albert John Gould
in the presence of — J-
Arthur Wadsworth,
Librarian, Federal Parliament.
.Signed Sealed and Delivered by the said
The Honorable Patrick McMahon
Glynn in the presence of—
R. R. Garran,
Secretary, Attorney-General's Dept. j
(Sgd.) EDWD. A. PETHERICK (1.5.)
(Sgd.)
MARY AGATHA PETHERICK
(L.S.)
(Sgd.) A. J. GOULD. (L.s.)
(Sgd.) P. McM. GLYNN, (ls.)
Printed and Published for the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia
by J. Kemp, Government Printer for the State of Victoria.
1911.
Petherick Collection.
No. 4.






