





THE DEAD WHICH AEE BLESSED,
A SERMON
PREACHED IN THE
CHUECH OF ST. THOMAS, WILLOUGHBY,
N.S.W.
On SUNDAY, 2nd MARCH, 1856,
THE DAY AFTER THE FUNERAL
OF THE LATE
Rear-Admiral PHILIP PARKER KING, M.C.
W. B. CLARKE, M.A
Of Jesus College, Cambridge.
Formerly Incumbent of Long fleet, Dorsetshire, and one of the Domestic
Chaplains of the late Lord Bishop of Salisbury ; now Incumbent of
Willoughby.
printed bg particular desire, for pribate distribution
onlg.
SYDNEY:
JOSEPH COOK & CO., “ CHURCH PRESS,”
OPPOSITE THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
1856.




ADVERTISEMENT.
M 3 155/F
It is due to myself to state, that the following sermon is printed (as the
title-page declares) for private distribution only ; at the earnest request of
the family of the late Admiral King and at their own charges. lam too
well aware of its imperfections to have hazarded its publication, notwith-
standing others of my congregation also desired it. But I do not feel at
liberty to deny the relatives of one, to whom I was so strongly attached,
and whose loss I so deeply deplore, compliance with a request, which is
unselfish, and which is connected with the hope that (however hastily com-
posed on the evening before it was delivered, after my return from the
funeral, and under the influence of indisposition, without time to correct
or to mature my own intention) the following pages may contain here and
there, what may prove a “ word spoken in due season ” to such as need it.
I have not considered myself justified in re-arranging or altering this
discourse, being aware, that the only interest it has excited rests in the
fact, that it was not a studied but an unpremeditated expression of feeling
towards the memory of a deeply regretted friend, as well as an honest appeal
to the congregation to which I have ministered since 1846, and of which
that friend was a distinguished member.
The only matter I have added is contained in the footnotes ; the extracts
from the newspapers, which form the Appendix, having been supplied by
a friend. It has been thought advisable to give a few particulars of the
life of Admiral King, and in order to make the extracts authentic, a
few corrections have been introduced.
I have only to add my sincere hope, that the blessing of God may
attend these pages, and, also, my hearty request, that the readers of them
will be charitable enough to take the proceeding explanation as an exten-
uation of the presumption of giving even this publication to so hurried a
performance.
Parsonage, St. Leonard's , W. B. C.
2 oth March, 1856.




A SERMON.
Rev, xiv. 13.
“ I heard a voice from Heaven saying unto me, Write, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth : Yea,
saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and
their works do follow them.”
There are some things in themselves so striking and of such
universal interest to mankind, that they may properly be con-
sidered as the especial acts of God directed to the furtherance of
His own designs for the correction, or for the salvation of the
world. This is true of the greater calamities which befall a
nation or a community, such as war and famine and pestilence,
that slay their thousands in a day. But, it is not less true of
the more common accidents of life. Every thing, in short, that
is capable of being employed in the education of the human soul
for the enjoyment of a blissful eternity, is an especial act of
divine grace and favour ; and thus, the ordinary deaths of Chris-
tians may be considered as means of encouragement to the
righteous, as well as of warning to the wicked.
But, when death comes without his usual notice of sickness
and sorrow, the example is so much the more important and
valuable. In the suddenness and violence of the blow we see
the certainty of his aim, and the unsparing fulfilment of the


universal doom “Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou
return .” But, we also see, in the case of the Christian, God’s
mercy to the individual as well as His justice to the world at
large. The suddenness of the blow is the method taken to
transport, at once, the believer to his rest; for “ Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord” And doubly blessed, if they are
spared the pains and alarms and distresses that often mark the
path of those that are called upon to “ walk ” —that is, to pass
gradually—“ through the valley of the shadow of death” They
leap at once, to blessedness, who, in an instant cast off the
“ tabernacle of the flesh,” and “enter,” with a bound, “into
the joy of their Lord.” And yet, brethren, who is there among
us, that, when he thinks of himself, will not join heart and soul
in the affecting supplication of the Litany? “ from sudden
death, good Lord deliver us.”
But why ? Why do we pray against sudden death ? I have known
one* who prayed for it and whose prayer was answered.
Perhaps, few men have such faith as that—or, it may have been,
such fear. The answer is obvious. Sudden death hath some-
thing terrible about it; for, it is, too often, death unexpected—
death unprepared for, and such, no doubt, is the meaning to be
attached to our supplication— “from unexpected , unprepared-for-
death, good Lord deliver us !”
But, they who “ die in the Lord,” however sudden he their
call, are not unprepared. They meet death not as an unexpec-
ted foe, hut as a welcome friend who comes to dislodge the soul
* The Rev. B. Wainewright, M. A., whom I followed to the grave, and
succeeded in the Curacy of Brantham, Suffolk, in the year 1823, left his
residence at Bast Bergholt in health, and drove to Colchester, where in
the course of the day he fell dead. He had frequently expressed his
desire, that he might be suddenly taken.


from its tenement of clay, and to clothe it with the “ house that
is from heaven ,” that “ mortality may he swallowed up of life.”
(2 Cor. V. 2,4.) The dissolution of “ the earthly house of
their tabernacle ,” sets them free to enter into the presence of the
Redeemer, clad in the garment of His spotless righteousness*
It becomes us not, therefore, in any given case that may
occur, to form hasty conclusions as to'which of the results, —
whether to a state of endless joy, or to one of endless misery—a
sudden death, or death unexpected by us as regards the departed,
may have introduced him. Our Lord Himself has taught us
this by the pen of the evangelist St. Luke, recording, as he does,
in the second lesson for this morning’st service, the true applica-
tion which should he made of the striking calamities of life.
“ There were present at that season some that told him of the
Galilceans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacri-
* The language of the “judicious Hooker,’’ on this subject seems
to he so right and scriptural, that a quotation from it may not here be out
of place :
“ Our good or evil state after death dependeth most upon the quality of
our lives. Yet somewhat there is, why a virtuous mind should rather
wish to depart this world with a kind of tractable disposition, than
to be suddenly cut off in a moment; rather to be taken, than to be
snatched away from the face of the earth.”. To such as judge
things according to the sense of natural men and ascend no higher,
suddenness, because it shorteneth their grief, should in reason be
most acceptable.”.... “ Quick riddance out of life is often both re-
quested and bestowed as a benefit.” “ Our prayer against it im-
parteth a two-fold desire, first, that death when it cometh may give
us some convenient respite ; or secondly, if it be desired us of God,
yet we may have wisdom to provide always before hand, that those
evils overtake us not, which death unexpected doth use to bring upon
careless men ; and that, although it he sudden in itself, nevertheless,
in regard of our prepared minds, it may not he sudden, — Eccles.
Polity, lib, 5, § 46.
f 2nd March.


fees. And Jesus answering said unto them, suppose ye that
these Galilceans were sinners above all the Galileeans, because
they suffered such things. I tell you, Nay : but except ye re-
pent, ye shall all likewise perish. Or those eighteen, upon
whom the tower in Siloam fell, and slew them, think ye that
they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem. I
tell you, Nay : but except ye repent ye shall all likewise
perish .” (St. Luke, xiu. 1-5.)
It might be, that, of those Galiheans, or of the eighteen in
Siloam, all, if any, were not sinners in an especial sense at all.
They might have been all righteous, for any thing we know to
the contrary. But the warning which their fate afforded is
this, —that Repentance is necessary, if we are sinners, lest a
similar fate befall ourselves.
Again, what says the Apostle Paul, in contemplation of any
kind of death, sudden or otherwise, that might await him ?
sudden, and violent, in truth his was.
“ / am now ready to be offered and the time of my departure is at
hand. — (2 Tim. iv, 6.)
“ Yea and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your
faith, I joy and rejoice with you all, for the same cause also
do ye joy and rejoice with me. — (u Phil. 17, 18.)
And what says St. Peter ? “ Knowing that shortly I must put
off this my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath
shewed me. — (2 Peter i, 14.)
Neither of these great martyrs knew the moment of his death ;
but each knew, that his death would come as it had been predic-
ted —that it would be violent and sudden—that it would be
painful; and yet the disciples were to see therein a subject for


rejoicing, whatever might be the conclusions of the heathen
We cannot doubt, that, if such had been the counsel of God,
the fate of the Galiheans slain by Pilate, or of the eighteen in
Siloam, would have been as great a cause of rejoicing to Paul and
Peter, as was the axe of the headsman to the one, and the cross
inverted to the other. The violence and suddenness of the
means by which all these were taken to their account, might be
interpreted of all, as well as of any (if such interpretation were
but just,) as signs of God's displeasure; whereas, we know,
so far as the Apostles were concerned, these were their crown
of martyrdom and triumph.
“ According to ray earnest expectation and my hope, that in
nothing I shall be ashamed, hut that with all boldness, as always,
so now Christ shall he magnified in my body, whether it be by
life or death. For to me to live is Christ, and xo die is gain.
For lam in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to
depart and to be with Christ which is better. (1. Phil.
20,21, 23.)
“ We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from
the body and to be present with the Lord. —(2. Cor. V. 8.)
All this was written in the consciousness of a violent and
sudden death.
As there are few such instances on record as those of Ananias
and Sapphira, it is not our province to determine the fate of that
man in judgement, or to pronounce him unprepared, whom it
may please God to summon in an instant from time to eternity.
Nay, I would go further. I would remind you, brethren, that
all deaths are, in one sense, sudden. Those who have watched
long by the bedside of a dying friend, who have assiduously
week after week, attended him in patience and weariness, —who


have seen what could not he postponed—who have waited, hour
by hour, for the approach of the unerring messenger,—have felt,
that when, at last, the fatal arrow has struck home, —when the
“ silver cord ” has be en “ loosed,” and “ the pitcher” has been
“ broken at the fountain,”—even then, after days and nights of
gradual progress, death’s coming is most sudden. For the mo-
ment (the less than a moment) has arrived, when, as instantly
as by the bullet of the rifleman, or by the knife of the assassin,
the last enemy dpeth his certain work. When, then, in the
course of God’s Providence such events arise, as strike us with
amazement and regret, let us not mistake their real import.
They are, merely, the more forcible and convincing modes by
which God giveth us gracious warnings.
Impressed by the idea, that all men die, we are apt to look
on Death with inconsiderateness and unconcern, because the
frequent occurrence has made us carelessly familiar with his
presence. But, when we see one of high degree—one whom all
men have agreed to honour,—one to whom society has been
proud to offer homage,—the man of honourable ambition, mental
superiority and refined accomplishments,—whom many have
envied and all have more or less admired, not dying the common
death of all men, but conspicuously, in manner, occasion and
place then, I say, the warning becomes emphatic and cannot
fail to be recognised. And, thus, it sometimes pleases Provi.
dence to make the fate of the lofty a lesson of wisdom for the
lowly, and to teach by the suddenness of the call at evening or
at midnight, that it will be too late, if our oil has not been
already purchased, and our lamps have not been trimmed, to
think of preparation, when the guests that are ready have
entered into the marriage chamber and the door is shut. Such
events are sent to instil into our minds by practical example—what


the Lord has taught us by parables in the pages of the Gospel,
the always needful precept, so long as we inhabit the house of
clay “ Watch, therefore, for ye know not what hour your
Lord doth come. — (Matt. xxrv. 42.)...“ neither the day nor the
hour when the Son of Man cometh.” — (Matt. xxv. 13.)
We have, for instance, been shocked by the relation of an
accident that occurred a few nights ago upon the Rail-road, how
a man unknown, unseen, unthought of, was dismembered, be.
headed, and torn in pieces by the carriage travelling in the
darkness; and opinions have been uttered, that this poor
sufferer must, of necessity (though conjectural only) have been
sleeping in a fit of drowsy drunkenness, and that so he paid the
penalty for such transgression, or for an ungodly life by a
fearful and sudden death. But dreadful as that fate has been,
it will, perhaps, for moral good, have no effect beyond the circle
of his own acquaintance. The busy travellers who frequent
that road will whirl along as carelessly as ever, and hundreds*
day by day, will fly across the marked his end without
the thought, that their individual souls are travelling faster than
their bodies to the terminus that must be reached at last.
There is a moral and a warning for them all; but they saw not,
and knew not the subject of it, —and so it passes from their
minds unheeded. And thus, day by day, they travel on their
way regardless of the possible contingency, that there may be also
brought upon themselves “ a swift destruction
We are, unfortunately, so hardened by habit, that such events
as these pass “ like a tale that is told,” and though intended to
warn, they excite little more than the uncharitable and unkind sug-
gestion — it is a judgment on the sufferer. And so we go on, un-
mindful that in the death of such nameless victim, there is, to
the eye of faith, a lesson sent by the Great Teacher to our indi-


vidual hearts, —a solemn summons to repentance, —a knocking
at the door of conscience for the entrance of His Holy Spirit.
“ Behold I stand at the door and knock : if any man hear my
voice and open the door I will come in to him, and will sup with
him and he with me.” — (Rev. m. 20.) By indifference to the
voice of God, we put away from us thousands and ten thousands
of such warnings, as in His wisdom and mercy He scatters
around, like leaves of the forest shaken down by the summer
breezes, as well as by the winter storms : “ Wisdom crieth with-
out, the uttereth her voice in the streets : she crieth in the chief
place of concourse, in the openings of the gates; in the city she
uttereth her words, saying, How long, ye simple ones will ye love
simplicity ? and the seorners delight in their scorning, and fools
hate knowledge .”—(Pnov. I. 20, 23.)
Happy, brethren, for us, if, when the warning comes nearer
and assumes a shape which we can recognise, we are, at last,
enabled to listen to Wisdom’s cry,—“ Whoso hearkeneth unto me
shall dwell safely, and shall he quiet from fear of evil” —
(Pkov. i. 33.)
Let me speak of such a warning,—one that has come to our
very doors, one that only yesterday was renewed as “ the
mourners went about the streets,” and as he was taken to his
“ long home,” whose fame is written in the annals of the land,
who was an office-bearer * in this very congregation, and with
whom “we took sweet counsel together and walked unto the house
of God in company — (Ps. lv. 14.) If we have neglected to
profit by more distant illustrations of the destiny of man, let us
not turn away from this ; for he, “ being dead, yet speaketh,”
although in death he spake not.
Admiral King had been a Churchwarden since Easter 1854.


Last Monday was a bright and pleasant day. On that morn-
ing, our departed brother left his home in unwonted cheerfulnes
(for, as you well know, his health was shattered,) and passed the
day in the enjoyment of social discourse, and in more than com-
mon freedom from his bodily infirmities. Towards evening, he
went on hoard the Juno fiigate ; and a record of that visit shows,
that he had carefully abstained from all excess of diet, and had
departed for this shore about ten minutes after eight o’clock,
having gratified his friends on board by his apparently improved
condition of health, and by the intelligence and varied nature of
the converse he had held. The boat had reached the ship again
a few minutes before nine o’clock : therefore, it is probable,
the attendant who had accompanied the Admiral to his gate
left him there, after his last “ Good Night,” at about forty
minutes after eight. In a few minutes more he was discovered
prostrate and unconscious at the gate of the dwelling, where his
wife awaited his return in patient expectation.
How solemn and affecting now appears that evening walk, —
his last on earth ! Scarcely had his attendant taken leave, when
the unseen spiritual hand that was upon him, struck him down,
closing his mortal eye for ever, but setting open the windows of
his soul, that he might see the land beyond the grave. From
half-past nine till half-past two next morning, when the last
pulse of life was felt, I watched beside his bed, and can declare,
that, during all that interval, there was no recognition of the
unwearied care, his son and wife and medical attendants showed,
no sign of consciousness—therefore, no evidence of pain,—and
thus, his death, though breathing and pulsation lasted for five
mournful hours, was in truth, a sudden death, yet one, by the
mercy of the summons, as we may, I think, justly conclude,
deprived of mental suffering, or of the knowledge of the struggle


by which his bodily powers were tried. This, I repeat, was
a sudden death ; but observe, what I must add, it was not an
unexpected nor an unprepared for end.
It is not the business of the Ministers of the Gospel to convert
the pulpit into the place of adulation ; nor would it be discreet
or appropriate to make laudation of the dead the subject of dis-
course. Yet, were it in my nature to flatter any one, living or
dead, on this occasion, though a friendship and intimacy of
nearly seventeen years, have shown me the bright side of his
character, and if I would I could say much in honour of his
memory, there is no necessity to call up many recollections of
his worth and kindness *; for the public acknowledgement of
yesterday,f spoke plainer and louder than I could speak, were
not my voice weakened as it is by temporary illness, and by per-
haps, an involuntary emotion. But, if I speak at all, it is my
duty to speak truthfully, and it is no flattery, brethren, —no un-
meaning eulogy, to express my firm conviction, that this sudden
death was not an unexpected death by him who suffered it.
It may be readily supposed, that there were other motives
besides what is common to persons of congenial tastes and simi-
lar pursuits, to cause me to have scrutinized our brother’s pri-
vate conduct. Apart from the charms of scientific discourse, I
have, in my ministerial career, had other interests inducing me
♦ I must not however, omit in this place to record my gratitude for
the unwearied care with which he corresponded with me during my length-
ened explorations in the interior during the years 1851, 1852, and 1853
constantly comparing my observations and checking my results, thus as-
sisting me by patient devotion to the work in which I was engaged for the
advantage of the colony, encouraging me in the midst of difficulties, and at
the close of my labours, offering useful voluntary testimony to my humble
services, not alone in his capacity as a man of science, but as a member of
the Legislature.
f See appendix, No. 3.


to study his personal character; and I can state, that he has
illustiated my opinion, that no man who is a Christian, whatever
may be his inclination,—whatever may be his tastes,—can reflect
upon the vanity of all earthly studies, and on the unsatisfactory
results of all earthly enquiries, without having some higher and
more ennobling ambition, than temporal honors and distinctions
can reward.
The man who has spent more than half-a-century in labours
for the benefit of his fellow men, whose whole career bears tes-
timony to his constant activity in the behalf of public good,—who
in spite of failing health and sight weakened in his country’s
service, has resolutely persevered as a man of science, as a Le-
gislator, and as a Christian in the path of social duty, who has
trained a large family in habits of morality and usefulness, and
placed them in respectable positions of life,—who has uniformly
been found on the side of religion, and in advocating the educa-
tion of others in the principles of the Gospel, and the last act of
whose career, was the endeavour to promote the establishment
of a school which has the character of the next generation of
colonists in view—may well be supposed, though not neglecting
his favourite studies, or the objects of the profession in which he
so long had served his Sovereign, to have gazed beyond the stars,
and to have looked for that new world, in which there shall be
“ no more sea.”
Defects of patience there may have been at times, —for who
is perfect ?—but defects of disposition as a Christian philosopher
cannot be rightly charged against him. I know that his senti-
ments as regarded himself, were often those of the antient servants
of God ; and he has uttered language in the silence of his closet,
which might be paraphrased in the words of Job—“ I have sin-
ned, what shall Ido unto Thee, 0 thou preserver of man ? and


why dost thou not pardon my iniquity , and take away my trans-
gression ? —and, literally did lie in liis death fulfil the present!*
xnent of the afflicted Patriarch —“ Now shall I sleep in the dust,
and thou shalt seek me in the morning, hut I shall not he ” —
(Job. vii. 20). In the dust, he', literally, slept. Literally, in
the morning he was not Now, I hold it to be my duty,
brethren, to point out to you, that, though, thus dying, he
made no sign,’ - ' —though he was unable to listen to the prayer
which was made beside his bed in the midst of his beloved ones—
he did not depart, till he had given proof of the earnestness of
his endeavours to make his peace with God.
On the last occasion of our meeting at the Holy Communion,
I had the plainest evidence that he entered deeply into the
meaning of that affecting rite, and I feel assured, that his re-
ception of the sacred elements, betokened his full persuasion of
the efficacy of the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ
to take away sin, and to preserve his body and soul unto
everlasting life. Not once, but often times, of late, have those
whom he knew not to be near, heard him in secret, as he thought,
after they had retired to rest, pouring out his soul to heaven for
pardon of all past transgressions, and beseeching a preparation
for the change which he confessed to be approaching. And in
a book of a devotional cast, which was, of late, continually in his
hands, his frequent memoranda show the earnest way in which
he was employed with God.
There is, then,' every reason to conclude, that, if our departed
brother was wise in the wisdom of men, he was not ignorant of
that “ Wisdom that is from above f— (James hi. 17.) and which
descendeth upon the believer’s soul, —that the defects of eaily
youth had been made up by the advances of more ripened and
reflecting age, and that, though he had made for himself a name


amongst the children of men, lie was yet anxious to walk, as
“ a babe in Christ,'\a\ong “ the narrow way that leadeth unto life .”
—He had not, amidst his earthly learning forgotten some of the
chief characteristics of the heavenly wisdom ; for, he was “pure,"
he was “full of mercy and good fruits," —he was “ without
partiality, without hypocrisy .” It was this latter qualification
which made him shy in conversation on religious topics, and it
was the dread of deceiving himself or others, that caused him to
confine his expression of sentiments to choice occasions, and to
select communications. Surely, I think, we may believe, that
lie who has been heard in secret, unreservedly, in faith and re-
pentance, appealing unto God, and praying for preparation
through the Holy Spirit, in the name of Jesus Christ, and who
has when health allowed, “professed a good profession before
many witnesses ,” —(i. Tim. vi. 12,) could not have been “far
from the Kingdom of God.”
If then, his death was sudden, it was not unexpected—nor was
it without fitting preparation. If, in mercy, the All-hountiful
spared him the consciousness of bodily suffering, let us, brethren,
be equally charitable, and believe that he might have been one
of those of whom the voice from heaven commanded the Evan-
gelist to “ Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.”
Were he living he would, no doubt, condemn as too highly
coloured this sketch of his Christian character; but, lam sure,
I only express, in outline, that which his own family, with fuller
experience, can confirm.
He, brethren, rests, as we hope, with his Redeemer—we, for
a while, tarry behind. His death was given to us in warning, if
not for our encouragement, let us, therefore, in conclusion take
it to ourselves.


The text declares, that “ the dead which die in the Lord arc
blessed.” We are not apt to associate blessedness with death,
and were it not for what follows, dreary and gloomy enough
would be even the death of the believer ; for “ if in this life only we
have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable,” —
(1 Con. xv. 19.) The voice from heaven heard by the Apostle
John, clears up all doubt on the subject. Whatever may have been
their lot in life, whether in slavery or in freedom, —in poverty
or in affluence, —in affliction or in joy,—“ blessed” are they in
death, if so be they “ die in the Lord”
And what is meant by this expression, is plainly declared in
the preceeding verse:—“ Here is the patience of the saints : here
are they that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of
Jesus.” — (Rev. xiv. 12.)
It is clear, therefore, that those who “ die in the Lord ” must
be such as have lived in Him ; and this is confirmed by St. Paul
in Gal. n. 20. “I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I
live : yet not I, hut Christ liveth in me: and the life which I now
live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God who loved
me and gave Himself for me.”
It is not merely to profess that we believe, but it is to obey
through the power of the Spirit vouchsafed unto us. When, then,
“ the Voice from heaven” proclaims—“ Blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord ” —He means to say, blessed are they,
who, living by faith in the Son of God, who loved them and gave
Himself for them, so live even unto the end. For the promise “He
that endureth to the end shall be saved” (Matt. x. 22.) is par-
alleled by the exhortation—“ he thou faithful unto death, and I
will give thee the crown of life.” (Rev. n. 10.) Thus, St. Paul
explained to the Romans, that “ none of us liveth to himself, and
no man dieth to himself. For whether we live, we live unto the


Lord: and whether we die, we die unto the Lord : whether we
live therefore, or die, we are the Lord’s ; for to this end Christ
both died and rose and revived that He might be Lord both of
the dead and living. —(xiv. 7,9.) We come, then, to this con-
clusion, that to insure a blessed death we must live a holy life.
Examine yourselves, then, on this point, brethren, and see
what is your own hope of realizing this blessedness, should God
be pleased to call you suddenly from this mortal state.
Consider, next, how solemnly the object of this holy dying
is announced to us : “ Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest
from their labours .” Elsewhere, the Scripture proves, that
“ there remaineth a rest for the people of God.” (Heb. iv. 9.)
But, from what are they to rest ? Not assuredly from the
blessedness that is before them, but in that blessedness, from the
labours and trials which they have left below. They are to rest
from sin, for they have shaken off “ the lusts that war in our
members they have been set free from that condition which
St. Paul declares is even experienced by the redeemed, whilst on
earth: “ I delight in the law of God after the inward man: Bub
/ see another law in my members , warring against the law
of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin
which is in my members .”— (Rom. vii. 22, 23.)
They rest therefore, from their temptations also. They are
no longer “in heaviness on account of them.” They are no
longer fearful, lest they should not realize the assurance that
they “ should count it all joy when they fall into divers temp-
tations:' (Jas. i. 2) Because they have kept the word of
“ patience ,” they are now “ kept from the hour of temptation .”
(Rev. iii. 10.) It can vex them no more.


They rest, too, from doubts and misgivings, and fears of every
kind. Especially, they rest from labours and occupations whe-
ther of mind or of body. They rest from the reproaches and
sarcasms and reviliugs of the enemies of Goo. T hey rest from
weariness and watchfulness; from sorrow and sufferings ; from
the loss of possessions and the loss of friends; from sickness
and accidents, and from death itself. For them the grave hath
no more terror ; —they have entered it in peace. Death hath
no more sting—the grave hath no more victory. They are “ more
than conquerors through Him that loved them.' There are no
more partings from their kindred ; —no more farewells to those,
of whom the prophet speaks : “ Weep not for the dead, neither
lemoan him. But weep sore for him that goelh away ; for he
shall return no more to see his native country (Jer. xxii. 10.)
Yea, brethren: there is rest from all that troubles rest —
repose in the everlasting arms, —sleep that shall know a joyous
waking in the land where all that has made life on earth vexa-
tious, shall be forgotten. This is the description of their rest by
the Spirit that declares them blessed: “ They shall hunger no
more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun light
on them, nor any heat. For the Lamb which is in the midst of
the throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living
fountains of waters : and God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes.” — (Rev. iii. 16, 17.)
Surely, brethren, this is enough ! But, no ! one thing more
remains, —“ and their works do follow them.” Not works of self
righteousness, networks done to merit reward, but works which are
the fruit of faith, and “ which are pleasing unto God for Christ's
dear sake’ ; works that shall be the evidence of faith in His un-
changing word; —works which shall follow them to the judgment
seat, and there proclaim their right to the tree of life, and to


entrance through the gates into the eternal city: (Rev. xxii, 14,)
works, that shall be welcomed in the face of the assembled
universe —“ well done , good and faithful servant, enter thou into
the joy of thy Lord” (Matt. xxv. 21.)
All such works, the fruits of faith in Him that “ worketh in
us to will and to do of His own good pleasure,” shall follow the
** dead which die in the Lord ” as the witnesses of adoption; for,
they were wrought under the influence of the promise—“ they
shall never perish , neither shall any man pluck them out of my
hand” —Job. x. 21.) and as such, they will be acknowledged
and accepted. Thus, then, for every tear of genuine repentance ;
for every sigh wrung from the heart in moments of self-examin-
ation for offences against God ; for every prayer of faith, uttered
in the silence of the closet, when the door is shut, and it may be
thought no eye but His who seeth in secret is upon the worshipper,
(Mat. vi. 6;) —for every act done to a brother, done to a
stranger, even if it be the giving of a cup of cold water in the
name of a disciple, “ verily , I say unto you,” declares the
judge of man, “he shall in no wise lose his reward. —(Mat.
x. 42.)
Brethren, I speak no more of him who has gone before us, to
this test of life and death. But, I speak to you. —If you admit
this exposition of our text, what, let me ask, is the evidence
which you possess as to its application to yourselves. Remember,
you are also mortal. The life that you now lead in the flesh,
is either the life that will be followed by a blessed death, or,
dreadful alternative, by that death of body and soul from which
there is no deliverance.
Flatter not yourselves with the idea, that your death may not
be sudden. Who of us here present can say, whether, when
he next walks amidst the silent shades of evening, there may not


be whispered in his ear, “ this night thy soul shall be required
of thee?” What, if you be taken at an hour when you are not
aware, thrown speechless and powerless in the dust, deprived of
sense and motion ? Will you, then, by the records of a life of
purity, piety and constancy, by the works of faith and love to
God and Christ, that shall follow you into the eternal world,
be able to add another to the company of the redeemed, of
whom the “ Voice from heaven” proclaims,—“ Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord ?”
Delude not yourselves with the idea either of a death-bed
repentance, or of a conversion in the hour of nature’s extremity;
for the thief upon the cross is no type of any but of those who,
the moment they are called and convinced, repent and believe,
and who live, so long as life shall last, by faith in the Son of
God. May the Lord, dear brethren, be gracious to us all! May
he teach us, by the examples of daily mortality, and especially
by that solemn warning which we of this congregation have
received, that, unless we live in the Lord we cannot die in Him,
and that all our labours in prayer and praise, and in the endea-
vour to exhibit a specious religion before men, will in that case,
be not reckoned among the works that will follow us to ever-
lasting rest.
This you have heard a hundred times by the hearing of the
natural ear. May it please God, however, for the sake of His
beloved Son to engraft it in your hearts by faith, and to enable
you not to be “ slothful” in your heavenly calling, but to be
“followers of them who through faith and patience, inherit the
promises. — (Her. \t. 12.)


APPENDIX No. I.
Extract from “ The Empire” Newspaper, February 27 th, 1856.
DEATH OF REAR-ADMIRAL KING, F.R.S., F.L.S., M.L.C.
Universally throughout Australia, the announcement of the sudden
death of Philip Parker King, Rear-Admiral of the Blue, but more
generally known as Captain King, will be received with feelings of the
deepest sorrow particularly by those who had the happiness to enjoy his
personal acquaintance. For a few weeks past he had been, we understand,
somewhat depressed in spirits, though in usually good health. Latterly,
however, he had recovered, and on Monday evening last dined on hoard
H. M.’s Ship Juno, now lying in Port Jackson, in company with Captain
Freemantle, H. M.’s Ship Juno, Captain Denham, H. M.’s Ship Herald,
also now in Port Jackson, and Sir Charles Nicholson, Speaker of the
Legislative Council. Having a few months ago sustained a stroke of
apoplexy he was carefully abstemious, lest he might provoke a recurrence
of the attack. However, while on board, he deported himself with great
cheerfulness; and when leaving made no mention of suffering the
slightest illness, nor did it appear to his friends that he had any occasion
to do so. On reaching the North Shore, he proceeded homewards on foot;
but on arriving in front of his residence, and while in the act of opening
the gate he fell down in an apoplectic fit. In this alarming condition
he was almost immediately discovered, and carried into the house, when
he was placed in bed—medical and spiritual assistance being instantly


sent for. The usu%l appliances to avert fatal consequences, and resusci-
tate the sufferer in such cases, were had recourse to, but we regret to say,
they all proved unavailing, and in a few hours after being seized, the
gallant officer, the warm hearted parent, the firm friend, the devoted
student of science and the benefactor of mankind, breathed his last.
Admiral King has left a widow, and a numerous and deeply attached
family to mourn his loss. Mrs. King is the daughter of the late
Christopher Lethbridge, Esq., of Launceston, county of Cornwall,
England, of which place the father of the lately deceased was also
a native.
Admiral King was the son of Philip Gidley King, Esq., Post Captain
in the Royal Navy, who from the ability he exhibited in the
settlement of Norfolk Island, was appointed to succeed Captain Hunter in
the Government of New South Wales, and who accordingly assumed
the position of Governor in the month of September, 1800, on the
departure of Governor Hunter for England. The subject of this memoir
was born at Norfolk Island, on the 13th of December, 1791, and was
consequently in the sixty-fifth year of his age. In early life, when only
in his sixteenth year, his gallant conduct in boat actions had obtained
the favourable notice of the officers in command. In later years he
conducted a survey of the coasts of Australia; and subsequently of the
southern coasts of America. In the advancement of science, particularly
in those departments calculated, in their developement, to be of advantage
to the mariner, Admiral King always, and almost to his latest hour,
took a deep and active interest; and to every effort, and every object of a
scientific nature he cordially gave the benefit of his extensive, varied, and
practically-acquired knowledge, and of his means to the utmost of
his ability.
To a recently-published and valuable work of Naval Biographies we
are indebted for the following particulars of the career of the deceased: —
“Philip Parker King entered the Navy in November, 1807, as a
first-class volunteer, on board the Diana, frigate, Captain Charles Grant;
whose first lieutenant the late Captain R. H. Barclay, he well supported
in an attack made by the ship’s boats in 1808 upon a French convoy
passing between Nantes and Rochefort On the night of the 2nd of
December, 1809, he was again noticed for his gallantry in the boats
under Lieutenant Daniel Miller at the cutting out of three schuyts,
moored to the shore of Odenskirk and provided with heavy ordnance.
On the 18th May, he obtained the rank of Midshipman; and in 1810
he proceeded as master’s mate of the Hibernia, 110, Captain John
Chambers White, to the Mediterranean, where he followed the latter


officer in the Centaur, 74; and in August 1811, joined the Cumberland ,
74, Captains Robert Walter Otway and Thomas Barker. Towards the
close of the same year he was received on board of the Adamant, 50,
flag-ship at Leith of Admiral William Albany Otway. After he had
again served for 18 months with Captain Grant in the Armada, 74, on
the Mediterranean station, he was thence in January 1814, transferred to
the Caledonia, 120, flag-ship of Sir Edward Pellew, through whom he
was promoted, 28th February following, to a Lieutenancy in the Trident,
64, guard-ship at Malta, bearing the flag of Rear-Admiral Langhorne.
He next, from July 1814, to July, 1815, served on board the Elizabeth,
74, Captain Edward Leveson Gower, flag-ship, part of the time, of
Rear-Admiral Charles Elphinstone Fleming, at Gibraltar, and in
February, 1817, he was entrusted with the conduct of an expedition,
having for its objects a survey of the coasts of Australia, a service on
which he continued employed in the Mermaid, cutter, and Bathurst,
sloop (to the command whereof he was promoted by commission, dated
17th July, 1821,) until his return to England, in 1823. The results of
the undertaking are contained in a narrative of the survey of the inter-
tropical and western coasts of Australia, and in an Atlas, both compiled
by Captain King, and published, the former by Murray, and the latter by
the Hydrographical Office, at the Admiralty. In September, 1825, from
the feeling of confidence with which he had impressed the Admiralty,
in the discharge of his late duties, he was appointed to the Adventure ,
sloop, and ordered to survey the southern coast of America, from the
entrance of the Rio Plata, round to Chiloe, and of Tierra del Fuego.
He was paid off on his arrival in England, 16th November, 1830, and has
not been since employed. His Post-commission bears date, 25th
February, 1830.
In 1832, Captain King published as the partial fruit of his recent
voyage, a volume entitled “Sailing Directions to the Coasts of Eastern and
Western Patagonia, including the Straits of Magalhaen, and the Sea-Coast
of Tierra del Fuego,” and, in conjunction with Captain Robert Fitz Roy,
R. N. (his colleague in command of the Beagle ,) published a work entitled
“ The Voyages of the Adventure and Beagle,” with an Atlas. Besides
being a F.R.S. and a F.L.S., Captain King is a Member of the Royal
Asiatic Society of London and a corresponding Member of the Zoological
Society.”
On his retirement from active service, Captain King returned to
Australia, and shortly after his arrival succeeded Colonel Dumaresq as
manager of the affairs of the Australian Agricultural Society, the duties
of which office he discharged with characteristic and exemplary ability
and attention for several years. He was appointed a nominee member of
the Legislative Council by Governor Sir George Gipps ; but latterly he


held his seat in the House in the more honorable capacity of a representa-
tive member, having at the general elections of 1851 offered himself as a
candidate for the constituency of Gloucester and Macquarie.
As an elective member he was, when his health permitted, generally
regular in his attendance ; and both in the House and in the numerous
committees on which he was appointed, took an active part in the business
under consideration. During the last session in Council he strongly suppor-
ted in particular the proposition for the establishment of a Nautical School;
so decidedly was he in favour of this benevolent object, that it was his
intention to be*present and address the public meeting to be held respecting
it to-day in the Victoria Theatre. For some time past he held the office
of Chairman of the Denominational Board of Education, and was
consequently regarded as the representative of that body in the
Council.
In September or October last, Captain King was promoted to the rank
of Retired Rear-Admiral of the Blue, but it was not till about the
middle of last month that he received intelligence of his advancement.
His was the first instance of a native of Australia rising to so distinguished
a rank in the British Navy, and every one must feel a deep regret that
his enjoyment of the honour was for so brief a period.
Both in public and in private life Admiral King merited, as he
obtained the cordial regard and high respect of all to whom he was known
whether personally or by repute.
Thus has Australia within a few months had to deplore the loss of two
of the illustrious sons of science who have adorned her history—the late
Sir Thomas Mitchell who explored her far interior, and Admiral King,
who surveyed her wide-extending coasts.
No. 2
Extract from “ The Sydney Morning Herald February 27th, 1856.
It was we believe, about the year 1831, that Captain King returned to
New South Wales, with the purpose of settling here. Immediately after
the publication of his sailing directions to the coasts of Eastern and
and Western Patagonia, we find Captain King devoting the leisure he
could command from the rural pursuits in which he engaged, to assist in
examining every questionable point, and recording every useful fact in
respect to the navigation of the coast line of Australasia. The passage
within the reefs, or inner route, through Torres Straits had been one to
which he had devoted unceasing care : and in a Calendar and Directory


published under the conduct of the late Mr. Raymond, then Postmaster-
General, Captain King published in 1833 his description of the
coast; and in 1834, his directions for the inner passage through these,
then supposed, dangerous Straits. From that period until the latest
moment that his impaired health would permit him to take part in any
correspondence which might arise on the subject of this navigation, he
readily gave his valuable advice founded upon his personal knowledge of
the practabilities of the Straits.
No. 3.
Extract from the “ Empire” of 3rd March, 1856.
FUNERAL OF THE LATE REAR-ADMIRAL KING.
Thb obsequies of the lately deceased and lamented Rear-Admiral Philip
Parker King, F.R.S., F.L.S., &c., took place on Saturday last. As it was,
understood to be the desire of the family that the funeral should be of as
private a nature as possible, there was but a small attendance, and
those present consisted principally, besides officials, of gentlemen related
to the deceased, and others with whom he had been on terms of
close and friendly intimacy.
The ceremony commenced at eight o’clock when the coffin was
removed from the residence of the deceased at Grantham, St. Leonards,
and carried alternately by six petty officers belonging to H.M.S. Juno,
and a like number belonging to H.M.S. Herald, to Milson’s Point
where it was placed in a barge of the Juno, on a platform prepared for the
purpose. The coffin which was covered with a Union Jack, and upon
which were placed the hat, epaulettes, and sword of the deceased was
preceded by the Rev. W. B. Clarke who attended in the double capacity
of Minister of the parish of Willoughby and friend, and by the Rev. G. F,
Macarthur who was a nephew of the deceased. It was followed by the
Rev. Robert King and Mr. Frederick King, sons of the Admiral, by
Mr. Philip King his grandson, by Copland Lethbridge, Esq., brother-in-
law, and by other relatives; as well as by Captain Fremantle, H.M.S.
Juno, Captain Denham, H.M.S. Herald, several other officers, and a few
of the residents at North Shore.
At a quarter past eight o’clock the barge containing the coffin, and in the
stern sheets of which were seated the mourners, was taken in tow by the
pinnace of the Juno, which was rowed by twelve seamen; Captain
Fremantle and Captain Denham followed. At the bow of the barge was
hoisted half mast, the blue flag of a Rear- Admiral, and the other boats, nine
in number, containing the officers of H.M.’s vessels of war in the port


also carried half high blue pendants at the bow and blue ensigns
at the stern At Fort Macquarie the Union Jack was displayed half
mast high ; and in a similar manner the captains ofvarious ships—British,
French, American, Dutch, &c., in harbour paid the usual naval tribute
of respect to the memory of the deceased.
On the procession leaving the North Shore the Juno and Herald
commenced firing alternately a Rear-Admiral’s funeral salute of twenty-two
minute guns, at an interval of half a minute between each gun, and
which continued until the barge reached the Circular Quay. When the
boats arrived amongst the vessels in the Cove, their funeral appearance, and
that of the shipping, the measured strokes of the rowers, the firing of
the minute guns, the drizzling rain, and two loud peals of thunder,
produced upon the minds of the assemblage on the Quay, a solemn and
impressive effect.
At eight o’clock Colonel Bloomfield, the other officers, the soldiers and
the band of the Xlth Regiment arrived at the Circular Quay. The
soldiers were drawn up in line and extending up Macquarie—place on
each side of the middle landing steps. In a few minutes afterwards his
Excellency the Governor-General arrived on foot, attended by his
aide-de-camp and orderlies. At the landing-place there were also present
the Lord Bishop of Sydney, his Honor the Chief Justice, Archdeacon
M'Encroe, Sir Charles Nicholson, the Attorney-General, Colonel
Barney, Captain Ward, (in military uniform) Lieutenant Sadlier,
Professor Woolley, Dr. Mitchell, Captain Moriarty, Captain Browne,
Immigration Agent; Captain Towns, Captain Sparkes, Captain Darley
Messrs, J. Stirling, Thomas Icely, Thomas Barker, John Campbell,
William Macpherson, &c.
At a quarter to nine o’clock the procession arrived at the middle
landing steps of the Circular Quay, and on the cofin being placed on
shore, his Excellency the Governor-General and other gentlemen present,
respectfully uncovered. Six of the petty officers of the Juno having lifted
the coffin on their shoulders, the procession moved to the hearse at the
head of the military lines. The Rev. W. B. Clarke and the Rev. G. F.
Macarthur preceded the coffin,w hich was followed by the chief mourners,
his Excellency the Governor-General, the Lord Bishop of Sydney,
Colonel Bloomfield, Captain Fremantle, Captain Denham, &c. During the
procession the band played a funeral march, while eleven minute guns were
fired from Fort Macquarie. On the coffin being placed in the hearse,
the hat, epaulettes, and sword ofthe deceased, and the Union Jack, by which
it was covered, were removed. The hearse, proceeded by the mutes, then
started for the Railway Station. The military remained stationary for a
few minutes, and afterwards left for Paddington Barracks. On the hearse


arriving at Bridge-street, his Excellency the Governor-General left for
Government House. The other gentlemen present, having entered their
carriages, followed along Bridge-street, George-street, and Parramatta-
street, to the Railway Station. On the procession passing along Parra-
matta-street, a solemn toll came from the bell of Christ Church.
The hearse arrived at the Railway Station shortly before 10 o’clock, and
h'as thence conveyed by rail to Paramatta, being accompanied by the Rev.
\V . B. Clarke, who returned immediately by the train to Sydney ; by the
Rev. G. F. Macarthur, who proceeded to South Creek and by the chief
mourners. At Paramatta several of the inhabitants, among whom were
Messrs. George Oakes, William Byrnes, James Byrnes, Messrs. Williams,
Watkins and Weaver, and the tutors and pupils of the King’s School, were
waiting at the station; and on the hearse being removed and proceeding,
to South Creek, they followed in procession as far as the toll-bar on the
P enrith-road. •
On arriving at St. Mary’s, the hearse was met by a number of the in-
habitants of the disirict, who, having formed in procession, followed it to
the cemetery, where, after the usual religious service, by the Rev. R. L.
King, assisted by the Rev. G. F. Macarthur, the coffin containing the
body was lowered into the family vault
Such was the high estimation in which the late Rear-Admiral King was
held, that many to whom he had been personally known, who attended the
ceremonies of Saturday last, were evidently deeply moved ; several being
unable wholly to restrain the expression of their feelings, in paying the funeral
tributes of respect to the remains of one who had rendered his country
such signal service, and whose private life was adorned by many unosten-
tatious benevolent and virtuous deeds.
Joseph Cook and Co., “ Church Press/’ George-street.










■-/ ■* * v 4 .’, ■ 4 fi- -#,>'•.V-* vs
