

THE
AUSTRALIAN NATIVES
Tragedy and Romance
by
SIR JOHN HARRIS
A Group of Aboriginal Children
The Anti-Slavery and Aborigines Protection Society
51 Denison House, Vauxhall Bridge Road, London, S.W.I


THE AUSTRALIAN NATIVES
Tragedy and Romance
By
SIR JOHN HARRIS
Within the last twenty-five or thirty years, a remarkable change has
taken place in the attitude of Australian public opinion and the Australian
Governments towards the aboriginal inhabitants of the Continent. It
would be difficult to find another instance of such a rapid rise of a primitive
people, from a position of inferiority, neglect and contempt to one of real
national concern. This striking change has been effected chiefly because,
at long last, the real merits and capacities of the aborigines have been
brought home to the knowledge and conscience of the Australian people.
The story of the progressive colonization of the great Australian Con-
tinent, from 1788 onwards, is everywhere a story of tragedy for the weak
and defenceless aborigines. It is painful reading—but not altogether
surprising. With slavery rampant in the West Indian and Southern
Colonies of North America, the average colonists from England, Scotland
and Ireland could hardly be expected to take with them to far-off Australia
any enlightened views about any kind of blackfellow. Dampier, the
first Englishman to set foot in New Holland, had left on record his opinion
that the natives of Australia were the lowest race on earth. He had had
only brief and unkind dealings with them—nevertheless, his judgment
was widely accepted by those who wrote and spoke two hundred years
later about the infant Colony of New South Wales. Large numbers of
natives were, in fact, ruthlessly swept away before the advancing white
man. So widespread was the practice of shooting or otherwise destroying
the natives that in 1838 the Governor of New South Wales issued a
proclamation forbidding indiscriminate slaughter. A generation later, the
traveller, De Beauvoir, met a young pioneer in Queensland possessing two
rifles with sixty-five notches on them. Each notch represented a native
whom he had shot. And so the work of destruction still went on in hidden
places.
The result of all this ‘ ‘ liquidation ’ ’ has been the reduction of the
native population—estimated as probably 1,000,000 at the first coming
of the white man—to some 60,000 in the present day.
It is true, of course, that all along there have been human-hearted
men and women in all ranks of life, who protested against this inhumanity,
and who, in their own dealings were kind and friendly to the natives. The
list of such includes explorers, governors, judges, magistrates, pioneers,
settlers, station-owners, farmers, even stockmen, shepherds and gold-
seekers. The Missions carried on by the different Churches of course had


an ameliorating influence, but they were only found here and there, and
some of them, through lack of support, had only a brief and ineffective
existence.
Happily, the tide has now turned. True, it is not yet very marked,
but it is clearly perceptible, and what is more important, it is a tide which
is gathering momentum as it flows. To begin with, the Australian Govern-
ments are now seeking to appoint officials with sympathetic outlook, and
these in turn will be required to make a closer study of native thought and
custom—a study which has already produced for enlightened Ministers
tomes of evidence, demonstrating, first, how grave have been the conse-
quences of past mis-judgments of the native problem, secondly, how great
are their potentialities for future usefulness in the life of the community.
Further, in close connection with a special Committee in London, Groups
and Committees have been formed in the principal cities of Australia, and
these together are convincing the public that a real and ghastly blunder
has been made in the past—but that it is not yet too late to apply remedies.
In this growth of public concern, the aborigine, as has already been
stated, has played a great and noble part. Indeed, the real purpose of
this pamphlet is to show that the remnant of this cruelly misrepresented
and ill-treated race, still surviving in the Australian deserts, is well worth
rescuing and uplifting.
No words need be spent on the economic value of the Australian
natives as shepherds, stockmen, boundary riders, drovers, fencers, plough-
men, carpenters, blacksmiths, mechanics, trackers in the bush, divers in
the pearl fisheries, and for all kind of domestic service.
MORAL AND INTELLECTUAL ABILITIES OF THE ABORIGINES.
It is in the ethical and educational spheres that the native shows such
surprising capacities. In these spheres he is not a " one talent ”, but an
enviable ‘ ‘ ten talent ’' human! Search history, and it is difficult to find
more romantic stories of self-sacrificing devotion than amongst these
hitherto despised people.
The Lost Airmen.
Five years ago, two German airmen—Bertram and Klausmann—
would have lost their lives in North Australia but for the devotion of the
aborigines. Captain Bertram, when rescued, told how the natives had
found them, succoured them and fed them when their own resources were
at an end, and they were utterly exhausted and drawing near death.
Klausmann was seriously ill, and a native mission-boy, Hector, travelled
ninety miles through very difficult country without sleep to get assistance
for him. Later, in Sydney, Captain Bertram promised to tell the people
of Germany of the wonderful Australian aborigines, who had watched his
aeroplane for two and a half months, and, even though short of water
and food, had not broken their promise to stay by it until help should
arrive, however long it might be.


The Lost Child.
Picture the poignant grief of the white parents in the “ Great Divide ”
who had lost their little boy. Whither had he wandered ? The aborigines
suggested that he must have lost himself in the vast desert. After two
days the distressed parents accepted this view, and implored the natives
to search the wide desert plains. After some hours they thought they
detected tiny footprints in the sand, then they lost them, then found them
again; twenty times a day they lost these imprints, and as many
times found them again over a hundred miles. On the natives went,
“ tracking ”, " tracking ”, " tracking ”, from sunrise till dark, with little
food and less water. Two days—three days—four days. By this time
they had crossed the sandy desert and entered a rock-strewn region, where
their white companions, seeing nothing, believed the " blackfellows ” had
blundered. Their despair was at its deepest when the aborigines pulled
up short at the edge of a precipice, with its probable and dreadful conse-
quences. One can picture the relief when suddenly the native trackers
wheeled round and raced across a stretch of rocky formation following
some mysterious clue.
What was that ? There, in a pocket of sand, was the unmistakable
footprint of a little child! Doubt vanished, only to be followed by fear
that they would find the child too late ; darkness closed in upon the
despairing rescue party. The morning of the sixth day broke, and with
the earliest light the weary trackers were again on the trail. Coming to
a stream, the tracks became so plain that it was possible to gallop the horses
in the race against starvation and death. On through the scrub, on over
sand and rocks they rode, and then they lost the trail again! Once again
the blackfellows picked up the tracks, more clearly this time, with the
mark of a shoe-nail showing in the footprints. Then a creek was reached,
and then a broken twig was seen, so recent that the sap in it had not dried.
At last came the heartening signal to the white followers—“ Close on him
now! ’’ Then the whole body of rescuers rushed forward with all haste,
and sure enough found the little white fellow, weary with his long trek,
but still safe and sound!
A Third Picture.
Twenty-five years ago, 250 miles from the nearest white settlement
in the Northern Territory, a mounted patrol officer captured four natives,
whom he charged with having raided a fencer’s hut. The trooper chained
them together and set off with them on the long journey to the distant
settlement to stand their trial. Near the end of the journey, the party
had to cross the Roper river, which was running spate.
But how to cross was a problem! "If”, argued the trooper, "I
cross and leave them here, they will run away ; if I send them over first,
they will do the same. ’ ’ As there was a risk either way, the trooper decided
to send his prisoners across first. After warning them of the penalties of
" bolting ”, he loosened them from one another but left an iron chain
attached to each, and then told them to swim across the river. This they


managed to do. Then the trooper entered the swirling river on horse-back,
but the swift current caught his horse, and man and horse rolled over in
the flood, and the iron-shod hoof of the horse struck the trooper on the
head, rendering him unconscious.
Here was a way of escape for the prisoners! Should they seize it ?
Without a moment’s hesitation, one of the prisoners, Neighbour by name,
coiling his chain round his naked body, plunged into the flooded river
and rescued his insensible captor. This was the story told by the trooper
himself when he got back to Darwin.
As Secretary of the Australian Board of Missions, Archdeacon Lefroy
was instrumental in getting this heroic deed brought to the notice of
King George V, who conferred the Royal Albert Medal upon his dusky
subject.
An interesting sequel followed when a police officer from Darwin, a
few months later, called at the office of the A.B.M. in Sydney to protest
against all this fuss being made over such a matter, for, said he, “ there
is nothing so very wonderful about it. Those blackfellows always act like
that !”
Could one imagine a higher tribute to the moral quality of the
Australian aboriginal ?
The Cripple.
Another and a recent picture is that of a native—a victim of leprosy,
who had already lost one of his feet. Ten years ago the lad had been
working for a policeman at Darwin, and had there learned the wonders
of the white man’s medicines. Now he was back with his own tribe,
in wild country, 250 miles from Darwin. “If only ”, he cried, “ I could
get to Darwin, there I could be treated so that I could walk again.” But
how to cross that 250 miles of almost waterless and foodless desert ?
Then came a generous offer—“ I will carry you there on my back,”
exclaimed a member of the tribe. Taking his fire-stick and a little food,
the generous-hearted fellow set off with the leper on his back. It was a
long, painful and exhausting journey ; sometimes they could only make
a mile a day. Food and water, too, were hard to get. But devotion
triumphed when, six months later, Kancubina stumbled into the police
station in Darwin with the crippled man. The hero himself was then
segregated, from fear that he himself might have caught the dreadful
disease. Surely such devotion merits some recognition and reward!
These are but four out of the many noble deeds done here or there,
at one time or another, by wild or semi-wild aborigines. But, unfortun-
ately, hitherto they have been too little known, and pondered over and
esteemed by the majority of the white people of Australia.
An altogether different kind of evidence is supplied by the remark-
able capacity of the aborigines for absorbing information. Here it is
possible to produce proofs and demonstrations of the most convincing
kind. The blocks and facts are supplied by organizations in Australia ;
they speak for themselves.


QJ
d d
£.2
“■a
C/l y
s’S
a-.
£
c/l C 3
d °
Oj rj
<L> H
rH|N
s
.SP »
»°
15
«4-H
t 3
s> tfl
qjO c/i
aj «j
i—i 73
S—l
‘sb a 3
_
g o
:^o
S-i T 1
O «
ri s
O) Si
r O ai
O ._
O &J 0
51
~ o
3 ri
m <u
J 3
.2 a
aj
si
tuo
iO o
II


% g
£ o
o
s%
o
VO
C/3
rt '£
* «
G
o'. 2
tn
03
T 3 G
O
u g
cd oj
03 -G
>3^
-v-i T 3
-G G
cd
’<3 ,
4-4
C/3 'o3
S g .
•s'- 3 1
Td G
G 3 c G
O cd 03
'C o H
a 03.-G
j__, -G
O
2 G
-s °
w 0,
CUO
G $
o
" s
<L>
J 3 Si
H£
C/2
o -2
.©‘G
s £
rj 03
O
■'—> .
S c/3
§
8
£


(c) Kundawarra is another full-blooded aboriginal. His school period
was ii months 3 weeks, when he carried off the first prize at Mount
Margaret Mission School for his essay on the Life of Christopher Columbus.
The actual text of the essay is reproduced. Examine the calligraphy,
check the spelling, note the composition.
Vut&r. '
y£o [u/Yf\-lrU-&
3L O t MJL ? dj> -s&e -
/a,34.
Cclcoh* ctf^rnj&y-ixxi..
IJL y'uato'jnJLem M/ctyo
(xrrrh Am -lj£mxrci Ah a^o-ut
-husTicl/WAt.
aoUuti -Jui. Assets a. s/svy. Sh dc^ttm
hji JLe. Could. CLQsij , iJLt J€ Jtcrr&j
Ijtccv-J f.cuat / Juxyirt, t-eon.
XOa£{. jT-lo.ee .to a ui&ul TTUm- -A3-CU-1
toctxy
Idoumlco* xJLat ctle
MJxrvld. -co 'y-o-u/Tud. , ~JLa.
■icmcj dmcrcccjJ' -ukh.dcC yect -to
JtloL. ct, JL -Iced cjmeat astl
otmd On-orx. . d-t Atdc
CjjjLzem ojP -tfyuxusyi sl-e.'t- j-£ou-€-d^>


&
do yet crruynty crAccvnAti*
A crllV7jiAuy* yLcuci o
.urdiem . c AALu/f~
Tflcuy-c d . XAe, nmxyn. Cyy-ULoi cmd ,tX.<yJj
jJity AtKHyld ncrt sXCL yjfi-aysre. Ct-fl OUS7I ■
'J'Aeyij stsCKct j AAt yyyo jcdsr Ot-cT
it, TTLOLoI OTnyX-OXs / ocyroot
cdto-OV-t <x Jsrdo
yvo ydceysX. ZAuyn CL y'Aya/n.od, yy-ott
yb&'fr-Uys cm sit Ccunrct 'Ay, xAt/ye.
Cl oUIcA cornel a JLI OstlcL cydAieyf-
Ajye i-L ys-eyyn. f oorcot Jc/jl '7nxy>x, -'A?i~c<jtS-
tLaX tCx Xosr\-ct -TXS-asy-
7hat TYLarrumcj scAly -etc.
'YYICOst , y£oAu/vr*A<ty> ,


<J3)
' tAe ThOuf- _ / (XSTLoi '
Qynci oCcusmocl it zU JLciiCj
J!ficu-7l • c-ihlci U? A:JoC L-C Ccl-ttu^
■to Jd -kmotcm co** ye Cl ot
c ~ldiZ 7Lcituv~e~4 -Al/tlcC _to
yLinm.
MJyfusn. yfu
crrui dde Y7lctsria-
cm a a/tict -Aecccsmyi.
umtcCed. XJzs. ~J®yyntcL .-dcxuAcat cturtXAj
CLSYXxt AtCi -Au/m. ■OJ'COO rLcrur
OTU A-Cuft, , aSYLcL -XsCat ycHZA
■too -sxmnall -to OCUT-ry a-CC -Acu-d.
■do -A-tccAi cl aitcr*-c
comet cl 'd a ~*C aynct yiomj- ' 'Ynuo*'
' y& ycro-uAct I-At


IV
UouTid ClCjsCt&TUi .JL? irfCZct *jO
JsojcJt dJLi. -OJ-cty //Lctd. Cchtcjc . .dfo
US-esfLi YLcrtt/fi CLSTLcI
Jrlausuncj d/u XxdeM.. X/lc MS&bd-
Asf-bj -us(/rtcLo curfl 'Ts&rry /l£onnn.y ■
*Mu Jltm.cc cLIcL sbt d/Lc .cerates?- /src,
CumcL X>cr/iumJLc4 /JLe. .tocrcclcL
Miy-ecJLul. LHe Mjr-trtt. erect cl /Lcjbbz/r Cu&cnx-t
yfcoi OyrtcC fult jtt .i/n. 4ira/XJicC
drtk ccm.cC jud/cna. d/e. , QsrccC
.UfYcfbc cm d/te. jtcrfx. dJLc uxr/t/rd- a -
jU. f dccAjt jit do dJLd.
Jitsng sfyvcusn.
~J3.td crci //icon. dAmoctyC
a//-
d/i JLasr/o-usr oj 'Pcts/o-o


(f)
-JLclcL dicuJed 'rui.ccvZkj
CL Zfectsr- t curud Mycoo
'ytceiAJ-e.d .xo-uJI -tJLe. c^Y-cad
Confronted with these moral and intellectual achievements, who can
any longer deny that the Australian aboriginal, so far from being the
lowest race in earth, if he were given a fair chance, would prove himself
quite as good as his white master.
THE OUTLOOK NOW.
The outlook for the natives now is far brighter than it has ever been
before. At the first meeting of a Permanent Conference of Commonwealth
and State Authorities, held at Canberra on 2ist-23rd April this year, a
really enlightened policy was heartily recommended. The ultimate destiny
of the whole race is to be absorption into the white community—and various
beneficent measures, judicial, administrative, educational and industrial,
are recommended with that object in view.


The Commonwealth Government, as is right and proper, is taking the
lead in the discharge of this great national obligation—but the States also
seem prepared to do their full share. It is not yet full daylight for the
Australian aborigines, but the darkness is breaking—not to close again,
we trust—and the sun of freedom and human right is beginning to rise
and shine upon them.
We are thankful to say that the Commonwealth Government has
now promised a progressive policy for the aborigines in the Northern
Territory, of which the following are the principal features :
(1) That detribalized natives are to be educated by the Government
with a view to taking their place as efficient economic units in the territory.
They are later to be trained in various avenues of employment.
(2) The children are to be educated to a standard comparable to that
required by the State for white children, particular attention being devoted
to equipping the child to take his place in the white community with prior
realization of his obligations to it.
(3) Aboriginal tribes who have not so far reached the stage of
detribalization will be provided with a large number of small reserves
where the remnants of the tribes may continue to live according to their
own customs and to which native employees may repair during seasons
of unemployment. In the course of time the natives in the reserves will
be brought under the influence of the education system established in the
more advanced areas.
(4) The areas occupied by Myall (unsettled) natives will, for the
present, continue as inviolable reserves. Missions may, however, be
permitted to operate in the reserves.




THE ANTI-SLAVERY AND ABORIGINES
PROTECTION SOCIETY
Invites all those to whom the maintenance of Justice for the weaker
races of the world appeals as a duty to assist it in its great task.
The general objects of the Society divide themselves into hve main
categories :
1. The total abolition of Slavery in all its forms.
2. The abolition of native labour systems analogous to Slavery.
3. The maintenance of justice for aboriginal and native races.
4. The maintenance of the policy of a common citizenship resting
upon a common standard of civilization —and consequently a
resolute opposition to the doctrine, “ there can be no equality
in Church or State between white and black ”.
5. To secure the general acceptance of the doctrine that the child
races of the world constitute for the stronger races a Sacred
Trusteeship.
I have much pleasure in contributing to the funds of
THE ANTI-SLAVERY AND ABORIGINES PROTECTION
SOCIETY
Pounds Shillings per Annum.
Name l : ,
A ddress
Please apply for this amount in of each year.
An Annual Subscription of 10s. 6d. and upwards will constitute the Subscriber
a Member of the Society and secures the receipt of the Quarterly Journal and all
publications of the Society.
An Annual Subscription of 2s. 6d. will constitute the Subscriber an Associate
Member of the Society, who will be entitled to receive the Annual Report and
copies of free literature as published.
“ Corporate Membership ” may be obtained by any group of persons, not less
than ten, contributing an annual subscription of 10s. 6d. which secures the receipt
of the Quarterly Journal and free literature.
Cheques and Postal Orders payable to the Hon. Treasurers or to the Secretary.
HntLSlaven? anb Hborioines protection Society
Denison House, Vauxhall Bridge Road, London, S.W.I
October 1937
HEADLEY BROTHERS
109 Kingsway, London, W.C.2
and Ashford, Kent
Name.
A ddress
