

THE
CATHOLIC MISSION
IN
AUSTRALASIA.
BY W. ULLATHORNE, D.D.,
VIC. GEN. OF THE RIGHT REV. THE VICAR APOSTOLIC OF
NEW HOLLAND AND VAN DIEKMAN’S LAND.
“SUFFER ME TO WEEP A LITTLE MY SORROW; FOR I
SHALL GO, AND SHALL NOT RETURN, TO A LAND OF MISERY
AND OF DARKNESS, WHERE IS THE SHADOW OF DEATH, AND
NO ORDER, BUT ETERNAL HORROR DWELLETH."-JOB
SECOND EDITION.
LIVERPOOL :
PRINTED AND ROCKLIFF & DUCKWORTH,
33, CASTLE-STREET
AND SOLO BY R. LYNCH, MANCHESTER; THOMSON, PRESTON;
MILNES BLACKBURN; SHARPE, ST. HELEN'S; COCKER,
WIGAN; STONE, BIRMINGHAM; CASSON, BOLTON; BIRD,
SHEFFIELD CROSHAW, YORK; AND T. JONES, 63, PATER-
NOSTER-ROW, LONDON.
PRICE NINEPENCE.


Arthur Kingston moore.


THE
CATHOLIC MISSION
IN
AUSTRALASIA.
BY W. ULLATHORNE, D.D.,
VlO. GEN. OP THE RIGHT REV. THE VICAR APOSTOLIC OP
NEW HOLLAND AND VAN DIEMAN'S LAND.
“SffPFEB ME TO WEEP A LITTLE MY SORROW i FOR I
SHALE GO, ARB SHALE NOT BETTOR, TO A LAND OP MIHHIIY
AND OP DARKNESS, WHERE IB THE SHADOW OP DEATH, AND
NO ORDER, BUT ETERNAL HORROR DWELLETH.”—JOB.
SECOND EDITION.
MTOlEl>©@.li,s
Morris) m K@©ifcyi?iF & ©lUKgimoo&TiHig
im.




PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS.
These few pages, dear reader, give you some little
information respecting the lot of the transported convict,
and the labours and wants of the Australasian Mission.
They appeal to the heart of every Catholic in the
United Kingdom.
If I am asked my motive for writing and means of
■information, I answer, as to ray means of information,
that for five years I have conversed, and almost lived
with the convict. I have often received him on his
arrival in New South Wales; I have thrice visited
him in Van Dieman’s Land; I have attended him in
his barracks ; I have followed him through every dis-
trict of the country to his place of assignment; I have
collected him from the ploughing oxen in the fields—
from the sheep wandering in their vast tracts—and
from the wild cattle in their distant runs. 1 have been
familiar with him in every township, and on every
highway; I have celebrated the mysterious rites of
our religion in the bark hut, beneath the gum tree in
the valley, and on the blue mountain’s top, which the
white cloud covers. The daughter of crime has bur-
dened my ear with her tale of folly and of woe ; the
A 2


dark-faced man has come to me, in his dress of sham &
and clanking fetters, from the degraded iron-gang? ;
the sentenced criminal has wrung my heart, filling m y
eyes, in the cell of death. I have twice sailed witl*
him to that last region on earth of crime and despair,
Norfolk Island, He has confided himself to me like:
a brother to an afflicted brother, and has poured his
■whole soul into my breast.
As to my motive, I have but one on earth. It oc-
cupied me years before I was permitted to follow it.
It has taken mo round the world ; it has induced mo
to return to my mother country now, for a time; it,
alone, will persuade me to return. This is my motive
the reformation of the convict.
/‘■lfl am thought bold, considof ray cause. .Fifty
thousand souls are festering in bondage. 'The'iron
which cankers their heel, corrodes their heart ; the
scourge which drinks the blood of their flesh, devours
the;spirit of their manhood. They are cast out for in-
timidation, and they encourage; for purification, anti
they are infinitely worse than when their country threw
them away. To these we are yearly adding above six;
thousand more. Would to Heaven the common error
were removed, and the poor people knew the bodily
sufferings, and the moral horrors, which, at those re-
mote extremes, await the hnplfcss convict* now blind
to his fate.
We have been doing an ungracious and an ungodly
thing. We have taken a vast portion of God’s earth,
and have made it a cess-pool; we have taken the
oceans, which, with their wonders, gird the globe, and
have made them the channels of a sink; we have poured
down scum upon scum, and dregs upon dregs, of the


offscourings of mankind, and as these harden and
become consistent together, we are building up with
them a nation of crime, to be, unless something bo
speedily done, a curse and a plague, and a by-word to
all the people of the earth.
The eye of God looks down upon a people* such as,
since the deluge, has not been. Where they marry in
haste, without affection; where each one lives to
his senses alone. A community without the feelings
of community; whose men are very wicked, whose
women are very shameless, and whose children are
very irreverent. Whose occupation has been, and is,
as that described by the prophet of sorrow, “ to steal,
to murder, to commit adultery, to swear falsely
The naked savage, who wanders through those
endless forests, knew of nothing monstrous in crime,
except cannibalism, until England schooled him in
horrors through her prisoners. The removal of such a
plague from the earth concerns the whole human race.
A 3


Thu vast regions forming the Apostolic Vicariate
of the Right Rev. Bishop Folding, include, under the
general name of Australasia, New Holland, Van
Dieraan’s Land, and the remote penal settlement of
Norfolk Island.
New Holland extends from 39 degrees south to
XOd. 30tn., and from 112 degrees east to 163 d. 40m.,
being 2577 miles in length from north to south, and
2004 in breadth from east to west; comprising a space
of 3,000,000 square miles, and being three-fourths
the extent of the whole of Europe. It is now popu-
lated, besides the aboriginals of the soil, by six differ-
ent, and, from each other, remote British colonies.
Four of these, situated on the southern coast, viz.
King George’s Sound-, Spencer’s Gulph, Gulph St.
Vincent, and Port Philip, are of recent formation ; the
fifth. Swan River, situated on the west, is becoming,
by its extent, population, and civil progress, of con-
siderable importance; but to none of these have we
yet been able to afford the least spiritual assistance,
not even a passing visit.
THE
CATHOLIC MISSION
IN AUSTRALASIA.


New South Wales, on the eastern coast, was, in
1788, owing to the separation of North America, se-
lected by the British government as a penal settlement;
and then first received a European population of 1030
souls, of whom more than 700 were criminals. Up to
1810 the colony continued to be little more than a
place of correction for deported criminals, and was
governed by a succession of naval officers. About
this period, emigration began to flow in the same
direction, but not in any considerable numbers until
some years later. The free population was further
increased by the emancipation of prisoners, either by
expiry of sentence, or in consideration of good con-
duct. In 1800, the European population did not amount
to more than 7,000, it now reaches nearly 100,000
souls. And these are dispersed over a territory of
600 miles along the coast, extending from Sydney, the
capital, containing 20,000 souls, on the north to Port
Macquarrie, and on the south to Twofold Bay; at
which points townships are now forming, speedily to
become the centres of new diffusion; the population
extends, in some places, for three hundred miles into
the interior country. These limits are daily extending,
with a view to secure the best positions and the most
fertile pastures for innumerable flocks and herds.
As to the relative number of Catholics diffused
through this population, the census of 1833 stated us
to be one-fifth : a census more recently and accurately
taken, gave us as more than one-fourth; lam confi-
dent that a still more accurate enumeration would find
us to be one-third. The error lies in some masters re-
turning the number of their servants without caring to
enquire as to their religion.
7


Separated by Bass’s Straits, and distant 120 mile«
to the south-east of Now Holland, lies the Island of
Van Dieman, whose extent nearly equals that of Ire-
land, From 1003, the period of its first settlement,
to 1021, it continued to bo a mere penal establishment.
It is now a very important colony, under a distinct go-
vernment, with a European population of 40,000 souls
spread over its surface. Hobart Town, the capital,
is distant 800 miles from Sydney, and contains a po-
pulation of 14,000, whilst Launceston, a seaport on
the opposite side of the island, already contains 7,000
souls.
The first missionor who reached these countries waa
tho Very FLev. Mr. Flinn, appointed by the Holy See
as Archpriest, with powers to confirm, Mr. Xfiinn
presented himself in Sydney and the surrounding coun-
try about the year 1818. He was a man of meek
demeanour, who speedily won the deep love of his
people, and by his ardent zeal did much in a short
time. But the local government, jealous of his happy
labours, under colour of his having come out unsana-
tioned by the British civil authorities—an act which
no law stood to prohibit—cast this apostolic man into
prison a few months after his arrival, deprived him of
all communications with the faithful, and sent him re-
luctantly away by the first ship sailing for England.
Tho Blessed Sacrament had been left by the Arch-
priest in the dwelling of a Catholic, of Sydney, where,
for two years after his departure, the faithful, as many
as could, were wont to assemble, there to offer up
their prayers and receive consolation in their miseries.
It is mournfully beautiful to contemplate these men of
sorrow gathered round the bread of life—bowed down


before the crucified—no voice but the silent one of
faith—not a priest within six thousand miles to extend
to them that pledge of pardon to repentance-—whose
near presence they see and feel.
Mr. Flinn still lives in the grateful memory of the
people. I shall never forget the words, with their ac-
companying accents, of a venerable, fresh-looking,
white-headed old man, who had come from a distance,
where he led a lonely life, to his religious duties, and
who, after expressing his gratitude at my arrival in the
country, exclaimed, “ Oh, had Father Flinn lived,
what would he have done! He had the sweetest and
the swiftest tongue of Irish that over my ear heard.”
The old man then apologised for his imperfect utter-
ance, by observing “ that he had never spoken one
word of English until it was made fifty lashes to speak
a word of Irish” Indeed, the Irish Catholic was
often, at that time, treated with extreme rigour. Cle-
rical magistrates, of another creed, awarded him the
scourge and darksome imprisonment for refusing 1 to
enter the protestant churches, and to mingle in a wor-
ship which his conscience disowned ; the plea, to be
sure, was obstinacy and disobedience. On one occa-
sion, a priest was even required to lay his hand on the
post at which some of his people were flogged, be-
cause they, not he, had risen in revolt to recover their
freedom, I mention these things in order to show
that our brief Australian history, of some forty-five
years-’ duration, is not without, like oil histories of im-
portance, its age of darkness and barbarism.
To allay the sensation produced in the mother coun-
tries by the treatment of the Very Rev. Mr. Flirin, the
government was induced to grant a small stipend each


to two clergymen, Messrs, Connolly and Therry, who
devoted themselves to this mission. These gentlemen
arrived in the colonies in the year 1820. Mr. Con-
nolly soon after established himself at Hobart Town,
the then infant capital of Van Dieman’s Land; whilst
the Rev. Mr. Therry—a name endeared to the con-
vict—employed himself indefatigably in traversing the
colony of N. S. Wales, in administering the sacra-
ments in every case of necessity which he could reach,
and in erecting the Church of St. Mary's, Sydney.
This church is a vast and lofty pile, of pointed archi-
tecture, without minute ornament, yet imposing from
its massive grandeur. Considering the period of its
commencement, and the means at that time existing
in the colony, it was a noble effort; its interior, how-
ever, remains uncompleted.
In 1829, Mr. Therry was joined in his labours by
the Rev. C. V. Dowling, and, in 1832, by the Rev.
J.M'Encroe.
Soon after, the writer of these pages—then Vicar
of the Right Rev. the Vicar .Apostolic of the Mauri-
tius, of whose district these vast regions at that time
formed a part—touched at Van Dieraan's Land, on his
voyage out. He there found religion to be in a very low
state. One solitary priest had lived there alone for
many years, without even the opportunity of meeting
a brother priest, Not a single school. A wretched
wooden shed, on the outskirts of Hobart Town, placed
high up the side of a lofty hill, not finished, no seat,
not even a flooring board arranged and fastened, inca-
pable of containing one half of the people—this was
the only Catholic erection in Van Dieman’s Land.
Such a scene of religious desolation, of absolute desti


tution, has been rarely witnessed amongst a numerous
Catholic population. The Governor was a man of a
pious turn of mind, who thought religion and education
of the utmost value to every one but a Catholic.
Arrived in N. S. Wales, the writer found one-third
of the population spread over this extensive territory
to be Catholic, with only three clergymen ; the church
at Sydney, not yet closed in; a chapel half raised at
Campbell Town, and the commencement of a second,
in a ruinous state, at Parramatta; a male and a female
free school at Sydney, and two others in the interior
country. Aided by the kind co-operation of his Excel-
lency, Major-General Sir Richard Bourke, a Governor
of a benevolent heart and of the most enlightened mind
—-whose anxiety was indefatigably directed to the es-
tablishment of a better state of things, by the diffusion
of a sounder morality amongst the people, through the
appliance of religious and other instruction—six addi-
tional free schools were established; preparations
were made for the erection of more churches, and we
anxiously expected an addition to our small number
of clergymen, for which the writer had most earnestly
petitioned. Meanwhile, patient until the time appoint-
ed by the Divine Providence to bring us that aid we
so much needed, every effort was made to supply the
place of numbers by activity. The writer lias com-
menced his Easter Sunday at Windsor, by celebrat-
ing mass, preaching, and attending the sick; then tra-
velled twenty miles to Parramatta, again offered the
holy sacrifice, preached, and visited the hospital;
and, after another distance of fifteen miles, has con-
cluded the public labours of the day in Sydney, by a
third sermon. The Rev. Mr. Therry has said his mid


night mass on Christmas-day, in Sydney—his second
at Liverpool, twenty miles distant—his third at Camp-
bell Town, thirteen miles further beyond. And the
other clergymen were not leas active. Each remote
district of the interior was repeatedly visited. Calls to
visit the dying came to us sometimes from a distance
of 80 miles, sometimes even further. The writer has
twice sailed a distance of a thousand miles to attend
executions—twice 800 miles in another direction, on
the duties of the mission. Wherever we came, the
people, full of faith—.whatever I may be compelled to
say of the morals of many, and how, alas I had they
been left to themselves—-looking with deep reverence
upon their clergy, gathered round us, A day or two’s
notice would collect together the Catholic population
from the circumference of thirty miles. Any place
covered with a roof served us as a chapel; but our
most common recourse was to a police office, a bar-
rack or hospital room, or a store. Tor a considerable
period the chapel at Parramatta was the guard-room,
in which there was not one window j a sermon wms
even preached against drunkenness in a public-house,
for want of some other place in which to assemble.
Many persons applied to be instructed in the faith,
and we received them, repenting, into the bosom of
our unity. In the course of four years, 20 criminals
from other creeds called in the aid of the priest, after
receiving sentence of death, and died with every sign
of the most sincere repentance.
At length, towards the close of 1836, arrived the
Right Rev, Dr. Folding, the Vicar Apostolic, accom-
panied by three priests, and four ecclesiastical stu-
dents, It was a time of unspeakable joy. Wo were,


indeed, moved to find, that the Successor of the Apos-
ties, who, from the chair of Peter, as from a watch'
tower, looks out and surveys the wants and distresses
of the world, had, with his pervading eye, reached
even us in our extremity, and had sent us a pastor
according to God’s own heart.
Van Dieman’s Land had been visited by our good
Bishop on his way. Every effort, which a short time
would permit, was made to instruct and reclaim the
people. Numbers embraced the occasion. The foun-
dation of a church was laid at Richmond; a poor-
school established at Hobart Town. Circumstances,
then uncontrolable, alone prevented the commence-
ment of a church in this latter place, for its 2000 Ca-
tholics : the Rev. Mr. Gotham remained in the colony
for their assistance. The Bishop in vain applied to
the Governor, in vain urged the justice and expedi-
ency of supporting a proper number of clergymen and
of schools. The 2,000 Catholics of Launceston, and
those dispersed over the surface of the country, from
that day to this, have lived and died without either
religious aid for themselves, or instruction for their
children.
Arrived in Sydney, the Bishop assembled his little
flock of six priests, and, retaining one in the capital,
containing above 6,000 Catholics, divided the interior
into vast districts, allotting to each of the remaining
priests one. These missionary districts take in each a
range of active duty, of some 60 or 100 miles extent,
a central township being selected for residence, and
the remainder being visited at regulated intervals. It
is thus evident that, even yet, little more can be done
in the interior than to preserve religion from entire
B


decay, than to run hastily from place to place, to an-
swer the most pressing demands—to administer the
rites of religion to the child and the dying man. The
individual efforts of the priest thus situated, must be
imperfect in their application, and weak in their power,
for his time is taken up, and his energies consumed, in
travelling, and he comes wearied and exhausted to the
Performance of his duties. Efficiency, on the other
hand, depends upon residence amongst his people,
and familiar acquaintance with their habitudes anti
dispositions,
The Bishop directed his immediate and most ear-
nest care to the increase of the number of schools, and
to (heir improvement—our chief hopes resting on the
rising generation—as also to the reformation of his
people generally. But, before all things else, the
frightfully immoral state of the convict population
claimed the first and greatest share of his pastoral
attention. That the reader may understand somewhat
of their condition, it will be necessary to enter upon
the subject at greater length j fully, indeed, I cannot,
,it would require a large volume, and a pen dipped in
the bitterest tears.
The number of criminals annually transported is
above 0,000. In 1836, the last year of which I have
a full account, there were transported to New South
Wales, 3,006 males, and 179 females; to Van Die-
man’s Land, 2,064 males, and 022 females; making a
total of 0,161 criminals. The entire number in actual
bondage, is, in New South Wales, nearly 80,000,
;whilst in Van Dieman’s Land there are nearly 20,000,
to which must be added ,3,000 for the penal settlements
of Norfolk Island; Moreton Bay, and Port Arthur,


It is to be further considered, that the great propor-
tion of free inhabitants of these colonies consists of
emancipists from a similar condition of bondage. Of
all these, one-third are Irish Catholics, of whom m any,
if I except those from the large cities, have been
transported for the infringement of penal laws, for
aggrarian offences, and minor delinquences ; whilst
those from England are, with rare exceptions, pu-
nished for direct aggression on property or the person.
As, however, there is no distinction in the degree of
punishment, they become mingled, contaminated, and
corrupted IfUAruJ^
They'arrive in numbers of from two to three hundred
n a ship, under the authority and superintendence of
i surgeon of the royal navy. Thrown together for four
months, with no occupation, they live over again their
guilty joys and exciting hazards, devising new ones
for the future. Their emulationespecially on board
the English ships, is, to exhibit to admiration their
accomplishments in wickedness—to prove the most
diverting of their comrades by the clever recital of
their past infamies—to enrich the effect of the whole
by the most profane and obscene language. Facets
exhausted, imagination is ready with her teeming
stores —thus they go on—incessantly applying the
whet-stone to their wit, and sharpening the edge : of
their guilty cunning. The day over, they are closed
down at night under hatches, each rolled in his blan-
ket, three, four, or more, placed together in one wood-
en crib—the seven years’ prisoner couched with the
convict for life—-■the petty thief with the murderer—
the simple countryman with the gaol polluted felon,
and the monster from the hulk. With such a mass of
D 2


individuals crowded together so long a time, wonder
not if you hear that the more decent soon rival the
worst in depravity of manners, insensibility of mind,
and corruption of heart. Bibles, common prayers,
and tracts, are plentifully distributed, even on board the
Irish ships, where they are worse than useless; whilst
there is no anxiety to furnish the Catholic with one
single book of prayer, or instruction, which he would
gladly read, On Sunday, on board the Irish as well
as English ships, the prisoners, a few Protestants
sprinkled amongst them, are driven, like sheep, to the
pasturage of Protestant common prayers and homi-
lies, the only effect of which is to stir up a secret spirit
of dissatisfaction and revolt, and to plant the feeling
of a grievance. The prisoner does not very nicely
discriminate qualities, but balances within his mind
the wrong-doing of his task-masters against his own
misdeeds, and deducts from the sum of respect which
he considers due to the constituted authorities.
Arrived at their destination, and placed, in the first
instance, in their barracks, they are not allowed to
associate with the “ old hands,” lest, say they, the now
ones should be contaminated—an admission that they
are not yet so bad, but they are destined to become
worse. Until lately, the boys were confined in a se-
parate establishment, but it proved such a hive of busy
wickedness sent out on the wing such a swarm of
accomplished pests, that it is now broken up, and boys
and men are lodged in the same great barrack. Here
begins the initiation into the deeper mysteries of the
masonry of crime. I have known the well-disposed
prisoner rejoice, after labouring all day, to be allowed
to watch an unenclosed building during the inclement


night, rather than be locked up there. I have knowd
the infirm man invoke any torture elsewhere, so he might
not rest there; I have known the blind consider his
privation of sight a blessing, as shutting out wickedness
through one sense from his knowledge. I remember a
youth who, expressing his astonishment at the infamies
amongst which he suddenly found himself, observed,
“ Such things no one knows in Ireland.” I think I
now see the newly-arrived convict, his frame shudder-
ing and shrinking together, whilst, with his feelings
yet fresh, he recurs to the iniquities of those barracks.
Colonel Arthur has spoken of the prisoner’s “ ex-
posure to ill usage from criminals worse than himself.”
Wherever he goes—to work, to church, to his meals
■ —he carries, tied to his person, his small canvas bag,
containing bis only little necessities, and, perhaps, a
prayer book, otherwise they would be stolen in a
moment. Whilst the poor creature who, with a more
timid conscience, and a keener sense of his condition,
seeks to separate as much as possible from the rest,
and to heal his seared conscience by the prayer of
repeptance, offers a fine game for the chase of ridicule,
and is hunted down with a mingled pack of scoffs,
jeers, obscene oaths, and rough practical jokes. The
newly-arrived stranger, whilst straying over Hyde
Park, and enjoying the first sight of that beautiful
scenery of undulating lands, of curious shrubs and
trees, of graceful mansions, and of the waters of the
Cove, arched over by So bright a sky, in the cool mel-
low evening, Is suddenly startled by a loud, brawling,
high-keyed, articulated yell, which, long and hurried,
breaks through the solemn stillness, when all again
is silent. Recovered from alarm, the stranger is told
B 3


that it is the voice of the overseer chiding, or giving
his directions to, the convict. The feelings of the
convict are petrified by the hardness of every thing
about him. He never feels the touch of kindness;
Wonder not that his vital warmth dies, and he becomes
a haggard, insensible thing.
Up to the present time, there has been no discrimi-
nation of punishment, graduated upon any distinction
of crime, except in the period of sentence. There are
now a few exceptions made in the case of certain cri-
minals worked by government; but assignment is yet
a lottery. The worst characters, men who, from their
civic acquirements and superior cunning, are found
most useful—and such as, in cases of equal crime, are
most guilty* from having had better instruction and
fewer temptations, generally come best off for being
transported. Let there bo landed from the sumo ship a
footman, a carpenter, and a blacksmith. The footman
has been brought up about a good family, well in-
structed, and never knew want. He is a prize quickly
drawn. His frieze jacket is doffed before a handsome
suit of livery; he has the run of his master’s'kitchen,
and soon contrives to find a little money. As he stands
at his master’s door, or sits on the coach-box, ho is
the envy of a number of hapless wretches, who, hav-
ing neither his ability in service or in crime, are has-
tening up the country, in their rough attire, from the
same ship, carrying, suspended from their shoulders,
their only consolation, a rug and blanket, there to bo
worked, like oxen, from daylight to dusk, under a
burning sun and a heartless overseer, with no better
encouragement than the threat of the lash. The car-
penter and blacksmith have been brought up appren-*


tices, amidst the domestic comforts and the good ex-
ample of the pains-taking middle class, These are
assigned to master mechanics. They are a valuable
property, and they know it. They work little or much,
well or bunglingly, as they are treated; and if they
consider that treatment decidedly bad, they will con-
trive to get returned to Government, and assigned to
a new master. They therefore receive a respectable
sum weekly to secure their industry. At slack times
they work a little privately for themselves, and have
an occasional holiday. On Sunday they appear to-
gether on the pavement, well-dressed, and conclude
the day with a few brother mechanics, over a friendly
glass. Monday is a holiday—a day to get drunk upon*
and probably ends in a brutal fight. The master
says they are sad rogues, but clever fellows he can-
not do without, and these things are overlooked. In
the midst of their sensualities, these men meet groups
of wo-begone countenances, which they knew on
ship-board, and which belong to men who are drag-
ging carts all day, and locked up all night, because
they had not their own skill either as mechanics or as
criminals. The footman was transported for breaking
into his master’s desk for gold, of which he had no
need; the mechanics made burglarious/instruments;
and broke into the sleeping house at dead/of night; the
cart-draggers were taken up for riot a fair; the
wretched men on their road up the country, stole bread
for their starving families, or ducks ini a frolic. That
tall, grizzly-headed man, with a sharp sinister counte-
nance, his body enveloped in a long,, seedy coat, once
black; he is assigned, as you perceive, to a couple
who, once prisoners, now free, keep a public-house by


the road-side, This man is considered by the neigh-
bours “ a gentleman” and “ a scholar.” I do not mean
to say that ho is of the educated class—-these are sent
to Port Mucqimrrie; but that ho can read, and write,
and talk. Ho keeps the accounts, teaches the child-
ren, writes prisoners’ petitions, and entertains guests.
That brawny man, with dripping hair and sun-scorchod
face, whom ho scolds and swears at for not cleaning
his shoes before he comes in for his ration of food
from the fields, ere he retire to his slab hut for the
night—there to lay his head on a log, and dream of his
ruined wife and outcast children—ho shot a partridge
and a pheasant. Thu lad who runs his errand, early
lost his parents, and foil among thieves. The hard-
working woman servant, whom he had to make drunk
before ho could subdue her sense of shame, stole, in
an hour of vanity, a few things from hor mistroHM.
The man in black himself forged a cheque for fifty
pounds.
In the; course of a short the footman grown
careless, is found occasionally drunk, fills the house,
in the absence of his master, with bad language—littia
things are missed, then things of more importance—
a flogging follows, and next the tread-mill. He there
finds a number of reckless companions, who teach him
that he is entitled to remunerate his own services. Ho
returns a hypocrite, and a conscientious thief. II in
master hesitates on further punishment, knowing ho
may fare still worse with a now servant, until, no
longer endurable, the man is sent to an iron-gang, to
be worked in chains for three months ; and one of the
female servants, IJot an equally obvious reason, is re-
turned to the factory, or house of correction, for two


years, After a few such vicissitudes of service and
punishment, by the magic of a ticket of leave, ena-
bling him to provide his own maintenance, the footman
marries, and commences publican ; the carpenter is
joined by his wife, who comes out by a compromise
with the law, and, as well as the smith, becomes a
master mechanic ; whilst the man in black marries the
relict of a hard-working settler. They hold their pro-
perty in the names of their free wives, and solace their
cares, from morning to night, with potations of rum—
all but the man in black, who lends out money at five
and forty per cent.
These are the few and unenviable exceptions to the
general rule of wretchedness, the report of which has,
in this country, spread so many delusions, and caused
such great mischief. As, however, a regulation is
about to be adopted, prohibiting assignment in towns,
they are not likely again to occur.
Let us now. follow the great body of convicts from
the ship to their assignment in the interior. We shall
readily distinguish those newly arrived from the “ old
hands” The grey woollen cap is mounted upon sets
of fresh-looking, lively features, the decent order of
dress, the eager glance of interest as you pass, the cu-
rious look round, the motion of respect, promise a very
different state of mind from the slovenly putting on,
the tawny, stagnant features, sluggish eye, and drowsy
ox-like movement of feet and shoulders, and down-
ward head, indicating indifference to all things but
himself, which mark the approach of the convict who
has felt his bondage. At every step in this dreadful
system, springs there up a new source of corruption.
They are assigned to masters who have probably from


thirty to seventy in the same condition. Lodged in a
row of log-walled, bark-roofed sheds, each containing
four or six persons, the new comers, until they gather
experience, are made the tools and cat’s-paws for mis-
chief of their more knowing associates, which brings
them to early punishment, and into bad odour with
their masters, whilst it yields sport to their crafty com-
rades behind the scene. In most cases, the practice
of religion is a thing unrecognised, the power of ridi-
cule forbids it to appear openly; the Catholic, isi per-
haps a hundred miles retaoVed from a priest; the Sun-
day is spent in mending clothes, in running over the
country, and in supporting sly grog-shops on stolen
property. Meanwhile, how many new-comers have I
known to have stolen into the woods to hide their
prayers, trembling to be discovered on their knees, as
though they were doing some guilty thing.
It can scarcely be expected that these men will bo
readily disposed to do more than can be avoided of
hard drudgery, which brings thorn no reward, or any
prospect of speedy termination, They are assigned to
their master for reformation, but the master’s object is
profit. His contention is to produce as much labour
out of his slave, in as short a time, as possible; when
this one is worked out, another is ready to his hand,
without further cost than an application to government.
The object of. the prisoner is to enjoy as much leisure
as possible. The incentive to industry and good con-
duct is the lash, This is the favourite and most fre-
quent punishment. Where a master in England finds
fault, the master in Australia threatens the lash; where
*he master here grows angry, the master there swears,
nd invokes the lash; where here he talks of turning


away, there he procures the infliction of the lash: for
idleness, the lash j for carelessness, the lash; for inso-
lence, the lash; for drunkenness, the lash; for disobe-
dience, the lash ; wherever there is reason, and where-
ever there is not reason, the lash. Ever on the mas-
ter’s tongue, and ever in the prisoner’s ear, just as he
himself urges his drowsy bullocks, sounds the lash!
the lash I—the lash!
“ The dread of his master’s frown,” observes Col.
Arthur, “ is to the prisoner like the drawn sword over
the head of Dyonisius’s courtier.” It may be observed
that some masters are men of education and humanity*
The greater number, however, are not so; and those
who are, come seldom into personal contact with their
convict servants. Their place is supplied by overseers,
men who, most commonly, have been themselves pri-
soners, and wreak their former sufferings on their pre-
sent subjects. If free, this is most often their chief
qualification for a very difficult charge—a charge re-
quiring- both good temper and sound sense, and whose
successful management demands a prudent intermix-
ture of kindness in manner with firmness of purpose.
Mr. Commissioner Bigge, in his report to Parliament,
has well observed, that “ the propensity to violent
language and abuse,” which becomes habitual with
those to whom is committed the irksome task of en-
forcing this compulsory labour, does not improve the
depraved, whilst it “ debases and hardens the heart of
others.” A little free license, and next a hot word or
a hasty check, draw out expressions which the over-
seer considers insolent and insulting to his dignity: he
let himself down, and now fears the consequence;
angry words follow; the man is reported—taken be


fore a magistrate; authority must be supported; pre-
sumption lies always against the prisoner; the case is
summarily decided; the hideous triangle is displayed
with its gory associations; the man is stripped and
hung up; the scourger comes forth from the place in
which he hides himself from the acorn of men ; he de-
liberately displays his brawny strength, grasps his
scourge, draws his clotted fingers through the tangles
of its many knots, the nine detested thongs descend,
and after a fiftieth repetition, each deliberate in pre-
paration and swift in its cutting stroke, he is taken
down. And now he is disposed to bo really insolent;
he has been stung by the eye of every on-looker; he
feels his degradation; he knows that a word, had it
been listened to, might have explained all; his brows
burn ; shapes that he dares not encourgage flit across
his mind ; he recklessly commits some new offence—
is again hung up—a few strokes remove the slough
with which nature has shielded his former wounds,
and now the wiry cords suck and cat their fill of the
flesh and gore of the wretched man —whilst bleeding,
writhing, swaliug— but let me spare the sickening
scene. The fiend now fills him with red visions of
vengeance, and he either murders Ids overseer—-a
common crime—or takes to the bush, where, finding
nothing on which to subsist, ho lives on plunder, is
taken up, and I generally find such men, so treated, in
the end, either in an iron gang, in the death cell, or in
Norfolk Island.
“ Eliou oioatrioum ot uoeleris pudet,
Pratrumque, 1 '
It may be observed that this cannot always be the
case, to which I answer, I am not giving the exception


but the rule. Yet this is not reformation, or the way
to it; treat man like the brute, and ho will become
one. A groat outcry was made by the slave-masters
against the present Governor of New South Wales,
for having limited the infliction to fifty lashes at a time,
although the records of this infliction are most sicken-
ing and appalling.* Whilst a former governor, Ge-
neral Macquarrio, states, ho has no doubt "that many
convicts, who might have been rendered useful and
good men, hud they been treated with humane and
reasonable centroid, have sunk into despondency by
the unfeeling treatment of such musters; and that
many of those wretched men, driven to acts of vio-
lence by harsh usage, and who, by a contrary treat-
ment, might have been reformed, have betaken them-
selves to the woods, where they can oidy subsist on
plunder, and have terminated theirlives on tho gallows.”
In the chain-gangs, great numbers of prisoners arc
brought together for colonial delinquencies of n second-
ary class. In 1835, the number of men in chain-gangs
was, in N.S. Wales, 1,191; in road-gangs, 082. In
Van Dienum s I.and, tho number in chain-gangs, was
805; in road-gangs, 2,010. They aro clothed in a
piebald dress of grey and yellow, and worked in irons
under a military guard. When employed in the inte-
rior, they are, at night, and on tho Sunday, locked up
in square portable boxes, some sixteen being crowded
together in a space considerably loss than two foot
square for each person. The countenances of those
men are shocking to behold. On board the Sydney
hulk, ten or twelve aro crowded together into a coll
so small that they cannot lie on their backs. Whoa
* Vide Appendix,
c


the public prison fills, before sessions, the prisoners
have often been compelled to stand and lie down al-
ternately for want of room. The consequence of all
this can only be conjectured by those experienced
amongst criminals.
What shall I say of the female convict, acknow-
ledged to be worse, and far more difficult of reforma-
tion, than the man? Her general character is immo-
desty, drunkenness, and the most horrible language.
On board the ship in which she sails, there are ge-
nerally to be found some two or three grey-headed
hags, the very incarnation of crime, who become
the priestesses of initiation to the younger and
more simple-minded during the voyage. Assigned
to service, she becomes the object of persecution,
either to her master—for they are assigned to all
classes —or to some favourite servant. Does she
defend herself, her life is made a torment. She is
harrassed, threats are held out, the police court is at
hand, a tale is readily made out—truth is never looked
for from a prisoner in self-defence—the police court is
amused, the town echoes the laugh of the police re-
porter, and the woman is doubly punished. Does she
fall, she is returned to the factory; carets taken of
her at the public expense, she remains nursing her
child for two years, it is then separated from the mo-
ther, (who returns to service,) and is placed in an or-
phan school—no enquiry is made, and she returns again
and again, I have baptized fourteen of these child-
ren at one time, whose mothers seldom gave any sign
that they felt ashamed, or were conscious of any rea-
son for such a feeling.
One of the favourite topics between the ladies of
Sydney, of the melancholy oast, concerns the re


volutions which their domestic empire is perpetu-
ally undergoing, from the misconduct and changes
of their assigned servants, The first thing against
which a stranger is cautioned is servants. Ho has
only to broach the subject in any house which he en-
ters, when ho will be inundated with complaints of the
negligence, slovenliness, drunkenness, and dishonesty
of assigned servants. I remember a lady having good
naturodly consoled herself, after one servant had gone
to be flogged, and another to the factory, with the con-
sideration, that all her neighbour’s servants had been
locked up, the night before, drunk together in the
watch-house. As marriage makes the female her own
mistress, by assigning her from her service to her hus-
band, it is eagerly sought after. The motive is to ob-
tain personal liberty. A slight, often the merest acci-
dental acquaintance—affection unconsulted—disparity
of ago, of character, and of manners thrown out; of
consideration—the possibility of a previous union in
the mother country unheeded—the known fact of such
a prior engagement not rarely concealed—and they are
married, to drag each other through a life of misery
and mistrust,
The factory at Parramatta is the female house of
correction; there is a similar establishment in Van
Dioman’s Land, It has hitherto been the sink of abo-
mination, Generally containing a fluctuating popula-
tion of some six hundred females, their principal occu-
pation is the work of mutual corruption. Returned
hither from service for correction, after receiving a new
finish in vice, they are again sent forth into circulation,
carrying with them infection to every extremity of the
colony. At Hobart Town, sundry persons have, by
C 2


favour, obtained their servants direct from the ships,
on arrival, to prevent their bringing with them the con-
tamination of the factory. In Parramatta the military
have been known to be called in, as a last resource,
to quell the female riots of the factory. lam happy
to hear, that, since my departure from the colony,
ameliorations have been introduced into this institution.
The numerical disparity between the sexes, which
is still, amongst the prison population, as three to one,
is the cause of indescribable evils, The government,
with a view to remedy, has been sending out ship-loads
of free females ; but what must those females generally
be, who, abandoning their country, go out such a voy-
age, unprotected, in the expectation of marrying con-
victs. The extravagant hopes held out to these poor
creatures—the richness with which the colonial pro-
spect is painted and gilded to their fancies—are of
course followed by disappointment, and disappoint-
ment by self-abandonment. And what is the con-
sequence, in this country, of so much exaggeration, by
way of lure, but to induce a belief that the convict’s
must indeed be a happy lot, when the authorities tell
us it is so delightful a thing to go out so long a voyage
with the expectation, in the end, of receiving his hand
in marriage.
I have said that our hopes are chiefly rested on the
rising generation. But, alas 1 we see them growing
up from earliest infancy in a spirit of irreverence and
dissoluteness, which is yet not to be wondered at when
we consider that they are in the hands, either as mo-
thers or as nurses, of such women as I have described*
I know a lady, who, from her experience, durst not
entrust her infant children with women, but actually


employed men convicts as nurses in preference. What
can I say of such women as mothers, but that their
children are cradled in vice, are nursed at the bosom
of profanity, and fed with the poison of ungodly lips,
and that they drink in iniquity from their parent’s ex-
ample. A youth, when corrected at school, will run
into the bush for days before he even returns to his
home, confident he wilt then be supported by his mo-
ther against his teacher.
A traveller in Australia has observed, that, to the
convict, “ the great charm of life is to be drunk as
often as possible.” An always sober servant in a
town would be a phenomenon, I have known 14
public-houses in full employ in a small township of
1800 inhabitants. In Sydney there are 224 licensed
taverns, in addition to sly grog shops; and they line
every road side at short intervals. In every consider-
able township there are one or more quarters in which
the signs hang out on each side into the street as thick
and numerous as the knightly banners that adorn the
chapel of Henry at Westminster. There the incessant
noise of fiddles, tambours, and hautboys—the drunken
song—the dissolute laugh—the heavy curse—the
scream, at intervals, startle and wake up (he ear of the
by-passer through the day and live-long night. Filthy,
swollen-faced wretches, with something of the shape
of woman in them, haunt the doors, and the very streets
reel and stagger with drunkenness, dissoluteness, and
debauchery, until the purest minds are defiled by the
continued contact. The prisoner is not supposed to
enter thesehouses, except for refreshment on a journey:
for him the sly grog shop is prepared. Wherever, a
little retired from the road or by-path, you perceive,
C 3


under the trees, the bark hut, with an unglazed opening
in place of window, forming a frame-work in which a
few musty peaches are scattered, domineered over by
a ginger beer bottle, holding in its mouth a few bro-
ken pipes; there, be assured, the prisoner will find,
though no one else can,-a person who, without leave
from bis master or license from the government, is
ready to exchange that master’s property for any
amount of the bane and paralysis of the colony, rum,
The annual amount of duty on this spirit received in
Sydney is £120,000. It has been calculated that the
quantity of rum drunk in New South Wales, compared
to the quantity of spirits consumed by an equal number
of people in England, is as 17 to 5. After hearing
all this, the number of criminal committals can awaken
no surprise. In 1835, there were 116 capital convic-
tions in the criminal court of Sydney, all for crimes of
violence; whilst the convictions for petty offences, for
the same year, throughout this one colony, amounted to
nearly 23,000. The Rev. Mr. M'Encroe has himself
attended 74 executions in the course of four years, and
a yet greater number capitally convicted also, but
committed to Norfolk Island, to them, he remarks,
“ a second death.” “Very many,” he writes to me,
“declared on the scaffold that they preferred suffer-
ing death to being sent to Norfolk Island, fearing
more the depravity of that place than death itself.”
Judge Burton described the colony, in an address from
the bench, as a people made up of criminals and prose-
cutors, occupied in incessantly crossing and recrossing
the threshold of the courts of justice. The crime of
perjury is of such common and notorious occurrence,
that the barristers tell me they seldom think of resting


evidence upon the positive oaths of witnesses, of whom
there are generally to be found several on each side of
a case swearing the directly contrary, A judge at
Hobart Town solemnly declared upon the bench, that
he had only to step into the street, and hold up a
finger, when twenty perjurers would appear, to swear
up any cause, however desperate.
Let it be borne in mind, that each of these men has
from two to three hundred shipmates, who are his
bosom companions; that, when arrived, he finds vari-
ous former intimates from the same town or county;
that, after a while, he probably adds to these some
hundred, or two, or three, of chain-gang mates ; that
all these are sworn brothers, prepared, with a true
esprit da ■corps, to back each other out of any diffi-
culty. Hence, in a case of defence or of revenge, as
the chance may be, the collecting together a few un-
principled, but ready-witted witnesses, is the least
difficulty. The display of malignant passions, which
are found darkly tracking their prey through our
Australian courts, is something horribly fearful.
There is another class of crimes, too frightful even
for the imagination of other lands; which St. l 3 aul, in
detailing the vices of the heathens, has not contem-
plated; which were unknown to the savage, until
taught by the convict—crimes which are notorious—
crimes that, dare I describe them, would make your
blood to freeze, and your hair to rise erect in horror
upon the pale flesh. Let them be eufolded in eternal
darkness.
There may be seen at Florence a representation of
the ravages of the plague, and of our human frame in
its progressive states from death to final decoroposi


tiou. It is on a very small scale, the subject being so
dreadful, that men say, were it larger, it would not be
endurable, It is for a similar reason that I have only
ventured to exhibit a miniature of the convict’s pro-
gress through the successive stages of his transition,
from first conviction to his ultimate state of corruption.
I have neither applied the strongest colours, nor
worked in the deepest shadows, nor brought oot the
worst details ‘.of the subject. Yet, what history can
produce the records of such a debasement of our hu-
man condition in the dark ages of any nation ?
In an atmosphere so thick with crime—on a land so
spread with obstacles—it is a people thus shamefully
fallen, that the Eight Eev. Bishop Folding, and bis
clergy, are most strenuously labouring to raise up and
reform,
Wherever they are gathered in numbers, as in bar-
racks, prisons, chain-gangs, bulks, &c., there, besides
the usual attendance, tbo Bishop, with one or two
priests, is to bo found at intervals, where, hy a succes-
sion, for some days, of exhortations, instructions, and
religious exercises, many are brought to repentance,
and, finally, to the sacraments. The hospitals, where
one-half the diseases are the direct offspring of crime,
arc daily visited. The prisoners in barrack are assem-
bled on a week-day evening, as well as on the Sunday.
Where we have not time to be, onr few ecclesiastical
students are called ia aid, and proceed, two by two, to
catechise, instruct, and prepare the way for us. Every
opportunity that offers is embraced to bring back these
poor lost ones to a sense of their condition, The peni-
tent is joyously received at every hour of the day or
night. We know of no rest, but in the heart of the


afflicted, Alas I how many that are now aliens would
embrace the faith, were there but pastors to instruct
them; and how many returning prodigals, wore there
but fathers to receive them ? Even from those of other
opinions, I have known, out of a number of forty-five
condemned to death, not less than two and twenty
who have, in their last hours, embraced the faith, and
died with all the signs of fervent repentance for their
sins; and this has been about the proportion of those
who, in tile last extremity, have sought our aid.
When a prison ship arrives, from Ireland especially,
by permission of government, who have soon the be,
neficial result, the Catholic prisoners are, for a suc-
cession of four or five days, conducted to the church,
preparatory to assignment. There the Bishop, assisted
by two priests, one of whom is called from the interior
for the occasion, outers with them upon a course of
religious exercises. They are first addressed with
gentle kindness; we show them our sympathy by en-
tering into their unhappy circumstances with compas-
sion. As their feelings begin to flow, and all irritation
and bitterness of heart ceases, (hey are chastened and
humbled under the duties of repentance; their mind is
directed to the cross, and to him who suffered upon
it, innocent, for their guilt; and their memory is filled
with the passion of God. With the mystery of atone-
ment, the value of resigned suffering, as a salutary
expiation, is dwelt upon. They are exhorted to submit
to, if not welcome, their privations in the spirit of pe-
nance—to attach their afflictions to the cross, to bow
beneath its power, and unburden their sins at its foot;
and, henceforth, to do and endure, for the penitent
love of God, whatever may be imposed upon them.


Their resolutions are strengthened with the sacra-
ments. Those exercises conclude with a series of
advice on their future condition ns prisoners, on their
duty to their masters, their dangers from their fellow-
servants and their own passions, and on the ultimate
towards of good conduct.
The effect of these labours, where they have reached,
has, with the grace of God, T am happy to say, become
already visible; so much so, that the Principal Super-
intendent of Convicts urged the fact, grounded on the
evidence of his personal observations, in a public
speech, since printed, as a motive for supporting our
religion, The acting Chief Justice, lam informed, has
stated that, since the arrival of the Bishop and his
clergy, a very visible diminution has taken place in the
number of police cases, which is attributed to their
labours. The newspapers—even those opposed to us
—have, for the last three years, successively recorded
their astonishment that the festival of St. Patrick is no
longer distinguished for its riotousness and drunken-
ness—particularly that on the occasion of its last
recurrence the number of police oases were fewer
than for many previous weeks. Mr. M'Arlhur, in his
recent work in support of certain petitions to King and
Parliament, speaks of the “ recent accounts from the
colony of great amelioration in the character and con-
dition of the Irish Homan Catholic population, in
consequence of the zealous labours of their clergy.”
Even Dr. Lang, with all his bitterness of unprovoked
opposition, though with a sinister object, admits their
“well-directed efforts,”*
* This gentleman, in his work on N, 8. Wales, takes every op-
rartunity of impressing the notion, that the Irish is a worse and


What might be done, indeed, had we means and
numbers ? At present, we are afraid of our own la-
bours. These unhappy men leave us in dispositions
so good, and our own minds are only filled with me-
lancholy forebodings. They leave us, and we see
them no more, except such as are brought down the
country to an hospital or a gaol; for, in the greater
part of the interior, the lot of the Catholic convict
continues much the same as when, in 1832, it was de-
scribed by Mr. Commissioner Therry.
“The moment he reaches the shores of Australia,
he is sent into the interior of the country, there to be
assigned to a settler, at a distance of perhaps fifty,
one hundred, or even two hundred miles from Sydney.
There he is estimated according to the quantity of la-
bour which he is capable of performing—there, amidst
associates reckless in their habits, and infamous in
their vices, his days are passed without care and with-
out solicitude —there, also, (and it is of this I com-
plain,) the voice of religion, with its salutary counsels
and its blessed consolations, never comes. For him,
religion has lost all sanction—morality, all attraction.
Can it be wondered at, that, when temptation presents
itself anew, the miserable man continues his career of
more unreformablo character than the English convict. In a long
passage in the first edition, left out in the second, he refutes him-
self. Exemplifying the effects of judicious management of farm
convict servants, in the ease of his brother's mode of treatment:
of thirteen persons, whose course he traces from faithful service to
final settlement for themselves, the greater number are Irish Ca-
tholios. The wakes after executions, and their bad effects, which
he so powerfully describes, do not exist. The bodies are interred
early in the afternoon of the day of execution. We are indebted
to Dr. L. for several errors of this sort.


crime, until, at length, he expiates his offences on the
gallows, or, by an equally horrible fate, is cast into a
penal settlement, whoso inhabitants consist of a popu-
lus vitorum, the misery and horror of which it is shock-
ing to contemplate.”
Of these penal settlements, the principal are, Nor-
folk Island, to which men are re-transported from N,
S. Wales; and Port Arthur, to which they are sent
from Van Pieman’s Land, Turning to this portion of
our mission, my memory fills with sensations of horror,
mingled with consolations, such as, perhaps, few have
experienced. But I must be brief,
Norfolk Island is 1,000 miles from Sydney, It is
small, only about twenty-one miles in circumference,
of volcanic origin, and one of the most beautiful spots
in the universe, llising abruptly on all sides but one
from the sea, clustering columns of basalt spring out
of the water, securing, at intervals, its endurance with
the strong architecture of God. That one side pre-
sents a low, sandy level, on which is placed that penal
settlement which is the horror of men. It is approach-
able only by boats, through a narrow bar in the reef
of coral, which, visible here, invisibly circles the
island. Except the military guard, and the various
officers and servants of government, none but the pri-
soners are permitted to reside on the island, nor, unless
in case of great emergency, can any ship, but those of
government showing the secret signals, be permitted
to approach. The island consists of a series of hills
and valleys, curiously interfolded, the green ridges
rising one above another, until they reach the shaggy
sides and crowning summit of Mount Pitt, at the height
of 3,000 feet above the level of the sea, The estah


lishment consists of a spacious quadrangle of build-
ings for the prisoners, the military barracks, and a se-
ries of offices in two ranges. A little further beyond,
on a green mound of nature’s beautiful making, rises
the mansion of the commandant, with its barred win-
dows, defensive cannon, and pacing sentry. Straying
some distance along a footpath, we come upon the
cemetery, closed in on three sides by close, thick, me-
lancholy groves of the tear-dropping manchineel;
whilst the fourth is open to the restless sea. The
graves are numerous and recent—most of the tenants
having reached, by an untimely end, the abode to
which they now contribute their hapless remains and
hapless story, I have myself witnessed fifteen de-
scents into those houses of mortality—and in every one
lies a hand of blood. Their lives were brief, and as
agitated and restless as the waves which now break at
their feet, and whose dying sound is their only requiem.
Passing on by a ledge cut in the cliff that hangs
over the resounding shore, we suddenly turn into an
amphitheatre of hills, which rise all round, until they
close in a circle of the blue heavens above—their
sides being thickly clothed with curious wild shrubs,
wild flowers, and wild grapery. Passing - the hasty
brook, and long and slowly ascending, we again reach
the open, varied ground. Here a tree-crested mound;
there a plantation of pines j and yonder, below, a ra-
vine, descending into the very bowels of the earth, and
covered with an intricacy of dark foliage, interlumi-
nal ed with checkers of sunlight, until beyond it opens
a receding vista to the blue sea. And now the path
closes, so that the sun is almost shut out; whilst giant
creepers shoot, twist, and contort themselves upon
D


you* path, beautiful pigeons, lories, parrots, paro-
quets, and other birds, rich and varied in plumage,
spring up at your approach. We now reach a valley
of exquisite beauty, in the middle of which, where the
winding, gurgling stream is jagged in its course, spring
up, the type of loneliness, a cluster of some eight fern
trees, the finest of their kind, which, with dififorent incli-
nations, rise up to the height of fifteen or twenty feet,
a clear, black, mossy stem, from the crown of which is
shot out on every side one long arching fern leaf, the
whole suggesting the idea of a clump of Chinese um-
brellas. Ascending again, through the dank forest,
we find, rising on every side, amongst other strange
forest trees, the gigantic pine of Norfolk island, which,
ascendinga clean stem, of vast circumference, to some
twelve feet, shoots out a coronal of dark boughs, each
in shape like the feathers of the ostrich indefinably
prolonged, until rising, with clear intervals, horizontal
stage above stage, the green pyramid cuts with its
point the blue ether, at the height of 200 feet. Through
these we at length reach the crown of Mount Pitt,
whence the tout ensemble, in so small a space, is in-
describable, of rock, forest, valley, corn-field, islets,
sea-birds, land-birds, sunshine, and sea. Descending,
we take a new path to find new varieties. Emerging,
after a while, from the deep gloom of the forest, glades
and openings lie on each hand, where, among many
plants and trees, the guava and lemon prevail. The
fern tree springs gracefully out, and is outstripped by
the beautiful palmetto, raising its “ light shaft of orient
mould,” from above the verdant level, and, at the
height of twenty-five feet, spreading abroad into the
ear air a.cluster of bright green fans. In other places,


the parasite creepers and climbers rise up in columns,
shoot over arch after arch, and again descend in every
variety of Gothic fantasy—now they form a high long
wall, whichis dense and impenetrable—and next, comes
tumbling down a cascade of green leaves, frothed over
with the delicate white convolvulus. Our way, at length,
becomes an interminable, closed-in vista of lemon trees,
forming over-head a varied arcade of green, gold, and
sunlight. The orange once crowded the island as
thickly, but were cut down by the wanton tyranny of
a former Commandant, as being too ready and too
great a luxury for the convict. Stray over the farms,
the yellow hulm bends with the fat of corn. Enter the
gardens, especially that delicious retreat, “ Orange
Yale,” there, by the broad-breasted English oak,
grows the delicate cinnamon tree—the lea, the coffee,
the sugar plant—the nutritious arrow-root—the ba-
nana, with its long* weeping streamers and creamy
fruit—the fig—all tropical fruits in perfection, and the
English vegetables in gigantic growth. The aif is
most pure, the sky most brilliant. In the morning, the
whole is drenched with dew. As the sun comes out
of his bed of amber, and shoots over a bar of crimson
rays, it is one embroidery of the pearl, the ruby, the
emerald; as the same sun, at mellow eventide, aslanta
his yellow rays between the pines and the mountain,
they show like the bronzed spires of some vast cathe-
dral, flooded in golden light.
It has been argued, even in the present case, that
beautiful nature is powerful to correct the human heart.
And here is beauty like the shadow of the counte-
nance of the Creator. Yet man alone, made in his
image, remains untouched by his spirit, and wanders
D 2


the demoniac of the scene. No. The devout man,
like David, will muse on these, his works, until he
kindle like a fire j but perverse hearts never see fine
days or beautiful prospects. How, indeed, can they?
Their thoughts are with society ; there they find their
sensual joys, and there they willingly dwell. As if
for ever to refute such a notion, we find the foulest
crimes always staining the fairest lands, Those five
criminal cities, on whom the Lord rained down his fire
and his fury, were placed in a very beautiful country,
and Norfolk Island is the modern representative of
those guilty cities. No; not nature, but Almighty
grace is powerful to convert and purify the heart.
I have already observed, that such is the horror the
convict of N. S. Wales entertains for this settlement,
that we frequently hear the condemned, even from the
gallows, thank God they are going to die, rather than
to live at Norfolk Island. The number of criminals at
the settlement, in 1835, was 1,200, of whom 450 wore
Catholic, Of late, this number has been augmented
by nearly 200 annually. They are worked in heavy
Irons, and fed on salt meat and maize bread. Until
lately, religion was utterly excluded from those miser-
able men. Their deep depravity had become a pro-
verb even in N. S. Wales. So corrupt was their most
ordinary language, as incessantly to present the ima-
gination with the absent objects of the passions as
though present—so perverse, that, in their dialect, evil
was literally called good, and good, evil —the well-dis-
posed man was branded wicked, whilst the loader in
monstrous vice was styled virluom, The human heart
seemed inverted, and the very conscience reversed.
So indifferent had even life become, that murders


were committed in cold blood; the murderer after-
wards declaring he had no ill-feeling against his vic-
tim, but that his sole object was to obtain his own
release. Lots were even cast; the man on whom it fell
committed the deed—his comrades being witnesses,
with the sole view of being taken, for a time, from the
scenes of their daily miseries to appear in the court at
Sydney, although, after the execution of their comrade,
they knew they should be remanded to their former
haunts of wretchedness. So notorious is this fact, that
it was made the ground of a legislative enaclment, by
whose power criminals are now tried by a special com-
mission upon the island. This arrangement has, in a
great measure, suspended such atrocities, though it
has not altogether put an end to them. The life of
these men was one of despair; their passions, severed
from their usual objects, centred in one intense thirst
for liberty, to be gained at whatever cost. Theirfaces
were like those of demons. If a comrade was sus-
pected of betraying their practices, he could no longer
with safety sleep amongst them, but was separated to
secure life.
In 1834, a conspiracy was formed by the prisoners
to destroy the military and seize the island. They
were defeated, and thirty one of their number con-
demned to death. In 1836, 1 sailed to the island to
prepare such of them as might be Catholic to meet
their end. My unexpected appearance, late on the
night of my arrival, came on them like a vision. I
found them crowded in three cells, so small as
barely to allow their lying down together—their
upper garments thrown off for a little coolness. They
had for six months been looking for their fate. I
D 3


had to announce life to all but thirteen—to these,
death, A few words of preparation, and then their
fate. Those who were to live wept bitterly; whilst
those doomed to die, without exception, dropped on
their knees, and, with dry eyes, thanked God they
were to bo delivered from so horrid a place. Who can
describe our emotions 7 I found only three of the con-
demned to be Catholic—four others wished me to take
them also to my care. During the five days permitted
for preparation, they manifested extraordinary fervour
of repentance. The morning coine, they received on
their knees the sentence as the will of God, Loosened
from their chains, they fell down in the dust, and, in
the warmth, of their gratitude, kissed the very feet that
had brought them peace. Their death moved many
of their comrades, On the two successive days of
execution and burial, I preached, from the graves of
the dead, to their former associates. During the week
still allowed before the departure of the ship, twenty
conversions followed, and one hundred and fifty general
confessions. I left books behind me before departure,
arranged a form of prayer for their use on Sunday,
and obtained the appointment of one as reader, whose
duty also it should be to teach those to read who were
unable, in the intervals between labour and food.
At the close of 1830, my good Bishop permitted me
again to visit Norfolk Island, a duty I had much at
heart. I was received with great joy by my poor pe-
nitents, who, through all sorts of ridicule and persecu-
tion from their comrades, had persevered in their
resolutions. I admitted them to the holy communion.
Nearly sixty had learned to read their prayer books.
The Commandant assured lire that crime had consider


ably diminished, and that the Catholics were remark-
ably attentive to their duties of religion. Let me not
forget how much of this was owing to the prudence
and solicitude of the Commandant himself. I record
the name of Major Anderson with unmingled satis-
faction. His minute personal knowledge of the despe-
rate men under his charge, and the discrimination with
which he encourages the well disposed, whilst he
strikes terror into the obstinate, has been attended
with most salutary consequences. What was ray de-
light to find that, for the fifteen months elapsed since
my last visit, there was not one Catholic to be brought
before the judge. During the fifteen days allowed me
before our return, three hundred confessions, and twelve
conversions, rewarded my labours. I saw these dreaded
characters come to the arms of religion like children.
What may she not do with men when every hope from
this world is departed, and nothing appears on their path
but sufferings. The penitents, now become the greater
number of Catholics, begged to be locked up in sepa-
rate wards from the rest, that they might say their
morning and night prayers together. Except these two
visits, no priest has been at Norfolk Island. Since my
arrival in England, I have received a letter from one of
these poor prisoners, who consoles me in these terms:—
“ Rev. Sir, —Aware that your insignia is ‘ Non ignarus malt,
miseris succurere disco,’ therefore I feel no hesitation in writing’
X rejoice to have to inform you that of the many who received your
instructions, there are none, I am aware of, returned to their for-
mer wickedness j but notwithstanding the many enemies they have
to encounter, the many instruments employed by Satan to debar
them from those duties due to their Creator, they have withstood
all. I have also to inform you that in addition to the number
which seemed to be zealous heretofore, there are three times that


number at present. They are all desirous to learn, to be instructed,
and earnestly look for books; oven those who have not attended
you during that happy time you have beau with ua, want books-
The wicked are constantly endeavouring to bring back to their for-
mer vice those in whom they perooivo any conversion. Wo earn-
estly request you will not he long absent from us, Tho constant
prayers of your most humble but unfortunate servant,
"ROBERT HEPBURNS.”
I might have paused ere giving recitals which would
seem to record my own acts; but I have a higher ob-
ject in view, and my reader will allow me to remind
him of St. Paul’s doctrine, that the most unworthy in-
struments are selected for the work of grace, that the
power of Clod may be manifest.
Port Arthur contains a like number of criminals,
re-transported from Van Pieman’s Land. There a
priest has never been seen. 1 was most anxious to
have visited them, and the duty was enjoined me by
my Bishop; but obstacles, I could not then surmount,
were put in my path. What may bo their condition,
I dare scarcely, from tiro reports that reach my ears,
conjecture, I can see nothing clearly beyond the
approaches to that dreaded peninsula; but the portal
seems to me, in the obscure distance, inscribed in lurid
characters like those which Dante rend :
“ Enter through mo into eternal sorrow 5
Enter, ami find tho citizens of grief;
Enter, and join the nation of the fallen j
All hope leave far behind—oh you that enter. 1 ’
It remains for me to say a few words on the abori-
ginal population of New Holland. They have been
considered, by those who have written on tho subject,
as the last and least intelligent of tho human race.
They do not, hovi'ever, appear to me so far wanting in
intellect, as in power of attention and perseverance.


They are said to approach nearest in resemblance to
the Papuas of New Guinea and of the Indian Archi-
pelago. They are of middle stature, their skin per-
fectly black, cheek-bones high, brow prominent, eyes
deep sunk, with the thick projecting lip of the African,
whilst the nose is as broad, but less flat, than that of
the Negro. Their hair is long and coarse, except on
the southern coast, and in Van Dieman’s Land, where
it is woolly. Their number is variously estimated : I
do not think they reach above 500,000. They are dis-
tributed into tribes of from 30 to 50 persons, each under
a chief, and occupying a territory of from twenty to
forty square miles —to transgress whose limits, into the
hunting grounds of another tribe, is a declaration of
war; hence the tribes have little communication with
each other, except such as are hostile. Their wars
are frequent. Their small numbers are owing to their
scanty means of subsistence, since the country pro-
duces originally neither fruits nor esculents. Their
food consists of the flesh of the kangaroo and oppos-
sum—to hunt these is their sole occupation—to which
they add the worms and grubs from the trees. They
run naked about the woods; for the cord of twisted
bark around their persons cannot be called clothing.
In the colder regions, a mantle of skins hangs from the
shoulder. They rarely make use of shelter in the
warmer regions; when they do, it consists of a strip of
bark torn from the half circle of a tree, under which
one person creeps, or of pieces of bark and branches
hastily thrown together, within which four or six per-
sons are huddled close upon each other.
They have not shown the least disposition to adopt
our habits of life, or means of subsistence. Their only


art is shown in their weapons of war. These consist
of a spear, a club, a shield of wood, and a singular in-
strument called a boomerang. This is made of heavy
wood, curved, about two feet and a half in length, and
perhaps two inches in breadth, being sharpened at the
end. It is hurled from the hand to the distance of 40
paces, then springs into the air, turns, returns, and
falls at the feet of the thrower. I have not yet seen
this remarkable effect explained by its physical laws.
Polygamy exists amongst the chiefs only. The wives
of one tribe are stolen, from another. The young wo-
man is surprised, beaten down insensible with a club,
dragged in triumph to the tribe, and ever afterwards
treated with cruel barbarity, as an inferior. The heads
of these women are covered with scars, and, after
death, their sculls are found indented and diaphonous
with blows Cannibalism is sometimes practised by
them. Of this there can bo no doubt; I have had the
declaration from their own mouths. They have nei-
ther temples nor idols, but many superstitions. They
stand in great fear of one or more evil spirits. At full
moon, they hold solemn religious dances in the woods
beneath her beams, called corobarees, in which they
mimic their Own wars, and the natural habits of the
kangaroo and emu. They have faith in the powers of
witchcraft, and in the transmigration of souls—believ-
ing the spirits of their fathers to return in the forms of
the animals around them, and in the white bodies of
the ■Europeans. What may be their real ideas of a
Supreme Being, of Divine Providence, and of an ulti-
mate future state, no one has been able to elicit. It is
exceedingly difficult to induce them to speak of their
religious notions.


These poor creatures have often.been treated by the
convicts, at the out stations, with atrocious barbarity;
who have even been known to shoot them, as game
for sport. From these they have acquired our lan-
guage in its most degraded dialect. From those they
have been initiated into more than our worst vices.
Their women have been shockingly treated. Where
the European population is thickest, they arc fast
dying off. The tribe nearest Sydney has no longer
more than live or six persons, and not one child to suc-
ceed their fathers. The tribes of Van Dieraan’s Land
are nearly extinct; there do not remain more than 150
souls, and these are now placed on an island in Bass’s
Straits, and supported by government. This exter-
mination of nearly a whole race has been the work of
twenty years.
I much regret that the urgent demands of the Eu-
ropean population for our spiritual assistance has
hitherto prevented our giving an especial attention to
this portion of our mission. Those of them who are
in our neighbourhood, are so grossly corrupted by
their communications with the convicts, that we can
hope nothing from them. Some children, in dangerous
sickness, have been baptized by the llev. Mr. Therry,
and there is occasionally one or two youths in our
schools; we have been able as yet to do nothing fur-
ther. Nor do 1 find that, from the evidence of their
reports, the especial missions from other creeds have
been, as yet, more successful. The only effectual me-
thod of proceeding—-the urgent wants of the convicts
render this impossible at present—will be to penetrate
beyond the limits of colonization, and to commence by
assimilating, as far as Christianity will permit, with


their habits, until their confidence be gradually won,
and their attention fixed upon a better state of things.
We have much more promising hopes of the natives
of New Zealand. These islands are 1000 miles re-
mote from Sydney; their inhabitants, a superior race,
are said to approach nearest in resemblance to the
Malays. Tall in stature, well made, of a copper co-
lour, with large, dark, expressive eyes; they are so-
cial, intelligent, fond of oratory, and live together in
villages, many of these being united in alliance.
Clothed with garments, woven by the women, of the
native flax, they cultivate the soil, and readily enter
into commerce. They may bo 150,000 in number.
The chief occupation of the men, from infancy, is war.
Their victories are followed with monstrous barbari-
ties, The head of the fallen enemy is cut off, baked
by a slow fire, then exposed to a current of cold air,
after which, perfectly preserved, it is conspicuously
placed, as a trophy, in the hut of the warrior, whilst
he devours the body, thinking that, as he eats tho
flesh, he partakes tho heroic qualities of the slain.
Their darling passion is revenge.
Soon after the arrival of our Bishop in Sydney, there
came a young man and woman from New Zealand.
They were the children of chiefs, sent to us under the
care of an Irish sailor, to hear of the Catholic religion,
The Bishop received them with great kindness. They
understood him to be " a chief of the people of Cod,
addressing the children of chiefs.” He presented to
them the image of our crucified Saviour, and when
they had gazed with mule and fixed attention upon it
for a time, he explained to them the mystery by their
own simple ideas. "It represented,” he told them,


“ the Son of the Great Spirit, come down from Heaven
to be a man like them, and, with the purpose of re-
venging the crimes of men against that Great Spirit—
by torments, not inflicted upon others, but upon him-
self—these were a part of his sufferings.” Here the
young chief shed tears. They were instructed, bap-
tized, and returned to their country.
I have since received letters, forwarded from New.
Zealand, from which it appears that the new Chris-
tians, on their return, had awakened a great interest in
their tribe. Their incessant talk of what they had
heard, of what they had seen, and of the ceremonials
of our church, which had strongly impressed them, had
induced another chief to send a message to the Bishop,
requesting, if he came over, the instruction and bap-
tism of himself and his son. These circumstances ap-
pear to present a favourable opening for the introduc-
tion of the mission into that country. lam happy to
add that two missioners are now on their way thither,
from the Missions Estranges,
And now, having given an outline of our mission
and our labours, permit me, dear reader, to say a word
upon our wants, which are very great,
Over the vast range of N. S. Wales, there are at
present only seven missioners. Sydney alone would
require three, and yet the Bishop is sometimes left
alone, with its duties added to his own. There are
vast districts, such as that of Bathurst, covered with
Catholics, and without a single priest. Van Dieman’s
Land requires seven priests at least, and has only two.
Two are demanded for Norfolk Island, for one alone
would be a thousand miles from a brother priest. The
south and western colonies, stretching along a line of
K


3,600 miles, have never seen a priest. The aborigi-
nal population, covering the vast interior, are under
the shadow of death. The government is prepared to
pay the expenses of a few more priests for N. S.
Wales, but not of an adequate number; of one for
Norfolk Island—of none at present for Van Dieman’s
Land. Without some such institution as the Sisters
of Charity, from the mother country,'ft seems impos-
sible to do much effectually with the female convicts.
A seminary is required for the education of youth, and
for the gradual formation of a body of native clergy
and schoolmasters, for which we are without means.
We have four buildings raised and closed infer ser-
vice, but not one ceiled or plastered. We are com-
mencing several others, but our present fund for their
completion is, hope. The government is disposed to
proportion a contribution to the gifts of the faithful;
but, with us, the great proportion are prisoners without
a penny. Our few wooden altars are naked of orna-
ment—we have scarcely a crucifix to put upon them,
The priests who go out will be without vestments or
chalices. Books of prayer and of instruction are
at an unlimited demand: we are obliged to give
one to every poor prisoner who arrives, and who can
read. How the Catholic prisoner clings to hiS prayer
book given by his priest I How he cltiSps it, when
every thing else is gone 1 How ingeniously he pre-
serves it through every hazard ! In the remote wilds,
it is to him in place of priest, and altar, and sacrifice.
We need means for the temperate defence of our
doctrines, for a great portion of the Australian press
has recently flooded us with the old calumnies. And,
indeed, what do we not need? We need the fervent
prayers of the faithful,


And now, dear reader, having followed us through
the vast regions of our mission—having shared in our
toils, our sorrows, our anxieties, and distresses—per-
mit an appeal to your charity.
You are not called, like us, to leave all things for
the sake of the miserable; but to aid us in the work
of their reparation is the vocation of ail. lam but a
voice—the voice of many thousands crying to you
from the ends of (be earth—the voice of lamentations
—the groans of the captive—(he call for help—the cry
of despair—the burden of Australia. Fifty thousand
souls are festering in bondage. The iron has entered
their souls—the scourge devours them. Their cala-
mities can only be expressed by inspirations of sor-
row. “ They went down in great ships upon the sea,
they saw the wonders of God in the deep—through
evils their souls pined away. They are cast upon the
ends of the earth, deprived of all their dear ones.
Bitter things are written against them—they are con-
sumed for the sins of their youth. Sorrow oppresses
their lives; wrinkles bear witness against them. They
reap the sorrows they had sown. Their bread is loath-
some to their eye—their meat unto their soul. As
slaves they long for the shade; they sigh for the
end of their work. They lie down to rest saying,
when shall I vise? They rise, and walk through sor-
row to the darkness. Their skin is withered and drawn
together; their flesh is devoured by the sun and dust-
They are encompassed round about with stripes, the
scourge comes upon them and they faint. The eyes
that saw them shall see them no more ; their place no
more beholds them. Their children ate oppressed with
want; they know not whether (hey come to honour
B 2


or to dishonour. Their hands render unto them sor-
row. Their bones are filled with the corruptions of
their youth. The riches they swallowed are cast forth;
they are punished for all they did, They are straitened j
God hath rained down war upon them ; the sword is
drawn—as it comelh forth, itglitterethin bitterness; the
terrible ones come and go upon them. A fire that no
hand kindled devours them; they are afflicted when
alone in their tent. They look for death, as those who
dig.for treasure, and it cometh not; they are exceed-
ingly rejoiced when they have found a grave, The
offspring of their house is exposed. What remains of
them is buried in death, and their widows do not weep,
As for me, when I remember, lam afraid; trembling
seizeth my flesh, Am I not enclosed in a prison with
the dead ? Shall ! speak but in the affliction of my
soul ? Shall I remain silent whilst strength remains ?”
We have given ourselves—wo have nothing loft;
we call on you for help, If, in your love of God, you
would see banished from before his face this array of
crime, which offends him—help us. If, in your cha-
rity, you look out for the poorest objects, if those most
Ibst, if those who have least aid within themselves—
help us. If you would descend to the deepest mise-
ries, and carry down there the most blessed good, and
pour it out to the greatest number of the unhappy-
assist us, If you would aspire to a godlike work, if
to emulate the perfection of that Eternal Father, whose
work is the creation of good, and the diffusion of light
through the places of darkness, and the preparation of
enjoyment, co-operate with him in the divinest of all
his divine works, the salvation of the fallen—help ns,
If you would be associated in the redemption of


Christ, who came down with sacrifice to deliver us
when heathens, and preached to the souls in prison-
help us. If to share in the merits of our npostleship
without the toil, and in our blessed consolations with-
out the sacrifice—if to combine the works of mercy
spiritual with those corporal, and present them in one
act to Christ—help us. If to these despairing thou-
sands you would he as the visible providence of God—
if at that last dread day you would hoar their appealing
voices on your behalf, 11 The Lord iie.nl this his angel,
who delivered mu out of prison"— if, in that groat hour,
you would hoar from the Eternal Son the decision of
your election, “ 1 was in prison , and ye come unto me”
if you would snatch from perdition those souls, wash
them in the blood of the cross, and place them, as ce-
lestial rubies, in your own immortal crown—bring to
us help.
If ever there was a prayer, deep, solemn, earnest—
if ever a supplication of the heart from which all pride
and confidence were gone, crushed out by the force of
calamity and the pressure of distress—if ever an en-
treaty from the soul, it is the cry of the convict to
you. He has offended; is he not punished ? He put
you in danger; is ho not cast out? He deserves;
are you then the avenger of blood ? “ Forgive us our
sins, us we forgive others" Have you then nothing to
forgive? Shall the cross ho taken down ? the wounds
of Christ cease to flow? the gates of mercy be closed,
and all pardon be at an end? Whatever have been
their crimes, are they not now sacred, anointed with
sorrow and consecrated to affliction P What if their
conditions of life had been yours, yours theirs ? We
are relentless and undiscerning in our condemnations
E 3


of the failed. 1 have often compared the monster
hunted from before man with the poor penitent trem-
bling before God, and have found them in one person.
How many good tendencies and sources of right feel-
ing are there even in the worst of men, for which the
world gives them little credit, and which, had they
been duly appreciated and rightly directed, would
have made all the difference ? I have known men
who, though death awaited them, and all the moving
mysteries of religion were displayed before their faith*
yet felt themselves hard and insensible as the iron that
bound them; but they felt it as a torture of the soul,
from which they strove and prayed deliverance in vain.
Were these men impenitent? Yet how could the world
have comprehended their repentance ? Could you but
sfee those dark-browed men, when we recall to them
their innocent years; when we oppose their sufferings
with the passion of Christ; when, unfolding the mys-
tery of grace, we show them that, with this world and
its hopes vanished, all is far from being lost: could
you but mark the fixed gaze—the tremble—.the long
sob—the tear, frozen since infancy, bursting down
the furrowed cheek of clay—.the hard-clasped hands'—
the shudder, as some great truth comes forth—-the
prostrate form, the glowing (ace* the fervent prayer—
you would confess in them the power of grace, the
will broken of its stubbornness, the heart subdued.
Oh,who will give them of those apostolic men, who
dwell beneath the shadow of the cross, and preach
nothing but its excellences. Men who will go forth
under the banner of the bleeding King, insatiable of
suffering; who will seek no rest but where they bring


peace; and who will count their wealth but in the
number of rescued souls.
But let me conclude—rest I am not allowed; for
wherever I go and whatever X do, the voices of these
wretched men follow me. Their shrunken forms
gather round me, an army of distress reproaching my
delays. The stagnant gaze from the interior—the dis-
solute features from the factory—the red glare through
the sunken eye of the barrack—the down-bent dejec-
tion of the iron-gang—the swollen head raised from
the death-cell floor, repressing the bursting heart—the
shame-sunk female from her destroyer, bowed down
with memory—the palsied head, white with age, but
without reverence, from the asylum—the haggard des r
pair from Norfolk Island; their spectral forms gather
round us, like a forest of humanity blasted by the
visitation of God. Oh, remember the human lot, and
have pity I The presence of Christ is amongst them;
his wounds and his agonies bleed anew; he calls on
you for help. Will you refuse him? No; for you
also are the child of his sorrows. The wild heathen
wanders through them deprived of light. The little
children point with their finger, and ask you whether
they shall become like these. From the shadow of
death that covers them, “bound in poverty and iron,”
they stretch forth their arms with mine to supplicate
you.


NOTE.
Lest L should be suspected of exaggerating the
effects of the lash, so often inflicted, I think it proper,
however painful the exhibition, to present my readers
with the following extracts from reports of punishments
under the existing law, delivered by the magistrates of
the colony to the government, in answer to a circular
of 21st August, 1833, They are cited from a pam-
phlet printed in Sydney in 1034, and addressed to
Lord Stanley by “An Unpaid Magistrate.” The
author observes —“ I could easily have extracted
severer punishments than these, but have no taste for
such topics.” —
“ Adam Ballatine, disobedience of orders in going to the hospital
under pretence of sickness; a troublesome character, 25 lashes.
This boy received 25 lashes on the 23d of July; he eried out loudly
at every lash; the blood ran freely from fresh and old sores j he
was severely punished.
“ Edward Scandrake, neglect of duty by feigning sickness,
261ashos. He received 50 lashes last Monday week, but was never
flogged before; was sore from the last punishment; blood came at
the first stroke; he screamed dreadfully at every lash, the blood
running freely from the old wounds; he lost much blood.
" Andrew M‘Mabon, drunk and disorderly, 50 lashes. This was
an pi J offender, had been flogged repeatedly; this was the first time
that he was punished with the regulation cat; he bellowed at every
lash and writhed with agony; his back was very much lacerated,


and more blood appeared than I had observed on any other crimi-
nal ; when taken down ho seemed much exhausted, and cried like a
child.
“ Francis Hayes, disorderly conduct and neglect of work, 50
lashes. A young manj had been punished before; at the first
lash he cried out, which he did during the whole of his punishment,
and struggled most violently, calling out that he could not stand
it, and praying to be taken down; about the Bth lash blood came,
and he begged for water, which was given him; his back was
much lacerated, and he appeared a good deal exhausted when taken
down.
“ George Delbridgc, drunk and disorderly, SO lashes. A strong
muscular man; previous to being tied up, he appeared to think
lightly of the punishment he was about to receive; the first lash,
however, caused him to change his opinion; he groaned aloud,
and let his head fall on his shoulder after every stripe; blood ap-
peared about the 9th lash, and his back was very much lacerated
at the conclusion of the punishment.
"John Carroll, neglect of duty by feigning sickness, 25 lashes.
This hoy received 12 lashes about three weeks ago, and was flogged
a short time before that; cried out loudly at the first lash ; blood
came on the 18th lash, and ran freely throughout the remaining
part of the punishment. He must have felt much pain.
"Jeremiah Higgins, absconding, S 5 lashes. This man was
flogged about 5 years ago; he writhed under the pain; the skin
Was lacerated at the 7th lash; the blood at the 12th lash; he cried
out at the 22d lash. This man was severely punished.
" John Thacker, neglect of duty, 50 lashes. Bruised, lacerated,
and blood drawn.
•‘William Robinson, drunk and making away with a part of his
dress which was given him by his master, 50 lashes. This man
was never flogged before; he cried out at every lash; the skin was
lacerated at the 12th lash; the blood appeared at the 20tb; this
man suffered intense agony. Twenty lashes would have been an
ample warning to him.
“ John Green, absconding, SO lashes. Appeared to suffer much,
bled freely, and fainted after the punishment,”


APPENDIX.
Conations for the Australasian Mission will be re-
ceived by Dr. Ullathorne, or at the bank of Messrs.
Wright and Co,, London ; also by the following cler-
gymen in various parts of the kingdom :*-The Rev.
Dr. Baldacconi, Rev. Mr. Rolfe, Rev. Mr. Hepston-
stall, London; the Revs, Dr. Youens, V. Glover, and
G. Gibson, Liverpool; Y. Rev. B. Rayment, York;
Rev. J, Worswick, Newcastle; Rev. J. Render,
Hull; Rev. H. Brewer, Brown Edge; Rev. Messrs.
West and Connolly, Preston;-Rev. R. Thompson,
Weld Bank, Chorley; Rev. J. Crook and Rev, W.
Turner, Manchester; Rev. G. Brown, Lancaster;
Rev. H. Warmsley, Leeds; Rev. J. M, M‘Donnell,
Birmingham; Rev. L. Barber, Salford House; Rev.
W.Willson, Nottingham; Rev. Mr. Cooper, Bath;
Rev. Mr. Shann, Cheltenham; V. Rev. Dr. Weedall,
Oscott; Rev, J. Brownbill, Stonyhurst; Rev. Dr.
Brown, Downside. Contributions in books, vest-
ments, altar plate, &c , are requested to be forwarded,
addressed to Dr. Ullathorne, care of Mr. T. Jones,
Catholic Bookseller, 63, Paternoster-row, London,
or to 42, Ranelagh-street, Liverpool.
