

mMi A -eSlt
I
THE
AUTOBIOGRAPHY
or a
POST OFFICE PEN.
r ~-. -
gklaibr:
THE ADVERTISER, GENERAL PRINTING OFFICES.




11 Pt" fU P ki 4
AUTOBIOGRAPHY
POST OFFICE PEN.
BI’M8 I’M a Number 800, made in tbe world-renowned manu-
al factory of Messrs. Joseph Grillott & Sons, of
Ijt Birmingham, and supplied by contractors in England
V to the Post and Telegraph Department of this well-
known Colony of South Australia.
I came out to the colony in one of those noble “ Orient”
liners, who in the more prosperous days of the colony
used to bring Her Britannic Majesty’s mail so regularly to
her shores. On arrival at the Port, our case and many others
were most unceremoniously thrown into a large van and
taken to the Port Bailway Station, where we had to wait
a long time. Through an opening in the case I heard
some folks say once, “ How is it that never a porter can
be seen anywhere about this station?” “Ah!” said
another voice, “ Why, it is just the same in Adelaide.”
At last we were forwarded to Adelaide, and I most
anxiously awaited my introduction to this model city of
the Southern Hemisphere. But, to my horror, after
waiting at the town goods shed for two long, hot days—
which were so hot that I was afraid my polished surface
would be corroded before my introduction to the
Postmaster-Greneral, whom I was most anxious to see ; and
coming from so large an establishment as that of the Messrs.
G-illott, I naturally felt anxious to look my best, as I
wished so much to be kept in the town department.
Well, I said those goods sheds on North-terrace were very
hot, but by rubbing myself against my companions as
well as I could, I managed to keep most of the corode off.
At last the case in which I was packed was once more,
taken up, this time by McCulloch & Oo.’s men. While .


'being lifted I beard a great crank, and I thought we were
going to have an ignominious capsize in front of the
venerable Trinity Church. However, our cases were
sufficiently strong to bear even the rough usage of that
firm’s employes, and on to the Post Office we were taken.
As we were going under what seemed and sounded to me
as some sort of arch, I was astonished to hear a voice say,
as the rumble of a passing vehicle grated on my point,
“ That’s the van that holds the ‘Yery Eeligious.’ “ How
do yon know that ?” said another. “ Don’t you see that
large ‘ Y. E.’ on it P ”
Again another lift, and then I felt myself being lowered
some feet down, and a voice shouted out, “Put those cases
on this side of the crypt!” How that old-fashioned word
sounded through my “barrel” —“Crypt of St. Pauls,” which
I had heard some of the young men at the manufactory
often speaking about. At last, then, again I am on terra
firma, but instead of being hot now I felt cold, almost as
cold as in “ Old England.” Day after day we waited and
not one glimmer of light could we see. I began to get
tired of the dull monotony, and think that if this was
life in the Post Office Department of the colony, I
should wish that my future prospects had opened in one
of the large London warehouses. However, there I was,
and I must make the best of it now. I was landed in
January, and from what I learned from the gossip in the
crypt, the stores were not distributed among the stations
until July. What plans I laid, what a future I hoped for,
what good I wished to do.
Time passed, month after month rolled by, and July
came round. What a noise now ; but the most peculiar
sound of all was a noise something like the sound of a
flat hammer falling at regular intervals through the pas-
sages of the place. Thump, thump ! What could it be? I
asked some of my companions, but they could not inform
me. At last, when all the thick of the packing was on,
our case was suddenly pulled down, and the cover taken
off. What a treat, after so many months of close confine-
ment, again to have change of air—-I cannot say fresh
air, tor, in consequence of gas being continually kept
burning, down where we were the air is anything but
fresh during the summer months.


1 then heard some one say, “Mr. J., the P.M.Q-., wants
you,” and thump, thump, thump, went that thing again.
One box in our company, in unpacking, got two pens
knocked out, and one of these told us that the cause of all
this peculiar sound was that Mr. J. had a wooden leg.
How thankful I felt that I never could have such a
thing; my barrel might be ill-used and my nib broken, but
fortunately I had no leg to break and supply its place
by a wooden one.
A little while after we were all lifted out of our places,
and sorted with sundry common brooms, matches, kerosine,
candles, ink, &c., into sundry heaps.
Only fancy, what low company for an 800 pen ! Oh,
if I had only known what my future would have been, I
would have managed, by some means or other, never to
have left the shores of “ Merrie England.”
Seme days passed, and the time of our departure drew
near, and, from observations dropped, I learnt that our
neap was to be sent to a post and telegraph station not a
thousand miles from Adelaide by rail.
¥e were sent to our destination sure enough, and
reached there safely ; but there were no Bradley’s,
McCulloch’s, or any other vans, to convey ns from the
railway station to our future home.
At last the storekeeper of the place, a Mr. C., lent his
cart and man, and shortly after into the office we were
bundled. I soon found out my new master was a
“missus” and O save us! how sorry I felt, and I
pictured a horrible future before me in writing love
letters—only fancy, a Humber 800 penning “Ever thine
own,” “ Tours till death,” &c. May the fates save me
from this miserable end. But as time rolled on I found
out this lady was one of a good sort, and always used me
well.
Into the cupboards all the stores were most tidily placed
by this good woman ; and now for some future time I shall
not be engaged actively ; but ere I bid you “ adieu,” I will
just relate two short incidents which are of daily occurrence,
I have been told, in the lives of all our country station-
masters. Listen ! 7 a.m. —Knock, knock, knock, front office
door. _ Up goes my mistress, thinking at that unseemly
hour it was a most important telegram. A very weak,


clntdislx voice, says; “Please for a twopenny stamp.”
££ My good child,” the lady answers, “no stamps are sold
before nine,” and down the passage again I bear ber
retreating footsteps. 8 a.m. —Back door. Listen again ;
man’s voice: ££ Mr. Jones has sent me for bis letters.”
££ Wo letters are delivered before nine,” I bear ber again say.
0 dear! what a model of patience this good lady must
be to stand a lifetime of this work ! 9 a.m.—Office has
been swept and dusted by the lad employed here, and
everything is in its place. The good woman and her
assistant are now very busy selling stamps, sending tele-
grams, making up mails, and I feel tired —my mind must
rest for a while.
After six months of quiet repose, I resume my story
again.
This morning the good lady, the S.M., drew the pen-
box containing myself and companions out, and placed it
on the counter. ££ John,” she said, addressing the
messenger in a few minutes, ££ Give me a new pen.”
John accordingly opened the box, and because, I suppose,
I was the best-looking pen there, he chose me, and placed
me on a common brown holder —the stick which I had
always thought that the Messrs. Gillott had placed in our
box for a life-preserver. Oh ! dear, after all my exalted
aspirations, I was placed on a common brown. holder. I
had fondly dreamed of being used on a silver, gold, or a
mounted porcupine holder —but no, here I am on a brown
stick!
Just as lam baptized-—not sprinkled, but dipped—into
the black fluid, I hear John say, “ Savings Bank depositor
at the window ” (for this is an agency of the Savings Bank
as well as a Post and Telegraph Station.) Away goes my
mistress, me in hand, to the open casement, and outside I
see a poor woman, very poor, who says, ££ Please mum,
here’s my book; I want to withdraw all I have saved. lam
go sorry, but my husband has been ill, and I have eight
children to feed, and I must have it all ; ” and I am put
into her hands to sign the notice of withdrawal. I feel so
grieved that my first public act should have been signing
a paper of this description —however, <£ such is life.”


A little time elapses, and I hear a trap stop at the door,
and a well-known gentleman, highly respected by all in the
district, gets out and comes to the telegraph window. “Do
you register deaths here? ” is the question asked. “I want to
register the death of a little niece,” he said (who, I after
wards learned from one of my relations on a yellow holder
lying on the counter, was a most loveable child of some
ten years, but who had died after days of terrible suffering,
from that fell destroyer diphtheria). Alas, that my point
should be used for such a purpose. After this the good lady
carried me into her sitting-room, and for two days I laid
most comfortably on the table of that snug little room.
Sunday came, and I saw her all ready for church, and
heard her singing in rather a sweet voice—
Thy way, not mine, 0 Lord,
However dark it be ;
Lead me by Thine own hand,
Choose out the path for me :
Smooth let it be, or rough,
It will be still the best;
Winding or straight, it leads
Eight onward to thy rest.
Ah ! thinks I, if I could only he used in writing such
lines as those what a much happier life mine would be,
instead of a life in a country town.
In the evening again I saw her sitting reading in her
easy chair. After a long quiet she withdrew, and I saw
her no more that night.
The nest morning I heard the lady say, “ John, where
is that nice pen I had yesterday, the one you gave me out
of that new box, I liked it so much ? Then steps drew
near. I was taken up, and, for a time at least, I appear
on the scene of public life.
Monday morning, 9 a.m. —I hear my holder say, sc I don’t
know how it is, but almost every week opens with a
telegram to some house of the death of some loved one.”
In her hand I write, “ Mother died yesterday; buried to-
morrow ; come down at once !” "Whose mother? I think to
myself. Who will read the words lam now writing?
Into whose home will this message bring sorrow and
tidings of bereavement ? I wait a second and I trace the
letters of a name that I have heard many times.


Tte toy takes out what I have written, and my mistress
throws herself into a chair, saying to herself: “ How
dreadful to have to send the tidings of sorrow and death
to that family !” And again I hear her soft voice sing—-
“ Why do we mourn departing friends,
Or shake at death’s alarms,
’Tis hut the voice that Jesus sends,
To call them to His arms.”
The office door opens ; John has returned. “ I don’t
like taking out telegrams like that,” he says; “It was
awful to see them. ‘My mother gone ! ’ cried one child.
‘Where’s mother?’ cried another. ‘l’m a widower,’
groaned the father. Oh! I don’t like those messages ; ”
and John shrugged his shoulders.
After this I am quietly put on the pen rack, and some
others of my comrades are used for a day or two. One
afternoon lam taken into use again. This time it appears
it is to register a letter containing a hank money-order for
£lO, which an Irish girl is sending home to her mother
in “ Erin’s Isle.” “ BallyjamesdufE,” I write. Sure, that’s
a queer place for money to go to ; if she sent it to James
Duff; I could understand, hut wdiat’s the Bally got to do
with it ? I could not understand that Ballyjamesduff: was
the name of a money order office, where her good old
mother had to go to get the money.
In putting me down on the counter my mistress dropped
me, and I trembled for the probability of my being trodden
on. Blessings on that brown holder, thinks I; if I had only
been put on a gold or silver holder, no such ignominious
downfall would have been mine ; and here I suppose I must
lie until I’m “ picked up.” How nice it sounds, “picked
up ! ” and all my dreams of future greatness are again
dispelled.
Saturday evening comes, office closes at six, and
immediately afterwards, in comes a good old charwoman to
scrub the office. Of course she picks me up like a
drunken man out of a gutter, and again I take my place
on the rack. The next thing I hear the good lady whose
servant I am say to herself, “ Why, it is four years and a-
half since I had a rise in salary, and it has been such hard
work to make ends meet; indeed, there is one account I
must pay next month. I will ask again for promotion.” And


then I am used in writing to head-quarters, setting forth
the length of time she had been in the service, &c., and
the P.M.Gr.’s favorable consideration is asked for the
application for a rise. May she get it, thinks I; answer
number five will come like number four, “I am in receipt
of your letter of 16th inst., and your case will come under
consideration with that of other ladies in the department.”
One of my relatives in the secretary’s office told me he had
written plenty of these replies. After the letter is finished
I hear a great groan, “ Oh ! if only I could get promoted
again I would not care how hard-worked—
‘ Women must work,
Women must weep.’ ’
I see her fold and address the letter, but I never knew
what the answer was. I think it must have been as I
imagined, as I noticed more sighs escaped her lips, her
dress grew shabby, her hair grew grey, and when asked for
subscriptions to any charitable purpose, “ I would if I
could, but I can’t afford it,” came from between her teeth.
Again a rest; I feel so wearied of this monotony of a
country life. The die is cast, however, lam again called
into requisition by answering a letter from the head office
about a missing letter containing money. I think to
myself, no wonder these letters go astray; their salaries
are so small, the hours so long, and the responsibilities so
great. Nothing is remembered by my owner about this
letter ; neither does she think, I heard her say, it ever
passed through her office.
“Another night awake,” she utters. “These missing
letters containing valuables make me so uneasy and worry me
so. (fod knows it has nothing to do with me. Would
that the public at large gave Post Office employes credit
for only half the trouble they take over 1 missing letters' ”
The door goes to, and I hear no more that night.
Next day I am used again on Savings Bank account.
This time I see a fine-looking young man at the window,
and I am used to take a deposit of his hard-earned savings
of £5O. Outspoken, manly young fellow, I hear him say,
“ I’m soon going to be married, and this sum with what I
have saved before is to buy my furniture. It is better to
put it away safely until I want it.” “ Most certainly,”
the S.M. answers ; “ I am ready to take as much as you


TTAf
like.” I could not kelp glancing at her books, wbicb I
saw were a model of neatness.
Next I am used to make out a return of all stores on
band, and all stores needed for proper working of the
office for the coming year, and a tedious piece of work
that is. By this time I begin to feel worn out, and that
the best part of my life is over, Eancy the multitudinous
work of an office pen; none but an 800 could do it.
Obliged to own, like an old minister, I’m worn out Life
in the Post Office work is hard, as the death of tried and
valued servants like W. J. Cunningham, Esq. (late
Assistant Supt. of Telegraphs), and H. L. Hurst, Esq.
(Chief Clerk), can testify ; men who laid down their lives
for the colony and the public. But “ there’s life in the
old dog yet,” as a lovely engraving illustrates ; and though
I may not write as well as I once did, I can still trace
lines.
Now I write a bank slip, “ Pay into Savings Bank
account the sum of £5OO ; ” then comes a cheque on
P.M.Gr.’s account at the bank for £7 10s., all the
characters of which I trace faithfully. Next I hear John
say to my mistress, “ Please, ma’am, may I have two days’
holiday ? I will do all I possibly can to help you ere I
go.” “ John,” she said, “ messengers in the Telegraph
Department are allowed no holidays unless they find
substitutes • but you are an obliging lad —I will try.”
Again I am called to aid in writing to the chief office for
permission to let John go. The answer comes in the
affirmative, and John gladly departs on a hare-hunting
expedition for two days.
Now it is the end of the month, and my last exertions
are used in preparing returns of telegraph receipts, money
order returns, records of letters of all sorts, rainfall,
Savings’ Bank returns. Business is increasing, and my dying
struggles are aggravated by those awful new postal regula-
tions, and an enormous increase of labor in that stamp
return. My strength is giving way, part of my point
breaks off, and my course on earth is over.
May you all do as I have done, “ wear otrf, not rust out.
Tours,
800.




