





DIOCESE OF TASMANIA
(Eommpmnratinti nf tlje JFtrat (El|«rrl|
ferine? Ijelfo in
FEBRUARY 26th, 1804
ORDER OF SERVICE
NATIONAL ANTHEM
OGOD, we have heard with our ears and our fathers
have declared unto us, the noble works that Thou
didst in their days, and in the old time before them.
LESSON. Isaiah xxxv
PRAYERS
OLORD our Saviour, who hast been pleased to send
Thy word into all lands and to the islands of the sea,
grant that we to whom Thou hast cast our lot in so
goodly a heritage, may strive together with fervent
prayer and almsgiving, and by every appointed means to
sustain and extend that which we so richly enjoy; and as
we have entered into the labours of other men, so to
labour that in their turn other men may enter into ours,
to the fulfilment of Thy holy will and our everlasting
salvation; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
OGOD, Who by the ministry of Thy servants didst
cause Thy holy religion to be acknowledged in our
land, give grace unto Thy Church devoutly to exercise
that holy discipline which from them it has received;
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
OLORD God of our fathers,Who in Thy goodness hast
led this people hitherto by wondrous ways; who
makest the nations to praise Thee, and knittest them to-
gether in the bonds of peace; we beseech Thee to pour


Thine abundant blessing on the Dominions over which
Thou hast called Thy servant George to be King. Grant
that all, of whatever race or colour or tongue, may in
prosperity and peace be united in the bond of brother-
hood, and in fellowship of the Faith, so that we may be
found acceptable unto Thee. Through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.
THE LORD’S PRAYER
THE GRACE OF OUR LORD
HYMN
ADDRESS
HYMN
BLESSING
RIGHT REV. ROBERT SNOWDON HAY
Bishop of Tasmania


Mo /
w
f
ijißtnnral jittrohurtioit
BASIL W. RAIT
THE first clergyman to arrive in Tasmania, or Van Die-
men’s Land, as it was known, was the Rev. Robert
Knopwood, a Church of England Minister, whose privi-
lege it was to administer to the wants of the people of
Van Diemen’s Land both spiritually and materially for
more than twenty years.
Bobby Knopwood, as he was more commonly known,
is pictured in the majority of historical works yet pub-
lished as being one who was fond of high living, and
given to unconventional methods; as a result he more
than once incurred the displeasure of the Commander-in-
Chief in New South Wales.
Born in Norfolk, England, on June 2nd, 1761, of an
ancient and respected Suffolk family, Knopwood was
educated first at Bury School, St. Edmonds, and later at
Cain’s College, Cambridge, where he took his Master of
Arts degree in 1784. Whilst still a young man he studied
for Holy Orders, and was ordained. By the death of his
father shortly afterwards, he inherited estates to the
value of £90,000; he then apparently became extremely
popular and many riotous livers of the latter part of the
eighteenth century were attracted to him and assisted
him in squandering his fortune.
In 1794, when it became necessary to earn a living,
Knopwood accepted the position as domestic chaplain to
Earl Spencer, the First Lord of the Admiralty, and
remained as such until 1801, in which year he was
appointed as chaplain to H.M.S. “Resolution.” Early in
January, 1803, he was commissioned as chaplain to Lieut.
Colonel Collins’ expedition to Port Phillip, and sailed
with Collins on April 27th in the “Calcutta,” which was
accompanied by the “Ocean.” The Calcutta reached Port
Phillip on October 9th, and Collins at once set to work
to form a settlement. As he was not impressed with the
surrounding country, he eventually decided to transfer
his company to the Derwent, where a small settlement


had already been formed at Risdon under Lieutenant
Bowen. Accordingly, he sailed from Port Phillip on
January 30th, 1804, and arrived at Risdon on February
15th.
On the following morning he inspected the settle-
ment, which he condemned as unsuitable. Thereupon,
he selected the site of the modern city of Hobart for his
settlement. On the 19th, Collins moved his ships to an
anchorage in Sullivan’s Cove, and on the 20th the com-
pany disembarked. Tents were then pitched, Collins
being on the site now occupied by the Town Hall portico,
and Knopwood’s nearby. Collins named the settlement
Hobart —after Lord Hobart, the then Secretary of State
for the Colonies.
The first divine service was held on Sunday, February
26th, in a tent near where the Franklin Square is now laid
out. In his diary for 1804, Knopwood records the event
as follows :
“Sunday, 26th, a.m. At 10 the military paraded; half-
past, all the convicts, settlers assembled, and the Lieut.-
Governor, with the officers of the new colony, heard
Divine Service; the sermon, by request of the Lieut.-
Governor, was upon the prosperity of the new settlement,
and to pray to God for a blessing upon the increase of it.”
The Prosperity of the Settlement
Taking as his text, Psalm 107, verse 43 —“Whoso is
wise, and will consider these things, even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord” —Knopwood
preached as follows : o
“This psalm appears, from several passages in it, to
have been composed in memory of the return from cap-
tivity. The primary design is to celebrate the mercies of
Providence in the restoration of the Jewish people; but
having mentioned the loving kindness of the Lord, the
religious mind of the author is struck with the many
obvious marks of it in the constitution of nature, and
takes notice of the appearances in several instances. He
observes that wickedness is usually followed by punish-
ment. ‘Fools, because of their transgressions, and be-
cause of their iniquities, are afflicted.’ And though their
case seems to be the least of all entitled to compassion,
yet, even these, ‘when they cry unto the Lord in their
trouble, He saveth them out of their distress.’ He then
observes the peculiar care of Providence attending on


those ‘who go down to the sea in ships, and do business
in great waters.’ The inference drawn by him from these
and other observations is full of wisdom and piety.
‘Whoso is wise, and will observe these things, even they
shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord.’ The
daily observance of what happens in the course of nature,
and in the life of man, is fully sufficient to manifest to a
considerate mind the infinite goodness of our Heavenly
Father. In order to pursue the same kind of meditation
into which the pious Psalmist has led us, I shall first
mention some of the proofs of divine goodness that are
visible in the works of nature, and in the condition of
mankind, and secondly point out the moral and religious
uses of the doctrine itself. Though the goodness of God
is acknowledged in general terms by all who profess
themselves His worshippers, yet the proofs of it are little
attended to, and the use and importance of it with regard
to religion are seldom duly considered. Great ignorance
and obscurity must necessarily accompany the notions
we form of God. The divine nature in that awful obscu-
rity in which it must probably ever remain to all created
beings, it is our business to study the visible efforts and
manifestations of it. And we need not look far to see
that ‘the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord; the
earth, O Lord, is full of Thy mercy/ Time would fail us
if we were to attempt to* describe the various ranks and
natures of the creatures who are our fellow inhabitants
on this globe. The soil, the climate, the element they
dwell in, are always suited to their natures; an ample
provision is made of the food that is proper for them all
and they are furnished with the strength and the activity,
and even with the weapons that is necessary to procure
it. They all pursue the dictates of nature, and during
their appointed term enjoy the gratifications of life.
Their pleasures are simple and natural, far superior to
their sufferings; so that we must acknowledge them to
be placed in a state of happiness, and indeed their voices
are generally expressive of inward satisfaction, and attest
the goodness of their Maker. But the race of man has
a clear and visible pre-eminence over the rest. He has
powers and faculties allotted to him which fit him for
better enjoyments, and a superior kind of life. Besides
this, God has given him ‘dominion over the beasts of the
field and the fowls of the air.’ By labour and art and
experience, he is enabled to subdue their force and baffle
their cunning. Such is his superiority, that he can apply


their strength to serve his various purposes, and use
them as instruments in the advancement of his designs.
Man, of all the beings we are: acquainted with, undoubt-
edly possesses the largest portion of the Divine favour.
He partakes of the gratifications of sense, and even those
are imparted to him with more variety, and in greater
excellence. Besides this, he has the faculty of reason
which enables him to observe the consequences of things,
to make trial of what is best, and to grow wise by expe-
rience. The inferior animals very soon reach the height
of that improvement their nature is susceptible of, and
there remain at a stand; but the mind of man is always
acquiring fresh information, collecting experience, im-
proving the arts of life, and facilitating the means of con-
veying it. He is by degrees enabled to raise his thoughts
above the transient state of the present life, and by ob-
serving the wisdom manifested in the frame of the world,
to collect at least an imperfect knowledge of the Great
Creator. And lest our reasonings, through inattention
on the cares of the world should be defective, our Hea-
venly Father has Himself revealed to us all that it is our
duty to do, and given that knowledge which is sufficient
for us. It is too hard a task in the narrow compass we have
assigned to ourselves to reckon up the advantages that
are peculiar to mankind, let it suffice, that in whatever
instance reason is preferable to sense, and art and expe-
rience to instinct, in whatever respect the wisdom and
strength of numbers united in society are superior to
solitary force and ignorance, this is to be numbered
among the privileges of mankind. And it adds much to
Lhe dignity of their character that God has made them
capable, as it were, of an intercourse with Himself by
devotion and prayer. And even the government we are
required to submit ourselves to, perhaps is the greates 1 .
proof of the divine goodness .we have received. The
obedience which God has exacted from us as the rule of
behaviour in our commerce with the world is, to do unto
other men as we would they should do unto us. As if
the endless display of His bounty in the universe had
been insufficient to answer all the good purposes of his
benevolence, Fie exhorts and commands His creatures to
unite in procuring their own happiness, to join their en-
deavours in carrying on the public good. The exercise
of this duty is not only productive of the good efforts
which it aims at, but is in itself a pleasure of the most
exalted kind. Unhappy is that mind which knows not


the delight that is felt in doing good, and the love and
gratitude that ought to attend the receiving of it. Could
we suppose the same benefits to be the produce of chance,
or the gifts of fortune, or even the rewards of industry;
yet without the intercourse of mutual obligation the
most exquisite part of the enjoyment would be lost. So
great has appeared the attention of Providence, not only
to our happiness itself, but even in the manner that they
recommend and endear it to us. And who, that looks
around him, from the delightful place where the
Almighty through PI is unbounded goodness has been
pleased to establish us in, can doubt this?
“Let us pray that God would bless and prosper all our
undertakings in this infant colony, and increase the fruits
of the earth, by which through His blessing, our lives
and those around us, the natives of the land, may be
amply supplied. Let us give God thanks for the grass of
the field, by which such a number of creatures are fed,
for the use of man. Let us take notice of the great
variety of those creatures which are made for our use,
some for labour, some for food, some for clothing, some
for pleasure; at the same time let us remember that our
right in these creatures is not absolute; we hold them
from God, and He can deprive us of them whenever we
abuse them. Let us turn our thoughts likewise upon the
mountains and hills which surround us; without these
the earth would be but an uncomfortable habitation;
these being made by *a merciful God to supply the lower
parts of the earth with springs and rivers, so useful to
man and beast. Let therefore the water we drink and
use put us in mind of that God who furnishes every coun-
try, and especially this of ours, with this necessary ele-
ment.
“When God gives us seasonable wealth, favourable
seed time, the former and the latter rains in their season,
and plentiful harvest,, how are we bound to thank Him
for these general blessings to ourselves and others. And
when He denies us these blessings, which He never does
but for our good, we are bound, even then, to be thankful.
“Having, therefore, all the marks of the divine good-
ness we have mentioned, and numberless others continu-
ally impressed upon our minds, let us in the next place
consider the religious uses to which these observations
may be applied.


5R
U- (o
“In the first place, the least and lowest return we can
make for all the blessings conferred upon us is to be
contented and pleased with them. It would be unpar-
donable to repine and murmur at our situation, when it
appears to have been the intention of Nature and Provi-
dence to make us happy. Mankind indeed are not exempt
from sufferings, which proceed in many instances to their
preservation and welfare. But if we take away those
evils which are of our own making, the pangs of
envy and discontent, of malice and resentment, the
pains with which Nature is loaded by luxury and
intemperance, human life, in its pure natural state
will appear to abound in comforts and enjoy-
ments, and its sufferings will be reduced to a few
natural evils which seldom occur, and are very support-
able in themselves. On the contrary, the sources of our
happiness are always open, pleasures are distributed to
us with liberal hand, and there are few but have suffered
more from the excess than from the want of them. Man-
kind, if they please, may abuse the favour of Heaven, but
let them not impute to Providence the evils they bring
upon themselves. To conclude: Let no man who calls
himself a Christian forget or neglect to praise God ‘for
His inestimable love in the redemption of the world by
our Lord Jesus Christ for the means of grace and for the
hope of glory.’ All, our happiness in this life, and in the
life to come, depends upon this invaluable blessing and
are being truly sensible of it, and thankful for it. May
God give us all grace to consider these things that we
may with heart and voice join with the Heavenly com-
pany mentioned in the Revelation, say dhou art worthy,
Q Lord, to receive honour and power and glory, for Thou
has created all things, and for Thy glory they are and
were created/ To Hinn therefore be ascribed all honour
and glory by us and all His faithful servants for ever and
ever. Amen.”
At the close of the service Knopwood proceeded to
Risdon in the Governor’s cutter and held a short service
there under a large gum tree, which is believed to be still
standing. As> the majority of the early services had to
be held in the open, they were held infrequently, for on
several occasions, according to Knopwood’s diary, “the
ground was so wet that the Governor declined having
D.V. service performed.” On some occasions the Gover-


nor thanked Mr. Knopwood “before the whole congrega-
tions for the excellent sermon/’
Besides being a minister of religion, Knopwood was
also a magistrate, and at times occasioned some scandal
among pious settlers by paying more attention to his civil
than to his religious duties. However, he soon gained
the reputation of being an unconventional “good fellow,”
full of sympathy, and fond of wine. As the settlement
progressed, Collins naturally insisted upon Divine Ser-
vice being held more regularly. A room in the first Gov-
ernment House was for a time used for church purposes;
later, it is believed that a store in Bathurst Street was
used.
Governor Collins died on March 24th, 1810, and
shortly afterwards the first church in the colony was
erected over his grave in St. David’s burial ground. This
building, however, was blown down during a storm in
1812, and for several years church services were held on
the verandah of Government House, in Macquarie Street.
In 1817, largely as a result of Knopwood’s representa-
tions, the construction of the first permanent church in
Hobart Town was commenced, the foundation stone
being laid on February 19th of the same year.
Knopwood’s task, prior to 1818, was by no means an
enviable one; not only had he to look after his
parishioners at Hobart Town, but it was also necessary
for him to visit Launceston and the outlying districts.
In other words, he was entirely responsible for the
spiritual instruction of the settlers in Van Diemen’s
Land. But in the latter year, however, the Rev. John
Youl took up his duties at Launceston; thus Knopwood,
although in failing health,, was able to devote more time
to his duties in the southern settlement. Early in April,
1823, he resigned and was succeeded as chaplain at
Hobart Town by Rev. W. Bedford. He then moved to
Clarence Plains, and until the time of his death on Sept-
ember 18th, 1838, continued to administer to the needs of
that parish.


