

The
WESTRALIAN
SCOUT
OFFICIAL—4th Edition
A Handbook for all Patrol
: Leaders and Officers :
Issued by the
BOY SCOUTS ASSOCIATION (W.A. Section Incp.)
103 William Street, Perth
1st December, 1931


From just around the
corner or the far Nor -
W est, you are sure to
come to Perth’s recog-
nised Shopping Head-
quarters —
3 1508 00638862 8
BOANS
BOANS LIMITED
Universal Providers
Wellington and Murray Streets, Perth


The
WESTRALIAN
SCOUT
OFFICIAL—4th Edition
Handbook for all Tatra I
Leaders and Officers
hsHtul hy ihe
BOY SCOUTS ASSOCIATION (W.A. Section I„ cp .)
103 William Street, Perth
Ist December, 1931


ALMOND
Toffee
r*' A
i
SBC
f*.
A
*Plaistoi
Product!
(l/1 Companion to T)airy Toffee


FOREWORD
[BY THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER]
The Boy Scouts of W.A. welcomed the first edition of this
book in 1916. Scouting was then a new game and the informa-
tion given in this handy form must have been useful to many
a Scout who has long since reached Rover age. But, like the
boys of 1916, Scouting has grown, and the experience of 15
years demands some record of its progress in knowledge and
methods. The principles, of course, remain the same, and ali
Scouts are reminded by the three-fold sign of their promise of
Loyalty, Helpfulness and obedience to the Scout Law. Those
principles arc not learned from books, but if you look carefully
you will see that they are present in some form or other in
all Scouting activities. A study of this Handbook will make
the Scout more efficient. At the back of that is the principle
that the more efficient he becomes the better able will he be
to help others. Similarly, at the back of the Ipise ceremony
is the principle of Loyalty.
There are now Commissioners at Headquarters who deal
with special sections of Scout work, such as Cubs, Rovers,
Sea Scouts, Training, Ambulance, Public Service, Lone Scouts,
Woodcraft, and Forestry. District Commissioners are being
appointed all over the country to help Scouters. We hope
soon to see a permanent camp, of the Gilwell type, established
where Commissioners and Scoutmasters can take a Wood-
badge course under the Deputy Camp Chief. After all, camp
is the place for Scouts. This was well shown by the rapid
increase in numbers of recruits after the 1929 Centenary Camp,
and especially after the 1931 camp on the occasion of the visit
of the Chief Scout of the World.
It is essential that Commissioners and Scoutmasters
should, both by study and by practice, become as efficient as
possible in Woodcraft and camping and “Be Prepared” for
those joyous times when they will have their troops cut under
the sky, in the forest or by the seashore.
I hope, therefore, that this book will circulate widely and
help all Scouts, and especially those in the outback areas to
keep up-to-date in their work. In this spirit, I wish all
who read it, “Good Camping and Good Scouting.”


BE PREPARED
'T'O <i Be Prepared ” is to realise that one has
to he ready to meet life’s daily conditions —
to render the greatest possible service, and the
good thing - is the only worth-while thing.
FOY’S
Founded on the principle that the Good Thing
is the only Worth-While Thing, that \Value
makes longer friends than cheapness, thatj Truth
ic better than Exaggeration, and that Confidence
is the only thing to be earned —the House of
Foy and Gibson gives abundant proof that it
pays to deal in merchandise of the highest quality
FOY & GIBSON
PTY. LTD.
Hay St. Thru to St. George’s Terrace


TO ALL PROSPECTIVE SCOUTERS
WHAT IS A GROUP, Etc.?
A complete Scout Group consists of the following three
sections—Cub Pack, Scout Troop and Rover Scout Crew—
but may at any given time consist of one or more sections
only.— {Rulg 9, P.O. & R.)
A Scout Troop is one of the sections of a Scout Group
and is under the charge of a Scoutmaster, with at least one
Assistant Scoutmaster to ensure continuity. (Each Group
must have a Group Scoutmaster—normally the Scoutmaster
of the Troop.)
A Troop is divided into Patrols consisting of six to eight
Scouts, including Patrol Leader and Second. The Patrol
should be the unit in all competitions and exercises, and the
formation of specialised Patrols is recommended. It is
usually found best to have Patrols of six rather than of
seven or eight.
If the Troop consists of more than three Patrols an
additional Assistant Scoutmaster is advisable for every three
Patrols or fraction thereof.— (See Rule 11.)
FIRST OF ALL
Read Scoufing for Boys, by the Lord Baden-Powell, of
Gilwell, the World Chief Scout. It is indispensable as setting
out the principles underlying Scouting. In reading bear in
mind that it is not a Manual but an aid to inspiration. Having
read this, peruse at least Part I of Policy, Organisation and
Rules. Both can be obtained from State Headquarters, 103
William-street, Perth. Next have a chat with an active
Commissioner, Deputy Camp Chief or other experienced
Scouter. He may be able to put you in touch with a Troop
so that you can see something of its work, or you might
become attached to a good Troop as Assistant Scoutmaster
for a period of three months. It is very desirable that all pros-
pective Scouters should attempt Part 1 (Theoretical) of the
Wood Badge. Particulars can be obtained from State Head-
quarters.


HEADQUARTERS
When you have deckled to start a Troop and feel that
you have acquired some knowledge of Scouting, decide if
the Troop is to be an Open one, or one attached to a Church
or School, etc. Next find a meeting place—a school or church
hall can be made to do, but best of all, if possible, find some
place which the Troop can have to itself for its very own.
It should be attractive, well-lighted, and it should stand apart
from dwelling houses. (Scouting is not always a quiet affair!)
Man.v of the most successful Troops have made for them-
selves most attractive headquarters in cellars, bams, stables
and sheds, etc., the Patrols fitting up their own corners.
NUMBERS
It is of vital importance to commence with small numbers.
If the Troop is likely to consist eventually of four Patrols—
that is- to say, if it is likely to bq from 24 toi 32 strong-—com-
mence with about six: or eight boys and train them up to the
Second Class Badge before actually forming the Troop.
PATROL LEADERS
Some of the first six or eight boys may, but not necessarily must,
become the Patrol Leaders as the Troop grows. It is often a
good thing not to appoint Patrol Leaders at the very com-
mencement. Try out the older boys by putting a different
boy at the head of the Patrol each night or week. At the end
of a month or six weeks you will have a much better idea as
to which boys are the natural leaders. When these first few
hoys are imbued with the Scout ideals and have finished their
Second Class work, then is the time to admit a few more
recruits. You may select the most promising of your first
boys and appoint them as Patrol Leaders and Scouters of your
first two Patrols, giving them the new boys to train in their
Tenderfoot tests. Thereafter you may ask Patrols to vote for
their own leaders. Voting should be by ballot, which must be
secret, and it must be understood that you will not necessarily
appoint the boy with the most votes.
TRAINING
If you start with small numbers, though it may not appear
so, it is really necessary to have an Assistant Scoutmaster


in order to ensure continuity of work in your possible un-
expected absence, owing to illness or other cause. Start your
venture by a general talk on Scouting, describing the Scout
Law and Promise, the formation of the Troop ( i.e ., Scout-
master, Assistant Scoutmasters, Patrol Leaders, Seconds and
Scouts), and the functions of the Court of Honour or Patrol
Leaders’ Council. Explain to the boys that while Scouting
will give them a great deal of pleasure and fun, yet there is
a serious side to it. Emphasise from the beginning that slack-
ers are not wanted, and each boy must be prepared to do his
bit to make the Troop a. thoroughly good one.
Don’t talk too long and don’t be too serious. In talking to
boys it is a golden rule that all talks, lectures and demonstra-
tions should be short in order to retain their interest.
. The first few weeks will be devoted to Tenderfoot work.
The Scout Law should be explained by you yourself in person,
a few points at a time. After this you may tackle the Scout
Signs, the Union Flag, the uses of the Scout Staff, the
Tenderfoot knots, whipping, etc.
DRILL
Too much drill is bad and not consistent with the methods
laid down in Scouting for Boys. Notes on drill will be found
on page 217 of the handbook. A little drill, however, is good for
the boys and helps to instil discipline.
GAMES
Games are most important, as Scout training is based
largely upon them. Many varieties Will be found in Scoufing
for Boys, while other books and other Scouters will suggest
more. Don’t repeat the same game too often, however popular
it may be. Make up a programme for each meeting before-
hand, not necessarily that you may stick to it exactly, but in
order that you may never be unprepared. Divide the time up
into periods of not more than twenty minutes each—first, a
period of work, then a period of games. Above all, you must
make the meetings interesting.
DISCIPLINE
Be firm, honest, and impartial to all. Give as few orders as
possible, but have these carried out at the double. (A hint


PETERS
ICE CREAM
A W.A. PRODUCT
| A Milk Food in its Most Attractive Form
| Endorsed by leading doctors and Food Experts


should be enough for a Scout.) On parade insist rigidly on
smartness, the Scout Sign and the use of “Sir” or “Scouter”;
off parade allow noise and romping, in which join in yourself
if possible.
TIMES OF MEETINGS
This depends entirely on local circumstances. Some Troops
have one meeting a week; others more. Many also meet on
Saturday afternoons in addition to a weekly evening meeting.
This is very desirable' as Scouting is an out-door game. Avoid
undue interference with home lessons or night classes, choir
practices and Sunday Schools, although with the two latter it
is usually easy, with tact, to make arrangements. As the
Patrols progress, consider the possibility of having separate
Patrol meetings in addition to the Troop meeting. Troop
meetings, usually last from an hour and a half to two hours.
Don’t keep the boys too late, especially in the country; this
annoys the parents. Break off at a fixed time, whether your
programme has been completed or not. Instil into the boys
that they should not loiter about the streets after the meeting
is over. Walking home smartly with a “cobber” shows the
Scout spirit.
A SCOUTS’ OWN
A Scours’ Own, which is a meeting for Scouts usually held
on a Sunday, where they are trained for the practice of the
Scout Promise and the Scout Law, is a particularly helpful
part of a Troop programme. Fuller details are given in The
Two Ideals, by Mr. H. Geoffrey Elwes, which can be obtained
from State Headquarters.
UNIFORM
Uniform may be a very difficult question. You may—
(a) Make each boy provide his own, in which case do not
on his getting the whole at once. The objection
to this plan is that if care is not exercised, different
shades of colours will spoil the turn out of the Troop.
(h) Obtain odd jobs of work for the poorer boy, the pro-
ceeds to be spent on providing uniform.
Let no boy wear uniform until he has passed the Tender-
foot tests. He is not a Scout until he has taken the Scout
Promise. (See “Enrolment” as laid down in Scouting for
Boys.)


State Headquarters has an Equipment Department and this
will help you to get uniformity in your Troop. The official
uniform can oul\ be obtained through Headquarters.
Scouts who have passed the Tenderfoot test and have been
enrolled should never appear in public without their button-
hole badge in their coat.
The Scout uniform is worn only one way, smartly and
correctly. No unauthorised additions or badges, etc., can be
permitted. A tin: form ceases to become such if only parts
of it are worn on duty, similarly much discouragement should
be given boys who wear articles of their uniform to school
or elsewhere. ...
The attention of S.M’s. is drawn to the requisition that
Scouts should appear in complete uniform (with neckerchief)
when acting as Scouts.
OUT OF DOORS
It dees not fall within the limits of this book to dilate
upon the necessity of maintaining an out-of-door atmosphere
in the Troop from the beginning, but don’t forget this point.
Remember also that camping is one of the natural outcomes
of Scout training and is necessary to complete that training.
Avoid “parlour” Scouting.
COURT OF HONOUR
When Patrol Leaders have been appointed, form a Court
of Honour consisting of the Scouters and Leaders. Properly
speaking, the Court deals only with questions that affect the
honour of the Troop, but as a kind of Patrol Leaders Coun-
cil, to which Seconds are sometimes admitted, it can be of
great assistance to the Scoutmaster in deciding on the forth-
coming programme of Troop work.
FINANCE
Make the Troop as self-supporting as possible. The beys
should pay a small weekly or monthly subscription-twopence
or threepence a week is the usual. Other ways of raising funds
are by concerts, displays, sale of handicrafts, etc. It is most
advisable that the Troop should not become too dependent on
outside subscriptions. Where such are obtained they must be
administered by the Group Committee.


Income' derived from the Scouts themselves, through sub-
scriptions or otherwise, should he administered by the Court
of Honour.
REGISTRATION
Permission to start a Troop should first be obtained from
the District Commissioner or Decal Association Secretary.
Where such does not exist, apply to State Headquarters.
When the Troop is properly founded, it should be registered
as the nucleus of a Group at State Headquarters, through the
Secretary of the Local Association. Where such does not exist,
apply to State Headquarters. (See /Wiry, Organisation and
Rules.) The name and address of the Local Secretary, if un-
known, can be obtained on application to the State Secretary
at Headquarters.
WARRANTS
Warrants signed by the Chief Scout are issued by State
Headquarters to all Scout officers (see Rule 41 of Policy,
Organisation and Rules) on the recommendation of the Local
Association and District Commissioner, or Headquarters Com-
missioner, application being made on the appropriate form (G.
or H.). A period of three months’ probationary service is
required before application for a Warrant for the prospective
Scoutmaster. It is necessary to produce the signatures of
six of the boys’ parents; a form is provided for this purpose.
The rules governing the issue of Warrants is laid down in
Policy, Organisation and Rules.
All Warrants remain the property of The Boy Scouts As-
sociation, and must be returned to the State Secretary at Head-
quarters on demand without his being called upon to state any
reason.
LOCAL ASSOCIATION AND COMMISSIONER
The functions of the Local Association and Commissioner
in respect of the Troops and Scouters in their areas should be
studied in Policy, Organisation and Rules.
GROUP COMMITTEE
To encourage interest in the Troop, it is most advisable to
form a Group Committee, consisting of parents and well-
wishers, who will help with the business side of the Group,


Be Sure You Buy
WATSONIA
HAMS AND BACONS
A. GRAIGIE
Sail, Tent, Tarpaulin
: and Flag Maker :
| All Scouts’ Camping Requisites
1 575 Hay Street, Perth Phone 84510


e.g., finance. Group headquarters, etc. It is well to have it
understood at the beginning that the Group Committee does
not interfere with the actual Scout work of the Troop.
As the Association is now an Incorporated body, Troop pro-
perty should be made out in the name of the Association who
is the . actual trustee of the Group.
Above all, remember that a Scout Troop is not a boys’ club.
If you are not personally prepared to carry out, as best you
can, the Scout Law, then do not take on the work. A poor-
spirited Troop harms the whole movement; so “play the game.”
BADGE EXAMINATIONS
The whole question of success or failure of the Badge
system depends upon the examiners. They are appointed by
Districts, Troops or by Headquarters arid must be:—
1. Qualified to examine;
2. Thoroughly conversant with the requirements of the
Badge.
Examiners are expected to use a certain amount of discretion
on their job and not to interpret the requirements of the Badge
too literally. The amount of preparation and effort shown by
the candidate must be taken into account, although he may
not be quite up to the standard required.
Tenderfoot and Second Class Badges can be passed by the
Patrol Leader after the Scoutmaster has satisfied himself that
the test has not been “skimped.” First Class Badges are, how-
ever, examined by an independent Scoutmaster or other quali-
fied man.
Papers for the Second and First Class tests are obtainable
from Headquarters as are cards for proficiency badges. The
instructions with them should be carefully read.
It is of great importance that all candidates for Badges
should have been thoroughly coached before presenting them-
selves. Remember, an ounce of practice is worth a ton of
theory,
SPECIAL EXAMINATIONS
The matter of Ambulance Badges is entirely handled by the
Commissioner in charge of Ambulance.
Similarly, Rescue and Swimming Badges are in charge of
the Sea Scout Commissioner as are all Sea Scout B'adges and


Pathfinder’s Badge is dealt with by the Headquarters Com-
missioner acting in conjunction with local examiners.
The King Scout Badge is awarded after the District Com-
missioner and the General Committee have satisfied themselves
that the award is in order.
Headquarters regulations define the necessary tests for
Badges, and, in cases of any uncertainty or inability to follow
same, S.M’s. may submit reasons to Chief Commissioner for
adjudication.
Qualifying badges for King’s Scout being Public Service
must be passed annually and a satisfactory standard of
efficiency attained and maintained.
Those Badges involving reading or drawing a sketch map
require special treatment inasmuch as a list of conventional
signs, including those peculiar to W.A., has superseded the
one shown in overseas Scout text books. This list, however,
shows quite a number of the signs in such text books.
Badges can only be obtained from State Headquarters and
are only issued to the Scoutmaster or his Assistant. If any
other member of the Troop is required to obtain Badges the
order must be countersigned by the Scoutmaster.
Badges should be purchased from the Group subscriptions
and presented to the Scout or Wolf Cub as his first issue.
Any further requirements to replace worn or soiled Badges
should be paid for by the Scout himself.
Second Class, First Class, Proficiency and King Scout
Badges must be applied for on the proper form and correctly
filled in, delay in the issue of Badges often occurs on account
of the application forms not being correctly filled in.
For the Cyclist Badge a Certificate is required in addition
to the Badge Card. It is important the requirements for this
Badge be thoroughly complied with.
When applying for all round cards a list of the badges as
required by Policy, Organisation and Rules should be for-
warded signed by the Scoutmaster and countersigned by the
District Commissioner or Headquarters Commissioner when no
District Commissioner exists.


GENERAL
In reading Policy, Organisation and Rules as issued by Im-
perial Headquarters, please note that wherever “Imperial
Headquarters” appears in these rules, read “State Head-
quarters,” and where “County Secretary” appears, read “State
Secretary.”
DIFFICULTIES
Finally, when difficulties arise (you may be sure they will
at one time or another, and they merely make the game more
interesting) use common sense and remember the Scout Law.
Consult your Commissioner and other Scouters, who will all
be willing to help. After you have gained some practical ex-
perience, you may find it worth while to take a course of train-
ing, about which the Secretary of the Local Association, or
your Headquarters Commissioner, will be able to give you in-
formation. One last point— a complete Scout Group consists
of Wolf Cubs, Scouts and Rover Scouts, so don’t remain satis-
fied with only one section of the three. Try and get others
started as well,
TROOP SUBSCRIPTIONS TO HEADQUARTERS
All newly registered Troops are required to pay to Head-
quarters 2/6 and an annual re-registration fee of 10/-. When
Local Associations exist 2/6 can be deducted by them from
each Troop’s subscription to help them to purchase their re-
quirements in stationery and postages, etc.
From the Ist- July, 1932, a new re-registration Group will
come into use and when this form is submitted the annual re-
registration fee must accompany, otherwise the Group will
cease to be an effective Group.
All such fees paid to Headquarters are used to assist in the
purchase of stationery, duplicating circulars, purchasing litera-
ture from Imperial Headquarters, postages, etc.
Postages, telegrams, stationery, literature and printing last
year cost £163/7/8. so supposing 150 Groups paid their annual
subscription of 10/- only £75 of this cost would be covered,
less the 2/6 per TProop where Local Associations exist.
Some of our Groups are very loyal to Headquarters and
in addition to paying their annual subscription arrange an
annual function, the proceeds of which are handed over to


Headquarters. We sincerely thank these Groups and recom-
mend the scheme to other Groups who could help m this way.
SCOUTS’ EQUIPMENT DEPARTMENT
This has proved without doubt a great asset to the Asso-
ciation. Last year the turn-over was £1,220/19/9, and the
profit on sales i273/17/10, thus it will be seen that only 224%
profit was made to cover overhead charges and help Head-
quarters. We sincerely thank all those Troops who have sup-
ported us. We have at times been up against what looked
like insurmountable difficulties, but we have overcome them
and the co-operation of all will in the future greatly assist
us to carry on.
The Quartermaster requires your sympathy and support.
Remember it is your shop and you should support it. It was
started under great difficulties for your benefit and it is
hoped all will realise this.
REMITTANCES
Remittances for badges, etc., as per published current price
list, must accompany all orders. Troops may open a credit
account with the Association, the cost of badges, etc., being
debited to same until balanced. No credit may be given.
“THE COURIER”
This bright little monthly publication is the official mouth-
piece of Scouting and Guiding, and can be obtained from
Headquarters; price 3d. It contains notes on Cubs, Rovers,
Scouts, Sea Scouts, troop news, hints, games, etc., and is
widely read.
HEADQUARTERS organisation
Chief Commissioner
Assistant Chief Commissioner for Rovers.
Assistant Chief Commissioner for Cubs.
Assistant Chief Commissioner for Sea Scouts.
Assistant Chief Commissioner for Training (also known as
Deputy Camp Chief). . ■ r , . ,
These four gentlemen are appointed to assist the Cniei
Commissioner in his duties and to give District Commission-
ers the benefit of their special training at all times necessary.


ANDY DAVIDSON
TAILOR
Brennan’s Arcade For All Requirements
Personal Attention
District Commissioner*
These are appointed for the following districts: Perth,
Fremantle, Subiaco, Claremont-Cottesloe, Albany, Geraldton,
Northam, Beverley, Kalgoorlie, Ydgarn .
They are .in complete charge of all Scouting activities
districts not under control of a District Commissioner
come under the Headquarters Commissioner.
Other Appointments
For specialised activities the following appointments have
been made; —
Ambulance and First Aid, Public Service, Woodcraft Scouts,
Lone Scouts, forestry Scouts: These appointments are
in the hands of officers of the movement, specially quali-
fied for such work; they rank as Assistant Commissioners
Other similar appointments may be made from time to
time.
Woodcraft Scants are in the nature of an experiment and
is an attempt to fill the gap caused by Scouting and Kovenng
not satisfactorily linking up.
Lotto. Scouts are those boys out of touch with Troops and
whose training and instruction is carried out by correspon-
dence and radio direct from Headquarters.
Forestry Work.— The Association has been delegated by
the Forestry Department of the State Government to plant and
maintain certain areas at Mundaring Weir with pines and the
present organisation provides for the periodical visitation ot
the plantation at week-ends by various troops.


POINTS FOR SCOUTS
HOW THEY BEHAVE IN PUBLIC
Wear your uniform smartly and correctly. Don’t slouch
about the streets, nor “sky-lark” and make yourself a nuisance.
Walk smartly and cheerfully; keep your hands out of your
pockets
Avoid wearing your jacket; if cold put on extra under-
clothing. Lace-ends, tags and garter tabs trailing around are
not Scoutlike.
When marching— march!
When the National Anthem is played in a hall, everybody
stand to alert. Everybody salutes.
When played outside, hats are kept on and all come to
alert. Everybody, salutes.
When a funeral passes Scouts salute. A Scout .never raises
his Scout hat te a passer-by—he salutes instead.
It is not correct for Scouts to take off their hats at an
open-air service when prayers are said, any more than it is
to do so when the National Anthem is played.
No member of the Scout movement is expected to smoke
in public in uniform; neither is it desirable that he do so in
front of boys.
THE SALUTE
S.M’s. are requested to recognise the instructions regarding
the Salute.
1. S.M’s. salute one another with a full salute and the salute
of Scouts with a full salute.
2. Scouts should be instructed to salute (when alone) passing
any troops on the march, all S.M’s. and other officers,
ministers of religion, schoolmasters who are known to
them, and the Union Jack; also to salute other Scouts
with the full salute. All salutes are given whether wear-
ing a hat or not.
SONG BOOK
A local edition of popular Scout songs and choruses can be
obtained from Headquarters; price 3d. Scout Troops are ex-
pected to sing their heads off at the right time and in the
right place.


WOLF CUBS IN W.A.
Tcnderpad. —To be a Wolf Cub, a boy must be between the
ages of 8 and 11. He must satisfy his Cubmaster that he
knows the Wolf Cub Law, signs and salute. He will then
make the following Promise:—
I promise to do my best—
1. To be loyal and to do my duty to God and the King,
and to keep the Law of the Wolf Cub Pack.
2. And to do a good turn to somebody every day.
The Law of the Wolf Cub Pack is—
1. The Cub gives in to the Old Wolf;
2. The Cub does not give into himself.
He is then a Tcnderpad and is entitled to wear the Wolf
Cub Badge.
This important section of the Movement was founded by
the Chief Scout in 1912, four years after the Scouts themselves
started. An insistent clamour arose from small boys who
were too young to be Scouts to be allowed to participate in
the activities of this rapidly spreading movement, and the
Chief, in his wisdom, conceived the idea of forming “Wolf
Cubs” for boys aged 8 to 11-12, thus giving them an ele-
mentary training in Scouting through games, dances, and
stories, founded on the pillars of romance. Badge tests were
also formulated, and training carried out by grouping the boys
into “Packs,” divided into “sixes.” The Pack was controlled
by a “Cubmaster,” and the six by a “sixer.” To-day Wolf
Cubs number 150,000, and a group is not complete without
the Wolf Cub section.
In our own State, as early as 1910, junior Scouts, out of
which eventually grew the Wolf Cubs, as we know them to-
day, were organised. These early “dib-dobbers” wore a pic-
turesque uniform consisting of a green “tabard,” with a
golden arrow across the breast, and a green woodcraft hood.
to the present conditions is not recorded, but
the progress has been such that the number of Cubs in W.A.
at present is 1,000, divided into 60 Packs.
The first rally of importance was held in King’s Park,
on. the 12th December, 1925, and was attended by the late


Governor in his capacity as Chief Scout. This event was a
great success.
Lady Cubmasters may take a special training course con-
ducted by a trained Akela leader who journeyed especially to
Gilwell Park, England, for the purpose.
A further development was the formation of Sea Cubs
in connection with the Ist Troop of Sea Scouts a few years
ago, and now several other troops have formed this section.
From time to time Imperial Headquarters in London have
cautiously and wisely amended the various Cub tests to suit
altered conditions as they arose, until it can now be said that
the section is on a definitely firm basis. Cubmasters know
exactly what is required of them, and the facilities exist for
acquiring their training.
SEA SCOUTS
Full information regarding Sea Scouting as it applies in
W.A. can be obtained in the 3d. blue pamphlet Sea Scouts,
obtainable of the Sea Scout Commissioner.
Scouters forming Sea Scout Groups or Patrols in Groups,
must observe the following principles:—
1. The permission of the District Commissioner must be
obtained, and he must be satisfied that the requisite
training will be given.
2. Only boats as approved by the Sea Scout Commissioner
may be obtained, and no boat is to be ordered cr pur
chased until she has been so approved.
3. The rules laid down to ensure safety in boats must be
observed. (See P.O. & R., Rules 61 and 82.)
4. Sea Scouting must not be allowed to degenerate into
joy riding.
There are certain variations in the badge tests as laid
down. These may be obtained on application or will be found
in the blue handbook.
Group calls from S.A. to S.Z. have been allotted to Sea
Scout Groups. Any new group will be given its distinguish-
ing “number” on application to the S.S.C.


WOOD BADGE TRAINING
When Gilwell Park, Essex, was handed over to the Boy
Scouts’ Association, and the Chief instituted his famous sys-
tem of Wood Badge camps, it soon became apparent that the
scheme would have to be extended to the Empire overseas,
and ultimately to foreign countries. Actually this has hap-
pened, and every Scouting country in the world of any im-
portance now has its own Deputy Camp Chief, acting under
the guidance of the Comp Chief at Gilwell Park.
The first West Australian Wood Badge course was con-
ducted at Karrakatta, in July, 1925, as a series of six fort-
nightly camps. The course was a wonderful success, some
thirty candidates taking part, showing great enthusiasm. His
Excellency the Governor and Chief Scout, Sir William R.
Campion, visited one of the camps, and was very interested
in all he saw.
Since that year, a course has been conducted regularly every
year, and the result is that now one hundred men in W.A.
have had Wood B'adge training. Of these some forty have
gone further, and passed the theoretical course, whilst over
twenty have completed the administrative course, thereby
gaining the Badge itself. In 1928, Commissioner Nile was
appointed a Deputy Camp Chief to assist with the work.
Of late it has become apparent that some form of pre-
liminary Wood Badge training is necessary, and steps have
been taken to provide this elementary course prior to taking
the actual badge itself.
These elementary courses are conducted by District Com-
missioners acting in consultation with the Headquarters
Commissioner for Training.
Cubmasters and Rover Leaders are also provided for,
special courses being arranged for them to suit their parti-
cular branch. The first Cubmaster course was conducted by
Akela Leader Miss Shearing, in November, 1930, and some
lady Cubmasters attended. A yellow 7 bead is provided
for Cub candidates who pass; green for Scout candidates,
and red for Rover candidates.
Efforts are being made to secure a permanent camping
ground for the Movement in W.A., so as Wood Badge courses


FOR HIKING AND CAMPING I
a wide rattle of All Australian Products packed under I
REX BRAND |
is available !
c. A Few Suggestions in Pastes : I
Ham Pate, Devilled Ham, Veal and Tongue, Anchovy Paste, (
Bloater, Salmoneile, Sandwich Meat Paste. j
The famous REX PYE in Jelly, Pork Brawn, Pork and Beans, |
Pigs Tongues, Red-y-racle (a delicious dish of choice Beef and I
Vegetables), Eclipse Corned Beef Loaf in Jelly, Eclipse Corned I
Mutton in Jelly, Rex Luncheon Cheese in tins, Cowslip Cheese in I
packets. |
FOGGITT JONES PROPRIETARY LIMITED j
Perth Fremantle Bellevue I
PATERSONS
PRINTING PRESS
88j hay street
The Scout Printers
'or
All Your
\Requirements


could be conducted with the minimum of interference., The
military ground at Karrakatta (kindly made available by the
Defence Department) has proved most suitable in the past.
While it is not possible to provide the same setting and the
same atmosphere at any other camp as exists at Gilwell itself,
it can be said, however, that the spirit shown throughout the
series of camps held here has been truly a wonderful one,
and the manner in which some of our veteran Scoutmasters
have thrown themselves into the idea of the scheme and be-
come boys again, not only at heart, but physically, and
mentally, has been a source of gratification to the sponsors
of Wood Badge training in W.A.
One word in conclusion; It is not claimed that this method
is the only one to produce Scouters who know their job. It
is said definitely, liowever, by the Chief himself and his
Commissioners, that it is by far the most effective and
picturesque!
REPORTS
Scoutmasters are requested to forward to State Headquarters,
a report through District Commissioners, with statistics, at
least once a quarter.
SCOUT NOTES IN “DAILY NEWS”
Notices of impending events, regulations, etc., appear in
Daily News and S.M.’s. are recommended to obtain the paper
each Monday.
Notices from Troops for insertion in Scout News to be for-
warded to Boy Scouts’ Association. Perth, who reserve the
right of altering, or curtailing the length of any matter.
“POLICY, RULES AND REGULATIONS”
Power has been given for Dominion State Councils to vary
regulations to suit local requirements. A list of such amend-
ments will be published in due course.


SIGNALLING
As Morse is the universal language, Scoutmasters are
strongly advised not to allow Scouts to start Semaphore until
the first-class badge has been passed, otherwise it is found the
boys are unwilling to trouble about Morse. A semaphore
signaller is useless at nights and at long distances, while a
Morse signaller can almost always find means to get a -mes-
sage through. By resolution of the Executive, semaphore is
no longer accepted for second and first class tests.
These notes arc. merely intended as an assistance towards
the First and Second Class tests. For the Signaller’s Badge, a
knowledge of the Military Signalling Manual is essential for
Scouts, the British Signal Manual for Sea Scouts, and the
Handbook for Wireless Telegraph Operators for Telegraph
lists.
In the teaching of Morse, it has been found that for “dot
dash” it is better to substitute sounds, which form a mental
image of the sound of a signalling apparatus or flag in motion.
Comparative tests have shown that this method the code
is learned in considerably less time. The code is, therefore,
given below in this method. Another way recommended is the
Ready Method (Albert and Son, 6d.).
THE MORSE CODE
A de daa
B da dd dt
C da d da dt
D da di dt
E dt
F d dda dt
G da da dt
H d d d dt
I ddt
J jl da da da
K da d da
L d da d dt
M da da
N da dt
O da da da
P d da da dt
Q da da d da
R d da dt
S d d dt
T daa
U d d da
V d d d da
W d da da
X da d d da
Y da d da da
Z da da d dt


NUMERALS
2 . .
3 ...
4.. . .
5
6—. . . .
7 ...
8 . .
10
MISCELLANEOUS SIGNALS
General answer
Preparatory ... .
Erase
Stop Q
Repeat IMI
Word after WA
Word before WB
Go on K
Break ...
End of message . . .
Full Stop . . —, .
CAMP HINTS
Tents, sails, etc., must not be rolled up when wet.
Rugs must not be placed against the tent walls.
Meals must not be eaten inside the tent.
All rugs must be aired, if possible, each morning, then
rolled and put away.
Flags should be hoisted at a convenient time before 9 a.m
and lowered at 6 p.m. or sunset.
Incinerators to the ratio of 1 per 100 boys, or part thereof,
should be provided, and should be used for disposing of all bum-
able refuse. *'
Rubbish Holes.- —One to 100 boys, and must be used for
disposing of all unburnable refuse.
SANITARY REGULATIONS AND SUGGESTIONS
1. All food must be protected from flies the whole of the time.
2. No scraps of food to be left about.
3. Provide grease traps.
4. Earth must be used in all latrines.
5. In case of sickness or accident, same to be immediately
reported.
<5. Where possible, use boiled water only for drinking purposes.


CLOTHING
Wet or clamp clothing must be removed immediately on
coming into camp.
Scouts must not halt or sit down in damp clothing.
Every garment worn during the day must be removed oil
retiring. Cotton or linen nightshirts or pyjamas are advised.
Boys must not be allowed to sleep in clothes.
COOKING
Scouts should cook at least one meal per day. Fires will be
lighted to leeward of camp, generally straight in front of
tent. They will be 20ft. in front of standing tents, and 3ft.
to sft. in front of bivouac tents. In either case a 20ft. circle
will be cleared of dry grass, etc., to prevent spreading.
Scouts must not drink unboiled water from creeks, ponds,
etc. Spring water is generally safe. Avoid water which
sheep can drink. Washing up must not be left to' attract flies
Tin billies, plates, etc., are often not washed, but wiped clean
and polished with sand if required.
The following are recommended: Pea sausages or soup
packets, currants or raisins, cheese, dried apples, condensed
milk or “Trumilk,” cabin biscuits, rice, tapioca, tea or cocoa,
tinned meat.
USEFUL RECIPES
Sea Pie— 11b. steak, 1 onion, 6 potatoes, 2 cups flour (self-
raising), salt and pepper. Cut meat small, if possible, fry
lightly, and stew till tender with potatoes and onions. Mix
flour with water to a stiff paste, using a fork only. Cut into
suitable sized pieces and drop into billy while boiling briskly
Serve at once as dough goes heavy if allowed to stand.
Duff.— Mix dough as above and drop into a billy of fast
boiling water, with a plate in bottom to prevent sticking. Serve
with golden syrup or jam.
Panagglety.— Cut small 6 potatoes and 2or 3 onions. Place
in camp oven or billy, just cover with water, and boil first
adding a large spoonful of dripping. Boil till potatoes begin
to break up, and season to taste.
Cook’s Delight.— Cook as for panagglety, and when almost
cooked add one tin of meat and stir well.


Bacon and Beans. —-Soak 1 cup of haricot beans for 12-24
hours in water to which has been added 1 teaspoon of baking
soda (not washing soda—it is poisonous). Boil for one hour,
pour off water, add hot salted water and a few pieces of bacon.
Boil till beans are tender, pour off water and add tomato
sauce to taste.
Mullet a la Delphis. —One tin mullet (or salmon), 3 eggs,
12 cabin biscuits or bread crumbs, milk, salt and pepper. Mix
mullet with biscuit (crushed) or breadcrumbs and a little
water. Spread on bottom of camp oven, beat up eggs with
milk and pour over; cook with deep setting of oven.
Fish. —Place in layers in camp oven, sprinkling on each layer
a little dripping and salt. Cook with low or deep setting of
oven.
THE CAMP OVEN
This is the most useful camp requisite there is. There are
three ways of using it—
(а) The high setting for stewing, boiling and the like, with
fire under it.
(б) The low setting, for slow cooking, porridge, stews, etc.,
with the fire round the sides of the oven as it sits
on the ashes.
( c ) The deep setting, in which the ashes are raked away
to give a hole deep enough to take the oven, which is
then covered up with hot ashes and live embers above
all to retain the heat. It is possible by the use of
these three settings to cook practically any dish which
can be done in an ordinary kitchen.
EQUIPMENT
Suggested List
Light Order. —Spare shirt and socks, mess tin, knife, fork,
spoon, mug, haversack, soap, towel, rug, rolled “Horse-collar”
style (plain rolled for boat or train), ration bags, water bottle,
candle.
Full Kit , additional to above (to be packed in kit bag)
Pillow bag, towel, change of clothes, pyjamas, boots (if on the
march) or shoes, note •books, pencils, crayons, plate, large
spoon, swimming trunks (not costume, except when camping
near town), ground sheet, 1 candle.


Per Patrol— Washing dish, lantern, tent (or 1 bivouac
tent per 2 or 3 Scouts), fire plate, cooking irons, 3 large
billies, to nest one in the other, frying pan, camp oven,
kerosene tin.
BOATS
These rules apply to all boats used by Scouts using boats. In
the case of such, all boys must be able to swim fifty yards and
unless the Scout in charge is familiar with the rule of the
road, all ferry and sailing traffic must be given a wide berth.
Land Scouts using a sailing boat must comply with all the
rules applying to such. Application should be made to the
Commissioner for Sea Scouts for the leaders of such to re-
ceive the necessary training and examination.
In the case of Land Scouts, using a sailing boat not below
Fremantle Road Bridge, knowledge of compass and rigs will
not be required, and for the Oarsman and Boatman Tests.
Sections 2 and 3 will not apply, but Scouts taking advantage
of these reduced conditions, will not be entitled to wear the
badge. Land Scouts while' afloat come under the jurisdiction
of the Commissioner for Sea Scouts.
1. No boat to be used except—
(a) With the permission of the Scoutmaster of the
troop, or, in his absence, of his assistant.
(ft) Within the area for which she is certified fit to
be used, by the Harbourmaster of the nearest port
(c) When in charge of a competent crew as laid down
herewith. ,
Except that nothing herein shall prevent a boat being used
in case of emergency or to save life when such use may involve
the breach of these rules, any such action being at once re-
ported by the Senior Scout involved to the Scoutmaster, and
through him to the Commissioner for Sea Scouts.
SAFETY RULES FOR SCOUTS ON WATER
Only swimmers will be allowed in a boat.
No boots are allowed in boats, except on short transports.
Soft shoes may be worn, otherwise boots will be removed
before boarding


Coats or overcoats will only be worn by permission of
officer in charge.
Haversacks and tomahawks will be removed before boarding.
In a boat, all gear must be kept tidy, and Scouts will not
secure themselves) to any part of the boat or gear.
In the event of a capsize, if the boat floats, Scouts will
stand by it. Otherwise they will secure all floating gear and
all keep together, under the direction of officer or senior
Scout.
If the boat floats the mast should be unshipped and secured,
the boat righted, and if possible, as much water got out as
can be, by rocking and baling. The junior Scout will then
carefully climb aboard and continue baling. It may be advis-
able for one or two juniors to board before baling is com-
menced, lying in the water so as to relieve the boat of their
weight. If the boat seems to lie too low to be baled, the senior
or officer will use his discretion as to leaving the boat, or
holding on till help comes. In any case, the boat should, if
possible, be righted, when the Scouts may board, lying low
in the water so as not to submerge the boat. Two of the best
swimmers may be despatched for help if necessary. Senior
Scouts will assist juniors as much asl possible. By arranging a
framework of oars and spars, juniors may be given spells
out of the water. In such case a windbreak should be arranged.
HOW TO START A ROVER CREW
Study the Rover Scout Handbook, Rovering to Success, if
you are already a Scout talk the whole thing over with your
Scouter. If possible, get in touch with a Rover Scout Crew
in your neighbourhood. It is desirable, if you are forming a
Crew and it is at all possible, that you serve the three
months’ probation with an existing Crew, and be invested
as a Roven before you start your own Rover Scout Crew.
Before a section of Rovers can be formed in a Group a
suitable Leader is absolutely essential. If possible, the Leader
should be a warranted Rover Scout Leader, or, at any rate,
a gentleman who is willing to become one.
The age for admission is definitely seventeen, this is the
minimum.


It is to be distinctly understood that the Rover Crew is a de-
finite section of the Group and comes under the control of
the Group Scouter.
Before being invested a prospective Rover Scout or Kovcr
Squire must not wear Rover shoulder strap or Rover badge.
His shoulder knot at this period will be yellow and green.
The secret of success is to build slowly but surely and
train your foundation members until they have served their
three months probation and are all invested Rovers, before
you admit any new recruits, and then only allow one or two
in at a time.' Don’t enrol any morq than you can comfortably
absorb.
The Chart of Organisation of a Rover Crew is as follows;
Group Scoutmaster;
Rover Leader;
Rover Mates;
Rover Scouts in Patrols.
A. Rover Patrol can consist of from four to eight Rovers
and is named either after a member of the Group who made
the supreme sacrifice serving the colours or after some Aus-
tralian or British explorer who devoted his life to the service
of his country. . , ...
It is, advisable that the Crew meet weekly, but it is essential
to the success of the Rovqr Crew that they have the use of a
separate Rover Den and give every Rover a definite job to do.
A Rover Mate is elected by the Patrol with the approval
of the Rover Scout Leader.
When there are two or more Patrols in a Crew they may
appoint a Senior Rover Mate. .
A Rover Second is selected by the Rover Mate to be ms
assistant and to take charge when he himself is away.
A Rover Scout Leader is one who holds warrant as such
and is in charge of the Crew of a registered Group. He defines
the policy of the Crew.
It is by no means essential the Rover Scout Leader be a
trained Scout. His executive officer is the Rover Mate or
the Senior Rover Mate. .
Rover Scout training is a continuation of that given to
Wolf Cubs and Boy Scouts, with the same objects, but with


a wider outlook and with the added object of helping Rover
Scouts to make useful careers for themselves. The term Rover
Scout stands for a true man and a good citizen. Rovering is
essentially Scouting from a man’s point of view.
If you desire help in the formation of your Rover Crew,
ask your District Commissioner, or write to the Rover Com-
missioner, c/o. Scout Headquarters, Perth. In the meantime
read all you can on the subject and study the following books;
Hovering to Success, Scouting for Boys, Rover Quests in
Practice, Rover Scouting, The Investiture of a Rover Scout;
Policy, Organisation and Rules, Rover Scouts, What They Are
and What They Do.
All these books are obtainable from State Headquarters,
Perth.
SCOUTS—AND THAT JOB
You want work in your own State. Have you ever stopped
to think that the surest way of making a job for yourself is
to .buy West Australian goods? Everything you buy from
outside the State lessens your chance; everything you buy
Westrolian-made adds to your chance.
Quite a lot of unthinking folk say, “H’m, Westralians
can’t make things well.” And then they cheerfully buy rub-
bish—made somewhere else. It is really a kind of idiocy.
You can do good work on a job. Can’t you? Well, so
can the rest of the West Australians. They are just like you.
They can turn out a decent article that will compare with
anything made anywhere else. Don’t forget that you will be
a West Australian workman someday. How would you feel
if stupid people said. “I won't buy Jim Scout’s goods. They
aren’t well enough made. You see, he’s only a Westralian.”
It does sound rubbish, doesn’t it? But that is what you are
really saying whenever you go into a shop and buy a foreign
article when there is a West Australian one to be got. You
hadn’t looked at it like that, had you? You really didn’t
think you were such a chump as all that! Well, you are
whenever you don’t stick to your own products. It is then
that you’re a—l was nearly going to say “goat,” but I re


membered that a West Australian goat has enough sense to
cat West Australian grass. You can find a name for yourself
yourself.
Our advertisers keep thousands of Western Australians in
jobs. They spend hundreds of thousands of pounds in the
West. And you may he looking to them for a job some day.
Unless you are fitted with a nicely turned jarrah head you
must support them. They have the goods.
Sweets! Can you beat Plaistowe's? Made from your fruit,
your milk and eggs, your almonds; you can’t get away from
it. You must purchase Plaistowe’s Products.
And Ice Cream. Get the Peter’s Habit. It’s not only a good
ice cream but a good food, made from the best materials. And
every Peter’s you buy helps to make a job.
What about your camp and hikes? You need canvas, ropes,
sails, waterbags! W’ell, Craigic has them and his sails set right!
Did you say food? Rex pies and cheeses are handy and
good. Foggif Jones Pfy. make them. You know they are right.
Bacon and butter? Watson’s Supply Stores have just spent
:£IS,OOO on a new factory. They’ll be able to build more u
you say “Watson’s, please!”
Who stocks these goods? Why, Boons and Pays, who em-
ploy thousands of West Australians. They may be employing
you some day. Get in first and help them to help you!
And this is to Scooters. Andy Daindson makes. uniforms
and suits that fit and won’t wear out. Drop in and see him.
Our advertisers have made this book possible. They have
done you a good turn. Xow do yourself another one.
When you buy anything—patronise them! And make sure
it’s Wes! Australian-made. It might mean that job for you!


Judging from long experience of people general!
perhaps, from experience of myself, 1 think that i
liaw is perhaps the least popular. Isn't it queer how
one of ns shrinks from the word "Thrift” as the
meant something very distasteful, like a bitter m
that wo know we should take fop our own good, but
we dislike intensely nevertheless t There must be
thing in it, however, for huge Savings Banks, and
uistitutioßs flourish throughout the world, showlii
definitely the people accept the necessity for being 1
**A Scout is Thrifty.” I like the commonsense of tl
who drafted that law. He didn't make the eass
of saying a scout should be thrifty, because he
that a conscientious scout couldn't help it. After t
high principles of scout craft are based on natnr
and Nature sets the highest possible e
of Thrift. Nothing is wasted in Nature. Bvei
serves its purpose, and having done that is oonvei
some other use. Coal is a splendid example. Th<
forests and other things that had served their imi
purpose were stored in the earth to develop Into i
substance which to-day we call coal, and which Is ’
mendously valuable to the commerce of the worh
That just sums up Thrift. It is the principle of
ing waste and storing up what is not immediately
•o that It can be put to good use later on. App
money it means that what you do not really nee
should be put aside until yon have a more valnal
for It. It doesn't mean being a miser, but it does 8
that yon should spend wisely well as save wis
No true scout would be wilfully wasteful and
intelligent scout knows that his future success
depends upon his own efforts. Therefore, a Scout is 1
So yon see, the word need not be unpalatable, a
that matter the practice of Thrift need not be diffh
The Commonwealth Savings Bank provides the
ample and profitable system. You can start with «
monwealth Bank Honey Box If yon like, just to ss
pennies coins, boy of any age ma


f
Perfect Printing
for
Particular P eople
n
i
Patersons Printing Press Ltd.
882 Hay St., Perth Phone 88891
