

THE SUGAR INDUSTRY OF
QUEENSLAND.
To the Agricultural Community of Great Britain.
M. HUME BLACK,
Special Agent to the Queensland Government ,
Printed by Lake & Sxson, 11, Victoria Street, Westminster, S.W. ;
and 185, Upper Thames Street, E.C.




QUEENSLAND.
THE SUGAR INDUSTRY OF
QUEENSLAND.
To the Agricultural Community of Great Britain.
M. HUME BLACK,
Special Agent to the Queensland Government ,
1894.
LONDON
Printed by Lake & Sison, 11, Victoria Street, Westminster, S.W. ;
and 135, Upper Thames Street, E.C.




KYrt* (rt* I f *7O Usa.
*\ w .
THE SUGAR INDUSTRY OF
QUEENSLAND.
IT has been computed that there are 5000 square miles of land in
Queensland between the Coast and the first parallel range known
as the Coast-range, which leads up to the Great Central Table-
land, that are capable of being utilised for tropical and semi-
tropical agriculture such as Sugar Cane, Coffee, Tea, Rice, Spices,
Tobacco, Maize, &c., and tropical fruits of every variety.
Although the growth of these products has been successful
experimentally, Cane growing and its manufacture into Sugar is the
branch of tropical agriculture that has mainly engaged the attention
of our agriculturalists and become one of the leading industries of
the Colony, supplying the wants of Queensland’s population, and
having an additional export value with hi-products of over one
million sterling.
The area cultivated amounts to no more than 50,000 acres at
present, leaving an enormous area still available for tropical
agriculture.
This area consists of delta lands bordering the numerous rivers
which discharge into the Pacific, in front of the Great Barrier Reef,
and of the volcanic soils which stretch between the Alluvial deposits
of the river systems and are chiefly comprised between latitudes 16°
and 28°.
Much of this land is covered by what is locally called “ Scrub,”
a thick jungle embracing almost every variety of tropical foliage and
vegetation. Large areas are open forest, while other sections are
rolling volcanic plains broken by water-courses which carry off' the
heavy tropical rains, and are rich in all the elements of luxurious
tropical growth.
At the present time very alluring inducements are offered to two
classes of settlers on these prolific sugar lands of Queensland.
First to what may be called the yeoman farmer who will take up
a comparatively large selection or homestead under the exceedingly
liberal land laws of the Colony. This is the class who may be
expected to bring with them a moderate capital, with which they
may start operations and pay current expenses without much difficulty
until a certain return comes in. Among this class may be found
groups of farmers who will combine together to take advantage of the
“ Sugar Works Guarantee Act of 1893,” by which the Government,
under certain conditions to be explained later, enable them to raise
the capital necessary for the purchase and erection of large central
mills for the conversion of their Cane into Sugar.


The second class may be comprised of farmers, also possessed
of moderate means, who will rent land from existing large estate
holders on various terms and conditions, who guarantee to purchase
all the Cane grown by the farmers at the market price over a series
of years. The rental of the farms may in most cases be accompanied
by a right of purchase by deferred payment extending over some
years.
That there is a magnificent opening for both classes is undoubted.
That in scores of instances men of each category have already
succeeded beyond their expectations is beyond question. That there
is no limit to the numbers of such men who may make an equally
secure and handsome provision for themselves and their children goes
without saying when one recalls the thousands of acres of virgin
sugar land waiting occupation for agricultural purposes, but now only
occupied for pastoral pursuits until required for denser settlement.
The terms on which agricultural land can be acquired from the
State are:—
By Conditional Selection.
Agricultural farms up to 160 acres, price 2s. 6d. per acre, payable
at the rate of 6d. per acre per annum, with personal residence.
Agricultural farms up to 1280 acres at from 15s. per acre, payable
in five years, or a fifty years lease at from Bd. upwards per acre per
annum. Personal residence or by agent.
Purchase by auction, upset price 20s. per acre, payments extending
over three years without interest.
To emigrants paying their own passages, Land Orders are issued
of the value of £2O for each adult and of £lO for each child between
1 and 12 years. These Land Orders are available for ten years from
date of issue for use by the head of the family in payment of rent of
any agricultural farm held by him from the Crown.
If an enterprising young man with a few hundreds of capital were
to take up a selection on State land, he would of course require to
calculate and provide for the initial expenses of clearing, and they may
be set down as follows :
Scrub Land.
Cutting down and burning off, about £8 per acre.
Planting, £3 per acre.
Forest Land.
Clearing, an average of Is. 6d. per tree.
Ploughing, 20s. to 255. per acre.
Harrowing, ss. per acre.
Cross ploughing, 15s. per acre.
Harrowing, 2s. 6d. per acre.
Planting, 10s, per acre.


The above are average contract prices, but if the farmer is able to
utilise his own labour, and perhaps that of some of his family, the
cost in all cases may be lessened.
Fencing costs on an average, £4O per mile.
The capital required may be said to be, for scrub land, £9 to £lO
per acre including cultivation, and for forest land, from £6 to £8 per
acre. This includes cost of cultivation up to the maturity of the
Cane usually twelve months after planting, and of course applies to
only that area of the selection under cultivation
In the case of forest land near mills, the sale of the timber
materially reduces the cost of clearing.
No doubt the Scrub land is the richest, but it costs more to start
with, to cut down, burn off, and plant, as only hand labour can be
employed, while in taking off the crop when ripe, more hand labour
is required than on forest land, hence on a cash balance for a decade
there would be little difference between scrub and good forest land.
As a matter of fact some good forest and alluvial land in the Mackay
district is still giving good yields after being cropped for twenty
years, without any artificial aid except occasional fallowing. The
labour required to work Sugar land varies with the quality and
situation. A married man and family, wife and three or four
children up to say 16 years, would be able without extraneous assis-
tance to cultivate 20 acres. A yeoman farmer could with Kanaka
labour easily manage 200 acres.
The problem of the cultivation of large estates versus small or
medium sized farms, also comes here into consideration. Experience
has proved, altogether contrary to the usual economic doctrines, that
Cane cultivation on a large scale is more expensive from a labour point
of view than on a small. For instance in not remote years the manager
of a North Queensland Plantation of say 1,000 acres thought it absolutely
necessary that he should have a proportion of one Kanaka to every five
acres under crop, and he was reckoned a somewhat hard taskmaster at
that. When the price of Sugar ruled high, in the days before the Beet
sugar bounties of Germany, Holland, and France, when sugars were
sold at from £35 to £4O per ton, it was no uncommon occurrence that
the labour on a thriving estate was equal to one pair of hands to say
three acres. With the fall of prices to about one-half that which had
prevailed, the Labour Bill has correspondingly decreased. The most
improved machinery now in use requires but little more than hall the
tonnage of cane per ton of Sugar. The growth of the cane is being
undertaken by practical farmers whose attention is solely devoted to
its cultivation. The mill owner or manager and his staff of skilled
engineers devote their attention to improvements in machinery that
experience dictates. Recurring to field labour, it may be put that on
forest land one Kanaka is required to every twelve acres, and on scrub
land two to twelve acres.
It will be seen that small or moderate-sized farms can thus raise
the cane far Cheaper than the old large estate system, and that at


present prices, the farmer can obtain a very handsome return for his
crop for sale to the manufacturing mills.
In a fair season the return may be reckoned on forest land at 22
to 30 tons per acre from plant Cane, and 10 to 15 tons per acre from
Ratoons, while on Scrub land the yield is from 30 to 40 tons per acre,
while instances of up to 60 acres are not uncommon from plant Cane,
and from 15 to 25 tons per acre from Ratoons.
Now as the average price of Cane delivered on trucks on the
railway, or at the mill, is from 13/- to 14/- per ton, the crop proves a
highly profitable one, the actual result of such enterprise may be
recorded here in a few typical cases.
At the Racecourse Central Mill in the Mackay District at the
crushing season just completed, 21,000 tons of cane were purchased
from farmers at an average price of 14s. 4d. per ton at the Mill
Rollers, and throughout the season one ton of sugar % was produced
from eight tons of cane.
Miss Shaw, the well-known, able, Special correspondent to the
Times , had an opportunity of studying the system on the spot, and
writes of what she saw on the Herbert River.
“In the north, on the cleared Scrub land of the Herbert River,
the system of small farming is in full activity. Here, selectors, living
upon 160 acres Government lots, are growing Cane with great success
for the neighbouring mills. Amongst several into whose accounts I
went with great care, I found that the man who was least well off,
had cleared 100 acres of land, of which 70 acres were under Cane, avid
that he was making an income of about £BOO a year, with working
expenses of £5OO. He had started originally as a ploughman,
without any capital, and in addition to his land, now possesses a very
good two-storeyed house, and all the horses and implements necessary
for the cultivation of his farm. The others were in a very similar
position, with incomes varying up to £1,500 and working expenses to
£l,OOO. The proportion between working expenses and gross receipts
was generally as five to eight. All of these men started as labourers,
and have worked to their existing position in periods of from ten to
twelve years, dating from the time of taking up their land. It is only
since they have begun to grow sugar that they have achieved the
results with which they are so satisfied.”
Regarding the Mackay district, one of the chief centres of the
Sugar industry, the farmer can begin by leasing Sugar land from the
the large estate proprietors, with the option of purchase by deferred
payment. One condition is that the farmer shall get the market price
for all his Cane, and pay £1 an acre per annum rent for the land, the
market price for Cane being dast year 13/- to 14/- per ton. Under
the second form of lease, the farmer contracts to sell all his Cane at
the market price, less 1/- per ton for rent. It is worthy of note that
this system of royalty, at the rate of 1/- per ton is in favour of the
owner in good years when there may be a heavy crop of from 20 to
30 tons, and even more, per acre. In bad seasons, the plan is in


£
s.
d.
To felling Scrub at 34/- per acre
255
0
0
,, clearing and burning off, 35/- per acre ...
262
10
0
Making holes for plants, 45/- per acre
337
10
0
Planting at 25/- per acre
187
10
0
To weeding and trashing, at 10/- per acre
for 4 years ...
300
0
0
To Erection of house...
60
0
0
favour of the tenant, as then he has his grazing land, homestead
and garden free, and if no crop of Cane, no rent.
Another system adopted on large estates which are divided, is to
pay the farmer from 8/- to 10/- per ton for the standing crop, thereby
relieving the farmer of all expense of delivering at the mill. The
price paid varies according to the distance the Cane has to be conveyed
to the mill.
In almost all cases, the companies owning the mills, make
advances against the growing crop as it matures.
In the Cairns district in North Queensland, there has been con-
siderable activity in taking up Sugar lands. Plantations have been
worked by large cultivating and manufacturing companies, by
chinamen, and by European families with little or no outside help,
for the past ten or twelve years. There are fully 1000 square miles
of the most splendid Chocolate and Scrub lands in this district,
suitable for Cane culture, and both Government and private lands are
offered on most advantageous terms.
Here is an actual balance sheet as printed by a correspondent of
the Queenslander of December 30th, 1898, of a selection in this
district.
Selection of 150 acres.
Expenditure.
Expenditure.
Receipts.
£1402 10 0
£ s. d.
By Ist. year nil.
~ 2nd. ~ 23 tons to the acre at 9/-per ton 1552 10 0
„ 3rd. „ 25 „ „ 1687 10 0
„ 4th. „ 25 „ „ 1687 10 0
„ sth. „ 18 „ „ 1215 0 0
£6142 10 0
The correspondent adds “ a profit of over £4,700 in five years
from 150 acres is a result sufficient to satisfy any Agriculturist, and
itj is one which, with judicious management, any combination of


farmers can obtain.” In this case the Cane was purchased standing in
the field. At the end of five years the stumps would be rotted out
and further cultivation would be done with implements.
Frequently in the Queensland Journals, there appear instances
of more than comfortable livings made by working men who have
taken up from 20 to 40 acres which they cleared and planted with
Cane and then sold the crop to the central or other mills. These
have come chiefly of late from the Wide Bay and Bundaberg Districts
and the scrub, forest, and delta lands that lie between the sea-port
towns of Bundaberg and Maryborough. Three instances are worth
quoting and were published in December last.
A small farmer at Gooburrum with 25 acres was paid £4OO for his
crop, which calculating his expenses at five-eights of the gross returns
gives a clear income of £250. Another at South Kolan with 35 acres
received £BOO from the central mill which purchased his Cane, giving
a profit of £5OO. A third in the Woongarra Scrub with 40 acres had
a gross return of £l,OOO for his crop, or £652 net.
The Times Correspondent collected interesting statistics from
farmers in the Burdekin District. These farms consist of 100 acres,
60 under crop and the balance reserved for grazing, garden and home-
stead. The land is bought under a purchasing lease of five years at
£5 per acre, which is included in the expenditure, while the return is
calculated on the basis of 13/- per ton of Cano delivered at the mills.
I can only briefly summarise the result: —In the first 18 months
there is an outlay of £636 55., with a return of only £487 155,, which
leaves a debit balance of £l4B 10s. to be subtracted from the next
year’s profit. The second year gives an expenditure of £460 with a
return of £715. The whole first expenditure is now paid off, with a
net profit of £ll5. The third year gives an expenditure of £468 15s.
with a return of £715 10s.—net profit £246 15s. The fourth year
gives an expenditure of £265 15s. Thirty acres this year are
fallowed, and the returns are only £Bls—net profit £4O. Fifth year,
expenditure £4lB, returns £5B0 —net profit £162. Sixth year expen-
diture £360 155., returns £7l5 —net profit £364 ss. From this time
the farmer has no more rent to pay. The land, worth £5OO, is his
own, and his expenditure will be reduced by £lOO a year hitherto paid
for rent.
The result of six years, therefore, stands thus : —Net profit, £9lB ;
horses and plant, £2OO ; land, valued at cost price, £500; crop,
estimated to produce—net £272, total £1,890. I give the figures as
they have been supplied to me, all labour being counted at con-
tract prices, assuming that the farmer does no manual work, and
that he buys land that has been already cleared. The result is
less favourable than the instances which came under my personal
observation on the Herbert, in which the farmers worked themselves
and paid nothing for land (having selected it from the Crown), and
much less favourable than an account given to me by one gentle-
man farmer at Mackay of his actual experience of seven years. He


had given his own work in the first years, employing Kanakas and
working with them, thus keeping for himself the profit which, in
the estimate given above goes to the contractor. He had also
selected from the Crown, scrub land and cleared it, instead of
buying land at £5 an acre. His experience was by so much the
rougher and the richer. In the seven years there were two years of
drought. They may therefore be taken as including a fair average of
accident. The result for him was that having started with £7OO of
borrowed capital and taken up 80 acres of uncleared scrub, he found
himself at the end of seven years with 80 acres of rich land under
Cane, a good house, the £7OO of borrowed capital paid off, and £2,000
in the bank. This is a result that demands no exceptional ability. It
may be achieved by any healthy, industrious, and fairly intelligent
man who cares enough about the future to endure the hardships of
the earlier years. A young man coming out from England, whether
he is the son of a gentleman or not, would do well to come with a
resolution to serve his apprenticeship by working, in the first instance,
for wages until he has gained practical experience. Suppose that he
comes out at the age of 20, that he works as a labourer for £1 a week
and his rations up to the age of 23, and that he then enters upon such
a seven years’ experience as I have described. If he finds himself at
the age of 30 in possession of a farm upon which the crop is worth
not less than a thousand a year, with a good house, and a balance of
£2,000 at the bank, the ten years will certainly have produced a better
result than can be hoped for by many of the younger sons of clergymen
and other professional men, as the outcome of ten years’ work under
the ordinary conditions that offer themselves for their acceptance.
In addition to the existing Sugar Districts, new lands, scrub and
forest and open plains, specially adapted for tropical agriculture, have
been or are ready to be thrown open to selection in farms from 10 to
320 acres or more, in various parts of Queensland, notably on the
Kolan River, in the Burnett District, at Broad Sound, at the St.
Laurence River between Rockhampton and Mackay, in the Bowen
District, at Cairns, and as far north as Cooktown.
Many of the large Sugar estates are being, or have been, cut up
into moderate sized holdings, and are being offered at easy and
advantageous terms with the guarantee of all Cane grown being pur-
chased by the mill owners.
These small farms are already cleared in most cases, are already
under cultivation, and ready for immediate profitable occupation,
and are to be had in all the Sugar Districts of Queensland.
The Central Mill System.
The Agricultural policy and the Commercial wisdom of separating
the cultivation of the Cane and the manufacture of the sugar there-
from has already been explained. The one is, however, mutually
dependent on the other. A mill without a supply of Cane would be


useless. The grandest crops of Cane would be worthless to the
farmer without a market in the shape of a manufacturing mill in the
immediate neighbourhood.
But while very little initial capital is required by the small farmer
a well equipped mill of even moderate dimensions with all the
latest scientific improvements for the economic production of the
largest quantity of Sugar and the utilization of the bi-products
from a given weight of Cane requires a capital of, say from £30,000
to £60,338. Realising the necessity of encouraging the expenditure
of capital in the erection and working of such mills which serve the
double purpose of giving an incentive to close settlement on the
land, and the provision of well payed employment for a large
number of white artisans and their families, the Queensland
Government and Parliament last Session (1898) passed a “ Sugar
Works Guarantee Act.”
Briefly stated, it is meant to encourage the co-operative manu-
facture of Sugar by companies, the members of which will in the
main be the Cane growers of a specified area, and also will, as share-
holders in the mills, participate in the profits of manufacture.
Under the provisions of the Act Companies will be formed to erect
and work mills technically called Sugar Works. They apply to the
Colonial Treasurer for permission to issue debentures for the purpose
of “defraying the cost of Sugar Works and the erection thereof.”
The application states the situation and value of the land upon which
it is proposed to erect the works, and the nature and cost of the
buildings and of the machinery to be placed therein. They must
also specify the land upon which it is proposed to grow cane in suf-
ficient quantity to keep the Sugar Works employed to the fullest
extent of their average capacity during the ordinary season for manu-
facturing sugar, and the names of the persons who propose to grow
the cane for the mill, and the area they propose to cultivate.
A valuer will then be sent by the Government to see that the land
mentioned in the application of the company is capable of growing a
sufficient quantity of Cane to keep the mill going, and that either the
Cane is planted or that an ample guarantee is given that the land is
in preparation for such being done. If the report is satisfactory, the
Colonial Treasurer grants permission to the company to issue deben-
tures payable to bearer, to an amount equal to the total cost of the
machinery and of the erection thereof. The money derived by the
sale of these debentures is to be applied to no other purpose.
The Government guarantees repayment of the debentures in fifteen
years and the interest thereon, at the rate of five per cent, per annum.
Effectual measures are taken in the Act to cover the Government
Guarantee, and the redemption of the debentures. The Sugar Works,
the machinery, the land on which they are erected, are to be mortgaged
to the Colonial Treasurer for their full amount; and the land on which
the Cane is grown, or guaranteed to be grown (the land in fact specified
in the original application to the Colonial Treasurer) is also to be


mortgaged to the Colonial Treasurer in a proportional amount of the
guaranteed debentures. The Act gives the Governor in Council power
to make and issue regulations necessary to give effect to the Act.
The effect of this Act has been marvellous. Before many weeks
on the Statute Book, meetings of Settlers and Farmers were held in
all the Sugar districts of the colony for the purpose of forming com-
panies for the erection of mills under its provisions, and land is being
cleared, broken up and planted with Cane in various parts of the colony
in anticipation of the erection of central mills. Companies have been
organised in the Moreton Bay, Wide Bay, Burnett, Mackay, Bowen,
and Cairns Districts, and an influx of farmers from the Southern
Colonies has set in. The hum of agriculture, as preliminary to
industrial activity, is heard from end to end of Queensland, so much
so, that in a recent tour progress through the Southern Division of
the colony, the Attorney General (The Hon. J. T. Brynes) and
the Minister for Works (The Hon. R. Philip), while commending
the scheme as beneficial to old settlers, aud encouraging in no small
degree to new, stated—
“ No work had been done by any Government before equal to what
had been done in the passing of the Sugar Works Guarantee Act.
They thought the principle of assisting the farmers of this country by
guaranteeing debentures to enable them to procure machinery to turn
their product into marketable form, would be productive of the greatest
benefit.
“ It showed that the Government were to be partners to some extent
in the great Sugar industry, and whatever Government might come
afterwards, they could never let the Sugar industry drop.”
The growing prosperity of all Sugar and tropical lands is assured.
Settlers, be they yeoman farmers, possessed of moderate capital, or
agricultural labourers,* whose capital consists of willing arms and
determination to make for themselves homes, are invited to carefully
consider and weigh the foregoing statement with a view to participat-
ing in the advantages offered of acquiring their own freeholds, large or
small, in a colony under the British flag, enjoying institutions,
free education for their children, and prosperity for themselves and
families.




ANNO QUINQUAG-ESIMO SEPTIMO
VICTORIA REGINA.
No. 18.
An Act to Authorise the making of Advances, by way of
guaranteed Loans, for the establishment of Sugar
Works, and to provide for the Repayment thereof,
and for other purposes connected therewith.
to 18th October, 1893.]
■WHEREAS it is expedient to encourage the growth of Preamble.
* ’ sugar in Queensland by providing facilities for its
manufacture; Be it enacted by the Queen s Most
Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent
of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly of
Queensland in Parliament assembled, and by the authority
of the same as follows :
1. This Act may be cited as “The Sugar Works short title
Guarantee Act of 1893.”
2. In this Act the following terms shall have the
meanings set against them respectively, unless the con-
text otherwise requires :
13


“ Company ” —Any company incorporated under
“The Companies Acts, 1863 to 1892,” carrying
on or intending to carry on the business of the
extraction and manufacture of sugar;
“ Sugar Works ” —Any mill for the extraction and
manufacture of sugar, and the by-products
thereof, together with all machinery, chattels,
and appurtenances used therein, and the allot-
ment or portion of land upon which such mill
is erected or which is used in connection there-
with, and any railways and tramways leading
thereto;
“ The Treasurer ” —The Colonial Treasurer.
company 3. Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be
m fo y r a per- y lawful for any company to apply to the Treasurer for per-
mission to • I T 1 t £ .1 p c •
issue deben-mission to issue debentures tor the purpose o± defraying
tures. j-jjg cos £ 0 £ sugar works and of the erection of the same,
and the Treasurer may grant such permission.
Particulars 4. Such application shall state precisely the situation
works to be and cost of the land upon which it is proposed to erect
siven ' such sugar works, and the nature and cost of the buildings
and of the machinery to be placed therein, together with
all other particulars which the Treasurer may demand.
particulars 5. The application shall further particularly set forth
nndei a o n u d iti- the land upon which it is intended to grow cane in
vatl g °ven. be sufficient quantity to keep the sugar works employed, to
the full extent of their average capacity, during the
ordinary season for manufacturing sugar, and the names
of the persons who propose to grow cane for the mill, and
the areas they propose to cultivate.
upon which 6. The Treasurer shall not grant permission to any
P to be company to issue debentures unless and until he is satisfied,
granted. U p on re port of the valuer appointed under section
14
57 Vic. No. 18,
Sugar Works Guarantee Act.


eleven of this Act, that sufficient land to keep such sugar
works so employed, and of a quality to produce adequate
crops of cane, has been so planted with cane, or until a
guarantee is given to his satisfaction that such planting
shall be duly carried on and maintained.
7. Upon such permission being granted it shall be D
lawful for the company to issue, and they are hereby lssued '
empowered to issue, debentures under their common seal,
payable to bearer, and to an amount equal to the total
cost of the sugar works, and of the erection thereof, as
set forth in the application, and the moneys to be derived
from the issue and sale of such debentures shall be applied
to such purposes and not otherwise.
8. Such debentures shall each of them be for the dentures,
same sum of money, and shall be in such form, for such
sum, in such series of numbers, and shall be payable at
such place or places as the Treasurer may direct; they
shall bear interest at the rate of five per centum per
annum; the principal sum shall be repayable at the
expiration of fifteen years from the date expressed thereon.
And the holder of any coupon originally annexed to a
debenture, and whether separated therefrom or not, shall
be entitled to receive payment in like manner of the
interest mentioned in such coupon upon presentation of
the same at the place where, and on or after the date
when, interest is payable.
9. It shall be lawful for the Governor in Council to
guarantee to the holders of such debentures the due pay-
ment of principal and interest; and thereupon such tureSl
payment shall be a charge upon, and shall be made good
out of, the consolidated revenue, which is hereby perma-
nently appropriated for that purpose :
Provided that such guarantee shall not operate and
take effect unless and until the company has, from time
to time, or at some time, made default in the payment of
15
Sugar Works Guarantee Act.
1893.


some part of the principal or interest actually due to the
holders of the debentures, or to any one of them.
Governor 10. Subject to the provisions in this Act contained,
may issue 0 -l , _ _ *4
"payment 1 Governor may, by warrant under his hand addressed
to the Treasurer, direct him to advance out of the consoli-
dated revenue such sums as the Governor in Council may
think fit for the redemption of any debentures and the
payment of any interest as prescribed by this Act.
The Treasurer shall from time to time be allowed
credit for any sum or sums of money paid by him in pur-
suance of any such warrant, and the receipt of the persons
to whom such payments are made shall be sufficient dis-
charge to the Treasurer.
Company to 11. For the purpose of securing the consolidated
mortgage, revenue against loss in respect of such guarantee, the
company shall execute, or cause to be executed, in the
name of and to the satisfaction of the Treasurer, a first
mortgage and charge over the sugar works and over such
additional freehold land to be used for the purpose of
growing cane for keeping such sugar works fully employed
and over such other land and chattels, the value of which
security will, in the opinion of the Treasurer, founded
upon a report made by a valuer appointed by the Treasurer
for that purpose as an able and practical valuer, and so
employed and instructed independently of the company,
amount in the aggregate to at least double the total sum
for which the consolidated revenue has or may become
liable under the guarantee.
S?o' 12. The mortgage to the Treasurer over the sugar
ted revenue works shall be for the full amount of the liability of the
in consolidated revenue under the guarantee, but the mort-
T°rea g su g r e eJ° gage over any portion of additional freehold land shall _be
for a proportional amount only of such liability, according
to the value of such portion as compared with the value
of the whole of such additional freehold land.
16
57 Vic. No. 18,
Sugar Works Guarantee Act.


13. If any land intended to be mortgaged to the
to Trcasur-
Treasurer under the provisions of this Act is subject to priority e
any already existing mortgage or encumbrance, and if the , ? n|m e
mortgagee or encumbrancee shall, by a writing endorsed ges>
upon the instrument evidencing the same, consent to the
intended mortgage to the Treasurer taking priority over
such already existing mortgage or encumbrance, such
mortgage to the Treasurer shall, when executed, and with-
out any release or re-execution of the already existing
mortgage or encumbrance, take priority over the same,
and the Registrar of Titles shall register the mortgage to
the Treasurer accordingly. .
14. The repayment of the amount of the principal
sum of the debentures and of the interest thereon shall be an
made by the Company as follows :
(a) As to the principal sum, by the payment to the
Treasurer in respect of each one hundred
pounds, and of any part thereof in like propor-
tion, of the yearly sum set forth in the
Schedule, such payment to commence at the
expiration of two years from the date expressed
upon the debentures, and to continue for
thirteen payments thereafter;
(b) As to the interest, by payment thereof to the
holders of the debentures, or of the coupons if
detached therefrom, at the times and places at
which the same is expressed to be payable.
15. The articles of association of every company shall
to be a first
provide that the payments set forth in the last preceding
profits.
section shall be a first charge on the profits of the sugar
works.
16. If any default be made by the company in pay-
made Min-
ment of any portion of the principal or interest, the price
price of
of all the cane to be purchased by the company shall be cane -
17
Sugar Works Guarantee Act.
1898.


57 Vic. No. 18,
fixed by the Treasurer, and thereafter until all arrears of
payments for principal and interest are duly discharged by
the company no cane shall be purchased by the company
at any higher rate than that so fixed, and if any cane be
purchased at any higher rate such purchase shall con-
stitute a default as between the company and the
Treasurer.
bemade U an 7 default whatsoever be made by the com-
ma a take r P an y b e lawful for the Treasurer to enter into
possession, possession of the sugar works, and of all land mortgaged
to him, and to manage and conduct the same, and to
appoint all necessary managers and servants, until the
whole liability resting upon the consolidated revenue has
been fully discharged, or to sell the same by public auction
if he thinks fit.
Mortgage
18. The amount which may be guaranteed under the
cost of
at authority of this Act shall not exceed the sum stated in
company, the application, and the Treasurer shall require the com-
pany, at its own cost, to execute and complete every
mortgage, lien, security, or assurance which the Treasurer
may demand for the better securing the amount of the
guarantee or proposed guarantee.
19. The Treasurer shall empower some person
may inspect
deputed by him to inspect the progress of the construction
works. 0 f the sugar works, and may control the purchase and
erection of all machinery, and other matters and things
connected with such sugar works, and may permit or pro-
hibit any action in connection therewith.
may inspect 20. Every company, so long as any debt remains due
books, & c . un q er the provisions of this Act, shall, when required
thereto by the Treasurer, permit the Treasurer, or any
person authorised by him in writing under his hand, to
inspect and take copies of all or any books, documents, or
records relating to the business or affairs of the sugar
works.
Sugar Works Guarantee Act.


21. The Treasurer may from time to time, so long Info t r o m b a e tion
as any guarantee remains subsisting under the provisions furmshed-
of this Act, demand such information as he thinks fit from
any company respecting the business and affairs of the
company, and may require such information to be verified
upon the oath of the manager or other principal officer of
such company, and it shall be supplied to the Treasurer
within seven days after the same shall have been
demanded.
22. The Treasurer may, by a notice under his hand, 0
require and direct the company to insure and keep insured
the sugar works against fire, in such insurance office and
in such amount as the Treasurer may prescribe, and, in
default of compliance with such notice, may effect such
insurance, and from time to time recover the premium
thereon from the company.
23. In the months of February and August respect- st “^ s
ively in every year, the Treasurer shall cause to be pub- pubhshed '
lished in the Gazette a detailed statement of all unpaid
moneys arising out of guarantees at that time entered
into on behalf of companies under the provisions of this
Act.
24. If after the publication of any statement as £££•£
aforesaid any payment of moneys required by this Act to be publish
be made by any company to the Treasurer is overdue and
in arrear, he shall forthwith publish in the Gazette , and
in some newspaper or newspapers circulating in the
neighbourhood referred to thereby, notice of his intention
to enforce payment of the same. And the last day on
which such notice is published shall be deemed to be the
day of publication thereof.
25. If after the expiration of fourteen days from the recover?
date of such publication such moneys remain unpaid, the
Treasurer may forthwith exercise all or any of the powers
19
Sugar Works Guarantee Act.
1898.


conferred upon him by this Act for the recovery of over-
due moneys payable by such company to the Treasurer
or into the consolidated revenue.
26. The liability at any time existing of the com-
pany to the Treasurer shall be a Crown debt due to Her
Majesty the Queen, and payment thereof may be enforced
against the whole of the assets ot such company where-
soever they may be found, in priority to all other creditors.
Amounts
due to be a
Crown debt.
The company shall repay to the Treasurer all expenses
incurred by him for inspections, valuations, and all other
matters and things connected with the administration of
this Act, and such expenses shall be added to and form
part of such debt, and shall be repaid at such times and
in such instalments as the Treasurer may direct.
A certificate in writing, signed by the Treasurer, of
the amount appearing to be due for such advances, shall
he primd facie evidence that the amount stated in such
certificate is actually due, and that all acts and conditions
precedent to the right of recovery of the amount thereof
from such company and all other persons liable to pay
the same have been duly performed and fulfilled.
Evidence
thereof.
27. Any obstruction, default, or non-compliance by
the company with any of the provisions of this Act shall
constitute a default between the Treasurer and the com-
pany, and the Treasurer may thereupon, in addition to
any other remedies, proceed to enforce all or any of the
remedies provided by this Act in that behalf.
Obstruction
default, or
non-compli-
28. A statement showing the amount of debentures
guaranteed under the provisions of this Act shall annually
be laid before Parliament. At the next session of Parlia-
ment after the passing of this Act, and annually thereafter,
the Treasurer shall prepare an estimate showing the
amount of probable guarantees required for the financial
20
57 Vic. No. 18,
Sugar Works Guarantee Act.


year then commencing, and obtain the approval of Parlia-
ment thereto.
29. The Governor in Council may from time to time Regulations
make such Regulations, not being contrary to the pro-
visions of this Act, as are necessary to give effect thereto.
Such Regulations shall be published in the Gazette ,
and after publication therein shall have the force of law,
and shall be judicially noticed in any court of justice.
THE SCHEDULE.
Table for the Accumulation of the sum of One Hundred Pounds at the
expiration of Fifteen Years by the following Equal Payments, bear-
ing Interest progressively at the Rate of Three and
centum per annum.
Payment to be made at end of
Annual Payment.
Second Year
Third ~
Fourth ~
Fifth ~
Sixth ~
Seventh ~
Eighth ~
Ninth ~
Tenth ~
Eleventh ~
Twelfth ~
Thirteenth ~
Fourteenth ~
Fifteenth ~
£5 13s. 2d.
£5 13s. 2d.
£5 13s. 2d.
£5 13s. 2d.
£5 13s. 2d.
£5 13s. 2d.
£5 13s. 2d.
£5 13s. 2d.
£5 13s. „ 2d.
£5 13s. 2d.
£5 13s. 2d.
£5 13s. 2d.
£5 13s. 2d.
£5 13s. 2d.
21
Sugar Works Guarantee Act.
1893.




REGULATIONS UNDER THE SUGAR WORKS
GUARANTEE ACT OF 1893.
The Treasury,
Brisbane, 18th December, 1898
His Excellency, the Governor, with the advice of the Executive
Council, has been pleased to make the following Regulations, under
the provisions of the “ Sugar Works Guarantee Act of 1893.”
Hugh M. Nelson.
REGULATIONS.
1. In these Regulations and in the forms in the Schedule hereto,
unless the context otherwise requires, the words “ Company ” and
“ Sugar Works ” shall have the meanings set against them, respectively,
in the second section of the “ Sugar Works Guarantee Act of 1893.”
The “Act” shall mean “The Sugar Works Guarantee Act of
1893.”
“ The Treasurer *’ shall mean the Colonial Treasurer or other
Minister, who for the time being performs his duties.
“ Prescribed ” shall mean prescribed by Regulation.
2. The Forms in the Schedule hereto are hereby prescribed as the
forms which shall be used for the purposes to which they are respec-
tively applicable.
3. The Treasurer may from time to time publish for general
information in the Government Gazette the forms which shall be
used under the Act, for the following purposes, that is to say:—
(1) Debentures.
(2) Coupons.
(3) All other instruments and notices which may be lawfully
made and issued under the Act, and the forms of which are not other-
wise hereby prescribed.
Provided however, that the Treasurer may in any case direct that
for the purposes above mentioned or any of them, such form or forms
shall be used as may be approved of by him.
4. The Treasurer shall not give permission to any Company to
issue Debentures, nor shall he guarantee such Debentures unless the
Articles of Association of the Company applying for such permission
or guarantee, contain at the time of making the application for such
permission or guarantee, the following clauses or provisions to the
like effect:—
(a). If any Debentures of the Company are guaranteed under
the Act, the objects and the operations of the Company
shall, so long as any guarantee or other liability to the


Government of Queensland subsists, be subject to the
conditions and agreements contained in the Act and in
any Regulations thereunder, and the Company shall not
without the previous consent in writing of the Trea-
surer, amalgamate or enter into partnership with any
person or Company.
(b). The Directors may make and execute under the common
seal of the Company, any bond which the Colonial
Treasurer may require for the purpose of securing the
Consolidated Revenue of Queensland against loss in
respect of any such guarantee. All payments to be
made by the Company under the fourteenth section of
the Act shall be a first charge on the profits of the
Company.
5. Every Debenture issued by permission under section seven and
guaranteed under section nine of the Act shall be endorsed by the
Treasurer, or by some officer appointed by him on that behalf; and
the Treasurer shall not incur any liability in respect of any Debenture
not so endorsed.
6. No guarantee shall be given in respect of the Debentures of
any Company unless such Company has a capital of at least one-half
the amount of the guarantee applied for, of which capital at least
one-tenth part shall be actually and bona fide paid up.
7. The Treasurer may retain possession of any debentures
guaranteed under the Act, for the purpose of delivering the same
to the purchasers, and may upon the authority of the Company
deliver the same to such purchasers ; provided that if the Treasurer
so requires, the proceeds of the sale of such debentures shall be paid
into the Treasury of the Colony of Queensland, or to the Agent
General of the said Colony in London.
The moneys so paid into the Treasury or to the said Agent General
shall be paid to the orders of the Company, but not unless and until
the Treasurer shall be satisfied that such orders have been given and
issued for payments to be made in accordance with the purposes set
forth in the Act.
SCHEDULE.
“ The Sugar Works Guarantee Act of 1898.’
Application for permission to issue Debentures.
To the Colonial Treasurer of Queensland.
1. The Company, Limited, of
, hereby applies for
permission to issue debentures under the seventh section of “ The
Sugar Works Guarantee Act of 1893,” amounting in the aggregate to
pounds sterling, for the purpose of defraying the cost of Sugar
Works and the erection of the same.


2. The land upon which it is proposed to erect the works is situated
, parish of , portion No. , and the cost price is
3. The cost of the Works is estimated at
4. The nature of the buildings proposed to be erected is as per
plan and specification herewith.
5. The nature of the machinery proposed to be erected is as per
plan and specification herewith.
6. The estimated cost of the building is
7. The estimated cost of the machinery is
8. The probable mileage of tramway is miles, at a cost of
per mile.
9. The particulars of the land upon which it is proposed to grow
cane are endorsed on the other side hereof.
The common seal of was hereunto affixed by ,
being the person duly authorised to affix the same, this day
of 189 , in the presence of
Particulars of the Land upon which it is proposed to grow Sugar
for the Company.
Name of owner or Cultivator;
Area; acres roods perches
No. of allotment or portion and parish ;
Description of land (whether forest, scrub, or planted with cane).
“ The Sugar Works Guarantee Act of 1893.” Guarantee by Com-
pany* „ % . , ~
Know all men by these presents that (name of company) is held
and firmly bound unto our Sovereign Lady Victoria, by the Grace of
God, of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland Queen,
Defender of the Faith, in the sum of of good and lawful money
of Great Britain, to be paid to our said Lady the Queen, Her Heirs
and Successors, for which payment well and truly to be made the
said Company binds itself and its successor firmly by these presents.
Sealed with the common seal of the said Company, dated the
day of in the year of Our Lord, one thousand eight
hundred and
W T hereas under the provisions of the “ Sugar Works Guarantee
Act of 1893,” the above bounden company has made the application
hereunto annexed to the Colonial Treasurer of the said Colony for
permission to issue Debentures to the amount of £ for the pur-
pose of defraying the cost of the Sugar Works and of the erection of
the same, as set forth in the said application.
And whereas the said Colonial Treasurer has granted such per-
mission on the condition that the said Company shall enter into the
bond herein contained.


Now, therefore, the condition of the above written bond and
obligation is such that if the said Company shall erect upon the land
mentioned in the said application the Sugar Works and buildings, and
place therein the machinery as set forth in the said application, and
shall plant cane on the land set forth in the said application in
sufficient quantity to keep such sugar works employed to the full
extent of their average capacity during the ordinary season for manu-
facturing sugar, and shall duly carry on and maintain such planting,
then this bond shall be void and of none effect, otherwise it shall be
and remain in full force and virtue.




