

tV * 6 cve,„ ■
THE OPENING of the
FIRST PARLIAMENT of the COMMONWEALTH of AUSTRALIA
.. ■ " . U
r ,/- ■„■ ~ Ksxtiiw.K M'3vv.y::\ IBvpUswm,
0f >» j. 4rf * & ”M £OOR||fe -icsTRAS.sA,
R THE OR;
BY
■ r


"The Opening of the First Parliament
of the Commonwealth of Australia."
PHOTOGRAVURE after the Original Painting by
By Permission of the Federal Government of Australia.
TOM ROBERTS.
Under the Distinguished Patronage of
Their Royal Highnesses The DUKE AND DUCHESS OF CORNWALL AND YORK,
His Excellency LORD HOPETOUN, Governor-General of Australia.
His Excellency REAR-ADMIRAL BEAUMONT, Commander-in-Chief of the Australian
Naval Station.
His Excellency LORD LAMINGTON, Governor of Queensland,
His Excellency LORD TENNYSON, Governor of South Australia.
The Right Rev. F. F. GOE, D.D., Bishop of Melbourne.
The Most Rev. THOMAS J. CARR, D.D., Archbishop of Melbourne.
The Right Rev. GEO. TAIT, Moderator of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
His Excellency Sir A. LAWLEY, Governor of Western Australia.
His Excellency Sir JOHN MADDEN, Lieut.-Governor of Victoria.
His Excellency Sir S. J. WAY, Lieut.-Governor of South Australia.
His Excellency Sir SAMUEL W. GRIFFITHS, Lieut.-Governor of Queensland.
His Excellency Sir JOHN DODDS, Lieut.-Governor of Tasmania.
The Right Hon. EDMUND BARTON, Prime Minister of Australia.
Members of the First Federal Parliament of Australia.
The Premiers of the Federated States of Australia.
Head Office NATIONAL MUTUAL BUILDINGS, 395 Collins Street, Melbourne,
Artist's Studio : — A.M.P. BUILDINGS, 463 Collins Street, Melbourne.
CSBOLDSTONE & AtTKINS, PRINTERS. 256 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.


T.R.H. the DUKE and DUCHESS of CORNWALL and YORK.


THE OPENING OF THE FIRSTS PARLIAMENT
OF THE COMMONWEALTH of AUSTRALIA
O FTH p pY HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUKE OE CORNWALL AND YORK,
1—) the future Sovereign of the Britannic Empire, at Melbourne, on the 9th of May,
1901, took place in the presence of an assemblage of distinguished men and women
from all parts of the world, and was, by reason of its stately grandeur, solemn
impressiveness and the incalculable magnitude of its possibilities, an event without
parallel in the past History of the World.
Never before in history has an entire continent been brought under the rule of a single Government
with a Parliament completely representative of a free people —a living expression of the popular will.
Privileged indeed was that great concourse of people which, with exalted feeling, awaited the
arrival of the Heir to the Throne, in the great avenues which branch out from beneath the vast dome of
the Exhibition Building. We have not in Australia any sense of the historical prestige which is attached
to a Royal opening of the Parliament at Westminster. There, the stately function is magnificent in
its setting and pregnant in its associations, but in no sense of the word can it be regarded as a people’s
function. It is witnessed by an extremely limited number. The majority of the peers are by force
of circumstances excluded from the limited space of their own chamber. Here, by a happy inspiration,
the function was made to the fullest extent a popular one. Twelve thousand people seated in a
vast structure —free people , courageous people , hopeful people —entrusted with the working out of their own destiny
and rejoicing in their own liberty, were gathered together to see the seal set upon their own \vork
and to participate in the dedication and starting of the magnificent engine of Government which they
themselves had devised.


EARL OF HOPETOUN, Governor General, and COUNTESS.


Still the Ceremony was not lacking in splendour of accessories. The mighty arches of
the dome, the spread of the great transepts, the grace of the decorations, were in
themselves inspiring; nor was even the sombre shade of the mourning dress, softened
by splashes of purple here and there, out of keeping with the event, typifying, as it
did, our reverential regard for the memory of a great constitutional Ruler, the mightiest
Sovereign of the People the world had known. The brilliant uniforms of the Governors,
the Naval and Military officers and the scarlet robes of the Judges, gave the touch of
color needed, while above all, the glorious colouring of the Royal Standard and the grand
old Union Jack lent additional warmth to the scene. The worthiest of Australia’s sons
were there —the men who held their distinguished positions because they had won them,
and because they deserved them. All that was best in Politics, in Commerce, in
Industry, in the Arts, in the Church, in the School, in the Public Service, was repre-
sented, and every heart beat high with hope. Not a soul in the vast continent but craved
to be present at this august gathering; for in the years to come, thousands of Australians,
as yet unborn, will listen while their grandparents tell of that historic event . “The
Opening of the First Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia
Just about noon, faint and far off, came the sound of music. Then a thrill of
excitement stirred the waiting multitude. Nearer still came a fanfare of trumpets, heralding
the approach of the Imperial envoys, and a moment or two later the Duke and Duchess
were on the dais and the strains of thfe National Anthem pealed through the vast edifice.
Up to this time there had only been the Senators in the space reserved for the
members of the first Parliament, to whom the proclamation had been read by the
Clerk of the Parliaments. But now, through the Usher of the Black Rod, the presence
of the members of the House of Representatives was requested, and shortly after they
arrived, led with grave and dignified bearing by the Prime Minister (The Right
Honorable Edmund Barton, P.C.)


R HON. SIR GEORGE TURNER P.C. KCMC
HON SIR WYLYNE K .C.MC.
Hon Alfred Deakin,
HON. J.G. DRAKE
RT HON. EDMUND BARTON. P.C.
Jt J HS*T
Commonwealth Ministry.
HON SIR JOHN FORREST GCMG
HON SIR PHILIP FYSH KCMC.
HON. CC KINGSTON
HON R.E. O'CONNOR


All being assembled, the religious feelings of the spectators were stirred by the
strains of the grand “ Old Hundredth ” to the words of the metrical psalm, commencing
“All People that [on earth do dwell.” This was taken up by thousands of the
audience, and its swelling harmonies rose grandly to the dome. Lord Hopetoun, setting
aside all complicated questions of religious precedence, himself read suitable prayers in his
clear, penetrating voice, so pleasantly familiar in Australia.
When the Duke stepped forward to the edge of the dais to deliver his speech to the Two
Houses a “ Hush” ran round the assembly, and everyone listened intently. His Royal Highness
spoke deliberately, in a clear, strong voice, and the speech he read was distinctly heard by
thousands of those present. It was a dignified, a graceful, a kindly, and a congratulatory
speech, and it expressed a confident belief that the new power granted to Australia
would only strengthen the affection of the people for the Throne and Empire. At the
final words, “1 now declare the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia
open,” the Duchess touched an electric button, which gave the signal for the despatch
of the message to London announcing the baptism of the ISew Nation and declaring
the object of the journey of the Royal envoys accomplished. Trumpets blared forth a
joyous call, and the booming of cannon in Royal salute was heard from the Domain.
It was noticed that, in accordance with ancient custom, His Royal Highness
during his speech • wore his hat, dispensing with it immediately afterwards. After a brief
pause, the Duke of Cornwall and York stepped forward once more and read the following
special cable message of congratulation from His Majesty the King:—“My thoughts are
with you in to=day’s important ceremony. Most fervently do I wish Australia
prosperity and happiness.”—EDWAßD R.I.
The message was received with universal attention, and at its close cheer after
cheer was given. Cheers without concert, without pre-arrangement, reverberated through
the mighty edifice. They were taken up time after time by sections of the audience.
The sound rang round the aisles and surged through the galleries ; a hearty, spontaneous,
irrepressible Australian cheer.


THE EXHIBITION BUILDING, MELBOURNE—Where the great Ceremony was performed.


The scene must have impressed itself indelibly on the sensitive minds of the
thousands of Australians who were privileged to behold it. Our children’s children,
we may gladly say, will be proud of the function which inaugurated the self-
governing existence of the Southern British nation. The Opening of The First Common-
wealth Parliament will become a tradition to the generations of Australians yet unborn.
They will weave all sorts of fancies about it, for though the description of the grandeur,
the dignity and the impressiveness of the ceremony may be handed down to them, it
will fail, as all word paintings must fail, to convey the full significance of its great
splendour and beauty.
What then could be more appropriate or happier than that Australia’s talented
artist, Mr. Tom Roberts, should make the reproduction on canvas of the historic event,
the work of his life, so that from generation to generation the unique scene might be
familiar in the households of the Commonwealth, in a worthy life-like and imperishable
form. There is something singularly befitting in the fact that a picture destined to
become historical and which represents the baptism of a nation should be executed by
one who has amongst us passed through all the emotions of hope, joy and pride, common
to the people of the whole Continent during this critical period. Mr. Roberts possesses
both the skill and artistic enthusiasm necessary to make his work a great picture. He is
sensible of the great historic interest attached to it and he is determined to make his
work worthy of the most memorable event in this history-making epoch. His task has
been made easier by the gracious and cordial courtesy with which he has been received by
Their Royal Highnesses The Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York, the Earl
of Hopetoun, Governor-General, and the Countess of Hopetoun, Lord Lamington,
Governor of Queensland, and Lady Lamington, Lord Tennyson, Governor of South
Australia, and Lady Tennyson, The Right Hon. Edmund Barton, Prime Minister, and
other distinguished personages who have already granted him sittings or intimated their
pleasure to sit when required.


THE following is a brief description of the picture : —To the left of
the canvas will be the dais, in the foreground of which His Royal
Highness the Duke of Cornwall and York, clad in the uniform of
an Admiral of the British Navy, will be depicted in the act of uttering
the words, “ I now, in the King’s name, and on his behalf, declare
this Parliament open.” Just behind him will be the Duchess, and
grouped upon the dais in the rear will be the Goi ernor-General,
Lord Hopetoun, Lady Hopetoun, the Governors of the several States,
and the members of the Royal Suite and others.
THE
ORIGINAL
PAINTING
The splendour of the Naval and Military uniforms, and the gold lace
bound court dresses, together with the brilliancy of the stars and other
decorations worn upon them will make this portion of the canvas a corner of
magnificence, while a patch of crimson carpeting in the centre of the cruciform
building will lend another touch of color.
Facing the dais will be shown the Senators and Members of the House of Repre=
sentatives, with the Prime Minister and Members of the Cabinet of the First Federal
Parliament.
Standing at the right and left of the dais and stretching far into the three great
transepts and the galleries will be shown the Judges, Mayors, and prominent men and
women of the various States, Representatives and Envoys from Canada, India, Natal
and Cape Colony, America, Germany, Russia, Netherlands, Consuls representing other
powers, distinguished guests and prominent pressmen.
To lend realism to the scene, the Artist will depict the sun’s rays streaming down
from the dome overhead, and shedding a golden light over all just at the psychological
moment.


By special permission of the Commonwealth Government we are enabled to issue to subscribers
Photogravure Reproductions of the original painting, mrliblj and measuring about s oin. by
40m. We intend to apply the most modern processes of reproduction, direct from the original, to be
obtained in Europe, and are confident that by sparing neither time, talent, nor money, the’ artistic
excellence of the picture will be secured and the most sanguine anticipations of subscribers will be realised.
Our part of the contract will be honorably and completely fulfilled, and we trust the result will be that
every home of patriotism and loyalty in Australia will possess a copy of such a faithful representation
of the most stupendous event in the History of the British Nation.
The acceptance by the Federal Government on behalf of the Parliament of the Commonwealth,
of the original canvas, and the Government’s desire to place the painting at the disposal of His
Majesty the King, should be a source of great satisfaction to the public and should lend additional
interest to our reproduction of the picture. There can be no doubt His Majesty would, under the
circumstances, wish his faithful subjects to possess a copy of the picture in commemoration of the historic
and final act in the cousummation of Australian Union, and we venture to say that every patriotic Australian
parent will desire to become the possessor of so beautiful a record of an event which is destined to play an
important part in the lives of their children and children’s children. There is no surer means of inculcating
love of country and reverent affection for its traditions and institutions than by placing in an honored
place among the household gods a reproduction of some historic event upon which the prosperity and
greatness of the nation have been established.
Not only will the photogravures be works of art, but they will afford life-like representations of
our Royal visitors as well as of those distinguished Australians whose names have long been household
words.


