

THE
WHITE STAR
JOURNAL
PRICE $2.00
Published, weekly on board the clipper ship
WHITE STAR
during a passage from Liverpool, England, to Melbourne, Australia,
with 600 emigrants, in the year 1833.


From an early lithograph
Clipper Ship WHITE STAR
Courtesy of the Peabody Museum, Salem, Massachusetts


THE
WHITE STAR
JOURNAL
Reprinted in full, in exact facsimile by
THE MARINE HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION
INCORPORATED
Mystic, Connecticut October, 1931
Published weekly on board the clipper ship
WHITE STAR
during a passage from Liverpool, England, to Melbourne, Australia,
with 600 emigrants, in the year 1833.




Foreword
s —~yn ife on the old emigrant ships of the mid-nineteenth century has been
described many times in journals, letters and articles. Such descrip-
tions, of necessity, record the impressions of a single individual. It
follows that whatever their merits—and many have found a well-deserved
place in literature—they are limited and colored by that persons selective and
analytical judgment, as conditioned by his preconceptions and interests. They
also reflect, in general, the point of view of the onlooker rather than a partici-
pant. The resulting picture, however striking or dramatic, is two-dimensional.
It falls short of reproducing the living, changing scene. For those who seek to
enter into the daily life of the emigrant and to evaluate the quality and charac-
ter of the ship’s company, something more is needed.
It remained for the great emigrant clippers of the Australian lines to
cover the field in more intimate fashion and broader perspective, by introduc-
ing the regular publication of weekly ship’s newspapers. Copies of these papers
are now rare. Even the fact of their existence is known to few outside the ranks
of maritime students.
Literary criteria aside, they possess a unique value. Note artlessly re-
vealing, now equally revealing in studied artfulness, they picture vividly the
little daily concerns, the problems, the plans and purposes, the hopes and aspi-
rations of the entire ship’s company. They meet the ultimate test of descriptive
writing—that of “coming alive.” One cannot read those long-buried pages with-
out feeling that, through the alchemy of some strange sea change, he is again
walking the long, slowly swaying deck, crowded with men and women and
children he once knew—that they are not the musty automata of history, but
living people, fixed forever in the act of living—the Micawbers, the Joey
Bagshots, the little Emilys and Sairy Gamps of an hundred years ago.
Just when the publication of these papers began is uncertain. The earliest
file in the possession of The Marine Historical Association, Inc., is that of the
clipper ship MARCO POLO, the first number of which was issued Wednesday,
23 November, 1853. Since ship’s newspapers presuppose a substantial passenger
list, it seems probable that the practice did not in any event antedate the pre-
ceding year, for the MARCO POLO (1625 tons) was one of the earliest of the


large colonial clippers carrying emigrants. She sailed on her maiden voyage
late in ’52, with a reported crew and passenger list of 1040.
Lubbock (Colonial Clippers, p. 97) is authority for the statement that
James Baines put printing presses on all his “Black Ball’’ ships for the amuse-
ment of the passengers. However that may be, the majority of ship’s news-
papers were apparently written out in longhand and circulated among the
“subscribers,” with the understanding that when port was made the file would
be printed and sent to all subscribers. The common price for such printed
numbers was three pence each. Since our files include four voyages of “Black
Ball” liners, all of which were actually printed either in England or Melbourne,
it seems evident that the practice of carrying printing presses on board was not
general, even among the “Black Bailers.”
The great Australian migration was touched off by the discovery there
of gold in small quantities in 1850, followed by the fabulous “strikes” of 1851,
starting with immensely rich placer grounds in Victoria on 29 September. This
was followed by others in rapid succession, and before the end of the year an
estimated three quarters of a million pounds sterling in gold had been taken
out. The rush to the “diggings” which began late that year assumed such pro-
portions during ’52 that British shipping agents found it necessary to order
craft of the largest size to replace the comparatively small vessels available
to transport the first emigrants. Ships of seven or eight hundred tons were suc-
ceeded by thirteen or fourteen hundred tonners, and even these proved inade-
quate. The early ships were two-deckers for the most part, with passenger
quarters on one deck only. Beginning in the latter part of 1852 they were
rapidly replaced by three-deckers ranging from 1600 to 2500 tons and up-
wards, most of which were built in the United States and Canada.
These ships could carry passengers on two decks as well as in roomy
deckhouses, with the result that while the rush was on they rarely sailed for
Melbourne with less than 600 passengers and frequently carried many more,
with a degree of comfort unprecedented in colonial vessels. All were built for
speed, but they had one important advantage over all other clippers. Since
both their upper and lower ’tween-decks were usually occupied by passengers
whose combined weight was trifling in comparison toiih that of freight, they
were rarely loaded below light load line. Thus they were not only down to
their best sailing marks, but their relatively enormous freeboard enabled them
to drive ahead in the heavy gales of the southern latitudes when deep-loaded
two deckers were compelled to heave to, a fact which goes far to account for
the remarkable port-to-port records they made. It also accounts for the fact
that the great majority of 400-mile day’s runs were made by these ships. Much


credit undoubtedly attached to their commanders, but the fact remains that
such runs could hardly have been made by the best ships afloat when deeply
loaded.
In passing, it is worthy of note that the great packets of the ’fifties and
their successors were so ably managed and served a definite need so well that
they continued to carry a substantial number of Australian emigrants years
after the White Star and other lines afforded a fast, regular and comfortable
steamship service. The writer well remembers speaking a large British ship
ploughing along under full sail in the southeast trades in the Fall of ’9B. It was
a beautiful day. A fresh breeze was blowing and her decks were literally
swarming with people—a striking contrast to our crew of 15 all told. After
exchanging signals, our second mate reported that she was an Australian emi-
grant ship, and volunteered the further information that he would give a
month’s pay to be aboard her.
It was an extremely profitable traffic from the first and quickly resulted
in the establishment of a number of prosperous lines both in England and
America. Some of these were famous the ivorld over in their day, but only two
seem to have survived the changing fortunes of the years—the New York firm
of R. W. Cameron ir Company and the famous “White Star Line.” The latter
was founded by Messrs. Pilkington 6- Wilson, a Liverpool firm which had
already been engaged in shipping in a modest way for several years when the
news of the Australian discoveries broke.
Pilkington <b Wilson were among the first to take advantage of the
demand created by the tremendous emigration which ensued. Their house
flag was a red swallowtail with a white star, from which their Australian line
received the popular designation of “White Star Line.” Their first ship in the
new trade was the BEN NEVIS, built in St. John, New Brunswick. She sailed
on her maiden voyage to Melbourne 27 September, 1852, with 600 passengers.
Other ships were added in rapid succession, among them the WHITE STAR
and the noted American clipper RED JACKET, both of which entered the
service in 1854.
The WHITE STAR was the largest ship that had been built in Canada
up to the time of her launching. Her tonnage was 2339, with an overall length
of 288 feet. She proved very fast. Before the advent of the clippers, 120 days
was considered a good run to the colonies. Her best time from Liverpool to
Melbourne was 72 days in 1858, port to port, but in 1856 she ran from land to
land in 67 days. Although she broke no records she was little inferior in size,
speed and accommodations to the great quartet of McKay-built “Black Ball”
clippers, of which the JAMES BAINES was the most noted.


The “White Star Journal,” here reprinted for the first time, contains the
record in 12 weekly numbers of the second voyage of the ship, under the com-
mand of Captain J. R. Brown. It is an accurate facsimile reproduction in
format, type and wording, of the complete file. Nothing has been changed,
added or omitted. It is believed that for the majority of our members it will
throw interesting light on the conditions of travel a century ago, and perhaps
on the character and quality of the traveling public as well. It has the added
interest of furnishing a basis of comparison between the crack “canvas back
liners” of the justly famous White Star Line during its early years and the
“QUEEN MARYS” of the present.
Whether the people have kept pace with the improvement in the ships
may be a debatable matter. Certainly the proportion between steerage and
cabin passengers has changed in favor of the latter. On the other hand, the
columns of the “White Star Journal” seem to indicate that a sound proportion
of the men and women of ability and worth on board were to be found in the
lowly steerage. The subsequent history of Australia, indeed, proves that, as in
the case of Canada and the United States, many of her most prominent citizens
rose from the ranks of her humblest immigrants.
21 August, 1951.
CARL C. CUTLER


THE
WHITE STAR JOURNAL.
ON BOARD THE “WHITE STAR.”
White Star Journal.
No. I.] SATURDAY, APRIL 28, 1855.
TO THE LADIES AND GENTLEMEN ON BOARD
THE “WHITE STAR.”
We have most auspiciously commenced a long voyage.
We have set out on a journey under circumstances the
most favorable. The elements have so far been our ■willing
servants ; and if we may judge from present appearances,
and predicate of the future from our experience of the past,
we may reasonably hope to reach our destination without
being subjected to any inconveniences, but such as are
absolutely inseparable from a sea voyage.
That we can altogether escape the penalty of our temerity
in quitting dry land, is not to be expected. Winds will rise
and chafe the ocean into anger; and it will fret and fume,
and surge about, and rear itself into most fantastic forms,
beautiful to look at; and at such times it is the nature of
ships to croak and groan, and pitch and roll about, and to
make desperate plunges, now to one side, now to the other;
or, as most of us have already come to consider it, grace-
fully to salute with her yard-arms, now to starboard, now to
port, and sometimes slightly to nod the nod of familiar
recognition, right ahead, from the end of her flying jibboom.
We have a splendid ship under us, so symmetrical in
form, and so beautiful in decoration, that, as she lay in the
river, it warmed the heart of many an old Salt to look at
her, and most of us must have felt a swell of personal pride
as we thought that our fortunes were for a time linked with
hers.
We have a skilful Captain and an able Crew, and every-
thing promises fair for a successful voyage; still, it is satis-
factory for the traveller to know that he is actually pro-
gressing on his journey, and as there are no milestones by
the way, and few landmarks, it is difficult to realise this
without keeping constantly in view the abstractions—lati-
tude and longitude.
It is therefore proposed to publish once a-week a Sum-
mary of the Log, shewing the ship’s position every day, and
such other particulars as may prove interesting. A hope is
also entertained, that the Journal thus commenced may
attain to the dignity of a Newspaper, furnishing a ready and
easily accessible means of communication between the
various parties on board, and perhaps becoming the vehicle
of some amusement and instruction.
Talent there is on board in abundance, especially the
description of it technically so called; but at present we
have less to do with histrionic and musical than with
literary capabilities; and if such as have a vocation that way
(and there must be some) will devote an hour or two weekly
B
to the amusement of the rest, this little adventure may
prove successful.
For tire present, little beyond the Log is attempted, as the
labour of transcribing under existing circumstances, and to
persons wholly unaccustomed to the present condition of
things, is necessarily great, and obliges us to put a check
upon our imagination.
And now, having taken upon ourselves the cares and
responsibilities of Editorship, by the adoption of the plural
pronoun, we beg leave to invite communications and con-
tributions from all parts of the ship. Whatever is commu-
nicated to us calculated to instruct or amuse, will receive
our best attention, and will be treated wholly on its merits,
irrespective of personal or local considerations.
We take leave of our readers for the present, in the hope
that every one on board will contribute to the success of
the White Star Journal, either by wilting something
for its pages, or receiving in a kindly and indulgent spirit
what is written by others.
DOMESTIC OCCURRENCES.
BIRTHS.
On Tuesday the 24th instant, at No. 135, Lower Deck, starboard side, Mrs.
White, of a son.
MARRIAGES.
The announcement of these events is postponed until they shall have
occurred.
Materials for Thought. —We submit the following queries to our
ingenious readers, with regard to the little stranger who arrrived on Tues-
day rooming:—What countryman is he ? To what parish does he belong ?
What relation is he to the buoy at the Nore, or the Cove of Cork? Does
his birth throw any light upon the question of the plurality of worlds, being
bom in the White Star?
STOWAWAYS.
On Tuesday the 24th instant, an unexpected addition
was made to our community, in the person of two ingenious
youths, who were fished out of the bowels of the ship.
They had secreted themselves there with a view to ob-
taining a passage, without the troublesome preliminary of
purchasing tickets. ■ They were reduced to this expedient
by the changes that have lately taken place in our penal
code; for under the old system, our paternal government
would have provided them with the means of transport.
Such attempts are very common, and in spite of every pre-
caution on the part of shipowners, often succeed. Lately,
the captain of an emigrant ship from Glasgow threw a
stowaway overboard off the island of Arran, when he was
fortunately picked up by the crew of a fishing boat; the more
common way, however, is that adopted by Captain Brown
in the present instance, viz.: to get as much work out of
them as possible.


OFFICERS AND CREW OF THE
W. S., IN
FULL.
Commander, —Mr. Brown.
Chief Officer, —Mr. Curwen.
Second Ditto, —Mr. Wheatley.
... ...
Third Ditto, —Mr. Thomas.
Fourth Ditto, —Mr. Burger.
8
Midshipman—Mr. Hall
Purser, —Mr. Eaves.
Chief Steward,—Mr. Travers
Boatswain, Carpenter, and Mates
4
Able Seamen
46
Ordinary Seamen and Boys ...
,
9
Stewards and Cooks
•
30
97
LIST OF SALOON PASSENGERS.
Mrs. Matthews
Captain Matthews
Mrs. Burger
Captain Eyre
Miss Burger
Mr. N. Harker
Miss Gill
Mr. Semple
Miss Wilson
Mr. Osman
Miss Wheatley
Mr. J. Harker
Miss M‘Kenzie
Mr. Perott
Miss W. M'Kenzie
Herr Kohler
Mrs. Harker
Rev. Mr. Hayden
The Misses Harker
Dr. Walker
Mrs. Hayden
Mr. Wallan
Mrs. Becket
Mr. Merrell
Miss Constardine
Mr. Edens
Mrs. Lindsell
Master Thrower
Mrs. Walker
Master Lindsell
Mrs. Edens
Master Hayden
Infants, 2
Total
35
SUMMARY OF PASSENGERS ON BOARD THE
English. Scotch. Irish.
Adults 179 162 66
Children between 1 and 14 64 37 18
Infants 8 2 2
Officers and Crew — — —
WHITE STAR.
Foreign. Total.
3 410
— 109
— 12
— 97
— 2
_
1
631
Fifteen hare to be deducted from this number, having been en-
gaged to assist on board as stewards, &c., leaving the aggregate
of persons on board, as nearly as can be ascertained,
616
ADVERTISEMENTS,
WANTED a Few Good Writers for theWniTE Stab Journal. Apply
at No. 99, ’tween decks.
ANTED a Hairdresser. Apply at the Purser’s Office.
ANTED Two Padlocks, Apply at No. 99, ’tween decks.
ANTED a Few Good Manx Bloaters. Apply at No. 97, ’tween decks.
< t XTTHITE STAR” STORES.—Bottled Ale reduced from Is. 6d. to
VY Is. per bottle from this date.
CORRESPONDENCE.
ME. EDITOR.
Sir, — I hear there is to be a Newspaper published on
board, and as Gentlemen of the press pretend to know
everything, and have an answer, right or wrong, to every
query, I hasten to submit to your wisdom a problem which
all the ship have been puzzling themselves with ever since
they came on board, and this is—the division of time. Bells
in different parts of the ship are struck at intervals, a cer-
tain number of times; but what relation such number of
strokes bears to the time of night or day, I have in vain en-
deavoured to discover. A gentleman who had made a
voyage before, and who on the strength of it sets up for an
authority on all matters of sea life, took it upon himself to
explain the matter to me, and upon listening to his tedious-
ness for a long time, I got hold of an idea, that the number
of strokes, divided by two, gave the time of day. The lec-
ture being finished about two o’clock in the afternoon, the
bell very opportunely chimed four, which furnished an apt
illustration of the principle; and so it went on —five, six,
seven, eight, each epoch confirming me in the the truth of
my rule, until, when I looked for nine bells, 10, it struck
one ! I hastened to my instructor to demand an explanation,
when he informed me (which indeed he had done at first,
though I had not observed it) that the score begins afresh
at the end of every four hours. Away I went again, con-
fident that I now possessed the key to the mystery—two
three, four came in succession, and then five you will say;
nothing of the kind, one, and so I give the matter up unless
you can assist me. Some facts I have got hold of and cling to,
in the hope of elaborating a principle out of them at some
time. I have found out that when the bell strikes two, it means
one; when it strikes seven, it means half-past seven; and
that once in twenty-four hours, it condescends to be literal
and correct, and at eight in the morning it actually strikes
eight, and no more. I leave the matter in your hands, and
I am, Sir, Your obedient servant, Belle.
[Time at sea is divided into periods of four hours, called
watches, in each of which there are eight half-hours, and
for each of these the bell is struck once. The watch from
four till eight p.m., however, is broken into two periods of
two hours each, called dog-watches; and at six p.m. one of
these being completed, the reckoning begins anew with one
bell at half-past six, and so on till eight.
We hope our correspondent will know the time of day
for the future.-
Ed. W.S.J.
AMUSEMENTS ON BOARD THE SHIP WHITE STAR,
Under this head we have much to say, which must be reserved for
another occasion j but our first number cannot be allowed to appear with-
out something on the subject.
In the first place, there is on board a band of seven performers procured
by the owners, who have played for several hours each day to the great
delight of all on board.
Among the passengers are professional and amateur musicians of every
grade, from the very highest; and when we add, that every one lias shewn
the greatest readiness in exercising his talents for the general amusement,
little anxiety need be felt on this point.
As will be seen below, an association has been formed already, with a
most efficient staff of office-bearers, whose special duty will be to provide
entertainment for the rest.
Captain Eyre, who has already been greatly distinguished on board by a
capacity for doing everything, and by his obliging disposition, has kindly
consented to take upon himself the office of director-general of the enter-
tainments ; and we are sure that every one on board already knows the
gallant gentleman sufficiently to feel that the matter is in moat efficient
hands.
THE WHITE STAR PHILHARMONIC UNION AND CONVIVIAL
SOCIETY.
General Managers: Captain Eyre, Captain Daly.
Leader and General Manager of Instrumental Concerts ; Herr Kohler.
Masters of Ceremonies for Dancing and Deportment: Mr. B. Clay
and Mr. Power.
Glees and Choruses: Messrs. Seward and Miller.
Acting Stewards:
Mr. J. Miller, Mr. Davy, Mr. Seward,
Mr. Eicke, Mr. S. Miller, Mr. C. Miller,
Mr. Pasley, Mr. Ford, Mr. Bergamini.
Established for the amusement and gratification of the passengers, on
board the White Star, April 24th, 1855.
STATISTICS.
POLITICS.
On Tuesday, the Queen, accompanied by the Emperor
and Empress of the French, was present at a magnificent
review of cavalry and artillery near Windsor Park.
On Wednesday, the Emperor received in the throne-room
at Windsor Castle, the badge of the most Noble Order of
the Garter. Afterwards the Queen gave a grand dinner
party, and in the evening a ball.


On Thursday, the Emperor and Empress, accompanied
by the Queen and Prince Albert, left Windsor Castle for
London, by the South Western. On arriving at Bucking-
ham Palace they received the corps diplomatique, after this
they proceeded to the city to visit the Guildhall. Every
possibly available space for seats was taken advantage of,
and all along the cheering was most enthusiastic.
Preparations on a grand scale are being made for the
visit of their Majesties to the Italian Opera. A new verse
has been added to the National Anthem, which is to be
sung on the occasion.
The latest intelligence from the Crimea gave nothing
satisfactory. The bombardment was said to be carried on
with vigor, and a breach having been made is spoken of.
The Conferences at Vienna do not seem to progress, the
Russians refusing to accept the conditions of the Allies on
the third point, with reference to the Black Sea. It is said
that Lord John Russell intended leaving Vienna on Friday,
the 20th.
Omar Pacha has landed 15,000 men at Kamiesch, in order
to take part in the assault.
At Eupatoria the Turks have fortified themselves so
strongly on the outside of the town, as to lead one to sup-
pose that they intend to maintain their footing there, now
that they have once established it.
The first division of the Sardinian contingent for the
East was reviewed on the 11th instant, by their King.
The greatest enthusiasm prevailed. Immediately after the
review, they set off in full marching order for Genoa, where
they are to embark. Twelve ships of the line and three
steamships of the Baltic fleet have passed the Belt: the
steamers have pushed their way through the ice as far as
Kiel, much to the astonishment of the Danes.
On the evening of Thursday, the 19th, a report spread
with electric rapidity through the Metropolis, that a French
refugee had attempted to fire at Napoleon on his return
from the Guildhall to Buckingham Palace. Upon inquiry,
it was ascertained that a Frenchman had been arrested for
attempting to throw a letter into the Emperor’s carriage, and
otherwise offering violence. Around the police station,
where the delinquent was detained, a large number of
Frenchmen were assembled.
LOG OF SHIP WHITE STAR,
CAPTAIN BROWN, FROM LIVERPOOL TOWARDS MELBOURNE.
Note. —ln keeping a ship’s reckoning at sea, the day ends at twelve
o’clock noon: thus, this day, the 28th, ends at noon, and the 29th com-
mences. It has been considered better, however, to use the civil reckoning
in the following journal, as being more intelligible to non-professional
readers, and the day will, therefore, be held to commence and end at
midnight.
Tuesday, 17 ih April, 1855. —Hauled the ship out of dock, and at one
p.m. let go the anchor off the Isacomhe slip.
Wednesday, 18.—Steamers plying to and from the ship all day with
passengers and their luggage.
Thursday, 19.—Passengers mustered and inspected by Government
agent. Steamers plying to and fro all day.
Friday, 20.—8 y eleven A.M. nearly all the passengers had come on board.
12'30 the remainder of the passengers, the captain, and the mails, con-
tained in nine bags, came on board. Mustered crew, and manned the
windlass. 2'20 passed the rock, two steamers ahead. At six p.m. Ormshead
S.W., distant 10 miles, one of the steamers left.
Saturday, 21.—Wind S.S.E., steering W.S.W., steamer ahead. At 4'30 p.m.
Tuskar Lighthouse, bearing W.N.W., distance 7 miles, pilot left with
steamer and departure taken. At midnight strong breezes and clear
weather, ship under full sail.
Sunday, 22.—Wind S.S.E., steering W.S.W., strong breezes and hazy.
At noon, lat. 49° 48’ N., long. 10 ° 15’W., distance run 226 miles. At
ten p.m., wind S.S.E., steering S.W., all studding sails set on the port side.
Monday, 23.—Wind S.S.E., steering W.S.W., fresh breezes and fine
weather. 3’30 a.m. passed an American packet ship steering for the
channel. Noon, lat. 46 ° 15’ N., long. 13 ° 46’ W., distance run 363 miles.
Tuesday, 24.— a.m. moderate breezes from S.E., steering S.S.W. Lat.
43 ° 31’ long. 16 ° 6’ W., distance run 182 miles, p.m. light airs from S.E.
Wednesday, 25. — A.m. light winds from N.N.E., steering S.S.W. Lat. at
noon 41 ° IV long. 16 ° 31’ W., distance 146 miles. p.m. light air and
clear weather, steering S.
Thursday, 26.— A.M. fresh breezes from N.N.E., steering S.S.W., lat.
88° 13’ N., long. 15° 28’ W., distance 188 miles. p.M fresh breezes.
Friday, 27.— a.m. light breezes from N.E. by N., lat. 35 ° 15’ N., long.
17 ° 25’W., distance run 202 miles. p.M. fresh breezes, steering S.W. by S.
White Star Journal.
No. 2.] SATURDAY, MAY 5, 1855.
Among six hundred people, assembled together from all
parts of the kingdom without concert, and with no more
distinguishing common feature than a desire to proceed to
the Australian colonies, it were reasonable to expect a con-
siderable variety of character; but we think the most
imaginative preconception on the subject must have come
short of the reality, as at present exhibited on board the
White Star, and we think a few minutes may be devoted
to a glance at the concomitants composing the aggregate of
six hundred and sixteen given in our last number.
Of course there are among us persons of all ages. There
is ,the infant bom on the voyage, whose first impressions
are those of a passenger-ship hospital, and upon whose
unconscious cheek is still to be seen the brown tint of
earliest infancy; and there is the reverend grandfather,
who has been content, for the benefit of his children
and his children’s children, to tear up the roots which for
sixty years have been strengthening in his native soil.
There is the young husband expending, in company with
two or three helpless children and their mother, the sum
accumulated for the purpose by perhaps painful privations,
in transferring his skill and his labor to a better market.
And there is the still hale father and mother, surrounded by
grown-up sons and daughters, going out in search of a wider
field for their exertions.
Nor are we much less diversified in social position than
in age. If we have on board no members of the titled
classes, there are scions of families so old and distinguished,
that title would add little to their honors; and there are
individuals and families representing the various grades of
middle-class life, skilful artizans, and laboring men.
There are among us—wives cheerfully undergoing the
hardships of the voyage, in the hope of being happily
reunited to husbands, from whom circumstances have for a
time separated them; and, if reports speak truly, we have
maidens going out to be invested with that dignity. We
have the bashful village beauty, whose sphere of action has
hitherto been confined to the Mayday festival and harvest
home. We have the City grisette, with assured manner and
confident look; and we have the belle of a season going
forth armed at all points, happy that there are new worlds
to conquer. We have men of the profession, but in such a
variety and abundance, that we must reserve the notice of
them for a special paper.
We have grave, dark, and bearded men, to whom
rumor gives the character of successful diggers, and their
comfortable appearance and intelligent conversation have
inspired with fresh confidence those adventurers who pur-
pose trying their luck at the Gold-fields, or who look to
them as a resource when some other scheme has failed.
Many there are returning to the colony, after a temporary
absence, who, having already achieved fortune there, may be
supposed to have little anxiety. But to the majority, the
future must be invested with all the interest of uncertainty ;
and to such we beg leave to express a hope that their very
highest anticipations may be realised.
Published by Henry Davy, at his Office, No. 99, Between Decks.


PUBLIC WORSHIP AT SEA.
On Sunday, 29th ult, Divine Service was performed for
the first time, and presented a scene so interesting and
impressive, that we think it deserves more than a casual
notice. Seals were placed upon the poop and main-deck for
the accommodation of the ladies, and the two capstans,
neatly covered with flags, served as pulpit and reading-desk.
The ship’s bells, fore and aft, summoned the passengers and
crew, and by eleven o’clock nearly all had assembled, —the
ladies seated on the benches, and the men ranged behind
them.
The bulwarks, the boats on the davits, the house tops and
the galleries, all had their occupants; and as all had made
some little change in their dress in honor of the day, and
maintained throughout an attentive and devout deportment,
the effect was most favorable to the object for which they had
met. The weather too was delightful,—a clearly defined sea
horizon all round, the blue dome above beautifully variegated
with light fleecy clouds ; and the intensity of the noontide
sun, tempered by a pleasant breeze of N.W. wind, tended to
render the open air thoroughly enjoyable.
Nor were the more immediate surrounding conditions
less in unison with devotional feeling. If we missed the
solemn aisle, the sculptured column, the storied window
and the painted decalogue, the want was atoned/for by the
presence of a numerous and interesting congregation of all
ages, and representing a wide range of social condition,
united by the all-pervading feeling of fond remembrance of
the Sabbath observances of their native land.
The beautiful and solemn service of the Church was read
by Mr. Hayden, amid perfect silence, and the chants sung
by Messrs. Miller, &c., under the direction of Herr Kohler
on the concertino. The reverend gentleman then preached
from the 58th chap. Isaiah, 13th and part of 14th verses, an
appropriate and impressive sermon on the observance of the
Sabbath. It may be noticed as a most pleasing feature of
the day’s proceedings, that though the passengers comprise
every variety of professing Christians—Protestant and
Catholic, Churchman and Dissenter, Episcopalian, Presby-
terian and Congregationalist, with perhaps representatives
from each of the more obscure divisions of the Church—all
seemed for the time to lay aside their differences, and
unite in offering thanks to the Providence which had brought
them safely so far on the voyage.
Captain Eyre officiated as clerk, and pronounced the
responses in a sonorous voice.
SISTERS OF CHARITY.
We have much pleasure in stating that, amid the many
distractions of the ship, some ladies find leisure to do good.
For an hour each morning and afternoon Mrs. Becketand
Miss Constardine may be seen seated on the main deck of the
ship, in the centre of little groups of girls and boys, to
whom they patiently labor to impart religious and secular
instruction; and so successful do they seem, that the cease-
less din and bustle by which they are surrounded fails to
distract the attention of teachers or pupils from their studies.
There is ample room for all; and we have no doubt,
before we reach Melbourne, the efforts of those ladies, and
such as their example may stimulate to similar good works,
will have effected much good.
LITERATURE.
The owners of the White Star, Messrs. Pilkington and
Wilson, have furnished a well-selected library of many
hundred volumes for the use of the cabin passengers, con-
sisting chiefly of works of fiction; and, in addition to this,
the Rev. Mr. Hayden has a number of useful and enter-
taining books designed for the use of the other passengers
in the ship, which were granted on application by the
Christian Knowledge Society for that purpose. Mr. Hayden
requests us to state, that any party wishing to read such
books, can obtain them upon application to him, between
the hours of ten and twelve o’clock, a.m. He can also
furnish a few catalogues. The books are to be returned
when read.
DIVINE SERVICE.
Will be performed to-morrow, May 6th, at the usual place, at eleven a.m.
and half-past four p.m.
DOMESTIC OCCURRENCES.
DIED.
On the 29th ultimo, at No. 141 berth, ’tween decks, David, infant son of
Mr. Mathison, aged four months.
MARRIAGES.
We hope to have the pleasure of announcing in our next number.
ORIGINAL POETRY.
EXODUS, XXXIII., 15.
Saviour, thy presence we implore,
In leaving thus our native shore;
Thy spirit give, and strength supply,
While o’er each crested wave we tiy.
When tempests threaten to o’erwhelm,
Do Thou in mercy guide our helm;
Increase our faith, cast out all fear,
And let us feel that Thou art near.
Let “ Peace be still,” these gracious words
Above the raging storm be heard;
Then shall the winds and waves be still,
And own thy Power, thy sovereign will
With hearts thus filled with joy and praise,
Glad hymns to Thee our God we’ll raise;
Tell how Thou didst in mercy save,
Thy servants from an ocean grave.
White Star, May Ist, 1855.
ERRATUM.
In the list of officers given last week, we omitted to men-
tion, Miss Simona Mackinzie Urquhart, second stewardess;
and Master William Burridge Radcliffe, third stewardess.
OCEAN SIGHTS.
“ Some said it was a shark,
And some said nay;
Some said ’twas empty bottles
The steward had thrown away.”
Most of the passengers, never having crossed the ocean
before, have since our sailing kept a bright look out for all
kinds of nautical phenomena; hut as yet, not much of the
wonderful has been seen. Some little birds of unfamiliar
aspect were to be seen for some days after leaving the
channel, and for several days past that pretty creature, the
nautilus, has been sailing past in considerable numbers.
Many unsuccessful attempts were made to catch them, with
a line and hook, but at last one was fished up in a bucket,
and exhibited through the ship, when it met with a great
deal of flattering attention. Great shoals of porpoises have
been seen, almost every day, sometimes accompanying the
ship on her course, and sometimes paying a mere flying
visit. But decidedly the most successful hit was made by
a shark, which appeared on Tuesday last and continued in
sight for some time. Some who were not fortunate enough


ADVERTISEMENTS.
ANTED, a Working Jeweller. Apply to Mr. Edens, Chief Cabin.
WANTED, some Sheets of Cardboard, Pasteboard, or Bristol Board. A
liberal price will be given. Apply to the Stewardess.
WANTED, a Gentleman’s New Straw Hat. Apply to the Kev. Mr
Hayden.
WANTED, a Straw Hat suitable for a Lady. Price no object. Apply
to Captain Eyre.
STOLEN from the Poop Deck, Two Nails of Black Embroidered Edging.
If found in any person’s possession after this notice, the offender will
be prosecuted.
LOST, a Bunch of Keys. Any person who may find them, and return
them to Captain Eyre, will be liberally rewarded.—The Keys have
since been found.
STOLEN, or taken in mistake, a Blanket If not swallowed by a
hippopotamus, please return it to No. 93, ’Tween Decks.
THE LOG.
Saturday , April 28.— a.m. light winds from N.E. by N., steering S.W. by
S. At noon, lat. 33° 11’ N., long. 19° 10’ W., distance 164 miles, p.m.
light winds and clear weather.
Sunday , 29.— a.m. light airs and clear, wind variable, steering S.S.W.
Noon lat. 31 ° 61’ N., long. 20 ° 37’ W., distance 108 miles, p.m. light winds
and variable.
Monday , 30.— a.m. light airs and clear, wind variable, steering S. W. by
S. Noon, lat. 30 ° 56’ N., long. 20 ° 67’ W., distance 62 miles, p.m. light
airs and clear weather.
Tuesday, May I.— a.m. light airs and clear, wind N.W., steering S.W. by
S. Noon, lat. 29 ° 37’ N,, long. 21 9 07’ W., distance 80 miles, p.m. clear
weather, wind very light and all round the compass.
lVednesday t 2.— A.M. light airs and fine weather, wind N. W. and
variable, steering S.W. by S. Noon, lat. 27 ° 42’ N., long. 21 ° 33’ W.,
distance 123 miles, p.m. light airs and fine weather.
Thursday , 3. —a.m. light airs and fine. Noon, lat. 25° 20’ N., long.
2° 31’ W., distance 147 miles, p.m. variable winds and cloudy.
Friday 4.— a.m. light breezes from N. to S.E., steering S.W. by S. Noon,
lat. 23 ° 47’ N., long. 23 ° 25* W., distance 108 miles.
to be in the way at the time, assert that it was no shark,
but the old voyagers say it was, and that it was twelve feet
long. Those various appearances were hailed with wonder
and delight by the passengers, especially those from the
agricultural districts.
AMUSEMENTS.
A Meeting of the Philharmonic Union and Convivial Society took
place upon the Poop, on Thursday afternoon, Captain Eyre in the Chair:
when it was unanimously agreed, that the Amusements on board the
White Star, being arranged by a Committee, it is hoped that general satis-
faction will be given to all parties.
The following will be the manner in which it is proposed by them to
carry out such, and from which no deviation can take place without general
consent
Mondays. —Dancing from seven to nine—Under the management of
Messrs. P. Torrey and Eicke.
Tuesday. —Dancing from seven to eight—Messrs. Eyre and Power. Glee
Singing, &c., from eight to nine—Under the direction of Herr W. Kohler,
Messrs. Miller and Seward.
Wednesday. —Dancing from seven to nine—Messrs. John Torrey and
Lyman.
Thursday. —Dancing from seven to nine—Messrs. S. Miller and Ben-
jamin.
Friday. Dancing from seven to eight—Messrs. Clay and Pasley.
Singing, &c., from eight to nine.
Saturday. —Dancing from seven to nine—Messrs. C, Miller and M.
Harker.
PROGRAMME OF THE DANCES.
No. 1 Country Dance. No. 5 Waltz and Galop,
2 Polka. 6 Polka.
3 Quadrille. 7 Quadrille.
4 Country Dance. 8 Keel or Scottische.
No, 9 Polka.
It was also proposed, that those who share and are interested in the
harmony that now prevails on board the White Star, that a subscription
be entered into for the extra music required of others not connected with
the band, such subscription to be quite voluntary; and the following gen-
tlemen were appointed to collect the same:—
Saloon —Captain Eyre.
House on Deck and*’Midships—Messrs. Ford and Davy.
Treasurer—K. W. Kohler.
Bags have been suspended, one over the sideboard in the
saloon, and one in the main hatchway, to receive communi-
cations for the White Star Journal. The Editor will be
happy to receive any communications, and if they contain
nothing of a personal or offensive nature, the incognito of
the writers will be preserved. — Ed. W.S.J.
The first death occurred on board the White Star on the
afternoon of Sunday last. We are informed that a post-
mortem examination of the body was made by Dr. Walker,
assisted by Captain Eyre, after which it was quietly com-
mitted to the sea.
NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Amicus. —The verses were received too late for publication, and we think
that, before next publishing day, the writer may touch them up a little,
there being several inaccuracies. We hope to hear from “ Amicus” again.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Me. Editor, —Permit me to call your attention to the
want of cleanliness on the part of some between decks,
which is generally complained of.
I myself am an eye-witness to several cases of itch and
other skin diseases, which call for immediate attention from
the surgeon of the ship.
I am, Sir, yours obediently,
PRO BONO PUBLICO.
White Star Journal.
No. 3.] SATURDAY, MAY 12, 1855.
If it be true that hell is paved with good intentions, as
the Spanish moralist has it, we think the commissioners of
paving there will be much indebted to the White Star, for
most of us came on board with noble resolutions for the
improvement of the ten or eleven weeks which we expected
to spend on board ship, hoping by industry and application
on the voyage to atone for much time misspent.
Some had accounts to arrange, hooks to post up, the
transactions of weeks scattered over the pages of note-books
to reduce to order and consistency.
Others had the newest works on their favourite science,
in a box, determined to bring up their knowledge to the
day. One had the Greek Testament to read ; and another,
some heavy works to get through in the regions of political
economy, or metaphysical speculation: but, alas for the
stability of human resolves! the lightest of the light litera-
ture in the ship’s library has been found all too heavy for
the relaxing air of the tropics, and the many external dis-
tractions of the ship.
Hard-headed men, who at home could shut themselves
up and sternly grapple with the knottiest subjects, suc-
cumbing to the atmospheric and other influence, may be
seen lounging upon the hen-coops and about the wheel-
house, languidly attempting to get up an interest in the two
cavaliers on horseback, whom J. P. E. James loves to intro-
duce to his readers; or sighing for the pine forest, the sedgy
river, or the frozen lake of J. F. Cooper.
But in spite of all this laziness, it is wonderful how the
time flies. One meal succeeds another with such rapidity,
and every one is so disposed to spend as much time over it
as possible, that the business of eating necessarily occupies
a great part of every day. The little operations of dressing,
sorting and re-arranging drawers and packing-cases, all
performed in the limited space of the state-rooms, and
Published by H. D., at his Office, 99, Between Decks.


without the means and appliances to which all have been
accustomed, leave little time which cannot be agreeably
spent in walking, lounging, chatting, and coquetting with a
piece of work or a book; so that when the dinner or tea bell
rings, the wonder is, not that it has been so long delayed,
but that it has come so soon.
The more serious business of the day, however, begins
at seven o’clock in the evening. The band, which through
the day have played listlessly and at intervals, now nerve
themselves for serious work ; the young people, and some
not so very young, begin to assemble in the waist, from all
parts of the ship, and, till nine o’clock, a brisk succession of
polka, waltz, quadrille, and country dance is kept up with
great vigour. The space allotted for the purpose, not being
able to accommodate all at once, there is usually a competi-
tion for room, and the masters of the ceremonies have no
sinecure in so arranging as that all may enjoy the amusement.
Tea-hour in the saloon being the hour at which the
dancing begins, the evening meal is much less protracted
than the others. Some of the gentlemen very soon begin
to manifest impatience, and by half-past seven all are usually
on deck. From this time till nine, especially before the
moon deserted us, the ship presented a gay and animated
scene—the party on the poop, and that on the main deck,
dancing with the utmost spirit to the music of the band,
relieved at intervals by the violin and tambourine.
Sometimes, however, less concert has been maintained,
and three distinct parties might be seen, each dancing their
own measure to their own music. Quadrilles on the poop,
polka in the waist, and a rattling Irish jig before the main-
mast.
At nine, the National Anthem announces the close of the
performances for the evening, and the ladies retire to their
various homes. A slight supper is then placed on the
saloon table, with which, a glass of wine, and a little con-
versation on the events of the day, we manage to bring on
eleven o’clock, when the lights being extinguished, the
ladies retire to recruit their energies for a new day; and the
gentlemen adjourn to the deck, to smoke the pipe of retro-
spection, and form plans for the more profitable employment
of their time for the future.
MESMERISM.
Among the other celebrities on board the ship, we are
happy to inform our readers, there is a professor of this
science, and we hope that before the end of the voyage, he
may find an opportunity of adding to the general amuse-
ment by a lecture, or, at least, some experiments.
We have had the pleasure of conversing with a very intel-
ligent lady in the house on deck, who has given much
attention to the science, and who has great faith in it as a
curative agent. She says that cases have fallen under her
own observation, of mesmerism effecting cures of rheuma-
tism, spine and hip-joint diseases, headache, toothache,
indigestion, and a whole host of other complaints, which
the faculty have great difficulty in treating.
Our informant assures us that the gentleman on board
has succeeded, after operating only twice, in very much
alleviating severe rheumatism with which she came on
board the ship.
She is aware that much scepticism exists on the subject,
but, as she very justly observes, facts are stubborn things;
and it is difficult for her to withhold her belief, with so
many benefits accruing to her and her friends from the
practice of mesmerism.
NAUTICAL PHENOMENA.
Since the dark evenings commenced, the sea has presented
a beautiful and interesting appearance, under the phosphoric
illumination. The ship’s wake has seemed all on fire, and
little whirlpools of quicksilver-like brilliancy have been
thrown off by the rudder. This has been a great attraction
to most of us, especially those to whom the sea is a novelty,
and various speculations and conjectures have been made
on the subject, of more or less depth and acuteness.
Flying fish in great numbers have also been seen, gene-
rally in shoals, flying and skimming along the surface.
Their motion has resembled that peculiar one called reco-
chetting ; and they have been seen to propel themselves a
long way by dipping into the crest of the waves, and so
recruiting themselves at intervals. We hear that some have
been seen on board, but we have not had an opportunity of
examining them.
The Mother Carey’s chicken, that bird of mysterious
associations, and prime favourite of the poets, has frequently
been seen ; but the storm, which its appearance is said to
herald, has not yet come.
Several boobies have also been seen, and some specimens
are on board for the inspection of the curious.
ORIGINAL POETRY.
TO OUR FRIENDS IN ENGLAND
1.
We leave ye now in sorrow—
But, oh! we hope to find
The sky more bright to-morrow,
Though we leave ye all behind.
2.
But we will not forget ye,
Though now obliged to part;
The memory of each kindness
Will dwell within our hearts.
3.
We’ll often think upon ye.
When the sun shines clear and bright;
We’ll often think upon ye
In the silence of the night.
4.
We’ll think upon ye waking;
We’ll dream, when fast asleep,
Of all the merry, happy days
Pass’d in each loved retreat.
5.
And, oh! we’ll not forget ye,
When our hearts are light and gay;
When we bless the love that sent us,
From our country far away.
6.
But we will best remember ye,
When, at the Throne of Grace,
We pray we all in Heaven may find
A happy meeting place.
White Stak.
THE WHITE STAR.
1.
Are you bound for Australia, to dig for the gold,
Andlay up a fortune of treasure untold?
Would you wish to secure the best clipper by far ?
Then pay for your passage on board the White Star.
2.
Perhaps you have roamed in astronomy's field,
And learned all the lessons the planets will yield;
What would be less likely your feelings to jar,
Than take up your study on board the White Star?
3.
Are you fond of good wine from the first to the last,
And sorely regret that Madeira is past ?
Come, keep up your spirits, content with the thought
That the vessel is steering directly for port.


SUBSCRIPTIONS FROM
GENTLEMEN IN THB HOUSE ON
DECK AND
BETWEEN
decks:
s.
d.
8.
d.
Captain Daly
... 2
6
Mr. Seward
... i
0
Mr, Lyman
... 2
0
Mr, Power
... i
0
Mr. Benjamin
... 1
6
Mr. Clay
... i
0
Mr. Tony
... 1
6
Mr. Virkett
... i
0
Mr. P. Tony
... 1
6
Mr. Surmaa
... i
0
Mr. Harrison
... 1
6
Mr. Eicke
... i
0
Mr. Ford
... 1
6
Mr. Ringrove
... i
0
Mr, Davy
... 1
6
Mr. S. Miller
... X
0
Mr. Randell
... 1
0
Mr. C. Miller
... i
0
Mr. Royse
... 1
0
Mr. G. Miller
... i
0
Mr. Pasley
... 1
0
ADVERTISEMENTS.
LEFT HER HOME, in the Fore Saloon, Mary Barton, a Manchester
Girl. Any person finding her is requested to return her to Miss
McKenzie, who will restore her to her friends,
ASTRAY, a Lamplighter, last seen in company with Pretty
Polly. He is earnestly requested to return to his home in the Saloon,
and all will be forgiven.
LOST, a Stiletto, also a Piercer, also a Borer. Any person restoring it
to Mrs. Edens, will be liberally rewarded.
LOST, a Pair of Scissors. Any person finding them is requested to
return them to Miss Wilson, Saloon.
LOST, a Pair of Scissors. If found, it is requested that they be returned
to Mrs. Becket.
a Thimble, To be returned to Miss Constardine, Saloon.
WANTED, a few pounds of superior Cavendish Tobacco. Also, a Pair
of Slippers, small men’s size, and the address of the bootmaker.
Apply to Jennings, Saloon Steward.
ANTED, a Watch Glass. Apply to Mr, Burger,.
LOST, from the House on Deck, a Penknife. Any person finding it, and
restoring it to the Steward, will be rewarded.
ANTED, a few Cigars. Apply to Hugh, in the Saloon.
WANTED, a Gentleman’s Straw Hat. Apply at the office of this
paper.
yy ANTED, a Hairdresser. Apply at the office of this paper.
WANTED, a person to do a little Washing, for which she will receive a
reasonable remuneration per dozen, and the eternal gratitude of a
gentleman in distress. Apply at our office, No. 99.
WANTED, Fusees, Lucifer Matches, Vestas, or Pipe-lighters of any
description. A liberal price will be given. Apply at the office of
this paper.
WANTED to purchase, a quantity of Ice, Apply to the first person
you meet.
WANTED, any quantity of Soda Water, Lemonade, Ginger Beer,
Seidlitz Powders, &c., &c., &c. Apply at the office of this paper.
4.
The folks on shore tell us, that captains, although
They may not love fighting , are fond of a blow;
But the ship does not think it such capital fun,
She tosses her head, and prepares for a run,
6.
May the breezes continue to practice their trades,
The voyage be a short one, the passage soon made.
In England they’ll hear it, and near and afar,
Each tongue, pen, and pencil will praise the White Star.
Amicus.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[Notice. —The Editor will be happy to receive any contributions and com-
munications, and if they contain nothing of a personal nature, the
incognito of the writer will he preserved.]
Mb. Editor.—Sir, —Allow me one word in reply to a
statement in your last week’s paper.
Before leaving Leeds, I asked the White Star agent of
that place, if the ship’s library was intended exclusively for
cabin passengers; he answered me distinctly that it was
not. Whether his opinion is correct, or yours, I leave with
the higher powers, and I remain, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
House on Deck. W. H. C.
Mr. Editor.—Sir, —Among the many strange things I
have seen upon this voyage, and which is altogether beyond
my comprehension, is the excessively dirty condition of the
Atlantic Ocean.
I had accustomed myself to think that once fairly away
from land, nothing but a magnificent expanse of blue waters
would be seen; such, however, is far from being the case.
Every day, and all day long, we are passing through a
stream of feathers, sheep-skins, empty boxes and barrels,
animal and vegetable debris of every description, and above
all things empty beer bottles.
How is this to be explained ? Is it caused by the Gulf
stream, which explains so many strange things at sea? I
do not like to ask questions until I have tried to puzzle
things out for myself; and as I have had plenty of time on
hand, I have carefully noted the appearances to which I
allude, in the hope of finding out the cause.
All the length I have got, however, is to ascertain that
the greatest quantity of beer bottles pass between the hours
of 12 o’clock and 1 p.m.
Could not this have been avoided by taking a different
track. I am, Sir, &c., &c.,
INTELLIGENT ENQUIRER.
[We think the appearances to which our correspondent
alludes may be partly ascribed to the ship herself, as we
have frequently seen the stewards and others throwing
things overboard.— Ed. W.S.J.]
WHITE STAR PHILHARMONIC UNION AND
CONVIVIAL SOCIETY.
Voluntary subscriptions in aid of the fund to meet the
extra musical expenses required to further the general
enjoyment of the passengers on board the White Star.
Messrs. Davy and Ford have commenced collecting in aid
of the above fund, and we subjoin a list of subscriptions,
most of which are paid and the rest promised. Messrs.
D. and F. beg to intimate that their list is still open, and
that they intend to keep it open.
Captain Eyre has not yet given in the results of his
labours in the saloon. We hope to hear from him next
week.
THE WEATHER.
We entered the tropics last Saturday, with a fine breeze
of favourable wind, and the heat was so far from being
oppressive, that after sundown, some of the ladies remarked
it was very cold for tropics. Since then, however, the
wind has died away, and for the last two days we have been
all but becalmed, giving old Sol ample opportunity of
revenging himself upon us for the slighting remark.
The heat has been dreadful. What it has been in degrees
we do not know, though there is a thermometer within
reach. To look at it would involve an amount of exertion
to which we are wholly unequal, and it is altogether beyond
the powers of any instrument of human construction to tell
the extent of our sufferings.
Our ladies, we regret to say, exhibit signs of exhaustion,
and some of them have had headaches and feinting fits;
but they generally carry it off gracefully. It is for the men


ADVERTISEMENTS.
LOST, a Lady’s Cloak. Any one finding the same is requested to return
it to Miss Wheatley, in the Saloon.
yy ANTED, a few ounces of white Angola. Apply to Mrs. Becket.
to suffer to the extent of absurdity, and to show grotesque
appearances. They wander about, with great beads of per-
spiration bedewing their faces, seeking vainly for cool places,
and employing their time in compounding strange drinks.
Dinner-time used to be our happiest time, but the tropics
have rather taken the fun out of it. Pea-soup, at three in
the afternoon, in the atmosphere of a brick-kiln, and par-
taken of in the inside of a steam boiler in the course of
construction, is not an agreeable picture, but it is very like
what we endure at dinner-time ; with tire addition of a brass
band, working its passage out, ceaselessly braying at our
very ears, “ Pop goes the Weasel” or “ Annie Laurie.”
But the sufferings by day are nothing to what we endure
at night. As bed-time draws near, lower-deck passengers
may be seen carrying their beds about the deck, vainly
looking for a quiet place where they may lay them down in
the fresh air, such as it is.
In the saloon berths, too, it has been found hardly possible
to sleep; and many of the ladies and gentlemen have been
obliged to try and get a little sleep out of the mess-room
floor.
CROSSING THE LINE
Is looked forward to with much anxiety, and we are fre-
quently asked when it will take place.
We would recommend a little patience, and have no doubt
that before our next publication all who desire it will have
an opportunity of looking at the line and satisfying them-
selves on the subject.
With the .help of the ship’s telescope and a bit of silk
thread it may easily be seen, but we understand it is never
visible to the naked eye.
There are other lines, however, besides the equinoctial
line, and some of these have been passed long since. For
instance, Mr. A. had crossed the line of propriety before we
got clear of the channel; Mr. B. passed the line of polite
retort in the little argument he had with Mr. C. on the
tenant-right question ; Mr. D. has crossed the line which
separates exhiliration from inebriety several times; and Miss
E. went far beyond the line of legitimate criticism in certain
remarks she made about this journal.
In the regions of the line very capricious weather is ex-
pected—calms, variables, uncertain airs, showers, squalls,
Ac.; and all these, and some things besides of which
meteorology has no knowledge, some of us have en-
countered during the last week in crossing the line between
general politeness and particular attention.
LIST OF HOUSE-ON-DECK PASSENGERS.
Mr. and Mrs. Berry, and
seven children
Mr. G. Miller
Mr. J. Miller
Mr. S. Miller
Mr. C. Miller
Mrs. Machlachlan
Mrs. F. Pearson and child
Capt. K. Daly, late of the
S. Tipperary Militia
Mr. W. H. Clapham
Mr. J. S. Torry
Mr. P. Torry
Mr. I. Jones
Mr. R. Loudon
Mr. J. Power
Mr. J. Macartney
Mr. W. Macartney
Miss E. Gleeson
Miss M, Waddington
Mrs. Hird
Mr. H. Peake
Mr. C. K. Geoghegan
Mr. J. Kingrose
Mr. J. Birkett
Mr. B. Donson
Mr. J. Young
Mr. W. Froyer
Mr. T. Manning
Mr. J. Lyman
Mrs. W. Bell
Miss J. E. Bell
Miss J. S. Hammond
Mr. T. Bell
Mrs. M. Bell
Miss A. Bell
Master W. Bell
Mr. W. Chamberlain
Mrs. E. K. Chamberlain
Mr. Seward
THE LOG.
Saturday, May s.— a.m. moderate breezes and cloudy; wind N.E. by E.
Noon, lat. 21° 29’ N., lon. 24 ° 6’W. Distance, 148 miles. P.M. moderate
breezes.
Sunday, 6.—a.m. fresh breezes from N.E. Noon, lat. 18° 5’ N., lon.
25 ° 15’ W. Distance, 220 miles. P.M. strong trade winds and sultry
weather.
Monday, 7.— a.m. strong trade winds from N.E. Noon, lat. 14 ° 24’ N.,
lon. 25 ° 66’ W. Distance, 230 miles, p.m. strong trade winds.
Tuesday, B.— A.M. fresh trade winds from E. by S. Noon, lat. 11 ° 14’ N.,
lon. 26 ° 44’ W. Distance, 194 miles. p.M. fresh breezes from the east
Wednesday, 9. — a.m. strong trade winds from E. by S. Noon, lat 6°
69’ N., lon. 25 ° 39’ W. Distance, 256 miles. p.m. strong winds.
Thursday, 10.— a.m. light and variable winds and hazy weather. Noon,
lat 6 ° 15’ N. Obscure. Distance, 106 miles, p.m. light winds, all round
the compass.
Friday, 11.— a.m. light and variable winds, and calms. Noon, lat 5°
44’ N.. lon. 24 ° 62' W. Distance, 50 miles, p.m. calm and cloudy. Light
airs, at times all round the compass.
DOMESTIC OCCURRENCES.
The marriage which we hoped to announce this week,
has not yet come off. We consider we have been ill-used
in the matter.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Mr. Editor, —During the last week or two, some of the
saloon and house-on-deck passengers have frequently made
their appearance between decks at unseasonable hours, to
the great annoyance of the sober and moral passengers.
Have they any business below at all, especially when it is
disagreeable to the passengers? Your reply will much
oblige, Yours respectfully, _
A READER.
White Star Journal.
No. 4.] SATURDAY, MAY 19, 1855.
“ Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you. • * And
let those that play your clowns speak no more than is set down for them.”
Hamlet, Act. 111., Scene 2,
The public Press—the Fourth Estate —who can estimate
its importance ? Like air and water, it is a necessary of
existence ; like them, it is a want of every hour of the day,
and, like them, we have had it laid on so plentifully at
home, as to be in danger of forgetting how much our com-
fort depended upon it. A sea voyage, however, introduces
us to a few new sensations, and some of them not very
agreeable ones—little water, less air, and no newspaper at
all but this, lazily conceived upon the hencoops, and pain-
fully brought forth in the ’tween decks, among the tin pan-
nikins and mess traps, is rather a distressing state of affairs.
The public Press: let us consider for a moment what it
is, and what it can do. Every one knows that the Press is
the great Palladium of our liberties, the bold advocate of
our rights, and the vigilant guardian of our privileges. It
is the necessity of our working hours, and the agreeable
companion of our leisure. Its influence pervades all
classes, and is felt equally in the palace and in the cottage;
it takes out of our hands the trouble of forming opinions,
Published by H. D., at his Office, 99, Between Decks.


and tells us when we ought to be pleased and when indig-
nant, when to praise and when to blame. It tells us where
everything, which it ever entered into the heart of man or
woman to long for, is to be procured on the most advanta-
geous terms, and suggests to us wants which we never felt
before. At its beck, favourites are disgraced and adminis-
trations set up. When it sounds the onslaught, navies are
manned and armies sent forth.
Through it a man wakes in the morning and finds hfrnself
famous; and by its investigations, the humbug and the
charlatan finds his painfully-built-up reputation crumbled
into the dust. By its means, A.B. informs X.Y. that her
last letter had been misunderstood ; and a despairing wife
intreats a truant husband to return and all will be for-
given.
But what, it will be asked, have we to do with all this ?
What need for the little cockboat to look at the frigate and
say, “ What a noble science is naval architecture ?” or the
very little minnow to point to the whale, and exclaim,
“ How big we are !” Well, perhaps not much. We have
no great power to boast of. We cannot speak of exhaustless
resources, or rapidly-increasing circulation; indeed, in this
latter respect we are obliged to acknowledge that we have
for some time been at a stand-still; but our influence has
been felt, and that in a direction in which the power of the
Press is not easily traced in most cases.
In our first number we opened a column for domestic
occurrences, and stated that we would defer the announce-
ment of marriages until they had occurred, foreseeing from
certain appearances that such events were approaching. In
our second, we remarked that the marriages would be pub-
lished in our next number; and when the publishing day
again came round, without any such event having occurred,
we were obliged to assume the tone of injured remonstrance,
and complained that we had not been well used. Mark the
consequence. This was on the Saturday, and on the
following Tuesday a young couple were happily united at
the starboard capstan, in the most decorous manner, as will
be found recorded in another place.
We beg to express to them our gratitude for furnishing
us with a text for this paper, and to wish them at the same
time every happiness compatible with the married state.
SHIPS IN SIGHT.
Since leaving Liverpool, scarcely a day has passed without
one or more ships being in sight; and watching their
movements has been a great source of amusement to us.
Ships sailing in every direction have been seen, outward
bound and homeward bound, sailing by and large ; ships
of every description have been seen, from clipper leviathans
—like the White Star —downwards, and, in every case
where the respective courses of the ships admitted of a trial
of speed, the result has been in favour of our ship, until
yesterday, when, as boys say, we met our match.
Since sailing it has been quite a common occurrence to
see ships, hull-down, ahead in the morning, and sink them
in the horizon astern in the course of the day.
On Thursday, however, the case was reversed. A large ship,
which had been in sight to leeward on Tuesday and Wed-
nesday, was discovered, when we got on deck in the morning,
broad off on our weather quarter, and some five or six
miles distant. In the course of the forenoon she edged
down towards us, and we had a conversation by signals.
She proved to be the iron clipper ship Conflict, from Liver-
pool, bound to Bombay.
She is a most beautiful ship, in fine sailing trim, and
very square rigged; the superiority in sailing was doubtless
owing to this and the very light winds that prevailed, as our
ship is very deep in the water.
Had the Conflict been bound to Melbourne, we should
have had a nice run with her, as all kinds of weather may
be expected before reaching.
The result of our signalising was, to ascertain that she
had sailed on the 22nd of April, two days after us. She
enquired how many passengers we had? Whether they
were all well ? When we lost the trade winds ?—Reply: In
6 ° 59’. We compared longitude, and found it to agree
within five miles. Enquired how many vessels we had
seen?—Reply: Fifty. We asked whether she had any
news?—Reply: None of importance; still fighting at Se-
bastopol. She then wished us good bye.
As we had the lee view of the ship, we saw her to the
utmost advantage, and very beautiful she looked, as no
doubt we did to her. She was for some within a quarter of
a mile of us, but it will be perhaps better understood how
near we were, if we say that, noon arriving while we kept
company, we heard her bell strike eight distinctly.
Yesterday, after breakfast, a small brig passed us to lee-
ward, close aboard. She was a very smart, rakish-looking
little craft, and it was remarked by some nautical gentleman
on board that she had not a very honest look.
She showed Spanish colours, and was said to look like a
slaver.
THE FEET-WASHING.
In the course of Monday last, it became generally known
that a marriage was to be celebrated on board. The cap-
tain’s consent had been obtained, and the Eev. Mr. Hayden
had promised to officiate.
Fortunately, it was known; for it enabled an intelligent
Scotchman to explain to the ladies certain frightful orgies
which were indulged in on the main deck, between four and
six in the evening.
At that time most of the passengers bad assembled on
the deck, enjoying the refreshing breeze, when a violent
game at romps commenced; the fun seemed to consist
principally in hoisting upon their shoulders one of their
companions, who turned out to be the bridegroom, and
carrying him at a run fore and aft along the deck, while he
struggled violently in their hands—sometimes escaping, and
being again caught after a chase, in which the usual dodging,
ducking, and tripping up occurred.
All this was conducted with great good humour, and when
the procession rushed in among a group of women, the way
they laughed and screamed was a caution.
The gentleman above alluded to, explained that it was a
rite preparatory to marriage much practised in Scotland, and
called the “ feet-washing.”
We are not antiquarians enough to know, but doubtless
it can be traced to some Druidical or Pictish marriage cere-
monial.
On order being somewhat restored, Captain Eyre took his
place upon the gallery leading from the poop, and published
the banns; he afterwards launched out into a disquisition
on things in general, and harangued the people at great
length, to his own amusement and theirs.
THE SHIP’S LIBRARY.
Captain Brown is anxious that the use of the ship’s
library should be extended to all classes of passengers.
To effect this without loss of the books, or injury to
them, certain regulations must be adopted, and with this
view Miss Constardine has kindly consented to act as
librarian.


She will attend in the saloon, for the purpose of issuing
and receiving the books, every Monday and Thursday,
between the hours of 11 a.m. and 12 noon.
Catalogues may be seen by applying to Mr. Seward, No.
12, in the house-on-deck, or Mr. Scott, in the ’tween decks;
and parties applying for books, are requested to ascertain
the numbers before coming aft. It is of course expected
that the books will be punctually returned, and every care
taken that they sustain no injury.
GROSSING THE LINE.
The rites usually practised on the occasion of crossing
the line for the first time have been in this case omitted,
and we slipped over some time on Thursday evening, so
quietly that scarcely any one knew. A communication
reached Captain Brown some time ago, through our letter-
bag, requesting, on behalf of some of the extra hands
among the crew, that a shaving-day should be allowed.
But among so many people, and they of such a promis-
cuous character, it is not considered safe to relax the reins
of discipline, so it was not acceded to. Besides, after being
for some days in the doldrums, fun is rather out of the
captain’s head, and the event having been at hand for several
days, the excitement on the subject had rather gone down.
Had Neptune paid us a visit, he would have found several
of our number much in want of the lather and razor; but
we suppose he was busy with the Conflict, which must have
claimed his notice an hour or two before we did.
NAUTICAL PHENOMENA.
On Saturday, the 12th, we were so fortunate as to see a
water-spout. Although distant—almost on the horizon—
one could watch almost all its motions with the naked eye.
For some time, the horizon had been darkened by a long
line of black cloud; about four o’clock the spout was first
noticed. At first, it was one distinct dark column, which
lasted for six or seven minutes; it suddenly disappeared,
and nothing was to be seen but hazy clouds; after which,
seven smaller spouts were visible for a few minutes.
Water-spouts are, we understand, sometimes so large and
powerful as to prove dangerous to ships, attracting them
from two to three miles out of their course, and finally
swallowing them up, when not discovered in the darkness
of night, and no means are taken to prevent such a catas-
trophe. This danger, however, can be avoided, by firing
off one of the ship’s guns, when the reverberation generally
causes them to burst, or, if this should prove insufficient,
by firing at them with chained shot.
On the same day it was said that a number of dolphins
were seen ; one or two whales, of a small species, were also
seen. Shoals of flying-fish still pass us occasionally; we
should like to know whether it has been remarked by any
that they always go northwards, and, supposing this to be
the case, whether any of the weather-wise persons on board,
of whom we are aware that there are many, can give a satis-
factory reason for their doing so.
We had new moon early on the morning of Wednesday
the 16th ; she was distinctly visible on the evening of
Thursday, when not forty-eight hours old.
We should like to call the attention of those on board to
the singular brilliancy of Venus.
On Thursday evening we had the Great Bear still in
sight, but the Polar Star was no longer visible—it had sunk
beneath the horizon. Our nightly course must hencefor-
ward be directed by the beautiful Southern Cross. With
reference to this constellation, however, there seems to be
some difference of opinion. Aware that there are on board
those skilled in the signs of the weather, we think it not
improbable that there may be some versed in the stars.
Will no kind friend come forward and give us the inform-
ation desired in the form of a lecture ? It would assist in
passing an hour pleasantly in the evening, and would give
a little relaxation to our vigorous dancers.
Some sensation was created on the forecastle on Thursday
forenoon by the catching of some “ benitas.” Such at least
was the name, so far as we were able to make it out, as pro-
nounced by a sailor. They are a beautiful fish in the water,
darting about very rapidly, and generally in circles, some-
times leaping out of the sea as much as three feet. When
they first come out of the water they are not less pretty to
look at, having lines of a fine deep blue running down
their backs. Those which we saw were about fifteen inches
long; they were very thick at the shoulders and almost
quite round; at the commencement of the tail they were
very thin; the tail itself was small and stiff, so that alto-
gether they presented an appearance as to shape unlike any
fish of our northern latitudes.
Two were taken, one with a hook and a piece of red and
white rag, hung out by a person from the end of the jib-
boom ; the other was harpooned by a sailor standing on the
martingale stays; several others leapt at baits, but the
vessel was going rather fast.
One of the fortunate fishermen, a sailor, immediately
began to prepare his benita for the frying-pan, telling us
that when so cooked it tasted very much like a sole.
N.B. We have since heard from a gentleman who partook
of the dish, that it tasted very much like “ boiled boots.”
Who was the gentleman who tasted the benita ? Being
very fond of fresh fish we ate a plateful of one, but could
not discover that it had any taste.
The waterspout attracted a good deal of notice, but one
old gentleman who has an ingenious way of finding out the
dark side of every picture, regarded it with great disgust
He refused to leave his seat to get a better view of it, and
seemed to think Messrs. Pilkington and Wilson were no
great things when they could not provide better waterspouts
for the amusement of their passengers.
We dare say our course will still be guided in a great
measure by the compass, in spite of the Southern Cross,
which our contributor has been in such a fever about. Ed.
MATRIMONY.
On Tuesday, the 15th instant, at ten o’clock a.m., the
marriage ceremony was performed at the starboard capstan,
by the Rev. Mr. Hayden, A.B. Trinity College, Dublin,
assisted by Captain Matthews.
The names of the couple made happy will be seen in the
usual place.
The bride, who maintained during the ceremony a de-
mure and solemn appearance, wore on the auspicious occa-
sion a lilac barege dress, black apron, and grey jacket taste-
fully embroidered with black braid. She wore neither
bonnet nor veil, and her hair was neatly arranged in
bandeaux.
The bridesmaid was in nearly similar attire, except that
her jacket was brown pecked out with black, and instead of
the neat cloth boots of the bride we think that she wore
shoes.
The bridegroom, a good-looking man, wore no particular
costume, and did not appear much impressed with the no-
velty of his situation.
We have not heard how the marriage party spent the day.
Some said that a pic-nic party to the foretopmast cross-trees


ADVERTISEMENTS.
LOST or STOLEN last week a brown Top Coat, belonging to one of the
occupants of No. 98 berth, middle of ship below. The person who
may have round the same, and returning the same to the owner, will be re-
warded. If after this notice the above is not returned, the owner is deter-
mined to expose the party who retains the same in his possession.
The person who may find an article which does not belong to him, and
does not endeavour to ascertain who the owner of the same may be, but ap-
propriates the same to his own use, is in my estimation a thief.
LOST or STOLEN a white leather Strap (Covered Buckle) from the
mahogany railing No. 49 cabin, Tween Decks. Whoever has found
the same and will return it will be thanked for his trouble; and whoever
retains the same after this notice will render himself liable to prosecution
for petty larceny.
B. CLAY and CO., Auctioneers, &c.
HAIRDRESSER greatly Wanted. Apply at No. 6, House on Deck. A
high fee will be given.
WANTED a Hairdresser. None need apply who cannot fnrnish testi-
monials of sobriety and steadiness. Apply at the office of this
paper.
ANTED to Purchase a few Cigars. Apply at No. 99, Tween Decks.
WANTED to Purchase Pipelights; price no object. Apply to Mr-
Semple.
WANTED a few Quires of Foolscap Paper, and some Black-lead Pencils.
Apply at the office of this paper.
WANTED a Cap for Master Fred. Apply to Mrs. Lindsell, saloon. For
one warranted not to lose, a liberal price will be given.
was proposed, but this must have been a joke, and there are
people among us ready to make a joke of anything. If any
such plan was entertained it must have been abandoned, as
the afternoon was very hot, and rendered out-of-door sprees
impossible.
In the evening, we heard the echo of some excellently
sung Scotch songs from the lower deck, which we supposed
to be part of the wedding festivities, and we hope the party
spent an agreeable evening.
THE WEATHER.
Since our last notice the heat has become rather less
severe, and except during the few hours about noon we may
say the weather has been very pleasant.
We are going away from the sun, and already feel that we
are stepping from under his hand ; indeed, with the help of a
good breeze, or the wind out of the spanker, or the draught
under the foot of “Cross John,” we can almost defy him to
do his worst.
But this is only on deck; below, the state of matters is as
bad as ever, and the sleeping rooms are so close that some
of us are still driven to the saloons, where we endeavour to
coax a little sleep out of the setees.
The most noticeable event of the week under this head is
an afternoon of right down tropical rain which we had upon
Monday, the 14th.
For several hours it came down, as the saying is, as if it
came out of buckets, and as it was fresh and cooling it was
very well received.
Most were contented to look on, and get as much refresh-
ment out of the sight and sound of it as they could, and
an occasional tumblerful to drink; but many were wiser
than they, and busied themselves in filling buckets, tinpails,
baths, footpans, &c. One young gentleman in the house on
deck, who has already endeared himself to us all by his
agreeable manner and obliging disposition, was particularly
active. Not only did he fill his own vessels and those of his
friends, but he continued to assist all who required help as
long as the rain lasted. On the following day the effects of
this unusual supply of fresh water was to be traced in the
altered complexions of many, and in the activity exhibited over
the washing tub. By ten o’clock a.m., clothes of all kinds
might be seen fluttering in the wind, and it was pleasant to
think that so much cleanliness was being obtained. On
Wednesday evening we saw the new moon—a mere thread
of a moon—being only one day old.
DIVINE SERVICE
Will be performed on Sunday, at eleven o’clock a.m., and at half-past
four p.m., at the usual place.
DOMESTIC OCCURRENCES.
MARRIAGES.
Notice.--Persons wishing to be married are required to give in their
names to the Rev. Mr. Hayden at least ten clear days before, in order to
allow time for the publication of banns.
On Tuesday, the 15th instant, at ten a.m., by the Rev, Mr. Hayden, 8.A.,
Mr. Henry iunninmouth, to Miss Janet Shaw.
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.
We are disappointed at not hearing from our poetical correspondent this
week. We shall be most happy to receive something from her pen in time
for next number.
Oke ok the People will see that there is another communication this
week on the subject on which he writes, which we hope will produce the
effect he desires.
Veritas.—Your communication has been received, but too late for in-
sertion this week.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the White Star Journal.
Sir, —Allow me to call your attention to a matter hearing
closely upon the sanitary condition of the ship. That such
matters deserve our best attention I am sure that all will
allow. We have hitherto escaped all infectious diseases, or
at least, if there have been cases of such on board, they have
been of so trifling a nature as not to come before the atten-
tion of the public; for this we have much reason to be
thankful, when we consider how awful might be the conse-
quences, were small pox or any other infectious disease to
break out. But, although we have been so fortunate, we
must not presume so far as to neglect any necessary pre-
cautions—precautions necessary at all times, but more es-
pecially during this hot season.
I shall only add that a more extensive use of the hose in
the forecastle would have a salutary effect.
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
SANITAS.
To the Editor of the White Star Journal.
Sir, —Are we never to enjoy the luxury of a hath ? What
was a luxuiy, becomes now in this hot weather a matter of
necessity. Does it not seem rather hard that we should be
surrounded on all sides by water, and yet have it neither
for drinking nor for bathing ? Sponging with a little salt
water may go on within the limited space of a cabin, but it
is a poor substitute for a bath. It is my own, as well as the
impression of several other passengers, that the White Star
advertisement in the Times promised baths for all classes.
However, passing over this as now a matter of uncertainty,
we appeal to the captain, and ask him whether he will not do
something for the comfort of his passengers. I am sure that
he will receive the grateful thanks of many.
I am, Sir, your obedient Servant,
A SUFFERER FROM THE HEAT.


SALE BY PUBLIC AUCTION, on Tuesday next, the 22nd May,
1855. —Mr. B. Clay begs most respectfully to intimate to the pas-
sengers on board the White Star, that on Tuesday next, 22nd instant, he
will sell by public auction (to the highest bidder) a quantity of miscella-
neous articles, comprising opera-glasses, watches, musical boxes, hams,
herrings, sprats, boots, shoes, clothes, &c. Terms: 7J per cent, commission.
Sale to commence at ten a.m. punctually, in front of the Main Hatch.
N.B. Goods of all kinds sold privately, on commission.
Mr. B. Clay purposes having a Sale by Auction every Tuesday morning:
passengers having goods or provisions for sale will please to name the same
one clear day prior to sale; and all articles sent for disposal to be legibly
numbered and labelled, with the owner’s name and reserve price affixed
thereto.
CLAY and CO., Auctioneers and Commission Agents, No. 47, Middle of
Ship below.
Four hundred tickets to be issued at one shilling each.
The subscription list will be opened on Monday, the 21st instant, and re-
main so till Thursday night. The prizes will be drawn on the Poop, be-
tween the hours of ten a.m. and twelve noon on Friday, the 25th instant.
The following gentlemen will form a Committee for the sale of the tickets
and for the carrying out of the lottery:—
Mr. R. Osman, President.
Mr. Joseph Millar,
Mr. R. 6. Daly.
Mr. Thomas Randle.
Mr. H. M. Scott.
It will be observed that the whole amount subscribed will be returned to
the subscribers in the form of prizes, and every facility will be afforded for
the whole proceedings being investigated by all concerned.
The amount of prizes will be paid over immediately after the numbers
being declared.
THE LOG.
Saturday, 12th May. — a.m. calms with light and variable breezes. Noon
05 ° 43’, 24 ° 17’ Distance 30 miles, p.m. cloudy weather and showers
of rain.
Sunday, 13.— A.M. calms and light airs. Long. 05° 19’, lat. 23° 47’.
Distance 39 miles, p.m. heavy weather.
Monday, 14.—04 ° 01’, 23 ° 22’. Distance 80 miles, p.m. very heavy
rains and light winds.
Tuesday, 15. — A.M. light trade winds and very sultry. 03 ° 37’, 24° 20’.
Distance 63.
Wednesday, 16.—At I’3o a.m. got S.E. trade winds, very light. 02 ° 39’
25 ° 50’. Distance 113 miles.
Thursday, 17.— a.m. light trade winds from S.S.E. 00 ° 42’N. 28° 44’W.
Distance 204 miles.
Friday, 18.— a.m. light trade winds from S.E. by E., clear weather,
00 ° 40’ S. 29 ° 49’ W. Distance 120 miles, p.m. light trade winds.
White Star Journal.
No. 5.] SATURDAY, MAY 26, 1855.
LAND HO!
On the 21st instant we were in the latitude of the Azores,
and passed the islands within forty miles, when some expe-
rienced nautical eye saw land, or some indication of it. On
Monday last, the 21st, the coast of Brazil was distinctly
seen by all who chose to look. We had been laid off for
several days by S. and S.E. winds, and were on the look-
out for land from noon. At 3 p.m. it became visible; a
long line of low-lying coast, which proved to be in the
neighbourhood of Pernambuco. Nearly all the passengers
came on deck, though it rained hard at the time, and had a
look at it. We tacked, and stood off to the south-east, and
soon lost it in the haze. We have thus had a glimpse of
the American continent, which we did not expect when we
set out, and is more than we bargained for with Pilkington
and Wilson.
DIVINE SERVICE.
Divine service has been duly celebrated on each Sunday
morning and evening since we last noticed it. On Sunday,
the 11th instant, in addition to the usual services of the day,
the sacrament of baptism was administered to the young
traveller who set out upon the journey of life since we
sailed. Mrs. Matthews kindly provided a christening cap
for the occasion.
We are happy to say that the passengers and crew have
evinced, by the regularity of their attendance, that they are
not indifferent to the ordinances of religion; and that the
same decorum, which we mentioned before, has all along
continued.
Captain Matthews has kindly officiated as clerk, and pro-
nounced the responses.
The choir, composed of Miss Ford, the Messrs. Miller,
Mr. Seward, the Messrs. Ford, &c., and accompanied on
the concertina by Herr Kohler, have greatly improved since
they commenced singing together, and, last Sunday,
chaunted the “Venite" and “Jubilate,” and led the
psalmody in a manner very seldom excelled on shore.
Mentioning the baptism, recals to our recollection a little
incident connected with it, which we think deserves to be
put upon record, as illustrating the straits we were about
the time reduced to. After the ceremony, a gallant gentle-
man, whose name will be found in other parts of this
journal, made an attempt to secure the water from the font,
and bottled it up. It may be supposed that he bolds
Puseyite views, and recognises some virtue in the element:
but such is not the case. He is, we believe, of low church
principles, but, at the same time, of a full habit of body
and a very active disposition. Consequently, in the tropics,
he draws considerably upon the fluid secretions, and the
supply of water being strictly limited, there is a difficulty in
keeping up moisture sufficient. The probability, therefore,
is, that he intended to use the water in compounding certain
mixtures.
THE POOP.
Soon after putting to sea, Captain Brown invited the
house-on-deck passengers to share with those in the saloon
the privilege of walking upon the poop. Since then, the
arrangements seem to have been pretty well understood, and
all parties accommodated as far as the extent of the poop
admitted: most of the house-on-deck passengers using it
when they wished, and plenty of room being left for those
in the saloon.
We make the statement, in consequence of some dissatis-
faction having been expressed by some among the ’tween-
deck passengers at their presence on the poop being objected
to, and we must say that we think them rather unreasonable
in the matter. It is plain that there is not room on the
poop for all; and, if all were admitted there, what is now a
privilege would be no privilege at all; and if some are to be
admitted, and some not, it must be by classes and not indi-
viduals, or a most difficult duty of selection would devolve
upon the captain.
ACCIDENTS.
A little girl, of eight or nine years old, had a severe fall
from a ladder the other evening.
Captain Eyre was immediately on the spot, and pro :
nounced the child uninjured. Soon after, Dr. Walker
arrived, and carefully examined the leg of which she com-
plained. It was much bruised; but has by this time been
healed, we hope.
Published by H. D.. at his Office, 99, Between Decks.


THE WEATHER.
Since our last, the temperature has moderated consider-
ably, and, during the greater part of the week, the weather
has been very pleasant.
Below, and especially during meals, it is still hot and
close; hut on deck it is positively enjoyable, and scarcely
any one remains below but to eat and sleep, and not always
then. By most of us, the Summer of 1855 will be recol-
lected as an unusually severe one ; but it has been got over
before the end of May, so our sufferings have not been pro-
tracted.
Men fly from ills they know to ills they know not of, and
during the hot weather it has been a common remark that
any extent of cold would be welcome in preference.
Probably before we reach Melbourne our powers of endu-
rance will have been tried on that tack too, and perhaps
some or us will remember with regret the melting mood.
It would he ungrateful not to mention that, during the
last week, we have had the society of a young May moon,
without a cloud upon her brow; and so attractive has she
been, that when bedtime arrived we have left the deck with
regret.
NAUTICAL PHENOMENA.
There is not much to notice this week, under this head.
While off the coast, flocks of gulls surrounded us, and
performed their graceful involutions. We suppose a sea-
mew is a sea-mew everywhere; at least those visitors from
the Brazilian coast seemed as like their cousins in the Firth
of Clyde and round Ailsa Craig as possible. We have
occasionally had Mother Carey’s chicken in our wake, and
we have seen flocks of flying-fish, as before. Three dolphins
were also distinctly seen. They were standing upon their
heads on the poop-deck, and supporting the binnacle with
their tails.
CROSSING THE LINE.
In our last number we mentioned that the ceremonies
usual on crossing the line, had upon this occasion been
omitted. It turned out that we were rather premature, for
on Saturday afternoon, the sailors got the forecastle-hose
rigged, and for two or three hours kept up a brisk fire upon
all the novices who came within their reach. Their atten-
tions were principally confined to their own order, and we
think few of the passengers came in for a share, except those
whom curiosity drew into dangerous localities. Of course,
from this, it may be inferred that some of our lady passen-
gers got a ducking.
At the proper moment, old Neptune made his appear-
ance over the ship’s bows ; his beard of oakum streaming
with water, his wife on his arm, his trident over his
shoulder, and, we may safely conclude, a quid of tobacco in
his starboard cheek.
We suppose he was restricted in his choice of victims,
for his principal efforts seemed to be directed against the
extra stewards, cooks, knife-cleaners, &c., and a sad time of
it they had. After great efforts to secrete themselves, they
were mostly all brought to light, hauled out from some
cunningly selected hiding-place by a foot or an ear, and
carried in triumph to the forecastle by a picket of sailors
detailed off for the purpose.
There a large puncheon standing on end, and full of
water, was prepared; and in it each was soused over head,
after being well lathered with a mixture of tar, grease, and
worse things, and shaved with a piece of old iron hoop,
according to time-honoured custom.
DIVINE SERVICE
Will be celebrated at the usual place to-morrow, at 11 a.m., and at 4 p.m.
MARRIAGES.
Persons wishing to be married must give the Rev. Mr. Hayden at least
ten days’ previous notice, to allow time for the publication of banns.
THE LIBRARY
Is open in the saloon on Monday and Thursday, from 11 a.m. till noon,
when Miss Constardine will give out and receive books. Persons applying
are to come prepared with the number of the books theywish.
ORIGINAL POETRY.
COLLOQUY BETWEEN CAPTAIN BROWN AND FATHER
NEPTUNE.
My dear Captain Brown, your old friend, Father Neptune,
As you cross his domain, would just ask you a question.
I am wishful to know, as you command the White Star,
What passengers have you, and of what class they are ?
Indeed, my dear sir, I am bound to confess
That your question’s a puzzler; for on board we’ve no less
Than six hundred and fifty, and one Captain Eyre,
Who is ever at hand to make love to the fair.
We have captains in plenty, some line, some militia;
And if, in the course of events, I should wish a
Little counsel or aid, there are two unattached
Ship captains, for skill who could hardly be matched.
There is one whose complexion’s unusually heightened
By good eating and drinking; but he need not be frightened—
I’ll mention no names, but let every one,
If he think the cap fits, slip it quietly on.
There is he from the corps of artillery mounted—
What, though his fine brow with gray hairs is surrounded I
In his heart there is still all the ardour of youth;
And, though very polite, he still sticks to the truth;
Which is more than some do, but let that matter pass.
If each lady and gentleman, each lad and each lass,
Must thus pass in review. I'll be out of the tropics
Before I have time to exhaust half my topics.
We have wives, a good number, some young and some old,
Whose husbands are now in the regions of gold;
And maidens, whose constancy none can gainsay.
And we hear they are going to whisper “ Obey.”
We have maids from the village, whose beauty has been
Confined to the May-day or dance on the green;
The city grisette, with manners assured,
And confident air which can scarce be endured.
We’ve the belle of a season, enchanting and fair,
Equipped at all points; and I wonder who dare
Dispute for a moment her right and her power,
To bring to her feet new admirers each hour.
We have sparkling wit from Erin’s green isle,
And Scotia is ever at hand to beguile
With cutting satire and clever bon mot ,
Hours that might otherwise pass tediously slow.
We have ladies au fait in heaving “ the log,”
A very few gentlemen fond of their grog.
We have musical genius, and medical skilly
And some who are clever in driving the “ quill! ”
We have some whose goodnature we cannot offend,
And some whose behaviour we can’t comprehend;
And some who are growling from morning till night,
Exclaiming to all how wretched their plight
We have smokers ne’er weary of pipe and cigar,
And if you feel anxious, I can tell who they are;
For no doubt they consider ’tis quite comme ilfauty
To be thus occupied as they pace to and fro.
But I must not omit to mention our bride;
For is she not truly an object of pride?
For where beauty and grace, and sweetness combine,
Oh! woman, dear woman, thou art almost divine.
We have some ceremonious, and some rather rude,
And one to whose kindness we wish to allude,
But fearing to call a blush to his cheek—
Of the wetting he got we will not now speak.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
SALE BT AUCTION, on Thursday, 21st May, 1855, at 3 p.m., Jn
front of the Main Hatch.
Catalogue:
Herrings, looking-glasses, books, sprats, satin figured vest pieces, chip
hats, cigars, sidecombs, horn and tortoiseshell cigar-cases, backcombs, horn
and tortoiseshell, vesta lights, knives, birds eye tobacco, guns, bacon, cheese,
oatmeal, pistols, &c.
CLAY and CO., Auctioneers and Commission Agents.
On Thursday afternoon there was a public sale on board, when a great
quantity of goods, of a most miscellaneous description, was exposed.
Either the expectations of the exposers were extravagant, or money was
not very plentiful among the passengers, for, we understand, few of the
articles changed owners.
TEN SHILLINGS REWARD —Stolen from the mahogany railing,
fronting forty-nine cabin, a white leather strap with covered buckle.
Whoever will give such information as will lead to the conviction of the
thief, shall receive the above Reward from CLAY and CO., Auctioneers.
N.B.—The advertiser, having received authentic information as to the
whereabouts of the strap, advises the party now holding the same to return
it instanter to where it was taken from, otherwise a public exposure will bo
made on board ship, as well as a prosecution hereafter.
LOST, a Pair of Kid Gloves. Any person having found the same will
greatly oblige the owner by leaving them at 88, ’tween-decks, when
he shall receive part of a bottle of beer as his Reward.
ANTED, a Cutler to set Razors. Apply to the Rev. Mr. Hayden.
THE LOTTERY.
In the course of last week, some gentlemen, ever vigilant in contriving
amusements for their fellow-passengers, proposed a lottery, to get np a little
excitement.
In our last number it was advertised, and early in the week the 400 tickets
were disposed of.
Yesterday the drawing took place on the poop, at half-past 10, and we
publish the results below.
The cuddy dinner-bell summoned all hands aft, and the band played a
variety of airs while they assembled; 400 tickets were placed in one bag,
numbered from one upwards. In another bag were also 400 tickets, thirteen
of which were prizes, and 387 blanks; and two boys, the Masters Berry,
drew simultaneously a ticket from each, which were handed to two gentle-
men, and opened. When a prize was drawn, the owner of the number taken
from the other bag at the same time, was the lucky individual.
£ s. d.
No. 88:—10 0 o—Mrs. Bird, house on deck.
„ B. 8 0 o—Captain Brown.
„ 104. 2 0 o—Miller and Co., house on deck.
„ 204. 010 o—Mr. Horlak, ’tween-dccks.
„ 208. 010 o—Mr. Osman, saloon.
„ 40. 010 o—Mr. Merrell, saloon.
„ 118.— 010 o—Sally Pearson, house on deck.
„ 39. 010 o—Mrs. Edens, saloon.
„ 298. 010 O—J. Bains, seaman.
„ 124. 010 o—Mr. Miller, house on deck.
„ 301. — 010 O—R. Martin, seaman.
„ 380. — 010 o—Miss Constardine.
„ 98. 010 o—Mr. J. Jones, house on deck.
The drawing passed off with great harmony, and all seemed pleased, both
who lost and those who won. While all the gentlemen deserve thanlu for
the trouble they took in conducting the lottery, we think Captain Daly
entitled to special mention for his exertions. He was not only industrious
himself, but was the cause of industry in others; and on Thursday afternoon
he might have been seen on the poop deck, surrounded by a group of ladies,
busily engaged in cutting and folding tickets, &c.
We have teachers and scholars, we’ve rich and we’ve poor;
We have those who can patiently hardness endure.
And a few who ne’er murmur whatever betide—
In these, Father Neptune, I truly confide.
But now, my old friend, you are doubtless aware
That a Captain has got but few moments to spare;
So pardon, I crave for this wretched effusion,
Believe me, my mind is quite in confusion.
“ White Star,” Saturday, May 19th, 1855.
THE COMMON DAISY.
Not worlds on worlds, in phalanx deep.
Need we to prove a God is here;
The “ Daisy,” fresh from nature’s sleep.
Tells of his hand in lines as clear:
For who but He who arched the skies,
And pours the day spring’s living flood,
Wondrous alike in all He tries,
Could raise the Daisy’s purple bud:
Mould its green cup, its wiry stem:
Its fringed border, nicely spin,
And cut the gold embossed gem,
That, set in silver, gleams within.
And fling it unrestrained and free.
O’er hul and dale, and desert sod,
That man, where’er be walks, may see,
In every step, the stamp of Goo.
SONG.
I wadna gie thee pain, Jeannie,
A thousand worlds to gain.
I think of auld lang syne, Jeannie,
And wish it o’er again.
I hae na felt sae sad, Jeannie,
For monie a wearie while,
Sin’ thou ha’e ceased to lo’e, Jeannie,
An’ ceased on me to smile.
Sin’ thon art gann awa, Jeannie,
I feel sad, sad and lane;
I often, sighing, wish, Jeannie,
The past would come again.
Ohl wad ye lo’ed as I, Jeannie,
With constancy of heart;
Ah I wad, we lo’ed again, Jeannie,
We never more would part.
The world may seem unkind, Jeannie,
And other hearts be cauld,
But one heart truly beats, Jeannie,
As in the days of auld—
When thy e’es were lovelit, Jeannie,
And the kiss of lo’e was ta’en;
I could nae pain thee now. Jeannie,
A thousand worlds to gain.
I winna gie thee pain, Jeannie,
How e’er unkind ye be;
And tho’ thy ire may flash, Jeannie,
From out thy bright blue e’e,
Ye mav not ever lo’e, Jeannie,
But 1 shall lo’e thee more;
Oh 1 wad we were again, Jeannie,
As we hae been before.
For I maun ever lo’e, Jeannie,
Wi’ lo’e sincere and true;
Thy bright e’es haunt me e’er, Jeannie,
Those bonnie eyne of blue.
Then think not e’er, my Jeannie,
That I could gie thee pain;
Oh, not I wadna, Jeannie,
A thousand worlds to gain.
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Veritas. —We have received your communication. It is strongly written.
Your simile of the rattlesnake and the innocent squirrel, reminds us of the
soul-harrowing tales of the London Journal.
But who is the “callous, mild, modest, easy man”—the "seeming cool, easy-
mannered man?” We have sought in vain to discover who sat for toe
picture. There are some queer folk on board the White Star, certainly;
but a man, combining all those dissimilar, if not contradictory, qualities,
would be a monster.
We think, too, that there can be no wholly unprotected females where
Captain Brown is.
Diogenes went about with a lantern looking for honest men j and Captain
Brown goes about with his lantern looking for single women.
We shall be happy to hear from you again. You take such a strong grasp
of your subject, that we hope you will favor us with your views on some
future occasion.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the White Stab Journal.
Sir, —The talent displayed in the leading articles of your
Journal, induces me to intrude myself on your empty space.
Your style so chaste, your composition so perfect, exhibiting
with a master-mind the great resources you possess; even
the grand secret of all seems no mystery to you—the
thorough knowledge of men in this world.
[The rest of our correspondent’s letter we do not consider
suitable for our columns, but we feel obliged to him for the
hints it conveys, and will return to the subject at another
time. ]


THE LOG.
Saturday , May 19tA. —a.m. light trades from S.E. by S. Noon, lat.
3° 37* S., long. 30* W. Distance 171 miles, p.m. light winds.
Sunday, 20th. — a.m. light winds from S.E. by S. Noon, lat. 6° 60’ S.,
long. 30 ° 58* W. Distance 156 miles, p.m. same weather.
Monday , 21s*. —a.m strong winds from S. by E. Noon, lat. 7 ° 35’ S.,
long. 34 ® 01’ W. Distance 210 miles, p.m. strong winds with rain.
Tuesday , 22nd. — a.m. fresh breezes from S. E. by S. Noon, lat. 6 ° 47* S.,
long. 32 ® 08’ W. Distance 157 miles, p.m. fresh breezes and rain.
Wednesday, 2Zrd. —A.M. fresh breezes from S. and squalls. Noon, lat.
8 ° 62’ S., long. 33 ° 53’ W. Distance 164 miles, p.m. squally weather.
Thursday , 24 th. —a.m. light breezes and variable. Noon, lat. 10 ° 61* S.,
long. 35 ° 31’ W. Distance 157 miles, p.m. light winds from S.E.
Friday , 25*A. — a.m. light airs from S.E. by S., clear weather. Noon, lat.
12 ° 45’ long. 36 0 22* W. Distance 131 miles. p.m. light airs and
variable.
White Star Journal.
No. 6.] SATURDAY, JUNE 3, 1855.
We would remind the ladies and gentlemen, that bags
are suspended in the saloon, opposite the side board, and
in the main hatchway, to receive communications for the
journal.
We can easily fill our sheet every week with such matter
as it has contained hitherto; but we submit whether it
would not be more amusing if it could be made to reflect a
greater variety of minds.
Different persons see the same things in different lights,
and from different points of view ; if, therefore, we had it
in our power to select from a variety of chance contributions,
our paper would furnish a much more faithful picture of
life at sea.
We shall make no enquires as to whom communications
come from; but, of course, shall exercise our own discretion
as to their admission.
We are delighted to hear that we are to have an opposi-
tion journal. Most things thrive better for a little whole-
some competition, and an adventure like this is nothing if it
has the field to itself. Every one has heard of the lawyer
in a peaceful neighbourhood, who was nearly starved out,
when a rival practitioner settled in the town, and made the
fortune of both. So with us : alone, we may sometimes be
at a loss for matter, and have a difficulty in keeping public
interest alive; but give us a rival, we will undertake to con-
trive amusement out of him from week to week.
As it is, there is another organ of public opiniofa on board
the ship, viz., the after hatchway house; and by means of
bills posted upon it, the feelings of the lower deck some-
times find expression; and sundry wants are made known.
There, various announcements are to be seen of a nature
too urgent to wait for our weekly advertising columns, and
sometimes animadversions upon walk and conversation too
personal for us to admit. It serves the purposes and enjoys
the immunities of an irresponsible press, and the quick
glance of apprehension is frequently cast upon it the first
thing in the morning.
Nor is it to be wondered at if circumstances sometimes
arose requiring more prompt attention than they can receive
from a weekly journal. A hitch may occur in the evening’s
amusements—a lamp may go out, or the tambourine may
not come up to time, and a meeting of the committee of the
“Philharmonic”and “Convivial”must be called, or a promi-
nent member of our society may be suddenly seized with a
severe illness, and public anxiety may require an hourly
bulletin.
At this moment we can see the details of the coming
lottery with its hundred prizes temptingly set forth, and the
particulars of a cheap excursion advertised. By the latter,
the saloon passengers are offered a trip to the forecastle,
with an opportunity of inspecting the sheep, pigs, and
poultry, as they pass; and the ladies and gentlemen forward
are invited to make an excursion to the poop on very rea-
sonable terms, at three o’clock in the afternoon, with the
privilege of inspecting the cuddy dinner through the sky-
lights, and partaking freely of the delicacies to be seen
there, if they can get them.
On Thursday morning, telegraphic news was published
in a poster, headed “ Fall of Sevastopol,” and announcing
the total destruction of the town and fleet, with very slight
loss on the part of the allies.
Such pleasantries are of frequent occurrence, and our
readers will be pleased to observe that there is more wit in
the ship than finds its way into our columns.
Sometimes matters of a grave kind are touched upon,
and a severe moral censor in the ’tween decks seeks in a
little handbill to guide an erring brother into the straight
path. May every success attend his efforts.
We will keep a look out upon the hatchway house for the
future, and duly notice anything amusing that may appear
there.
MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARANCE.
We were all surprised last Tuesday morning at missing
Captain Eyre from his usual haunts. When we saw the
steward take a cup of coffee and a plateful of twice-laid to
his room, we began to feel uneasy; but it was not till he
returned for a second cup of coffee and a second plateful
of twice-laid, and reported the gallant sufferer no better,
that we felt really alarmed.
Immediately after breakfast, several of his friends visited
him in his cabin in quick succession, and though we are aware
they meant well, we are almost afraid their attentions may
have proved troublesome. A bulletin was posted up at the
main-hatchway, dated half-past nine a.m., announcing that
he had spent a bad night.
About eleven a.m., public anxiety reached its height, when
the carpenter was seen going towards the cuddy door with
his foot rule open in his hand, and fortunately the invalid
soon after made his appearance on deck, apparently very
little the worse.
We were all the more surprised from the sudden nature
of the attack, as he was seen on deck in good health and
spirits so late as eleven o’clock the previous night, assisting
Captain Brown in putting the ship about.
Some doubts exist as to the cause of the attack; but after
careful enquiries, we have come to the conclusion that it
was the sardines, of which he partook rather plentifully at
supper, on Monday night.
In the morning little Master Hayden was seen playing
with the empty tin case, and a provident gentleman, who
knows the value of evidence, put it aside to be produced at
the inquest, in case of the worst.
THE WEATHER.
We have seen stable of temperatures of the air and water,
kept by Mr. Burger, one of the officers of the ship, and
extract the following particulars, which will, we think, prove
interesting.
The observations date from the 3rd of May, and on that
day the mean of three observations, viz., at 10 a.m., 3 p.m.,
and 6 p.m., give :
Air, 70° 40’; water, 70° 30’. From this date the tempera-
Published by H. D., at his Office, 99, Between Decks.


ture gradually rises, till upon the 13th it attains its maxi-
mum of—
Air, 85° 20’; water, 85° 00’. It then gradually declines;
and on the 31st has fallen to:
Air, 75° 00’; water, 76° 20’. The temperature was taken
on deck in the shade, and, of course, affords no indication
of the heat below.
The discrepancy between the heat of the air and water is
from two to three degrees, but we cannot find that any
principle runs through the register. Sometimes one is
higher, and sometimes the other, and that at all the three
times of the day.
During the week the weather has been delightful, and
even below it is now no longer oppressive. As a proof of
how peaceful we have found the Atlantic, we may mention,
that though we have been at sea forty-three days, the royals
have not been once hauled down, and a small boat might
have come all the way,—not only without danger, but with-
out inconvenience.
NAUTICAL PHENOMENA.
On Thursday afternoon two whales were seen. They
were of the variety called finbacks, from 35 to 45 feet long,
and quite black. They were travelling in a direction at
right angles with the ship’s course, and crossed our stem at
no great distance.
The spout was first seen, and then the huge bulk of the fish
was to be seen lazily rolling into sight and disappearing.
We hope the ladies are now satisfied; for frequently great
disappointment has been expressed by them at so few of the
wonders of the deep being seen; and we must say that
hitherto the voyage has been very unproductive in this
respect.
Excepting the flying-fish, nothing has been seen which
we have not often seen on the coast of Scotland.
The shark was contemptuously called a dog-fish, and the
waterspout came far short of expectation.
Mother Carey’s chicken was pretty well received, and
continue in pretty plentiful attendance upon us. Even
these poor whales are looked down upon. Captain Brown
tells us they are the most worthless of their kind, and are
not reckoned worth killing by whalers, or perhaps we should
not have seen them.
DIVINE SERVICE
Will be celebrated to-morrow at the usual place, at eleven o’clock a.m. and
4 - 15 p.m.
MARRIAGES.
Parties wishing to be married, must give the Rev. Mr. Hayden at
least ten days’ previous notice, in order to afford time for the due publication
of banns.
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.
It has been suggested to us by a gentleman of a literary turn, that a
series of letters in the style of Junius would be acceptable to our readers.
No doubt they would, and they would be very acceptable to us; and so
would a little descriptive writing in the style o‘f Dickens; or a little poetry
in the style of Moore; or a little westerly wind; or many things we could
name; but how are they to be come by ?
If the gentleman will send ns something in the style he mentions, or in
the style of Lord Bacon, or Mrs. Hannah Moore, or Mr. Micawber, or
indeed in any style, if the matter be amusing, or even instructing, we shall
feel obliged to him.
The Common Daisy.—ln our last number we gave an ode to the Daisy,
which was handed into us. It has since been discovered that it was not
original. One gentleman could repeat it word for word twenty years ago,
and another recollected copying it into an album; but this evidence we en-
deavoured to bear up against, until it was actually produced in good legible
type in a “ Floral Wreath” or “ Poetical Bouquet,” or something of that
kind, and flourished in our face upon the poop.
The most obvious course in such a case would be to fall back upon our
publisher, and say that he inserted it without our knowledge; but we are
too magnanimous for that, and plead instead that it is hardly possible to
bear in memory every scrap of poetry that ever was written upon a daisy or
any other subject. We think, too, that our columns will prove that such
verses being produced on board the ship, was not very improbable.
Sir Walter Scott was accused of plagiarism on the grounds of his first
attempt being discovered, by a literary druggist’s wife, to be copied almost
verbatim from an old magazine; but he complained that he was ill-used,
as he had only stolen all the ideas; and most of the words. Our corres-
pondent has stolen all the ideas; and all the words but one; if he had stolen
that one too, it would have been an improvement.
Angelina.—Your question is on a subject which hardly comes within
our province. Endeavour to interest some judicious female acquaintance in
your case, and be guided by her advice.
Enquirer.—No, decidedly not.
I.—Your lines are under consideration.
Eliza.—Are you sure your verses are original ? Many of them are sweetly
pretty; but some of the ideas, we think, are familiar to us, and we are sure that
most of the words are to be found in the writings of Matthew Prior.
Kitty.—We cannot tell you the age of the gentleman you allude to.
N—M —p.—You must be guided by your own feelings.
Publicola.—Your communication is wholly unsuited for our columns.
All that you advance has been said before, and in a way much more likely
to produce the effect you desire.
Mrs. P. —There is no foundation for the report you allude to. If yon
did not make it yourself, the person who mentioned it to you must have
done so. We have made enquiry, and in every ease the information has
been traced back to yourself.
2nd Intermediate.—The practice to which you allude does not trans-
gress any code of morality that ever we heard of. Whether it may be
courteous or neighbourly is another question. Perhaps if the gentleman
were spoken to again, he would desist.
Betsy Jane wishes to know whether a squeeze of the hand may be held
as amounting to'a declaration. Much depends upon time, place, and manner
of course; but we fear that in a court, either of law or of love, the proof
would be held insufficient.
We would advise B. J. to give the gentleman a little line, and he will be
more explicit.
There is a good part of the voyage to come yet, but if when we have
doubled the Cape, the gentleman has still maintained silence, B. J. may
write us again.
S. B.—lt is not true that the ship was in danger of falling overboard on
Wednesday night. Some one has been making fun of you. Be more on
your guard.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Mr. Editor, —In reviewing your journal of the 26th inst.,
I deem a few remarks necessary as to the disposal of the
“ Holy Water” that is supposed to have been used for the
concoction of certain mixtures.
The waters of Jordan are oftimes bottled and preserved
as a holy relic, and why not such be the case with the con-
secrated liquid on board the White Star? lam sure that
although tie fluid was of much value at the time, the gal-
lant gentleman you allude to would never be guilty of par-
taking of any thing so precious. Cleopatra may have dis-
solved her jewels to make the draft more costly; but that
was extravagance. Only fancy turning ourselves into a
walking church-font. He, who is alluded to, would rather
take his mixtures nate, than be guilty of such sacrilege.
No, Mr. Editor, the water is in perfect preservation for the
next presentation, which, if according to report, will oftimes
be in requision during the voyage. Trusting you will in-
sert this for the information of those concerned, and the
protection of the innocent,
I remain, Sir, your well-wisher,
HEAVY WET.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE Third Number of this Journal, saloon copy, is missing. The
ladies and gentlemen are requested to look for it in their cabins.
lyy^ - ANTED a quantity of Foolscap Paper for the use of this office.
■'y^' ANTED to Purchase a quantity of Starch. Apply to Mr. Edens.
WANTED to Purchase a few Good Cigars. Apply at the office of
this paper.
WANTE D Pipe Lights; any price will be given. Apply to Mr.
Semple.
WANTED to Purchase a few Pots of Marmalade. Apply at the office
of this paper.
WANTED a Hairdresser. A good hand will find employment irres-
pective of character.
THE LOG.
Saturday, 26 th May. —a.m. light airs from S.E. by S. Noon lat.
13 ° 29’ S., long. 37 ° 07’ W. Distance 59 miles, p.m. variable winds.
Sunday, 27.— a.m. light winds from S.E. by S. Noon, lat. 13° 25’ S.,
long. 35° 11’ Distance 126 miles. p.m. fresh breezes and cloudy
weather.
Monday, 28.— A.M. light winds from S. by E. to S. by ~W. Noon,
lat. 13® 34’5., long, 33° 37’ W. Distance 101 miles, p.m. light and
variable winds,
Tuesday, 29.— a.m, light airs and variable. Noon, lat.' 14 ® 07’ S., long.
33 ® 12’ W. Distance 62 miles, p.m. light winds and calms.
Wednesday, 30. — a.m. fresh breezes from S.E. and clear weather. Noon,
lat. 16 ® 14’S., long. 34 ® 58’. Distance 173 miles, p.m. moderate breezes
from S.E. by S.
Thursday, 31.—Noon, lat. 16® 47’ S„ long. 34® 54’ W.
Friday, Ist dune. —Lat. 18® 59’ S., long. 35 ® 49’ W.
White Star Journal.
No. 7.] SATURDAY, JUNE 9, 1855.
Although this world (which seems, at present, wholly of
a watery nature) is a sphere revolving upon its axis, and
travelling round the sun, and being with it, perhaps, carried
round some remote luminary, of which we have no know-
ledge ; and though those various revolutions are performed
with a rapidity which figures can express, hut of which the
mind can form no conception ; to the great majority of its
inhabitants it seems an extended plane, and without any
motion whatever. To them the vault of heaven, with its
thousand lights of varying hue and magnitude, and arranged
into such endless variety of beautiful and fantastic shapes,
are only lamps hung out to light us up, or at best a pleasure-
garden to the earth, or a field for the imagination to run
riot in. To the intelligent observer, however, all resolves
itself into the most beautiful system. At the command of
the astronomer, order comes out of chaos; and the stars,
which, to the uninitiated, seem to have been powdered over
the sky out of a pepper-box, are marshalled into rank, and
obliged each to assume its proper place. He calls them by
name, and knows all about them—whence they come, and
whither they are going; and if it were possible for one to
lag behind its turn, he would detect it in a moment.
In this ship may be found something like a parallel. She
is a complicated machine. For her construction, all nature
has been ransacked to find materials—the animal, vegetable
and mineral kingdoms have contributed, and some hundreds
of skilled workmen have given their labour.
In her various fittings and appurtenances may be seen
what mechanical science has achieved in this direction up
to a recent date ; and in directing her course through the
ocean, we believe that the most advanced nautical knowledge
is employed.
Still, to the great majority of the passengers, she is
nothing more than a very inconvenient home, in which they
must live for a certain (or, rather, an uncertain) number of
weeks, in order that at the expiry of the time they may find
themselves in Melbourne —a house where the various
domestic duties must be performed under circumstances the
most trying, and where generally an ordeal is to be gone
through, and a penance done before reaching the land of
their expectation.
Nor is it necessary for practical purposes that it should
be otherwise. The farmer commits his seeds to the earth
at the usual time, and knows that in their proper seasons
rains will nourish his crops, and sunshine ripen them with-
out requiring to consider whether he goes to the sun or the
sun comes to him; and the passenger on board the White
Star, in most cases, busies himself with his more immediate
concerns, without troubling himself to inquire how the
ship’s head is, or what is the longitude, knowing that the
voyage will be accomplished all the same, whether he super-
intends the process or not.
But as the intelligent traveller, whether round the sun or
round the earth, has most to interest and amuse him, we
think that all on board should endeavour to acquire, while
on the voyage, as much knowledge as they can conveniently
come by, of the ship herself, and the arts and sciences by
which the sea and winds are made to minister to man’s
pleasures and necessities.
We intended to call the attention of our readers to the
subject in an earlier number, and hoped some one on board
possessing the requisite knowledge would have supplied us
with a few short papers containing information of this kind ;
and we are not without hope that such may still be the
case.
In the meantime we will collect such information as we
can procure about the ship herself, and give it in our next
number.
HAIR CUTTING.
Any person who has glanced at our advertising columns
from week to week will see that there is a great demand for
a hair-dresser.
An amateur has been at work during the last week, and
he certainly takes the fleece off very clean. A young gentle-
man brought his head to our office the other day for inspec-
tion, and we must admit if we had been disposed to find
fault, there was very little to lay hold of. It is a style of
haircutting which brings the ears into strong relief. We
would advise the young gentleman to stay on board the ship
for as people’s lives are always saved by their being seized
by the hair of the head, there might be a difficulty in pulling
him in again, if he got overboard.
THE PUBLIC HEALTH.
We have great reason to be thankful for the good health
that has prevailed on hoard during the voyage.
During the very hot weather many suffered from head-
aches and fainting fits, but that is now all over.
The only complaint which has become at all general
is measles, and at present there are a great many
cases, principally among the children, hut not exclusively.
A mother and child have b£en siezed, and some other grown
up persons. We are glad to say that it is a mild description
of the disease.
Published by Henry Davy, at his Office, No. 99, Between Decks.


THE WEATHER.
Up till Wednesday evening the weather continued fine,
and all were enjoying the open air nearly all day long, and
congratulating themselves upon being excellent sailors; but
on Thursday morning things presented a different appear-
ance. During the night the wind and sea had got up, and
the motion of the ship was again felt to an extent far from
agreeable to the more delicate.
Things were tumbling about; the timbers and planks,
groaning and creaking, as if each uttered its complaint in a
different accent; and occasionally the crash of a falling bottle
or tray of spoons was to be heard.
A diminished muster at the breakfast table was one re-
sult, and during the day the saloon presented a miserable
contrast to its usual lively appearance.
Instead of ladies and gentlemen clustered about reading,
writing, or engaged in the many forms of idleness which
ladies call work, silence and closed doors prevailed.
To add to our other sources of discomfort, it rained nearly
all day, and the few ladies who ventured on deck were
equipped in waterproof coats, hats, and some in Wellington
boots.
On Friday the weather was again fine, and though there
was still a good deal of motion, nearly all appeared on deck.
A good deal of washing had been done, for as soon as
the sun shone out, the ship was clad fore and aft with clothes
drying.
There is no heat to complain of, and we could gladly
bargain for the temperature as it is now, till the end of the
voyage.
Continued rains will interfere most with our comfort, es-
pecially between decks. On Thursday, when nearly all were
confined below by the rain, it became excessively close and
disagreeable from the heat and moisture exhaling from the
clothes of those who had got wet.
OFFENCES.
Various small articles of dress, and such trifles as knives,
brushes, sheets, pocket-handkerchiefs, &c., have been missing
at different times since we commenced the voyage, as may
be surmised from the advertisements that have appeared in
our columns. Many of those waifs have been recovered
after due enquiry, and we hope the balance may be attri-
butable to the confusion necessarily existing on board ship,
as we would be sorry to think we have dishonest people
among us, if we could avoid such a conclusion.
On Sunday last, some excitement was occasioned by a
culprit being brought before Captain Brown, accused of
stealing a watch. The evidence went to shew, that, the
watch having been missed, a search was instituted, and it
was found in the bed of the accused. He asserted that he
knew nothing about it; that he had not been in his berth
for a considerable time, and that many had access to his
bed, as well as himself.
The general impression seems to be that he is innocent,
and we are glad of it, as he is an honest-looking fellow;
and as some practical joking had been going on between
him and some of his neighbours, the thing may be accounted
for in that way.
On Monday, an investigation into the whole matter was
commenced. A gentleman, who does not wish his name
mentioned, as he has often appeared in our pages before,
might have been seen seated upon an inverted bucket and
with an empty cask before him, which he used as a desk.
He was surrounded by a group of witnesses, and highly
interested spectators, and seemed busily engaged in hearing
evidence of which he took voluminous notes.
We are sony to record that his disinterested efforts in the
cause of justice were not appreciated as they ought to have
been. A party in the background seemed disposed to cast
ridicule upon the enquiry, and even proceeded to lengths
which we consider quite unjustifiable. Under the circum-
stances, and in the midst of such a promiscuous assembly,
we think little deviations from strict etiquette might be over-
looked ; but when it comes to the pelting the president of
the court in the face with rice, we think it high time for
the college of justice to disperse, as it accordingly did, with
some strong expressions of indignation.
NAUTICAL PHENOMENA.
The shark is of course the event of the week, but he will
be found in a comer by himself.
For some days past we have had the company of flocks of
birds. A large handsome black bird first made its appear-
ance, and hovered about the wake of the ship, picking up
whatever was to be found. The sailors call it the Cape hen.
On Thursday a few Cape pigeons joined us, and yesterday
we had quite a flock of them in close attendance upon us.
The latter is a beautiful little bird, white in the belly, and
the under side of the wings, and ribbed black and white on
the back. It is about the size of the common pigeon, but
much longer in the wing. We would be happy to give the
scientific names of those birds, but cannot find any one who
knows.
A solitary albatross was also seen, but did not accompany
us on our course, like the others.
There has been some very fair rifle practice at our visitors,
but as yet no bad luck has been earned for the ship. We
have not yet killed the albatross. Lines have also been
kept constantly floating over the stem, in the hope of catch-
ing them upon hooks; but these Cape-uns are not such gulls
as to swallow the bait.
CATCHING A SHARK.
On Wednesday morning a shark was caught measuring
eight feet eight inches in length.
The catching of a shark upon a hook baited with a piece
of salted pork; its flapping its tail convulsively upon the
deck to the great terror of the passengers, and its being ul-
timately killed by the second mate with a hatchet, is such a
common event, that we never read an account of a voyage in
which it did not occur, and that exactly in the way it hap-
pened with us.
The description might have been written weeks ago, and
kept ready for use; in that case it would certainly have
been incorrect in one particular; but our poetical con-
tributor has managed that matter so well, that we need not
further allude to it.
The interesting young creature, thus cut off (or cut up)
in its infancy (for it seems it had not shed its foal’s teeth),
had two pilot-fish in his suite; and a gentleman of,we fear a
very unsentimental, nature, treacherously endeavoured to
catch them with a bait cut from their deceased patron’s eye-
brow. However much they may have been attached to the
shark, they did not seem to like him to eat, and we are glad
to say they did not bite; unlike parasites in general, they
did not desert their protector immediately on his getting
into misfortune, but followed the ship for a considerable
time, from which we may conclude they are very foolish fish.
DIVINE SERVICE
■Will be performed to-morrow, at the usual place, at 11 a.m. and 4.15 r.M.


ORIGINAL POETRY.
One mom this week, as I lay sleeping,
And dreaming of an early happy meeting,
Methought I heard a cry,—and nark!
It fills the ship,—“ A shark I A shark I”
One moment saw me out of bed;
Another, I was dressed, and sped
Like lightning through the two saloons,
Upsetting stewards, cups and spoons.
On deck, I learned with much delight
That Mr. Shark bad ta’en a bite
Of salted pork (though all uncooked),
And Captain Brown had got him hooked.
These facts I had in half a second,
But on his length I bad not reckoned.
Until his lordship came on deck—
For him a most unlucky spec.
On every side an eager crowd
Were gathered round, to see him towed
O’er the ship’s side, when who e’er saw.
A fish come out with such eclat.
By dint of ropes and twenty sailors,
Up, up he comes, amidst the gazers;
When there arose a deafening cheer,
“ Hurrah, hurrah, the shark Is here 1”
With wonder all looked on the monster,
Who, eight feet eight, was yet a youngster.
And fancied we should not admire
A close encounter with his sire.
And, now, one fact I must admit, —
Readers, I know you’ll wonder at it, —
Our gallant friend, our Captain Eyre,
Was sought in vain —he was not there.
Where can he be? what can he ail?
Sure, sure we are his health must fail ;
Were questions asked on every side,
But all in vain, no one replied.
Soon Mr. Tallman came in sight,
And called aloud, “ Our friend’s all right,
And begs you will not be distressed;
The fish must wait until he’s dressed.
But Jack, too eager for his prey.
Would not consent to this delay;
And ere the captain’s face appeared
The shark had well nigh disappeared.
In vain we asked an explanation
Of that which which caused such consternation,
The captain’s absence —'twos most mysterious.
It certainly was something serious.
But sometimes ignorance is bliss,
And e’en in such a case as this
Perhaps ’twere folly to be wise,
And better left to mere surmise.
White Star, June Bth, 1855.
NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.
X.—Your lines have been considered, and though there are undoubted
indications of talent in them, they are hardly up to our mark. The follow-
ing couplets we consider pretty fair:
“ The lightning flashed, the rain in torrents fell,
The ’tween-deck passengers bad all to stay below,
And tumble over stools and chairs pell mell,
Even our bold chanticleer forgot to crow.”
Borne was not built in a day, and mastery over the art of versification is
not to be got without some labour. We hope to bear from you again.
P.P. —Tour rhyme and rhythm are neither of them perfect; as for
instance:—
“ Beside the booby-hatch he stood,
Gazing upon the angry flood,
And troubled waters—
When past came one he oft before had met.
Hunger in his eye, and in his hand a net.
Going to wash his ‘ taters.’ ”
Do not be discouraged by your first failure.
Emma, in the first intermediate, has received a good deal of attention
from a young man in the second, and applies to us for advice. Emma would
like to maintain her gentility, and mate in her own rank of life, but has ob-
viously a feeling in favour of the bold youth, who has presumed so far, or
she would not ask the advise of anyone. Our opinion is, that if her suitor
is sober, industrious, well-principled, of a suitable age and moderately
well-looking, Emma should overlook the difference of £2 10s. in
their social position We think it would be a pity for a well-con-
ducted young man to be driven to despair for the trifling matter of fifty
shillings.
Wilhelmina.— We are not aware of any gentleman of title being on
board in disguise. There is a young man, we believe, who abandoned rank
to try his fortune in the colony. We believe it was the cab-rank.
Peter.—Yes, of course: how can you ask ?
CORRESPONDENCE.
Mb. Editor, —In your last number you make an appeal to
the public to take pen in hand and write contributions for
your columns. In the same number are replies to a great
many communications which appear to have been addressed
to you; and, judging from those replies, the letters them-
selves would seem to have been veiy mysterious and inte-
resting. Why not publish some of them ? lam sure they
would be very amusing, and a decided improvement upon
some of the matter you admit.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
CONSTANT READER.
White Star, June Bth, 1855.
To the Editor of the White Stab Journal.
Sib, —The ladies in the saloon think it quite useless
writing any more articles for the White Star Journal, see-
ing they are never removed from the bag until removed by
the writers themselves.
Saloon, Saturday, 2nd June, 1855.
[The above communications have reached us, and re-
quire a word in explanation.
In the first place, the Editor’s bag was unfilled so late as
five o’clock on the eve of publishing day, and communica-
tions received after that time can hardly receive proper con-
sideration.
In reply to “ Constant Header,” we beg to state that the
communications to which replies are given are not of a na-
ture suited to our columns or we would endeavour to find
space for them. As may be gathered from the answers,the
subjects are of such a private and personal nature, in most
cases, as to render them scarcely fit for publication. We
are, besides, anxious that everyone in trouble or in doubt
should apply to us for advice; and this we could not ex-
pect did we not hold everyone’s confidence sacred.—En.J
Dear Mr. Editor, —I am naturally of an amiable and
contented disposition, hearing patiently anything which
can possibly be endured; but there is one evil which I
have encountered, and which has now reached a pitch quite
beyond endurance, and of which not only I, but many of
my companions, complain bitterly,—this is, the total want
of truthfulness of some of the gentlemen on board. There
is one in particular, on whose approach every lady is obliged
to put on a complete armour of mistrust, and is kept in a
perfect fever of excitement endeavouring to discover what
she may believe, and what reject with contempt.
Yet sometimes the consequences of this evil propensity
fall with heaviness upon his own head. One instance, in
particular, I may mention. In this case he had sent a
bottle of water to be filtered, which, as the filter was empty,
could not, of course, be returned. When he found this, he
actually tried to persuade two ladies that he had intended
the water for them. Some days after, the steward returned


ADVERTISEMENTS.
WANTED, a pair of Dice. If any person has a pair to dispose of, he
will hear ot a purchaser by applying at the office of this paper.
Perhaps some handy person would make a pair. He will be supplied with
bone for the purpose, or he can use his own bones.
LOST a Knife, with three handles and a brown buck-horn blade; also,
a black Ink-bottle with green ink. Any person finding the above, or
either of them, is requested to return them to Mr. Thrower,
ANTED, a Chest or Box Lock and Key, Apply to Captain Eyre.
ANTED, for the use of this office, a quantity of Foolscap Paper,
WANTED, a Hairdresser. A tolerable hand will do, and no questions
asked. Apply at our office..
w ANTED, a few pots of Honey or Marmalade. Apply at this office.
THE LOG.
Saturday, June '2nd.—A.M. moderate breezes and fine weather. Noon,
lat. 21 ° 47’ S., long. 35° 15’ W. Distance, 177 miles, p.m. fresh breezes
and cloudy weather.
Sunday, 3rd.—a.m. fresh breezes from N.E. Cloudy. Noon, lat. 25 ° 14’
S., long. 33 ° 10’W. Distance, 232. p.m. moderate winds and clear.
Monday, 4th.— a.m. moderate breezes, and squally weather, with rain.
Noon, lat. 27 3 56’ S., long. 30 ° 48’ W. Distance, 204. p.m. moderate
and variable winds.
Tuesday, 6th.— a.m. light breezes from N.W., with squalls and rain.
Noon, lat. 29 ° 56’, long. 28 ° 55’ W. Distance, 162. p.m. fresh breezes
from N.W.
Wednesday, Gth.— a.m. light winds and calms for seven hours. Noon,
obscure. Distance, 100. At noon commenced to rain.
Thursday, 7th— a.m. fresh, breezes and rainy weather. Wind, N.N.E.
Obscure. Long. 25 ° 38‘ W. Distance, 202. p.m. strong breezes.
Friday , Bth. —a.m. moderate breezes and thick foggy weather. At noon
cleared off. Lat. 35 ° 34* S., long. 22 ° 09’ \V. Distance, 200. p.m. mode-
rate breezes and rain.
him the water in the presence of the ladies, who immedi-
ately claimed it, and he was obliged to yield it, although he
did so with feelings which brought tears to his eyes. The
reason, Dear Sir, why I trouble you with remarks on this
subject is, that I may be able to request you to write an
essay on the subject of truthfulness in your next paper,
which will make this offender blush, and convince all your
readers of the impropriety of deceiving anyone, but particu-
larly ladies.
VERITY.
[Such a wide field of speculation is opened up by your
letter, that we must postpone our remarks upon it till next
week, and leave it, in the meantime, to produce what effect
it may upon public opinion.
The whole question of truth and falsehood will require
to be considered, as well as the character of the gentleman
in question, and the effect produced on water by a sponge-
filter. Is the allusion to the water-bottle literal or allego-
rical?—Ed.]
White Star Journal.
No. B.] SATURDAY, JUNE 16, 1855.
We regret that our appearance this week has been so long
delayed. The state of the lower deck, wet, dark, and com-
fortless, renders it hardly possible to write there. This,
and other matters which need not be more distinctly
alluded to, we must request our readers to accept as an
explanation. For the future we will endeavour to be very
punctual.
Truth and falsehood are separated from each other by a
line clear and well defined. There is a gulf between them
wide as the Atlantic Ocean, and none of us are inclined, at
present, to underrate its extent.
The man who, in a bargain, states more or less than the
truth, is a swindler; he who denies or equivocates, in order
to escape the consequences of his actions, is a coward ; and
he who maliciously invents tales to the injury of his neigh-
bour, is a villain.
The boaster, who exaggerates and romances about his
pedigree, his possessions, or his achievements, is, if not so
great a rogue as the others, a much greater fool; for he
incurs the penalty, and misses his aim, being invariably
set down by the discriminating at his proper value.
But if there is one species of falsehood which more than
any other has been singled out, and justly, for reprobation,
it is perfidy to the female sex ; and we are sorry that our
correspondent “Verity,” who gives herself so good a charac-
ter, has discovered that there is such a deceiver on board.
There is no mistaking the person pointed at; and, as we
think that, with all his faults, he means well, we should
like, if possible, to put him in the way of clearing himself.
We think that having stated our own views so clearly
above, we may give his defence without any risk of being
misunderstood, and beg to express a hope that Madame
Verity, who is of such a contented disposition, and her
friends, will give what he has to say for himself at least a
favorable consideration.
He says, that, however clear may be the line betwen truth
and untruth in general, there are cases in which they so
closely border on each other, that, like the animal and vege-
table creations, it is difficult to tell where one ends and the
otherbegins. Hesays that fontelling the truth sometimes a man
deserves to be whipped, while there are some falsehoods so
happy in their effects, and proceeding from motives so
amiable, that, as some writer observes, when the accusing
angel flies up to heaven and gives them in, the recording
angel wipes the entry out again with a tear.
He says, that falsehood consists in the intention to deceive,
and that a little touch added here and there to heighten the
effect of a story, is surely admissible in a man making no
great pretensions, when grave moralists think themselves
justified in giving to the world whole volumes of pure fic-
tion to enforce truthfulness or temperance, or even the
lesser virtues—punctuality or order.
He says, that the exaggerations in which he sometimes
indulges, being gross, open, palpable, can deceive nobody,
and consequently are no falsehoods at all.
With regard to the most serious count in the indictment,
viz., that he has deceived ladies, we can awaken in him not
the least penitence. He says, that before a man can de-
ceive he must be trusted, and to be twice trusted is twice as
much happiness as usually falls to the lot of man.
The allegory about the bottle of water we can make
nothing of. Truth is said to dwell in the bottom of a well,
and it is also said to come out of the bottle; —but certainly
not the water bottle.
If our correspondent, who is of such an amiable disposi-
tion, will again favor us by pointing in what direction our
mimic thunder should be directed, we promise her the
offender shall catch it.
DISASTERS AT SEA.
When we commenced this voyage and newspaper, we
expected that our narrative would be chequered by disasters
at sea; or, at least, what to landsmen would appear such.
Our first seven numbers (a considerable proportion of the
entire series of ten or twelve) had appeared, and, nothing had
Published by H. Davy, at his office, No. 99 ’tween Decks.


been recorded but fine weather and calms, or calm weather
and fine, for a variety.
We were beginning to think that our history would be
sadly deficient in incident, until the events of the past week
occurred, and gave us something to record.
While on the subject of disasters, we may mention one or
two little things that occurred before, and were not con-
sidered at the time important enough to be noticed.
First we had a jib-sheet carried away, and again, during a
temporary strong wind one night in the middle watch, the
main-tack gave way, and the flapping of the clew of the sail
upon the house on deck caused some alarm to the passen-
gers who live there, unaccustomed as they had been to any-
thing breaking in upon the stillness of the night. The
loss of the dolphin-striker will complete the list of our losses
up to the past week, which supplies a fuller chapter of
accidents.
On Tuesday night, there being at the time a strong wind
and a heavy sea running, a wave broke over the ship’s stem,
and the saloon door on the weather side having been left
open, a considerable portion of the Atlantic Ocean found its
way into the saloon.
We were all awoke by the unusual noise of a mass of water
washing across the cabin floors, and lashing against the
bulkheads as the ship rolled, and, upon getting up, found
ourselves nearly up to the ankles in water. A very strange
scene then presented itself; ladies and gentlemen were to
be seen flying about in various stages of dress or undress,
and uttering their complaints and their fears in many dif-
ferent keys.
After ascertaining that there was no danger, most of us
turned to and removed our property out of the reach of
injury, and then assisted the stewards and crew in baling
out the water with cups, saucers, or whatever came to hand;
and, some say, with sponges and salt-spoons.
On Wednesday evening the party in the saloon were
startled when at tea by a violent concussion upon the poop
deck overhead; it proved to have been occasioned by the
spanker-boom and gaff coming down, the chain peak tye
having given way.
At the same time were heard a succession of loud claps,
like the reverberation of not very distant thunder. We
soon discovered that the main-sheet was carried away, and
the sail thus let loose, played some wild antics before it
could be secured again. Like a giant unbound, it was
bent upon showing its power; but by means of clewlines,
buntlines and leach-lines, it was soon subdued and furled.
The ship was now under her three topsails, topgallant
sails, fore-course, and fore-topmast staysail, and going
along at a capital rate. At about ten the mainsail was
again let fall and set.
Soon after our retiring for the night, and before falling
asleep, something was heard to fall with great violence
upon the poop, and upon getting out upon the quarter-
deck, a scene of great confusion presented itself. The
wind had risen to a strong gale ; the sea was running
high, rain was falling rapidly, and it was as dark as
it well could be. This being the state of the weather,
nautical men will realise our condition in a moment,
when we say that the main-yard was carried away, broken
right short off near the slings; but to the non-professional
it will be necessary to explain that the yard carried away
is the principal transverse spar in the ship, upwards of 90
feet long, and that upon it are extended the two principal
sails, viz.; the head of the main-course, and the foot of the
main topsail.
These two immense sheets of canvass were of course in a
very queer condition, and had to remain so for some time;
for, before giving them attention it was necessary to reef
the fore-topsail. In the morning the mainmast looked very
odd, without a stitch of cloth upon it, and fortunately we
had a good strong breeze of fair wind, or we would have
missed it sadly.
A number of hands were to be seen busily engaged in
preparing a new yard for being sent aloft, and the injured
sails were on the poop under the hands of the sailmaker.
Towards the afternoon a new main-topsail was set, the
clews being confined by sheets leading down upon deck.
At night the wind again increased to a strong gale with
occasionally heavy squalls, and it was found necessary to
shorten sail considerably. In consequence of the absence
of the yard some difficulty was experienced in taking in the
main-topsail, and we are sorry to say it was not secured
without sustaining some injury. We have, then, two crip-
pled topsails, and one main-course ; and yesterday, the wind
being high, it was rather aggravating to see the canvass that
ought to be winging us upon our way stretched upon the
poop.
The yard is now nearly ready for going up, and we have
no doubt by to-morrow night we shall be all ataunto again.
It is said, that for want of a horseshoe nail the man was
lost, and for want of a sound hook in the starboard main-
brace block, our main-yard was lost, but without, we are glad
to say, any injury to life or limb.
THE WEATHER.
We have not left ourselves much to say on this subject.
As may be gathered from the above, we have had during the
week a good deal of high wind, and, in addition, it has
rained more or less every day, but generally more. This
and the cold, together with the extremely slippery condition
of the decks, have kept nearly everyone under cover. Be-
tween fresh and salt water the deck has been kept always wet,
and everyone has experienced the greatest difficulty in
maintaining the perpendicular.
If the reader can imagine a sheet of perfectly smooth ice,
undulating in every direction, and people helplessly sprawling
about on it, he may understand our case. As was to be
expected, many heavy falls have been sustained, and some
have received hurts of which they have not yet ceased to
feel the effects.
PUBLIC WORSHIP.
Last Sunday morning Divine service was celebrated upon
the poop, the main deck being too wet to admit of our as-
sembling there. There was a good deal of motion at the,
time, and the worshippers could only retain .their places by
keeping a firm hold. In the evening, the weather having
moderated a little, we met in the usual place, and consider-
ing the circumstances, there was a pretty good muster.
Everything proceeded pleasantly till the concluding
hymn was being sung, when the ship lurched violently to
starboard, and precipitated the congregation into the scup-
pers.
A file of ladies were ranged against the front of the poop,
Mrs. A. holding on by Miss 8., who in her turn held on
by Mrs. C., &c., up to Mrs. F., who was supposed to be
holding on by the handle of the cuddy door. When the
emergency occurred it was found that she had ceased to
hold on, lulled into a false security by the ship treacher-
ously remaining still for a few minutes:—the result may
be imagined. We cannot sufficiently praise the fortitude
of one gentleman. He was singing at the time, and he
rolled into the lee scuppers, picked himself up, and re-
turned to his place without even missing a note of the
tune.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
LOST from the Saloon or Poop, a red, black and green plaid; it is sup-
posed some one has it by mistake. If found, please return it to Mr.
Marker.
THE LOG.
Saturday, June 9th. —a.m. light winds from S.W. with a heavy swell.
Noon, lat. 87 ° 08’ S., long. 18® 33’ W. Distance 197 miles, p.m. fresh
breezes and cloudy weather.
Sunday, 10.—a.m. fresh breezes from N.W., heavy rain and very heavy
swell. Noon, lat. 38° 38’ S., long. 16® 02’ W. Distance 174 miles.
f.m. fresh breezes and hazy weather.
Monday, 11.— a.m. strong winds and squally, with rain; wind west.
Noon, obscure. Distance 218 miles, p.m. strong breezes and dark cloudy
weather.
Tuesday, 12.—A.M. squally weather; wind\V.N.W. Noon, lat. 40 ® 60’ S.,
long. GO ® W. Distance 251 miles.
Wednesday, 13.—A.M. strong breezes from W.N.W., lat. 40° 49’ S., long.
00 ° 47’ W, Distance 240 miles, p.m. fresh gale and squally.
Thursday, 14.— a.m. light breezes from N. by W. Noon, fat. 41 ° 46’ S.
long. 04° 07’E. Distance 214 miles, p.m. fresh breezes.
Friday, 15.— A M. light breezes and cloudy with a heavy swell. Noon,
lat. 42 ° 51’ S., long. 09 ° 9’ E. Distance 249 miles, p.m. fresh breezes
and cloudy weather.
AMUSEMENTS.
Since last we gave any information on the subject, a complete revolution
has taken place. Then dancing was the principal feature, and that exer-
cise was persisted in till long after we, who were spectators, had ceased to
wonder what pleasure the performers could possibly find in it, so unfavor-
able were the circumstances. A wet and slippery deck, sometimes in an
horizontal position, but not often, and the darkness of the night rendered
visible by a single lantern, did not offer a very tempting arena; but in
spite of every difficulty, waltz, schottische, polka, country-dance, and quad-
rille went on vigorously. Sometimes the different couples might be seen
advancing upon each other, under the influence of a heavy lurch of the
ship, with a velocity which threatened a violent concussion, or “ turning
partners ” fairly over into the scuppers.
There is a large tank by the pantry-door, used for washing dishes In, and
one evening a gentleman chassed his partner right into it, filled, as it was
at the time, with greasy water.
These, and such mishaps, rendered it necessary at least to look for some
other kind of amusement, and it has been found in a great variety of games
From the first, and during the fine weather, a partv of gentlemen, upon
the poop and elsewhere, were faithful in their devotions to dominoes, and
from morning to night, and nearly from every morning till every nighh
they might be seen indulging in this innocent amusement, wherever a scrap
of shade was to be had. Backgammon, draughts, fox-and-geese, and occa-
sionally whist might also be seen, but only in the easy, indifferent way in
which everything was done, with the temperaiure at ever so much in the
shade.
Now, however, the case is different. We have long winter evenings to
dispose of, and the above exercises have been seriously engaged in, with the
addition of cribbage, all-fours, keep, and a variety of round games to in-
clude the ladies. Hor have sports of a more intellectual nature been
wanting. “Consequences,” “ What is my thought like,” twenty questions,
“How, when, and where,” “Cross questions and crooked answers,” have
gone merrily round, giving all an opportunity of displaying their wit and
vivacity.
There was one evening in particular, which will live long in our me-
mories. Some of our young gentlemen being laid up with measles, and
Master Thrower being the only one left, he was permitted to join us in our
sports. Thus encouraged and being relieved by the absence of the other
youths, who perhaps keep him down a little, he became excessively enter-
taining, and plied us with a succession of amusing anecdotes, interspersed
with riddles, conundrums, anagrams and rebuses, in such a way as to keep
our wits alive during the whole evening. Some of his riddles, indeed, were
of a nature so recondite, as to seem more mysterious after we heard the ex-
planation than before; but for all that, we "were all highly delighted, and
hope, before we part, to have another “night with Thrower.”
So much for the saloon. In other parts of the ship a similar change has
taken place ; but of course the same degree of refinement could not be ex-
pected to characterise the amusements.
In the house-on-deck card playing and singing, and between-decks an
excessively ungenteel game called “ turning the trencher,” have been
mentioned to us.
This, and such like sports, have not, of course, the elevating tendency of
our elegant recreations in the west-end of the ship, and are not so calculated
to raise men in the scale of thinking beings; but we should remember dif-
ferent appetites crave different kinds of food, and that even “hunt the
slipper,” if engaged in with a spirit of courtesy and love for our fellow man,
may assist in passing agreeably a few of the tedious hours of a long voyage
without permanently injuring the mind.
Our band has been silent for some time, the instruments, we suppose,
being incommoded by the rolling of the ship.
DIVINE SERVICE
Will be celebrated in tbe saloon to-morrow at 11 a.m., and in the ’tween-
decks at 4"30 p.m.
ORIGINAL POETRY.
LINES ON LEAVING MY BIRTHPLACE.
John, hi., 7.
My birthplace! Oh, I love thee well,
More than my feeble tongue can tell;
And let me go where’er I may,
My thoughts to thee will often stray;
And ever on each Sabbath morn
I’ll pray for where my soul was born.
I love the church, the old grey tower;
They apeak of many a peaceful hour
Within those sacred walls I’ve passed.
Mem’ry, I charge thee hold them fast; "
And ever on the Sabbath morn
Go pray for where thy soul was born.
I love the country village street,
Secluded quite, a calm retreat;
The world seems hidden from our view—
And well I know a chosen few
Hail with delight each Sabbath mom
In this sweet spot where I was bom.
I speak not of my mortal birth;
That were a thing of little worth;
It matters not where first I came
Into this world of sin and pain;
But here I know my soul was bom—
I’ll pray for thee each Sabbath morn.
The old church bells I love to hear,
Though forth they bring the starting tear;
Their changeful note borne on the wind
Speaks of the friends I leave behind;
But oh, I trust each Sabbath morn
They’ll pray for one who here was bom.
The graveyard, with its grassy mound,
And tombstones scattered thickly round,
Speaks to my soul, and seems to say—
“ Go work while yet ’tis called to-day,”
Lest on the resurrection mom
Thou art not found with those new-bom.
I love my simple dwelling, too.
Though to a stranger’s passing view
’Tis but a mean and simple cot.
But oh, ’twill never be forgot,
For here I heard, each Sabbath day.
The invitation, “ Come and pray.”
Mem’ry would linger yet awhile
Around that venerable pile—
The house of God—and oh, I trust,
When I’m committed to the dust,
Those old church-bells, some Sabbath morn.
May toll for one who here was born.
White Star.
April, 1855,
NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS,
The promised book has come to hand, and will receive our best attention
in an early number.
Y. Z.—Your communication -will be inserted next week. We have some-
thing to say in reply, and as there is not room to insert both this week, we
think it as well to keep back the letter, which we hope you will excuse.
We may say, in the meantime, that some of your remarks evince great
good sense and acuteness.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Dear Editor, —I perceive that in your last number, the
advertisement of my knife was stated wrong, which made
everybody that read it laugh.
CORRECTION.
Lost a knife with three blades and a buckliom handle;
any body finding the knife and bringing it to Master
Thrower, before saloon, shall be rewarded of his trouble.
Believe me to remain, your’s truly,
W. C. THROWER.
Published by 11. Davy, at No. 90 ’tween Decks.


White Star Journal.
No. 9.] SATURDAY, JUNE 23, 1855.
We are now well advanced upon the last stage of our
journey, running along under topsails and topgallant sails,
before a fine strong westerly wind, which, if nothing unfore-
seen occurs, will carry us into port. Already we are begin-
ning to count the days till we get on shore; and we suppose
three more numbers of this great illuminator will end the
series.
With the prospect of our dissolution before our eyes, we
would say a word about our rise and progress.
A few days before sailing, the present writer suggested to
Captain Brown that a printing press should be procured,
with a view to publishing a newspaper during the voyage.
He quite entered into the scheme, and proposed it to the
owners, Messrs. Pilkington and Wilson, who promised to
procure a press, and put it on board. On the Thurday
morning previous to our sailing, we were told by Mr. Wilson
that they had not succeeded in procuring a press, and that
when the thing was first proposed, it was already too late to
send for one. Still unwilling to give up, we preceded on
board the ship and exhibited in various parts an invitation
to compositors, if any were on board, to come forward,
hoping if any were among the passengers, to he able even
then to procure a press and types, but none appeared, and
we were obliged to abandon all thoughts of a paper.
A few days after sailing, Captain Brown urged us still
to attempt it, and proposed that we should follow the me-
thod adopted, under similar circumstances on board the
Eagle, viz.:—to publish in manuscript, and have the whole
printed after reaching Melbourne, in order that each pas-
senger might obtain as many copies of the complete set as he
required, either to keep as a record of the voyage, or send
to his friends.
We accordingly set to work, partly to please Captain
Brown, and partly to please ourselves, hut principally that
its perusal at some future date might afford pleasure to two
young persons at home, who, when they read this, will know
what it means; and on the first Saturday morning after
leaving Liverpool, being then seven clear days out,
our publication commenced, and it has gone on steadily
since.
We have something to say about the difficulties besetting
our position, as Editor on board ship, but will keep it for
our valedictory address, when, with a little compliment to
ourselves, and a great deal to our readers, we will make our
bow and exit. In the meantime, we would remind the in-
telligent public on board the White Star, that if this paper
is to be printed, some arrangement will require to he made
for the purpose before we separate. One or two little things
deserving of notice have been overlooked ; but in the two or
three numbers yet to come, we will hark hack, and take
them in as naturally as possible, so that when the series
is complete, it will present a pretty fair history of the
voyage.
THE MAIN-YARD.
On Sunday last, early in the afternoon, the mainyard
began to go up. An immense tackle was rigged for the
purpose, and being hooked on to the middle of the spar,
and the fall passed round both the quarter-deck capstans, it
was steadily walked up by a forty-passenger power. Quar-
ter tackles and guys restrained it in every direction in which
it should not go; but as it was necessary (to prevent its
coming in contact with boats, rigging, &c.) that.it should be
kept nearly on end till it had reached the proper altitude,
some intelligent observers were heard to wonder how the
drooping end would be got up; but this riddle was soon
solved, for as the one end was lowered, the other as quickly
rose, until the yard made right angles with the mast. Be-
fore nightfall the maincourse and maintopsail had been
bent and set, and the White Star was once more a full-
rigged ship.
BENEVOLENCE.
The ladies of the Female Emigration Society, in the
exercise of the very benevolent task which they have set
themselves, put on board the ship a large quantity of use-
ful articles (accompanied by the note we give below) for
distribution among the passengers.
The gift has proved most acceptable, and could not have
been better administered if a committee of the society had
accompanied it for the purpose. If there is anything for
which the daughters of England are more distinguished,
than beauty and genius, it is the ardour with which they
throw themselves into societies, and project their goodness
to the uttermost parts of the earth
But there is one thing more beautiful still than universal
benevolence, viz., particular benevolence; and one lady on
board, whose name we should like to mention, did we not
fear to alarm her modesty, has spent a great part of every
day in little offices of kindness to the poorer among the
passengers. She is, consequently, well acquainted with the
necessities in every case, and Captain Brown having wisely
availed himself of her assistance in distributing the various
articles, we, very reasonably, conclude that the munificence
of the Society has, in this case, produced the maximum
amount of comfort.
On Thursday there was a grand issue of hags to single
women. We inquired of a lady what they contained, and
received a list, which covers the hack of an old envelope.
It comprises all the implements of female industry, with
some materials to exercise them upon; and in each bag
there was a New Testament.
We cannot conclude this notice without calling particular
attention to the great forethought which the ladies of the
Female Emigration Society have exercised in their collec-
tion. All the epochs of life have been kept in view, and
every contingency provided against, in a way which reflects
great credit on their goodness of heart, and evinces great
skill and management.
“ To the Captain of the White Star.
“ The ladies of the Female Emigration Society send on
board the White Star a parcel, containing a hospital bag
for the use of invalids, and a number of workbags, to be
distributed by the captain amongst those female emigrants
whom the captain thinks most likely to make a good use of
them. The ladies would feel obliged to the captain, if, on
his return, he would let them know if their donation was
valued by the emigrants.
“Prince’s Dock, Liverpool, April 12th, 1855.”
NAUTICAL PHENOMENA.
Great rolling seas; long-backed seas; white-crested seas;
albatrosses ; Cape pigeons ; porpoises of a beautifully
speckled description, and little floating islands of sea weed.
The gentleman who did the nautical phenomena for us
is, we regret to say, in bad health at present, and
unequal to any work. Above are the materials, and
every reader may season to taste, and serve in the way he
likes best.


THE LIBRARY.
We are glad to observe that the privilege of using the
books in the library has been very generally taken advan-
tage of.
During the fine weather, when reading on deck was prac-
ticable, great numbers might be seen in the hands of the
passengers, conspicuous as most of them are from their blue
covers.
On Mondays and Thursdays, the giving-out-days, there
is quite a bustle about the saloon door, especially during
the last half of the hour appointed.
Miss Constardine deserves great praise for the trouble
she has taken as librarian. Unless some one had been
found to undertake the duties, the use of the books must
have been confined to the saloon passengers, which would
have been a great pity; and she has not only performed the
duties, but she has done so with so much alacrity and good
humor, and with such an evident desire to please, that we
are sure everyone must have felt it a pleasure to apply
for a book. We have also frequently observed Mr. Perot
assisting when a press occurred.
THE WEATHER.
During the week, the weather has been changeable and
unpleasant. The ship has appeared under every aspect,
from close-hauled, under double-reefed top-sails, to right
before the wind, with studding-sails a-low and aloft on both
sides.
There has been a good deal of heavy rain, some snow,
and during nearly every day a very heavy sea running. The
consequence has been that the deck has been constantly
wet, rendering it both unpleasant and unsafe to walk much;
so we have nearly all remained below.
As in the previous week, some severe falls have been
sustained; but we think that, except Mr. Ford’s case, no
serious injury has been received. He was thrown down
with great violence, on Thursday evening, by a heavy sea
which struck the ship amidships ; and a ladder falling on
his leg, we are sorry to say it was fractured above the
ancle.
He was carried into the house-on-deck, and Dr. Walker
being immediately in attendance, the leg was set, and the
patient removed to the hospital, where, we are happy to say,
he is recovering.
Great sympathy has been expressed for Mr. Ford and his
family ; and we hope the use of his leg will be restored be-
fore we reach Melbourne, if it be possible, without our
voyage being protracted.
DIVINE SERVICE
Will be celebrated to-morrow, at eleven a.m. in the saloon, and at six p.ra.
between-decks. The fore saloon will be reserved for those who attend from
other parts of the ship.
DOMESTIC OCCURRENCES.
BIRTHS.
On Saturday, the 9th instant, at 93 ’tween-decks, the wife of Mr. Frogley,
of a daughter.
DEATHS.
On Friday, the 22nd instant, at 81 ’tween-decks, Emily, the daughter of
Richard Baker, aged 5 years and 25 days.
ORIGINAL POETRY.
“ They were strangers and pilgrims in the earth.” —Hebrews, xi. 13.
A pilgrim, Lord, I am,
Bound for a home above;
Guide me through every dangerous path,
Thou God of Love!
Thy presence I implore,
In even- step I take;
Let thy good Spirit be with me,
For Jesu’s sake.
A traveller, Lord, I am,
With little strength to light;
Through this dark, howling wilderness.
Oh give me light!
To Thee for help 1 flee.
Do Thou my fears allay;
Let me not murmur or repine,—
God chose the way.
A stranger, Lord, I am,
Sojourning here in fear;
Oft trembling, as I try to keep
A conscience clear.
Sin cleaves to all I do,
My holiest things not pure j
How shall 1 then before Thee stand—
Thy wrath endure ?
A robe of righteousness
My Saviour has prepared.
Washed and made white in his own blood,
“ For me He cared I”
No longer can I fear,
My Saviour intercedes j
I’ll on my way rejoicing go,
For Jesus pleads 1
White Star.
TO MY SISTER.
Oh sister dear, I cannot sleep,
The waves rise mountains high;
Our noble ship perchance may sink.
And I’m not fit to die.
For years I’ve made a mock at sin,
And trifled with the word;
And thought, perhaps, when I grew old,
I then would seek the Lord.
I thought that you, my sister dear,
Were cold, unkind, severe;
For often when I loudest laughed,
You could not hide a tear.
I could not tell why you should grieve,
To see me happy,—gay;
While all around looked on and smiled.
And called me “Lovely May.”
But now, too late, I see it all,
Heaven I cannot win;
I chose the world —and now receive
The wages of my sin.
A fearful dread o’erwhelms me now, —
Sister, I dare not die:
Pray, pray for me —you have a God
On whom you can rely.
Dear sister May, I hear the storm,
I see the lightning flash,
And ever and anon the waves
Against my window dash.
But still I cannot feel alarm;
Jesus, the crucified,
Whispers in every hour of need, —
“ Sinner, for thee I died.”
Again, He says “Be of good cheer,”
“’Tis I, be not afraid;
Earth is my footstool, Heaven my throne,
The boundless sea I made.”
And what, dear May, if we should sleep
Beneath the rippling waves;
Shall we not rise as soon as they
. Who rest in English graves?


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.
M.A. says that the defence put forth in the latter part of our opening
article last week is not logical. Of course not, who ever thinks of being
logical where ladies are concerned. M. A. will please remember that we
are not accountable for the reasoning which she finds so inconclusive.
L. L. L. sends us some verses of a tragic and soul-harrowing description,
entitled “The Dark Lady of Bermondsey, and the Bloody Bodkin.” They
are of too distressing a nature for our columns; but we .have perused them
with absorbing interest, and we think we can read in them a history of the
gifted author’s own life. Are we wrong in supposing that her first years
were spent in the midst of every luxury, and that, subsequently, she has
been tried in the crucible of affliction until reason tottered on its throne ?
If L. L. L. will search her portfolio for some little piece of a lighter nature,
we shall be happy to insert it.
Inquirer wishes to know if we are in our right course ? Most of us are,
as far as we know, but there are a few in improper courses.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
No advertisements have come in this week; and we have no time to
make any.
THE LOG.
Saturday , June 16th. —a.m. light winds and variable. Noon, obscure.
Distance 190 miles, p.m. weather cloudy, and a heavy swell.
Sunday, 17.— A.M. strong wind from S.W. by W., and thick. Noon, lat.
43® 19’S., long. 15® 20’E. Distance 190 miles, p.m. strong winds.
Monday, 18.—A.M. strong winds from N.E., cloudy weather. Noon,
lat. 44® 46' S., long. 18 ® 37’ E. Distance 174 miles. p.m. strong winds
from E.N.E.
Tuesday, 19 —A.M. squally weather with rain. Noon, lat. 45 ® 56’ S.,
long. 22 = 44’. Distance 198 miles, p.m. strong breozes.
Wednesday, 20.— a.m. fresh breezes from N.W., clear. Noon, lat.
45 ® 39’ S., long. 27 ® 52’ E. Distance 211 miles, p.m. light breezes.
Thursday, 21.— a.m. strong wind from N.W. and squally. Noon, lat.
45 = 09’ S., long. 34 ° 27’ E. Distance 274 miles, p.m. strong breezes and
showers of snow.
Friday, 22.—A.M. strong wind from N.N.W., and heavy swell. Noon,
lat. 45 ® 56’ S., long. 40 ® 55’ E. Distance 277 miles, p.m. strong breezes
and rain.
But, sister dear, ’tis not too late,
Pardon may still be found;
For know ye not that Christ our Lord
In mercy does abound?
He came to seek and save the lost;
He died that we might live;
And well I know He’s willing now
Pardon and peace to give.
Seek Him at once, He’ll not despise
The broken contrite heart;
And e’en in life’s last hour He can
Bid every fear depart.
Go boldly to the throne of grace,
And plead for mercy there;
“ So shall yonr strength be as your day,”
And Christ your sins will bear.
Thus with our feet upon “ the Rock,”
Prepared for life or death;
Let us, dear May, in praising God,
Employ our latest breath.
White Star, June 19th, 1856.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the White Star Journal.
Sir, —Will you allow me, through the medium of your
much valued paper, to give expression to a few thoughts
which have often occurred to me, but have been suppressed
in the hope that similar ones might have suggested them-
selves to some one better able to give utterance to them.
Our friends at home will, I am sure, be delighted to re-
ceive a full and particular account of our voyage, and es-
pecially to have it in a printed form; but to have it filled up
with mere trifles or barefaced personalities would betray a
want of talent, of which the passengers in the White Star
ought not to be accused.
We have amongst us gentlemen who have travelled all
over the world, and how delightful would it be to have a sort
of fireside lecture now and then to hear of their exploits and
of the customs and manners of other nations. Then we have
others, skilled in the “ arts and sciences,” as well as those
who rank amongst the “judges of our land,” who might
give us information, and all these apart from the great sub-
ject which is at all times of vital importance, but especially
so now when we are tossed on the billows, and might by a
single breath from the Almighty be sent into a watery grave
without the least earthly aid, or any but ourselves being
aware of it.
For my own part, I think there is great praise due to our
worthy Editor for the disinterested perseverance he has dis-
played, and trust that some of our friends (now that we have
so little to engage our attention) will think upon these or
any other subject, and furnish a few communications which
shall both please and edify. These, I think, mixed with a
little of the frivolous, would produce a variety which could
not fail to be well received. Should these few remarks be
thought worthy of insertion, you will oblige,
Your’s respectfully,
Y. Z.
[Some of our correspondent’s remarks shew great good
sense, and almost entitle her to the nom-de-plume which she
has assumed; at the same time we can hardly agree with
her in thinking that instruction in the arts and sciences
would be more acceptable to our friends at home
fb(in the details of the trifles which make up the sum of
our existence here. In these days of Atheneums,
institutes, and mutual improvement societies, an excellent
lecture can be had at most places for sixpence, and a valu-
able book borrowed for a penny, and to those resources we
will leave our friends at home. As to fireside lectures, we
have no opinion of them ; they are to single men what cur-
tain lectures are to married men, and rather to be avoided
than otherwise. One day an inoffensive individual tried to
light his pipe at the galley-fire. “ Stand around,” says Mr.
Snowball, “don’t come here bothering;” and that was the
only fireside lecture we have heard on board. We have no
wish to accuse the passengers of wanting talent; on the
contrary, we are of opinion that such a collection of “ pow-
erful minds” never met on board one ship before, and
scarcely a day passes that we do not tell some of our neigh-
bors how clever we think them. The arrival of the White
Star will be quite an epoch in the intellectual histoiy of the
colony. Wisehead suggests that some of our travelled fellow-
passengers should be invited to detail their exploits, but
really we think this too severe. During these long dark
evenings, cold and rainy as they are, it is hardly possible to
stay out of doors ; and if Wisehead’s suggestion were acted
upon, we really fear that many would be driven to commit
some desperate act. Who can it be “ who ranks with the
judges of the land, and is at the same time apart from the
great subject which is at all times of vital importance ?”
We cannot conceive who this can be. There is one gentle-
man on board, who, had he remained at home, expected to
have been included in the next commission of the peace for
a certain county in Ireland; but whether he is apart, «c., we
cannot tell. Another gentleman has in his possession a
copy of Blackstone’s Commentaries; but he says, had he
been a judge of what was good for him, he had never been
here. We had an investigation one day, and the gentleman
conducting it may in some sense be considered a judge;
but, to be sure, he would not be a judge of the land.—
Editor.]
Published by Henry Davy, at his office, No. 99 ’tween-decks.


White Star Journal.
No. 10.] SATURDAY, JUNE 30, 1855.
When we attempted, in one of our earlier numbers, a
review of the population on board the White Star, we al-
luded to one class which we supposed to be numerously
represented, viz.: the entertaining classes, or those who
professionally minister to the amusement of the public.
We are not certain that any artistes from the opera or
ballet are here, and indeed the difficulty there is in getting
reliable information, without making direct enquiries, has
kept us from the subject; but we know that Herr Kohler,
the leader of the orchestra, is among us, and the distant
echo of his practising is often to be heard.
From the boards we have, it is understood, a heavy actor,
—the man who does the “ inexorable creditor and stem
guardian,” a walking gentleman, a man of general utility,
and one ready to undertake the leading legitimate business.
There are two gentlemen of melo-dramatic appearance,
who are also supposed to have smelled the foot-lights, and
to have tasted the joys of being called before the curtain.
They are of a silent and moody nature as becomes them,
and we know nothing of their antecedents ; but if we give
fancy her fling for a moment, they appear in slouched hats
and buff boots, and stride along the deck with a long step
and a short one, as stage brigands or outlaws, while the right
hand of the one grasps the dagger of the midnight assassin,
and the other hastens to drain the poisoned bowl of domestic
tragedy.
The saw-dust has also its representatives; there is the
man, who, as Mazeppa, has been strapped upon the back of
a spotted horse, and careered madly round the ring, making
the dust fly into the faces of an admiring public in the
pit; or with his hardened villain-expression has personated
the “Wicked Uncle,” in the equestrian edition of the
“ Babes in the Wood.”
We have the gentleman who follows in the ring with his
long whip, skilled to cut the leg and spare the stocking, and
who indulges in bandinage with the clown; and we have the
man in motley himself, but the voyage has not agreed with
him, and we are really concerned to hear that he now looks
in anything but merry case.
If he were a Shakspearian clown we should be tempted
to say, “ Where now are thy quirks, thy quips, and thy
quiddities ? ” but we have not the pleasure of knowing the
man of fun even by sight, and though he once made an in-
cursion into the middle of the dancers in his professional
costume, and caused no little sensation by suddenly ap-
pearing with his heels in the air, and the usual “ Here
we are,” we never could recognise him again in plain
clothes.
Punch is also here—a regular legitimate Punch, with pul-
pit and puppits, and all the other accessaries of this truly
English and time-honored divertisement.
One evening “ ’tween the gloarain and the mirk," when in
about 22 ° north, he set up his little theatre on the poop,
and was immediately surrounded by an attentive and ad-
miring audience.
Every point told as perhaps it had never done before (in
the same degree of north latitude), and at the end of the
piece the curtain fell amid loud and general applause. One
of tlie spectators, a gentleman who looks at things from a
commercial point of view, remarked that it was a very pro-
mising adventure, and if, as he believed, there was no
Punch on the gold-fields already, our fellow passenger
would have a chance to realise considerably.
There is Frau Yunge and her tambourine,, with which
she can strike music out of any part of her body,—her head,
her shoulders, her knees, her elbows, or her toes ; and who
looks so neat on Sunday with her snooded-up hair, and
her figured black silk shawl, which, no doubt, some remote
ancestors wore on the banks of the Ehine a hundred years
ago; and the Deutschers themselves, simple,good-humored
looking creatures, who attend so punctually at the galley,
when the puddings are coming out, and who come to prayers
so regularly, dressed in their best—an example to many who
would understand much better than they, for they have but
slight knowledge of English.
There are two or three fiddlers ; but we are not aware
that they are professional players; and we think the above
a pretty fair addition for one ship to make to the resources
of the colony. We know that, at least, some are first-rate
performers; and while we congratulate the colony of Victoria
upon their arrival, we wish our fellow passengers a large
measure of success, and hope to have the pleasure of
witnessing it.
THE SHIP WHITE STAR.
In our number of the 16th inst. we promised some in-
formation about the ship, which we now proceed to give.
She was built by Messrs. Wright, of St. John’s, New
Brunswick, last year, and her first certificate of registry is
dated there, 6th November, 1854.
Her dimensions are—length 258 feet, breadth 40 feet,
and depth 28 feet. Her registered tonnage, N.M., 2339
tons.
There are four different erections on deck: first, the
forecastle; next, a large house, nearly 50 feet long, com-
mencing immediately abaft the fore hatchway, and contain-
ing, first, the kitchen, and abaft it the accommodation for
the second-class passengers. In this part of the ship the
sleeping apartments are very good, indeed better than some
in the saloon, but we do not admire the mess-room much.
It consists of a narrow stripe along either side, in which
the passengers sit at their meals looking point-blank against
the bulkhead. Abaft this house is the main hatchway,
and then another house, in which the officers of the ship
sleep. Then comes the after-hatchway, and some fifteen
feet abaft it commences a long range of building, containing
the pantry, captain’s room, two saloons, sleeping apart-
ments, wheel-house, &c.
Above each hatchway is a house to protect it from the
weather, and in spite of all those obstructions, the deck has
still a spacious look, so large is its area.
The principal promenade is upon the poop, and it has
the advantage of being always dry, being placed so high
out of the water, except in very severe weather, or during
rain.
She made the run from St. John’s to Liverpool, we un-
derstand, in sixteen days, with a cargo of timber on board.
On this voyage, we believe her best performance has
been 13 knots for four hours -consecutively, but she is
loaded far beyond the best sailing line.
There are upwards of 3000 tons of cargo on board, be-
sides passengers and their effects ; and though she has
proved herself an excellent carrying ship, it would have
been better if she had not been so well tried; —had she
carried less she would have carried us faster, and we might
have been by this time in Melbourne.
DISASTERS AT SEA.
Written at the special desire of the Ladies.
The White Star is certainly not a fixed star, —and one
effect of her vagaries is visible every morning in the dimi


NOTICE TO CORESPONDENTS.
It is very hard to bo anything but perfectly polite with that
most loveable of beings, a “ Constant Reader,” and Jail we will say
is, that we never questioned the power of ladies to converse on “ subjects
logical,” or any other kind of subjects;—the difficulty is in treating the
subjects logically. “ Constant Reader ” would like to know what subjects,
we would think suitable for the weaker sex. If by this is meant the ladies,
we should say, without having time to give the subject due consideration—
comparative anatomy, fortification, agricultural chemistry, and, on Sun-
days and holidays, controversial divinity.
If we ever showed a disposition to draw ladies into conversation about
babies, we did great wrong to our own instincts, and we will not err in the
same way again.
B. S. offers us a five-act drama for publication, but it is impossible at
this advanced stage of our voyage. It has been written on board the ship,
and is founded upon incidents that have happened on board. It is titled,
“The After-Hatchway, or the Unexpected Recognition,” and the interest
of the piece turns upon the loves of a young pair, who met on board the ship
for the first time after a long separation.
Old love is easily rekindled, it is said; and it appears the affair, thus
taken up where it was left off, is to be brought to a happy conclusion when
we reach Melbourne.
How much of this is real, and how much fiction, we, of course, do not
know; and we hope that our gifted author will find a more numerous
audience than we can introduce him to.
Beatrice. —You must be guided by your own judgment. In cases like
yours, there are so many little circumstances to be considered, which can-
not very well be submitted to a third party, that it is difficult to give an
opinion.
We see you often in conversation with Mrs. G. We think she has a great
deal of good sense; consult her. But, perhaps, after all, your own feelings
will be a safer guide than either your judgment or Mrs. G.’s experience.
P.P, —Tour question is absurd. If you have any doubts on the subject,
apply to the person herself, and we are sure she will give a satisfactory
explanation.
? —About twenty-six, we should say.
Mrs. P.—We heard the anecdote at least a week ago, though not quite
the same version of it you seem to have got. How do you come to be so
far behind, and incorrect after all ? You must be much less vigilant than
you used to be.
nished tea-equipage upon the breakfast-table. When we
left England there was a very imposing display of “ White
Star Line ” crockery, decanters, glasses, &c., —and among
the rest, a set of new bowls for eating our soup out of.
Soon, however, the vicissitudes of our journey began to
tell upon them, and although the crashes we occasionally
heard afforded only amusement, the blanks by and bye
ceased to be filled up, and then it became a more personal
matter.
The deficiency first made itself felt in the above-men-
tioned soup-bowls, and as they disappeared their places
were taken by butter-coolers, —a most inconvenient substi-
tute.
Among the cups there has been a still greater mortality.
One evening four dozen were whipped off the hooks, where
they hung suspended from a beam in the pantiy,—literally
snapped off, the handles being left dangling. The method
adopted by the stewards is to commence laying the table at
the top, and use up the whole cups, so far as they will go,
and then fall back upon such substitutes as they can find.
One morning we found ourselves just on the right side of
the line of substitution, and expected that on the following
day we should require to grasp the cup by the middle; but
during the night there was a grand crash, and when break-
fast time again came round there was hardly a cup in sight,
their places being supplied by the never-failing butter-
coolers. These are most impracticable utensils; —they are
a kind of cup and saucer together, so constructed that both
overflow at the same angle of depression ; and the advan-
tage of this is, that the saucer part being always filled by
the rolling of the ship, you get a little into your mouth and
a great deal upon your bosom at eveiy attempt.
Dundee marmalade pots have come greatly into favour,
and are being very generally used, and it is expected, if we
encounter much more rough weather, that we shall be re-
duced to employ lobster tins and sardine cases.
THE WEATHER.
The weather during the week, though very aggravating
to the captain, and to us all while we kept in view that our
object was to get to Melbourne, has decidedly been in im-
provement of that of the two previous weeks.
On Monday last, for the first time since the weather be-
came stormy, the decks were dry, and the passengers, in
spite of the cold, came up in great numbers to enjoy the
fresh air. Many faces appeared which we had almost for-
gotten, and a general hilarity prevailed. Jumping, skip-
ping, and a great many other sports, were commenced, and
in the evening dancing was resumed.
The ladies and gentlemen on the poop seemed to get a
great deal of laughing and exercise out of a game called
Terzy,—and altogether the change of weather has had the
happiest effects.
The little Scotch girls and boys have some very pretty
games. They join hands all round, and dance to some
pretty tune, which they sing at the same time. To a Scotch
ear it was quite delightful to hear the well-known jingo-ring
and others, so familiar to the streets of a Scotch village on a
summer’s evening.
Now the weather is settled and dry, and the wind being
in the N.E. the cold is not so great.
DIVINE SERVICE
Will be celebrated in the Saloon on Sunday, Ist of July, at 11 a.m.; and
between-decks at 6 p.ra.
The fore Saloon will be reserved for persons from other parts of the ship.
NAUTICAL PHENOMENA.
None.
ORIGINAL POETRY.
“Aconstant reader” would be glad to know
Why Mr. Editor should deem it so
Ridiculous—to speak to ladies
Of ought save crochet, servant maids, or babies.
Perhaps he thinks a lady can’t attend
To subjects “logical,” yet condescnd
To mend his shirts, his household keep in order,
Dam well his hose, and children’s frocks embroider.
“Blue stockings,” certainly, I don’t admire,
But still I think a lady may aspire—
To something better than a “ cookery book,”
And still domestic duties not o’erlook.
At least, I would that woman might have credit
For common sense, though she may not inherit
An intellect so dazzling as to gain
A world’s applause (uncertain as ’tis vain).
Perhaps our Editor (if time permit)
Will tell us what are subjects he thinks fit
For conversation with the weaker sex,
Whose minds, of shallowness, be thus suspects.
White Star, June 29th, 1855.
A CONSTANT READER
CORRESPONDENCE.
Dear Me. Editor, —Much as I value the White Star
Journal, and much as I esteem its Editor, I nevertheless
feel somewhat grieved at the thought of its going forth to the
public, without one word being said in refutation of the un-
blushing defence of “Falsehood,’’which appeared in the Jour-
nal for the 16th inst. Shall our friends in England, Ireland,


ADVERTISEMENTS.
WANTED Board and Lodging with an agreeable family in Melbourne,
or the immediate neighbourhood, by a gentleman who would take
possession immediately upon the arrival of the White Star. He would
require a parlour and bed-room to himself, in addition to the run of the
family apartments, and proposes as remuneration his own society.
He would have no objection to take part in quadrilles two nights in the
week, and assist in making up the whist-table on other three.
If any arrangement could be come to in regard to his washing, he would
dance round dances sometimes, or sing a song.
With regard to wine, spirits, and other extras, that might be discussed
afterwards; but it may be mentioned that he has the latest gossip from
Europe, and a very neat hand for albums.
Applications addressed to E. Q. T., may be put in the letter bag, and will
be treated as strictly confidential.
Please state the respective ages of the different members of the
family, &c., &c.
ANTED to purchase a Strong Deal Box. Apply at our office.
"^jT ANTED to purchase two good Padlocks. Apply at our office.
THE LOG.
Saturday, June 23.— A.M. moderate breezes from W.N.W., ahd hazy
weather. Noon, lat. 46° 00’ S., long. 47° 16’E. Distance 264 miles.
P.M. moderate breezes and cloudy.
Sunday, 24.— a.m. fresh breezes and thick foggy weather; wind N.W.
by N. Noon, obscure. Distance 235 miles. p.M. fresh breezes and hazy.
Monday, 25.— a.m. light westerly winds and cloudy. Noon, lat. 45 ° 35’ S.
long. 55 ° 50’ E. Distance 143 miles. p.M. light winds and hazy.
Tuesday, 26, — A.M. light winds from N W., with occasional squalls. Noon,
lat. 46 ° 04’ S., lon. 68 ° 48’ E. Distance 138 miles p.m. moderate breezes
and rain.
Wednesday, 27.— a.m. strong winds from the south. Noon, lat. 46 ° 24’
S., lon. 64° 18 E. Distance 252 miles, p.m. strong breezes.
Thursday, 28. — a.m. fresh breezes from S.S.E. and cloudy weather.
Noon, lat 44 ° 20’ S. Obscure. Distance 223 miles, p.m. fresh breezes
from S.E.
Friday, 29. — a.m. light winds from N.E. and variable. Noon, obscure.
Distance 76 miles, p.m. light and variable winds.
and Scotland suppose that on board the White Star there
is not even one person valiant for the truth ?—not one per-
son who will step forward and expose the flimsy arguments
with which the line between truth and falsehood is endea-
voured to be frittered away into nothingness ? Shall it be
supposed that we sit down satisfied to believe in the
necessity for occasional untruths, and that there are times
when a “ man ought to be whipped for telling the truth ? ”
On the contrary, 1 trust there are many on board who are
not ashamed to “ speak the truth from the heart,” remem-
bering that we have a clear and positive command “ not to
do evil that good may come.” It is quite true that there
are persons priding themselves on their candour, who ap-
pear to take a real pleasure in making “ candid remarks,”
which, though perfectly truthful, are quite unnecessary,—
frequently calculated to wound the feelings of others. Now
I am far from admiring this—on the contrary, I have a
great regard for the feelings of my neighbours, and think
it often the most charitable plan not to speak at all. But
still, when it comes to an actual point whether the truth
must be spoken or not, why, I think there can be but one
Scriptural conclusion, and that is—to speak the truth, let
the consequences be as they may (Eph. iv. 25). I waited
anxiously for last week’s paper, in the hope that some one
would have vindicated so good a cause, but was disap-
pointed. True it is that one M. A. B. accuses you of not
being “ logical.” This was not much, but quite sufficient
to expose the weakness of your position, when we see the
only answer you can give to this accusation, —“ Who ever
thinks of being logical with ladies ? ” I certainly expected
better reasoning from you, Mr. Editor, for whom I entertain
the greatest respect, and feel really sorry to see you sup-
porting error, when you might with honour have carried
arms in the defence of truth.
Hoping the gentleman hinted at by “ Verity ’’ is in no
way connected with yourself,
I remain, very truly yours,
A LOVER OF TRUTH.
White Star, June 28th, 1855.
[The defence contained in our number of 16th inst, and
which our correspondent finds so much fault with, we
thought would be seen to be a jocular defence against a
jocular charge.
. It is very hard to be driven into a comer this way, and
obliged to say that we were in joke, and we regret that the
wording of the article was not more clear.
Falsehood is false; and that is the very worst that can
be said about it; nor are we aware of having said less.
We publish the letter, that it may produce the effect the
writer wishes, and because we have the very highest opi-
nion of the lady from whom we suppose it to come ; and at
the same time beg to assure our readers that we quite con-
cur with the sentiments expressed on the general ques-
tion.]
“A Lady” begs leave to present her regards to the
Editor, and to assure him that (though at present, for
reasons which she need not explain, removed from her
proper sphere) she is a real lady.
She would further state, that having been brought up in
the lap of luxury, she has been accustomed to a great many
little delicacies of the table, to which she has been a
stranger on this voyage, and the object of this note is to
request that the Editor will prevail upon Captain Brown to
consent to her obtaining a few receipts from the cook of
the ship, as she has been given to understand that the
dishes dressed for the saloon passengers are real chefs-
d’oeuvre of the culinaiy art. Perhaps if they were pub-
lished in the White Star Journal, it would confer a real
benefit, as there are many ladies on board who will by-and-
bye have the comfort of a household depending upon their
skill.
“ A Lady ” flatters herself that her wishes will not be
disregarded, so attentive has she found the Editor on one
or two occasions, when chance threw her in his way.
White Star, June 29th.
[There is an excellent work in the library,—No. 240, —
to which we would refer our fair correspondent.
We cannot approve of the plan she proposes, as we may
perhaps dine with some of our White Star acquaintances
in their own houses.]
White Star Journal.
No. 11.] SATURDAY, JULY 7, 1855.
The voyage is coming to an end, and with it this jour-
nal, as many more important things have come to an end
before.
Already are to be seen, on every side, indications of the
approaching break up in our little community. Everything
is undertaken with special reference to our landing, and
the day, and even the hour, are speculated upon. When
the ship’s position for the day has been decided, and the
miles distant from Melbourne ascertained, there is quite a
buzz of conversation, and each, according as he is of a san-
guine or a desponding temperament, fixes the exact time of
our arrival.
Some, indeed, take things easy, and never having taken
the trouble to understand what latitude and longitude mean,
accept the nearest date, and go on with their work un-
Published by Henry Davy, at his Office, 99 Between Decks.


moved; while others, having long since given up all hope of
ever seeing land again, smile a despairing smile, and feebly
say, they hope it may be so.
Dress is also beginning to occupy the attention of the
ladies more than it used to do, and much anxiety is felt as
to the condition of certain dresses and bonnets, which
were designed to assist in making first impressions, or for
still more interesting purposes. In little matters, too, more
personal still than dress, we think we can detect a desire to
“ get up the looks for Melbourne,” and altogether we are in
a state of agreeable flutter and excitement.
While, however, our arrival in port will be the beginning
of many things, it will be the end of this paper, and that
we cannot anticipate without a kind of regret. During the
hot and lazy times in the tropics, we often, when a Friday
afternoon arrived, and there was no preparation made for
next day’s publication, felt quite spiteful and angiy at it;
but now we begin to regard it with a kind of affection, and
though we will have arrived before the next number is due,
we will defer our leave-taking till the end of next week,
when we hope to issue our last White Star Journal, telling
how the voyage came to a happy conclusion, and the man-
ner of our safe landing.
THE LIBRARY.
We are requested to state that all books belonging to the
library must be returned next week, and that no more will
now be given out.
We have examined the library-book, and find that about
three hundred volumes have been taken out during the
voyage, and as most of those have been kept a long time,
and read by several persons before being returned, and as
those used by the saloon passengers are not taken account
of, there would seem to have been a good deal of reading on
board. In looking over the list, we endeavoured to find out
what books had been in greatest request, but in order to
come to any conclusion, we would require to analyse the
list, which we have not time to do. We would also require
to know, not only which books were oftenest out, but which
were oftenest applied for. There is one book which we hear
has been constantly out, viz., “ The Henpecked Husband.”
We should consider this rather dangerous reading for some
of our young people, did we not know that the heroine
comes to grief in the third volume.
OUR INTERNAL ECONOMY.
We have long intended to give some particulars regarding
the internal economy of the ship, for the information of the
friends to whom we may send copies of this journal.
In the first place, in the saloon there is a numerous staff
of stewards and stewardesses to attend upon the passengers,
and perform for them the various offices performed by their
own servants at home.
In the “ house-on-deck ” there are also stewards, who
receive the provisions from the purser, carry them to and
from the cooks, and act generally as the stewards in the
saloon do, though we understand the attendance is less in
extent, and of an inferior quality.
Between decks, a different system prevails; there, the
passengers have all to do for themselves, and are divided
into groups of about twelve each, called messes. The men of
those messes take the office of captain in turn, and perform
the duties for a week each at a time. Those duties are to
assist in sweeping and scraping the lower deck, ladders,
tables, &c., and this is done every day after breakfast; to re-
ceive the provisions from the purser, and deal them out
again, when (as is often the case) messes are subdivided (for
the members of one family naturally desire to mess by
themselves); to take the food to the galley to be cooked, and
attend to receive it when it is done, and generally to look
after the interests of the mess.
As may be easily supposed, the comfort of the rest de-
pends a good deal upon the zeal of these captains in the
performance of their duties, and we have often wondered
what means were used with them when they were neglectful;
a case has occurred, and we will tell the mode of procedure.
The person at fault was a Mr. Eobinson, from Lincoln-
shire, who for reasons which, no doubt, seemed to him
sufficient reasons, neglected, refused, or delayed the per-
formance of his duties, and a regular court was held upon
his conduct. The other members of the mess wished to
expel him, and counsel being retained on either side, an
argument was gone into which lasted several hours. The
finding of the court was, that the offender should continue
in the mess, provided he performed his duties faithfully for
the future, and paid a certain fine, to be expended in drink
on the first convenient opportunity.
There is a good deal of bread and pudding manufactured
among the passengers below, and in the house on deck, and
when a man is seen up to his elbows in flour, it is easy to
tell, by his style of working, whether he is on his first
voyage or not.
Some of the ladies in the saloon took to making cakes
once or twice. There was one pound-cake in particular,
about which there was a great fuss and preparation, and
which every one declared to be exceedingly good. We can-
not say, of our own knowledge, as the share that came our
way was so small that we could hardly taste it; but, if so,
it upsets the old proverb, that “ many cooks spoil the
broth."
REAL DISASTERS AT SEA.
On Tuesday morning last, between eight and nine o’clock,
when hoisting the main-topsail, after shaking out a reef, the
chain-tye broke, and the yard came slap down on the cap,
and snapped in two. Here was a great misfortune, so near
our journey’s end as we thought ourselves. Of course, the
best had to be made of a bad job, and while the officers and
crew were getting the sail and the remains of the spar on
deck, the carpenters set vigorously to work to prepare a new
yard.
The loss of this spar was not the whole misfortune, for
the edge of the truss chafed into the main-topmast to such
an extent, that we understand it is not now considered trust-
worthy.
After breakfast on Wednesday, all had been got ready,
and the capstans began to go round to the old tunes. There
was a very busy day of it, and by two o’clock in the after-
noon the topsail was bent, sheeted home, and in the act of
being swayed up, when, melancholy to relate, the tye again
gave way, and the yard came down as before upon the cap,
with such velocity that it snapped right through in the
slings, although a fine, sound, pitch-pine spar. It carried
away the mizen-topgallant-stay, and did some other trifling
damage; but, most fortunately, no one was hurt, although
the second mate and a number of hands were aloft at the
time.
We are thus without a main-topsail-yard, which may be
said to be our mainstay; but if we have the luck to carry
the present strong wind with us, the misfortune will not
protract our voyage much.
The carpenters are busy making a new yard out of two of
the broken ends, but we suppose we shall hardly stay so
long on board as to see it across.


NOTICE TO CORRESPONDENTS.
House-on-deck. —Your letter is well and temperately expressed, but for
reasons, which we think have been already stated in this journal, we do not
consider this a proper field for the discussion of such matters. We have no
doubt that what you state is true; but much that you have found unplea-
sant may be inseparable from a long voyage, and some things might have
been remedied by a direct application to Captain Brown. We have neither
the will nor the power to arbitrate on the subject, and can only repeat that
we do not think our columns a suitable place /or its discussion.
W. T. wishes a description of the word “toadyism.” We do not know
that it requires much description. It is an ordinary looking word of three
syllables. If a definition is required, it will be easily found in the dic-
tionary. W. T. thinks there are some toadies on board, but we have not seen
many such. As far as our observation extends, we have had rather a way
of speaking our minds to each other.
Medicus, peo tem. —Your letter which found its way into our publishers’
pocket without his knowledge, has been carefully considered. We think
that had you exercised as much consideration in the writing as we have in
the reading of it, the meaning would have been more obvious. As we have
not devoted a comer to riddles, we do not think it necessary to publish it.
TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY.
A lady outside requested one of the Saloon passengers to
procure for her from the Library a certain book on domestic
economy, bearing the number 240. The book was not to
be found; and the gentleman, who no doubt considers
himself a funny fellow, got up quite an entertainment, by
applying for it a great many times every day, and especially
at unseasonable times and in unexpected places.
“ No. 240—for a lady; only to make a few extracts from”
—was the constant cry, until at last our librarian com-
pletely turned the tables upon our funnyman, and sent him
word, at times still more ingeniously unsuitable, that “ two
hundred and forty was not yet found.”
This little story is told, partly to shew how easily people
may be amused at sea, and partly to get in the following
verses, which were produced in the course of the play, and
which we think too good to be lost. A nice ear for analogies
may discover in it a resemblance to “ The Burial of Sir
John Moore.”
“No. 240—FOR A LADY.”
Indeed, Mr. Semple, ’tie very unkind
To tease and torment me so;
For this book in vain I’ve tried to find,
And sought it both high and low.
Now, only think how often you’ve said,
“A few extracts I wish to make j”
I offered you one she had not read,
But that book you would not take.
Why, then, do yon call me, from morning till night,
To find this “ Two hundred and forty ?
The lady herself would say I was right,
When I call you exceedingly naughty .
Just fancy 1 When first I peep out of my room,
There’s a voice, that I very well know,
“ Will you please to look out that book very soon,
As the lady is waiting below?”
At dinner-time, too, you ne’er leave me alone;
Two notes you have sent me already;
And you plague me so much for the book that is gone,—
Sir, my temper is getting unsteady.
Is the “ Cookery Book” stiff the wish of your heart?
Will no other book do instead?
If so, not an effort shall cease on my part,
Till “ Two hundred and forty” is read.
June 30th, supper-time.
THE WEATHER.
There has been no weather of any kind during the last
week, at least none worth making a fuss about, unless a
moderately fine day like yesterday deserves notice.
The temperature was something like that of a fine
October day at home, and the sun condescended to show
himself during a good part of it. The consequence was,
that many who had not seen daylight for a long time got on
deck, and we hope they were the better of it.
PRINTING OF THE JOURNAL.
We have endeavored to find out what will be the expense
of printing this Journal, but with only partial success.
But, as the time of our separating is now very near, and as
it will be too late after we go on shore to make any arrange-
ment, we propose to fix the price at 2s. per set for the first,
and Is. 6d. for each additional set taken by any individual,
and this will, we think, as nearly as we can tell, cover the
expense, if 350 copies are sold.
Every one will get an opportunity of subscribing for the
number of copies he desires, and those who will not be in
Melbourne long enough to obtain delivery of them, can
make arrangements to have them forwarded.
NAUTICAL PHENOMENA.
Absolutely nothing has turned up under this head since
last notice, and as the ocean has done so little for us in the
way of supplying matter, we give it up, and will not take
the trouble to invent anything for it.
We kept on from week to week making the most of what
little things we could get a hold of, in the hope that by and
bye it would reward us for our trouble, and roll back the
curtain behind which it concealed its greater mysteries ; but
we have been disappointed, and now give the matter up in
despair.
DIVINE SERVICE
Will be celebrated to-morrow, in the saloon, at 11 A.M., and in the
’tween decks at 6 p.m. The fore saloon will be reserved for persona
coming from other parts of the ship.
DEATHS.
On Tuesday morning last, at 91 ’tween decks, Mrs. Naughten, aged
57 years.
CORRESPONDENCE,
DOMESTIC OCCURRENCES.
To the Editor of the White Star Journal,
Sir, —Yesterday evening, at sun-down, a senior and
junior member of our floating society appeared on the
Poop, from the larboard side of the House-on-Deck (and
from appearance and attire n'avaitpas touche de Veau demiere-
merit), after about five weeks’ “ convalescent” confinement to
cabin, and presence created no veiy great excitement.
BYSTANDER.
[The above was intended for last week’s issue, but was
too late for insertion. It is considered very amusing, by
those who can understand it.]
Mister Editur, —I ce in your gumel a gent as wants
lodgins hand bord on mootial akomidashun terms. If he
wil cum to my ouse we’ll try an mak things comfturble. i
intend settin up in the washin and dressin line (wich I hopes
the ladys an genlemen on bord the Witstor wil favor
me with ther kustum), an if the gent as wants lodgins is
agreable to mak hisself genially yousfull, he wil get a shair
of wots goin an welcum, as my ole man niver tuck kinely
to the mangel.
In regard to hextrs i don’t mind standin a pot a here an
a bit o backy to my ole man an him on a Sattirday nite wen
he as karred ome the klose.
I remanes, yours trooly,
JENNY SUDS.
Witstob, 6 juli, 1854.


Mr. Editor,—Sir, —I feel that an apology is due from me
for having trespassed so much on your space ; or rather that
the few very simple unconnected remarks I made a fortnight ago
should have been the occasion of occupying six columns of
your paper, which might have been more profitably filled
up. Nor should I again have troubled you, had it not been
for the gross error you had committed in thinking that the
two last letters in the alphabet meant “wise head,” instead
of tiying to find out their proper signification. As you
seem to have but one and the same satirical (I had nearly
said contemptuous) style, in which you treat all things, per-
haps the writer would have better merited the very eupho-
neous name you have thought proper to give her, had she
remained a quiet observer. For a change, I shall now give
you the two first instead of the two last letters, and wait to
see what construction you put upon them. I have, there-
fore, the happiness to subscribe myself
A. B.
But not A. B. B.
To the respected Editor of the White Star Journal.
[We are glad to have our errors pointed out, especially
gross errors. We thought our correspondent’s first signa-
ture had no signification at all; it seems it had, though we
cannot find it out.
We really are at a loss what construction to put upon her
new one. It may mean “A bee,” or “Able-bodied,” or
“ Bachelor of Arts,” but, if we understand her right, she
does not wish to be considered “ a baby.”]
The following letter, though not intended for us, we take
the liberty of copying.
Sir,—I perceive, by an advertisement in last week’s
White Star Journal, that you are in want of board and
lodgings, and I flatter myself that a residence in my family
would realise your brightest anticipations of domestic bliss.
You wish to know the number of the family and their
ages, which I shall proceed to detail, with such other par-
ticulars as will enable you to people our little parlour in
imagination, and enjoy a kind of foretaste of what may he
in store for you, if, after full and searching inquiries, I
should decide upon admitting you into my sheepfold.
First, there is my first-bom, my Ellen Jane, a charming
child of thirteen, with the greatest thirst for knowledge,
which she evinces in constantly asking questions, all of
which you will be expected to answer, and with whom you
will be expected to practise polka and waltzes for an hour or
two every morning before breakfast. Then comes Thomas,
the intellectual pride of the family, aged twelve last March,
who has the greatest taste for natural history, and is con-
stantly bringing home percussion-cap boxes full of insects.
You will be required to make yourself familiar with such
things, that you may know which of these creatures can be
admitted with safety to our family circle, and which should
be excluded.
Herbert and Alfred were added to our flock at the same
time, and are ten and a half years old. They are naturally
more inclined to out-of-door sports than I could wish, and I
shall expect you to seize every opportunity of opening
their young minds by improving conversation. Alfred is
also inclined to speak through his nose, which you will have
to correct; and there is something about Herbert’s eyes ever
since he had the measles, which requires frequent visits
to the oculist’s,—whither you will be expected to accom-
pany him.
Then come Margaret and Isabella, of the same age—
nine; and after them Louisa, Harry, Eobert, Jacky, the
two little girls, and the baby, and that is all at present.
I need not go into the characteristics of all the sweet
children—each has his own peculiarities, and those you will
require to study carefully, in order to render yourself always
agreeable. You will accompany them in their visits to the
hairdresser, the dentist, &c., and endeavour to cure Louisa of
a trick she has of biting her nails. Tom is also a sad stam-
merer, which it is expected you will be able to remedy; and
Jacky, if not reminded of it, would be very apt to neglect
to wipe his nose.
Some of the younger ones are very fretful at night, ever
since they had whooping-cough, and they will have their
little cots put into your room, so that, if troublesome in the
night, you may attend to them.
From the above sketch you will see what will be ex-
pected at your hands, if you become a member of our
family ; but before that can be, I have a great many inqui-
ries to make, so you will please furnish me with your proper
address and references.
Of course you will not expect a hot dinner, except on
Sunday. I remain, Sir, yours,
LOUISA ANN FONDMOTHER.
To the Editor of the White Star Journal.
Sir, —Will you allow me to tell you of the great treat
which we “house-on-deck” passengers on the port side enjoy
every Sunday evening, in the sacred music sung by the
Messrs. Miller and Mr. Seward. They have been in the
habit of occupying their own time, and favouring us in
this way ever since the evenings became long. It only
struck me, however, to mention the matter to you on the
evening ot the Sunday before last, and I should have
begged your insertion of this in your last week’s journal.
They were, on that occasion, accompanied by Herr Kohler
on the concertina, which added greatly to the effect of the
music; indeed, it was such as one would only expect to
hear in a London concert room.
I wish that more had had an opportunity of hearing it,
as I am sure there are many on board who would have felt
pleasure equal to my own.
I am, Sir, yours truly,
6th July, 1855.
J. S. T.
Sir, —Will you allow me through the medium of your
columns to thank a friend of ours, a passenger in the house
on deck on the port side, for the kind arid liberal manner in
which he has dispensed pills, and at times, when necessary,
other medicines, to those around him who were in need of
them.
I must also add my own testimony, speaking from per-
sonal experience, to the judicious manner in which he has
done it. Whilst saying this, Sir, I wish it to be understood
that I do so with all due deference to Dr. Walker, for when
under his care I experienced both kindness and attention.
I am, Sir, yours truly,
6th July, 1855.
CONVALESCENT.
On Monday last, we witnessed the solemn spectacle of a
funeral at sea.
The death will he seen in tire usual place, and the fact of
the deceased being a person of mature years, gave more
solemnity to the occasion than had attached to the previous
ones.
We believe it is not usual to use coffins in burying at sea,
but in this case the affection of the friends of the deceased
provided one which was loaded with stones to sink it. The
service was read, and the coffin slipped down a plank into
the sea in the presence of a great number of persons.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
WANTED to purchase a couple of strong Padlocks. A good price
will be given. Apply 09 ’tween decks.
LOST, a Washerwoman. Any one finding the same and bringing
her to the office of this paper will be rewarded.
THE LOG.
Saturday, June 30.—a.m. fresh breezes from N.N.E., and hazy weather.
Noon, no observation. Distance 222 miles, p.m. strong breezes.
Sunday, July 1, —a.m. strong wind from N.N.E. and showers of rain.
Noon, no observation.- Distance 207 miles, p.m. fresh breezes and
squally.
Monday, 2.—Strong winds from S.W. by S. Noon, lat. 46 ° 40’ S., lon.
87 ° 63’ E. Distance 274 miles, p.m, strong breezes from S.W. and
cloudy weather.
Tuesday, 3. — a.m. fresh breezes from S.W. and squally weather. Noon,
lat. 45 ° 13* S., lon. 92 ° 38’ E. Distance 230 miles. p.m. light breezes.
Wednesday, 4.—a.m. strong winds from the westward. Noon, lat 46 °
20’ S>, lon. 08 ° 18’ E. Distance 230 miles. p.m. strong breezes and
squally.
Thursday, 6.—a.m. strong winds and cloudy. Wind, W.N.W. Noon,
lat. 46 ° 48* S., lon. 104 ® 18* E. Distance 247 miles, pm. squally
weather and showers of snow.
Friday, 6.—a.m. fresh breezes from W.S.W. Noon, lat. 46 ° 18’ S., lon.
109 ° 40* E. Distance 225 miles, p.m. strong breezes and fine weather.
White Star Journal.
No. 12.] MELBOURNE, JULY 21, 1855.
When last we addressed our readers, we expected to have
landed before publishing day again came round, but per-
verse head winds delayed our arrival, and a Saturday was
allowed to pass without a White Star Journal making its
appearance, partly because being so near port that a change
of wind would very soon bring the voyage to an end, we
had delayed making the necessary preparations for it; and
partly because we had already fixed the number of the series
at twelve, and wished our last issue to contain an account
of the conclusion of the voyage.
In looking back over the collected numbers of this paper,
we are surprised to find it so meagre and trifling, and have
no doubt that many who were so good natured as to be
amused by it as it appeared, will, should they chance to
turn over its pages at some future period, feel equal surprise
that they should ever have been in a state of mind to be so
easily entertained.
But life at sea is like life no where else, it involves a total
resolution in our social habits—a suspension of many little
arrangements, upon which, when on shore, we had allowed
our comfort in a great measure to depend, and a vacuity of
mind which supervening upon the sudden cessation from
every mental and physical employment, produces on the
passenger a state of feeling very prone to grumble and find
fault; indeed, a good grievance is sometimes the greatest
blessing that can befal him, and when one was started with
us, it was hotly discussed—viewed on this side and on that,
and bandied about till it fell, usually with its funny side up,
and we ended by having a good laugh at it.
Fortunately for the Editor of a ship newspaper, the pas-
senger, while prone to complain, is at the same time easy
to amuse, and if he (the Editor) can only manage to import
a little fun into his pages, and strike the proper line between
good humoured and offensive personality (for personal to a
certain extent he must be if he would be read), his efforts,
judging from our own experience, are sure to be rewarded.
Other gentlemen of the press address themselves to
perhaps a hundred thousand readers, while we had only two
or three hundred; but the two or three hundred were about
and around us, so that whatever impression we made was
visible at once, and what little applause we earned was im-
mediately offered.
The articles are all short, and in looking them over we
grudge at seeing subjects which could have been made to
turn the comer of a long column handsomely, dismissed so
abruptly; but it must be borne in mind that we published
in manuscript, which few of the intelligent public on board
could read with facility, and as we certainly wished to have
as many readers as possible, we kept the different papers
short, that they might be intelligible : if, then, our papers
have no other merit, they have the merit of brevity, and we
need not say what that has been called.
We think the history of the voyage is pretty fully told
in our pages, but in a fragmentary manner:—our first idea
was to have a continuous narrative, written by different
persons, and in different parts of the ship, describing each
event as it occurred, and as it appeared from each writer’s
point of observation; but we did not find our neighbours
so willing to contribute as we had expected, and so things
had to be introduced in paragraphs, as they now appear.
Sometimes newspapers like this are promoted by ship-
owners for the purpose of puffing a ship or line of ships,
and as a copy of the White Star Journal may happen to
fall into the hand of persons projecting a voyage, and still
undecided by what ship to sail, we think it only fair to
state that, except to the extent described in the opening
article of our ninth number, this journal was wholly unin-
fluenced by either owners or captain ; it was carried on by
the passengers for their own amusement, and Captain
Brown did not make a single suggestion, either as to what
should be inserted or what should be excluded.
There were two or three other matters to which we in-
tended to refer before relinquishing the button of our indul-
gent reader, but so many things have to be wound up this
week that we must have done, or our concluding number
will grow to an unnatural size;—so we must say, good-
bye, with a hope that all our fellow-passengers will enjoy
great health and happiness, and a full realisation of the
hopes with which they left home.
One more “ last word ” and we have done. A very hand-
some acknowledgment of the services of the Editor has been
made, which we are almost ashamed to accept, while the
much more laborious duties which devolved upon the pub-
lisher are left unnoticed.
He had all the work, and no share of the reward ; which
is less than fair play; and all that we can do is to place it
here upon record, that what little success the White Star
Journal met with is due in a great measure to the industiy
and intelligence of Mr. Henry Davy.
DIVINE SERVICE
Continued to be celebrated until the end, and, indeed, it
was not once omitted morning or evening since it com-
menced.
Morning and evening prayers have also been read in the
saloon during the week, and have been well attended.
A more demonstrative man than Mr. Hayden might
sooner have made himself conspicuous among the pas-
sengers, and might have left a stronger impression on their
minds, had the voyage lasted twelve days instead of twelve
weeks; but the unobtrusive and genuine benevolence of our
excellent chaplain, gained for him, steadily and surely, the
esteem of all classes, and during the concluding weeks his
discourses were listened to with marked attention.
On the evening of Sunday the Bth inst., we assembled
on the lower deck, under the impression that it would be the
last opportunity we would have of meeting for the worship
of God on board the ship. There was a very large attend-
Published by Henry Davy, at his office, No. 99 ’tween Decks,


NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.
One op the Deluded,” “J. B. P.,” “Amicus,” “Enquirer,” “Peter
Teaxle,” “A Sufferer,” &c. We have taken the liberty of excluding your
communications, because there are a great many claims upon our space this
week, and because the voyage being now over the interest is, in most cases,
much lessened.
We received four verses of tolerable poetry, which we would have made
room for had they not contained certain allusions which, though harmless
at the time the verses were written, are rendered unsuitable for publication
by a subsequent event.
Alpha wishes to be informed whether we have happened to hear a cer-
tain gentleman mention where he lives in Melbourne. No; he has been
very agreeable all the voyage, and very neighbourly, but we think he has
been rather inclined to be close in this respect. We have not heard him
say at what hour he dines either, and of course one would not like to seem
curious on those points.
ance and the Rev. Gentleman had prepared an address
admirably adapted to the occasion and to his hearers. He
feelingly alluded to the leaving of home and friends, and to
the uncertainty that attended the future prospects of many
of us; he skilfully touched the chord, at the time most
highly strung, and many of his audience were visibly af-
fected.
We have heard Mr. Hayden spoken of by all classes on
board the ship in terms of the highest esteem, and we know
that in whatever part of those colonies his lot may be cast, if
a White Star passenger has been there before him, he will
find he has been preceded by a good name.
THE MAIN TOPSAIL YARD.
Notwithstanding the prediction to the contrary, contained
in our last number, this spar was finished and sent aloft on
the afternoon of the 7th instant.
Great exertions were made by Capt. Brown to effect this,
and he was ably seconded by Mr. Wheatley, the second
officer, and by the boatswain. Several mechanics from
among the passengers were employed at, we understand,
high wages, and the work was carried on by the light of
lanterns till midnight.
BON JOUR PHILIPINA.
On certain days of the week, we have a spread after the
cloth is removed, and the nuts and raisins, besides affording
us agreeable occupation at the time, have been productive
of amusement on the mornings following.
Every one who has made a sea-voyage with an agreeable
party, or has lived in a fashionable boarding-house, or has
assisted in filling up a friend’s house at Christmas time,
will be acquainted with the popular game mentioned above;
hut, for the benefit of the few who do not understand it, a
short explanation is necessary. When, at dessert, a double
almond is found, one kernel is given away, and the other
retained; the conditions being, that he or she of the con-
tracting parties who first accosts the other the following
morning, gains a forfeit previously settled upon, or the right
to make a demand which the other is bound to comply with.
It happened with us, that while a large proportion of the
walnuts had no kernel at all, a large proportion of the
almonds had two, and a great deal of fun was got out of
them.
On the mornings after dessert-days, during the short
intervals between the two breakfast bells, a great deal of
watching and prying might be seen—ladies and gentlemen
lurking behind bulkheads, and playing at hide-and-seek
round the hospital ventilator and the mizen-mast, or treach-
erously employing others to bring them intelligence where
their competitors were to be found, and, as often as not,
being basely betrayed for their pains. It is said that one
morning a gentleman, who had some half-dozen of these
ventures pending with as many different ladies, endeavoured
to steal a march upon them by getting out of his bedroom
window, but the aperture not being wide enough, he stuck
fast when half through, and was in this helpless position
surrounded by the ladies, who, before pushing him back,
secured each her pair of gloves. We cannot vouch for the
truth of this, for such tales were sometimes made up on but
slight foundation.
By and bye, so many philipinas had been lost and won,
that the account became extremely complicated, and before
every little gain and loss could be appraised, and a balance
struck, there would be a clearing day more formidable than
ever was seen at Euston Square.
The kind of things put to the venture deserves notice.
and the value put upon certain things is interesting, as illus-
trating the rapidity with which the price of an article will
run up when the supply is limited. While in the tropics, a
gentleman, usually an excellent husband and father, gam-
bled away a whole jug-full of water; and thus would have
left his beautiful young wife and interesting child destitute,
had not his creditor proved merciful. The difference be-
tween immediate and deferred payments was also illustrated.
Anything which could only he paid after our arrival in Mel-
bourne, was liberally promised; but things involving an
immediate sacrifice were more grudgingly parted with.
Some things, indeed, were lost and gained which no arith-
metic could turn into a money value; and some accounts
were left open, the settling of which might have been some
little alleviation of the grief at parting. But we fear we are
becoming sentimental, and will take our leave of the subject
before we commit ourselves.
BON SOIR PHILIPINA.
CORRESPONDENCE.
DOMESTIC OCCURRENCE.
Sir, Wednesday, 1 r.M.
This day a few ups and downs in words, as well as crockery and cabin
requisites, has been going ahead; and strong appearances of nearing port
with distinct evidence of personal independence in more than one
quarter alone being declared with activity. Amongst the crowd on
board are some persons in the House-on-dcck, who might be termed
to be always “ going it.” I mean our “ intendant” and aged
“ dame ” of No. 4, port-side. Go when you might their labours with
each other are notorious and exciting, and verily most amusing
in a certain sense. A very good remark occurred from one of
those competitors for “ vulgarte et P impudence ,” which was corrected thus
after an hour’s confab—“ Intendant t” asks “la dame ” “ What latitude her
washhand-stand and red herrings were in, did she think ?” This query
put the amusement to a close by a cool reply, “ Oh! you ‘nasty faggot,”
and all was silent as with the shock of electric- power. Thank God, our
passage is nearly got through, after much severe forbearance with our ship’s
scarcity.
Yours, Mr. Editor,
LITTLE BIRD!!!
[Although there are great demands upon our space this week, we can-
not deprive our readers of the above letter.
Two ladies to whom we shewed the original made themselves ill laughing.
It will be seen that “Little Bird!!!” and “Bystander” of last week
are the same person—in fact, the style betrays itself at once.
We think our correspondent has been quite too long of beginning to write,
and we understand he thinks so himself.
What a correspondent from the seat of war he would make. —Ed.]
CONCLUDING NARRATIVE.
On the morning of Monday, the 16th, we sighted King’s Island, and kept
it in view for some hours; and being the first land we had seen with any
thing like distinctness since the Irish mountains melted from our view, it
was regarded with considerable interest, hut still was not considered alto-
gether satisfactory. “ Its not a speck upon the horizon,” the ladies would
say. “ Its not an appearance which some call land and some cloud that we
wish to see; show us trees, fields, houses, and caws, if possible, and we will
be satisfied.” _ _ i
One day more, and all those material guarantees were afforded them; for
coming on deck about eight on Tuesday morning the mainland of Australia
was found within four or five miles of us on the port side.
We were on a wind, standing along the land for Port Phillip Heads, and
about eleven o’clock made out the pilot schooner lying-too just outside
waiting for us, and she became an object of great interest.


At 12’30, having previously taken the pilot on board, we stood in between
the Heads, and soon after hove the ship to off the Queensclife Telegraphic
Station, when several boats came alongside,—one, we believe, containing re-
presentatives of the Custom House and Health Departments, who have cer-
tain rites to perform with regard to new arrivals.
One boat brought on board an enterprising butcher, who lies in wait at
this out-post, and upon receiving orders transmits them to town by telegraph,
that the supplies may be ready for the ship immediately on her reaching
the anchorage; but most of the passengers seemed to think that he would
have shown a better knowledge of the wants of people coming off a long
voyage, if he had brought some of his commodities along with him.
But the most welcome visitor of all was the newspaper representative who
boards ships here, telegraphs their arrival up to Melbourne, and when she
happens to have the eclat attaching to her, as we had, of bringing “ latest
news from England,” extracting from the papers on board the most impor-
tant pieces of intelligence for immediate transmission to town.
Several Melbourne papers being got out of the different boats, were seized
upon with the greatest avidity, and he who had the good luck to secure one
—whether Herald, Age, or Argus, —was immediately surrounded by a
group of highly interested listeners.
By and bye litttle scraps of information got abroad, —“ the price of flour,”
“ wages,” &c., and the general summing up of the whole was, that times
were dreadful bad.
These various little observances being at length completed, and some
private telegraphic messages having been dispatched, we made sail on the
ship, and proceeded up by the East Channel, there not being a sufficient
depth of water for a ship of our draught in the more direct one.
The weather was fine and the wind light, so we had ample time to enjoy
the scenery as we coasted along; and so near to the land were we at times,
that we could not only see the cows, but those who could bring English
or Scotch skill to bear upon the subject, engaged in a critical discussion
of their merits.
At seven o’clock in the evening, while still twenty miles from the anchor-
age, we were boarded by the Argus reporting boat, which had set off on
receiving by telegraph news of our arrival at the Heads; —and we think it
must have required considerable skill and knowledge of the channel thus to
pick us up in the dark.
This incident impressed all new-comers with a high opinion of the
enterprise with which things are conducted in the colony; and the great
thirst for intelligence which it indicated prepared us for meeting a commu-
nity thoroughly awake and on the alert in all matters, social, commercial,
ana political.
The only other incident which enlivened the afternoon, was a dispute
between the captain and the pilot as to the propaiety of proceeding after
dark; the latter being determined to anchor the ship, while the captain
was by no means disposed to submit to such a loss of time.
Mr. Pilot asserted that he had recently been suspended from his post and
emoluments for four months, for attempting to take a ship down at night;
but he unfortunately let out that he not only attempted to take the ship
down, but succeeded in running her ashore.
Binding this did not serve his purpose, he threatened to abdicate, and
throw all the responsibility on the captain; but we still proceeded, and
about eight o’clock met a steamer which had been sent to our assistance,
and, having been taken in tow, we dropped anchor in Hobson’s Bay some
time after midnight; the result thus proving that even so large a ship as
the White Star could, under proper management, safely navigate the
approaching channels without the aid of daylight
By the steamer some gentlemen came on board, friends to members of our
party, but this was not the first welcome to the shores of Australia. A note
had come on board in the Argus boat for one of the gentlemen, and when
this became known, it (the note) was quite an object of interest, and was
handed round the tea table for inspection.
How Tuesday evening was spent will be found in another place, and on
Wednesday morning we were ail stirring earlier than usual, and many of us
a good deal excited with the thoughts of landing and meeting our mends,
such of us as had that happiness in prospect.
By nine o’clock the ship was surrounded by boats, and boats in such
variety as few of us had seen before—and the wise virgins, those who
always keep oil in their lamps, and who had all their packing done, had
leisure to concentrate their minds upon the arrivals.
Of course every one’s friends could not arrive first, and as many remained
on board until the different steamers for Adelaide, Sydney and Hobart
Town should arrive, there was nothing to cause a feeling of desertion; still,
to those who were left, it was very aggravating to see others claimed and
carried off in triumph.
The lighter came alongside in the course of the forenoon, but it was
found too late to effect the general landing that day, and nearly all had to
compose their minds as they best could to spend one more night in the
White Star.
Most of the departures had been from the saloon, and when such of us
as were left assembled at tea, our diminished numbers and the absence of many
familiar faces cast a shade over what used to be our merriest meal, and
though two or three of the gentlemen tried hard to be amusing, and were
indeed tolerably witty, they did not succeed in making a merry meeting
of it.
At nine o’clock on Thursday morning, the. Adelaide steamer came along-
bide, and at noon that for Geelong, and each took away her respective quota
of passengers; and about two in the afternoon the remainder of those
bound to Melbourne left upon a steamer and lighter, and steamed up the
Yarra Yarra.
There were sufficient numbers on board waiting for transport to Sydney
and Hobart Town to give us three hearty cheers, which were as heartily
returned.
PRESENTATION TO THE CAPTAIN.
On the evening of Tuesday the 17th inst., being in tow
of the steamer, and rapidly approaching the anchorage in
Hobson’s Bay, we all assembled at the supper table with
the mixed feeling strong upon us of joy at the prospect of
seeing our friends on shore, and sorrow at parting from our
friends on board. We took our supper, nevertheless, and
wine being put upon the table, and our glasses filled, Mr.
Perrot got upon his legs. How Mr. Perrot looks in that
position, it is not necessary to describe; but we had observed
that during supper the light flow of easy and agreeable
conversation for which he had been distinguished for once
failed him. He had evidently something on his mind, and
there was about his mouth the expression of firm resolve
so often seen in men who have nerved themselves for some
serious effort, and as soon as we had settled ourselves into a
listening attitude, he read the following address—
TO CAPTAIN BROWN.
Dear Sir, —The voyage is now coming to an end, and
we, the saloon passengers, cannot thing of dispersing with-
out uniting in an expression of thanks to you for the un-
tiring vigilance with which you have watched over our
safety.
You have had an aggregate of six hundred passengers to
care for—a new and untried ship to sail, and a succession
of harassing circumstances, in the shape of light, uncertain
and contrary winds to contend against; but have managed,
by unceasing exertions on your own part, to shield us from
nearly all inconvenience, and to make the most of unfavour-
able circumstances.
We have lost a main-yard and two main topsail-yards, be-
sides other smaller accidents, and we have all admired the
great promptitude and skill with which those losses have
been repaired.
In conclusion, we beg to wish you every success in your
future voyages, and to express our opinion that Messrs.
Pilkinton and Wilson have shown great attention to the
safety and camfort of their passengers in their choice of a
captain for the White Star.
With every, expression of good will,
We remain, dear Sir,
Your sincere well wishers,
Robert E. Wallen John Barker
Thomas Edens R. E. Osmen
Fanny Edens W. A. Eyre
Emma Beckett Nat. Harker
Margery Wheatley Williamina F. M'Kenzie
Eliza Gill Fanny Wilson
R. W. Kohler Mrs. Lindsill
B. R. Mathews and family Barbara G. Mackenzie
Mary Ann Matthews S. A. Consterdine
Agnes Hayden Maria Harker
Thomas Hayden Hannah Burger
Andrew W. Semple Isabella Burger
R. D. Merrill C. W. S. Perrott.
Ship White Star, of Liverpool,
17th July, 1856.
The applause which followed shewed that the feeling
with which Captain Brown was regarded by his passengers
was far from being overstated, and as soon as Mr. Perrot
could again obtain a hearing, he proposed his (the captain’s)
health in very complimentary terms. We need not say
there was a very hearty response—three times three, and
“ He's a right good fellow,” were given in a way which
awoke the echoes of the whole ship, and made the ladies


THE LOG.
Saturday, July Ith. —a.m. stiong breezes from N.N.W., and dark cloudy
weather. Noon, no observation. Distance 249 miles, p.m. strong winds
and squally weather.
Sunday, B.— a.m. strong breezes from S.S.E., and squally weather. Noon,
lat. 44 ° 30’ S., long. 120 ° 21* E. Distance 216 miles, p.m. strong winds
and clear weather; wind S.E.
Monday, 9.— a.m. strong winds from N.N.W. and clear weather. Noon,
lat. 44 ° 00’ N., long. 127 ° 23’ E. Distance 293 miles, p.m. strong breezes
from N. by W.
Tuesday, 10.— a.m. strong winds from N.W. and fine weather. Noon,
lat. 42 ° 53’ N., long. 132 ° 60’ E. Distance 217 miles, p.m. strong breezes
and hazy weather.
Wednesday, 11.— a.m. calms and sultry weather. Noon, lat. 43° 51 N.,
long. 134° 43’. Distance 156 miles, p.m, strong breezes from N.E, by N,
and heavy rain.
Thursday, 12. —Strong winds from E. by N., and thick weather. Noon,
no observation. Distance 192 miles. p.m. strong breezes and foggy
weather.
Friday , 13.— a.m. fresh breeezes from N.N.E., with rain and foggy
weather. Noon, no observation. Distance 175 miles, p.m. strong breezes
from the N. and fog.
Saturday, 14.— a.m. light winds and calms, fine weather. Noon, lat,
41 ° 25’ N., long. 143 ° 32* E. Distance 125 miles, p.m. light and vari-
able winds.
Sunday, 15.— a.m. calm and a heavy westerly swell. Noon, lat. 40° 13*
N., long. 143 ° 15’ E. Distance 72 miles, p.m. calms and light winds.
Monday , 16. — a.m. light airs and calms. Noon, lat. 39° 45* N., long.
143° 24’. Distance 43 miles. King’s Island E. by S4S. Distance 24
miles. Cape Otway N. by E., distant 49 miles, p.m light winds and
calms.
Tuesday , 17. — a.m. light breezes and fine weather. At 12'30 took the
pilot on board and stood in between the Heads. At midnight anchored in
Hobson’s Bay.
Wednesday, 18.—Landed most of the Saloon passengers; lighter along-
side to receive the luggage,
Thursday, 19.—9 a.m. steamer alongside for the Adelaide passengers.
2'30 p.m. Melbourne passengers left on board tug steamer and lighter.
put their hands to their ears. After a little time Captain
Brown rose to return thanks, which he did in a very feeling
manner. He said he had done all he could for the safety
and comfort of all on board, and finished off with a good
point, hoping to carry us all home again when we had our
fortunes made. After this, several songs were sung and
speeches delivered; but the entertainment fell almost
wholly into the hands of some gentlemen who had come off
in the tug steamer. The representative of the Argus sat
near us for some time, and seemed a good deal impressed
with the beauty of some of our ladies. He remarked par-
ticularly upon an elegant style of hairdressing, which he
then saw for the first time, and admired so much, that we
expected to have seen it prominently noticed the following
morning; but as it did not appear, we suppose it was not
in his department.
CAPTAIN EYRE.
The death of this gentleman and the tragic manner of it,
casts a gloom over the concluding pages of this narrative.
We at first intended to take no notice of the event, and to
cut out some of the allusions to him which will be found in
our earlier numbers; but his presence was such a marked
feature, and he is so intimately connected with every recol-
lection of the voyage, that to have done so would have de-
stroyed the faithfulness of our history. Every allusion to
him was made good-humouredly, and was well enough re-
ceived by himself, and though with the knowledge of sub-
sequent events, we would be more cautious in introducing
his name if the Journal was still to write, we do not think
ourselves justified in altering what has been already written.
Since we have not felt warranted in excluding the subject
altogether, we think a few details necessary for the informa-
tion of those who have no knowledge of the unfortunate
gentleman but what they may gather from our pages, and
also such of the passengers as left Melbourne immediately
after our arrival.
Captain Eyre was thirty-two years of age, and in person
what is usually called a fine man, large and well made, with
a florid complexion, and a rather exaggerated military
bearing.
He had been gifted by nature with considerable talents,
but of a specious and showy description, and was deficient
in stability, the ballast which is so indispensable to a safe
voyage through life. He was good-humoured, obliging,
and anxious to please, and for several weeks after we put to
sea he evinced the greatest desire to assist in every scheme
for the general amusement. In fact very little went on in
which Captain Eyre did not take a part, as will be seen by
reference to our earlier numbers.
Of late, however, as we all observed with regret, he took
more drink than any man could with safety; whether driven
to this indulgence by the uncertainty of his future prospects,
or to drown the recollection of unpleasant passages in his pre-
vious history, we of course cannot tell; but for some days
before landing he seemed in a state of painful excitement.
He landed, we believe, nearly penniless, on Thursday
afternoon; and that night, and such of Friday night as he
spent in this world, was spent in a dreary house of enter-
tainment in an obscure part of the city.
A friend (who had accompanind him from Ireland, and
who had, within our own knowledge, frequently remonstrated
with him on board ship as to the danger of the course he
was pursuing, had taken up his residence at the Union
Hotel, but in the course of Friday had, at the urgent request
of Captain Eyre, removed his things to the place above
referred to) went home about midnight, after spending the
evening with some friends, and, on going into his (Captain
Eyre’s) room, found him in bed, where he had been from
eight o’clock, but not asleep.
He was restless and excited, and complained of noises in
the house and of lights flashing across his window.
Those disturbances we need hardly say were imaginary—
the birth of a disordered brain; and his friend, after par-
tially composing him, retired to bed in an adjoining room.
He had not been long asleep, however, when Captain Eyre
came to his bed-side, with a candle in his hand, and com-
plained that the noises were worse than ever.
He was persuaded to return to his bed and endeavor to
sleep, and nothing more is known of him till about four
o’clock, when the house was disturbed by the screams of
his son, poor little Willie, who it seems had been awakened
by his father’s groans, and going to the bed-side put his
hands into the blood.
Three medical gentlemen were soon on the spot, but the
hemorrhage had proceeded too far to leave any chance of
life being saved.
In the afternoon an inquest was held, and a verdict re-
turned, “Died from the effects of a wound in the neck,
inflicted by himself while labouring under temporary
insanity,” and the same evening he was respectably interred,
the hearse being followed to the grave, in the New Cemetery,
by a number of friends.
His son Willie, a fine intelligent, high-spirited hoy of
ten years old, and who was a great favorite with us all, was
generously taken charge of by Mr. Cadden, who had known
the Eyrecourt family at home, and was by him immediately
sent to school along with his own boys.
To the Editor of the White Star Journal.
Sir, —As this good ship is approaching the termination of
her voyage, and as the next number of the White Star
Journal will probably be the last which will see the light,
I think that, embodied in it, there should be some recogni-
tion of the amusement afforded us, the information given,


and the trouble of each individual keeping a log saved us
by the publication of the weekly paper;—for those who
have not been passengers, it should be known that for its
origin, its continuance, and the necessary exertions in ar-
ranging for its publication, we are indebted to Mr. Andrew
W. Semple. Most of the articles are, I believe, from his
pen ; and a perusal will convince every reader that he has
turned to the best account all the little incidents which
make up the sum of life at sea, however trivial and unim-
portant they may appear to folks ashore.
To those who have not been on a long voyage, and espe-
cially through the tropics, it may not be known that idle-
ness is a prevailing epidemic on board ship, and few bear
up against it. Some writer observes, that “ industrious
intentions formed before starting on a voyage with all the
determination of an Augustus, fade away with the fickleness
of an Antony upon the faithless bosom of the deep.” To
our Editor this quotation is quite inapplicable. From his
first endeavours to obtain a press and compositors in Liver-
pool, he has steadily persevered, and the paper has been
issued with commendable regularity under all disadvan-
tages.
Although this letter comes from myself individually, it is
only just to say that the feeling therein expressed is that
felt by every passenger on board the ship with whom I
have communicated.
The ladies in the saloon have, I understand, made ar-
rangements to show their appreciation of Mr. Semple’s
talents collectively.
I must apologise for addressing you in the second per-
son, and praising you in the third, as it is difficult to praise
a man to his face.
I should prefer assuming a rum de guerre, but as some
might attribute this letter to yourself,
With best wishes, therefore,
I subscribe myself,
ROB. E. WALLEN.
White Star, 19th July, 1855.
My dear Sir, —I feel much obliged by the above hand-
somely expressed letter.
There may be a difference of opinion as to how far your
compliments are deserved, but it is enough for me that you
and the other gentlemen think they are.
I would willingly say more, but feel ashamed to occupy
so much space with matter personal to myself.
I am, dear Sir, yours sincerely,
ANDREW W. SEMPLE.
Robt, E. Wallen, Esq.
Melbourne, July 21, 1355.
Saloon, Ship White Star, July 12th, 1855.
The lady passengers on board the White Star desire to
offer to Mr. Semple their united thanks, for his disinterested
kindness in undertaking the editorship of the White Star
Journal, which has not only contributed so much to their
own amusement, but will also be a source of gratification to
their friends at home.
The ladies, therefore, beg his acceptance of the accom-
panying pencil-case,* as a small token of their esteem, hoping
that, when employing it in his own service, he will some-
times remember those whom his kindness so much assisted
in passing the weary hours of a long sea-voyage.
Mary Ann Mathews Fanny Wilson
Hannah Burger Margery Wheatley
Isabella Burger Eliza Gill
• A handsome gold pencil case.
K. Lindsay Walker B. & W. Mackenzie
Mrs. Lindsell S. A. Consterdine
Maria Harker Fanny Edens
Agnes Hayden Emma Beckett.
Dear Ladies —The receipt of the above address and the
accompanying pencil-case, affords me the greatest
pleasure.
For the trouble I had in contriving matter for the
White Star Journal, I was far more than repaid by the
interest which the lady passengers always took in its
appearance, and the generous promptitude with which they
found out and acknowledged any little merit there was in it.
It would be going too far to say that I was in love with
all my fair readers, but there were some among them whose
smiles would repay me for greater exertions than the
White Star Journal demanded at my hand; and as those
were never withheld, this reward, coming at the conclusion,
is so much clear gain and profit.
I am expected when I use the pencil to remember the
givers—perhaps it were better for my peace of mind that I
could forget; but to speak in sober earnestness for once, I
would say that from their society I have derived the very
highest enjoyment.
Some were beautiful, many accomplished, a few witty, and
all* were agreeable; and the recollection of the happy hours
spent with them will live after the tablecloths and the pre-
served potatoes and the composition are forgotten.
Let it never be said again that ladies cannot keep a
secret. The getting up of the above address must have in-
volved a good deal of planning and management, yet so
well did the conspirators keep their own counsel, that up
till Wednesday I had not been told by more than three of
them what was in store for me ; that is, in distinct terms.
Several had given me a hint of it, and my friend H. used to
tell me, as we smoked our cigars at the cuddy door before
retiring for the night, all that he knew about it, which
ought to be a lesson to the sex to be cautious how
they admit married ladies into their confidence. Still it
was a very pleasant surprise, when meeting my friend W.
in Collins-street, immediately after coming ashore, he told
me that a deputation from the ladies, consisting of four of
their nu mber, had been waiting for me at his counting-house
to make a presentation.
Nothing adds more to the value of a gift than an agreeable
manner of giving, and the ladies whom I missed on the oc-
casion were exactly those whom it would have been most
gratifying to me to meet; and I can only say now, what I
would have preferred saying in person, “your good opinion,
ladies, and the good opinion of those whom you represent,
make me feel very proud, and the accompanying gift will
be treasured among my most valued possessions."
To conclude, I beg leave to express a hope that every
happiness may attend the ladies of the White Star, and
those with whom they have linked their fortunes.
We are now nearly all scattered, but through the shifts
and changes of colonial fortunes we may meet again ; and
when that happens I hope that each may be as well pleased
to see me as I shall certainly be to see her.
I remain, dear ladies,
Your sincere friend,
ANDREW W. SEMPLE.
Melbourne, 21st. July 1855.
* Here instead of “ all,” I had written “ very nearly alland my friend
Captain Daly happening in at the time, I read it to him, when he indig-
nantly remonstrated against the reservation. It shewed a kind-hearted
and gentlemanly feeling in him, and I was not too proud to act upon the
suggestion.


