





THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
friz ll+<\




THE
COMMONWEALTH
AUSTRALIA
FOUR LECTURES ON
THE CONSTITUTION BILL 1897
DELIVERED BY
W. HARRISON MOORE, 8.A., LL.B.
Professor of Law in the University of Melbourne
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, AND BRISBANE




CONTENTS.
M 3399 FI 21
io-fr-Tl
LECTURE I.— Federal Union
LECTURE ll. —The Constitution—The States—The
Crown— The Parliament : its Nature and
Powers
LECTURE lll. —The Parliament : its Constitution—
Money Bills—The Executive Government - 62
LECTURE IV. The Judiciary Constitutional
Construction—The Amendment of the Con-
stitution
L’Envoi




PREFACE.
These lectures were delivered in the Uni-
versity of Melbourne in June of this year,
and are published in the hope of interesting
those who wish to get some knowledge of
the Commonwealth Bill as a whole. Public
discussion necessarily turns on matters of
difference rather than matters of agreement,
with the result that the citizen is often
without information on the most important
subjects on which he is called upon to form
an opinion. No attempt is made to deal
with the merits of the various questions
which are now before the country. In
nearly every case in which criticism is
offered or suggestions are made it is in the
direction of carrying out what appears to be
the general scheme of the bill. Laymen


are impatient of legal discussions, and
lawyers are at a disadvantage in attempting
in a popular assembly to give formal and
accurate expression to rule.
The trade provisions of the hid are not
discussed, for the excellent reason that I
could not say anything about them likely to
be in the least useful to anyone. They are
dealt with by Sir Samuel Griffith in his
invaluable paper presented to the Govern-
ment of Queensland, I regret that I had
not the opportunity of seeing the memo-
randum until my own paper was in the
press.


THE
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
LECTURE I.
FEDERAL UNION.
One of the greatest difficulties which the
student of politics has to encounter springs
from the inexact use of terms ; another comes
from neglecting the fact that these terms, not
less than the facts for which they stand, have
a history, so that a sense which is their true
sense at one time is perfectly untrue at
another. We sometimes, like Locke, find
“reason to doubt whether language, as it
has been employed, has contributed more to
the improvement or hindrance of knowledge
among mankind.”
No word has had a greater part in the
politics of the century than the word
k ‘ federation ; ” yet the unions of states
which go by that name present so great a
diversity of character that one is forced to


the conclusion that little is essential but
agreement. Is it to be found in the purposes
of the union ? At one time it was believed
that the common purposes did not extend
beyond the conduct of external affairs, in-
cluding therein the relation of the states to
each other. This, however, can no longer be
deemed essential ; the later federations at
any rate go far beyond it. “ All must be
subject to a common power in matters which
concern the whole body of members col-
lectively ” is a rule which still leaves the
question—What are such common matters %
Is the federal character to be found in
organization and operation of laws ? We find
not less variety here. A federation, indeed,
is highly complex, and we may expect to find
in it features which suggest every form of
political union.
When states which have been hitherto
independent as regards each other come
together for any purpose of common action, it
may be in any one of three degrees : First—
There may be such an union as makes them


for those purposes one people—an union
which ignores their former separate character
altogether. Such an union may be called a
consolidated union, to use the term in vogue
7 c 5
during the formation of the Constitution of
the United States ; an incorporated union,
to use the term applied at the establishment
of the United Kingdom ; unification, to use
the term most familiar in the discussions on
Australian federation. This is a national
union.
Secondly—The union may be one which
emphasizes the continued foreign relation
between the states. Every state is for the
purposes of its foreign relations personified
in its government, or in some part of its
government. The British Empire is per-
sonified in the Queen ; France, in the
President of the French Republic, and so
on. Beyond the person or body so personi-
fying the state, foreign Governments do not
look. A permanent union of states may be
formed upon this basis. “ The Federal
Power represents only the governments of


the several members of the union ; its powers
consist simply in issuing requisitions to the
state governments, which, when within the
proper limits of the federal authority, it is
the duty of those governments to carry out.”
This is a system of confederate states.
Thirdly—The union may be still an union
of states, but one which is of a more intimate
kind, which looks behind the Government and
affects the state in all its parts—the state in
its corporate capacity, its government, and
its citizens. Such an union is far from ignor-
ing the separate existence of the states. It
is, on the contrary, built upon a separate ex-
istence. This is a federal union.
The circumstances which determine the
form of the union will be in general the same
as those which determine the extent of its
objects. Where the objects of union extend
to all or nearly all of the purposes of govern-
ment, we may expect to find consolidation ;
where they are few, a confederacy may suf-
fice ; where they are many, there will be a
federal unioni


But while these are the types of union, we
shall find that they have hardly ever been
perfectly realized. The United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland is a consolidation,
and the Imperial Parliament is the very model
of unbounded political power; yet there are
federal elements in the Constitution. The
representation of England, Scotland, and
Ireland is separate ; it has been, and even now
is in the House of Lords, based upon different
principles ; the proportionate contribution of
each to taxation is settled by fixed rule ; the
“three kingdoms” are separate administrative
areas, and there is plenty of evidence that
the federal element is growing—that there is
more and more a tendency to regard them
as separate units within the union. Their
distinct character comes out most of all in
their private law—the civil and criminal law;
they form what Professor Dicey calls “sepa-
rate law districts; ” their courts and their
laws are foreign to each other. And this
while subject to a common superior—the
Imperial Parliament, whose sovereignty is


more complete and undivided than any the
world knows.
The confederacy is likely to confine itself
to a common defence against external ag-
es o
gression, and to such matters as are incident
thereto. It may undertake the whole de-
partment of foreign affairs ; it will certainly
concern itself to prevent causes of quarrel
arising amongst the component states, and
to this end may enjoin every Government to
refrain from acts of internal government of
an unfriendly kind. These were the general
purposes of the Confederacy of the United
States. To attain them it addressed itself
in the main, though not exclusively, to the
governments of the states, and for the aid
of executive and judicial power it was de-
pendent upon their co-operation ; and therein
lay its weakness. But to people of English
race and traditions such an union of states’
governments was more than ineffective, it
was repugnant. One of the most striking
characteristics of our political history is the
way in which every relation of the depart-


ments of government has come to be a legal
relation with the individual citizen ; and we
may surmise that the Confederacy, even had
it been effective, would, in the end, have re-
ceived a federal character in the courts.
The federation may differ but little from
the confederacy in the character and extent
of its objects. Provision will be made
for common defence, and in return for sur-
rendering its right to maintain separate forces
the state will receive a guarantee against
external aggression or domestic violence.
Foreign affairs will be entirely given up to
the federal government, or, at any rate, a
state which conducts its own foreign affairs
will do so under supervision or control.
Provision will be made for the prevention
of internal quarrels, whether between the
federal government and the states or be-
tween the states, and no state will be per-
mitted to take any action even in matters
within its own peculiar province, as its
political constitution, which may endanger
the whole. As one of the most frequent


causes of quarrel amongst states is the harsh
or unfair treatment of the citizens of one by
another, we may find provision against dis-
criminating laws, or even securing to the
citizens of every state the full privileges of
citizenship in every other state ; and for
further security, provision that causes of
dispute between different states or their
citizens shall be justiciable in special tri-
bunals. The strength of such an union will
lie in the fact that to carry out its objects
it has the full machinery of government—
legislative, executive, and judicial—and is not
dependent upon the governmental machinery
of the states.
Now this is the general character of the
Constitution of the United States of 1789.
After making provision for external relations
and defence, its “ chief aim was to secure the
national government against accroachments
on the part of the states, and to prevent
causes of quarrel both between the central
and state authorities and between the several
states.” In the reaction of 1789 care is


taken to protect the citizens against the
national government. But “ the framers of
the Constitution had no wish to produce
uniformity among the states in government
or institutions, and little care to protect the
citizens against abuses of state powers.” So
far the Constitution is federal. But there
are matters which go beyond this, and, as
emphasizing the unity of the people, give the
Constitution in some respects a national
character. The submission to the Federal
Government of certain matters of internal
arrangement wherein the common interest is
best served by common action is not of
much significance in one way or the other.
The Constitution, however, in its preamble
expresses the aim of its founders to “ secure
the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our
posterity ; ” and in pursuance of this object
does, in certain respects, protect the citizen
against his own state. By Article 1., § 10,
of the Constitution no state may pass any
Bill of Attainder, ex post facto law, or law
impairing the obligation of contracts. Again,


by § 8 Congress has power to establish
an uniform rule of naturalization, though it
was not until 1868 that it was enacted that
“ All persons born or naturalized within
the United States, and subject to the juris-
diction thereof, are citizens of the United
States and of the state wherein they reside.”
(Article XIV.) There is thus throughout a
federal and a national element, which finds
expression in the organization of the Legis-
lature. The House of Representatives stands
for the national principle; the Senate, where
the states are equally represented, for the
federal; and the whole government is spoken
of indifferently as the National or the Federal
Government. As one might expect, the
national idea has been growing at the ex-
pense of the federal; the great struggle of
the Civil War of 1861 decided by force one
of the questions —the right of withdrawal;
and the settlement of 1866-8 further em-
phasizes the national character of the union
by providing that “ no state shall make or
enforce any law which shall abridge the


privileges or immunities of citizens of the
United States ; nor shall any state deprive
any person of life, liberty, or property, with-
out due process of law, nor deny to any
person within its jurisdiction the equal pro-
tection of the law.” Truly we may say with
the Federalist that “ the Constitution is in
strictness neither a national nor a federal
constituent, but a composition of both; ”
with Mr. Bryce that “ the central or national
government is not a mere league, for it does
not depend wholly upon the component com-
munities which we call the states. It is
itself a commonwealth as well as a union
of commonwealths.”
The later federations, especially that of
the German Empire, are more liberal in
their view of matters of common interest.
The German Empire was formed under a
strong sense of nationality, and presents so
high a centralization that some have seen in
it a consolidation or unification. Particu-
larly its objects include legislation upon all
matters of civil and criminal law, and within


the last few weeks a code of commercial law
has been adopted for the whole empire. Yet
with all this legislative centralization, which
finds a counterpart in the judicial arrange-
ments, the equipment for administrative
purposes is singularly small, and effective
administration is, in fact, largely dependent
upon the co-operation of the states’ govern-
ments and use of the executive machinery of
Prussia. In the Legislature the Beichsrath
is a national assembly whose members are
chosen upon a universal suffrage in single-
member electoral districts fixed by Imperial
law. The Bundesrath at first appears to
have something of the national character, in
that the states do not return an equal
number of members, but have a membership
corresponding with, though not proportionate
to, their respective population and import-
ance. But in its main features the Bundes-
rath is not national, nor even federal, but
confederate. Its members are nominated by
the states governments, and have all the
character and even the special privileges of


ambassadors ; they are delegates who receive
instructions and must vote in accordance
with those instructions. The voting is by
states, each state casting the whole of its
votes in one way or the other, and the
voting power of each state is wholly in-
dependent of the number of representatives
it chooses to send ; many of the states, in
fact, may entrust their votes to one repre-
sentative. “ The true conception of the
Bundesrath is that of an assembly of the
sovereigns of the states, who appear in the
persons of their representatives.”
When we regard the functions and organ-
ization of the Commonwealth we find that
it is no more possible than in the Constitu-
tion of the United States or in the Constitu-
tion of the German Empire to treat them
as wholly national or wholly federal. Con-
federate they are not, for the Constitution
and the laws made thereunder are expressly
declared to be binding upon the judges,
courts, and people of every state and of the
Commonwealth; and even in the federal


House of the Legislature we find no trace of
the confederate relation. It has, too, that
full equipment of government —legislative,
executive, and judicial power—which a con-
federacy has not, and may thus be distin-
guished from the existing Federal Council,
which is a purely legislative body. In
respect of purposes, the national and federal
characters appear in a manner somewhat
different from the way in which they appear
in the United States. The attitude of the
Australian people towards Government is
not that of the founders of the American
Constitution ; it is one of over great reliance
rather than distrust. We are not to expect
the national element to appear in the security
given to the citizen against undue inter-
ference by his state ; we think that he has
sufficient security in the share which he has
in forming his state government. Still
there are provisions of this kind, the more
significant because we do not expect them.
§ 110 requires that every state shall secure
to all persons the equal protection of its laws,


and § 109 provides that no state shall make
any law prohibiting the free exercise of any
religion. Other national elements are of
course implied-—there is a common citizen-
ship at present in our common subjection
to the Crown, and power is given to the
Commonwealth Parliament to legislate on
naturalization. At the same time that is not
one of the exclusive powers of legislation,
and the Constitution more than once speaks
of citizens of the several states, and secures
them against abridgment of privileges in
other states of the union—a federal rather
than a national provision. The union, too,
rests on a national basis, in that, besides
being of the same race and language and of
the same diversity of religions, the people
have inherited a common stock of laws and
institutions. A colony so different in its
nature as Fiji, though within the “Aus-
tralasian group,” and within the existing
Federal Council, is not included. Just as
the United States is an union of republics,
so the Australian Commonwealth is an


union of states which have adopted, even
in minute detail, a common political system.
And while there is no provision in the bill
against a change in state contitutions exactly
corresponding with that in the United States
Constitution against the adoption of any but
a republican form of government, the union
is expressed to be an union under the
Crown.
Again, there is an impulse towards uni-
formity of the law in certain departments—
notably in the law of the domestic relations
and in commercial law, though this uniformity
may at first, at any rate, be obtained rather
by determining the sphere within which the
laws and courts of each state may act than
by destroying the separate “ law districts ”
which the states at present form, and making
them one law district with a completely
uniform law. On the other hand, there are
distinctly federal elements—facts which re-
mind us that the Commonwealth is an union
of commonwealths. Putting aside those
restrictions upon state action which are of a


national kind—viz., its action upon its own
citizens and disregarding those powers
which are withdrawn from the states because
conferred upon the Commonwealth, we find
a number of sections governing the relation
of the Federal Government to the states,
and the relation of the states to each other.
The states have certain duties to perform
towards the Commonwealth ; they have im-
portant financial and trade relations with it,
and at the outset the Parliament has to
adjust their financial relations towards each
other; their particular concurrence is required
in respect of the exercise of certain powers,
and they are amenable as states to the courts
of the Commonwealth, at any rate to the ex-
tent of being liable to suit there by another
state. They have certain express rights and
duties as between each other, full faith and
credit to their laws and public acts, and pro-
tection of their citizens against discriminating
laws. Finally, they are entitled to call for
certain definite services from the Common-
wealth protection against invasion and


domestic violence. The Commonwealth may
impose no tax on state property, and the
states may not tax the property of the
Commonwealth.
The two-fold character of the union
appears in the organization of Parliament
—the national element is in the House of
Representatives, where the membership for
each state is proportionate to its population;
the federal element is in the Senate, where
the principle of the equality of states is
recognized in the equality of representation.
Again, in the provisions for the amendment
of the Constitution the same principles are
recognized in the requirement of a majority
of the electors and a majority of the states.
The Parliamentary Organization. The
composition of and distribution of powers
between the two Houses has been the only
matter discussed in temper ; and the com-
position of the Senate has been described as
of an anti-federal character, some centrifugal
force at variance with the principle of union.
Certainly it is non-national, but it is federal


—it does express the fact that the states are
members of the Commonwealth, that the
Commonwealth is a complex and not a
simple state. Some misconceptions might
have been avoided if instead of the names
Senate and House of Representatives the
Convention had adopted the names suggested
by Mr. Barton in 1891—Federal Assembly
and National Assembly. The present names
are mere “ fancy ” names. Even in the United
States they are not truly descriptive, though
the executive purposes of the Senate were
some justification for the adoption of the
name. In the Australian Commonwealth
the executive functions are not present in
the Senate, and fitly enough it loses in its
organization the appearance of a permanent
conference of ambassadors. It is not to be
appointed by the states legislatures as in the
United States, but is to be elected by the
people of the states; the one confederate
mark of the United States Constitution,
then, is not reproduced in the Common-
wealth Constitution, which substitutes for it


the federal character. Both the Houses are
representative; both, as elected upon an ex-
tensive if not an identical suffrage, contain
that “ popular ” element which the name
“ assembly ” has come to imply, but they
stand for the separate principles, the federal
and the national.
Though the constitution of the Senate is
federal, not national, it would be wrong to
regard it as anti-national. The principles of
federalism and nationalism are neither identi-
cal nor antipathetic ; they co-exist as forces
tending to strengthen the union. Every
new political organism has in it elements of
weakness, and it is no safe thing to found a
nation by counting heads, even to save the
trouble of breaking them : such a nation is
likely to want cohesion, stability, durability.
It is the perception of this which has led the
builders of nations to seek a foundation in
existing political organizations. It must not
be forgotten that our House of Commons
rested upon this principle —it was the House,
not of the commonalty, but of the commu-


nities; it was communitas communitatum.
Dr. Hearn says of it:—“lt points to the
commune, to the political body, and not to
the individuals of whom that is com-
posed, as the object of representation. The
basis of English representation has never
been personal, but organic. . . . Thus
our system of representation is the re-
presentation, not of interests or opinions or
of population, but of population organized.”
This is the character of the Senate—it
represents the people organized as states,
and it is therefore the Senate rather than
the House of Representatives which, in
respect of its organization, bears the mark
of a House of Commons.
As soon as the Senate is elected, how-
ever, it is no longer an assembly of states.
The Senate is to be no mere body of
nominees of state governments, no mere
body of delegates who cast a solid vote for
Victoria or New South Wales as the case
may be. What Burke said of the House of
Commons will be true of the Senate :—“ Par-


liament is not a congress of ambassadors
from different and hostile interests, which
interests each must maintain as an agent and
advocate against other agents and advocates,
but Parliament is a deliberative assembly of
our nation, with one interest, that of the
whole, where not local purposes nor local pre-
judices ought to guide, but the general good
resulting from the reason of the whole. You
choose a member indeed, but when you have
chosen him he is not a member of Bristol,
but he is a member of Parliament.” The
members are elected, and, when elected, each
member is a member of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth, exercising his separate judg-
ment and giving his individual vote. So
much is conceded, but the question of
equality of representation still remains, and
undoubtedly it has in its favour the legal
view that “ all states are equal.” Having
regard to the purposes of the Commonwealth
and to the need for stability, the organization
determined on at Adelaide seems not merely
a fair compromise but the wisest arrangement


for a beginning. But if we look to the
future we shall see that after the financial
and trade relations of the Commonwealth
have been settled, much that is distinctly
federal will recede, and the national elements
will be more in the foreground. We ought
to be able to count, too, upon the growth of
the national sentiment, as it has grown in
America. Should not some provision be
made for this change in conditions ? In the
bill no state can be deprived of its equal
representation in the Senate without its own
consent —a provision similar to that in the
American Constitution. If a modification
of the present bill is necessary —and there
seems some reason to believe that without
some modification federation will not be
accomplished—might it not be made here ?
Retain the present equality of representation
for ten or fifteen years, and thereafter leave
the matter to be dealt with in the ordinary
way of constitutional amendment —by a
majority of the people and a majority of the
states.


LECTURE 11.
THE CONSTITUTION THE STATES THE CROWN
THE PARLIAMENT I ITS NATURE AND POWERS.
The term constitution is one which is
already sufficiently ambiguous, and the
Commonwealth Bill does some dis-service
to political language, and therefore to
political thought, by giving us new ambigui-
ties. The term is, in fact, used by the
framers of the Constitution with three
distinct meanings ; it describes the new
political organism when in § 3 the colonies
are united in a federal constitution ; it is the
name of the whole bill in §l, where it is
provided that this Act may be cited as the
Constitution of the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia ; and by § 8 it is what we may call the
“ instrument of government.” These various
meanings may fcause some trouble in respect
of the amending power.
The general scope and purpose of the bill
is best shown by setting out the resolutions


adopted by the Convention as the ground-
work :
That, in order to enlarge the powers of self-govern-
ment of the people of Australasia, it is desirable to
create a Federal Government which shall exercise
authority throughout the Federated Colonies, subject to
the following principal conditions :
I. That the powers, privileges, and territories of
the several existing colonies shall remain in-
tact, except in respect of such surrenders as
may be agreed upon to secure uniformity of
law and administration in matters of common
concern.
ii. That, after the establishment of the Federal
Government, there shall be no alteration of
the territorial possessions or boundaries of any
colony without the consent of the colony or
colonies concerned.
in. That the exclusive power to impose and collect
duties of Customs and Excise, and to give
bounties, shall be vested in the Federal Parlia-
ment.
iv. That the exclusive control of the Military and
Naval Defences of the Federated Colonies
shall be vested in the Federal Parliament.
v. That the trade and intercourse between the
Federated Colonies, whether by land or sea,
shall become and remain absolutely free.


Subject to the carrying out of these, and such other
conditions as may be hereafter deemed necessary, this
Convention approves of the framing of a Federal Con-
stitution which shall establish —
(a) A Parliament to consist of two houses, namely,
a States Assembly or Senate, and a National
Assembly or House of Representatives : the
States Assembly to consist of representatives
of each colony, to hold office for such periods
and be chosen in such manner as will best
secure to that Chamber a perpetual existence,
combined with definite responsibility to the
people of the State which shall have chosen
them : the National Assembly to be elected
by districts formed on a population basis, and
to possess the sole power of originating all
bills appropriating revenue or imposing taxa-
tion.
(i h) An Executive, consisting of a Governor-
General, to be appointed by the Queen, and of
such persons as from time to time may be
appointed as his advisers.
(c) A Supreme Federal Court, which shall also be
the High Court of Appeal for each colony in
the Federation.
To give the Constitution the force of law,
the authority of the Imperial Parliament
must be invoked; and the Commonwealth is


constituted, in fact, not merely, as it says in
the preamble, “under the Crown” and
“ under the Constitution,” but also under the
Imperial Parliament. This is at once im-
portant and familiar—important because it
indicates that the union is a matter of law,
that it is no mere compact which may be
discharged or from which a party may with-
draw at will. We are saved from the per-
plexing and dangerous questions which have
so troubled the Americans ; and our union
bears the impress of indissolubility even
without the recital in the bill. The position
is familiar, for we are accustomed to
Imperial laws operating directly in the
colonies and unalterable by the colonial
Parliaments. The supremacy of the Im-
perial Parliament therefore stands us in good
stead.
The Act is brought into operation by pro-
clamation of the Queen in Council declaring
that on and after a date appointed, not being
later than six months after the passing of
the Act, the people of the colonies which


have adopted the Constitution shall be united
in a federal constitution under the name of
the Commonwealth of Australia (§3), The
eligible colonies are New South Wales, New
Zealand, Queensland, Tasmania, Victoria, and
Western Australia, and the province of South
Australia (§ 5). Those of the colonies which
come in at the outset do so in all respects
upon the terms of the Constitution ; those
which come in afterwards come in by ad-
mission of the Parliament and upon such
terms as Parliament thinks fit (§ 114). The
alteration of existing state limits and the
separation of existing states are governed by
the Parliament of the Commonwealth, acting
with the consent of the parliament of the
state concerned. Provision is made for the
government of territories not forming part of
any state (§ 115), whether they are (1)
acquired by surrender by any state, or (2)
placed under the Commonwealth by the
Crown. The first of these provisions relates
in the main to territory determined upon by
Parliament as the seat of the Commonwealth


Government, which will be separated from its
state and will be directly governed by the
Commonwealth (§ 53), a provision which
practically prevents the fixing of the federal
capital at the capital of any of the existing
states. It relates also to the government of
federal dockyards, arsenals, &c. (§ 53, sub-sec.
2). The second provision contemplates the
existence of “ dependencies ” of the Common-
wealth ; but it is hard to see why the power
of Parliament in respect of them should be
limited to making laws for the provisional
administration and government (§ 115).
The Constitution borrows from the con-
stitutions of the United States, Canada,
Switzerland, and the present Australian
colonies. From the Constitution of the
Australian colonies we get those provisions
in the bill which are especially designed to
provide for “ responsible government,” and
the relations between the Executive and
Parliament, and between the two Houses of
Parliament, which responsible government
has implied. The Swiss Constitution gives


us the submission of amendments in the
Constitution for the acceptance of the people
and the states. Canada gives us the form of
establishment and certain matters of detail,
the subjects of legislation referred to Par-
liament (with some additions, and the notable
exclusion of criminal law) and a High Court
of Appeal. But in the most material matters
in which there is a difference between the
Constitution of Canada and the Constitution
of the United States, we follow the United
States, and it is the older constitution which
is the true model of the present bill.
In the first place the object of the bill is
to give a constitution to the Commonwealth,
not to the states. While, therefore, the
British North America Act distributes the
powers of government between the Dominion
and the provinces, the Commonwealth Bill
concerns itself with the Commonwealth
alone, and the constitutions of the states are
dealt with only to preserve them intact.
§ 99. All powers which at the establish-
ment of the Commonwealth are vested in


the parliaments of the several colonies, and
which are not by this Constitution exclusively
vested in the Parliament of the Common-
wealth, or withdrawn from the parliaments
of the several states, are reserved to and shall
remain in the parliaments of the states
respectively.
§ 102. All powers and functions which are
at the establishment of the Commonwealth
vested in the Governors of the colonies
respectively shall, so far as the same are
capable of being exercised, after the establish-
ment of the Commonwealth, in relation to the
government of the states, continue to be
vested in the Governors of the states re-
spectively.
§ 103. Subject to the provisions of the
Constitution, the constitutions of the several
states of the Commonwealth shall continue
as at the establishment of the Common-
wealth until altered by or under the authority
of the parliaments thereof in accordance with
the provisions of their existing constitu-
tions.


In other words, all the governmental
powers at present possessed by the states
remain to them, except so far as they have
been conferred upon the Commonwealth.
The residue of power, then, remains to the
states, as in the United States ; in Canada it
lies in the Dominion.
The second point in which we follow the
United States rather than Canada is in
respect of amendment. In the United
States there was no external superior to
whom the States might look for amendment ;
amending power, carefully restricted and
safeguarded, had to be left to the republic.
In Canada the Constitution came through
the Imperial Parliament; it was best secured
by requiring that alterations should come
from the same authority. In Australia, the
parliaments have all been entrusted with the
power of amending the constitutions of their
own colonies. In a federal constitution such
a power could hardly be entrusted to the
Parliament, but there was no reason why it
should not be exercised by the Common-


wealth; and this is the provision that is
made.
The states parliaments are thus in a
stronger position than the states legislatures
in the United States and provincial parlia-
ments in Canada. In Canada, not only is
the residue of power in the Dominion
Parliament, but the Dominion Executive
exercises supervision over the legislatures of
the provinces in the power of the Governor-
General to disallow Provincial Acts. In
the Commonwealth, as in the United States,
there is no such power of supervision ; the
state within its own sphere is as independent
as though the Commonwealth did not exist.
The states parliaments are stronger than the
states legislatures in the United States, for
however wide the powers of the states, those
powers are not all possessed by the states
legislatures. The characteristic feature of
the United States has been a jealousy and
distrust of government ; and the states when
they got rid of one oppressor were by no
means ready to put another in his place.


The state, therefore, kept its power to itself,
and gave out only so much as appeared neces-
sary. We have seen already that the Federal
Constitution secures the citizen in important
matters against the national government and
his state. But the state constitutions with-
draw a vast number of powers from the
state government and so restrict the action
of the legislatures. This jealousy has in-
creased rather than diminished. In Aus-
tralia there has not been this jealousy, and
the parliaments of the respective colonies
exercise the whole of the powers of self-
government which the colonies possess.
It is a mistake, therefore, to suppose that
federation will be a check upon the powers
of the parliaments of the colonies. That
section of the community which believes that
we are too much and not over wisely
governed, has hailed federation as a means
of reducing -parliamentary power. They
have believed that if only there was a parlia-
ment which was free from the reproach of
pettiness and provincialism, wiser councils


would prevail in affairs, and that those wiser
counsels would give us less government, and
government of a better kind. They have
known perhaps that the state legislatures in
the United States and the provincial parlia-
ments in Canada have limited powers, and
they have looked upon federation as a re-
straining influence, one which, calling into
existence one set of powers to do the work
now requiring several sets, would relieve the
state of the burden of many governmental
institutions. And their imagination has seen
each colonial parliament reduced to the
condition of a glorified municipality, ex-
ercising functions differing not greatly, save
in the wider area over which they extend,
from those now associated with local govern-
ment.
Whatever federation means it does not
mean this. In Canada the limits of pro-
vincial action are. set by the delegation of
special powers, and on this, among other
grounds, the Dominion of Canada has been
said to be no true federation. In the


United States the limitations upon state
legislatures are to be found mainly in the
constitutions of the states, and differ in each
state, though common evils have led to
common precautions. In Australia federa-
tion is a means of enlarging our powers of
self-government, and self-government has
meant parliamentary government. How-
ever, we may see some signs of distrust of
parliament. There are two significant
differences between the Constitutions of 1891
and 1897. The bill of 1891 was framed in
a convention nominated by the parliaments
of the colonies ; the Senate of the Common-
wealth was to be formed by the same process
of nomination. The bill of 1897 was framed
by a convention in the main elected by the
people of the colonies, and the Senate is
to be wholly elective. It is possible that
federation may make it necessary or de-
sirable for the states to reform their con-
stitutions. One disadvantage of a Federal
Government is that it has some tendency
to degrade the political life of the states.


The “ best men ” are apt to betake them-
selves to the larger stage, where are the
greater rewards and the greater glory, and
where they are likely to find a sphere of
greater usefulness. The present bill wisely
omits the provision of the bill of 1891
under which no member of the Federal
Parliament could be a member of a state
parliament. But there is nothing to pre-
vent the states creating such a disquali-
fication, and this is what has been done in
many of the states in America, The bill
does inferentially disqualify Ministers of the
Crown in the various colonies from sitting
in the Federal Parliament, and prevents
under penalty any member of the Federal
Parliament from becoming a Minister in his
own state (or a judge there) within six
months of his ceasing to be a member (§ 48).
Such offices are “ offices of profit under the
Crown,” and are not exempted from the
general disqualifications and penalties which
attach to office. The penal provision, how-
ever, may be altered by Parliament. But


in any case there will be few men with
sufficient leisure for both Commonwealth
and state parliaments, and there will be a
practical separation of the political life of
the Commonwealth and the states.
The result may well be that the states
may think fit to assume much direct legis-
lative power, and to that end restrict the
powers of their legislatures, giving them
somewhat the character of delegate bodies.
One may suggest therefore that in referring
to the states’ powers the Constitution
should consistently speak of the “ states,”
and not indifferently of the states and the
“ parliaments of the states.” This would
cause no embarrassment as to the exercise
of powers, for notice must be taken of the
lodging of constitutional power in the states
under § 111, whereby “full faith and credit
shall be given throughout the Common-
wealth to the laws, the public acts and
records, and the judicial proceedings of the
states.”
The Crown. —The last matter to be con-


sidered in relation to the states will lead us
to a consideration of the position of the
Crown and its prerogatives in the Common-
wealth. The first thing to be noticed is that,
consistently with the determination to leave
the constitution of the states untouched, the
Act does not put an end to the direct re-
lation between the Crown and its represent-
ative in the various colonies. Nothing is
said of the appointment of states Governors,
and the Crown will, as of old, exercise its
discretion in regard to the officer and his
powers, save so far as those are defined by
the existing law or necessarily transferred to
the Governor-General (§ 102). But the
continuance of state Governors is clearly
contemplated, for not only is there a reserva-
tion of his powers (§ 102), but he has certain
specific duties in respect of the elections for
the Parliament of the Commonwealth and in
other matters ( e.g ., §§ 12, 14, 20). Even in
Canada, where there is much more apparent
dependence of the provinces upon the
Dominion, and where the provincial Gover-


nors are appointed by the Governor-General,
the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
has held that “ the relation between the
Crown and the provinces is the same as that
which subsists between the Crown and
Dominion in respect of such powers, execu-
tive and legislative, as are vested in them
respectively ” — Maritime Bank of Canada v.
Receiver-General of New Brunswick, L.P.
1892, Ap. Cas,
In respect of Imperial legislation for the
states, that power still remains in the Im-
perial Parliament; but there is a provision
for “ the exercise within the Commonwealth
at the request or with the concurrence of the
parliaments of all the states concerned, of
any legislative powers which can at the
establishment of the Constitution be exercised
only by the Imperial Parliament of the
United Kingdom or the Federal Council of
Australasia.”
The Relation of the Crown to the Common-
wealth is, of course, a matter with which the
Constitution is more intimately concerned,


and in general the relation is to be that
which at present subsists between the Crown
and the separate colonies. The representa-
tive of the Crown is to be called the Governor-
General, and will be appointed by the Queen.
Like the Governor of a colony, he has his
delegate character emphasized —he is no
viceroy, clothed with all the prerogatives of
the Crown ; he has merely to exercise, sub-
ject to the provisions of the Constitution,
“ such powers and functions as Her Majesty
may think fit to assign to him.” This pro-
vision is one which in times past would have
caused some soreness, and may even yet
cause some inconvenience. The Supreme
Court of Victoria held in the great case of
Ah Toy v. Musgrove that the Governor of a
colony which enjoyed responsible government
was legally in the position which it had been
long settled was the position of the Governor
of a Crown colony—he was no viceroy, no
general agent, but the special agent of the
Crown to exercise those powers which had
been expressly conferred upon him. The


prerogatives of the Crown exercisable in the
colony belong to the Governor only when he
is the officer upon whom they have been con-
ferred by the commission or instructions of
the Crown or by Act of Parliament. The
importance of this ruling lies in this—that if
the Governor possessed all the prerogatives
of the Crown exercisable in the colony ex-
cept such as had been expressly reserved by
Act of Parliament, all those prerogatives
would be exercised by him on the advice of
the colonial ministry, and any attempt on the
part of the Home authorities to limit his
powers or direct his judgment would have
to be ignored. If, on the other hand, the
Governor has only such powers as are
allotted to him there is greater scope for the
lawful interference of the Home authorities.
In practice, of course, the interference of the
Colonial Office has in recent years been
limited to the “needs of the unity of empire.”
Consistent on the bench with his attitude in
politics, Chief Justice Higinbotham delivered
a strong dissenting judgment in the case


referred to, holding that the Governor pos-
sessed, as incident to the grant of self-
government, all the prerogatives of the
Crown exercisable in the colonies save those
which were withheld from him by Act of
Parliament, and that he was to exercise
these prerogatives on the advice of his
responsible Ministers.
In two places the Constitution comes into
contact with the prerogative. It is one of
the prerogatives of the Crown, as the repre-
sentative of the empire in external affairs,
to make treaties independent of Parliament;
but the extent to which these are binding on
the subject is not very well settled. The
general relations of the Commonwealth to
foreign states will, of course, be directed by
the Imperial authorities, though some of the
legislative and judiciary powers are applic-
able to direct foreign relations. The Com-
monwealth Bill, § 52, empowers the Parlia-
ment to make laws for the regulation of
trade and commerce with other countries
and among the several states ; and “ external


affairs and treaties ” are dealt with in the
legislative and judiciary chapters. It is no
doubt proposed that the Crown shall be asked
to extend the powers of the Commonwealth
in commercial relations, and accordingly pro-
vision is made in advance whereby treaties
made by the Commonwealth shall be binding
on the subject. That probably accounts for
the special and somewhat peculiar wording
of § 7, whereby while laws made by the Par-
liament are only binding when in pursuance
of the powers conferred by the Constitution,
all treaties made by the Commonwealth are
binding. And in considering this matter
we must not forget that by § 2 the whole
Act is to bind the Crown—a provision
the effect of which is to rebut the pre-
sumption against interference with the pre-
rogative.
The other matter is the appeal to the
Queen in Council. These appeals have
always to be' regarded from two points of
view—the right of the subject to appeal,
and the prerogative of the Crown to enter-


tain an appeal. While there is no presump-
tion in favour of the former, the presumption
which saves the prerogative of course applies
to the latter; and a doubt has been ex-
pressed by high authority whether the pre-
rogative of the Crown to hear an appeal as a
matter of grace can be impaired by legisla-
tion of the Dominion Parliament. In the
Commonwealth Bill the ordinary appeal as
of right to the Privy Council is taken away
by § 7 5 ; and special leave to appeal may be
granted by the Queen only in cases where
“the public interests of the Commonwealth,
or of any state, or any other part of the
Queen’s Dominions are concerned.”
The Parliament: its Nature and Powers.
—The supremacy of the Imperial Parlia-
ment over colonial parliaments has made
us familiar with the position of a subordinate
legislature. On the other hand, saving
always this supremacy, the parliament of
an Australian colony possesses the widest
powers. It dominates the Executive and the
judiciary, as does the Imperial Parliament ;


it possesses that most striking of the char-
acteristics of the Imperial Parliament, that
it may alter the Constitution itself. In the
language of publicists, it is “at once a con-
stituent and a legislative assembly. ” The
most important fact connected with the Com-
monwealth Parliament is that it has not this
power; the Parliament, not less than the
executive or the judiciary, is under the
Constitution. In the Commonwealth, then,
we meet a fact with which neither the United
Kingdom nor any of the existing colonies of
Australia has to deal: the principle of the
supremacy of Parliament gives way to the
principle of the supremacy of the Constitu-
tion. There is, then, “ somewhat fundamen-
tal ; ” we have a “ rigid ” Constitutional
law —alterable, indeed, but not by the Parlia-
ment which it has created—a law which in
its source is extra-Parliamentary, and in its
force is superior to Parliament. Not but
that there are some things in the Constitu-
tion that Parliament may alter; many of
the arrangements are expressed to be pro-


visional merely. But the greater matters are
fundamental.
Another characteristic of the Parliament
has been already dealt with in speaking of
the states. The Parliament, like the other
federal powers, has a special rather than a
general power. It has full power and
authority to make laws for the peace, order,
and good government of the Commonwealth,
not generally, but “ with respect to all or
any of the matters following.” It bears the
delegate mark—the character of a special
agent; it is not in general necessary to for-
bid action to it, for it must bring its laws
within the scope of its authority. But too
much must not be inferred from this fact;
we must not proceed to compare it with a
company incorporated for some special pur-
pose, or with some municipal corporation. If
the power and authority is special in respect
of the subjects, it is full in respect of its
extent over them.
Speaking of the Congress of the United
States, whose powers come to it in the same


way, Mr. Bryce (i., p. 329) says :—“ There
is, of course, this enormous difference between
Congress and a subordinate law-making
authority in England, that Congress is
supreme within its proper sphere, the people
having no higher or permanent organ to
over-ride or repeal such statutes as Congress
may pass within that sphere; whereas in
England there exists in Parliament a con-
stantly present supervising authority which
may at any moment cancel or modify what
any subordinate body may have enacted,
whether within or without the scope of its
delegated powers. That is an important
distinction.” What the power is that re-
strains the Commonwealth Parliament to
action within the scope of its powers will
appear later ; but the distinction indicated by
Mr. Bryce is in the highest degree important
when we come to construe the Constitution
whether of the Commonwealth or a colony.
Particularly is it important in that it gives
us a doctrine of construction excluding the
application of the maxim, Delegatus non


potest delegare. In the United States the
well-recognized supremacy of the State over
the Legislature has caused the application
of this doctrine with much caution; but
English Courts, familiar with the doctrine
of Parliamentary sovereignty, have had no
hesitation whatever in applying it to the
enactments of the provincial legislatures in
Canada and the subordinate legislatures in
India,
Subjects of Legislation. —The matters on
which the Parliament is to have full power
and authority are specially enumerated in
§§ 52 and 53, but they by no means re-
present the whole of the powers of Parliament.
As already mentioned, many of the arrange-
ments made by the bill are provisional only,
and remain “ until Parliament otherwise
provides.” Then there is power in respect
of the admission of new states and territories
—a power of an executive rather than a
legislative kind. Then there are the wide
powers, necessarily insinuated rather than
expressed, of controlling the Executive, and


making and unmaking Cabinets. Finally,
by § 121, constitutional amendments may be
initiated by Parliament alone, a matter in
which we depart from the Constitution of the
United States, where by Article V. of the
Constitution the Congress must call a con-
vention for proposing amendments whenever
required to do so by the legislatures of two-
thirds of the states.
The most general of the powers conferred
on Parliament by § 52 is that in sub-section
xxxyii., under which it may legislate on “any
matters necessary for or incidental to the
carrying into execution of the foregoing
powers” ( i.e ., those enumerated in the pre-
ceding sub-sections) “ or of any other powers
vested by this Constitution in the Parliament
or the Executive Government of the Com-
monwealth, or in any department or office
thereof.”
The other powers contained in § 52 may
in the first instance be classified as direct or
indirect, the last being exercisable with the
consent of a state or at the request or with


the concurrence of a state. The powers exer-
cised by consent of a state are the taking over
of state railways and the construction of rail-
ways (xxxm. and xxxiv.) ; those by request
or concurrence are :—“ xxxv. Any matter
referred by the Parliament of any state, but
so that the law shall extend only to the state
so referring, and to such other states as may
afterwards adopt the law. xxxvi. Any legis-
lative powers which can at the establishment
of the Constitution be exercised only by the
Parliament of the United Kingdom or by
the Federal Council.” It is to be noted that
the powers of the Federal Council are not
taken over en masse.
The direct powers of the Parliament may
be roughly classified as follows :
1. Those which relate to the external
affairs of the Commonwealth—Trade and
commerce (i.); fisheries in Australian waters
beyond territorial limits (xii.) ; naturalization
and aliens (xxi.); immigration and emigration
(xxvii.) ; influx of criminals (xxvm.); ex-
ternal affairs and treaties (xxix.); and the


relation of the Commonwealth to the islands
of the Pacific (xxx.)
2. Defence. —The military and naval de-
fence of the Commonwealth and of the several
states, and the calling out of the forces to
execute and maintain the laws of the Com-
monwealth (yi.) ; munitions of war (vn.) ;
control of railways with respect to transport
for the military purposes of the Common-
wealth (xxxn.)
3. Shipping. — Navigation and shipping
(vm.); ocean beacons and buoys, and ocean
lighthouses and lightships (ix.) ; quarantine
(xi.) ; control and regulation of the navi-
gation of the River Murray, and the use
of the waters thereof, from where it first
forms the boundary between Victoria and
New South Wales to the sea (xxxi.)
4. Raising Money. —Customs and excise
and bounties, but so that these shall be uni-
form throughout the Commonwealth, and
that no tax or duty shall be imposed on any
goods exported from one state to another
(ii.) ; raising money by any other mode of


taxation, but so that it shall be uniform
throughout the Commonwealth (in.); bor-
rowing money on the public credit of the
Commonwealth (iv.)
5. Certain provisions designed to secure
uniformity of the law, public and private,
or to adjust the relations and to secure the
common action of the states therein.
(a). Public Law. —Postal, telegraphic, tele-
phonic, and other like services (v.);
astronomical and meteorological obser-
vations (x.); census and statistics (xm.);
currency, coinage, and legal tender (xiv.);
weights and measures (xvii.)
(6). Private Law. —Matters principally falling
under the head of commercial law, status,
or procedure. Banking, the incorporation
of banks and the issue of paper money
(xv.) ; insurance, “excluding state insur-
ance not extending beyond the limits of
the state concerned” (xvi.); bills of ex-
change and promissory notes (xvm.) ;
bankruptcy and insolvency (xix.) ; copy-
rights and patents, designs, and trade


marks (xx.) ; foreign corporations, and
trading or financial corporations formed
in any state or part of the Common-
wealth (xxii.) ; marriage and divorce
(xxm.) ; parental rights and the custody
and guardianship of infants (xxiv.) ;
service and execution throughout the
Commonwealth of the civil and criminal
process and judgments of the courts of
the states (xxv.) ; the recognition
throughout the Commonwealth of the
laws, the public acts, and records and
judicial proceedings of the states (xxvi.)
It is under this last head that we observe
a great difference from the Constitution of
the United States and an approach to the
Constitutions of the later federations. At the
establishment of the Constitution of the
United States complete independence of
the states in matters of civil and criminal
legislation was deemed an almost essential
condition ; such legislation was not matter of
common interest but of internal relations.
However, the intimate relations which


have been established between different
countries by reason of the facilities for
communication of all sorts, have shown that
there is scarcely any matter which can be
regarded purely as a matter of internal
concern; and there is a constantly growing
body of law determining the region within
which local law and foreign law shall apply,
local courts and foreign courts shall exercise
jurisdiction. The closer the intimacy be-
tween the states the more constantly do
questions of this kind arise; and wherever
states have fallen into groups, whether joined
by any political bond or not, the subject of
private international law, or the conflict
of laws, has soon become a large department
of their legal system. Now, the subjects
which have been referred to the Parliament
of the Commonwealth are those subjects
in which there is the greatest conflict of laws
and of jurisdictions. The colonies have re-
ceived an uniform basis of law, the common
law of England ; but as they form “ separate
law districts,” their laws and jurisdictions


frequently clash, and there is no common
superior save the Imperial Parliament which
can determine the proper sphere of each.
In the department of procedure, the Federal
Council has had some power of facilitating in
a proper case the process of the courts of
one colony in another colony, and of regulat-
ing the enforcement in one colony of judg-
ments obtained in another ; but nothing has
yet been done to bring the laws into relation
in such important matters as bankruptcy and
divorce.
While a general power of legislation in
regard to the matters enumerated belongs
to the Federal Parliament, we may expect
that the power will be exercised principally
in the adjustment of the relations of the
states as “ law districts ; ” for it is important
to remember that separate law districts they
remain, and that, for most purposes, the laws
and courts of each state in the Common-
wealth will be “ foreign ” to the laws and
courts of every other, just as Scotch law and
Scotch courts are foreign to English law and


English courts. One might suggest that
there would be some convenience in ex-
tending the powers of the Parliament to all
cases of the conflict of laws and jurisdictions,
so as to include the recognition of foreign laws
and judgments and dispositions of property,
and so to establish our jurisdiction and the
operation of our laws that, by avoiding con-
flict with the laws or invasion of the juris-
diction of foreign states, they may be likely
to secure recognition and enforcement abroad
and the co-operation of foreign courts. Aus-
tralia might thus prepare to do her part in
that codification of private international law
which has for some time engaged the atten-
tion of the jurists of Europe.
The powers of which we have spoken are
not declared to be “ exclusive,” but it does
not necessarily follow that any state may
legislate upon all of them. Some of them
are obviously without the jurisdiction of
state parliaments, which are subject to a
strict territorial limitation. Others fall
within the “ matters relating to departments


of the public service control of which is
transferred to the Executive Government of
the Commonwealth; ” these, by § 53, are
within the exclusive powers of the Parlia-
ment. Such departments are —Customs and
excise ; posts and telegraphs ; military and
naval defence ; ocean beacons and buoys and
ocean lighthouses and lightships ; and quar-
antine (§ 69).
On the imposition of uniform duties by the
Parliament, the power of imposing customs
and excise duties and offering bounties (save
bounties or aids to mining for gold, silver, or
other metals) becomes an exclusive power
(§ 84), and the laws of the states thereon cease
to have effect. Parliament is to impose these
duties within two years (§ 88), but nothing
is said as to what is to happen if the power
is not exercised within that time. The pro-
hibition on state legislation in these matters
is repeated in § 106, which makes an ex-
ception in favour of charges for executing
the inspection laws of the states, and such
inspection laws are brought under the direct


review of the Commonwealth Parliament by
a provision that they may be annulled by that
body. As soon as uniform duties have been
established, trade and intercourse throughout
the Commonwealth is to be absolutely free
(§ 89), and neither the Commonwealth nor
any state shall make any law derogating
from the freedom of trade or commerce
between the different parts of the Common-
wealth (§ 95).
States may not raise or maintain forces
without consent of Commonwealth Parlia-
ment (§ 107), or coin money, or make any-
thing but gold or silver a legal tender in
payment of debts (§ 108). The other
exclusive powers of the Commonwealth
Parliament are (§53) :
1. The affairs of the people of any race
with respect to whom it is deemed necessary
to make special laws not applicable to the
whole community—viz., Asiatic races —but
not so as to include aboriginals.
2. The government of the territory adopted
as the seat of Government; and the exercise


of like authority over all places acquired by
the Commonwealth, with the consent of the
state in which such places are situate, for the
construction of forts, magazines, arsenals,
dockyards, quarantine stations, or for any
other purpose of public concern. These
powers are plenary in a high sense; they
extend to all purposes of government, and
are not subject to those restrictions which
are put upon the states.
Commonwealth and State Legislation. —
From what has already been said it will be
seen that there is a wide range of matters
over which both federal and state legislation
may extend. On these matters the power of
Commonwealth and state is independent;
there is no power in the Commonwealth
Parliament to forbid or annul state legisla-
tion, but “ when a law of a state is incon-
sistent with a law of the Commonwealth the
latter shall prevail, and the former shall, to
the extent of the inconsistency, be invalid ”
(§ no)-
By a “ law of the Commonwealth ” and


“ a law of the state,” of course, is meant
an enactment dealing with some matter on
which the Commonwealth Parliament and
State Parliament have legislative competence.
In that case alone is there any conflict, and
therefore any need for prevalence. Any
enactment hy either in a matter in which it
has no competence is simply a nullity.


LECTURE 111.
THE PARLIAMENT : ITS CONSTITUTION THE
EXECUTIVE GOVERNMENT.
Much that might have been said under this
head has been said in discussing the nature
of the Commonwealth. The Parliament is
to consist of the Queen, a Senate, and a
House of Representatives. The incorpora-
tion of the Crown in the Parliament is the
only feature in this arrangement that re-
quires special notice ; the bill herein follows
the precedent of the Canadian Constitution
and the Constitution of New Zealand. It
would seem to follow that the old constitu-
tional formula of enactment “ by the Crown,
by and with the advice and consent of [the
two Houses] in this present Parliament as-
sembled ” must be abandoned in the case of the
Commonwealth legislation, and that all such
laws must be in the name of the Parliament
alone. The royal assent is given in general
by the Governor-General, but he may with-


hold such assent or reserve it (§ 57), and a
bill assented to by the Governor-General
may be disallowed within one year by the
Queen in Council (§ 58). A reserved bill
lapses unless within two years it receives the
assent of the Queen (§ 59). It is now a
well-settled constitutional rule that an Act
assented to by a Governor is not invalidated
by any defect in the powers of the Governor
or by the terms of his instructions or com-
mission—save in so far as he is restrained
by Act of Parliament, he is armed with the
full prerogative of the Crown in respect of
legislation. By § 6 the Governor-General is
to fix the time for the calling of Parliament,
and may prorogue Parliament, and may
dissolve the House of Representatives.
The number of members of each House
and the manner of election is to be prescribed
by Parliament, subject to certain restrictions.
In the Senate each state is to have at least
six senators, and the equal representation of
each state therein is protected, as we have
seen, not only from interference by Parlia-


ment, but from any alteration save by the
consent of the state concerned. In the
House of Representatives each state is to
have not fewer than five members, but sub-
ject to this the membership of each state
is to be according to its population
(§ 24), deducting therefrom, however, the
number of the people of any race not allowed
to vote (§25). No state is to be deprived of
its proportionate representation in the House
without its own consent. There is a curious
provision concerning the number of members,
whereby “as nearly as practicable there
shall be two members of the House of Repre-
sentatives for every member of the Senate ”
(§ 24). The object of establishing this
numerical relation was said to be to facili-
tate one of the many schemes which have
been suggested for preventing deadlocks—
a proposal that the Houses should, for
such a purpose, meet and vote as one body.
This idea, however, was not entertained by
the Constitutional Committee, and the pro-
vision stands as a means of preventing the


growth of the numbers of the House by
mere increase of population, and for pre-
venting such a disparity in numbers as might
threaten the strength and power of the
Senate.
The Senate and the House of Repre-
sentatives.—We have spoken of the Senate
as containing the federal element, the House
of Representatives the national element, in
the Parliament. We now have to see that
both contain the popular element, for the
Constitution provides for uniformity in the
qualifications of members and electors.
While Parliament is to prescribe the qualifi-
cation of members of and electors for both
Houses the Constitution provides that the
qualification shall be the same for both
Houses; the power of Parliament is also
limited by the rule that in voting for either
House no elector shall vote more than once.
Until Parliament otherwise provides, the
qualification of electors is to be in each state
that which is prescribed by the law of the
state as the qualification for the more


numerous House of the Parliament of the
state (§ 30). Section 30 meets the case of
colonies in which women’s suffrage exists,
or may exist, by saving the rights of those
electors who “at the establishment of the
Constitution or afterwards ” have or acquire
a right to vote for the lower House in their
state ; they are not to be prevented by any
law of the Commonwealth from exercising
their right at elections for the House of
Representatives. There is great difficulty in
gathering the true meaning of the sections
relating to qualifications, and they will
doubtless be recast. Questions arise as to
whether the saving clause will enable the
persons indicated to vote for the Senate
as well as the House ; and whether “ after-
wards ” means at any time hereafter, or
only after the establishment of the Com-
monwealth and until Parliament otherwise
provides. It is probable that the intention
was to exclude them from voting for the
Senate, and the debates show that the saving
was to be applicable only to rights acquired


before Parliament establishes a franchise.
But courts cannot look at debates, and the
matter should be put beyond doubt.
So far we have two Chambers, each of a
popular character—in the identity of the
qualifications for membership and the prac-
tical, if not the complete, uniformity of the
qualification of their electors. Even in re-
spect of remuneration the members of the
two Houses are upon the same footing—
every member is to receive £4OO a year,
though Parliament may increase or diminish
the amount (§ 44). We have to see what
conclusions can be drawn as to the relations
between the Chambers.
We have seen that the recognition of the
states is a fact which makes for stability.
How much of its character as a restraining
power the Senate of the United States owes
to the fact that it is not elected by the people,
but nominated by the Parliaments, may be
doubted ; but whatever be the uses it makes
of its power we cannot doubt that the Senate
of the Commonwealth gains in power by the


fact of popular election. We may get some
information as to the use which the Senate
is expected to make of its power from the
other provisions in the Constitution concern-
ing it. Its members are elected for six years,
while the House is only elected for three.
Half the members of the Senate retire every
three years, but the Senate cannot be dis-
solved. The House of Representatives may
be dissolved at any time. Here, then, the
Senate is distinguished by its permanent
existence and by the longer tenure of its
members. These are some of the conditions
under which it is claimed for existing Upper
Houses in the and all second
Chambers elsewhere, that they serve as a
check on “ democratic recklessness ; ” they
are, as was said of the Senate of the United
States, the “ saucers into which we pour our
tea to cool it when it is hot.” This char-
acter of a check upon the Lower House
appears also in another provision. While
Parliament may prescribe the electoral dis-
tricts for the House of Representatives, the


members of the Senate are to be elected by
each state as one constituency. The Senate,
then, is to be a check upon localism and the
favouring of particular districts; for it is
by no means unknown of national assemblies
that “ they represent the nation too little
and particular districts too much ” —are, in
fact, destructive of those very national in-
terests which they are called into existence
to protect. In colonies with an elected
Upper House, the electoral divisions for that
House are large. So in France and in Italy
the single electoral district for the Lower
House was abandoned in favour of large
constituencies, to check the local and restore
the national spirit in politics. That the
change in the last cases had not the desired
result does not concern us here.
The Senate, then, appears designed to
serve the same purposes as the Legislative
Councils in the colonies and the House of
Lords in the United Kingdom; but as
standing for the federal element in the Com-
monwealth life it has another function to


perform. It is the guardian of the interests
of the states in matters which are within
the federal power, as the courts are the
guardians of the rights of the states in
matters that lie outside the federal power.
The Senate has thus a set of special func-
tions sufficiently clearly indicated to secure
it a definite place in the Constitution and
to ensure it a certain vitality. There re-
mains the question whether it will consider
itself limited to these functions, or, possessing
powers in the main co-ordinate with the
House of Representatives, will extend itself
equally over all matters of federal govern-
ment save those which are made the especial
province of the House.
The predominant power in any nation will
ultimately lie in that part of the Constitu-
tion which best corresponds with the national
life and spirit. The Federal House in
Canada has been of small account, since it
has not a popular character. On the other
hand, the Council of States has prevailed in
Germany, and overshadowed the National


Assembly, for in Germany the monarchical
principle as yet dominates the democratic
principle in the national life. The Senate of
the United States, though its members are
elected in the states legislatures, is far from
independent of the electors. The Senate in
the Commonwealth will be as immediately
dependent upon popular election as the
House itself.
In these circumstances we may expect to
see the Senate, in fact as well as in name,
co-ordinate with the House, though it should
contribute rather to the stability than the
activity of government.
In one important respect the bill deals
with the relations of the Houses. The one
thing that will not wait for the educative
influence of time is the ways and means of
government. There are certain matters for
which money must be provided, otherwise
government will come to an end; and it is
not enough to provide money, you must
provide authority to spend it. To allow
equal powers to conflicting authorities in


these matters would be to endanger govern-
ment itself. In England the Lower House
initiates all taxation and appropriation bills ;
the Upper House may not amend, and may
hardly reject such measures, for the Lower
House may practically force upon the Upper
any tax or appropriation by putting all the
financial proposals for the year in one
measure, resting assured that the Lords would
never take so extreme a step as to reject an
Appropriation Bill. In the colonies this
relation has been, with some modifications,
reproduced, a larger measure of control
being, however, secured to the Upper House
by a conventional rule against “ tacking,”
sanctioned by the knowledge that the Upper
House will not hesitate to reject an Appro-
priation Bill if “tacking” has been resorted
to. In the Commonwealth it is recognized
that the Senate is, to some extent, in the
position of an Upper House. In respect of
the “ necessary supplies for the ordinary
services ” of government, and for so much of
taxation as is necessary to meet them, there


is no place for a retarding House, while in
respect of all taxation measures it is felt that
those who pay should have an influence
according to the extent of their contribu-
tion.
Accordingly, adopting the view that supply
is the grant of the Lower House, it is pro-
vided that proposed laws having for their
main object the appropriation of any part of
the public revenue or moneys, or the imposi-
tion of any tax or impost shall originate in
the House of Representatives (§ 54). Laws
imposing taxation and laws appropriating
the necessary supplies for the ordinary
annual services of the Government may be
rejected by the Senate but not amended
(§ 55, sub-section 1). Save for this the
Senate shall have equal power with the
House in respect of every proposed law;
but they may not amend any proposed law in
such a manner as to increase any proposed
charge or burden on the people (sub-section
1). The Senate have the power to suggest
amendments in all cases where the power to


amend is taken away (sub-section 5). And
in order that the Senate may exercise its
deliberate judgment upon these measures it
is provided that laws imposing taxation shall
deal with taxation only, and with one subject
of taxation only ; and that expenditure for
services other than the ordinary annual
services shall be authorized, not by the law
which authorizes the ordinary annual services
but by a separate law or laws. All this, of
course, suggests more than is expressed. It
is expected that in regard to the measures
that they may not amend the Upper House
will content themselves with a consideration
of ruling principles. Such objections, then,
as are revelant in the Senate are those which
go to the root of the matter—are so serious
as to be fatal to the measure. The retarding
function is not applicable ; the revising
function has in general to give way to the
necessity for carrying on government, but in
order not to exclude this mode of accom-
modation the Senate may request the House
to make an omission or amendment. This


request may be made at any time during the
progress of the bill, and the Senate will pro-
bably ascertain at some early stage whether
the House is prepared to meet its views. If
it obtains a satisfactory undertaking, it will
proceed with the measure; if not, it will
have to determine whether the matter is so
serious as to justify it in laying aside the bill.
If the Senate takes the bill through all its
stages and sends it back to the House with
the suggestion, the bill has passed beyond the
control of the Senate, and the House will
send on the bill to the Governor-General for
his assent, adopting the suggestion or not, as
it thinks fit. With the ample safeguards for
expressing its opinion on financial affairs, and
the careful exclusion of “ tacking ” from the
resources of the House, the occasion can
hardly arise when the Senate could justify
itself in rejecting the bill dealing with the
necessary supplies for the ordinary annual
service of Government. Save in the case of
an obvious outbreak of localism on the part
of the House where the matter would call for


the exercise of the special functions of the
Senate, such a step would be treated as an
illegitimate exercise of financial control— i.e.,
unconstitutional.
An essential condition of our Parliamen-
tary system has always been that every
grant of money for the public service should
be based upon the request or recommenda-
tion of the Crown, and this has come to fix
upon the Ministry a definite responsibility
for financial affairs which acts as a safeguard
against Parliamentary recklessness. This
was one of the conditions insisted upon by
Lord Derham in his famous Canada Report,
and in one form or other finds a place in
those colonies which have adopted respon-
sible government; while the want of it in
some of the Continental constitutions framed
after the British Constitution is deemed to
be one reason why party government has
not been a success in Europe. In England
and in the colonies it has been the practice
that all bills appropriating public money
shall originate in the Lower House ; the


rule requiring a royal message has therefore
been made applicable to the proceeding in
that House. In the Commonwealth bills
which appropriate money, so long as they
have not the appropriation of money for
their main object, may arise in the Senate,
and it is, of course, desirable that the finan-
cial proceedings there shall be in the same
way under ministerial control as they are in
the House. Accordingly it is provided that
“it shall not be lawful for the Senate or
the House of Representatives to pass any
vote, resolution, or proposed law for the ap-
propriation of any part of the public revenue
or moneys to any purpose which has not
been first recommended to the House in
which the proposal for appropriation origi-
nated by message of the Governor-General
in the session in which the vote, resolution,
or law is proposed ” (§ 56).
It is to be observed that this section pro-
hibits, not the introduction, but the passing,
of such measures. Reasons of convenience
were urged for the adoption of this form ;


but the enactment makes it possible that the
provision may be useless as a safeguard. If
the Parliament is to proceed to the con-
sideration of appropriations without the
ministerial initiative, the Governor-General’s
message may become as much a thing of
course as the Governor-General’s assent.
Moreover, the section reads as though the
Governor-General’s message were to be a
recommendation of the purpose, not of the
vote. This would leave it in the power of
any member to move an increase in the vote,
and again the ministerial control is lost.
The financial control of Parliament con-
sists not merely in the imposition of taxation
and the appropriation of supplies, but also
in the fact that Parliament follows the
money into the hands of the public officers
and sees that it is expended on the purposes
authorized and on no others. Therefore we
find under the head of “ Finance ” the usual
constitutional provisions concerning the ex-
penditure and the issue of public money
(§ 83) and the audit of accounts (§ 94).


The Executive Government. — This part of
the Constitution resembles the Constitu-
tion Acts of the colonies by insinuating
much more than it expresses. The delicate
relations between the Crown, the Cabinet,
and the Parliament in the United Kingdom
have never been formulated in written rules
of law—are, in fact, expressed in the main by
conventions and understandings which only
rest ultimately on the law. In the colonies
some of these “ conventions ” have been
expressed in terms of law ; but this has
hardly served to make the Constitution Acts
more understandable. While from the law
of the Constitution Blackstone and the
framers of the American Constitution were
able to devise a working machine which is
wholly different from the real political
machine of England, it would be difficult for
anyone to set up a working political machine
from the Constitution Acts of the colonies
alone—they say too much for the American
plan, while they are far from embracing the
whole of the relations existing in England


and reproduced in the colonies under the
name of responsible government. Com-
plicated and delicate as this system is, it
becomes much more complicated and delicate
in a composite state where there are two
Houses of Parliament representing two dis-
tinct principles of organization, each of which
is an essential part of the Commonwealth.
In a federation neither House is likely to
acquiesce in the supremacy of the other, and
we have seen that the special functions of
the Senate are sufficiently marked, and its
constitution is sufficiently strong, to secure
for it a place which will make it comparable
with the Senate of the United States or the
Bundesrath in Germany rather than the
Senate in Canada or the Council of States in
Switzerland. In the United States and in
Germany the Federal House is something
more than a legislative Chamber; it is a de-
liberative body which has functions not unlike
many of those which belong to the Cabinet
in England. In the Commonwealth the
Federal House has not this special character,


but its powers are too great for it not to
claim some share in the making and un-
making of Cabinets, while the very name
Senate suggests the possession of powers
extending beyond legislation. How that
power will be exercised it is impossible to
foresee. It has commonly been assumed
that responsibility of Ministers to two
Houses is impossible; and it has been urged
that if the weakness of the Executive is one
of the greatest dangers of party government
with responsibility to one House, responsi-
bility to two Houses would break down the
executive machinery altogether. It may
well be that this fear is not justified, and
that the stability of government may be
increased by each House developing a power
to protect the Ministry from the caprice and
intrigues of the other. And it will be no
small service to the state if Ministers, owing
a certain responsibility to both Houses, learn
that it is their duty, not less than that of the
Crown, to preserve a good correspondence
between the two branches of the Legislature.


In any case we may be sure that responsible
government will suffer modifications. The
party system is the outcome of peculiar con-
ditions, and was slowly established by the
pressure of necessity, aided by the good sense
of statesmen. We need not despair of the
statesmen of the future ; and the important
thing is that the road should be left open for
such development as practice and experience
may bring about.
The Queen’s Ministers of State—a new
and convenient designation—are to be
appointed by the Governor-General and
are to hold office during his pleasure
(§ 63). Such ministers, though holding
offices of profit, are not only eligible for a
seat in Parliament, but must be members
of one of the Houses. They are to be
members of the Federal Executive Council,
a body chosen by the Governor-General,
the members of which are from time to time
chosen and summoned by the Governor-
General, and hold office during his pleasure.
While every Minister of State is necessarily


a member of the Executive Council, not
every Executive Councillor is a Minister of
State; an Executive Councillor is not as
such the holder of an office of profit,
and is therefore not disqualified for a seat
in Parliament. On the other hand he
need not be a member of Parliament. On
the whole, the bill appears to contemplate
the existence of a body like the Privy
Council—a body some, at any rate, of
whose members may have no connection
with office or even with politics, and whose
members remain for an indefinite time. At
the same time, the Council may change,
like the Executive Council of New South
Wales, with every change of the ministers.
The Council is u to aid and advise the
Governor-General in the Government of
the Commonwealth” (§ 61); the Ministers
of State are “to administer such departments
of state as the Governor-General in Council
may from time to time establish” (§ 63).
Notwithstanding this difference in function,
and the possibility of an enlarged Council,


we may be quite sure that it will be the
Ministers of State with two or three
members of the Council who, as the Cabinet
(a body of which consistently with constitu-
tional usage there is no mention in the
bill), will collectively aid and advise, and
that the Council as a body will confine
itself to formal action. The Ministers of
State are not to exceed seven a number
small in comparison with the number of
ministers in colonies like New South Wales
and Victoria—but this is accounted for by the
limited number of the departments of govern-
ment over which the executive operations of
the Commonwealth will extend. The in-
clusion in the Cabinet of Executive Council-
lors who are without office is an arrangement
with which the colonies are thoroughly
familiar ; it is unusual in England, and in
1855, when Lord John Russell, on resigning
the Foreign Office, remained in Lord Aber-
deen’s Cabinet, the Queen thought it neces-
sary to remonstrate with him on constitutional
grounds. In England there are several


departments of state in which the adminis-
trative work is merely nominal, as the First
Lordship of the Treasury, the Privy Seal,
and the Duchy of Lancaster. The designa-
tion of the officers is to be prescribed by
Parliament (which may increase the number
of officers eligible for membership) or by the
Governor-General in Council ; their nature
may be gathered from the powers and
functions of the Commonwealth. We may
expect a Minister of Customs, a Postmaster-
General, a Minister of Defence, to administer
the state departments taken over ; there
must necessarily be a Treasurer or Minister
of Finance, an Attorney-General, and an
“ omnibus ” officer like the Chief Secretary
in the separate colonies. As far as the first
three offices are concerned, the corresponding
offices in the various colonies will, no doubt,
cease to exist. One modification of the
familiar constitutional relation of ministers to
Parliament may be suggested. The pre-
dominance of the Lower House is recognized
in each of the colonies by the fact that most


of the ministers are chosen from its members,
and frequently the Cabinet is almost unrepre-
sented in the Upper House of Parliament.
Such an arrangement is hardly possible in
the federation; and it would be convenient
to adopt the practice almost universal on
the Continent, whereby the ministers may
sit and speak in both Houses, voting only in
that House of which they are members. The
use of the ambiguous expression “ either
House of Parliament ” (§ § 48, 64) might
make such an arrangement possible under
the present bill; it might perhaps be
brought about by Standing Order, or by
Act of Parliament, for a minister would
not “ sit as a member ” save in that
House for which he had been chosen. One
can well understand that a constitutional
change of this kind might go a long way
to promote a good correspondence between
the two Houses, and make less necessary
any machinery against deadlocks, of which
the principal danger is that it tends to
strain rather than to reconcile relations.


The ordinary governmental powers are
to be exercised as in the colonies by the
Governor-General through his Council, and
this notwithstanding that the “ executive
power and authority of the Commonwealth
is vested in the Queen and shall be exer-
cised by the Governor-General as the
Queen’s representative (§ 60). What the
“ executive power and authority ” is is
naturally left in the main to inference. By
§ 67 it “ extends to the execution of the
provisions of this Constitution and of the
laws of the Commonwealth ; ” and by § 69,
“On the establishment of the Common-
wealth the control of the following
departments of the Public Service in each
state shall become transferred to the Ex-
ecutive Government of the Commonwealth,
that is to say :
Customs and Excise.
Posts and Telegraphs.
Military and Naval Defence.
Ocean Beacons and Buoys, and Ocean
Lighthouses and Lightships.
Quarantine.


The obligations of each state in respect of
the departments transferred shall thereupon
be assumed by the Commonwealth. ”
Officers employed in the departments
transferred come under the control of the
Commonwealth, all rights existing and ac-
cruing being preserved (§ 85). If any such
officer is not retained in the service of the
Commonwealth he shall be entitled to any
gratuity or other compensation payable
under the law of his state on the abolition
of his office. Subject to these provisions the
appointment and removal of officers other
than the Ministers of State and Executive
Councillors (§ 66) is vested in the Governor-
General in Council. The command in chief
of the forces of the Commonwealth is vested
in the Governor-General as the Queen’s
representative (§ 68) —a provision which is
intended to be in accord with the present
commission of a Governor under which he is
designated “ Governor and Commander-in-
Chief.” It is not designed to indicate that
the powers of the Governor-General are to


be exercised by him otherwise than upon the
advice of his responsible ministers. Section
70 vests in the Governor-General, with the
advice of his Executive Council, all the
powers and functions transferred to the Com-
monwealth and now vested in the Governor
of a colony with or without the advice of
his Executive Council ; where they are at
present vested in some other officer in the
colony, they are vested in the officer exercis-
ing similar functions in the Commonwealth.
For the rest, the measure of the prerogative
exercisable in the colony must depend in the
main upon the Governor-General’s commission
and instructions as before indicated, and it is
not likely that his personal discretion will be
abridged. A Governor has ever been, not
merely the guardian of Imperial interests,
but also the guardian of the Constitution
and the Law. We have seen that the Act
vests in him, and not in his Council, the
appointment and removal of ministers, the
summoning and prorogation of Parliament,
and the dissolution of the House of Eepre-


sentatives. A large amount of personal dis-
cretion must remain here; and the position
of a Governor, sufficiently difficult with
ministers responsible in the main to one
House, must become much more difficult
where there is something of responsibility to
two Houses, to one of which—the Senate —
the remedy of dissolution, “ penal ” or other-
wise, is not applicable.


LECTURE IV.
THE FEDERAL JUDICATURE THE INTERPRETATION
OF THE CONSTITUTION —AMENDMENT OP THE
CONSTITUTION.
The Federal Judicature. —We now come
to that part of the Constitution which is in
many ways the most interesting. In examin-
ing the powers and functions of the Parlia-
ment and the Executive we saw that they
were carefully limited to their special pro-
vinces, and were not allowed to entrench
upon the powers of the state parliaments and
state executives ; that even where legislative
powers were given to the Commonwealth
Parliament, it could not directly review the
legislation of the states parliaments. The
federal judicature, however, does extend
itself into all the states, and is supreme over
their courts. To understand this relation it
is necessary to examine the powers of the
courts in some detail. We shall find that
the Federal Court appears in three ways :


First, as the supreme court of appeal from
the states courts. Secondly, as the guardian
and interpreter of the Constitution and of
the federal laws. Thirdly, as the tribunal
for certain matters of special concern to the
Commonwealth.
The Federal Court as a Court of Appeal. —
Hitherto the Supreme Courts of the colonies
in Australia have been, like all other colonial
courts, subject to the Judicial Committee of
the Privy Council in that to that body lay an
appeal from their decisions either as a matter
of right in the subject or by the grace of the
Crown. There is thus a common court of
appeal for the empire beyond the United
Kingdom. In the case of the colonies
within the Commonwealth, that right of
appeal, and the power of the Crown to enter-
tain such appeals, is to cease (§ 75), and
an appeal to the High Court of Australia
is to be substituted (§ 74). In this
there is nothing extraordinary —it is the
mere substitution of one court of appeal for
another, though, of course, there is room for


much difference of opinion as to the wisdom
of such substitution. The power of the
Crown to grant leave to appeal is for the
future limited to cases where “ the public
interests of the Commonwealth, or of any
state, or any other part of Her Majesty’s
dominions are concerned” (§ 75). It may
be suggested that the extent of the appellate
jurisdiction might be made more clear.
Section 74, conferring upon the High Court
its appellate jurisdiction, and § 75, dealing
with the appeal to the Privy Council, might
be read so as to apply only to cases “ within
the judicial power” (§ 73). The form of §
73 is taken from the Constitution of the
United States, where there is no general
appellate jurisdiction as in the High Court
of Australia.
The Federal Court in the Coristitution. —
But apart from the powers of the High Court
as a court of appeal, it has a great and
important part as an essential element in the
Constitution. Who is to decide whether the
Commonwealth Parliament or the States


Parliaments have acted within their powers ?
Who is to decide whether, the matter being
one within the competence of both, the laws
of a state are inconsistent with the laws of
the Commonwealth? The answer is —“ The
Courts of Justice.” Every court before
which such a question comes has to decide
the question for itself. However strange the
review of Acts of Parliament by courts of
law may appear in England, such a course is
perfectly familiar in the colonies, and is the
outcome of one of the most deeply-rooted
principles of English law. Colonial courts
all over the empire have constantly had to
consider questions similar to those to be pre-
sented to the federal and state courts under
the Constitution. Is an Act of the colonial
Legislature within the territorial limits im-
posed upon the Legislature ? Is the Act
“ repugnant to the laws of England ? ” was
an old question ; it now appears in the form
“ Is the Act inconsistent with any Act of
the Imperial Parliament applicable to the
colony ? ” In no way will the nature of the


questions arising under the Constitution
differ from these familiar questions, though
they will doubtless arise much more fre-
quently. The courts have ever had to
review the legislation of colonial Legislatures,
as they have had to review the acts of other
dependent legislatures, e.g., corporations.
The fact of review and the way in which
such review takes place are highly character-
istic of our Constitution. I said at the outset
that in the British Constitution we hardly
know of any relation of the governmental
powers which if binding at all does not
constitute a relation of which the subject
may take advantage. Where, then, a power
is lodged in some branch of the Constitu-
tion, every subject who is affected by it is
entitled to require that it shall be exercised
in a lawful way, and that good warrant
shall be shown in the courts of law. Thus
the action of the courts of law may extend
itself into every department of government.
This is the fact that is so ably demonstrated
by Professor Dicey in his “ Law of the


Constitution.” It is by no means the only
possible course; it is not necessarily the
most obvious. In those Constitutions which
attach great importance to the distinction
between public and private law, which have
adopted in an extreme form that separa-
tion of governmental power which belongs
to the political theory of Montesquieu, it
may well be said that the judiciary, in pass-
ing upon legislative or administrative acts,
is going outside its own department and is
endangering the harmonious working of the
separate powers in the state. In Germany
to-day the relation of the courts to Imperial
and state legislation is a matter of grave
dispute ; and there is the highest authority
for saying that the Legislature is to be the
interpreter of its own powers. The relation
of the courts to administrative acts all over
the Continent would certainly lead to this
conclusion. We have just read of a similar
dispute between court and legislature in
the Transvaal Republic. Another possible
course is that the acts of a legislature


should prevail in its own sphere, but be
liable to review in some higher sphere.
Thus all state laws would be binding in state
courts, but liable to review in the courts of
the federation; while federal laws would
not be subject to review in federal courts,
This is the course taken in Switzerland,
where a federal law is liable only to review
by the popular vote on the challenge of
30,000 citizens or eight cantons.
If the nature of the relation of the courts
to the Constitution is characteristic of the
English Constitution and law, the manner of
it is not less characteristic. Until recently
there was the greatest misconception as to
the manner in which the Supreme Court in
the United States acted as the guardian of
the Constitution. There is no power in the
Supreme Court, either proprio motu or on
the invocation of a citizen, to call up a
federal statute or state statute and. enquire
into its validity. What happens is that in a
civil suit between A. and 8., or in the prose-
cution of X. by the people, where one party


is relying upon a statute, the other may set
up that the statute is an infringement of the
federal or the state Constitution (as the case
may be), and the court has then to consider
whether it is bound by the statute. Even in
so passing upon the cause, a declaration by
a court that the statute was void would
be of no effect. A court decides in favour
of A. because the statute was within the
competence of the Legislature, or in favour
of B. because the statute was not within the
competence of the Legislature. And the
“ annulment of the statute ” means no more
than this, that the decision is a precedent
binding until overruled. The relation of the
courts and their degree of authority is well
settled—the Supreme Court of any state is
the authentic interpreter of state laws and
constitutions ; the Supreme Court of the
United States is the authentic interpreter of
the federal Constitution and federal laws. It
is in this sense —as the final interpreter of
the Constitution and federal laws—that the
Supreme Court of the United States is the


guardian and protector of the Constitution.
Its powers and its functions and the manner
of their exercise are the outcome of the “ rule
of law” which the American colonists took
with them as part of the common law of
England, which includes “ the equal sub-
jection of all to the ordinary law of the land
administered by the ordinary law courts,”
and which is opposed to the notion that
affairs and disputes in which the government
or its servants are concerned are beyond the
sphere of the civil courts. The “ rule of law ”
means also that the Constitution is the result
of the ordinary private law of the land
(Dicey, “ Law of the Constitution,” p. 190).
This is the state of things which naturally
finds its way into the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Australia, with one dif-
ference, that the High Court of Australia—
but not other federal courts—will be, as we
have seen, the final interpreter of all state
law as well as federal law, and will thus
give a national character to our private law
which is wanting in America.


In only one other matter does the juris-
diction of the federal courts in the Common-
wealth differ from that of the federal courts
in the United States. It has been more than
once remarked that one of the principal
features of the United States Constitution is
distrust, and this distrust extends to the
judicial department. There was reason to
fear that there were cases in which, by reason
of the parties concerned, the state judiciary
could not be trusted to do justice. We need
not treat cases affecting foreign ministers or
the Commonwealth as of this class ; but there
is no other reason for placing within the
federal jurisdiction all controversies to which
a state is a party, or in which foreigners or
citizens of different states are parties. This
class of case nowadays occupies the greater
part of the time of the federal courts. In
the Commonwealth there is no such distrust
of the state courts, which have ever been
accustomed to do justice without distinction
of parties, and accordingly these matters are
left to the state courts, subject, of course, to


the ordinary appeal to the High Court of
Australia.
By way of emphasizing the position of the
supreme federal court, the High Court of
Australia is to take its existence directly
from the Constitution itself, and not, as in
the bill of 1891, from the Commonwealth
Parliament.
The judicial power of the Commonwealth
is vested in one Supreme Court, to be called
the High Court of Australia, and in such
other courts as the Parliament may from
time to time create or invest with federal
jurisdiction. The High Court is to consist
of a Chief Justice and so many other justices
(not less than four) as Parliament may from
time to time prescribe (§7l). Jurisdiction
may be exercised by such number of judges
as the Parliament prescribes (§ 78). The
power to increase the number of judges of
the High Court is the only one of the pro-
visions relating to the office of a judge that
could be in any way objected to. For the
rest, § 72 carefully protects the office and the


emoluments of the federal judge. The
justices of the High Court and of the other
courts created by the Parliament are (i.) to
be appointed by the Governor-General in
Council, (11.) to hold office during good be-
haviour, and are (m.) not to be removed
except for incapacity or misbehaviour, “ and
then only by the Governor-General in Coun-
cil upon an address from both Houses of
Parliament in the same session praying for
such removal.” We here depart from the
provisions of the English and most of the
colonial Constitutions, under which the judges
hold during good behaviour as regards the
Executive, during pleasure as regards the
Parliament, thus giving a double condition
of tenure. The change serves to emphasize
the fact that the courts are the guardians of
the Constitution even against the Parliament.
The decision of Parliament in respect of
judicial conduct and capacity will be liable to
review in the courts just as the action of the
Executive in removing a judge is now open
to such review. It would be advisable in


every interest to allow an appeal to the
Queen in Council in this class of cases. The
remuneration of a judge (which is to be fixed
by Parliament) is protected by the provision
that it shall not be diminished during his
continuance in office. The separation of the
judicial and executive departments is marked
by disqualifying judges for the office of
Governor-General or his deputy or any other
executive office.
The general scheme of this part of
the bill is plain enough. The High Court
of Australia stands as the head of the
system of courts, whether federal or state;
it is the supreme appellate tribunal in the
Commonwealth. There are certain matters
of judicature, however, which are of
especial concern to the general interests of
the Commonwealth, and over which there-
fore the Commonwealth is to take original
as well as appellate jurisdiction; and of
these some are of so high an importance
that they should be at once justiciable, not
merely by a subordinate federal court, but


by the High Court itself. This is what is
expressed by § § 73 and 77.
“ § 73. The judicial power shall extend
to all matters :
i. Arising under this Constitution or
involving its interpretation
ii. Arising under any laws made by
the Parliament.
hi. Arising under any treaty.
iv. Of admiralty or maritime jurisdic-
tion.
v. Affecting the public ministers, consuls,
or other representatives of other
countries.
vi. In which the Commonwealth, or a
person suing or being sued on behalf
of the Commonwealth, is a party,
vn. In which a mandamus or prohibi-
tion is sought against an officer of
the Commonwealth.
viii. Between states.
ix. Referring to the same subject-matter
claimed under the laws of different
states.”


§ 77. In all these matters save i., n., iv.,
and ix, the High Court shall have original
as well as appellate jurisdiction.
Sections 76 and 77 have for their object
the prevention of certain difficulties which
have arisen in connection with the judicial
power in the United States, conferring ex-
pressly upon Parliament certain powers, the
possession of which by Congress has been a
matter of doubt or has been denied. Parlia-
ment may extend the original jurisdiction of
the High Court to all cases within the judicial
power (§ 77), may define the jurisdiction of
the federal courts other than the High Court,
and invest the courts of the states with such
federal jurisdiction as it thinks fit. The last
is a useful power, avoiding the establishment
of an extensive system of separate federal
courts. It must not, it would seem, be re-
garded as denying the power of the states
courts to consider cases merely because they
fall within the judicial power of the Common-
wealth. In some they have, at present,
jurisdiction by their own laws ; of others


they will have cognizance in causes depend-
ing before them in virtue of the fact that the
Constitution, the laws, and treaties of the
Commonwealth are binding on the courts and
judges of every state (§ 7). Such jurisdiction
they will exercise, not as “ courts invested
with federal jurisdiction,” but as courts of the
states administering the laws in operation
there from whatever source they spring. The
Parliament may, however, prescribe whether
the jurisdiction of the federal courts shall be
exclusive of or concurrent with that which
may belong to or be vested in the courts of
the states (§ 76). It seems unnecessary to
give this power in respect of the jurisdiction
vested in the states courts, by which is pre-
sumably meant federal jurisdiction conferred
on them by Parliament. There is room for a
good deal of improvement in the drafting and
arrangement of this part of the bill.
Any full comment on the matters within
the judicial power is here impossible. Still
a few points may be noted. The bill does
not in terms submit the states as such to


the federal courts, except in the one case of
a suit by another state, and their liability to
legal proceedings, and the form of such pro-
ceedings must be governed by the law of the
state concerned, or, in matters within the
federal power, by the Commonwealth as an in-
cidental power. (Here it should be noticed
that the power of legislating in matters
incidental or necessary to Commonwealth
powers given in § 52, sub-section 37, does not
clearly extend to matters within the judicial
power ; whether it does extend to that
power depends upon the reference of the
term “thereof” in the phrase “Parliament
or Executive Government of the Common-
wealth, or in any department or officer
thereof.”)'" Nor must it be inferred that the
Commonwealth is suable in the federal
courts ; the excision of a clause in the bill
of 1891 exempting the Commonwealth from
private suit does no more than leave with
the Federal Parliament the power to declare
how far and in what form the Common-
* See page 50.


wealth shall be amenable to the Courts.
The power to assume cognizance of matters
between state and state is one to which
great importance is attached, as preventing
disastrous quarrels between the states. How
far it will afford a means of settling disputes
may be doubted. Clearly it can afford no
means of disposing of controversies which do
not turn upon any question of legal right.
The term “ matter ” is a term of art, and
implies some causa jurisdictionis some
“ suit, action, cause, matter, or other similar
proceeding competently brought before and
litigated in a court of law.” The most
obvious of such cases are territorial disputes.
The sub-section dealing with the “ same
subject-matter claimed under the laws of
different states ” covers cases in which there
are competing claims in respect of the owner-
ship or possession of property.
The Interpretation of the Constitution. —
Having necessarily spoken of interpretation
in relation to the courts, a word may be said
on the interpretation of the Constitution in


general. While the courts are the final
interpreters and the sole authoritative inter-
preters (authoritative, that is to say, in that
their construction is binding as a precedent),
every functionary to whom a power is
entrusted must, of course, interpret in the
first instance his power for himself. And it
is by no means the case that every dispute,
even as to the legal limit of constitutional
powers, may come before the courts. The
courts require a causa jurisdictionis, and
frequently there may be none.
In cases involving Parliamentary privilege,
English courts have shown a reluctance to
interfere which is not a little remarkable,
and have left to each House of Parliament a
very wide sphere within which their action
cannot be questioned. On the other hand,
if the matter lies clearly outside privilege,
they have readily interfered to protect the
citizen against the House. Some matters in
the bill are directory merely, e.g., the pro-
vision that an uniform tariff shall be estab-
lished in two years ; it would hardly be held


that such a provision causes the powers of
Parliament to lapse if not exercised within
the time. Again, some questions are not of
a nature to come before the courts at all, e.g.,
the relation of the two Houses to each other.
Disputes between the Houses may well arise
upon a pure matter of law, e.g., what are
“ necessary supplies,” and what is the
“ ordinary annual service ” of government ;
and, indeed, in a complex Constitution like
a federation there is a great tendency for
political disputes to become constitutional
and legal. The courts are concerned with
the rule that money shall not be raised or
expended save by lawful authority ; they
will see that financial action has had the
assent of the whole of Parliament, and not
of a mere part of it. They may even go
further than this (and it is the intention of
the framers of the Constitution that they
should), and protect the subject against any
departure from those rules which are set to
preserve the financial powers of the Senate—
they may hold a tax unlawful, for instance,


if the act authorizing it deals also with ex-
penditure, or deals with several taxes. But
any such jurisdiction will be exercised not by
the courts posing as the mediator in Parlia-
mentary disputes or as the formal director
of the Houses in the exercise of their
powers, but because the decision is in-
volved in the complaint of a citizen in liti-
gation before them. This is a wise rule.
The formal submission of such disputes to the
Courts might cause bitterness between the
Legislature and the judiciary, and though
the latter is sufficiently protected, the
efficiency of the judiciary depends so much
on public confidence that anything like a
conflict is always a national misfortune. In
Canada the old power of consulting the
judges, which is in England exercised now
by the House of Lords alone, exists ; the
Governor-General in Council may refer any
matter to the Supreme Court of Canada for
its opinion. In the Commonwealth there is
no such power of reference; and the judges
would properly refuse, as the Supreme Court


in the United States refused, to entertain
such matters. Disputes of the kind I have
mentioned, however, are not wholly be-
yond the consideration of a judicial tribunal.
There is a power in the Queen to refer to
the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
any matter on which she desires their
opinion; this power has more than once
been exercised in respect of colonial consti-
tutions, and its invocation in the famous
disputes in Victoria was suggested. That
power is still available, and would no doubt
be exercised on the request of all parties
concerned.
When we come to consider the mode of
constitutional construction, there is some
ground for abating our satisfaction. From
causes too numerous to be dealt with here,
English law has always been distinguished
“ by the scantiness of its apparatus of rules
for construing statute law as a whole.”
Now, in construing the Constitution, the
United States courts have had to abandon
the traditional rule under which our lawyers


bid us keep within the “ four corners of the
Act.” Particularly have they looked at
history and the political incidents of the
time; and in the way of “ contemporary
exposition ” they had an invaluable guide
in the writings of Hamilton Jay and Madison
in the Federalist. The subject of constitu-
tional interpretation is too vast for discussion
here ; we may only state, as a general rule,
that which Story lays down in connection
with the “ necessary or incidental powers of
legislation,” that “powers contained in a
constitution of government ought to be liber-
ally expounded in advancement of public
good.”
The main object and purpose of a Consti-
tution as an instrument of government must
ever be kept in mind ; this will in itself keep
us from many an error. We shall not, for
instance, be led to regard the legislative
powers of Parliament as we regard the
powers of a corporation to make by-laws ;
we have seen already an application of this
in the rules concerning delegation. So where


there is a provisional arrangement “ until
Parliament otherwise provides,” a broad
view of the power will say that Parliament
may provide from time to time. Again,
while maxims such as “ the letter killeth but
the spirit giveth life” are, as a rule, but
dangerous guides, there are occasions when
the letter would mock the spirit, and then we
must not hesitate to adopt the spirit. Of
such a case an excellent illustration is to be
found in the last section of the Constitution.
The section provides the mode of constitu-
tional amendment, and adds that no state is
to be deprived of its proportionate represen-
tation without its own consent. The letter
might allow the alteration of this safeguard
in the ordinary way of constitutional amend-
ment ; but such a result would mock the
spirit, and it may safely be inferred that no
such amendment could be adopted without
the unanimous consent of the states.
The Amendment of the Constitution . —
Section 121 brings us back to the action of
the people and the states in the existence of


a power of amendment which is extra-Par-
liamentary. It has been already observed
that much of the bill is concerned with
provisional arrangements, which are wholly
within the control of Parliament. It would
have emphasized the fundamental character
of the Constitution if these matters could
have been detached and dealt with in a
separate Act, alterable, of course, by the Par-
liament of the Commonweath. Again, some
matters are temporary merely; so that,
ultimately, the operative Constitution will be
a much smaller instrument than that now
before us.
But the number of matters which are
fundamental is large, and it is therefore well
that the difficulty of amendment should not
be so great as it is in the United States.
Unlike the United States and Swiss Con-
stitutions, the sole initiative is in Parliament.
Any proposed law for the alteration of the
Constitution must be passed by an absolute
majority of the Senate and of the House. It
is thereupon to be submitted in each state to


the electors qualified to vote for the House,
“ not less than two nor more than six cal-
endar months after the passage through both
Houses of the proposed law.” The vote is
to be taken in such manner as Parliament
prescribes. “ And if a majority of the states
and a majority of the electors voting approve
the proposed law, it shall be presented to the
Governor-General for the Queen’s assent.”
The approval required is similar to that in
the Swiss Constitution, the decision of the
states being ascertained by the vote of the
majority of the electors voting. It might be
well to state this explicitly, as is done in the
Swiss Constitution.
To prevent the vote of a state in which
adult suffrage prevails having an undue
weight in the decision of the people, it is
provided that until the qualification of
electors becomes uniform throughout the
Commonwealth, only one-half the votes for
and against the proposed law shall be
counted. Any alteration by which the pro-
portionate representation of any state in


either House of the Parliament or the
minimum number of representatives of a
state in the House of Representatives is
diminished shall not become law without the
consent of the majority of electors voting in
that state.
Some difficulty may arise in respect of
amendment by reason of the different uses
of the term Constitution already noticed.
Section 121 enacts that “ the provisions of
this Constitution shall not be altered except
in the following manner; ” and it is doubtful
whether this means the whole Act or only
as much as follows the provision of § 8 that
“ the Constitution of the Commonwealth
shall be as follows.”


L’ENYOL
The draft Constitution is now in its second
stage —it is under consideration by the Par-
liaments of the various colonies. In Septem-
ber the Convention will reassemble, when
the Constitution will be reconsidered,
“ together with such amendments as shall
have been forwarded by the various Legis-
latures.” There is, of course, no limit to the
range of discussion, but it is evident that
debate will turn in the main upon a few
points that were either reserved by the first
Convention for further consideration, or have
been raised in the Parliaments of the colonies.
There were, at any rate, two matters upon
which the members of the Convention at
Adelaide indicated that the last word had
not been said—the appeal from the High
Court of Australia to the Queen in Council,
and the prevention of deadlocks by reason
of dispute between the two Houses of Par-
liament. For dealing with Parliamentary


disputes, two substantive proposals were
submitted, one by Mr. Wise (N.S.W.), the
other by Mr. Isaacs (Victoria). Mr. Wise’s
scheme is that where a bill originating in the
House of Representatives is lost in the
Senate, or passed by the Senate with amend-
ments with which the House will not agree,
and the House is “on that account” dissolved,
if the bill meets with the same fate on again
being sent to the Senate, the Senate may be
dissolved. The special advantage of this
scheme is that it is sufficiently burdensome
to both Houses to ensure that it will not be
resorted to except in an extreme case. Mr.
Higgins (Victoria) thought that the course
proposed was unnecessarily tedious and ob-
jectionable as extending the time of crisis;
accordingly he moved an amendment that
the dissolution of the Senate should not
be contingent upon a dissolution of the
House and the second submission of the
bill. The Convention rejected the amend-
ment by 24 to 7, and Mr. Wise’s clause
by 19 to 11. Mr. Isaacs’ proposal is that


if either House of Parliament shall in two
consecutive sessions, with at least six weeks
between them, send a bill to the other
which is not agreed to absolutely or with
such amendments as the first House can
accept, the originating chamber may pass a
resolution that in its opinion the matter is
urgent. The bill is sent back with the
resolution to the second House ; if this does
not lead to acceptance or to an arrangement
between the Houses, the originating chamber
may resolve that the bill be referred to the
direct determination of the people. The vote
of the people is to be taken in each state
separately, “ and if the proposed law is
affirmed by a majority of the states, contain-
ing also a majority of the population of the
Commonwealth,” it shall be submitted to the
Governor-General for his assent. The use
of the referendum in substitution for the
assent of a second chamber has been fre-
quently suggested in Australia ; elsewhere it
is used rather as a means for checking legis-
lation than for facilitating it. It may be


compared with the popular initiative in
Switzerland, which in the confederation,
however, as distinguished from the cantons,
is applicable only to constitutional and not
to ordinary laws. Mr. Isaacs’ scheme is
noticeable as combining the facilitation of
legislation with a veto ; for he proposes that
if the popular vote is against the measure, the
proposed law is not merely defeated for the
time, but shall not be again proposed for at
least three years.
Other matters which will demand con-
sideration from the Convention are the
equal representation of the states in the
Senate and the power of the Senate in
regard to money bills. At the Adelaide
session equality of representation was prac-
tically assumed to be an essential, and
Mr. Higgins was listened to with im-
patience when he raised the question.
The debates in New South Wales, however,
show that there is some reluctance in the
Parliament of that colony to accept that
settlement, and there are indications that


many members of the Victorian Parliament
will also oppose equality.
The amendments suggested by the Parlia-
ments will, of course, be entitled to respectful
attention in the second session of the Con-
vention. But they are in no sense instruc-
tions to the Convention—the members of the
Convention elected receive their mandate,
such as it is, from the people of the states.
In New South Wales, South Australia,
Tasmania, and Victoria the bill finally
adopted by the Convention is to be sub-
mitted to the electors for the Lower
House, no elector, however, to have more
than one vote. The majority of votes in
each colony is to determine the acceptance
or rejection of the Constitution by that
colony, subject to the proviso that any
number of votes less than 50,000 in favour
of acceptance is to be equivalent to the
rejection of the bill. When three colonies
have adopted the Constitution, the two
Houses of Parliament in each of those
colonies may adopt addresses to the Queen


praying that the Constitution may be passed
into law by the Imperial Parliament upon
receipt of similar addresses from the Par-
liaments of the other colonies.


T4f>
B *6 WO
flirty
hJ COJisj
MELBOURNE
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND CO.
LITTLE COLLINS STREET




