





THE FOREST RESOURCES
WESTERN
AUSTRALIA.
ALBERT F. CALVERT,
M.E., F.R.S.A., F.R.G.S.A., &C.,
MEMB. BRIT. ASSOC.
Author of “ The Aborigines of Western Australia," ** Hints on
Gold Prospecting," “ Pearls: Their Origin and Formation
“ Explorations in North-West Australia," " Tht
Forest Resources of Western Australia," " The
Mineral Resources of Western Australia,"
&c., &>c.
bonbon:
W. Milligan & Co.,
3a, Camden Road, N.W.
1892.




THE FOREST RESOURCES
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTORY.
'THE mother-country being overcrowded, with the
A result that its sons and daughters find themselves
every year more and more unable to secure for them-
selves adequate employment capable of ministering to
decent subsistence, the question of seeking another home
has become one of the first national importance.
Whither shall we go ? Let us submit the claims of
Western Australia to their best and most serious
consideration.
The Colony of Western Australia, now in course of
steady development, extends from South Australia to




CONTENTS.
PAGE
CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTORY
CHAPTER 11.
FOREST RESOURCES
CHAPTER HI.
COMMERCIAL VALUE




THE FOREST RESOURCES
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTORY.
'THE mother-country being overcrowded, with the
result that its sons and daughters find themselves
every year more and more unable to secure for them-
selves adequate employment capable of ministering to
decent subsistence, the question of seeking another home
has become one of the first national importance.
Whither shall we go ? Let us submit the claims of
Western Australia to their best and most serious
consideration.
The Colony of Western Australia, now in course of
steady development, extends from South Australia to


the Indian Ocean, a distance of a thousand miles ; its
greatest length from north to south being fourteen
hundred and fifty miles ; and its coast-line being about
three thousand miles.
It has an area of 1,060,000 square miles, or 678,400,222
acres, of which immense expanse of soil less than 150,000
acres are at present under cultivation; and the total
population, all told, is only some 60,000.
Western Australia, be it remembered, occupies more
than one third of the whole Australian continent; and
to make its proportions really intelligible, we have only
to state that the Colony is equal in size to Austro-
Hungary, Belgium, Bulgaria, Denmark, France, Ger-
many, Greece, Spain, Turkey, and Roumania ; —all put
together. The mind of the reader will be impressed by
so definite an illustration.
The Climate, of course, varies in so enormous a range
of territory. In the south and south-west, it is magni-
ficent, being both temperate and cool, with a rainfall
sufficiently heavy and regular to obviate the possibility
of those constant periods of drought which are the base
of so many districts of the Australian continent.
Towards the east, so far as has been ascertained, it is
drier, with a fair rainfall; very heavy dews on the
Murchison and Gascoyne compensating for the apparent
lack of rainfall, and the heat occasionally experienced
being tempered by strong and cool breezes. The heat
in the north is attended with the advantage of being dry.


The soil welcomes and rewards almost every branch
of agriculture. As has been proved, wheat can be
easily and profitably grown over vast tracts ; and barley,
oats, maize, potatoes, and hay are cultivated success-
fully. Fruit of every description grows in profusion ;
and in many parts, especially in the district intermediate
between the Blackwood and Geraldton, the soil and
climate are eminently suitable for the culture of the
vine. At a low estimate it has been computed that
5,000 square miles can be devoted to this most profitable
industry. No time indeed has been lost in attending to
it; and the wines of Western Australia bid fair, with
time and care, to establish themselves in popular favour.
For Dairy-farming there is an almost unlimited field.
The area over which it can be pursued with profit
embraces all the coast line from the Moore river down
south as far as Cape Leeuwin, and extends as far back
as the Darling range ; and with the rapid progress of
the railway system, by which vast tracts of land
specially favouring the production of dairy commodities
—ham, bacon, eggs, butter, poultry, potatoes, and the
like —will be brought within easy reach not only of the
great markets of Australia, but also of numerous ports
whence they can be expeditiously forwarded to the ever
ready markets of Great Britain, which may be said to
invite the produce of the universe for their satisfaction.
The Mineral resources, which are both large and
varied, are practically undeveloped and unexploited.


The Goldfields have recently begun to be systematically
worked ; and thus the notion so long prevalent as to the
non-auriferous character of the colony has happily been
exploded. Rich deposits have been found to exist from
one end to the other; and capital alone is needed to
give the necessary expansion to operations in this most
lucrative branch of industry. Copper and lead abound;
and the increasing demand for pig-lead both in Australia,
and in China, where it is converted into the lining of
tea-chests, points to a highly favourable opportunity for
re-establishment of smelting-works. Traces of iron
occur almost everywhere. In fact, from the large
quantity of iron in this colony it is almost impossiole to
work, with any degree of accuracy, with a magnetic
compass. Antimony, zinc, manganese, mica, asbestus,
kaolin, and graphite have also to be mentioned.
All along the coast there are extensive Fisheries ; but
they await proper development to yield the best results.
Pearls are to be obtained over an area covering nearly
the whole extent of the north-west coast. The export
value of pearls and pearl-shells last year was
This slender outline of the diversified resources of
Western Australia must now be supplemented with
some definite information respecting those to whom the
colony offers singular advantages.
In Western Australia capitalists will find a field, at
once ample and remunerative, for the investment of
their means in the further development of the railway


system ; in the establishment of large works and
factories equipped with the best and most efficient
machines and appliances; in mining operations, of
which Gold may be held to be the chief; in agricultural
operations upon an extended scale, specially utilising
the vast areas so suitable for the rearing of wheat and
other similar crops ; in the cultivation of the vine; in
pastoral occupations; and in financial and banking
operations, which naturally play so important a part in
stimulating and encouraging the growth of a new and
rapidly increasing community.
Practical farmers, especially dairy-farmers and fruit-
growers, with a capital of £5OO and upwards, may be
assured of success.
Intelligent young men with a slender capital (not less
than prepared to rough it for a time, and,
forgetting much that they have already learnt, to adapt
themselves to the novel conditions of life in a growing
colony, will soon work their way to the front.
First-class Mechanics, with a good all-round mastery
of the use of tools, and willing to turn their hand tos
anything in the shape of labour, are in good demand.
They need never lack employment.
Practical Miners will form a highly-important class of
the community of labour. To able-bodied Navvies the
railways offer continual work ; and carpenters, joiners,
bricklayers and masons, sawyers, smiths,
tanners, and gardeners are largely invited. To honest


labour in all its branches, indeed, Western Australia
holds out the brightest prospects. As to female
immigration, there is a good demand generally for
cooks, general servants and laundresses, and for dress-
makers, though to a less extent. The requirements of
the colony in all these regards are multiplied as the
years go by.
The Board of Immigration grants assisted passages
to farmers, agriculturists, millers, wheelwrights, and
others likely to be useful in country districts, all of
whom must be possessed of some small capital. As a
rule, a single man is required to deposit with the
Agent-General not less than £lOO. Free passages are
granted only to female servants.
With this preface I proceed to dwell upon the
Forest Resources of Western Australia.


CHAPTER 11.
FOREST RESOURCES.
VIVID notion of the character of these resources
may be derived from the bare statement that the
forest regions of extra-tropic Western Australia occupy
an area equal to the whole territory of Great Britain, and
that over this vast extent of wooded country a species
of Eucalyptus (Jarrah) prevails, which for the durability
of its timber is, by universal consent, admitted to be un-
surpassed by any kind of tree in any portion of the
globe. Furthermore, this most valuable timber is
obtainable through at least five degrees of geographic
latitude, and that within so short a distance of shipping-
ports as to render it easily accessible to foreign traffic.
When we take into account the numerous other kinds
of useful trees that flourish in the more southern portion
of the territory, and the still more varied sorts of
timber-trees within its intra-tropic regions, the Forest
Resources of Western Australia are seen to be of the
first importance.
The Jarrah (Eucalyptus marginata), which has acquired
so world-wide a reputation, extends over the greater
portion of the country from the Moore River to King
George’s Sound, advancing also to Cape Leeuwin.
The tree occasionally exceeds 100 feet, but rarely


attains to the height of 150. When specially selected
from hilly localities, cut while the sap is least active,
and subsequently dried carefully, it defies the ravages
of the chelura, teredo, and termites. It, therefore, is in
extensive demand for jetties, piles, railway-sleepers,
fence-posts, and all kinds of underground structures ;
its durability recommending it for the planking and
frames of ships, and its non-inflammability for build-
ings. The average weight of well-seasoned wood is
sixty-four pounds per cubic foot. Stems have been
measured eighty feet to the first branch, with a
circumference of thirty-two feet at five feet from the
ground. As Baron Ferd. Von Mueller, to whose
Report we are all indebted for information upon the
subject at once exact and authoritative, remarked,
Jarrah is “ destined to supply one of the most lasting of
hardwood timbers for a long time to come, at the least
costly rate, to very many parts of the globe.” It is also
largely used in the colony for flooring, rafters, spars,
and furniture. For the last purpose it is most useful,
as being scarcely inferior, in point of beauty of grain, to
mahogany, to which, in fact, it bears a marked resem-
blance, and taking an exquisite polish. The toughness
of the wood admits of its being split into great lengths,
and excellent tree-rails are made from it. The leading
Jarrah timber-stations are situate at Jarrahdale, and
are connected by railway with Freemantle, and a small
part in the vicinity called Rockingham.
12


The gigantic Karri (Eucalyptus diversicolor ) has its
home in the humid country at and near the Warren,
Shannon, Donelly, Walpole, and Gardner Rivers,
towards the coast constituting forests. It occurs also
as far east as Mount Marypeak and the Porongerap,
and westward fully to Cape Leeuwin. Startling
accounts of monster specimen trees are on record, and
its maximum height is pronounced to be certainly not
over-estimated at 400 feet. Stems have been measured
300 feet long up to the first limb ; and the circumference
of one particularly gigantic tree was found to be 60 feet
round the base. Widths of timber to the extent of
twelve feet can be obtained. The wood is regarded as
elastic and durable ; but it is not so easily wrought as
Jarrah. For shafts, spokes, felloes, and rails it has
proved to be most serviceable, and it is particularly
sought for large planks.
Eucalyptus calophylla (the red gum-tree of South-West
Australia), the most umbrageous of the tall eucalypts of
the colony, supplies timber for naves, harrows, ploughs,
shafts, spokes, rafters, handles, frames, rails, and various
building requirements ; but the wood cannot be used
for subterranean work, being subject to decay when so
employed. This is the only tree in Western Australia
that yields kino copiously ; the tanning substance being
exported both in a liquid and in a dry state.
Eucalyptus Coxopkleha (the York gum-tree), content
with poor soil, more particularly occupies the eastern


slopes of the Darling range. It seldom exceeds the
height of eighty feet, and frequently is of crooked
growth; the stem rarely being above four feet in
diameter. On account of its toughness, the wood is
highly esteemed for naves and felloes, and the fact that
it is not sufficiently fissile to be split into rails causes it
to be preferred for many superior purposes.
Eucalyptus redunea (the Wandooj, the principal white
gum-tree of the colony, prevails on the eastern slopes of
the Darling range. Its height rarely exceeds 120 feet;
and the stem only occasionally attains to a diameter of
seventeen feet. The wood, which is very pale, hard,
and durable, is much used for curb-shafts, spokes, cogs,
rollers, naves, and felloes ; for which, in spite of its
toughness and consequent difficulty of working, it is
held to be the best. The seasoned wood is so heavy
that it acquires a weight of seventy pounds to the cubic
foot.
Of Eucalyptus cornuta (the Yate tree), the habitat of
which extends from the vicinity of Geographe Bay to
Cape Riche, the wood is elastic and very hard, and lends
itself most efficiently to the manufacture of agricultural
implements and boat-ribs; for wheelwright’s work it is
as good as the York gum-tree ; and for cart-shafts it
enjoys a reputation equal to that of the best English
ash-wood. Even on poor soil its growth is most rapid.
In Lucknow it attained, in the first year, to the height
of from eight to ten feet.


Eucalyptus gamphxcephala (the Tuart tree), is found in
the calcarious coast-tracts at intervals from the vicinity
of the Swan River to near Cape Leeuwin. Though it
rarely reaches the attitude of more than a 100 feet,
its stem often is of considerable diameter. The wood,
which is solid and hard, is used for shafts, naves,
felloes, and various implements, and serves well for
ship-building. It is twisted and casted in the grain, and
shrinks very little in seasoning, during which process
it does not split. It is capable of yielding planks
and scantling from 20 to 40 feet long, and 2 feet
wide.
Eucalyptus vostrata (the Flooded gum-tree), which
generally lines the water-courses of the far interior, and
thus is useful in indicating the lines of creeks to
explorers, and watering-places for their flocks to pastoral
settlers, is one of the few eucalypts that stretch from the
west coast of the Australian continent to the east and
south-east coasts, extending even to the southern shores
east of the Great Bright. It rarely exceeds 100 feet in
height. It is inferior only to the Jarrah in the extraor-
dinary endurance of its timber in subterranean
structures. For piles, culverts, telegraph-posts, railway-
sleepers, and fence-posts it serves admirably ; and for
ship-building its invulnerability to the attacks of the
crustaceous chelura and limnoria of teredo mollusc as
well as termiles renders it specially valuable. The tree
exudes an excellent kino for medicinal and tannic use.


The weight of a cubic foot of the seasoned wood varies
from fifty-three to forty-eight pounds.
Eucalyptus microtheca, which from the Murchison river
is scattered northward as far as Cambridge Gulf, is also
widely distributed through the vast interior of Australia,
and reaches to the Flinders and Darling rivers, and also
nearly to the east coast of Queensland. Though not
very large, this tree is of sufficient dimensions to yield
timber. Like the Flooded gum-tree, with which it is
associated in many places, it is fond of swampy ground.
The wood, which is dark, hard, heavy, and elastic, has
the quality of lasting both above and below ground, and
therefore is well adapted for waterworks, railway-posts
and sleepers, and general carpentry work.
Eucalyptus oleosa proclaims its value in its title.
Though it has no claim to enumeration among the
timber trees, it is important for the valuable oil so
plentifully derivable from its foliage. This oil, of which
the specific gravity is 0.911, is said to be the best known
solvent of amber and other fossil resins, and of India-
rubber, and to have proved unique in many technologic
applications. The tree is found in the interior extra-
tropical desert country, forming a portion of the
Mallee-scrub, which extends over a vast portion of the
Australian deserts.
Eucalyptus longicornes (the Morrell tree), which may be
regarded as a variety of the preceding, differs from it in
its comparatively tall stature, attaining a height of 120


feet. From the sources of the Swan river it extends
eastward. The leaves are very rich in oil. The wood,
which is nearly as dark as Jarrah, and remarkably hard,
is used for rafters, shafts, naves, spokes, harrows, and
all kinds of wheelwrights’ work. From young trees
straight and lasting rails up to twenty-five feet in length
can be obtained.
Eucalyptus salmonophloid (the salmon-barked cacalypt),
which occurs in interrupted patches from the upper
regions of Swan River to the vicinity of Victoria Springs,
reaches a height of zoo feet. It has been largely
employed as fence-wood. The foliage is rich in oil.
Eucalyptus salubris (t he Gimlet-wood or Fluted eucalypt)
bas been found in the same region as the preceding.
Not rarely the length of the stem up to the first branch
reaches 100 teet. The wood, which though tough is
worked with comparative ease, serves for poles, shafts,
and rails. It is paler and harder than Morrell wood,
and is specially designed for the service of the wood-
engravers. The leaves abound with oil.
Several other eucalypts, with the economic properties
of which we are not familiar, are to be added to the
list ; but let me advert to timber trees that are not
eucalypts. Of the Casuarinas, which are the most
important in respect of wood, C. Fraseriana supplies most
elegant material for decorative furniture ; and C. Glanca
is both hard and durable. The Peppermint tree
(Agonis flexuosa), found on many of the river-banks and


in humid valleys, attains to a height of seventy feet.
Apart from its general applicability to purposes of
utility, it makes fuel of a superior quality. The Paper-
bark tree (Melaleuca Leucadendvon), found on the banks
of rivers in the intra-tropical districts, averages 100 feet
in height, and will thrive on wet saline ground, even on
tidal streams. Its hard wood resists the white ant, and
is available in the building sphere and in naval con-
struction. Frenela verrucosa is the widely distributed
Cypress pine, valuable alike for its splendid wood and
for its resin, which closely resembles the sandarae
derived from the Callistris pine of Northern Africa ; and
Santalum cygnorum , which ranges from the vicinity of the
Great Bight to Sharks Bay, is the fragrant Sandalwood.
Of the numerous family of Acacias let me mention
two or three. Acuminata , with its raspberry scent,
invites utilisation for ornamental wood-work. It yields-
durable fence-posts, and furnishes the best of charcoal
for local consumption. The bark of Saligna , which is
easily and quickly raised from seeds even on poor sandy
soil, is rich in tannic acid, yielding thirty per cent ; and
Micobotrya yields an enormous quantity of superior gum.
According to one authority, as much as fifty pounds-
weight has been derived from a single tree. The
Acacias are a numerous family; more than 150 have
already been recorded; and several of them supply
fragrant wood, tanners’ bark, and mimosa gum.


CHAPTER 111.
COMMERCIAL VALUE.
T T aving thus summarised the Forest Resources of
Western Australia, I now address myself to the
commercial value of Jarrah and Karri, the two timbers
that stand alone in the competition for superiority, and
between which the favour of exports is pretty equally
divided. The Report made by the Commission ap-
pointed in 1887 to examine and report upon their
relative value for construction of works, particularly for
submarine operations, embodied a large mass of testi-
mony on the subject, the net result of which may be
said to be that the two timbers approximate so closely
as to goodness and quality that even experienced men
are unable to proclaim their preference. The great
thing evidently is that both these timbers should be cu;
at the proper season, and then carefully dried before
they are applied to uses that will test them to the
utmost. As an illustration of the durability of Jarrah,
it is recorded that the piles supporting the keeper’s
quarters at the Port Adelaide lighthouse, 26 in number,
and about 14 in. by 14 in. hewn timber, which were
driven in 1868, continue to be as sound as they were on
that date. The durability of Karri has been similarly


attested ; and, instead of experts, familiar with only one
of these valuable products of the Forests, eulogising the
one and vilifying the other, they should rather rejoice to
think that they have two such agents of tried efficiency
ready to minister to the requirements of Civilisation.
London will provide ample means for testing the
value of both Jarrah and Karri as material for road-
paving. The oak and the elm, after prolonged trial,
have proved unequal to the severe strain of London
traffic ; and the two Australian hardwoods have recently
been called into requisition ; and the results achieved
confirm the experience derived from the large cities of
Australia. The street pavements of London are now
being constructed of Jarrah and Karri; they both keep
an excellent surface, the difference in wear being so
slight as to be hardly appreciable, while the contrast
they shew to give is of a most marked character. Three
years ago a small trial section of Jarrah was laid by
Mr. Weaver in the Kensington-road, and in October
ast a small area was paved with the same wood in the
Old Brompton-road ; with the most satisfactory results.
Their even wear, which strikes the close observer, is
accounted for by the extreme uniformity of quality.
At Hammersmith, in 1889-90, the Broadway was laid
with Jarrah, and the results obtained were so satisfactory
that the Hammersmith-road has been similarly treated.
It has been noted that a much smaller proportion of


horses fall on the hardwood than on the pine pavements-
leading to it in all directions; the reason given by
Mr. Mair being that, keeping the camber so well, the
hardwood drains quickly, and retains a very small pro-
portion of mud upon its surface.
Testimony of the same sort comes indeed from every
quarter ; from the district of St. Giles, the West Strand
and Lambeth. No one therefore can entertain a doubt
that for the street pavements of London, on which the
traffic is so continuous and heavy, we have at last found
the proper material; and if Jarrah and Karri were
limited only to rendering our roadways pleasant even
to ourselves, and less oppressive than they heretofore:
have been to the horses freighted with the burden of
transporting us from place to place, the two timbers-
would merit our special attention. In view of what has
been accomplished with these hardwoods, it may be
confidently predicted that the days of fire blocks for
street pavements are over. They have been tried for
years in place of superior wood; and the advent of
Jarrah and Karri has finally displaced them.
The products of the forests and woods of Western
Australia exported in 1891 reached a total of 337..
The timber was estimated at ; the sandalwood
at and tanning bark at £1,561.
Finally it is important to explain, for the benefit of
intending emigrants, that every facility is offered to
those intending to settle in the new colony. A large;


■extent of the best land has been acquired by the Land
Corporation of West Australia, Limited, who hold
about 1,236,460 acres under the Crown on conditional
leases. A Settler can obtain from the Company a hold-
ing on the following conditions : “ That a yearly rent of
£1 per 1,000 acres be paid ; that within the period of
seventeen years, from the Ist of January, 1890, the land
be enclosed with a good and substantial fence of two
rails or three strong wires ; and that the land be cleared
of what is known as the poison-plant, which is
dangerous to sheep if eaten at certain seasons of the
year, though, curiously enough, its presence is a sure
indication of good land.
On these easy conditions being complied with at any
time within three years of the expiration of the said
term, the freehold title in fee-simple is granted ; but, if
the conditions are complied with, and the full balance of
rent paid during any period of the lease, the Crown
grant will thereupon be issued. The cost of enclosing
the land with a six wire fence and substantial standards
is about per mile ; and that of clearing the land of
the poison-plant 6 d. per acre. The upset price of
uncleared government land ranges from ten to twenty
shillings an acre.
In the case of Government land many special advan-
tages are offered to particular classes. In the Kimberley
district a reduction of one-half his rent is made to
anyone for the first fourteen years of his lease, if within


five years he can show ten head of sheep or one head of
large stock for every 1,000 acres leased ; or in the Eucla
division, to the eastward of a line drawn northward of
Port Culver, if he has expended £S per 1,000 acres in
tanks, wells, dams, or boring for water. For garden
purposes small areas of not less than five or more than
twenty acres may be purchased, on the conditioh that
within three years the land shall be fenced and one-tenth
planted with vines of fruit-trees or vegetables.
Assisted passages are granted by the Government to
the families of eligible applicants.
The cost of living, which is somewhat higher at
present than it is in England, will of course diminish as
the colony is opened out, local manufactories estab-
lished, and articles of consumption at nome now have to
be imported from a distance.
Wages, however, are considerably higher than in
England, especially for farm labourers, female servants,
miners, shipwrights, and most of the ordinary classes of
skilled mechanics.
Western Australia, so bountifully endowed by Nature,
with all the elements of national greatness, necessarily
has a magnificent future assured to it. Capital and
population are the two wants at present. Both are
slowly, but surely, tending towards it; and I am
confident that within a very few years its progress will
be marked by leaps and bounds, to the expansion of the


British Empire and to the well-being of the nation at
large. Let all classes of the community apply them-
selves to the study of their own interests. Western
Australia invites them all. Prosperity begets happiness
and contentment ; and they are the only sure and
substantial basis of social order.
VV. MILLIGAN & CO., 3a, CAMDEN ROAD, LONDON, N.W.




