

ARMY
APPRENTICES
SCHOOL
KNOW HOW..
secres success as a SOLDIER-TRADESMAN!


THE AUSTRALIAN ARMY
APPRENTICES SCHOOL
BALCOMBE
VICTORIA
CONTENTS
PART 1 Introduction.
PART 2 The Army as a Career.
PART 3 The Course and Curriculum.
PART 4 Sport and Extra-Curricula Activities.
PART 5 Conditions at Balcombe.
PART 6 Eligibility for Entry,


Entrance Gates to the Apprentices School (Memorial to U.S. Marines).


PART I
INTRODUCTION
In the following pages of this booklet, a brief outline is given of the role of the Army
Apprentices School in the life of the Australian nation.
The School, which was established in 1948 to meet the increased needs of the Army for
tradesmen, is located at Balcombe on the Mornington Peninsula on Port Phillip Bay about 38 miles
from Melbourne.
Today’s modern Army is using more machines and technical devices than ever before. These
machines are of no value without the skilled operators and technicians to maintain them.
The Army obtains these tradesmen in one of three ways: —
(a) the already qualified tradesman;
(b) from selected soldiers, who after enlistment, attend schools and courses; and
(c) those young men, who enter the Army Apprentices School and, on joining their corps,
start their careers as technicians with all the advantages that such qualification can bring
and with every chance of early and rapid promotion.
As the trades taught at the Army Apprentices School are recognized by the Apprenticeship
Commissions and trade unions, an Apprentice not only fits himself for a fine career in the Army,
but also gives himself a secure future when the time comes for him to leave the service.
It is hoped that this booklet will be read and discussed. If any young man is stimulated to
apply for admittance, we at Balcombe will be gratified. We are interested in attracting the highest
calibre of young men in the country and of making more people aware of the facts about Balcombe.


12™ YEAR
II th YEAR
OVERSEAS TRAINING
OR
DPPirFD
OVERSEAS TRAINING
APPOINTMENT TO COMMISSIONED RANK
II th YEAR
UNIVERSITY DEGREE
WARRANT OFFICER CLASS 1 (POSSIBLE )
12™ YEAR
10 th year
WARRANT OFFICER CLASS II (POSSIBLE)
II th YEAR
9 th YEAR
WARRANT OFFICER CLASS II (POSSIBLE)
10 th YEAR
DIPLOMA
COURSE
SERGEANT CLASS 1 TRADESMAN
9 th YEAR
8 th YEAR
FULL OR PART SCHOOLING
MATRICULATION
OFFICER PROMOTION
EXAMS
JAN
PROMOTION EXAMS
SCHOOLS AND COURSES
7 th YEAR
DIPLOMA COURSE
FULL OR PART SCHOOLING
“I
1
I
1
jjULY
SERGEANT CLASS 1 TRADESMAN
PROMOTION EXAMS
SCHOOLS AND COURSES
8™ YEAR
niDi oma rniiDCF
POSTED
CC
TO ANY
[jAN
6 th YEAR
FULL TIME
SCHOOLING
)RPS
1
[JULY
UAN
CORPORAL CLASS II TRADESMAN
PROMOTION EXAMS
TRADE SCHOOL COURSES
7 th YEAR
r
i
i
i
i
SPONSORED
i
i
CORPS SPONSORED
li
CORPS NON
r
JULY
CORPORAL CLASS II TRADESMAN
TRADE SCHOOL COURSES
6 th YEAR
-
—
-1 ■> -
_J
[jAN
1
PROMOTION EXAMS
TRADE SCHOOL COURSES
5 th YEAR
moos cDONcnopn and non mDD<;
I
5™ YEAR
OFFICER CADET SCHOOL
ACADEMIC
TRADE
4™ YEAR
FINAL YEAR APPRENTICE TRAINING
CLASS III TRADESMAN
( Leaving Cert. Part Time )
mu- 1
4 th YEAR
ALLOCATION TO CORPS AND UNITS
ENGINEERS-SIGNALS
ELECTRICAL MECHANICAL ENGINEERS
■
§)}■
3 RD YEAR
TRADE Grade IV (Leaving Cert. Part Time)
ARMY
2" D YEAR
TRADE Grade 111 (leaving Cert.Part Time)
> APPRENTICES
M 4
I st YEAR
TRADE GRADE 1
TRADE GRADE 11
SCHOOL
P'SJ
SELECTION BOARD
FOR ENTRY
11
CIVILIAN
SCHOOLS
ARMY CAREER PLANNING CHART


PART 2
THE ARMY AS A CAREER
The King’s or the Queen’s Service has always attracted the very best of the Empire’s young
men and boys.
The “Trade of Arms” is more than a figure of speech in today’s modern Army. The Army is
a highly complex technical organization, which cannot function in peace or in war without the
resources of skilled tradesmen and specialists. The men filling these appointments must, as well as
being trained soldiers, he as equally skilled in their Army employments as are their counterparts in
civilian jobs. For the keen young men of today, the Australian Regular Army has provided a
splendid opportunity with the establishment of its Apprentices School and School of Music. These
Schools train young men as tradesmen, clerks and musicians.
The Army today has a strong appeal for the young man who wishes to serve his country, and
while doing so, acquire trade or specialist qualifications which will entitle him to qualified status on
his return to civil life. The Army Apprentices School and the Army School of Music meet the needs
of this type of young men because they open the way to an economically sound career which offers
the prospect of travel and adventure coupled with opportunity of promotion to positions of responsi-
bility. The tradesman or specialist who has held a responsible position in the Army has an employment
advantage in the corresponding civilian sphere.
★
APPRENTICE TRADESMEN are trained under a syllabus used in Victorian Technical Colleges
and approved by apprenticeship authorities in all States. Employers’ associations and trade unions
recognize as a fully accredited tradesman, any man who has qualified at the Army Apprentices’
School and completed his initial Army engagement. Students so desiring can be coached to Leaving
Standard at the School. On graduation, apprentices are paid as skilled adult soldier tradesmen. They
are posted to suitable units for their final year of training under the supervision of an expert
apprentice master. These units are usually within the Royal Australian Engineers, the Royal Australian
Corps of Signals or the Royal Australian Electrical and Mechanical Engineers, whose roles are
conducive to the highest development of military and civilian trade skills.
★
APPRENTICE CLERKS receive a thorough clerical training in which special attention is paid to
commercial subjects, including typing and shorthand. Education training, to Intermediate standard
in commercial subjects, is provided for all apprentice clerks. Those showing capacity and willingness
can be coached at the School to Leaving standard. On graduation, apprentices are posted to units and
paid as adult qualified clerks with appropriate skill pay. These units are usually within the Royal
Australian Army Service Corps, in which the wide diversity of employment offers excellent oppor-
tunities for gaining valuable experience in clerical and commercial practice.
★
APPRENTICE MUSICIANS receive, through the affiliated School of Music, a thorough training in
both the practice and theory of music. On graduation, apprentices are posted to regular Army bands
and receive appropriate skilled pay for that rank. Advancement is through the ranks of lance
corporal, corporal, sergeant, and warrant officer bandsmen. Over 40 per cent, of regular Army
bandsmen hold ranks above that in which they were originally posted.
AVENUES FOR PROMOTION
The Army vigorously and systematically encourages graduates to develop their trade and
military skills with resultant promotion and pay increases. The diagram shows the planned career of
an apprentice. Courses are held under both military and civilian auspices, and some lead to diplomas,
degrees and commissions. There are opportunities for overseas training in some fields.




PART 3
THE COURSE AND CURRICULUM
THE AIM
The aim of Balcombe is to train boys to become soldier-specialists for service in the Regular
Army, and to foster in them the mental and moral qualities which are essential in the good soldier
and citizen, and which promote fitness for higher rank.
Towards realizing this aim, the curriculum is designed to provide:—
• educational, military and physical training
• technical training to fit apprentice tradesmen for service as highly skilled soldier-tradesmen
• clerical training to fit apprentice clerks for service as qualified clerks
• musical training, in conjunction with the Army School of Music, to fit apprentice musicians
for service as qualified bandsmen.
THE COURSE
The length of course is dependent upon the type of training being undertaken by the
apprentice.
APPRENTICESHIP TRADES courses all last four years, of which the first three are spent at
the School. The fourth year is spent gaining advanced practical training and experience in an Army
workshop or technical unit, and by attending suitable Army schools of trade training.
APPRENTICE CLERKS courses last one and a half years and complete training is provided at
the School.
APPRENTICE MUSICIANS courses last two years and complete training is provided at the
School, in association with the Army School of Music. An apprentice musician, reaching the required
educational and military standards, may be posted to a band upon completing the two years at the
School.
METHODS OF INSTRUCTION
In all courses, tuition of the highest order is provided by trained military and civilian
specialists and teachers. Training is carried out under the “wing system”. In each wing, the training
programme is conducted under the direction of the School Headquarters through a regimental and
technical training staff of instructors in military subjects, general education, trade and specialist
techniques.
MILITARY TRAINING
No matter what his job, every man enlisted in the Army is firstly a soldier. In modern warfare,
the soldier-specialist may, according to the needs of the situation and his own defence, have to use his
weapons against the enemy, for example against enemy troops filtering through to the vicinity of a
workshops or other rear area installations. To this end, the Army ensures that its specialists receive
the full basic military training of all fighting soldiers. This basic training includes drill, weapon
training, fieldcraft, physical training, team games and other subjects.
This military training gives the young man faith in the efficiency of his weapons and his own
ability to use them. The resultant self-confidence makes for a more efficient specialist, no matter what
his Army employment may be. It promotes also the development of those personal traits of reliability,
initiative, endurance and resourcefulness, which are essential attributes of the modern soldier.
PHYSICAL TRAINING
The overall aim of the physical training programme is to develop in the young man the fitness
and stamina necessary to meet the most rigorous conditions likely to be experienced in a soldier’s life
and to promote a mental alertness conducive to successful studies. Tests at the end of each term record
progress, detect any persisting weaknesses, and enable training schedules to be adjusted to suit
individuals.




TECHNICAL TRAINING
Training at the School covers instruction in: —
• Automotive trades
© Metal trades (including Fitting, Turning, Blacksmithing and Welding)
©Building trades (including Bricklaying, Carpentry and Joinery, Plumbing and Pipe Fitting)
© Electrical trades (including the training of Electrical Fitters and Mechanics and Radio, Radar
and Television Technicians)
© Clerical subjects
© General education
© Technical education as required for the trade being studied
• Band music.
MOTOR VEHICLE WING
Here the apprentices receive basic training in metal trades subjects and specialist training-
in mechanical and electrical engineering as applicable to automotive and stationary engines. The
latest methods and equipment are used. Theoretical problems are explained by films and illustrated
lectures. Mechanical construction is demonstrated by modern training aids, among which are
sectionized models of vehicles including electrical and diesel types.
METAL TRADES WING
In this wing there are three sections: —
• Fitting and Turning.
• Blacksmithing.
©Welding (including Oxy-Acetylene and Arc Welding).
In the first, apprentices to the trade of fitting and turning are taught turning, fitting, milling,
grinding and trade metallurgy.
In the second, apprentice blacksmiths are trained to Grade 4 Blacksmithing (Theory and
Practice) standard.
In the third section, all apprentices to the trades of motor vehicle mechanic, fitting and turning
and blacksmithing, receive a special course in oxy-acetylene and arc welding.
Allied trade training to the requirements of the Victorian Apprenticeship Commission in
machine shop practice is given to apprentice motor mechanics, electrical fitters, electrical mechanics,
and radio mechanics.
The workshops are fully equipped with modern lathes, milling machines and grinding machines.
The welding shop has an up-to-date reticulation system for oxy-acetylene welding.
To supplement their training at School, all students are from time to time conducted through
selected Army and civil workshops in the Melbourne area, where specialised machines are seen in
operation.
BUILDING TRADES WING
Apprentices are, within the three branches of this wing, trained in either bricklaying, carpentry
and joinery or plumbing. To co-ordinate the Technical College Syllabus with training in a wide *ans;e
of practical work, constructional building details are covered in the three branches of the wing. Under
this system, apprentices receive, in addition to specialized training in their respective trades, a basic
training in related trades.




The building trades wing is equipped with an extensive range of machine tools and appliances.
During practical instruction, the apprentices are employed on actual building projects within
the School area and they can see the results of their work and training.
During their training, they receive instruction in draftsmanship to a stage necessary for their
work.
ELECTRICAL TRADE WING
In the two branches of this wing, the electrical and telecommunication trades are taught to
prepare apprentices for their progression to the status of fully licensed electricians or certified radio
tradesmen.
Apprentice electrical mechanics’ and electrical fitters’ training covers all trade aspects including
house and factory wiring and installation of electrically powered machinery and appliances. The course
covers training in armature winding and motor maintenance to a standard which qualifies the
apprentice to rewind stators and rotors of electrical motors operating on either direct or alternating
currents.
The School’s radio mechanics’ course provides a sound theoretical training in the fundamental
principles of modern communications systems and covers intensive experimental work in the
laboratories.
Under control of this wing, the School’s amateur radio club operates its own station with the
call sign VK3AAS. Apprentices from all trades are encouraged to join the club as a spare time
interest, whereby they may keep their own radio sets in running order, further their trade studies
generally or prepare to secure an amateur operator’s licence.
THE CLERICAL TRAINING WING
During their eighteen months at the School, the clerks receive a thorough clerical training with
special attention being paid to shorthand, typing and other commercial subjects. Those successful will
reach the standard of Army First Class Education Certificate and of the Victorian Intermediate
Certificate (commercial subjects).
Those showing aptitude and willingness can, at the School, be coached to the stage of fitness
to sit for Intermediate or Leaving Certificates or their equivalents.
DRAWING WING
This wing provides the requisite instruction in trade drawing and applied geometrical drawing
for all trades.
A course in Mechanical Drawing at Leaving Certificate level is offered to selected apprentices.
EDUCATION WING
The School’s educational programme relates the technical requirements of all training courses
with general educational training, and is carried out under a qualified teaching staff from the Army
Education Corps.
A general educational course is conducted leading to the award of the Army First Class
Certificate of Education (Technical) to apprentices passing the required examinations.
The wing has physics and chemistry laboratories and a well-stocked reference library. Educa-
tional films, lectures and current affairs discussions supplement normal studies.
MUSICIAN TRAINING
The tuition received by apprentice musicians during their two years at the Army School of
Music is of a high order. They are taught the theory and practice of music, the techniques of
ceremonial marching and counter marching and other spectacular phases of Army bandsmanship.
In the later stages of training, instruction includes participation in elementary harmony.
The training system at the School of Music is designed towards the full development of the
musical inclinations which prompt boys to enter the School. The system promotes evident musical
abilities and brings out latent talents.




PART 4
SPORTS AND EXTRA-CURRICULA
ACTIVITIES
SPORTS
The Australian Army is concerned with the whole man. A soldier posted to any duty must be
fit. The Army considers that games are essential in training as they promote physical fitness, team
spirit, leadership instruction, comradeship and loyalty.
All codes of football, and cricket, hockey and tennis are played on the School’s ovals and
tennis courts, and teams are entered in suitable competitions in the Melbourne and surrounding areas.
The close proximity of the School to Port Phillip Bay facilitates training in aquatic sports under
exceptionally safe conditions.
In addition, there is a modern gymnasium where training is conducted by qualified instructors.
The waking life of the apprentices is not all “spit and polish”, parades, training and study
with no time for sport and relaxation. Extra-curricula activities are planned to enable apprentices to
enjoy practically the same type of recreation as any schoolboy.
A modern well-stocked library, to which selected popular books are added regularly, is
provided. Within the School there are numerous hobby clubs such as rifle, cycling, model, fishing,
sailing, chess, “bush”-walking and radio clubs. The radio club operates its own amateur station with
call sign VK3AAS.
SOCIAL
Dances and other social activities are held on an average of once a fortnight.




PAY AND ALLOWANCES
APPRENTICE TRADESMEN
WEEKLY RATES
Drawing
Deferred
Total
First year
£4 1 1
£0 2
6
£4 3 7
Second Year:
At 16-17 years
4 11 1
0 5
0
4 16 1
At 18 years
4 14 7
0 5
0
4 19 7
Third year:
At 17 years
5 3 7
0 5
0
5 8 7
At 18 years
5 7 1
0 5
0
5 12 1
APPRENTICE CLERKS AND
MUSICIANS
First year:
Drawing
Deferred
Total
under 16
at 16
£3 10 0
—
£3 10 0
17
3 10 0
1 15
0
5 5 0
18 (Recruit Adult)
4 16 10(a)
5 15
6
10 12 4(a
Second year:
5 12 7(a)
6 15
4
12 7 11(a
under 16
3 10 0
—
3 10 0
at 16
4 12 2
0 12
10
5 5 0
17
6 2 6(a)
4 9
10
10 12 4(a
18 I Recruit Adult)
6 14 9(a)
5 13
2
12 7 11(a
PART 5
CONDITIONS AT BALCOMBE
ORGANIZATION
For administrative purposes, the School is organized into three companies. The company
is an essential unit as far as the military side is concerned, and under supervision the apprentices
from the senior classes fill executive positions and generally run their day to day administration.
MESSING
Meals, scientifically planned to meet the needs of the growing youths, are prepared in modern
and well-equipped kitchens.
ACCOMMODATION
Accommodation is provided in suitable barracks with individual wardrobe space. Clean linen is
issued weekly and as many blankets as required. The apprentices are required to keep their barracks
in a clean and tidy condition.
HEALTH
First-class medical and dental care is provided free for apprentices. In addition to the routine
medical attention, a small hospital and a well-equipped dental clinic are established at the School.
Cases of a more serious nature are transferred to the Flinders Naval Depot Hospital for
attention by leading specialists.
SPIRITUAL
The highest possible moral standard is maintained at the School, with every facility for
religious instruction in the particular denomination of the student.
The apprentices must attend the weekly “Commanding Officer’s Hour”, which is conducted
under the guidance of the School chaplains. This special period of instruction is designed to develop
the moral and spiritual well-being of the student, leading to a proper sense of self-discipline and
community service.
CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT
A complete outfit of clothing for winter, summer, working dress and sports wear is provided
free to apprentices. All books and tools are supplied without cost.
All apprentices are paid while training. A small additional allowance to cover laundry and
other personal expenses is paid to apprentice tradesmen only.
The current rates of pay are: —


Tradesmen in training are soldiers, too.


The Deferred Pay shown in the tables is saved for the young apprentices and paid to them in
a lump sum on dates which vary according to the kind of apprenticeship training period successfully
completed. In the case of tradesmen, the amount is paid when they graduate from the School,
In the case of clerks and musicians, the amount deferred is paid when they are posted to a
unit on completion of their training period at the School.
During leave, pay continues at the rate which the apprentice has been receiving and, in addition,
a daily sustenance allowance is paid in lieu of board and lodging.
RETIREMENT BENEFITS
All apprentices are entitled to benefits under the Defence Forces Retirement Benefits Fund from
date of enlistment. They are not required to contribute to the Fund until they reach the age of 18
years, when their contribution per week during the balance of their training is:—
Apprentice Tradesmen £0 10 0
Apprentice Clerks and Musicians £0 16 0
LEAVE
There are two leave breaks each year, with free return home travel. One period of four weeks
in mid-summer, December/January, and the other of two weeks in mid-winter.
PARENTS ’ OR GUARDIANS' QUERIES
Parents or guardians are encouraged to write to the Commanding Officer of the School about
any point concerning their boy on which they require information or guidance.
Visits of parents, guardians, relations or friends to the School can be readily arranged with
the Commanding Officer.
Apprentices embus for leave.


The Apprentice Musician Band.
Graduation Parade.


PART 6
ENTRANCE TO BALCOMBE
VACANCIES
In January of each year a new Intake of approximately one hundred and fifty apprentices
enters the School, These young men must meet the conditions of eligibility and are selected on the
basis of ability and potential.
ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS
AGE
Candidates for entry must be between the ages of:
Tradesmen and Musicians —over 15 and under 17 years.
Clerks —over 15| and under 17 years.
All candidates must have the written consent of the parent or guardian.
NATIONALITY
Be Australian citizens or British subjects living permanently in Australia and Non-British
migrants who can produce evidence that they are applying for naturalization.
EDUCATIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Candidates for entry as apprentices —
(a) Tradesmen —must have obtained, or be currently studying for the Intermediate, Junior,
or Technical Intermediate Standard.
(b) Clerks—have attained Sub-Intermediate, or higher.
(c) Musicians —have attained the equivalent standard of entry to the Sub-Intermediate year
of Victoria.
MEDICAL STANDARD
Candidates must be medically fit.
The following standards are for the guidance of prospective candidates: —
Height—s feet 2 inches.
Chest —a minimum expansion of 2 inches.
Vision (unaided) —6/18 each eye, or 6/12 one eye and 6/36 the other eye.
Hearing —ability to hear with each ear a strong whisper at a distance of 20 feet.
Dental —provided the applicants have jaws which lend themselves to the fitting of effective
dentures, they will not be rejected for dental reasons.
In general, the candidate must not have any departure from complete health or normal physique
sufficient to make him unfit for military service.


He should not suffer from any of these particular disabilities:—
Defect of heart, lungs or circulation.
Hernia.
Insufficient muscular development.
Defects of speech.
Chronic or recurrent ear disease.
Postural deformities.
Deformities of limbs, especially hands and feet.
No colour blindness (tradesmen only).
PERIOD OF ENGAGEMENT
CHARACTER
Applicant must be of good character.
The periods of initial enlistment, which include the School training periods and service in the
Australian Regular Army when initial training is complete are: —
Tradesmen—9 years.
Clerks—years.
Musicians—B years.
SERVICE OBLIGATIONS
All apprentices are required to undertake to serve anywhere within or beyond the limits of the
Commonwealth of Australia. However, no soldier is permitted to serve abroad until he has reached the
age of 18 years nor is he permitted to serve in an operational area before he has reached the age
of 19 years.
CLOSING DATE FOR ENTRY
Ihe application closing date, which is usually about the middle of August each year, is
published in the press and other media.
Eligible candidates are interviewed by a selection board usually in the capital cities. Candidates
from country cities and towns are brought at the Army’s expense to the nearest capital city in
which the board is to sit.
There is no competitive examination for any course.
Under pre-selection procedure, candidates are examined for medical fitness before interview by
the selection board.
HOW TO APPLY FOR ENTRANCE
Any of the following Headquarters will supply full information:—
QUEENSLAND
Headquarters Northern Command, Victoria Barracks, Brisbane.
NEW SOUTH WALES
Headquarters Eastern Command, Victoria Barracks, Paddington, Sydney.
VICTORIA
Headquarters Southern Command, Victoria Barracks, St. Kilda Rd., Melbourne.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Headquarters Central Command, Keswick Barracks, Keswick, Adelaide.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Headquarters Western Command, Swan Barracks, Perth.
NORTHERN TERRITORY
Headquarters Northern Territory Command, Larrakeyah Barracks, Darwin.
TASMANIA
Headquarters The Royal Tasmania Regiment, Anglesea Barracks, Hobart.
Completed application forms should normally be sent to the Military Headquarters in the
applicant’s State of residence.




