

NEW
LAUGHS JOKES AND [?]
Price
as told by
JULIAN ROSE
PIP POWELL.
RICHE & RICH.
LAUDER
and
other
WILL H. FOX.
WALTON P. KELLY.
CHAS. ZOLI.
WILLIAMS.
and
others
A COLLECTION OF THE
WORLD OF FUN
Publisher J OF SLATER Sydney.


CobberMouth Organs
Fitted with sound-reflecting- Covers and Bell
Metal Reeds, give absolutely the loudest,
clearest and most musical tone of any Mouth
Organ. The covers are acoustically correct
in shape, and magnify the sound from the
only the ignorant buyer is misled as such
covers reduce the volume and interfere with
the free production of the tone. Only thor-
oughly seasoned material is used in the manu-
facture of Cobber Mouth Organs and their
reeds as the Horn
increases the tone
of a Phonograph.
Many inferior
Mouth Organs are
fitted with fancy
shaped covers, but
g— : r-* es r— ■ m rr? g r — i
durability therefore
can be relied on. We
guarantee to replace
any Cobber Mouth
Organ which is de-
fective in material
or manufacture.
No. I. —The Professional Cobber, 40 Bell
Metal Reeds in fine Metal Case ... 3/“
No. 2.—The Standard Cobber, 20 Bell
Metal Reeds in fancy Cardboard
Case 2/“
No.
No.
3. —The Miniature Professional
Cobber, 20 Bell Metal Reeds in fine
Metal Case ... 1/6
4. —The Cobber Vamper, 20 Bell
Metal Heeds in fancy Cardboard Box 1 -
* JACKSON & MACDONALD, Druitt Street, Sydney
A. E. BEAL. East St., Rockhampton, & 367-9 Queen St., Brisbane: WILES & CO.. 7 Quadrant, Launceston
G • w - RYAN, 43 Bourke St., Melbourne; OPTICAL & PHOTO SUPPLIES CO., Hay St., Perth.
Printed by Matthews & Co., Goulburn Street, Sydney,
for the Proprietors, Joe Slater Publishing Co,,
Haymarket and Leichhardt, Sydney.


JULIAN ROSE (Our Hebrew Friend).
LEVENSKY AT THE WEDDING.
GIVEN WITH ROARS OF LAUGHTER.
X must tell you about the wedding 1 .
Last week a fellow that works for me
says, “I want to get married,” so I gave
him half a day off. Yes, sometimes it
takes more, sometimes it takes three days.
Well, he sent me an invitation—“ Mr.
Levin sky, your presents is requested.”
Right avay, before I get to the wedding!
Stingy people. It said come in evening
dress. Jacky Liberman came in his pa-
jumpers.
You ought to see the bride. She had a
lace curtain in front of her face like a
mosquito net. A white dress, trimmed with
satin. It was cut so low (indicating with
hands), I could not look her in the face all
night. Her dress was ripped open right
down the side (like that) a directory, with
one leg sticking out, a fat one, I ‘saw it
twice. In her necktie she had a bunch of
Don ’t-you-for-get-it-nots, ’ ’ and her hair
was upholstered in the latest style, with
white iegrets sticking out. She was a very
nice lady, fat. My word! that lady have a
good future behind her. The bride-
gioom he had a new suit, made to order for
14/-, all wool. They were made for his
brother, when he got married. It fitted


him good, too, oil but the coot and pants.
The pants was a little too tight. It was
alright when he stood up, but ven he* sit
down he stood up! He had an 18 carat
vatch, open# face, steam winder, with a
Swiss chese movement, quarentined for 18
years, at a 1/- per week. Well, when they
marched out of the alley, they played
“Mundlebaun’s Wedding March.” There
was three little girls holding up the bride’s
dress. The bridegroom’s pant’s was held
up by a safety pin. They stuck flowers all
over the floor—2lbs. for a penny. When
the Rabbi said, “Will you take this wed-
ded woman to be your legal wife!” She
said, “Say yes, you mug, or I’ll knock your
eye out.” Really, she ought to be very
happy. She is working steady. They got
telegrams from all over the country of
congratulation. Telegrams from all their
friends—collect on delivery.
At night time we had everybody in
society there—all the aristocoplacy. Mrs.
Cohen was dressed up to kill. Why
shouldn’t she be? She was a butcher.
Young Isaacstein was there, too, he is from
college where he is studying to be a civil-
ised engineer. Mrs. Cohen came from the
hospital straight. She was suffering fiom
spinal maginnis. The doctor said her
blood was full of muriatic acid.


PRICE SIXPENCE. (Examine the Contents)
PUBLISHED BY . . .
JOE SLATER MUSIC CO-
Leichhardt - and - Haymarket,
SYDNEY
The world fo Humor.
CONTAINING
a collection of Flashes of Incidents, Sparks
of Merriment, Monologues, Cross Patter,
Jokes, Parodies and Laughable Stories
AS TOLD BY
Sam Mayo.
Billy Williams.
Wilkie Bard.
Chas. R. Sweet.
Barney Bernard.
Fred. Bluett.
Jen. Latona.
Gus Harris.
Tom Dawson.
Margaret Cooper.
Ike and Will Scott.
Walter P. Kelly.
Rich and Rich,
Will H. Fox.
Drew and Alders.
Archie Glen.
Julian Rose.
George Fuller Golden.
Will Whitburn.
Oelavale and Gilbert.
Ernest Pitcher.
Dave Samuels.
Pip Powell.
Hayman and Franklin.
Dan Leno.
Bert Gilbert.
Fred. Niblo.
Bert, Bailey.
Harry Lauder,
and Hosts of Others.


Then the time comes for the bride and
everybody to go home. Somebody said,
“Supper is ready downstairs.” Every-
body began pushing and crowding down-
stairs like pigs. It was disgraeeless. I was
down at the supper table first. What a
dinner it was. Served in eight corsets.
There was soup with oatmeal and pickles.
There was strangled eggs—they nearly
strangled me. There was one thing on the
front of the card “Menu.” I didn’t get
none of that. We had chicken and castor
oil, and lobster with limberger, covered all
over the top with olives. Do you know
olives? Green plums. I don’t like them,
they roll off my knife. We had serviettes,
too, clean ones—paper ones. Everybody
took them home with them, spoons, too
(and they blamed me).
Yoi! Yoi! Yoi!
Do you know Abraham Cohen? He was
there with his two daughters, Rachel and
Rebecca. Rachel is 17 years old, she
speaks, in words that big (indicating), you
could not understand them. She recited
“Asleep in the Ditch.” The other sang
“Alice, Where is She,” She has a nice
muzzled soprano voice. Some weeks ago
she could not sing, she was operated on,
and the operator took out her utensils.
Next year she is going to Italy to have it


kalcimined. The other was playing the
piano. Cohen said, “What do you think
of her execution, Levinsky,” I said, lam
in favour of it.” <
Cohen knows everything. We were sit-
ting at the table together. He does not like
roast beef because the gravy does not
match his waistcoat. Oh! he knows every-
You should hear him eat soup, fie
takes up a knife like that and picks ns
teeth. I said, “Cohen, you should not do
that, it is not etiquette, you should use the
fork.” There was a bottle of pickled on-
ions, and he takes the bottle and puts al
the onions in his pocket. 1 asked him why
he did that. He said, “I’ve got a new
coat.” He thought they were camphor
balls He said, “Levinsky, please pass the
potatoes,” and I passed them, and he takes
the whole business and puts them on his
plate. I said, “I like potatoes, too,
Cohen.” He said, “Not ao much as I do,
though.” He was dressed up, too. Cohen,
I thought he had a red necktie with white
stripes, but I found out he had been eating
tomato and macaroni soup for dinner.
There was one Irishman there. Only
one, that is enough. He was Micky
McDougall, the caretaker of the place. He
gets £2 10s Od a month and the neighbour’s
milk Nobody invited him in, and no-


body had the nerves to invite him to go
out. We gave him three or four glasses
of beer. Rosinski said, “Look out, he is
Irishman, he is a fighter.” But he was not
a fighter. Me and my two cousins and my
brother we nearly licked him.
We had a lot of trouble with that Irish-
man. He picked up a bottle and threw it
at Cohen. It struck him in the face and
knocked him sensible. It was a lucky thing
Cohen was there, or it would have broken
the window. Cohen saw he was getting
mad and he gave him a glass of whiskey,
then he got mad again. Everything was
alright until Rosenthal sang a song, “Why
did they sell Killarney?” That was the
first time that the Irishman knew they had
sold Killarney, and he blamed Rosenthal
for it. Then he took off his coat and said,
“lam going to clean out the place.” We
were going to stop him, but Goldstein
said, “Let him clean it out, it will be the
first time, and he has a right to.”
Mrs. Levi fainted, and Doctor Goldberg
gave her an epidemic. The poor woman
was historical. She lost her switch. They
put water on her face and her complexion
came off. Mrs. Levinstein fainted, and
then the Irishman feinted—he feinted with
his right and hit me with his left. Cohen
shouted, “Look out.” I was looking out,


I was under the table. I beat him with the
foot, though. He kicked me in the tooth,
and somewhere else, twice in the same
place, and he promised me another one, but
it did not reach me, I was sitting on it.
They arrested Cohen. The way they
treated that fellow was abominable. He
had not a stitch to his back, but he had
three in his head that the Irishman gave
him. They put an icicle in his mouth to
take away his temperance. It was the first
time they had ever got anything from
Cohen without paying for it.
When the wedding was all over every-
body marched out of the hall. The organ
was playing Lohengrin’s Wedding March.
They threw rice and slippers, and they hit
me with a tomato —an old one—a soft one.
My brother said, “Don’t look round Abe,
or you will get one in the face.” Then
they threw old shoes, just for luck. The
Irishman was standing there, and he
threw one at me-his foot was in it. (Exit.)
TALL TALES BY ERNEST PITCHER.
(THE BIG MUG).
I suppose you know —
I’m in a new line of business now, I’ve
got a liver and lemon stable —I mean a
livery and bait stable—one day last week
who should come in but little Billy Bice.


I suppose you all know Billy Rice f Well I
must tell you, Billy hired a horse off me—
and off he went riding the horse at a great
old trot. He was getting along fine when
all of a sudden he came to a church where
a wedding was taking place, and when the
horse got opposite the Church he stopped
dead —and what do you suppose he did?—
Now what do you supose he did—Well he
Threw Rice I
My friend Bill is a mug . Every one can
see he is a mug . One day he was passing
a bird shop, and a large cockatoo was out-
side who, when he saw Bill, said, “I know
something about you.” Now Bill thought
—l’ve heard these birds live to 150 years
old; he might know something. So he said
to the man who stood at the door, “Will
you sell him?” The man said, “No, but
I’ll sell you some of his eggs if you like.”
Bill gave the man 10/-, and the man picked
three eggs and gave them to Bill. Bill took
them home and hatched them in the incu-
bator. One was a Magpie, the other a
Crow, and the other a Buck. Bill put the
three in a cage and went to the shop again
with them. When he arrived the cockatoo
saw him, and again said, “I know some-
thing about you.” Bill held the cage up
and said, “Yes, be gosh, and I know some-
thing about you.”


IKE AND WILL SCOTT’S LAUGH-MAKER.
HOW CRONJIE SURRENDERED.
See, it was like this. We were all lying
in a trench in the open. There was Lord
Roberts parading his horse up and down
waiting for the enemy, so I went up to him
and I says: “Good-day, Bobs.” He says:
‘ ‘ Good-day, Ike. ” I said: “ What time do
you expect the enemy, Bobs ” He said, as
he looked at his watch, “Oh, about an
hour’s time.” Then I said; “We had bet-
ter go and have one. ’ ’ He said; All
right, Ike.” So we went away and had a
pint of beer each. When we came back
we found Cronjie and his men were there.
So I went up and I said: “Are you
Cronjie?” He said, “Yes; I’m Cronjie.”
So I said, “You’re a bit early, ain’t yer?”
“Yes ” says Cronjie, “I’m 30 minutes to
the good.” “Well,” I said, “Are you
ready to start?” He said, “I’m a couple
of men short. ”‘ ‘ Well, ’’ I said, ‘ ‘ You bet-
ter surrender.” So he surrendered, and
we all went and had one.
“Where have you been for your holi-
days ?”
“Oh, I’ve been to Southanesberg. Where
have you been?”
“Oh I’ve been to Joeafrica.”
—lke and Will Scott.


Why is my head like Saturday to Mon-
day?
Because its your week end.
—Melrose and Menzies.
ABOUT BERT GILBERT.
A man was at the railway station en-
quiring for a ticket, he was very intoxi-
cated. The porter said: —“I see you are
in a had way, sir; anyhow, what station do
you want”? The drunken one turned and
answered smilingly, “What stations have
you got”?
SAM MAYO'S SCREAMER.
SON OF A GUN!
I met a friend of mine the other night
whose name was Gun. Now, this man Gun
has a father whose name is Gun. There-
fore he is a son of a gun. Well,
Gun and I had a few drinks. Gun got
grossly intoxicated. I had to carry Gun
home on my back. On our way home, we
met a policeman. The policeman said to
me, ‘ ‘ Hello I what have you got there ? ” I
told him, “that was Gun.” He says, “Yes,
and by his appearance I think he is Loaded.
Anyway, I shall have to lock you up.” I
asked, “What for?” The policeman said,
“for carrying a loaded Gun.” Next morn


ing we appeared at the court, and the ver-
dict was Discharged, and the next day we
heard the Report in the paper.
MARGARET COOPER’S MONOLOGIST’S
ENCORE.
Ladies and Gentlemen: I thank you from
the bottom of my heart for the sympathy
you have shown me, but please remember
the show is not half over and there are
other artists waiting to earn their money.
The manager has requested me to an-
nounce that to-morrow evening we give a
special charity performance. All proceeds
will be turned over to that poor, unfortun-
ate family of Anthony Hordern and Sons.
DREW AND ALDERS’ LAUGHABLE
“FARM GAG.”
(SMILE, BILL, SMILE.)
Speaking about fruit, that reminds me
of my uncle’s farm.
Has your uncle got a farm?
Farm? My uncle has a farm that covers
two thousands of land.
What does your uncle grow on that
farm?
My uncle has apples.
Apples 1 Now if there is one thing m
the world I like that’s apples. What sort


of apples has your uncle got—pippens,
maiden’s blush
My uncle has one tree with over three
thousand five hundred apples on, and the
tree is bent over so much that the apples
touch the ground.
Oh, get off there; is that the biggest lie
that you can tell I
That, sir, is no lie.
What else has your uncle got on his
farm?
My uncle has strawberries as large as
any wash-tub you have seen.
jumping sinner! Oh, my gosh, they
ought to make a lawyer of you. What else
has your uncle got on his farm?
My uncle has cows that give over fifty
quarts of milk a day.
Fifty quarts of milk every day!
Yes, sir; fifty quarts of milk a day.
But, say, do they give it willingly?
How dare you, sir.
What else has your uncle got on his
farm?
My uncle has horses that stand nineteen
feet high.
Nineteen foot! Well, look'here, all your
uncle’s horses and cows and strawberries
and lot would not fit in one corner of my
uncle’s farm.
Has your uncle got a farm?


Farms (very loud). Why, my uncle has
the largest farm that ever existed. My
uncle has a farm over four million miles
and two inches. He has the finest little
geese that’s gooselin, and little gosleeu
that’s gooselin. Then my uncle has hens
that lays— now, the other day my uncle se
a side of hacon under our old hen, and in
three weeks what do you suppose camel
I don’t know; what camel
A smoked pig. Then, again, my uncle
has fleas on his farmland every one ot
them fleas is just as big as any ot your
uncle’s horses are—(Exit).
ONLY FOR MEN.
I dreamt the other night that I died and
went to Heaven. I knocked at the door;
Peter came out, and I asked him could
come in. He said, “All right Then I
told him I had my wife outside, and also
asked could she come in. He said Wo-
men are not allowed in here. That s whj
they call it Heaven. —Will Van Allen.
NEW JOKES BY PIP POWELL AND KATE
VERSEY.
She; Do you know I’ve had three tickets
for one ball all in the one week.
He: That’s nothing; I’ve had one ticket
in for three halls this last year.


She: Why you’re nothing, don’t you talk
to me.
He: Don’t talk to you, why I might tell
you ( that I have mixed with Royalty.
She: When ?
He: Why just now —I was stung by a
Queen Bee.
Have you heard the latest in songs ?
“Will you love me in suspenders as you
do in sox?”
She: Is your father living?
He: No, he’s keeping boarders.
She: Does he keep them long?
He: No, but he keeps them so thin that
they look long.
She: What does he feed them on?
He: Sawdust.
She: Why, that isn’t very good board.
He: Sawdust is fine board.
She: Does he ever lose a boarder?
He: Once in a while. One fell down a
waterpipe yesterday.
She: I mean, don’t his boarders ever
quit?
He: No. They’re too weak to quit.
She: Nonsense! I mean don’t they ever
kick
He: One kicked this morning.
She: What for?


He: He couldn't help it. He kicked the
bucket.
She: That was sad.
He: Very sad. He owed a week s board.
LARRY LEWIS ON HORSES.
A man went to select a horse one day
from a well-known Sydney livery stable.
He secured a thoroughbred, rode along
Kensington, attempted a jump, and was
thrown off on to his head. The same man
went to the same stable yesterday, and
sa id— “pll take that black one with the
white blaze on the face.”
“I wouldn’t have that one if I were you,
sir ” said the horse-dealer. “Why not?
asked our friend. “He’ll run away with
yon.” “Well, that’s what I
“The other beggar ran away without me,
said the man.
HEBREW GAGS BY GUEST AND NEWLYN.
Do you know that your insurance policy
runs out next Tuesday? _
Veil! The fire-engine will run out next
Monday.
Do you know my little boy has been sick?
Well’ What have you been giving him?
Oh! I makes him take Cod Liver Oil once
every day.


And does he like taking it?
Of coufte he does; because I give him
one penny a day for taking it.
And what does he do with the pennies ?
Oh I He saves them up till he gets fifty.
And wliat does he do when he gets fifty?
Yell; Den I takes them from him and
buys him another bottle.
What’s the best thing for “Woman’s
Rights ”
Why, man’s lefts.—Jules Garrison.
WHAT I SAW IN A MUSIC SHOP WINDOW.
(FRANK YORKE'S LATEST.)
“My Wife’s Gone to the Country,” for
1/6, “Come and Put Your Arms Around
me,” for 1/-, “I do Like to be Beside the
Seaside,” for 10d., “I Don’t Care What
Becomes of Me,” for 2/-, “Is Marriage a
Failure,” for 1/3 (thousands have been
sold), “When King George is Crowned,”
for 1/3, “Rosy had a Rosy Time,” for
1/-, “I Wonder Who’s Kissing Her Now,”
for 1/3, “There Are Nice Girls Every-
where,” for 9d., and “Father Coaxed Her
In,” for 3d.


BILLY WILLIAMS’ VERY LATEST STORY.
Two Irishmen had just landed in New
York and were stopping at my hotel. That
night fire broke out about a block from our
place. The two Irishmen had never seen a
real fire department before. At the sound
of the clanging of the gongs Mike poked
his head out of the window just in time to
see two fire-engines, puffing and throwing
out fire and sparks, dash by.
Mike excitedly called to his friend and
bedmate: “Pat, fer the love of heaven,
wake up!” .
Pat jumped up and yelled: ‘ Mhat is
it? What is it?”
“They’re moving hell, and I just saw
two loads go by.”
“STUTTERER.”
R. G. KNOWLES’ COMIC WHEEZE
I am a brakeman in the bird-store.
I break bread for sick monkeys.
A woman came in last week, and she
stuttered a wee.
“M-m-mister,” she said, “how m-m-
-much is that Pp-p-p-01l P-p-p-p-p-arrotP ’
“15/-,” said I
“C-can he t-t-t-t-talk! ” says she.
“If he couldn’t talk any better than you,
I’d wring his blessed neck.”


I was passing Goulburn-street the other
evening. The Salvation Army had congre-
gated there.
After they had got through their cere-
mony, the captain said, “Fall in, brother,
fall in.” I do not know whether he meant
in the river.
So I said to him, “Where are you
going?”
He said, “We are on the road to
Heaven.”
“Oh,” said I, “and how long have you
been going?”
“Nine years,” he replied.
I said, “Well, if you’ve been nine years
on the road and haven’t got any farther
than Goulburn-st, you’d better tackle an-
other road!” —Harry Lauder.
“HE WOULDN’T TELL NOBODY.”
He was a great drinker, and he went to
a party. As a natural consequence, he im-
bibed too freely and too well. It was not an
uncommon occurrence.
He arrived at his door about two o’clock
in the morning. His father met him in the
hall.
The moment the father saw the son, he
cried, “Drunk again!”
And the thoughtful son said, “Ssh! don’t
say a word. So am I.”—Bert Bailey.


HOW TO MAKE ONION SALAD.
Take a good, strong, healthy onion, when
the man isn’t looking, and kill it. Then get
a hammer and drive the smell out. That’s
all.—Harry Lauder.
GRAHAME AND DENT’S CLEVER SKITS.
Ah, you are the only woman I love.
Don’t talk to me.
I say you will either have to marry me
or become my wife.
But I always thought you were my
uncle.
Well, I aunt.
Don’t you know a woman is worth a
crown to her husband?
Well, I’ll take half a dollar for you.
Night and day I believe you think only
of other women.
Ain’t it wonderful how women guess
your thoughts?
You are my protector.
I’m a liar! —You’re my chest-protector.
Say another word like that and I’ll ram
my throat down your fist.
But you are not your mother’s sister.
(Sings)—
When we are married, ah, what will
you do
Just as if she didn’t know?


Sir, you insult me. Remember my mother
was a lady.
Then here’s my card—“ Admit two—
Dog’s Home!”
Sir, you’re a scoundrel.
Discovered at last.
Do you know I’m old enough to be your
sister.
Yes, you look a bit called in.
Do you know I can have you arrested.
For what?
For confiding me away from my home.
Then I am lost! Ah, Isabel! I am a
ruined man—but in mercy tell me before
I go—
What?
Why does a chicken cross the road?
Because the greater the ruin the tighter
she clings.
Thanks, now I can face death like a
basket of Woolloomooloo fish.—(Exit.)
DAN LEND S NEW LODGE.
I hear you joined a new lodge last week.
I did.
What benefits do you derive from it?
Why, I get seven shillings a week when
I’m sick, and when I die my parents get a
thousand pounds.
I belong to a good lodge myself.


What benefits do you derive?
When I’m sick I get one hundred shil-
lings a week, and when I die I go to heaven.
But supposing you don’t go to heaven?
Then they give me my money back.
BERT BAILEY AND GUS HARRIS
BERT BAILEY AND GUS HARRIS.
(CROSS FIRE.)
1 can take a joke. Yes, and you can take
two shillings.
I wouldn’t take two steps. Nol this was
two shillings.
Look here, I won’t have it. Alright, give
it hack, I can do with it.
Change the subject. Right, it’s changed.
What is? My two shillings.
Don’t touch me. I wouldn’t touch you
for anything. No, you touched me for two
shillings.
I call this a piece of impudence. Yes;
but I call it a piece of silver.
Joe, I have two sisters. Yes, I had two
once. What, sisters No, two shillings.
I had some money left me last week.
Yes; how much? £SOO. Yes, and I had
some money left me. How much? Two
shillings. You will bring in that two shil-
lings.
My brother married, you know. He had


two children. Are you sure it wasn’t two
shillings ?
You are a gentleman, arn’t you? Yes,
but I have not worked at it lately.
See! Look! Look! in the distance, it
comes to me; yes, it’s approaching; Ha!
Ha! it is still nearer, yes it is, No! No!
Great Heavens, it has gone, it has gone;
What’s gone?
Why, my two shillings.
FRED NIBLOS DROLLERIES,
My friend Mclntyre went into an hotel
for a drink yesterday. Mclntyre called for
whisky, and after he drank the whisky, he
said to the girl behind the bar, “I will pay
for this to-morrow.” The girl said, “wait
a minute,” and she called out to the land-
lord on top—“ls Mclntyre good for a
drink?” The landlord said, “Has he had
it?” The barmaid said, “yes.” The land-
lord said “Certainly.”—Mclntyre told me
that.
HOW TO MAKE CHEESE.
Get a pint of milk and skim it in the
morning. Then get a tub and drop in two
flies. Then you let the milk stand a little
while till it gets tired, and then you let it


sit down. Now dig a hole in the yard and
build a wall around it so that the cheese
can’t get away. Then, in six weeks, when
the cheese is grey-headed and able to walk
alone, grab it by the back of the neck and
eat it quick.
BEAN SOUP.
Ingredients: —One bean and four quarts
of water. Add two quantities of salt, and
wait up till the bean dissolves. Then stir
the liquor with a broom handle. If you
keep a boarding-house put in more water.
—Fred Niblo..
WILL WHITBURN’S LAUGHABLE GAG,
‘•THEY LOCKED SMITH UP.”
A friend of mine, Billy Smith—you know
Billy Smith, don’t you? Well; Billy was
caught in the Chinaman’s the other night
playing “Fan Tan.” A couple of coppers
came in and pinched the crowd—Billy in-
cluded. They were all brought up next
morning before the Magistrate. The Magi-
strate asked Billy what trade he was, Billy
said, “A Locksmith.” Then, said the
Magistrate, “What were you doing when
the police arrested you ” Billy said, “If
you please, sir, I was making a bolt for
the door.” He couldn’t fool Billy.


I wish that the good Lord had made me
a man.
Perhaps he has, but you haven’t found
him yet.—Armstrong and Verne.
I know someone who saw a whole town
take water once.
Who was it?
A fellow who drove a milk wagon.
—Vaude and Verne.
Lady enters street car with infant in her
arms and hands the conductor a one pound
note. Conductor looks at her and says
abruptly, “Is that your smallest?” She
says, “Yes, sir, I’ve only been married a
year.”—Fred. Curran.
GUEST AND NEWLYN’S LATEST.
(HEBREW DIALECT.)
My daughter she got married the other
day. Everybody gave her some gold pre-
sents. My wife she give a nice gold
brooch; my brother Sol give a nice gold
bracelet ; and I gave some gold fish.
Do you like moving furniture? No, but
I don’t mind “moving pictures.”
—Pip Powell.


Why did a tin whistle ?—Because Fred
Blew it (Fred. Bluett).
Irishman: “Three cheers for Home
Rule.”
Scotchman: “Three cheers for hell.”
Irishman: “You are right; ivery one
should stick up for his own country.”
—Hayman and Franklin.
He: My first wife was over 18 stone in
weight!
She: What a big woman she must have
been ?
He: Yes, she was built for comfort, not
for speed.—Hayman and Franklin.
One of my pensioners was just now out-
side the door, “Poor fellow,” I used to
give him five shillings every week. I ex-
plained to him, my son was getting married.
He said, “Well, Mr. Cohen, I wish him all
the luck in the world; but the next time
you marry off any of your children do it
with your own money.”
—Hayman and Franklin.


"PULLING A TOOTH."
An Irishman went into a dentist’s to
have a tooth drawn. When he saw the for-
ceps he weakened, and said he’d wait for
a while, unless the Dentist could give him
a glass of whisky too give him courage.
The Dentist complied. The Irishman, after
drinking the whisky, said he was ready.
However, on seeing the forceps for the
second time, he weakened again, and asked
for more whisky. Again the Dentist com-
plied. The Irishman, seeing that the Dent-
ist complied with his request so readily,
played this until he began to feel the effect
of it. He then got up from the chair, and
throwing off his coat, he said, “Now, I’d
like to see the son of a gun that will pull
that tooth.”
IRISHMAN AND THE JEW.
Comic Gag.)
Given by John F. Sheridan.
There was a three-storey house, and in
it lived an Irishman, a Jew, and an Eng-
lishman. The Jew lived on the top floor,
the Irishman on the middle floor, and the
Englishman on the bottom floor. Whatever
the Irishman or the Jew wanted they had
a pulley, and instead of running down-
stairs, they could tie it to the pulley and


lower it down. So one day the Jew was
pulling up a can of beer, the Irishman saw
it, and as it reached to the middle floor the
Irishman pulled it in, drank the beer, and
sent the can up to the Jew empty. The
Jew, who saw it, turned round and said:
“Irishman, you’re a thief.” The Irishman
said: “If I’d been a Jew, you wouldn’t
have got the can back.”
TOAST.
“Here’s to the girl that’t strictly in it,
Who doesn’t lose her head even for a
minute,
Plays well the game and knows the limit,
And still gets all the fun there’s in it.”
—P. P. Powell.
BREEZY PIECES BY CLARKE & MOSTOL.
My wife said to me yesterday morn:
“Whatever shall I do. I’ve gone and
dropped an egg.” I said, “You’d better
cackle, old girl.”
I know a man that has no nose. How
does he smell? Oh, terrible.
Two men named Brown and White
bumped into each other until they were
black and blue.


A funny tiling happened to me the other
clay. I planted an acorn in my garden, and
three days after what do you think came
up?
“What!”
“Why, a rose tree.”
“That’t nothing. I planted a dead cat
in my garden, and what do you think came
up?”
‘ { What ’ ’
Why, the sanitary inspector!”
Judge: “What’s the charge agin’ this
man ? ’ ’
Officer: “Stealing nine bottles of beer,
your honor.”
Judge: “Discharged. I can’t make a
case out of nine bottles.”
MILLIE DORIS’ FUNNYOSITIES.
(SHE OF THE HOT X BUN.)
Men, indeed! why you’re nothing more
or less than a bold, bad, bald-headed, brag-
ging, boozing, blithering lot of idiots.
Nice gentleman, the married man, who
plays a double game by pretending he’s
single! his poor wife can’t do it because
the law makes her wear a ring on her
finger. I’d make every married man wear
a ring through his nose.
Fancy rolling home at one in the morn


ing, blue-blind, and bis poor wife waiting
up nursing tbe kid in the cold room.
Then they say, “He’s one of the boys,”
(just one of the boys). A woman can’t do
that.
Man, indeed! Before marriage he’ll hold
your hands. After marriage he’ll throw
you under the table.
Then look at the advantage he has again.
A man can go out to the middle of the road
and stand on his head; if a woman did that
she’d get pinched.
I told him this morning I’d play second
fiddle to no other woman.
He said, “You’re damn lucky to be in
the band at all.”
YOU CAN'T DO FATHER.
ARCHIE GLEN’S CURIOUS CUSTOMS.
Father took a short walk one day along
the river side, when he saw a man strug-
gling in the water, who was crying, “Help!
help!” My father rushed to the side and
he said to himself: “I know that man’s
face; I know where he works; I’ll go and
pinch his job!” When he got there, he was
too late; the man who pushed him in had
got the job.
Father went a little further down the
river, and saw another man in the water.


The man threw his hands in the air, and
cried: “ I can’t swim no more! ’ ’ My father
said: ‘‘Well, sink to the bottom and walk
ashore!” “But I cannot swim,” said the
man. “Well,” said my father, “I can’t
swim, but I don’t make a fuss about it!”
He took my mother to the theatre one
night, and when they sat down, he said to
her: “Can you see alright?” “Oh, yes!
I can see alright,” she said. “No big hats
in front of you?” “Oh, no! I can see al-
right.” Father said: “Well, change places
with me!”
My uncle came down from the country
once, and my father took him along to
show him the railway tunnel near our
home. By and by a train came along, and
dashed at the tunnel. My uncle was speech-
less for a minute or two, then he said.
“There’ll be a devil of a smash if ever the
train misses that hole!”
I bought some gold fish once. And I was
going away for a week’s Holiday, so, be-
fore I went, I give the gold fish some
fresh water, and said to my father: “Will
you give them some fresh water when I’m
away?” He said: “Yes, I’ll look after
them.” When I came ’back I found they
had the same water. I said to father:
“Why didn’t you give them fresh water!”


He said: “Why, they haven’t drunk what
they’ve got, yet!”
Father went out one day and joined the
Horse Artillery. When he came home that
night, he went to bed with his spurs on, and
my mother was awfully cut up.
THEATRICAL PHRASES.
Ad lib. —Speech, “business,” situations
or costumes which are left to performers
to supply to the best of their judgment.
{Aside) A speech that another per-
former is not supposed to hear—one that
only the audience is to hear.
Border —That part of the scenery which
hangs overhead.
Business —Everything may be called
“business” that pertains to action and not
speech, although speech and action are
often combined.
Cue —That part of the speech or business
which leads into another actor’s speech,
business, entrance or exit.
Curtain Call —An applause-call from the
audience for an actor or author to appear
after curtain falls on an act. Also called
‘ ‘ taking a bow. ’ ’


Down-Stage —That part of the stage
from footlights to first groove is termed
‘ ‘ down-stage. ’ ’
Exit —Sometimes written ‘‘exeunt,”
meaning to leave the stage.
Flies —The loft or space above the stage.
Front of the House —The front part of
theatre; from street entrance to ticket-
taker.
Forty —(Forte). To play or sing with
force; loud music.
Heavies —Villains’ parts in plays.
Man Ahead— The advance agent of a
company.
Property-Man —The man who has charge
of all “props,” or special articles, used on
the stage.
Paper —Lithographs and all printed ad-
vertising matter are called “paper.” Also
used when lots of complimentary tickets
are given out. ‘ ‘ The house is full of papei .
Piano —-TJsed by authors and stage-man-
agers to signify that music is to be played
softly.
Soubrette —Young-woman role generally
done in short skirts and played in a girlish
manner.
Wings —The sides of the stage out of
sight of the audience.


Flirtations.
HANDKERCHIEF FLIRTATION.
Drawing across the lips—Desirous of an acquaint-
ance. Drawing across the eyes—l am sorry. Dropp-
ing—We will be friends. Twirling in both hands—
Indifference. Taking it by the centre—You are too
willing. Drawing across cheek—l love you. Draw-
ing through hand—l hate you. Resting on right
cheek—Yes. Resting on left cheek—No. Twisting
In left hand—l wish to get rid of you. Twisting in
right hand—l love another. Folding it—l wish to
speak with you. Over the shoulder—Follow me.
Opposite corners in both hands—Wait for me. Draw-
ing across the forehead—We are watched. Placing
on right ear—You have changed. Letting It remain
on the eyes—You are cruel. Winding around the
forefinger—l am engaged. Winding around third
finger—l am married. Putting it in the pocket—No
more at present.
GLOVE FLIRTATION.
Holding the tips downward—l wish to be acquaint-
ed. Twirling around the fingers—We are watched.
On the right hand with naked thumb exposed—
Kiss me. On left hand with naked thumb exposed
—Do you love me? Using as a fan—lntroduce me
to your company. Smoothing them gently—l wish
I were with you. Holding loosely in left hand—l am
satisfied. Holding loosely in right hand—Be content-
ed. Biting tips—l wish to be rid of you. Folding
carefully—Get rid of your company. Striking over
hand—l am displeased. Drawing half way on left
hand—lndifference. Clenching (rolled up) in right
hand—No. Striking over shoulder—Follow me. Toss-
ing up gently—-I am engaged. Turning them Inside
out I hate you. Tapping the chin—l love another.
Putting them aside—l am vexed. Dropping one of
them—Yes. Dropping both of them—l love you.


FAN FLIRTATION.
Carrying in right hand in front of face—Follow
me. Carrying in left hand in front of face—l wish
to be acquainted. Placing on right ear—You have
changed. Twirling in left hand—l wish to get rid
of you. Drawing across forehead—We are watched.
Carrying in right hand. You are too willing. Twirl-
ing in right hand—l love another. Closing—l wish
to speak with you. Drawing across the eyes—l am
sorry. Resting on right cheek—Yes. Resting on
left cheek—No. Open and shut—You are cruel.
Dropping. We will be friends. Fanning slowly—
I am married. Fanning quickly—4 am engaged.
Handle to lips—Kiss me. Shut—You have changed.
Open wide—Wait for me. Drawing through hand—
I hate you. Drawing across cheek—l love you.
POSTAGE STAMP FLIRTATION.
Upside down on left corner—l love you. Same
corner crosswise—my heart is another’s. Straight
up and down—Good-bye sweetheart. Upside down
on right corner—Write no more. In centre, at top—
Yes. Opposite, at bottom—No. On right-hand cor-
ner, at right angles—do you love me? In left hand
corner—l hate you. Top corner at the right—l wish
your friendship. Bottom corner at the left—l seek
your acquaintance. On line with surname—Accept
ray love. The same upside down—l am engaged.
At right angle, same place—l long to see you. In
middle at right-hand edge—Write immediately.
CIGAR FLIRTATION.
Biting the end off—Desiring acquaintance. Tak-
ing a smell of the cigar—Wait for me. Smoke slow
—.Follow me. Smoke fast—You are too willing.
Blowing smoke to the left—l would I were with
thee. Blowing smoke to the right—To-night. Blow-
ing smoke upward—l am sorry. Blowing smoke
downward—l love you. Blowing smoke straight—
Are you engaged for the night? Rolling cigar be-
tween forefinger and thumb—Yes. Rolling in both


hands—No, Knocking the ashes oft—l don’t under-
stand. Breaking cigar—l wish to speak with you.
Throwing it away—We are watched. Lighting an-
other—Let us go.
EYE FLIRTATION.
Winking the right eye—l love you. Winking the
left eye—l hate you. Winking both eyes—Yes.
Winking both eyes at once—We are watched. Wink-
ing right eye twice—l am engaged. Winking left
eye twice—l am married. Dropping the eyelids—
May I kiss you? Raising the eyebrows—Kiss me.
Closing left eye slowly—Try and love me. Closing
right eye slowly—You are beautiful. Covering both
eyes with both hands—Bye, bye. Placing right fore-
finger to the right eye—Do you love me? Left fore-
finger to the left eye—May I see you home? Placing
right forefinger to the left eye—You are handsome.
Placing left third finger to the left eye—So are you.
Placing right little finger to the right eye—Aren’t
you ashamed?
New Tricks with Cards
TO TELL THE CARD THAT MAY BE
NOTED.
Take several cards, say, ten or twelve; remember
how many there are, and hold them up with their
backs towards you; open four or five of the upper-
most, and, while you hold them out, request some
person to note a card, and tell you whether it is the
first, second, or third from the top; when he has
informed you, shut up the cards in your hand, place
the remainder of the pack upon them, and tap their
ends and sides upon the table, so as to make it seem
impossible to find the card in question. It may,
however, be easily found thus: Subtract the number
of cards you had in your hand from fifty-two, which
is the number of the pack, and to the remainder
add the number of the noted card, and you will
instantly have the number of the noted card from
the top.


CIRCLE OF FOURTEEN CARDS.
To turn down fourteen cards which lie in a circle
upon the table, observing to turn down only those
cards at which you count the number seven. To
do this you must bear in mind the card which you
first turn down. Begin counting from any card from
one to seven, and turn the seventh card down.
Starting with this card, you again count from one to
seven, and turn the seventh card down, etc., etc.
When you come to the card which you first turned
down, you skip it, passing on to the next, and so
on until all the cards are turned. This is a very
entertaining trick.
TO GUESS SEVERAL CARDS CHOSEN AT
RANDOM.
Show as many cards to each person as there are
persons to choose; that is to say, three to each if
there are three persons. When the first has thought
of one, lay aside the three cards among which he
sets his choice. So with the next two persons, and
then spread out the first three cards, face up, and
above them the next three, and above these the
last three, so that all the cards may be in three
heaps of three each. Then ask each person In which
lot is the card he thought of, and this much known,
you can tell the cards, for the first person’s card will
be the first in the heap to which it belongs, the
will be the second of that next heap, and
the last person the third of the last heap.
THE THREE JACKS.
There is a trick often played called “the three
jacks.” A man will seemingly have three jacks on the
top of the pack. He will put the three top cards, which
you suppose to be jacks or aces, whichever he shows
you, in various parts of the pack. He will then take
one and put it near the bottom, and another near
the middle, and another higher up, and then let you
cut the cards. then offers to bet that they are
all three together in some part of the pack, which
they cannot fail of being, as he has three cards on
top of the jacks when he shows you their faces,


which he disperses in their stead, not moving the
jacks, and the cut only places them in the middle
of the pack.
THE TRIPLE DEAL.
Take any twenty-one cards, and ask some one to
choose one from them. Lay them out in three heaps,
and ask the person who took the card in which
heap it is. You may turn your back while be
searches. Gather them up and put that heap be-
tween the other two. Do this twice more, and the
chosen card will always be the 11th from the top.
CARD NAMED WITHOUT BEING SEEN.
When shuttling the pack cast a glance at the
bottom card, say the ace of spades. Lay out the
pack in as many heaps as you like, noting where
that one is laid which contains that bottom card.
Ask any one to take up the top card of any heap,
look at it, and replace it. You then gather up the
heaps apparently by chance, but you take care to
put the heap containing the bottom card upon the
card which has been chosen. You then give any
one the cards to cut, and on counting them over
the card that immediately follows the ace of spades
is the card chosen.
If by any accident the two cards should lie sepe-
rated when cut the upper card of the pack is the
chosen one, and can be picked out with seeming
care.
NEW CONUNDRUMS AND RIDDLES.
Why is education like a tailor? Because it forms
our habits.
Who was Jonah’s tutor? The whale that brought
him up.
When does a man impose on himself? When he
taxes his memory.
Whom do the mermaids mash? The swells of
the ocean.
Why is a hive like r spectator? It is a bee-holder
(beholder).


How can you shoot 120 hares at one shot? Shoot
at a wig.
When is a sailor not a sailor: When he’s a-board.
When is a soldier charitable. When he presents
arms.
Why is a horse like the letter O? Because Gee
makes it go.
Why does a miller wear a white hat? To cover
his head.
Why is a hotel waiter like a racehorse? Because
he runs for the pla£e.
Why is a lady embraced like a pocket-book? Be-
cause she is clasped.
Why is a grave-digger like an oarsman? He
handles the skulls.
When is a ship like a half-dressed woman? When
she is in stays.
Why is a monument like a proud man? Because
it’s lofty.
Why is a poor man like a seamstress? He makes
shifts.
When is a man led astray like one governed by
a girl? He is miss-led.
Why is a false report like a tottering house? It
has a weak foundation.
Why is a tale-bearer like a bricklayer? He raises
stories.
Why is a peevish man like a watch? He is often
wound up.
Why is a troy weight like a dishonest person? It
has no scruples.
Why does a duck put its head under water? For
divers reasons.
What tree is of the greatest importance in history?
The date.
When does a cow weigh the least? When she is
within the pound.
Why is a crooked man like a partial judge? He
is all on one side.
What is higher and handsomer when the head is
off? A pillow.
Why is the letter F like a fish-hook? Because it
will make eel feel.
When is a straight field not a straight field? When
it is a rye field.


When may a chair be said to dislike you? When
it can’t bear you.
What smells most in a chemist’s shop? The nose.
Why is a proud girl like a music-book? She is full
of airs.
What is that which divides by uniting, and unite*
by dividing? Scissor.
Which is the most ancient of trees? The elder
tree.
On which side of the pitcher is the handle? Out-
side.
What is an old lady in the middle of a river like?
Like to be drowned.
When is it a good thing to lose your temper. When
it’s a bad one.
Why is it easy to break into an old man’s house?
Because his gait is broken and his locks are few.
What wind would a hungry sailor prefer? One
that blows fowl and chops about.
What two letters do boys delight in, to the annoy-
ance of their elders? Two T’s,
When is a man over head and ears in debt? When
he wears a wig that is not paid for.
Why is an acquitted prisoner like a gun? Because
he is charged, taken up, and then let off.
Why can negroes be safely trusted with secrets?
Because they always keep dark.
Would you rather an elephant killed you, or a
gorilla? Rather the elephant killed the gorilla.
Why are doctors always bad characters? Because
the worse people are the more they are with them.
When is a chair treated spitefully? When you
have it caned simply because it cannot bear you.
Who killed the greatest number of chickens?
Hamlet’s uncle “did murder most foul.”
Why cannot a thief easily steal a watch? Because
he must take it off its guard.
What should you do if you split your sides with
laughter. Run till you get a stitch in them.
Why is a field of grass like a person older than
yourself? Because it’s past your age (pasturage).
Which is one of the longest words in the English
language? Smiles; because there is a mile between
the first and last letters.


Why is a bridegrooom often more expensive than
a bride? Because the bride is given away, but the
groom Is often sold.
What Is the difference between a person late fofr
the train and a schoolmistress? One misses the
train, the other trains the misses.
Why may carpenters reasonably believe there is
ao such thing as stone? Because they never saw it.
Why is the volunteer movement like a basket of
apples? Because every corps (core) has its colonel
(kernel).
Why have poultry no future state of existence?
Because they have their necks twirled (next world)
in this.
Why should a man troubled with the gout make his
will? Because he will then have his legatees (leg
at ease).
What is the difference between a man going up-
stairs and one looking up? One is stepping up the
stairs, the other staring up the steps.
Why should a man named Ben marry a girl called
Anne? Becaucs he would be Benny-fitted, and she
Annie-mated.
Why are two young ladies kissing each other like
an emblem of Christianity? Because they are doing
unto each other as they would men should do unto
them.
PARODY ON “WILL MY SOUL PASS
THROUGH OLD IRELAND.”
Written by Thomas Morcom.
Sung by Harry Linden.
In the corner of a garret.
Stands a mother and her son,
He is talking like a parrot,
Of a deed that he had done.
"Yes," he says, “I tore my breetchss,
Jumping on a moving train,
And they’ll need a good few stitches
’Fore they’re fit to wear again.”
“But, my darling,’’ said the mother,
All our cotton is too thin,
And I cannot get no other,
So I’ll have to use a pin."


But the youngster’s very doubtful.
He’s afraid that it will hurt.
And the mother hears him shouting
Ab she pushes In his shirt:
Chorus,
Will that pin pass through my trousers,
Where the back part’s torn away?
If I sit down will it hurt me?
Will I have to stand all day?
’Neath the back part of my trousers
And the tail of my old shirt
There’s a nice tender place as soft as my face—
Will that pin pass through my old trousers?
gING ME TO SLEEP.
Fred Curran Parody Hit.
Sing me to sleep, cried an organ man,
A little green whiskered Italian,
His monkey suddenly stood on its head.
My poor old feet are tired, he said.
I’ve been performing the whole day long,
Dancing about to this sleepy song;
My teeth’s all broke, my mouth won t shut.
I’ve been cracking a marble instead of a nut
Chorus.
I am so lonely, oh! dear, oh! dear,
And my little red coat only come down to here;
My wife’s out in Egypt, that’s why I weep,
Put me in the organ, and grind me to sleep,
GRANDMA.
(AMERICAN COMIC PARODY.)
By Archie Thompson.
Runs by Ted Tutty. Con Carroll. Will Gilbert and
Fred Bluett.
This bunch of green carrots, grandma dear, is for you,
I plucked them for you, dear, to-day;
I also have bought a large corn round of beef.
For your appetite’s good, I should say.
Since you’ve gone on the booze you ve no a or no
shoes,


While grandpa works hard all the day.
You’ve gone looney that’s true, you can’t see what
to do,
You should give up the beer right away.
Chorus.
Grandma, grandma, once you were dear old grandma
Now you’re so tight, you can’t sleep at night,
Your breath’s strong enough to blow out the light;
When daddy would chide, and around you we’d hide'.
And he’d comb out the nits from your head
And you’d say with a tear, “Just another long beer ”
Have a pot, and then roll into bed.
DADDY.
Fred Curran’s Parody Hit.
Written by William Hargreaves.
Sung throughout England with enormous success by
Fred Curran.
Lay your head on my shoulder, daddy,
Turn your face to the west;
To make your trousers fit me, daddy,
I’ve cut down your coat and vest.
The day has been long without you, daddy,
It measured near 6 foot 2,
And you are as tired of your work, daddy,
As if you had work to do;
But I’ve got you and you’ve got me,
The game’s a draw for sure;
Just move your king, and move your breath,
And play with the draughts round the door,
Daddy, play with the draughts round the door.
I often sit down and I think, daddy,
When you’ve had a whisky attack;
It was the colour of your nose, daddy.
That suggested the Union Jack.
But should you go up aloft, daddy,
You’ll have to alter your ways,
You’ll not find much whisky left, daddy,
Because mother’s been there three days.
When she’d had two and you’d had three,
Lor’ lumme, how you’d fight;
So if you meet her in your dreams,
No wonder you don’t sleep at night.
Dear daddy, tea caddy, good night.


WHEN WE WERE TWO LITTLE BOYS.
Parody.
Written by J. M. Smith.
Sung by Harry Lindon.
Two Jewish boys went peddling toys,
Each was a business man;
Into each place, with a sau face.
Trying to sell all they can.
They grew up quick, learned the Jew trick,
And started a business place;
Business was bad, they both looked sad.
And one of them said in disgrace:
Chorus.
Did you think I could stand bad business,
When the place is insured heavy?
Soon the fire will be shining,
And we both will feel happy,
When we see the engines working,
We’ll feel like packages of joys.
Then wa’H go back to the business we had
When we were two little boys.
CURRAN'S PARODY, HOME, SWEET HOME.
I am a very happy man,
It is the truth I speak;
I’ve got one wife and fourteen kids,
And fifteen bob per week.
My kids are very clever ’uns,
Believe in what I say;
Each of them can shift about
A dozen meals per day.
Chorus.
Home, home, sweet home,
It’s no wonder I look pale;
The tick-shop shut, so I’ll have to put
My appetite up for sale.
This morning we’d one bloater,
Amongst the blooming lot,
Oh, listen to my tale of woe,


For the tail was all I got.
My wife had twins three weeks ago,
And the rent’s three months behind;
And the back door of my pantaloons
Is whistling in the wind.
Home, home, sweet lodgings,
Sweet spirits and sweet ale;
Be it ever so humble.
There’s no place like gaol.
PARODY ON WHEN OTHER LIPS AND
OTHER HEARTS.
Written and sung by James Curran.
When other lips, and other hearts,
Their tells of love shall tale;
I might as well inform you that
I learned this song in gaol.
The warder heard me sing this song,
And so well pleased was he,
That he found me extra work to do,
Saying—You’ll remember me.
I did remember.
For he flogged me with the C-A-T.
When other lips are steeped in boooze,
And these poor lips are dry,
I stand beside some brewery gate,
And watch the barrels roll by,
And hail the fragrance of the hops,
And I wish that I could be
One of those barrels full to the bung—
That would give joy to me,
I’d die contented,
And be buried in a brew-er-E.
PARODY ON CLOGS AND SHAWL.
Written by Fred Bluett.
I am nearly off my head,
Every night when I'm in bed,'
I can never sleep, you se«.
I've always got some company.


if it's not the chap next door,
Or the couple on the second floor,
Out of my little bed I have to rise,
And try for to stop all the screams and the cries
Chorus.
Of the cats on the wall, little cats, large and small,
Spoil my sleep by their terrible squall.
With a brick and a boot, I stopped their midnight
ball,
I was kept very busy by Tommy and Lizzie,
The cats on the garden wall.
JULIAN EOSES PAEODY ON “IF THE
MAN IN THE MOON WEEE A COON.”
Given with roars of laughter.
Sam Cohen got an invitation to a party on Christmas
Eve * . . .. .
And it was expected that everyone who was invited
a present would surely give.
Levi heard somebody say they were going to give
that boy some thing.
Some handsome silver spoons, with an inscription
on—the presents they would bring.
Chorus.
So ttjey met in a room, in a room, room, room—a
roomy room;
And every man in the room had a spoon, spoon,
spoon—a silver spoon.
Some stamped ‘‘A Happy Christmas,”
And “A New Year,” as well:
But Cohen’s was stamped “The Australia Hotel.”
Every man in the room had a spoon, spoon, spoon.
THE VIRGINIAN JUCM*E.
WALTER P. KELLY’S CLEVER MONO-
LOGUE.
AFTER A STORM COMES A CALM.
A gentleman talking to a friend on the subject
of marriage, said. “I first saw my wife in a storm;
carried her to a ball in a storm; courted her in a
storm; married in a storm; lived in a storm; but,
thank heaven I buried her in pleasant weather.


A man rang my front door bell and said: “Does
Isaac Rosenbaum live here?” I said, “No, this is a
fireproof building.”
“Laugh and the world laughs with you.
Weep and you weep alone,
This grave old earth, must borrow its mirth
It has troubles enough of its own.”
' A WARMER CLIMATE.
My wife has been very sick of late. Last week
I had to call in the Doctor. The Doctor told me my
wife must have a change; I would have to send
her to a warmer climate.
I said, “Doctor, shall I send her to India?”
He said, “No, it would not be hot enough.”
I then asked, “Shall I send her out to Africa
among the Zulus?”
He said, “It would not be half hot enough.”
So I handed him the axe and said, “You hit her.
Doctor, I haven’t got the heart.” —Whitburn.
A policeman caught hold of me the other day and
asked my name. I told him my name was Oats—
Samuel Oats. “Why,” said he, “I’ve been looking
for you for three months. I’ve got a warrant for
you for beating your children.” Well, I told him
I thought it was pretty hard if a man couldn’t
thrash his own oats.
CHAS. ZOLI IMPERSONATION OF DIALECT.
FITZSIMMONS VERSUS A DAGO.
(An Amusing Italian Skit).
Fitzsimmons, whil« touring the United States, ad-
tised he would give £lOOO to anyone that would
stand up 8 rounds. Macaroni Spaghetti seen the
advt, and matches his friend, Sylvesto, [against
Fitz. He tells of the defeat, and great loss in this
very peculiar Italian way:—“Well, you see, we reada
in the paper that the Shamrocka Fitza coma here.
You know' the Shamrocka Fitza, the fighta man,
who knocka everybody out with a onea punch. Well,
we have onea stronga Italian boy—oh, he stronga
as the dev’. Biga de mus’ disaway, biga de mus’


dataway, and chest lik’ one elephant. Well, I go
to Sylvio and say:—Sylvlo, you fighta the Shamrocka
Fitza! He say, you betsa sweeta lifea I will fighta
for my countra. Well, I taka him home wida me
and giva him plenta good eat—maccaroni, soft da
sheila a crab—maka him very stronga man—oh, he
very strong—biga da leg, biga da mus’, yes, blga
de head. I sell onea da wag’ for forty dol’; I sell
onea da horse for twenty dol’, then I go to brother
Lugi. I say, ‘Lugi, sella da peanutta stand an’
banan’ or whata you getta.’ Well, he sella da stan’
and puta da mon’ upon Sylvio—Yer’ well; da mighta
Shamrocka come—Theatre all biga crowd—very
mucha excite. Puty quick a man wida balda heada,
come outa da staga—He say, gentlemena, we hava a
theetra fourda round fighta, gooseberry marka rules.
Thena, Shamrocka Fitza he sita dat a sida of da
stage. Sylvio sita dees side of da stage. Then Ballda
Head say, ‘gentlemen, I introduce Sylvesto, champion
Itily—then everyonea of the Italian man clapa da
foot and stampa da hand and cry, ‘Viva la Italianno!
Knocka out a Shamrocka wida onea punch.’ Thena
he say, T introduce Shamrocka da Fitza, champion.’
Then every one of the Irishman_clapa da foota and
stampa da hand—‘Horoo, be jabers! Killa da banan’
wida onea punch.’ Then, purty quick, he pulla da
watch out of his pock’ and say time; then they come
up to the fronta of da stage and shaka da hand just
lika da besta frien’, Purty quick, Shamrocka Fitza
stand lika this—very nica way he stan’—everybody
Ilka da stan’—Sylvio standa lika dis—everybody no
lika stand—Sylvio he spita da hand deesa way—he
hava two biga da hand lika onea bunch a da banan.’
Purta quick Sylvio maka a punch for Shamrocka;
he no hita de Shamrocka, Sylvio maka a noder
punch a’ Shamrocka, he no hita him again—Purty
quick Shamrocka go deesa way—you call him cutta
up way hitta de Sylvio onea punch knocka him
downa—vera quicka. Then I jumpa da stage and
go to Sylvio and say, ‘Sylvio, Sylvio, speaka to me
—he no speaka to me, I speaka to him threeda fourda
time, he no still speaka me—Shamrocka knocka him
outa wida onea punch—l dhinka he killa him—l feela
very mucha bad, I nearly go craze. I loosa alia my
mon’, and my brother Lugi loosa da peanutta and
banan’ stand, and feel lika cutting Sylvio’s throat.
. I will go back to New York, and try to geta more
mon’ with da org’ and da monk’.”


DREW AND ALDERS—Side Splitter.
“THE POLL PARROT.”
I am very fond of parrots. I took a visit to a
friend of mine on Sunday morning, when he ex-
claimed:—
“I’ve got a new parrot.”
“Have you?” says I.
“Yes, and he’s a beauty.”
I said, “Where is he?”
“He’s in the dining-room,”
I went into the dining-room. There he was, sit-
ting on a perch. Directly I entered he looked at me
and said, ‘Hallo, you old josser!”
Now, of course, a bird that will say that Is liable
to say almost anything. So I whispered to myself,
“Now, I’ll teach him to call me something nice; I’ll
teach him to call me ‘Uncle.’ ” y'
I took him off the perch, got him on my finger. I
said, “There’s a pretty boy!”
He said, “Hallo! pretty little boy, scratch-a little
eye out! pigs feet! Bow-wow! pup-pup! ssh-ssh!”
I said, “Now there’s a pretty boy! Say ‘Uncle!’ ”
He said, “Josser!”
I said, ‘Say Uncle’!”
He said, “Josser!”
I said, “Say ‘Uncle,’ you silly old fool; say ‘Uncle’
and I smacked him as hard as I could.
He said, “Josser! Josser! Josser!”
I said, “Say ‘Uncle,’ you silly old fool; say ‘Uncle,’
and I gave him another smack on the side of the
head.
He wouldn’t say it.
I got that mad I grabbed him by the back of the
neck, went down to the backyard, threw him in the
chicken-coop, and left him there. I was mad!
I thought nothing of him till the next morning. I
went down to the chicken-coop, and there he was
with hardly a feather on him. He had killed twenty-
nine chickens, and he had got the thirtieth, a great
big Shanghai-rooster, up in a corner. He had one
claw round the rooster’s throat, and was smacking
him with the other, and all the time crying
“Say ‘Uncle,’ you silly old fool; say ‘Uncle’!”


RICH AND RICH’S BIG LAUGH MAKER.
“BROWN v. ERKISON.”
Comedian: “Have you heard that I am about to
abandon this gay and festive life?”
Straight Man: “What business do you propose
following?”
C.: “Back to the old game—Solicitor.”
S.: "Oh! then have you been admitted to the bar.”
C.: “Yes; I think they will stand me in any bar
they’ll stand you In,”
S,: “No; I mean are you practising?”
C.: “Yes; I have the most extensive practise in
Sydney.
S.: “Where are your Chambers?”
C.: Lower George Street (or local).
S.: “Have you had any cases of note?”
C.: “Yes, I had a five pound note from a Chow day
before yesterday.
S.: “I mean any cases whereby you have gained
a reputation.
“Yes; “I had one of the greatest cases on record.”
S.: “What were the facts of the case?”
C.:'"The facts of the case, as briefly as I can re-
late them, are these:—Brown, the party of the first
part, was the owner of a twelve-acre paddock up in
the Wollongong district. Erkison, the party of the
second part, was also the owner of a similar piece
of ground adjoining that of Brown’s, the party of
the first part. Brown, the party of the first part,
was also the possessor of a male bovine of the
species commonly called Bull. Now, this bull was
a bully bull. He was alright. He used to meander
throughout the paddock belonging to Brown, the party
of the first part, and graze the gentle verdure that
grew therein, and one day, during his perambula-
tions, this male bovine meandered towards the boun-
dary line, that is the fence dividing the two pad-
docks belonging to Brown, the party of the first, and
Erkison, the party of the second part; and while
lingering over the fence, gazing into the far distant,
he there discovered a female lady Bulless, and it
was a case of love at first sight. So they used to
meet day after day by appointment. One day this
male bovine came in search of his female com-
panion. She being non est, he meanders over th«
fence belonging to Brown, the party of the first


part, and when Erkiaon, the party of the second
part, saw this male bovine in his domain, he rushes
into his cabin and brings forth a missile commonly
called a stuffed club, and with malice aforethought,
takes deliberate aim, and kills the male bovine be-
longing to Brown, the party of the first part, and
Brown, the party of the first part, and the bull,
the party of the hind part, and Erkison, the fore
part, got mixed up—-there was a sort of a congealed
conglomeration and I’m blessed if I know what
I’m talking about!”
S.: “No; I don’t think you do. Were you for the
plaintiff or defendant?”
C.: “I was for the bull.”
S.: “Were there any witnesses in the case?”
C.: “Only one, and the testimony of that witness
won the case.”
S.: “Who was that?”
C.: “Your humble servant—F.M.C.G.H.”
S.: "I thought you were Barrister?”
C.: “That’s me; I was Barrister, Judge, Referee,
Stake Holder—l ran the whole shebang, bull and
all.”
S.: “Then you saw the occurrence?”
C.: “No; I wasn’t there at the time.”
S.: “How far were you from the scene of the
accident?”
C.: “What’s that got to do with you, close your
face up and go on with the next song.”
S.: “No, sir, I’ll do nothing of the kind. I insist
upon knowing how far you were from the scene
of the accident.”
C.: “Well, if you must know, I was one mile,- eight
furlongs, a chain, and a distance,”
S.: “Why are you so precise as to the exact dis-
tance.”
C.: “Because I thought you or some other in-
quisitive angora goat might ask me some day, and
I would be prepared with an answer.”
S.: “Oh, thank you. Ladies and gentlemen, I
must crave your indulgence for a few moments,
while I,call your attention to this nonentity on my
right. This noodle—this nincompoop—this diabolical
concoctor of falsehoods—this unmitigated prevari-
cator—this quintessence of nothing. You, sir, to have
the audacity to talk to me—a man that has prac-
tised before all the learned Judges of the civilized


world. I’d have you know, sir, that in the section
of the country from where 1 come, I am looked upon
as fL big fish—l, sir, a big fish—and before concluding
I must inform you that I have had conferred upon
me the extreme honour of being allowed to attach
the initial letters LL.D. after my baptismal appella-
tion. With these few remarks, ladies and gentle-
men, I will subside.
C.: “Have you finished, Mr. Wade? Mr. Willis
will now address the jury. Ladies and gentlemen, I
don’t wish to infringe on your most valuable time,
nor shall.l resort to any harsh or coarse language.
I shall simply speak to him as a father would speak
to his erring son, had he a desire to lead that son
back from the paths of sin to rectitude. I shan’t
be boisterous or loud, as my learned friend on my
left has been, but say in the mildest form imaginable
‘YOU’RE A LIAR!’ You old tomato-faced microbe!
You you—the defunct end of a decayed pork saus-
age! You, a man that has got influenza, from doss-
ing in boilers on the wharf! A man, ladies and
gentlemen, that has been ekeing out a miserable
existence on the free lunches set by our hospitable
landlords of Sydney! A man that is too mean to
buy socks, but wears his missus’ long stockings,
and when he has worn the feet out, pulls them
up and wears them for trousers! You say that, in
the section from which you came, you are looked
upon as a big fish.”
S.: “I repeat, sir, a big fish!”
C.: “Yes, I have often heard It remarked—that
the section from which you immigrate, Flatheads
attain an unusual growth! You furthermore state
that you are an LL.D.”
S.: “Yes, sir, I am; and I’m afraid you do not
understand the definition of the term LL.D.”
C.: “Yes, I do.”
S.: “Well, what is it, sir?”
C.: “Long, Lean, and Dirty. With these few re-
marks, ladies and gentlemen, I will perspire.
WILL H. FOX TELLS US.
How to make love with the ladies. When you
get close to your fiancee, hold her hands not too


tight, but fast enough to flavour. Roll the whites
of your eyes, add two sighs (oh, dear), mix two tea-
spoonfuls of moonlight, 18 ounces of shady lane, let
right arm go to waist (waste), sit in a cool spot and
don’t stir. Warranted to keep in any climate.
Have you ever been to Paris? In Paris you have
to do as the Parisians do. It’s a very eccentric
city, even the rivers (In-sane). I went into a cafe
there and asked the waiter for a mutton chop, a
few mushrooms, and a glass of milk. He did not
understand me. “Not being able to speak the lan-
guage, I borrowed a piece of paper and drew a
sketch of two mushrooms and a cow. He went
away for a few minutes, and when he returned he
brought me two umbrellas and a ticket for a bull
fight.
A man came in the other day to see the doctor.
He said he was not feeling well. The doctor said,
“Did you carry out; my Instructions ?’’ He said, “Yes,
you told me to take a pill three times a day, but
after I had got the first one down I could not get it
up again.
A woman walked into Mark Foy’s drapery stores
the other day. I asked the man behind the counter
what was the matter with her. He replied, “Clepto-
mania.’’ I then said, “Why don’t she take some-
thing for it?” He said, “She will in a minute, you
watch her.”
A man walked into a railway refreshment room
and called for a bottle of ginger ale. The lady
attendant asked, “Will you drink it here, or take it
away?” The man said, “I’ll do both.”
There was once an Honest Lawyer, his name was
Mr. Strange. He was ill one day, so he said to his
wife, ‘Now that I am dying I have made ample pro-
vision for you, but I would Hke you to do one thing,
put a small stone at the head of my grave with no
name on it—just ‘Here Lies an Honest Lawyer.’ ”
His wife said, “But your friends will not know it is
your grave.” “Oh yes, they will—when they read
the headstone they will all say, 'That’s Strange.”’
I was in a chemist’s shop the other day when a
woman came in with the most impossible face you
ever saw. She said, “I want some powder.” The
clerk then asked, “Face or insect?”


A FEW REMARKS BY DAVE SAMUELS.
When I got up to the altar the parson
looked at me. He said,'“Are you as miser-
able as you look?” I said, “Get it over,
go on.”
After the ceremony the organ played
“The Lost Chord,” and the roof fell in.
Then we went to breakfast. We had a
lovely little breakfast—boiled eggs. A
nice little crowd gathered round the table.
Somebody shouted, “speech.” I said,
“Guilty.”
When I got home this morning, I found
someone had been chopping wood with my
razor. I said, “Who has done this?” And
my son Charlie said, with tears in his eyes,
he said, “Father, I cannot tell a lie, I did
it.” I said, “My noble boy, my gallant
son. ’ ’ I drew him to my arms, I lifted him
up tenderly, and I gave him the damdest
hiding he ever got.
Cohen visited a baker’s shop, put down
2d., and then asked the man behind the
counter for a loaf of bread.
The baker said: “My dear man, bread
has gone up to 3d. a loaf.”
Cohen says: “Ven did it go up?”


The baker said: “To-day.”
Cohen said; “Give me one of yester-
day’s.”
TOM DAWSON’S ECCENTRIC LAUGHS.
I got one of the daughters. What a
beauty she was. She had a nice business.
She used to be understudy to a dress-
maker. I used to be timekeeper for the
unemployed. A lot to do and a long time
to do it in.
Her father was a nice man. He was a
brassfinisher and soon finished all mine.
Then he used to be a furniture remover —
when nobody was looking. He used to do
a lot of night work.
I will never forget when I went round to
ask him for the wife. He said, “What is
your position ? How much money have you
got?” I said, “I have enough to do me
all my life—if I was to die to-morrow?”
Anyhow, we got married. The man who
was to drive us to church, came round to
drive us at four o’clock in the morning.
I said, “Don’t you know the wedding
is at 10 o’clock?”
He said, “ Yes, but I cannot go then, I
want the cart to take the milk out.”


ON POPULAR NEW PLAYS.
“The Girl from Rectors” fell in love
with ‘ ‘ Captain Moonlight, ’ ’ who introduced
her to “Our Miss Gibbs,” but soon they
found she was “A Bad Girl of the
Family.” “In the Luck of a Roaring
Camp” they received a “Message from
Mars,” “Via Wireless,” that told of “Her
Character” “In London Town.” She
pleaded to “Salvation Nell,” but it was
an “Off Chance.” They called in “The
Detective” to prove “Right is Might.”
She was brought up before the “Magis-
trate,” who gave her “The Whip,” and
sentenced her to “Seven Days.”—Jack
Cannot.
• KATOOMBA FALLS.
I took a trip to the mountains the other
day. I was advised not to miss the Falls.
I might tell you the train was overcrowd-
ed 5 you couldn’t get a seat 5 and now and
again, turning a curve, I fell on everybody,
and when the train stopped suddenly I
made a grab for a strap, and missed it, and
over I went. The conductor camp round
for the fare. He says, “Shall I take for
the Falls?” I says, “Yes, take out for the
Falls.” The conductor says, “How
many?” I says, “I think three, including


the last one.” He saya, “One way—or
both ways ” I says, “I think all ways but
side ways.”—Jack Cannot.
“Do you know Ihe difference between
Liberal and Labour?”
“No.”
“Well, if I loaned you 10s., that would
be Liberal. If I tried to get it back, that
would be Labour.”
—Fred Poplar.
Have you ever been to school?
Why, of course I have.
What did you learn at school?
What did i learn? Why, I learnt-dicta-
tion and I learnt histppy, and I learnt goes-
into.
What do you mean by goesinto?
Oh; one goes into two, and two goes into
three.
—Delavale & Hilbert.
TED KALMAN’S COMIC PATTER.
Talk about Luck! Poor dear Bob! He
never once lifted his hand to me, he was
very handy with his foot, though. I al-
ways used to mind the key of his cash box.


I used to call it Buckingham Palace, be-
cause it didn’t very often have a sovereign
in it. I had twenty for him out of the
Foresters, bless him! Mrs. Carter came
round the day he snuffed it. You don’t
know Mrs. Carter, do you? Such a kind,
sympathetic woman, so handy at births and
funerals. Give that woman a glass of gin,
she’ll cry like rain. So thoughtful, on the
morning he was buried, I sent her out for
some tea, and the man says to her, “Will
you have Black, Green or Mixed ?” “ Oh, ’ ’
she says, “I’d better have Black, because
it’s for a funeral.”
Talk about luck! Our house is some-
thing awful for runaway knocks. There’s
that Mr. Bacon I went to, of all the hogs of
men, Bacon was one. Mrs. Bacon never
done a rasher act than when she married
him. A brute to her. I see him one day
throw a cushion and hit Mrs. Bacon in the
side. I couldn’t have fancied him, a nasty,
fat, streaky face. If I’d had him, I’d have
cured him (loud laughter).
R. H. DOUGLAS SAYS:
One of those very hard faced old women
always kept asking difficult matters to an-
swer, so I said, “Madam, what is your


name?” She said, “My name is Mrs.
Snuff.” Then I said, “Mrs. Snuff, you
ought to be pinched.”
THE SNOW.
The snow, the snow, the beautiful snow,
Tread on a lump, and down you go.
—Pip Powell.
MANCHESTER WEATHER.
The rain, the rain, the beautiful rain,
Knocks off for a minute, then comes on
again.
There was an old maiden from Redding,
One day she was fixing the bedding,
When the lodger looked in
And said with a grin,
My word! If I catch you black leading.
—Pip Powell.
WILKIE BARD AND PUSS CAFES.
My voice and good, looks has driven me
to drink —driven me to those “Puss
Cafes,” with their mixed colored cordials
like a rainbow. After you drink a few of
them, the storm just starts, and when you
wake up in the morning you lie in bed
and imagine you are in a three-ring circus,
and can’t get up until the parade passes.


ABOUT SUICIDE.
Poor little Suie. Well, one day they
went to the sea side, and sat on a side seat
side by side, they were in love, so she sighed
and he sighed, and she was beside herself
as the wind sighed at the sea side; when she
sighed for cider, he left her side and
brought back the cider, placed it beside her.
As soon as she got the cider in side her she
died. Then he took the remainder of the
cider, laid down b eside her, and he died.
And the verdict was: “Willie died by Suie-
side!”—Fred. Curran.
CHAS. R. SWEET’S COMIC KISSING GAG.
Did you ever sit in a parlour and kiss a
girl?
Now, I will wager that there is not one
young man in a hundred who knows how
to kiss a girl properly.
Take my advice. When you go to kiss a
girl, don’t grab hold of her as though you
were grabbing an American drink on a
hot night. Don’t suddenly run your arm
around her waist and yank her over to you
until you hear her neck crack.
Go slow. Take your time. It is there.
It won’t get away. She won’t even dodge.
Take my advice, and, kind o ’ sneakingly
like, slip your arm around her slender


waist, and gently draw her to you, and
when you feel her velvety cheek reclining
on your manly bosom, her eyes rolled
heavenward, her lips commencing to
pucker, and you feel the pegs drawing
through the soles of your boots, then swoop
down on her.
Then go outside and throw rocks at your-
self.
✓
FRED BLUETT’S CREATION.
XMAS GAMES FOR THE DRAWING-ROOM.
One evening, at a select gathering for
the benefit of our church, it was proposed
to play games. We first played a game
called Plewetts. It was a sweet Arcadian
game of chaste simplicity, but it comes
expensive if your taste runs high. It is a
development of the ancient Kissing Game
—you are allowed to kiss any girl in the
room for so much money. For instance, a
young girl of sixteen. Well, they wanted
five shillings from you for kissing her. A
young girl of eighteen, ten shillings. A
young married woman two pounds ten shil-
lings. A blushing bride, five pounds. Old
maids, seven for sixpence.


It took three hours for my parade to pass
one morning. I saw more new animals
that morning than I ever saw before—l
must cut out them “puss cafes' for the
future.
HADN’T WOKE UP.
The other night my wife gave birth to
triplets. It was in the middle of the night,
but I was so happy that I went next door
to Sullivan’s house, and asked him to come
in and see them. Sullivan is a dog fancier,
and he was dreaming about a new litter of
imps when I woke him up. He came into
the house, looked the babies over critically,
and then said, yawning and rubbing his-
eyes; “If I was you, I’d keep the one in
the middle.”—William Crgmwell.
ON THE WRONG SIDE.
A lady friend of mine invited me into a
boot shop, with her, to buy a pair of boots.
We both walked along the gentlemen’s side
of the shop—and fell over a foot-stool. We
landed in a heap. As the clerk assisted us
up he says to me, “Won’t you take a seat
on the ladies’ side?” I says, “I just sat on
her back—ain’t that enough.”—Neil
Kenyon.


BARNEY BERNARD S AMUSING SKITS ON
VARIOUS THINGS.
Mankind is distinguished from the rest
of creation by the possession of five organs.
Monkeys, however, are usually supplied
with a fifth organ, and a man to play it.
Horses have the gift of speech, but it
only extends to one word, “Neigh,” which
plainly means “Nix.”
Bears are found nearly everywhere,
chiefly in menageries.
The Ant Bear is a common species, but
the Uncle Bear is unknown, except to his
near relations.
The Polar Bear is, of course, descended
from the barber’s pole.
But of all the different races the horse-
race takes the prize.
Cats are of two kinds—some having nine
lives, the others nine tails. Cats are placed
in the Cat-egory of Feline Animals, the
other animals in the fee line are doctors
and lawyers.
Fishes. The principal fish is the whale,
but it must be distinctly understood that
the Prince of Wales is not a fish.
Birds. All birds have bills, except jail
birds, whose wants are supplied by a beak.
One Swallow does not make a summer.
No, but one swallow will often make a man
feel top-heavy.


The Flea derives its title from the fact
that it flees as soon as you attempt to catch
it. A flea is just as hard to find as a man
who owes you a sovereign when you’re
stone broke.
FRED NIBLO’S ECCENTRIC STORY,
“SAWYER!”
I was once travelling to a town in New
Jersey called Sawyer. Now, just before
you reach Sawyer by the railroad, your
train rattles through a tunnel. The tunnel
is short, but it is there. After running
through the tunnel, the train stops at the
Depot—De-pot—Daypo—Depo—station
or whatever else they call it! Anyhow, it
is the place where they put up cars and
stable locomotives.
Just before your train strikes the plat-
form, the brakeman calls out the name of
the station. It generally sounds like,
‘ 1 Break-your-necks-is-the-next-station! ’ ’
Well, on the seat in front of me was a
young couple. A new couple. Ahe and a
her. A couple that had just lately been
coupled.
Now you know how young couples act on
a honeymoon trip. He at her with a
far-away glint in his eye, like a fellow who
can’t pay his board.


And she says, “Give me a hold of your
hand, or'l’ll lose you in the crowd.”
Then he looks at her, and she looks at
him, and they repeat this performance in-
definitely.
These two had one gum-drop between
them, and they were both using it at the
same time.
Just as we struck that tunnel outside
Sawyer he kissed her.
I know he kissed her. I didn’t see it. I
didn’t hear it, but I’ll make an affidavit that
he kissed her.
T
It was one of those long, lingering kisses
that shudder their passionate way right
through a railway car. I could feel it in
the next seat.
(I have here a few remarks to make in
parenthesis: You know that women are stf
anxious to be kissed that they kiss one an-
other. But there is nothing sincere in it.
Two women meet. They kiss. Then on«
turns away and says, “The horrid thing!
I wonder how much she paid for that ss.
hat! I don’t believe it was Is. 6d.”)
Just then the train came to the station
and the conductor called out “Sawyer,”
and the young lady said, “I don’t care if
you did, we’re married.”


new music i * mw music i
1913-13 NEW i-IST OP
i.Mnnw. tM ERIC AW & AUSTRALIA!* BQHG SUCCESSES
your sweet eyes tell me so,
(London Concert Song)
WATTLE DAY, (Intermezzo), ... •••
Played throughout Australasia with unbounded success.
REDEEMED, (Sacred Song),
RAGS AND GOLD, (Ballad;
TIVOLI QUADRILLES,
THE FELLOW WITH THE BIG BROWN
EYES •• (Gus Harris)
ALL I WANT IS A GIRLIE, (Gus Harris)
STICK to your mother, tom
I DON’T CARE IF THE MORMONS
COME ••• (Florne Forde)
CUPID AND ROSES
Price 1/6
Price 1/6
Price 1/6
Price 1/-
Price 1/-
Price 1/-
Price 1/-
Price 1/*
Price 1/-
Price 1/-
PSEiW 6 cl. MUSIC EDITIONS.
Big Sunflower Waltz
Bon Ton Two Step
I’m net Ashamed to Call tier
Mother.
The Hobble Skirt
You Take My Saturday Ha’penny
The Last Waltz
X Can’t Forget You Mother, Dear
Bor Love’s Sweet Sake
Happy Thoughts (Lancers)
Silver Star (Waltz)
The Old Bush Home
When the Moon Shines over the
Harbour
Good-Bye, Little Sailor Boy
We’ll Nail Our Colours to the Mast
Australia (The Original Chorus
Hong)
My Own Wild Native Rose
Don’t Run the Workin Man
Down
Oh, You're the One
Sally Horner
All Aboard for Manly Beach
Wattle Day (March Song)
A Faded Leaf of Shamrock
The Dying Scout
La Rinka Flirtation
Mother s Day, (Gavotte)
Christmas Day in the Workhouse
INew Ous Harris Music Album, I - ; (Just Out)
ISew Tivoli Song Album, INo. 35 ; (Ready Soon)
ISew Tivoli Dance Annual, INo. I ; (Big Success)
Joe Slater Publishing Co..
Havmurket and Fredtoert Street, Leichhardt,
y SYDNEY, NS.W.
Telephone 131 Balmain Cable Address—'Songster/' Sydney


Dominion JSccordeons
ARE HIGH GRADE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS.
And excel in their superior quality of TONE and their HANDSOME FINISH.
As on’y thoroughly seasoned material is used in their manufacture, their
durability may be relied on. The REEDS are. of BELL METAL, an alloy
distinguished for its BRILLIANCY and POWER.
Our Catalogue illustrates several Styles, ranging in price from 12 - to
30 - Three of the most popular models are :
ri
ft
Pi»ioe 29/
Dominion Accordeon
INo. 101
Size 8J inches x 4| inches, two
sets reeds, two stops, eight-fold
double bellows, with all corners
metal bound, polished ebonised
tops and mouldings, nickel pallets
and keys ... Price 12/
Dominion Accordeon
INo. 107
Size 8| inches x 4| inches, three
sets reeds, three stops, eight-fold
double bellows, polished ebonised
tops and mouldings, gilt pallets,
bone keys, black and green leather
cloth bellows ... Price 18/-
Dominion Accordeon
INo, 117.
Size ll£ inches x inches,
three sets reeds, three stops, nine-
fold triple bellows with all
corners metal bound, polished
ebonised tops &- mouldings Fitted
with BRASS AMPLIFYING
TRUMPETS on keyboard. Very
powerful tone.
Order from your local storekeeper. If he will not supply, order direct,
remitting by Postal Note or Momy Order.
Jackson & Macdonald, Au Clt. s . ian Druitt St. Sydney
A. E. Beal, East St.. Rockhampton A 367/9 Oueen St., Brisbane
Wills A Co., 7 Quadrant, Launceston
C. W. Ryan, 43 Bourke Street, Melbourne.
Optical and Photo Supplies Co, Hay Street, Perth.
