

THE DEMOCRAT:
A DRAMA IN FOUR ACTS.
PERIOD 185—.
■* III fare* the land, to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates, and men decay"
GOLDSMITH.
BY
ALF. S. DAY.
ENTERED AT STATIONERS' HALE LONDON.
Melbourne:
PRINTED AT THE VICTORIAN PRINTING WORKS, 367 a P.O. PLACE.
MDCCCXC.


SYNOPSIS OF SCENERY.
act I.—ENGLAND.
Lisle Manor. —Kentish Landscape is the Rear.
Farr will.
ACT lI.—AUSTRALIA.
Diggings near Ballarat.
Bush Track near Diggings.
Scene: Diggings isy Moonlight.
FaUeh/ . t reused.
ACT lII.—AUSTRALIA.
Prison Cell. Melbourne.
A Bush Track near Diggings.
Bush Scene.
Tracked.
act IV.—ENGLAND.
A Gambling Den. London.
Drawing Room. Lisle Manor
■‘All's Well that Ends Well."


DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
ENGLISH :
WALTER LISLE, )
} Beothees.
CHARLES LISLE,)
SIR RICHARD GREENBANK.
ERNEST GREENBANK.
JOHN BURTON, a Tenant of Lisle.
MAX STEVENS.
ISAAC SAUL, A Moneylender.
LUCY BURTON.
MRS. LISLE.
MARION GREENBANK.
AUSTRALIAN:
CHARLEY LAWSON.
JONATHAN SMART.
BILLY BLUNT.
808.
SEAMES.
DINGLOW.
BRIEFLY, a Solicitor.
POLICE OFFICER.
Huntsmen. Diggers, Police, %e.


THE DEMOCRAT :
A DRAMA IN FOUR ACTS.
ACT I.—ENGLAND.
Scene : Lisle Manor. Kentish Landscape in the Rear.
The Morning of the Meet. A Hunting Party.
Huntsmen’s Sosa—
Hurrah I for a limiting mom :
It makes the sportsman's heart bound
To hear the call of the horn,
And the yelp of the scenting hound.
'Then here’s to the ladies fair.
And here’s to the huntsman bold :
To Reynard in bis lair.
And the sport so loved of old.
O here’s to the Lord of the Hall,
And here’s to us all together.
(. Horn call is heard.')
Hark I there's the starting call ;
We hope it will keep fine weather.
Tallyho ! Tallyho ! Harkaway !
[Exeunt all. excepting Charles, Max, and Ernest.]
Max. Come, diaries : you seem out of sorts this morning.
Cuas. Yes : I’m not rjuite myself.
Ern. Why, what’s the matter, Charley ? You’re not ill ?
Chas. 0 clear no. Ernest, my boy : only a little upset. To-day’s
fox hunt has no interest for me.


Ekn. Not going to join the hounds, Charley ? By Jove ! then
I’ll be off. \ ou’re aware my father and Marion are coming
to Lisle to-day ? Good morning !
Chas. Yes ; lam aware of it, Ernest. A pleasant day’s outing.
Max. Ta, ta, old bo3 r . A jolly time, and don’t be surprised if
you see us sailing along, after all.
\_Exit Ernest.]
Now t , Charles, old sport, what’s given you the blues on a
morning like this ? If I were not your guest here to keep
you in good spirits, I believe you would become a most
morbid creature. Come, confide in me. We are bosom
friends ; we ride, fish, shoot, play, have seen a little life
together, and you’ve always found me stick to you.
Chas. All my troubles flow from the one source, Max. You
heard Ernest say Marion is a guest at Lisle to-day with her
father. If lam at the hunt my, brother will be at home.
Max. Ah ! I thought so. Sweet Miss Greenbank again. It’ s
no use, she’ll jilt you. It’s always the way with girls who
have a little money behind them ; they jilt and flirt. Giddy
creatures ! Yon fall in love with them, and they fall in love
with someone else.
Chas. For Heaven’s sake, Max, don’t jest at me !
Max. Let me try to rouse you up. Now, take my advice >
Charles, feign indifference. Nothing wins a woman quickei’
than making pretence you don’t care for her. Why, look at
little Lucy Burton ; she follows me about like a lamb. Tut,
tut ! never let a woman come between you and enjoyment.
My motto is, “ Sport first, woman second.’’
Chas. You have no cause, Max, to feign indifference with Lucy
Burton.
Max. Well, one can’t help getting tired of a girl. You know
you promised to raise the rent, and compel her and her dad
to quit. But I had to do the business another way myself.
Chas. I instructed Roberts to raise the rents, not only with
Burton, but with the whole of the tenantry. You know we
have been living a bit fast since we came together, and we
must have funds.
Max. Certainly. I wish mine were not so closely locked up ; I
would oblige you.
Chas. Hot at all. When a gentleman lives extravagantly — well,
the serfs that work the land must pay it.


Max, Those are exactly my sentiments.
Chas. Then there is my candidate for the Derby, and you
persuaded me to mortgage the whole of my estate to back it.
O God ! what would my mother say if she knew. It drives
me mad to think that my very existence depends on the foot
and wind of a racehorse.
Max. Now, that is reproachful, after my having been the instru-
ment in making you one of the richest and most respected
men in England, for the horse must win.
Chas. Well, it’s too late now—we can only await the result—and
it was too late to raise the rent on Burton.
Max. I don’t understand !
Chas. When you refused to acknowledge Lucy she left her home,
and has not been heard of since. Old Burton is running
about like a madman, and told Roberts he would find her if
he lost his life in the search.
Max. Ha, ha, ha ! He’ll have a long chase. The fact is, to
save trouble, I advised Lucy for her own sake to allow me to
pay her passage to Australia, where I would soon join her
and make her happy. She followed the advice, and is on her
wa3 r now.
Chas. But you are not going to Australia ?
Max. O dear no ! Havn’t the least intention ; my plan was to
save trouble. It doesn’t do for a gentleman to have his
name blackened by a common farmer’s daughter. Now,
forget sweet Marion for to-day, and let’s join the hounds.
Chas. I can’t forget, nor can I feign indifference. I love her.
She must be my wife in spite of herself. It’s that dastard
brother of mine’s the cause of it all. Everything he does
meets approval in her eyes. When you urge that his
associates are vagrants, she will tell you they are the poor in
trouble. But I’ll not be defeated. She shall marry me or
marry no one.
Max. Ah ! now you’re coming round again to your old self,
Charles. Never try to lead a woman—force her ; and as for
your brother, whom she loves, can’t you manage to ship him
where I hare sent sweet Lucy ?
Chas. He will not think of leaving until I insult him.
Max. Then insult him, by all means. Ah! there, are the hounds
in full cry. If we take a out for Mistletoe we shall meet
them.


Enter Walter.
Chas. He lias overheard us.
Max. Never mind ; insult him.
Walter. Why, Charles, not with the hounds ? You’re late.
[To Max : Good morning, sir.]
Chas. I’m not aware that it concerns you whether I am late or
early.
Walter. What do you mean ?
Chas. I mean, Walter, that you are plotting against my happi-
ness. You stand between me and my will. You have
raised the tenantry against me. But I warn you to beware.
Come, Max. [Going.']
Walter. Stay and explain
\Exeunt Chas. and Max.]
Enter Mrs. Lisle.
I plotting against him ! I stand between him and his will!
What does he mean ?
Mrs. Lisle. He means that you are plotting against him by what is
supposed your philanthropy with the tenants. When he raises
the rents you assist them to pay. They hate him and love you.
Again, you stand between him and his will, and mine also.
You know, Walter, he loves Marion. It has been my wish
for years they should wed. It was your father’s wish.
Walter. Marion has no thought for Charles.
Mrs. Lisle. No ; she loves you, and whilst you are near he has no
hope. Charles is the heir of Lisle, Marion is a rich heiress,
and it requires their joint fortunes to sustain the name of the
family in the county.
Walter. What would you have me do ?
Mrs. Lisle. Throw away your democratic opinions—they are beneath
an English gentleman—and mix with the society that becomes
your position and family. And you must promise me you
will not stand between Charles and Marion, for I’ve set my
heart on their marriage.
Walter. In all ray doings, mother, I have behaved honorably to
you and my brother. I have assisted the struggling tenantry
because they needed help. Marion and I have loved—why,
I know not ;wo have loved from childhood. She has not


thought of Charles. But I will do as you and my dear
dead father have wished. I will forego her love, and teach
her to think of him. But the poor shall not suffer whilst I
can help them.
Mrs. Lisle. Your conduct towards the tenantry becomes not a gentle-
man of your birth. There are two castes of people—poor
and rich. And it is the aim of Society to keep them apart.
It is for the common people to hold democratic notions—
not for one of your rank. But more anon. Marion and
Sir Richard are expected at Lisle to-day. I will roly on
your promise.
\_Exit.~\
W alter. Who am I that I should live in idleness and riches without
using my brains or soiling my hands—riches extorted from
my fellow creatures whilst they wallow in poverty ? Can I
not engage in some honest toil for my only livelihood ? The
laws of English Society answer No ! lam a gentleman by
birth, and it is beneath an English gentleman to win his own
bread ! Can this be just ? Is it reasonable ? Should I
ignore these social laws I would be regarded as a maniac.
My kindred would turn away in disdain—my mother in
disgust. Oh ! that I were an independent man, dependent
on my own exertions—then would Ibe happy, indeed ! I
will forego these ties; they may regard me as a Democrat.
For who is a Democrat ? The man who condemns the
distinction of classes, who upholds the fellowship—yea, the
brotherhood of man. This being so, lam a convert to
democracy, indeed ! Ah ! give me the man who attains an
exalted position by pure merit rather than lie who inherits it
by birth.
Enter Sir Richard and Marion.
Sir R. Not so fast, not so fast, my little fa ry ; why, one would
think there’s some attraction here. \_Seeing Walter,] Ah!
Walter, how d’ye do, how d’ye do ?
[Shake hands.~\
Walter. I’m glad to see you about again, Sir Richard.
Sir R. _ The gout and I have had a severe tussle, but I conquered
it at last. What a bookworm you are, to be sure ! Most.
young men at your age think of” nothing but sport. I was
the same myself ; but I admire thoughtful young men. All
our are in the sear and yellow leaf like myself,
and what’s to become of England when they’re gone I don’t
know. I like thoughtful young men.


Enter Mbs. Lisle. [Greets Marion.]
Sir R. Ah ! Mrs. Lisle, you have a good son 1
Mrs. Lisle. Yes, Sir Richard, I have a good son ; and, like his
ancestors, lie is fond of our English foxhunt. He is after
the hounds now. There is nothing like our old customs, Sir
Richard.
Sir R. (thoughtfully.') I like thoughtful young men. (Aloud) : Men of
thought are of more value to their country than men of
customs. (Giving Mrs. Lisle his arm ) : Well, I want to
have a chat with you. Don’t you think these young people
can take care of themselves ?
Mrs. Lisle (aside.) I can, I think, depend on his promise. (Aloud,
smilingly) : I think so, Sir Richard.
[Exeunt Sir R. and Mrs. Lisle.]
Marion. Oh ! Walter, all the way I was so afraid you would be
absent. See what I have for you. (Placing a rosebud in
his coat.) Why, what’s the matter ? What makes you so
weary ? There is some trouble on your mind. Tell me all
about it.
Walter. Why should 1 tell you any trouble of mine, Marion ? If
I do, you will have a burden also.
Marion. Are you not a brother to me — yea, more, Walter — are you
not my betrothed ? It is mine, then, to help you bear your
burden.
Walter. Yes ; we plighted our troth only yesterday eve, but even
since then a storm has gathered about my head and
threatened to burst. I must leave England.
Marion. Yo !
Walter. Alas! yes. In future think of me only as a brother. Yo,
don’t question me, Marion. There are others will make you
happier than I can ever hope to make you. Don’t think
hard of me ; I cannot explain.
Marion. Only tell me why you will leave England ?
W t altkr. That would be telling all. Marion, there is another who
loves you. Try and think of him and you will reward me.
(Rosebud Jails unobserved.) Excuse me now 7 ; I must
leave you.
[Exit Walter.]


Marion. What mystery is this ? He is so cold, so distant. No,
no ! He has not grown weary of me! He tells me to think
of another who loves me. Never ! Whv, here is my poor
little love token !
\_Stands meditating .]
Enter Charles.
Chas. Good morning, Marion. Why are you so sad ?
Marion (bitterly.') Oh! nothing, sir. lam meditating.
Chas. Would I were the subject of your meditations. Look not
so scornful, Marion. To see you and speak with you 1 have
returned from the hunt. You know why lam here. I
cannot take your refusal. I love you !
Marion. Charles Lisle, I repeat the answer I have already given—
No! Why are you so persistent ? It is in vain.
Chas. You love my brother! Marion, he is unworthy of your
scorn.
Marion. Sir, he is worthy a holier love than mine. I know his
noble nature. Ah! I see the storm that threatens him. He
is in your way !
Chas. (savagely.) Curse him ! you shall be mine !
Marion. I would die first. Leave me, sir, or if you will not go, I
shall. [] Going.) ion will favor me by never addressing
me again.
[Exit Marion.]
Chas. Marion Greenbank, the time will come when you will
humble yourself before Charles Lisle. I will devise ways
and means of breaking your haughty spirit. You love my
brother. I hate him !
Enter Max (having been thrown into a ditch).
Max. Ah ! here you are, Charles. What do you think of my
personal appearance ?
Chas. What on earth happened you ? Have you been thrown ?
Max. Only this. You went over the ditch a regular fiyer, and 1
went in a regular flyer. You were too thoughtful to look
around ; so I returned alone. Somehow I thought you were
here before me.
Chas. Well, Max, I’m sorry for your mishap. You had better
get a change before the company assemble.


Max. Before I go I want to meet a gentleman I saw approach-
ing when I entered.
Chas. Who is he ?
Max. Isaac Saul, the mortgagee.
Chas. (anxiously.) What brings him here ? The bargain was that he
should keep it a profound secret.
Max. Oh! it’s all right; you had better disappear and leave
him to me. I’ll keep him quiet.
Chas. Thanks, Max; you’re a true friend. Get rid of him as
soon as possible lest he should arouse suspicion.
[Exit Charles.]
Max. Ha, ha ! How everything works into my hands. I, an
utter stranger, with nothing but my wits to back me, have
got this high-bred, lovelorn, brainless fool into my clutches.
Ha, ha, ha! How d’ye do ?
Isaac. Good day, Mr. Stevens. Beautiful veather, ain’t it ?
Yy, you have met with an accident, Mr. Stevens !
Max. Been out riding ; never did much before I came here. I
went at a great pace at the hedge, where, seeing water, my
horse stopped so suddenly that we parted. Now, tell me
what brings yon here, you old fox ! You know the mort-
gage is a private matter that the old lady mustn’t get wind
of, don’t you ?
Isaac. I am fully acquainted with the particulars, my dear friend.
It is you I wish to see.
Max. Me? Well, what’s the matter ?
Isaac. Yell, you bring this young gentleman to me, and advise
me to loan him £lO,OOO on this estate, which is worth
£40,000, and you told me, for a certain sum of money,
which I paid you, rmu would take care that he spent it
recklessly.
Max. Well ?
Isaac. Yell, here he is, proprietor of the favorite for the Derby.
I hear there is nothing can touch him in the race. He has
spent the money backing him. He will win, and a property
worth £40,000 slip out of my hands,


Wax. Go along, you old suspicious fool I Is that all the con-
fidence you have in me? 1 tell you the nag hasn’t a goat’s
chance. I raised the report myself, stuffed the touts and
reporters about sensational gallops—that and Lisle’s money
going on raised him to first favorite.
Isaac. Yell, I knowed you would manage it well, my dear Mr.
Stevens. I never for one moment lost my confidence in
you. But it is a big stake, this property. (Looking round.')
I would be ruined if I missed it.
Max. Pay me well, and I will manage well.
Isaac. My dear friend, you shall be rewarded. Here is some-
thing on account. I want you to stick to him, and lead him
along a bit fast. Make his friends ashamed of him. Drag
him down, so that they will not help him to lift the mort-
gage. I will give you one thousand pounds the day the
mortgage closes.
Max. It’s a bargain. You may depend on me. Beware you do
not play me false ! Yon had better be going : I hear voices.
Enter Sir Richard and Mrs. Lisle from house as they go by rear.
Isaac (bowing.) Good day. Beautiful veather, ain’t it ?
[ Exeunt Max and Isaac.]
Mrs. Lisle. It would be a happy day, indeed, for me to see Charles
and Marion married.
Sir R. That the lifelong friendship existing between our families
should end in union is an estimable desire. It is my wish.
I think I have hinted the same to Marion : but I’m not a
domestic man, Mrs. Lisle, so I let things take their own
course. But here comes my little Marion ; speak to her
about it. Ah! Marion, where have you been ? where have
you been, that you deserted your old father ?
Marion. Forgive me, Mrs. Lisle, and dear papa. I thought that
you would be talking of matters that would not interest me,
so I did not hurry.
Sir R. We have, indeed, been speaking of what has the greatest
interest for you, Marion. We have been conversing on the
subject of your marriage with Charles Lisle, which we both
heartily wish will yet take place.
Marion. I am willing to do anything you would ask me, papa ; but
you would not ask me to marry a man I do not love !
Sir R. No, Marion ; your choice shall be free.


Mrs. Lisle. My son is a gentleman by birth, possessing all the qualities
of his ancestors.
Marion. Mrs. Lisle, worth is better than high birth. This subject
is painful to me.
[Exit haughtily.']
Sir E. Marion is right. lam afraid we have hurt her feelings.
I’ll go and speak to her.
[ Goes to right.]
Mrs. Lisle (aside.) The idea of refusing my noble son, and walking off
with such offended dignity ! Walter is in the way ; but it
must not be. She shall marry Charles. I’ve set my heart
on it.
Sir E. Some one else in the garden to confide in. Ah ! my
fairj 7 ,1 see how the cat jumps, and to my own mind it jumps
well. 1 walk another way.
[Exit.]
Charles rushes in passionately.
Ohas. I) n it, mamma, is my happiness to be completely
marred by that low-minded brother of mine ? The first
thing I see on entering the house was he and Marion in
close conversation, he pleading with her. Mother, I’ll never
be happy while Walter remains here. He is a serpent in
my path. I hate him.
[Walter and Marion appear at centre rear unobserved .J
Mrs. Lisle. He pleading with her? Then he has broken his promise.
He shall no longer stand between yon and the lady you love.
Walter shall quit this house. He’s a disgrace to us, and
we’ll tolerate him no longer.
[Walter coming down stage.]
Walter. I’m not an eavesdropper, mother, but have overheard your
words. In what time of my life have I disgraced you that
my presence should be intolerable? You desire my absence.
It is granted. I will leave England and seek a distant land,
and then, untrammelled by social laws, realise the dream of
my life—to be dependent on my own exertion, and not by
the oppression of the toiler.
Chas. What do you mean by this, scoundrel ?
[TfifsArs at Walter, who catches him by the shoulder. Charles
draws back. J


Walter. I’ll not strike you : you are my brother. You tremble,
Charles. Your actions bespeak a coward heart, for cowardlj',
indeed, is he who tramples on the powerless. You oppress
the tenantry, and they curse you. You despise me because
I help them. I sympathise with you, because I find wanting
in you our father’s noble nature.
Mrs. Lisle. You are at fault. How dare you speak to your brother in
this manner ? You shall receive your portion, so leave this
house.
Walter. As you will, mother. The day may come when you will feel
the remorse of this act. I have ever shown you the respect
due to a mother; you have not shown me that due to a son.
Goodbye.
Enter Huntsmen, Ernest, &c.
[He goes to take her hand. She drmos haughtily away. He retreats up
stage to centre rear.]
Walter. Farewell! farewell !
[Marion rushes towards him. ]
Charles moves forward to draw her away. She turns scornfully from
him.
Tableau.
EXD OF FIRST ACT.


ACT II.—AUSTRALIA.
SCENE : A Diggings near Ballarat.
(Diggers working at various parts of the Stage. Liwsox turning a
windlass in the centre.)
Lawson (shouting down). Look out, below !
Ron (looking round). What say about crib time ?
Billy (looking id the sun). Ye’re rigid. Bob, The billy and chuck’s on
that ’ere log.
Lawson (shouts down to mate). Crib, ho I below !
(Diggers gather round with billies and hags while Lawson winds up
Walter Lisle.]
Lawson. Why, Lisle, old man, you’re been going in this morning.
The stuff’s been coming up by the cartload !
Billy. Ain’t yer gettin’ a bit wearied of this life, Lisle ?
Walter. Wearied ? No ! I revel in this work. 1 felt it some-
what rough at first, but now I am a full-fledged digger, and
feel like one, too, for every hearty digger welcomes crib time.
Come along, mate.
[ Exeunt Walter and Lawson.]
Bob. That there Lisle’s a noble sort of fellow ; he's been we
brnng up, I’ll bet.
Billy. Brnng up ! why he’s a haristocrat by hath ; but he’s one
of those sorter coves, like you and me, Bob, that don’t put
on no hairs.
Bob. I see wat yer drivin’ at; he’s a big bug, and yet he’s not a
big bug.
Billy. That’s it ; Ins mate was a spinuin’ me all about it.
Bon. Shovel it out, then.
Chorus, Shovel it out, Billv.


Billy. Well, yer see. him and his brother was left a big Instate
in Hingland, and this 'ere brother of his, don’t yer see, was
a real tip-topper, and used to make it a bit ’ard on the
tenants of this ’ere Instate. Well, this ’ere cove wat’s ’ere
couldn’t stand it, so ’e Imps and tells the ’igh-tlyer ; but it
all wound up in a blooming' row, and this cove just packed
up his swag and travelled.
Enter Burton, unobserved.
Bon. Well, the cove that'll stick up for the working man is a
good ’un : ’ems my politics.
Billy. And ain’t he bin a doin’ the same ’ere. Them com-
missioner beaks have a set on ’ini ’cause he told ’em the
diggers’ license wasn’t the clean pertater. They’d like to get
a case against ’ini, 1 reckon, even if it was only insultin’
hehaver.
Burton. Who is the man you speak about ?
Bon. By the ’obey ! a new chum I Twig him.
Burton. Yes, I am a new arrival.
Billy. Think yer are. When yer been colonialised ye’ll know
not to ax questions until after yer been properly recommended.
Burton. Excuse me, I thought from what you said of the man you
were speaking about that his name was Lisle—Walter Lisle !
Chorus. So it is 1
Billy. Do you know him ?
Burton. Know him ? Yes.
Billy. A friend of yours ?
Burton. Yes, a friend, indeed !
Billy. Then ’ere’s my ’and. I wouldn’t have said w’at I did if
I’d knowed Lisle was your passport. We all swear by
Lisle, we do
Diggers. Hear.’ear I
Enter Lisle, unobserved by Burton.
Burton. I’m glad to hear it. All you have said of him is true. I
was a tenant on the Lisle estate' myself, and Mr. Walter
Lisle is all that is manly
WALTER.]


Walter. John Burton, as I live ! [Shake hands.)) So you’ve
found your way to Australia, have you .’ Ah I I know the
treasure you seek is not gold !
Burton*. No ; I seek my wronged daughter. It was a long whil e
before 1 got on the track, and only then by chance. Lucy
wrote to Mason’s daughter, inquiring about me, but insisted
on her secrecy not to let me know her whereabouts, and I
should never have known were it not for Miss Marion, by
whose, advice and assistance lam here. Miss Marion found
out you were here from the same source, and told me that
should [ ever meet you to deliver this.
\_llaruh Walter letter. ]
Walter. Thanks, Burton, thanks! (Aside.) Noble Marion, you
have remained true, whilst I, thinking of others, have for-
saken you. [Scribbles note and terns it from pocket-hook .]
( To Billy) : You are going to Ballarat, are you not ?
Bii.lv. Almost directly. I’m right out of ’baccy and grub.
Walter. Will you deliver this at the address ? Should you see
Lucy herself ask her to meet me without fail about dusk at
the bend near the Halfway House.
Billy. Thar I will. [Takes notef\
[Diggers, giving Billy moneyf\
Ist Digger. Bring me a pound of tobaccy.
2xn Digger. Get me some beef and portaters, if yer don’t mind, Billy.
dun Digger. Call for my Wellington boots at old Tim’s.
4tii Digger. Billy, do me a turn, and fetch me a gallon o’ whisky : I’m
cleaned out.
Billy. Well, mates, I ain’t no blooming bullock waggon, I ain’t:
so don’t ax anything else.
Walter (to Barton). I have sent -a note by Billy, and this evening will
discover to you your long-lost treasure 1
Burton*. Then, thank Heaven ! my long journey has not been in
vain.
[ Diggers start up excited, and the cry of “ Joe, Joe , Joe," rings
along the galley. TTi-y hoot , shout, and cheer, indicating
the Police are aj'tei a digger
Ist Digger. Oh I here’s a pretty go. The he Hlow miking down
this way !


Chorus. Hurrah ! Well dodged. mate.
2nti Digger. Why, The hanged if it isn’t Yankee Smart they're arter !
Ist Digger. Yank’s got a license: 1 se’d it rneself.
2nd Digger. That’s him coming this way. I’ll tell you what, Yank’s
mate ain’t got no license, so Yank’s leading them on the
wrong- scent.
Chorus. Ha, ha, ha ! Well dont\ Yank ! Look at the beak on
horseback coming up. Oh 1 you cowardly dog !
[Diggers hoot the police un/l cheer Yank, who rushes in amongst
them, pursued by the police. Police Officer seizes Yank by
the shirt collar .]
Yank. Say, steady that. Hands oil I What crime have I
committed to he hunted down like a darned thief?
Pol. Officer. Your license, scoundrel I
Yank. My license ? Why didn’t yer say so before ?
Pol. Officer. You didn’t give me time.
[Yank produces licence, at which the diggers cheer him and jeer
the police with ‘‘Joe, Joe, sold.’ ”]
.Bob. Why, bless my soul, the copper’s copped hissell.
[Police call on them to produce their licenses. They all produce
them.~\
Pol. Officer {to Burton.') Your license, fellow ?
Burton. f have only arrived : I am not a digger.
Pol. Officer. That won’t do. Your license, I say ?
Enter Police, with several diggers chained together.
Walter. It is true what he says, having only- arrived half-an-hour
ago.
Pol. Officer. How, you hound, mind your own concerns. We’ve got
our eye on you already. [Looks threateningly at Walter.]
Walter. He’s innocent : I swear he’s innocent.
Diggers {furiously). He’s innocent. Hands off I hands off !
Pol. Officer {to Walter). There, you’ve raised another row. Well.
I’ll reckon up with you some day.
\ ank. If you threaten Lisle again, why, darn me, I’ll pitch vou
down that hole !


Diggers. Let him go, you cowardly hounds
[Police present revolver#.']
Pol. Officer. Stand back, and let them pass I
[Diggers full back.]
Pol. Officer. Take them away, and chain them up till to-morrow !
[Prisoners pass out. J
(To Walter) : As for you, your license will be cancelled
at once.
[Exit.]
Yank. Let's rescue them. This is nothing short of tyranny.
[Diggers seize picks, shovels, <fx'., and prepare for an assault.]
Diggers. Who will lead us ?
Yank. Lisle!
Diggers. Lisle ! Lisle .' !
Walter ( standing upon a log). Fellow-diggers, are you mad ? Pause
one moment and think. We cannot rescue them without
bloodshed. You are noble fellows, and love to see your
fellowman free. You have a just cause, but to the last
extremity obey the law.
Yank. The law is an injustice, and tramples on our liberty !
W alter. Then it is for us to amend it. We diggers are the
majority, and by sober consideration we can frame laws mu
only for the present, but for the great future before us. The
appointed dignitaries and their contemptible supporters would
deprive us of our rights, and make these diggings with
their untold wealth the El Dorado of capitalists. We are
freeborn men in a new land, where we will make our homes.
We do not intend to rob the country of her natural wealth
and become absentees. Then let us in the name of Austra-
lians unite and command our rights.
[Diggers cheer.]
Yank. On what foundation would you build these laws, Lisle ?
Walter. Let there be no distinction of classes. Sink denominational
prejudice under foot, and extend the hand of fellowship to
all worthy of the soil. Beware that the land fall not into
large estates, for that is the great step of oligarchy. Federate
the sister colonies. Make “ Democracy ” your watchword,
and maintain it to the last, and consider an Australian
beneath you who sinks low enough to buy the 'empty titles of


the Old World. For there is no higher title under Heaven
than Honkst Max. And this above all let your motto over
be : Advance Australia, until she takes her place among the
foremost nations of the world.
The flag of the Southern Cross is hoisted, and the diggers sing :
" Australian sons your flag unfurl.
And proudly wave the banner high,
Till every nation may behold
Tour glorious standard in the sky.
Unfurl the flag that all may see.
Our proudest boast is Liberty."*
\_Bepeat the two closing linesf\
Scene 11. ; A Bush Road near the Diggings.
Enter Seamks and Dinglow, armed with revolvers and knives.
Seamks. They are to pass this way. At what time ?
Din ’ Dusk.
Skames. Then they’re on their way now. D > yer know their
plans ?
Ding. Yes ; I overheard it behind the tent. The cove Lawson's
to carry the lucre to Ballarat, and the mate Lisle, the feller
who's alays a proachin’, is coming part ways to meet a flame
o’ his.
Seambs. Hadn't we better wait till they're apart, partner Dingy ?
It’s easier to do for one than two. It’s a risky business.
Ding. We only wants the gold.
Sbames. Ye’re right, partner Dingy. How much do yer think
they’ve got ?
Ding. lie wat I beared, most o’ their stuffs safe already. They've
been middling lucky, and the >wag they carry to Ballarat to-
night is worthy our notice.
Seamks. I don’t like the business ; its risky, partner Dingy.
Ding. Hone o’ yer snivelling for me. Here, take a nip o’ this :
it’ll steady yer nerves.
[Hands him flask of brandy. Sea.mes drinks f\
* Selected.


Seameb. Well, that warms one anyhow. Wat’s yer plan
Dm;. We can't use this {rerolrer) : it makes too much row.
Skambs. An’ would attract attiution, partner Dingy.
Ding. This will do the trick (knife). One 1 nicked from their
own tent a week gone.
Shames. Right ye are partner Dingy, and mind ye, when the job’s
done, fair dinkum.
Ding. Yer’ll get yer share, so just mind ye do yer part in the
business.
Seamks. Right yer are, partner Dingy ! Right yer are !
Ding. They’re coming along now. 1 hear voices. Move along,
and no snivelling 1
Shames. It’s a risky business, but fair dinkum, partner Dingy.
[ Exeunt. ]
Enter Walter and Lawson.
Walter. Well, Lawson, this is the place 1 promised to meet Lucv,
and make her peace with her father. The poor girl will be
disappointed when she finds he’s not here. Yon had better
wait, and when Lucy arrives we’ll all go along together. It
will be a dark night, and these gold-carrying journeys are
not the safest.
Lawson. Oh 1 never fear. Lisle. There’s no danger. No one
knows of our success. The trap didn’t think when he
threatened to cancel your license that you were already
independent of him. Ha, ha, ha ! Do you know, Lisle, I
have been thinking of my old home as we came along the
road.
Walter. 1 have been thinking of mine also.
Lawson. 1 have been thinking of one who played with me in child-
hood ; who was my companion in youth. One who I try to
believe is now looking up at the stars and thinking of me.
She promised to be my wife, but 1 was poor, and when the
news of goldfields reached me I tore myself away, with the
promise to return with gold. I have found the gold, and I
am miserable.
Walter. Why miserable, Lawson ?
Lawson. Because in seeking for gold 1. may have lost her. I think
perhaps in my absence she may have changed. Do vuu
think she would be the same to mo as she was before 1 left ?


Walter. 1 think so !
Lawsos. Thanks 1 shake hands ! Then I will sell out my share
and return to her with the gold ! have worked so hard for.
There is a bright future in my life. Now I’ll get along
as merry as a lark, and you may expect me back at eight.
\_Kxit.~)
Walter ( looking after him). Manly, honest fellow, always cheerful and
always ready. I trust that the future you look forward to
may not be blighted. ( Looking round.) What a calm
seems to hover around this place—not a sound ( listens , and
hears birds chirp) onl} r the wild birds chirping nestward.
It’s pleasant to steal away from the coarse jest of the camp,
and think. A man would forget he had a soul were it not for
leisures Hite this. It is a fitting place to read over again
my darling Marion’s letter.
[.StO down and reads. ]
“ Since my poor father’s death the last ties that bound me
to Old England are severed, and I am resolved to accompany
my brother to Australia, where I trust to meet you. I shall
have sailed long before poor Burton gives you this. I
understand now the cause of your leaving England, and why
you have not written ”
Enter Lucy, in great excitement.
Lucy. Oh I Master Walter, I have been so terribly frightened I
There were two evil-looking men down the road, and as I
passed they frowned at me. I saw them watching me all
along the road. Look, someone has lost their pocket-book.
[Hands him pocket-book . j
Walter. Now,|Lucy, don’t be afraid ; you imagine all these things.
Why, this is Lawson’s pocket-book ! He must have dropped
it.
Lucy. Whore is my father 1
Walter. I am sorry to say he was taken prisoner to-day because he
could not produce a digger's license.
Lucy. Oh I my poor father, what trouble I have brought upon
you .' How can 1 ever face him ?
W alter. Be of good cheer. Lucy. f our father loves you, and has
followed you to forgive and lake you back again his own
wronged child.
Lucy. Oh ! I have sinned !


Walter. It is not a sin'for a woman to misplace her innocence and
truth to a ruthless villain 1
Lucy. Oh ! don’t say that of him, Master Walter !
Walter. The man you placed your confidence in is a base deceiver.
You.are not the. only one he has ruined. Still he is coun-
tenanced by Society, while his victims are spurned. He has
also ruined my brother, and the old home is likely to fall
into the hands of moneylenders.
Lucy. Oh I 1 have been basely deceived I
Walter. It is all over now, Lucy. Your father is here to forgive
and receive you. Take my arm, and we will converse on
these things as we walk homewards.
[Exeunt .J
Scene 111 ; The same Diggings hg Moonlight.
Diggers’ Soko—
It is not wealth that makes the man,
It is not; show, nor costly dress.
Put on appearances you can, —
These serve to hide a worthlessness.
Inherit titles won of old,
And boast about a lordly birth,
I count it idle all you say.
It does not prove a man of worth.
Chorus—
A honest man’s the nobleman,
lie high or low his birth ;
If true to himself and fellow man,
Then he is a man of worth.
Oh ! you who bask 'neath fortune’s smiles,
Turn not the cold hard gaze of scorn,
On one who shares not in her wiles. '
.Because his coat is bare and torn.
Ho may be one of the best men
That over trod on this green earth,
Be true to himself and to all.
And be in deeds a man of worth.
A honest man’s the nobleman, &c.
13on. Say, Yank, will you try some toddy ?


Yank. [ guess I might. Just pass the pannikin and try me.
That’s the tack to keep yer skin from cracking. Say, don’t
all speak at once, who did I lend my weed to a while ago?
Billy. Here it is, Yank.
Bob. I wonder where Lisle is to-night ; he’s seldom away from
the camp.
Yank ( cutting tobacco.') Jest wat I been trying to calculate myself. I
guess he’s not safe : them beaks have a set on him, and gad
knows they’d just swear his life away if they got the chance.
Chorus. But they won't get the chance.
Yank. Well, mates, after the way Lisle spoke to-day, I’m one to
stand by him to the death should anything unpleasant turn
up.
Diggers. Hear, hear I We’ll all stand by Lisle.
Enter Walter.
Walter. Thanks, mates, thanks ; I know you will, but, thank
heaven, there’s no occasion. Has Lawson not returned ?
Yank. I guess the beaks would just like to rake up something,
anyway.
Walter. It is not likely I shall put myself in their power mates.
It’s hard a man can’t stand up for his fellow man without
having the officials of the law upon him.
Enter Hingj.ow followed by Police.
Ding. There’s been a murder committed I
Chorus. Murder ! Where ?
Ding. Just about a quarter of a mile from the Half-way House.
Walker. Ob, horror ! Who was the victim ?
Ding. Your mate. Lawson !
Ding, (to police, pointing out Lisle.) That’s the man 1 saw near the spot
where I found the body.
[Exit.]
[Police seizes Walter. Diggers crowd around.]
Walter. What is the meaning of this ?
Pol. Officer. I arrest you on the charge of murder ! Search him !


Walter. Before God, I am innocent !
Pol. Officer. Yon will have to prove that before an open Court.
Policeman (finds Lawson’s pocket-book.) The murdered man’s pocket-
book I
Pol. Officer. Do you know that knife ?
Walter. Yes; it is mine. I lost it a fortnight ago,
Pol. Officer. You can tell that to His Worship.
Walter. Hands off until I explain myself I
Diggers. Let him alone !
Yank (to police.) This is some vile plot. If you don’t stand back I’ll
bore holes in you 1
Diggers (savagely.) He’s innocent 1
[Diggers prepare for an attack. ]
Walter (to diggers.) Forbear, I command you ! My hands are not yet
stained with blood. I know you believe in my innocence.
1 am willing to go, for it is the guilty who haye cause to
shrink. The law is just, and will protect the innocent and
punish the guilty. And lam innocent !
Tableau.
END OF SECOND ACT.


ACT III.
SCENE I: A Melbourne Prison Cell. LISLE a Prisoner.
Walter. Arrested, tried, and sentenced to death ! Oh .' is it all a
dream ? [s it all a dream .’ No, no 1 it is a reality. These
walls are prison walls. This is the apparel of a criminal.
'I am watched as a felon, yet, O heaven, am I none ! In my
past life my step has been turned lest it should crush the
unconscious worm in my path. Now am I condemned for
the murder of my fellow creature. My life has been sworn
away on circumstantial evidence, and I die for another’s
crime. But there shall be no fear of death in me. I have
done nothing to dread the unknown. Yet could 1 weep
because of the disgrace heaped upon my good name. After
T am gone my friends will grow to distrust mine innocence,
and my brother will accomplish a victory over me. Still
there is one who will proclaim mine innocence, tho’ her heart
will bleed. When 1 think of thee, Marion, mine affliction
becomes unbearable, my reason is strained, and 1 wonder if
there is an Omnipotent Being who rules the lives and destinies
of men ! Marion ! Oh, Marion ! it is only thou can’st make
death terrible : it is only thou cau’st make me weep.
[Breaks down .]
Enter Gaoler.
Gaoler. Prisoner, a lady has gained permission to see you.
Enter Marion.
Marion. Oh, \V r alter ! Walter !1
[.Breaks down.))
Walter ( raising her). Alas ! it is thus we meet —our hopes and expect-
ations shattered. I would die a hundred deaths to save you
one pang. Marion, become resigned ; your heart will break
in its anguish.
Marion. My heart is bursting in its anguish to think that one like
you should be suspected of such a crime. 1 have come to
bid you hope, for, Walter, there is One above who rules
the lives and destinies of men. lam here as your wife, to
help you bear your burden.


Walter. To what depth can a true woman not love ! What sacrifice
can a tme woman not make ? In my distraction and despair
I have even distrusted Providence ; luit you, Marion, have
proved my tetter angel, and from your woman’s heart have
taught me the duty of a man.
Enter Ernest and Briefby, a Solicitor.
Walter. Ernest', I am sorry that our meeting should be thus.
Ernest. Walter, I will never believe in anything but your innocence.
Walter. Thank (bid I Oh, Ernest, tell it at the old home, and to
the people there that you believe me guiltless.
Ernest. There is still hope. The real perpetrators of the crime
may yet he taken. Be-cheerful, Walter. Mr. Briefby will
explain.
Walter. I thank you, Mr. Briefby, for the sincerity with which you
pleaded my cause
Briefby. Do not thank me for that in which I have failed. Know-
ing you innocent as 1 do
Marion. Oh, sir ! you know him guiltless, and can you not save
him ?
Briefby. Yes, Miss Greeubank, T know him guiltless, and altho’ the
trial is over, and be has been condemned, I have never ceased
in my endeavours to bring the real persons to account.
Walter. Whom do yon suspect ?
Briefby. The principal witnesses against you.
Walter. Do you refer to the police ?
Briefby. No ; I refer to the witnesses Seames and Dinglow.
Walter. From what cause did you arrive at this suspicion ?
Briefby. When I had almost given up the case as hopeless. Miss
Lucy Burton called at my office and informed me she had
been watching them ever since, the trial. She knew them to
be the same men she met near the spot that evening, and
with wonderful perseverance has watched them night and day.
She has even heard them quarrel, in a half drunken state, about
dividing the gold they planted that night in the bush.
Walter. 0, Sir, you have fired me with hope. I was prepared to
die, but this news makes me shudder at the thought.


Brikfby. The diggers are true to their word, and are on the track
now, led hv the undaunted Yankee, who swears ho will yet
foil the heaks.
Walter. Noble fellows .'
Brikfby. Since your imprisonment, the diggers broke nut in open
revolt against the licence law. A desperate fight took place.
They were led hv one of indomitable courage, and they stood
hv him to the man. Unfortunately, they were hut poorly
armed, and after a hold defence were overcome by the
military. Their leader was wounded, but they managed to
hide him ; and although a great reward has been offered for
his head, there are none base enough to betray him.
However, their stand was not in vain, for the abominable
law has been repealed.
Walter. Those worthy fellows who have stood by their rights have
shown the spirit of freedom, becoming pioneers, and have
marked an epoch in the history of the land that must for
ever ho admired. And to the all-wise Providence who moves
so mvsterionsly, 1 trust for my deliverance.
SCENE II : Bush Track near Diggings.
Enter BURTON and LUCY.
Lucv. And yon have forgiven me, father ?
Burton. Forgiven you, Lucy ? Yes, my darling child, why should
I not ? You trusted and were deceived, and fled from a
disgrace which was not yours. You in your love of truth
and right have overtaxed your strength watching those
wretches, and now we have almost trapped them, whilst the
soeiety that would trample on you have accepted poor Walter
guilty.
Lucy. I have only done my duty, father. You know how he
helped us in our old home, and God has given us an
opportunity to serve him as he has so often served us.
Buktos. Yes.
Lucy. And should Master Walter he set free again, will we return
to England, father ?
Buktos. No, Lucy ; 1 shall make my home here. Old England
is no longer the land of freedom to her toiling sons. As for
vour future, Lucy—well, I think one comes here will answer
for me.


Enter The Yank.
Tank, (to Burton). The boys are close handy, accompanied by some of
the Melbourne police, lying in ambush. They’re waiting yon.
Burton. Ay, ay, Yank, my boy ; I’ll join them.
[ Exit •]
Tank. Look ’ore, Lucy ; I nint much of a man for the women—.
I only cared for one woman in me life before I met yon, and
she was my mother—but, darn me, you’re as good as a gold
mine, and I want to be the man to possess you.
Lucy. But
T ank. Now, Lucy, don’t say that. 1 ain’t going to be in a
break-neck hurry, so you will have time to think it over, and
if I can t make you say “ Tea” before long, my name ain’t
Jonathan Smart. Ton jest take my arm and walk with me
to the Half-way House, where I must leave you to join the
lads.
\_E«eunt.~\
SCENE III: Bush Scene (where the Gold was hidden.)
Enter Seames and Dinglow armed, cautiously.
Seamus. I tell yer, partner Dingy, I’s scared over this cronk
business.
Ring. Get out you cowardly hound, yer’ll be givin’ us away if
yer don’t stop that whinin’,
Seames. I hasn’t slept a wink since that ’ere trial. All night long
I see Lisle a starin’ at me, and savin’: “Will yer see a man
swing for yer crime ? Will yer see a man swing for yer
crime ?” It’s conscience, that’s wat it is. partner Dingv."
Ding. It’s wat did yer say ?
Seames. It’s conscience, that’s wat it is.
Ding. Bah ! wat do the likes o' ye want with that ’ere article ? Yer
ain’t a bloomin’ member o’ Parliment.
Seames. I say we ain’t safe till we clears the country.
Ding. If yer don’t give over I’ll do for yer, d’yer ’ear ?


Sbames. Oh, don’t, partner Dingy. I don’t mean anything, only
let’s get the stuff wat’s ’ere and quit the country for Arnerikv.
[Disglow goes to the u corner and starts removing stones.
Sbames. Is it all safe, partner Dingy ?
Ding. The same as we left ’em.
[ Throws out two hags of gold, one larger than the other.
Shames seizes the largest .]
'Ding. ( seeing him ) No yer don’t : jest hand that over ’ere.
Sbames. There’s no difference in ’em.
Ding. You greedy dog ; hand it oyer, I say !
Sbames. I don’t mean anything by taking it, Partner Dingy.
Ding. Look you ’ere, Seames—settlin’ time’s come. Yer didn’t
do your share of the business, so yer don’t get any of this
swag.
Seamus. Then I’ll (Dinglow covers him with revolver .]
No ! no ! Partner Dingy.
Ding. No, yer won’t split ! [Fires, Sbames /'alls.'] There, you
whining hound ! I’m safe now you’re gone, for there’s none
to prove I did for Lawson.
Enter Burton, Police and Diggers, suddenly , armed. Cover
Dinglow with revolvers.
Burton. There is. I can !
\_Dinglow tries to fire, hut is over/towered and handcuffed by the
Police .]
Yank. So, you murdering scoundrel, you’re trapped at last.
Sbames (dying, supported by Billy) He did it all ; he did it all.
Ding. Crawling wretch ! I could strangle you,
Sbames (to Police). I’ll turn Queen’s evidence. He murdered Lawson !
Burton. Thus crime recoils, with its guilty hand, upon itself, and
removes the stigma it would cast upon Truth.
END OP THIRD ACT.
