

THE HOUSE ON THE FENS
ARTHUR GASK


THE HOUSE ON THE FENS


WHAT THIS STORY IS ABOUT
But for the timely intervention of Inspector
Stone, Gilbert Larose, who has brought an end
to many a dangerous criminal, might himself
have been arrested for murder. As it was, the
weight of evidence was overwhelmingly against
him, and he was compelled to bring into play
all his wit and resource in an effort to establish
his own innocence.
His researches led him to a dark, lonely,
jealously-guarded house deeply hidden in the
Norfolk fens where he stumbled upon the triple
mystery of a rich recluse, a criminal imperson-
ation and a girl in dire distress. Regardless of
danger and his own interests he decided to
probe the affair to its depths.
Another gripping story of the quality of The
Vengeance of Larose, about which H. G. Wells
said: “By far the best piece of story-telling
Gask has done. It kept me up to half-past one
last night.”
BY THE SAME AUTHOR
THE VENGEANCE OF LAROSE
THE FALL OF A DICTATOR
THE GRAVE-DIGGER OF MONKS ARDEN
See also pages 283-288


THE HOUSE ON THE FENS
by
ARTHUR GASK
HERBERT JENKINS LIMITED
8 DUKE OF YORK STREET, ST. JAMES’S,
LONDON, S.W.I


First printing ig<f.o
MADS AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY PITRNELL AND SONS, LTD*,
PAULTON (SOMERSET) AND LONDON


CONTENTS
4S&FTBB PAOB
I. THE WAYS OF DEATH .... 9
11. THE HOUNDS OF THE LAW .... 38
EH. THE HOUSE ON THE FENS .... 64
IV. THAT CURSED DOG, LABOSB ... 95
V. THE HOUSE OF EVIL ..... 132
Tl. THE HOUND ON THE TRAIL. . . . 155
yn. POOLS OP SILENCE ..... 181
Vm. SECRET SERVICE 209
H. THE SECRET OF THE FENS .... 233
X. THE ORDEAL OF GILBERT LABOSB . . 253




THE HOUSE ON THE FENS


All the characters in this book are purely imaginary
and have no relation whatever to any living persons.


THE
HOUSE ON THE FENS
CHAPTER I
THE WAYS OF DEATH
DR. METHUEN’S beautifully appointed consulting-
room, with all evidence about it of how successful
his practice must be, was not infrequently the
stage upon which poignant tragedies of life were set, and
the curtain had just been rung up upon one more.
A patient had been told he was suffering from the rather
rare disease of myeloid leukaemia, a persistent increase of
the white corpuscles of the blood, and that there was no
hope for him. Medical science knew of no cure or, indeed,
of any way of retarding the approaching death.
Dr. Methuen’s manner was grave and solemn, as was
natural when having to break to an unsuspecting patient
that he was in the throes of a mortal disease. But then,
as far as the doctor was concerned, it was all in the day’s
work and the memory of the incident would speedily pass
out of his well-ordered mind.
In the evening he would go home as usual to his family,
dine well, read, or play a hand or two of bridge until about
eleven o’clock, and then turn into bed for a good night’s
rest. And that was how it should be, for, if he were to
continue to carry on his large consulting practice success-
fully, other people’s misfortunes must never be allowed
to interfere in any way with the methodical daily routine
of his life.
Still, always a keen student of psychology, and realising
fully that no medical practitioner can be a success in his
profession if he is not, he was always interested in the way
in which a patient received his sentence of death.
And he was particularly interested now.


When he delivered a verdict of this nature some took it
bravely, their blanched faces and parted lips alone betray-
ing the emotion which they felt. Others, however, would
tremblingly implore for the possibility of a mistaken
diagnosis, and yet others, again, would burst into paroxysms
of uncontrollable tears.
But this patient now before him had become only as if
furiously angry. His jaw had set hard, his face become
black and scowling, and there was a snarl in his tones as
he asked, “And so I am to pass out at thirty-four while
others enjoy their lives up to more than double that age?”
“But you will not die suddenly,” said Dr. Methuen,
trying to soften down the blow, “and you will not die in
pain. You will simply gradually become weaker and in
time have to take to your bed.” He shrugged his shoulders.
“But, of course, if you would like a second opinion,
although I am afraid the microscope leaves no doubt what-
soever, I would suggest your consulting Dr. Price Edwards.
He ”
“I want no other opinion,” interrupted the patient
brusquely. “I am quite convinced.” He spoke contemp-
tuously. “I thought there was something peculiar in Dr.
Bain’s manner when he told me to *come to you. He
seemed so anxious to get me out of his place as quickly
as possible as if he was expecting some catastrophe would
happen to me there.” The scowl returned to his face.
“And you say I have even less than a year to live!”
Dr. Methuen nodded gravely. “I am afraid not many
months. You see, you have been in this condition for a
long time.”
“Gad, and I only thought I was run down and wanted
a tonic!” exclaimed the patient. “That’s what I went to
my own man for.” His tone became almost a violent one.
“The miserable coward, why didn’t he tell me himself
instead of going through the farce of sending me on to
you?”
“Well, you can do anything you like now,” said the
doctor soothingly, “for nothing will make you either
better or worse. Just live from day to day and give your-
self the best of everything you can.”


"Good advice, that!” scoffed the patient ironically.
"With this cursed disease on me I shall naturally feel
inclined for all sorts of pleasures.” He rose abruptly to
his feet. “What’s your fee, now?”
“Three guineas, please.”
The patient opened his wallet and passed over a bank-
note. To the doctor’s astonishment he saw it was one for £SO.
“But—er ” he began.
“Oh, it’ll be a good one,” said the patient sharply.
“I got it off a bookmaker at Sandown Park on Saturday
and the man’s well known to everybody.”
“But it’s a large one to give change for,” said the doctor.
He hesitated a moment and then went on quickly. “Still,
as it happens I can manage it. I’ve just been paid a large
account in cash.”
He unlocked a drawer in his desk and, abstracting a
sheaf of notes, counted out the required change, and
handed it to the patient. The latter, without verifying its
correctness, crushed up the notes and thrust them into
his trouser pocket. “Good morning,” he said and, without
another word, and giving the doctor no time to precede
him, he let himself out of the consulting-room.
For a long minute the doctor continued to stand by his
desk, interestedly regarding the £SO bank-note which he
was holding in his hand.
“I’ll give it to Elsie for her birthday,” he said at length.
“She’ll never have seen a bank-note for £SO, and it’ll be
a novelty to her.” His thoughts reverted to the patient,
and he frowned. “An unpleasant fellow, and quite likely
to become mental. His expression was almost maniacal.
I shouldn’t wonder if he did away with himself.”
In the meantime the man whose sentence of death he
had pronounced was walking defiantly down the street.
As when in the consulting-room, he was showing no signs
of fear, but only those of an intense and almost ungovern-
able rage. He felt as if someone had tricked him and,
helpless and bound hand and foot, he was being handed
over to a revengeful enemy.
Hailing a taxi, he was driven to a fashionable and
expensive restaurant and there proceeded to order an


elaborate meal and a bottle of the best champagne. But
the food almost choked him and the wine brought no
feeling of exhilaration.
The restaurant was beginning to fill up for luncheon
and he looked round scowlmgly at the happy and animated
throng. He took in the pretty girls with the smiling, care-
free men who were escorting them, and their joy of life
struck at him like a stinging blow.
Why should happiness and pleasure of so many years
be before them when it was ordained he should die so
soon?
Ah, how he’d love to drag them down into oblivion
with him! If he could only press a button and crash the
whole world into ruins! If he were doomed to die, then
everyone should die with him if it were only in his power!
Then he thought of his friends, his smiling, sleek, com-
placent friends, and—something seemed to snap with great
violence in his brain. A red mist rose up before his eyes
and he gnashed his teeth in rage. They were hypocrites
every one of them. When he was rotting in his coffin they
would carry on just the same as if he had never been,
smiling and laughing, kissing pretty girls, eating good
dinners, golfing, going to races and—bah! now he saw
things clearly, how he hated them all!
His thoughts ran on and, giving rein to his imagination,
his eyes gloated in vengefiil ecstasy. He turned now to
his meal with more zest and, drinking his champagne to
the last drop, something of a feeling of well-being coursed
through him.
Presently he left the restaurant, carrying himself with
quite a jaunty air.
Sir George and Lady Almaine were entertaining some
friends to dinner in their beautiful home in Hampstead,
and if there were anywhere a happy man it should surely
have been the good-looking baronet.
He was only thirty years of age, in the best of health,
of ample means, and barely a year previously had married
a beautiful young girl who had just recently presented him


with a son and heir. He was a typical English gentleman,
of a restrained and quiet disposition and with his emotions,
to all appearances, always kept well under control.
He had looked many times at his wife during the meal
and had thought, as he so often did, how really lovely
she was. Not yet twenty-two, her profile was clear-cut,
her complexion of flawless ivory and cream, and she had
long-lashed, calm grey eyes. The serenity of her Madonna-
like face was relieved, however, by the hint of warmth
and passion in her very pretty mouth. The formation of
the beautifully moulded lips was a perfect Cupid’s bow.
The other women there were certainly all attractive
but they could none of them compare with their hostess.
Mrs. Hutchings-Vane was a vivacious widow in the early
thirties, the dainty prettiness of Alma Livingstone would
make any man look twice at her and the two sisters, Joan
and Mary Rising, if good looks counted for anything,
would certainly not remain in their maiden states for
long.
Of the men, there was Dr. Revire, a rising Harley Street
physician, and the despair of many mothers with marriage-
able daughters; Major Sampon, an old friend of Sir George
and his wife; the alert-looking, suave Arnold Gauntry,
a successful rubber broker in the city, Julian Travers, a
lean-jawed barrister with the mobile mouth of the orator,
and the debonair Gilbert Larose, the one-time well-known
international detective. All the men guests were bachelors,
except Larose, who had married Lady Ardane, the wealthy
widow of the late Sir Charles Ardane.
The meal over, while the ladies chatted in the drawing-
room, the men adjourned to Sir George’s study for some
poker. They were all well-seasoned card players and,
while the limit was not made unduly high, it was, never-
theless, still high enough to suggest all the players were
well-to-do and that the loss of ten or twenty pounds would
not worry them in any way.
For an hour and longer the game proceeded with the
utmost good fellowship, it being laughingly remarked,
however, that whenever Major Sampon was the dealer
he always somehow managed to get a good hand.


Then a most unfortunate thing happened.
It had been Major Sampon’s turn again to deal and the
betting was high, with a good sum showing on the table.
Then when the cards came to be put down it was seen that
the major bad the best hand, with four kings and the
three of diamonds. He was about to pick up the pool, for
the fourth time it was remembered when he had been
dealing, when Larose, who was seated next to him,
exclaimed suddenly, “Hullo, but this won’t do! There’s
a card there on the carpet, just by your feet. You must
have dropped one when dealing.”
The other players craned their necks and, sure enough,
there was the two of spades lying under the major’s chair.
A few moments of most embarrassed silence followed,
with the major getting furiously red.
“I’m afraid that’ll have to nullify the hand,” said
Larose frowningly. “Of course, it was an accident, but
it leaves a doubt as to what your original five cards really
were and ”
“You damned policeman! ” roared the major in a sudden
burst of temper. “You accuse me of cheating? ”
“Not for a moment,” replied Larose quietly and with
his temper well in hand, “but you must see ”
“But you do mean I cheated!” shouted the major. He
could hardly get his breath. “You cad, you’ve no business
to be here at all. You are aping the gentleman on your
wife’s money. Everyone knows you only married her
because of that and ”
“Shut up, Sampon,” called out Sir George angrily.
“Remember you are a guest here and that this gentleman
is my friend. You are entirely in the wrong.”
The major sprang up from his chair. “Well, at any rate
I won’t play any more,” he shouted, his rage in no wise
abated. He sneered. “I’ll go where the company is more
to my liking,” and, striding over to the door, he let himself
out of the room and banged the door to behind him.
Sir George was all apologies. “I’m so sorry, Mr. Larose,”
he said miserably. “He didn’t really mean anything he
said. He was only naturally very upset by finding himself
in such an awkward predicament.”


Larose looked pale but he laughed it off lightly. “I
don’t mind,” he smiled. “He’ll probably come back
presently and be quite all right again.” He made a grimace.
“But I had to call attention to that card, hadn’t I?”
“Of course you had,” said Julian Travers emphatically.
“It was a damned piece of carelessness on Sampon’s part,
and if some of us didn’t know him, well —we might even
think it worse than that.” He looked round significantly
from one to the other. “Gad, but hadn’t he a good hand
almost every time when he was the dealer!”
Sir George shook his head emphatically. “But Sampon’s
not like that,” he said quickly. “He and I have been
friends since our Harrow days and I’ve always found him
straight. It was rotten carelessness dropping that card
but, I am quite sure, nothing more.” He looked puzzled.
“I can’t understand his being so bad-tempered and insult-
ing, either, as he’s generally such a good-tempered chap.”
“Well, don’t let it spoil the game,” said the barrister.
“It’s your deal now, Mr. Gauntry. I’ve cut.”
So the game was resumed, but there was no zest in it,
and after a couple more hands they stopped playing.
“Now, of course, not a word to anyone outside this
room what’s happened,” said Sir George, as he rose to his
feet, “and then no harm will have been done. I expect
Sampon will have come to his senses by now. I’ll go and
see what he’s doing.”
But if Sir George were hoping the matter would be kept
secret, the moment he entered the drawing-room he saw
he was going to be disappointed. The major was not there,
and the ladies were grouped together talking earnestly,
with unsmiling faces.
“What’s happened, George?” asked Lady Almaine,
with a pretty frown. “Major Sampon’s fearfully upset.
He’s been telling us he’s been accused of cheating.”
“Nothing of the kind!” exclaimed Sir George testily.
“It’s all a mistake. He happened to drop a card under
his chair when dealing and Mr. Larose was the one to
notice it when the hand had been played. Then Sampon
lost his temper. That was all. A storm in a tea-cup,
nothing more.”


“But he was dreadfully put out,” commented Mrs.
Hutchings-Vane. “I’ve never seen him like it before.”
“He ought to have been dreadfully apologetic,” snapped
Sir George. “He insulted Mr. Larose, who gave him no
provocation. He was in the wrong from first to last,
from being so careless as to drop a card when he was
dealing, to telling you all here anything about it. Really,
I’m quite ashamed of him.” He turned to his wife. “Where
is he now, Joyce?”
Lady Almaine inclined her head. “Out on the balcony,
I think. He said he’d go there. He didn’t say anything
about going home.”
“No, he’s not gone home,” said Sir George. “His coat
and hat are still in the hall.” He frowned. “Well, if he’s
on the balcony, let him stay there a bit and cool his heels.”
He became the smiling host again. “But come on, let’s
have some music. I’ll bring the others in. Look in the
paper, dear, and see if there is anything decent to listen
to on the wireless.”
Then for an hour and longer the time sped quickly by.
Lady Almaine played some pieces of Chopin, Mrs. Vane
sang two songs in a rich contralto voice and they listened
to a ghost-story over the air.
But all the time an undercurrent of uneasiness was
seemingly felt by everyone. Major Sampon had not
reappeared, and it was unpleasant that the harmony of
the evening was being spoilt by his bad temper.
Then, rather apologetically, Arnold Gauntry voiced the
opinion of them all.
“I think we ought to bring the major back into the
fold,” he said smilingly. “He must be feeling very sorry
for himself by now, but probably doesn’t like to come in,
not knowing quite what reception he’ll get.” He turned
to Larose. “Look here, Mr. Larose, wouldn’t it be a nice
thing if you went out and fetched him? You’re the injured
party and could make it easier for him than anybody
else.”
“Oh, yes, do go, Mr. Larose,” supplemented Lady
Almaine pleadingly. “I hate to think of the poor man
out there, imagining we’re all angry with him.”
16
THE HOUSE ON THE FENS


“All right,” laughed Larose, “I’ll go and be very nice
to him,” and he immediately left the room.
It was still rankling in Larose’s mind that the major
had flung into his teeth that he had married a rich woman
for her money, but for all that he was still smiling when
he went on to the balcony.
Sir George Almaine’s house stood in the middle of a
large garden surrounded by a high wall. The house itself
was built upon an elevation, with the ground in front of
it sloping sharply down. So the architect had designed
a broad and rather ornate verandah all along one side,
with a balustrade about three feet high. There was a drop
of about six feet from the verandah to the ground below.
It was a bright moonlight night and, turning on to the
verandah, Larose expected to find the bad-tempered major
upon one of the seats there. But there was no sign of
him anywhere and so he walked down the steps into the
garden. He went all round the house without finding him
and then returned into the house.
“But didn’t we hear loud talking?” asked Gauntry,
when Larose had made known the major was not to be
seen anywhere. “Oh, I made certain I did and was afraid
the major was still in his bad temper.”
Everyone was concerned that Major Sampon had gone
off without coming in first to make his peace, but Sir
George affected to make light of the whole matter.
“Never mind,” he said. “He’s probably only gone for
a bit of a walk and will be returning any moment for his
hat and coat.”
They talked on for about half an hour and then, it
getting towards midnight, all the guests prepared to leave
together. They were chatting by the hall door and saying
their final goodbye when Travers and Gauntry happened
to go round the comer on to the verandah.
“What’s that up at the far end, there,” asked Gauntry
suddenly, “in the shadow under the balustrade?”
“Workmen’s tools, I think,” replied Travers, but
advancing a few steps forward, he cried out excitedly,
“No, it isn’t! It’s someone lying there and it may be
Sampon. Perhaps he’s fainted.”
B


His cry had brought the other men running round and
in a few seconds they were all bending over a recumbent
figure. A torch was flashed and it was seen at once it was
that of the missing major. He was lying upon his side,
with his head in a dark pool of blood. There was a trail
of blood, too, from a large garden chair about six feet
away. Horrified exclamations burst from those standing
round.
“God, he’s been murdered!” exclaimed Dr. Revire
breathlessly. “Look where his head’s been battered in!”
“Keep the ladies away,” cried Larose hoarsely, “and
stand back, everybody, except the doctor. Don’t touch
anything, whatever you do. Now, are you sure he’s quite
dead, Doctor?”
“Dead!” exclaimed Dr. Revire. “God, yes! His skull’s
crushed right in! He couldn’t have lived ten seconds with
a head like that.” He looked round with horror-struck
eyes. “Who could have killed him?”
“We’ll have to find that out,” snapped Larose. He
turned quickly to Sir George. “Have a car brought round
the comer and flash the headlights on. Everyone move
off the verandah. I’ll go and ring up the police.” His
eyes swept round upon the ghastly-faced little group of
men. “Another thing, we must none of us go away now.
The police will want to question us all.” He glanced back
at Dr. Revire, who was still bending down over the body.
“How long do you think he’s been dead, Doctor?”
The doctor had now recovered his equanimity and
spoke in a sharp professional manner. “From the warmth
of his body, not more than half an hour,” he said. He
repeated his former question. “But who on earth can have
killed him?”
“Look here,” said Sfr George shakily, “as you must
have all seen when you drove in, they’re laying new water
mains in the road. Well, there’s a watchman outside all
night to make sure the warning lights are kept burning.
I’ll go and find out if he’s seen anyone come into the
drive,” and he ran off at once.
After a quick search through the grounds by Larose
and the other two men they went back into the house.


The ladies were standing shivering and shaking just inside
the front door.
“Oh, is he really dead?” asked Lady Almaine, almost
in tears.
“I’m sorry to say he is,” said Larose solemnly, “and
so everyone must remain here now. No one must leave
until the police have done with them. I’m just going to
ring up the station.”
“But are you sure he’s been murdered?” asked Mrs.
Hutchings-Vane, the colouring upon her face standing
out grotesquely against its white background.
Larose nodded. “Quite sure!”
He went into Sir George’s study and rang up the Hamp-
stead police station, quickly informing the sergeant in
charge who he was and what had happened. Then he
put in another call to the private house of Chief Inspector
Stone, one of the Big Four of Scotland Yard. He was
longer there in getting any answer and then a grumbling
voice asked sleepily, “Well, what is it now?”
“It’s I, Charlie,” replied Larose. “Gilbert, and I’m in
a bit of a hole, or I wouldn’t have dreamed of ringing
you up.”
“All right, boy,” came the voice with some animation
in it now, “I don’t mind if it’s you. What’s happened?”
“I’m at Sir George Almaine’s house, Avon Court, on
Hampstead Hill,” said Larose, speaking very distinctly.
“I’ve been spending the evening here. One of my fellow
guests has been murdered out on the verandah and earlier
in the evening he had fastened a quarrel on me. I’m not
certain I wasn’t out in the garden just about the time he
was done in. Anyhow, when the local police arrive, and
I’ve just rung them up, they’re bound to be darned sus-
picious about me, and it’s an odds on chance they’ll want
to put me in the cells. So if you would come along, too,
you might save me a lot of unpleasantness.”
Inspector Stone whistled. “Was he shot, Gilbert?”
“No, Charlie, what are you dreaming about? He was
bashed in on the top of his head.”
“All right, all right, my boy, that lets you out,” came
the booming vqice over the phone. “You never were a


basher, whatever else you were. Yes, I’ll come but I’ll
have to ring the Chief first as a matter of form. So it’ll
probably be at least three quarters of an hour before
I’m with you. Keep your pecker up. Old Charlie Stone
will pull you through,” and the receivers at both ends
were jerked back on to their stands.
Larose returned into the lounge, where Sir George and
Lady Almaine and the others were gathered together,
talking in hushed voices, and there was no hiding from
himself that he was regarded uneasily by them all. They
stopped speaking, too, the instant he appeared.
Dr. Revire frowned hard, the barrister took out a silk
handkerchief and began industriously wiping over his
glasses again and again, Arnold Gauntry looked rather
nervous, while Sir George’s handsome face was white and
strained. All the ladies appeared as if they were upon the
verge of breaking down.
“Well, did you find any night watchman outside?”
asked Larose frowningly of Sir George.
Sir George nodded solemnly. “Yes, but he said no one
had come in or gone out of the drive the whole evening.”
“Was he close enough to the gates to see?” snapped
Larose.
“Not twenty yards away, and he’d had to stop there
all the time to look after the tools. He had only two lamps
to watch, so there was no reason for him to go far away.”
Larose forced a smile upon his face and spoke up boldly.
“Look here,” he said, “I don’t pretend I don’t know
what you must all be fearing, but make your minds quite
easy. I didn’t do it. I never set eyes upon him when I
went out to look for him. I never ”
“My dear fellow,” broke in Sir George vehemently, so
vehemently that it might almost have been that he spoke
in great relief. “None of us suspect you for a moment.
We are only thinking of the unhappy position in which
you are placed. You had every reason to be angry with
him for having insulted you.”
“Of course, we don’t suspect you,” added Lady Almaine
with equal vehemence. “It’s unthinkable you would do
anything like that. It would not be like you at all.” She


hesitated. “We wonder if it would be best not to say any-
thing about what’s happened. It might save ”
“No, no,” interrupted Larose sternly, “there must not
be the slightest attempt to keep anything back. Every-
thing must be told fully. All of you have nothing to be
afraid of and it can be only of me they will have any
suspicions.” He nodded confidently. “But suspicions are
not proof, you know.”
They talked on for a few minutes, with the front door
wide open, and then a car came tearing up the drive.
Out of it jumped four men, with one of them carrying
a large-sized camera.
“I’m Inspector Flower,” announced the first of them
to Sir George as the latter came forward. “We were rung
up from here,” and Sir George, having made himself and
Larose known, led the inspector and his assistants on to
the balcony.
He told the inspector briefly that the dead man was a
friend of his, Major Sampon, who along with seven other
guests had been spending the evening with him, that
about half past nine the major had gone out of the house,
as they all thought for a few minutes, but had not returned,
and then that, when all the other guests had been leaving,
his dead body had been discovered where it now was.
He mentioned also that the watchman outside in the
road had seen no one enter or leave the drive since eight
o’clock.
The inspector was a shrewd-looking, hard-faced man
about forty, and he carried himself importantly. He and
Larose had not met before, as he, the inspector, had but
recently been transferred from the north of England. He
had not long been a Divisional Inspector and was of a
pushing and ambitious nature. Secretly, he was not too
pleased to find the Well-known one-time detective, Gilbert
Larose, on the scene.
He just glanced at the body and then told the photo-
grapher to get busy.
“And you say nothing’s been touched?” he asked Sir
George sharply. “Everything’s exactly as it was when
you found him?”


“Exactly,” replied Sir George. Then he added, “One
of my guests who is a medical man thinks he must have
been killed between eleven and half past.”
“Our own surgeon will decide that,” commented the
inspector brusquely. “He will arrive in a few minutes.”
The police surgeon drove up in his car even as the
inspector was speaking and, quickly taking in everything
upon the scene of the murder, with hardly a word of
comment, commenced a brisk and business-like examina-
tion of the body.
“Been dead some time round about an hour and a hall*”
he announced, “but can’t say within twenty minutes or
so. Killed by one fierce blow with a blunt instrument,
probably a hammer. Both parietal bones deeply fractured
at their junction. Died practically in-tantaneously.” He
looked at his watch. “Twelve thirty-six, so he was killed
between eleven and eleven-thirty. I can’t tell you any-
thing more until after the autopsy.”
“Did he call out, do you think?” asked the inspector.
“Certainly not after he was struck. No struggling of
any kind. Most likely taken unawares from behind, when
lying back in that chair. Then, of course, he was dragged
here.”
“What time will it suit you to do the autopsy? ” asked
the inspector.
“Two o’clock this afternoon,” replied the police sur-
geon, and he was off again as speedily as he had come.
The finger-print expert started looking for finger-prints,
and the dead man’s pockets were turned out. A pocket-
book was taken from the breast one and the inspector
was about to put it to one side when Larose said sharply,
“See what’s inside, please. It’s important.”
The inspector frowned and half hesitated, but he com-
plied with the request and opened the wallet. In one com-
partment there were five five-pound bank notes and, in
the other, seven treasury ones, to the value of £6.
“Thank you,” said Larose, and he frowned now in his
turn.
The body was taken away in the ambulance and a search
now started for the weapon which had killed the major,


but nothing of a probable nature was found among the
masonry tools lying close to the balustrade.
“But there’s no hammer here,” said Larose, “and yet
there undoubtedly should be. We’d better search the
grounds below. It may have been thrown there.”
The sky was still unclouded and the moon made every-
thing almost as bright as day. Eight cigarette butts were
found on the ground just under that end of the balcony
where the major had been killed, and one of the plain-
clothes men carefully wrapped them up.
collect the matches, too,” said Larose, and the
frowning inspector watched while ten were found and put
away.
Then suddenly the third plain clothes man gave a shout
and it was seen he was flashing his torch upon a big hammer
lying by the edge of one of the flower beds.'
It needed no second glance to determine it was the
weapon used to commit the murder, for its head was bloody
and there were hairs sticking to it.
It was carried carefully into the house to be examined
for finger-prints and then the inspector turned to Sir
George.
“Now a list, please,” he said sharply, “of everyone who’s
in the house. I understand no one has gone out since
dinner, so that will cover everybody who could have had
anything to do with the crime. Then I’ll be questioning
you one by one.”
A couple of minutes later, Sir George led the inspector
and one of the plain clothes men into his study and, with
the door closed behind them, proceeded to relate every-
thing which had happened. The plain clothes man took
shorthand notes of the conversation.
Mindful of what Larose had insisted, Sir George glossed
over nothing, mentioning every happening of the evening
connected with the major which he could recall.
The inspector’s eyes opened wide when he heard of
the unpleasantness at the card-table, and all that had
followed after, but they opened wider still when he learnt
that Larose had been out looking for the major about the
very time the police surgeon said the latter had probably


been killed. Then, when, with obvious reluctance, Sir
George mentioned that Arnold Gauntry thought he had
heard voices upon the verandah when Larose was outside,
the inspector caught his breath sharply, but then immedi-
ately masked all expression from his face.
He immediately, however, asked Sir George about how
long Larose had been absent from the room.
“A very short time,” replied the baronet, “not more
than three or four minutes at the outside.”
A long silence followed and then the inspector said
very quietly, “Thank you, Sir George. You have been
very frank, although the whole matter must be most
harrowing to you. Now I think I’d better see Mr. Gauntry
next if you will please send him in to me.”
Then when Sir George had left the room, the inspector
leant back in his chair and tried to collect his excited
thoughts. Incredible though it was, it seemed as if this
one-time Chief Inspector of the Criminal Investigation
Department must be the murderer. Grossly insulted at
the card table and no doubt the insult being repeated
again upon the verandah, with no premeditation, he had
seized the first thing handy, the big mason’s hammer, and
struck the major that fierce blow. Then coming to his
senses, with all the cool effrontery for which he had been
notorious when at the Yard, he was now attempting to
brazen things out, no doubt relying upon his reputation
when in the C.I.D. to pull him through.
A feeling of exultation surged through the inspector.
If he could bring home the murder to Gilbert Larose,
with all the ensuing publicity, he, Thomas Flower, would
be a made man!
Arnold Gauntry entered the room looking very quiet
and subdued. The inspector was favourably impressed,
being at once of opinion that he would make a reliable
witness.
Gauntry told his story with no waste of words. Then
the inspector asked, “And how did Mr. Larose seem to
take it when Major Sampon insulted him?”
“Well, he didn’t look pleased,” replied Gauntry thought-
fully, “but then who would when he was told in front of


everyone that he was aping the gentleman on his wife’s
money? It was a horrible thing to say.”
“Did he lose his temper?”
“He didn’t have time to because Sir George interfered
and told the major to hold his tongue. Of course Mr.
Larose looked very upset.”
“Then, when, later in the evening, he went out, at your
suggestion I understand, to look for the major, how long
would you say he was gone?”
“Not very long,” replied Gauntry. “Five or six minutes
I should say.”
“All that time?” queried the inspector.
“I think so,” replied Gauntry, considering. Then he
added quickly, “But, of course, that is only conjecture.
It might have been less or it might have even been more.”
“And how did he seem when he returned?”
“Quite all right, very little to say and very quiet as
he had been all the evening since the unpleasantness with
the major.”
The inspector spoke carelessly. “And I understand
from Sir George that when Mr. Larose was out of the
room you heard voices out on the verandah?”
Gauntry hesitated. “We-11, I certainly thought I did,
but, of course, I may have been mistaken. You see, there
was a lot of conversation going on in the drawing-room
where we all were.”
“But you thought you did?” insisted the inspector.
“ Oh, yes, and I remarked upon it to Mr. Larose directly
he came in. But he said there had been no one out there.”
“Then to hear voices outside above the conversation
that was going oh in the room,” suggested the inspector,
“they must have been pretty loud, mustn’t they?”
Gauntry looked uncomfortable. “I suppose so,” he
admitted reluctantly, “and it made me think the un-
pleasantness between Mr. Larose and the major had started
again.”
“And who else heard the voices beside yourself?”
Gauntry shrugged his shoulders. “I don’t know. Per-
haps no one. At any rate, no one made any comment
when Mr. Larose said I had been mistaken.”


The inspector eyed him intently. “Did you know
Major Sampon well?”
“Good gracious, no!” replied Gauntry. “I had never
met him before to-night. Until I was introduced to him
here I had never set eyes on him before.”
“Well, did he strike you as being a bad-tempered man? ”
asked the inspector.
“No, on the contrary, he seemed very quiet and reserved.
I took him to be a man who would show his feelings very
little.”
The inspector frowned. “Then in that case what made
him flare up as suddenly as he did when you were all at
that game of poker?”
Gauntry hesitated. “Well, no man likes to be held
up as a cheat, now does he?”
“But Sir George says Mr. Larose did not accuse him
of cheating.”
“Not exactly! But Mr. Larose spoke very sharply to
him, and, certainly, as if there were some grounds for
suspicion.” Gauntry frowned uneasily. “You see, the
unfortunate thing was Major Sampon had been having
unusually good hands every time he had been the dealer,
and if Mr. Larose hadn’t noticed the odd card upon the
ground, he would have picked up more than another £l2
then.”
There was a knock upon the door and the police photo-
grapher entered. He handed a piece of paper to the
inspector upon which was written, “No traces of any finger-
marks upon the handle of the hammer.” The inspector
nodded and the man left the room.
“Thank you, Mr. Gauntry,” said the inspector. “That
will do. Now, will you please ask Mr. Travers to come in
next?” he asked. “And I leave it to your good sense
not to discuss the questions I have asked you with the
others.”
The inspector was now quite satisfied that Larose
was the guilty party and, leaving him until the last, his
subsequent questioning of all the others was very brief.
He was disappointed that none of them had heard the
voices upon the balcony.
26
THE HOUSE ON THE FENS


When at last Larose came in, he eyed him frowningly.
“Of course you realise,” he said sharply, “that I shall
have to treat you just as an ordinary person. It will make
no difference to me that you have yourself been attached
to the Criminal Investigation Department.”
“And it shouldn’t,” nodded Larose imperturbably. “It
would be a gross neglect of duty on your part if it did.”
He spoke as sharply as the inspector himself had done.
“Now it will save a lot of questioning if I tell you my
story first and then you can ask any ”
The inspector held up his hand. “If you please,” he
said coldly, “I would prefer to deal with everything in
my own way.” He spoke with a trace of sarcasm. “My
methods may be entirely different from yours.”
Larose smiled. “Then go ahead,” he said. “I’m all
ready.”
The inspector took a good grip of himself. A man of
quick decisions, he had made up his mind what he would
do. “See here, Mr. Larose,” he said sharply, “I’m not
going to beat about the bush. With the evidence already
before me, in my opinion it would be sheer waste of time
asking you any questions now, but”—he rose to his feet
—“I consider it my duty to ”
But he heard a voice outside in the lounge and suddenly
stopped speaking. It was a loud and booming voice that
he knew well and his eyebrows came together in a heavy
frown.
The door opened quickly to admit a big, stout man,
just beyond middle years, with a fatherly and happy-
looking face. He was Chief Inspector Stone, considered
to be one of the shrewdest men in the Criminal Investiga-
tion Department.
He nodded to Inspector Flower and made a half smile
in the direction of Larose, but gave no explanation to
account for his sudden arrival.
“I’m sorry I’m late,” he said to the inspector, “but
my taxi had a blow-out.” He pulled a chair up close and
asked, “Now, how far have you got?”
Larose breathed a sign of intense relief. He realised
quite well that the inspector had been intending to order


his arrest, and with all his bold and confident demeanour
he, Larose, had felt sick at heart at the very thought of
being detained upon a charge of murder.
But if Larose was happy, the inspector was certainly
not, and he muttered an imprecation under his breath.
It was a damnable piece of misfortune the coming of this
chief inspector, for it meant the taking of the whole case
out of his hands. Now he would lose all the credit of being
the one to have arrested the well-known Gilbert Larose
upon a charge of murder, and he had lost it only by a
few seconds, too. But he dissembled his disgust under a
stolid policeman-like expression.
“I had practically finished,” he said, regarding Larose
very sternly, “and was just about to ”
But Stone interrupted sharply. “I’ll have the notes
read over, please,” he said. He turned to Larose, “And
you had better go outside until we want you again. *
“But he’s not to leave the house,” said the inspector
quickly. “He’s to ”
“Of course, he won’t leave,” said Stone testily. “He
knows better than to take himself off before everyone’s
allowed to go.”
Larose left the room, suppressing a delighted grin. The
mortification of the inspector was so apparent. Then the
latter at once proceeded to give a quick and businesslike
review of everything which had taken place. He gave it
well, too, and Stone soon had a good grasp of the whole
case. Then the notes of the plain-clothes man were read
through.
A short silence followed, with Stone looking very
thoughtful.
The inspector spoke emphatically. “Of course, Mr.
Stone, it is most regrettable to have to come to the con-
clusion,” he said, “but unhappily, everything points to
Gilbert Larose being the party who killed the man. There
was the provocation at the card-table, the quarrel was
renewed out on the balcony, as evidenced by the raised
voices heard by Mr. Gauntry, and the major was found
dead an hour afterwards. No one but Larose had left
the house during the evening, and no stranger had entered


the grounds.” He nodded. “Everything appears quite
clear and, pending further enquiries, we are fully justified
in arresting Larose at once.”
Stone frowned. “You haven’t spoken to the night-
watchman yourself?” he asked.
“No, Sir George had questioned him before we arrived,
and the man was most emphatic no one had entered the
drive.”
Stone looked sceptical. “But whether his statement is
worth anything,” he said, “depends entirely upon the
character of the man himself.” He shook his head.
“Generally speaking, I have no high opinion of the in-
telligence of night-watchmen. They wouldn’t be night-
watchmen if they had any brains. We must go out and
question him ourselves, but, first, we’ll have Mr. Larose
in again.”
Larose was brought in and Stone at once started to
question him. “Was Major Sampon a friend of yours?”
he asked.
“No, I had never met him until to-night,” replied
Larose.
“And he was very rude to you at the card-table?”
“Yes, very insulting.”
“And naturally you were very angry?”
“Yes, at the time.”
“You say at the time! Then you were not angry when
you went out to speak to him on the balcony?”
“No, or I shouldn’t have gone out.”
“Was it your own idea to go out and make it up with
him? ”
“No, Mr. Gauntry suggested it first and then Lady
Almaine, too, asked me to go.”
“And you went almost immediately after you had all
been listening to that ghost-story on the radio? That
would make it just after twenty minutes past eleven,
when the ghost story was scheduled to finish.”
“Yes, almost immediately after, within a couple of
minutes or so.”
“Did you go straight on to the verandah when you
went out?”


“Yes, through the lounge and then’ by the french
window of the dining-room which was open.”
“Who told you the major was then upon the verandah? ”
Larose hesitated. “Well, no one. But he had told the
ladies earlier in the evening that he was going there to
have a smoke and, as it was surmised from his hat and coat
being still in the hall that he had not gone home, it was
naturally supposed by us all that he would be still there.”
“At any rate the verandah would have been the most
likely place where you would have expected to find him,
would it not?” asked Stone.
“Yes, certainly. It was the only place outside where
there were any seats comfortable enough to sit on for the
long time he had been outside. You remember it rained
heavily yesterday afternoon, and so all the cushioned
chairs had been brought there.”
Stone considered for a few moments. Then he asked,
“And if, when you went out at twenty-two minutes past
eleven, the body had been where it was found later—you
would have seen it, would you not?”
“No, I never looked in the shadows under the balus-
trade,” replied Larose. “I just gave a quick glance over
the verandah and, seeing he was not either upon one of
the chairs or walking about, went straight into the garden
to look for him.”
“Then, when the body was subsequently found, did it
strike you you might have over-looked it?”
“Yes, it did.”
A moment’s silence followed and then Inspector Flower
said, with his face expressing surprise, “But we are told
that when Mr. Travers and Mr. Gauntry went on the
verandah later, they saw the body aft .once.”
“No, they didn’t,” snapped Larose. “They walked
much farther up the verandah, too, than I had gone before
they saw anything. Then, at first, they mistook the body
for the masons’ tool bags. We all knew the verandah
was being repaired because we had been out on it before
dinner.”
With Stone still silent, the inspector went on. “Now,
Mr. Larose,” he said sternly, “there is no getting away


from the fact that you were the only person known to
have left the house after that quarrel with Major Sampon.
No one else could have gone out without it being noticed,
and therefore ”
“Oh, but couldn’t they?” interrupted Larose. He spoke
scornfully. “Why, any of us could have gone out with-
out being noticed and have stayed out for a quarter of
an hour, too, when the ghost-story was on.”
“When what?” cried the inspector explosively.
“When the ghost-story was on,” repeated Larose.
“Hasn’t anybody told you that, at the suggestion of the
announcer, we listened to it in complete darkness. All
the lights were switched off, and the curtains drawn.”
He shrugged his shoulders. “So anyone could have left
the room and returned without being seen.”
“Gad,” exclaimed Stone with his eyes as wide as saucers,
“then that brings everybody in!”
“Yes,” nodded Larose, “if it were certain one of us
or Sir George or Lady Almaine committed the murder.”
Stone drew in a deep breath. “And the police-surgeon
said at 12.36 that the major had been killed between an
hour and an hour and a half previously.” He emphasized
the point with one big, fat forefinger. “Then that would
make his death occur some time during the time when the
lights were switched off!”
“Or just after they had been switched on again,”
scowled the inspector, “when Mr. Larose went out to look
for him.” He sprang to his feet and opened the study
door. “Sir George,” he called out, “please come here. We
want you,” and Stbne gave Larose a big wink.
Sir George appeared at once and the inspector, waving
him into the room, closed the door behind him.
“Why didn’t you tell me,” he asked with obvious
anger in his tones, “that the drawing-room was in dark-
ness for twenty minutes when you were listening to the
radio? ”
The baronet evidently did not like the way in which
he was being spoken to, and his face flushed.
“Why should I have told you?” he asked coldly. “I
mentioned the things which were important.”


“Only the things which were*important!” exclaimed the
inspector, raising his voice. “Why, man ”
But Stone interrupted sharply. “One moment, if you
please, Inspector.” He turned to Sir George. “You see,
sir, that putting the room in darkness may be very vital
to what happened for it was possible for any of you to have
left the room, committed the murder, and returned un-
noticed by everyone.”
Sir George’s face fell. “Good God,” he exclaimed, “I
never thought of that!” His voice shook. “But surely
you don’t think any of us did it? ”
“We don’t know what to think,” said Stone gravely.
“Until we heard of this turning out of the lights, it was
only of Mr. Larose we could have any suspicion, but now
every one of you comes into the picture.” He nodded.
“We don’t know who may not have been holding a secret
hatred of Major Sampon and taken that opportunity to
injure him.”
“My God,” exclaimed Sir George again, “what a ghastly
idea!”
“Well,” went on Stone briskly and inwardly greatly
relieved that his old friend Larose was now not the only
one in the limelight, “we shall have to question you all
again, and I put you on your honour not to tell any of
the others what the inspector has just called you in for.
Good! Then you go and wait outside. We’ll want you
in a couple of minutes.”
The moment the door was closed he turned to Larose.
“Now, sir, you didn’t leave the room during the ghost
story? And you listened to it all? Excellent! Then please
tell me quickly what the story was about and we shall
be able to make sure you are speaking the truth.”
Larose smiled at the wiliness of the old fox, but it was
just like Charlie Stone to get a grasp of the essentials so
quickly.
“It was the story of an old lady, nearly eighty, who
had lived all her life in the same house in a lonely part
of the country,” he said, “and she and her servants began
to be terrified by mysterious happenings which took place
in the dead of night. Things were knocked over and there


was a sound, like the hissing of a snake. A couple of months
or so before it had been rumoured that a deadly cobra
had escaped from a travelling menagerie, and it was now
thought it must have taken refuge somewhere in the house.
The four servants were threatening to leave, particularly
so the nurse-attendant, and the butler who had been with
he* twenty years. The old lady had a weak heart. The
police were called in and two officials from the Zoo came
down, but no traces of the snake were found. One night
the hissing was louder than ever and the old lady nearly
died. Then ”
“But what did the nurse-attendant do that night?”
asked Stone, with a sharp interruption.
“Shrieked and knocked over a water-bottle,” replied
Larose.
“Go on,” urged Stone, “and cut it short now.”
“Well, the old lady’s grandson came down. He was
very smart and got the family solicitor to show him the
old lady’s will. Then ”
“Name of solicitor?” snapped Stone.
“Don’t remember,” said Larose, “but he was old-
fashioned and kept taking snuff. Well, the grandson saw
in the will that the old lady had left the butler £SOO and
a cottage and he began to suspect him of wanting to kill
off his grandmother and marry the nurse who was in a
conspiracy with him. So, making out he had gone back
to London, he climbed up into his bedroom instead. Then
he caught the butler in the very act of ”
“That’ll do,” interrupted Stone. “We’ve had enough
of you. Now you send in Sir George and, after him, we’U
have a few words with everybody else, but”—he spoke
most emphatically—“l want you to keep all those we’ve
had these few words with separate from those we’ve not
spoken to. You understand, the two lots are not to meet
until we’re finished with them all.”
“And one of my men shall help you,” said the inspector
grimly, as he touched the bell upon the desk.
“Good!” exclaimed Stone, with his eyes twinkling.
“That will give an official sanction to the proceedings.
Now, we’ll have Sir George in again.”
c


But when Larose had left the room and before the
baronet had time to appear, the inspector asked Stone
frowningly, “But how do you know Mr. Larose wasn’t
making up the whole story?”
“Because it happens I heard it myself, in my own
house,” replied Stone smilingly. “My wife would sit up
for it and I make it a rule never to go to bed before she
does, because” —he lowered his voice to a whisper—“l’m
always afraid she may go through my pockets when I’m
asleep.”
The inspector frowned more than ever. He could not
understand such frivolity in a man of Stone’s reputation.
“Now, Sir George,” said Stone pleasantly, when the
baronet had come in, “I ask you as a matter of formality
if you were present in the room during the whole telling
of the ghost story?”
“Certainly, I was,” was the instant reply.
“Then just tell us the story briefly so that we can
be quite satisfied you were there.”
The baronet got rather red. “We-11, er, er, that’s
awkward,” he replied hesitatingly, “because I really didn’t
listen to it. I only just caught the beginning and the
end. I was worrying about the unpleasantness with Major
Sampon and how the evening had been spoilt. You see,
apart from the insult to Mr. Larose, I have been friendly
with Sampon for many years and my wife has known him
since she was a girl. As a matter of fact he first intro-
duced her to me. So you can understand how upset and
pre-occupied I was, and not at all in the mood to
listen to a rubbishy ghost story.” He nodded. “But I
was in the room all right and never stirred from my
chair.”
Stone looked sympathetic. “Well, we certainly won’t
suspect you, Sir George. Now go and send in Mr. Gauntry,
but please have no conversation with any of the others
until we have done with them. I expect Mr. Larose ha»
made that clear to you.”
Arnold Gauntry rattled off the story glibly. He cer-
tainly made some mistakes and could not answer a couple
of questions Stone put to him, giving, however, the same


explanation as Sir George had done, that his thoughts
had been wandering to Major Sampon.
Dr. Revire gave a clear enough epitome of the story,
but his remembrance of details was faulty and he could
not state what exactly the nurse-attendant had broken
when she had shrieked, although he struggled hard to
recall what it was. He said he had been feeling very sleepy
and several times had almost dozed off.
Julian Travers was a little better but not very much.
He thought all ghost stories were rubbish, and had pur-
posely turned his thoughts away. He was engaged in an
important case on the morrow, and had tried to concen-
trate on it. Of course, he had heard the shrieks, half a
dozen he should say, but they had only detracted him while
they lasted and then he had called his thoughts back to
his brief.
“Well, this line of enquiry doesn’t seem to be helping
us much,” commented Stone, when the barrister had left
the room. “Sir George himself might in fact be the guilty
party and none of the others could put- up a really cast-
iron alibi upon what they remember of the story.” He
made a gesture of resignation. “Still, as we’ve examined
the men we may as well talk to the women as well, if only
as a matter of form.”
Then to his amazement, the first lady they called in,
Mrs. Hutchings-Vane, supplied a most disconcerting piece
of information, when, upon being asked if she had listened
attentively to the ghost story, she replied hesitatingly,
“ We-11,1 wasn’t too interested, as I knew the story already.”
“You knew it already!” exclaimed Stone, elevating
his eyebrows in great surprise. “But surely it’s not been
on the air before to-night?”
“Not on the air, perhaps, but it appeared in Nash’s
Magazine last month, and I read it there. It’s by Eliah
Ranson, who specialises in that creepy sort of stuff, and
was called “The Snake Ghost.”
Stone turned to the inspector and shrugged his shoulders
despondently. “Thank you, Mrs. Hutchings-Vane,” he
said, “but after what you’ve just told us we won’t ques-
tion you any more and we shan’t need to have any of the


other ladies in, either!” and Mrs. Hutchings-Vane at once
left the room.
A few moments of hurried conversation between Stone
and the inspector, and the two proceeded into the lounge,
where Sir George and Lady Almaine and their guests
were waiting.
“Now one thing more, ladies and gentlemen,” announced
Stone, “and then we can let you all go. I want you to
go back into the drawing-room and sit where you were
sitting when you listened to that ghost-story in the dark.
We want to make an experiment.”
So back into the drawing-room they trooped and when
all were seated, Stone asked, “Now you’re all in your right
places? Good! And the door’s exactly as it was, half
open? Now you see Inspector Flower and me standing
in this comer and I’ve got my hand upon the switch.
Well, I’m going to turn off the lights for exactly three
minutes —I can see the time by the luminous hands of
my watch —and I want whoever hears me to say so as
I am crossing the room. Mind you, I don’t say I am
going to move from my place here at all, but I want to
find out if anyone can leave this room without the others
hearing him do so. Now, no false alarms, please, and when
anyone calls out they hear me I shan’t say whether they
are right or wrong until the lights all go up again.”
The room was plunged into darkness and a long tense
silence followed; minutes when the women bit hard upon
their handkerchiefs to prevent themselves calling out and
the men cursed Chief Inspector Stone for putting everyone
to this harrowing test. But no one called out that he had
heard any movement anywhere and the silence was not
broken.
“Time up!” called out Stone. “Switch on, please.
Inspector,” and the lights coming on again with dazzling
suddenness, it was seen that Stone was now standing by
the door. In the darkness he had moved across the room
without being heard.
“Do you see,” he began, “it was quite ”
But he suddenly stopped speaking and stared, as every-
one else was now staring, at a neatly folded garment


lying in the clear space in the very middle of the drawing-
room floor. Upon it was perched the peaked cap of an
inspector of police.
“They’re mine!” exclaimed Inspector Flower angrily.
“I left them in the car. Who brought them in?”
But everyone looked at one another with blank faces
and no one made any reply.
“You can all go, ladies and gentlemen,” announced
Stone hurriedly, before the question could be repeated,
“but please understand we may want to question you
all again in the course of the next day or so,” and he
and the inspector returned to Sir George’s study for
further consultation.


CHAPTER II
THE HOUNDS OF THE LAW
THE afternoon following upon that early morning
when he had been dragged from his comfortable
bed to go to Avon Court, Chief Inspector Charles
Stone was closeted with his colleague Chief Inspector Elias
Carter in the former’s private room in Scotland Yard.
Carter was cockney-bom and, tall and lanky and with
high cheek bones, he looked out upon the world with
shrewd grey eyes from under very bushy brows. Stone
had been detailing to him all the happenings of the previous
night at Sir George Almaine’s house in Hampstead and
he had listened intently, interjecting with a remark only
very occasionally and asking very few questions. He knew
Stone well enough to be quite sure that nothing of any
importance would have escaped the observation of the big
stout man with whom he had worked for so many years.
They had been humble policemen together, they had been
transferred to the plain clothes branch almost at the same
time and, step by step, they had mounted together to their
chief inspectorships. Now, as far as possible, the most
important cases were always entrusted to them and it
would be a mystery indeed if one or other of them did
not flash some bright light into its darkest corner.
“But I believe that night watchman,” went on Stone,
“for, contrary to the usual run of his calling, he is quite
an intelligent man, and not only that, but he had had
toothache all the evening, and so is not likely to have
dropped asleep. So we can take it for granted that no
stranger entered the grounds through the drive. Then the
walls surrounding the grounds are high and studded with
broken glass, and there is no sign of anyone having climbed
over.”
He nodded. “So we came to the inevitable conclusion
that someone inside the house committed the murder,
and that leaves us with five maid-servants, Sir George


and Lady Almaine, and eight guests. Now I dismiss the
maids at once. The two housemaids were in bed by half
past ten and have a perfect alibi, the cook is fifty-one,
stout and motherly, and the two parlourmaids were with
her in the kitchen until the three of them went upstairs
to their rooms, a short time before half past eleven.” He
looked enquiringly at his colleague. “Now, Elias,” he asked,
“have you got a grasp of everything up to the moment
when we finished with Avon Court?”
“Except who it was,” said Carter, “who brought the
inspector’s cap and cape into the drawing-room when you
had switched off the lights; you haven’t told me that
yet.”
Stone smiled. “And I can’t tell you for certain. When
the inspector roared out to know who had done it no one
owned up, and I didn’t press the question.” His smile
broadened. “But, of course, I expect it was our lively
friend, Gilbert. Flower had continued to be so stubborn
that everything pointed to him as being the guilty party
and that no one could have had any opportunity to com-
mit the murder except him that, naturally, Larose wanted
to prove him to be wrong,” his smile became a broad
grin, “and he did it very neatly. Flower was completely
knocked off his pedestal.”
He went on, “Well, when I left Avon Court early this
morning, although I was certain that one of those ten
people must be the guilty party, I had no suspicion about
any one of them in particular.” He spoke very solemnly.
“Now I am sorry to say I have, although I confess the
very idea shocks me and, also, it doesn’t fit in accurately
with all the facts.”
“But surely you don’t think it was Larose? ” asked Carter
sharply.
Stone shook his head vigorously. “No, no, not for a
moment. But you listen to me, Elias, and, although you
know none of the parties concerned, you see if you are
not a bit shocked, too. This morning I took possession
of everything which had come out of the dead man’s
pockets, including his bunch of keys, and went off to his
house in Maida Vale. He was a well-to-do bachelor, and


although his house is on the small side, everything suggests
ample means. He kept a working housekeeper and one
maid. I unlocked the big roll-top desk in his study and
at once saw, lying face open before me, a letter which was
dated yesterday. I’ll read it to you.”
He produced a sheet of notepaper from a portfolio and
proceeded to read very slowly:
“19 Queen Street,
“Maida Vale.
“July 22nd.
“My deae Tom,
“You will not receive this letter until after I am
dead, but in case anything should happen to me I am
making all arrangements for everything to be in order
when I am gone. I am well off, and my estate should
be worth about £40,000. Except for a few small legacies,
I have left everything to you in appreciation of our happy
friendship. I took great pleasure in the thought of what
comfort the money will bring to you.
“I have not much trust in lawyers, and so yesterday
sent this last Will of mine, which of course nullifies all
previous ones, to our mutual friend. Sir George Almaine,
to produce at the proper time.
“Hoping you will live for many years to enjoy what
I am bequeathing you,
“Affectionately yours,
“HENRY SAMPON.
“P.S. ”
“But there is no postscript,” went on Stone, “and it
is evident he was keeping the letter open to add one.
Another thing, for the moment I don’t know to whom
this letter was written, for there was no addressed envelope
with it.” He looked hard at his companion. “Now, before
I go on, do you quite understand the significance of this
letter?”
Carter nodded. “He was expecting he would not live
long, and”—he hesitated—“it almost looks as if he knew
his end was going to be a sudden one.”


“Exactly!” exclaimed Stone. “In other words, he was
ntending to make away with himself.” He produced
mother letter and held it up to his colleague. “Now
lore’s the one which was in a sealed envelope, addressed
o Sir George. Under the circumstances I had no com-
mnction in opening it. It is dated yesterday, too, and”
—he spoke very solemnly—“you just listen to what he
Frote.”
“My dear George,
“It is terrible for me to have to write this letter. I
shall be dead when it reaches you, for I cannot endure
life any more. But I dare not die with my un confessed
guilt upon me. I half think, however, that you will
guess what I am about to write. Joyce believes she burnt
that letter which she cannot find, but an instinct tells
me you found it and know all about our guilty affec-
tion. Joyce and I had been lovers since long before
she met you.
“No, George, in the beginning it was not dishonour-
ing you, because she was not bound to you then and
was free to do what she liked with herself. The wrong
only began after she became your wife. We have met
here many times unknown to you.
“The awful mistake was that I did not marry
her before I went to Africa for those six months.
Then, when I came back it was too late for, be-
lieving she no longer loved me and dazzled by your
title, she had married you. When I returned home,
although only a bride of three weeks, she realised at
once she still cared for me and—but I won’t put it
into words, George, remembering there is now that little
boy.
“It is a dreadful thing for me to have to write this
about Joyce, and I feel mean and contemptible in doing
it and then escaping the consequences. But in your
mercy and forgiveness never let Joyce know I have
told you. It was all my fault for I am so much older
than she is. If you keep silent you can still be happy
for, if Joyce could not give you the love which was


mine, she has at least as great a respbct for you as any
woman could ever have for any man.
“Your broken-hearted one-time friend,
“HENRY SAMPON.
“P.S.—I do not know when I shall post this letter,
for like a moth I still hover round the candle. Rest
assured, however, that when it reaches you I shall be
dead.”
Stone finished reading the letter and looked up at his
colleague. “A ghastly letter from a most despicable
coward! Why the devil didn’t he say nothing and just
shoot himself?” He sighed heavily. “But we’ve got a
motive now for the murder, sure enough, and it points
straight to Sir George. He went out on to the balcony
under cover of the darkness when they were all listening
to that ghost story and killed the man.” He thumped
upon the table. “But I should never have dreamed her
ladyship was that kind of woman. She’s one of the last
I should have picked out to be deceiving her husband.”
“She’s much younger than he is, you say?” queried
Carter.
“Yes, about eight years, and she’s a pretty, dainty
thing and, to look at, a perfect little lady. Gosh, but she
must be some actress, too, as last night she was pretending
to look at Sir George as if he were the only man in the
whole world to her! She certainly doesn’t suspect him of
the murder—and God! what’ll happen when we accuse
him of killing her lover?”
Carter raised one hand protestingly. “One moment,
Charlie, you’re going too fast. To make it quite clear Sir
George had a reason for wanting to kill the man, you’ve
first to prove he was aware of his wife’s unfaithfulness.”
“But that won’t be difficult,” frowned Stone. “Sir
George is a gentleman and not of the type to be able to
lie plausibly. He won’t break down but’ll probably admit
everything, so that we don’t have to bring in this letter
of Sampon’s as evidence of probability. He’ll try to save
his wife’s reputation at all costs and, perhaps, make out


he knew Sampon had designs upon his wife and killed him
to save her from him.”
“But the weak spot there,” said Carter, “is that if Sir
George had suspected him of being his wife’s lover, is it
likely he would have asked him to the house last night?”
“Oh, I thought of that, right enough,” nodded Stone.
“Still, as you know quite well, the unfaithfulness of their
women will stir men to the most cunning and patient
waiting for their revenge.”
“But another thing,” commented Carter, “the murder
was, of course, quite unpremeditated, for it was only by
chance the murderer found his victim sitting defenceless
and with his back towards him in that chair. Then, too,
it was chance again that the hammer happened to be so
handy to strike him with.”
“Certainly,” agreed Stone readily, “and I know you’ll
want to argue that if Sir George had not gone out on the
balcony expressly to injure the major—why should he
have gone out there at all?”
“Exactly,” smiled Carter, “and if he had no evil pur-
pose in his mind, why should he have left the drawing
room when it was all in darkness in the secretive, stealthy
manner you want to make out he did?”
“I don’t say he left in a stealthy manner,” retorted
Stone instantly. “He may have just left it quietly so as
not to disturb those listening to the ghost story. His only
idea then might have been to bring the major back as a
pleasant surprise for everyone, and restore the harmony
of the evening. Remember, he was the host and, if he had
masked his suspicions sufficiently to have invited the major
to the house, he would naturally be wanting to keep up
the pretence of being friendly with him.”
Carter shook his head. “No Charlie, it doesn’t sound
convincing and, until you can prove Sir George knew of
his wife’s deceit, you have no case at all against
him.”
Stone was still stubborn. “Well, you and I will go
and have a talk with him straightaway. We’ll soon find
out if he suspected her.” He rubbed his chin uneasily.
But it’s not too pleasant to ask a husband if he knows


his wife has been carrying on with another man” —he
pointed to the letter upon the desk—“particularly so after
that significant reference to the little boy.”
There was a knock upon the door, and a constable
entered. “Mr. Gilbert Larose would like to see you, sir,”
he said, addressing Stone.
The two chief inspectors looked hard at each other.
“All right,” said Stone to the constable, “ask him to wait
a few minutes. Tell him I shan’t be long.”
“Well, Elias, what about it?” asked Stone when the
constable had left the room. “Shall we ask Gilbert to
have a yam with us? I think we’re justified in telling
him this new development.”
“Y-e-s, I suppose we are,” admitted Carter slowly, and
his face broke into a dry smile, “although he’s also one of
the suspects.”
“Gad, he’s that right enough with Flower!” exclaimed
Stone. “Why, if I hadn’t arrived when I did, Gilbert
would have been under arrest in another two minutes.”
He shook his head. “Still, we can put him right out of our
calculations at once. We’ve never known him lose his
temper, have we?”
“Never,” replied Carter emphatically, “and he always
thinks carefully before he acts.”
Larose came in smilingly and shook hands with both
the men. In his old days at the Yard they had all three
worked many times together and had always been the
best of friends.
“Well, my boy,” smiled Stone, “have you had one of
those wonderful inspirations of yours and got the whole
thing cut and dried for us?”
“No, I haven’t,” said Larose with an unsmiling face,
“but I think I’ve picked up a trail.” He shook his head.
“You know neither you nor I, Charlie, nor that damned
inspector, either, had all our wits about us last night.
Every one of those guests ought to have been searched
at once, for I’m pretty confident that Major Sampon was
robbed as well as murdered.”
“O-oh,” exclaimed Stone, “and how do you make that
out?”


“Well, only £3l was found in his wallet,” said Larose,
“and I am sure there should have been much more than
that. As far as I can remember and reckoning roughly,
of that £3l he had won more than £2O of it from us that
evening. That makes out he started to play with only
£ll on him.”
“And quite enough for him to be prepared to lose at a
friendly game!” commented Stone.
“But not when directly we sat down,” snapped Larose,
“he wanted to play for high stakes. You see, there were
five of us and bridge was first suggested, with one of us
to cut out. Then the major said at once, ‘All right, and
we’ll play for shilling points!’ But Dr. Revire said he’d
prefer poker, if we didn’t mind, as he’d not played bridge
for a long while. So poker was agreed upon and Sir George
suggested a one pound limit but Sampon at once wanted
to raise it to a fiver.”
“A fiver!” exclaimed Stone. “Pretty hot, that, at a
private house!”
“Yes,” nodded Larose emphatically, “and do you think
he’d have suggested shilling points at bridge or a £5 limit
at poker if he’d come with only £ll on him and no cheque
book?”
But the two chief inspectors making no comment, Larose
went on. “Then another thing, and a most suspicious one.
Before we started playing Sampon asked if anyone could
change a £lO note for him and Travers, the barrister,
obliged. Then when Sampon produced his pocket-book to
get out the ten pound note, I took in, subconsciously,
that it didn’t seem very fat. It was one of those pretty
soft doeskin ones and ”
“Here it is,” broke in Stone, as he fished it out from
a drawer, “I’ve got everything here that was found in
his pockets.”
“Ah,” exclaimed Larose, with his eyes glinting, “and
there should be twelve notes in it now! That’s what there
was when it was taken out of his pocket by the inspector.”
“Correct,” nodded Stone as he handed it out to him,
“five fivers, five ones and two halves.”
“But I’ll swear when he took it out at the card table


to give Travers the tenner,” said Larose, “it wasn’t any-
thing like as fat as that. It couldn’t have had more than
four or five notes in it then. It was quite thin.” He shook
his head frowningly. “I’m sure there’s something funny
there.”
“You mean, of course,” commented Carter, “that, want-
ing to play heavily and having few notes upon him, some
of those few would have been high ones.”
“Yes, and high enough,” nodded Larose, “to make it
worth while for his murderer to take them.” He went
on quickly. “You see, I look at it like this. When his
body was being dragged into the shadow of that balus-
trade, perhaps this pocket-book fell out of his pocket and,
the murderer picking it up—being doeskin there was no
risk of any finger-marks—just glanced inside. Then seeing
some bank-notes of high denomination, say of fifty or a
hundred pounds each, he thought it would be quite safe
to take them. With £3l left intact, no one would dream
for a moment that the man had been robbed.”
“Very plausible,” smiled Carter with his dry humorous
smile, “but all conjecture, isn’t it?”
“By no means!” rejoined Larose sharply. “I’ve got
plenty to support it. Now you listen. Not two hours ago
I was lunching with Sir George and Lady Almaine and I
brought up this idea of the major having been robbed to
them. Then Sir George almost jumped out of his chair.
He said Major Sampon had won £2OO at Sandown Park
last Saturday. He had had £3 on Maid of Orleans at a
hundred to six and then, when the Maid had won, he
had put the whole £SO on the favourite, Atlantic, in the
next race at three to one, and picked up £2OO altogether
in the two bets. Now, what do you think of that? ”
Stone frowned. “Was Sir George at Sandown Park
with him?” he asked.
“No, but Sampon told Lady Almaine about it on Sun-
day.”
“Does Sir George know with whom he had the bets?”
“No, nothing more than that they were cash ones,”
replied Larose, “and the only bets he had had that after-
noon. Now another thing. Sir George knew where Sampon


banked and is acquainted with the manager there. So,
directly after lunch we both went round to the Regent
Street branch of the Consolidated Bank and, explaining
everything to the manager, he at once found out for us
that Sampon had paid in no money or cheques for longer
than three weeks.”
“And that means, of course,” began Stone, “that ”
“If you don’t find the notes at his house in Maida
Vale,” said Larose, “they have been stolen from
him.”
“I’ve just come from looking through his things,” said
Stone, “and there was no money either in his desk, the
safe, or the pockets of his other clothes.” He nodded.
“Still, I’ll go back and see if he’s hidden any notes any-
where else.”
A short- silence followed and then Carter said, “And
you had lunch to-day with Sir George and his wife! Then,
of course, you found them very upset?”
“Terribly so,” replied Larose, “for, quite apart from
the dreadful scandal which will fall upon them, they have
lost one of their greatest friends.”
Carter spoke casually. “Was he as great a friend of
her ladyship’s as of her husband?”
“Probably a greater one,” nodded Larose. “She had
known him longer than she could remember and was say-
ing to-day he’d been like an elder brother to her. When
she was a little girl in pig-tails he used to call for her and
take her to the Zoo. But for him, too, she might never
have known Sir George. He introduced him to her less
than two years ago.”
“Do you think Sir George was ever jealous of him?”
asked Carter in the same careless tone.
Larose shook his head. “No, he’s not that kind of
man and she”—he looked scornful —“is not that kind of
woman to make him jealous. Anyone can see with half
an eye that she almost worships him.”
Stone cleared his throat uneasily. “Well, Gilbert, we’re
going to take you into our complete confidence, and so you
just read this letter. I found it this morning in his desk.
There was no envelope and I don’t know who this Tom


is,” and he handed him the first of the letters he had shown
to Carter.
Larose read it carefully and frowned hard. ‘“ln case
anything may happen to me,’” he repeated. “What the
devil did he mean? Did he anticipate someone was going
to murder him? What for? What had he done?”
But instead of replying to his questions, Stone handed
him the second letter. “This was in a sealed envelope and
addressed to Sir George,” he said very solemnly. “I
opened it. Notice it is dated yesterday, so, as with ther
other letter, Sampon must have written it a few hours
before going up to Avon Court to dinner.”
Larose took the letter from his out-stretched hand and,
starting to read it, his face instantly became puckered
into a frown; then he paled, his lips parted and his expres-
sion was one of horrified and incredulous amazement.
He read it slowly through to the end, and for a long
moment there was a dead silence. Then he asked hoarsely,
“But are you sure he wrote it? Are you certain this is
his handwriting?”
“Quite,” replied Stone. “Here’s his driving licence with
his signature upon it, and here is his cheque book with
the used butts. There’s not the slightest doubt the hand-
writings are the same.”
“Good God!” exclaimed Larose, “then what a little
Jezebel that girl must be! Married to one of the best of
men, a happy wife and mother!” His voice rose. “But
no, I can’t believe it! I don’t believe it! She’s not that
kind of woman!” He spoke sharply. “Now, look here,
Charlie. You’ve seen and spoken to her, and so tell me
honestly, did she strike you as one who would be deceiving
her husband in the way this Sampon writes she was?”
Stone shook his head. “No, she didn’t, Gilbert, but I
learnt from Sampon’s housekeeper this morning that she’d
been visiting him a lot lately, sometimes coming for an
hour or so even as often as three and four times a week.”
He shrugged his shoulders. “But then you can never really
sum up a woman. Their minds are unfathomable to us.”
“Nonsense!” snapped Larose. “On broad lines, women
can be summed up just as easily as men. You can tell at


a glance whether they’re warm and impulsive or cold and
unemotional; whether they’re good or bad-tempered, and
whether they tell more untruths than are permissible to
their sex.” He scoffed. “I don’t say for a moment that
you can tell everything about them, but you can see
instantly if they’re thorough bad lots, and if ever there’s
been one who isn’t, it’s Lady Almaine. No, I don’t believe
she’s ever carried on with that brute. He is a brute to
have written a letter like that and it shows him up as a
man of despicable character.”
“It’s not a nice letter, certainly,” admitted Stone. “He
dragged the girl in and then was intending to get out of
everything himself by committing suicide. It’s a very
selfish letter.”
“Selfish! ” exclaimed Larose angrily. “It seems actually
spiteful to me. He makes out he’s broken-hearted and
yet he deliberately rubs in his treachery by that ghastly
hint, about the child.” He calmed down again and asked
sharply. “Then what do you intend to infer from it?”
“That Sir George had found out from the lost letter
referred to,” replied Stone, “that Sampon was carrying
on with his wife and ”
“Invited him to dinner,” broke in Larose sarcastically.
“A-ah, that might have been a ruse,” retorted Stone,
“as I have been arguing with Carter here. He might have
wanted to watch them when they were together.”
“Then going out on to the balcony,” went on Larose, “in
a sudden fit of fury he killed him. That’s your idea, isn’t it ? ”
“Exactly!”
“But don’t you see,” argued Larose, “if he’d been
enraged enough to be in the mood to want to kill him,
he would have been much more than suspecting him—
he’d have been certain of everything.” His voice rose
scoffingly. “Then if he were certain, can you imagine him
inviting the wretch to his house? What would have been
his object? What was there to gain by it?”
Stone made no answer and Larose went on, “No, it
all crystallises into this. If his wife had indeed been
unfaithful to him there is not the slightest indication that
Sir George suspected anything of it. Then, that being so,
D


the motive for his committing the murder is gone and he
drops out of the lime-light altogether.”
Stone spoke firmly. “We shall go up to Avon Court
and ask Sir George a question or two.”
Larose nodded, “Yes, about that letter Sampon wrote
to his friend, Tom. Find out what Sampon said when he
sent the Will to Sir George. He must have sent a covering
letter with it. Of course you won’t show Sir George that
other letter about his wife.”
“Not if we can help it,” said Stone rather uneasily.
“We don’t want to, but we may have to and ”
Larose looked horrified. “But you mustn’t show it him
on any account,” he said emphatically. “Whether Lady
Almaine has been unfaithful or not, with Sampon dead,
it’s only her secret now and there’s no necessity to bring
the matter up, point-blank, to her husband.”
Stone shook his head. “But our whole case against
him depends upon whether he knew of his wife’s relations
with the dead man.”
“Well, you can find that out at once without asking
him directly. Question him as to the reputation the major
had, and he won’t be subtle enough to hide his real feelings
about the man.” Larose spoke scornfully. “Goodness,
gracious, you’ve been all these years having dealings with
people who’ve fallen foul of the law, and if you can’t
form a pretty good idea now when you’re being lied to,
well, you haven’t learnt much from your experiences.”
“All right, my son,” smiled Stone, “we’ll go up to
Avon Court straightaway and manage everything as tact-
fully as we can.” A thought struck him. “And if you like
you can come with us. As a friend of his, you can lead
him on to talk about what we want to know without,
perhaps, exciting his suspicions.”
“Certainly, I’d like to come,” said Larose, “and, as I’ve
suggested, the excuse will be to show him this letter to
Tom and find out who Tom is and all about the Will.”
“Then we’ll go off immediately,” nodded Stone. “But,
first, is there anything else you want to tell me?”
“Yes, there is,” replied Larose instantly, “and please
listen patiently to me for a minute or two.” He paused


a few moments as if to collect his thoughts and went on,
“Now are you quite convinced the major was murdered
by someone who came from inside the house? Well, so
am I and, as Sir George tells me you are certain none of
the maids could have had any hand in it, the enquiry
can be narrowed down to Sir George, Lady Almaine and
his eight guests. Then, that being so, the only chance
any of them —excepting, of course, myself—had of com-
mitting the murder was during that twenty minutes of
darkness when the ghost story was on. We are agreed
there, are we not?”
Stone smiled. “Yes, both you and I made it quite
clear anyone could move about in that room, unnoticed.”
“Then of those ten people,” went on Larose, “leaving
out Sir George and me for the moment, what about the
women ? Can you imagine any of them striking that blow ? ”
Stone considered for a moment. “I wouldn’t say it
was impossible. That Livingstone girl looks muscular
and the widow’s not a weakling by any means.”
“By Jove, no!” agreed Larose. “She’s a noted golfer
and golfs five or six days out of the seven. As for the
pretty Alma Livingstone, she captained an English hockey
team to France last year. Yes, they both could have
struck that blow easily enough, but I don’t think for a
moment they did. If one of them had, she would cer-
tainly have shown some noticeable signs of emotion when
she was back in the room and the lights went up. As it
was, no one noticed anything about anyone. Then ”
“One moment,” interrupted Stone. “What about Lady
Almaine herself? Suppose she had got an idea that Sampon
was going to make a confession to her husband, it is
possible she might have struck that blow to prevent him
speaking. Certainly she’s dainty and most refined looking,
but she’s healthy and strong and no weakling, either.”
“Yes,” agreed Larose sarcastically, “and directly after
she had murdered her lover she was rolling a cigarette for
her husband and she did it so neatly and with such un-
shaking hands that we all stood round to watch her!”
Stone made no comment and Larose went on, “But to
return to the men, and we are left with only Arnold Gauntry,


Dr. Revire and the barrister, Julian Travers. Now the
only one of them I had met before was this Travers, but
Sir George has told me everything he knows about the
other two. Revire he has known about three years hut
Gauntry only for about one. He met him at the house
of a mutual friend and ”
“One moment,” interrupted Carter, “how long have
you yourself known Sir George?”
“About a year, but I have only been to his house twice
before last night. I know Travers pretty well. His people
live near my place in Norfolk and he comes of an irre-
proachable family. So I am inclined to dismiss him from
my calculations altogether.”
“Here, but you’re pretty quick in giving him a clear-
ance, aren’t you?” frowned Stone.
“I’m only going on general principles,” replied Larose,
“for as I think someone both murdered and robbed last
night, then if he wasn’t already a hardened criminal, he
is not unlikely to have come from a family, some of whose
members are abnormal in some ways and, certainly,
Travers does not fill the bill there.”
“Was Travers a friend of the dead man?” asked
Carter.
“Yes, and Dr. Revire was a friend of his, too. That
brings us to the doctor, and we must be careful there. As
we all know, we must always be careful when considering
a medical man, for no calling brings out the inherent good
and bad qualities more than theirs.”
“That’s true, Gilbert,” nodded Stone. “There are more
outstanding saints and sinners among doctors than among
any other class of men, but thank Heaven the saints are
in the greater number.”
“Well, Revire’s father was a Russian nobleman who
married an English girl,” went on Larose. “Revire was
bom in London and educated at Charterhouse. He then
went on to Batholomew’s Hospital and, after a distin-
guished career, started to practise as a nerve specialist.
He has private means, is of good reputation and, on the
surface, there is nothing against him. Now we come to
Arnold Gauntry.”


Stone laughed. “Keeping your best card until the last,
aren’t you, Gilbert? ”
“Unhappily, it’s not much of a best card,” said Larose
frowningly, “but still there are one or two things about
this man which stand out in sharper relief than those
about any of the others. His antecedents are unknown
and Sir George says he never mentions his family or con-
nections or says anything about his life prior to his setting
up as a rubber broker in the city. Now this seems peculiar
to me as he’s, naturally, a chatty, conversational sort of
fellow. At dinner last night he was most entertaining
with some happenings about a holiday he’d recently spent
in Scotland. I’m of opinion, too, he’s lived abroad at
some time or other of his life and, if so, he has some special
reason for never referring to it.”
“What makes you think he’s lived abroad? ” asked Carter.
“Well, I was asking Sir George every question I could
think of about him,” replied Larose, “and he happened
to mention he was subject to bad attacks of influenza, all
the year round, and nothing put him right but big doses
of quinine.” He nodded, “Now big doses of quinine
suggest malaria rather than influenza to me.”
“Certainly,” nodded back Stone, “and if his business
is in rubber, then we can reasonably infer from these
bouts of malaria that he learnt it in—say Malaya or
Ceylon. He has a slightly yellow look, too, as if he’d lived
in the tropics.”
“But he’s never mentioned to Sir George that he’s
been out of Europe,” frowned Larose, “and that’s what
seems curious to me. He must have some reason for his
reticence.”
“Well, we’ll find out all we can about him,” said Stone.
“He’s given us his address at 17 Swallow Street, Loth-
bury.”
“But that’s only his place of business,” said Larose.
“He’s got a flat in 22 Fitzroy Square. Still, don’t you go
enquiring there; I’ll see to that end. If there are too
many of us on his trail he may get to hear of it. Now
another thing about this man—and I’m thinking about it
quite a lot.”


Here he paused for so long that Stone at length said a
little testily, “Well, get on with it. What’s worrying
you?”
“It’s this,” said Larose. He looked from one to the
other of the inspectors, and the words came out with a
jerk. “I wonder if I fell into a trap last night. Yes, a
trap deliberately set for me and me alone. Look here.
Sampon had insulted me and everybody in that house knew
it. Sampon was murdered and I was induced to go out
to look for him. So when he was found dead it was naturally
everyone’s first thought that I had killed him.” He raised
his hand to emphasize his point. “Now had this Arnold
Gauntry murdered Sampon and wanted to fasten suspicion
on me?”
Stone smiled. “But as he had not met the man until
last night, what possible motive could he have had for
killing him?”
Larose nodded. “That’s the snag. Things don’t fit
in there.” He frowned. “Still, looking back, I am sure
Gauntry’s manner towards me was peculiar last night. I
didn’t realise it so much at the time, but I can see now
that for some reason he was particularly interested in me.
When we were first introduced, apparently he didn’t get
my name correctly, for, speaking to me a few minutes
later, he addressed me as ‘Mr. Rose.’ I corrected him.
‘Larose,’ I said, ‘Gilbert Larose,’ and he immediately
puckered up his face into a frown. I imagined then, with
some amusement, that he was remembering me as having
been once here at the Yard and was wondering how a
policeman, as Sampon called me afterwards, came to be
a friend of Sir George.”
“And what are you imagining now?” smiled Stone.
Larose hesitated. “Well, I don’t forget that if it hadn’t
been for this Gauntry’s damned interference there wouldn’t
have been any suspicion about me at all. When you come
to think of it, too, it was a fearful piece of cheek his taking
upon himself to suggest that I should go out and ask the
sulking major to come in. What had he got to do with
it? It was no business of his.”
Neither of the two chief inspectors made any answer


and Stone looked at his watch. “Well, we’d better be
going now to have that talk with Sir George.”
Arriving at Avon Court, they were ushered into Sir
George’s study, where the baronet was busy writing. Carter
was introduced to him, and then Stone said briskly, “Now,
we want to ask you a few questions, and the first is, do you
know the purport of the last Will Major Sampon made?”
Sir George nodded. “Yes, as a matter of fact I’ve
just come from his lawyer. He’s left everything to my
little son.”
Stone could not contain his surprise. “O-oh,” he ex-
claimed, “and when was the Will made?”
“Just after the baby was bom. A little less than two
months ago.”
“O-oh,” exclaimed Stone again, “and did you know
he’d made that Will?”
“Not exactly, but he’d mentioned more than once that
he was intending to make my son his heir.”
“Did your wife know that?”
“Oh, yes, it was her he told.”
Stone thought for a moment. “Well, do you know a
friend of his,” he asked, “whose Christian name is Tom.”
“Yes, Tom Kennedy. He’s on the Stock Exchange.
He lives at Earl’s Court.”
“Was he a great friend of Major Sampon?”
Sir George hesitated. “Well, I wouldn’t say exactly
that they were great friends. They were very good friends
and often went fishing together. Kennedy is a nice fellow.
I know him well.”
Stone drew in a deep breath and, producing the “My
dear Tom” letter, handed it to Sir George. “Well, just
read that,” he said. “We found it this morning, lying
open in Major Sampon’s desk.”
Sir George started to read it, but almost immediately
he frowned. “‘ln case anything should happen to me,’”
he read out. “What does he mean?” He read on and
then he frowned harder. “But I’ve had no Will from
him!” he exclaimed. He looked at the date. “And this
was written on Wednesday. Then if he sent it to me
the day before he wrote this, I ought to have had it on


the Wednesday.” He shook his head emphatically. “No,
I’ve had no Will or even a letter from him lately. He
always phoned up when he wanted to speak to my
wife.”
“But are you quite sure it’s not come,” asked Stone
sharply, “and not been given to you?”
“Most unlikely,” replied Sir George, and then, appar-
ently realising for the first time the significance of what
everything meant, he reddened slightly.
“Who takes in the letters?” asked Stone.
“The parlourmaid, nearly always,” replied Sir George
emphatically.
“What time do they come?”
“Just before seven, about twelve, and again about half
past four.”
“But perhaps it came by hand,” suggested Stone.
“Why should it?” asked Sir George, now obviously
beginning to put himself upon the defensive. “The post
only takes a few hours.”
“Well, you don’t mind our questioning the parlourmaid,
do you?” asked Stone.
“Certainly not,” replied Sir George, and he pressed a
bell upon his desk. “You’ll find her intelligent and she
has a good memory. When anything in the house is mis-
laid she generally knows where it is.”
And certainly the parlourmaid did seem intelligent,
answering Stone’s questions quickly and with no hesita-
tion. She said it was she who always took the letters
out of the box on the front door. Yes, she remembered
what letters came yesterday; there were five in the morn-
ing, one at mid-day, and one in the evening. There was
one long one with a half-penny stamp on it but it was
only a circular, with Dunlop Tyres printed on the envelope.
The day before that she was quite certain there had been
none in long envelopes. No, no letter addressed in Major
Sampon’s handwriting had come for a long time. She was
certain of that.
Stone eyed her intently. “How do you come to know
his handwriting?” he asked.
“Because when he was away in South Africa,” she replied,


“he wrote several times to her ladyship, and his hand-
writing is easy to remember. It is so very big.” She
smiled. “I have been in service here for nearly four years
and naturally have got to know the handwritings of most
of the people who write.”
A short silence followed when she had left the room,
and then Stone asked thoughtfully, “Was the major a
greater friend of Lady Almaine than of you?”
Sir George hesitated. “Well, I suppose he was,” he
said slowly. ‘‘ I had known him since we were boys at Harrow
together, but lost touch with him afterwards until about
three years ago. My wife, however, had known him all
her life. Besides, he was at all times very reserved with
men and told me much less about himself than he did her.”
He nodded. “Yes, I suppose he was a closer friend to her
than to me, although we always got on very well together.”
“Did she see him often?” went on Stone.
“No, only occasionally; perhaps once in every two or
three weeks. Sometimes Sampon’s time was very occupied,
his work is at the War Office, and then he would be away
a lot. No, we neither of us saw him very often.”
A hard, tense silence followed. Sir George’s statement
was most damning to his wife, and Stone sighed heavily.
There was no help for it, and he, Stone, must now produce
the dreadful letter Major Sampon had written. His hand
moved to his breast pocket while, at the same time, he
looked furtively at Larose. But Larose, very much on
the alert, had been watching him intently and he now
spoke up quickly.
“But one moment,” he said. “May I suggest some-
thing. As Lady Almaine knew the major so well, couldn’t
we have a word with her now. Perhaps she may even
be able to explain to us what this letter to Mr. Tom
Kennedy means.” He pointed through the long French
window. “I see she’s out on the lawn there with the
baby. May I call her in?” and he rose to his feet and
walked over to the window.
“Certainly,” said Sir George. “But I don’t think she’ll
know anything about the letter to Mr. Kennedy or she’d
have told me.”


The window was opened and Sir George called out,
“Joyce, dear, will you come here for a minute? Inspector
Stone wants to speak to you.”
Lady Almaine nodded and came through the window.
For the moment she seemed to look rather frightened at
seeing so many there, but quickly recovered herself and
gave Larose and Stone a friendly smile. She was intro-
duced to Inspector Carter and then Stone said genially,
“So this is the son and heir, is it! What a splendid little
fellow,” and it might almost have been said that a look
of relief came over his face as he added, “And isn’t he like
his father!”
Lady Almaine laughed lightly. “He’s going to be much
more handsome, I think,” she said, but the proud look
she flashed at her husband made them all doubt that she
was giving expression to her real opinion.
Certainly the baby was very like Sir George, with the
same cast of features and the same shape of head. His
beautiful grey eyes, however, came from his mother.
For the second time Stone sighed heavily as he looked
from the child to the mother. Most susceptible always to
the charms of the gentler sex, he was well aware of
his weakness and was now fighting hard lest his
conviction of Lady Almaine’s guilt should be swamped
by her winsome attractiveness.
Larose repressed a smile. In spite of the sickening sus-
picion in his heart that she might be a guilty woman,
he yet wanted to save Sir George the agony of learning
it and, seeing the struggle which was now going on in
Stone’s mind, he thought there were good hopes of averting
the catastrophe. He spoke up quickly, so that Stone
should not get in first.
“It’s like this, Lady Almaine,” he said. “Mr. Stone
has come across a letter in Major Sampon’s desk and we
wonder if you can explain it. It was one he wrote yester-
day to Mr. Tom Kennedy and was lying open, evidently
awaiting the postscript he was intending to add.”
Stone did not seem to mind that Larose had taken the
initiative from him, and at once held out the letter to Lady
Almaine, who had passed over the baby to her husband.


Lady Almaine took the letter from him but, as she pro-
ceeded to read down it, her expression became a very
puzzled one. Watching her intently, Carter thought she
was prettier than ever Mrs. Carter had been, although
at one time in his opinion his Nancy had been the hand-
somest girl in Tooting. With his eyes upon her, too, Stone
could not help sighing regretfully that his own days of
romance were over.
Lady Almaine read through the letter and then looked
up at her husband. “But you’ve had no Will, George!”
she exclaimed.
“No, dear,” he replied. “That’s the puzzle!”
“And this sounds, too, as if he thought he was soon
going to die,” she went on, frowningly, “although on
Sunday he certainly had no idea of it, as he was talking
about going to Switzerland at Christmas.” She turned to
Stone. “I was at his house with him for more than an
hour that afternoon and he was quite bright and chatty.”
Stone cleared his throat. “You knew him well, did
you, Lady Almaine ? ” he asked.
“Very well. I’ve known him all my life.”
Stone hesitated. “And would you say he was a truth-
ful man?”
She seemed surprised at the question. “Of course, he
was. He was a gentleman. He would never have purposely
deceived anyone.”
“Then how do you account,” asked Stone sharply, “for
his writing he had sent the Will to your husband the
previous day and yet Sir George has not received it?”
“Why, it’s just a mistake,” she replied. “He was
intending to send it and forgot to do so.” Her face clouded.
“But I don’t understand his making this new Will, as
he’s told me several times he had made our small son
his heir. Not that we wanted the money for him, as we’ve
plenty to give him ourselves,” she added quickly, “but it
makes it look as if he were offended with us in some way.”
“Then you have no idea what made him change his
mind?” asked Stone.
“Not the slightest. He was as kind and friendly as he
could be when I saw him on Sunday.”


“Was he a man of moods?” asked Stone.
“Not a bit,” replied Lady Almaine. “He was always
the same, quiet and calm. I’ve never seen him upset until
last night. In all these years I’ve never seen him in a
temper before.” Then, as if wanting to make excuses
for him, she went on, “Still, he hasn’t seemed to me in
the best of health lately.”
“Oh, in what way?” asked Larose instantly.
“Well, he said that of late he’d been getting tired
very easily and had not felt inclined to do anything.”
“Had he been to see a doctor?” asked Larose.
“I don’t know,” replied Lady Almaine. She shook her
head. “He wouldn’t have told me if he had. Although
he and I were such good friends, he was most reticent in
some ways and there were some things in his life about
which he never talked. For instance, he’s never told any-
one, not even me, what his work in connection with the
War Office was. But it must have been very important,
for it sometimes took him away from home for many
days on end together. When we saw him again, however,
he never used to mention where he’d been.”
A short silence followed and then Stone said, “So we’re
to understand he was a secret, silent man who made very
few friends.” He eyed Lady Almaine very sharply. “Well,
do you think there was a woman in his life?”
In spite of her general air of sadness, Lady Almaine
laughed. “I’m quite sure there wasn’t. He wasn’t that kind
of man. He was in no way a woman-hater, but there was
nothing passionate in his liking for us.” Her voice rippled.
“I’m sure he’s never been in love in his whole life.”
Stone frowned. “But I understand he was very friendly
with that widow who was here last night?” he asked.
Lady Almaine nodded. “Yes, but I’m sure she and I
were the only women friends he had. She is the widow
of a brother officer of his, and the attraction there was
wholly intellectual. They were both students of foreign
languages and knew French, German, Italian, Japanese,
besides other languages as well.”
At last Stone evidently thought he had got the oppor-
tunity he wanted and, turning to Sir George, he asked


bluntly, “And in the matter of the other sex do you, too,
consider Major Sampon was a moral man?”
Sir George smiled. “I haven’t the slightest doubt about
it. He never thought about women, he never talked about
them and, although a man of wide reading, he hated
books touching on matters of sex.” He shrugged his
shoulders. “In fact, he was rather an old-fashioned prude.”
They talked on for some time and then, to Larose’s
great relief, the conversation began to languish. He saw
that, at any rate for the time being, Stone had shot his
bolt and was not going to produce the second letter.
Then Lady Almaine would insist upon providing refresh-
ments and Stone found himself looking smilingly into
her eyes as she mixed him a whisky and soda. He sighed
heavily for the third time as he thought in what dainty
and attractive surroundings evil could be. He felt dis-
gusted with himself, however, for his weakness.
At length they all took their leave, and directly their
car was out of the drive Larose asked curiously, “Well,
what do you think of it?”
“I wish I hadn’t got to think of it at all,” grunted
Stone. “It’ll be the death of that man when he comes to
learn what his wife has been doing.”
“He’ll never learn it,” said Larose calmly. “Under
the circumstances it’s quite unnecessary for us to make
known our suspicions to him.”
“Suspicions!” ejaculated Stone contemptuously. He
seemed about to speak with some heat, but then im-
mediately calmed himself down. “No, Gilbert,” he went
on sadly, “with all her prettiness and nice maimers, we
simply can’t get away from that vile letter Sampon wrote.
She is a guilty woman, without the slightest doubt.”
“But I have a great doubt,” retorted Larose stoutly.
“An instinct tells me she is devoted to her husband and
has never been untrue to him.”
“But what reason then had the man for writing as he
did?” asked Stone. He looked very troubled. “I’d like
to think it was all a pack of lies, but my cooler judgment
won’t let me.” His face broke into a smile. “Gosh! but
what a perfect little actress she is! She almost won me


over several times.” He turned round to his colleague
on the back seat. “What do you think of her, Carter?
Can she be a wrong ’un, with that beautiful face of hers? ”
Carter took quite a long time to answer. “I haven’t
made up my mind yet,” he said slowly. “I’ll have to
consider it carefully, now I’m not under that sort of spell
she would always throw over all us poor weak men. She’s
an exceedingly pretty woman.” He spoke with more
animation. “But I’m quite of the opinion her husband
has never had any suspicions of her, whatever she’s been
doing. He’s a man of very transparent nature and if he
thought she was a guilty woman he couldn’t have hidden
it from us.”
“Then what about that Will Sampon said he sent her? ”
grunted Stone.
“He never received it,” replied Carter. “His surprise
was quite genuine there. But I’ll read those two letters
again when we get in. I’m thinking now they must he
taken together. They were written at the same time, when
the writer was in the same mood and therefore they both
reflect the same condition of mind. So we have a double
chance of making out what it was.”
“Yes, and in my opinion he was lying in both of them,”
commented Larose dryly. “He had never sent any Will
to Sir George.”
“Then why the blazes was he writing to that Kennedy
man?” snapped Stone, evidently not liking the confident
way in which Larose was speaking.
“Probably to cause further anxiety to his best friend,”
replied Larose contemptuously. He spoke angrily. “Don’t
you realise how deuced awkward it will make it for Sir
George when Kennedy gets that letter and reads that
Sampon has made him his heir and entrusted the Will
to Sir George’s keeping? Of course, it will look as if Sir
George is suppressing this second Will, so that his kid
may come into all the money under the first one! ”
“Well, the Will may turn up yet,” nodded Stone. “We
may find Sampon’s housekeeper knows something about
it.” He laughed. “You know, Gilbert, a pretty woman
could always get round you, but I can’t bring myself to


believe that Major Sampon suddenly started upon a
campaign of lying. It isn’t reasonable. Now is it?”
Larose dropped them at the Yard and Stone, going
up to his room, learned that a caller had been waiting
some time most impatiently to see him.
The caller was shown in and, directly he was alone
with Stone, he said sharply, “I’m Colonel Templar and
I want all details about the murder of Major Sampon.”
He handed a card to the Chief Inspector. “I come from
the Intelligence Department, where Major Sampon was
one of our most trusted officers.”
“Oh, he was in the Secret Service, was he?” asked
Stone, drawing a deep breath.
“Yes, and we have just learnt that at the time of his
death he was in the company of a man whom we believe
to be a dangerous spy in the pay of the Soviet, a Dr.
An sell Revire.”
And, even in that day of many surprises, Stone thought
this announcement the greatest surprise of them all.


CHAPTER III
THE HOUSE ON THE FENS
I AROSE had been greatly relieved to see that afternoon
that the newspapers had not got hold of much detail
in their accounts of the tragedy at Avon Court,
and that none of the names of the dead man’s fellow guests
were mentioned. But, with Sir George refusing to furnish
any information at all and with Chief Inspector Stone
keeping a tight rein upon what should be released by the
police at that juncture, he could understand it.
No one would realise better than Stone how intrigued
the public would have been to learn that suspicion of
having committed the murder was pointing to a former
officer of the Criminal Investigation Department of Scotland
Yard, and that one, who in his time had trailed many
murderers, was now most unpleasantly in the limelight
in connection with a dreadful crime.
It meant everything to Larose that opportunity should
be given to the police to track down the murderer before
it became known that he, Larose, had been involved in
a SO:called quarrel with the dead man, such a very short
time before the latter had been so foully done to death.
But, if Larose were congratulating himself that a little
breathing space was going to be given him, his spirits
fell to zero when Sir George rang him up at the hotel
where he was staying, just after dinner.
Five reporters, Sir George told him, had been up to
Avon Court that evening and, arriving one after another
and all within a few minutes, they had refused to go away
without having speech with him. They had stood outside
in the drive just by the front door and had insisted it
was imperative that, for his own sake, he should speak
to them.
So in great annoyance, he, Sir George, had gone out,
intending to deal most summarily with them. But he
had found them most polite and even apologetic, with


their spokesman informing him that they were in possession
of all the main facts and it was in every way in his own
interest that he should listen to them.
Then, to his disgust, he learnt that they knew the
names of all those who had been his guests the previous
evening, all about the unpleasantness at the card-table
and everything that had happened afterwards, even to
the fact that the well-known Gilbert Larose had narrowly
escaped being arrested on the spot.
Sir George said he had been flabbergasted, but he had
still declined to say anything, and in the end the reporters
had gone away.
But a most unfortunate thing had followed, for as the
reporters were just going out of the drive, they had met
one of the housemaids coming in, and, taking the chance,
had stopped her and asked her if she were one of the
servants. The girl had at once admitted she was and, a
stupid, timid creature, had straightaway allowed herself
to be pumped dry as to all which she knew had taken
place the previous evening.
Sir George said “damn!” several times as he was telling
Larose everything, but the latter could not think of any
swear words equal to the occasion, and ultimately hung
up the receiver with a very unpleasant feeling in his
stomach.
The next morning his worst misgivings were fulfilled,
for newspaper after newspaper provided its readers with
sensational headlines above many intimate details of the
dinner party and all that had taken place later in the
evening.
They one and all gave the names of the guests, making,
however, two mistakes there and calling Arnold Gauntry
just “Mr. Daunt” and the barrister Travers, “Mr. Plovers.”
Then they told of the game of poker, the Daily Cry here
adding that it understood the stakes were high. They
went on that Major Sampon had been winning consistently
and then it had suddenly been thought he had been cheating,
with angry words following between him and Mr. Gilbert
Larose, the former well-known international detective.
Then they told of the furious and protesting major taking
B


himself off into the grounds, how Mr. Larose had tried
unsuccessfully to find him, but how, later, his dead body
had been discovered upon the verandah, dragged into
the shadows of the balustrade. They described the injuries
the murdered man had received, finishing up with the
statement that Inspector Flower of the Highgate police
had almost completed his preliminary investigations when
Chief Inspector Stone had arrived upon the scene and
taken charge of everything.
Larose licked his dry lips. “Exactly,” he remarked
bitterly, “they don’t exactly put it into words but the
implication is there, right enough, that I of all those
people had reason to wish that man an injury.” He sighed
heavily. “Well, I must get busy now, to save myself
this time.”
He read carefully through every newspaper again and
then, hawing sat very thoughtful for a long time, suddenly
roused himself briskly into action.
He took a taxi and was driven to Fleet Street. Then
he alighted at the palatial building of the Daily Megaphone
and sent in his card to the editor. He was not kept waiting
long, and was soon ushered into the presence of the man
who was well known as one of the shining lights of London’s
journalistic circles.
The great man advanced at once and shook hands
cordially. “I’ve never had the pleasure of meeting you,
Mr. Larose,” he said. “But, of course, I’ve heard of you.
Now what can I do for you?”
Larose came straight to the point at once. “It’s about
that report you’ve got of the murder at Avon Court, in
this morning’s issue, I’ve come,” he said. He smiled.
“It doesn’t make things look too good for me, does it?”
The editor hesitated. “Oh, I wouldn’t say that, Mr.
Larose.” He smiled back. “Of course it makes things
more interesting to our readers our mentioning your having
been present in the house.”
“Well, under the circumstances,” went on Larose, “I
should be greatly obliged if you would disclose to me the
source of your information.” He pointed to a copy of
the Daily Megaphone upon the editorial desk. “Your


representative certainly didn’t get all those details there
from that servant girl he interviewed in the drive and,
for a special reason, I should like to know who gave them
to him.”
“What special reason?” frowned the editor.
“Because the report rather appears to me particularly to
single me out,” replied Larose.
“How? It mentions the names of all the others who
were there as well.”
“Certainly, but it gives two of them wrongly, whereas
mine is not only given correctly, but the Christian name is
added as well, the only Christian name of anyone mentioned.
Also, it refers to my one-time association with Scotland
Yard.”
“And you,mean it suggests animus against you?”
“Spite,” nodded Larose, “to make it as unpleasant for
me as possible, until the real criminal is found out.”
The editor considered for a few moments. “Well, of
course, as a general rule,” he said at length, “we never
disclose our source of information but, as in this case the
information was given to four other newspapers, it was
more or less publicly supplied and so I see no harm in
telling you.” He picked a paper from among others on
his desk and handed it over to Larose. “This arrived
by the five o’clock post yesterday afternoon and our
representative went up hot-foot to Avon Court. Sir George
Almaine refused to tell us anything, but Jane Ashley,
one of the maids there, corroborated a great deal of what
was in the letter, and so we took it that it was all true
and made use of it.”
Larose took the paper from him. It was just an ordinary
piece of typewriting paper and, with no place of origin
given, under the date of the previous day was typed:
“In connection with the murder of Major Sampon at
Avon Court last night, the following particulars may be
of interest to your readers. Those present at dinner
with Sir George and Lady Almaine were Mrs. Hutchings-
Vane, the two Miss Risings, Miss Livingstone, Major
Sampon, Dr. Revire, Mr. Plovers, Mr. Daunt, and Mr


Gilbert Larose, the well-known one-time detective. After
dinner the men played poker, with a one-pound limit.
Major Sampon won consistently every time he had the
deal. Then Mr. Gilbert Larose accused him of cheating
and the major was very insulting to Mr. Larose. The
major left the room and went out into the grounds.
Later, Mr. Larose went out to bring him back, but said
he could not find him. Then just as the guests were
leaving, about an hour afterwards, the dead body of
Major Sampon, with his head horribly battered in, was
found upon the verandah. It had been dragged into
the shadows cast by the balustrade. Inspector Flower
was the officer who first arrived at Avon Court but,
later in the night and just at the last moment, Chief
Inspector Stone appeared and took full charge of the
investigation. It is understood that Chief Inspector
Stone and Mr. Gilbert Larose had often worked together
when the latter was at Scotland Yard.”
Larose made a grimace as he read the final sentence.
“You see,” he nodded, “that last sentence was, of course,
to imply that Chief Inspector Stone was a personal friend
of mine.” He nodded. “But happily, no paper put
it in.”
The editor shook his head. “No, it didn’t touch the
matter of the murder and so apparently everyone left
it out.”
"And all four newspapers had had a letter like this?”
asked Larose.
"I think so. I presume they were the same. At any
rate all the men who went up to Avon Court last night
said among themselves that a typed communication had
been sent to their papers.”
“Well, may I take this?” said Larose, holding up the
paper.
The editor hesitated. “What do you want it for?” he
asked.
"To show to Inspector Stone,” replied Larose. He spoke
very solemnly. “You see, the fact that someone took the
trouble to type off all these copies and broadcast them


round means something, spite against someone”—he
nodded—“and I believe that someone is me.”
“All right, you can have it,” said the editor and, thanking
him, Larose at once took his leave.
Larose’s next journey was to Arnold Gauntry’s flat in
Fitzroy Square. He was not for one moment expecting
to find Gauntry at home at that hour of the day, but he
was chancing he might be able to learn something about
him from someone in the house.
He found number twenty-two was a large flat-fronted
house of five storeys and a basement, of that type so
esteemed in mid-Victorian days. It had, however, been
reconditioned recently and was now divided off into eight
self-contained flats. He was delighted to see a small board
affixed to the area railings, notifying that there was a
flat vacant and that enquiries should be made to the
caretaker inside.
The big front door was open and in the hall he came
upon the caretaker himself, polishing the floor. He asked
about the vacant flat, and was at once taken up to the
third floor to inspect it.
“The only drawback here, sir,” explained the caretaker,
“is that we have no lift. But then the rentals would not
be so moderate if we had.”
Larose chatted for a minute or two, all the time consider-
ing the caretaker and making up his mind if he were a
man he could trust. The man was middle-aged and pleasant-
looking, with a happy, humorous face. He carried himself
very erectly, and Larose noticed he had lost two fingers
off his left hand.
“Been in the army?” queried Larose. “Ah, I thought
so! How did you come to injure your hand?”
“Piece of shell, sir, August 1915, on the Somme.”
Then Larose asked if the flats were quiet and about
the other tenants, and who looked after their suites for
them.
“All except one have daily maids, sir,” replied the man.
“My wife looks after that one. The tenant there is a
painter—lady. Miss Charlotte Torrens, and is very well
known.”


Then Larose said, “You have a Mr. Arnold Gauntry
living here, haven’t you? Do you happen to know what
his occupation is?”
“No, sir,” replied the man. “I know nothing about
him at all.” His pleasant face seemed to harden. “He
never speaks to anyone”—he smiled—“not even to say
good morning if I happen to meet him in the hall or upon
the stairs. He is a very reserved gentleman.”
Larose had already decided he could trust the man and
thought now was the propitious moment. “Look here,”
he said, with his voice only just above a whisper. “I’m
going to trust you. I’ve not really come to take any flat
at all but only just to try to find out what I can about
this man.” He took a one-pound note from his pocket-
book and held it out. “Now what can you tell me about
him?”
But the caretaker made no movement to take the proffered
note. Instead, he shook his head. “I’m sorry, sir,” he
said firmly, “but I should lose my place if it was found
out I was talking about the tenants.” He smiled. “And
I can’t afford that. I’ve got a wife and children.”
“No one will ever know,” laughed Larose, “and it’ll
be quite safe.” But the caretaker still refusing to take
the note, he went on confidingly, “See here, you fought
for us in the Great War and so I’ll tell you something.”
He lowered his voice again and spoke very slowly. “It is
suspected this Mr. Gauntry’s occupation is to spy out
military and naval secrets, and that is why I’m after
him.”
“Then are you a detective?” asked the caretaker, now
most interested.
“I used to be. I was attached to Scotland Yard once.
My name is Gilbert Larose.”
The caretaker nodded vehemently. “Oh, I’ve heard
of you. You were in lots of murder cases”—his face
suddenly took on a rather frightened look—“and you’re
well mixed up in one now. I’ve just been reading about
that murder at Hampstead!”
Larose felt furious with himself for having given his
name. For the moment he had quite forgotten about the


report in the newspapers that morning. But he grasped
the situation quickly and went on very solemnly, “Yes,
and there’s something very mysterious about that murder
that we can’t make out.” He nodded significantly. “This
Mr. Gauntry was there, too. His name was given wrongly
in the papers as Daunt.”
The caretaker whistled. “Good God,” he exclaimed,
“then if he’s a spy, as you say, then he might easily turn
out to be the murderer.” He could hardly get his breath
now in his excitement, as he blurted out, “Major Sampon
worked for the British Secret Service!”
Larose’s face was the picture of astonishment. “How
do you come to know that?” he snapped.
The caretaker looked rather sheepish. “Well, sir, you
see, in 1917 I was servant to a Colonel Meadows who used
to question the German prisoners because he spoke German
so well. Then, after the war, I knew he worked for the
Intelligence Department, because I had got my sister a
situation with him in his place near Dorking, as cook,
and she told me. She was with him until he died last
year, and she said his special job was to train officers
for Secret Service work. I was allowed to go there every
summer for my holiday and I’ve often seen a Major Sampon
there. The name is a very unusual one and this morning,
when I saw he had been murdered, it struck me at once
he must be the same gentleman. He was tall and thin
with sandy hair.”
“Yes, that’s the same one,” nodded Larose. He spoke
very sternly. “But you mustn’t tell it to anybody else.”
“Oh, I won’t, sir. I promise you,” said the caretaker
earnestly. “I won’t mention it again.”
T “Well, about this Mr. Gauntry,” continued Larose, “you
must realise now you must keep back nothing.”
“But I know so little, sir. There’s really nothing I
can tell you.”
“What are his habits? Tell me them.”
“Nearly always the same, sir. His daily attendant lets
herself into his flat at seven. He has his breakfast about
eight, goes away by half-past, and then I don’t see anything
more of him until eight or nine at night. His lights generally


go out early and one day of the week is just the same as
another, except Sunday, when his servant gets his lunch
for him and doesn’t go out until the afternoon.”
“Does he have any visitors?”
“Very few, unless they come after I’ve gone home,
which is about ten o’clock every night. Oh, about once a
fortnight some gentlemen come in for cards. I don’t know
who they are, and they’re often different ones.”
“But how do you know they come to play cards?”
The caretaker smiled. “There are never more than
three of them, sir, so I’m thinking they come to play
bridge.”
Larose smiled. “You are very sharp and would make a
good detective. Now about letters? Does he get many? ”
“Hardly any —only tradesmen’s accounts not stuck
down. Oh, I took up a letter this morning that wasn’t
an account, and I remember he’s had others from the
same party before. The postmark on them is Foxwold.”
“Foxwold, that’s in the fen country in Norfolk!”
exclaimed Larose. “Well, then, how often does he get
letters from there?”
“Every three or four weeks or thereabouts.”
“Is the writing on the envelope a woman’s, do you
think?” asked Larose.
The caretaker laughed. “I shouldn’t think so. It’s
big and too bold to be a woman’s.”
A short silence followed, and then Larose asked, “Now,
do you happen to know if he’s got a typewriter in the
flat here?”
“I don’t know,” replied the man, “but, funnily enough,
he came in with one yesterday and I heard him tap-
tapping with it a few minutes later when I was passing
his door. He had arrived in a taxi and seemed in a bit
of a hurry from the way he ran up the stairs.”
“What time was that?” asked Larose, with his heart
beating quickly.
“About lunch-time, just before one.” The man laughed.
“I’ve just told you he is never at home during the day,
and yet yesterday he was. But it was the first time I
have ever known him to come home.”


“How long did he stay?” asked Larose.
“Not long, about three quarters of an hour I should
say. I was here in the hall when he passed through.”
“Had he got the typewriter with him, then?”
“Oh, yes! It was one of those small portable ones, and
not much of a lump to carry.”
Larose took his leave, very much elated with what he
had found out. Then it was pretty certain Gauntry had
sent those typed letters to the newspapers and, that being
so, what was his reason for doing it? He gritted his teeth.
He would find out!
He spent a few minutes at a call-office, talking to Sir
George over the telephone, and then drove straight to
Scotland Yard. Going up to Stone’s room, he asked to
see him of the constable who was on duty in the corridor
outside. He was known to the constable, who told him
the Chief Inspector was busy at that moment upon very
important business.
“But I’ll see that he knows at once that you are here,
sir,” added the constable, and Larose sat down to wait.
But he had not to wait long, for almost immediately
another constable reappeared and beckoned to Larose to
follow him. Then, greatly to his astonishment, Larose
found himself being ushered into the presence of Sir Garnet
Holden, the Chief Commissioner of Police. He had not
met the Chief before, as the latter had been appointed
some years after he had left the C.1.D., but he recognised
him at once from the photographs he had, from time to
time, seen in the Press. Stone was present in the room,
and at once introduced him.
Sir Garnet was a fine, soldierly-looking man, with a
very stern, set face. He eyed Larose intently and inclined
his head, rather coldly, Larose thought, without offering
to shake hands.
“lam pleased to meet you, Mr. Larose,” he said gravely,
“but regret it is under these circumstances.” He plunged
at once into the matter of the murder. “It is a very
serious business, this killing of Major Sampon. He was
an important man.”
“Yes, I have heard he was,” assented Larose readily.


“He was a member of the Secret Service and it is not
unlikely he was on duty when he met his death.”
Sir Garnet frowned. “How do you come to know he
was attached to the Secret Service?” he asked. “The
nature of his work was not public property.”
But Larose was not minded to disclose that it was by
chance only he had learnt about the dead man’s association
with the Secret Service. With his faculties always upon
the alert and most sensitive always to his environment,
he believed he had sensed an atmosphere of possible
hostility directly he had entered the room.
So now he said quite sharply, “I have not been working
on this case for twenty-four hours, sir, without finding
out something, and I am more than unusually interested
here, because I am the one particularly under suspicion.
That Major Sampon had been very rude to me at the card-
table and with all that followed afterwards, it has made
things look decidedly unpleasant for me.”
“Yes, it has,” said Sir Garnet bluntly and making no
attempt to gloss over what was evidently in his mind,
“and that mention in the newspapers this morning of
your one-time association with Scotland Yard makes it
unpleasant also for us.”
“But it might have been worse,” smiled Larose, hiding
nothing in his turn, “for if Mr. Stone had not arrived
when he did I should, certainly, have been put under
arrest, straightaway. Inspector Flower had quite made
up his mind I was the guilty party.”
Sir Garnet did not smile back. “And have you yourself
formed any opinion yet,” he asked coldly, “as to who
among you might be the criminal? ” There was just a
trace of sarcasm in his tones. “Mr. Stone here says the
fact that you must have been in close touch with the
unknown person who committed the murder will make
your services to us most valuable.”
“I hope so,” laughed Larose. His face sobered down.
“At any rate I have made certain discoveries and am
expecting they may lead us somewhere.” He spoke quickly
and confidently. “This murder is not an uncomplicated
crime and there is more in it than the actual killing of


Major Sampon. For some reason I was purposely drawn
into it, and when that reason is known the identity of
the murderer will be clearer.”
‘‘What on earth do you mean?” asked Sir Garnet, his
habitual impassive expression being now turned into one
of astonishment.
“Major Sampon was murdered, sir,” said Larose quietly,
“and then a deliberate attempt was made to fasten the
blame on to me. It looked an easy thing, too, for the
major had insulted me and it might quite naturally have
been supposed that I was spiteful towards him.”
“Explain, please, what you mean,” said Sir Garnet,
from whose face all surprise had now faded.
“One moment, sir,” said Larose. He looked round at
Stone. “Have the finger-prints of everyone there been
checked up yet, Mr. Stone?”
The inspector nodded. “Yes, but none of them are upon
the records.” He shook his head. “We got nothing there.”
Larose turned back to the Chief. “And, of course, sir,
you have heard everything that took place that night?
You know that at the suggestion of one of the other guests
I went outside to look for Major Sampon?”
Sir Garnet assented with a curt nod. He did not quite
like Larose’s manner. It seemed to lack deference and
almost looked as if he, Larose, might have been addressing
his remarks to anyone and not to the Chief Commissioner
of Police himself.
Larose went on calmly, “Well, exactly as following
upon the suggestion of Mr. Arnold Gauntry suspicion came
to be focused upon me, so exactly also, in my opinion,
had that same gentleman first made it possible that there
should be something to be suspicious about. In short,
he first committed the murder with the deliberate intention
of later fastening the guilt upon me.”
The Chief Commissioner’s face was sterner and colder
than ever. “Do you mean to tell me,” he asked in-
credulously, “that you really believe this Arnold Gauntry
committed a dreadful murder just in the hope that every-
one would think it was you?” He raised his voice ever
so little. “It is quite incredible, Mr. Larose.”


Larose smiled. “Incredible or not, sir, all that has
happened subsequently goes quite a long way to prove
it.” He raised his hand impressively. “Listeh. This
morning five newspapers published an account of the
happening of the night before last, and they were all, as
you have admitted, most unpleasant for me. They gave
my surname with the Christian name as well, so that there
should be no possibility of any mistake. Mark you—the only
person whose Christian name they mentioned. Then they
stated I had accused Major Sampon of cheating and ”
“No, no,” corrected Sir Garnet instantly, “they didn’t
specifically say that it was you who had accused him of
cheating. They mentioned no name there.”
“Well, it amounted to the same thing,” retorted Larose,
“when they went on to say that high words had followed
between him and me.” He shrugged his shoulders. “No
matter, the whole purport of the report which had been
supplied to them was obviously given to single me out,
particularly, from among all the others there. You must
see that.”
“But what report are you referring to?” asked Sir
Garnet sharply. “I understand the reporters from these
newspapers went up to the house and extracted their
information from one of the maids they happened to
meet outside in the drive.”
“No, sir,” said Larose, “those reporters went up to
Avon Court, following upon a typed anonymous com-
munication their papers had all received by the five o’clock
postal delivery yesterday afternoon. What the maid told
them only assured them that the information which had
been mailed their papers was in the main correct. She
could not, however, have given them all those details
they published, because she did not know them herself.
I have been on the phone to Sir George and learnt exactly
what she did tell them, following upon the questions they
asked her.”
“Go on,” said the Chief Commissioner, because Larose
had stopped speaking.
‘Well, sir,” said Larose very solemnly, “it was this
Arnold Gauntry who sent that report to those newspapers! ”


“How do you know that?” came the sharp query like
a shot from a gun, and Larose at once proceeded to relate
all he had learnt, only a few minutes previously, from the
caretaker of Gauntry’s flat.
“So you see, sir,” he insisted, “everything points to
him having sent those reports after he had typed them
at midday yesterday, with great secrecy. There was the
hurried visit to his flat at a most unusual time of day,
and there was the typing of them himself, when he has
clerks and typewriters of his own at his place of business
in the city.”
The Chief Commissioner looked frowningly at Stone,
“We must obtain those reports,” he said, “and ”
“I have one here,” interrupted Larose and with a
dramatic flourish he abstracted the letter from his pocket
and handed it to the Chief. “I got it from the editor of
the Daily Megaphone.” He went on quickly, “Now, there
are certain points about it which undoubtedly, in my
mind, are conclusive evidence that it is Gauntry’s work.
First, there are a number of mistakes where the words
have had to be typed over again, and that shows it was
done by someone who is obviously not accustomed to
habitual use of the typewriter.”
“But how do you know he is not accustomed to typing? ”
asked the Chief Commissioner.
“A man doesn’t usually keep a dog and bark, too,”
laughed Larose. “The head of a business firm does not
as a rule do any typing when there are typists to do it
for him.” He went on, “Then, take notice of the craftiness
of the man. He doesn’t want publicity for himself and so
puts his own name wrong, as Daunt, and so that the error
shall not stand out conspicuously as the only name given
incorrectly, he makes Travers become Plovers, both wrong
names not wholly dissimilar but differing sufficiently so
that no one will recognise in them Gauntry and Travers.”
Sir Garnet smiled for the first time. “Really, you are
very plausible, Mr. Larose. Go on.”
“Well,” smiled back Larose, “we come now to what
I consider clinches the whole matter of his mysterious
venom against me. That last sentence in the letter proves


most conclusively that I was uppermost in his mind the
whole time, and that he only wrote the letter to damage
me. Read with what went before, it distinctly implies
that Mr. Stone was shielding me and that but for him
I should deservedly have been arrested on suspicion.”
“But I understand you and this Arnold Gauntry had
never met each other before that night,” frowned the
Commissioner, “and so what possible reason could he
have had for wanting to injure you?”
“I don’t know yet,” replied Larose. He nodded. “That’s
what I’ve got to find out.”
The Commissioner was still frowning. “And you suggest
he went on to the balcony with the express purpose of
murdering Major Sampon?”
“No, certainly not!” exclaimed Larose. He spoke very
slowly. “Thinking it over carefully, I believe he just
went out so that he could go on smoking. He is an inveterate
chain-smoker and had never been without a cigarette in
his mouth the whole evening, since we got up from dinner.
You see, he couldn’t smoke with all the lights ou as no
one ever enjoys smoking in the dark. Then, going out
very quietly, he saw the top of the major’s head just
above the rail of the chair, and the big mason’s hammer
lying close beside him. He may have thought what a
nice mark the major’s head would make and then, perhaps,
it flashed through him that if he struck the blow —it
would naturally be put down to me because of the insult
I had received. So, upon the impulse of the moment,
he crashed Major Sampon’s head in, dragged the body
into the shadows, and inveigled me into going outside,
so that, later, suspicion would be fastened upon me.”
A short silence followed and the Commissioner smiled
again. “Your theory is certainly clever, Mr. Larose, if a
little far-fetched.” His manner thawed. “But now, how
do you propose to follow it up? Are you at a dead end?”
“No,” replied Larose confidently, “I shall find out what
he was before he set up as a rubber broker in the city five
years ago, and see where his past crossed mine. I am
convinced there is some hidden bond of enmity between
us.”


“But where are you going to start?” asked the
Commissioner. “How are you going to pick up any tracks
of his past life?”
“I learnt from that caretaker,” said Larose slowly,
“that from time to time he receives letters from someone
in Norfolk. They are postmarked from a lonely little
village in the Fens. I shall find out who this someone
is.”
“How?” queried the Commissioner.
Larose nodded. “The handwriting is big, and that
should be good enough in a little village. I shall go to
the post office and cook up a tale.” He looked round at
Stone and his face broke into a smile. “Often in our
work together, a smaller thing than that has brought
someone to the six-foot drop, hasn’t it, Mr. Stone?”
“Sure!” smiled back Stone. “You’d find out something
because a man happened to have been bom on a Tuesday
instead of a Wednesday! You’d pick up a trail from
that.”
With the Commissioner now in a much more pleasant
frame of mind, they all discussed matters for a few minutes
longer, and then Larose left the room to wait for Stone
in the latter’s own sanctum.
The inspector appeared very soon and laying his hand
affectionately upon Larose’s shoulder, said gravely, “I’m
devilish glad you turned up as you did, my son. Some of
Flower’s pals have been whispering and the whispering
had got to the Chief’s ear. He was a bit upset and sent
for me. We were actually talking about you when I got
the message you were here.”
Larose made a grimace. “I thought he was a bit distant
when I came in, but he was quite all right when I left.”
“Oh, yes, perfectly all right! You quite won him over
and he hasn’t a suspicion about you now. He thinks, too,
there’s a lot in your idea although it’s right opposite to
the one we’ve got.”
“But what’s your idea?” asked Larose. “Have you
found out anything?”
“We have not found out much,” granted Stone, “but
we know now Sampon was in the Secret Service and


trailing that Dr. Revire as a suspected spy. We’re hot
on the doctor’s track now.”
“Whew!” whistled Larose in amazement, “what a boil
over! ” His face fell. “Then if Revire killed him, it knocks
all my ideas on the head!”
“Not altogether,” commented Stone. “Revire, and
Gauntry may have been working together. I’m now
suspicious, too, of that widow woman. Her interest in
foreign languages may have been all a blind to keep herself
in close touch with the major. At any rate I’m going up
to Sir George to find out how she came to know Sampon
in the first instance.”
“ But you won’t bring up that letter again! ” said Larose,
looking rather troubled. “You promise me that?”
Stone nodded. “Not without giving you warning, at
any rate.” He frowned. “ Still, it’s not altogether impossible
that pretty Joyce Almaine is mixed up in it all, too. Her
friendship”—he stressed the word ironically “with
Sampon, may have been only to worm out secrets from
him. She may be in the spy ring too.”
“Nonsense!” snorted Larose contemptuously. “A girl
only twenty-two with her first baby isn’t the stuff to
make a spy out of! Goodness gracious, her father is a
country parson and the surroundings of her up-bringing
would not have been suitable either.”
“But at any rate,” nodded Stone darkly, “they were
suitable enough to incline her to pay small regard to her
marriage vows.”
“You’re a stubborn old ass,” laughed Larose, “and
in the end, I’m sure you’ll be very sorry you ever held
a bad opinion of her.”
“Well, we’ll see,” retorted Stone, determined to have
the last word. “Yes, we’ll see.”
Towards noon the following day, in a rakish-looking
sports car with the hood thrown back, Larose drove into
the little village of Foxwold, upon the border of the dreary
Norfolk fens. He was equipped with a large camera, two
fishing rods, a sporting gun, a rifle, blankets, a small tent
and a cooking stove. Altogether, things had every appear-
ance" of his being a holidaying tourist, independent of


hotels and towns. He drove up to the little general shop,
which was also the post office, and bought some cigarettes.
Then he asked of the woman who served him, “Can
you tell me, please, where a Mr. Curtis is staying?”
“Curtis, Curtis!” repeated the woman. She shook her
head. “I’m sorry, I’ve never heard of him.”
Larose smiled his most pleasant smile. “ But he’s staying
somewhere here,” he said, “because I’ve had two letters
from him lately with the Foxwold postmark on them,
and he wrote he should be staying here all this month.
Unfortunately he’s very absent-minded and omitted to
give the exact address. If he’s been in the village you
must have noticed him because he’s very tall, more
than six feet. He’s about forty and a great friend of
mine.”
The woman shook her head again. “But I’ve never
seen him,” she said, “and I don’t remember stamping
any letters in a handwriting I don’t know.” She nodded.
“Still, my daughter may have stamped them, but she’s
away in London now.”
“Well, you couldn’t mistake his handwriting,” smiled
Larose. “It’s very big and bold.”
“That’s how Professor Bannister writes,” said the
woman. “His writing takes up most of the envelope.”
“The great Professor Bannister!” exclaimed Larose, as
if very surprised.
“Yes, I’ve heard,” nodded the woman, “that his books
are read all over the world.”
“So they are,” nodded back Larose. He went on with
animation, “Why, I know him, too. Do you mean to
say he lives here?”
“About four miles away,” replied the woman, “at
Wrack House, right in the heart of the Fens.”
“Oh, then I must go and call upon him! How do you
get to his place?”
The woman looked curiously at Larose. “Well, it’s
a long way,” she said slowly, “and a very bad road.
Unless you’re a very great friend, too, it mayn’t be worth
your while to go, as he never sees anybody now, He
won’t even come out to speak to them, but has them all
F


sent away. Sometimes, too, some of the gates are pad-
locked, so that no cars can get near the house.”
“But he’ll see me,” smiled Larose, for some reason rather
elated at what the woman was telling him. “We are very
old friends. How do you get there?”
The woman led him to the shop door and pointed with
her hand. “You go towards Feltwell for about half a
mile until you come to a narrow, unmade road, on the
right. It is very rough and looks as if no one ever used
it. It’s very muddy in bad weather, but it’ll be all right
to-day. Turn into it and keep straight on over all the
dykes for a long, long way, more than two miles.”
“Of course, there are bridges over these dykes,” frowned
Larose.
“Yes, but they’re only made of heavy planks, and are
very narrow, so you’ll have to be careful in a car. Then
at- last you’ll come to the Big Drain. You cross over that
and then turn sharply to the left. Then keep by the side
of the Drain for nearly another mile, until you see a house
far away in the distance on the left. You can’t mistake
it, for it’s very lonely and there’s not another one within
three miles. Now one thing more. When you get near
the house, whatever you do, don’t get out of your car
until someone comes, for the Professor has got two big
Alsatian dogs and they’re said to be very fierce with
strangers. Oh, and another thing! The mists come up
over the Fens without any warning and it would be
dangerous if you were caught in one. You might have to
stop where you were all night.”
Larose made a grimace. “It doesn’t sound very in-
viting.” He nodded. “Still, I’ll go.”
The woman smiled. “He’s very eccentric,” she said,
“and from what I’ve heard he’s become much more so
lately. He’s never wanted to see people, and he’s more
like that than ever now.”
“Doesn’t he ever come into the village?” asked
Larose.
“Well, lately we’ve sometimes seen him passing through
in his car, with his niece driving, but they never pull
up.”


“But where does he get his provisions from?”
She looked resentful. “I don’t know. I believe they
all come from London and are picked up at some railway
station. But when this man Bent was here, they used to
deal with me quite a lot, but now he never spends a penny,
locally”—she sniffed—“except to send for a few postage
stamps by Miss Bannister.”
“Does he keep many servants? ” was Larose’s next ques-
tion.
“No, none at all now. He used to have this man Bent
and an elderly woman, Mary Trescowthick, but they both
went some months ago, and now this niece, quite a young
girl, is the only person living up there now.”
“But doesn’t he do any farming?” asked Larose.
“No, and he never has done. He’s let all his land go
to Wild and waste. He just writes his books and fishes
and shoots.”
Larose thanked her for her information and, driving
on in the direction she had indicated, directly he was out
of sight of the village, pulled up his car to the side of the
road and started to think hard.
He had never heard of this Professor Bannister before,
and had no idea what sort of books he wrote. In one
respect it didn’t seem he was going to be at all helpful,
and yet in another there were certainly distinct possi-
bilities he might be.
What association with crime was a learned man whose
books were read all over the world be likely to have ? And
yet, these padlocked gates, these fierce hounds to keep
strangers away, and this refusal of late to allow anyone
to come near him—rather suggested something of a mys-
terious and sinister nature.
But with what excuse could he,” Larose, approach him,
with the slightest chance of learning anything about
him?
Most painstaking and thorough in all things, Larose
quickly made up his mind. Before going to Wrack House
he would find out what were the books the Professor had
written. He would straightaway go to Cambridge and at
the Public Library there would be certain to learn all


about him. It meant a journey of about sixty miles there
and back, but what did that count as he had already
travelled so far? Yes, he would go to Cambridge and begin
his investigations with a good lunch at the Bull Hotel.
He found two rows of Jasper Bannister’s works upon
the shelves of the Library, and frowned rather helplessly
when, upon taking one down, he noted the highly scientific
nature of its contents. The title of the books was Man's
Real Place in Nature, and he saw that the Professor was
a Doctor of Medicine, a Doctor of Science and possessed
a long string of letters after his name, quite half of which
conveyed no meaning to Larose. But he smiled all the
same.
“Good,” he told himself, “then I’ll go as the repre-
sentative of a publishing firm and, if I can get to see him,
suggest that he should do business with us! When he
refiises, which, of course, he will do, I’ll say then that
I’m also on holiday and ask him if I can take some photo-
graphs of his house, or where I can get any shooting or
fishing or something like that. He won’t see through
me. A man of his great mind will be sure to have cob-
webs somewhere in his brain.” He screwed up his face.
“ But where the deuce does Gauntry come in ? ” He grinned.
“Perhaps Bannister is a vampire and Gauntry supplies
him with corpses so that he may suck their blood.”
To prepare himself further for an interview with the
Professor, he had a little chat with one of the attendants
at the Library, and learnt that the Professor was not
only a great anthropologist but also a well-known mathe-
matician as well. He was a great student of chess, too,
and occasionally contributed chess problems of profound
intricacy to the chess magazines.
“Yes, he fives not far from here, among the Norfolk
Fens, sir,” concluded the attendant, shaking his head,
“but nothing has come lately from his pen and there
are rumours that he is now inclined to be mental. He
refuses to receive any callers, and once when a young
reporter did succeed in catching him out on his land,
the newspaper man came back with the report that the
professor had seemed to him half drunk. He had actually


set two fierce dogs on him and the reporter had only-
escaped by jumping into his car. This occurred only a
few weeks ago.”
An hour later, passing by some workmen who were
repairing the main road there, Larose turned into the
narrow track to which the woman had directed him and,
the deeper he got among the Fens, the more dismal and
dreary the prospect seemed. Endless low wastes of land,
stretching as far as the eye could see, countless muddy
dykes criss-crossing in every direction and filled with
malodorous mud and, for a long while, not a habitation
to be seen anywhere. He became a little uneasy, too, as
he noticed it looked rather misty in the distance.
At last, what he knew must be Wrack House came into
sight and, as he approached nearer, he saw it was a long,
low building of two stories. But about a quarter of a
mile away from the house, a padlocked gate barred his
way. He grinned, however, when he found he could lift
the free end off its hinges.
“Now for it,” he told himself a little breathlessly, as
he drove quietly up to the front of the house. “If those
dogs are handy, they ought to be hearing me by now.”
But no dogs came rushing out and the house seemed
quite empty and deserted. Weeds grew on all the paths
ail round, the many windows were all closed, and there
were no signs of life anywhere. Still keeping in his car,
he turned and drove round to the back of the house.
There, to his delight, he came upon a young woman
feeding some little chickens. He had driven round very
quietly, and the wind blowing in the opposite direction,
she did not become aware of his approach until he was
within a few yards of her.
Then, instantly, she looked up, her face paled and she
appeared very frightened. “What are you doing here?”
she gasped. “Who are you?”
“I’ve come to see Professor Bannister,” he said with a
friendly smile. “Is he at home, can you tell me?”
But the girl made no answer and was staring at him
with widely-opened eyes. She was now leaning against
the wall and her expression was a very startled one.


“I come from a firm of publishers,” went on Larose,
gently, “and my name is Curtis.”
“No, it isn’t,” she burst out quickly. She seemed to
he struggling to get her breath. “You are Mr. Gilbert
Larose, who used to be that great detective.”
Larose was thunderstruck and felt himself getting
furiously red. He stared at the girl in bewilderment.
Then suddenly the girl’s whole expression altered, and,
from one of fear, it became one of intense relief. Her
colour rushed back and her eyes sparkled. She sprang
forward and held out both her hands to him.
“Oh, I’m so glad you’ve come!” she exclaimed and her
voice shook. “I couldn’t have prayed for anyone better.”
She had to choke back her tears. “Oh, Mr. Larose, I’m
in such trouble!”
Larose was stirred instantly to sympathy and a desire
to protect her. She could not be much over twenty, he
thought, and she was dark-eyed and pretty. It was
evident she was of a gentle disposition. He made no attempt
to deny his identity.
“Well, I’ll get you out of it,” he smiled reassuringly.
“But tell me how you came to know me.”
“I was staying at the same hotel as you were in Harro-
gate last year,” she replied, “and you helped to judge
the costumes at the Fancy Dress Ball. I was introduced
to Mrs. Larose, too. I was with my mother who, unhappily,
has since died. My name is Ethel Bannister.” She smiled.
“I never forget a face.”
“And how can I help you? ” he asked. He looked round
quickly and lowered his voice to a whisper. “But first,
where’s the Professor? ”
“He’s gone to look at some rabbit-traps and it’ll be
quite safe for about half an hour as they’re nearly a mile
away. But come inside, will you? We can talk better
there.”
And so in a big, shabby room, with furniture of one-
time grandeur, Ethel Bannister told her story —and a
strange enough story it was.
She had come from Edinburgh a little over three
months previously, her widowed mother having died very


suddenly. The annuity they had been living on ending
with her mother’s death, she had written to her distin-
guished uncle, the Professor, whom she had never seen,
asking him if he could put her in the way of earning a
living as secretary to one of his friends.
Then, rather to her surprise, he had offered her a post
himself with £SO a year salary to begin with. But she
was on no account to tell anyone where she was coming
to. So many people wrote to him for assistance, he said,
and if it were known he had helped anyone, then everyone
would expect him to do the same for them.
She had promised to tell no one, and, coming south with
the money he had sent her, he had met her late one night
at the railway station at Ely and brought her to Wrack
House.
Then had commenced a life which was very different
from what she had expected. It was a general servant
her uncle had wanted and not a secretary. She had to
prepare all the meals and if she didn’t keep the house
clean, no one would have done it, and it would have
continued to be, as she had found it when she had arrived,
too filthy to live in.
But it wasn’t what she found she had to do about the
house which so astonished her. It was her uncle himself
who had been the great surprise. As she had never seen
him before, and had only very hazy ideas of what he would
be like, she had expected to find him eccentric, but had
never dreamed that a man of his great scholarship would
sometimes be so rough and unpleasant in his ways.
He was not of sober habits and some days was drinking
all day long. Then he would not wash or dress himself
and would go about with only his pyjamas on. He was
never incapably drunk, but often would lie back in his
arm-chair and sing horribly coarse songs until he was
too hoarse to go on any longer.
Lately she had become really frightened of him for—
she blushed here—he had taken to watching her in a
horrible sort of way, and patting her on the cheek and
wanting to hold her hand. He had a dreadfully cruel
smile and was cruel in his nature, too.


A few days previously a calf had been bom and, as he
hadn’t wanted it kept alive, he had given it to his two
Alsatian dogs to tear to death.
Larose had been listening most intently all the time,
trying to pick up something which would link together
this most uncommon man and the rubber broker of Loth-
bury.
But the girl’s next words came to him as a staggering
shock and sent his pulse bounding up to a furious rate.
“And do you know, Mr. Larose,” she went on very
solemnly, “the idea has been gradually forming in my
mind”—her eyes took on a startled look and she spoke
very softly—“that he is not my uncle at all.”
“W-h-a-t, what do you mean?” gasped Larose.
The girl looked very grave. “I think my real uncle
has died,” she whispered, “and that he is taking his place.”
A long silence followed, and with a perfect welter of
possibilities avalanching themselves through Larose’s mind.
But he soon had mastered his excitement and could speak
in a quiet tone again.
“What makes you think so?” he asked.
“Well, from the very first he has never struck me as
being an educated man. He won’t even talk about history
or science; he doesn’t know the names of the most common
wild flowers, and the other day when he cut his thumb
at dinner with the carving knife, the same evening he was
worrying that he felt blood-poisoning coming on. Yet
even I know that any signs of poisoning wouldn’t come
on for a few days, and my uncle, as a doctor, would have
known that, too. Yes, I don’t believe this man here is
my uncle, the famous Professor Bannister.”
“What an extraordinary idea!” exclaimed Larose,
wanting time to take it all in.
“Of course,” went on the girl, “he’s like what I knew
Uncle Jasper was, in some ways. He’s got the same hand-
writing. Uncle always wrote to my mother and sent her
a cheque for £lO at Christmas, and he’s got the same
big black beard Uncle was said to have.” She nodded
vigorously here. “But about the colour of his beard I
have become suspicious. He had a black mark on his


cheek yesterday and when I asked him how he’d managed
to get ink there, he looked as if he were very guilty about
something and got up immediately and went into his
bedroom and washed it off. Yes, I think his beard is
only dyed black and his hair as well.”
“But if he’s not your uncle,” said Larose frowningly,
“surely someone in the neighbourhood would have found
it out by now?”
“No, they wouldn’t!” said the girl instantly, “because
he never lets anyone get near enough to him to see that
there’s a difference between them. Before I came up here,
I don’t think he ever went off his own land in daylight.
Now whenever he’s outdoors if it’s only twenty yards from.
the house, he wears a slouch hat well down over his eyes
so that in the distance everyone would take him for my
uncle, because of the black beard.”
“But doesn’t he ever go out in the car?”
“Yes, he goes out in it, but I drive, while he sits huddled
in a comer at the back. We never pull up in any town or
villages until we’re nearly twenty-five or thirty miles
away, and then I get out to do all the shopping. Another
thing about him ,which is very strange—he always wears
a big pink patch over one eye. He says he had that eye
injured years ago and it looks so horrible he doesn’t want
me to see it.”
“And what do you imagine there?” asked Larose, very
puzzled.
“I don’t know,” said the girl frowning hard, “but one
day I caught him without the patch when he was washing
under the pump, and he clapped his hand over his face
and swore angrily at me to go away. It came into my
mind then he was only using the patch to make his appear-
ance, for some extraordinary reason, look different to me.”
“But had you ever heard your uncle had injured his
eye?” asked Larose.
“Certainly not, and I’m sure Mother had never heard
of it, although she hadn’t seen him for some years.”
A short silence followed, and then Larose asked, “Does
he write much?”
The girl was emphatic. “I am sure he never writes a


word, that is, I mean, of any book. He’s got a lot of loose
pages of manuscript upon his desk and sometimes shuts
himself up in his room and pretends to be going on with
this new book. Then I’m forbidden to interrupt him on
any pretext.” She shook her head. “But all the time
I think he’s only doing chess problems. He hasn’t used
up a pennyworth of ink since I’ve been up here. I do
know that for certain.”
“Anything morel” asked Larose.
The girl thought for a moment and then nodded. “Yes,
he can etch most beautifully and I never heard my uncle
could do that.”
Another short silence followed and then Larose said,
“And so you never do any shopping locally?”
“No, always a long way away, either in Ely or Cam-
bridge or Newmarket. Then, he generally waits until its
beginning to get dark before we start out. He hates my
going out into Foxwold for the letters, too, and is always
warning me not to stop and talk to anyone. It’s a perfect
mania with him that nothing should be known what is
going on here”—she smiled sadly—“though, goodness
knows, nothing ever happens.”
“Well, does he write many letters?” asked Larose,
coming at last to what had brought him all that way to
the Fens.
“No, very few; to his bank in London, to a firm there,
too, when he orders a case of whisky to be sent to some
railway station to be picked up in the car, and, very
occasionally, what looks like a private letter.”
“Does he get many letters?”
“Not many. You see, it’s been known everywhere for
years and years that he was very eccentric and would
never reply to any letters his admirers sent him, and so
people gave up writing. Those this uncle of mine now
here,” she smiled half sadly and half amused, “does receive,
he just glances through and throws them into the grate
at once. Then he puts a match to them. He’s not a bit
interested unless they contain cheques.”
“But about the letters he writes himself,” asked Larose,
“have you posted any lately to anyone in London?”


“Yes, to a Mr. Gauntry at 22 Fitzroy Square, and I
think he had an answer back from him among the letters
I brought from Fox wold yesterday.”
Larose felt his heart bumping. “But how do you come
to know this Mr. Gauntry’s handwriting?”
“Well, a letter has always arrived in that handwriting
about two days after uncle has sent one to this Mr. Gauntry.
So I have presumed they were from him.”
“Did he bum that last letter he had in Mr. Gauntry’s
handwriting? ”
“I suppose he did. At any rate I’ve not seen it lying
about.”
“Well, do you know what this man here who is making
out he is your uncle has to write to that Mr. Gauntry
about?”
She shook her head. “I haven’t the remotest idea.”
She nodded. “But I know he sent him a cheque the other
day, because I happened to see him putting it in the
envelope.” She nodded again. “You see, he gets plenty
of money. A cheque came from his publishers last week
and it was for £750. I looked in his desk when he was
outside killing a fowl.”
“And you’re beginning to feel perfectly sure now that
he’s not your uncle?” asked Larose.
The girl hesitated. “Except for one other thing be-
sides the handwritings being just the same, and that is,
as my uncle was, he’s an enthusiastic chess-player. I
play chess, too, and every evening when he’s not been
drinking he sets up the chessmen and sometimes keeps
me up until terribly late, until past midnight even.”
A thought seemed suddenly to strike her and she asked
curiously. “But what have you come up here for, Mr.
Larose? ”
Larose smiled. “Evidently because Fate or Providence
or something sent me up to help you.” He became grave
again. “Now I can trust you, can’t I? Of course, I can!”
He spoke slowly, “Well, I’m back on my old detecting
business again and I want to find out something about
this gentleman who has been writing to that Mr. Gauntry.
Mr. Gauntry is under suspicion of having done something


which brings him into bad disfavour with the Law, and
I want to know who his friends are. You understand?”
‘‘Yes, but I don’t see how you’ll find out anything”
—she made a little face—“from this uncle of mine.” She
looked troubled. “When he comes home, he won’t let
you get a word in, and he may even put his two big dogs
on to you. He’s in a specially bad humour to-day because
he’s found there’s not a drop of anything more to drink
in the house. He made a miscalculation and thought that
there was another case of whisky in the cellar.”
“That’s bad,” frowned Larose. “Take away his drink
from a man who’s accustomed to plenty and it’s inclined
to make him as savage as a bear.”
“And worse still,” went on the girl, “he’s run out of
petrol, too, and doesn’t know what on earth he’s going
to do. He’s been talking of making me walk into the
village and bring back a gallon in a tin.”
Then suddenly an idea seized Larose, and he snapped
his fingers together triumphantly. “I’ve got it!” he ex-
claimed, “I’ll make out I’m a traveller for a wine and spirit
firm in London and have brought some samples with me.
I’ve got one, if not two, bottles of whisky in the back
of the car and a large bottle of champagne as well.”
The girl’s eyes sparkled. “And I’ll go a little way to
meet him and tell him,” she said. “That’ll stop him getting
furious before he comes into the house.”
“And another thing,” said Larose. He looked uneasily
out of the window. “It looks as if there’s one of those
ghastly mists coming up, and I might be able to make
that an excuse for stopping an hour or two.” He smiled.
“You see, I don’t know Professor Bannister any more
than you did when you first came here, and I can’t find
out everything in a few minutes.”
“And it won’t be a few minutes you’ll have to stop!”
exclaimed the girl, who now peered out through the window,
too. “This is a big mist coming over and in a quarter of
an hour you mayn’t be able to see half a dozen yards
in front of you.”
“Then I’ll stop until it clears,” said Larose, “and have
a good talk to him.” He pointed across the room to some


very large-sized chessmen upon an enormous chessboard.
“Why, I might even suggest having a game of chess with
him?”
“But do you play chess?” she asked eagerly.
“Certainly I do, and I’m pretty good at it, too.”
She clasped her hands together. “Oh, then if you can
give him something to drink, and get him into a good
humour and start a game of chess, why—he won’t want
you to go for a week. He’s mad on chess and is always
grumbling it is no pleasure playing with me. He has to
give me a rook and then always beats me. Yes, he has
a regular mania about chess. He spends hours and hours
working out problems.”
“Then I’ll settle him,” nodded Larose confidently.
“You see if I don’t.”
The girl was all smiles, until she remembered her first
trouble and then she asked anxiously, “But how are you
going to help me? I’ve got no money to get away.”
“I’ll do something,” nodded Larose. “We’ll first find
out if he’s an impostor, and, if he is, you can come straight
away with me. You can stop with my wife for a time.
We live in Carmel Abbey, which isn’t very far from
here.”
“How awfully kind of you,” said the girl. She blushed.
“No woman would ever be afraid of trusting herself with
you. There is something in your face which gives ”
but she suddenly stopped talking and pointed to the
window. “There he is!” she whispered. “I’ll go and
try to calm him down before he catches sight of your
car.”
Larose saw a man emerging in shadowy outline from
the now quickly-gathering mist. He was carrying some
rabbits, and on either side of him stalked a magnificent
looking hound, almost as big as a young calf.
The man disappeared out of sight and a short silence
followed. Then came a loud bellowing shout, “What the
hell is this? Where is the ” but the voice died away
and a long silence ensued. Then Larose heard heavy foot-
steps in the passage, the door was pushed wide open, and
he found himself being scowlingly regarded by a rough


looking man with a big black beard and a large patch
over one eye.
Larose started and the ingratiating, easy smile died on
his face, for the man before him had most unmistakably
the same general cast of features and the same shaped
head as Arnold Gauntry.


CHAPTER IV
THAT CURSED DOG, LAROSE
FOR a long moment they stood staring at each other
and then the bearded man burst out fiercely, “How
the devil did you get here?”
“I came in my car,” began Larose, “and ”
“I know that,” shouted the man, “I can see, can’t I,
and that’s your car outside. But how did you unlock the
padlock on the gate?”
“I didn’t unlock it,” said Larose meekly. “The staples
were quite loose in the woodwork, and I just lifted the
gate off the post. I am going to replace it as I go back.”
“But who are you?”
“ My name is Curtis, sir, and I travel for Macgregor’s Scotch
whisky. I also represent the Bollinger champagne. I am
really on a holiday, but I am looking out for business at the
same time. I had lost my way and, this fog coming on and
seeing your house in the distance, I thought I would call in.”
“But how do you come to be on my land at all?”
“I was looking for somewhere to fish. I have heard
there are a lot of eels in the Big Drain.”
The bearded man growled. “Didn’t you know whose
house this was?”
“Not until the young lady told me. I am quite a stranger
to'these parts.”
“ But of course you’ve heard of me, Professor Bannister! ”
Larose was very much upon the alert and sensed some-
thing of anxiety in the question. He pretended to be very
confused. “I’m—sorry—Professor,” he stammered, “but
I don’t remember having heard the name before.”
The Professor calmed down. “Then you’ve never read
any of my books?”
Larose shook his head. “No, I never have been a deep-
reading man. I only read novels and stories of the detective
type.” He smiled a sheepish smile. “I’m afraid I’m not
at all brainy.”


The Professor’s manner became quite agreeable. “And
you travel in whisky, do you? Well, have you got any
samples with you?”
Larose at once became business-like. “Yes, sir,” he
replied briskly, “and I shall have much pleasure in giving
you a bottle to try. I will also leave you a bottle of our
champagne.” He made a movement towards the door.
“I’ll go and get them now out of the car.”
“But I’d better come with you,” nodded the Professor
unpleasantly. “There are two dogs outside who might
tear you to pieces if I wasn’t there,” and he led the way
out of the room.
Passing outside, Larose was certainly glad of the Pro-
fessor’s company. Although only a few yards away, the
car was not visible in the thick mist which was now
blanketing the house, but the two huge dogs were very
much in evidence, and sniffing hard with muzzles low down
upon the ground. They had evidently smelt the presence
of a stranger, and started to growl menacingly the moment
they caught sight of Larose. They were terrifying looking
animals with big, blood-shot eyes.
“Not nice to meet if you were alone, eh?” laughed the
Professor. “They wouldn’t give you much quarter.” He
waved the dogs away with his arm. “Get off, Hitler, you
brute! Get away, Himmler!” He pointed to the latter
animal. “That dog killed a man just before I bought
him, not three months ago, and the police ordered him
to be shot. But the owner smuggled him away and I got
him. It was weeks before I dared to let him off his chain.”
He added proudly. “Both of these beasts could pull down
a bullock.”
And looking at them, Larose thought, too, that they
both could. In view of the plan which was forming in his
mind, he was furious with himself for having brought no
pistol with him.
A bottle of whisky and the one of champagne were
brought in and, at Larose’s suggestion, the latter bottle
was opened at once and two tumblers filled to the brim
with the diamond-sparkling wine.
“Well, here’s luck,” said the Professor, lifting up his


glass. “I never welcome visitors, as I’ve probably made
you understand”—he smiled quite pleasantly—“but under
the circumstances, I don’t particularly object to you. It
happens I’m a little short of liquor at the present moment.”
He drained the tumbler to the last drop in one long
draught and, setting it down, smacked his Ups in obvious
appreciation!
Larose bowed in warm approval. “That’s the proper
way to drink champagne, sir,” he said smilingly, “a long,
big pull of the first glass and it gets down at once to your
very toes. I can always tell when a gentleman is accus-
tomed to good wine. Never any sipping, except with port,
or a white wine of good vintage. Drink sherry in small
mouthfuls and burgundy and claret in Uttle bigger ones.”
He spoke with the enthusiasm of a real lover of wine.
“Now, what do you think of that champagne?”
“Not at all bad,” said the Professor. “In fact it’s quite
good.”
“Well, I can put it in for you at two hundred and fifty
shilling? a case,” went on Larose in good salesman’s
manner. “£l2 10s., and it’s dirt cheap at the price.” He
picked up*the bottle. “Let me fill your tumbler again,
but drink it more slowly this time, so that you can get
the flavour as well as the effect. No, no, thank you, I
won’t have any more myself. It gets to my head on an
empty stomach.”
Accordingly, the Professor finished the rest of the bottle
on his own, and quickly began to mellow into an agree-
able companion. He told Larose whereabouts there would
'be likely to be good sport with the eels in the Big Drain,
and how he could get a duck or two, if very wary, in
certain places on the Fens.
Conversation progressed most friendlily and Larose,
learning of his petrol dilemma, at once offered to let him
have a spare two-gallon tin he had in his car.
Then Larose’s eyes, roving round the room, appeared to
fall haphazardly on the outsize chessmen and board upon
the table in the comer, and at once starting up from
where he had been sitting, without any apology, he walked
over to inspect them.
G


“Oh, what magnificent chessmen!” he exclaimed with
great enthusiasm. “I don’t remember ever having seen
any so large before.”
“No, they’re certainly a bit out of the way,” com-
mented the Professor, and then he asked casually, “Ever
play chess yourself?”
“Yes,” nodded Larose, “I’m rather keen on it.” He
smiled. “I play a pretty good game, too.”
The Professor looked scornful. “Bah,” he exclaimed,
“I’ll give you a knight and play you for a pound! ”
Instantly Larose had every appearance of having been
insulted. “There’s no player living who could do that,”
he said warmly. “I’ve played with the chess masters at
Boloni’s and I always put up a good fight.”
“Well then, I’ll give you a pawn and play you for
half-a-crown.”
“No, you won’t,” said Larose firmly. “I’ll have a game
with you if you really want it, but we’ll play even.” He
smiled. “If you lose you shall give me an order for a
case of that champagne.”
“Right,” agreed the Professor heartily, “and you shall
have first move!”
“Not at all,” snapped Larose. “I’ll have no favours
from anyone. We’ll draw for it.”
The men were set up and the Professor, having drawn
White, made the first move. He opened with the King’s
Gambit, offering the usual sacrifice of the pawn. The first
seven or eight moves were made with lightning rapidity,
almost in as many seconds, and then the Professor
paused.
“Gad,” he exclaimed smilingly, “I see you can play
and I’m glad you didn’t take me on for that pound!”
“I’m President of the North Tooting Club,” said Larose
coldly, and as if nettled at the other’s patronising manner,
“and I told you I could play a good game.”
And play a good game he certainly could, but he soon
perceived the Professor was equally as strong. An hour
went by, extending to nearly two, and still the game did
not appear to have swung definitely toward either player.
Larose’s thoughts had, however, been rather distracted


from the game, for all the time he had been trying to sum
up the character of his strange, uncouth-looking opponent
with the disfiguring patch over one eye. The man was an
impostor, of course, for he was certainly not a professor,
and there was no doubt, too, that he was some blood
relation of Arnold Gauntry. The likeness between them
was striking, and most likely they were brothers.
This man, however, was much rougher and coarser than
Gauntry. Still, his present mode of life would in a way
account for that. His beard was straggling and untrimmed
and the one bushy eye-brow which was exposed had not
been cut for months. His hands were dirty and his finger-
nails begrimed.
But with all his coarseness, he was a man of strong
and intelligent character. He was calculating and had
courage and resource, as indeed was indicated by the
moves he was now making on the board. He was possessed
of good brain power, but was a man of action rather than
a man of thought. He had nothing of the scientist or the
thjnker about him. To conclude, his face betrayed his
ruthless nature, and his one eye was very cruel.
The game went on, until, looking at his watch, Larose
saw it was nearly six o’clock.
“I’m afraid,” he said with feigned reluctance, “that I
shall have to go now, so do you mind agreeing to call the
game a draw? I think it would work out to be one in any
case.”
“Draw be damned!” bellowed the Professor truculently.
“I’ve got a win here!” He clenched his fist determinedly.
“We’re going to play this out if you have to stop here all
night. This is the first decent game I’ve had for months,”
he shook his head vexatiously—“l mean for years.” He
pointed through the window. “‘You’ll have to go,’” he
mimicked. “How the devil are you going ‘to go’? Why,
man, you couldn’t get a hundred yards from the house
in this fog, without getting lost!”
“But it’s nearly six o’clock!” said Larose hesitatingly.
“Well, you’ll stay here for the night and we’ll finish
this game and have another after tea.”
“It’s very good of you,” began Larose. “I ”


“Not at all,” cried the Professor. “It’s myself I’m
thinking of. I’m bored to death in this beastly hole, and
except for” —he seemed to pull himself up—“except for
my writing I’d never stop here another day.” He raised
his voice loudly. “Ethel, what have you got for tea?”
The girl appeared in the doorway, looldng hot and
flurried. “ I’m roasting those two ducks, Uncle, and there’ll
be bread and butter pudding.”
“That’ll do, girl.” He turned to Larose. “Now, we’ll
go on with the game. It’s my move, isn’t it?” His eyes
turned back to the board upon which there were now
few pieces left, and he went on reminiscently, “You
know, this ending here reminds me of one I remember
playing about seven years ago”—he frowned and corrected
himself quickly—“oh, twenty years ago. I was playing
third man for a club in a match against the great City
of London once, and there were just the same pieces on
the board then as there are now, four pawns, two knights
and each had this bishop of differing colour.”
“What a wonderful memory you have!” said Larose,
wanting to encourage him to go on, as he had stopped
speaking.
The Professor seemed pleased at the compliment and
at once resumed his story. “But I particularly happen
to remember that game because it was almost historic
in its importance and I won it by a ruse. The whole
winning or losing of the whole match depended upon it.
There were fifteen players a side and the score up to then
was seven all. Well, Black offered a draw, but I wouldn’t
have it, as I could see he was getting upset at the crowd
of people standing round, and I hoped he would make a
mistake. But I knew he would have to make it soon,
for it was getting on towards midnight and we shouldn’t
be allowed to play a minute after that, and then, with
the game looking so even, the adjudicators would be bound
to give it as a draw.”
The Professor leant back here and laughed heartily.
“Black was a fine player, but I got him all right in the
end, almost in the last couple of minutes. He was a stutterer
and a nervous little chap, and I suddenly noticed—l had


got a bit of a cold—that he started and looked up angrily
at me every time I blew my nose. So I took to blowing
it whenever I saw he was about to make his move. And
then—what I expected would happen, did. His hand was
shaking badly and he accidentally touched the wrong
pawn. Then, of course, he had to move it, and I gave
him mate in three. Ha, ha, ha, he was wild as blazes
about it, and glared at me like a scalded cat!”
Larose laughed heartily, too. “But you won’t frighten
me in that way,” he said.
“No, perhaps not,” agreed the Professor. He regarded
Larose thoughtfully. “You’re quite a different man when
you’re not trying to sell booze to anyone. You strike me
as very much all there, then.”
The game was resumed and presently, of set purpose,
Larose allowed the Professor to win. The latter was
overjoyed and shook Larose warmly by the hand, thanking
him profusely for the great game he had given him.
Presently tea was announced and, proceeding into the
kitchep, they partook of an appetising meal and although
the month was July, appreciated the warmth coming
from the big, old-fashioned stove.
“You need a fire at night for ten months of the year
on these damned Fens,” growled the Professor. “It’s a
fearful part to live in, too, unless you like solitude, for
in the winter we’re often wrapped for days and nights
on end in fog.”
Ethel Bannister waited on them quickly and deftly
and Larose was glad to see her face no longer bore the
strained and frightened look it had when she had been
telling him her story in the afternoon. Every now and
then she flashed him a grateful glance over her uncle’s
shoulder, as if she were quite sure and happy now under
his protection.
The meal over, more chess followed until nearly mid-
night, with Larose scoring one game and the Professor
another.
The Professor had become increasingly friendly as the
evening had worn on, so much so that it had been finally
arranged Larose should stay on at Wrack House at any


rate over the following day, when he would be taken out
and given some good sport with the eels in the Big Drain.
And all the evening Larose had been wondering, if this
man were an impostor, what had become of the real
Professor. Had he died a natural death or had he—Larose
shuddered at the thought —come to a violent and bloody
end and was now rotting in some hidden grave among
those mist and fog-shrouded wastes of the lonely Fens?
Larose saw no difficulty that the man was an impostor
in the fact that he was an ardent chess-player, even as
Professor Bannister had been. That was only a coincidence,
one of the many surprising ones that were so often
encountered in everyday life. Neither were his ideas upset
that the handwritings of them both seemed identical.
This man was an etcher of outstanding ability —he had
shown Larose, with much pride, some of the etchings he
had done —and it would be nothing to an etcher, after
a little practice, to imitate any handwriting. So there
was no difficulty about the imposture there.
Then about this man being a famous writer, Larose
scoffed at the idea that he ever did any writing at all.
His desk was placed altogether in the wrong position for
a man who wrote much. Sitting at it by the window, the
light fell over the right side and no habitual writer would
ever tolerate his right hand continually casting a shadow
as he wrote.
Larose was greatly heartened at the thought that he
had got in touch with a scoundrel, perhaps even a dreadful
criminal, for it was strengthening his case immeasurably
against Arnold Gauntry. He was sure he had but to find
the secret bond of enmity between the latter and himself
and then the reason for the murder of Major Sampon
would be quite clear.
He was thinking hard of all those things later, as he
lay wide-eyed and wakeful in the darkness of his room
towards one o’clock in the morning.
He must get speech again alone with Ethel Bannister,
but how on earth he was to manage it he did not know.
The man with the black beard seemed to have no work
to do and, what with this confounded chess-playing and


this rotten, muddy business of going after eels, he would
probably never leave his side.
But this problem was solved in a totally unexpected
manner.
Larose was going over for the hundredth time how he
could trap both Gauntry and this one-eyed relation of
his, when he suddenly became aware of a gentle tapping
upon his door, and then he heard the handle turn softly.
“It’s all right, it’s only I,” came the gentle voice of
Ethel Bannister. “But stay where you are and don’t
get out of bed. I’m going to light a candle.” She laughed
a little nervously. “But I’ve had to shut the door again,
because of the dogs. There was Himmler outside just
now, and I shouldn’t wonder if Uncle had put him on
the watch there. He was very friendly with you to-night,
but he wouldn’t trust you more than anybody. He dis-
trusts everyone but me, and he only leaves me out because
he thinks women have no brains.”
His first surprise over, Larose smiled in the darkness.
This girl had got courage anyhow!
“But is it quite safe?” he whispered when she had lit
the candle and he saw her in a dressing-gown standing
just inside the door.
“Quite,” she whispered back. “You just listen,” and
through the ill-fitting door, with a wide space at the bottom,
he heard the faint but unmistakable sounds of loud snoring
some distance away.
Even in the dim light cast by the candle, he could
see that the girl was blushing and he thought it was a
most becoming blush too.
“I told you this afternoon,” she went on whisperingly,
“that you were a man no woman need be afraid of, and you
see this proves I was paying you no empty compliment.”
“Quite all right, my dear,” said Larose in his most
fatherly manner. “If I were only a few years older I
should be double your age, and I have a great respect
for brave girls. Now, you bring that chair a little closer
and we’ll talk. As you say, we’ll be quite safe as long as
we hear Blackboard snoring and the snores are that distance
away.”


“All the same we must be very quiet,” whispered the
girl warningly, “for in spite of his loud snoring he’s a
light sleeper and it takes very little to wake him.” Her
bosom was rising and falling quickly in her emotion. “And
what do you think of him? ”
“He’s not your uncle,” replied Larose decisively. “He’s
a scoundrel and a very dangerous man and it’s not safe
for you to stay here alone with him any longer.”
“But what’s become of my uncle, then?” she asked,
almost in tears.
“I don’t know, but we must find that out and you can
help me a lot if you give your mind to it. Now, I learnt
from the woman in the post office in Fox wold that he
used to employ a man and an elderly woman here. Well,
do you know how long they had been gone before you
came here?”
The girl pulled herself together and replied steadily,
“No, but it must have been some time, for everything
about the house was so filthy.”
“But was it years or months, do you think?” asked
Larose.
“ Oh, it wasn’t years, ’ ’ she said. ‘‘ It could have been only
months, at any rate since the woman left, because there
were cakes in the cupboard which she had nif.de. Of course
they were hard as bricks when I found them, but they
weren’t a bit mouldy and would have been quite all right
to eat if one wasn’t particular. I gave them to the fowls.”
“How do you know she had made them? ” asked Larose.
“They might have been bought at some shop.”
“Oh, no, they weren’t! They were saffron cakes and
there was a little tin of saffron in the cupboard, too. The
woman must have been Cornish, because her name was
Trescowthick, and they’re very fond of saffron cakes in
Cornwall.”
“But this man here might have made them!” suggested
Larose.
The girl laughed softly. “He can’t cook anything, not
even a potato. He was living on tinned stuff when I
came up here, and bread which he got in from somewhere
about once every ten days or a fortnight.”


“But how did he get the Professor’s letters, then,” went
on Larose, “if he didn’t dare to show himself in the
village? ”
“He didn’t get them,” replied the girl. “The last time
this man of his, Bent he was called, went into Fox wold,
he took a letter to the postmistress from my uncle saying
he was going away for some weeks and the letters were
to remain until he came back. So when I went in with
another letter saying they were then to be given to me,
there were quite a number to be collected.”
“Ah,” exclaimed Larose with great interest, “then to
how long before did the letters go back?”
The girl shook her head. “I don’t know. I wasn’t
curious then.” She hesitated. “But I think the woman
in the shop said something about three months.”
Larose snapped his fingers together. “Then every-
thing’s as clear as day,” he exclaimed triumphantly. “This
impostor here is Bent himself and his reason for keeping
out of everybody’s sight for all those weeks was just so
that he could grow his beard much longer. Now anyone
happening to see him at a distance will naturally take
him for your uncle.”
Ethel Bannister was trembling all over. “Oh, yes, you
must be right,” she said brokenly, “When I first came
here his beard wasn’t nearly so long as it is now.” She
nodded vehemently. “And the letter he sent me to
Edinburgh, asking me to come here, was posted in Ely.
So he went all that way to post it so that no one by any
chance would catch sight of him in the village here. Yes,
yes, of course, he’s that man Bent.’”
“But do you know if Bent had anything the matter
with his eye?” asked Larose quickly.
She shook her head. “I really don’t know anything
about him. This man here will never talk about him or
the woman either, and has always put me off when I’ve
asked about them. He’s just told me that Mary Trescow-
thick was lazy and dirty and that he had to send Bent
off for being impertinent.”
“But who was supposed to be staying here when your
uncle went on his holiday? There musij have been someone


to look after the cow and the fowls, yes, and the dogs,
too.”
“Oh, the woman was here then. He’s told me that.”
“ Then presumably Bent was supposed to have gone off
when the Professor did, and the woman after the Professor
had come back.”
“Yes, only that would fit in with the little I’ve been
told.”
Larose spoke very solemnly. “Then it seems to me
that your uncle and this Mary Trescowthick faded away,
both at the same time. They disappeared suddenly and
this fellow here at once took command of everything.”
Then for a long minute neither of them spoke, the
dead and awed silence being only broken by the snoring
in the distant room.
At last Larose said briskly and as if, after all, there
was nothing much to worry about, “Well, about that
letter Bent, yes, we’ll call him by his proper name from
now on, received yesterday from this Mr. Gauntry. If
he didn’t burn it, where is it likely to be now? ”
Ethel Bannister moistened her dry lips with her tongue.
“In his jacket pocket,” she said. “He’s very careless
about putting things away and, indeed, he’s got no place
where he can lock up anything, except the little medicine
cupboard in his bedroom.” She smiled wanly. “That’s
where he keeps his bottle of hair-dye. There are no
keys to his desk or to any of the other cupboards.”
“Well, has he got a pistol or revolver in the house,
do you know?” was Larose’s next question.
She shook her head. “I’ve never seen one, but he’s
got two rifles and a gun.”
Larose put his finger to his lips and made a movement
as if he were going to get very stealthily out of the bed.
“Then I’ll go and look in that jacket pocket of his,” he
whispered. “I want that letter badly.”
But the girl held up her hand instantly in terrified
protest. “No, no, you mustn’t,” she whispered hoarsely.
“I’ve sent Himmler back to the kitchen, but both the dogs
are in the house and if they hear strange footsteps they’ll
come up at once.” She nodded. “I’d go, if it’d be any


good, but it wouldn’t be, for I couldn’t get into bis room
without waking him. The lock of the door won’t catch
and so he has to put a chair against the door to prevent
it rattling. Everything in this house is like that. It’s
all ”
But suddenly there was a loud resounding bang as a
door up the passage slammed to with great violence.
“Oh, it’s my door!” almost wailed the girl. “I left
it open. Now, it will have wakened him up and he’ll
come out to see what’s happened. He’s dreadfully super-
stitious and half believes in ghosts. He is always upset
by strange noises in the night.”
“Then put out that candle,” hissed Larose instantly,
“and don’t even breathe until we know what’s happened.”
Deep silence ensued when the girl had done as she
was bidden, but only for a few seconds, and then they
heard the sound as of a scraping of a chair upon the floor,
followed almost immediately by heavy footsteps in the
distance.
Larose flashed a small electric torch, to find the girl
lying prone upon the floor with her ear pressed close to
the space at the bottom of the door.
With a quick movement of her hand she smoothed her
dressing-gown down over her legs the instant she saw the
light, and then looked up smilingly at Larose.
“He’s gone downstairs,” she whispered, “perhaps only
to get something to drink. He often does in the middle of
the night. Was there any whisky left?”
“Yes, quite a third of a bottle.”
She rose swiftly to her feet. “Then that may keep
him there for a little while. Quick, give me your torch
and I’ll go and look for that letter,” and she had opened
the door softly and was out of the room in a few seconds.
Larose jumped out of bed and, groping his way across
the room, stood in the doorway with his head craned round
and peering anxiously into the darkness of the passage.
Then to his horror he heard the unmistakable sounds of
Bent’s heavy footsteps coming up the creaking stairs.
“Good God,” he exclaimed fearfully, “he’ll catch her
in his room!”


But happily his fears were short-lived, for almost
immediately he saw the dancing light of his torch in the
passage and the girl came running swiftly up.
“He’s coming back,” she panted, as the light fell upon
Larose, and without a sound they both glided into the
room and the door was closed very softly behind them.
“Here’s the letter,” she went on breathlessly, “but he’s
lighted a candle and may come up the passage this time.
Oh, I hope to Heaven he doesn’t knock on my door. I
tell you, noises in the night always make him come out
to see what they are.”
“But you must hide somewhere,” whispered Larose
sharply. He looked round the big room, which was almost
bare of furnishings. “Get on to the bed and lie close up
against the wall. I’ll throw the counterpane over you,”
and once again the room was plunged into darkness.
As the girl had feared, the man came up the passage,
and soon the light of his candle was seen showing under
the door. As it remained stationary there, Larose, in a
lightning flash, resolved upon his course of action, and
called out loudly, “Hullo, what’s up?” at the same time
jumping on to the floor as if he had just got out of the
bed. “Come in,” he went on, “I can’t find my torch.”
The man opened the door and entered, holding his
candle high up so that he could see all round the room.
Behind him padded the big Alsatian, Himmler, looking
more fierce and menacing than ever. “Did you hear any
noise,” snapped Bent suspiciously, “like some heavy
person falling down?”
“No, but my door slammed to,” replied Larose. “I
evidently hadn’t latched it properly and it made enough
noise to wake the dead.”
“Oh, that’s what it was!” exclaimed Bent, evidently
with some relief. “It woke me up with a start.” He
subsided into the one solitary chair the room contained,
and drew in a deep breath. “Do you know, sometimes
I think this damned house is haunted?”
“I shouldn’t wonder,” agreed Larose. “It must have
been built for donkey’s years, and of course a lot of people
have died in it.”


Bent drew in another deep breath. “It’s funny, I’m
afraid of nothing living,” he went on, “but I’m always
jumpy about spooks. Of course, I don’t really believe
in them and yet” —he hesitated—“well, you don’t either,
do you?”
“Oh, I don’t know,” said Larose as if rather doubtful,
longing to get rid of him, and yet at the same time anxious
to lead him on. He spoke judicially. “I think if anyone
has died violently he mightn’t rest easy in his grave. You
see, spiritualists will have it that the spirit of a person
who’s been cut off suddenly never really rests until the
hour when he would have died in his properly appointed
time, in a natural way.”
“But the spirit wouldn’t wander! ” insisted Bent quickly,
in a manner as if more to satisfy himself than as if he
really believed it. “I mean, it would keep to the place
where the party had actually died.”
Larose looked doubtful again. “I couldn’t say,” he
said, shaking his head, “but I should think it would come
back to the place where it had always lived. I know people
in the occult world hold to that view.”
Bent rose to his feet. “Well, at any rate,” he said with
a forced laugh, “these dogs will keep anyone, alive or
dead, at a distance. That’s what I got them for.”
Then suddenly Himmler began sniffing hard and began
to pad stealthily towards the bed upon which Larose had
all the time been sitting.
“Here, I say,” laughed Larose, “keep him away from
my bed, will you? I’m very susceptible to fleas and I’ll
bet he’s got plenty.”
“Come here, you brute,” called out Bent angrily, and
giving the animal a kick, he drove him out of the room.
“Well, good night again,” he went on. “I’ll go and get
some more sleep now and I’ll make sure this damned door
is shut properly this time.”
He pulled the door to behind him with a resounding
bang which reverberated through the house and then they
heard his footsteps retreating down the passage.
“Oh, I’m sure he’s killed my uncle,” came in a terrified
whisper in the darkness, “and that’s what makes him


so afraid of noises in the night. The darkness frightens
him because he’s got a guilty conscience.”
“Well, never mind,” said Larose soothingly. “You’ll
soon be away from here and then I’ll find out everything
and see he gets his punishment.” He flashed his torch
and went on in matter-of-fact tones, “Now you remain
exactly where you are until it gets light. Cover yourself
up properly to keep warm, but let me have one of your
blankets. I’ll make myself comfortable on the floor. It’ll
only be for a couple of hours or so and then you can get
back to your room.”
“You are kind,” said the girl brokenly. “I don’t know
what would have happened to me if you hadn’t come.”
“Well, don’t think about it,” said Larose. “Don’t talk
any more and try to get some sleep. One minute, though,
while I read this letter and then I’ll put out the light.”
So, taking the letter out of its envelope, by the light
of the torch, he read it quickly through, smiling exultingly
almost as soon as his eyes fell upon the first words. It
was dated the day following upon the night of Major
Sampon’s murder and read:
“Dear Joe,
“News which will amaze you. Just by blind chance
it may be that our dream of vengeance is unexpectedly
coming true. That cursed dog, Larose, is in a tight
corner and it looks as if the public hangman will soon
be doing the job we wanted to do ourselves. What a
fool you are not to take in any newspapers! If you
had you would have read all about it. It is too long
to tell you everything in a letter, but I will run down
soon—l may come any time—and see you. I got the
cheque passed through all right, but I don’t think you
had better stop up there much longer. It’s too risky
and I have been uneasy ever since the visit of that
bank manager.
“Yours,
“HARRY."
Larose’s heart beat violently in his excitement. “Just
what I wanted!” he exclaimed breathlessly to the girl,


“and I’ll be grateful all my life to you for getting it for
me.”
“But what’s in it?” she asked.
“It’s too long to explain just now,” said Larose, “but
it proves that this man here is not your uncle and that
the man who is writing to him is a criminal, too.” He
nodded. “I’ll tell you about it to-morrow.”
“But one thing, first,” pleaded the girl. “If no one
interfered with this man here, how long do you think
he would he staying on here as my uncle?”
“As long as he dared,” replied Larose, “to get in as
much of the money which is being paid in by the publishers
for the royalties on your uncle’s hooks. Perhaps, also,
he is selling some stocks and shares which your uncle
may have had. But now go to sleep. I am going to switch
off the torch.”
A deep silence followed, and after a long while it was
apparent, from her regular breathing, that the girl had
fallen asleep. Presently it seemed that Larose was asleep,
too, as he had pow got his eyes shut and was no longer
staring into the darkness.
The night waned and the dawn began to break and
still for an hour and longer there was no movement in
the room. Then, suddenly, the girl awoke with a start
and sat up instantly, looking scared and frightened, hut
the scared expression changed to one of great thankfulness
when her eyes fell upon the sleeping man upon the floor.
For a long minute she remained quite still and then,
after a quick glance at her wrist-watch, without making
a sound, she slid out of the bed and tip-toed very quietly
towards the door. About to pass Larose, however, she
stopped and for a moment stood looking down at him.
Then she suddenly dropped upon her knees and, pulling
the blanket a little closer over him, lightly brushed over
his forehead with her hand before she glided smilingly
from the room.
Larose smiled, too, when she had gone. “Poor child,”
he murmured sleepily, “it’s nice to think she knows she’s
got a protector.” His eyes opened wider. “Gad, but
things might have gone very badly with her if I hadn’t


happened to come. The wonder is she’s been safe with
that brute for so long.”
That morning at breakfast Bent, looking lusty and
strong, and with all his fears of the night passed away,
suggested an alteration in the day’s programme. He
wanted Larose to drive him into Newmarket in his, Larose’s,
car, to get some more whisky and also a few things in the
provision line. Then, they would have good sport with
the eels in the afternoon.
Larose at once expressed himself as quite agreeable;
indeed he was pleased with the suggestion that he should
drive him into Newmarket, hoping that at some of the
shops they might visit there he would, later on, be able
to find out something about Mary Trescowthick. He
thought it was quite probable that some of the trades-
people with whom the real Professor was in the habit of
dealing might have some idea where her people lived.
He would then learn if she had returned to them or was
just “missing.”
Just as they were about to start upon their journey,
and were actually seated in the car, Bent called to Ethel
Bannister to come outside.
“Here, girl,” he said sharply, “I want you to go into
Foxwold this morning and see if there are any letters
for me. I’m expecting an important one. You can use
the petrol this gentleman has lent me. Then get his tin
refilled and our tank filled up, too, in the village.” He
raised his finger wamingly. “But mind, no gossiping. I
don’t want anyone to know I’ve got a visitor here or they’ll
be thinking everyone can come.”
Larose flashed a reassuring glance at the girl, but was
very annoyed he could get no private speech with her
and tell her to keep back any letter there was. He was
quite confident, however, that if there were another letter
in the handwriting of Arnold Gauntry she would certainly
not give it up to the party it would be addressed to.
Although the morning was warm and sunny, Larose
was not a bit surprised that Bent asked for the hood
to be put up and the whole journey sat leaning back in
the corner with his cap pulled well down over his forehead.


Larose had a good laugh to himself, wondering how this
rough, uncouth man beside him could be so dense as to
imagine that he, Larose, was taking him to be a learned
man of science whose books were read all over the world.
He began wondering, also, with much curiosity if Bent
had ever attempted to pass himself off as Professor
Bannister in Newmarket. He was certainly well acquainted
with the town, for he talked of what shops they would
go to and particularly mentioned one provision shop where
one could always be certain of obtaining prime, sugar-
cured and well-cooked hams.
But upon approaching the environs of the town, Larose
speedily learnt the part he himself was expected to play.
He was to do all the shopping while Bent was not intending
to set foot out of the car.
“You see,” laughed Bent in explanation, pointing to
his shabby, greasy clothes, “I never intend to tog myself
up for anyone.” He made a horrible grimace. “Still, I
don’t want people to see me dressed like this. A paragraph
about me might get in the newspapers and I simply loathe
publicity of all kinds.” He tried to look very stem and
uncompromising. “My reputation as a man of science
is the only thing about me I want people to be interested
in.”
Larose said he quite understood and Bent went on, “So,
of course, don’t mention my name anywhere.”
Larose nodded smilingly, but all the same, at every
place he went in, beginning with one of the hotels where
he bought half a dozen bottles of whisky, he purposely,
but as if quite by accident, mentioned that what he was
purchasing was for Professor Bannister. But no one
seemed a bit interested, and no one took up the name until
he came to the last shop of all, when he went in to get
the delicious sugar-cured ham Bent had so smacked his
lips about.
There, the man who served him, who happened to be
the proprietor of the shop himself, at once exclaimed
smilingly, “Oh, it’s for Professor Bannister, is it? Well,
I’m very pleased to hear it. He often used to buy things
from us, but we’ve not heard of him for months now,
H


and we quite thought we’d lost his custom by offending
him in some way. How is he keeping, sir, may I ask?”
“Oh, he’s quite well, thank you,” said Larose, “very
busy, always at work on those wonderful books of his.”
Then he asked, as if rather surprised, “But he didn’t
often come here himself, did he?”
“No, no, it was his man, Bent, who used to come, but
we knew the things were for the Professor because he had
an account with us, and used to pay by cheque.”
“Ah, that fellow Bent!” exclaimed Larose. “He’s
been gone some time. The Professor had to send him
away for getting drunk.”
“I don’t wonder,” nodded the provision merchant. “He
was often just a little the worse for liquor when he came
in here.” He nodded again. “A morose, unpleasant-
looking man, and looking worse with that dreadful eye
of his.”
Larose’s heart gave a big bump. Here was news at
last! The very thing he wanted to find out.
“I never saw him,” he said. “What was the matter
with his eye?”
“A dreadful squint, sir. I don’t think I’ve ever seen
a worse one. And I’m sure it was that which helped to
make him so bad-mannered. He was very ashamed of
that eye, so much so, that I remember when he first
used. to come here as the Professor’s new servant, he
always used to keep it closed. Really, it was a long time
before he let anyone see the squint and we had quite got
to think he couldn’t open that eye.”
“And how many years is it since he first came to your
shop?” asked Larose, the more and more delighted with
the information he was receiving.
“Let me see,” considered the provision merchant. “Oh,
I can tell you. It was soon after I bought this shop. Yes,
about six years ago. I happen to remember it because
the first time he came in he’d lost the order Professor
Bannister had given him and we were a little bit doubtful
about trusting him. He got very angry and said he was
the Professor’s new man. He went out to the car and
brought in the Professor’s woman servant to prove it,”


“Oh, the woman Trescowthick!” exclaimed Larose.
“Yes, ‘old Mary’ as we always called her. She used
often to come in here with Bent and buy sixpenny-worth
of bulls’-eyes. She was very fond of peppermints.”
“But you’ve not seen her lately!” said Larose, shaking
his head.
“No, sir,” replied the man looking very solemn. “I
think it was the last time Bent came in that he told us
she had died suddenly in a fit of apoplexy. I was rather
surprised to hear it, because she looked too thin to me
to be likely to be taken off by anything like that.”
“She wasn’t very old,” suggested Larose, hazarding a
guess.
“No, sir, certainly not,” said the man, “but the way
she carried herself, with her shoulders all hunched up,
made her look older than she really was.” He laughed.
“ With her big hooked nose and her dark skin, and untidy
hair, I always thought of her as something like an old
witch. I’m sure she had Gipsy blood in her.”
“And to test your memory,” smiled Larose, “how long
do you reckon it is since this last visit of Bent?”
“About six months, sir,” smiled back the man. “It
was during that week of hard frost and snow we had in
February, and we wondered how he would get back to
Foxwold. He’d had a spot or two that afternoon and
was not too steady on his feet.”
Notwithstanding all he had found out, there was no
elation in his heart as Larose presently walked out to
the waiting car. It sickened him almost to nausea to be
going back with this man, who, now he was almost sure,
must be a murderer, to that grim, gloomy house, so deep
in the heart of the Fens. The place was so lonely, and if
help were needed there would be no possibility of obtaining
it.
The slightest suspicion in Bent’s mind, too, that he,
Larose, had come to spy things out, and the situation
would become one of the gravest danger. Bent would be
like one who had been awakened by a thunderclap and,
hasty and impetuous by nature, quite probably would
resort to violence at once. Then with all the advantage of


surprise on his side, what chance would he, Laroae again,
have? The man was of strong and powerful physique and,
moreover, those dreadful dogs were never farther than a
few yards away from his side.
Larose cursed deeply here, that, contrary to his usual
habit, when upon any investigation, he had come unarmed.
With his trusty little automatic handy, he would have
faced, as he had so often done before, almost any odds
with equanimity, but now—well, he must just be as cunning
as a fox to anticipate danger before it came.
Of course, he could have tried to buy a pistol there
and then in the town. But he dismissed that idea at once
as being far too risky, for it would have meant going
round to the police station to get a permit before any
gunsmith would sell him one, and he was sure Bent’s
mind was not sleepy enough to stand that. The man was
careless and unthinking up to a certain point, but once his
faculties were aroused he would be sharp as a weasel and
nothing would escape him.
Then his thoughts went back suddenly to the hapless
Ethel Bannister and how much she was depending upon
him, and he squared his shoulders resolutely and all his
confidence came back. He would rely upon his mother
wit. It had never failed him yet, and he was smiling
happily as he approached the car.
Bent regarded him frowningly. “You’ve been a devil
of a time, haven’t you?” he asked.
Larose nodded as he jumped into the car. “Yes, there
are a lot of customers in the shop.”
“Who served you?” asked Bent, Larose thought a trifle
suspiciously.
“Oh, a fool of a young chap!” replied Larose. “He was
devilish slow and a bit deaf as well. I had to repeat
thing I said twice before he seemed to he able to take it
in.”
Bent seemed satisfied and, much to Larose’s disgust,
because he wanted to think, kept up a conversation the
whole way back. But it was mostly about chess and the
great possibilities of the Evan’s Gambit.
“And just fancy,” he exclaimed enviously, “that one


simple move of a boozing old sea captain has put him
among the great men of the world. He will be remembered ”
—he grinned slyly here—“when well-known writers like
myself have been long forgotten.”
Arriving home, without bothering to help carry in any
of the things which had been bought, Bent betook him-
self quickly into the house to see if there were any letters
for him. Larose drove his car into one of the sheds and
then lingered quite a long time over getting out the parcels,
hoping the girl would appear to help him. And he was
not disappointed there, for presently she came running out
and he commenced piling some of the things into her arms.
“There were two letters for him,” she whispered. “One
contained a dividend from some oil company and the other
was from uncle’s publishers in Saint James’s. This one
had got their name outside on the envelope and he was
very gloomy when he read it.”
Larose nodded smilingly. “Well, I’ve found out a lot
about him from a man in one of the shops in Newmarket.
As we said, he’s Bent himself, and he’s just wearing that
patch over his eye so that you shan’t see he’s got a bad
squint in it. Evidently, he’s been afraid that if you saw
it you might happen to mention about it to someone in
the village, and then they would, of course, have known
at once who was up here, making out he was the Professor.”
“But what are we to do?” asked the girl fearfully.
“I haven’t decided yet,” replied Larose, “but don’t
you worry. I tell you you shall come away with me when
I go. I’ll have to think everything out before the day’s
over, and you be all prepared to leave at a moment’s
notice. The great risk to me now is that this Arnold
Gauntry may arrive before we’ve gone. You see, the devil
of it is he’s Bent’s brother and he knows who I am.”
“Bent’s brother!” exclaimed the girl looking more
frightened than ever. “Then does he know you suspect
him of something and are making inquiries about him?”
“No, certainly not,” said Larose. “He pretends to be
quite friendly with me, and has no reason to believe I
am not as equally friendly towards him. If he comes, I’ll
just have to be as surprised as he is that we are meeting


here, and bluff it out somehow.” He nodded. “I’ll be
ready with some story which will sound quite plausible.”
“Oh, but I shall be so glad to get away!” she exclaimed.
“I shall never feel safe with him any more.”
“But you’ll be quite all right as long as I’m with you,”
assured Larose. “Still, now I’m here, I want to find out
everything I can, and if this man has done anything very
wrong”—he hesitated, not liking to put his thoughts
into words—“perhaps ”
“You mean if he’s murdered my uncle and that woman! ”
broke in the girl fiercely.
Larose nodded reluctantly. “Yes, and if he’s done that
I may be able so to prey upon his mind that he’ll drop
some hint as to where he’s put them.” He lowered his
voice to the merest whisper. “Now I’ve got an idea and,
like the brave girl you’ve shown yourself to be, you must
help me.”
Then two minutes’ rapid conversation ensued, with Ethel
Bannister breathing hard but nodding in scared acquies-
cence as Larose unfolded his plan. Then, not daring to
remain outside any longer, they returned with the parcels
into the house.
The sky was very overcast as if a sudden change of
weather were coming.
During the meal which followed, Bent appeared to be
very thoughtful and hardly spoke a word. He sat very
silent with his one eye blinking unpleasantly into vacancy.
The room was getting darker and darker every minute,
and it was evident a big storm was about to burst. Just
as they were getting up from their chairs, a loud peal of
thunder broke over the house, and the rain began to fall
in torrents.
“No fishing to-day,” announced Bent. He smiled for
the first time. “So, we’ll have some more chess. Thank
goodness you are here!”
They played right on until tea-time, with Bent all the
afternoon imbibing generous draughts of whisky with very
little water. He became much more animated and Larose
saw that side of his nature which had so frightened Ethel
Bannister.


As the afternoon wore on he began to take quite a
lively interest in her, stopping often between his moves,
to stare intently in her direction. He remarked, too, with
no reserve, what a nice figure she had got and how pretty
she was when she had any colour. He winked violently
at Larose to emphasize his statements and the latter
would have dearly loved to slap his face for his coarse-
ness.
After tea the two men drew their chairs up to the fire
and Larose casually brought round the conversation to what
they had been discussing in his bedroom in the early hours
of that morning.
• He told some really blood-curdling stories of people
walking after death in the dead hours of the night, and
gave it emphatically as his opinion that there must be
some truth in the idea of ghosts because so many level-
headed people believed in them.
He stated, too, as a Well-known fact, that in prisons
where “hanged men” had been buried, the most hardened
warders would never venture to go alone into the grave-
yard at night. Also, the graves there, he said, were dug
at least three feet deeper than ordinary ones, with the
heaviest paving stones being always placed over them
with the least possible delay.
“But what the hell’s that for?” demanded Bent, who
all the time had been stirring uneasily in his chair. “If
ghosts really come up they must be able to get out of
any grave.”
“Oh, I don’t altogether agree there,” said Larose.
“They say the deeper a grave is and the heavier are the
stones over it, the harder it is for spirits to escape. At
any rate, I met the caretaker of a cemetery once and he
said he had often found that, when people had died sud-
denly, the loose earth over their graves looked disturbed
in the mornings.”
“I don’t believe it,” growled Bent. “It’s ridiculous!”
Larose shrugged his shoulders. “Well, that’s what he
said, and he swore he was continually raking the earth
back until the headstone had been finally placed in posi-
tion.”


“Well, what about the people who never get any head-
stones? ” sneered Bent derisively.
“He said complaints were always being made then by
their relations that the graves had been interfered with.
Yes, and another thing! He said, too, that in violent
death cases the grass on the graves took much longer to
grow. He was sure of that.”
“Well, if ghosts do walk,” snarled Bent after a long
silence to digest this last piece of information, “they can’t
do you any harm. They can’t hit you if they’re only damned
spirits.”
“But they can give you nasty shocks,” said Larose,
“and may even cause death from hemorrhage of the
brain from fright. I read once of two people dying in a
house which was haunted by the spirit of a murdered
man. The doctors said it was just as if they had been
strangled, although there were no marks of fingers or a
rope round their necks.”
“Did they bum the house down?” growled Bent.
“No, they laid the ghost at last by firing off guns over
the murdered man’s grave. It sounds ridiculous, of course,
but it was said to be effective.”
“I tell you it’s all damned rot,” exclaimed Bent, raising
his voice, “and we’re fools to talk about it.” He turned
to Ethel Bannister, who all the time had been listening
open-mouthed to the conversation. “Here, you girl, you
get off to bed,” —he sneered—“and pull the chest of
drawers up against your door as you always do. It’s
spooks you must be afraid of.”
The girl made no comment but, obediently fighting her
candle, bade them both good-night and left the room. A
few minutes later, they heard her slow footsteps ascending
the creaking stairs.
“Yes, we’ve been fools to talk about this nonsense,”
scowled Bent. “There is nothing in it, as I say, and it’s
only because I’ve lived on these cursed Eens for all these
years that I’ve come to think about spooks at all.
I never used to, but the mists roll up of nights like ghosts
and ”
But a piercing shriek came from the floor above and


his blood seemed almost to freeze in his veins as he heard
the voice of Ethel Bannister calling loudly for help.
“You go,” he gasped hoarsely to Larose. “My heart’s
bad! See what’s the matter!” and Larose, although appar-
ently almost as scared as he was, darted from the room.
But he met the girl already half-way down the stairs
and, gripping her tightly by the arm, led her into the
kitchen, where she sank wide-eyed and dishevelled into the
nearest chair.
“What’s happened? What were you shrieking about?”
snarled Bent, his fright stinging him into a furious anger.
But it was quite a minute before the girl could speak.
Then she gasped brokenly, “There was an old woman
up there on the landing, and she was gliding along towards
me. I was so frightened.”
“A woman gliding along!” roared Bent, by a strange
twist in his nature, all his courage now coming back,
although his face was livid and his forehead all picked
out in little beads of sweat. “Hell, I’ll see to that! Hitler,
Himmler,” he shouted, as he flung open the door leading
into the yard, “come in, you brutes!” and the two big
hounds, excited by his loud calling, crashed into the room.
“You carry the lamp,” he ordered Larose and, snatch-
ing up the poker, he led the way into the passage and
towards the staircase. “Up you go, Himmler! Sool her.
Hitler! Bring her down! Sool her, good dogs!”
And then followed pandemonium, with the excited
hounds baying furiously, as they sprang up the stairs, and
the two men running quickly after them.
Ethel Bannister sat up in her chair and smiled, although
a little weakly. Her emotion was almost overpowering
her. She listened breathlessly to the loud trampling above,
the banging of doors and the fierce shouting of Bent as
he urged the dogs on.
But very soon the noise all died down, the voices sank
to ordinary tones and at length she heard the men returning
down the stairs.
“There was no one there!” exclaimed Bent angrily as
they came back into the kitchen. “You fool of a girl, you
imagined it all!”


“Oh, but I didn’t,” protested the girl hotly. “I saw
her as plainly as I see you now, and if I hadn’t run she
would have seized hold of me in another moment.”
“But she can’t have got away,” frowned Larose, as if
very annoyed, too. “All the windows were shut, we’ve
searched through every room and the dogs would have
smelt out anyone if they had been there.”
“But she was there,” persisted the girl, “and I tell you
she was coming up to take hold of me.”
“Well, what was she like?” asked Larose, a little more
gently. “Come, pull yourself together and describe her
to us.” He spoke soothingly. “Now was she young or
old?”
“She was old,” panted Ethel Bannister, “very dark,
like a Gypsy woman and she had a hooked nose and dark
piercing eyes. She got so close to me that I could even
smell her. There was a strong peppermint smell.”
“Gad,” exclaimed Larose as if very astounded, “now
you mention it I remember I smelt peppermint too! Didn’t
you, Professor? The smell was quite strong at the top of
the stairs.”
But Bent did not answer. His face had gone livid
again now and the sweat had burst on to his face once more.
He stared horror-struck at the girl, for all the world as if
he had heard some dreadful news and could not believe
his ears.
“It’s funny!” went on Larose slowly. His words came
haltingly as he stared long and hard at Bent. “I wouldn’t
believe a word of it if she hadn’t smelt that smell.” He
forced a smile on to his lips. “Are there any peppermints
in the house, Professor?”
“No,” snapped the Professor, finding his voice at last,
“and there never have been.” His colour began to return
now. “What damned foolery that a spook would smell
of sweets!”
“Ah, but it wouldn’t be sweets!” exclaimed Larose.
“It would just mean that the woman had been buried
near where the peppermint grows. There are a lot about
here and they have little bell-shaped flowers.”
Bent had slumped heavily into a chair. “Well, I’m


tired,” he said wearily, “and I don’t want to talk about
it any more. This darned girl has made a fool of us and
we’d better all go off to bed.” He nodded towards the
dogs. “At any rate I’ll have these brutes up on the landing
all night, and if that darned woman walks again, it’ll be
she then who’ll get the fright.”
Ethel Bannister went upstairs first, taking the dogs for
company as far as her door. Then Bent saw Larose up
to his room and soon the house was wrapped in complete
silence for the night. >
“That got at him,” nodded Larose solemnly as he
started to undress. “He’s done her in right enough. Per-
haps the Professor died suddenly and he saw his chance.
He’s just of the type to stick at nothing.”
The next morning came bright and clear and there
were all the prospects of a glorious summer day. Bent
seemed quite himself again at breakfast, and was in a good
humour and even inclined to be jovial. By tacit consent
no mention was made of the previous night.
The meal over, Bent suggested he and Larose should
go out along the dykes on the chance of getting a duck
or two.
“You see,” he explained, “after that heavy rain yester-
day the water will be very disturbed for a little while,
and we’d better give it a few hours to become clearer.
But there are sure to be duck about and we’ll go after
them now, and then fish in the afternoon. Have you
got plenty of cartridges? Well, then I’ll buy some from
you if you can spare me a box. I happen to be very short
just now.”
“But aren’t you going to take the dogs, Uncle?” asked
Ethel, very surprised when she saw him chaining them
up.
“No, they’d only be a nuisance,” grunted Bent. “They’d
frighten the birds,” but Larose guessed from his manner
that that was not the real reason for leaving them at
home.
They started off in a direction exactly opposite to that
of the track leading to the village, and it soon came into
Larose’s mind once again How hopeless it would be to search


for any grave in that vast wilderness, unless some direct
pointer had been given as to whereabouts it lay. But
he kept his eyes well open, hoping that some such pointer
might be given now. Bent’s superstitious nature had
been so well stirred up the previous night that it was
just possible that it was all a pretence his now coming
out after duck. It might be that he really wanted to
find out if the grass were actually refusing to grow over
the spot where he bad buried a body.
But watch Bent intently as Larose did, he could detect
no sign of the man displaying any special interest in the
ground anywhere as they walked along. Still he, Larose,
got some little satisfaction in noticing that Bent became
much brighter and more animated as they were approaching
the far end of the Wrack House lands.
“And this is as far as I go,” announced Bent, “nearly
a thousand acres in all.”
“And where’s the next house?” asked Larose, thinking
he had never been in a more lonely and desolate place
before, in all his life.
“A couple of miles or so over there,” laughed Bent.
“You can’t see it, because it is low down and only one
story high.” He looked cunningly at Larose. “An un-
interesting place for any spooks to make their homes,
eh?”
Larose laughed merrily but the remark made him quite
certain what thoughts were uppermost in Bent’s mind
and that if the latter were indeed responsible for any
grave upon the Fens, then they had just been passing
not very far from it.
They got no ducks, but, as Larose had not really been
expecting any, he was not disappointed. He knew enough
about duck shooting to know that if any had been there
they would not have allowed themselves to be approached,
near enough to be shot, in that open haphazard manner.
They returned home after about a couple of hours, with
Bent now quite cheerful and as if he had, at any rate for
the moment, thrown some great load off his mind. After
dinner he got out his car and drove Larose off to that
section of the Big Drain just by where the latter had


turned off to get to the Professor’s house, the day but one
previously.
“Now this Big Drain,” he explained, “is the main
artery carrying off all water from this part of the Fens.
The waters from all the dykes empty themselves in it
about here, and bring down plenty of eels. So, we can
either fish for them with worms or else spear them down
through the mud at the banks,” and then he began swearing
angrily when he found the pronged head of the long
spear he had brought with him was loose on its handle.
“Blast!” he exclaimed, when all his manipulation failed
to make it firm, “I’ll have to go back and put a couple
of rivets in it. Never mind, you dig about for a worm or
two and use the rod while I am gone. I won’t be very
long,” and off he drove in the car.
Larose had soon dug up some worms and, baiting his
hook with one, started to fish. But his thoughts were far
away and he did not take much interest in what he was
doing.
He could certainly easily get Bent arrested upon the
charge of impersonating the absent Professor and taking
possession of his monies. There was all evidence, too,
that Arnold Gauntry was aiding and abetting him in the
fraud, as was proved by the latter’s letter. But it was
not sufficient to get Gauntry charged merely with fraud.
He wanted to get him convicted of murder and, if it could
be found out that the Professor and the woman Treseow-
thick had met with foul play at Bent’s hands, then he,
Gauntry, would certainly be in it, too, up to the neck.
Indeed, it might turn out that the two brothers—he was
sure they must be brothers as he had made up his mind
now that the shape of their hands were very similar—
had carried out the murders between them. If so, then
the presence of a known murderer in Avon Court that
night when Major Sampon had met his death would be
of supreme significance in determining who had been
the actual killer then.
At this point Larose got a bite and, notwithstanding
his worried preoccupation, it was with something of a
thrill that he landed a fine big eel.


He baited his hook with another worm and let his
thoughts run on.
But could he be quite sure this man Bent was a mur-
derer as well as a thief?
Added to the significant way in which Bent had been
affected the previous night when Ethel Bannister had
acted so realistically in making out she had seen the ghost
of Mary Trescowthick, there were many things which
pointed to it. The sudden disappearance of both the
Professor and the woman was extremely suspicious and
it was most unlikely they would have died from natural
causes both at the same time. Then again, if Mary
Trescowthick’s disappearance were accounted for by the
Professor having dismissed her from his service, why
had Bent told that perfectly unnecessary lie to the t man
in the provision shop that she had died suddenly in a
fit?
But if Bent had actually murdered them both, he must
have disposed of the bodies somewhere, and that was the
snag which was going to prevent the crime being brought
home to him.
Larose rose sharply to his feet here and let his gaze
wander again, as he had let it wander so many times
during his long walk with Bent, over the wide wastes
of fenland stretching so far and desolate in every direction.
Had he been right in thinking they had passed near
some hidden grave that morning and, even if they had,
what chance had he, after all these months, of locating it?
He shrugged his shoulders helplessly, knowing as well
that no charge of murder could be substantiated unless
the bodies were forthcoming. Even unable to deny that
he had been impersonating the Professor, Bent could
just sit tight and insist that both his master and the
woman had gone away and he didn’t know where. Then
fraud would be all which could be proved against him,
with Arnold Gauntry as his accomplice, and what good
would that be in helping to suggest the latter was the
killer of Major Sampon that night?
But suddenly Larose started and his heart almost
seemed to stand still in his dismay, as he saw in the distance


a moving speck, travelling along at a good speed by the
side of the Big Drain. He knew instantly that it could
only he a car and it must be coming to Wrack House.
Then the worst had happened and Gauntry was now
appearing upon the scene!
He moistened his dry lips with his tongue, hut a few
minutes later threw back his head and hurst into a hearty
laugh. What a terrible dilemma to be in, and what on earth
could he say to the man? Gauntry was no fool and would
not he easily taken in. His suspicions, too, would be
aroused straightaway. In their surroundings of guilt, a
man who had once been a member of the Criminal In-
vestigation Department would appear to wrong-doers
as a naked light right over an open barrel of gunpowder
upon which they were sitting.
His thoughts avalanched through him like lightning
as he gave his imagination full rein, and then in a flash
an inspiration came to him. He knew what tale he would
tell! No, he was not beaten yet!
So it was a very amazed Larose who stood, fishing rod
in hand, staring with startled eyes at Gauntry, as the
latter turned his little single-seater car to pass very slowly
over the narrow bridge across the dyke which ran at right
angles to the Big Drain.
Gauntry recognised who it was at once and, as astounded
as Larose appeared to be, brought his car to a standstill
with a jerk and shut off the engine. Then they both gazed
at each other in dead silence for about as long as an or-
dinary man could comfortably hold his breath.
Larose was the first to speak and his words came spas-
modically from his heaving chest. “Gosh, then you’ve
followed me!” he exclaimed. He could hardly get his
words out. “How did you know I’d come this way?”
Gauntry eyed him stonily, with eyes as hard as flint.
“What are you doing here?” he asked curtly.
Larose laughed nervously. “I’ve been fishing,” he
said, “and look at the big eel I’ve caught.” He swallowed
hard. “But I say, is it just by chance you’ve come here?
You know this track leads only to Professor Bannister’s
house? Do you know him?”


“Do you?” asked Gauntry, making no reply to any
of his questions.
Larose nodded. “I do now but I didn’t until yesterday.
I had never even heard of him before.” He went on quickly,
“Look here, I see I’ll have to make a clean breast of it, and
I trust to your honour to respect my confidence. The
fact is”—he hesitated for a long moment here and then
blurted out—“the fact is I’m in smoke. In plain language
I’m keeping out of the way for a few days and I don’t
want anyone to know where I am.”
“But what on earth for?” asked Gauntry, his curiosity
now stronger than anything else.
“Well, things were getting a bit too hot for me about
that major being killed,” replied Larose, “and upon
Inspector Stone’s advice, he is a great friend of mine, I’ve
made myself scarce until things are cleared up. Of course
I know suspicion was stronger against me than anyone
else, but that damned Inspector Flower has been pulling
all the strings he can to get me arrested at once. Still,
Stone’s confident he knows the real murderer and every-
thing will be all right in a few days.”
“Knows the real murderer!” exclaimed Gauntry. His
face had gone a nasty colour. “Then who the devil is he?
Has he said?”
Larose nodded. “Yes, that night watchman. They
took his finger-prints and found out they were on the
records. He served two years for housebreaking some
time ago.” He spoke confidently. “You see, what we
think happened was this. The man’s lamp blew out and
he’d got no matches. So he came up the drive to borrow
some from the house and found Sampon asleep upon
the verandah. He noticed Sampon’s wrist watch and hit
him on the head to get it. He only meant to stun him,
but killed him instead. Then he got frightened and ran
off without picking his pockets.”
“What an extraordinary story!” exclaimed Gauntry
with a heavy frown. “Has Inspector Stone any proof?”
“The wrist watch is missing,” replied Larose, “and
the night watchman has been contradicting himself in a
most suspicious way. He admits now he did fall asleep


and half thinks, as he was waking up, that he saw a man
dash out of the drive. At any rate, Stone believe he’s
guilty and expects him to break down and confess.”
“But why didn’t you sit tight and face the music?”
asked Gauntry, as if very mystified and a little bit suspicious
as well.
“I just didn’t want to be so shamed before everybody
by being arrested,” said Larose. “I’ve been told I’m on
the fist for a knighthood in the next Birthday Honours,
and if I had been arrested, if only for an hour, all my chances
would have been spoilt.”
“And how did you happen to come here?” asked
Gauntry.
“It was just by chance,” explained Larose volubly.
“I had driven in my car yesterday, bringing a camping
outfit with me, to camp somewhere on these Fens, as
being a place where I would be certain to be quite safe.
Then I saw a thick fog coming on and bolted for the only
house there was in sight. There was a girl there and she
told me it belonged to her uncle, this Professor Bannister,
who never allowed people to trespass on his land. She
seemed very frightened and said he might put his two
savage Alsatian dogs on to me. She told me to go off
at once.”
Larose paused to swallow hard. Then he shrugged
his shoulders. “But how could I go? ” he went on. “This
cursed fog was coming down like a blanket and I daren’t
try to get back over all those narrow plank-bridges again.
Then I happened to catch sight of a big heap of empty
whisky bottles in the yard and an inspiration came to
me. I said I was a traveller for a Scotch whisky firm,
and it appeared I couldn’t have put up a better excuse.
The Professor is a boozer and it happened he was out
of drink. The girl took the bait at once.” He grinned at
his own cleverness. “Then the rest was easy.”
“Oh, was it? ” asked Gauntry unpleasantly. He sneered.
“Do you think you deceived him? ”
Larose laughed seoffingly. “I’m sure I did. By great
good luck I had two bottles of whisky with me in the car
and we became friends at once. I played chess with him
i


and he wouldn’t let me go. I stopped the night, and
we drove into Newmarket this morning in my car—he
was out of petrol too—to get more whisky.” He nodded
triumphantly. “We are bosom friends now and with his
mania for chess, I believe I could stop here as long as I
liked.”
“Oh, and how long are you going to stop?” queried
Gauntry with a heavy frown.
Larose frowned too. “I can’t stop. It’s too risky.
I’m off to-morrow.” He appeared to remember something
and asked rather anxiously, “Were there any men re-
pairing the road just now, as you turned off? Ah, they
are still there, are they?” He nodded most uneasily.
“Well, one of them recognised me as I passed him, and
he saw me come this way. He called out to me. He used
to be a road-mender near my own place, Carmel Abbey,
and if it gets into the newspapers that I can’t be found,
he may talk and give the whole show away. So, I’m
inclined to go off, first thing to-morrow, directly it gets
fight.”
“And what do you think of Professor Bannister?”
asked Gauntry, after a short pause, fixing Larose intently
with his eyes.
“Mad, like all great men!” replied Larose instantly.
Then he added quickly, “At least, I suppose he’s great
although, as I say, I’d never heard of him or his greatness
before. But he must be great, I suppose, to have written
all those books he’s got there lying about.” He made a
grimace. “Highbrows are not in my fine and never will
be.” A thought seemed to strike him, and he asked,
“But do you know him well? ”
Gauntry shook his head, “No, I’ve never seen him. But
I’ve done business with him in connection with the selling of
rubber shares and, being up this way, I thought I’d look in.”
“But he won’t see you,” said Larose. “He’ll turn
you away at once.”
“Oh, no, he won’t,” laughed Gauntry. “I’ve come to
give him some money.”
Larose spoke earnestly, “Well, you won’t give me away,
will you?”


“I suppose not,” replied Gauntry slowly.
“And you won’t tell anybody you’ve seen me?” went
on Larose.
Gauntry shook his head. “No, I’ve always found it
best to mind my own business.” He eyed Larose intently
again. “But where are you going to-morrow?”
“I’ve thought it all out,” replied Larose confidingly.
“I shall go to Dunwich, on the Suffolk coast. It’s a small
village and I shall stay at the little inn there. Then I
shall be able to get the newspapers, and telephone up to
Stone or Sir George if I want to. I see now it was a mistake
to get right away from newspapers and telephone.”
Gauntry started his engine. “Well, I’ll be going on
now,” he said. He smiled for the first time. “No, I won’t
give you away. I’ll pretend I’ve never seen you before
and it’ll be a bit of a joke between us.” He looked down
at the big eel Larose had caught. “I may even come out
later and do a bit of fishing myself.”
“Yes, and perhaps try and push me in the Big Drain
when I’m not looking,” muttered Larose, as he gazed
after the retreating car. He smiled. “Still, I think I
took him in right enough. These big rogues are often
big babies if you know the right way to handle them.”


CHAPTER V
THE HOUSE OF EVIL
WITH a very thoughtful expression upon his face,
Gauntry drove on up to the house. He turned
into- the yard at the back to find no one there,
but almost immediately Bent appeared from one of the
sheds, holding the big eel-spear in his hand.
“Gad,” he exclaimed, “you gave me a fright! I wondered
who the blazes it was.”
“ But didn’t you get my letter? ” asked Gauntry, jumping
quickly out of the car.
“Yes, but I didn’t think you’d turn up so soon. Still,
I’m devilish glad to see you. Come into the house. I’ve
a lot to tell you.”
“And I’ve a lot to tell you, too,” nodded Gauntry
significantly, “but I don’t think I’ll go inside.” He inclined
his head in the direction of the house. “You’ve still got
that girl there?”
Bent grinned. “My niece, you mean? Yes, of course,
I have, and very useful I find her. She cooks beautifully
and is a pretty creature, too.” His grin broadened. “If
we weren’t uncle and niece I might almost be inclined to
marry her. I’ve thought about it several times.”
“Don’t be a fool,” said Gauntry rudely. “I consider
it a great mistake you ever got her here. No, I won’t go
into the house. I shall feel safer talking to you outside.
Come back into that shed.”
“I’ve got another visitor here, too,” went on Bent as
he led the way back to where he’d been repairing the
spear. “Didn’t you pass a man, fishing, as you came along
by the Big Drain?”
“Yes, and I stopped to speak to him,” nodded Gauntry
grimly. “I’ve met him before.”
Bent appeared most astonished. “You know him!” he
exclaimed. “He travels for Macgregor’s whisky.”
“Macgregor’s whisky be damned!” scoffed Gauntry


contemptuously. “He’s an ex-detective from Scotland
Yard and” —he gritted his teeth together menacingly—
“that blackguard Gilbert Larose!”
Then followed a ten minutes’ conversation with Bent
one moment clenching his fists in furious anger and the
next nodding his head exultingly, with his eyes gleaming
with a bitter hate. His face was sweating and he had
taken off his patch, his badly squinting eye thus adding
not a little to his general appearance of malignity.
“And are you sure the devil will hang?” he asked at
length. “You say he can’t get out of it? ”
“I don’t see how he possibly can,” replied Gauntry
emphatically, “for his running away like this will make
things look blacker than ever for him.” He nodded
significantly. “I’ll take care that information as to where
he’s hiding reaches the proper quarters. That Inspector
Flower is as spiteful as a nest of wasps about the handling
of the case being taken from him.”
Bent suddenly looked doubtful. “But I don’t altogether
like the matter being left to the police!” he exclaimed.
“Remember he’s one of them himself, and they’ll shield
him all they can. He’s got money, too, and can pull a
lot of strings.”
“But he can’t muzzle the Press,” smiled Gauntry
cunningly, “and directly I get back to town I shall type
off a little letter to them. It will make good reading that
Gilbert Larose, Esquire, of Carmel Abbey, has been seen
camping on the Norfolk Fens, or is now stopping at
Dunwich. They all know he’s suspected and it’ll be meat
and drink to the Yellow newspapers to print anything
about him.”
But Bent was very grim. “I think we’re milksops,” he
said. “We’ve got him here and we could put paid to him
ourselves without a soul being any the wiser.” He clenched
his fists again. “I’ll do it myself and there’d be no marks
on him if he’s ever found. We’ve learnt our lesson there
and we’ll run no risks this time. I’ll just strangle him”
—he threw out his hands—“and he’ll just vanish. No
one will ever know he’s been here.”
“And you’ll strangle his car, too, I suppose,” commented


Gauntry sarcastically, “and this girl you’ve got here, as
well! Oh, but you’d have to shut her mouth! Women are
the very devil to talk if they get a hint of any mystery
in anything.”
“But she’s a little fool,” grunted Bent contemptuously,
“and we could feed her up with any tale. She’s pretty
enough, as you’ll say when you’ve seen her, but she hasn’t
got the brain of a mouse or I shouldn’t have humbugged
her for so long.” He caught hold of the other’s sleeve.
“I tell you, Harry, I vote for doing in the chap ourselves.
He’s our meat and we mustn’t let him go now we’ve got
the chance.”
“Don’t be a fool, Joe, it’d be much too risky,” said
Gauntry sharply. “Why, those road-repairers saw him
come this way, and one of them knows who he is. He was
in a devil of a stew about it just now.” He nodded. “We
can’t afford to have anyone making enquiries here. You
know that quite well.”
Bent’s face fell, and he said spitefully, “You’ve just
sneered about me being taken in by him, but what about
yourself? How do you know he’s not told you a pack
of lies ? If he’s Larose, as you say, how do you know he’s
not been put on to find out all about me and Bannister? ”
“When he’s in such a scrape himself he’s likely to be
meddling in other affairs, isn’t he?” sneered Gauntry. He
shook his head. “No, his talk fits in all right with what
I myself know about him. He’s just admitted Inspector
Stone is shielding him and I know that for a fact. So it’s
quite plausible he’s come away on Stone’s advice, although”
—he smiled evilly—“a lot of good that’ll do him.”
A short silence followed and then Bent said with a
frown, “Well, I’ve got some things which are worrying
me here and the first is that cursed American publisher
of Bannister’s is coming here to see me to-morrow, and
I don’t know what the blazes to do. I had a letter from
him yesterday.”
“Then wire him at once that you’re going away im-
mediately,” exclaimed Gauntry, looking very worried.
‘Say you’re travelling abroad somewhere and don’t know
when you’ll be back.”


“But I don’t know where to wire him,” said Bent
disgustedly. “He wrote from a hotel in Birmingham just
before, as he said, he was leaving to visit a couple of places
before he came on to me. You remember it was this chap
who arrived here without warning in April. Fortunately,
I met him when I was out fishing by the Big Drain, and
I bluffed him that Bannister had gone away. He was
very annoyed because he was going back to New York
the next week and couldn’t come again for some months.”
“Well, what’s the trouble?” asked Gauntry. “Tell him
the Professor’s gone away again.”
“But that’ll look queer,” said Bent, “because last time
he was inclined to be suspicious and not to believe me
at first. You see, there was a strong wind blowing and
I didn’t hear his car until it was within a few yards of
me. Then I got a bit flurried and started swearing at him
for trespassing. Then I wasn’t too quick with my answers
about Bannister and he eyed me very queerly.”
“Well, you’ll be all ready for him now,” said Gauntry,
“and can tell a plausible tale without any hesitation.”
“Yes, but the awkward part is,” went on Bent, “don’t
you forget that £750 cheque came from him only last
week, and in writing to say I’d got it, in reply to what
he asked, I said I was hard at work on my next book
and that it would be ready in a few weeks. I had to reply
to his question.”
“Has he ever seen the Professor, do you know?” asked
Gauntry after a few moments’ thought.
Bent shook his head. “No, of course he hasn’t. No
one has seen him since he came to five here, about twelve
years ago. He’s often told me that.” He grinned cunningly.
“If you hadn’t told me who this devil here is, I was half
thinking of getting him to make out he was Bannister.
I would have pretended to arrange it as a joke. You
see, I know for certain that Bannister hadn’t allowed
himself to be photographed since he became famous, and
so no one knows what he is like.”
Gauntry appeared to be thinking hard. “I might,” he
said slowly, “I might, although it may be damned risky,
make out I’m the Professor.” He looked at the rough,


uncouth Bent, and then let his glance fall upon his own
spick-and-span clothes. “At any rate I should more look
the part.”
Bent grinned delightedly. “Yes, you do it. You can
be in bed and say you’re not well, so that he doesn’t stop
long. I’ll pack that girl off to the village the moment
he comes, so that she’ll know nothing about it.”
“And about that girl!” asked Gauntry sharply. “What’s
going to become of her when you leave here ? ” He spoke
warningly. “You know you can’t stop here much longer,
not a day after we’ve got rid of those shares and the next
royalties from the London publishers come in. Then what
are you going to do with the girl? ”
“Pack her off with the money that’s due to her, I
suppose,” frowned Bent. He sighed, “Although I tell
you I wouldn’t mind keeping her by me.” He looked a
bit shame-faced. “I’ve got rather taken with her lately
and shall hate to be without her, wherever I am.”
“You big ass!” exclaimed Gauntry angrily. “That’s
the way so many people have brought penal servitude and
worse upon themselves—through some woman.” He
nodded. “She’ll probably talk a lot about what’s happened
here as it is and”—his eyes were hard and steely—“there
must be no confidences between you and her because
she’s got a pretty face.”
“Ah, and she could make herself very dangerous!”
nodded Bent, suddenly remembering about the ghost
Ethel Bannister was so sure she had seen. He looked at
Gauntry uneasily and went on very slowly, “She saw that
Trescowthick woman’s spirit last night.”
“She saw her what?” asked Gauntry, his face all puckered
up into an incredulous frown.
“Saw her spirit, I said,” snapped Bent, “her spook,
her ghost, or whatever you like to call it,” and then“,
taking no notice of the contempt upon Gauntry’s face,
he went on to relate all that had happened the previous
night.
When he had finished, Gauntry looked more disgustedly
at him than ever. “And do you mean to tell me,” he asked
angrily, “that a big, hulking fellow like you, who can be


as callous and bloody as a slaughterman when he wants
to, can actually be such a booby as to believe the girl
saw anything at all?”
“Certainly, I do,” replied Bent fiercely, “and it was
the old woman’s spook, without a shadow of doubt,
which she saw.” His voice rose in its earnestness. “Why,
man, she described Mary exactly and she knew nothing of
what she was like before.”
“How do you know?” asked Gauntry sneeringly.
“Couldn’t they have told her in the village?”
“But they hadn’t,” insisted Bent. “Ethel’s a shy,
timid girl, with no curiosity at all, and she’s much too
reserved to have had conversations with strangers. I’d
told her she was never to talk to anyone in Foxwold and
I believe she’s obeyed me.”
“And what did that damned Larose think of it?”
asked Gauntry with a scowl.
“He was as scared as I was,” replied Bent. “His
mouth was like a rabbit trap when she was telling us
what she’d seen.”
“Then you were all a pack of fools,” commented Gauntry,
“and I can understand better now why Larose is hiding
himself away. He’s got a yellow streak in him or else
high living on his wife’s money has made him soft. At
any rate, he’s nothing like the man of character, now,
he was once supposed to be. But come on, I want to
see this girl. I’ll soon tell you if she’s a sly one. These
quiet girls often are.” He nodded significantly. “I’ll leave
you my automatic and half a dozen cartridges when I
go, and you can pump bullets into any more ghosts which
appear.”
Bent led the way into the kitchen and called out loudly
for Ethel Bannister to come. But it was quite a minute
before she appeared, which was very quick considering
she had had to come in a roundabout way from behind
the shed where the two men had been holding their
conversation. She had managed to overhear quite a lot
which they had said, and so it was with some effort that
she composed her face to mask the emotion she was
experiencing.


“This is my niece,” announced Bent with a grim smile.
“Ethel, this is a friend of mine, Mr. Gauntry, to whom
you posted a letter for me the other day.”
“I don’t remember,” smiled the girl, as she came forward
and shyly took the hand which Gauntry held out.
Gauntry took her in well and frowned slightly. She
was certainly attractive and certainly, also—the thought
for some reason made him uneasy—no fool. Her face
was intelligent and brimful of common sense.
“Well, Miss Bannister, and how do you like living
here?” he asked.
“It’s very lonely,” she replied hesitatingly. She glanced
at Bent. “But I promised Uncle I’d stop for six months.”
“And after that?” asked Gauntry with a smile.
“I think I shall go to London and train to be a nurse.”
“And then what about me?” asked Bent jovially. “I
suppose I’ll have to go back to tinned goods again.”
“Well, Uncle, it isn’t fair, is it,” she asked, “to expect
me to remain on here for ever?” She made a grimace.
“I never have anyone but you to talk to, and I hate these
mists and fogs.”
“Oh, it’s a sweetheart you want,” laughed Bent, “and
I wonder you haven’t got one before.”
She shook her head. “ No, it’s not that. I want a career.
I don’t like having to do nothing but housework.”
The two men went into Bent’s study and Gauntry
whispered quickly, “Make some excuse to get her out
of the house so that there’ll be no chance of her over-
hearing us. She’s not the fool you think she is and, if
I’m going to make out I’m Bannister, we must have
everything cut and dried before that damned publisher
appears.”
Bent nodded and went to the door of the room. “Here,
Ethel,” he called out, “just take that eel-spear to Mr.
Curtis and tell him I’ll follow in a few minutes. You’ll
find him by the Big Drain just before the first dyke.”
So, a few minutes later, Larose was put in possession
of what she had managed to overhear and his mouth
went a little dry at the recital. “That settles it,” he nodded,
“and we’ll have to clear out to-morrow morning. I’ll


say I want to get away very early and won’t bother about
any breakfast. You can slip out before me and be waiting
for me here, but you’ll have to smuggle any things you
want to take, in my car the last thing to-night.”
“But Bent may get up to see you off,” said the girl
anxiously, “and then what shall I do?”
“He won’t get up,” nodded Larose. “I’ve got some
sleeping tablets with me, and we must manage to give
them both a good dose to-night. You can slip the stuff
in their drinks, the last thing before you go to bed.”
“But won’t it make his brother very suspicious about
you,” asked Ethel, “when they find you’ve taken me
away?” She nodded. “He looks a very shrewd man to
me.”
“Oh, he’s shrewd enough,” laughed Larose, “but look
what a good excuse you’ve got. You can leave a note
behind, saying that seeing that ghost has terrified you
and you can’t stop on in the house. Say, too, I didn’t
know anything about your leaving but that you’re going
to walk on and make me pick you up when I overtake
you.”
“Oh, what a friend you are!” she exclaimed thankfully.
“What should I have done without you?”
“And what should I have done without you?” returned
Larose. “Why, my dear girl, you’ve saved the whole
situation for me.” He went on briskly, “Now, does this
Bent keep any money in the house?”
“He gets £lO sent him at a time from the bank and
the last £lO came last week. He keeps it in one of the
drawers of his desk.”
“And he spent about five pounds of it in Newmarket
yesterday!” commented Larose. “Well, you’ll have to
take all you can find, as part of the wages due to you.
That’ll make them more inclined to believe I had nothing
to do with it.”
“But oh, how glad I shall be to get away!” exclaimed
the girl. “Thank Heaven, it is only a few hours and nothing
can happen to us in that short time.”
But Larose, in his own mind, was not quite so sure
about that. He had yet to pass all the rest of the day in


the company of two desperate men, desperate with the
frenzy of cornered rats, too, if the very slightest inkling came
to them as to what was going on. They would he watchful,
and one false step on his side and the avalanche would fall.
All the time he would have to he playing a part, and
the cold steely eyes of Gauntry and the murderous-looking
one of Bent would be fixed on him to read him through
and through.
And if anything happened he would he so helpless.
Bent might come up behind him and grip his windpipe
with those hairy paws of his, he might knock him out
with some sudden blow or he might stab him with that
ugly-looking knife which, just now, he had come provided
with to gut the eels.
And the mental agony would be that he could do
absolutely nothing to safeguard himself. He must give
no sign that he knew he was in danger and he must betray
nothing of the fear which he felt. He must play up to
Gauntry as if grateful to him for the confidence he was
respecting, and he must play up to Bent as if he were
the carefree Scotch whisky traveller out upon his holiday.
But he dissembled his thoughts and exclaimed brightly
to Ethel Bannister, “Yes, to-day will soon pass and this
time to-morrow you will be in my beautiful home, Carmel
Abbey, among friends who will take every care of you
and see to it that your future is a happy one.” He shook
his head warningly. “But now I think you’d better go
back. You’ve been here quite long enough. Tell them I
have caught five eels and am very excited about it.”
The girl went off as he had bidden her and later in the
afternoon Gauntry and Bent came up in the car. Bent’s
manner was hearty and most friendly, and he laughed
boisterously at several feeble jokes he cracked. They both
joined in the fishing and, of studied purpose but with
some mental strain, Larose never attempted to guard
against being pushed into the water. He was assured
that his safest course was to appear as if he thought they
were all good friends together.
But for all his brave front, the evening was not a pleasant
one. Ethel was looking white and nervous and he caught


Gauntry many times regarding her thoughtfully. Also,
it was obviously very hard for Bent continually to keep
up his appearance of friendliness, and every now and then his
one eye would glare menacingly, in a most vicious manner.
After the evening meal they played nap for nearly two
hours, with Larose, by making some very ill-judged calls,
obligingly dropping more than five pounds to the others.
That seemed to please Gauntry quite a lot, and gradually
he lost his thoughtful frown. Yes, this policeman fellow,
Larose, had lost his kick now and was undoubtedly nothing
like the man of keen intelligence he had once been reported
to be.
About ten o’clock Larose, upon a secret sign from Ethel,
knew that both the men had drunk their doped liquor
and a few minutes later he started yawning and remarking
how sleepy he was.
“It’s that fishing in the sun,” he laughed. “I’ve always
noticed that when you have sat fishing like that for some
time you always feel sleepy at night. I’ll go off to bed,
if you don’t mind, so that I’ll be quite fit for to-morrow.
I’ll go off very quietly without disturbing anyone.”
Neither Gauntry nor Bent raised any objection, indeed
that was what they preferred, as they were wanting to
perfect all their plans for the reception of the American
publisher on the morrow. But they did not stay up as
long as they had intended, for they both soon became
sleepy too.
So up to bed they went, with them both, however, first
tiptoeing to the door of Larose’s room.
“Yes, he’s all right,” whispered Gauntry. “I can hear
him snoring ajid he must have gone off to sleep at once.”
But as a matter of fact Larose was not asleep. He had
heard their stealthy footsteps, and accordingly had
simulated some gentle snores. He was not even undressed
but, with his coat off, was sitting up in a chair. He did
not dare to trust himself to the softness of a comfortable
bed, in case he over-slept himself.
He need not have worried there, however, for Ethel
tapped softly upon his door even as the first rays of the
morning fight began to penetrate into the room.


She opened the door very softly and looked in. “I’ll
go and chain up the dogs,” she whispered. “They might
growl.if they saw you without their master and we daren’t
take a single risk.” She nodded. “I saw that man give
Bent a pistol last night, when you were out of the room,
and he showed him how to use it.”
Dawn came and the morning crept on. Five, six, seven
o’clock and both Bent and Gauntry were still sleeping.
Towards eight, however, Bent lazily opened his eyes and,
blinking hard for a few moments, suddenly became aware
how flooded with sunshine his room was.
“Hell,” he exclaimed, “it must be damned late!” and
rolling over to look at his watch upon the chair, he saw
it wanted only ten minutes to eight.
He jumped out of bed at once, vaguely wondering how
it was he heard no movements of Ethel downstairs. Then,
instantly, his eyes fell upon a sheet of note-paper which
had been pushed under his door.
He picked it up frowningly and gritted his teeth together
furiously at almost the first words he read.
“My Deab Uncle,
“After seeing that awful ghost I cannot stop here
another night. It is impossible for me to sleep. So I
am going to walk on and make Mr. Curtis pick me up
when he overtakes me. I shall tell him I have arranged
it with you so that he won’t refuse. You owe for fifteen
weeks’ salary, but I took' the four pound notes out of
the desk. So will you deduct that and send on the
balance to me, care of the General Post Office, London?
I shall get Mr. Curtis to drop me at some railway station
and then I will take the train on from there. Thank
you for your kindness. I do so hope you won’t be angry
with me.
“Your affectionate niece,
“ETHEL BANNISTER.
“P.S. You said you would pay for repairing my
watch when you knocked it off the table. I expect
it will cost quite ten shillings, so will you please add
that on? ”


“Blast her!” exclaimed Bent, “I’ll never send her a
penny,” and he ran out to tell Gauntry the news.
He found him still sleeping and had to shake him to
wake him up. Gauntry read the letter without a word,
hut then remarked, “And it’s a damned good thing, too.
I’m glad she’s gone. I could see you were well on the way
to making a fool of yourself if she were here with you much
longer.” He looked at his watch and frowned heavily.
“But I say, isn’t there something funny about us both
having slept so late. I never sleep all the night through
like this.”
Bent stared hard at him for a long moment before he
took in what he meant. “But she couldn’t have given us
anything,” he said. “She brought no medicines and I’ve
got no sleeping stuff in the house.”
“How do you know she’d brought nothing?” asked
Gauntry, sharply.
The other laughed coarsely. “Because, when she’s been
outside milking I’ve often gone through everything she’s
got in her room.” He nodded cunningly. “ I wasn’t taking
everything for granted, I tell you, and I wanted to make
sure she wasn’t sending away letters to anyone. I used
to count the envelopes she’d got in her box to see if she’d
been using any.” He nodded again. “No, I’ve seen every
blessed thing she’d got and there was not a spot of medicine
among them.”
But Gauntry was not quite satisfied in his own mind,
particularly so as he still felt rather drowsy. He wondered
uneasily if after all it would not have been better, at all
risks, to deal with Larose as the other had wanted
to.
Towards eleven o’clock Bent, who all the time had been
on the look out, saw a car coming up the track in the
distance and, according to plan, Gauntry slipped on his
pyjamas and prepared to take to his bed. He had decided
to make out he had got a bad attack of gout, as he had
recently been visiting a client of his who was suffering
from one. He had seen him with his foot all bandaged
up and, accordingly, Bent had got ready a bandage, made
from lengths of a tom sheet. Now, it was hurriedly wrapped


round and round one of his feet, and the ensuing pro-
truberance under the coverlet upon the bed suggested to
the conspirators that everything would look perfectly
natural for one suffering from such a painful complaint.
The blind was pulled half down, leaving the room in
semi darkness. Gauntry put on a pair of large, dark glasses,
which Professor Bannister had used and Bent had found
for him, and nodded that he was then all ready.
As they had expected, the arrival was the American
publisher and Bent opened the door to him with what he
thought was the gravity becoming a servant whose master
was ill.
“I’m Dr. Hiram Salter,” announced the American,
“and I wrote Professor Bannister I was coming.”
“Yes, certainly, sir,” nodded Bent, blinking unpleasantly
with his one uncovered eye. He hesitated. “But I don’t
quite know whether I ought to let you see the master.
He’s ill and has to be kept perfectly quiet.”
“Oh, I’m sorry to hear that,” exclaimed the other
sympathetically, “and I hope it’s not serious. What’s he
got the matter with him? ”
“A very bad gout attack, sir,” said Bent seriously, “and
he’s got a lot of pain.”
The American considered. “ But I’ve come a long distance
out of my way to see him,” he said at length, “and,
remember this is the second time I’ve been here, both
times at a lot of inconvenience, too.” His face brightened.
“I know, of course, gout can be very painful as I’ve had a
touch myself; still, it isn’t a grave sickness and perhaps the
Professor will spare me a few minutes. I won’t keep him
long.”
“Well, I’ll see, sir,” said Bent, after a short pause.
“You just come inside, will you?” and as if with great
reluctance, he led him into what was evidently the Professor’s
dining-room. Then making sure the door was closed behind
him, he rushed off at a quick tip-toe run to Gauntry.
“He’s a doctor!” he announced in an excited whisper.
“He calls himself Dr. Salter!” He looked most per-
turbed. “Oh hell!”
“Don’t be an ass,” snarled Gauntry. “They’re all


doctors where he comes from, the man who makes your
false teeth or who sells you a cake of soap over a shop
counter. It often means nothing over there.” He spoke
sharply. “Tell me what he’s like?”
Bent looked somewhat relieved and wiped over his
forehead with his sleeve. “He’s tall and thin like a regular
Yank,” he said, “and he looks darned smart in the head,
too.” He nodded wamingly, “He’s a shrewdie, all right,
and you’ll have to be devilish cute to put it over him.”
“Bring me a drink,” said Gauntry curtly, and Bent
at once left the room, returning, however, quickly with
a tumbler half filled with what looked like port wine.
“What the devil’s this?” asked Gauntry with some
irritation.
“What you need,” replied Bent, “a stiff whisky in
port wine. It’ll stoke you up properly.”
“You fool, whisky doesn’t go with port!” snapped
Gauntry. “It ought to have been brandy if anything.”
He reached out his hand. “Never mind, give it me and
show that fellow in. I want to get it over. Oh, and when
he’s been here ten minutes, not a minute longer, come in
and ask me if I want anything, or say it’s time I had my
sleep. You understand? Play the faithful servant and
look as little like a boozing barman as you can.”
Bent winked his unpleasant wink and left the room. A
moment later the publisher from America was ushered in.
Bent had been quite correct in describing the latter
as looking a shrewdie. He certainly was shrewd-looking,
with an alert, intelligent face and very keen grey eyes.
He regarded Gauntry very intently as he advanced to the
bed and shook hands.
“ So sorry to find you sick, Professor,” he said in educated
tones. “It’s hard luck for everyone when you can’t put
down those great ideas of yours on paper.” He spoke as
if rather surprised. “But you’re much younger-looking
than I expected!”
“It’s living the life I do that keeps me young,” said
Gauntry slowly and in a very deep voice. “Away from
all the world here, I have no worries, and the sharp fenland
air is invigorating.”
K


“But I shouldn’t think it was too good for your gout,”
commented the American doubtfully. “I’m told you
get six long months of fog and mist here.”
“All that,” agreed Gauntry readily, “but still it suits
me and, except for occasional attacks like this, I keep in
the best of health.”
“Well, I hope you’re taking good care of yourself now,”
nodded Dr. Salter warmly. He looked round the room
as if expecting to see some medicine bottles about and
asked, “But what treatment, may I ask, are you giving
yourself? ”
Gauntry cursed him for his inquisitiveness, not having
the remotest idea what treatment was generally given
for gout. He was determined, however, not to allow
himself to be taken out of his depth.
“Just rest!” he replied with a deep sigh. “I always
find rest is the only thing for me.”
“But that’s foolish!” exclaimed the doctor sharply.
“As medical men, we both know that colchicum has a
specific effect in gout.” He could not contain his surprise.
“Do you mean to tell me you are not taking any?”
Gauntry shook his head frowningly, as if the catechism
were not pleasing to him. “I know what suits me best,”
he said a little testily. “I leave it to nature and let it run
its course.”
The American saw his annoyance and at once turned
the conversation. “Well, and how are you getting on
with your new book? ” he asked.
Gauntry took quite half a minute before he replied.
It had been most disconcerting to learn that the man was
a real doctor, and he was now wondering if he had said
anything which would raise suspicion in the other’s mind
that he was not acting as a medical man would.
“Oh, quite well!” he replied at length. “I shall have
it all finished in about three or four months.”
The doctor almost jumped from his chair. “Three or
four months!” he exclaimed. He looked quite worried.
“Do you forget you are under contract-with us to deliver
it by the end of next month? Why, we have already
listed it as among our forthcoming autumn publications!


We have broadcast it everywhere that it will be on sale
in November.”
Gauntry smiled a sickly smile. “Well, you shall have
it by the agreed time,” he said. “I am rather absent-
minded and had quite forgotten when I promised it to
you.”
Dr. Salter seemed relieved. “Well, who shall we get
to write the preface? ” he asked.
“I’m not particular,” replied Gauntry with a shrug of
his shoulders. “Get whom you like.”
“But you insisted in your last letter but one to me,”
commented the doctor with a very puzzled frown, “that
we must be most careful whom we asked.”
“Well, I’ve changed my mind,” said Gauntry, a little
testily. “I see I’ve been too fussy. That’s all.”
“Then I’ll ask Dr. Seltzer,” said the doctor.
“Good,” nodded Gauntry, “he’ll do!”
“He’ll do!” exclaimed the doctor with his face all
puckered up. “You don’t forget Dr. Seltzer is a woman? ”
“Ah, of course not,” nodded Gauntry, “and a very
worthy one, too.” He spoke carelessly and as if the matter
were of no account. “A man or a woman, it’s all the
same to me.”
Dr. Salter stroked his chin thoughtfully, and then
asked, “Well, what do you think of H. G. Wells’s new
book, Whence, Where and When? We sent you a copy.”
“Excellent!” nodded Gauntry. “I thought it a splendid
piece of work!”
The doctor frowned. “But I thought you didn’t like
Wells. Remember, you wrote in Abnormal Life that he
ought to have joined up with the Girl Guides. You said
it was only their society that he was fitted for.”
“So I did,” admitted Gauntry readily. “So I did. But
I’ve altered my mind since. He is one of our greatest
men.”
Dr. Salter changed the conversation abruptly. “Now,
what do you think of the view Makenoff takes of the South
American fossil doth?” He spoke most earnestly. “I
should like you to give me your candid opinion there,
as it will be of profound interest to us all in America.”


Gauntry swallowed hard. He was in a tight comer
there and did not know what to say. Indeed, he had never
heard of any fossil sloth. But he was saved from the dis-
courtesy of refusing to discuss the matter with his visitor
by the entrance of Bent, as his faithful servitor.
“I think, Master,” he said with the familiarity of an
old dependent, “that you’ve talked quite enough. So,
I’ll bring you another glass of that port and you must
try and get some sleep.” He turned to the amazed Dr.
Salter, who was thunderstruck at the idea of an acute
gouty sufferer having ‘another glass of port’ and added
apologetically, “I’m sorry, sir, but I know my master,
and I simply won’t let him go on any longer.”
“He’s right,” supplemented Gauntry very weakly, “I
feel the excitement is bringing on another attack.”
The doctor stared hard and harder from one to the
other of them in a most startled sort of way. Then he
seemed about to address himself rather angrily to Gauntry.
But he quickly thought better of it and, rising to his feet,
advanced to shake hands with the sufferer.
“Good-bye,” he said most politely. “I hope you’ll be
better soon,” and with a courtly little bow, he preceded
Bent out of the room.
“Ah,” he exclaimed as, upon their way back to the
front entrance to the house, they passed a window looking
into the yard, “I see you’ve got some Alsatians here.”
He stopped to regard them interestedly. “What do you
keep them for?”
“Mostly to prevent strangers approaching the house,”
said Bent. “They’re very savage and everyone knows
we’ve got them. Professor Bannister must have perfect
privacy to carry on his great work.”
“Exactly!” nodded the doctor. He regarded the dogs
intently. “They look in fine condition. How long have
you had them?”
“Oh, a long time,” replied Bent evasively, “between
three and four years, I should think.”
The doctor regarded them more interestedly than ever.
“As long as that? ” He shook his head. “But I wouldn’t
have thought they were so old.”


Bent saw him off in his car and returned to Gauntry
with great relief. “He’s gone,” he chuckled, “and I think
we cooked his goose well.”
“I hope so,” grunted Gauntry, “but you only came in
just in time. He was starting to ask me about some
fossils and I should have had to be positively rude to
him to put him off.” He became quite cheerful. “Now,
let’s have a decent meal. My breakfast was choking me
this morning at the thought of his coming, and I hardly
ate anything.”
“Me, too,” laughed Bent, “but I had three or four
spots to brace me up.”
They sat down to their meal with light hearts, but they
would hardly have been so cheerful if they had known
what was passing through the mind of their late visitor
at that exact moment.
He was profoundly suspicious that he had not seen
Professor Bannister at all!
As had been Bent’s opinion, he was a very shrewd man,
and as he now looked back upon his interview with the
invalid, thought by thought began to pile up that for
some reason he had been deliberately deceived and that
the person he had been talking to was anyone but the
renowned Professor himself.
Now he came to think of it, not once during the con-
versation had the man’s replies to his questions suggested
he was conversant with Professor Bannister’s literary
affairs. He had not known when it was contracted that
the manuscript of the new book should be delivered, he
had not known that some scientific confrere of great
eminence was to be asked to write a preface and he had
not remembered—a most dreadful lapse—that Dr. Seltzer,
with whom he had certainly often corresponded, was a
woman.
Then, too, about the man pretending he was Professor
Bannister laid up with an acute attack of gout, why, it
was a farce, it was a huge joke!
The doctor laughed heartily here, as he negotiated his
way along the narrow track leading on to the Fox wold
road.


Fancy any medical man drinking port wine when
suffering from such an ailment, and fancy him not cutting
short his suffering at once with some form or other of the
world-wide panacea for gout, the bulb of the meadow
saffron, colchicum!
Then he frowned in annoyance. Of course, the whole
business was just part of Professor Bannister’s well-known
eccentricity. Without doubt he had a morbid aversion
to having speech with strangers and so had taken these
means of escaping an interview. Here, the doctor laughed
again. Certainly it had its amusing side, but still it was
rather exasperating.
And it was the added feeling of annoyance at the thought
of those up at Wrack House who might now be chuckling
at the success of the deception they had carried out which
made Dr. Salter pull up his car in Foxwold. He had
caught sight of a constable whom he rightly decided must
belong to the village and he stopped to speak to him.
“Good morning, Constable,” he said. “Now do you
happen to know the great Professor Bannister?”
“Yes, sir,” replied the policeman. “He lives not far
from here, at Wrack House. I’ve spokep to him once or
twice.”
“Well, have you seen him about lately?”
“Yes, sir, the day before yesterday, not in the village
here, but three or four miles back on the Newmarket
Road. He was in a car with another gentleman.”
“Oh, he was out in his car, was he?”
“Not in his car, sir. It was a strange one and he was
not at the wheel.”
“Then did you happen to notice what the man who
was driving was like. Was he a biggish-looking man
with a black beard?”
“No, sir, he was a good-looking gentleman, much
younger than the Professor. The Professot was the one
with the black beard.”
Dr. Salter elevated his eyebrows. “Oh, then Professor
Bannister has a black beard?”
“Yes, sir, a big bushy one, and you can always pick
him out by it, a long way away.”


The doctor whistled. “And he’s got a pink patch over
one eye, hasn’t he?”
The constable shook his head. “No, sir, not that I
know of, unless he’s met with some trouble to his eye
lately.”
A short silence followed, and then Dr. Salter asked,
“He’s very eccentric, isn’t he, this great Professor, and he
doesn’t like strangers to visit him?”
“No, sir, if he can help it, he won’t let anybody come
on to his land. He lives a very quiet life and there’s only
him and his niece up there, shut away from everyone else.”
“But surely he keeps a man to look after his cows
and his fowls and his dogs and all that? ” asked the doctor.
The constable shook his head. “Not now, sir. He used
to have one, a chap called Bent, but he went away some
months ago. We used to see quite a lot of him when he
was there, as he did all the errands and the marketing for
the house.”
“And what was he like? ” was the doctor’s next question.
“Had he got a patch over his eye?”
“No, sir, but he’d got a bad squint in one. I’ve never
seen such a squipt and it gave him a nasty appearance.
He was a biggish, rough-looking chap, not a nice man to
have any dealings with. He was very rude and off-hand
to everyone.”
“And about this niece of his, what’s she like?”
The constable smiled. “A real little lady, sir, very
quiet and reserved. She comes in here to fetch his letters.
1 saw her the day before yesterday.”
“I suppose you don’t happen to know if she mentioned
that the Professor was ill.”
“I didn’t speak to her, sir,” replied the constable.
“She only went into the post-office.” He made a motion
with his head towards the little general shop a few yards
away. “But perhaps Mrs. Leadbetter, the postmistress,
can tell you.” He looked curiously at the doctor. “But
were you thinking of going up to his house, sir?”
“I had half thought of it,” nodded the doctor, “but
from what I can hear I think I should get a bad sort of
reception.”


The policeman laughed. “I’m sure you would, sir.
He’s got two savage Alsatians up there and they’re not
friendly with strangers.”
“And how long’s he had them? ”
The policeman considered. “Oh, about six months!
That man Bent brought them up just before he left.
They came in a big cage, upon a trailer behind the car,
looking just like wild animals.”
Dr. Salter thanked the constable, and proceeding into
the post office, bought some cigarettes. Then he said
casually, “I understand Miss Bannister was in here the
day before yesterday! Did she happen to say her uncle
was ill?”
The woman shook her head. “No, sir, and I don’t think
he can be, as she passed here very early this morning,
in a car going up the London Road. I’m sure she wouldn’t
be leaving him if he weren’t well.”
“Oh, then Professor Bannister wasn’t driving her?”
“No, a strange gentleman, and it wasn’t the Professor’s
car. I happened to be at the window as they went by.”
“A very charming young lady,” nodded Dr. Salter.
“Yes, sir, but very shy. She hardly says a word when
she comes in.”
The doctor got back into his car quite satisfied that
he had solved the mystery. At the Professor’s instigation
someone had impersonated him at the interview! The
Professor must have been privy to it, for his own man
had helped in the deceit! It was most annoying, and
he was half inclined to go back and let them know he
had not been so easily gulled as they thought, and insist
upon having speech with the Professor in person.
But no, it wasn’t worth it! The man was entitled to
his privacy if he wanted it and besides—it would not
do to offend one of their most profitable clients. The
handling of Professor Bannister’s books was quite a little
gold mine to the firm.
Bent and Gauntry enjoyed their breakfast, and the
former, although it rankled in him that he would no
longer have the company of Ethel Bannister, was quite
cheerful until he suddenly remembered something. Then


he gasped out, “But how the hell shall I manage to get
the letters now that damned girl’s not here to go for
them? ”
“I’ve thought of that,” replied Gauntry, “and it’ll be
quite easy. For the few weeks you’ll be remaining on
here you’ll have to go hack to being Bannister’s man
again. I’ll push on the selling of the last lot of shares,
straightaway, and you needn’t wait one single day longer
here after you’ve got those royalties from London about
the second of September.”
“But I don’t like the idea,” frowned Bent. “I’ve
been out of everybody’s thoughts for so long now that,
when it comes to be found out Bannister’s gone, they’ll
never think of me having a hand in it. But if I pop up
now again before everyone, as you say, then when they
learn he’s disappeared, it will look devilish suspicious
against me and, whenever I try to hide, I’ll be picked
up quick and lively to explain everything.”
“But they won’t be able to find you,” said Gauntry
with the utmost confidence. “I’ve thought of a way
out of that.”
“Won’t be able to find me!” growled Bent. “What
about this eye? You know it was only by damned good
luck I escaped those six years ago. If Bannister had been
reading any newspapers then he’d have known who I
was at once and would never have given me the situation.”
Gauntry smiled. “I’ve been making some enquiries,
only this last week, and I’ve heard of a French surgeon
who’s a great master in dealing with cases like yours.
So, I’ll take you straight over to Paris and he may be
able to put you right, at once, so that no one will know
you’ve had a squint.”
“And what if he says he can’t do it,” grumbled Bent.
“I’ll be in a nice hole then.”
“Not at all, for if it’s inoperable you’ll have to have
the eye out and a glass one put in instead.”
Bent made a gesture of disgust. “Curse you, it’s nothing
to you because it’s not your eye.”
“Oh, isn’t it!” scoffed Gauntry. His face was grim
and hard. “You just remember, Joe, I stand to sink or


swim with you and I’m not going to take any chances.”
He nodded. “Now, we’re very nearly out of danger, with
a good sum of money to be divided between us, and so
you just watch every step you take during the next few
weeks.”
“Oh, I’ll keep my end up here all right,” growled Bent,
“but I don’t like the idea of the loneliness I’ve got to put
up with and”—he glared defiantly—“l’m not ashamed
to say I don’t like ghosts.”
“Well, I’ve given you my pistol,” smiled Gauntry,
“and don’t you hesitate to use it.” The frown faded from
his face and he looked very grim and stern. “Also, I
advise you, for your own sake and mine, if you ever find
yourself in a desperate position, which I don’t suppose
for a moment you ever will”—he spoke very solemnly—
“shoot to kill, and then blow your own brains out.”
“Thank you,” nodded Bent sarcastically, “It’s very
comforting, I am sure.”
“But it’d be the only thing to do,” went on Gauntry
emphatically, “for don’t you forget, Joe, you are wanted
on many charges now, and”—his tones were more solemn
and grim than ever—“the hangman’s noose can’t be nice
about one’s neck, and it would be far pleasanter to snuff
out the quicker way.”


CHAPTER VI
THE HOUND ON THE TRAIL
A g Larose had told the Chief Commissioner of the
Police, so many of the most outstanding triumphs
JL. A. of his professional career had been achieved from
the very smallest and, apparently, most trivial of hap-
penings. So now, he was by no means despairing that,
in a few hours almost, he would not unmask the identity
of the false Professor Bannister.
All he had, however, to help him was the knowledge
that the man squinted badly with his left eye and once,
when playing in a chess match against the City of London
Club, any time over six years previously, had won the
deciding game for his own side.
Arriving in town early in the afternoon, he looked
up in the directory the headquarters of the City of London
Club and, upon enquiring there, at once learnt the name
and home address of the secretary. Ringing up that
address he learnt that that gentleman was an officer in
the Strand branch of a well-known hank, and very shortly
he was interviewing him at his place of work. He ex-
plained who he was and stated that he was upon a private
investigation of great importance.
“Now, do you keep a record of all the matches your
club has played?” he asked the secretary, who was a
smartly dressed young fellow of about thirty years of age.
“Certainly we do,” replied the secretary, “but unhappily
we possess now only the records going hack for a very
short time. Four years ago the place where we used
to meet was burnt down and all our books were destroyed.”
Larose’s face fell. “Then, of course,” he said most
disappointedly, “you can’t tell me about any of the
matches before that time?”
The secretary shook his head. “No, I am sorry I can’t.”
He looked curiously at Larose. “But what is it you so
particularly want to know?”


Larose made an apologetic grimace. “The name of a
man who was playing on board three against you when
your club lost a certain match by one point, some time
over six years ago.”
The secretary laughed. “That’s a big order, I’m afraid,
as we generally play about twenty matches a year. No, I
can’t help you in any way. Oh, wait a minute! I can
send you a gentleman who was a member of our club
for over fifty years. He gave up active participation with
us only about three years ago.”
“Who is he?” asked Larose, willing to grasp at any
straw.
“He’s an old clergyman,” said the secretary, “and,
I’m sorry to say, rather getting into his dotage, but he
has still a prodigious chess memory and he might be able
to help you. He used to be one of the Canons of St. Paul’s
Cathedral, Canon Newbury, and now he’s the Rector
of a little parish in Essex, Good Easter, about thirty-five
miles out of town. He’ll help you, if anybody can, for I
think the absorbing passion of his life now is chess, and
chess only.” He laughed. “When he goes to heaven, if
indeed they admit clergymen there, I’m sure he’ll be
wanting to play over again some of the games of his
earthly life.”
Late in the afternoon Larose found himself in the
delightful little village of Good Easter and, enquiring
at the Rectory there, learnt that the Rector had only
a few minutes previously stepped across to church to take
the daily evensong.
So, into the church Larose went and joined the small
crowd of three assembled there. The Canon was a very
reverent-looking old gentleman, with a patriarchal beard
into which most of the words of the service seemed to
disappear. Larose’s heart fell as he noted how painfully
the Canon stumbled over the reading of the First Lesson
and how in his absent-mindedness, apparently, he altogether
omitted to read the second one. Here was poor material,
he thought, from which to weave the net which was to
draw in two malefactors.
He tackled him, however, when he came out of the
156
THE HOUSE ON THE FENS


church and asked if he could have a few minutes’ private
conversation.
The old clergyman seemed slow in taking in what was
required of him and eyed Larose with heavy, brooding
eyes.
“You’re not a reporter, are you? ” he asked. “Because,
if you are, I don’t want to see you. I’m eighty-four and
have no craving for publicity.”
“No, I’m not a reporter,” smiled Larose, “and I only
want to speak to you about chess. I understand you
played for the great City of London Club for longer than
fifty years.”
“No, no,” reproved the old man, his face lighting up,
“only for forty-eight, and then for reasons of health,
unhappily, I had to give up my stall in the cathedral
and come to finish my days down here. Oh, you want to
talk to me about chess, do you? Certainly, I’ll see you,”
and he tottered to the Rectory, with Larose following
closely behind.
Larose started to explain what he was wanting and he
found himself now in the presence of quite a different
individual from the mumbling old clergyman in the age-
old and ivy-covered adjoining church.
He explained what he wanted and the Canon took it
in without any difficulty. He screwed up his face thought-
fully. “I gather you want to know,” he said, “about
some particular game upon which the fate of one of our
matches depended, and where we lost by one point, seven
to eight years ago, you say. Now let me think, let me think
if I can remember.” He smiled. “I forget so many things
and never can remember names, but, strangely enough, I
can shut my eyes and recall the moves of games played
half a century ago. Now let me see.” He considered for
a long moment and then started up. “Was it a game where
Black used the French defence?” he asked sharply.
“No, it was quite a lively game,” said Larose. “White
opened with the King’s Gambit and . . .”
“Oh, oh,” broke in the Canon quickly, “but you make
a mistake. The French defence can develop into quite
a lively game, and if his opponent isn’t careful Black can


assume the attack on the eleventh move. I was a great
believer in the French defence, and have gained many a
hard-won victory with it.” He closed his eyes. “But let
me think again.”
Larose could have wept. The old gentleman would
meander on and on and the interview would end in dis-
appointment. But all at once, with a startled exclamation,
the Canon rose abruptly to his feet and, striding over
to a cupboard with more energy than Larose had thought
him capable of, brought out a chess-board and set of
men and laid them upon the table.
“Now,” he said briskly, “do you remember the positions
when the game ended? Well, put everything upon the
board, exactly as it was, and I may be able to tell you
about the game.” He smiled an old and wrinkled smile.
“A chord of memory has been stirred in me.”
So, rather breathlessly, Larose set up the pieces and the
pawns as they had all been when Bent had been stirred
into reminiscence only two days before.
“No, that’s not how it should be,” cried the Canon,
excitedly. “The black bishop should be on rook’s fourth
and not on rook’s sixth.” He leant back in his chair and
smiled. “Yes, I remember the game perfectly and our
man lost through an oversight. He should have moved
the king’s pawn and not the queen’s.- He made a bad
mistake, but just through sheer nervousness, I believe.”
“Then do you remember who the players were?” asked
Larose quietly, a great hope surging up in his heart.
“Well, I remember our man distinctly. He was a
nervous little fellow. He was nearly bald and had sandy
whiskers. He used to stammer when he got excited.”
“But his name?” asked Larose, pleadingly.
“His name, his name!” muttered the Canon. He shook
his head. “No, I can’t remember that, although I ought
to, for I said the Burial Service over him some time after-
wards. He died suddenly of pneumonia. No, it’s no good,
I shall never think of his name. I can’t remember any
names now.”
“Well, which club were you playing against?” asked
Larose, striving manfully to keep up hope.


The old clergyman shook his head again. “No, I can’t
tell you that either and it’s no good you worrying me.
Ah, I remember one thing! They were common fellows
in that club we were matched against, and one of our
members remarked afterwards, rather unkindly I thought,
that they were in keeping with the place they came from,
as they smelt of leather.”
And cross-examine the Canon as he did, that was all
the information Larose could get out of him. He returned
to his car and drove back to town very thoughtfully and
in anything but a cheerful frame of mind.
Approaching the city, however, he smiled and some-
thing of his natural light-heartedness seemed to come back
to him. In Aldgate he pulled up his car by the side of
the kerb and beckoned to a policeman, who was standing
near.
“I say, Constable,” he said, smilingly, “you look a
bright, intelligent fellow. Were you bom in London?”
The policeman smiled back. “Yes, sir, and my father
and his father, too. So I’ve got bricks and mortar in my
veins.”
“Well, I was bom in Australia,” went on Larose, “and
so don’t know as much about this little place as you do.
So tell me,” he laughed—“if you met a man and he smelt
of leather, where would you say he came from?”
“If I met him in London, sir? Oh, then for sure I’d
say he came from Bermondsey. It’s just across the river
there. All the big tanneries are there and they smell very
strong.”
“Thank you, Constable. I am very much obliged.”
“Not at all, sir,” returned the policeman. “Go over
the Tower Bridge and you’re there in no time. Oh, but
you needn’t have given me anything, sir.” For Larose
had passed over half-a-crown. “It was nothing in telling
you that.”
“Nothing to you, perhaps, my friend,” murmured
Larose, as he drove in the direction indicated, “but all the
same it may lead to the hanging of two men.”
Gaining the other side of the river, his nostrils were
speedily assailed with the acrid odour of the tanneries,


and he sniffed hard as if it were some very delightful and
delicious perfume.
He drove straight to the Public Library and asked of a
very obliging assistant there if there were any chess clubs
in the district.
“Oh, yes, sir,” replied the man, “but they only meet
in the winter. They have a room in Snowfield’s.”
So Larose obtained the name of the secretary and very
soon was ringing at that gentleman’s door. He kept a
hairdresser’s shop in a little mean street off Crucifix Lane
and Larose was pleased to see that, although the hour
then was well past ten o’clock, there was a light showing
over the side door.
A middle-aged man, who turned out to be the secretary
himself, at once appeared.
Larose apologised for troubling him at so late an hour,
but explained he was upon a very important enquiry and,
coming straight to the point, asked him if his chess club
kept any records of their matches with other clubs and
the name of their members who played in them.
The man shook his head. “We certainly do keep a minute
book,” he replied, “and in our annual report the results
of the matches we have played are put down, but not the
names of the players.”
“Well, have you ever had among your members,”
asked Larose, his heart beating painfully, “a very good
player who had a bad squint in his left eye, a very pro-
nounced squint no one could help noticing?”
The man thought for a few moments, and then shook
his head again. “No, I don’t remember any member
like that.”
Larose’s hopes at once fell to zero, but they rose again
when the secretary went on to say that he had only been
connected with the club for a little over three years.
“Oh, but the man I want to know about,” he said,
“used to play for the club much longer ago than that,
at least six or seven years. Then can you put me on to
anyone who would be likely to remember the members
of about that time?”
‘Certainly, I can,” said the secretary, and he pointed


across the street. “You just go over to Mr. Tomkins,
the chemist, there. He’s about our oldest member and
joined up when the club was first founded about twenty
years ago. I see his light’s still on upstairs, so he won’t
be in bed.” He laughed. “You may find him a bit annoyed
at being roused up so late, as he’s always a rather cranky
old chap, but say you want some of the special cough
drops he makes and he’ll be quite pleasant at once.”
So Larose rang at the chemist’s door and after a longish
interval, heavy footsteps sounded coming down the stairs.
The door opened and he was confronted with a querulous-
looking old man in very soiled pyjamas and with big horn
spectacles perched upon the top of his long, thin nose.
“I’m very sorry to knock you up,” said Larose most
apologetically, “but I want some of your famous cough
lozenges, very urgently.”
“Cough lozenges at this time of night!” snarled the
old man. “Haven’t you more consideration for other
people than to come at this ghastly hour for a trivial
thing like that?”
“But I want ten shillings’ worth,” said Larose quickly,
confident that such an order would be a very large one
for such a little shop in so poor a quarter.
“Oh, ten shillings’ worth!” exclaimed the chemist, and
the scowl upon his face instantly faded away. “Then
come inside, will you,” and he led Larose into the shop
and switched on the lights.
Larose at once passed over a ten-shilling note as evidence
of his good faith. “But, first, I want to ask you a couple
of questions,” he said. “Now, you’re a noted chess-
player, aren’t you, and you’ve belonged to the Bermondsey
Club for many years?”
“I was one of the first members,” said the chemist.
He smiled. “And I’m their oldest, if not their best
player.”
“Well, do you remember another very good player,”
asked Larose, “who belonged to the club about six or seven
years ago, a man with a dreadful squint in his left eye, a
biggish chap who frowned a lot and had large hands?”
The chemist’s mouth opened and he stared very hard at
L


Larose. He had been about to bring down a huge bottle
from off a shelf, but now his arms dropped to his side and
he seemed to have altogether forgotten what he had been
going to do.
“Do I remember a player with a horrible squint in his
left eye ? ” he repeated slowly. A dry smile came into his
face and he asked, as if very amused, “Do you want
him?”
“Yes, I do,” replied Larose. “I want him badly.”
“Ah!” and the chemist’s look of amusement passed into
a low chuckling laugh. “So do a lot of people,” he went on,
“the Home Secretary, the Chief Commissioner of the
Police, the two thousand City police, the thirty thousand
metropolitan ones and all the police and detectives all
over the country.” He drew in a deep breath. “Good God,
they’ve been looking for him for years!”
“Did he ever play at the third board,” asked Larose,
hoarsely, “in a match when you beat the City of London
Club by one point?”
“Ay, he did,” nodded the chemist, “the only match
we’ve ever won against that great club of stuck-up and
purse-proud members.” His old eyes took on a far-away,
reminiscent look. “Ay, it was a great game, but our man
gave us a shock by opening with the risky King’s Gambit.
Still, Joe was always a bold, fighting fellow ”
“But Joe who ? ” asked Larose sharply, his heart beating
painfully, and his nerves strung up almost to breaking
point.
“Joe Carrabin, one of the Dencross murderers,” chuckled
the chemist, “the only always-to-be-remembered member
our club will ever have! Joe Carrabin, who with his father
strangled that old lady for her jewels and shot her butler
afterwards! Old man Carrabin was hanged but Joe got
away like a streak of lightning, and has never been caught
sight of from that day to this.” He sighed heavily. “We’ve
missed Joe a lot! He always put up a good game and was
so cunning in his moves that we none of us wonder that he
escaped the clumsy police.”
But Larose was no longer listening. He was feeling faint
and had to lean against the counter so that he would not


fall. A dark mist was before his eyes and his ears were
closed to all sounds.
The Dencross murders! It had been nearly his last case
when at Scotland Yard! A case presenting dreadful
difficulties and with, apparently, not one single clue the
murderers had left behind! But he, with infinite patience
and almost by sheer intuition, had picked up a trail. He
had followed it when, a score of times and more, it had
seemed to lead nowhere and just to vanish into air. But
he had persevered, he had never grown weary, and in the
end his triumph had come. Ah, but it had only been half a
triumph! He had got the father hanged, but his son, the
co-murderer, had escaped and never been caught.
He drew in a deep breath. No wonder the Carrabins
hated him, for it had come out at the trial that but for
him the identity of the murderers would never have been
disclosed. Lord Aveling, the presiding judge, had com-
mended him warmly and the Press had applauded him as
“the man who never failed.”
He came back to earth again, with the old chemist still
meandering on and going over every move of that historic
game. Apparently, the savagery of Joseph Sylvester
Carrabin was of a more faded memory to him than the
murderer’s proficiency in the great game of chess.
“But what do you want to know about Joe for?” the
chemist asked suddenly, regarding Larose now very
suspiciously over the top of his glasses.
“Well, I was with an old clergyman this afternoon,”
laughed Larose, pulling himself together, “and he was
present at that match. He had a most lively recollection
of that game on board three, perhaps because soon after
he had buried the man who had been playing Black
and . . .”
“A nervous little chap, with a bald head,” interrupted
the chemist, “a famous County Court judge and very
highly thought of, so we heard. He was as bold as a lion
when he’d got his wig and gown on, but very highly strung
and a stammerer when he was playing chess. Ha, ha, Joe
kept upsetting him by blowing his nose like a fog-horn
and he dropped a certain draw because of it.”


Once started upon his reminiscences, the chemist would
have been happy to go on for hours, but Larose cut him
short and went off at last with his lozenges.
He tried to make his mind a blank until he reached the
hotel where he was going to stay, and then, in the privacy
of his bedroom, throwing himself into a big arm-chair, he
went back in memory over all the details of those murders
in Dencross Hall, which had taken place more than six
years previously. Yes, it was more than six years ago, six
years and seven months, because the crime had been com-
mitted upon a dark night in December.
An old lady, very well-to-do, indeed much more wealthy
than anyone had supposed, as was learnt when the Will was
proved, lived with four servants in a beautiful old house,
deep in the heart of the country, near the little village of
Dencross in Surrey.
She was a widow, the wife of a judge, and had lost her
husband some fifteen years previously. They had been a
childless couple and she had been greatly affected by the
loss, at once cutting herself off from the few distant relations
she had, and denying herself all visitors.
The memory of her husband was sacred to her and it was
the obsession of her widowed life to keep everything in her
surroundings as near as possible to what they had been
when he was with her.
So, the same staff was retained, three maids and a butler,
and they all grew old together. The only real difference in
the arrangement of the affairs of the household was that
the butler took over the duties of the gardener. It had
been the man’s own wish that he should do so, for with
no entertaining now he would have had practically
nothing to do in his old capacity. Still, every night at
dinner, he was the butler again, and he and the parlour-
maid waited upon the old lady in state, she always in
evening dress and wearing some of the beautiful jewels
Which had come to her in the days of her youth.
And it was those very jewels which were to bring her to
such a dreadful form of death, handing all that remained
of her to the police surgeon who performed the post-mortem,
a fearful-looking travesty of one-time lovely womanhood,


•with convulsed limbs and blue-black face. She bad been
strangled.
About a month before the tragedy occurred, she sud-
denly noticed that one of the large emeralds in her necklace
was loose and a thorough examination of her other jewellery
convinced her that they all needed a good overhauling.
So, a great event in her life, for one day she broke the
seclusion she had enforced upon herself, and accompanied
by Battery, the butler, and Thompson, the parlourmaid
(in her service all the servants were called by their sur-
names), as a body-guard, she took train to town to entrust
her jewellery to Surplice and James, the well-known
jewellers in Bond Street.
Three weeks later a like journey was undertaken to
town to bring back the overhauled treasures.
Then exactly a week after the jewellery had been brought
home the crime occurred.
The cook was awakened just after two o’clock in the
morning by the sound of groaning outside her bedroom
door, and, jumping out of bed to see what was the matter,
was horror-struck to find the butler, with a ghastly trail
of blood behind him, lying in the corridor and almost in
the very act of death.
He was bleeding from a bullet wound in the stomach
and only lived just long enough to gasp out what had
happened.
It appeared he had been awakened by suspicious noises
and, proceeding to the door of his mistress’s room, had
found it unlatched. He had pushed it open and entered
the room. There, he had seen two masked men. One was
at the back of his mistress and had got a cord round her
neck and was strangling her, while the other was by her
bureau and searching through the drawers. This second
man had immediately fired a pistol at him, which had
made only a sound like the cracking of a whip, and he had
felt he was hit and had fainted. Then presently he had
come to and managed to crawl to the cook’s door. He
could not describe the men, but said that the one who had
shot him looked much older than the other, because of
his hair, which was very scanty round the temples. Also,


this second man was of a stouter and heavier build. Then
the butler had gasped out his last breath and died.
The cook had at once telephoned the police station at
Edenbridge and within a few minutes a sergeant and two
policemen had arrived.
But they had found no clue to the identities of the
murderers.
Subsequent investigations showed that all the jewels
had been taken and, also, about twenty pounds in treasury
notes which, it was known, the old lady had had in
her bedroom. Entry into the house had been effected
through a sky-light opening into a small lumber-room,
the men had gained access by climbing up on to the
roof by way of the ivy and the lightning conductor.
It was presumed that the younger and more agile of the
men had done the climbing and then had admitted the
elder man through the front door.
This was the position when Scotland Yard was called
in, and some of the shrewdest and most experienced
members of the Criminal Investigation Department were
speedily devoting all their energies to pick up the beginnings
of a trail.
There was no doubt the crime had been carried out by
those perfectly familiar with the house, for the skylight
was in a well in the very centre of the roof and hidden
from all view below by the high up-sloping sides of the
other parts of the roof.
So a most systematic and patient enquiry was under-
taken to check up all strangers who could have been in
possession of such knowledge, and attention was imme-
diately focused upon the workmen of a firm of decorators
who had done up the interior of the house the previous
year. But this firm was a local one, in Edenbridge, and the
conclusion was quickly arrived at that there was nothing
warranting any suspicion there.
The theft of the jewellery, too, was now considered from
another point of view. It was held to be anything but a
coincidence that the jewels had been taken within a few
days of their return from the London jewellers. Apparently, ‘
up to the time of their being brought to town to receive


attention, no one, except the servants in the house, had
been aware that Mr. Rampini was in possession of jewels
of. such value, or, at any rate, if anyone had known it
before, then their knowledge must date back to more than
fifteen years, to when the husband was alive and company
was often entertained.
But the idea was immediately dismissed that anyone
of criminal intent and possessing such knowledge would
have waited all those years before acting. Then, that
being so, it was taken for granted that the jewels were
stolen because a knowledge of their existence and value
had followed only upon their being entrusted to the Bond
Street jewellers to overhaul.
So, someone in the employ of the Bond Street firm, it
was considered, must be suspect. This had seen
the jewels; he had heard of the motor-carless and eccentric
old lady who had brought them up by train, with her old
butler and elderly parlourmaid for an escort, and he had
judged, and rightly so, that their protection when at
Dencross Hall would be of the same primitive and old-
fashioned nature.
But here came the difficulty, for not only had a man
of criminal intent to be found among the Bond Street
employes, but he must either himself, or in conspiracy with
another person, know all about the geography of the Hall
and the best place where to get in.
And that proved the snag. The five workmen and the
elderly one-armed commissionaire employed by Surplice
and James were men of impeccable character. They had
all been some time in the service of the firm, and their
private lives, too, gone into most minutely, yielded nothing
of the very slightest suspicious nature. Also, they all
denied strenuously that they had ever discussed the affairs
of the firm with strangers.
Larose smiled as it came back to him now how hopeless
everything had seemed when he had been sent down to take
over the case. Apparently there was not a clue to be picked
up and no place from where he could start off upon a trail.
He had gone afresh over all the ground which had already
been traversed so minutely and with such patience, and


then, he remembered, there had been one thing which had
inclined him at once to the belief that the enquiry had
not been pushed back far enough.
Everyone had been puzzled about this one particular
happening, for it was most peculiar and unexplainable,
but no one hitherto appeared to have grasped its true
significance.
The happening was this:
When the two burglars had entered the house, the one
by the skylight and the other, presumably, by the front
door, they had, apparently, been intending to take one
precaution against being heard and interrupted by any of
the servants —one precaution and one only.
Into the jamb of a door they had driven a stout staple
and to it, with a strong piece of copper wire, had attached
the handle of the door so that it could not be pulled open
from inside. This proceeding, however, had not helped
them in any way, because the room so dealt with had been
an empty one in an unoccupied wing, of the house.
But he, Larose, was quite sure it had been done for
some specific purpose and, after much questioning of the
cook and hard searching back in memory on her part,
had learnt that many years back, when much company
was entertained, the butler had always slept in that par-
ticular room. Later on, however, upon his master’s death
he had changed into a room in the opposite wing, simply
for purposes of convenience, so that all the occupied rooms
would be together.
He, Larose again, had therefore at once come to the con-
clusion that the burglars’ knowledge of the ways of the
house must go back to those distant years, they evidently
thinking that the butler still slept in that room, and they
had accordingly meant to wire him in, as being the only
dangerous member of the household.
He next found out that about twenty years previously
electric light had been installed in the Hall, the work
being carried out by four men from a firm in Lambeth.
So off to that firm he went and, after much turning over '
of books by them, managed to obtain the names and
addresses of the four employes who had done the job.


Two of them, he found, were dead, one he couldn’t trace
at all, but with great patience he followed up the fourth,
by name of Charles Alexander Carrabin, and through the
courtesy of the Electricians’ Union, learnt where he was
then living. He was by himself and renting two rooms
upon the fourth floor of a house in a street off Tottenham
Court Road.
He did not approach him direct but, by discreet enquiries,
found out quite a lot about him. He was about fifty years
of age and in the employ of the Marylebone Corporation.
He was a very reserved man, keeping himself very much
to himself. Of regular habits, every evening he spent an
hour or so in the bar of an unpretentious but comfortable
little public-house, the Spade and Shovel, just round the
comer.
Larose remembered having had the man pointed out to
him as the former was leaving the house where he lived
and judged him to be an individual of some force of
character, although possibly of not a very agreeable one,
as his expression was always frowning and unfriendly.
When he went out of an evening he wore good clothes,
looking recent purchases, and he carried himself like a
person of some importance.
“Yes,” smiled Larose here, “and every night for a week,
made up, however, to look quite a different person, I
followed that fellow. An instinct told me I was on to
something crooked, for he had a habit of looking back over
his shoulder as if to see if anyone were trailing him, and
I remember how pleased I was at the interest he took in
gazing into the windows of jewellers’ shop. They were the
only ones he appeared to be interested in. That was all
I got for my trouble for a solid six nights, as he never
went anywhere in particular except to that little public-
house and when there never spoke to anyone. But then
on the seventh night I clicked at last.”
He nodded reminiscently. “Yes, I was in that little
pub and how my heart bumped when I saw the jeweller’s
one-armed commissionaire come in. The Carrabin man
gave him a swift covert look and then dropped his eyes,
but the commissionaire did not seem to know him. But


oh, how elated I was! Here at last was what I had been
looking for, a line joining up Carrabin with someone from
the jeweller’s shop; the link between the putting in of that
electric light twenty years before, and the burglary and
murders of only three weeks back.”
He shook his head. “Ah, that commissionaire was a
nice fellow and I never let them know that it was through
him that the news about the Rampini jewels had leaked
out! He’d been quite sure he’d never talked about the
firm’s business outside. But he had. He couldn’t carry
his liquor. That was the trouble, and after a couple of
glasses, though he was quite sober, his tongue began to
wag. I can remember his conversation that night, even
now, although I’m sure he himself couldn’t have told
anyone a single word of it the next morning.”
“How’s diamonds to-day, old chap? ” asked the publican.
“Pretty good, pretty good, old Beer and Stout,” he
replied. “Lady Mascot bought some diamond studs off
us to-day and paid three hundred quid for them, but that
was nothing to her. She gave me two half-crowns for just
opening the door to let her out. Not bad that, for five
seconds’ work!”
“Sell any rings?”
“Rather! There was a lovely bit of stuff came in this
morning with her boy. She was Lord MacToon’s daughter
and she’s got the bluest eyes I ever saw. The viscount,
he was her boy; yes, Viscount Harlow, and the ring he
put on her pretty little finger—l could have kissed it —
cost him one hundred and fifty quid.”
Larose heaved a big sigh. “Yes, it was he who had
caused all the trouble. Charles Carrabin had heard his
gassing about the Rampini jewels one night and that had
sealed the old lady’s doom. Carrabin remembered he had
once worked in the house and guessed the job would be
an easy snip for him.”
He paused again to consider. “Now what exactly did
I do next? Yes, yes, it was that same night when I had to
put down all my cards in a great hurry and I nearly lost
the whole game altogether. I had followed Carrabin to
those tenements in Lisson Grove, where he had gone to


see his son, Joe, although I didn’t find until afterwards that
it was Joe he had been to see. Well, I must have been
clumsy somehow as, when returning home, he suddenly
became suspicious he was being shadowed. He stopped
to look in a shop window, not a jeweller’s this time, and
I was so close behind him that I daren’t stop, too, but
had to walk on and pass him. As I did, he had got his
back to me and I couldn’t see his face, but I saw his hands
were shaking. That was a bad sign and I had to make
up my mind like lightning.”
Larose leant back here and chuckled delightedly for
some moments. It was one of those memories of his
resource which was always pleasing to him.
He went on, “Yes, I walked on only for a few paces and
then I turned round to see what he was doing. Gripes!
it was a good thing I did, for he was bolting across the
street like a rabbit. I knew then it was neck or nothing
and I raced after him shouting, “Pickpocket, pickpocket,
that fellow’s got my wallet.” Oh, the rumpus which
followed! Two young chaps collared him and held him
tight, though for a few moments he fought like a fury.
Then a policeman came up and, white with rage, he was
marched to the police station. Then he was goosed properly,
for I took the sergeant to one side and told him who I
was. Dear old Charlie Stone was there in a quarter of an
hour and while friend Carrabin was detained, we went
and broke into his rooms.”
Larose nodded solemnly. “It was a risk, I knew, for I
had so little to go upon, but I remembered those shaking
hands and was quite sure the fellow would be wanted for
something. Then Charlie was as pleased as punch for we
found an automatic and, better than that, the old judge’s
gold watch, which had been fisted among the missing
things.”
He drew in another big sigh. “But we weren’t as clever
as we thought, for Joe slipped us. We raced to those
tenements and, learning from the caretaker then that there
was a man called Carrabin upstairs, in a couple of shakes
we were thundering at his door. But Joe was out and the
caretaker had to open the door with his master key. Then,


what a find! All the jewellery which had been stolen, yes,
every bit of it, except the old man’s watch!”
He clenched his fist and shook his head vexatiously.
“But we made one fearful blunder. We had left that
damned police car outside and Joe, coming home like a
lamb, spotted the driver’s uniform. He saw the red lights
at once and went off like lightning.
“He stole a motor bicycle from a nearby backyard, and
that was the last we heard of him. His father was hanged
for the murder of the butler, though a lot of good people
argued he ought not to have been because of the weakness
of the evidence. Still, the dreadful manner in which the
poor old lady had been killed no doubt influenced both
jury and judge.”
A long silence followed and then he went on very sadly,
“But what a fool you’ve been, Gilbert! You ought to have
remembered that Joe squinted with his left eye. It was
an unpardonable thing to forget for if you hadn’t you would
have at once been suspicious who this chap Bent was.
Your only excuse is you had never set eyes on the man
and so were not carrying his picture in your mind.”
He helped himself to a big drink of whisky and his face
lighted up exultingly. “Still, you’re *in at the death,
Gilbert. You’re the old dog who picked up trail again and
you haven’t been beaten in the end. But I must off to bed
now, for I’m very tired and I have an interesting day
to-morrow.” He grinned. “I wonder what that rather
unfriendly Chief Commissioner of the Police will say when
he hears what I have to tell him? ”
The following day Larose was up early and spent a busy
morning going from place to place at break-neck speed.
Towards one o’clock, however, he had apparently finished
his enquiries and betook himself, carefree and light-
hearted as ever, to enjoy a good lunch at a good restaurant.
He fingered over his meal, many times looking at his watch.
At half-past two, he left the restaurant and, taking a
taxi to Scotland Yard, was soon being ushered into the
private room of Chief Inspector Stone.
The latter regarded him rather anxiously as he came in.
“Any news, my lad?” he asked quietly.


“Too right,” smiled Larose, “plenty of good stuff this
time.”
Stone raised one hand wamingly. “Not a word,” he
exclaimed. “I’ve got to take you straight to the Chief
directly you turn up. I’m to have no conversation with
you, before.” He picked up the receiver of the telephone
upon his desk and spoke into it. “Sir Garnet, please.
Oh, he’s engaged, is he? Oh, oh, all right, then, hut tell
him at once that Mr. Larose is here.”
He put down the receiver and smiled a grim smile. “ He’s
with the Home Secretary for the moment, but I don’t
suppose he’ll keep us long. No, don’t tell me anything,
but”—although they were quite alone and the door shut,
he lowered his voice to a whisper—“l’ll tell you, as your
friend Charlie Stone and not in any official capacity, that
the Chief is very disturbed about you. He was worrying
me all yesterday.”
“Oh, what about?” grunted Larose.
Stone made a grimace. “He thinks you bluffed him in
that little talk you had with him the other day and, great
Jupiter, I do believe it’s at the bottom of his mind you’ve
bolted.” He shook his head frowningly. “It’s only that
he doesn’t know you, Gilbert, and friends of that damned
Inspector Flower have been poisoning his mind. He thinks
now we ought not to have let you go so easily and he’s snap-
ping at me for, as he says, having persuaded him.” His
big fatherly face looked very troubled. “But it is quite all
right, you say, my lad. You’ve found out something?”
Larose nodded in the greatest of good humour. “I’ll
blow him skyhigh, Charlie. I’ll bust him to bits and ”
but the telephone bell tingled and Stone picked up the
receiver again.
“Good, we’ll come at once,” he said, and gripping
Larose affectionately by the arm, led him from the
room.
The Chief Commissioner was not alone this time. There
was another man in the room, a big man, with a big face
and rather humorous-looking eyes. He was Mr. Chambers,
the Secretary of State for Home Affairs, and Larose greeted
him sociably, but he was not going to offer to shake hands


with him. The big man, however rose at once and held
out his hand smilingly.
“We’ve met before, haven’t we, Mr. Larose?” he said.
“Yes, sir,” smiled back Larose, “that night in Paris.”
“Hush,” exclaimed the big man in mock embarrassment,
“I was on holiday then and we mustn’t talk about it!”
His face sobered down. “Sit down, Sir Garnet wants to
have a little chat with you.”
The Chief Commissioner spoke up at once. “Have you
met with any success, Mr. Larose?”
Larose nodded. “Yes, quite a lot.” He paused for a
long moment and then went on very slowly, “For one
thing, I know where Joseph Carrabin, the Dencross
murderer, is in hiding and he can be arrested at once.”
“The Dencross murderer,” exclaimed Mr. Chambers
with animation. “Let me think, let me think. Didn’t he
murder that old lady, the wife of Judge Rampini for her
jewels?” He turned to the Chief Commissioner. “Wasn’t
I in office at the time, Sir Garnet? ”
“ Yes, sir, you were, ” replied the Chief, masking his amaze -
ment at Larose’s news in a stiff official manner. “It was a
double murder, too, of that Mrs. Rampini and her butler,
carried out by two men, father and son, Charles and Joseph
Carrabin.”
“The father shot the butler,” supplemented Larose,
calmly taking his part in the conversation as if as a matter
of course, “and the son strangled the woman. The father
was hanged, but the son got into hiding and has evaded
arrest ever since.” He nodded smilingly. “It was one of
my last cases when I was attached to Scotland Yard.”
“Gad, and it was one of your greatest, too,” commented
Stone warmly, his awe of his Chief now quite swamped in
his admiration for his friend. He nodded to the Home
Secretary. “It will always be considered as a classic, sir,
at the Yard, a perfect miracle of imagination, plus infinite
patience.”
“But you mustn’t believe quite all Mr. Stone says,”
laughed Larose. He looked warmly at the stout inspector.
“He and I have been staunch friends for years and we
have a great affection for each other.”


“But it was a marvellous case, Mr. Larose!” exclaimed
the Home Secretary. “I remember it all now, and how
unstinting Lord Aveling was in his praise of you. Yes,
and there was a petition to reprieve the father, but I would
not advise it because his lordship was so strong against any
clemency, as the strangling of the old lady had been so
ghastly.”
“And where is this Joseph Carrabin in hiding now?”
asked the Chief Commissioner coldly.
“In a lonely and isolated house, deep in the Norfolk
Fens,” replied Larose. “He is there by himself, along with
two savage Alsatians. He is a man of ruthless disposition
and is armed with an automatic pistol. We shall have to be
very wary in arresting him without it entailing loss of life.”
“Have you seen him yourself? ” asked the Chief.
“Yes, I spent two days and nights in his company. I
got back yesterday morning.”
“Did you recognise him for certain as this Joseph
Carrabin?”
“No, I had never seen him before and I didn’t know,
until late last night, some sixteen hours after I left him,
who he was.”
“Well, how did you come to find out? ” asked the Chief
frowningly.
Larose drew in a long breath. “Well, I went to him as a
traveller in Scotch whisky and, seeing a set of chess-men
on a table, brought up the subject of chess to him. I found
he was a great enthusiast and our conversation led to my
agreeing to stay with him as his guest, so that we could have
a few games together. Then the position of the pieces
towards the end of the first gaAe stirred his memory, and
he said it was exactly like the ending in a game he had
once taken part in many years previously, when he had
been playing in a match for the chess club he belonged to,
against the City of London Club.”
Larose nodded here. “By then I was quite sure he was a
crook in some way, but his story of this game he had
played and how his winning of it had decided the whole
match in favour of his club were all I had to go upon to
find out whb he was.”


The Home Secretary frowned heavily. “And you tell us
from this game of chess you discovered his identity.”
“Oh yes,” laughed Larose. “I left the house where he
is living at about four o’clock yesterday morning, and by
eleven o’clock last night, when all the enquiries I had
been making were finished, I knew without a shadow of
doubt who he was.”
He went on, “You see, it was like this—l was sure that
if I could only find out to which Metropolitan club he had
belonged, someone in that club would be certain to
remember the player who had won the decisive game for
them in a match against the renowned City of London
Club.”
“Ah, I follow you now,” exclaimed Mr. Chambers.
“Much simpler, perhaps, than it would at first appear.”
“Yes, up to a point, it was,” agreed Larose instantly,
“but the difficulty came in when I learnt that all the
records of the City of London Club had been destroyed
in a fire of a few years ago. It seemed almost as if I was at
a dead end then, because it seemed doubtful if any member
of the club could remember the details of a particular
match played so many years ago.”
“But how many years previously did the man say he’d
played that game?” asked Mr. Chambers.
“About twenty,” replied Larose. “But I rather guessed
from his age, which must be well under forty, that he was
telling a he there.” He nodded. “But still, even ten years
would be much too long a time for most memories to go
back about a matter like that.”
“I should think so,” commented Stone. “I belong
to a bowling club and couldn’t tell you matches we’ve
played, even half a dozen years ago.”
“Still, after some trouble,” continued Larose, “I routed
out an old clergyman now living down in Essex about
thirty-five miles from town. He had been a member
of the City of London Club for nearly fifty years. He’s
a retired Canon of St. Paul’s Cathedral and he’s over
eighty now. He’s ”
“I know him,” broke in the Home Secretary, holding up
his hands disgustedly. “You mean old Canon Newbury!


Well, you can’t go by anything he says! He’s all gone to
pieces lately. He’s in his dotage! ”
“In every-day matters he’s in his dotage, perhaps,”
laughed Larose, “but in matters of chess he’s still in the
prime of life.” He made a grimace. “But at first, as you
say, it seemed hopeless. I don’t think he remembers the
name of any club against whom the City of London has
ever played, but”—he held up one forefinger impressively—
“when I described the game to him and put the pieces
and pawns upon his board, just in the positions they had
been two days ago in my game with that man, he told me
instantly he remembered the game perfectly and that the
opponents of his club that night had been common fellows.”
Larose chuckled. “Yes, that’s what he told me, and
beyond the fact that one of his fellow-members had
remarked that they looked like the place they came from
and smelt of leather, he remembered nothing more.” He
seemed very pleased with himself. “But that was quite
enough. I went to Bermondsey where the tanneries are
and got in touch with the secretary of the Bermondsey
Chess Club, who put me on to an old chemist who is an
ardent chess player. I told him what I wanted and he
remembered the match at once. He said instantly that
the player who had won that game for them”—Larose
paused dramatically here—“was Joe Carrabin, the Dencross
murderer.”
A long silence followed and then the Chief Commissioner,
with a little more pleasantness than he had hitherto shown,
asked, “Did he describe this chess-player to you?”
“Yes, and the description tallied exactly with that of
the man I have just been stopping with. He mentioned
particularly a bad squint in the left eye.”
Inspector Stone made a violent exclamation. “Yes,
by James!” he cried excitedly, “that’s Joe Carrabin,
right enough. Everyone who knew him said his squint
was dreadful.” He spoke sharply to Larose. “Now, Mr.
Larose, what was this man doing among those Fens where
you met him?”
Larose paused so long to answer that a frown settled
upon the faces of all his audience and they began to look
u


impatient. “He is living in that big, lonely house,” he
replied very slowly, “and he is. impersonating the owner,
the well-known, eccentric scientist, Professor Jasper
Bannister. For longer than six months now he has been
doing it, imitating his handwriting, forging his signature,
and collecting any monies which come in for the absent
man. Also” —he lowered his voice to the merest whisper—
“l would not like to give it as my opinion that he has
not murdered the Professor as well as an elderly woman
who, for many years, had been in service there.”
An awed hush followed. The Chief Commissioner was
scowling hard, Stone had got his mouth wide open and
the Home Secretary looked rather white and was breathing
hard.
The Chief spoke first. “Have you any evidence to
support that? ” he asked.
Larose shrugged his shoulders. “No direct evidence as
yet,” he replied, “but both disappeared at the same time
under very suspicious circumstances, and” —he made
another of his impressive silences, —“Joseph Carrabin is
now most terrified of their ghosts.”
The Home Secretary mopped his forehead with his
handkerchief. “Very gruesome, Mr. Larose,” he exclaimed,
“and most interesting even if it were only a tale from a
book.” He smiled a sickly smile. “Really, I don’t think
I shall sleep to-night.”
The Chief Commissioner awoke to red-tape preciseness.
“But if this be all as you say, Mr. Larose”—his voice was
cold and official—“how does it help us in any way to
determine the murderer of Major Sampon?”
“Yes, that’s it,” nodded Mr. Chambers, quickly. “How
does it help us to bring home to anyone that crime?”
Larose made another of his irritating pauses. “Only,”
he said, speaking now more slowly than ever, “that Arnold
Gauntry happens to be Joe Carrabin’s brother, and murder
often runs in families.”
Stone almost jumped from his chair. “Good God,
Gilbert!” he exclaimed, “what a scoop! What a thunder-
bolt!” He turned excitedly to the Chief Commissioner.
“ It’s quite all right, sir! It’s quite all right! If Mr. Larose


states anything as a fact, then you can be, quite sure
it is one. In all the years he was with us at the Yard,
I’ve never known him deceive us.” His face beamed as
he clapped Larose soundly upon the shoulder. “Good
for you, Gilbert! You are a sharp boy!”
The face of the Chief Commissioner was now smiling,
and Larose did not want to see it frown again, so, stepping
forward, he drew a paper out of his pocket and held it out
to him.
“Here, sir,” he said, “is a list of the names of the
passengers travelling from Colombo in the P. & 0. liner
Orontes in March, 1931, and you will see that Henry
Carrabin is among them. He probably came over to see
his father before he was hanged. Then because of the
scandal attaching to the name of Carrabin, a most unusual
name, he changed it and three months later the name of
Arnold Gauntry appears for the first time in the telephone
directory. Finally, here is a letter he wrote, only five days
ago, to his brother on the Fens. Note, the envelope is
addressed to Professor Bannister, but the letter commences
‘Dear Joe’ and is signed ‘Harry,’” and Larose resumed
his seat, as if he were quite confident he had now clinched
the whole matter.
And everyone else was undoubtedly of the same opinion
when the Chief had read the letter aloud.
“Then, of course,” nodded the latter, “this Gauntry
is privy to the impersonation of the Professor, and he
shows, most clearly, his animus against you.” He smiled
most friendlily at Larose. “Now, sir, you have carried
through this investigation so wonderfully that I am sure
any advice you give us will be most valuable. So what
do you suggest should be done next?”
“Joe Carrabin must be arrested on the original warrant
issued for the murder of Mrs. Rampini,” said Larose,
“and then we must search for the bodies of Professor
Bannister and the woman, Mary Trescowthick. I am
convinced they have been buried on the Fens.”
“Then you would leave his brother alone for the
present?” frowned the Commissioner.
“Oh, yes!” exclaimed Larose, hurriedly. “Don’t give


him an inkling that we have any suspicion about him, in
any way.” He nodded. “I still have hopes of sheeting
home to him the Sampon murder. I have yet another
card to play.”
They talked on for some time and then the little party
broke up, with Larose, however, accompanying Stone to
the latter’s private room.
“Gosh, Gilbert, but you’ve saved the whole situation!”
exclaimed the stout inspector fervently. “We were at a
dead end everywhere. We certainly believe that Dr. Revire
is an agent, working for the Soviet Republic, but we have
no conclusive evidence there. Since that murder of
Sampon he has shut down like a knife and we haven’t
been able to find a thing against him.”
“Never mind Revire for the moment, Charlie,” smiled
Larose. “Our first job now is to get the cuffs on friend
Joe, and we’ve got all our work cut out to do it. As I told
them just now, he’s armed, and, if I know anything of men,
he’s just the type to let out hell amongst us, and then
shoot himself so that he won’t be taken alive. Yes, we
shall want all our wits about us to keep him nice and
healthy for that appointment with the hangman.”


CHAPTER VII
POOLS OF SILENCE
EiOSE returned to his hotel, the Semins, just off
the Haymarket, in a very happy frame of mind.
Not only had he dispelled all the suspicion there
had been against him in high circles but, to his great satis-
faction, he had succeeded in obtaining from Stone the
letter which Major Sampon had written to Sir George
incriminating the latter’s wife.
He had had a hard tussle there with the stout inspector,
but in the end had prevailed, insisting that the letter could
have no possible bearing upon the murder of the major,
and, moreover, stating he wanted it for a specific purpose,
which he would disclose later. He had promised, however,
that it would be forthcoming any time if Stone should
want it back.
Regarding the contemplated arrest of Joe Carrabin in
his lonely retreat upon the Fens, as there appeared to
be no imperative need that he should be taken in hot
haste, it had been arranged that it should be effected
the next day but one. Stone was giving evidence in
the Criminal Courts on the morrow, and the arrest was
considered so important that he wanted to superintend
it himself. So it had been decided that those taking
part in it should leave the city the following night so
as to be all ready upon the spot the first thing the next
morning.
This suited Larose admirably, as an idea concerning the
murdered major had been forming in his mind, and he
wanted to try it out.
The next day by nine o’clock he was in the major’s
house in Maida Vale and interviewing the housekeeper.
Then, obtaining from her the name and address of Sam-
pon’s usual medical man, he learnt the latter lived only
a few streets away, and was fortunate to catch him just
as he was about to leave upon his morning rounds. He


explained who he was and that he was making some
private enquiries about the deceased man.
“Now do you mind telling me, Doctor,” he said, “if
you happen to know if Major Sampon had been in good
health just prior to the dreadful fate which overtook
him?”
The doctor considered for a moment. “No, I see no
reason why I should not tell you,” he said. He nodded
solemnly. “Major Sampon was in a very bad state of
health and suffering from an incurable disease. His sickness
was what is known as myeloid leukaemia, a very insidious
form of blood disease.”
“Oh, oh!” exclaimed Larose, very startled, “and did
he know he’d got it?”
The doctor nodded again. “Yes, I diagnosed it myself
but sent him on to a specialist to have the diagnosis
confirmed.”
“How long ago was that?” asked Larose, breathing
a little quickly.
“I saw him the Friday before he was murdered, and
he saw the specialist the following Monday.”
“Did you tell him on the Friday what was wrong with
him?”
“No, I left it to the specialist, so that then he would
have no days of suspense. I was quite certain of my
diagnosis, but thought it wiser he should be told by one
who would convince him, straightaway. I didn’t want
him to be harrowed by preliminary uncertainty.”
“And when did he see this specialist, do you say?”
“On the Monday morning. The specialist was Dr.
Methuen of Wimpole Street.”
“Well, now one more question,” said Larose. “Was
Major Sampon quite normal mentally when he came to
see you upon that Friday?”
The doctor hesitated. “He was perfectly sane and in
full possession of all his faculties, if you mean that. Still,
he seemed very irritable and he was also hasty in his
speech. I noticed those things particularly because, as a
general rule, he was a man of most placid disposition,
a quiet, reserved man, who spoke very little.”


Larose thanked him for his courtesy and a few minutes
later was ringing the bell of Dr. Methuen’s door in Wimpole
Street. But he quickly found this medical man was not
so accessible as the Maida Vale one had been, and, indeed,
he was told at first that it was quite impossible for him
to see the specialist that day, as the latter was already
full up with appointments.
But he insisted he must see him, as he was not a patient
and came upon a matter of urgent importance. So, in the
end, it was arranged he should return at ten minutes to
three, when perhaps, under the very unusual circum-
stances, the great man might spare him a few minutes.
Larose was not sorry to have the morning free, as among
the scraps of conversation which Ethel Bannister had
managed to pick up tvhen listening behind the shed while
Bent and Gauntry had been whispering together, was one
about the Professor’s American publisher coming the
following day, and the two men, she said, had sounded
very uneasy about it.
So he was now most curious to know what had happened
and what story had been given to account for the Profes-
sor’s absence when the publisher had arrived.
He went into a bookseller’s shop and found out the
name of Professor Bannister’s London publishers and,
getting them on the phone, learnt who his American
publishers were. Then he said he had heard that the head
of the latter firm was at present in London and asked who
he was and how he could get in touch with him.
He was given his name, Dr. Hiram Salter, but was
informed that was all the information which could be
supplied. They were not aware even that Dr. Salter was
on this side of the water.
Nothing daunted, however, Larose next rang up the
American Embassy. They knew of the doctor, who was
himself a distinguished man of science, but did not know
if he were in England at the present time. But they sug-
gested that if he were now in London he would
most probably be putting up at the Rialto Hotel, which
was the one most favoured by citizens of the United
States.


Accordingly, to the Rialto Larose went and, to his
great joy, learnt that the doctor was staying there,
although he was not in the hotel at that moment. However,
just before one o’clock the doctor returned and he was
soon interviewing him in his private room. He explained
who he was and that at one time he had been attached
to Scotland Yard in the Criminal Investigation Department.
“Now forgive my troubling you,” he went on, “but I
understand you were intending to call upon Professor
Bannister at Wrack House, the day before yesterday.
Well, may I ask if you saw him?”
The doctor eyed him very intently. “What’s that to
do with you?” he asked brusquely.
“Well, I told you I had been a detective once,” replied
Larose. He smiled. “And as a matter of fact I’m doing
a bit of private detective work now.”
“Oh, you are, are you?” commented the doctor frown-
ingly. “Well, what do you want to find out?”
Larose had summed up the character of the American
correctly, and realised that the latter was not a man to
be bluffed into talking when he had no reason to say any-
thing. He must be confided in, at any rate to a certain extent.
So he at once proceeded to explain how the matter stood.
“The fact is, sir,” he replied, “I have strong suspicions
that everything is not as it should be up there. Indeed,
of course in strict confidence, I believe Professor Bannister
is not in the house at all, and that his place is being taken
by an impostor.”
The American elevated his eyebrows. “Oh, oh; then
have you been up there?” he asked.
“Yes, the day before you were supposed to be coming.
In fact, I left Wrack House very early upon the morning
when you were due to arrive.”
“And did you find the Professor in bed,” asked the
American grimly, “suffering from an acute attack of gout
and waited upon by a bearded, one-eyed ruffian who was
dosing him with port wine?”
Larose showed his undoubted surprise, but after a few
moments laughed merrily. “No, sir,” he said; “in my case
the bearded ruffian, as you call him, was the Professor.


He said he was the party who had written all those
wonderful books.”
The American now joined in the laugh. “Then they’ve
tried to deceive us both,” he said, “and a very clumsy
business they made of it.”
“But who was your Professor?” asked Larose, being
quite sure, however, it had been Gauntry, but at the same
time wanting Dr. Salter’s assurance to that effect.
The American considered. “An educated man, in a
way, quite shrewd up to a certain point, a man of the world
but knowing absolutely nothing about science or medicine.”
He nodded. “A clever rogue but out if his depth nearly
all the time he was talking to me.” He frowned suddenly.
“But I say, what did it mean, my friend? Was it a joke
on Professor Bannister’s part to prevent himself from
being disturbed by strangers?”
Larose shook his head. “I’m afraid not, sir,” he spoke
solemnly. “I’m afraid Professor Bannister’s dead.”
“But you appal me!” exclaimed the American. “What
do you mean? Speak plainly, man! You can trust me.”
So then Larose, saying nothing, however, about foul
play, took the publisher partly into his confidence, half
an hour later leaving that gentleman in a very bewildered
state of mind. He had got from him a description of the
supposed invalid which tallied exactly with that of
Gauntry.
“And you keep your eyes on the newspapers, sir,” were
Larose’s parting words. He nodded significantly. “Yon
may see something very interesting in them soon.”
Just before three o’clock he was ushered into Dr.
Methuen’s consulting-room, finding that gentleman, not-
withstanding the inconvenience put upon him, in a most
amiable state of mind.
“Of course I had to see you, Mr. Larose,” smiled the
doctor. “I remember some of your exploits when at
Scotland Yard, and have no doubt you have come now
about the late Major Sampon.”
“Yes, and I won’t keep you long, sir,” replied Larose
quickly. “I spoke to Dr. Bain this morning, and he told
me what the major was suffering from and that he had


eent him on to you. Now all I want to know is, would
you say the major was a perfectly sane man when he came
to you last Monday week? ”
For a long moment the doctor regarded Larose very
thoughtfully. Then he said slowly, “You ask me a ques-
tion to which it is difficult to give a precise answer. We
are all well aware now of the profound influence exerted
by diseases of the body upon the mind” —he shook his
head—“and this disease had been sapping that poor man for
a long time. Was he perfectly sane, you ask me—well”—
he hesitated again—“l’ll go so far as to say this. He was
sane when he was with me in this room, but his general
condition was such that he might have been on the very
verge of a mental breakdown.”
“Then you consider he was quite responsible for his
actions when you saw him?” asked Larose rather dis-
appointedly.
“Yes, yes, quite responsible,” replied the doctor, “but
still, as I tell you, his mental balance might have been
just hovering over the precipice side.” He frowned. “The
verdict it was my unpleasant duty to pronounce was a
great shock to him and he took it very badly. Indeed,
as he sat there where you are sitting, his sanity might have
suddenly given way, all in one single moment. ” He shrugged
his shoulders. “Of course I couldn’t tell that.”
“But how did he take what you told him?”
“Oh, he became very angry!” replied the doctor. “He
was furious that he should die so young and other people
continue to enjoy life.” He shook his head. “In fact it
was in my mind then that he might become mental.” He
spoke curiously. “But why are you asking me all this?”
“Well, the very next day,” said Larose, “he wrote a
vile letter accusing himself of a dastardly crime and
involving someone else in it.”
“Bum it, burn it!” exclaimed the doctor warmly.
“Take no notice of it! Let it be as if he had never written
it.” He smiled. “You see, Mr. Larose, I have been giving
you the very guarded opinion of an individual who has
been a practitioner of medicine for longer than forty years,
and I had to be most precise in what I said, but if I spoke


to you unprofessionally and as man to man, I should say,”
he raised his voice ever so little, “that Major Sampon was
a nasty, unpleasant fellow, and that he left this consulting-
room ripe for any spite and mischief against those who
were in more fortunate health than he was.” He rose to
his feet. “Now, good-bye, I can’t spare you a minute
longer.”
“Thank you very much, Doctor,” said Larose. “You
have told me just what I wanted to know. I am most
grateful to you and I am so sorry I have been taking up
your time.”
“Not at all, not at all!” smiled the doctor, leading the
way to the consulting-room door. “Very pleased to be of
any service and I hope I have helped you.”
But with his hand upon the door he stopped suddenly.
“Oh, another interesting thing about that man! Do you
know he made me change a £5O note to get my fee?”
“A £5O note!” exclaimed Larose, and his memory went
surging violently back. “Have you still got it? ” he asked
excitedly.
“Certainly! I haven’t changed it yet. I’m keeping it to
give my daughter for a birthday present.”
“Oh, do show it to me,” said Larose eagerly. “I want
the number badly, as we believe the major was robbed as
well as murdered and very likely banknotes of considerable
value were taken from him. Their numbers may be con-
secutive ones to the note you have.”
“Most probably,” nodded the doctor, unlocking a drawer
and producing the £5O note, “as he took four of them out
of his pocket and they all looked crisp and clean as if they
had not been in circulation before. He said he had won
them at the races the previous Saturday afternoon.”
“Did he say who he’d got them from?” asked Larose,
in great jubiliation, and taking down the number.
“I think he mentioned Ike somebody, as he was assuring
me they would be good ones because the bookmaker was
a man of high reputation.”
Larose returned to his hotel, a little tired with all his
rushing about but very pleased so far with his day’s
work.


It had been arranged he should pick up Stone at six
o’clock that evening and drive him down to Foxwold in
his, Larose’s, own car. They were to he followed by four
plain-clothes men in a big police car. Certain preparations
had been made and they were hoping to arrest the redoubt-
able Joe Carrabin without any fighting on the morrow.
The afternoon was hot and sultry and Larose thought
a tepid bath would do him good. There was a bathroom
en suite opening out of his bedroom and, as he leisurely
undressed, he smiled happily to himself at the surprises
both the brothers Carrabin might be getting in the course
of the next few days.
“First Joe,” he told himself, “and then the dear Henry,
but I hope to goodness we don’t find the wily Arnold
Gauntry still up with brother Joe when we get there.
We mustn’t put the wind up him yet.” He frowned. “It’s
not a bit of good to me his being nabbed for helping Joe
to steal old Bannister’s money. I want him on a charge
of murder and until I can prove there’s been murder done
up there and, at least that he’s connived at it, we must
leave him alone.” He drew in a deep breath. “Oh, what a
thud I’ll come if it turns out that the Professor has really
gone away and just left Joe in charge. The woman, even,
may be alive and well and back in her home in Cornwall! ”
He braced himself up and shook his head. “No, no,
everything points to there having been foul play and even
if we can’t prove Henry took part in it, his conniving at
the crime will be prfectly clear.” He thought for a
moment. “Yes, I will phone Stone presently to get some-
one to ring up at a call office and make quite sure Gauntry,
the rubber merchant, has returned to the city,” and, all
his clothes off now, he stepped into the bathroom and
pulled to the door behind him.
And not half a minute afterwards the other door of the
bedroom, that leading on to the corridor, opened stealthily
for about a foot and the very astonished face of the m«.n
who was so much in his thoughts came peering round.
It had come about in this way.
A few minutes previously, Arnold Gauntry, happening
to pass down the Haymarket, had caught sight of Larose


and, greatly surprised at seeing him in town, had followed
to see where he was going. Then, seeing him pass into the
hotel with something of that indefinable manner in his
walk, as of a person who has reached the end of his journey,
and, moreover, seeing the hotel commissionaire smile at
him as if he knew him well, he at once jumped to the
conclusion that he was staying there.
Then immediately he was of two minds. On the one
hand he did not want Larose to ask him any awkward
questions about Professor Bannister and yet, on the other,
he wanted to find out how it was Larose was now daring
to appear in town again.
He was most curious to learn if Inspector Stone had
found out anything more about the night-watchman to
confirm his suspicions of the latter’s guilt, and so made
it safe for Larose to come out of hiding.
The two wishes struggled for the mastery in him and,
finally, the first one prevailed and he decided to seek out
Larose in the hotel and have a talk with him.
So he walked up the lounge and, addressing the girl at
the reception desk, said brusquely, “Mr. Gilbert Larose,
what number? I’ve just seen him come in. I’ll go up.
He’s expecting me.”
“Fifth floor, number twenty-nine, sir,” replied the girl
and, accordingly, he took the lift to that floor. Then
approaching the door of number twenty-nine, at the end
of a long and deserted corridor, he was about to rap upon
the door with his knuckles when he saw it was not latched
but only pushed to.
For a moment he hesitated but, hearing no sound
within, he opened the door wider to find the room empty
and see clothes lying about upon the chairs. He now
heard the loud splashing of water in the adjoining bath-
room.
In a flash he realised exactly what had happened.
Through inadvertence the bedroom door had been left
unlatched and Larose was in the bathroom having a
bath.
For a few seconds his inability to decide what to do
next was positive agony to him. He could see the outline


of what looked like a fat pocket-book in the breast-pocket
of a jacket lying upon a chair and his fingers itched to
get hold of it. The lure of big thefts or petty pilfering
ran strongly in his blood, and the pocket-book was a
temptation.
Larose was a wealthy man through his wife, and having
so recently been in flight, it might contain hundreds, even
thousands of pounds!
But was it worth the risk, he asked himself in a lightning
thought, and then in another he came to the conclusion
it was. He tip-toed forward and abstracted the pocket-
book, darting quickly back to the door. Then more loud
splashing continuing—Larose was evidently now turning
on the shower —a gentle click followed, the door latched,
and Gauntry had effectively covered his tracks.
He was sure Larose would now think either that his
pocket had been picked or that the pocket-book had fallen
out in the street.
With a great effort to exhibit no signs of haste, he
proceeded out of the hotel and up to Piccadilly Circus
before he took a taxi and was driven to his flat in Fitzroy
Square.
Then in the privacy of his rooms, he opened the pocket-
book to see what he had obtained by his theft and the
foregoing of his conversation with Larose.
He was very disappointed. There were seven pounds
in treasury notes, some postage stamps and visiting cards,
a driving-licence, and a letter in an opened envelope.
Then he took in to whom the envelope was addressed and,
quickly abstracting the letter, he read through it with
gaping mouth and startled eyes.
It was the letter Major Sampon had written to Sir
George Almaine, confessing he had been Lady Almaine’s
lover.
Larose discovered the loss of his pocket-book within a
very few minutes of coming out of the bathroom to resume
his clothes. From his early days, all his life long he had
trained his mind to register everything his eyes saw and
it functioned in that way automatically. So now, when
he made to put on his jacket his hand drew back suddenly


and he frowned hard. He had not left his jacket like that!
He was always most particular how he put down his
clothes and now one of the sleeves was folded backwards
in a crease! Immediately then he snatched up the jacket
to find that his pocket-book was gone.
In a flash he sent his thoughts running back and he
remembered hearing a click, the click of his door being
closed he realised now, when he had been under the
shower. Then someone had entered his room and taken
the pocket-book, and he gritted his teeth in rage. He
went out into the corridor but no one was there and, a
thought coming into his mind, he proceeded down to the
reception desk and enquired if any visitor had been sent
up to his room.
But his good fortune was out there, as a fresh girl had
just come on duty and he was informed that the other one
would not be back until the following day. So he returned
disappointedly and in rather a dejected frame of mind to
his room.
In the meantime the man who was calling himself Bent
had been having anything but a pleasant time. Arnold
Gauntry had left about three o’clock and he had accom-
panied him in the car as far as the Big Drain, thinking
that the walk back, short as it was, would do him good
and shake up his fiver.
Reaching the house and going into the yard, he found
the two Alsatians had been fighting and Hitler had got a
ghastly-looking wound by his throat, exposing part of the
cartilage. Thereupon he had snatched up a stick to give
Himmler a good hiding. But at the first blow the savage
beast had sprung upon him and he had been thankful to
escape into the house and bang the door to behind him.
Then, infuriated by a nasty bite the dog had given him,
on the arm, he had loaded the automatic pistol which
Gauntry had given him and fired at Himmler through
the kitchen window.
But although firing at such a close range, he was not
much of a marksman. He had broken one of the dog’s
legs with the first shot but it had taken two more to
kill him.


Returning into the yard to see what he could do for
Hitler, he had found the animal breathing so painfully
through his lacerated wind-pipe that he had thought it
best to kill him too.
So there the dogs lay in a perfect welter of blood and
it made him feel very sick. He never could bear the sight
of blood and he went indoors again to have a stiff drink
to make himself feel better.
He had several more stiff drinks afterwards and, in a
half fuddled state, cut his hand badly in opening another
bottle of whisky, with more blood dripping all about the
kitchen floor.
He lay back in a big arm-chair all the evening and then,
when it began to get dark, feeling altogether too shaky to
attempt to light the lamp, he staggered upstairs to his bed-
room and threw himself, just as he was, boots and all,
upon the bed.
He soon went off into a drunken slumber but he did
not sleep for very long, waking up suddenly about half-
past ten in a muck sweat from the terror of a dreadful
dream. It was just about the time when Larose was inter-
viewing the old chemist in Bermondsey.
He had dreamt that he was lying, all trussed up upon
the floor, with Larose fastening a rope round his
neck. Professor Bannister was standing over him and
smiling.
It was a dreadful dream and, cursing deeply, he jumped
out of bed and barricaded his door with every thing that
he could pull against it. Then, for the remaining part of
the night, he alternately dozed lightly or kept starting up
to listen for footsteps coming up the stairs. His eyes
blinked fearfully into the darkness.
The relief was almost overwhelming when light began
to appear in the room, and at last he sank into a heavy
slumber which lasted for many hours.
It was nearly noon before he finally awoke to conscious-
ness, feeling like the last thing in the world, and with his
head so heavy that he wanted to hold it up with his hands.
But half a tumbler of neat whisky put some life into
him and he went out into the yard. There the two great


Alsatians lay, stiffened horribly in death and surrounded
by ugly-looking, dried-up black pools.
It was a beautifully warm English summer day and,
pulling himself together, he drew in deep breaths of the
sunlit air.
He must get rid of the bodies. He couldn’t leave them
there. The heat would soon make them reek and, apart
from that, they sickened him each time he looked at them.
So he would take them away, a long distance from the
house. He would drop them in the Big Drain below where
he was accustomed to fish, so that they could not contami-
nate the water.
He drove his car out of the shed and, overcoming his
repugnance, dragged the bodies off the ground and
lashed them on to the luggage grid behind. He noticed
then that Himmler had got a grass-seed sticking into one
eyeball, at the comer, and he understood then what had
made the beast more particularly savage than usual.
The exercise and a good souse over his head from the
pump making him feel much better, he drove out of the
yard in quite good spirits.
The dogs were dead! Well, what did it matter? He
would have had to have shot them in any case when he
went away because he couldn’t have left them to prey
upon the countryside! Wanting their usual feed of rahhits,
they would soon have roamed over the Fens, taking their
toll of lambs and sheep. Then an outcry would speedily
have been raised and it would have been found out
within a few days that no one was living in Wrack House.
That would have been the last thing he wanted. He
intended to leave secretly and by night, and it might
be months, even, before anyone would leam that he had
gone. Then —and he guffawed hoarsely here—what a
mystery it would be to everyone what had really happened
to the renowned Professor Bannister of such world-wide
fame! And the mystery would never be solved! Bannister,
his man and the serving woman would just have vanished
from all human sight, and their disappearance would be
one of the great unsolved mysteries of smug, order-loving
England.
K


He reached the place by the Big Drain where he was
intending to topple in the Alsatians and, not wishing to
handle the blood-fouled bodies more than he could
help, he hacked his car to the very edge of the bank,
putting on the brakes so that the car should remain
stationary.
But either the brake-linings were worn thin, or else
his whisky-shaking hands had not pushed down the brake
lever far enough, for the movement of his jumping out
started the car moving, and in a matter of seconds it had
run backwards and was toppling into the Big Drain.
Over it went, and with a resounding splash it fell into
the muddy waters and disappeared. For a few moments
the eddies swirled and widened, and then the Big Drain
was left to guard its secret until the next big drought was
to grip the lonely Fens.
For a long minute Bent did not seem to have taken in
what had happened. He just stared hard and harder, as
if he were very puzzled. Then a realisation of everything
came to him and his face was convulsed in fury.
He clenched his hands, he stamped his feet, and he
shouted out his curses at the very top of his voice. Then
a panic seized him and he looked round and round, as if
there were enemies on every side.
What in hell’s name was he going to do now? How
was he going to get his food? How would he get his letters
and how could he post one to let his brother know the fix
he was in?
But he calmed down presently and felt relief that, at
any rate, he had some whisky left in the house. The
thought of the strong spirit stirred him into action, and
at an ambling run he returned to the house.
A stiff drink quickly made him regard things in a better
light, and he laughed his horrible hoarse laugh. Things
were not so very bad after all. There was enough food in
the house to last him a long time and as for posting any
letters, well, he would have to walk into the village in the
dead of night when no one was about.
Of course, if he became Professor Bannister’s man, Bent,
again, he could go openly about wherever and whenever he


wanted to but still—still, that idea continued to be un-
pleasing to him and, certainly, he would put it off for as
long as he could.
He nodded confidently to himself. Well, there was no
hurry and he could take his time to make up his mind
what he would do.
He got himself a scratch meal and then for the rest of
the day sat out in the sunshine in the yard, returning,
however, into the house every now and then to get himself
a spot of whisky. But he did not drink nearly so heavily
as he had done the previous day.
The afternoon waned, the evening came slowly and then
dusk began to fall. He dreaded the darkness for he could
not forget his dreadful dream.
Again he lit no lamp, and before it had become quite
dark he was up in his bedroom and had barricaded the door
as before.
Strangely enough, he dropped to sleep quickly, but
towards midnight awoke in the horrors of another dreadful
dream. Larose was again putting a rope round his neck,
but this time it was Mary Trescowthick who was standing
over him. Her face was bloody, her hair was all dishevelled,
and her eyes were full of reproach as she looked down at
him.
He started up in terror and shouted loudly, “It’s this
cursed house which gives these dreams. It’s haunted,”
and then emboldened that his cry had brought down no
catastrophe upon him, he sprang out of bed and, by the
faint light of the starlit night, tore away the barricade
behind his door. He tramped down the stairs, still shouting
loudly, and burst out through the kitchen door into the
yard.
There the peace and calmness of the night soon calmed
him. “But I’ll never sleep inside again,” he swore. He
nodded assuringly to himself. “I’ll bring a mattress down
and sleep on the fenlands where the damned dreams won’t
come.” ,
But not daring to go upstairs again in the darkness,
he took some cushions and made himself a bed upon the
grass about fifty yards away from the house, and so


exhausted was he by his fright that he soon dropped into a
fitful slumber again.
He woke up several times before the dawn came, but he
had no more dreams and that confirmed him in his opinion
that his sleep would be quite undisturbed as long as he
was not under the roof of the house.
The next day, to give himself something to do, he went
fishing in the dykes and obtained several eels. But the
day was long and tedious and he was glad when darkness
approached so that he could put his plan in operation and
make a comfortable bed for himself right away from the
house.
He did not, however, go very far, barely a hundred
yards, and there, with a mattress tucked away among the
big tussocks of coarse grass, and with a pillow and a
blanket, he prepared to pass the night. He did not undress.
But though all was peace and quiet he could not sleep
and lay for a long while staring up at the starlit sky. The
night was quite warm.
At last he thought he must have just dozed off, when he
was gradually awakened by the sounds of low voices very
close to where he lay.
He was about to start up when he heard a voice which
he recognised and he was instantly frozen into immobility.
It was Larose speaking.
“Now, that’s as near the house as we’d better go,” he
heard. “Joe Carrabin may sleep heavily when he’s full of
booze but those beastly dogs of his may hear the slightest
sound. Whew! Doesn’t this aniseed stink?”
“By Jove, it does!” came another voice. “We’ll smell
of it for days,”
“Still, the dogs will pick it up directly they’re let out,”
laughed Larose, “and they’ll be a mile and more away when
we come for Joe. Still, I expect we’ll have to shoot them
afterwards. They’re as fierce and savage as wild animals.
But let’s clear off now and we’ll be able to get a few hours
sleep. Joe’s not an early riser and I reckon if we all get
here by eight o’clock it’ll be soon enough.”
The voices faded away and Joe Carrabin lay on like a
dead man.


It was indeed several minutes before he could take
in that the voices had been real and not part of another
dream. Even then he might have doubted he had really
heard them if his nostrils had not been now assailed by a
pungent odour. It reminded him of cough lozenges and
the sweets he used to suck when he was a boy. Yes, the
smell was that of aniseed right enough and, of course—
he actually found himself smiling—a trail of it had been
laid to decoy the Alsatians away from the house.
Then, quite calmly and strangely enough without any
sense of fear the full realisation of what had happened
came home to him.
Somehow Larose, the one-time detective of Scotland
Yard, had found out who he was. He had informed the
police and a body of them were coming the next morning
to arrest him. Of course, the charge would be the old one
for which he had been wanted for getting on now for seven
years, strangling that old Rampini woman to get her
jewels.
A lot of hard thinking on the part of the recumbent
Joe followed, quite clear thinking, too, and wholly
unobscured by any alcoholic haze. He was no longer the
whisky-sodden Bent, with no backbone and haunted by the
bloodied ghost of an old woman. He was Joe Carrabin,
the cunning and very resourceful outlaw with criminal
blood running hot and strong within his veins. His dead
mother had been jailed several times for shop-lifting, his
father had been hanged and his clever brother Henry, the
cleverest of the family, had climbed his way up to gentility
by many acts of fraud, for which, however, he had never
been caught.
So Joe now considered what he would do. He never
gave it a thought that they were coming for him for any-
thing to do with Professor Bannister. They had found out
he was Joe Carrabin and they were just coming for him for
that.
He was certainly in a bad way, with no car, and with
his dreadful squinting eye which would give him away
to the first person who saw him when his description was
re-broadcast.


No, he wasn’t going to run away. He had had too
much of that, six and a half years hack. He wasn’t going
to give himself up either. He’d got a'better plan than that.
He would just hide in the least likely place where the
damned police would look for him. He would remain
where he was.
“Now that devil Larose said they’d come about eight
o’clock, didn’t he?” he muttered. “Splendid, then I’ve
got plenty of time,” and he rose up quite leisurely and,
carrying his bedding with him, went very quietly back
into the house. The moon had now risen and was giving
plenty of light.
He collected two out of the three loaves in the breadpan,
two tins of corned beef, a jar of dripping and an empty two
gallon petrol tin which he filed with water. All these he
carried into an empty, open shed which in days gone by
had been used as a stable, and which had once possessed
a door. Over a small part of the front of the shed ran a sort
of loft, but it was so narrow and occupied so little space
that, unless one came right into the shed, it would not be
noticed that any such loft was there. It had no ladder
leading up to it but one reached it by climbing up
successively upon two narrow shelves running along the
whole length of one side of the shed.
Upon this loft he was going to hide, making sure it
would not be searched. It had the added advantage of a
small window which opened on to the yard, exactly opposite
the kitchen door. He also carried up some blankets
and a pillow. Then, after throwing about the things in his
bedroom to suggest a hurried get-away, and wiping out
the kitchen sink most carefully until it was perfectly dry,
he betook himself up into the loft and lay down to get some
sleep.
He had reached a state of fatalism when he didn’t really
seem to mind what happened but, with the loaded auto-
matic in his pocket, he was intending to make a fight of
it if necessary, and, if the worse came to the worst, finally
blow out his own brains to avoid arrest. He would be quite
happy, he told himself, if he could first get the hated Larose.
The Carrabins had always been a united family and an


imagined wrong against one member of them would be
always faithfully repaid by the others.
Notwithstanding his new condition of iron nerve, it
was a long time before he got to sleep, but sleep came
with the first rays of morning light and he did not wake
until roused by the loud sounding of a motor horn.
Raising himself upon one elbow, he looked through
the dirty window pane and smiled grimly at what he saw
below.
A light delivery van had drawn up in the yard and
a youngish looking man in a light dustcoat and a rakish
trilby was jumping out. The man had got a half-smoked
cigarette drooping down from one comer of his mouth.
He approached the back door and rapped loudly with
his knuckles. Then, waiting for someone to appear, he
turned his back to the door and hummed the first bars of a
popular tune. No one answering his knock, after about
half a minute he rapped again. Then he rapped on
the kitchen window and called out loudly, “Hi, hi, does
Professor Bannister five here? I’ve got a parcel*^ for
him.”
But no one still appearing, he tried the handle of the door
and, finding the door unlocked, opened it and put his head
inside. He shouted “Hi, hi” again, but then withdrew his
head and, walking round the house, glanced into the sheds
to see if anyone was about, returning, however, in a few
moments to the yard.
Finally, he became bolder and entered the house, all
the time continuing his shouting of “Hi, hi.” He walked
through the kitchen and along the passage looking in every
room, the doors of which were all open wide, as he passed.
Next, he went up the stairs still calling out all the time.
Then he reappeared in the yard and announced sibilantly
to the, apparently, untenanted delivery van, “There’s no
one here and it looks darned like as if the bird has flown.
In a darned hurry, too,” he added, “as the clothes in one
bedroom are all scattered about anyhow.”
The back of the delivery van opened with a jerk and
Larose, Inspector Stone and three plain-clothes men jumped
out.


“Damnation,” swore Larose, with his face about a couple
of feet long, “he’s bolted right enough! His car’s gone!”
Stone laughed good-naturedly. “So you weren’t so
clever as you thought, Gilbert. He got the wind up some-
how.”
“But perhaps he’s out in the grounds,” suggested one
of the plainclothes men, London bom and whose idea
was that houses in the country were always surrounded by
grounds.
“Grounds be Mowed!” laughed Stone. “You great
ninny, the grounds here are umpteen square miles of open
fenland!” He started suddenly and pointed to the big
dark patches on the ground at the other side of the yard.
“ Gosh, that’s blood! ” His eyes opened very wide. “What’s
been happening here?”
Larose darted across to the patches and, after a quick
moment’s inspection, picked up the big axe. “He killed
the dogs before he went,” he exclaimed breathlessly. “Look
at the blood and hairs on this axe! ”
They all crowded into the house and, after another
search had been made, a council of war was held.
“He went the day before yesterday, I should say,”
announced Stone. “At any rate, he killed the dogs then,
as that blood is at least thirty-six hours old. Then the sink
is as dry as a bone, and the "bit of soap, too.” He nodded
grimly. “Yes, he’s had time to get almost anywhere in
England, Scotland or Wales by now.”
“Never mind, we’ll get him in the end,” said Larose
cheerfully. He indicated two of the plainclothes men.
“Well, I’ll stay on here with King and Casey as arranged.
King will go back with you to the Big Drain and pick up
my car,”
Stone rose to his feet with a big sigh. “And I’ll have to
go back to the Chief with my tail between my legs.” He
made a gnmace at Larose. “Your stock’s falling, my boy,
and if you don’t find any corpses it’ll go lower still.”
Half an hour later Larose and the two men who had
been left with him were having a belated breakfast of sand-
wiches in the kitchen of Wrack House. Larose was quite
cheerful.


“Now you quite understand what we’ve got to do!”
he said. “I reckon he buried them around the last week in
February and we’ve got to find where the ground is a bit
raised up somewhere, or an oblong patch where the grass
looks different from everywhere else.” He grinned. “We’ve
got about a thousand acres to go over, but still the job
won’t be nearly so difficult as it seems. I’ve got a pretty
good idea in which direction to go and we shall be helped
by seeing some empty cartridge cases lying about.”
“But do you really think, sir,” asked one of the men,
“that he fired any cartridges over a grave?”
“I do,” nodded Larose, “and I feel more confident
than ever now, since we’ve come here, that there are bodies
buried. I sold him a full box of twenty five cartridges and,
as you saw, there are seven gone from it now. That means
to me that he’s fired them over a grave.” He laughed.
“Seven and thirteen are always the particular numbers
which superstitious people either love or fear.”
“Well, he must be darned superstitious,” laughed back
the man, “to do a silly thing like that.”
“He is darned superstitious,” said Larose. “For a
minute or two he was as terrified as a little child would
have been when that girl made out she had seen a ghost.
He was white as death and shivering as if he was in an ague.
But come on now, let’s start. We may have a long tramp
before us, but at any rate it’ll be in the fresh air.”
So Joe, up in his loft, saw them set out and he frowned
uneasily when he saw one of them was carrying a big garden
fork. Then, his eyes sweeping round upon the wide expanse
of fenland on every side, he became amused and tossed his
head contemptuously. Soon seeing them far specks in the
distance, he got down to stretch his legs and proceeded
leisurely into the house. He inspected curiously what they
had brought with them and ate a small slice of some tasty -
looking brawn which he found wrapped up in a piece of
sandwich paper.
“By Hell, but if I’d only got some poison in the house,”
he muttered, “wouldn’t I just play up with it!”
He looked at a whisky bottle upon one of the shelves
and his mouth watered. It was his last bottle and three


parts full. He hesitated a moment, and then poured out
a good stiff drink in a tumbler. He felt it do him good and
had another one. Then, suddenly realising what a fall his
two drinks had made to the level of the whisky in the
bottle, after a moment’s consideration, he poured in a
sufficient quantity of water to restore the level to that it
had been before he had taken any of the spirit.
He was fearing the sharp-eyed Larose might by chance
have happened to take note of how much whisky the bottle
had contained.
He swore angrily here. No, Larose would do nothing
by chance. Everything he did would be of set purpose.
Although he could not for the life of him think how he
done it, he, Larose, had found him out and he was now
respecting him accordingly.
Rinsing and drying the cup most carefully, he returned
to the loft. He was now feeling quite hungry, and opening
one of the tins of corned beef, ate half of its contents,
along with some slices of bread, thickly spread over with
dripping. The savoury smell of the fat speedily attracted
the flies and he cursed roundly as he drove them off, realis-
ing now that he would have to keep all his eatables covered
up with something as long as he was in the loft.
His meal over, and his food under the blanket, he lay
down and soon dropped off to sleep.
Larose and his assistants had a very disappointing day,
returning to the house about six, thoroughly worn out.
They had expected the search would be an arduous one
but, forgetting they were none of them accustomed to much
walking, had not reckoned how stiff and weary they would
be.
Larose had brought a small flask of brandy with him
and that had been shared equally between the three of
them. But it had only been a very little drink and, tired
as they were, they looked rather enviously at the bottle of
whisky upon the shelf.
If Larose had noticed it that morning when they had
first entered the house and subconsciously he had wondered
if that were the last of the bottles he had bought for the
man he had been supposed to regard then as the Professor.


“Well, boys,” he said, noting the glances the others
were casting upon the whisky, “what about it? A little
would do us good, wouldn’t it?” He laughed as he took
down the bottle. “The spoils of war, you know.”
“But do you think it will be all right?” asked one of
the men. “He won’t have put poison in it!”
“I shouldn’t think so,” returned Larose, “at any rate
I’ll taste it first.”
He got some upon his finger and put it to his lips. Then
he put a little in a teaspoon and sipped it. “Seems quite
all right,” he said, holding up the bottle to the light, “but
devilish weak. Why, I’d swear it has been watered.”
However, they each had a tot and then, their evening
meal finished, took themselves off to the rooms upstairs,
where they each requisitioned a bed. Larose chose the one
where Joe Carrabin had been wont to sleep, with the
laughing intimation to the others that perhaps by so doing
he would dream of Joe and learn where he was.
The following morning he was first up, and about eight
o’clock was down in the kitchen and had lit the primus
to boil some water. It had been a hot night and there was
every prospect of its being a very hot day. They had all
slept badly until the early morning and that accounted for
them having awakened so late.
Waiting for the kettle to boil, he stood looking out
idly through the kitchen window on to the yard and the
sheds. Yes, it certainly was going to be a gruelling day for
it was hot even now and there were a lot of flies about.
Then, subconsciously at first, he took in the number of
flies buzzing about, in and out through the broken window
high up on the shed just opposite. Before he had gone to
sleep Joe had covered his jar of dripping with the end of his
blanket, but in the night he had kicked the blanket off,
and the flies were now having a good feast.
Larose was interested and, his mind at that moment
very full of thoughts about dead bodies, he wondered
what was now of such interest to the flies he was watching.
He would go and see.
So he crossed leisurely over the yard and went into the
shed, or rather he started to go in, for he suddenly pulled


himself up sharply, with a look of incredulous amazement
upon his face.
He had heard the unmistakable sounds of loud snoring
just above his head!
But it was only for two seconds that he stood still and
then, with his heart beating furiously, he was tip-toeing
back into the house. The two detectives were now in the
kitchen.
“Quick,” he hissed in a hoarse whisper, “he’s up there
in the loft on the top of that shed. He’s fast asleep.”
“What, Joe Carrabin?” gasped one of the men.
“Yes, almost for certain! Someone’s snoring up there
and it’s sure to be Joe. Quick, not a sound!”
So it came about not a half a minute later that Joe
was awakened by a heavy body falling upon him, followed,
so it seemed, by a dozen pairs of hands gripping him all
over. He started to struggle furiously but soon realised
it was hopeless, with two men upon his chest pinioning his
arms and a third coiling a length of rope round his
imprisoned legs.
.“Keep quiet, Joe,” ordered Larose, “and you won’t
get hurt. The game’s up and you can’t do anything.”
So the murderer of poor old Mrs. Rampini his legs tied
and his arms fastened to his sides by another length of
rope, was lowered down into the shed and then carried
into the house.
There, he was bound more scientifically and propped up
in the big armchair in the kitchen, where he had always
sat in his impersonation of the master of the house.
And all the time he had never uttered a word. His eyes
had glared ferociously, his face had sweated until the
perspiration had dripped off him, and his chest had heaved
convulsively, but there had been no abuse. He had not
sworn or uttered a single oath.
Of special purpose, Larose sent off both his men post-
haste to Foxwold to ring up Inspector Stone. He wanted
to get them out of the way, so that he could have a talk
with Joe Carrahin without any witnesses. He had long
since grasped that members of the Carrabin family would
always be loyal to one another, but still if he dealt tactfully


with Joe he thought he might get something out of him
without the latter being aware of it.
So when they were alone he wiped the perspiration off
the man’s face and offered him a cigarette. But he got no
response, only a stony glare. Then he suggested a spot of
whisky, but the glare was still there, only not quite so stony
now.
Accordingly, he put a good two inches of the watered
whisky in a glass and held it up to Joe’s lips. The latter
drank it eagerly and his expression became a little less
unpleasant.
Larose shook his head. “But you shouldn’t have watered
that whisky, Joe. Of course you came in yesterday when
we were out and had a spot and then put water in the bottle
so that it shouldn’t be noticed. But, without my actually
realising it, you made me suspicious and put all my senses
on the alert. I thought there was something peculiar
somewhere, and then, when I saw those flies buzzing round
that little window, I went into the shed at once to see
what they were doing there and—l heard you snoring.”
He laughed as if it were a good joke. “But you were
clever, very clever, Joe. It was really smart of you to
think of remaining on here and it took us all in. It was
just chance that we found you, those flies coming after
your dripping and attacting my attention. Ah, that drip-
ping was another of your mistakes! ”
Joe Carrabin made no comment and Larose went on,
“But it was all chance that you’ve been caught. It was
chance that brought me down here and I saw at once you
weren’t Professor Bannister, because I’d been in Cambridge
that very morning and another Professor I know had been
telling me about him. He is a much older man than you,
for one thing. So I became curious and wanted to know
who you were. Then that wonderful game you told me
you won against the City of London Club’s third man gave
the whole game away. They sent me to the Bermondsey
Club and an old chemist, Tomkins I think his name was,
told'me who you were. He remembered the game quite
well and said you were a grand player.” He laughed.
“All very simple, wasn’t it?”


“Damn you!” swore Joe deeply. “I’d throttle you if I
could.”
“Yes, as you did that old woman,” nodded Larose.
He nodded again. “You’ll hang for that, Joe.”
“Not I,” scoffed Joe. “They can’t prove I did it.”
“Oh, can’t they? What about the statement of that
butler whom your Dad shot?”
“It won’t hold water. He made a mistake. I was only
putting the old woman on the bed when he saw me. She
had fainted. Then, when I was out of the room she came to
and Dad tried to stop her. But he squeezed her too hard
and she snuffed out.”
Larose spoke very solemnly. “But there are other things
against you now, Joe.” He paused a moment. “You’ve
murdered Bannister and Mary Trescowthick.”
Joe burst into a loud guffaw. “You just prove it.”
He seemed most indignant. “Why, Bannister went away
six months and more ago and left me in full charge of every-
thing. He sacked the Trescowthick woman before he went.”
“Oh, and where has he gone to?” asked Larose sarcasti-
cally.
“Somewhere in China, I think, to a place called Tibet,”
replied Joe with a fine assumption of carelessness. “He
said he was going to find out how some old witch doctors
there could manage to live a hundred and fifty years.”
He shrugged his shoulders. “That’s all I know.”
Larose shook his head. “You’ve buried him out here on
the Fens, Joe, as well as poor Mary Trescowthick,” he
spoke very sternly, “and we’re going to find the bodies.”
Joe laughed loudly. “Oh, that’s why you went out this
morning with gardening tools is it? I noticed the fork
and thought you were going to look for mushrooms.”
Larose shook his head again. “It won’t wash, Joe!
There’s a grave out somewhere on these Fens. I’m sure of
it.”
“Then you find it,” sneered Joe. He seemed amused.
“You can’t lay any charge of murder until you produce
the bodies. But give us another drop of whisky.” He
grinned. “I don’t suppose now I’ll be getting too much
of it in the next few years.”


“ But in a few weeks’ time you’ll be having that one stiff
drink more,” commented Larose significantly, “just after
the chaplain’s had his little talk with you one morning—
and that, Joe, will be the last drink you’ll ever have.”
“Oh, will it?” jeered Joe defiantly. “Well, we’ll see.”
“So you’d far better confess everything about the
Professor and poor old Mary,” went on Larose. “If you
don’t” —he nodded darkly—“then Mary will go on haunt-
ing you when you’re in the cells!”
“But you told me the other day,” grinned Joe triumph-
antly “that ghosts only haunted the place where the dead
’uns had once lived,” and Larose felt rather foolish that he,
Larose, had over-reached himself that time.
Stone appeared not very much later than noon, having
broken all traffic regulations in his anxiety to arrive before
Joe Carrabin had managed to evade them again.
He had a short conversation with Larose and it was
arranged what should be given out to the Press. Above all
things, they did not want to let the man passing as Arnold
Gauntry learn that anything was known of his brother’s
impersonation of Professor Bannister, until more time had
been given to discover any bodies if they had really been
buried as Larose was so confidently assuming.
Of course, the news of Joe Carrabin’s arrest could not
be kept secret beyond a few hours, as he would have to be
brought before the magistrates, at any rate the next day,
and committed for trial.
So it was agreed the Press should be informed that the
much wanted Joe Carrabin, the Dencross murderer, for
whose arrest a warrant had been issued six and a half
years ago, had been caught at last. He had been recognised,
when being driven in a car by a young lady as they were
passing through Brandon some weeks ago, by a man who
had known him once in Bermondsey. The man had
informed the police of his suspicions, but it had been with
great difficulty that the police had been able to trace the
car. Then it had been found that Carrabin was in the employ
of the great Professor Bannister, on his land in the heart of
the Norfolk Fens.
“That’ll give nothing away, Gilbert,” nodded Stone,


“and you can go on playing about here as long as you
like.” He smiled. “Kit were not you who were so certain
that he’s murdered and buried those two, I would say it
was all hunk and that you’ll have all your trouble for
nothing. Still”—and his smile became a broad grin—“as
it’s you who are on the job I expect a couple of corpses,
whosoever’s they are, will be produced to prove something.
Good-bye, my lad, and good luck to you.”


CHAPTER VIII
SECRET SERVICE
DR. REVIRE did not look too pleased when, very
full up with appointments the next morning but
one, the card of Arnold Gauntry was handed to
him by the nurse-attendant, with the message that the
former had not come to see him professionally, but wanted
a few minutes’ private conversation with him as soon as
possible.
The doctor had met Gauntry upon two occasions at Avon
Court but had not formed a good opinion of him and,
indeed, had rather wondered how he came to be a friend
of Sir George Almaine.
So he frowned now as he glanced down at the card.
“Tell him I’m very busy,” he said, “and ask him please to
call again some other day.”
But the nurse-attendant came hack immediately. “He
says he must see you, Doctor,” she said. “He insists the
matter is very urgent.”
“All right, then,” nodded the doctor, “but he’ll have
to' wait some time. I shan’t see him out of his turn.”
So, to Gauntry’s great disgust, he was kept waiting
longer than an hour and it had not improved his temper
when at last he was shown into the consulting-room.
Perhaps sensing that the doctor would not be inclined
to be too friendly with him, he did not offer to shake hands.
He, however, sat himself down in the chair to which Dr.
Revire had politely waved him.
“I won’t waste any time, Dr. Revire,” he said sharply.
“I’ll come straight to the point.” He spoke almost as if he
was addressing>an inferior. “I am quite aware you have
more interests than your professional ones, and that you
are working for the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.”
He raised his hand protestingly. “No, no, you needn’t
be at all uneasy.” He nodded. “I am working for them


myself, and quite a lot of the information you supply
passes through my hands.”
Dr. Revire’s face was an impassive mask, and its
expression did not admit or deny anything. It almost
seemed he was not interested.
Gauntry went on. “ Two years ago when upon a holiday
in Turkestan, you became friendly with another traveller
and you crossed the Caspian sea with him in the steamer
Tamur. Upon your arrival in Baku he became ill and for
three weeks you were both his doctor and nurse. He
turned out to be a high Soviet official and through his
persuasion you were induced to work for the Soviet Republic
when you returned to London. You have unique
opportunities of obtaining information, as among your
patients are many moving in diplomatic circles and ”
Dr. Revire raised his hand. “Why all this? As there are
no witnesses I can admit it all.”
“But it was necessary so that there should be perfect
confidence between us,” said Gauntry.
The doctor looked at his watch. “Well, what have you
come to me about? ” he asked rather sharply.
“The late Major Sampon,” said Gauntry very slowly,
“was high up in the British Secret Service.” He nodded
impressively. “He was trailing you!”
The doctor’s eyes opened very wide. He was certainly
interested now. “Ah,” he exclaimed, “I’m not surprised
now you tell me!” He nodded. “He rather wanted to
push a friendship on me.”
“And he is dead now!” went on Gauntry significantly.
Dr. Revire started. “You mean ”he began.
“I mean nothing,” broke in Gauntry sharply. “I just
stated a fact. He nodded. “But it’s a good thing he’s
gone. He was becoming a menace to us both and if I
hadn’t dealt with him Valmar would have seen to it he
could have done our cause no more harm.”
u doctor’s face was white and he spoke a little hoarsely.
To supply political information and gather details of
armaments and pass on scraps of conversation is one
thing, he said, “but ” he shook his head emphatically
the taking of life is repellent to me.”


“But if a state of war were on,” countered Gauntry
scoffingly, “you would be hanged without mercy if you
were found out, and the same with me. To put it plainly
we are both spies.”
Dr. Revire frowned. “Necessary evils!” he commented.
“Someone has to do the work.” He spoke with some
dignity. “Besides, I am Russian bom, and I am only
helping my country. Added to that, I am heart and soul
a believer in the great ideals of Lenin. I am wholly in
accord with what he stood for.” His frown deepened.
“But I tell you frankly I do not approve of what those
in authority in my country are doing now, and it is in my
mind to help them no further until their policy shows a
great change.”
Gauntry sneered, “But with all your love of these great
ideals, you have been taking money for the information
you have supplied.”
“No, I have not been taking it,” retorted the doctor
sharply. “Where it has been necessary to pay for the
information I have obtained, every penny which has
come to me I have passed on to my informants.” He
scoffed. “I have no need of getting money that way.
I make plenty in my profession.” His face hardened
suddenly. “But you shock me by what you tell me.”
He recoiled in his chair. “Do you mean to say you killed
Major Sampon?”
“I say nothing,” replied Gauntry coldly. “He is dead
and that’s an end to it.” He turned the conversation.
“Now what I’ve come to you about is this.” For a moment
he seemed to hesitate and then he went on firmly and
decisively, “That killing has got to be fixed on someone
and Gilbert Larose deserves it most. He has worked several
times for the British Secret Service, and, to my own
knowledge, has got two German agents put away. Besides,
he’s always been most ready with his gun and has shot
several people himself when he thought the law couldn’t
get them in the proper way.” He nodded. “Yes, he’s
the one who should hang for Sampon’s death.”
Dr. Revire looked puzzled. “I don’t quite understand
what you mean.”


Gauntry smiled. “But it’s very simple. When the
adjourned inquest comes on, your evidence, as well as
mine, must weigh strongly against him. You must ring
up that Inspector Flower without any delay and say it
comes back to you now that you did hear voices when
Larose was out on the verandah and you think one of
them belonged to him. Yes, Flower’s the best man to
ring up. He’s a spiteful little beast and will jump at
what you tell him.”
Gauntry was in many ways a shrewd man, but he was
a poor judge of character, particularly so of those more
educated or cleverer than himself. His mother had been
bom in Nuremberg of German parents and he had inherited
from her that fatal miscalculation of what was in other
people’s minds. He was no psychologist and it was his
view that self-interest would buy anything.
So now he was profoundly astonished at the way Dr,
Revire received his suggestion. The latter’s eyes blazed
with wrath, he sprang to his feet and for the moment it
seemed as if he were actually about to resort to physical
violence. But he quickly took a grip of himself again
and spoke icily and very quietly.
“Will you please clear out, Mr. Gauntry?” he said.
“Your presence nauseates me.” In spite of his self-control
his anger rose. “You contemptible fool, aren’t you a better
judge of men than that?” he scoffed. “I may be a spy,
but I’m not a perjurer and in my ordinary dealings I
try to behave as a gentleman.” He waved towards the
door. “Go on, let yourself out.”
Gauntry’s face was suffused with fury and, no coward
himself, he wished the doctor had attempted to resort
to violence. But he forced up a smile which was
evil and threatening. “Very well, Doctor,” he said.
“You know the consequences. You will be exposed to the
authorities. It will be done anonymously, quite easily
and without exposing anyone else, least of all myself, to
risk.”
The doctor shook his head ironically. “No, Mr. Gauntry,
you are quite harmless and cannot injure me in any way.”
He went on quickly, “I am not quite a fool and I have


never laid myself open to being uncovered by the very
alert counter-espionage people of this country. You say
a lot of the information I have supplied has passed through
your hands. Well, if you look back it will perhaps come
home to you as an unpleasant shock that you do not even
know what my handwriting is like.”
He spoke confidently. “Not only have I never put
pen or pencil to paper and everything I have passed on
has been done by word of mouth, but also, I have never
met any other agent here in this house. It has always
been when I could not by any possibility have been
trailed.”
He screwed up his face and moved his lips as if he
had an unpleasant taste in his mouth. “Now you just
get out!” and he pressed violently upon the bell-push
on his desk.
The nurse-attendant at once appeared and Gauntry
rose to his feet. “Good-day to you, Doctor,” he said
with the utmost pleasantness. “We’ll see who’s right,”
and he bowed himself out as if they were the best of
friends.
Dr. Revire attended to the rest of his patients that
day with no outward traces of the mental storm which
was inwardly disturbing him. Notwithstanding the bold
front he had put on before Gauntry, he had been rendered
very uneasy by the latter’s visit.
It was not of himself he was thinking, for he felt quite
safe there, but it was of Larose, and he was determined
that, as far as he could prevent it, no evidence should
be faked against the one-time detective who had im-
pressed him as being both a gentleman and a very likeable
fellow.
He was in two minds. He was not going to see a gross
injustice done, but at the same time he did not want
to strike a blow at the espionage system of his own
country.
Still, he reflected, Gauntry had just exposed himself
as a man dangerous to any organisation and, with his
violent methods of carrying on his work, it was most
probable he would sooner or later get laid by the heels


and then bring down much better men than he with
him.
Dr. Revire at last decided what he would do.
His consulting hours over, he drove out into the suburbs
as far as Muswell Hill. There he looked out for and found
a roadside telephone call-box. He entered and rang up
Scotland Yard, asking to be put on to someone in authority
in the Political Department.
“Well, what do you want?” asked a gruff voice at
length, “and who’s speaking?”
“It doesn’t matter who I am,” replied the doctor in
a hoarse whisper which effectively disguised his voice, “but
I want to furnish some information. ”
“Then what is it?”
“Keep your eye on Arnold Gauntry, a dealer in rubber
in the city, and who lives privately in a flat in Fitzroy
Square. You’ll find his exact addresses in the telephone
directory.”
“What’s he done?”
The doctor spoke with an effort. “He’s a Soviet agent
and also”—he spoke as if much more willingly—“just
make some enquiries about him in relation to that murder
of Major Sampon. He knew the major was in the Secret
Service and was not very far from him when he was
murdered. Mind what you’re up to, though, for Gauntry
is pretty sharp and a difficult man to be caught
tripping.”
“Oh, please give us a bit more information than that!”
pleaded the police official, but the receiver had been
hung up and the line was dead.
The news was at once reported to the Chief Commissioner,
and the frown already upon his face deepened. Less than
an hour previously, Stone had been with him relating
their failure to find Joe Carrabin that morning. He now
sent for Stone and handed him the phone message which
had been written down, watching the expression upon the
latter’s face as he read it.
“Gosh,” exclaimed Stone, his eyes like saucers, “then
Mr. Larose is not the only one who thinks this Gauntry
murdered the major!” He read through the message


again. “And this man is an agent of the Soviet, too!
What beasts there were among that party that night!”
“It is probable,” suggested the Chief “that Gauntry
and this Dr. Revire managed the killing between
them! ”
“Of course, of course they did!” agreed Stone at once,
but then he frowned and half shook his head. “Still,
the doctor didn’t strike me as that sort of man. He
seemed a gentleman and of quite a different class from the
Carrabin fellow.” He regarded his Chief intently. “Is
it quite proved, sir, that the doctor is a Soviet agent?”
“No, it isn’t,” replied the Chief. “The counter-espionage
people admit they have been suspecting him for a long
time, but they have never succeeded in fastening any-
thing on him.”
“Good,” exclaimed Stone, “then I’m almost certain
he’s not working with that other man.”
The Chief Commissioner lifted the receiver off the
telephone upon his desk. “McGubbin,” he said laconically.
“I want him at once,” and very quickly there was a
knock upon the door and a tall lanky raw-boned Scots-
man appeared.
He had weak, watery blue eyes and they blinked as
if he had just got out of bed and was still sleepy. He
looked anything but the competent man he was, the
head inspector working for Scotland Yard in conjunction
with the counter-espionage in Whitehall.
Without a word, the Chief handed him the slip of
paper which he had just shown to Stone. The Scotsman
read it through twice and then looked up at his superior
and just exclaimed “Ah!”
“Have you ever heard of this Arnold Gauntry before?”
asked the Chief.
“Noo,” replied the Scotsman and then for a long
moment he looked down at the paper again.
“Then you can’t say whether there’s anything in it?”
frowned the Chief.
McGubbin spoke slowly after the manner of one who
always weighed his words most carefully. “Sir,” he said,
“ on May the sixteenth and seventeeeth last our Detective


Ironson was trailing the Russian jeweller, Rubinoff, but
he lost him both times at the comer of this Swallow Street
in Lothbury. He said he disappeared so quickly that
he didn’t see into which building he had gone and he
was not able to find out. Then if you remember, on the
night of May the twentieth,” he spoke very solemnly,
“Ironson was picked up dead in Fitzroy Square. He had
been pistolled in the head and the pistol used had un-
doubtedly had a silencer on, because no one had heard
the shot.” He nodded. “Yes, I think there’s a lot in this
bit of information. It’s very valuable.”
“Good God,” exclaimed the Chief to Stone, “what a
climax things seem to be leading up to!” He turned
to the big Scotsman. “We know something about this
fellow already, and we believe his real name is Carrabin.
We have not been trailing him because we think he can
be picked up any time we want him.”
“But I’ll shadow him now,” nodded the Scotsman,
“and we’ll know as much about him as his mother did
before he could even toddle.”
In the meantime Gauntry had been carrying on his
legitimate business in the city that afternoon in a very
unpleasant frame of mind. Judging all people by his
own standard, he had been quite certain Dr. Revire would
have had no compunction in agreeing to pile up evidence
against Larose and, consequently, he was furious at the
rebuff he had received in that quarter.
But he had not played all the cards in his hand yet,
he told himself, and he nodded grimly when he thought
of the hold the letter which he had taken from Larose
gave him over the pretty Lady Almaine. Certainly, he
could put the screw on there.
It never entered into his mind for one moment that
the letter was not stating the exact truth. Of course
Lady Almaine and the major had been lovers! She was
just the alert and clever kind of woman to be deceiving
her husband, and the latter was just the heavy unsuspicious
type of man to be easily hood-winked.
He felt pretty confident, too, that he knew how Larose
had got hold of the letter. Of course Inspector Stone


was over-awed by the fellow having so much money now,
and he had allowed him to meddle in their trying to find
out who had killed the major. So no doubt he had been
the one to go through the dead man’s papers. There, he
had come across this letter addressed to Sir George and
with his usual way of poking his nose into everyone’s
business, he had opened it and read what was inside.
Then, of course, he had kept it to himself, perhaps,
thinking that one day he would do a line with Lady Almaine
himself. He looked a man who would be fond of girls
and, particularly so, if they were as pretty as the little
Joyce.
Gauntry made up his mind to press on with the matter
at once and go up to Avon Court the next morning.
Then, suddenly, he began to wonder which of the two,
Sir George, or his wife, it would work out the better to
approach, for he was realising now how really damaging
the letter made things look for the baronet if he had really
been aware of what was going on between his wife and
the major.
He thought everything over for a long while, but in
the end came to the conclusion it would be easier to deal
with Lady Almaine. Sir George might prove very stubborn
and at all costs refuse to do as he, Gauntry, suggested.
Then the question came up as to how he could manage
to get speech with Lady Almaine alone, but the difficulty
there was quickly got over.
Ringing up Sir George, with the pretence of learning
how they all were at Avon Court, the baronet told him,
with some annoyance, that he had to go into the country
on business connected with some property he owned,
and would be away from home the whole day.
So the coast being all clear, the next morning he drove
up to Hampstead and was soon alone with Lady Almaine
in her sitting-room. It struck him how extremely pretty
she looked, and it came to him as quite an agreeable
thought that, as a further price for his silence about
the very compromising letter, it was just possible she
might be an agreeable conquest for him when he had
leisure to consider such matters.


“Now, Lady Almaine,” he said, speaking very seriously,
“I come about a very delicate matter and I realise I must
take you fully into a confidence which I am sure you
will respect, as the giving of it involves a certain danger
to me! ” 1
“Good gracious,” exclaimed Joyce, “what on earth
are you going to tell me?” Then, a thought striking her,
she asked quickly, “But was it my husband you really
wanted to see?”
“No, certainly not!” smiled Gauntry. “He told me last
night over the phone he would be away and that is what
made me come up now. It was urgent that I should speak
to you alone, with no one else present.”
Lady Almaine looked just a little bit uneasy. She had
never had a particular liking for Gauntry, and she sensed a
certain familiarity in his manner now which rather grated
upon her.
He went on. “Now, of course, it will be no surprise
to you when I mention that Major Sampon was a member
of the British Secret Service and ”
“But it is a great surprise to me!” exclaimed Lady
Almaine. She looked very puzzled. “Are you sure?”
Her surprise was undoubtedly genuine and Gauntry’s
opinion of the deceased major rose. Evidently the latter
had not allowed his love affairs to interfere with his
work, and like a wise man he had kept the women out
of it.
He laughed. “Of course, I’m sure! We worked to-
gether. I’m in the Secret Service too!”
“You!” she exclaimed, “but he never told me he
knew you. I didn’t think you’d ever met until the other
night.”
Gauntry seemed amused. “We’ve known each other for
years, but it’s a rule of life with us in the service to keep
ourselves as much apart from each other as possible.”
He lowered his voice mysteriously. “We were watching
Mr. Gilbert Larose. He’s working on behalf of Bussia
and sending all the news he can about our, army and
navy and air force to Moscow.”
“But I don’t believe it!” exclaimed Lady Almaine


hotly. “Mr. Larose is a gentleman and wouldn’t be a
traitor to his country!”
Gauntry spoke as if with great reluctance. “He’s not
only that but”—his voice hardened and he spoke with
the utmost sternness—“he’s a murderer as well.” He added
very solemnly, “It was he who killed Major Sampon.”
Lady Almaine started to her feet. “I don’t believe it,”
she cried passionately. “It’s unbelievable. I certainly
don’t know Mr. Larose very well, but anyone can see he’s
a man of kind nature and he would never harm an innocent
man.”
Gauntry shrugged his shoulders. “But Major Sampon
wasn’t innocent in his eyes. He was tracking him down
and he had come to learn it. It would have been only a
matter of days and the great Larose would have been
arrested.”
Lady Almaine was breathing hard. “But I can’t believe
it. No, I won’t.” She snapped angrily at him, “But
why have you come to tell me all this?”
Gauntry was very stem. “Because this Larose must
be punished for his crime. He must not get off because
he once belonged to the police. He has powerful friends
at Scotland Yard and if we are not careful he will get out
of it. So we must arrange that the evidence is strong
against him and you must do your share.”
“I? ” exclaimed Lady Almaine. “Why should I?”
Gauntry regarded her with steely eyes. “You must
back me up that you too heard voices when he went out
on to the verandah to look for the major, and it sounded
as if they were quarrelling. You must say that, although
you didn’t recall it when Inspector Flower was questioning
you that night, you can remember it distinctly now.”
She looked furiously at him. “You are an evil man and
I shall do nothing of the sort,” she cried, “and I shall
tell Mr. Larose how you are plotting against him.”
Gauntry smiled sneeringly as he put his hand in his
breast pocket. “But I don’t think you will, my lady, when
you’ve read this.” He held out the envelope containing
the letter Major Sampon had written to Sir George. “Do
you recognise this writing?”


She just glanced carelessly at the envelope. “Certainly,
I do! It’s Major Sampon’s.” She spoke angrily. “But
what are you doing with a letter addressed to my
husband? ”
He did not reply, but, taking out the letter and folding
it across so that she could read only the first few lines,
held it towards her. “No, I’m not going to give it you.
It’s not going out of my hands. But just you read how
it starts.”
Slowly, and with her face all puckered up in a frown,
•he started to read—
‘“My dear George, It is terrible for me to have to
write this letter. I shall be dead when it reaches you, for
I cannot endure life any more. But I dare not die with
my unconfessed guilt upon me.’”
She looked up into his face with a startled expression.
“But what does it mean?” she asked, with her voice
shaking.
Gauntry smiled. “Is it his handwriting? You are
quite sure? You are positive about it?”
She nodded. “Quite sure! Positive! I know his hand-
writing as well as I do my own.”
“Then finish it!” exclaimed Gauntry, triumphantly,
as he exposed the whole sheet. “But you’re not to snatch.
So keep your hands down.”
Very slowly she read through the letter. Her face
whitened, her lips parted and her breath came very quickly.
But she did not speak until she had finished. Then, looking
up, she said tremblingly but very quietly, “I was mistaken.
It is not Major Sampon’s handwriting.” She pointed
with scorn. “He never wrote that.”
Gauntry smiled unpleasantly. “Oh, he didn’t, didn’t
he? But you said you were sure it was his handwriting.
You were positive about it.” He shook his head con-
temptuously. “No, little Joyce, you and he were lovers
and, with this evidence before them, no one will have
the slightest doubt about it.” He put the letter back
in his pocket and tried to assume a kindly manner. “Still,
it will be a secret between you and me, and no one need
ever know anything about it.” He nodded solemnly.


“If you do as I tell you I will give you the letter and
you can destroy it.”
“Where iid you get it from? ” she asked, in a voice she
did not recognise as her own.
“He gave it me to give to Sir George if anything ever
happened to him,” replied Gauntry. He shrugged his
shoulders. “Of course, I hadn’t the remotest idea what
was in it and just locked it up in my safe. I knew he lived,
as all we Secret Service agents do, a dangerous life, and
I only thought he was finalising some instructions to one
of his greatest friends, something, perhaps, about his
estate, in case anything should happen to him.”
“And why did you open it? ” asked Lady Almaine, in a
voice as cold as ice.
Gauntry looked just a little bit embarrassed and hesitated
before answering. “Well,” he said at length, “under the
circumstances in which my friend met his death, I thought
it my duty to go through every paper he had left in my
charge.” He nodded. “That letter wasn’t the only one.
I have several things to do for him which I regard as
sacred duties.”
A short silence followed. Lady Almaine had sunk back
in the chair, looking very drawn and tired.
Gauntry went on. “Well, it’s very simple what I want
you to do. Just ring up Inspector Flower and say that
now you come to think of it you did hear voices on the
verandah that night and that they were those of Major
Sampon and Mr. Larose. You can add that it sounded as
if they were quarrelling.” He smiled, but with a trace of
menace in his tones. “Now you understand? You know
what to do?”
She was quite calm now. She nodded. “Yes, I shall
tell my husband.”
Gauntry spoke as if more her friend than her enemy.
“Oh, I should certainly not do that,” he said, persuasively,
“for even if by some miracle you get him to believe for
the moment that the letter is a forgery, he will not believe
it for long, and all his life doubt will always be with him.”
He smiled evilly. “And I don’t believe he’ll think it’s a
forgery. Remember it says you and Major Sampon met


much more often than he thought, and the proof of that
will be easy. He has only to speak to that housekeeper
and she’ll tell him you used to come there, perhaps three
and four times a week.” There was a horrible note in his
laugh. “I’m sure he didn’t know that.”
Lady Almaine felt a cold shiver run down her spine.
She felt herself indeed caught in the toils. They had been
intending to go to Italy next Christmas and, all unbeknown
to her husband and as a great surprise for him, she had
been having lessons in Italian from Major Sampon.
Gauntry saw her obvious fear and pressed home his ad-
vantage. “And another thing,” he went on, warningly.
“This letter makes things look rather black against Sir
George. If he knew, as it suggests, what were your relations
with Sampon”—he nodded—“then it is quite feasible
he went out and struck him down himself, not necessarily
intending to kill him, but as a punishment for the fellow’s
treachery.”
Joyce’s heart stood still. She loved her husband heart
and soul, almost revering him for the lovely little son he
had given her. She had difficulty in restraining her tears.
Gauntry now exhibited a lot of tact. He saw she was on
the point of breaking down, and judged it was best to
leave her. He did not want a wailing and weeping woman
on his hands, who might in her terror consent to do what
he had urged her and then, under cross-examination,
break down and confess to the conspiracy. He wanted one
who would be strong and reliant in her perjury and fight
like a lioness for her honour.
Well, he had administered the poison and he would now
leave it to do its dreadful work.
He rose to his feet. “But I must be going now and you
can just ring up in a day or two and you can tell me you’re
willing to do what I suggest.”
“And if I’m not willing,” she asked and for all the world
she could not keep the shaking out of her voice.
He spoke very sternly. “Then I shall just have to con-
sider what I ought to do. I shall either show the letter
to Sir George and try to induce him for his own safety to
back me up, or else”—he shrugged his shoulders—“l


shall just hand the letter over to the police and it will
become public property. That’s all.” And he let himself
out of the door and regained his waiting car in the
drive.
He thought quite a lot about Joyce Almaine in the
ensuing hours and many times he ruminated pleasantly
on the hold he had over a very pretty girl. She was certainly
charming to look at and, with her guilty secret in his
possession, he should be able to do what he liked with her.
He had not had a love-affair for many years but, now,
approaching middle age, he thought he could enjoy every
delicious thrill of one, with the ardour of a young man,
coupled with the restraint of maturer age. It would be
like sipping some rare and delicious wine, very slowly.
No, he would certainly not give her back that letter,
whatever evidence she gave against the much hated
Larose. He would hold it over her like a scourge, ready
to fall upon her white shoulders —he almost shivered in
delightful anticipation here—until he had grown tired of
her.
But these ruminations and this happy frame of mind
came, suddenly, to an abrupt termination.
Leaving his office, with his day’s work over, about half
past four he heard a newsboy crying his papers in Lothbury!
What was that he heard ? Some familiar chord of memory
was stirred in him by a name! The memory was an un-
pleasant one, too.
Then he almost snatched a paper from the newsboy’s
hands. “The Dencross Murderer Trapped at Last!”
he read. “Arrest of Joe Carrabin, who strangled Mrs.
Rampini.”
A dreadful mist rose before his eyes and the letters of
the newsprint were all blurred and running together.
There was a basement caf6 nearby, where he often
went for light meals, and with shaking legs he made his
way down the stairs, and ordered a cup of coffee. There,
in the cool and quiet, and with the roar of the traffic
muffled down, he read his paper.
There was really not very much in it about his brother,
but what there was struck terror into his heart, so much


so that he feared the other people in the cafe might notice
his agitation.
He read that Joe had been recognised by a Bermondsey
acquaintance of many years ago, a couple of weeks or so
previously when he had been seen motoring through the
little village of Brandon, in Suffolk. But the police had
had great difficulty in trailing the car. At last, however,
they had learnt it belonged to the well-known Professor
Bannister who resided in a lonely house, deep among the
Norfolk Fens.
They had, accordingly, raided the house and, taking
Carrabin completely by surprise, had arrested him without
any difficulty, after having, however, to shoot his two
savage dogs.
It appeared he had been living there in the employ of
Professor Bannister for upwards of six years. The Professor
had been away from home when Carrabin had been arrested
and it was not known where he was, or when he would
return. But then the great man was known to be of most
eccentric character, keeping all his movements secret,
and avoiding all publicity as much as he possibly could.
Still, when he eventually came back, no doubt it would
be a very great surprise to him to learn that the man he
had left behind to manage his affairs was a notorious
character, over whose head a warrant had been hanging
for all those years.
Gauntry breathed a sigh of relief when he had read
all there was about his brother’s arrest.
Apparently, the Professor’s absence was not considered
in any way suspicious, and the police were evidently
pushing no enquiries there. So he, Gauntry, was quite
safe and there was no need for him to take any precautions
for his own safety! Of course, his brother would say.
nothing! No Carrabin would ever give another away,
if any harm would come from it!
But Joe must have all the help that could be given him.
He must have the best legal advice possible. The crime
for which he was charged was more than six years old,
and it was just possible he might be able to escape capital
punishment.


Accordingly, Gauntry taxied at once to the chambers
of one of the best criminal lawyers, and was fortunate
to find him in. He said he wanted arrangements made
for the defence of Joseph Carrabin, but explained he
did not want it to become known who was financing
him.
The solicitor nodded understandingly. The criminal
classes were a good source of income to him and he was
often approached by friends and relatives of arrested
men who were not anxious for the limelight and did not
want their interest broadcast. It was nothing to him who
they were as long as they paid his fees and he generally
found they were well provided with money.
So it came about that that same evening the sullen
Joe was visited by a frowning, portly man with big pene-
trating eyes and big bushy eyebrows.
Joe gave his version of the death of the judge’s widow,
much the same as that he had given to Larose, and the
solicitor listened gravely but without comment. With
his knowledge of men and women he knew he was in the
presence of a consummate liar, but he had expected that
and it did not surprise him.
“Well, we’ll brief Wickham Adders to defend you,”
he said in parting, “and, if anyone can get you off he
will,” and with a curt nod to Joe he took his departure.
Joe was well satisfied. He had heard of this Wickham
Adders, who for many years had been practising in the
Criminal Courts, and knew that no advocate could better
bully or cajole a hesitating and uncertain jury than he.
It was held, generally, that through his persuasion many
an accused had been loosed back into Society, when by
rights he should have been handed over to the hangman.
The next day, Gauntry, pursuing his usual business in
the city, suddenly became uneasy. He thought he was
being followed.
He was always wary about that, but now he became
more than usually suspicious. It was always his habit
to cast occasional glances over his shoulder and to stop
and look in shop windows and, by their reflection, note
who was passing behind him. He would often, too, turn
p


round suddenly and retrace his steps for fifty yards or so to
determine if he saw the same face, twice.
That morning, however, something different had struck
him. He had had to go out to call upon some clients, as
indeed he often had to do, and, uneasy about his brother’s
arrest, he had turned and retraced his steps more times
than usual.
Then, twice something had happened. He had certainly
not recognised any face he had seen before, but he had
met two men in his walkings back, on each occasion a
different one, who, as if studiously and of set purpose,
had not taken the slightest notice of him. Although
passing within a couple of paces of him, they had stared
fixedly straight before them in what, he thought, was
a most unnatural manner. He was sure their attitudes
had been strained. He had noted, too, that they were
both tall men. They had struck him somehow as being
of the same type, and their tightly buttoned coats sug-
gested business to him. Yet, they had been walking
leisurely, as if time were of no consequence to them.
He had been rather worried about this all day long, and it
had prevented him from concentrating his thoughts properly
upon an important rubber deal. Another thing, too, had
annoyed him. That afternoon he had been expecting a
visit from one of his most particular agents who had been
senf upon an important mission to Portsmouth. He was
the man, Valmar, who, as he had mentioned to Dr. Revire,
would have ultimately dealt with Major Sampon, if he
himself had not done so. Valmar was always most punc-
tilious in keeping his appointments and yet he had neither
sent any messages nor telephoned to explain his non-appear-
ance. So, he was now wondering if anything could have
happened to him.
He returned to his flat in Fitzroy Square just before
ten that night and, meeting the caretaker in the hall, he
was sure the latter had looked curiously at him. Then he
cursed himself for all his suspicions and told himself it was
all nerves. Of course, he had not been followed, Valmar
had been detained for some special reason and the care-
taker had been just the same as usual. He had always


thought this caretaker had inquisitive eyes, but the fool
couldn’t help it.
The next day, however, he went to his office with his
camera; he had always been a keen amateur photographer,
and the camera was an expensive one. Then, at quarter of
an hour intervals during the morning, from the window of
his private room, he took six snaps of people passing in
the street below. Summoning one of his clerks when the
last one had been taken, he ordered him to go out at once
to a Kodak shop he named and get all the films developed.
They were to be enlarged and, at no matter what expense,
everything was to be done straight away. He was to call
for them at four o’clock.
Gauntry was now getting really worried, for not only
was there no news of Valmar, but another agent was now
late in reporting. This latter had a relative who worked in
the submarine sheds on the Medway and it was a valuable
connection for the Soviet.
Shortly after four o’clock the man he had sent to the
Kodak Company returned with the pictures and, pinning
them down upon his desk, under a big magnifying glass,
Gauntry proceeded to examine them.
Then very soon a horrible feeling of nausea began to
take possession of him, for in every picture among the busy
throng of people, who had been then passing up the street,
he picked three identical men. They were all tall, they
looked like detectives, and moreover, worst of all, he
recognised one of them as being the very man who had
not looked at him when he had passed him the previous
day.
The sweat poured out upon his forehead in little beads.
He was uncovered at last! They were after him and
probably only waiting for other Soviet agents to visit
him and be drawn into the net as well!
But worse was to follow, for the telephone upon his
desk rang almost immediately afterwards and a voice he
did not know asked if he would like a demonstration of a
new car, the Wanderer, which had been put on the market.
This would-be seller of a car gave his name as Harvey
and stated he would be free to call round any time.


Gauntry’s face went almost green with horror, for it
was the very worst message he could have received. Such
wording of a message was only to be used in the greatest
of emergencies and had been sent, he knew, in a round-
about way from the Soviet Embassy itself. It was an
imperative order for him to bum all incriminating papers
immediately, and escape, in any way he could, with the
least possible delay.
This shock, stunning as it had been for the moment,
was quickly over, and the beating of his heart slowing down,
he considered the exact position he was in.
He had been considering himself so safe that he was
caught now at a great disadvantage. He had ample funds
in two banks, but they were both closed now and, apart
from that, he would not have dared to approach them lest
any withdrawal of a large sum might have precipitated the
catastrophe. He could, however, lay hands upon enough
ready money to get him out of the country and, indeed,
much more than that if he could manage to elude the men
who he was quite certain were now shadowing him.
One thing, too, gave him a certain amount of confidence.
He was quite sure now that it was not intended that he
should be arrested at once. For the moment the authorities
were only keeping in close touch with him so that he should
not escape. But any flurried action on his part, any
betraying of the fact that he knew they were after him,
and then the blow would fall instantly.
And the danger of it was that someone, even in his own
office, might be spying upon him. Three of his six clerks
had been with him only a short time and he could not be
sure of them. Indeed, he could be sure of only one of his
staff, the one he had sent for the photographs, as the
latter was a worker for the Soviet as well.
He summoned the man at once into his room. “Look
here, Harl,” he said, speaking in a whisper. “I believe I’m
being watched and may have to go into hiding. But they
can have nothing against you and you’ll be quite safe.
I shall go at my usual time or, perhaps, a little earlier.
But you stay behind after the others have gone and bum
any scrap of paper in that safe. I dare not do it because ”


he nodded in the direction of the outer office—“one of
them in there may smell the burning paper and give a
signal to those who’re perhaps waiting outside. They may
be on the watch for the slightest indication that I know
they’re after me and then they’ll rush in at once.
But I’m sure it’s only me they’re after. You under-
stand? ”
The man nodded back. “All right, I’ll make a clean
sweep of everything before I leave. Don’t you worry,”
and he shook hands with Gauntry and wished him good
luck.
So a few minutes later, Gauntry walked leisurely through
his offices, stopped in the street to light a cigarette and
then, taking a taxi, was driven to his club, the Brougham
in North Audley Street. It was a very select club, whose
members were mostly staid and well-to-do business men,
who played bridge for small points between half-past four
and seven every day. It was the last place in the world
where you would expect to find anyone of anti-British
and unpatriotic activities.
Next, Gauntry dined at a good restaurant, partaking of
cocktails, a large bottle of champagne, and quite a number
of liqueur brandies. He fingered over his meal and did
not arrive home until after half-past nine. He was driven
there in a taxi and, indeed, took so long in fumbling in
his pocket for the fare and seemed so unsteady on his legs
that it might almost have been thought by any person
watching him that he was slightly the worse for liquor.
He stumbled up to his flat and, after much banging
about, his fights went out and perfect quietude in his
rooms followed.
“He’s good for the night,” remarked one lounger in the
square, sidling up to another, “but still, orders are that one
of us must remain here. So I’ll stop until two and then
you can relieve me until six,” and the man he addressed
disappeared in the direction of Tottenham Court Road.
But if the watchers had thought Gauntry was asleep
they were very much mistaken. He was wide awake, and
his head was as clear as if he had not taken a drop of
alcohol that evening.


He was very busy, too, and his movements were like
lightning. He had changed into a dark lounge suit, and
was busy sorting out some papers which he took out from
a locked suit-case. He took only a few of these and, making
them into a small packet, thrust them carefully into one
of the side pockets of his jacket.
Then, donning a cap which he pulled low down over his
forehead, he let himself out of his flat and tip-toed softly
down the stairs. It was now a quarter past two and he
guessed rightly that the caretaker had gone for the night.
He passed right down to the basement of the building
and unbolting the door at the back, let himself out as
softly as a cat and crept up the steps into a small yard
level with the ground floor.
Then there was not the slightest hesitation about what
he did. He climbed over into the neighbouring yard,
into the yard beyond that, and finally into the third yard.
This last one belonged to a small private hospital. He
had been an inmate of this hospital about three months
previously when he had sprained his ankle badly and his
medical man had insisted he should not remain without
attendance in his flat.
He was expecting that all the houses in that side of
the square would be built much on the same plan and
reckoned he would have no difficulty in finding his way
to the front door. He saw there were lights still on
and, if he should meet anyone, was prepared with the
excuse that he had climbed over into their yard looking
for a parrot of his which had escaped. Being known to
the nurses and the maids, he was confident his excuse
would be accepted without suspicion.
As he had anticipated, he was able to make his way
without any difficulty to the front door. He met no one,
although he heard voices and laughter in some of the
rooms he passed. He let himself out quietly and, pulling
the door to behind him, passed out into the square. He
walked in the direction opposite to that of his own building
and was soon proceeding briskly down the Euston Road.
He felt quite safe now and was confident he would get
away.


Working as a secret agent for a Foreign Power, he knew
possible danger was always never very far away and,
accordingly, he was at all events prepared in one way for
the contingency which had now arisen. He knew where
a car could be procured, night or day, with all charges
being rendered to the Soviet Embassy.
So he proceeded to a small garage in one of the streets
behind King’s Cross station, kept by a man who traded
in used cars and who, when he thought it safe, was not
averse to dealing with stolen ones as well.
Here, explaining from where he came, he was speedily
supplied with a serviceable, if shabby-looking car and,
three-quarters of an hour after he had left his flat, was
travelling at a good pace eastwards out of London.
Now, for the twentieth time, he considered how it had
come about that the avalanche had descended so suddenly
upon him. The Moscow-born Valmar had probably been
caught, and other minor agents had probably been mopped
up as well; but he felt sure somehow, as far as he himself
was concerned, the crisis had been precipitated by Joyce
Almaine.
Possibly, in terror at the position in which she found
herself with her guilty intrigue exposed, she had taken a
bold course, as the lesser of two evils, and directly after
he had left her had rung up Inspector Stone to help her.
She would probably have told him everything which
had taken place at the interview.
Then Stone would have been furious that faked evidence
had been sought after against his great friend, Larose.
He would have known, too, it was a lie that Larose was
a Russian spy and he would have soon found out that he,
Gauntry, was not, as he had stated, working for the
British Secret Service.
Gauntry cursed here. He had made a bad slip in telling
her that Major Sampon was working for the Intelligence
Department, as, immediately, they would be most sus-
picious how he had come to learn it. That would have
instantly brought him, Gauntry, into their orbit, and their
suspicions once having been aroused—he shrugged his
shoulders —anything might have been found out.


Gauntry gritted his teeth viciously. Well, anyhow, he
could vent his spite against the woman. He had brought
the letter with him and before he left the country he would
post it to her husband. That would pay her out.
It was a fine, starlit night and, directly he was well out
of London, he speeded up his car as fast as it would go.
He had a lot to do before dawn.


CHAPTER IX
THE SECRET OF THE FENS
IN the meantime Larose and his two helpers had spent
two very arduous and disappointing, if nevertheless
they had been healthy, days. Theoretically, it cer-
tainly had not seemed a matter of great labour for three
men thoroughly to explore even as large an acreage of
land as one thousand acres, but in practice it was a very
different thing.
The grass was in so many places so coarse and long that
it would wholly mask any slight elevation of the ground,
and to look for empty cartridge cases meant nearly always
pushing aside the grass, tuft by tuft, with the hands.
Larose had thought hopefully that proceeding in the
direction Joe Carrabin had taken him, when supposedly
going after duck that morning, would have led to some
quick discovery. But he had soon realised that the slight
elevation, near the bank of the nearly two-mile-long
dyke along which they had walked, gave a view of a
very wide vista of fenland and was not going to be of
any help.
Still the three of them, walking slowly and spread out
with a few yards between them, persevered, with the
sickening thought, however, always at the back of their
minds that after all there might be no bodies buried
anywhere and that they were just wasting their time.
They started out each morning about eight o’clock and,
taking their mid-day meal with them, did not return home
until seven.
On the third day when they had begun working about a
mile and a half away ffom the house, things went on much
the same as on the two preceding days until about five
o’clock. Then Larose announced that he was going to-
knock off and proceed to his home, Carmel Abbey, which
was distant less than an hour’s run. He would stay the
night, he said, and on the morrow bring back some much


more tasty provisions than upon which they had hitherto
been regaling themselves.
“And I’ll be back early, boys,” he went on to the two
detectives, “ by eight o’clock at the latest. But don’t you
stop until the usual time.” He smiled. “You may be very
close now to the very spot where the bodies are.”
So he left them to themselves and, about half an hour
afterwards, they saw his car in the distance speeding along
in the direction of the Big Drain.
“Well, what about it?” laughed one of them, by the
name of King, a shrewd-looking Cockney. “Shall we have
a sleep, Casey?”
“No, we’ll stick at it,” grinned the other, who was also
a Cockney, but whose name, Patrick Casey, suggested
that he was of Irish stock. “No, we’ll keep going for
another hour.” He nodded in the direction of the now
fast-disappearing car. “He’s a decent chap, the guv’nor,
and we’ll do our best for him.” He nodded again. “This
means a lot to him, although I don’t quite understand how.
A good many people would like to think he had a hand in
that Sampon murder himself.” He nodded a third time.
“I’ve heard whisperings, and you must have heard them,
too, that if it hadn’t been for old Stone, Flower would have
arrested him there and then that night in Hampstead.”
So the search was renewed with the same thoroughness
as if Larose had been there, and another hour went by.
Then Casey flopped down among some big tussocks.
“Oh, aren’t my poor legs tired!” he cried, and he pushed
the'tussocks aside to make his position more comfortable.
But in an instant he had sprung to his feet again and,
holding out something in his hand to his - companion, was
staring at him with startled eyes. He had picked up an
empty cartridge shell, and it was bright and new as if
it had only lain for a few days where he had found it.
A few moments’ silence followed and then King gave a
big whoop. “Gosh, gosh,” he cried, “then Larose was
right after all.”
“Steady, steady,” admonished Casey, “this may mean
nothing. It may he the only one here,” hut in spite of
his doubtful tones, his face was flushed and excited.


And the excitement was not abated when, in less than
a couple of minutes, four more cartridge cases were found
within a few yards of where the first one had been picked up.
Then the responsibility of their calling sobered down
the two men. They had both been in the Force for many
years and it had not been by chance that Stone had selected
them to help Larose. They were shrewd and intelligent
men and they soon showed the stuff they were made of.
“Now Casey,” said King, “a couple of blankets would
cover every inch of this ground where we’ve picked up
these cases, so we can assume he stood within a few yards
of here. Then, Joe is a right-handed man, so every time
he broke that old gun of his to get out the empty cart- .
ridges he took them out with his right hand and flung them
to the right.”
“One moment,” said Casey. “I was wondering in which
direction he was facing when he fired the gun, but of course
he would have had his back to the way from which he’d
come, his back to the house, I mean. He wouldn’t have
walked round the place where he’d buried anything before
he’d started shooting.”
A few moments’ quick glancing round and then their
eyes fell upon a patch of grass different from that anywhere
else. The tussocks were taller and thicker and had a
bright colour. The two men looked significantly at each
other.
“It’s had nourishment,” nodded Casey grimly. He
grinned. “Joe must have been surprised at what a good
crop had come up instead of the bare patch he’d been
expecting.”
Then dismay seized them. They had not got the garden-
fork with them. Tired of carrying it upon such a hot day,
they had left it sticking up in the ground half a mile and
more away.
But they were too eager to wait while they went back
to fetch it, and King began pulling up the tussocks, while
Casey attacked the earth underneath with his big clasp
knife.
They worked, however, for only a very short time and
then Casey started back as if he had been bitten by an


adder for, in a hole he had dug barely six inches into the
ground, he had uncovered the toe part of a much mildewed
boot. He wiped the perspiration from his forehead.
“I think that clinches it,” he said hoarsely. “I’ll go back
and fetch that fork.”
“No, no,” cried King at once, “we’ll leave it until the
guv’nor’s here to-morrow morning. It’s nearly seven
o’clock now and we can’t take the remains away if we
dig them up. No, I vote we leave them.” His face lit up
with enthusiasm. “Good old Larose, it’ll be one of the
happiest moments of his life!” He whistled. “Whew,
but what an imagination he’s got to think any bodies
would be here!”
“But wait a minute,” said Casey. “We’ll see if they’re
both here,” and he began knifing up the soil parallel to
the part of the boot he had uncovered. The blade of his
knife soon caught in something and, reaching down, he
dragged up for a few inches what looked like a piece of a
woman’s stocking.
The two grimaced at each other and, pressing back the
earth they had disturbed, without a word started to walk
back to the house.
It was not until they were indoors that either of them
spoke. Then King said, “We really ought to walk into the
village and phone up the Yard.”
“No, I won’t hear of it,” returned Casey instantly,
“I’m too dog-tired to walk another yard and”—he made
the pretence of shuddering—“if murder’s been done in
this house I’m not going to remain here by myself while
you’re away.” He nodded. “My dad and mum came
from Galway, and they’re just as much afraid of ghosts
as poor Joe was. No, we’ve done enough for to-day and
deserved a rest. Tarnation, man, it’s a ten-mile walk there
and back to the village! Besides”—and he nodded again,
but more vehemently this time —“if anyone should be
phoned up it’s Mr. Larose, and we don’t know his phone
number. Carmel Abbey may be anywhere in Norfolk.”
“But we could easily find out,” said King. He smiled.
“Still, we’ll leave it as a pleasant surprise for him when
he comes to-morrow morning.”


Notwithstanding that it was their daily life to move
among the after-scenes of violence and that dead men
and women coming to bloody ends were no novelty to them,
something of awe was in the very bones of the two men
as they sat on in the kitchen that night after their
meal.
They were not accustomed to the silence of the country-
side and they thought uneasily of the wide, lonely wastes
about the old house, and the long miles which separated
them from other human beings. They missed the noise of
the traffic and the stirring of the great city which never
slept.
They sat up talking until quite late, both unwilling,
although they would neither of them have admitted it,
to go upstairs to bed. At last, however, about half-past
ten, they carried up the lamp to a big bedroom they were
sharing, and in a few minutes the house was wrapped in
darkness and in silence. Casey had seen to it most par-
ticularly that both the doors were bolted and they had no
thought of their being disturbed during the night.
At the very moment, however, when they put out their
light, Gauntry was making all speed along the Romford
Road, his destination being the very house in which they
were sleeping, and his objective the desk in Professor
Bannister’s room.
Ethel Bannister had spoken to the best of her knowledge,
but she had not been correct when she had told Larose
that the man who was impersonating her uncle had no
place in which to hide anything private away.
On the contrary, he had a place and, at all events as
far as she was concerned, a perfectly effective one. It was
a so-called secret drawer in the very old-fashioned desk
at which Professor Bannister had been wont to write.
Its secrecy, however, would not have baffled anyone
who was looking for it for five minutes, as the space it
took up was suspiciously obtrusive under the pigeon holes.
Still, it had served its purpose with the Professor and in
it he had kept a thousand pounds’ worth of bonds to
bearer as well as nearly a hundred pounds in treasury
notes of small dimensions. When Joe Carrabin, as he had


often chuckled to himself, had come into the property,
he had left the bonds and notes there, in case he ever
had to get away in a hurry which, however, he was not
for one moment expecting.
So Gauntry, having upon his visit to the lawyer handed
over a substantial cheque to provide for his brother’s
defence, was now going to annex Joe’s nest-egg for his own
pressing needs.
He was reckoning confidently that Wrack House
would be now locked up and empty, but for all that he was
taking no chances and so, arriving at the Big Drain about
three o’clock in the morning, left his car there and proceeded
the last half mile on foot.
Casey was sleeping badly. Although his work as
a detective had developed him into a practical level-
headed man, upon occasions his Irish blood ran strong
within him and the fancies and superstitions so prevalent
among the people of the Galway hills were now taking
their hold upon him.
So his slumbers were light and troubled and it was no
wonder a slight noise from one of the rooms below awoke
him with a start.
He leant up upon one elbow and listened. Yes, there
was no doubt the sounds were not part of his dreams.
He could hear most distinctly a low grating noise and, his
teeth chattering, he slid hurriedly out of bed and tip-toed
over to his colleague. “Hist,” he whispered when he had
awakened him, “that darned ghost’s come back! I can
hear her in the room below.”
King had all his senses on the alert in an instant, and he
heard the noise, too. “Nonsense, you big fool,” he
whispered back sharply, “ghosts don’t make noises. It’s
someone trying to break into the house,” and in a second
he was out of bed, too, and by the faint starlight illuminat-
ing the room, groping for his trousers.
“But put your shoes on,” he ordered. “If you’ve got
bare feet you know you can never grapple properly with a
man. He’ll stamp on your toes.” He grinned as he braced
up his trousers like lightning, “Gosh, what a place we’ve
come to! It’s nothing but one surprise after another.”


They groped their way downstairs by the spare use of
an electric torch, flashing the light backwards so that it
should not herald their coming. Arriving at the study door,
which was wide open, they peered cautiously round, just
in time to see a man lifting the lower sash of the window
of the room. As he had expected, Gauntry had found the
doors locked, and so had effected an entrance through the
window. He had found the bolt too stiff to move and so
had cut through it with the blade of a hack-saw. He
stepped into the room, not bothering much about the noise
he made. He was quite confident the house was empty.
The two detectives remained where they were, waiting
to see what he was going to do next. Not knowing whether
he were armed or not, they were not intending to rush him
but were all ready to pounce upon him directly he came
within reach.
But he made no movement to come their way. Instead,
he walked over to the desk, and, throwing back the roll-
top, by the light of an electric torch began fumbling at the
back. A click followed, a drawer was pulled back and there
came a rustling of papers.
Then Casey, in his eagerness to lose nothing of what was
going on, precipitated a catastrophe. He had bent forward
too far and, in an effort to recover himself, he stumbled.
Gauntry heard him and instantly flashed his torch in
the direction from which the sound had come, at once
showing up the white faces of the two watching men.
King was the first to take in that they had been seen
and with a cry “Hands up” he hurled himself in the
direction of the torch and the man behind it. But Gauntry
was almost as quick as he was and, whipping an automatic
out of his pocket, without the fraction of a second’s hesita-
tion, fired point-blank at him.
But the excitements of the day and the long motor ride
had made his hand unsteady and, although King was then
only a few paces away, he missed him altogether. Casey,
however, uttered a hoarse cry and toppled to the floor.
Then before Gauntry had time to fire again King was upon
him and with the impetus of his fierce rush, had knocked
him over backwards. He crashed down heavily and.


his head striking a comer of the desk, he was instantly
rendered unconscious.
King was on top of him almost as quickly as he had
fallen, but at once realised what had happened and that
for the moment, at all events, he was helpless. He picked
up the pistol, however, and then darted back to Casey.
His comrade’s face was covered with blood and King
thought with a dreadful pang that he had been hit in the
forehead. But, after a short inspection by the light of the
torch he uttered a fervent “Thank Heaven!” The bullet
had almost missed him, just grazing the side of his head, and
he was not even unconscious.
“It’s all right, old man,” King said reassuringly,
“Another twentieth of an inch and you wouldn’t have been
hit at all. It’s just cut the skin. But keep where you are for
a minute.” He jerked his head in the direction where
Gauntry lay. “That devil’s stunned, but I’ll trass him up
in case he comes to.”
So he tore a tablecloth to pieces and tied Gauntry both
at his ankles and his wrists, being very interested when he
was doing it as to what manner of man the burglar was.
To his surprise, he saw the man was well-dressed, with
smart collar and tie, and that his shoes were expensive
looking. Also, he reckoned that the wrist watch he took
off to make his tying the more effective must have cost
at least twenty pounds.
Gauntry disposed of for the moment, he lit a lamp and,
helping Casey on to the sofa, proceeded to bathe his wound.
It was a very superficial one and, bandaged up, Casey soon
felt much better.
Next King went back again to Gauntry and, taking
everything out of his pockets, made a little pile of their
contents upon a small table. He whistled when he came
across three £SO banknotes pinned into one of his top waist-
coat pockets with a stout safety pin. Finally, the dawn
beginning to break, he carried Gauntry into an adjoining
room and, laying him upon a settee there, doused his head
and face over with cold water. Gauntry was now beginning
to come to, and blinked his eyes with much perplexity at
the face he saw bending over him. He drank a long drink


of water and seemed altogether to be recovering his senses
so quickly that King thought it advisable to secure him
with more lengths of tablecloth to the settee before he left
him.
About seven o’clock King heard the sounds of a motor
car and met Larose as he was coming into the yard.
“Whose car is that by the Big Drain?” asked Larose
instantly. “Has anyone come on here?”
“Certainly, sir,” smiled the man, “a city gentleman who
dropped in through the study window during the night.
He evidently thought the house was empty and used his
gun on us when he found it was not,” and then he went
on to tell Larose all that had happened.
Larose’s face was the picture of astonishment. “But
what on earth did he come to a lonely old house like this
for?” he asked.
“Oh, for some bonds and notes which were in the desk,”
replied King. He nodded. “They seem worth a tidy bit
of money.”
“Bonds and notes!” exclaimed Larose. Then a thought
flashed through him and he rapped out, “What’s ho
like?”
“A gentleman,” said King, “nicely dressed and all that.
If the pocket-book which I took off him is his own, from
the visiting-cards inside he’s a Mr. Arnold Gauntry.”
Larose gasped and could only get out his words in jerks.
“I’ll go in and see him,” he said, striding quickly towards
the door. “It seems incredible but ”
“Wait a minute, sir,” urged King, interposing himself
between Larose and the door. “I’ve something else to
tell you as well,” and he blurted out with great delight,
“We’ve found those bodies, two of them, a man’s and a
woman’s. We found them last night,” and then, for the
second time within those few minutes, Larose could hardly
believe his ears.
“This’ll mean promotion for both of you chaps,” he said
enthusiastically, shaking King warmly by the hand, “be-
sides a good money present for you which I’ll see myself
you get. But now I’ll go and see this man. Where have
you put him?”
0


“In the first room on the right up the passage, sir. He’s
trussed up and you’ll find him looking very disagreeable. He
seems quite all right now, although he’s not spoken a word.”
Larose went into the little room, half fearing he would
see a stranger. But no, it was the man he had known as
Gauntry, right enough, although looking very undignified,
tied round with strips of tablecloth.
“Hullo!” exclaimed Larose pleasantly. “How are you,
Mr. Gauntry?”
Gauntry smiled and replied in an equally pleasant tone,
“Quite well, thank you, Mr. Larose, except that they’ve
tied these knots too tightly and I’d like a cup of tea. I’m
very thirsty.”
“All right,” nodded Larose, “you shall have it, in a
minute or two,” and he went into the study to see what
Gauntry had come after in the desk. King came with him,
while Casey all smiles now and quite himself again, had
gone into the kitchen to make some tea. Larose noted the
bonds to bearer and the substantial bundle of Treasury
notes. Then his eyes fell upon the little pile of things which
had been taken from Gauntry’s pockets and put upon the
table. He was about to pick them up and see what they
were, when his hand drew back and he suppressed a start,
for he had seen among them the letter which Sampon had
written to Sir George. Apart from the handwriting, so
well remembered now, he knew it by the paper and shape
of the envelope and by one of the comers of the envelope
being turned up at the bottom.
“God, the letter about that poor woman! ” he murmured
to himself. “How on earth did that get here?”
“I haven’t taken any inventory or even looked through
them yet,” said King.
Larose saw his chance. “Well, you go at once and get
some brown paper and wrap everything up. You’ll find
some in the cupboard in the kitchen,” and then, the man
turning to comply with his request, he whipped up the fatal
letter and pushed it in his pocket.
“ Oh, wait a minute,” he went on. “Perhaps you’d better
make an inventory first. I’ll be helping Casey with the
breakfast. Still, get the brown paper.”


“All right, sir,” said the man coming hack, “I’ll do it
at once.” He seemed doubtful. “But what am I to do
with these £SO notes? ” and he pointed to them, folded up
among the papers on the table.
“£SO notes!” exclaimed Larose. “Where did you find
them ? ”
“Pinned into one of his waistcoat pockets,” replied
King. “I mightn’t have noticed them at all if it hadn’t
been for that big safety pin, as they were folded up so
small.”
Larose whistled. “Great Scot,” he exclaimed excitedly,
“they may be more important than anything. Unfold
them and read out the numbers. No, I won’t touch them.
My oil-pipe leaked as I was coming down and I’ve got oily
hands. You do it all.” Then he added with a quick intake
of breath, “ Did Casey see you take them out of his pocket? ”
“Sure, he did,” grinned King. “He was terribly inter-
ested. He’d never seen notes for such a large amount
before.”
It was a very astonished Inspector Stone who was rung
up an hour later from the village. It was Larose himself
who had gone into Foxwold, and he now gave an outline
of what had happened and so excited was Stone that his
heavy breathing could be heard distinctly over the wire.
“ Gad, what a thundering round up! ”he exclaimed when
Larose had finished speaking. “Yes, I’ll get the number of
Dr. Methuen’s note again to make everything quite certain
before we start to come down. Then you can reckon that
in three and a half hours we arrive, surgeon, photographer,
ambulance and all. All right, my lad. I’ll ring up the Chief
at once. Good-bye, I’ll be seeing you soon. No, we won’t
let a word leak out until to-morrow. Don’t you worry
about that.”
Larose returned to Wrack House in a very happy frame
of mind. It gave him no added elation when he arrived
there to learn that in his absence Gauntry had tried to
bribe the two men to give him back his pistol and let him
shoot himself.
He bore no resentment, either, against Gauntry, and
although, if need had arisen, he would have shot him down


■without the slightest compunction, now he was caught, in
a way he felt rather sorry for him.
He knew so well the dreadful time which was before
Gauntry, the waiting before the trial, the hopeless fight
for a verdict of not guilty, and then the awed moment
which even the most hardened criminal could not endure
without terror when the judge put on the black cap. Then
would come more waiting before the sentence was carried
out, and finally that last day when in the early morning
he would be led to where in a few moments his neck was
to be broken.
No man could go through all those happenings without
poignant agony of mind.
But Larose was under no delusions. He was labelling
Gauntry as still dangerous to him, most dangerous, and
much as he would have liked to question him he did not
dare. Indeed, he did not intend to be alone with him for
one moment. He was looking ahead.
The presence of the Sampon letter among the things
taken from Gauntry’s pockets could only mean that it
was Gauntry who had come into his, Larose’s, room in the
hotel that afternoon. Then that being so, to account for
Major Sampon’s three £SO bank notes being in his possession
—which was really the only one vital fact linking him up with
the murder—it was quite likely Gauntry would admit the
theft of the pocket-book and swear he had found the notes
inside when he had stolen it.
Then that would turn suspicion upon him, Larose,
again!
A cold shiver ran down Larose’s spine. With the best
of motives, would he have to perjure himself and deny
he had ever lost any pocket-book?
Gauntry would have been able to prove with absolute
certainty that he had taken the pocket-book if the scheduled
fist of the contents of his pockets, made by the detective
King, had included the Sampon letter. But, with no
mention of the letter having been found among his things,
there would be only his bare word to support his statement
and who would believe that?
Ah, but would there be only his bare word? No, there


would be more than that, for the pocket-book had con-
tained his, Larose’s, driving-licence and, haying to admit
its loss, Gauntry’s contention about his theft of the pocket-
book would be proved up to the hilt.
Then again, when Gauntry’s flat was searched, which
it assuredly would be, the pocket-book itself might be
found. Gauntry might not have thrown it away as it was
an expensive morocco one, with the initials G.L. on it in
gold and there could be no possible doubt as to whom it
had belonged.
To sum everything up, if when he, Larose, went into
the witness box he were asked by Gauntry’s counsel if he
had lost his pocket-book, he would have to admit it at
once and then —what a loop-hole it would give Gauntry
to get out of having committed the murder!
It was very awkward altogether.
Stone arrived about one o’clock with two police cars
and an ambulance. The bodies were dug up carefully and
the police surgeon at once gave it as his opinion that,
while he could not then determine how Professor Bannister
had died, the woman’s skull had been fractured by a violent
blow at the back, with that probably causing her
death.
The following morning Larose went up to Avon Court
to break the news to Sir George and Lady Almaine that
Arnold Gauntry had been arrested, and was being charged
with the murder of Major Sampon.
Rather to his annoyance he learnt Sir George had gone
out and would not be back until lunch, but Joyce appeared
at once and took him to her boudoir. He noticed with
some distress that she was looking very tired and worn.
She had lost her pretty colour and there were dark lines
round her eyes.
“I’ve rather bad news,” he said directly they were
alone. “Arnold Gauntry has been arrested for the murder
of Major Sampon and will be charged this morning.”
She started up on the instant. “What!” she exclaimed
hoarsely and with widely opened eyes. “Arnold Gauntry!
Oh, the fiend!” and, subsiding back into her chair, she
covered her face with her hands and burst into tears.


Larose hated to see a woman cry, and, above all, a
pretty one. So he moved his chair up beside her with the
intention of giving her what comfort he could.
“Now, don’t take it so much to heart,” he said with
the utmost sympathy. “I know Mr. Gauntry was a friend
of yours, but——”
“A friend of mine!” she exclaimed passionately, snatch-
ing her hands from her face. “Why”—she could hardly
get her breath—“he is the worst enemy any woman could
possibly have and I hate him.”
“But I thought ” began Larose in great astonish-
ment.
“No matter what you thought,” she broke in vehemently.
“He is a devil and”—she nodded significantly—“he is no
friend of yours, either.”
“I know that,” smiled Larose. “He did his best to
fasten the murder on to me.”
She nodded again. “Yes, even to the extent of coming
here and trying to make me promise to give false evidence.
He wanted me to say I’d heard you and Major Sampon
quarrelling on the verandah when you went out to look
for him.” She began to cry again. “Oh, he is a devil!”
Larose was thinking quickly. So Gauntry had been
up to see her! He had dared to ask her to lie about that
night of the murder! Indeed, more than that, he seemed
to have been threatening her, too! And now she was look-
ing ill and depressed! Good God, Gauntry had had that
letter with him when he had come up and he had brought
it out! He had been attempting to blackmail her!
He spoke quickly and impressively. “Look here, Lady
Almaine,” he said, “let you and me trust each other.” He
spoke in a most business-like way. “Now, did that fellow
show you any letter he’d got?”
Joyce looked terrified and her face blanched to the
colour of chalk. She stared at him like a hunted creature.
“No, don’t look so frightened,” smiled Larose. “I’m
your friend. I’m going to help you. I believe the wretch
was trying to blackmail you! ” He put his hand in his breast
pocket and, feeling about for a few moments, produced
Major Sampon’s letter. “Look here,” he went on, “is


this what he showed you?” and he held it out toward
her.
She stared hard with her bosom rising and falling quickly
in her emotion. “Yes,” she whispered, “and he read it
out to me.”
“I thought so,” nodded Larose. He thrust the letter
into her hands. “Well, you destroy it and forget all about
it. But read it again first to make sure it’s the same
one.”
A short silence followed and then she looked up and
nodded. She could not speak.
“Good, then I’ll bum it,” said Larose and, taking it
from her, he put it in the grate and set alight to it with a
match. In silence they watched it being burnt, envelope
and all, and then Larose crumpled up the ashes in his
fingers.
“Well, that’s finished with,” he said. He laughed. “But
I really oughtn’t to have done it. Still, you must never tell
and then it’ll be all right.”
She found her voice at last. “Who’s seen it? ” she asked,
still speaking tremulously.
“Only Inspector Stone, that wretch and I,” replied
Larose. “It was found among Major Sampon’s papers,
then I had care of it, but Gauntry stole it from me.”
“Do you believe it is true?” she asked, her face now
suffused to a burning crimson.
“Certainly not,” replied Larose sharply. “The major
was absolutely out of his mind when he wrote it. He had
just learnt from a doctor in Wimpole Street that he was
suffering from a dreadful and incurable disease, and it had
sent him out of his mind,” and then he told her the whole
story of the letter, beginning with its being found in the
major’s desk, going on to his visit to Dr. Methuen, how he
had discovered the letter had been stolen from him and
finally, how he had seen it among the things taken from
Gauntry’s pockets and got hold of it without anyone seeing
him.
He made a grimace. “Now, if I’m asked about it in the
witness-box,” he said, “I’m afraid I shall have to perjure
myself and say I know nothing about it.” He smiled. “Still,


it won’t worry me much, for I feel I shall he perfectly
justified.”
She laid her hand upon his arm. “Oh, Mr. Larose, I’m
so grateful to you,” she said with a sob. “I’ve had three
miserable days and I’ve even thought of doing away with
myself.”
“Well, it’s all over now,” said Larose briskly. He
nodded solemnly. “But this little talk here is never to be
mentioned. It’s to be a secret even from your husband.”
Then seeing her eyes welling up with tears again and, to
distract her thoughts, he went on gaily, “Now what about
a glass of sherry! It’s early but I could do with one.”
She brightened up at once and, not wishing any maid to
see her until all traces of her emotion had passed away,
herself fetched the sherry and some biscuits. Then sitting
close beside him, she joined him in both.
“Do you know, sir,” she said brightly, her worn expres-
sion now passed, and her eyes pools of great relief, “that
these biscuits are the first food I’ve taken for three days
without actually forcing it down my throat. I don’t believe,
too, that for three nights I’ve slept one single hom- on
end.”
Presently she bade good-bye to Larose at the front
door, and he got into his car with a lump in his throat. She
had had to choke back her tears in parting and, glancing
back over her shoulder to see none of the maids were about,
she had suddenly lifted up his hand and kissed it.
“Really, Gilbert,” he murmured as he drove away,
“you must be rather a bad sort of man, for you would
certainly have liked to have kissed her back”—he sighed
heavily—“but it would not have been upon the hand you
would have kissed her.”
With his thoughts still lingering upon the pretty face
and alluring figure of Joyce Almaine, he drove to Scotland
Yard to have a little talk with Stone. He found the stout
inspector in the best of spirits, with his good-natured
face all happiness and smiles.
“A great feather in our caps, Gilbert, the laying of this
second Carrabin by the heels. Not only is he being charged
with the murder of Sampon, but the Secret Service would


like to have a go at him, too. He’s been a dreadful thorn
in their side for a long time. He’s the unknown master-
agent they’ve been trying to uncover for months and
months, but they had no idea who he was and where he
was working. Now they’re got a whole fistful of evidence
against him.” He smiled his happy, fatherly smile. “I tell
you the Yard is in high favour all round.”
“Good for you, Charlie,” smiled back Larose; then he
pretended to look frightened. “But I’ve got a confession
to make!”
“Oh, what is it?” asked Stone. He grinned. “I suppose
I’ll have to forgive you whatever you’ve done.”
“Well, I’ve burnt that letter of Sampon’s,” said Larose.
“It was dangerous and like keeping a bomb.”
Stone considered frowningly. “But I don’t suppose it
matters,” he said after a few moments. His face bright-
ened. “No, we’ll forget all about it. That’ll be the best
thing.”
Larose raised one forefinger warningly. “And you’ll
never say you gave it me?”
“Not I,” boomed Stone instantly. “A nice scandal it’d
be if it became known I’d passed over an official document
to a private individual”—he smiled—“for that’s all you
are now, Gilbert, in spite of what you’ve done for us.” He
made a sweep with his arm and shook his head vigorously.
“No, I’ve forgotten all about it. That’ll be the best thing.
I never saw it, and it didn’t exist.” He pulled out a drawer
in his desk. “Now, have a cigar? ”
In due course of time the trials of the two brothers
came on. Joe was tried first and he was arraigned upon
four charges; breaking into Dencross Hall, murdering Mrs.
Rampini, murdering Mary Trescowthick and fraudulently
converting to himself monies of the deceased Professor
Bannister.
No charge was laid against him of murdering Professor
Bannister, because the post-mortem could not determine
the latter had not died a natural death. About Mary
Trescowthick, however, there was no doubt, her skull
having been fractured in two places, in such a manner that
her death could not have been anything but a violent one.


With the redoubtable efforts of the great King’s Counsel,
Wickham Adders, Joe put up a spirited defence to both
the capital charges.
He boldly took his stand in the witness box and, under
oath, gave evidence on his own behalf. He told his story,
too, clearly, and without any hesitation, exactly as if he
were making the moves of a well-thought out game of
chess.
With regard to Mrs. Rampini he pleaded as he had
outlined to Larose, that he was completely innocent of her
murder. He had not even, he said, handled the poor lady
roughly. She had fainted from fright, and all her butler
had seen him doing had been lifting her up on to the bed.
Then he had been out of the room for several minutes
to make sure all was quiet and had come back to find Mrs.
Rampini dead. His father had been very much distressed.
The latter also had never intended to kill the butler, either,
but had purposely fired low in order to hit him in the legs.
Then about Mary Trescowthick. Her death was none of
his doing either. Professor Bannister had struck her with
the axe because she had inadvertently burnt a lot of his
manuscript. The Professor was a man of most violent temper
and it was all over in a matter of seconds before he, Joe,
had had time to prevent it.
Then the Professor realised what he had done and the
shock was so great he had been taken with a fit. He had
fallen to the ground and never spoken or moved again.
Joe said he had been very frightened because the
tragedies had occurred late one night when they had been
snow-bound, with huge drifts all round the house cutting
them off from all help or communication with the outside
world.
Then for five terrible days he had had to live with the
corpses, the snow preventing him from getting a dozen
yards away from them. He believed he must have been
drunk most of the time, as he found out afterwards that
he got through nearly a whole case of whisky.
Then the idea began to form gradually in his mind that
when he did get into Foxwold his story would not be
believed and he would be accused of a double murder.


So, directly the snow allowed him to leave the house,
that was on the sixth day, although for a week longer the
sodden fenland prevented him from getting into the village,
he took the bodies out along the harder ground by the
dyke-side and buried them.
Then, going through the Professor’s desk to look at his
papers, he suddenly thought how easy it would be to imi-
tate his handwriting and draw cheques. He practised for
some days and then started upon a systematic course of
fraud, fie had taken no one into his confidence, making
out to his brother that it was Professor Bannister’s own wish
—the professor was a most eccentric man—that he, Joe
Carrabin, should act in his place while he was away upon
a holiday in Tibet.
That was his story, Joe said, and he told it very well,
speaking sadly after the manner of a man who realised that
he was under a cloud, but who thought himself very much
misunderstood. And he was not shaken anywhere in the
fierce cross-examination he had to undergo at the hands of
Peter Shearer, who led for the Crown. He just stuck to his
story, doggedly, and as if it were the absolute, if extra-
ordinary, truth.
Then the ponderous Wickham Adders rasped in the
moral for the defence, thundering into the jury that it
was contrary to all canons of justice to judge a man by
his character, good or bad.
It was upon facts alone they were to give their verdict,
hard, solid facts which had withstood the fire of all the
scorn which had been poured upon them, facts which might
almost have seemed fantastic until it had been realised
they could not be disproved. In conclusion, the accused
was a broken, friendless man, but he asked for no pity.
Justice was what he claimed, and he, Wickham Adders, was
confident he would receive it.
Ultimately, the jury retired early in the afternoon, but
they could not agree upon the verdict, and so were locked
up for the night.
At noon the next day a message was received that they
were ready and they filed into Court trying to mask all
expression from their faces. An awed hush filled the Court,


but the knowing ones nodded significantly to one another.
There was going to be no putting on of the black cap, for
the jurymen would have been looking much more nervous
in that case.
And the knowing ones proved to be quite right, for
when the verdict was pronounced it was heard Joe Carrabin
had been acquitted upon the two capital charges, but
found guilty upon the others.
The judge’s voice was grim and icy cold when he sent-
enced Joe to seven years' hard labour for the burglary
and seven years upon the fraudulent conversion charge.
“And the sentences not to be concurrent,” he snapped.
“The prisoner will serve both terms.”
“That shows what old Harbank thought,” commented
Peter Shearer dryly to Adders when the two advocates
were in the disrobing room.
Adders looked very amused. “Well, so didn’t we all?”
he laughed. He whispered in Peter Shearer’s ear, “Those
jurymen ought to be excused for a thousand years. They’re
a positive menace to the community,” and he went off as
if very pleased with his own wit.


CHAPTER X
THE ORDEAL OF GILBERT LAROSE
THE trial of Henry Carrabin, or of Arnold Gauntry
as we have known him all along, began the follow-
ing week and, if there had been interest in the trial
of Joseph, that of his brother was intensified tenfold.
By his own special request Larose had not been called
to give evidence at the trial of Joe, and no mention of the
part he had played in bringing the latter to justice had
come out in Court. But what he had really done had more
than leaked out in the newspapers—indeed, it had simply
poured out —and enterprising newspaper men, from one
source and another, had put together nearly the whole
story.
Unstinting praise had been accorded him and the publio
had been greatly disappointed he had not been in the
limelight during the whole course of the trial.
But they were consoling themselves they would both
see and hear plenty of him at the trial of this other brother,
for not only would he be the star witness but, also —thia
was whispered—it would be almost as if he himself were
upon trial.
It was an open secret in the clubs, in the hotels and
wherever people foregathered that the great Larose had
almost been arrested for the murder of Major Sampon. The
two had had a quarrel but a couple of hours before the
major had been found killed and—this was whispered,
too—Larose had had a better opportunity than anyone
else to commit the crime.
But Larose had been allowed to remain free and with
almost superhuman intelligence and, without doubt spurred
on by the realisation of his own danger, in a few days h©
had unmasked the real murderer.
Still, nothing could be certain until the verdict of the
jury had been given and, until then, it would be a duel of
wits between the two great King’s Counsels, Peter Shearer


for the Crown and the mighty Wickham Adders for the
accused, with Larose hovering in the background and his
whole future waiting upon the result.
Yes, if this Henry Carrabin were not found guilty of the
murder then Larose’s position would be a most uncomfort-
able one.
The day of the trial arrived and the Court was packed
almost as soon as the doors were opened. Lord Attle-
borough was to preside and, of stern and unemotional
probity, it was generally conceded the scales of Justice
would balance to a hair’s breadth in his hands.
(The trial lasted five days and, in the report which
follows, the intervals and adjournments are skipped and,
for the convenience of the reader, the happenings are given
as one uninterrupted whole. —Author’s note.)
The trial opened, and Henry Carrabin stepped into the
dock looking calm and unconcerned. He was smartly
dressed, and everything about him was spick and span,
his appearance, generally, making a good impression upon
the spectators.
“But he doesn’t look like a murderer,” whispered old
Lady Fitzmore, whose first murder trial it was. “That
skinny man there, whose face we can just see, looks far
more like one to me.”
“Hush, Mother,” whispered back her daughter re-
provingly, “that’s Canon Boxworthy, the Wandsworth
Prison chaplain. You musn’t speak now.”
Peter Shearer opened very quietly, with his beautifully
modulated voice. He was a scholarly-looking man, tall
and slight and with an intellectual cast of countenance.
There were never any fire-works about him, but none
better than he could drive home his facts, like the scin-
tillating flashes of a rapier.
It was a strange story, he said, he had to tell, and at
first consideration it appeared to begin a few weeks ago
at a social gathering in Hampstead. But, in reality, it


began long before that and its ramifications were far-
reaching.
“Upon July, the twenty-second last,” he went on,
“Sir George and Lady Almaine gave a dinner-party at
their house, Avon Court, and after dinner the six men of
the party adjourned to the library for a game of poker.
With only three of them, however, have we any concern.
They were Mr. Gilbert Larose, the well-known one-time
international detective now retired from his profession
but still remembered for many of his brilliant achieve-
ments when attached to the Criminal Investigation De-
partment at Scotland Yard; Major Sampon, believed by
everyone to be working at the War Office; and Mr. Arnold
Gauntry, who carried on a business in the city as a dealer
in rubber.
“None of these three men had ever met before and,
apparently, they knew nothing of one another. But
anyone who was imagining there were no bonds of union
between them and that the happenings of their lives had
never mingled together would have been very much
mistaken.
“Major Sampon was a highly-trusted officer of the
British Secret Service, whose activities at that time were
being wholly directed to the uncovering of Russian spies
in England; Arnold Gauntry, whose real name was Henry
Carrabin and whose father had been hanged for murder
seven years previously, was a dangerous and much-wanted
agent of the Soviet Republic, and Gilbert Larose was the
officer of the Criminal Investigation Department who had
been almost wholly responsible for bringing Carrabin’s
father to the scaffold.”
Peter Shearer paused dramatically for a few moments
and a thrill ran round the Court at the possibilities of the
drama about to be enacted before them.
The King’s Counsel went on very solemnly, “So, in
that room the stage was all set for the dreadful tragedy,
with the characters—the hunter after his quarry who,
all unbeknown to him, was sitting but a few feet away,
and a third man whose presence there was stirring feelings
of revenge and hate in the breast of one of the others.”


Peter Shearer pressed home his point. “You must take
in that Major Sampon did not know who this Arnold
Gauntry was. He was not aware he was the dangerous
but unknown Soviet agent for whose uncovering he had
been working so assiduously for so many months. You
must grasp, too, that at that time Larose did not know
who Gauntry was, either, but”—he raised his hand im-
pressively—“we can prove that Gauntry knew who both
the others were. He knew, too, that Sampon was hot
upon his trail—we shall bring witnesses to prove that—
and he knew also that Larose was the man who had
practically hanged his father. We shall prove that as well.”
Then Peter Shearer went on to relate all that had taken
place that night at Avon Court, the unpleasantness at the
card-table, the major going out of the house in a sulk,
the listening to the ghost-story in the dark, Larose going
out to look for the major, the discovery later of the body
and, finally, the arrival of the police.
He went on impressively, “Now there is no denying the
fact that when the police appeared Mr. Larose was under
the gravest suspicion. The dead man had grossly insulted
him, he, alone of them all in the house, was known positively
to have had the opportunity of striking that dread blow,
and, moreover, this Arnold Gauntry had testified to the
investigating inspector that he, Gauntry, was of opinion
he had heard quarrelling voices when Larose had been
out on the verandah.
“And that was how the situation was continuing the
next day. Everyone under suspicion and Mr. Larose
most of all. But Larose was already getting ideas and
one was that Major Sampon had been robbed, as well
as murdered.”
Then he told how Larose had confided his suspicions
to Inspector Stone, because he had learnt Major Sampon
had received four £SO notes the previous Saturday at the
races, and he brought in then how, later, Larose had
come to visit Dr. Methuen and obtain from him the number
of the £SO note he, the doctor, had in his possession.
“You see,” he nodded to the jury, “by the morning after
the murder had been done Larose’s suspicions were definitely


turning in the direction of this Arnold Gauntry, because
it was wholly through him he was under such a cloud and,
although he could give no reason for it, he was suspecting
malice on Gauntry’s part. He had come to believe that
when he had been sent out at Gauntry’s suggestion to look
for Major Sampon he had been sent to fall into a trap.
Then, if he were right in his surmise there. Gauntry had
known that the major was lying dead upon the verandah
and, to have been aware of that, he must almost in all
certainty have killed him himself. These suspicions were
engendered by two happenings, the first, as he had told
Inspector Stone, Gauntry’s expression had been a most
unfriendly one when he had learnt Larose’s name and,
the second, Gauntry had made out he had heard those
quarrelling voices coming from the verandah when Larose
was out there. No one else had heard the voices and Larose
was certain Gauntry had not heard them, either.”
He paused here to take a drink of water and then related
what had followed, how Larose could leam little of Gauntry
in the city but at the latter’s flat in Fitzroy Square had
heard about the letter with the Foxwold postmark upon
it, how he had gone to that little village and on to Wrack
House and how he had been received by Professor Bannister’s
niece. Then he told of all which had happened there, with
the girl recognising Larose and making known her fears,
how Larose had become certain the man was an imposter,
the games of chess which had been played, and the sus-
picions gradually coming into Larose’s mind that both the
Professor and the serving-woman had met with foul play.
Next, he mentioned the arrival of Gauntry upon the scene,
how very soon Larose had formed the opinion that the two
were almost certainly brothers and, finally, he described
the departure from Wrack House of Larose and Ethel
Bannister.
“Then, my lord and gentlemen of the jury,” he cried,
“followed one of the most amazing pieces of detective
work which has ever been recorded in either fact or fiction.
With nothing to go upon except that the man posing as
Professor Bannister had stated that, once when playing in a
chess-club match, he had been successful with an opening
R


to his game, known to chess-players as the King’s Gambit,
Gilbert Larose established without a shadow of a doubt
that the false Professor was Joseph Carrabin, wanted for the
Dencross murder and”—he pointed dramatically towards
the dock—“that that man there was his brother, Henry.”
A delighted thrill ran through the spectators. Things
were developing and they were beginning to get some return
for sitting so long upon their hard and uncomfortable
seats.
Then Peter Shearer said very solemnly, “ But Mr. Larose
had now established another fact. He understood the
hatred with which this Arnold Gauntry must be regarding
him, and he realised why the man had been so determined
to fasten the guilt of the murder upon him. It was ven-
geance, the son of a criminal and a criminal himself, too,
seeking revenge upon the man who had brought his father
to the scaffold.”
Again a thrill ran through the spectators and they turned
their glances upon the prisoner in the dock. But he added
nothing to their emotions, as he was looking—only just
amused.
The King’s Counsel went on, “Well, as all the world
knows, Joe Carrabin was arrested. But Larose was not
content there. He was more strongly of opinion than ever
that Professor Bannister and the serving-woman, Mary
Trescowthick, had not gone away as Joe Carrabin had
stated, but that they had come to violent ends and were
lying buried somewhere upon those wide and desolate
fen-lands surrounding the house. So he remained behind
there and, with two men from Scotland Yard, began a
systematic search of one thousand acres.”
He looked down at his notes for a few moments and
then resumed his address. “But I will now leave them
looking for the bodies and go back to this Arnold Gauntry.
Returning to the city, Gauntry had suddenly become most
uneasy, for he had learnt somehow that he was being
watched. Added to that, his agents were no longer re-
porting to him as they should have been doing and, no
doubt, a deadly fear was gripping at his heart that he
had been betrayed.


“Then, we know now, he suddenly received a message
in the middle of the afternoon, warning him to burn all
his papers and take to instant flight. At the time, to those
listening into his phone the message seemed innocent enough
and its significance, unhappily, was not realised until it
was too late. At any rate he had to flee. But he was rather
in a dilemma, for it was after the closing hour of the banka
and he was short of ready money.
“The situation was not, however, wholly desperate, as
hidden away in a secret drawer in Professor Bannister’s
desk at Wrack House were upwards of one thousand
pounds in Treasury notes and bonds to bearer. So, if he
could only lay hands upon them he would be in funds to
make it easier for him to get out of the country.”
“Then, by a clever ruse, he managed to elude those who
were on the watch for him and made his way down to
the Norfolk Fens. In the dead of night he broke into the
Professor’s house. He thought it was untenanted, but the
two Scotland Yard detectives were sleeping there. They
were awakened by sounds in the room below and, creeping
down, caught him in the very act of rifling the desk. He
made a murderous attack upon them with an automatic
pistol and it was by a miracle only that one of them escaped
death. But he was quickly overpowered and tied up. Then
a search of his pockets was made.”
Peter Shearer paused dramatically here and all eyes in
the Court were riveted upon him. A surprise was expected
and, certainly, no one was disappointed. The King’s
Counsel went on.
“And, among other things, what did they find?” His
voice was very stem and solemn as he answered his own
question. “The three £5O notes which had belonged to
Major Sampon and which, it was presumed, had been
taken from his pocket-book when he had been lying that
night in the very act of death upon the verandah!”
No grave could have been more silent than was the Court
then. No one seemed to breathe and they sat on as motion-
less as graven images.
Peter Shearer broke the silence, speaking now in brisk
and business-like tones.


“Now, my lord and gentlemen of the jury, the witnesses
I shall call will prove the guilt of the accused up to the
very hilt. The whole case is in a nut-shell. An officer of the
British Secret Service is foully done to death, an agent of
the Soviet Union whose safety that officer was imperilling
is known to have been near him when he was murdered and,
later, in the possession of this agent are found bank-notes
belonging to the murdered man!” He raised his voice in
declamation. “What more conclusive evidence could
anyone want?”
Dr. Methuen was the first witness called and the £SO
bank-note he had received from Major Sampon was pro-
duced. Next came Mr. Israel Abrahams, a book-maker,
who produced his betting-book and testified he had paid
out four £SO notes to an unknown better, whose description,
however, tallied with that of Major Sampon, that Saturday
afternoon at Sandown Park. Next came a bank cashier
who gave evidence that on that Saturday morning he had
paid out eight £SO notes to Mr. Abrahams and that four
of the numbers of them were those of Dr. Methuen’s bank-
note and the three found upon the prisoner when he had
been arrested.
No cross-examination of any of these witnesses was made,
but it was not so with the fourth witness, Inspector Stone,
who gave formal evidence of the arrest of the prisoner, for
Wickham Adders at once rose briskly to his feet.
Adders was a big, heavy man, looking every ounce of his
sixteen stone. He had a huge head, with a wide forehead,
big ox-like eyes, eye-brows as bushy as a bird’s nest, and a
long straight mouth with the firm and mobile lips of the
orator.
Junior counsel were wont to say that when he stood up
suddenly it was like a whale heaving its body out of the sea.
His reputation was one of the highest at the Bar. Certainly,
he could assume a most ferocious air when he wanted to
but, at heart, he was always a gentleman and never treated
witnesses unfairly.
He smiled pleasantly at Stone and, after eliciting from
him that he had been responsible for the handling of the
enquiry into the major’s death, asked, almost casually so it


seemed, “And so, of course, it was you who went through
the papers of the deceased?”
“Yes, I went through them all,” replied Stone.
“And, of course again, you allowed none of them to pass
out of your hands?”
“Certainly not,” frowned Stone, as if rather shocked at
the question being asked.
“And they have all been placed at the disposal of the
defence?” went on the King’s Counsel, and Stone replying
in the affirmative he was told he could leave the box. Then
it was quite a minute before he remembered the letter he
had been cajoled into giving up to Larose and he would
have whistled in dismay if he had not realised where he was.
He took out his handkerchief and wiped the perspiration
from his forehead.
An officer from the Intelligence Department was now
in the box and, with documentary evidence to support his
statements, he testified to the prisoner’s activities as an
agent on behalf of the Soviet Union. Next came witnesses
who told of his particular interest in the murdered man,
one relating how he had been ordered to shadow the major
as closely as he could, get to know the geography of his
house in Maida Vale and, if possible, find out if the major
were in the habit of being alone in his garden any time
after it had become dark.
Wickham Adders did not seem much interested in any of
these witnesses and asked no questions, leaning back in a
bored manner in his seat and looking up at the ceiling. But
he straightened himself up instantly the name of Gilbert
Larose was called by the usher and, looking round, seemed
to sense with some amusement the thrill which
passed through the Court as the one-time detective
appeared.
Larose’s face was unsmiling, but it was not grave. He
looked self-possessed and very sure of himself.
He took the oath and Peter Shearer proceeded to run
him quickly through the happenings of the fatal night.
He did not refer to his subsequent investigations as he had
outlined them to the Court in his, Peter Shearer’s, opening
address. He took him back, however, to the part he had


played leading up to the arrest of the elder Carrabin who
had been hanged seven years before.
Larose was a good witness, never saying either too much
or too little, but just answering the questions briefly and
clearly, as they were put to him.
Wickham Adders rose to cross-examine and his voice
was particularly soft and gentle, always an ominous sign
to those who knew his ways.
“Now, Mr. Larose,” he began, “we have been told by
my learned friend that, in an unofficial capacity, you have
taken a large part in the working-up of this case. That is so,
is it not?”
“Yes,” smiled Larose, “I was particularly interested.”
“Of course you were,” smiled back Adders, “for, as
with everyone else in the house, you were under a cloud.”
He spoke carelessly. “It was you who found out from the
housekeeper the name of Major Sampon’s doctor?”
“Yes,” nodded Larose.
“And when you called at the house in Maida Vale she
opened the door to you herself? ”
“No, one of the maids opened it.”
Adders nodded approvingly. “Ah, an excellent memory
for little things, as you went there more than ten weeks
ago!” He went on, “And you waited in the hall until the
housekeeper came?”
“No, I was shown into a room to wait.”
“Were you kept waiting long?”
“No, a very short time.”
“And what room was it you were shown into?”
“The drawing-room, I should say.”
“What makes you say that?”
“Because it contained more ornaments than would be
in a room of everyday use and there was no central table.”
For the second time Adders nodded approvingly. “More
observations! Excellent! Then tell the court what furniture,
etc., the room contained.”
Larose considered for a few moments. “A sofa, a number
•of chairs, some small tables, a writing-bureau and a
pianola.”
“And what day was it you went there?” asked Adders.


“ On the Tuesday, the 29th of July,” replied Larose with
no hesitation, “exactly a week after the murder.”
Adders went off on a new tack. “And when you arrived
at Professor Bannister’s house on the Fens, very early that
morning, only a few horn's after the prisoner had broken
in, no doubt you were very astonished to find out who the
burglar was?”
“Very,” replied Larose.
“And when you had seen him and made sure who he
was,” went on Adders, “you would naturally have been
most interested to see what he had come after? ”
“Yes, I was,” replied Larose.
“And you were naturally interested, also, in the things
which had been taken from his pockets and were lying in
that little pile upon the table?”
“Not particularly so,” said Larose, “until Detective
King had pointed out to me the three £SO bank-notes.
Then I was tremendously interested in those notes.”
“But, of course, you went through the other things
which were with them?” suggested Adders carelessly and
almost as if the question were an idle one.
Larose shook his head. “No, my interest was over after
seeing the numbers on the notes, as I knew then they were
those which had been taken from Major Sampon and I
was satisfied.” He shrugged his shoulders. “I had rounded
up my investigations and the case was finished as far as I
was concerned.” He smiled. “You see, the reactions at
times like those are very distressing, and I felt limp as a
rag.
“But come now,” urged Adders silkily. “There was a
little pile of papers and things there and it is not in human
nature you would not have been curious.” He frowned.
“Remember, you had been hounding down this man and
his brother, night and day for many days, and surely the
most trivial things about him would have been of absorbing
interest to you?”
“But I tell you they no longer were,” said Larose.
Then he added after a moment’s thought, “I might,
perhaps, have been mildly curious, but all the same I
know I didn’t examine anything. Ah, I remember now!


I told Detective King to make the packet of everything,
as my fingers were oily. I had had an oil-break coming
down and my hands were very dirty. You see, I was in a
great hurry, too, to go out and see where they had found
those bodies.”
Adders looked smilingly at the jury, as if he were very
doubtful of the truth of what Larose had just said and as
if he were quite confident, too, that they would be of the
same opinion.
The Court, generally, was most puzzled at the line the
cross-examination was taking but, the majority of them
fully conversant with the subtlety of the great advocate,
were expecting at any moment some great surprise. The
crafty Wickham Adders, the hero of a hundred and more
criminal trials in his many years at the Bar, was certainly
not asking these seemingly profitless questions for nothing
and, accordingly, expectation was at fever point.
Adders went on in the same careless tone, “I believe
you generally stop at the Semiris Hotel when you are in
town? Well, when you were staying there the day before
you went back to Wrack House to assist in the arrest of
Joe Carrabin, do you happen to remember the number and
floor of your room?” He raised his hand quickly. “No, no,
don’t mention the number. Just answer yes or no.”
“Yes,” smiled Larose.
“You remember it distinctly, with no chance of any
mistake?”
“Certainly!” replied Larose. “I always get that par-
ticular room when I can, because it is one of the quietest
in the hotel.”
Adders picked up a piece of paper and pencil and
beckoned to an usher. “Give these to the witness, please.”
He looked up at Larose again. “And you, sir, write down
the number and the floor.”
A moment’s silence followed while Larose did as he was
requested. Then, the paper handed back, the King’s
Counsel just glanced down at it and, folding it in two,
placed it by his brief.
He looked very intently at Larose. “Now, sir,” he said
sternly, and there was a fuller and a deeper note in his tones


as he rapped out his next question, “do you happen to
have lost a pocket-book lately?”
Larose felt his heart beating quickly, for, in a lightning
flash of thought, he realised what was coming. As he had
been expecting, the wretch in the dock, like a cornered
rat, was going to admit he had stolen the pocket-book and
declare he had found the damning £SO notes inside. Then it
would appear as if he, Larose, had taken them off the
murdered man and therefore, by implication, was the
murderer.
So there was no help for it. Lie must he met with lie,
but his own lie would be a forgivable one. It would be
downright cowardice to be squeamish in dealing with any
man of the Carrabin type and it was a mercy he, Larose,
was all prepared.
He spoke with no hesitation. “No, not lately,” he replied,
“but I lost one in July, upon the night of the murder.”
Instantly, the big King’s Counsel frowned, as if it were
not the answer he had been expecting and, for the moment,
he seemed to have been altogether thrown out of his stride.
He darted a quick and almost angry glance at the prisoner
and then hesitated, as if uncertain what to say next. It
was noticed, too, that the prisoner was now frowning as
well, the first time he had done so since he had entered the
dock.
“On the night of the murder!” exclaimed Adders at
last. He appeared incredulous. “Do you mean it was
stolen from you at Avon Court?”
Larose shook his head. “No, I don’t think that,” he
replied. “ I think it fell out of my pocket as I was changing
a tyre. I had a puncture in Regent Street as I was returning
to my hotel.”
“And what was in it?” asked Adders very sharply.
“Some Treasury notes, a few postage stamps, my visiting-
cards and my driving-licence,” rattled off Larose glibly.
“When did you discover its loss?”
“The next morning when I was brushing my jacket,
I missed it at once.”
“And, of course, you made instant enquiries in the hotel
on the chance that you might have dropped it somewhere


there?” was the next question, put very sternly as if the
matter were of some importance.
Larose shook his head again. “No, because, as I say, I
was almost certain I had lost it in the street. As a matter
of fact, I made no enquiries at all, anywhere. As my cards
were inside the pocket-book, I knew quite well that, if it
had been picked up by an honest person, it would be
returned to me, but”—he shrugged his shoulders—“if
by a dishonest one, then I never expected to hear of it
again.” He nodded. “I never did.”
“But you made no enquiries anywhere?” queried
Adders, as if in the greatest surprise. He puckered up his
face into a most puzzled frown. “You mean to tell us you
did not ring up Avon Court to find out if you had dropped
it there?”
“No,” replied Larose, “for I knew if they had found it
they would have rung me up. They knew where I was
staying.” He smiled. “Besides, the loss was not great,
only a few pounds, and I had many other things to think
of that morning.”
“But your driving-licence!” exclaimed Adders. “Surely
that was most important? ” His voice took on a sharp tone
again. “Of course, you applied for another one, at once?”
“No, I didn’t,” smiled Larose. “I forgot all about it
and it wasn’t until about a fortnight afterwards that I
went to get one.”
A short silence followed and then, eyeing Larose most
intently, Adders burst out like a bullet from a gun, “Have
you got a pocket-book upon you now? Then show it to the
Court. Open it and well see what you’ve got inside.”
Larose looked amused and took out half a dozen Treasury
notes, some postage-stamps, a few visiting-cards and a
motor-driving licence. “Almost exactly what was in the
other one,” he smiled. “I never carry much in any pocket-
book because of the bulge it makes in the jacket.”
Adders raised a big, fat forefinger in solemn warning.
“But I put it to you, Mr. Larose,” he said with the utmost
sternness, “that you did not, as you have just told the
Court, lose your pocket-book upon the night of the murder,
Tuesday, July the 22nd. Instead, you lost it, sir, on Tuesday


the 29th, in the afternoon, on the same day that you
had paid your visit to the house of the murdered man
in Maida Vale.” His voice rose in emphasis, with the big
forefinger now moving up and down like a pendulum.
“And there was more in that pocket-book than you have
admitted to us, for it contained a letter which did not belong
to you and which you had purloined secretly from Major
Sampon’s writing-bureau that very morning.” His voice
was thundering now and he crashed his clenched fist into
the palm of his other hand. “Yes, sir, you had taken it
from - that bureau when you had been left alone in the
room.”
Larose could have laughed in his relief. He was on sure
ground now. He had certainly taken no letter from the
house in Maida Vale and he had not even looked inside
the bureau. He spoke up boldly and with his face the very
picture of surprise. “There was no such letter,” he said
with indignation, “and I never purloined one. I did not
go near the desk.”
“Remember you are on oath, sir,” thundered Adders,
“and you swear to the Court that you did not take a
letter and that it was not in the pocket-book when it was
lost?”
“I do,” replied Larose quietly, “and I am quite aware
I am on oath.”
For a long moment the King’s Counsel stood staring at
him, as if he would have bored him through and through
with his eyes. The spectators in the Court were thrilled
to their very marrows now. Some great climax was on the
point of eventuating. Wickham Adders was about to hurl
another question and it would hurst like a bomb into the
calm and confident equanimity of Larose. It could not be
for nothing that the great advocate had been hammering
in about the lost pocket-book all this time. It had been of
deadly purpose he had been putting all his questions.
But, to their amazement and most dreadful disappoint-
ment, nothing happened and, the lines of his face smoothing
down, Wickham Adders made a little smiling bow to
Larose and subsided heavily into his seat. The cross-
examination was over.


And if the spectators had not been able to grasp the
significance of what had been happening under their very
eyes, neither had Peter Shearer. He was quite sure, how-
ever, that a duel of most deadly nature had been taking
place and that it had been thrust and parry all along. He
could not understand it, but Larose, undoubtedly, emerging
from the fight unscathed, like the shrewd man he was he
left well alone and made no re-examination.
The next witness was Detective King and, when he was
called into Court and stepped into the box, Wickham
Adders leant forward as if determining to lose no single
word of what the man might say or fail to notice every
expression passing across his face.
Peter Shearer took him quickly through the happenings
of the night when Henry Carrabin had broken into Wrack
House, how they had been awakened by the noise, how they
had come downstairs and seen him going to the desk, how
he had become aware that they were watching and had
fired point-blank at them, and all that happened after.
He gave his evidence with policeman-like precision,
answering at once and never putting in an unnecessary
word.
Wickham Adders rose up in a leisurely way to cross-
examine. “And I expect, Mr. King,” he smiled, “that you
remember every incident of that night ? You have
forgotten nothing?”
“No, sir, nothing,” replied the detective.
“You can recall everything in the exact order in which
it happened? Everything stands out clearly to you?”
“Yes, sir, everything.”
Then Adders went on to ask a number of seemingly
irrelevant questions about what Larose said and did when
he arrived and went in to see the man they had made
prisoner, how he addressed him, did he approach up doge
to him and who it was who loosed the man’s bonds.
He appeared to want to find out most particularly if Larose
had actually touched him.
The wise ones among the spectators nodded undet-
standingly to one another. Wickham Adders was not
really interested in any of these things. He was just setting


a trap for the witness and in a few moments the latter
would fall headlong in.
Adders went on, “Then after the little talk with the
prisoner, of course, Mr. Larose went into Professor Ban-
nister’s room to see what the man had come after in the
desk?”
“Yes, sir, I took him in and showed him the money and
the bonds.”
“Had you counted the notes then?”
“Yes, sir, there was £95.”
“And, of course, Mr. Larose cheeked the amount?”
asked Adders carelessly.
The detective shook his head. “No, sir, he didn’t touch
anything. He said his hands were too dirty. He’d been
making some adjustments to his car on the way down.”
Adders nodded. “Ah, I remember he told us that!
Well, about the things you had taken from the prisoner’s
pockets, of course, he was very interested there?”
“Not until I had told him about the three £SO notes*
sir,” replied King. “Then he was very startled.”
“But hadn’t he seen them lying on the table among the
other things? ” asked Adders, as if very surprised.
“No, sir, I had pushed them under some of the papers.”
Adders frowned. “Why?” he asked very sharply.
For the first time the detective seemed to hesitate,
“Well, sir, you see £l5O was a lot of money and I didn’t
want to leave the bank-notes lying about for the first
person who came in to see. I was responsible for them.”
“Then, of course, being such a careful man,” suggested
the King’s Counsel rather sarcastically, “you had hidden
away the bonds and the £95 which had been in the desk? ”
“No, sir,” smiled the detective, “but I had shut up tha
desk and they were quite safe.”
Adders continued, “You say Mr. Larose was very
startled when you told him about the notes, then what
did he do? ”
“He whistled and then he said, ‘Show them to me,
quick! What are the numbers?’”
“And he took them from you—quick—to examine tha
numbers?”


The detective shook his head. “No, sir, he never actually
touched them. He said he wouldn’t because of the oil
upon his hands. I just held them up to him and he read
the numbers.”
“Then?” asked Adders with a heavy frown.
“He ordered me to get some brown paper out of the
kitchen cupboard, make a list of everything that was on
the table and do them up in a packet. I was to give the
packet, too, only to Inspector Stone.”
Adders spoke very carelessly, “And you left him stand-
ing there while you went for the brown paper? ”
“No, sir, he said he was going to have a cup of tea and
he came with me into the kitchen.”
“He followed after you, you mean?”
“No, sir, we both went together.”
The King’s Counsel unmasked his guns at last. “I
want to be assured,” he thundered, “that Mr. Larose was
never left alone for one single moment with those things
which had been taken out of the prisoner’s pockets.” His
voice reverberated through the Court. “Now, can you tell
me or can you not? ”
“I can, sir,” replied King firmly. “I am absolutely
positive he was not.”
“But how, after all those weeks,” went on Adders
fiercely, “can you remember such a trifling happening as
that?”
"Because, sir,” smiled the detective, “as we were going
out through the door Mr. Larose flourished a cake of scented
soap which he had just brought from his own house. He
held it up to me to smell and said laughingly that we could
all have a decent wash at last. We had been complaining
of the soap we had found in the kitchen because it seemed
to have become rancid.”
“What happened next?” snapped the King’s Counsel,
looking so annoyed that the spectators were quite sure
that if a trap had been set for the detective, then he had
certainly not fallen into it.
“I got a piece of brown paper and went back into the
study,” replied King. “I made a list of everything which
had come out of the prisoner’s pockets and then wrapped


them up and put them in my pocket. Then the packet
did not go out of my possession again until I gave it up to
Inspector Stone, along with the list I had made out.”
“And on that list you made out,” asked Adders, “there
was no mention of a letter, in an envelope which had
been opened?”
“No, sir, there was no letter there at all.”
“And you put your name to only one list? Yes, yes,
I’ve seen it. I mean you never made out another list,
deleting anything you had put down in the first one.”
“Certainly not, sir,” replied the detective with the utmost
firmness, and Adders once more subsided into his seat,
with the expression upon his face by no means a trium-
phant one.
Inspector Stone, seated in the body of the Court, wiped
over his forehead once again. He did not deceive himself
as to what had really happened. That dare-devil Larose
had been taking big risks again and—he smiled a half
reluctant smile here—had got away with them successfully,
as he generally did. Gosh, but he was a dangerous fellow!
The case for the Crown was soon closed after the detec-
tive’s evidence and Wickham Adders, jumping quickly
to his feet, opened his address for the defence.
He started off at once upon a high note, as one who was
intending to take no nonsense from anyone. He thundered
into the jury with fierce vehemence that this was a trial
for murder and for nothing else. One man had been foully
done to death and another man, the prisoner, was being
charged with the committing of the crime. It was all
outside the charge that the accused was a proved spy and
a confessing thief, and that he had been fraudulently
converting a dead man’s property to his own and his
brother’s use. He was not being tried for spying, or for
theft, or for fraudulent conversion, but only for murder,
and it was upon that charge and that charge alone that
he must be found innocent or guilty.
Wickham Adders looked with pitying scorn here in the
direction of Peter Shearer. His learned brother, he went
on, in his opening address for the Crown had stated that
the story of the crime went back for many years and


had many ramifications. But that was only a wild flight
of fancy upon his learned friend’s part, for the story began
and ended upon the night of Tuesday, July the twenty -
second last.
It did not matter if the accused had been a spy in the
pay of the Soviet Union for twenty years, or if his father,
his mother and all his uncles and aunts had been brought
to the scaffold through the instrumentality of Mr. Gilbert
Larose. Those happenings, in themselves, were no proof
at all that he had struck the fatal blow which had killed
Major Sampon on July the twenty-second, and it was
upon the facts of that night alone he must be judged.
It might indeed be that the accused was anti-social
in his ways and a most undesirable individual for any
community to shelter. But that must not be weighed
against him in connection with the crime with which
he was now charged.
This was a Court of Justice and, however unsavoury
might be the character of the accused, he was entitled
to the same exact mead of justice as would be accorded
to a person of most blameless life.
Finally, the King’s Counsel announced that he would
call only one outside witness and then put the accused
straight into the witness-box and let him tell his own
story.
The name of Ann Thomson was at once called and the
late Major Sampon’s housekeeper came into the Court
and stepped into the witness-box.
“You had been Major Sampon’s housekeeper for the
six years prior to the day of his death?” asked Adders.
“Yes, sir,” replied the housekeeper.
“So we may take it that you were fully conversant with
all the major’s ways?”
“Yes, sir, I was.”
“Then did he often use this drawing-room of his where
the pianola and the writing-bureau were?”
“Not very often, sir, but he did occasionally.”
“Did he ever write any of his letters there?”
“Yes, he did sometimes when he was listening to the
pianola. It was an electric one.”


“Do you know if he had been writing there upon any
day just preceding his death?”
“I can’t say that for certain, sir, but I remember he
was in there, with the pianola going, upon the afternoon
of the day he went up to dine at Avon Court.”
“And Mr. Larose came up to see you a week later,
on Tuesday the 29th?”
“I think it was on the Tuesday, sir. At any rate I am
sure it was on the Monday or the Tuesday because I
was doing some washing when he called and I always wash
on one of those days.”
“And he was shown into this drawing-room by one of
the maids and left there by himself for a few minutes?”
“Yes, sir, whilst I dried my hands and made myself
tidy to go and see him.”
“Well, did the writing bureau in there contain any of
the house note-paper, with the embossed address?”
“Yes, sir, I always saw to it that there was some there,
as well as envelopes and blotting-paper. The master was
very particular in all his ways.”
“Now was this writing bureau kept locked?”
“No, sir, never. It could always be pulled open.”
“And was this bureau gone through when Inspector
Stone came up to examine the major’s papers? ”
“No, sir, no one went into the drawing-room. The police
just asked me where Master kept everything and I took
them into his study. I never thought of the drawing-room.”
“And had you yourself looked into this bureau after
your master had died?”
“No, sir, and I’ve never looked in it since.”
“Thank you, Miss Thomson. That will do.”
Wickham Adders made a motion with his arm and
Henry Carrabin stepped out of the dock and into the
witness-box. He took the oath without the slightest trace
of nervousness, appearing quite calm and self-possessed,
although his face had, perhaps, paled a little. A deep
hush filled the Court.
The King’s Counsel was quick and almost brusque in
his questioning. “Now, Carrabin,” he asked, “did you
kill Major Sampon?” ~
s


The reply came quick and sharp, too. “No, I did not.”
“Did you leave the drawing-room at Avon Court at
any moment when that ghost-story was being listened-in
to in the dark?”
“I did not.”
“Did you go outside the house at any time after dinner,
until you all, finally, went out together when you were
going to your cars?”
“No, I did not.”
“Did you hear voices coming from the direction of the
verandah when Mr. Larose had gone out alone to look
for Major Sampon?”
“Yes, I did.”
“Did it strike you at the time that they were angry
voices?”
“Yes, it did.”
“And did you volunteer that information to Inspector
Flower when, later, he was questioning you?”
“No, I did not. He asked me point-blank.”
A short pause in the examination followed and then
Adders, after glancing down at his notes, looked up and
asked, “Were you walking down the Haymarket at about
a quarter to four on the afternoon of Tuesday, July the
twenty-ninth? ”
“I was.”
“And did you suddenly catch sight of Mr. Gilbert
Larose walking in front of you and follow him and see
him go into the Semiris Hotel? ”
“I did.”
“And you were very surprised? Then tell the Court,
in your own words, why.”
Henry Carrabin spoke a little hoarsely. “I had most
unexpectedly met Mr. Larose two days previously upon
the Norfolk Fens, when I was going to see my brother,
and he had told me then that, acting upon the strong
advice of Inspector Stone, he had come there to hide
for a few days. He said he was in danger of being arrested
for the murder of Major Sampon and the inspector had
told him to go away at once'until the real murderer had
been arrested. He told me Inspector Stone was certain


that the night-watchman, who had been out in the road
when Major Sampon was killed, had committed the
crime and that any moment the man would be confessing
he had done it.”
“And you believed his story?” asked Adders, with a
face as expressionless as a block of wood.
“I did implicitly,” replied Carrabin. He added dryly,
“Mr. Larose is a great actor and can tell a lie with a
straight enough face to convince anybody.”
Adders went on, “And you followed him into the
hotel?”
“Yes, but not until a few minutes afterwards. I was
curious to find out if he felt himself safe now because
he had learnt the night-watchman had confessed, but I
hesitated to go and talk to him, because”—he was ap-
parently speaking with the utmost candour—“l didn’t
want him to ask me any questions, which might have
been awkward to answer, about my brother.”
“Well, you went in after a few minutes,” said Adders.
“Yes, after about ten minutes, certainly not longer.”
“Then tell the Court what happened.”
Carrabin spoke slowly as if he were making certain to
leave nothing out. “I went up to the reception-desk
and said to the girl there, ‘l’ve come to see Mr. Gilbert
Larose. He’s just come in and he expects me. I’ll go up
to his room. What’s the number?’ Then she told me
it was number twenty-nine on the fifth floor and ”
“One moment,” interrupted Adders sharply, and he
picked up the piece of paper upon which Larose had
written down the number and floor of his room and,
beckoning to the usher for the third time, bade him hand
it up to the Bench. “The same floor and number which
Mr. Larose wrote down, my lord, floor five and number
twenty-nine.” He waved to Carrabin to go on.
“I went up in the lift,” said Carrabin, “and the room
was the last one at the end of a long passage. I saw no
one about. I was just going to knock on the door when
I saw it was unlatched. No sound coming from inside,
I pushed it open. There was no one in the room, but I
heard the noise of water splashing in the bathroom which


led out from it. I guessed Mr. Larose was having a hath
because I saw clothes lying about upon the chairs.”
He paused for a moment here and swallowed hard.
Then he went on, but speaking much more quickly now,
“Then I saw the top of a pocket-book, just protruding
from the breast-pocket of a jacket lying upon a chair,
and I tip-toed in and took it.”
“What special reason made you take it?” asked Adders
very sharply.
Carrahin spoke very slowly again, “Because I thought
that, as he had been so recently hiding away, he would
probably have been carrying plenty of money. The pocket-
book bulged the pocket a little as if it were well-filled.”
“Then what did you do next?”
“I left the hotel at once as quickly as I could and went
straight home to my flat in Fitzroy Square. Then I looked
to see what was in the pocket-book.”
“And what did you find?”
Carrahin spoke more slowly than ever, “I found,” he
said impressively and for the first time he looked in the
direction of the jury, “a motor-driving licence, some
postage stamps, seven pounds in one pound Treasury
notes and”—he could hardly get his words out now—
“three £SO bank-notes.”
A deep ‘ah’ ran round the Court. They could under-
stand the meaning of everything now! Wickham Adders
had been leading up to this amazing climax all the time!
The defence was making out that Larose, and not the
prisoner, had taken the three £SO bank-notes from off
the body of the dead man. It was a truly dreadful and
almost incredible possibility!
Adders asked very quietly, ‘ ‘ And were these bank-notes the
same ones which were found upon you when you were caught
breaking into Professor’s Bannister’s house that night?”
“They were,” replied Carrahin very solemnly, and a
deep sigh seemed to fill the Court.
But Adders gave no time for any whispering between
the spectators. “And what else did you find in the pocket-
book?” he asked, with the same sharpness with which
all the time he seemed to have been addressing the prisoner.


“A letter,” replied Carrabin, “and ”
“You are not to say to whom it was addressed,” broke
in Adders quickly and with a heavy frown upon his face.
“You are to tell us only from where it was written, the date
on it and the signature at the bottom.”
Carrabin nodded as if he quite understood. “It was
written from 19 Queen Street, Maida Yale,” he said,
“The date on it was July the twenty-second and it was
signed Henry Sampon.”
Not a sound was to be heard in the Court. Everyone
was thrilled, waiting for what disclosure was coming next.
“And this letter,” went on Adders, “detailed some very
personal happenings of Major Sampon’s life in connection
with a lady.” He raised his hand sharply and spoke with
the utmost sternness. “Now no names. Just answer my
question.”
“It did,” replied Carrabin very solemnly.
“Then what became of this letter,” asked Adders,
“which you swear to the Court had been taken from Mr.
Larose’s pocket-book upon the afternoon of July the
twenty-ninth?”
“I carried it about with me,” replied Carrabin more
solemnly than ever, “that day, the next day, and the day
after that—until it was taken from me by Detective King
when he turned out my pockets as I was roped up at Wrack
House.”
The Court hardly breathed, the excitement was so great.
“You are sure of that?” boomed Adders. “There is
not the shadow of a doubt in your mind that you had it
upon you then?”
“Not the faintest shadow of a doubt,” nodded Carrabin
emphatically. “I have never been more sure of anything
in my life.”
“One last question,” said Adders. “What did you do
with this pocket-book you have told us you stole from
Mr. Larose?”
“I burnt it in my flat.”
The 'King’s Counsel looked at the judge. “I have
finished, my lord,” he said and he plumped down into his
seat.


Now the beat epitome of some aspects of the trial was
given, weeks afterwards, by a young barrister, who had
just taken silk, to his father who had but recently returned
from a holiday in Australia and whom he had not seen for
six months.
“You must understand, Dad,” he said, “that as far as
the defence was concerned it was a most unusual trial.
Those of us who knew Wickham Adders could see that his
heart was not in his work and that it was distasteful to
him, as if all the time he knew the man he was defending
were guilty. Naturally, he did his best to earn his fee,
it was said he got twenty-five hundred guineas out of it,
but there was so obviously no trust between him and the
accused. When the man was making his sworn statement
in the witness-box Adders had to keep on preventing him
from blurting out something which Adders was determined
should not be mentioned in Court. Of course, it all had to
do with that letter Carrabin had sworn he had taken out
of Larose’s pocket-book and which was damaging to the
reputation of some unknown woman.”
“ But do you think there really had been any such letter ? ”
asked the father.
The young barrister hesitated. “I don’t know any more
than Adders did and he himself was evidently very doubtful
about it. There was absolutely nothing but the prisoner’s
word to go upon that the letter had existed, and so Adders
wouldn’t let any supposed contents be broadcast. You
see, perhaps out of sheer malice Carrabin only might
have been wanting publicly to slander some woman
who, he was thinking, had given him away.” He shook
his head. “Adders is a gentleman and wouldn’t have
it.”
“But do you think,” asked the father, “that Larose
deliberately perjured himself when he denied there had
been any letter in his pocket-book? ”
The barrister shook his head. “Not exactly, but I think
if there had been any letter he got out of it by a quibble.
Adders may have slipped there and put the question to
him in a wrong way by asking, as he did, if Larose had
taken a letter from anyone which did not belong to him. If


the letter had really existed, then most likely Larose
hadn’t. Perhaps, he had found it or, perhaps even, it had
been given to him.”
“But what about the date when he declared he had lost
the pocket-book?” went on the father. “Was Larose
perjuring himself there?”
The barrister made a grimace. “I wouldn’t like to say
and no one but Larose will ever know. You see, it is well-
known to be one of Larose’s ideas that if a man is
undoubtedly guilty of a crime and a thoroughly bad lot
then, to make sure of his conviction and punishment,
nothing is an unrighteous thing.”
The father smiled. “He makes his own ten command-
ments, then?”
The son smiled back. “Exactly, and they’re not bad ones,
either.” He spoke impressively. “You must take in that
the other Carrabin brother, Joe, who had undoubtedly
been a double, and perhaps treble, murderer, had only a
few days before been declared not guilty on the capital
charges. On the face of it, it had appeared to be a gross
miscarriage of justice and old Harbank, the judge who had
presided at the trial, was known to have been very much
put out about it. It had come out afterwards that the
acquittal there had been all the work of one single jury-
man who had harangued and harangued and so absolutely
worn down the others that they had at last given in.” He
shrugged his shoulders. “So, it would have been only
natural if Larose had been very determined this other
Carrabin should have no loop-hole of escape.”
The father nodded. “And upon which particular
Tuesday the pocket-book had been lost by Larose was a
vital matter for the defence? ”
"Oh, yes, for if Carrabin could have proved he had
found a letter in Larose’s pocket-book when he stole it
in the hotel upon that afternoon of July the 29th, then it
made it possible to believe he had found the three £SO
bank-notes there, as well. But Larose, making out he had
lost the pocket-book a week earlier than that, knocked
all the bottom out of Carrabin’s story about stealing it
that particular afternoon at the hotel and made the whole


thing look a deliberate and lying invention upon Carrabin’s
part.”
“Well, how did Carrabin stand up to Peter Shearer’s
cross-examination?” asked the father.
“Admitted everything except that he’d murdered
Sampon!” smiled the barrister. “Admitted that he knew
Sampon was a Secret Service man and becoming very
dangerous to him! Admitted, even, that he had had
enquiries made as to Sampon’s ways and habits when at
home, but said there it had been done only to learn how best
to avoid him if they came to search his house! ”
“Well, I expect Peter Shearer didn’t ask him much about
that letter?”
The barrister threw out his hands. “Never mentioned it,
as if he knew he were treading upon dangerous ground!
And he never asked him a question, either, about his visit
to the hotel! Just ignored it, as if it were so obvious a
lie that it wasn’t worth referring to!”
“But couldn’t Carrabin bring that girl-clerk at the
reception desk of the hotel to prove that he had called
there that Tuesday afternoon?”
The barrister shook his head. “No, Carrabin’s luck was
out there. It was known the defence had been to the hotel,
but the girl couldn’t remember anything about it. She
admitted she had a bad memory, but she had no recollection
of having sent anyone up to Larose’s room.”
“Still, it was funny that Carrabin knew his number.”
“A bit, but then he might have got someone to go and
look down the visitor’s book afterwards, on the pretence
of wanting to find out if he’d got a friend staying there.
You see, the number of the room is always pencilled by the
visitor’s name.”
“And Lord Attleborough, how did he sum up?”
“Very fairly, but all the time as if he’d got a nasty taste
in his mouth. He warned the jury most strongly against
any prejudice because of the prisoner’s anti-social activities
and he stressed, every bit as emphatically as Adders had
done, that Carrabin was being tried for murder and nothing
else. Then he added that, if the jury believed the prisoner’s
story of how he had come into possession of the bank


notes, then the case for the Crown must fail, for his having
taken them off the body was the only absolute proof of his
having committed the crime.”
“And then?” asked the father.
His son seemed amused. “The jury were absent for just
twenty minutes and, as they filed into Court, everyone
realised their verdict was going to be one of guilty. Lord
Attleborough’s grim comment was that he thoroughly
agreed with it and. he put on the black cap.”
“How did Carrabin take it? ”
“He didn’t seem to mind a bit. He bowed ironically to
the judge and went down out of the dock with a smile
upon his face.”
“He’s evidently a hard case,” sighed the father.
“He was,” nodded the son. “He no longer is, as he was
hanged the day before yesterday.”
A few days after the trial Inspector Stone met Larose
in Regent Street and they stopped to speak. Larose was
smiling inscrutably.
“A-a-ah!” exclaimed the stout inspector with a heavy
frown, “I don’t wonder you’ve been keeping out of my way,
Gilbert.” He shook his finger admonishingly. “You made
a bad man of me, my lad! You made me a common
perjurer! ”
“Not at all! ” smiled Larose. “It was not I! It was your
bad memory. That was it.” He drew in a deep breath.
“Gad, but wasn’t I glad when I heard you’d said nothing
about that letter!”
“Yes,” nodded Stone sternly, “it would have put us
both in a nice hole, wouldn’t it? I know I should have
been dismissed the Force and lost my pension.”
“All in a good cause, Charlie,” laughed Larose. His face
sobered down. “We saved that poor woman from dreadful
unhappiness. She would never have been happy again if
that letter had come out.”
Stone sighed. “I suppose not,” he said. His face
brightened. “I saw her on Sunday iu Kew Gardens and
she looked as pretty as a peach.” He nodded. “Yes, and


then for the first time my conscience stopped pricking mo.
She was with her husband and they both looked so happy.”
“Did they see you?” asked Larose.
“Rather!” exclaimed Stone. “Bless your heart, they
came and took us into the pavilion for tea. I was with my
missus and two of the kids and everything was as nice and
friendly as possible. They would insist, too, upon driving
us back all the way to town afterwards.” His face beamed.
“But I say, Gilbert, isn’t she a pretty girl?” His voice
dropped to a whisper. “Here, I’ll tell you something.
My missis says ”
“You old wretch!” laughed Larose. “But come on. I’ll
stand you a drink. We’ll crack a small bottle together in
memory of old times.”
“Gilbert, Gilbert,” reproved Stone, but with his face
wreathed in a big smile, “so you’d make a drunkard of me,
as well as a perjurer!” He nodded. “Well, well, I’ll risk it.
Lead the way, lad, and let’s hear the cork go pop.” He
smacked his lips. “It’ll do us good and perhaps help us
both to forget what bad men we’ve been.”
THE END


THRILLERS BY ARTHUR CASK
THE HODSE ON THE FENS
But for the timely intervention of Inspector Stone,
Gilbert Larose, the dauntless investigator who has brought
many a dangerous criminal to justice, might himself have
been arrested for murder. Set in a dark, lonely, jealously-
guarded house deeply hidden in the Norfolk fens, this
splendid Larose story is a yam to send delicious cold shivers
down your spine. u net
THE VENGEANCE OF LAROSE
H. G. Wells says of this highly exciting yam: “By far
the best piece of story-telling Gask has done. It kept me
up to half past one last night.”
Sunday Mercury : " Mr. Gask knows all there is to know
of how to write a good mystery story, which also means
how to keep the reader’s nose buried in the book until
the last page.” net
THE FALL OF A DICTATOR
Aberdeen Press : “As topical and fascinating as its title
suggests. The story is original and makes excellent espionage
reading.”
Manchester Evening News : " One of the best constructed
dramas of the British Secret Service we have read for
some time.”
45-
o d. net
THE GRAVE-DIGGER OF MONKS ARDEN
Scotsman: “Not to be recommended as a bedside book
except for people with strong nerves. Larose’s adventures
are varied and exciting. It is a strange story, rich in
fhrilk and ‘creeps’, and makes excellent reading.”
Nottingham Journal: “A full-blooded, well-told tale
which has the merit of a new theme. Hardly the thing
for the squeamish.” net


THE NIGHT OF THE STORM
The three young mistresses of a beautiful old Priory in
Essex are faced suddenly with an accusation of murder.
Harassed by the unceasing police investigations the girls
appeal to Gilbert Larose. Another thrilling chapter in the
life of the famous detective.
3s. 0 d. net
THE MASTER SPY
This exciting international spy story will keep the
reader breathless from cover to cover.
East Anglian Times: “ Will be relished by those who
revel in thrills.”
3s. o d. net.
THE JEST OF LIFE
A pleasantly humorous novel. Mr. Cask’s touch is light
and sure, and his characterization shows a deep and
sympathetic insight into the frailties of human nature.
Truth: " A rich feast of riotous humour with a moral
to it.”
3s. 0 i. net.
THE HANGMAN’S KNOT
Gilbert Larose has met crime in a hundred guises but
never has he been called upon to elucidate a mystery so
completely baffling as in this first-class thriller.
Manchester Evening Chronicle: " An amazing amount of
cleverness and ingenuity .."
3s. o d. net.
THE DARK HIGHWAY
The story of a double crime, perpetrated at midnight
amongst the lonely sand-dunes of the Coorong.
Nottingham Journal: “ A thrilling story.”
3s. 0 d. net.
THRILLERS BY ARTHUR CASK


THRILLERS BY ARTHUR CASK
THE POISONED GOBLET
Tells of the efforts of a gang of men to kidnap the child
of Lady Ardave. Larose takes a hand and finds himself
faced with one of the most puzzling cases of his career.
Manchester Evening Chronicle: “ A pleasing piece of
work.”
3 s. o d. net.
THE HIDDEN DOOR
Gilbert Larose to the rescue once more—this time to the
Suffolk coast, where, in the space of a few weeks, four
residents of adjoining villages had mysteriously dis-
appeared. An extremely clever detective story.
3 s. o d. net.
RED PASTE MURDERS
For the eighth time in a fortnight, and for the fourth
day in succession, murder is committed in Adelaide. Who
is the mysterious assassin ? A novel of non-stop thrills
and excitement.
3s. 0 d. net.
GENTLEMEN OF CRIME
A millionaire was being forced to pay enormous sums of
money by a blackmailer. So he hired the most celebrated
detectives and crooks to help him. A magnificent story of
plot and counterplot.
3s. 6d. net.
, THE SHADOW OF LAROSE
Is murder, in exceptional cases, justifiable ? It was with
any thoughts but those of murder that Charles Edis began
his holiday, yet before many hours had passed—he had
committed murder.
Times Literary Supplement; “ Moves quickly and
excitingly.”
3 s. 0 d. net.


THRILLERS BY ARTHUR CASK
THE JUDGMENT OF LAROSE
A distinguished house-party was assembled at South-
down Court when suddenly the peace of this country house
was shattered by the discovery of a terrible crime. An
extremely ingenious and forceful yam.
3 s. 0 d. net.
THE SECRET OF THE SANDHILLS
Two little boys and a dog came upon a good pair of
shoes on the beach. The dog sniffed so much at the sand
close by, that the boys scraped away and came across
a man’s leg. An intriguing murder mystery.
3 s. 0 d. net.
THE SECRET OF THE GARDEN
Archibald Cups, a bank clerk, is sentenced to prison for
an embezzlement which he did not commit. He escapes
and hides in the house of the very judge who sentenced him.
Field :" Mr. Cask is a great hand at ingenious situations.”
2s. 0 d. net.
CLOUD THE SMITER
The story of a great criminal and his associates who for
long defied the police of Australia. But in the end one
word proved the undoing of the whole band.
The Times: " The Smiter is a capital creation.”
2s. 0 d. net.
THE LONELY HOUSE
Tells of a lonely house upon a lonely shore, and how
a master-criminal was in hiding there; how chance led a
great tracker of crime to the spot, and how his feet came
first to be set upon the trail.
Times Literary Supplement: “ Thrilling front beginning
to end.”
25. 0 d. net.


CRIME and DETECTION
Each 8s. 3d. net
DEATH COMES BY POST
by Jolyon Carr Author of “Freedom for Two"
One summer evening Ronald Campion walked out of
his house and disappeared. Two days later Connie Hansel,
walking home along the riverside, found his drowned body
among the shallows. “Suicide” said the coroner’s jury.
“Murder” said the village of Middle Wycherley. Known
and liked by everyone, who could have wished to drive
Campion to his death? An extremely clever detective story
by the talented author of Murder in the Dispensary.
JANE CARBERRY, DETECTIVE
by Beryl Symons Author of " Through a Glass Darkly ”
Evan in her wildest dreams Jane Carberry could not have
pictured herself as the instrument chosen by fate to bring a
gang of international jewel thieves to justice and a murderer
to execution. Yet by an incredible series of events she, a
wealthy fastidious society woman, became involved with
crime and criminals. In the opinion of our most experienced
readers none of Beryl Symons’s many popular novels has
better exemplified not only her remarkable versatility but
her marvellous gifts for story-telling.
DEATH IN MERMAID LANE
by Gret Lane Author of “ Death Visits the Summerhouse''
With the appearance of a nurse and child at the old inn in
Mermaid Lane fear, strange and deep, took possession of
Tree House opposite. In this atmosphere of brooding
terror, three mysterious and ruthless attempts were made
upon the life of the nurse. Then Kate Marsh, the author’s
famous heroine investigator, took a hand in the affair.
Unable to prevent two cunningly conceived murders, she
finally, by brilliant reasoning and resource, solved the
problem and, in the nick of time, saved a third victim from
a diabolically clever killer. A mystery thriller of unusual
merit.


THRILLS
Each Bs. 3d. net
TWISTED FACE DEFENDS HIS TITLE
by G. Davison Author of“ Twisted Face Strikes Again"
Twisted Face, the infamous hero of a hundred criminal
exploits, is openly challenged by his treacherous disciple,
Otto. In the black arts of crime Otto has little to learn from
his master though he hides his fiendish ingenuity behind a
mask of pleasant and disarming bonhomie. But he has
thrown down the gauntlet and Twisted Face has accepted
the challenge with diabolical satisfaction. A book which will
be warmly welcomed by G. Davison’s myriad admirers.
PLAYGIRL WANTED
by Roy Vickers Author of "The Enemy Within”
A high-spirited but unsophisticated girl, pursuing an
innocent social adventure, is caught in the wheels of a
political kidnapping. Wanted by the authorities and
threatened by the infamous Kamilov, she becomes the un-
willing pawn of two sides. Though ignorant of the technique
of intrigue, she acts on her own commonsense and kindly
initiative with astonishing results. A swift, light-hearted
Secret Service thriller, written with that verve and fresh-
ness that we have come to expect from Roy Vickers.
HER SECOND MURDER
by James Corbett Author of “The Ghost Train ”
Another breathless story of international crime and espion-
age forwhich James Corbett is so justly famed. Ataxi-driver
was urgently directed by his fare,a young and attractive girl,
to Vine Street Police Station. Upon arrival he found, to
his horrified amazement, that she had been strangled. But
there were two dues in her handbag: a green silk handker-
chief and a piece of paper. The story of a foul crime—a
crime that precipitated a grave national menace.
