

THE CASE FOR
THE DIGGERS
To Mr , Hughes, KC.C,
By W. B. DALLEY
“Smith’s Weekly "


Qua
E.
I
George Howe JJj
GAZETTE^RESSrKZjI~ig>
Jerguson Collection.
Rational Library"
Canberra
ncy]
ors
z.
in
al
supervision, thereby upholding the best
traditions of the old firm.
Our Mr. Alf. Byerlee, who has been 4 years
with A.I.F. abroad, will be pleased to
wait on you.
NOTE (ONLY) ADDRESS:
4th Floor, Ocean House
MOORE STREET


THE OCEAN’S OWN.
There are monuments in France and Egypt and
in most other places where the Diggers fell; there
are commemorative avenues in Australia by the
score, and each of the great cities is contemplating
some stately memorial; but as yet no word has been
spoken in memory of the lonely Diggers who died at
sea. An army of great Australians lines the ocean
tracks: men who went grimly towards their duty,
and others who turned Southwards with duty nobly
done, and all at the finish wrapped in canvas with a
heavy weight of firebars at their feet. For the
future the ocean roads are sacred places. They
have been consecrated by the sacrificial offerings of
the splendid dead. There are memorials which are
less perishable than tangible ones. The artistic in-
fallibility of the French has detected the fact. The
Fare Monceau contains the remains of the victims of
Paris in her agony. France has not relied on a
marble monument. She has ordained that all
wheeled traffic shall pass' this spot at walking pace.
We are a maritime people, and our breed is scat-
tered over the Seven Seas. At sunset on our ships
throughout the world the flag is struck. The Great
War has made imperative the adding of one other
ceremonial. As the flag comes down the Last Post
should be sounded. It may be that the boys below
will hear. If they do they will be happy. It will
be a message to them that we are carrying on the
Empire for which they died.
A
THE CASE FOR THE DIGGERS.


advertisement.
LEARN
BOYD SHORTHAND
—IN 30 DAYS
(IT PAYS).
Taught Personally or by Mail.
Accepted in Commonwealth and State
Exams.
SHORTHAND TOUCH TYPEWRITING
-AND-
BOOKKEEPING CLASSES
(Day and Night).
Boyd Shorthand (n.s.w.) Ltd.
Daking House, Rawson Place
SYDNEY
A. A. LAIRD, L.S.W.,
’Phone: City 1940. Managing Director.


A LESSON NEEDED.
Impostors in uniform, and the wearers of bogus
uniforms, are on the increase. Their object is to
batten on the charitably-disposed for cash or drinks,
or both. Up to the present the method has been to
fine them, but it is becoming more evident every day
that fines will not abate the nuisance. A sharp
sentence of imprisonment is the only remedy. The
magistrates do not seem to realise that these frauds
are making so good a living at the game that they
can afford to laugh at fines. They constitute a
plague which should be stamped out. They put the
taint of mendicancy upon the Army, and their opera-
tions have been seized upon as an excuse to re-intro-
duce the unspeakable G.M.P. With the latter gentry
come all kinds of inducements to breaches of the
Peace. It would be worth the whole of the Grown
Law Office to consider whether or not these mas-
queraders are indictable for obtaining money by
false pretences. The pretence is as to a present
f ac t__to wit, that they are soldiers— and it is false.
If a few of them were passed along to, say, Judge
Backhouse, at Quarter Sessions, the world of good
would be clone.
A DUTY UNFULFILLED.
Whilst all admit that the blinded Digger should
get first cut, the bad shrapnel, phosphorus, and other
cases must not be forgotten if permanent pensions
are fixed. Men are still receiving treatment, who
were wounded as much as three years ago. As a
result of the various poisons used by the Germans,
the wounds of these men open from time to time.
Therefore, they cannot enter occupations with any
degree of certainty. There are also bad cases of gas-
poisoning, which have reduced men to physical
wrecks. Surely these should be adequately recog-
nised. Of course, no monetary compensation is


ADVERTISEMENT.
Oh Digger! Where did you
get your Civvies ?
Why! Don't you know ?
At the
Peninsula Store
424 Pitt Street, City
For everything in Men's wear
and all the latest in War Ribbons
They'll do me for Mine


adequate to a man who has lost both physique and
health in his country's service, but at least the
country should ensure him decency and comfort.
No man can live in decency on the present miser-
able pittance. The Government has admitted that
the minimum living wage for a (healthy) male is
£3. Happily, the men who are totally and perman-
ently disabled are not numerous, and in a rich
Commonwealth such as ours the annual bill should
not be prohibitive.
THE INACCESSIBLE LANDS.
The only announcement which Mr. Hughes has
made from which anything really definite can be
drawn shows that in one matter which is vital to
Australia he sees eye to eye with us. We have said
that the lands of this continent must be taken
out of the hands of bureaucrats, and that
the disposition of them must be left to
the one great man we have. Mr. Hughes recently
said that in fifteen or twenty years from now our
population will exceed that of the Mother-Country,
This will only happen if the land policy advocated
by us is carried out. The New South Wales Gov-
ernment regards it as an achievement that 418 farms
will be ready for gazettal in a month from now.
How much further does it really get us? Even if
the rate were maintained, it would mean less' than
5,000 families settled in a year, less than 100,000
settled in 20 years, at the end of the longer period,
say, half to three-quarters of a million of people put
on the land. The cables said on Monday that Eng-
lish farmers, in steadily increasing numbers, are
considering the prospects of settling in Australia.
Those interested are men of considerable capital,
and the most useful class of immigrant. Numbers
of demobilised soldiers, who are farmers’ sons, are
also anxious to come here. It is of vital importance
to us and to the Empire that these kinsmen of ours
should not be lost to us, but under the present
system nothing else can happen.
B


ADVERTISEMENT.
£10 or
£10,000
NO MATTER!
We will furnish
your house
throughout and
make it— —
A REAL HOME
FOR CASH
OR
ON TERMS
Marcus Clark & Co., Ltd.
827-31 GEORGE STREET,
CENTRAL SQUARE, SYDNEY
(Opposite Railway)


THE CASE FOR
THE DIGGERS
TO
Mr. HUGHES, K.C.
By
W. B. DALLEY
“Smith’s Weekly ”
■ 1919
\V i i.M am Brooks &Co liiiviitki>
Printers and Publishers
17 Cnstlerertrh Street, Sydney


ADVERTISEMENT.
The Comfortable Spring Frame
muiim Motocucle
With. Side Car
FOR
! Power — Speed — Reliability
Everything’s JAKERLOO boys
This is the DINKUM OIL
Give it a DECKO on our front
or write in tor booklets
“CALLED TO THE COLORS”
BIDEN & ROBERTS
Sole Distributors , N.S.W.
PITT-HAY STREETS, SYDNEY


CONTENTS.
Page.
1. Foreword . . . . . . _ _ 5
2. Stand Together . . . . . . . . 10
3. No Politics . . . , . . . . , . 43
4. The Fathers . . . . . . . . . . IT
5. Corporal Williams . . . . . . . . 21
6. The Outcasts . . . . . . . 27
7. The Children . . ... . . . . 32
8. The Hun .. .. .. . . .. 30
9. The Court . . .. . . . . . . 40
10. Army Administration .. . . . . 44
11. The Promised Land . . . . .. ■ 48
12. Land Repatriation , . ~ .. . . 51
13. The Repatriated .. .. . . . . 57
14. The Doctors . . ~ .. .. .. 00
15. The Race . . ~ .. .. . . 04
16. The Pressing Need ... .. .. 09




THE FOREWORD.
“But for the men who fought, Australia to-day
would be in chains. To these men we owe
everything,”— The Prime Minister.
Commenting on the arrival of Mr. Hughes, one
of the newspapers observed that an Australian,
whether a soldier or a statesman, after a prolonged
absence, is apt to get a false perspective.
We have never doubted that Mr. Hughes will
see to it that the soldier gets his rights, but the win-
ning of them will involve a bitter fight.
We pointed out some weeks ago that, now that
the flags have been duly waved, the cheers given,
and the crackers let off, it will be found there will be
a widespread tendency to drop the subject. The
soldier will be expected to “behave like a gentle-
man” and efface himself,
Mr. Hughes finds his brief ready for delivery
in this matter. Week by week we have patiently
built up the soldier’s case. We have presented all
the most important aspects of the problem, and
along with each aspect we have given the solution.
Four of these problems in particular are so im-
portant that they stand in a class by themselves.
They relate to the cases of the blinded men, the
totally incapacitated men, the education of the chil-
dren of the dead, and the cases of those Diggers
who have been convicted by Courts-Martial.
Hereunder we briefly outline to the Prime Min-
ister the nature of the case we make for these and
certain others.
We say that all such blinded and totally inca-
pacitated soldiers as like to ask for it should receive


such a pension as will guarantee the comforts of
life.
There are two ways of looking at this proposi-
tion, one being the financial and the other the moral.
Happily there are less than one hundred blinded
Diggers, and there are only one hundred and eight
who are totally incapacitated. Even if all claimed
this pension—-which is improbable —the cost to the
country would amount to nothing overwhelming.
We are asking this rich Commonwealth to do
no more than a private citizen of France has done.
In order to help the birthrate of that country, accord,
ing to a cable, Mons. Cognac has settled a sum which
produces £90,000 per annum. Out of it, incomes of
£I,OOO per annum are to be settled on ninety poor
families consisting of not less than nine children
each. It is probable that the reference to Mons.
Cognac is a mistake, and that the reference as
really to the Department or County. But even so,
fabulously wealthy Australia should do at least
as much in the aggregate as a French Province.
In so far as the moral obligation is concerned,
these Diggers have given all to keep our people
free. For them the war will never be over. They
are pensioned at 30/- per week—half the amount
which a Court has specified as the minimum living
wage for a male.
Another of our weightiest obligations is the edu-
cation of the children of the dead. If there is
anything in the doctrine of heredity the, breed of
these children is the best in Australia. Their fathers,
had they lived, were of the type which puts its
impress on the world. Carving out careers for them-
selves, they would have established their children.
These would have passed through schools and uni-
versities, and they would have emerged at the end
as products commensurate with the greatness of
their breeding. As it is they will be Nothing.
The fourth outstandng principle for which we
contend is this; In all cases where Diggers have


been convicted before Courts-Martial of purely mili-
tary offences, there must be a quashing of the con-
viction, and a deletion of the record; and in the
rare cases where there have been convictions in res-
pect of Common-Law felonies and misdemeanours
there should be a re-trial before a civil judge.
Many weeks ago we pointed out the necessity
for a Soldiers’ Court, to deal with this and other
matters. We indicated the structure of this Court,
the scope and nature of its civil and criminal juris-
diction, and we said that its first President should be
Judge Brissenden.
Unless all of these convictions are quashed and
the records of them deleted from the national arch-
ives, there are thousands of good Australians whose
names will go down to posterity besmirched. We
have made, and proved, the statement, that in so
far as Australia is concerned, not one military court
has sat during the whole of this war which was com-
petent to conduct a legal proceeding. The myriad
injuctices which have been wrought by these fatu-
ous tribunals must be set right.
There is one matter which requires the
attention of Mr. Hughes before it is too late. He
will find that the military administration of the Com-
monwealth is in the hands of either Home-Service
people or non-service people, and that those splen-
did leaders in the field whom it cost the country
five years of war and millions of pounds to train are
being driven back into civil life and lost to us. They
arc the only men who can create and lead the Army
which Australia requires, and the big Diggers look
to the little one to stop this wastage.
Before any real progress can be made with the
vital matter of land settlement an alteration in the
Constitution will be required. We have pointed out
that, although we have a continent the size of
Europe, access to it is barred by the spectre of
Departmentalism, and that in the absence of a man
c


who is ruthless both in action and imagination it
will continue to be barred.
The problem is not one to be handled by bu-
reaus and the bureaucrats. Their hopelessly limit eu
purview, their worship of form as something sacro-
sanct, are the natural and necessary result of lives
lived in the atmosphere of officialdom.
The lands of this great continent must be
removed from their hesitant and incompetent con-
trol, and the disposition of them must be left to the
one great man we have.
And there is one more matter in respect of
which the Diggers look to their leader. He spoke
at Perth as follows;—“I do not know whether _it
will be possible for Germany ever to strike again,
but she will never strike as she did in 1914.” Gen
many, as Mr, Hughes will rapidly find, is striking
now, and striking hard at that. Our shops and
warehouses, v/hich are stacked with ‘‘American
goods, are the proof of it. We have warned the
Commonwealth of Germany’s plan. It is an insidi-
ous and far-sighted one. With the design of depriv-
ing England of the leadership of the world, she will
place all her resources unreservedly at the disposal
of America. Arrangements are already afoot for
bringing the “American” goods of the future in
“American” steamers. It must be prevented.
If England loses her supremacy as the world’s
sea-carrier we all go under. America for the mo-
ment would be supreme, but it would be only for a
moment. Germany knows that she herself is racially
pure, and that America is not. In the result, Amer-
ica in her turn would go under before Germany, and
Germany after all would dominate the world.
To forbid the entry of American ships and
goods would not be compatible with international
courtesy. But there is a method of arriving at the
same result which is compatible An all-round ad
valorem tariff of, say 50 per cent., should be put on
all goods which are shipped into the Commonwealth,


this to include British goods. This would be a spe-
cial all-round duty which would be super-imposed
upon any tariff at present in force. Then have a
remission of 45 per cent, of the same in respect of
British goods, on condition that they are carried in
British bottoms.
Such is a sketchy outline of the more important
features of the brief which we hereby deliver to
Mr, Hughes. It is a bigger case, and it has got
more fight in it, than any that he is ever likely to
handle. For ourselves, we would have chosen no
other counsel to present it. .


STAND TOGETHER.
Unless the soldiers watch it, they will he div ided
up. The process of disintegration has already begun.
The popular attitude towards the returned
man’s badge is symptomatic of it. It is already fairly
well established that if a man wants a job he will be
more likely to get it If he removes his badge.
A famous soldier, who is a commercial travel-
ler in private life, was talking to us the other day.
He gave it as his experience that in many cases
buyers would do no business when his badge was
on, though the same men were all smiles when the
badge was off.
It is an unpleasant fact, and even a discreditable
one, but nothing is to be gained by blinking it.
Once a war has finished no British community
has ever had much time for the soldiers who fought
in it. The rapturous promises and'tumultuous ap-
plause with which all campaigns open, are balanced
by the silent indifference with which they close.
And that moment is already with us, although not
much more than half of the Army is back.
Although the people’s Army is disbanding, for
many collective purposes it must continue to be
the Army for years to come. Many of its numbers
are in the happy position of wanting nothing from
the Military, or from the State or anybody else.
But many more are not. Perhaps the most marked
characteristic of the Anzacs was their spirit of
mateship, and their readiness at all moments to
help lame dogs over stiles. Now is the moment
for that spirit to come into play, and in that spirit
all should concentrate in righting comrades who
are being wronged, and helping those who arc
being put upon.


They will waste their time if they look to Hie
politicians. If they wish for the proof of that they
have only to contrast the promises with which these
people opened the war by ' the performance with
which they close it. Party politics will profit them
nothing. All that they will ever get from _ the
Nationalist will come to them without taking sides.
And it is unthinkable that the men who have fought
for Australia should fall in with the leaderless
horde of aliens, pacifists and defeatists which for
the moment is called the Australian Labour Party.
Therefore, it is only by a unification on cer-
tain special aspects of the A.I.P ease, and by treat-
ing those aspects as entirely distinct from politics,
that results will come. The Williams ease stands for
one such aspect. It is the common case of the inno-
cent soldier who is tried by an unjust and incom-
petent Court, and convicted. There is probably
no member of the A.I.P. who does not know of at
least one ease, in regard to which he believes, rightly
or wrongly, that the same things happened.
These victims—and they are numerous—-are
amongst those whom it is the Army’s duty not only
to free from gaol, but to free from stain. It was our
claim that the record of Williams’ conviction should
he deleted from the Records. We made that claim,
as it happens, on various grounds, but if it had
stood alone as a ground, we should have made it
with confidence, on the sole ground that the Court
which tried him was untrained in the conduct of
legal proceedings. By the success of our claim we
have established the right to make it in other cases,
and shall duly proceed to do so. By that means we
shall erase an infamous stain from the name of
many a good Australian who is unjustly branded.
If, as is pointed to by the facts referred to at the
beginning of this chapter, the A.I.P. tends to dis-
integrate, it will be powerless to help forward such
a cause. But if it holds together In a unification
on causes such as this, it must prevail.


And there are many others, though happily not
involving such grave consequences. The dramatic
resignation of Major Evans from the Housing Com-
mission draws attention to the Repatriation harle-
quinade. It is a familar story. Here it is according
to the Major: “The objects of the scheme were an-
nounced in the newspapers. Applications from sol-
diers poured in. Every application has been hung
up. Every applicant has been utterly disappointed.
We have done nothing except tell these people to
‘wait’ or ‘call again.’ In most cases it was pathetic,
in many it was tragic.” The incredible Department
in which this was occurring has ear-marked fifty
million pounds of public money for its purposes. It
has had since December last in which to organise
itself. The work which it is purporting to do is.
after all, only the work of an ordinary building soci-
ety. Yet, with all the resources of the Commonwealth
behind it, only chaos is evolved. And nothing else
ever will be evolved, unless a unified A.I.F. puts in
a peremptory claim for the installation of a busi-
ness man.
Assuming that such a unification could be
brought about, there are a hundred other matters
which could be presented to the general body by
its governing Council. And all of these matters are
ones which involve the interests of a distinct class
in the A.I.F. To mention only a few: There is
the case of the blinded soldiers which has hardly
had a hearing at all. There is the case of the miser-
able pensions, which are doled out to the totally
incapacitated. There are the numerous subtle de-
vices for diverting those Repatriation moneys, which
are the property of the soldier, into other channels.
There is the Pay scandal, the Hospital-Red-Tapeism
scandal, and many others of a major sort, and there
are others which are minor. On all of them a uni-
fied amd non-political A.I.F. could speak with an
authoritative voice.


NO POLITICS.
Now that the flags have been duly waved, the
cheers given and the crackers let off, it will be
found that there will be a widespread tendency to
drop the subject. The soldier will be expected to
behave like a gentleman and efface himslf.
Many factors will contribute to this end. Those
who have exploited him will desire it. So will those
who have wronged and are wronging him. Those
who were prepared to leave him to his fate, and on
Avhom his presence constitutes an ever-present re-
flection, will be as anxious to get rid of him as are
those who are sick of the sight of him. and the
numbers of others who regard him as merely un-
fashionable. But the element above ail others which
will hope to have seen the last of him as a homo-
geneous force in our National life, is that element
of hybrid racialism which is raising its ugly head
throughout the Commonwealth.
There is no Peace nor anything resembling it.
There is not a leading mind in Australia but sees
eye to eye with us on the point. The Governor-
General warns us against our dangerous state of
insincere complacency, and Sir Edmund Barton that
we can bring our land nothing but ruin, unless we
cast out the present devil of discord.
This “ casting out” is work for the A.I.F. Upon
it the Array can unify, for it involves no question
of Party polities, but certain great principles, on
which all are agreed. At the root of them all lies
the ideal of a White and British Australia. We
must not only de-Germanise, but completely de-alien-
ise ourselves. The task is not an impossible one.
Ninety-seven per cent, of the population of this eon


tineul is of pure British blood. When the last group
of aliens has left these shores, it will be found that
the devil of discord has gone with them.
The fact that a proposition is a startling one
is no more of a warranty in itself for discarding it,
than it would have been a warranty for discarding
like propositions when the war broke out. Sir
Samuel Griffith is our greatest intellect. He is im-
partial, judicial, detached. He says that the whole
basis of society in Australia is threatened, and he
expresses his conviction that the structure of soci-
ety will have to be radically reorganised.
If we fail to act, and disaster results, as it will,
we will not even have the excuse that we were not
forewarned. Germany is out once more to wreck
the Empire. She is as frank about it as she was in
the' days which preceded the war, and we once
more are as ludicrously incredulous.
“Vor warts” is the most authoritative exponent
of German opinion. Before the terms of Peace had
even been signed, the paper said that the Germans
must instantly begin combating them, employing
every intellectual and moral weapon, assisted by
the international labour movement. The document
we rely on is only a scrap of paper.
The promise of “Vor warts” is already being
made good. The German is already hard at his
beaver-like work. Prom the wreckage of war he
has salvaged great gold reserves. An English states-
man tells ns of the use to which these are being
put. He says that the Germans are joining in
a campaign in America, with the object of splitting
the Anglo-Saxon Hegemony. And into this cam-
paign, with remarkable ingenuity, they have man-
aged to introduce a sectarian issue.
The same thing is happening in Australia. An
individual named Walsh, who is not an Australian,
lias suddenly appeared as the Saviour of Austra-
lian democracy. He makes no bones whatever
about the fact that he, too, has a lien on these funds.


‘/From certain sources” in Germany he “can get
assistance.”
Statistics show that the German inhabitants of
America have always been pre-eminent amongst the
rest in crimes of violence. It is, therefore, in strict
accordance with Germanism that its representatives
here should recommend such methods. Walsh says
that Melbourne must be made unsafe after night-
fall. In plain terms, he incites to felony.
And in all sorts of more obscure ways the Ger-
man is already burrowing in our midst. Evidences
of his money turn up in the most unexpected quar-
ters. The Adelaide “Advertiser” is supposed to be
a staid and respectable journal. It recently pub-
lished an advertisement from a “Farmer, 36, like
correspond with Australian German girl, aged 23
to 30.”
The brood which would result from this union
would probably be numerous. Beyond doubt it
would be nurtured in the theories of “Yorwarts.”
The German can no more assimilate to us than
we can to him. Every Australian.who has lived in
certain districts knows it, and he knows that the
most virulently anti-British of all are those Ger-
mans who have been born in Australia. By the time
Germany is ready to strike once more, the fruits of
the “Advertiser’s” advertisement may have reached
maturity.
The Germans in Australia have noted their
mistakes in this war. They will not repeat them in
the next. If we are such fools as to allow them to
remain in our midst, they will be more of a danger
than ever.
There can be no question that the Soldiers’ Con-
gress at Adelaide did the right thing by the Com-
monwealth and the Empire, when it carried its mo-
tion calling upon both Federal and State Govern-
ments “to compulsorily acquire all land belonging
to German and other enemy disloyalists. ”
D


It is an ideal example of the class of business
which a united A.I.F. could effectively handle. U
involves one of those great elementary principles
which we refer to at the beginning of this chapter.
Far above party politics, it is an issue on which
the Army would never split. It is safe to say that
in whatever foreign country he served, there is no
Australian soldier who has returned, who has not
got a profound conviction that the only stock for
this country is British stock.
There are many other great national issues on
which the Army can speak as one. One of them
should be a stern ultimatum to all politicians and
sundry that there is to be no political interference
with the Navy. Another should be a claim for a
rigid deliminatiou of the liabilities of the Australian
Army Reserve.
And there are many other pure principles which
it is the Army’s duty, and also its privilege, to es-
tablish for all time. But we have repeatedly pointed
out that these things will never be achieved under
the present system of unrelated or disconnected
Leagues, There must be as real a unification for
this purpose as there was for a war. For the struc-
tural alterations which are required, to bring it
about, the men must be found. The proper men to
lay the foundations of the structure are the Fathers
of the Army. .


THE FATHERS.
The problems of Peace are on us with a ven-
geance. We are as unprepared to meet them as we
were to meet the Germans.
To sustain us against the Germans we had the
Navy. To sustain us now we have only an intan-
gible thing, but it may be made just as infallible.
If the nation’s resolve to do its duty by those
who saved it is an earnest one, Australia will work
out her own salvation. But if it is not, then we
will, all of us, go under.
A placid reliance on Governments will not save
us. It is a task which is too big for any Govern-
ment. The people’s leaders are already admitting
it.
For Australia Mr. Watt and Mr. Hughes, for
England men like Lloyd George and Bonar Law, all
are flying signals of distress, as they contemplate the
gigantic task ahead. And we know that all of these
are prescient men, for they warned us years ago that
this would be so.
Where then is this extra-Governmental help to
come from? Its source is clearly indicated. The
Army which saved the country once must do it
again. But this time the Army will do it indirectly.
The work is work for the Fathers of the Army.
The men who gave their sons to the country’s ser-
vice must now give to the same the best of their
brains. An A.T.F. unified for the purpose of repat-
riating itself, and acting under the guidance of its
natural mentors, will solve the problem.
Take the ease of the State of New South Wales
It has the largest population, but no Fathers’
League. As in every other part of the Empire, the


leading men in all walks of life sent sons to the War.
Amongst others, the man who is the proper and na-
tural head of any great non-political public move-
ment —the State Chief Justice. And Sir William
Cullen could properly take the Presidency of such
a League, for its watchword first and last must be
“no politics.”
If the Army—as an Army —touches politics, its
possibilities of helping itself are finished. The great
bulk of our Members of Parliament are well-mean-
ing men, but as a body they are daunted by the
problems they have to face. They will welcome
the soldiers for two very natural reasons. The ob-
vious one is the support in votes these will bring.
The other reason is at once more obscure and
more powerful. With the Army in politics, the Go-
vernment will be out of all difficulty. The army
would get rid of itself by a process of disintegration.
The usual parties would form and would fight each
other. On any issue that could conceivably arise,
leaders would crack the whip and their henchmen
would dance. It is the easy way out, and politicians
not being necessarily supermen, can hardly be blam-
ed for preferring it.
The concentrations in relation to the A.I.F. must
be two, and they must be concentrations on purely
domestic questions, and each individual must be left
to himself for his politics. The bitter need for co-
hesion is already widespread in England. Sir Doug-
las Haig quotes the case of “a demobilised officer
who had won the Y.C., D. 5.0., and M. 0.,” who
is “trudging the London streets in search of work.”
Such happenings must be averted in the streets of
Melbourne and Sydney.
The two concentrations required, therefore, are
first of the men and next of the Fathers. The Re-
turned Sailors and Soldiers' Imperial League is a
good basis to build on so far as the men are con-
cerned. But its possibilities are not even in embryo


as. yet. It could have a Cabinet or Executive com-
posed of some of the best brains in Australia —brains
a 1 ove all which have been tested and proved for ad-
ministrative quality. Such a Cabinet would adopt
the matured views of the Fathers’ Executive in re-
lation to given matters, and would press these views
on the Nation’s Government. The Government
would not only act, but in whatever direction it act-
ed it would do so wisely, for its action would be
taken on the advice of specialists.
The need of special advice becomes more urgent
with every fresh batch of men that reaches these
shores. The other day we related the case of a
youth of twenty who was apprenticed by the Repat-
riation Department to a master-tailor. The boy was
to be given six months’ training, and at the end of
that time was required to be sixty per cent, efficient.
A specialist in tailoring could have told the Govern-
ment that the thing required was impossible. But
no machinery was available to enable the specialist
to impress this fact.
If a Fathers’ League were formed, as has been
here indicated, it would embrace the picked specia-
lists of the State, from the Chief Justice downwards.
There would be experts in medicine, finance, land
settlement, sheep, dairying, hogs, cattle, mercan-
tile matters, shipping, and every other form of
national activity, and the advice of every one of
these experts would be at the disposal of the
Government.
They would relieve the Government of a respon-
sibility which is demonstratably too great for it to
carry:—of a burden so crushing that it may yet bring
both Government and Country to the ground.
There are many other factors which make this
League a matter both of need and of propriety. The
need of it we have persistently indicated. It is not
to be supposed that-the right men would fail to find
a way out —provided that the right men could be


found. Specialists exist who could alleviate all these
tragedies —the tragedies of the consumptive eases,
of the blinded men, the legless ones, the gassed and
the shell-shocked.
The advice of business men would yield us an
efficient pay department, of organisers an efficient
pensions and hospitals administration, and from
others we would get the proper solution of the thou-
sand different problems which confront us.
However much we may rail at Senator Millen, it
will get us no further if we have set him a task
which it is impossible for any single individual to
perform. The settling of the Army is no less of a
task than was the raising of it. Unless we are to
have a permanent body of some hundreds of thou-
sands of wronged fellow-citizens in our midst it is
a task which will have to be tackled.
It can be tackled, and successfully. At the ap-
propriate moment the best men in the community
applied themselves to make a success of Recruiting.
As the best brains applied themselves to get the
men, so must they now be applied to settling them.


CORPORAL WILLIAMS.
Since we have not done with War —perhaps
not even with this War —it is important that Aus-
tralia should take what profit she can from the
knowledge which has been gained during the last
five years. Tens of thousands of Diggers have
returned since the Williams ease was concluded.
Consequently, they know nothing about the issues
which were involved. They do not know that whilst
they were fighting in the Field, a military caste was
establishing itself in this country: that it flourished
exceedingly as the years went on: and that in the
end it had reached such a pitch of arrogance that
it publicly proclaimed that its authority was superior
to the authority of the civil Courts, and that its
agents were at liberty to commit felonies and mis-
demeanours and to be immune from punishment in
respect thereof. Since all the wars that Australia
ever has been, or ever will be in, have been, and
will continue to be, citizen’s wars, we must see
to it that no such state of affairs is ever allowed
to arise again. Now is the time to take the neces-
sary steps.
In Sydney, as in other towns and States of
the Commonwealth, a reign of terror had been estab-
lished by the Garrison Military Police. One of the
many victims of it was Corporal Williams, a re-
turned man and a Military Medallist. His case
was as follows: On an afternoon in December last
he was walking along George-street, when he was
stopped by two G.M.P. named Ryan and Kennedy,
who demanded his pass. Neither Ryan nor Ken-
nedy had been to the War. Williams started to
look for his pass. It was on him, but for the


moment he could not find it. While he was search-
ing for it, Ryan remarked: “1 see he’s got a Mili-
tary Medal. I wonder where he got it.” Kennedy
said: “Oh! I suppose it came up with the rations.”
Williams said: “It may have, but don’t forget I’ve
fought and bled for the likes of you.” Thereupon
both men grabbed Williams, and Kennedy stunned
him with a baton. Kennedy is a powerful man—
a blacksmith’s fettler in civil life, and Williams has
lost the use of one hand in the war. What the on-
lookers thought of the merits of the ease was in-
dicated by the G.M.P., who said, “The crowd was
very wild and howling.”
This carries the story up to the moment when
Williams was knocked senseless. Constable Neary,
a member of the Civil Police, carries it forward.
He says, “I was on duty near the spot. On the
corner I saw a crowd of people. They were hooting,
jeering and making a demonstration, and I went
over to see what the cause of the trouble was. 1
saw Ryan with handcuffs, about to handcuff Wil-
liams, and I saw Kennedy with a baton in his hand.
The crowd was very restive and excited. Blood was
spouting from Williams’ forehead over the right eye.
I told Ryan to put away the handcuffs,, and I told
Kennedy to put away the baton. Williams was in
a dazed condition and told me that he had been
struck with a baton, and asked me to protect him.
Williams said to me, ‘What is the charge? I have
done nothing. I have got a pass in my pocket.’
The G.M.P. asked me to take him in charge. I said,
T have got nothing against him. Now that you
have struck him, you will have to keep him.’ Wil-
liams asked me for protection, I said, ‘Alright!
I’ll go with you to the Police Station. Go quietly
and I’ll see that you are not further assaulted.’ I
accompanied the party to Sydney Central.”
At this stage Williams resumes the story. He
says that “on arrival there, I was searched by the
G.M.P.—-Neary and other civil police being present


—everything was taken from me and I was locked
in the yard. They charged me with absence with-
out leave and assault. At about 9 p.m. I was re-
moved by some of the G-.M.P. to Darlinghurst, and
put in a cell. Before being taken to Darlinghurst
I found my pass. I spent the night in the cell, and
was brought in the morning before Major Bowie
Wilson, who remanded me for Court-Martial.”
In due course he was tried on charges of (1)
not wearing blue arm-bands, and (2) striking a
G-.M.P. At the trial the character of Williams was
given on oath by his Company Commander. He said
that he could not speak too highly of him, that he
was always the first to volunteer for any dangerous
work; that he was a non-drinker, non-smoker, and
quiet and inoffensive. His record was spotless.
Williams denied both charges, and was acquitted
on the first and convicted on the second.
The GI.M.P. swore positively that Williams had
no blue arm-bands on, Williams produced over-
whelming evidence to show that he had. The Mili-
tary Police story was that he had none on when he
was put in the cells, but they admitted that he had
them on when he was let out. At a later stage it
urns discovered that the bands had been put on by a
sewing machine. Of course the Court acquitted.
On the second charge, which was supported by the
same C.M.P. (and by them only), and denied by
Williams and other witnesses, the Court-Martial
ignored the rule that doubt must go in favour of
the accused, and accepted on charge (2) the wit-
nesses whom it had discredited and rejected on
charge (1), and so convicted.
At this stage, therefore, the position was as
follows: The spotless reputation of a brave soldier
had been blasted by the monstrous judgment of an
incompetent Court, which had acted on the perjured
testimony of two stay-at-homes. There was no
redress.
E


Had such a conviction occurred before a Civil
Court, there could, and would, have been an appeal.
From the finding of a Court-Martial there is no
appeal. Unless Courts-Martial are to be abolished
altogether—which is what should happen—this state
of the law requires amendment. Prom a Military
Court, as from any other, there should be an oppor-
tunity of setting right ‘‘any substantial miscar-
riage of justice.”
There was only one method by which Williams
could re-establish his good name in the world, and
he adopted it. He commenced a prosecution of
Ryan and Kennedy in the Civil Courts, and under
the Crimes Act. In due course the trial began at
Sydney Central Police Court. The legal representa-
tive of the Defence Department appeared for the
defence, and laid it down that the Civil Courts
have no right to interfere in respect of crimes com-
mitted by soldiers inter se. In support of this con-
tention he cited the decision in a ease called Marks
v. Frogley —an English case —and also the decision
of Judge Fitzhardinge in a local case. The Court
submitted to the contention and declined jurisdic-
tion. Williams, who had been fighting the Depart-
ment with his own slender resources, ran out of
money, and there, but for our intervention, the
matter would have dropped.
It was obvious, as we said at the time, that
if this decision was allowed to stand, the tens of
thousands of Expeditionaries yet to return would
fall before that very Prussianism which they had
been fighting for four years to destroy. On further
consideration of the matter, we formed the follow-
ing conclusions: That the Magistrate at Sydney
Central Police Court was wrong in his law. That
the decision in Marks v. Frogley was irrelevant to
the issue. That Judge Fitzhardinge was wrong in
his law. That Kennedy was amenable to the civil
power. Finally, that we would fight the point up
to the Privy Council if necessary, and that if that


tribunal decided against us, we would launch a cam-
paign to have the law altered.
It was in these circumstances that “Smith’s
Wieekly” placed its financial resources at the dis-
posal of Williams, Kennedy was charged once more
with an offence under the Crimes Act. At the
Police Court the law was most ably argued by the
late Mr. George Martin, and the accused was com-
mitted to take his trial before a jury. In due course
he was tried, and was awarded a sentence of six
months ’ imprisonment.
The principle which was vindicated by the con-
viction of Kennedy is one of the most important
that has ever been established in Australia. It
nipped the insolent pretention that the military may
commit felonies and misdemeanours and remain
immune. It confirmed the view which we have held
throughout; that those who are guilty of breaches
of the King's Peace will be punished, whatever their,
status, in the King’s Courts. It gave the quietus to
the attempt to impose martial law on a British com-
munity. It confirms Dicey, who Is our greatest
authority on English systems of Government. In
the words of Dicey, “Martial or Military law, or
any supersession of the ordinary law of the land,
does not exist, and never has existed, in British
communities.” The temporary government of a
country, or parts of it, by means of military tri-
bunals, is unknown to the law of England. In the
original proceedings as taken by Williams it was
argued against him that we were at war. We have
denied throughout that we are, or ever have been,
at war, in so far as such purposes are concerned.
And again in support of that wc quoted Dicey, who
says that “at a time and place when the ordinary
civil courts are open, and freely and fully exercise
their ordinary jurisdiction, there exists, presumably,
a state of peace, and where there is peace there
cannot be Martial law.” For so long as the Navy
continues to rules the seas of the world, no sane


Briton will wish for any emendation of Dicey s
rule. That being so, the proper course is to wipe
Courts-Martial off the Statute Book.
The fight for justice in the Williams case was
long and bitter—as one incident of it, we were pro-
secuted—and the conviction of Kennedy was not
the end of it, Williams had still his character to get
back. We, therefore, claimed the quashing of his
conviction and its deletion from the records. Once
more the cumbrous process began of securing elemen-
tary justice for the Army. Every attempt was
made to evade this obvious and equitable act of
reparation. But in the end we prevailed, and Wil-
liams received a communication from the Defence
Department, informing him that his conviction was
quashed and that he was to be relieved of all the
consequences of his trial.
The case of Corporal Williams was not of a
rare sort. It was of an every-day sort, at the time
of its occurrence. Williams as an individual was
relatively unimportant, but as the visible symbol
of many and widespread miscarriages of justice he
stood for nothing less than a Cause. The wrong
that has been righted in his case will have to be
righted in others. Not one Military Court has sat
during the whole of this War which was competent
to conduct a legal proceeding. The convictions of
every one of them, in so far as military offences
are concerned, will have to be quashed. Only thus
will justice be done to many a fine citizen who has
passed through Hell, that our people might be free.


THE OUTCASTS.
“Ttoe prisoners detrained at Sydney Central Station in the
presence of a large and curious crowd. All had been sentenced
to long terms by Courts-Martial, and all were manapled. Some
looked mere boys, and these seemed to feel their position
keenly. Several wore wound-stripes and long-service chev-
rons.”—News Item.
When War broke out and Danger loomed you didn't pick and choose.
You gladly took the blackguard with the Saint :
And all were starred as heroes who had lives to give and lose;
But now the Peril’s past you put a taint
On him who went through Hell for you I Is he the man to_ shun —
The soldier with the wound-stripe, or the stay-at-home with nonet
He failed —just once in Bar’s stern test, as thousands more have
failed;
God knows he paid full measure for his sin.
And now you make him pay again . . . and yet, though thus assailed,
He holds one prize his critics cannot win—
Which would a Woman rather own. as husband, brother, son? 1
The trier with the wound stripe, or the smug young cub with none ?
He heard the call for help and went ! Tom stayed ! You cannot know
The thousand things that brought about his fall.
Because he Jell you put the outlaw’s brand upon his brow
So that he may be damned beyond recall !
Which is the better citizen, when all is said and done—
The Sinner with the wound-stripe, or the Pharisee with nonet
There are five main facts which it is the public’s
duty to grasp in relation to the men who have been
sentenced by Courts-Martial.
It must realise who these men are; "Why it was
that they were put in prison: The nature of the
authority which put them there: The relation of the
punishments to the crimes charged: And, finally,
the conduct of their gaolers.
When the electorate has discharged this duty,
and grasped these facts in all their aspects, there
will he a public uproar which no Government will
dare to withstand.
With the very rare exception of a few pro-
fessional criminals, the bulk of whom never got
further than England, these men belonged to the
flower of Australia,


The civilian mind has only the slightest con-
ception of what the military mind calls a “crime.’
Some wild and high-spirited boy has lost control
for 1 p mompnt and struck a superior. It has cost
him five years.
Or a reckless one, lured, maybe, by a girl, has
gone A.W.L. It has cost him fifteen.
Or, again ! About the middle of 1917 we were
chatting with the Court-Martial officer of one of the
Divisions. Said the officer: “Yesterday I was try-
ing capital cases. Desertion charges. Men who
had refused to go into the line, or else had_ walked
out of the line. Magnificent men, the pick and
flower of Australia, who had been in every stunt
since the Landing. But they were absolutely worn
out and fed-up, and didn’t care what happened. We
sentenced them all to death.”
To form the Court to try these men there would
have been a sort of hide-and-seek through the Divi-
sion for officers. The ones detailed in orders might
have turned up, or they might have been in the line
through missing the orders, or they might have been
just coming out of the line, more or less mentally
and physically exhausted.
It is improbable that any of them had any legal
training. The Army never seemed to want men
with legal training. It will be remembered thal
Judge Brissenden left these shores without a com-
mission. A fair example of a three-officer Court on
the Western Front would consist of a stock-and-
station agent, a civil servant, and a butter-grader.
It is a startling statement, but a meticulously
exact one, that, so far as the Australian Army is
concerned, not a solitary court-martial has been con-
stituted during the war which was competent to
conduct a legal proceeding.
The reason is this: A Court-Martial consists
of at least three members. A court here or there
might have included a member of the Bar, but never


three such members. In any event there were very
few barristers to draw upon.
Of the New South Wales Bar, a negligible
number enlisted. And the few who did were rarely
availed of for such purposes. It may well he that
this was of policy and prepense. Such men would
have dismissed many charges, and Chargors, Prose-
cutors, and Convening Authorities would have been
proportionately discredited with the rank and file.
We know of the case of a barrister in France,
who from time to time acted as ‘‘Friend of Accused.”
As a result of the analysis to which he subjected
charges, a certain number broke down. In the end
he was told that he must appear no longer in defence
except by special permission of Headquarters.
The demeanour of Prosecutors was eloquent of
the mental attitude of the System. The officer de-
tailed for the job seemed to think that he had failed
in his duty if he lost his case, though probably
most laymen are aware that it is not a prosecutor’s
duty in military or any other court to either win
or lose cases, but that he is charged merely to pre-
sent certain matters for consideration.
It is for reasons such as these that it is impos-
sible for the community to feel confidence that the
soldiers who were punished were justly punished,
and it is axiomatic in every civilised country that
rather than one innocent man shall suffer a thou-
sand guilty ones shall be absolved. In the case of
every one of these men the conviction should be
quashed, and the record of the same deleted.
Little as it saw of the war, the United States
is suffering from the miscarriages of justice which
have been brought about by Courts-Martial. In that
country two points have been established before the
Senate Committee on Military Affairs. One, that
there was a marked tendency on the part of military
eourts to impose sentences whose severity is quite
out of proportion to the crime of the accused. The
other, that in a great many instances the machinery


of justice was operated by men quite unskilled in
the law.
The Philadelphia “Saturday Evening Post”
discusses the matter. That paper says that “the
aim should be to so correct military legal procedure
that the fact that the accused is a soldier shall not
impair the fairness of his trial.”
Speaking out of technical knowledge generally,
and with knowledge of these Courts and of their
methods in particular, we say confidently that this
aim is impossible of achievement under present con-
ditions. The whole system of such trials must go
by the board. It is a system which has no sanctity
beyond its age. It is a superfluous system, for mili-
tary offences can be tried by civil judges sitting with
military assessors, just as in other jurisdictions they
sit with Admiralty or Ecclesiastical assessors.
Returning to the case of the men referred to
above as sentenced to death, it has to be to be pointed
out that they would not have been executed. Hap-
pily for the peace of mind of the Commonwealth,
Mr. Hughes insisted on an arrangement, the prac-
tical effect of which was that it was impossible to
execute an Australian soldier.
It may be incidentally mentioned that heavy
and constant pressure was brought to bear on the
Prime Minister to have the arrangement altered,
but he was unshiftable.
But the men were prisoners. They would have
been sent to England to make a start in serving
their life sentences. Just as here the Defence De-
partment selected Darlinghurst Gaol as an appro-
priate place of immurement for its soldiers, so in
England it managed to commandeer from the Im-
perial Government three notorious homes of the
felonry. These were respectively Lewes Gaol,
Wandsworth Gaol, and the Isle of Wight Prison.
Arrived at one or other of these Hells, the
soldier fell under the bestial sway of Warderism.
The incomer was told, “Now, lad, do you know we


tame lions here?” and, “Yon might have broken
your mother’s heart, but you won’t break ours.”
The art of Warderism consists in the breaking
of spirits, and many a proud Australian soul was
crushed in these three places.
For turning a head to look at the next man, an
unmerciful smash from behind. For not standing
with meticulous precision, a tierce hack on the shins.
Any retaliation and there was a visit to the cells
and a brutal beating. If any complaint was made
—-and not proved—another offence had been com
mitted. The result may be imagined.
When the electorate has grasped these ghastly
facts, it will see where duty points. Men were
doomed to crushing sentences of penal servitude in
respect of offences, which now that peace has come,
would not even merit a fine at a police court. And
there were boys who were little more than children,
to whom the same things happened. Never again
must they happen. Australia has not done with
wars. In the wars of the future it is our citizens
who will fight. For their assistance we already
provide qn Australian Medical Service, a Dental
Service, and expert Services to deal with ears, eyes,
and every other part of the anatomy. Even for
the animals which our men take with them into
battle, we provide all that is required, from Vete-
rinary Surgeons down to Shoeing Smiths. The most
vital matter of alLwe have ignored. There is no
expert service for the preservation and protection
of their reputations, which, to such voluntary fight-
ers above all, are the most precious of all possessions.
Just as our Army has these other expert services,
so must it have an Australian Legal Service. It is
the only way, and the Diggers look to Mr. Hughes
to follow it. i ,
F


THE CHILDREN.
The Minister for Repatriation said last March
that the re-establishment of the soldier in civil life
is, so far, a story of experiment in all those countries
which are engaged upon the task.
As the experiment proceeds it becomes increas-
ingly evident that the problem is too big for any
one man to handle. We are not one whit nearer a
solution than we were at the beginning.
As it is too big for any one man, so is it too big
for any Government.
In the matter of Repatriation, all that is best in
the community has two aims. One of them is that
no citizen shall be penalised because he has done
his duty by the country. The other is that no such
citizen’s wife, widow, child or orphan shall be pen-
alised.
The problem of raising the Army was small by-
comparison with this. Consider the machinery which
was available for the smaller task by comparison
with that which is available now.
To create the A.I.F. the Government clothed it-
self with despotic powers. It took possession of
every form of national energy. It had whole-heart-
ed public enthusiasm behind it.
For the work of disbandment it has had to fall
back on the old political machine. It is a machine
which was never intended for such work as this.
And even if it were, the public opinion which fur-
nishes its motive power has changed from enthu-
siasm to indifference.
The debates in Parliament, where the “outs”
are back at the old game of blackguarding the “ins,”
show pitiable levity in view of what is happening.


Yards of “Hansard” and hours of time are devot-
ed to the affairs of such persons as Paul Freeman
and Tom Walsh. And whilst the national energies
are being concentrated on the woes of undesirables
of this description, thousands of children, who have
sprung from the flower of Australia, are living in
indigence, or worse.
A consideration of the figures is appalling. The
dead alone number 58,668. There are nearly one hun-
dred and seventy thousand wounded men, and close
on ninety thousand sick. Apart from the years that
they have lost, there will be a big proportion of
these sick and wounded who will be partly unfitted
for doing as well as they otherwise would have done
for their children.
But it is the children of the dead who are in the
worst case. It is in the nature of war that their
breadwinners were young, and consequently they
had not had time to establish their families in con-
ditions of anything more than comfort for the most
part. In lieu of these fathers the country provides
a living allowance. It is on a sliding scale. It
ranges from the widow with one child who gets
fifty-one shillings per week, up to the widow with
five children who gets sixty-five. These figures are
inclusive of pension. How is it possible to educate
these children? Wkat hope have they of getting a
start in the world?
And yet it is of enormous importance to Austra-
lia that they should have their education and their
start —not on account of the moral obligation which
is involved, but for a. purely scientific reason. If
there is anything in the doctrine of heredity the
breed of these children is the best in Australia.
In the nature of things, the men who were killed
were the cream of the cream of Australia. The
Army was the pick of the land, and these were the
pick of the Army. Speaking broadly, it is the phy-
sically-fit, and the bold and courageous who die


young in war. Those with the zest for struggle are
the likeliest to go. Had there been no War these
men would have matured, and would have used
their gifts of courage and restless enterprise for the
Commonwealth’s benefit.
Their blood is still with us. It can yet be made
to tell. Every indication points to the fact that
the maintenance of a White and British Australia
will become increasingly difficult as time goes on.
At the present moment Britain is supreme in the
world. A generation hence she may be less so. By
that time we will be well steeped in further inter-
national complications as an unavoidable result of
our unavoidable responsibility in respect of the Pa-
cific Mandates. The best that Australia can get in
the way of leadership will be none too good, hut the
best is the least she should have.
It is from the children of the Anzacs who have
saved the present generation that she is likeliest to
get it. But that will not happen if, having doled
out a few shillings, we let the work drop from our
nerveless fingers. There are various minds in Aus-
tralia at this moment which are concentrating on the
problem. One instance is that of Mr, T. W. Adam-
son, of Tamworth, in the State of New South Wales.
He has worked out in detail a complete educational
scheme. It ranges from the primary stages up to
University Scholarships. But unaided, of course,
he can do nothing.
This brings us back once more to the theme
that we have been hammering at for weeks —that
of a unified A.1.F., acting under an Executive of
its best brains, in all special branches of know-
ledge. This body would supply that extra-Govern-
raental help which is needed, and it could give prac-
tical effect either to Mr. Adamson’s scheme or to
some other scheme like it.
It stands above all other things as an example
of a matter which is essentially work and a duty


for the Army. The most notable feature of the Aus-
tralian soldier was his spirit of mateship, irrespec-
tive of rank. The children of the dead should be a
sacred charge on all of the dead men’s comrades
who are left.
If nothing is done beyond the present dole,
there are multitudes of the children of the Anzacs
who will be left to drive cows, to eke out existence
in the slums, to live as best they can from hand to
mouth, starved of knowledge as of food.
Their fathers, had they lived, were of the type
which puts its impress on the world. Carving out
careers for themselves they would have established
their children. These would have passed through
schools and Universities, and they would have
emerged at the end as products, commensurate with
the greatness of their breeding. They would have
been fitted to be the leaders of the nation.
As it is, they will be Nothing.


THE HUN.
“England is expectantly waiting to see what
Australia intends to do in the matter of trading
with Germany.”
“The Germans have disguised a number of their
merchant ships as Dutch for service in South
America.”
—Two notable Cable items.
Unless the Army takes a firm and united stand,
the Hun will re-establish himself in Australia, and
we for our part will have betrayed our trust to our
tens of thousands of wounded and our sixty thou-
sand dead.
Manifesting almost incredible recuperative
power, Germany is once more at work all oyer
the world. Evidences of the fact accumulate with
every fresh batch of cables. All her efforts are
directed towards smashing Britain and the Empire.
Even in the matter of fighting in the literal sense,
it now transpires that the British Force, which was
imperilled at Archangel, was faced by troops which
were led by Prussian officers. General Botha said
that the only guarantees of Peace lie in the inten-
tions of the Germans themselves, and this Archan-
gel fact is definitely symptomatic of what those in-
tentions are.
The blow which Germany is preparing is com-
mercial, and it is going to be delivered through
America. Mr. J. H. Thomas is the greatest leader
of labour in England. He said a few weeks ago
that America is making such gigantic preparations
to capture our trade that there is real danger that
she may be in a position to hold the Empire to


ransom. He adds that we are drifting to ruin. If
Germany could so engineer it that America could
bring England to her knees, America in her turn
would go down before Germany, for Germany is
racially pure, whilst America is not. Thus, in the
end, by the operation of a natural law, Germany,
after all, would dominate the world.
In the Field the A.I.F. used to be unanimous
on the point that there should be no more German-
Australian trade. The moment has come to give
effect to that unanimity. Amongst the many things
that the soldiers are expecting of the Prime Minister,
this is one of the most important. The Returned
Soldiers’ Leagues in every State should make this
clear to him at once.
The German has abandoned his pre-war methods
of penetration. In those days he sapped our com-
mercial foundations by an adroit manipulation of
the Companies Acts. The trick is out-worn. He
can no longer effectively disguise himself as a
Britisher by becoming a shareholder in a British
corporation. The sudden, keen competition of
American buyers for our hides and wool proves that
time he is going to disguise himself as a Yankee
business man.
# It is a commonplace that if Britain loses her
position as the world’s sea-carrier, we all go under.
Seven hundred and twenty-nine “American” steam-
ers, aggregating four and a half million tons, are
going to be placed on sixty regular lines throughout
the world. It is proposed to run one of these lines
to Australia. The soldiers can prevent this. If
they fail to do so, here is what will happen.
There are lots of men who were young enough
to join the Army who are at the same time old
enough to remember the days when any flag but
the Red Ensign was a rare sight on shipping in our
ports. But years ago, beginning in a small way,
the German flag appeared upon the scene. It spread


and spread, and ultimately with the arrival of 1914,
that flag, with the commerce which it stood for,
was a menace. The “ American ” line is also start-
ing in a small way. But if it is allowed to it will
grow. It is already a graver menace than the other.
As to the method by which the danger can he
averted, it is clear that international courtesy pre-
cludes any flat prohibition against entry. To single
out America for exclusion, whilst we admit minor
and innocuous traders such as the Dutch, Danes,
and Swedes, would at least he invidious, even if it
did not savour of a boycott.
But there is no necessity for any such sweeping
procedure. The difficulty can be got over without
giving offence to any body by an application of the
principle of preference. Let an ad valorem tariff
of 50 per cent, be put on all goods of whatsoever
description which are shipped into the Common-
wealth. This would be a special all-round duty,
superimposed upon any tariffs at present in force.
Then have a remission of 45 per cent, of the same
in respect of British goods on condition that they
are carried in British bottoms.
The matter is one which does not admit of
delay. To-day it can be done without friction, and
with the accord and approval of most people. That
will not be the case if ‘the proposed service is
allowed to establish itself. With its advent inte-
rests will arise. As it grows these interests will ex-
pand. When they have become vested, as they will,
the thing which is easy now will have become im-
possible, for the interests will have become inera-
dicable.
In one of his last speeches on the other side,
Mr. Hughes told the Diggers to get home and start
working for this country and the Empire. They
can best serve Australia by speaking with a single
and authoritative voice on certain great national
issues, but as vet they have not done so. They are
as one in a determination that there shall neither


be a covert nor an overt Germanisation of the Com-
monwealth, and the Prime Minister is whole-heart-
edly with them on the point. It is for him to clap
an embargo on the subtle and insidious attempt
which is now being made. By issuing an emphatic
pronouncement they will give Mr. Hughes the
needed support.


THE COURT.
The military machine shows in various ways
that it is cracking. The authorities are afraid to
trust their Garrison Military Police on the ; streets,
and, consequently, if it is true that the A.I.F. con-
tains the dangerous and disorderly element which
Headquarters predicates, the only barrier between
this element and the citizens has gone. Fortunately
it is not true.
Of course, there is a percentage of wasters,
which requires handling, but it is now left to the
Civil police. An obvious comment on this is that
since the G.M.P. is not doing the work which it is
paid to do, it represents a waste of public monev
which should stop.
military policemen are doubly superfluous.
-Mot only are they making no arrests —since they
ar ® ? ot t^ le . re to make arrests—but, influenced by
public opinion, the military authorities have tem-
porarily shelved the Court-Martial system. Brave
words were used in the Argyllshire case, but they
were never translated into action. Orders were
msued from Melbourne, that disciplinary measures
should be taken against the men who broke quaran-
Arf’+w tha L t rmg-leaders should be prosecuted.
All- that materialised was the prosecution of a pri-
vate named Williamson, who was not a ring-leader,
and who had wandered out of quarantine to look for
his wife. The crazy legal advisers of the militarv
charged him with desertion, in respect of facts
which could not amount to desertion in law, and,
a Her. a trial which was grotesque from every point
of view, the Court sent its adverse decision to


Melbourne. Williamson was Authority s only
victim out of eight hundred and fifty men, and he
had had almost nothing to do with the episode.
The scrapping of the old machine creates the
need for a new one. This should take the form of a
special Soldiers’ Court, presided over by a civilian
judge or judges, and vested with both a civil and
criminal jurisdiction. One man is obviously in-
dicated, on all the facts, as its first President. This
is Judge Brissenden. He is not only a sound lawyer,
but he has served in the ranks with the A.I.F.
Understanding the conditions thoroughly, he would
be equipped to appraise the cases, and the evidence
in connection with them.
The scope of this Court’s criminal jurisdiction
would cover the period between disembarkation and
discharge, and it would be the sole authority to
whom the soldier would be responsible for punitive
purposes, unless he elected to accept the punitive
power of his own C.O. for the time being. Thus
the country would be permanently rid of Courts-
Martial. Soldiers deserving punishment would get
it; but, on the other hand, there would be no_ sus-
picion anywhere that they were liable to be punished
unjustly.
In its civil jurisdiction, such a Court could
handle an infinite variety of matters, and it should
be given a very wide authority.
Take such inquiries, for instance, as the Sar-
dinia one. Under the present system, such proceed-
ings are dilatory, and by the time they are com-
pleted everybody has lost interest in the subject-
matter, and nothing is done. A Court composed of
skilled men would handle such with expedi-
tion. Suppose an inquiry were decided on, into
(say) Holdsworthy. The President would have
under him as Official Referee—either temporarily
or permanently appointed —a barrister of standing.
Having fixed the general ambit of the inquiry


say, in this case, food, morality, or Bolshevism—he
would submit terms of reference to his Referee, who
would return him findings of fact.
The Court would similarly deal with other mat-
ters. Take an example of a thing which recently
happened in the Department—-the re-opening of the
Courts-Martial in the cases of Corporal Williams
and Warrant-Officer Kerr. In the Department these
matters may have _ dragged on indefinitely. Ail
parties being ready in a Court controlled by a man
such as Judge Brissenden, both cases would have
been disposed of in a couple of hours.
Or, again, take pay, and the maddening delays
to which men are subjected in their efforts to get
the money which is due to them. Many of these
men know exactly what is owing, and are able to
prove it. Actions to recover pay, which were un-
defended, could be taken before the Registrar of the
Court, and the soldier, having taken his judgment,
could collect on it from the Department.
Or, take another aspect of the pay question—
as exemplified in the case of the Argyllshire men.
Melbourne issued an extraordinary order, which,
it is true, it hastily withdrew, that the pay of these
men was to be withheld, lest at some future time
they might become liable- to the Commonwealth in
respect of a military fine. This order is a typical
emanation of the military autocrat, and orders of a
kindred sort will issue in the future, and—unless
they are brought to the public notice—they will be
carried out. Judge Brissenden’s Court should be
given powers, inter alia, to issue prohibitions to the
Minister and his agents, in respect of such orders.
It is only reasonable. The men, as Mr. Hughes
has said, are citizens. It is true that the grant of a
power to issue prohibitions would be a serious
derogation from the powers of the military, but
militarism means nothing to Australia.
The Court should have wide punitive powers in
respect of derelictions of duty or breaches cf con


tract, on the part of individuals or companies con-
trolling troopships. The companies owning the
troopships could be fined, and individuals such, for
instance, as cooks who sell the troops their own
food —could be imprisoned. Higher ships’ officials,
conniving at this, or tampering with the men’s food
themselves, could be dealt with in the same way.
There are also traders who work swindles in food
from the shore. Those who are in the jurisdiction
could be dealt with.
Certain convictions have occurred before Courts-
Martial in respect of other than military offences,
The only thing about these convictions which is
certain is that the result of them has been to brand
certain Australian citizen-soldiers as felons and
misdemeanants. All of these cases should be re-
opened. The judgment of untrained men cannot be
safely trusted in such matters. The institution of
this Court will ensure that if, and when, we go
to war again—by no means an improbability—that
there will be machinery in being which is adequate
for the protection of the liberty and reputation of
such of our fellow-citizens as fight. Never again
must the Australian citizen-soldier be liable to
arraignment before a Military Court. Just as the
Australian Army has a medical branch, a veterinary
branch, a dental branch, and numerous other
branches, so must it have a legal and judicial branch.


ARMY ADMINISTRATION.
“Stick close to your desks and never go to sea,
And you all may be the rulers of the Queen’s navee.”
In business, in the learned professions, in trade,
agriculture, mining, scientific investigation, or any
other form of public or private endeavour one can
think of, this is the age of the expert. The recogni-
tion of the principle is so absolute, that the master-
expert—such, for instance, as Mr. Schwab, the great
steel specialist in the United States—-commands
almost any salary he likes to name. In modern
industry, neither the youth of a given individual
nor the fact that he has had no previous connection
with a particular firm is a bar to his employment
in the highest positions. Special knowledge and
the capacity to use it in the interests of the business
are the major considerations. Age and long-service
alone do not lift a man out of the ruck or into the
higher salaried positions.
The old British system implies that commis-
sioned rank in the Army was the prerogative of the
well-to-do amateur. The social attractions drew
numbers of this class to the service, and the num-
bers were sufficiently large to yield in effect enough
experts for the small requirements of the times.
The South African war made it clear to Eng-
land that the times had outgrown the system. She
started the war with an army commanded and
largely officered by the dilettante, and in the middle
of it had to rush out the specialists, Roberts and
Kitchener. These two men cleaned up the mess in
Africa and returned to clean up the mess at home.
They found the barracks and offices filled with just


such an old gang as fills the barracks and offices
of Australia to-day. They mercilessly scrapped the
whole of these incompetents in favour of specialists,
and an expert, though a ranker, was placed at the
head of the Staff College. The result of their efforts
was seen in the present war. They not only pro-
duced the superbly-officered army of the Great Re-
treat, and the organisation to place it on the con-
tinent with almost incredible speed, but also the
Cadre to contain those later armies which ran into
millions. Had England not had forced upon her
this military regeneration, but remained, as Aus-
tralia remains, under the old gang, the German
organisation would have passed over her organisa-
tion as a wool-waggon might pass over a box of silk-
worms.
Just as England at the close of the African
war had Kitchener, so Australia, by great, good
fortune, now has Monash. Just as Kitchener had
a brilliant body of officers to draw on, so has Monash
now. There are Divisional Commanders such as
Hobbs and Rosenthal, commanders of mounted
troops such as Ryrie and Chauvel, artillery experts
such as King and Lloyd, and infantry men such as
Murray, Glasgow, Marks and a hundred others. If
Australia does the obvious thing and employs
Monash at whatever fee to re-organise her forces, it
is men such as these that he will want. He has
already laid it down that Australia requires them.
A few weeks ago he was cabled as emphasising in
London the folly and danger of losing the highly-
skilled officers whom the war has produced, and the
vital importance to this country of retaining their
services. Then, he says, “the men would be easily
trainable, and usable to the best effect.” This, he
considers, is worth ‘‘ a substantial expenditure. ’ ’
Regard this proposition from what angle you
will, it cannot be faulted. War has left the Com-
monwealth with a national debt roughly equal to


that of England before the war. There are certain
gams, and it is our business to make the most of
them. War, costly though it be, leaves certain assets
in its wake. The mountains of material amassed
by Britain—the motor-boats, lorries and cars, the
oods, metals, hutments, machinery, clothing, sadd-
-P-CkS’ shovels ’ and what not—are all saleable.
p yiimster has been appointed to organise the sale
of them, and he estimates that it will yield a sum
of one thousand million pounds.
Personnel is more valuable than material. The
material can be changed into cash and that is the
end of it. But the personnel which has cost all these
millions to train and evolve cannot be valued in
easily It is beyond price, because it gives birth to
activities which never die. Postulating that the
country is to keep its new men, what is to be done
with the old ones? On the outbreak of war many
of them were kept on and labelled £ 1 indispensable. ”
in a way, they were. They knew the various “Army
I onus” and the procedure. They knew, for in-
stance, that if you wanted camp-beds, you requisi-
tioned for “Bedsteads, Camp, Iron, Officers for the
use of, four,” and not for four officers’ camp-cots.
1 hat is all they know now. The returned expert
now knows that, plus his own technical military job.
Certain of the so-called “indispensables” were men
of advanced who had spent long lives in the
seivice of the military, but others were young The
young men should be got rid of. The old men
should be retired on full pay. The cost would be
negligible, and it would represent an equitable solu-
tion of the problem.
Repatriation will be an expensive process at the
best. The suggestion made here represents a form
of repatriation which is desirable from every point
of view, and its cost would be far outweighed in
any event by the gain in military efficiency. But
the cost is not even great. Actuarial calculations


on the lives of these elderly men will prove this,
and, moreover, there has to he deducted the cost
which the State would otherwise he put to in launch-
ing the returned men in other careers.
The matter, as Sir John Monash pointed out,
is not one that will keep. If something of this sort
is not done at once, these priceless specialists will-
drift into private life and be lost to the service.
To our knowledge many have already done so. A
little more delay, and Gilbert’s squib will become
a truism so far as the Australian army is concerned.


THE PROMISED LAND?
The case of New South Wales affords a fair
example of the manner in which the work of settling
the A.T.F. on the land is being bungled from the
start. To the returned soldier time is everything.
He is sick of inaction and wants to get back to work.
He passes first into the Surveyor-General’s
hands. Nothing happens, and he writes to ask why.
He is told that his “application will be dealt with
in its order.” This means that the matter is in
the hands of the Department’s District Surveyor,
who is allowed an area, of which he makes the
rounds, taking the blocks in their turn. No area
takes less than three months to cover, and some
take as much as six. The soldier may be at the
beginning of the official roster, but he may also
be at the end of it.
The remedy lies in the employment of contract
surveyors, and the provisional grant of applications
until the survey is confirmed by the official surveyors
—if even such confirmation is necessary. There is
a supply of contract surveyors in all districts. They
are always looking for work from the Lands, be-
cause it means plain surface work at good rates.
As against the departmental man, who gets nothing
for pace, the outsider would make money by speed.
Being paid by the job, he would carry it out against
time. He employs the minimum of chain-men and
assistants, so he could quote low and save the Go-
vernment money, and, through the Government, the
soldier. It is reasonable to say that a saving of
33 per cent, could be effected on this part of the
transaction. A list of contract surveyors should


be made out for each district, and as repatriation
work comes along, tenders should he called for from
the district affected. The work should be allotted
subject to a time limit.
The returned expeditionary falls next into the
hands of the lawyers. The file of papers relating
to his case is now considerable, and it is officially
marked “awaiting transfer,” or else, “papers for-
warded to C.L.0.” (i.e., Crown Law Office). When
he enquires about the delay, he is told that his
papers have been so marked. At the Law Office
the matter is not taken as Repatriation business,_ but
goes into the general file and is handled as it is
reached. It is handicapped by the tendency in
Oovernment offices to take the easy stuff first, and
so it gets a further set-back. Already there have
been thousands of applications, and piles of docu-
ments are steadily banking up. Transfer work is
technical and slow, and furthermore this work
comes on top of the normal flow of business with
which the legal department was originally intended
to cope, which means still more congestion. The
same remedy is imperative in the Crown as in
the Surveyor-General’s Office. Lists of solicitors
should be made out. There is a proportion of the
profession who would do their share of this work
for nothing, on patriotic grounds.
The remaining reform required is this: “Pre-
ferential Right” should be granted to soldier-appli-
cants, subject to compensation granted by the Board,
and the applicants should not be compelled to wait
until the Board has decided on the compensation—
if any. At present, holders of land, under various
forms of tenure, including freehold, offer their land
for settlement by soldiers, or have it withdrawn
from them (if less than freehold) by the Depart-
ment for soldier-settlement. This having been done,
the ex-holder is sometimes entitled to compensation.
The Land Board decides whether he is or not, It


takes, on an average, three months to get a given
matter before the Board, as from the time l when
the file leaves the legal branch. If it is decided that
the ex-holder is entitled to compensation, the amount
becomes a charge against the soldier, but if it is
decided the other way, the delay was unnecessary.
In either event all delay in waiting for the
Board’s decision can be cut out by gazetting the
land available for occupation subject to adjustment
for compensation—if any—as allowed by the Board.
Thus three months would be saved. The survey
and the legal work respectively can be speeded up
by the methods suggested. They can be still further
speeded iip by working on a duplicate file. In that
way their operations would be concurrent and not
consecutive. A month is a generous allowance for
the whole thing. At present it is taking from nine
to twelve months.


LAND REPATRIATION.
Senator Milieu recently explained at Perth that
the Australian Repatriation scheme was the most
generous and comprehensive in the world. Why can
it not be made the most simple? The most vital
question is land. The Federal Government has no
laud system of its own, though it has powers of
resumption for public purposes, under legislation
which is already on the Statute book. The problem
is, therefore, left to the States to tackle. Take the
case of New South Wales. Mr. Ashford recently
announced that cases had come under his notice of
returned soldiers who had purchased land on terms
from private owners, the attention of the returned
men having been drawn to these propositions by
advertisements offering special terms to returned
men, “and, apparently, the benefits of the Returned
Soldiers’ Settlement Act have been quoted as an
inducement to purchase” He then went on to warn
the men that the benefits of the Act may only be
claimed subject to certain conditions.
Things are in a hopeless position if the average
soldier is to be referred to such a piece of legislation
as this. It is so complicated that counsel of the
most skilled sort would require days of labour to
express an opinion on it. Moreover, it is interwoven
with a number of other Acts. Its preamble expresses
it as “An Act to make provision for the settlement
of returned soldiers on Crown lands or lands
acquired under the Closer Settlement Acts, to amend
the Crown Lands Consolidation Act, 1913, the Closer
Settlement Acts, the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Act,
1910, and the Irrigation Act, 1912.” Consequently
the soldier-settler is subjected to all the terms and


conditions of these various statutes. Having bought
copies at the Government Printer’s, and applied
himself to the study of them, he 1 finds that in the
Crown Lands Consolidation Act he has acquired the
second largest statute in the British Empire—-and
possibly the most intricate.
If an exploiter of suburban subdivisions —such,
for example, as Mr. Arthur Rickard —-can sell on
simple terms, why cannot a Government Depart-
ment do the same ? And if, in fact, it is impossible
for the Department to do it, why does it not hand
over the job to some such person as Mr. Rickard,
who can do it? Here is one of the many cases that
the writer knows of: A group of three ex-officers
of the A.I.F. have been struggling for eighteen
months to repatriate themselves. All three belonged
to a fighting arm, all were wounded, and all have
had considerable bush experience. Therefore, from
every point of view, it is desirable that they should
be settled on the land. A famous Western pastora-
list is anxious to take them. His objects are purely
patriotic, and he has gone to a great deal of trouble
to get them. He has told Mr. Ashford’s Department
in writing that* he is prepared to father them, and
that he will guarantee their success. He will make
them a gift of their fencing posts and of half their
wire. He will give them the benefit of his own
experience, and also of that of his own overseer and
of his own manager. He will allow their sheep to
be shorn at his own shed. A mountain of papers
already exists in relation to the matter, and it is
growing daily. But beyond this, nothing is done,
and apparently nothing can be done. If a citizen
such as Mr. Rickard ran his establishment on such
lines as these, he would not run it far before he
was put in bankruptcy, and he would certainly
deserve to be put in an asylum.
There is another aspect of Mr. Ashford’s in-
sistence that returned soldiers should avail them-
selves of the Returned Soldiers’ Settlement Act.


He says that returned soldiers have got land through
their attention being drawn by advertisements offer-
ing special terms to returned men, the said advertise-
ments “apparently” quoting the benefits of the Act.
If it is really the case that persons have sold land
by advertising that the purchaser will take the land
with the advantages of the Returned Soldiers’ Settle-
ment Act, when, in fact, the land is not subject
to the Act, the Minister should prosecute the vendors
on charges of obtaining money under false pretences.
But, if Mr. Ashford’s statement is wholly inaccurate,
it is as though designed—like a departmental answer
in the House —to reply to the question in terms and
give no information.
But this sort of ghost is not to be laid by
official obscurities. The heart of the trouble will
have to be got at. The fault lies in the fact that
the departmental system is so cumbrous that nobody
can get any forrarder with even the simplest pro-
position. There is neither sense nor justice in Minis-
terial complaints that the system is being exploited
by unscrupulous land speculators, if the Minister
will not take the trouble to so simplify the procedure
under the statutes that the soldier will naturally
turn to his Department for assistance. Everybody
knows that the land-seeker has not the opportunities
of acquiring land that the land laws profess to give
him. Faulty administration, corruption, and a host
of other causes combine to defeat statutes which are
otherwise honest and democratic in their intention.
Had war been averted, the community might have
worried along under the old conditions. Many men
have spent five years in the service of their country
which they might have devoted to trying to get
land out of the Department. It is up to the Depart-
ment now to devise 1 a simple system by following
which they may get it. Take Yanco, where there
are thousands of blocks waiting for soldiers. They
cover an area which must be somewhere near the
size of Ireland. There is unlimited water and sun,


and one of the best climates in the world. Normal
adjuncts of life there, are electric light, showers,
baths, and telephones. Any soldier who works
there must make good. Why, in the name of com-
mon sense, cannot this land be peddled out in the
simple way in which a business firm would peddle
it out? If the Government is putting a man on
the land, the land ought to be good enough for any
money that the man can owe them. If it is not,
they have no business to put him there.
The case of Mr. R. H. Morris is a fair indication
of the hopeless deadlock at which we have arrived.
Morris—who is a returned man, of course—is the
ideal sort of citizen for Australia. He is of the
pjoneer type, and has no desire to settle near a
railway.
He is a native of Tenterfield, and has lived up-
country all his life. He is the father of ten children,
the eldest of whom is eighteen years. He has found
cattle-country which is in a mountainous region,
which is fifty miles from the nearest township, and
which is wanted by nobody on earth except him-
self. If he could get it, there is no reason to doubt
that he could use it to found a sturdy family of
good Australians.
But Departmentalism stands inexorably be-
tween Morris and his need, and the country and its
benefit.
fi he land in question is a block in the county
of Butler. _ The New South Wales Lands Depart-
ment is willing to let him have it. But because
m years gone by some mining was done in the
vicinity, the Mines Department declines to let it
go.
A well-known nastoralist, who is also a member
0 t arliament, has been trying to get Morris settled.
After some months of labour he has thrown up the
sponge. He writes: Ml fear I can do no more than
1 liave done—the affair brings in two Departments.”


And yet this mining reserve was tested and
worked out years ago, and even were that not so,
the Mining oh Private Property Act enables miners
to search and mine on any land.
Owing to the noxious weeds, the place is rapidly
becoming useless, for it is nobody’s business to keep
these under control. There is blackberry, not only
in parts of the creeks, but in patches all up the sides
of the steep Mils, and this pest will be further
spread by birds.
The Nagorra Burr has possession of portions
of the main River, and of the flats and creeks. In
parts this weed is twelve feet high, and it, too, will
spread. The country is granite formation, and the
sandy soil will not stand drought, so it is useless
for farming and dairying purposes.
It would cost nothing for resumption, but if
Morris were settled it would produce a revenue.
But nothing can be done to remedy this incredible
state of affiairs, because any attempt to move would
“bring in two Departments.”
Until the present system is revolutionised by
some strong man, that answer has to be accepted
as final. Meanwhile, there are two comments to
be made. There is good reason for suspecting that
propaganda is being conducted in Britain with a
view to luring immigrants to Australia.
It is the duty of the English Press to acquaint
its public that if any unfortunates are deluded into
coming to these shores they will find everywhere
some such state of affairs as has been here described.
Manifestly it is a state of affairs which cannot be
allowed to continue.
We were compelled by circumstances to raise
a great army. Circumstances will equally compel
as to repatriate it. The task of raising that army
was a great one, and no less great is the one that
is set us now. It is not one to be handled by
bureaus and the bureaucrats. Their hopelessly


limited purview, their puerile worship of form as
something sacrosanct, are the natural and necessary
result of lives lived in the atmosphere of official-
dom.
The lands of this great continent must be re-
moved from their hesitant and incompetent control.
The disposition of them must be left to the one great
man we have.
The way out of the present impasse is no doubt
intricate. We can only look to the vision of Mr.
Hughes to find it. The belief that he will succeed
is confirmed by the review of his whole career.
Once he sees clear the issue from the tangle,
we may rely upon it that all the bureaucrats, red-
tape, and departmentalists in the Commonwealth
will fail to hold him back.


THE REPATRIATED.
“If that were all that we could do for them,
gratitude is proven fraudulent, device bankrupt.”—-
(nils worthy.
Hereunder are some facts in the career of
Colonel Maitland-—fictitious name —who recently re-
turned to Sydney. The facts stated amount to a
schedule of some of Australia ? s debts, and the extent
to which these debts have been met.
Maitland left as a subaltern in one of the famous
battalions of the First Division. He went all
through the Peninsula, from the landing to the
evacuation. Whilst there he 1 rose to the rank of
Major and Second-in-command of his battalion, and
at various times commanded it.
After the evacuation he took the unit at Tel-el-
Kebir, and he commanded continuously there and in
France until October of 1918, when he left on Anzac
furlough, and returned to Australia as C.O. troops
on one of the carriers.
In France, in addition to commanding his bat-
talion, he commanded the Brigade—which is four
battalions—-and, in addition, such complementary
units as pioneers, engineers, A.S.C., and so on, as are
attached to a Brigadier,
At Villers-Bretonneux he did brilliant work in
taking an initiative when the Germans had practi-
cally over-run the other troops facing them, and he
urn ■ lon the Huns and beat them badly. His initia-
tive rag one of the strongest sort, for he practically
arrogated the direction of the Brigades on both his
flanks. His bold decision was heavily instrumental
in saving Amiens, and all those other things that
were involved in the fate of the city.


He is how working at 17s. a day in the N.S.W.
Government Railways and Tramways Department.
There are jobs at the Sydney Barracks, which
are filled by people who have not been to the war,
and which carry a pay of 30s. a day, and 425. a day,'
and 58s. a day. Or again. Maitland could have been
appointed by the Railway people—if necessary by
supersession—to work commensurate with his talent
and proved powers of organisation.
The Public Service regulations provide that in
the case of specially competent men there shall be
supersession. Hitherto this regulation has been used
to promote persons of influence. The time has come
when it should be used in its literal sense in respect
of eases such as this.
This man, whose talents might be of untold
value to a service which badly needs them, has
been placed in a dead-end branch of the Depart-
ment, which, so far as he is concerned, may bring
his salary up in the end to four, or at the most five
hundred a year. ’
_ From the country’s point of view it involves the
limitation of his powers to a supervision of railway
telephones, wires telephonic and telegraphic, and
similar inconsequent odds and ends. Had he’ even
been put into the Traffic Branch he would have had
scope for the exercise of his ability in administra-
tion and the control of men, and might have risen
Commissioner. These possibilities of service to
the mate are closed to him.
That is the practical aspect. But there is a moral
one which is even more important Maitland has
given five of the best years of his life to the Com-
monwealth. They were the years during ’which he
would normally have laid the foundations of a ca-
i an d resolve which were applied
to the salvation of Amiens would-have been con-
centrated on an honourable personal ambition. Who
can doubt where he would have stood to-day?


The object of Eepatriation is not achieved by
merely dumping a man into a job. The motto of
an honourable community can only be this: “We
will place you in as good a position as you would
have been in if the five years which you gave to
us had been kept for yourself.” It is an aim which
is difficult of realisation, but that is no valid reason
for abandoning it.
At present no attempt is being made at its
realisation. The naval and military establishments
thronged with Home-Service officers, the Govern-
ment Departments thronged with highly-placed
eligibles; these are standing proof of our neglect
of our duty, and they amount to indelible stains on
the good name of the Commonwealth.


THE DOCTORS.
Whilst talk on the subject of preference waxes,
the practice of the principle is on the wane.
By alertness and resolution the Soldiers’
Leagues may do something to help it forward, but
even with as much of these two qualities as they
can summon the prospects remain more than doubt-
ful.
Its advocates will either be met with a flat
negation, or else they will be put off with that illu-
sory application of the principle by means of which
batches of returned men are put on to minor and
temporary jobs, only to be replaced at the end of
a few months by other batches.
In both State and Federal spheres it is the same.
Senator Pearce was recently interviewed in
London on the subject of the future prospects of
expeditionary officers. In this connection it has to
be remembered, that with a few exceptions, the
citizen officers of the Australian Army far outshone
the permanent ones. But the Senator said that the
positions held by these non-professiopals must soon
be vacated in favour of permanent soldiers.
With a crude sort of cynicism, he jauntily added
that doubtless many young officers who forsook
civil occupations in their junior capacities, and were
now Colonels and Brigadiers, would feel the pinch
of returning to civil life—which meant starting at
scratch. That, however, was unavoidable. They
were “eligible for whatever facilities the Land and
Civil Service were offering ex-service men.”


The State Governments are as callously in-
different as is the Federal. A large body ot re-
turned officers conies within the scope of State
authority, to wit the Medical Officers. In Victoria
the body recently waited on the Premier and de-
manded that preference be given to returned doctors
in respect of appointments to the position ot G.M.U.
(Government Medical Officer). In isolated cases,
similar demands have been made by the li.o.b.i.ii.
to the New South "Wales Government. They have
been rejected.
There is no class in the community which has
more completely entitled itself to generosity in the
matter of preference than the returned medical men.
At a time when they were for the most part young,
and just establishing themselves in life, they ex-
changed lucrative practices for a Captain’s pay, m
order to perform a vitally necessary service to their
country. Conversely there is no class which is so
completely disentitled to consideration as the many
eligible medicos who stayed at home to steal tlm
practices of those who went.
These cases were common. We know of one
man who bought a practice and established himself,
lie married, and there was a child. War was de-
clared and he enlisted. He broke up his For
three years he served with a combatant unit in the
line. Meanwhile his more wary “colleague” re-
mained at home, took over the whole of the prac-
tice, and declined to give the original owner any
of the takings. On his return this man applied to
the New South Wales Government for the position
of G.M.O. in his district, and was turned down.
There are other than moral or equitable reasons
why these positions should be tilled in the future by
returned men only. The G.M.O. is charged with the
duty of examining for pensions; and no man who
has not been with the soldiers has any hope of
discharging this duty adequately.


The shell-shock case is one of the mysteries of
the war, just as it is probably the worst of its
horrors. Those who have not studied it on the spot
can have no understanding of it. The ordinary
practitioner on applying the usual tests to the appli-
cant for a pension would find .that the subject
of his examination was organically sound and would
so categorise him. He would not understand, and
could never be made to understand, that a man may
be organically sound and yet be functionally all to
pieces.
The widespread nature of this appalling malady
can only be vaguely guessed at. A sister speaking
from an experience of four years’ work in one of
the military hospitals on the other side, gave it as
her belief that every man who had ever been in
the line, was to some extent, however slightly, a
sufferer. Many medical men with war experience
endorse that view. The least the country should
accord these victims is medical examination at the
hands of those who have knowledge and under-
standing.
Closely interwoven with the shell-shock cases
are those of the “partially-incapacitated.” An
equally subtle problem presents itself to the Gr.M.O.
when he is called upon to examine and assess these
men for pensions purposes. He is faced with the
duty of arriving at a proportionate pension, which
he is called upon to compute according to the degree
of disability of the applicant.
There is not a man in the Army who is not
convinced that the medical man who stayed at home
has no possible chance of arriving at a fair and just
assessment in such matters.
As one, result of charging these non-expedi-
tion ary medical men with a duty which they are
incapable of fulfilling, there is already wide spread
misery, want, and even hunger, amongst those who
have suffered in the country’s service.


All example of such a case was quoted in a
Sydney paper. A “partially-incapacitated” man
was computed at 7/6 per week, plus 6/3 for Ms
wife and child. For twelve months he had been
doing light work, but has never been free from
suffering. Three months ago a baby was born, and
he applied for a further pension, and a result
of his “examination” the combined original pen-
sions were reduced to a total of 9/4| per week.
This is the kind of thing that will continue to
happen for so long as “examinations” are confined
to the non-expeditionary G.M.O. This is the kind
of infamy which the New South Wales and Victorian
Governments are conniving at.
Nothing more grotesque could be imagined than
the present method of filling the office of G.M.O.
It goes to the doctor who has seniority by reason
of longest residence in the town, and when he dies
or disappears the next longest resident doctor goes
on. In other words, the man who merely keeps
alive, and in position, whilst other and more ambi-
tions men go elsewhere, becomes ipso facto entitled
to the job. Its occupant is, therefore, in the nature
of things an old man. In the nature of age his mind
is no longer fluid. It has long ceased to be recep-
tive of new ideas. This, of all men, is the one to
whom the Government has allotted the task of
dabbling with the most novel, the most obscure, and
the most mysterious development in medical science.


THE RACE.
“ Thrice is he armed, who hath his quarrel just;
But four times he who gets his blow in fust!”
■ The West Australian Labour Congress recently
resolved at Perth that military training for lads of
18 and under must be abolished, and there can be no
doubt that if the Congress could secure this limited
abolition the next claim would be one for universal
abolition.
Such claims have their uses, for they are a warn-
ing and reminder that the electorate contains ele-
ments which would lead the Commonwealth to des-
truction.
The War and the policy of the Prime Minister
have left Australia with certain irrevocable commit-
ments. It was rightly said by Mr. G. H. Knibbs that
a people’s “only virile course is to walk in the ways
of international life strong-armed, taking care to
avoid all unnecessary offence to other nations.”
By force of circumstances, this continent is a
permanent offence to all the peoples of the East.
Unless we are overwhelmed by an inundation from
Asia, it must ever remain so.
Not even the futile debaters of Perth would
dare to abate the national claim to a White and
British Australia. But looked at from the point of
view of the hundreds of millions of coloured men,
this claim is an insolent one.
We can, and do, seek to minimise its offensive-
ness by alleging that our discrimination is not racial,
but economic.
Does any sane Australian believe that so astute
a being as the Japanese is likely to accept such a


distinction? If not, then he must agree with Mr.
Knibbs that “the on U safe course is the path of
competency and strenuousness,” and that “however
pleasant a Utopia may be to live in, flowery ways
are poor if our children, or our children’s children,
are in consequence to be helots of a people more
deeply in earnest.”
Therefore, an Army and Navy ready and fit to
support our policy by force of arms is a sine qua
non of our existence as a free and unpolluted race.
The Navy we will always have. But what of the
Army ?
An army depends for its value on those who
train it. The formative influences of its officers and
N.C.O.’s are as absolute as are those of a mother
over her child Whatever the qualities of the rank
and file, inferior officers will turn out inferior
troops.
The Australian Home Forces are cursed at this
moment with a plague of inferior officers. These
Forces, on whose effectiveness the life of Australia
may one day depend, could be under the command
of some of the most brilliant officers in the world;
that is to say, the ones who have won distinction
in the A.I.F.
These men are some of the tangible assets which
the war has left us. It has cost the country tens
of millions to train and educate them in their art.
But because of certain provisions in the Defence
Act—an Act which was passed at a time when the
sweeping changes induced by Armageddon had
never been thought of —the country may not avail
itself of their services.
The defect lies here. It originated in a pro-
viso which was commendably democratic. This
proviso says that commissions in the Commonwealth
Military Forces can only issue to the sergeants’
ranks of the said Forces.
Many of the most brilliant and distinguished
soldiers whom the war produced never had any


thing to do with soldiering in pre-war days. They
enlisted as rankers in the A.1.F., and proving their
title to command in the Field, rose to the position
they ultimately held.
An example in point is the late Colonel Reid,
who rose from private to the command of his bat-
talion in 21 months. So far as the Commonwealth
Military Force is concerned, Reid was officially non-
existent. He was prohibited by law from applying
his talents in the sphere in which they could have
been of splendid service to the country.
There is another variant of this imbecility.
Men who held commissions in the C.M.F, when war
broke out, and gained promotion in the A.1.F.,
revert on return to their original C.M.F, seniority!
because Parliament has not provided for the re-
cognition of commissions gained in the Field.
Lieut.-Colonel Douglas Marks was a 2nd Lieutenant
in the C.M.F. when war broke out So far as the
Australian Military Forces are concerned, he is a
2nd Lieutenant still. In the intervening period he
lose to the command of the 13th Battalion—a unit
which will be immortal for so long as Australian
history lasts. He proved himself a great infantry-
J na ?' * n hi® case, as in Reid’s, Parliament for-
bade him to apply his gifts in those directions where
they would have been of most use. He will have
to serve as junior to C.M.F. officers who have stayed
at home for reasons of age. or incompetence ‘ or
lack of energy.
The young Australian trainee has no respect
for these stay-at-home officers, and has frequently
demonstrated the fact on parade. Who can blame
him :■ He is the lineal descendant of the Anzaes,
and is no more disposed to he put upon by o*nff
than were his forbears.
The reform which is imperative is this. Parlia-
ment must decree that all officers in the A.I.F. and
Naval and Military Expeditionary Forces shall be


deemed to have received commissions in the Aus-
tralian Military Forces automatically when they
received their commissions in the Field, and further,
that all expeditionary officers shall retain the rank
with which they return to Australia.
This step will result in an enormous surplusage
of officers. This should be dealt with as follows:
In the first place, and in the interests of the Army,
there must be a wholesale clearance of those who
have not seen war service—where it seems equit-
able with compensation for discharge. All who
have reached the age limit must be retired. There
must be an elimination of the medically unfit after
a real examination with a high standard and on a
rigid basis.
After this a Board must be appointed composed
of men such as Glasgow, Rosenthal, Brand, Lloyd,
and a dozen others who could be named who could
be trusted to wield the pruning-knife on what re-
mained, and to Avield it with knowledge and re-
morselessly. Only thus will Australia get the army
she deserves.
The morale and tradition of Anzac is the right-
ful inheritance of posterity. Only the Anzacs them-
selves can pass it along, and only Parliament can
remove the prohibition which prevents them at pre-
sent from doing so.
The Federal Parliament will remain supine in
this matter unless Mr. Hughes forces it into action.
The reasons for its inactivity arc known in those
circles which are interested. These reasons flow
from timidity. It is feared that any amendment
of the Defence Act will result in a reopening of the
whole question of compulsory training, and that in
the result the rvhole scheme will fall. We do not
esteem, the Australian people so lightly as to believe
it, nor, we are sure, does Mr. Hughes. There are
elements such as the members of the Perth Con-
gress, it is true. There is a proportion of traitors,
of cranks, and of aliens who serve ends of their


own. But the great bulk of the nation is solid and
sane. - It knows that we have a continent which is
the prize of the world. That it is ours to hold it
in trust for the race.
That we are performing that duty in spite of
the fact that we only have two persons per square
mile to do the work. And that we are determined
to go on doing it whatever the sacrifice in service
or otherwise.


Name
S. Jepson
P. McGarry
G. Rat'd iff e
R. Johnson
CIVIL COURT
Offence
Larceny
Destruction
Fraud
Burglary
Sentence
3 months
3 months
6 months
6 months
MILITARY COURT
Name
Offence
Sentence
Frivate D.
Escaping custody
2 years
Private S.
Desertion
2 years
Gunner C.
Desertion
5 years
Private P.
Desertion
5 years
THE PRESSING NEED.
The Legal Corps.
The late Surgeon-General Williams performed
a signal service to Australia in his organisation of
our Army Medical Service.
In the days of Williams’ youth, the medical
services of armies were regarded as unimportant.
As a result, there was the appalling waste of life in
the Crimea.
Even in so modern an affair as the African
campaign, disease accounted for many more deaths
than bullets.
It was not until the Great War that we fully
realised the value of efficient medical administration.
It was largely due to the prescience of Williams
that Australia had it when the need arose.
There is another form of auxiliary military ser-
vice, which is as sorely needed to-day as was a medi-
cal service in the days of the Crimea. The branch
which is needed is a legal service.


Its personnel must accompany our future armies
into the field, Just as the doctors do. Never again
must the liberties and reputations of our citizen-
soldiers be left at the mercy of the amateur.
All these courts are of the one type. Incom-
petence and savagery are the outstanding charac-
teristics of every one of them.
Luckily for recruiting, the censorship was used
to prevent a general knowledge of the awful truth
from reaching Australia. Had such knowledge been
generally disseminated, recruiting would have been
killed stone dead. In spite of the censorship, certain
information percolated through, and there can be
uo doubt that, scanty as it was, it had a very sub-
stantial effect upon enlistments.
None but fools believe that wars are done with.
If we are to carry out our intention.of handing
down a White and British Australia to posterity, we
least of all will be immune. Our policy and people
are a permanent offence to all of the teeming millions
of the East. They are a permanent offence to the
millions of aliens who are living on the border-line
of starvation on the continent of Europe.
We will keep our race unpolluted and our
country free with nothing but our strong right arm.
Before the war, Australia was almost unknown.
I-he valour of our troops has drawn upon us the
attention of the world. Our acts for the future
will be done in the glare of publicity. To pretend
that it is otherwise is to imitate the ostrich. The
public nature of our status carries privileges, but it
also carries penalties.
Therefore, since it is certain that we will again
be appealing to our citizens to take up arms—and,
perhaps, at a date which is not even remote-now is
the time to make sure that, to the best of our
ability, we do the fair thing by such citizens as
enlist.


There is no reason why a man should not have
as fair a trial in the line as he has in civil life.
It should be as obvious to any reasonable man as it
was obvious to Williams half a century ago that
there is no reason why a man should not have as
good a medical service in the line as he has in civil
life.
Consider the legal service which our troops do
get. The table shown is given in illustration. The
facts are taken from one day’s issue of the Sydney
press. They are a contrast in the operations of the
trained civil courts, as against the untrained mili-
tai’y ones. It has to be remembered that the trained
courts were trying the scum of the land, whilst the
military courts Avere trying the flower. It has fur-
ther to be noted that the trained courts Avere trying
criminal offences, as against the other courts, which
were trying purely military ones. Note the dif-
ference in the sentences.
It boils down to this. Where the trained court
thinks in months, the other one thinks in years.
Why should such horrors exist? —for horrors
they are, Avhich are only equalled for ghastliness by
the medical horrors of Crimean days. The answer
to the question is furnished by the bone-headed re-
actionaries who make up the bulk of the military
caste. These would say that such savagery is neces-
sary in the interests of military discipline. A few
decades ago, their prototypes regarded the abolition
of flogging as a calamity for the same reason. These
very men, in this very Avar, regarded Mr. Hughes
himself as a calamity, because the Prime Minister in
flat defiance of every influence that could be brought
to bear upon him, including heavy and persistent
pressure from the British GoAmrnment, absolutely
forbade capital punishment in the Australian army.
Which does Australia say was right to-day?
Mr. Hughes Or the reactionaries? The public may


take our assurance that hundreds of good
Australians would now be lying in dishonoured
graves, had it not been for the resolution of the
Prime Minister.
When the Army Legal Service conies—as come
it must—it will be worked on exactly the same lines
as those on which the Army Medical is worked. Sick
and wounded men are drafted out of the line
through casualty clearing stations, and into the
hands of experts.
. -f°, wUh tlle delinquents. They also will be
dratted out. As the others pass into the hands of
doctors, these would pass into the hands of men
legally trained. As the others passed into the hos-
pitals or to the base, the accused would pass into
( , an(1? . hmybe, gaols. They would be assured
oi a lair trial and a proper punishment. It is the
least of the assurances which a citizen who takes up
arms in defence of his country should have the right
to demand.
At present there are special services to attend
to every portion of the soldier’s anatomy. There are
even special services to attend to the animals which
accompany him. The one thing for the protection of
which, there is no special service, is the most price-
less thing of all—his character, his reputation


ADVERTISEMENT.
Telephone 5 CITY 4936
W. A. LITTLE
EXPERT VALUER
FINE ART, FURNITURE
AND —
GENERAL AUCTIONEER
Main' Entrance:
42 Castlereagh Street
Directly opposite Hotel Australia
Other Entrance:
51 & 53 Elizabeth Street
Midway between King and Hunter Sts.
SYDNEY
Valuations made for Inventories prepared.
Probate and other ■ ,• — etc., etc.
purposes. t: %. .


advertisement.
Returned Soldiers —
Here’s the Information
You want-
For the very best qual-
ities and most reason-
able prices for Tools
of all Trades, go to
NOCK & KIRBY
=- T rn
See us also for Furniture,
Household Hardware, and
General Drapery supplies*
We also carry out all
manner of Repairs, effic-
iently and cheaply.
188 to 194a George Street
{Near Circular Quay)
SYDNEY


USING THE LION’S SKIN.
There is one direction in which the Government
might properly forbid the use of such words as
“Anzac” and “Digger.” Their assumption as pen-
names might well be barred. This reflection is
prompted by the perusal of a sheet called the “Bris-
bane Daily Standard.” Its two main suits are ex-
pletives and mis-statements. In a recent issue, it
published a letter, signed “Digger.” This individual
says that he was in France, and that he was
“pinched” for putting “a tin of hot tea through the
barb wire to 26 blind Australians, who have taken
their own eyesight to get out of prison. . . . those
boys took their own sight with a wooden match to
inoculate their eyes. I have been an eye-witness to
it.” This statement is a monstrous libel on the
Army, which was world-famed for its freedom from
“self-inflicted wounds.” But that may pass, for
worse than that is the fact that it is an attack on
the helpless blind. Apply the test of figures. This
alleged “Digger” says that he himself saw 26 blind
men. The official figures show that “the number of
blind men for the whole war is fewer than 100.”
Therefore, the Brisbane statement accuses at least
one out of every four of these unfortunates of being
a self-inflicted casualty. It is safe to say that no
more cowardly libel has ever been published in Aus-
tralia.
MINE AND COUNTER-MINE.
Here are some matters which the soldiers will
have to watch. The local Germans are freely stating
that the ex-German Governor is coming out to
Rabaul to manage German interests there. If this is
permitted, the natives, who know him well, will
never believe that the Germans have lost their
colony. Needless to say, the reason for sending him
is to foster that belief in the native mind. The


ADVERTISEMENT.
“For the Big Shints ”
In these latest models of the
successful series 19
STUDEBAKERS
The “Digger” will find the
mechanical expression of those
qualities of POWER, ENDUR-
ANCE, DASH, and LEADER-
SHIP that wins out.
These splendid cars grant a
CAPACITY with ECONOMY
in upkeep that makes them
specially suitable for the “Dig-
ger” contemplating entry into
the Garage and Hire-car Busi-
ness; and to him, if he so de-
sires, Studebaker will extend
very easy terms of purchase.
Designed for the convenience,
comfort, and service of the man
who drives his own car, these
beautiful models represent the
utmost value in the market
to-day.
A Light Six
A Big Six
STUDEBAKER
I 77 Elizabeth Street,
SYDNEY


missions are already airing their views as to what
it is that may be done now peace is signed, and it is
the present intention to try and get permission to
dump a batch of German missionaries. That will be;
another insidious thrust at British prestige. The
German firms in the colony engaged Australians to
replace their German employees who were interned
at Holdsworthy. If these internees are allowed to
go back to New Guinea they will displace our own
people. Two of them, incidentally, took part in the
flogging of the Reverend Mr. Cox, the British mis-
sionary, in 1914. Here again. If these two men
are allowed to be seen again in the Island where
will we stand with the natives? The name of our
Empire will be mud, which, of course, is what all
of these Germans are plotting for.
THE ANZAC’S CHILDREN.
Some figures which came out a few days ago
show that there are about twelve thousand orphans
of soldiers in the Commonwealth. A University
education should be provided for every one of these
children that wants it, and every effort should be
made to induce each one of them to want it. Other
provision will have to be made for those children
of the fallen whose mothers are alive. In many
cases it is the custom to take a child from school
at as early an age as the law permits, so that the
child may assist in the support of the family. This
can be counteracted by giving to such mothers as re-
quire it a compensation for the loss of service. It
may be that it will be costly to the nation to carry
through each of these little ones to the end of a
University course, but posterity will reap inestim-
able benefits from the expenditure. Meanwhile,
every effort should be made, and every inducement
offered, to get the sons of the dead into the Royal
Naval and Royal Military Colleges. If breeding
counts, these of all others are the places for them.


ADVERTISEMENT.
Soldier
Land Settlement!
(Under the Government Closer Settlement Scheme)
GEO. HARDWICK & CO.
(W. J. FROST, late A.I.F.)
™r l^ VJ V THE 9 OOD AT THE RIGHT
rKICES. Von pick your block of Laud and
leave the rest to us.
We protect your interests in all matters re-
lating to LAND SETTLEMENT, also assist
you in obtaining necessary advances from the
Government and £625 for purchase of STOCK
and PLANT,
Farms Available
A Famous NEW ENGLAND STATION
6 miles from Railway, in 26 FARMS, all Free-
A ™P roved ’ AGRICULTURAL and
GRAZING (sheep to the acre land); also em-
inently suited for potatoes and maize.
No Survey Fees, No Ballot.
Apply to us for Lithos and
full particulars
We also lave GRAZING, MIXED FARMING WHEAT
LUCERNE and DAIRY-FARMS for Sale i, ail
Write or Call for Lists.
GEO. HARDWICK & CO.
(W. J. FROST, late A.I.F.)
* Twyford House,” 17 Castlereagl. SIreel, Sydney


THE HERO RETURNS.
• 0| course 'the Returned Man receives preference
- -in any conspicuous Jobs that do not matter. Enter
any large building, and the man who opens the swing
doors for you is a returned soldier. A one-legged
warrior operates the lift, whilst the messenger wears
the 1914-15 ribbon. But get within where the big
jobs are, and a different state of affairs is promptly
manifest. These men “dug in” whilst their betters
were absent on thn country’s service. In open com-
petition, they wo aid have had no chance; but, realis-
ing their opportunity, they hung on, and were
rewarded with exceeding promotion. As against
the returning soldiers, these stay-at-homes have three
or four years’ service to put in the balance, and a
wann place in the heart of the boss for sticking to
him, whilst the good men deserting him to join
the colours. And there is another side. No firm
will dispense with those whom it has trained at cer-
tain trouble and expense. Many places, such as the
Victorian State Savings Bank, will be hundreds
Over-strength when all their men return. This will
mean increased running expenses and slower promo-
tion. Competition will be keen, and war-weary men
qannot be expected to outshine the shirkers in their
own jobs. Popular feeling in favour of the Digger
is on the ebb, and the outlook for many of the boys
--—especially the incapacitated—is wrapped in gloom.
AN OBVIOUS PRECAUTION.
One of the many weaknesses of the German is
Ids habit of boasting of Ids secret intentions to all
and sundry. It is the duty of the Government to


ADVERTISEMENT.
SPECIALS
They soothe into being, that happy
feeling of REAL smofcc-contcnt
Enjoy one to-night, after dinner
The Cigar that Satisfies
Exquisite Cigarettes
No smoker can fully appreciate the
possibilities of a cigarette until he has
tried Abdulla. They soothe and
delight—and are invariably the choice
of the connoisseur.
Try them yourself
'
ft
L.A
l Guaranteed British Hand-made Cigarettes


profit by such information. The Germans who left
by the Ypiringa—including the delectable Paul Free-
man—were warped off to the tune of shouts to those
on shore of “We will see you again.” This means
that these undesirables will buy or forge faked
papers on their arrival in Europe, and that they
will use these papers to re-enter the Commonwealth.
It can be prevented. Before any of these pople are
landed at Rotterdam their finger-prints should be
taken. It will be found that the finger-print system
will be one of the best guarantees of the effective
working of the new Immigration Amendment Act.
THE LABOURER’S HIRE.
One of the many glaringly inequitable results of
Army rule was the system of docking pay in
respect of F.P. No. 2. A punishment of 60 days’
F.P. No. 2 was a common thing at the front, and,
inter alia, it connoted loss of pay for that period.
For this purpose pay was estimated to amount to
6s. a day, although the private abroad was only
allowed to draw 2s. A soldier who was awarded the
punishment was required to pay off at the 2s. rate,
and therefore for three times 60 days (180 days), he
endured the agonies of penury. This was bad
enough in all conscience. But whilst this punish-
ment was going on he continued to serve his country
in the Field. On the principle that the honest em-
ployer pays for work done, it is now up to Australia
to see that all deprivations of pay incurred under
this heading are refunded to those who earned the
money. Doubtless the offences, in respect of which
these forfeitures were incurred, had a degree of im-
portance at the time, but they were trivial things at
best; and the Hell of poverty, which the delinquent
endured for six months, should more than satisfy
the most clamorous upholders of vindictiveness.


SOBS FOR SQUAREHEADS.
_ Amongst its other aggregations of cranks anti
zanies, Sydney contains an Anti-Deportation
League. Its secretary says that the deportation of
Germans “brings us back to the dim, dark days of
Magna Charta.” He adds that “the whole thing
reeks with infamy” and is “un-Christian.” England
is getting her share of similar vapourings. The
March issue of the “Fortnightly Review” supplies a
corrective. It says that so far are such measures
from implying a break with the historic policy of
our people, that on the contrary they imply a re-
turn to it, inasmuch as the Act of Settlement ex-
cluded naturalised subjects from Parliament and
the Privy Council. In dealing with the “Christian-
ity” aspect of the matter, the “Review” revives a
remarkable forecast which was made by Sir Robert
Morier. Sir Robert was one of England’s ambas-
sadors, and in 1875 he wrote of Germany that “in
the event of war her action would be stamped with
a pedantic ferocity, a scientific cynicism, an aca-
demic cruelty, which history would never forget and
mankind would take a long time to forgive.” The
comment of the “Review” is that “those who would
instantly condone the crimes of the Germans and
welcome them back to commercial and social inter-
course are making the repetition of such crimes in
future wars not only possible but probable.” There
cannot be a doubt that this is so, “Woe to the
vanquished” is the credo of the German. It is only
by the stern application of his own doctrine to his
own person that he will acquire that genuine convic-
tion of the futility of war which—subject to the
Navy—is the world’s only guarantee of peace.


Dependable Furniture
MADE IN OUR OWN FACTORY!
mm
m
V
n
r h
Wi
-
1
M
IT WILL PAY YOU TO INSPECT OUR SHOW-ROOMS
BEFORE YOU BUY ELSEWHERE
BECAUSE
We are Manufacturers and oar Prices bear ONE PROFIT only.
We Mark Everything in PLAIN FIGURES at a Nett Price.
There is no adjustment of Prices to allow of Special Dis-
counts and Concessions.
WE STOCK EVERYTHING NEEDED for the COMPLETE
FURNISHING of your Home.
Oar VALUES are BETTER, for the SAME COST, or LESS.
Ltd.
Furniture Manufacturers
Home Furnishers
Decorative Experts
Removalists and Storers
opp. TOWN HALL, GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY


WHERE YOU MEET THE
BEST PEOPLE!
Orchestral Performances Daily at
Luncheon, Afternoon Tea & Dinner
W. H. Rayner’s
PAVILION
PARRAMATTA WHARF
CIRCULAR QUAY
Public and Private Dining Rooms,
Roof Garden, After - Theatre Suppers
Sydney’s Restaurant De Luxe
Outside Catering Conducted by Special
Catering Department
Telephone, City 380
Printed by William Broods & Co., Ltd., 17 Castlereagh St., Sydney.
