

THE
RULES AND OBJECTS
OF THE
TASMANIAN
ACCLIMATISATION SOCIETY,
WITH
A LIST OF THE OFFICERS, MEMBERS, AND
SUBSCRIBERS TO THE SOCIETY.
HOBART TOWN:
BURNET, PRINTER, 69, COLLINS STREET.
MDCCCLXII.




THE
RULES AND OBJECTS
OF THE
TASMANIAN
ACCLIMATISATION SOCIETY,
WITH
A LIST OF THE OFFICERS, MEMBERS, AND
SHBSCRIBERS TO THE SOCIETY.
HOBART TOWH:
BURNET, PRINTER, 69, COLLINS STREET.
MDOCCLXII.




THE RULES AND OBJECTS
OF THE
Tasmanian Acclimatisation Society.
11. The objects of the Society shall be the introduction,
icclimatisation, and domestication of all innocuous Quadrupeds,
lirds, fishes, insects, and vegetables, whether useful or orna-
nentalthe perfection, propagation, and hybridisation of
races newly introduced or already domesticatedthe spread
if indigenous animals, &c., from parts of the Colonies where they
are already known, to other localities where they are not
knownthe procuring, whether by purchase, gift, or exchange,
if animals, &c., from Great Britain, the British Colonies, and
foreign countriesthe transmission of animals, &c., from the
Colony to Ehgland and foreign parts, in exchange for others
sent thence to the Societythe holding of periodical meetings,
and the publication of reports and transactions, for the purpose
of spreading knowledge of acclimatisation and inquiry into the
causes of success or failure ;-the interchange of reports, &c.,
with kindred associations in other parts of the world, with the
view, by correspondence and mutual good offices, of giving the
widest possible scope to the project of acclimatisation ;-the
conferring rewards, honorary or intrinsically valuable, upon
seafaring men, passengers from distant countries, and others
who may render valuable services to the cause of acclimatisation.
2. A subscriber of One Guinea or upwards annually shall be
Objects of the
Society.
Membership.


Subscriptions.
Property to vest in
Trustees.
Executive
Officers.
Vacancy in Coun-
cil, how supplied
a Member of the Society; and contributors, within one year, of
Ten Guineas or upwards shall be Life Members of the Society;
and any person who may render special services to the Society,
by contribution of stock or otherwise, shall be eligible for life
membership, and may be elected as such by the Committee, or
by any annual general meeting.
3. The annual subscription shall be payable on the first day
of April in each year, and may be received by any Member of
the Committee, or the Collector, either of whom on receiving the
sajne shall cause the person so subscribing to be enrolled a
member accordingly.
4. All the property of the Society, of what nature or kind
soever, shall vest in Trustees to be appointed by the Council,
for the use, purposes, and benefit of the Society.
5. The Society shall be governed by a Council of twenty-four
members, to include a President, Yice-President, Treasurer, and
an Honorary Secretary, to be elected by ballot at the first
general meeting of the Society, eight of whom shall retire
annually by rotation, but shall be, eligible for re-election.
Provided that if the Hobart Town Corporation, or any of
the adjacent Municipalities, shall decide upon expending
any sum of money exceeding £5O in any one year upon the
grounds or for the objects of the Society, the Mayor of Hobart
Town, or Warden of such Municipality, shall be for such year
a member of the Council, and be at liberty to act in every
respect as an ordinaiy member.
6. In case of a vacancy occurring by the death or resignation
of any Member of the Council, the remaining Members may
appoint another Member of the Society to be a Member of the
Council in the place of the deceased, or resigned, Member.
Provided that such vacancy shall not be supplied by the Council
except after seven days’ notice given of the new Member to be
proposed, and unless in the presence of at least five Members
of the Council.


7. The Society shall hold periodical Meetings, at which
papers and other communications relating to the objects of the
Society, and reports prepared by the Council, shall be received,
and such discussions shall he encouraged as may be of value in
propagating a knowledge of acclimatisation amongst the
Members and the public. And such business generally shall be
disposed of as may be brought under consideration by the
Council, or by any Member who shall have given seven days’
previous notice thereof to the Honorary Secretary, or as a
majority of two-thirds of the Members present shall see fit to
entertain and consider; and each Member shall have the
privilege of introducing two friends at such Meetings.
8. The Council shall meet at least once a month, and three
Members, of whom the President, Vice-President, Treasurer, or
Honorary Secretary shall be one, shall form a quorum, and be
capable of transacting the business of the Council, subject to such
limitations as may be imposed by any bye-law of the Council, or
rule, or resolution of the Society, which may be hereafter made.
9. The Council shall have the sole management of the affairs
of the Society, and of the income and property thereof, for the
uses, purposes, and benefit of the Society; and shall have the
right of appointing an Honorary Secretary and Honorary
Treasurer, and also of appointing paid servants, and to make
such bye-laws as they may deem requisite, which are to be
subject to the approval of the next annual or special general
meeting of the Society.
10. Minutes shall be made, in books kept for the purpose,
of all the proceedings at the general and special meetings of the
Members, and minutes shall also be made of the proceedings of
the Council at their general and special meetings, and of the
names of the Members attending the same, and such minutes
shall be open to inspection of any Member of the Society at all
reasonable times.
11. All subscriptions and other monies payable to the Society,
Quarterly Meetings
of the Society.
Meetings of
Council.
Powers and Duties
of Council.
Minutes of Pro-
ceedings.
Monies to be paid
to Treasurer.


Annual Meeting.
Nonpayment of
Subscriptions.
Special Meetings of
Members.
Honorary Mem-
bers.
shall be paid into a Bank, to he named by the Council, to the
credit of the Society; and no sum shall be paid on account of
the Society until the same shall have been ordered by the
Council, and such order be duly entered in the book of the
proceedings of the Council; and all cheques shall be signed by
the Treasurer as such, and be countersigned by the Honorary
Secretary, or by some other member of the Council delegated
by the Council to act as such.
12. An annual meeting shall be held on the second Wednesday
in August of each year, or, if a holiday, upon a day to be fixed
by the Council; and the Council shall report their proceedings
during the past year, and shall produce their accounts, duly
audited, for publication if deemed desirable; and the meeting
shall elect new Members of Council to supply the vacancies
therein. And notices of motion must be furnished to the
Honorary Secretary, or Assistant Secretary, one day previous
to the holding of such meeting, or such motions may be rejected
by the Chairman.
13. All privileges of membership shall cease in case any
Member shall be three months in arrear, subject, however, to.
his restoration on the payment of such subscription as aforesaid,
accompanied by satisfactory explanation.
14. Upon receiving a requisition in writing, signed bj tvel\e
or more Members of the Society, or upon a resolution of the
Council, the Honorary Secretary shall convene a special meeting
of the Members to be held within fifteen days of the receipt by
him of such requisition or resolution. Provided always that
such requisition and resolution, and the notices thereunder
convening the Meeting, shall specify the subject to be considered
at such meeting, and that subject only shall be discussed at
such meeting.
15. The Council or any general meeting of the Society may
admit, as Honorary Members, such ladies or gentlemen as may


have distinguished themselves in connection with the objects of
the Society, or in objects of a kindred nature.
16. It shall be lawful for any annual or special meeting to
alter, vary, or amend the Rules; or to substitute another for
any of the same; or to make any new Rule which may be
considered desirable; after a notice specifying the nature of
such alteration, variation, amendment, substitution, or new
Rule, shall have been given to the Honorary Secretary fifteen
days before the holding of such meeting. And such alteration,
variation, amendment, substitution, or new Rule, shall be valid
if carried by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the
members present at such meeting.
Power to alter
Buies.


LIST OF THE RULES OFFICERS
OF THE
Tasmanian Acclimatisation Society.
|3rttrtnr.
HJS EXCELLENCY COLONEL GORE BROWNE, C.B.
Prctftlrntt.
(tffftuml.
Sir V. FLEMING.
FRANCIS SMITH, Esq.
His Worship THE MAYOR OF
HOBART TOWN.
The Rev. T. J. EWING, F.E.S.,
F.S.S.
The Hon. W. HENTY, Esq., M.L.C.
The Hon. P. H. GELL,Esq., M.L.C.
The Hon. Capt. LANGDON, M.L. C.
The Hon. JOSEPH ARCHER,
Esq., M.L.C.
The Hon. THE SPEAKER.
The Hon. T. D. CHAPMAN,
Esq., M.H.A.
W. ARCHER, Esq., M.H.A., F.L.S,
The Hon. W. L. DOBSON,
Esq., M.H.A.
C. S. HENTY, Esq., M.H.A.
R. Q. KERMODE, Esq., M.H.A.
J.MACLANACHAN,Esq., M.H.A.
J. W. AGNEW, Esq., M.D.
T. J. KNIGHT, Esq., Q.C.
J. W. GRAVES, Esq.
J. FOSTER, Esq.
JULIES J. STUTZER, Esq.
Dr. BUTLER, M.H.A.
CHARLES GOULD, Esq., F.G.S.
2Trfnearer,
THOMAS GIBLIN, Esq.
MORTON ALLPORT, Esq.


LIST OF MEMBERS AND SUBSCRIBERS.
Annual r. ..
Subscriptions. Donations.
His Excellency Colonel Gore Browne, Patron £5 5 0...£5 5 0
His Honor Sir Y, Fleming, 0. J 1 1 0 2 2 0
His Honor Francis Smith, Esq 1 1 0 2 2 0
Colonel Broughton, R.E 110
His Worship the Mayor of Hobart Town
The Venerable Archdeacon Davies 1 1 0
The Rev. T. J. Ewing 1 1 0
The Rev. F. H. Cox . 1 1 0
The Rev. J. M. Norman 1 1 0
The Rev. J. R. Buckland 1 1 0
The Hon. W. Henty, Esq., M.L.C 1 1 0 2 2 0
The Hon. P. H. Gell, Esq., M.L.C 1 1 0 2 2 0
The Hon. Capt. Langdon, M.L.C 1 1 0 2 2 0
The Hon. Joseph Archer, Esq., M.L.C
The Hon. Isaac Bisdee, Esq., M.L.C 1 1 0
The Hon. J. M. Wilson, Esq., M.L.C 1 1 0
The Hon. W. Carter, Esq., M.L.C 1 1 0
The Hon. J. H. Wedge, Esq., M.L.C 1 1 0 1 1 0
The Hon. the Speaker 1 1 0 3 3 0
The Hon. T. D. Chapman, Esq., M.H.A 1 1 0 2 2 0
The Hon. W. L. Dobson, Esq., M.H.A 1 1 0 3 3 0
Dr. Butler, M.H.A 1 1 0 2 2 0
A. F. Rooke, Esq., M.H.A 110
C. S. Henty, Esq., M.H.A
W. Archer, Esq., M.H.A 1 1 0 3 3 0
R. Q. Kermode, Esq., M.H.A 1 1 0 5 5 0
J. Maclanachan, Esq., M.H.A 1 1 0 2 2 0
R. P. Adams, Esq., M.H.A 110
F. Synnott, Esq., M.H.A 110
Dr. Agnew 1 1 0 2 2 0
E. S. P. Bedford,Esq 110
T. J. Knight, Esq., Q,.C 1 1 0 2 2 0
Morton Allport, Esq 1 1 0 2 2 0
F. S. Dobson, Esq
John Roberts, Esq 1 1 0
J. J. A. Watkins, Esq 1 1 0 2 2 0
W. Pitt, Esq 1 1 0
A. J. Watchom, Esq 1 1 0


Annual Donations.
Subscriptions.
C. Butler, Esq £1 1 0
J. W. Graves, Esq 1 1 0 2 2 0
William Ritchie, Esq
S. Crisp, jun., Esq 1 ®
J. Foster, Esq 10 10 0
Julius J. Stutzer, Esq 1 1 0 2 2 0
Charles Gould, Esq 1 ®
H. J. Buckland, Esq 1 ®
William Giblin, Esq 1 1 0
Yemon Midwood, Esq 1 1 0
F. H. Henslowe, Esq 1 ®
W. R. Falconer, Esq 1 1 0
Capt. F. E. Steward 1 1 0 2 2 0
Thomas Giblin, Esq * 1 ® ® 3 0
Nigel Gresloy, Esq * * ®
James Lord, Esq
J. J. Butler, Esq 110
Henry Yicary, Esq
Bassett Dickson, jun., Esq 1 1 0
Ebenezer Shoobridge, Esq 1 1 0
Askin Morrison, Esq
Alfred Wilkins, Esq
J. Williams, Esq. (Adelaide) 1 1 0
William Boys, Esq 1 1 0
Henry Hinshy, Esq * * 0
Lavington Roope, Esq 1 1 0
W. V. Morriss, Esq 110
Alexander Kissock, Esq 1 1 0
George Whiting, Esq * 1 0
John Davies, Esq
George YThitcomb, Esq 110
William Murray, Esq. (Elizabeth-street) 1 1 0 2 2 0
H. B. Tonkin, Esq 1 1 0
John Walker, Esq 1 1 0
Mr. Charles Greig 1 1 0
Mr. W. G. Weaver 110
Mr. John McConnell 1 1 0
Mr. J. H. B. Walch 1 1 0
Mr. C. E. Walch 1 1 0
W. Robertson, Esq * 1 0
