

The Education of the Young
IN THE
Laws of Reproduction.
A Plea for Teaching , by “Practitioner."
PERTH
1915




THE EDUCATION OF THE YOUNG
IN THE LAWS OF REPRODUCTION.
The Articles contained in this pamphlet first appeared in the June
and July numbers of "Western Women,” They are reprinted in re-
sponse to the request of several persons who thought they might be of
use to many parents. The reprinted notice of the first article is taken
from a leader which appeared in "The Medical Journal of Australia,"
July 10th, 1915.
SEXUAL EDUCATION.
An important discussion on Urn
subject of venereal disease stands
adjourned in the South Australian
Branch of the British Medical As-
sociation. In other States various
stops are being considered in connec-
tion with this highly important mat-
ter, and the public, has had it brought
violently to its notice both in relation
to the sexual excesses of the sol-
diers on the field of battle and
through the. sociological movement,
which has taken this subject as one.
to he dealt with without delay. .Vari-
ous suggestions have been brought
forward within the. past few years,
including notification, control, and
night clinics. A further suggestion,
is the. education of the public, and
closely associated with this matter is
the question of education of the
child in sexual physiology. An able
article on the last-named subject Ims
appeared in the “Western Women,”
of .June 1, 1!)15. This publication
has been in existence for less than
one year, but promises to serve a.
highly useful purpose in bringing to
women living in the bush information
of a political, social and economical
nature. The article referred to is
signed “Practitioner,” and hears the
stump of the work of a careful ob-
server and an able thinker, The
writer pleads for .judicious and early
information on sexual physiology,
ami above all for truth in l-ho replies
by parents to the enquiries by child-
ren. The (lunger of learning 100
lute, danger,s of prostitution, vene-
real infection and.sexual precocity,
leading to perversion, are real, and
the quotation of Bloch is made that
it is “Better.a year too soon thiin »«
hour too hil,e.” How and when the
child should be taught the laws of
reproduction, and the significance of
sex, are questions which must find
answers varying according to the en-
vironment of the child and the atti-
tude towards sexual matters of the
parent. Unanimity will probably
never he attained.
We are, not inclined to the belief
that this will stamp out prostitution
or eradicate, venereal disease. But
there is little doubt that cautious
and correct information at a suitable
time, and under auspicious condi-
tions, will eifect a saving of indivi-
duals from the dangers of both ig-
norant action and ('tireless exposure
to the risk of infection. More may
lie expected from educational meas-
ures in girls than in hoys, but oven
in the latter harm cannot follow,
provided that the, teaching is accom-
plished in a proper manner, and in a
tnimher of instances the child may be
induced to adopt a clean attitude of
mind and n healthy conception of sex
functions..


A PLEA PUR TEACHING.
It is somewhat strange that it
should be necessary to present a,
plea for the education of the young
in the laws of reproduction since
they are universal, and of supremo
importance to the race; yet as the
giving of that education is still op-
posed in public and in private
by persons of both sexes, the neces-
sity remains. Man, in common with
all other creatures, obeys the two
great laws of life —that of self-pre-
servation, and that of reproduction.
Wo must recognise the universal
application of these laws if we are
to deal with the question of teaching
our children about them. We spend
plenty of time, thought, and money
in preparing these children to carry
on the struggle necessitated by the
first, but not nearly enough of all
three in preparing them to carry on
efficiently and well the duties en-
tailed by the second. Wo need to get
back to what may be called the
“natural” point of view as complete-
ly as possible to see the question in
its proper focus. Among the brute
creation, and among the primitive
peoples, we sec this law obeyed as
openly and as naturally as any other
of the great natural laws: as eating
and drinking for instance. With
them there is no thought of shame
nor of wrong-doing associated with
it; it is simply a part of life. The
young of the lower animals, on at-
taining to maturity, but not befoi’c,
are prepared to fulfil—‘indeed, are
anxious to fulfil —these functions as
a matter of course, just as they are
to fulfil all other functions of life.
Left to themselves this would lie
equally true of the young of man-
kind. The child’s opening mind re-
cognises the phenomena of sex ns
lining of equal interest with, but of
no greater interest than, those of
other phenomena. We are ready to
impart: to this enquiring mind infor-
mation such as it can assimilate on
every subject except this one; why
do we except this? Is it not as es-
sential as most, and is it not more
far-reaching in its effects upon the
well-being of the race than any other,
regarded from a purely physical
basis 1 ? Ur. Lyttlelon, head master
of Eton, some twenty years ago, when
writing on this subject, said: “It
would be impossible to name any sub-
juet of such general importance and
interest as this Upon' which so little
has been said; the reasons being that
the interest and importance of the
subject are outweighed by its diffi-
culty; and that while the dangers of
speaking are patent to the most
superficial re (lection, the far greater
dangers of reticence are not to be
understood without prolonged obser-
vation and much thought.” The first
part of this paragraph is not so true
now as it was then, for of recent
years a great deal has been said and
written by scientists, educationalists,
and sociologists on the desirability of
teaching being given, and the tide of
public opinion is surely though slowly
turning in that direction. What" are
the gains of silence? For some a few
period of ignorance varying accord-
ing to their mental development,
powers of observation, and the safe-
guards of their home; these few are
practically always girls. For many
more a rude and painful awakening
to tacts, which at flrsl appal and
distress,' instead of, being as they
might; be, teachers of the oneness
of life, sighs of the great mind be-
hind -all natural laws. For more
still, years, sometimes a whole'life


time, of ■ misery ami sorrow, when,
through ighonlnce, they have lirnns-
grossod those laws a ltd tind that in-
evitable penalties, physical, mental,
and moral, have to be paid. Does not
(.be race pay over and over again for
the diseases contracted bv the young,
the ignorant, and the thoughtless?
It (lays in physical pain, in' mental
suffering, in crippled and inefficient
citizens, in high infant mortality, and
in many other ways. It pays, too,
not only in diseases ■ ■ contracted' in
adult life, lint by abuses which exist
among children, and particularly
among boys, who have never been
taught about their own bodies, and
I he importance of the functions
which develop at puberty. Parents
greatly exaggerate the difficulties of
dealing with this subject' because
they know how man has debased this
instinct and dragged it in the mud df
selttshness and bestiality', hut they
forget that a child is ignorant of all
(his. They must seek to divest the
subject in their own minds of all but
its natural, pare and best associa-
tions; to see with the child’s’eyes, to
enter into its mind, and to present’the
truth in the form suited to 'it. It:
is no doubt easier to go on in the
old tracks of convention than' to
strike out a new course; easier to
t rust to a happy chance Than to
think and educate ourselves, in order
to educate our children; but arc we
justified in taking this course?' The
in which this teaching may
heddealt with further on, but here it
may lie pointed out that in one thing
all authorities agree. With one voice
they say “Tell no lies.’’ Unhappily,
this advice is only too much needed.
People who would not ordinarily be
untruthful will fell a child an unlrulh
or an inferential untruth about this
subject:; they evade, they talk non-
sense. Now, children arc the aeutest
of observers and redsonors; their
conclusions they often keep to them-
selves, but they are usually wonder-
fully accurate, and a child quickly
finds out whether what it has been
told is genuine or not. Once it knows
it has been deceived its faith and con-
fidence are either lost,or so severely
shaken that.they can never he wholly
restored; mi' parent, therefore, who
desires to retain a child's trust, will
take this method of dealing with it.
Children vary much as to the age
when they begin to notice and impure
about these natural phenomena—
sdme do so as early ns three years,
some much later; but Whenever they
do begin to ask, a truthful answer,
suited lo their capacity, should he
given, and generally speaking they
will he satisfied. One of the best in-
stances of a ehild’s acumen in detect-'
ing untruth is contained in the fol-
lowing conversation. A hoy of seven
asked his mother: ‘“Where do babies'
come from?” Sim replied! “People
hay them.” “I don’t, believe it," said
he. “Why not?” asked his mother.
“Because poor people have most.” To
again quote Dr. Lyttleton : "The' first
presentation is the most permanent:
let us give them the truest and best.”'
The 'words (if another writer are also
well worth remembering: “Better a
year 100 soon than an hour too late.”
Mow bitterly many parents have real-
ised this when Diced by their child's
question; “Why did you' never lell
me?” after that child had brought
upon himself or herself shame 'and
suffering'by giving way to natural in-
stincts and desires (sometimes in
fin'turnl, sometimes in unnatural'
ways), in ignorance of the results
which might follow such indulgence.


HOW TO TEACH.
It is by asking questions, by being
curious in fact, that children learn.
Anyone who has lived with and notic-
ed children knows that their atten-
tion passes quickly from one subject
to another, that they are-constantly
receiving new impressions, and that
no one idea occupies them for long
at a time. This is particularly true
when their questions about any sub-
ject are answered promptly, and to
their satisfaction. We therefore find
that the best method to teach a child
the facts of life is to reply as fully,
as possible, to such questions as it
may ask from time to time; if after
answering up to a, certain point, the
questioner still persists it is well to
promise further information later. A
child with real confidence in its par-
ents practically always responds to
this method. Often for months at a
time it will neither think about nor
ask for information on this subject;
all the facts of life are new- to it, and
all, so to speak, of equal interest; it
wants to know about each in turn.
An easy method of teaching is this;
Bhow (lie child a flower seed, tell it
that all .life springs from a seed or
cell of some kind, that there are-
different kinds of seeds for differ-
ent . flowers, for different vege-
tables, for different trees;, it can be
shown .varieties of these. Point out
that a seed coming from a certain
plant always grows up into a plant
like the one, it came from. Take a
flower and pull it to pieces; show the
child the yellow.pollen dust, the tube
down which it travels, (he little
ovules which, lie at tint'bottom of the
tube; explain that-the pollen dust or.
grains must enter these ovules before
they become proper- living seeds
which will grow into now plants. Tell
it 1 , in fact, that there must always be
a father (in plants, the male element
—the pollen) and a mother (in plants
the female element —the ovule in the
ovary) before there can be a baby
plant, and that this relationship
which it sees in its own home and the
homes of its companions is true not
only of plants but of animals from
the lowest to the highest.
Show how there is always a safe
place prepared for the little seeds in
which they lie until they are ripe and
ready to grow alone; such as the pod
for peas, and so on. Explain that in
the same way places are prepared for
the voting of all animals. Erom time
to time as questions arc asked ex-
pand this teaching, and prove its.
truth from facts the child can verify
for itself. Always encourage the
asking of questions that the work-
ings of a (fluid’s mind may lie follow-
ed, corrected and helped. Once the
idea of a safe place for the young has
been grasped in the vegetable king-
dom, point out how the same rule
holds in the animal kingdom; how
chickens are developed in eggs which
need to he kept .warm by the mother;
how kangaroos have . pouches for
their young. When the child notices
the growth in girth of domestic ani-
mals, such as cgts, dogs, and cows.
—and it does not do this as a rule
until eight or nine years of age, and
often not until later, unless its atten-
tion is directed to the fact by an
older child, or an adult—it can bo
told that in these animals a place is
provided for the young inside the
mother's, body. Little by little, the
child’s .mind, itself working, pieces
together this .teaching, which covers
in:actual practice smtlimJi.years, until
it is prepared ,to learn that, it was
once carried within -its mother, and
that when it was born she needed rest


and care, in order to be able to care
for it properly. .Side by side with
this teaching of natural facts, as the.
child’s mental and moral capacity de-
velop, there ('an lie given leaching
about the duty wc all owe to the race;
the sacredncss of life; the need of
modesty; the care of the generative
organs, which may some day be ex-
ercised in the giving of life to others.
Point out how unripe seeds bear no
plants, how badly developed and ill-
caml-for ones reproduce others of
their kind,, and draw the lesson of
the danger of the use of the repro-
ductive function by immature persons
of either sex. Teach all along and
always the lessons of self-control
and thought for others; self-control
in eating, in drinking, in indulgence
of any kind. The boy or girl who
is taught and learns these lessons
has already half won the buttle
against natural impulses when they
arise. When the time of puberty ar-
rives help the. child by sympathy, by
diverting the mind, while safe-
guarding the physical health; let it
feel there is nothing to he ashamed
of in the emotions experienced, hut
that there is need for. controlling
them. Point out the moral tempta-
tions and dangers which will assail it,
and do so in plain, sensible language,
not in vague, mysterious hints. By
this method the mind is led on step
by step, and learns much that is
good mid helpful; by the time the
child is fifteen or sixteen it is in pos-
session ol' the knowledge necessary
to safeguard it from many dangers.
Those dangers nan then be explained
to it. “To be forewarned is to be fore-
armed.” It should 1)0 a rule when giv-
ing this teaching to a child to tell it
that it is teaching for itself alone, or
if given to several children in a family
for them alone; and this, not because
there is anything wrong in it, hut be-
cause other people like to teach their
own children. If n child wishes to
talk about the subject, lot it do so to
its parents; if other children want to
speak of it, it can always say it
knows already. No parents who
teach their children along these lines
willhave cause to regret their action;
on the other hand, their children will
in days to come have cause to thank
them for knowledge cleanly ami pro-
perly given. Parents are undoubted-
ly the right persons to give this
teaching: hut if for any reason it is
impossible for them to do so, it ought
to he given by medical men or women,
or by especially trained teachers, un-
til all the children of a. generation,
having themselves been taught, be-
come the ten chon* of the next. When
.that day dawns wo may expect a
healthier race and a cleaner and
purer moral atmosphere than that in
which wo now live.
THE COLORTYPE PREig, KING *TREET
