

THE CASE OF CAPTAIN MURRAY,
[LATE OF THE ROYALS,]
Decided after a lapse of Twenty-seven Years!
FROM THE “ AUSTRAL-ASIATIC REVIEW,” JULY 18.
THE IRISH MARRIAGE ACT. liameni, in favor of the object of the meeting, argued before them at very great length, much
T , —— , We noticed in our last number the injustice
In our number of last week, we noticed of retrospective operation of the pro-
the extreme injustice which would be worked posed Act afj follows f
by the passing a Law, by any Legislature, In conse ence of the recent deciskm of
which would render any Act an offence, that xv T a rr 1 a,- .a-
J , . . ’ the twelve Judges of Ireland (inserted m a
Act being no offence by the existing Law at
,1, , ■ c -, J 6 , recent number) that marriages celebrated by
the time of its occurrence. The proposed nut- ir ■ , , ° _ ,
~ , , v t Presbyterian Ministers between Presby te-
Law (or rather, said to be proposed) • , . .. , ~ 3
j , ‘ 5 ' nans and Episcopalians, were actually “no
would be so monstrous a perpetration of • , 77 7, , , ,
inrlivirlnni tu f , marriages at all, an Act was introduced
individual wrong, that we are convinced • . ~T T - T , „„ ,
it will either not pass at all, or it will be so the H ° USe * Lords ’ on r 2 . 8t1 L. 0f
modified in the Committee of the House of Februa O' ; u pon the petition of certain Dis-
Lords to which its provisions have been Se “ tlng Mlnis ‘ ers ’ , whloh we shall insert ln
especially referred, upon the motion of the ° Ur n f Xt n “ mber ’ the ob J ect of which is > as
Lord Chancellor, as to remove its retro- Stat , ed ln the newspaper sports, to render
spective operation. It will be perhaps Sucb mama S cs valid. It is impossible that
necessary to show the origin of this pro- tbe P ro Posed Act can P ass > if it is to operate
posed Act. A man named Smith, was retrospectively, particularly without giving
indicted at the last November Assizes, at Bntlsh sub J ects 111 all parts of the Empire
Armagh, for bigamy. He being a member sufficient time to petition against it, repre-
of the Church of England, not a minor, Senting any in j u stice it might effect. K
but of full age, had married a Presbyterian exam P le > let 11 be supposed that a ceremony
lady, the ceremony performed by a Presby ■ bav * n o been performed, which by the exist-
terian minister. His counsel took the ob- ing law ’ as solemnl y declared by the twelve
jection that it mas no marriage ;he was dud S es > was “ no marriage at all,” either of
found guilty, but the point was reserved for tbe P arties to such a ceremony were to
the decision of the twelve Judges. They marr 7 according to law, and a family
decided, as is known, that the ceremony was was t 0 be tbe resu lt whose right it
“no marriage at all,” and the man was would be to inherit entailed estates. Is it
discharged. The whole of the Dissenting not mons trous, to suppose it possible
Clergy in the North of Ireland took the tbat u P wards of forty years afterwards the
alarm, and thefollowing proceedings ensued. e 9 ceremony should be legalized, and the
We copy from the Dublin Monitor : Lgal marriage illegalized P The extreme in-
“At a public meeting of the ministers and laity j ur 7 which this would effect, to say nothing
Synod “friend, “° f * “ atter ° f
Liberty , was held in the Meeting-house of the first P er - ect impossibility that an Act perpetrating
Presbyterian Congregation, Belfast, on Wednes- such monstrous injustice can pass the British
day, the 2nd February, 1842, A. H. Halidav Eso , •, , m 1
ofClifden, High Sheriff Elect of the Co. Antrim’ le S lslature - To suppose it possible that a
in the chair, when the following Resolutions were l a W could be passed inflicting severe pains
I ~ , and penalties for any proceeding which had
OweS M !! tg ° mery> SeCond6d by tuken place long previously, at a time when
“That we have heard with much alarm of a P roCeedin & was sub Jf ted to nei ther
decision pronounced by the majority of the Judges P ams nor penalties, would be to suppose
of Ireland, on a case recently argued before them, that the legislature could be capable of com-
by which they are reported to have declared that ~ , „ r
marriages celebrated by Presbyterian ministers mittlll S tbe most flagrant wrong. An in-
between parties, whereof one is a member of the stance somewhat but far inferior in point
Sfabsitly^l'a^tiL” 111 " * Presb ? teriaa ’ “curred last week at Port Phillip. A man
Moved by the Rev. James Carley, seconded J 3 ® f arged lth horse -stealing, and being
by Alexander Montgomery, Esq., round guilty, Judge Willis passed upon him
“That the view of the law of marriage in a sentence unauthorised by law. Upon that
Ireland taken by the learned Judges in the case fact being made to appear, the Judge imme-
*»*.*«***,,***»*■ »•
several solemn decisions of the common law tri- more rightfully would those proceedings have
bunals; that the illegality of such marriages was been annulled, had, as in the pre-supnosed 1
utterly unknown to the Presbyterian ministers . ’ ’ 1 supposed
and people of Ireland, as well as to large numbers marna g e case, the horse-stealing charge
of their fellow-subjects of other denominations; been by the law, as it at the time existed
BPresbyterian ministers* " 0 at a 11! Wbat would he 1
the validity of which has never been successfully sa id of any legislature by which a law should i
T; r bjecting tne maii atPort Phiilip aad - -
other persons interested , until the announcement belonging to him to severe pains am’ ,
of the recent decision of the Judges.” penalties for an act which, at the time it 1
Moved by the Rev. William Glendy, was committed, was by the law no offence
seconded by Alexander Stewart, Esq., of at all ? It is impossible. Most likely the ’
Rosstrevor,— newspaper reports of the proposed Act do \
wisdomofthe in- eXCeptionS and t
volved in the decision above adverted to will de- which it must in common justice contain. '
stroy the peace of numbers of families, not only It is difficult to describe the efforts ’
belonging to the Presbyterian, but to the Esta- a l .l • . . r
Wished, and other Churches in Ireland, and will mac i e b y the Dissenting ministers of the t
unsettle a large amount of property ’which has North of Ireland to procure the passing 1:
descended to the issue of such marriap-es bv a , ! ■ \. 1 , , , ° t
hitherto unquestionable title, or which has been , ’ consequence was, that the t
alienated by persons the issue of such marriages tab i es of both Houses of Parliament were I
to other parties deriving title under them.” loaded with petitions in its favor, those who !
Moved by the Rev. John Porter, seconded would be affected by its retrospective ope-
by James Gnmshaw, Esq., Whitehouse,— ration, being too distant from the Kingdom s
“ That, under these circumstances, we look to he enabled i n „ 0 n
with confidence to the Legislature, to grant re- a . ~ P . 8 necessai T P r0 ‘ "
lief to the persons affected by the above decision cee dings in their behalf, in time to prevent P
by an Act of Parliament , declaring the validity to the consummation of a proceeding there- 11
all intents and purposes, of all past marriages which ~ , s ’ r
have been celebrated by Dissenting Ministers in tros P ectwe o perat!on of which would, as we s'
Ireland, whether the parties so united in marriage bave shown, work the very Utmost possible
have been both Dissenters or notf oppression and injustice. One individual d
Moved by the Rev. J. Scott Porter, se- was referred to by the Marquess Clanricarde, "
conded by John Dunville, Esq,- on the occasion of the presenti tition t.
weli-being to in faVOr of lbe Act House of Lords, g
of minds of Dissenters, and to the prevalence of a ® follows. We copy from the Southern
peace and harmony between the different reli- Reporter : "
gious denominations, that the law of marriao-e in P
Ireland be henceforth definitely settled by™ 1“ T , w marriages.
of Parliament, founded on the basis of religious • Jjora brougham presented petitions from va- li
liberty, and affording equal advantages to all riou ? congregations of Antrim, Dromore, Down- b;
sects; and that as all religious denominations in 1’ aIUI T 3' rone > P ra yiu" for the amendment hi
England and Scotland enjoy a perfect equality of 01 iSf relatln S ta Presbyterian marriages,
privilege, as to the right of celebrating marriage * "; ar q ue ss of Clanricarde said that he had ci
w-e trust to the justice of Parliament to concede !' T ° P 6 *’ 1 . 10113 to present to the house upon the la
an equal measure of religious liberty to Ireland ” same subject, and he would take that opportunity 2(
Moved hv the Rev D While \ , of re U arkln S that thl3 was not the first time this oi
ivloved by the Rev. D. Whyte, seconded question had been mooted. In the year 1815 si
by Robert Montgomery, Esq., of Sandy- Petitions were presented to both houses of Parlia- fif
mount ment from an officer who had been convicted of hi
“ Tv.lt e a a lu 1 , ° l 9 am y> when the same point arose; but the case w
tleeTu * P etltlan3 > on the above resolu- being referred to Sir William Garrow and Sir p£
tious, be presented to both Houses of Pa-hament, Samuel Shepherd, the Attorney and Solicitor-
read be adopted, and Generals of the day, they declared that then enler-
that they be forwarded for presentation ; that to tained no doubt that the marriage was a valid .
the House of Lords to the Marquis of London- marriage. The sentence was, therefore carried C 1
iTr^’lnblfT? l^!! 4 ” the H ° USe ° f Commons t 0 mto e ff ect - The noble marquess concluded by D
Dord John Russell. presenting two petitions from Armagh and another
Moved by the Rev. W. H. Doherty, se- P;. ac ?’. * be nam o of which did not reach us, both lc
ennded bv Alexander ot which prayed for an amendment of the law. or
°” d , Py Alexander > Brenan, Esq.,— Lord Campbell wished to call the attention of re
I hat we earnestly call upon all the Congre- his noble friend on the woolsack to the subject to
gations in connexion with the Presbytery of Antrim which the petitions which had just been presented ca
and the Remonstrant Synod of Ulster, and upon to the house referred. His noble friend was aware hi
all other persons interested in the subject, to pre- of the intense anxiety which was felt by a large ,
pare and forward petitions to Parliament, praying class of persons upon this point. He (Lord CA Sb
for the objects specified in the foregoing Resolu- had lately received several communications re- Wi
tion; and to procure them to be presented to both lative to the painful situation of parties affected th
Houses, as soon aajiossible after the commence- by the decision of the Irish judges. No doubt ,
ment of fhe Session.” had existed, for many years, but that marriages tb
Moved by Rev. C. J. M'Alister, seconded contrac ted under the circumstances in question th
t, f whitiaw. Esq.,
1 hat a Committee be now appointed for the the earliest opportunity, introduce a bill to remedy de
purpose of corresponding with Government, and the evil, but that his noble and learned friend on cb
adopting such other measures as may be thought the woolsack would introduce the bill into that '
needful for promoting the success of our petitions • house in the first instance, and as early as possible. 6 V
and that they be requested to co-operate with any Lord Brougham said he wished to unite with I6i
other body of persons seeking for similar objects his noble and learned friend who had preceded
with those specified in our petitions and resolu- him, in recommending to his noble and learned S6>
turns; said Committee to consist of our Chairman, Mend on the woolsack to introduce the measure nl
and the movers and seconders of resolutions at immediately into the house. He was sure that m(
this meeting, with power to add to their number.” there never was a subject more appropriate for
Moved by Rev. W. B. Miniss, seconded c onsideratiou of the house than the subject to ra '
bv Michael Andrews Eso which he wasthen referring; and he thought that as
3 . T , “ f Andrews, Esq., * came peculiarly within the range oftheir Lord- +0
1 hat the foregoing resolutions be inserted m ships deliberation. LU
the Belfast newspapers.” _ The Lord Chancellor said that it was not his an
(Signed) A. H. Halid ay, Chairman. intention to say a single word in reference to the as
Several other resolutions were passed, all observations thrown out by his noble and learned n u
e ,■ , , , r ’ friends with respect to the law upon this ques- •
of which as were the above, were moved by tion. All he would say, was this, that the Irish
Dissenting Ministers, and were calculated bench was never filled by lawyers more eminent J as
to enlist a strong party, in and out of Par- aTDresent^ThpT l6^ 6 tbai L tbose MwTiffed it
r at present. Ihe question had been deliberately
argued before them at very great length, much been favoured by a friend with the follow
consideration was given to the subject, and he • 3 WUII 1116 IolloW-
was therefore bound to entertain the greatest re- ln o ™portant extract from a detailed report
speet for the decision which had been come to of the proceedings in the House of Com-
under those circumstances. (Hear, hear hear i .1 co , T ,
With respect to the question put to him by his mo . ns on tbe of February in the Sun,
noble and learned friend, he begged leave to state which entirely removes all those anxieties
•' hich f M '“«»>• - th. «u„..
before the Law Officers of the Crown. Every rous other newspapers we had seen were
one who had attended to the subject must per- calculated to create. We have now the sa-
and°much xtoo! tisfaCti ° n t 0 find *at the Act has NOT
vernment had not turned their attention to the retrospective operation. But what amends
conv “ or i“ con venience of can be made to one who has been subiected
bringing the measure before their Lordships in . . u . ueeu sunjeciea
the first instance. But, for his part, he should t 0 severe pains and penalties—loss of pro-
have haduo objection to follow such a course, perty, of an honourable profession, in which
hos lound that it would be mor© ©xopdipnl i l j , i . ,
to adopt it, he should have no hesitation in be had Passed the best days of his life, by
doing so. the unjust operation of an unjust proceeding
The excitement which had been so indus- now declared solemnly by the judges of the
triously created had of course the effect of land—by an Act of Parliament itself spe-
causing the Act required by the Dissenting cially passed, and when that Act shall have
ministers to be introduced. The following received the royal assent, as it has done
conversation took place on the occasion, long ere this, by the united authority of
We copy from the Dublin Monitor -. Queen, Lords and Commons to have been
ly Presbyterian marriages in Ireland. illegal! Restoration, as far as it can
t- Lord Elliot rose to move for leave to bring in abe made is of course a rioLt ~,;n
“bill to legalize marriages which have been so- , * ° COUrSB a rl § ht > whlch wlll
' e lemmzed in Ireland, by Presbyterian ministers, no c loll * 3l he at once acknowledged; the
of between Presbyterians and members of the Church rest we leave to the reflection of e verv com-
England. It would not be necessary to em- ■ j J
ploy much argument to induce the house to consent motd y generous mind,
ly to the introduction of this measure. Its object HotJSE commons—Monday, February 28.
it wc f s *° re^eve a large class of her Majesty’s subjects Dissenters’ Marriage Act.
™ h pJ lad contracted matrimonial engagements in good The House went into Committee.
, ZIZ *?? accordance with a custom which they Sir R. Ferguson said a question arose on the
] e believed to be the law of the land. It had been first clause, whether Presbyterian Ministers mem
16 (be practice m the north _of Ireland, for Presby. hers of the Established Church in Scotland were
teuan ministers to solemnize marriages where one to be regarded as Dissenting Ministers in Ireland
16 ? nd ff ot j} era ™mber Mr. Serjeant Jackson said there could be no
I- C *“ rc *- Therefore he need doubt that in Ireland, where the Episcopal Church
not describe the jbsmay with which persons so was the established religion, Presbyterian Minis-
g circumstanced had heard of a legal decision which ters were Dissenters.
Df rendered their marriages invalid , and their offspring After a short conversation, in which Sir R Fer
„ dle g ltlraate - At the Summer Assizes of Armagh guson, Mr. Jackson, and Mr. Vernon took nart
b a person nam P<i Smith was indicted for bigamy, the clause was agreed to. P ’
ih It appeared that, being a member of the Church On the second clause being read
a fs n |i la L d ’ h « l^ad . l be®n married to a Presbyterian Mr. Smith O’Brien said it was his intention to
b n. a Presb y terli annnmster. The parties oppose the clause in its present form. He could
S Iftlq WA 0r aS man ? n 1 d Wlf ? for mne y ears - In not 90 farther than to say that parties contracting
d 1839, Smith was married again, according to the second marriages, should not be subjected to be mo
rites and ceremonies of the Church of England, secutedfor bigamy; that was the utmost extent to
to a member ot that Church. Being indicted for which he could go. To the clause as it stood at
!r bigamy, his counsel contended that the former present he should say no, and if any hon member
marriage was mya id, having been celebrated by a would support him he would divide Z com
Presbyterian minister, a person not in holy orders, mittee on the clause
,- between parties one of whom was a member of Mr. Sergeant Jackson defended the clause
■ fpnd C H U tWtL I he c ? unsel for tbe Crown con- Mr. Fox Maule said they had certainly to chuse
it tfnn d f 1 tHe m . ar f, la f e was valld > tbe mterven- between two serious evils,“ but he was inclined to
I ‘ a ° f NlitL m hl ? y °- d f’- S n , ot emg neces ‘ think that j us tice required the recognition of the
n sary. _ Neither counsel maintained that a Pres- first marriage of course exempting the parties from
„ byterian minister was a person in holy orders, a prosecution of bigamy. 9 tne parties from
g within the meaning of the statute. The pri- After a few'words from Mr. O’Connell in favor
ri soner s objection was overruled on the trial; but of the Bill and against delay,
the point was reserved Jor the consideration of the The Solicitor-General said that they could not
Judges. On the first day of Hilary term last unquestionably make the present Act have a re
- there was a meeting of the Judges. The case trospective effect, by declaring illegal second mar-
II )) as elaborately argued, and the result was that riages contracted by parties who have been married
e dadgeS determined, by a majority of 10 to 2, in the first instance, under the late law andZhile
- that the conviction oj f>mith was bad, the Jormer those marriages, according to the decision of the
J marriage having been invalid, and Smith was dis- Judges, had not been legal. All that could be said
e to offlr a nT' 6 resum P + taous “ u P on tha subject was, that the law about to be
, ? “ jft 4 °“ e f , an °P lmon on the sub- enacted could not meet the -whole of the evil
’ r,/ hat d t° lSl ° n; bu ? j mu34 be considered to Mr. S. O’Brien said that he thought it proper
S be the law unless overruled. Therefore the pre- that those should be absolved from Prosecutwn^for
J doubted I tWtbTl 3 ne f essary - It . co T uld not be Bigamy who had married a second wife, their for-
, i °i marrlag L m Irelanc ! "’ as mer marriage having been declared illegal. J
) imitation as to person, so that not unfrequeffily
• tss%. h."* «• -
Inerefore it was absolutely necessary that the
whole subject should be made matter for conside- a mv ontinmoiiA «
ration. Her Majesty’s government proposed first / . Ur antlcl P a^lon S of the justice of the
1 to bring on the measure which he was about to British legislature, when no political ob~
' £ SiZj a i 6Ct iS J° b f T ain * d ’ are full y confirmed.
1 tbe whole subject their consideration during the bmce tbe whole of the preceding notice of
1 Present session, with a view to a permanent and this subject was in type, the CorJc Renortpr
satisfactory settlement of the law. He bea-e-ed .1, 0.1 cm , , c xccpurier
I to move for leave to bring in the bill. 08 ° P tbe Bld oP March has been very kindly
Mr. O’Connell said that the class of persons transmitted to us by a highly resoected
sought to be relieved by this bill had married friend in which is the Aof P 1*
under the full conviction that their marriages •* ’ wll >Ch is the Act of Parliament
were legitimate. He hoped the bill would be ltsell > a cO Py of which we subjoin. Its
passed as speedily as possible, and he was sure provisions, as will be seen, are nerfectlw
there would be no objection to it. The mar- ah • p ecuy
riage law of England was strict; but extreme e( l ultab ' le - marriages are confirmed.
Strictness was not essential. There was consi- where the parties by not marrying again
derable latitude in Ireland, and complete latitude shew that thev are dpcimno u
in Scotland; yet Scotland was not the least pru- g , qL desirous of such con-
dent or the least moral part of the empire. There nrmatlon * W here subsequent marriages
to° U i,Li b L ° US da f ger in alter “g arrangements have taken place, they are distinctly recoe-
to which the people were accustomed, and he nUprl as L 7 v. „ y reco g'
hoped the noble lord would treat the subject with nlZed as having been lawfully contracted-,
great caution in his general measure. Ml pains and penalties which mav have
Colonel Rawdon snid that in Armagh, the town been inflicted for contracting them c
which he represented, the greatest excitement . conlractln g them are of
prevailed on the subject. course as distinctly declared to have been
Mr. Jackson said it was not long since Par- illegal. This is fair and iust tn all
haraent had assembled, and it was impossible to and must be ffillnw!rh j V *’
bring forward such a measure as this without ' b tollowed h Y the rendering
having time to consider it. every possible restoration, and comnensa-
Mr. Fox Maule thought that when such a cir- tion, which can be marie , il, P
cumstance as that alluded to by the hon. and gal- u re an be “ade, to those who
lant member for Armagh had taken place on the naVe sultered Under former injustice. The
rl- of ,m nual 7’ notiee should ff ave been given following is the Act of Parliament
of this bill on the first day of the Session Minv , 4 • in riiaraent, Which,
similar instances might have occurred during the WG re P eat ’ 18 wholly Unobjectionable :
fifteen days that had been lost. Now that the Presbyterian marriages
bill had been introduced, he hoped the noble lord A Tim ~
would go on with it, de die in diem , until it was firmatwn of certain Marriages in
passed. * Ireland.
Leave was then given to bring in the bill. . Whereas, marriages have, in divers instances
We have not any information of the pre- DlsZunrmi.fistosnr ti” J relandb y Pr °testant
cise nature of the Bill, but we find in the bein S a member of
Dublin, Cork, and other Irish papers that !V;‘°I a '!l and e .' and ’ and the other a Protestant
the 2nd clause is to the effect that it shall marriages’; be it thereZelZted\“tt QueTnt
only extend to where both parties unite in m ° st cxccl,l;nt Majesty, by and with the advice
requiring that it shall do so, and not to Temp°r ri ,
cases where the marriages were declared void Wed, and by the authority of the same thaZl
by a competent court. We cannot under- ™ ar ™g e sheretofore had anil solemnized in Ireland
«.nd .ke l.« exception. It ,h, cer.mon,
was de facto so entirely null and void as u “ ted cbureh of England and Ireland, and the
that it effected “no marriage at all,” as be adimWd P iss f nt . er > shall be, and shall
the twelve judges solemnly decided to he the same und no otheTforceZd e^eTas^fhsuc 0 !!
the case, we cannot understand how the in- bad been had and solemnized by clere-y
tervention of any court can be required to Maud UnUed ehurch of En S ,and Sd
declare that void which the law itself de- Pr °yWed always, and be it enacted that no
dared to be so ab initio. The Bill, how- ex4nd“ affect ” be
ever, on being carried up to the Lords, was declared invalid by any court of competentTunf
read a first time, and as in that grave as- • ° n passing of this act, or amt mar-
sembly not very much notice is taken of Sl7jf
interested clamour, the cool, calm judg- law intermarried with any other person J ’
ment of the law lords is permitted to ope- thW ZLifZ 01 '’ ? d b ? ifc enacted ’ tha t no-
,afe. The Lord Chancellor therefore moved, SKlt “5
as we have stated, that the Bill be referred the P assin s: of . thi3 a W, under the authority of
to a committee to consider its whole scope ZalZsZZ m effeZ d ZZ at Z, any f per '
and effect, and to make such amendments wi A °r testament, or the performance ofTnytrusif
as might be calculated to meet the desired fur f ther a a .»d be it enacted, that nol
object without inflicting injury upon any.
I inis the matter stands at the date of the w P ersol ? 3 . and in such manner as is herein
last intelligence. \ a a
6 Andbeit.enacted, that this act may be amended,
Smce the above was in type, we have prerent’ 1,6 passed “ thU
