

1921.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.
BULLETIN No. 81.
THE
GEOLOGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES
OF THE
YALGOO GOLDFIELD.
PART I.
THE WARRIEDAR GOLD-MINING CENTRE.
BY
F. R. FELDTMANN.
WITH AN APPENDIX ON
The Merallurgical Test of a Refractory Ore from Warriedar,
BY
E. S. SIMPSON, B.E., D.Sc., F.C.S.
Issued under the Authority of
THE HON. J. SCADDAN, M.L.A., MINSTER FOR MINES.
WITH THREE PLATES AND FIVE FIGURES.
PERTH:
BY AUTHORITY : FRED. WM. SIMPSON, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1921.


1921.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY.
BULLETIN No. 81.
THE
GEOLOGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES
OF THE
YALGOO GOLDFIELD.
Part I.
THE WARRIEDAR GOLD-MINING CENTRE,
BY
F. R. FELDTMANN.
WITH an appendix on
The Metallurgical Test of a Refractory Ore from Warriedar,
BY
E. S. SIMPSON, B.E., D.Sc., F.C.S.
Issued under the Authority of
THE HON. J. SCADDAN, M.L.A., Minister for Mines.
WITH THREE PLATES AND FIVE FIGURES.
PERTH:
BT AUTHORITY; FRED. WM. SIMPSON, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1921 ‘


GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
LIST OF OFFICERS.
1021.
Government Geologist A. Gibb Maitland
(Director of the Survey.)
Field Staff.
Assistant Geologist ... ... ... ... ... T. Blatchford
Field Geologist ... ... ... ... F. R. Feldtmann
Do. R. C. Wilson
Laboratory Staff : Petrological Staff ;
Government Mineralogist and Chem- Petrologist—R. A. Farquharson,
ist—E. S. Simpson. Assistant to Petrologist —B. S.
Senior Chemist and Analyst—H. Welsh.
Bowley.
Chemist and Analyst—i). G. Murray.
Drafting Room.
Draftsman ... ... ... C. B. Kidson.
Office Staff.
Clerk-in-Charge and Librarian ... ... ... F. H. Maslin.
Clerk and Typist ... ... ... J. D. Glover.
Messenger ... G. G. Kidson.




PREFATORY NOTE.
As the efforts which had been made towards the development
of the Yalgoo (Joldtield, about which least was known officially, since
its discovery in the year 1900, seemed to warrant such assistance
and guidance as might be afforded by a reasonably accurate delinea-
tion of those salient geological features which had any bearing upon
economic questions, a start was made in the year 1015 with a survey
which was designed to include all those centres at which mining was
being or had been carried out. It is hoped that such work will re-
sult in a more or less correct understanding of the general geology
of the field, in addition to furnishing detailed information regarding
its mineral resources and future prospects.
The Yalgoo Goldfield has long been of scientific and eommer-
dal interest on account of the variety of its mineral deposits, viz.,
gold, iron, copper, wolfram, molybdenite, bismuth, corundum, etc.
The condition of the gold-mining industry on the Yalgoo Gold-
field may in a measure he gauged by the fact that it embraces an
area of 23,230 square miles, and at the end of 1017 it had 34 gold-
mining leases in force, which totalled an area of 500 acres. The
number of mining centres on the field amounts to 10, which have
returned, up to the end of 1917, 11,238-21 ozs. of fine gold. The
gold deposits also include a series of auriferous conglomerates, upon
two beds of which mining operations have been carried out. The
importance of the occurrence of these auriferous conglomerates lies
in the fact that they point to the possibility of there being other
Weas of ancient sediments which are also gold bearing.
The geological survey of the field has been hampered through
fte want of reliable maps upon which the geological and other de-
Wls can he laid down.
In order that the information at present acquired regarding
mfiividual raining centres might be available to the public without
filing for the completion of the examination of the remaining por-
fi°n of the field, it has been decided to issue the reports in the order
m which they have been completed. References to the iron de-
posits of Mount Gibson, the molybdenite occurrences at Mount
Mnlgine, the tungsten ores of Yandanhoo Hill, and the copper de-
posits of the Ringing Bell will bo found in the Annual Reports of
fte Geological Survey for the years 1915, 1910, and 1917.


This Bulletin deals solely with the gold-mining centre of
Warriedar, which was surveyed by Mr. F. R. Feldtmann during the
latter part of the year 1910.
Field work is being continued at other centres, and will be
carried on until all the mining areas have been geologically examiner).
Government Geologist.
Geological Survey Office,
Berth, Bth December, 1918.


CONTENTS.
Page.
Prefatory Note 3
I— General Remarks f>
Introduction 9
Topography 6
Vegetation ... 7
Water 8
ll General Geology 8
lII Rocks 13
A. —lgneous 13
1. Derivatives of gabbro or dolerite 13
2. Granitic rocks 15
(a) The Mulgine granite 15
(&) Quartz porphyry 16
3. Basaltic dolerite ... ... 10
B. —Sedimentary—The Warriedar Beds ... ... ... 16
C. —Superficial deposits ... 17
(а) Laterite ... 17
(б) Detrital materia! 17
IV. The Jaspers and Ore Deposits 17
1. The jaspers 17
2. The lodes 19
The Mug's Luck-Aurum Lode ... ... 20
The Warriedar Lode 21
The Warriedar Cross Lode 21
The Porcupine Lode ... ... ... 21
The Ironclad Lode 21
Internal structure and mineral composition 22
3. The quartz reefs 23
(а) In the gabbro derivatives 23
(б) In the granitic rocks 24
4. Detrital deposits ... 24
V. —Summary and Conclusions 25
Summary and geological history 25
Economic prospects 25
Recommendations ... ... ... ... ... ... 26
—The Mines 27
A. —The Porcupine group 27
B. —The St. Patrick’s Day group 33
C. —The Highland Chief group 34
Appendix.—Metallurgical test of a refractory ore from Warriedar ... 36
LIST OF PLATES.
I.—Geological Map of the Porcupine Group At the end.
Ttr —® e °l°lP ca l Map of the Highland Chief Group ... „
—Plan and longitudinal section of the Mug’s Luck Leases „
LIST OF FIGURES,
frontispiece.-— Locality Map.
!• Sketch map of Warriedar District 9
Geological map of the St. Patrick’s Day Group 11
• Geological map of the Blague Lease 13
?• G.M.L. 699, Ironclad—Plan showing sheeting of epidiorite ... 15
• Plan and longitudinal section of G.M.L. 699. Ironclad ... ... 32


THE WARRIEDAR GOLD-MINING CENTRE,
YALGOO GOLDFIELD.
I.—GENERAL REMARKS.
INTIRODUCTION.
The Warriedar gold-mining centre was surveyed during the
latter part of 1916. The Porcupine, St. Patrick's Day, and High-
land Chief groups of leases and the country in their immediate
neighbourhood—about 4 square miles in all —were mapped in de-
tail, and an inspection was made of the surrounding country.
The township of Warriedar is situated 5 miles west of the
prominent hill of that name and 5G miles, as the crow flies, SSE.
of Yalgoo—about 70 miles by road. The nearest railway siding
is Perenjori, on the Wongan Hills line, 50 miles WSW. of War-
riedar as the crow flies, and between 00 and 70 miles by road.
The main group of leases —the Porcupine—is immediately west
of the town, the Porcupine lease itself being a mile WNW. of the
town; the St. Patrick’s Day group is a little under 2 miles NNW.,
and the Highland Chief group about 5% miles SW. of the town, as
the crow flies. Another small group—the Golden Bar—is about 4or
5 miles south of the town, but the exact position of this group had
not been fixed at the time of my survey. Isolated leases such as the
Blague, P/i miles NNB. of the town, have been taken up and aban-
doned after a short trial.
TOPOGRAPHY.
The country in which the Porcupine group is situated, and that
immediately west and south, is strongly undulating, consisting of
several parallel and fairly steep ridges running nearly east and
west, and separated by comparatively narrow’ valleys. Most of
the valleys are marked by well-defined creeks or watercourses, the
general fall of which is in an easterly direction towards Lake
Monger, The largest creek within this area is one which starts
about 30 chains west of Block 2—the westernmost lease of the
Porcupine group—and runs east through Blocks 1, 10, and 11 and
north of Blocks 12 and 9, and the township, towards the Govern-
ment Well.
North of the Porcupine leases gently undulating country ex-
tends beyond the St. Patrick’s Day group.
About two miles to the west and northwest of the Porcupine
lease the undulating country gives place to plain country which


eitends in a southerly direction to the N—S. range of hills on
which Trig. Station B.A. 10—about 7 miles WSW. of Warriedar —
is situated.
Between the town and Mt. Warriedar the country is compara-
tively flat, but with a general fall towards Lake Monger. Mt.
Warriedar is an imposing hill rising nearly GOO feet above the plain
and visible for many miles. It forms the southern end of a long
range which, with a few breaks, extends NNW. nearly to Yalgoo.
South of the Porcupine group and the town, the hilly country
extends about three-quarters of a mile. Beyond it is a fairly wide
valley in which the - Government Battery is situated.
At the Golden Bar group, farther south, the country is again
hilly and undulating. This hilly ground extends westwards to Mt.
Mulgine (Trig. Station B.A. 8), a steep rounded granite hill 6 miles
SSW. of Warriedar township, and to the Highland Chief group,
about 1% miles farther northwest. The hills of this southern area
are higher and steeper than (hose near Warriedar and there is less
tendency to form parallel ridges.
VEGETATION.
The vegetation of this district is varied. There are a few
patches of gums of various types common to the goldfields and
suitable for mining purposes, one of the largest patches occurring
a few miles west of the Highland Chief. Sheoak and quandong
are common and there are a few kurrajong. Among the smaller
bushes are jam, wattle, and some of the smaller types of mulga.
A narrow belt of low-lying sandy country, timbered with cypress
pine, crosses the track from Warriedar to the Highland Chief; this
cypress belt appears to extend for a considerable distance south-
east, the main road from Warriedar to Rothsay crossing what is
probably the same belt southeast of Mt. Mulgine.
In the spring there is a great variety of wildflowers both of
tbe goldfields and coastal types; the former are best represented
by everlastings, the latter include a number of small orchids, among
them the spider orchid.
There does not appear to be any marked relationship between
the vegetation and the underlying rocks in this district, the vegeta-
tion varying rather with the presence or absence of any depth of
soil and with the type and degree of weathering of the rocks. On
tbe whole, gums and quandong are more common where there is a
fair depth of soil, sheoak on the rocky ridges, and wattle on the
slightly weathered epidiorite on the tops of some of the hills. A
dense growth of jam marks the line of the watercourses in the
narrower valleys. The few kurrajong seen were apparently con-
fined to the lower-lying ground. There are a few patches of
hibiscus—one occurring on the Aurum lease—these appear to be
restricted to areas which have been subjected to bush fires.


WATER.
A number of bores have been sunk in this area by the Mines
Water Supply, in search of water, but with no great success. The
best supply is obtained from the Government windmill well about
1% miles ESE. of the town; the water from this well is of fair
quality.
Bores have been sunk along the main creek at the northern
end of the Porcupine group of leases; along the small creek south
of the St. Patrick’s Day group; near the track from Warriedar to
the Highland Chief; and in the vicinity of the Highland Chief
group. The only successful bore was one, 82 feet in depth, close
to the west comer of the Highland Chief Deeps. Water was
struck at 63 feet in this bore; it is potable but contains much
mineral matter and is unpleasant to drink if the "water has been
standing in the well for any time.
The water for the plant on the Mug’s Luck-Aurum leases
was first obtained from a shaft in the narrow valley in Block 6.
The supply from this shaft, which is in somewhat weathered and
talcose hornhlendite and is not on any main line of shearing, proved
inadequate, and another shaft was sunk in the broad valley V/z
miles SSW. of the town, near where the Government Battery now
stands. A good supply of water was obtained from this shaft.
A few holes in the larger creeks hold water for a considerable
time after heavy rains. The largest of these is about a couple of
chains south of the Government Well; it is over 100 feet long and,
after being filled, holds wafer for many weeks.
II.—GENERAL GEOLOGY.
The roeks of the area examined include massive amphibolites of
gabbroid origin, granite and allied rocks, and an extensive series of
sedimentary rocks comprising shales, quartzites, and conglomerates
(Fig. 1). In addition, a few thin dykes probably of basaltic
dolerite, or of amphibolite therefrom, intrude the granitic rocks.
West and south of Warriedar the amphibolites are traversed
by a series of parallel Jaspers striking nearly east. A few Jaspers
also occur in the sedimentary roeks, Jasper lenses forming the back-
bone of the range of hills 7 miles WSW. of Warriedar. A few
small “bars” traverse the granitic rocks in places.
The auriferous deposits, which include lode formations and
quartz reefs, occur in the amphibolites—the only exceptions being
a few small reefs within the margin of the granitic rocks at the
Highland Chief group.
The granite at Mt. Mulgine is noteworthy for the occurrence
of molybdenite in payable quantities.
The amphibolites occupy a wide ares extending from the St.
Patrick’s Day group on the northeast, where they adjoin the sedi*




mentary rocks, to the Highland Chief group on the southwest and
including the town, the Porcupine group, and the Golden Bar
group. East of the Camping Reserve the rocks are obscured by
superficial deposits, but the amphibolites probably extend nearly
to the Government Well, where the rocks exposed were too decom-
posed for determination, but appeared to be altered sediments. On
the west, amphibolite ridges extend for about three miles from the
town. The plain country farther west was not examined.
The amphibolites of this area have been derived from gabbros
or coarse dolerites and resemble the majority of the dolerite-
amphibolites of the goldfields. In this area, however, the rocks are,
as a rule, coarser in grain and more basic in composition than usual,
many of the specimens examined being practically homblendites.
Another area of amphibolitic rocks occurs at Rothsay, 15 miles
SW. by S. from Warriedar. This area includes Weedin Weedin
hill (Trig. Station W. 8), a little more than 13 miles SW. of War-
riedar. The Weedin Weedin amphibolites are finer grained than
the Warriedar rocks, but are also of doleritic origin. There is, as
yet, insufficient evidence to show whether the Rothsay-Weedin
Weedin rocks form part of the same belt as the Warriedar am-
phibolites, or are Separated from them by the sediments extending
south from Trig. Station B.A. 10 and the granite extending west
from Mt. Hulgine.
Bit. Mulgine and a considerable area to the south are occupied
by granitic rocks extending northwest to the Highland Chief group,
where they intrude the amphibolites. The margin of the granite is
very irregular, and numerous tongues, mainly of fine-grained quartz
porphyry, run for a distance of 10 or 20 chains into the amphibolite
(vide Plate II.). The Mulgine granite is particularly acid in com-
position, consisting chiefly of quartz, mierocline, and muscovite. It
contains numerous pegmatitic veins and quartz reefs, many of which,
as well as certain areas_ of the granite itself, contain molybdenite
in payable quantities. At and near the Highland Chief the main
body of the granitic rock is much obscured by soil and rock debris,
and such outcrops as occur are too highly weathered for accurate
determination. The rock is comparatively fine grained, however,
and appears to be highly micaceous; it has been subjected to in-
tense shearing. As previously stated, the tongue-like dykes in-
truding the amphibolites are mainly quartz porphyry, and it is
probable that the main body of the Highland Chief rock consists
of intermediate forms between the quartz porphyry and the Mul-
gine granite.
A striking feature of the granite in the neighbourhood of the
Highland Chief, particularly on a small steep hill a quarter of a
mile to the south, is the extraordinary number of parallel quartz
reefs from a few inches to several feet in width, striking from 20°
to 25° N, of W.




The granite boundary was only mapped near the Highland
Chief,'where it appears to reach its northernmost point.
The Mulgine granite apparently passes into more normal granite
to the south and is probably an acid marginal facies which has
undergone eonsiderable shearing and possibly some vein alteration.
Granite of a more normal type but with large porphyritic felspar
crystals was observed south of Mt. Mulgine, on the Rothsay road, and
Mr. Benjamin, formerly Assayer for the Warriedar Options, in-
formed me that he had found fragments of normal granite in a
watercourse some distance east of the Highland Chief.
The few narrow dykes of a later basic intrusive, in the granite,
are composed of a very fine-grained dark-green rock, most probably
basaltic dolerite. According to Mr. Maitland* these dykes have a
general northeasterly trend. It is possible that similar dykes occur
in the gabbroid rocks, although none were observed; they would,
however, easily escape observation except in detailed mapping. They
appear to be (be youngest rocks of the district and are probably
post-gold.
The range of which Alt. Warriedar is the most prominent fea-
ture is composed, so far as examined, of sedimentary rocks which
include shales, quartzites, and conglomerates. The southwestern
boundary of these sediments, which may be termed the “Warriedar
Beds,” runs through the St. Patrick’s Day group (Fig. 2) and the
Blague lease (Fig. 3), the general strike of this portion of the boun-
dary being about N. 56° W.; farther south the boundary probably
strikes more nearly northwest and runs not far from the Govern-
ment Well. The nearest outcrops of these rocks east of the well
are about half-way between the well and Mt. Warriedar. The north-
eastern boundary of the beds crosses the Field’s Find road about a
mile eastsoutheast of the Trig. Station. The country farther east
is occupied by greenstones.
At and near Mt. Warriedar the rocks consist of bands of fine-
grained quartzite, with some grits and a few thin bands of con-
glomerate, containing small pebbles of white quartz. Along a series
of rough hog-backed outliers, west of the mount, the beds strike
about N. 50° W. and dip about 80° SW.; on the eastern side of
the mount the dip appears to be much shallower in places.
At the Blague and the St. Patrick’s Day leases, the beds con-
sist of fine-grained phyllitie shales, and though some of the bands
appear to be more quartzitic in places, this is probably due to
laterisation. In the Tittle Groper lease, one of the St. Patrick’s Day
group, the beds strike about N. 25° W. and dip southwest at a steep
angle; in the Sons of Erin lease, the beds are almost vertical in
places.
* Ann. Pros'. Eept. of the Geol. Survey, 1816, p. 10,1917.


Sedimentary rocks, practically identical in appearance with the
shales of the St. Patrick’s Day group, and, undoubtedly, part of the
Warriedar series, form the range of hills at the north end of which
Trig. Station B.A. 10 is situated, 7 miles WSW. of Warriedar.
Geological Map of the Blague Lease
The Trig, station is nearly 400 feet above the bore well near the
Highland Chief. The backbone of this range is formed by a series
of finely-banded jasper lenses, closely resembling the typical jaspers
in the greenstone rocks. These jaspers dip west at about 50°-55°;
the strike is variable but nearly north. On the east side of the
south end of the range the shales strike about N. 20° W. and dip
west at angles ranging from 35° to about 50°.
III.—THE ROCKS.
A. IGNEOUS.
1. Derivatives of Gabbro or Dolerite. — These include am-
phibolites, hornblendites, and epidiorites. What may be regarded as
the type rock forms a steep ridge which runs through the Aurum lease
and extends west for over a mile. It is a medium-grained dark
greenish rock [ B y, composed chiefly of platy green hornblende,
with some small patches of fine scaly hornblende, and plagioclase


felspar—the hornblende predominating. According to the Petrolo-
gist file felspar is:—
in pronounced columns with the structure typical of gabbros. Many
of the felspar columns, however, are moulded by the hornblende
plates forming the ophitic structure.
The rook is an amphibolised ophitic gabbro.
In places, particularly on a parallel ridge north of the main
creek, outcrops of a much coarser-grained facies occur, with horn-
blende crystals up to three-quarters of an inch in length. In some
specimens—such as [j-jVt]’ fr° m the northeast boundary of Block
I—the hornblende is in broad, platy forms, in others —for example
[ttos ]> from point 12 chains east of the north corner of the
same lease —the hornblende occurs chiefly in long prisms. [ixVa]>
which is somewhat more felspathie than usual and contains a fair
amount of quartz in the groundmass, is classified by Mr. Farquhar-
son as a quartz epidiorite.
Another modification of the type rock was found on the dump
of the old water-shaft on Block (5. It is a paler, greyish medium-
grained somewhat decomposed rock [xAt]’ composed almost en-
tirely of fibrous, prismatic hornblende with a little chlorite and may
be classified as a hornblendite. A taleose variety [fAs 1 °f this
rock occurs on the same dump, on which there are also numerous
fragments of creamy talc [ x'ios ]> evidently from small veins.
There are a few isolated occurrences of fine-grained varieties.
About half-way along the southeast boundary of the Ironclad South
a large boulder of very fine-grained epidiorite [ xiW 1 was seen, sur-
rounded by more typical epidiorites of fairly coarse grain. From
its occurrence this rock is regarded as being merely a local fine-
grained facies of the normal rock rather than a dyke intrusive into
the latter. The specimen resembles tiie Weedin Weedin epidiorite
[tAt] cxce Pt that in the latter rock the structure is confused.
Near the lodes and jaspers the rocks show signs of dynamic
action in the granulation of their mineral constituents and, in places,
in their marked sheeted structure. On the hanging-wall side of the
lode in the Anrum main shaft there is very distinct horizontal
sheeting, the sheets averaging about half an inch in thickness —the
rock is a medium-grained quartz epidiorite [xAt]) quartz being
very noticeable in the section. In the Ironclad lease there are zones
of sheeting, separated by zones of jointed rock, on the hanging-wall
side of the lode; the sheeting is either vertical or dips steeply to
the north, and is at right angles to the lode (Fig. 4). The rock is
similar to that of the Aurum lease.
The rock from the Mug’s Luck main shaft is a somewhat granu-
lated fibrous epidiorite [AW L resembling that from the Aurum,
but with little or no quartz.
At the Highland Chief, the amphibolites are fairly fine-grained
and somewhat resemble the Weedin Weedin rock in the hand speci


men. Hornblende predominates, and the few original felspars are
now, according to the Petrologist, represented by occasional small
patches of greyish granular material. The rock [ T jgg] is classified
as an amphibolite, approaching a homblendite in composition.
On the tops of some of the hills and ridges, the rocks present
a somewhat bleached appearance, due to incipient weathering with
epidotisation. This, coupled with slight differences in vegetation,
has caused some observers to regard these slightly altered rocks, as
well as the sheeted rocks adjoining the lodes, as being of a different
age and type to the less altered amphibolites. There is little doubt,
however, that all the above mentioned types are merely varieties of
the same rock mass.
2. Granitic Rocks. —These include, within the area mapped,
only those marginal portions of the granite, extending northwards
from Mt. Mulgine, in the vicinity of the Highland Chief group of
leases (vide Plate II.).
(a.) The Mulgine granite. —The Mulgine granite is composed
mainly of quartz, microcline, oligoclase, and muscovite in varying
proportions; * the accessory minerals are zircon, cpidotc, zoisite,
apatite, tourmaline, ilmenite (or magnetite), and ehrysocolla. The
texture of the rock varies considerably but, as a rule, is moderately
fine. In the molybdenite-bearing portions of the granite there are,
in addition to molybdenite and coarse pyrites, occasional small
patches of lemon-yellow molybdite (hydrated molybdate of iron)
in short silky, readily powdered fibres; in places, the molybdite,
which usually occurs along cracks and in small vughs in the rock,
* Vide Ann. Prog. Kept. 1916, p, 10.


appears to be pseudomorphous after the molybdenite. A small
fragment of selieelite, associated with quartz and apparently coated
with tungstic ochre, was found by Mr. Benjamin in a watercourse a
short distance northeast of M.L. 39; other specimens, associated
with the molybdenite, have since been found in M.L. 39.
(b.) Quartz porphyry. —The tongue-like dykes forming a fringe
to the granitic rock at the Highland Chief group consist of fine-
grained quartz porphyry, which, in most of the tongues, shows the
effects of shearing to a marked degree. A fairly typical tongue runs
through G.M.L. 823, Wheel of Fortune, cutting the northeast
boundary of the lease about midway {vide Plate II.). A specimen
[xiVol I' rom a point on this tongue, about 4 chains northeast of
this boundary, consists of a comparatively fine-grained pale-greyish
rock, with numerous phenocrysts of clear quartz and veinlets of
somewhat vughy quartz. According to the Petrologist, the rock con-
sists of:—
Partly or wholly granulated phenocrysts of quartz and felspar in a
fine granular gronndmass of quartz and felspar obscured by numerous
small scales of muscovite. The felspar phenocrysts are all partly mica-
eised. Quartz veinlets traverse the slide.
The rock is a fine-grained extremely mieaoised and granulated quartz
porphyry
The main body of the rock, in and near the Highland Chief, and
some of the smaller tongues, appear to be more micaceous than the
above specimen and show the effects of shearing to a greater degree.
A specimen [ xtst J rom a much narrower tongue, about 6 chains
south of the north corner of G.M.L. 547, Deoeh an Doris, resembles
[fAffl * n original characters, but has been intensely sheared
and contains many more irregular veinlets and lentieles of clear
quartz. The gronndmass is composed almost wholly of pale mica-
ceous material, with some quartz.
3. Basaltic Dolehite. —The basic dykes which intrude the
Mulgine granite and which, in the absence of microscopic evidence,
are provisionally classified as basaltic dolerite—from their close re-
semblance to other dykes of that rock, apparently of muck the same
age—are fine-grained dark-green rocks, consisting, so far as could
be judged from the hand specimen, largely of hornblende.
B. SBDIMENTABY.
The Wahmbdak Beds. — As previously stated, these include
shales, quartzites, and conglomerates, but in the small areas mapped
in detail at the St. Patrick’s Day group and the Blague the beds
appear to consist entirely of fine-grained phyllitie shales of a pale
grey colour.
Sections of a typical specimen [yyg-gj from a point near where
the boundary of these rocks crosses the northeastern boundary of
the Killoln G.M.L. 796, show, according to the Petrologist:—
numerous minute micaceous scales and small scaly micaceous aggre-
gates as well as minute grains of quartz.


The laterisation of the beds in places in this locality—namely
on several small hills to the north of the leases —has also been
mentioned. In places, small breakaways mark the edge of the
lateritio areas.
C. SUPERFICIAL. DEPOSITS.
These are of the usual types found on the goldfields and in-
clude —
(a) Laterite and
(b) Detrital material.
(a) Laterite. —Laterite deposits, both of the high-level and
low-level types, cover an extensive area in this district. Where
possible, the two types have been separated on the map (Plate I.).
High-level deposits are found capping the amphibolites, the
granitic rocks, and the shales, on those portions of the higher ground
where weathering has taken place to a considerable depth. Those
capping the shales have already been mentioned. The deposits
capping the granitic rocks are found south and southwest of the
Highland Chief group: they appear to be very similar to those
capping -the shales. The high-level deposits on the amphibolites
are, as a rule, highly ferruginous, and are usually associated with
the jaspers; the ridges on which they occur have, in places, a steep
escarpment facing north, usually along the hanging-wall side of
the jaspers. Where untraversed by jaspers the amphibolite ridges
are usually composed of fresh unweathered rock. The lateritie area
northwest of Blocks 1 and 2, however, is not associated with a
jasper and has an escarpment facing SSE, due to its cutting back
by watercourses.
Deposits of the low-level type cover the amphibolites in places
in the lower portions and usually on the southern side of the narrow
valleys between the ridges. They have evidently been formed by
the reeementing of the weathered rock debris by ferruginous matter
deposited from surface solutions.
(b) Detrital material. —The narrow valleys parallel to and
separating the amphibolite and jasper ridges are largely covered by
soil derived from the wearing down of the rocks composing the
higher ground. The soil appears to be of fair depth in places. The
broader flats are also largely covered by soil, which in this case is
probably due, in part, to the weathering in situ of the underlying
rocks.
IV.—THE JASPERS AND ORE DEPOSITS.
1. The Jaspers. —Within the area mapped round the Porcu-
pine group there are four strong lines of jasper, with an average
general strike of about N. 79° W. They have, however, a general
curve, with the concave side facing south.


SiO,
43 13
Pe.0,
53-25
FeO
1-28
TiO,
. . . . . *
P,0.
-05
s
-01
Ignition loss
2-70
Total
100-42
Metallic Iron
38-27
Analyst: H, Bowley.
Between these jaspers and the Government Battery there ap-
pear to be a number of other parallel jaspers, which may be seen
outcropping in places along the pipe-line from the water-shaft,
near the Battery.
The jaspers usually dip steeply north, but the dips observed
range from 57° N. to 02° S. The average dip is probably a trifle
under 70° N.
The typical “bars” consist, in the oxidised zone, of alternating
lamina?, of varying thickness, of dark purplish-brown iron ore and
of paler, yellowish-brown flinty, siliceous material. The following
is an analysis of a typical specimen from the main shaft
on the Ironclad G.M.L. 099:
Below the oxidised zone the jaspers are represented by zones
of sheared and altered rock, densely- impregnated by sulphides.
The northernmost of the four main jaspers runs through
Block 3, the Mug’s Luck, Ironclad North, Ironclad, Winning Post,
and Exchange leases. It has been cut and faulted by the lodes and
by minor fault planes, apparently associated with the lodes. Eight
chains south of the south comer of the townsite the jasper pinches,
but makes again about a chain farther southeast and continues be-
yond the limits of the map.
The second jasper is, on the average, about 26 chains south of
the first. It runs through Blocks 5,6, and 7 and south of Block 8.
In Blocks 5 and 6it is partly obscured by laterite. Within the
limits of the map this jasper has only been faulted in one place,
south of Block 8, where the horizontal displacement is about 130
feet.
The third and fourth “bars” run, on the average, about 12 and
21 chains, respectively, south of the second jasper. They occupy
some of the highest ground in the neighbourhood of the leases and
are much obscured by laterite. They do not appear to have been
faulted within the limits of the map.
Mention should be made of a long and narrow shear zone, in
which but little vein alteration has taken place, at an average dis-
tance of about 16 chains northeast of Blocks 12 and 9 and the


townsite, and approximately parallel to and about 35 chains north-
east of the eastern portion of the first jasper. The average strike
of this shear zone is N. 53° W. and the dip is to the north at a steep
angle. Associated with this shear zone, and, on the average, about
85 feet northeast thereof, is a hand of laminated quartz of varying
width. The shear zone also contains a little laminated quartz, in
places, but for the most part consists of alternate white and greyish-
green hands passing indefinitely into each other; both white and
green hands consist, according to the Petrologist, of granular zoisite
and quartz and small opaque grey granular forms resembling sphene,
but the green hands contain, in addition, pale fibrous hornblende
derived from augite. It has not been ascertained whether the
laminated quartz is auriferous, hut it is not unlikely.
The jaspers traversing the amphibolites and granitic rocks at
the Highland Chief group have already been mentioned. They
appear to vary, in some measure, in composition with the enclosing
rock.
The jaspers in the sedimentary rocks near Trig. Station B.A. 10
have also been mentioned. In the southern portion of the Blague
lease a jasper marks the boundary between the amphibolites and the
shales.
2. The Lodes.— ln the Porcupine group there are four main
lines of lode—the Mug’s Luck-Anrum, Warriedar, Porcupine, and
Ironclad lodes. The average general strike of the first three is
about KNW., and the dip about 6S° ESE. These lodes are of no
great length, averaging little more than 15 chains; they apparently
die out a little to the north of the first jasper and only extend about
half-way to the second jasper, and for part of the distance are
represented only by narrow shear zones, which have undergone but
little vein alteration. The Mug’s Luek-Aurum, Warriedar and Iron-
clad lodes fault the jaspers and must be regarded as normal fault
zones with the downthrow to the WSW. in the ease of the first two,
and to the ESE. in the case of the Ironclad lode. Relative to the
jaspers they range between dip and oblique faults. The Porcupine
lode has only been traced a few feet past the 62 feet shaft on that
lease, and the structural features north of that point are unfortun-
ately somewhat obscured, but considerable faulting—including block
faulting—of the jasper appears to have taken place. The heave,
or horizontal displacement, of the jaspers along the fault lines
ranges from about 5 feet in the Ironclad to 230 feet in the Mug's
Luck. There is little evidence to show whether the movement along
the fault-planes was perpendicular, transverse, or parallel to the
strike of those planes. If perpendicular, then, assuming a dip of
60° for the jasper where cut by the Mug’s Luck lode—the dip at
this point was very variable and the average could not be ascer-
tained with any certainty—the throw, or vertical displacement, would
be nearly 400 feet. From examination of the jasper laminae near


the fault it appears probable that there was a component parallel
to the strike of the fault and that there was a southerly movement
of the jasper on the hanging-wall side of the fault. It is probable,
therefore, that the movement was a transverse one with a southerly
pitch. Along the Ironclad lode the direction of pitch was probably
northeast. The general stress which gave rise to the faulting may
have been tortional.
In addition to the four main lodes there is a small cross lode
between the Warriedar and Porcupine lodes, about 100 feet south
of the north boundary of the Warriedar lease. A short N. —S. lode
has also been worked near the north boundary of the Black Jack
lease.
What appears to be another lode formation, along the same line
as the Warriedar lode, cuts the second jasper in Block 7 and runs
into Block (i near the east corner of the last-named lease. It con-
sists mainly of quartz and iron ore and does not appear to have
been seriously tested.
The fault previously mentioned as affecting the second jasper
south of Block 8 is obscured by superficial deposits, and no pros-
pecting hail been done there up to the time of my survey. As the
other main fault lines have been proved to be auriferous it would
be advisable to test this fault.
The lodes of the Golden Bar group were only briefly examined.
That in the Golden Bar G.M.L. 822 was associated with what ap-
peared to be a much weathered porphyry dyke. The lode, where
exposed, was completely oxidised. The Golden Bar Extended
(G.M.L. 803) lode was only exposed for a short distance. It ap-
peared to be a little more than a foot wide and much resembled the
smaller Jasper Hill lodes, such as Kelly’s —consisting mainly of
sheeted or schistose amphibolite, with resinous quartz .stringers.
The gold content of the lodes is erratic; some of the samples
from the Ironclad assayed over 3 ozs. per ton, though others from
no great distance away gave no trace of gold. The gold appears
to occur in roughly lenticular shoots, but the workings were not
sufficiently extensive to determine the general direction of pitch of
the shoots.
The Bfufj’s Luclc-Anrum Lode (vide Plate HI.). —This lode has
been traced through the southeastern half of the Mug’s Luek lease,
and through the Aurum lease to a point about 2 chains southeast
of the main shaft. Northwards, the lode is hidden by superficial
deposits; southwards, the same line of weakness appears to be
occupied by a quartz reef which crosses the pipe-line from the water-
shaft, 4 chains southeast of the north corner of the Aurum lease,
and continues for a short distance east of the pipe-line. The general
strike is N. 27%° W., but the lode curves considerably, the convex
side being in the direction of dip; the dip ranges from about 40
to 00° SW., the average being about 52° SW. The width ranges


from less than 3 feet to 7 feet, but there seems to have been a certain
amount of secondary impregnation of the enclosing country, in
places in the oxidised zone, resulting in a greater width of auriferous
material. The mineral composition of this and the other lodes is
described on a later page.
The Warriedar Lode. —This lode has not been traced north of
the first jasper, but as it faults the jasper for a horizontal distance
of 50 feet it should extend for some distance farther north. It
traverses the Warriedar lease and has been cut in a eosteen in the
Black Jack lease, 54 feet south of the Warriedar south boundary,
but has not been traced any distance south of this eosteen. This
lode strikes N. 24° W. for the greater part of its length, but turns
slightly west of south before crossing the Warriedar south bound-
ary. The dip averages about 49° WSW., but the dips observed
range from 40° to 55°. The lode outcrops strongly on the crest of
the ridge north of the Warriedar south boundary, the outcrop con-
sisting of dense purplish-black iron ore. The average width is
about 2 or 3 feet.
The Warriedar Cross Lode. —This lode has been traced from
the eastern boundary of the Warriedar lease, westward for about
5 chains. It strikes 12° N. of W. and dips 51° S. The width of
the auriferous material, where exposed, ranges from 2 to 12 feet,
the average width being probably 7 or 8 feet. This lode is more
quartzose than usual, but contains a good deal of iron ore in addition
to the quartz and altered amphibolite. Gold occurs in all three, but
the quartz and iron are said to be richer. The formation is breeciated
in places.
The Porcupine Lode. —This lode has not actually been traced
up to the jasper, but there are a number of fault lines, a little to
the east, apparently connected with it and possibly also with the
Warriedar Cross Lode. The lode runs through the Porcupine and
Porcupine South leases into the Porcupine South Extended, where
lode matter, probably marking its southerly extension, has been
traced for a distance of three chains. The strike is N. 14° W. and
the average dip about 57° W. 14° S., the dips observed ranging from
51° to 01°. The average width is probably about 4 feet. At the
southern shaft on the lode in the Porcupine lease, and also near the
southern end of the Porcupine South, the lode is cut by quartz reefs
striking WNW.; it does not, however, appear to be faulted along
them. Dense iron ore is visible in places along the outcrop of the
lode.
The Ironclad Lode (vide Fig. 5). —As already mentioned, this
lode differs in strike and direction of dip from the other main lodes.
The general strike is N. 29° E. and the average dip probably about
68° ESE. In the workings in the Ironclad lease the lode ranges from
a thin seam to about 4 feet in width. It appears to die out one or


two chains north of the jasper and lias only heen worked near the
latter. It has been cut in a costeen near the southwestern boundary
of the Ironclad, but has not been followed for any distance in the
Ironclad South. In a pot-hole close to and about half-way along
the southwestern boundary of the last-named lease, however, there
is a trace of formation with coarse pistachio-green crystals of a de-
composed orthorhombic pyroxene, which probably marks the south-
ern end of the lode.
Internal structure and mineral composition. —ln the oxidised
zone, the lodes consist chiefly of masses of dense iron ore, which in
places occupy the full width of the lodes; seams and bands of
sheared and kaoliniscd country: ehloropal, usually in irregular
seams near the walls of the lodes; irregular seams of a form of
ehrysotile asbestos—locally known as “woolly nose”—the fibrous
aggregates of which are arranged in a manner suggesting their
derivation, from coarse interlocking crystals of an orthorhombic
pyroxene; opal, irregularly distributed in seams and lenses, and
usually yellowish-brown, red, or flame-coloured, but in places, par-
ticularly in the Ironclad lode, stained green or bine by malachite
or azuriie; and resinous-looking quartz in irregular stringers and
lenses. Other minerals identified in the oxidised zone include
psilomelane—the hydrous oxide of manganese—(Aurnm lode), na-
tive bismuth and the carbonate bisinntite (Warriedar cross loda
and Porcupine lode), and green, amber-coloured, and black scorodite
—the hydrated arsenate of iron—(Porcupine lode); the black
colour of some of the seorodite was found by the Government
.Mineralogist and Chemist to be due to the presence of minute grains
of arsenopyrite, from which the seorodite lias evidently been derived.
Large masses of dense iron ore are characteristic of the Aurum,
Warriedar, and Porcupine lodes.
The Warriedar Cross Lode is more quartzose than the others.
In a picked specimen [xsV?] °* f l !iartz from this lode, native bis-
muth, bismutite, and gold were visible to the naked eye; the speci-
men assayed 20 ozs. 16 dwts. 9 grs. of gold, 6 dwts. 3 grs. of
silver, and 0-50 per cent of bismuth.
■ Variegated opal is common in the Ironclad and Aurum lodes.
A specimen [j-gx?] °f copper-stained opal from the face of the
south drive at the 48 feet level in the Ironclad was found to contain
opal, chalcoeite, chrysocolla, malachite, azurite, and quartz; it
assayed 9 dwts. 3 grs. of gold, 19 dwts. 4 grs. of silver, and 5-54
per cent of copper.
In the Porcupine group the sulphide zone had been penetrated
only in the Aurum and Ironclad leases. The unoxidised ore-bodies
appeared to consist of granulated and partly ehloritised and mica-
eised epidiorite, with irregular lenses and stringers of quartz, and
irregularly distributed patches of dense pyrites. A specimen
[rzVs] from the lode, near the bottom of the Ironclad shaft, was


found to contain arsenopyrite, actinolite, magnetite, wolfram, psilo-
melane, and quartz; it assayed 3 ozs. 7 dwts. 17 grains of gold and
6 dwts. 3 grains of silver. Neither copper nor bismuth were present
in this specimen.
A specimen of sulphide ore from the Golden Bar Extended
lode was found to contain arsenopyrite, mareasite, and quartz, in ad-
dition to gold and silver (vide Appendix).
3. The Quabtz Reefs. —(a) In the gahhro derivatives. —In
the Porcupine group, a number of quartz reefs outcrop between the
first and second jaspers. In the Aurum and Warriedar leases, there
are a few' reefs, three or four feet wide in places, striking, roughly,
north and dipping west at a steep angle; they carry a little gold, up
to about sdwts. in places. The majority of the reefs, including those
in Blocks 3 and 4 and in the Porcupine and Porcupine South, are
more or less parallel to the jaspers in strike, but usually dip south;
they cut the lodes in places. But few of the reefs are more than
seven or eight chains in length; they range from a thread to about
four feet in width, averaging about a foot. Fair assays have been
obtained from a few of the reefs, but the majority do not appear to
be payable propositions.
Some work has been done on the reefs in the Warriedar, Por-
cupine, and Porcupine South Extended leases, but the results do not
appear to have been encouraging. In the Porcupine South Ex-
tended, the reef strikes N. 53° E. and dips SE. at angles ranging
from 45° to 03°; it is about seven chains in length. In the
northeast shaft on this lease, this reef is an irregular compound
body consisting of a number of quartz stringers in a band of horn-
blende schist, probably micaceous. On the footwall, there are seams
of a pale-green bladed mineral, resembling the orthorhombic pyro-
xene which occurs at the southern end of the Ironclad lode. The
formation cuts the “combs” of the country, which are vertical here.
A crushing from this shaft is said to have averaged lldwts. over the
plates and 22dwts. in the sands.
In the Porcupine lease, the main reef, which extends northwest
and southeast into the adjoining leases, and is probably about 10
chains long, lias a general strike of N. 63° W., and dips about
40° SW. In the southeast shaft on this lease the reef is very
irregular and ranges in width from a thread to about 2% feet. The
reef bulges considerably where it crosses the Porcupine lode, but
narrows again to the northwest, and its outcrop is obscured. What
is probably its nortlnvesterly extension has been worked in a shaft
in the Warriedar lease. There are a great number of flat joints in
the reef in this last shaft.
West of the Porcupine group, there are a few reefs, mostly
striking about northeast, between the second and third jaspers.
Some of these reefs run up to the second jasper, and the contacts
might be tested for small patches.


There are a few short reefs in the amphibolite at the St. Pat-
rick's Day group, near the boundary of the sedimentary rocks. The
majority strike about northeast and dip southeast. Crushings from
a reef in the St. Patrick’s Day lease, dipping southeast at about
75°, averaged 0.44 o/.s. per ton, for 95 tons.
There are some reefs in the amphibolite near the Highland
Chief group. Most of these are near the margin of the granitic
rocks and in places run into those rocks. North of the leases most of
the reefs strike slightly west of north; east of the leases, the reefs
strike nearly east. The majority are only a few inches wide. These
reefs, apparently, earry little or no gold, but traces of molybdenite
have been observed in two of the reefs east of the Highland Chief;
these are evidently genetically connected with the granitic rocks.
(b) In the granitic rocks. —As mentioned in the general descrip-
tion of the geology of the district, there are an extraordinary num-
ber of reefs in the granitic rocks, near the Highland Chief. These
reefs apparently belong to two series; one striking from 20°
to 25° N. of W., which includes most of the reefs south of the
leases; and one striking slightly north of east, best developed in the
Highland Chief and Highland Chief Deeps. It was only possible to
show a small proportion of the reefs of the first series on the map
(Plate II.). The two series are roughly parallel to the northwestern
and northeastern boundaries of the granite. The reefs of both
series, as well as the neighbouring reefs in the amphibolite, are prob-
ably all of the same age. They do not appear to be auriferous.
Some of the reefs of the first series are 12 feet wide in places.
Very good prospects have been obtained from a creamy-
coloured, sandy reef in the Highland Chief, near the margin of the
granitic rock. This reef strikes approximately N. 60° W. and
dips southwest —away from the margin—at about 45°. A fair
amount of work has been done on this reef, which, at the time of
my survey, looked very promising. A quantity of bismuth carbonate
was present in some of the richer stone, suggesting that the reef
belongs to the same period as the ore-bodies of the Porcupine group-
In the same lease, prospects have also been obtained from a small
reef about eight chains northwest of the main shaft, and about a
chain north of the track from the Government Well. This reef,
however, had not been followed for any distance.
4. Detritat. Deposits. —Practically no alluvial work has been
done in this area, the physical features of which, particularly in the
neighbourhood of the Porcupine group, do not lend themselves to the
formation of payable alluvial deposits.
All the important ore-bodies of the Porcupine group occur on
the northern slope of the main amphibolite ridge, and any go*
leached therefrom by surface waters, or removed by molian agencies,
would be carried towards the valley to the north. Here the alluvia
deposits are spread over a comparatively wide area before the main


creek, some 20 chains north of the ore-bodies, is reached, and it is
therefore unlikely that any well-defined alluvial lead exists in this
locality.
V.—SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS.
Summary and geological history —The rocks of this district
comprise amphibolites, hornblendites, and epidiorites, from gabbros
or coarse dolerites, forming the country rock of the auriferous de-
posits; granitic rocks, including microcline-muscovite granite and
quartz porphyry and, probably, intermediate facies; a series of
ancient sedimentary rocks —the Warriedar Beds —including shales,
quartzites, and conglomerates; and a few dykes, probably of bas-
altic dolerite.
The basaltic dykes are apparently the youngest igneous rocks of
the area and are intrusive into the granitic rocks, which, in their
turn, are intrusive into the amphibolites. As to the relative age of
the sedimentary rocks, there is but little evidence, and that is in
favour of their being older than the granite. I am inclined to regard
them as younger than the gabbroid rocks, and it is possible that
they belong to the same period as the Mosquito Creek Beds and
the older sediments northeast of Meekatharra.
The gabbroid rocks have been subjected to intense pressure, re-
sulting in the formation of a number of parallel shear zones, now
occupied by the jaspers and the corresponding sulphide bodies below
the zone of oxidation.
Subsequent earth movements, probably local, faulted the jaspers
along zones, of no great length, which at a later date, probably dur-
ing the final period of activity of the granite magma, were invaded
by solutions carrying gold, silver, bismuth, and other metals. The
deposition of quartz, also to some degree auriferous, in fissures
formed subsequent to the fault zones occupied by the lodes, prob-
ably marked the last stage of this period of igneous activity.
The basaltic dykes probably belong to an entirely different
period of igneous activity.
Economic prospects. —Including the Warriedar cross lode, there
are, in the Porcupine group, five main lines of lode, and a few minor
lines which need hardly be considered. Two lines of lode have also
been found in the Golden Bar group. Payable shoots have been
worked in the Aurum and Ironclad lodes, the Warriedar cross lode,
and the Golden Bar Extended lode. High assays—over 2 1 /z ozs. for
the width of the lode in a few places in the Ironclad —have been
obtained in places, but the ore treated to the end of 1017 averaged
0.30 fine ozs. per ton for the Aurum lode, 0.40 ozs. for the Ironclad,
and 0.76 ozs. for the Golden Bar Extended; returns for the Warrie-
dar lease averaged 0.33 ozs., but I was unable to ascertain how much
of the ore came from the cross lode, which may average a trifle


higher. The shoots, discovered so far, all occur in the oxidised zone;
I see no reason why equally rich shoots should not occur below that
zone, but the higher cost of mining and treatment of the sulphide ore
will have to be taken into consideration.
In addition, a number of quartz reefs occur in the district;
several of these are auriferous, but only a few have so far been
found to contain payable shoots', namely, the reefs in the Porcupine
South Extended, the St. Patrick’s Day, and the Highland Chief
leases, and a reef, not previously mentioned, in the Dives Pogue—
about a mile west of the Golden Bar group; with the possible excep-
tion of that in the Highland Chief, these shoots have not proved of
any great length.
The general geological conditions of the district, namely, the
existence of a large area of greenstone rocks, intruded by granite,
and traversed by a number of well-defined lines of jasper, may be
regarded as favourable to the occurrence of payable ore-bodies. These
generally favourable conditions are, however, modified by the follow-
ing facts: —
(a) The lines of weakness, other than those occupied by the
jaspers, are scattered, and those discovered, up to the
present, are of no great length.
(b) The gold content, both of the lodes and reefs, is erratic,
and in the reefs, with a few exceptions, is unpayable,
though the existence of rich patches at the junctions
of reefs and jaspers is by no means unlikely.
(c) The mineral composition of the lodes is complex, and the
occurrence of copper and bismuth ores, and of arseno-
pyrite and marcasite in the sulphide zone, greatly com-
plicates the treatment of the ore (vide Appendix). The
presence of native bismuth affects the amalgamation
of the gold, and that of arsenopyrite and marcasite
renders it necessary to roast the sulphide ores, thus
increasing the treatment costs.
Recommendations, —Prospecting in this district is to some ex-
tent hindered by the dense growth of scrub, in places, and by the
obscuring of the rocks by superficial deposits.
Further search should be made near the greenstone-granite con-
tact, particularly in the vicinity of the Golden Bar group and be-
tween that group and the Highland Chief leases.
With the high prices ruling at present, a careful watch should
be kept, when prospecting, for the occurrence of metallic minerals
other than gold, such as molybdenite, scheelite, wolfram, and the
bismuth and copper minerals, which are known to occur in the dis-
trict. Molybdenite is more likely to ocur in veins in the granitic
rocks, bismuth and copper ores in lodes and reefs in the greenstones,
scheelite and wolfram mav occur in either rock.


Concentrates from those reefs or lodes, in which bismuth and
its compounds are known to occur in any quantity, should be as-
sayed for that metal with a view to its recovery.
In sinking a prospecting shaft on a reef or lode, the outcrop of
which has been located, it is advisable, in order to avoid dead work,
to follow the formation on the underlay, rather than stand off and
sink a vertical shaft to cut the formation at depth; the majority of
vertical shafts sunk by prospectors are useless, should a large com-
pany later take over the ground. Similarly, when working an ore-
shoot, the shaft or winze should follow the pitch of the shoot to
avoid unnecessary driving as well as handling of the ore.
VI.—THE MINES.
A.—THE PORCUPINE GROUP.
The Mug’s Luck Leases (vide Plate III.). —These include
U.M.Ls. 708, Mug’s Luck, and 711, Aurum, both of which were
taken up towards the end of 1913.
There are five shafts in the Mug’s Luck lease; four of these are
on the main lode; the fifth and northernmost shaft (v.d. 33 feet),
which has been sunk in the superficial deposits of tlie valley, ap-
pears to be slightly east of the line of the lode. The southernmost
shaft connects with the north drive at the 79 feet level from the
Aurum main shaft. Between the southernmost shaft and the Mug’s
Luck main shaft is a shaft with a vertical depth of 25 feet; no
driving has been done from this shaft, in which the lode was unpay-
able.
The main shaft has been sunk vertically to a depth of 30 feet, but
also follows the lode on the underlay from the surface to a vertical
depth of 71 feet. 100 feet of driving, chiefly to the south, has been
done on the lode from the bottom of the shaft; a little crosscutting
has also been done. In this drive, the average width of the lode is
about five feet. It consists largely of brown opal, some iron ore —
chiefly on the hanging-wall side —chloropal—in which are pseudo-
morphs after pyrites—and kaolin. With a few exceptions, assays
from the shaft and drive gave results too low to be payable.
The fourth shaft, also on the underlay, has a vertical depth of
61 feet. It is on the junction of the lode with the eastern portion
of the jasper. The lode has been driven on to the south, from the
bottom of the shaft, for 35 feet. In this drive it consists chiefly of
kaolinic material, more or less ferruginous; a seam of green puggy
material, probably halloysite, marks the hanging-wall in places; the
footwall is marked by halloysite or kaolin. Assay returns for this
shaft were erratic; the first 28 feet of the drive gave fair returns,
but the rest was unpayable.


There are four shafts in the Aurum lease. The main shaft
(v.d. 139 feet), is dose to the Mug’s Luck boundary. It is underlay
from the surface, but a vertical shaft 20 feet further west runs into
it. The lode has been driven, on for 153 feet to the northwest and
104 feet to the southeast at the 79 feet level. This level corresponds
to the 71 feet level from the Mug’s Luck main shaft. The lode
has been sloped above this level to points about 75 feet northwest
and 70 feet southeast of the main shaft to a vertical distance of
about 30 feet from the surface in places. In the shaft, the lode is
practically valueless from the surface to a vertical depth of 24 feet;
thence to the bottom of the shaft assays gave good results. In the
drives the lode was payable to a few feet beyond the shafts 50 feet
northwest and 50 feet southeast of the main shaft, but beyond those
points contained but litle gold.
Except for a few feet at the end of the south drive, the lode is
completely oxidised at the 79 feet level, and consists mainly of dense
iron ore with a few patches of variegated opal, seams of asbestos,
and a little chloropal and kaolin. The sulphide ore has already been
described. The rock on the walls of the lode is oxidised in the north-
west drive, but is nnoxidised at tiie plat and in places in the south-
east drive. Below the 79 feet level the shaft was under water.
The lode has not been definitely traced beyond the face of the
south drive from the main shaft, but in the shaft 175 feet south-
east (vd. 23 feet), apparently on the same line, there is some quartz
in biotitic or ehloritie schist.
The fourth shaft, 500 feet SSE. of the main shaft, has a verti-
cal depth of 29 feet. It is on a quartz reef, which extends south-
east for about 150 feet, and northwards runs towards the lode, which
it should meet about half-way between the shafts 50 feet south and
175 feet southeast of the main shaft. Low values were obtained m
this reef.
During my survey, the option held over these leases by Messrs.
Bewick, Moreing and Co., was thrown up, and, in consequence, no
work was being done on tbe ground.
There is a sliming and eyaniding plant on these leases.
Mines Department Returns up to the end of 1917 show a total
for these leases of 5,194.00 tons treated for 1,539.98 fine ozs. of gold,
an average of 0.30 fine ozs. per ton.
IuoNCL,u) North G.M.L. 751 (voided). —There is only one shaft
on this lease, which was formerly G.M.L. 700, of the same name.
This shaft is on tbe north wall of the jasper, about 200 feet north-
east of the southwest corner of the lease. It is vertical to 34 feet
from the surface, thence follows the jasper, which here dips
south at angles ranging from 70° to 85°. At the 34 feet level are
several short drives, both with and across the jasper. There is n®
defined ore-body in these workings, but a few flat quartz veins, with
a slight southerly dip, run into the jasper. The oxidised country m


the vicinity probably carries a little gold, due to impregnation by
surface solutions.
There are no returns for this lease.
Warriedar G.M.L. 727. —There are eight shafts in the lease,
including two on the Warriedar lode, three on the cross lode, and
three on different quartz reefs. The north (No. 2) shaft on the
Warriedar lode is 26 feet deep on a dip of 43° (v.d. 17 feet). The
lode here consists chiefly of sheared, altered, and oxidised amphi-
bolite, with some iron ore, opal, asbestos, and a few seams of dark-
brown micaceous material on the hanging-wall side. There are a
number of irregular, flat joints, marked by lenses of resinous quartz.
The south shaft on this lode is 25 feet deep on a dip of 55°
(v.d. 201/2 feet). In this shaft the lode is about three feet wide,
.consisting of one foot of iron ore —on the hanging-wall side—and
two feet of micaceous schist; there are traces of quartz and asbestos.
The west (No. 1) shaft on the cross lode is 73 feet deep on a
dip of 50V2 0 (v.d. 56 feet). The'middle (hauling) shaft is 32 feet
farther east; it is vertical for the first seven feet, thence 49. feet
deep on a dip of SIVa 0 (total v.d. 45 feet). Levels connect the two
shafts at depths of 29 and 38 feet. Some sloping has been done at
the bottom of the hauling shaft, where there is over 12 feet of
auriferous material, including five feet of quartz with some iron ore.
At the bottom of the No. 1 shaft, the lode has been driven on for a
few feet. The lode is three feet wide in this shaft and is said to have
averaged 3ozs. to the ton. On the west side, the lode is poorer,
though well-defined. The average width of the lode in these work-
ings is about eight feet.
The east shaft, on the cross lode, is 36 feet deep on a dip of
52° (v.d. 28 feet). No driving has been done on the lode, which
is from six to eight feet wide here and somewhat irregular. It con-
sists mainly of iron ore and quartz.
At the time of my survey, Messrs. Hornhardt and party were
working the cross lode in the stope at the bottom of the hauling
shaft, and also in the east shaft.
About 85 feet southwest of the east shaft on the cross lode is a
shaft 27 feet deep on a southerly dip of 40° (v.d. 17 feet), on
what is probably the westerly continuation of the large quartz reef
which cuts the Porcupine lode. The reef here consists of oilly quartz
with some purplish-black iron ore, and contains numerous flat joints
with a slight dip north. In one place the reef has been faulted 3
feet on a flat “head.” —the movement of the upper portion of the
reef being to the north.
One hundred and thirty feet southeast of this last shaft is a ver-
tical shaft, 16 feet deep, on a small vein of opaline quartz about 6
inches wide and associated with a little asbestos. The vein strikes
north and dips about 80° west.


The eighth shaft is about 105 feet ENE. of the south shaft on
the Warriedar lode. It is on an irregular quartz reef, striking north
and dipping about 70° west. The reef is about 7 chains long
and is apparently unpayable.
Returns for the lease show a total of 077.25 tons treated for
225.72 fine ozs.; an average of 0.33 fine ozs. per ton.
Black Jack G.M.L. 843 (voided). —There are two shafts on
this lease, IS feet apart, near the north boundary. The shafts are
on a small lode striking north and dipping about 61° west. The
north shaft is 52 feet deep on the underlay (v.d. 45% feet). The
second is vertical for 11 feet, thence 15 feet on the underlay (total
v.d. 24 feet). The two shafts are connected at the 24 feet level. The
lode consists chiefly of schist, probably micaceous, with about one
foot of dense iron ore and a little asbestos. It has not been traced
any distance north or south of the shafts.
The only returns for the lease show 10 tons of ore treated for
3.96 fine ozs. of gold; an average of 0.25 fine ozs. per ton.
Porcupine G.M.L. 731. —The ground covered by this lease was
first taken up as G.M.L. 688 of the same name —the first lease at this
centre —in May, 1913, There are four shafts on the lease, including
two on the lode, one —to the north —on the southern edge of the
jasper—apparently a little west of the line of lode, should it extend
so far —and one near the southeast eorner on the long quartz reef
which traverses the lease.
No driving or crosscutting has been done from the north shaft,
which is vertical and 27 feet deep.
The middle shaft is 73 feet deep on a dip of 58° (v.d. 62
feet). From the bottom of the shaft a drive extends northwards on
the lode for 10 feet. The lode averages about four feet wide in the
shaft and contains a fair amount of iron ore and a trace of asbestos;
there is little or no quartz. In the face of the drive, the lode consists
chiefly of brown opal, brown aetinolitie material, and a little iron
ore.
The south (main) shaft on the lode is 61 feet deep on a dip of
58° (v.d. 52 feet). No driving has been done from this shaft
The lode is four feet wide in this shaft, and from the surface to
about 15 feet from the bottom of the shaft consists mainly of quartz
with a little iron ore. At the bottom of the shaft there is about
2% feet of iron ore with a little opal and asbestos, and about a foot
of decomposed schist on each wall. The hanging-wall is much sliek-
ensided. The large quartz reef crosses the lode about 15 feet north
of the shaft; the lode has been sfoped for a short distance from the
surface at this point.
The shaft on the reef near the southeast eorner was inacces-
sible. The reef is very irregular here, ranging from a thread to over
2 feet in width. The dip is about 40°.


No work was being done on this lease at the time of my visit.
Returns show a total of 66.25 tons treated for 12.73 fine ozs.
of gold; an average of 0.19 fine ozs. per ton.
Porcupine South G.M.L. 739. —The ground formed parts of
former G.M.Ls. 715, Ironclad South and 716, Porcupine South.
The only shaft on the lease, on the Porcupine lode, is 25 deep on a
dip of 61° (v.d. 22 feet). The lode here consists chiefly of iron
ore. Several quartz reefs traverse the lease, but none appear to
carry gold in any quantity.
Returns show a total of 81.00 tons treated for 16.99 fine ozs.; an
average of 0.21 fine ozs. per ton. These returns possibly include
those from G.M.L. 756.
Porcupine South Extended G.M.L. 750. —This lease formed
part of former G.M.L. 716, Porcupine South. There are three shal-
low shafts on the ground; two approximately on the line of the Por-
cupine lode, which is ill-defined in this lease; and one on a quartz
reef striking nearly northeast, which cuts the northern boundary
about 160 feet from the north corner.
Of the first two shafts, the northernmost is vertical and 15 feet
deep. It is chiefly in amphibolite, but cuts some oxidised schist with
a trace of iron ore, which may represent the Porcupine lode.
The south shaft is 11 feet deep. There is a little brown iron
ore on the east side of the shaft.
The northeast shaft, on the reef, is 21 feet deep on a dip of
63° ( v.d. 19 feet): a description of the reef in this shaft has already
been given.
There are no returns for this lease.
Ironclad G.M.L. 699 (Fig. s).—This lease was taken up in Sep-
tember, 1913. There are four shafts on the ground, all on the Iron-
clad lode, and at no great distance apart. The southernmost (main
shaft) is 137 feet deep on a dip of 68° (v.d. 127 feet). There
are drives north and south on the lode, at the 48 and 88 feet levels
(measured on the incline). The north drive at the 48 feet level con-
nects with a shaft 50 feet north. There are also drives north and
south at the same level at the fourth shaft (130 feet north). The
three northern shafts are connected by a drive at the 24 feet level
from the fourth shaft. The south drive from the main shaft at the
48 feet level is 30 feet long. At the 88 feet level the north drive is
123 feet long, the south drive 38 feet. From about 10 feet north of
the main shaft to rather more than 10 feet north of the second shaft,
the lode has been sloped from the 88 feet level to about 20 feet from
the surface. A little sloping has also been done south of the main
shaft from the 48 and 88 feet levels.
The lode ranges in width from 1% to 4 feet in the main shaft.
At the 88 feet level it narrows going south and is only a seam in the
face of the drive. In the face of the north drive, at 41 feet, from
the shaft 130 feet north, the lode is also represented only by a nar-
row shear zone.




Assays from the main shaft gave somewhat erratic results, but
from the surface to a depth, on the underlay, of 122 feet averaged
pis. for a width of just over 2 feet. The average value in the north
drive at the 88 feet level was somewhat lower.
The lode, as exposed in these workings, is more schistose than
those previously described, and contains less iron ore. Copper-
stained opal was much in evidence in the stopes south of the main
shaft.
The lode has been cut in a costeen near the southwest boundary
of the lease, but no work has been done thereon.
Returns for the lease up to the end of 1917 show a total of
1,307.50 tons treated for G 34.37 fine ozs. of gold and 7.30 fine ozs.
'of silver; the average rate per ton of gold being 0.40 fine ozs.
Ironclad South G.M.L. 745. —This ground formed part of
former G.M.L. 715.
The southerly continuation of the Ironclad lode runs through
the lease but is apparently represented only by a narrow shear zone
which has undergone but little vein alteration. Practically no work
has been done thereon.
There is only one shaft on the lease, on a short quartz reef
which strikes approximately N. 60° E. and dips at 59° SSE.
A narrow shoot of gold in this reef was being stoped at the time of
my survey. The shaft follows the pitch of the shoot which is about
42° SW. The reef ranges in width from -6 inches to 2 feet, the
average being about a foot The stope length of the shoot was about
16 feet. The reef contained a little iron ore and bismuth.
From this shaft 127.75 tons of ore has been treated for a re-
turn of 37.08 fine ozs.; an average of 0.20 fine ozs. per ton.
B.—THE ST. PATRICK’S DAY GROUP.
St. Patrick’s Day G.M.L. 785 (voided). —There are five shafts
on this lease. Three of these are on a quartz reef about 2'/j chains
in length striking N. 32° B. and dipping at about 75° SB. The
fourth shaft is farther southwest, on the same line but apparently
somewhat southeast of the reef, which it has failed to cut. The
fifth shaft is on a small parallel reef about 85 feet southeast of the
first.
The main reef has been stoped near the surface from the second
and third shafts. In the second shaft it is about 78 inches wide.
The other shafts were inaccessible.
The lease is entirely in amphibolite, which, however, is largely
obscured by superficial deposits.
Returns for the lease give a total of 95-00 tons treated for 42-20
fine ozs. of gold; an average of 0.44 fine ozs. per ton.


Kii.lolu G.M.L. 706 (voided).—The northern portion of this
lease is in the sedimentary shales, the southern and larger portion
in amphibolite.
There are three shafts on the lease. One—a vertical shaft—in
the amphibolite close to the boundary of the shales and apparently
in country only. The other two are on a quart/, reef about 3% chains
long and roughly parallel to the St. Patrick’s Day reef. The more
northerly of the two is vertical, and was inaccessible; the other
which is only a few feet deep, is on the underlay. There are two
other short reefs on the lease, hut these appear to carry no gold.
There are no returns for this lease.
Sons of Hium G.M.L. 806 (voided).—Of this lease, also, the
northern portion is in the sediments, the southern in amphibolite.
There are two comparatively shallow shafts on the ground, on
a short jasperoid lens, in the shales close to the edge of the am-
phibolite; this formation cuts the boundary between the two rocks.
There is no record ns to the values obtained therein.
In the amphibolite between the shafts and the western boundary
of the lease are two parallel quartz reefs striking about NNE. and
running up to the boundary of the shales. They are, however, of
a “bucky” character and do not appear to he auriferous.
There are no'returns for the lease.
C. —THE HIGHLAND CHIEF GROUP.
HiuiiUAKu Chief G.M.L. 841. —This is the only lease in this
group on which any work has been done. The southwestern ami
greater portion of the lease is in the granitic rocks, the remainder
in amphibolite. The boundary between the two rocks is very
irregular, but as a whole is nearly parallel to and about 4 chains
southwest of the northeast boundary of the lease. Several E. —W.
quart/, reefs traverse the lease. A jasper lens runs from the margin
of tlie granite a little south of the centre of the lease in an ESL.
direction, cutting the southeast houndary about 40 feet from the
east corner. A quart/, reef runs along the southern wall'of the
jasper.
The only reef worked for its gold content is one about 4 chains
long, just within the boundary of the granitic rocks about 20 feet
southwest of the jasper, to which the northwestern half of the reef
is roughly parallel; the southeastern portion turns in a more south-
erly direction, parallel to the margin of the granite. The reef dips
away from the margin at about 45°. The southeastern portion of
the reef makes a strong outcrop of sandy quartz, worked in a
shallow open cut, in which it gave very good prospects. A vertical
shaft was later sunk to a depth of 40 feet v ahout 80 feet west of the
open cut. As shown, however, by subsequent work in an incline


Name and Number of
Lease or Prospecting
Area.
Locality. j tr °![cd.'
i
Gold
therefrom.
Pate
per ton.
tons.
fine ozfl.
fine oz».
GALL. 822, Golden
Par
About 4 miles S. of
Warriedar
191-00
39-04
0-21
GALL. 803, Golden
Par Extended
S mile SAY. of GALL.
' 822
174-25
132-23
0-70
G.M.L. 8G7, Dives
Pogue
1 mile W. of GALL.
822
19-00
15-10
0-79
P.A. 4071 1*
About 1 mile \V. of
G.M.L. 806
29-00
10-95
0-38
P.A. 420 J
W*s> .
East of and adjoin-
ing P.A. 407
118-00
29-04
0-25
Sundry’Claims
92-50
64-45*
0-70
shaft, about 30 feet northeast, the vertical shaft cuts the plane of
intersection of the reef with a small fault striking nearly at right
angles to the reef, and no quartz was cut where the reef should have
crossed the shaft. About 30 feet of crosscutting was done from the
bottom of the shaft with the mistaken idea of picking up the reef
farther east. In addition, a few feet of driving and stuping have
been done on a quartz vein approximately parallel to the main reef,
but dipping northeast towards it, A little work has .also been done
on a similar vein, dipping northeast, from a shallow shaft about
60 feet southwest of the main shaft.
The main reef looked very promising at the time of my visit,
but may prove somewhat erratic in width and gold content. The
richer portions of the reef contain a fair quantity of bismuth
carbonate.
Up to the end of 1017 a total of 344.50 lons from this lease
was treated for a return of 185-01 fine ozs. of gold; an average
of 0-54 tine ozs. per ton.
The following are returns from the Warriodar centre up to the
end of 1017, other than those given above: —
* Includes 1-80 fine ozs. dollied and specimens.


Arsenopyrlte
Mareasite
.. 23-6 „
Quartz
.. 35-6 „
Other minerals including gold
4-5 ..
100 0
APPENDIX.
MKTAX.LCRfiICAL TEST OP A KEFKACTORV ORE FROM
WARRIEDAR.
By
E. S. SIMPSON, B.E., D.Sc., F.C.S.
G.S.L. 109 SE. This ore was obtained from the Golden Bar Ex-
tended G.M.L. SC3, and was a heavy sulphide. The chief mineral
constituents were:—
Determinations of the most important constituents from a
metallurgical standpoint gave: —
Jiaw Ore.
Gold .. .. sozs. Odwts. 19grs. per ton.
Silver ... .. loz. Idwt. 14grs. per ton.
Sulphur .. .. 10-80 per cent.
Arsenic .. .. 16-72 „
Insoluble .. .. 35-65 (mainly qnartz).
Copper, Lead, Bismuth nil.
Coarse metallic gold was visible in the hand specimens of the
ore and was met with in sifting the crushed ore. The very unstable
iron sulphide, marcasite, rapidly started to weather, with the pro-
duction of iron sulphate and free sulphuric acid even when the ore
was kept dry under cover. The presence of this mineral precludes
the adoption of any solution treatment without previous roasting.
The ore was crushed through a 20 mesh screen and was then
found to have the following size:—
Under 20; over 40 .. .. ..38-0 per cent.
„ 40; „ 80 19-0 „
„ 80 .... .. 42-1 „
On a large scale somewhat coarser grinding (10 mesh) would
probably be found sufficient for an ore of this nature, but the time
and cost of roasting would be appreciably increased if the grinding
were too coarse.


The ore was roasted in small quantities in a muffle for three
hours, the first two hours being at a very low temperature, only just
sufficient to drive off sulphur and arsenic, the last hour at a bright
red heat.
The roasted ore weighed 75 per cent of the raw ore and
assayed:—
Roasted Ore,
■ -(fold .. .. .. fiozs. Cdwts. Ogrs. per ton.
"Silver .. ~ .. loa. 7dwts. Ogrs. per ton.
Sulphur (as sulphate) .. 0-14 per cent.
Arsenic (as arsenate) .. 3-20 „
She,
Under 20; over 40 .. .. ~ 15-6 per cent.
» 40; „ 80 27-1 „
» 80 57-3 „
The roasted ore was alkaline in reaction to methyl orange.
Direct Cyanidation.
Owing to the large proportion of coarse gold present, direct
cyanidation of the roasted ore was a failure, residues assaying:—
Gold, 2ozs. lOdwts. 23grs. per ton.
Silver, 14dwts. 4grs. per ton.
Equal to an extraction of only 59-89 per cent of the gold.
Amalgamation followed by Cyanidation.
Pan amalgamation was then tried for the removal of the coarse
gold followed by cyanidation for the recovery of the fine gold. The
amalgamation was done in a pan with a very light muller to avoid
fine grinding, the time of grinding being half an hour.
After grinding the sands assayed;—
Gold, loz. Odwts. 3grs. per ton.
Silver, 13dwts. 2grs. per ton.
Equal to an extraction of 79-26 per cent, of the gold.
The sands were then leached with cyanide, three davs wifi
0-76 per cent solution and one day with 9-13 per cent solution.
The residues assayed:—
Gold, 3dwts. 6grs. per ton.
Silver, Bdwts. 2grs. per ton.
The total extraction of gold being 97-42 per cent.
The consumption of cyanide on unwashed roasted ore was
2-69 lbs. per ton.


INDEX.
Page i
Actlnnllte .. .. .. 23,30
Amphibolite S, 10,13, 15, 21,25, 29, 31.
.*>3 34 i
laterltc on . . . . • • 1£ [
jaspers In . . . . • • 3 0
reefs in . . • • • • 24
Apatite .. . • • • •» 1°
Arsenic .. .. • • •• 30,37
Arsenopyrlte . • •. 22,23,20,36
Asbestos 22, 28, 20, 30
Augite .. • • • • • • IjJ
Auntm lease, description of .. 28
gabbro in .• •• •• 13
hibiscus on .. .. .. 7
reef In .. •. • • 23
water supply .. • • 8
Anrura lode .. .. •• 25
Iron ore in .. *. .. 22
opal in .. .. •• 22
psilomelane in .. .. 22 I
Aurum main shaft .. .. 27 1
sheeting In .. .. .. 14
Azurite .. .. .. • ■ 22
Basaltic dolerite. description of .. 16
oee.urrence of . . 8,12, 25
Benjamin, Mr. .. .. .. 12.16
Uiotitic schist . . • • • . 28
Bismuth .. .. •• 25,26.33,36
earbonate. Rett Blsmutite.
native .. •• •• 22
Blsmutite .. .. 22,23,35
Black Jack lease, description of 30
lode in .. . . . •. 20, 21
Blague lease, jasper in .. :. 10
location of .. •. 6
sediments at /. .. •. 12
Block 1, creek In .. .. 6,14
2, creek near .. .. 6
3, jasper fn .. .. 18
reefs in . . .. 23
4, reefs In .. .. 23
5, jasper in .. .. IB
0, jasper In .. .. .18
lodes In .. .. 20
water shaft on .. .. 8
7, jasper In .. .. 18
lode in .. .. 20
8, faulting near .. .. 18, 20
9, shear zone northeast of IS
10, creek in . . - . 6
11, creek in .. .. 6
12, creek north of .. .. 6
Camping Reserve, rocks near .. 10
Chalcocite • • • • •• 22
Chloropal .. .. •• 22,27,28
Chrysocolla . . . . • . 15,22
Chrysotile asbestos .. .. 22
Conglomerates . . . . 8, 12, 16, 25
Copper ore .. .. • • • • 26
Cypress pine ~ .. -. 7
Page
Pcoeh an Ports lease, quartz por-
phyry in . • • • '•• • 15
Pclrltal deposits .. .. 24
. material .. • ■ 1* • • ii
Pniorlte .. .. ■ • 19, 25
basaltic .. .. S, 12, 18, 25
Pfves Pogue lease, reef in •.. 26
return for .. . • , -■
Bpldiorlte, description of.. .. 13.14
fine-grained .. . • ■ • ■**
granulated .. 22
occurrence of .. . • 25
vegetation on .. . • ’
Epidote .. • • 1“
Epidotisation .. . • • 1”
Exchange lease, Jasper In .. 1"
Farquharaon. R. A. . • • • 14
Felspar. See also Microclme, Ollgo-
ciase, Plagfoclase. .. •• }j
Field’s Find road .. .. • • i“
Faults .. .. 18,19, 20. 21,25,3 a
Gabbro ~ ~ , • ~ 10,2 a
derivatives, description of .. 13-15
Oabbroid rocks .. .. • • **•"
reefs in .. • • ■ ■ *■
Golden Bar Extended lease, return
for iode :: :: •■ '26,23.25
Golden Bar group, amphibolites at
location of .2
lodes in 20.25
topography of .. • -
Golden Bar lease, return for ..
lode ■ .. ■■ •• %
Government Battery .. •• •>!
jaspers near .. .. •• i.
Government Weil, rocks near .. 10> J “
water at .. . • • •
Granite .. .. ..7,8,10,12.2
boundary of .. .. •• if
description of .. •. I°'*“
Granitic rocks .. .. 10,25,«
description of .. ■■ I 5 "*;
iateriaation of .. ■, *1
jaspers in ... .. . ■ ■
reefs in *
Greenstones .. .. .. iz.
See also Amphibolite; Bpi-
diorite: Hornblendite. „
Grits H
Gums. .. .. .. • • *
Hailoysite .. .. •. ■ ■
Hibiscus
Highland Chief Peeps lease, reefs
In . . .. v • ■■


Page
Highland Chief group, amphibolite
It 10,14
bore near .. ■. - • »
gums near .. .. ... 1
jaspers near .. .. 19
location of . - . ■ 6
reefs in ■. • ■ . .. 8,24
topography of .. .. 7
Highland Chief lease, description
0 { 34,35
• reefs in .. ~ 24, 26, 34
Hornblende .. .. 13, 14,16.10
schist .. .. .. • • 23
Hornblendite .. 8,10,13,14.15, 25
Hornhardt and party .. .. 29
Ilmenite .. .. • • .. 15
Impregnation, secondary .. 21
Iron ore .. 21,22,27,28,29.30,31,33
Ironclad lease .. .. .. 21, 22
description of .. .. 31
Jasper in .. .. .. 18
sheeting In .. .. .. "14
Ironclad lode ~ .. 19, 20, 25, 31
description of .. .. 21
Ironclad North lease, descrip-
tion of ~ .. .. .. 28
Jasper in .. .. .. ■ 18
Ironclad shaft, sulphide ore in .. 22
Ironclad South lease .. .. 31
description of .. .. 33
lode in .. .. .. .22
Jam bush, occurrence of .. 7
Jasper .. .. 23, 26, 28, 30, 34
analysis of .. .. ... 18
description of .. . . 17-10
occurrence of .. .. 8,13
Jasper Hill lodes .. .. 20
Kaolin 27, 28
KHlolu lease, description of .. 34
Kurrajong, occurrence of .. 7
Lake Monger .. . • .. ’6, 7
Laminated quartz .. ■ ■ 19
Latcrlsation .. .. ..12,17
laterite .. .. .. .. 17,18
Little Groper lease, shales in . . 12
Uides, description of .. . • 19-23
structure and composition of 22
Magnetite .. .. .. .. 23
Maitland, A. Gibb .. .. 12
Malachite .. .. .. .. 22
Marcasite 23, 26. 36
Meekatharra, sediments near .. 25
Micaceous schist .. .. . • 29, 30
Mlcrocline 10.15
Molybdenite .. .. 8,10,15. 26
Molybdite 15
Mosquito Creek Beds , . .. 25
Mt. Muigine, geology of . . . . 10
location of .. .. 7
, - molybdenite at .. .. 8
normal granite .near. .. 12
Page
Mount Warricdar .. . • 6,7
rocks of .. . • ■ • 12
Mug's Luck-Aurum lode .. 19
description of .. ■ ■ 20
Mug's Luck lease, Jasper In .. 18
shafts on .. .. • • 27
water supply .. • ■ 8
Mug's Luck lease, description of.. 27,28
Mug’s Luck main shaft, epidlorite
in 14
Mulga .. .. . • . • 7
Muigine granite .. .. 10,12,15.16
Muscovite .. .. .. 10, 15,16
Oligoclase . . . . • . ■ • .15
Opal . . • ■ 22, 27, 28. 29. 33
Ophltic structure .. ... ■. 14
Pegmatite veins .. .. •. 10
FerenJori siding .. .. -. 6
Phyliitlc shales .. .. ■. 12
Piagloclase .. • • •. 13
Porcupine group, amphibolite at 10
bores in . . . . ■. 8
Jaspers in .. .. .. 17, 18
location of . ■ • ■ 6
lodes in .. .. . • 25
mines of .. .. 27
reefs in .... .. 23
topography of .. .. 6
Porcupine lease .. .. ■ • 21
description of .. .. 30
Porcupine lode .. 19, 20, 23, 29, 30, 31
bismuth in .. .. 22
description of .. .. 21
scorodite in .. .. .. 22
iron ore in .. .. .. 22
Porcupine South Extended lease 21
description of .. .. 31
reefs in .. .. .. 23, 26
Porcupine South lease .. .. 21
description of .. •. 31
reefs In .. .. .. 23
Psllomelane .. .. .. 22,23
Pyrites . . .. .. 15,22,27
Pyroxene, orthorhombic .. .. 22, 23
Quandong .. .. .. •. 7
Quartz .. 10,15,16.20.21.25.29,30
Quartz epidlorite .. .. .. 14
Quartz porphyry .. .. .. 10, 25
description of .. .. 10
Quartz reefs 10.20.20,28,29,30,31,33.
34, 35
description of 23
Quartz stringers .. .. , ■ 20, 22
Quartzites .. .. 8,12,16,25
Rothsay. amphibolite at .. 10
road to .. .. • • 7
St. Patrick's Day group, am-
phibolite at .. .. . ■ 8
bores near .. .. .. 8
description of .. .. 33, 34
location of .. .. .. 6
reefs Mn .. .. .. 24
, . . sediments at .. .. .. 12,13
INDEX — continued.


Page
St. Patrick’s Day lease, descrip-
tion of .. .. .. 33
reefs In .. 24,26,34
Scheelite 16. 20
Schist .. .. . . . . 30, 31
bJotitic . . .. . . 28
micaceous .. .. .. 29,30
Seorodlte .. .. .. .. 22
Sedimentary rocks 8, 10, 12,13, 34
boundary ,of .. .. .. 12
Jaspers In .. .. . . 13,19
Shales . . .. 8, 12. 19, 25. 34
Shear zones .. .. 18,1§, 25, 31
Sheeted structure .. .. 14,20
Sheoak. occurrence of .. .. 7
Sons of Erin lease, description of 3t
shales in .. .. .. 12
Sphene .. .. 19
Spider orchid .. .. .. 7
Sulphide ore .. .. .. 22, 28
test of 36,37
Sulphide zone .. .. .. 22
Sulphur 36, 37
Tourmaline .. •. .. 15
Trig. Station B.A. 8. Sec Mt
Mulgine.
Trig. Station B.A. 10, location of 7
sediments at .. .. 10,13,19
Trig. Station W. 8. See Weedln
Weedin.
Tungstic ochre .. .. .. 16
Page
Vegetation .. .. . • T
Warriedar. Mt. See Mt. Warrle-
dar.
Warriedar Beds .. ..12,25
description of .. .. 16
Warriedar cross lode .. 20,25,29
bismuth in .. .. 22
description of .. .. 21
Warriedar lease .. .. .. 20,21
description of .. .. 29
reefs In .. .. .. 23
Warriedar lode .. .. 19,20,29
description of .. .. 21
Iron ore In .. . . .. 22
Warriedar township, location of .. 6
Water 8
Wattle, occurrence of .. .. 2
Weedin Weedin hill .. .. 19
Weedin Weedin epidlorite .. H
Wheel of Fortune lease, quartz
porphyry in .. .. .. 1®
Wlldfiowers .. .. .7
Winning Post lease, jasper In .. 18
Wolfram .. .. .. ..23,26
Valgoo .. .. -. • • & 2
Zfcon S
Zolslte 1». “
By Authority: Fbkb. wm, Simpson, Government Printer, Perth.
INDEX— ■continued.






By Authority: FEED. WM. SIMPSON. Goveroment Printer, porth.
