

EAST SYDNEY— —
jL Newspaper
V Agency, * *
144 IVilliam Stteet, Sydney ,
Authorised Agency
FOB
Sydney Morning Herald,
Daily Telegraph,
Evening News,
AND
Australian Star.
Which are Delivered at daylight every morning,
and the Latest Edition of Evening Papers
after 6 p.m.
American, English and Continental
M Newspapers and Periodicals
Received Direct Every Mail.




THE MYSTERY
Of
Poplar Walk.
And a Sensational Snapshot.
BY
JAMES KNOTT.
Author of “Gaffer Green;” “Charlie’s Uncle, or Leaves of Night
Life;” and “Doctor Ellerton, or the Singular Story
of a Sydney Surgeon.”
Sydney:
WILLIAM DYMOCK,
Book Arcade and Circulating Library,
428 George Street.
1897.


BEATTY, RICHARDSON & CO.
PRINTERS,
PALING’S BUILDINGS, SYDNEY.


Tie Ryslery of Poplar Walk.




& e0.,-^
Fasliionable Tailors,
114 KING STREET,
Suits to Order, £3 Bs.
Trousers, 16s. 6d.
The Mystery of Poplar Walk.
WELL, yes, sir,” remarked Mrs. Brown,
the landlady, as she sat back in the
easy chair and smoothed out her
apron, “ I’ve been letting lodgings for a long
time now. In fact, I might say I’ve been
doing it all my life, for I was born into it, as
you might say, considering that my poor, dear
mother, who’s dead now and gone to dust, used
to let lodgings before me.”
Mrs. Brown, it may be remarked, had com-
pleted most of her daily task, and was in a
•communicative frame of mind.
“Yes,” she continued, “ I’ve had some queer
■experiences in my time, but Lor’ bless you, sir,
it would take no end of time to tell you all


about them, and as I’m fully let now, and up
to my eyes, as the saying is, from the time I
rise till I go to bed again, I hav’nt much time
for talking.
“ Tell you about the murder ?
“ Well, I don’t know that,l would go so far
as to call it that right-out, for murder is an
ugly word, sir—but although the jury didn’t
bring it in that way, I have my own opinions
about it, and I shall always believe, if I live
till I’m a hundred, that poor Mr. Appleton was
murdered in the middle of the night.
“ Yes, that was his name, sir—Appleton—■
he was a very old lodger of mine, having been
with me for years. I could never see any harm
in the poor old gentleman, although none of the
other lodgers seemed to care for him, and always
preferred his room to his company. He was
certainly a bit crotchety and fidgety, and would
try to have everything his own way as much as
possible, but that was only to be expected from
an old man like he was I’m not going to say
he had no faults—for, as you know, sir, no man’s
an angel in this world, whatever he may be in
the next; so I won’t deny but what he might
at times have run the girls up and down stairs
too much with his shaving-water, and tea and
toast, boots and other things, which, of course.
10


he had to have ; but I never thought he was
going to meet with such a terrible end.
“ It makes me shudder to think of it even
now, and it does seem strange that you should
come here to Poplar Walk on Christmas Eve
and ask me to tell you about it, for it was this
very night three years ago that it all happened.
It’s a terrible thing to remember every
Chritmas, but I suppose I shall be haunted by
it till my dying day. It makes me tremble and
shake like a leaf every time I recall it to
memory, for it’s the greatest mercy in the world
we were not all murdered in our beds without
knowing anything about it.
“ My poor, dear husband, who has since gone
to his long home, poor man, was alive at the time,
and although he was in a decline and wasting
O O
away before my very eyes every day, I am sure
the shock he received hastened his end.
“ One can’t be too careful in this world, sir,
especially when you’re letting lodgings, other-
wise, in busy times, you would soon have your
house filled with all sorts, and it wouldn’t be
long before your character would be gone, and
then you might just as well shut up altogether.
“ I don’t think any mortal woman could
have been more careful than I was up to that
night, and although in one way I lay poor Mr.
11


Appleton’s death at my own door, still some-
times I can’t see how I was to blame, for I
would defy anyone to have told that young Mr.
Robinson was any other than a gentleman when
he drove up and got out of a hansom in front
of my place on that Christmas .Eve.
“ Yes, that was his name, sir ; and a very
common name it was ; but I never hear it now
without its making my heart come up almost
into my mouth.
“ Although the name was common enough,
sir, the young man himself was a very uncom-
mon looking person, and when it was all over,
and I came to collect my thoughts and remem-
ber it, I wondered that I never noticed the
queer look about him. For he did have a
queer look on his face, sir; but whether it was
because it was Christmas Eve and w T e were all
happy and comfortable—as, of course, every-
one should be at such a time—with no pre-
sentiment of evil about us, and ready to look
over everything. I really don’t know, but true
it is, that I did not look at him so much as I
might have done if it had been any other time,
and when Josiah—that was my poor husband’s
name, sir, who, as I said before, is dead and
gone now—looked over to me and called out,
‘ Oh, yes, mother ! let the young man have the
12


room!’ I made no more ado about it, but called
the girl and got her to show him up to the
second floor front then and there.
“ I must take a drink of water, sir, if you’ll
kindly excuse me ; for it sets me all of a shake
to think of it, leave alone tell about it.
“ Something stronger ! did you say ? Oh
no, sir ; I never take anything—that is unless
I have a touch of the spasms or something
sudden like that, and then I take just the
smallest drop of something by way of medicine;
it saves doctor’s bills.
“ Well, sir, to go back to where I left off, I
fancy I can see young Mr. Robinson now as
plain as anything, just as he was when he
jumped out of the cab and came up the steps
with his ‘ Merry Christmas and Happy New
Year ’ on his lips, and said to me, ‘ Good even-
ing, Mrs. Brown, I’ve just called round to see
if you can accommodate me with a room for a
few nights.’
“ It has always been a puzzle to me how
he knew my name, for I never would put it on
the door or in the window ; but there, sir, as
you might know, when you’re letting lodgings
you’re almost a public character, as I’ve often
mentioned to Mrs. Jones, whose husband’s gone
to sea, and who lives over the way and sticks
13


her name on her gate, back and front, and even
hangs it on the trees in the garden and puts it
in the newspapers, which is quite unnecessary,
as I’ve often told her, and likely to lead to no
good, for I can assure you, sir, I’ve seen some
very queer customers call there all hours of the
night ; but there, it’s not for me to say any-
thing about it, although you can’t help noticing
what takes place when it goes on right under
your very eyes. Well, he had my name pat
enough, had Mr. Robinson, wherever he got it
from,and little did I think when Mr. Appleton—
who was in a good humour that evening—raised
no objection to the young man having the empty
bed in his room—which, as I’ve said before, was
the second floor front—that the poor old gen-
tleman was signing his death warrant as it were.
“It is quite true, sir, that you should not
take anybody by their appearance, and I never
did before, but always asked for references ; but
Mr. Robinson looked such a perfect gentleman
—so well dressed and well spoken—that I’m
sure he would have deceived his own mother.
Little did I dream that his delicate-looking
fingers—covered almost as they were with
handsome gold rings, which I could not help
noticing at the time—would be stained with
poor Mr. Appleton’s blood before daylight.


“ Well, when I say, stained with blood,
they were hardly that either, for there was no
blood, sir, and that was the queer part of it,
considering that when we found the poor, dear
man, he was as dead as if he had been hacked to
pieces with a knife ; and I never will believe but
what the new lodger did away with him in
some way.
“He was brighter than usual that evening,
poor dear man, and they do say, you know, sir,
that when anyone is cast for death, a change
comes over them, and when I come to think of
it all every now and again in my calm moments,
I must say there was a great alteration in poor
Mr. Appleton that evening, and I can't for the
life of me think how I didn’t notice it all at the
time, so as to have been warned—but there, it’s
easy enough to see it all now when it s too late.
“ But he was more cheerful and agreeable
that evening than I ever knew him to be before,
and we sat for two hours or more listening to
his stories about the bushrangers, and the dig-
gings at Ballarat. He had knocked about a
good deal in his time, sir, and gone through a
great many hardships, and it would almost
frighten your life out to hear of the trouble he
had with the outlaws in the early days. He
must have been a very brave and fearless man.
15


for I heard him say distinctly with my own ears
that night that if he could only have got up be-
hind Morgan, the bushranger, with his gun, he
would have shot him as dead as a doornail; so
that I don’t think it’s all fair for people to be
going about saying, as they have been, that the
poor old man was frightened to death.
“If it had been my Josiah, there might
have been some truth in such a statement, for,
as it w r as, he was almost scared out of his life.
When it occurred, he was so dazed that I had
to shake him pretty rough to bring him to his
senses; but as for poor Mr. Appleton going on
like that wdth fright, leave alone dying of it,
I’m sure he would do no such thing, for I had
often heard him say at the time when the bur-
glars w r ere killing people in their beds at night
that he only wished a few of them would come
in here some night, for if they did, he wmuld
take care that they didn’t get out again alive.
“ Well, I must hurry on, sir, as I have a
good bit to tell yet, and I must soon go and
tidy up after the lodgers.
“ As I was telling you, we sat talking some
time that night longer than usual, it being
Christmas Eve. Mr. Robinson never came
down after he w r as once up. Josiah said he
thought it was owing to his being a bit shy.
16


perhaps, as everything was new to him,
but I always maintained that it was suspicious,
although it didn’t strike me that way at the
time. Poor Mr. Appleton finished his stories
after a bit, and got up to go to bed, wishing us
all good night, and a merry Christmas when it
came, his last words being, as he was going
up the stairs, that he never felt so well in all
his life as he was then. The rest soon got tired
dawdling about, and picked up and went to bed,
too, leaving Josiah and me to go round and see
that all was safe, as usual, and lock up for the
night, which we very soon did; and it was not
very long before we were all snug in bed and
everything quiet.
“ I couldn’t have been asleep, I suppose,
more than half-an-hour when I was roused by
my poor husband, who said he thought there
was something queer going on in the house.
He said he was sure he heard someone walking
about once or twice, and something fall over in
one of the rooms, but he couldn’t tell which one
it was. We listened for a little while, but
couldn’t hear anything mure than Mrs. Johnson
and her husband talking low like in the room
next to ours.
“ She was a strange little woman was Mrs.
Johnson —dreadfully nervous —she had a fearful
17


dread of burglars breaking in, and I declare to
you, sir, when the two of us would be alone in
the house, as sometimes happened at night
when business was slack and the rooms wouldn’t
let, she used to make my flesh creep, and turn
me hot and cold all over at the same time with
her stories of how we would most likely be
butchered some night by Jack the Ripper, or
some other bad character, and she used to do
her best to try and get my poor husband to set
traps all about the house at night to catch
burglars—which, of course, wouldn’t do at all
in a respectable boarding-house, with the
lodgers coming in late and running the risk of
losing their lives in a man-trap.
“ ‘ You must be mistaken,’ I said to Josiah,
‘ it’s only the Johnsons shifting their things up
against the door.’
“ She would always do that, sir, no matter if
the house was full. She would pile everything
she could move up against the door, and then
shift the bed over against it all, and I know
one night her husband had to climb up a very
dangerous place and get in through the window,
because she couldn’t get the bed back to let
him in, and my poor Josiah was as near being
hanged as anything through it, for he told me
the next day that, mistaking Mr. Johnson for a
18


burglar, sure enough he was just about to get
his revolver to fire at him, when she, hearing
him moving about inside, called out, ‘ It’s all
right Mr. Brown ; it’s only Alfred come
home. ’
“ Poor Josiah said he never felt so much like
a corpse in his life when she spoke and he dis-
covered what he had nearly done, for it would
have been a terrible thing, you know, sir, if he
had blown Mr. Johnson into eternity by
mistake.
“ I felt a bit put out with Josiah for waking
me for nothing, so soon after I had got off into
my first sleep. I always did believe, if possible,
in having an hour’s sleep before midnight, for
they do say that the one hour before twelve is
better than all the others after. I stifled my
feelings against Josiah as best I could—for no
one knows when they close their eyes for the
night whether they will ever open them again
—and was composing myself to try and drop
off again when I was suddenly brought bolt up
rioht in the bed with a shriek of ‘ Murder ’ that
O
I shall never forget as long as the breath is in
my body. It seemed for a minute to fill the
whole house, and you couldn’t tell where it
came from. It was different to any cry I had
19


ever heard before in my life, and scarcely like
the voice of a human being at all.
“ I have heard tell of the cry of the lost soul,
and I suppose you have, too, sir, and I should
think this was more like that than anything
else, for it really seemed something unconnected
with this world. It was repeated two or three
times, and then it stopped, and I heard a heavy
thud as though someone had fallen on the floor
in one of the rooms.
“ As you may imagine, sir, it roused the
whole house and half the street, for it was
enough to scare every living creature within
ear shot to death. In a feAv moments I heard
the lodgers scampering all over the place, and
there was as much uproar as there might be if
the end of the world had come. The doors
were slamming, and the women folk were all
screaming, and everything was in a state of
confusion. Mrs. Johnson went right off into
hysterics, and I heard her husband put up the
window and jump out into the back yard. My
poor dead and gone man clung to me as though
he thought his end had come, but as soon as he
got his senses back—for it seemed tome he had
completely lost them, sir—he jumped out to get
a light, with his teeth chattering and his limbs
O ' O
knocking together. Not a single match was to
o o o
20


be found—as is always the case at such a time
so he gave up looking, and slipped on some
things, and in spite of my warnings rushed out
in the dark and went down the stairs at the
risk of breaking his neck,
“ I hunted high and low in the room, and at
last I found the matches and got a light. My
first thoughts then were about the new lodger,
and it striking me all of a sudden that he might
be something in disguise, I rushed off to Mr.
Appleton’s room, and never will I forget the
sight which met my eyes when I got there.
“ Almost in the middle of the room was
poor Mr. Appleton lying as still as death on the
flour. I called him two or three times, but not
a sound could I get from him, and I went over
to him and lifted up his arm, but it fell like a
lump of lead, and I thought my heart was going
down into my boots. Never will I forget the
sensations that went through me as fast as I
can tell you. As quick as thought I looked
across to the new lodger’s bed, and there was
Mr. Robinson to all appearances lying fast
asleep. I had barely time to think how strange it
was when he let a piercing scream out of him
and sprang several feet in the air. My hair
seemed to go up straight and my whole body
turned to goose flesh as I ran from the room
21


calling ‘ Help !’ as loud as I could. In going-
down stairs I fell two or three steps, but
fortunately caught the bannisters and slid to
the bottom, where I fell into the arms of
Inspector Todd, who had just come in, and Avho
had known me from the time I was a little girl.
“ ‘ What’s the matter here ? ’ he says.
“ ‘ Murder’s the matter,’ I answered, ‘ he’s
dead, he’s dead ! ’
“ ‘ Whose dead ? ’ says he.
“ ‘ Mr. Appleton,’ I said, £ the new lodger’s
killed him.’
“ ‘ Where is he ? ’ inquired the inspector.
“ ‘ On the floor of his room upstairs,’ I
replied.
“ ‘ No, the other one I mean,’ he says.
“ ‘ Up against the ceiling in Mr. Appleton’s
room,’ I said, ‘ when I came down, and appa-
rently out of his mind.
“ ‘ Oh, calm yourself, my good woman,’ he
said, as I showed signs of going off. ‘ How on
earth can a man be up against the ceiling ; he’s
not a fly.’
“ ‘ Well he was, sir,’ I said, ‘ if I never speak
again. Do go upstairs, sir, and see what is
<ming on.’
O O
“ Not one inch would the inspector stir until
he had asked me all about it, and made me just
22


crazy with suspense, for at such a time, as you
know, sir, the minutes seem like hours, and
when he did go up he went so slow that I
thought we would never reach poor Mr. Apple-
ton’s room. I don’t know how it is, sir, but
policemen or doctors never will be in a hurry
when you want them to be.
“ When we got to the landing all the others
were there, and we went into the room to-
gether.
“ Mr. Robinson was sitting on his bed, and
looked as if he had only just woke up, and when
he saw the inspector he pointed down to Mr.
Appleton, who was lying where he was before
on the floor, and said as cool as you like, ‘ Poor
old Father Christmas ! it seems to have been too
much for him.’
“ 4 What was too much for him ? ’ asked
Inspector Todd, and if he had only waited a
minute, he might have got a clean breast of it,
but without giving Mr. Robinson a chance to
speak, he said, ‘Now look here young man, this
is a very serious business, and you will have to
come with me ; and remember, whatever you
say will be took down and be given against you
as evidence.
“ Well, sir, it was not likely he’d get any-
thing out of the young man after that, and he
23


didn’t either, for he simply closed his lips then
and there, and never opened them again to
speak anything good, bad or indifferent about it.
My Josiah often remarked to me afterwards
that if half the people who had been hanged
had only kept their mouths shut like he did
they would most likely have been living to-day.
“ Well, sir, they took the young man away
for murder, and he went off downstairs just as
unconcerned as he might have done if he had
been ofoinof out to sinn Christmas carols instead
of to be locked up and hanged for murder.
“The papers were full of it the next day
sir. They called it “ The Poplar Walk
Mystery.” And so great was the excitement
that the people gathered in knots in front of
the house to talk about it. Nothing else, in
fact, was talked about for two or three weeks,
and Josiah and I had a pretty lively time in
answering all the questions we were asked about
it. Poor Mr. Appleton was buried, of course,
and everyone up to then looked upon Mr.
Robinson as his murderer. It all appeared to
be so clear against him that people said he
couldn’t possibly get out of it. But, Lor’ bless
you, sir, the unexpected always happens, and so
it did in his case.
24


“ When the trial came on, the young man’s
friends came forward and told how he had been
a most notorious character, in one respect,
pretty well all his life—that how, from the day
he was born, he was the victim of an ailment
which they all thought would kill him some day,
and Mr. Robinson was not at all backward in
speaking up for himself, either, at the last'
moment.
“ Here’s what he said, sir. It was given
full in the paper at the time, and I’ve kept it
ever since. Speaking from the dock, he said :
‘ For twenty-five years I’ve lived a dual kind of
existence. lam the victim of a malady which,
although regarded at first somewhat in the light
of a triviality, more funny than serious, has
eventuated in a state of things which has sur-
rounded life as far as I am concerned with a
good deal of uncertainty. Blest—or, as many
people were inclined to think, cursed—with an
ovet-aetive brain, and being peculiarly suscepti-
ble to impressions from passing events, my
physical powers have always been exhausted
during the day, and I have been left at night to
suffer torments easier to remember than
describe. Images and delusions of the most
terrible nature—the result of excessive action
of the brain—arise in the imagination, causing
25


me to fight desperately in my sleep for dear life,
and to give voice to shrieks which have simply
made night hideous to those around and
about me. The visions I had were not mere
spectral illusions. I received no supernatural
warnings in my sleep, and saw no apparitions
from the other wmrld. I had no communication
with spirits or the spirit land, but no sooner
would I fall into a sound sleep than I would be
seized by the worst powers of darkness. Many
a time have I fought against tremendous odds
in the dead of the night. Time and space
formed no obstruction. In my efforts to escape
a visionary violent death, over and over again I
have sprung hundreds of feet without turning a
hair. I have supported the whole weight of a
falling building, defended myself against an
army of beseigers, swam rivers, rescued myself
from the perils of the deep, and accomplished
many other superhuman feats of a like nature.
The performance of these fast and furious heroic
deeds proved exceedingly inconvenient and an-
noying to a large circle of friends who could see
no fun in them, and who were of necessity com-
pelled to submit to the ravings of such hallucina-
tion. When I started out into the world to seek
my fortune I was pronounced incurable by the
Tacuity, and I believe that in the minds of many of
26


my friends a limit had been placed to my existence.
The malady had taken the form of a settled
disease, which, it was believed, would sooner or
later put a period to my life. It was anticipated
that my end would come suddenly, and that I
would collapse in a paroxysm of fear or fright.
But the unexpected generally happens, and fate
decreed that the prophecies concerning my
departure from this mortal sphere should not be
fulfilled. My part in the drama of life should
have been a fairly easy one to play, but no
sooner was I launched on the stage of the world
than the conviction was forced upon me that I
was handicapped to a most unfortunate extent.
I endeavoured to live respectably, and whilst'
daylight lasted I succeeded, for I was extremely
choice in my intimates and uncommonly circum J
spect in avoiding connection with all doubtful
characters. But as surely as the night followed
the day, so surely did the inevitable occur, and
I found myself in utter disgrace. The sins of
the father, it is stated, shall be visited upon the
children, and had I not conclusive evidence
to the contrary, I must have been forced
to the conviction that I was the son of one of
the greatest sinners on earth —the offspring of
a villain of the deepest dye. I found it abso-’
lutely impossible to get people to believe that I
27


had not committed one of the blackest crimes
in the calendar. I was regarded as a man who
had something terrible on his mind, and as a
shocking example of that remorse which is con-
sequent upon a guilty conscience. Ultimately I
was moved on and on, and from house to house I
trotted, and found it most difficult to obtain
shelter where my peculiarities w T ere at all known.
The flesh creeps and the skin of the head
tightens, producing that sensation peculiar to
hair-raising, as I think of the miraculous escapes
I have had from an untimely end. For years I
have been compelled to take a fiendish delight
in paralysing people with fear. It has been
quite an ordinary thing for me to smash up
their property before them, and I have fairly
succeeded in scaring many a poor creature to the
very verge of the grave. I believe I have
caused the ruin, financially, of scores of land-
ladies. I have stopped a ship on the ocean with
a yell that has sent fear even into the hearts of
the hardiest seaman. lam doomed by one of
Nature’s cruellest freaks to undergo a sentence
compared with which penal servitude might be
considered mild. A sane man by day and a
conundrum by night, I now find myself at last
indicted for a murder of which I know abso-
lutely nothing.’
28


“ Then the young man’s friends spoke up for
him, sir, and stated as how all he had said was
perfectly true. It was said that he was hurt in
some way before he was born—that his mother
received a shock from which he had suffered all
his life. It had made him subject to terrible
■dreams, in which he acted as though for the
time being he was bereft of his senses, and
although he had never been known to injure
•anybody by doing them personal violence, still,
wherever he had gone, he had scared people
almost out of their lives in the dead of the night;
and as the doctor stated that poor Mr. Apple-
ton’s heart was not to be depended upon—that
the poor old man was liable to go off at any
time before he did—the jury found that he died
from sudden shock, and that Mr. Robinson was
not, under the circumstances, to blame ; and so
the young man was set free.
“That’s the whole story, sir. It was an ill-
wind that blew Mr. Robinson our way on that
Christmas Eve, for we lost all our lodgers
through it, and if during the flush times we had
not put by a bit for a rainy day, I really don’t
know what would have become of us. It
doesn’t do, sir, to have a murder, or a suicide, or
a death under mysterious circumstances in your
house when you are letting lodgings, and so for
29


.prise & e©.,.
Fasliionalile Tailors,
114 KING STREET,
>-«asSSsss—SITIDIsTEIT.
Suits to Order, £3 3s. Trousers, 16s. 6d.
nearly two years after that terrible affair people
kept away and we were almost entirely unlet.”
After this cheerful narrative Mrs. Brown
naturally discovered that she had an attack
of the spasms, and accordingly sought the
remedy.
30


-PRICE & e©.,— *
sliioxxa'ble Tailors,
114 KING STREET,
Suits to Order, £3 3s. Trousers, 16s, 6d.
A Sensational Snapshot.
IT is remarkable under what peculiar circum-
stances you sometimes encounter strange
occurrences.
What took me to the office on the afternoon
on which the Ford fatality occurred I have
never yet been able to tell, for I had no reason
in the world for going there that I can re-
member now. I only know that it was by quite
the merest accident that I did drop in.
Although at the time I considered myself
victimised the mere act of dropping in as I did
places me now in a position to tell you the story
lam about to relate.
At the very moment I poked my head into
the sub-editqr’s den—merely I suppose out of
31


curiosity, he wheeled suddenly round in his chair
and looked straight at the door, or rather at me,
as I was standing there, for his eye immediately
caught mine, and as it did so it seemed to light
up with triumph. I could see at once that I
was “ had,” so to speak, and that he was gloat-
ing over his good fortune in having so easily
secured his victim.
“ Here, I want you,” he said hastily. “ I
think this is the first time you have been so
conveniently on hand just when you were
wanted.”
He was never very polite to members of the
staff at such times, and the younger ones used
often to get a bit scared and terrified when he
launched out at them for apparently no reason
whatever; but the others, those who had been
through the mill, so to speak, used to often let
it pass with the compensating reflection that
he had lost his head again.
It seemed to them, indeed, that he always
lost his head when there was anything requiring
the exercise of calm and cool judgment to be
done, and they always took credit to themselves
for pulling him through. It was often remarked
in fact that if he hadn’t such a good reliable
staff under him he would most invariably have
got himself into a deplorable mess.
32


I could see that he was in a terrible fluster
and stew as I walked'leisurely into the den in
response to his invitation and took a seat.
“ For Heaven’s sake man don’t sit down,”
he shouted excitedly, rising from his own chair.
“ There’s been a dreadful murder up the street,
and there’s barely time to get an account of it
before we go to press; go at once and get full
particulars.”
“ I’ll attend to it at once,” I said, rising
hurriedly, for a murder is always an exciting
affair even to a pressman.
i! What’s the nature of the case ? ” I asked,
placing a roll of copy in my pocket.
“ George Ford, the dentist, has shot his
wife,” he replied, “I have only a very few par-
ticulars concerning it from a man who came
rushing in with the news just now, but they are
.sufficient to show that it s a very bad case. The
fellow’s a sure candidate for the gallows. He’s
safe to hang, can’t get out of it.
“Ford is already under arrest, I believe,
.and vows that he is innocent of the crime. You
might by a little tact get an interview with
him.”
“ How on earth,” I asked, “ can I get an
interview with a man who is under arrest for
murder ? ”
33


“ For God’s sake, man, don’t stop to argue
the point,” he yelled. “ That’s your business,
and you have been long enough at it now to be
able to devise some scheme by which you can
get all the information you want.”
I saw that it was absolutely useless to at-
tempt to reason with him at such a moment,
and so without further remark I hurried away,
not at all pleased with the prospect before me,
but cursing the fate which had led me into the
trap.
On reaching the street I jumped into a
cab, and in a few seconds was rolling along to
the scene of the tragedy. I had no difficulty
in finding the place, for there were already
several hundred people in front of it. The news
had quickly circulated, and there was intense
excitement. Leaving the cab as it drew up to
the side walk I pushed my way with some diffi-
culty through the eager crowd and hurried into
the house, where I found an inspector of police
and several constables, from whom I elicited as
much information respecting the tragedy as they
felt at liberty to give.
The woman had been shot through the heart,
the weapon used being a small six-chamber ivory
handled revolver which was found by her side
when the police entered the place. Five cham-
bers of the revolver were still loaded.


Ford, against whom there appeared to be a
very strong feeling, had been removed just be-
fore my arrival to the gaol, and was already safe
under lock and key, so that there seemed to
be not the remotest chance of getting an inter-
view with him.
I dashed off hastily an account of the shock-
ing occurrence from the facts I had gleaned,
and having despatched it to the office by a
special messenger, I took a turn on the street to
think over the situation.
The more I thought of it the more I became
convinced of the importance andnecessityof inter-
viewing the prisoner; but how was it to be accom-
plished ? Not by presenting myself at the
gaol in my true character as a pressman —cer-
tainly not —for I felt sure that the authorities
would not entertain the idea for an instant.
The time was passing rapidly, too, and there
was not a moment to lose if anything further
was to be done; but the more I considered the
matter the more hopeless the task seemed. I
was just on the point of giving it up in despair
when an idea struck me. It was a rather risky
one, I admit; but on the spur of the moment
it seemed to me the only way out of the diffi-
culty.
“ By Jove, I’ll do it if I’m gaoled for it,” I
35


said half aloud, as I hailed a passing hansom.
“To the Gaol,” I said to the driver, as I
jumped in, “ and don’t let the grass grow under
you.”
In a few moments I was landed safely at the
prison gate, where I was admitted without
delay.
“ I represent the firm of , solicitors,”
I said, addressing the gatekeeper, “ we have un-
dertaken the defence of the prisoner George
Ford, charged with the murder of his wife, and
it is necessary that I should have an interview
with him at once if possible.”
“ Just take a seat in here for a few minutes,
sir,” he said, opening the door of a waiting-
room, “ and I will send across to the Governor
of the Gaol.”
I felt exceedingly uneasy as I sat down to
wait, for the serious nature of the step I had
taken was now beginning to force itself on me,
and I recognised that I had gone too far to with-
draw. I found some consolation, however, in
the fact that I ran very little risk of being im-
mediately discovered, as 1 had done none of the
gaol work for the paper with which I was con-
nected, and was therefore not known to the
Governor or any of the warders or other officials
of the prison. As I was reflecting with some
36


slight satisfaction on this fact, the Governor of
the gaol made his appearance, and I'repeated my
request to him.
“ I seems very strange,” he replied, “but I
have just communicated with the prisoner, and
he states distinctly that he has given no instruc-
tions whatever for anyone to defend him, and
further that he does not intend doing so.”
“ Was the name of my firm given him ? ” I
asked, as I felt my courage leaving me very
fist.
“ Most certainly, he replied ; “ but Ford
states that he has given no instructions to any
firm respecting his defence.”
“ There must certainly be some misunder-
standing or mistake about the matter,” I said.
“If I could see him for a few moments I am
sure I could clear it up.”
“ Well, there may be something wrong,” re-
plied the Governor of the gaol. “I don’t
suppose there will be any harm in your seeing
him for a moment; but from all accounts, mind
you, I don’t think it’s likely that any firm of
solicitors will be able to get him out of the
trouble he is in.”
He then beckoned to a warder, and directed
him to take me across to George Ford’s cell.
37


where a surprise of a most startling nature
awaited me.
The cell was only a hundred yards away, but
whether it was the unlocking of the two or
three gates through which we passed from one
division of the penal establishment to another,
or the fear occasioned as to the probable conse-
quences of the double part I was playing, should'
discovery follow, I cannot say. It may have
been both ; but true it is that by the time we
reached the prisoner’s cell I was in an exceed-
ingly nervous and uncomfortable state.
“ This is Ford’s cell, sir,” said the warder.
The prisonor, who was seated at a small
bench or table with his face partially hidden
and resting on his elbows, rose immediately, and
then came a surprise which for the moment com-
pletely staggered me, for the name of the man
before me was not George Ford but George
Hamilton—an old schoolmate from whom I had
parted many years ago in another colony—and
the last man in the world whom I should have
expected to find in such a position.
I could see at once that the recognition was
mutual, but I was so overcome for the moment
that had it not been for the tact displayed by the
prisoner, I should probably have blurted out
something giving my whole scheme away to the
•official who was looking on.
38


“You had better leave us together,” he said
to the warder, “ On second thoughts I think I
will give this gentleman a statement of my
case.”
Much to my relief the warder immediately
stepped aside and partially closed the door
leaving us by ourselves. I sank rather than
sat gradually down on the rough bench in the
cell. Hamilton was the first to speak.
“ Why have you come here ?” he ques-
tioned.
“ To be frank with you,” I replied, “ I came
to the gaol to interview the supposed ‘George
Jford.’ ”
“ To write up and give to the public as many
harrowing details as you could glean respecting
this tragic occurrence,” he said with a strange
laugh. “ Well, you shall have them all before
you leave. I will tell you everything.”
“ I implore you,” I said, “ not to make a
confession to me respecting this terrible crime
of which you stand charged, anti in which, it
seems to me, you are hopelessly involved.”
“ But the details will interest you more
than anyone else in the town,” he said. “ The
woman was an old acquaintance of yours.”
Strangely enough, up to that moment I had
not given the woman a thought; but now, as
39


her identity flashed across my mind, the cell
seemed to swim with me. As I rose, I almost
reeled. Surely it was some sick fancy of the
brain.
“ Who was the woman ? ” I asked, steadying'
myself against the bench. “ Surely it was not
Lucy Drayton ? ”
“ The woman,” he replied, “ who lies cold
and stiff at the present moment in my house is
the woman who was known to you at one time
by the name you mention. She was at one
time Lucy Drayton—the woman who has been
my evil genius throughout life.”
I looked at him as composedly as it was
possible to do; but I was now inwardly con-
sumed with a desire to know as much as
possible.
“ Go on,” I muttered, motioning him to pro-
ceed, “ I will hear everything you have to say
now.”
He paced the cell excitedly for a few mo-
ments, and then turned suddenly upon me.
“ Hang it, old man,” he said, “I don’t know why
you, above all men, should come here to pry
into my affairs at the present time.”
“You knew Lucy Drayton as well as I did
before I married her. I wish to heaven you had
had her instead of me, but you were lucky
40


enough to escape. You and others who were
in love with her at the time thought she was
an ano-el, but it was I who was unfortunate
O 7
enough to undertake the task of finding out
that she was nothing of the kind.
I never thought that she would make a
good wife, I was certain, in fact, that she
wonld not before I married her. I was in love
with her, and that was quite sufficient then. I
was hard hit, as you all knew, and instead of
working hard at my business, I wasted my time
with her until I was left behind in the race for
place and position.
“ She was pretty and fascinating in those
days, as you know full well, and she clung to
me in a way which made it impossible for me to
shake her off. She knew my income was not
sufficient to keep a wife, and that my prospects
were anything but reassuring ; but for that she
cared little. She seemed to have but one aim
in life, and that was to become united to me.
She would be content, so she said then, with
anything. The veriest toy house in the world
would suit her so long as she was not separated
from me. She would be content with a deal
table to eat from, and even a wooden box to sit
on, and would slave from morning till night
until there was a change in my circumstances.
41


“ All this she promised me—and much more.
My common sense deserted me at the critical
moment. I took the risk and we were married.
“You remember what you fellows all said
then—when you were madly jealous—about
love in a cottage flying out of the window when
poverty stalked in at the door, and all the rest
of it, and how I laughed as I threw you all
over and went with Lucy into scanty lodgings,
where, for a time, all her friends looked upon
her as a long-suffering angel, and, upon me, as
one of the greatest brutes in creation. Well,
we lived on, as you know, in spite of all that
busy tongues could say, lived on the bare neces-
saries of life, and those of the cheapest kind,
and Lucy managed well until we took a cheap
house, and went slightly into debt for furniture.
Then complications arose, but I worked on from
daylight till dark, and sometimes far into the
night, until we got out of what little diffi-
culties we had got into.
“ It was then she first started going out.
She visited her friends, and that was the com-
mencement of the trouble. The sight of her
friends’ houses made her discontented with her
lot, and she upbraided herself for marrying me.
I came home one day and found her on the
floor in a fearful fit of temper. She abused m&
42


roundly for inducing her to link her fate with
o O
mine, and made no secret of the fact that she
considered she had thrown herself away. I
attempted to argue with her, but that was dan-
gerous. She became absolutely hysterical, and
in order to avoid more serious trouble I left the
house. I wandered about the squares of the
city in a distracted state of mind, and it was
not until I was perfectly fagged and played out
that I returned to the house.
“ I found her still on the floor, but she was
sleeping peacefully. The storm was apparently
over, and when she awoke she was more
amenable to reason. We talked quietly over
everything, and I eventually promised to get
her a few things she wanted.
“ In that way I acted very foolishly, for
I displayed a weakness in giving way to her,
which she did not fail to take advantage of on
every possible occasion. From that moment I
lost all control of my own affairs, and from then
up to the present time I have had no rest. I pur-
chased her a piano on the time-payment system,
but that was only a mere trifle compared with
the rest of it. Our house became elegantly fur-
nished by degrees—so much so indeed that the
few friends we had congratulated us warmly on
the admirable way in which we were getting
43


along. Our circle of acquaintances widened
speedily, and we soon found ourselves keeping
almost open house. I remonstrated with Lucy
on several occasions on the extravagant way in
which she was doing things, and endeavoured
to get her to economise, but all to no purpose.
Although she invariably promised to keep
down expenses, she never kept her word, but
went on in the old way until at last I found my-
self hopelessly involved.
“ Strange to relate, when things were at
their worst I met with a stroke of good luck.
My prospects suddenly brightened in a most
providential way. We moved then to an adjoin-
ing colony, where I received what Lucy called
a princely income, but she soon made it appa-
rent that she intended to live up to every penny
of it. She speedily did more. She lived be-
yond it by going into what she called £ society.’
She visited and received visitors, and gave so
many parties and balls, and kept up such style,
that I was soon in serious difficulties and had
to borrow money at ruinous interest to tempo-
rarily extricate myself.
“I then talked over the matter seriously
with her, and on several occasions endeavoured
to compel her to economise. I pointed out that
it was now absolutely necessary that we should
44


not only live within our means, but that we
should deprive ourselves of many comforts in
order to meet bills which were soon to fall due.
The situation was a very grave and serious one
even to her, and she became alarmed. She
promised readily enough to do her best, but as
usual made no attempt to keep her word. She
dragged me month by month deeper into the
mire, until ultimately I was driven to commit
an act which necessitated our immediate flight.
“ It was then I took the name you now find
me under. I wished her dead, and longed to
kill her then, but dared not do it. She followed
me half round the world with a devotion which
under the circumstances, was to me sickening
in the extreme, and I was compelled so as to
avoid detection and arrest, to- take her in and
hide as best I could with her. With a heavy
heart and light pocket I managed to struggle
on till fortune favoured me once more. I made
money again, and having ascertained that the
only persons who could give evidence against
me in Australia, were at last removed out of the
way by death, I came across to this city and
invested my capital in the dentistry business
from which I was taken this afternoon. The
investment proved to be an exceedingly good
one, and after the first twelve months my
45


income increased to between two and three
thousand pounds per year.
“ Determined to reap the full benefit of my
improved circumstances, I made Lucy simply
an allowance for housekeeping, and for a time
she was content, and only for a time. As soon
as she felt that all danger of my apprehension was
passed, she sought to commence her former ex-
travagant habits. To this I strongly objected,
and persisted, despite all her entreaties, in fol-
lowing the course I had marked out. My
business was increasing so rapidly as to make
it apparent that, with proper economy, I should,
in a comparatively short time, be able to retire.
She could not, unfortunately for herself, see any
sense in this, but was anxious to occupy once
more what she called a high social position.
Many were the arguments we had on the sub-
ject, but I was determined. She became abso-
lutely sullen, and at times intractable, and then
commenced a series of scenes and wrangles
which terminated in to-day’s tragedy.
“ She threatened on almost every occasion
on which we had a dispute to destroy herself,
but of that I took little or no notice until to-
day, when she alarmed me by the paroxysm of
temper into which she threw herself, but I
never for one moment thought she would carry
her threat into execution.”
46


“ You mean to say, then,” I remarked, as
he halted to take breath, “ that she destroyed
herself ? ”
“ Most decidedly,” he replied, “ I could
have prevented her if I had been fully assured
of her determination, and that I would have
done so—much as I wished to be rid of her—
you, who know me best, can have no doubt.”
“ And what do you propose to do ? ” I
asked.
“ Why, tell the truth, of course,” he replied.
“ But that will not avail you,” I replied,
“ without some proof. The circumstantial evi-
dence against you is strong enough to hang you.”
“ The circumstantial evidence is strong
enough to clear me,” he said ; “ it’s that which I
rely on to prove my innocence. It was all done
in a second, at the end of a very serious quarrel.
I was on the point of leaving the room with a
small hand-camera in my hand, already set for
the purpose of taking a snapshot on the street,
when she rushed to the chest of drawers, drew
the revolver, which was always kept there, and
placing it against herself pulled the trigger. As-
she did so I instinctively raised the hand in which
I had the camera, and fortunately for me the
slide proves more effectually than any living
witness to the deed could have done, that my
47


prise & e©.,--^
ionatile Tailors,
114 KING STREET,
Suits to Order, £3 3s. Trousers, 16s. 6d.
wife, in a fit of mad desperation, took her own
life, and that I am an innocent man.”
As I left the gaol towards evening, reflect-
ing on the series of surprises I had gone
through, I could not but regard my experiences
as extraordinary in the extreme. The account
of the interview which I published completely
counteracted the strong feeling which had arisen
in the public mind against the prisoner. The
case did not go further than the police court,
for on the following day, when George Hamil-
ton was brought before the Bench, the photo-
graph was produced, and proved beyond all
question that the case was one of suicide, and
not murder.
48


Pioneer Tannery, Lane Cove River.
