

The Pambula gold-deposits.
Power Frederick Danvers


The Pambula
Gold
Deposits
by F Danvers Power F.G.S


[From the Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society for
May 1893, Yol. xlix.]
The PAMBULA GOLA-DEPOSITS.
By FREDERICK DANVERS POWER, Esq., F.G.S., M.Am.Inst.M.E.
[Abridged.]
The Pambula Goldfield is situated in the parish of Yowaka, county
of Auckland, in the south-eastern corner of New South Wales, and
is about 11 miles north of Twofold Bay.'
Most so-called ‘ practical ’ miners, especially those accustomed to
well-defined quartz-reefs, acknowledge . that these deposits are
quite different from anything they have ever met with, and admit
that they do not understand them. This is not surprising, for, if
the observer takes a cursory view, without giving due weight to
minor details, these lodes do indeed appear different from the
general run of auriferous deposits, chiefly owing to the fact that
the material filling the does not differ much in appear-
ance from the enclosing rock (‘ country ’), and is but slightly
impregnated with metallic sulphides.
The ore-deposits of Australasia are for the most part confined to
certain belts of country, running more or less parallel with the
sea-coast and with the main ranges of hills. The rocks which
contain the Pambula gold-deposits are no exception to the general
rule, their average strike being 12 deg. W. of N. The enclosing
rock or ‘ country ’ is*pyrophyllite-schist, interbedded with felspar-
porphyry, sometimes merging into quartz-porphyry, the whole of
which is tilted at a high angle; near the surface the rocks dip
considerably to the east, while deeper down they are almost perpen-
dicular. The planes of cleavage and the planes of bedding of the
‘ country ’ appear to be coincident.
Examined microscopically, the structure of the schist is lenticular,
and this is repeated on a macroscopical scale, more especially in
those zones of disturbance which now form the lodes. The lenti-
cular structure is carried still further, for the lodes themselves,
while tending to a north-and-south strike, cut up the field and form
a network; but of the whole system, it is only the main or central
lode which has been worked at a profit. Some of the lodes are
accompanied by a quartz ‘indicator’; that is to say, either a
succession of small detached veinlets of quartz or one continuous
vein (‘ leader ’), 9 inches wide, as shown in the figure on p. 234.
Curiously enough, however, this quartz contains little or no gold,
the precious metal being found in the shattered ‘ country •* lying
on the ‘ footwall ’ side. This shattered zone always has a good
‘ hanging wall,’ whether the quartz indicator is present or not, but on
the footwall side it gradually merges into the normal rock. The
width for which it may be profitably worked varies from a few inches
to 5 feet, and is not defined by any sharp line. In Faulkner’s
Claim there arc rich lenticular parts of the shattered zone which
measure as much as 18 feet long and 18 feet deep. The richness of
♦ S pwv»Ct) Ck
>SV _


these lenses varies, but several of them in succession will form a
‘ shoot/ These shoots have a southerly ‘ pitch/ and as a rule are
short, but one at Faulkner’s, running into the Pambula Company’s
ground, has so far proved to be from 400 to 500 feet long. The
more broken and wider the lode, the richer it is found to be. The
spaces between the lenses, where they overlap one another, are
occupied by clay, and when this material is scraped out it has at
times yielded as much as 1 lb. of gold to the ‘ dish.’ 1 On the
AA= Pyrophyllite-schist.
BB= Well-marked hanging wall.
CC = Quartz indicator.
DD= Shattered rock containing gold,
not separated by a well-defined
plane from the schist on the
footwall-side.
surface the lode material is bleached by organic matter; a little
lower down it is tinted red, owing to the decomposition of iron
pyrites ; while still deeper the rock has a greenish hue, and is more
or less impregnated with iron pyrites. • In Pipe Clay Creek, a dyke
of clay running E. and W. diverts the course of the lodes where it
cuts them, but the latter eventually return to their original direc-
tion. This dyke is 2 or 3 feet wide, and ‘ underlies ’ slightly to
the south.
From the above data it will be observed that there are many
points in common between these deposits and those which are
universally acknowledged to be lodes. These deposits have a
general course parallel to the sea-coast, but individually run in
such directions as to divide the district into large, irregular lenses,
which together form a system of gold-deposits. Those zones of
disturbed rock which are off the main line are poor in gold. The
deposits have at least one good wall, and are made up of shattered
‘ country/ sometimes showing a brecciated structure, the broken
particles having been more or less rounded, perhaps by corrosive
liquids. Evidences of motion are also to be seen in the striations
on the quartz forming the indicator, and in the clay between the
lenticular masses of rock. The gold occurs in ‘ shoots ’ which ‘ pitch ’
1 The ‘ dish ’ is a measure of capacity=s72 cub. ins.


southerly (the most usual direction for shoots in Australia), and
these are richest in loose or soft ‘ country,’ but gradually become
poorer towards the footwall-side, where the stone becomes ‘ tighter.’
Iron pyrites, though not in a massive form, is associated with the
gold. The course, ‘ underlay,’ and width vary in these lodes, within
certain limits, as in others, and they are also affected by a dyke
which crosses them. The country is hilly and disturbed, as is
generally the case where lodes occur.
Some observers term these deposits ‘ true fissure-lodes ’; but many
miners believe that the word ‘ fissure ’ suggests an open crack of
some importance. In the gold-bearing portion there is no evidence
that such an open crack ever took place; the rupture was caused
by pressure, which would not allow of an open crack existing. The
minute joints between the lenses cannot, with the greatest stretch
of the imagination, be called ‘ fissures.’ The quartz indicator runs
parallel with the cleavage of the surrounding rocks, and evidently
occupies a cleavage-joint which was gradually filled with quartz ;
for the grooves on the face of the quartz, where it has rubbed
against itself, prove that motion has taken place since some of the
quartz was deposited. Lodes in soft rocks are not so likely to be
well defined as those in hard, so the merging of one ‘ wall ’ into
the enclosing rock was to be expected. The foliated structure
of this enclosing rock is not obliterated in the ore-channel, except in
very rare instances. The difference between these lodes and lodes
abundant in sulphides is due more to degree than to any fundamental
character; it seems greater than it really is, on account of the diffi-
culty of distinguishing between the ore-channel and the enclosing
rock, a distinction rendered less easy because the ore-channel is for the
most part a ‘ bedded lode,’ and has not been subjected to a meta-
somatic change, nor had it wide interstices which could be filled by
extraneous minerals.
These lodes are worked with profit on the top of Mount Gahan
(named after one of the original prospectors), where rock has
been crushed, yielding 1 oz. 12 dwt. to the ton, and also in Pipe Clay
Gully, 493 feet below, where the picked stone sent to the battery
gives 11 oz. per ton. The rock is naturally looser on the surface than
deeper down, and therefore it is to be feared that, since the spaces
between the lenses are so minute on the surface, they will be still
smaller as the depth increases, until finally the ‘ country ’ becomes
so ‘ tight’ that there will be no place for the gold to lodge.
Discussion.
Mr. H. Bauerman said that the condition of occurrence noticed
by the Author was characteristic of a considerable area in North
America, in the States of North and South Carolina and Georgia,
where gold has been obtained from pyrophyllite and other soft
schists associated with quartzite and irregular quartz-veins, the latter
not being always gold-bearing. As a particular instaucc, he men-
tioned the Brewer Mine in South Carolina.
