

f >},Im 1 ss Bk m ▲ M .. m^^Fm W.^0-^i
“ i.XjM \ \ j1 Bp
I
p. a % ?♦ ■
.Vxj^ — gttrSff II
\ i 1 iH
I i V \_
C IB8® >»■ aJWPSe V v ' «;- -_ £ ,)?
■ V 4lK?jlmBWlife* : *%. ~^‘~ BBRlSft. BJf r** \ tl' IfcJ I -
IWl > 1
\ I I J/ IB f XV T \
\ 1 II HL \


'
/


fajCKJL/ O ' U-
9KcJL^X^^
I< ,
'sOx^qtL , (5/oa JLsz "$0
v =—
b-‘ fl I




The Rival Treasure Hunters




'


jj ft
m-‘i S
- f
• -^^mm^r
■b J& **-' —’* m^$ t *
Sr r .
\ vi~ -■'&" -•■- •?%£»;£-'i S ■ '•> *•' . .
c 10
A RACE AGAINST TIME


The
Rival Treasure Hunters
A Tale of the Debatable Frontier
of British Guiana
ROBERT M. MACDONALD
Author of “ The Great White Chief"
ILLUSTRATED BY CYRUS CUNEO
BLACKIE AND SON LIMITED
LONDON GLASGOW DUBLIN BOMBAY




A. M.
“The Pioneer”




Preface
In this story I have endeavoured to give a fleeting
glimpse of the lives of the dauntless pioneers who, in
their search for treasure, roll back the mist clouds,
which still hang heavily over the hinterlands of some
of Britain’s remote possessions. The quest of dia-
monds and other gems, gold, or the ores of commerce
is their avowed object; but the fascination of the
Unknown is the real reason of their wandering lives,
and often, when material fortunes lie within their
reach, they pass on. The love of untrammelled free-
dom and of true comradeship is stronger within them
than the desire for mere wealth.
Big Tassy and most of the comrades are known
wherever the flag of freedom flies, and in many places
where the symbolic banner is neither British nor
American. On the debatable frontier of one such
country the scene of this story is laid.
Throughout the trackless forests of northern South
America are scattered many evidences of a mighty
departed race, and occasionally the prospector comes
across a people greatly superior to the present sur-
rounding tribes. Strangely enough, these people
always claim descent from the former lords of the soil.


Preface
Doc, the ever cool and resourceful; the gentle Par-
son of the strong arm; Kangaroo Dave, the soft-
hearted, simple-minded, and courageous son of the
great Austral Land; Boston Bob, the immaculate
product of a famous American university; Big Tassy,
the born wanderer; and most of the others were my
comrades, and I am proud of them. They, with
others not less well-known, still pursue the elusive
quest of Eldorado throughout the earth and its sur-
rounding waters, and if the fates are kind will
yet again be with them.
ROBERT M. MACDONALD.


Contents
Prologue : The Comrades
I. Music hath Charms
11. The Beginning of the Quest 67
111. The First Blow 9I
IV. The Little Red Monkeys uy
V. The Mysterious River 141
VI. “Where are our Comrades?” x 65
VII. The Chief of the Razois 19 0
VIII. Piccadilly Peter
IX. Changing the Face of Nature - 235
X. Through the Mountains 260
XI. The First Restoration . 2 gg
XII. The Waters are Released 210
XIII. The Blue Diamonds 338
XIV. A Race Against Time




Illustrations
A Race against Time - Frontispiece 365
Surprised by the Venezuelans 2 g
The Parson fights the Bully 97
The Native Dance
" - 140
Escaping from Carville’s Gang 194
Piccadilly Peter helps himself ...
Climbing the Chain Ladder
“Gentlemenl” he cried, “we are not your enemies” 339




PROLOGUE
The Comrades
It was night in the great forest. Red baboons howled
dismally in the upper growths ; and the roar of the
jaguar and other prey-seeking members of the cat
tribe, the scream of the jackal, and the hoarse bark
of some amphibious creature in the river near by filled
the dense woods with sounds inexplicably weird.
But the men sitting round the camp-fire, burning
brightly by the water’s edge, paid but little attention
to night’s savage orchestra ; they were accustomed to
life in the hinterland of British Guiana, and cared
nothing for the forest’s noises, so long as its denizens
kept at a safe distance from their camp. Tall trees
reared their dinger-encircled stems, until lost in the
canopy of foliage which they supported, and from
which hung down into the under world long, graceful,
looped, rope-like growths, which looked more like
swings than anything else. Creepers of interminable
length flung their tendrils from tree to tree, forming
a zone of vegetation in the space beneath the gigantic
leaves of the troolie palm which formed the forest
roof, and in which numerous varieties of parrots, bats,
and small green and black-tailed monkeys had their
homes.
Stretching out across the river, too, into the dark-


ness on the far side, long festoons hung motionless in
the still air. They formed bridges over the waterway,
by which the smaller creatures of the forest, not
endowed with the powers of flight, could continue
their peregrinations until some mighty river blocked
farther progress.
The blazing camp-fire was the only centre of cheer-
fulness in all that vast grim land ; yet even in the
subdued chattering of the birds there seemed to be an
air of expectancy, which indicated that with morn
would come a transformation, and that the sombre-
ness and eerieness of their environment would, with
the life-giving sunlight, give place to a beautiful and
joyous aspect.
There were eight men in the group round the fire,
all bronzed specimens of the dauntless pioneers who
have kept Britain ever in the forefront in the work of
reclaiming and civilising the waste, savage, inhospit-
able, and unknown parts of the world. The men
might be of any ages between twenty and forty.
Their faces gave little indication as to this, but all
were full of expression. Rifles lay by their sides, and
revolvers hung unobtrusively in their belts. Their
dress was simple, belted trousers, top boots, black
silk shirts, and soft, broad-brimmed felt hats com-
pleting all that was visible of their apparel, although
it was averred by some that Doc, one of their number,
also carried a necktie and a silk handkerchief con-
cealed somewhere about his person. Two long Indian
bark canoes were moored in the water close beside
the camp, and in them reposed the stores, ammuni-
tion, tools, and treasure of the party.
Supper was over, and all were now enjoying a


well-earned smoke round the fire before retiring to
their hammocks, which were slung near.
‘ Well, boys ! ’ remarked one, who answered to the
cognomen of Big Tassy. He was a Tasmanian, and
a prospector well known on all the world’s gold-fields.
But he was not much given to verbosity, and, after
delivering the two words, he paused and gazed reflec-
tively into the fire.
‘Well what?’ asked Boston Bob, a gentleman
famed for his punctiliousness of speech, also for his
pugilistic powers. ‘ Kindly recall your wandering
thoughts, and elucidate to us the profundity of your
brilliant remark.’
‘ 1 was thinking,’ said Big Tassy, ‘that we might
as well give up the search for that lost mine and
other things. We’re getting good gold here, and I
don’t see that there is any call for us to go chasing
spook mines all over South America.’
He looked round for approval of his words, and
Mersey Jack, the camp’s chief musician, at once
chimed in. ‘ You’re right, Tassy,’ he said. ‘ A bird
I mean, an ounce of gold in the hand is worth two
in—in ’
‘ln the teeth,’ suggested Piccadilly Peter ten-
tatively, as Boston Bob laughed.
‘ In any one else’s,’ finished Jack.
‘ Did you mean to insinuate that I carry two ounces
of gold in my teeth, friend Peter of Piccadilly ?’ asked
Boston Bob. ‘ Because if you did, I can assure you
that all is not gold that—that ’ he hesitated a
moment to find a suitable simile, and Piccadilly Peter
innocently helped him out with : ‘ Gets stuck in
the—er—crushing mill.’


Piccadilly Peter was the despair of the camp in
matters sartorial. His nether garments were patched
in many places, and his shirt was very much the worse
for wear. His boots, too, were wonderful things ; for
having worn out his original pair long ago, he had
constructed those he was now wearing himself, with
the help of a piece of crudely-cured cayman hide. He
was the best cook in camp, and a remarkably fine shot.
The remaining four men were known as Damper
Charlie, an Australian prospector of no mean fame,
and a man with most original ideas, if they were only
practicable. Irish Mike was also a world wanderer,
who knew the earth by the track of his footsteps, a
brave, true-hearted comrade, and the possessor of a
rich Irish brogue that won him friends everywhere.
Sailor Bill was, as his title implied, a rover of the
sea more than of the land. He knew but little of
minerals, but in many other ways was indispensable
to his comrades. He, too, was a good cook, a recom-
mendation which ranks fairly high among prospectors.
The last man was Doc, quiet, cool, reckless, happy-
go-lucky Doc ; one of the best men that Dublin
University ever sent forth to roam over the earth ; a
born fighter, a dead shot, and as soft-hearted a man
as ever lived.
Smoking a fragrant cigar, he sat and listened to the
discussion which now raged round the fire without
saying a word. The subject of Boston Bob’s molars
had now been relegated to the past, and the men were
arguing out the matter of continuing their search for
a fabulously wealthy diamond mine, said by the
Indian tribes to be in the vicinity, or of contenting
themselves where they were, and working the rich


golden sands of the river, on the left bank of which
they were camped.
‘ I don’t mind what we do, bhoys,’ Irish Mike was
saying. ‘ There is moighty foine gold here, to be sure,
but I wouldn’t mind going on hunting for that lost
mine, if only we knew where it was ’
‘Of course not, Irish,’ laughed Sailor Bill, ‘ but we
don't know, and I for one don’t know where we are
ourselves at this moment.’
‘You shouldn’t shout out about your ignorance,’
said Mersey Jack, addressing the last speaker ; ‘ we’re
somewhere in the back of British Guiana ’
‘Are we?’ asked Boston Bob. ‘Until you en-
lightened us I had been of opinion that we were in
Venezuela, and liable to be caught and treated as a
filibustering party at any moment.’
‘Just see what it is to have eddication, mates,’ put
in Damper Charlie. ‘ Here Tassy an’ me were
figuring out we were in Brazil, an’ we were reckonin’
that these ghost people, an’ their diamond mine, must
live somewhere up the big mountain the sun sets
behind ’
‘ None of us know where we are or where any one
else is,’ put in Big Tassy, with an air of finality.
‘ We’re all at sea ’
‘ I’m precious sure that is just where we are not,’
said Sailor Bill. ‘lf we were at sea ’
‘ We wouldn’t be on the borders of British Guiana,
Brazil, and Venezuela,’ spoke Doc. ‘Boys, we are
at this moment in latitude 5 0 .15 North and almost on
the meridian of 60°.45 West, but which of the three
countries named those lines pass through is beyond
,my knowledge.’
(C 10) 2


‘Does it matter?’ asked Piccadilly Peter, deftly
fashioning a clutch out of a darning needle, to replace
the broken one on his belt. ‘ South America doesn’t
hang out—er—“ keep-off-the-grass ” notices.’
‘ No, but her gloriously free and independent
States have a peculiar custom of hanging up any
armed men found inside their boundaries who cannot
claim the rights of citizenship,’ Boston Bob answered,
killing about a dozen energetic mosquitoes hard at
work upon his face, with one adroitly contrived sweep
of the hand. ‘ Personally I have a slight objection to
being treated this way, but I am very fond of jewellery,
and my desire to find that wonderful diamondiferous
deposit outweighs my fears of the risk run in trying
to do so. We must be near the place, and I propose
we keep on searching.’
‘I back that ticket,’ cried Mersey Jack. ‘I want
some diamonds. I promised to send some home to —
to my sister.’
‘ I never knew you—er —had a sister, Jack,’ said
Piccadilly Peter, without looking up from his work.
‘Well, it isn’t my fault if you’re not strong in
geography,’ Mersey Jack retorted. ‘lf I haven’t
sisters, plenty other fellows I know have ’
‘ Of course,’ broke in Big Tassy, ‘ I didn’t mean to
say that I didn’t want to go hunting around for this
mysterious people and their diamond mines. And if
there’s likely to be any fun goin’ with the greasy
Venezuelans, or them other people who grow nuts,
I’m on every time.’
‘I reckon we’re all on,’ said Damper Charlie,
throwing a firebrand at a crocodile, whose inquisitive
disposition had brought half-way out on the bank of


The Comrades i 9
the river, ‘ but I’m jiggered if I know what a Vene-
zuelan is, nor ’
‘lt isn’t Venezuelans we’re hunting for,’ Sailor
Bob informed Charlie, ‘it’s diamonds.’
‘ And ain’t the one as valuable as the other? ’ asked
Charlie. They re new to me, but I know all about
opals an’ rubies an’ pearls an’ ’
No, a Venezuelan is no good,’ Mersey Jack
laughed. ‘You can’t get anything for him
Keep your eye on that black snake, Mike—he is
always looking for trouble, and Hullo, Mike !
what are you trying to do? ’
‘ Begorrah! I cyan’t see the poor little reptile
soosancide itself in the fire an’ I am sending him
home to his mother, that s all,’ answered Mike, rising
with the wriggling snake Jack had warned him
3.§"cimst in his hand and moving into the scrub
with it.
‘ Drop it this instant,’ roared Doc. ‘ That is one of
the deadliest snakes in South America.’
‘Shure, Doc, I know that,’ returned Mike, ‘but
I’ve got the poor creature where it cyan’t bite, an’
There, now, run away an’ play, an’ don’t come back
here again, or I’ll tell your mother.’ Mike released
the reptile, and it scurried off into the crackling
scrub.
‘I say, Doc, said Boston Bob, ‘you are the man
who knows most of this invisible people and their
diamonds. It is too hot to turn in yet; you might
kindly elevate the conversation by relating what you
know on the subject.’
‘ My knowledge is not much more than that already
common to us all,’ Doc answered, shaking the ash


from his cigar leisurely, and at the same time gently
ejecting a 6-inch centipede from inside the rim of his
left boot. ‘lt seems, according to the many stories I
have heard from various sources, that a mysterious
tribe of Indians inhabit the dividing range whence
rise some of the headwaters of the Orinoco, Essiquibo,
and Amazon. They live by themselves, and hold no
intercourse with the people surrounding them. But
this was not always so. At one time they visited
their nearest neighbours to barter with them for their
produce, always giving in exchange diamonds of a
peculiar blue tinge. Some of these gems at length
reached Europe, and soon after many expeditions
were sent out to procure more. But the diamond-
dealing people could not be found. They had dis-
appeared, and since then have not been seen by any
white man. The natives, however, assert that they
are still in existence, but they either don’t know or
will not tell where. They say that the hidden people
have no more diamonds, because the mine which
produced them was lost. That is all the story. It is
supposed that the people themselves are a remnant of
some ancient highly-civilised race who, becoming
effete in the art of war, betook themselves to this
hiding-place, and there continued their existence. Of
course South America is now divided into so-called
civilised States, and these people, therefore, must be
included in the territory claimed by Britain, Vene-
zuela, or Brazil. At all events they are lost, and the
source of their diamonds is unknown. Many bands of
adventurers have roamed these wilds in hopes of
finding traces of them, but so far none have been
successful.’ Doc paused and replaced his cigar in


his mouth. Evidently he had said all he intended
to say.
‘How about Carville’s gang?’ spoke Piccadilly
Peter. ‘They seem to have got pretty hot on the
scent, for we know—er—they are somewhere near
here now.’
‘ Probably Carville, or his satellite Maclaren the
Scot, has gathered the same information as I have,’
said Doc. ‘ Perhaps they may have discovered more,
but I doubt it.’
‘ What if their party and ours get there at the same
time?’ Mersey Jack inquired. ‘Will that not spell
trouble ? ’
‘ I guess it will,’ said Boston Bob grimly. ‘We
made advances to them in Georgetown and they
rejected them, and now we fight at sight.’
‘I knew Carville long ago,’ Doc said musingly,
hurling a burning log at a vampire bat, circling lazily
overhead, between the men and the intermediate
trellis-work roof of creepers.
‘ I'll bet he was a low down skunk then,’ hazarded
Damper Charlie. ‘ His kind are never any good until
they’re dead, and then it’s only the worms that gain.’
‘Strange to say,’ Doc went on, ‘he was not
altogether a bad sort of fellow. We had our differ-
ences, of course, but it was not until he fell in with
his alter ego , Maclaren, that he ceased to become a
fair fighter.’
‘ His associates now, however, are little better than
a g an g of cut-throats,’ observed Boston Bob, ‘and it
is quite impossible for us to be otherwise than at
enmity with them. We are all square men in this
party, and even Piccadilly Peter is a gentleman ’


‘Thanks, Boston, I’mssurer —I look it,’ laughed
the gentleman named. He stood up, and, removing
his tattered hat, made an elaborate bow to his
tormentor.
‘ I won’t lie, old man —you don’t,’ was the answer,
‘ but you can’t help being one, seeing you are in such
distinguished company.’
‘No, that’s a fact,’ said Peter reflectively. ‘Yet
one of them has even stolen my —er —tooth-brush.’
‘Ah ! you are back to teeth again, Piccadilly ’
‘Well, I might add that I have also missed the—
er—piece of glass I had for a mirror and three sewing-
needles,’ continued the gentleman from Piccadilly
ruefully, but he got no farther, for the laugh that
arose from his comrades at the idea of Piccadilly
Peter requiring a mirror, or using needles, when such
a good substitute for string in the shape of fibre was
abundant, drowned his words effectually.
‘Ah, well, boys,’ Damper Charlie said, rising
after the laughter had spent itself, ‘ I reckon I’ll
get inside my net, these mosquitoes are pretty
bad to-night, an’ no man seems to have any more
to say.’
‘ And we’ll carry our canoes across country to-
morrow,’ said Big Tassy. ‘lf we keep on crossing
from the headwaters of the Essiquibo feeder—the
Mazuruni —to the Branco, which flows into the
Amazon, and then round to the Caroni, the Orinoco
tributary, and back to the Mazuruni again, we must
run against that lost tribe sometime.’
‘lf we don’t go round about them,’ put in Sailor
Bill. ‘ I vote we hide our canoes and cut into the
forest on the west side of this river. There must be a


big mountain near, or how could all these rivers be
flowing in different directions ?’
‘You’ve struck it, me bhoy,’ cried Irish Mike.
i The divide must be near us now, and when we foind
it we’ll have run up against the lost tribes of Israel
too ’
‘ Fight it out amongst yourselves,’ yawned Boston
Bob,' and while you are edifying each other, I shall go
forth into the forest, and administer chastisement to
one or two of these tigers who are so insolently
noising their presence.’ He picked up his rifle and
stepped out from the circle. Damper Charlie and
Mersey Jack were already in their hammocks.
‘ Don’t,’ spoke Doc suddenly. He had been
unusually quiet all evening, only speaking when
addressed directly by his comrades. He laid a re-
straining hand on Boston Bob’s rifle, and its owner
looked questioningly at him. Well he knew Doc
had a reason for all his actions.
‘ The jaguars are becoming too bold,’ Bob said.
‘ If I don’t shoot one, they may come into camp when
we are asleep.’
‘ They won’t,’ replied Doc shortly.
‘Will you mesmerise them, Doc?’ asked Sailor
Bill.
Piccadilly Peter looked up at Doc, and without a
word seized his rifle and examined its contents. His
action was infectious, and the others at once did the
same. Prospectors do not waste time asking ques-
tions before preparing for emergencies. Boston Bob
came back among his comrades, and after a moment
asked : ‘ How do you know they will not visit us
during the night, Doc?’


‘ Because we won’t be here,’ answered Doc, lighting
a fresh cigar. ‘ The band is about to play, and the
music may not be to our liking.’
‘Explain, Doc,’ said Piccadilly Peter, as Damper
Charlie and Mersey Jack tumbled out of their ham-
mocks and joined the others. ‘ What band is going
to perform? And can’t we burst their drums if the
music is—er—too noisy?’
‘ You surely do not mean that the calls of the birds
and the howls of the baboons will force us to seek a
fresh camping-ground?’ continued Boston Bob; he
stood facing the direction whence the disturbance
came, rifle in hand.
Doc rose. ‘ It’s not the forest noises, although
they are becoming unusually unpleasant to-night up
the waterway, which will occasion our removing,’ he
said. ‘ It’s the cause of the noise. I expect it is a
band of soldiers on patrol duty, for I scarcely think
that Carville and his men would move about at night,
knowing we were in the vicinity. Ah ! they are
much nearer than I thought. Listen to the angry
growls of the disturbed denizens of the woods ! I
have been trying to account for some far-off startled
cries all evening, but now the reason is clear ’
‘ Begorrah, it is ! ’ exclaimed Irish Mike. ‘ I cyan
hear men speaking now. By the Powers! there
must be a moighty big army of them too. Just listen
to them crashing through the scrub ! ’
‘What’s the programme, Doc?’ Big Tassy asked
quietly. ‘ Fight or run ? ’
‘We dare not fight,’answered Doc. ‘lf we did,
it would mean that Britain would have to pay an ex-
orbitant claim for compensation, or become involved


in a war with the petty State whose soldiers are com-
ing here now. It matters little whether they are
Brazilians or Venezuelans. Rightly or wrongly they
will claim this ground, and we are an armed force,
and therefore filibusters.’
‘ Then we are simply to say our prayers, and stand
out to be shot like little lambs,’ said Damper Charlie.
‘ I tell you, Doc, I come from Bourke in New South
Wales. It’s the hottest place I know, but I’ll see
them ten miles and a quarter on the far side of it
first ’
‘But, instead, Damper Charlie,’interrupted Doc,
‘ you and the boys will put yourselves a mile or so
down this stream, and thus obviate any necessity of
consigning the poor soldiers to the scorching deserts,
beyond the town on the Darling River you have
named.’
‘ Do you know Bourke, Doc ? ’ cried Charlie in sur-
prise.
‘Of course, but time is precious; get into the
canoes and drift down the river.’
‘ Did you know old Barney ? ’
‘We’ll talk of Bourke and its people some other
time, Charlie. Hurry, lads, we must not be caught
here.’
‘ But if these are soldiers,’ said Piccadilly Peter,
‘ they must have knowledge of—er—our presence,
and also knowing the country and the twists in the
river better than—er—we do, they will easily contrive
to cut us off somewhere, and ’
‘ No, they won’t. Boston Bob and I will remain
here and be found by them. We will, I expect,
prove quite enough for them to handle.’


‘But they’ll give you a bad time,’ said Piccadilly
Peter. ‘ I think we should stay and chance things.
We could at least—er—share the responsibility.’
‘That’s my sentiments,’ said Big Tassy. ‘And if
they start a racket it is their own funeral. What do
we need to care for a handful of half-castes ? ’
‘ Men, if you don’t go, we may give up all hope of
ever finding the hidden people and their diamonds.
The soldiers might not be able to take us prisoners,
but they would simply return to their headquarters
and report that filibusters were in the country, and
reinforcements would be sent, and perhaps catch us
just as we had discovered the source of the famous
diamonds. We can’t fight Brazil or Venezuela
ourselves, and we must not embroil Britain in
trouble on our behalf. Strategy may succeed where
our strength would fail. We must not allow them
to think that there are more than Bob and I in
this party, or the patrols will never leave this part of
the country. Go, boys, at once, they will see our fire
directly.’
‘But,’ cried Sailor Bill, ‘what about you? How
are we to know whether we’ve to come back and
rescue you or not? And what are our orders, until
you do join us again, anyway?’
‘ You are not to follow us on any account. We’ll
look after ourselves. They may take us as prisoners
down to some of their towns, but we’ll escape when
we think the time is ripe. Meanwhile, don’t you see
you are getting a splendid chance to explore this
neighbourhood. Give it one week, and if we do not
join you by that time, it will be because we think it
best not to run the risk of drawing the soldiers here


again. Whatever you do, act carefully, and re-
member that force simply must not be employed
under any circumstances.’
‘ You seem to have got this programme pretty well
off by heart, Doc,’ put in Mersey Jack. ‘ Did you
know this was going to happen ? ’
The men were bundling their hammocks and cook-
ing utensils into the canoes.
‘ I expected trouble certainly, but I did not look for
it from the soldiers,’ replied Doc. ‘ I thought we
might escape their attentions, for we are far from any
outpost of either Brazil or Venezuela.’
‘ I guess our old friends Carville and Co. have
something to do with our receiving a call from the
military gentlemen,’ said Boston Bob. ‘ But stay not
on the order of your going, boys, as a distinguished
person is averred to have said some time ago. Go
at once. Our visitors arc almost here.’
‘Good-bye, then, lads,’ Doc sang out, as the laden
canoes shot out into the stream. ‘ Don’t go too far,
and leave signs so that we may be able to follow you.
You know the old method?’
‘ We’ll never leave this blamed old country without
you two with us,’ sang out Big Tassy, ‘and Damper
Charlie and I will fight all South America before ’
His words were lost in the splashing of paddles, and
the canoes disappeared in the darkness.
‘Well, old man, we’re in for a circus now,’ re-
marked Boston Bob, sitting down by the fire again.
‘ I am quite sure that this is a serious business, and
engineered entirely by Carville or Maclaren, and the
gang-.’
‘ Here they are,’ broke in Doc, puffing vigorously


at his cigar, ‘and they’re Venezuelans. I wonder if
they’ll hang us? ’
‘ We’ll soon know. They are perspiring and blow-
ing as if they had been running for many miles. You
do the talky talky, Doc, and I’ll chime in when I
calculate that my words of wisdom will drop like
heavenly dew.’
‘Ah! Here dey are,’ cried the leader of the
soldiers ; then, reverting to Spanish, he ordered his
men to surround the camp. Meanwhile Doc and
Boston looked on apparently unconcerned, and waited
for the officer to speak. He seemed to be very excited,
and danced about like a character in comic opera, his
long sword somehow always getting between his legs,
despite his efforts to keep it where it should be. All
the soldiers were picturesquely garbed and remark-
ably handsome in appearance, their long black hair,
lustrous dark eyes, and swarthy complexions adding
greatly to the impression that on the stage they would
be a great success, but elsewhere—well—that had yet
to be proved. They quickly surrounded the two men
and aimed their rifles at them, and then a silence fell
over all. Doc smoked, and Boston Bob idly watched
the antics of some monkeys in the branches overhead.
‘ The setting of the scene is complete now, Doc,’
the latter gentleman remarked suddenly, showing that
he was well aware of every movement going on
around. ‘ I suppose el Capitaine will step forward
and sing now.’
‘ I’ll bet my cigar that that lieutenant, over by that
troolie palm near the water, is no more a native of
Venezuela than I am,’ answered Doc irrelevantly,
blowing rings of smoke into the air.


«L «j B t» K\ Sp *JgtS-
|H1 | ■ .■fi-* •,.
| J 2^... y* «fH
.bVE©
■*&%-'- t ‘sroP^
SURPRISED BY THE VENEZUELANS


■


‘ Get ready, then; Sancho Panza is going to
speak ’
‘ What are you—a —doing here ? ’ sternly demanded
the little captain, striding up to the camp fire, and
assuming his most dignified expression. His English
was remarkably good.
‘ Fishing,’ answered Doc laconically. ‘ Fine night,
isn’t it?’ He turned and smiled at the captain.
‘ Will you surrender quietly, or ?’
‘ What are you talking about, old man ? Are you
brigands, or have you been exposed to the full
moon ? ’
‘ You wish to insult me ! ’ cried the officer angrily.
‘ I will say but one word and my brave men will
shoot ’
‘ Then say that word,’ advised Doc ; ‘ I don’t mind
you shooting each other, although it would be a pity
to make such a mess of this beautiful spot.’
The little man danced, and his sword nearly
brought about his downfall. ‘lt is you we will
shoot! ’he screamed. ‘ You—you ’
‘ \ ou 11 have to arrange your men differently then,’
Doc laughed. ‘As they are grouped at present they
look very well, I will admit, but they would shoot
each other if they fired. And in any case why should
you wish to shoot us ? Have a cigar, old man, and
sit down and tell us all about your trouble.’
‘ Trobel ! ’ gasped the officer, falling into his natural
accent in his surprised anger. ‘ Eet ees you who are
in trobel. ou will come with me to Bolivar, and if
you try to escape so much more will I be pleased.
All nations allow eet ees right to shoot escaping
prisoners.’


‘ But we don’t want to go to Bolivar,’ interrupted
Doc. ‘ltis a nice town, and the hotels are good in
their own way, and I have some friends there, but
really we are quite content to remain where we are.
British Guiana is a free country.’
‘ But this ees not British Guiana. This ees ’
‘ Well, allowing that it is Brazil, to save argument.
The Government of that country does not object to
our studying the flora and fauna of its dominions.’
‘ But this ees not the Republique of Brazil ’
‘ Oh, you are too hard to please. If it is not
British Guiana and not Brazil, what on earth can
it be? ’
‘ Eet ees part of the Venezuelan Confederacy, and
as the officer commanding the patrols of that nation’s
southern borders, I take you prisoners. You are
British filibusters.’
‘ Hold hard there, Senor Long Sword ! ’ cried
Boston Bob. ‘lam a citizen of the United States of
America, and if you interfere with me your insignifi-
cant little State will probably be blotted from the map
of South America soon after. The old Munroe
Doctrine binds us to defend you against European
aggression, but I’ll speculate my boots on the fact that
that doesn’t mean we’re to stand your cheek our-
selves ’
‘ Are you Americanos ? ’ inquired the captain
surprisedly. ‘ I was informed that you were all
British. The great American people are our friends,
and now that we know you are of that people I hasten
to make eet known to you that you are free ’
‘ Not much, general! I stick to my comrade.
Besides, we are breaking no laws. If we choose to


come here to fish or to catch butterflies and beetles, I
don’t think the Venezuelan authorities really have
any objection. In fact, my friend, I think you are
exceeding your duty considerably, and I expect you’ll
hear more of the business.’
‘ I know my duty, sir, and do not require to be
instructed by filibusters concerning eet. I have orders
to search for, and to take prisoners, the band of adven-
turers from British Guiana who recently invaded our
territory. I have found you, and there now only
remains to take you to Bolivar, where the civil
authorities will deal with you. But where are the
rest of your party ? ’
‘You make me tired,’ yawned Doc. ‘ After all, I
don’t know that I have any objections to visiting
Bolivar again. I may enter for the Presidency, if the
weather is good and the State exchequer well filled.
Call off your dogs ! They are nervous, I can see ;
and if by chance one of them pulled the trigger I
should have to chastise him severely.’
‘ Then you surrender? ’ cried the officer.
‘ Pro tevi .,’ answered Boston Bob. ‘We are tired
arguing. We protest, nevertheless, and you most
likely will get the usual thanks for being over zealous.
If we are in Venezuela we are doing no harm, we are
not robbing the State, nor have we designs against
its welfare ; but I feel positive of the fact that we
are now on British soil. I know the frontier lines are
debatable, but it is generally allowed by all concerned
that the watershed is the true division. Now this
stream is flowing south, and therefore must join the
Essiquibo, which fact seems to show that it is you and
your men who are filibustering on British territory.’


The Venezuelan officer’s face had undergone
several changes of expression while Boston Bob had
been speaking. Clearly he had not anticipated having
to deal with an American citizen as Boston Bob claimed
to be, but when the latter mentioned the watershed as
being the true boundary his countenance brightened.
‘You have said truly that the watershed ees the
boundary. That admission an end puts to the matter.
This river does not flow south more than two or
three what you Americanos an’ British call miles,
eet turns round the mountain, and flows north den,
and joins the Caroni, which enters the Orinoca near
Bolivar. Now, will you come quietly, or will you be
shot where you stand ? ’ The officer was certainly in
a temper now.
‘ Oh, we’ll come ! ’ said Doc. ‘ I have already said
we would. Where did you acquire your English?’
‘A Venezuelan soldier, sir, makes eet his duty to
know the language of the nations with which his
country may be compelled to fight some day.’
‘ Great Columbus ! ’ ejaculated the American. ‘ I
guess, Doc, the days of the British Empire are
numbered now.’
‘ Our own prospects of a long life wouldn’t be
much inducement to an insurance company,’ answered
Doc in low tones, as the captain addressed his men
in their own tongue. ‘ I hope Piccadilly Peter has
managed to get the boys away all right. You noted
that this river flows round some mountain?’
The soldiers now closed in ; they had been stand-
ing motionless with levelled rifles all the time ;
they had not understood what all the talk had been
about, nor why their captain had deemed it neces-


sary ; it was not their duty to think, however; they
had but to pose theatrically, and they had done so.
But, somehow, their prisoners did not seem to be
impressed, and as they formed into an irregular line
to retrace their way through the forest, they wondered
why they had been put to so much trouble to capture
two harmless - looking men. The prisoners were
placed carelessly about the middle of the line, and
after an hour’s marching, or rather struggling through
the undergrowths, they were left to keep pace with
the soldiers as they pleased. This fact had been
evident to them for some time, when Boston Bob sug-
gested to Doc that, if they suddenly broke away, the
soldiers would have a poor chance of catching them
again. He had scarcely finished speaking when the
lieutenant of the party came alongside and in perfect
English remarked in casual tones : ‘ Look here, you
fellows, whatever you may think, don’t try to escape.
The captain is not sure of his ground, and if you
broke away, you would simply be making things
easy for him. In fact, he would like nothing better.’
‘ Why ? ’ asked Doc. ‘lf he thinks he has made
a mistake he has merely to say so and let us go free.’
‘Oh, he has made no mistake about his orders,’
the lieutenant laughed. ‘He was to bring the fili-
bustering gang’s leaders to Bolivar, whence they will
be sent to Caracas, or leave them dead somewhere
in undisputed Venezuelan territory, so that no ques-
tions could be raised afterwards.’
‘Well,’ said Boston Bob, ‘he is taking us to
Bolivar. What need he fear ? ’
‘ Several things. He is acting under instructions
certainly, but he is quite sure that it was not known
(C 10) 3


his work would mean arresting an American citizen,
and he fears he may be left to bear the consequences
himself. Such things happen in this country, you
know ’
‘ This is the first time I have ever experienced the
benefit of being under the protection of the Stars and
Stripes,’ laughed Boston Bob. ‘Why didn’t you
claim American protection too, Doc?’
‘ Poor old Britain is good enough for me. lam of
opinion that she can look after her children, however
far from home they wander.’
‘ Which can’t be very far on this globe,’ put in the
lieutenant. ‘ She has sprinkled red pretty well all
over it ’
‘You are not a Venezuelan,’ said Boston Bob.
‘ Your voice rings familiar.’
‘ Likely enough ; when I’m at home I’m in a little
place called Edinburgh.’
‘Then you are a Scotsman,’ said Doc in surprise.
‘ What induced you to become an officer in the
Venezuelan army?’
‘ Good pay. But it is not I who is in trouble at
present, it is you, and I want to help you.’
‘ But you have already told us that the captain is
afraid of the consequences,’ broke in Boston Bob
‘Of interfering with an American, alive, but he
could obey orders, satisfy every one concerned, and
run no risk, if that American were dead.’
‘ But he would never be so foolish as to run his
country into trouble with both Britain and America.
They would certainly inquire into the matter.’
‘ They would never know. A brief cable message
might possibly reach London and New York, among


other places, that some filibusters had been shot here
in attempting to escape from the patrol, but there the
affair would end. Now the captain has given orders
to the men to allow you every chance to escape, and
to shoot you down the moment you try to take the
opportunity. Am I understood?’
‘ Perfectly,’ said Doc. ‘ You haven’t a spare cigar
you could give to a Christian friend, have you? Ah,
thanks ; mine are all packed in one of the canoes ’
‘What canoes? We didn’t see any.’
‘ No, they left for other ports before you came.
But this is an excellent smoke. I will repay you in
Bolivar.’
‘ I hope not. Bolivar will be a very unhealthy
place for you people. But here is the captain ; he has
an evil mind himself, and is suspicious of me. I’ll
see you later.’ The lieutenant went ahead, and his
superior officer took his place.
‘ We are almost through the forest now,’ he cried.
‘ See, there ees your river again only eet ees flowing
north now.’
A broad placid waterway gleamed through the
trees in the faint starlight.
‘ Look out for that camoudie ! ’ Doc cried. ‘I am
sure it has designs upon you.’ A huge boa con-
strictor was coiled round the stem of a cedar tree, its
long sinuous body almost hidden among the flowering
creepers which also encircled the tree. The officer
sprang back quickly, and Boston Bob laughed.
‘You are nervous,’ he remarked. ‘Be careful or
you will tread upon that bushmaster now. A bite
from that snake is worse than all the camoudie
could do.’


‘ You are pleased to laugh,’ spoke the captain. ‘ I
do not think you will laugh when I tell you that our
steam launch and maxim gun went up that river when
we left it to cut you off. It would get to your camp
soon after we got there, and if you had any friends
on the river well ’ The man’s gesture was
significant.
‘ That can’t be the same river,’ Doc said; but the
officer’s words had aroused a great fear within him.
‘ Oh, yes, it is ; it rises in the mountains on our
left and flows right round it. See, here it is. Ah !
the launch is back already. What can that mean?’
‘ I should guess it means that she ran against a
snag,’ suggested Boston Bob ; but the captain went
ahead hurriedly without answering.
Next moment the soldiers drew up on the river’s
bank beside a large steam launch, which certainly had
only arrived a few minutes before. Some large canoes
and other vessels were also moored alongside; evidently
the launch would take them all in tow at daybreak.
The captain gave an order, after holding a brief con-
versation with the launch’s crew, and immediately the
tired soldiers threw themselves upon the ground and
fell asleep. The prisoners did likewise, but they did
not sleep long; the lieutenant awoke them ; he was
lying beside them.
‘ I am sorry, boys,’ he whispered, ‘ but you may as
well be told. The launch reports that she witnessed
the annihilation of your comrades at the hands of a
tribe of Indians, only escaping herself by means of
her speed.’
‘ Our comrades in trouble, Doc, and we not with
them,’ gasped Boston Bob.


‘They’re past trouble now,’ said the lieutenant;
‘there is no doubt as to that. No, don’t speak just
yet. I have come to help you to escape, but, boys,
you needn’t go back. Believe me, the Indians up
here never leave a man alive to tell a tale.’
‘ Then they can kill us too,’ muttered Doc brokenly.
‘ We’re going back to share their fate.’
‘We are, Doc,’ said Boston Bob. ‘I don’t think
we want to live if the boys have gone ’
‘ Listen,’ broke in the lieutenant. ‘So sure is the
captain that your comrades have been wiped out, that
he has arranged your escape in the hope that you too
will be killed, though not by Indians, and then his
mission will have been accomplished without risk and
without reproach to himself, and in a manner highly
satisfactory to all. See, he has ordered that canoe to
be placed in the water beside you, so that when you
awake and find the camp apparently asleep you will
jump into it, cut the ropes, and be hurled to destruc-
tion over the falls a mile farther down the river. We
have to carry or drag our boats from here to below
the falls, but you are not supposed to know that.’
‘But we are not going to escape by boat,’ said
Boston Bob. ‘ Our road is back the way we came.’
‘ Comrades, I know your thoughts as I know my
own. But it is essential that you should be reported
in Bolivar as dead. Give me your hats, I will watch
my chance and place them in the canoe, they will be
found at daylight in the whirlpool below the falls, and
tell their own tale. Now, I will wriggle back and
call the landward sentries to my side for orders.
Those two by the water you can strangle and gag
yourselves, and throw them in the canoe if you like,


and then make tracks as you please. Do you follow
me? ’
A silent grip of the hand was his answer, and he
wriggled away into the darkness. Shortly after he
called in the landward sentries, and the minute later,
the two watchers on the river’s bank were seized in
grips that effectually prevented them from making
any sound. When they recovered consciousness
their assailants were a mile beyond their own old
camp, but not a sign nor a trace of their comrades,
nor any indications as to their fate, could be found.
A week later the two gaunt and haggard men were
still looking for them.


CHAPTER I
Music hath Charms
The sports were over, and Charlie Ainsworth and his
comrade, Harry Middleton, walked back to the station.
They were members of a competing team, and between
them had carried off most of the prizes. Both were
splendid specimens of budding manhood, and both
were filled with the enthusiasm of youth.
‘You ought to feel pleased with yourself, Charlie,’
Harry said, as they fell in behind some others also
walking towards the station. ‘ You have broken the
record for the four hundred and forty yards, the half-
mile, and the mile, and generally proved that our
team was the best.’
‘You didn’t do so badly yourself, Harry,’ Charlie
answered. ‘You won the hundred yards’ sprint in
record time, and you beat that much-talked-of Welsh
flier, Jones, in fine style in the ten miles’ cycle race.’
‘ At any rate we’ve not disgraced the reputation of
the team we represented,’ said Harry, ‘and, although
we have not gained more than honour for ourselves,
even that is something in these days of keen com-
petition.’
‘Yes, I suppose so, Harry, but do you know, I
often think we have missed our work in this game of
life? What good can our fleetness of foot, or our


ability to push a bicycle faster than most other men,
serve us in this world of money-grabbing? It is
brains that count, and we haven’t got any.’
‘ Stop, Charlie, you at least have got brains ; it
is only I who can complain that nature has not
given me much of an understanding. I should have
been a savage, and not a member of a civilised race of
people.’
‘ Well, Harr}", surely I may say the same. We
have both got powers that among savages would
count for something, but in Britain they mean very
little indeed. lam thinking of leaving this country,
Harry ; I know my people will not object, apart from
sentimental reasons, for I am only a drain on them
just now, and my chance of ever being able to repay
them is not by any means in sight.’
‘ All right, Charlie, I’ll go too. This country is
done for people who want to raise themselves above
the level of labourers. All the professions are filled
and hedged round with obstacles I, for one, could not
get over, and I don’t think I could make clothes, or
sell tea and sugar satisfactorily, and I shouldn’t like
to try breaking stones for a living.’
‘There’s the army and the navy?’ suggested
Charlie. ‘ I thought of them for some time.’
‘ And, if there were any chance of fighting, I would
join the army at once,’ said Harry. ‘ But there isn’t;
and I don’t think I could stand being bossed about
by a more or less ignorant sergeant; and, as you
know, I haven’t the means to live, although I might
pass the exams, as an officer.’
‘ Ah, well, Harry, we are both alike in our mis-
fortunes. There does not seem to be much room for


us in our own country ; that is why I have decided to
go away.’
‘ And I am going with you ; but where can we
go? Canada has been rushed so much of late that it
must be overcrowded with such as we are already.
Australia and New Zealand are so far away, and
perhaps conditions there are not much better than
they are here; and as for South Africa, all the
diamonds belong to a big company, and we couldn’t
work a gold-mine ourselves.’
‘ I was thinking of trying some of the lesser known
parts of the British Empire,’ said Charlie, ‘where
people die off quickly we might have a chance.
There’s Sierra Leone, for instance, we might go there
and make a name for ourselves, if we didn’t die before
we had time ’
‘ Thanks, Charlie, I don’t want to die just yet.
What about East Africa ? ’
‘No good ; there’s nothing but lions there, and
wealthy M.P.’s and other people who go to shoot
them. India offers no chances except to Government
officials, and the Fiji and other South Sea islands
which belong to Britain are so far away, that we
couldn't think of risking them, seeing we know
absolutely nothing about them.’
‘By Jove, Charlie, the British Empire is not so
big after all. Here we’ve gone all round it, and can’t
find a spot which seems to offer more inducement
than we have where we are.’
‘ There are still some places we haven’t mentioned,
but I don’t think much of Hong Kong, or British
Borneo, or New Guinea. We don’t want to eat
people, as they do in these last two places, nor do we


want people to eat us. Malta and Gibraltar are only
military stations ; the African possessions we haven’t
discussed are hopeless, so there only remains the
Falkland Islands and British Guiana.’
‘ British Guiana ! That is on the north-east coast
of South America, and has Venezuela and Brazil for
neighbours.’
‘Yes, in addition to French and Dutch Guiana;
but what has struck you, Harry, you seem to have
got hold of an idea ? ’
‘No such luck, Charlie. The mention of Venezuela
brought to my mind the story my cousin—a reckless
sort of fellow whose people live in Edinburgh—has
just sent home. He left Scotland some years ago to
seek his fortune abroad, and, it seems, joined the
Venezuelan army. Anyhow he has written a letter
to his people, and they have sent it down to my
parents, especially for my benefit, the idea being that
after having read it I will lose all notion of going to
uncivilised parts. It has only made me more deter-
mined than ever to see the world, and I shouldn’t
wonder if South America proves the particular part
of it.’
‘ Was the letter one of regret that he left home?’
‘ Oh dear, no ! You don’t know Andrew Macallister,
Charlie. He is enjoying himself immensely. His
letter was just telling us about how a party of Britishers
had been exterminated, while prospecting for gold or
something else, by a tribe of natives. He is not sure
whether the affair happened in British Guiana or in
Venezuela, but he says some of them were decent
fellows, and he is a bit cut up about it. He thinks,
too, that there is more in the business than what will


ever be known, for he knows that some people in
authority in Venezuela were very anxious that the
Britishers should be killed.’
‘By Jove, Harry, suppose we go there? We can
sail direct from Liverpool to Georgetown in British
Guiana, and then go up the Demerara to where the
gold is. I know something about gold, you know.
I have been studying its occurrence of late, and it is
said there is quite a lot in British Guiana.’
‘I am on, Charlie. We’ll inquire about the boats
at once. Luckily we live in Liverpool. But here is
the station now, and our train is waiting ; hurry, or
we’ll miss it.’
The two boys broke into a run, and were just in
time to gain entrance to a compartment, as the train
drew out of the station. Two of the men who had
been walking before them were already in the carriage,
and they did not seem over pleased when the lads
jumped in. They evidently concluded, however, that
their companions had no interest in their affairs, and
soon began talking together, and apparently did not
recognise that the two heroes of the great sport’s
meeting which they had witnessed were before them.
‘Well, it is all over now, and again we have the
field to ourselves,’ one remarked. ‘ I must say I
didn’t feel easy until I saw what the mail brought in
about the matter. The President could stop the
cables without much trouble, but the mails are a
different matter.’
‘ It wadna matter much to us anyway,’ the other, a
short, thick-set, clean-shaven man answered in a pro-
nounced Scotch accent. ‘We had nae hand in it,
and the other two did the trick themselves.’


‘ True, but the British authorities might have sent
a force to investigate the matter, and then most likely
some sharp-brained youngster among the officers
would play Sherlock Holmes, and—well, you know
the rest.’
‘ No, I dinna see that even an exceptionally clever
lieutenant, who hadn’t yet got his ideas o’ what his
work should be knocked out o’ him, could find what
we havna discovered. The mountain hides the
secret, we know, but who kens what that means?
But there were no cables, it seems, from all we could
gather when we landed. What has the mails
brought? ’
‘ Only the story as reported in Caracas. Here are
all the versions published in this afternoon’s papers.
I had just time to get them at the bookstall.’ The
speaker, a tall man with a carefully trained black
moustache, opened a newspaper and read :
Caracas.— lt is reported here that a British filibustering
force has been massacred by the Indians on the headwaters of
the Caroni River. The boundary patrol has brought the news,
but no confirmation otherwise can be obtained. Much relief
is expressed in Bolivar and here, that the Venezuelan soldiers
were entirely ignorant of the presence of the British adventurers,
and, therefore, cannot be blamed for having any hand in the
unfortunate occurrence.
‘Ay, it’s vera sad. Is there nae report from
Georgetown about the affair? The same boat brings
all the South American mails.’
‘Yes, there is a brief paragraph to the same effect
from Georgetown,’ answered the tall man, mentally
scanning another item in the news column. It adds :


Phis is not the first accident that has happened to pioneer-
ing parties, and it is time prospectors learned to keep away
from countries not yet under the influence of any civilisation.
‘Ah weel, the matter will rest there, I suppose,
but we ken ’ He checked himself and leaned
over towards Charlie. ‘lt’s an awfu’ thing, laddie,’
he said, ‘ this killing’ o’ folk.’
‘lt is,’ answered Charlie. ‘ Has another war
broken out ? ’
‘ No; some o’ our countrymen have paid the
penalty attached to their being where they shouldna
be. The greed o’ gold surpassed! human under-
standing.’ The man rolled his eyes as he spoke and
appeared to be reflectively inclined. His comrade
cut short his meditations, however, with the words :
‘Shut up, you canting old hypocrite, here’s our
station.’
The Scot looked reproachfully at his comrade, but
made no reply, and as the train drew up at the ticket-
collecting station outside the terminus, both men got
out.
‘ Did you ever know of anything like this before?’
cried Harry, the moment he w'as alone with his friend.
‘ The fellow with the black moustache right, when
he said that the mails were beyond the President’s
controlling powers. My cousin’s letter is an instance.’
‘ Do you think they were referring to the same
thing?’ Charlie asked, lowering the carriage window
and looking out.
‘Of course they were. Didn’t they mention
Caracas, and the Caroni River, and British filibusters.
Caracas is the capital of Venezuela, the Caroni is a
tributary of the Orinoco that rises on the British


Guianian frontier, and the so-called British filibusters
are the people my cousin wrote about.’
‘You certainly know more about Venezuelan
geography than I do, Harry,’ said Charlie; ‘but I
can see we are not built for conspirators. Our two
friends saw how eagerly we were listening to their
words, and left here expressly to get away from us.
I see they have boarded the train again a few carriages
farther back.’
‘ Who can they be, I wonder? You remember one
saying they now had the field to themselves?’
‘ Oh, we have stumbled across something not
intended to be known. Look here, Harry, are you
game to inquire farther into this ? These men are
deep ones, I feel sure, and we may find out much
which we can use to advantage, if we watch them.’
‘Just what I was thinking, Charlie; let us follow
them when they get off the train. Men who talk so
glibly of mountain secrets, British filibusters, and
Venezuelan Presidents are well worth watching.’
The two boys were fully agreed as to this, and thus
it came about that when the two men alighted from
the train at the terminus a few minutes later, and made
their way into the streets, they were followed by the
young athletic enthusiasts, who cared little where they
were led, and who were ready for any adventures into
which their investigations might lead them.
But just then they were not led far, nor were their
experiences very exciting. The men walked a short
distance and entered an hotel, and the boys found
themselves baffled in any attempts to get into closer
touch with them. Judicious inquiries revealed the
fact that the men stayed there and that they were


foreigners, and with this knowledge the young
detectives were obliged to content themselves ; for
clearly they could do nothing more even had it
appeared to be worth the trouble.
‘We’ll go home, Harry,’ said Charlie, as they
stood outside the hotel entrance. ‘ We’ve been
building up a mystery out of nothing. There is no
room for romance in this century, and we were very
foolish to have imagined there might be.’
‘ I don’t know,’ replied Harry thoughtfully.
‘ Clever people might think that the mystery has only
grown deeper. Those men are not foreigners, we
know, and why should they pretend to be?’
‘lt beats me, Harry. Probably they have a reason,
but that is their own affair, and there is nothing wrong
in their passing themselves off as Chinamen if they
like.’
The boys walked away feeling greatly disappointed
that their adventure had turned out so tamely ; still
the thought of what they had heard was uppermost
in their minds, and they had not gone far when
Charlie stopped and uttered an exclamation. He was
reading a news’ bill of an evening paper.
‘What do you make of that, Harry?’ he cried.
‘ It seems Venezuela and British Guianan affairs are
to be forced on us.’ He pointed to the bill displayed
outside a newsagent’s shop, and Harry saw printed
in large letters: ‘ Reported Massacre of British
Prospectors in British Guiana. Supposed Complicity
of Venezuela. The Old Boundary Question Involved.’
Next moment Charlie had purchased a paper, and,
boarding a passing tram-car, the two boys were soon
making themselves acquainted with the latest Central


and South American mail news —the mail steamer
having only arrived in Liverpool that afternoon. But
they had already heard their train companions discuss
most of what the paper gave as news on the subject.
Evidently a party of gold-seekers had been murdered
by the Indians somewhere on the debatable frontier
of British Guiana, Venezuela, and Brazil. The news
was solely from Venezuelan sources, and the men
were termed filibusters. There was a paragraph
copied from a Georgetown paper, but as its news
appeared to have been culled from the original Caracas
report, there was nothing fresh in it, except that the
victims therein were termed prospectors instead of
filibusters.
‘ We know more than that ourselves,’ said Charlie,
after reading the items. ‘ Apparently there is nothing
unusual in the affair, or the world would have known
earlier. I see the news in both cases is three weeks’
old, and if it had been worth cabling about Why ! ’
he interrupted himself, ‘ that’s just what one of the
men said.’
‘Yes,’ cried Harry, forgetting he was in a crowded
tram-car. ‘He said the President could stop the
cables without much trouble, but the mails were a
different matter. I think we should go round to the
newspaper offices and tell them what we know, Charlie.
We heard the men say enough to show that all was
not right about the business, and the letter sent down
from Edinburgh to my people too suggests that much.’
‘ I have been wondering, Harry, how that letter
came. The mail is only in this afternoon, and yet
you knew the story at least some days ago ? ’
‘ I expect that my cousin Andrew, being an officer


in the patrol force who brought the news, was able to
catch an earlier mail. But what did the headlines on
the bills mean by saying that Venezuela was supposed
to be mixed up in the matter? There is nothing to
indicate that in these paragraphs. ’
‘ Excuse my interfering in your affairs, gentlemen,’
a tall man interrupted, leaning forward on a seat almost
opposite, i but if you will turn to the latest news
column you will see why.’ He became absorbed in
his own paper again, and, surprised to find that their
conversation had been overheard, Charlie quickly
turned to the page, in which part of a column is always
left blank for late cables and other important informa-
tion. On it was found the following :— ‘ A. P. A.
cable sent to Georgetown, British Guiana, this after-
noon, in reference to the massacre of the white pro-
spectors, has elicited the appended reply ; Rumours
are now beginning to circulate here that the Vene-
zuelan authorities know more about the occurrence
than they are willing to admit. The murdered men
were members of a band of prospectors known as Big
Tassy’s party. Big Tassy himself was one of the
West Australian gold-fields pioneers, and his com-
rades included several of the most famous explorers
and prospectors of the times, drawn from all parts of
the British Empire and America. Two men known to
have belonged to the ill-fated party were recognised in
Georgetown three weeks ago, but whether they were
survivors, or had left their comrades before the sad
occurrence is not known. They sailed for New York
or Europe before being interviewed, the news then not
being known here. The tribes of the interior deny all
knowledge of the affair, but tell strange tales of a
(C 10) 4


mysterious people said to inhabit some unknown
mountain range, in the vicinity of which the massacre
is said to have occurred.’
‘By Jupiter !’ exclaimed Harry, as they finished
reading the lengthy cable message, ‘ we’ve met the
two survivors to-day, and there’s something not right
about them. I remember one saying “We have the
field all to ourselves now,” and that was in connection
with this affair. And that also accounts for their
passing themselves off as foreigners. They don’t
want it to be suspected that they were ever connected
with the unfortunate party.’
‘ Perhaps you are right,’ said Charlie, slowly, ‘ but
we can do nothing. I only wish we were out with a
company of prospectors somewhere ; we would risk
being killed by natives ’
‘ I again beg your pardon, gentlemen,’ broke in the
stranger who had previously addressed Harry and
directed his attention to the latest news. ‘ I can’t help
hearing what you say, and as your subject of conver-
sation is highly interesting to me, it is my duty to
warn you ’
‘We don’t care who hears us,’ said Charlie. ‘We
are not plotting against king or country, nor have we
need to keep secret our opinions on a matter which
will likely figure largely in the press for the next few
days.’
‘ But I know something about the matter you had
under discussion, of which the press are ignorant,’
continued the stranger.
‘ We know some things ourselves,’ returned Harry,
‘ and we are going to give our information to the police
before this night is very much older.’


‘ 7 ou w iH pardon my presumption, I should
suggest that you keep your information to yourselves
in the meantime,’ the stranger went on. ‘ I say this,
because I happen to know that you are under a misap-
prehension in regard to the identity of the gentlemen
whom, I could not help hearing you say, you met this
afternoon.’
‘ Indeed, sir,’ said Charlie, ‘ I was not aware that
our conversation was of such an interesting nature, or
we should have reserved it for a less public place than
a tram-car.’
‘Which would have been a pity, I think, seeing we
are all interested in the same subject ; but good-night,
gentlemen, I get off here. I suppose I needn’t ask
you to honour me with your company to dinner? I
have a friend who, I am sure, would like very much
to meet you. ’
‘We thank you, sir, but without meaning any
offence, we feel we could not accept your kind invita-
tion. You see, our English nature cannot quickly
respond to the advances of strangers.’ Charlie was
the speaker.
‘ You say English in a manner that suggests you
have the copyright of that term. May I ask of what
nationality you think lam?’
‘ American, or we should have resented your inter-
fering in our business.’
‘ Then lam privileged. This is the second time I
have experienced a material advantage through being
a citizen of the great Republic. But I have passed
my station now. Gentlemen, I would esteem it as a
great favour if you would call on me at this address.
I, with a comrade, only landed in Liverpool to-day,


and I may say that our chief business in the Old
Country is directly concerned with this—this affair
reported in to-night’s papers. I may also tell you that
the men you evidently met to-day never were con-
nected with the unfortunate party, and if they said so,
they lied. Good night .’ He rose to go, but
Charlie suddenly gave vent to an ejaculation of
surprise, and the American looked at him. The lad
was staring at the card the other had given him. It
bore the address of an hotel, and the name of Robert
Ellison was written across the top in pencil.
‘ Well, my lad, did you make a remark ? ’ the donor
of the card asked.
‘ Yes,’ answered Charlie, ‘you are about two miles
from this address, and every moment you are going
farther away.’
‘ Dear me ! ’ laughed the American, sitting down
again, ‘ I can pretty well roam the world with my eyes
shut, yet in Liverpool I am bushed, and I am keeping
my seeing apparatus in a condition which among some
of my countrymen is known as peeled. I’ll entrust
my safe return to a cabman, I think, for I am rather
late already.’
‘ If you will allow us, sir, we will see you to your
hotel,’ said Charlie. ‘lt so happens that the hotel
where you are staying is the one in which the people
you heard us talk of are residing. I have suddenly
acquired a desire to cultivate their acquaintance more
closely than we have yet done, and my friend and I
are going back in any case.’
‘You bet we are!’ said Harry. He had been
thinking, too, and his thoughts were almost identical
with his comrade’s.


‘Then you will dine with us, after all?’ said the
stranger, starting up again.
‘No ! ’ answered Charlie. ‘We live out in that
direction, and only boarded this car to read our paper.
We will see you at your destination, and Oh,
can you tell me where the Cuyuni River is? And
if Caracas is near New York?’
The American smiled. ‘ The Cuyuni is a feeder of
the Essiquibo,’ he said, ‘ and Caracas is the port and
capital—at least it is the largest town in Venezuela.
You forget that the paper you have read to-night
practically tells you that much. Ask me something
more difficult.’
‘ Have you ever been in Venezuela, sir?’ asked
Harry, innocently.
‘ I have.’
‘Do you know British Guiana?’ Charlie inquired.
‘ I do ; as well, perhaps, as I know any part of the
globe ; but I perceive lam under examination. Pro-
ceed, please, and if I satisfy you I will make a proposal
to you.’
‘ Have you ever heard of a man named Andrew
Macalister out somewhere about these countries?’
put in Harry, seemingly haphazardly.
‘ The Scotsman who is an officer in the Venezuelan
army?’ cried the American in surprise. ‘Of course I
have. He is my friend. What do you know of him ? ’
‘He is my cousin,’ said Harry. ‘And he has
written home telling of the fate of the British pro-
spectors.’
‘ Let us get off here,’ broke in Charlie. ‘We can
just catch a car that will take us back to the hotel.’
They hurried out as the car stopped, and soon had


joined another, which the boys knew would carry them
to the door of the hotel mentioned on their American
friend’s card. When they were seated Charlie said :
‘ Mr. Ellison, my friend and I have thought things
out a bit, and we’ve resolved to explain our position
and our knowledge to you. We do not imagine for
a moment that we can be of the slightest service, but
if we can, you may depend on us doing our utmost.’
‘Boys, I know that,’ replied Mr. Ellison. ‘ I felt
we would be friends when I first saw you. It is just
possible that you can help me to some extent, but we’ll
talk of that later. Won’t you give me your names?’
‘ My friend is Harry Middleton, and my name is
Charlie Ainsworth.’ The three shook hands, and
Charlie resumed: ‘We are not people of much
account. Harry is in an office, and lam an engineer,
and we have decided to go abroad in the hope of
bettering ourselves. Still, it is not the desire for
wealth that made us determined to go elsewhere so
much as a wish to see the world and to meet those
men you read about those careless and happy
wanderers who seek gold or gems or something else
during the day, and pass the night round a blazing
camp fire, enjoying each other’s fellowship, and in-
different to the fierce roars of all kinds of wild beasts
round about them.’
‘Take a rest, Charlie,’ Harry interrupted. ‘That
is the longest speech you have ever made. The
fiercest wild beast either of us have met was a cat
or a dog.’
‘And yet,’ said Mr. Ellison, musingly, ‘what is a
jaguar, a leopard, or a tiger but a cat; or a wolf,
coyote, or dingo but a dog? But proceed, my young


friend, you have heard the call of the wild. I heard
it first years ago, but the sound even now is ringing
in my ears. Civilised places are not for such as we
are. We are Nature’s children, and the desire to be
free, untrammelled, and beyond the bounds of all that
is artificial is strong within us ’
‘ And what about me?’ put in Harry. ‘ I can hear
the lion’s roar too, and I want to go and dig up
nuggets or diamonds and meet with all kinds of
adventures.’
‘ And probably you shall,’ said Mr. Ellison. ‘ But
we’ve interrupted Mr. Ainsworth’s story.’
‘ I hadn’t much more to say ; I was only trying to
explain why we became so interested in this Venezuelan
or British Guianan business.’
‘Ah, yes,’ said Mr. Ellison, ‘for the moment I had
forgotten that. Let me say, gentlemen, that my
comrade and I came over to Britain expressly to
ascertain the views of the British Government as to
where that sad event took place.’
‘ Oh, then you are American agents on behalf of
Venezuela? ’ exclaimed Charlie. ‘ Good-night ’
‘ Stay, Mr. Electric Spark, we are not at the hotel
yet, and I perceive you have one misapprehension, at
least, I should like to eradicate. Your impetuous
nature leads you to jump at conclusions before you
know the direction in which you are travelling. My
country is, in a way, pledged to protect the entire
continent of America, north and south, against
European aggression, but it assuredly will not lend
its might to support that which is not right, neither in
the New World nor in the Old. Besides, boys, our
mission has nothing to do with political affairs, and .at


present I am as British at heart as you are. We are
here to see if latitude 5*15 north by 60’45 west is in
British territory or not, and if the Cuyuni—not the
Caroni—is indisputably British from its source to the
Essiquibo.’
‘ If you had been inquiring about the Mersey, or
the Manchester Ship Canal, or even the Clyde or the
Thames, we could have answered you,’ said Harry,
‘ but South America is outside our cycling boundaries,
and we know nothing about its rivers, except what we
were taught in school, although we hope to increase
our knowledge some day soon.’
‘Which really is all I was going to say,’ added
Charlie. ‘We have decided to go abroad, as I told
you, and it seems the British Guianan interior offers
more chances than anywhere else, for if some prospec-
tors were killed there, the fact shows there was gold
or something equally valuable in the country, or the
prospectors would not have been there.’
‘There is plenty of gold in British Guiana,’ Mr.
Ellison observed, quietly, ‘ but go on,’
‘We made up our minds to-day to book passages
for Georgetown as soon as we could raise the money,
and to our surprise we heard two men discussing
British Guiana and Venezuela while sitting in the
train a few minutes later. We could not help listen-
ing, and their talk showed that they knew both
countries well. They discussed the massacre of the
white prospectors, too, in a manner that suggested
they knew more of the matter than was generally
known, but when they noticed we were listening so
intently, they changed carriages. One of them was a
Scotsman, I am sure, and the other might have been


anything. We followed them to this hotel to which
you were going, and found that they were passing
themselves off as foreigners. After that we bought a
paper, entered a car, and met you. That is all our
story, and here is your hotel.’
‘Was the man you took to be a Scot a short but
heavily built man, with a very big head and a kind of
parson-like expression?’ Mr. Ellison asked, eagerly.
‘You have described him exactly,’ said Harry.
‘ And the other was a tall man with a heavy black
moustache, which he was always twirling with his
fingers.’
‘ How strange!’ muttered Mr. Ellison. ‘ I wonder if
they have spotted us, or if it is only accident that has
brought us under the same roof.’
‘Do you know them, sir?’ asked Charlie. ‘We
thought, after reading the newspaper, that they were
the survivors of the unfortunate prospecting party?
The car stopped just then and they alighted.’
‘Yes, I know them, they are certainly world-
wanderers of repute, but I doubt very much if they
ever did an honest day’s prospecting in their lives,
although looking for minerals is avowedly their pro-
fession. I suspect they do know something of the
massacre more than other people—in fact, my comrade
and I both think they were in some way responsible
for it. They are in this country for no good purpose,
lam certain. I only wish I knew more about their
movements. But you must come inside and meet my
friend, boys, and we’ll dine together.’ They were now
standing at the brilliantly lit hotel entrance.
‘ Not to-night,’ said Charlie. ‘ We’re not dressed,
and our people will be anxious about us. We have


been away all afternoon at a sports meeting, and
draw back into the shadows. There are the two men
coming out.’
Quickly the three men moved into the darkness, and
the men they had been discussing walked past them.
They were smoking cigars, and their very stylish
overcoats partly revealed their evening dress. Laugh-
ing and talking carelessly they strode along the street,
and for a moment the watchers looked after them.
Then Charlie turned to Mr. Ellison and said : ‘ Did
you hear their words, sir? They are foreigners after
all. They spoke in Spanish.’
* Most South American travellers know that lan-
guage,’ Mr. Ellison replied. ‘I am glad I have seen
them. They are the men I thought they were, and I
would give a lot to know their business here. But,
gentlemen, if you will not honour us with your com-
pany to-night, might I ask if you will do so some
night soon? We intend staying here until some
arrangements are completed, and I should like to
meet you again.’
‘We’ll call round on Monday night, if that will be
convenient, Charlie said. ‘We should like to get
all the information you may care to give us concerning
British Guiana.’
‘ Very well, my lads, we shall expect you on Mon-
day evening, and all our knowledge of South America
will be at your disposal.’ They shook hands and
parted, the boys now walking rapidly in the direction
of their homes, for they knew that their parents would
be somewhat anxious about them, knowing that the
sports finished in the afternoon, the results being
already in all the papers.


But their arrival home was subjected to still further
delay. Harry suddenly touched his friend’s arm and
both stopped instantly. Two men were walking in
front of them, and the boys recognised that for the
second time they were shadowing the mysterious
strangers, who in some way were interested in Vene-
zuelan and British Guianan affairs.
‘ By Jove, Charlie, we’ll follow them to where they
are going,’ said Harry; ‘ they can’t recognise us in
the dark, and perhaps we’ll find some more information
to give to Mr. Ellison.’
‘Yes!’ Charlie agreed. ‘I like Mr. Ellison, and
although he didn’t say so, I know that he and those
men in front are enemies. Wouldn’t it be great,
Harry, if we were taken on by him as members of an
expedition to South America?’
‘What’s the use of talking of such an impossible
thing as that, Charlie. Let us follow our friends
ahead, just to see if we have enough detective instinct
to find out anything further about them.’
‘ All right, Harry, but it looks as if we haven’t got
to follow them far. See, they are going into that
concert-hall. What can be the attraction there for
such men as they.’
‘ Suppose we go in and see,’ Harry suggested.
‘ The tickets are only a shilling.’
‘ Then we’ll speculate that much,’ laughed Charlie,
as they passed inside. ‘lt is worth a good bit more,
if only to see what draws our friends here.’
Much to their surprise the programme showed that
a really first-class concert was to be the entertainment,
the artistes’ names being a sufficient guarantee as to
its quality, and the vast throng of people already


6o The Rival Treasure Hunters
assembled affording evidence of the high state of
musical culture to which the citizens of Liverpool had
attained.
By some skilful manoeuvring the boys secured
seats immediately behind the two men in whom they
were interested, and their conversation could readily
be overheard ; the body of the hall, too, being dark in
comparison with the stage, it would not be easy to
identify any one by looking behind. The men, how-
ever, said nothing that by any stretch of imagination
could be construed into anything beyond the common-
place, and when a lady came on the stage and sang
a famous old German song they listened with much
appreciation, and refrained entirely from conversation.
The boys were greatly disappointed. They liked
music, but it was not to gratify their tastes in that
direction that they had entered the hall. They were
thinking of retiring, when a so-called comic item was
announced, and a famous star with the orthodox red
nose, dilapidated garments, and impossible but in-
dispensable umbrella appeared, and began to tell of
his joys and sorrows in connection with a new motor
car he had bought. Certainly it was funny to hear
such a man talk glibly of his purchase, when to all
appearances his entire worldly possessions would be
dear at half-a-crown, but it is doubtful if that point
was what the man himself intended to be provocative
of mirth.
Evidently the two men in front of the boys were as
little interested in this turn as were the boys them-
selves, and while the crowd roared in appreciation of
what doubtless were some clever and witty expressions,
the men began to talk to each other. They spoke in


Spanish, however, and this fact at once excited the
suspicion of the boys, and they closed their ears to
all sounds other than those of the speakers. Ever
since they had dreamed of going abroad they had
been studying Spanish, as being the language most
universally used after English, and much of their
spare time had been spent about the docks where the
Spanish ore-laden ships came in, in more or less
laboured conversation with the sailors. The two
music-loving strangers, therefore, were not so secure
against all contingencies as they thought they had
made themselves, by adopting a foreign language as
a medium of conversation in a crowded hall. They
may have imagined—not without reason—that only
in such a place, surrounded by people whose interests
were centred on the proceedings they had paid to see
and hear, were they safe from eavesdroppers, and then
even if by chance any of their words did reach the
ears of their neighbours, the extra precaution of
speaking in a foreign tongue would render those
words meaningless. This reasoning would in most
cases be logical, but it so happened that there were
two people behind them who cared as little for the
antics of the funny man as they did, who were greatly
interested in hearing their conversation, and who
fairly well understood the tongue they used to express
themselves. But the possibility of such a remote
combination of circumstances had not entered the
minds of the two men, and while the crowd around
yelled with delight, the Scot, ever the cautious one,
looked over his shoulder and to his right and left, to
see who his immediate neighbours were. He saw no
one whom he knew, the light was bad behind, and the


boys’ faces were concealed by their programmes.
Probably even had he recognised them he would not
have been suspicious, for how could a pair of boys
interfere with their plans in any way, even if they had
the intention of trying to do so?
‘What do you make of the survivor story?’ the
short man said to his comrade in faultless Spanish.
‘ Nothing ! ’ answered the tall man, ‘ Didn’t we
see what was left of them after they went over the
falls?’
‘ We saw their hats, and we took it for granted
that their bodies were in the whirlpool ’
‘ Well, don’t we know that nothing ever comes out
that goes into the Devil’s Pool, and didn’t half the
men see the canoe go over? The hats, probably,
being light, were blown beyond the influence of the
swirl, or we would not even have seen them.’
‘True, they made a brave attempt to escape, as
they were intended to do, but what avails the utmost
strength of man against ’
‘ Stop that cant, Maclaren, it’s out of place coming
from such a case-hardened villain as you. I am half
sorry it was Rawson and Ellison who were killed
though, they were better men than ever we’ll be ’
‘Who is the hypocrite now, Carville?’ broke in
the short man with a laugh that caused his neighbours
to look round in surprise, the funny man had not been
funny for some little time.
‘ Well, I am saying what I think,’ went on the tall
man, ‘ and that is certainly not a failing of yours.’
‘ No, in my opinion speech is best used to hide
what one thinks. But have you taken into considera-
tion the fact that the two survivors reported as having


been seen in Georgetown might have been two of the
lot who were taken prisoners by the Razois. Big
Tassy’s boys were a tough lot, you know ’
‘Again you are suggesting what you know is
impossible,’ interrupted the tall man. ‘ The Razois’
prisoners never escape ; they take good care of that,
for their secret would not be a secret five minutes after
any white man could get down to Georgetown or
Bolivar with the story. From the fact that George-
town knows nothing about the hidden people, except
the usual rumours, we may conclude that none of the
party got away from them.’
‘ Isn’t it wonderful how Providence interfered to
save ’
‘ Best leave Providence out of the question,
Maclaren. I don’t think we have much claim ’
‘ I was going to say that it was wonderful how we
were saved from doing dirty work. Tassy’s boys
would have found out all we know, and we had to
get them out of the way. We wished them the best
of luck where their business and ours didn’t clash, but
it did clash then, for they were hot on the scent. Well,
we played the low down and brought the Venezuelan
soldiers along, going right up the river ourselves in
the launch to make sure of our work, and then just
when we were going to turn the machine guns on
them, down swoop the Razois and they were all
prisoners before they knew what had struck them,
and our hands were saved from bloodshed.’
‘You sanctimonious old fraud,’ said the tall man.
‘ Much you cared whether they were shot down by
our machine guns or not.’
‘ We’ll not discuss that question in the meantime.


That supposed-to-be funny man has gone never to
return, and the next item, I see, is Tosti’s “Good-
Bye ” —’ here the speaker relapsed into English and
continued— ‘ by a lady I regret very much I have
never had the pleasure o’ hearing.’
The two men were absolutely silent as the singer
rendered the favourite air most sympathetically, and
the boys scanned their programmes for the next item
they thought would not be greatly appreciated by the
Spanish-talking strangers. They guessed rightly that
it would be the bioscope turn, and when it came the
men resumed their conversation, as naturally as if there
had been no break in it.
‘ What are our plans now ? ’ asked the little man in
Spanish.
‘ We’ll find out what country the mountain is really
in, and apply for the concession to work its mineral
deposits. This we’ll do with the help of the biggest
gang of unscrupulous adventurers we can pick up in
this country, and the world will never know if the
Razois cease to exist as a race.’
‘ Yes, the plan is good. I would suggest, however,
that instead of taking all our men from here we pick
them in detachments from America, Australia, and
even France or Germany.’
‘Good gracious! why? We don’t want a mixed
foreign legion.’
‘ I think we do. We could set them all fighting
each other when we were done with them, and dead
men wouldn’t need shares in the plunder.’
‘ Maclaren, you are certainly a cold-blooded
scoundrel, and will be hanged some day, but you
have a head ’


‘Don’t waste time with compliments,’said Maclaren,
deprecatingly. ‘ I see that the next item is a violin
solo by that fancy-named Russian, and as we must
hear that, I’ll finish this discourse for the present by
telling you that we haven’t got the game completely
in our hands yet Rawson was not killed, as we
thought, over the falls. I saw him to-night in the
hotel in which we are staying ’
‘Yousawhim? Impossible! You were dreaming,’
gasped the other.
‘I am not the kind to dream. He was there. He
stays there, and we’ve got to deal with him.’
‘ Then he must be found dead by to-morrow
morning. We have risked too much to allow any one
to interfere with our plans now. After the concert is
over we’ll put some of the gang on the job. Fool that
he is to come back to life again ! ’
‘ Not another word to-night then. Here is the
violinist, and we’ll have five minutes’ paradise.’
Both men settled back in their chairs to enjoy the
exquisite melody. But there were two people in that
audience who had no interest in the gifted Russian.
Quietly and unobtrusively they left the hall, as he
drew his first bow across the trembling strings. A
few minutes later they rushed into the hotel where
they had left Mr. Ellison. They found him in
the smoke-room with a friend. He stood up to
greet them with a smile of welcome, but, before he
could speak, Charlie blurted out : ‘We have been
with two men named Maclaren and Carville since
we left you. They have decided that a man
called Rawson will be found dead to - morrow
morning.’
(C 10) 5


66 The Rival Treasure Hunters
Ellison’s friend smiled, and lit a fresh cigar.
‘ Thanks for telling me,’ he said. ‘ Rawson is my
name.’
He pencilled a few lines on a card as he spoke, and
handed it to a waiter with some instructions.


CHAPTER II
The Beginning of the Quest
‘ Sit down, boys, keep cool, and tell us what you
know,’ Mr. Ellison said, kindly. ‘ This is my comrade,
Dr. Rawson. I’ve been telling him about you, but
we had not expected the pleasure of meeting you
to-night.’
‘ I am delighted to meet you, boys,’ said Dr.
Rawson. ‘We only landed from South America to-day,
but my friend informs me you have unconsciously
been working in our behalf. I hope we shall from
now on remain good friends and comrades.’
1 1 am sure we shall,’ said Harry, impulsively. He
had already been drawn to the handsome, bronzed-
faced stranger, even as his chum and he had been
attracted to Mr, Ellison.
‘ But you must get away at once,’ cried Charlie.
‘ The concert will soon be over, and then ’
‘ And then, we rather fancy,’ finished the American,
‘ that we are well able to take care of ourselves, even
if we are in civilised Liverpool, and not in the heart of
South America. But begin at the beginning and
give us your story. I’ll order something to eat for
you. You must be hungry ’
‘No, we haven’t time,’ Charlie said. ‘We have
not been home yet, and it is only because we have
reason to believe that the prospecting party in British


Guiana are alive and that you are their comrades, and
in great danger, that we have come here ’
‘ The boys alive ? ’ exclaimed the doctor and Ellison
simultaneously. ‘ Explain ’
‘ Anything you wish that wealth can procure will
be yours, if you can give us information to prove that
fact, boys,’ Doc added.
‘We want no reward,’ replied Charlie. ‘ Big
Tassy and his comrades are already our friends, and
we shall hunt them up ourselves when we get out to
British Guiana. But here are our experiences since
parting with Mr. Ellison to-night.’
Charlie then related in full the story of their move-
ments and actions, and told how they had overheard
the two Spanish-talking men’s conversation. Harry
added details which seemed to him to be of import-
ance, and which his comrade, for the sake of briefness,
had omitted.
For a space silence ensued after the boys had
finished. Both the doctor and Ellison apparently
were piecing together the facts, and slowly evolving
therefrom the plan of their own future actions.
‘ My boys,’ at length the doctor said, ‘you have
given us a new desire to live. We were broken men,
but now we are ourselves again, and more than able
to defeat all the schemes which Maclaren and Carville
can arrange. Our comrades are alive after all. We
are going to them at once.’
‘ But did you not know that they were alive ? ’
asked Charlie.
‘ No, we were told they were killed, and we searched
for them for a week where we left them. We knew
no more than is reported from Georgetown this after-


The Beginning of the Quest 6g
noon. We are the two survivors who sailed for
Liverpool from that town. We, as you have heard,
were captured by the Venezuelans, but thanks to
Lieutenant Macalister, we escaped—not in the way we
were intended to escape, over the falls ; only our boats
went that way. We came to the Old Country, to
make an attempt to induce the Government to settle
the boundary question one way or another, if they
could not assure us that the region in which we were
interested lay within British territory. Then we in-
tended to go back with a strong party and continue
our search for the hidden people and the mysterious
diamonds, the profit of which expedition we would
send to the relatives of our old comrades. Is that not
so, Bob ? ’
‘ \ ou have spoken truly, Doc,’ Ellison answered,
i but it seems to me that the plan now requires some
alteration. We now know that our comrades are alive,
and prisoners in the hands of these strange people.
We also know that we were so near to finding out
some vital secret concerning them, that Maclaren
and Carville, who apparently had already discovered
it, were so alarmed that they had to call in the
\ enezuelans to thwart us. Well, we are still very
much alive, and I shouldn’t think that it requires
much brilliancy of brain power to arrive at the con-
clusion that we’ll find our comrades somewhere in
these mountains, round which the river where we were
camped flows.’
‘ Agreed, Bob ! ’ said he who was addressed as Doc.
‘ What follows ? ’
‘ I think it follows that the sooner we are back in
the vicinity of that mysterious mountain, the better it


will be for Big Tassy and the boys. Let the people
keep their diamonds ! We never wanted to steal
them anyway, and not all the gems in the world would
any of us place in the scales against one of our
comrades.’
‘ Again you are voicing my thoughts, Bob. Go
on ! ’ said Dr. Rawson, nodding his approval.
‘Then let us get there without delay. We want
no large party of men with us : a big expedition could
not hide its movements, and there are those who could,
and would, bring powerful influence to bear against
such a party if they knew of its existence. Even with
a fully-equipped band of picked men we could not
openly fight Venezuela with any chance of success,
and if we did make the attempt, it would mean that,
either we were filibusters, or authorised by the British
Government, and, in the latter case, who knows what
European and American complications might arise.
In addition to this we would have hostile tribes,
possibly Brazil, and without counting the formidable
opposition of the hidden people themselves when we
did discover them, the utmost efforts of Carville and
his gang to contend with, and we know that Maclaren
and he are by no means such as can be ignored.’
‘Well, what do you propose?’ spoke the Doctor.
The two boys were drinking in every word.
‘ I propose that we go ourselves ; a small party
could hide, and, by means of some strategy, effect all
the results a stronger band could achieve. We might
pick up one or two fellows en route ; but even if we
don’t, the four of us are enough ’
‘ The four of us? ’ cried Harry. ‘Do you mean that
we are included ? ’


‘ Certainly,’ said Rawson. ‘ You have expressed a
wish to go to the country, and you are our friends ; you
are young and strong, and as well fitted for the work
as any men, excepting our old comrades, whom we
could pick up.’
‘ And as for profits,’ added Mr. Ellison, ‘ I happen
to be endowed with more worldly wealth than I re-
quire, and I will guarantee you a fair return for your
services, apart from our chances of finding gold or
diamonds.’
‘ Thank you! ’ said Charlie; ‘ but we are not mercen-
arily inclined. We are only too delighted to get the
opportunity of going with such men as you ; and for the
purpose of finding and rescuing the prospectors, whom
we have grown to look upon as our personal friends,
we are willing to take all risks, and do not require
any one to undertake that we shall be rewarded. We
know nothing of the country, however, and my fear is
that you might have reason to be disappointed in us,
through our ignorance and general inability ’
‘ That will do, my lad! ’ Dr. Rawson broke in.
‘ You are both made of the right stuff, and we have
no fear of your disappointing us. If you think you
would care to cast in your lot with ours, one of us will
go home with you and see your people. Ours is not
a schoolboy picnic ; but I can promise adventure
enough, and perhaps more gold, and other things
valued by most people, than could possibly be ob-
tained elsewhere. But the risks are great, my boys,
and I would not willingly have you underrate them.
There are dangers of which you can have no concep-
tion-fierce, unreasoning natives with poisonous
spears and arrows, wild animals who fear not man


and resent his intrusion in their domain, deadly
reptiles, fever swamps, the soldiers of two countries,
and the machinations of a gang of desperadoes the
men you have watched to-night may enlist in their
services.’
‘ We are not afraid of any of the dangers you have
mentioned,’ said Harry. ‘ And if you think we are
able for the work otherwise, and really mean that you
want us, the matter is settled and we are going. We
can shoot and run and cycle, and we are not bad at
rowing or swimming.’
‘ Then consider yourselves engaged as members of
the relief expedition,’ said Mr. Ellison. ‘And, if you
like, I will now go with you and explain the reason of
your lateness to your parents.’
‘ But what of Mr. Rawson ?’cried Charlie. ‘The
other men will be here at any time now ’
‘Oh, you may leave me to look after myself,’ the
doctor laughed. ‘ Thanks to your warning, I’ll be
able to circumvent them.’
‘ But they’ll be here any minute ’
‘ They were here some time ago. I saw them
through the doorway.’
‘ Then they will be watching us all now,’ persisted
Charlie.
‘ I don’t think so. They went out again after an
actor I’ve paid to be my double while in Liverpool,
and to whom I sent a message when you first came
in. I instructed him to lead them to the London
train, and by the time they discover their mistake I’ll
not be here either. I expect they will then conclude
that Maclaren made a similar error, when he thought
he recognised me earlier in the day, and as our names


are not on the hotel books, their quest will probably
end when they return and become acquainted with
that fact. Meanwhile I will gather our few belong-
ings together and catch the midnight mail for
Glasgow. You, Bob, can catch that train too, and
you boys can join us there on Monday forenoon.’
‘Why Glasgow, sir?’ asked Harry.
‘ Because I noticed in this evening’s paper an Allan
Line sailing-list from that port.’
‘ But these boats sail on Saturday,’ continued
Harry, whose hobby was the study of ships and all
concerning them.
‘ Possibly,’ smiled the doctor; ‘ but it appears
that this steamer, the Grampian , I think it is named,
was delayed for some specific purpose, and we can
therefore catch it.’
‘ But the Grampian goes to Canada,’ insisted
Harry. He rather liked to air his knowledge.
‘So I believe ; but that suits us all the better. We
do not wish to be followed or watched, and even
although our friends still remain of opinion that I
really am alive and in this country, it would take a
lot of reasoning on their part to deduce that I had
gone to Glasgow. Allowing, however, they eventu-
ally find out that I, or Mr. Ellison and I, are both on
top of the ground, and have gone to the town on the
Cly de, they will lose us there, for why should we
ha\e gone to Canada of all places? London, they
must imagine, is our ultimate destination ; and while
they are trying to locate us and completing their own
plans, we will have reached IVew York from Canada,
and shipped for the West Indies on a steamer from
that port. Thence it is an easy matter getting over


to Georgetown, and there we will begin our work, as
if we had sailed direct from Liverpool.’
‘That is very well arranged, sir,’ began Charlie;
‘but if I may be allowed to give an opinion, I think
that the other people can find out your plans much
more easily than you have calculated—that is, if they
still think it was you they saw, and discover you have
left for Glasgow.’
‘Explain, then,’ said Mr. Ellison, ‘but be brief,
for time is pressing, if I have to go home with you
and be back at Lime Street in time for the north
mail to-night.’
‘ They will simply ask themselves, why did you go
to Glasgow in such a hurry? and very soon the fact
that the Grampian sails on Monday will offer an
explanation. Its destination is Canada, and from
what I know of the men the rest will not be much of a
task to them to deduce, if they are in any way anxious
about our movements.’
‘ But they will cease worrying,’ laughed Mr.
Ellison, ‘when they discover that they have been
following another man, thinking he was my friend.
And in any case we can’t do much better than has
been proposed, unless we sail for New York direct, and
in that event we would certainly be seen. We don’t
want to fit out in Georgetown, and we haven’t time to
do it here ; so I say let us get over the Atlantic with
all possible speed, whether we sail from Glasgow,
Liverpool, or Southampton, and let us get away from
the hotel before Messrs. Maclaren and Carville return.
We know now all that we need know, although we
have had to travel a considerable distance to obtain
our knowledge, and with the help of Providence


we’ll see Piccadilly Peter and the boys before very
long.’
‘ Then good-bye, boys! ’ said the doctor, rising.
‘Go home and report yourselves, and I’ll square
matters here and drive to the station. My address
will be the Central Station Hotel until Monday
afternoon.’
Five minutes later the boys were speeding home-
wards in a cab with Mr, Ellison, and not long after
they had left, Mr. Maclaren and Mr. Carville re-entered
the hotel and approached the office.
‘ Have you any one staying here named Rawson ? ’
Carville asked, without any ceremony, when the clerk
came forward. ‘ We, as you probably know, are
South Americans, and we expected a friend from
Georgetown to land to-day.’
The official thought for a moment, then turned to
his books. ‘ Rawson! ’he repeated, scanning the list of
recent arrivals. ‘ No, lam afraid, sir, he has gone
somewhere else. Lime Street Station Hotel is very
popular with foreigners who don’t know their way
about. Shall I ’phone and inquire?’
‘ No, you needn’t mind,’ said Carville. ‘My friend
had a habit of changing his name at times so as to
escape the attention of the newspaper people. Had
you any people to-day who might have come off the
South American boat?’
‘There is no mail in to Liverpool to-day, sir. The
Royal Mail liner Para got into Southampton the
day before yesterday ; your friend would most likely
travel on board that ship ’
‘ No, we came over on that steamer ourselves, and
came up here to meet our friend, who was travelling


on a slower boat direct from Demerara, or the West
Indies.’
‘ Why yes, sir, the Harrison boat got in to-day,
and now that I think of it I did notice some baggage
bearing that company’s labels. Was your friend
young, of medium height, and clean shaven ? ’
‘Yes,’ answered Maclaren, quickly, ‘and good-
looking and gey weel bronzed.’
‘Shut up, you all-fired idiot,’ whispered Carville,
‘ whoever heard of a South American with a Scotch
accent like yours? One could cut it with a knife.’
‘Ma man,’ retorted Maclaren, unruffled, as the
clerk went off to inquire about some one he thought
might prove to be the man for whom the others were
asking, ‘ if you can tell me o’ a president or a famous
general, or anybody else o’ importance in South
America who doesna owe his greatness to his Scotch
descent, 1-11—I’ll eat him.’
‘Come down, Maclaren,’ laughed Carville, ‘the
only distinguished South Americans I know are black.
I refer to the coolies imported as cheap labourers ;
they have certainly a distinguishable smell about
them.’
At that moment the clerk returned : ‘ I am sorry I
must have been mistaken about that foreign baggage,
sir ; it was left under that stairway, I thought, but I
see there is nothing there but some commercial’s
sample cases with Manchester labels. The gentleman
I thought might be your friend, too, left for London
per Midland route two hours ago, and not a man
in the hotel knows anything about any foreigners,
except yourselves, having rooms here ; there are a few
Americans, but we don’t term them foreigners ’


‘Just so,’ remarked Carville, cutting the obliging
clerk short, ‘ I suppose my friend must have gone
elsewhere.’ The supposed South Americans walked
into the smoking-room and called for refreshments,
and while partaking of these, Carville lit a cigar, and,
lolling comfortably back in his chair, said to his
companion : ‘ Well, Mac, old man, for the first time
that I know of in our co-partnery of iniquity you have
made a mistake, and I must say lam glad. Somehow,
I’m squeamish about taking life. I don’t think I was
meant to be such a thorough-going villain as you
are.’
‘ I wadna wonder,’ murmured the Scot, as he care-
fully selected a cigar from his case and proceeded to
light up. ‘ Sometimes I fancy you might have made
a guid grocer, or storekeeper, or maybe a draper.
Wha kens, ye might even hae qualified for a stage
villain, if the ways o’ sin hadna proved too great a
temptation. But what mistake did I make?’ He
blew a cloud of smoke into the air, and followed its
course reflectively.
‘You canting old humbug,’ replied his companion
good-humouredly, ‘you might have made a good
farmer, or a banker, or, who knows, a member of
parliament, yourself, if you hadn’t been what you
are, a double-distilled, multum in parvo , hard-headed
Scot. ’
‘Mak’ no more allusions,’ interrupted Maclaren,
without altering his gaze. ‘Come on wi’ that
mistake.’
‘Well, you know you thought you recognised
Rawson in this hotel, and had it not been for the
music I should have had a fit of—well, anything you


like—when you told me. We followed him to the
London train, however, and he turned out to be only
a man remarkably like him. I tell you I feel much
relieved, however, for we don’t want men on our
tracks who could survive going over a waterfall that
we know. lam glad we had no hand in that affair.
Poor beggars ! what a fate, just when they thought
they had escaped too ’
‘ Dinna waste your sympathy, ma man,’ broke in
the Scot, ‘ye’ll maybe need it a’ for yoursel’ on the
day these same two men meet us.’
‘What do you mean, Mac? Ghosts don’t come
into our calculation.’
‘They’ll be gey tangible ghosts, I’m thinkin’,’
murmured the Scot, mysteriously. ‘ But I’m vera
tired, I think I’ll go to bed.’ He stood up and
stretched himself sleepily.
‘Yes, I feel that way too,’ Carville said, with a
yawn ; ‘ but I feel I can sleep like a saint to-night,
through not having had to call upon the services of
some of the boys. Ah, well, to-morrow is Sunday ;
we’ll go and hear Dr. preach, Mac, his church is
not far from the hotel, and I believe he has the reputa-
tion of being able to deliver an edifying discourse.’
‘ Ay, we’ll gang an’ hear what he’s got to say any-
way,’ said Maclaren, as they left the smoke-room, and
made their way to the elevator ; ‘ it’s a long time since
I heard a sermon I appreciated.’
Shortly afterwards they were soundly asleep in
their respective rooms, and their dreams, if any,
certainly did not trouble them.
Meanwhile Charlie and Harry were finding out
that their parents and brothers and sisters did care


something about their movements, and were certainly
not willing to allow them to go away so suddenly to a
land where, according to the newspapers, life was
not esteemed of much value, and where fevers,
animals, reptiles, pests, natives, and foreign soldiers
combined to make things as disagreeable as possible.
The two families lived near each other, and had
assembled in Mr. Ainsworth’s house in answer to his
message on the arrival of the boys with Mr. Ellison.
They had all formed a most favourable impression of
the tall, handsome American at first sight, but, not-
withstanding, they could not part with the boys with-
out much visible emotion.
‘ But you know we had decided to go abroad in any
case,’ Harry expostulated with the party, ‘and now
that we have the chance of doing so in the company
of experienced men, you raise objections.’
‘We never thought we would lose our boys so
soon,’ Charlie’s mother replied. ‘We know that the
prospects of young men making names for themselves
in Britain without influence of any kind are not very
bright at present, but we hoped things would improve
and give you a chance.’
‘ But they are not going away for ever,’ Mr.
Ellison said ; ‘ I hope to bring them back to you
within a year at most.’ He had already explained
that the object of their mission was to find some of
his comrades who had been lost, and that the boys
were exactly what he and Dr. Rawson required to aid
them in their search, being young, healthy, strong,
and loyal-hearted. ‘We might easily pick men
nearly double their age to accompany us,’ he had
added, ‘ but we could never feel sure of them. Ours


8o The Rival Treasure Hunters
is not a mission depending for its success upon its
strength. In fact, I have hopes that we shall never
see any Venezuelans; for their differences with Holland
will most likely cause all their strength to be concen-
trated on their coast. Besides, we are not breaking
any of that country’s laws ; we are not seeking to
extend the British boundary, and even Venezuela
will not object to our looking for our comrades in
their territory—if the district really belongs to that
country, which I very much doubt—so long as we are
a small, and therefore harmless party. The chances
are, too, that our existence will never be known. My
comrade and I like the boys, we will guarantee them
a good reward for their services, and I will promise
that so far as is in the power of man to contend with
circumstances, no danger will come to them, unless
fate has first put us beyond the power to take it further
upon ourselves.’
‘Then I am not going,’ cried Charlie, and his
tones were decisive. ‘ What use can we be if you
have to protect us from the risks which the journey
entails. If we are not able to look after ourselves we
would only be a burden upon Dr. Rawson and you,
and while I thank you for so kindly making out to
our parents that we were really likely to be of service
to you, we must decline now to join you on the con-
ditions. We are not helpless little children ’
‘ Bravo, my son ! ’ cried Mr. Ainsworth, ‘ you
have the true grit, after all. I should be sorry indeed
to think that my son required to be protected from
danger by any other man.’
‘ Protected, indeed ! ’ pouted Harry’s sister, ‘ I
should like to see the man who could protect them


when they couldn’t look after themselves. Are not
the papers filled with their athletic performances at
the sports? Why, doesn’t one of them say : “ Charlie
Ainsworth and Henry Middleton are splendid speci-
mens of British manhood, worthy successors to the
long line of athletes who have carried their country’s
fame into all parts of the world.” ’
‘ Oh, are you those two champions of whom so
much is said in to-night’s papers?’ asked Mr. Ellison,
in surprise. ‘You never told me, and I was reading
about you when I first saw you in the car.’
‘The papers make a lot of nothing,’ Charlie
answered, modestly, ‘We won some prizes, of course,
but hundreds more could have done as well if they
had been in training, or if luck had been with
them.’
‘ I don’t think many more could have equalled
your achievements,’ said Mr. Ellison. ‘ I know some-
thing about records myself, and your times, as given
in the papers, were certainly remarkable. Boys, I
am now more than ever determined that you should
be my future comrades.’
‘ And after due consideration I give my consent to
Charlie joining you if he pleases,’ said Mr. Ains-
worth. ‘lt is only right that he should see this world
we live in, and I am sure I w r ould jump at his chance
myself if it were offered to me. ’
‘Harry, of course, can go where Charlie goes,’
observed Mr. Middleton. ‘ I have faith in their abili-
ties to come through most things, and I am sure they
will never do anything which is not right.’
‘No, father,’ cried Harry, ‘of that you may rest
assured, and we’ll come home again with a knowledge
(C 10) 6


and experience of the world and its people, which will
qualify us for any position we may afterwards fill.’
‘My boy,’ said Mr. Ellison, quietly, ‘you’ll come
home with the means to enable you to follow out your
bent, in whatever direction it may be. But I fear, as
my comrade said, the call of the wild will ever sound
in your ears, even as in mine. The adventurer’s
spirit knows no restraint, and only with the world as
its confines, and the unknown ever in front, will it give
you rest. But lam talking foolishly, Mr. Ainsworth
and Mr, Middleton, I thank you for trusting Dr.
Rawson and myself with your sons. I believe our
records will bear inspection, and I don’t think any
man can truthfully say we ever betrayed a trust.’
‘We have every confidence in you, sir,’ Mr.
Middleton said. ‘lt is only sentimental reasons that
were the cause of our objections. Our boys will be
the better of some adventure, and I am sure they
couldn’t be in better company.’
‘ Meanwhile, if you will join us in a bit of supper
we shall be delighted,’said Mr. Ainsworth. ‘We’ll
all imagine the table is a camp-fire, and crowd round
it anyhow ’
And what a supper-party that was ! The girls took
possession of the two prospective travellers, and the
seniors entertained Mr. Ellison, and certainly no
camp-fire circle ever indulged in talk so varied, and of
such a strangely inconsistent nature. Question after
question was fired from one end of the long table to
the other, and answered by Mr. Ellison, or the two
youthful heroes, just as quickly. It seemed that the
entire world and its peoples formed a necessary part
of the conversation, and then, in the midst of airing


her knowledge, schoolgirl of course, of the Essiquibo
River, one of the girls would suddenly stop, and
inquire anxiously about the most suitable articles
of apparel for the boys to wear. At the same time
Harry’s sister would be instructing Charlie in the art
of sewing on buttons. He suspected that buttons
were not much used in the interior of British Guiana,
but he was too gallant to say so, and he liked to hear
Nellie talk. Harry, meanwhile, when not dealing out
geographical information, was telling Charlie’s sister,
Violet, of the diamonds he would send home to her,
and Mr. Ellison was describing the country in graphic
language to the parents of both boys. But there were
still the younger brothers, and they kept up a formid-
able attack of questions, varied only by wonderful
advice as to the best way to kill alligators, boa-con-
strictors, and to escape from hostile natives, finally
informing the party, although none heard them, that
the first week there was no mail from the adventurers,
they, the younger brothers, would immediately sail to
look for them, and then woe be to the people who had
taken them prisoners. Probably the conversation of
a week under ordinary circumstances was condensed
into one hour and a half, and even then the time
seemed so short that it was with a start of surprise Mr.
Ellison, on glancing at his watch, found that it was
already midnight.
‘Dear me,’ he remarked, ‘my time is short. I
must join my friend at the station. Fortunately Liver-
pool is well supplied with night trains, and the Glasgow
express does not leave Lime Street until 12.45.’
But it was half an hour later before he got away,
and then Mr. Ainsworth and Mr. Middleton drove


with him. ‘ I’ll come back with the boys when our
work is done and stay with you a whole night,’ he
cried, as the cab started, ‘and perhaps we’ll bring some
of the other boys with us. ’
When Mr. Middleton and Mr. Ainsworth returned
they found the young people still sitting round the
table, talking at a rate which implied that they knew
their time was limited. They told all that they had
found Doc to be a gentleman whom they had instantly
liked, and his nature was much the same as Mr.
Ellison’s, only that he was quieter, and very fond of
good cigars. They added also that he was equally
handsome, and said that they had never met two
men before with whom they had been so favourably
impressed.
All this was very gratifying to Charlie and Harry,
who saw in their two friends their ideals of all that
was good and noble. Well they knew that it was
not because of their known merits they were asked to
become the comrades of such men, but they deter-
mined that if it lay in their power they would yet
deserve the honour done them.
All night the members of both families sat and
talked together, and it was indeed strange to see with
what boyish-like enthusiasm the two fathers discussed
the best ways and means of penetrating to the position
given them by Mr. Ellison, undetected, and after-
wards of effecting the escape of the prisoner pro-
spectors. And even more wonderful was the manner
in which the other members of the families looked
upon the adventure. They thought it was a treasure-
hunt of much the same nature as those of Sir Walter
Raleigh’s time, and, instead of dwelling on the pos-


sible dangers of the expedition, revelled in the idea
that even in the twentieth century adventure could
still be found by those daring enough to look for it.
1 Whatever you do,’ said Charlie’s younger brother,
a great newspaper reader, ‘ don’t take any part in the
trouble between \ enezuela and Holland. Remember
you are British subjects, and Britons must play the
game fair.’ He spoke with the air of a minister of
state, but his years were not yet twelve.
‘We’ll keep clear of international entanglements,
young Socrates,’ laughed Harry, ‘ but you must know
Venezuela, without the United States of America to
back it up, would be a scrambling ground for several
European Powers in no time.’
‘ Well, don’t you enter into that scramble,’ advised
the youngster; ‘ Britain has already got more land than
most school boys can remember.’
And so the night passed, no one thinking of retir-
ing to rest. Next day was a day of packing, and
Nearly on Monday morning the boys, after a farewell,
the obviously affectionate nature of which they would
gladly have seen reduced considerably, entrained for
Glasgow. They were young and enthusiastic, and
the future to them held nothing but golden promises.
During the journey northwards they studied the
map of South America, of which they had long ago
possessed themselves, but they soon assimilated the
meagre details it gave of British Guiana and the
States on its borders. Acting on instructions, they
were travelling by the Midland route, and duly arrived
at Carlisle about half an hour after mid-day. Here
their hopes received a shock, for on purchasing a
copy of the Glasgow Herald at the station, while the


Glasgow and South-Western engines were being
attached to the train, they read an item of news which
informed them that the Allan Liner Grampian sailed
with the tide that morning with a full complement
of passengers. This was certainly disconcerting in-
formation, and the boys’ thoughts and feelings under-
went many changes as the train sped north towards
the great Scottish city.
‘ Maybe it had to sail from Glasgow with the tide,’
hazarded Harry. ‘ The Clyde is not very deep at
Glasgow, and perhaps it waits at Greenock, farther
down, for its passengers.’
‘ But it says here, “sailed with full complement of
passengers,” and we know that our tickets could not
be taken out until this morning,’ said Charlie.
‘ Maybe the paper is a bit ahead of time,’ suggested
Harry, hopefully. ‘lt must be published very early,
and knowing the steamer was to sail with the tide,
and that no people would be reading the paper until
some time after that, they just said “ Sailed,” so as not
to be a day late in giving the news.’
‘ But we are not due in Glasgow until 3.20, and by
that time another tide will have passed.’
‘Well, we are doing as we were told, Charlie, and
anyway the train from Lime Street only gets in twenty
minutes before this one. I expect Dr. Rawson was
thinking of something when he instructed us to travel
by this route.’
And Harry was right in his conjecture. When
the express drew into Kilmarnock, they saw Mr.
Ellison standing on the platform, scrutinising each
carriage as it passed him. He saw the boys at once,
and ran alongside their carriage. ‘ Come out! ’he


cried. ‘We’ve got some train-juggling to do to
catch our boat.’
‘ Has she sailed?’ Charlie asked, as he jumped out
and received from Harr}' their portmanteaux.
‘ Not yet, but she will leave Greenock long before
we can be there by train, going round by Glasgow.
Doc is waiting for us now somewhere, and we
simply must catch the boat, as things are moving in
Venezuela in a way favourable to us.’
‘ But is the train not the fastest method of travel-
ling?’ Charlie asked. ‘We are due in Glasgow at
3.20, and a train leaves for Greenock soon after.’
‘ Yes ; a slow train, which would just enable us to
see the Grampian disappear. Doc has written direc-
tions for us on this card. He intended at first that
you should change at a place, called Paisley, into a
train which would take us to Greenock, a full hour
before the one connecting with this train at Glasgow ;
that is why you travelled by this route ; but we dis-
covered this forenoon that this train does not stop at
Paisley, and that this station is the last stop before
Glasgow. I don’t know the railway system of this
country, but Doc knows everything, and now we are
in his hands.’
‘ But we are a long way from Greenock, sir, and
there is no direct railway from here.’
Mr. Ellison consulted the card in his hand before
answering. ‘Our directions are,’ he said, ‘to join
a train leaving here for Ardrossan, wherever that is ;
there further instructions will be given us. That is
the Ardrossan train over there, ready to start when
the express continues its journey. Let us get on
board. I’ve got tickets.’


Both Charlie and Harry were now completely
mystified as to their movements, but they guessed
that there were more reasons behind them than they
had been told. It was apparent, however, that if
Maclaren and Carville had discovered their connec-
tion with Dr. Rawson and Mr. Ellison, and were
following them to Glasgow, they would again be
disappointed.
Ardrossan proved to be a town on the coast about
twenty miles south of Greenock, and when the local
train steamed into the Glasgow and South-Western
Railway Station there, both Charlie and Harry were
wondering how the next stage of their journey was to
be accomplished. But that question was not long
left in doubt. Dr. Rawson met the train as it
stopped, and after shaking hands with the boys and
inquiring kindly for their parents and relatives, lit
a cigar slowly and remarked : ‘ Well, boys, I am
sorry we have not much time to waste between here
and Greenock. This train, I believe, goes on to
Largs, farther up the coast; but I thought we might
save five or ten minutes by leaving it here, and motor-
ing to Greenock. The road, lam informed, is good,
and we can just cover the distance in time if nothing
breaks down. I have a powerful car outside, and a
driver ; there is also something in the way of food for
you, which I procured in this town. lam sure you
must be hungry by this time.’
In another minute they were in the car, and soon
they were speeding along the Clyde shore road towards
Greenock. Before the boys had quite finished the ex-
cellent repast provided for them, the car swung round
a turn, and they saw the Grampian lying out in the


roadstead off Greenock, a thin wisp of steam hanging
round her funnel. A few minutes later they rushed
through Gourock, and shortly afterwards the car
drew up outside Princes Pier Station in Greenock.
A motor launch was waiting, and signing to the boys
to step into it, Dr. Rawson leisurely followed Mr.
Ellison down the ladderway also, ‘We have five
minutes to spare after all,’ he remarked. ‘ I thought
we might have one minute ; but I fear our chauffeur
has been exceeding the speed limit.’
‘ Well, you have paid him enough to allow him to
look upon a prospective fine with equanimity,’ Mr.
Ellison laughed. ‘ But you are the coolest hustler
I ever knew, Doc, and how you arranged all this
steeplechasing game is more than I know.’
‘ It was necessary, and I knew that on Saturday
night. I worked out everything with Ordnance Survey
maps and time-tables while waiting for you at the
station. I ’phoned through to Glasgow, expecting
the Allan Line offices would not be closed, and
arranged passages, and ascertained the exact sailing
times from Glasgow and Greenock.’
‘ Do you mean to say, sir,’ cried Charlie, ‘ that you
had all this planned out on Saturday night?’
‘ Not entirely, but I knew you couldn’t catch the
boat by leaving Liverpool on Monday morning, and
coming on to Glasgow, and wishing to give you all
the time possible with your people, I did not want you
to leave on Sunday night, as all the other Liverpool
passengers by the Grampian had to do. Of course I
might have arranged for a special train for you, leaving
Liverpool an hour or so earlier, but that might have
attracted more attention than we desire. But here is


go The Rival Treasure Hunters
the Grampian , and her gangway is down for us. I
don’t think our music-loving friends can have followed
us so far. ’
The boys did not answer ; they were beginning to
realise that the cool, unemotional doctor was a man
who in emergencies would act quickly and surely, and
they rejoiced exceedingly that henceforth they were to
be comrades in adventure or misadventure.
The great vessel’s screws began to churn the waters
the minute after they had stepped on her deck, and
when darkness fell she was rolling gently in the
Atlantic swell. A swift passage to Quebec was
effected, and there the party left the comfortable
steamer and went on to Montreal by train. Next day
they started for New York, and after an extraordinarily
fast journey the train landed them in that great city.
Here some purchases were made, and on the following
day they boarded a steamer leaving for the Barbadoes
Islands. Two days after clearing the port of Bridge-
town, Georgetown began to loom through the heat
haze, and the boys knew that soon now their calibre
would be tried, and that the pleasant part of their
quest of adventure was ended.
‘ We are three full days ahead of any steamer which
left a British port after we did,’ Doc remarked. ‘So
you see, boys, a roundabout road is sometimes the
quickest.’
‘ That depends on whether Dr. Rawson is navigat-
ing officer or not,’ laughed Mr. Ellison.
And the youthful members of the party agreed
with him.


CHAPTER 111
The First Blow
Georgetown greatly impressed the boys. They
had never seen any town outside Britain until the
Grampian had landed them at Quebec, and this great
Canadian city, notwithstanding its history, they found
as British as their own native town. Then there had
followed the rapid railway ride to Montreal, and
thence through country which Mr. Ellison, with justi-
fiable pride, described as the finest piece of earth under
the sun, to New York. Here everything appeared to
be on a scale of lavishness most bewildering to the
youthful visitors. All the people seemed to be in a
desperate hurry, and apparently spent their lives in
dodging swiftly travelling cable cars. Still the mighty
progressive city, probably destined to be the world’s
capital some day, did not strike them at first as being
essentially different from London, and only the pres-
ence of so many black men in the streets and in the
hotels forced upon them the realisation of the fact that
they were not now in British territory. But that made
little difference, the people talked the same language,
were courteous and kind, and all with whom the boys
came into contact seemed most anxious to be of service
to them. ‘This is my country,’ Mr. Ellison had
informed them as they walked down Broadway, ‘ and
with all modesty I rather think it can lick creation.


When old Britain lays down her mantle of world’s
peace-keeper, I guess we’ll take it up. We’ve got
the ships, the men, and the dollars.’
‘ But Britons and Americans are all one people,’
said Harry. ‘ Why don’t they amalgamate, and thus
form the most powerful combination the world has
ever known ? ’
Mr. Ellison laughed. ‘You are actually support-
ing the formation of a trust,’ he said. ‘ Most people
think that such huge combines are wicked things,
because, whether they deal in nations, iron, copper,
or soap, they crush the smaller or weaker concerns
out of existence. No, boys, we are all Anglo-Saxons,
and in the hour of real danger will stand by each
other, but until that time comes we, like most relatives,
agree best separate. ’
Dr. Rawson had interrupted the conversation then
and it was not resumed. The pleasant sail down
into warmer latitudes next was experienced, and one
night Bridgetown, in the British island of Barbadoes,
was reached. The boys did not see much of this
place, as the connecting steamer was on the point of
sailing, and night affords little opportunities for
exploring strange towns. Thus it was that George-
town was the first town they saw which seemed to be
different entirely from Liverpool or Manchester, or
any of the towns they knew.
The streets were wide, and canals or waterways
occupied the middle, the surfaces of which were
covered with beautiful Victoria Regia lilies. The
sides of the streets, too, were lined by cool, shady
avenues of trees, the refreshing greenness of which
was pleasant indeed to the tired eye. Behind them,


surrounded by gardens and groves of many vividly
hued shrubs and palm trees, the white-painted houses
shone out most effectively from a scenic point of view,
and the gorgeously coloured flowers of the tropics
flourished everywhere. It seemed like a dream city,
and the boys wandered through its streets with a
delight which they did not try to conceal. The great
sea wall, too, took up their attention. It was fully
two miles in length, and, according to Charlie’s rough
measurement, twenty-five feet broad on top. Seats
were placed at intervals all along its length, and
graceful palms towered high into the azure sky a little
way behind. Promenading along this great and last-
ing monument to convict labour, the citizens of George-
town could gaze out on the shoreward rushing billows
of the Atlantic with composure. Without its protec-
tion Georgetown would assuredly be swept away some
day when the seething waters were piled high by one of
the periodical wind-storms, but safe behind her mighty
rampart the town lay secure against old ocean’s fiercest
attack.
But it was the people of the town themselves who
chiefly interested the boys. They seemed to consist
of most races of the globe. Ever-smiling pig-tailed
Chinamen ambled along in company with the gaudily
but cheaply dressed East Indian coolie, while pompous
mulattoes swaggered disdainfully past the humbler,
but considerably cleaner negroes whom they met.
Portuguese storekeepers, quadroons, and lordty-look-
ing natives from the interior all jostled each other
throughout the town’s fifty miles of streets, and the
good-natured Bovianders (the descendants of the early
Dutch settlers) in town to dispose of their produce


from their flower-covered homes scattered throughout
the bush and along the rivers’ banks, were also con-
spicuous. Picturesque Arabs could also be seen, and
many other odd-looking people, which Mr. Ellison
told the boys included Annamese, Tonquinese, and
Algerians, who had probably either escaped, or been
liberated, from the French penal settlement, Cayenne,
farther down the coast. He also told them that
Russians, Frenchmen, Norwegians, and Germans
were represented among the white population, and
his listeners began to wonder if there were any
Anglo-Saxons there beside themselves.
But their minds were soon set at rest upon this
point. They passed the ‘ Planters’ Club’ just then,
and from its cool interior floated the words of a rousing
English chorus, sung, the boys thought, with slightly
more energy than was necessary.
‘ They’re having their midday swizzle ! ’ Mr, Elli-
son laughed. 4 1 can pick out Dandy Jim’s voice in
that chorus.’
4 Yes!’ agreed his comrade. 4 I expected they
would all be inside at this time, that is why we
came out to show our young friends the town.
We can’t afford to be seen too much, you
know, for, although the fellows are straight through
and through, they might make a bit of a fuss
over us, and if we once draw attention upon our-
selves we’ll be watched too well afterwards, to be
able to set about our business as secretly as we
would like.’
4 Oh, we’re pretty safe to wander about just now,’
said Mr. Ellison. 4 Every Briton and American in
Georgetown is sure to be in some of the clubs, and


will remain there until the sun gets well over the
meridian.’
‘At least all those whom we know, or who are
likely to know us,’ the doctor added. ‘Some of the
older people may be asleep in their own houses,
and it is possible that a few of the more recent
arrivals have still retained some of the ideas regard-
ing business and work which prevail in the Old
Country.’
‘Which means they will be having only themselves
for company, and I know of no worse company in
the tropics than oneself. Hullo!’ Mr. Ellison
paused ; they were passing an hotel, and from the
shaded balcony overhead came sounds of an alterca-
tion. ‘That’s English enough for you surely, lads,’
he continued. ‘ Listen to the eloquent flow of real
undiluted Liverpool. I suppose it is a quarrel among
some gold miners down to the coast for a spell. This
hotel is greatly patronised by them.’
‘ But there is only one man speaking ! ’ said Charlie.
‘ I thought it took two to make a quarrel ? ’
‘Not always,’ laughed Mr. Ellison. ‘Sometimes
in Georgetown a man will quarrel with his shadow.
But look at Doc’s face what’s the matter, Doc?’
His comrade made no answer, but signed to
the others to listen, and, greatly surprised that Dr,
Rawson should take any interest in what probably
was a drunken brawl, they obeyed. And now they
heard a second voice. It was soft and musical. ‘ I
have no desire to quarrel with you, my friend,’ it
said. ‘ Surely the town is large enough to hold
us both ?’
‘ Drink or fight! ’ broke in the first voice. ‘ When


I invite a crowd to drink, the man who refuses has got
to answer for himself.’
A buzz of applause followed this remark, ancß
apparently pleased with the approbation he was
receiving, the bully went on : ‘ I should like to know
what this blamed old world is coming to when I,
Bruiser Tom, the world’s middle-weight champion,
has got to take cheek from a lime-juice swilling new
chum of a parson Come on, drink or stand out
for your gruel.’
Another burst of applause hailed the valiant
remarks, and before the noise subsided, Dr. Rawson
had entered the hotel, and rushed upstairs to the
balcony. He was closely followed by Mr. Ellison
and the boys. They were surprised, but they knew
their comrade had reasons for his action, and their
business was by his side, even if trouble resulted.
They came out on the scene of the disturbance just as
the soft-voiced man was about to reply, and to their
amazement they beheld a slimly-built, youthful-
looking man in a garb slightly suggestive of clerical
cut. About a dozen men stood near smoking cigars,
and sipping swizzles occasionally, and a bar occupied
the far end of the verandah. All were too much
interested in the prospects of a fight to notice the new
arrivals when they first appeared.
‘Well,’ began the man who objected to drink
Bruiser Tom’s swizzle, ‘you have not given me much
of an alternative, and I am a man of peaceable
inclinations.’ He took up the glass on the little table
beside him, and as all eyes watched him, continued in
a voice, if possible, even quieter than before—a quiet-
ness full of significance to at least one listener, and


L, I II IVT p
■11% v JUI n m-m w » a f V
m i i *q jft »
wl J^\P
■ y 1^
. \ V \ V
tf
® il*% 1 V v* | k v - >~jig
B~ £
L* v 'Tvfrt *^efv
|| ■ ■ vi
1 \3uA N*- . .
THE PARSON FIGHTS THE BULLY




which ought to have been understood by the bully,
‘And as I will not drink, I’ll fight.’ He dashed the
iced gin concoction in his tormentor’s face as he con-
cluded, and sprang into a defensive posture, and with
a roar, more like that of a jaguar than of a man, the
other rushed at him, his face steaming with the evil-
smelling fluid with which it had been so recklessly
bathed.
‘ By the Stars and Stripes ! I’m having a hand in
this,’ cried Mr, Ellison. ‘ I’ll not see the youngster
abused by that hulking bruiser.’
‘ Come back, Bob,’ said Doc, now wonderfully
calm, and apparently well pleased with himself.
‘ That youngster is as old as you, and as well able to
take care of himself. Ah, look at that! ’ The bully’s
rush had been stopped by a blow which sent him
staggering back against the bar. It was a blow
which had trained strength behind it, and Bruiser
Tom ought to have recognised that he was not dealing
with the gentle, effeminate creature his opponent
appeared to be. But he was now blind to reason, and
fast becoming in the same condition regarding his
surroundings also. He leaped at his adversary and
aimed a terrific blow at his head ; it was his favourite
‘ knock-out ’ blow, and the trick by which he had
always managed to get home with it, despite his
opponent’s guard, was known only to himself.
But his ponderous fist smote only the air that time.
Other people as well as himself had special tricks,
which they knew how to exploit to advantage. How
his had been circumvented he never knew, for he did
not, in like manner, escape when the retaliating
strategy was employed. Instead, he found himself
(C 10) 7


deliberately and repeatedly running his face against
what seemed to him to be a steam piston broken loose
from a fly-wheel, and which struck at a rate faster than
he had ever thought any steam-driven concern could
work. Finally, he struck the floor with his nose, and
his knowledge of after events became confused, and
suddenly ceased entirely.
Dr. Rawson had seated himself on the verandah
rail meanwhile, and was now reflectively studying
some smoke-cloud effects ; his cigar was excellent.
He turned his eyes towards the scene of conflict as the
bully fell, and remarked quietly : ‘ That’s hot work,
parson. Hurry up with it, and come and be introduced
to my friends.’
The parson turned quickly at the sound of the
doctor’s voice. For a moment he seemed to be
doubting the evidence of his senses, but the next he
was running towards the speaker, an expression of
extreme delight upon his face.
‘ Why, Doc,’ he cried, grasping the extended hand,
‘where did you come from? Where are you going?
How has the world been using you, and where are the
rest of the boys ? ’
‘Yourself first, old comrade,’ Doc said. ‘What
brings you to Georgetown ? We parted in Melbourne
about a year ago. You were about to be married,
much to the regret of the boys, you doubtless will
remember? ’
The parson laughed bitterly. ‘ Don’t go back to
that subject, Doc,’ he said. ‘ I—l did not marry. I
went back to the church, and for some months
endeavoured to do the duty for which I was trained,
in a back-block township on the borders of Queens-


land. But it was no good. The old spirit of restless-
ness came over me, and I felt I had no right to live
comfortably among the simple-minded, true-hearted
people among whom my lot had been cast.
‘ One day I allowed my nature to get the better of
my reason. I thrashed a half-drunken, but most
influential, squatter after church service. I cannot
say I am truly penitent even now, for I think he richly
deserved it. But after that I couldn’t stay, and, before
I could hear of my merited censure from Sydney, I
sent in my resignation and left the place. I felt that
if I had a mission on earth it was to the world, to
those adventurous wanderers who, relying only upon
their own strength, are apt to forget that even strength
is a gift for which they should thank the Almighty.
I wanted to be with the boys again, to share their joys
and sorrows, and to take all chances with them. I
didn’t know where to find any of them, nor whether
they were still world-wanderers or not, but I guessed
when I read in the Sydney Mail of the discovery
of gold and diamonds somewhere on the borders
of British Guiana, Brazil, and Venezuela, that
those who still felt the call of the unknown would
gravitate thither; and so I came here. I came to
Monte Video in a homeward-bound cattle-boat, and
transhipping there came up the coast on a royal mail
steamer to Rio. I changed at that port again, and
landed here yesterday from the first connecting
vessel.
‘ I am glad to say that I found a letter awaiting me
at the Post Office, which informed me that my action
in thrashing the squatter was approved of by the
Church Council in Sydney, and also by the people


ioo The Rival Treasure Hunters
who formed my congregation. Consequently, my
resignation from the church was not accepted, and I
am still a good-for-nothing parson, with no money—
I spent all our profits among our people—no qualifica-
tion for any position, and cursed with a strength and
a knowledge of self-defence which always leads me
into temptation, as you have just witnessed. But
dear me! I had forgotten Bruiser Tom, he may need
treatment ’
‘ Not he ! ’ laughed Dr. Rawson ; ‘ I see our young
comrades have been attending to him as well as I
could have done. He is used to being half-killed,
and, but for the state of his face, will be all right again
and looking for more trouble presently. But these
are my friends, parson, and henceforth yours too.
Mr. Ellison is a man after your own heart, and Charlie
and Harry are the latest additions to the ranks of
world-wanderers. Their future is in our hands, and
you must now take your share in shaping it. lam
glad you’ve turned up, for we were needing you ’
The parson smilingly shook hands with Mr. Ellison
and the boys, and said : ‘ I am proud to meet my old
comrade’s friends, but I regret exceedingly that you
were witnesses of such a disgraceful exhibition of
brutality on my part. I am sure, however, you will
believe me when I say I do not spend my time looking
for trouble, and that I am not really of a quarrelsome
disposition ’
‘But sometimes I am,’ said Mr. Ellison, ‘Doc
hasn’t introduced me correctly. To my friends lam
Boston Bob, and I hope you will know me by that
title. But that is not what I meant to say. I see your
old acquaintances are inclined to be nasty over the


defeat of Bruiser Tom. Evidently they think we are
tenderfeet, and I am going to disillusion them.’
‘Go on then, Bob,’ Doc laughed between his puffs,
‘ I am inclined to be a bit reckless myself now, but
old Dublin didn’t make me a great fighter. Polish
them off and we’ll sail in if required.’
‘ Gentlemen,’said Boston Bob, stepping in front
of the murmuring men, ‘ my friend the parson wishes
to talk to his old comrade just now, and I have ap-
pointed myself his deputy. Now, I haven’t time to
deal with you all, one after the other, and I know that
you being either Americans or Britons, are more or
less fair-minded sportsmen, and therefore will not
behave like Portuguese or coolies. Kindly form a
ring and see fair play, and come on two at a time
against me ’
‘I don’t see that we should always be so useless,’
added Charlie, joining Mr. Ellison ; ‘ Harry and I will
tackle one each until they have all had satisfaction
one way or another. You needn’t be afraid of killing
us, gentlemen, we’re harder than we look.’
‘Come here, my boys,’ cried the parson, for such
seemed to be the only name Doc meant to give him,
‘ it is not good for innocent youth to become entangled
in common brawls ’
‘You leave them alone, parson,’ said Doc, laugh-
ingly. ‘ They are youthful and innocent, but they are
also made of the right stuff, and they have yet to
receive their baptism in the ways of the earth-wanderer.
Let them stand out by the side of Boston Bob, their
comrade, and take a thrashing, as I have done many
times. Only by so doing will they know how they
can compare with their fellows.’


io2 The Rival Treasure Hunters
‘Your reasoning, however well-meant, is faulty,
Doc,’ said the parson. ‘lt is our duty to protect the
lads from the evils of this world, and surely the less
they know of them the better. But I perceive I must
go back into the fight again, for there is one man there
whose looks I don’t like ’
‘ We’ll make a family party of the scrimmage,’ said
Doc, throwing his cigar away and walking forward,
‘ I feel some exercise would do me good, and I do
want a smash at Kangaroo Dave for being a member
of such a crowd as he now has round him.’
But Doc did not exercise himself just then, the man
he had singled out by name jumped to meet with
outstretched hand.
‘Jumping beans!’ he ejaculated, ‘I was sure I
knew you, Doc. I don’t belong to this gang ; I was
only waiting to see the circus when the parson got
started. I knew him right away, and meant to sail in
if he needed me. Let us go for this gang and talk
afterwards, we’re six against ten ’
‘ Count me out, boss ! I don’t see that I’ve got any
call to fight for Bruiser Tom,’ cried one of the men,
coughing violently.
‘And me—and me,’ echoed another two, edging
away with very red faces.
‘ Six against seven,’ roared he whom Doc had called
Kangaroo Dave, in delight. ‘My ! won’t we give
them beans ’
‘ I don’t reckon we want any fight to-day,’ drawled
the evil-eyed man the parson had been watching.
‘ It’s too hot, and drinking swizzles is a cooler job
He drank the contents of his glass, and tears came
into his eyes.


‘Charlie is shying, mates,’ laughed one of those
who had not yet spoken. ‘ He’s got skeert of the
glory prospector ’
‘ An’ you can just bet your dirty socks I have, Ted
Clancy,’ spluttered Charlie of the cross eyes. ‘ I aint
such a sand-blasted idiot as to run my dial in where
Bruiser Tom’s couldn’t stick. I am a good-looking
fellow, not like some of you dead-beats, an’ I mean to
preserve my beauty ’ An attack of hiccup made
him pause.
‘ In that case,’ said another with a grin, ‘ the circus
is off. Pick up the Bruiser and we’ll pour a cocktail
down his pipes. That will bring him round into this
weary world quicker than anything else.’
The opposing group meanwhile had been standing
together ready for the expected onslaught, and the
three who had declared themselves neutral had gone
up to the bar. With some laughing remarks at
the Bruiser’s downfall, the others lifted that gentle-
man to his feet and led him to the swizzle-dispensing
part of the establishment, and the visitors, with the
parson and Kangaroo Dave, were left masters of the
situation.
‘ Howlin’ snakes! It ain’t fair,’ wailed Dave.
‘ Here I am spoilin’ for a fight to show what I can
do, an’ now the beggars won’t fight,’
‘Why did you not take my side at first, Dave?’
asked the parson, as they passed out into the street
again. ‘ I thought my old comrade of the South
Seas, Australia, and New Guinea would have stood
up for me at once ’
‘An’ so I did, parson,’ Kangaroo Dave replied,
‘ but I was doing what old Mac used to tell us to do ;


io4 The Rival Treasure Hunters
I was using strategy. If I had put in my shout for
you they would have kept their blinkers on me, an’ I
wouldn’t have got the chance I did of putting cayenne
pepper in their glasses.’
‘ Oh, that was the reason of their sudden tameness,
was it?’ cried Doc. ‘I suspected something had
gone wrong with them. Cayenne and swizzles don’t
go well together. I suppose they’re pretty sick by
this time.’
‘I hope so,’ said Kangaroo Dave. ‘ I gave them
plenty anyhow. I wasn’t payin’ for it.’
‘ They walked rapidly towards the hotel in which
the original quartette had taken up their temporary
abode, and soon were sitting down to an excellent
lunch. The parson and Kangaroo Dave had attached
themselves to the party as a matter of course, and
Doc had effected a general introduction, and explained
that Dave, the parson, and he had been comrades in
several adventures in other parts of the world, before
they reached the hotel.
‘ But, Doc,’ suddenly broke in the parson towards
the end of the meal, ‘ you haven’t yet said a word
about yourself and your object in coming to British
Guiana? It surely must be a strange quest, if you
hope to carry it through with such a small party.
Where are all the other boys, and why have you not
some of them with you ? lam sure the same reason
that brought me to this mosquito-infested land must
also have acted on some of our friends.’
‘ It did,’ Doc answered, laconically, ‘ but about six
months ago.’
‘ Then where are they now, and why are you not
together? ’


‘We are on our way to join them now,’ put in
Boston Bob, seeing that Doc was silent. ‘Of course
you are coming with us?’
‘ Certainly,’ said the parson. ‘ I wouldn’t leave
you now if you turned a machine gun on me.’
‘ Same here ! ’ ejaculated Kangaroo Dave, looking
up in surprise that the idea of their not going with
the others had entered any man’s head.
‘Very well,’ said Doc, quietly, ‘it is only fitting
that you two should be with us. Our comrades are
prisoners in the hands of a mysterious tribe of Indians,
who live somewhere near the debatable frontier of
British Guiana, Venezuela, and Brazil ’
‘You don’t mean, Doc, that our comrades were
members of that prospecting party said to have been
massacred somewhere in the interior about six weeks
ago ? I heard all about that to-day. ’
‘Great one-legged centipedes! ’ exclaimed Kangaroo
Dave, ‘ I see through the Bruiser’s game now ’
‘You tell the story, Bob,’ said Doc. ‘I have
some arrangements to make in the town ’
‘ No, boss,’ cried Kangaroo Dave, springing up,
‘ let the youngsters an’ me do anything you want
done. Bruiser Tom is watching for you, so as to be
able to put some other fellows on your track when
they come. He told me yesterday, when half-drunk,
that he had a soft job on hand ; that he was to look
out for two fellows he knew, landing here from
England, and follow them wherever they went, and,
by any means he liked, keep them from going up
country. That was his gang the parson ran against,
and they are known as a pretty bad lot everywhere.
They say they are prospectors, but I’ll bet all the


io6 The Rival Treasure Hunters
gold I ever found that none of them could tell a chunk
of copper from a flapjack. He asked me to join their
crowd, and I was only hanging on to see who the two
fellows were.’ Kangaroo Dave sat down exhausted.
He had never made a speech of such length before,
and the effort had been too much. He was a genuine
son of the great Australian Never Never Land.
‘ But we don’t fear Bruiser Tom and his friends,
Dave,’ observed the parson.
‘ Did he see us to-day, Bob ? ’ asked Doc. ‘ I
thought I recognised him as one of the old gang.’
‘ No, his eyes were closed before his face was
turned in our direction. He won’t see any one for
some time. Of course he can describe us to his
friends, and they might watch us.’
‘You are right, Dave,’ Doc said. ‘We cannot
afford to take any unnecessary risks. You go out
with Charlie and Harry and make all arrangements
for a journey into the far interior. We’ll lie low, and
endeavour to get away down the river without being
seen.’
‘But surely, sir, you don’t think that that man
Bruiser Tom is worth worrying about?’ Harry said.
‘ We can fight all his gang ourselves.’
‘ My boy, fear does not come into the question
of this expedition at all,’ Doc replied with a smile.
‘We are going to rescue our comrades, and there
are brains of a very high order working to defeat
that object, as you know. Bruiser Tom is only a
catspaw in the game, and whether we dealt with him
now or not would make no difference, except that the
fact would show we knew we were being watched, and
cause Maclaren and Carville to be more cautious. Go


with Dave and make all our purchases ; you can tell
him our story and we will make the parson acquainted
with things. We go down the Demerara at daylight
to-morrow ; there is a steamer leaving for Christian-
burg with several parties of returning miners on
board, and we can travel among them without receiv-
ing more than ordinary attention.’
Dave and the boys departed, and before evening
completed their purchases to their satisfaction, and
got everything placed on board the little steamer,
which was to bear them sixty miles down the river.
Their rifles and other weapons of offence, defence, and
utility they had brought with them from New York,
but these they would carry on board themselves in
the morning. After dinner a council of war was held
on the balcony of the hotel, all the other guests
having gone out to witness some theatrical perform-
ance in the Town Hall. And here the boys learned
to their cost the power of the mosquitoes in making
life miserable. They swarmed around in clouds, and
the intense irritation caused by their bites made the
boys rub their skins until great swellings resulted.
They were receiving their initiation to the wanderers’
life, and it was not pleasant.
Meanwhile Doc lay back in a cane chair and
smoked ; and, sublimely indifferent to the pests, the
others also smoked and talked. At length the parson
noticed the plight of the boys, and, excusing himself,
he ran for some soothing oil to allay the irritation of
their skins.
1 Boys, I had forgotten that you were not accus-
tomed to these playful insects,’ Doc said, ‘or I would
not have allowed you to sit here. Take our cigars


ioB The Rival Treasure Hunters
and paint the affected parts with the nicotine. That
makes you feel easier, does it not? A counter-irritant
is the best salve. Ah, here is the parson with
eucalyptus, there is no disguising its smell ; it will
keep the pests away from you.’
He and the parson gently rubbed the pungent oil
on the boys’ burning skin, then Doc said : ‘ Now,
there is no reason why you should be prisoners here.
Go out and see how the town looks in electric light.
Explore the place thoroughly, and use your powers
of observation. You may go anywhere, for although
Georgetown is by no means a model city, its streets
are perhaps safer at night than those of London or
New York.’
‘ But can we not be of some use ? ’ Charlie asked.
‘As yet we have only caused you trouble and ex-
pense.’
‘ That which you term trouble has been a pleasure
to us, and expense means nothing to Mr. Ellison, and
little to myself.’
‘Yes, go out and enjoy yourselves, boys,’ the
parson added. ‘ Your youth and enthusiasm will, I
expect, be one of our party’s most important assets
before long.’
‘And buy me a toothbrush,’ said Mr. Ellison.
‘ I may lose the one I have.’
Charlie and Harry went downstairs into the well-lit
streets, and at once forgot the mosquitoes and other
pests. They seemed to be in an enchanted land, and
the tinkling of pianos in the houses hidden among
the luxuriant flowering vegetation, which flanked the
roadway, sounded to them like the music of another
world. The night was oppressively hot, not a breath


of air stirred the trees, and a loud discordant noise,
which Harry likened to many hundreds of men crying
Pork!—Pork!—Pork! unceasingly, almost drowned
all other sounds. The pleasant scent of flowers was
everywhere, and the gay dresses of the ladies—
English, Creole, Quadroons, Portuguese, Hindus,
and Chinese—and the red-sashed, white-shirted garb
of the sugar-planter, the lords of the land—all tended
to complete the colouring of a scene from some ex-
travaganza. No one seemed to mind the heat, and
apparently no one had any worries. All were happy,
and enjoyment was the chief end of existence.
‘ I can scarcely realise that we are in the same
world and among an English - speaking people,
Harry,’ said Charlie, as they walked along the street.
‘ Look at those palm trees, and listen to the roar of
the surf against the sea-wall. I don’t know exactly
in which direction the sea lies, but it makes itself
heard, anyhow.’
‘Maybe it isn’t the sea at all,’ Harry replied.
‘ There are so many sounds in this place that I am
completely at a loss to tell what causes them. What,
for instance, makes that awful “pork-pork” noise? It
is deafening, and yet the people don’t seem to notice
it.’
‘ Oh, Kangaroo Dave told me about that earlier
in the evening. It is frogs that make that sound.
They live in these little canals which intersect the
streets,’ Charlie answered. ‘ After a bit one gets used
to them, although I don’t think I’ll ever be able to
stand these mosquitoes. But we’ll soon be hearing
other sounds, Harry, and we need make no mistake
about them. Mr. Ellison was telling me to-day of


no The Rival Treasure Hunters
the waracabra tiger, and I, for one, would rather not
be near enough one of these creatures to hear its cry.’
‘Charlie,’ said Harry, after a pause, ‘I think I’m
sorry we came here.’
‘What?’ cried his companion. ‘Surely not,
Harry. This is the chance of our lives ’
‘ I am not so sure about that. It is true that we
belong to a party the members of which have the
ability to do anything and everything they attempt;
but that is just the trouble, they can manage without
us ; we are of no use, and are simply being carted
along as ornaments. Why, we can’t even act as camp
cooks when we get out into the interior.’
‘ But Dr. Rawson and Mr. Ellison know our
capabilities already; we did not ask to join them. I
know we have done nothing so far to show that we
are fitted to be of any service ; but that was because
we never got a chance.’
‘ Exactly, and we never will get a chance. What
can we do that that fighting parson or Dr. Rawson
or Mr. Ellison could not do themselves? We have
only caused expense so far, as you yourself said in
the hotel.’
‘ That was because I thought they looked upon us
as mere boys, and meant Kangaroo Dave to do the
work we were first intended to carry through. But I
have changed my mind about that, and I believe the
doctor had something in his mind when he told us
to go out and amuse ourselves. You must remember
too, Harry, that we couldn’t very well show how brave
and capable we were on the decks of first-class mail
steamers. There were no pirates to fight, and the
crews didn’t break out in mutiny. Dr. Rawson and


Mr. Ellison couldn’t make adventures for us, and
you know that in the wildly exciting game of bull-
board and deck-quoits we easily beat every one.’
‘ By Jove ! Charlie,’ broke in Harry, ‘ I believe I
have tumbled to the doctor’s idea in sending us out.
It was to watch. He did not tell us, probably because
he wanted to see if we could take that upon ourselves
without being told, after hearing all the stories.’
‘Well, we will watch, Harry. Supposing we go
and see what Bruiser Tom and his gang are doing?
Perhaps they won’t know us, and even if they do it
doesn’t matter. Here is their hotel now.’
Without a word both boys entered and went up to
the balcony. The electric light made the place almost
as clear as day, but it also caused great shadows to
be cast behind a clump of dwarfed palms growing on
the balcony. Bruiser Tom, with a bandage round
his eyes, and several others, among whom were some
of the men the boys had seen with him in the forenoon,
were sitting at a table near the palms, with the usual
swizzle glasses before them. They were playing some
strange card game, but the Bruiser took no part in it.
The boys called for lemon squashes, and sat down
on deck chairs in the shadows behind the palms and
listened. The other people were in that state in which
discretion in talk is unknown, and, as they played,
they kept up a running conversation with the unseeing
one, which might have been heard across the road, if
any one had been interested enough to listen. And
the boys certainly were interested, as they were much
nearer than the other side of the street.
For a while talk was chiefly concerning the game,
and consisted of lurid exclamatory words which might


have set fire to any dictionary had it contained them,
but at length Bruiser Tom found his inaction unbear-
able, and he kicked the card-table over among the
palms. ‘ It’s time you fellows got on to the job on
hand,’ he growled, as some of the winning players
showed signs of resenting his arbitrary measures.
‘ Everybody is at the theatre to-night, and now’s the
time.’
‘ You are as shaky as a kid, Bruiser,’ laughed the
man with the cross eyes. ‘ I think that glory slogger
has knocked all the nerve out of you, as well as closed
your optics.’
‘ I’ll knock so much outen you, Barnsley, that
what’s left will go inside a cocoanut,’ retorted the
Bruiser. ‘ You just wait till I can see ’
‘ Oh, I’m not a bit frightened of you now, Bruiser.
I reckon most of your name has been got by bluff,
and I’ll chance all you can do.’
‘Are you going or are you not?’ roared the blind
man. ‘lf not, say so, an’ I’ll get others.’
‘We’re going, old man; don’t worry,’ Barnsley
answered. ‘ But hadn’t you better tell us what we’ve
got to do? Bill an’ I don’t want to go round riskin’
our necks for anything not on the programme, and
we don’t know what is written on it yet.’
‘ Then listen, you blamed set of smoodging loafers ! ’
Bruiser Tom cried in a high-pitched voice. ‘The
bosses will be here with the mail boat the day after
to-morrow, an’ we’ve got to keep the other crowd from
getting up the river before them, somehow, even if
more prospectors go amissing.’
‘ Well, ain’t that easy enough? ’ grunted Barnsley.
‘ What’s to hinder us from sticking them up in


their hotel, an’ gettin’ the thing blamed on the
niggers ? ’
‘ By the ghosts of the Razois ! ’ exclaimed Bruiser
Tom. ‘ You can try that game if you like, Barnsley,
and I’ll see you get well paid if you do the trick, but
not any for me, thank you. I ain’t on the suicide
racket just yet, an’ I guess it means the same thing
to tackle a crowd that holds Boston Bob an’ that
condensed lightning parson.’
‘ Then how are we to stop them going up the
river?' asked one of the men. ‘The boat leaves at
daybreak, an’ all their stuffs on board ’
‘ Steal their outfit off the steamer to-night, of course,’
answered the Bruiser. ‘ They won’t go without it,
but the boat will, and there ain’t another one this
week.’
‘My eye, boys ! See what it is to have a head ! ’
exclaimed Barnsley, sarcastically. ‘lf we can’t deal
with the men, we can always steal their stuff ’
‘ You go a bit slow with that phonograph o’ yours,’
interrupted some one. ‘ I think the Bruiser’s idea is
0.K., an’ it’s at least safe, seeing there will only be
a nigger or two about the wharf to-night, an’ nobody
at all on the steamer.’ ,
‘An’ without mentioning names,’ growled the
Bruiser, ‘ I say that somebody will get his eyes
knocked straight if he has much more lip to give.’
‘A pity you can’t see, Bruiser,’ sneered Barnsley.
‘That little parson has done as much for you as a
fiver s worth of cocktails. However, you are running
this show, an’ I’m just dyin’ to obey you.’
‘ Then Bill and you get round to the launch and
steam alongside the Duchess in the dark. You know
(C 10) g


their outfits, an’ I needn’t say anything more. The
rest of us will hang round the shebang where the
owners hang out, an’ maybe, if we pray enough,
we might get a chance to pay them our com-
pliments ’
The listeners heard no more, for as Barnsley and
the man called Bill rose and tossed off what remained
of their drink, they hurried noiselessly downstairs,
and out into the street.
‘ Can we tackle them, do you think, Charlie?’ said
Harry, as with one accord they walked rapidly in the
direction of the Duchess , the river steamer.
‘Easily,’ was the confident reply. ‘We are as
strong as most men, and they are more than half-
drunk. But we must not adopt half-measures ; we
must make absolutely certain of them.’
‘ All right, Charlie ; we’ll strike the first blow for
our side, and we’ll put all our strength into it.’
No more was said, and increasing their pace as
they came into deserted streets, they finally broke into
a run, which they sustained until the Duchess loomed
before them. She was all ready for sailing up the
Demerara in the morning, and her crew were all in
town. Only a few black labourers, loading rum and
molasses on a homeward-bound steamer sailing next
day, were about the wharf, and without difficulty
the boys got on board the river steamer, and made
their preparations. Away from the electric light the
darkness was impenetrable.
Half an hour later they heard a steam launch come
alongside, and shortly aftenvards they heard some one
clamber over the gunwale on to the Duchess's deck.
‘ It’s all right, Barnsley,’ they heard the man say


to his companion in the launch. ‘ Stand by, and I’ll
lower you the blamed outfits directly. This is a soft
job an’ no mistake ’
Just then he tripped over a rope stretched across
the deck expressly to effect his downfall, and as he
fell a stunning blow likewise descended on his head.
The weapon which struck him was a spare pick shaft,
and the wielder was Harry. The man lay where he
fell, and uttered no sound.
‘ Hurry up, Bill ; don’t be all night! ’ came a voice
from the river. ‘ The current is running so fast that
we’re bound to break away soon.’
‘Come up an’ give a hand then,’ an answer was
growled in clever imitation of Bill’s voice. Charlie
was a perfect mimic.
‘ Blow you for a good-for-nothing gum-sucker,’
answered Barnsley, climbing on deck. ‘ Can’t you
pass a rope round a prospector’s swag yourself?
Where are you? What the ? ’ He had stumbled
against the rope, and Harry’s blow cut his words off
like water when the tap is shut. Both boys then
jumped into the launch ; they had suddenly altered
their plans, a better and simpler way of disposing of
the men without giving their own hand away having
presented itself. A minute later, in the light of one
or two matches in Harry’s hand, Charlie had knocked
out the pin connecting the crank shaft of the vessel’s
engine with her piston. It had come out very easily,
and was the most crudely fitted crank-pin Charlie had
ever seen. He put it in his pocket, and dropped the
hammer and improvised pin-driver he had found in
the launch and used, overboard. Another minute
and they had passed the two unconscious men into


the helpless launch, and cut it adrift. It faded into
the darkness almost instantly.
‘By the time they come round,’ said Charlie,
thoughtfully, ‘ the current will have carried them
some miles out to sea. It will take them some time
after that to discover what is wrong with the engine,
and even if they have better luck than I hope they
will have, it will at least be daylight before they can
reach the nearest shore. Let us get away now. We
have struck first in the game after all, Harry, and
we’ve got the start in what seems very like a race, in
which more than gold medals are for prizes.’


CHAPTER IV
The Little Red Monkeys
The camp-fire was enveloped in a dense cloud of
pungent smoke, and safe from mosquitoes and other
attentive pests amidst its rolling folds, four men and
two boys sat and talked of the work they had accom-
plished, and of that which they had yet in front of
them.
‘Well, boys,’ said one, lighting a cigar with a
burning brand, ‘ you have had a fair share of exciting
adventures these last few days, and have good
reason to be proud of yourselves. I wonder if
you could yet find your way back to Georgetown
yourselves ? ’
‘ I think so, sir,’ Charlie Ainsworth answered,
looking up from his work. He was baking johnny
cakes in the ashes, under the supervision of Kangaroo
Dave. ‘At least we have taken careful note of our
journey so far.’ He rubbed some smoke from his
eyes and continued : ‘We came seventy miles on the
Demerara River to a little township named Christian-
burg, then we left the Duchess and travelled across
country for about twenty miles on a funny little railway
to the Essiquibo River. From that point the little
steam launch which you purchased towed us about
another sixty miles up the big river to the falls. Then
we dragged the launch and canoes and outfits across


country for a mile, and now we are camped on a river
flowing into the Essiquibo from the south-west, and
about eighty miles from the junction.’
‘ Correct, Charlie ; we are now forcing a passage
up the Potaro River. I don’t know exactly how near
it will take us to where we are going, but even if we
have to leave our boats and carry our stores, the dis-
tance we will have to travel is much shorter than if
we had come round on the Cuyuni or the Mazuruni.
All these rivers have their headwaters somewhere
about 5.15 0 north and 60.45° west. At least that is
the position of our last camp, and there we will camp
again and begin our search systematically. If we
had gone up either the Cuyuni or the Mazuruni, our
movements would have been known and advertised
in Georgetown soon after, for the penal settlement of
the colony is just on the great falls of the former, and
there are several mission stations on the latter, not to
speak of miles of rapids impossible to navigate.’
‘ I fancy we have given our friends the slip now at
any rate,’ said Boston Bob, rising and stretching him-
self. ‘ They will have to travel fast to catch us, even if
they find out the way we have gone.’
‘There, those cakes are ready now,’ said Charlie,
lifting a nicely-browned sample from the ashes. ‘ Try
one, Harry. Catch ! ’ He threw the specimen of his
handiwork across to his comrade, who caught it and
broke it in two with a pick.
‘lt’s a bit hard, Charlie,’ he laughed. ‘But I’ll
set my teeth to work upon it when I get these maps
finished.’ He examined the fractured over-baked
comestible critically, and laid the pieces down with a
sigh. ‘ It’s our turn to-morrow night,’ he said to the


parson, who was cleaning his rifle assiduously. ‘ I
hope you know something about baking.’
‘ I ought to,' the parson said, with a smile. ‘ I’ve
taken my turn as cook in many strange places before
now. ’
‘An' a bosker cook you were, parson,’ chimed in
Kangaroo Dave, ‘although I can’t say I liked that
patent soup you once made over in New Guinea, with
a tin of strawberry jam an’ another of sardines.’
‘There was nothing else in our larder, Dave,’ the
parson answered, mildly, ‘ and Silent Ted said they
would go all right.’
‘ I wonder where Ted is now?’ mused Kangaroo
Dave. ‘He was the best cook ever any man knew,
and what he couldn’t make outen a pair of old boots
would puzzle a Chinaman.’
‘ He went over to the New Hebrides with Fat Jack
to grow vanilla,’ Doc put in. ‘They’ll both be tired
of that game by this time though, and I shouldn’t
wonder if we run across them some day, when we
think we are where no white men have ever been
before. ’
‘lam sleepy,’ yawned Boston Bob. ‘ I think I’ll
turn in. We have a big journey to-morrow,’
‘I can hardly keep my eyes open,’ said Charlie.
‘ I think this smoke makes us drowsy.’
‘Of course it does,’ said Doc. ‘ That is one of the
provisions of nature for the good of prospectors in
these parts. The smoke of the camp-fire exerts a
soporific influence and enables him to sleep soundly
in his hammock despite the roar of tigers, the chatter-
ing of parrots, or anything else. Let us have some
coffee, and then we’ll all turn in.’


i2o The Rival Treasure Hunters
Soon after, six sleeping forms filled the white
mosquito-curtained hammocks slung near, and some
monkeys came down from the trees whose branches
reached out over the water, and began to investigate
the empty tins which lay around. Incidentally they
also ate all the johnny cakes Charlie had baked.
Becoming bolder as they saw they were unmolested,
they then swarmed into the two canoes beached on
the water’s edge, and after satisfying their curiosity
regarding their contents, and sampling everything
that could possibly be placed in their mouths, they
turned to the steam launch moored near ; they did not
understand this strange-looking monster, but their
desire for knowledge was so intense that soon they
had subjected it to a most minute inspection, and
turned all the valve wheels, and moved all the levers
they could find. But knowledge is seldom, if ever,
gained without cost, and the little red imp that opened
one of the exhaust taps discovered to his cost that a
boiler may carry steam even if the fires are out, and
that steam is unpleasantly hot. In an instant, with
cries almost human, the creatures had swung up into
the overhanging branches, and there, doubtless, the
sufferer gave a graphic account of his experience to
his sympathetic companions.
But the escaping steam also roused the sleepers,
and to a man they sprang from their hammocks and
ran to investigate the cause. Overhead the baboons,
suddenly become silent, watched them interestedly.
Charlie turned off the hissing steam, and wonderingly
looked around for signs of prowling visitors. Harry
was doing likewise, and the parson and Kangaroo
Dave also seemed perturbed. Not so Doc and Boston


Bob, however ; after a moment’s glance around they
laughed and went back to their hammocks.
4 Get back to bed, boys ! ’ the latter called out.
4 We have had a visit from our ancestors ; they’re
quite harmless, and they wear long tails but nothing
else.’ He was asleep almost immediately, and,
muttering to himself, Kangaroo Dave kicked the fire
into a blaze and got into his hammock too. The
parson soon followed, and then Harry and Charlie.
As soon as the camp was quiet again the causes of the
disturbance came down and pranced round the now
blazing fire, to see if, perchance, any changes had been
made by the great upright walking creatures who had
invaded their solitudes, which might result in their
getting something more to eat. But there was nothing
they had not already sampled, and they began chatter-
ing angrily ; apparently they had a grievance against
the men of the camp.
Charlie was not asleep this time. He was watching
the antics of the little red creatures, and to him they
seemed the very embodiment of frolicsome imps, as
they performed sundry evolutions around the fire.
Suddenly an idea struck one of them, evidently a
leader, or a wise councillor, and in some mysterious
manner he imparted it to all the company. Strange
to say, Charlie understood, too, what they were going
to do next. He had seen them look towards the
launch and then up to the branches overhead. They
certainly had an intelligence of no mean order, and
the fear assailed him that if they once grasped its
significance they might easily contrive to cast off the
vessel’s mooring rope and set it drifting back down
the stream, even as Harry and he had dealt with


i 22 The Rival Treasure Hunters
another and more powerful launch about a fortnight
earlier.
But apparently the monkeys had not yet reached
the stage of intellectual development necessary, before
they could reason out cause and effect to such a degree
of nicety as was required for that purpose. Their idea
—if it can be called such—was to investigate the steam
question again, and while thus gratifying their own
curiosity, cause the beings in the hammocks annoy-
ance. Perhaps the experiment might lead to their
getting more of the stone-like edibles which had first
rewarded their search among the ashes, and anyhow
they would have grand fun watching the grotesque
bipeds running about to remedy the effects of their
evil doings. They remembered, however, that the
white vapour, which shot out when a certain tap was
turned, caused a painful sensation to be experienced by
all those who got in its way, and the better to escape
this time they swarmed up into the trees, and crawled
out on the branches until directly over the launch.
Then they quickly formed a ladder among themselves,
the largest and strongest clutching the tree limb, and
the next his tail. Sometimes in the living line two
would grasp hands, or the limbs they so deftly used
as such, and in the case of the last two at least, the
tails were interlocked.
And now the leading spirit, or rather monkey, in the
tribe was swinging over the launch, the tap was
within his reach, and next time the strange pendulum
swung past he would turn it. But he didn’t. Even
as he was already experiencing anticipatory delight a
large camoudie shot up from the water, between the
bank and the bows of the launch, and flung a coil


around him. Only one scream did he utter as the
waters closed over him, but he held his grip on his
neighbour with such strength that the line suddenly
parted in the middle, and several of his comrades went
with him into the dark and silent depths. The rest
scurried up into the trees, and sad little monkeys were
they. Their grief was pitiful to see, for they cried
like children. Charlie felt strange too. He had wit-
nessed the whole proceeding, and his sensations were
as if he had been party to the fateful deed. He had
not seen an anaconda before, and the picture of the
l° n g> glossy, sinuous body darting upwards from the
water, within the radius of the firelight influence, and
the frantic effort of the victims to escape, filled him
with a horror which effectually banished all hope of
sleep. Up in the trees the monkeys wailed discon-
solately. Truly there is tragedy in more forms of life
than the human race.
Meanwhile the other members of the camp slept,
entirely unconscious of their surroundings, and in-
different to the strange and weird noises which had for
some time been growing more pronounced in their
vicinity. For an hour Charlie tossed about in his
hammock, but sleep would not come, and at length he
flung aside his mosquito net and gasped for free air.
The night was sultry, and the clearing on the river’s
bank in which the hammocks were slung seemed to be
a vacuum chamber. The fire had now died down to a
feeble flicker, and the sleepers were in complete dark-
ness. Charlie sat up, the little red baboons were now
quiet—probably the other noises of the forest had
frightened them.
‘ I wonder how they can sleep so soundly,’ the lone


i 24 The Rival Treasure Hunters
watcher murmured to himself. ‘ They must know that
in the river beside us, and on its banks, lurk hideous boa
constrictors of gigantic size, and other creatures
perhaps more deadly, and they cannot but be aware
that fierce jaguars and other savage animals prowl
nightly through these forests Hullo ! some one
has got up.’
Charlie prepared to jump from his hammock, but
even in the act of doing so his heart almost ceased
beating ; it had dawned upon him that the man by the
far side of the dying fire was not one of his comrades.
His face was brown. Nor was he an ordinary Indian
of the Accawoios, Carib, Macusi, or Arawak tribes,
which were all that the party had as yet met. These
tribes were semi-civilised, and when not dressed in a
varied assortment of clothing, which they had stolen,
or otherwise acquired, from the prospectors throughout
the country, were entirely naked. This man, how-
ever, was picturesquely garbed in a long flowing
robe of ingeniously woven feathers, and he had some
sort of long skin boots upon his feet. He was tall,
and so far as Charlie could see in the gloom, not
unhandsome. He carried a short rod in his hand,
and it needed no one to tell the watcher that this was
the dreaded blow-pipe, about which he had heard so
much since leaving Georgetown. Charlie lay still and
watched him, fascinatedly, and even as he looked the
native faded away.
Startled beyond measure, the lad then got up and
walked over to the fire, but not a trace of the visitor
could he find. The monkeys still wailed overhead,
and the parrots chattered noisily, as if angry at being
disturbed in their slumbers by the trumpeting sounds


which seemed passing by, some distance away. Now
and then a loud splash in the water told that some of
its denizens were actively engaged in their usual
nightly work of securing their prey, and Charlie
shuddered as he thought of the great anaconda he had
seen shoot up between the launch and the bank close
beside him. Verily the amphibious creatures of the
Potaro River were as unpleasant neighbours as those
of the inpenetrable forest, and he marvelled the more
that his comrades slept unconcernedly.
‘ I must have been dreaming,’ he muttered. ‘ Per-
haps I’ve got a touch of that fever Doc says is sure to
attack Harry and me some time. Well, if so, I sup-
pose it is just as well to get it over as soon as possible.
Doc said we were not to get excited nor feel alarmed
when we thought we saw strange things during the
night, but to tell him and he would make us all
right. But I won’t; I can suffer the thing through.
If he knew I had the fever he would order a camp
until I had recovered, and I could never stand that,
especially as I know I am of little use, and time is so
precious.’ He tumbled into his hammock again and
lay gasping for air. The bush noises suddenly died
away, and an intense silence fell over the land. ‘By
Jove, he said to himself, ‘ I believe I am getting
sleepy. I hope I’ll have no more dreams of monkeys,
and water-snakes, and feather-robed Indians. I’ll
swallow a whole bottle of quinine tabloids in the
morning.’ Then he slept.
‘ Turn out, boys, you know that we are not camping
here for ever,’ were the words which aroused the camp
at daylight, and at once every man rolled out of his
hammock and saw with great satisfaction that the


parson had breakfast almost ready. A hasty dis-
robing, a plunge in the river, and a speedy reassump-
tion of their scanty garments, and they were ready.
Charlie dived off the launch, however, with a feeling
of misgiving ; he could not entirely bring himself to
believe that the long coiling creature he had seen
during the night was only a dream creation. Strangely
enough, he felt quite fit, and forgot his resolution about
taking quinine.
The parson was really a good cook ; he had got
up an hour before daylight and prepared the large
muscovy duck Boston Bob had shot the previous
evening. He also had trapped some splendid fish, by
means known only to himself, and those who have
wandered on the lone Darling’s banks from Walget to
Wentworth in New South Wales.
While the utensils were being packed up after
breakfast Charlie stoked up the fires of the little launch
with timber Harry and Dave cut, and soon steam was
raised sufficient to allow a start to be made. Then
towing their two heavily laden canoes, in each of
which one of the party always sat to ensure proper
steering, a passage was forced up the river. At noon
they reached some rapids, not marked on the chart
Doc had procured from the Government offices in
Georgetown and filled in with further details himself.
It was useless trying to stem the torrent, and, recog-
nising this, the boats were beached and preparations
made for hauling them overland to the upper end of
the rapids. This operation occupied the rest of the
day, for the canoes had to be lightened of their loads,
which fact caused in all six journeys to be made before
everything was transported beyond the unnavigable


stretch. At the end of the rapids was a great water-
fall, the roar of which had been heard all day, but
from the point where the water tumbled over the rocks
in a boiling snow-white mass the river seemed to
promise easy navigation.
As the sun sank behind the ranges on the Brazilian
frontier they completed their work, and while Charlie
and Doc arranged the hammocks, Boston Bob and
Kangaroo Dave cleared a space around their belong-
ings in which the fire could be built. Harry and the
parson were responsible for the catering department
that night, and while the boy arranged his fire, so as
to obtain speedily the necessary ashes for cooking,
the parson sauntered into the bush with his rifle, and
in a few minutes came back with a fat peccary and
half-a-dozen pigeons.
Supper that night was a great success, chiefly owing
to the parson’s culinary skill, and to the able efforts
of his assistant. After it was over and the utensils
cleaned for the morrow, Doc set his cigar in working
order, and all gathered round the fire to discuss the
events of the day.
‘ I wish we had a boat with more powerful engines,’
Boston Bob began. ‘ I think I recognise this water-
way now, and, if I am right, the current a few miles
farther up becomes so strong that I fear we’ll not be
able to force it.’
‘You mean when we turn off to the west?’ Doc
interposed.
‘Yes, the river we were camped on that night
cannot be far from the tributary of this stream, which,
if we are right, must join the main channel somewhere
about here.’


‘ I remember we left our launch and canoes, and
cut across country until we struck what we thought to
be one of the Mazuruni headwaters,’ Doc continued,
‘ but it seemed we made a mistake, and that it was
really a feeder of the Caroni. The Venezuelan patrol
came up that river, and their launch sailed right round
until they saw the last of our comrades.’
‘ There must be a great number of streams running
parallel to each other, with very little watershed
between near the position to which we are heading,’
the parson remarked, thoughtfully.
‘Yes,’ agreed Boston Bob, ‘ and also a great many
streams flowing north, south, east, and west, and
some making a circular course, which takes in all
points of the compass.’
‘ But you surely don’t think that it was on this river
these mysterious people met your comrades?’ said
Charlie.
‘Oh no, we are quite sure it wasn’t,’ Boston Bob
answered ; ‘ but a feeder of this stream will take us, if
we have engine-power to force against its current,
to within a short distance of the place, and we can
then drag our boats across, and after building a head-
quarters camp, proceed from it each day to look for the
hidden mountain which determines the courses of all
the differently flowing streams.’
‘Are we looking for a blamed mountain?’ asked
Kangaroo Dave, in some surprise. ‘Can’t we see
it?’
‘ No, it is somewhere between the river systems we
have been discussing,’ Boston Bob replied, ‘ but we
don’t know whether it is in British Guiana, Brazil, or
Venezuela, nor do we know exactly where it is. We


can’t see past the tree-tops, you know, and the rivers
seemingly flow round its base. We’ll find it only by
cross-country exploration.’
‘ But can’t we set fire to the bush and clear it all
away in front of us?’ persisted Kangaroo Dave. ‘We
could see what the country was like then.’
‘ And have the soldiers of Venezuela and Brazil on
our heels at the first blaze,’ Doc said. ‘ No, thanks,
Dave, we’ll work in secret this time. We know our
comrades are somewhere about that mountain, but
there must be some strange secret about it; for
the people who have made it their home can hide
themselves completely on it, under it, or in it.’
* 1 shouldn’t wonder but that you’ve struck it that
time, Doc,’ said Boston Bob. ‘They live under it
or in it, and that also explains where the wonderful
diamonds originated. They will be living in the
mines which produce them.’
‘\ ou forget, Bob, that no diamonds come from
the place now, so far as we have been able to gather,
nor have the strange people been seen, except by the
Venezuelan patrol and our comrades, for a long time.’
‘ But Maclaren and Carville must know all about
them,’ put in Harry. ‘We heard them talk about the
Razois, you will remember?’
‘\es ; that, of course, is why we are here. They
must have discovered some secret which they feared
we were on the point of finding out for ourselves, but
they can t know everything, or they would never
have gone home to the Old Country and left our
fellows in the place ; but I am tired talking, boys,
and my cigar has gone out.’ Doc re-lit his fragrant
weed and became absorbed in reflection.
(C 10) 9


i 3 o The Rival Treasure Hunters
For a space there was silence—all were thinking
in their own way about the work which lay ahead.
Kangaroo Dave, however, had something additional
to take up his attention ; he was the cook for the
following day, and the menu for the different meals
had yet to be arranged. It was not an easy task he
had in hand, for he wished to excel the efforts of all
the others, and already they had set the standard very
high. While he was planning his programme, the
others gave their thoughts to more serious matters.
At length the parson spoke. ‘lt seems to me,’ he
said, ‘ that there is not really so much mystery con-
cerning the affair we have on hand as appears at first
sight. It is common knowledge that these strange
diamond-possessing people exist, probably a remnant
of one of South America’s ancient highly civilised
tribes. It is also a matter beyond doubt that when
your comrades were captured, you were so near to
them that they became alarmed and struck at you
as they did, to save their secret. The fact of the
Venezuelan patrol coming along just then, I lay to the
machinations of your rival diamond-seekers, and I
don’t think they really knew much more of the mys-
terious people than we do ourselves. I have had
experience, as some of you know, in connection with
hidden cities and underground-dwelling people, before
this. In each case there was some apparently insol v-
able mystery attached—to the Chinese of the Palmer
River in North Queensland, and the strange tribe of
Papuans on the heights of the border range between
British and German New Guinea, for instance. But
the mysteries disappeared when an attempt to solve
them was made, and I have no doubt the present case


The Little Red Monkeys i 3 i
will prove very simple indeed when once we attack it
systematically.’
‘ I like your logic, parson,’ Boston Bob replied.
‘ But I think this case contains a few factors, against
which you had not to contend in any of your previous
experiences. If we could simply keep on searching
until we found the diamond-mining people, I have no
doubt that we would ultimately succeed; but the
trouble is that at any moment we may be seized by
the Venezuelans or the Brazilians as filibusters, and I
can assure you both peoples are very unreasonable in
dealing with armed men found within their boundaries.
We have also the natives of these forests to watch ;
they pretend to be simple and unsophisticated, but,
believe me, they are not; they have had about three
hundred years to learn a lesson in—well—the nega-
tive virtues of their white brethren, Spanish, Dutch,
and British, not to speak of the people who are now
the citizens of the great South American Republics,
and they have done so remarkably well, and added
some qualities peculiar to themselves, which do not by
any means tend to make them saints ’
‘ I reckon you are too long-winded, Boston Bob,’
interrupted Kangaroo Dave. ‘ How do you think I
can think about my work to-morrow, if you take up
all the night spouting lessons from poetry books. I
never saw the niggers I needed to worry about yet,
and puncture me with a triantawong, if I don’t reckon
I can eat all we meet on this trip.’
‘Oh! we’re not afraid, Dave,’ said Boston Bob,
‘ but we know we must be careful. By the evening
of the day after to-morrow, if nothing unforeseen
happens, we should be as near the position of our last


camp as this river’s tributary waters can take us, and
jthen you’ll get every chance to show us how to do
things in the proper manner. I only wish we had
the powerful launch we first owned when in this part
of the world. It would stem any current; but I fear
we’ll have to get out and walk before we reach the
headwaters in this case.’
‘ What happened to your first launch ? ’ asked
Harry. He had been watching the antics of some
playful monkeys for some time, and wondering if
they were the same lot as had disturbed their previous
night’s rest.
‘We left it moored in the water when we began
our cross-country work,’ Boston Bob replied, ‘ but
the natives, or some one else, must have found it and
taken it away. At anyrate, it wasn’t there when Doc
and I went back for it, the day after the break-up of
our camp.’
‘ The natives could not make much use of it
anyway,’ Doc interrupted, suddenly rousing himself.
‘ I remember it had gone wrong in its machinery,
and none of us were much good as mechanics except
yourself, and you had no tools.’
‘There was very little wrong, Doc,’ Boston Bob
answered. ‘ The pin holding the piston and crank
shaft together had somehow come out and got lost,
but that was all. I had no tools, it is true, but,
nevertheless, I am inclined to think that the piece of a
drill I hammered into its place would have held well
enough. I only wish we had the vessel now, with or
without the pin.’
‘ Did you say you put a drill in place of the pin?’
asked Charlie, eagerly.


‘Yes, it seemed to act well enough, too. Why do
you ask? Have you never heard of similar make-
shifts ? ’
‘Yes!’ Charlie cried. ‘lndeed, very similar.
Is that the drill?’ He took from his pocket the pin
he had removed from the launch in Georgetown, and
held it out to Boston Bob.
‘ Why, that is the pin ! ’ cried Doc and Boston
Bob, simultaneously. ‘ Where did you get it?’
‘ Then it proves that your makeshift did its work
well,’ Charlie continued, addressing Boston Bob.
‘ That is the pin I removed from the engines of the
boat which we set adrift on the Demerara ’
Doc nodded. ‘ I thought as much,’ he said.
‘ Maclaren and Carville stole our boat, when they
thought we were beyond being able to call them
to account for the deed. I expect we’ll have a
chance to recover our property, though, so keep
the old drill in your possession, Charlie; we may
need it.’
‘I have it! I have it!’ yelled Kangaroo Dave,
springing to his feet.
‘ You can’t have it, Dave,’ said Charlie, in some
surprise. ‘ See, I have it myself ’
‘ I wasn’t talking of an ole broken piece of steel,’
Dave retorted. ‘Do you think there is nothing one
can have but that ? ’
‘ Then what have you so suddenly acquired, Dave?’
asked the parson. ‘I do hope it is not an attack of
fever ? ’
‘ Fever be jiggered ! ’ roared Dave. ‘ It’s to-
morrow s dinner I have got! ’
‘ Where ? ’ cried every one; and Boston Bob


i 34 The Rival Treasure Hunters
added : ‘ We’ll take it now, then, Dave, and you can
prepare another one for to-morrow.’
‘ How have some people no sense ? ’ spoke Da\ r e,
with a withering glance around his comrades’ faces.
‘ I haven’t got it in my pocket, nor hidden anywhere,
it is in my head—where I keep my brains—l have it.
It is a stew, that no man ever made before ’
‘As bad as that, Dave?’ said the parson, sym-
pathisingly. ‘Come, swallow this quinine tabloid.’
‘ I’m jiggered if I don’t put quinine into the stew!’
cried Dave, angrily. ‘ Did you think the stew was in
my head ? ’
‘ Well, you said so, Dave,’ Boston Bob observed ;
‘ but tell us what is going to be comprised in your
wonderful stew. lam actually becoming hungry,
now, in anticipation.’
‘ An’ I reckon you’ll be a mighty lot hungrier
before you get it,’ snorted the next day’s cook. ‘ An’
I won’t tell what my patent is either. I reckon I’ve
been insulted, and I’ll get even with you all, some
way. ’
‘ But I said nothing, Dave,’ put in Harry, con-
tritely. ‘ Please don’t include me in your scheme of
vengeance.’
‘ I don’t care, you were among them that did speak,
an’ anyhow I saw you laugh.’
Dave’s righteous indignation was great, and the
more the others laughed, the more terse became his
comments on their conduct. ‘ An’ as for you, parson,
I’ve a good mind to wallop the life out o’ ye,’ was the
wind-up of a lengthy peroration, in which he had
thrown out dark hints concerning the fate of each
member of the party.


‘Why, Dave?’ the parson asked mildly, and the
others became silent. ‘ What have I done to deserve
that?’
‘What have you done?’ repeated Dave, in fine
scorn. ‘ You’ve done everything. You said that ’
The speaker gazed round in bewilderment: ‘You
said—blow me, if I remember what you said !—but you
said it anyway ’
‘ And what did I do, Dave?’ Boston Bob inquired.
‘ Why should I suffer the horrible fate you promised
me?’
‘ Great Darling River! How should I know ?
Do you think I am a walking chunk of knowledge?’
‘Then what is all the trouble about?’ demanded
Doc, sternly. He knew Dave’s type well.
‘ I’m sugared if I know, Doc,’ Dave replied, rapidly
cooling down. Again his eyes wandered round the
faces of his comrades, and fancying that Charlie
looked the least inclined to laugh, he said to him,
appealingly : ‘ I say, Charlie, you might tell a fellow
what all the fun is about, and how every one is laugh-
ing but me? I reckon I’ve as good a right to share
the circus as any man. What’s the joke?’
‘Surely you remember, Dave,’ Charlie answered
gravely. ‘ You challenged us to guess all the things
which are to be in a wonderful stew you are going to
make to-morrow, and we are trying our best, and can’t
do it ’
‘Oh yes, the stew ! Boys, I tell you, it will be a
bouncer But, I say, Charlie, was I going to
wallop the poor parson over what was to be in the
stew ? ’ Dave was greatly perplexed, and astonished
with himself, and when Charlie seemed to signify


that it was on account of his prospective concoction
that the poor parson had got into trouble, he straight-
way arose and walked over to that gentleman and
said, ‘ Parson, I’m real sorry I said I would give you
a hiding. I don’t believe I could, when I come to
think of it ; an’ I’ll take your day at cooking, when it
comes round again ’
‘That’s all right, Dave/ laughed the parson. ‘I
knew you didn’t mean to do as you said. But tell us
about that stew now.’
Dave grinned. ‘ I reckon I’ll keep the secret until
it’s before you,’ he said. ‘My word, but it will
surprise you.’
But it was a good many days before Dave’s great
masterpiece came into being, and then the attendant
circumstances were very much changed.
In time the men retired to their hammocks, and
again the forest noises formed an orchestral accompani-
ment to their sleep. The dull, continuous roar of the
mighty falls near, however, after a time proved very
lulling, and the half-moon climbed in the starry sky
and began its descent before any one stirred. Then
the parson quietly sat up, and listened to the sounds
of the wilds. Then he watched the little red baboons
go through their curious performances round the
embers of the camp-fire, and saw them leap lightly
over the packed outfits in the canoes, and play them-
selves in the launch. Several times they fumbled
among the taps, but, as the boiler had no steam, owing
to its fires having been drawn before the vessel was
pulled overland to the top of the falls, their insatiable
curiosity was not gratified with the result which
greeted the first attempt on the previous evening.


Suddenly Charlie opened his eyes and watched the
movements of the little creatures too. He remem-
bered what had happened the night before, or rather
what he had dreamed had occurred, and he felt almost
sure that he was again in a dream state, and about to
witness another similar drama enacted. But he was
mistaken. The parson appeared beside him as if part
of his dream, but his first words awoke Charlie to his
fullest senses, and he was on the ground in a moment.
‘ I saw you were awake,’ the parson said. ‘lf I
am not back at daylight, tell the boys I’ve gone out to
investigate some little matters which seem to me to be
worth some attention.’
‘ No, indeed ! ’ said Charlie, seizing his rifle. ‘lf
you are going from camp lam going too. But have
you really come to suspect that anything is wrong?’
‘ Charlie, I may be wrong, but if I am right, there
is some danger in leaving camp. Please allow me to
go myself. lam well accustomed to moving about in
all kinds of lands at night-time alone.’
‘ I am not afraid of danger,’ the lad replied, firmly ;
1 nor am I here on a holiday, during which others have
to take all the risks while I do nothing. I’ll leave a
note in Harry’s hammock. He can tell the others if
we are not back ourselves.’
‘ Very well,’ agreed the parson. ‘ Perhaps two of
us can manage better than one ; but here is a line I
had pencilled before I noticed that you were awake.
Put it where Harry will be sure to see it, and come
along.’
Next minute they were cautiously treading the
dense forest undergrowths, in a direction which led
them away from the river. Then, without any warning,


they struck a well-defined trail which ran parallel to
the stream they had left.
‘ I saw this when I was out last night looking for
our supper,’ said the parson, indicating the bush pad,
and turning along its winding course. ‘I am some-
what ignorant of the ways which obtain in this part of
the world, but myexperiences elsewhere have taught me
that a path and a village are like smoke and fire, always
in connection with each other. But I may be wrong,
or the village may be many miles away, or this path
may simply be a track connecting two rivers. I didn’t
wish to alarm the boys unnecessarily, for they were
very tired, and in fact had almost dismissed the idea
that a village was near from my own mind, but some-
thing awoke me during the night, and the full signifi-
cance of my knowledge came back with a rush. I
watched the monkeys, and their actions convinced me
that they were accustomed to the presence of mankind,
for some of their imitative tricks were peculiarly
human. Then I thought I heard a series of sounds
that could not be caused by any of the forest
creatures, and I got up at once. We’ll soon see,
however ; but I am a bit surprised that neither Doc nor
Boston Bob seemed to imagine the presence of a
village possible.’
‘ Perhaps they did,’ suggested Charlie, ‘ but didn’t
think the matter worth mentioning.’
‘ That would be quite in keeping with Doc’s char-
acter. I know him of old, but Boston Bob knows this
country too. He should have warned us that possibly
we might be in the vicinity of some tribes’ head-
quarters.’
‘ Boston Bob didn’t care though we were. I think


I know him fairly well by this time. Without risks,
life to him would not be worth living. He is a
strange man, but he never speaks of himself. I
wonder if we will ever know his story ? ’
‘ I don’t think so, Charlie. When true-hearted,
highly educated men like him take to the wanderer’s
life, there is always a reason, but it is sacred to them-
selves, and they never profane it by telling others ’
‘Then Doc and yourself must have a past, sir?’
cried Charlie, surprised at the depths of feeling in the
parson’s words.
‘Yes, I suppose we have. In Doc’s case it may
be a painful or a pleasant memory, but—but in this
kind of life we forget it, and glory in overcoming the
obstacles which nature places in our way, to prevent
us fulfilling the mission we have taken in hand. But
Harry and you are young, and the whole world lies
before you. To you there is nothing but glorious
triumphs ahead. The pioneer’s life is a lordly one,
and when youth, knowledge, and enthusiasm go
together, who knows what the results may be?
Always remember, though, Charlie, that the greatest
glory comes not through self-aggrandisement, and
that human life is precious and exists because of the
Will of the Almighty, whether its outward encasement
is black, white, yellow or brown But I am
preaching now, and I didn’t mean to, Charlie ’
‘ But I would rather hear you talk as you are doing
than anything else,’ said Charlie.
‘ So you think just now, my boy, but if I continued
in that strain you would soon feel bored, and that
would never do. We are comrades, and it is by being
such among men that I feel my mission in life is best


accomplished.’ The parson relapsed into silence, and
they ran on, snakes, iguanas, armadilloes, and hun-
dreds of the smaller ground creatures scurrying off
into the bush in front of them, while the larger forms
of animal life, such as the tapir, the tiger, and the boa
constrictor, merely turned aside, or up into the trees,
where already were congregated monkeys, owls, bats,
and other creatures, whose usual environment were the
impenetrable parasitical growths of the upper world.
Suddenly the parson stopped and laid his hand on
Charlie’s arm. A glare of light was shining through
the trees only a little way ahead. Cautiously, now,
they continued their advance, and in a few minutes
later they were peering through the foliage at a native
village. On a cleared space in front of the chief house
—an erection constructed of bark, mud, and palm-
leaves— a great number of naked men were going
through some weird performance round a blazing fire.
Clearly something unusual was happening, or about
to happen, when these natives were holding one of
their feast meetings in the middle of the night.
‘ Let us crawl up and hear and see all we can,’ said
the parson. And they did so.


Ej>Jy^B^^cjflk
'SjpRsJ^
. \aA w \f \w <
• \v tL BBP&^sA
_ ft v •^RhBp^ 1 -
Hf W|jifj4 . \ n
I hvSRt* ., MR
i '*
UK 1 il« V iriinBi • ■
.A- *&,,.ymmBB
THE NATIVE DANCE




CHAPTER V
The Mysterious River
It was truly an awe-inspiring scene that the two
watchers beheld. A large fire sent forth long tongues
of flame, in a manner which showed that some resinous
substance had been added to, or was contained in the
fuel, and the light therefrom illuminated the clearing
for fully fifty feet around. Away in the background
the benabs (huts) of the people could just be distin-
guished, but one much larger and more imposing
looking edifice—evidently the chiefs house—was in
the full glare of the firelight. The men, stalwart and
well made physically, numbered about a hundred, and
they, with monotonous shrill yells of ‘ Yaw ! Yaw !
Yaw ! ’ repeated continuously, were going through the
evolutions of a dance that certainly was unique com-
pared with those of civilised countries. The point in
the dance which seemed most strange to Charlie was
that, as each man passed his fellow, he struck out at
him with an ornamented whip which he carried.
There was no mistake about the goodwill of the
blow, it could be heard quite plainly ; but, as the lash
cut into the skin, the recipient made no sign of having
felt it. He concentrated all his attention upon deliver-
ing an effective return of the compliment to the man
opposite him, at the next movement of the dance. The
men’s skins were painted a bright red, touched up with


grotesque daubs of white here and there. They were
entirely naked.
But this strange dance was of too strenuous a
nature to last long without refreshment, and so, after
a bit, it stopped abruptly, on the appearance of a
number of copper coloured young ladies, bearing with
them calabashes filled with some fluid. This they
dealt out to the dancers, and after all had drank
greedily, the fair attendants retired into the darkness
again, and the whipping game was resumed with
renewed vigour.
‘These people are intoxicated,’ Charlie whispered
to his companion. ‘ They are silly. I don’t think we
need fear them.’
‘ I don't know. All this is only a prelude to some-
thing else. They are working themselves up just
now. When they become mad enough they will then
start to carry out the business, for which all this cere-
mony is supposed to make them thoroughly prepared.
But look over towards the chiefs house. Is there not
a man there different from the other people?’
‘Yes,’ Charlie almost spoke aloud in his excite-
ment. ‘ And he is the man whom I saw at our
fire last night after the monkeys had become
quiet ’
‘At our fire, Charlie?’ the parson repeated.
‘Surely you know what you are saying? I never
knew we had a visitor.’
‘ No, because I didn’t tell any one. I thought I
was dreaming. See, he is dressed in clothes made of
feathers, and besides ornaments in his hair, has long
skin boots on his feet. He is tied to a tree, too ;he is
a prisoner—and look ! every dancer as he goes past


him slashes at him with his whip and he can’t hit
back. That isn’t fair ’
‘ No, it is a one-sided arrangement that doesn’t seem
quite right. Can you run, Charlie?’ The parson
looked at his companion inquiringly. Evidently he
had a scheme under review. He did not know that
fleetness of foot was Charlie’s greatest gift.
‘ A little,’ was the modest answer. ‘ Why?’
‘ Because it does not need much of a guess to know
that that prisoner is destined by the dancers to depart
from this world before daylight, and I propose giving
him a run for his life. There are two ways of doing
that. One is to go back for the boys and set him free
by force, the other is to do it ourselves.’
‘ Then let us do it ourselves,’ said Charlie. ‘ Maybe
he is one of the mysterious people we are looking for,
and if we could do him a good turn, it might result in
many ways to our benefit. ’
‘ Very well, we’ll crawl round and, when the dancers
turn this way again, cut him loose. I think I can
look after those two guards who never leave his side,
while you attend to cutting the thongs, and if we
manage all right we’ll make tracks the way we came,
after he has gone his own way.’
‘ All right, sir, but let us understand every detail
before we start, so that we need make no mis.take.’
‘Simplicity is our keynote, Charlie. I’ll knock
down his guards when the dancers turn, and while I
am holding them on the ground you’ll use your knife.’
‘ But won’t the natives you tackle see us, and thus
cause the whole tribe to follow us to our own camp,
and we’ll not get there in time to get the boys ready.’
‘No fear of that, my boy, I will undertake that


i 44 The Rival Treasure Hunters
those two men will never know what struck them, but
I won’t hurt them, for we really have no quarrel with
them. I will hold them face downward on the
ground, and do my best to make them think an
evil spirit has got them—oh, you are a first-rate
mimic, Charlie ; I forgot. Do you think you could
imitate that strange cry we heard the night before
last, that cry which Doc said was thought to be the
roar of the waracabra tiger, which the natives dread
so much?’
For answer Charlie placed his hands to his mouth
and emitted a blood-curdling wail, which seemed to
pierce the hot stifling air like a rifle shot. Its effect
was instantaneous. The dancers stopped, then, giving
only one glance in the direction whence the sound
came, they dropped their whips and ran into the
gloom on the opposite side of the fire.
‘By Jupiter!’ laughed Charlie, ‘the waracabra
tigers must be terrible creatures. I wonder what
they are like?’
‘ I don’t think any man can tell you. I have
doubts if they exist at all outside the superstitious
minds of the natives, but they are supposed to always
hunt in packs, I think. Do you think you could
screw out another growl ? ’
Again the indescribable sound reverberated through
the forest, and when its echoes died away only the
bound prisoner was left to meet the fearful monster.
He raised his head defiantly and awaited his fate.
His air was imperious, and on his strangely handsome
features there was an expression of wistfulness that
appealed to both Charlie and the parson as they crept
up towards him. His face was light brown in colour,


in fact it was not much darker in shade than the
parson’s own bronzed face, and possibly Kangaroo
Dave s tanned visage was even of a deeper colour.
Another howl delivered with the full power of Charlie’s
lungs, and he turned his head as far as his bonds
would allow, to see the ferocious creatures about to
rend his flesh from his bones. He saw two dark
figures spring at him from behind, then he closed his
eyes and muttered some unintelligible sounds, prob-
ably a prayer to the Great Unknown god of his
fathers to which he surrendered his soul. He felt
one of the creature’s sharp claws strike at the tree to
which he was tied, and while he dimly wondered why
the end was so long in coming, he suddenly found
himself free. But he was weak from stoppage of his
blood’s circulation, and he subsided in spite of his
efforts to remain erect. He did not cry out, as two of
the lithe and powerful kings of the forest seized him
and bore him into the neighbouring undergrowths,
but he could not restrain an exclamation a moment
or so later, when he was placed gently on his feet and
told to ‘run.’ Two white men were beside him, and
there were no dreaded waracabra tigers.
‘Poor fellow,’ murmured the parson, stooping
down and rubbing the Indian’s limbs, in an effort to
restore circulation, ‘ A little longer and even the real
tiger would not have troubled you. Go now, and
we’ll keep the mob back until you get a start.’
‘He can’t know what you are saying, sir,’ said
Charlie. ‘ See, he is wondering if he is still a prisoner.
I wish Doc or Boston Bob were here. I feel sure our
friend is some one of importance.’
At this point, realising that he had actually been
(G10) IO


given his freedom, the native broke into a torrent of
words, and almost immediately Charlie grasped their
significance.
‘He is talking Spanish,’ he cried. ‘He is telling
us he is grateful and will not forget this service.’
‘ Tell him he had better send his thanks by letter
then ; I hear our superstitious friends coming back,’
the parson said. ‘Turn on the tiger again, Charlie,
or there will be three prisoners shortly ah! lie
down, quick ’
Five warriors had silently appeared close beside
them. Evidently they had regained their courage
with their weapons, and probably another drink of
the fluid in the calabashes. They were now deter-
mined to teach the savage monsters a lesson. But
they didn’t. A terrific roar burst upon the still air,
and all their courage went into their legs as they
turned to fly. Nor did they fly far. The parson
sprang upon two and, after rattling their heads
together, flung them to the ground. With a shout of
joy the late prisoner had flung himself on another,
and he too went down. Charlie tried conclusions
with the fourth man by leaping on his back and
fastening his hands round his throat, but the fifth
might have succeeded in making good his escape, had
not the parson overtaken him and thrown him,
screaming with terror, among some dense under-
growths, through which he crashed headlong and lay
still.
‘ Run,’ the parson then cried ; ‘ they will be about
us in a minute.’
Charlie repeated the word in Spanish to the Indian,
and at once they began to run in the direction of the


pad. ‘lf your own people dwell far away you can
come with us to our camp,’ Charlie said to their new
friend in Spanish, but the native shook his head.
‘ My people dwell not very far from here,’ he replied.
‘ Return ye with all speed to your own people. Tell
them great danger is fast approaching them. Tell
them to go quickly to the great river and wait until
the time is more seasonable. Henceforth lam your
friend and your enemies are my enemies. Go now !
and leave me to go my way alone. But first take this
gift, so that in the hour of danger we may know each
other. Adios ! ’
He plunged into the bush and Charlie found a
tiny cold stone in his hand, which instinctively he
guessed was one of the mysterious and far-famed blue
diamonds. And his instinct was correct.
An hour before sunrise the camp by the waterfall
was still wrapt in slumber, but just then Harry
awoke and found a note by his head. A match
enabled him to read it, and next moment he had
roused the camp. Every man was on his feet, ready
armed, in an instant, but Doc lit a cigar and tumbled
into bed again, when he knew it was the parson who
had written the message. ‘You needn’t worry,
boys, it isn’t daylight yet,’ he said. ‘The parson
has caught on to something, and he knows what he
is doing.’
‘That is all right in a way,’ commented Boston
Bob, ‘ but we would like to know what he is doing
too. And then there is Charlie.’
‘I am going to look for them,’ cried Harry. ‘lt
isn’t fair that they should be having all the adventures.’
‘ \ ou will get more than is good for you in that


line, young man, before you are many days older,’
spoke Doc. ‘ But tell me when breakfast is ready,
I’ve had no sleep all night.’ He rolled himself over,
and apparently fell fast asleep, but the aroma of his
cigar continued to linger about the camp, and Harry
was not cheated by the smoker’s little pretence of
indifference.
Kangaroo Dave assumed an importance in keeping
with his position as cook for the day, and very soon
he was frying some fish which Boston Bob caught for
him. A dozen large turkey’s eggs were also ready
for cooking as soon as the water in the largest billy
boiled, and then he had cold duck and cold wild pig
in quantities sufficient to feed an army, if required.
British Guiana and the countries on its borders are
kinder than most countries to the adventuresome
wanderers in their solitudes.
And when all was ready, the two missing men
broke through the forest entanglements, and sat down
unconcernedly. ‘Good morning, boys,’ the parson
said coolly. ‘We’ve had a most delightful walk in
the country. One cannot realise the exquisite beauty
of this part of the world, unless he pierces the great
forests flanking the waterways.’
‘ Blow the exquisite beauties of nature,’ grumbled
the cook. ‘ What I want to know is what have you
brought in that will do for my stew to-night?’
‘ Nothing, Dave,’ the parson answered. ‘We
were too busy to look for game ; besides we had no
time even if we had not been otherwise engaged.
And I have doubts even if we’ll have time to stop for
that stew of yours to-night. There is a native village
within a couple of miles of us, its people are all drunk


and spoiling for a fight, and will certainly cause
trouble to us when we try to sail past ’
‘We are not going to sail past their village,’ Doc
broke in, tumbling out of his hammock. ‘ One reason
is that we cannot, another is that there is a parallel
flowing river about half-a-mile through the bush, and
it will take us as near as we can go to our old camp.’
‘Dear me,’ remarked Boston Bob, looking at Doc
in amazement, ‘when did you discover all this?’
‘Since the parson spoke,’ Doc answered. ‘But
I’ve been thinking over the matter all night as well.’
‘Why, weren’t you asleep when we left camp?’
asked the parson.
‘ Not a bit. I saw you go. I was just preparing
to go and investigate one or two things myself, when
you and Charlie set out on your wanderings. After
that I slept, for I knew you would find out anything
there was to discover.’
‘ Thanks, Doc; it was Charlie who did all the
work to-night, though, and I think you were fortunate
indeed to be enabled to enlist his services, and that of
his young companion, in your enterprise. The en-
thusiasm of youth, Doc, more than counterbalances
lack of experience in work such as ours ’
‘Cut it, parson, and come to the point,’ grumbled
Kangaroo Dave, who perceived that his breakfast was
getting little attention.
‘ Here is the point,’ said Charlie. ‘ I think it is a
blue diamond, but we’ll see when the sun rises.’ He
held up the gift he had received from the Indian,
‘Great New York City!’ ejaculated Boston Bob.
‘We don’t need the sun to tell us what that is.’ He
took the gem from Charlie’s hand, and bent over the


fire with it, and even in the flickering flames the stone
flashed spasmodically from its chipped facets. Then
the parson told the story of their adventures, omitting
nothing, and as he concluded the sun rose above the
eastern horizon and shone through the foliage.
‘ Comrades,’ then said Doc, ‘ we are nearer the end,
or rather the beginning, of our quest than I thought.
That native whom the parson and Charlie rescued
was a prince or a chief among the mysterious people
for whom we are looking. How he became a prisoner
in the hands of the Accawoios, whom I presume the
people of the village must be, I can’t imagine, for
I thought all the surrounding tribes regarded the
diamond-owning people as sacred. But our work is
now much more defined, for we know we are in the
country over which their influence extends. We must
leave the main waterways now and hide our move-
ments as much as possible.’
‘ But what did he mean by telling Charlie to tell
his people that great danger was fast approaching
them, and that we should go back to the great river
and wait for a more seasonable time? ’ asked Kangaroo
Dave.
‘We are not laying ourselves out to guess con-
undrums, Dave,’ said Boston Bob. ‘Evidently the
Spanish-speaking native meant what he said, and he
certainly is a prince by nature, if not by blood, for
that diamond is worth a fortune in itself. You are
now a wealthy man, Charlie, and that stone ’
‘ Belongs to the company, and not to me,’ broke in
Charlie, handing the stone to Doc. ‘Harry and I
did not come here for diamonds. We came because
we liked you and Doc, and wanted some adventure


which might turn out profitable. Now we know the
parson and Dave, and our greatest wish is to justify
ourselves in being comrades of such men.’
‘Right, Charlie,’cried Harry. ‘We’re not much
more than kids as far as years go, but you speak for
me too in what you have said. We are for our com-
rades first; afterwards diamonds, gold, or anything
else that will enable us to help our people at home.’
‘ Boys, you needn’t worry further about that,’ said
Doc. ‘ Mr. Ellison and I arranged one or two little
details in Liverpool, which I trust your parents have
taken advantage of before now. lam sure not one in
this party worships wealth ; if there were, he would
simply stay here where we are camped now and work
the sands in the river beside us. I washed a pan last
night when you were all doing something else, and I
found a prospect of gold in the riffle, which indicated
an extremely rich deposit of the precious metal.’
‘ Gold, be blowed!’sniffed Kangaroo Dave. ‘Who
wants to get gold if there ain’t no fun in gettin’ it?
It’s the boys I’m here for, an’ all the gold in South
America —an’ I reckon that is the last place made, an’
isn’t finished yet —wouldn’t make me—now, what
wouldn’t it make me not do? I’m jiggered, boys,
but I’ve forgotten what I was going to say.’
‘lt doesn’t matter, Dave; we know what you
mean,’ the parson said kindly. ‘ But we have finished
breakfast, and I don’t think we can afford to wait
here much longer. I am sure our presence is
known.’
‘Then, Bob,’ said Doc, ‘ kindly cast your memory
back a couple of months or so, and say if you do not
think it possible we’ve passed that tributary we


thought last night lay ahead? We sailed down into
the Potaro, you know, and we passed no village, nor
can I remember this particular waterfall.’
‘That thought has been in my mind all morning,
Doc. Perhaps we have already passed the stream
where we should have turned off. There may have
been a river joining this one, down among those
mangrove swamps, about twelve miles below these
falls. lam quite sure we passed no village on our
way down to the coast, and although we ran several
rapids, I can’t say I recollect any fall quite so large
as the one beside us.’
‘ Then the river we did come down must be, as I
have been thinking all night, just a mile or so over to
the west. Some of us had better make sure of that
matter at once, and if there is a waterway, we’ll drag
our boats across, and continue our journey along its
course. We can’t afford to have any dealings with
the tribes who live about here ; for even if we could
handle them all right, we would simply be advertising
our presence to the mysterious people we wish to find
without their knowing of our proximity.’
‘You need have no doubt about the other river,’
said the parson ; ‘Charlie and I saw it already. It
is even less than a mile due west, I should say, and
seems larger than this one.’
‘Then our course is clear, gentlemen,’ observed
Boston Bob. ‘We can’t continue on this river, so,
being mobile and able to travel on land as well as on
water, we’ll do as the Romans did of old in many
places, and drag our boats overland to the next water-
way. ’
‘ All aboard for the overlanding trip ! ’ Kangaroo


Dave sang out, as he proceeded to pack up his
enamelled tin dishes.
‘ \ es, we’d better get a move on without delay,’
agreed Doc. ‘ Parson, you might go ahead and clear
a sort of track for us. The rest can haul the canoes
and stores, and we’ll make a second trip for the
launch. Hullo! Where is it?’
‘Where is what?’asked Boston Bob—‘the river,
or Dave’s stew ? ’
‘ The launch ! It was moored there last night!
Who shifted it ? ’ Doc looked round for an answer,
but the expression of surprise on each face was
sufficient to tell him that all were seeking for the
same solution. The launch was not there. The ropes
with which it had been tied hung loosely over the
banks of the stream, their free ends trailing in the
swiftly moving current.
The men gazed helplessly at each other. This
certainly was an unexpected dilemma. Where was
their launch? Who had taken it? And how could
they hope to be of any service to any one, if they could
not prevent their steam-launch from being taken
away under their noses?
At length Doc laughed. ‘ Our friends the monkeys
have scored on us after all,’ he said. ‘ I was always
under the impression that a knot was a puzzle the
monkey couldn’t unravel ; but it seems the red howl-
ing baboons are a stage beyond others of their frater-
nity in brain-power.’
‘You seem quite pleased, Doc,’ said Boston Bob,
looking inquiringly at his comrade. ‘ Our boat must
be over the falls by this time if the monkeys cut it
adrift.’


‘ Good luck to the monkeys ! ’ yelled Kangaroo
Dave. ‘ The launch couldn’t carry us overland, and
I for one didn’t see what good could come outen us
fellows lugging it. It was unnatural, an’ seein’ we
don’t need it any longer, I reckon I’m glad we’ve got
rid of it.’
‘Yes, Dave,’ said Doc. ‘lt could not help us
much now, for we are nearer our journey’s end than
we have been thinking. However, there is no use
discussing that point; it is gone, and I don’t think
the pieces that may be left of it, after having gone
over that fall, will be of much use to any one.’
Doc spoke very quietly, and it was easily evident
that he was not saying all he thought.
But talk could not now serve any useful purpose,
and without more ado ropes were attached to the
canoes, and a start made through the bush after the
parson. The journey proved to be a short one ; and,
although the task of pulling heavily-laden canoes
through dense forest-land was by no means easy, it
was accomplished in a remarkably short space of
time, and soon the canoes were launched upon the
new river.
No one mentioned the fact, for some reason or
other best known to themselves, but all noted with a
great deal more surprise than they showed that the
water was flowing in exactly the opposite direction to
the stream they had left, this proving that, at any
rate, it could not be a tributary of the first, which
effected a junction below the falls, as Doc seemed to
have at first thought.
While the boats were being balanced properly with
their load, and room made for three men to sit in each,


Doc took an observation with his sextant to ascertain
their position. Boston Bob did likewise, while Doc
was working out the figures to several places of deci-
mals, and afterwards they compared results. Then
they pushed off and paddled upstream, but heading
south; hitherto their course had been north-west.
Boston Bob, Charlie, and Kangaroo Dave were in
the first canoe, and the others followed immediately
behind. The stream was flowing swiftly, and pro-
gress was very slow and laborious.
Kangaroo Dave's curiosity at length mastered his
determination to say nothing in case he should cause
alarm. He fancied that he alone knew the trick the
river was playing them. ‘ I say, Mr. Boston Bob,’
he sang out from his position in the bows, ‘ I reckon
the old sun has lost his bearings among all them
rivers, an’ gone off the track.’
‘ What makes you think that, Dave?’asked Boston
Bob, with an amused smile. He had a compass in
front of him, resting on a case of jam.
‘ Well, the old fellow was burning a hole in my
right shoulder in the forenoon all along, an’ now he’s
gone an’ got slewed round to my left, an’ it ain’t near
noon yet.’
‘ Oh, I expect he’ll be back in his old place by to-
morrow, laughed Boston Bob, ‘ if he doesn’t manage
to wriggle round before then.’
‘ I was thinking that if we turned an’ went the
other way it would keep the old fellow right for a bit,’
continued Dave. ‘ I hate to feel he’s bushed in this
watery country when we could put him right, an’ it
vould be a lot easier for us too, if we were going the
other way.’


‘ Doubtless, Dave, but then you see we’re making
for a certain position just now, and we are taking the
route that leads us in that direction. The old camp in
which our fellows were last together is only about ten
miles through the bush, in a line through that big
troolie palm on shore, and this river will likely take a
kink round soon which should land us pretty near that
spot.’
‘ Then, why don’t we get out and walk?’ asked Dave.
‘ It appears to me that if you know the place where
you want to go is only ten miles away that would be
the most sensible thing to do. This funny river may
take us all round the South Pole afore it comes back
to its senses an’ runs the right way.’ Dave never
ceased plying his paddle while he spoke, and steadily
they forged ahead. Soon a turbulent stream rushed
in from their left, and caused some commotion among
the waters at the meeting-place.
‘ That is why we do not walk, Dave,’ spoke Boston
Bob, as they fought through the contending waters.
‘ We don’t know how many rivers like that one we
would meet, and I am certain we couldn’t swim them,
even if the anacondas and other water monsters had
nothing to say ’
‘ I’ll allow I don’t like water snakes,’ Dave admitted,
raising his voice above the roar of the waters. ‘ I
don’t mind how many snakes I meet on dry land,
but when they collar you in the water, I pass.’
And so thought Charlie ; the memory of his dream
was still upon him, but he was now beginning to
think that it was no dream.
They passed on, and in time gained a long stretch
of comparatively smooth water, where the current


allowed of more rapid progress being made. But
this did not last long, and suddenly they found them-
selves between high rocky banks through which the
river forced a turbulent passage. It was hopeless to
think of landing and hauling the boats over the rocks,
and although the water offered no obstacles except the
strength of its current, that in itself was more than
three men could pull against. They landed on a
ledge and held a consultation.
Boston Bob thought they should hide their boats
and risk cutting a road through the bush to their old
camp, and Kangaroo Dave sided with him. Doc,
however, wonderful to say, was somewhat excited,
and he insisted on ‘ monkey jumping ’ 1 the boats up
through the gorge. ‘We can take them one at a
time,’ he said, ‘and I know this condition of things
cannot last very long. lam convinced that this river
holds some secret which means everything to us. It
has changed its course completely since w T e started
to-day, and is now coming straight from the spot
where we want to go.’
‘ But you surely do not imagine that this is our
river, Doc?’ Boston Bob said in some surprise. ‘lt
was easily navigable, and, as you know, the Vene-
zuelans sailed up its channel right to our camp from
the Caroni.’
‘ Bob, I know all that too well. But we are now
little more than five miles from that spot, and you
know we crossed and recrossed the country for more
than that distance around, and yet never saw this
river. Now, why was that?’
‘ Because the blamed river wasn’t here, maybe,’
1 Pulling boats up by means of ropes fixed on shore.


suggested Dave, smashing with his long paddle at
the head of some strange amphibious creature, as it
tried to climb up on the ledge beside them.
‘ I won’t go the length of saying that, Dave,’ Doc
resumed. ‘ But there is some mystery connected with
this stream, and I feel that in forcing our way to its
source, and discovering where and how it gets round
our river, we will be doing much to find out the haunts
of the people who have our comrades in their hands.
If only we had our own steam launch that current
wouldn’t stop us ’
‘Why didn’t you bring that fellow you rescued
back to camp with you, Charlie ? ’ asked Harry. ‘We
might have been able to make him act as guide, at
least.’
‘We weren’t selling our services, Harry,’ the
parson answered. ‘We gave him his freedom with-
out imposing conditions which would have made it a
mockery.’
‘ You did right,’ said Doc. ‘We are at war with
no men, and have no right to force any one into our
services, unless in self-defence.’
‘ Well, I hope we’ll soon have to defend ourselves,’
grunted Dave. ‘ This crowd, all but the parson, is
too much Sunday school-like for my taste. But look
here, boys, this ledge runs pretty well up the side of
this crocodile creek. I believe we could haul the tubs
up with ropes if we were to walk along. Let’s try,
anyhow, for it’s getting on in the afternoon, an’ I’ve
got to shoot the stuff for my stew yet.’
And Dave’s idea was adopted. Leaving one of
the canoes on the ledge, they proceeded to pull the
other up the stream, one man remaining on board to


fend her off the rocks, and two going ahead to pick
the best track. It was much easier work than any of
them had anticipated, and after an hour’s towing the
end of the gorge appeared. But what an end ! It was
a sheer wall of oozy, fern-covered rock, and it blocked
all further progress. All stopped when they saw it.
Was this the end of their quest after all their
endeavours? Fate had surely played them a mean
trick.
For some time they stood and gazed at the barrier
which confronted them, their spirits very low indeed.
Then Boston Bob uttered an exclamation, ‘ Where is
the river coming from?’ he cried. ‘lt isn’t falling
over the top, and it can’t simply start at the base of
the rock.’
‘ It is coming from under the rocks,’cried Harry,
who had gone ahead. ‘lt is boiling up from under-
neath.’
‘ Boys, there is something requiring an explanation
here,’ said Doc, turning to his comrades, ‘ I find I
have marked on my map the position of our river as
flowing right across here, at right angles to this water.
We are only two and a half miles from our camp now,
and I am making no mistake.’
Doc was very serious ; he sat down on the wet
ledge, and buried his face in his hands. The parson
meanwhile was scaling the great wall, to see what was
on top. His comrades watched him listlessly ; they
had lost all interest in geological formations, although
Doc’s words were startling enough, and were it not
that evidences of the age of the canon were abund-
antly displayed everywhere, they would have believed
that some mighty earthquake had altered the features


of the country since Doc and Boston Bob had left the
vicinity'.
And the sun slowly sank in the heavens, and
Kangaroo Dave looked round for the wherewithal to
prepare a fire. His elaborate stew was beyond hope
now. No, not quite ; the parson had reached the
top, and he was shouting and waving his arms
excitedly. In a few minutes all had scaled the wall,
the clinging creepers and mosses affording hand and
footholds. And then a shout of joy arose ; before
them, flowing tranquilly between tree-fringed banks,
lay a noble river. Its course was at right angles to
the stream which bubbled from subterranean depths,
and it was only distant a hundred yards from the
edge of the gully. Doc had made no mistake in his
calculations.
All now prepared to haul up the store-laden canoe
to the higher elevation, and after that was successfully
accomplished, Dave set about his culinary prepara-
tions with feverish activity, the parson lending a hand
in building the fire, and Boston Bob going forth with
his rifle to look for the necessary ingredients.
‘ Dinner will be late, boys,’ Dave announced, ‘ but
it ain’t my fault. If the creeks think it a fair thing to
boil up through the ground like an artesian bore in
Queensland, and stick us from getting ahead, I can’t
help it. But, by the Warrego River, if I was the
fellow in charge of the waterworks of this country, I’d
alter the course of a lot of these rivers and dam most
of them up. It’s a shame to see so much water wasted,
when we need it so badly out beyond the Cooper in
Queensland and South Aus.’
‘Never mind, Dave,’ said Doc, ‘we’re going to


appoint ourselves river surveyors for some time now,
and we don’t blame you for dinner being late. We’ve
got our own river now. Two miles north against the
stream is the site of our old camp, and about twenty
miles down the stream, after circling until it is flowing
north again, is the great waterfall where we escaped
from the Venezuelans. That fall is only three miles
beyond our camp, and therefore this river almost com-
pletes a circle in its course before it becomes a respect-
able straight-going tributary of the Caroni. The
space inside that circle, we believe, contains the moun-
tain which determines the flow of all these rivers ;
so on, in, or under that mountain dwell the people for
whom we are looking.’
‘ And we may find them sooner than we wish,’ said
the parson. ‘We can’t hope to fight them, seeing the
other boys had no chance.’
‘No,’ remarked Boston Bob, coming in with a
large duck ; ‘if they find us instead of our finding
them, we will be in a position known popularly as “up
a gum-tree.” We must move so that we are always
hidden, and lay our plans well. When we discover
the secret of the mysterious tribe, we will then
endeavour by some strategy to get into communica-
tion with our comrades, and if we convey the rifles we
were carrying into their hands, we can then put up a
good fight, if need be ; for we will then be twelve men
strong. Once we find a suitable base, of course, we
will do our best to make it impregnable against
assault ’
‘ And that reminds me,’ put in Doc, ‘ that the ropes
we left trailing in the water belonging to our lost
launch would be extremely useful if we had them. I
(C 10) ix


think we’ll do some nightwork and try to get them,
and our other canoe brought up here.’
‘ Then let Charlie and me do it,’ cried Harry. ‘We
can at least save two or three hours’ time, and save the
rest a lot of work.’
‘ What do you mean, Harry?’ asked Doc. ‘ What
idea have you caught on to ? ’
‘ Charlie and I can start now and get down to our
canoe in half an hour,’ began Harr)’, enthusiastically ;
‘we can then lighten it of its load and drift down to
the place where we started from this forenoon ; we’ll
beach it there, and run across to our last camp, get
the ropes, and come back to the canoe. We can
nearly manage all that before dark, and anyway, there
is a fair moon now. We could paddle the light canoe
up to the entrance of the gorge ourselves, and there
some of you fellows could meet us, and another hour
or so would see everything up here.’
‘ You are taking on a contract that took us all day,
my boy,’ Boston Bob said, with a laugh. ‘You
would get lost somewhere, and then we would have
two parties to look for ’
‘ I don’t think we should get lost,’ said Charlie,
thoughtfully. ‘We will be saving your time if we
are allowed to do this, and there is nothing really
difficult in the work until we come back to the rapids.’
‘ I don’t like the idea of allowing you boys to go
alone,’ said Doc. ‘Still, we would be the better of
having those ropes, I can see. I didn’t expect when
we left camp this morning that we were so near our
journey’s end, or we should certainly have taken
them.’
‘ I suggest you should give the lads the commis-


sion to regain them,’ said the parson. ‘ They are
quite able to act without supervision, and I can see
they are burning to show that they are not helpless
boys. ’
‘ But, dear me, parson, we all know that already,’
reasoned Doc. ‘No one treats them as boys ; they
do their share of all work, the same as any of us ’
‘ No, sir,’ cried Harry ; ‘we don’t do our share of
work, and you are all so careful that no harm can
come near us, that we never get a chance to show we
are more than boys. You would have no hesitation
in sending the parson and Kangaroo Dave for those
ropes, and yet they don’t know this country any more
than we do ; nor would you think anything of going
yourself, or of allowing Boston Bob to go ’
‘ Boys, you may go,’ Doc interrupted. ‘ But no
seeking for adventure, remember. Take something
to eat in your hands and get away at once. We’ll
meet you at the rapids.’
‘An’ my stew will just be ready when you come
back,’ added Dave, by way of encouragement. ‘ Here
are some hard Johnny cakes to keep your teeth going
meanwhile.’
A few seconds later Charlie and Harry had dropped
lightly down the wall which formed the end of the
gorge, and, arriving at the ledge by the side of the
stream safely, they began to run along its rather
dangerous path with a speed that showed they knew
they were on their mettle. In about twenty minutes
they reached the beached canoe, and, flinging its load
on shore, they, without loss of time, pushed off and
began drifting down the stream at an alarming rate.
But they steered well, and while there was still half


an hour of daylight they ran their craft into the bank,
at the spot where they had launched it that forenoon.
Then they ran through the dense scrub, brushing
aside the creepers and overhanging branches as if
they were only straws, and came out at length, on the
clearing in which their last camp had stood. ‘ There
is the launch! ’ cried Harry, pointing to a vessel
moored where their own had been. Next moment he
had dropped flat upon the ground beside his comrade.
A camp-fire was burning brightly on the site of their
own old camp, and round it sat a number of white
men, while many natives also were in attendance.
Among the men they had no difficulty in recognising
Carville and Maclaren, although their garb was
greatly different from that in which they had as yet
seen them. There were also present the two men
with whom they had so summarily dealt in George-
town, and the steam launch moored to their old ropes
was the vessel they had cut adrift on the Demerara.


CHAPTER VI
‘ Where are our Comrades ? ’
‘Charlie,’ groaned Harry, ‘what does this mean?
These people are chasing us, and they are less than a
day behind us ; and there are enough of them to
eat us.’
‘ It seems to me that it means we are very near our
journey’s end, or are, at least, on the right track,
otherwise Maclaren and Carville wouldn’t trouble
about following us. They must have been travelling
very fast.’
‘ Well they might; they need no canoes; that
launch is big enough to carry over a dozen men, and
powerful enough to stem the worst current we have
yet met. If only the monkeys would do with it as
they did with ours ’
‘ I don’t care, Harry ; in fact, I am rather glad that
it has fallen to us to have to deal with this crowd.
We’ll show whether we are simple boys or not. My !
what will Doc and Boston Bob say when they hear of
how we beat these fellows ? ’
‘ Good, Charlie ! I was thinking that way myself.
lam glad you didn’t propose running away. Let us
draw back a bit where we can talk safely and plot
how we can get the better of them. It will be pitch
dark directly, and the moon doesn’t rise for half an
hour. I’ll back ourselves against the entire gang,


but we’ll have to act as carefully, as if Boston Bob
was engineering the business, and do nothing reckless
or foolish, even if we would like to have a laugh at
them.’
4 All right, Harry,’ agreed Charlie, as they drew
back into the bush, ‘what ideas have you got hold
of, and what do you propose that we should do ? ’
‘ Oh, you do the proposing and I’ll second all your
motions, then we have simply to carry the ideas out.
By the way, could we not do the monkey trick?’
‘You mean cut their launch adrift as we did in
Georgetown ? ’
‘ Exactly, if their boat went over the falls they
would be stuck. They have no canoes, and they
could never cross the big creek that runs into the
other river without boats of some kind. And maybe
they don’t know of the river over there, and if they
went on by land, they would only come to the village
the parson and you found last night.’
‘ I see the idea; we’ll be monkeys all right.
Jupiter! if we only had some time we could run into
the village afterwards, fire some shots into the air,
and then when we were seen cut down here again,
drawing the natives after us. Maclaren and Carville
would have a lot of trouble in explaining matters, if
they got the chance to do so, and anyhow, we may be
sure some of the gang would be disabled in the
skirmish. But we needn’t think of that; if we are
not back at the rapids by the time we said, all the
others will come on to see what has happened to us,
and they would be sure to blunder into this camp and
spoil everything.’
‘Yes, isn’t it funny that they think we can’t do


anything, and we are just as afraid of them. Now I
am sure they would bungle things if they were here.
What would they do if they were in our place?’
‘Doc would light a cigar and have a smoke,’
Charlie answered. ‘ Afterwards he might go over
and have a yarn with Carville and Co. Boston Bob
would probably advise rushing them and trying to
force them into the river, the parson would either go
away and leave them alone, or lie here until they were
asleep, and then cautiously crawl up and strangle the
leaders. Kangaroo Dave would pick out his men
from here and begin shooting at them, that is if he
didn’t set fire to the forest in hopes of burning them
out.’
‘ I have an idea that Kangaroo Dave’s plan would
be best,’ Harry laughed ; ‘ all the same, I think Boston
Bob, before rushing our friends over there, would try
some sort of dodge to give them a bad time first. He
might think of turning the natives on them, or maybe
he would creep in and steal their rifles.’
‘lt doesn’t matter much anyway, Harry. We are
in command here, and the question is what are we to
do and how are we to do it? And we can’t waste
time about the job. Let us decide and set about it at
once.’
‘ Then let us send their launch over the falls, take
our ropes, and clear out. They will not be able to
follow us after that, and they will think it was the
monkeys who played them the trick.’
‘ All right, Harry, we’ll wriggle round the camp to
the bank of the river, but watch you don’t grab any
snakes in your hands. If we are detected we’ll make
an effort to cut the ropes and run for it; once we get


clear I don’t think any of that fireside party could
catch us, and they couldn’t see to shoot us.’
Having - thus decided upon their plan of action the
daring youths began to creep forward again, but
making a detour which would take them to the river
some ten yards or so above the camp. The noise of
the rushing waters, the crackling of the brushwood
under reptiles and animals, and the chattering of
birds, not to speak of the strange bark-like roars of
the baboons, would then cover any unavoidable
sounds they made themselves. They reached the
river safely and began to draw in on the camp,
although Harry almost cried out when a huge
camoudie stretched itself out of the water beside him,
and seized a little rat-like animal, which had unwisely
moved from its comparatively safe lair at the approach
of the boys. With a shudder he crawled on, and in
a few minutes both he and Charlie were lying at full
length among the undergrowths, with the mooring
ropes of the little steamer within reach of their knives.
The men by the fire were now in full view, and their
talk was easily overheard, but the visitors were not
interested in their conversation just then, they had
sterner work on hand. The rope was looped round a
tree trunk, whence it passed to a steel ring inside the
launch at her bows ; passing through this ring, the
rope then returned to the same tree, where a couple
of hitches made it secure. Already Charlie had
unloosened one of these knots ; for they did not wish
to cut the ropes, being strongly desirous of fulfilling
the mission on which they had come, and which
meant that they should take the complete mooring-
rope back with them.


But he stopped suddenly and rolled back in the
sand. Harry, who had been watching the camp
circle, had given him the sign that danger was near.
And it looked as if discovery must ensue. For a
second Charlie thought of slashing at the moorings
with his knife, but even in that brief space of time he
saw that that proceeding could serve no useful
purpose, as, even if he did manage to cut the rope, the
launch could be caught before it had drifted into the
current. The boys lay still and hardly breathed.
The reason was not far to seek. Maclaren had arisen
from his seat by the fire and was stretching himself,
his eyes meanwhile fixed in the direction of the
launch.
‘Weel, lads,’ he was saying, and his words came
to the boys’ ears distinctly, ‘ we’ve been working
pretty hard all day, and I’m tired, so I’ll just take a
look at our boat to see that our vera guid freinds are
no’ tryin’ to pay us back for the trick we played on
them last night. Anything might happen within a
few yards o’ us in this part o’ the world and we would
never ken.’
‘ I’m blamed well sure that none of the other crowd
would come within miles of us if they could help it,’
one of the other men laughed. ‘ They’ll likely be
trapped by this time, for even if they didn’t go round
past Turpentine’s village, his people could follow
them and make things a good bit livelier than they’ll
like.’
‘ Maybe,’ agreed Maclaren, ‘ but I’m thinking that,
seeing they have got those laddies wi’ them, it is just
possible they’ll no’ do exactly as, according to the
best o’ reasoning, they should. However, we needna


i;o The Rival Treasure Hunters
worry about them, an’ I’ll give the fire a bit poke up ;
so as to have steam ready for an early start to-morrow.
They lost some hours, I am sure, by no’ bein’ acquaint
wi’ the natural features o’ this place, but if they had
kent that it was the same river they had struck, only
twisted round, I should have been a bit anxious. But
■we’re sure to get in first, an’ I dinna think we need
trouble ourselves any more about what they do, so
long as they don’t interfere with us.’
‘Shut up, you talking machine,’ growled the man
called Bruiser Tom. ‘ Our work isn’t done, even when
we do get in among the diamond people. They may
be strong enough to make things fairly lively for us.
I think, too, we’ll have to keep a guard after this, for
if we lost our boat everything would be U P.’
Maclaren shrugged his shoulders without replying.
He seemed to be wonderfully good-natured. Whist-
ling a psalm tune he walked over to the launch, and
examined its moorings closely. ‘ I thought I put a
double hitch in that rope,’ he soliloquised, ‘but I
suppose I must be mistaken.’ He stood so near the
boys that they could have pushed him into the water
without much trouble. They watched him closely,
fully resolved that if his face underwent any change,
or his actions showed that he was aware of their
presence, to spring upon him and risk the results.
‘ Ay,’ the broad-shouldered Scot went on musingly,
‘ what will men not do for diamonds or gold ? I
wonder how it is that for the sake o’ wealth that could
never be used in a lifetime, men will act towards man
like savage beasts. Of course there may not be
enough diamonds for every one, and I suppose that is
the real explanation. If that fellow Ellison and his


mate Rawson got in among the Razois they would
soon make their place impregnable, and then whaur
would we be? I wonder if they ken their comrades
are prisoners? Ah well, they’ll be prisoners too by
this time, and it is left to us to get the diamonds.
The Venezuelan soldiers will be waiting to help us,
and after the slaughter o’ the innocents, I canna say,
conscientiously, that I’ll mind much the killing o’ this
gang o’ cut-throats we’re forced to associate wi’ the
noo. I’m half sorry for these laddies Rawson has got
wi’ him. I wonder what was his idea in taking them ?
I suppose he has found out by this time that men are
not to be trusted. Ah well, I’ve enough o’ my ain
worries, an’ if I get back to Scotland I’ll build the
finest church in the country and But I’d better
gang back to the others or they’ll be thinkin’ some-
thing has gone wrong.’ He put another hitch in the
rope. ‘ There,’ he muttered, ‘ that makes our man-o’-
war safe for the night. Michty me ! if we lost her we
might just as weel give up the whole business. It’s
easy seen that the other fellows don’t know the secret,
or they would have taken care that their boat wasna
stolen from them, nor, after they had lost it, would
they have gone on without it.’ Humming a well-
known hymn, he stepped into the launch and raked
the fires, then, after satisfying himself that there was
plenty of water in the boiler, he blew a jet of steam
through the exhaust, examined the engines, shafting,
and even looked over at the propeller, and stepped on
shore and walked back to the fire.
A few minutes afterwards Bruiser Tom produced a
banjo from somewhere, and after giving the strings a
few preliminary twangs raised his voice in ‘ Way


down upon the Swanee River.’ All the men joined
in the chorus, and while the forests rang with the
melody, Charlie and Harry w r orked like Trojans.
They were not now content to set the steamer over
the falls. It belonged by right to their party, and
they had paid great attention to Maclaren’s words.
They intended to take it with them.
Loudly swelled the harmonious chorus of the
plaintive song, as the ropes which bound the vessel
to the shore were slipped ; then Charlie got inside and
lay down beside the engine, while Harry held the
ropes, still attached to the boat, in his hands. Steam
sufficient to set the engines in motion was at com-
mand, but the thud of the pistons would cause a hail
of bullets to fall round the steersman, if heard, and
they hoped to arrange that the engines would not be
heard. Thus, all ready for the next move, they waited,
and their coolness was such as would have delighted
Doc s heart. They would make no mistake, nor
would they spoil their carefully calculated chances of
success by a premature or hasty action.
The chorus finished, and again Bruiser Tom’s
powerful but not unpleasant voice accompanied by
the banjo which he played well—it is a strange fact
that even the worst men have some redeeming features,
and perhaps love of music is not the least of virtues—
went on with the solo part.
Then, with a burst of melody, the chorus came on
again, and high above all others rang Maclaren’s
tenor, and, rumbling away in the bass, Carville’s
melodious voice also added to the grandly swelling
chorus : ‘ All the world am sad and weary, everywhere
I roam ’ sounded out the popular refrain, but as


the first notes swelled on the night air, Harry struck
up the river, pulling the boat behind him, Charlie
fending it off the bank with a boathook he found on
board. About twenty yards’ progress was made while
the singing lasted, and then, fearful of making the
slightest suspicious sound, a halt was made until the
chorus was again reached.
But Bruiser Tom’s voice had stopped entirely, and
a silence reigned over all.
‘We are done, Harry,’ spoke Charlie. ‘They
have missed us already. Jump in and we’ll run for it.’
‘No, I hear Maclaren speaking,’said Harry. ‘I
think he is asking them to sing something else.’ And
so it seemed, for next minute a good though untrained
voice started the world-famous air: ‘Home, Sweet
Home.’
As the refrain rose and fell in glorious harmony,
doubtless causing the denizens of the wood to wonder
what was happening, Harry gained another twenty
yards, and when next the chorus came along he added
yet another twenty yards to the distance separating
them from the singers.
Then there was a period of silence, and Charlie
was just about to turn on the steam and steer for mid-
channel when the strains of that ever-popular hymn,
the ‘Holy City,’ was wafted up the river, and the
necessity for extreme caution having gone now, Harry
made another dart forward.
‘ Jump in now, Harry ! ’ cried Charlie, as the words
‘ Jerusalem ! Jerusalem ! Lift up your gates and sing,’
were thundered forth nearly a hundred yards away.
‘ I’ll hold on to the launch with the boathook till you
get in.’


i 74 The Rival Treasure Hunters
Harry threw his towing-rope inside. He certainly
would not leave it now, after all their work, and as
the launch hugged the bank, dropped on board.
‘Hold her here,’ Charlie said, ‘until I see if there
is steam pressure enough to carry her against the
current.’ His comrade took his place with the boat-
hook gripped firmly in the bank, and Charlie, after a
brief inspection to see that all was in order, gently
turned on the steam. Slowly the piston was driven
from the engine cylinder, then a hiss of steam from
the exhaust indicated that the end of the stroke
had been reached ; back again went the piston,
only to be driven forth once more with increased
momentum.
‘She is holding her own,’ cried Harry. ‘See,
I’ve let her go, and already we’re leaving a wash
behind.’
‘By Jupiter! she is,’exclaimed Charlie. ‘ Take the
helm and steer for the darkness on the other side
while I force the fires a bit.’ He threw open the
furnace door as he spoke, and charged the fire with
ready-cut timber which had been provided for an
early start by the late owners. Quickly the steam
mounted up on the little gauge, and faster revolved
the propeller in response. The engine was now
running at nearly full speed, and under Charlie’s
skilful attention it was only a question of minutes
when the maximum of steam pressure would be
attained.
Meanwhile the singing continued, but now growing
fainter and fainter in the rapidly increasing distance.
Soon Harry steered the little craft round a bend and
the glow of the camp-fire became lost to view, and


shortly afterwards the vocal efforts of the men around
it became like a dream melody, and finally ceased
altogether.
‘They are a jolly lot, Charlie,’ laughed Harry, as
they headed up the channel at a five-knot speed.
‘ Yes, but I fancy they’ll sing a different tune when
they discover their loss,’ his comrade answered ; ‘ I do
hope we come to the turn in the river soon, for now
that we know it is all the same river, we may expect
the crowd to try to cut us off, by overlanding, as we
did this morning, if they miss their boat and guess
we’ve taken it.’
‘ They certainly won’t believe in the monkey
dodge, anyway. My! Charlie, why were we so
easily cheated?’
‘ I don’t think we were all cheated, Harry. I feel
sure that Doc and Boston Bob guessed, but didn’t
want to say anything to frighten us. Some of these
people must have come up from their last camp below
the falls while the parson and I were away at the
village. In fact, lam beginning to think that they,
after gaining the time we caused them to lose, by
means of a swifter steam launch and perhaps a better
knowledge of the rivers, deliberately kept one camp
behind us, although they have gone past us through
the bush during the night at times, to spy on us and
also to raise the people of the villages against us.
However, we’ve scored this time, and we’ll not be
treated as helpless boys after this.”
‘ I hope there are more things in store for us to do,
Charlie. I feel that you and I could do anything if
we set our minds to it But hullo ! here is more
trouble straight ahead ’


‘ I expect that is the village we saw last night.
Why ! the river is turning completely round here.
Keep into the shadows of this side, Harry, and maybe
we’ll get past without being seen.’
‘ But what are all the lights for? Jupiter ! There
are hundreds of people there, and they are all running
about like madmen. Something must be happening
among them.’
‘ Probably they are having another piwarrie feast,
as Doc called their last night’s performance when we
told the camp of what we saw. This must be the
village our friends called old Turpentine’s.’
‘They don’t see us, anyway, but I wonder they
don’t hear us, the beat of the engines is surely an
unusual sound in these parts? This must be an im-
portant village, Charlie. Look at all those big men
by that fire on the river-bank. I shouldn’t like to
have to deal with them at close quarters. They are all
armed with spears and clubs too ; surely they can’t be
getting ready to attack our fellows?’
‘ We’ll hurry, in any case, it is as well to be prepared.
I don’t think they have seen us yet, and we are nearly
past. What funny houses they have, that troolie-
palm leaf with which they all seem to be thatched is
a wonderful provision of nature for the benefit of
people who don’t use slates and never saw galvanised
iron. These leaves must be more than twenty feet
long.’
‘ Hurrah ! we are past. Let her rip ; Charlie, our
first step is for our canoe. Hadn’t we better hug the
other side now for fear we miss the place, it can’t be
much more than a mile.’
‘ All right, but sit as low down in the boat as you


can ; our friends may be waiting for us, and bullets
are nasty things.’
On the little craft rushed ; she was far more powerful
than the launch which had been stolen, and cleaved
the waters without apparent effort. And now the
moon rose above the trees which fringed the bank on
their left, lighting up the water with most eerie effect.
Huge ungainly bodies splashed all around them, and
at times the long black snout of a cayman would break
the surface close beside them, while drifting objects,
which in the moonlight they took to be tree-trunks,
suddenly became endowed with life and dived beneath,
or scurried into the safety of the overhanging banks.
Roars, barks, trumpetings, and cries of the ‘ Kill-a-
cow,’ the ‘ Who-are-you,’ the ‘Twa-twa,’ and the
‘Pee-pee-yo’ birds, and many other sounds which
the boys had not previously heard, filled the air and
re-echoed among the trees, as the startled animal and
bird life which dwelt by the river beheld the approach
of the fire-vomiting monster.
But neither Charlie nor Harry were in the slightest
degree affected by the noises, whether they under-
stood their causes or not. Nor did they give any
attention to the amphibious creatures around them,
further than was necessary to steer clear of any that
might damage their craft, if it ran into their unwieldy
and ponderous carcases. They had now but one
object in view, their work was to rejoin their comrades
with the least possible delay, and their environment,
dangerous or otherwise, mattered nothing to them.
Doc s coolness, Boston Bob’s sang froid , and perhaps
the recklessness of Kangaroo Dave, and the unflinch-
ing determination of the parson had already become
(C 10) I 2


attributes in their characters, and, added to all these
copied traits, was their own originality and resource-
fulness.
‘ I hope none of our fellows have come down after
us,’ said Harry, as they steamed along close into the
side where they had beached their canoe. ‘ After this,
Charlie, perhaps Doc will allow us to act according to
our discretion. If we had not promised that we would
be back at a certain time, just imagine what informa-
tion we might have got by listening to the other
people.’
‘ Not in this case, Harry,’ answered the engineer.
‘Their singing was pleasing but not particularly
edifying, and if they are not waiting to shoot us now,
they went to sleep after their concert was ended.
What a scolding we’ll get from Doc and Boston Bob,
though, even after they know all our story.’
‘ But that is because they feel they are responsible
for our safe return to our people, and after it is over
Boston Bob will use words some yards in length, to
thank us for what we’ve done.’
‘The Parson will take our side at once, I’m sure.
He understands us better than the others, but
Kangaroo Dave will be mad, because he wasn’t in
the business. I know he’ll want to come right away
back and fight the other crowd.’
‘ There is our canoe, anyhow, and I don’t see any
signs of the gang. We’ll tie it astern and be off again
in no time.’ Harry steered for the shore, but Charlie
cried hurriedly: ‘ No, Harry, don’t go in yet; if the
gang are there, they will be hiding, so as to catch us
and regain their boat when we land. Keep on up
stream past the place, and if they are hiding near, they


will shoot at us when they see we are not going to
land.’
‘By Jupiter! Charlie,’ laughed Harry, ‘you are a
second edition of Boston Bob for ’cuteness.’ He
brought the vessel back to its original course as he
spoke, and next minute they were sailing past their
canoe with eyes searching the shore keenly for lurking
forms. But no rifle shot came after them, and after
proceeding about a couple of hundred yards up the
stream, Charlie slowed down the engines, until they
could not quite keep equal with the speed of the cur-
rent. Thus, carefully, and ready at a fraction of a
second’s notice to dart onwards again, they drifted
slowly back, finally halting with engines, running to
correspond exactly with the downward force of the
river. Then they manoeuvred skilfully until they
were alongside the bank, and after waiting a moment
to give their enemies a chance to show themselves, if
present, Harry leaped ashore and fastened the old
mooring-rope to the bows of the canoe. Charlie could
not risk leaving the engine, but he contrived to secure
the other end of the rope to a ring in the stern of the
launch. Next minute the canoe was in the water,
straining vainly to escape down-stream, and as Harry
sprang on board again Charlie turned on full steam,
and the voyage was resumed.
Soon they encountered the contending currents of
the impetuous tributary stream, but the steam power
was more than equal to the task of taking them
through, and before long the rocky walls, within which
the rapids rushed headlong, loomed up ahead in the
moonlight.
1 1 hope they have not been waiting very long,’


iBo The Rival Treasure Hunters
Charlie remarked, ‘ but at any rate they won’t be very
angry when they know what detained us. Perhaps
we had better shout out to them, they will never guess
what has happened, and when they see our fiery funnel
they’ll likely take shelter somewhere, with the intention
of giving us a warm reception.’
‘ Hullo ! ’ both sang out as they approached the
ledge, but no response greeted them. ‘ Hullo ! ’ they
again shouted, but only the reverberating echoes
answered.
‘ They’ll have gone back for the other canoe, mean-
ing to come after us,’ said Harry; ‘we’ll meet them
coming down the rapids. Suppose we land here,
and see if there are any signs that they have been
here?’
‘Certainly,’ assented Charlie. ‘We have got to
take our stores on board anyway. I wonder, though,
why they are not here? They ought to have allowed
us a little more extra time to come and go on, and I
don’t think we are more than half an hour beyond the
time we said we would be here.’
The craft with the canoe in tow was now alongside
the ledge, and Harry stepped on shore and made it
fast, by passing a rope he found in its bows round a
jutting rock. Charlie then joined him on the ledge,
but absolutely no sign that their comrades had been
there could they find. Everything was exactly as they
had left it, only a few rock snakes and other creatures
had taken up temporary lodgings among the cases of
jam, tinned meat, and condensed milk which had
formed the load of the canoe.
‘ This is funny,’ Harry remarked as they placed the
stores on board both boats, ignoring the reptiles, or


kicking them into the water if they did not get out of
their way. ‘ They haven’t been here yet. I’ll bet they
have started on Dave’s stew, and can’t leave it. Let’s
hurry, Charlie, I’m as hungry as a cannibal.’
‘ I’m pretty much that way too, but get on board
our Atlantic liner again, and we’ll soon join them,’
Charlie replied, and almost immediately they were
stemming the rapids through which earlier in the day
the canoes had to be pulled. It was close work, but
the engines held their own, and when Charlie shook
up the fires and stopped the cold water feed-pump,
the steam rose in response to such an extent that fully
another six revolutions per minute were given by the
engines.
Up the gorge they slowly forced a passage. Some-
times the spray would break over the little vessel’s
bows and drench them to the skin, but it was a luxury
in that part of the world to feel wet, and they heeded
not. Ihe snags, too, were somewhat dangerous, and
both boys kept a constant look-out on the waters
ahead ; well they knew that if a drifting tree struck
them it would smash their boat as if it were a match-
box.
At last the end of the gorge appeared, and, running
inshore where they had previously landed, Harry
again made the vessel fast to the side, and stopping
the engines for the first time Charlie joined him.
There were still no signs of their comrades, and this
was rendered more unaccountable because the boys
were not now late. They had made up time by being
able to force the rapids with the launch.
Wondering vaguely if anything had happened, the
two adventurers began to climb the wall, and on


reaching - the top they shouted to herald their safe
return, and ran over to the camp-fire they saw glim-
mering among the trees by the other river. But no
one was there. A camp oven lay amid some hot
ashes, and cooking utensils were scattered around
promiscuously. Hammocks were lying ready to be
swung, and timber was cut ready to replenish the fire.
The canoe lay peacefully on the smooth water hard
by, and stores were littered near as they had been left.
Some feathers and potato and onion parings showed
that Dave had gone about his stew systematically,
and on lifting the lid of the camp oven that fact was
made certain ; his stew was inside, ready.
But where were those for whom it was cooked?
And why were they not on hand to welcome the boys’
return? Charlie felt a sinking feeling at his heart as
he gazed around. What had happened ? He was no
longer hungry. He threw himself on the ground and
tried to think. A cry from his comrade roused him.
Harry had gone out some distance beyond the camp,
and he was now holding in his hand a broken rifle
stock. With a bound Charlie was by his side, and
next moment his worst fears received confirmation.
It was part of Boston Bob’s rifle that Harry held, and
both knew it. But that was not all. Lying near was
Doc’s revolver and Kangaroo Dave’s knife. The
parson’s hat was caught among some branches on the
bank of the river, and everywhere, as far as could be
seen in the wan moonlight, were scattered tufts of
human hair, blow-pipes, bows and arrows, ornamental
feathers, and pieces of cloth, which the boys recognised
as having formed part of their comrades’ shirts and
other garments. And the ground was saturated with


blood ; it oozed out and stained the boys’ clothes,
ghastly significant of the copious quantity which had
been shed. Gory tracks also led away down the river
until lost in the springy scrub.
The boys looked at each other and groaned. Was
this the end of all their elaborate work? Were they
all that were left of the expedition ? How had it
happened? Who were the attackers? And where
were their comrades now? Those thoughts rushed
through their brains simultaneously, but no solution
presented itself.
‘There has been a fight, Harry,’ said Charlie
brokenly, ‘ and we have been away having unnecessary
adventures while our comrades were so much in need
of us. Oh, why did we leave them? Only four of
them against perhaps hundreds of maddened natives.’
‘ We’ll find them, Charlie,’ spoke Harry. ‘ Perhaps
after all we were destined to save them, and our going
away was part of the scheme of things, for if we had
been here we should simply have shared their fate
without doing much, if any, good. One thing, they
are not dead. An Indian wouldn’t trouble to carry
away dead men. Come, Charlie, we’ll start after them
at once. We know it wasn’t the white men who did
this anyway Why, it must have been those people
we saw back at the bend in the river; they were excited
over something, and you remember one of the men
round the camp-fire suggested that the chief called
Turpentine would make things lively. Let us away
at once ; we’ll make things lively for him, or we don’t
know ourselves.’
‘ Come then,’ said Charlie, ‘anything is better than
inaction. We’ll go back to the village and shoot the


people down from the launch until not one is left alive,
or they give us back our comrades.’
Without another word both lads began to run to
the top of the gorge, and soon they were once more
on board the launch. But they were cooler now, and
becoming more alive to the position of things. They
began to realise that it was not reckless impetuosity
that would do their comrades any service, for what
could two boys avail against a tribe which had been
too much for their comrades, all tried men, and abso-
lutely fearless? No, it was left to them to do or die in
an effort, but dying would serve no useful purpose ;
therefore they must live, and to keep their own lives
required the use of brains more than anything else.
Surely it was a strange position in which they
found themselves? Two boys, not yet a couple of
months away from their home in civilised England,
the survivors, or at least the only hope of men who
hitherto had not deemed them able to do much more
than look after themselves, and beset with dangers
on every hand, any of which the bravest of men might
hesitate to face. But Charlie and Harry had been
fearless sportsmen at home, and since then they had
become imbued with the spirit of their dauntless,
world-roving comrades. They were ready for anything
Fate had in store for them, but while life lasted they
would devote it to rescuing their dearly loved comrades.
Now they understood the meaning of devotion, and
why Doc and Boston Bob went to such trouble for
their lost friends. The similarity of the situation never
struck them, nor had they a thought for the diamond
people, the Razois. Now they were left to their own
resources, and they needed not to fear the judgment of


Doc and Boston Bob upon their actions. But with this
knowledge all desire for adventure had melted away ;
they had grown old in an hour. Boyhood days were
now left behind for ever, and henceforth they would
be men with the composite characters of their lost
comrades, and would act accordingly.
Thus, when they got on board the little steamer,
Charlie saw that an assortment of stores was there
also, and Harry opened a case of ammunition, and
after transferring a few hundred rounds to the launch’s
locker, closed the case again, and hid it among some
rocks, where the sun’s rays would not reach it, and
where it would not readily be found by any prowlers,
who might come across the other cases of foodstuffs.
Down the rapids they rushed, Charlie stoking the fire
and getting up steam in readiness for the time when
they might need it. They cleared the gorge, and
navigated the currents, where the tributary joined,
safely and quickly, and then, turning on full steam,
they raced down the river at a speed which sent
camoudies, caymans, and all other forms of water or
amphibious monsters into their cavernous holes under
the banks.
They passed the place where their canoes had been
launched in the morning without even looking at it,
and a minute later the lights of Turpentine’s village
began to gleam through the trees. Then their reason-
ing instincts asserted themselves, and they headed
into the bank, and lashed their craft under some over-
hanging brushwood, where it would not be readily
seen. Arming themselves with their rifles and a
couple of revolvers each, and all the ammunition they
could conveniently carry, they next began to break


through the forest towards the village, as the Parson
and Charlie had done the previous night. The road
was not easy, and many a nameless creature was
squelched beneath their boots as they struggled on-
wards, every nerve at highest tension. At length
they reached the clearing in which the village stood.
Men were running about everywhere, entirely naked,
but with skins painted a bright red. Clearly some
unusual event had already occurred or was now taking
place. Quickly noting that the centre of attraction
was an imposing-looking house, which stood in the
shade of some large flowering trees, they worked
round until they were immediately behind it, and then
raced across the cleared space which intervened
between it and the dense forest. The house was built
of timber, mud, and palm-leaves, and was raised
about six feet above the ground on piles. Several
holes in the walls served for windows, and a screen of
some gaudy-coloured cloth hid the inside from the
gaze of the curious.
The boys gained the shadows cast by the black
wall, and climbed to one of these windows. A great
commotion was going on in front, and inside, but
behind they had the place to themselves. They moved
the screen aside at the two lower corners and peered in.
The chief, dressed in a tall hat, and a pair of
dilapidated trousers, stood in the middle of the ant-bed
floor. Round him w r ere about a dozen of his warriors,
and inside the circle they formed were two white men,
one of whom the watchers recognised as the man
named Barnsley, whom they had already met in
Georgetown. Evidently the discussion which had
been going on was nearly finished. For a time the


boys could not hear what was said, because of the
noise made by the warriors entering and leaving the
house, bringing news to, and receiving fresh orders
from the chief, who, to the amazement of the boys,
spoke English remarkably well, although with an
accent suggestive of the negro.
At last the room was cleared of the noisy
messengers, and Barnsley began : ‘ Well, old
Turpentine, I’m tired talking to you, and I can’t
promise you any more presents, because I’ve already
mentioned every blamed article I know, unless a
safety razor, and I don’t suppose you want that ?’
‘ Bet your life I want him too,’ said the chief. ‘ I
give him to my wives ’
‘Well, shut up until I’m finished!’ interrupted
Barnsley. ‘ You have him safe? ’
‘ Bet your blamed life I have him in there ! ’
answered Turpentine, indicating an adjoining room.
‘ And you didn’t see those beggars passing up
to-day ? ’
‘No, but old Turpentine make up for that
later ’
‘Well, that’s all. Keep your prisoner until our
fellows arrive to-morrow, and when you hand him
over to us, you’ll receive in return everything I’ve
promised you. Good-night, you drunken old pig, and
I’d advise you to have a bath before our bosses set
eyes on you.’
Barnsley and his companion strode from the room,
and Turpentine rubbed his hands with glee, and
began enumerating the various presents he had asked
for his services, which included a clay pipe, a white
collar, a mouth organ, and a large cruiser, all of


which he had been promised without hesitation on
Barnsley’s part. The room was now cleared, hurriedly;
Turpentine had no longer any need to make a display
of his power, for the white men were already on the
track which led from the village dowm past the great
waterfall. After the last warrior had departed, the
chief closed his rudely-contrived door, and dropped a
tough sapling into notches cut in the walls, which
effectually barred it. Then he turned—doubtless to
drink the calabash of piwarrie resting on one of the
window-ledges—and found himself looking down the
tube of a Winchester rifle. It was only a foot from
his devoted head, and a stalwart young white man
was at the other end of it.
‘My poor old heart! ’ ejaculated the chief. ‘ How
you get in here ? ’ His eyes roved uneasily.
‘Through that window,’ replied the youth, ‘but
there is no time to talk just now. Lie down on the
floor or I’ll blow your head off.’
‘What for you point rifle at me? My name old
Turpentine, and I friends with white men.’
‘ I don’t care who you are nor what you are. If
you are not flat on the floor when I count three you
will be, the instant after. One—two ’ But here
Harry tripped Turpentine from behind as had been
arranged, and Charlie lowered his weapon and
promptly pressed his knees on the chief’s chest.
‘ Run now, Harry !’ he cried. ‘ Open the place and
let them out. I’ll hold Turpentine ’
Harry darted to the inner door and flung out the
sapling which barred its entrance. Then a cry burst
from him, and it was one of despair. A man, the
only occupant, stepped out, and he was an Indian,


although of light colour, and much handsomer than
any Harry had yet seen.
Charlie looked up when he heard his comrade’s
cry, and beheld the man whom the Parson and he
had rescued the night before.
‘We meet again, friend,’ spoke the Indian in pure
Spanish. ‘ Twice have you saved me. Now I shall
prove I am grateful.’
‘Where are our comrades?’ cried Charlie. ‘Tell
us where they are and we’ll be grateful for ever ’
‘ I will take you to them
A loud clamour arose outside, and curses and
shouts enough to wake the dead filled the air. ‘ Come
out, Turpentine,’ a voice cried above the din. ‘Our
launch has been stolen, and we are stuck. Get your
men out to hunt for the thieves, and you’ll have a
thousand dollars for every dead one you bring in.’
A fusilade of blows rained upon the door.


CHAPTER VII
The Chief of the Razois
Charlie rose from Turpentine’s fat body and laughed
hysterically. ‘Answer your friends, Turpentine,’ he
said. ‘ Here are two thousand dollars waiting for
you.’
‘Yes, but we’ll be mighty cheap at that price,
Charlie,’ said Harry. ‘We’re worth a few of the
mob yet. Get behind that pile of gin cases and we’ll
shoot them down as they enter.’
‘ Open your rat-trap of a door, ’ roared the voice
outside, ‘or we’ll tear your walls down. Wake up,
you drunken old thief, and call out your warriors ’
A chorus of angry curses accompanied the speaker’s
words, and the blows on the door shook the entire
erection.
‘ Come in through windows,’ screamed Turpentine.
‘ I’ve got two here, and they ’ His voice broke
away in a sickening gurgle in his throat. The
Indian prisoner had rushed at him and seized his
wind-pipe in a grip that knew no half measures.
Turpentine would not take part in any conversation
for some time to come.
‘ Oh, Jemima ! We’ve struck a soft thing, boys ! ’
yelled a man at the back window. ‘ Here are two ’
He too stopped in the middle of his sentence. Harry’s
revolver spat out in his face and carried his right ear


away; the lad could not aim to kill even those who
would have no scruples regarding him. But the
Indian had no compunction regarding the matter,
and he leaped at the man before he could withdraw
his head and pulled him through the aperture into
the apartment. The man was now beginning to
curse, and he managed to fire one shot at his captor
even as he was rolling on the floor. Next minute he
ceased to take an intelligent interest in things, for
the Indian had dashed his head on the hard ant-bed
floor.
Meanwhile, careless as to their fate and desperate
beyond measure, Charlie and Harry had rolled some
rum and gin cases over to the front aperture, and
standing on them they blazed away with their re-
volvers, in answer to the storm of lead which had
suddenly burst round them. The Indian had put out
all lights.
‘Great glory, boys! We’ve struck a snag!’
yelled a man. ‘ Let us git cover and set fire to the
shebang! ’
‘ It’s only two kids ! ’ shouted another. ‘ Git round
the place and pepper them from all points ! ’
‘ Rush the blamed windows ! ’ another voice cried.
‘ They can’t aim for nuts Oh ’
‘ That kid has aimed straight enough to knock you
out, I guess,’ some one laughed, and the boys recog-
nised Bruiser Tom by the sound.
‘ Don’t act like Highlanders storming a position,
men,’ said a quiet voice during a lull which ensued.
‘We have plenty of time and we don’t need to rush
matters. Form a circle round the house so that
they cannot get awav. We’ll make them pay dearly


for this when we do catch them.’ The speaker was
Carville.
Another rain of bullets spattered round the window
apertures, then apparently realising that they could
not see their opponents, while they themselves, stand-
ing in the bright moonlight, made excellent targets,
they drew back out of the danger zone.
And now the night was strangely silent, where but
a minute earlier an inferno had raged. The natives
were all inside their benabs terror-stricken, for they
thought they had been again visited by the Ven-
ezuelan soldiers, and they knew what that meant.
‘Come,’ said the Indian to the boys, ‘they will
burn us like tigers in the forest. Follow me ! I will
lead you to a safe place.’ He spoke in Spanish, of
course, but both boys understood him.
‘ But we don’t want to go away,’ said Charlie.
‘ Our comrades are prisoners somewhere and we will
not leave without them.’
‘ Your comrades are safe. I will take you to them.
It is not the Accawoios who hold your comrades—
they couldn’t. It is the Razois. They fought bravely,
but who can withstand the rush of the mountain
people? As well try to stay the waters that flow
towards the great north river in flood time. Come, I
will take you to them.’
‘ Who are you, and how do you happen to know
so much about our comrades?’ demanded Charlie.
‘ We’ll not leave this place until we know we are not
being led into another trap.’
The Indian looked reproachfully at Charlie, and
drew himself up to his full height of six feet. ‘I am
a Razois,’ he said, proudly. ‘ A Razois can die, but


he cannot lie. Behold lam a prince of the hidden
people, and I have given my word.’
A crackling sound now broke out underneath the
house, and a smell of burning palm leaves filled the
room.
‘You are a prince of the Razois?’ cried the boys
in amazement. ‘ And our comrades are prisoners
with your people ? ’
‘ Even so,’ replied the Indian. ‘ They were caught
to-night. But come now, or all will be lost. Follow
me! ’ He leaped at the window through which the
boys had entered, and dropped on the logged verandah
outside. An oath, then a heavy thud followed, and
when Charlie stood outside he saw the body of a man
rolling under the piles, among the scurrying snakes
escaping from the fire. The prince certainly was a
strong man.
‘ Run, and bend low,’ he said, as he saw his youth-
ful companions beside him. ‘We must breakthrough
the circle of bad white men before it is complete.’ He
started off at a rapid rate, and the boys kept pace with
him, apparently much to his surprise.
‘My young friends are fleet of foot,’ he said. ‘ I
see men in front of us. Can you run yet faster ? ’
‘ Make the pace what you like,’ Harry answered,
‘we’ll keep by you.’ He did not waste breath to tell
him that they were almost the fleetest men Britain
could claim as her sons, but they certainly were paced
in a manner that compelled them to put forth their
utmost to keep their place. Suddenly a voice spoke
from the shadows of a clump of flowering vegetation,
and instinctively they slowed down.
‘ Ca’ canny, laddies, or I’ll be under the verra
(C 10) 13


i 94 The Rival Treasure Hunters
painfu’ necessity o’ shooting you,’ the voice spoke.
‘ You have done brawly so far, but I canna allow you
to do any more damage.’ Maclaren stepped from the
shadows, a couple of revolvers in his hands, and a
smile upon his face. ‘ Where is the boat ?’
‘Shoot the brats and say less,’ growled Carville
from the shelter of another clump ; ‘or stand clear
and I’ll do it if you are soft-hearted.’
‘ Great Grampians ! ’ ejaculated Maclaren, ‘ hae
you the cheek to ’ Charlie had sprung at him
like a tiger at its prey, and the powerful though
squatly-built Scot was borne to the ground before he
fully realised that desperation, agility, and science
sometimes make up for lack of brute strength.
Bang ! Bang ! Bang ! went a revolver in Carville’s
hands as he advanced upon the little group, shouting
to his followers to close in. The oaths and other ex-
clamations which now arose all round showed that
many men were near.
‘ I’m hit! ’ cried Charlie. ‘ Pay him back, Harry ! ’
And Harry did. The prince lifted Charlie in his
arms, and delivering a kick at Maclaren which would
have broken the ribs of most men, he leaped over his
prostrate body and, breaking off the track he had
been following, turned towards the river. Harry stood
still, his rifle was at his shoulder, and when Carville
came out from behind a tree he pulled the trigger.
A deafening report followed and Carville dropped,
shot in the right arm above the wrist. Harry could
just as easily have sent the ball through his heart,
which he intended to do later, if Charlie was severely
wounded.
Without looking at his victim he dived after the


A pV Si v -‘ '- ’ . fe vi >’
1 jfl ak 1 '
« lv-~ ■ - %»<, .1 L <k.
i ■ hi ,t «sap^ v
Pf i i
! '**■■►■ _ p w*^*|
/ WKsPRIjr v-' ; t v L
/iMmaf UT * * '* :
P Pm * n
’ ’mIK K"- ■'C^jL' V
V f - tf 3 '
WkM J « 1
V® JP I 31|| I
ESCAPING FROM CtVRVILLE’S GANG




prince, turning every few yards to blaze at his
demoniacal pursuers, although only with intent to
check them, and not to kill or disable. Shots answered
readily enough ; but luckily for him the men had only
their revolvers, having left their heavy rifles behind
in camp.
But now the natives were out; they had somehow
got to know that it was their own white friends who
had been making the disturbance, and that their aid
was required to hunt down their late prisoner and
two boys. There was little danger in this, and so
they joined in the chase with an enthusiasm that
seemed to consist chiefly of yells and many-syllabled
war cries. They knew the bush tracks and were fleet-
footed, but, fortunately for the pursued, had no fire-
arms. But they gained at least one yard in every
three travelled, for the prince was heavily handi-
capped, and Harry kept behind on purpose, grimly
significant, as the hot barrel of his rifle could testify.
He did not know what idea of escape the prince had
in his head, nor did he care much. Dimly he thought
the end would come some time, but until then he knew
his duty.
At length, however, he perceived that the prince
was on a track running alongside the river bank, and
then the memory of the launch flashed across his
brain. If steam were available they had a chance
still, if they could gain enough time to get on board
and push off.
‘We’re near the launch, Charlie,’ he called out.
‘Are you badly hurt?’ He awaited the answer
anxiously. On it depended the decision, whether or
not he should go back, and shoot down at long range


every man who opposed him, until he had reckoned
with Carville.
‘ I don’t think so, Harry. I don’t feel any pain,
but I’m soaking with blood, and I’m a bit sick ’
‘Don’t talk,’ said the Indian. ‘l’m a good
medicine man, and I’ll make you all right soon. We
are going to cross the river ; the women - hearted
Accawoios dare not follow us for fear of the water
mammas who dwell in the pools where we shall cross,
and the bad white men will not be in time to shoot us.’
‘A moment please, prince,’ Harry called out. I
see where our steam launch is hidden. If you will
carry Charlie on board, I’ll push off and jump in after
you.’ It was difficult for Harry to render his mean-
ing intelligible in Spanish, but Charlie took up the
explanation, and soon they were by the vessel’s side.
The prince was extremely chary of entering the boat;
apparently his education did not include a knowledge
of steam and its application to boats, but, after he had
deposited his burden, Harry somewhat unceremoni-
ously pushed him over the low gunwale and cast off
the mooring ropes. Next moment they were in mid-
stream and drifting with the current.
Bravely Charlie strove to rake the fires after start-
ing the engines, but the result was only sufficient to
generate steam for steering way, and quickly grasping
this, Harry swung the vessel round with the stream,
and by dint of skilful handling drove her into
the other side among some mangroves. Under the
circumstances, however, that was the best thing he
could have done, for when the natives came up to
where they had seen them take to the water, they
yelled valiantly and shot arrows across to the other


side. But the dreaded water mammas, fierce spirits
of the dark pools that are for ever seeking to drag men
to their oozy lairs, there to feast on their bones, pre-
vented their great bravery from showing itself in any
other way. When the white men came up and were
told that those whom they were following had crossed
the river, they fired revolver shots into the opposite
bank and up the stream, but not once did they dream
of wasting ammunition in a downward direction. The
war canoes of the Accawoios would already be on the
river, and the fugitives would never venture to face
them. If they did, of course, so much the better, as
they would then be between the waterfalls and the
natives, and the white men could scour the country
intervening by daylight. Meanwhile, Harry had
stoked up the fires and seen that water was in the
boiler. The mangroves hid the ruddy glow above
the funnel, and thus, while the war canoes were
approaching slowly up the river, they were acquiring
fresh power, against which human strength hardly
counted.
Charlie meanwhile had bathed his wound, a deep
charred cut in his scalp, which only missed being fatal
by a very small margin indeed. The prince after-
wards dressed it with leaves, which he said were magical
in their properties, and at any rate were wonderfully
soothing. Only then did he tell the boys that he
had been shot himself, and that it was his blood which
had given Charlie such a fright. He did not seem to
mind the inconvenience, and after the boys had helped
him to bind the place with the healing leaves, he
declared himself ready to meet any number of the
cowardly Accawoios. The boys reminded him that


he had promised to take them to their comrades,
and on his repeating his intention of doing so, they
inquired the direction in which they were to travel.
‘Up the river,’ he answered, ‘until we can go no
farther. We can be there at sunrise by a track I
know. ’
‘We can be there in a couple of hours by this
launch,’ said Charlie. ‘We have been flying up and
down this water all day, and we know it well enough
now to navigate it with our eyes shut’
‘Can this fire spirit take you through the rapids?’
the prince asked in surprise, examining the launch
with interest.
‘lt can,’ said Harry. ‘And the other fellows
cannot follow us unless by a roundabout track, for
they have not got one. But I think they have gone
away now, I don’t hear any more shots ; perhaps we
had better start in case they come on us from behind.’
And start they did, with steam at full pressure,
Harry sitting at the rudder, Charlie by the engines, and
the prince sitting upon a case between the two, eagerly
watching the movements of the pulsating machinery.
Then Harry remembered he was hungry; that
recollection came upon him with the comforting know-
ledge that they had now a powerful ally to help them
in their search. They had started on a quest which
had a hope of success, and the mere fact that there
were against them powerful combinations of natives
and desperate adventurers, who would not hesitate to
adopt any measures to frustrate their work, did not
trouble them.
He opened a box of biscuits and handed out
some to Charlie and the prince, and seeing how this


simple fare was appreciated, a tin of preserved meat
was next dealt round. This, washed down by draughts
of water from the river, seemed to all the best meal
they had ever enjoyed, and, when it was finished, they
started again on more biscuits and another tin of meat.
They were now past the place where they had
launched their canoes that morning—it felt more like
last year to the boys—and were approaching the
feeder river. They had been talking all the time, and
strangely enough they did not often misunderstand
each other, although the boys’ Spanish was anything
but perfect. This, perhaps, was because they could
nearly always guess the import of any word the prince
used which they did not know, and when they
smuggled to express themselves, he, in turn, also
used his intelligence to help them to find the right
phrases.
‘ But, prince, ’ said Charlie, after a pause which
had lasted until they had passed beyond the region of
cross currents, ‘ there are lots of things we would like
to ask you, but we don’t know the etiquette of Razois
society, and we fear to offend ’
‘ That you shall not do, my friends,’ replied the
Indian. ‘We are comrades now. Has not our blood
mingled? Have we not eaten and drank together?
Have you not saved me twice from the cowardly
Accawoios ? ’
‘ In our country we just tell each other our names,
if we can’t get some one else who knows both parties
to introduce us,’ said Harry. ‘My comrade’s name
is Charlie and mine is Harry.’
‘ My name is never mentioned among our people,’
the prince said. ‘lt is not according to our custom


that it should be, and it is so long that it would take
me many minutes to tell it to you. Since I have been
wandering, people have known me as Aztel. Call me
by that name if you will. It means in the tongue of
our ancestors —the unfortunate, and of a truth that
is I.’
‘ But your bad fortune will pass away, if you get
our comrades on your side,’ cried Charlie. ‘They
can do wonders in the way of altering circumstances.
But, prince, I mean Aztel, why did your people
attack our comrades? Why are you wandering
alone ? Why were you a prisoner with these natives
down the river? Why did you allow yourself to be
caught a second time? And why were the bad white
men so anxious to get you ? ’
‘ You ask much more than can be fully told in one
night, my friend, but I will tell you briefly ’
‘ I am more concerned to know why those other
white people are so bitter against us,’observed Harry.
‘ Why did they need to follow us, and why should
they become common thieves and murderers, to pre-
vent us from carrying out our mission, surely harmless
enough to them ?’
I can tell you that, said Aztel. ‘ When you have
succeeded in your work you will also have discovered
theirs, and perhaps spoiled the scheme which they
ha\ e now been watching for many years. They will
not lightly allow themselves to be beaten, and your
success, I am glad to see they think, means an end to
their dreams.’
‘But you talk in parables,’said Charlie. ‘What
is the meaning of it all ? ’
Listen then and I will tell. Give me your word


that, if you cannot help me, you will not use the know-
ledge I will give against my people.’
‘ When you give our comrades their freedom, Aztel,
we will give our entire services to help you and so will
they,’ said Charlie; ‘but until they are free we will
give no promise that might hinder us in our work of
finding them.’
‘You will find them, my friend, that I have said,
but, alas ! their freedom rests not with me. I have no
voice among my people. Though prince, until I
have redeemed myself in their eyes, I am an outcast.’
Aztel spoke with intense sadness, and the boys at once
felt their sympathy go out to him. ‘ I will tell you/
he went on, raising his head ; ‘ Aztel will trust you.
You will not betray his trust. Aztel has learned
during his wanderings that all white men are not bad,
and he likes you. Listen ! Years ago, when I was
about your age, the Razois were a happy, prosperous
people, proud of their descent from the great Incas
who were a civilised people while the world beyond
the waters was yet a vast savage land, in which men
slew each other without much reason. But the Incas
went down before the barbarous conqueror from that
world, as we would go back over these rapids, were it
not for the fiery spirit which you have enslaved, and
in time little more than their memory was left. But
one tribe preserved itself, the Razois, and they with-
drew far into the depths of the boundless forest and
lived alone, free from the convulsions that from time to
time shook the outside world almost to its doom, and
happy so long as they were left in peace. The Razois
still exist, and I am their present chief; but we have
been forced back by the greed of the powerful nation


on our north into an impregnable mountain home,
and there we shall continue to dwell or die out, even
as the snows on the highest peaks melt at the approach
of the sun.
' But time passes, so I will not now dwell further
upon the wrongs we have suffered. We studied the
art of peace, not of war, and consequently became the
remnant we now are. We were still happy, however,
and finding in the heart of our guarding mountain
many flashing stones which the outside world valued,
we bought the protecting services of the many fierce,
fighting peoples who dwelt around us. That system
of defence endured many years before I first saw the
light of the glorious sun, but well was I named Aztel :
in my time at your age, as I have said, the great
nation on the north sent her soldiers down to include
us in its dominion. We objected, but fruitlessly.
Our valley was invaded by armed men, more fit to be
called tigers than human beings. We hid our flash-
ing stones and took to our caves, and they were foiled ;
for peace hath victories of a kind that far outlasts those
of force of arms. But the soldiers stayed on in our
valley and would not leave. We thought of appeal-
ing to the great British nation for help ; for we knew
that under that mighty people’s protection the weak
and oppressed lived securely, and we were aware that
the country towards the rising sun was already rejoic-
ing in the rule of the great white queen.
‘ Alas ! before our messengers had departed by our
hidden way on their mission to the city by the sea, we
discovered that the real leaders of our enemies were
British people, who, attracted by the stories of our
flashing stones, had bought our valley from the


Venezuelans ; they had purchased that which was not
any man’s to sell, but the soldiers were behind them
and we could do nothing.
‘ Then we thought of sending messengers to that
great free country lying far beyond the land of our
invaders. A nation which our traditions told us had
already championed the cause of the weak against the
strong, and whose ships were as mighty as the
thunders they called down. Again we were doomed to
disappointment. America had already given her sym-
pathy to Venezuela, because the latter power had said
they were only securing their own boundary against
British aggression. What could we do? While
Britain and America discussed the matter in entire
ignorance of the real state of affairs, Venezuelan
soldiers, and wicked British and American conces-
sionaires, were pillaging our happy sunlit valley. At
length they were on the point of discovering the secret
of our mines, and in desperation we held a council in
the great hall of the sun god in the heart of the moun-
tain. I, being chief of the Razois, was listened to by
the old councillors with deference, and after some
discussion my plan to defeat the object of the invaders
was agreed upon. I should say here that among our
people the chiefs will is law until it proves to be bad
for the populace, then the councillors revoke that law,
and they rule until the chief has worked out the
penalty imposed upon him by them for the suffering
he has caused. Now, my plan was simple. In the
days when my people were first forced to betake
themselves to the wilds, after their great emigration
from the land of eternal snows, they founded their
future home on the shores of a vast lake lying low in


a great mountain hollow. When the flashing stones
were found under the level of the lake, our ancestors,
by means I know not, cut a passage through the
mountains to the north, which drained the hollow of
its waters, and enabled them to work the valuable
deposits. They then cut another passage through
the mountain walls towards the east, far above the old
level of the waters, so that they might be able to pass
to the outer world, without the long journey over the
summit. Well, my plan was that we should close the
sluice gates of the lake-draining passage, and thus
cause the waters to rise and flood the mines. We
thought our enemies would never know what caused
the rise of the waters, for the underground passage
by which they found egress was hidden under a great
fall of waters on the river which surrounds our moun-
tain and flows to the north. The copper chains which
operated the sluices passed round large wheels, con-
cealed in a cave above the passage, and were worked
by many men turning other wheels with long levers.
‘ We closed the passage one night, and in the morn-
ing the streams which rolled down from the mountain
tops had accumulated in the hollow, until the lower
mines were already covered. By nightfall the lake
was deeper than a man is high, and next morning a
great inland sea stretched, where for many years before
had been dry land. In a few days more the water
rose above the entrance tunnels of the highest mines,
and the soldiers were forced to betake themselves to
the slopes, leaving most of their stores and weapons
behind them. Then we came forth and drove them
over the mountain top and down the north-flowing
river towards their own country.


‘ But even while success was in our grasp it was
snatched from us. The white men, who claimed to
have bought the right to rob our land of its mineral
wealth, had found out our secret by torturing some of
our people whom they had caught, and when I sped
to the cave, in which was concealed the sluice operat-
ing machinery, I found two of those men just finishing
the severing of the long raising and lowering chains.
One shot at me and I fell, and as they escaped past
me one cried, “You have cheated us out of the
diamonds, now we have cheated you out of your
valley.” And they had. The waters continued to
rise, and we could not stay them. Soon they entered
the caves wherein we lived, and we had to turn loose
our cattle and domestic animals or see them drown.
We fled to the upper slopes of the mountains, and saw
all our homes destroyed by the ever-rising flood.
At last it ceased to rise farther, and we knew it had
found an exit through the passage our forefathers had
cut through the mountains towards the east, thus
barring us from ever leaving our valley, except by the
long track over the summit.
‘My tale is now nearly ended. We made ourselves
a new city above the level of the waters, and studied the
science of self-defence. This, we soon discovered, meant
striking first at any possible enemy, and since then
we have done so. At the council held after the retreat
of the soldiers new laws were passed, but my voice was
not allowed to be heard. The Razois had lost their
source of wealth and independence, and, until that was
restored, my name might not be mentioned, nor my
voice heard in council. In my wanderings I have
learned that other peoples do not hold their chief


206 The Rival Treasure Hunters
responsible for every evil that comes upon them ; but
among the Razois, as with their ancestors, the Incas,
the belief that the King, being supreme, controls the
destinies of his people, and is therefore answerable
for all that happens, good or bad, is a law that is
unchangeable. I was disgraced until such times as
I had brought back the prosperity of my people, and
until then the councillors ruled.
‘ We soon became well able to defend ourselves, and
all people whom we caught on our mountain we
attacked before they knew they were in our vicinity.
We did not kill—our traditions are against that—but
we set every prisoner to work in our long galleries,
cutting another passage beneath the lake, so that our
children some day will be able to empty it and gaze
upon the flashing stones that mean so much to the
outside world. The Venezuelan soldiers have often
come up their river in fiery canoes like yours, but we
hid when we thought we could not capture them, for
we could allow none to escape with the tale, and in
time they learned to leave us alone.
‘We also built watch-towers along the mountain top,
so that we could see the glow of their camp fires many
days before people came near, and our sentries then
watched them until the moment of attacking them drew
nigh. We had no more sun-containing stones with
which to buy the warriors of the tribes near us, so we
ceased to cultivate their friendship and kept entirely
to ourselves, relying on our own powers of defence.
‘ But I was an outcast. I could come and go as I
pleased, but no welcome greeted me, nor did any one
ask whither I went. Among some of our prisoners,
however, I have friends ; they sympathised with me,


and it was because of what some white gold-seekers
told me that I at last set out to wander in the wilds.
They told me to go forth to the city by the sea, and
procure certain things which they wrote down, and
that when I returned with them they would help me
by their means to bring our lake back to a level which
would uncover our old dwellings.
‘ I went forth and had returned to the base of our
mountain, when I saw by the signals on our watch-
towers that people were approaching. Leaving my
canoe in a safe place, I went back to see, and, lo ! I
found two camps, of one of which you, my friends, were
members, and the other consisting of bad white men,
some of whom I remembered as being among the
invaders who caused all our trouble. Among them
also I recognised the American and the strange-spoken
Britisher who bought our valley from those who had
no right to sell it, and a plan of revenge at once came
to me. I came back with all speed, and was treacher-
ously taken prisoner by the natives of the village we
left to-night. You and another rescued me, and I
came on to the head of this stream. There I witnessed
the attack upon your comrades, but was powerless to
prevent it. I tried to get some of my own people to
come back with me to visit the other camp, but they
ignored me, and left me standing alone, even according
to the law of the Razois. I returned, alone, meaning
to spy still further upon them, until the opportunity
of luring them into the trap I had devised occurred.
But it seems the natives of the village and they were
in league, and I was again captured. I did not mind,
however, for I saw that I could lead them to their
destruction, and end my own life in one last effort to


208 The Rival Treasure Hunters
be revenged ; but fate intervened, and a second time,
you, my friend, saved me. That is all. They think,
which thought gives me joy, that you and your
comrades will thwart their game, whatever it is, and
thus are they so bitter against you. I know not, how-
ever, what they intended doing.’
Aztel ceased and gazed ahead at the end of the
gorge now only a short distance away, and his two
companions were also silent. They too were thinking.
Finally Harry spoke.
‘I know what they meant to do,’ he said. ‘We
overheard their plans one night. They mean to force
an entrance into your valley by some road they think
they know, kill you all with the help of Venezuelan
soldiers coming to meet them, and then continue their
search for your diamonds.’
‘ They may enter our valley, but it will only be
after a fight which will do away with the necessity of
killing us afterwards,’ said Aztel slowly. ‘ But the
lake covers our stones.’
‘ That doesn’t seem a big obstacle,’ Charlie put in.
‘They’ll grapple for the ends of the chains and join
them again, after which they will connect the old
levers and wheels and merely open the sluices.’
Aztel shook his head. ‘We know nothing of the
ways of the outside world,’ he said. ‘We are a people
who live in the light of the past. Still, if I under-
stand you aright to mean that the broken ends of the
great copper chains could be picked up from the
bottom of the lake, it is not the simple matter it may
appear to you to be. The Razois are skilled in
working with water, but they can’t live under it for
long, and then only at a depth to which straws will


reach through which they may breathe. Can the men
of your country do more than that ? ’
‘ Oh, yes,’ said Harry, ‘we can go down under the
water in submarine boats and in diving-dresses, but
it would be out of the question getting such appliances
up here. But why can you not fish for the ends of
the chain and join them ?’
‘My dear friends,’ sighed Aztel, ‘times without
number have we caught the ends of the chains, but
that means little. Since they were cut, the lake has
risen far above the point to which they reach, and
even the chamber, in which the raising machinery was
placed, is far under the water now. What is the use,
therefore, in groping for the chains? We cannot
reach down to connect them with the ends in the cave,
and, if we could, who could work the levers ? Many
of our people have given up their lives in diving down
to the submerged chamber. Some never came up
again. Perhaps the water mammas got them.
Perhaps they were caught in the vortex over the
sluice, caused by the holes we have broken through it.’
‘You broke holes in the sluice gate?’ exclaimed
Charlie, deeply interested. ‘ Then couldn’t you keep
on breaking holes, until there was room for the water
to get away ? ’
‘No ; so great is the suction over those we have
pierced, that all objects in the water are drawn down
to them and held there. So much has this been the
case that the sluice gates themselves are now covered
by many feet of trees and stones, and we can no
longer touch them at all with our long copper
rods.’
‘ Oh! you can make long copper rods ? ’ cried
(C *0) I 4


2io The Rival Treasure Hunters
Charlie, thinking rapidly. ‘ How long and how thick
can you make them ? ’
‘As long as we like, and as heavy as we can
handle,’ Aztel answered. ‘We preserved the art of
working in copper, as handed down from our fore-
fathers. We can make it hard or soft at will.’
‘Aztel, I believe we can open the sluices for you,’
Charlie said. ‘ Help us to free our comrades, by
using your influence, or in any other way, and we’ll
do the rest. We want no diamonds nor reward of
any kind.’
‘My dear friends, what Aztel the chief of the
Razois can do for your comrades, even to the extent
of giving his life, he shall do. I will go to the council
and tell them that it is my wish that the white prisoners
should be free. If they will not listen to me, then I
shall call upon my people to overthrow the council
and ’
‘ And it strikes me from what you have told us
about the Razois that that would mean the death of
Aztel,’ said Charlie. ‘You will, I hope, excuse me,
prince, but it seems to me that a Razois chief is just
about of the same importance as some big European
potentates. They can talk as much as they please,
and even write letters or send telegrams, but only on
their own account, and they sometimes get into trouble
even over that. They cannot tell their Parliament
what they want done, or, if there is anything certain
in this world, it is that that Parliament would straight-
way proceed to do the exact opposite, to show their
independence. Now human nature, as Doc and
Boston Bob would say, is much the same all the
world over, and I fancy that you would simply cause


our comrades to be put in chains—if they are not in
them already—if you asked your wise old councillors
to give them their freedom ’
‘Dry up, Charlie, we’re at the pier,’ interrupted
Harry. ‘We will devise our plans later.’
‘ Sluices and underground rivers seem very common
in this country,’ said Charlie. ‘ls this river one of
your waterways, prince?’ He was gazing at the
boiling waters at the base of the rock.
‘ That water is the overflow of the lake,’ said
Aztel. ‘lt comes through the mountain by the
passage cut to the east for a road. Never again will
Aztel tread its winding track.’
I am not so sure about that,’ Charlie muttered,
trying to form an idea of the volume of water which
gushed up from underneath.
‘ I suppose we’d better smash up our launch now?’
spoke Harry. ‘We don’t want our friends to get it
again.’
‘I suppose so,’ agreed his comrade, ‘but it is
a pity.’
‘ There is a cave here which only our people know,’
said Aztel, guessing what was troubling them. ‘We
can pull the fiery canoe over the sand bar, and it will
remain safe in it.’
They did so, placing all their stores on board, and
just finding room in the hole for their canoe in
addition. The cave could not be seen from the ledge,
which passed over it, and no canoe could approach
the entrance driven only by man power. Steps cut
in the rock afforded means of access to the ledge, and
as the boys stood thereon, the first streaks of dawn shot
athwart the starry sky.


CHAPTER VIII
Piccadilly Peter
‘ I don’t wish to hurt your feelings, Aztel, but I think
the Razois are a very elementary people despite their
boasted descent.’ The speaker was Charlie. A halt
had been made for lunch in the shade of some giant
fern trees. It was difficult to render his words in
Spanish, but both Harry and he had become more
proficient in that language since meeting Aztel the
previous night.
‘ My people have not improved, I fear, since they first
left their home among the eternal snows far towards
the setting sun. I, who have wandered, know well
their deficiencies, but, as I have said, my voice must
not be heard in the council hall. Yet why do you say
that, my friend ? What have you discovered ? ’
‘ Nothing, and that is the trouble. We have been
wandering in a circle since sunrise, and I see by those
twin peaks on our right that we are back near the
same point at which we started, after crossing that
mountain-encircling river this morning.’
‘ But much higher, or you could not see the valleys
through which all these rivers flow. Now we are
looking down over the tree-tops, and can trace the
river up which you came to its junction with the great
east-flowing water.’
‘Yes, I can understand all that, and have grasped


the fact that we are now on the slopes of a mountain
we could not see before, because we never thought of
climbing a big tree. If we had done so, we could
have seen the mountain many days ago, but, of course,
living in the under world we saw nothing.’
‘ Then what prompted your first words just now? ’
‘ I was wondering why we were going round a
mountain when we might have aimed at the top right
away, especially as we know that we must cross the
ridge before reaching the hollow where your people
live. Why haven't you a road cut straight up the
side ? If there were a road we could have been at the
top now, I am sure, for this path we are following
only goes round about, and doubtless will lead us
back here several times before we screw our way to
the summit.’
‘ We will gaze upon the forest tops now before us
another three times before our journey is ended,’ said
Aztel. ‘ But each circle we make will be much shorter
than the last. By to-morrow’s sundown the top of
the mountain will be under our feet.’
‘ But surely, Aztel, you don’t mean to say that we
can’t climb straight up and be on the top to-night? ’
It was Harry who spoke this time. Charlie thought
he understood.
Aztel smiled. ‘ I had thought that the people
under the great white queen were old in wisdom, even
while they were young in years,’ he said; ‘but I
now see that youth is the same among you as with
ourselves ’
‘ It is a king who now rules the British Empire,’
interrupted Harry, rather impatiently. He was
beginning to think that Aztel was too much inclined


2i4 The Rival Treasure Hunters
to verbosity, to be practical when the need arose.
‘ But what has your words got to do with the climbing
of this mountain ? We could break through that
mass of giant convolvulus, and red and white wild
roses, or whatever you call them, and steer upwards
in a straight line. Of course your people could not
be expected to know that old Euclid said a straight
line was the shortest distance between two points, but
we are telling you now.’
‘ My young friend, I know that my people know
little of the arts and sciences of your people, but I
have found that in matters of distance, time, and
space, we are the better judges. We live, which is
what the great Unknown God requires of us. Time
means nothing to us, nor space, for what are we that
we should dare set bounds to either ? ’
' But time means everything to us ! ’ cried Harry.
‘We have our comrades to rescue. And excuse my
saying so, Aztel, but I agree with Charlie that your
people are very silly. Why, if time meant nothing
to you, should you go about South America mourning
the fact that some diamond mines had been flooded ?
Why don’t you set to work and divert the streams
which feed the lake, and leave the sun to evaporate
the waters already in it?’
‘And die by pestilence? That was tried in my
time, and my people died like beasts of the forest in
a great spreading fire for lack of fresh, life-giving
fluid, the gift of the Unknown One.’
‘ Then to come to the point. Why can we not
strike upwards from here, instead of spiralling round
the hillside, as if we were travelling along the thread
of a corkscrew ? ’


* Because the moment you attempted to climb
straight, the people even now watching us would set
upon you, and carry you off as captives to work in the
galleries in the heart of the mountain. That is one
way by which we know friends and foes. Many bands
of men have attempted to climb our mountain, but since
the time when we drove out the soldiers of Venezuela,
none have succeeded, and none will. Friends know
that the only way into our valley is by the slow but
sure, encircling track, and those who would storm
the slopes can only be people like the first invaders,
and our galleries receive so many more workers.’
‘I see,’ said Harry, reflectively. ‘You believe in
cheap labour, and are a kind of protectionists and free
traders combined. What use do you hope to make
of your subterranean galleries when completed ? ’
‘ Empty the lake again as our fathers did of old,’
replied Aztel, not noticing Harry’s sarcasm, which in
Spanish had lost all its meaning.
‘ Well, as I said before,’ remarked Charlie, ‘ I don’t
think a great deal of the Razois’ system of government.
They might have got along somehow in the Stone
Age, or even a little more recently, but in this twentieth
century they and their methods are far out of date.
Prince, do you know what would happen to your
precious mountain if the British Government knew
you had British subjects prisoners in its heart?’
‘ They would send men with big guns to bombard
it, but we would be safe in our caves in the hollow,
and the guns could not be brought up the mountain.
That act would also mean a war with Venezuela,
which we should like to see very much, and in the
end things would remain as they are now.’


‘ Then leaving Britain out of the question, don’t
you think it is a bit foolish to make war upon peace-
able prospectors who care nothing for either you or
your diamonds, instead of concentrating your strength
to enable you to come forth from your valley, and
hold your own in this great fertile land of the outer
world? What, for instance, was the purpose served
in treacherously attacking our comrades last night?
They meant no harm to your people. And why,
seeing you have such an elaborate system of espionage,
do you leave your real enemies—the people who nearly
caught us last night—to come to your doors before
attacking them ? ’
‘My friend, were you in our council, or were I
allowed to raise my voice there, many changes might
result, but our laws are for us to obey. They were
made by the will of the people, and can only be
revoked by them. If I were once more ruler, in my
own right, I would make many new laws, for I have
acquired much wisdom in my wanderings that, were
I free to teach my people, would make them far more
powerful than any of the warlike tribes around them.
We have much knowledge that is still strange to your
people, and our greatest wish is to be allowed to live
in peace, so that we might study the almost-forgotten
arts of our ancestors. Have I answered enough ? ’
‘Yes, Aztel,’ said both boys. ‘You are a decent
fellow yourself, at any rate.’
‘ And if our comrades were free they would very
soon make things right for you and give you back
your own rights,’ added Harry. ‘ But hadn’t we
better be moving again ? We can talk as we go.’
‘You speak wisely,’ said Aztel. ‘We must make


two complete circles before night, and then I will
leave you for a space.’
‘You will leave us?’ exclaimed Charlie, as they
started off along the almost indistinguishable track.
‘ Surely you cannot mean that, Aztel, after taking us
so far ? ’ Charlie’s tones were reproachful to a decided
degree.
‘ My young friend doubts me?’ spoke the prince,
also reproachfully. ‘He should not doubt his com-
rade. Were we not together in danger? Wherefore
now should he have fears ? By nightfall we shall
reach a village perched high on the hillside, where
you may rest safely. It is the home of one of the
tribes we still pay to defend our approaches, and
among them Aztel is still an honoured prince. But I
shall continue my journey alone through the night,
and arrive among my people at sunrise. I shall then
acquaint them of your coming as my guests, and
cause men to be sent down for my canoe and its
contents. If the councillors will meet to hear me, I
shall speak to them some words of wisdom concerning
the white prisoners, and when that is done, come back
for you. If your comrades will then give us of their
knowledge to bring back the lake to its old level, the
Razois will bless them for ever, and much of that
yellow metal which your people prize, and many of the
flashing stones, shall be theirs. As for you, my dear
comrades, all that Aztel possesses of those stones are
yours already without condition.’
‘ Consider that old lake as good as drained now,
Aztel,’ said Charlie. ‘ Doc and Boston Bob and the
parson know everything, and I am an engineer myself.
I have a plan already, but they’ll be able to devise a


2i B The Rival Treasure Hunters
better scheme in no time. And we want neither
diamonds nor gold, Aztel. lam proud indeed to say
that our comrades are men who value the friendship
of their fellow-men more than all the wealth the world
can give them, and I speak for Harry and myself
too.’
‘You do,’ said Harry. ‘l’d rather go back and
begin pen-pushing in England again—and that is a
horrible thing to think of—than sell my services to
you, Aztel. We’ll send that lake about its business
quick enough without reward, for surely when our
countrymen carried the sea inland to Manchester, and
Boston Bob’s people are cutting a waterway across
the continent of America, between us we can open a
road to allow a lake to get out to the sea. Hullo !
What’s this ? ’
‘A thunderstorm is coming,’ Aztel answered,
somewhat surprised at Harry’s sudden exclamation.
‘But I’m not referring to the weather,’ insisted
Harry. ‘ There is a cloud of blue enamelled butter-
flies dropping down on us.’
And such was the case. The spaces between the
foliage and the undergrowths had suddenly become a
scintillating, moving mass of light blue. It hung
over and around the three travellers, and blotted
everything else from their vision. It seemed to be
composed of myriads of fluttering creatures, whose
blue wings had a peculiar metallic lustre. Slowly the
dense cloud settled to the ground and piled itself up,
like successive layers of a translucent blue carpet.
They were butterflies—a brief investigation made that
fact clear.
‘ I wish Doc was here,’ Charlie said to Harry.


‘ He could tell us where these creatures came from
and what their sudden descent means.’
‘ But that is just what Aztel has told us,’ reminded
his comrade. ‘He says it portends a thunderstorm.’
‘We must hurry,’ Aztel put in. ‘ This storm will
be severe, and it is coming quickly.’ He had not
understood the words the boys exchanged. Nor did
he imagine that a storm in tropical British Guiana,
or rather Venezuela, could be in any particular way
different from a climatic disturbance elsewhere. They
increased their pace, for Aztel seemed to be anxious,
although the boys could not guess why a coming
storm should cause him any perturbation. The sky
grew dark and the sun became obscured with a
suddenness which startled the boys, and made them
participate to some extent in Aztel’s alarm. And then
the whole forest seemed to awaken to some impending
danger. Flocks of parrots, macaws, and other noisy
members of these families chattered uneasily over-
head. Mocking-birds gave vent to strange sounds,
and the doves cooed plaintively, while on a dead tree
limb a huge buzzard emitted harsh, discordant cries.
Nor was the agitation confined to bird-life. Little
sackawinki monkeys ran up and down the orchid and
other parasite-infected trees —orchids are hideous to
look upon when not in flower—and myriads of small,
long-nosed bats seemed to be everywhere.
But the adventurers did not study the preparations
of the forest denizens for the storm. They hurried
on themselves, although they could not help marvelling
at the varied and brilliant colours of the flights of
disturbed humming-birds, which flitted under the
foliage. At least they thought they were humming-


birds, but soon they realised that some of the droning
creatures they saw were huge wood-boring bees, also
seeking for shelter.
Animals of prey growled in their lairs, and reptiles
wriggled away into their holes. The bush was full
of sounds and smells, and the atmosphere was stifling
and unbearably hot. They were carrying some
selected provisions calculated to last for some days,
but the weight, at first a small inconvenience, now
felt intolerable. The darkness of night, though it
was yet early in the afternoon, enveloped the forest,
and all sounds became stilled as if by magic. Blindly
the little party struggled on, bruising themselves
against tree trunks, and cutting their faces among the
prickly creepers, which now seemed to be everywhere.
The perspiration streamed from their bodies, and they
gasped for breath ; only they in all that vast and
impenetrable forest were moving ; all other forms of
life were now secure. A silence as of a dead world
lay over all.
‘We cannot reach the village on the other side,’
Aztel suddenly said, stopping at the same time and
looking skywards through the tree-tops. ‘We must
camp here and wait, the storm will be too violent to
last long.’ As he uttered his last words a vivid streak
of lightning flashed across the heavens, and illumi-
nated the forest for a moment, to an extent greater than
the sun had ever effected. It also showed the party
the nature of their immediate surroundings, which
information Aztel, expecting the flash, had photo-
graphed upon his memory. An utter blindness fell
over Charlie and Harry, even while the bluish-white
light still shot away down towards the Orinoco, but


Aztel was already at work gathering some freshly
fallen leaves of gigantic size. A moment later the
boys were assisting him, the light of a match giving
an illumination which, under other circumstances,
might not have been equalled by an electric arc lamp.
In little more than a minute, and while the forest still
waited with an expectant hush, the palm leaves were
placed in a slanting position against a tree stem with
their sharp ends stuck in the ground. Deftly Aztel
arranged them round the central support until a bell
tent was formed, then flinging a tough fibrous creeper
rope round the top he pulled them tightly together
and locked them round the stem. A noise not unlike
the roar of the rapids they had passed now broke upon
the still air, and immediately there followed a terrific
clap of thunder.
‘ Inside, comrades! ’ cried Aztel, throwing the
packs of stores each had carried into the leaf tent,
and then rushing frantically to collect some brush-
wood, which he also bundled inside. He seemed to
be able to see in the dark, and now the boys were also
able to distinguish the outline of the nearer objects.
They crept under the leafy shelter and lit a candle
which Harry, with wonderful foresight, had carried
in his load, and waited. But not long. Well they
knew that the noise, now filling the air with deafening
sound, was a tropical thunder shower falling upon the
top leaves of the protecting trees, and dripping
through upon the foliage underneath. It needed little
exercise of brain power to know that soon the great
weight of water would bend or break the fragile upper
growths, and come down to the ground in a mighty,
almost solid, mass. And it did, carrying with it dead


leaves and limbs which crashed through the under
branches and rudely disturbed many birds, reptiles,
and animals which had taken refuge in hollow living
offshoots.
‘By Jupiter ! ’ murmured Harry, ‘it is good to be
under shelter. Any poor beggars out to-night will
get a wetting, at any rate.’
The water was glancing off their own benaboo and
sinking into the undergrowths harmlessly.
‘ Why should we be afraid of getting wet, Aztel ? ’
asked Charlie. ‘ We’ve been capsized into the river
many times coming here, and we never troubled.
We just went naked, or nearly so, until our clothes
dried in the sun again, and no bad results ever
happened.’
‘ If my young friends went naked here after a storm,
their tender skins would be tortured by the bites and
stings of many insects the falling waters call to life,’
replied Aztel. ‘ Only the coarse-skinned peoples who
live down on the rivers, and whose blood is not
pleasing to taste, can go naked with impunity after a
storm.’
‘ Then why can’t we go about in our clothes until
they become dry?’ continued Harry. He certainly
did not see the necessity of seeking shelter from rain,
when work of a stern nature lay ahead, in the carrying
out of which it was not improbable their own blood
might drench their garments.
‘ Because if my friends’ skins were long in contact
with their garments, sodden with water which has
washed the eggs of many blood-poisoning creatures
from the leaves overhead, they would surely die from
the effects of fevers,’ Aztel again made answer. ‘ But


not so with me. My blood is not as yours, and it
matters little whether my clothes are wet or dry. If
you will make a fire now with the dry wood beside
you, Aztel will continue his journey and leave you
here until his return.’
‘ Do you mean to say that you will travel on your-
self until to-morrow morning?’ cried Charlie, much
astonished at the cool manner in which their friend
proposed to negotiate the dark forest alone.
‘ No, at the first signs of this storm our hillside
watching people would be called in, for our councillors
know that no invaders would risk coming up the
mountain in the darkness, and that if they were so
foolish as to make the attempt, the storm would instil
the fever into their blood and make them easy to fall
before us. Knowing this, I can safely strike from
here to the top and descend into our cave city, arriving
there when the stars of night are riding in the sky,
and the storm far down towards the great river. At
daylight I will come for you and take you to my
people as my honoured and beloved friends.’
‘But if you don’t come, Aztel?’ said Charlie.
‘ Supposing these silly people you care so much for
have ideas of their own about our coming?’
‘ Aztel will be here at daylight, unless the great
Unknown God calls for his soul before that time, or
his people have put him in chains.’
‘ It will be as bad for your people as we can con-
trive to make it in the latter case, Aztel,’ said Harry.
‘ We’ll come on ourselves, if you are not here at day-
light, when next it comes, and when -we give our
comrades their liberty we’ll hunt you up, and take you
away from a people who don’t know how to appreciate


you. Remember we’ll start at daylight But stay,
Aztel, you are not leaving us now? You’ll be
drowned ’
‘ The storm is nothing to me. See, my gar-
ments are made of feathers, and I can shake the
waters from them even as a bird.’
‘ But you don’t need to go now, even if you are a
fish,’ put in Charlie. ‘ I’ll make some tea and we’ll
sit round our fire ’
‘ My dear friends, Aztel has reasons for his early
departure which he may not tell. Had this storm
not come he need not have hastened, but now for the
sake of your comrades, and his own, his place is with
his people. To-night there will be gathered into the
city all our outlying soldiers, and among them are
many of Aztel’s friends who would gladly see him
restored to his position. The bad white men too,
who caused all our trouble, are not far off now. They
may force the hills to-night and find no fighting
Razois to bar their passage. My people may not
know of their approach, and may be taken by surprise,
and it is a chance for which Aztel has long prayed to
the Great God to be allowed to lead our trained
fighters against those who flooded our homes.’
‘That’s all right, Aztel,’ said Charlie. ‘But if
these old enemies of yours pay you a visit, they’ll
have made their plans to meet such a case as you
have mentioned. I rather think we dealt them the
heaviest blow they are likely to receive when we cut
out their launch, but if they do join with a Venezuelan
army and attack you, I think your chances of resisting
them are slight unless you enlist our comrades—also
their enemies, as you know—on your side.’


‘ Which is the chief reason of my going to the city
to-night, said Aztel. ‘lf I get the ear of my people
your comrades will be our guests before many hours
have passed, if not Aztel will be with them in the
great galleries.’
‘And we will be the relief party ourselves then,’
put in Harry. ‘ I wish you would give us a plan of
your city and the position of those galleries and sluice-
gates, Aztel. Our work is going to be rather hard if
you don’t get back.’
‘ My friends,’ said Aztel, ‘ if I am not here at sun-
rise, do not try to come farther: it will be useless.
ou cannot help your comrades if my will is ignored
by the councillors. The river which led you to our
old hidden passage will take you back in your fire
canoe to the great river. It will take you to the sea.
If I come not, depart at once, and stay not until you
are many miles away. Perhaps you may escape if
you travel fast.’
‘Have a drink of tea, Aztel,’ broke in Charlie.
He had caught some water as it gushed down the
sides of their shelter, and had boiled it on the fire
kindled at the doorway. The rain still fell in torrents,
the lightning flashed and danced through the gloom
overhead in mighty zigzag streaks, and the thunder
rolled and reverberated among the forest-fringed
rivers in short, spiteful peals which seemed to shake
the mountain to its foundation, away in the heart of
the molten earth.
Aztel drank the proffered pannikin of tea and ate a
biscuit and a piece of tinned meat, then standing up,
and watching the magnificent play of the lightning
for a minute, he turned to the boys and said : ‘ It will
(Clo) i S


soon be over now, and Aztel will take to the mountain.
My dear friends, I have not much to give, but, should
we never greet each other again, I should like to
remain in your memory ’
‘ Don’t talk rot! ’ exclaimed Harry in English.
‘ We’ll see you to-morrow, if we have to blow up your
confounded mountain to get at you. You are one of
our comrades now. Leave those nigger people of
yours, and come away with us when we get our
comrades.’
Aztel smiled. ‘I am proud to be called comrade,’
he said, guessing the effect of Harry’s words.
‘ But take these flashing stones in remembrance of
me. They are all I have to give. If the Great
Unknown is with us many more will be yours ’
1 No, no, Aztel,’ cried Charlie, pushing away
Aztel’s hand. ‘ Those diamonds you are offering us
are worth a fortune. We want nothing. You are
our comrade ’
‘ And it is as a comrade I ask you to take them.
They mean nothing to me. Your people value them,
but my people only look on them as upon any other
stone.’
‘That is because they are not cut, Aztel. These
are diamonds, and if they were cut they would flash
all over in the light, the same as the one you gave me
already.’
‘Yes, we know they give out light when we
break them a certain way,’ Aztel said. ‘That is
why we call them flashing stones. They are
yours.’
For a moment the boys hesitated, then Harry
said : ‘ Very well, Aztel, we’ll take them in the mean-


time, but only in exchange until we meet again.
Here is one of my revolvers and a box of cartridges.
You know how to use it, and it may prove useful to
you.’
‘And take this one in remembrance of me,’ said
Charlie. ‘lt is all I have to give just now, but if it
were many times as valuable you would have it just
the same.’
Aztel took the revolvers with a courtly bow. ‘ Even
so, my comrades,’ he said, ‘you have given me what
is more valuable to me than all the diamonds in our
mines. I shall never forget you, but till we meet
again His ‘ adios floated back from the darkness
into which he had plunged, and the boys were alone.
Several small dull pebbles lay in Charlie’s hand, but
the edge of one where it had been chipped shot out
fiery flashes even in the feeble light of the fire. The
stones were of immense value, and the boys were well
aware of the fact. The storm raged with unabated
fury, and it was evident that the sun would not break
through the dense clouds that day. Inside the palm
leaf benaboo all was dry and comfortable, but the
feeling of loneliness was most depressing.
‘Charlie,’ said Harry, after a spell of silence, ‘are
we really awake, do you think? Is all this idea
that we’re away in the back of British Guiana, alone
in an almost boundless forest, amidst a storm such as
we have never imagined, not just a dream? I fear
I’ll awake and find myself in Liverpool, getting out of
bed to go to the office.’
‘ The pain in my head where that beggar shot me
is real enough to me, anyhow,’ Charlie answered.
‘ But things do seem a bit hazy, I’ll admit. What


are we doing with a handful of uncut diamonds?
Why are we taking things so coolly, when we know
that wild beasts of all kinds are around us, and that
snakes of deadly nature are perhaps inside this strange
tent with us ? Why are we two boys, who never were
outside our own country before, thus suddenly become
the sole survivors of a relief expedition, and why do
we not seem to care for any danger that may even
now be threatening us ? ’
‘ I never was much good at answering conundrums,
Charlie,’ said Harry, ‘ but I should think that the
real reason why we are not excited over matters is
because we are so ignorant, that we don’t realise the
many dangers which surround us. I don’t suppose
we would care much even if we had the wisdom of
Boston Bob and Doc, and knew everything. But, by
Jupiter! Charlie, we must act very carefully, just to
show our comrades that we really are not foolish boys.
What a surprise they’ll get when we sail into those
galleries and tell them they are free ! ’
‘Yes,’ agreed Charlie, yawning, ‘I vote we try to
go to sleep. We’ve moved about a bit since we last
slept.’ The proposal was pleasing to Harry, and
after partaking of some tea they smoothed out some
dry leaves in their strange house and lay down, and
in a few seconds were oblivious to their environ-
ment.
The hours passed, the storm moved away towards
the great Orinoco tributary valleys, and peace again
reigned. But the sun was down and the moon and
stars shone brightly in the fast clearing sky. Soon
the frogs began to croak joyfully, then the birds began
to call to each other, and finally the forest came to life


again, and the roar of beasts of prey mingled with the
shrill screaming of parrots, and the hoarse barking
sounds and angry mutterings of many creatures of the
undergrowths. Still the boys slept peacefully and
dreamed of far-away England and their brothers and
sisters, and in time, but for the noise of the night-
prowling inhabitants as they crashed through the
brushwood, the forest became again silent, this time
in slumber.
Suddenly Charlie awoke, the wound in his head
was giving him some pain, but it was not that which
had caused him to sit up on his bed of leaves. He
arose, and stepping outside, damped the dressing on
his head with some water contained in a large fallen
palm leaf. Aztel had told him to do this, and the
effect was magical.
‘ It must be near morning,’ he muttered, gazing up
to the clear sky. ‘ That bright star over above the
Potaro River must be the one Doc calls the four o’clock
star. I wonder what wakened me ? There must have
been a sound near which shouldn’t be, or which means
danger. I hope it is not a pack of these horrible
waracabra tigers which every one is afraid of, but no
man has seen. Ah, well, we can’t help ourselves,
even if it is. I’ll go back and have another sleep ;
it’s too dark and wet outside to do anything, and Aztel
will be here at daylight in time for breakfast.’ He re-
entered the tent, and stood for a moment as if trying
to account for something. The moon was shining
through the doorway. ‘ Surely that can’t be a swarm
of bees out at this time?’ he muttered, ‘that sound
seems to be inside too. If I were not where lam I
should be sure I heard a large fan working. By


Jupiter! it’s inside our little house, whatever it is.
Wake up, Harry, there’s a steam engine and a big
fan Hullo ! ’
He struck wildly at a huge bat-like creature
standing on his comrade’s chest; its wings, kept in
continual motion, were causing the lulling fan-like
sound, and while its victim slept it drank his blood.
It was a vampire bat such as Boston Bob and Doc had
often described to the boys. Already Harry’s gar-
ments were stained red with blood, which flowed
copiously from an incision the creature had made in
his cheek, and the fanning wings would keep him
sleeping until faintness from loss of blood would cause
him to awake.
Harry at once regained full consciousness when his
comrade spoke, and he sprang up. But the bat had
escaped into the open, despite the blow Charlie had
delivered at its head. ‘ This is no country for poor
innocent people like us, Charlie,’ he said, laughingly,
as he bathed his face outside as his comrade had done
earlier. ‘ Sleeping or waking we are never free from
trouble.’
‘ And it strikes me that more trouble is coming
now,’ said Charlie, listening to some sounds as yet
a good distance off. ‘ I hear something crashing
through the bush which has a decided object in view,
and therefore is not a meal-seeking animal. It is
coming straight towards us, and coming at a rapid
rate.’
‘ Perhaps it is Aztel,’ suggested Harry, as Charlie
applied some of the healing leaves to his cheek. ‘He
was to be here at daylight, and it can’t be far from
sunrise now.’


‘lt might be,’ said Charlie, doubtfully, ‘but he
would be shouting to us by this time if it were he, I
think. Suppose we climb a tree and wait until the
noisy night-rover shows itself. It might be one of
those man-eating jaguars or a waracabra tiger.
They are very energetic just before morning, Doc
told me.’
‘ A good idea ! ’ agreed Harry. ‘ We’ll be able to see
the top of this mountain from the branches, and I want
to pay that funny little monkey back for dropping nuts
on me. My ! whatever is coming is in a hurry, and
it is coming straight here. Up you go, Charlie, I’ll
pass the rifles up to you.’
In a few seconds both boys were hidden among the
dripping foliage overhead. They intended to take no
unnecessary risks, and their rifles were fully loaded,
resting among the great leaves, beside them. Nearer
and nearer came the intruder, the sound of crashing
scrub and the crackling of the undergrowths heralding
his approach. Straight to the camp beneath he
seemed to be steering. ‘ I’ll bet it’s only a big tapir
making for the river,’remarked Harry. ‘He’s got
bushed with the storm, and Hullo! It’s a
man.’ A human being dressed most strangely
had appeared. He ran towards the tent, paused
a moment, then passed inside and came out
presently, devouring the contents of a tin of pre-
served beef.
‘ He’s blamed cheeky, anyway,’ commented Charlie.
'There goes our cold tea now.’ The stranger had
picked up the billy which contained the tea left over
from their meal when Aztel left, and gulped down
the cold fluid with evident relish ; then he looked about


hurriedly for more luxuries, and made a dive inside
the benaboo again.
‘Oh,’ ejaculated Charlie, ‘we must stop this game
or we’ll be ruined. There, I knew it. He’s got all
our hard biscuits.’
‘l’ll drop something on his head,’ murmured
Harry. ‘Heis a regular glutton. My ! I wonder
who is his tailor?’ He aimed a large nut of some
kind at the hungry being below. It struck him and
rattled against his nether garments, which seemed to
be built after the pattern of trousers. He looked up
for a moment, then sat down on a log and went on
with his meal.
‘By Jove, Charlie,’ said Harry, ‘his trousers are
made of tin. What can he be? He is not of the same
people as Aztel, nor is he one of the common natives
of the rivers. And look at the rest of his dress. He’s
got a bit of a soft felt hat on his head, and I’m sure
that is a shirt he’s wearing, or rather once was
such an article. His legs are covered with woven
feathers, too, up to where his knee-joints are, and
above them that must be old billy-cans he has on
each leg, and a circle of some metal sheeting round
his waist ’
At that moment the man sprang to his feet and
assumed a listening attitude, then muttering : ‘ Buenos
dineros son casa con pucheros, ’ 1 he sat down again,
and swallowed biscuits as if his life depended on the
speed at which he disposed of them. But Charlie
could not suffer further loss of their stores without
complaint.
1 Spanish proverb, meaning, ‘A house with a stock of provisions is good
money.’


r* 6- jBBfcfajk
w &&
3RjJjJJ" % \ flBt J| WtojtKtF^'*
um|AjB I I
SKfiffCa A V \. jfflmSk x
■B, ■ \
yTm^^Bg. *^f4f;;‘. (w ~^B_
< ■ -T3* / _ JM __ ■ *uBJ
■I
I 8k J ; V'* V
'' ‘"C.; ' J : ,-,
v • 3 ■ v B
PICCADILLY PETER HELPS HIMSELF




‘A’ vuestra salud, viejo, mas co?ne poco. ’ (Your
good health, old man, but lunch lightly.)
The old man thus adjured dropped a biscuit, stared
up into the branches a moment, and ran off.
l Adios, que esquilan .’ (Good-day. lamin a
desperate hurry), he called out, adding some other
words which sounded familiar to the boys, but which
they did not quite understand.
‘Jupiter! The beggar is afraid,’ cried Harry, in
English. ‘ See how he runs. Should we follow
him?’
*No huye el que se retiro .’ (He who retreats does
not run away), cried the man from the scrub. ‘ Quand
on est bien il faut s'y tenir.' (When you are well off
there is no need to move.)
‘ But that last sentence is not Spanish,’explained
Charlie, forgetting himself.
‘No,’ returned the other voice in English, ‘but it
is the best French I can raise. I never took kindly to
Spanish.’
‘ Come back ! Come back ! ’ shouted both boys.
‘ We’re English too. Who are you ? ’
‘ I am certainly not going to leave my tree dwelling,
countrymen,’ spoke the oddly dressed figure, re-
appearing beneath. ‘ I really have doubts in the
meantime as to who I am, but to my friends I am—er
—Piccadilly Peter.’
‘ Piccadilly Peter ! ’ yelled the boys in great excite-
ment. ‘We’re coming down. We’re the rescuing
party come to look for you.’
‘ Indeed ! Then, gentlemen, if it is all the same to
you, I think I’d better come up, if my —er —fashion-
able attire will allow me. There are some angry


234 The Rival Treasure Hunters
people on my track, and if we must fight, perhaps the
higher elevation will be more favourable to us. May
I—er—ask your names ? ’
He picked up the biscuit he dropped, and began to
scale the tree, and now the sounds of a great number
of men breaking through the bush were quite dis-
tinguishable to all.


CHAPTER IX
Changing the Face of Nature
‘And now, Mr. Piccadilly Peter,’ began Charlie,
‘ tell us everything. Are all the old comrades well ?
Are Doc, Boston Bob, the parson, and Kangaroo
Dave with them now? Has Aztel returned safely?
Are the galleries likely to be successful? Do the
Razois know that we are coming? Have you done
anything with the lake? Are the councillors hard-
hearted men? Have you any diamonds? Were you
prisoners, really ? How did you escape, and have
you any message for us ? ’
‘ Are those your biscuits down there?’ asked Picca-
dilly Peter, when Charlie had finished.
‘ Yes, but tell us about the boys. Were you
surprised to see Doc and Boston Bob drop in among
you ? ’
‘ Because if they are,' went on the gentleman in the
picturesque garb, ‘ I should like very much to have
some. I am really hungry, and in a few minutes
we’ll not have the chance of getting them, as these—er
—noisy people coming this way will eat them all.’
‘Of course the biscuits are ours,’ said Harry, ‘ and
the people coming, if they are Razois, won’t touch us.
We are Aztel’s friends, and he will be here at day-
light, now not much more than an hour away ’
‘ Then with your permission I will fill the places I


have in my —er —apparel for pockets with them,’ said
Piccadilly Peter ; ‘ and if you have far to go, I should
—er —advise you to do the same. The hotels about
here are by no means first-class, and you are sure to
have a good appetite.’
‘But tell us about our comrades,’ cried Charlie.
‘ What do we care for biscuits when we are so near
them ? ’
‘ Pardon me, I—er —like biscuits. If you have no
objections, I will go down and get some. If you had
to live on cassava for some months you would perhaps
appreciate them also. As for your tinned meat,
believe me, it—er —has many virtues of which I am
sure you do not dream.’
‘ Are you pursued ?’asked Harry. ‘ls that noise
we hear caused by people coming after you?’
‘Verily thou art a man of keen perception, my
friend ; that noise is caused by a score or more fight-
ing Razois who—er—love me so much that they will
not return to their water city without me. True, as I
see, you have weapons ; we may shoot the majority of
them, but that goes against my sporting instincts, as
I know the beggars will get into serious trouble if
they use drastic means against us. Now we can be
quite comfortable roosting up here while—er —con-
suming the surplus fare you have in your larder
downstairs, and need not trouble the gentlemen of the
Razois unless they unfortunately trouble us ’
‘But are the boys alive?’ demanded Charlie, im-
patiently. ‘Tell us that—
‘My young friend—l perceive you are —er—youth-
ful, although I cannot see your face clearly—you
should really cultivate the virtue known among some


people as patience. I hadn’t any knowledge of that
attribute myself at one time, I admit, but I have
since discovered that as a fighting influence it is—er
—invincible.’
‘ Oh, we know all about patience being a virtue
which but few possess,’ exclaimed Charlie, irritably,
‘ but these old proverbs are not always right. Times
have changed now. The doctrine you preach would
kill ambition. There would never be any great deed
accomplished if men merely sat down and waited.
“ Everything comes to him who waits ” may be true in
theory, but the end of the world might come first, and
after that ’
‘ I really must have those biscuits Excuse
me, gentlemen, I will rejoin you presently, and we
can then continue this most interesting discussion.’
‘ Oh, go for the biscuits, you walking fashion-
plate,’ growled Charlie, ‘and confound them and
you and the discussion ; it’s our comrades we’re
interested in, and nothing else.’
Piccadilly Peter looked mildly at the speaker.
‘Look here, young man,’ he said, slowly, ‘who do
you imagine is most concerned in those —er —comrades
of whom you talk so glibly? You, who have never,
to the best of my knowledge, seen them, or I, who
have shared all the—er —fun with them?’
‘You don’t seem to be very anxious about them
anyhow,’ said Harry. ‘Your mind is chiefly taken
up with trivial things, and we have no time for such,
for we are here to rescue them ’
‘ Do you really mean what you say ? ’ asked the
visitor, amusedly. ‘ I suppose you are lieutenants in
a British force, although you don’t look it. Well, it


doesn’t matter; you'll be prisoners, too, before many
hours have passed, and all for being obstinate. Now,
I wanted those stores removed for—er—three reasons,
but of course a late captain in the Guards can play
the game any way the powers that be ordain ’
‘ You never said anything about removing the
stores,’ cried Charlie. ‘Tell us what you mean at
once.’
‘No time now. I’m—er—hungry, therefore I
wanted something to eat. You’ll be hungry in time
yourselves, and you’ll want something, probably,
when you can get nothing. Our friends will see that
benaboo presently, also those—er—signs of civilisa-
tion, and they will connect them with the near
presence of visitors. Now visitors are not allowed
on this mountain, so after devouring your stores,
they will catch you, and the long galleries will benefit
thereby.’
Before he had finished speaking both boys had
slid to the ground ; in a minute their leafy shelter was
thrown down, and their fire ashes scattered. Piccadilly
Peter meanwhile gathered up the billy and other
utensils and clambered overhead again, and in a very
brief space indeed nothing remained below to indicate
that men had recently sheltered there from the storm.
And not much too soon were they in regaining
their perch among the branches. Suddenly, silently,
and running swiftly, a number of feather-bedecked
men, armed with blow-pipes and spears, broke into
view and rushed past underneath. They uttered no
sound, but grim determination was marked on their
faces. They were all clad in a feathery dress similar
to Aztel’s, and looked very formidable. Soon they


were lost in the bush again, and only the crashing
scrub, as it fell before their advance, told which way
they went.
‘And now that we know each other,’ remarked
Piccadilly Peter, as he dangled his armour-plated
limbs over a branch and munched biscuits and tinned
beef, ‘ perhaps you would —er —enlighten me as to
who and what you two gentlemen really are. I have
not yet had the honour of being told your names, but
perhaps you are like me, members of that band who
prefer to forget their names ? ’
‘Oh no, we are not,’ said Harry. ‘ Our names
are Charlie Ainsworth and Harry Middleton ; that is
Charlie, and lam Harry. We left England with
Doc and Boston Bob to come out here to find their old
comrades, known as Big Tassy, Sailor Bill, Mersey
Jack, Damper Charlie, Irish Mike, and yourself. At
Georgetown the parson and Kangaroo Dave joined
us, and after a quick but eventful journey we arrived
at the base of this mountain. There our four comrades
were captured by the Razois, while we were dealing
with a gang brought along by gentlemen called
Maclaren and Carville. We tricked them and met
the Razois chief, Aztel. He took us thus far and left
us to go into the city, and we are waiting here for his
return at daylight. He has promised to help us in
carrying out the work for which Doc and Boston Bob
engaged us, and which we will see through no matter
what happens. That is all our story.’
‘ Gentlemen, I apologise for my seeming rudeness
or indifference,’ said Piccadilly Peter. ‘ Believe me,
though, I too was acting as I thought best. I thought
you were members of a punitive force, and I knew


that any attempt to enter the hollow by direct assault
was doomed to disappointment. Then, after a bit, I
thought you might be members of the gang you have
mentioned, for we knew they were coming—my escape
is—er—one result—and I did not wish to give any-
thing away. I was never much good at thinking, and
your presence here upset my—er —thought machinery
so much that, while you were speaking I had to strive
hard to bring the brains I have to bear upon the situa-
tion. I understand now, however, that ours is a
common cause, and after I tell all I know I’ll take
orders and carry them out as faithfully as you could
do yourselves. As for Aztel, I fear you will never
see him again. He entered the city last night, and
was immediately made a prisoner by order of the
councillors. They think he has been a traitor, and I
shouldn’t wonder but they’ll depart from their law
against the taking of human life in dealing with
him ’
‘ls he in danger among his own people?’ cried
Harry.
Piccadilly Peter smiled. ‘ln my experience of life,
young man,’ he said, slowly, ‘ I have found one’s own
people to be less charitably disposed than any out-
siders. Aztel will join his great ancestors within the
next few days unless—er—a miracle happens. He is
a decent fellow, and I am sorry for him.—Hand over
another piece of beef, I’m still hungry.—He is accused
of having associated with the enemies of his people,
and of leading some of them up this mountain ’
‘But we are not enemies of the Razois,’ Charlie
interrupted. ‘We rescued him from those who were,
and we hope to drain the hollow of its waters ’


‘And as I was going to say,’ continued Piccadilly
Peter, between mouthfuls of biscuits and beef, ‘ he is
not allowed to say a word in his defence, for by some
silly old law of theirs a chief’s voice may not be heard
while trouble for which he is deemed responsible
lasts.’
‘lt’s time we got on the road again,’ said Harry.
‘ It’s almost daylight now, and we’ve got to save him
some way. How far are we from the city now, Mr.
Piccadilly Peter?’
‘ Drop the mister, if you —er —don’t mind. We
don’t believe in flourishes in this part of the world.
You are about a mile from the top of this mountain,
and an additional half mile down the crater slopes
will take you to the cave dwellings of the mysterious
people. Of course you know it is the crater of an
enormous extinct volcano they inhabit. No, I forgot
you couldn’t know, for you haven’t been there, and
since the Venezulan visit no one who has seen the lake
shores, except myself, has ever got out of the place.’
‘Well, we are going to see it now,’ observed
Harry. ‘You may come with us if you like, but of
course we do not expect that you will be anxious to
go back. Tell us all you know of the approaches,
and we’ll get away.’
‘ Strange to say, young man, I rather think—er—l
will go back,’ Peter said, musingly, ‘ but not with you,
I hope. In fact, now that you have told me that Doc
and Boston Bob are alive and well, and in the hands
of those people, I don’t want to escape. We will be
together again, and that means more to me than life
elsewhere without them.’
‘ But we are a rescuing expedition, and we mean to
(C 10) x 6


take them all out of the place,’ said Charlie, quietly.
‘ Please don’t laugh ; we mean every word we say,
and we will never leave this mountain without them.
We, too, have tasted of the joys of comradeship.’
‘ I believe you, boys, but you can never enter the
valley over the mountain top. Even an entire High-
land brigade couldn’t do that The only possible
pass is through a gorge in the volcanic rocks, cut out
by the Razois themselves since they were invaded by
a Venezuelan force over ten years ago. That passage
ends in a precipice which drops a hundred feet sheer
into the hollow, before foothold can be obtained ; and
in galleries cut in its sides above the narrow roadway,
connected with their cave city far beneath, there watch
continually enough Razois to throw down thousands
of tons of rock upon those who would attempt to force
an entrance. No, boys, it is impossible, I know, for
it was my lot to —er —lead a storming force against a
much less impregnable position than this pass in
the South African War, and as a result I was —er—
disgraced and sent home, and that is why I am here.’
‘ Then how are you going to enter? ’ asked Charlie.
‘ And how do the Razois themselves get out and in ? ’
‘ I shall enter as a recaptured prisoner. The
Razois have secret passages leading from the valley
inside which open into the pass, but you could never
find them, as only one is open at a time, and it is well
guarded.’
‘Then how did you escape?’ demanded Charlie;
‘ how did you break through this guard ? ’
‘ The galleries in which we were working suddenly
burst into one of these passages, and before our
guards were aware of the fact it was agreed that I


should make the attempt to reach the outside world
and inform it of our position. We couldn’t all come
because we should be missed at once. I started, but
turned the wrong way and found myself in the cave
used as the council chamber. While there a number
of men came in along the same passage with the
chief, Aztel, as their prisoner, and hiding against the
wall until I thought I had an opportunity, I ran back
and finally came out into a cave guarding the pass.
It was under-manned at the time through some of its
men having gone down with Aztel, and doubtless the
rest thought I was a messenger of some kind until I
rushed through them and out into the pass. Then
they followed. I ran down the hill, and—well, here I
am. The people who followed will not return without
me, and it seems to me now that my presence with you
merely means that you will go back too, as prisoners.
I, therefore, having bequeathed my mission to you,
propose allowing myself to be caught, and while they
are taking me back you can—er —escape ’
‘Thanks, but we are not built that way. We are
not going to try to escape,’ said Harry.
‘ I beg your pardon, boys, I did not mean to insult
you, but I never was brilliant in expressing myself or
I might now be—er—a general, or at least a colonel
in the British army. I meant that you might get
down off the mountain and try some other method
of gaining entrance into the hollow. I know that if
you were able to get the better of that Scotsman
Maclaren and his American co-partner Carville, you
are not by any means an ally to be despised, and if
you could, by some stroke of strategy or good luck,
gain access to the caves which open into the galleries


we are cutting now, you might be able to pull us up
into them at night, from which, after making due
preparations, we might contrive to escape in a body
by rushing the pass guards.’
‘ Is there any other means of access to the hollow ? ’
asked Charlie. ‘ Aztel didn’t mention it. He said
the only way was by circling round this mountain until
we reached the pass ’
‘ Where you would at once be taken prisoners and
sent to work in the passages they are cutting through
the hill to the outside world, and where, until we do
break through, you would remain as helpless as we
are. There is an entrance to the crater from the
outside somewhere, for the overflow waters get out
by means of a tunnel through which we have often
thought of trying to escape.’
‘You mean the roadway which the people once
used?’ asked Charlie.
‘ I suppose so ; at least it looks as if it had been an
engineered cut. If you could find its other end and
effect an entrance, the rest would be easy. In the city
itself, if I may call it a city, there is no guard kept at
night. The people all live in caves cut in the rocks
above the shores of the lake, and all defence is left to
the pass guards. But there is little good talking, if
it were possible for you to get inside the people
would be well aware of the fact, and will have taken
steps already to frustrate any attempt in that direction.
Gentlemen, I thank you for the—er—very excellent
meal I have enjoyed. Cassava is—er—not very
palatable after a while, and we are given nothing else.
Ah, there comes the sun now. Good-morning.’ He
prepared to descend from the tree.


‘ Hold on a minute ! ’ cried Charlie. ‘ Where are
you going, and what are you intending to do?’
‘To look for the people who are looking for me,
and get caught by them. I haven’t seen Doc nor
Boston Bob for some months—we all thought they
had answered at the big roll call—and I am in a
hurry to shake hands with them. Jove ! to think of
them being prisoners too ’
‘ But wouldn’t it be better for every one, if you
were to help us instead of allowing yourself to be
caught?’ said Harry ; ‘and can’t you give us a plan
of that impregnable place, anyhow? We’ve got work
in front of us to rescue you all, and we need all the
help we can get.’
‘Young man, it is to assist your chances that I
propose being caught,’ answered Piccadilly Peter,
tying his feathery leggings in position, and hitching up
his tin trousers. ‘lf they don’t get me, they will keep on
searching until they find you. Now, I admit that you
can be of more service at liberty than I can be, hence
my idea Oh yes, here is a plan of some kind
given to Big Tassy by Aztel a month or so ago.
Big Tassy told him to provide him with certain
things, and he would empty his lake. Of course, if
that were done, we would be free, for Aztel would again
be sole ruler of the people, and he is friendly disposed
to us. But it can’t be done now, so we needn’t talk
of it. The Razois are stupid barbarians a thousand
years behind the times, but without flying machines
no one can get into their valley without their consent,
and I am sorry for Maclaren and Co. if they try.
Here, take charge of this example of high art in map
survey work. Big Tassy filled in all the words him-


self. He says he understands it, but I don’t. I
never had much brains ’
‘Why, this is as plain as can be,’ exclaimed
Charlie, examining the roughly drawn plan. ‘ Can it
be correct? ’
‘ I think you may assume that it is, if you can
make it out,’ said Piccadilly Peter. ‘ Aztel wouldn’t
make any mistake. Can I tell you anything else? I
hear the warriors returning, and I am impatient to
get back to see Doc and Boston Bob. Sailor Bill
and I have an argument on, and if I don’t get back
soon he’ll have won both over to his side. We’ve
each got two backers just now. Do you think you
might—er—be favourably inclined to my side when
you join us?’ He looked at Charlie and then at
Harry inquiringly, and waited for their answer.
‘ls it a very serious question?’ Charlie asked, in
surprise ; ‘what is the argument about?’
‘ Yes, it may—er —mean a lot Stop laughing,
young man, it is not good form to laugh at your
senior, even if he is dressed in clothes of his—er—
own make.’
‘ I’m not laughing,’ spluttered Harry, ‘ I’m only
choking. Surely a fellow may choke if he likes?’
‘ I see you gentlemen think I am—er —slightly
touched in the head,’ smiled Piccadilly Peter. ‘ Per-
haps I may be, but, believe me, I am not nearly so mad
as you will be, after you have—er—lived on cassava
for some months.’
‘What is the subject of your argument?’ again
asked Charlie. ‘ We'll take your side if we can gulp it
down at all.’
‘lt is easily told. Sailor Bill says that we are


prisoners in Venezuelan territory, and I hold that it is
British country in which the Razois dwell. What do
you think? ’
‘ According to the latest accounts the flow of the
waters was to determine the boundary,’ said Charlie.
‘ That decision, of course, was obvious to every one,
for otherwise Venezuela had no case. According to
position this mountain is in British territory, and
Brazil has a much greater right to dispute that fact
than Venezuela. But allowing that the watershed
fixes the line, and not the meridian, what country, in
your opinion, can claim this mountain?’
‘ Doc told us that the river which rises on its slopes
flows round its base, as I see it is marked on this
plan, and flows into the Caroni, a tributary of the
Orinoco. That seems to make the mountain Vene-
zuelan,’ said Charlie. ‘Soit is marked on our charts.’
‘ But Boston Bob pointed out that the Cotinga also
rises on this mountain,’ put in Harry ; ‘and that fact
seems to give Brazil a fair claim, for the Cotinga flows
into the Branco, which in turn feeds the Amazon.’
‘Quite so,’agreed Piccadilly Peter, gravely; ‘but
it is the inside of the mountain that interests us, and I
hold that when Maclaren and Carville closed the
lake’s outlet, and caused it to flow through the road
passage into the Potaro, they made the crater British
property.’
‘By Jupiter! you are right,’ cried both boys,
simultaneously, ‘the lake determines the watershed
and it drains into British Guiana,’ continued Charlie,
‘ so we’ll take your side when we join you.’
‘Thanks! I’ll clear out now so that the warriors
won’t catch me near here. I’ll tell the boys you’re


coming, and we’ll look out for you. Wait here until
our—er —friends pass, and then slide down to the base
of the mountain and look for the lake’s outlet. Per-
haps it can be forced, and if not you can come to the
Pass and be captured and thus join our party, or go
back down to Georgetown and tell what you know.
You don’t mind my —er —taking some biscuits with
me?’
‘ Take everything we have,’ said Charlie. ‘ We’ve
plenty of stores at the foot of the mountain. And if
you think you must go, tell Doc and the others when
you see them that we are on the trail and that we’ll
make no mistakes. If you can get a talk with Aztel
he’ll tell you all about what we’ve done.’
‘ Good-morning, then, boys ! I hope to see you
again soon ; bring ropes with you if you find the pas-
sage, and come through at night. You’ll know the
gallery in which we are working, readily, because
there is always a fire burning at the mouth. Don’t
come to it though, or you’ll be collared. Climb to the
system of caves directly above, they are connected
with ours, but we can’t get up into them.’ Piccadilly
Peter shook hands with each and climbed down the
tree, and next moment was out of sight, although
they could hear him breaking through the scrub, until
similar noises behind took up their attention.
‘ Mr. Piccadilly Peter is an odd sort of person,’
commented Harry, as they waited among the branches
to see the returning warriors, ‘ but he is certainly
original in his ideas of dress, and I like his cool way
of taking things. Jove ! I think it must be a picnic
those supposed prisoners are having, or he wouldn’t
be so anxious to be re-captured.’


‘ I don’t know about that,’ said Charlie, ‘ I think he
is a fine fellow, and really is allowing himself to be
retaken for our benefit. The parson told me that men,
when away in the wilds for a long time, think differ-
ently from what they do in the midst of civilisation.
They exaggerate trifles, and treat the serious and im-
portant circumstances of their lives as if they were
mere trivial details. One thing, anyway, Doc and the
others will know from him that we are still something
on which they may depend, and we must justify them
in that belief.’
‘ We shall, Charlie Hullo ! there’s one of the
n igg ers > the others are passing over on our right.’
‘And he sees us too, although he is pretending he
hasn’t. Look out for a dart from his blow-pipe. He
is going to yell on his comrades. No, don’t shoot,
Harry, they’ll hear. Take that, you beggar ’
The native took it and fell in a heap. It was a
well-directed beef-tin, and it struck him on the head.
‘ Now, Harry, we’d better make tracks down the
mountain before he is missed,’ continued Charlie, ‘ I
am sorry that we had to give him a headache, but we
couldn’t help it, and anyhow there are plenty of these
healing leaves about. Come along ! ’
They scrambled to the ground and made off just
as a wild shouting some distance up the hillside
announced that Piccadilly Peter had been sighted, if
not already caught.
But they could not afford to interfere, even if their
friend’s capture had not been part of the arranged
plan. It was already an hour past sunrise and Aztel
had not arrived. He would not come now, they
knew, therefore it was time they acted for themselves,


if they wished to be of any service to their comrades.
They had Piccadilly Peter’s assurance that the pass at
the end of the circling road was closed to them, and
they knew they were in a danger zone in which they
might be captured any minute. But in both a daring
idea was fast shaping itself. They would go back and
examine the passage through which the lake poured
its surplus waters. Perhaps in it they would find a
means of entrance to the grimly guarded hollow.
When Aztel told them of its significance it was too
dark to inspect it closely, and in any case they could
see the gorge only a few miles beneath them, although
they had travelled about twenty in getting to their
present position.
Down through the wet forest interlacements they
rushed, trampling over slow-moving reptiles, and
leaping across other startled creatures that had not
time to get out of their line of advance. In about half-
an-hour they reached the smoothly-flowing river
which ran round the mountain, and running along its
bank for a couple of miles they found the canoe in
which they had crossed the previous morning. They
pushed it into the water, swollen considerably as a
result of the storm, and paddled to the other side ; then
after beaching it safely among some scrub where it
would not be seen, they ran over to the wall which
closed in the gorge. Then they stopped, and gazed
blankly at each other. All their work had been
wasted, and they had run blindly into a danger which
they ought to have foreseen.
The space below flanking the rapids was alive
with human beings. Hundreds of Accawoios Indians
were even then scaling the rocky bluff, and a dozen


white men armed with rifles were keeping guard
beneath. Among them were Maclaren and Carville.
‘We’ve done it this time,’ gasped Harry. ‘Shall
we run or fight? ’
‘We can’t fight that crowd,’ groaned Charlie.
‘They have evidently just come up the rapids, being
hauled in these canoes by the natives. We’ll be
caught in another minute.’ He drew his revolver,
and pushed cartridges into any empty chambers, and
his action was at once copied by Harry.
‘But they don't know we’re here yet,’ said the
latter. ‘We can still clear out. These natives are
coming up to guard against a surprise attack, I think,
and these white men are going to do something down
there. ’
‘We might shoot the niggers as they reach the
top,’ suggested Charlie; ‘but I don’t like the idea
of bloodshed.’
‘By Jupiter ! Those fellows down there are up to
some trick. Look, Charlie ! Maclaren has a rope
round him, and he’s in the water where it is bubbling
up. Carville and some of the others are pulling him
across the rock face.’
‘They know the secret of the passage,’ replied
Charlie, sadly. ‘ And we are beaten again ’
‘Well, we’re not going to lie here, and let them
get their murderous fingers round our throats without
some show of fight. Come, Charlie, we’re not beaten
yet. We can run along the top of the gorge and get
round that bluff before these niggers see us. Then
we can watch, as we have done before. If the worst
comes to the worst we can pick off Maclaren and
Carville and the other leading men with our rifles ’


‘All right, Harry, we’ll have yet another try for
our comrades,’ said Charlie. ‘They haven’t found
the launch yet, and maybe we’ll be able to take
advantage of any discovery they make.’
They ran along the top of the rocks on one side of
the rapids, and as they rounded a large boulder which
hid them from sight, the Accawoios began to swarm
over the edge of the cliff they had vacated.
‘This is like school-days,’ said Harry, as they
threw themselves flat on the ground, and began to
crawl to a position from which they could watch the
doings of the white men. ‘ The game we are playing
is simply a version of hide-and-seek, and it seems that
we are always the hiders.’
‘One slight difference is that the seekers have
rifles, Harry, and know how to use them, I have no
doubt. Another is, that the game absolutely finishes
if they see us. I expect it will finish us too ’
‘\ ou have grown awfully pessimistic of late,
Charlie. I thought the more the adventure the more
you would enjoy the game?’
‘ That’s all right, but our adventures don’t seem to
have much chance of a happy ending. We are the
only players on our side, and one mistake or accident
means an end to all our hopes. If we were in some
civilised country, and taking part in sports, I should
think our chances as good as any of the other com-
petitors, but we are handicapped too severely. We
are in a country we don’t know, and all the rest are
against us, and it is not a game we have practised we
are playing. In fact, Harry, we are mad to think we
ourselves can successfully fight the Razois and these
people too. Maclaren and Carville are too much


for us, for they have a knowledge which we don’t
possess, and they certainly have brains which, if
directed in a right way, would make them very famous
indeed.’
‘And I suppose we have no brains, Charlie? We
are bound to go under in everything we try? We
have never beaten these people before now, and
Hullo! Look at them now! They don’t mean
to be surprised by the mysterious mountain people
anyway.’
They had gained the edge of the rocks about a
hundred yards down from the end of the ravine, and
could now see all that was taking place. The natives
were scattering themselves along the top of the wall
in which the gorge terminated, and with much noise
some were proclaiming that they had found signs
which told them a battle had taken place, recently, in
the vicinity. Down in the bottom of the rock-flanked
waterway most of the white men had congregated,
and that they were preparing to do something there
was easily evident, from the tools they were unload-
ing from some of the bark canoes lying on the ledge
beside them.
‘ It has just struck me, Harry,’ said Charlie, with
more hope in his tones than had been for some time,
‘ that the Razois will soon take a hand in this game.
If not, they do not justify their traditions, which
assume that a sudden attack is the best defence.’
‘But what is that man Maclaren doing? He is
sitting in a sling in the water in front of the rock, and
the other men are holding him in that position with
ropes stretched up to the top of the rocks, and to the
sides. Are they trying to drown him ? ’


‘No fear ! Why, I have it, Harry ! I know their
game now, and we’ll beat them again. We must get
down to the launch ’
‘ Don’t get excited, Charlie. What have you dis-
covered? Let me into the secret.’
‘You remember we heard them congratulating
themselves that we would be stuck without our launch,
even if we did know something or other?’
‘ Yes ; then we appropriated theirs, and it is down
in a hole in the rocks underneath us just now. What
of that ? ’
‘ Don’t you see that Maclaren is sitting in the boil-
ing waters just where they gush out of the rocks?’
‘Yes, he’s getting wet, I know. I only wish some
cayman or camoudie would haul him underneath ; but
of course no creature could live in that whirlpool of
waters.’
‘ See ! The other men are handing out to him
long steel bars and a hammer, and he has lit his pipe,
as if he were quite contented to remain where he is
for some time.’
‘Well, the water is warm ; but he can’t dive into
the passage and live. What are you driving at,
Charlie? I can’t follow you?’
‘ Maclaren is going to drill a hole into the rocks
above the passage and charge it with dynamite, or
some other explosive. He knows that the exit of
these waters is much smaller than the rest of the
passage, and hopes that when he blasts away the
rocks at the mouth that his men will be able to sail
into the heart of the mountain. That is where the
need of a powerful launch comes in. He must have
a plan the same as ours.’ Charlie produced the rough


sketch Piccadilly Peter had given him, and examined
it minutely, his comrade watching the doings of the
man on the sling meanwhile.
‘ Yes, that is the idea,’ Charlie went on, excitedly.
They mean to enter the hollow in which the Razois
dwell by that passage, and they must know its forma-
tion makes that possible, or they wouldn’t trouble
trying to enlarge its entrance. The game is ours yet,
Harry ; we’ll go to the launch and get up steam.’
‘You know, Charlie, I’m not an engineer; but
I’m getting hungry, and there’s plenty to eat in the
launch, and if we could get into the cave where it is
hidden without being seen, we could watch just as
well, and even be able to stand a siege. Maclaren is
certainly hammering at the rocks above the place
where the water gushes out. Good luck to him, and
I hope the Razois don’t come along until we see the
result of his work.’
‘ Move slowly, and take great care then, Harry ;
we’ll try to work down to the ledge underneath ’
‘ Too risky, Charlie ; we might drop the distance
suddenly, and the abrupt stop at the end wouldn’t
be pleasant. Why not run along the rocks until we
come to where the rapids begin, or rather end ; we
could then come up the ledge, and drop into our cave
when we saw our chance.’
‘ All right, come on ! ’ The boys crawled back from
the cliff until they were out of sight, and then ran
towards the open end of the ravine, descending all the
time, until at length they found themselves standing
on the ledge, along which they had first travelled when
pulling their canoes up the rapids. Afraid of missing
any doings which might mean much to them, they


then hurried back along the strange natural towing-
path, and in due course came within sight of the end of
the gorge. Overhead the natives and some white men
kept constant guard, and at the foot the rest of the
white men assisted Maclaren to the best of their
ability. The clang of his heavy hammer on the head
of his bar steel jumper resounded among the rocks
above the roar of the rapids. He was a skilful worker,
as was evident, although how and where the power-
ful, squatly-built man gained his experience in rock
drilling was probably known only to himself, and,
perhaps, his inseparable companion, Carville.
Watching their chance, the boys wriggled across
an exposed stretch of rock which lay between them
and the cave. It was risky, but it had to be done ;
and by dint of careful work, stopping all forward
motion and lying flat when any man looked their way,
and proceeding again when they thought they had an
opportunity of doing so unobserved, they at last
reached the hidden steps leading down into the cave
on the water’s edge.
Meanwhile the army of watchers on top were
erecting defence works ; apparently they expected to
be attacked, but they did not intend being taken by
surprise, or at any disadvantage. They never troubled
to look down the narrow channel in which the waters
rushed impetuously towards the Potaro, or they could
not have failed to have seen the flat, motionless forms
on the ledge far below them.
Drill after drill was handed to Maclaren as the one
in use became blunt, and a man at a fire quickly
dressed and tempered the steel bars anew as he
received them. Maclaren smoked peacefully, and


Changing the Face of Nature 257
drove his drills home with mighty, regular strokes,
pausing only occasionally to clean out the small hole
he was making, with water.
And while he worked and smoked, and others
watched, the boys reached the cave in safety, and sat
down on the gunwale of the launch. They could now
see without being seen, and could even hear the rude
jests which Bruiser Tom and some of his associates
passed concerning Maclaren and his rock-boring skill.
Hastily partaking of some tinned food, the two
adventurers looked around to see what prospects there
were of the smoke escaping, without proclaiming their
presence, if they kindled the fires under the vessel’s
boiler. Luck was with them, for a small opening in
the rocks formed a vent, which would carry the smoke
a good distance away before allowing it to escape into
the air. This they proved by kindling a small fire
beside the cleft and watching for the smoke. But they
could see none, and the draught was so great that they
knew the crack must extend to nearly the top of the
rocks before opening into the air.
Shortly afterwards the launch fires were in full
blast, and while Charlie assiduously tended them,
Harry piled on board all the driftwood which had
been swirled into the cave. This, with the cut timber
already round the boiler, they calculated would serve
until they could replenish the supply elsewhere ; and
while arranging it, Harry discovered various tools
stowed away beneath the seats. Incidentally he also
noticed that a new crank pin had been fitted.
An hour passed, the steam was now at full pressure
on the gauges, and Maclaren had finished his drill-
hole. Overhead the native guard still watched, and
(Clo) 17


amused themselves by whipping each other. They
were entirely naked, and their idea of a pastime was
one that would not appeal to most people.
‘ I wish our friends outside would hurry,’ Charlie
remarked. ‘I am afraid they’ll hear the steam
blowing off at the safety valve. Ah, Maclaren is
charging his hole with gelignite now. We’ll see a
change in the landscape directly.’
‘ I think it is about time the Razois put in an
appearance,’ Harry said, irrelevantly. ‘ Now is their
chance of doing good work for themselves and us.’
‘ Keep under cover,’ cried Charlie, looking out,
‘ he’s nearly ready.’
Maclaren had now rammed his hole tight with
plugs of the explosive he was using, and, as the boys
watched, he attached a whole length of fuse to a
fulminating cap, by squeezing the fuse inside the cap
cylinder with his teeth, as coolly as if he were biting
off the end of a cigar, and, inserting the cap in the
heart of the last plug placed in the hole, he stuffed
the remainder of the bore with paper, and completed
it with clay. He was then pulled on shore with the
free end of the fuse in his hand, and all the men but
himself at once began to scale the rock. He calmly
applied a match to the fuse, and, after seeing that it
was burning all right, leisurely followed.
Fascinated, the boys lay under cover and watched.
They knew they were within the reach of flying rocks,
but they could not help themselves. A minute passed,
and yet another, then a wild burst of frenzied yells
broke out overhead, and men came falling over the
cliff face.
‘ Keep back, you idiots ! Keep back or you’ll be


blown to glory ! ’ rang out Maclaren’s voice. Rifles
and revolvers barked as if in answer. Shrieks and
groans filled the air, and a swaying crowd of humanity
appeared on the top of the cliff. Loud swelled the
sounds of savage warfare, and above all rose the
voices of Maclaren and Carville. Pandemonium had
broken loose ; in other words, the Razois had come.
And then, with a dull muffled report, not unlike the
crack of a stock-whip, the face of the wall suddenly fell
forwards into the rapids, and a great black hole lay
beyond through which foaming waters, now released
from the pressure of their narrow exit, bounded forward
jubilantly into the open air. Then a cloud of evil-
smelling smoke settled down and screened the passage
from view.


CHAPTER X
Through the Mountains
‘What has happened?’ cried Harry. ‘Are these
dead men who are being pitched over the cliff?
Look ! There is Carville with half-a-dozen Razois
hanging on to him. They are forcing him over the
top. Oh ! No, he is saved, and it is they who are
going over. What ! can that blood-stained man who
has flung himself on the natives so savagely be
Maclaren ? Jupiter! He is as strong as ten men!
Ah ! they have got him down now. I feel I must
shoot, Charlie. I can’t see the man murdered before
my eyes. What fierce brutes these Razois are !
Maclaren is done! No! he is on his feet again !
Whew! he is knocking them down like skittles.
There is Carville going to his rescue. They are
both down. Oh ! Charlie, they’ll be rolled over in
a second ’
‘ Give me a hand, Harry ; our chance has come
now. See, the Accawoios are running away, and
there is Bruiser Tom smashing among the Razois
with his clubbed rifle. I don’t see Maclaren or
Carville. Have they been thrown over the cliff?
Come, Harry, don’t dream ; we must get away now.
Ah, there is Maclaren again ; he is blazing at the
mob with a couple of revolvers, and Carville is lying
at his feet. Ah! he is down too, clubbed from


behind. Push off, Harry ! The shots are dying
away, and we’ll be caught, too, if we wait here.’
Charlie leaped into the water and began pushing
the launch over the sand bar at the mouth of the cave ;
and, shuddering at the awful scene on the cliff-top,
Harry mechanically assisted.
‘Now, Harry, jump in and steer straight for the
opening in the rocks behind that cloud of heavy
smoke.’ As he spoke the launch was shot into the
rapids, where it was at once caught by the current and
carried broadside on downstream. Clinging to its
sides were the two boys, but now they were them-
selves again, and though keenly appreciative of their
danger, their nerves were steady and their brains
clear. Harry scrambled over the gunwale and
stumbled towards the tiller ropes, and Charlie quickly
reached the engines and turned on full steam.
And not by much were they saved from being
dashed against a snag in midstream, which would
assuredly have put an end to their careers. But
the engines responded nobly, and although almost
half-filled with water shipped over the side, the vessel
was no longer a helpless, drifting mass. Thus she
just cleared the sharp jutting rock by heading across
the stream, for well Harry knew he could not check
her motion in time to avert a catastrophe by swinging
her round. But the water was now clear of danger
for a space, and skilfully he brought her head to face
upstream. Slowly the drifting ceased, then after
battling bravely for a moment, and just holding their
own, the engines triumphed, and almost imperceptibly
the launch began to forge ahead.
Not for a moment had the engineer or steersman


given a thought to anything but their respective
duties, but now, conscious that once more they had
retrieved a victory over circumstances which might
well have daunted most men, they wiped the blinding
perspiration from their eyes, and looked around.
The battle was still raging on the face of the cliff
overhead, but it had now resolved itself into a one-
sided affair. The natives, led by Turpentine, had fled,
and the white men were lying behind any shelter
they could find, emptying their revolvers into the
compact mass of Razois every time they rushed them.
Many of the latter went down, but each rush enabled
them to capture one of their enemies. They did not
know that by retreating they gave the white men time
to reload their weapons. Their system was very
elementary, but still wonderfully sure. Before each
rush they decided upon the man they would take, and
despite the well-aimed bullets which showered among
them, they took him. It was only a matter of time
when the last would be their prisoner, for, strangely
enough, they seemed more anxious to make captures
than to kill. Probably they were thinking of the
need of workers in their galleries.
But the boys had no time to waste watching a
fight which meant disaster to them, whoever were the
victors, if they were caught; and Harry headed the
steadily-moving craft straight at the cavernous
entrance Maclaren had blown out of the rock face.
They did not know whether or not they had been
seen, but Charlie kept his eyes fixed aloft as they
neared the dark tunnel’s mouth, expecting to see some
boulders come down on top of their frail craft. Inch
by inch the propeller screwed ahead, and now they


were near enough to understand fully what Maclaren’s
blast had done. They were entering a tunnel through
which the water forced a passage, but which, if their
boat could stem the current, would allow them about
four feet of clearance between the surface and the roof.
Evidently the exit had been much smaller than the
rest of the tunnel, so as to be the more easily defended
if need be. Clearly the long passage had been cut by
the hands of men, for the marks of tools could be
seen in the roof. Where it ended, and under what
circumstances, the navigators did not know, nor just
then did they care.
Suddenly they passed the grim portals, and the
light of day was shut behind ; the noise of battle
became drowned in the deafening thunder of the
waters, and a cold air chilled them to the bone.
1 Can we do it? ’ shouted Charlie, trying to note in
the gathering gloom the rate of their vessel’s progress.
‘ This passage has a clear air outlet somewhere, other-
wise there would be no air current.’
‘I think we can,’ Harry roared back. ‘ We’re still
moving ahead, anyway. Will the steam hold out ? ’
‘Lie forward,’ was Charlie’s reply. ‘There may
be rocks projecting from the roof somewhere. We
can keep up steam for an hour.’
The boys bent low, so as to miss any irregular part
which might be in the roof of the passage, Harry with
the steering-ropes in his hands, and Charlie as close
to the furnace as the limited space allowed. They
did not know when the space between the water
surface and the rocky arch above them might become
contracted to such a point that further progress would
be impossible, but they knew from the fact that a


decided draught of cold air was encountered that an
air space did exist, and had a free outlet somewhere.
Then Harry had a brilliant thought. ‘ Why, Charlie,’
he shouted, ‘ the funnel reaches higher than we do.
‘ we sit directly behind it we cannot fail to get
through where it goes.’
‘You are right,’ agreed his comrade, ‘and we’ll
make it light our way, too.’ He flung open the
furnace door and threw in lengths of the hard timber
lying beside him until the fire could hold no more,
then, by aid of a burning log, he examined the steam
and water gauges, and closed the door again.
‘Everything is right,’ he said, ‘and we can do
without starting the cold water feed-pump for the time
I have said. The draught in this passage is acting
as a natural flue in addition to our funnel, and, if
we’ve fuel enough to last, we’ll get up a greater head
of steam than ever was raised on these boilers. Don’t
look at the funnel, Harry ; look past it so as not
to be blinded ; its flaming mouth will give light
directly.’
The noise of the waters was now augmented by the
sharp whistling-like shriek of the roaring fire, and a
column of pungent smoke flew back over their heads
towards the exit in a manner which proved that the
natural draught of the passage was working in their
favour. Further conversation was almost impossible,
and soon the boys ceased attempting to speak to each
other. But they were not now in complete darkness.
A lurid glow hung over the funnel’s mouth, and
although the back-flying smoke absorbed it quickly,
it threw a weird, flickering glare many yards ahead,
and pierced the damp gloom very effectively. The


navigators now saw that they were gaining on the
stream at a certain steady rate of almost a mile per
hour ; but the fiery receding smoke-cloud and the
foaming water beneath seemed to be rushing back-
wards at a speed which promised instant destruction
should their steam-power fail, or their engines cease
to respond.
But the boys had stout hearts ; they knew their
danger, and they also knew what fate would meet
them even if they did successfully drift back into day-
light. Besides, their one mission on earth at the
moment was to help their comrades, and to them it
mattered little what risks they undertook for that
purpose.
Slowly, steadily, and surely they forced up the
tunnel, deafened by the noises, chilled with the cold
air, and with eyes, noses, and throats smarting under
the influence of the smoke. These slight incon-
veniences were ignored, and each devoted his whole
attention to the work which was in his special care.
Slowly, slowly they penetrated the heart of the moun-
tain until time lost all meaning to them. They felt
they had been days in the subterranean waterway, but
their knowledge of the evaporating propensities of
water in a multitubular boiler and the state of their
stock of fuel told them that barely an hour had passed.
And now a new trouble threatened them. The water
was dangerously low in the gauge-glasses, and if the
feed-pump were started the steam pressure would fall
immediately, to such an extent that it was extremely
questionable if they could hold their own against the
current. Charlie tried the experiment, and found that
his fears were correct. The cold water addition was


too much for the fires to render into sufficient high-
pressure steam, and quickly enough to keep the
engines running at a speed able to combat with the
swiftly flowing stream, and for a minute their forward
motion was arrested ; then the little vessel began to
lose, and the boys’ hopes dropped to zero.
There was no help for them unless the end of the
tunnel or a place of rest could be reached without
adding cold water to the boiler ; and, recognising this,
Charlie shut off the feed and piled more logs on the
fire. In about ten minutes the boiler would burst if
no relief came, and shouting to Harry to look out for
any irregularity in the sides of the tunnel to which
they might fasten until they had replenished the boiler
and got up steam again, he opened the controlling
valve to its fullest, and once more they moved ahead.
Anxiously Charlie watched the water disappearing
in the gauge-glass ; it was only a matter of a few
minutes now, and no signs of any change in the
passage could be detected. ‘We will be blown up
in less than five minutes,’ he shouted to Harry.
‘ Our water is done.’
Even as he spoke the launch seemed to leap forward,
the walls widened out on either side, and they were
sailing on a subterranean lake in which the water,
having plenty of room, was not striving so fiercely
to escape. A minute later they had run their bows
against a wall of rock which barred all further progress.
Charlie’s first thoughts were of the boiler, and he at
once started the feed-pumps and backed the launch
into a recess in the rocks where she lay secure. Then
while the boiler was being refilled, the comrades tried
to talk. Harry found a torch in the stern locker, and


lighting it, he swung it into a blaze which flung light
around for a great distance.
They were inside a great dome-shaped cavern ;
behind them lay the tunnel they had navigated, before
them rose the barrier rocks, overhead they could not
see, but about a hundred feet on their right a thunder-
ing sound, which they knew was caused by falling
water, seemed to indicate that the outlet, if any existed,
was in that direction. When the engines stopped,
conversation became a simpler matter, though by no
means such as would tend to a waste of words. ‘ Are
we stuck?’ Harry asked, holding his torch aloft.
‘lt looks like it; still, I don’t think we are,’ Charlie
replied, looking round. ‘ The passage continues some-
where, and if it is upwards it now goes, we will find it.’
‘Of course it is upwards, Charlie ; but how are we
to get up? That waterfall drops some hundreds of
feet, I’m sure, and nothing without wings could scale
that rock face it tumbles over.’
‘ But we know that there was once a roadway,
Harry, and that it is only since the lake was dammed
back that it became a water passage. Now lam sure
the Razois could not walk down over that precipice,
any more than we can go up. There must be a track.
This is a natural cave, and the diamond people took
advantage of it, when making their roadway, to bring
their track to the level of the outside country.’
‘ And > by Jove ! Charlie, the road is alongside us ! ’
Harry exclaimed, jumping out of the launch on to a
ledge which rose slantingly from the pool and con-
tinued in an upward direction, until lost in the darkness
beyond the influence of their torch-light. He ran
along its course for some distance and returned in great


excitement. ‘ We’ve struck it! ’he cried. ‘ This ledge
circles round the face of the dome, and rises like a
spiral to the top.’
‘ But what good is that to us ? ’ asked Charlie.
( The continuation to the outside will be through
another tunnel, just like the one we have already
come, and we can’t swim through it, nor can we drag
our boat up to it. I can see where the water breaks
through now and ’
‘You are always crying out before you are hit,
Charlie,’ laughed Harry. ‘ Let us get up and have a
look at the other tunnel, before we say we can’t go
through it.’
So they went up. The cave was about a hundred
feet in diameter, and its walls were very regular, though
it was quite evident that it was the result of one, or
several, natural upheavals, and not the work of man.
As Harry had surmised, the ledge ran round its
circumference, ever spiralling upwards. This road-
way, of course, had been cut in the walls by human
agencies, and signs were not wanting that a high
standard of efficiency had been reached by its engineers
and labourers.
Round and round the boys screwed their way
towards the higher levels, pausing occasionally to
rest and look down upon the pool below. It was a
fairly simple matter passing the waterfall when they
reached it in their circumgyrations, as it fell from the
upper tunnel in a long, graceful curve, and overshot
the track by a good number of feet. Twice they
passed under the cascade, their light causing the
unbroken wall of waters to sparkle like a great arch of
fire-flashing diamonds and rubies ; but, when they


approached the fall the third time, they saw they had
reached the tunnel through which the waters came
from the lake. The road led straight into the aperture,
and became lost in the seething swirl. Apparently
the subterranean explorers had encountered an obstacle
which would defy their powers to surmount. They
sat down on the damp track, as near to the issuing
water as they could go, and bitterly bewailed their
plight. It was hard to be thwarted now, after having
dared and accomplished so much.
But they had not yet given up hope. They were
by this time used to meeting and overcoming
opposition, and they looked upon the circumstance
that a water-tunnel lay between them and the mysteri-
ous valley of the Razois, through which not even the
launch could pass even had it been available—the
strength of the current was much greater than that in
the lower tunnel—as affording merely another little
problem which they must solve. Charlie thought in
silence. He was an engineer, and knew the difficulties
they had to overcome better than his comrade. But
Harry was not silent.
‘ Charlie,’ he said, abruptly, ‘ did you ever blow
soap bubbles ? ’
‘ Good gracious, Harry ! What have soap bubbles
to do with our present position ? ’ Charlie certainly
was surprised.
‘ Oh, I don’t know ; perhaps a lot! Doesn’t it
strike you that this vertical funnel, or cave, we are
in is just a bubble that nature blew in these rocks,
not with soap, of course, but in the molten rocks
themselves ? ’
‘Well, this place might have been formed by


volcanic agencies ; in fact, it is almost certain that it
has been, and we know the valley outside somewhere
is a crater, but what difference to us does that make ? ’
‘ Only that if this is a bubble it most likely
burst somewhere, and being of rock it couldn’t fall
away like a soapy one.’
‘ But it may have burst along this tunnel, and the
Razois made use of the rent to form the road-
way ? ’
‘ It is too evenly cut, Charlie, and it seems to be
on a carefully-devised inclined plane. Hullo! I’m
sure I see a streak of light far above.’ Harry dashed
out his torch, so as to be able to see better if he were
correct, and next moment both boys shouted aloud.
The bubble had burst. High overhead a long, narrow
glimmer of light was discernible ; it was not much,
and clearly it reached the cave through a deep, ragged
cleft, which might extend for miles for all the young
adventurers knew.
‘ That is our road, Charlie,’ said Harry, cheerfully,
pointing upwards. ‘ We’ve got to get out through
that burst somehow, so set your brains to work to
find out how. I wonder though whether we will
come out inside the valley or on the wrong side of
the mountain ? And I’m beat to understand why
we didn’t see that light before now.’
‘ Yes, we’ll come out inside the valley, and that is
why we didn’t see the light before this. Only the
afternoon sun can shine into these cracks above, and
until now it hadn’t sunk far enough in the sky.’
‘ Hold hard, Charlie ! Explain ! How do you
know we’ll come out in the valley, and what has the
sun to do with where we come out ? ’


‘Well, we know it isn’t morning, and we know
that the sun sets in the west, don’t we ?’
‘Yes.’
‘ And the mountain lay west of us this forenoon
when we entered the tunnel? Therefore the fact that
we now see light, where earlier in the day we didn’t,
shows that the sun has sank far enough to shine into
these clefts. Therefore these clefts are on the opposite
side of the mountain on which we started, and, as we
know we haven’t sailed through the entire mountain,
under the lake, valley and all, it follows that we are
looking at cracks which open into the valley.
q.e.d:
‘ Marvellous ! You could tell by looking at that
waterfall if Maclaren is dead or a prisoner, I suppose ?
And if Carville, Bruiser Tom, Barnsley, Turpentine,
and the others know we are here ? ’
‘ I am chiefly concerned in Doc, Boston Bob, the
parson, Kangaroo Dave, Aztel, and Piccadilly Peter
and his comrades,’ answered Charlie, with a laugh.
‘ But we’re not out of our happy little home yet, and,
seeing we haven’t wings, I don’t know how we are to
get out.’
He pulled out the chart Piccadilly Peter had given
him, and with the aid of the relighted torch studied it
intently. ‘By the Mersey ! These cracks are marked
here!’ he exclaimed; ‘and there is the word “chains”
written beside them. What can that mean, I
wonder ? ’
‘ What it says, I should imagine,’ answered Harry,
also examining the crude sketch. ‘ Maybe the people
have made a new entrance into this place by chain-
ladders, seeing their old roadway was flooded ? ’


‘ If there are any chains dropping from that gash
into here, they must reach to this ledge to be of any
service,’ went on Charlie. ‘Unless they are only
used for hanging people ’
‘ Charlie, as I am a no-good ignoramus ! I do
believe I see a long, chain-like affair hanging down
the wall-face over there.’ Harry rose, and ran down
the ledge a few yards, then shouted excitedly : ‘ It is,
Charlie ! Hurrah ! we’ve found our way into the
valley of the Razois, and we’ll have every one released,
the lake emptied, and pockets full of blue diamonds,
and ’
‘Take a breath, Harry! We’ll go down to our
launch, and bring up some stores and tools, and I
think we’d better have something to eat also. We
may not have another meal for a long time. Hullo !
that chain is copper.’
‘ Well, what of that? I shouldn’t worry even if it
were gold. I suppose it will carry our weight?
What big links ’
‘ The Razois have certainly some knowledge of
metals that we don’t possess,’ continued Charlie.
‘ See how this great long chain is fashioned with six-
inch links, and how thin the metal is of which the
links are formed. Put your weight on the chain,
Harry ; I can hardly believe that a copper chain like
that can carry a man ’
‘ Nonsense ! ’ cried Harry, running up the links like
a sailor on a ship’s rigging, ‘ it will carry a dozen
light weights like us.’
Charlie stepped into the links and climbed a few
feet after his comrade. ‘Yes, it is all right,’ he
agreed. ‘lt is made of tempered copper, or some


alloy of which we know nothing. But come down,
and we’ll bring up some stores by our spiral stairway.’
Light-hearted and happy with the thought that they
had now discovered a means of entering the mysterious
valley, they hurried down to the dark pool, and soon
were dining on tinned beef and biscuits and tea boiled
on the launch furnace. Then they saw that the
vessel was safely moored, drew the fires, and loaded
themselves with everything they could find on board
in the way of weapons and tools. They also selected
some provisions, for they could not depend upon
finding supplies in the valley, and they remembered
Piccadilly Peter’s ravenous state and his comments
on cassava, evidently the staple food of the Razois.
It was a long climb, and, heavily burdened as they
were, it took them some considerable time before they
reached the water tunnel overhead. The light from
the cracks still higher up had now almost faded ; a sure
sign that the sun was well down on the other side of
the mountain. Without loss of time they prepared
to climb the metallic chain-ladder, but here it was
forced upon them that they could never pull themselves
up its long length, if they attempted to weight them-
selves with anything.
But problems were now treated lightly, and after
a little thought Charlie uncoiled their first launch’s
mooring rope from his load—they were determined to
take that with them at any cost —and attached his load
to it, telling Harry to do the same. Taking the free
end with him, he then began the ascent, and his
comrade followed closely at his heels. The chain
ladder lay against the rock face and dangled danger-
ously at times, as, link by link, they climbed upwards.
(C 10) jg


The thought that it might break or cut itself
against jagged edges of rock did not occur to them,
nor did they look down. Upwards was their motto,
and patiently and laboriously they persisted in this
direction.
They were now far above the water tunnel, and
the roar of the falling waters became dulled in their
ears ; but the clefts were not yet near, and Charlie
expected to find himself at the end of his rope every
step. While his mind was engaged in thinking out
their plan of action when the rope end was reached,
the rock face fell away from the ladder, and he found
himself bridging a dark recess of unknown dimensions.
The feeling was not pleasant, and he called to Harry
to halt for a moment. As long as they had felt their
feet press against the solid rock, even although it
afforded no support, a sense of security was with
them, and they relied on their own strength ; but now,
when Charlie experienced the sensation of dangling
in mid-air on a frail chain, off which even the jerks
transmitted to it by his comrade’s steps might easily
dislodge him, he felt slightly sick.
‘What’s the matter?’ cried Harry. ‘Are the
signals against us, or have we arrived at a station?’
‘ It strikes me that the first real stop is a thousand
feet away,’ Charlie answered, ‘ downwards in the pool,
with perhaps a bound when we hit the ledge ’
‘ Great Scot! Charlie, have you been looking
down? Why, I feel a ledge just over my head, and
only a step or two under your feet. Come off and
rest a bit. I’m nearly done, anyway, and I can’t go
much farther.’
Charlie held on with one hand while he fumbled


VCe. v . 3P9I
r ; s v* : ~ *. v, "**&**?■. -^jffiS^|s|
/ v^ar r *^ r ~", Wrjufc. Vft
Mr*®**86«|k \w£' fP ap$
i * s JHKI
r ~%Sir *" v J *%5|KijHk v-
■ M
H % |t.\
m Iw A a
\Hi * 9
•Pfe* fK \ JR
, »b.. ivv!Vr«hi w " ■*■ If
i-J . , %u| ■ • m
mk J -1
"Sl ft
VJ 5 / \ 9
PR- J %
11 Li-I I j Rk hJk 7 Jb
CLIMBING THE CHAIN LADDER




for a match. ‘A second, Harry,’ he said, sorry he
had spoken as he had done, for he saw that his com-
rade was really exhausted, and his strength was still
with him. He managed to light the match, and its
radiance showed a level platform cut into the rocks at
his feet. Ten feet higher the solid rocks bore against
the chain once more. Evidently the recess was
intended for a resting-place.
It requires considerable skill and much nerve to
step off a ladder on to a platform which affords no
grip for the hands, but Charlie did not hesitate.
‘Hold tight, Harry,’ he cried, ‘and plant your feet
well. I’m going to jump for the ledge.’
‘ Be careful, then ; don’t let go until you find it
with your feet.’
But Charlie had jumped, and safely. Next instant
he was lying flat and reaching out to catch Harry, for
he knew the effort to gain a footing would cause the
chain to be forced out from the wall, and if Harry’s
hold was not that of a vice—well—he banished the
thought, and gripped his comrade under the armpits.
‘ Let go now, Harry,’ he said ; ‘ I have you ! ’
‘All right, Charlie,’ responded Harry simply.
‘ Hold tight—now—you’ve got me.’
The chain clattered against the rocks once or twice
when freed of its load, but both boys were safe on the
ledge, breathing hard and perspiring freely. They
had finished one stage of their vertical journey, but no
light now shone overhead, and they knew not how
much more lay ahead.
For some minutes they rested, and then they began
hauling up their belongings from the ledge below.
In a short time everything was landed beside them


on the platform, and, roughly measuring his rope,
Charlie calculated that they had climbed fifty feet to
their present position.
‘ I think we may take it that another platform will
be found about the same distance higher,’ he said to
Harry, vainly endeavouring to pierce the darkness
above with his torch-light. ‘ When you feel fit, we’ll
explore the next stage.’
‘I am all right now, Charlie,’ answered Harry,
and next minute they had swung out on the chain
again. The links were six inches in diameter, so
they reckoned that a hundred steps would take them
to the next resting-place, if it really existed.
They had made no mistake. When Charlie had
reached the ninetieth link with his feet, his hands
gripped the chain above his head without coming in
contact with the rock. He shouted out the news to
Harry, who was following some twenty links behind,
and exactly as he placed his foot on the hundredth
link he found it also resting on the rock. But he was
taking no risks, so, before stepping off, he lit a match
to make certain of the platform, and, as its feeble
flicker died away, he was again waiting to help his
comrade off the ladder-way.
Once more they pulled their gear to their feet, and
after a brief space essayed a third stage of their
climb. A fourth and fifth time they successfully
repeated the performance, each time bringing their
stores and weapons up after them.
But they had evidently now reached the top of the
great dome, for the chain no longer rose sheer ; instead,
it bent sharply into the rocks, and investigation
proved that it continued upwards resting on the rock


face at an angle of about forty-five degrees off the
perpendicular.
‘We are in the cleft now,’Charlie observed. ‘I
wonder how far we have to go before reaching the
outside world? It is night, I suppose, or we would
see light of some kind. I hope our chain will see us
through.’
‘ This place we have left behind must be a sanctuary
the Razois have assisted Nature in designing as a
retreat, should their outposts be forced, and their
valley invaded,’ said Harry, ‘ but I don’t want to climb
that chain ladder again.’
The climb was now much easier owing to the
favourable angle, and they could rest when they liked,
by lying on the rock-supported ladder. Platforms
were found levelled out in the inclined plane as be-
fore, and link by link, stage by stage, the brave lads
struggled onwards. At length the angle of the floor
of the passage became less acute, and soon they found
they could walk upright on its smooth surface. But
it seemed to be endless. The platforms no longer
existed, not being necessary, and the boys shouldered
their bundles and marched ahead, ever rising, but
never, seemingly, coming nearer to the outside world.
They were now walking along a slightly ascending
flooring in a large cave, the walls of which were
honeycombed with other caves, large and small,
leading off at right and left into the heart of the
mountain. They must have been an hour plodding
through this cavernous passage when Harry said :
‘ It may be my imagination, Charlie, but I fancy that
chain on the floor is shaking. Surely Maclaren and
his gang couldn’t follow us?’


‘x\ot while the water remains in the first tunnel.
They have no launch, and human power could never
force it.’
‘ But supposing they have got our old boat. They
may have hidden it, you know, and not sent it over the
falls.’
‘lt doesn’t matter. It was an obsolete tub, and
could never make headway against the current.’
‘ Then some one is on the chain somewhere, Charlie.
See, it is moving, and we’re not touching it.’
‘lt must be at this end then. Hullo ! I see stars
ahead, Harry. We are nearly out of this awful
place.’
‘ And by Jupiter! I see a man bending over the
chain. He is a native and he is cutting the chain.
Whew! We have escaped a horrible downward
journey, but our way back is cut off now. What can
be his meaning? Can he know of our coming?’
‘ I don t care, we must catch him. Harry, sprint
your best and collar him. I’ll come along at your
heels. He’ll raise the alarm if he sees us.’
Harry dropped his load without a word and darted
forward towards the man, whom they could see working
at the chain by torchlight. Charlie tore along after
him, but his forte was long distances, and Harry
gained ground on him. Suddenly the native, doubt-
less hearing their flying feet, looked up and saw two
men rushing upon him. He dropped his tools,
and uttering a yell, fled towards the mouth of the
cave.
‘Slow down, Harry,’ cried Charlie. ‘Save your
wind; he is a long way from the outside yet.’ He
was now running alongside his comrade, and steadily


they overhauled the fleeing' native, finally running
him down, while yet some distance from the mouth of
the cave. But the man did not give in tamely. He
turned on his pursuers as they came up, and sprang at
Harry’s throat. That act, however, settled his fate,
for while he struggled to choke Harry, who was by
no means allowing the native to have all his own way,
Charlie seized him by the hair, and pulled him off with
such violence that he fell to the ground.
‘We are sorry we haven’t time to play the game
like sportsmen,’ muttered Charlie, ‘and, as we don’t
mean you any harm, perhaps you will excuse us
Oh, I forgot. Habla listed Espanol? ’ (Can you
speak Spanish ?)
‘Who are you?’ the astonished native gasped in
Spanish, by way of answer. ‘ Whence come you ?
And for what ? ’
‘We are friends of the great chief Aztel,’ replied
Charlie. ‘We mean you no harm. We have come
through the mountain.’
‘Do you speak truth, and not a lie, when you
say you are my chiefs friends? Prove to me that
you know him ’
‘ Rise then and look at these,’ said Charlie, swing-
ing the native’s discarded torch into a flame. ‘ Aztel
gave these stones to us.’ He displayed some of the
rough diamonds which Aztel had presented to them.
‘ Enough ! spoke the native. ‘ You are the two
youthful whites for whom I was to go and search to-
night. Come back into the depths of the cave. We
must not talk here. * I, too, am Aztel’s friend, and he
dies to-night.’
‘ W ell, it is time we were out of this,’ said Harry.


280 The Rival Treasure Hunters
‘ If he dies he will have company in the spirit-land, if
we haven’t lost the power of shooting straight.’
‘ Listen ! said the native, who did not fully under-
stand Harry’s words, which had not quite come out in
Spanish as he intended, and their present companion
had not the quick intellect of Aztel. ‘Aztel dies
to-night by order of the councillors, but he has many
friends among the people. To-night I was to seek
you on the outer mountain, and tell you that he had
failed to move the hearts of the councillors, and that
if you wished to live, you must go back to the great
river ’
‘Well, we are not going,’ said Charlie. ‘We
have had some trouble in getting here, and we mean
to stay here now. Why were you cutting that
chain ? ’
‘So that they could not take him down to the
chamber of death. The light of heaven may not see
the great Chief of the Razois die, and only by the
shores of the great pool which grew on our roadways,
because of his sins, may the councillors kill him.
Perhaps, dead, he may find the passage through the
mountain, which once was open to his people.’
‘Charlie,’ said Harry in English, ‘we can go back
and wait for them, and save him yet ’
‘And I have succeeded,’ went on the native,
ignorant of what had been said. ‘ The chain ladder
will be in the pool now, for I took away its spirit, and
soon after it would break and drop down.’
He means he has taken the temper out of the
chain at this end, and that it will not now have
strength to hold up its own weight,’ said Charlie in
English. ‘ Listen, thou friend of Aztel,’ he went on


in Spanish. ‘ Can you give back its spirit to the
chain ? If you can we may yet save Aztel ? ’
A loud, reverberating clang rang out, and re-echoed
through the cavern, changing in its nature from a
sharp, shrill, bell-like sound, to a dull, muffled report
before it died away among the rocks.
‘The spirit once set free cannot be restored either
to man or metal,’ said the native, simply, ‘ But Aztel
will not die to-night. That noise was the chain-ladder
falling.’
‘lt is a pity,’ commented Charlie. ‘We might
have saved him more easily, if he had been taken safely
to the great pool. But we’ll have to adopt some other
plan. Listen, friend of Aztel, we would do much for
our mutual friend. Will you trust us as he did ? ’
‘ With my life. I will willingly give it for my
chief’s, for he saved me from the evil water spirits,
when I sought to find the sluice-gates of our closed
waterway. ’
‘Then tell us, or better, show us how to get to
Aztel now. We will take him away until the lake is
emptied.’
‘Aztel is in the council chamber, but you cannot
enter, nor is it possible for him to escape. I can take
you where you may see him, if you will.’
‘ Then do so —but wait! First come back with us to
the chain-path, where we left our weapons and tools to
follow you.’
‘ It is a pity these Razois are so strangely minded,’
said Harry. ‘ All we have met of them have been
real decent fellows, and, if only they had the sense to
enlist our comrades in their services, their lake wouldn’t
exist long.’


‘ I expect they cannot discriminate between our
comrades and the other gang,’ Charlie answered. ‘ I
wonder if they were wiped out to-day, or if they are
still a force with which we will have to reckon.’
‘They can’t come in the way we came anyhow,’
Harry laughed, ‘ for, even if they force the lower tunnel,
the chain ladder is not at their service now. Look,
there is the snapped link ; it is broken off like the
stem of a clay pipe.’
‘ Many prisoners were taken to-day,’ the native
volunteered as they picked up their possessions, ‘ and
many were killed of our people. But some of the bad
white men escaped, although they will not long be at
liberty. Many of our warriors are following them,
and will not return to the valley until the white men
are killed or are their prisoners.’
‘ Good luck to your warriors then ! ’ said Charlie.
‘ The bad white men are our enemies as well as yours,
but I fear it will not be an easy matter capturing such
men as Maclaren and Carville, their leaders ’
‘ Here is the way to the council chamber,’ inter-
rupted the native. He did not always grasp the
purport of even Charlie’s best Spanish, and in such
cases was very impatient. He indicated one of the
smaller caves leading off the main passage.
‘ But can’t we get out into the air?’ asked Harry.
‘ I am tired of living in holes like snakes and
Razois.’
‘No,’ answered the native. ‘The mouth of this
passage is guarded by many warriors to-night, as
the councillors fear that the people may come to steal
Aztel from them. Nor could you safely pass if there
were no guard, for you would be seen. Many of our


leading people dwell in caves which open off this one,
near its mouth. They live as near the flooded mines,
which we once worked, as they can. This way will
lead us to the cave behind the council chamber ; it is
the way those doomed to die take. Through a hole
you can see into the larger cave.’
Much that their guide said was not known to the
boys, for his Spanish was of a colloquial nature, in
which were many phrases and words which doubtless
came down from his ancestors, surviving the great
Spanish conquest because of their utility. They
followed him, nevertheless, and he proved true. After
passing from natural caves into long cut galleries,
and ascending and descending many passages until
they had completely lost all idea as to the general
direction in which they were travelling, he suddenly
stopped and announced : ‘ Behold the hall of the
councillors ! ’
An aroma of fragrant tobacco was in the air, and a
flood of light shone through a square aperture in the
wall beside them. The hole was evidently a venti-
lator, but a man could easily pass through it. The
boys looked through and saw half-a-dozen dignified-
looking men, elaborately dressed in a costume similar
to that which Aztel had worn. Aztel himself sat upon
a bench cut in the rocks at one end of the hall, and
near him, seated on the floor, was Doc, his gaze fixed
upwards on the rings of smoke he was blowing.
Apparently some sort of trial had been going on for
some time, but was now near its conclusion.
‘ Hear then, thou who must not be named,’ ex-
claimed one of the councillors in good Spanish, as the
listeners took up places, ‘again has much woe come


to thy people, and many have gone to their great
ancestors this day in defending their people against
the white invaders whom thou hast brought hither.
Thou hast been judged a traitor, and the great pool
which under your rule came into existence to shut us
from the outer world will receive thy living body, for
the Razois do not take life, yet thou must die. Thy
companion will suffer the same fate, for he is the
leader of the invaders and has insulted a councillor,
and without him the prisoners will work in the
galleries. Thou hast heard? Signify that thy fate
is just, but make no utterance, for by the old law of
the Razois a disgraced chief’s voice may not be
heard.’
Aztel arose, gazed around proudly for a moment,
then bowed in acceptance of his sentence. He was a
chief. He knew the laws, and he would meet his fate
in a manner worthy of his ancestors. He sat down
again, and the chief councillor addressed Doc.
‘Thou hast heard thy sentence ? ’ he said, ‘and being
a prisoner may speak if thou wilt. What hast thou
to say ? ’
‘Not much,’ spoke Doc, removing his cigar from
his mouth, and flicking the ashes from its extremity,
‘ only that I think you are the most unreasonable
people I have ever met, and in my time I have run
across a fair number of fanatical tribes. The chief is
not answerable for your people’s misfortunes, and you
won’t listen to him when he tries to tell you how you
may remedy matters. Again, I am not one of your
enemies ; the people you have reason to fear are my
enemies as much as yours. My comrades and I have
no connection with those people whom you attacked


this morning. Put your chief in command of his
people and set my comrades at liberty, and I promise
that your enemies will be driven away miles from your
mountain, and that the waters will also be cast forth
from your valley. The great white king, whose
subject I am, will then grant you land anywhere in
his dominions along the rivers, and protect you
against all enemies. I have spoken.’
‘The words of the white man have been heard,’
replied the chief councillor politely, ‘ but we pay no
heed to them. The white man’s words are as the air
which bloweth, and those who believe them always
lose what little of store that they possess. No, the
councillors have decreed, and there only now remains
the last appeal to the Great Unknown God, whose
humble and unworthy servants we are ’
‘ Then go on with the funeral,’ cried Doc, replacing
his cigar in his mouth, ‘ but I’ll see,’ he added in
English, ‘ that one or two councillors don’t draw any
further salaries.’
‘ Silence ! ’ thundered one of the judges, but Doc
laughed and went on with his smoke. His right hand
was behind his back, however, and in it he held a tiny
revolver, which had not been taken from him. It
contained six loaded chambers, and there were six
judges.
‘ Thou, the last Chief of the Razois, make thy
appeal to the Great Unknown, who suffers not that
which is wrong to be done,’ cried the chief judge,
standing forth in the centre of the room, and holding
high in his right hand, between finger and thumb, an
enormous cut diamond which flashed and scintillated
as if on fire. ‘ Thou knowest what our records say ?


This light-giving - stone, whose fires have never grown
dim in our people’s history, will on appeal to the
Almighty, cease to send forth flashes, if a wrong is
about to be committed. Ever}" man about to die has
the right of appeal. Make thine ! ’
Aztel bowed his head reverently, and his lips
moved. Doc’s face had assumed a hard expression,
and he was holding his breath; his hand moved
slightly too. He knew that the moment to act was
at hand. So did the watchers. A dead silence
ensued. The judge held the stone of appeal aloft. A
second passed, the positions of all remained un-
changed, the stone still flashed. Another second,
and the only change was among the watchers ; Charlie
was glancing along his rifle barrel, his teeth were
set, and his eyes were blazing, yet his hands were as
steady as those of the man who held the stone. All
eyes were fixed on the fate-deciding symbol—its lustre
was as great as ever. Evidently the Unknown God
was not to interfere.
Crack ! The stone flew from the judge’s hand and
disappeared no one knew whither; and Charlie laid
down his smoking rifle.
‘ A miracle ! ’ A miracle ! ’ exclaimed the councillors.
‘ No, it was the white man’s magic ! ’ cried he who
had held the stone, showing bleeding fingers, where
the flying gem had torn them. ‘ Seize him and take
him away to his death.’ With a cry the men closed
in on Doc.
‘No ! ’ shouted Aztel. ‘ I am vindicated. He is
my friend. Who dares oppose the Chief of the
Razois ? ’
‘ Doc ! Aztel! We’re here ! Jump through the


hole ! ’ cried Harry. ‘ Hurry, and we’ll shoot those
who try to stop you ! ’
‘ Charlie and Harry ! ejaculated Doc, staggering
back in utter amazement. ‘ Have the dead come to
life?’
Next moment he had burst through the ring and
leaped head first through the aperture, and with a
joyous shout Aztel followed him. Then the hitherto
unemotional Doc broke down.
‘Oh, boys,’ he cried, ‘I thank the Almighty for
preserving you. Human power could not do it— ’
Run ! broke in the native, who did not under-
stand emotion of any kind. ‘We will be trapped !
Follow me ! ’ His Spanish was imperfect, but his
meaning was clear.
They ran after him through long and innumerable
galleries.


CHAPTER XI
The First Restoration
‘ Well, boys, your story is certainly one of the most
remarkable I have ever heard,’ said Doc. ‘Who
would have thought that two lads could accomplish
what so many prospecting parties have tried in vain.
To think that you actually forced a passage through
the mountain on a launch captured from Maclaren’s
gang and arrived in time to save the lives of—some
of these well-meaning but pig-headed councillors, not
to mention Aztel’s and my own, which assuredly
would have gone in the scramble. I can scarcely
bring myself to believe that I am looking at you in
the flesh ; that tunnel must have been a terrible
experience.’
‘Oh, we didn’t think much about it,’ said Harry.
‘lt was the chain-ladder that nearly finished us.
Jupiter ! I don’t think we could have climbed it, if we
had known what it was to be like.’
‘ Your fame shall be sung in all parts of the earth,
where daring and hardihood are still reckoned at-
tributes,’said Doc. ‘ Your comrades will spread the
story of your deeds on every gold-field, in every
mining camp, and throughout the length and breadth
of the British and American dominions. Writers of
adventure tales will place you in their pages as re-
futation of the theory held by most stay-at-home


people, that the living present cannot produce heroes
equal to those of the dead past. Boys, I congratulate
myself on being your comrade and ’
‘ But we only did what was natural,’ interrupted
Charlie, greatly surprised, but as greatly pleased at
Doc’s praise. ‘We reasoned out things and acted as
we thought Boston Bob, the parson, and you would
do, and luck was with us.’
Doc smiled. ‘ltis as true now as ever it was,’ he
said, ‘ that fortune favours the brave, and true modesty
is always a characteristic trait of genuine worth.
But here is Aztel and his faithful warrior Queno, and
they have recovered your property, and brought
something to eat.’
The two Razois came forward and joined the little
party, and soon the five were partaking of food.
They were in a cave looking out upon a lake which
filled the bottom of a great mountain hollow. Queno
had led them thither by passages in the rocks, which he
said were known only to himself, and then Aztel and
he had gone back to see what was happening, as a result
of the escape of Aztel and the white man. While
they were away, the boys had told Doc their experi-
ences from the time they left camp, to recover the
mooring rope, until the moment of their reunion, relat-
ing how they crept up on the gang under Maclaren
and Carville, and how they learned that their new
launch had not been set adrift by the monkeys, as had
been thought. The story of the cutting out of the
other launch followed and all the subsequent details,
including the fight in Turpentine’s village, their
journey with Aztel, and their meeting with Piccadilly
Peter after the storm. Faithfully, Harry and Charlie
( c 10) I 9


related the incidents connected with the blowing up
of the tunnel-mouth and the great attack of the Razois,
taking turn about, at Doc’s suggestion, that so much
talking might not inconvenience them. The history
of their forcing the lower passage, their discovery of
the spiral roadway connecting the two levels, and the
account of their awful climb on the chain-ladder was
told briefly, but Doc knew that most people would
have made a much fuller story, had the experience
been theirs. Finally their meeting with Queno was
described, and how they had come to be watchers at
the strange trial, when the appeal to the Unknown
God was made.
‘ And Charlie shot the diamond out of the man’s
hand,’ Harry finished, ‘wasn’t that a good shot?’
‘You could have done the same, Harry,’Charlie
had said deprecatingly, and then had followed Doc’s
words already quoted.
And now they dined on cassava cakes which Queno
had brought with him on his return, and a tin of jam
and another of cheese from Harry’s pack. They also
prepared hot coffee, and after Doc thought the meal
was over, Charlie produced a handful of cigars which
he handed to him.
‘We thought you would like them,’ he said,
‘so we opened one of your boxes we found in the
canoe ’
‘Charlie, you have given me new life,’ cried
Doc. ‘ I smoked my last at that burlesque of a
trial you saw.’ He had one lit in a moment, and
soon the fragrant aroma was diffused throughout the
cave.
‘ But where are the parson and Kangaroo Dave ? ’


The First Restoration 2gi
asked Harry, after some general conversation. ‘And
where are all the others whom we came to find ? ’
‘ Aztel told me the other boys are all safe and well,
but the fate of the parson and Kangaroo Dave I have
yet to learn—but I have not told my story yet ’
Doc spoke a few words in Spanish to Aztel, asking to
be excused for speaking the English language for a
few minutes, while he made his comrades acquainted
with his experiences. Aztel assented, saying that he
too had much to learn from Queno, of what had
happened since he had set out upon his wanderings,
and, drawing apart a little way, both parties began to
talk earnestly.
‘We saw you start down the ledge alongside the
rapids,’ Doc began, ‘and then resumed our prepara-
tions for supper ; Dave had just placed his stew upon
the fire, and darkness was closing in, when, without a
sound of warning, the place became alive with Razois.
Where they came from I don’t know, nor did we get
time to inquire. They rushed at us in a body, and
bore us back from the fire, before we had realised that
we were attacked. Of course we defended ourselves,
and we gave them a bad time—Boston Bob and the
parson fighting with their fists when their revolvers
were empty, and Kangaroo Dave smashing heads
with his frying pan, the only weapon he had had
time to seize. We fought to get over to our rifles,
and, strangely enough, we remained unharmed until
our attackers saw our intentions. Then they simply
rushed us, and by superior weight bore us to the
ground and bound us. When we were lying helpless
they patched up the wounds of their comrades—and
they were not a few and collected our weapons ;


after which they carried us up the stream, to where a
fleet of bark canoes were hidden, by means of which
they crossed the river. We never had the slightest
chance of escape, and, after the journey up the
mountain was started, we lost touch with each other.
Sometime during the night we reached the pass, and
were taken through some tunnels in the rocks which
led down to the lake. We were then unbound and
left in a large cave looking out on the water, but high
above it, and given cassava bread to eat. The next
day some one of importance came to us, and made us
understand that we were to be held prisoners until
their valley was drained of its waters, and that, if we
attempted to escape, the same consideration would not
be shown us as at first. We didn’t think of escape,
however; we were in the mysterious valley, and in it
we would remain until such times as our comrades
could get away with us. Our only fears were con-
cerning you, but we thought you could find your way
back to Georgetown ’
‘ What ! ’ exclaimed Harry. ‘ You thought we
would go back ? ’
‘ I used the wrong word, my boy. I should have
said we hoped you would.’
‘ But surely you didn’t think we would desert our
comrades?’ said Charlie. ‘ Surely you knew us better
than that ? ’
‘ Charlie, we knew you wouldn’t, and that was why
we were troubled. But you have done what was
regarded as impossible, and, I believe, saved us all
from a fate not pleasant to contemplate, for now I
have hopes that all will turn out well. But we’ll talk
of that later. All day we remained in the cave under


a strong guard. They were not bad fellows, however,
and when they discovered that we understood their
language, they kept us informed of what was taking
place among the people. Night came, and with it a
storm of great severity, but something of more import
than a storm evidently troubled our captors, and soon
their numbers were lessened considerably to make up
a raiding party, which set out while the storm was at
its height. About this time, too, we were informed
that their chief had returned from some wanderings,
and had been placed under arrest for something or
other, and that one of the white prisoners had escaped.
The night passed slowly, and, when morning came,
we could see that our guards were very anxious indeed
about the result of the expedition which had set out
during the night, and there was much coming and
going among them, showing that some cause for
excitement really existed.
‘ We offered our services to them, telling them we
would fight for them if they restored our rifles, but
they only laughed by way of reply. Then we told
them that we would promise to remain where we were,
without any guard, until they returned, if the impend-
ing fight was likely to be one requiring their strongest
efforts. Again they laughed—the white man’s word
is not of much account among the Razois—and we
were informed that the Razois doubted not their
ability to overcome many times the number of men
their comrades were watching. Gradually we learned
that it was white men who were the object of the
attack, and again we feared it was you, but later on
we heard that a neighbouring tribe of natives were
assisting the white men, and soon after we recognised


among the prisoners thrown in among us Bruiser
Tom, Barnsley, and some other members of Maclaren
and Carville’s gang. This was a denouement for
which we were not entirely unprepared, and we felt
somewhat glad that the gang had gone down before
the Razois’ attack, but we had misgivings when
Bruiser Tom told us that the leaders were still safe,
and that they were last seen escaping down the rapids
in a canoe. But it was the next stage of the proceed-
ings that alarmed me. Towards evening we dis-
covered that the victorious mountaineers looked upon
all white men as being members of the one party.
This was more than we could stand, and we protested
vigorously. But they would listen to no explanations,
and although Bob, Dave, the parson and I sailed
in and thrashed Bruiser Tom and his crowd for giving
cheek, the guard seemed only to be amused. Then
one of the councillors came and told us that our work
in the gallery they were cutting through the mountain
would begin on the morrow. Seeing he was an
important man among the people, I began in my best
Spanish to tell him that our party were friendly to the
Razois, that we were the enemies of the people they
had fought last, and that if he set our comrades free
with us, we would give our word not to leave the
valley until we had reduced the level of the lake to its
old place. He only smiled at my words, and was
turning away when I caught him by the arm and
repeated my words. Then he spoke. “You white
men are all pigs,” he said, “and the truth is not in
you. Ido not believe one word of what you say.”
‘ Boys, I have never, to my knowledge, told an
untruth, for I hold falsehood one of the most detest-


able sins of which man is capable, and to be told to my
face that I was a liar was too much for me, so I
seized him by the throat and threw him to the ground.
I am now sorry for my hasty action, for, after all, the
man had good cause to think evil of his white brethren.
But I paid quickly for my temper. It seems that
among the Razois councillors are almost sacred, and
to insult them in any way is a crime punishable by
death—the only offence which entails such in their
laws. I was at once carried off by the guards, and
although I believe the man I struck made no charge
against me, I was ranged with Aztel for trial in the
council hall, and you know all that followed. But we
are free agents now, thanks to you, and the end is not
far distant, I feel sure. We will set about getting
into touch with the others at once, and then plan our
escape. ’
‘ But we can’t leave Aztel in disgrace,’ said Harry ;
‘ and even if we can escape—which Piccadilly Peter
said is impossible—l for one would like to have a shot
at emptying that lake out there.’
‘And we’ll make the attempt,’ answered Doc.
‘ We owe that much to Aztel, and, notwithstanding
what has happened, I have a soft side for the noble
though narrow-minded Razois. They have many
virtues which wewhite people have not, and Boys,
we’ll see them through their troubles, even if
a Venezuelan army comes along with Carville and
Maclaren.’
‘ Right! ’ cried Harry. ‘ We’ll make Aztel the
great chief of his people again before we leave.’
‘We’ll try, anyhow,’ said Charlie. He was an
engineer, and probably was thinking of the difficulties


that he knew lay in the way of emptying the lake.
1 But shouldn’t we ask Aztel to join us now ? I see
Queno has gone away.’
‘By all means,’ agreed Doc. ‘We can struggle
along in Spanish until we decide what to do.’
In answer to Doc’s call Aztel came forward, and sat
with them around the little fire. He explained that
Queno had gone to gather the latest reports from all
sources concerning the trial and escape of the prisoners,
what the people thought, and if the scouts had brought
in news of any other approaching enemies.
‘Well, friend Aztel,’ said Doc, when he had
finished, ‘ you are, in a way, in the same predicament
as ourselves. You have no quarrel with your people,
nor have we. But they will probably kill you if they
get their hands on you, and I am fairly confident the
same fate would be ours. If the evils which fell upon
your people in your time are removed, however, I
understand that you are once more absolute ruler, and
I now propose to you that we join forces to bring
about that end. Our only conditions are that you
assist us in any way you can in effecting the freedom
of our comrades. We do not wish you to do anything
against the interest of the Razois, but if that lake is
to be drained, our comrades must be free. We will
not leave the valley until you yourself give us per-
mission to go, and I hope, when that time does
come, you and your people will also come forth to
place yourself under the protection of His Majesty,
King Edward of the British Empire. Your people
will then live in peace and absolute freedom, and with
your diamonds you can buy the luxuries of the world.
We do not want your diamonds. All white men are


not thieves, and some of them can speak the truth at
times. Is it a bargain, that we work together?’
‘lt is,’ replied Aztel, ‘but conditionally. ‘You
white men and some of my people value these stones
which are found in caves under the waters of that lake.
Aztel does not. This, then, is my proposal. All the
stones that we may recover when the mines are un-
covered will go to the councillors on behalf of my
people ’
' Certainly, Aztel,’ said Harry. ‘We have already
said we don’t want them. We can go somewhere
else, can’t we, Doc, and look for gold ?’
‘ My young friend speaks too soon,’ reproved Aztel
gently ; ‘ I have not yet spoken my words. Of all
the stones and other prized possessions of the Razois
the chiefs share is one-tenth part. Now, if you make
me the beloved of my people once more, surely it is
only right that you should receive in turn that which
you value and which I do not, but which is mine to
give.’
‘Nonsense, Aztel,’ interrupted Doc. ‘We’ll help
you for your own sake. I am thankful to say that
there is not one of my comrades who would break his
heart, though he never saw a blue diamond ’
‘ Then I refuse to accept your assistance,’ said Aztel
proudly. ‘lf you will not take from me, I cannot take
from you. We will work our own way. I cannot
free your companions, but it is my wish that they
should be allowed to depart in peace. All white men
are not wicked, I know, but I have no voice among
my people.’
‘My dear Aztel,’ observed Doc, ‘if it is only the
question of some diamonds that stands between us, it


is easily settled. We will accept payment for any
services we hope to be able to render, but don’t let us
worry about that detail now. We have no objection
to diamonds, especially blue diamonds ; in fact we
rather like them—they command extremely high prices
in our country. We will promise, therefore, after
everything is right with you, to accept whatever you
may be pleased to give us in that direction ; perhaps
we may then be allowed to make some return for them,
which will prove that it was not the hope of diamonds
that bought our friendship.’
‘ Good old Doc,’ said Harry impulsively. ‘ I knew
he wouldn’t let diamonds split up our plans.’
‘ I like you,’ said Aztel, rising and grasping Doc’s
hand. ‘ Your nature is the same as that of my young
friends. Aztel is grateful. We are brothers. What
Aztel has is yours ’
‘ And what we have is Aztel’s,’ said Charlie quietly.
‘ Now we can start to work.’
‘ Not yet, my young friend,’ said Aztel, ‘you have
already done much that I do not understand since I
left you on the mountain side ; but, although you have
by some miraculous means come into the valley of
the Razois, I fear that getting out is now beyond your
power. We must, therefore, act with great care, for,
believe me, my people are not fools when they have
reason to think danger threatens them. Let us wait
until Queno returns. He will bring news, and then,
to the death, Aztel is with you. You are tired and
worn out with your great efforts. Sleep until I call
you.’
‘ Aztel speaks words of wisdom, my boys,’ added
Doc. ‘You are strong and healthy, but you must


preserve your strength and health, for we depend upon
you now more than ever we did. Our comrades can
easily suffer bondage a little while longer, and if we
try to rush things blindly, we are sure to fail. Try
to sleep for a few hours. Aztel and I will watch,
and I will explain your presence in the valley to
him.’
‘All right, Doc,’ the boys replied. They felt that
their responsibility had been removed since Doc was
restored to them, and they quite naturally accepted
his judgment on all things as final. It was pleasant
to have some one to think out ways and means, more-
over they were tired and sleepy, and their limbs ached
in everyjoint from the effects of their long chain-ladder
climb. They slept; while Doc and Aztel talked, and
watched and waited for Queno’s return. They had
blocked up the back entrance to their cave, so that
any one entering would have to crawl through a small
aperture, and the front, being fifty feet sheer above
the lake, was deemed secure against any attack. The
hours passed, and the cave-city of the Razois was
silent. But its people were not sleeping. High on
the summit-ridges great beacons blazed ; outside on
the mountain slopes strong bodies of picked warriors
kept watch and ward, their eyes ever turned towards
the north ; and far away to the north and east intrepid
scouts kept in touch with each other, ready to signal
back to their comrades on the mountain, with fires
kindled on the tree-tops, the news of the approach of
the expected Venezuelan force, or the return of the
enemy they had already defeated.
Inside the council hall the calm, courageous, and
wise councillors held an all-night sitting. The fate of


the people trembled in the balance, and theirs it was
to keep cool and devise defensive methods. These as
yet consisted of sudden attacks, but they knew that
when the soldiers from the north joined forces with
the less picturesquely dressed, but sterner fighting
men from the east, their outposts would be driven in,
and then their defence would rest solely upon the
impregnable nature of the pass into the hollow. That
night an old law of the people was repealed, a law as
old perhaps as the hollow in which they now lived,
and which, if annulled when the Spaniards first
invaded their peaceful home in the distant cloud-
piercing Andes, might have altered the history of
South America, and caused them to be to-day a Power
of world importance. That law said, ‘ Thou shalt
not kill.’ The hoary mists of antiquity shrouded the
date of its framing. Earth must have been an Eden
then, and Spaniards, greed, and avarice alike unknown
and undreamt of. Probably Spain herself was non-
existent at the time, or at best but a conquered
Mohammedan province.
But that night in solemn conclave, after much de-
liberation, and many appeals to the Great Unknown
God for advice, it was abrogated. Henceforth the
Razois would endeavour to kill their enemies like
other highly civilised nations. They were driven to
this momentous decision as a last resort to save the
remnant of their race, for their foes were closing in
on them for the death struggle—and their diamonds.
Perhaps it was unfortunate that they were so late in
repealing that humanitarian law. They had the fire
weapons captured from the many prisoners they had
taken at different times, and they knew how to use


them. Their civilisation had advanced a stupendous
distance at one step.
Meanwhile, unconscious of the great forward stride
in the art of extermination his councillors had taken,
the Chief of the Razois sat in a lonely cave far down
the lake-side, and planned with one of the supposed
enemies of his people how their fortunes could be
restored, and how they could best be brought under
the protecting influence of Great Britain. Two youths
slept peacefully at the feet of the schemers, and a fire
burned low behind them. It was near morning. All
was silent, and the air was chilly. Suddenly a shrill,
piercing cry shattered the stillness, and instantly the
sleepers awoke and sat up.
‘That’s strange,’ said Doc musingly. ‘ What can
a waracabra tiger be doing around here? I thought
the lake lapped the rocks too ? ’ He seemed surprised,
and Aztel noticed the fact.
‘ That is not the waracabra tiger,’ said he. ‘ There
is not foothold for even a bird on these shores ’
‘Then it is on the water,’ cried Doc, as the sound
burst out again. ‘ I must see the animal that makes
that cry.’
‘ I heard that cry before, under circumstances not
pleasant,’ said Aztel, smiling at Charlie. ‘ Will my
young friend answer Queno in the way he knows
so well ? ’
‘What, is it Queno?’ Doc cried. ‘Why has he
come by water ?’ A loud ear-piercing cry at his
side made him spring round hurriedly. Then he
laughed. ‘ I had forgotten your powers of mimicry,
Charlie,’ he said. ‘We may be able to make good
use of your gift in the near future, and I suppose


we’ll make use of that fateful mooring-rope now, for
without its aid Queno cannot come up here.’
Aztel had gone to the mouth of the cave and was
speaking to his faithful warrior on the lake beneath.
Queno had a canoe, and even in the darkness the
boys could make out that it was well loaded. At
once the rope was lowered, and soon, in answer to a
signal, it was pulled up and a grass sack of cassava
taken from its end. Again and again it was lowered,
and each time more stores were hauled aloft, until at
last the brave Queno came up himself. He was full
of news.
‘ The councillors have decided to kill all the
prisoners the moment our outposts are no longer
able to hold their own,’ he announced. ‘ More
warriors have departed to reinforce the pass-guards,
for some of the latest captives have told that our old
enemies are coming down from the north, to join with
those we this day defeated, to force an entrance to our
valley. It is supposed that you, my chief, and the
white prisoner whose magic interfered with the decree
of the councillors, have escaped through the pass
tunnels and are now travelling to join the enemy.
You are therefore safe here, and I have brought much
food that I could not safely carry through the
galleries.’
‘You have done well,’ said Aztel, ‘and when my
fortune changes I shall not forget. Queno, you
believe your chief when he tells you that all white
men are not bad men, and that those with us are our
friends ? ’
‘ That which my chief says is my law, be it right
or wrong, v said Queno simply. ‘You have but to


say to Queno your desires, and they shall be carried
out, or Queno will have ceased to live.’
‘ It seems that Aztel is nearly as fortunate in one
way as we are,’ said Harry to Charlie. ‘Queno has
just expressed himself in a manner befitting a true
comrade, and we couldn’t say more if we tried.’
‘Then, Queno,’ continued Aztel, ‘some of the
white men in the long gallery are also friends. We
must rescue them and bring them here, for the good
white men who are with us now have said—and their
words are truth—that they will use their magic in
driving forth the waters of the lake, and thus giving
us back our mines and making me free from disgrace.
I ask you to obey our white friends, Queno, even as
you would obey me, and your reward will be the
friendship of Aztel and that which it may bring.’
‘ Queno knows already. He has spoken to many
of the prisoners while he was one of the guard over
them. He will do even as you say, O Great Chief,
and when the days of thy good fortune come again,
Queno will have all the reward his soul desires. But
if the prisoners are to be taken here, it must be done
quickly. The guard over them are now young boys
who have not yet been trained, for to-night all the
skilled warriors depart to the defences in the pass and
the watch-towers on the mountain top. I also am
numbered with the fighting men, but, having taken
part in the last two fights, I am among these left
resting, until called upon for the final stand.’
\ es, muttered Doc, ‘ I think I remember you
now, Queno. You got into grips with me, and I had
to tap you on the head before you let go.’ He spoke
in English, and only the boys understood him.


They, too, had introduced themselves to Queno rather
roughly.
‘ Can you take us to the long gallery now, good
Queno? ’ said Aztel. ‘lf the guards are new, perhaps
they might not miss some of the prisoners when there
are so many fresh captives, not our friends, added to
their number.’
‘ Come then,’ answered Queno. ‘ I know a way to
one of the guard’s caves, which overlooks the great
gallery in which they work and sleep. We can over-
power them, if need be, and pull our friends up to
us, even as I was raised from the lake. Bring
ropes.’
* You bet we will,’ muttered Harry. ‘ I think if I
ever attain a position which requires me to have a
coat-of-arms, or anything of that nature, I’ll have
either a rope or a chain with big links emblazoned
on ’
‘ Get out, Harry,’ laughed Charlie. ‘ People would
say nasty things about such a design. I’ll have blue
diamonds as a crest. ’
Harry’s reply was indistinguishable. He was
crawling through the back of the cave after Queno,
into the passage which seemingly led parallel to the
face of the rocks. Half an hour’s journey in the rock-
bound roadway took them into the outskirts of the
city. The boys knew it was a cave-city, but the
labyrinths of passages which opened before them
surprised them exceedingly. Evidently the dwellers
in the mountain’s heart numbered many more than
they had imagined, and when Aztel told them that
underneath, flooded by the waters of the lake, was a
system of cut-out caves of even greater extent than


that which they were exploring, their interest was
unbounded.
But Queno paused not. He knew that if they were
seen by any of the citizens of the strange township
their chances of success were small indeed, and he
hurried forward, and finally entered a tunnel which
led straight into the heart of the mountain. Every
hundred feet or so, little caves opened off the main
passage on the right-hand side, and Aztel explained
that these were the guards’ vantage points, from which
they controlled the prisoners working in the larger
parallel gallery far beneath.
‘But what is the idea in all this?’ Doc asked.
‘ Why cut two roads through the mountain ?’
‘ We will never again be caught unprepared,’ Aztel
answered. ‘ This passage is the high level roadway
our own people are cutting through the mountain.
Underneath on our right is the great future waterway
which, although it has become blocked, we will
always be able to make right, by reason of our being
able to gain access to it from this passage. The
prisoners work down there, many feet under the bed
of the lake.’
‘ But when you try to break through into the lake
after your passage through the mountain is completed,
you will drown all the workers,’ said Doc. ‘But
perhaps you intend getting rid of your prisoners in
that way ? ’
‘ Our people are not without men who will exchange
their lives for the honour of being allowed to complete
the waterway,’ Aztel answered with dignity. ‘Cer-
tainly those who may be our prisoners then will have
no part in the completion of our work.’
(C Io) 20


‘ But, dear me, Aztel,’ insisted Doc, ‘it will take a
long time to cut through the mountain with only
copper drills. When do you expect the tunnel will
be finished? ’
‘ In about two hundred years, if nothing happens
to retard the w r ork and our supply of labour does not
run short.’
‘Oh! You are a wonderful people, Aztel. I
suppose you expect to receive much deferred honour
then ; that is if your valley, lake, and mountain are
not blown out of existence by an eruption of the
volcano in whose crater your people dwell.’
‘ Aztel’s memory may be alive then, and how many
of your people are remembered after their course on
earth has been run ? ’
‘ I give it up, Aztel. You are a bit in advance of
us in your manner of thought. Most of our people
live for the present, and care little what tales their
tombstones tell. I hope, however, that your two
hundred years’ gallery will not be required. In fact,
I’m fairly confident that you’ll be handling those
famous diamonds at present under the lake in a few
days, and if we can fight the Venezuelans until a*
British Protectorate is established, your name may
still go down to posterity as a great and wise
chief ’
‘ We are as near as we can go to the white captives
now,’ interrupted Queno. ‘We must not talk or the
guards will hear. Enter this cave, and we will see
where our friends are sleeping. The guards are in
the next cave, the last one cut.’
Queno led the way into one of the branch passages
as he spoke, and flourished his torch around. They


were in a small alley, and at the far end a hole in the
floor opened into a large gallery beneath, running
parallel with the long passage they had been following.
A faint light came from below, and the smoke of a
fire they could see also found a vent through the
aperture. Eagerly they clustered round the hole
and looked down, and Doc meanwhile uncoiled the
long mooring rope which had already proved so
useful.
‘Your friends are there,’ said Queno. ‘At one
time they were allowed to sleep at the mouth of a cave
overlooking the lake, but since last night they have
been kept beside their work, so that they could not
hurt people by their magic.’
‘Poor old comrades,’ mused Doc. ‘ What magic
could you work without tools or weapons ? I wonder
if you know, or if you are dreaming, that friends are
near? ’
‘ I see the parson,’ cried Harry. ‘He got up and
stirred that fire. There are two bodies of men. Oh !
I see Kangaroo Dave too ’
‘Don’t speak so loud,’ entreated Queno. ‘We
will be heard and then ’ His gesture was signifi-
cant.
‘Boys,’ spoke Doc, making a loop on the end of
the rope, ‘ I am not going to rob you of your justly-
earned glory. Which of you is going down ? ’
‘ I will go*’ promptly answered both, and Doc
smiled. He knew them well now.
‘Only one is necessary,’ he said, ‘and he will be
lowered through the roof here. Which of you will
yield place to his comrade?’
‘ I will, again came the simultaneous reply. Each


308 The Rival Treasure Hunters
wished the other to have the honour; danger had
ceased to mean anything to them.
‘Then I will choose Harry,’ decided Doc. ‘He is
the lighter, and the younger, I believe, and Charlie’s
strength will be of more use here.’
In an instant Harry had seized the rope. ‘ Put
only one foot in the loop, Harry,’ said Charlie, ‘and
grip high up.’
He knew about sling work, but he did not grudge
his comrade his chance. Next moment Harry was
being lowered into the great gallery by four strong
pairs of hands.
‘ Touch that big man sleeping on the far side of the
fire, on the shoulder,’ said Doc, as he dropped
through. ‘ Say to him quietly that I want him up
here, and then wake Boston Bob and tell him we’re
on deck. The parson is watching us now, I see, so
say to him that he must wait to the last.’
‘ All right,’ answered Harry, and a minute later he
was on the floor beneath. He ran to the group of
sleeping men and touched the big man on the shoulder.
‘Doc wants you,’ he said. ‘You’ll find a rope over
there.’
‘Does he?’ growled the big one. ‘He’s been a
mighty long time in sending for me, I reckon. Who
are you ? ’
‘ Harry, one of your comrades. You are Big
Tassy, aren’t you ? ’
‘ I m mighty glad to meet you, boy, and proud to
know you. I—l—it’s fine weather this, isn’t it! Yes,
you’ve got my handle all right ’
Get aloft then, quick! ’ spoke some one near.
‘ Never mind saying good-bye.’


‘ Kick me ! I forgot,’ said the big man, running
towards the dangling rope.
Two minutes later Big Tassy was shaking
Doc’s hand. The first of the comrades had been
restored.


CHAPTER XII
The Waters are Released
Harry bent over Boston Bob and shook him gently.
‘ Get up,’ he said, in low tones. ‘ Doc and Charlie
and I are up aloft.’
* Lie down, youngster,’ whispered a voice beside
him. ‘ We’re watched.’
Harry subsided into the place vacated by Big
Tassy, and the voice continued : ‘ Piccadilly Peter
told us about two kids wandering among the tree-tops
outside. Are you one of them ? ’
‘Yes,’ answered Harry. ‘We have come in to
help you to escape. Doc is with us, and we’ve a rope
dropped from that hole in the roof back there. Who
are you ? ’
‘ Mersey Jack among my comrades. My other
name is of no account.’
‘I am one of the band now too, Jack. Are all the
rest here ? I already know Boston Bob and Piccadilly
Peter, and the parson and Kangaroo Dave are also
my friends. But I see they are signalling for my
return. Perhaps something has gone wrong ?’
‘ Yes, I expect the guards have rushed them.
We 11 have the whole mob down among us directly.
\ ou made a big try, young man, and we fellows are
mighty grateful, but there is no escape from this place,
and we know it. That’s Sailor Bill who is snoring


beside you. Irish Mike is sleeping between Boston
Bob and Damper Charlie. You know the others.
That other crowd is a new lot; they belong to
Maclaren and Carville’s gang, and they are low down
dirty skunks which I should advise you not to chum
up with ’
‘ Oh, I have met them before,’ broke in Harry.
‘ They are no friends of ours. But can you see if we
are being watched yet? We can’t afford to waste
time ’
‘What difference does time make, youngster?
It’s all the same what day it is, or what year it may
happen to be. We’re here until an earthquake blows
up this blamed mountain, and then, I expect, we ’ll go
sky high too.’
‘ You will be here just as long as you stay here.
We have come to rescue you. We came through the
mountain, and we’ll fly back over the top before we’re
beaten. Wake up all the boys at once, and tell them
to get ready to crawl over to the rope. ’
‘ We’re all awake now, kid, and listening,’ said a
voice, * and keel-haul me if I don’t stop Mersey Jack’s
rations of cassava for frightening you. Say on, your
words are like a breeze of wind on a becalmed tropical
sea ’
‘ Oh, Jack is not making me frightened in the least,’
returned Harry. ‘ But I don’t know where the guard
is. If you fellows can see that the coast is clear,
arrange quickly among yourselves who is going aloft
first. I was told by Doc to say that the parson had to
wait till the last.’
‘ But how did Doc and you get here ? ’ asked some
one. ‘l’m blowed if I can get the hang of things ’


3i2 The Rival Treasure Hunters
‘ Never mind hurting yourself trying, Charlie,’said
Boston Bob’s voice. ‘ The guards have gone to sleep
again in their sentry-cave up above, and it is time we
changed our lodgings.’
‘ Here, what’s all this talk about? ’ broke in a voice
from the other circle of men. ‘ I’m blamed sure you
fellows are not going to get out of this rat-trap if we
can’t Hullo ! guard ’ A low, gurgling sound
broke off the cry. The parson had rolled over and
gripped the speaker by the throat.
‘ Boys, don’t keep your comrades waiting,’ the
parson then called out to the others. ‘ Get away at
once, explanations can follow.’
‘ Begorrah, do ye think any man here is going to
leave the mates he has lived on cassava with for so
long? ’ said some one.
‘We are all coming,’ returned the parson im-
patiently. ‘ I’ll keep this man quiet until you are all
safe and—ah, thanks, Harry, I will have much easier
work should his companions awake now, with your
revolver’s help. I will return it when next we meet.
Boston Bob, go first, or the boys will never move.
Crawl along the shadows and watch the guards don’t
see you as you are being hauled up.’
Without a word Boston Bob began crawling
towards the dangling rope, and as he disappeared
in the shadows the parson said, ‘ Now, Harry, you
next.’
‘ I am going to stay with you to the last,’ began
Harry, but the parson cut him short.
‘Go now,’ he said, ‘and at once.’ And Harry
went.
‘ Piccadilly Peter, will you oblige by moving


forward now? And don’t rattle those garments of
yours, please.’
Piccadilly Peter began to expostulate, but the
parson would not listen. ‘ I don’t care anything about
what you think. Doc is aloft and wants you all, and
if I don’t clear you out at once, he’ll be caught again
too Irish Mike, please wriggle after Peter.’
‘ Be the Powers, parson, Oi am an Irishman, an’
Oi am not going to leave you to handle these dirty
beggars alone. Shure, they’re all awake now. I see
that fellow whose eyes Boston Bob blackened is just
about to howl. Ah ! ’ Irish Mike made a bound and
stifled the shout of alarm in its utterance. He too
knew where and how to grip his man. But the entire
gang were now awake, as the Irishman had said, and
as they dimly comprehended that the men against
whom they had been employed to fight, if need be,
were on the point of escaping from their joint prison,
they became filled with virtuous indignation. ‘ Where
do we come in in this little game ? ’ wailed Barnsley,
sitting up.
‘ You don’t come in, you double-distilled hoatzin,’
growled Damper Charlie, springing at him and
pinning him to the ground. ‘ You’re to wait here
and carry on the work we’re leaving Jack !
Bill ! Look alive! collar these beggars. Quick !
they’re going to howl! ’
But they didn’t. The parson applied some extra
pressure to the throat of the man he had already in his
grip, then leaving him, he seized the man nearest and
dashed his head against the rocky floor. Meanwhile,
Mersey Jack, Sailor Bill, and Kangaroo Dave had set
to work, and as a result only a few of the new


prisoners were able to shout even had they wished to
do so. They, however, were not so disposed. The
parson had a cocked revolver in his right hand, and
perhaps that fact exercised a soothing influence over
them. ‘ Gentlemen of the Carville gang,’ he observed
quietly, ‘ I should not like to break a certain law of
the people whose guests we are, but notwithstanding,
I will put a bullet through the head of the first man
among you, and every succeeding one also, who
makes a sound. Leave your man alone, Irish Mike,
and get up that rope. Our comrades are waiting.
Don’t strangle that man, Kangaroo Dave ’
‘Be jabbers, parson, but if I hadn’t known ye
before, I would punch your face into smithereens for
bossing me about like this ! ’ growled the Irishman.
He glided away, all the same, and soon was being
hauled up the rope.
‘ Sailor Bill,’ called the parson, ‘ leave your man to
me, and get aloft. Not a word ! Go at once ! ’ Sailor
Bill went.
‘Dave, clear out! I’ll shoot your man if he
moves.’
‘All right, parson,’ replied Dave. ‘I hate argi-
ments, and I smell tucker.’
‘ Damper Charlie ’
‘ Oh, I say, parson, send Mersey Jack first. I
want this fellow’s togs ; they’re better than my own
Oh, all right; when a parson is on the warpath, it is
high time I wasn’t near.’ He too glided into the
gloom, and the parson turned to Mersey Jack. ‘ Now,
Jack,’ he said, ‘ I can easily control our friends down
here. Follow Charlie ! ’
‘ I’ll fight you for who waits to the last, parson,’


suggested Mersey Jack. ‘ I know blamed well the
mob will be after the last man, and the old fellow
who lives farther down still always takes the hind-
most ’
‘We’ll fight upstairs, Jack. I am only obeying
Doc’s orders. Up you go ! ’
‘ But what about you? When you make for the
rope, the mob will come for you like ’
‘ Dear me ! ’ exclaimed the parson, ‘ there is much
more trouble in making you fellows save yourselves
then in fighting our enemies. Get a move on, or
I’ll ’
1 \ es, what will you do, parson? I’m blowed if
I m going to leave a sky pilot to be the last man here.
What are you going to do about it ? ’
4 I will pray for your soul, Jack ; then I shall thrash
you and send you up in a sling. But the delay will
cause much inconvenience to our comrades, and
corresponding delight to our companions here ’
‘I 11 go, parson, but we’ll settle that thrashing
business later,’ Mersey Jack grumbled, rising to his
feet. ‘ The world is coming to a fine pass when we
fellows have got to be bossed by a glory prospector,
who would be more at home in a drawing-room in
England than among civilised people like us.’ He
glided away, still grumbling, and the parson smiled.
It was many years since he had been in an English
drawing-room, but of course Mersey Jack couldn’t
know that. He waited, toying significantly with the
re\olver Harry had tossed to him, until Mersey Jack
was hauled through the roof, and then he addressed
his companions. 4 Some of you may know, perhaps,
that I never break my word,’ he said pleasantly ; ‘you


3i6 The Rival Treasure Hunters
will therefore do well to remember what I promised
the man who first makes a sound. Believe me, I am,
in a way, sorry to leave you, for I am of opinion that
after a few thrashings you would all be amenable to
reason, and possibly might even be hammered into
honest men. Good-bye ! ’
He arose, and walked off as coolly as though he
had just taken leave of some dear friends, and for a
moment those he had left were too much dumbfounded
to speak.
Bruiser Tom, however, speedily recovered himself.
‘ Hullo ! you niggers ! ’ he shouted, ‘ your prisoners
are escaping. Wake up, and shoot them ! ’ His
comrades joined their voices, and a yell went up which
caused the great cavern to tremble, while the rebound-
ing echoes became distorted, until they seemed like a
combined effort of hundreds of steam syrens blowing
together, but not in unison. The natives who formed
the night-guard, in the cave directly above the yelling
men, immediately awoke, and next minute were
lowering long ropes into the big gallery. They did
not know what the noise meant, but they intended to
investigate. Long before the reverberations died
away, or before the parson had reached the rope
lowered from the cave in which were his comrades,
the natives were swarming down their ropes with the
agility of monkeys ; but the parson seemed to be in
no hurry. He turned round as he reached his com-
rades’ rope and cried : ‘ Bruiser Tom, I exceedingly
regret that you have doubted my word. I will not be
made a liar by any man, far less an opprobrious male
biped such as you Standstill, you fool, or I may
accidentally kill you instead of only leaving you


something by which you will remember me.’ Bruiser
Tom uttered a shout of derision, and followed by his
gang rushed at the parson, and following them also
came a score or so of the guard. The parson put his
left foot in the loop, and waited for a moment. The
howling horde was almost upon him, but he did not
flinch. His eyes followed Bruiser Tom’s movements,
and suddenly he raised his right hand, and a flash of
fire spurted out, a sharp, bark-like sound accompanied,
and a shriek from Bruiser Tom followed. The rush
was stayed, for the Bruiser had subsided, and was
screaming horribly. ‘Just as I thought,’the parson
observed, as he signalled to be pulled up. ‘The
greatest bullies are always the biggest cowards. He
is only shot through the arm, men, and it is absolute
fright that is causing him to make such an outcry.’
A few seconds later he was shaking hands with
Doc and the boys, and then with Aztel. But the boys
with Queno disappeared hurriedly, even while the
others were watching the disturbance below. They
ran to the next side cave wherein the guards had been
sleeping, and cut all the ropes and threw them down.
They were now safe from pursuit so far as these
gentlemen were concerned, and they rejoined their
own party, now reunited, and augmented to the
number of fourteen.
Obeying a sign from Aztel, Queno led the departure,
and just as the sun’s first rays shone into the valley,
the last man crawled through into their cave of refuge.
‘ Now, boys,’ said Doc, ‘we have had no time to
speak hitherto, and there is much which we have to
discuss, but allow me, before we enter into any ex-
planations, to introduce to you our two new comrades,


3iB The Rival Treasure Hunters
Charlie and Harry. They have no qualifying titles
as yet, but to them we owe our comparative freedom
at this moment, and alone and unaided, and after
foiling the attempts of Maclaren and Carville, they
gained access to this mysterious valley of the Razois.
Some of their exploits are, I gather, already known
to you through Piccadilly Peter, but the grand finish
of their work on behalf of their comrades is a story
which must be deferred until we are within British
territory again. We have yet something to do before
we are free, and—well, I needn’t say more. Boys, I
am proud to be with you once more. Boston Bob
and I never for a moment forgot you, and those of
you who know the parson and Kangaroo Dave, and
I think most of you have that privilege, will agree
that our relieving force was as strong as could be
safely negotiated through these debateable lands.
Nevertheless, but for these boys, we would have failed
miserably.’
‘ What a mighty long speech for Doc, boys,’ com-
mented Big Tassy. ‘I am more than glad, 1 can tell
you, that he’s got his tongue loosened since last we
saw him. And as for the kids, I reckon they’ve
proved themselves worthy of all the honour we can
give them, and that is the free and true comradeship
of our band. From now until the last peg out, what
Big Tassy has is theirs.’
‘And my claim is always open to them,’ cried
Damper Charlie. ‘I am proud to have them as
mates.’
‘ My sentiments to a hair-split,’ said Sailor Bill.
‘And mine—and mine,’ added Mersey Jack and
Irish Mike ; and Piccadilly Peter, feeling that the


occasion required a speech from him also, said in the
drawling tones of the district which gave him his
appellation, ‘ And, boys—er—l hope you will call on
—er —my people when you are in London. They will
be very pleased to see you, and—er Oh, dash
it! I’ve got nothing but my—er —clothes, my young
comrades, but—er—l’ll make you suits like mine out
of the first kerosene tins we find.’ He shook hands
with the lads as he concluded, and adjusted the glass-
less rim of a monocle in his eye.
‘ And—er— ’ began Kangaroo Dave, adopting the
last speaker’s style, possibly because he thought it
very effective, and evidence of high culture, ‘ I’ll show
you —er —how to bake—er—johnny cakes without—
er —baking-powder .’
Boston Bob administered a kick to Dave ; and
while he relapsed into his true vernacular to inquire
the reason, the American said, ‘Charlie and Harry,
when I first met you in Liverpool I took you to be
youthful enthusiasts. We wanted such as you among
us, and you came. But youth usually means inex-
perience, and enthusiasm generally indicates imagina-
tive qualities, but little else when serious troubles
threaten. You have proved that youth, in your case,
meant hopefulness and energy, and that the other
attribute was the equivalent of fearlessness and in-
domitable will power. I will say no more at present,
except that I hope we shall be comrades in many
adventures after this.’
‘I am not at present going to add to this eulogy,’
said the parson. ‘lt will tend to spoil our young
comrades. Boys, get away and attend to that which
is in your minds ; you have only done that which I


knew, and Doc and Boston Bob also knew, you would
try to do. How you have managed it, I don’t know.’
‘That’s all very fine,’ interrupted Mersey Jack ;
‘ but we’re not out of this rat-trap of a place yet, and
I don’t see that we have got any farther in that direc-
tion than we have managed ourselves, every time we
attempted to escape. And I’ve a bone to pick with
this parson fellow, too. Who is he? and when did
he become one of our crowd ? ’
‘Be jabbers ! Mersey Jack,’ laughed Irish Mike.
‘ It’s aisy seen ye don’t know the parson, or ye
wouldn’t sphake like that. Ask for him on any gold-
field in this world. Thry the pearl-fisheries of the
South Seas, the New Zealand gum-fields, or the New
Guinean fever swamps. Then shift over and look for
his record in the Klondike ’
‘Jack,’ broke in the parson, ‘don’t listen to my
old comrade Mike. ‘Our differences can be easily
settled afterwards. Meanwhile, let me offer you a
cigar. I don’t know how they came to be here, but
I know the brand, and can recommend them.’
‘ And we are not going to try to escape,’ said Doc
quietly. ‘ Comrades, I have undertaken that between
us we will drain this mountain hollow of its waters
before we leave, then the way will be open to us, for
the chief of the people, whose prisoners we were, is
our friend. Allow me to present you to Prince Aztel
of the Razois ’ He led Aztel forward by the hand
as he concluded, and talked a few words of Spanish
for his benefit. The comrades gravely shook hands
with Aztel, and after hearing some explanations,
which Boston Bob and Doc made conjointly, promised
to see him out of his troubles, no matter what


happened. At the same time they told the story of
their capture by the Razois—it was simply a case of
being overwhelmed by numbers —how they had made
several attempts to escape, all of which were frustrated,
and how by degrees they had become acquainted with
the entire history of their captors.
‘ But this is no time for talky-talky,’ Big Tassy
suddenly interrupted. ‘lf the Venezuelans are coming
this way in league with Carville’s crowd, it is about
time we got that little pond out there emptied. Now,
it seems to me that the best way to do that is to blow
up the sluice-gates with dynamite, and I told Aztel
long ago to send down to Georgetown for some cases
of that stuff. Did you attend to that business, old
man?’ His last words were in Spanish, and Aztel
at once replied :
‘1 did ; but my canoe and its load are now in the
hands of the councillors.’
‘ But how can we get down to drill holes for the
charges anyway?’ asked Mersey Jack. ‘We’re not
fishes, and we haven’t got diving-dresses. I think
we should stop all the inflowing waters and pump
this water-hole dry.’
‘ And where would you put the water you pumped
out, Jack?’ asked Sailor Bill. ‘We couldn’t drink
it all, you know.’
‘ If we had some gelignite,’ said Doc, ‘ we might
weight a powerful charge and lower it on to the
sluices, and fire it by means of a long fuse.’
‘ And if we had a lot of powerful fire-engines,’ Big
Tassy commented, ‘we might pump the blamed water
over the mountain-top.’
‘ But as we have nothing,’ put in Piccadilly Peter,
(C 10) 2 r


‘ how would it do to block up the entrances to the
submerged mines, and then sink new shafts into them
through the hillside, and bail out the water they
contain ? ’
‘ Life is too short,’ Big Tassy answered. ‘ I’m
beginning to think the natives themselves were going
about the business in the right way, by making us cut
a new passage.’
‘ Which Aztel says will be completed in two hun-
dred years,’ said Doc quietly.
‘Let’s hear what the kids have to say,’ suggested
Damper Charlie. ‘ They’ve got more brains than we
have.’
‘ Speak for yourself, Damper Charlie,’advised Kan-
garoo Dave. ‘ We’re not all so badly off as you ’
‘ But the kids are not here ! ’ cried Mersey Jack.
‘ They’ll have got into trouble. And where is Irish
Mike?’
‘And where is Queno?’ inquired Doc anxiously.
‘ Count yourselves, boys, and see how many are
missing.’
‘Jumping beans ! ’ exclaimed Damper Charlie, ‘the
half of us are not here. We’re only nine strong ’
‘ The parson is among the lost crowd ! ’ cried Sailor
Bill. ‘ Where can they have gone?’
‘ I expect they got tired of so much talk and have
gone to work,’ said Piccadilly Peter. T shouldn’t
wonder if the lake suddenly disappears. Those
youngsters and that parson are a powerful com-
bination.’
‘And they’ve taken Irish Mike instead of me,’
Kangaroo Dave wailed. ‘ I reckon that ain’t fair.’
Dave’s indignation was great.


‘lf I remember rightly, Mike was an engineer of
some note at one time,’ Doc said musingly. ‘Per-
haps they have gone with Queno to look at the sluice-
gates. I am not alarmed about them ; if they can’t
look after themselves, we needn’t think our superior
judgment could be of any service to them.’
‘ Centipedes and camoudies ! ’ ejaculated Damper
Charlie. 4 Look what’s coming down the lake, and
we’ve got no guns.’
All ran to the mouth of the cave to see what had
occasioned their comrade’s remarks, and then their
hearts sank. About a dozen large war canoes were
being propelled over the lake’s surface along the base
of the rocks. Their cave would certainly receive some
attention, and what the result would be did not require
much guessing.
‘ My! Who would have thought that the whole
Razois fleet would come out after us?’ said Mersey
Jack. 4 1 move we drop stones on the men-o’-war as
they pass, and shatter their armour-plate ’
‘What for?’ demanded Damper Charlie. 4 Can’t
the councillors come out for a water-works’ inspection
trip if they like? I reckon they’re expecting a long
drought, and are going round to see that there are no
leakages in their dam.’
4 Shut up, you mutton chop ! ’ growled Sailor Bill.
4 Do you think all countries are like Australia?’
4 1 am blamed well sure Australia is a better
country than this,’ returned Damper Charlie hotly,
4 and I might tell ’
But what he might tell was never known. Doc
had been speaking to Aztel, and he now addressed his
comrades.


‘ Boys,’ he said, ‘ Aztel says our chance has come.
There are over fifty men in these canoes, and all
the councillors are there. The city proper must be
empty of its fighting male population ; for big drafts
went up to the pass last night. Aztel recommends
that we try to seize the city, and then make terms
with the councillors on their return. He will pro-
claim himself responsible chief and we will form his
army.’
‘We will,’ chorussed the men. ‘And we’ll annex
the place for Britain, too.’
‘ Form ! ’ roared Piccadilly Peter, in military style.
He flourished a copper drill above his head, in lieu of
a sword.
‘We can’t,’ replied Mersey Jack; ‘there isn’t
room ’
‘ Crawl through after me,’ said Doc ; ‘ I expect we’ll
overtake the parson and the boys on the way. I feel
certain they are up to some game calculated to
surprise us.’ He led the way through the small
passage leading to the other gallery, and one after
the other all followed, taking with them every-
thing in the shape of weapons which the boys and
Queno had brought to the cave, but they left some
harmless-looking biscuit boxes behind, and that little
omission was a fortunate circumstance.
They eventually reached the honeycombed rocks
which formed the city proper, and quickly made them-
selves masters of the chief entrances and exits. The
old men and women welcomed Aztel’s return ; the
councillors’ ways were not their ways, and they did
not understand why their peaceful valley had been
transformed into a huge fighting camp. Incidentally


they assisted in blocking up the ends of the passages
leading to the pass above ; so that their sons could
not return to help the councillors in the impending
struggle between them and their prince.
But the boys, the parson, Irish Mike, and Queno
were still missing, and, despite their seeming indiffer-
ence, most of the men were uneasy regarding them.
This feeling at length found characteristic expression
among the comrades, but the announcement that the
councillors and their bodyguard were returning com-
pelled an abandonment of all schemes suggested as to
searching for them.
‘ Well, I’m jiggered if I can say who has command
of this rabbit warren of a city,’ Big Tassy commented,
as he watched the fleet of canoes approach the landing-
stage at the head of the lake, near where its surplus
waters found egress through the old roadway, and
almost directly underneath the great rock cleft, in
which most of the people dwelt. ‘ Can anybody tell
me who are the prisoners here? It can’t be us, for the
city is in our hands, and we can prevent these fellows
from landing easily enough.’
‘ It is the strangest war game that ever was played,’
said Piccadilly Peter thoughtfully. ‘We are not
now prisoners, yet we can’t escape.’
‘ War game?’ snorted Mersey Jack, ‘ it’s more like
a game of draughts, with living people for the men,
and we’re all about as harmless too. If only we had
a rifle or two ’
‘You have named the situation very appropriately,
Jack,’ laughed Boston Bob. ‘This is the best game
of draughts I’ve ever known. But the game looks
like a draw. The strong army of fighting Razois in


the pass and beyond are holding the Venezuelans and
Maclaren and Carville in check. But they can’t move
back, for we’ve blocked the passage—that is, our man
is on the controlling square.’
‘How about these other fellows?’ Sailor Bill
observed. ‘lf we’re playing draughts, don’t they
block us in turn ? ’
‘ It all depends on who has the move,’ said Boston
Bob reflectively, ‘ but I think we can pull off a draw.’
‘We have the move,’ put in Doc quietly, ‘and it
means a win.’
‘How do you make that out?’ Piccadilly Peter
asked. ‘lt looks like a complete block to me.’
‘ You forget that we have an extra man free to
move about this great board without opposition, so
long as we sit tight and block the enemy. That man
will win the game.’
‘And I’ll bet he is at crown-head now,’ cried
Mersey Jack. ‘ Which means the other end of this
lake where the sluice-gates are.’
‘ I don’t see why the parson, Mike, and the kids
should have all the fun,’ grumbled Kangaroo Dave.
‘ You have a fair chance of excitement coming
your way now, Dave,’ said Boston Bob. ‘Go down
and tell those fellows about to land that they must
first take the oath of allegiance to Aztel, or we shall
be under the painful necessity of disallowing their
disembarkation.’
‘ You couldn’t put it in smaller words, I suppose?’
asked Dave. ‘ The last time I used embrocation was
out in New South Wales, and the horse I used it on
kicked me over the yard rails.’
‘ Sorry I haven’t time now, Dave. Come along,


Aztel, and dictate your terms.’ Boston Bob spoke
the last sentence in Spanish, and followed by an
imposing-looking army of old men and his eight
white friends, Aztel at once marched down to the
landing-stage.
Meanwhile, about three miles distant, at the other
end of the lake, strenuous work was proceeding, and
had been for some time. While Doc was introducing
his comrades to Aztel, the parson, noting Queno’s
endeavours to attract attention, had engaged him in
conversation to the best of his ability, but Charlie
coming to his assistance, it was soon apparent that
Queno thought too much time was being wasted in
talk.
‘ Come and see if your magic can open the old
waterway,’ he had said in his own tongue, and Charlie
signed to Harry, and the parson touched Irish Mike
on the shoulder, and all followed without being
obser\ r ed by their comrades. Queno led them along
the passage, which soon terminated in another cave
looking out on the lake. He then fastened a fibre
rope he had carried to a jutting rock and slid down
into the water, telling the others to wait until he
called for them. They watched him swim back to his
canoe resting beneath the cave in which their com-
rades were still discussing matters, and when a few
minutes after he had brought it to a point below
them, they swarmed down the rope into it. Queno
then paddled to the end of the lake, and intimated
that they were now above the flood-gates. Rocks
rose sheer above the water, but a foothold had been
cut on the level of the lake, which gave them standing-
room.


‘ Say what you need to work your magic and Queno
will do his best to provide it,’ the native had said.
‘ Begorra ! ’ exclaimed Mike. ‘Do ye think we
carry the magic in our pockets? What are these long
copper rods sticking up through the water over there ? ’
Harry translated the latter part of Mike’s question,
and Queno replied : ‘ These are the drills we tried to
hammer through the sluice-gates. They could not be
driven, and we could not withdraw them. They have
been there a long time.’
‘By Jupiter! they’re hollow!’ cried Charlie,
paddling over to inspect them.
‘ Yes,’answered Queno. ‘They must be hollow,
or we could not give them their spirit.’ Charlie’s
exclamation had been in English, but Queno had
guessed its purport.
‘ Hullo ! ’ said Mike. ‘ He’s talking Australian
aboriginal Gaelic. What is he trying to say?’
‘He says,’ replied Charlie, in some excitement,
‘ that these are tempered copper tubes, the other ends
of which are stuck fast in the sluice-doors at the
bottom. Does gelignite explode only along the lines
of least resistance ? ’
‘No,’ answered Mike. ‘lt plays blazes all roads.
Shure an many a time we’ve blown up rocks with a
few plugs, just by sticking them on to the face of it
with clay. But we haven’t got any gelignite, and
common gunpowder is the only explosive we can
make here, an’ it is as harmless as a plug of tobacco
unless it is confined.’
‘ What are the ends of these tubes like ? ’ Charlie
asked Queno, with increasing excitement, in spite of
his efforts to keep cool.


‘The same as the top,’ was the answer, ‘only the
metal is much thinner and the cutting edges are as fine
as a knife-blade. We must have driven some nearly
through the great doors, or we would have been able
to remove them to regrind the edges.’
‘Your idea seems to me to be correct, Charlie,’
observed the parson, guessing the lad’s intention.
He had stripped and gone into the water to examine
the projecting copper drills. ‘ But we’ll have to invent
some other explosive compound—something we can
make with the material around us. I see plenty of
nitrate of potash on that slope over there, and there
is any amount of sulphur in that volcanic cleft on our
right; all we need is charcoal, and we can make that
by burning these logs floating on the lake’s surface.
Why, boys, we can make tons of gunpowder ’
‘Which isn’t any good,’ said Irish Mike. ‘We
can’t get down to drill a hole, and ’
‘And we don’t need it,’ cried Harry, swimming
over to the canoe after having gone round all the
tempered copper tubes. ‘We have all the gelignite
we brought from Georgetown in some biscuit tins in
our cave, and we have plenty of fuse too. Let me
have the canoe, and I’ll go back for it, Charlie ’
‘ I fear we have overstepped ourselves a bit this time,’
said the parson. ‘ Here is a fighting flotilla coming
down the lake.’
1 Hide ! ’ cried Queno. ‘lt is the councillors looking
for Aztel. Get into the water and lie behind that log.’
His gestures made his meaning clear without any
translation, and in a moment the parson and Mike
were immersed in the lake up to their necks, supporting
themselves by holding on to a log floating near, and


also hiding their heads behind it. Queno scrambled
into the canoe and seized the paddles, and Charlie and
Harry lay flat inside. Slowly and deliberately Queno
propelled his craft in among the tubes and appeared
to be so engrossed in testing them, to see if any had
slackened that he did not notice the approach of the
fleet, until one of the councillors called out to him :
‘ Are your wounds healed already, Queno? Why
are you here if you are well, and not with your
comrades in the pass?’
‘ Queno’s wounds are not yet healed, my father,’
the young warrior answered deferentially, ‘ but when
the hour of the great struggle comes he will be in it.’
‘We do not doubt you,’ the councillor who had
just spoken continued, as the canoes swept round and
rested preparatory for the return journey up the lake ;
‘ Queno has ever been in the battle’s forefront. But
you should return to your home, good Queno ; like
you, we sorrow over our people’s misfortunes, but this
is no time to give way to despair,’
Queno murmured an answer, and the canoe fleet
began to glide away.
‘Poor Queno!’ one of the councillors remarked
sympathetically, ‘He feels the disgrace of his old
chief very keenly. He was his favourite attendant,
and broods continually on his fate,’
‘ Woe to the unhappy man ! ’ cried another. ‘ Yet
he was a brave and fearless chief, and loved his
people ’ The words were lost in the growing
distance, and shortly afterwards Queno raised his
head and watched the receding vessels.
‘ Woe to you !’ he cried. ‘ You have despoiled the
greatest and best Chief of the Razois, and you have


made me lie, though not with my tongue. Aztel will
again command his people in spite of you.’
‘ That sounds well, my bhoy,’ spoke Mike, climbing
out of the water. ‘ But shure an’ it is this child who
doesn’t know one word that was said. The man who
invented Spanish was no Irishman ’
‘ Wait till we come back, ’ interrupted Charlie, sitting
up. ‘ We’re going for our gelignite.’ He spoke a
few words to Queno, and at once the canoe shot away
up the lake. The parson then joined Mike on the
ledge, and endeavoured to explain to that gentleman
that the councillors did not appear to be bloodthirsty
tyrants.
The morning sun was now throwing its burning
rays over the water, and the entire valley was bathed
in dancing light. ‘ This is truly an impregnable
stronghold,’ said the parson, as he donned his gar-
ments and took in the scene around. ‘No foes could
come down over the rocks overhead, even if they did
storm the pass. And if they succeeded in capturing
the cave entrances, which give access to the sub-
terranean passages leading down, they would still
be in the same position as that in which we find
ourselves, for the passages would simply be blocked,
and they could not return. In time the dauntless
Razois would reduce the unfortunate people to a few
survivors, who would be sent to work in the long
galleries. I wonder, though, where the Razois find
their food. This valley could not support even goats.’
‘They’re all vegetarians,’ replied Mike, ‘an’ they
live on cassava, and nothing else. That is grown on
good ground on the very top of the mountain an’
down the outside slopes. But it is the diamonds that


bate me. I cyant see how they cyan grow here at all,
an’ they say the caves under the wather are full of
them.’
‘ Probably the accounts of these stones are greatly
exa £T£f era ted, ’ said the parson. ‘ I can’t conceive how
diamonds could occur in country of this nature, but
certainly the samples Charlie and Harry have are
magnificent specimens.’
‘ Here the heroes come,’ cried Mike. ‘ Begorra !
we ought to have some limelight to throw on them.’
‘ The sunlight is all they desire, Mike. They are
healthy-minded and built of the right stuff, and I
believe they’ll empty this lake.’
‘We’ve got the biscuit tins,’ cried Harry, as the
canoe came near, ‘ but our fellows have left the cave
and taken everything else with them.’
‘ Perhaps they went with Aztel to visit the city
when they saw the fleet coming down the lake,’ the
parson suggested. ‘ They will have formulated some
idea of doing something which I fear our absence
may handicap. We may have done wrong in leaving
them, boys.’
‘They are well able to look after themselves,’
said Charlie. ‘ Our work is to blow up these sluice-
gates ; after we do that we can go and look for
them.’
‘Be the Powers ! Hear them ! ’ cried Mike. ‘Do
ye think we can do in an hour or two what has been
tried for years ? ’
‘lf we can do it at all, Mike, it will be only a
question of minutes,’ Charlie replied. ‘Would you
mind charging that farthest away tube with all the
gelignite you can crush into it? Here is a box con-


taining fifty plugs, and we’ve got a lot of fuse, and
detonators too.’
‘ But, bhoys, fifty plugs will blow up the mountain,
and anyway there’s no use of filling the tube with the
stuff; it would just blow out at the top if we don’t
tamp it properly.’
‘ Well, tamp it any way you like. These sluice-
gates must go, and we don’t need to care how much
of the mountain goes with them. Land is cheap here.’
Mike divided his box with the parson, and they
propelled the log which had already sheltered them
over to their tubes and set to work. Each also armed
himself with about thirty feet of fuse and some caps.
But the boys paid little attention to them. They
intended charging another two tubes, and they had
their own ideas as to how this should be done, having
profited much by some object-lessons Doc and Boston
Bob had given them in the art of blasting, while on
the long journey up the Potaro River. They squeezed
several plugs into a ball and inserted the cap and fuse
in its heart. Then they weighted the charge with as
many rifle cartridges as they could push into the
plastic mass, and dropped the combination down one
of the tubes. Charlie then tore the sleeves from his
shirt, and, after dropping down another heavily-
weighted charge, rolled them into a bundle, which he
also weighted heavily and lowered into the depths of
the strange drill-hole.
‘ That will do for that one,’ he said to Harry, as he
cut off the fuse a foot above the tubes. ‘ The cloth
will expand and jam in the tubes when the charge is
fired, and the water in the tube is a perfectly air-tight
tamping. In another minute they were repeating


their work in Harry’s tube, but this time it was his
shirt that was used. When they were finished they
waited until the parson and Mike had completed their
work, explaining to the wondering Queno meanwhile
what they hoped would be the result when the magic
acted.
Mike tamped his hole in his own way, covering his
charge with bundles of grass, and weighting the whole
with stones. He then filled the tube with sand,
through the middle of which his fuse passed. The
parson’s plan was slightly different. He set his
gelignite in the usual way, and then cut a circular
piece of leather from his leggings almost the size of
the inside of the tubes. Boring a hole in this, he
passed it over the long fuse, and sank it into place
with sand. ‘ That leather washer, I hope, will expand
when the gases underneath burst against it,’ he said,
‘ and if the tube really has any grip of the sluice
timber, some damage must be done.’
All was now ready for the great attempt, and Mike
swam round to inspect the other holes. He was the
only man with much experience in blasting, although
the parson seemed to possess a fair knowledge of the art.
4 Drop some sand down to cover your charges,
bhoys, he said. ‘ Water tamping is all very foine
sometimes, but, when ye have bullets for packing, a
Gatling gun wouldn t be in it with your cannons
when the dynamite explodes. It might rain bullets
for days afterwards.’
Recognising the wisdom of his advice, the in-
structions were at once obeyed, and then all looked
round for a safe vantage point. The nearest was the
cave from which their fibre rope still hung.


‘ Bhoys, get away ! ’ said Mike. ‘ I will fire these
and swim after ye.’ He produced a match-box he
had managed to save.
‘Not at all,’ said Charlie. ‘We can all go to the
cave, and I can come back in the canoe and fire the
fuses.’
‘Be jabbers ! Do ye think that Irish Mike is the
man to allow a kid or a parson to go fooling about
dynamite ? ’
‘ But in this case, Mike,’ said the parson, ‘we need
not worry. These are thirty feet fuses, and therefore
will not reach the explosives until half an hour after
they are fired. We can fire them at our leisure from
the canoe, and all go away together.’
‘Jove! I had forgotten we had so much time,’
laughed Charlie. ‘Of course, we can make one job
of the firing. Here goes mine.’
He applied a lighted match to the free end of the
fuse, and the hissing sound which followed told that
the fiery message was on its way.
‘Jump in ! ’ cried the parson. ‘An accident might
easily happen to cause delay.’
‘We’re all on board,’ answered Mike. ‘Full
speed ahead to the next cannon’s mouth, bhoys.’
Quickly, but quite coolly and deliberately, Charlie
paddled the canoe round to the remaining three fuses,
and Harry started them in rotation. Then the craft
was headed towards the cave, and in a few minutes
all stood safely inside its sheltering walls.
‘ How long have we to wait before the explosion ? ’
asked Harry, after they had been standing watching
the danger zone for some time.
‘About ten minutes, I should say,’ answered the


parson. No one had a watch. The boys’ timekeepers
had come to grief at an early stage of the journey, and
the parson’s and Mike’s possibly rested in the Razois’
treasure hall, if they had such a place.
‘ Dear me ! ’ exclaimed Charlie, after Mike had
told what he thought was a funny story. ‘I am sure
twice ten minutes have passed now ; they must have
missed fire.’
‘ All couldn’t miss fire, my bhoy,’ said Mike ; ‘ but
it is a long ten minutes, to be sure.’
‘ Let us go and see ! ’ cried Harry, after another
spell. ‘ We’ll be here at night if we wait until the
explosion.’
‘ Half an hour is a long time, Harry,’ said the
parson ; ‘ I don’t think that thirty minutes have yet
passed since we fired.’
‘ Look ! Look ! ’ cried Charlie. ‘ There is two —
three—of the tubes blown into the air.’
A loud explosion—then another, and another
drowned his words, and while they looked in awed
silence, a column of water flew skywards, then several
logs of timber, and hundreds of smaller pieces of rock,
wood, and other substances. A muffled report came
to their ears, while the air was filled with flying
fragments, and the fourth tube flew straight out of the
water, now a boiling mass of foam.
‘ Failed ! ’ ejaculated the parson. ‘ The tubes had
no grip.’
‘ It’s killed a few fish, an’ given the sluice-doors a
good shaking, anyway,’ said Mike. ‘ Begorra ! see
the commotion in the water.’
A great swirling current was now in fierce gyration
above the sluices, and next moment the waters opened


in a filler-shaped funnel. A mighty roar resounded,
and the funnel seemed to extend in an ever-increasing
seething swirl.
‘Save our canoe!’ cried Harry. ‘lt’s drifting
away. Oh! too late! Look! it’s into the whirl-
pool! It has broken in two! It has disappeared!
The whole lake is rushing past ’
‘ Gentlemen,’ said the parson quietly, ‘ let us con-
gratulate each other. The sluice-gates are opened.
In a few hours the valley of the Razois will be
emptied of its waters.’


CHAPTER XIII
The Blue Diamonds
‘ Sorry, old man, but you can’t land here. This
city, or whatever you like to call it, belongs to a fellow
with a name I can’t pronounce, but which some
sensible people have shortened to Aztel, and he has
just passed an Alien Act, which decrees that no man
shall be allowed to enter his capital without first taking
an oath of allegiance to him. lam one of his ministers
of state ; the rest, with his army, are behind these
rocks up there, and I tell you straight you’ll be com-
mitting suicide if you try to put a foot on shore. My
name is Big Tassy ; I’m tired talking, and I’ve left
my card-case at home. God save the king ! ’
‘ Talk Spanish to them, Tassy ! ’ called out Boston
Bob. ‘ They can’t understand a word you’re saying.’
‘ I’ll bet they’ll make a mighty good guess,’ replied
Tassy, ‘ but here goes ! Je vous demande hien pardon,
messieurs ;la loi dit ce que le roi veut ’ (I really
beg your pardon, sirs ; the law says what the king
pleases).
‘ That isn’t Spanish, Tassy ! ’ cried Doc.
‘ Hang it all, I know that! Can’t you let me have
a chance to show I’m strong in French ?’
‘We have been betrayed, comrades!’ cried a
councillor. ‘ The city is in the hands of the
prisoners.’


> -jft £
1 i
w| ■ w jS B n *
1 1 Vy ff*l I itl
BK^Bj
■ftjc 1 »V« J T H# %¥’,*" m Xij*
tt fl? i
if « a® m***i **k $'■'
X » V
K.
4fe t- |jS| HBH8r .
yHV fBB
“gentlemen!” he cried, “we are not your enemies




‘That’s good Spanish,’ commented Big Tassy
approvingly, in the same tongue. ‘ But you are only
half right. You haven’t been betrayed. Aztel is
willing to issue a free pardon to all who acknowledge
his authority. And we are just as ready to give a
free pass to the next world to those who won’t ’
‘ Oh, Tassy, you are a bad diplomatist! ’ cried
Boston Bob, joining him on the landing-stage. ‘ Let
me speak to them ’
The councillors had hastily called a halt, and were
talking excitedly together. Evidently most favoured
storming the landing, but some advised retreat,
and at least one suggested that they should try
to compromise, until they found out how matters
were.
But Boston Bob did not believe in allowing them
to come to conclusions before stating his case, and he
began at once. He was a fluent Spanish speaker,
and his voice rang out loud and clear. ‘ Gentlemen ! ’
he cried, ‘ we are not your enemies, and although you
have treated us as such, we wish to prove to you that
we are not. We believe we can force the waters to
leave your valley, and we seek no gain for ourselves
in so doing. True, we have captured your city, and
reinstated your old chief, but we have done that in
your interests. You would not listen to your chief
nor to us, unless we were in a position to command
attention, and we knew that your chief was no traitor.
We have sworn to help him to defeat his foes, no
matter who they may be. His foes are yours, and
most of them are also ours. We are not the people
who brought this trouble upon you. We are of the
same race, but that means nothing in cases of right


and wrong. Am I understood ? ’ He paused for a
reply.
And it quickly came. ‘We hear you, but we
believe you not,’ said an old councillor, standing up
in one of the canoes. ‘ I say not these words to insult
you, but rather because our experience has proved
that the white man’s utterances are always false.’
‘ Not always, sir ! ’ cried Boston Bob. ‘ I admit
that many white men know not the meaning of truth,
but those are the bad among us. Are there no men
among the Razois who depart not from the truth ? ’
‘ No,’ replied the old man proudly ; ‘ the Razois do
not lie.’
‘ What a liar he is ! ’ muttered Big Tassy. ‘Go
on, Boston ; fire into their Sunday-school education ! ’
A derisive laugh from the rocks above also greeted
the councillor’s speech, but Doc and Piccadilly Peter
checked the outburst of their comrades at once, and
silence reigned again.
‘ Gentlemen, it is with sorrow that I learn your
dealings with the white man have not been such as
can be laid to his credit. Nevertheless all white men
are not perverters of the truth, and my comrades are
not ’
‘ Excepting Mersey Jack and Damper Charlie,
Boston!’ cried Sailor Bill in English. ‘ Don’t mislead
the poor natives.’
The two individuals mentioned did not know more
than a few words of Spanish, and thinking they were
being commended for some virtue they stood up behind
the rocks and bowed, much to the delight of their
companions, who were more conversant with the
language Boston Bob was using.


Boston Bob, however, ignored the interruption, and
proceeded : ‘ We understand why you will not believe
us ! ’ he cried ; ‘ but surely the fact that we are offering
friendship for a return of the same and nothing else,
is proof that we have no evil designs against you.
We are in command of your city, yet we make no
terms concerning giving it over to you, except the
stipulation that you will allow us to help you, and
that you will respect the wishes, or at least hear the
words of your own chief.’
‘ If you had your magic you would not be so ready
to be our friends,’ cried a young councillor. ‘ You
are afraid. You know you can’t escape through the
pass, and soon you will be starved out. You know
too that your fire weapons are in our hands, and even
now we could use them against you.’
* My friend makes a mistake,’ cried Boston Bob.
‘ We fear nothing ; and to prove that we can believe
the word of the Razois, although they will not take
ours ’
‘I say, Boston,’ put in Sailor Bill, ‘if they have
our rifles in these canoes shouldn’t we make an
attempt to get them. We’ve got the kids’ guns here
although we haven’t much ammunition ’
‘Shut up, Bill,’ reproved Piccadilly Peter. ‘Our
representative is speaking, and we must remember
we are gentlemen.’
‘ I now propose,’ continued Boston Bob, ‘that you
give us permission to try to empty this lake. Promise
that you will give us liberty for one week, and that
during that time your chief may have his rights
restored, and we will use our magic for you. We do
not ask you to trust us. If you agree, you may take


over your city and appoint a guard of six men over
every man in our party, to see that we do no harm.
When the week is up, if we haven’t earned the right
to depart in peace from your city, and to be regarded
as friends, then the truce is ended, and you can do
what seems best in your eyes. Think over my words
and give your answer as true Razois ’
‘By thunder! what was that?’ exclaimed Big
Tassy. ‘ I heard heavy firing. The Venezuelans
must be bombarding the pass. Did you hear those
shots, mates? I reckon something is happening,’
‘ It sounded mighty like blasting,’ Kangaroo Dave
replied from above. ‘ I do hope the kids are not
monkeying with dynamite?’
‘We agree to your proposal,’ cried one of the
councillors, after they had held some talk among
themselves. ‘ Our enemies are on every hand, and
we can’t help ourselves. If you speak truly, and will
use your magic for us, the Razois will be grateful.’
‘ Land then, freely, and see to the defences of your
city,’ replied Boston Bob. ‘We will set about our
work at once. Come down, boys,’ he called to his
comrades, ‘ this lake must disappear before we are
free men. Hullo! what’s the meaning of that
current? ’
‘lt means that while we have been talking, the
parson, Mike, and the boys have been working,’
answered Doc. ‘ The lake is emptying itself now.’
‘ Great Australia ! ’ ejaculated Damper Charlie,
‘ it’s rushing away like a Darling flood ! ’
‘ Pull shorewards at once, gentlemen,’ cried Doc
in Spanish. ‘ Our magic has commenced. And you
may be carried away with it.’


‘ Dash it all, I—er—must be dreaming,’ remarked
Piccadilly Peter. ‘ The tide—er—seems to be going
out.’
‘ Er—of course it is, old man,’ said Kangaroo Dave.
‘ I’ll bet—er—the kids have whistled—er—on it, or
Irish Mike has—er—started drinking it.’
‘ Well, I’ll be jiggered ! ’ exclaimed Big Tassy.
‘And I’ll be—knocked into the middle of next
week,’ commented Mersey Jack.
‘ Blow me tighter than the waistcoat I used to
wear,’ grunted Sailor Bill. ‘ I’m becalmed ! ’
Doc made no further comment, nor did Boston Bob
make any utterance. Their surprise was as great as
that of their comrades, but they did not wish the
Razois to know that. Aztel probably was the least
surprised of all present. In some dim way he felt that
his young friends had not remained absent from their
comrades without having some purpose in view, and
he had unbounded faith in their abilities. They had
opened the sluice-gates, as they said they would do,
and they had simply kept their word. And there was
no doubt about the fact that the waters were falling.
A strong current was flowing towards the sluice-gates
at the far end of the lake, instead of through the hole
which connected with the old roadway beside where
the people were now assembled, and already there was
a dark, slimy rim beginning to appear on the rocks
round the lake’s shore indicating the old level of the
waters.
But what a change came over the proud and
dignified councillors, as they witnessed the startling
and speedy result of the white man’s magic. It was
with difficulty they managed to land, but, when they


stood once more on shore, their first act was to render
homage to Aztel. Then a shout arose from the people
that re-echoed far down the valley. Aztel was their
chief again, and the wise councillors had acknowledged
him. Now they were ready to fight the world.
‘ Arise, my most noble and learned fathers,’ Aztel
said to the councillors, who with tears of joy running
down their faces were now assuring him of life-
long devotion. ‘You faithfully, and without fear or
favour, carried out the laws of our ancestors, and
Aztel remembers not what he suffered. But now that
he may be heard in council, he has much to say to
his wise advisers. These white men are true friends.
Prepare a banquet for them and let us do them much
honour. Also send forth and find their comrades,
and let them all attend in our council hall, to give
advice as to how we may defeat our enemies.’
All day the waters continued to fall, and in the
afternoon the parson, Irish Mike, and the boys, were
escorted in triumph into the city amid the cheers
of the people; but Queno quickly separated himself
from his white friends. He had no desire for glory.
Aztel was chief again, and he was happy. Besides,
he did not think it advisable that the councillors
should know he had deceived them earlier in the day.
Messengers were sent up to the pass to report the
joyful news, that the waters were rushing from their
submerged homes, and that soon their fortunes would
be restored. At the meeting in the council chamber
much was discussed. All the white men had been
invited to be present, but they thought they could
employ themselves better by attending to other duties;
but Doc and Big Tassy were deputed to represent


them, and make what arrangements they thought
advisable.
That was a meeting which will live long in the
history of the Razois. Aztel told of his experiences
while wandering, and of how he had first met his
white friends, and all that he knew since that time,
and Doc related the history of his first expedition to
the country around the mountain slopes, telling what he
knew of Maclaren and Carville, and their method of
obtaining a concession from the Venezuelan Govern-
ment. He also added that, if the mountain were in
British territory, the Razois need have no fear while
they were present, as no foe would dare attack them ;
but if it were in the dominion of any other power, he
advised that they should work out the strange diamond
deposits or conglomeration as soon as possible, and
store them to put upon the market at future dates,
removing, after they had done so, to country well
within the British boundary, where they could make
a new home for themselves in peace. The councillors
listened intently to Doc’s speech, but they intimated
that while they hoped they would be taken under
British protection, they would not leave their mountain
hollow, even if Venezuela and Brazil combined to make
war against them.
‘ 1 think you are British in any case,’ said Doc
finally, ‘ for the flow of the waters, it has been decided,
is the real boundary, and your lake drains into the
Potaro, no matter where the outside rivers go.’
A great banquet was given that night, at which
much piwarrie was drunk, and many varieties of
cassava cakes eaten. All night the music of the
sinking waters sang in the ears of the feasters, and


when they looked out in the morning, behold ! the
lake was empty. A brown expanse of mud filled the
bed of the valley, and in the fast-decreasing semi-fluid
—even the mud was in motion towards the sluices—
fishes flopped spasmodically.
‘ There are the diamond mines ! ’ cried an old
councillor. ‘My heart is glad, for I little thought to
behold them again.’ He pointed to a row of openings
in the rocks far underneath, but about ten feet above
the level of the lake’s bed, and many were the prayers
of thankfulness muttered by his fellows, as they gazed
upon the mines their ancestors had left to them,
which they had allowed to be flooded. Early in the
forenoon a state visit was paid to the old workings,
and then the white men saw that the wonderful
diamond deposit was an actual fact. But the parson,
who was an expert geologist, also read the story the
formations offered to those who could read it.
‘lt is as we thought,’ he said to Doc, as they
surveyed the very commonplace-looking mass of
dripping pebbly cement, exposed in narrow flumes
here and there in the caves. ‘ These diamondiferous
blows were formed in an age long past, when this
mountain was not in existence, and when probably
all this part of the South American Continent was
under the sea. Since their formation the land has
been lifted bodily in one or more gigantic upheavals,
and finally the crust of the earth burst and lava and
fire poured out in enormous volumes through the
crater which now forms the lake-bed. Thus a cap of
lava overlies, but does not form, the original country
of which this mountain is composed, and the presence
of these diamonds is accidental, and they may not


occur in any other part, except where we see
them.'
‘ You talk as if we had just duffered a shaft, parson. ’
Doc laughed, and Boston Bob also seemed amused.
‘ What does it matter though there were no more
diamonds in all South America? There are enough
in sight to make all the Razois rich for life, and surely
you don’t want them to bequeath an enormous burden
of wealth, and its attendant evils, to their descendants?’
‘ I didn’t mean that I was disappointed,’ the parson
said smiling. ‘ I was thinking more of the explana-
tion of the fact of how carbon, unconsumed, could
remain in the walls of a volcanic crater ’
‘ Dry up, parson ! ’ advised Kangaroo Dave.
‘ They’re there, and that’s enough. If you could tell
me how it happens that my boots are on Piccadilly’s
feet and not on my own, you would be explaining the
biggest mystery I know.’
‘They’re there, and that’s enough,’ laughed Sailor
Bill, Piccadilly Peter was digging out diamonds,
and apparently did not hear Dave’s implied charge.
‘ I should say he got up first, Dave,’ the parson
said, examining some dull-looking stones he knew
were diamonds.
‘I should say that myself if I had been to bed,’
replied Dave, ‘ but I haven’t been there since before
the flood—l mean our flood, of course, not Damper
Charlie’s Darling flood.’
‘ I understand,’ said the parson reflectively. ‘ The
only supposition I can offer, then, is that you sampled
too much piwarrie last night, and—well, you lost your
boots about the same time as you lost your memory.’
‘ And Piccadilly found them,’ added Mersey Jack.


‘ He’s about the best hand at finding things I ever
knew.’
The boys had gone exploring on their own account,
as soon as it became evident that the parson’s flow of
geological eloquence had been stopped, and Queno
accompanied them to point out the richest formations.
The lower caves were still difficult of access, so much
deposited matter had been left in them, but Queno led
them through the labyrinth of passages which con-
tained the strange, vertical, pebble-containing flumes
by a route which avoided the silt-filled caverns. Above
the mouths of the main entrance the smooth, shiny
rocks rose abruptly far above the recent lake level, but
a few feet lower a smooth rocky ledge had been cut
right round the entire hollow. This platform was
about six feet wide, and Harry’s first comment when
he saw it was : ‘ My, Charlie ! what a fine cycling
track this would make. Once round must be about
eight miles.’
‘We’ll get up a foot-race some day,’ Charlie
answered, ‘ and see how we compare with Razois
runners.’
All day was passed in the diamondiferous caves,
and Big Tassy blew out as many of the valuable
though common-looking stones with one charge of
powder taken from rifle cartridges as the Razois could
dig out with their copper implements in a month.
Some of the others also fired great chunks of the
conglomeration, and by night Doc felt constrained to
advise Aztel to flood the mines again. ‘ You have
more of these stones now than can be put upon the
market in many years, without causing the prices to
fall considerably,’ he said. ‘ You have sufficient to


enable you to purchase anything that the outside
world has to give. I therefore advise you to close the
sluices again, and with some of your councillors come
with us to Georgetown, where the British authorities
will formally take your people under protection.
Then you will be safe and secure against the attempts
of the many invaders who undoubtedly will try to find
the mines whence these stones come.’
‘You speak wisely,’ Aztel replied, and after some
discussion the councillors also intimated that they saw
the wisdom of the advice. ‘ To-morrow we shall
close the sluices once more,’ they said, ‘ and we will
have no chains on them which our enemies may cut.
The mines will remain flooded until our children
desire more fire-stones, and then they can open the
sluices with the help of some good white men from
the great city by the sea.’
‘ Then make no marks to show where the flood-
gates are,’ said Boston Bob, ‘and you can leave your
valley undefended when you like, and build your
homes outside where the sun always shines ’
‘ Look here,’ interjected Mersey Jack, ‘ I’m as sleepy
as an anaconda after a big meal. I suppose we can
start on our back journey to-morrow some time, and
if so, I should like to start fresh. My eye, mates !
What a feed we’ll have when we get out among the
muscovy ducks and other luxuries again.’
‘You’ll get my patent stew first night,’ Kangaroo
Dave promised, ‘ if old Carville an’ his fellows haven’t
stolen my stew-pot.’
‘ That stew should be pretty well cooked by this
time, Dave,’ the parson laughed ; but Dave’s hasty
assurance that it was a fresh concoction he meant to


prepare was passed unheeded ; the chief councillor
was speaking, and those who understood his words
communicated their meaning to their comrades, whose
Spanish education had been neglected.
‘ We have now to divide the stones with our white
friends,’ the man was saying. ‘The Razois will be
pleased if they will take half of that which has been
to-day by their help obtained.’
‘Then the Razois are not going to be pleased,’
said Doc firmly. ‘ Whatever our intentions were
when we first came to this part of our small planet,
we are not robbers. The stones are yours. We will
accept a small present, but ’
‘ V ou have already promised to accept my share,’
reminded Aztel. ‘ That is one-tenth of the whole.’
‘Very well,’ went on the councillors, ‘you have
agreed to take one-tenth from our beloved chief;
you must therefore receive at least as much from his
people No, my dear friends, you cannot refuse,
you must allow the Razois the pleasure of showing
their appreciation of your friendship ’
‘ But you are giving us far too much,’ broke in
Boston Bob. ‘We are adventure-loving prospectors,
but we are not so eager for wealth that we would rob
you. We have completed our bargain, and have
earned our freedom, and that is all.’
‘ And because that you were not always free, and
because that the Razois in their trouble made many
mistakes, you are therefore entitled to more recom-
pense. These two-tenth parts of stones are yours.’
‘Take them, Doc,’ the parson interrupted, ‘it
will give them pleasure, and after all it costs them
nothing.’


‘Very well,’ said Doc, ‘on behalf of my comrades
I accept these two-tenth parts of stones. Our younger
comrades at least deserve them although we have
done nothing ’
‘ Stop, Doc, please ! ’ cried Charlie, ‘ but for you
and Boston Bob we would most likely still be in
Liverpool, with little hope of ever meeting men like
our present comrades.’
‘Friends, we are sorry that you are leaving us,’
continued the spokesman of the councillors, ‘ but after
all it is well, for if our foes from the north drive in
our outposts we might not be able to defend you ’
‘ And by all the saints in the Spanish calendar ! ’
cried Big Tassy. ‘Do you imagine that we would leave
you if we thought there was danger coming along in
the shape of Venezuelans? If you think you can’t
spiflicate them, say so, and we’ll stay and pitch in
with you whether this is British or not.’
‘That sounds 0.K., Tassy,’ said Damper Charlie,
‘and I second it, whatever it is.’
‘This valley was British as long as the lake
drained into the Potaro,’ observed Piccadilly Peter,
who understood what had been said.
‘ Jumping beans ! Piccadilly has—er—forgotten—
er—how he should—er—speak ’ cried Kangaroo
Dave. ‘ And, by my whiskers, boys ! How did he
come to be wearing my hat?' He looked at Picca-
dilly Peter in open-mouthed surprise, but the latter
was busily engaged in fixing his moustache with
some wild beeswax he had found during the day,
and in the laugh which followed Dave’s remark—
Dave was yet a comparative stranger among the
comrades, and consequently did not know their in-


dividual peculiarities very well—the humour of Peter’s
dandified appearance struck him, and he laughed too.
After some further talk the white men were given
the council chamber to themselves in which to sleep,
and soon after being left alone they stretched them-
selves out on the rocky floor, and almost immediately
most of them forgot their environment and everything
else. Among those who did not fall asleep at once
were the boys, Piccadilly Peter, and Kangaroo Dave.
Charlie and Harry went out with Aztel for a few
minutes’ private conversation, and when they returned
they saw Piccadilly Peter move over to a vacant space
beside Dave. ‘You don’t—er—mind my sleeping
beside you, do you?’ they heard the former remark
to Dave. He laid himself down beside his victim
without waiting for an answer.
‘ No, certainly—er—not,’ Dave replied dubiously,
‘ you haven’t—er—got a bit of—er—string about—er
—you ? ’
‘ No, the last piece I had I used to tie on my trousers
to my waist. You see my garments are—er —a bit
odd.’
‘I see,’ said Dave, ‘and it—er —was to prevent —
er—them from being more odd that I wanted the
string. I know I’ll be wearing them in the morning
if I don’t get my own tied on my legs in a way
that they can’t be—oh, I forgot—er—taken off—er—
without—er—waking me.’
Piccadilly Peter arose with a sigh. ‘ Keep your
trousers,’ he said; ‘because I am trying to make
myself look decent before leaving this place you are
all jealous—but say, what will you take that I’ve got,
for your shirt?’


Dave’s soft heart was touched. ‘ Teach me how to
put in ‘ er ’ in the proper place an’ it’s yours,’ he said,
hauling the coveted black silken garment over his
head. ‘ I don’t need a shirt, but I can sneak the
parson’s when he’s sleeping.’
Piccadilly Peter was evidently surprised at his easy
conquest, but he could not accept the gift on the terms
proposed. ‘ I’ll tell you what, Dave,’ he said, ‘if you
give me your trousers too, I’ll teach you how to wear
an eyeglass, as well.’
‘ Done ! ’ cried Dave. ‘ I’ve got another pair down
in our canoe outside anyhow.’
The listeners fell asleep then and heard no more of
the strange bargaining, which in the morning resulted
in the metamorphosis of Piccadilly Peter. He was
now the best-dressed man among the comrades, but
each had contributed to his wardrobe. It was not
Kangaroo Dave, however, who wore the tin trousers,
it was Sailor Bill. The parson also found himself
shirtless, but as Queno in some mysterious manner
provided another, he said nothing. But the others
were by no means silent. Dave clearly had been
taught more things than those attributes for a know-
ledge of which he had parted with his clothes. Prob-
ably Piccadilly Peter had instructed him in some
other matters as an extra, but if there were any
truth in the saying that clothes make the man, then
Piccadilly Peter and Dave were certainly composite
characters.
But the disturbance was soon quelled. Clothes are
a superfluity in tropical latitudes, when the skin is
hardened against the attacks of insect pests, and
every one was good-natured. After all, first up was
(C 10) 23


entitled to his choice of any garments more or less
loose, and the losers would soon have an opportunity
of making good their deficiencies.
After breakfast of cassava porridge and some tins
of preserved meat which the boys had brought in
with them, the comrades went down to the mines
with all the available natives to put in some more
work, and to timber some of the tunnels, so that they
might safely be once more flooded and yet remain
undamaged.
While there they learned that a fight had taken
place on the outside slopes during the night, and that
one of the opposing leaders had been brought into
the city as a prisoner, while the army of natives which
had supported him had been scattered to the four
winds of heaven. The councillors were greatly sur-
prised that the Venezuelan army supposed to be in
the vicinity had not taken part in the attack, but they
expected that they would have to deal with that
country’s invading force shortly, and strengthened
the pass-guard with every available man.
‘ Bring your prisoner here,’ said Doc to Aztel when
all was told. ‘We will show him that there are
now but few diamonds in this tunnel.’
‘ And we’ll let him keep on looking for them while
the waters are rising again,’ proposed Damper Charlie.
‘ He’ll not be able to get out then without a good
swim ’
‘ That will do, Damper Charlie,’ Boston Bob
interrupted. ‘ When we can’t fight fair we’ll give
up the game.’
The prisoner was led into the mines soon after,
and the comrades gazed at him in surprise. ‘ Dear


me, Carville ! ’ remarked Doc, offering him a cigar,
‘ I am grieved to see you in this state. What has
happened ? ’
‘ Cut it! ’ laughed Carville, lighting the cigar.
‘You’ve won this trick, but the game isn’t finished
yet. The law is on our side, and you’ll have reason
to repent having poached on our preserves.’
‘ Don’t be silly, Carville,’ put in Boston Bob. ‘ You
may have obtained from President Castro, by means
known only to yourselves, some supposed rights to
this mountain hollow, but it was not his to give ; this
lake drains into British Guianan territory.’
‘ It didn’t when we saw it first.’
‘ No, but you made it do so yourselves when you
closed the sluices.’
‘ Oh yes, I know all about that ; but you’ve opened
them again, consequently this place is once more
Venezuelan. The lake now empties into the Caroni
under the waterfall over which you and your beloved
comrade, Dr. Rawson, were supposed to have gone.’
‘We changed our minds about that,’ said Doc.
‘ Instead, we went home to England and enlisted some
friends ’
‘Yes, two confounded kids, who have trumped
every card we played. I would like to wring their
necks ’
‘ I’m surprised, Carville, that you have lost the
philosophical nature that characterised your earlier
methods, said Boston Bob. ‘ The kids, as you term
them, beat you and your precious gang from the start,
and you can’t complain that they did not play the
game a good bit fairer than your crowd.’
‘ Now you’ve reached bed-rock, Boston ; I’m not a


howler when the game is lost; but I suppose vou will
admit that, seeing I have the concession of this
mountain from the Venezuelan Government, I have
at least some right to be here ? ’
‘ Well, we can’t be hard on people in your position,
although they may deserve the greatest punishment
possible to inflict,’ answered the parson. ‘Soif it
will give you any comfort we will allow that, rightly
or wrongly, you may have some reason for believing
you have a right to be here. But you are a prisoner,
and we are not your captors. We are sorry for you.’
‘ Oh, dispense with all the rest. I’m not crying
out, nor am I repentant worth a cent. lam asking
neither your help nor your mercy. lam still the
villain of this little play, and had I the opportunity I
would make short work of you all. What I wanted
to say is this : Give Maclaren his liberty and we’ll
renounce all claim to everything in your favour. It
is all my fault that we were captured. He recom-
mended slow and careful advance and the use of
strategy, but I overruled him and advised a rush as
the best means of capturing your death-trap of a pass.
Set him free, therefore, and do with me as you like.
I never did care much for diamonds anyhow. And
may you all be swallowed by the first earthquake that
comes along! ’
‘ Carville, we can’t take advantage of even a man
like you,’ replied Boston Bob. ‘ Maclaren is, so far
as we know, as free as air at this moment, but if you
admit your so-called concession of this valley doesn’t
hold good if the lake flows into the Potaro, then our
dispute will soon be settled, for it will resume giving
its waters to that river before nightfall.’


* What! ’ exclaimed Carville, ‘ Maclaren is not a
prisoner after all ? ’
‘No, he never was.’
‘ Then, you stupid old concession-jumpers, I take
back everything I’ve said. He’ll find away in here in
spite of you, and between him and the Venezuelans
you’ll get the hottest time of your lives. Why, he’ll
hang you all on these rocks, and then blow you to
fragments with a charge of gelignite ’
‘ Less cheek, old man,’ broke in Big Tassy, as the
others smiled at the implied powers of the little
Scotsman, ‘ some of us boys have a big score against
you, and you’ll be made to swallow some of your front
teeth, if you don’t keep mighty quiet.’
‘ Oh yes, call out your native allies ; you’re sure to
beat me among you all.’
‘ It seems the natives beat you and your wonderful
comrade, and all the forces you could bring against
them already, and without our help,’said Boston Bob,
‘so you needn t shout so much, Carville ; you’ve
lost in this game, and the sooner you realise that fact
the better it will be for yourself.’
Perhaps, Boston, but I am not of the opinion
that anything is lost, as long as old Mac is above
ground ’
‘ Ah, well, broke in the parson, ‘ we’ve heard
enough of that notorious person, and I propose we
get ahead with our work now. We’re timbering those
drives, as you see, my friend, and you can either help
us, or go and dig out diamonds where you can find
them. I don’t think the owners will object, and we’ll
see that you do not escape.’
Thanks ! said Carville, ‘ I don’t intend to try to


escape, nor am I inclined to help you in your work.
This is the main cave we are in, I see, so I’ll just go
along its various drives and have a look at my
property. Remember, I will only pay you the current
wages of unskilled labourers for your work when I
take over the mines, so if you are not pleased, you
know what to do. ’
‘ I know what I would like to do now,’ growled
Sailor Bill. ‘ A swab like you needs a hiding badly.’
‘ I’ll toss you who gives it to him, Bill,’ cried
Kangaroo Dave.
‘Oh no, you don’t; you might burst these trousers
if you did, and I still have a friendly interest in
them.’
‘ Comrades, I am ashamed of you,’ began the
parson. ‘ Carville is a helpless prisoner ; you should
not add to his misery.’
* Don’t worry about me, Mr. Psalm-singer,’ sneered
Carville. ‘ I’m able to stand up against any two men
among you. Who wants a try ? ’
The parson’s eyes glittered, but he said nothing.
He would have liked to have proved to Carville that
he was in error.
‘ Suppose you close up, Carville,’ suggested Boston
Bob. ‘We’ve got some work to do, and we won’t
stand you much longer.’
‘All right, Boston, I’m off to explore,’ Carville
cried, running back into the cave. ‘Shout on me
when it’s feeding-time.’
The comrades proceeded with their duties, and
soon most of the natives, having completed their
tasks according to the white men’s instructions, left to
reinforce the pass-guard.


An hour or so later Doc asked Charlie to go down
to the sluices and think over the best means of closing
them again. ‘lt will save us all making two journeys,
Charlie,’ he said, ‘ and we can trust to your knowledge.
See what is wanted in the way of tools and timber,
and by the time you come back we’ll all be finished
here. If we have luck, we may be able to say good-
bye to this mountain hollow to-night.’
Charlie departed at once, having told Harry to
come after him when his special duties were com-
pleted. He was somewhat surprised, as he left the
cave in which all had been working to note that
during the time they had been inside an appreciable
amount of water had gathered in the lake. ‘ I suppose
some obstructions have become fixed in the sluices,’ he
muttered, ‘and the water is not getting away freely.’
He increased his pace, but soon became alarmed at
the rapid rate in which the lake was refilling. It was
nearly up to the ledge now, and soon his passage
would be blocked. He ran, wondering what had
happened. They had intended to close the sluices,
but not just yet. He reached the great logs of timber
which formed the flood-gates, and then received the
greatest surprise he had experienced for some time.
They had been carefully built into position, so as to
close the ragged aperture blown in them, and Maclaren
was grinning at him from a recess in the rocks near.


CHAPTER XIV
A Race Against Time
‘ Don’t stop there, Charlie ; you have-na won the race
until you touch the winning-post, and in this case,
that’s me,’ cried the ever-smiling Scot, stepping out
from the sluice-control chambers. ‘ I’ve been wanting
to see you at close range for some time, and surely
you’ll not disappoint me now? Come right over;
I’ll no’ hurt you.’
‘ I’m coming ! ’ responded Charlie. ‘ I’m not afraid
of you. Don’t move your hand or I’ll send a bullet
through you ! ’
‘ Man, Charlie, I’m surprised at you,’ laughed
Maclaren good-humouredly ; ‘ I thought heroes like
you wadna be so ungentlemanly in their dealings wi’
people so much older than themselves. Put that pea-
shooter back in your belt and come here. I’ll no
touch you.’
‘ No, I’ll take care of that; but you seem to have
forgotten that we are enemies, and that therefore I
may touch you.’
‘Tut, tut, laddie! you’re getting worse than ever.
You are no’ the man I took ye for, after all, and I’m
grievously disappointed. Have you no’ thought that
if I had been so inclined I could have dropped you as
easily as I could smoke a cigar—if I had one—as you
came along that ledge? And even now do you think


for a minute that you could hold your own wi’ me, if I
wanted to be nasty ? ’
‘ I could shoot you, at any rate, the moment you
moved.’
‘Ha ! ha ! Man, you amuse me. I’m no’ goin’ to
do it, mind you, but if I sprang at you the noo, how
many bullets do you think you could pump into me?’
‘ Six ; and then I wouldn’t mind risking a fight
with you. I’m stronger than I look.’
‘ And I could take these six bullets as if they were
pads o’ blotting paper, and then I could squeeze your
bones tighter than a forty-feet constrictor could
But I see you dinna ken me as weel as I ken you. You
are one of the world’s best long-distance runners, but
I’m allowed to be one of the world’s strongest men,
although I may not look it. Appearances are often
deceptive, laddie. I don’t suppose you, by any
chance, have any tobacco about you ? ’
‘ I’ v e got one of Doc’s cigars. I was keeping it
until he finds he has smoked his last,—but I’ll let
you have it. I am sure Doc won’t mind, although
your crowd and ours are enemies.’ He approached
and lowered his revolver.
‘Thanks, Charlie,’ said Maclaren, accepting the
cigar and lighting it at once. ‘ Scripture tells us to
love our enemies, and I can stretch a point in that
line too ’
‘Scripture!’ ejaculated Charlie. ‘What do you
know about Scripture ? ’
‘ Everything. I can quote it by heart by the
mile. In professions like mine it comes in vera
convenient to be able to give an apt quotation at
times.’


‘ I have no doubt,’ said Charlie. ‘ Your profession
is a strange one.’
‘Yes, professional bad man, laddie. But wait a
wee or I’ll forget. Keep this watch in your hand,
and, whatever we’re discussing at the time, shout out
the vera second the big hand reaches the quarter to
the hour.’
‘ What on earth do you mean ? ’ asked Charlie,
taking the splendid gold chronometer proffered him
in his hands. ‘ Have you an appointment at the
quarter? ’
‘No, I’m merely thanking you for the cigar. I
always pay my debts. You can still do the mile
inside the five minutes?’
‘I think so. Why?’
‘ And maybe three inside fifteen, at a pinch?’
‘ Not with any seconds to spare, at any rate.
What are you trying to get at? Are you going to
race me? ’
‘Ay, but against time, laddie. But we’ll change
the subject now. Did you get many blue diamonds?’
‘ Yes, a good many. See, here are some of them.’
Charlie held out a handful to Maclaren.
‘These are first-class gems, and should fetch a
good price ; but see that the buyers don’t swindle
you, laddie.’
‘ Oh, I’ll not sell them. Doc or Boston Bob, or
maybe the parson can attend to that.’
‘ I m no’ just so sure,’ said Maclaren, returning the
stones. ‘You see I have vera grave doubts about
their ability to live under water for any length of time.’
‘Of course they can’t do that,’ laughed Charlie,
‘and I’m sure they won’t be foolish enough to try.


But how did you get in here ? The pass is guarded,
and you were not among the prisoners.’
‘ I came in by the old roadway ; the same way as
you came, only I walked on solid land all the way.
The water is away now, you know. Laddie, I was
filled wi’ admiration when I saw your comrade and
yourself tackle that passage I blew up, in our launch.
I’m a specialist in explosives, I may say ’
‘ Did you see us ? ’
‘ Brawly ; I was being vera severely handled at the
time, but I saw you all the same. Keep your gun
always handy, though, should you be thrown much
in the company o’ Bruiser Tom or Barnsley ; they
canna appreciate anything that goes against them-
selves Is it near the quarter yet?’
‘ Eight minutes to go. I wish Harry were here ;
we both saw you first, together, you know.’
‘ Ay, in the train ; but although I have been able
to trace your work in most things since then, I dinna
ken how you first got on our tracks.’
‘ We sat behind you in the concert hall in Liverpool,
and heard you discuss the reported massacre of pro-
spectors in British Guiana.’
‘ Bonnie Dundee ! Were you there? But we
talked Spanish ’
‘Yes, but we understood that language, and that
same night, in your hotel, we met Boston Bob and
Doc.’
Maclaren removed his cigar from his mouth and
looked at Charlie in wonderment. ‘ Maist extra-
ordinary I ’ he muttered. ‘We ought to have had
you on our side. He might have been living now.
But the time, laddie?’


■ Four minutes yet? Why did you close this lake
a second time, seeing that you make it British by so
doing?’
‘To drown you and your crowd while they are in
the lower caves. We can empty it again when the
game is once more in favour o’ the bad men.’
‘ But the rising of the water won’t trap them. We
were going to close the sluices to-day in any case.’
‘ It will prevent them escaping by the road I came
in anyway ; that passage will soon be blocked now.’
‘ You seem to be very foolish ; when we want to go
away, we can leave by the mountain pass.’
‘ But they canna reach the entrance to the passages
leading up to the summit. The rocks rise sheer above
the lake, and by this time our people will have cut all
the ladders. I took the opportunity, I may say, of
setting free all our fellows when I came in through
the night, and they’ve got their rifles ’
‘ But Doc and the boys will come out of the big
cave whenever they see the water ?’
‘I don’t think so —Carville will be gloriously
avenged. Time, laddie? ’
‘A minute to go. What do you mean? Why
can they not come out?’
‘ Listen and dinna speak. You know the south-
east corner of the chief entrance where your people
are now? Well, exactly a yard inside, in a crack in
the roof, is the business end o’ a long fuse, in touch
wi’ enough gelignite in a hole there to blow the
whole mountain into vera vulgar fractions. I put it
there this morning when you were all inside, and the
natives up above who saw me thought I was one of
your fellows. You may rest assured that the cave


entrance, at least, will be blocked up, so that your
vera clever comrades canna get out, and the rising
waters will do the rest.’
‘ Oh, you wholesale murderer! But the fuse will
never be fired ’
‘ Thanks for the compliment. Do you no’ mind I
telt ye I was a specialist in explosives? It is fired and
will reach the gelignite exactly at the hour ’
‘Time!’ shouted Charlie, springing to his feet,
hardly comprehending what the man was telling him.
‘ Then flee like the—well—like that Greek fellow
after Marathon.’
‘ But your own comrade ! ’
‘ Run ! Run ! You’ve the world’s record to break,
and the water is on the ledge now. Give me back my
watch ’
‘ But Carville is in the cave too ! You’ve drowned
him as well as my comrades ! But I’ll do it ’
‘What!’ cried Maclaren, ‘Carville alive? And
I’ve killed him ! Then I dinna want to live either.’
Through a mist of perspiration, Charlie, as he flew
along the ledge, saw the Scot throw his hands in the
air and stagger forward.
Meanwhile, work in the chief mine tunnel had been
pushed ahead. Many diamonds had been extracted
from the flumes, and the walls of the drives timbered
carefully, so that the action of the waters might not
cause them to fall in.
‘Well, boys,’ said Doc, ‘we’ve carried out our
obligation to our friends, the Razois, and now little
remains that we can do for them except to flood the
waters again.’
‘ May Igo and join Charlie now ? ’ said Harry. ‘ I


want to have a good look at the ledge, for we are to
race back over it with Queno and some others.’
‘ Certainly, Harry, but you shouldn’t tax your
powers in a climate like this ; the sluices must be
about three miles from here, and you know the battle
of Marathon was not fought in the tropics.’ Doc was
amused at Harry’s enthusiasm.
‘Oh, Charlie will beat me in three miles,’ Harry
said. ‘ But I think I can give him points in a
sprint.’
‘Can you sprint a mile?’ asked Kangaroo Dave,
as Harry departed. ‘’Cos if not, I’ll show you how
to do it when we’re coming back.’
‘ I could do a mighty powerful sprint myself, if
there were a good feed of something else than cassava
at the far end of it,’ said Mersey Jack.
‘ Then I’ll race you for a handful of blue diamonds,
Jack,’ put in Irish Mike. ‘ Shure, ye cyan eat them
if ye like.’
‘ But let us block up this side drive, boys, and then
we can race each other down to the sluices,’ said
Doc. ‘ Has any one a fuse burning? I fancy I hear
a hissing sound somewhere.’
‘ I’ve been wondering what it was for some time,’
Big Tassy observed. ‘ But it can’t be a fuse, for none
of us have set any.’
‘ I have heard that sound all morning,’ said the
parson. ‘lt must be water soaking through some
fissures. It seems to come from the entrance.
‘ I reckon it’s Kangaroo Dave practising how to
lisp,’ laughed Sailor Bill. ‘ I heard Piccadilly Peter
telling him it was all the rage in London, this
morning.’


‘Well, he got my belt for telling me,’ Kangaroo
Dave replied ; ‘ but it isn’t me—l can’t lisp until I
get a hole bored in my teeth and stuffed with gold ’
‘ It doesn’t matter in any case,’ put in Boston Bob
hurriedly. He did not like his teeth to form the
subject of any discussion. The comrades set to work
to build up the entrance of one of the smaller tunnels
opening off the main one, Doc explaining to the few
councillors who remained the reasons for so doing,
and making them prepare a rough map of the workings
for future reference.
By this time Harry had gone down the lake side
about a mile. Like Charlie he had been greatly
surprised at seeing the waters so high, and he realised
that the arranged race would have to be declared off,
for the waters were already breaking over the ledge,
and still rising.
‘ Surely Charlie couldn’t have built up the gaps in
the sluices himself?’ he mused; ‘and if he hasn’t,
what has happened ? Why, the mines will be flooded
in some minutes now. Perhaps I should go back,
and alarm our fellows. They may not notice the rise
of the lake.’ He went on a little way farther, and
then gave a cry of astonishment. Some one was tear-
ing along the ledge towards him. An inch of water
now lay over the rocky patch, and the runner was
enveloped in an iridescent shower of spray kicked up
by his flying feet. Swiftly the moving water-mass
bore down upon Harry, who had stopped to gaze at
the peculiar phenomenon. And now he could distin-
guish the figure in the heart of the splashes. ‘ Charlie! ’
he shouted, ‘ what’s wrong? ’
The runner raised his drooping head. Clearly he


was spent. He had covered two miles, the last one
through water, at top speed, and now only his spirit
held him up. He had had fourteen minutes and some
seconds to complete a distance which might be over
or under three miles by some yards. He knew he had
probably broken the world’s record over the first mile,
but he feared he had lost several precious seconds on
the next, and he had still a mile to cover in something
under five minutes. He knew that Maclaren was one
who had reduced the science of measuring time and
possibilities to absolute zero, and he also knew that
he had been given a chance calculated to be just
possible, but no more. He never doubted for a
moment that the fuse would reach the gelignite the
precise second which marked the completion of the
hour. He sped on blindly, and soaking to the skin
in the water he threw up. But though his strides
were not now so quick, nor of the same length, the
difference in his speed was as yet imperceptible ; a
second more or less would mean everything, however,
and his comrades were dear to him.
Then Harry’s cry sounded in his dulled ears, and
a feeling of joy shot through him ; one at least was
out of danger. No, not out of danger ; in it. In
Harry’s fleetness lay the saving second or two.
Between them they would annihilate time and distance.
Harry could reel off the four hundred and forty yards
against any living man ; he could now do four times
that distance at the same speed, or drop in the attempt.
And Harry was ready.
‘ What is it, Charlie ? ’ he cried, turning and running
%
alongside.
‘ Fuse—south-east corner of main tunnel—yard


inside—explode gelignite in less than five minutes.
Maclaren closed sluices. Run ’
‘Yes, Charlie, I understand. Where is the fuse?’
‘ Crack in roof—all I know ’
‘ Slow down, then ; I’ll do it if it’s in me ! ’ With
a bound Harry shot ahead. He knew there was no
time for gratifying curiosity then. At once he was
into the stride which had so often carried him to victory
in the quarter-mile. He would carry that pace through,
though he never ran in his life again. Charlie still
kept on, hope rising in his heart, as he saw light-footed
Harry drawing away from him. On Harry sped ; the
water was now approaching his ankles. The tunnels
in the rock face grew nearer ; he passed the first; the
end of the lake lay only half-a-mile ahead, and the
main cave in which were his comrades was in the
rocks which formed the head. Now only about five
hundred yards lay between him and the deadly fuse.
He laughed aloud, and tackled the distance as if it
were a hundred yards’ sprint. The water was still
rising; already it was retarding his progress consider-
ably. The caves of the upper city loomed out
distinctly ; then some men became visible, but they
were not Razois nor were they his comrades. He
was almost blind with perspiration, but he was now
on his last hundred yards.
Bang ! A bullet whizzed past his head, and the
noise of shouting men overhead filled his ears.
Another bullet whistled past him, and he smiled to
himself. ‘That must be the Venezuelans at last,’ he
thought, ‘ but they’re not much good at shooting.’
Then he saw his comrades appear at the mouth of the
cave, and heard their exclamations as they saw the
(C Io) 24


water in front of them. ‘ Doc !’ he tried to shout, and
at once Doc, the parson, and Piccadilly Peter ran out
to meet him.
‘ Fuse burning in crack in roof in south-east corner
a yard inside ! ’ he articulated ; then a bullet found its
billet, and he splashed heavily forward. The parson
was at his side in an instant, and heard him repeat
his message. He was caught up in powerful arms,
and the message went forth from the parson’s lips in
a stentorian shout. There was a moment’s excitement
among the men in the cave, but Boston Bob made a
sudden leap into the air, and next instant the shelter
of the cave was gained.
‘ So that was what we’ve been hearing all morning?’
remarked Boston Bob, rubbing some charred debris
from his fingers. ‘ Harry, my boy, you’ve saved us
by ’he examined the crack in the roof, and pulled
forth a piece of snuffed fuse fastened in a cap— ‘ by
three seconds. There’s enough gelignite in a blow
hole here to shatter the entire mountain.’
‘ It was Charlie who found it out,’ gasped Harry.
‘He ran from the sluices until he met me. He is
coming on behind.’
‘ Here he comes ! ’ cried Damper Charlie. ‘ Doc
and Piccadilly Peter have got him between them.’
‘ I’d give a thousand pounds for a rifle,’ groaned
Big Tassy. ‘ Those skunks up there can’t miss every
time.’
‘ Come on, boys,’ shouted Mersey Jack, running
out to meet them. ‘We will beat the beggars yet.’
‘ Did you find the fuse ? ’ cried Charlie. ‘ls Harry
safe ? ’
‘ He won by three seconds,’ answered Mersey Jack.


A bullet shot away his hat as he spoke, and it fell into
the lake. ‘ Blow you for unmannerly pigs,’ he shouted
at the men on the rocks above, jumping in after his
property and regaining possession. ‘ I’d give all my
diamonds to get among you for a few minutes.’
Another bullet sang past him, but he scrambled on to
the submerged ledge unhurt, and in another minute
all the comrades were standing in the cave to the
mouth of which the water was fast rising.
Harry was not much hurt, the bullet having only
singed his temple, and Queno was already applying
some healing leaves, which it seemed the Razois
always carried.
J
After a few minutes’ rest to recover himself, Charlie
told the story of his adventure, which also explained
the presence of the old gang overhead. ‘So we are
not yet beat,’ he concluded. ‘ Maclaren came in by
the late water passage, and if we can reach its entrance
we may yet escape that way. ’
‘ But the lake will be pouring through to the
Potaro by that tunnel presently,’ said Boston Bob.
‘ And we can just beat it by a second or two,’ cried
Kangaroo Dave. ‘ Come on, the kids have beaten
time between them, let’s see if we can’t best the old
lake in a race.’
Here one of the councillors interposed. ‘ Warriors
are now coming down from the pass,’ he said. ‘ They
will sweep these men up there into the lake and lower
ladders for us, by which we can climb to safety.’
‘ But as we’ll be up to the neck inside this cave
before then,’ replied Big Tassy in Spanish, ‘and
likely get so full of lead if we go outside on the ledge
that we couldn’t float long enough to light a pipe,


I vote we make a rush for that upper level outlet now.
And you fellows had better come too. You can get
back to your city from the outside.’
‘ I say, boys, we haven’t much time to think,’
ventured Piccadilly Peter. ‘lt seems to me that if
we stay here we’ll be drowned, and if we go out into
the water we’ll be both shot and drowned. The boys
came through the bigger half of the passage when it
was in full flood, so surely we can force it now when
as yet there is no water in it ’
‘ Er—Piccadilly, you are —er —forgetting the errs,’
said Kangaroo Dave reproachfully. ‘ I move-er—
boys, that we make a—er—bolt for that—er—tunnel,
and take our chances.’
‘ All right, lads, we’ve come through many a tight
place and still survive, and perhaps we’ll live to laugh
over this adventure too,’ said Doc. ‘Get ready for
the rush. They’re bad shots, but we can’t afford to
waste time once we start. Keep close in to the wall
until we reach a point underneath the tunnel, and
then we’ll help each other into it. Where’s Carville?’
‘Oh, I’m all right, Doc,’spoke Carville from the
gloom behind, ‘ but you can’t make anything out of
me. I’ve heard all that was said, and I know that
dear old Mac put in a great attempt to get our deal
squared. He was always soft-hearted, however, and
that and your Marathon runners have done the rest. I
suppose you fancy that I’ll ask the boys aloft to call
matters even if you let me go free? If so, I tell you
I’ll take my gruel with you, and I’ll make them no
sign. You’ll likely all be shot in trying to reach that
old water-road, and I don’t care a hang whether
I drown in here or be killed by you out there.’


‘You’re putting the heroics on in the wrong place,’
said Big Tassy. ‘We wouldn’t take a gift of our
lives from you. We want to give you equal chances
with us of saving your own carcase, but if you try any
monkey tricks in the water, I’ll carve you into strips
as sure as my handle is Big Tassy.’
‘Are you ready, boys?’ cried Doc. ‘ It’s a swim-
ming matter now ; the water is rising very fast. Is
there any one who can’t swim ? ’
‘ Howling hurricanes ! ’ cried Sailor Bill, ‘ if there
is, I’ll haul him along. Ask the natives though, Doc,
may-be some of them can’t.’
Doc repeated his question in Spanish, but one of
the Razois answered with an amused smile that they
were as much at home in the water as out of it.
‘ Then follow me and dive when the bullets come.’
He took a header into the water outside, and was
followed in quick succession by the others. The water
was now six feet deep over the ledge, but yet about
the same distance under the bottom edge of the old
water tunnel. This waterway was ten feet in height
but very narrow, and, when the lake was at full flood,
only a foot of space remained clear of water. The
lake was swelling at an alarming rate, because the
water which fell during the great rain-storm a week
ago was only now finding its way into the crater-bed
from the numberless porous formations and fissures
which existed in the heart of the mountain.
It was some time before the late prisoners above
noticed that their victims had taken to the water in
preference to awaiting death in the mines, and the
few minutes’ grace allowed the swimmers to get close
into the end wall, where they could not readily be hit


unless by bullets fired vertically. When they were
discovered, however, a hail of lead spattered the water
around, but as each man dived at the proper moment,
they escaped the first volley. Suddenly, Bruiser
Tom’s voice rang out. ‘ Strike me pink, boys ! there’s
that sneak Carville among them. He’s got caught
nicely. He’s been among the diamonds all the time,
and likely meant that we should be collared by the
natives. Pepper him, boys ; the man who sells his
mates, or doesn’t play square with them, deserves all
the lead we can drive into him.’
And pepper him they did. ‘Tell them you are
not one of us,’ cried Doc. ‘ Save yourself if you can.’
He swam under the mouth of the passage as he spoke,
and waited to help the next comer up into its protect-
ing entrance.
‘ No, I’ll tell the brutes nothing,’ growled Carville.
‘ If they had had the spirit of dead dogs we should
have forced an entrance here long ago. Fire away,
you cross-eyed beauty. You are very brave when
there is no danger of being struck back.’
‘ I’ll puncture you, if I’ve to come down and ram
my rifle through you,’ snarled Barnsley, and again a
rain of revolver shots rose many miniature geysers on
the water.
Doc meanwhile had assisted an agile native to
climb into the tunnel, and he, fastening his feet
in some cracks, laid himself flat on the rocks and
reached down to give help to the others. Harry was
next; he was whisked up into the passage, as if by
magic. Big Tassy now came along, and helped
Queno into a place beside his fellow-warrior, and he,
likewise, prepared to pull the others aloft. At last


it seemed that all were safely in the water-passage, for,
notwithstanding the shots fired at them, no one com-
plained of being hit. Doc and Big Tassy were soon
with their comrades, now a simple enough matter to
be accomplished, as the lake had risen considerably
meanwhile.
‘ Now, boys,’ said Doc, shaking himself, ‘if we
get through this mountain before the water catches
us, we can call ourselves the luckiest people who ever
lived. Queno, you might lead, and be very careful,
but make as good time as you can, for Charlie tells
me there are still some cigars in the launch, wherever
it is.’ He addressed Queno in Spanish, of course,
and, followed by the four councillors and half-a-dozen
warriors, who had been in the mines with the white
men, Queno started off briskly.
‘ I’ll follow you directly,’ the parson sang out. ‘ I’m
going back to give Carville a hand. I see we’ve for-
gotten he was in the party, and they are still firing
away at him.’
‘Good old parson!’ cried Mersey Jack. ‘May I
be kicked if I don’t come with you ! ’
‘ And may I never get my trousers back if I leave
you, added Sailor Bill, casting a regretful glance at
Kangaroo Dave’s nether garments. The parson had
dived into the water. Carville was resting against a
projecting rock, which afforded protection from the
shots. The parson swam up to him, and Carville
scowled ferociously. ‘ What in thunder do you want
here, you wandered sky-pilot?’ he snarled. ‘Best
get away quickly, or the bad men will get you.’
Come away, old man,’ said the parson gently.
‘ You are wounded, I see. I’ll give you a hand.’


‘Thanks! I don’t want your help. I’m no repen-
tant sinner, and I think I prefer to peg out here.’
‘ Don’t be foolish. Catch hold of me in the right
way. That’s right; now paddle all you can ; you’ll
be safe presently.’
And he was, as far as the tunnel meant safety.
Sailor Bill and Mersey Jack hauled him up, and then
raised the parson to a position beside them.
‘ Thanks ! ’ said Carville weakly, as the parson
came up ; ‘I am obliged to you. But my goose is
cooked all the same. Clear out and leave me. I can’t
follow.’
‘ Lead on, Mersey Jack ! ’ said the parson, lifting
Carville in his arms, ‘ and sing out if the track is
dangerous.’
But the track was straight and smooth, and they
soon overtook their comrades, who had been travelling
slowly for their benefit; and, although they expected
every moment to be pitched headlong by a rush of
water, they suddenly broke into a great domed cavern,
through the top of which a dim light shone.
‘I know the road now,’ cried Charlie. ‘We are
safe ! ’ He led the way down the spiralling path, and
almost immediately after they had cleared the tunnel
the roar of the waters was heard, and a black mass
shot out and fell in a long curve into the darkness
below.
‘ By Jove ! but we’ve cut it fine again,’ said Harry.
‘ A little of this game goes a long way.’
‘But we’re improving, Harry,’ said Boston Bob.
‘We had a minute to spare this time. The last
spasm—the fuse damping—was only a matter of
seconds.’


Down and round the long circling path they
hurried, and at last Charlie cried out delightedly,
‘ I see our launch, and it is exactly as we left it.’
Next minute he had procured matches and lit a
torch.
The lake was now pouring its waters into the
Potaro, as it had been doing when first the boys saw
the great subterranean waterfall. They promptly took
command, and the others obeyed their orders at once.
The launch was pulled forth from its basin, and they
all got on board. Charlie took up his position in the
bows with his torch, and Harry sat with the tiller-
ropes in hand.
But there was no steam-power to assist in control-
ling the vessel’s movements this time, and it was at
the mercy of the current that they were eventually
borne forth into daylight. Harry beached the launch
and Charlie set about getting up steam.
‘We’ll camp here for a day or so, until we hear
from Aztel,’ said Doc. ‘We can’t leave him now to
deal with the Venezuelans.’
‘And our clothes need drying,’ put in Sailor Bill,
with a look at Kangaroo Dave. ‘ I move we take
them off and hang them in the sun.’
‘Oh, I don’t—er—care now,’answered Kangaroo
Dave. ‘ I'll let you have those togs I—er —am
wearing now, Sailor, 'cos—er—l’ve others in the —er
—launch. But, boys, I’ve got a stew-pan and some
other things up on these rocks. Somebody go out
and shoot something, and I’ll cook the best feed
you’ve had for a long time.’
‘ We’ve no guns,’ said Big Tassy ruefully.
‘And we’ve no diamonds,’ put in Mersey Jack.


‘ Everything was left behind in our hurry to catch the
boat. ’
‘ I’ve got some,’ said Charlie ; ‘enough to give one
to each Hullo ! There’s a man’s body coming
through the tunnel.’
‘ It’s Maclaren ! ’ cried Carville. ‘ And he’s alive ! ’
He staggered to his feet, and was on the point of
throwing himself into the rushing waters when Boston
Bob caught him. At the same moment Piccadilly
Peter and Charlie plunged into the stream and caught
hold of the still conscious being. But human power
could not stem the torrent, and the three men drifted
past, struggling desperately but impotently. But
before any others had sprang after them, Sailor Bill’s
quick mind had grasped the situation, and seizing
a rope he ran down the ledge and cast it into mid-
stream. Charlie gripped it as he floated past, and a
minute later the three men were hauled on shore by
many willing hands.
Under Doc’s attention the half-drowned Scot re-
covered himself, and then he and Carville showed an
emotion at meeting each other which forced the
remark from the parson that they could not be entirely
bad-hearted men or all feeling would be dead. A
meal was prepared from the tinned stores still in the
canoe, and the Razois, at least, partook of the best
dinner they had ever enjoyed, Maclaren and Carville
also receiving an attention from the kind-hearted
comrades that surprised them exceedingly.
‘ I suppose we’re prisoners?’ Maclaren said to the
parson, when that gentleman went over to see how he
was progressing.
‘ Certainly not,’ was the decided answer. ‘We are


not your judges. You will be hanged in time, I’ve
no doubt. But we have only pity for you.’
‘Do you mean what you say?’ Maclaren asked
eagerly, as some more of the men gathered round.
‘ We are honest prospectors,’ said the parson, ‘ and
can afford to return good for evil ’
‘ Don’t let the parson start on poor old Maclaren,
boys,’ cried Kangaroo Dave. ‘He means to preach.
I see it in his eye.’
‘You are wrong, Dave. I was only going to ask
how he contrived to come here.’
‘ I started after Charlie when he told me Carville
was in the mine I had arranged to blow up, hoping to
get near enough to be struck by a flying piece of rock
and gie up the ghost near him. But I’m no’ a flash
o’ lightning where my feet are concerned, and the
rising water beat me when I was in sight o’ the mine.
I rested in one of the smaller caves and then swam to
the next, for by this time I kent that Charlie had
done the impossible. I was only a hundred yards
behind you when you took to the w'ater, and I
followed, and was just able to climb into the tunnel.
There was a big fight going on up above, but I paid
no attention to it, nor did the fighters see me. I ran
through the tunnel, and was knocked down just at its
end by the flood, but I got a grip on the rocks where
the fall empties over, and the waters shot past above
me. In time I scrambled on to the circling ledge and
ran down to the bottom, and as nothing else could be
done, I flung myself into the stream and dinna ken
any more except that I’m here. But I’m no’ a poor
man, parson ; I’ll see that this crowd are well payed
for what they’ve lost, and I’ll give ten thousand


pounds to you to devote to any good cause in pay-
ment for the saving of my carcase.’
‘ No man in this crowd would touch a cent of yours,
Maclaren,’ cried Big Tassy.
‘ I should say not,’ added Piccadilly Peter.
‘ Er—and you are offering—er—too much to the
parson,’ Kangaroo Dave commented. ‘Your—er—
life isn’t worth—er—the money.’
‘ I will also give the same as my comrade,’ said
Carville. ‘ And while we don’t promise to live good
lives ever after—we couldn't—l’ll undertake that we
never take a hand in any deal in which any of you
fellows are engaged, unless to help you.’
‘We will accept your last promise, Carville,’ said
Doc, ‘ but nothing else, and we only take the promise
so that the Razois may live in peace, for personally
we are not afraid of anything you could do against
us. Our youngest members can outwit you every
time ’
‘ Centipedes and sinners ! ’ interrupted Damper
Charlie. ‘ Here is a mob of Razois, and Aztel is
with them. They are coming over the face like
a lot of willy willies.’ Next minute Aztel was shaking
hands with the comrades, and his warriors were un-
loading themselves of rifles and other impedimenta.
‘We thought never to behold the faces of our
friends again, cried Aztel joyously ; ‘ but the great
God has been good. We swept the bad men before
us like leaves before a storm, and our city is once
more our own. Here are your fire weapons, and I
have brought your stones. Aztel sorrows because his
friends are leaving, but will live in the belief that,
when the Razois have come through their trouble


with the great nation on the north, you will come and
be his guests.’
‘ Aztel,’ said Doc, ‘we are not going to leave you
to fight the Venezuelans alone. Your mountain is
British, and we shall help you to defend it; afterwards
you will come with us to Georgetown and receive a
charter from the British Government.’
‘ Can I put in a word?’ asked Maclaren in Spanish.
‘ I dinna want to play the penitent, but I think I can
ease your minds.’
‘Well,’ said Doc, ‘what can you say? We are
concerned for the safety of the Razois against a
Venezuelan attack ’
‘Which will never come,’ said Maclaren. ‘The
\ enezuelans are a civilised people now, and wish to
live at peace with all nations. This country is
British, and the Razois are already under British
protection. President Castro has run away ; he will
sell no more concessions, and the new Venezuelan
Government are turning their soldiers into farmers.’
The men looked at each other.
‘ My patent stew will be ready at sundown,’ said
Kangaroo Dave, breaking the silence which followed
Maclaren’s fateful news. ‘lt will—oh, I forgot—er—
be a—er—bosker one.’
‘And to-morrow we start for England,’ added
Mersey Jack, as the meaning dawned on him, ‘ with
fortunes in blue diamonds.’
The Razois’ troubles were over.
‘ All of which we owe to the kids,’ said Big Tassy.
‘ Boys, three cheers for them.’
And that gorge which at least twice already had
echoed and re-echoed with the grim sounds of battle


now rang with the acclaiming shouts of those who
had been the chief actors in the previous occasion.
The boys’ cup of happiness was full. . . .
Next day a start was made for Georgetown. Aztel,
Queno, and two councillors went with the party, and
Maclaren and Carville were also allowed to accompany
them. They were now changed men.
1 I hope, Doc, you have some other adventures
ready for us,’ said Charlie one day, as they steamed
swiftly down the Essiquibo. *We hadn’t much
chance of being of service this time, but we know
more now.’
Doc smiled, as did all those who heard Charlie’s
words. ‘We will set out in search of Eldorado when
you get tired of old England, Charlie,’ he said.
‘ Laddie, I’ve got a wee thing in my possession
which if you would accept from me I should feel vera
much honoured,’said Maclaren. ‘lt will serve as a
memento o’ an incident that will live in my memory
until I’m called to answer for my sins, and if you
look at it at times, I’m sure its ticking eloquence will
tell you whether or no’ you have been of service.’
The Scot handed Charlie his watch.
‘Take it, Charlie,’ said the parson, as the lad drew
back.
Charlie took it.


“English boys owe a debt of gratitude to Mr. Henty.”— Athenaeum.
Blackie & Son’s
Illustrated Story Books
G. A. HENTY
With Cochrane the Dauntless: £ J al ?-, of
his Exploits.
Illustrated. New Edition. 2 s - 6^.
“ This tale we specially recommend, for the career of Lord Cochrane and his many
valiant fights in the cause of liberty deserve to be better known than they are.”
— Si. James's Gazette.
-A Jacobite Exile;
or, In the Service of Charles XII
of Sweden. Illustrated. New
Edition. 31. 6 d.
“ Shows Mr. Henty at his best. A Jacobite Exile is full of life, adventure,
movement, and admirably illustrated; it is in Mr. Henty’s best manner, and while
never losing sight of the imaginative and romantic interest, has a substantial value
as a bit of historical painting.”— Scotsman.
-With Frederick the Great; A Tale the
Seven Years
War. Illustrated. New Edition. 6d,
“ Those who have not leisure to read Carlyle would do well to procure Henty. It
is a good deal to say, but this prolific and admirable writer has never done better
than this story.” —British Weekly.
-With Moore at Corunna: ATale o f the Penin-
sular War. Illus-
trated. New Edition. 3L 6 d.
“ A very spirited story, well worthy to be ranked with the best of Mr. Henty’s
work."— Spectator.
Facing Death * or ’ ero Vaughan pit
O * Illustrated. New Edition. 3s. 6 d.
“ If any father, godfather, clergyman, or schoolmaster is on the lookout for a good
book to give as a present to a boy who is worth his salt, this is the book we would
recommend.”— Standard.
-The Dragon and the Raven; or > Da A y , s
o of King Al-
fred. Illustrated. New Edition. 3 s. 6 d.
. “A well-built superstructure of fiction on an interesting substratum of fact. Treated
m a manner most attractive to the boyish reader. ’— Athenceum.
U6] (1) A


One of the 28th: A Taleof Waterloo Illustrated.
New Edition. 6 d.
“Contains one of the best descriptions of the various battles which raged round
Waterloo which it has ever been our fate to read.” —Daily Telegraph.
-Cat of Bubastes; A Story of Ancient Egypt, Illus-
trated. New Edition. 3-t. o d.
“ Full of exciting adventures.” —Saturday Review.
-With Clive in India: or, The Beginnings of an
Empire. Illustrated. New
Edition. y. 6 d.
“Those who know something about India will be the first to thank Mr. Henty for
giving them this instructive volume to place in the hands of their children.”
— Academy.
-Condemned as a Nihilist:
trated by Wal Paget. New Edition. 6 d.
“ His narrative is more interesting than many of the tales with which the public is
familiar of escape from Siberia. The escape of the hero and his faithful Tartar from
the hostile Samoyedes is quite the high-water mark of the author’s achievement.”
—National Observer.
- Under Wellington’s Command: Tale . of
D the Penin-
sular War. Illustrated by Wal Paget. New Edition, y. 6 d.
An admirable exposition of Mr. Henty’s masterly method of combining instruction
with amusement.”— lVarid.
“ The Young Carthaginian: S H° a^n^ai he 5
trated. 6 d. New Edition.
“ From first to last nothing stays the interest of the narrative. It bears us along as
on a stream, whose current varies in direction, but never loses its force.”
—Saturday Review.
-By England’s Aid : or. The Freeing of the Nether-
J D lands (1585-1604). Illustrated
by Alfred Pearse. With 4 Maps. New Edition, y. 6 d.
“ Boys know and love Mr. Henty’s books of adventure, and will welcome his tale
of the freeing of the Netherlands.”— Athenceum.
-The Lion of the North: T Tal f of Gustavus
Adolphus. Illus-
trated. New Edition. 2 s - 6d.
“The tale is a clever and instructive piece of history, and as boys may be trusted
to read it conscientiously, they can hardly fail to be profited as well as pleased. ”
The Times.


The Lion of St. Mark: A y aleof^ en * ce - Illus *
trated. Cloth elegant.
New Edition, y. 6d.
“ Every boy should read The Lion of St. Mark."—Saturday Review.
- Both Sides the Border: t Tale of Ho , t , s P u , r and
Glendower. Illustrated
Ralph Peacock. New Edition, y. 6 d.
“ Mr. Henty retains the reader’s interest throughout the story, which he tells
clearly and vigorously.”— Daily Telegraph.
-Captain Bayley’s Heir: *
New Edition. y. 6 d.
“The portraits of Captain Bayley and the headmaster of Westminster School are
admirably drawn, and the adventures in California are told with that vigour which is
peculiar to Mr. Henty."— Academy.
- When London Burned :
J. Finnemore. 6s.
“A handsome volume, and boys will rejoice to possess it ... It will undoubtedly
become a standard work.”— Record.
- A March on London: f Story of w f‘ Tyle,J !
Insurrection. Illustrated
W. H. Margetson. 5-r.
“The story of Wat Tyler’s ever-famous insurrection is set forth with a degree of
cunning that may always be looked for in the work that comes from this practised
hand."— Daily Telegraph.
-The Treasure of the Incas: A Tale . of Ad-
venture in Peru.
Illustrated by Wal Paget. With a Map. 5^
“ The interest never flags for one moment, and the story is told with vigour.”
World.
With Roberts to Pretoria: A L ale °f the s ° uth
African War. Illus-
trated by William Rainey, r.i. With a Map. 6s.
“In this story of the South African war Mr. Henty proves once more his incon-
testable pre-eminence as a writer for boys.”— Standard.
- Orange and Green: A .T ale ,he B 7? e a " d Lim-
o enck. Illustrated by GORDON
Browne, R.I. 5^
“ Orange and Green is an extremely spirited story.”— Saturday Review.


Bonnie Prince Charlie: A ot nten °y a " d
Gulloden. Illustrated by
Gordon Browne, R.I 6s.
“ A historical romance of the best quality.' — Academy.
-Through Russian Snows: Napoleon’s Retreat
o from Moscow. Illus-
trated by W. H. Overend. ss.
“The hero is altogether a fine character such as boys will delight in, whilst the
story of the campaign is very graphically told. ’ — Si. James's Gazette.
-The Tiger of Mysore: a story of the war with
o J Tippoo Saib. Illustrated
by W. H. Margetson. 6s.
“Mr. Henty not only concocts a thrilling tale, he weaves fact and fiction with so
skilful a hand that the reader cannot help acquiring a just and clear view of that fierce
and terrible struggle which gave to us our Indian empire.”— Atheneeum.
-On the Irrawaddy: * Stor *f ‘he First Burmese
J War. Illustrated by W. H.
OVEREND. SS.
“ Stanley Brooke’s pluck is even greater than his luck, and he is precisely the boy
to hearten with emulation the boys who read his stirring story.” —Saturday Review.
- Wulf the Saxon: A Story of the Norman Conquest,
Illustrated by Ralph Peacock. 6s.
“ We may safely say that a boy may learn from it more genuine history than he will
from many a tedious tome. ” — Spectator.
-With Kitchener in the Soudan: A f A T ale
of Atbara
and Omdurman. Illustrated by W. Rainey, r.i. With 3 Maps. 6s.
“ Mr. Henty has collected a vast amount of information about the reconquest of
the Soudan, and he succeeds in impressing it upon his reader’s mind at the very time
when he is interesting him most.” —Literary World.
-At the Point of the Bayonet: A a^t^v^ e
Illustrated by Wal Paget. With 2 Maps. 6s.
“A brisk, dashing narrative.”— Bookman.
-Through the Sikh War: A Tale of the con-
c* quest of the Punjaub.
Illustrated by Hal HURST. 6s.
“ On the whole we have never read a more vivid and faithful narrative of military
adventure in India,”— Academy.


Through Three Campaigns: al St^ y e of Ti^‘
and Ashanti. Illustrated by Wal Paget. With 3 Maps. 6s.
“Every true boy will enjoy this story of plucky adventure.” —Educational News.
“ Gives animation to recent history, and its confident art and abundant spirit will
greatly satisfy the intelligent and spirited boy.” —Dundee Advertiser.
-St. George for England:
by Gordon Browne, r.i. s^.
“ A story of very great interest for boys. The author has endeavoured to show that
determination and enthusiasm can accomplish marvellous results. ’’
—Pall Mall Gazette.
-With the British Legion: w St th r eCa ,fif
o Wars. Illustrated by
Wal Paget. 6s.
“ It is a rattling story told with verve and spirit,” —Pall Mall Gazette.
-True to the Old Flacr- A Tale of the American
LU uie WIU. ridg. War of Independence.
Illustrated. 6s.
“Mr. Henty undoubtedly possesses the secret of writing eminently successful his-
torical tales; and those older than the lads whom the author addresses in his preface
may read the story with pleasure.”— Academy.
-At Aboukir and Acre : * llustratec * t>y william
Rainey, R.I. s^.
“ It is difficult to keep count of Mr. Henty’s very numerous stories, with their
respective degrees of merit; but there is no doubt but that, for intrinsic interest and
appropriateness, At Aboukir and Acre should rank high in the list .''—Spectator.
-Redskin and Cow-Boy: a jaie of the western
J Plains. Illustrated by
Alfred Pearse. 6s.
“A strong interest of open-air life and movement pervades the whole book.”— Scotsman.
-With Duller in Natal: or ’ A ®°™p i f der - Illus-
trated by W. Rainey,r.i.,
and a Map. 6y,
“Just the sort of book to inspire an enterprising boy.”— Army and Navy Gazette.
-By Conduct and Courage: A r St ° ry of the Da ys
J o of Nelson. Illus-
trated by William Rainey, R.l. 6s.
“As it is the last it is good to be able to say that it shows no falling off in the
veteran’s vigour of style or in his happy choice of a subject.”— Globe.


With the Allies to Pekin: AStor y oftheßell^ f
of the Legations. Il-
lustrated by Wal Paget. With a Map. 6s.
“ The author’s object being to interest and amuse, it must be admitted that he has
succeeded, and the British youth for whom he writes will probably endorse this
estimate by reading and enjoying his work.”— Guardian.
—Bv Sheer Pluck ' Tale of the Ashanti War. Illus-
■y * trated by Gordon Browne, R. I. 55-.
“ Written with a simple directness, force, and purity of style worthy of Defoe.
Morally the book is everything that could be desired, setting before the boys a bright
and bracing ideal of the English gentleman.” —Christian Leader.
-To Herat and Cabul: t Story .n ftheF i r t A r gh «
War. Illustrated by C. M.
Sheldon, and Map. ss - .
“We can heartily commend it to boys, old and young.”— Spectator.
-A Knight of the White Cross: T f eof
o the Siege
of Rhodes. Illustrated by Ralph Peacock. 6s.
“In stirring interest this is quite up to the level of Mr. Henty’s former historical
tales.” —Saturday Review.
-By Right of Conquest:
by W. S. Stacey, and 2 Maps. 6s.
“ Mr. Henty’s skill has never been more convincingly displayed than in this admir-
able and ingenious story.” —Saturday Review.
-Under Drake’s Flag: a Tale of * e Spanish
D Main. Illustrated by
Gordon Browne, R.I. 6s.
“ A stirring book of Drake’s time, and just such a book as the youth of this mari-
time country are likely to prize highly." —Daily Telegraph.
-In the Heart of the Rockies: , Story of
Adventure
in Colorado. Illustrated by G. C. Hindley. 53-.
“ Mr. Henty is seen here at his best as an artist in lightning fiction.”— Academy.
-The Bravest of the Brave: ".wi*Peterborough
in Spain. With 8
page Illustrations by H. M. PAGET. s^.
“The adventures of the aide-de-camp, Jack, will probably be found to be no less
interesting than the marvellous operations of the General himself, in which he takes
a leading part.”— Spectator.


A Roving Commission : Thro , ugh th f e ® lagk
D Insurrection of Hayti.
Illustrated by William Rainey, R.I. 6s.
“ A stirring tale, which may be confidently recommended to schoolboy readers. ”
— Guardian.
St. Bartholomew’s Eve:
tions and a Map. 6s.
“ A really good story. . . . He is a most attractive hero, always plucky and fine-
spirited. Boys, and girls too, are strongly advised to read the book, the best Mr.
Henty has provided for them lately.”— Bookman.
-For Name and Fame: ?. r ; ToCa . bulWlth Roberts.
Illustrated. 5-f.
“ The book teems with spirited scenes and stirring adventures, and the boy who
reads it attentively will acquire a sound knowledge on subjects that are of vital
importance to our Indian Empire.”— School Guardian.
-Maori and Settler: A Story of the New Zealand
War. Illustrated by Alfred
Pearse. ss.
“A book which all young people, but especially boys, will read with avidity.”
—A thenaum.
In the Reign of Terror: Tbe . Adventure s of
O a Westminster Boy.
Illustrated by J. Schonberg. 5-f.
“ May fairly be said to beat Mr. Henty’s record. The adventures will delight boys
by the audacity and peril they depict. The story is one of Mr. Henty’s best.”
—Saturday Review.
-Eerie the Briton:
A Story of the Roman Invasion of
Britain. Illustrated by W. Par-
kinson. 6s.
"He is a hero of the most attractive kind. . . . One of the most spirited and well-
imagined stories Mr. Henty has written.”— Saturday Review.
“ His conflict with a lion in the arena is a thrilling chapter.”
—School Board Chronicle.
“ Full of every form of heroism and pluck.”— Christian World.
_ "NJyy Surrender I A Tale t^'e R' s i n £ > n La Vendde.
” Gunuiuu . Illustrated by Stanley L. Wood. s*.
“A vivid tale of manly struggle against oppression.”— World.


The Dash for Khartoum: £ Ta ! e of the lle
Expedition. Illus-
trated by John Schonberg and J. Nash. 6s.
“ The Dash for Khartoum is your ideal boys book. — Tablet.
“ It is literally true that the narrative never flags a moment."— Academy.
“ The Dash for Khartoum will be appreciated even by those who don’t ordinarily
care a dash for anything.”— Punch.
In Greek Waters: A Story of the Grecian War of
Independence. Illustrated by
W. S. Stacey. 6s.
“ There are adventures of all kinds for the hero and his Mends, whose pluck and
ingenuity in extricating themselves from awkward fixes are always equal to the
occasion.” —Journal of Education.
With Wolfe in Canada: or, The Winning of
a Continent. Illus-
trations by Gordon Browne. 6j.
“ A moving tale of military exploit and thrilling adventure.” —Daily News.
Out with Garibaldi: A , story of the Übe ! atl ™
of Italy. Illustrated by W.
Rainey, r.i. s*.
“ It is a stirring tale, crammed full of hard fighting, gallant rescues, and narrow
escapes.”— Graphic.
Held Fast for England A Tale of the Siege
o of Gibraltar. Illus-
trated by Gordon Browne. s^.
“There is no cessation of exciting incident throughout the story.”— Athenceum.
Won by the Sword: ATale ° f the J? ir ? Years '
J War. Illustrated by Charles
M. Sheldon. 6s.
“As fascinating as ever came from Mr. Henty’s pen.” —Westminster Gazette.
In the Irish Brigade: A J^ eofw^ in Zanders
O and Spain. Illustrated by
Charles M. Sheldon. 6s.
A stirring book of military adventure.”— Scotsman.
At Agincourt: ATale Hoods °} Paris-
o Illustrated by Wal Paget. 6s.
“ Cannot fail to commend itself to boys of all ages.” —Manchester Courier.


Blackie & Son’s
Story Books for Boys
Capt. F. S. BRERETON
How Canada was Won:
by W, Rainey, R.i. Large crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“ Here history and romance are blended, with the adeptness we expect of Captain
Brereton, who is one of the best of living writers for boys.” —Birmingham Post.
-Roughriders of the Pampas; £ an S' e L ife
in South America. Illustrated by Stanley L. Wood. Crown
Bvo, cloth extra, olivine edges, s^.
"Furnishes a capital idea of life among the gauchos, the details of which have
been carefully studied, . . . The interest is unflagging throughout the well-written
tal t."-World.
-With Wolseley to Kumasi: £"* l
War. Illustrated by Gordon Browne, r.i. Large crown Bvo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“The author’s experiences enable him to depict warfare in the dark corners of the
Empire with an accuracy of detail to be envied by most of his rivals.”— Outlook.
- Tones of the 64th : A J a ! e of ,he of A f a >’ e
J ~ and Laswaree. Illustrated by
W. Rainey, r.i. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, s^.
“The story is full of dash and spirit, and betrays the military knowledge of the
author.” —Birmingham Post.
- Roger the Bold: A Tale °[ ‘ u he f onquest ° f !V'“ico-
o Illustrated by Stanley L. Wood.
Large crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6^.
“ The tale forms lively reading, the fighting being especially good.”— Athenaum.
“ The author has excelled himself.”— Outlook.
-With Roberts to Candahar: T^ le A °/, the
Third Afghan
War. Illustrated by W. Rainey, r.i. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, s^.
“ A very tried author, who improves with each book he writes, is Captain F. S.
Brereton. ” —A cademy.


Capt. F. S. BRERETON
A Knight of St. John: £ ™ mussed' 6°'
“ It contains exactly that mixture of fighting and romance which, handled as the
author has handled it, would enthral any boy reader.”— World.
- A of Toncm • A Tale of the Russo-Japanese
-a soldier ot japan. War lllustrated 5J
“ The pages bristle with hairbreadth escapes and gallantry, and the historical side
of the tale is worked out with much accuracy and detail.” — Graphic.
-Foes of the Red Cockade: A St ° ry ° f t i he
French Revolu-
tion. Illustrated. 6s.
“ Captain Brereton describes their experiences with the vigour and spirit which
always lend force to his writing. He presents a stirring picture of a fearful time."
World.
-One of the Fighting Scouts: A J a l e r of , Guer '
o o nlla Warfare in
South Africa. Illustrated by Stanley L. Wood. With a Map. s^.
“ Altogether an unusually good story.” —Yorkshire Post.
- With Rifle and Bayonet: war^nu^trated^y
Wal Paget. ss.
“ The book is one the British boy will read and treasure.” —Newcastle "Journal.
-With the Dyaks of Borneo: A ale ° f the
J Head Hunters.
Illustrated by Fritz Bergen. Large crown Bvo, 6s.
“Young readers must be hard to please if With the Dyaks does not suit them.”
— Spectator.
-In the King’s Service: A Tale ° f Cromwell’s in-
o vasion of Ireland. Illus-
trated. 5.?.
“The book is calculated to stir the pulses of all readers, but of boys especially.”
—Liverpool Courier.
- A Hero of Lucknow: * Ta,e of ; he ' ndia “ Mutiny.
Illustrated by William
Rainey, r.i. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, s^.
“ Full of action and picturesque adventure. A splendid book for boys, as Captain
Brereton’s always are.” —British Weekly.
- In the Grip of the Mullah: ATale of Somaliland-
r Illustrated. 55.
“A fresher, more exciting, and more spirited tale could not be wished for.”
—British Weekly.
(10)


ALEXANDER MACDONALD
The White Trail • A Story of the Early Days of
1 lie VV 111LC 1 I dll . Klondike. Illustrated by W.
Rainey, r.i. With a Map. Large crown Bvo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 6s.
“The interest of the story never slackens. It is kept up by a series of exciting
incidents and by the sayings and doings of as strange and as true a little group of
characters as chance ever brought together. . . . One of the most powerful stories
Mr. Macdonald has yet given his young readers.” —Glasgow Herald.
-The Island Traders- A Tale of the South Seas-
-1 11C IbldllU 1 1 dUCIS . Illustrated by Charles M.
Sheldon. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6 d.
“The story is replete with excitement, which is well sustained throughout.
No better book for an older scholar could be desired.”— Teachers' Aid.
-The Pearl Seekers: A Story of Adventure in the
Southern Seas. Illustrated by
Edward S. Hodgson. Large crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine
edges, 6s.
“This is the kind of story a boy will want to read at a sitting. From start to finish
it is full of stirring incidents that delight the hearts of boys.”— Schoolmaster.
-The Quest of the Black Opals:
in the Heart of Australia. Illustrated by W. Rainey, R.i. Crown
Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 55-.
“An admirable tale . . . the difficulties and dangers that ensue are numerous, and
show Mr. Macdonald’s excellent powers as a storyteller.” —Westminster Gazette.
-The Lost Explorers: A Stor y oi Trackless
1 Desert. Illustrated by
Arthur H. Buckland. Large crown Bvo, cloth, olivine edges, 6s.
“As splendid and as vivid a narrative as any boy could wish to read.”
—Daily Graphic.
HARRY COLLINGWOOD
-A Middy in Command:
trated b) Edward S. Hodgson. Large crown Bvo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 6s.
“ A thoroughly good yarn of the right sort. . . . The book is full of incident, has
a healthy tone, and is the right thing for Englishmen in the making.”— Globe.


HARRY COLLINGWOOD
-Under the Chilian Flag:
Peru (1879-1881). Illustrated by W. Rainey, r.i. Crown Bvo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, y. 6 d.
“ In Under the Chilian Flag Mr. Collingwood writes of naval warfare in a fashion
likely to hold the close attention of any boy into whose hands the book may fall.”
—Morning Post.
STAFF SURGEON T. T. JEANS, R.N.
Mr. Midshipman Glover, R.N.:
Navy of To-day. Illustrated by Edward S. HODGSON. Large
crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges,
“ Will probably prove one of the most successful boys’ books of the season.”
—E vetting Standard.
HERBERT STRANG
The Adventures of Harry Rochester:
A Story of the Days of Marlborough and Eugene. Illustrated. 6s.
“ In The Adventures of Harry Rochester Mr. Strang has written one of the best
stories of a military and historical type we have seen for many a day.”— Atheneeum.
- Boys of the Light Brigade: A , Sto 7 of s P ain
J 00 and the Penin-
sular War. Illustrated. 6s.
Professor Oman (Chichele Professor of Modem History at Oxford, and author of
A History of the Peninsular ]Var) writes: “I can’t tell you what a pleasure and
rarity it is to the specialist to find a tale on the history of his own period in which
the details are all right . . . accept thanks from a historian for having got historical
accuracy combined with your fine romantic adventures ",
- Brown of Moukden: AStory r ° f the Russo-Japanese
War. Illustrated. s*.
“ The incident of the locomotive race down the Siberian Railway is, for breathless
interest, the equal of anything we know of in the whole range of juvenile fiction. . . .
The book will hold boy readers spellbound.”— Church Times.
-Tom Bnrnahv A Story of Uganda the Great
10m Durnaoy. Congo ForesL Illustrated Crown
Bvo, cloth, olivine edges. 5-y.
“Told with a vigour and enthusiasm that will stir the heart of any boy. A
delightful story of African adventure.”— Spectator.


ROBERT M. MACDONALD
The Great White Chief: f Story Adven '
ture in Unknown
New Guinea. Illustrated by W. Rainey, r.i. Large crown Bvo,
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 6s.
“ A narrative of intense interest from first to last. A rattling story told with spirit
and vigour.”— British Weekly.
DAVID KER
Under the Flag of France: a tale of Bertrand
o du Guesclm. Illus-
trated by Stanley L. Wood. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine
edges, 5-y.
“ Under the Flag of France is one of the best stories of the season, dealing with
the adventures of Bertrand du Guesclin in delightful style.”— Globe.
- Among the Dark Mountains : or ’ Cast away
D m Sumatra.
Illustrated by Frances Ewan. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, 3s. 6d.
“ A glorious tale of adventure." — Educational News.
ERNEST GLANVILLE
The Diamond Seekers: A | tory f r
in South Africa. Illus-
trated. 6s.
“We have seldom seen abetter story for boys.”— Guardian.
-In Search of the Okapi: A Story °L Advent “,n in
i Central Afnca. Illus-
trated. 65.
“An admirable story.”— Daily Chronicle.
MEREDITH FLETCHER
Every Inch a Briton: A ? ch ° o1 St ° ry - Illustra ted
J by Sydney Cowell. 3s. 6d.
“ In Every Inch a Briton Mr. Meredith Fletcher has scored a success.”
—Manchester Guardian.
Tcfl’GT'sOTY Tumor * School Story. Illustrated by J. R.
jciicisuii j UlilUl . Burgess> Crown Bvo, cloth elegant,
3 s. 6d.
“A comical yarn. . . . The boy who does not break out into sudden fits of uncon-
trollable laughter on reading it has no fun in his bones.”— Yorkshire Daily Observer.
(13)


BLAOKIE'S STORY BOOKS FOR BOYS
FREDERICK P. GIBBON
The Disputed V.C. ™ u o ® ated Js by STANLEV L '
“A good, stirring tale, well told.”— Graphic.
G. MANVILLE FENN
BunviD Land * Among Blackfellows in New Guinea.
J A r * Illustrated. 2s-
“ One of the best tales of adventure produced by any living writer.”
—Daily Chronicle.
-In the King’s Name. Illustrated. 3-r. 6 d.
“ Mr. Fenn has won a foremost place among writers for boys. This *s, we think,
the best of all his productions in this field.” —Daily News.
- Dick o’ the Fens : * R ° man ” of the Great East
Swamp. Illustrated by Frank
Dadd. Cloth elegant, olivine edges, 2 s - 6 d.
“ We conscientiously believe that boys will find it capital reading.”— Times.
Dr. GORDON STABLES, R.N.
The Naval Cadet: A Story of Adventure on Land
and Sea. Illustrated by W.
Rainey, r.l 2 s -
“An interesting travellers’ tale, with plenty of fun and incident in it.”— Spectator.
-For Life and Liberty: A of thecmi war
J m America. With Illus-
trations and Map. 3^.
“ The story is lively and spirited, with abundance of blockade running, hard fight-
ing, and narrow escapes. ” — Times.
-To Greenland and the Pole : Stor £ of the
Arctic Regions.
Illustrated. 3^.
“ The adventures are actual experiences. It is one of the books of the season,
and one of the best Dr. Stables has ever written.”— Truth,
FRED SMITH
The World of Animal Life. Edited by Fred
Smith. Pro-
fusely illustrated with Engravings after F. SPECHT and other
eminent artists. SJ.
“An admirable volume for the young mind enquiring after Nature.”
—Birmingham Gazette.
114)


A. J. CHURCH
Lords of the World:
trated by Ralph Peacock. y. 6d.
“As a boy’s book, Lords of the World deserves a hearty welcome.”— Spectator.
“An excellent story.”— Daily Chronicle.
G. I. WHITHAM
Sir Sleep-Awake and his Brother:
A Story of the Crusades. Illustrated by N. Tenison. 2 s. 6d.
“ The writer has framed a stirring story that will hold the attention of young
readers and give them very real ideas of those stirring times.”— Schoolmaster.
ESCOTT LYNN
When Lion-Heart was King: * ob f n al H O ° d f
and Merry Sherwood. Illustrated by William Rainey, r.i.
Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges, 3.L 6 d.
“A lively tale of Robin Hood . . . certainly the adventures follow thick and fast.”
—Birmingham Post.
CHARLES R. KENYON
’Twixt Earth and Sky: A Tale of Adventure
J m Central America.
Illustrated by Charles Horrell. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant,
olivine edges, 6 d.
“A capital story of adventure. ... It is written brightly, and has a novel plot.”
—Globe.
DOROTHEA MOORE
Qod’s Bairn • A Story of tlie Fen Countr y- illustrated.
Gilt edges, is. 6 d.
“An excellent tale, most dainty in execution and fortunate in subject.”— Globe.
“ Miss Dorothea Moore may be warmly complimented upon her pretty and touch-
ing story.”— Guardian.


WALTER C. RHOADES
For the Sake of His Chum: story. S iuus!
trated by N. TENISON. Crown Bvo, cloth elegant, olivine edges,
3 s - 6d.
“ The characters are manly, and there is a breeziness about the book which is sure
to commend it.” — Athenaeum.
-Two Scapegraces: haLold coping
cloth elegant, olivine edges, 3s. 6 d.
“A school story of high merit. ... It maintains the interest of the reader through-
out, and boys will revel in its well-told incidents of school life." —Liverpool Mercury.
PAUL DANBY
The Red Army Book. With many Illustrations
J in colour and in black-
and-white. 6s.
“ Every boy would glory in the keeping and reading of such a prize." —Daily Telegraph.
J. CUTHBERT HADDEN
The Nelson Navy Book. Wltbman y illustrations
J in colour and in black-
and-white. Large crown Bvo, cloth, olivine edges, 6j.
“A stirring, heartening tale, bold and bracing as the sea itself.” —The Standard.
“An ideal book for boys.” —Sheffield Telegraph.
PERCY F. WESTERMAN
A T ‘j. , A Story of Adventure on Land and
/A UdU OI ejnt . Sea in Restoration Times. Illus-
trated. 25.6 d.
“ A capital book for boys.”— Record.
W. C. METCALFE
Pigtails and Pirates: A „ of the Sea - illustrated
o by W. Rainey, r.i. 2s. 6 d.
“An exceptionally good story of the sea. . . . The characters are individual
beyond the common.”— Globe.


{


N wpj ■
I
-


fc


