

rliicf'j
..THE..
FOREIGN MISSION WORK
OF OUR CHURCH.
HISTORICAL
By Rev. James Lamont, F.L.S.,
Convener Foreign Missions Committee.


; •/ t
\- " •


HISTORICAL SUMMARY.
By Rev. James Lamont, F.L.S.
It has been thought that a short account of the different departments of Mission
work carried on by our Church might be interesting to our people. The new departure
made by the Assembly last year, and the earnest effort now put forth in many Congrega-
tions to establish Missionary Associations, render this all the more necessary. Missionary
work is one of those subjects which becomes of increasing interest the more fully it is
known.
In the year 1865 the scattered fragments of Presbyterianism within the Colony
united, and became the Presbyterian Church of New South Wales. In that same year
a resolution was passed by the General Assembly to this effect: —“The General Assembly
shall create a Fund to be called ‘ The Fund for Missions to the Heathen.’ This Fund
shall be under the management of a Committee appointed by the General Assembly. . .
... and shall be devoted to the support of Missionaries who shall be employed by the
1 Church —among the Chinese in the Colony, and among the natives of the New Hebrides ;
\ but the Committee shall be at liberty to assist any Missions approved by them, which
may be established among the Aborigines of Australia.”
Here we have an outline of all the Mission work that the Church has undertaken
until now, with the exception of the work of the Women’s Missionary Association in
India, which was commenced about eight years ago.
THE NEW HEBRIDES.
Dr. J. G. Paton thus describes these Islands From Ranto in the north to
\ Aneityum in the south, a distance of about 400 miles, there are scattered over the ocean
130 Islands, 20 being well inhabited, and 11 of them being of considerable size, from
Aneityum, which is forty miles in circumference, to Santo, which measures seventy
(miles by forty. The Islands lie 1000 miles to the north of New Zealand, 1400 miles
north-east from Sydney, 400 miles west of Fiji, and 200 east of New Caledonia. The popu-
lation is now estimated at 70,000 ; but in the early days of Missions, before traders and
Kanaka-collectors, and the new epidemics of civilization had decimated them, their
numbers were certainly three times greater.
“ The general appearance of the Islands is that of a range of mountains bursting up
out of the sea, clothed with forests, and severed from each other by deep valleys, through
which the tides now flow. They are all volcanic in origin, but the lava has poured itself
out over a bed of coral, and the mountains have reared themselves up on a coral base.
The fires are still active on Tanna, being now, as in the days of Cook, a pillar of cloud
by day and of fire by night, a far-shining lighthouse for the sailor, kindled by the finger
of God Himself. The climate is moist and humid, with a thermometer seldom below 60°
and seldom above 90° in the shade ; their winter is called the rainy season, and their
vegetation is tropical in its luxuriance.”
« The New Hebrides Mission Synod, which is composed of all the Presbyterian Mis-
) sionaries on the Islands, and meets once a year, arranges for the settlement of the different
JM issionaries in the places considered most advantageous. In the New Hebrides group the
Missionaries are almost all Presbyterians, representing Churches in Scotland, Canada,
New Zealand, Victoria, New South Wales, South Australia, and Tasmania. The whole
of the Islands in the Pacific, either by mutual consent or by agreement, are apportioned in
groups among the different Protestant Churches, so that no more than one form of
Christianity is ever presented to the natives. Hie advantage of this, as well as the
danger of overlapping being avoided, must be evident to all.
The Rev. Joseph Copeland, so well known and highly respected in our Church,
addressed the first General Assembly in 1865, upon “The Mission Work in the New
Hebrides.” Mr. Copeland was at that time a Missionary stationed on the Island of


Aneityum, in connection with the Reformed Presbyterian Church of Scotland. The
Assembly cordially thanked Mr. Copeland for his address, praying that the blessing of
the Great Head of the Church might rest upon him and his fellow labourers. Believing,
as we still believe, that a great and solemn responsibility rests upon the Christian
Churches of Australia with reference to the evangelisation of the heathen in these
Islands that lie so near the Australian coast, our Church was eager from the very first
to take part in this good work already begun among a wild and mostly cannibal people.
But the difficulty was to get qualified men who were willing to go to these places.
In the colony there were none to spare of such men as were needed in the Islands, and
it was not until three years afterwards that the Church succeeded in obtaining the
services of the Rev. J. I). Gordon, of Canada. Mr. Gordon was a brother of the Rev.
G. N. Gordon who with his wife had been martyred in Krromanga in 18(51, the scene of
the martyrdom of the Rev. John Williams and the Rev. James Harris in 1839.
While a student in Nova Scotia, Mr. J. I). Gordon heard of the murder of his
brother, and immediately offered himself to take the place of him who had fallen. With
the sanction of the Canadian Foreign Mission Board, his services were transferred to this
Church in 18(58. His work was partly in the Island of Erromanga, and partly in the
large Island of Santo, with a population at that time of fifty to sixty thousand. After
two years of earnest and self-denying labours in the service of this Church, Mr. Gordon
severed his connection with us, and in two years more he was counted worthy to wear
the martyr’s crown. This cannibal Island of Erromanga, on which so many martyrs
fell, is now entirely Christian. The Rev. H. A. Robertson, of Canada, so favourably
known in our own Church, has been honoured of God to bring about this wondrous
change.
It 'was not until thirteeen years after the death of Mr. Gordon that our Church
succeeded in obtaining a Missionary for the New Hebrides. During all these years
earnest efforts were put forth in that direction, and all the Missionaries at home on
furlough were commissioned to obtain a suitable man, but without success. Meanwhile
the Missionary spirit of the Church was kept alive by the visits of various Missionaries.
Some of these, when on furlough to the colony, or when in Sydney engaged in the work
of revising the printing of the Gospels in the language of the Islanders, gave a part of
their time to deputation work, and were the means of much good to the Church. The
late Rev. Dr. Steel, of St. Stephen’s, Sydney, an enthusiast in Mission work, succeeded
in procuring a number of lantern slides illustrative of the New Hebrides, and these
were shown wherever practicable. His book on “Missions in the New Hebrides was
also helpful in the same direction.
In 1883 the Rev. J. Inglis, while in Scotland, persuaded the Rev. W. B. Murray,
M.A., who had just completed his studies in Aberdeen, to come out as the Missionary
of our Church to the New Hebrides. Mr. Murray was settled with his wife on Ambrim,
an Island near the middle of the Group. After a brief career of two years Mr. Murray
passed away to his rest and his reward. He was a man full of earnestness and zeal.
The work on Ambrim was taken up by his brother, the Rev. C. Murray, M.A., in con-
nection with the Presbyterian Church of New Zealand.
Our well-beloved and devoted Missionary, the Rev. John Dunlop Landels, entered
/ the service of our Church in 1886, and in the following year he and his wife commenced
! work on the Island of Malo. This Island, which was named St. Bartholomew bj
Captain Cook, is about seventeen miles long, and situated a few miles south of the large
Island of Santo. Malo contains about 1,200 inhabitants. Twelve native teachers work
under the direction of our Missionary. Of these native teachers, the following Sabbath-
schools maintain one each, namely, the Glebe, Leichhardt, Randwick, Bexley, Chalmers
Church, St. Peter’s (North Shore), and East Maitland Missionary Association.
About 500 persons are in attendance at the services held in different parts of the
Island, and there are 28 communicants. About 300 scholars are under instruction. The
first fruits of the Gospel on Malo was the young chief Antas. His was a noble life,
alas ! so short. His younger brother is now in the Training Institute, Tangoa, to which
our youthful lady Missionary, Miss Symonds, 8.A., has so recently been appointed as one
of the teachers. Thus we see that the work of our Missionaries, Mr. and Mrs. Landels,
has been highly blessed of God. May the time soon come when that can be said of them
and of Malo which was said of the late Dr. Geddie and Aneityum : “When he landed
there were no Christians . , . when we left there were no heathen.” The first part of
the saying was sadly true ; may the latter speedily be accomplished.


THE MISSION SHIP “ DAYSPRINO.’
£/ Early in the history of the New Hebrides Mission the want of a ship was greatly
felt to take the Missionaries from one Island to another, and to communicate with the
great world at Sydney, or some other port on the Australian coast. The Missionaries
were entirely dependent upon the trading vessels that might be trading or calling at the
different Islands. They were frequently delayed in their efforts to go from one place to
another, and the character of the crews of most of those ships in the early days was
such as to make any close acquaintance with them undesirable. Chiefly by the efforts
of Dr. J. G. Paton a ship was obtained for the exclusive use of the Missionaries. A
large portion of the money was raised by the Sabbath-schools in Scotland, Canada, and
the Australian colonies. The vessel, a two-masted brig, was built in Canada, named the
Dayspring, and reached Australia in 1804. The different Churches contributed annually
to her support. Our Church has given the sum of £2OO every year since the ship was
obtained until the present time.
After a useful career of ten years the Dayspring was wrecked in 1873, and the three-
masted schooner Paragon was chartered to take her place. Eventually the name of this
vessel was changed to the Dayspring, and for 15 years she served the Mission well. As
the number of Missionaries became larger and more of the Islands were occupied, it was
felt that the service required was too much for a sailing vessel to accomplish. In 1890
an arrangement was made with the Agents of a line of steamers trading to the Islands
to do all the work of the Mission, and the old ship was sold.
Dr. J. G. Paton, and some of the friends in Victoria, had set their heart upon
having another Dayspring, but this time a fast-going steamer. The new Dayspring
steamer was obtained in 1895, and after three visits to the Islands, was wrecked on the
16th October in the same year. Messrs. Burns, Philp and Company’s line of steamers
trading to the Islands are now doing the work of the Mission to the entire satisfaction of
our Church. The “Dayspring” Board still takes the oversight of the work of these
steamers as far as they have to do with our Missionaries, and the name “ Dayspring
Service” is still retained, so that our Sabbath scholars and young people may continue to
support this branch of our Mission work as they have done for the last 35 years.
CHINESE MISSION WORK.
As early as 1867, efforts were made to obtain Missionaries to work among the
Chinese in the colony. At first it was thought desirable to have a European minister
who could speak the Chinese language, and the minutes of the Foreign Missions Com-
mittee from 1867 to 1880, show an extensive correspondence with Missionaries in Hong
Kong, Amoy, and elsewhere, with reference to the subject. But a minister so qualified
could not be found, nor did it seem practicable to have one of our own ministers so
trained as to be effective for such work.
)In 1869, a Chinese convert named Philip Lee Hyung, trained under the Rev. Mr.
Matthew, of Pleasant Creek, Victoria, who had learned the Chinese language, was settled
at the goldfield of Araluen, in the Braidwood district, where many Chinese diggers were
at that time employed. The Rev. Henry Macready, who was then our minister at
Braidwood, had superintendence of the' Mission. But Mr. Macready found it impossible
to know how the Mission was prospering or to guide the Mission in any way owing to
the fact that the Missionary was unable to speak, or even to understand, th English
language. For this reason the Missionary was discharged in 1871, and the work for a
ftime came to an end. In 1872, George Ah Lin was engaged, and continued to work
among the Chinese in Sydney for a period of eight years. The progress made was "not
great, the meetings being held either in the different places where the Chinese were at
work, or in the Ragged School at Harrington-street.
(In 1882 Mr. John Young Wai commenced his labours. The Scots Church School-
room then became the place of meeting. Services were also held in a house in Goulbum-
street, for the convenience of the Chinese residents in that locality. The success that
has attended Mr. Wai’s efforts is well known to most of our people. The church in
J Foster-street —so largely paid for by the Chinese themselves —also the Waterloo church,
built two years ago, declare—as far as material things can declare—how earnest and
how successful Mr. Young Wai has been. There are between 50 and 60 communicants
in the Chinese Church in Sydney. About 30 other members have left during the past
I few years ; 10 returning to China to be Missionaries to their friends and countrymen in


that teeming land ; 10 having gone to West Australia, and become the nucleus of a
congregation for Mr. Paul Pow Chee ; and 10 have gone to other places. Ten adults and
two infants were baptised in Sydney last year. From 100 to 150 attend the Sabbath
services. In Sydney and suburbs there are about 2000 Chinese residents. Besides the
Rev. J. Young Wai, there are three Christian Missionaries belonging to other denomi-
nations.
Parramatta. —Mr. David Shing, a Chinese Evangelist, came to take Mr. Young
Wai’s work when he went home to China to be married in 1880. When Mr. Wai re-
turned with his bride, Mr. Shing was sent to Parramatta. After two or three years, a
number of the Chinese having left the district, the Mission was closed, and Mr. Shing
went to Beech worth, Victoria.
Newcastle. —This Mission was begun in 1888. Mr. James F. Rem Yee, who had been
prosecuting a course of study for some years at Ballarat, was upon the completion of his
studies sent to Newcastle. Shortly afterwards, owing to the scarcity of funds, the Com-
mittee were afraid that the work would have to be abandoned. Indeed, they had made ar-
rangements for Mr. Kem Yee to enter the service of the New Zealand Church. Hearing of
this, the Rev. W. Bain, and a number of Christians connected with different denomina-
tions in Newcastle, succeeded in forming a Ladies’ Association, which undertook to raise
a certain sum for the Mission every year. They have nobly fulfilled their promise, not-
withstanding the great financial depression that shortly afterwards brought ruin upon so
many in that district. But for this generous assistance of the Christian people of New-
castle, who have helped us in many ways, the work there could not have been main-
tained. A Ladies’ Society (undenominational) was also formed in Maitland, and funds
were raised for the payment of Mr. Kem Yee’s travelling expenses to and from Maitland,
so that he might conduct services regularly among his countrymen there. These services
are still continued, and our Missionary is thus enabled to visit more or less frequently
most of the Chinese who reside in the Lower Hunter district, as well as those who live
in Newcastle and its suburbs. There are about 500 Chinese resident in the district.
MISSIONS TO THE ABORIGINES.
As long ago as the early fifties there was a Presbyterian Missionary labouring among
the Aborigines in New South Wales. This was the Rev. William Ridley, M.A., who
came to the colony in 1849, and became professor of Creek, Latin, and Hebrew in the
Australian College, of which Dr. Lang was Principal. After a time he interested him-
self in the Aborigines, especially the Kamilaroi tribe, whose headquarters were princi-
jjally on the Barwon, Namoi, and Bogan rivers. Mr. Ridley was a man of exceptional
ability and literary attainments, as well as of earnest, humble piety. His linguistic
powers were almost marvellous. He wrote a book entitled “ Kamilaroi and other Aus-
tralian Languages,” which was published by the Government, and is still recognised as a
standard work on that subject. The celebrated Professor Max Muller speaks of this
work in the very highest terms. Mr. Ridley was a valuable member of the Heathen
Missions Committee of our Church until his death, which occurred in 1878.
During many years our Church supported the Missions to the Aborigines carried on
by the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, contributing about £5O per annum. Various
attempts were made to form a Mission in this colony, but without success. Mr. Hous-
mann, son of the Rev. F. G. Housmann of the Moravian Mission, was in the service of
our Church during part of the year 1809. He endeavoured to establish a Mission station
among the Aborigines on the Tweed River, but the undertaking, after some months,
collapsed. Next year the usual grant of £5O was sent to \ ictoria, and was continued
annually for many years. Aid was also given from time to time to the Church of Eng-
land Mission station at Warrangesda, and to Mr. Matthews’ Mission at Maloga. In
1879 the sum of £B6 was contributed by our Church to these Missions.
In 1891 the federated Churches of Australia and Tasmania established a Mission to
the Aborigines at Mapoon, Batavia River, Northern Queensland. The expenses of the
Mission are divided among the Churches of the Federation, our Church being responsible
for the sum of £75 per annum. A second station was formed last year at Maypa, on
the Embley River, about /0 miles south of Mapoon. The Missionaries are the Rev. N.
and Mrs. Hey, and Mrs. Ward, who are stationed at Mapoon ; and the Rev. E. and Mrs,
Brown fit Maypa. All those have come to us from the Moravian Churc}).


THE women’s MISSIONARY ASSOCIATION
This Association was formed in 1891 during the visit to the colony of Mrs.
Longhurst, of the Church of Scotland Zenana Mission, Madras. The Association was
established to assist the Missions of the Church, and for Zenana work in India. Shortly
afterwards, Miss Maclean was appointed as their first Missionary, to work under the
direction of the Church of Scotland Zenana Mission at Madras. After six years of
faithful service. Miss Maclean visited most of our Congregations when at home on fur-
lough last year. 'Since then, Miss McNeill, and Miss Symonds, 8.A., have been
appointed as Missionaries, Miss McNeill to India, and Miss Symonds to the New
Hebrides.
GENERAL.
Such has been the Mission work carried on by our Church since 1865. Individual
Congregations have given aid, and some continue still to give aid to other Missions. The
Congregation of Woollahra has for seven years supported a lady Missionary in China,
who works in connection with the China Inland Mission. This Congregation has also
for the last four years maintained a colporteur in China, labouring under the direction of
the National Bible Society of Scotland. The Fellowship Union has for a large number
of years contributed a good sum of money to the funds of the Foreign Missions Com-
mittee, to be devoted to the Mission work among the Chinese of Sydney, and several
members of Fellowship Associations are found among the earnest band of helpers in the
Rev. J. Young Wai’s Church in Foster-street.
There are indications throughout our Church that an increasing interest is being
taken in the great subject of Missions. The work is great, and “ there remaineth yet
very much land to be possessed.” As Christians may we all realise our responsibilities,
and our privileges. If we are remiss, the great Master will require it of us. If we are
earnest and sympathetic and prayerful, and liberal according to our ability, then every
offering of service or of substance ‘ ‘ is accepted according to that a man hath, and not
according to that he hath not.”
We are the Lord’s ; then let us gladly tender
Our souls to Him, in deeds, not empty words ;
Let heart and tongue and life unite to render
No doubtful witness that we are the Lord’s.
In name and by authority of the Foreign Missions Committee,
JAMES LAMONT, Convener.
ASSEMBLY’S RESOLUTION ON FOREIGN MISSIONS REPORT.
15th May, 1899.
The Report of the Committee on Foreign Missions was submitted by
Rev. J. Lamont, Convener , who addressed the House.
The Report was taken as read. v
There was a very large audience present, which took the liveliest interest
in the proceedings ; also many Chinese Christians.
Addresses were delivered by the following speakers—Dr. Gunn,
Missionary at Futuna, New Hebrides ; Dr. George Brown, of the Wesleyan
Methodist Church ; Rev. J. D. Landels, the Church’s Missionary on Malo ;
Rev. John Young Wai, Minister of Chinese Church, Foster Street; and Mr.
Kem Yee, of the Chinese Mission, Newcastle.
The thanks of the Assembly were recorded to the speakers for their ad-
mirable addresses.


Rev, J . Lamont moved the deliverance, which was seconded by Rev. I).
Southland carried on the voices, as follows ;
Receive the Report,
Express gratitude to God for the measure of success that has attended the
self-denying efforts of our Missionaries in their different spheres of labour.
Commend anew the Missionaries and their work to the prayerful
sympathy of the Church.
Thankfully recognise the increased interest shown in Foreign Missions
throughout the Church. Express the hope that this interest will continue to
grow, and that the spirit of prayerfulness and liberality will abound among
all our people.
Approve of the purchase of the property for the Mission in Newcastle,
and heartily thank all those whose generous efforts have contributed towards
the satisfactory result.
Express satisfaction with the present Maritime Service. Re-aflirm the
previous decisions against the proposal to build a new Dayspriny ; and in view
of the growing feeling against the proposal, disapprove of the renewal of the
negotiations by the Presbytexdan Church of Victoria, and direct that intima-
tion to this effect be made to all parties concerned.
Agree to modify the resolution of last Assembly re the Maritime Service
to the following effect, viz.,—That the sum to be contributed by this Church
be i/100 per annum, and any additional sum over that amount which may be
expended in the interests of this Church.
Rejoice in the success of the Women’s Missionary Association, and
gi atefully acknowledge the stimulus and help given by it to the great cause
of Missions in our Church.
It was moved, seconded, and agreed :—The Assembly recognising the
value of the interesting Historical Summary of the Mission Work of the
Church drawn up by the Convener and appended to the Report, instruct the
Committee to have the Summary published in suitable form and circulated
for the information of our people.
.S-v.MtijL 12. Lkks, Printer axu Stationer, 81 CeaUexce Street, SVrneV.
