

' 1 ‘
b
05
fc
b
Q
o
b
b
b
h / ) \' J
gnjOLS .


ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA,
BEING AN ACCOUNT OF
THE INSTITUTION FOE THEIE EDUCATION
POONINDIE,
IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Founded in 1850 by the Yen. ARCHDEACON HALE, a Missionary
of S.P.G.
THE
RIGHT REV. BISHOP HALE.
PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE TRACT COMMITTEE.
LONDON:
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,
NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, CHARING CROSS, W.C. ;
43, QUEEN VICTORIA STREET, E.C.
BRIGHTON: 135, north street.
New York: E. & J. B. YOUNG & CO.


/ ' 't
THE ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA.
I propose in the following pages to give some account of
the first formation of the Natives Institution of Poonindie in
South Australia. It was established in the year 1850 for
training and Christianizing some members of the aboriginal
race, and it is now (in 1889) still carrying on its beneficent
work.
But it seems right that I should, in the first instance,
explain how it came about that I, having gone to
Australia in the same ship with the Bishop of Adelaide
when he first went out, to be his Archdeacon, should after-
wards have devoted myself specially to work amongst
the natives, allowing the work properly pertaining to me
as Archdeacon to fall almost into abeyance.
My explanation must carry me back to the time of the
emancipation of the slaves in the West Indies. At that
time I thought much and deeply upon the great responsi-
bility which rested upon us, as a nation, with reference to
those heathen races, which, in various parts of the world,
had become subject to British rule. As regards the
slaves just alluded to, I had very great doubts whether the
measures which were being adopted for the amelioration
of their condition would be really beneficial to them if
those measures should be terminated by the mere Act of
Emancipation.
It appeared to me that the slaves, when freed from the
compulsory control of those who had been their masters,
would be subject to no control at all, unless some powerful
moral influence could be brought to bear upon them, in
place of the physical restraint from which they were being
relieved, and I know of no moral influence which could be


brought to bear upon them except by means of Christian
teaching.
So strong was this feeling within me that, before I was
ordained, I earnestly desired to go to the West Indies and
to devote myself to the work which appeared to me to be
so loudly called for. Acting upon this desire I went to the
office of S.P.G. I was probably unfortunate in the
clergyman with whom I had an interview. My visit was
not encouraging, and I did not repeat it. Subsequently,
in a well considered letter to my father, I made a definite
proposition to go to the West Indies. But the proposition
was received so unfavourably by all the members of my
family that I gave up the project, and eventually I entered
upon a curacy in this country.
But the feeling, which had impelled me to take the steps
just described, never left my mind. I frequently spoke at
meetings, of S.P.G., and also for C.M.S.; and, from
time to time, I said to myself, “ It is one thing to stand on
“ a platform and to hold forth about the duty of going to
“ the heathen , but it is quite another thing to go oneself.”
However, during the first eleven years that I was in Holy
Orders, my own path of duty seemed plain enough. It
seemed clear to me, during those years, that my work was
in the mother country.
Then came the year 1847, when four Bishops, all for the
Colonies, were consecrated in Westminster Abbey, on
St. Peter’s Day. It was a great day for the Colonial
Church, and I do not hesitate to say that, in consequence of
the impetus which was then given to the cause of mission-
ary work generally, it was a great day for the Church at
home.
A few weeks after this event I was staying in the
house with one of those Bishops—Dr. Short, the
Bishop for Adelaide, South Australia—and I had many
conversations about the Church in the Colonies, and about
the treatment of the aboriginal inhabitants ; and one day,
during one of our conversations (we were walking), the
Bishop, in that peculiar abrupt way, which every one who
knew the dear old man will remember, stopped, and facing
about, and standing opposite to me said, in his peculiar,
short, quick manner, “ You must come out, and be my
“Archdeacon.” The thought of going out with him hadnever
entered my mind ; but, when I came seriously to consider


the matter, I could see that there really was no good and
sufficient reason why I should not obey the call which
seemed to be thus sent to me. _
For nearly six years I had borne the weight of the duties
of the parish of Stroud —a parish of 8,000 inhabitants, to
which I had been appointed by Bishop Monk. _ But in
184. S I was compelled, by the effect upon my mind ot a
great sorrow, to resign it. In 1847 I, and my two little
motherless children, were living with my father, who had
also not long become a widower, in Wiltshire. I had
taken charge of a small country parish, a daughter parish
of Bradford-on-Avon, and connected with my father’s pro-
perty. One of my brothers (unmarried) was, at the time I
met Bishop Short, returning with his regiment from
India, and I knew that he could take my place with
my father. Circumstanced as I was, my arrangements
were speedily made; and, on the 2nd of September, I and
my children and two female servants embarked in the same
ship with the Bishop and his family and other
clergymen, whom he had engaged for work in his new
diocese.
During the early part of the voyage I kept a diary, in the
hope that some opportunity might occur by which I might
send it back to England for the information of my friends.
I must here give an extract from it, explaining that on the
day on which this was written, the Bishop was preparing a
document for my formal appointment of Archdeacon on our
arrival in Adelaide. And he had been good enough to call
me into his cabin to be present as assessor while he was so
engaged. My remark written afterwards was as follows ;
“The puzzling out of a beginning of things in a new
u diocese will be 3. peculiar cind difficult kind of work.
“ But it has its charms for my mind, and I much hope and
“ pray for grace and guidance to get pretty well through it.
“ Being thrown so much together, I have, of course, seen a
“ great deal of the Bishop, and have become very intimate
“ with him ; and the more I see of him, the more thankful
“ I am that, having been so long desirous of entering upon
“such an enterprise as the present one, I have been led to
“ embark in this one with such a man as the Bishop of
“ Adelaide.” Written Feb. 24th, when we had been about
three weeks at sea.
These little personal explanations have seemed to me


to be necessary in order that the reader may understand
that there had been in my mind, for a considerable time,
a readiness (if I may so express it) to enter upon work
such as that which I am about to describe.
On our arrival in Adelaide we found that the Govern-
ment had not been altogether unmindful of their duty to
the aborigines. Very excellent schools for native
children of both sexes had been for some time in
existence in close proximity to Government House.
The children were lodged and boarded on the school
premises; but there were frequently absentees. The adult
natives, hanging about the town, would often get some
of them away for days, and even for weeks, together.
Those, however, who attended with any degree of
regularity, made fair progress with their lessons, and
proved that they were quite capable of receiving instruc-
tion, and, with God’s blessing, of receiving into their
minds the first seeds of Christian truth.
But we learned, with sorrow, that there was no
arrangement in existence by means of which these young
people, so long and often successfully cared for, could be
guided and protected after they had outgrown the school.
Just at the ages when they most needed care and
guidance they were thrown upon their own resources, and
lost to civilization. Hence the need of some supple-
mental institution into which they might be received
at this critical period of their lives.
It will, I presume, be clearly understood that nothing
could be done towards carrying out any such scheme as
seemed to be required without the sanction and assistance
of the Government. Happily, the gentleman who, at the
time lam now speaking of, was Governor of South
Australia was Sir Henry Edward Fox Young, and it
gives me much pleasure to record here how thoroughly
and heartily he entered into the scheme, and how ready
he was to assist me in every way. In fact it would have
been quite impossible for me to have attempted to carry
out my project if Sir Henry Young had been apathetic
or half-hearted about it.
As my narrative will show, important concessions from
the Government were absolutely necessary in order that
the scheme might be put upon a proper footing. And I
never should have obtained those concessions if the


Governor had not used his influence on my behalf
with the other members of the Executive.
The necessity for the thing having been acknowledged,
I, at first, appeared simply in the character of the person
deputed to put some definite plan before His Excellency
on paper. I had two or three interviews with him
concerning the said scheme, and made certain alterations
which he suggested. Finally the thing was brought into
such a shape as to meet with his full approval. Then he
said, “And, now, who is to do it?” And he evidently
had not at all expected the answer which I made when
I replied that, with His Excellency’s permission, I was
prepared to undertake it. The Bishop’s permission was,
of course, also necessary. But I knew that that would
be given.
I now introduce a letter written to the Governor by
myself, and His Excellency’s reply. These documents
led to the immediate commencement of work. In this
letter the name of Mr. Moorhouse is mentioned. It will
be frequently mentioned in the course of the narrative.
He was a Government officer, the Protector of Aborigines.
The children, while in Adelaide, were in his charge.
He also fell in with the scheme thoroughly and heartily,
and was always ready to take any amount of trouble to
help me.
From Archdeacon Hale to His Excellency Sir
Edward Henry Fox Young.
August ijth, 1850.
“ May it please your Excellency,
“ I am encouraged, by the observations which fell
from your Excellency this morning, to address you
again on the subject of the contemplated Natives
Institution.
“ The despatches which have reached your Excellency
by the Candahar appear to leave no doubt upon your
mind as to the answer which will be returned to your
Excellency’s despatch of the 12th of July last. And I
further gather from your observations that, under the
influence of this feeling, you would be willing to sanction
the opening of the Institution, on a modified scale, without
further delay.


“ That there should be as little delay as possible before
commencing operations is, in my opinion, a matter of
great importance. The great need for the establishment
of such an institution arises from the necessity of so
extending the means which are at present in use for the
benefit of the natives that they may not be thrown back
wholly upon their own resources when they leave the
school.
“ It appears that there are now at the present time
‘a set ’ of school children of both sexes just arriving at
this critical age. Mr. Moorhouse has many times
described their state to me by saying ‘ they are just now
‘ fit to be put under a missionary’s care.’ They have got
all that they will get from the school. They can, for the
most part, read and write and cast accounts, and are
acquainted with the leading principles and facts of the
Christian religion.
“ If these young people are left to go their own way for
the next eight or ten months, there is every reason to
suppose (because the same thing has happened over and
over again with their predecessors) that they will by that
time have become vitiated and corrupted, either by being
drawn away again to their former wild habits of life or
by associating with the dregs of the population of this
city.
“ So great is the anxiety of Mr. Moorhouse to preserve
them from these contaminating influences that he has
already run the risk of sending four young couples to
Port Lincoln, in order that they may be there ready to
enter the institution whenever it shall be ready for their
reception.
“On account of these persons I think it extremely
important that no time should be lost in commencing
operations. They will, for the present, be assigned as
servants, to certain persons in and about Port Lincoln.
But experience has too often proved that, however kind
and well-disposed settlers may be towards the natives,
they will not take the pains with them, nor exercise thcit
degree of vigilance and care which is necessary to prevent
their falling back from those good habits which they
may have acquired at the school. Their instruction is,
at any rate, quite certain to be neglected.
“ But there exist even stronger reasons why they should


not be left in the position above described. For natives
of Port Lincoln to return overland from to
that settlement has become a very common practice;
and, inasmuch as the Adelaide natives in question will
have frequent opportunities of seeing and conversing
with those who have already performed the overland
journey, there is great reason to apprehend that they
may be induced to attempt to return to their homes.
“ Now any attempt of this kind, successful or unsuc-
cessful, would be extremely prejudicial to the prospects
of the contemplated institution, on account of the feeling
which it would give rise to amongst the Adelaide
natives. _
“ The original scheme might be modified in a very
easy and simple manner by merely leaving out, for the
present, the juvenile department. There are five couples
of our Adelaide natives already at Port Lincoln. Mr.
Moorhouse might take measures for pairing off a few more
couples of the young people now leaving the school; and
our operations for the next few months might be confined
to these married couples.
“A grant of £2OO and rations for a definite number of
such couples for twelve months (the number to be fixed by
your Excellency, after conference with Mr. Moorhouse)
would enable us at once to commence operations upon
this scale.
“It would be unjust to the Colonists to omit tomention
to your Excellency the many circumstances which have
occurred to encourage me to press forward in this enter-
prise. I beg, first and foremost, to state that there are
two persons, whom I believe to be most_ single-minded
and devoted in their purpose, who are willing to go to
work with me at any moment as coadjutors. Mr. Henry
Minchin, as schoolmaster, and Mr. John Martin, as
superintendent of out-door works. The latter person is,
I think, exactly the man for the situation—an experienced
labourer, fencer, and sawyer, of 45 years of age. They
both desire to devote themselves to the work from motives
of piety, and because they lament and mourn over the
miseries of the unhappy blacks.
“ I would next state that I find that there exists a degree
of interest in this scheme amongst the quiet, retiring portion
of our Colonists, which is generally much underrated. Ithere-


fore anticipate considerable support from private sources,
ur'r the amount of assistance above specified from
public funds, I have no doubt of being able to carry on
matters to the satisfaction of the Government until your
Excellency receives the answer to your despatch of
July iath. r
“ I remain, &c.,
“ Matthew B. Hale.”
Note, 1889.—The answer to the said despatch of
July 12th, 1850, was not received in Adelaide until the end
of November, 1851. This will show how extremely im-
portant it was to my undertaking to have to deal with a
Governor like Sir Henry Young, who gave me his hearty
support and was not afraid to act upon his own responsi-
bility when he saw that it was needful to do so. The
Institution was fourteen months old when Sir Henry
received the reply to his first request to the Home Govern-
ment to be permitted to establish it:
“From Sir Henry Young to Archdeacon Hale.
“ 24 th August, 1850.
“ Dear Archdeacon,
“ 1 have the pleasure of informing you that the modified
Proposal contained in your letter of the 17th is approved.
You wil! earn from Captain Sturt, or the Auditor-General,
the Gra t t ° n, ’ t^e rmS t 0 ' 3e gone though for obtaining
“ Yours sincerely,
“ H. E. F. Young.”
Haymg thus obtained the sanction of his Excellency
the Governor, I was able to prepare for work without
delay ; _ My next step was to put forth a prospectus
explaining, for the information of the colonists, what I
proposed to do, and the principles of action by which I
hoped to be guided in my proceedings. The said pros-
pectus was put forth as a letter addressed to the Editor of
1 he south Australian Register,
It was as follows :


PROSPECTUS
OF AN INSTITUTION ABOUT TO BE FORMED AT PORT LINCOLN
FOR THE RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION AND MORAL
TRAINING OF ABORIGINAL NATIVES.
[From the South Australian Register , August 28th, 1850.]
To the Editors of the 11 South Australian Register .”
“ Gentlemen —I trust you will permit me, through your
pages, to address a few words to your readers on a sub-
ject which cannot be otherwise than interesting to every
Christian mind, and which ought not to be a matter of
indifference to any inhabitant of this colony. That sub-
ject is the spiritual condition of the aboriginal natives.
My object in calling attention to it is to make a statement
with respect to an effort which is about to be made to
ameliorate the condition of certain individuals of this
unhappy race.
“ Every one, who is acquainted with the measures which
have of late years been in operation for the instruction of
aboriginal children in the neighbourhood of this city, must
have this conviction, that further means —over and above
those at present in use —are required in order to accomplish
anything permanently beneficial.
“ The whole means at present employed consist of schools
for the children of either sex. They are only schools—the
machinery is not calculated or adapted to accomplish more
than would be accomplished by schools in any other
place under similar circumstances. The case is pretty
much the same as that of Ragged Schools in any of the
large cities of England: children are collected to receive
instruction from dark alleys and filthy courts, from the
daily companionship of relations and associates of the
lowest grade of society. If no efficient measures were
taken to separate the scholars from such associates —if no
means were employed to give those scholars, if they
should wish it, a reasonable opportunity of carrying out
Christian practices in their daily life—who would expect
any other result from the Ragged School than that the
scholars therein taught should go forth from it, sharpened
in intellect indeed, more apt for every deed of mischief;
but still rogues, thieves, pickpockets, as their parents and
associates had been before them.


. “ point which I wish to illustrate must be suffi-
ciently obvious. Every reflecting person must see that
something must be added to the schools, as at present con-
stituted, before we can entertain any hope of their being
permanently useful to the natives.
Three distinct sets of children have now been in-
structed in that school since its foundation, and have gone
forth again upon the world. Their position, upon leaving
the school, becomes at once one of banishment from the
sound of the Gospel of Christ. Their habits are such as
t°. prevent the employment of any agency to keep them in
mind of that Supreme Being whose name they have been
taught to call upon. They are without pastoral superin-
tendence, without the means of grace, without refuge or
protection from the contaminations of vice which surround
them on every side. The school has not been without
instances of youths who have given the plainest indica-
tions of being under strong religious impressions ; but what
youthful piety unless indeed sustained by a miracle of
grace—could stand against the torrent of vice which must
assail the poor young native who goes forth amongst the
manifold temptations of this place.
“I now proceed to the statement which I wish to lay
before your readers, viz., that an attempt is about to be
made to supply the grand desideratum, in Order to turn to
better account those means which are at present in use.
An institution is about to be formed, where those natives
who have been brought up at the Adelaide School, and
others who may seem fit subjects for admission into it,
may be gathered together in one little community apart
from the vicious portion of the white population and the
wild portion of the Macks, where they may be kept under
regular Christian instruction, and enjoy the means of
grace where the attempt may be made to lead them by
degrees into habits of industry and a more settled mode of
life.
“ And here, if space would permit, I should be tempted
answer in anticipation the objections which will be
raised by some persons against any such scheme, on the
ground of its hopelessness, and the consequent so-called
waste of time, and trouble, and money which will be
incurred. I shall, however, content myself with one single
answer. It is unphilosophical in the highest degree, it is


unreasonable, it is bigoted, to condemn any proposed
experiment as hopeless, because certain other experiments,
bearing some degree of resemblance to it, have been tried
without success. It is by trying again and again, correct-
ing each later experiment by the information derived from
former failures, that success in all difficult cases is ulti-
mately to be obtained. That success in the case before us
is possible, no one who believes the Scriptures can doubt ;
being men, it cannot be impossible that these natives should
come to the knowledge of the truth, and obtain eternal
life. There may be certain extraneous circumstances
acting upon them which may render them, humanly speak-
ing, incapable, for the time being, of receiving Divine
knowledge; but to say that the individual men, women,
and children, of any given race are absolutely and essentially
incapable of attaining to everlasting life, would be a posi-
tion which I trust no one would venture to advance. If,
then, there is a way of guiding these benighted beings into
the paths of eternal happiness, how shall we dare to stay
our efforts, or say that we are weary of the work, until we
shall have exhausted every means which God shall put it
into our power to attempt ?
“ Here, again, it would be well pleasing to me to enlarge
upon the great motives to missionary exertion which
should prompt the inhabitants of this colony' to assist, to
the utmost of their power, in carrying out this good work.
We might many of us, with much advantage to ourselves,
indulge in such reflections as these —that although we may
have, in our own minds and in a very easy and summary
manner, settled all questions relating to the occupation of
this country by the right of conquest —these questions
have hereafter to be tried again before a much higher and
more impartial tribunal than any earthly judgment seat.
The Anglo-Saxon race are deriving countless wealth from
the sunny hills and dales of South Australia, we have
acquired here a noble country, destined, perhaps, to sustain
its millions of population in prosperity and power. Here-
after we shall have to give an account of the return which
has been made to the original proprietors of this territory ?
What have we bestowed upon them as a recompense for
the wrongs, the privations, the miseries, which they have
suffered through our intrusion ?
“ But it is time that I should now confine myself to the


particulars of the scheme which is proposed at the present
time. It has already been stated, in the heading of this
paper, that Port Lincoln has been selected as the locality
for the intended Institution. Our natives, from this part
of the colony, will be there removed from the influences
which the elders of their own tribes at present exercise
over them ; and it is known from experience that natives
who have been brought up as strangers to each other are
by no means forward to associate together in the wild state.
There is therefore scarcely any reason to fear that our
people will ever wish to forsake the Institution with a view
to join the Port Lincoln natives in their bush life. It is
hoped also that they may be prevented from making any
attempt to return to this part of the colony overland ; the
fear which they have of the Port Lincoln natives on
account of their wilder and more daring character will go
far in deterring them from making this experiment. But
unwearied endeavour will be to engender in their
minds a feeling of real attachment towards the Institution
as their home ; we shall give to the married couples their
own hut, their own plot of ground, their regular, though
hght and easy daily employment, we shall contrive variety
and change in their occupations, and add a due admixture
of relaxation and amusement; and, above all, we shall
strive to make them feel the value of a settled mode of
life as affording them the means of religious instruction,
and of enabling them to attend to those things which con-
cern their everlasting welfare.
‘‘With respect to the willingness of the young natives to
go from Adelaide to Port Lincoln, this point has already
been ascertained. Five young couples have actually gone
to that settlement, where for the present they are cared for
and employed by certain settlers in that district. There
are several more still about Adelaide who are quite willing
to follow the example thus set them.
“ In the first instance these young married couples only
will.be admitted to the Institution. Schools for the children
of either sex will next be added, so soon as our means and
other opportunities enable us to adopt this measure.
“We next come to the question of the support of the
Institution. _ It is to be carried on by means of funds con-
jointly furnished by the Colonial Government and by
voluntary contributions, administered through the Church


of England. The latter for her part will find, pay, and
support the living agency, i.e., the Missionary Superin-
tendent, and all other Europeans employed in conducting
the affairs of the Institution. I make bold to undertake
for her that she will never do less than this. I shall hope
and trust that she will do more. I more especially trust
that she will do more at our first commencement ; that we
may be enabled to make a good beginning, and have no
unnecessary difficulties to contend with.
“ The Government aid at present granted amounts to
the sum of fizoo for the erection of the necessary huts, and
the promise to maintain a limited number of married
couples for a period of twelve months. In the mean time,
his Excellency the Governor is in correspondence with the
Home Government on the subject ; and there can be
scarcely the shadow of a doubt but that, if the scheme
proves itself to be worthy of support, assistance will here-
after be given to a much larger extent. But while this in-
creased assistance is as yet only in prospect, we trust that
the measure will be cordially and liberally supported by
the inhabitants of this colony. With to expend upon
the erection of huts, the purchase of tools, implements, the
necessary articles of simple furniture, and the various
other needful appliances, we can make a beginning, it is
true, but what sort of a beginning it would be,' I will leave
each person to judge for himself. But, no ! I will not
believe that the colonists of South Australia will permit
that the first expenditure in such a cause should be limited
to this sum.
“ Our first care, however, must be to see our living
agency provided for by means of voluntary contributions.
The unworthy individual whose name is attached to this
paper, has the honour of being appointed to the superin-
tendence of this enterprise; he asks nothing of the
colonists for himself —but he does ask a provision for those
true-hearted men who have pressed forward to join him in
the work, who are ready to go to it without fee or reward ;
and are determined, “ having food and raiment, to be
therewith content.” But “ the labourer is worthy of his
hire and, however well it may become them to set forward
thus in this labour of love, it would ill-become us to permit
them to remain unrequited as to worldly goods, and without
that compensation to which they will be so justly entitled.


“ These men are Mr. Henry Minchin, assistant religious
instructor and schoolmaster; and Mr. John Martin,
assistant schoolmaster and superintendent of out-door
works. One other person it will be highly advisable to
add to the establishment, viz., some Christian-minded
female, rather advanced in life, who would teach and
superintend the female natives, and instruct them in the
performance of their domestic duties. If we fail in finding
either the person suited to this position, or the means of
securing her services, it will be necessary to authorise one
of the native women to perform these duties so far as she
may be able to do so. I trust we may have it in our power
to make an arrangement less unsatisfactory than this
would be.
“ One word more, gentlemen, and I bring this lengthy
letter to an end. I have now only to entreat, to implore,
that the prayers and intercessions of those who address
themselves to the Throne of Grace may be earnestly
offered up in behalf of myself and those who will be
associated with me in this arduous undertaking. We
desire to go forth to our work with a single eye to the
glory of our common Saviour, striving, after His example,
‘to seek and to save that which was lost.’ To all our
Christian-minded friends, who love such works of piety, we
reiterate again and again —pray for us that ’ this one work
may prosper in our hands.
“ I am, Gentlemen,
“ Your obedient servant,
“ Matthew B. Hale,
“ Archdeacon of Adelaide.
“ Adelaide, August 26 th, 1850.”
As soon as possible after this we proceeded with our
work, and, a few months later, having been asked to give
some account of our doings for publication in a little
local periodical, I give the following extracts; —
“ On the 10th September we set up our tent upon Boston
Island—an island of great beauty and many attractions,
forming the shelter to the far-famed harbour of Port Lincoln.
It will readily be understood, from the remarks which I
have made above, that our object in choosing that locality
was principally seclusion —that we might be cut off from
the society of blacks living in a wild state, and protected


from the unwelcome intrusions of evil-minded persons
amongst the whites. These advantages we set against
the formidable disadvantage that no permanent fresh water
had, as yet, been discovered upon the island. We thought
that we should be in a position to make a closer search
for this necessary element than had ever been made before
we trusted much to the acknowledged natural sagacity
of the natives in such cases—we determined to persevere
in making well after well, so long as a hope remained
of our obtaining the object of our search. However,
all our expectations —all our efforts proved fruitless. Salt
water ! Salt water ! was the oft-told tale of every well that
was sunk. So prevalent is salt in the composition of the
soil, above as well as below, that even the rain-water as it
trickles down the sides of the hills, when but newly fallen
from the clouds, tastes almost like the briny sea itself.
Our wants in the mean time had been mainly supplied
from a fine natural reservoir in a rock, where pure water to
the amount of about 150 gallons is deposited by every
moderate shower of rain ; and which we duly and carefully
stowed away in casks for our daily use. But the angry ocean
deprived us of even this resource. High and secure as our
reservoir appeared upon ordinary occasions, the foaming
billows beat up into it, on the occurrence of a storm, and
showed us that even this resource might at any time
fail us in the hour of greatest need.
“ I need scarcely add that after this we abandoned the
island. But the beauty of its scenery —the romantic
wildness of its hills—the state of seclusion in which we had
lived, and the primitive habits of life to which we had
conformed during our sojourn of one short month upon its
shores, made us all feel some measure of attachment
towards it ; and I believe scarcely one of our party,
whether white or black, quitted it without some feelings of
regret.
“We had been, of course, thrown entirely upon our own
resources as to our habitations, and a round or bell tent,
which was kindly lent to us by the Surveyor-General,
served for a shelter for our stores and such other things as
most required protection from the weather, as well as for a
sleeping apartment for the females of our little party.
With respect to ourselves, the men (both white and black),
the particulars of our sleeping apartment are soon given; an


ample fire to counteract the keenness of the night air,—
some closely wattled branches to defend us from the wind,
and the glorious canopy of heaven for a roof over our heads
—thus did we pass the first nights of our residence upon
Boston Island.
“ Our exertions by day were of course directed to the
formation of a hut. The materials which presented them,
selves were long gum poles of a kind which I do not
remember to have seen anywhere else in the colony—they
are of all lengths up to 16 or 17 feet, the longest being five or
six inches in diameter at the larger end. The character of
this material seemed plainy to indicate to us that our
intended habitation would be most conveniently erected
in the shape of a hut. A small shrub, apparently a
species of broom, formed an excellent material for thatching
the same. Accordingly in due time, Mr. Rayner being the
director of the operations, a very commodious habitation
was the result of our labours ; the dimensions being 32 feet
in length by 12 in width. Having accomplished this object
in order to secure to ourselves some degree of comfort in
the event of unsettled weather, we next directed our
attention to an active and energetic search for permanent
fresh water—of the result of these labours I have already
informed you.”
When I found, as above explained, that our position on
Boston Island, was absolutely untenable, I wrote another
letter to the Governor, explaining all the circumstances of
the case, and praying for the sanction of the Government
to our removal to the main land. After most careful
consideration, I had come to the conclusion that a
locality about ten miles, by land, from Port Lincoln, was
I considered, admirably suited to our purpose. And the
following extracts from my letter will explain the nature
of the petition which I then made.
Our party at this period was composed of thirteen
persons—five native couples (one couple having joined
us on the island) Mr. Minchin, Mr. Raynor, and my-
self. Under what circumstances Mr. Rayner took the
place of Mr. John Martin, previously mentioned, I do not
at all remember. Mr. Rayner was quite an elderly man ■
but still strong and active, and handy at work of all
kinds; but, unfortunately, he had a temper, and he did


not remain with us long. The following are the extracts
referred to: —
“ The Tod opens into South Bay in Spencer’s Gulf about
nine miles by sea, from Port Lincoln. There are on and
about it thirty-five sections of surveyed land. These sec-
tions cannot be said to be in much request amongst
settlers, inasmuch as, although they have been surveyed
and laid out for eight years, only two of them have ever
been purchased. The proprietor of one lives in England,
and the other in Adelaide. Neither of them have ever
derived a fraction of profit from the sections. My peti-
tion, therefore, to your Excellency is that the remaining
thirty-three sections be declared Natives Reserves (three
of them, by the way, are Native Reserves already, and
means will be taken to re-purchase the two already sold),
that they be let to some responsible body (say the Society
for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts), for
the purposes of the Institution; upon the longest lease
possible at a nominal rent, so long as the Institution should
continue in a vigorous and efficient state. But if the
native inmates of the Institution should, at any time, be
so reduced in number (the exact minimum number should
be specified) as to afford sufficient evidence that the
scheme was not succeeding, it should then be. competent
for the Colonial Government to demand a real rent for
or call upon, the parties connected with the Institution to
give up the bulk of the sections, retaining at the nominal
rent a number of sections only proportionate to the
number of inmates still connected with the Institution, at
the rate of one section for every adult native and one
section for every two children.
“ I need say nothing in support of the practice of
making Native Reserves, nor of granting a section for the
benefit of one individual native (as in the case of a black
woman marrying a white man), since these practices have
already received the sanction of precedent and of the
highest authorities. I will only say that there is every
probability that the number of inmates in our Institution
will be sufficient to entitle them to ask for these sections
upon the plea that they wish to settle upon them, and how in-
finitely greater will be the probability of their deriving benefit
from them, granted in this way, than if they were granted
as isolated sections, scattered throughout the Colony.


“ I now proceed to explain how I propose to use this
land for the benefit of the natives. It forms no part of my
scheme to make them settlers on their own account in the
early stage of their training. I would work a small farm on
account of the general fund of the concern, and employ the
individual natives as labourers at fixed wages.
“ I must here explain that it is intended even from the
first, to give every man his own separate hut, with his
little garden, to be cultivated at leisure times.’’
My letter then goes on to explain the absolute necessity
for having not only the surveyed sections under the control
of the Institution, but also the small sheep run surrounding
those sections. I remark that, so long as the run is in the
hands of any person not associated with us in our under-
taking, we should be liable to the intrusion of shepherds,
hut-keepers, stockmen, and persons of this description, who
would, if they should come amongst our people, be always
in the way, and might do us incalculable mischief.
The Governor, again, in this case, heartily supported
my application, and the sections in question were declared
to be a Native Reserve. Then came the question of the
run. I know that it would be quite too much to ask that
the Government should purchase the sheep and run, and
I therefore determined to make that • purchase myself,
that is to say, 1 induced my father to advance the money
for me. Ino doubt fully explained to him how my heart
was set upon this enterprise, and I felt sure that he would
help me in the matter. I therefore drew upon him for
£1, 200, and my bills were, in due course, readily accepted
by him.
I must here explain that when a run having stock upon
it changes hands, the stock, having been absolutely the
property of the vendor, becomes absolutely the property of
the purchaser, and the purchaser takes the place of
the vendor as lessee of the run under the Govern-
ment.
The run, known as the Poonindie run, is a most interest-
ing and picturesque bit of country, on the shore of
Louth Bay in Spencer’s Gulf. The most prominent fea-
tures are the River Tod and Mount Gawler. The last-
named is a very pretty round-topped hill, rising perhaps
about 300 ft. above the sea, and is excellent feeding ground
throughout. The Tod is a very short tidal river, which ceases


running during the dry weather in summer, but in the
rainy season a large body of water is sometimes poured
down from the sides of Mount Gawler, and the river
becomes impassable at the ford. The river is at all times
deep and of considerable width as far as the tide comes up,
the banks being steep and well-defined.
It was at this part of the river, on a level, pleasant,
grassy plain, that our little village was eventually placed
and the river, with its deep water holes, for swimming and
fishing, was a never-failing source of pleasure and occupa-
tion to the natives. The one drawback was that sand-
banks, or shoals, barred the entrance from the sea, so that
the river was of no use to us as regards our intercourse
with the ships which brought our stores or took away our
produce.
I am not sure of the extent of the run, but I think it was
about twelve square miles. The important question, how-
ever, about a run is not so much—How big is it ? as—What
amount of stock will it carry ? There were 3,400 sheep upon
the run when I got it, and, with that number upon it, it was
supposed to be fully stocked. The only building upon it
near the Tod was a hut in a very dilapidated condition.
It had, in fact, been seriously damaged by fire not long
before I came into possession. (It was built of stone, with
a mud floor.) We were, therefore, under the'necessity of
putting up all our own buildings, and this, as may be sup-
posed, afforded abundant occupation for all hands for a
long time. As regards our immediate wants in the way of
shelter, after our experience on the island, we had very
little difficulty in putting up temporary huts, similar to
those which we had erected before. We therefore lost no
time in getting about the permanent huts and other
buildings for the natives and my white assistants. For
myself and family, I rented a wooden house in the little
township of Port Lincoln, until, other things having been
attended to, I could get a dwelling for myself put up. In
the meantime, I spent most of the week at Poonindie,
sleeping sometimes in one place, sometimes in another,
as the case might be. But I was always in Port Lincoln
on the Sunday, where I held services regularly for the few
Europeans who lived in the little township and the neigh-
bourhood.
Now, about the sheep and my white helpers. Sheep in


Australia are not only valuable property, but they are also
perishable property: that is to say, they are especially liable
to injury if they are not very carefully watched and guarded
by night as well as by day. I thought it would be very bad
policy to expose them to any unnecessary risks, and there-
fore I retained the services of the European shepherds for
some months, and I also engaged an overseer. The task of
putting up substantial buildings also required more skill
and knowledge than the natives possessed ; and again, the
natives were not, at first, skilled as farm labourers. So
that in one way and another, I had several white men
in my employ when we began to form our settlement.
There was, however, plenty of work to be done which could
be done by unskilled hands ; so that there was no lack of
employment for the natives. And, as will be seen as my
narrative proceeds, they themselves very soon became
skilled hands, and were able to take the place of the
Europeans both in shepherding and in the cultivation of the
soil.
My predecessor on the run—Mr. Spicer—had not
attempted cultivation of any kind; but with us it was
necessarily a matter of supreme importance that we
should grow our own grain; and I began at once to pre-
pare very energetically for the performance of this duty.
Our first operations were, as may be supposed, on a com-
paratively small scale. Our first crop was harvested at the
end of 1851, and it will be seen that we made pretty rapid
progress when I state that the crop of the end of 1855 (the
last harvested before my departure) yielded no less than 700
bushels of wheat of excellent quality,
I brought with me from Adelaide two horses and a spring
cart, and I bought a pony from Mr. Spicer. These animals
enabled us to keep up our communication with Port Lin-
coln, and the journeys between the two places were
necessarily pretty frequent. We had to procure every-
thing from that township. The post-office was there;
and there came all communications with Adelaide and
the rest of the world. But, although our light horses
enabled us to keep up this communication, heavier
animals became necessary when we began our building,
fencing, &c., &c.
It would have been of no use to begin our cultivation
until we had formed our paddocks, and protected them by


proper fences. I was getting horned cattle on the run, as
I found opportunity of buying good ones, and quiet; and
nothing but post and rail fences would be sufficient to
keep them off growing crops. These fences I had put up
by white men, working by contract.
The overseer whom I first engaged was not a satisfactory
person, and I kept him only a short time. The next
was Mr. George Wollaston, one of the sons of the
Venerable John Ramsden Wollaston, appointed first
Archdeacon of Western Australia by Bishop Short
(Western Australia having been included in the diocese of
Adelaide). Mr. G. Wollaston understood the care of
sheep and farming in all its branches, and gave me most
valuable assistance in all my outdoor operations. He did
all the ploughing the first season; the natives, of course,
giving him all the assistance he required in looking after
his teams, driving for him, &c.
Mr. Minchin’s duties detained him more upon the
premises amongst the huts. He kept school for the
natives during school hours, and at other times had to
look after those who were not engaged upon any fixed
job. He had to see that there were none of them idling
about, but that they were all doing something.
It was my duty to send regular reports to the Govern-
ment, and I did send them, sometimes more' fully, some-
times briefly. These reports were published in the
Government Gazette, and are, of course, now accessible,
if any one wishes to see them ; I find that I have pre-
served a few of them, but not many.
I must here make mention of other reports which it was
my duty to make; but which I fear I did not make except
with great irregularity, viz., reports to S.P.G. The Society
was extremely liberal to the Bishop on the first formation
of the Diocese, and indeed for many years afterwards. I
was one of its missionaries, and others of the clergy were
greatly indebted to it for its bounty. I therefore ought to
have sent in my reports with strict regularity; but, having
duties of so many kinds upon my hands, I found that
rendering my quarterly reports to the Government was as
much as I could manage. It was, in fact, a serious tax
upon my time and attention, and I fear my more lenient
master, S.P.G., was rather badly treated in the matter of
reports. From one of my reports to the Government, viz.,


that for June, 1851, I find that same periodical, which I
have already made use of, has in its issue for August of that
year made the following extracts. These extracts will
serve to show what our position was at the above-named
date, seven or eight months after we commenced opera-
tions :
“ By purchasing the sheep depasturing on the surround-
ing runs, I have acquired also the use of about 12 square
miles as run ; so that, as far as localhy is concerned, I con-
sider that our advantages are very great. We have good
(though not first-rate) agricultural land, good pasturage,
abundance of fuel, and good water.
“ The buildings at present consist of three substantial
stone huts, and nine log huts.
“ A well-manured paddock of five acres has been cleared,
fenced with a three-rail fence, and sown with oats. A por-
tion of another eighty-acre paddock is also being fenced
and ploughed. Three wells have also been dug.
“ These works have been carried on mostly by European
agency. The natives are helpers, or (as the Archdeacon
terms them) ‘ second-class labourers,’ whom they have
‘ employed in a variety of ways; and, thus employed
(says he), they have worked with considerable steadiness,
and have cheerfully performed their duties'.’
“Their wages, in ordinary cases, are 6d. per day (of five
hours), but for extra work they are paid more. These
wages, it appears, they only draw as they require cash ;
and when drawn, ‘ they never squander it, but lay it out
in clothes or articles which may be useful about their
houses.’
“ Each couple reside at present in the small log huts,
which they keep tidy, and ‘ make decided efforts to surround
themselves with the comforts of civilised life.’
“The number of natives in residence at the Institution
at the present time is fourteen; four couples ; two single
men, two single women, and two boys; 19 in all have been
sent to us from Adelaide. Of these, three have been dis-
missed and sent back to Adelaide, one out of five who have
been to Adelaide on a visit, did not return, and one has
died.’
“ The Archdeacon considers the native school in Adelaide
very desirable for first teaching our language and inculca-


ting right principles and habits, as the impressions made in
their early life will be the most durable.
“ The amount of funds in aid of the Institution have been
as follows :—Contributions in the Colony, about from
the public funds granted by his Excellency,
« The agency at present consists of Mr. H. P. Minchin,
Mr. G. Wollaston, Mr. W. Chandler, and Mrs. Smith.”
I wish here to make some explanation about the cases
of dismissal referred to in the above report. The object
which I had primarily in view (and I always tried to have
this clearly understood) was to carry on the instruction and
training of those children, or young persons, who had been
brought up in the Adelaide School. Those who, so to
speak, had been thus handled by European teachers when
they were young, had acquired, at any rate, the idea of
being under control. I may go further and say that, as a
matter of fact, they had acquired, not only the idea of
order, but habits of order and obedience.
It was my purpose to try to induce those who were put
under my care to go on training themselves in the habits
of civilised life, and all my plans would have been defeated
if I had allowed, especially in the first instance, the daily
presence amongst us of those who had not acquired even
the idea of obedience and of order. But, while I firmly
declined to receive anyone who had not been in the
Adelaide School, I was more than willing to receive back
those who had simply outgrown the school, and had left
it from no fault of their own. Some, who proved to be
amongst our very best inmates and most efficient work-
men, were young men who had been in the school, a.nd
had left it; some for a considerable time. But, having
been under the quieting, training, influence of school life
in their early years, those who had any real desire to
remain in the Institution, and were likely to be benefited
by it, soon fell again into habits of obedience and order.
I remember quite well the three persons mentioned
above as having been dismissed. Two of them were men.
They had, apparently, associated with white men of a low
class after they left the school and before they came to us.
They gave us a great deal of trouble, and did much harm
while they were with us ; and we found that matters went on
much better and more quietly after they were sent away.


Upon the third case, that of a female, I must dwell at
some length. Maria, the black girl at Government
House, was known by repute to almost every one in
Adelaide. The fact of her being an inmate of Government
House, and the further fact of the remarkable progress
which she had made towards civilization, combined to give
her this general notoriety.
The Bishop and Mrs. Short were guests of Governor
Robe for some time after our arrival, and the Bishop, writing
to a friend in England, said : —“ We have a native girl in
“the house. She has been here five years; and makes a
“ very good servant. She does our washing, and lam told
“gets up linen very well; but I have not yet seen her
“performance. If she is treated harshly, or offended, she
“ will walk off for a day or two, and then come back. And
“I am told that, when the weather is very hot, she will
“leave her clothes and throw a blanket over her shoulders
“ and go into the bush.”
I get this out of a little book published by S.P.C.K.,
■“ Annals of the Colonial Church—Diocese of Adelaide.”
Nothing is said about the date of the letter, but I am of
opinion that there is conclusive internal evidence that it
was written soon after our arrival in Adelaide, say early in
1848. As I have already implied, Maria was a person
much talked about, and many little incidents were repeated
to illustrate her advancement towards civilization, and
to show that she attached considerable importance to her
attainments. For example, it was said that some young
man once spoke to her in that jargon in which the un-
cultivated natives are usually spoken to. Whereupon
Maria drew herself up and said, “ Why do you talk to me
like that ? I can speak English as well as you can.”
Maria came to us in October, 1850, probably about two
years and a half after the writing of the Bishop’s letter.
She had,_ unhappily, in the meantime, fallen into disreput-
able habits of life. But, as she was willing to join us, I
was_ quite willing to receive her, hoping that she might
retrieve her character, and become a respectable woman.
She brought with her a little half-caste son about seven
months old ; and partly on the child’s account, and partly
on her own account, she remained at first chiefly in our
own house. But, we found after a time, that it was im-
possible to keep her. She conducted herself in such a


way that it was quite certain that she was not trying _ to
reform her own habits; and that she would, necessarily,
do much harm as an inmate of the Institution. I kept her
only about four months, and was then obliged to send her
away. She was quite willing to leave her little son, and
we were quite willing to keep him. He grew up_ to be a
young man, and was drowned in a boat-accident in Louth
Bay early in 1872.
This case of Maria, being so very widely known, became
a stock case in the mouths of all persons who wished to
throw cold water upon efforts to civilize and Christianize
the natives. “Look at the case of Maria ; think what was
done for her! Think how everyone was led to suppose
that that she was going to be a truly respectable woman.
See now what has become of her: she has taken to bad
ways, and has altogether gone wrong.” Yes, but who led
her into those bad ways ? I have the authority of Mr,
Moorhouse himsell for stating that the person who first led
her astray was the proprietor of a thriving store in one of the
best streets in Adelaide. He systematically laid siege to
the girl, gave her presents, flattered and fed her vanity, and
set her going upon her downward path. There was no
reason why anything about the natives should be unknown
to Mr. Moorhouse. From one or another of them he
he could find out anything he washed to know.'
The first death amongst the natives is referred to in this
report, and, because it is the first mentioned, and because
in the course of my narrative, many more will be mentioned,
I desire to make some remarks on the subject of native
mortality.
English readers, who know only about the rate of mor-
tality in European countries, will be startled on learning
how frequently deaths occurred amongst But every-
one who knows even a little about aboriginal races is
aware that those races which are of a low type mentally,
and who are, at the same time, weak in constitution, rapidly
die out when their country comes to be occupied by a dif-
ferent race much more vigorous, robust and pushing
than themselves. The phenomenon is explained in
many different ways, according to men’s preconceived
opinions and habits of thought. But, whatever may
be the true explanation, there can be no doubt about the
fact.


When I was making my final report to the Government
on leaving the Institution, I asked our medical attendant—■
Dr. Lawson—to state, in writing, the result of his ex-
perience. He says :
“ I have had some thirteen years’ professional experience
“ amongst the aborigines of this Colony.
“Having acted as medical attendant to the Native
“ Training Institution since its commencement in 1850,
“ and, having visited and prescribed for, I believe, every
“ case which has proved fatal, I can, with confidence, state
“ that the principal cause of death was of a pulmonary
“ character, in one form or other. The disease is very
“ common with natives (he means those in the bush):
“ only their deaths are not particularly taken notice of, or even
“ inquired into. Let the cause be as it may, once they are
“ attacked there is little or no hope of a recovery. This
“has been proved at the Poonindie Institution, where they
“ have had all the comfort and attention that could be
“ given in such cases. They are by nature too weak, I may
“ say, to stand any disease.”
This evidence is, of course, of infinitely more value than
anything which I can say. But I must repeat here some
remarks which I copy from my own printed report to the
Government: “ I fully admit that, as regards health and dura-
“ tion of life amongst our inmates, our efforts have not met
“ with that measure of success which I had hoped for and
“ expected. But whilst admitting this, I by no means admit
“ that the question of the utility of the Institution is
“ affected, except to a very limited extent, or that the duty
“of maintaining it is affected at all. Health and duration
“ of life are unquestionably great and important objects in
“ this world, and great blessings when it pleases God to
“ grant them to us. But they are not the chief objects of
“ life. So far from these being the chief objects there are,
“ undoubtedly, many other objects which it is a man’s duty
“ and also his interest to pursue, even though health and
“ duration of life be sacrificed in the pursuit.”
With reference to the constitutional weakness of the
natives I said, “In an unhealthy season, in which there
“ would be, amongst Europeans, an unusual prevalence of
“ sickness (as in influenza, &c.), but, perhaps, no unusual
“ number of deaths, the sickness amongst the natives would
“ assume a much more serious and deadly character, and


“ the number of deaths amongst them would be very
“ greatly increased.”
With reference to the rapidity with which certain tribes
die out and disappear, I said as follows (and it must be
borne in mind that this was written in an official document
to be presented to the Government, with a view to its being
printed and published for general information. I was not
likely, therefore, to hazard such a statement as this without
being very certain that it was correct): “I may, as an
“ instance, refer to the case of the tribe which formerly
“ occupied the country whereon the city of Adelaide and
“ the surrounding townships now stand. In 1836, as I
“ have been repeatedly informed by old colonists, there
“ dwelt in that country a numerous tribe. Fourteen years
“ from that time, viz., in 1850, when my acquaintance
“ with the natives commenced, that tribe was on the very
“ verge of extinction. The members of it had, in that
“ short time, become so few that, although I have received
“ from Adelaide for this Institution sixty-seven individuals,
“ six only belonged to the tribe I speak of. ... I
“ know also, from my own observation during my residence
“ here, that the process of extinction amongst the natives
“ of this district has been going on at a very rapid rate.”
In consequence of this want of stamina, or the powers of
endurance, the working hours at Poonindie were much
shorter than the usual working hours of white men. From
five to six hours a day were our usual hours. I have no
doubt, however, that, at busy times, harvest time and
shearing time, the men worked very much longer. I am
quite aware that there might have been found many picked
men capable of enduring great fatigue. In almost every
exploring expedition the party would include probably two
natives, who, in some cases, rendered most important
services during the journey, and appeared to be equal to
the white men in their powers of endurance.
I have gone into this digression on the first mention of a
death amongst our inmates, because I am afraid that the
frequent mention of death, which will be found in my
narrative, might prove a serious stumbling block to some
of my readers. My purpose is not only to mention the
deaths as they occur, but, in some cases, to dwell on them.
It is unhappily the habit of the ordinary unthinking colo-
nial man (I am speaking of white men) to look upon, and to


treat, the natives as scarcely human beings. They seem
to think that they are found in the land to be treated and
made use of merely as beasts of burden. The idea of the
possibility of these natives becoming Christians never
enters into the minds of the white men of the class I speak
of. What I want to show is that not only can they become
Christians, but they can become Christians of a very high
order measured by the true standard of Christianity. They
can receive the Truths of Christianity with that mind most
dear to our blessed Lord—the mind of the little child, with
its meekness and docility and truthfulness, and they can
go on growing in grace, responding in their lives to the
exhortation set before the Christians at Rome, “rejoicing
“ in hope, patient in tribulation, continuing constant in
“ prayer.”
In making this digression, I have anticipated somewhat
in time ; but we are still engagd with the events of 1851.
We had only the one death in that year; and the move-
ment amongst the natives in favour of Christianity had
not yet commenced.
Early in the year some of our leading men went to
Adelaide for an outing. They had been scholars in one
of the Church Sunday Schools in Adelaide, and by this
and other means they had many friends and acquaintances.
There were also many other friends of the Institution who
were glad to see them. First and foremost amongst those
friends were the Bishop and Mrs. Short, who were always
most kind and hospitable to them. Such visits to the
chief city did good to the men themselves, and they did
good also to the Institution.
It was by means of such visits that we got back many
of those, of whom I have already spoken, who had left the
school and had gone elsewhere. The news quickly spread
that some Poonindie boys (they were always spoken of as
boys) were in Adelaide, well dressed, and made much of
by the white people, and that they liked Poonindie, and
were going back. Old schoolmates came in to see them ;
and, as I have just said, several were thus restored to
civilization who had wandered away. The white friends had
nothing but what was good to say of the conduct and man-
ners of their black visitors; and the latter returned to their
homes and to their work at the appointed time, bringing
with them sometimes one, sometimes two or three recruits.


Amongst the many duties which engaged our attention
when we first took possession of our run was the duty of
tracing and marking the boundaries thereof. Mr. Spicer
and the white shepherds had, no doubt, a general know-
ledge of the boundaries such as answered their purposes.
But,- for various reasons, it was absolutely necessary that
we should have those boundaries distinctly marked. And
this could be done only by a professional surveyor. The
person who rendered this service to us was John
Macdougal Stuart, afterwards known to fame as the able
and daring explorer who crossed the Australian Continent
from South to North, and planted the Union Jack on the
sea shore on the northern coast. The track which he laid
down in the chart became, a few years afterwards, the tele-
graph line from Adelaide to Port Darwin.
The affairs of the Institution, negotiations with the
Government, See., &c., made it necessary for me to go to
Adelaide from time to time. Moreover, I could not rightly
separate myself altogether from diocesan affairs. I, there-
fore, paid two or three visits to our chief city in the
course of 1851. The distance was about 200 miles
by sea, and our passenger vessel was a small schooner
of about 30 tons. If the wind and weather happened to
be fair the passage either way was not so bad. Some-
times we had anything but fair weather, and then the
knocking about in the little craft was miserable enough.
Sometimes the wind would blow persistently for several
days from one quarter ; and when the persistent wind
blew from an unfavourable quarter a start would be post-
poned from day to day in the most trying manner,
intending passengers being obliged to remain in the
township, or run'the risk of losing the passage.
I was detained in Adelaide in this way in the month of
September in this year. A neighbour who lived near to
Poonindie, and, with whom I was very intimate, Mr.
William Peter, was detained in the same way. (He
has been now, for many years, a prosperous settler in
New Zealand, and a member of the Upper House of the
Legislature.) He became very impatient in consequence
of the delay and the great waste of time. At last he
could stand it no longer, and determined to go overland
round the head of Spencer’s Gulf; and I agreed to go
with him. I had to furnish myself with everything for


the journey—horse, saddle and bridle, tether rope and
hobbles, saddle bags, &c., &c. However, we soon made
our preparations, and started on the nth of September.
I find the following entry made in my diary at Port
Lincoln in the same year, under date July 23rd, making
mention of the same journey made by four police troopers.
When I made the entry I little thought that I should so
soon make the journey myself.
“ July 23rd ; —This evening arrived the four policemen,
“ who left Adelaide June 25th, to travel overland round the
“head of the gulf. They were thus twenty-seven days on
“ their journey. At one period of their journey, something
“ north of Franklin Harbour, they suffered much through
“ the want of water. Their provisions also ran short, as
“ they started with only ten day’s rations.”
They would not have to use their own rations at the
beginning of the journey, as they would make police stations
at night.
“ Mr. Dashwood expected that they would accomplish
“the journey in fourteen days, which I told him I was con-
“ fident they would not do. People who know the route
“ consider that Mr. Eyre performed a feat in getting round
“in 1842 in seventeen days.”
From the nth of September to the 21st we were travel-
ling through settled country, within the colony of South
Australia, on the eastern side of the Gulf. We stayed
every night at stations, and were most hospitably enter-
tained. On the 21st we took leave of inhabited country,
and from that day to the 28th, we had to depend upon the
scanty stock of provisions which we were able to carry on
our one pack horse. At that time no human habitation
existed down the whole western side of the Gulf; and until
we reached Port Lincoln District, we did not see a single
human being, either white or black. The want of water
for our horses was the great difficulty. We could carry a
little for ourselves, but the horses could get a drink only
when we came to some scanty spring or puddle of rain
water in a hole in a rock or a clay-pan. Upon one occa-
sion, apparently about the same part of the journey as that
in which the four policemen suffered, we were forty hours
without water for the horses, and they had to travel fifty-five
miles during that time.
We were accompanied by a man who had been in the


police, but had left the force. He generally lead the pack
horse. But our path-finder was Mr. Peter, who had in a
very remarkable degree, the valuable faculty of never being
at a loss about his whereabouts in the bush. lam told that
there have now, for many years, been thriving sheep stations
all down the west side of Spencer’s Gulf.
As my readers will have supposed the schooner, for whose
departure we had waited in Adelaide, arrived at Port
Lincoln before us. But we had had a most interesting
journey. I was, in colonial phrase, almost a “newchum”
in the Colony, having been out not quite three years, and
the novelty of the thing charmed me greatly. I had really
enjoyed the journey ; and I have always looked back upon it
with great satisfaction, as one of the marked events of my life
. , B y th is time (the end of September), Mr. Wollaston, con-
sidering the many things which had to be attended to had
made good progress with the cultivation. He had ploughed
and sown about eleven or twelve acres. But the crops
this first season, were, I think, all cut for hay. I think no
com was grown until the season of 1852.
Our sheep shearing began on the Bth of October and
was finished on the 28th. Eleven bales of wool were'sent
away on the 16th, but I find no record of the number of
bales which were sent away altogether. And I cannot
say positively whether any of the natives took part in the
actual shearing. But as I certainly intended that they
should be shearers, I think it highly improbable that I
should have let the opportunity pass by without setting
some ot them on to learn. &
During the month of November our operations suffered
some hindrance in consequence of a Mr. Playes having
induced the Government to send me a requisition to assist
him in making some experiments in charcoal burning
Mr. Hayes arrived November 6th, with his apparatus'
which was a large retort. I have no memo, of its size but’
so far as I remember, it was about 6 or 7 feet in length’
and nearly, or quite, 3 feet in diameter. This had to be
mounted upon masonry in such a way that a large fire
might be kept burning underneath.
A mason was hired to do the stone work, but the labour
connected with the operation was considerable, and our
teams and men were in this way occupied for several days.
The retort had to be got up from the beach; the stone for


the building had to be carted to the place selected for the
experiments ; much wood had to be cut and carted, some
for consumption in the retort, and some for the fire under-
neath. The operation was to answer two purposes: the
extraction of a liquid from the wood within the retort, and
the reduction of the wood itself to charcoal. We began at
once to make preparations, and on the nth we had got the
retort and other parts of the apparatus to the scene of
operations. On the 18th the first charge was drawn and
it was not a success. The wood in the retort was not
properly burned, so another charge was drawn the next
day, and the note in my diary is that the wood was
properly burned, but that the burning had taken 18 or ig
hours ; a much longer time than Mr. Hayes had led us to
expect. He seemed to attach considerable importance to
the liquid extracted; but I have no note about it, and I
do not remember what became of it.
I now told Mr. Hayes that, having by means of our
labour given him a fair opportunity of trying his experi-
ment, I must leave him to take his own course ; but that
we must put our own men to our own work. He felt much
aggrieved, and appealed to the Government. But I
pointed out to him that his demand that we should leave
our own urgent work in order to please him was most un-
reasonable. What representations he made to the Govern-
ment I don’t know ; but he entirely failed to show that
his experiments, even if they had answered his expecta-
tions, would have been of any service to anyone. There
was no market for the charcoal. A blacksmith living
about five miles off took some of it, but he attached no im-
portance to it. It would answer his purpose better to burn
his own charcoal nearer home. Mr. Hayes could have
hired other men to continue his operations if he had chosen
to do so. But he did nothing more.
After this, Mr. Wollaston and some of the natives took
a trip to Adelaide. They left November 20th, and returned
December 6th, bringing more recruits with them.
At the end of December I had occasion to go to Adelaide
myself, and upon this occasion our voyage caused, at one
time, very considerable anxiety. In fact, we were in great
danger. During a heavy squall, just when we were passing
the Althorpe Islands, the light in the binnacle was blown
out. The man at the helm (the captain) could not see the


compass, and, of course, could not tell how the little craft
was heading, or what she was doing. The wind continued
to blow hard, and the captain seemed to us to be a long time
fumbling with his lamp before he could secure it properly,
and keep it alight. We were very thankful, however, that
he made it all right at last, and we pursued our course.
The last illness and death of Takan-arro, which I am
now about to describe, had a most important bearing upon
my proceedings. Not my own mind only, but many minds
were deeply stirred by this event. It had a great effect
upon the minds of the natives in the school, and gave a
great impetus to the desire to go to Poonindie. I had desired
to be cautious in my admissions to the Institution ; but I
now consented to receive several new candidates, and I took
them with me on my return.
Before I proceed with the story of Takan-arro, I must
say something about Mr. Moorhouse and Mr. Ross. I
have already mentioned Mr. Moorhouse as the Protector of
Aborigines, appointed by the Government. He was a fully
qualified medical practitioner, and had had, in that
capacity, much experience amongst the natives. The
interest which he took in Takan-arro’s spiritual state, shows
him to have been a truly good man. This he certainly was,
and the assistance wdiich he gave to me at all times was of
the greatest importance to me. His house was very near
to the Native School. Mr. Ross was the schoolmaster, also
a truly good man —and there can be no doubt but that his
teaching was the means chiefly employed by God to bring
Takan-arro to that blessed state of mind in which I found
him. It gives me pleasure to testify to the immense advan-
tage which it was to me, in dealing with those who had been
at the school, that they had had, in their early years, such
a good and godly instructor as Mr. Ross.
SOME ACCOUNT OF THE LAST ILLNESS AND
DEATH OF TAKAN-ARRO,
A CHRISTIAN ABORIGINAL NATIVE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
[The following extract is taken from the Diary of the Venerable
Matthew B. Hale, M.A., Archdeacon of Adelaide, and Missionary
Superintendent of the Native Training Institution at Port Lincoln.
For an account of the Institution, see Annals of the Diocese of
Adelaide , page 59.]
Tuesday, December 30 th, 1851. —When visiting the Natives’
School at Adelaide, this day, Mr. Ross told me that one of


the lads was very ill, that, in fact, he was not expected to
recover. He said he was one of their best boys; and,
when he mentioned his name, Takan-arro, I at once
remembered him as being one of the candidates for ad-
mission into our Institution, and also as one of the
most promising of the native boys attending the Sunday-
school of St. John’s. Mr. Ross told me that during the
first part of his illness he had been at Mr. Moorhouse’s
residence, and that he (Mr. M.) had been much gratified by
the indications which he had given of seriousness of mind
and hopes of a better world. When I saw Mr. Moor-
house, he also told me, that in the early stage of his illness,
when not so weak as at present, he had been very diligent
in reading the New Testament, for which part of the Bible
he expressed his preference, because it told him about
Jesus Christ. Mr. Moorhouse had more than once heard
him praying earnestly when by himself, and for this pur-
pose he would even raise himself up in his bed during the
night. He had also requested to have read to him a
particular chapter, the hearing of which gave him special
pleasure, viz., i John iii. beginning “ Behold what manner
of love.” The expectations and hopes which I had formed
respecting him were fully realised when I had the happi-
ness of hearing him speak for himself. His expressions with
regard to the forgiveness of his sins and his trust in Jesus
Christ, were most gratifying and satisfactory. He was
very importunate to be taken with me to Port Lincoln ; nor
could I, for some time, make him desist from his entreaties,
which he urged even with tears. I reminded him again
and again of his extreme weakness, and the impossibility of
his being removed : but he still kept on, “I want to go
with you ; you stay two or three days.” Then he said,
“ All my boys gone away to Port Lincoln—Tartuan and
Mudlong and Kadling-arro and Kandwillan ; I want to see
my boys.” Then I reminded him that he had better pray
to God to forgive him his sins and make him a good boy,
and take him to a better place ; and that I hoped those
boys would do the same and be good ; and then they would
all meet again and would never be parted any more, nor
have sickness nor pain. I promised moreover, that if it
should please God to make him well again he should go to
Port Lincoln. I asked him about his prayers—if he prayed
much, and he said he used to pray more when he was at


Mr. Moorhouse’s, but now he was so weak. When I prayed
with him he joined very fervently in the prayers, and
repeated the petitions of the Lord’s Prayer and other
petitions after me with great earnestness. After remaining
with him for some time, I went into Mr. Moorhouse’s
office. Whilst I was there Mr. Ross came to me and said
that Takan-arro wanted to see me again to pray with him.
His particular object in sending for me was, that I might
repeat with him the general Confession ; as that being
familiar to his mind, he could follow me more readily. I
did so accordingly, and he repeated it after me in the
most solemn and fervent manner. I had now further
conversation with him, and became more and more
satisfied as to the reality and depth of his religious feel-
ings, and the question came forcibly home to me—What
doth hinder him from being baptised ? I therefore went
again to Mr. Moorhouse, to ascertain from him what he
really thought of the probability of life being continued
to him for any length of time. Mr. M. said he had no
hope of his recovery; that he might live a few days, or
he might go off suddenly —even that very night. I then
deemed it right to baptize him without delay. I re-
capitulated to him, in a few plain words, the nature and
intent of that Holy Sacrament ; and he expressed his
desire to receive it. Mr, Ross then came in, as did
also one of our own Institution boys, now visiting
Adelaide—Pitpanure—and, with great joy, I admitted
this child of the desert into the communion and fellow-
ship of the saints. When I once more took leave of
him and was going out, followed by Pitpanure, he called
after the latter, and said, “ I want him stay pray with
me.” Pitpanure readily consented to remain, and seemed
much impressed at the whole scene. In the course of
many years of close and constant attendance at the bed-
side of the sick and dying, seldom have I been more
affected, and, I may also say ? more edified, than I was
this day by the bedside of this poor native.
Wednesday, December 31 st. —This morning I found him
less languid and apparently better. He spoke in the same
edifying manner as before. I asked him if he had been
able to pray ; and he said that he had awoke in “ the dark
time,” and had called Pitpanure -and asked him to pray
with him. His answers, with respect to his desire for for-


giveness, his trust in Jesus Christ, and his hopes of heaven,
were given in the same ready and satisfactory manner as be-
fore ; and he followed me most fervently when praying. He
seemed more at ease and peaceful than yesterday, and I
asked him if he was happy. He said—Yes, he was happy.
Pitpanure is most constant and tender in waiting upon
him. I asked him how he had slept, and if he was com-
fortable ; and he described to me how Pitpanure had got
up and arranged his bed and made it softer for him.
I saw him three or four times in the course of the day.
His Sunday School teacher also came to see him and talked
with him.
Thursday, January ist, 1852. —Having been occupied out
of town this morning, it was about one o’clock when I
arrived at the Native School. Mr. Ross told me that
Takan-arro was not so well, and was then asleep; that he
had asked repeatedly for me. I was unwilling to disturb
him from his sleep, and w r ent away, saying I would return
to see him. When I returned it was about four o’clock.
Mr. Ross said he had not been at all pleased that I had
gone away without w'aking him. When I talked to him,
his expressions as to the state of his mind -were, to the full,
as satisfactory and pleasing as upon the previous days.
He said he had not been able to pray, so well because he
had been so weak. When I led him in prayer he joined as
earnestly and fervently as before. I again read the general
Confession for this purpose, for the reasons before given,
offering up also other short and plain petitions, such as he
could well appreciate. As I directed his mind to profitable
contemplations, he spoke with considerable freedom and
intelligence, and manifested the greatest earnestness and at-
tention. For instance, the lads at the school had been more
away from him to-day than on the previous days, and he
expressed a feeling of loneliness. I then reminded him of
the condition of the Saviour when in the hands of his
enemies, how r “all His disciples forsook Him and fled; ”
and again, how the three had slept in the garden instead
of watching with Him whilst He prayed. He perfectly
entered into the application of these lessons, and repeated
some of the disciples’ names and mentioned the part they
had taken in these transactions. Again, on speaking to
him about sorrow for sin, I asked him to recollect some-
thing particular which he had done wrong and for which


he was now sorry. Then he said, after a little pause, “ I
remember, a long time ago, when some other boys tempted
me and I went with them into a garden and took some
melons ; ” and then he added two or three times, with great
earnestness, “ but I won’t do it again—l won’t doit again.”
He was extremely unwilling for me to leave him ; and,
more than once, when I had risen from my seat, he would
have me sit down again, saying, “ You are not going away
yet.” He was very particular in getting my promise to
visit him again on the morrow.
Friday , January 2nd. —When I went in to see him to-day,
I found the Bishop [of Adelaide] with him. He was sitting
up, and appeared better than yesterday—much less weak
and languid. The Bishop, when I went in, was recalling
to his mind the chief passages of Scripture which speak of
the second coming of Christ; and the glorified form which
will be worn upon that occasion by Himself and His
people ; and thence referring to the Transfiguration on the
Mount. His answers and manner were such as to show
that his mind was fully alive to all that was being said, and
he listened with the greatest interest and attention. The
Bishop afterwards expressed to me his surprise, as well as
his extreme pleasure and gratification, in having witnessed
the degree of intellingence which he displayed, and the
earnest manner in which he entered into thejsubject. Mr.
Moorhouse, who was also present, told me, that before I
arrived, he had been saying that he believed if he should
die he should go to heaven, where Jesus Christ is, and that
he should be happy there. Upon this occasion, also, Mr.
Moorhouse remarked upon the vivacity of mind which he
habitually exhibited in reference to spiritual things; that
his attention is always alive to these matters —that, when-
ever you go to him, you find that these are the subjects
uppermost in his thoughts—and that he always takes
pleasure in hearing about them. This testimony from Mr.
Moorhouse as to this point is very important, because, being
near at hand, he is in and out with him more frequently
than I am. I found him quite full of these subjects when
I began to talk to him : he had the Testament on one side
of him on the bench, and the Book of Common Prayer on
the other side ; in each of these books he had marked a
passage which had especially arrested his attention whilst
reading by himself, and which he wished to point out to


me. In the Testament he had marked i John v., and in
the Prayer Book, the Gospel for the Fourth Sunday in
Lent, viz., part of John vi. In conversation he showed
himself even more to advantage than on the previous days ;
partly, no doubt, in consequence of his feeling stronger and
better bodily. He talked and answered questions put to
him with great earnestness and intelligence. He told me
that Pitpanure and he had again got up in the night to
pray ; and that they had also prayed together this morning.
He said that he felt that whatever God should see fit to do
with him would be good; whether to take him to a better
place, or to return him to health and continue his life in
this world. He felt that he was quite satisfied te leave the
matter entirely in God’s hands.
Saturday, January 3 rd. —To-day he appeared much weaker
again, and his mind and intellectual powers seemed to par-
ticipate in this want of energy and tone. Mr. Moorhouse
considers him much weaker than yesterday. As regards
his spiritual state, praised be God, I can affirm that every
time I see him I am more and more satisfied as to his concern
about the one thing needful, and that he has a deep and heart-
felt desire to be a true and faithful follower of the Lord Jesus.
Sunday, January yth. —When I visited him to-day he ap-
peared rather more lively again than he had been yesterday.
Mr. Moorhouse, however, does not think’at all more favour-
ably of him, as to the probability of his recovery. I asked
him if anything particularly occurred to him which he
wished me to read from the Scripture, and he said, “ About
Christ upon the cross.” When I was leaving him I met
the Bishop (who had been at the hospital and the Pulteney-
street schoolroom) just coming to see him. As I had been
with him some time, the Bishop said he would just see how
he was, and speak two or three words to him. When,
however, he was going out again, Takan-arro could not
be contented that he should depart without first praying
with him. “ I want to pray with him,” he said to me, in a
tone of voice which indicated that he was yearning to lift
his heart up in prayer to his blessed Saviour. The Bishop
had been talking to him about the promised happiness of
heaven, and the good men (Bible characters and others) who
have already gone there ; and he inquired if he should see
those good men, and if he should know them. The Bishop
also talked to him about his own people, upon which he


seemed downcast, and was slow in entering into the sub-
ject. After a time he shook his head with an air of sadness,
and said they were all upon the Murray. When the Bishop
made further allusion to their state, and reminded him that
he should pray for them, he said, “ I like to teach them.”
The earnestness and fervency with which he joins in the
prayers and responses to the petitions is at all times very
striking, and this was especially the case to-day, both when
I prayed with him, and also when the Bishop did so at his
own particular request. The recollection of its being Sun-
day was quite upon his mind, and whilst I was sitting with
him he two or three times expressed his wish that he had
been able to go down to church. I asked him if, when the
clergyman is speaking in church, he is able to understand
him, and he said “ Yes.”
Wednesday, January yth. —During the last three days he
has been getting very much weaker, and more lethargic, so
that he has lost, in a great degree, that vivacity of mind
which was so remarkable upon previous occasions. Never-
theless, blessed be God, what he does say is all of the same
peaceful and happy character as before. The manifesta-
tions of feeling are less strong, but still they are the same
manifestations, and the feelings are the same. Yesterday
and to-day I spoke to him with great plainness as to the
probable very near approach of his death. He expressed
no other feeling than that of resignation, and hope, and
peace of mind at this prospect. He betrayed no wish for
any other lot or dispensation of Providence than that which
appeared to be prepared for him. He expressed his belief
that his sins would be forgiven him, and that he should be
happy with Christ his Saviour.
Thursday, January Bth. —I saw Takan-arro no more alive
after making the preceding entry. I went to the Natives’
School about 4 o’clock this day, when I learnt from Mr.
Ross that he had departed to a better world about an hour
before. He had not spoken since about nine o’clock in the
morning. Death had been disarmed of all its terrors ere it
visited him; he had fallen asleep in Jesus with as much
quietness and peace as the weary child would fall asleep in
its mother’s lap. The still, calm features, as I gazed upon
them, seemed to testify, even in death, to that peace of God
which, through divine goodness, had been mercifully shed
abroad in his heart in life.


Friday, January gtk.— At a little past four o’clock this
day, the Bishop and myself, Mr. Moorhouse, Mr. Ross,
Pitpanure, and several of the native children now at the
school, stood round a grave in the public cemetery, and
committed to the earth, with the thrilling words of our
Service for the Burial of the Dead, the mortal remains
of the once wild and heathen Takan-arro. I read the
service, and the Bishop addressed a few plain and im-
pressive words to the native children. They have followed
the corpse of their companion to its last-resting place on
earth God grant that many of this outcast people may
follow his soul to its eternal resting-place above !
1852. —I left Adelaide again for Port Lincoln in the
Government schooner Yatala, taking with me fifteen fresh
volunteers from the school. The members of this party
turned out extremely well ; some of them became efficient
leaders in our little community. The case of one of
these was so peculiar that I must state some of the
facts.
On the occasion of my visit to Adelaide in August
and September, when our settlement had been for some
months in existence, and, no doubt, much talked about
amongst the natives generally, the transaction of my
business on behalf of the Institution made it necessary
for me to be much about the town of Adelaide, goingin and
out of stores, &c. Whilst thus engaged, I was constantly
followed by a tall, powerful native lad, clad like the bush
natives, i.e., having simply his blanket thrown over
his shoulder and wrapped round him. In answer to my
inquiry as to what he wanted, the reply was, “ Me want
to go with you.” I told him, again and again, that I could
not take him—that Poonindie was only for those who
had been in the school. Still he was not discouraged ■
wherever I went, and however long I might stay in any
store or shop, there was the youth waiting, gazing upon
me with an imploring look. He was not importunate or
troublesome ; but a look of earnest entreaty lighted up his
black face whenever I gave him an opportunity of speak-
ln£ “ Want to go with you.” After a time this changed
to “ Me go to school.”
This was a new view of the case. In the first place, I
could not tell whether this great fellow, nearly six feet high
and, to all outward appearance, a mere wild black fellow’


would be admitted to the school. In the next place, was it
likely that he, having known no restraint in his younger
days, being now probably of the age of about seventeen
or eighteen, would conform to the rales of the school ?
However, I endeavoured to explain to him what going
to school would mean : that he would have to sit
quietly and obediently amongst the children, and try to
learn lessons, &c. He most readily promised compliance
with any commands which might be given to him ; and his
anxiety about the matter was so great that I pleaded his
cause, and obtained his admission to the school. He kept
his promises and gave no trouble, and when I took away
the party, some four months afterwards, my friend, Neruid,
was a member of it. As his frame filled out he became
physically a remarkably fine man, well proportioned, and,
I may say, graceful in his movements. His feelings of
affection for and gratitude to me were unmistakable. My
least word was ever law to him, and from his height and
strength and skill in labour of all kinds he became a most
valuable member of our little society. He was baptized
August 6th, 1853, and was a most consistent Christian all
the time I was at Poonindie. He lived in that quiet
Christian village for twenty years, dying February 9th,
1871.
His was the last death that had occurred when I re-
visited the Institution in November, 1872. Four of the
inmates of the Institution, seniors of it, in fact, having heard
that I was likely to pay them a visit, wrote to me in July,
1872. Their letter contains these words : “ Dear Father,
“ we have not forgotten you, although we have been parted
“ for many years and all our dear friends are gone, we
“ hope, to heaven. The last one God took away from
“ amongst us was our dear friend Charlie Neruid, and he
“ died believing in Christ, and he has left us a good
“ example.” This is word for word, but I have, in a few
instances, corrected the spelling.
The expression of a hope that their companion had
gone to heaven is not to be viewed in the same light as
similar expressions sometimes, unhappily, uttered in a
light and careless manner by thoughtless persons of our
own race. The tone of mind prevailing at Poonindie with
reference to religion was intensely serious, and it was such
that religious matters formed topics frequently talked


about, so that, whatever a man’s life might have been, it
would have been difficult for him to be altogether uncon-
scious as to whether he was living for heaven or not, and
the simple-minded people were much too matter-of-fact to
say lightly that their departed friends had gone to heaven,
unless they had known by experience that they had been
living for heaven.
The Bishop himself, writing to S.P.G., under date
February 13th, 1857, says;—“Since Archdeacon Hale
“ left the Mission for Western Australia, seven months
“ ago, thirteen natives have died, some of them the most
“ advanced in intellect and spirit. In every instance,
“ save one, Mr. Hammond is satisfied that they died in
“ hope, and many in clear faith.”
I must not, however, dismiss the subject of Neruid
without mentioning a remarkable instance of the power of
conscience, even in the mind of an Australian native.
One means by which I expressed my displeasure in the
case of any serious misconduct was by ordering the
offender to confine himself to his hut, and not to mix with
his companions until I should give him permission. Upon
a certain occasion Neruid had sinned in thought and
intention, and had also tempted one of his companions to
sin. The sin, however, had not been actually com-
mitted, and there was no probability whatever that the
matter would have come to my knowledge. But a
reaction had set in in Neruid’s mind, and he was filled
with remorse. He confined himself to his hut of his
own accord, and sent to me to tell me he wished to see
me. When I went to him he told me, with every indi-
cation of the most sincere penitence, what was troubling
his mind.
The considerable addition to our numbers, which I
have already mentioned, necessarily increased our cares
and anxieties. The new comers were mostly boys and
lads, and arrangements had to be made for their superin-
tendence while at work, and also for carrying on their school
instruction. Mr. Minchin had been chiefly responsible
for the school work; but he was now chiefly employed in
looking after those natives who were occupied in all kinds
of miscellaneous work and odd jobs. And I engaged a
fresh schoolmaster to carry on the reading and writing, &c.
Mr. Minchin’s occupation was, at times, very trying,


and his services were of great value to the Institution. I
find that in one of my reports to the Government I made
mention of him in the following terms “It gives me the
“ most heartfelt pleasure to inform you that Mr. H. Paul
{£ Minchm, who in the first instance entered so ■warmly
“upon the work, has continued from that time to labour
“in the cause with the most devoted zeal. Upon him has
“ fallen, in a great degree, the real drudgery of the under -
“ taking. While my part has been to exercise a general
“ supervision over the whole, his part has been to feel the
“ weight of the difficulties, and to stand at his post sup-
“ ported by his patience and his faith.”
As ive had some fair agricultural land, the raising of
grain crops for our own maintenance was naturally a
matter of primary importance. In the season of 1851
all the ploughing and sowing w r as done by Mr. Wollaston.
But the gold fever was by this time at its height in
Adelaide. Two of Mr. Wollaston’s brothers had gone to
the diggings, and they persuaded him to join them. He
left early in March, 1852, and I had then no other
alternative but to turn to myself, and train the natives to
do all the agricultural work. Our efforts, lam happy to
say, w 7 ere crowmed with success. We broke up several
acres of fresh land, and had an excellent crop of wheat.
The work was done entirely by the natives, wdth no
other teaching except that which I could give them , und
I had to be a learner myself. I had to get what infer-
mation I required from books, and I then had to reduce it
to practice in order to become a teacher. I shall, as I go
on, give some extracts from my diary ; and I shall give
some explanations for the information of those readers who
are not acquainted with the details of Australian farming.
I must here mention an event of no little importance to
my own personal comfort. I have already stated that,
when I brought my family from Adelaide, I took, for their
accommodation, a wooden house in the little township of
Port Lincoln. I myself w 7 ent to and fro, spending most of
the week at Poonindie; but being always at Port Lincoln
on the Sunday. The getting up the necessary buildings
(such as they w 7 ere) for the Institution was a long and
difficult task, and it was not until April, 1852, that I was
able to get finished, and fit for our reception, a weather
board house in the midst of the native village. Into this


house I moved my family April 21, 1552. It was, of
course, a great comfort to us all to be once more together,
and it was a great help to me in my work to have my fixed
dwelling at the station. I still continued to go into Port
Lincoln for the Sunday services. Happily, I had in Port
Lincoln, what I may almost call a second home in the
house of my dear kind friends Captain and Mrs. Bishop,
with whom I invariably stayed when I went into the town-
ship.
We had plenty of stone near at hand at Poonindie, but
it was all of one kind : very hard water-worn boulders of
all sizes collected from the bed of the river. Bricks were
therefore an absolute necessity, and I engaged a profes-
sional brickmaker in Adelaide. By the latter end of March
he had moulded enough for a kiln of 20,000. He had the
assistance of such of the natives as he required ; and one
or two became quite expert moulders. Much hauling of
wood was requisite for the burning. This was done by
the natives with bullock teams. In fact, hauling for one
purpose or another was almost always going on, and, in
addition to a team which I had already acquired by pur-
chasing a few head of quiet cattle, I bought, towards the
end of March, a team of eight bullocks with their dray and
all their gear. These were sold to me at a very low price
by a man bent upon going to the gold diggings, and we
were now in a good position to begin ploughing whenever
the rains should commence to render the ground sufficiently
soft—until the rains commence, the ground, baked by the
Australian summer, is quite impenetrable. We began
ploughing on the 10th of March—the ground, however,
was not sufficiently moistened for good work, and the work
was therefore very trying to the new learners. I find this
entry in my diary under the date just named. “ This
“attempt at ploughing, with the natives only as agents I
“ }°ok upon as a most important event in its probable bear-
ing upon our future operations.” In order to encourage
them and to induce them to go on with spirit, I took the
plough in hand myself. On March 25th I recorded as
follows : —“ I yoked up a pair of bullocks to-day for the first
“time. Last week, for the first time, I succeeded in holding
“the plough, and making tolerable work.” On May 21 I
recorded “This morning we had two teams of bullocks
“again and made an excellent day’s work. William held


“ one plough and I the other (the iron one) the whole day.”
These performances of mine, however, were only now and
again, and were of no real assistance to the men except as
an example and encouragement.
In my concise official report to the Government, dated
Dec. 31, 1852, I made the following statement: “With
“ respect to the conduct of the natives generally, it gives
“me pleasure to speak of it in the same favourable terms
“as upon former occasions, and also as to the readiness
“ with which they are brought to the performance of all
“ kinds of ordinary labour. Our grain crop, grown entirely
“ by them, has been, I am thankful to say, an abundant
“ one, and, as the season is remarkably early, it has been
“ already gathered in and stacked. With respect to the
“ shearing of sheep (an operation still more difficult than
“ those of either ploughing or reaping), not only were our
“ own sheep shorn by the natives, but I was also able to
“ undertake to shear for two other persons in the district.
“ Our shearers went from home to shear for both these
“ persons, and accomplished their work in a manner
“ which would have done credit to any party of shearers of
“ our own race. ”
But before I pass on to the next year, I must mention
some further particulars about our proceedings in 1852.
I stated above that when I took delivery of the sheep
I did not venture at first to put them under the care of
our own men. I retained, until the beginning of April,
the services of the white shepherds whom I found upon
the run. Certain of our own men were constantly with
those shepherds, and received instruction also from Mr.
Wollaston: so that by the time just named (April, 1852)
I was able to dispense with the white shepherds’ services,
and our flocks were put entirely under the care of our own
men.
In saying this I must, however, except the lambing
season. This was in the month of June, when the rainy
season had fully set in. It is so critical a time for the
sheep, and a period of such immense importance, that I
considered it necessary to employ a competent white man
to give a general superintendence to the lambing. Several
of our own men were, however, necessarily employed,
giving him assistance and gaining experience for them-
selves. When the lambs had grown strong and the counting


time had arrived, it was found that we had an increase of
800.
Persons who are not acquainted with Australian sheep
farming may wonder why the lambing is so timed as to
fall in the midst of the rainy season. The reason is this :
During the long and hot summer the country where the
flocks feed becomes almost completely bare, and it is,
therefore, peremptorily necessary to delay the lambing
until, under the influence of the first rains, the young
grass has sprung up sufficiently to afford the sheep the
requisite nourishment. If the summer drought in any
season continues much beyond the usual time, the sheep
become so poor and weak that, if the lambing then com-
mences, the mothers are not able to give the lambs the
necessary nourishment, and a considerable portion of them
dm No doubt wet and cold days and nights are very
bad for the lambs, but starvation is still worse.
I identified myself with all the pursuits and proceed-
ings of our inmates, and I did this not only as a policy
it was quite in accordance with my inclination. I liked
to be associated wfith the men in their work, as well as
m their recreation. I stood aloof from nothing. I took
to bullock driving as well as ploughing. We were nothing
without our bullocks. Their contribution towards our
success was most important. My readers will therefore
I hope, permit me to devote a small space to these most
useful animals. As with all inferior creatures which give
their services to man, the behaviour of bullocks depends
entirely upon the treatment which they receive.
White bullock-drivers in the Colonies are, unhappily
too often rough, drinking men, who have little idea
of what can be done wfith animals by kindness and gentle-
ness. The lash of their whips is for ever sounding on
tlm poor brutes’ backs, and the men seem to think that
their language to them must necessarily be freely inter-
spersed with oaths. The animals are often dazed and
be Ti^ ed , by thelr rough usage ’ and become awkward
and difficult to manage. The manner of our drivers was
all kindness and good temper, and the result was that our
bullocks were quiet, obedient, and handy in the extreme.
1 confess that I took the greatest interest in them ; and
I was soon able to handle them. In my diary, under
date April 28th, 1852, I find this entry, “ This morning, while


“Jack was absent looking for some bullocks, and Charley
“in a different direction, I yoked up a team of six bullocks
“and put them into the dray, the first time I have ac-
complished this feat myself. The dray was used for
“hauling stone for Tom Coffin.” Tom Coffin was the
mason, and I presume there was a danger of his being
hindered in his work for want of stone, and that there-
fore I was anxious to get the dray ready, that the absent
drivers might start for their work at once when they
returned.
I do not know if I am right, but my impression is that
when bullocks are used in England, they are always
harnessed. I will, therefore, take the liberty of describing
what “ yoking up ” means. All the gear that is put upon
a bullock is simply the yoke and the bow. The yoke is
a piece of wood long enough to be laid upon the necks
of two bullocks standing side by side. The top is flat
and the bottom slightly arched over the neck of each
bullock to make it ride more easily. And it has, in it,
four holes to receive the bows.
We will suppose, then, that six bullocks are to be yoked
up. The driver puts them into a yard. As a rule, every
bullock has his own place in the team, and they are much
more easily brought up to be yoked, and they stand more
steadily if the proper mates are brought up together.
The pair which the driver means to yoke up first, he
puts into a corner, their faces being against the rails of
one side of the yard. He then, having the yoke and
bows belonging to this pair at hand, stands on the near
or left hand side of the animals, and, as gently and quietly
as he can, puts the yoke across the two necks. Then he
takes the bows, one after another, and pushes them up
from below into, and through, the holes in the yoke intended
for them.
The bows are then secured by small pieces of iron called
keys. He then proceeds exactly in the same manner with the
other two pairs. Having done this, he next places the three
pairs in their proper order one behind the other against one
side of the yard, having, as before, rails in front of them.
Then he puts on the chains. Each yoke has a ring in the
middle, to which the chain is hooked. The first pair are
joined by the chain to the second pair, and another chain
joins the second to the third. The team is complete.


The driver then opens the slip-rails of the yard and
leads his team out to the dray. He then puts them in
position in front of the dray, and backs the team until he has
the two last, or pole bullocks, in their places, one on either
side of the dray pole. The ring on the pole bullocks’
yoke is much larger than the other rings, large enough for
the end of the pole to go through it. The driver puts
the pole through this ring, and drops a thick iron pin into
a hole in front of the ring. Another pin is already
behind it, so that the pole is now fastened to the yoke.
He then removes the hook of the chain of the next
bullocks from the ring on the pole bullocks’ yoke, and puts
it into an iron loop at the end of the pole, and the whole
operation is complete.
All these movements of the bullocks are done by the
word of command, and by certain motions of the whip
such as letting the lash fall gently on the off-side of the
shoulder when you want to bring the bullock towards
you, and pushing him quietly with the butt end of the
whip when you want him to turn away from you.
Before I pass on to the year 1853 I must make another
quotation from my official report, dated December 31,
1852 “In reporting upon the state of this Institution
“ f ° r . tlle P ast f our months, the subject which, on account
“ of lts importance, first demands our ’attention is the
“ £ reat , extent to which sickness and mortality have
“ prevailed amongst the inmates during this period. But
“ 1 have the happiness of being able to state that, in two
“ cases of death which have lately occurred, the last hours
“ °f the sufferers were so cheered by the peace and hope
“ which they derived from their belief in the blessed
truths of the Gospel, that our sorrow, we may say
“ h as > f° r the time, been turned into joy, and our
“ mourning into gladness. Still, these frequent deaths we
“ must needs feel to be a heavy affliction.”
There were six deaths in 1852. Constantly in my
addresses to the inmates, which, during times of affliction
or anxiety, were given almost daily, evening prayer
affording the needful opportunity, I put before our people
the necessity of baptism as the entrance into the Christian
brotherhood. But Ino less earnestly and frequently
dwelt upon the necessity of their taking hold sincerely and
firmly of the hope set before them before coming forward


for baptism. It was only by degrees that I could get them
to come to the point, And so, as already stated, four passed
away without making any such confession of their belief as
would have justified the administration of baptism.
The first to be taken from us in 1852 was Manya, one of
the original party on Boston Island, and the wife of
Narrung. She was gentle and amiable, but had no force
of character; and, although she had a long illness and
much instruction, she failed to make up her mind to
declare herself distinctly in favour of Christianity.
Yorroke had been with us fifteen months; Memritten nine
months. Charley was a very early inmate, having come
in December, 1850. He was then quite a boy—a merry,
laughing fellow, very well disposed, but wanting in
ballast. But in his last illness his mind matured rapidly,
and he became in heart a true, penitent and firm believer
in his Lord. Before I left the station on a certain
Saturday, to go into Port Lincoln for the Sunday services,
I had arranged to baptize him on the Monday. Some
other engagement, however, detained me, and the poor
dear fellow passed away in my absence. I saw nothing in
his condition on Saturday to lead me to suppose that the
end was so near. I was grieved that the sacrament had
been wanting to him, but he had earnestly desired it, and
the omission was from no fault or backwardness on his
part, and we were able to rejoice in his translation to a
better world.
The next, Ullean Ullean, had been with us only eleven
months. He had not been in the Adelaide school, and was
wholly uninstructed. He was, however, a most willing
worker, and was the first to handle the plough.
Kaituan died early in December, 1852. He had been
with us nearly a year and eleven months. He had been
baptized and died rejoicing, believing in his Lord with all
his heart.
It was with real sorrow that I made the following state-
ment in the same official Report which I have already
quoted: “ I regret to state that I have been compelled to
“ dismiss after so long a period of probation one of our
“ ‘ original members,’ a man from the neighbourhood of
“ Lake Bonney, called Popjoy. His case, has been more
“ than once mentioned in my Reports. He was the only
“ one amongst the original members who had grown up to


“ manhood without receiving any kind of training or in-
“ struction. The experiment of civilization, as regarded
“ him, was therefore different from any of the others, and
“ his case was one of peculiar interest. He has been
“ always extremely difficult to manage, and, on account of
“ the ungovernable violence of his temper, he set a very
“ mischievous example to the other inmates. Indeed, his
“ paroxysms of rage were at times by no means without
“ danger to those with whom he was enraged. I was
“ therefore at length obliged, although most reluctantly, to
relieve the Institution of his presence.” He was a fine,
powerful man, an excellent worker, and very willing. He
and Neruid were related, Popjoy being probably some ten
years the senior. He was not baptized. The name is a
very singular one. Many years after, when a passenger in
a P. and O. steamer, I heard that there was a man of that
name also a passenger, who had been a settler somewhere
in the interior of N.S.W. The white men often call
natives by the names of their employers. Mr. Moorhouse
informed me, about eleven months after Popjoy’s dismissal,
that he had died in Adelaide of consumption.
After recounting, in my official Report quoted above, our
losses by death in the year 1852, I added, “ Another
“ female is now so ill that it is quite evident that her end
“is approaching. She is herself quite conscious that such
“ is the case, and is looking forward with peace and hope
to the better home which she believes is prepared for her
A note is added at a later date in these words :
“ She died full of faith and peace and hope, January 5,
“ 1853.” Her name was Merari. She came to us in
June, 1851, and had been baptized in December, 1852.
15 53- —I have already stated that the minds of several of
om inmates had been dwelling much on the question of
their baptism for a considerable time. Happily these
searchings of heart ripened and bore good fruit early in
i 85- At the beginning of February we had the privilege
of receiving a visit from the Bishop, and when it was
known that he was coming amongst us, ten of the men
a J nd ° ne woman expressed their desire to be baptized by
the Bishop during his visit. The Bishop was good enough
to write an account of this visit to S.P.G. I venture to
incorporate the greater part of his letter with this mv
narrative.


Whatever I then wrote about our proceedings came from
me as from a worker in the midst of his occupations.
The Bishop came, on the occasion which he describes, as
an observer, deeply interested in the work ; having helped
it, and being ready to help it in every possible way. The
statement of an observer’s Impressions must always have
an interest specially its own, which no details from the
worker’s pen can interfere with. I omit from his letter
some descriptions of the country, because I have already
given them; I omit also some remarks on attempts in
general to civilize aboriginal races. The Bishop tells, in
his own words, what he saw and what he joined in at
Poonindie.
Port Lincoln, Feb. 14, 1853.
“ My dear Sir, —Having long been desirous of visiting
the native Mission at Poonindie, under Archdeacon M. B.
Hale, to ascertain its progress, and report to the Society
upon the degree of success with which his disinterested
efforts have been blessed, I gladly avail myself of a favour-
able opportunity; and, embarking in a small coasting
trader of fifty tons, which plies between Adelaide and this
place, reached this settlement, the little township of Port
Lincoln, on Thursday, Feb. 3, having left home on the
preceding Monday. After officiating, together with the
Archdeacon, in the church (St. Thomas’s) at Port Lincoln
on Sunday, Feb. 6th, when I confirmed five young women,
residents of the place, we left for Poonindie early on
Tuesday morning. The road winds along the picturesque
shores of Boston Bay, and after crossing the pretty little
valley of the river Tod, brought us to cottages and huts,
which forms the Mission settlement of Poonindie. Besides
the clap-boarded cottage in which the Archdeacon lives,
three others accommodate the schoolmaster, the overseer,
and the working foreman. Fourteen smaller huts contain
eleven married native couples, and the other, children of
both sexes. A kitchen and offices, washing-shed, &c.,
complete the present hamlet of Poonindie ; at some dis-
tance above and. below which, on the river, three other
stone detached cottages also belong to the Mission. The
“Native Reserve,” set apart by the local government for
the use of the Institution, comprises a fine, grassy, park-
like plain, at the base of a range of hills of moderate


height, which afford pasturage for between 3,000 and 4,000
sheep.
“ Much has been said in proof of the impossibility of con-
verting the natives —of two girls who, after having been
employed as servants at Government House, subsequently
returned to native life and habits. But what are the facts ?
They were not suitable wives for Europeans ; if married to
natives, they must needs belong to their affianced husbands,
or run the risk of being speared. Few or no colonists would
have taken them as domestic servants, unwilling to take
the necessary trouble with them, or exercise the requisite
patience; and thus, after a few months or years of school-
ing and superficial civilization, together with a little
Christian knowledge, rather than a real change of heart,
they were thrown back upon native life, or became the
degraded victims of European vice. Their case only
demonstrated the necessity of an Institution, such as the
Archdeacon has succeeded in setting on foot, for the recep-
tion of the elder native children who had been partially
educated at Adelaide, at the most critical period of life,
when approaching manhood. He devoted himself to the
holy object of converting, if possible, the remnant that was
left, and saving them from the ravages of disease and
infamy. The principles on which he proposed to proceed
were pointed out by past experience and former failures.
They were isolation, industrial education, as well as the
usual schooling; marriage, separate dwellings, hiring and
service for wages ; gradual and progressive moral improve-
ment based upon Christian instruction, Christian worship,
and Christian superintendence. Without disturbing the
school at Adelaide (which he proposed to leave as an
elementary training establishment), he desired to draft,
from time to time, the elder boys and girls to the Mission
Station at Port Lincoln. For this purpose, Boston Island,
which closes Boston Bay, Port Lincoln, to seaward, con-
taining about four square miles, was pitched upon for the
Mission. But the inability to find fresh water, after sink-
ing several wells, necessitated removal, after a sojourn of a
few weeks, to some better watered spot. Poonindie, on
the river Tod, was accordingly selected; and, in order to
carry out the system of isolation and industrial employ-
ment, the surrounding district was proclaimed a Native
Reserve, exempting it, therefore, from sale to private in-


dividuals. The various duties of farming sheep and
cattle herding for the young men offered the best means of
training these young people to the habits and duties of
civilized life. The Archdeacon had first to gain their con-
fidence, and win their affection. His simple, kind, firm,
Christian earnestness—teaching, controlling, reproving,
governing, in short, with enlightened charity, these
children of the bush —has at length been blessed with a
considerable degree of success. Many young adult natives,
who would have belonged to the most degraded portion of
the human family, are now clothed and in their right
minds, sitting at the feet of Jesus, and intelligently
worshipping, through Him, their heavenly Father.
‘ 1 The Mission now consists of fifty-four natives, comprising
eleven married couples ; the rest children of either sex,
thirteen being from the Port Lincoln district. The married
couples have each their little hut, built of the trunks of the
shea-oak set up in the ground, the interstices being neatly
plastered and whitewashed, roofed with broad paling. The
other children in small divisions occupy the remaining ones.
They have their meals in common in the general kitchen ;
the working party first, then the women and children.
Narrung, one of the elder young men, assisted by two
mates, is steward, butcher, and cook. At half-past six in
the morning, and in the evening, after all assemble
at the Archdeacon’s cottage, for the reading of Scripture
and prayer. The Schoolmaster leads the singing of a
simple hymn, and the low, soft voices of the natives make
pleasing melody. A plain exposition follows. After break-
fast they go to their several employments : the cowherds
milk, &c. ; some were engaged in putting up posts and
rails for a stock-yard; the shepherds were with their flocks ;
two assisted the bricklayer, one preparing mortar, the other
laying bricks. At the proper season they plow, reap, shear,
make bricks, burn charcoal, cut wood ; do, in fact, under
the direction of the overseer, the usual work of a station.
Six hours are the limits of the working day; they are
unequal to more. Shepherds and first-class labourers
receive Bs. per week and rations ; second-class, ss. ; third,
3s. 6d.; fourth, 2s. 6d. The younger children attend
school; the married women wash, and learn sewing clothes,
making and mending. Such is an outline of the occupation,
education, and religious training adopted at Poonindie.


which, begun with very limited means, and with no
previous instance of success to encourage hope, has never-
theless, through a blessing upon the Archdeacon’s patient,
untiring, quiet zeal, reached a very promising state of
maturity. Thus far the Institution is an exception to the
list of Australian Missionary failures.
“ Let us look at the present results, under the heads of
Civilization, Moral Training, and Christian Attainment.
“Firstly. We find eleven married couples decently
clothed, clean in their persons, keeping their own huts and
clothes in order, and much attached to each other —in the
place of the promiscuous unchastity, and the brutal degra-
dation of the native women in their wild state. A farm of
twenty acres has been fenced, plowed, reaped, and stacked,
by these children of the soil; two flocks are wholly under
their charge. These they have shorn, besides two other
flocks belonging to settlers ; and five were just about to
shear the lambs of Mr. Peter, at eighteen shillings per
hundred. I saw an excellent kiln of bricks w'hich, under
the direction of a brickmaker from Adelaide, they had
helped to make, mould, and burn. In fact, while the other
settlers at Port Lincoln were much hampered by the
migration of their servants and shepherds to the Victoria
Diggings, the Archdeacon was able to carry on the improve-
ment of the Mission premises, the labours’ at the farm, as
well as assist his neighbours with native shearers, who
shear remarkably well.
“ Secondly. In regard to Moral Training, the wild native
knows little or nothing of the value of money or property ;
but at Poonindie the Mission lads earn weekly wages, and,
what is more, “ shop ” for themselves at the store in Port
Lincoln, or even send up orders to Adelaide for goods.
This indicates a real mental and moral development. The
following purchases were made by one of the Mission
natives, Kewrie, for himself and friend, while I was
present: a pair of shoes, two pairs of trowsers, a blue
woollen shirt, a packet of currants and raisins for puddings,
a flask of salad oil for the hair ; a bonnet was looked at for
his wife, but left for her determination, and a shawl for the
throat rejected as being too dear. The same youth, had he
been left to native influences upon leaving school, would
probably have become, after a short time, a dirty, ragged,
diseased, lazy sheep-stealer, or an occasional hewer of


wood and drawer of water for some of the inhabitants of
Adelaide, or settlers in the Bush. He is now a nice-look-
ing, decent, intelligent, well-conducted young man.
“ Thirdly. With respect to conversion. When the
Archdeacon came in from Poonindie to meet me, he was
followed by ten of the elder boys and young men, who
asked leave to go and meet the Bishop. Some I had
known in the Sunday School at Adelaide. I was
agreeably surprised to see them nicely dressed in the
usual clothing worn by settlers; check shirts, light
summer coats, plaid trowsers, with shoes and felt hats
articles mostly purchased with their own earnings. They were
better dressed than the labouring class in general at home.
They had brought their blankets, blacking, brushes, &c.,
making the broad verandah of a wood-shed their sleeping
place, and cooking their meals at a fire in the yard.
Not far off was a small native camp, and the contrast
between these two groups would have convinced any
candid observer of the truth for which the Archdeacon
has always contended, viz., that the aborigines are not
only entitled to our Christian regard, but are capable,
under God’s blessing, of being brought out of darkness
into light, and from the power of Satan unto God.
“ It was very pleasing to see these young men, on
Sunday morning before church, sitting together reading
in their Testaments or hymn-books, which they had
brought with them, and afterwards filling, at both services,
two benches in the pretty little church. Most of them
were Catechumens, whom the Archdeacon thought he
could recommend as fit to be baptized. Accordingly, on
Thursday, the 10th, at Poonindie, I conversed severally
with ten men, and Tanda, the wife of Conwillan, in the
presence of the Archdeacon. The native manner is
naturally shy, reserved, and incommunicative, but gentle
and unimpassioned. After hearing them, and asking them
Questions, I agreed with the Archdeacon that there
good ground for admitting them by baptism into the
ark of Christ’s Church, believing them to be subjects of
God’s grace and favour. We held regular evening service
at sundown ; and after tb.e second lesson I baptized
Thomas Nytchie, James Narrung, Samuel Conwillan,
Joseph Mudlong, David Tolbonko, John Wangaru, Daniel
Toodko, Matthew Kewrie, Timothy Tartan, Isaac Pitpowie,


and Martha Tanda, wife of Comvillan. The other women
and girls are not yet so advanced as Martha and Annette
fu a v? 11 Rlver Jnative, who has long formed part of
the Archdeacon’s family. Each native answered for
mmself distinctly, according to the service for Adult
aptism, and, from their devotional manner and previous
answers, I have reason to believe that they understood
and intended to keep the vow which they then volun-
anly made. On the following morning I consecrated
the cemetery, where the remains of those who have died
repose. Of these, eight in number, three, in addition to
I akanarro (of whose last illness and happy death I sent
you a _ printed account), gave strong evidence of their
dying in faith and assured hope.
“ f must here observe, with respect to this mortality,
that compared with Europeans, the ordinary native is
ight in frame and feeble in constitution, easily brought
low by sickness, and pining away often from unaccountable
causes, principally pulmonary complaints, aggravated by
their own thoughtlessness and roving mode of life. The
seeds of disease have also been widely spread through the
native tribes since their contact with Europeans; and
hence the dwindling away of the race from premature
death and fruitless marriage. F
“ one , more incident I may mention in proof of their
progress in civilization: a cricket match played by the
Foonmdie lads and young men, on a holiday given on the
occasion of my visit. I was pleased at watching, with the
Archdeacon, two Australian native ‘ elevens ’ thus enjoying
themseives, and remarked, not only their neatness in
fielding and batting, but, what was far more worthy of
note, the perfect good humour which prevailed throughout
the games ; no ill-temper shown, or angry appeals to the
umpire, as is generally the case in a match of Whites.
“ I have little more to add, than that the Mission is
again strengthened by the accession of Mr. George Wollas-
ton, son of Archdeacon Wollaston, who will act as over-
seer of the sheep and farm labour. A good schoolmistress
is shortly expected from England, and thus the education
of the younger boys and girls will be well carried on. A
new school-room is projected, and subscriptions are col-
TVM«° g thC P u^P. ose - R appears to me that the
Mission is so consolidated as to admit of gradual enlarge-


ment. There is now a small body of trained Christian
natives, the nucleus of the native Church. The Arch-
deacon, and all friends of Missions, have reason to thank
God and take courage. His blessing will never fail to
attend enlightened zeal, chastened and sustained as that is,
in Mr. Hale, by Christian love and firmness of purpose.
“ I sail in a few days for Adelaide when the wind serves.
“ Yours truly,
“ Rev. E. Hawkins. “ Augustus Adelaide.”
“ P.S. —We set sail on Saturday, the 19th, and reached
Adelaide on Monday morning, after a quick passage.”
I have more than once stated that the question of
baptism had been for some time gradually and steadily
working in the thoughts of some of the men, and, as I
hoped and believed, ripening their minds for a decided
declaration of their faith. That all-important event, the
first public baptism, had now taken place. The leader in
the movement had undoubtedly been Narrung, and he had
been cordially supported by his younger brother, who had
been more steady in his attendance at the Adelaide school,
and was a very good scholar. Narrung, as he confessed,
had neglected the school. He learned to read at Poo-
nindie, and, by going over the same ground ' very many
times, he could at length make his way through two or
three chapters of St. John’s Gospel. The seventeenth
chapter was the one he especially delighted to spell
over.
I find in my diary an entry headed as follows:—“ Sup-
plemental entry to diary, July 17th, 1852. There has
“ been about Narrung ever since he has been with us, a
“ sweetness and amiableness of disposition, a docility of
“ mind, and a propriety of life and conversation which have
“ made him a universal favourite. And of late, lam most
“ thankful to say, I have seen reason to believe that his
“ naturally good disposition has, under God’s grace,
“ ripened into a really serious and religious state of
“ mind. He was one of the original party which was sent
“ to Port Lincoln by Mr. Moorhouse, just at this time
“ about two years ago. He and his partner Manya, were
“ assigned to Captain Bishop, in whose service they made
“ themselves very useful during the interval which elapsed


“ between their arrival in the settlement and their going
“ with me to Boston Island. He always treated Manya
“ with kindness, but I think they had lived together for
“ nearly twelve months before they manifested anything
“ like a real attachment towards each other. They became
“ at length very much attached, and on the 17th of October,
“1851, I duly and regularly solemnized their marriage,
“ together with that of another original couple, Konwillan
“ and Tanda.
“ Shortly after this, Manya, with three other of our
“ native girls, went on a visit to Adelaide. She was ill the
“ greater part of the time she was there. And, after her
“ return she was for some time alarmingly ill at our house at
Port After a time, however, she got very much
better, and joined Narrung and her other companions at
“ Poonindie. _ Naming’s affection for her displayed itself
“ in a very striking manner during this illness ; so much so,
“ that at the annual meeting of the South Australian Church
“ Society at Adelaide, I made mention of some incidents
illustrating his affection for her, and his anxiety about
“ her health.
“When her death occurred” [after an illness subse-
quent to the one recorded above] “he was most deeply
“ affected, and took it much to heart. And I have this
“ further ground for believing that it was to him a real afflic-
tion, viz., that it appears to have produced in him the best
‘ fruit of affliction, and his religious feelings have evidently
“ assumed a deeper and more decided character since that
“ event.
1 made great efforts to bring about this result of deepen-
“ mg the religious feeling, both as regards Narrung and
“also the rest of the natives, and I strove for it both by
general exhortations to them all and also by means of
“ private conversations. Narrung responded to my efforts
“ in a way that gave me the deepest gratification and moved
“ me to my inmost soul with thankfulness to my merciful,
gracious God for His goodness in this and in all other ways so
“ abundantly evidenced. Of late Narrung has moved down
“ here again from Colombo (a hut and sheep station on
“ Mount Gawler), and forms one of a party of four or five of
“ the elder and more trustworthy and intelligent single men,
“ who have their quarters at one of the stone cottages.
“ And now I arrive at last at the conversation which I


“ had with him this evening, whilst he was sitting with me
“ in my hut, I said, ‘ Narrung, I hope you boys down at
“ that place (the stone cottages were a little way off the
“ village) talk about good things, and do not spend all your
“ time in foolish talk.’ He said, ‘Oh yes, we talk about
“ good things. That day when I came down from Colombo
“ (meaning the day he came down for his wife’s funeral),
“ then I said to them boys, “ Now we must think about good
“ things. We must talk about what we do, not to do
“ wicked things.” ’ I said 1 Andyou always pray down there’ ?
“ ‘ Oh, yes, we pray; only one night we forgot, then we said
“ the next night, ‘We forgot to pray last night, we must
“ not forget to pray.’ I asked who it was who said that,
“ then he said, ‘ I said that to them.’ Then I asked, ‘ And
“ when you said that, were they all ready to pray and liked
“to say prayers ? ’ ‘Oh yes, then we knelt down, and
“ Toodko (his younger brother before referred to) said
“ prayers and we repeated after him.’ In the course of the
“ conversation he said, ‘ We must pray to God to forgive
“ us all them wicked things and mischief what we have done.
“ I often say this to boys, We must pray to God to forgive
“ us.’ And then he said, with every indication of manner
“ and voice of deep and sincere feeling, ‘ I pray God to
“ forgive me ; I hope God forgive me. I hope I never do
“them things again which I have done wrong.’ ’Again in the
“ course of the conversation, I said something about the ad-
vantage of being able to attend the morning and evening
“prayers. He said, 1 When I was in the Bush shepherding
“ there, I say to myself I shall ask Mr. Hale to let me go
“ down to Poonindie and stop there, then I can always go
“to prayers with the other boys and hear about good
“ things.’
“ He then again told me, as he has several times told me
“ before, how constantly his thoughts were upon good things
“ when he is out in the Bush shepherding. ‘ All day I
“ think about good things. We must try not to do wicked
“things. We must pray to God, and try to please
“ Him.’ About his baptism we, of course, always talk
“ upon the occasion of such conversations as the present
“ one. Ido not wish to urge him on to it alone, as he has
“ a little feeling of shrinking from being the first to take
“ this step by himself. And I have great hope that it will be
“ the gracious pleasure of my merciful God to suffer me to


“ see, before any long time, others coming forward also, and
“ bearing Narmng company in his holy desires and wishes.”
The hope thus devoutly expressed on July 17, 1852,
was, through the great goodness and mercy of God,
abundantly realized within a period of six months from that
time when Narrung, not alone, but accompanied by no less
than ten of his companions, received the blessed sacrament
of baptism at the hands of the Bishop of the Diocese.
These details of my conversations with Narrung may
serve to illustrate the manner in which the question of
baptism had been steadily coming to the front in the
minds of some of our inmates. I thought I could not
illustrate the movement better than by connecting this
quiet progress in Narrung’s mind immediately with the
account of the Bishop’s visit and the celebration of
baptism. I must now, however, go back to the first day
of the year 1853. On that day a most important change
took place in my position in relation to the South Australian
Government. The documents here introduced will, to a
certain extent, explain the nature of that change; but I
shall feel it necessary to give, presently, further explanation,
that the reader may be enabled to understand some of our
surrounding circumstances.
With respect to the documents, they were, of course,
published for general information at the tiriie to which they
belonged. But, in compliance with my particular request,
they were again published in connection with my last
returns when I was leaving Port Lincoln in 1856. They
are as follows :
“ Port Lincoln, 20 th Sept., 1852.
“ May it please your Excellency,—
“ In approaching your Excellency with this petition for
an increase in the amount of the funds placed at my dis-
posal for promoting the welfare of the aboriginal natives of
this Province, I beg respectfully to solicit your Excellency’s
attention to the following circumstances :
“ That the Native Training Institution, which I formed
by means of funds granted to me for that purpose, and
which has now been in active operation for a period of two
years, has been blessed with a remarkable amount of
success, and is steadily accomplishing the purposes for
which it was established.
“ That this success has itself led to a very large increase


in the number of inmates (the number being at the present
time 45), and that the expenses attendant upon its support
have also been very greatly increased.
“ That the rise in the price of provisions has affected us
to a very serious extent, and advantage has been taken of
the unsettled state of affairs by the owner of the coasting
vessel which visits this port to make most exorbitant
charges for freight.
“ As touching generally the subject of the expenditure of
money upon the natives, all experience has tended to show
that considerable sums of money must be expended upon
them in one way or other, and no one can for a moment
question that measures for their permanent improvement
and the amelioration of their condition are infinitely better
than coercion and punishment.
“ I enclose herewith a formal proposition to undertake
the support and carrying on of the existing Institution, and
also of the school for the children of the aboriginal natives
of this district under a certain contract, and I enclose also
a certificate from the Government Resident of the district
having reference to the said contract.
“ My reasons for wishing to enter upon the undertaking
as a contractor are these :
“ 1. To obtain liberty of action with respect to the funds
•which is absolutely necessary to enable me to make the
most of my means. In carrying on farming and other
operations upon rather an extensive scale, in order to afford
occupation to the natives, and make the Institution, as far
as possible, self-supporting, I should be often obliged to
make sales and purchases -which it would be difficult to
bring in satisfactorily into statements of accounts submitted
in detail to the Government.
“2. Even supposing that my accounts were likely to be
of the plainest and most simple character, the amazing
inconvenience to which we are subjected in this place by
reason of the irregularity of the communication with Ade-
laide, would make it almost impracticable for me to render
in my accounts at the proper times, and in a correct and
satisfactory manner.
“ To guard, as far as may be, against any misconception
with respect to my object in entering into the matter as a
contractor, and as an apology for myself, being a person in
Holy Orders, entering into a contract at all, I have thought


fit to attach to my propositions for the contract a solemn
declaration as to the motives by which I am actuated in
this transaction, and declaring that I am in no way in-
fluenced by the desire to make a gain or profit by the
undertaking.
“ I remain,
“ Your Excellency’s obliged and faithful servant,
“ Mathew B. Hale.
His Excellency Sir H. E. F. Young.”
“I, Mathew Blagden Hale, being a person in Holy
Orders, and being desirous of entering into a contract
under the Government of this Province of South
Australia for the performance of certain duties for the
benefit of the aboriginal natives, consider it to be due to
my sacred calling to make the following solemn declaration
touching the motives by which I am actuated in desiring
to undertake the said duties and to enter into a contract for
their performance.
1 I, Matthew Blagden Hale, do solemnly declare before
Almighty God, that I am moved to this work by feelings of
pity and compassion towards that unhappy race, whose
welfare those works are intended to promote ; and because
I believe from my heart that I cannot in other way so
effectually promote the glory of God, or make Him an
acceptable offering as by devoting myself to the unwearied
performance of these works of mercy.
“ And I do further solemnly declare that I have no wish
or desire to make any gain or profit by the said contract,
or in any way to derive from it any pecuniary benefit or
advantage ; but that I wish to undertake these duties as a
contract, simply as matter of convenience, and because I
shall be thereby enabled to employ the funds at my dis-
posaUo the greatest advantage for promoting the proposed
I, Mathew Blagden Hale, undertake to support and
carry on the Natives’Training Institution now under my
care, the future and duties of which (it having been
established for a period of two years) are by past and
present practices sufficiently marked out and defined ; and
I undertake to receive into the said Institution, in addition
to the present inmates, any person, of whatever age or sex
and whether half-castes or wholly of the aboriginal race, as


shall be sent to me by the Protector of Aborigines. And I
undertake also to relieve the Government of all expenses
connected with the school for the children of aboriginal
natives of this district, at present under the care of Mr.
Schiirmann, and to use all diligence to draw to the said
school, and to retain in it, as many native children as pos-
sible, and to feed, clothe, and educate them, and to
endeavour to train them to the performance of works of
industry, and in the habits of civilised life ; and to impart
to them, so far as they shall be able to receive it, a know-
ledge of the way of salvation, through our blessed Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ.
“These duties I undertake to perform for the sum of
£I,OOO (one thousand pounds) per annum, the said sum to
be paid to me, or my order, by the Colonial Treasurer, in
monthly instalments, so long as I shall continue to furnish
to His Excellency, the Lieut.-Governor, and the Executive
Council, good and sufficient evidence (the nature of such
evidence to be determined by themselves) that the above-
named duties are being actually and faithfully performed.
And I desire that this contract should begin to take effect
on and after the ist day of January, 1853.
“ ( Signed ) Mathew Blagden Hale.”
“ Government Residency, Port Lincoln,
“Sept. 2.oth, 1852.
“Being well aware of the objects which were con-
templated in the formation of the Natives’ Training
Institution in this place under Archdeacon Hale, and
having had frequent opportunities of seeing and observing
the progress of the said Institution since the period of its
first formation, now two years ago ; I hereby give it as my
opinion, that the experiment so made has been successful
in its results, and that the purposes for which it was
established are in course of being gradually and steadily
obtained.
“ I have also read and considered the terms of the
contract which Archdeacon Hale wishes to enter into for
the future support and carrying on the school for the
children of aboriginal parents of this district, at present
under the care of Mr. Schiirmann. And I hereby give it
as my opinion, that the sum of per annum is not
more than sufficient to enable Archdeacon Hale to fulfil


that contract, and to carry out, in an efficient and satis-
factory manner, the combined purposes of the said Institu-
tion and the said school.
“(Signed) Chas. Driver, J.P.,
“ Government Resident.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Adelaide,
Oct. 13 tk, 1852.
“Sir, —I have the honour to inform you, that the
Lieutenant-Governor approves of your offer to carry out
certain objects with regard to the natives at Port Lincoln,
for the annual sum of £l,OOO, to be paid, on your order, by
the Colonial Treasurer, in monthly instalments, so long as
His Excellency shall be satisfied that the duties, in respect
of which this payment is to be made, are faithfully fulfilled.
“ The conditions embraced in this arrangement are:—
“ Ist. That commencing on the Ist January, 1853, you
shall support and carry on the Native Training Institution
now under your care, the nature and duties of which are,
by past and present practice, sufficiently marked out and
defined ; and that you will receive into the said Institution,
in addition to the present inmates, any person of whatever
age or sex, and whether half-castes or wholly of the aboriginal
race, who may be sent to you by the Protector of Aborigines.
“ 2nd. That you relieve the Government of all expenses
connected with the school for the children of aboriginal
parents in the Port Lincoln district, at present under the
care of Mr. Schiirmann, and that you use all diligence to
draw to the said school, and to retain in it, as many of these
native children as possible; and that you feed, clothe, and
educate them, endeavouring to train them to the perfor-
mance of works of industry, and in the habits of civilized
life, and to impart to them, so far as they shall be able to
receive it, a knowledge of the truths of the Christian
religion.
“ I have, &c.,
“(Signed,) B. T. Finnis,
“ Colonial Secretary.
“ To the Very Rev. Archdeacon Hale.’’
I must now explain that the natives of the neighbour-
hood of Port Lincoln, with whom I was from that time to
be brought into close contact, by receiving their children from


Mr. Schurmann’s school, differed, in some very important
particulars, from the tribes from which our first inmates
had sprung. Their language was quite different, and they
differed in many of their customs or habits. Our first
inmates came from the neighbourhood of the Murray
River, which is from 1,000 to 1,500 miles more to the east
than Port Lincoln. In fact it was impossible to avoid the
conclusion that the two people in question had come upon
the Continent at opposite points : one on the East Coast and
the other on the West.
The most important difference, bearing upon their civili-
zation, relates to, what I suppose I must call, their
marriage customs. Amongst the Murray natives, a middle-
aged man claims a right to certain female children. They
are said to have fallen in some mysterious way to him as
his lawful property, and when he thinks fit he takes them
to be his wives and servants ; and one sees a big, burly man,
whose features are almost hidden by the profusion of hair
on his head and face, stalking along at his ease, and two,
or perhaps three, miserable looking little females toiling
after him, carrying all the family possessions.
Young men are not allowed to have wives—the girls of
their own age having been appropriated, even in childhood,
by men old enough to be their fathers. Such a -custom as
this must necessarily have a most demoralizing effect upon
any people amongst whom it prevails, and must also
be a terrible hindrance in the way of efforts made
for their civilization. The Port Lincoln natives have
no such custom as this. There were pleasing instances
of man and wife having lived together from youth
to old age, with offspring of various ages around
them. The Adelaide school suffered grievously from
the interference of the elders with the children.
There was no such interference on the part of the Port
Lincoln natives when I took in hand to deal with their
children. When the children were troublesome and ran
away for a few days to visit some old haunts or old friends
in the Bush, it was their own doing. Some had absented
themselves from Mr. Schurmann’s school at the time that I
took charge of his children. But I believe all the absentees
afterwards joined their schoolmates at Poonindie.
The district of Port Lincoln (using that phrase in a very
wide sense) had, about the time of our going there, acquired


a sad notoriety on account of the number of murders
committed by natives upon white men. These murders
were all of the same kind, the unfortunate victims being
solitary individuals, in charge either of sheep on the run or
of a shepherd’s hut. The object in all cases was the
acquisition of food—either sheep to be driven away
from the flocks and afterwards killed and eaten, or flour
and sugar and tobacco to be found in the hut and carried
off.
But none of the outrages occurred near the township of
Port Lincoln, and, therefore, not near Poonindie. The
natives about us were a perfectly quiet and harmless set
of people. There was excellent fishing at various places
along the coast. They had different methods of fishing;
the usual method was to spear the fish in the water, and
it was astonishing to what skill and accuracy of aim some
of them attained.
Although I frequently employed them to do odd jobs,
they, of course, stood upon a totally different footing from
the inmates of the Institution. All those who were
enrolled as inmates had to conform strictly to the habits
of civilized life. They had all to be in their own proper
sleeping places at night; they had to attend prayers in
the house, take their breakfast, dinner, &c., at the proper
time, and attend prayers again at night—over the outside,
or Wurley natives—Wurley was the name of the little
temporary habitations which they set up for themselves,
made of the branches of trees, reeds, rushes, &c.—l did
not attempt to exercise any control ; and when I employed
them it was always by the job, not by the day.
The jobs at which they were employed might be
clearing a given piece of ground of stumps of trees,
roots, &c., or cutting down the trees on a certain space,
or making rough fences by cutting down and putting
together trees or branches. This was quite a sufficient
fence for sheep; but the small branches soon became dry
and brittle, and the fences required frequent watching and
frequent repairing. The payment to the Wurley natives
would be certain specified rations per day, i.e., so much
flour, sugar, tea and tobacco, and a small money pay-
ment. If a good many hands, say ten or twelve, were
put on upon a job, then one of the older men amongst the
inmates would be set over them to see that the work was


properly done. But a small party of the more trust-
worthy or skilful men would do the appointed work quite
satisfactorily without any superintendence.
They had, of course, frequent opportunities of seeing
the superior comfort in which our people lived. But I
never could discover that anyone had, at any time, the
slightest ambition to be enrolled as an inmate. Neither
could we induce anyone ever to listen seriously to our in-
struction. The trial was repeatedly made, not only by
myself and the other white people of the Institution, but
by some of our natives. Toodko especially manifested the
greatest desire to impart to them some knowledge of
Christianity. But all in vain. The man to whom he was
talking would look at him with a good-humoured expression
on his face, probably smiling internally at this kind
solicitude, but one would look in vain for any sign of even
the smallest spark of interest in what was being said, or
any indication that the man was trying to, or wished to,
understand it. Then again these people had the case of
their own children before them, i.e., those who had been
brought up in Mr. Schiirmann’s school; they saw their
children growing up, and being taught in the Christian
faith, their conduct influenced and ruled thereby. But
nothing made any impression upon them.
It would appear, then, that our Poonindie experience
proved two things :
(1) That, in the case of an Australian aborigine, if he is
put under instruction when he is quite young ; if his in-
tellect is kept growing and his mind expanding, that
growth and expansion may be continued in after years;
that if the truths of Christianity are fittingly put before
him his natural simplicity of mind and his docility will
dispose him readily to receive those truths, and that he
may, by the grace of God, become not only a Christian,
but a Christian of a high stamp and a truly spiritually-
minded person ; such, I say unhesitatingly, were Narrung,
Toodko, and Mudlong amongst our inmates.
(2) What we learn, secondly, at any rate what I feel
that I learned from my long intercourse with some of the
amiable well-disposed Port Lincoln natives, is that if the
intellect is not stimulated in early years, not cultivated,
nothing set before the mind to help it on in expansion and
growth, it becomes hopelessly dwarfed or stunted. There


is a time for growth and expansion. But if that time is
lost it can never be recovered.
I have already dwelt at some length upon the case of
Neruid. I suppose him to have been about seventeen or
eighteen when he came into our hands. His mind was
operated upon by a very powerful motive. He had an
intense desire to become a Poonindie native. But even at
the age I have named the time for growth of mind or in-
tellect was apparently rapidly passing away with him.
Although he was very anxious to learn, he could not make
much progress. He could not at all keep pace with the
children. But by God’s grace the efforts which his strong
will enabled him to make were sufficient to open his mind
to receive the truths of Christianity. He received those
truths in the love of them. He lived the life of a Christian
for twenty years ; and when he died his friends gladly
testified concerning him that he had left them u a good
example. But his case was a solitary one. Isfo case like
it was ever brought to my knowledge. That which I
have now stated is the lesson which I learned from my
intercourse with the aborigines of the Port Lincoln dis-
trict. But I learned a very similar lesson from my inter-
course with the peasantry of our Western Counties of
England fifty years ago.
I suppose, as a result of the very great efforts which
have been made in promoting public education during
the last twenty-five or thirty years, there are comparatively
few persons now who have not attended schools in their
early years. But at the time I speak of the number of
persons amongst the peasants who could not read was very
large, and one almost never heard of a person who had
to read after he or she had grown to man’s or
woman s estate. I am far from saying that this ignorance
or indisposition to mental effort formed any difficulty in
the way of these people receiving the truths of Chris-
tianity. I know that that was not the case, because, as
a rule, they had been hearing about these truths, in one
way or another, almost from their infancy. What I mean
to say is this: that it would appear that, in the case of
persons whose intellects have not been aroused or
quickened by ordinary school instruction in early life a
certain measure of torpidity creeps over their minds,
which seems to deaden any desire for instruction, and


stands in the way of their even learning to read in
after life, though they must know quite well that, for very
many reasons, it would be greatly to their advantage to
do so. But to return to the question of the natives.
Although they have been rapidly dying out in the settled
districts, there are still thousands of square miles on the
Australian Continent where Europeans have not settled,
and where the natives still remain in force : and there is
in the minds of very many persons an earnest desire to do
something towards civilising and Christianising some
members at least of this unhappy race. If it please God
to permit me to accomplish what I have in view, I will
add to my narrative a separate paper describing my
views of the way in which I think the work should be
gone about. I will now only say this, that the object to
be primarily aimed at in all cases should be the getting
hold of and instructing the children. The children of this
race quickly spring up to maturity.
Let me give an instance. Mr, Schiinnann commenced
his school a few months before I commenced at Poonindie.
In two-years-and-a-half from the time he commenced he
had three girls well taught, and so far grown up that they
had become restless and unsettled at the school: and he
feared that they might be enticed back into the Bush to
live again with the Wurley natives. Knowing that we had at
Poonindie many more young men than young women, he
begged of me to see if I could not arrange for these three
girls to join the Institution as wives of three of our young
men. The arrangement was brought about.
The girls came to us. They proved to be suitable
inmates, and in the course of time, gave satisfactory
evidence of an earnest desire to lead Christian lives, and
were baptized. Surely, then, Mr. Schiirmann’s school was
not long in bearing fruit. Any one devoting himself to
missionary work may well be prepared to wait three or
four years, and at the end of that period his pupils may
have become well grounded in the facts and truths of
Christianity.
Let me again call attention to the fact that the two
experiments—teaching the children and trying to teach the
adults—were in our case being tried simultaneously, the
natives of Port Lincoln being the subjects of our experi-
ments ; and what were the results ? As regards the


children, in the course of about four or five years after
Mr. Schiirmann opened his school, we had in the Poonindie
Institution several of his pupils as members of a Christian
community, some as baptized Christians, others as
Catechumens preparing for baptism. As regards the
adults, during the same space of time we had failed
to make a single convert. It is true that some of
the men would, in the most patient and good-humoured
manner listen to us, so far as the hearing of the ear went ;
but we had failed to perceive the slightest indication that a
single individual took the least interest in what we were
saying, or felt any desire whatever to understand the
matter.
Having so often repeated Mr. Schtirmann’s name I think
I ought to say something more about him. He, and some
other Lutheran pastors, were sent out by some German
missionary society to labour, in any way they could,
amongst the Australian aborigines, and, in the year 1849,
Mr. Schiirmann, under the authority of the Government,
started the school for native children on a spot about half-
way between Port Lincoln and the then Poonindie sheep
station. He had a small salary as schoolmaster, and he
had also a small salary as interpreter of the native lan-
guage. But when the gold fever set in, and people were
running away from South Australia by thousands to go to
the diggings, there ensued a sort of panic—an idea that
the Colony might be almost on the brink of ruin. Then
there came a day, afterwards known as “ Black Thursday,”
when a great number of Government officials were told
that their services would no longer be required. Amongst
the sufferers was Mr. Schiirmann, who lost his interpreter-
ship. He soon afterwards made up his mind to give up
the school; and it became attached to Poonindie.
It will be remembered that, in the first instance, I had
nothing to do with any other natives except those who had
come, or were to come, from the Adelaide school. In
giving my explanation of the way in which I was brought
into close contact with the Port Lincoln natives, I have
been led into this digression. I now return to other
matters.
The Bishop, in his letter to S. G. P. above quoted, men-
tions the return of Mr. Wollaston to Poonindie. It will be
remembered that he left in March, 1852, in order to join his


brother at the diggings. We were very glad of his return,
especially as Mr. Minchin had, in the meantime, received
an appointment from the Government as Protector of
Aborigines somewhere near the head of Spencer s Gult,
and had gone to enter upon his duties.
I regret that, for the purpose of carrying on my narrative,
I cannot make extracts from a diary for 1853. For I nnd
that I have none for that year. It appears that i alto-
gether neglected it. But, as I have already pretty luffy
described the various duties of the Institution, and how
those duties were carried on, the loss is, perhaps, not a
very serious one ; more especially as I have copies of some
of my official Reports to the Government.
Apparently, I had some fear that the members of the
Government might be discouraged by the frequent deaths
amongst us —and might be tempted to think that, even
supposing that the Institution was making Christians of
the inmates, this would not be of much use if they were to
die immediately after. At any rate I appear to have
indirectly combated any idea of that kind. In one Report
“ I said the spiritual advancement of the inmates has
“ always been the great object of my solicitude. Indeed it
“ is the object which I have in view in entering upon and
“ continuing to carry on the undertaking which I have in
“ hand. . . . The test which has been applied to the
“religious principles of our little community has been ot
“ the most severe and searching description in the great
“ prevalence of sickness and death. And the faith in
“ Christ of these poor children of the desert has been
“ proved to be of no false or hollow character. In the
“ minds of the dying it has shone more brightly and clearly
“as death approached. In the minds of the living it has
“ remained firm and steadfast whilst the hand of death has
“ been busy amongst their companions.”
In another Report I mentioned the death of another dear
lad, Tartan. He was only a boy when he came to us at
the time of our settling at Poonindie, October, 1850. “ e
had been constant in his attendance at the Adelaide School,
and was really a very good scholar, and such a cheerful,
amiable fellow that every one was fond of him. He was
one of the eleven baptized by the Bishop, February 10,
1833, and he was carried off by a rapid consumption on the
27th of the following month, the day being Easter Sunday.


I reported the matter to the Government in the following
words “He was taken from us on Easter Sunday, March
“ 2 7- But, whilst we deeply deplore his loss from amongst
us, the circumstances connected with his departure were
“ as to afford us the most abundant comfort and con-
“ solation. His latter end, as that of three of his com-
“panions who had gone before him, was cheered by
<1 u S rm Blessed Redeemer, and by the joyful
“ hope of a blessed and glorious resurrection to eternal
“ life.”
In yet another Report, during this same year, 1853,1 wrote
thus“ Ido not pretend to deny that I feel at times
“ greatly depressed by these afflicting dispensations. And
“ w , hen 1 consider them in all their bearings, I find no
difficulty in discerning how, in the hands of an omni-
potent and all-merciful God, these afflictions become the
instruments by which the highest and most important
purposes are worked out. There can be doubt but that
“ the ver y general serious and anxious attention which is
“ now paid by the natives to all matters of a religious
‘ nature must be regarded as, in a great measure, the effect
of these frequent visitations.”
It had been my constant endeavour to get this great
truth firmly implanted in their minds, viz., that the great
purpose for which we are placed in this world is, not merely
that we may live long lives, but that we may so live as to
be constantly preparing for a better life, and that if, by God’s
grace, we do so prepare, we should look forward to that
better life cheerfully and joyfully, and gladly receive the
summons t 0 g ° t 0 Xt when it: should please God to call us
And most thankful I am to be able to say that this was
the Prevailing feeling in the minds of many of our inmates
while still in health. It might be supposed that, under the
circumstances above described, our little community would
have been oppressed by a general feeling of gloom or
despondency. Nothing of the sort took place. We
sorrowed, truly and sincerely, for the loss of the companion-
ship of our dear friends, as they were taken from us. But
we sorrowed not as them that are without hope. We
willingly resigned our friends to their loving Father who
had taken them, knowing that our loss was their ever-
lasting gam.
I must now say something about the work of the Institu-


tion. In my report for June, 1853, I wrote as follows: —
“ As the different seasons come round for the performance
“ of the various operations of farming the land and getting
“ the land into cultivation, they serve to mark the progress
“ which the natives are making in skill and general use-
“ fulness. We have just now completed the ploughing
“ and sowing for the present season. And the manner in
“ which this has been accomplished affords the clearest
“evidence of advancement from year to year. In 1851 the
“ploughing was performed entirely by Europeans.” [lt
was in fact done by Mr. Wollaston.] “In 1852 it was
“ performed by the natives. But I was myself constantly
“ on the spot, and superintending and directing, and mark-
“ing off the lands.”
“ This year, superintendence and assistance from Mr.
“ Wollaston at the commencement of the season, and to a
“ limited extent, have been found sufficient. Upon divers
“ occasions the ploughmen have gone on with their work,
“marking off the lands, and going through the whole
“ process of the ploughing without even the presence of
“an European in the field for days together. In the case
“of one small paddock of about four acres, they were
“ left to complete the sowing and harrowing by themselves
“ without any assistance. The extent of land which has
“ been thus got under crop is about twenty acres. The
“ whole of it is sown with wheat.”
In my report for September, I stated that another
public baptism had taken place, the date thereof was
August 6. After referring to the baptisms celebrated
by the Bishop on February 10, I go on to say: —“I
“ have now the further happiness of stating that, since
“ that time, I have had the privilege of baptizing sixteen
“ more. Nearly the whole of these candidates last named
“ belonged to that party of lads and boys whom I brought
“ with me from the natives’ school in Adelaide, after the
“ happy death of the youth Takenarro, which occurred at
“ that school in January, 1852.
“ On account of the number brought to Poonindie upon
“ that occasion, and on account of their being just at the
“ age when youths are considered to be most impatient of
“ control, I had great misgivings with respect to the evils
“ which I thought might probably result from my receiving
“ them at that time into the Institution. I am most


“ thankful to say that my fears with respect to their
“ conduct have not been by any means realized. And
“ when I now find myself surrounded by these same indi-
“ viduals, most of them having, by this time, sprung up
“ to manhood, and when I feel that I can look upon the
“ majority of them as serious and consistent Christians,
“my mind is filled with gratitude to the Almighty
“ Disposer of events that I was induced to attend to the
“ entreaties of these simple-hearted creatures, and to
“ bring them with me upon that occasion to join their
“ former companions at this place.”
I then proceeded to mention how the work of God had
been helped on by the pious efforts of some of the natives
themselves: I said, “Another thing which makes this
“ general attention to the things of God still more deeply
interesting is the way in which the good work has been
“ promoted and helped forward by some of the more
“ influential of the young men themselves. The pious
“ efforts of two of these in particular ” [they were Naming
and his brother Toodko] “ have been productive of much
“good and have been attended with most beneficial
“ results.”
I have already stated that the Poonindie shearers, after
shearing our own sheep, took jobs of shearing at other
stations. This became quite an established yearly custom,
an arrangement which was both useful to the district and
profitable to our men. As the shearing time of 1853
approached, it occurred to me that I might contrive some
mechanical arrangement for pressing the wool into the wool
bales. The wool bale is hung inside a wooden box, the bale
and box both being open at the top, and, as the fleeces are
put in, they require, of course, to be pressed down. If this
is done without mechanical power a man stands upon the
wool, treading it down in the centre, and tucking it down
with a spade at the sides of the bale.
But this is necessarily a slow process, and, when the
elasticity of wool is taken into account, it will be at once
perceived that a very much smaller quantity of wool could
be put into a bale in this way than could be put by means
of mechanical pressure. Ships’ freights are charged by
measurement, and it is therefore so much money in the
wool grower’s pocket if he can reduce the number of his
bales without reducing the quantity of wool transmitted.


Very efficient wool presses are imported into the Colonies,
and they are used at all large and important stations. But
with our small number of sheep, one of these machines was
out of the question.
I had seen in the yard of Captain Bishop’s store at Port
Lincoln, a little, common machine known as a timber-gin,
which is extensively used in timber yards, shipbuilding
yards, &c., and for stowing cargo in ships. It looks like a
block of wood, perhaps about two feet six long, and about
nine or ten inches broad. It has in it an arrangement of
cogwheels by means of which a strong piece of iron called
the sword is pushed out with great power from one end. It
occurred to me that by fixing this up immediately over the
wool bale, the sword might be pushed downward, and we
might thereby obtain the necessary pressure. I therefore
proceeded to work out the idea ; and I made a cardboard
model of the structure I wished to be erected. It was
simply a very massive gallows, strong enough and heavy
enough to resist the upward pressure when the machine
was putting forth its strength downward. I substituted
staves, which could be worked by two men, for the ordinary
windlass handle. A stage also was to be erected at the
proper height on which the men were to stand to work the
staves, the structure was set up under Mr. Wollaston’s
superintendence, according to the cardboard model. It
answered admirably, and continued to be used for several
seasons. In fact by means of it, we could put into a bale
as many fleeces as the bale would contain without the
danger of bursting. I forget what the limit is, but I think
it is about 380 lbs. If somewhere about that weight is
exceeded, the probability is that in consequence of the
rough handling which the bale will meet with, it will burst
before it reaches its destination.
I should have been glad if I could have given the names
of the men who composed the party of shearers, but I
cannot do so. In the year 1872, when I again visited
Poonindie, I fell in, in the steamer, with a large flock
owner, I believe the largest in the Port Lincoln district.
He habitually employed the Poonindie shearers, and bore
testimony to their usefulness and good conduct. He
referred particularly to one of them, Tom Adams, and he
said that there was not a man in the district that he liked
better to see in his wool shed than Tom Adams. He is a


to tHMt an T d , ha ! I hlst P T y’ and 1 must here digress a little
went Lp 1 he^ d of hls father some time before I
nf Poomnd ! e .- H 6 was a shepherd in the employ of
one of my great friends, at whose house I have very often
stayed the night when on my journeys to and fro between
Adelaide and the Clare district, where I was at one time
stationed. This shepherd, Adams, had taken to wife a
native woman, who had been brought up at some settler’s
station and was partially educated. Adams could not read
and the black wife taught the white husband to read. Two
or three times I quoted this case when pleading the cause
of the natives at public meetings in South Australia. It
that m t H <3 T 6ar 1848 tha ? 1 WaS fre quently up and down
Slateh s ad ’ Fng at mg lt at the Stati ° n referred to—Mr.
In the month of May, in the year 1855, the man Adams
“I 6 t!! apP<^ rai ? Ce , at Poon j ndie . bringing two little half-
Port ““ e fr ° m Mn Skter ’ S Station to
t ‘p Adelaide, a nd had then taken ship and come on by sea
If u- V^i ln i 0ln ’ f ° r * e P ur P° se of asking me to take charge
of his little boys. They were both sufficiently young to be
baptized according to the form for Infant Baptism. They
thJ T gr .°' Vl ?. Up to . b | exemplary men and leading men in
the Institution. And I hear that Tom, the eldest and the
tamous shearer, is now a grandfather. Of course I saw
him on the occasion referred to, my visit of 1872, and a
fine specimen of a man he is. He and his brother have
four years mmat6S ° f Instltutlon for very nearly thirty-
The great farming event of each year, after the shearing
was the harvest, and I am sorry to say that, as I neglected
y diary the latter part of 1853 a nd for several months
afterwards, I am not able to give any account of the harvest
ot that year. _ My impression is that it was a fairly good
one, and that it was got in, threshed, and cleaned, &c., by
the natives, under Mr. Wollaston’s superintendence 7
1 have made mention above of the achievement of the
Poomnche men as shearers in after years, and I think I
shall be excused if I make the following extract from the
Government Gazette, of February 12, 1880, to show that
they became accomplished ploughmen, as well as shearers
as time went on. _Mr. Joseph Shaw, at that time super-
intending the institution, reported to the Government as


follows :—“ We have two or three very good ploughers,
“ and, at a ploughing match in the district, some months
“ ago, the natives succeeded in obtaining all the best
“ prizes, much to the surprise of every one, particularly of
“ the competitors, who were farmers of long standing in
“ the district.”
I find that, in consequence of my neglect of my diary, I
made a short summary of events connected with our
spiritual concerns in 1853 and the beginning of 1854. The
following is an extract of the summary : —“ Most important
“ have been the events which marked this period. What
“ mercies have been showered down upon me ! How has
“ God’s goodness called upon me to devote myself more
“ than ever to His service, with devoted zeal and singleness
“ of purpose, and tenderness of spirit, in my endeavours to
“ win souls to Christ. A mixture of sorrows and of joys in
“ large measures has characterised the year : especially
“ from our having been afflicted with so much sickness
“ amongst the natives, and so many deaths. Most of them,
“ however, watched the approach of the time for their re-
“ spective departures out of this world, full of faith and hope.
“ And, God be praised, they gave us every reason to
“ believe that they were firmly established in the faith of
“ Christ. In fact the state in which their minds were was
“ such as nothing but the work of the Holy Spirit could
“ have produced. Immediately connected with this sub-
“ject, and giving occasion for expressions of unbounded
“ gratitude to the Giver of all good, is the progress which
“ the work of God has been making during this period.
“The crowning point is that the natives now advise and
“ exhort one another, and help one another.”
Our dear friend Narrung died December 5. His was
the last death in 1853. For the reason already alleged, I
am not able to give any particulars of his last hours. I am
sure, however, that he died as I have represented him
above, a devout and earnest Christian. This much I dis-
tinctly remember, that when he had ceased to be able to
go to work, he used to sit in the open air with a cheerful
and happy look upon his face, reading his Testament; i,e.,
the three or four chapters of St. John which he had learned
to read by going over them again and again. The seven-
teenth chapter was the one he especially loved. His usual
expression was that he was just waiting until it should
please God to call him.


I have now brought my narrative down to the end of
1853. I have entered much into details. My hope has
been that I might so set the whole matter before the
minds of my readers, that anyone who might think it
worth while to make the effort, might almost fancy himself
to be living and moving amongst us. He may surely
pretty clearly understand how we were all occupied, and
what was our general routine of employment from day to
day. By the time we arrived at the end of the year
1853, that routine was firmly established by custom, and
it appears to me that it is quite unnecessary for me to
repeat the same things over and over again. I propose,
therefore, to state only briefly the occurrences of the
remaining time of my stay at Poonindie, concluding with a
full account of the state of affairs at the time of my
departure.
I have, in the course of my narrative, said much about
the good conduct of our inmates and their progress in
Christian knowdedge and in the practice of Christian
duties. But I have said nothing about the falls into sin
of some amongst them. My silence on this last-named
subject has by no means been occasioned by any desire to
conceal the fact that there were falls into sin. But I have
felt that to enter into details about these matters would be
anything but edifying to the reader, and could not answer
any good purpose. It must suffice therefore for me to say
that we had cases of grievous falls. And what is, if
possible, still more sad is, that we had grievous falls amongst
my white assistants. In fact if by any possibility I could
measure my trouble and distress of mind from the one
source and from the other, it might be found that I had
suffered almost more from the misconduct of some of the
white people than from that of the natives. There was
this difference. When the natives fell, they fell from a
position which was new to them. They had had such a
short time to accustom themselves to live up to the high
standard of morals required by Christianity. They had
had but a short time to learn and experience the utter help-
lessness of man without the grace of God, and his liability
to fall if he should neglect, even for the shortest time,
diligently to seek that grace. The native fell. But his
conscience was not outraged by sins done deliberately and
of set purpose, in opposition to full light and knowledge.


■The conscience therefore was not silenced; the offender
was troubled in mind by its reproaches and the conse-
quent remorse. The offender then became a penitent and
rose again from his fall. In the case of the white offenders
they put their hands to our work as persons having a zeal
for religion. They sinned against the light and knowledge
of many years. The conscience had been deliberately
resisted ; it had been reduced to silence ; and there followed
no sign of repentance.
1854. —The year 1854 was a year of marked character
throughout the Colony of South Australia on account of the
failure of the wheat crop. The long drought prevailing, I
believe,over the whole Colony, produced the most disastrous
results. At Poonindie, where there were so many mouths
to be fed, this calamity affected us most seriously, ftwas not
only from the failure of our own crop that we suffered; but
the general failure ran up the price of flour to almost
double what it had been when the Institution was first
established. In 1850 and 1851 the price of flour ranged
at about £ll or £l2 per ton. After the failure of the
wheat crop of 1854 the price went up to £2.0 per ton.
And this was not all. The owner of the little schooner
which carried on the shipping trade between Port Adelaide
and Port Lincoln raised enormously his charges for freight.
These high prices lasted through nearly all the year 1855,
and I was thereby greatly thrown back in my financial
position. When I first started I had, of course, every-
thing to do, and very insufficient funds to do it with,
and I then got considerably into arrears. But, after I
entered upon my contract, and had the£"i,ooo per annum,
I was gradually picking up; and had nearly righted myself
when the calamity of 1854 threw me back again. I here
gratefully mention the name of Mr. Alexander Lang
Elder—for he it was who sustained me in my difficulties,
and enabled me to carry on my undertaking. I did all my
business with him ; and he, knowing how I was circum-
stanced, continued to send me flour and other provisions
according to my need, when I had got far behind in my
payments.
He, and Mrs. Elder and their little boy, taking a pleasure
trip in one of his well-earned holidays, paid a visit to Port
Lincoln ; and I had the pleasure of driving them out to
Poonindie to see our little settlement.


So far from being discouraged by the failure of the crop
for 1854, we got more land than ever under cultivation in
1855, and it then pleased God to bless us with an
abundant crop. We were able to send 600 bushels of
wheat to Captain Hart’s mill at Port Adelaide to be
ground for the Institution, and 100 bushels were kept at
home for seed or any other purpose for which it might be
required.
I must now return to that subject which occupies so large
a space in this narrative. In one of my official Reports to
the Government, I wrote as follows : “I am most anxious
“to leave no means untried to preserve our inmates in
“ health, and, if possible, to stay the tide of mortality which
“ seems to have set in upon us. With a view to the more
“effectual use of such means as may be within our reach,
“ I am anxious to procure, for at any rate some months, the
“ services of a medical man to be resident at the Institu-
“ tion, who would then have it in his power to watch very
“ narrowly the health of the inmates ; and he might be able to
“ discover whether, amongst the peculiarities of their habits
“ and of their manner of life in this place, there is anything
“ which can be specially fixed upon as being detrimental to
“ health. To any person who may read this, and who will
“ endeavour to procure for me the benefit of such medical
“aid, I shall feel really and sincerely indebted.’’ I then
mentioned the name of Mr. Moorhouse, and the names of
two other leading medical men to whom communications
might be addressed. I again returned to this subject in a
later Report, and said : “ I have still the same anxieties as
“ I before expressed to have the benefit of the temporary
“residence of some medical manat the Institution; but
“ I have received no communication from any quarter upon
“ the subject.”
But that which I spoke of as a tide of mortality setting
in upon us did not recede. We had many deaths in 1854
and 1855 ; but we had still the same consolations to support
us as those already described. In the majority of cases
those who left us departed full of Christian faith, hoping
for a blessed resurrection. Having no diary of the period
to refer to, I am not able to specify particulars, except in a
few cases ; for, as may be supposed, there was much simi-
larity in the cases. I have a distinct recollection, however,
of one of my visits to the bedside of a dear lad named


Moonchie. He was a cheerful, good tempered fellow, much
liked by his companions ; but he was volatile, and had often
needed reproofs. On the occasion I refer to, I had read to
him the parable of the Prodigal Son, and was trying to
bring home to him its application. I remarked upon the
action of the father, as represented in the parable, and his
fatherly love and readiness to forgive ; and then I asked,
“ What does that mean ?” He answered quitereadily, “That
means God.” Then I remarked upon the action of the
returning son, and was proceeding to ask the same ques-
tion with reference to him. I have very often made use of
the parable in the same way, when teaching young or
simple-minded persons ; and the answer about the son has
been, so far I remember, invariably a general one, such
as “ That means the sinner praying for forgiveness of his
“ sins,” and in such cases something more has to be said
to make the application personal. But, in poor Moonchie’s
case, there was no need to get to the point in a round-
about way. He scarcely gave me time to ask the question
about the son, but replied quickly, and with much
animation, “ That’s me.” Moonchie was one of the
fifteen whom I brought with me from Adelaide in January,
1852. He was baptized in August, 1853, and died in
December, 1854.
I mention another case, that of Taaba, because she
belonged to the Port Lincoln district, and was the
first of that district who, as we hope, died in the faith.
It will be remembered that, at Mr. Schiirrnann’s urgent
request, I received, before the school was transferred to
Poonindie, three of his girls, who, as he said, had out-
grown the school. Taaba was one of them ; and for that
reason I made special mention of her case in my Report
to the Government of January, 1856. She was admitted
to Poonindie, November, 1852 ; was baptized at the same
time as Moonchie, August, 1853 ; and died December,
1855. This is what I said of her;—“ She had uniformly
“ conducted herself with strict propriety. She was very
“ intelligent, and could read well, but she did not manifest
“ that degree of earnestness in the pursuit of the Kingdom
“of Heaven, or that deep concern about the salvation of
“ her soul which I should have been thankful to have
“ witnessed. Her own relations, mother, &c., still living
“ for the most part in the Bush, and conforming to Bush


“ habits of life, were constantly with her during her last
“ illness ; and their presence and companionship operated,
“ I have no doubt, in a manner very unfavourable to her
“ spiritual condition.”
Dear, good Neechi, who died in August, 1855, had been
truly a pillar of the Institution from the day of its
foundation. He was one of those ■who had been sent by
Mr. Moorhouse to be employed upon a station before I
had anything to do with the matter. He and his wife
Kilpa joined our party when we went to Boston Island.
He was a man of different temperament from his great
friend N arrung, less animated, and quiet in manner. But
he sympathized, heart and soul, with his friend in every
thing that was good. His services, in work of all kinds,
were valuable, because he could always be thoroughly
depended upon. And he w r as at home in occupations of
every kind. I have no record of his last days, but I feel
perfectly sure that he died, as he had lived, an earnest,
consistent and devout Christian.
It appears that I did not, as a rule, preserve copies of
my Reports to the Government, although I have been
able to give extracts from some of them. The following
extracts is from the Report of December 31, 1855 :
“ I have now to record the death of another whose loss
we deeply feel.
“ For a length of time, the exemplary conduct and
unblemished character of Joseph Mudlong exercised a most
important influence amongst the members of our little
community. When I first made his acquaintance, at the
beginning of 1851,he was a messenger at Government
House known by the name of Jemmy. In June of that
same year he joined the Institution. In February, 1853, on
the occasion of the Bishop’s visit to Poonindie, he,
together with Neechi, Narrung and others, eleven in all,
received the Sacrament of Baptism at his Lordship’s
hands. From first to last his conduct was most correct
and blameless ; but not only by this decorum and correct-
ness of life was the reality of his Christian principles
evidenced. It was manifest that his heart was with God.
He was a lover of good things and one who yearned after
the souls of others. He was ever forward to instruct the
young and to guide and teach + hose who possessed less
knowledge than himself. The man who, taking a less


favoured brother for his pupil, unobserved by any eye but
that of God, unbidden by any voice but that of Christian
charity speaking within him, will affectionately strive for
that brother’s soul and patiently instruct him in the
blessed way of salvation—that man must needs be a
blessing to any community, and his departure from that
community must needs be felt to be a heavy privation.
Such was Joseph Mudlong at Poonindie. The day is yet
future when the fruits of his spiritual labours will be fully
known. His last days upon earth were strictly in keeping
with those which had gone before. As the time
approached for his departure to that Heavenly Kingdom,
which he so earnestly desired, his disposition, habitually
cheerful, became more so than usual; and, notwithstand-
ing his sufferings and extreme debility, there was a tone
of happiness, I may indeed say of joyousness, pervading
his whole mind, which was most edifying to all about him.
We shall greatly feel his loss. In the school, as well as
elsewhere, he rendered important aid ; and frequently on
Sundays, as well as upon other days, he conducted
Divine Service in my absence. .
“ I bear in mind in this case, as I have done upon similar
occasions before, that I am writing an Official Report, and,
therefore, I abstain from saying more than I feel to be
necessary to show that the Institution is. satisfactorily
accomplishing the great object for which it was formed,
viz. that of leading on the inmates step by step to a know-
ledge of their Crucified Redeemer, and preparing them to
enter into everlasting life. We now reckon something like
seventeen or eighteen souls, once members of our little
community, whom we firmly believe to have entered into
their heavenly rest. , , .
“ Of the peculiar features and characteristics of their
piety I could say much if I considered this a proper place
for such enlargement. One feature, however, I must
remark upon, viz., the clear and unclouded happiness of
their minds as death approaches. For nearly twenty years
the duties of my sacred calling have brought me much into
the presence of the sick and dying. In my ministrations
amongst persons in this condition I feel that my Divine
Master has enabled me to reap my richest fruits. Yet the
calm, uninterrupted happiness at the approach of death
such as that which I have just described, I have met with


in comparatively but few instances amongst those of my own
race. A lurking worldliness of mind, a hankering after and
a care for ‘ many things ’ —how often do these enemies of
the Christian’s peace disturb his mind and cast a cloud over
his happiness as his great change draws near. At the
death-bed of Joseph Mudlong, and others of his race who
have gone before him, I have felt, indeed, constrained to
exclaim, ‘ Let me die the death of the righteous, and let
my last end be like his.’ ”
I have now brought to a conclusion my part of the
story of Poonindie. For the second part we are to be in-
debted to the pen of Mr, Edwin Blackmore, Clerk of the
Legislative Council of South Australia. Mr. Blackmore
possesses every qualification requisite for the performance
of this task. He is not only intimately acquainted with
Poonindie and all connected with the place, he is also
officially connected with the Institution, having been for the
past eight years the acting Trustee thereof, and he is
thoroughly accustomed to literary work. The second part
will be of great interest and importance, because it will
show that the Institution has a vitality of its own. Like
all human institutions, it has had its ups and downs.
Many hands and many minds have been connected with
its management, but it has still kept steadily on its way for
a period of nearly forty years, doing its work for God’s
glory and for the salvation of souls. (
Many readers of my narrative may like to know what
strangers have thought and said about Poonindie. I there-
fore add four Appendices. Appendix Ais a letter written
by a gentleman named Lowe, who stayed with us a short
time a few weeks before my departure. Mr. Lowe’s ex-
pressions and his whole earnest demeanour made it manifest
that his visit made a very deep impression upon him.
About Mr. Goodwin, the writer of the letter, Appendix B,
I never had any information except that which I derived
from newspapers. My impression is that he travelled from
Melbourne for the express purpose of visiting Poonindie,
and that he -was requested to do this, either on behalf of
some religious society or as a representative of the press.
All that I could learn about the writer of the paper in
Appendix C was that he was a stranger who visited the
Port Lincoln district. The Melbourne Missionary, in 'which
the paper appeared, is a little religious periodical, edited by


the Rev. Hussey de Burgh Macartney, of Melbourne. The
paper, Appendix D, with the heading, sufficiently explains
itself.
Appendix A.
A VISIT TO POONINDIE.
The following is an extract from a letter written to
Archdeacon Hale by a gentleman, long resident in the
Colony of New South Wales, who, early in the year 1856,
visited the Natives’ Training Institution at Poonindie,
Port Lincoln :
“ I could not, after the termination of a long journey
across this vast country from E. to W., along a line of
rivers on whose banks abundant examples of the aboriginal
population are to be seen and studied in their habits and
condition, witness what I saw at Poonindie, and in con-
nection with your Training Institution, without a deep
impression of the wonderful work it has accomplished. I
say wonderful, because at every stage of my journey I
made, as opportunity occurred, and such was almost
daily, minute inquiries as to the gradually wasting away
of tribes of men once occupiers of the soil, and the
progress of the remnant that was left—in European
habits, general civilization, moral and religious improve-
ment, as also as to their food, their dress, their supersti-
tions—the results of contact with the white man—their
intelligence, their capabilities; and the result was that
each day added to the hopelessness I felt of any such
change as would rescue them from the degraded condition
that everywhere, in one shape or another, was presented.
I became conscious of the amount of depravity that was
conquered only when I contrasted the wretchedness to
which I have averted with the comforts you have be-
stowed on the aboriginal natives under your personal care,
as evidenced by the condition of those around you.
“ I think you had sixty inmates when I visited your
institution ; and w r hen I saw the adult members of your
flock pursuing the avocations of the farm, conscious of the
self-respect which man owes to himself as a rational being,
well clothed (by means of their own earnings), quiet,
orderly, deferential yet not servile, supplying the place of
my own countrymen (without their vices) in shearing
the plough, with the sickle, as shepherds, standing out in


strong relief from the wild tribes around them, I then felt
that the objection was for ever silenced that the aboriginal
is not to be reclaimed. He stood before me as an example
of a good and useful member of society ; but that was not
all. I saw not only his social improvement, but the
cultivation of religion bearing its fruits—in some thirty, in
some an hundredfold. My feelings are not readily to be
described when, as your guest, I heard the matins bell
summoning the village to early worship ; and, obeying its
call, I found your chapel benches filled by civilized and
baptized natives, who were repeating in my own tongue
the responses of my own Church, and listening re-
verentially to the portion of the Scripture she dispenses
to them daily, and observing a demeanour which would
put many of those white men to shame, who, when they
enter a church, are there ashamed to kneel. Not only by
outward posture, but with heartfelt earnestness, did these
men reverence the sanctuary. I heard the tone of their
repetition of the Confession. I heard the voice of their
psalmody and thanksgivings in the accents of our own
Church music, accompanied by their flutes, and I ac-
knowledged that they were there my teachers. Here, then,
was the further proof that these difficult and blind tribes
can be brought to the light of faith, and can evidence it by
their lives. Let no man henceforth say they have neither
part nor lot with us in the salvation vouchsafed to all!
And, as these things were thus passing before me, one
there was in your hospital, whose hours were numbered,
even then praying for the conversion of his tribe.”
Appendix B.
CHURCH OF ENGLAND MISSION TO THE
ABORIGINES.
The following narrative of Mr. Goodwin’s was read at
the annual meeting of themembers andfriends ofthis Mission
on the 19th Jan., iB6O :
“ I arrived at Port Lincoln (by the steamer Marion) on
Sunday afternoon, November 27. The Bishop of Adelaide
having kindly furnished me with an introduction to a Mr.
Bishop, I at once directed my steps towards his residence,
and there met with the Rev. O. Hammond, the superin-
tendent of the Native Training Institution at Poonindie,


who welcomed me in a very cordial manner. After a short
delay, we started on horseback for Poonindie, which lies
ten miles to the north of the town of Port Lincoln, The
road lay along the shores of the noble harbour of Boston
Bay, and for the first few miles over hills thickly timbered
with sheoak to the water’s edge, the country becoming
more level and open as we neared Poonindie, which is
situated a short distance from the banks of a small river
named the Tod, upon a plain lightly timbered with sheoak,
which is the prevailing timber of the country.
“The village of Poonindie consists of the superinten-
dent’s residence, and sundry out-buildings, a large stone
building, used as a dining-hall by the natives, eight brick
cottages (mostly two-roomed), and a schoolroom, which is
36 feet long by 16 feet wide inside, with a bay-window ot
four lights 4 feet deep; the side-walls are 17 feet high,
the gable-ends 28 feet high; on one of them is a bell-
turret ; it is built of stone with brick quoins, and torms a
prominent and pleasing object in the view of the village, as
seen from a distance.
“We arrived at Poonindie at 6 o oclock p.m,, at
7 the bell was rung for evening service, when all the adult
native population and other residents assembled in the
schoolroom, forming a congregation of about 35 to 40
persons. . , . ,
“ The Rev. O. Hammond read service, the whole con-
gregation joining in the responses, in a devout and
intelligent manner, confessing that they had ‘ done
those things which they ought not to have done, and
left undone those things which they ought to have
done: ’ reading in an audible yet subdued voice the
alternate verses ot the Psalms, the ) Magnificat ’ and ‘ Deus
Misereatur ; ’ professing their belief in God the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and uniting in singing the
praises of our Lord and Saviour—the singing being led by
two men (aborigines) playing on flutes from written music
before them, in a manner highly creditable to themselves,
and most pleasing to hear. The hymn sung was ‘Lo. He
comes in clouds descending.’ Mr. Hammond, in a simple
and impressive manner, addressed them on the subject of
Our Lord’s second coming, and the service concluded by
sinking the hymn, 1 Lord, dismiss us with Thy blessing.
“ I never saw a more quiet, orderly and attentive con-


gregation. I had heard and read some little of what was
done at Poonindie, but I was scarcely prepared for what I
witnessed there. Here were these who by many persons
are deemed but one remove above ‘ the beasts that perish ’
reckoned almost beneath the notice of the Almighty,
incapable of civilization, unsusceptible of religious impres-
sions, and hopelessly sunk in ignorance, barbarism, and
sensuality—here were these, a remnant, it is true, but yet
a people ‘ clothed and in their right mind,’ worshipping
Him whom their fathers knew not, but who, by His all
powerful grace, they have been brought to know and love.
“ What I saw filled me with much joy—my heart over-
flowed—tears filled my eyes—l 1 thanked God and took
courage.’
“ On Monday morning, at seven o’clock, the bell was rung
for prayers, at which most of the people attended, when a
chapter from the Old Testament and a selection of prayers
from the Liturgy were read. After breakfast the men and
boys went about the business of the farm. Most of them
were employed in cutting hay, which was carted home
during the week, the whole being done by them without any
superintendence. At eleven o’clock the women and children
assembled in the schoolroom for instruction. I heard them
read from their lesson books, and also from the New
Testament, and many of them gave suitable replies to
questions that were addressed to them, and nearly all of
them are acquainted with the Church Catechism.
“ In the afternoon they again met to be taught sewing,
in addition to reading and writing. The evening school'
conducted by Mr. Hammond, was well attended by men
and boys ; many of them can read and write very well, and
are able to give intelligent replies to questions proposed to
them on what they have read. The cleanly state of their
copy-books, and the uniform progress of their improvement
in writing, would do credit to any school. All, of course,
are not equally talented, some making more rapid progress
and taking greater delight in their work than others.
“ At about half-past eight the bell was rung, when the adult
population assembled in the schoolroom for evening prayer.
A hymn was sung, a chapter from the New Testament and
a selection of prayers from the Liturgy read ; and thus was
the day brought to a conclusion in a profitable, peaceful,
and Christian-like manner. The same course of procedure


is gone through daily, except during shearing time, when
the school is necessarily interrupted.
“ On Tuesday I inspected the premises, and went over
a part of the run. The natives’ cottages are built of brick,
and thatched. Most of them contain two separate rooms,
about g by feet 7, with fireplace in each, and form a resi-
dence for two families. All the cottages were in a cleanly
and tidy condition, and in nearly all I saw a small shelf,
on which were a few well-used books, and most prominent
of all was the New Testament, which I was told they
prefer to any other, generally taking that in preference to
any other book when they go to any of the out-stations to
shepherd. The run comprises 35 square miles, and the
stock consists of a little more than 6,000 (six thousand) sheep,
about 300 (three hundred) cattle, and from 40 to 50 horses.
“ The expenses of building have hitherto required an
annual grant from Government, which last year was
reduced from £I,OOO to £ SOO. With the above-mentioned
stock, it is thought and hoped by many that the time is
near when the Institution will be altogether self-supporting,
and independent of the Government grant. A portion of
the land is cultivated, but only 15 acres are under wheat
this year, and owing to the very dry season, it will be but
a very poor crop. On Wednesday there was a flock of
sheep to be drafted. I went to the sheepyards, and when
the drafting was done the sheep were counted out of the
yard by one of the blacks. Placing myself in a convenient
position, I also counted the sheep, but without his being
aware that I was doing so. When the whole were counted
I found that he had counted them quite correctly; the
flock numbered over 1,500 (fifteen hundred).
“ Who will say after this that the aborigines are incapable
of mental improvement ?
“ With regard to their spiritual improvement there is
cause for much thankfulness. Many have given good
evidence, both in their life and by their death, that the
saving truths of our most holy religion have found a place
in their hearts —their sorrow for sin, their faith in Christ’s
atonement, their forgiveness of injuries, their love to their
fellow-men, and earnest desire that they should be taught
the truth as it is in Jesus, have proved in those that have
departed to their rest, and yet prove in those that remain,
the sincerity of their faith in Christ.


I would not, however, be understood to say that thev
have attained to all that we desire to see them—that they
are 1 model Christians.’ I think people in general expect
too much from all missionary efforts, and because they do
not see the heathen converts, and especially the aborigines
of this country, attain to the perfect model of Christian life
and practice which they think they should, they are, if
friendly to missions, discouraged ; or, on the other hand,
if unfriendly, they at once say it is useless to attempt
either conversion or improvement.
“Let us, however, ‘ judge righteous judgment; ’ let us
contrast the present state of the inmates of the Institution
at Poonindie with that of the natives in the Bush, with
that in which their forefathers lived—yea, contrast their
state, their lives, and conduct with those of many of our
own people who have had advantages far exceeding any
that the poor aborigines have had—and I say the contrast
will be much in favour of the inhabitants of Poonindie.
If ‘ all who profess and call themselves Christians ’ were
practical Christians, as well as professing Christians we
should hear less about the impossibility of converting the
aborigines ; less about the inutility of any efforts for their
civilization, and more about the good that has been
effected by the few and feeble efforts that have been made
for their improvement and well being, arid those efforts,
instead of being discouraged and deprecated, would be
lauded and redoubled.
“ As an instance that the instruction given at Poonindie
is not in vain, I heard of a woman who a few years ago
was dismissed from the Institution for ill conduct. A few
months since she was employed at a station some miles
distant, and while there was taken ill and died. Her last
words were, ‘ Tell the boys I have not forgotten what I
learned at Poonindie—tell the boys I have not forgotten
what I learned at Poonindie.’ The seed sown had taken
root, rugged though the soil was ; and may we not hope
that though the day of her life was dark and cloudy, that
at ‘ eventide there was light ? ’
“I remained at Poonindie a week, and during that
time had ample opportunities of observing the character
and conduct of its forty-five inhabitants—a more peace-
able, orderly, and contented community there cannot be ;
and taking into consideration their want of stamina, and


their inability to endure long-continued labour (and also
the natural indolence of the race, which cannot be eradi-
cated in one generation or two), they are on the whole
industrious.
“ I shall ever look back with pleasure to my week’s
sojourn amongst them, and with grateful recollection of the
kind and openhearted hospitality shown me by Mr.
Hammond and his family.
“ I left Poonindie at five o’clock on the morning ot
Sunday, December 4, and arrived at Port Lincoln in
time for the steamer to Adelaide.” — Argus.
Appendix C.
The following account of the Poonindie Native Settle-
ment, South Australia, is from The Melbourne Missionary
“ What a curious village ! No public-house and no gaol or
police-barracks ! Here in this arcadia the little community,
men, women, and children, morning and evening, meet in
church for prayer and praise. None of its members ever go
to law ; no drunkenness or crime is here found, and should
any little dispute arise it is settled among themselves in a
Christian manner, in accordance with St. Paul’s instruc-
tions to the Corinthians. There is an educational estab-
lishment, where some of the pupils can show creditable
specimens of penmanship, &c. Singing classes for practising
sacred music are held in the church. Everybody looked
fat, happy and clean. One of the laws is that every one
must have a hot bath every Saturday evening, and a cold
one as often as he or she likes. The curfew-bed tolls a
little later than under the Norman rule, and when it rings
lights are put out and all retire to rest. Every morning the
men proceed to their rural avocations —some reaping, some
shepherding, some building. Meantime the wives are
washing and cooking, and the children learning and playing,
and on the Sabbath they listen in their beloved church to
their pastor, and chant their glorias and anthems and sing
hymns in a beautiful manner. Now, who are those people
living in such an orderly and exemplary manner ? The
despised aborigines of South Australia.
Those farmers who with their families, take a pleasure
in every morning meeting in church to ask God’s blessing
on the day, and in the evening return thanks in the same


manner, whose lives and conduct may compare favourably
with the squirearchy of the last century, are the race that
has furnished examples of degraded humanity to every
author treating of the variety of the various divisions of the
human race. It is impossible to visit Poonindie Institution
without being deeply interested. The problem whether
aborigines can be civilized or not is here solved ; and mind,
no partial civilization, no mixing up of Christian and pagan
usages here ; no carrying about of dead bodies, as is allowed
elsewhere ; no fear of offending by decidedly preventing any
pagan and filthy usages; but a firm, kind control, under
which order and harmony prevail. These people are not
the lazy recipients of State aid or private benevolence.
Everyone of ability has to work, and so fond are they of the
mode of life that the greatest punishment that can be in-
flicted upon them is to threaten to send them away. Of
course this order and almost perfection did not come at
once. The present superintendent, Mr. W. R. Holden, is
much beloved by the natives.
Appendix D.
An extract from an account of a visit to Poonindie in
year 1872, written by the Bishop (Dr. Short) of Adelaide.
“ For five happy years, under the Archdeacon’s per-
sonal direction, this growth, material and spiritual, con-
tinued. In spite of about twenty deaths—not less than
seventeen of which were attended with circumstances
justifying a very happy hope of the state of the departed—
the numbers in the Institution reached sixty-two. They
are now eighty-three, and the difficulties which beset it at
an earlier period seemed in great measure to have been
removed. The natives were moral in their conduct, and
able to resist temptation when sent with drayloads into
Port Lincoln. It is remembered how “ Conwillan ”on one
occasion having loaded his own dray with goods from a
coasting vessel according to orders, was found by the
Archdeacon rendering the like service to a settler, whose
teamster was lying intoxicated on the beach; and in no
one single instance did it happen that a Poonindie native,
sent upon errands into the township, was ever found ‘ the
worse for liquor,’ however frequently sent there upon
business. At that time drunkenness was the constant and
prevailing sin of the white labourers.


“The Sunday services meanwhile, and daily worship
carried on at the Poonindie Chapel, were marked with so
much reverence and devotional fervour, that the ‘strangers’
from Adelaide or elsewhere became most favourably im-
pressed with the sincerity of that worship,and the piety of
spirit from which it emanated. The singing was led by
three of the elder young men playing on flutes, while the
low gentle voices of the others made their ‘ psalms and
hymns and spiritual songs ’ a delight to themselves and all
who heard them.
Time at length brought its vicissitudes. In June, 1050,
Archdeacon Hale was called, in the Providence of God, to
fill the See of Perth, in Western Australia, which was at
that time made a separate diocese from Adelaide. The
removal of the founder —the spiritual and temporal head of
the Institution, the friend and guide, the teacher and
counsellor, the example and ruler of the natives, could not
but be a sorrowful event. It might have been disastrous.
The loss of a loving Christian father must needs be dis-
tressing to his children. Poonindie was not exempted from
the sadness and ill effects of such a deprivation.
“ The difficulty, nay, impossibility of finding one to suc-
ceed the Bishop of Perth, as deeply interested as himself
in the Mission, as well as qualified to conduct its com-
plicated details, was quickly discovered. Even if the like
Christian temper and benevolence might be hoped for, it
was not easy to find a missionary his equal in knowledge
of men and things ; of business habits, and hai ing a general
acquaintance with the details of sheep and cattle manage-
ment as well as farming. The expenses of the establish-
ment were to be defrayed in part out of the proceeds of
the sheep and farm. Then followed a season of severe
sickness, under which, during two years, month after
month the elder natives were struck down. Between
July, 1856, and March, 1858, in spite of all Mr. Hammond’s
skill, watchfulness, and care, twenty-one deaths ensued.
The cloud of sorrow lay dark and heavy upon the Insti-
tution. The spirit of the inmates sank; a rumour of the
mortality had reached their friends in the Bush, and none
were inclined to enter what seemed to them the 1 valley of
the shadow of death.’ f
“Other discouragements succeeded, lire House 01
Assembly refused to vote supplies for its support, although


a new Trustee had been chosen, and an Overseer, directly
responsible to the Government, had, at the instance of the
Chief Secretary, been appointed. Rumours became rife
of revocation of the native reserve; of the putting up for
sale the land marked out in sections : of mismanagement;
and that, associated with utter unbelief in the public
mind generally of any possible benefit from the Institution
to the natives; complaints from the natives themselves
of harsh and unfair treatment from the Overseer. To
obviate such complaints and secure some fruit of their
labour beyond food, raiment, and clothing, the Trustees
arranged that a weekly money payment should be placed
to their account, which they might spend as they
themselves chose. The system thus inaugurated was
found to work well, as it had, at an earlier period, under
the Archdeacon. It has since been continued and
extended.
“It was pleasing toobservehow well, generally speaking,
the money was spent: in procuring good clothes for them-
selves and wives, or domestic comforts, or paying passage
money by steamer to Adelaide, and spending there, with all
propriety of conduct, a short holiday. Health and quiet-
ness seemed once more to come back to the Institution,
which prospered in a worldly sense under the skilful
management of the Overseer ; but the higher tone and
happier spirit of the primitive period were lacking. The
Superintendent acting in the name of the Church, and the
Overseer exercising authority over the natives on behalf
of the Government, the usual consequences of divided
responsibility followed; and while the Station prospered,
the Mission was overshadowed. During this period, how-
ever, the school was kept up by Mr. Hammond and his
daughter, and then taken charge of by two theological
students in succession during two-years-and-a-half —the
Revs. W. Clayfield and F. S. Poole—who did good service,
maintaining discipline and good conduct among the
younger inmates.
“ A change at length took place on the appointment as
Trustee of Mr. G. W. Hawkes —a name well-known in
Sydney and Adelaide for zealous co-operation in every
work of benevolence. The Governor having ratified his
nomination by the Lord Bishop of Adelaide, the Institution
was carried on after his appointment in the joint names of


the present Trustees —the Lord Bishop of Adelaide, Samuel
Davenport, and G. W. Hawkes, Esqs.
“ Once more it became possible, by a change in the
management, to restore the missionary character of the
Institution, and realize the grand idea of the founder, viz.:
—a Christian village of South Australian natives, reclaimed
from barbarism, trained to the duties of social Christian
life, and walking in the fear of God, through knowledge
and faith in the love of Christ their Saviour ; and the
power of His Spirit.
“ It is unnecessary to trace the steps by which, m June,
1868, the existing arrangements were brought into full
working order under the present staff of officers :
“The Rev. O. Hammond, Chaplain (charged also_ with
inspection of the sanitary condition of the natives).
“ Mr. Robert William Holden, Superintendent and In-
structor. (Mrs. Holden subsequently took charge of
the women and girls.)
“ Mr. Watts Newland, Managing Overseer of the
Station.
“ The object of employing only native labour in the opera-
tions of the farm and run being kept in view, as few white
people were engaged as possible, viz., a carpenter, a plough-
man, and a station cook, who baked for the natives.
“ The ordinary routine of daily employment then adopted
is as follows :
“At six a.m. the station-bell rings. The natives having
charge of teams go to the stables to feed and water their
horses. The bullocks and horses required for the day are
brought in by the stockmen. At seven the Chapel-bell is
rung for morning prayer, when all the inmates of the
Institution are expected to attend. There is seldom
occasion to find fault with the attendance. During the
months of September and October of the present year,
1872, 60 adults are recorded as present both morning and
evening, besides children, out of a total of 86 natives. At
half-past seven, breakfast; the single men and boys break-
fasting together in their kitchen ; the single women and
girls also by themselves; the married couples in their
cottages. In winter, the time is one half-hour later.
“ At eight a.m. the station work-hell is rung and the work-
men go to their different employments varying with the
season —such as ploughing, when six teams are generally


at work, five under natives ; harrowing, sowing, tending
the mowing or reaping machine, fencing, grubbing—the
two latter exclusively by natives —the former partially, being
under the direction of the ploughman. The run being
fenced, four natives are employed as boundary riders to
keep the fences in order. In the lambing season natives
only are employed —mustering, cutting, branding, drafting
both sheep and cattle. At the shearing season they wash,
shear, press, and cart the wool bales to the shipping place.
“ At twelve the dinner-bell rings for the whole establish-
ment ; at one, work is resumed on the bell being rung ; at
six in the summer and five in winter the labours of the day
cease ; at half-past seven p.m. evening prayer is read by
the Superintendent, with a lesson from Scripture, and two
hymns are sung ; at nine the single boys and girls are
mustered at the Mission House, and then retire to their
respective dormitories —-the married couples soon after.
Such is the general routine of the day for the working
population.
“ If it is asked in what way the natives are remunerated
for their labour, the following system is in full and satis-
factory operation ; —For day work from ios. per week to
12s. are paid, according to ability ; at machine work or
ploughing, £1 per week ; shearing, 15s. per 100, the same
as whites. The two best native shearers earned each £i\
in a month during the present season.
“ Besides the above wages the following is the ration
allowance :—Sugar, 2 lbs. a week for each adult; tea, lb. ,
flour, 10 lbs.; rice, 1 lb. ; tobacco, four sticks to each man ;
soap, 1 lb.; meat, 10 lbs.; bacon, i£lbs._; honey, treacle,
oatmeal as required. If sick, sago, maizena, and other
medical comforts are supplied gratis. Half the above scale
is adopted for children.
“ With regard to schooling, all the children who need
to be instructed, not being allowed to go to work, are
assembled in the schoolroom from g to 11 a.m., and 2 to 3
in the afternoon. A sewing class assembles at the same
time, when Mrs. Holden instructs the women and girls.
“ In the evening there is school for adults and boys from
6.30 to 7.30, at which hour the chapel bell rings for prayers.
The whole number under instruction averages thirty.
Their reading is intelligent; writing very fair ; the arith-
metic does not go beyond the four first rules. There are


also- maps, Scripture plates, and others for teaching natural
history.
“ One evening in the week a sewing class assembles at
the Mission House, the work being paid for according to
skill, and the proceeds devoted to some charitable or
missionary object. Mrs. Holden then reads to the women
as they work. The average number attending is fifteen.
Out of the funds thus collected, £1 was sent in July, 1872,
to the Mayor of Glenelg in aid of the fund then being
collected for two widows of boatmen, who were about that
time drowned. It should also be mentioned that £lO is
annually subscribed by the native men and women to
maintain one Melanesian scholar at the Isle of Mota in the
school established under Rev. George Sarawia by the
lamented Bishop Patteson. Towards the debt on St.
John’s, Auburn, a sum of £2 15s. was also contributed.
“ Linen for the Communion table—the finest which could
be procured in the Colony —has been recently purchased by
them, and their gratitude towards their Founder has lately
manifested itself in the purchase of a tea service for pre-
sentation to him on his late visit to Poonindie, at the cost
of £io-
“ Amusements.—The experience of twenty-five years has
shown that the native temperament is soon depressed by
continuous labour, to which they have never been habituated.
Their spirits flag ; they become ill and restless ; they long
for change of scene, and thus are tempted to stray back
into the Bush. Cricketing, therefore, was introduced with
great success, and the Poonindie eleven has been with one
exception successful in the matches with their white rivals
at Port Lincoln. With the same object the schoolroom is
thrown open every evening, when bagatelle, drafts, and
other games (cards only excepted) are allowed. Music is
a favourite pursuit. More than nine have learned to play
the concertina ; the flute and violin are also heard among
them. Occasionally a few couples amuse themselves with
dancing, and that with grace and decorum. A hornpipe
danced by two of the men was remarkable for the precision
of time. At nine o’clock the room is closed.
“ At the time of writing this account, nothing can be
more satisfactory than the health of every single native in
the Institution—men, women, boys, girls, children, and
infants. Of the last there are at this time fifteen, and the


comparative barrenness which for years hung over this,
as over other native mission institutions, has been removed.
This effect may probably be immediately traced to the
higher moral, spiritual, and mental development of the
inmates, and an improved physical condition resulting
from such training. It is most pleasing to witness the
affectionate relations of the married couples, and their
great fondness for their children. The bright, happy
playfulness of the latter, and the propriety of their
behaviour, is a source of extreme pleasure to those
who watch their free and unconstrained good-humour.
There is very seldom indeed any dispute or quarrelling
among them.
“We shall close this brief narrative with some account
of the visit of the Bishop of Perth (after an absence of
sixteen years) to the Institution which he had founded,
and of a Sunday spent at Poonindie. Under the able
management of Mr. Hawkes, it had been entirely relieved
from debt, and all necessary improvements effected. The run
had been fenced in, paddocks made, 200 acres cleared and
ploughed, cottages built, schoolroom and dormitories erected,
and the chapel repaired and beautified. An air of neatness
and comfort pervaded the whole place. The whitewashed
cottages—some with garden plots—were all tidy and clean
within and without. The joyous looks of the natives on
welcoming their first friend (though few only remained of
those who had been under his personal care) sufficiently
showed their grateful sense of what he had done for them.
There was a full attendance at evening prayer, and a visit
to some of the cottages and older married natives after
service soon satisfied him of the advance made in their
domestic and social habits, and consequent comfort and
happiness. On Thursday, November 21, the schoolroom
having been tastefully decorated with flowers and ever-
greens by the natives and half-castes themselves, at
7 o’clock their presentation of a tea service to the Bishop
of Perth took place. An address was read on their behalf
by Mr. Holden, to which the Bishop replied in his usual
simple and feeling manner. The Bishop of Adelaide then
read a letter concerning the Melanesian Mission, written
by Mr. Codrington, on board the mission schooner, the
Southern Cross, on the anniversary of Bishop Patteson’s
death, September 20, 1871. It stated that the visits of


the mission ship were still gladly received by the natives,
and that one move island had been added to the list of those
which gladly received the Word of God. This intelligence
caused much pleasure, showing that the Poonindie contribution
oi £lO annually to the mission fund was well and usefully
bestowed. The pastoral staff given to the Bishop of
Adelaide by the clergy and laity on completing the twenty-
fifth year of his Episcopate, was then shown to them,
many of the natives having contributed a trifle towards its
purchase. On Saturday, the wool-carting having been
completed, and the hay mown and cocked, a half-holiday
was employed in cricketing, at which the young men are
adepts, rarely failing to catch or pick up and throw with
accuracy the ball.
“On Sunday the 24th, the Bishop of Perth took the
morning services at 7 a.m. and n. The first lesson for the
day proved to be Ecclesiastes xi., which opens with
words singularly appropriate to the occasion— ‘ Cast thy
bread upon the waters; and thou shalt find it after
many days.’ On this topic the Bishop dwelt in his dis-
course, and there was scarcely a dry eye in the assem-
bly. The natives and half-castes were deeply impressed
with the signal fulfilment of this promise to their founder
and benefactor, while he himself could not but thank-
fully recognise the hand of God in all that has been ac-
complished. Many of the white neighbours also were
present, and when the Bishop administered Holy Com-
munion, twenty-one of the aboriginal inmates presented
themselves to receive from his hands the emblems of
their Redeemer’s sacrifice. It was a season of refreshment
much to be remembered at Poonindie, and encouraging
alike to themselves and their spiritual guides and overseers.
In the evening the Bishop of Adelaide (who had held a Con-
firmation in the morning at St. Thomas’s, Port Lincoln)
officiated. There was again a full attendance at service,
and the hearty manner in which all responded and sang
the hymns would have surprised as well as gratified all
who believe the Gospel to be the power of God unto
salvation.
“ It remains only to add that the station was all astir at
six a.m. on Monday morning. After full attendance in the
Chapel, and breakfast, the whole establishment, men,
women, and children, proceeded—some on foot, some by


dray—to the shores of Louth Bay, about four miles from
Poonindie, to see the wool bales (100) shipped on board the
steamer Ltihra. In 1871 the Poonindie wool fetched
is. Bitd. per lb. The shipping day is always a kind of red
letter festival in the simple calendar of the Station, but this
occasion was more than usually interesting, because the
Poonindie eleven were to embark for Adelaide to play a
cricket match with the scholars of the Collegiate School of
St. Peter. To those who have any doubts as to the identity
of the manhood in the white and black-skinned races, it
may be satisfactory to learn that the same hopes and fears,
the same zeal for the honour of the Institution, the same
pride in the cricketing uniform and colours, the same self-
-complacent vanity in looking ‘ the thing,’ the same, it may
be, affectionate pride on the part of the dark-skinned 1 loving
wife ’ in the appearance at Adelaide of her ‘ well got-up ’
husband, animated on this occasion the quondam denizens of
the wilderness; as the like feelings annually manifest
themselves on the part of mothers and sisters of old—
Etonians and Harrovians at the cricket matches at Lord’s
proving incontestably that the Anglican aristocracy of
England and the ‘ noble savage ’ who ran wild in the
Australian woods are linked together in one brotherhood of
blood —moved by the same passions, desires, .and affections ;
differing only because in His wisdom God has ordained
that His revealed truth, made known first to a Syrian,
ready to perish, from ‘Ur of the Chaldees,’ should travel
westward from the hills and valleys of Canaan ; until at the
appointed time the stream of Divine knowledge should
turn eastward, and cover the whole earth ‘ as the waters
cover the sea.’ It may suffice to lower the pride of the
white-skinned race to know, that the half-caste children
between the high Caucasian Englishman and the (supposed)
degraded Australian type of humanity are a fine, powerful,
healthy, good-looking race —both men and women ; not
darker than the natives of Southern Europe, and capable
in all respects of taking their place even in the first genera-
tion beside the Briton or Teuton ; driving the plough, or
wielding the axe with equal precision, or shearing with
greater care and skill—from 75 to 100 sheep a day—than
their white competitors. It is well known in the Port
Lincoln district that the Poonindie shearers do their
work most satisfactorily, and that Tom Adams is con-


sidered the best shearer in the whole district. Let
prejudice then give way before the inexorable logic of
facts, and let the 1 caviller,’ if he can, point out a
hamlet of equal numbers, composed of natives from different
districts of Great Britain and Ireland, so dwelling together
in peace and harmony, and equally free from moral offences,
or so attentive to their religious duties, as are the natives
and half-castes now living in the Institution at Poonindie;
enjoying consequently much happiness, and walking in the
fear of God. To Him be all the glory, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.
“ Augustus Adelaide.”
the END.


PUBLICATIONS
OF THE
Sotretii for promoting Jlnololeiige.
FOR MISSIONS (AT HOME AND ABROAD).
A Missionary Brotherhood in the Far West; or, the
Story of Nashotah.
Fcap. Bvo., covers, 6d.
[A Memorial of the Foundation and Work of an Associate
Mission and Theological Seminary of the American Church: for
General Readers.]
A Suffolk Boy in East Africa.
18mo. With Illustrations. Cloth boards, 9d.
[An Account of the Work of a Young Missionary on the East
Coast of Africa; an incentive to Mission Work: for Young Lads.]
A Trial of Faith ; or, Adventures in a Mission Station
in Labrador.
18mo., paper cover, 2d.
[A Story of Hardships experienced at a Mission Station in
Labrador; for Young People.]
Addresses to English Men and English Women in
India.
By the Bishops of Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay. Leap. Bvo.,
paper cover, Id.
[For Parochial Distribution among the Better Classes.]
Adjai; or, the True Story of a Little African Slave
Boy.
18mo., with an Illustration. Paper cover, Id.
[Tells how a Slave Boy became a Bishop of the Church in
Africa : for Young Readers.]
Aunt Hilda’s Story.
18mo., paper cover, 3d.
[An Account of Mission Work in the Deccan: for Young
People.]
Christian Missions before the Reformation.
By the Rev. F. F. Waleond, M.A. Post Bvo., with four illustra-
tions, cloth boards, 2s. 6d. [For General Readers.]


PUBLICATIONS OP THE
Christian Missions of the Middle Ages; or, A Thousand
Years.
By the late Rev. John Wise. Bvo., with four illustrations,
cloth boards, 2s.
[Principally suited for Educated Persons.]
Distant Brethren of Low Degree; or, Missionary
Gleanings in Southern Africa.
By the Rev. John Widdicoiibe, of the South Becuanaland Mis-
sion. 18mo., paper cover, 4d.
[Exhibits the Effect of Grace on Individuals of the Lowest
Races: for General Readers, Young and Old.]
Early Missions to and within the British Islands.
By the Rev. C. Hole, B.A. Post Bvo., cloth boards, 2s.
[The History of British Missions from the Introduction of
Christianity till the time of Archbishop Theodore.]
Klatsassan, and other Reminiscences of Missionary
Life in British Columbia.
By the Rev. R. C. Lundin Beown, M.A. Post Bvo., with Map
and three illustrations on toned paper. Cloth boards, 2s.
[A Book of Adventure : for General Readers.]
Mission Heroes.
Bishop Patteson, Missionary, Bishop, and Martyr.
Bishop Field, of Newfoundland.
Bishop Steere, of Zanzibar.
Bishop Selwyn.
Bishop Cotton, of India.
Bishop Gray. Crown Bvo., Id. each.
[A Series of Lives of the principal Workers in the Mission
field.]
Mission Tales in Yerse.
By the Rev. F. W. Mant, 8.A., with several illustrations. Foap.
Bvo., paper cover, 4d.
[The Stories told are interesting in themselves, and calculated
to excite among the Young interest in Mission Work.]
Mission Work among the Indian Tribes in the Forests
of Guiana.
By the Rev. W. H. Brett, 8.D., with map and illustrations.
Crown Bvo., cloth boards, 3s.
[An interesting and valuable Account of Mission Work among
the Natives of Guiana, by one who has spent half a lifetime
there: for the Parochial Library.]
Missionary Work among the Ojebway Indians.
By the Rev. B. F. Wilson, with numerous illustrations. Post
Bvo., cloth boards, 2s. 6d.
[An interesting Account of Mission Work among the Ojebway
Indians, giving Details about a Region little known.]


SOCIETY FOE PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.
Mrs. Poynter’s Missionary Box.
A Tale, by C. L. C., with an illustration. 18mo., paper cover,
2d.
[Shows how Indifference was roused to Action, and a Life
rescued from discontent by the idea of Duty; for Parochial
Use.]
My Two Years in an Indian Mission.
By the Rev. H. Field Blackett. Post Bvo., cloth boards, Is. 6d.
[A fresh and graphic Account of Religious Work in India.]
Promadeni, a Biographical Sketch connected with the
Indian Mission Among Women.
By Eugenia Yon Mizlaff. 18mo., with three illustrations, cloth
boards, Is.
[A History of an Indian Conversion : for Young People.]
Sketches of our Life at Sarawak.
By Haekiette McDocgall. Crown Bvo., with map and four full-
page illustrations. Cloth boards, 2s. 6d.
[Twenty years’ experience of Mission Life in Sarawak. There
is much interesting information concerning Rajah Brookes’
Administration : for General Readers.]
Ten Years of Mission Life in British Guiana.
Being a Memoir of the Rev. Thomas Youd, by the Rev. W. T.
Veness. With map. Foap. Bvo., limp cloth, Is. ,
[An interesting account of Missionary Dangers and Incidents
in this little known region : for General Use.]
The Missionary Church of England.
A Course of Six Sermons preached on the Afternoons of the Six
Sundays after Easter, 1877, at St. James’s, Westminster. Post
Bvo., cloth boards, Is. 4d.
[For intelligent Readers, &c.]
“Till the Day Break.”
The Story of a Canadian Mission, by Fkedeeiok Teavees. Post
Bvo, limp cloth, 6d.
[An interesting Tale of Mission Work.]
Under His Banner.
Papers on the Missionary Work of Modern Times. By the Rev.
H. W. Tdckee, Secretary of the Society for the Propagation of
the Gospel. Crown Bvo., with map, cloth boards, ss.
[A Record of Missionary Labour, alike interesting to the
Religious Man, the Patriot, and General Reader. Revised and
brought up to date.]


PUBLICATIONS OF THE
THE HEATHEN WORLD AND ST. PAUL.
This! Series is intended to throw Light upon the Writings and Labours
of the Apostle of the Gentiles.
Fcap. Bvo., cloth boards, 2s. each
St. Paul in Greece.
By the Rev. G. S. Davies. With Map.
St. Paul in Damascus and Arabia.
By the Rev. Geoeoe Eawlisson, M.A., Canon of Canterbury.
With Map.
St. Paul at Rome.
By the Very Rev. Charles Meeivale, D.D., D.C.L., Dean of Ely.
With Map.
St. Paul in Asia Minor and at the Syrian Antioch.
By the Rev. E. H. Plumptke, D.D. With Map.
ANCIENT HISTORY from the MONUMENTS.
This Series of Books is chiefly intended to illustrate the Sacred Scriptures
by the results of recent Monumental Researches in the East.
Fcap. Bvo., cloth boards, 2s. each.
Assyria, from the Earliest Times to the Fall of
Nineveh.
By the late Geoege Smith, of the British Museum.
Sinai: from the Fourth Egyptian Dynasty to the
Present Day.
By Henby S. Palmer, Major R. E., P.R.A.S. With Map.
Babylonia (The History of).
By the late Geoege Smith. Edited by the Rev. A. H. Saycb.
Greek Cities and Islands of Asia Minor.
By the late W. S. W. Vaus, M.A.
Egypt from the Earliest Times to B.C. 300.
6 By the late S. Bikch, LL.D.
Persia from the Earliest Period to the Arab Conquest,
By the late W. S. W. Vacs, M.A.


SOCIETY FOE PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.
THE FATHERS FOR ENGLISH READERS.
A series of Monograms on the Chief Fathers of the Church , the Fathers
selected being centres of influence at important periods of Church History
and in important spheres of action.
Fcap. Bvo., cloth boards, 2s. each.
Leo the Great.
the Rev. Charles Goee, M.A.
Gregory the Great.
By the Eev. J. Baemby, B.D,
Saint Ambrose: his Life, Times, and Teaching,
By the Eev. Eobinbon Thobnion, D.D.
Saint Athanasius: his Life and Times.
By the Eev. E. Whelee Bush. (2s. 6d.)
Saint Augustine.
the Eev. E. L. Cdits, B.A.
Saint Basil the Great.
the Eev. Eiohaed T. Smith, B.D.
Saint Hilary of Poitiers, and Saint Martin of
By the Eev. J. Gibson Cazenove, D.D.
Tours,
Saint Jerome.
the Rev. Edwabd L. Cutts, B.A.
Saint John of Damascus.
By the Eev. J. H. Lupton, M.A.
Synesius of Gyrene, Philosopher and Bishop.
By Alice Gardner.
The Apostolic Fathers.
By the Eev. H. S. Holland.
The Defenders of the Faith; or, The Christian
gists of the Second and Third Centuries.
A polo
the Rev. F. Watson, M.A.
The Venerable Bede.
the Eev. G. F. Browne.


PUBLICATIONS OF THE S.P.C.E.
NON-CHRISTIAN RELIGIOUS SYSTEMS.
A Series of Manuals which furnish in a brief and popular form an accurate
account of the great Non-Christian Religious Systems of the World.
Fcap. Bvo., cloth boards, 2s. 6d. each.
Buddhism: Being a Sketch of the Life and Teachings of
Guatama, the Buddha.
T. W. Rhys Davids. With Map.
Buddhism in China.
the Rev. S. Beal. With Map.
Confucianism and Taouism.
By Professor Robert K. Douglas, of the British Museum. With
Ma-P-
Hinduism.
Professor Moniek Williams. With Map.
Islam and its Founder.
By J. W. H. Stobakt. With Map.
Islam, as a Missionary Religion.
By Chakles E. Haines, M.A.
The Coran —lts Composition and Teaching, and the
Testimony it bears to the Holy Scriptures.
Sin William Mdie, K.C.S.I.
LONDON;
NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, CHARING CROSS, W.C.;
43, Queen Victoeia Street, E C.
BRIGHTON : 135, North Street.
