





THE
NEW ZEALAND MISSIONARY.
“How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that
bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that brineth good
tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy
God reigneth !” ISAIAH LII. 7.
[?] N. M.
CHELTENHAM:
PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM WIGHT,
AT HIS THEOLOGICAL LIBRARY:
SOLD IN LONDON BY HAMILTON, ADAMS, AND CO.; AND
JOHN HATCHARD AND SON.
1838.


MACINTOSH, I'KiNTERj
GREAT NEW STREET, I,UN DON.


TO THE
UEV. FRANCIS CLOSE, A.M.,
AND THE
FRIENDS OF MISSIONS
TO THE HEATHEN AT NEW ZEALAND,
oTje lollntows Ecttcvs,
FROM A NATIVE OF CHELTENHAM,
NOW LABOURING IN THAT BENIGHTED LAND,
ARE RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED
BY
THE PUBLISHER.




INTRODUCTION.
Letters from an absent friend are always
welcome, and never more so than when the chords
of Christian love are touched.
To the followers of the Lord Jesus Christ,
there is no harmony so sweet as the voice that tells
of souls converted, and of Satan’s empire weak-
ened. Hence, letters from the Missionary who
has left father and mother, sister and brother,
house and land, to teach heathen children the
way of salvation are peculiarly interesting.
In the accompanying pages we cannot but be
interested. First, with the simple and unaffected
narrative of events on board of ship, which may
be received as a detail of a missionary’s voyage
generally. Secondly, With his introduction to
the field of labour. Thirdly, His necessary
manual employment. Fourthly, His long journeys
by sea and land. Fifthly, His trials of unbelief.
Sixthly, His occasional encouragements in hopeful
appearances among the heathen. Seventhly, The
a 3


checks he experiences from his own countrymen,
through their drunken example, so frightfully ex-
hibited wherever they go. Eighthly, The gracious
means vouchsafed to the preached Word, and
the establishment of schools. And Ninthly, (lest
he should be vainly puffed up), the sudden de-
struction of his fair prospects ; and with him we
are constrained to say, “ Lord, who is sufficient
for these things ? ”
A faithful portraiture of all these anxieties,
joys, vexations, and disappointments, will here
be found touchingly delineated, and the savage
cruelties of the cannibal natives will be seen
beautifully contrasted by the artless innocence of
little children when trained in the love of the
Gospel.*
May God, in his mercy, bless the publication
of these letters (although not designed at first
for the public eye) to the advancement of his
glory, by stirring up the hearts of the young and
old to increased exertions, that the name of the
Lord Jesus “ may be known among all nations.”
Cheltenham, November, 1837.
* See p. 07, last paragraph.


LETTERS FROM NEW ZEALAND.
LETTER I.
Cape Town, Cape of Good Hope,
September 9,5 th, 1833.
Dear Father and Mother, — Yours, of
the 3d of July last, I received with much plea-
sure ; the affectionate expressions therein contained,
together with past friendship and the parental
kindness I always experienced at your hands,
will never be erased from my mind. You told
me you were gratified at the information I gave
you of the various places I passed ; I am no less
gratified that I am privileged again to write of those
things which I hope will interest you. If I neg-
lected to do any thing which promoted in the least
the happiness of my dear parents, I should charge
myself with supineness and ingratitude. I feel a
pleasure in informing you, as you will be most
happy to hear, that I have not had the slightest
sensation of sea-sickness since I left Portsmouth.
I went to Portsmouth, as I before told you,
on Sunday, June 30th, and remained until
Monday afternoon ; I then went in a steamer to
Hyde, Isle of Wight, whore I was most kindly
treated by my dear friends, the Rev. Noble


Coleman and family, the sisters of Sir John Key,
and several ladies and gentlemen, friends of
Mr. Coleman. I could not see Sir Henry
Thompson, as he resides some miles from Ryde.
The friendship I received from Christians at Ryde
will ever be remembered by me. It surpassed
all I ever met with among Christians at home.
As the Captain had not joined the ship, we
did not know when she would sail; therefore, on
Wednesday, July 3d, Mr. Coleman hired a large
boat; and Mr. Coleman senior, the Rev. N. and
Mrs. Coleman, the Misses Chisholms, my friend,
(son of Mr. King, New Zealand,) and myself,
went on board the ship, which lay three miles
from the shore; but the Captain not being
there, and the mate unable to tell us when she
would sail, (which he thought would be on Satur-
day,) our friends would not allow us to remain
on board, and w y e returned to Ryde.
On Friday afternoon, the same company, with
Ihe Rev. Mr. Sibthorp, and a gentleman of the
London Missionary Society, (at whose first anni-
versary I was privileged to attend,) went on
board the ship, where we remained until now,
and, no doubt, we shall be on board three or
four months longer. The kind and affectionate
manner in which they commended us to God, on
the morning of our departure, we shall long
remember.
I did not seem to be leaving England until the
boat bore us away from the Gravesend steamer
to the ship, (the steamer being full of people,
and a band playing the whole way). But when


I found myself confined within the bulwarks of
a ship, the emotion then felt is indescribable.
In reference to my feelings on this occasion,
perhaps I ought to say nothing, but I cannot
forbear, the heart is relieved by making known
its sorrows, and I require this relief; for, in
leaving England, and especially parents and
friends, this seemed to exceed all that preceded it.
But I must proceed to answer the rest of your
letter. I was very sorry to hear, that the
Rev. F. Close was from home, as a letter from
him, my pastor, would have been cheerfully
received by me. I received a letter, signed by
the Rev. J. Brown and the Rev. S. Beresford,
for which I am truly thankful. I have not had
a letter from Mr. Glass, on whom you were so
kind as to call. I was pleased to hear that the
blessings of health had attended you all, as it has
me to the present hour, for which we have to
praise God, “ in whom we live, and move, and
have our being.”
You also told me my father was from home,
but I am persuaded the old proverb, “ Out of
sight out of mind,” will never be made good
with us.
I will now attempt to describe the various
places as we passed them :
Monday, July B.—Weighed anchor and left
Portsmouth ; passed on the south side of the Isle
of Wight and of the Isle of Purbeck. We then
made Ushant lights; continuing a fine breeze
until we ran into the Bay of Biscay.
On the 13th, our chief mate and a few others
a 3


boarded an American schooner, which had been
twenty-five days from Teneriffe, bound to Boston,
laden with wine.
Sunday, 1 \<th. —(No doubt you remember the
day.) Was the twenty-second Anniversary of
my birth. A remarkable coincidence, that on
this day Divine service was first held, (we have,
I fear, no truly pious people on board,) and also
the day our wine was first served out, half-a-
bottle for Sunday. Same day made Cape Ortegal
and Cape Finisterre ; had a fine view of Portugal
and Spain.
Tuesday , 1 6th. —Saw a schooner and a
ship.
Thursday, 18 th. —Saw two vessels, but so
distant that we could not make them out.
Friday, 19i th, at seven, a. m. — Saw a whirlwind
making a direct line for the ship, but happily it
dispersed about 200 fathoms from us.
Sunday, 21st. —Saw Porto Sancto and Ma-
deira. A dove was flying about the ship all the.
morning to obtain “ rest for the sole of her foot,”
but the sailors, in attempting to catch her, drove
her away. The Island of Porto Sancto bore a
most picturesque and romantic appearance.
Tuesday, 23 d. —Saw <pi immense shoal of
flying fish, and on Saturday caught six of them,
which were very good.
Sunday, 2Hth. —Made the Island of Sancto
Antonio, one of the Cape de Yerd Islands. Saw
the first dolphin; the passengers all begin to
complain of the excessive heat. The hottest
weather we have had was six degrees north of


the line, and the coldest about twenty degrees
south of the line.
Monday, 29th. Saw the ship Alexander,
about a mile distant from us. This ship was at
anchor close by us at Gravesend.
Wednesday, 31.s<.—Saw a ship and brig.
Tuesday, Aug. 6th. —A woman died on board.
She was taken to England as servant to Mr.
Stevens, the Attorney-General of Van Diemen’s
Land, to see her friends, and was with him
returning to join her husband, who, as well as
herself, was a convict. At half-past seven next
morning, she was sown up in her hammock and
consigned to the deep. The burial service was
read by the Captain and Mr. Bedford, the sur-
geon ; it appeared to cause little or no impres-
sion, all seemed quite unconcerned and unaf-
fected.
During her illness, she sent for me into the
steerage to read and to pray with her. I went,
but with fear and much trembling, as the enemies
of God were on every side laughing, mocking,
and ridiculing religion, with all its professors. It
was a most difficult duty ; for, in the first place,
she was very deaf; and secondly, she was at
times quite lightheaded; therefore it was neces-
sary I should speak loud that she might hear,
and answer very simple and foolish questions in
the next place, amid the jestings of scoffers.
One or two others were at the point of death at
the same time, but recovered.
August 13th Caught a dolphin and skip-.
jack.


1 6th. —Neptune, finding us so near the line,
hailed the ship, and with an imperious voice,
asked the commander’s name ; the Captain, in
reply, told him, Mallard, and his aquatic Majesty
told him he should be on board “ to-morrow,” to
name his new-born sons.
Saturday, 1 9th. —Neptune came in his car,
dressed in style, and we were alternately
lathered with a tar-brush and shaved with an iron
hoop filled with notches; then thrown backward
into a large body of water, being the whole time
blindfolded. At night there was dancing from
one end of the ship to the other ; the Captain
gave away a quantity of Hollands gin.
August 9,oth. Our cabin-boy, by the falling
of a hatch, had the great toe of his right foot cut
off. Saw an Hanoverian ship, but that, like all
others, without exception, beat us completely.
28 th —A great many Cape pigeons about the
ship; they are, as lam told, very much like the
freshwater puffins.
September bth. —Attorney-General Stevens
sent his chart down to Kennedy, one of us of the
second cabin, by winch we found we were in
latitude 31 deg. ; west longitude 19 deg.
Friday, 6th. —An albatross was caught and
brought on board; the wings extended nine feet
six inches. After surveying it, it was thrown
overboard unhurt. Its colour is that of a com-
mon grey goose, and its beak like a puffin's,
though of course longer, from the of the
bird.
Sunday, Bfh. —One of the seamen, named


Brown, had been found last night unfit for the
helm from excess of liquor, and was consequently
ordered down. This morning he was brought
aft by the Captain, and ill words ensued, which
ended by Brown being chained to the mizen on
the poop. As he (Brown) was going up the
ladder to undergo his punishment, the Captain
kicked him on the head, whence the blood issued
freely, and as he lay on the quarter-deck, ho
kicked him again on the chest. The Captain
wmuld have soon proclaimed a mutiny, for he
spoke of shooting if he had pistols. It looked
ugly, but it w r as soon over.
Thursday , 12 th. —A Cape pigeon was hooked
and brought on board.
Tuesday , llth, at twelve, m.— Made land at
six, p.m. ; w'ent about. The land made w r as about
eighty miles north of the Cape.
Wednesday. —Wind from S.E.; stood on the
S.W. tack till six, p.m. Went about and stood
for land, lying S.E. by S.
Thursday, at twelve, m.— Made land ; w r ent
about again, being about forty miles north of
Table Bay.
On Saturday afternoon we arrived in Table
Bay. We were within eighty miles of Cape
Town four days before w r e arrived there; having
contrary wdnds, we could not get enough south.
Our Captain had never been to the Cape before,
and seemed quite surprised when he found he
first made the w'rong land, which proved to be a
part of Africa that inhabited by nothing but
B


wild beasts. The Table Mountain is the most
splendid sight I ever beheld.
On landing at Cape Town, I went a little
way up the mountain; but after throe months
confinement in the ship I found myself unable to
walk far, therefore I only reached a sufficient height
to view the town, which is a delightful sight from
a hill at the end of the mountain, called the
Lion’s Rump, which I ascended nearly to the
top. The prevailing language is Dutch. Many
of the English there speak Dutch; also the
Hottentots, who arc a distinct race of people.
I never had the painful sight of watching the
degradations of slavery until I arrived at this
town, where the poor men are marked with the
letter G on their backs, in the same way as cattle
are marked in England. 1 was also affected with
a remark whicli one of them made, which was to
this effect, (to the disgrace of my own country) :
—“ Hottentot and Scotchmen all one, we like
dem, a very free people ; we no like Englishmen,
dey like slavery.” There are very few real
Hottentots in the town, they live in the country
round about; they never come, but in droves.
They are distinguished for their cheek-bones
being very large.
There is service at the churches, which are
two in number, at eight o’clock on Sunday
morning, in the Dutch language: when they
come out the English go in, at half-past eleven,
and the service is in English. I had the hap-
piness to attend, and was privileged once more


to hear the Gospel preached faithfully. The
text was taken from the third chapter of Ephe-
sians, 14th and two following verses. There was
a large and respectable congregation of English,
with about one hundred coloured people ; the
chants were the same that are sung at home.
The much-respected Dr. Phillip, of the London
Missionary Society, is labouring here with success.
One gentleman of our ship went up the moun-
tain a shooting, and was attacked by a wolf; but
the wolf, frightened at the gun, made his escape.
There are also scorpions and lizards, with a few
tigers ; and at a short distance, there are lions,
tigers, and panthers in abundance. I saw the
Government gardens, where were a lion and
lioness confined in a den ; and, in other gardens
and vineyards, orange and lemon-trees, fig-trees,
and many other things which w'ere interesting.
Very fine wild gilliflowers grow at the bottom of the
mountain, nearly as large as our plum-trees. The
weeds are as fine as cultivated flowers in England.
I saw soldiers exercise and parade in the square.
I have bought a small quantity of Cape wine,
a few dried apples, and a few lemons, which are
ninepence per hundred, a little coffee, and fish
for pickling. These I consider necessaries for the
remaining part of the voyage. I must now con-
clude, for our ship is ready to sail; therefore,
excuse the manner this is written, as, amid the
bustle I could not compose my thoughts, or I
would have said more.
I remain, your obedient and loving son,
HENRY MILES PILLEY.
B 2


Give my very best love to Harriet, and all my
dear brothers and sisters ; also, my love to all my
friends, teachers of the National and Cheltenham
Chapel schools, and others.
H. M. P.
LETTER II.
Paihm , New Zealand,
Feb. 22, 1834.
Dear Father and Mother, — I am glad to
tell you that it has pleased God, in his infinite
mercy, to land me sate on the shores of the
island so long wished for—New Zealand ! for
which I ought to be (as indeed I am) very
thankful.
I arrived on the 4th instant, being on my
voyage (from the 24th June) nearly eight
months ; ten days of which we stopped at the
Cape of Good Hope, six weeks at Hobart Town,
Van Diemen’s Land, and twenty-five days at
Sydney, in New South Wales. At the tormer
place we had no friends, as we did not make
ourselves known, but at the two latter we had
abundance of kind and valued friends.
At Hobart Town, the Rev. J. Palmer, Rural
Dean, who went out to that place in the Warrior,
in March, 1833 ; also Rev. J. Norman, a staunch
friend to missionary exertions; Mr. Yeoland,
Commissary-General; Rev. N. Turner, Wes-
leyan minister, who w'as formerly a Missionary


in New Zealand, but driven out by the natives;
also, Mr. Stanfield, Master of the National
School; Mr. Hopkins, and others. At Syd-
ney, the Rev. R. Hill; Rev. Mr. Marsden,
founder of the New Zealand Mission, now
minister in Paramatta and Governor of the Peni-
tentiary ; also Mr. Morris, and Mr. Parker,
druggist, who formerly assisted the Wesleyan
Mission here ; and others, who treated me with
the greatest possible kindness, and gave me every
encouragement.
I attended the Sunday school, over which
Morris, Esq., superintends. I also went to
the infant school, which is going on prosperously.
My dear parents, excuse me for not giving a full
detail of my voyage, as nothing of importance
happened to myself; but at a future time, if God
permits, you shall have my journal, if it may be
termed a journal. I assure you I have scarcely
time to write this letter, as the ship, which is
going to England, is expected to sail this day ;
therefore I cannot mention things as I otherwise
would.
I have great reason to be thankful that my
health has been preserved to the present moment;
able, I trust, to proceed on the duties before me
with renewed strength and enlivened zeal: the
Lord grant that my future life may be spent for
the glory of God, and the good of mankind.
My dear parents, I happened not to know of
the vessel going to England until a short time
since, or I should have prepared my letter. My
object for leaving it till I heard of a vessel was
b 3


to furnish a little information respecting the mis-
sion, which I thought would not only be interesting
to you, but also to my dear friend, the Rev.
Mr. Close, who, I am sure, would be happy to
hear of the success of the mission, but time
does not allow me to gather much information.
I landed at Paihea, and was welcomed by the
Rev. W. and H. Williams, Rev. N. Brown,
Mr. Chapman, Mr. Fairbourne, and the ladies,
who had been expecting ray arrival for some
time past. The next day I went to Tapuna,
the settlement of Mr. King and Mr. Wilson.
Mr. King is father to my friend, who accompa-
nied me during the voyage, and has been at New
Zealand for twenty years, and was the first who
went there in the mission cause.
While at Tapuna, I, in company with the
Rev. W. Williams and Mr. Wilson, went across
the water to a native village, to exhort the
natives, but the chief of that tribe framed all the
excuses that ingenuity could suggest for not
attending Divine service at Tapuna. He listened
very attentively, but continued still blind to his
own interests. I mention this, as being the first
time and first native village I ever attended.
Among them, I spent two Sabbaths, and then
left for Paihea, a much more prosperous and
interesting settlement, where I am, and shall
probably remain until I am appointed to. the
southward; a new station, about 200 miles
distant from the Bay of Islands. At this settle-
ment, the following pleasing anecdote occurred
in my presence :


A chief from the southward, perhaps about
three hundred miles distant, walked over-land,
to entreat one of our Missionaries to go and
labour among them ; they wished, he said, to
be taught a knowledge of the Scriptures and
learn the way to heaven. However, his conti-
nued importunities seeming to avail nothing, as
none could be spared to any place in that direc-
tion but those under contemplation: he seized
Mr. Chapman, and with a rope, tied together his
legs, telling him, he would take him by force if
he would not consent to go; but by promising to
consider the subject he let him free for the
present.
I lament to say, it is for want,of funds that we
can go no further. Oh, that Mr. Close, and all
ministers, could stir up the minds of the people to
liberality;—that men might go forth, “ To give
light to them that sit in darkness and in the
shadow of death, and to guide their feet in the
way of peace.”
Oh, my dear parents, convey this information to
Mr. Close, as I cannot at present send him a
letter. I have by this vessel to write to the
Society in London, to announce to them my
safe arrival, which will occupy every spare
moment. I hope you are both well in health,
also my brothers and sisters, unto whom I send
my kindest and most tender love, and who I
hope are growing up in the fear of the Lord.
Oh, tell them not to follow the evil examples I
placed before them, but to imitate the example
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is laid down in


the “ Word of God,” and to which, I would
recommend their most serious consideration and
perusal.
Please to inform Mr. Humphris, that Mrs.
H. Williams has received the parcel he entrusted
to my care, and the Rev. H. Williams, the letter
from the Rev. J. Brown, of Cheltenham Chapel.
He was very pleased to hear from him, which
indeed I also should very much. He is a gentle-
man I shall ever respect, and upon whose ministry
I shall ever pray that the Lord may grant his
blessing, that many through his instrumentality
may be converted to God.
I send my kind love to all the teachers con-
nected with his chapel, and the teachers of the
National and other Sunday schools; may they not
be weary of the trust committed to their charge
—may they go on in that labour of love which
may terminate in the salvation of souls.
Here is an infant school of about thirty in
number, and a boys’ school for the sons of mis-
sionaries, conducted by Mr. Chapman, with
whom I am living.
Direct to me—Paihea, Bay of Islands, New
Zealand. My dear friends, Mr. Williams or
Chapman, would convey it to me wherever I may
be stationed; and now, my dear parents, room
forbids me saying any more, so I must conclude,
begging your hearty prayers in my behalf, and
may the Lord, in his mercy, answer them to the
joy of the soul of
Your affectionate son,
HENRY MILES PILLEY.


LETTER III.
Paihea, April 5, 1834.
Deae Sir, — It affords me great pleasure to
write to one, who I am sure, will feel interested
in any thing that comes from New Zealand, howr-
ever humble is its character.
I remember well your requests that I should
write every month, but I fear it would be
attended with great difficulty, for obvious rea-
sons. In the first place, I find so much to
occupy every moment of my time, that I have
few leisure hours to devote to myself. And
again, I have many friends in various places,
who have pressed upon me the same task, so that
writing alone would fill up every moment of my
spare time ; but this is not all, there are some-
times for months together no ships going from
the bay to England, so that, w r ere Ito devote the
whole of my time to writing, I should find it
impossible to convey it to my friends.
But, Sir, you may feel assured, that as often
as possible, both for your information, and for
the information of those of my dear friends who
feel a like interest in the evangelization of the
heathen world, I shall write such things as
cometh under my personal notice.
In attempting to describe the character of the
natives, I fall far short of picturing them as they
really are. I will, however, mention one instance
of their wild and savage state.


A slave deserted Ins master, and swam across
the bay from one village to another, where he
was seized by four different parties, and each
party contending for him as a prize, began to
pull him as if limb from limb, while the coun-
tenance of the poor slave depicted fear, misery,
and almost death, knowing the perilous situation
he was in.
He was placed on the ground, the natives
sitting round him with muskets pointed at him,
and another row behind them, with battle-axes
uplifted ready to strike him if occasion required.
Two of the chiefs began pulling each other’s
hair, and knocking each other about at a fearful
rate, while the whole was in an uproar and con-
fusion. The shrieking and bawling of the natives,
with their eyes ready, as it were, to start out of
their heads, was most terrific. I can compare
the scene to nothing less, than that of a company
of infernal beings from the regions of the bot-
tomless pit. But to proceed—
While in the height of action, the wife of one
of the contending chiefs threw a blanket over the
slave in such an artful manner as to cause his
escape into her camp, having passed through the
crowd, as it were, by magic. Presently he was
missed, and the other chief, finding himself out-
witted, gave over, and the whole scene, in the
space of a few minutes, was complete tranquillity.
I write this merely to show, that for the least
offence they are up in arms as if the whole were
about to be massacred, and in a few minutes all is
peaceable and quiet; but it often is the case,


that some unfortunate slave falls a prey to their
vicious appetite, who is immediately cooked and
eaten. They take but little notice at any time
of killing a slave and eating him.
At the death of a chief, (if it was his request,)
as many slaves as he wished are killed for the
purpose of accompanying his spirit to another
world, there to wait upon him. Generally their
favourite and most attentive slaves are chosen
to wait upon them after death. They believe
they have a spirit within them that will live after
their body is dead.
New Zealanders are a fine race of men, capable
of all the enjoyments of civilized society, of learning
any trade, and of attaining to any intellectual
acquirements that may be required of them.
They are excessively dirty in their habits and
uncouth in their behaviour, but this we expect
from cannibals.
On my first arrival at Paihea they treated me
with every possible respect, wishing to know
where I was stationed, and if I would stop with
them at least till I had learned the language;
being appointed to that settlement, it will be in
some measure according to their desire, but I
expect in perhaps half-a-year I shall be removed
to a new settlement, about 200 miles to the
South, with the Rev. W. Brown, Mr. Fairbourne,
and Mr. Wilson.
I have as yet kept no regular journal, having the
most of my time devoted to mechanical purposes ;
I can write a week’s journal by merely saying,
“ fitting up schools,” as I am making desks,


forms, tables, &c., for the European boys’
school, also a gallery, folding forms, &e., for the
infant school. My conversation with the natives
hitherto has been very little. Wehave aconvenient
chapel, built by the Missionaries, and in it a small
organ which was presented to the Messrs.
Williams, by their brother in England.
We have on the morning of the Lord’s-day
English and native service blended together at
nine a.m. ; infant school at nine and at two,
kept by Miss Coldham and Mrs. W. Williams.
As I am living with Mr. Chapman at the
boys’ school, I take charge of them most Sabbath
afternoons from two till three for the purpose of
hearing them repeat the Collect, and Gospel,
and text of the day, also to hear them read in a
class some portion of the Holy Scriptures, which
I endeavour to explain to them the best way I can.
In the school there are four sons of the Rev.
H. Williams, two of Mr. Hamlin’s, two of Mr.
Clear’s, two of Mr. Fairbourne’s, and six more
are expected after next vacation ; they are taken
in at eight years old, and remain there till they
are fourteen. The Society after that provides
them with a piece of land and so much money,
in order that they may hereafter provide for
themselves.
Several marriages have taken place since I
have been here, two of which were with Eng-
lishmen and two native women, which is not
unfrequent here.
The funerals of the natives are conducted with
decency, i. e., those connected with the settle


ments. I saw a funeral the other clay of a native
that died in a very happy state of mind, there is
every reason to hope in the faith. He had a
neat coffin made by the natives, over which was
thrown a white pall, borne on the shoulders of
four natives, followed by a long train of mourners,
walking two and two, the Missionary walking
before: the scene was solemn and affecting.
Another native of our settlement died soon
after, of whose sincerity and hope of a Saviour
there is no doubt, as the same was manifest in his
conduct for some considerable time previous to
his departure.
Saturday , March I—Went with the Rev. W.
Williams to, a native village called the Kawa
Kawa. We pitched our tents amongst the natives
and slept in peace.
Sunday —Had prayers with the natives early
in the morning. At nine o’clock we rang the bell,
which we carry w ith us, forservice; upwards of 150
natives assembled to hear the Word of God ; their
behaviour in the house of God surpassed all I
could have imagined from cannibals, and though
I knew 7 not a word that was said but w hat was
interpreted to me by Mr. W., yet the pleasure I
felt in the service is beyond expression ; the
manner in which they enter the house of God,
their apparent devotion during the time of
prayers, the beautiful manner in which they re-
peated part of the Liturgy, together with their
songs of praise, all combine in one to cause
gratitude and praise to Almighty God, that he
c


ever put it into the heart of man to go forth
among the heathen, nothing doubting.
Sunday, March 8 Went to a village about
two miles across the bay, called Koraradica, a
place where many ships were at anchor ; at this
time there are a dozen ; consequently , from the
depraved state of sailors, drunkenness and de-
bauchery are carried on to an enormous extent.
There are many British settlers, all of whom keep
grog-shops for the gratification of the vices of
the sailors. Rang the bell for service, and about
fifty natives assembled; the service was conducted
by one of my boat’s crew. We rang the bell again
for English service, (as is customary where
Europeans are,) but no one came. With a heavy
heart I returned; the more so, because there
were—as the following lamentable fact caused
to be observed—about two hundred sailors
in the different grog-shops, in one of which
were many assembled. A bottle of sugar
of lead was placed on the table for gin, a glass
of which was drank by one, which caused
his death in a few hours, in the most agonizing
pain. Another man belonging to the same crew
drank part of a glass ; he is still alive, but with
little hopes of his recovery. Several instances
of death caused by drunkenness have happened
at that place within these last two years; I will
mention one only.
A vessel came in on Sabbath morning ; just
after dropping anchor a boat’s crew went on shore
for the purpose of drinking, and before twenty


four hours had elapsed one was a corpse from its
effects.
Sunday, March 30.—Went to Koraradica.
Native service well attended, conducted by a
native who went with me. Afterwards English
service, conducted by myself; had from twenty to
thirty sailors, with one or two settlers; this gave
me great comfort, coming so unexpectedly, but
probably it being Easter-day was one cause why
they came.
We had a grand day on Thursday, March 13.
A man-of-war ship came in, bringing three flags
with her, for the chiefs to decide by vote which
should be the standard of the nation, as New
Zealand was about to be placed on the scale of
nations. Mr. Bushy, the British Resident, pro-
vided a splendid dinner for the Europeans, which
were from fifty to sixty in number, chiefly con-
sisting of the captains and other officers of the
man-of-war, captains of merchant ships, the
missionaries, and the respectable settlers; the
natives also were provided for with plenty of
boiled flour, which they esteem the greatest
luxury they can have. When the flag was
hoisted, twenty-one guns from the man-of-war
were fired, the natives joining in one continual
shout of acclamations. The day was an import-
ant one.
Wednesday, 26th of March. —The most fearful
gale and hurricane I ever witnessed ; it lasted
all the afternoon until midnight ; it washed
down a great part of our banks, broke away our
fencing, killed our fruit-trees, shrubs, and flowers,
c 2


together with vegetables in the gardens at a
great distance from the sea ; killed some of our
poultry, washed down our boat-house, and tore
up hundreds of large trees by the roots. Two
ships in the bay were stuck fast in the mud,
another drifted near the rocks, near to the place
where a vessel called the Brampton was wrecked ;
fortunately for the whole, the wind suddenly
changed, so that they got safe back, but not
before one had chopped down her masts. Room
forbids my saying more. I have said nothing
about my voyage, or the kindness of friends I
met with during my voyage, but I presume you
are not altogether ignorant of it, as I have
sent to my dear mother letters which, no doubt,
you have seen.
I like New Zealand very well, the climate is
remarkably healthy. I have experienced no
winter since I left England; it was summer
all the way out, and summer at New Zealand,
but the heat is not excessive; the winters are
mild. I suppose you will not find much news
here that will interest you, but as I have not
been here long I cannot say much. I feel you
are aware how welcome your letters would be to
me, who have now but little society. Do, pray,
Sir, condescend to write as often as you can. I
hope you are quite well, with your family. Re-
member me kindly to all my friends when
you have an opportunity of conversing with
any.
You would oblige me very much by getting
forme a volume of sermons, suitable for preaching


to Christians, and such as assemble in our chapels
(Europeans), with the price.
I desire again to thank you, and those of my
friends, who so kindly presented me with books,
and Mr. Rogers for his publication on the
Infant System, which I find useful. Please to
inform my dear parents that I am well, and have
written to them on date Feb. 22.
I remain, with tenderest regards and affection,
your most faithful friend and servant,
HENRY M. PILLEY.
To the Rev. F. Close, fyc., § c.
LETTER IV.
PaiJiea, June 1 Oth, 1834.
My Dear Father and Mother, —You
never were more dear to me than at the present
moment. I am desirous to know how you
are as to health and circumstances. I hope
you have enjoyed as many mercies and blessings
as I have, and am still enjoying.
I have reason to thank God that he gave me
kind parents to nourish and support me in the
early part of my life, that he also gave me
friends and many earthly comforts. He is now
appointing me trials greater than I have yet
known, but I hope I can say, “ It is well.” Give
me but humble resignation to thy will, O my
God ! I ask no more.
c 3


The presence of Jesus makes a mud-walled
cottage, a foreign land, and savage associates,
desirable. What but the light of the Redeemer’s
countenance could make me happy at home, and
what but that can delight my soul in this far dis-
tant country ?
11 For me remains nor time nor space,
My country is in every place ;
I can be calm and free from care
On any shore, since God is there.”
How' consoling has been the beloved promise
when sinking under the contemplated difficulties
of a missionary life, “ My grace is sufficient for
thee.” Surely I have nothing but a depraved
heart to discourage me in this great undertaking,
for God has pledged his word for the safety of
his believing children, and not one jot or tittle of
his word shall fail.
It is a great cause for thankfulness, that these
savage and barbarous cannibals have thrown open
the land for the reception of missionaries, through
the whole length and breadth of it. There is a
principal chief now at our settlement from
Rotorua, staying with a determination not to go
back till a missionary goes with him. Myself
and my friend Mr. Chapman are appointed for
that place, should the Committee at home sanc-
tion the formation of a station there. It is about
240 miles from the Bay of Islands, where we are
at present.
To show you what a peculiarly interesting
time is the present, I will relate a little respecting
a journey to the southward by two of our bre


thren on foot;—The Rev. A. N. Brown left
home on the 25th Feb., accompanied by Mr.
Hamlin, —started from Waimato the following
morning on their way to the Waikato district, in
order to visit the natives, and ascertain what
eligible spots there might be in that part of the
island for the introduction of the Gospel.
They anticipated procuring a gu'de from
Mangakah ia, but on reaching that place they fou n d
it impossible to do so, as the natives there had
made an attackupon Waikato, and peace had not
since that period been established between them.
They therefore purchased a canoe, and proceeded
in it to Kaipara (Cook’s False Bay), where they
hid it, and struck inland towards Waikato, but not
having a single native with them acquainted with
the road, they could only steer by compass
through the broken and trackless country which
Jay before them.
On the 13th March they came upon the
Manukau river, which they were obliged to head,
as they had no canoe to cross in. On the
18th they were intercepted by the Papakura (a
branch of the Manukau), and as they would
travel too much to the eastward if they attempted
to head it, they therefore passed through it, and
on the 20th March came down to the Waikato river.
Here, again, they were unable to procure a
canoe, they therefore cut a quantity of Roupo
(New Zealand flax) and tied it together in
bundles, upon which they floated down the river
about ten miles, when they met a boat manned
by New Zealanders, with whom they took a pas


sage to Waipa, a large branch of the Waikato
river.
It is worthy of remark, as showing the de-
solating effects which war has produced in this
country, and the consequent urgent necessity
there is to preach the Gospel of peace through-
out the length and breadth of this benighted
land, that the boat’s crew were the only natives
they saw between Mangakahia and Waikato, the
immense district they had passed being without
inhabitant. “ Throughout our long journey,”
says Mr. Brown, “ mercy and goodness followed
us wherever we pitched our tents. The bar-
barous people treated us with no small kindness.”
A strong desire was expressed on all sides for the
residence of missionaries amongst them, and we
could not but feel with gratitude that a wide and
effectual door had been opened by our Master for
declaring amongst them Christ and him crucified.
From the different lists which I took of the
Waikato tribes, their number appears to be about
6,000 lighting men, and the whole population
probably 24,000, as in a native census they do
not include either women, children, or slaves.
This body is scattered over a large tract of
country, but the natives appear more concentrated
about Kawia and Waipa; they number 2,800 as
belonging to the latter place, and at the former
there is a single tribe, the Ngatemaniapoto, of
1,200 fighting men, as large a field of labour in
itself as is now occupied by three of our stations
and eight of our missionaries.
Mr. Brown recommends that the Parent or


corresponding committee be requested to sanc-
tion the formation of stations consisting of two
members each, at Kawia and Waipa. He also
goes on to say, that if in consideration of the
many calls for missionaries in other parts of the
Island, it be deemed unadvisable at present to
form two stations at Waikato, then, that a single
station be formed at Waipa, to consist of three
members, one of whom should be held disposable
to branch off to Kawia, when the Lord of the
harvest shall enable our Society to send forth
more labourers into the fields around us, which
are already white unto the harvest.
I will conclude by recording the observation
made by the first chief we met in the Wai-
.kato district, an observation which fell on my
ear as a severe, though on his part an uninten-
tional reproof, of the supineness and lukewarmness
of the Christian Church in the missionary cause,
“ The missionaries should have come and lived
with us years back, and then the large tribes at
Taranake would not have been cut off by us,
but we shall continue to destroy each other till
missionaries do reside amongst us.”
The following persons are at the present time
considered to be disposable, Messrs. W. Williams,
Preece, Morgan, and Pilley, together with Messrs.
Brown,Fairbourne, and Wilson, already appointed
to Puriri, and if, through the mercy of God, the
persons promised in the Society’s letters are per-
mitted to arrive, there will be Mr. Chapman, one
additional clergyman, and Mr. Stack. At our
last committee it was resolved that the following


disposition of these labourers be proposed for the
sanction of the corresponding committee: Puriri—
Fairbourne and Preece ; Tauranga-—Wilson and
Printer; Rotorua—Chapman and Pilley; Rev. A.
N. Brown to be stationed at Tauranga, and to
attend to the ministerial duties of the three sta-
tions ; Waipa—the Rev. W. Williams, Mr. Mor-
gan, and Mr. Stack.
I hope Mr. Brown will be able to come to our
station as often as four times a-year to admi-
nister the Sacrament; he will be our nearest
European neighbour, at the distance only of
thirty miles, the next is fifty miles in another
direction.
Room forbids my saying any more, therefore
I conclude, hoping you will receive my kind love,
and give the same to my dear brothers and sisters,
who, I hope, are all well. My love to all my
my dear friends who may inquire after me. The
Lord bless you, my dear parents, and lift up the light
pf his countenance upon me. Believe me to be,
Your most affectionate and ever loving son,
HENRY MILES PILLEY.
LETTER V.
Rotorua, September 30, 1834.
Dear Sir, —1 daresay you think it strange I
have not written before, but really, pressed as I
am on every side, the opportunities afforded me are
very few. I fear my good friends in Cheltenham


think I have forgotten them, but I often bear
them on my heart, hoping that God would bless
them while enjoying the means of grace and
ordinances of the Lord's house, which I, in the
ordering of God’s providence, am deprived of.
Ah I the people in England know not what
they enjoy; they cannot value their privileges
sufficiently until they are deprived of them.
Wherever I turn my eyes I behold nothing
but savages, holding their superstitions and vices
with all the eagerness of a beast of prey grasp-
ing its victim. We have a great deal to contend
with from them; they are very trying to the
temper, even the very best of them show us some-
times they are natives still. We are often dis-
tressed on account of those for whom we have
formed a sincere attachment. Knowing how
little they are able to bear, we are often obliged
to do what is repugnant to our own feelings, and
the feelings of a Christian ; and were our friends
to see us they would sometimes think us cruel,
but experience has taught u», that the moment
you begin to treat a native as you would au
Englishman, that moment you begin to spoil him.
How natural it is to show to those whom we
love, and in whom we see some amiable quality,
little acts of kindness, but great caution is re-
quired with the natives here, as they cannot bear
it. This often very much distresses us, but the
Gospel, when it reaches the heart, will remedy
this, as well as many other things which now dis-
tress us.


Let us now turn and view the openings for
the everlasting Gospel. Wherever we go we
are welcome; “ bring missionaries,"' they tell us
they are wicked, and they wish us to come and
teach them better things. We are, as you
have no doubt heard, spreading ourselves far and
wide.
Our forces, from the formation of the mission
until very lately, have been concentrated, but
now we rejoice that we can travel with safety to
any part of the island, and not only so, but are
welcomed most cordially wherever we go, and
invited to remain with them.
There have been many changes in the mission
since I arrived in the land; then it was thought
a great thing to go to a new station. Where I
landed, which was at Paihea, there I remained
for half a-year, during which time I set going on
better foundation the infant school. Afterward
I removed to Puriri, our first southward station,
when I turned my attention to the infant school,
which is now the nicest in this land.
Mrs. Fairbourne, who has the care of it, wrote
me word the other day that one of the boys could
read well in the Bible, two or three others in the
Testament, and several others in the spelling
lessons; this is very encouraging- I attended
this school during my stay there, and taught them
to sing, which they are very fond of.
The little children come in their native mats,
and put on little frocks which we provide for
them. As soon as they get to the school-room


door they strip off their dirty mats, and when
school is over they leave their frocks with us.
Every half-year, as rewards for good behaviour
and punctual attendance, we present them with
one of those little frocks, which, with care, will
serve them for constant wear.
I would doubly thank those kind ladies who
sent me those garments which I brought with me
to New Zealand, and a parcel I haye since re-
ceived, which I have found exceedingly useful.
I would say to those ladies, if they honour me
with any more, that strong and plain round-
abouts are the best things for New Zealand
children.
Please to tell the little children of Cheltenham
Infant School that little New Zealand children
are wearing the little aprons and frocks which
were made by them, and how astonished they are
to hear that children so small can make sucli
things.
We every day take them out of school in their
dress to the great admiration of hundreds of
spectators. They walk one behind another, singing
as they go some pretty tune. I find my singing
qualities of great use, as singing keeps them alive.
We have a school for men and boys, which we
conduct on the circular system (a most admirable
system for natives).
Mr. Chapman and myself were appointed for
a new station (Rotorua) soon after the time I
arrived in the land, to proceed thither whenever
Mr. Chapman could be liberated from the
European Boys’ School, of which he was
D


master. In April last he had his liberty, and in-
stantly set out for Puriri, in the Thames, and
called for me to join him for Rotorua station. It
is the plan in New Zealand to go two and two.
On March sth we set out, and as I made a
note or two of the journey, I will put it down.
Left Puriri this morning for Rotorua with Mr.
Chapman, for the purpose of forming a station
there.*
As soon as we arrived at our destined place
we were welcomed by the rude shoutings. of
about 500 wild-looking natives, who were all as-
sembled in the Pa. Several speeches were made,
but as I was in so much pain I begged to be car-
ried to my tent, where I remained for a fortnight,
after which time it pleased God to give me
strength in my leg to enable me to walk about.f
We remained here about three months, and we
returned to the Bay of Islands for Mrs. C. and
our goods and chattels. Three labourers arrived,
and three are on their way. Our strength is
greatly increased ; the Lord has a great work to
do in this land. Lord, make us ever faithful in
making known the objects of our coming
amongst them, and though we may speak with
faltering stammering tongues, yet may it be
owned and blessed of thee!
We left Paihea on the Bth of August, for
Rotorua, and arrived here on the 23d, leaving
Mr. C. at Makatcr to see to the bringing in of
the goods. I was here a month by myself, with-
• For an account of this journey see letter vi., p. 39,
f See p. 44.


out any one to speak to but natives: Mr. and
Mrs. C. arrived on the 24th of September, and
on the 25th I was taken with an attack of the
erysipelas, from which I am just recovering;
there is a fine sphere of usefulness at this place,
having six large Pa’s, or fortified places where
the natives are concentrated, and presents a fine
opening for schools. I hope to have an infant
school here before long, as there is an abundance!
of children. Yours, truly,
H. M. PILLEY.
To the Rev. F. Close, §n., fyc.
LETTER VI.
Rotorua, Dec. 29, 1835.
My dear Father and Mother, —It is
pleasing to know, that though widely separated as
we are by distance both of land and water, we can
correspond, and make known our thoughts to
each other, by means of our pen; thus we see,
amidst the greatest privations, something is
afforded to compensate for all our losses, and
especially if our services are devoted to the
service of Christ; for then we can encourage
and cheer each other through our pilgrimage on
earth. I acknowledge the receipt of your affec-
tionate letter, dated January 27th, and also of
the “ Cheltenham Chronicle,” you were so kind
as to send me, for which receive my hearty
thanks. You know not with what interest any
publication, either descriptive of Cheltenham, or
d 2


things transacted in it, would be perused by me.
Could you send me something ?
We are as usual, all bustle, scarcely a moment
can we get for retirement and meditation; I never
had so little time upon my hands as at the
present, and as my acquaintance with the natives
increases, so much the more do I feel the duties
of a new station pressing upon me. I should
like to give you a sketch of our station from the
commencement, which would show you the
difficulties in the formation of stations in New
Zealand.
I believe I told you Mr. Chapman and myself
were appointed to llotorua. Since that period
another has been added to our number, a Mr.
Knight, of Hull, a single young man, lately
arrived in this land, so that I am not quite lonely,
for while Mr. and Mrs. C. form a society for
themselves, Mr. Knight and myself form a society
for each other, can talk over our little matters,
and also encourage each other on our way through
life. He is a very interesting young man, whose
acquaintance I find profitable.
Before I say anything of our station allow me
to send you a few notes respecting my first
journey to this place from Puriri, at which place
Mr. C. called on his way from Paihea, for the
purpose of me joining him for Rotorua.
March 5 Left Puriri this morning for
Rotorua with Mr. Chapman, for the purpose of
forming a station there. We embarked on board
a native waka (a solid piece of wood formed
from a large tree), in which we had to go about


fifty miles up the river Thames. We were
accompanied by Mr. Wilson on his way to
Mattamatta, as he, with the Rev. A. N. Brown,
are forming a station there, which is about three
days’ journey from Rotorua; we had not gone
more than eight miles, before we saw two large
canoes filled with natives, who had been informed
that a large party of natives from Waikato were
in the river Piako, coming to destroy the tribes
in and about Puriri; they were informed by means
of a special messenger from Mattamatta (an
alliance of Waikato).
The alarm in which the natives continually
live, take up so much of their time that very
little is left for cultivation, consequently a great
part of the land is laying waste. Oh! that I
may see the day when a great change will take
place in the condition of this benighted people.
At four o’clock we pitched our tents for the
night on the banks of the river; after taking
some refreshment, we had prayers and spoke to a
party of natives, who listened with attention; we
were here told that a fighting party were going
from Mattamatta to Rotorua to seek payment
for a murder committed upon one belonging to
the former party. After dark we retired for the
night to our tents.
March 6 Mr. Chapman very ill with
lumbago; Mr. Wilson went forward, leaving
us where we slept; at about ten a.m. we
followed up the river; met several parties of
natives, with whom we conversed. At about ten
d 3


p.m. pitched our tents for the night on the banks
of the river.
March 7- —Struck our tents at six a.m., and
continued up the river, at eleven we went on
shore and prepared breakfast, had prayers with
the natives, and then proceeded. At five p.m.
pitched our tents at a place, which not many
years since was very thickly inhabited, but now,
like many other places in the river, is laid waste,
and made desolate by their continual wars.
March 8, Sabbath. —Spent a very comfortable
day on the banks of the river; had service with
our natives, after which English service was held
in my tent; I read a discourse from these words,
“Tome to live is Christ , to die is gain!' Which
I trust was found profitable to our souls. After
dinner had school with the natives. Two
strangers who came up part of the river with us
began to argue the superiority of their god to
our’s. They have very confused ideas about their
gods, and in argument generally get the worst
side of the question. “Truth shall prevail .”
At sunset had prayers and retired.
March 9.—Set off this morning at five, and
travelled till five p.m., when we landed to go
the remaining part of our journey by land; we
had no sooner landed and pitched our tents, than
about a hundred wild natives ran towards us
from various places which they were cultivating ;
in a few minutes our tents were surrounded ; we
had prayers and spoke to them of the great
truths of salvation; they continued round our
tents all night.


March 10.—Struck our tents at about six a.m.,
and walked as far as Mattamatta, the station of
Messrs. Brown and Wilson, a distance of about
twelve miles, nearly one of which is through a
deep miry swamp. We had pitched our tents
about half an hour, when a messenger came in
haste for Mr. Wilson’s return, as his little boy
was taken ill of a fever.
When we left Puriri Mr. Brown’s little boy
was ill of the same fever, and had been fourteen
days without taking any kind of food. Mr.
Wilson hastened back, and we struck our tents,
and walked on about twelve miles further, where
there was a party of natives sitting; after talking
with them for some time, we had prayers and
retired.
March 11.—Started early this morning and
walked till after sunset, when we pitched our
tents by the side of a hill for the night.
March 12.—This morning there was very
heavy rain from one o’clock; our tents were
completely soaked and our bedding quite wet.
We got up, and as it had every appearance of a
long gale, we were obliged to go on for want of
provisions. We had unfortunately left our meat
and our salt behind at Mattamatta, and had
nothing with us but potatoes with a little tea and
sugar; but, why should I say anything ? “ For
I have food, while others starve, or beg from door
to door.” It rained the whole day in torrents,
\vc had many woods to go through, which made
it very uncomfortable ; there was no place of


shelter to which we could run till towards sunset,
when we saw a few huts, in one of which we
took refuge. While the natives pitched our tents,
we replenished our stock of potatoes, being the
only thing, with the exception of Indian corn,
with which natives can supply us. After evening
prayers I unfortunately let fall from my hands
about two quarts of boiling water, nearly the
whole of which ran down my leg, the result of
which was, I was confined to my bed with most
excruciating pain ; one blister covered my leg and
foot, which put an end to my walking.
March 13.—1 n dreadful pain from my scald;
brother Chapman sat up nearly all night applying
flour to my leg; a little of which we providentially
had in our food-box. Blessed be God I he has
provided the very thing I want, even in this desert.
The natives are making a litter to carry me in
the remaining part of our journey.
March 14.—At ten a.m., struck our tents and
went on for about two hours, when it came on
to rain so violently, that we were obliged to pitch
our tents; my sedan was carried on the shoulders
of two natives, four following behind carrying
alternately.
March 15, Sunday. —So wet that we could
not move out of our tents all day ; our natives
had service and school in one tent, while we had
English service in the other.
March 16 Ceased raining about eleven,
when we struck our tents and proceeded; it held
dry for about two hours, till we arrived in a


wood, when it began again and continued all day;
we pitched our tents after walking till dark in
the wood.
March 17. —Travelled all day through the
wood, raining the whole time. My foot exceed-
ingly painful; which, with laying on my back and
my face exposed to the rain, and the continued
knocks the natives gave me in passing between
the trees, with loss of appetite, made me quite
ill. Afflictions are not joyous, but grievous;
but our light afflictions, which are but for a
moment, will, if we are devoted followers of
Christ, “ work out for us a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of glory."
March 18.—The rain so heavy, obliged us to
remain in our tents all day, though we had but
few potatoes left, and no other kind of food. I
never knew the value of salt till now, that we are
obliged to do without it.
March 19.—The rain ceased and we pro-
ceeded ; about four o’clock p.m., we got out of
the wood, for which I felt very thankful, as
travelling in a thick wood, having no beaten
path, was very injurious to my leg. We arrived
at a Pa, and bought potatoes for our natives;
after having eaten we proceeded for Rotorua, at
which place we arrived at sunset.
I was carried into the Pa and put down in the
midst of a large assemblage of natives, who
were gathered together to receive us. They
gave us a hearty welcome, brought us a supply
of lobsters and potatoes, of which I ate freely.
The chiefs began speechifying, which lasted till


dark, but feeling unwell 1 was obliged to be
removed to my tent. Blessed be the Lord, that
he has given us favour in the sight of this people,
so that we can go among them with a degree of
safety not known at any former period.
March 20.—Mr. C. went (leaving me in my
tent) with the natives to choose a spot of land
for the station. He chose an admirable spot,
ten minutes’ walk from the Pa, where there are
about five hundred men besides women and
children. We have five other Pas wdthin sight.
March 21—Was taken into a canoe and rowed
across the Lake to our new station, where my
tent was pitched to receive me. We remained
three months, after which we returned by the
same way wc came as far as Puriri, and there
embarked on board our mission vessel for the
Bay of Islands. The object of this visit was
principally to choose a station, to see to the
putting up of a rush-house, and also the fencings
around it, with sundry other things requisite for
the reception of a female in a land like this.
After the endless perplexities of packing and
conveying goods on board, we again left the
Bay, with Mr. Chapman and Mr. Knight, toge-
ther with Mr. and Mrs. Wade and Mr. King for
Tauranga, another new station, and where our
things will have to be landed for our inland
station. After our vessel arrived at port, Mr.
Knight and myself left here for our station, to
prepare the way for Mrs. C. We were a month
before wc were joined by them (Mr. and Mrs. C.),
a thing by no means desirable in a land like this.


We were much delighted when we saw our boat
with Mr. and Mrs. C., and six canoes with our
goods and stores, coming across the lake ; I had
a flag-staff up, and with the assistance of a sheet
and a red handkerchief we soon hoisted a flag—a
very pleasant sight in a savage land is that of an
English flag. We have ever since hoisted the
same on the Sabbath-day; we hoist it on a hill
behind our house, and it is seen from all parts of
the lake, at the distance of seven or eight miles
on every side. But, in looking at your letter,
and also the little space left me in mine, I am
reminded it is time to begin to answer your
inquiries relative to the climate and country
of New Zealand, upon which I am not able
to say much. We are subject to frequent
rains at one season of the year, but this climate
is by no means variable, the seasons are quite
reverse to those of England, our summers often
show specimens of winter, as our winter does of
summer, for we have the warm sunshine more or
less gleaming upon us every day through the
year, no sultry nights, as we have the refreshing
sea-breeze, which renders it very pleasant. Upon
the whole I think a more healthy climate is not
to be found. The country is remarkably moun-
tainous, and presents one continued scene of
broken land, which seems to have been torn
asunder by some violent convulsion of nature.
Those parts of New Zealand not of the above
character are principally swampy ground, which
sometimes extend from twenty to thirty miles in
length, presenting to the eye the appearance of a


field of wheat-stubble. The woods of New
Zealand are extensive, and contain much useful
timber, indeed, every wood necessary for building
and domestic purposes. But I am inclined to
think wood will be rather scarce in this country
a century hence, owing to the manner in which
it is destroyed by the natives, who think no more
of setting fire to a wood than getting their food.
I have not seen a volcano in New Zealand, but
I have seen the light arising from one not a great
distance south from where I live.
I have been on a very singular island in the
Frith of the Thames, whose surface is entirely
covered with lava, and on its mountain top a
large crater. I should judge from the appearance
of the country that it contains a great quantity
of volcanic matter. Pumice-stone is found in
various places, and in great quantities. At our
station, as far down as we have dug, which has
been about ten feet, we have found nothing but
pumice-stone gravel; we have found cockle-shells
at the distance of six feet below the surface of
the earth; they are quite perfect as when alive.
Timber also has been found in the earth at a
much greater distance, all of which go to prove
the truth of Scripture concerning the deluge,
and also the effects of volcanic convulsions.
Rotorua, the lake near which our station
stands, is one of the most singular, and at the
same time one of the most beautiful places I have
seen in New Zealand. The lake is nearly
circular, and is, I suppose, eighteen miles in
circumference; in the centre, as near as I can


judge, a beautiful island is situated. The country
round the lake is very varied, and comprises in
its circle every species of scenery, from the
plain to the bold and lofty mountain.
boiling hot springs are seen in various parts
sending forth their tribute of steam; the Pa is
literally situated upon a boiling cauldron. Fancy
to yourself a village in England with large flat
stones twenty or thirty feet square, so hot as
scarcely bearable to the feet, also here and there
a boiling spring, sending forth its pillars of steam
to the skies, with the water boiling up at the
height of ten or twelve feet, the overplus of
which forms gutters of boiling water in all direc-
tions emptying themselves into the lake ; also in
going to it by water, at one part of it, you would
have to row your boat through boiling-water—
such is our Pa. One sheet of water, about thirty
feet by sixty and twenty feet deep, we have at
the bottom of our garden nearly boiling, which
is found very useful for washing and sundry
other purposes. Some of the springs contain a
great quantity of sulphur, others are strongly
impregnated with acidity, of a vitriolic nature,
so much so, that all the natives of Rotorua are
known by their black teeth, from boiling their
food in its waters (a thing contrary to the
generality of New Zealanders, who are remarkable
for their beautiful teeth); I have no doubt their
medicinal qualities are great, and perhaps by-
and-by this place will become the Cheltenham
of New Zealand !
I have no space left for saying much of what
£


has occurred at this station since our coming, but
I refer you to Mr. Close’s letter,* which I am
about to begin, wherein I intend to continue
what I have began in your’s.
My dear parents, I think much of you, and I
pray that the Lord may bless and keep you in
body and in mind; accept my best love, and
give the same to my dear brothers and sisters ; I
am glad to hear Charles is going on well, please
to give him a sheet of paper that he may write
to me; how is it he has so long neglected mo ?
Give my love to my cousins, John and William
Pilley, and tell them there are ships going at all
seasons in the year to the South Seas, so that
the letter they have so long written for me
without any opportunity of sending it, may be
forwarded immediately.
I will tell you how I spent my Christmas-day.
About nine o’clock, just before service, we were
informed of a murder which had taken place on
the opposite side of the lake, on the body of a
man belonging to Mattamatta. Upon hearing it
Mr. C. took the boat and hastened across the
lake, to secure the head if possible, in order to
appease the anger of the party to which the man
belonged. He succeeded after much difficulty,
but the body was cut up in pieces and sent as
presents to several of the neighbouring chiefs,
which they had in time for a Christmas dinner.
The man who had committed the murder came
past our boat-house while we were launching
our boat to go across to his place, on his way to
* Letter vii. p. 52.


our Pa, to a sacred place, there to make Karakia
(Incantations) to his god, in order that he may
not be angry, and also to present him with the
heart and vitals of the murdered man. He came
from the sacred place into the Pa, and when
some of the chiefs (friends of the man he had
killed) quarrelled with him for what he had
done, he threw a stone at the head chief, which
for a while left him senseless, and after passing a
few blows with a few others he left the Pa. I
know of nothing more calculated to make a man
a great man in New Zealand than such daring
acts as these; the more desperate and cruel a
man is, the more he is looked up to. This mur-
der will probably involve us in war again for the
next two years, as the Mattamatta tribe is
expected daily at this place, to seek payment for
the murder, and for every life lost a payment
will be sought, which makes it nothing less than
a perpetual war, and the poor innocent traveller
often falls a prey to some party or other who is
lurking in the bush for the purpose of entrapping
all who may pass by. The head for the present
was interred in our garden ; it had several cuts
about it from the blows it received by the hatchet.
The sight quite made me shudder; but what
affected me most was, the manner in which my
school children looked upon it. It was to them
as an every day’s occurrence, and upon talking to
them on the subject, found there was scarcely one
present who had not eaten human flesh. What
a horrid thing to think of, and to you in England
especially, for you know not how different such
b 2


things appear to me now, my feelings seem
blunted by the continual scenes of horrid cruelty
presented to my view.
In a measure such things are abandoned at
the Bay of Islands, but we have no reason to
expect it here, as where the influence of the
Gospel has not been extended we cannot look
for a change of heart or morals.
Present my love to Mr., Mrs., and Miss
Wellington, and also to Mr. Glass; beg his pardon
for'me that I have not yet answered his kind
letter, but I hope he will receive one before long.
My kind regards to Mrs. Glass, and also to my
aunt Spillard. Tell Harriet I shall soon be very
angry with her if she does not write; I am sorry
paper is so scarce in Cheltenham. My dear
mother, you washed to know if I was happy,
allow me to inform you that I am very happy,
the only alloy I find is, the want of your instruc-
tions ; I have many kind friends here, but I have
no mother. Remember me in Christian love to
Miss Payne and all friends, and believe me to
remain your dutiful and most obedient son,
HENRY M. PILLEY.
LETTER VII.
Rotorua, Dec. 31, 1835.
My Dear Sir, —Although I have had no letter
from you to acknowledge, yet I with no less
pleasure again take up my pen to address a few


lines to you: may they find you in health of body
and peace of mind.
I very much lament the loss of those vessels
which ought to have brought your letters to me,
which has deprived me of hearing from you
since I left home.
I have been living at this station from its for-
mation, upwards of eight months ; in this infant
state you must not expect to hear of conversions
or even convictions of sin ; we are sowing the seed,
while some of our brethren at the Bay of Islands
are reaping the fruits of their labour.
One of our Missionaries (Rev. W. Yate) has
gone to England, and from him you have no
doubt heard of the progress the Gospel is making
in the northern part of the island; since he
left, the work has continued to go on with great
success. A village called the Kauakana, where
our brethren have laboured for many years
without seeing the least fruit, now presents a
theme of much thankfulness to Almighty God,
that he has condescended to bless the labours of
his servants in this benighted land, in that we
can now praise him, not only for dying testi-
monies, but for living witnesses.
In letters we have just received from the
northward, we have very encouraging accounts,
not only of the progress of the Gospel among
the natives, where they are coming forward to
be baptized in the name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, confessing their
sins, but also of the cause of temperance among
Europeans.
E 3


Many of the respectable settlers in the Bay of
Islands, seeing the great evils which have arisen
from intemperance, have resolved to have no
more spirits in their possession, and one has
written to New South Wales to countermand a
previous order given for a cargo of rum ( liquid
fire). The greatest obstacle in the way of the
Gospel is the baneful influence of Europeans,
who, not contented with running headlong into
misery themselves, must draw the silly natives
to be partakers of their evil deeds.
There are many captains of whale-ships who
glory in getting the poor natives into their cabins,
and forcing rum down their throats like water
into a bottle ; but the exertions of our brethren,
with the respectable settlers, attended with the
Divine blessing, will, I hope, ere long entirety
abolish spirit drinking from the land.
Our Pa (fortification), is a singular place, as
you will find by the letter I sent to my dear
mother. Accidents are continually occurring by
the carelessness of natives in walking too near the
boiling springs, the earth around often gives way,
and the natives slip in, by which they are severely
scalded, some having one continual blister down
to their toes’ ends. We have recourse to flour on
all occasions, it absorbs the moisture and draws
out the inflammation. During the first three
months of our residence among them, seven
persons were scalded to death.
On one Sabbath morning duringdivine service,
a man fell into a boiling spring, he was ill at the
time, and being a slave they would not be


troubled witli him, which was quite a common
practice formerly. After service we heard of it,
and on speaking to the natives about it, they felt
surprise that we should even mention it, saying,
“ It was of no consequence, as he was only
a slave, and that such things are very good for
them, but not for us.” One day on a visit to
Makoia (the island in the centre of the lake), I
saw a heap of human bones, and on asking why
they did not inter them, understood that their
plan was, after a chief died, to set up his bones
against a tree to look as near life as possible, and
from that time never after to touch them; after a
time they tumble down in heaps and there remain.
When we look around upon the natives of this land,
we are ready to say, “ O Lord, can these dry bones
live ? O breathe upon them, and they shall live.”
At this place they promised to build a school-
room that we might teach their children ; I have
the charge of this department; my daily school
in the settlement amounts to upwards of seventy
children, —on my books I have 163, but not
being able to clothe them they will not attend,
and in order that they may all wear what
clothes I have, they come by turns. Those
kind ladies who presented me with frocks on
my coming out, could not have anticipated
the utility they would render to the schools in
New Zealand, or I am sure by this time, instead
of being able to clothe seventy children only, I
could have clothed all who are down in my books.
Rotorua Infant School is conducted on a plan
somewhat different from those in the Bay, their


stations being situated in such places as to render
it impossible for children to go to school by day
and live at home by night; consequently, the
infant schools are not large, having no children
but those connected with the mission-houses, but
our station being situated within ten minutes’
walk of the Pa, the children assemble daily in
the morning at nine o’clock, when they are
clothed with little frocks during school time;
after school they again put on their mats, which
they wear home, which is a cheap way of con-
ducting schools, as we neither board, lodge, nor
clothe them but during school-hours; at four in
the afternoon, about twenty of the bigger boys
and girls assemble for writing, some of whom are
making great progress.
By the liberality of Mr. and Mrs. Chapman I
was enabled to distribute prizes yesterday after-
noon, consisting of Jews’ harps, children’s flutes,
lark whistles, pincushions, thimbles, needles,
thread, pieces of ribbon, little bags, &c., with
which they were highly delighted. My greatest
encouragement seems to be that the children are
desirous to come, notwithstanding some of the
parents try all in their power to persuade them
from it, saying , we are teaching them to forsake
the way of their fathers and follow our God ;
some protesting that their children shall not be
separated from them after death, yet their love
for the school acts most powerfully.
To-day I told my children I was writing home,
and asked them if they had any thing to say to
the children of the Cheltenham Infant School.


when they very eagerly said, Yes, a great deal,
I then wrote down the following by their dicta-
tion : “ Nga Utmariki maori hi Rotorua, hi nga
tamarihi Pakeha hi te Ware hura o te Puri i
mua, E hoa ma, ha hari nga ngakeiu hi ou houtou
atawai hi a matou, ho mai te tahi atu hahahu,
kia tinu, hia roroa nga ringaringa, ha pai te ware
hura o nga tamarihi he a matou, ho to Piri te
hai wakaako, ha mae atu matou hi a te Piri, hia
noho tonu hikonei me-he-m,ea ha haere hoe, ha
tangi tonu nga tamarihi, E kore matou, e matau
te tuhituhi hahahu, e tino hiahia hi te matou,
Ko Witi, Ko Wakake, nga manita,” which,
translated, is thus :—-
“ The native children of Rotorua, to the
English children of Mr. Pilley’s school aforetime,
(meaning the infant school in Cheltenham).
“Dear Friends, —Our hearts are very glad for
your kindness to us, will you send us some more
garments? a quantity, let the sleeves be long;
the infant school is very good for us, Mr. Pilley
is our teacher; we have said to Mr. Pilley, You
sit here always, if you go away we shall cry
always for you, we do not know how to sew gar-
ments, but we desire to know.
“ Witi and Wakake, monitors.”
These two, a boy and girl, wished me very
much to send their names, saying, that whenever
the children talked of Rotorua they would say,
Witi and Wakake are the monitors. Allow me
to add a word to this letter, stating, that should
the liberality of Cheltenham friends be again
directed this way in the above manner, I would


hint that roundabouts, with a band round the
waist, are the best things which can be made.
I have this moment received a letter from
Waikato, wherein is stated a distressing affair
which took place there a few days ago.
A chief, who felt displeased because Mr. Stack
(one of our Missionaries at that station) would
not comply with his unreasonable request, loaded
his musket and fired four balls into the room
where Mr. and Mrs. Stack and infant were sitting;
one ball, through Divine interposition, struck
the lintel of the window, or, in all probability,
it would have penetrated the head of Mr. Stack.
We are thankful to say no accident happened,
and the man has expressed sorrow for his deed,
and given two pigs to make peace.
We have just heard that a straggling party from
Mattamatta have seized a woman belonging to this
place and have killed her, on whom they are now
feasting; we are in great excitement, all our
natives are afraid to sleep on our premises, and
have begged leave to go to the Pa, to which we
most willingly consented, knowing the danger to
which they are exposed, and the great respon-
sibility resting upon us, being uncertain what
may happen to them, or to us on their account,
should any of them be killed on our premises.
We are therefore left entirely alone, though not
alone, for our Heavenly Father is always at hand,
preserving us in times of difficulty and danger.
Our chief, who three times went to the Bay of
Islands for a missionary, (though evidently from
interested motives,) left the Bay for Rotorua


when we did, we in the mission schooner, he in a
large boat belonging to one of the southern
stations.
We arrived at Rotorua in a fortnight, while he
was four months, which gave us great anxiety
and considerable alarm, for we had given up all
hopes of his life, and native reports were freely
circulated; some said he was killed by the Bay
of Islanders in going out of the Bay; others said
he was kept secretly back in order that the
natives here may strip us for a payment; while
others said they were quite positive he was upset
in the sea, describing to us the place. These re-
ports we did not like, knowing that they are
often circulated in order to know the minds of
people, and we did not know how soon some
party might fall upon us, and strip us (if nothing
worse), as a payment for his reported death.
One night while some of our lads were at the
Pa, they were told it was the intention of some
to come that night and kill us all as payment for
Waretutu, upon hearing which, the natives ran
instantly to inform us, but before they could
reach us, they were overtaken by a party of the
principal chiefs, who were coming to assure us of
our safety, saying, it was not their intention to
to do any thing of the sort, and told us to be
strong and courageous, and not show the least
timidity ; they also told Mr. Chapman, that as a
payment for Waretutu, he must never move from
their place, but live and die there, but if he
attempted to go, they would not answer for his
safety; but (and thanks be to God for it)Ware


tutu has since arrived, informing us he was
detained on an island by foul winds and heavy
seas.
Since he arrived he has recovered several
things which were stolen from us, for every one
thought it was but j ust to rob us; in this way we
have lost many things,—articles of barter to the
amount of twenty axes, besides spades, hoes,
combs, and other things which were taken imme-
diately upon landing; since that, a case of wine
(a great thing in a land like this) was broken
open, and six dozen of bottles, all we had in it,
were taken out.
Mr. Knight’s chest of clothes was broken open
and the things taken out, leaving him little more
than what he had on, besides linen belonging to
Mr. Chapman, all of which was taken before we
could get them to our station.
Since we have been here we have had the
house filled with natives day after day, and in
open daylight, taking away whatever they could
lay their hands on.
It requires great grace to bear with Christian
fortitude the many insults offered to us by our
New Zealand friends ; but we have great cause
for thankfulness that our God hath so mercifully
preserved us in this savage land. No missionary
has yet fell a prey to their cruelty, then why
should wo distrust the gracious hand of our God ?
It is true, others of our unfortunate countrymen
have been brought to an untimely end, but, per-
haps, not without some provocation on their
part to the natives, at least in many instances.


The last and only Englishman who lived here
before us, was rushed upon unawares and de-
stroyed. Thus, “in the midst of life we arc in
death.”
Things are undergoing a change, though
gradual, in this land, and we may reasonably
hope that, as the knowledge of God is extended
among them, their horrid cruelties and supersti-
tions will give place to things of a better nature.
My dear Sir, you must excuse the unconnected
style of this letter, for I assure you I cannot col-
lect my ideas now in the present disturbed state
of affairs.—Present my kind regards to Mrs.
Close, and believe me,
My dear Sir, to remain yours most truly,
HENRY MILES PILLEY.
To Rev. F. Close, Sfc., §c,
P.S. My love to all inquiring friends. Should
you see my dear friend, Rev. John Browne, of
Cheltenham Chapel, you would much oblige me
by remembering me most affectionately to him ;
I hope he has sustained no lasting injury by the
accident he received.
Monday, Jan. 4, 1836. —As I did not seal
my letter on Saturday night, I will just men-
tion how we are situated at this time. Yes-
terday, just as service was over, news came
that the fight was at hand, upon which all my
children ran out in the greatest consternation,
and made off for the Pa.
As these things greatly unnerve Mrs. Chap-
man, we consulted together on the propriety of
removing Mrs. C.; we at last agreed that she
r


should be removed to the island in the centre of
the lake. Mrs. C. felt the necessity of the re-
moval, but doubted whether or not it was the
path of duty, fearing, perhaps, the natives may
think we distrusted the providence of God, but
we concluded, that as God was the God of means,
so every means in our power were expected to be
used by us his creatures.
To-day Mrs. C. was taken to the island, with
such things as could easily be carried in the
boat.
In the afternoon of yesterday I went to the Pa,
and found our natives busily engaged in prepara-
tion for war.
I told my dear children not to come to school any
more till a change took place. When I left, about,
thirty of them followed me as far as I considered
safe, they then watched me till I was out of sight;
their last words were, “ Don't forget, ns, tve very
much love yon,” which quite overpowered me : to
hear such language from New Zealand children,
and also to see them following me to danger, is
too much for me.
Tell my dear mother I am quite happy, and
am under no apprehension of danger.
H. M. P.
LETTER VIII.
Mokoia, Botorva, Any. 6, 1836.
Rev. Sir, —Were you aware of the circum


stances which for a long' time have surrounded
our much-loved, but (it is with tears I write)
our fallen station, at which I lately resided, I
should not need to apologize for my long silence ;
having had permission to address you as often as
possible, I trust I shall ever avail myself of every
opportunity to show that I am not insensible to
the privilege.
In writing to you from a mission, the progress
and blessed effects of which have both cherished
and rejoiced the minds of many who are looking
for tire redemption of the heathen, I cannot but
deeply regret that my present letter should con-
tain intelligence of an unfavourable nature, and
the more so, because the prospects of this mission
a few months ago were as bright and cheering as
they are now dark and discouraging, and those
bright prospects having been forwarded to the
Parent Committee, arc, of course, made known
to the public—only to be followed by others of a
contrary nature ; —nevertheless I hope it will not
damp the zeal of English Christians; though
Satan rage, and for a moment seems to triumph,
we know that in the end he shall assuredly be
crushed beneath the woman’s conquering seed,
never to rise again.
I believe in my last I mentioned to you the
taking of Maketu by the tribes of Waikato in
April last, and since that period our station
has worn a gloomy aspect, as have all our southern
stations, though Rotorua station is the first to
suffer.
f 2


About six weeks after the taking of Maketu,
the town belonging to Tauranga, on the coast,
was taken by our people, and about 150 persons,
men, women, and children, without distinction,
killed, quartered, and eaten. O! my heart is
read} 7 to burst, when I think that every boy in
my once flourishing infant school (save the two
little boys who have joined themselves to me)
partook of this repast.
My heart bleeds when I remember that all my
dear little children, both boys and girls, saw
human flesh cut up as beasts, and roasted to
satisfy the craving appetite of degraded men. It
has been dangerous to move outside the fencing,
as murdering parties have been out in all direc-
tions to seize the heedless traveller ; many small
parties of nine and ten have been repeatedly cut off 1
belonging to one or another tribe by its enemy;
but the eventful day was yesterday. About nine
o’clock, a.m., a small party came running, and
and firing as they came, as a challenge for our
people to follow them, which they immediately
did to the number of about 500, and met the
enemy, about 600 in number, behind our fence
in a plain. After the first charge of the enemy,
our people fled; I then began to fear, and not
without reason, for the enemy followed them up
closely as our people ran by. Some were scarcely
able to put one foot before the other from the
loss of blood, and consequently were overtaken
by the enemy, who almost before we could move
round were upon us.


In less Ilian ten minutes om' house was com-
pletely empty, with all the doors, window's, &c.
broken to pieces, I was soon surrounded by men
who were each trying to strip me ; I found they
would not hear reason, so I was silent, and only
begged of them to desist; at the same time de-
termined while my strength lasted not to be left
naked. They soon threw me down, took off my
hat and shoes, and partly succeeded in taking off
my trousers and coat, but by great exertions I
kept it on; five men w'ere so enraged that they
stamped upon me till I thought I should soon be
no more; however, blessed be God for it, they
w'ere obliged to run, as a reinforcement of our
people w'ere upon them; they helped me up and
carried me outside, when I found myself pos-
sessed only of half a shirt, my trousers little
better than none, and my coat split all up the
back.
I instantly looked round for Mr. Knight, a
young man much younger than myself and a new-
comer, and to my surprise fount! he was taken
off by the enemy. Here I was left by myself
without any one to cheer or console me at this
critical period, on a cold windy morning, with-
out a covering for my head or feet, and without
a home. W hen I think of yesterday lam quite
unnerved. Men were dragged along without
heads, some with the head and part of the body,
some quartered, some cut up in joints, wiiiic
others carrying the heart, liver, &c., &c. Oh !
the horrid sights of a Now Zealand war! God
*■ 3


Almighty grant that I may ever be preserved
from witnessing such sights again.
About four o’clock our house, with houses for
our natives, &c., eight in number,were all in flames.
Oh 1 that once-interesting spot, now reduced to
a level plain. I had a house built a few weeks
ago, at the island in the centre of the lake, to
which place we had providentially taken a few
of our things and deposited them, where I am
now sitting with Mr. Knight, who made his
escape with only his shirt and trousers.
Blessed be God, wc are safe, though all we
possess are a few sweet potatoes and some Indian
corn, which I hope our hearts are thankful for.
We have received no letters either from our
friends in England, (O happy land! !) or from
our brethren in this land.
We are overwhelmed, I had almost said cast-
away ; but blessed be our God, who never casts
away his children that put their trust in Him, what
an encouraging thought, that salvation springs
not from our merit, not from the strength of our
reason, or the number of our acquirements, but
from the free mercy of God in Christ Jesus.
Excuse, dear Sir, the unconnected style of
this letter, but put my case to yourself, and
see if the mental anxiety, with pains of body, &c.
would not produce a scrawl.
I remain, dear Sir, yours affectionately,
HENRY MILES PILLEY.
About fifty bodies, horrid to say, have been
eaten here this morning.


P.S. Please, Sir, tell my poor dear father and
mother I will write to them as soon as strength
permits, but at present I am quite worn out; —
you can, Sir, if you please, communicate to them
any thing in this letter, tell them I am quite safe.
My love to all—farewell.
H. M. P.
IHE EMI.
MaemtuJi, Pi inter, (Jicat Ncw-jlrccl, Loudon.


WORKS JUST PUBLISHED
BY
WILLIAM WIGHT,
At his Circulating Library of Theology and Useful
Literature,
PROMENADE, CHELTENHAM;
And may also be had of Hamilton, Adams, and Co., and J.
Hatchard and Son, London.
A CATALOGUE of W. Wight’s CIRCULAT-
ING LIBRARY of THEOLOGY and USEFUL LI-
TERATURE. Just published, with a Second Part, Is. Cd.
A Brief SKETCH of the CHARACTER and LAST
DAYS of the Rev. C. SIMEON. By the Rev. F. CLOSE.
Third Edition, price Is.
A PORTRAIT of the Rev. FRANCIS CLOSE, Per-
petual Curate of Cheltenham. Engraved by W - Ward, Esq.,
Engraver to his late Majesty. Proofs 215., Prints 12s.
Ditto, Second Impression. ss.
MISCELLANEOUS SERMONS. By the Rev. F.
CLOSE. Vol. 1., Second Edition, !!vo., Pis. Vol. 11.,
five., 12s.
NINE SERMONS on the LITURGY. By Rev. F.
CLOSE, Perpetual Curate of Cheltenham. 12ra0., 55.,
Fifth Edition.
HISTORICAL DISCOURSES on GENESIS. By
Rev. F. CLOSE, Perpetual Curate of Cheltenham. 12m0., (is.
A SERMON on PAUPERISM. By the Rev. F.
CLOSE, Perpetual Curate of Cheltenham. Is.
THOUGHTS upon FASTING. By Rev. F. CLOSE,
Perpetual Curate of Cheltenham. 4d.
DISCOURSES on TYPICAL SUBJECTS connected
with the PATRIARCHAL COVENANTS. By the
Rev. THOMAS PAGE, M.A. 12m0., ss. fid, doth.
SERMONS. By Rev. JOHN BROWNE, of Trinity
Church, Cheltenham. Cloth, 12s.


CLA RIKSiIIA : or the Rule of the Christian Heart.
By A Clergyman. With Remarks on Conversion, &c.,
by the Rev. C. Simeon. Second Thousand, royal 32m0.,
cloth, price Is.
THOUGHTS in SUFFERING. Royal 32m0„ cloth,
gold lettered, Is.; or in silk, 2s. Fifth Edition.
SIMPLE RULES for the guidance of persons in Humble
Lite; more particularly for Young Girls going outfo Service.
By Lady DARLING. Third Edition, 18mo., cloth, Is. (id.
The CHILD’S COMMENTARY on the GOSPEL of
ST. LUKE. In Familiar Conversations. By Mrs. J. B.
WEBB. Second Edition, 18mo , 2s. Cd.
FAITH’S PLEA upon GOD’S WORD. Fifth Edition,
32m0., sewed, 3d., or in cloth, gold edges, Is.
St. JOHN’S LETTER from the ISLE of PATMOS,
being a Copy of a MS. supposed to be written by St. John,
found by an aged Christian, banished from his Native Country.
Cloth, lettered on the back and sides, Is. (id., or silk, gilt
edges, 2s. Cd.
The NEW ZEALAND MISSIONARY from CHEL-
TENHAM. Cd. sewed, or cloth, Is.
PRIMITIVE NONCONFORMITY opposed to MO-
DERN DISSENT. Sixth Thousand, Id.
SYMPATHY, EXAMPLE, and ATONEMENT of
JESUS. 32m0., cloth gilt, Is. ; silk, 2s.
GOSPEL RECREATIONS for SABBATH EVEN-
INGS. By R. MIMPRISS. With Thirty Illustrations
from the old Masters, on cards, in a case, 10s. (id.
R. MIMPRISS’S PICTORIAL CHART of the LIFE
and MINISTRY of- our LORD. Various sizes. 2/. 12s.
(il. to 21s. Cd.
CHART of the ACTS of the APOSTLES.
2,'. 12s. Cd.
The SYMPATHY of JESUS. Seventh Edition, 32m0,
3d.
The EXAMPLE of JESUS. Third Edition, 32m0. 3i’.
The ATONEMENT of JESUS. By the Author of Sym-
pathy. Second Thousand, 2d.
Works Published by W. Wight.


DU, STRAUSS oil RESTITUTION. Translated from
the German. By Miss SLEE. Cloth, Is. Gd.
The FIRST REJECTION of CHRIST, a WARN-
ING to the CHURCH: a SERMON. By Rev. J.
CROSTHWAITE. 18rno., 6d.
The following by KRUMMACHER, Author of “Elijah
the Tishbite ” :
BROTHERLY UNION. Cd. sewed, Is. cloth.
JOHN the BAPTIST. Gd. sewed, or Is. in cloth, lettered.
HOLY GHOST and HIS LIVING TEMPLE. Gd.
sewed, or Is. in cloth lettered.
The TRUE CHURCH. Cd. sewed, or Is. in cloth let-
tered.
ISSACHER. Cd. sewed, or Is. in cloth, lettered.
WHO IS HE THAT CONDEMNETH ? Gd. sewed,
or Is. in cloth, lettered.
The TEMPTATION of CHRIST in the WILDER-
NESS. Cloth, Is. Gd.
Also, The INFANT SAVIOUR, the RANSOMED of
the LORD, and the FLYING ROLL. Cloth, Is. Gd.
RE-MARKS on the SPEECH delivered by Sir ROBERT
PEEL, on his Installation as Lord Rector of the University
oi Glasgow, January 11, 1837* Foolscap Cvo., price 2d,
An ATTEMPT to REPLY to PORTIONS of an
ARTICLE on EVANGELICAL PREACHING, in the
“ Edinburgh Review.” By the Author of “ Clarissima.”
Price Cd., or os. per dozen.
A WARNING to the INQUIRER after TRUTH.
From J. D.D., “On the Holy Spirit.” 32m0., 3d.
PREPARE to MEET THY GOD. 32m0., 2d.
MEMOIR of the Rev. JOHN BERRIDGE. 3d.
An EARNEST INVITATION to the THRONE of
GRACE. By Rev. MATTHEW, HENRY. 18mo.,
cloth, with a neat Frontispiece. Is. 6d.
The YOUNG CHRISTIAN’S SUNDAY EXER-
CISES; or, Conversations on the Church Liturgy. Part I.
By the Author of “ Simple Rules.'*
Works Published by W. Wight,


An IMPORTANT INQUIRY, applicable to all, espe-
cially to the aged. 32m0., 2d.
“An excellent little book, and well adopted for distribution.’’
ABBOTT’S STORY of LOUISA ; or, The Danger
of Delay, Neatly bound, 32m0., Cd.
The DEATH of a MISSIONARY, and of a YOUNG
JEWISH CONVERT. 32m0., neatly bound, 3d.
THE WEEK WELL SPENT. 32m0., 3d.
The LAMB’S BOOK of LIFE. By A Clergyman. Is.
Rev. E. TOTTENHAM’S SPEECH on CHURCH-
RATES. 2s.
MAN AS HE IS, and AS HE OUGHT TO BE.
By Mrs. T. BEST. Cd., sewed, Is. cloth.
The SINNER’S FRIEND. 3d. Irish and Welsh
Ditto, 4d. Nearly 200,000 copies of this excellent little
work have been already sold.
A LETTER from a YOUNG LADY to her FRIENDS
in CHELTENHAM and BATH. 3d.
VENN’S LETTERS to JONATHAN SCOTT, Esq.
2d., or gilt edges, 3d.
LAST HOURS of the Rev. J. COWPER. 3d.
RAYS of LIGHT ; a Text for every Day in the Year. 3d.
MATTHEW HENRY’S INVITATION to the
THRONE of GRACE. 3d.
COME and WELCOME. 2d.
A DYING THIEF and a DYING SAVIOUR.
With an address to the Reader. By the Rev. PETER
ROE. 2d.
The FRIEND. By JACOB ABBOTT. 3d.
NEW YEAR’S DAY; or TIME’S MEMENTO.
Third Thousand, 18mo., cloth. Is.
A FULL and CORRECTED REPORT of a PUBLIC
meeting of the friends of scriptural edu-
cation, held at the Assembly Rooms, Cheltenham. 4d.
WATTS’S FIRST CATECHISM. Beautiful Edition,
Id., or ss. Cd. per hundred.
WATTS’S DIVINE and MORAI SONGS. Lid., or
Bs. per hundred.
Works Published by If . Wight,


The SYSTEM of NATIONAL EDUCATION in
IRELAND. Its Principle and Practice. By J. C.
COLQUHOUN, Esq., of Killermont, M.P.
BIBLE TRAINING, with Illustrations for the Use of
Sabbath Schools. By DAVID STOW, Esq. Oil., or
doth lettered, Is. An admirable work for Sunday School
Teachers, or those engaged in instructing the young.
THADY BRADY. Fourth Edition, Id.
TIME to DANCE. Third Edition, 32m0., Id.
GLAD TIDINGS of GREAT JOY. 32ra0., Id.
The INFANT BROTHERS ; or Notices of the Lives
and Death of Abner and David Brown. Fourth Edition,
IBmo., cloth, 3s. Gd. Abridged, sewed, Is.
LETTERS to the Y’OUNG on the IMPORTANCE
of EARLY RELIGION. Second Edition, Gd.
SKETCHES for HUMBLE LIFE. By Mrs.
HANNAH MORE.
The following by the same Author may be had detached.
IT IS ALL FOR THE BEST.
The HISTORY of HESTER WILMOTT.
The TWO WEALTHY FARMERS, or the History
of Mr. Bragwell.
The TWO SHOEMAKERS.
The SHEPHERD of SALISBURY PLAIN.
VILLAGE POLITICS.
NEWTON’S CARDIPHONIA. 18mo., cloth gilt,
lettered, 2s. Gd.
The following Twelve Books can be had in two neat volumes,
at 4s. cloth.
The VISION: or, Whence is Happiness ? 3d.
The MOUNTAIN MILLER. 3d.
MEMOIR of Miss LKTITIA STAPLETON. 3d.
A TOUR to the LAKES. 3d.
The LADY’S MISSION. 3d.
The MOUNTAINEERS, the VILLAGE, and the
MINISTER. 3d.
The INFIDEL SON. 3d.
A MEMOIR of the Riaht Hon. Baron DVKERN. 3d.
The PILOT, the CAPTAIN, and the CABIN BOV. 3d.
The EXCOMMUNICATED: or, a Young Jewish
Merchant Cot;verted to Christianity. 3d.
The SEA BOY’S GRAVE. 31.
The WRECK. 3.1.
Works Published by W. Wight.


