



THE RESCUE OFS VICTORIA
THE BEAUTIFUL NIHILIST.
By T. P. DEEGAN.
Chapter I.
HAPPY DAYS OF CHILDHOOD.
Whilst skies are blue and bright,
Whilst flowers are gay,
Whilst eyes that change ere night
Make glad the day;
Whilst yet the calm hours creep,
Dream thou —
Shelley.
“Be seated, clears: dinner is ripe, and remem-
ber there’s devilled yams and naroo for desert,
said the hostess, a bright little girl of fourteen
annums.
Her hotchpot comprised geebungs, cranberries,
wild cherries, wattle gum and manna—or rather, a
similar substance of doubtful composition, and was
arranged beneath a shady dome of boughs that had
once served as a black gin’s gunyah. She was
playing housekeeper, and the guests, tire an
hungry, had returned after a ramble in the woods.


“Your feast is fat and fruity, fair Maii!” ex-
claimed Kirrie, a bright little lad about her own
age.
“ Aye—and fit for any laureate, sir I” she re-
torted.
Your feast is spare and faulty, madam,” said
Bondar, “ and unworthy of the guests, for they’ve
displayed well—they’ve despatched two ringtails,
captured a young ladybird, discovered a boori-
garry’s nest, and rescued a pollen-laden bee that
had, alas, sipped nectar from an intoxicating plant
and had fallen into a limpid stream.”
La La ! the kickshaw!” exclaimed the others;
“ let's make an exhibition of it.”
. “. Yc f ! yes! Let’s hold an exhibition!” said
Kirrie, “and have foreign courts and ambassadors
and wine kiosks, and fairy dells—music and art
galore!”
“Oh, yes! Yes!” exclaimed Maii, elated at
the idea, that 11 be grand, and I’ll be a gipsy
queen and tell fortunes.”
“And I’ll run a newspaper!” said Kirrie.
“ And I’ll be a reporter and foreign correspon-
dent!” exclaimed Bondar.
The idea boomed—the bright little folks entered
into the spirit of the game with much zest. The
interior of the withered old mia-mia was forthwith
portioned off and transformed into courts.
Kirrie took possession of one corner, where he
faked up something like the disc of an old jam-pot,
which all understood to be a printing press. Pens
and paper were not available, but pins and bough
eaves were; and a prospectus of the great coming


show was pricked out on large gum leaves, and
issued to all.
Romping, laughing, sunny Maii was a dimpled
brunette —wild and gay, and full of life and gab;
she was chosen gipsy queen, sewn up in a chaos
of wild flowers, crowned with a tiara of corn ears
and set on a falkstool.
The anterior decorations were great —green and
gorgeous; twigs crested with oaten panicles and
wild weld hung from the ridge of the bowery
pavilion, and swayed and nodded in the breeze.
Kirrie stood on a dais in the avenue of nations
and read the charter.
Three commissioners were appointed, and judges
gazetted; everything was done thoroughly; spon-
taneous powers were vested in the three commis-
sioners, who did everything by the Rule of Three.
When the triumphal cavalcade entered the main
hall, Maii stepped forward and questioned the mar-
shal, “Who are ye? Whither have ye come?” she
asked.
Kirrie’s courtier presented a large blue-gum
bough leaf on which a few lines were pricked out:
“ That’s our pedigree, fair love-bird,” said he;
“ read it and say thy will.”
HIS PEDIGREE:
Once upon a time,
It wasn’t any crime
To write a little rhyme,
Or get married.
Then Gordon got a station,
And rivalled all creation,
For he begot a nation.
And never wearied.


And this is how it came:
Kirrie took his father’s name;
His children did the same;
Yet none were buried.
They all loved matrimony,
And lived on patrimony;
And for better money
They never worried.
“ Pass on, brave sir,” said the Gipsy; “ the free-
dom of Arcadia is yours.”
The fair assembly loitered about the courts, in-
spected the exhibits and carried out their parts to
the letter.
Kirrie approached the Gipsy and gave her his
hand:
“ Fair women wait on thee, sir,” she said gaily,
“ and fortune clambers up hill to meet thee and
tramples adversity down before thee. Smiling bards,
with viols in their hands, linger on the highways and
byways of life through which thou must pass, and
are ready to troll sweet numbers in thy hearing.
Trouble, like a wan spectre, has slipped her guard-
ians, and is at large, but she dare not cross thy path,
for wealth has cast her mystic glow about thee
which is suddenly fatal to all thy enemies. An
argosy will soon bear thee to other lands, but
remember, sir, amidst all thy pleasures and triumphs,
that the sands of life are passing, and Time, leaning
on his ready scythe, watches and waits for thee.”
Kirrie kissed the Gipsy’s hand, bowed and
retired. Bondar came forward and gave him a folio
of punctured leaves:
“My report, sir,” said he, “is written; peruse it
and pass it on to the kingdoms of Arcadia.”
Kirrie went to his desk, unclasped the folio and
laid aside the leaves one by one as he read them :


BONDAR’S REPORT.
“ Austers great Arcadian Exhibition was opened
to-day in the presence of the assembled wards of
creation. Many legions of wildered creatures passed
through the fungoid turnstiles. Twenty thousand
and eleven grasshoppers that were too late for the
dawn, went under and were trodden out, and the
ghost of the great Maatuus entered by the welkin
portals and shed tears in quotients over the stark
remains of his late subjects. A galaxy of ascianb
whose shadows were with the sun, alone survived.
Sylphs and men met and shook hands, and rival
butterflies laughed and left the fields together. All
went well, and the gambols of creation went not
amiss until a little wood mouse rose to a point of
order; mercury then fell to zero, and the exhibits
closed their eyes for the night.”
“ Your matter, sir,” said Kirrie, “is palaver,
unique and fit for any doom, and your omission of a
comma has mixed matters up much ; a lesser lapse
might wreck a world —see to it immediately.
Their farce was interrupted at this stage by the
entrance of a tall gentleman, who seemed a giant
amidst dwarfs.
“ Heyday, my little gumsuckers!” he exclaimed,
coming upon them suddenly. “ And what’s this
gimcrack ?” he asked, pointing to Kirrie’s tin-pot
disc.
“ Why, that’s Kirrie’s newspaper printing
machine,” said Mail. “ i hat s quite an outdoer,
Uncle—prints rival dogmas in prose and verse with-
out the least excitement, and in less than no time.
“ Ho! ho! Maii; and pray what time is that, fair
one?”


“Triple time: summer time, day time, night
time; as you will—any time but dinner time.”
“ Very good, Maii; a very timely retort indeed.
But tell me, what part do you take in these
mumming ceremonies? Harvest queen, eh?”
No; Maii’s a Gipsy,” said Kirrie, “ and, my
word, she knows what’s what! She can tell you
something—everything if you only show her your
hand.”
Ah-hern! No doubt,” said the gentleman; “but
it’s not the proper thing nowadays to show one’s
hand. Oho! and Maii’s a gipsy, is she? And full
of strange whims,” he said, pleasantly. “ Oh, fate-
ful chit! he exclaimed, in mock gravity, “ pray tell
me where the wild fire blows.”
“ Aye, wishful sir, you shall know,” she said,
sagely. Its poles are above the zenith and below
the nadir—it gambols in the interval.”
So! so! My little sweetheart; thy wit’s a
morsel pleasant,” said he, amused at her ready
retort. 7
“ You see. Uncle,” said she, suavely, “ the wind
takes impressions like the wax cylinder of a phono-
graph-history repeats itself—hence I’ve only to tap
the revolving strata of air, and all is manifest.”
“Oh. you can tap the air, can you?” said the
Uncle.
\ es, but that s a secret only gipsies know.
You must know—
I am the fairy, Mab; to me ’tis given
The wonders of the human world to keep;
The secrets of the immeasurable past,
Iti the unfailing consciences of men,
Those stern, unflattering chroniclers, I And
The future from the causes which arise,
In each event, I gather.


“ Come away, little folks; come over to the
Homestead !” said he, taking Maii by the hand and
leading off. “ Lady Gordon awaits you, and the
Christmas tree has blossomed out since you left,
and is much laden, but the lower branches have
been reserved for the spoils of your morning’s
forage.”
The others gathered up their spoils and romped
along after Maii and her uncle, in high spirits.
Hay season was again in the land, and the sun
was flush with vitality, and pillowed above in a
chioro scuro of grey cirrus, which was burnished
with a flush of his own glory. The wild meadows
through which they passed were littered with far-
rago, which lay like great, green sea serpents in
parallel swaths, just as the mowers had thrown it,
and the air was prime with the fragrance of new-
mown hay.
Mr. Gordon was a squatter whose flocks had, in
the early days, grazed over a great run of country
in the county of Talbot, Victoria.
His magnificent run was bounded on the south
by the Guildford Plains, and from thence it followed
the Loddon River beyond Maldon. He had long
since won a title, but it rested awkwardly on one so
long accustomed to the bush. The Homestead was
situated adjacent to Mount Tarrengower, which
overlooked the country for miles around.
Sir Rolf Gordon lived there, and fully enjoyed
the fruits of his industry and early hardships. Kirrie
was the sum total of his progeny, and his whole
interest was centred in the mental and physical
development of the lad.
He had a friend, Marcus Boldrewood, who was
also a squatter, but, unlike Gordon, he was a much


later arrival. He came in the sixties, when the
civilisation, or rather colonisation, of Victoria was
an accomplished fact. He brought money with him
and became a permanent colonist, bought a station,
and grew old and wealthy as the years followed
each other down the gulf of time. His pastures also
bordered the Loddon, and followed it even to where
the river fell into the great “Millewa.” As boys,
Gordon and Boldrewood were fellow collegians,
and as men fellow-colonists; but, whilst the latter
was but a “cockatoo,” the former’s wealth was only
told in seven figures.
Boldrewood was sure of his genealogy; Gordon
was sure of his gold. The former was as proud of
abstract distinctions as the latter was of concrete
substances. Boldrewood could prove by quadratic
equations that his forefathers were aristocrats; Gor-
don could prove by the worth of his stations that he
was worth more than the reputation of all the fore-
fathers in the mortuary annals of the world; Mail
Boldrewood and Kirrie Gordon were parallel
prodigies of juvenile mentality. She was a casket
of leavened imagination; he was a temple full of
brooding thought. He could fashion material
worlds of wondrous designs; she could clothe them
in radiant colors, and people them with marvellous
creatures.
The children had been much together, and
naturally regarded each other as relatives, and
always addressed each other’s parents as Uncle and
Aunt. Maii, like Kirrie, was an only child.
This was a glad day with the young folks of
Maldon. Kirrie had just returned from school for
a special holiday, and his father was glad, and
lavished his wealth on the neighbors' children with
a great generosity.


The Christmas tree on this occasion was nothing
artificial. An evergreen sheoak sapling about four
feet in height stood in the centre of a clear park.
This was dedicated to old hathei Christmas, and
Santa Claus was invoked to be more than usually
generous with his favors. Large, bright king-cups
were tacked to the branches, and bands of king’s
yellow were wound diagonally round the slim,
tapering stem from base to summit, where a bright
oriflamme flapped in the December breeze. The
lower branches, reserved for the young folks’ spoils,
were soon weighed down with a wealth of wild
fruits and flowers, and the carnival went agog.
Mail was unique, and Kirrie was boisterous.
Game succeeded game as the day wore on, and yet
the revellers did not tire.
“What shall we play next?” shouted Meg Ben-
digo.
“ Forfeits!” exclaimed Maii.
“ Yes ; forfeits ! forfeits !” shouted a chorus of
small voices.
The children gathered in a semi .circle around
Meg, who was selected as exponent. Forfeits were
paid in, and the game proceeded.
Kirrie’s forfeit was eventually held up.
“ What must the owner of this pretty thing do?”
was asked.
“Do wonders,” exclaimed the exponent. “Pie’s
a brave lad, and his lady-love is rigid and overmuch
romantic; hence he must bring her the node of a
larch that grows on the verge of Mount Erebus and
the spat of a newt spawned in the mossy fens of
Greenland—build a coral with the former and im


pound therein the latter. That accomplished, his
love is acceptable.”
“ The reward is mammoth, fair Leman, for a task
so light,” said Kirrie. “ Fauna and Flora is all you
as k—they are the offspring of climate. The great
1 arrangower towers above us; climatic zones mark
every grade of its elevation. The larch grows on its
upper slopes and the dank fens of mossy Greenland
lay thick about its base—the Polar world is thus
within my grasp.”
That is sufficient,” said the exponent.
“ Maii’s forfeit was the next.”
What say you ?” asked the interrogator. “ Fine
or superfine?”
” Superfine!” was the response.
“ What must the fair one do?” was asked.
" She must live and love for a lifetime—bow to
the will of Hymen whenever he crosses her path
kiss none nor never, save beneath the mistletoe, and
give heart and hand to him who first kisses her
there.”
Similar and other impossible tasks were set for
each until the game was up. But the children were
not yet tired. Kiss in the ring was next called on;‘
they romped around in a merry circle, and Maii was
much courted, but all failed to kiss her. She played
with great spirit; ran off often, and was captured as
many times. But she was firm in her resolve, and
would not submit to the test of the game. Kirrie’s
turn came; she challenged him and he captured her
after a smart run.
The park was quite clear; there were no trees
save the Christmas tree in it.


“ Now Maii, you’re mine,” said he; “I must kiss
you.”
“ Yours, indeed!” she retorted indignantly, and
pouting.
She was dressed in armless sleeves, and linking
his arm in hers, he led her towards the ring. He
was not slow to note that her snowy arm was
flecked with a large, dark mole.
He paused suddenly; “Now, Maii,” said he,
“ this kiss —what say you ? May I ?”
“No! No!” she protested. “Not without the
mistletoe; where is it?”
“ The mistletoe is a parasite, is it not?” he said,
getting up an artful grin.
“ Ah, yes; so they say. What is a parasite,
Kirrie?” she asked in the blandest manner.
“ An evergreen or foreign growth which grows
on trees, &c.”
“Well! well!” she exclaimed, just evincing a
little childish wonder.
“Yes, Maii,” he said; “this is a mistletoe,” as
he remarked the mole on her arm, and before she
could realise the purport of his allusion, he raised
her arm over her head and kissed her.
“ The fort is won, and I’m the king of the
castle!” he shouted, in a paen of wild delight.
“ You bad—bold —boy! You’re too fast, sir,” she
said, “ and Bondar looking too,” and she broke away
from him.
“.You grand —good—girl!” he retorted recipro-
cally ; “ even profane adjectives fall sinless from thy
dulcet lips.”
11


She blushed, looked confused and kept out of his
reach.
“ Come, my lady-bird,” said he coaxingly, “ be
wise now; you see it’s quite legitimate, the mistle-
toe and all as ritual as the riddle read it."
“ I'm fully ashamed of myself and of you too,”
she simpered.
“ No one knows of its legality, and it looks mal-
apert, but it’s quite jolly and proper, I suppose,” and
she drew near him and smiled lovely.
“Yes, fair love-bird; it’s quite marital,” said he,
and he led her into the centre of the ring and kissed
her before them all.
“ There ; that seals it, rivals!” said he.
“ Ah, Maii; you partial pussy,” exclaimed Bon-
dar spitefully. “You shall be impeached for this —
the mistletoe —where is it?” he asked indignantly.
“ Here it is!” exclaimed Kirrie, holding up the
snowy arm on which the dark brown spot was much
conspicuous. “ A mole’s a mistletoe, don’t you
know?” said he, and he kissed her again.
“Ah, just fancy; and how did you discover it,
Kirrie?” asked the interested little onlookers.
“ Thuswise,” said he. “Moles are subject to
fairy spells; to overcome difficulties, break the spell
thus, and the way is obvious; take the left shin bone
of a misogynist and shape therefrom a battledore,
preserving the marrow. Then take three minims of
an old maid’s scruples—blend parts of the former
and latter in the ratio of 2 : i. Stick the tail feathers
of a cuckoo hen in the compound and you have a
shuttlecock that will pierce the arc of a crumbling
12


rainbow. Toss the shuttlecock aloft a stroke
of the battledore, and the spell is broken.’
“ Yes,” said he with swelling inflection, fairies
gather round a rainbow like moths round a candle,
the sexless bird falls among them with the force of
a bomb, and losing their gravity, they fall to the
earth like showers of star-dust.
“ That’s a bright stellar fable,” exclaimed Bon-
dar, laughing heartily; the laugh was general, and
they romped around the ring with greater vigor than
ever.
“ Wait!” exclaimed Meg Bendigo, a big girl who
lorded it over the little folks. “ I’ve an idea; let us
marry these fays that the fauns have mated so
well.”
“ Yes, yes; let’s have a wedding! ’ shouted the
others, eager for anything novel. “ A grand wed-
ding that’ll make the beasts and birds stare with
jealousy.”
Mali was at once taken in hand by the fair little
milliners, and robed in vestal garments of the most
original design. She was clothed m Meg s grea
mantle, which was a trained gown to her and was
over-coated with the bright leaves of the silver
wattle A zone of flowering sarsaparilla encircled
her waist and her forehead was crowned with a
wreath of wattle blossoms and clad thus, she was
led up to the stump at which Bondar was to officiate
as an altar.
“ Hail, fair one!” said he, bowing profoundly.
“ Since I cannot be the bridegroom 1 may well pro-
nounce the bride’s doom.
“ Where’s Kirrie?” asked the nuptial maids of
the folks assembled, who were so rapt in admiration
13


m the presence of the bride-elect, that they had not
noticed his absence.
“He’s yonder!” exclaimed Meg, “dodging a
Spanish butterfly around an almug bush.”
Summon him suddenly, said Maii. A whipper-
in was sent over, and Kirrie came leisurely up the
meadow and took his stand before Bondar, who had
agreed to tie the knot.
“Oh, Kirrie! why this cold-bloodedness?” ex-
claimed Maii hotly. “Don’t } r ou know poor little
masher is lost in the crop and must be rescued be-
fore this job is completed. Oh, if you only knew
how wildly my poor heart palpitates! my nerves are
over-wrought with anxiety lest he should expire
before the crops are cut down; ah, poor little kit—he
was such a pretty little pet.”
“You know, dear,” replied Kirrie coolly; “I
should like everything done quietly—calmly—
coolly ” (aside) “ everything except the starvation
of kit that I should like to have done suddenly.
... I like everything done in the shade, at a
mean average temperature of 60 degrees, and I
thought it just as well to dip the thermometer in
the well and thus reduce the general temperature of
the atmosphere, so that all might end well.”
“ Well! well! well!” exclaimed the little folks to-
gether.
“ Come this way, you romantic integers,” ex-
claimed Bondar, and Kirrie and Maii stepped up to
the altar.
“ You wish me to pair you,” said he. “Your lives
are now single, and your loves double, eh! You
wish to double up your loves into a single life.
Aye!” said he; “ it’s only the complement of Nature


that seeks fulfilment, and the plus sign shall do it —
the sign of the cross is my symbol—the service is
simple, but marriage is a pyx that tests humanity at
every level, and before merging young insanities, I
deem it my duty to prick their fickle fancies on many
minor points; now mark my interrogations.”
Have you ever sat on a railway line to medi-
tate on the uncertain ways of life? or lost your head
in a ballroom and found it in a mare’s nest?”
“ Have you ever lived in the bizarre realm of
abstraction or gathered the gilly-flowers that grow
there in the flitting dells of Utopia?”
“ Have you ever made puns on duns, or dwelt
lightly on the point of a joke that was sharp enough
to kill your creditors?”
“ Do you make love letter-ly or literally?”
Have you told your loves in characters angular
or round?”
“ Fabrics built on the angle are the most lasting,
but the round runs best.”
“ Do you love in globo or polygamous-like?”
“ These are ideas that vex and veer striplings
much, and on which much lachrymosity depends—
what say you ?”
“ Oh, fie, good parson!” exclaimed Meg, im-
patiently ; “your ‘ haves ’ and ‘ do’s ’ are platitudes
vague and impertinent; the wavering thoughts that
animate the minds of the adolescent are ephemeral
and not subject to laws positive.”
Rev. Lector!” said Kirrie, addressing Bondar.
Behold, we present ourselves to you respectively
m the youthful ripeness of an absolute and inde


pendent oneness; duality is the fond, dizzy state
that we contemplate —will you amalgamate us?”
“ It’s sudden luck, sir, to seal your lucky lot,”
retorted Bondar, “ and minus mead or malice, I’ll
do it.”
Bondar then placed them in apposition and pro-
ceeded with the ceremony.
“ Now stand akimbo,” said he, “ and note the
dogma on which your banns depend.” (He reads) ;
“ Matrimony is a hazard, and in a chronic state
it may lead to limbo or elysium, for Hymen is a
jolly god, and dabbles oft and lightly in honey-
moons. But lovers should note that honeymoons,
like harvest moons, are transitive
“ Pooh, you ninny!” exclaimed Meg Bendigo;
“ that’s nonsense. Harvest moons are nouns—only
verbs are transitive.”
“ Yes,” said Bondar, continuing “ and brides are
nouns, yet like verbs, they have moods and tenses
as various as the chromatic scale and as strange as
night. But they should remember that men who
would brave a tempest, to test a merry thought, are
as fickle as dicky-birds and may be petted and
patted with extraordinary familiarity; husbands
should also remember that women are pleasant fib-
bers, and would tell a fit one even to foil an old
fogey.
“ Now for the grand lanyard,” exclaimed Bon-
dar. “Do you love this glowing mammal; this mel-
low nest of curves and dimples?” he asked. “If you
love her, say so.”
"So!” readily ejaculated Kirrie. "Yes;’ said
he. “With all the pluperfect gluttony of a suckling,
I love her.”


“ You will take far better than worse,” said Bon-
dar, wilfully mixing up the marriage text.
“ Impious Vandal!” exclaimed Meg, “ how dare
you trifle with a serious subject and thus mis-state
the orthodox—the sacred saga of our forefathers.”
“ Never mind the doxa,” Kirrie, “ that’s mine.
Come Maii,” said he, “ let us quit this dingle and go
out and play at the pond together.”
“ Oh, yes,” she said enthusiastically. “ Let us go
and catch dab-chicks and gather swamp violets and
mix them up; what a splendid olio that will make,
eh, Kirrie!”
“ Come, chucklings,” said Bondar, “be grave,
and let us get on with the ceremonies. Now Maii,
do you love this vain glorious valentine of yours?”
“Well, yes; I love him all right enough, you
know; but I love Masher too. Oh, what’s this?” she
exclaimed, picking up a fragment of gray wacke.
“ That’s pretty, is it not, Parson ?” she remarked,
showing the specimen to Bondar; “and it’s just the
color of Masher’s fur. Poor little Masher, he must
be lonely.”
“ Come now, produce the ring,” said Bondar.
“ The ring,” repeated Kirrie. “ Ah, yes; there it
is,” said he. “ Hark! The dinner bell—it rings,”
and they broke up and scampered off to dinner,
laughing merrily.


Chapter II.
Bears on its wing - each hour a load of fate.
The swain, who, lulled by Seine’s mild murmurs, led
His weary oxen to their nightly shed,
To-morrow may rule a tempest-troeibled State.
Coleridge.
Boxing day was a scorcher; the wind was high
and hot, and bush fires were rampant. The atmo-
sphere was condensed and decidedly muggy and
laden with impregnations of smoke, dust and
locusts. Maii’s boisterous energy was somewhat lax
to-day, and she sat in the shade and amused herself
in a simple manner. Kirrie had given her a folio of
his earliest sketches, which he had preserved as
artistic specimens of his young ideas—
THE SHADES OF EXTINCT INSPIRATIONS
he called them. She turned the pages slowly and
laughed aside at the novelty and extravagance of
his young ideas.
“ Here’s an archetypal fetich, Uncle,” said she,
holding up the shade of a departed inspiration.
“ What is it, fair one?” he asked.
“ The personification of Old Sol, he calls it,” she
said.
She read the text beneath, which was as unique
as the sketch itself; it ran thus :
“ The sun is a Minotaur that always blinks and
runs a race with Time, who gathers the days and
nights that fall from his inflamed lids —theorem. To
have eternal daylight, insert the arc of an ordinary


planet between the lids when open, which will pro-
duce wonders —result anticipated: the abolition of
Time and consequently the eventuation of perpetual
youth.”
“ Oh, what an infinite idea!” she remarked as she
turned another page, and a slip of paper fell to the
floor; it was blank save that it bore the symbol
C. H. C. I. 3. She gazed vacantly at the letters for
some time; then an idea occurred to her.
“Clever boy, Kirrie!” she ejaculated. “Cipher,
no doubt; probably the initials and address of some
fair city belle. C. H. C. I. and a little three!” she
repeated very deliberately, looking earnestly at
Kirrie, who was swaying himself easily in a ham-
mock suspended from the shady limb of an adjacent
box-tree.
“Whose initials, Kirrie?” she asked pointedly,
passing the note in question to him.
“ Oh, botheration!” he exclaimed, springing up
quickly; “ this reminds me. It’s a chemical symbol.
I promised to meet Bondar in the laboratory this
morning, when he would initiate me in the art of
generating chloroform. Come, } r ou will join me?”
said he.
“Yes; I certainly shall,” she replied. “It’s a
great love-lammas to me, to be in a chemist’s shop—
I love scents so much.”
Bondar’s study was detached; they crossed the
lawn immediately and paused at the door, which was
ajar.
“ Mind yer preshus lives now, me bould kin-
chins, for ye’r invadin’ th’ regions of danger; why,
that’s a magazine of spontanus combustion —an
mcubator of sudden deaths,” exclaimed one of the


harvest hands who saw them approaching; and in
truth Bondar's studio bore a dreadful reputation.
Explosions were frequent therein, and on one occa-
sion a large evaporating basin was blown through
the roof. On another occasion, a stick of phos-
phorus took fire and frightened everyone on the
homestead except Bondar himself; domestic pets
and minor animals that picked up gleanings there-
abouts seldom survived the day.
“ Hush!” exclaimed Maii, “ he’s studying; cram-
ming for his next exam., probably.”
Kirrie cocked his ear and laughed at what he
heard; Bondar was parading the room and repeating
in subdued, though exultant, tones, “Eureka!
Eureka!”
Kirrie and Maii walked in abreast.
“ Pugh!” she exclaimed. “ What a mess! what a
smell!” and true enough the place was in a mess
and the nauseous fumes of heated chemicals per-
vaded her dainty nostrils.
Bondar stopped short, and standing in the centre
of his surroundings, gazed mutely at the intruders.
He was fairly in it. Pestle and mortar were there;
and test tubes, blowpipes, beakers, sand trays, retort
stands, crucible tongs, condensers, evaporating
dishes—all the paraphernalia necessary for experi-
menting in syntheses and analyses, was at hand; an
eudiometer stood on the bench, and the heated con-
tents of a stoppered retort showed that it had just
felt the glow of the burner.
“What—a—chaotic mess!” said Maii, gazing
curiously about her.
“ Y —e —s,” retorted Bondar with reciprocal de-
liberation. “ Primarily, chaos was reduced to order
20


by a procreative word, herein, order has been
reduced to chaos by your father’s ward.”
“Ah; so we see, cousin,” said Kirrie. “But,
what have you discovered that excites you so
much ?”
“ Discovered!” ejaculated Bondar in wild excite-
ment. “ Why, I’ve discovered a synthesis that’ll
stagger the intelligence of man; I’ve discovered
secrets that will overshadow the results of Edison’s
master-thoughts; I’ve obtained an elemental com-
bination that will neutralise the force of gravity, if
you can understand what that means. I can walk
up a tree, along the walls and ceiling of a room—in
fact there’s no walls or ceilings to me now, it’s all
a matter of choice, as I can entirely do away with
gravity. I can produce earthquakes, thunder-storms
or tornadoes, at a moment’s notice, and quell them
with equal despatch, and I can throw forked light-
nings about like rice at a wedding. The principle is
this:—When dynamics explode, a momentary
vacuum gxists at the centre of combustive activity;
though the ignition of the chemicals annihilates
their constituent particles, a new' force is born of
the compact—this force is the protoplasm of grav-
ity ; but how I secure it and how' I utilise it, are
dangerous secrets which I must never reveal.
Among lesser discoveries I have found that music is
a liquid and may be bottled like ale and measured
out by the pint; fogs may be solidified and used as
hoardings on which posters wdll be displayed in the
future. Yes,” said he, “ abstract elements are tan-
gible substances which may be solidified and used
in an ordinary w r ay; even the shadow that precedes
or follows us on a sunshiny day, may be gathered
up and used. Here is a chemical that will do it,” and
fie went to a cabinet and took therefrom a small
21


phial, removed the stopper and sprinkled some of
the contents upon Maii’s shadow, which, as she
stood in the doorway, fell across the floor. He
stooped and picked up fragments of an opaque film
which corresponded in shape with the outlines of the
blots made by the liquid thrown down. The gaps
were apparent, momentarily, but quickly closed up
again.
Kirrie took the elemental fabric in his hands and
examined it—it was as tough and as smooth as vel-
lum, and void of warp or weft. He held it up to the
light—it was semi-transparent, but not porous.
“ This,” said he, “ should supersede all knoAvn
fabrics as a weather-proof material.”
“ No, said Bondar, “ it’s volatile in sunlight and
evaporates readily. It’s ”
“ Allegorical! eh, lad! —allegorical of what you
will do when you’re a man,” said Pater Gordon, who
stood in the doorway. “ Well, let us hope so; I like
ambitious boys—ambition is proemial of great-
ness.”
Bondar was Kirrie’s senior by many years; how
many, no one knew. He was a strange child, and
nothing whatever was known of his origin; but it
was said by the quidnuncs of the district that he
was born in a burning bush on Black Thursday, and
that both his parents, if ever he had any, perished
in the wild stampede which took place on that awful
day.
It was said that a female kangaroo which had
lost her joey in the wild rush for life, snatched him
up as she hopped over a burning bush, put him into
her empty pouch and carried him safely through


burning forests, across blazing plains that were
wrapt in billows of flame, and landed him safely
beyond all danger.
Sir Rolf Gordon possessed a curious aboriginal
manuscript, which told the strange story of the
child’s birth and rescue. This remarkable sherd was
the handicraft of an intelligent old blackfellow who
had witnessed the incident, and many months after-
wards recovered the child and restored it to a bush-
man, who in turn left it at a shepherd’s hut on Sir
Rolf’s station. The bushman tacked the original,
together with his own very free translation of the
same, to the child’s clothing, and the shepherd find-
ing the little stranger in possession of his bunk on
his return in the evening, was much astonished, and
removed it forthwith to the homestead.
The blackfellow called him “ Bondar,” which
signifies a star in the aboriginal dialect; he explained
that when the tribe surrounded the little white mam-
mal, it reminded him of a star set in a dusky sky.
Thus it was recorded that Bondar was born on
Black Thursday in a tempest of fire that plundered
the land of its offspring and plumed the heavens
with fire and smoke; born on a day that reeked with
strange phenomena, which presaged the golden era
that was about to follow, for the sun loomed, lurid
and limp in shapes protean and strange in an atmo-
sphere of chaotic wildness in which the cradle, tub
and dish were severally outlined —loomed through
intermundane shadows and red-hot ashes that rose
from a surging sea of fire.
Sir Rolf was greatly interested in the little mam-
mal, which had apparently lived through many
years that could not be estimated in its lean develop-
ment; it could articulate freely, but its expressions
were mere jargon that no one could understand.
23


Sir Rolf was wont to note memorable events in
his diary, and thus he entered the item; “ A strange
human pupe arrived to-day in the shape of a gaunt
waif that glares wildly and gabbles like a Gael; its
physical aspects are decidedly infantile, but the dull,
gray iris that limits the expansion of the dilating
pupil is indicative of age. From its physical aspects
it might be regarded as human, but its intelligence is
abnormal, and consequently it must be the progeny
of prodigies. 1 have no faith in mete-psychosis, but
this creature puzzles me; it surely possesses a trans-
ferred spirit. However, let it be even an amalgam
of man and devil, I shall develop its metaphysical
resources and lead out its strange lights.”
Sir Rolf kept his promise; he adopted the little
waif, fed, clothed and for years he educated it, side
by side with his own child. But as their spheres in
life would be very different as they advanced in life,
he very wisely separated them while they were yet
children.
Kirrie was sent to college, in Melbourne, whilst
Bondar was placed under the tuition of a scholarly
teacher whose attainments were second to none in
the country.
But now that the lads were grown to youths,
both were students fond of study for its own sake;
neither of them knew what relationship existed be-
tween them—they understood that they were cou-
sins, but neither bothered about it nor questioned
the certainty of it. They were both doing well, and
were satisfied to let well alone. Bondar understood
that Sir Rolf was his Uncle, and he was not yet curi-
ous enough to inquire about the past —to ask how it
was he had no parents or what had become of
them.


Sir Rolf had an idea which he resolved to carry
out in reference to the future of the lads. He had
often overheard them in conversation. Kirrie had,
to his sire’s astonishment, given expression on many
of these occasions, to radical notions that were very
obnoxious to his parents old conservative
consciences, but on this occasion he had spoken of
the most cherished fads of the Aristocracy with a
recklessness and indifference that were altogether
inconsistent in one who owed so much to the wealth
of his parent.
But Bondar had gone further; he had candidly
expressed his approval of Anarchy and eulogised
the means it advocated for the removal of the Sam-
sons of law and order —to overcome the minions of
wealth and to loot and divide their possessions
among the poor and needy.
This was a crushing discovery to Sir Rolf, who
had set his heart on making a thorough aristocrat
of his clever little son, and he was no less surprised
than mortified ; but he listened and smiled with com-
mendable gravity. For he argued that it was not in-
consistent with his own ideas of evolution the lads
were truly in perfect consonance with their environ-
ment —the country was a spawn-bed of red-hot
republican rabble, and the lads must necessarily
assimilate ideas that were as prevalent as the ozone
in the atmosphere. But he resolved to remove them
before the baneful spores of this social spawn had
taken root in their fecund imaginations.
Both would be transported to other climes where
their educations would be completed and the natural
bent of their inclinations allowed to develop. Kir-
rie would be sent to the West End of London, where
the chosen of Mammon revel in a summer wave of
perpetual gaiety. Bondar would be placed in charge


of his tutor, who would be furnished with ample
means to provide for all his wants and education,
and instructed to travel the world over and over
with him.
“ Let him see and know,” said Sir Rolf to Liebeg,
his tutor, “ what the great, wide world is like. I
want you to develop the afllatus evil or divine that
is in him. Hence you must take him over the world
from the Arctic regions, where the Eskimo stands
shadowless amidst shadows, even to the equator,
where the Anteseii stand shadowless beneath the
fulness of the sun’s effulgence. Let him wander
through the slums of Damascus, where the lazars
who have wasted their lives in uncleanness, totter
on the brink of eternity; let him sun himself on the
boulevards of Paris, where the demi-monde and
beau-monde outdo each other in the pomp and
vanities of this world; let him analyse humanity at
every level of its diverse and complex being; let him
study the polity of Russia where the nascent wolves
of freedom are still struggling with and strangling
the lag-hounds of ignorance; let him stand on the
sublime heights of the Alps where the high-priestess
of Nature displays her wonders which appeal to the
ideality of man; lose him for a time in modern
Babylon where the debauchee and the denizens of
poverty and uncleanness, wallow in the humus of
their own filth; let him know what it is to be alone
in the world without friends and funds; disguise your-
self and follow him throughout his wandering when
hardships and destitution overcome him; watch him
closely, meet him and assist him and note carefully
what he says and does under all circumstances;
then let us talk of the evolution of man.”


Chapter III
Lament who will, in fruitless tears,
The speed with which our moments tiy;
I sigh not over banished years,
But watch the years that hasten by.
Bryant.
“ Look, Sir Rolf! Look at this little hezapod! Is
it not a beauty ? a precious specimen; it’s the first of
the kind I’ve seen yet, and will add much interest to
my collection.”
Thus exclaimed Maii, bursting breathlessly into
the library where Sir Rolf was absorbed in the con-
tents of his correspondence. The mail had just
arrived, and he had received letters from Kirrie and
Bondar which were full of important news.
“ Ah, yeshe replied absent-mindedly and with-
out raising his eyes from the text of the letter which
he perused.
“ Look at it!” she repeated, putting it down on
the desk before him.
“ Aye; I see, it’s a goby, no doubt, that has fallen
from the constellation, Draco,” said he impatiently.
“ Ah! what’s this?” she asked, taking up a letter
addressed to herself —“ a letter for me, and you
never told me anything about it; and from Kirrie,
too,” she said, impatiently opening it. The little
creature fell from her hands and crawled away; she
did not notice that it disappeared immediately. She
ran her eyes hastily over the postmarks, and was
anxious to know how her young friend was pro-
gressing in the land of his forefathers.


“ Yes, yes! Maii, I quite—forgot to mention it.
There’s a—er —letter for you from—ha! ha! ha!—
from a—er —Grecian kyreille—ha ! ha !” exclaimed
Sir Rolf, laughing heartily as he laid aside one of
many leaflets of manuscript which he held in his
hand.
“ Now, Uncle; whatever tickles your fancy so,”
asked Maii, looking surprised at the levity of this
austere man.
“ Nothing, child, nothing!” he retorted, knitting
his brow as he laid aside another leaflet—the story
had evidently changed—comedy had given place to
tragedy. “ I shot Osaki —shot him dead on the
spot!” ejaculated Sir Rolf, and he paused and sighed
heavily. “ Zounds!” he exclaimed, “ Bondar has
run amuck—run amuck among the Diamios of
Japan or some other wilderness. Liebeg, the idiot,
has lost his head !”
" What now?” asked Maii absent-mindedly; she
was now absorbed in the contents of her own letter.
"What! Liebeg beheaded with an—er —air baloon
that went off with a bang and blew the pro-
fessor’s ”
Maii paused and laughed heartily—laughed out-
right in Sir Rolf’s face. She had not caught the gist
of his exclamation. They stared at each other and
neither spoke for a minute; both had struck mirth-
provoking matter.
“ Here Maii,” said he, "you read it; I cannot,”
and he handed to her Bondar’s manuscript, which
was neatly written out on one side only and num-
bered like printer’s " copy.” The letter ran thus:—
" Kai-fang, China, Jan. Ist, 1881.
" My Dear Uncle, —Let me record the capture of
your last lisp, which overtook me at Malwa. I was


glad to learn that health was still a blood-ally of
yours as it is of mine—was pleased to hear of Mail's
success in the great field of Natural history—she
writes me, she’s quite a plenary museum of colonial
curiosities, including a grass-hopper’s shin-bone.
“ You may tell her I have secured a rare avis for
her, in the shape of the scalp of Rollo, the notorious
Viking who lived in the year 911 A.D. I’ve so much
to tell you that I must give it you in contracted par-
lance and limited instalments. An event quite equal
to any Grecian kyreille occurred recently—let me
tell you first, the last draft you forwarded to Liebeg
fell quite accidentally into my possession—ah, it
was magnum-bonum —my generosity, which has
been curbed of late, was immediately gravid ; and I
was immensely popular with my chums —1 hate Lie-
beg; he watches me like a sentinal star. I now
resolved to give him the slip. I evaded him at last.
“Ha! ha! I was free! I was suddenly seized
with an inspiration to laugh aloud; I laughed in the
face of the gladiatorial world around me, which was
so full of its own concerns, it did not regard the
gambols of a stranger. 1 laughed and laughed, and
a passing maiden paused and asked me what it was
that kept the mirth-provoking bacteria in action and
thus prolonged.
“ Ah, Uncle! She was such a maiden; it is
enough to say —I have never laughed since. She
was a prescriptum that would tell upon the rational-
ity of any man. She filled me—fired me with
desires; lawful or unlawful, I know' not —I was not
myself—desire had me in its fiery grasp. She had
charms—l had talents —I suggested an alliance, but
the maiden was wary—she said No!
“ There are obstacles,” said she, “ that intervene ;
insurmountable, awful obstacles.”


“ No! None that I cannot overcome,” said I.
“My sire," said she, “is a Jew; his name’s
Osaki; he’s richer than the Rothchilds and stranger
than the Aurora. My name is Amana; and the man
that would marry me must obtain my sire’s consent.
To reach my awful sire, you must carry the battle-
ments of a bloody gorge; the site is 90 miles from
a given point on the Aldan Ranges, from whence the
march begins. At that point an agent records the
pedigree of him who would enter the lists; the race
is with, yet against, the sun, for he who succeeds
must rise with the sun and gain the gorge ere he
sets. The ways and means of travel and approach
may be of his own choice and invention; the dell in
which my sire dwells is situated in the verdant
crater of an extinct volcano six miles in circumfer-
ence and four miles in depth—two colossal columns
rise from the centre of this basin and tower above
its verge, and from a beam that spans the summit of
these columns a cage is suspended, which, swayed
by natural laws of gravitation, swings like a huge
pendulum from side to side once in every fifteen
minutes.
“ This cage is the only means by which com-
munication may be had with the outer world. My
sire tells me that 800 men garrison the only pass
that leads to it, yet it is possible to pass through it
and gain the dell unharmed. When I had arrived at
years of maturity, my sire placed me in the cage and
swung me into the outer world:
“ Go,” said he, “ out of this into that —out of a
microcosm into a macrocosm; when you return,”
said he, “ let it be with my successor —a successor
worthy of your noble sire, who has guarded faith-
fully and well and kept intact, the precious inherit-
ance of the Osakis. Let him pass through the gorge


of Bactria for no other entrance or exit is there to
the vale of gold and vedas from whence wealth and
knowledge emanate.
“ Thrice have I attempted to return with the
chosen of my heart, and thrice has he been slain; as
each was vanquished, the cage swung to the verge
of the crater and my sire exclaimed:— ‘ Thou art
fighting against fate, my child! Go! seek him
again; he is in the outer world.
“ Let me tell you of my past suitors. One was
a soldier king, daring and adventurous, reckless and
romantic, who tried to carry the pass, man for man,
but his scheme failed, and he, himself (his army was
annihilated) was drowned and swept away by the
blood of his own men which rushed down the gorge
with the volume and force of a mountain torrent
“ The next was a successful fool with a wealth
of wit, who successfully fooled the guards on the
ramparts, but paid for his folly in the gorge, where
he lost his head in a hurry.
Ihe last was a four-fold millionaire, who laid
down a line of golden rails and forged a golden car
m which he approached the gorge, showering bul-
lion on the defenders from a massive steam hydrant.
His motives were mistaken by the defenders, and he
was destroyed and his wealth thrown into the vale.
N °w,” said she, “ If you have the heart, come, for I
love you.”
“ I have,” said I, and am prepared to overcome
these trifling difficulties. I was born in a fire, and
vvhen I m baptised in the blood of your father’s
guards, I shall be prepared to conquer the world.”
We started for the site at once. I collected an army
Armenian beauties and reached the Aldan ranges
raced with and against the sun, and gained the


place in the given time. “For what purpose have
you brought these beautiful women?” asked Amana
as we neared the goal of our destination.”
“To overcome your warriors,” said I. “ You
are the lirst woman that has overcome me —it was
your beauty that did it—hence my stratagem —they
shall overcome your sire’s garrison.
“We shall see!” she sullenly responded.
I formed the fair creatures in a semicircle fours
deep, and thus they approached the gorge with open
arms; the plan of attack was completely successful;
the valiant warriors who had carried the day in a
thousand bloody wars, were vanquished. Feminine
charms overcame masculine arms —the hardy
soldiers threw down their arms and rushed into the
arms of the storming army. I passed through the
gorge alone and unmolested, and shot Osaki where
he stood on the brink of the crater, and he toppled
into the chasm below, which was a barren cavity
piled high with human skeletons —the spoils of
many massacres.
The first person I encountered on emerging from
the gorge was Liebeg; having discovered me in the
act of collecting the Armenians, he disguised him-
self as a maiden and was among the fair army.
“Bravo!” exclaimed Sir Rolf. “Liebeg is a
Saxon after all.”
Amana was a siren fiend who seduced wealthy
victims whom Osaki assassinated and they divided
the spoils; she fled when she saw that all was lost,
and the garrison was only too glad to be rid of a
tyrant who had long held them in servile bondage,
and they welcomed me as a redeemer, for they were
all fatalists, and had a superstitious dread of Osaki,
who promised them that they would over-run the
32


world, when the bones of all the Christians were
bleached in this crater, which Allah had prepared
foi the destruction of the enemies of Mohammed.
Liebeg and myself are now reconciled, but I’m
still thirsting for adventure, and he fears me—yes,
he’s afraid I’ll set aside the sacred canons of China
and i ise a lebellion among the Khan kings. I reck
not; this is a world in which a man plays a losing
game all through, for he loses his life in the long
i un, no matter what turns up trumps—my trump
card is adventure, and I’ll play it straight out.”
Begad,” said Sir Rolf, laughing amusedly, “ his
story is a barmy one indeed, and it shows what’s in
the lad; I fear he’ll sorely try the probity of his
sponsors ere his race is run.”
Now, said Maii, I shall read to you Kirrie’s
letter-all but the postscript, which is strictlv pri-
vate. Reads:—
“London, nth Dec., 1880.
“ My dear Maii, —Allow me to thank you kindly
for youi last instalment, which—if I may so speak—
was like a great warm slice of Australia (wrapped
in the sea-green leaves of sweet September), trans-
lated from the heart of our old haunts, all flushed
with the glow of early spring and fraught with a
wealth of fresh, wild blossoms—it reminds me
forcibly of the truth of the old refrain—home, sweet
home; there’s no place like home—oh! how I wish
I was home again! I hardly know what to write
you; I’m growing more bookish every day.”
Sir Rolf: “ Poor lad! He’s home-sick.”
" not in my elements here, Maii; it’s such a
Raven bed of aristocrats whose squeamish ideas I
c annot endure.”
33


Sir Rolf: “Oh dear! oh dear! If he would only
assimilate their ideas they would make a nobleman
of him.”
“ You can have no notion, Maii—no, not in the
least, what an indignity it is for an independent and
out-spoken fellow like myself to be dubbed a corn-
stalk and gum-sucker, and sneered at by a clique of
blue-blooded lordlings whose greatest and only
boast is their infernal genealogy.”
Sir Rolf : “ Pshaw! the pride of the beggars —the
progeny of Titus Oateses and Meal Tub Plotters.”
“ They bore me, Maii, with repeated recitals of
their precious genealogies, for the best of which I
would not give the brief pedigree of an Australian
jockey! But I take a rise or a fall, as the case may
be, out of them occasionally. Fortunately some of
these lads of tall ideas, are radical blades like my-
self—we’re a fit lot and game for anything; we’ve
gathered together quite a brood of our own sort.
We are known as the great, gibbon guild.
Sir Rolf: “ Oh! Lord! That my son-in-heir
should come to this —amalgamate with a society of
apes!”
“ The principals of the academy are aware of our
principles, and let us have a go in at the blue-bloods
occasionally—they laugh at our sallies, but they
have no sympathy whatever with our philosophy.
I myself delivered a lecture quite recently on the
‘ Philosophy of Modern Ideas,’ in which I showed
that the trend of modernism is to break down the
greatness on which Capital has so securely and self-
ishly established itself, and to distribute the fruits
of this world with more impartiality.”
Sir Rolf: “Begad, the lad will dethrone his own
father before he is done.”


“ The principals allowed the blue-bloods to reply
just for the sake of argument, as they put it. The
rector was present, and stated that he took a neutral
stand in the matter, and would give the palm to the
one who practically exploded the other’s idea.”
“ A loquacious lordling whom I shall call ‘ Pro-
fessor Bubbles,’ replied on behalf of the lads of tall
ideas.”
“ Th e modernism,” said he, “ that these faddists
describe as the democratic cult, which is going to
turn society upside down, and compel Capital to
wash the dirty feet of Labor, is but a bubble—an
inflated bag of airy eloquence which is without
gravity; these men are enthusiasts whose schemes
are volatile.” (To emphasise his argument he had
provided himself with a small air-bladder which he
held captive with an ell or so of silk.)
“ Now boys,” said he, “ this is my idea of their
idea!” as he proudly balanced the floating air-
bubble. I rushed to the front and pierced the
bladder with a pin, and lo! his idea had collapsed.
The democrat wins!” cried my admirers, and
many of my opponents joined in the cry.
“ Your idea is exploded,” said I, as the bladder
wcnt off with a bang and blew the rector’s mortar
off his bald scalp.”
Sir Rolf: “Ha ! ha ! the wag. He possesses the
pleasant whims of his dad, withall.”
Phis is just one of the many little episodes that
diversify the life of a student whose heart is hot
with wild desires and hungers after pursuits that
have often proved fatal to the minds of the great:
but I am swayed by a healthy ambition, Maii—the


desire to do something laudable —something that
would ameliorate the lot of the struggling masses
throughout the world.”
Sir Rolf: “ That boy is an enigma! I can’t
understand him.”
“ There’s something wrong, Mail—radically
wrong with the political economy of the whole
world, and I mean to set it right. There’s no lack
of wealth; the harvest is prolific; corn and wine and
wool and oil are piled in plenty in all the great gran-
aries of the world—yet the toilers are in want, in
want and willing to work. Their children arc un-
clad and unfed, whilst the idlers of our set are
unconscious or indifferent of it, and revel in luxury
and live on the fat of the land.”
Sir Rolf: “ The little plebeian ; I must throw him
on his own resources for a time. Perhaps poverty
will blunt or paralyse, as it does, the powers of his
mental perception.”
“ 1 can’t endure it, Mali, I can’t! When I pass
through the busy streets of London and observe the
jaded spoils of poverty that people the great city—
the breakdowns of humanity that are plying menial
callings for a paltry pittance, I wish myself a thou-
sand miles away from the presence of such a heart-
sick sight—a struggling throng that must for ever
feast and fast; laugh and cry in juxtaposition. It
makes me exclaim in the littleness of my compas-
sion—“Oh, servile man, whatever hast thou done to
deserve it!’ It’s painfully, pitifully intolerable,
Maii, to see so much poverty and to be so helpless,
it makes me homesick —truly homesick; oh, fair
Australia! Let me sun myself again on thy broad,
prolific plains.”
“ Yet I know, Maii, that in our own land, minor
miseries of the same order prevail—that's what dis-
36


concerts me. Maii, I’m heartily afraid of the future.
I can never live in luxury in the midst of poverty.
Wait and watch for developments.”
There!” said Maii; that’s your share of the
letter—that’s all that’s public; the rest is for my
own delectation.”
“ That’s enough,” retorted Sir Rolf, “enough to
convince me that my son is a sundowner. Now,”
said Sir Rolf, handing Maii another letter, “ let us
see what the young democrat has to tell his
father.”
The letter was curt and decisive, and ran
thus:—
“My dear Pater, —1 may tell you, my education,
for which you are ever solicitous, is abreast of my
years; but I’m sorely disappointed in the world.
I find it is not, as you taught me to believe, a
sportive domain in which love and pleasures alone
prevail, but a blood-thirsty octopus that strangles
the best dispositions of virtue, and money is the
thew with which it grasps its prey. I find that those
who ride first and highest in the car of public esti-
mation are sometimes, nay, often, last and lowest
in the scale of integrity. London is a living georama
in which all this is manifest. Now, my dear Pater,
I have an idea—a great novel idea that I wish to
carry out ”
Sir Rolf: “Ha ! By George ! that boy always had
ideas—ideas will be the ruin of him yet.”
‘That I am determined to carry out; but I want
your assistance and your benediction. Here’s a
thesis: follow me in its statement, and then let us
analyse it. You’re an Australian statesman; you
have.a title, wealth and influence second to none in


your land of adoption. I’m your son and heir, hence
I shall one day be your successor; thus I may speak
in the plural. Now, my dear Pater, let me tell you,
this city is full of our sort —the spoilers of the poor
—the drones of every land who suck the life’s blood
ot the toilers —are here. Here they live in idleness
and iniquity—here they squander their unhallowed
gains.
“ The masses hate them and hate us, and no
wonder, for the wealthy, to them, are all the same;
but we, the wealthy, are as yet indifferent to the
masses; we do not think it worth our while to
entertain or consider the likes or dislikes of the
masses. It’s all the same to us—we can easily
afford to ignore them. But the time will surely
come when they will depose us, if we do not depose
ourselves. This may seem strange language, my
dear Pater, but I speak as I think.
“ Now, my great idea is this: when I come into
my inheritance, I shall depose myself and forthwith
inaugurate a mighty trust to be called ‘The Mil-
lionaires’ Sodality,’ in which the wealthy will be
invited to sink their superfluous wealth for the
benefit of the indigent and unfortunate, and the
good of mankind in general. You will observe that
this is a modern, gigantic movement that has
originated with myself, but many of my fellow
students whose expectations are far greater than
mine, are prepared to combine with me in carrying
out my idea.
“ We propose the formation of a wealthy com-
bination whose intention it is to blot out entirely
what is known as want and dire poverty, and the
train of ills that are begotten of it. We recognise
the fact that had not our ancestors acquired some
undue advantages over their fellows they could not
38


have accumulated such vast hordes of wealth;
hence it is our firm resolve to distribute it again,
and we feel that we will reap an ample reward in
the pleasures of redistribution.
“ Living in the midst of wealth, we have come
to the conclusion that it is but an ignis fatuus that
sustains the pride of the vainglorious, and we are
too wise, even in our young days, to glory in the
abstract vanity that is the ban of man, as it was of
the rebellious angels—their schism was foolish, but
they at least would have gained everlasting privi-
leges had their revolt been successful. But man is
a finite creature —his schemes are finite—his suc-
cesses are finite; hence the folly of his pride and
vanity.
“We purpose inviting the co-operation of the
wealthy of every country whose superfluous mil-
lions will be invested in this mighty trust —‘ The
Millionaires’ Sodality.’ The primary object of the
Sodality will be to reduce the opulence of the very
wealthy and to raise the position of the very poor;
a secondary object will be the perpetuation of the
memory of those who may join our sodality. You
will observe, my dear Pater, that our scheme is yet
larval ”
Sir Rolf: “ I should say so ! I should, indeed !”
“ but it will develop like an imago and come to per-
fection in the fulness of time, and the good names of
its founders and supporters will flourish for ever.
Now, I know, my dear Pater, that you will see the
wisdom of my idea and assist me substantially in its
development.”
Sir Rolf: “ Oh, the parvenu ! I shall absolutely
disinherit him.” He had listened with painful
interest to the revelation of his son’s great idea, and
thus he exclaimed at the conclusion.


“ And you, too, Maii; you must tell him he is
a monomaniac, and that you will not entertain his
ravings,” said he.
/
“Ah. don’t, sir, don’t!” exclaimed Maii; “don’t
heed him; he’s only romancing. Kirrie is very
magnanimous, and it’s just the way his warm sym-
pathy would boil over—sympathy for the poor and
unfortunate was always a weakness of his. In fact,
he never passed a working man without moralising
on the capricious order of things. ‘ls it not grossly
unfair,’ he would exclaim, ‘ that this man (pointing
to a laborer) is condemned to a life of servility and
poverty, whilst I am living in idleness and
luxury?’”
“ Well, let him have one chance to mend his
ways and reflect on the absurdity of his maud in
sentimentality,” said Sir Rolf; “ and let him know
that it is due to your intercession. Now, my dear
Maii, just write a few lines to my dictation.”
“ Ah, that’s noble! That’s truly parental,” ob-
served Maii. “ I know that you will find Kirrie
amenable and willing to take your advice.”
“ I hope so; 1 earnestly hope so,” retorted Sir
Rolf.
Maii drew her chair to the escritoire and pre-
pared to write, while Sir Rolf leaned his brow on his
hand and posed himself thoughtfully: “Write thus,”
said he: —
“ My dear Son, —Re your grand idea, I may say
I consider it the wild dream of an idealist who
would lend himself and his wealth to the rabble, and
spend his lifetime in the establishment of an impos-
sible millennium. As a spontaneous outburst of
human sympathy and an expression of the nobility


of your nature, it is pleasing to me ; but, entertained
seriously and taken as a gnomon of your rationality,
it fills me with anger and astonishment. It would
be almost as wise to attempt to capture the sub-
stance of a dream and cut out of it Utopian patterns.
Even were your idea initiated and supported by the
plutocracy of Europe I would not lend my support
to it. But you have the consolation of knowing that
in two years you will be of age; you will then be
better fortified to battle with the world than I was
at your age. Should you still desire to follow up
your idea—your great, novel idea—follow it up, my
lad, but, bear in mind, not at my expense. I would
forthwith disinherit you and bestow ray possessions
on Bondar ”
“ Oh, the adder! the adder!” exclaimed Meg
Bendigo, who appeared at the door and gave vent
to an alarming scream; “the adder has escaped! It
is crawling over the place.”
“ 1 must go,” said Mail; “they may destroy my
little pet.”
“ That will do, my dear ; I shall seal and sign it
myself,” said Sir Rolf; and Maii rushed off to the
scene of alarm, to find that it was only the little
hexapod—her latest discovery—that had crawled
into the diningroom, and thus alarmed the house-
hold, who were fearfully afraid of it, and timidly
watched its movements at a safe distance.
It was known that Maii had a salamander among
her live specimens, which was erroneously supposed
to be an adder; hence the excitement. Maii secured
the strange little reptile, and laughed heartily at the
timidity of her friends.
Meg Bendigo was now a grown girl, and had
long since been installed as house maid at the
“ Granite Range,” Sir Rolf’s homestead. Maii spent


the best part of her time at the Grange, and as girls
of her own social status were very scarce in her own
district, she made a confidante of Meg, who sym-
pathised with her in all the little troubles in which
Kirrie’s radicalism involved him. Kirrie and Meg
had often played together as children, and, indeed,
it was from Meg Bendigo that he had imbibed his
democratic ideas. As a child, she was wild, wilful
and dictatorial, and she would stand on the summit
of Tarrangower, and. waving her little hands
dramatically, she would utter all kinds of exclama-
tions.
When the excitement consequent on the little
hexapod adventure was over, and the members of
the family had dispersed and were again busy with
their several duties, Maii followed Meg Bendigo
into the diningroom, where she was engaged at her
household duties. She was excited, and Meg knew
it; she could tell by the unusual light in her eye*
and the bright glow on her cheeks, that she had
news from the Mentor, as she used to call Kirrie.
“ Joy diminuendo!” exclaimed Maii, running her
fingers over the keyboard of the piano.
“ You’ve had a letter,” said Meg, without the
least ceremony; “ you're excited, and glad, and
gloomy, all at once.”
“Yes; a letter that is full of promise,” said
Maii.
“ A promise of marriage, eh?” observed Meg,
with an insinuating smile.
“ No; Kirrie is full of enterprise, and has
begotten a great and novel idea —greater and nobler
than anything he entertained before he quitted Aus-
tralia ; he has proposed to form a Millionaires’
Sodality, which will wipe poverty and crime off the
face of the earth altogether.”


“ Ah! Quite a millennial idea/' exclaimed Meg;
“and his other ideas —what of them?” she asked.
“ Does he purpose shelving them in favor of this
gigantic inspiration ?”
“ No, no!” said Maii; “ his colonial ideas flourish
and expand notwithstanding the spleen and splen-
dors of his British nephews. But his father is in-
flexible in his determination, and threatens to disin-
herit him altogether—to absolutely disinherit him
if he perseveres in his resolution to establish this
great Sodality.”
“Let him just dare to do it!” said Meg, with
eyes ablaze. “I happen to know something that
might just trammel him in his bad intention, and
trip him up short in the heyday of his knighthood.
Tell Kirrie,” said she, “tell him, when you write,
that his idea is a real spondee, and, kangaroo-like in
its bound, beyond anything of the sort hitherto sug-
gested by any of his compeers in wealth; and tell
him that Australia is with him to a woman in it,”
and she delivered her words with virile emphasis.
“ I will indeed,” said Maii, with great earnest-
ness.
“ Ah! 1 would indeed; to two women,” ex-
claimed Sir Rolf, who had overheard their conversa-
tion.
“ Tell him, Maii,” said he, “ that the women of
Australia are with him to a man,” and he looked at
Meg with an expression on his countenance that im-
plied what he meant. Sir Rolf treated the matter as
a joke, and laughed heartily, but his face was never-
theless thoughtful.
“ You are but children,” said he, addressing them
in his most pleasing manner, “ mere infants in
worldly matters; we must wait; we cannot expect
maxims from minors.


Chapter IV.
He left his home with a bounding heart,
For the world was all before him;
And he felt it scarce a pain to part—
Such sun-bright beams came o’er him!
He turned him to visions of future years,
The rainbow’s hues were round them;
And a father’s bodings—a mother’s tears —
Might not weigh with the hopes that crowned them.
A. A. Watts.
Liebeg was faithful to his charge; Bondar had
wandered over the world with him for three yea r s.
The wildest, as well as the most civilised centres of
Europe had been visited. It was Liebeg’s life task,
to educate the lad, and he devoted himself to it
with all the verve of an enthusiast, and as a conse-
quence, Bondar’s literary attainments were abnor-
mal for one so young. He could read, corre-
spond, and converse with accuracy and ease in four
different languages: English, French, German and
Russian. The greater portion of his time was spent
in Paris and St. Petersburg ; the former was the seat
of his social triumphs—the latter the seat of his
literary activity.
There he found an outlet for the overflow of his
prolific genius; vaunted vagaries had often appeared
in print, yet no one ever suspected the author. Pie
was a Nihilist at heart, and sympathised with them;
they had his advice at all times, and he invented for
them a clever, enigmatical system of cypher by
which they could promulgate their principles
through the leading columns of the Government
press—words that told of the ardent loyalty of the
toiling serfs, to the person of the Czar, and breathed
of their profound respect for his autocratic regime,


indicated to Nihilists, by means of this cypher, the
progress of diabolical plots that meant assassina-
tion to every scion of the Royal family.
It interested him greatly, the pursuit of a danger-
ous calling, and thus he found ample scope for his
recklessness among the leaders of his desperate
acquaintances. During one of his visits to St.
Petersburg he became intimate with one Binkhov, a
notorious Nihilist who had been advised of Bondar’s
ability, and who was anxious to initiate him into the
secrets of the Brotherhood, and it was through the
influence of this same Binkhov that his extraordin-
ary mental attributes had been brought under the
notice of the Nihilists; they readily acknowledged
his superiority, for he had out-done the best of them
in the subtlety of his suggestions; hence they recog-
nised in him one who could, if he would, bring their
craft to a state of perfection and strength which
would make it formidable in its demands and terrible
in its revenge. But he was not yet prepared to join
them; he saw weak points in their organisation, of
which he advised the removal before he would trust
himself in their ranks. In company with Binkhov,
he met their trusted leaders on many occasions,
tested them and advised them of the weakness of
their diplomacy; they acknowledged the force of his
arguments and sought to initiate him, but he
laughed at them for their efforts and challenged
them to make him a member of the Brotherhood
either by fair means or fraud.
He was willing to join conditionally, but their
laws were rigidly unconditional, and thus matters
stood. Yet the differences between them were
trifling to men of their resolves, but as it was a
matter of life or death to many innocent persons,
Bondar would not forego his principles for theirs;


he would not consent to the assassination of a
“ marked man ” at the risk of killing- an innocent per-
son, no matter how obscure that person might be.
This excepted, he recognised in their laws nothing
more than an inexorable votive code in which life
was given for life; but he would never agree that
they were justified in sacrificing the lives of inno-
cent persons in their attempts to remove those whom
they had condemned to death.
They accepted his challenge and endeavored to
initiate him, and after many attempts they were
successful. “ Once a Nihilist, a Nihilist for ever ”
that is their gospel, and they make their members
live up to it. Bondar was captured in this wise: A
great military ball was given by General Saratov, a
wealthy nobleman who was considered the shrewd-
est man in the Russian Army. His spacious ances-
tral mansions were, in antiquity and grandeur,
hardly second to the Kremlin. It was in one of
these magnificent monuments of Russian autocracy
that Bondar was initiated into the ranks of that
terrible league whose existence is one of the most
diabolical abortions of the 19th century —here where
least of all he would have anticipated an attempt, he
was captured and made a Nihilist. Many students
sworn members of the Brotherhood, were among the
vast assemblage that filled the halls. Binkhov, who
was a distinguished member of the elite of Russia,
had secured an invitation for his friend, Bondar, who
found himself in the presence of a brilliant gathering
that would have graced the State reception of any
monarch in Europe.
The festivities had been in progress for several
hours, and everyone was moving and living in a
whirl of joyous excitement, but now there was a
pause—an interval in which Victoria Viatka was to


sing—Victoria whose vocal gift was now the vogue
of all Russia. This beautiful and gifted Diva was a
Princess by birth, but her father had, in a rash
moment, excited the anger of the Czar, whom he
openly denounced as a despotic tyrant; as a conse-
quence, his ancestral possessions were confiscated
and he was exiled for life in Siberia.
The mother of Victoria did not long survive the
ruin that overtook her and blighted the bright pro-
spects of her own young life. Victoria was removed
by the Czar’s orders from Novgorod, the seat of her
ancestry since the days of Ruric, to St. Petersburg,
where she was placed in a State seminary and
received a thorough education; her talents were
remarkable, and developed yearly untd now she was
recognised as the national songstress of all the
Russians.
But the notoriety which her national successes
excited caused her genealogy to be questioned, with
the result that the Nihilists traced her origin and
proved her to be the daughter of Baron Libau, of
Novgorod, who was an exile in Siberia; proof of the
fact was intimated to Victoria by the Nihilists, and
she immediately took the oath, being the first and
only woman who had ever been initiated into the
secrets of the terrible brotherhood. She very wisely
kept her place in society, bore her secret in silence,
and plotted for the escape of her exiled parent.
Binkhov soon discovered that Bondar was im-
mutable in his principles—that he was proof against
all his appeals; but he conceived the happy idea that
his principles might be impeached—that his resolves
might be overcome by the assistance of Victoria,
whose transcendental combination of beauty and
talent might win him. He had set his heart on


securing Bondar, and this was the final device by
which he hoped to surprise him.
Victoria was advised of the plot, and approved
of it, and that was considered sufficient to ensure its
success; she was escorted to the stage by a German
Count, whose courtly presence was the admiration
of all present.
Whilst she sang, Binkhov stood beside Bondar,
who was enthralled by the magic of her voice, and
swept the scale of his polyglot vocabulary in quest
of adjectives that would adequately express his
estimation of her grand attributes.
“ Ah, me! she’s a ravishing creature,” he ex-
claimed, as she bowed in acknowledgement of pro-
longed applause.
“ Who is she?” he asked, in an earnest manner.
“ I know her by reputation only,” replied Bink-
hov, indifferently; “ but my friend, Kalmar, is one
of her courtiers —he is most intimate with her, and
will be glad to present you if you wish it.”
“ Wish it? I desire it most anxiously.”
“ Come, then,” said Binkhov; “ see, she retires
to her own set; Kalmar will present you at once.”
They reached the alcove where she stood smiling
and blushing amidst her friends, who were literally
showering encomiums on her. Binkhov summoned
Kalmar, and the presentation followed.
Victoria was struck with the intense intelligence
of her latest admirer; supper was forthwith an-
nounced, and she accepted his arm, and left the ball-
room with him.
The banquet hall, in which the supper was laid,
was an adjacent building, and was gained by semi


circular avenues which encompassed an oval court-
yard, in the centre of which stood a fantastic
rotunda, which housed the band when outdoor fes-
tivities were seasonable. This was the spot that Vic-
toria had chosen for the denouncement of her plot.
It was isolated, and was not within the range of
hearers. Hence the presence of eavesdroppers need
not be feared.
Bondar was bewildered with flashes of a pleasant,
strange feeling that w r as new to him, and he could
not command his feelings. A trembling sensation
which was spontaneous and immediate in its ap-
proach, thrilled the fibres of his nerves and
quickened his blood, which leaped through his
system like quivering volts of electricity, and the
magnet that wrought this change was fearful in its
power.
The tables were laid with silver and gold plate,
and the rarest and most costly delicacies that the
combined products of the world could offer, were
there in lavish plentitude; but Bondar saw them
not. His eyes rested on Victoria, and wandered
anon from her around the room in an abstract
manner. Aye, wandered vacantly around the room
in which sat the vaunted belles of many climes. But
all was commonplace to him —all but the presence
of this wonderful woman. He selected an apple
from a golden tray, and instantly the text of the
old fable crossed his mind: “Let the fairest take it!”
Ah! if Discordia should appear now and give that
command, it would not be hard to decide the contest
—all would fall back and let the fair Victoria take
her own.
They loitered at the supper table and in the
avenues till all others had retired. The night was a
study in silver and grey; the snowclad ground and


frosty eaves sparkled beneath the beams of a full
moon.
Bondar told her something of his past; the
dreams of his early life—the elements he had
analysed and the discoveries he had anticipated. She
was captivated with his manner, and wondered at
the latitude of his knowledge.
“ What a peerless mind you have!” said she.
“ There is nothing under heaven, neither concrete
nor abstract, that you have not analysed and reduced
to the statute of laws positive.”
“ Yes, there are two things that still puzzle me,”
said he, “love and electricity; both are subject to
natural influences, but I cannot locate what I call
the elemental bacteria or disturbing element that
excites them.”
“You have strange lights,” she observed; “the
strangest of all men whom I have met.”
“ So have the heavens, fair Diva; just note that
tiny star,” said he, elevating his fore digit Milky
Way-wards, “ that casts its twinkling shafts of
light athwart the bosom of immensity, that may be
a sun greater than ours, the centre of a system more
complex than ours —that’s strange, is it not? Hence,
what a strange light is the intelligence of man that
it can comprehend the possibility of such things?”
“ Ah, yes!” she exclaimed vaguely. “ But we
may not dwell on these matters; they are subjects
fit for the reflection of lonely sages; we are only
light-hearted, thoughtless revellers.”
“ Look!” he exclaimed, suddenly pointing
towards the north, where the shimmering lights of
the Auro a, which had just made its appearance,
were shooting upwards in a million changing colors


and spreading themselves out on a boreal curtain of
great splendor, which loomed intensely vivid
through the keen, frosty air.
“ Look at these wondrous manifestations of
Nature! Does it not appeal to the sublimity of our
nature —does it not concern us to know what they
are?” and his face beamed with a strange, spiritual
look of inquiry as he watched the quivering
streamers, or merry dancers, as they are called,
chase each other across the boreal prisms.
“ Ah!” she sighed, “ that is a phantom that defies
explanation —a phenomena whose genesis cannot be
defined until the gloom of the Pole has been ex-
plored and its frozen limits brought within the range
of man’s discriminating intellect.”
“ Let us gain the open court,” said Bondar, “ and
see it at its best;” and he took her gently by the
hand and led her to the rotunda, where their vision
might sweep the entire section of the horizon on
which the glowing phenomena appeared.
“ What a glorious phantasmagoria!” she ex-
claimed enthusiastically in a fervent outburst of
admiration. .“Of what does it remind one?—the
wanton spoils of Nature —splintered sunbeams and
broken rainbows falling upon prisms of ether might
produce it, eh!”
“ It reminds me,” said he, “ of a dream that once
occurred to me; I shall tell it to you.” His right
hand rested on her shoulder and his voice was soft
and low, and as he breathed into her willing ear she
quivered; this was an opportunity; if she were only
flirting, this would be delightful; but she was acting
a part—acting a part and a serious part in a great
plot, and yet his touch was delightful, aye, irresist-
ible; she would let one, aye, even two such oppor


tunities pass; she would listen passively to the
recital of his dreadful dream.
‘‘The dream,” she whispered; “go on. repeat
it r
“ Yes,’ said he, “ I had a dream that made mani-
fest the origin of the interesting displays—a dream
in which I was taken behind the scenes and shown
the secrets of Nature. I saw Nature unrobed and
in action in the seething laboratory of her inner
sanctuary —I dreamt that I had committed suicide
and had been called before the bar of justice in the
great Hereafter. It was a weird and uncanny
vision, and left a great impression upon me; it
seemed that my insanity was not the result of a
sudden or wayward impulse, but that I had deliber-
ately resolved to destroy myself for some time pre-
viously and was fully prepared to go; I had received
mortal provocation, and was coolly indifferent of
the awful consequences of my votive act, and the
fatal deed was carried out with great determina-
tion.
Life was let loose, as it were; then an unseen
spirit whose presence I can only describe as an in-
fluence, took possession of me; his presence was
soon manifest, however, to me, for I could see his
all-powerful thoughts shaping themselves just as
we observe each other’s actions. My senses were
clear, my consciousness complete. I was involved
in another body, an elemental or spiritual substance
devoid of gravity, which retained my originality in
every outline—l had lost nothing of my mundane
attributes except the control of my will, which was
entirely subject to my captor, who pinioned me
securely with his thoughts and moved me wherever
he wished by the influence of his all-powerful im-
pulses. It seemed to me that I had been dissolved


for some time, and had been moving about with this
ghostly sprite like a bubble of marsh gas over a
domain of mildew; the scene was tranquil and the
light exquisite, soft and radiant just like the purple
glories in which artists love to clothe their sunsets.
But a darkness suddenly fell upon us, and the spirit
spoke to me for the first time; there was no sound
when he spoke, none seemed necessary—neither did
I hear him speak—l saw what he said; his expres-
sions came out of the darkness that surrounded us,
like lightnings from a cloud;
“Brother!” said he, “your crime is the maxi-
mum amongst the sins of men; you may have
destroyed the entity of many worlds. As there is
no end to time nor space, there may be no limit to
the offspring of even one man; but you are not
absolutely lost —you shall see the consequences of
your rash act before your doom is pronounced.”
Fie then led me to an eminence that overlooked
a weird, a chaotic waste of color and form, in which
nothing was definite—all was confusion. 1 was
transfixed, and gazed wistfully around me: the
scene was a strange one: it was not like anything I
could ever have imagined. There was no horizon —
there was no locality. What was now, anon was
not; space was agitated like a bowl of ferment;
cumulated masses of phosphorescent vapor were in
perpetual evolution; the very foundation of the ele-
mental disc on which we seemed to stand were
enveloped in these curdling glories; they gathered
and broke about its base like breakers around a
lighthouse. My spiritual superior suddenly disap-
peared and I was alone —alone on a Avastc of meta-
physical forces. “ What is the next move?” thought
I. “ Surely I was not to be cast adrift in that deso-
late and terrible sea of abstractions!”
53


No, my term of suspense was as brief as it was
painful. I gazed intently into the chaos of intense
mists in which I was enveloped, and lo! I saw a
moving object—its expression was human. At first
it seemed a tiny pupe, but it developed rapidly
whilst I watched it, and now it was an adult in
whose countenance I could discover my own like-
ness; then it spoke and 1 quaked, for its wail was
fearful.
“ Oh Bondar!” said it, “ I am the soul of a being
that you were destined to bring into the world, but
you have pandered to the Gnomes of Destiny, and
the consequences of your act is upon me—you have
cut off the source of my development and destroyed
the means on which the completion of my existence
depended for ever! for ever! ! for ever! ! !” and I
am now doomed to wander and to wail here in bond-
age and immaturity for ever! for ever' ' for
ever! ! !”
Oh, its reproach w'as fearful! and it resolved it-
self again into its obscure state whilst I watched it;
then another shadowy visage came forth and
assailed me. It was apparently the spiritual out-
line of a woman who wanted being and lamented
her lot, and lo! —the yawning depths of immensity
around me were suddenly peopled with multitudes
of similar pupes whose upturned faces were terrible
to look upon; and their wails were fearful as they
cried in anguish:
“Oh, Bondar! We are your unbegotten child-
ren —the souls of the people of many generations
that you have robbed of existence; here we are
doomed to wander and to wail until the great
mystery of life is revealed.”
Oh! their wails were awful; then my captor ap-
peared and transported me to another realm, in


which the old familiar colors of the earth and day
and night were again manifest.
The site was an eminence adjacent to the North
Pole. The Pole itself, seen from my position, looked
like a large reflective brilliant of ice that caught up
the scanty rays of solar light which fell obliquely
upon the convex latitudes that bounded it. These
rays were condensed and thrown out again with
electric brilliancy, in countless milliards of brighter
rays which spent themselves upon the spires of ice
that rose on all sides.
As the earth revolved with lightning speed east-
wards, the effect was magical and wondrous—it
was truly an unparalleled spectacle; men were
there in countless numbers—men like ourselves,
apparently of ethereal substances, who chased the
flitting coruscations which seemed to be flitting
westwards; aye, chased them thus for ever and ever.
As they darted past the sparkling towers of ice, the
shadows of their weird outlines shot upwards and
danced upon the borders of the firmament below.
“ Look!” I exclaimed. “ These men run round
the world twice in a trice; yet they gain not on the
fugitive lights. Whatever is the purpose of their
action ?”
“ Lo!” said he. “ ’Tis but their own outlines
they chase; go,” said he, casting me from the height
on which we stood; “ you are one of them,” and I
fell forward; fell out of bed in a dreadful night-
mare.
Victoria listened to his dreadful recital with
intense, aye, almost painful, interest: noAv she
laughed outright.
“lam a believer in dreams,” said Bondar, and
some day I shall set out for the North Pole and test
55


the truth of my vision.” During- the recital of this
strange dream he had stealthily stolen his arm
around her, and her head lay back against his breast
in an easy manner; both were gazing intently at the
auroral display which was now waning. His de-
scription of the awful predicament in which he
found himself was so vivid, and his delivery so dra-
matic, that when he exclaimed how he had fallen
forward among the lost souls, she involuntarily
grasped him by the neck, and he was not slow to
avail himself of the tempting privilege which such
an opportunity offered; yet he did not treat her
with the ready familiarity with which he would
have treated an ordinary society girl. He was just
a little timid of her; she was a celebrated woman,
and celebrated people are generally feared, or per-
haps over-respected, even by their own celebrated
contemporaries. It was a feeling akin to this that
caused Bondar to hesitate in his desire to taste the
sweetness of her tempting lips; but he bent his head
gently and Avas about to impress an impassioned
kiss thereon when she sprang from his embrace
with a startled bound like a young antelope, and ex-
claimed in Avild dismay :
“Don’t man, don’t; for heaven’s sake! You
know not Avhat the risk is that you would incur; no
man that is not fated to be my consort may do that
Avith impunity—for it involves danger, and perhaps
death.”
“ In good sooth, my fair friend, you are over-
much cautious; but may I not be fated to be your
consort? How do avc knoAv? We are both gifted
and considered worthy of laudation among our fel-
loavs—might Ave not consort with fitting felicity?”
“ We might, and we might not; that remains to
be proved.”


She gave him a sign which only a Nihilist could
take, but he failed to respond.
“ No!” she said with weighty emphasis, “we
cannot be consorts, that is evident; if my reputation
is at par, yours is at a premium.”
“ What do you mean?—explain!—l am anything
you are—anything that you wish to make me!”
“What!” she asked with a suddenness that
struck the keen air like the concussion of an air gun
—“ you are what?”
“ I am anything that you may ordain,” repeated
Bondar.
“ I have been advised of your history,” said she
coolly; you are young and gifted and ambitious, and
perhaps overleavened with originality—you may
have a great future before you—you are the son of
a free land whose children are the sponsors of Free-
dom throughout the world. Now —what am I ? I
am a contradiction of what I appear to be; I am a
singer and less than that—l am a dissembler.”
“ Ah—l understand,” said he. “ You are an
actor, but you are not always in sympathy with
what you sing. Nay —you need not repine ; you are
the much petted minion of all the Russias—that’s a
magnificent distinction and one that the most cele-
brated person in the world might desire.”
He came nearer to her, and took her by the
hand; she was trembling like a striken viol string:
“You tremble!” said he; “you fear me—you love
me—which is it?”
“ Perhaps it is as well that you think so,” said
she; “ but the truth is, I fear for you,” and she
sighed deeply. “ Ah!” said she, “if you only knew


the life I lead and the bond that unites me to my
dear country, you would envy me 1 am sure.”
He caught both her hands in his. “ You are a
Nihilist, and you do not fear me,” said he in a
hoarse whisper. “Be not secret with me, you need
not fear me! lam no enemy of theirs.”
“ I am a Nihilist—you say truly,” she replied in
evident alarm; “ but I had unchallenged cause for
becoming one. Even now my father is a prisoner in
Siberia, whither he was banished when I was but
two years of age. His crime was nothing—nothing
but political prattle and the wild and wayward ex-
pressions of a successful boy who had won more
marbles, fought more boys, wrote more poetry and
kissed more girls than any other boy in the pro-
vince. His possessions—the possessions of our
noble ancestors than whom the descendants of the
Czars were not more ancient—were confiscated, and
I was removed to St. Petersburg, where the Czar
endeavored to obliterate my identity; but the Nihil-
ists discovered my genealogy and revealed all to
me, and alas! —l am one of themselves. I have
sworn to effect my father’s redemption at the cost
of my own life or the Czar’s also if needs be. You
are clever, you will join us—you will help me!” said
she, and she seized his hands with a wild grasp that
conveyed to him most eloquently the animus with
which she was moved, and emphasised the potency
of her appeal.
“ They say I am clever,” retorted Bondar; “ but
it would not be the policy of a clever man who
wished to help you, to join your fraternity. The
principles of the Nihilists are not exactly in sym-
pathy with the task you have set yourself. Theirs
is a national grievance; yours is personal. Hence
it should be your own and only aim in life to rescue
your father and leave the country for ever.”


“ But our estates, our ancient and honorable
prestige—can we not recover it?”
“ Your estates are forfeited; they are gone from
you for ever. But your prestige, it is vernal; it
lives and will flourish again in other lands.”
She pressed his hand. “ Your advice,” she said,
“is maturely sage; I can already see the pretext of
it. As a Briton, I shall ask you to assist me.”
“ And let me assure you, as a Briton I shall help
you; and I shall ask you to bear in mind that the
word success is written largely upon the face of
every scheme that I have yet undertaken.”
“You’re as brave as Achilles,” she said; “and
I’ll trust you faithfully.”
They left the precincts of the courtyard together
and repaired to the ballroom, where they again
mingled with the guests of the evening. Their re-
treating figures were scarcely lost in the shadows
of the tall gables when the floor of the spot upon
which they had just stood was forced upwards, and
the fur-clad figure of a small man emerged from
a cavity beneath. A spy had overheard their con-
versation. He waited until the)' had re-entered the
ballroom; then he crossed the courtyard and con-
sulted an officer, who was evidently prepared for
such emergencies, for he produced a folio of war-
rants signed and fit for immediate execution, one
of which he filled in by the flash of a bullseye lan-
tern. The officer and the spy then considered the
matter for a brief interval, and it was resolved that
they would arrest Victoria at once.
Guards were posted at every door and cautioned
to challenge the purpose of any person who might
attempt to leave the place. As the stern, sombre


clad officers of the law passed through the brilliant
halls, the gay revellers shuddered in the heat of their
pleasures, for the presence of the police was ominous
of trouble. The beautiful Victoria was leaning on
the arm of Ivan Rostav, the Grand Duke of Finland,
when the officials approached her.
“ This woman is a Nihilist!” said the spy, plac-
ing his hand on Victoria’s shoulder. The Duke was
amazed, and challenged her immediately.
“Do I listen to a false accusation? Tell me
truly!” said he.
“ Alas ! your Grace ; it is true —it is indeed !” said
Victoria.
“ Let her be arrested !” said the Duke, and she
was taken into custody by the officers.
A galaxy of distinguished courtiers were ready
and willing to go bail for her for any sum that the
court might demand, but the law of the land is
inexorable and will have its own; neither youth nor
beauty, nor age nor talent, is of any avail. Within
a month she was banished to one of the least rigor-
ous penal establishments in Siberia.
Bondar was cautioned and advised to leave the
country. He joined the Nihilists and disappeared
at once; he had sworn to rescue Victoria and her
father, and he now retired to a city beyond the
dominion of Russia, where he might mature his
plans in safety.


Chapter V.
Around the boards the guests were met,
The lights above them beaming;
And in their cups, replenished oft,
The ruddy wine was streaming.
Their cheeks were flushed, their eyes were bright,
Their hearts with pleasure bounded,
The song was sung, the toast was given,
And loud the revel sounded!
I drained a goblet with the rest,
And cried, “Away with sorrow!
Let us be happy for to-day;
What care we for to-morrow?”
Dr. C. Mackay.
Baron Blondon was a pleasant fellow; the
L’allegro of the college, in fact, and consequently a
great favorite with all the students. In some ways
he was as wise as a wiseacre, in others as wayward
as a wallaby, but a great-hearted fellow withal.
Like all promising lads, he had an ambition to do
something notorious. It was his hobby to get on
intimate terms with the new boys, initiate them in
the wiles of the wildest boys, and show them around
town. Kirrie Gordon was, comparatively speaking,
a new boy, with whom Blondon was now familiar,
and it was his turn to be shown around town. Blon-
don was proud of the opportunity, and walked
jauntily into Kirrie’s study.
“ Hallo, Gordon! why this troubled brow? Why
sit here alone brooding over gloomy classics that
belong to the dead past. Let the dead past bury
its dead. Come, away with mortar and gown! away
with study! and come along with us. The present
is rife with festivities —the future is a chimera —it
belongs to the unbegotten; come along and enjoy
yourself!”


“ Ah, Blondon! you’re a gay fellow and no mis-
take, said Gordon as he raised his eyes and gazed
at the intruder, the deep lines of thought showing
off to advantage the splendid mould of his ample
brow —“ quite a classical larrikin I declare; I wish
I could be as gay as you. But no; I cannot!—l’ve
just been indulging in weighty thoughts—thoughts
such as men like Bunyan may have pondered over
in the dim past. You see, old fellow, life is so short
and the deeds one may do so many; hence I have
decided to live up to the ideal that inspired the poet
whose benediction runs thus :
Oh! happy is the man who hears Instruction’s warning’
voice,
And who celestial wisdom makes his early, only choice.
In fact I have decided to tabulate my daily
actions for the future and to work according to time-
table.”
“ Why so, my dear pal ?” asked Blondon earn-
estly.
“ Simply because 1 find, after due consideration,
that there’s nothing in the life that opens to me,
worth living for; hence I must espouse some cause
that is worthy of the labors of a man’s life.”
Oh, that’s nonsense!” retorted Blondon, who
seated himself, leaned his arms over the back of the
chair and looked as if he intended to argue it out
with his new friend as he had done with others on
many former occasions. “ Why—l’m told your
father is a millionaire! —just consider what a brilli-
ant future awaits you!—you must be an unwitting
idiot. Know you not that the great, greedy, cring-
ing world adores wealth and bows down before it.”
“ Aye!—and that’s just one of the most import-
ant features in life prospective that bothers me,”


said Kirrie quietly. “ I’ve considered the future,
and it is for it that I wish to prepare. I’m am-
bitious, but it is my desire not alone to gain dis-
tinction and fame here. I’m anxious to leave some-
thing behind me, more lasting than a marble sherd,
to mark the passage of my spirit across life’s high-
way. I’m anxious to do something that will give
me immortality.”
“ And yet they tell me you’re an Australian
Native!” said Blondon sarcastically. “Well, I’m
surprised; I fear your reason has been tilted off its
balance by some of Bunyan’s serious contentions—
how can you —an Australian student—you, whose
countrymen are the most rabid Socialists and out-
landish secularists in the world—how can you, I
ask, seriously entertain or express such a desire!”
“You see, my father is a squatter in Australia;
you know what that means, of course!” said Kir-
rie.
“ Aye—l know what it means in Australia at any
rate,” remarked Blondon; “ A selfish old party who
squats, without any right or title, on a large segment
of the continent which he appropriates for all time,
and portions out amongst his own kith and kins-
folk.”
“ Squatters must needs have been pioneers,” said
Gordon, “ and therefore worthy of the lands be-
stowed on them; but your affirmation is neverthe-
less true in another sense, for my worthy sire did
squat on immense tracts of land without any title,
and now he possesses the lands, together with a
title, for a knighthood has been conferred on him.
And that’s what bothers me. You see, I’m his son-
in-heir. Now, I’ve studied the ethnography of many
countries, and noted the trend of their politics, and
63


from comparisons made, I feel convinced that my
countrymen are ultra-democrats, yet the best fel-
lows in the world. But they taboo titles and all
aristocratic distinctions that tend to create grades
and classes of society such as exist in the old lands.
They measure men’s worth by standards other than
those of wealth and influence, and fame and honor
come only to the famous and honorable. Hence you
will see that a title in such a country is a menace to
one’s happiness and decidedly antagonistic to the
popularity that is so essential to an ambitious
man.”
"Ah, Gordon!” exclaimed Blondon laconically;
“ you might well exclaim like young Arthur in
Prince John: Ts it my fault that I am Gordon’s
son ?’ ”
“ Yes, I might; but with less success. You con-
servative Englishmen don’t understand our people ;
you cannot bluff Australians—you cannot trifle with
them. You must be true blue or its antithesis. The
Australian radical press is the most impartial, yet
the most discriminating and exacting in the world,
and, as it champions the principles of the masses,
they support it splendidly. Australian pressmen are
true Bohemians, the people trust them, and their
pen is potential in its influence and moulds public
thought, so much so that one often hears one’s
neighbor swear by what he saw in his paper, as if
it were a matter of history. Newspaper literature is
extensively disseminated, and thus cosmopolitan
ideas are very prevalent throughout the land.”
“ Bah! your people are dreamers; enthusiastic
world federationists who court ridicule by reason of
the notorious novelty of their ideas.”
“ You see, Blondon, our ideas, like our plains,
are of continental dimensions—so much broader


than yours. Moreover, the Australian Natives are
now coming to the front and are taking the destinies
of the nation in their own hands, and thus many a
time-honored statute of English constitutional cus-
tom must go by the board. The natives fully recog-
nise the yeoman services of their pioneer fathers,
but, you see, Time itself has doomed the follies of
the old world, and it is the great privilege of young
Australia to participate in their extinction.”
“ Follies!” ejaculated Blondon excitedly. “What
do you mean, Gordon?—your assertions are hor-
ribly enigmatical—can you not explain? Follies if
you like, but not constitutional statutes; oh, dear,
no! You cannot dispense so readily with these.”
“ Many political bogies that bar the progress of
your country,” said Gordon, “ might be noted, but
one will suffice. The House of Lords, for instance,
which possesses many statesmen whose genealogy
is the only trait that recommends them; many of
them indulge in social and political sins that would
cancel their term of political life were they subject
to a test like the colonial ballot box ; but the Lords
are protected by obsolescent customs and fine points
of privilege which gag those who might challenge
their integrity or question their abilities. Let them
be lords by all means, but let them lord it over their
own estates and leave it to the people to say who
shall lord it over the destinies of the Empire.”
“ By Jove, I’m getting interested in you, Gor-
don,” said Blondon; “ you seem to be an embryo of
original ideas. But you must remember, Australia
is but a part of Greater Britain, and will find her
level eventually in a scheme of Imperial federation
—which has yet to be propounded.”
“ Imperial Fad-eration you mean,” retorted Gor-
don. “ Now mark my words, Blondon, for I have
65


felt the pulse of Australian sentiment beating in my
own arterial system, and I can tell you something of
their aspirations. Australians do not wish to sever
the kindred ties that bind them to this country, but
they do feel somewhat limited under the present
regime, and will soon demand the full freedom of
manhood. Such a freedom as a wise father gives a
grown son —a parallel and independent existence.
Australia is not now a baby-nation; she’s grown and
of age. and must cast aside the toys that once
amused her. Talent is rife and indigenous, and the
fisk is full of gold; these are the factors and motors
of greatness, hence she must take the tiller and
mark the limits of her own greatness.”
" Ho! ho! my grand antipodean, so you’re a
dreamer too!” exclaimed Blondon. “Go on, my
boy ; give latitude to your tropical imagination and
you may yet prove that the sun is but a reflective
body lit up by the evanescent glories of Australia! I
suppose if one could tie the planets together at the
end of an elastic cord and thus dangle them in space
it would be essential to stand on Australia as the
one and only place in the wide, wide world of suffici-
ent stability to bear the strain. Personified, Austra-
lia is a teeming maiden, glowing with vitality and
as fair as a bard’s dream of Aurora, but as fickle as
a butterfly. She’s a precocious, fastidious, wayward,
rash, romantic, spoiled child, who has had alto-
gether too much of her own way; but she must be
bluffed of her conceit and thoroughly civilised be-
fore she fills a higher grade in the scale of nations
than a British Governor’s protege.”
“ Governor’s protege!” ejaculated Gordon in evi-
dent contempt. “Ah. Blondon! that strikes a
brooding cord in the breast of young Australia, but
—satis verborum—we shall see. Oh, my shemo-
66


miny!” he exclaimed, rising and yawning languidly,
“ you have knocked the gravity out of me for to-
night. My capacity for study is in a state of dis-
order : hence I may as well join you in your gambols
to-night.”
Gordon invested himself in a suit that was at
once a comfort and a disguise, and went forth to see
the ways in which his compeers in wealth wasted
their manhood and squandered their inheritance
whilst the poor plebs slumbered and dreamed of a
millennium that was to spread over the land like
the pregnant smiles of Spring, and bring prosperity
to them all.
Blondon was wise in the ways of the worldly
and straightway led his charge to the rooms of a
fashionable club which was carried on under the
distinguished patronage of the lords of the prize
ring. It happened that a glove contest of some im-
portance was fixed for this particular evening, and
consequently the noble sons of promise were there
in great numbers.
“ Now you must bear in mind,” said Blondon, ere
they entered, “ that we are all lords and earls here;
it is strictly understood that no others are intro-
duced —that is, prospective nobles, of course, and
you shall be introduced as Lord Aurum. Now you
must be civil; bear with fortitude anything said that
may hurt your feelings, and on no account retort in
an angry spirit.”
“ Right you are,” said Gordon. Lift me as
high as yon like, but let me down lightly.”
Blondon was evidently highly popular with the
chappies, for, as he passes through the smoking
salons he wore a prolonged smile in mute acknow-
ledgment of their universal recognition. Billiards


was the only game among their many pastimes that
interested Gordon; it was his chosen exercise of all
games, and consequently he was very dexterous
with the cue.
Lord Quidnunc and Earl Patrimony had just
concluded a game of billiards as they entered.
“ Allow me, my dear Lord Patrimony,” said he, “ to
present to you the Earl of Australia, Lord Aurum.”
Lord Patrimony shook him warmly by the
hand.
I trust my noble young friend will take kindly
to the metamorphosis that must now necessarily
ensue in his mental regimen; you know, Aurum,”
said he, squeezing his hand fraternally, “ the
pioneers of Australia were Britons—you are proud
of that! So are we; but you see, they lost the arts
of their primogenitors in the wilds of their adopted
country, and their sons are proletarians.”
“ 1 beg my Lord’s pardon!” expostulated Gor-
don.
Blond on raised his finger in an attitude indica-
tive of silence, and Gordon paused and listened.
“No, no!” continued Lord Patrimony; “you
cannot see it, my dear fellow—of course not! None
of your fellows can : but I assure you, it is so. Your
colonials are quite unfit for society, they talk dingo
and write doggerel, and their politics are simply lip-
lather, the consistence of which depends entirely
upon climate. But all will come right in the end.
Your plutocrats are as fond of British titles as we
are of Australian gold. Aye, and so are your red-
breasted, firebrand republicans; the smile of a mon-
arch is fatal to them, and they make the best blood-
allies. And it’s our motto to capture them—in fact
68


to capture and knight all your leading men of ability
as fast as they rise from the gutter; we’ll smuggle
their principles and make Lords of them.”
Gordon was rampant with indignation, and only
restrained himself with the greatest efforts. Blon-
don watched him closely and urged him by signs to
be patient and silent.
“ You will get a show presently,” said he, “ then
you may put them on the quit-rack one after
another and punish them until they cry enough!
But it would not do yet —you are a stranger, and
your status might be questioned.”
He was next presented to Lord Quidnunc.
“ xA.h-ah-bah Jove! th’ Earl of Australia,” ex-
claimed Lord Quidnunc laconically. “ Ah—l’m
proud to meet you here,” said he, putting on his eye-
glass to scrutinise his Australian peer.
“ Ah, yes, 1 remember—Australia, the land of
the great liberals. Ah, yes! what a place for sport
it is! I remember a friend of mine went over there
quite recently. By the way, must know him,
Aurum ; he's the Governor —Lord Plenty, the Gov-
ernor of Australia, which is, I believe, a big place
with a little town in it. He tells me it’s a queer
place, in which the summer comes early and lingers
long—that labor lags whilst sport is epidemical and
quickens the vices of the people —that even the par-
sons follow the vogue and take or give odds on the
nature of the next life; he tells me that education is
overdone, yet ill-done, for whilst even sucklings are
taught the humanities, the masses are a rude rabble
—that whilst the local literati —authors and artists—
may pass through the streets unknown and unob-
served, the bullies of sport whose portraits adorn
the local newspapers are extolled and pointed out as


the great men of the country; that's the place to
fallow folly and gather odds of its wild flowers."
Bosh, man, bosh!” exclaimed Gordon excit-
edly; he could no longer restrain himself. " You
Cockneys are drugged by the prattle of your own
false gossips,” said he. “ Just listen to me and I'll
tell you why your blooming ideas don’t quite fit in
with our philosophy. You look at the piccadilloes
of Australians through the wrong end of your
glasses, and the results are manifest—our greatest
virtues are lessened in a ratio equal to the gross
amount of your ignorance on matters Australian
and prejudice to colonial enterprise, whilst our little
follies which are apparent because of their popu-
larity with even your own people, are magnified be-
cause they’re followed in an open way. Now let me
tell you, Lord Wiseacre, that as scholars, statesmen,
athletes or any other capacity in which intellectual
and physical prowess predominates, Australians are
the compeers of your own countrymen, and conse-
quently the equals of any nation. The literature of
Australia is fast maturing, and some of the greatest
literary triumphs of the future are now lurking in
the brooding brains of our students.”
“ That’s a splendid break, Patrimony,” said Lord
Quidnunc, drawing his lordship’s attention to the
game; “89 put up with such reckless freedom ; it
puzzles one how it’s done.”
"Fluke! Fluke! old fellah,'' retorted the Earl,
knocking the ash from his cigar.
1 hat was no fluke, said Gordon; “ I followed
the player through every stroke, and was delighted
with the scientific skill with which he nursed the
balls for a succession of cannons; that man has 1
consumate knowledge of the game.”


This observation brought the Earl and his colo-
nial cousin into contact again. Gordon expressed
himself with a peculiar democratic air of dogmat-
ism that quite disconcerted his lordly friends.
“ Damned ostentatious!" grunted the earl.
Lord Quidnunc put up his glasses and focussed
his antagonist with a supercilious squint; then he
dropped his glasses and turned to the Earl.
“Bah Jov’” said he; “these damn'd colonials
have no pink-eyed opinion of themselves. Perhaps
the noble Lord Aurum,” said he, addressing Gordon,
“ will show us how to handle the cue and dish up
the spheres!”
“ I’m but a tyro, said Gordon, “ and wouldn t
venture to pit my skill against a common bushman
from the back-blocks of Australia; but I’m game for
any wager that I can spare a centum to the best of
your men in scores of 500 up.”
“ Bravo! bravo! Australia,” exclaimed Blondon,
clapping his hands enthusiastically. Fhe excite-
ment caused others in the room to gather round the
speakers, and Gordon’s challenge was freely dis-
cussed.
“ Let the dook do him for any wager that he
can put up,” said the Earl.
“ Yes,” said the others; “ let the Dook show him
how to strike a tangent—the Dook will beggar the
biggest score that the chosen of Australia can put
up.”
“ The Dook was a sizar named Payne, who was
regarded as the best all round athlete that \isited the
club; but boxing and billiards were his leading
qualifications. He was a sanguine man who could
71


not brook defeat, and whenever he lost at billiards,
which was seldom the case, he invariably invited
his opponent to put on the gloves, with which he
was an expert. The Lords were always eager to get
on a match, and freely subscribed whatever amount
it was decided to box for. A match was quickly
arranged for £2O a side—soo up. Blondon mag-
nanimously backed his friend, though he had no
knowledge whatever of his capacity as a billiard
player.
Intelligence of the event passed through the
rooms like wildfire, and quite an international inter-
est was evoked in the game. Several Australian
students of advanced terms were in the room, and
encouraged their clever countryman at intervals
with wild exclamations of delight. The Book
refused to accept their profifered 100, and the game
proceeded on terms of equality. The scores were
almost equal until about 250 had been put together
by either side, the players scoring with remarkable
equanimity, but Gordon's opportunity soon came.
The balls were left in contiguous proximity by his
opponent, and he nursed them skilfully for a success-
ion of cannons that culminated in a break of 89.
The Dock followed, but failed to score, and Gordon
led off again with a brilliant display of billiards that
carried him out of the game with a lead of 137.
“ Well, old fellow,” said the Dook pleasantly,
you ve shown us that you are no novice with the
cue, now let us see how you can shape with the
mittens on, and he threw down a pair of boxing
gloves whilst he proceeded to involve his own digits
in a similar set.
Gordon surveyed the gloves in mute astonish-
ment; this was a surprise to him for which he was
not prepared.


“ ’Tis gory the glory that comes to gladiators of
the ring,” said he, “ let them have it; I covet it
not.”
“ But I challenge you, sir,” said the Dook in a
bullying, arrogant tone; “challenge you to defend
yourself and the honor of Australia, with which
your own fellows seem to have entrusted you to-
night.”
Gordon picked up the gloves, smiled and bowed,
and his smile was a study in which the reflection of
his thoughts was apparent; it implied better than
words that the challenge was accepted in a national
spirit, and that the fight would be fought as his
antagonist had desired, for the honor of Australia.
“ Boxing is an art,” said he, “ that finds great
favor with Australians; yet that does not imply that
every colonial is a boxer. I’m a quiet sort myself,
but nevertheless I’ve sparred with a ringster or two
and can duck and parry a trifle better than a woman,
but I’ve never yet shaped at a man except in self-
defence, and never shall do so.”
They immediately repaired to an adjacent apart-
ment of octagonal outlines known as the “arena,’
in which the false conceits of many a braggart had
been dispelled. The Dook, who had been there be-
fore many a time, took up his position and prepared
for the contest.
“ Now for thy baldric, Australia! Begad the
cornstalk strips well! Ah!—what biceps; as full
and as firm as a new pillion. What a great breast
the little fellow has, as bilged as a ship’s bottom.
Begad he’ll shake the gravity of old England for
once in a lifetime!”
Such were the remarks that escaped those pre-
sent whose sympathies were with Gordon. The


Dock's friends smiled and felt satisfied. They were
sure of the success of their man, and waited silently
for the event. The referee gave the signal, and the
Dook rushed to the centre and got his right in before
Gordon was aware the fight had begun, but a left
hand body blow failed its mark and Gordon ducked
and parried until the men went to their corners.
Round i was over and Gordon had done nothing.
Round 2: The Dook came up with a grim smile
that spread his little pugnacious organ out like an
isosceles angle. Gordon looked determined, and
feinted, and the Dook landed a severe blow on his
chest. This seemed to rouse him from a reverie, and
he followed the Dook round the ring and smashed
him right and left in grand style.
Round 3: The Dook was timid, and tried his skill
at long range, but received a brace of lefts and rights
which put him in a passion. Gordon forced him to
the ropes again and smashed him severely.
Round 4: Ihe Dook made a rush ; Gordon
ducked, and the Dook went down at the ropes; ere
he gained the centre again, Gordon swung his left
savagely and landed on the Dock's stomach. The
Dook’s friends looked serious; their man was
forcing the fighting and getting the worst of it.
Round 5: The Dook led with the right; Gordon
ducked skilfully and landed a left on the Dook’s
nose, the blood flowing freely. The Dook rushed,
and Gordon feinted cleverly and smashed him in the
face and he went down; he was up quickly, and
Gordon battered him about the face with great
effect.
Round 6: The Dook, who had Tone all the lead-
ing, now waited, and Gordon went for him with a
wild rush and landed his left on the Dook’s chin;


the Dock dropped his arms and staggered, then he
attempted to spar, but Gordon forced the fighting
and battered hard on the face. He fell on his knees
and his head dropped. He rose again, and Gordon
swung his right and landed on the Hook’s nose; he
went down, and the referee counted in vain—the
Hook had collapsed.
Gordon’s friends were wild with joy ; champagne
followed, and Gordon got thoroughly jolly and was
carried away by the great results of his evening's
doings. Like Eve, he had listened to the tempter—
he had entered on an evil course and he found it
pleasant. The programme of this evening was soon
and often repeated ; yet he sometimes repined, and
remorseful murmurs escaped him, but his friends
were wayward fellows. “ All young men had wild
oats to sow,” they told him, “ so had he.”
He went out often, and remained out late, and
sowed his wild oats with lavish freedom. His appli-
cation for study waned as his taste for pleasure
increased; learning became irksome, and no one
was more surprised than himself that his nature
could have undergone such a great change. The
letters that came from his father from time to time
were fraught with encouragement, and hopes were
expressed that he would prove himself a worthy suc-
cessor to his honored sire and fit himself for the
splendid inheritance that awaited him —that he
would assimilate the manner and tastes of his fellow
students, who comprised the nascent statesmen of
Britain, so that he might in the course of time return
to his own country and take a leading part in its
political conventionalities.
Time tempered his judgment, and the radical
levity that distinguished his juvenile expiessions
gave place to a mute indifference as to matters


political; but this was no guarantee of an altered
principle—the germ was but latent and might burst
forth again at any moment. But his parent was
pleased, for he noted by his letters that his son was
much in vogue with the nobilities—the repetition
with which he quoted the lords, and dukes that fre-
quented his club, and with whom he was associated
in adventures and scandals, made the old man's life
happy. But Mail’s letters were parabolical and
striking were the similes that she stated. She well
knew his nature—aye, better than he himself, and
she gathered from the brief and glaring platitudes
with which he filled his billet doux that he was con-
juring with herself and his father—that he was fol-
lowing up some line of conduct that was not in
accord with the grand philosophy of his younger
days—some wayward course that might soon strand
him in the wassails of the nondescript. But she
failed to express her fears openly, and he failed to
comprehend in her insinuations the warnings that
were intended. But notwithstanding the vicious
habits of his new life, he acquired languages, made
a distinct mark in classical studies, and published a
small volume of Anacreontic poems which won him
many valuable press encomiums; this was soon fol-
lowed by the publication of an illustrated work en-
titled “An Ancient Pastoral,” or “ Painted
Britons.”
As a literary effort this work was considered
clever, but subsequent editions were adjudged inde-
cent, and through its publication himself and his
collaborator, Blondon, were expelled the college.
They had, however, gained considerable notoriety
and money by the condemnation of their publica-
tion, the copyright of which was purchased by a
French firm for a substantial sum.


Gordon and his collaborator now established
themselves in chambers in Paternoster Row, Lon-
don, E.C., and devoted themselves entirely to the
production of light literature and characteristic
sketches of the celebrities of the day. This work
was interesting for a time, but it paid indifferently,
and they soon tired of it. They were young and
vigorous; their hearts were hot and restless, and
they thirsted for adventures that would suit their
wild tastes and make them notorious in some way.
They had just issued a satire on the unknown
virtues of John Bull, which the press had desig-
nated as crude matter of the most witless and veriest
description; this was an affront that ruffled the
wings of their vanity for they had wrought labor-
iously in the production of this work, and had hoped
for fame in the way of recompense.
Gordon sat at his desk and gazed thoughtfully
at a copy of the rejected work which had cost him
so much labor and anxiety. “ I’m sick of this fame-
less forum,” he exclaimed, “ that bids for nothing
better than the spoils of commerce —as Napoleon
truly said —the English are indeed a nation of shop-
keepers and cannot appreciate good things. Let us
travel, Blondon, and seek for a fuller measure of life
in other lands; so far we have only realised the tare
and tret of life.”
Blondon, who was scanning the columns of the
« Times,” smiled pleasantly at his companion’s syni-
cal remarks. “ Here’s a vacant professional engage-
ment that would suit us, Gordon, he observed, star-
ing at his companion with a semi-serious, semi-comi-
cal expression on his face.
“ What is it?” asked Gordon somewhat inter-
ested.


This is it:—‘Notice Extraordinary! To ali
whom it may interest! Englishmen, noblemen,
soldiers and savants of independent means. The
Russian Government is anxious to secure the ser-
vices of two English gentlemen who must be fairly
conversant with the Finno-Tartarian and Indo-
European languages. The applicants must be men
of means, fearless of dangers, and must have had
some military experience or education. The Rus-
sian military authorities are prepared to deal mag-
nanimously with suitable applicants. Candidates
will be received daily by the Ambassador (at the
consulate), who will furnish them with full particu-
lars and make final arrangements with the success-
ful persons.’ ”
That would be a dainty vocation for us,” said
Gordon, holding out his hand for the paper; “ let me
see it! said he. “ I have had a wabbling desire to
see that country for a long time—l feel convinced
that it contains the elements of some startling
adventures.”
Having satisfied himself of the verity of his
friend’s statement, he passed the paper back.
“ Would you go?” he asked, appealing to Blondon,
whose face had suddenly grown thoughtful.
“ Certainly!—l have no social ties that bind me
to England, and I’m feverishly anxious to travel and
treble my knowledge.”
“ That is well,” said Gordon. “ Let us see about
it at once.”
The Russian consulate was immediately visited;
it was agreed that Blondon should open negotiations
and make all arrangements if such were to be
made.


M. Novijii was a man of great urbanity, and
received his visitors with Gallic courtesy. He was
glad to learn that they waited on him in respect to
foreign matters. What information might he have
the honor of unfolding for their pleasure or instruc-
tion !
“ Your advertisement extraordinary, sir, in the
papers, commands our attention,” said Blondon. “ I
may tell you, we deem it an opening for which
Nature in her spontaneity has specially built us, and
for which the arts of man have specially prepared
us. We have means and education, and ability and
courage, and ”
“Ah, gentlemen!” interjected M. Novijii, “you
must be brave to carry such valuables openly about
with you.”
“ Aye!” continued Blondon, “ and we have a
strong desire to travel through lands that are new
to us—to explore regions that are wild and weather-
bound, where dangers are rife and lurk in ambush,
and where Nature invincible bars the progress of
man.”
“ Your ambition, gentlemen, is one that does you
credit!” retorted M. Novijii, smiling diplomatically.
“ The land that bears such men need fear no enemies
—nations may threaten, but dare not assail her; no,
gentlemen, let me emphasise it—dare not I say
advisedly unless they would court disaster, for they
would totter and collapse before such valor as yours.
Your land, gentlemen, is quits with the world—she
owes not homage to any nation, for she has ever
been an asylum to which the persecuted of every
clime have flocked for shelter. But not so with our
people; we have a vile brood of enemies within our
shores—aye, enemies that we have housed and fed


since the days of Vladamir. But our country is a
vast country, and it so happens that we have a little
limbo of our own to which we can consign our out-
laws as fast as we capture them, and this brings me
to the purpose of our interview—for it is in connec-
tion with the deportation of this offal of society that
I wish to negotiate with you. You see, the rustics
of Russia through which these condemned gangs
must pass en route are boors of the most uncivilised
class, whose minds cannot comprehend the gravity
of the crimes of which their fellows have been con-
victed. The punishment seems brutal to them, for
they have heard so much of the horrors of Siberia
and understand so little the purposes for which it
exists, that they are always in secret sympathy with
the exiles. And thus it is that we find it unwise to
trust implicitly in anyone—not even the soldiers, for
we know not in what manner may be allied to
each other.”
“ Aye! I can cpffte understand it,” said Blondon.
“Now,” continued M. Novijii, "we want to
secure the service of a couple of independent Eng-
lishmen whose own wealth places them beyond
temptation, for the friends of these exiles are some-
times very wealthy and can afford to offer princely
bribes for the release of those near and dear to them
•—we want men with a courage like Horatius, who
are not afraid if needs be to challenge any odds in
the event of an emergency arising—we will request
you to take charge of a batch of criminals who will
be under the direct charge of a strong military con-
voy, but you will be expected to direct the move-
ments of the escort and answer to us for the safe
deportation of the gang to its destination. Remem-
ber, gentlemen, it may be a matter of life and death
with you—it certainly will be a matter of death to


you if yon are caught napping. Hence, be vigilant,
for it needs more than Spartan valor to brave the
desperation of an unfettered gang of Nihilists whose
freedom has been forfeited to the law. Say, now!—
at all hazards, are you prepared to go?’’
The men looked at each other steadfastly. Blon-
don extended his right hand, which Gordon grasped
firmly, and the ready response: “ We are,” was firm
and simultaneous.
M. Novijii seated himself; the muscles of his
massive face relaxed, and the stern, set cast of his
inexpressive countenance gave place to a frigid
smile that lingered for some minutes about his large,
firm mouth.
“ Look here!” said he, “ the louvre is open, and
you may see the terrible fate that befel your pre-
decessors, ” and he showed them the sketch of a
bloody melee in which an escort had been surprised
by a rescue party and massacred.
“ Many exiles are enormously wealthy, and their
friends organise surprise parties composed of the
most desperate men in the country.
“ That’s glorious!” exclaimed Blondon. “ I love
adventures in which blood means blood and no
quarter is the battle cry.”
“ I have no fears,” said Gordon; “ I shall do my
duty or perish in the attempt.”
“ Gentlemen, you seem to treat the matter with
the levity due to a grandam’s scramble,” said M.
Novijii; “ let us trust you will find it nothing more
serious. You will do, gentlemen ! ’


Chapter VI.
All are architects of Fate,
Working in these walls of time;
Some with massive deeds and great,
Some with ornaments of rhyme.
Nothing useless is or low;
Each thing in its place is best;
And what seems but idle show
Strengthens and supports the rest.
Longfellow.
When Bondar left St. Petersburg-, he repaired
to a town in Poland, on the Russian frontier, where
the headquarters of the Nihilists were then estab-
lished. There he interviewed the chief council, sub-
mitted a scheme for the rescue of Victoria and the
rescue of her father also, which was approved of,
and he was thereupon admitted as a member of the
brotherhood on the understanding that they would
assist him in his endeavor to carry his plan into
effect.
He commenced operations at once. Shortly
afterwards a mountaineer from cic—Caucasia
arrived at the township and reported the discovery
of a rich find of gold in the bed of a mountain tor-
rent that bordered a region which had never before
been explored. A limited company was immedi-
ately formed with a large capital, the directors being-
men of distinction and influence in the city, and an
imperial Ukase was proclaimed granting the new
company permission to prospect the auriferous
country indicated by the mountaineer. Applications
from capable managers were invited, and Bondar —
who it was, had instructed the mountaineer, who
was also a Nihilist, to salt the claim and fabricate the
story of its discovery—was selected. This in itself


was a grand achievement, for it would place him as
a free resident within easy distance of the Algasit
Valley, where the Count was exiled; and also within
a day’s march of the route that led to the Nertschin-
sker silver mines, to which Victoria was destined.
When Bondar and his party of prospectors first
appeared at the rude village of Omski, they naturally
excited the curiosity of the residents, and the mili-
tary authorities were very dubious as to the bona
tides of their intentions; but they were armed with
the necessary Imperial permit, which dispelled
suspicion, and they forthwith prosecuted their
labors unmolested. But the prefect was not one to
be easily assured, even with an imperial warrant,
and he kept a watchful eye on the miners for some
time.
But Bondar was equal to the occasion. Gold was
thrown into the sands every evening and washed
out every day, and the miners prospered and seemed
contented. Bondar apparently took so little interest
in official matters that he soon gained for himself
the designation of the dodder, whilst his generosity
and condescension won him favor with the rude in-
habitants, with whom bear and wolf hunting was an
almost daily pastime. And the bold and daring
manner in which he engaged in the dangers of sport
and invaded the haunts of old bruin, gained for him
the influence of a fetish man over them.
Outside his hours of duty at the mines there was
nothing for him but sport—sport was all he asked
for —sport was all he seemed to think of or indulge
in. When the eye of the Czar’s minions was on
him, he was like his neighbors, a plodding serf,
pigeon-livered and pig-headed; but when far away
in the forest where the myrmidons of the law were
not at hand, he was a wide-awake perk whose secret


intentions were never questioned by the sporting
boors who accompanied him. These sporting excur-
sions were highly satisfactory to him, for they were
quite in accord with the development of his scheme;
he was soon familiar with the lay of the country for
miles around, and had mapped out in his own mind
every point that would be of advantage to him in
his future operations.
Gold is a wizard in every land. There are no
avenues that it cannot open—no task that it cannot
accomplish. Bondar had command of it in unlimi-
ted stores, and consequently his plans flourished.
He was able to organise a system of communication
that placed him in possession of all the military in-
formation that came to Omski, as the telegraph line
passed through a gorge in the mountains that was
wild and weather-bound, situated in a desolate an 1
isolated region called the “ Hounds’ Gorge.” No
one lived within many miles of it—no one would
venture near it—it was believed by the superstitious
mountaineers that the gorge was haunted by the
spirits of Zingis Khan and all his subsequent suc-
cessors who had been vanquished under the regime
of Ivan Basilovitch.
There Bondar placed one of his confederates
named Kars, who was skilled in telegraphy. He
was housed in a natural cave that overlooked a
frowning precipice which was gained by a rope
ladder. The entrance to his retreat was placed be-
yond detection by nature of the wild origanum that
end)owered it, Kars was amply provisioned for
months, and furnished with ever} r comfort. A te-e-
-----graph recorder was fitted up in his mountain retreat,
and this was connected with the main line by wires
which ran underground for the half mile or there-
abouts which intervened between his abode and the


telegraph line. Kars was well fitted for his position,
for he was one of the most desperate and subtle men
in the ranks of the Nihilists, and felt quite impreg-
nable in his mountain fort. He had invented a
mechanical contrivance of electrical movements that
carried an unlimited reel of tape so that every com-
munication that passed over the wires to or from
Omski throughout the day or night was fully
recorded.
Thus he was able to keep Bondar posted as to the
movements of the gang in which V ictoria would be
included.
He thus learned that the Czar was seized with
a great spasm of Imperial humanity in which he had
decided that Victoria should be consigned to the
same prison as that in which her father had been
confined for so many years, so that the companion-
ship of father and daughter might in some measure
reconcile them to their hard lot and recompense
them for their loss of liberty. He further learned
when the gang left St. Petersburg, and watched the
progress it had made towards Siberia through Inc
more civilised parts until Forte Paulo was reached,
when all traces of civilisation w r ere left behind, and
the exiles entered the great forest of Pittirriski and
struck off in a north-easterly direction for the
frontiers of Siberia.
It w r as now time for them to be on the alert-
time for Bondar to take action. He recognised in
the route they had taken the point of a great advant-
age to him if he only acted his part with wisdom.
He did not until Victoria had been safely
deposited with her sire in durance vile. Oh, no!
That would be trifling with the good graces of Fate ;
he had a braver idea than that to launch. When the
escort which conducted Victoria and her compan


ions in exile, had fairly entered the great wilderness
which lay between Fort Paulo and the Siberian
frontier. Bondar instructed Kars to advise the
Governor of Nertscheinsker by telegram that the
Czar having relented of the harshness of his recent
decree, had issued an Imperial ukase extraordinary,
in which he had cancelled the sentence on Victoria,
and had also pardoned her sire. The message
further stated that Victoria would be released from
gang B.V. No. 6 at Forte Paulo, where she would
await the arrival of her sire, who would be imme-
diately released and supplied with means to prose-
cute his own speedy return.
The scheme was an unqualified success. The
Count was advised of all the circumstances relating
to it through the agency of one of the guards who
had always been in sympathy with the exiles, and
especially this exiled nobleman, but who could
never be induced to take any part in schemes that
had heretofore been mooted for the Count’s re-
lease.
The genuineness of the message was never ques-
tioned by the authorities at the mines, and the
Count was set at liberty. He was
equipped with a horse and other necessaries of a
traveller’s outfit, and thus he set out, with a party
ot military officers who were returning to St. Peters-
burg with the annual dowry of silver for presenta-
tion to the Czar. The Count kept in touch with his
distinguished companions until he reached the
locality in which he had been advised that Bondar
and his party would be awaiting him.
Many bears had been surprised during their
march, and he trusted one would soon turn up now
to give him a pretence to break away from his com-
rades. His luck was about, for a yearling grizzly


started from its lair and rushed oft" through the
dense boscage through which they were passing.
“ Let us capture it!” exclaimed the Count,
urging his horse through the thicket.
“Hold, you idiot!” exclaimed the astonished
officers; “you must not follow that fellow. You
may encounter its grand-dam,” but he heard not
their exclamations, and was out of sight before they
had time to warn him of the danger to which he
was exposing himself. They waited for him for
several hours, but he did not return. Then they
became alarmed for his safety, and ventured into
the forest in search of him, but could find nothing
to indicate what had befallen him.
They camped for the night in close proximity to
the spot on which he had disappeared, blew their
trumpets, and fired off several volleys to warn him
of their whereabouts, should he be lost and wander-
ing about hopelessly through a pathless expanse of
forest, as they believed he was. When darkness set
in they piled together a large quantity of brush-
wood, which lit up the lonesome forest for many
miles around; but the Count was not seen again
by them. He had accomplished his desire, and had
successfully evaded them.
The Count followed the bear for some distance,
as it seemed to lead him through the best openings
in the forest, but eventually it turned oft" into a miry
glen, and he galloped on unmindful of its further
movements. He soon halted, however, took out his
pocket compass and noted his position. He also
carried a chart, by means of which he was able to
determine his exact latitude and longitude, and he
made extraordinary headway, even through the
devious byw'ays of that Continental forest, and
joined Bondar before nightfall.


Kars still remained at his post. Pie cut off all
communication between St. Petersburg and the
Nertschinsker mines, and received and answered
every message that was intended for the Governor
of the district. He had received instructions from
Bondar to vacate his post and follow his comrades
not sooner than four days after their departure.
Bondar marshalled his small, but well-armed
band of trusty comrades, uniformed like the Czar’s
soldiers, and pushed on. Pavaski, who had first
published the discovery of gold at the White Wolf
Mountains, acted as their guide. He was long
familiar with those parts, and knew every river
fording, fort and mountain pass that intercepted the
wilds through which they must pass. After a hard
march of three days they gained a narrow gorge in
the mountains that brought them within 200 miles
of Fort Paulo. Here Bondar determined to make
a stand and await the approach of the advancing
party.
A lofty range of timbered mountains, inacces-
sible and snow-clad, which crossed their line of
march and extended at right angles to it for at least
50 miles on either side, divided at this point, and
disclosed a water-course whose sheer embankments
seemed almost artificial in the regularity of their
declivity; and a mountain torrent which broke at
intervals into graceful cascades and precipitous
cataracts, rushed through the gorge about 1000 feet
beneath the verge of the embankment, and produced
a mountain mist in which the outlines of the specta-
tor were mirrored in magnified proportions. This
was called the Palindrome Pass, as the natural
approaches at either side were identical.
A narrow, zig-zag footway, upon which three
men might walk abreast, had been excavated on the


eastern side by cutting the sloping embankment
down to the perpendicular at a level somewhat mid-
way between the base and summit, which, judging
by the convexity of the embankment above, must
have been the original bed of the river when the
waters first burst through this strange waterway,
which did not harmonise in any way with the laws
of geology.
The verge of this footway which overlooked the
torrent was protected by a solid stone parapet about
five and a half feet in height. The Palindrome Pass
was regarded as a very advanced point in the long
and toilsome march that lay between Siberia and
civilisation. It was neither impregnable nor
fortified, but, to guard against the possibilities of
surprise, small forts garrisoned by a few men were
erected at the approaches to the pass at either side.
Pavoski, the guide, who had originally been a
guard on duty at this very fort, was familiar with
their passwords and code of signals, but it was now'
many months since he had mysteriously disap-
peared, and no one knew what had become of him.
It appears that a gang of condemned exiles passed
through one day, among whom he recognised a
long-estranged brother of his, who had been exiled,
as he learned from his own lips, for a crime of which
he was not guilty. Pavoski disappeared that night,
and the next day fragments of his clothes, scattered
and gory, w r ere discovered in close proximity to the
fort. Hence it was concluded that he had been
seized by bears and devoured.
He followed the gang to the mines of Nertschin-
sker, keeping well within cover of the forest that
bordered the Vladimirka, and plotting out some
indefinite plan of rescuing his brother; but before
he could put it into execution he heard of his


brother’s death, and, having afterwards heard of
Bondar s intentions, he joined him, and decided to
assist him.
Bondar resolved to take possession of the forts
that commanded the Palindrome Pass. Having
disaimed the guards, he would iron them and place
them in the cells, invest his own men in their uni-
foims, and await the approach of the gang which
included Victoria. Pavoski s signal was successful,
ihey approached the fort in a neat, military squad.
Flie guards challenged, and Bondar gave the pass-
word; the guard saluted, and they were in posses-
sion. It but the work of a moment to pinion
the nonplussed and surprised garrison, who could
offer no resistance. They were chained together
and placed in a dungeon—a mere catacomb hol-
lowed out of the mountain side. The southern fort
was known to be lavishly protected against surprise
and better manned, but it was captured by the same
simple stratagem. The guards were chained
together, removed to the northern fort and im-
prisoned with the others. Bondar left four men in
charge of the prisoners, and prepared to give his
approaching friends a grand reception.
About noon on the day following that on which
they had invested and occupied the forts, it w ? as
manifest that the expected party was approaching,
though yet some miles away in the forest. A salvo
of guns was fired by the approaching party.
Pavoski told them this was a precautionary signal,
which he immediately answered by manipulating a
lever, which exposed the face of a reflecting disc
posted on the summit of an outlook semaphore
which rose high in the air above the embankment
and overlooked the surrounding country for many
miles. Several salvos followed, and each was


answered by the manipulation of other discs, which
satisfied the approaching - party that all was right
within the fort.
Pavoski, to whose lot it had fallen, invested him-
self in the uniform of the vanquished guard whose
place he must take, and thus equipped he posted
himself on the rampart, which consisted of a solid
stone wall some twelve feet in height, which was
mounted by a sentry box of solid stone, furnished
with portholes through which the sentry could
watch the approach of doubtful visitors. The fort
was protected by two stone walls of similar stability
and dimensions, and was gained by a large portal
which commanded the outer wall and a smaller one.
by which communication was had with the interior
of the fort. The second portal would in no case be
opened until the escort, together with the prisoners,
had all safely passed through the greater gateway.
Bondar had not yet quite decided upon the line
of action he would pursue, but he favored an idea
that it would be wise to drop the portcullis and
shoot down the leaders as soon as they had passed
the portals of the first great gateway. Such a course
might be fatal to Pavoski; but, then, he was a
Nihilist, and the task had fairly fallen to him by
lot, and consequently he must take the conse-
quences.
No sooner had the approaching party fired their
first salvo than Bondar drew up his men in line,
thirteen all told, and addressed them finally.
“Comrades!” said he; “you are Nihilists —so
am I. Let us rejoice that we are such! We have
long been the creatures of a quaking and stunted
Liberty that has mocked the efforts of those who
have striven to raise her out of the quagmire of


ignorance and social stagnation in which she has
wallowed for ages past. But the strength and
courage of the Nihilists have at length prevailed,
and the dawn of a higher intelligence bids fair to
shatter the despotic powers which have ruled so
ruthlessly in the past. Death is a tyrant that appals
all men, but we have conquered it; for when we
become Nihilists we severally signed our own death
warrants, inasmuch as we surrendered all the rights
and privileges of life-all the emotions and senti-
ments that are involved in the subtle web of life, we
surrendered when we placed ourselves in the hands
of a wanton destiny that revels in the blood of the
Czars. The better impulses which at times rise up
and challenge our bloody resolves are but the
lingering lights of a common humanity which we
have renounced for ever. We are now outlaws, and
the enemies of society, the rights of which we do
not recognise. Comrades, you are now probably
on the very brink of eternity; but, let me remind
you again to be merciful to the lower order of crea-
tion. Do not even tread on the root of a polyp nor
touch rudely the antenna of the coleoptera if you
can possibly avoid it; but trample out the life of
the Czars at the first opportunity, and the blood of
their minions and lictors. Let it be upon them-
selves. See! The caravan approaches—the men
that lead it are the Czar's minions. They have
chosen their parts; let them bear the consequences!
No quarter, and death to the progeny of Ivan
Basilovitch—let this be our battle cry.”
I he last and lowest reflector on the semaphore
had been opened and the last salvo fired. So near
was the discharge now that the report reverberated
ominously throughout the gorge and seemed to leap
from hill to hill. Domic Dortheim, a hardy Finn,
took up his position on the outlook, which com


manded the portal—he would receive the first chal-
lenge.
Pavoski commanded the approach to the inner
portal, and within the fort barricades had been
erected.
Bondar and the Count ascended the semaphore
glass in hand, and reconnoitred the advancing
cavalcade, which came slowly forward with one
measured movement, like the body of a great
animal. A squad of gendarmes, four abreast, ad-
vanced in front of the main body; then came the
convicts, with hands manacled, whilst a heavy con-
tinuous chain held the whole gang in one network
of iron.
Bondar’s heart beat a little faster as the squad
neared the fort, for there was Victoria in the very
front rank of the convicts. He called to the Count,
who looked as directed, and beheld his beautiful
daughter for the first time for more than eighteen
years.
“ Oh, Lord!” he exclaimed, with a pang that was
heartbreaking in its intensity. “ Oh, that even a
missal-bird should be condemned to spend its youth
in such a wild, raddle-bound wilderness!”
The advanced guard has now gained the ap-
proaches, and was within hail of the sentry. Dormic
gave the challenge, to which the captain responded
faithfully, and all’s well.
The first squad passed through the portals and
opened out in lines to right and left, through which
the gang of convicts passed ; then the second squad
followed; and when all had gained the moat Domic
let the ponderous portcullis fall. Ihe advance
guard again formed fours and moved forward; the
93


captain was again challenged, this time by Povaski,
and again the response was faithfully given. The
second gateway, which was a solid sheet of iron,
was raised and lowered bodily by the manipulation
of a lever. The advance guard had just passed
through when the pulley ropes gave way with a
sudden creak, and the ponderous gateway collapsed
and fell into position, and lo! the soldiers were
divided by walls of iron, impregnable and unassail-
able.
This might have been an accident, which to all
intents and purposes it was, or seemed to be, to
everyone except the captain of the rearguard, who
recognised Pavoski. Pavoski also noted the recog-
nition, and sought shelter within the sentry-box, but
not one moment too soon, for the captain gave the
command to fire, and a volley was immediately
poured through the portholes, but its effect was
fruitless. Pavoski immediately returned the fire,
and his bullet passed through the body of the cap-
tain, killing him outright.
Within the fort matters had assumed a most
critical aspect. Bondar, who should have given the
order to fire, stepped boldly forward, but stood
irresolute, like one paralysed. The captain of the
surprised party, who was at once cognisant of how
matters stood, also lost his head, and stood
befogged. Pie wavered, hesitated, and the im-
petuous gendarmes, eager for the onslaught,
involuntarily raised their carbines, but he stopped
them with a military gesture, and called for a
truce.
It was Bondar and Kirrie who faced each other
in this awful predicament. The cousins were lost
in amazement for the nonce. That one should
encounter the other thus, in such a terrible crisis


was awfully romantic. Bondar advanced and ex-
tended his right hand, which Kirrie seized, and their
greeting was awesomely affecting. Bondar turned
to his men and exclaimed,
“ Comrades, this is my cousin, remember,” said
he; “this is no surrender; we lose nothing by this
parley.”
Bondar and Kirrie retired to some little distance
from the others to discuss matters. “ Cousin,” said
Kirrie, “ you were very nearly paid off that time.”
“ It would have been but a wink between the
times of our departure,-” retorted Bondar; “ but tell
me—what brings you here?”
“ I’m chief in command of this gang of convicts
which I have sworn to deliver safely at the Nerts-
chinsker mines. “ But your presence—what does it
mean ?” asked Kirrie.
“ I’m an outlaw in this country,” said Bondar.
“ The Czar is a regnant tyrant, but he shall not lord
it over Britons. One of your prisoners is a British
subject; she has appealed for British protection I
have resolved to rescue her, and I’m here to put my
resolve into action.”
“ I regret to hear that, said Kirrie, for your
resolve exceeds your power —you have no status in
this country; but you were always a lad of great
resolves.”
“ Will you baulk me?” asked Bondar hotly.
“No ! Not I!” retorted Kirrie; “ your affairs are
no business of mine; I am simply in charge of this
o-ang. I took the position, not for gain, as you must
know —not for revenge —not for any political pur-
pose, but simply because it was a hazardous under


taking that ottered no end of adventures. I took it
in the spirit in which an idle child might follow a
wayward impulse and get stranded in the surf; and
likev ise, I suppose I must take the consequences of
my rashness. At all events, when this interview
terminates, I shall ask you to stand aside and allow
me to carry out the conditions of my odd little
idea.”
Aye! Just so! ejaculated Bondar carelesssly.
But you will observe that mine is an odd occu-
pation, too, and like yourself, I have simply entered
into it in a spirit of waywardness—l have made a
compact with the Nihilists to rescue Count Vodski
and his beautiful daughter, Victoria, who is one of
your gang—to rescue them at all hazards—not from
you. but from the Russian Authorities. As you see
these forts are now in my possession, and manned
by a force in numbers and valor equal to yours.”
——. “ B * h! You are boasting cousin.” exclaimed
Ivirne lightly; "let us not appeal to arms for the
settlement of this little dispute; let us rather reduce
the matter to the terms of a syllogism and deduct
from the premises stated the only logical conclusion
which common sense will allow. If that fails to
satisfy either of us, then let us resort to other means.
As the matter is almost a personal one between our-
selves and our duties, perhaps the wisest step would
be to decide it by the result of a duel between our-
selves. As for myself, I do not fear the consequences
of anything that may happen; but it would be wilful
murder to ask these men to fire upon each other
under the present circumstances.”
Well, said Bondar, “ let us see what can be
done; let us have your statement of the case and see
what its logical eventuation would be.”


“ Right!” exclaimed Kirrie. “ Briefly stated, it is
this: I am for the time being a Russian, and on the
strength of my credentials, I have gained the con-
fidence of the authorities, and have been placed in
charge of a gang of convicts who are to be deported
to Siberia; I have no knowledge of the crimes for
which these exiles have been banished —I need none
—their past does not concern me. It is enough that
I have pledged my life that 1 will transport them
safely to their destination.”
“So far so good. Well, I enter upon my journey,
and having reached this fort, I am surprised by a
band of outlaws captained by my own cousin. The
position is a trying one, aye!—more so than I had
anticipated in my wildest flights of imagination—it
causes me to falter and my compact is broken, for I
should have shot him down without any hesitation,
but the better impulses of my nature prevail, and I
spare him.”
“ We parley and we find that we are both bound
by sacred pledges in the carrying out of which our
lives are involved. He has pledged himself to
rescue at all hazards, a lovely woman whose love no
doubt is the only gage that binds him to his promise.
I have faithfully pledged myself to deport to Siberia
a gang of convicts of which this very woman is a
member."
“ But the difference between my position and his
is manifest; mine is a pledge given to millions
given to a nation, whilst his is a personal one
simply a pledge given to an individual, and conse-
quently it follows as a logical conclusion that he
should forego his right to interfere with me in the
execution of my duty.’
“ 1 grant it, Cousin,” said Bondar, “ that your
thesis is fairly put, and did the case stand thus I


should be bound to bow to the laws of logic; but it
is not so. I have doffed the manhood of my own
nationality and have taken upon myself the ward-
ship of an outlawed people. I am doubly charged
to carry out this commission, for in the first place I
am a Nihilist.”
‘What! A Nihilist!” ejaculated Kirrie, and a
cold shudder ran through his nerves.
“ Aye, Cousin, a Nihilist!—the pawn of a hapless
brotherhood 'whose bann is upon the minions of law
and order, and whose only purpose in life is secret
warfare of a dreadful and deadly nature; and in the
second place, I am the inamorato of this Avoman,”
“Ah, me! It is worse than I had anticipated,”
ejaculated Kirrie, and a heavy sigh escaped him.
“ Let us not waste time, Cousin,” said he; “ there is
but one way for us to decide this dispute—let us
appeal to arms, and to it at once—suspense is pain-
ful.”
“ Enough!” said Bondar, “ let it be so—the truce
is off.”
They immediately resumed their former posi-
tions. Kirrie looked pale and anxious, but Bondar
was as cool as a lichen. • They shook hands and
wished each other an affectionate fareAvell. Bondar
took a flask of gunpowder from his cartouch, poured
out a portion of it upon one of the stone steps that
flanked the base of the semaphore— to this he placed
one end of a coil of fuse. Having lighted the other
end, he retreated and took up his old position.
“ There,” said he. “ When that explodes, let it
be the signal for onslaught—let Fate do the rest.”
The contending parties stood firm with ready
carbines, and anxiously watched the progress of the
98


fizzing element as it devoured the intervening coil
of fuse; and with mental palpitations they measured
the minutes that were yet theirs. This ordeal was
worse than battle, for the suspense was awful; there
was no choice for the cousins but to endeavor to
shoot each other—it seemed but a novel means of
deliberate suicide, in which all within the fort had
decided to die together. Those without were like
cattle in a pen—they were ignorant of the progress
of events.
The men look more determined now, for they
know that the conflict will be short and sharp; will
be a matter of man for man and no quarter. The
flickering little drift of smoke and flame which
traces the progress of the fatal spark, shows that the
fuse is all but spent—the greedy fire-fiend rushes
madly on, hissing spitefully like a serpent that has
summoned all its venom and is intent on the certain
destruction of its enemy. It is now within touch of
the powder, and all will soon be over. Mark the
anxious gaze of the men as they watch its progress!
But what is this that approaches from the northern
fort?—a man bearing a white flag, who rushes
frantically towards them shouting lustily. He is
now within the fort and understands that a mortal
combat is imminent. He throws himself between the
contending parties, flaunts an official document, and
proclaims the issue of an Imperial Ukase.
“ A truce, lads; a truce!” he shouts. “ Let me
forfend this slaughter that is impending for the sins
of the sons of Calmuck are cancelled.”
The men who stand like pointers watching the
movements of a sportsman, involuntarily raise their
carbines and are anxious for the conflict; he is just
in the nick of time. Bondar snatches the fuse from
the powder, and Kirrie seizes the document and


reads the proclamation-. It is Kars who has saved
them. He has been supplied by Bondar with a
forged document—a facsimile of the instrument
which the Czar uses for such purposes, and thus dis-
armed suspicion. The Count’s reconciliation with
his long-parted daughter was a scene that one would
not wish to witness twice in a lifetime. Bondar left
four men in charge of the fort, which they were to
hold for a few days, when they might seek their own
safety in flight, and having induced Kirrie to join
him, they lost no time in placing themselves beyond the
the dominions of the Czar. Kirrie was not apprised
of the true state of affairs until they had been some
days on the roads, when Bondar told him every-
thing. He was glad that matters had eventuated so
happily, for he was satisfied that he had carried out
his contract fairly and honorably, and though he
might be outlawed by the Russian authorities, he
would feel no qualms of conscience under the
circumstances. Bondar had, before setting out on
his perilous mission, chartered the Daedolus, a small
schooner, for the purpose of the rescue of the party.
The shipper had instructions to dally in the Cattegat
for some days, when he was to sail for the Baltic
and cruise about at a given point, where he was
advised Bondar’s party would be found.
True to his instructions, he found the party at
the point indicated, and, having taken all aboard, he
set sail for Australia, where we will follow their
fortunes in our next volume.




