

NLd 823,912 P561to
-
'
'


j I m g p




' M cv3 n
0


OO KS for the BAI RN S.-No. 208.
HE STORY OF WfIHGO:
An Exciting Tale of the Australian Bush.
JESSIE PHILLIPS.
ILLUSTRATED BY BRINSLEY LE FANU.
LONDON;
STEAD’S PUBLISHING HOUSE.
PRICE ONE PENNY NET.


FENHIHGS
For Children Cutting their Teeth. They prevent Convulsions.
Are Cooling and Soothing (Do not contain Antimony, Calomel,
Opium, Morphia, or anything injurious to a tender babe). Sold
Everywhere in Stamped Boxes, Is, IJd, and 2s. 9d., with
full directions, or post free 15 and 34 stamps.
CHILDREN’S-
Read Fannings'
Every Mother’s Book,
containing Valuable Hints on
Feeding, Teething, Weaning,
Bleeping, Ac.
Ask yonr Chemist or Grocer
for a FREE Copy, or one will
be sent POST FREE on appli-
cation to Altbid Fbsbibos,
Cowes, Isle of Wight,
(Observe, FENCING? CHILDREN'S
POWDERS alone have the Trade Mark
thereon of “ A Baby in a Cradle,” }
POWDERS
Dr. J. Coliis Browne’s
•i/tlvrvdf*'
The BEST REMEDY known for
COUGHS, COLDS,
ASTHMA, BRONCHITIS.
Effectually cuts short all attacks of 1 T 1 ??,? 1 } 1 ? P Trm phb
SPASMS, HYSTERIA, and *'
PALPITATION. I GOUT, RHJsUMAriSM.
Acts like a Charm in DIAREHCKA, CHOLERA, and DYSENTERY.
Refuse Imitations and insist on haring; Dr. J. Coliis Brownes,
The ORIGINAL and ONLY GENUINE Chlorodyne.
Convincing Medical Testimony with each Bottle. Of all Chemists, 1/lf, 1/S, 1A
The Most Valuable Medicine
ever discovered.


Bonnie Bairns
c H ;t DREN graw v rM d
“■ f thrive on VAN
I HOUTEN’S COCOA be-
| cause it is richer in nutri-
_ ~ ment and body-building
W' elements than any other.
*1 A Handsome Gift Casket of
Chocolates, produced in Art
Metal, is presented to all regular
users of VAN HOUTEN’S
COCOA in exchange for 12
Coupons from 9d. tins.
(^ / anJiouten’Ai
C/ocact
The Hest for Children.


“The Play’s the thing,” said Shakespeare.
AND THE MUSICAL FAIRY-TALE PLAYS FOR CHILDREN WERE
FIRST POPULARIZED BY "BOOKS FOR THE BAIRNS.''
They are still the Cheapest and the Best Published.
The new number is one of the best of the Series, viz.,
THE PRINCESS AND THE MONSTER,
(For 8 Boys and 6 or more Girls)
SNOW-WHITE | THE BEARS,
(For 5 Boys and 5 Girls)
the queen of the MAY,
(For 4 Boys and 7 Girls)
ALI BABA 1 THE THIEVES,
(For 6 Boys and 4 Girls)
the babes in the wood,
(For 9 Boys and 4 Girls)
RED riding hood,
(For 7 Boys and 6 Girls)
CINDERELLA,
(For 4 Boys and 4 Girls)
the sleeping beauty,
(For 2 Boys and 7 Girls)
DICK WHITTINGTON,
(For 5 Boys and 5 Girls)
BEAUTY AND THE BEAST,
(For 4 Boys and 4 Girls)
the slave of the lamp,
(For 3 Boys and 8 Girls)
MAID MARIAN.
(For 5 Boys and 4 Girls)
All specially written and arranged for Children’s Performance.
Words only, price Id. net; by post, l|d.
Original Songs and Choruses are introduced,
which greatlv add to the attractiveness of the performance.
As published in “ Books for the Bairns,” the penny edition contains simply the
melody Vf the Songs in Tonic Sol-fa ; but a book of the Music with the Songs,
Choruses, and Dances printed in the full score, with piano accompaniment, wnlw
obtained for One Shilling (post free). This edition is. of course, indispensable
for the pianist if the play is performed as a Musical Play.
STEAD’S PUBLISHING HOUSE, KINOSWAY, LONDON.


THE
STORY OF WANGO
JESSIE PHILLIPS,
AUTHOR OF “THE ADVENTURES OF BRIGHT EYES *'
(NO. 197. “BOOKS FOR THE BAIRNS").
ILLUSTRATED BY BRINSLEY LE FANU.
STEAD’S PUBLISHING HOUSE,
BANK BUILDINGS, KINGSWAY, LONDON, W.C.
D£p6t Exclusif pour la France:
Librairie Larousse, Rue Montparnasse 13-19, Paris.




THE STORY OF WANGO.
CHAPTER I.—WANGO IN THE BUSH.
Once upon a time there lived a little kangaroo,
whose name was Wango. His home was in the great
lone Australian bush, where for miles and miles there
was nothing to be seen but the tall grey gum trees, for
“bush” in Australia is only another name for forest.
They seemed to Wango to touch the sky, and one
day he said to himself he would climb up and up and
find out what the stars were made of.
He never did find out what the stars were made
of, and he could not climb, he could only leap.
Wango was too small to know this yet, and he
thought he could do everything. He was quite an
old, old kangaroo, as old as his father, before he learnt
all the things that a kangaroo could not do, and even
then I am not at all sure that he knew his lessons off
by heart.
His father’s name was Rangoo, and he was king
of all the kangaroos of his tribe, because he was the
largest and strongest of them all, and could leap
farthest. He could leap seventy feet in one spring.
When he stood upright on his hind legs he was as
tall as a man, and his tail was so large and thick
that he could sit down on it quite comfortably.
His mother’s name was Karoo, and she was very
beautiful —that is for a kangaroo. She had large
soft eyes, and a fine coat, and a long thick tail, and,


most wonderful of all, she had a pocket in her coat
into which she could pop Wango and carry him
wherever she went.
Rangoo was not only called by that name, but he
had the grand title given him as well of “ Old Man
Dog-Killer.”
All the king kangaroos are called “Old Man” —it
is a mark of respect. But Rangoo was called “ Dog-
Killer ” because in the days of his youth he had
wandered to the edge of the bush where it sloped
down to the sea. He was in the habit of doing this
in order to enjoy the view, but this time it was the
greatest shock of his life to find that a new, strange
and wonderful animal called a “ white man ” had
camped there.
The white man had two other animals called
“dogs” with him, and when they saw the kangaroo
they sprang at him. Rangoo turned and made off into
the bush, but the dogs dashed after him.
The other kangaroos were quietly feeding and rest-
ing together, when Rangoo burst in upon them,
followed by the fierce dogs. Instantly what a
scuttling and leaping began. The kangaroos were off
like streaks of lightning. Only Rangoo was left
behind, for the white man, who at first had been as
surprised as Rangoo himself, had followed the dogs,
after snatching up his gun, and ping, ping~a bullet
struck Rangoo’s shoulder. It was the first time in
his life that Rangoo had ever felt anything like that,
and in a rage he turned at bay ready for the dogs as
they flung themselves upon him. He seized the dogs,
first one, then the other, with his great claws. In his
rage and pain he was too strong for them, and in a
few minutes there were no dogs left to tell the tale.
The white man, however, put another bullet into
Rangoo’s shoulder, and it was a half-dead kangaroo
that rejoined his companions in the bush.


The escape of Rangoo, king of the kangaroos.


When Rangoo got quite well again he was made
king of the tribe, and that was how he got the title
of “ Dog-Killer.”
Wango was very proud of his father’s bravery and
strength, and of his mother’s beauty, so proud, indeed,
that it seemed sometimes as if he took all the credit
to himself.
“ I will be called the Dog-Killer, too, when I am
an old man kangaroo,” he said proudly.
“You will have to be hunted by the dogs first;
how wiil you like that ? ” asked the platypus, who
was lazily listening to Wango’s account of all he
meant to do when he became an old man kangaroo.
“Huh,” said Wango scornfully, “/ am not afraid
of the dogs ; I am not afraid of anything, old duckbill,
though many things are afraid of me.”
A . « <S t I * 1 , 1 'll • • i « • • .
“Are they?” said the platypus, with great dignity,
taking no notice of Wango’s disrespectful way of
addressing him. “ And who may they be, pray ? ”
“ Look,” whispered Wango, “ and you’ll see.” He
hopped softly towards a bush, which seemed covered
with gaudy flowers, and when he was safely under-
neath it he jumped as far as his small body could
reach, and rustled the leaves.
Instantly all the “flowers” came to life, and rose
screaming and squawking into the air; they were a
crowd of young parrots.
The platypus yawned. He was a curious sight.
He looked as if he had begun life by being a bird,
and later on had changed his mind and grown into an
animal instead, for he had a great long flat bill,
larger than a duck’s, and webbed feet like a duck, but
the rest of him was covered with fur. N
“ If that is all you can do, my boy,” he said, “ the
best thing for you, when you see a dog, is to hop as
quickly as you can into your mother’s pocket.”
“ I won’t do anything of the kind,” cried Wango


ajS, J||S|
Wango and the Platypus.


angrily. “If I ever see a dog I shall turn on him
like my father did. I shall take hold of him, I shall.”
But no one heard the rest of the things Wango
was going to do, for ping, ping, something struck him
on his head.
It was only a wild cherry that the laughing jack-
ass slily dropped upon him, but if it had bten a white
man’s bullet, Wango could not have been more
frightened, and, with a funny little sound of terror, he
scuttled off with all the speed he could make until he
reached Karoo, who was just coming to look for him,
and before anyone could say “Jack Robinson,” he
was safe inside her pocket.
“Ha, ha, ha, ha!” laughed the jackass, who dearly
loved a joke. “Ha, ha, ha, ha!” His great rollicking
laugh rang through the trees, and was taken up by
other jackasses near and far, until the bush echoed
with their laughter. The parrots came flying back to
their bush, and chattered and screamed at Wango.
Every one seemed laughing at him, so that he felt
ashamed even to show the tip of his nose to the
world, but hid himself quite out of sight.
“ Foolish little Wango,” said Karoo. “ Know thou
that this is the best place for thee if ever the white
man chases us with his dogs and his guns.”
“ I am very much afraid,” murmured the platypus,
as he slowly waddled off in search of water, “that
some of us may see the white man and his guns and
his dogs sooner than we think, for there are bad times
coming to the bush. The streams are nearly dry, and
soon there will be no water, save for those who dare
to venture to the white man’s water-holes.”


\ " ' **'' ' '' '
The joke of the laughing jackass.


r~~ "
<£_
The laughing jackass in the squatter’s garden.


CHAPTER II. —THE PICNIC.
After the platypus had gone, a silence fell upon
the animals, but it was suddenly broken by Rang
leaping into the midst of theim .. Hasten
“ The white man s cubs ! he cnea.
J'ss.-s? “F >r :
and wide. Only the jackass remained pouring forth
"donkey that could
laulh as Lehigh, suppose from his name; he
WaS H : was* a large bird, much larger than an English
crow, with black and wings,
beak great beak there often poured
forth’peal after peal of loud, rollicking laughter that
through the bush
had stopped suddenly in startled wonder at hearing
a laugh as from some big, deep-chested man quite
Cl °And°the rn bird would laugh louder than ever, as if
at the joke of having frightened the traveller, until
he would have to join in and laugh too.
j* the squatter's garden there was a clump ot
trees called she-oaks, and here the jackass often
loved to perch and wake the household with his
laughter in the morning. No one ever tried to harm
Jackass- it was supposed to be lucky to have
“ e in a gal-den, and thus it happened that he saw
and knew more of the humans than did any of


other creatures in the bush. He remained now on a
branch of the tall gum tree watching the little party
advancing. It consisted of the squatter’s wife and
three children. The jackass could see them talking
busily, each carrying something in their hands.
i J T J hCre WaS Torn ’ 3 boy with a face as brown as
old duckbill s coat, and eyes that were browner than
that. Then there was Elsie, whose eyes were the
same colour as the sky, and her hair as yellow as
the sunshine. Between them toddled a rosy, chubby
httle fellow whom they called Ronnie, and who was
quite as fond of getting into mischief as Wango.
The mother stopped under the great gum tree.
“This W in do nicely for Qur picnic/ . she said _
It will not be safe for us to venture farther into
the bush.”
“Oh, do let us go on!” pleaded Ronnie; “I want
to see the kangaroos.”
“He is just like Wango,” thought the listening
jackass; “ they ought to be brothers,” and with that
he burst out laughing.
“Oh, look, Ronnie!” cried Elsie; “there is our
dear old jackass. I am sure it is the same one that
comes to our garden.”
Ronnie looked up and began to laugh loudly to
make the jackass reply, and between them they made
enough noise for a dozen. While Ronnie’s attention
was thus safely occupied, the others quickly unpacked
their baskets, and soon there was a dainty feast
spread at the foot of the gum tree. Tom made a fire
and placed the “billy,” as they called the tin which
held the water, on to boil.
“I do love ‘billy’ tea,” sighed Elsie contentedly
when the meal began. “ When I am grown up I will
always have tea made in a ‘billy.’”
“ When I am grown up I will always have tea out
of doors,” said Tom.


The picnic under the gum tree.


“ Everything is just perfect to-day, except that
lather is not home for my birthday.”
"Never mind," said his mother, “he will be back
to-morrow, and it will be like having a second birth-
Melbourne." Sha " Wha ' haS brOUght *»“ from
“ I wonder what it will be ? ” said Elsie. “ What
would you like most, Tom ? ”
A gun, replied Tom. “Father promised me that
when I was twelve I should have a real gun but
perhaps he has forgotten.” ’
“ Twelve years old to-day,” thought the jackass,
Who was an interested listener to all this. “ What a
great age do the human folk reach; they are still
younglings when we bush folk are getting old.”
“If it were your birthday, what would you like
best, Ronnie?”
With his mouth full of cake, Ronnie was just
neard to murmur the one word, “ Pony.”
“A pony!” cried Elsie. “You greedy boy, you’ve
got one already.” y y
“ ’Mother one,” said Ronnie. “ I would like a new
pony every birthday, then when I’m grown up they’d
all be there, lots and lots.” He spread his little arms
as far as he could. “Paddocks full,” he said. Every-
body laughed, and the jackass loudest of all, and then
everybody laughed again because he laughed. So the
home mCal WCnt ° n UntU at l3St WaS time t0 So
Elsie and Tom helped their mother to pack the tea
basket, and while they were busy, Ronnie looked
eagerly round him.
“Im sure there’d be a kangaroo if I went in a
hckle way,” he said.
a nH H Fi I0 ° ked i a i mother ’ her was turned,
and Elsie and Tom were bending over the basket
Naughty Ronnie slipped quickly away behind a tree,"


11
|m| ;
* ’’ N **«
Ronnie disappears in search of kangaroos.


and ran and ran as fast as his little legs could carry
him.
When the mother looked up from the packing
there was no Ronnie to be seen. For the moment
she was not very frightened, but called to the child.
Ronnie heard her calling, but only ran all the faster.
When, after calling several times, Ronnie did not
answer, the others started to look for him, expecting
every moment to see his chubby face peep round a
tree trunk at them. But no Ronnie appeared. He
toddled on chuckling with glee at his own naughti-
ness, and looking out for the kangaroos, for although
they lived so near the bush the children had never
seen a real live kangaroo;
By and by Ronnie stopped out of breath ; he was
alone in the great forest, and suddenly felt very, very
small among the tall gum trees. Besides, there were
no kangaroos after all, nothing to be seen but trees.
He began to run back again, but the trees here were
so much alike that while he thought he was running
home, he was going farther and farther away. His
mother and poor Elsie again had gone in just the
opposite direction, and their calling voices failed to
reach him. Every step they went took them farther
from him. If they had only paid some attention to
the jackass, all might yet have been well. He saw
Ronnie's flight and flew after him, but the little boy
was now very frightened and began to cry. Then
the jackass flew back to the mother, but his loud
“Ha, ha!” only seemed to bewilder her.
“ Oh,” she cried, “ that dreadful bird will drive me
mad; he seems to be mocking us in our trouble.”
They searched until darkness began to fall, then,
with white, tear-stained faces, they went back to the
homestead. Alas ! the squatter was away from home
buying new stock that day, but his wife quickly
roused up all the men on the place, and they set out


A sad ending to the picnic.


to hunt for the lost child ; but there was no trace of
him to be found. Only the jackass knew what had
become of Ronnie, and, alas! they could not under-
stand him. So very sorrowfully he flew away once
more to tell the tale to the bush folk. They all
crowded round him to hear the story; even the
platypus was interested, and as for Wango, he wanted
it repeated over and over again.
But it is to be feared he did not listen so atten-
tively to his father’s addition to the sto~y.
“ Take heed, Wango, and let the sorrow the white
man’s cub has brought upon himself and his people
by his naughtiness be a lesson to thee also, and do
not so often think thou knowest better than those
who are older and wiser than thee.”
CHAPTER lII.—WHAT BECAME OF RONNIE.
What had happened was this: The picnic was not
very far into the bush, and Ronnie was running all
the time near the outskirts of the forest. By and by
he came out on to the road; there he stood for a
moment. On each side of the road there was
nothing but tall gum trees, and looking backwards
and forwards there was nothing but roads, all looking
exactly the same. Ronnie did not know which way
he ought to go, but, too frightened now to stop where
he was until someone came to look for him, he ran
down the road ; but he took the wrong direction, and
ran away from his home instead of to it. On and
on he went, until he droppe'd down by the side of
the road, half dead with fright and weariness, and
fell asleep.
Presently a man came along, riding a brown horse
and leading a coal-black pony. He stopped when he


I
j\ ** - |£ ., «KvM I
I j-^
Found by a stranger.


reside. CUr,y ' headed little b °y fast asleep by the
d,d , the little cha P S et here?” he said;
ntteen miles from anywhere ? ”
littu h *h s 2 uatter s home wa s midway between two
other- w townships, thirty miles apart from each
stead ’so h' he tra " eller dld not know of the home-
-2 ’° he w ondered greatly how the little boy
could have got so far. y
,*5, e W ‘! d Ronnie 6 en tly and placed him on the
addle in front of him, and continued his journey to
Wariatown. When Ronnie awoke, refreshed Ld
‘ ‘ y ; a " d very bun f y after his long sleep and ride
rutrs in a ‘ r ’t i d himSelf Iying on a P ile of
ths r a T tent - Two men - one of them being
at him t‘it* h ° rSe ’ S3 ‘ nCar him ’ lookin e
at him and talking in low tones. They were talking
between themselves of the possibility of a reward
would ° h ffered for th . e boy ’ s rec overy, and whether it
would be wiser to let the news that they had found
him be known at once in Warratown, or whether to
wait until a reward was offered.
Ronnie broke in upon their talk by sitting up and
asking where he was.
He was a plucky little fellow really, and although
he was puzzled at finding himself in such strange
surroundings now that he was with people again he
o longer felt frightened. He answered all the men’s
questions, and told them about the picnic and how
he had ran away and lost himself; and by the time
he had finished a nice basin of bread and milk which
they gave him, he and the men were quite good
When Ronnie had finished his supper, and began
to look around him, he found he was in the most
wonderful place he had ever seen. Ronnie had never
been away from the homestead in his life, so he had


In the circus.


seen very little, and this was nothing less than a
ravelling circus. The circus in which Ronnie found
imse was a small one, but it seemed wonderful to
him. There were cages containing different animals;
there was a relation of duckbill’s; there was a young
opossum, and a cage of snakes, that were supposed
o be poisonous, but they were not. Billy Renton—
that was the name of the man who had found Ronnie
-used to come into the circus dressed up as an
Indian, and call himself the “ Indian Snake Charmer.”
The snakes used to coil all round him while he
played on a kind of flute. The people thought it was
wonderful, and that he really charmed the snakes.
But in reality they were quite harmless and did not
require any “charming” at all.
But what interested Ronnie most were the horses.
Black white, and brown horses he had often seen
but there were a couple of piebald ponies with long
tails which were unlike any he had seen before. The
men were amused at his delight, and told him that
the next day he should see Billy’s partner riding
s andmg on one of the team of nine ponies all going
at the same time, " s
Ronnie sprang up, his eyes sparkling.
“ Lei me do it too,” he cried. The men laughed.
“Can you ride, sonny?” asked Bill.
“Course I can,” said Ronnie, with great scorn.
I can ride wivout any saggle. Let me ride that
pwetty black pony, and I’ll show you.”
“ N ° one has ever ridden him yet,” said Bill.
“You couldnt stick on him for five seconds, sonny.”
“I can, said Ronnie, tears of vexation in his eves
at not being believed. “Let me twy ; I will stick on ”
“ Let the youngster have a try since he wants to,”
laughed Bill’s partner; “he can’t hurt himself much
here. So they put Ronnie upon the black pony and
waited to catch him as he fell.


■ 7 7 7 7 7 ~~
Billy Lenton, the “Indian snake charmer.”


But Ronnie did not fall off. The pony pranced and
kicked in its efforts to get rid of its light burden, but
Ronnie held on, and, to the men’s astonishment, he
even jumped the pony over a log of wood that lay
in his path.
“ Bravo ! ” cried the men.
“ He and that pony were just born for each other,”
said Bill.
The men exchanged a look which Ronnie did not
see. Both men were thinking wistfully what a fine
addition Ronnie would make to them.
At present there were only Bill and his partner to
do everything. Bill used to come on in one scene as
a Red Indian riding his horses, in the next as a
clown, and in the next dressed up as Buffalo Bill, and
so on ; while his partner did all the tricks with the
other animals, the snakes, and the performing dogs.
They were not rich enough to take in another partner,
though they wished to do so, and how strangely into
their hands had fallen this splendid little rider.
He was such a handsome little fellow too. What
an attraction he would be if they could only have him
in the circus.
“ Now,” said Ronnie, when, flushed and laughing,
he came off the pony, “ if you will let me have anuver
horse / will wide standing on his back too. I don’t
fink I could do four at once, not yet, for I’ve never
tried; but I’ve often widden Spitfire at home life
that.” The two men looked at each other again.
“To-morrow,” said Bill “you shall; you must go
to sleep now, and we shall see what you can do in
the morning.” So Ronnie went off quite contentedly
to sleep, but the two men sat talking together long
afterwards.
“ If we take him back,” said Bill, “ we shall get a
reward, and perhaps they will let us train him for the
horses too, seeing that he seems made for the life.”


Ronnie distinguishes himself.


“Not they,” replied his partner. “I guess his
folk have a stock farm, and he will be brought up to
manage the stock; he’ll have as much to do with
horses that way as he wants. Do you think folk of
that kind,” he jerked his thumb at the sleeping child,
“ are going to let their son be brought up as a circus
clown ? Not they. No, the only plan is for us to nab
him, and to clear off now before daylight.”
“ And be clapped into jail in a few days’ time,”
said Bill sulkily.
“ Nonsense ! ” said the other. “ Not a soul has seen
the boy with us, and our going will not be noticed,
as we have given our last performance here, and are
timed to leave to-morrow morning in any case. Be-
sides, he was lost in the bush, and the bush, as you
know, extends hundreds of miles from where you
found him. His folk will search the bush for days
and weeks, perhaps months, and then they will give
him up for dead.”
At last Bill was talked over, and as quickly and
quietly as possible, they packed up their belongings,
and before daybreak came they had vanished from
Warratown, taking Ronnie with them.
CHAPTER IV.—A KANGAROO HUNT.
The next day the squatter came back to a home of
grief and desolation. All work was given up, and he
and his men scoured the bush, as the showman had
foretold, for days and days. The news of the boy’s
loss was sent to Warratown, and all the men of the
little township turned out to help in the search, but
with no avail.
Weeks passed by, and the squatter had given up
hope; there were grey streaks in his hair that had
not been there before, and his shoulders were bowed.


(i v^vjl
•-. ■ ■ < 1
In search of Ronnie.


gave the ff I he b ° y 5 loss u P° n the mother also
? n _. h squatter muc h uneasiness. She had not
ce given way to tears, but went about her daily
duties with a set face, that grew thinner and greyer
very day, and her eyes seemed to look at everything
*'•! 10U ' \ ee ‘"S i'- Only Tom and Elsie, Ifter the
shock was oyer, became like their old selves
once more. They could not believe that Ronnie was
One y of°the 3 n d °^ n . talked about him to each other.
One or the possibilities put forward by the Warra
town searchers was that travellers through the bush
must have found Ronnie, and the children seized upon
this comfort and believed in it without any doubt
Some day, they feu sure> the travellers wou , > d arriye-
be happTagafn a " d We "’ a " d ‘ hen anybody would
the M h an h Wh r ile ’ r here WaS trouble and unhappiness in
true bad , ’ Wha * ' he Platypus »««1 «id was
rue bad times were upon the bush, and most of the
animals went further and further away to seek water
n ß « So °,r d i iaro °i more daring than the rest, went
earer the edge of the bush, and every night they
pa.d a stealthy visit to the squatter's water-holes
The squatter lived in a long low wooden house
whose windows looked towards the sea. Around ii
were one or two smaller wooden houses, where his
{OT . thG SqUatter had Prospered, and he
had mueh land and great flocks of sheep.
he field, or as the Australians say, the paddock
nearest the house was called the stable paddock’
because the stables were built there; next to that
came the home paddock, and then came stretching
away in wild rugged tussocks the sea paddock, ending
in the great cliffs that looked towards No-man’s land &
m the last paddock that the great water-holes
“There is little danger,” said Rangoo, when Karoo


The kangaroos in search of water.


at first showed fear. “We are far enough from the
house, and are not likely to be seen if we choose our
times well.” And thus it happened that the greatest
adventure in Wango’s life befell him.
Tom’s pony, Brenda, was kept in the home pad-
dock, and one morning very early, just after sunrise,
Tom went to find her.
If she were in a good temper she would whinny
prettily, and trot up to him directly she saw him.
But sometimes she would be in a playful mood, and
would toss up her heels, and it would be a long time
before Tom could get the bridle on and ride her bare-
backed to the stables.
This morning Brenda had made up her mind that
she was not going to be caught if she could help it.
and she led him a fine chase, through the home
paddock right across into the sea paddock, and he
panted on, calling and whistling, feeling hot and tired
and very cross, ween she suddenly stopped right
down by the water-holes.
“ Now is my chance,” thought Tom, and he went
softly up to her, when he saw why she had stopped
so suddenly.
Two fine kangaroos, surprised by the pony, were
leaping off as fast as they could.
They were Rangoo and Karoo. Of course, he could
not see Wango because he was hid in his mother’s
pocket.
In an instant Tom was on Brenda’s back, and was
riding home as fast as he could go, and he burst into
the house with the news.
“Father! father! two large kangaroos down by
the water-holes.”
The squatter himself had not much interest in any-
thing now, but there happened to be a sheep-dealer
staying for a day or two at the house. He was as
much excited as Tom when he heard the news, and


to please him the squatter decided to have a kangaroo
hunt. *
“Oh, father,” cried Tom, “may I come too? It
was I who found the kangaroos. Do let me come
too, and let me take my new gun.”
So his father said that as they had been the first
to see them, he and Brenda might come too.
And Rangoo said to Karoo:
“ Mother Karoo, the white men are out with their
guns and their dogs. We must not stay here any
longer.
So Karoo picked up little Wango and popped him
into her pocket, and said :
“ Lie still now, and we* will soon be away from
the white men and their guns and dogs.”
But Wango cried : “ Oh, let me see the guns and
the dogs.”
“ Lie still ! lie still! The white men are come to
look for us; their dogs will find us and their guns
will kill us. Lie still! ”
But Wango would not lie still; he wriggled and
wriggled, longing to get a glimpse of the white men
and their wonderful guns and dogs.
“I will have a peep, I will see them,” he said to
himself. And at last he stretched so far out of the
pocket, craning his head round his mother’s back
just when she was in the act of leaping, that he
fell out.
Karoo was leaping so swiftly that she did not notice
that Wango had fallen out, and she and Rangoo went
on for many hours until they were safe in the depths
of the bush, where they knew the white men could not
follow.
Then Rangoo looked at Karoo, and Karoo looked at
Rangoo. Alas ! poor little Wango was left far behind
to the mercy of the white men with their guns and
their dogs.
No. 208. B


Rangoo railed bitterly at Karoo, saying: “Oh,
chreless mother to let him fall out of thy pouch.”
Poor Karoo cried greatly, and told him how she
had bidden Wango lie still, and how he had said he
wanted to see the hunters, so he must have tried to
get out.
And then Rangoo stopped scolding, for he knew
what a headstrong, disobedient, boastful little kangaroo
Wango was.
Then they began to think of how to get him back.
“ For,” said Rangoo, “ the white men do not make
war upon cubs; they will not kill a youngling.”
“The dogs will,” sobbed Karoo.
CHAPTER V.—THE CAPTURE OF WANGO.
But the dogs had not killed Wango, as Karoo
feared. The way men hunt the kangaroo is to try
to enclose the animals in a circle, each hunter standing
behind a tree. Rangoo and Karoo had broken through
the circle with the dogs after them, and there in the
middle of the circle was naughty Wango !
It was Tom who saw him first.
“Look! look!” he cried. “A baby kangaroo!”
He rushed forward, and to his surprise and delight,
instead of trying to escape, Wango leaped almost
straight into his arms.
Even the squatter for a moment forgot his trouble
in the excitement. There was the baby kangaroo to
be admired and wondered over, and the dogs, when,
they returned from their fruitless chase, to be kept in
order. Tom was allowed to carry Wango home, and
the sheep-dealer was evidently quite envious, for he
too was delighted with their strange find.
So Wango saw the white men and their guns and


Wango is caught.


I
The little house that smelt of D O G.


dogs, and laughed to himself at the simplicity of his
father and mother at being afraid of them.
“ 1 knew they would not hurt me," he said to
himself boastfully. “ They fear me even as the little
parrots do.”
But as he listened to their talk he began to under-
stand that it was only because he was so little that
he had been saved, and he began to feel afraid also,
and to wonder whether they meant to keep him until
he too was an old man kangaroo, and then shoot him.
And that night, instead of sleeping out under the
open sky, tucked cosily into Karoo’s pocket from
which he could peep out and see the bright stars, he
was put into a little dark wooden house that smelt
of D O G.
As Tom was putting him into the little house,
Wango heard a sudden “Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!” and,
looking up, caught a glimpse of the laughing jackass
watching him from the shelter of a big she-oak.
“Oh, dear jackass!” called Wango, “tell Old
Man Dog-Killer to come and rescue me.” But the
bird only laughed and laughed, for he dearly loved a
joke.
Long after Wango had been safely shut up in the
little house that smelt so horribly of D O G, he could
hear his great “Ha, ha!” still going on outside.
Poor little Wango! He got so homesick for
Rangoo and Karoo that he cried a great deal, and
wished he had never been so inquisitive and dis-
obedient, but had laid still when he was told.
But the jackass, although he laughed, flew into the
bush to find them, and tell them what had become of
Wango.
If Wango could have heard the talk about him
after he had been safely put into the dog’s kennel he
would have been more frightened still. The sheep-
dealer was leaving at daybreak; one of the squatter’s


Breakfast before a journey.


men was going to drive him in the buggy into Warra-
town, when he would catch the one train that left
every day for Melbourne. And he wanted to take
Wango with him.
“What good will he be to you?” he asked Tom,
who wanted to keep the little kangaroo for a pet.
“ B y and by, when his claws are grown, you will
find him a tough customer to deal with, and you
won’t know what to do with him.”
“ But what will you do with him ? ” asked Tom.
Take him to the Melbourne Zoo,” answered the
dealer. “See, I’ll give you this for him.” N
He produced a bright golden sovereign and held it
out to Tom.
That settled it. “The kangaroo was not half as
interesting or intelligent as Brenda, or any of the
dogs, thought Tom. And there was a whole
sovereign between him and Elsie in exchange for a
troublesome pet.
The squatter knew that the Zoo would pay much
more than that for Wango, but the dealer was a good
customer and had bought a great number of sheep,
so he said nothing. ’
Wango’s spirits rose when he was taken out of
the dog’s kennel and given a basin of sweet bread
and milk. The great heat of the Australian day had
not yet set in, and the morning was cool and fresh.
All the household were up, and Elsie and Tom patted
and played with Wango, laughing over his funny
antics and his enjoyment of his breakfast. But no
sooner was breakfast over than Wango found himself
put into a box that smelt just as strongly of dog as
the little house in which he had spent the night. It
was a dog’s travelling box, and although there were
holes through which the air came, it seemed unbear-
ably stuffy to Wango. The box was bumped about a
great deal, and presently Wango found that there


were several bars in the side of the box through
which he could see what was going on. He saw
that the box had been hoisted on the top of a buggy,
and then with a crack of the whip, and shouts of
“Good-bye,” and waving of hands, the buggy started.
The squatter’s house and the children seemed
suddenly to run away from Wango, although he
crouched perfectly still in the strange box. On
through the crisp morning air they went, between the
tall gum trees. As they passed one spot a group of
parrots fluttered into the air, startled by the horses.
They were the same parrots Wango had so often tried
to frighten, and he whimpered to them to come and
save him. But they heard nothing. On and on the
buggy bumped and jerked, until they reached Warra-
town, and there Wango’s senses almost failed him.
Peering through the bars he saw a terrific animal,
ten times larger than any animal he had ever seen in
the bush. It rent the air with its shriek of rage as
it came thundering on, spitting out fire and smoke.
“Oh, the terrible dragon, it will eat me!” cried
Wango in terror, and, shutting his eyes, he shrank into
the farthest corner of the box, and dared not move for
the rest of the journey. His box was thrust into the
tail of the dragon, that is to say, in the guard’s van,
for the great roaring monster that nearly killed
Wango with fright was nothing more nor less than a
railway train.


CHAPTER VI.—TWO MOTHERS.
Just at that moment when the monster, as it
seemed to Wango, swallowed him up, Rangoo and
Karoo, tired and thirsty and footsore, reached the
squatter’s house, and Karoo boldly entered the house-
yard, while Rangoo watched and waited outside.
Karoo leapt straight to the kennel in which Wango
had slept the night before, and, as she sniffed at it,
in her eagerness she overturned it with her great
claws.
Poor Karoo! The kennel was empty! Yet only a
few hours before the jackass had seen Wango put
into it, and, besides, did not her own nose bear out
his story ?
Yet the kennel was empty. What had these cruel
men folk done with her Wango ? She gave a short,
sharp sound of misery and rage as she stood there
with her fore feet clasping the kennel.
It was Elsie who saw Karoo first.
“Oh, look, mother!” she cried, as Karoo entered
the yard, “ there’s the mother kangaroo come to look
for the little one ! ”
The squatter’s wife went to the doorway and
watched the little scene with a strange look in her
eyes.
When Karoo uttered that strange cry it seemed to
Ronnie’s mother as if the poor animal was saying to
her: “Why have you done this? Surely you of all
people know what it is to lose a little son.”
She turned sharply away from the door and almost
ran against her husband. He had his gun in his
hand, but before he could lift it she caught hold of it.
“No, dear, no,” she cried; “you must not shoot


Wango’s mother and Ronnie’s mother.


it! I beg of you do not harm the poor creature!”
and then, to the squatter’s surprise, his wife burst
into tears. He put down his gun and flung his arms
around her.
“My dear,” he said, “what is it?” At first the
only word he could hear was “ Ronnie.” Then she
sobbed: “How could we have been so cruel? We
have taken away that poor little baby animal and sent
it to a life of captivity ! ”
The squatter was quite taken aback. Since the loss
of Ronnie his wife had gone about the house with a
white, thin face that never changed in expression.
He was thankful to see that set calm give way at
last, but he could not make out what Ronnie had to
do with the little kangaroo.
“ My dear,” he said, “ you don’t mean to say you
are crying over a kangaroo?”
“The poor mother—look at her, John! Don’t you
know what it feels like?”
The squatter looked at Karoo—she was still stand-
ing- by the kennel, and again she gave that sharp bark
of anguish. She had travelled all day and night with-
out food or water, and her fine coat was covered with
dust. In her misery she had no fear now of the white
man or his gun, and passed quite close to him as she
went out of the yard to rejoin Rangoo.
Suddenly the squatter understood what had so
moved his wife, and his own eyes for a moment grew
dim.
“Poor thing,” he said, “she looked quite human.”
“Oh, John!” cried his wife, “do get the little
creature back ; I cannot bear it.”
“It can’t be helped now,” said the squatter; “try
not to think about it.”
But his wife was not to be comforted. She begged
and prayed him to fetch Wango back.
Now that her calmness had at last given way it


The doctor is called in.


seemed as if her strength was quite broken down.
For several days she lay white and still upon her bed,
and every day Karoo came at the same hour and
roamed about the house-yard, looking wistfully for
Wango. No one harmed her, as the squatter had
given orders to that effect, and down at the water-
holes Rangoo watched and waited for her.
The squatter at last became so anxious about his
wife that he drove into Warratown, and brought
back with him the one doctor who lived there.
And after he had seen her the doctor said to the
squatter ;
“ There is only one thing to be done : you must
get that little creature back from the Zoo, or wher-
ever it has been sent to.”
“Nonsense,” said the squatter; “the cause of my
wife’s illness is the loss of our little son. One would
think, to hear you, that she was fretting for the
kangaroo.” \
“ You don’t understand,” said the doctor im-
patiently; “it was the sight of the kangaroo search-
ing for its little one that broke the unnatural strain
in which your wife was bound. You have indeed to
thank the kangaroo for causing your wife to break
down into tears, and thus save her reason. But she
realizes her loss now as never before, only in her
mind it is bound up with the similar loss which you
have inflicted upon the animal. Of course, if little
Ronnie could be restored to her, all would be well;
but that is not in your power. It /s in your power
to restore the little kangaroo to its mother. Your
wife’s mind is fixed upon thaf, and by easing the
sufferings of the animal, you will ease your wife’s
sufferings also. I cannot explain it any clearer than
that; I can only add that if you would save your
wife, you will lose no time, but do as I have advised
as soon as possible.”


The squatter turned pale. Was it as bad as that?
Was he to lose his wife as well as Ronnie?
Rather than that he would fetch Wango back,
even if he had to go half round the world in order
to do it.
The next morning saw the squatter speeding to
Melbourne to see the sheep-dealer.
“I want you to come with me to the Zoo,” he
said, “ and ask if I can buy back the little kangaroo
you took there.”
“ Oh,” said the sheep-dealer when the matter was
explained to him, “they would not have him at the
Zoo ; said they had enough native animals. I was
rather taken aback, for I didn’t know what to do
with the little nipper. But I fell in with a show-
man and his circus close to the Zoo and I sold it
to him.”
The squatter’s heart sank.
“Where is the circus?” he asked.
“It was only passing through Melbourne. I fancy
it only performs at bush townships, where folk are
only too delighted to pay for anything in the nature
of an entertainment. But as it prided itself on being
the only travelling circus in Australia, it ought not
to be difficult to find.”
They made inquiries and found that the circus was
performing for a week at a miners’ camp a day’s
journey from Melbourne, so, saying good-bye to the
sheep-dealer, the squatter took train for that place.
It seemed a wild sort of chase to spend all this
money and time running after a little kangaroo,
thought the squatter, as he sat with bent head in the
train. But it was to save his wife. How was she ?
he wondered. It was two days since he had left home.
What might not have happened since then ?
His mind was torn with anxiety and fears, and the
train seemed to crawl past the little bush stations.


In Melbourne they made inquiries about the circus.


Outside the circus.


At last MLneville was reached, and the squatter sprang
out of the train. .
It was already evening, and the Australian nigh
was settling down upon the little town, for there is
no soft twilight in Australia the darkness comes
swiftly and suddenly.
The squatter made his way up the long straggling
street, in which groups of men were laughing and
talking. There, in a paddock a little distance oft, he
could see a large tent and the lights flaring outside it.
Many of the miners were going in that direction, and
scraps of their talk came to him now and then.
“Worth going to see?” said one in answer to
some question. “ I tell you it’s worth going to see if
only for the sake of the little nipper !
“Can’t he ride just!” said another. “But it's a
shame, I think, to let such a little fellow do them
dangerous tricks ! ”
“ Nonsense —he likes it! ” replied the first.
By this time he had reached the circus. On each
side of the entrance the squatter noticed two roughly
drawn posters representing a little boy in bright blue
tights riding a black pony. “ Australia’s most wonder-
ful rider,” he read. So this was the little nipper who
had so won the miner s admiration.
The performance had already begun, and he was
told that the man he had come to see was himself
doing his turn.
He must wait till the performance was over. So
he entered the big tent with the miners and sat down,
little knowing what awaited him.


Preparing for the show.


CHAPTER VII.—ALL’S WELL THAT ENDS
WELL.
Behind the tent, in a space curtained off from the
show, a little boy sat on the floor putting on his
shoes, that matched the sky-blue tights he wore.
“ Look alive, sonny,” said Billy Renton; “ your
turn will come in a few seconds.”
The little boy looked up. “ I’m ready now,”
he said; “ and so is he.” As he spoke, he put his
arm round a dark bundle that crouched close at his
side. It was none other than our friend Wango.
Poor Wango! He looked a forlorn and draggled
little kangaroo, with all the spirit gone from him.
Since he had come to this strange place he had been
made to work. Yes, he, Karoo’s petted baby, had
been set to learn tricks and turn somersaults until he
was tired out.
He hated those big men, and would do nothing
they told him. The only one who could make him do>
his tricks was this little boy, for Wango knew all
about this little boy.
He remembered every word of the jackass’s story,
and he knew that this was Ronnie. He was a
thinner, whiter, older-looking Ronnie than the laugh-
ing, chubby-faced boy who had run away at the
picnic. Yet the circus men were kind to him in
their rough way, and Ronnie did not even now quite
understand that they had stolen him.
When, instead of taking him home, they had gone
through strange places, they told him they were trying
to find his home, and at first he had been quite
happy in the delight of being allowed to ride the
pretty ponies; but now he began to fear he would


? 7 / ""
The miners went crazy with delight.


never see his dear father and mother again, and every
night he cried himself to sleep in his home-sickness.
He was more home-sick than ever to-night, and the
touch of the little kangaroo and the look in its so ,
liquid eyes somehow seemed to comfort him.
There was a sound of loud clapping from the tent,
and Bill’s partner came out dressed as an Indian
snake charmer, with huge snakes coiled about his
neck and arms. .
It was Ronnie’s turn now, and the clapping in
the tent swelled to a roar as the gallant little figure
in blue and silver, standing upright on the black pony,
came into view.
“This new turn ought to be worth a pretty penny
to us” chuckled Bill to his partner. “It was clever
of me to think of it, but what a good thing the little
beast is so easy to manage. I’ve never seen any-
thing like the way he has taken to the boy.
This was a new idea of Bill’s, tried for the
first time to-night. Ronnie was to personify “ Young
Australia.” With one hand he unfurled the Australian
colours as he galloped round the tent, while on his
left shoulder Wango sat. Shivering and trembling,
not daring to move, Wango’s eyes were fixed on the
people. The miners went nearly crazy with delight
at the sight of him. Had Wango known that one
half of the shouts and cheers were because of him,
his vanity, which had died out since his great adven-
ture, would have come alive again.
As they went round the tent for the third time,
Wango suddenly nearly slipped off Ronnie s shoulder,
for there in one of the front rows stood a tall brown-
faced man, whom he knew at once as the squatter.
The squatter dared not cry out for fear of startling
the boy. He stood with a beating heart amidst all the
laughter and cheers, hardly daring to believe that
he was gazing at his own little son.


“It is your father,” barked Wango, but of course
Ronnie did not understand. But what he did feel was
the sudden dig which Wango’s claws made at his
shoulder.
He swerved round and the next moment had seen
the brown-faced man. With one glad cry, “Father!”
he leaped off the pony’s back and landed, Wango and
all, right in his father’s arms. The hubbub that arose
nearly brought down the tent.
The squatter clasped his boy tight, unable to speak
m his joy, and the miners pressed round eager to
know the meaning .of the strange scene. When they
understood the story, a crowd of them burst through
the back of the tent to capture the two men.
But Billy Renton had seen what had happened
as he stood watching the black pony and its rider.
With white faces he and his partner had rushed
to the fleetest horses they possessed ; taking all their
money with them, they left everything else behind
and galloped for their lives into the bush.
When the miners found the birds had flown, they
returned to the tent, and insisted on driving the
squatter and his boy to the next township, where a
train left for Melbourne that night.
They offered him huge sums for Wango, for they
were one and all anxious to have him.
But of course the squatter would not part with
him. Was it not for Wango that his journey had
been made P He had come all this way to find Wango
and in finding him had found his own little son as
well. Certainly not the biggest fortune would tempt
him, and he put aside the big nuggets of real gold
that some of the miners held out to him.
So Wango and Ronnie went home together. What
a home-coming that was !
The squatter had wired to the doctor to break the
news to Ronnie’s mq’her, and she was up, pale and *


The flight of the circus proprietors.


thin, but radiant with happiness, to meet him. She
held Ronnie as if she could never let go again, and
never said a word about his naughtiness in running
away that day.
Tom and Elsie poured out questions about the
circus, until at last the squatter said they had talked
enough for that night, and must all go to bed. It was
a very happy household that slept in the big white
house that night.
The only one who was not happy was Wango, for
he was once more put into the little house that smelt
of dog.
“ If only they knew how hateful the smell of dog
is to a little kangaroo they wouldn’t put me here,”
whimpered Wango, “for I am sure they meant to be
kind. But, oh dear ! I did think I was coming home
too. But it seems I shall have to live always now in
this dreadful little wooden house.”
He was very tired after all that had happened, and
soon whimpered himself off to sleep. It seemed to
him but a short time when he heard a familiar “ Ha,
ha!” ringing outside. The next moment the door of
the little house was opened, and, peering out, Wango
saw that the morning had dawned.
At the door all the household had assembled in a
great state of excitement; but Wango had barely
time to notice them, for, leaping up the yard, was
Karoo.
Like a flash of lightning Wango was out of the
kennel and the next moment was safe inside his
mother’s pocket.
For a moment Karoo stood as if unable to believe
it was true. It seemed to the squatter’s wife as if
Karoo’s large eyes met hers with a look of gratitude
in them.
Then with great swinging leaps Karoo was off
through the yard down through the paddocks to the


Home again.


wate r - h °le s , where Rangoo had so often waited in
Vain,
They did not stop now to hear Wango’s story, but
leaped on and on far into the bush. flew
the jackass, and his loud, rollicking voice called all
the animals together to hear the news
" A lV' 7, ell that ends well '” said the platypus,
when the tale was told for the twentieth time. .. It
un a a „ a d PPy 7 f ° r “ S aU ’ f ° r the drou e ht is breaking
bush " g * lmeS are C ° ming ° nce more t0 *•>«
all ended Ual ’n Wh = t thepplay Pust yP us said was true, and
forvnt hf, W S ° '° ng 38 he lived Wan «° never
torgot his experience at the circus, nor the hours he
spent in the little house that smelt of dog.'
in^r h a e n^ h K-i^ eCame an old man kangaroo, his wonder-
ing grandchildren would gather round him and listen
wanted t 6 ° f What ha PP ened to the little kangaroo who
wanted to see too much of the world. Some of them
who, m fact, resembled Wango more than the others’
cfrcus S™ •? tCaCh thCm th£ tricks he learnt at the
circus. So if you ever explore the Australian bush
be? a ° r ° SS 3 httlC kangaro ° who can sit up and
beg and turn somersaults, you may be sure you have
met one of the descendants of Wango.
THE END.


• • •• |l
raj _ a (•>
* S«r Oertamtiea. V/J g
5?: Mr The ‘Allenburys’ Foods are based on scientific cer- gK
CSI if tainties. Used as directed, they are exactly what a baby pg
needs to develop into a healthy and robust child. The \ |3|
IfSiM ‘Allenburys’Foods are easily assimilated; digestive and kindred
l|t| disorders are avoided by their use.
l4micnburgs Foods 1
jjj) jk W* Pamphlet “Infant Feeding and Management"
if i/TV ALLEN O’ HANBURYS Lid. M
jgp • Lombard Street, London.
Poems for the Schoolroom
and the Scholar.
EDITED BY
ROBERT S. WOOD.
Complete ia One Volume. Price One Shilling net; by post Is. 3d.
Bound in Cloth, 244 pp.
L—Simple Poems for Reading and Recitation in Junior Classes.
ll.—For Recitation and as First Studies in Literature for the
Young.
Hl.—Scenes from Shakespeare and Milton.
IV.—The Teaching of Literature in Schools, with more Scenes
from Shakespeare.
STEAD’S PUBLISHING HOUSE, KINQSWAY, LONDON, W.C.


TWO NEW PUBLICATIONS.
HISTORICAL AND ROMANTIC SCENES
For Classroom Reading and Recital.
FRANK MUNDELL and R. S. WOOD.
Price 4d. net; by post sd.
These seven original and well-chosen Scenes from History and Romance
will greatly aid the teacher in his efforts to utilise the DRAMATIC METHOD
IN TEACHING advocated by Mr. Sharpe, C.8., and other inspectors.
“I like the book immensely,” says a Headmaster, “and I will introduce
it at an early date into my school.”
“We have no hesitation,” says The London Teacher, “ in inviting teachers
to obtain a copy of this cheap little book, and investigate the possibilities
of its methods.”
“ These scenes present a wide and interesting series of dramatic readings
and situations that will appeal strongly to teacher and child.” Head
Teachers Review,
“Whether for reading or recital in the classroom or in the concert hall
this series of seven scenes is peculiarly well adapted.”— Educational News.
NEW RECITATIONS AND DIALOGUES
FOR THE LITTLE FOLKS.
A Collection of Original Recitations, Dialogues,
and Simple Scenes.
Price 3d. net; by post 4d.
We are frequently asked for some new recitations for the smallest children
to be used at Infant School Entertainments and such like occasions. Here
is an attractive selection to meet the needs so frequently expressed.
“It is a bright and versatile miscellany,” says the School Government
Chrarticle, from which teachers and parents can make easy choice of
pleasing subjects, well within the ability of the little boys and girls to
memorise and to represent in simple and suitable action.”
STEAD’S PUBLISHING HOUSE, KINQSWAY, LONDON, W.C.


THE MAKING OF ENGLAND
AND THE EMPIRE.
MARY E. HANCOCK
(Member of the Sunderland Education Committee).
BOOK I.—Early Times to the Death of the Conqueror, 1087.
BOOK ll.—The Youth of the Nation, 1087-1485.
BOOK 111.—Growth and Struggles of the Nation, 1509-1714.
BOOK IV.—The Manhood and Expansion of the Nation, 1714-1910.
FULLY ILLUSTRATED
With Maps, Illustrations after David Maclise, R.A.,
H. C. Selous, and others ; Questions for Composition,
Historical Calendars and an Invaluable Introduction by
ROBERT S. WOOD.
Price 4d. net. By Post, sd.
Also bound in Cloth, each book for Sevenpence net ; or the whole work in
2 vols., 256 pp. each, cloth boards, lettered, Onb Shilling each net.
PERSPECTIVELAND: HOW PEGGY LEARNED TO DRAW
ROSA WAUGH.
A Practical Scholar’s and Teacher’s Aid in Popularizing Perspective for even the
youngest Pupil. Demy Bvo. Fully Illustrated.
Price 9d. net. By Post, lOd.
TALES OF THE TOWER OF LONDON.
By CHAS. MORLEY and WM. STEAD, Jr.
In addition to the Tales, the book contains a complete guide to the Tower.
Price 6d. net. Post Free 7d.
STEAD’S PUBLISHING HOUSE. BANK BUILDINGS, KINGSWAY, LONDON, W C


STEAD'S SCHOOL AND SCHOLAR SERIES
(Adopted by the Home Reading Union).
NEW SELECTIONS FROM POPULAR POETS.
Edited by ROBERT S. WOOD
{Author 0/ “ Macmillan's Composition and Word-Building Series ”)
u4 Mo „,
Best Verse, and wIU cuUlvate I "or Literature r Unlque Anthologies of the
.. Hen. by the^fTrealde^aoM^asVhrough'.llent
6 4P “g„. s 1 ?r sa^rs-"
SyT 1 One Penny net*"* 5 S^fd™ 113 P * eCeS SUiUble f ° r bo *C»“? and
Longfellow s ‘ Narrative and Shorter Poems and Ballads ”
fiS^ndgrou^cf^^'^^’^the^^eslde^^Son o ” s ’ ?? Qu « tio “' and *««-
Workers ; IV. Poems of cLage. Manliness 'v
Land—Poems of the Norvmpn • vt n<* c \ ~* crinc< - * v. In Viking
VII. At the Weak*
Life, Death, and After. 48 pages. One Penny net. By post,*^' ghtS ° n
Longfellow’s 41 Evangeline.”
I? S g&rsn&
Cowper’s Selected Poems.
Including Boadicea, My Mother's Picture Animal „
The Olney Hymns. Selections from “The' m f s I’.l?un 1 ’. I ? unl ° rous Poem *.
pieces. One Penny net By post?" K and thirty other standard
Wordsworth’s Shorter Poems
■ choice pieces. 64 pages. One Penny net By post. i£d. * d y ° ther
THE FOLLOWING BOOKS ARE FULLY ILLUSTRATED _
“ Wonders of the Round Table.”
Kfn„ P - oSe T S i torie f r° f King £" hur ' S Ku from Tennyson’s - Idylls of the
King. Tales of Courtesy, Valour, and Chivalry retold for f .
Moral Instruction Training. Twopence net. By post? 3d. d g UssQns m
“ Prose Tales from Tennyson.”
The Lady of Shalott and the Voyage of Maeldune • or a a
the Magic Islands. Arthurian and Celtic Stories. One Penny
Alfred the Great; or, England a Thousand Years ago
•jfflcSsrtfT Fu,,y
, , JU. , uy posi, 4Q.
BTEAOT p raUBHIM HOUSE, tak IgiMUn. CiwwarTl^^


STEAD’S SCHOOL AND SCHOLAR SERIES.
"A BOOK FULL OF PICTURES IS A BOOK FULL OF THOUGHTS."
Pictures are now recognized as the best aids in teaching Composition.
PICTURE, SONG, AND STORY.
Illustrated Gems from the Poets.
Special Aids in Moral Instruction Training.
Edited by ROBERT S. WOOD,
Author of " Macmillan » Word-Building and Composition Series.’’
PRICE ONE PENNY EACH NET (by post I|d). 64 PAGES.
ILLUSTRATED RECITATIONS. PART I.—For Juniors.
It contains 45 Stanoard Lyric, Ballad, Narrative, and Nature Poems by R. L. Stevenson,
C. Kingsley, Emerson, Wm. Blake, Tennyson, Scott, Lord Houghton, W. Allingham,
Campbell, Coleridge, Mary Howett, Jane Taylor, Longfellow, Wordsworth, &c.
With Practical Notes and Suggestions on Word Drill, Vocal Gymnastics, and Correct
Articulation, Exercises on Emphasis, and the Correction of Children's Faults of Pronuncia-
tion, by R. S. Wood.
ILLUSTRATED RECITATIONS. PART H.-For children aged 8
to 10 years.
It contains 28 longer pieces, with 35 original and charming Sketches by the clever black and
white artist, Brinsley Le Fanu, to assist the children in representing the characters through
dialogues in class.
There are also Useful Hints on Teaching the Poems, and " Twelve Golden Rules,” by
R. S. Wood, for securing Intelligent and Expressive Speaking and Reading through thetue
of the dramatic faculty in children.
“POPULAR NURSERY RHYMES AND JINGLES/’-For Infants.
PART I. contains favourites, with striking original pictures illustrating the text and for
drawing by children.
“MORE NURSERY RHYMES AND JINGLES.”-For Infants.
PART 11. contains 18 popular pieces, many of which lend themselves to character taking and
dialogue by the children in class.
THE ILLUSTRATED “CHILDREN’S HYMN BOOK.”
This book contains 60 of the Hymns most popular with children. It is specially adapted for
use at the Opening and Closing of the Day School, for Memorizing at Home, and for
Children’s Sunday School Services and Festivals.
It contains such favourites as “ Jesus, Tender Shepherd, Hear me,” “ Now the Day is Over,"
“ I Love to Hear the Story,” “ All Things Bright and Beautiful,” “ Dare to he a Daniel,”
“ Hush’d was the Ev’ning Hymn,” and 54 others by lamous hymn writers for the young.
ROBERT BROWNINGS “THE PIED PIPER OF HAMELIN ”
AND BARHAM S FAMOUS “ JACKDAW OF RHEIMS.”
With 32 remarkable pictures by Le Fanu.
COLERIDGE’S FAMOUS RHYME OF “ THE ANCIENT
MARINER.' ’
With 25 striking sketches to illustrate the text and assist memorizing.
COWFER’S CLASSIC, “THE COMICAL HISTORY OF JOHN
GILPIN’S RIDE.”
With 36 humorous and striking pictures by Le Fanu.
STEAD’S PUBLISHING HOUSE, Bank Buildings, Klngsway, London, W.C.


Matchless for the Complexion.


A. — cL, fUJJ a x ftuica- * » **
2. Tales and Wonders of Jesus.
3. Nursery Rhymes.
4. Nursery Tales.
5. Reynard the Fox.
6. Brer Rabbit.
7. -Cinderella, and other Fairy Tales.
10. The Christmas Stocking.
11. Gulliver’s Travels in LUiput.
12. Stories from Hans Andersen.
13. -stories from Grimm’s Fairy Tales.
14. -Eyes and No Eyes, &c.
15. Gulliver among the Giants.
18. Twice One are Two
19. Mere Nursery Rhymes.
20. -More stories about Brer Rabbit.
22.—The Christmas Tree.
23 —Travels of Baron Munchausen.
24. -Tale of a Donkey's life.
25. the Sailor.
26. JEsop’s Fables. Part IL
27. Labours of Hercules.
30.—Perseus the Gorgon Slayer. [History.
31— Six Famous Stories from English
33.—Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp.
35.—Hymns with Pictures.
36 -Six Great Events in British History.
37. The Stolen Princess.
38. St. George and Merrie England.
39. Tom Thumb’s Adventures.
41—Fairy Tales from Flowerland.
43. Wonders of the Round Table. 2d.
44. Stories from Sandford and Merton.
47.—From January to December.
50.—The First Birdie Book.
51—Childe Horn; Tales of Long Ago
52.—Fairy Tales from China.
55. Country Scenes on a Farm.
56. Indian Fairy Tales.
58.—The Snow Queen.
60.—Tbe Wonder Book.
21.—Brer Fox’s Adventures.
64.—Stories from Ancient Romo.
67. King Alfred the Great.
68. Shock-Headed Peter.
70.—Father Christmas.
78. Fairy Tales from Japan.
79. Fairy Tales from Africa.
82. John Gilpin.
83. Stories from Chaucer.
84. Illustrated School Recitations.
85. The Babes in the Wood,
86. Animal Stories.
87. The Pled Piper of Hameliu.
83.—Little Snow-White.
89 —A Seaside Story.
90. Ten Stories of Insect Life.
91. Legend of the Birch Tree.
92. Tales from Shakespeare.
97. Coleridge’s Ancient Mariner
98. Pictures to Paint.
99. -Greek Fairy Tales.
100 —Budge and Toddie.
101.—The Quest of the Golden Fleece.
103. A Picture Book for the Bairns.
104. Recitations for Schools. Part IL
110.—The Wishing Carpet.
113.—The Story of Hiawatha
115.—Holiday Stories.
119— Ivanhoe.
120.—Robin Hood.
123.—Tbe House In the Wood.
121—'The Chief of the Giants.
125 —Letters from Fairyland.
126.—Cecily among the Birds.
127 —The Wise Men of Gotham.
130.—The Yellow Dwarf, &c.
132.—The Mouse-Princess.
133 —Ruskin’s ‘King ofthe Golden River.”
134 -Lady of the Lake (in Prose).
136.—The Animals at "The Zoo "
137. -The Magic Rose.
138. A. Summer in Squirrel-Land.
139. What Katy Did.
144.—The Giant with the Golden Hair.
147. nook of Nonsense.
148. The Gold Brocade.
149. Heroes in Real Life.
151. The Magic Seven.
152. Stories of Persian Kings.
155. Tales Told in the Rag-Bag.
156. The Palace under me Sea
160. -Prince or Tailor.
161. Tales from Tennyson.
163. The Story of Undine. [Folks).
164. The Brownies (Fables for Little
165. His First Pair of Trousers.
167. The Gambler Prince.
168. A Brownie’s Love Story.
169. The Little Grey Man.
171. Frank’s Wonderful Journey.
172. The Boy who Wanted to Know.
173. The Pride of Princess Olga.
174. Barney 800 Roo.
175. -Fairy Tales from Russia.
176. Merrymind the Fiddler,
178 & 179.—The Enchanted Village.
180. The Cuckoo and the Merry Tree.
181. The Young Fur Traders.
182. The Black Dog of the House.
183. A Tale of a Tortoise.
184. The Fairy Palace.
185. Crowning of King George V.
186. Little Breeches.
188. The Talisman (Scott).
189. The Basket of Violets.
190. The First Baby.
191. Snow-White and the Bears. A Play.
192. The Sported Cat.
193. -In Lazy Land. ,
194. The Raksha Rajah.
195. The Last of the Minstrels.
19i.—The Barber’s Bargain.
197.—Adventures of Bnght-Eves.
193.—H0w Jack Learned to Play.
169.—Adventures of Three Brownies.
20D.—Kit-Kat.
29L —The Tale of Pat.
202. Peter Good-for-Nothing.
203. The Magic Shoe.
204. Pictures and Stories from Holland.
205. The Princess and the Monster.
206. A Brave Boy’s Fight, and What cams
207 -Little Heart, the Gipsy. [of it.
STEAD'S PUBLISHING HOUSE, BANK BUILDINGS, KINGSWAY, LONDON, W.C.


A Wonderful Discovery!
MACKINTOSH’S fliW J(K/ /L
TOFFEE de LUXE ®|J5££ lV
Sbld to tte shops in silver-finished salvers. wil V
% W/W \ v
/ 1
THE-TIN YOU CON TIN UE.
PURE
CJ BREAKFA
BREAKFAST
ivour.” 'Cocoa
Unsurpassed
Flavour.”
per |lb. tin.
(The Yellow and Red Label.)
“The Highest Cocoa Value Obtainable
NO COUPONS—FULL VALUE IN THE COCOA.
A Wonderful Discovery !
MACKINTOSHS
TOFFEE de LUXE
Stold to the shops in silver-finished salvers.


NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA




C2C3'233


