

Pent
i. ' ?.
; ?. , ?
THE
STATE SYSTEM OF EDUCATION
IN VICTORIA
ITS ABSOLUTE PERFECTIONS, AND MANIFOLD BLESSINGS,
INDICATED IN ITS THREE GREAT AND
GLORIOUS CHARACTERISTICS
?SECULAR, COMPULSORY, AND FREE
A SEEMON
Recently preached in Melbourne by an Anglican Clergyman , and published
at the request and expense of some Members of his Congregation.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
HUlfrflurnc:
WALKER, MAY & CO., PRINTERS, 9 MACKILLOP STREET
(pFF 56 BOURKE STREET WEST)
1876.


? ,
.*
'
*
.
? ,
?
j


THE STATE AND SUNDAY SCHOOL.
Prov. xxii. 6.?? Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is
old, he will not depart from it.?
There is not, perhaps, a text in the Old Testament Scrip-
tures better known or more often quoted than this; and
yet, strange to say, the precept it inculcates is less regarded
by parents and guardians than almost any other which
comes to us with Biblical authority. I know, of course,
that there is no virtue in a mere text, and that it is not
because Solomon said, .?Train up a child in the way he
should go, and when he is old, he will not depart from it,?
therefore that it is right, and according to the will of God,
that we should do so; but, because common sense, reason,
and experience, as well as our sense of Christian duty and
obligation, impose upon us the necessity of training them
up in the fear of God, and in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord, if we would see them become virtuous, upright,
unselfish, industrious men and women, and useful and
respected members of society. But Solomon, although a
very learned man for the age in which he lived, probably
the wis*est man of his day, and whose proverbs contain a
fund of moral maxims, ? wise saws,? and important pre-
cepts of great value to mankind in all generations, was not
infallible in his ethical utterances. The text before us
shows that either he was not always correct as to his
conclusions, or else that he himself failed to put in practice


what he preached; and when he wrote that aphorism,
?Train up a child in the way he should go,? &c., he
probably, little thought that he would be one of the first
to find his axiom nullified in his own personal experience ;
for this wise king, Solomon, had a son, one Rehoboam, who
turned out a bad and wicked man, and who, by his inso-
lence, oppression, and wrongs, nearly destroyed the wealthy
and splendid kingdom which he inherited from his magnifi-
cent and voluptuous father. If it was true in the days of
the Jewish commonwealth, and under the Mosaic dispensa-
tion, that all who were trained up in the way they should
go when they were old did not depart from it, it is quite
clear that Solomon must have grossly neglected the educa-
tion and training of his own son, who turned out so badly,
because he was not ? trained up in the way he should go.?
If, on the other hand, Solomon did his duty by his boy,
and trained him up in the right way, his subsequent
miserable departure from it, and his sinful after-life,
afforded convincing proof that under the Jewish dispensa-
tion, no more than under the Christian, can it be predicated
7 \
that a child who is ? trained up in the way he should
go ? will not depart from the right path in after years.
But it is most probable that Solomon was only laying down
a general principle, and indicating rather what ought to be,
or what might be expected to be the result of good moral
and religious training in childhood, and not what always
actually followed that training; and although, unhappily,
there are many exceptions, it may be taken as a general
rule now, as then, and one which the experience of the vast
majority of cases fully bears out, that if children are pro-
perly trained in the knowledge and love of truth, in their
duty to God and man, and in the principles and habits of
purity, integrity, industry, unselfish generosity, and loving-
kindness, they will grow up all that the most anxious
Christian parents can hope for or desire; and this may
be safely affirmed, notwithstanding the exceptions to this


rule, where we see young men and women who have been
brought up in the fear and love of God by pious parents or
friends, departing sadly and irrevocably from the paths of
virtue and righteousness, and dying in their sins, perish
eternally; their previous advantages and privileges, and
their knowledge of the truth, which they have wilfully
rejected, only adding to the weight of their condemnation.
Although, therefore, Solomon undoubtedly made a mistake,
if he meant his words to be taken literally, and to
be applied to all (which he probably did not), since it
by no means always follows that if a child be ? trained
up in the way he should go, when he is old he will
not depart from it,? yet, since it is perfectly true that
the only hope of seeing our children following the
good and right way when they grow up, and becoming a
blessing to us, and a credit to the community, is in
training them in the right path of truth, righteousness,
and godliness; and since it is equally certain, as all
experience shows, that without that training they will,
inevitably, turn out badly, become sensual, selfish, worldly,
and godless, if not actually criminal, we cannot impress
this well-known precept of Solomon with too much direct-
ness and emphasis upon all those who, as parents, guard-
ians, ministers, teachers, or conductors of Christian Schools,
are in any way responsible for the training of the rising
generation; and we can appropriately make this proverb the
text of an appeal to your consciences, and through them to
your purses, on behalf of that invaluable and most useful
Christian institution, the Sunday School.
Brethren, I have no desire to discuss politics in the
pulpit, least of all colonial politics ; but in speaking of the
training and instruction of the young, and asking for
money to help-to bring them up in the way which they
should go, in the fear of God and love of truth and
righteousness, I cannot very well avoid saying something
upon the system of public education adopted by the State


in this colony, and which has rendered the maintenance
and efficiency of our Sunday Schools more important and
imperative than they ever were before the passing of the
Education Act. For good, or for evil, a majority of the
people of Victoria, so far as they can be said to be repre-
sented by that very remarkable assembly, the Colonial
Parliament, have decreed that the education given in our
State Schools, at a cost to the taxpayers of some half-
million sterling per annum, shall be henceforth secular ,
compulsory , and free.
With regard to the compulsory clause, every right-
thinking man must acknowledge that it is a most wise,
merciful, and just provision. If parents are so dead to
their obligations to their children, and so indifferent to
their character and welfare that they will not educate them
sufficiently to fit them to discharge the common duties of
life, and to earn an honest and respectable living, it
becomes the bounden duty of the State to compel them to
do so, and to punish them if they disobey. Untaught,
neglected children are for the most part incipient criminals,
and are a moral pest and curse to society; and, therefore,
simply as a matter of police, of order, and good govern-
ment, they should be forced to go to school, for their own
benefit and for the general well-being of the community.
A man has no more right to starve and neglect the mind
of his child than he has to starve and neglect his body ;
and if the magistrate justly compels him to feed and
clothe the latter, he ought to have the power also to
compel him to provide mental food for the former; and,
therefore, those who arc so wicked, insensate, and brutal as
to allow their children to grow up in ignorance, the parent
of crime, without education and culture of any kind,
deserve no consideration whatever at the hands of the
magistrate, and should be dealt with in the most merciless
way the law will allow, as an enemy of the State, of
society, and of the human race. No possible exception.


therefore, could be taken to an Education Act which con-
tains a stringent compulsory clause, and the more stringent
the better it is for the country.
But under the new system adopted in the State Schools
of this colony, education is not only compulsory, but free ;
from the children of the Governor down to those of the
chimney-sweeper and street beggar, it is offered to all
comers alike, rich and poor?free, gratis, all for nothing.
And, not only does the State generously give a sound
elementary education, embracing what are facetiously
termed the three R?s?reading, writing, and arithmetic ?
free of charge, which is all that the children of the working
classes require, and all that the State has any right to give
{and that only to those who cannot afford to pay for it),
but the fortunate children of Victoria are taught accom-
plishments also at the expense of the taxpayers. Singing
and drawing already form a regular part of school
instruction, whilst other accomplishments, such as elocution
and botany, are being contemplated by the Department,
and which, doubtless, will be followed by many others
from time to time, according to the necessity of the
political head of the Department to bid for popularity,
until our State Charity Schools will turn out from year to
year thousands of highly accomplished and cultured young
ladies and gentlemen who, too proud to work for their
daily bread like their fathers, because educated far above
their station in life, will starve upon their gentility and
become a nuisance and an incubus to society. Such
appears to be the inevitable result in store for this colony
from her present free system of national education. I
confess that I, for one, feel very strongly that this portion
of the measure, especially as it promises to be carried out
by political ministers, who seem bent upon developing it
into a system of high class education, both to the rich who
ought to bear the burden themselves, and to the poor who
do not require it at the expense of the State; is politically


unsound, vicious in principle, and manifestly unjust to a
large section of the community, who, having the means to-
pay for the education of their children, and possessing too
much British independence of spirit and character to accept
the eleemosynary benevolence of the Government, are
compelled to pay for the instruction of the children of
parents as well able to bear the expense as themselves;
whilst the State enters into a most unfair and unequal
competition with the conductors of private schools, who
cannot afford to give their pupils instruction without
adequate remuneration. However, in an ultra-democratic
country like this, where the whole of the political power is
vested in those who are the least fitted to exercise it, I
suppose that the old pagan adage holds good?? Vox
populi vox Dei" (the voice of the people is the voice of
God), and so we must make the best of our blessings of
democracy, and quietly pay the enormous sums required of
us without a murmur, and only be too thankful that we
have got the money to pay.
With these remarks, which arc not half as strong as I
would have made them had I been in any other place, I
pass on to say a few words on another part of the subject.
The education now given in our State schools is not only
compulsory and free, but it is also secular , purely secular.
The presence in our community of an active, restless, and
aggressive body of materialists and secularists who
recognize no religion but the religion of Nature, or the
? Gospel of Humanity,? and of a minority of Irish Roman
Catholics who make common cause with them against the
Bible and Bible teaching, has no doubt rendered it
necessary that the State, in establishing a national system
of education, should exclude direct religious instruction
altogether from the State schools. This seems to be
inevitable under existing circumstances. But our wise
legislators have carried this principle to such an absurd
and unreasonable extent as to render their system abso-


lutely deficient and imperfect, even from a secular point of
view; for not only have they, under the influence of
? secularism run mad,? excluded the Bible and all
religious books, and even expunged passages in the school
class-books which have any reference to religious subjects,
however undogmatic and harmless, but they have actually
gone the length of prohibiting History from their course of
instruction, simply because some of them know, and others
believe it on their evidence, that the history of every
European nation describes the fierce and bloody wars,
the political wickedness, the violent revolutions, the
persecutions and abominations, which have been carried
on and practised by ? Christians ? through many cen-
turies in the sacred name of religion, either for the
aggrandisement, or for the overthrow, of the power of
an immoral and degrading ecclesiastical despotism. And
yet in a sound healthy education, the study of history is
one of the most important factors, in expanding the mind,
increasing the store of useful knowledge, and giving
intelligence and force to the character of the young.
History is, not only the most interesting, but the most
instructive portion of secular education. With the loss of
history more than half the sum of human knowledge would
disappear. To exclude history from our schools is to
consign the rising generation to absolute ignorance of their
fatherland, its laws and institutions; of all that has been
done and suffered by their forefathers, of which they are
now reaping the happy fruits ; of all that has made Great
Britain what she now is, the greatest, the wealthiest, the
freest, the happiest, the most powerful nation on the face of
the earth; of all that has been going on in the world for
two thousand years ; of the rise and fall of kingdoms; of
the progress and development of civil, political, and
religious liberty, and every other form of Christian civili-
zation ?in short,-of those subjects for thought and reflection,
a knowledge of which is absolutely necessary to form the


mind and character of an intelligent, sensible, and educated
man or woman.
But even with this naked and lifeless secularism, this
utter abnegation of God in history as well as God in
revelation and nature in our State Schools, our advanced
reformers are not satisfied ; having banished every semb-
lance of religious instruction from their secular system of
education, they are determined so far as their power
extends, and legislative enactment can reach, that the
children of this country shall not enjoy the blessings of
Christianity at all. They have not only thrown God?s
altar and image out of the school doors, but they must
needs add insult to injury by treading them in the mire
underfoot.
When the Education Act first passed, I in common with
many others welcomed it as, on the whole, the best solution
offered of a great and difficult problem, and (with the
exception of the clause providing a free education for all
at the expense of the country) a measure which was fair
and just to all parties in the State, and to all sections of
the Christian Church. And why did I so regard it?
Because I found that so far as words could make it so, I
should have the right of giving religious instruction to the
children of any government school with which I might be
locally connected, at hours when the building was not
required for State and secular purposes. A clause in the
Act provides that the Local Board of Advice might allow
the use of the school buildings to clergymen and others of
various denominations, Protestant and Catholic, for giving
religious instruction to any children they could get
together, and who were willing to receive it, at any hours
of the day other than those required by the State, so long
as it did not interfere with the regulations or arrangements
of the Education Department. But as if to illustrate the
truth of Talleyrand?s famous Machiavelian saying, ?the
use of language is to conceal the speaker?s meaning,? now


that the Act has come into operation, and the country
is fully committed to it, we are coolly informed that the
meaning of the permissive clause in question is, that
only with the consent of the political head of the Depart-
ment for the time being (who may be hostile or totally
indifferent to all religion) can this privilege be allowed ;
and acting upon this manifestly unjust interpretation, the
present Minister of Public Instruction, to the surprise and
disappointment of thousands, has absolutely refused the
use of the school buildings for this purpose and under
these conditions; and thus a gross fraud has been perpe-
trated by our secular politicians upon the Christian
community and the Christian Churches.
Under the present regime therefore, no religious
instruction whatever, in or out of school hours, can be
given to the children who flock by tens of thousands to our
State Charity Schools, and who are thus brought up?so
far as our Government and Legislature are concerned?
without religion of any kind, without any sense of moral
obligation, without a knowledge of anything beyond this
world, in simple unmitigated paganism, which unless some
great and decisive effort be made by that large section of
the people who still believe in God and his Christ, and in
Heaven and Hell, to avert the evil, must issue in training
up thousands upon thousands in this land not ?in the way
they should go,? which is Godward and Heavenward, but
in the way they should not go, which is Devilward and
Hellward, a community of sceptical rationalists, of mocking
unbelievers, of naked materialists or of avowed atheists.
After what I have said, I need hardly point out to you
why the Sunday School should be regarded by us all as so
vastly important a Christian agency at the present time.
Practically the Sunday School is the only means now left
to us of teaching the young of the great majority of our
people, the truth of God and a knowledge of Christ, whom
to know is life eternal ; the only way of ? training them up


in the way which they should go, that when they are old
they may not depart from itfor unhappily a great
majority of parents are utterly indifferent to the spiritual
welfare of their offspring, and knowing nothing themselves
of the blessings of true religion, they naturally have no
desire to impart those blessings to their children. And as
home, moral, and religious training is in all such cases
entirely neglected, and ministers of the Gospel are unable
to undertake this duty in private houses, even were they
permitted to do so by the parents, and as every vestige of
Scripture teaching is jealously excluded from our State
School system, we must depend in future almost exclusively
upon the Sunday School for the religious education of the
young of this colony. If, therefore, ministers, teachers, and
other Christians, who are anxious for the happiness and
well being of their fellow men, would use their influence to
bring into our Sunday Schools the thousands who now do
not attend them, and therefore who receive, except in a few
instances, no religious instruction whatever, but are growing
up, in spite of their superior secular education, in a state of
civilized heathenism, they would confer an invaluable and
lasting blessing upon the future of this young and
flourishing colony; for secular instruction, however good
and useful in itself, without the sanctions of religion and
morality means nothing more or less than cultivated
scepticism or educated unbelief. I shall now leave you,
brethren, to shew by your liberal collection towards our
Sunday School, that you at least concur with Solomon in
his oft quoted aphorism, ?Train up a child in the way,
&c.and that you desire to see the Sunday Schools of
Victoria confer a blessing on the land, by imparting to the
rising generation those great truths and holy precepts of
the Gospel of Christ, which alone ?can make men wise
unto Salvation.? Amen.
Walker, May, & Co., Printers, 9 Maekillop Street, Melbourne.
