

TRANSACTIONS
OF THE
London Lodge
OF
THE THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY
No. 38.]
[May, 1903.
THE CONSTITUTION OF THE EARTH
By A. P. SINNETT
PRICE ONE SHILLING




TRANSACTIONS
OF THE
London lodge
OF
THE THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY.
No. 38.]
[May, 1903.
An enlarged version of two Lectures delivered to the London
Lodge on the 28th of February and the 7th of March, 1903, by
A. P. Sinnett.




The Constitution of the Earth.
Few of the mysteries of Nature are wrapped in more profound
obscurity than those which relate to the condition of the Earth’s
interior. Vaguely some of us, accustomed to credit Science with
an almost unlimited wealth]of knowledge, may suppose that Geo-
logy deals with the physical constitution of the globe on the sur-
face of which we stand. Sir Archibald Geikie in his Text-hook of
Geology recognises that geologists “ investigate ” the history of
the Earth from the earliest beginnings of its separate existence,
and “ through its various stages of growth,” but when the ques-
tion arises: What is the present condition of the interior of the
Earth ?—Geologists have to confess that “ the mere outside skin
of our planet is all with which direct acquaintance can be ex-
pected.” With regard to its interior, they can only consider the
claims of various theories that have from time to time been
propounded with the view of dealing by conjecture with the
unapproachable enigma beneath our feet.
Of such theories Geikie says there are only three that merit
serious consideration.
1. That the Earth consists of a solid beneath which
lies a molten interior.
2. That with the exception of local vesicular spaces, the globe
is solid and rigid to the centre.
3. That while the great mass of the globe is solid, there lies
a liquid substratum beneath the crust.


The first, the old-fashioned theory, held its own almost un-
challenged till the middle of the last century, when calculations
at last showed that the figure of the Earth could not be main-
tained under the influence of the attractive forces around, if it
were a molten globe with a relatively thin crust. In the begin-
ning, as scientific students are always reluctant to revolutionise
previous beliefs, it was argued that the solid crust could not be
less than 800 to 1,000 miles thick (instead of only twenty-five or
thirty miles as had formerly been suggested). That would be
the least thickness that would resist the distorting effect of the
Moon’s attraction. Later on Lord Kelvin maintained that the
rigidity of the whole globe could not be less than it would be if
it were one solid ball of cold steel or glass. The second and
third theories are still available in explanation of some of the
phenomena concerned, but are modified by considerations con-
nected with heat and pressure. Great pressure raises the melt-
ing point of all bodies : that is to say, rock which would be liquid
at some given temperature on the surface of the Earth, when
subject to no greater pressure than that of the atmosphere, would
remain solid at a much higher temperature when subject to the
great pressure it would experience at a depth of several miles
below the surface. Sir Archibald Geikie thus leans to the belief
that while the interior heat is enormous, the pressure, continually
augmenting as lower depths are reached, keeps the body of the
Earth solid throughout. A bit of evidence tending to support
this view is to be found in the fact that while the density of the
Earth as a whole, ascertained by experiments on its gravitating
energy, is shown to be five and a half times that of water, the
specific gravity, or density, of the heaviest rocks known to geolo-
gists at the surface, is only three times that of water. But the
hint in question does not prove a high internal temperature, as
cold rock under enormous pressure, or rock that had solidified
and cooled under enormous pressure, would naturally acquire a


higher density than that of similar rock on or near the
surface.
Mining and boring operations do not afford very much evidence
of a kind to illuminate the conditions of the Earth’s interior.
The deepest would not represent more than the thickness of a
sheet of thin paper on a globe two feet in diameter, and all they
tell us is that as a rule the heat of the rock pierced increases as
we go down at the rate of one degree Fahrenheit for every fifty
feet. The rate is by no means uniform in all parts of the
world, nor is it uniform throughout the same boring in all
cases, but it is so general as to promote the conclusion that at
a depth of twenty or thirty miles the temperature reached would
be such as to fuse all the rocks and most of the metals that
we know of, subject to the consideration that increased pressure
raises the melting point.
Brief as this summary of existing scientific knowledge has
been, it really includes nearly all that can be stated with any
degree of certainty on the subject in hand. And looking at the
problem from the point of view of occult students, it will be
recognised as extremely improbable that mere physical investi-
gation will ever interpret the mystery more precisely. There
is only one instrument of research that can be successfully em-
ployed to grapple with such problems as those which the Earth’s
interior holds for us, and that is not yet appreciated by the
current science of the age. Clairvoyance is the only faculty
which defies the embarrassments of the situation when we are
in search of information concerning the condition, as regards its
interior, of the world we live on —but are debarred hopelessly
from living in. Nor indeed would clairvoyance of any but a
very exalted kind be equal to the task of discerning the interior
conditions of the Earth. To elaborate that last statement com-
pletely would involve a protracted attempt to elucidate the
motives which induce the spiritual authorities by whom the


evolution of the human race is guided, to guard some natural
secrets from premature discovery even while willing to let some
forecast of future discovery leak out here and there. As far
as we can gather at present it would not be possible for any
natural clairvoyant, however beautifully gifted, to explore the
Earth’s interior and describe the various evolutions going on
there. There may be many people among us able to exercise even
that superior sort of clairvoyance involved in being able to func-
tion freely on the astral plane and to bring back to the waking
physical brain a full recollection of all experiences gathered in
that way. But it would be only those among such persons who
were actually invested with the powers accruing from advanced
Initiation, who would be able to extend astral wanderings in the
direction we are now talking about. For the present in refer-
ence therefore to problems connected with the Earth’s constitu-
tion, we can only benefit by any information that may come to
us from initiated teachers, without expecting just yet to be able
to verify such teaching by personal investigation.
In that same way, however, in the first instance the foundations
of all our theosophic knowledge were laid. In 1883 all that was
then put in circulation concerning the astral and manasic planes,
the conditions of reincarnation, the working of the law of karma,
the early root races and so on, was ex cathedra teaching,
wonderfully though all that has been verified since, by those
whose faculties have undergone the appropriate development.
So at present the information contained in this paper concerning
the interior conditions of the Earth, is ex cathedra teaching, of a
kind that can only be appreciated at its true value by those who
have followed the stream of theosophic literature from its source.
For some readers, perhaps, the statements I am about to put
forward, in spite of their extraordinary interest, will seem too
entirely out of touch with any previous body of knowledge to
command even provisional belief. To others there will be some


thing in the conception we are now enabled to form of the pro-
cesses through which the planet itself was evolved before the
evolution of the earliest living kingdoms began upon its surface,
that appeals to the inner understanding as satisfactory. But in
any case I may perhaps reasonably assume that readers in the
Theosophical Society will remember that a good deal of teaching
concerning the higher mysteries of Nature has reached them in
the first instance in the shape of writings which I, by virtue of
communication with exalted sources of information, have been
enabled to put forward, and will be slow to suppose that I am
now putting forward the very wonderful story which this paper
includes, without having received it myself under conditions that,
for me, at all events, guarantee its accuracy.
We shall not, it is true, be able with our present stock in
trade of physical knowledge, to realise every step of the process to
be described. The Earth was formed partly by the activity of
natural laws we fully understand and can observe in operation
to-day, but partly also by the intervention of forces with which
we are not yet familiar. Those agents of Divine Will who
guide and control such undertakings as the formation of a
planet, carry out their work by methods which they have no
wish to disguise or conceal. On the contrary, their desire so
we are assured—is to work in a way that will be intelligible to
those who are following them in the pathways of the higher
evolution. Thus we find natural law bringing about results
which at an earlier stage of human thought were credited to
miracle, but the wide extension of scientific knowledge concern-
ing natural law which the last century has witnessed, has now
led popular impression rather too far in the opposite direction.
We are inclined to expect an interpretation along the lines of
natural laws already comprehended, of everything that occurs in
the Universe. We calculate the density of the Sun and the
thermal value of his rays, and figure out the probable duration


of their activity. We observe the effect of diffused carbon in a
gas flame, and assign the luminosity of the photosphere to a
precisely similar cause. We take note of the rate at which the
rivers of the world carry down sediment to the sea, and measure
the future life-period of continents on the same scale. Physicists
have been able to account for so much in Nature, by the appli-
cation of the laws they have unravelled, that they ignore the
possible existence of other laws which link the phenomena of
physical nature with higher planes of manifestation, the very
existence of which is unsuspected by the students of ordinary
science. But when we have to deal with explanations of some
mysteries of nature that at present can only be derived from the
ex cathedra teaching of initiated instructors, we find that the laws
commonly understood at this period of human knowledge will
not suffice to interpret all that takes place. At some stages of
the world’s evolution we shall see events occurring that will
seem miraculous in the light even of our advanced familiarity
with the laws of matter. This will not really mean that the
agents of Divine Will were breaking through their rule of working
along methods susceptible of comprehension, but simply that
some of the methods they have to employ in such grand enter-
prises involve the use of forces at present quite outside the
catagory of those we have been able so far to study.
On the other] hand, astronomical research has done a great
deal to render the broad course of planetary evolution intelligible
to ordinary thinking. The nebular “ hypothesis,” as it used to
be called, has ceased to be hypothetical, just as the luminiferous
ether, which was hypothetical less than fifty years back, is now
as definitely recognised as the atmosphere. Concerning both
the ether and the nebular explanation of the origin of solar
systems, there is much yet to be learned, but the broad principles
are intelligible. In the vast space assigned to the organisation
of a new solar system a cloud of celestial matter billions of miles


in diameter is aggregated together, and this gradually condenses
under the influence of laws that we know nothing about as yet,
rising to a temperature exceeding any that we know of on earth
at present, till the central mass becomes the Sun of the new
system, while the rings of nebulous matter that separate off as
the condensation proceeds provide the matter from which its
planets are to be formed. We are not depending merely on
guesswork in developing these ideas. They were elaborated in
the first instance by the sheer intelligence or intuition of
astronomers, but the heavens have since then vindicated the
brilliant conjecture. Now that celestial photography has been
so perfected as to give us clear pictures of objects that could
never have been perceived by mere telescopic observation, we
have been able to accumulate photographs of a large number of
nebulae in different stages of growth. It is of no use to watch
any one in the hope of discerning its progress, but by arranging
our collection in an order which obviously corresponds with
their age and development, we get a complete life history of a
nebula, and can actually follow the growth of the planetary
rings and perceive the beginnings of planetary formation in the
substance of these rings.
So far unaided science paves the way for the explanations on
which we are about to enter and indeed will afford collateral con-
firmations as we proceed of some among the statements I am in
a position to lay before the reader. But it will be necessary
before we go much further to part company with the inferences
of physical science, and frankly to set forth the teaching I have
received on its own merits, offering it without specific credentials
to those who may be inclined, with me, to accept it respectfully,
while remaining quite indifferent to the probability that others
will be indisposed to do this in the absence of collateral guarantees
that I am not in a position to furnish.
During the life of our solar system so far, other planets besides


those now visible in the sky have been in existence for a time
and have since been broken up. Every theosophical student
familiar with the teaching concerning the progress of the man-
vantaras will have realised long ago that this must have been
the case. And so in the future, planets now in existence will be
disintegrated long before the activities of the system as a whole
are exhausted, and others will be formed in their stead. For
example, it has already been shown in other theosophical writ-
ings that during the last manvantara of our planetary scheme
the Moon—then a much larger planet than it is at this moment
—was the home of the evolution to which we belong, and in
some former writings of my own I have been able to describe
how when the Earth was in process of formation it drew over
a large portion of the matter that had previously belonged to the
Moon (see Growth of the Soul, p. 280). But the bulk of the matter
used for the building up of the Earth was derived from the
meteoric matter circulating in the orbit of our scheme, or
rather in the central orbit of our scheme, for in this manvan-
tara we are concerned with three orbits in reference to which
I shall presently have something further to say. The word
“ orbit ” of course simply means the path of a planet through
space considered with reference to the Sun, but each of the
paths identified with the known planets is filled with miscel-
laneous matter in excess of that actually used up by the existing
planet of the orbit. This is available for the construction of a
new planet when required, the old one by that time having com-
pleted its life-bearing period and being ready to surrender its
volatile ingredients to its successor.
When the idea just set forth is fully appreciated the reader
may ask how long this successive formation, breaking up, and
re-formation of planets has been going on in our orbit ? Ordinary
astronomy has assumed as a matter of course that the planetary
scheme we now belong to has directly ensued from the first con


densation of the nebula out of which our solar system was
developed. This is an erroneous conception, and we should
come nearer the truth if we entertained the idea that a pro-
tracted series of planetary schemes has been evolved around the
Sun since the beginning of the whole system. But I am not at
present in a position to attempt a complete history of the system
from the beginning, and this last suggestion must remain a mere
hint along a line of inquiry which after all has little to do with
the actual problem before us for the moment. The London
Lodge Transaction of April, 1896, “ The System to which we
Belong” (the substance of which is embodied in The Growth of
the Soul) will give a sufficiently complete view of the existing
condition of the system, to pave the way for the correct compre-
hension of what now follows. Confining our attention for the
moment to our own orbit and the evolutions that have gone on
within that great pathway, the Moon when in full activity during
the last or Lunar manvantara of this scheme was the first
physical planet brought to perfection in this orbit, since the solar
system began to assume manifestation. Certainly there were
earlier conditions of non-physical planetary growth within the
orbit. The reader will remember that the successive manvan-
taras of a planetary scheme are associated with different degrees
of relationship to the physical plane. We are now going through
the fourth manvantara of our scheme and three physical planets
are concerned with the activities of this period. In the last 'or
Lunar manvantara there was only one physical planet in activity
—our present Moon. In the manvantara before that there
were no physical planets at all in association with the process—
then carried on exclusively on Astral and Manasic globes. The
course and character of successive manvantaras would afford a
theme for wide-reaching speculation growing out of the know-
ledge we already possess, but I need not diverge into that path-
way of speculation just now. It is enough for our present pur-


pose to realise the broad fact that though processes preparatory
to a more advanced evolution were already going on in this orbit
before the formation of the Moon, that planet had no full-fledged
predecessor in the orbit. And yet it would not be quite true to
say that it was the first planet put together (so to speak) within
the orbit! There were early attempts at planetary formation (in
our orbit) before the Moon was formed. These were discarded
as failures, and were disintegrated.
The view of Nature embodied in the last sentence is full of
interest. In studying the sublime phenomena of astronomy along
ordinary lines of thought and with the help of no better data
than physical plane observation can afford, we get into the habit
of supposing that “ Creation ” is in the nature of an easy out-
come of Omnipotence, the progress of which, though veiled from
us as regards its earlier stages, must have been as faultless in its
operation as the laws of chemistry or physics at the present day.
The theory of Creation, on the other hand, which theosophical
study begins to reveal, shows us a condition of things which is
much more vvaisemblable than the crude imaginings of ignorant
faith, and really, at the same time, one calculated to enhance
rather than diminish our admiration for the Powers and Agencies
we sum up under the term “ Nature.” There is no credit due
for the wonderful results of Creation, if we suppose it the fruit
of Omniscience plus Omnipotence. Indeed to the critical mind
the question why evolution has been attended with suffering pre-
sents itself with disagreeable persistence in connection with the
old-fashioned idea of Creation, derived from mediaeval religion.
But when we recognise that the work of Nature is carried on by
specific Beings —certainly of awfully sublime rank in the Hier-
archies of the Universe but still Agents of the ever-mysterious
Divine Supremacy behind all, then it seems to me the results ac-
complished, despite shortcomings, overwhelm the mind with awe
in a greater degree than is possible along the other line of think


ing. They are not Omniscient and 'Omnipotent in the mathe-
matical sense of those words—the sublime Agents of Divinity
who control such undertakings as the growth of planets—but
they do not launch a planet on its career as a life-bearer until
they are satisfied with it as a piece of physical plane manifesta-
tion. Thus there were, as a matter of fact, some other planets
in existence before the Moon but they did not satisfy their
Authors and were suffered to relapse again into the condition of
raw material.
And now I may return to the main stream of the information I
have to set forth, and to that stage of the planetary evolution to
which we belong, which has to do with the development of our
own Earth.
Only in the very earliest planetary evolutions in any given
orbit, can the process of condensation be direct from the original
nebula. By the time the Earth was wanted to carry on the
work of our present manvantara, all the nebulous matter of this
orbit had condensed either into the then active planet of the
orbit, or into the form of relatively small masses of solid matter
such as those that constitute meteor streams. But such matter
is just as easily available for planetary construction as the
original nebulous matter.
Just as in the case of a new solar system more than one
method of accomplishing the required result is available for
adoption by the agents of Divine Will, so also with the business
of planetary formation we may assume that more than one
method might be available for selection, but it is not difficult to
imagine that a method recognised by ordinary science is at any
rate sometimes adopted. The clashing together of meteor
streams in space has been thought of as a condition sufficient to
account for the sudden appearance of a new star in, a distant
constellation. That meteor streams are flowing about through
the system to which we belong, is plainly evidenced by meteoric


displays, often arising from what is probably a mere touch with
the outskirts of some such stream. It is easy to understand
that when a new planet is required the full force of some con-
siderable stream is directed against a corresponding mass of
planetary matter in the orbit of the occurrence, and the heat so
engendered would resolve the matter of the clashing streams
into a planetary nebula. Its condensation as time went on would
provide the nucleus of a new planet.
I say “ the nucleus ” rather than the planet itself because I
now approach a statement for which ordinary scientific observa-
tion has not prepared us, although the condition of things I have
to describe is more or less clearly foreshadowed in the admirable
work on the Nebula Theory which we owe to Mr. William Ford
Stanley. This is an orthodox scientific treatise, and I quote it
not to corroborate the fragment of occult science I am privileged
to put forward, the claims of which on my own belief would be
quite sufficient even if it were quite out of touch with previous
scientific thinking, but it is always interesting to find the
farthest-reaching conjectures of ordinary science tending in the
direction of the ampler knowledge derived from occult research.
Mr. Stanley recognises the possibility that the planets were not
formed by a single operation but perhaps by successive con-
densations of ring-matter in the very way 1 am about to describe.
He writes : “ Very probably the planet-forming ring was never
perfect, or if perfect it is improbable that it should have con-
densed entirely at once into a single planet.” He distinctly
recognises that an orbit may contain a young planet and a great
mass of meteoric matter as well. “If of the same period they
would maintain their vis viva and not be detected by any calcula-
tion in the variation in the Earth’s mean course or by telescopic
observation.” He also says: “ Neither is it necessary to assume
in all cases a single ring of a perfect ring system: there may
have been many imperfect or partial rings detached before these


formed a single planet, these being united afterwards by varia-
tion of time orbits and crossings of perihelia through’eccentricity
or by drifting in spiral lines inwards.”
The actual fact I understand to be that the planet on which
we are at present living was the result of several condensations
of nebulous matter, and the constitution of the Earth at this
mature period of its existence is only to be understood by
reference to this method of development. The nucleus having
been formed in the first instance in the way already described, a
considerable time was allowed to elapse before the second de-
position of matter took place. In this interval the surface of
the nucleus had time to solidify and cool down to temperatures
in which all but its more volatile ingredients assumed, on the
surface, the solid state. Then another clash of meteoric streams
surrounded the young Earth with a huge envelope of fresh
nebulous matter. I say “nebulous” because the heat en-
gendered by the collision of the meteor streams would resolve
the meteoric matter back again into its primitive state. It is
necessary, indeed, that such a return should be included in the
process in order to provide the growing Earth with the varied
materials required in its composition. Meteoric matter for the
most part is simple in its composition, and very largely made up
of certain metals of which iron is the most abundant. But a
planet consisting almost entirely of iron would not be a suitable
home for the evolutions it might be destined to bear. Occult
teaching in reference to the constitution of matter comes in here
to relieve us of the embarrassment this thought suggests.
Thrown back into the nebulous condition by the intense heat of
the meteoric collision the matter of the meteor streams, even if
it had all been iron to begin with, would be once more in the
etheric state—in that state in which Sir William Crookes has
called it “ protyle” in connection with his extremely admirable
and occultly justified theory of “ the Genesis of the Elements.”


From that state it would be capable of rearranging its atoms
in the varied forms of the many chemical elements required
for the service of a life-bearing planet.
The new envelope of nebulous matter is destined to condense
into a complete solid shell surrounding the originalnucleus and
here it is for the first time in the course of this explanation
necessary to interpolate an idea for which we are not fully
prepared by any ordinary habits of scientific thought. When
the outer shell has been completely solidified, the condition of
things we find to exist is this: The volatile ingredients in the
composition of the original nucleus have not been, as expecta-
tion might have led us to expect, squeezed through the newly
deposited shell of solid matter but have been confined within
that at an enormous pressure and at a corresponding tempera-
ture. At the stage of the Earth’s growth we have reached in
imagination, we have an interior globe of solid matter, the
central portions of which are still at an enormously high
temperature while the outer crust is relatively cool. But on the
surface of that crust there exists a stratum of compressed
gaseous matter, largely consisting of water in its gaseous form,
at the temperature, or even exceeding through contraction the
temperature of the nebula which condensed upon it. We
cannot expect at this stage of our knowledge to understand
precisely how the condensation is so effected as to keep the
gaseous matter within the new shell, but no extravagant amount
of intellectual modesty is required to induce us to recog-
nise that there may be laws of nature which come into play
when new planets are being constructed, the full details of
which are missing as yet from our present catalogue of such
laws.
The outer shell having in its turn had time to cool down so
that its least volatile ingredients are solid, and its more volatile
ingredients in the atmospheric state around it, a third process


sets in. Again there is a clash of meteor streams, another vast
nebulous sheath is condensed around the growing globe and in
time this forms a second shell with a stratum of confined gaseous
matter between it and the interior shell. Further operations of
a similar character are carried on at later stages of the planet’s
growth until it arrives at maturity, and consists as at present of
six concentric spheres or shells surrounding a central nucleus,
with strata of hot gaseous matter intervening between each
sphere and its neighbours. The outer shells are of considerably
greater thickness than those immediately surrounding the
nucleus, and the outermost of all, with which'we are concerned,
is much the thickest of all, as will be seen by reference to the
diagram at the end of this paper, which shows a section of the
Earth and gives what I am assured is an approximately correct
idea of the proportions of the different parts. I have not on this
drawing endeavoured to represent the shallow stratum of heated
matter which does actually exist at a depth of about twenty-five
or thirty miles below the surface. It is of a wholly different
character from the interstitial spaces of hot condensed gases.
It is simply a portion of the Earth’s solid shell which is hot by
reason of the fact that it was an extra nebulous condensation
superimposed upon the otherwise completely finished planet,
with an end in view no doubt which I do not as yet exactly
understand, but which I believe to have related in some way to
the ultimate development of the vegetable kingdom. The sur-
face layer of hot matter (as it may be called by comparison with
the interstitial layers far down in the depths of the globe), was a
kind of “ top dressing,” to use an agricultural expression, which
seems to have been provided for as regards the actual material
used up, by the disintegration of the two outer shells of the
Moon. Some forecast of this condition of things has been already
embodied in theosophic writings as mentioned above, but the
present explanations will advance our comprehension of the


matter to some extent. Leaving over for the moment the fuller
interpretation of the statement just made about the two outer
shells of the Moon, let us keep to the Earth’s history till that is
further developed. The final “ top-dressing ” was not designed
to form a new shell separate in any way from the great crust
already formed. It did not operate to confine between itself
and the established surface any atmospheric gases. It was
simply a hot layer of physical matter, the more volatile portions
of which remained in the atmosphere of the globe already formed,
while the solid portions settled down and beginning to cool from
the outside, eventually established the conditions now prevailing.
Of course at first the whole new layer of physical matter twenty-
five miles thick was incandescent, but the cooling and solidifica-
cation of the surface prepared the way for the establishment
thereon of the geological deposits with which we are familiar, and
eventually for the development of the vegetable and animal
kingdoms.
The direction of rotation of all the concentric spheres is the
same, and the axis of rotation identically the same, but the
rapidity of rotation increases from within outwards. Each new
shell deposited as the growth of the planet proceeds rotates
with an increased velocity compared with its predecessor. I
cannot give figures in this connection with exactitude, but the
third globe going inwards has a rate of rotation equal to about
half the rapidity of our outer shell, making one turn in forty-
eight hours and the innermost central globe makes only one
turn in about half that time, or say in ninety-six hours. The
intervening spheres move at intervening rates.
Critics of this present statement will no doubtask to what
forces I assign the task of establishing these rates of -rotation in
the first instance, or that of keeping them up in spite of the fric-
tion which the varying rates concerned must engender. We will
come to that directly, but for theosophical students I do not


recommend to their acceptance the explanations I am now
giving, as susceptible of justification at every point by
reference to known laws, but simply because they come to me
under conditions which entitle me to regard them as invested
with high occult authority. Again I must emphasise the
idea that much was done in connection with the early
growth of this world and indeed much is being done to-
day in connection with the maintenance of its planetary
life, that involves the use of natural forces of which at present
modern science knows nothing whatever. The intelligence
of the human race as it advances in the path of evolution
—at any rate the intelligence of the last developed races
which constitute its advanced guard—is steadily overtaking
occult teaching and will at a later date interpret with exacti-
tude phenomena we can as yet merely recognise without
pretending to understand them. But meanwhile there must be
a margin of tolerance in the minds of occult students eager to
rush on in advance of current knowledge for statements that it
is impossible as yet to fit in with the limited body of natural law
so far catalogued and indexed.
I have been interested in finding since I have been at work
upon this interpretation of the Earth’s constitution, that in
other schools of oriental occultism besides that with which my
own opportunities have chiefly brought me into contact,
the Earth is described as resembling in its constitution “ the
skins of an onion.” The subject has not hitherto been treated
in any western expositions of theosophic teaching, but the main
ideas of the present explanation are vaguely in circulation
already among the pupils of some eastern occultists, even
though the onion with its skins would not constitute a satis-
factory analogy for the western scientific mind once directed to
the problems of the Earth’s constitution.
It has been vaguely known by occult students for a long time


that in the neighbourhood of the North Pole there is a natural
orifice in the ground penetrating to inconceivable depths. This
wonderful shaft has been regarded as fulfilling some mysterious
need of the Earth, analogous to breathing, and it has been
supposed that a similar shaft connects the South Pole with the
interior, though this is even more impenetrably guarded by the
ice of the Antarctic region from the curiosity of humanity than
the orifice of the North. I have no information that would
enable me to attempt an interpretation of the purpose in nature
which these great polar shafts fulfil, but I have indicated their
position on the diagram appended to this paper, because I know
that they play an enormously important though very mysterious
part in the economy of the whole planet and are associated with
the activities of the Mighty Being who presides over its growth
and health. This reference impinges on a branch of the great
subject with which I am dealing to which I will shortly direct
attention, but meanwhile it is unnecessary for us to exaggerate
the difficulties of the problem presented to us by the question of
friction.
To begin with it will be obvious that friction will be enor-
mously greater at the equatorial regions of the internal spheres
than in the neighbourhood of the poles. But at the equatorial
region the thickness of the gaseous stratum is at the maximum.
The interstitial space contracts as it approaches the polar regions
and the adjacent spheres are in close contact in the region
immediately around the central shaft already spoken of. The
friction at such surfaces of contact would be extremely small, areas
that need not be thought of as more than a few hundred yards
in diameter, revolving against each other in periods considerably
exceedingly twenty-four hours. For if the internal shell which
is the next neighbour of this outermost one on which we live
revolves, say at a speed of thirty-two hours, it would take three
days and not twenty-four hours for the complete revolution of


the two polar surfaces in contact. The same principle would
hold good with emphasised force as we go inward in imagination,
for the smaller the interior globes would be the less need be the
areas of surface in contact, in view of the purpose for which
such contact seems mainly designed,—that is to say for the
purpose of confining the highly compressed gases of the inter-
stitial spaces within their proper limits. If there were no sur-
faces of contact at the polar regions, these gases would rush out
into the central shaft and speedily exhaust all their energies,
while the shafts in question would, as long as the tremendous
process lasted, be volcanoes of unimaginable violence. That is
not their function, which has to do with the circulation of forces
within the interior, of which at present we can form but very
imperfect conceptions. That they are related with solar influ-
ences seems clear, but it is useless to attempt just yet to
elucidate this branch of the colossal subject under examination.
The thickness of the gaseous stratum between our outer-
most shell and the next concentric sphere is thus about two to
three hundred miles around the equator, diminishing to nothing
at the poles. At the equatorial region the friction is distributed
throughout the stratum, the gases in actual contact with each
revolving surface moving no doubt at different speeds with each
surface. The friction is therefore to be sought for entirely in
the gaseous mass. Such friction would obviously be exceedingly
small if the gaseous mass were as rarefied as gases on the surface
at our atmospheric pressures. It will be much greater when the
pressure is such as to bring the gases concerned to something
like the densities of rock. But still, owing to the conditions of
temperature far above the critical points of any that may be
present, they will still be gaseous, and this must be borne in
mind in any conjectures concerning the friction problems arising
from the exposition I am venturing to put forward.
I must now endeavour to interpret as far as that may be pos


sible the expression used above, “ the Mighty Being who pre-
sides over the growth and health of the planet. In some earlier
theosophic writings vague reference has been made to “the
Spirit of the Earth.” There is such a Spirit, belonging to an
evolution quite apart from our own, who is in the first instance
an emanation from the stupendous life of the Sun. And such an
emanation is the first step taken in connection with the creation
of any planet of the system. It is by his power that the meteor
streams are guided in the paths of those tremendous collisions
which give rise to the successive nebulous clouds required for
the construction of the successive concentric spheres. The
nucleus-globe remains to the end of the planet’s life his great
workshop if the phrase may be allowed—and storehouse of
those incomprehensible energies which maintain the physical
health of the planet. It is by virtue of forces emanating from
that central globe and passing up the polar shafts that the exact
harmony of the axial rotation of the concentric spheres is main-
tained. Probably indeed, when the parallelism of their axial
rotations is once established, no very great force is required to
maintain this, for within our own knowledge the plane of rota-
tion of a revolving body is not easily disturbed, but so extremely
minute a disturbance would be sufficient in this case to block
the central shafts that means are employed to guard against
even such a slight disturbance.
The heat of the interior of the central globe far exceeds any
temperature maintained in the interstitial spaces, and a vast
army of Elemental Agencies is employed there, under the direc-
tion of the Spirit of the Earth, on tasks the nature of which is
utterly beyond the range of our present comprehension. But
our world somehow depends for its continued life on the activities
carried on in the central globe, and they are never relaxed until
the planet concerned has fulfilled its destiny and the time has
come for its decease or disintegration.


Let us now consider how far the explanations already given fit
in with some of the physical phenomena of the Earth’s surface
in reference to which scientific speculation—familiar as the phe-
nomena in question are—is still almost entirely helpless. For
example, will the concentric sphere arrangement enable us to
interpret the eruptions of volcanoes more satisfactorily than this
has been done by geological guesswork up to the present
time ?
If we turn to the best books on the subject we shall find an
enormous mass of detail concerning the external characteristics
of volcanic eruptions. The nature of the ejected matter has
been studied with great care, and the chemical composition of
the lavas and volatile substances thrown out has been examined
with the closest attention, but when the question is : What com-
bination of forces in the earth’s interior gives rise to the eruption
itself ? we get little or no satisfaction from the specialists who
have devoted themselves to this subject. Some relation is assumed
to exist between volcanic eruptions and the stratum of highly
heated matter supposed to lie at a depth of about twenty-five to
thirty miles below the surface, but no suggestion is made as to
why such a stratum should exist, if below that again there is
rigid solidity instead of that complete globe of molten matter
talked of at an earlier stage of human knowledge. I need not
recapitulate the various ideas that have been thrown out by
some writers in the hope of reconciling incompatible conditions.
All theories on the subject are in turn reviewed and rejected .By
the best authorities. Professor Bonney’s work on Volcanoes is
the most recent treatise on the subject as a whole, and he in
turn refers to Professor Judd’s interesting book with the same
title as still up to date though now some twenty years old.
From neither of these books do we get any coherent theory of
volcanoes, which remain for ordinary science an unsolved enigma.
Certainly it is held with considerable confidence that sea-water


percolates to hot regions, and there producing explosive steam,
may have something to do with eruptions, but even that
idea is not entirely exempt from embarrassment, for as soon
as the inflowing stream reached the hot region and became
steam, it would exercise a backward pressure against the further
inflow. One does not quite see how sea-water can account for
the immense abundance of steam that is emitted from volcanoes
during their activity.
It is very important to appreciate the extent to which steam
is emitted from volcanoes in eruption. Professor Bonney says ;
“ M. Fouque, who studied an eruption of Etna in 1865, made a
number of observations in order to measure the quantity of
water which was discharged from the vent in the form of steam.
Each explosion, he estimated, ejected about seventy-nine cubic
yards of water in this condition, and one of these occurred on an
average every fourhninutes for about a hundred days. That is
to say the discharge amounted to 2,829,600 cubic yards of water.”
This, Professor Bonney goes on to explain, would be rather more
than the contents of a Jake two and a quarter miles long, 700
yards across and thirty feet deep. It is very difficult to imagine
such a mass of water getting down into the hot region from the
sea-bed. It would have to work its way through fissures in the
rock for twenty-five or thirty miles against the pressure created
by its own expansion when converted into steam. And yet the
enormous volumes of steam above referred to are invariably
emitted during eruptions, and the torrential rains in the neigh-
bourhood to which they afterwards give rise are sometimes re-
garded by the inhabitants of volcanic region as among the most
dangerous features of an outbreak. And looking at the problem
from another point of view, the theory which assigns the steam
of a volcanic eruption to the inflow of sea-water would not ex-
plain the floods of molten rock in the condition of lava which
are emitted from the volcano in action as well as the steanj.


Grant the inflow of sea-water and the existence of a chimney
connecting the region to which it should find access with the
surface, and still we do not account for the uprush of molten
rock. It would be a very extravagant hypothesis to assume
that the sea-water first got underneath the interior reservoirs of
molten rock, waited till it was well in that position to become
steam, and then blew up the lava through the chimney some
twenty-five or thirty miles long ! If volcanoes emitted nothing
but steam and rough fragments of relatively cold rock torn off
the chimney in its upward passage, the theory under notice
might deserve a little more attention, but as things stand the
sea-water, even if it plays some part in the development of a
complete eruption, cannot be its main spring so to speak.
Nor do we find in the theory of the hot stratum twenty-five miles
down, any explanation of an expansive force inherent in that
stratum which would tend to account for the uprush of molten
rock. Of course, to begin with, there is absolutely no theory in
circulation that pretends to account for the existence of the hot
stratum compatibly with the modern theories of the earth s
general constitution. But granting its existence without even
seeking to account for it, molten rock would have no ex-
pansive energy that could drive any portion of its substance
to the surface. Summing up the whole case as it presents
itself to ordinary scientific speculation, there is, in fact, no
current explanation of volcanic disturbances that approaches a
solution of the problem.
The explanation which occult information affords us con-
cerns itself very little if at all with the heated stratum at the
twenty-five mile level. That has a real existence and is due, as
already explained, to the last deposition of nebulous matter
which finally dressed the surface of the outermost concentric
sphere. The thickness of that sphere is enormously greater
than the twenty-five miles in question, and is to be measured in


hundreds of miles. lam encouraged to regard the outermost
shell on which we live as about seven hundred miles in thickness.
The interior spheres are by no means so thick, and we may
allow a diameter of about two thousand miles for the central
nucleus. The interstitial strata of heated gases are each at the
equatorial region about three-quarters of the thickness of the
next interior sphere, and I have endeavoured to put these
dimensions into a diagrammatic shape in the annexed sectional
representation of the earth’s interior. But let us now return to
the problems of volcanic action on the earth’s surface.
The main point to be understood is that the energy displayed
by volcanic eruptions is derived from the compressed gases
of the nearest interstitial space and not in any way from
the shallow stratum of heated rock at the twenty-five mile
level.
It is generally recognised and quite correctly that a relation-
ship exists in most cases between volcanic displays and earth-
quakes. It is not necessary to suppose that every eruption from
an established volcanic vent is preluded by an earthquake, but
probably no such volcanic vent has ever been established in the
first instance without the agency of an earthquake. The earth-
quake itself is quite correctly assigned by ordinary scientific
speculation to the crumpling and fracture of rock strata owing
to the contraction as it gradually cools of the outer concentric
sphere—or the Earth’s crust as geology would more vaguely put
it. When such fracture occurs on a large scale a fissure is estab-
lished reaching right down to the first interstitial layer of hot
compressed gases. These as I have said chiefly consist of water
in the gaseous state or steam (though other ingredients are
freely mingled with the steam), but the word “steam” inade-
quately conveys to ordinary thinking any correct idea of the
state in which that substance exists in the interstitial layers.
Probably its beat exceeds the temperature of the electric furnace.


The pressure it exercises would be hardly calculable in terras
with which we are familiar. But when it finds an upward vent
in the fissure established by a rock fracture, it not alone has
energy enough to force its way to the surface, but heat enough
to melt the rock surfaces between which it rushes up. In pass-
ing through the heated stratum at the twenty-five mile level it
carries with it some of the molten matter which it finds there,
but a larger part of the lava ejected from active volcanoes actu-
ally comes from immense depths, and the enormous volumes of
steam pouring forth from volcanoes in eruption have actually
come from many hundred miles below the surface and not from
the neighbouring seas. The sea-water may contribute in a
minor degree to the effect by finding its way into the fissure
somewhere near the surface and by meeting the upward current
of superheated steam and molten rock from below, but it is quite
a subordinate factor in the whole undertaking.
The reader will see at once how remarkably this explanation
of volcanic action fits in with the well-known fact that ancient
eruptions were on a much larger scale than any with which we
have to do in the present state of geology. At earlier stages of
its life the cooling of the outer sphere involved much more
frequent and violent contractions than are going on at the present
day. Huger fissures than any that could be produced by the
milder earthquakes of this period, allowed of far more tremendous
emissions of interstitial energy than are likely to be renewed at
the present day. Indeed it seems obvious that all the volcanoes
of the present day are due to the partial reopening, at special
points of weakness, of old fissures established by the colossal
earthquakes of prehistoric periods. This thought is one of con-
siderable interest because it gives us the clue to an understand-
ing of a little difficulty that may occur to some critics of this
explanation. Why do the volcanoes of the present day take the
shape of chimneys or spouts instead of that of longitudinal rents


in the surface, as one would expect to be the arrangement if they
are assigned to fractures of the rock strata ? At a very much
earlier period of the world’s history than that which has been
covered by familiar records, volcanic action actually did take
the shape of fissure emissions. The geology of North America
especially shows us manifest examples of such volcanic erup-
tions in very remote epochs. And the common distribution of
modern volcanoes along lines on the earth’s surface—volcanic
zones as they are sometimes called—is significant of the manner
in which these zones were originally established. Look at such
a great chain, for instance, as that of the Andes and one can
easily imagine that it may have been the product of a stupendous
rent in the surface created by one of the gigantic rock fractures
of a period when the contraction of the outer shell by cooling
was very much more violent than it is now. Then follow
periods of quiescence when the fissure as a whole is sealed up
by the operation of forces we do not as yet fully comprehend.
A more profound acquaintance with these forces than I have
been privileged as yet to obtain, would be required for the com-
plete elucidation of the way volcanic vents are stopped up when
eruptions come to an end, but as I have already said the inquiry
we are concerned with deals with the methods adopted for its
construction by the great agencies employed in the building of
the Earth, some of which lie within the area of our present com-
prehension, while others are at present outside it. The laws of
nature that we do comprehend—the laws of heat and pressure
account for a great deal that takes place but not for all. When
some great volcanic eruption has served its purpose in the
economy of nature, whatever that may be, there appears to be a
means of arresting its further progress which we must be content
as yet to recognise without fully understanding it.
But it is quite intelligible that when a fissure eruption has
come to an end the closed up fissure has regions of strength and


points of weakness. A comparatively slight earthquake in the
neighbourhood of some such point, might be enough to start a
new eruption at that point. Then a mountain forms around the
new vent and a modern volcano is established, subject to
occasional resumptions of activity as the ages proceed.
Everyone will see tthat in [their upward passage from the
interstitial space the expansive or explosive gases must pass
through the heated stratum near the surface, the twenty-five
mile level. No doubt they bring up some of the heated ingredi-
ents of the eruption from that stratum, but it seems clear that
the main quantity of lava in the case of an [eruption giving rise
to large emissions of that substance is brought up from the
walls of the main fissure melted by the passage of the hot gas.
And certainly almost all the vast volumes of steam streaming
all the time from any volcano in activity must come from the
low-lying level.
Some writers have been inclined to attach importance to
barometric conditions, and others to aspects of the Sun and
Moon, in seeking for the explanation of earthquakes and volcanic
displays. And though the effects for most of us will seem out of
proportion to such relatively insignificant causes, there is no
doubt about the significance of solar-lunar aspects establishing
attractive strains, considered in reference to certain seismo-
logical and volcanic phenomena. It would be indeed absurd
to assign the phenomena in question to atmospheric and tidal
conditions as a complete cause, but the idea may find a place
in the whole theory, where it need not look ridiculous when we
regard the small influence as a process analogous to pulling a
trigger. If we have in the volcanic shaft a condition of unstable
equilibrium, and in the adjacent rock strata a tendency to a
slip, the special attraction of a conjunction of the Sun and Moon
or even an abnormal atmospheric wave might just start the dis-
turbance. After all, the difference of an inch of Mercury in the


barometer means a difference of a million tons pressure on every
square mile. Such a difference might conceivably be enough in
some cases to set the adjusted machinery of an eruption in motion.
Modern seismology—the science of earthquakes—though only
a few years old already helps us to a bit of evidence that seems
as far as it goes to corroborate the explanations embodied in
this paper. Experience has shown that any considerable earth-
quake in any part of the world sends a tremor through the whole
body and can be recorded anywhere. Thus at the seismological
observatory at Shide in the Isle of Wight, Professor Milne, the
leading expert in the new branch of science, can get tracings on
his instruments that show the occurrence of earthquakes as far
off as South America or Japan. Now it always happens when
the pencil of a recording instrument gives a signal—in the shape
of a wriggle in an otherwise continuous line on the revolving
drum that this signal is followed a little later on by a second
"higgle identical L in character with the first, but very much
more vehement. Then after a considerable interval—if in the
case of a Japan earthquake the first signal had been followed by
the second at an interval of say a quarter of an hour, the third
signal would follow about three-quarters of an hour later still
—the self-same wriggle is repeated with an intermediate charac-
ter of amplitude. Now it is obvious that each of these signals
relates to the same earthquake and how is it that the same
original vibration causes the successive signals ? The conven-
tional explanation is in the main quite satisfactory. The
original centre of disturbance sends forth vibrations in all
directions. Some travel straight through the body of the Earth
in a straight line from the point of departure to the distant
observatory. Others travel through the rocks on the Earth’s
surface, those coming the short way [round manifesting them-
selves first, and later on those that come the long way round.
But why are the amplitudes so different ? The conventional


answer is that the direct wave is deadened ;by the extra density
of the rocks through which it passes, while the more elastic
rocks on the surface respond more freely to the wave. This
answer seems to me unsatisfactory. Test the idea by thinking
of a sound wave. That would certainly be transmitted with
greater energy by a bar of steel than by a bar of india-rubber
But the phenomena of sound waves show us that when a wave
is made to traverse media of different densities in its course, the
amplitude is deadened. Now on the theory of the Earth s con-
stitution that the present explanation sets forth, the direct
earthquake wave has to pass in its direct course through strata of
very varying density. It first goes through the outer sphere,
then through the interstitial stratum of condensed gases, then
through the solid mass of the first interior sphere and out again
through the gas stratum and the solid crust of the external
sphere. These transitions would have just the deadening effect
on the wave that is actually observed. The first signal is weak,
the second coming round the short way, via the external
crust, is emphatic, the third is unimpeded by different densities,
but somewhat weakened by having to make a long journey
The seismological records therefore as a whole are distinctly in
favour of the concentric sphere arrangement.
I understand that life exists in the Earth’s interior, even
in the intensely hot regions of the interstitial spaces, and
startling as the idea may seem at the first glance, it is only
for the cramped understandings of people brought up to
regard the conditions around them as the only kind compatible
with consciousness, that the conception will be seriously em-
barrassing. Flesh and blood designed to be the vehicle of
consciousness on the surface of the external sphere and at
temperatures familiar to human life would not be adapted to
temperatures at which platinum would be a mobile liquid, but
every occult student is well aware that his consciousness, his


life, can'go 'on just as freely when he is in an astral vehicle or
body as when he is animating flesh and blood. And in the
astral vehicle, physical temperature is a condition that does not
affect him one way or the other. In an astral body he could
live as comfortably in the heart of a furnace or in the midst of
arctic ice-floes as in the meadows of an English farm in the
summer. It is not even necessary to assume that the bodies of
the beings who inhabit the interstitial spaces of the earth are
entirely of astral matter. That intervening condition of matter
which is called etheric would, perhaps, furnish the material
a dapted to provide vehicles of consciousness for the beings in
question. However this may be arranged, this closely packed
earth of ours is made use of throughout. Not merely in the
heated spaces that constitute the surface of each interior globe
but within the substance of each concentric sphere there are
forms of life adapted to the conditions around. For in the cool
and solid*depths of each mighty crust there are great cavernous
spaces in which beings exist who are going through evolutions
of their own, and are scarcely in touch at all with the supreme
evolution—supreme as far as this Earth is concerned—to which
the human race belongs. Very little information relating to
these interior races has reached me, and it would be useless to
speculate as to the purpose in the whole economy of the system
served by the involvement of any part of the Supreme conscious-
ness, in forms and in the midst of conditions that do not appear
favourable to spiritual or any other kind of growth. But the
varieties of under which life is carried on, in and
around we share with so many other tenants, is all
but Nor is the life of the Earth’s interior confined to
the more'or less intelligent beings or entities established there.
Wild as thejnotion may strike one at the first glance, there is
somet hing|analogous to a vegetable kingdom on the white hot
surfaces of the interior globes—actual plants with leaves and a


kind of granular circulation analogous to the sap of plants on
the outer surface. If difficulties present themselves to the mind
as we endeavour to realise the scenes of these strange worlds
within our own, that is merely due to the false system on which
the average mind of the nineteenth century has been educated.
The tendency has been not merely to encourage the idea that
“ what I know not is not knowledge ” but to invest the
victims of our educational system with a conviction that
what they do not understand cannot exist. We do know
something of the relationship in space and magnitude be-
tween the habitable portions of the Earth’s surface and
the Universe at large. And yet the nineteenth century mind
has been only half inclined to admit that there may be intelligent
beings in other worlds than ours—always assuming that some of
these may be adequately provided with water, food and sunshine,
without which we know life is impossible! The contrast
afforded by the brilliant intellectual achievements of the nine-
teenth century mind along some lines of activity and investiga-
tion, with the imbecile silliness of its habitual limitations, is
equally irritating and amusing to the occult student who has got
outside those -limitations. But even for many such students,
familiar though they may be with the idea of superior planes of
Nature and faculties of a wider reach than those of the physical
brain, the explanation here given of the real condition of the
Earth’s interior may be received with a kind of gasping surprise.
We were not prepared for so complex an organisation in the
body of our planet, any more than the physiologists of, say, the
Elizabethan period were prepared to find so much in the human
body as later research has disclosed. But in all likelihood the
sketch here given errs in its omissions to a far greater extent
than in its positive statements. It is a mere broad outline of
the story that might be told by those thoroughly conversant
with the facts. The interest from the mere scientific point of


view of further detail if we could obtain it would be intense, but
for the present we must remain, if not content, unsatisfied as
regards the multitude of questions that naturally arise in the
mind. To what extent does the incombustible vegetable
kingdom of the interior surfaces cover the whole glowing
landscape ? Are there forests of white hot trees, and is there
an appropriate animal kingdom associated with the others of the
inner worlds ? The beings in more or less astral bodies already
referred to, would be the relatively human kingdom in each
case, the head evolution of the series 'to which it belonged, but
it is more than probable that it would be surrounded by
satellite evolutions, as our own on the outer surface is so
surrounded.
With intense heat we naturally associate the idea of light, so
as regards the inhabitants of the regions I have called the inter-
stitial spaces there is no need to consider the question how these
are illuminated. But directly we confront that question we
cannot but be struck with the mistaken impulse which prompts
it. If the intelligent beings of the inner regions are invested
with astral vehicles of consciousness they see with senses
altogether unlike those of the physical plane, and are thus quite
independent of physical plane light. A very moderate acquaint-
ance with the experiences of super-physical research amongst
ourselves will render us familiar with the idea that darkness is
more favourable than what we call light to the activities of some
beings at all events functioning in astral vehicles of conscious-
ness. So it may easily be that the beings inhabiting the dark
interior caverns of the solid crusts may have senses to which
that darkness is perfectly luminous. It is apparently held by
the authorities of the Earth that the humanity of the outer
surface should be effectually cut off from communication with
the interior kingdoms, and this may be provided for by the
heated stratum at the twenty-five mile depth through which it is


quite impossible that any inquisitive borings on our part should
ever penetrate. But knowledge may be gained, as occult
students are well aware, in reference to regions quite beyond
the reach of physical investigation. And so it is coming to pass
that we are learning something of the conditions under which
existence is carried on in the deeply buried cavern worlds of the
Earth’s interior.
All thoughts will turn in connexion with this subject to the beau-
tiful story evolved from Lord Lytton’s imagination concerning
the magnificent civilisation of his “ Coming Race.” But though
there is just so much actual justification for the tale in question
as is embodied in the fact that races do actually exist in vast
cavernous spaces in the interior of the outermost and some
others of the concentric globes, we must deny ourselves the
intellectual luxury of conceiving that the superb Gy-ei of Vrilya
will ever ascend to the upper world to set our “ Koom-poshes ”
in order. The interior evolutions are far below the intellectual
level of even our present humanity, although they are advanced
enough to have something like systems of government, dwelling-
places of artificial construction, and to put inscriptions on the
walls of their inner world.
Yet a third order of consciousness ranges the interior spaces
of the Earth, but this is altogether elemental in its character. I
have spoken of the armies of “ fire elementals ” employed under
the Spirit of the Earth on the mysterious tasks carried out in the
central globe of all. Elemental evolutions are very difficult to
understand, but in some way there is an evolution outwards pos-
sible for these fire elementals, and an emergence for them in
some cases into the superior elemental life of the external surface
of the earth. I can say so little on this subject that it may seem
to some readers hardly worth while to have said anything at all,
but vague as our information must for the present remain in
reference to the interior evolutions, the mere recognition of these


\
as in progress is calculated to enlarge our view of the Nature of
which we form a part. To my mind there is a gulf of difference
in the conception of this vast planet on the surface of which we
roam about, as a huge lump of inorganic matter serviceable for
no other purpose than to bear the minute organisms swarming
on its outside, and on the other hand the conception of it as a
teeming hive of life and consciousness filled to overflowing with
the vital influence of The Logos. The mere physical complexity
of its structure as now explained dignifies the whole globe as
compared with the crude ideas of its interior condition prevalent
in the common imagination hitherto. And although orthodox
science—as bigotted in reference to its methods as the Church in
reference to its dogmas—will decline any enlightenment that
does not come along familiar roads, occult students will be en-
abled by the explanations now set forth to check some of the
speculations concerning the past history of the Earth in which
scientific writers allow themselves to indulge. We are con-
stantly told that the manner in which the Moon rotates once on
her axis in the same time that she revolves once round the
Earth, is the result of tidal action in the remote past. The
satellite is assumed to have been cast off from the Earth while
this was still in its early molten condition and having thus been
flung into space to have settled down to its present habits as
the result of tidal retardation while it was still a plastic mass.
Tidal friction is very much in favour just now among speculative
physicists as an explanation of some phenomena that have taken
place (in an entirely different way) and of some others (errone-
ously) assumed to be in preparation for the future. As the Moon
was really in existence for millions of years before the first
initial measures were taken for the formation of the Earth, all
guesses based upon the idea that it was a bit of the original
Earth torn off by an early convulsion of Nature are little likely
to find themselves in harmony with the truth. The Moon is


indeed a dead planet now, not because it has never been any-
thing else, as the conventional theory would imply, but because
it has fulfilled its part in the economy of the scheme to which it
belonged and is in process of disintegration.
For the final return to the bosom of Nature of the materials
used in the construction of a planet is accomplished by degrees,
just as the planet in the beginning has been built up by degrees.
The concentric sphere arrangement is, as I infer from what I
have learned, the method of planetary formation adopted through-
out the solar system, but at any rate it was the method adopted
in the formation of the Moon in the beginning (long before the
Earth was thought about) just as in our own case afterwards.
And when the active life of the Lunar world was over and its
physical body had to be dispersed again—as in the case of each
one of us when each life is spent the physical body concerned
has to return to dust—the outermost shells disintegrated first.
As with their original construction forces are employed that we
do not habitually reckon with, so in the processes of disintegra-
tion agencies of an unfamiliar kind take the work in hand, but
the broad idea is that when the Spirit of the Planet that is out-
worn has no longer any work to do there he leaves it and decay
sets in as naturally as it sets in with a human corpse when the
soul has fled away. In its full maturity the Moon must have
been a planet about the same size as our own, for as we look at
it now we see the surface of what was originally its third con-
centric sphere going inwards. The two outer ones have been
shed, and the matter of which they were composed no doubt
largely drawn upon for the final deposit of matter on the outer
shell of the Earth. A long time will yet elapse before the four
remaining shells and the internal nucleus return to the oceanic
store of meteoric matter, but time in these undertakings is spent
by Nature with much prodigality. In guess-work concerning
the duration of astronomical periods modern science has not yet


been furnished with data on which to proceed with security, and
its confidence in the data which it assumes is apt to be mis-
placed. Thus all calculations relating to the supposed mainten-
ance of the Sun’s heat by shrinkage are quite ludicrously wrong,
and the forecasts at present in favour as regards the time at
which there will be no room for it to shrink any more, and at
which consequently the planetary family around it will be frozen
to death, will sooner or later be looked back upon by the science
of the future as quite on a level with the theory of the tortoise
that supports the world. lam little inclined, however, to en-
courage the flippancy of some occultists who speak disrespect-
fully of modern science because our information enables us to
catch it out here and there in mistakes. The science of the
western world is in the van of Ruman intelligence, if we
except only the wisdom of Adeptship. Its achievements so far
have been beautiful and glorious. It merely needs now to avail
itself of the wonderful instruments of research which lie but half
hidden in the depths of human faculty, and then it will carry
the exquisite discipline of its thought into regions where at
present only a few exceptionally gifted explorers are roaming,
unprepared by their training for the work they attempt to
perform. In times not long gone by, the reconciliation of
science and religion was hoped for by enthusiasts as promising,
when it should be accomplished, some immense advance in
general civilisation. That union is in process of realisation,
religion having, so to speak, accorded a grudging consent. But
the next great step must be the reconciliation of science and
occultism. That, too, must come, though perhaps this time it
will be the scientific world that will show some disposition to be
sulky as the change forces its way. That will not matter in the
long run, and in that long run the state of facts dealt with in
this paper will assuredly be the subject of investigations with
which future members of the Royal Society will be engaged,


though at the moment the wonderful story I have had to tell
may find even some Theosophists incredulous, unless they
have intuition enough to feel sure that, all things considered,
I should not be likely to put it forward without such assurance
of its accuracy as suffices to justify its association with the many
other Fragments of Occult Truth which it has been my privilege
to set forth.


LONDON
WOMEN’S PRINTING SOCIETY, LIMITED
66 & 68, Whitcomb Street, W.C.


NORTH POLE






