

LIFE
OF
A. J. DRAPER


with
THE LIFE OF
A. J. DRAPER


THE LIFE OF
A. J. DRAPER
Compiled and Published by
“THE CAIRNS POST”
[For Private Circulation]
CAIRNS
The Cairns Poft Ltd.
1931




The Life of A. J. Draper
The Draper Family.
PIE actual life of a man is that which, operating from an
inherited motif, culminates in achievements or degenerates
to futility. Most lives are futile, but it is a reflection of supreme
importance that they are becoming less futile by the increasing
permeation of civilisation through the social body. Despite all
the weaknesses of the world in its organised state, it is a pleasant
thought that the majority of those who pass leave the world some-
what better than they found it. There are still those hardier
souls who may be called pioneers. Alexander Frederick John
Draper was one. His life was charged with electric power and
a strong current of directive force. Naturally, one seeks its origin
in his ancestry; there is still something, principally sound, in the
ancestor worship of older civilisations.
The Draper genealogy may be traced through four generations
on both sides of the family, and the conspicuous strains of the
families may be followed further should one be so minded. The
male line has retained a social elevation; the immediate fore-
bears of A. J. Draper were of high professional repute.
At the beginning of the 19th century, for instance, Dr. John
Draper had an extensive medical practice in the West End of


London. He was physician to Sir Thomas Baring, at whose
town house he died after a paralytic stroke in the year 1820. He
left two daughters, Clarissa and Matilda, and a son, John Miles
Draper. Clarissa went to Scotland and the other daughter, with
John Miles, remained at the home of Sir Thomas Baring—Matilda
was occupied as companion to Lady Baring. John Miles Draper,
an apt pupil of his father, obtained his diploma as a physician under
Sir Ashley Cooper and, it is recorded, “walked the Guy’s Hos-
pital.” He worked up a large practice in the East End and lived
at Hermitage Street near Wapping, St. George’s in the East. He
married Louisa Mollett, daughter of a substantial farmer at Farn-
ham, in 1824, the issue being five children, three of whom died
in infancy. The two survivors were a daughter, Clarissa (after-
awards Mrs. Usher), and Henry John Mollett Draper. Dr. John
Miles Draper died in 1 830, and his practice was subsequently sold
by his widow.
His son, Henry John Mollett Draper, went to sea when he
was about 15, in 1842. His first vessel was the brig “Middle-
ton” (Capt. Tinian), but he rose rapidly in the service. When at
the age of 19 he sought and obtained a berth on the barque “Sey-
mour,” he was surprised to learn from the captain that he had been
recommended as an excellent second mate. It took away his breath
for a moment; he wrote later that he walked the poop all night
putting the ship into all manner of difficulties and extricating it
with ease. He was the youngest second mate in the service but.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


although awed by his sudden eminence, he exhibited the forceful
characteristic of his stock. He decided to go through with it as
though it were his natural birthright. His grand opportunity came
when the “Seymour” was out of Odessa in the Black Sea. The
captain fell ill and had to remain off the bridge. The chief mate,
after desperate efforts to conceal the fact, admitted that he knew
nothing about navigation beyond the method of taking an altitude
of the sun. Young Draper took charge of the ship and navigated
her safely to port. Shortly afterwards he was appointed first mate
on another vessel.
He came to Australia several times subsequently. In 1849
he sailed for Adelaide in the barque “Trafalgar,” which arrived
in 92 days. It was a sailing time record but was short lived; in
the same week two other vessels arrived in port, one 85 days
and the other 77 days out from England. After another trip
home Draper joined the “Lady Nelson” for Melbourne, where
the crew promptly deserted and made for the recently opened
gold diggings in Victoria. About 9000 ounces of gold was put
aboard the “Lady Nelson,” but about 1 a.m. the vessel was
boarded by an armed gang. The gold was lifted from the ship
and Draper was wounded by a pistol shot fired at close range.
He was detained in the colony pending the arrest and trial of
the robbers and did not return to England. He accepted a post
as captain in the Port Phillip pilot service at Williamstown. His life
was crowded with “incidents” and adventures for nearly 40 years
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


and then, leaving the service, he still served his State as a member
of the Marine Board.
Captain Draper married Ellen Young at Singapore Terrace,
Geelong, Victoria, in 1855. Ellen had come to Australia from
Glasgow with her mother and two brothers in 1849. The first
of the 17 children born to Captain and Ellen Draper is the
subject of this sketch. He was born at Williamstown on April 5,
1863.
Early Years.
IN the sight of the sea and influenced by its wayward strength
Alexander Frederick John Draper spent his boyhood. Many
years later, 2000 miles from the Williamstown pilotage, he
had not ceased to remember his initial influences. He recalled
them often with humour as well. One story he told fre-
quently. Old Captain Draper, like many a seaman, was fervent in
approaching the Almighty, and it was part of his glory that his
children attended Sunday School regularly. But one Sunday
A.J. and his brother Edwin Charles Mollett Draper launched a
pilot boat, forgetting Sunday School in the desire to dip an oar.
But they came to grief and a passing vessel had to rescue the
boys from peril. Next morning the father looked up from his
newspaper and challenged A.J.:
”H’m; did you go to Sunday School yesterday, Alec?”
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


“Yes, Dad,” was the prompt reply.
“Then how the devil did you get into the paper this morn-
ing?”
The paper contained a full account of the timely rescue of
the two boys from the upturned keel of a boat belonging to the
pilot service.
He was also mindful of the physical as well as the spiritual
need of his children, and the foundation of the fine physique
of the Draper boys might be traced to the gymnastic appliances
with which they were familiar at home. The father found the
germ of much mental good, too, in sending the children to the
grocer with an oral order “as long as your arm”; and woe betide
them if they forgot one of the items. Still, A. J. Draper, when
telling the story about a year before his own death, suspected
that the old man himself remembered the items of those orders
by the aid of a pencilled list.
A Youth at Work.
AFTER leaving school Alec, began work. Despite his in-
grained love of the seafaring life he wanted to see
something of life away from ships and tides. Having entered
the Bank of Australasia as a junior clerk, he was sent almost
immediately to Beechworth in Victoria, in 1879. He left home
with joy and singing in his heart, but it is left on record that
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


when he arrived at the bank for the first time the office was not
open. He wandered about for a few minutes and then sat upon
the kerb to weep for very homesickness. But that weakness was
not to endure; he conquered the desire to run back home and
was soon making good in the bank. It was the first of many
desires conquered ultimately by the exercise of his will. Within
a short time he was transferred to Bethanga (Vic.), and then to
Jerilderie in New South Wales where, shortly before (February,
1879) the notorious Kelly Gang of bushrangers had robbed
bank and held up the township in daylight. At Jerilderie he met
Miss Mary Georgina Capron, who was holidaying from Geelong,
and who was destined to be his partner in life for more than 40
years.
His next change was a more important one, and one that
took him 2000 miles from his home. Young Draper was sent as
accountant to the branch of the bank at Townsville, in North
Queensland. For six months he worked there under Mr. W.
Lennon, who ultimately became the Hon. Speaker in the Queens-
land Parliament and then Lieutenant-Governor. Lennon formed
a high opinion of Draper’s ability and of his character. A friend-
ship was formed that lasted through life, and when both were very
active in politics^—Lennon as a pronounced Labour sympathiser
and Draper as an equally pronounced “Tory,” the personal friend-
ship remained unshaken.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


From Townsville he went to Charters Towers. The youth
who wished to broaden his knowledge and conception of life
keenly welcomed these changes; besides, each transfer went hand
in hand with promotion. His life at the Towers began really to
widen out. It was a busy branch, especially as the period was one
of much activity in gold buying. The Towers was alive; its im-
portance was appreciated in the whole State, and its economic
activity naturally reflected itself in a steady banking business. It
might be said from fact that A. J. Draper won his first spurs dur-
ing those two years. Opportunities came to him, and he began
to reveal that keen sense of awareness that later characterised
his life. The manager of the Charters Towers branch was
Mr. Owen Maurice Williams, subsequently bank inspector, but now
retired. His absence for about six months caused young Draper,
then about to enter his 21 st year, to be appointed acting-manager.
The term “Boy Manager” applied to him was made popular on
the field by the late Mr. Thadaeus O’Kane, editor-proprietor of
the “Northern Miner.” The term and the promotion reflected by
it were both pleasing to the elder Draper, who recalled his own
appointment as first mate before his 20th year. In discussing his
son, Captain Draper did not halt to distinguish finely between the
respective appellations “acting-manager” and “first mate.”
A. J. Draper’s association with Mr. O. M. Williams was the
happiest. The friendship which commenced merely as the associ-
ation of manager and assistant was of the uncommon order that
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


lasts through a lifetime. It was renewed during Mr. Williams’s
three years’ residence at Hambledon, near Cairns.
When Mr. Williams returned to resume his duties at the
Towers, the institution decided that Draper should not be lost to
their administrative staff and determined to find an executive post
for him. Cairns, in the Far North of Queensland, at the time was
rapidly coming into historical prominence, and it was there that
Draper went on transfer as branch manager. He was then within
a month of his 21st birthday.
But really what was Cairns, and what was its significance?
Cairns in the Making.
CAPTAIN JAMES COOK sailed leisurely around Cape Grafton,
skirted what he called the False Cape and then, because
it was Trinity Sunday in the year of grace 1770, regarded the wide
indentation of coast-line and wrote across his chart: “Trinity
Bay.”
A century later the rich agricultural, timber and mineral
lands began to attract the attention of the colonies that had sprung
into being in the southern parts of the great continent. Settle-
ments and towns grew up along the North Coast. In 1876 the
steamer “Victoria” landed a party of Government officials upon
the shores of Trinity Inlet. The spot was a wild, mangrove-
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


covered, muddy foreshore, with thick scrub stretching from the
water’s edge to the encircling foothills. A small canvas town grew
rapidly near the spot now marked by the Strand Hotel. During
the next six years the young settlement struggled onward, but not
without mishaps. There was a flood, a cyclone, heavy wet
seasons came, and terrific summer heat. A rival township*—-
Smithfield—sprang up on the north side of the Barron River in
1877. It was a more natural outlet to the sea for the men of the
mining fields, who had demanded a port on Trinity Bay; but
just when it appeared that Cairns would have to fold her tents or
be annihilated a tremendous flood swept the new township of
Smithfield—and Cairns, even in her sympathy, breathed again.
A more serious rival appeared when Port Douglas was opened
in 1882 and took the trade of the Hodgkinson. Still the natural
deep water harbour at Cairns won in the struggle and the first
port reasserted itself. The temporary eclipse passed over; the
township began to grow, attend to its business affairs and settle
down. Thus, ten years after its formal establishment, Cairns was
on the high road to success. The population was becoming set-
tled, business grew, comfort in private and public life became more
certain and there was more money to spend than one had dreamed
of in ’76. The voters’ roll had increased from about 80 names in
1881 to 600 in 1884. Imports and exports increased at a great
rate, and the settlement’s revenue had doubled itself four times
before the end of 1 884.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


And in that year, on June 26, Alexander F. J. Draper landed
in Cairns from the s.s. “Quiraing” to take charge of the Bank of
Australasia. The institution was a primitive looking wooden
building, low and gabled, but judged by the law of comparison,
it stood well in die eyes of the public. The banking business was
brisk and did not decline for many years, and even then the
apparent decline was temporary. The opening of the cane areas
and the steady progress of the mining ventures brought more
banks, more business and more endeavour.
All the formative movements of a new and rising colony
were going forward. Cairns was ruled locally by a Divisional
Board, the prototype of the modern shire. A Progress Associa-
tion was much alive and in it originated several of those public
movements. One was an effort to have the town incorporated
under the Local Authorities Act as a municipal borough. This
was one of the first things into which the newcomer at the Bank
of Australasia Hung his support. A petition was drawn up for
presentation to the Home Secretary and one of the first signatures
secured for it was Draper’s.
At the same time he was working with those restless souls
who were agitating for separation. The interests of North Queens-
land were ill served by the Government in the South, and the
Separationists were numerous during the second half of the cen-
tury. In the newly established settlements the feeling ran high
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


owing to the sense of isolation superimposed upon the pre-exist*
ing sense of injustice. There was also the fear of blacks in such
places as Cairns, where almost daily reports of attacks by natives
were received. In many cases the assaults were merely reprisals
for the high-handed and often brutal manner in which the natives
were treated by the newcomers. It was the old, old story of
conquest and race bitterness. But the separation movement was
based upon economic reasoning as much as upon sentiment. It
flourished as a consequence. The Cairns Progress Association
adopted a definite attitude in regard to it and Draper was not long
in Cairns before he was enrolled as an ardent Separationist. How-
ever, he did not actually become a member of the Progress Asso-
ciation until February, 1885.
When Cairns rose triumphant over Smithfield and Port
Douglas as the port of the Hinterland, the need was to construct
a road to Herberton over the range. The tracks that existed were
merely pads cut by miners without any surveying experience.
They decided to run a railway over the Smithfield Range. It
would be the greatest undertaking of its kind in Australia, but
the lure of gold, tin, lead and copper in the Cairns Hinterland
lent justification to the venture. The Cairns Progress Association
had this matter in hand also when Draper came to Cairns, and
here again he found an outlet for some of his amazing energy.
When ultimately a Railway League was formed in Cairns to fur-
ther the project, Draper became its secretary. The story of that
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


line to Myola from Cairns, thence to Mareeba, Atherton and Her-
berton is one to be told in a note in another place.
Apart, also, from such public activity Draper was not neglect-
ing his own material interests. In October of that first year in
Cairns he was interested in the Chance Extended Gold Mining
Company as a director. The Chance mine was on the Mulgrave,
and it was a lucky find in the mine back in 1882 that opened the
Mulgrave field. Thus, within three months of his coming to
Cairns, he was looked to as one who was likely to improve his
own fortunes and those of the district.
He had a distinctive appearance; set face from which a pair
of deep-set eyes Hashed beneath straight, strongly moulded brows.
His hair fell across a broad, square forehead, high at the temples
and capacious enough to overbear the whole face, but for the
sense of balance suggested by his set mouth and prominent chin.
His humour was sometimes cynical, sometimes ironical, but when
he was amused the laugh came from his eyes.
Cairns grew rapidly, and just as naturally the impatience of
A. J. Draper at being confined to the daily round of banking
grew. He had gone as far as a man may go. He had climbed the
hill he had set out to ascend, and there was nothing left for him
but to retrace his steps or to remain inactive at the summit. He
chose neither course. He saw other and higher hills and decided
to climb them, even if it meant commencing again at sea level.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


The desires that had been creeping into his mind increased. A
field in which ambition might satisfy itself was growing around
him. So in November he resigned from the bank, “to save his
elbows,” he said. He could not accept that a young man should
for ever wear out his sleeves counting up figures and tending
accounts.
Upon his resignation he received an autograph letter of appre-
ciation for his services from Mr. E. S. Parkes, the Australian
superintendent of the bank. It was stated to be the first such
testimonial written by Mr. Parkes during his long career.
Having left the bank, he entered into business partnership
with Mr. W. D. Hobson, who, having resigned from the Q.N. Bank
at Cooktown, had established himself in Cairns as a general mer-
chant and commission agent. The new year came when A.J. had
been six months in Cairns. To the first months of ’BS really
belong the beginning of his long and restless association with local
political affairs. Divisional Board elections were looming and
Draper became one of the committeemen and nominators of the
late Richard Ash Kingsford. He worked with resistless zeal for
the return of his candidate during January and February, and had
the gratification of seeing him returned. In the same year he was
concerned in a business contract with the board but which did
not return him much popularity. His tender for the Work of
valuator was accepted upon the motion of Board-member Hob-
son, although another tender stipulated half Draper’s price and
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


the time for the completed work was also proportionately lower.
'There was an outcry from members who were not at the meeting,
and from the public. It was charged that Hobson had voted his
partner the work. Draper submitted that he had more knowledge
of the work and his experience in the bank had given him an
insight into the actual time and costs involved in such a task;
but as his honour had been questioned, he withdrew his tender.
This year, perhaps, was the most momentous in his life.
Manhood and Marriage.
DEFINITE and unhesitating in his decisions he made life a
thorough partnership. Less than nine months after his
arrival he essayed a trip to Victoria where, at Holy Trinity
Church, Williamstown, on April 9, 1885, he married Miss Capron,
with whom he shared all his subsequent success. In this,
history was again to repeat itself. Captain Draper and his wife
shared each other’s public and social activities at Williams-
town. Much regret was expressed, even in the public Press, when
the elder Mrs. Draper began to sever her active connection with
sundry social bodies. In his wife A. J. Draper also had a help-
mate who encouraged and assisted him throughout his long public
career.
Mrs. Draper’s introduction to Cairns was not less worthy of
remembrance than her young husband’s had been. They were
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


both very youthful when they set out from Victoria to face the
world in one of its most romantic and unprepossessing comers.
They were challenging a country that demanded only the best
of human endeavour. It did not want weaklings either in body or
in temperament. The young couple stayed about a week in
Sydney, but the journey to Cairns may be said to have been
really continuous. They voyaged by the "Egremont” to Brisbane
and landed at Cairns on April 23 from the s.s. “Ranelagh,” a
small coastal vessel of little more than lugger tonnage. The pas-
sengers were taken off in a tender across the shallow water to a
primitive jetty made of thin saplings and bushes. The only buggy
then in Cairns belonged to Draper’s partner, Hobson, and it was
there to meet the honeymooning party. Mrs. Hobson had also
thoughtfully cared for the house that was awaiting the new young
wife. She had put three pounds of butter in the cupboard, but
there human kindness ended. The tropics was not so kind, and
by the time the butter was needed it was a pale, oily liquid which
no effort of the pioneers could solidify. To make matters worse,
Mrs. Draper had come from the South, and it being the middle
of the year she had worn her best winter clothing. The warm,
midyear sun of the tropics did not kindly consider such things.
While Mrs. Draper was busy making herself familiar with
the best housekeeping methods in the primitive community, her
husband settled again into business and public life with the energy
that marked his progression. Part of his duties in the firm was
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


the writing of business in the outside settlements and amongst
the stations. In 12 months he had ridden over all the country
back of Cairns, even to the Gulf. He bought a black stallion at
one of the stations he visited and named it Satan. The name
apparently was well chosen, because ere long the beast had thrown
him and broken his collar bone. He was always a daring rider
but never an expert one. The experience in this work and the
knowledge of the district he had gained came back as bread upon
the waters nearly ten years later, when the question of a meat
works at Mareeba was being discussed. Draper was deputed to
represent Cairns at a public meeting held in the Valley of Lagoons.
He rode with a pack horse to the Valley, a distance of 400 miles.
Although the business of Hobson and Draper prospered
during their partnership he was impatient to be moving forward.
Besides, he was also urged as it were by a personality that irked
under restraint. A personality that even then was naturally dom-
inating. To be free to develop that personality and to permit the
elements of his character to co-operate he demanded freedom to
act without division of thought. The desire to go alone and to be
alone was strong within him. The business sense of co-operation
that had existed between the partners was strained by intermit-
tent personal antagonisms. A severance came inevitably and
Draper started alone in 1887 in much the same line of business,
auctioneer and general commission agent.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


A Railway Programme.
IF is history that he was appointed to the honorary secretary-
ship of the Railway League which was formed after his
return to Cairns. The first section of the line was put in hand
by the Government as a result chiefly of agitations in the Cairns
district, agitations initiated by the Progress Association and kept
alive by the league. The Premier, Sir Samuel Walker Griffiths,
turned the first sod of the first section on May 10, 1 886, and the
section was completed on October 8 of the following year at Red-
lynch, 8J miles from Cairns. But the Government was not per-
mitted to dally with the work. The importance of the line was
that it should go over the range. It was gazetted as the Cairns-
Herberton railway and was fully intended to go to Herberton in
four stages. The second stage from Redlynch to Myola was the
most stupendous and the most necessary part of the work. Beyond
Redlynch the line had to rise to Kuranda quickly—loo feet to a
mile—and twist along the edge of the Barron Gorge. The rails
and other materials were packed up to the Red Bluff, which stood
out against the sky as one looked up from the Barron River at
Kammerunga. This second section was to cover about 14 miles,
but the task was so difficult that it was the most protracted. The
contractor was John Robb, from Melbourne, who had at one time
1500 men under him. Numbers of the workmen lost their lives,
mainly through falling into the gorge. Three men, it is reported,
were swept by a rolling log into a fire at what was called the
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


Horseshoe Bend, and burned to death. At the end of the work
on the section about £I7OO was unclaimed from the authorities
and represented the wages of men who had been killed. When
the section was finished on June 15, 1891, the line swept in suc-
cessive curves across the side of the gorge over numbers of spidery
bridges and through 1 5 tunnels, the while swinging almost over
the edge of the gorge, thence past the mighty Barron Falls. It
was a magnificent achievement, no less grand than mechanically
marvellous. For the first time Cairns was linked with its own
Hinterland by means of a speedy and reliable means of transport.
The third section was to go to Granite Creek (now Mareeba),
and the fourth to Carrington (the present Nyleta), beyond Ather-
ton. At this point the Herberton people began to be restive
owing to a fear that the line would either stop at Carrington or
turn directly westward without coming into the Herberton dis-
trict. By 1 890 the second section Was nearing completion and the
third and fourth had been sanctioned by the Government; but
another governmental delay came to annoy the Railway League.
Coupled with it was the knowledge that disaffection in Herber-
ton had been growing. It was openly stated that, as the line to
Granite Creek was assured, Cairns would take no more active
interest in it. The prospect of having to fight a lone battle to
have it continued into Herberton did not appeal strongly to the
Herberton people. A meeting of the Railway League was held
in Cairns on June 23, 1890, to appoint a deputation to impress
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


upon the Railway Commissioners in Cairns the need for pushing
on with the third section without delay. Draper seconded a
motion by R. A. Tills that the Commissioners be asked when the
tenders would be called for that section. Tills was afraid that the
Government would procrastinate until the wet season set in, which
would mean a loss of about eight months. He argued that it was
the most important line under construction in the State, although
money voted for less important lines in the South was immediately
spent. Draper told the meeting that the tenders for the third
section would be called within a week or two, but all the same
they should get a definite promise from the Commissioners. He
agreed with another speaker (Mr. Bates) that they should bend
their energies to*wards securing sanctions for the fourth section
to Carrington. He added caustically that it would be better to
ignore the ill-feeling in Herberton altogether because no one could
understand why it existed. Cairns had pledged itself to support
the line to Carrington and they were doing so. It seemed likely
that the Mount Albion and Irvinebank interests had sown the dis-
sension, but if the line went westward to satisfy those interests
instead of going into Herberton it would not be the fault of Cairns
or of the Railway League.
At this meeting, also, the league’s hopes for a line south of
Cairns to Geraldton (afterwards Innisfail) and Mourilyan were
given concrete shape. The league had been semi-officially advised
that the Government might sanction the project, recognising its
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


importance as a substantial link in the North Coast Line. The
league decided to place before the Commissioners its views that a
survey of the country to Mourilyan should be made. The Com-
missioners were met, but refused point blank to discuss either
problem on the ground that it was purely a matter of ministerial
policy. But the league merely transferred its petitions to the
Cabinet. The definite result of that meeting of the league in
1890 was of great importance to future railway construction in the
Far North.
The third section of the Cairns-Herberton line in fact was
pushed through and completed at Mareeba by the beginning of
August, 1893. The league was restless under the delays, which,
however, were brief compared with the holding up of the promised
fourth section to Carrington, thence to Herberton. This section
was not concluded until 1903. In the meantime the Chillagoe
Mines and Development Company had been granted a concession
to construct a line to Chillagoe from Mareeba—another cause of
grievance to Herberton people, who continued to “pack” to and
from Cairns against the railway.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


Cane Sugar Products.
MR. DRAPER’S first venture in sugar cane production
belonged to his association with Hobson. The Hap Wah
plantation was situated a few miles out of the town towards what is
now called Woree and was approached by Hap Wah Road. Later
the name was changed to Hop Wah, but it also had to give way—
to Mulgrave Road. The Mulgrave Road has become, through
the advocacy of Draper and such as he on the municipal councils,
chambers of commerce and other public vehicles a broad, sweep-
ing main road through marvellous tropical jungle to Gordonvale.
But in the middle ’eighties no such road existed; at best it was a
bullock track negotiated from motives of necessity rather than of
pleasure. The Hap Wah plantation was controlled by Chinese
when Hobson and Draper acquired it. They worked and treated
about 600 tons of sugar but the results were rather disastrous to
the financial resources of the partners. The working was by very
primitive methods. There were no tramways and the cane had
to be hauled over sodden, yielding tracks between the paddocks.
When it arrived at the “mill” it was treated by methods equally
crude. The product was boiled in open pans and for the finishing
process only one small vacuum pan was available.
Another difficulty which militated against the mill becoming
a white man’s sugar industry was the inability of white workers to
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


adapt themselves to the then conditions and in competition with
the Chinese. The placid Asiatic could earn with comparative ease
£3 per week, where white men could not drudge through a suffi-
cient output to earn £l. It was subsequently to be proved (and no
one more than A. J. Draper came to admit the folly of previous
conceptions regarding the value of Kanaka or other alien labor)
that white labour was to be more efficient, more economical and
socially more desirable than coloured labour. But while Cairns
was in its swaddling clothes, as it was when Hobson and Draper
secured the Hap Wah interests, the very suggestion of white labour
was a revolutionary thought. Still, when everything else had been
said the looming fact is that Hobson and Draper, both very young
and very inexperienced, were more courageous than wise. They
knew absolutely nothing about sugar or sugar milling; and what
they learned from this venture was hardly worth the cost. The
Hap Wah undertaking ended in a heavy debit.
By the Lands Acts of the Mcllwraith Government individual
selectors were encouraged and what naturally followed was the
taking up of fertile lands along the Mulgrave. W. H. Swallow
selected Hambledon, near Edmonton, in 1882, and established
the first successful sugar mill in the Cairns district. After a pro-
ductive career for some years it was eventually taken over by the
Colonial Sugar Refining Company, who control it at present. At
the Pyramid, J. B. Loridan, formerly a flour miller amongst other
things in Victoria, selected a site for a mill in 1885. Much money
THE LIFE OF A. J, DRAPER


from French sources is said, to have been invested in the project
and some very costly machinery went over the inlet for the mill.
But the enterprise did not flourish. The machinery was requis-
itioned in later years for the proposed Aloomba mill, but was
not used, and ultimately found a home under the roof of the
Hambledon mill, where some of it still remains.
However, with the foregoing two ventures Draper had no
business connection. His interest in anything that concerned
them was purely that of a citizen with eyes gazing toward a vision
of the future and with a mind receptive to any influence that might
bring a measure of prosperity to the district. He knew instinctively
that he might share in that prosperity personally, but it was suffi-
cient to him that the district was to be served, and so he gave
little heed to the fact that his advocacy might also bring a measure
of loss to him. Numbers of instances justify the statement often
made, and here made again deliberately, that A. J. Draper, broad
in his business outlook and made sensitive to commercial possi-
bilities by his economic training, nevertheless frequently turned
away business by his downrightness and by his outspoken public
utterances. Draper was aware of this “weakness” as it was termed
by the lesser men who secured the business thus turned from his
office.
If his sympathy for, and support of, those early mill pro-
positions were more civic than commercial he was not held by his
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


first unfortunate experience from engaging in the industry. He
had become interested in the possibilities of sugar cane growing
and he bent his energies towards acquiring the knowledge of the
industry that would help him to avoid the pitfall his first essay
had proven to be.
Municipolitics.
THE petition drawn up by the Progress Association beseech-
ing the Government to consider the municipal aspirations
of Cairns ultimately was successful. Amidst much jubilation in
Cairns the town was gazetted a borough before the year was out.
The first council met on July 22, 1885, and elected Kingsford its
first Mayor. Draper warmed to local politics after that. At a by-
election in 1 889 he essayed candidature and was successful. He
held the seat again during the three subsequent annual elections.
His contributions to debate while he was still new to the
council were marked by wit and keen thinking, enlivened by
humour—sometimes caustic, sometimes droll—but underlying
every quality or mannerism was an impatience to get something
done. He was never satisfied until the reason for any proposition
was clear to him. Perhaps because of his zeal and intelligent in-
terest in public affairs he was elected Mayor in 1891. He had been
an Alderman for about two years and was still a young man. But the
body politic hardly weighed that against his undoubted value as
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


a legislator. Consequently when his first annual term had expired
it caused no surprise that he was sent back for another term—
and then for another.
The first council of any municipality has a great deal of
trench work to do. This was true of Cairns. The deep, sandy
clearing that was the township made the making of streets and
the formulation of a drainage system problems for the surveyors
as well as for the finance committees of the councils. For many
years a buggy could not be drawn over most of the yielding sur-
faces. When he first went to Lilybank, Draper, when leaving his
office, had to convey his ctfwn household provisions to Freshwater
in bag panniers flung across his saddle. For many a year the
grocer, the baker or the iceman did not draw his cart to the front
gate at Lilybank. However, when A.J. entered the council the
town was beginning to lose its most primitive characters, but one
of his first battles was waged on behalf of street forming and
drainage. He was from the beginning a master of the financial
issues facing the local legislators. Perhaps throughout his long
career as an alderman his particular claim to remembrance was
related to his financial knowledge. This was exemplified strik-
ingly during the bank disturbance in 1893. He was stricken in
his own private financial affairs and had to leave the council
table in May of that year, in the middle of his third term as
Mayor. But he was back as an alderman very soon, and in March,
1895, he brought forward what was called “Alderman Draper’s
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


No. 2 Account” scheme. It was a method by which an account
was to be created for paying off the interest upon a staggering
overdraft at the Q.N. Bank. Hundreds of pounds were outstand-
ing in rates and the scheme provided for their being collected for
the No. 2 account. Meanwhile, current expenditure was to be
met from current revenue. Those are the bare details of a scheme
which was more involved than is apparent. Necessarily it pre-
supposed a policy of retrenchment and rigid economy and entailed
a certain amount of unpopularity for the mayor and the aldermen.
But it was enforced, with happy results to the treasury.
Draper did not seek re-election in 1896 but he returned
in the following year and was chosen for the fourth time to fill
the mayoral chair. It was noticed, too, that in each of his terms
the revenue from rates increased. It was unhesitatingly credited
to his power of over-lordship. His uncompromising attitude when
a thing was needed earned him such sobriquets as “The Great 1
Am,” “The Mighty A-J.,” and the “Lord Almighty.” The sub-
ject of such “pleasantries” took them in good part. They did no
harm to his candidature, apparently, and the sting was taken out
of them often because of his personal friendship with those who
used them so glibly on the hustings. Naturally he always fell foul
of the Labour movement in municipal as in other fields. In Cairns,
Labour newspapers have existed with lapses for 40 years. They
were variously named “The Advocate,” “The Trinity Times,
and the “Cairns Daily Times.” Thomas Givens, M.L.A., and
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


later Senator, edited the “Advocate” for some time and the refer-
ences to Draper were not always complimentary—nor were
Draper’s to that paper’s editor. Those were days when the dis-
inclination to sulphurously libel and defame each other was regarded
as a weakness. During one municipal election Draper was furi-
ously charged with owning property in Chinatown and drawing
rents from it. Chinatown was the quarter where, apart from the
nationalities of the legitimate business people, social purists were
not to be found. Draper owned no such property there, and was
in no way interested in any. After the election he mentioned to
the editor of the Labour paper that the staunchest supporter of
that paper’s candidate owned half a block in Chinatown. The
editor grinned his knowledge of the fact. At another time, the
“Mighty A.J.” met Jim Anderson, the “Trinity Times” reporter,
and voiced a grievance that he was becoming unpopular. It was
generally believed, he said, that he owned a majority of shares in
the “Trinity Times.” He had read the paper himself that morning
and found his name in it 362 times. “You know, it’s not fair,
Anderson,” he complained. “People will charge me with leading
a strike in the mill if things like that get about.” And he went off
with a chuckle.
Regarding Chinatown it was charged against him even in
very recent years that he was drawing personal revenue from the
hovels in that quarter. But he was not interested in one brick in
“the street.” After 1896 he was not absent from the Council
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


Chamber until his resignation shortly before his death. He was
selected for the mayoralty again in 1902, then in 1918, and after
the introduction of the three-year terms he was chosen by the
electors for 1924-27.
Although mayor of Cairns for seven terms he essayed to
enter the Shire Council only once. This was upon the death of
W. J. Munro in 1912. The other contestant for the seat was S.
H. Warner, who had been clerk to Munro, and was his right hand
man. He was rising in public life and when he became executor
to Munro’s estate it was expected that he would follow him into
public life. At all events, Warner won the by-election and re-
mained at the shire table until 1930, for ten years as chairman.
Draper at Lilybank.
THE first home of Mr. and Mrs. Draper was upon the Esplan-
ade near the present terminal of Minnie-street. They lived
there for about three years and then removed to “Lilybank,” at
Freshwater. The new home was purchased from the late Sam
Cochrane, who was one of the original white settlers of Freshwater.
For 35 years “Lilybank” was the home of the Draper family and
there six of their seven children were born. With such a growing
family it was necessary that extra provision be made, and the
home soon became one of the most picturesque bungalows in the
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


North. But one of the original objectives in the purchase of
“Lilybank” was to convert its 160 acres into an orchard and nur-
sery. It was eminently suitable for the growing of tropical fruits,
and its proprietor, from the beginning, flung his energies into its
improvement. The result was that “Lilybank” became renowned
for its beauty as a country residence, for the excellence of its
products and for the hospitality always to be had there. But of
more historic importance was it that from “Lilybank,” after
Draper took possession, the first consignment of pineapples went
forward from Cairns to Southern markets. The shipment, which
was the forerunner of many, comprised between 600 and 1000
cases, a large consignment, especially as it was destined for mar-
kets so far distant as Melbourne. It is probable that Chinese
gardeners had previously exported pines in unimportant quantities
but the undoubted honour of commencing an export trade of im-
portance belongs to the white settlers through the pioneer, A. J.
Draper.
In connection with his citrus orchard he also developed a
local trade. The cases were made by his Chinese labourers, who
went into the scrub to cut the wood for the purpose. In his “Lily-
bank” nursery were thousands of trees, and hundreds of young
ones were despatched to every part of the State. About 1890
he imported dozens of young trees from Victoria and New South
Wales—peaches, apples, pears, mulberries, and others. But they
were not a success; none of them matured under tropical con-
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


ditions. So he re-directed his energies to cultivating what nature
had already decreed as suitable to the. climate. At the same time
he was interested in horse breeding. Many colts left his yards not
only for purchasers in the district, but even in the South.
In conjunction with these “Lilybank” ventures, of course, he
was pursuing his town business, to which he rode on horseback
every morning. He had built up a forwarding agency for Fresh-
water and Redlynch products, through which thousands of fruit
cases went forward from Till’s sawmill at Redlynch. Pearl shell
cases also were shipped for the Thursday Island trade, which was
then flourishing.
Apart from the productive value of Freshwater district, A.J.
had chosen a fine site for the founding of a country home. To the
natural beauty of the scrub-clad hills and jungle river-side was
added an air of romance. It sprang partly from the country s tradi-
tionless history. Land and forest and river flat had never been
disturbed by the clamour of the white man with his industrial out-
look. Partly, too, Was the romance due to the Oriental aspect of
the small colony. The Chinese were early in the district; some
had come North from Townsville, and others had drifted down
from the Palmer River goldfield. They scattered along the banks
of the Barron River or beside Freshwater Creek, their carver built
sampans or “junks” trading in leisurely manner along the river
or crawling around Barron Point to and from Cairns. As late
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


as 1895 a fleet of ten junks in the Cairns harbour was a pictur-
esque vision even to those who were already familiar with the
graceful vessels. Those particular junks were built of N.Q. cedar
and hardwood procured through Tills’s mill. They came slowly
into port from the Barron with square-cut sterns and bluff bows,
and each, with its single large lateen sail ribbed with bamboo
canes, loaded to the gunwales with green fruit grown by their com-
patriots where to-day white settlers chiefly cultivate sugar cane,
with bananas, pineapples, paw-paws, etc., as sidelines.
It was an industrious era although method was lacking, unless
it be the method by which the Chinese managed to keep the plums
of their calling for members of their own race. To such pioneers
as Sam Cochrane, A. J. Draper and a few others, should go the
credit of establishing the new order of methodical production and
export which made Redlynch and Freshwater the prosperous sub-
urban area of after years.
Domestic Concerns.
EARLY in his married life A. J. created a reputation for careful
attention to his family. He was charged one night with
being “domesticated,” because he insisted upon driving home
although it was nearly midnight. Another story reflecting Draper’s
“family sense” was told by the late W. J. Munro. He and Draper,
while in the South, engaged upon some public business, went into a
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


bar. Munro called for a whisky, which was delivered from a
peculiarly cut and shaped glass decanter. Draper eyed it for some
moments, and then called the girl over. “I say. Miss,” he asked
confidentially, “where do you get those bottles? It’s the very thing
my wife wants for some sauce or something.” Munro told the story
with relish. It was one of Draper’s special characteristics that he
could not leave his wife and family behind when he roamed. But
it was a characteristic that his associates admired and remembered
even while they joked about it. Nor was that spirit relaxed in after
years. Did he have to attend a meeting of any kind he did so punc-
tually, and left immediately afterwards for home. Even when the
Mulgrave Central Mill had been established he cheerfully drove
through the 18 miles of thick bush and usually sought the scrub
track again for home at the conclusion of the meeting. Once or
twice when the meetings were late he remained overnight in Mul-
grave, but the same sense of responsibility to his home life never
left him; rather with the coming of children it became constitu-
tional. The eldest child Henry John Mollett was born at the
Esplanade home on November 30, 1886, but the subsequent six
children all daughters—were born and reared at “Lilybank.”
The mention of the children recalls the first great tragedy that
entered the lives of Mr. and Mrs. Draper. The boy, Henry, was
less than five years old when he died under distressing circum-
stances on July 31, 1891. While playing in the road near the
house he picked up an undischarged cartridge. He began to probe
THE LIFE OF A, J. DRAPER


it and then hammered it between two stones. It exploded, and the
little fellow fell terribly wounded about the body. His father
was in town. Mrs. Draper had the draught horse harnessed to the
buckboard and drove alone over the rough sandy four-mile track
to Cairns with the boy across her knees. She arrived at Dr. Koch’s
house about 5 o’clock in the evening; but all her wonderful resource
and anguish of mind availed little. Henry died about midnight.
All through life A. J. Draper was horrified by the possibility
of the public’s “finding him out’’ as being subject to human frail-
ties. An instance is given by the Town Clerk (Mr. A. E. Wilkin-
son). Regularly, when Mayor, A, J. stepped into the Town Clerk’s
office at 9 a.m. prior to going to his own office. Any business that
had come in since the previous morning was then dealt with. One
morning he was late, and when he came he was looking unwell.
He got through the business as though it were a task and the Clerk
asked him if he were ill. The Mayor looked at him as if alarmed.
“I don’t think I am,” he replied. “Why, can you see it?’’ Shortly
after he had left the office he returned. He looked troubled. “I
say, Wilkinson; I’m not too well. I think I’ll go home for a while.
You are sure you can notice it, are you?”
He went back home, not so much to get over the indisposition
as to hide it from others. This mental attitude was with him always.
If he had a cold he was irritated, not by the cold, but by the con-
sciousness that other people knew it and persisted in sympathising
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


with him. When he was stricken down finally it was by an attack
of which he had had several warnings, but very few people knew
about them.
The Show Association.
THE decade which followed Draper's arrival in Cairns in 1 884
was a period of rapid transition. All the public movements
that helped to spur the settlement along the road to prosperity
were inaugurated in that era. At least there are few of the city’s
enterprises to-day but had their origin in those years, and against
the few mushroom institutions of later years may be set those im-
portant public engagements which have been allowed to lapse. One
such was the show committee that is the Agricultural, Pastoral
and Mining Association. In its initial stages and until about 1905,
when he relinquished the office, A. J. Draper was secretary to the
association. From 1900 an annual two days’ show was held in
grounds at Edgehill between the road from Cairns and the railway
line. The railway station indeed was near the gate to the grounds
and about a mile and a half from the town. It was eminently
suitable in point of distance. But later the committee removed to
new grounds secured upon a 99 years’ lease from the late William
Pryne, then the licensee of the Union Jack (Four-Mile) Hotel, at
what was later named Woree. The new grounds were certainly
picturesque. They were encircled by a thick grove of massive
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


mango trees through which the sun glinted upon a thousand differ-
ent tints and shades. Through the trees the green of the neigh-
bouring grass paddocks enhanced the colourful effect in the bright
weather that invariably favoured the function. Between 2000 and
3000 people attended the annual gathering and most of them
scattered in groups beneath the trees during the luncheon hour. The
ladies in their late Victorian costumes, with neat hats and bright
sunshades, added the charm of animated colour to the general
scheme. For many years during Draper s direction of the organis-
ation the show outing was the festival of the district. But it was
not that only. Draper, when he was interested in anything strove
that all the practical value of that thing should be realised. With
him business came first. It was so in regard to the association.
The natural result was that to the social success was added such
material success that the functions became part and parcel of the
economic life of the community; products were constantly im-
proved because of it. The secretary was one of the prominent
exhibitors besides being a constant competitor, and often winner,
in the ring events. He was proud of his horses and of his horse
knowledge, and the opinion of the judges usually lent justice to his
pride.
The preparation and the conduct of the association’s annual
outing entailed a great amount of detailed work and organisation,
and as usual the bulk of it fell to the secretary. But in addition,
a comprehensive two days’ exhibition was held “second instal-
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


ment” as the secretary termed it in the Divisional (Shire) Hall.
The organisation did not decline until after Draper’s severance from
it. With the greater development of sugar cane as the all-engross-
ing industry of the coastal belt, interest appeared to wane and the
shows became but a memory of their former power. When the
race club acquired the new course with its enclosures and grand-
stand opposite the Four-Mile Hotel at Woree, in 1911, it was
suggested that the two organisations might combine forces and run
their meetings in unison. Subsequent shows were held at the race-
course but they never attracted the interest that had gone into the
earlier gatherings. They were held until about 1923 and, although
much work was carried out by the executives, sentiment more than
a practical outlook appeared to be the chief impetus. Later efforts
to revive the show association were sporadic and fruitless.
During this period of 1 5 years ( 1 890-1 905) A. J. Draper was
also devoting his attention to the affairs of the Fire Brigade Board,
of which he was almost continuously a member, and many times
chairman. As Mayor, he was chairman of the board the year before
his death. He was trustee of the Cairns Cemetery, a Justice of the
Peace and a Licensing Justice almost from the time he arrived
in Cairns.
THE LIFE OF A, J. DRAPER


Cairns Garrison Battery.
MANY Australians will remember the Russian scare of 1883.
There were many scares during the last quarter of the
19th century just as later there were an Indian, a German and a
Yellow Peril to threaten the hearths of those living in such outposts
of Empire as Australia. The scare that had the ominous figure
of the Czar in the background was probably a reflex of the Crimean
War. In any case it culminated in an enthusiastic effort to defend
the Far North against the Russian gunboats that even then were
reported to have been seen in Torres Straits. The people of the
North were particularly alarmed; they took a mental view of their
extensive seaboard, thought deeply of the scattered population and
of the meagre means of withstanding any assault from the sea.
The long grey shadows of the mysterious gunboats were seen in
dreams and the belted legions of the Czar were imagined to be
lurking everywhere on the fringe of the great continent. The
alarm was real.
The authorities called upon the Police Magistrate (Mr. W.
R. O. Hill) to organise a volunteer corps, and within three days
of the first meeting, in April, 1885, 96 men had been enrolled.
W. C. Smith, later the manager of the Bank of North Queensland,
was elected first captain and his lieutenant was A. J. Draper, who
had only recently arrived in Cairns. Draper was slow to be stam-
peded, but the agitations of the time left their impress upon his
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


thought. Always an Imperialist of the unostentatious if determined
type, and already a keen Northerner, he argued that, scare or no
•care, the coastline of North Queensland was particularly open to
attack by gunboats. Should any power decide to wrest Australia
from the circle of the British Empire, where was a more vulnerable
point than Cape York Peninsula? What hope of effective resist-
ance had the handful of pioneers who had no means of rapid com-
munication with the south or anywhere else?
The volunteer force was placed under the Defence Act as a
garrison battery, and to it Draper was posted as acting lieutenant on
June 11,1 885. Two years later he was promoted to the captaincy
of the battery, with Tills as lieutenant. The Cairns Garrison Bat-
tery became a crack corps early and participated regularly in the
annual encampments held at Townsville. Draper led it several
times to the encampments, and during his leadership the corps, two
years in succession, was awarded a silver bugle trophy for the best
all round company and for big gun practice at Kissing Point.
On one of these trips to Townsville Captain Draper was the
unwitting cause of some humour at the expense of Lieutenant Tills.
The lieutenant was very tall, and in his youth no stoop of the
shoulders detracted from his height. As the vessel crossed Cleve-
land Bay Captain Draper asked if anyone had seen Lieutenant
Tills. There was silence for a while, and then the respectful voice
of one, Gunner Rhodes, volunteered: “Yes, Captain, he’s jist
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


stepped ashore.” The vessel was about three leagues off shore at
the time.
Another incident, amusing and semi-tragic, was the “battle of
‘Lilybank.’ ” It commenced as a sham fight between the various
units of the defence force, the object being to capture or hold the
hill at “Lilybank.” The inherent rivalry between the garrison
battery and the other forces became keen to enmity during the
fight, with a result that more than one casualty was registered. A
combatant left the field with his ear almost severed by a cutlass
and another appeared before a subsequent court-martial in the drill
hall with a black eye. Asked by the presiding officer where he
got it he responded dolefully: “On active service. Sir.”
“Silence!”
The garrison artillery (or battery) remained active for some
years; in fact, although it went into recess it never actually went
out of commission until the taking over and reorganising of the
Queensland Defence Force after the assumption of defence respon-
sibility by the Commonwealth. Draper, however, did not retain
his commission for more than two years. He took the work seri-
ously and especially maintained his right to effective equipment.
He was several times at loggerheads with the authorities, his most
serious difference with them being about a gun. He possessed an
old battered and out-of-date heavy gun with which he was expected
to train his men. The gun (the barrel of which remained at the
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


Cairns drill hall for many years and was buried in the yard about
four years ago) had been dismantled at Sebastopol in the Crimea,
and was really a relic more than an effective unit in the defence
material of the Cairns Garrison Artillery. Captain Draper con-
sidered that the battery was not only ill served by the thing, but
that the dignity of the force suffered by having to rely upon it at
all. Even in the volunteer corps before the creation of the gar-
rison battery the matter of equipment was a sore point with the
officers. The volunteers had been supplied with rifles and bayo-
nets but were never equipped with belts in which to put the bayo-
nets. When asked by a fellow officer what the men were to do
with the bayonets. Captain Draper is reported to have replied:
“Tell them to stick ’em behind their ears.”
Draper’s severance with the battery came on November 29,
1 889, when, at his request, he was transferred to the unattached
list with the rank of captain. He was succeeded in the captaincy
of the battery by Tills. A few years later, 1 896, Major Ricardo
(Brisbane) invited Draper to act as enrolling officer in order to
revive the garrison battery. Tills had left the district for a time
and the battery had languished through lack of incentive. Draper
eagerly assented to help revive the unit. His instructions were to
enrol a company of 61 to be known as the North Queensland Gar-
rison Battery whose headquarters were to be at Cairns and half of
whose complement was to be stationed at Thursday Island. En-
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


rolment was slow, however, although Captain Draper threw all his
characteristic energy into the effort. The zeal of those who had
sponsored the earlier corps was lacking and the enlisting of the
Thursday Island detachment was more expeditious than that of
the Cairns quota. But in February of the new year (1897) Major
Ricardo telegraphed his appreciation of Draper’s services and asked
for a list of the enrolments. He concluded with a hearty invita-
tion to Draper to captain the battery. But A. J, had had enough
for the time being. He was proud of the honour paid by the Com-
mandant but did not think that the ride from Lilybank on two
nights a week, merely to drill 25 men, would be justified from
his own or his family’s point of view. But his interest could not
die, and where his interests were his effort went also.
Consequently, it gives no surprise to find him in army history
a provost-marshal at the June encampment at Townsville in 1897
attached to the naval brigade.
In May of the same year he was again on the active list of
the land forces and he was posted to the Townsville Garrison Bat-
tery in the following September. Two years later (October, 1 899)
he was transferred to the command of “F” company of the Third
Queensland (Kennedy) regiment. He was still in command when,
on December 1, 1901, he was placed upon the retired list. At
the time of his death he was registered upon the retired list of the
Australian defence forces First Military District.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


Until his retirement, of course, he was senior military officer in
Cairns. In this capacity he found much to interest him in the
Transvaal or Boer War. He was busy recruiting the few volun-
teers that left Cairns to become members of the expeditionary
force or working zealously at the head of the Cairns Patriotic Fund
—formed to take care of the families of those who went overseas or
of the dependants of those who did not return. When the World
War broke out in 1914 his military training and Imperial outlook
reasserted themselves. He resumed his active participation in the
vital concerns of the country with effective results.
In passing out of this period of active military work one might
recall the amusing and almost serious election incident of 1893. As
a result Captain Draper was seriously court-martialled and sen-
tenced by Colonel French. But an appeal was lodged and it was
ordered that the sentence be reversed and the punishment struck
out.
Mcllwraith Days.
Richard ash kingsford, a former more or less suc-
cessful business man in Brisbane, had represented South
Brisbane in the Legislative Assembly as a supporter of Samuel Grif-
fith, the liberal or radical leader. But he very soon changed his
political allegiance to the Mcllwraith-Macrossan combination. The
ultimate result was that South Brisbane also elected to transfer
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


its allegiance—from him. Kingsford married his daughter to W.
C. Smith, manager of the North Queensland bank in Cairns, and
it was through the representations of his son-in-law that Kingsford
decided to try his political metal in Cairns—or Cook as the con-
stituency was then called.
In passing it might be pointed out that this domestic relation-
ship of Kingsford and Smith was the origin of a more epochal event
in world affairs many years later. Smith’s son carried the name of
father and grandfather to the four corners of the earth in 1927
when he crossed the Atlantic from America to Australia in a Fok-
ker triple engine monoplane. As Kingsford Smith his subsequent
exploits became important in aerial history
Actually Draper’s initiation into State politics was associated
with Kingsford. The success of the municipal campaign was merely
a preliminary exercise in strategy. Draper’s political deity at the
time was Mcllwraith, and it was as a Mcllwraithian candidate that
Kingsford went into the 1 888 campaign. He started with bright
prospects. In 1883, Fred T. Wimble had established the first news-
paper in the town, “The Cairns Post,” which at this time was
espousing Mcllwraith. In 1 886, the “Cairns Chronicle” came into
being with Edward Charles Mollett Draper (A. J’s. brother) as its
editor. It also championed (Sir) Thomas Mcllwraith. But a
split in the support occurred over Wimble’s reluctance to tolerate
Kingsford as the candidate for Cook. Wimble was a power owing
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


to his effective land and business deals, but chiefly through the aid
of his weekly newspaper. He had no inclination to trust Kings-
ford, whom he regarded as a renegade from his earlier political
faith and who, he believed, would desert his new leaders when it
suited his own purpose so to do. Wimble personally interviewed
Mcllwraith to obtain his endorsement of H. E. King’s nomination
as the party candidate for Cook. King had been speaker during
the Griffiths Government. Mcllwraith did not yield to the plea
and Wimble then placed his own services and those of his paper
at the disposal of the other party. He became the Griffith candi-
date for Cook. Naturally the taunt of “ratting” that he had flung
at Kingsford was flung with some violence back to him by Kings-
ford’s supporters.
The 1888 election campaign thereupon became interesting
and of historical importance to the North. The Griffith candidate
was now the favourite. The services of the oldest and most in-
fluential newspaper, and of its editor-proprietor, were withdrawn
from Mcllwraith. Griffith was the “democratic” leader; his Gov-
ernment had granted and commenced the railway in Cairns;
Wimble was a strong local candidate; he had been a member of
the hospital board and other public bodies; he had originated the
progress association; he was a member of the first borough council
of which Kingsford was the Mayor; he was an ardent Separationist,
and of particular popularity at that time was the fact that he, and
the “Cairns Post,” had kept up a running campaign for the separa-
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


tion of Cairns from the Cook electorate. These things became is-
sues and the success of Wimble at the election was no evidence of
lack of energy and enterprise by Draper and the committee sup-
porting Kingsford. Wimble became the member and remained
so until the bank troubles of 1893 affected him keenly. He re-
signed from Parliament and left the North to re-engage in his old
business of printers’ furnisher and printing ink maker in Sydney.
But the election of 1888 was also responsible for the creation
of a separate Cairns electorate. Political history really began for
Cairns as an entity of standing.
Mr. Draper, while supporting Kingsford, was also a keen
fighter for many of the reforms for which Wimble stood. He was
a Separationist and we have already mentioned his advocacy of
the railway and his work in its interest. He had been one of the
first to advocate also the splitting of the electorate, and he carried
on these efforts long after that memorable election of ’BB.
The Barron Board.
IN 1893, he commenced his long association with the Barron
Shire, or Divisional Board, as it was then termed. He was
secretary to the board the territory of which commenced near
Freshwater Creek at the Cairns divisional boundary and embraced
the region below and above the range to within 12 miles of
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


Mareeba. The authority remained in existence until 1919, when the
section below the range reverted to the Cairns Shire, and that above
the range was merged with Woothakata Shire. During the whole
course of this shire connection A. J. acted as secretary, kept the
books, performed the usual duties of clerk to such an institution,
and supplied an office in his own business premises. From his
salary of about £ 100 per annum he paid an assistant clerk and
bought all the necessary stationery.
The board was an important municipal authority for many
years but with the growing importance of Cairns as a shire and as
a city it was relieved gradually of much of its usefulness. Meet-
ings which at one time were fully represented and very enthusiastic
began to lapse for lack of quorums. For some time, in fact, it was
generally stated that A. J. Draper was really the Barron Shire.
His association with the board at all events helped forward his
thorough grasp of municipolitics. By his almost faultless know-
ledge of the Local Authorities Act he constituted himself, even as
a young man, an authority upon matters of municipal government.
Many times at Barron Board meetings he was the power behind
the chair.
Consideration for those whose duties impelled them to sit
through the meetings, although taking no official part in them, was
a particular characteristic of Mr. Secretary Draper. One instance
had its element of ironic humour. He approached the Press table
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


where a representative of the Cairns “Trinity Times,” a youth who,
new to his job then, has seen many vicissitudes in press work and
other work since then. He was Mr. J. Anderson, who is now on
the reading staff of the “Cairns Post.”
“Look here, young fellow,” said the board secretary, “What
do you want to sit through all this for? You can’t understand
them; they don’t know what they’re talking about themselves. If
you wait till they start banging the ink bottles at each other you
might block one with your head. Skip off and have a swim; I’ll
dish up something about it for you after.”
The young reporter skipped and A. J. was true; to his bond.
He supplied a report that gladdened that young man’s heart.
In Sporting Vein.
A NEWSPAPER had existed in Cairns since 1882. In 1883
it was called “The Cairns Post,” a weekly paper marked
by its vigour and recklessness. It published a lament which was
at the same time a censure upon a community that had not sufficient
public spirit to form a race club. The gibe was not permitted to
stand, so a jockey club was formed and was successful for about
five years. It is recorded that the steamer “Bee” conveyed a
large number of passengers up the inlet to land them within three-
quarters of a mile of the race-course for the first race meeting.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


The club had varying fortunes, and amongst its enthusiastic
supporters was A. J. Draper. Yet before the end of the decade
it had ceased to function. The newspaper again came to the front
with scorn and derision and the club was resuscitated in 1894. A
New Year’s Day meeting was held on the old course. Then the
club acquired another course at Edgehill beside the show grounds.
Still another course was obtained at Warwon, now called Queerah.
Draper was one of the three trustees of the new course and was the
last of the three to die. None of them nominated a successor in
the trusteeship. For some years A. J. was secretary, trustee or
judge to the Cairns Club, and in those years it had become an in-
stitution in the district. With the increasing prosperity of the club
and of the district many members thought that the course was too
far out, so they obtained the lease of a ground from Mr. John Can-
non at Woree. They amalgamated with the Mulgrave Jockey Club
and ran a few meetings as the Cairns-Mulgrave Jockey Club until
the two sections went their separate ways.
Draper, however, had ceased his official connection with the
club by that time, but continued his support. He was a regular
attendant at meetings and several times in public recorded his
opinion that “a live jockey club—and bowling club—were of im-
portance to any community.” Upon another occasion he said that
both those clubs were amongst the few outward and visible signs
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


of a people’s civilisation. He spoke with his characteristic unob-
trusive humour, but also with a certain sense of conviction.
When he attended race meetings, even though he was out of
office, he was generally discovered on the ground and invited to
the officials’ stand. It was a courtesy for past services to the club,
and one which he always remembered vividly and gratefully.
Matters of sport occupied his mind considerably for the
greater part of his life. In fact, at no time was he completely free
of self-imposed obligations to one sporting body or another. While
he took a keen interest personally in such bodies as the race club,
the aquatic club and the bowling club, he was also ready with a
helping word or cheque for other organisations. For more than
20 years he was patron or president of the tennis club in which his
daughters were always urged forward to active participation. Foot-
ball and cricket were very little in his selection, although he was
enthusiastic in the development of a football club in connection
with the Kennedy Regiment.
It has been said that bowling was Mr. Draper’s best love in
the sports. At least in the last years he devoted most of his time
to it and was the most consistent supporter of the early efforts
to establish a club in Cairns. The first definite step forward was
taken in 1908; he was one of the originators who met in the Cairns
stock exchange on August 31, of that year, and decided to form
a club. The Mayor, the late Mr. Sinclair Miller, presided. A. J.,
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


inevitably it would seem, was one of those included in the sub-
committee appointed to study problems connected with the acquisi-
tion of the ground and to devise means of raising funds. From
that day he was a thorough devotee of the game. The aims of the
new body, however, did not materialise immediately, and about
two years later a new effort was made to “form a bowling club in
Cairns.” This time it met with better results. W. J. Munro was
elected the first president. The organisation progressed and within
a year was meeting in its own club house. Draper became trustee
and president in 1915 at a meeting held on November 24, and
he held the office until his death. Like many other associations the
Cairns Bowling Club has placed upon permanent record a gen-
erous minute to his interest in the club from its inception.
At that meeting, in 1908, which really originated the Cairns
club, another present was Norman Edgar Percy Draper, the young-
est brother of the subject of these notes. He was at this time be-
ginning to take his place in public and business affairs beside his
brothers. E. C. M. Draper has been referred to before; after a
life of exceptional vitality he died in 1901. Harvey George Lloyd
had made a reputation for himself as an architect in Victoria and
Western Australia and he is memorialised in Cairns (he died in
1921) by several of the most handsome public and private
buildings in the district, including the picturesque bowling club
pavilion. In the middle nineties Arthur Frank Miles Draper ar-
rived in Cairns from the Jerilderie branch of the Bank of Austral-
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


asia, following the steps of his oldest brother. But he soon gave up
the banking career upon which he had set out. He was activated
by a more roaming disposition and went gold seeking. He re-
turned to Victoria for a time after his mining experiences but
came back to Cairns to engage in the sugar industry with Swallow
Bros, at Hambledon; then at Mossman. Finally he drifted out of
the North to settle in the Northern Rivers country of N.S.W.
Herbert Allen Cecil Dtaper was associated with Arthur in
sugar growing at Mossman in the middle nineties but subsequently
entered the business of A. J. Draper Ltd., devoting himself par-
ticularly to its extension in the outside centres.
This digression has not been essential, probably, except to re-
cord the Draper strain of activity that appeared to have been trans-
mitted from Captain Draper to his sons.
Local Government.
HIS battles on behalf of the Cairns Divisional Board candi-
dates, his own association with the Barron Divisional
Board, his activity in State political elections during the five or six
years after his marriage, and his membership of the Cairns Borough
Council, were all thorough schooling for A. J. Draper in the law
and practice of municipolitics. Allied with his keen study of local
government theory this experience gave him the reputation of an
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


authority upon the subject. That the reputation was not ill placed
was proved several times during the last decade of the century.
For some years the Northern local authorities had been muttering
their discontent with the provisions of the Local Government Act.
It was regarded as being so obsolete that it was not only ineffective
but a hindrance to the proper working of the public bodies. The
disaffection was more keenly felt in the North because of the other
disabilities under which the people suffered—in fact which had
given rise to the Separation movement. An agitation for the re-
vision of the Local Government Act was led in Cairns by such as
A. J. Draper. When it became allied with the Separationist move-
ment, and after it had actually spread to the South, the Govern-
ment was moved to take notice. They set up a c.ommission to in-
quire into the working of the act and to investigate all possible
avenues of improvement. The Home Secretary (Hon. Sir Horace
Tozer) drew up a local government bill which was hailed by
Draper in the North as one of the most skilful bills that had ever
been drawn up. The commission went to work, and in 1896 sub-
mitted a very voluminous report to Parliament. The report em-
bodied a bill somewhat along the lines that Tozer’s Bill followed
but differing from it in certain points. The proposed bill was quite
satisfactory and, if it became law, would wholly or partially repeal
about 54 existing acts including the Local Government Act and the
Divisional Boards Act. Future local authorities would all work
under the same local authorities act. Provision was also made for
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


the creation of port authorities to control their respective foreshores
and possessing its own harbour dues fund.
It was in this matter that Draper’s knowledge of local govern-
ment was tested and definitely accepted. It was impossible that
everybody could see the proposed bill, nor were all the aldermen
able to digest the tremendous amount of material collected by the
commission. As the annual conference of local authorities was to
sit in Cairns the following year it was necessary that the trend of
the movement and the proposals of the commission should be
made known. So Draper was asked to make them known. He
pamphletised the history of the demands for a reorganisation of
local authority legislation, the recommendations of the commission
and the terms of the proposed bill. His analysis of the bill was
minute and popular—the more popular as he could step aside at
intervals to comment vividly upon issues that presented themselves.
For instance: “The right of Chinese to vote is abolished, and 1
think no-one will regret it.” He was equally cryptic in regard to
the proposed prevention of “dummying.”
He was elected to the mayoralty without opposition that year.
Two reasons given by his nominator were that he was eminently
fitted to receive the Governor, who was to visit Cairns within the
year, and that it was in the interests of Cairns to have him repre-
sent the council at the annual local authorities conference. He
had represented Cairns already at three of the six conferences, but
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


as the issue was the proposed local government act amendments
Draper was regarded as one possessing particular qualifications.
Nor were the aldermen disappointed. The conference was held in
July, 1897, and Draper was elected president. The proposed bill
was exhaustively discussed but has no interest here, of course. The
Act was ultimately amended closely upon the lines of the proposed
bill. As a consequence, Cairns borough became a town and the
old divisional board became a shire. The new act became law in
1902 while Draper was again in the mayoral chair.
“The Cairns Post.”
ABOUT 1 895, when Draper was actively concerned in pro-
moting so many movements that he was really guiding the
policy of a district, he acquired a new weapon that became a
mighty fighting force in his hands. His brother, Edward Charles
Mollett (“Hoppy”) Draper, one of the cleverest journalists in
Australia at the time, took over the control of the “Cairns Post.”
His earlier venture, “The Chronicle,” had long ceased publication.
But back of the venture was the business and financial acumen of
the real proprietor, A. J. Draper. Whatever “Hoppy’s” abilities
as a writer were, whatever the strength of his argument and the
penetrating power of his invective, he was not regarded as re-
sponsible in business matters.
THE LIFE OF A, J. DRAPER


E. C. Draper guided public opinion to definite purpose in re-
gard to what he considered should be public affairs, and it is a
justified hazard that many problems would have lapsed altogether
for lack of impetus had not the weekly paper supplied it. This in-
fluence can be traced in several of those institutions in which A. J.
Draper was himself interested. The School of Arts committee, for
instance, had existed since 1887 but had been allowed to languish.
Draper was one of the trustees. Soon after the appearance of the
new “Cairns Post” a leader and a few reminders were responsible
for the committee’s resuscitation in February, 1897. The committee
has been operating ever since and Draper was always a keen sup-
porter, for the greater part of the time as a trustee or committee-
man.
But greater utility was made of the journal by the Draper
brothers in keeping alive interest in the economic welfare of the
district. In sugar cane possibilities it was always alert and de-
veloped a reputation as the “Sugar Journal of the North.” Whe-
ther a public newspaper should be delighted with being a reputed
“single track” organ is a matter that may be debated elsewhere.
The point of concern is that at that time it was a valuable forum
for public discussion. From it the work of clearing the Barron
Valley and the Mulgrave Valley for sugar cane growing may be
said to have drawn its most insistent urge.
It might be profitable to review at this point some results of
that urge.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


More Struggles for Sugar.
A MEETING of property owners from the Freshwater and
Barron River district was held in Cairns on May 15, 1895.
The gathering was the outcome of a general belief that the rich
lands were eminently suitable for the growing of sugar cane. In
fact, a suggestion had been made that the lands would be quickly
developed if a mill were erected in the vicinity of the Barron
River. The meeting resolved itself into a company for the pur-
pose of promoting such a mill, and Draper was appointed its secre-
tary.
Soon afterwards he circularised every property owner in the
area to the effect that 3612 acres had been guaranteed at an esti-
mated value of £IB,OOO. The sum, of course, was considerably
short of the amount needed as a guarantee if they expected the
Government to listen to their request. The area had special facili-
ties for the successful operation of a mill. The railway passed
through it to Redlynch, and the Barron River passed through an-
other section which afforded ready and cheap means of transport.
The mill at such a centre would have drawn upon 12,000 acres,
and from that fact could be gauged the complementary fact that
the mill need never suffer from insufficient cane.
It happened that when the company was being formed Mr. R.
W. McCulloch, the Government valuator, was in the North valu-
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


ing the Russell River lands. The Barron River Company invited
him to inspect the land at the Freshwater end, for which permis-
sion was given by his department. But his report was disappoint-
ing to the shareholders. Draper argued that the land had not
been given a proper chance because of the limited time at Mr. Mc-
Culloch’s disposal and also because he had been suffering from
a fever all the time he had been in the Cairns district. At Draper’s
pleading the Government consented to allow Mr. E. Cowley, super-
intendent of the Kamerunga State Nursery, near Redlynch, to re-
value the lands. He did, and submitted a highly favorable report.
But the Government did not accept his valuation, which was ap-
proximately 50 per cent, higher than McCulloch’s.
Draper again drew up a case for the mill and sent it to Bris-
bane. When the Hon. R. Philp, Minister for Mines and Railways,
was in Cairns on April 2, 1896, a deputation comprising Draper,
Tills, R. Sturt, J. J. Fallon, A. Martin and M. Petersen placed their
case before him. Draper, as chief spokesman, was supported espec-
ially by Sturt and Tills. The Minister was sympathetic but non-
committal—as Ministers often are. He was prepared to accept a
10 per cent, increase upon the Government valuation, he said, but
it was of no use their demanding a mill if they could not put in
sufficient securities. He chided them with having flown in the
Government’s face as soon as they got their valuation, instead of
permitting the Government to help them.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


“We were not flying in your face,” Draper deprecated. “But
in the face of McCulloch; he didn’t know what he was talking
about.”
But the movement died; the Government was never satisfied
with the securities offered by the provisional directors, who saw
nothing ahead but dissolution. The successful operations at Mul-
grave and Mossman mills also hastened the end of the Barron Val-
ley effort.
A great deal of publicity was also given the Aloomba Central
Mill Company’s effort to establish a mill near the Mulgrave in the
dying months of last century. Money was appropriated by the
Government for the mill and Draper was appointed valuator. But
the efforts came to nought. The Aloomba growers accepted an
agreement to have their cane crushed at Hambledon. Subsequently,
when the Barron River lands were supplying cane to the Mulgrave
mill, an exchange was made; Aloomba land was assigned to Mul-
grave and the Barron lands diverted their supplies to Hambledon.
Another abortive proposition was that of the growers on the
Russell River. The Bellenden Ker Central Mill Company was
formed at a meeting of settlers held in the Cairns Divisional Hall,
in June, 1895. Provisional directors were appointed and the Gov-
ernment was approached for the necessary grant. After some de-
lay the company was duly registered, a board was appointed and
shares allotted. Another delay occurred while the directors and
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


shareholders debated whether the mill site should be at French-
man’s Creek or Harvey’s Creek. In 1897, a compromise was
reached and the chairman (W. H. Swallow), announced that Junc-
tion Creek had been agreed upon. Meanwhile the Government
had made an appropriation for the mill and was then awaiting the
settlement of the internal disputes.
To the difficulties was added the inclusion in the bill of a
clause prohibiting the employment of alien labour. The bill was
refused the Royal assent. Draper was running with the cam-
paigners and his paper was giving all the assistance that a news-
paper could. In March, 1 897, he held about 250 shares in the com-
pany. But by 1898 the end of the company had come and the
money allotted was diverted by the Government to other mills.
This was the last of the uphill struggles for sugar in which Draper
was concerned; thenceforward his efforts were to be crowned with
success. His dream of a large cane industry from the Russell River
to the Barron was not permitted to die. Even as the Bellenden Ker
project was dissolving before him he was watching and carrying
out the greatest work of his lifetime—the Mulgrave Central Mill.
Greater Politics.
POLITICAL movements retained his attention, especially in
the years when he was at the top of his fighting form. His
connection with Divisional Board and Council candidates and his
Mcllwraith activities were merely skirmishes compared with his
zealous advocacy of later Ministerial candidates. He was liberal-
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


minded, an Imperialist, secessionist and an individualist—all beliefs
and qualities that provoked storms of political controversy in those
times. Withal, he had keen admiration for men like Sir Thomas
Mcllwraith and Robert Philp.
In those battles, as far as Cairns was concerned, there were
only two political parties—Ministerialist and Opposition.
Politics in the ten years preceding Federation were lively, and
big issues faced the young community of Cairns. Draper, of course,
was active. Hon. T. J, Byrne, elected 1893, became Attorney-
General in the Nelson Ministry, but at the election in 1896 disap-
pointment was expressed in deliberate terms and tones by the
Cairns Political Association, when he withdrew from Cairns to con-
test North Brisbane. Draper, the secretary of the association, led
a mild revolt inside the organisation against the action of the Gov-
ernment in nominating Isidore Lissner to contest Cairns without
consulting the local Ministerial party. Another Ministerialist, E.
A. Milford, a Cairns solicitor, contested the plebiscite, and Draper’s
support of him was guided by the facts that Lissner belonged to
another district and that the Government had challenged their
rights as free selectors. But Lissner was endorsed by the Cairns
Association and had no stronger fighting supporter than his secre-
tary, Draper. He also won the election, the defeated candidate
being Thomas Givens.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


W. J. Munro was the secretary to the organisation for the fol-
lowing election in 1899. Lissner, who had not visited the elector-
ate once during his term, was advised by the association to with-
draw. He did. The selected Ministerialist was Thomatis, who
also withdrew his candidature later in favor of an independent—J.
P. Hoolan, M.L.A. for Burke. The Ministerial organisation swung
behind Hoolan, chiefly because of his advocacy of the Etheridge
railway, which would link the Etheridge country with the port of
Cairns via Chillagoe. But Givens was again returned, although
after a hard fight. In that and in his other campaigns—he was de-
feated by J. Lyons in 1902—he confessed that his opponents were
not his chief concern but that always he had to fight Munro, Draper
and Tills. The enthusiastic triumvirate pursued the sitting member
from camp to camp seeking definite answers to questions. Amongst
other things they charged Givens with having thwarted the Bel-
lenden Ker mill and delayed the Babinda Creek mill for ten years
through his opposition to alien labour. Givens, on the other hand,
was just as defiant; while he favored the central mill policy he
would nevertheless lift no hand or finger to assist the establish-
ment of a mill which would only mean the advance of large sums
of public money to create a colony of Chinese or Kanakas. Draper
demanded to know where the white labour was to come from
and how they could do the work as cheaply as the alien; Givens
retorted that that was the business of Draper, Munro and Tills; his
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


concern was that people of his own race should prevent the colon-
ising of the North by Chinese and Japanese. Draper and Tills
were particularly irritating to the member. When question time
arose Draper would be busy turning back to the candidate his own
statements, which were being diligently extracted from copies of
Hansard by his lieutenant, Tills. At one meeting in Nelson (Gor-
donvale), Givens challenged them to come on to the platform and
debate the question at issue. The invitation was rushed; Draper
and Tills stamped on to the platform amidst the mingled applause
and execrations of a typical Northern political audience. Many of
those who listened decided that both sides won the debate. At any
rate Givens did not win the election.
Several attempts to have Draper contest the seat in those years
were fruitless. He gloried in the tussles and in the hard hitting
that characterised political campaigning then; he was also alive to
the significance of political action in the settlement of local prob-
lems; but he had been building up great business interests that oc-
cupied his thought and time, which certainly were more remunera-
tive than the hazards of politics would have been. Besides, he
argued that politicians were merely the instruments through which
measures were carried into law; the real political force lay at their
back in the communities that originated measures and fought them
through the hustings. Perhaps, he was right.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


Lyons did not contest the 1904 election and the Government
candidate was Draper’s old friend, Tills. John Mann was the
Labor candidate to succeed Givens who, after his defeat, had gone
into the Senate in 1903. Mann defeated Tills and held the seat
until 1912, when he went down to the redoubtable W. McCor-
mack, the ultimate Labor Premier. Mann had left the Labor Party
after his first election and ran as an Independent. He essayed
Federal politics with the aid of Draper in 1913, but unsuccessfully.
Draper personally was friendly with the new Labor member (Mc-
Cormack). Nevertheless, he had political principles, and from
them he never wavered. He believed that the Labor movement
owed all its political success to the fact that they made it a busi-
ness; that they studied economics and politics.
During subsequent elections, Federal and State, he was always
a committeeman of the campaign organisation. Generally, he was
chairman.
“The Greatest of These.”
AS secretary to the hospital committee Draper watched the in-
stitution grow from the primitive structure of the early
eighties to one of the finest in the State. He was re-elected to the
secretaryship at the annual meetings with almost monotonous regu-
larity, and particularly during the annual appeals for funds on Hos-
pital Sundays was his honorary work appreciated. In this capacity
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


he was greatly assisted by Mrs. Draper, not only in her office as
Mayoress but as one whose interest in the institution was personal.
She was one of the leaders for many years in the women’s commit-
tees organised at various times and for various objects, all tending
to the assistance of that and other purposes of charity. She was
prominent, too, in the collecting “drives” made in the city. To-
day the hospital upon the Esplanade is surrounded by a splendid
brick and iron fence that was solely paid for by funds collected
by Mrs. Draper and Mrs. Peter Allen, wife of one of the early
presidents of the hospital.
A. J. relinquished the secretaryship ultimately owing to at-
tacks from a section of the Press. The attacks were directed from
a political angle originally but drifted into a form of personal in-
vective in which was a suggestion, not well disguised, that the secre-
tary received too much remuneration for the service given. His
salary was £SO per annum. He resigned at the general meeting in
1905.
Closely allied with hospital work is that of the Queensland
Ambulance Transport Brigade than which, perhaps, there is no
finer organisation of first aid workers in the world. The Cairns
centre had existed for many years, and had always the sympathetic
support of Draper. In 1921, he and the late P. J. Doyle laid the
foundation stone of the splendid new brigade quarters in Cairns,
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


and in 1926 Draper officially opened it. Superintendent M. J.
Hogan has publicly acknowledged a great debt to Draper for aid
found both in advice and in an open cheque book. In this work he
was also assisted and often represented by his wife. In that, in
the assistance given to soldiers and their dependents during the
Great War, in the Red Cross Society and many others, he found no
support greater than that which he found beside his own hearth.
The Red Cross work called forth a great deal of Mrs. Draper’s
sympathy, and later, when it was proposed to form a local branch
of the Country Women’s Association, she was again the leading
spirit. As a fact, in 1925 the Governor of Queensland (Sir
Mathew Nathan), who was intensely interested in such movements,
was in Cairns prior to his leaving Australia at the end of his term.
He it was who proposed the formation of a branch. The Draper
family were living then at “Kerami,” the city home to which they
had removed from Lilybank in 1922, and it was at “Kerami” that
the inaugural meeting of the C.W.A. was held. Sir Mathew was
present and although the meeting was informal and rather in the
nature of a private afternoon, at that gathering the association was
born. When, shortly afterwards, a branch was definitely formed
with its officers and constitution, Mrs. Draper became the Patron,
Mrs. R. T. McManus was the first president, and Mrs. A. H. Clarke,
the first secretary, assisted by Miss Remilton.
Draper himself was keenly interested in the movement.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


Amongst his charitable interests the Penny Savings Bank
might be referred to, because it was thoughts of the children’s wel-
fare that prompted his support of the Bank. He believed heartily
in inculcating the habits of thrift in children, as much for their
moral as their material satisfaction. The bank has operated in
Cairns very successfully for 30 years. A. J. Draper was a trustee
for some years.
The Mulgrave Mill.
THE Mulgrave Central Mill Company was the first to be regis-
tered under the Sugar Works Guarantee Act of 1 893, which
provided for Government assistance to central mills chiefly with a
view to obviating possible difficulties due to the switching over from
alien labour. The growers on the Mulgrave River concluded that,
without a mill, they would receive but little from their holdings. A
meeting was therefore held in 1893 on Tom Mackay’s farm, near
Edmonton. Amongst those who attended were W. H. Swallow,
John Gordon, Dick Blackwell, Henry Simmonds, Carl M oiler and
a number of other pioneers of the Mulgrave. Swallow presided,
and a provisional directorate was formed with the purpose of pro-
curing a mill. Shortly afterwards Tom Mackay became the chair-
man of the provisional directors. In March, 1 894, the lands were
valued by Mr. Cowley, but the company was not satisfied, and
when, in the following month the Honourables H. M. Nelson, T.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


J. Byrne and R. Philp came to Cairns, the directors waited upon
them for advice. Philp told them bluntly to get some of the land
under cultivation and the Government would stand behind them.
Some of the directors took his advice, and they were then success-
ful in having a new valuation made, for which work the Govern-
ment appointed A. J. Draper. His valuation amounted to
£23,660, considerably more than Cowley’s. The company approved
Draper’s valuation and the Government accepted it. They
sent the company a letter of guarantee and undertook to
add a second valuation when 500 acres were planted. Very
soon 800 acres were planted out. About the same time a Cairns
syndicate, which had bought 1000 acres, known as Mrs. Letrielle’s
block on the bank of the river opposite the mill site, applied to
have it included in the company’s security. Then ensued what al-
most became an irreparable split in the company. One section fav-
oured the taking in of the block and another considered that, as the
proposed mill had a limited crushing capacity of 4000 tons for
the season, they could not take more land. The wrangle went on
for nearly 12 months, but was ultimately settled by the company
accepting the block. Meanwhile a check was received by the
company when James Kenny, of the Cairns Divisional Board, went
to Brisbane to interview the Hon. T. J. Byrne and also Mr. Philp.
His immediate business was to secure assistance for the Cairns Divi-
sional Board’s proposal to construct a tramline to the Mulgrave.
Naturally the proposed mill was the incentive for the tramline,
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


which would convey the sugar to the Cairns wharf. Byrne told
Kenny that the Mulgrave people had given up the desire for a mill.
He was in error, but his information had come from a section of
the growers.
The Minister who came to Cairns shortly afterwards saw and
acknowledged his error. Moreover, he encouraged the provisional
directors to go on with their scheme—provided they could put up
the necessary securities, he said, the Government would back them.
The shareholders put new life into their efforts, the mill went for-
ward not, it may be, without some troubles and drawbacks caused
by the inevitable dissensions inside; and the Divisional Board got
their backing for the Mulgrave tramway, which was officially
opened for traffic in April, 1 897.
The company was definitely registered in Brisbane in Novem-
ber, 1895, and the first formal board of directors was appointed
the following year with Henry Simmonds as chairman. Difficulties
natural to such a big undertaking were encountered. The tram-
line was not laid during the first season at all, but the mill was got
under steam on October 2, 1896, and the first actual crushing was
made four weeks later. At the end of November about 60 workers
were employed in the mill, and a gang of 120 Chinese cutters had
sent 1500 tons of cane through the mill, an average of 24£ tons to
the acre harvested. At this stage Swallow, Munro and R. J. Black
resigned from the directorate, and in their stead were elected
Draper, R. Blackwell and T. Mackay. On his own Mulgrave farm
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


at this time Draper had 65 acres under cane, and had an additional
share interest in virtue of his trusteeship in the estate of the late
George McKay. Immediately upon his accepting a seat upon the
directorate he spent several days at Mulgrave acquainting himself
with the technical processes of the mill and endeavouring to qualify
for an intelligent participation in the deliberations of the company.
It was characteristic of his general business thoroughness and the
beneficial results to the company during the years that followed
were incalculable. He Was known as the Father of the Mill, and it
is true that no single man at any time held such a sweeping know-
ledge of the mill affairs. While he recognised the limitations of a
layman he also appreciated the restricted sphere of the technolo-
gist; the great border line was his held.
The next trouble to face the company was that too much cane
was being crushed, the mill was working a little too satisfactorily,
and more money was needed in order that the plant and tramlines
could be completed. Under the guarantee act they had received
£36,000, and the Government considered that they had exceeded
the limit set by that act; but not to be deterred the directors met
and pledged their own personal credit for an additional advance.
But the enterprise went forward, and in March it was declared to
be working better than any other central mill had worked during
its hrst year. The “Cairns Post,” in a jubilant leader on March 25
of the following year, declared that;—
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


“In the past a blight or shadow pervaded every com-
mercial or speculative effort in (Cairns) company direc-
tion, but now the Mulgrave Central Sugar Mill is about to
make an eventful departure and the old time curse is pre-
paring for a flit.”
Within a few months 1433 tons of sugar, valued at £14,186/-
14/- had been obtained from 13,758 tons of sugar cane, at an
average cost of 3/9 per ton. The net profit was £231 3/14/-. After
all its trials the Mulgrave mill had justified, if ever a mill could,
the passing of the Sugar Works Guarantee Act. But if that were in
its first few months what may be said after its 30 years of life?
Draper was appointed managing director at the third general
meeting of the company, held in May, 1897, and at once entered
into the duties with zeal. At the end of the year he, with Mrs.
Draper and their family of two girls, spent a holiday in Melbourne,
but en route he found time to spend a week in Brisbane busying
himself on behalf of the mill and of the Cairns Municipal Council,
of which he was then Mayor. A result of his importunities at the
door of the Premier and his Treasurer was the securing of another
loan of £IO,OOO for the needed extension of mill plant, rolling
stock and condensing machinery. That was a stroke of business
for the company, although at the end of that financial year (1897),
while registering a nominal profit of £320, they nevertheless
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


suffered a loss because the interest due to the Government for the
year (£16,000) had not been paid.
The general meeting in June, 1 898, therefore, was not very
smooth. Shareholders resent a balance-sheet that does not dis-
close a handsome profit to be scattered about in healthy dividends.
They objected to that one, ignoring the difficulties of the manage-
ment during the year. Three directors were to be nominated in
place of the three retiring members (of whom Draper was one),
the chairman himself was not nominated. Instead, one member
who was not eligible under the articles was nominated. The chair-
man steadily refused to accept it. After a storm, in which it seemed
that the shareholders wished to discard for the time their own art-
icles, the majority walked out of the room. The directors and a
few shareholders were left. However, there was a quorum, and the
three new directors appointed were Draper, Munro and J. Grimes.
Draper was again appointed chairman of directors.
The revolting section of shareholders, led by T. McKay, held
separate meetings in the town, and demanded amongst other things
the alteration of the articles and a complete change of the direct-
orate. Their chief aims were to obtain a different voting system
and an amendment in the qualifications for directors. The aims,
however, could have been achieved by the ordinary method of re-
solution in general assembly.
But the storm died as storms do. In the course of the next
season it was found that the mill had been acting up to its full
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


capacity and that before the 1900 season it would be overtaxed.
Draper and Munro left for Townsville, where they interviewed the
Treasurer (Hon. R. Philp) regarding another loan of £IO,OOO for
plant additions. Munro, besides being a fellow director, was
also chairman of the Divisional Board which had control of the
Mulgrave tramway—“the Mulgrave Railway Commissioner,” he
was called. He was thus a valuable support to the chairman of
the mill in the mission to the Treasurer. The loan was obtained
and expended to the enhanced position of the mill in the follow-
ing seasons.
At the meeting in April, 1899, Munro, who had opposed the
chairman at the previous general meeting on certain points of ad-
ministration, paid a glowing tribute to the financial and business
ability, the energy and private time that the chairman had put at
the disposal of the company during the year. Munro, who came
into conflict on many public matters with Draper in the course of
their 30 years association, revealed an admirable spirit of justice
and appreciation for a service rendered. It was at this meeting also
that, in Draper, was discovered a trait that won the admiration of
even Mackay, who had been bitterly opposed to Draper and all
the works of Draper. It was charged against the chairman that he
had received all the insurance of the mill for his company, insur-
ance which, according to custom, should have been shared by
seven companies. However, it was ascertained that quite the con-
trary had occurred. The premiums had been 15/- in the £IOO,
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


but the Insurance Association had increased it to 25/-. Draper,
as the representative of the South British Company, had objected
to the unfair increase, and he had been supported by his man-
ager. Still the association was the deciding body. Draper would
not accept the increase, so he devised a plan by which the manager
of the mill (Mr. S. W. Davids) could be appointed resident repre-
sentative of the company at Mulgrave. By the plan Draper sacri-
ficed his own commission and saved the mill about £35 per annum.
It was Munro again who vouched for the accuracy of the statement
and the meeting applauded.
The chairman of directors was voted an allowance of £SO for
his work, although Munro moved that it be £IOO. Prior to that
meeting the directors were not remunerated at all, although the
hard work of straightening the finances had occupied their minds
night and day. When Draper took over the chair the books were
in such a confused state that he decided to re-write them. With
the aid of the secretary (Mr. A. W. Mighell) and the local auditor
he spent days on the books until a completely new set had been
written up. The work was particularly commended by the Gov-
ernment auditor.
But the Mackay faction were not silenced easily. Just criti-
cism, of course, is always as necessary as it is the right of share-
holders to criticise, especially when it affects their finances. But it is
hard to gauge the real motive behind the drift that set in against the
directors during those first two or three years. It was set in motion
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


certainly by growers who had personal enmity to serve, but it was
supported by others who voted for those same directors. Thus,
after the 1 898 meeting a petition was presented to the Govern-
ment imploring that the loan of £IO,OOO be not granted until the
articles of association were altered. It contained a long list of rea-
sons, which amounted to charges of unfair dealing, dishonesty and
worse against the directors. It set out 1 7 clauses of complaint.
The directors, when the petition was referred to them by the Gov-
ernment department, immediately sought an inquiry, and the Gov-
ernment appointed B. R. Stafford, P.M., W. T. White, Lands Com-
missioner, and R. W. McCulloch, Government Inspector of Central
Mills, as a board of inquiry to take evidence. They sat in Nel-
son for four days and the result was that the petition was dismissed.
Five and a half of the clauses were discarded at once as merely
matters of statement upon which no evidence could be taken; for
the rest, most of those signing the petition had not even read it.
Mackay himself had not read all of it and disagreed with some
of it. One man had not seen it, but he told a fellow grower to sign
it in his name. The only good that the petition appeared to do was
to let out the simmering thoughts of some growers.
That storm blew over and there was triumph and satisfaction
in the camp of even the Philistine when the 1900 meeting con-
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


sidered the operations of the 1899 season. The directors tabled a
balance-sheet showing a profit of £4995. An outstanding over-
draft at the Q. N. Bank was covered by an outstanding advance
from the Government. All interest debt to the Government had
been met and the working of the mill had been so satisfactory that
not even a grumble was heard at the general meeting. Better than
all else, perhaps, from the shareholders’ point of view, was the pay-
ment of an extra 1/- per ton for cane. Mackay was absent and
the meeting was as amicable as that of any prosperous business con-
cern. By a unanimous vote Draper was awarded the £IOO chair-
man’s allowance that had been denied him at the preceding gen-
eral meeting.
The new century began well with the mill and it was the be-
ginning of a satisfactory series of credit balances. In later years
a complaint frequently heard about the Mulgrave general meetings
was that they were not worth attending; it was impossible to get up
a fight about anything. Some meetings began at 10 o’clock in the
morning and had been finished at the lunch hour.
In 1911 the easy working of the enterprise was interfered
with by a strike which, however, was common to the industry in
all parts of the State. The demands were for an eight hour day
and a minimum weekly wage. Still, the general success of the mill
as a business venture was definite. It was due to the business train-
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


ing of the directors compared with the haphazard methods, or lack
of method, previously adopted By the hard-headed growers; and
die directors unanimously declared, year by year, that the driving
force, the imaginative impetus and the constructive philosophy all
radiated from the chairman. For 31 years, until his death, he pre-
sided over the destinies of the mill without challenge.
White Australia.
THE big question that faced everybody concerned in the
growing of sugar cane was that of field labour. The Poly-
nesians (or Kanakas) were at work in the State before Cairns was
settled at all, and naturally the system was extended to that dis-
trict. From the beginning the efficacy of the Polynesian labourer
had its advocates and its strenuous detractors. The political party,
led by Sir Samuel Griffith, was pledged to the elimination of alien
labour in favour of European labour, and in 1893 they enacted
that island labour be restricted. But later, when Sir Thomas Mc-
Ilwraith assumed office, an agitation for a reversion of the policy
was successful.
When Draper became interested he supported the policy of
those favouring a restoration of coloured labour. He objected that
the industry could not prosper with white labour, and his own first
experience at Hap Wah strengthened his belief. New ideas gain
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


ground very slowly in every effort and old ones struggle with amaz-
ing energy to retain the last spark of ebbing vitality. That is the
outstanding character of all history. It could not be otherwise,
therefore, on the canehelds. One living in the present cannot
imagine sharply the revolution of thought and practice involved
in the proposal to settle and work the tropics solely with European
stock; and thus it comes about that men, who in all other ways
were the foremost progressive forces in their day, steadily opposed
the new idea on the canefields.
For fifteen years Draper was associated with those who kept
alive the campaign against a white industry. The battle became
intense as the Federal movement became concrete and gathered
power. When the last convention had been held and the matter
became one of practical politics, a final stand was made to win
the sympathy of the Commonwealth Government. Draper was
a Federalist, but he was also a Northerner with the bluff
Northerner's downrightness. He pinned his colours to the mast-
head of his frail little barque and sailed into the perilous seas of
controversy where many a stouter vessel was being buffeted by
the unrelenting waves of current opinion. It was a magnificent
gesture; and in the Far North he was almost alone in his public
advocacy. He was a man open at all times to conviction, but in
this he showed again the doggedness that could lead him far ahead
of other men in a battle. His convictions could be altered only
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


by arguments supported by cold logic. In this matter, he held
that the logic was not forthcoming.
The agitation was so keen that the Government decided to
send a representative, both to ascertain the real feeling of the set-
tlers and to place before them the Government’s own policy. The
representative was the Minister for Customs, W. C. Kingston, “the
biggest gun in the Barton Ministry,” the Cairns Press called him.
Kingston came in 1903 and was well feted. There were
several meetings at which, of course, sugar and the white labour
nightmare were thoroughly ventilated. The radical and Labour
sections rallied to the support of the Minister, and at one meeting,
which resolved itself into a deputation to the Minister, Draper
took the initiative; but it was pointed out to Kingston by his sup-
porters that few of those who spoke were actually growers and it
was quickly seen that A. J. Draper was almost the sole effective
speaker. The growers’ case suffered as a consequence. But that
was not Draper’s only encounter with Kingston, nor his most
memorable one.
A battle of wits took place at the Mulgrave between Kingston
and Draper. A verbatim shorthand report of the duel was pre-
served and showed both men in fighting mood, with the sugar
industry as the bone of contention. Draper received congratu-
lations from all parts of the State. The Northern Press, which
was almost unanimously against the Government upon that issue.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


naturally saw the special virtues of Draper’s speech, but the
compliments were not derived solely from sympathetic quarters.
There is little doubt that A. J. Draper summed up the case for
the retention of the alien as it had not been handled before and
the Minister himself congratulated him. But it was a losing battle.
Draper, ten years later, admitted that they had been unnecessarily
alarmed. The subsequent history of the sugar industry had justi-
fied the conversion to white labour.
In 1927 the writer was with him in the Hambledon area after a
visit to the Mulgrave. He stopped the car and pointed to the long
stretch of swaying cane that swept to the foot of the range.
“You see those pockets over there?” he said. “They were
dotted with Kanakas 30 years ago.” After a pause: “What
damned nigger drivers we all were in those days!”
I was interested: “And what about it?” 1 asked. “Are you
sorry for the good old days?”
"No fear,” he responded decisively. “Those days are better
dead. We’ve done a sight better since the Kanaka left.”
This change of attitude was just as candidly admitted upon
several other occasions. That it was a genuine revision of view-
point was attested by his public utterances numbers of times
during the last ten years of his life. It was also supported by his
strenuous campaign for a white population in the Australian
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


tropics. Anything that sought to disparage the white man as a
dweller in the North found him at once in the battle. He was per-
sistent that the race was healthier and hardier for living in the
North. The year before he died he engaged in public contro-
versy with a noted church dignitary regarding the physical appear-
ance of the children born on the littoral compared with those on
the Tablelands, where the climate was milder. Sufficient for him
was any suggestion that the coastal children were less hardy. The
Mayor and the Churchman compromised; it was agreed that there
was no superiority, at least, whatever appearances may have sug-
gested.
Gordonvale.
IHE name Gordonvale applied to the township whose arteries
radiate from the mill, is a memorial to the late John
Gordon, a pioneer of the district and one of the first directors of
the mill. He was still a director when he died in 1929.
The original name was Mulgrave, which was changed to
Nelson when the residents decided to transfer their homage to
Sir Hugh M. Nelson, who was Premier of Queensland from 1893
to 1898. Ultimately John Gordon procured the fickle worship
of the settlement. It will probably remain Gordonvale; but any
one of the names was worthy of perpetuation.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


The point that interests one studying the importance of indi-
viduals in the building up of such a township in the Far North
is the rapid growth of such a township by whatever name it was
called. The Mulgrave settlement was 14 miles from Cairns, and
when the mill began to operate in 1896 it was both primitive and
isolated. The only communication with the outside world was a
horse track cut between Cairns and Innisfail in 1882, but which
was only negotiated from extreme necessity. One of the party
which decided to cut the track for a reward offered by the Cairns
Divisional Board said that it took them four weeks to cut their
way through the scrub and tangled undergrowth to Woree, about
four miles. When T. f'Jisbct went to Gordonvale in company
with his successor in the secretaryship of the mill in 1896 they had
to blaze their way to the settlement, so primitive was the bush pad
on which they rode.
About 300 Kanakas and a few white overseers and mill
workers came in to commence the operations, and they were
strengthened by the farmers scattered over the area. In the
year the mill commenced the gaol was a log. When Mr. A. W.
Mighell took up his work there his first experience was the seeing
a leper tied to a tree awaiting removal. Outside the mill a few
rough shacks, hastily flung together, and a small hospital formed
the township. Then Mrs. Denis O’Hara opened the first hotel,
and in 1897 James O’Neill established a store. The first crushing
was a gala day. Mrs. Henry Simmonds, wife of the Chairman,
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


broke a bottle of champagne over the rollers and christened the
new mill.
The settlement was still self-contained in a social sense and
was forced by its isolation to create its own diversions. Mr.
Frank Pyne delivered the mail from Cairns on horseback at irregu-
lar intervals, although very early it was increased to once a week.
The need for social life grew, and it was ministered to when the
sugar floor was completed. It formed an excellent dance floor.
Many remember the bush jollity of those first dances and the
genial “Liverpool Jack” Owens, who invariably acted as M.C.
Thence, as a result of the increasing operations of the mill,
advances were steady. When the “Father of the Mill (A. J.
Draper) concluded his stewardship in 1928 the town had grown
to a population of 3000 Europeans. There had been no Kanakas
or aliens in the industry for 20 years, and the whole of this 3000
people plus the cutters and other seasonal workers were depend-
ent upon the mill which Draper, John Gordon, T. Mackay,
Henry Simmonds and a half dozen others had laboured to estab-
lish. Whatever the mistakes made in the beginning were, and
whatever the unwise policies sometimes pursued by the company
—shareholders and directors alike—the result in its final settling
up is that, here in the tropics, a white race has mastered a problem
of the ages; has grown and prospered in the tropics, supplanting
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


the alien whom, it was held for 50 years, it was impossible to
supplant.
Compared with those first few crushings and the return in
cash are the returns from the Mulgrave Mill for the last season
of A. J. Draper’s association with the mill (1927). In that year
163,706 tons of cane crushed yielded 23,370 tons of 94 net titre
sugar. The farmers received £2/1 7/5 i per ton of cane at the
weighbridge. Yet it was a very bad year because of the disas-
trous cyclone and floods in February.
Barron Falls Scheme.
THE Barron Falls at Kuranda, hurling a tremendous volume of
turbulent water into its great gorge, is one of the most mag-
nificent and awe provoking sights in Australia. Since the comple-
tion of the Cairns railway the falls have drawn millions of sight-
seers from all parts of the world. Cairns has always been alive to its
grandeur, but many of the earlier citizens regarded it from a
more practical point of view. It was proposed in the late ’Bo’s
that the falls might well be ultilised for the generating of electricity.
But at that time the thought of electrified streets and homes was
considered to be a vision that might materialise in 50 years.
Amongst those, however, who maintained that it was not
only practicable, but immediately so, was A. J. Draper, although
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


in later years it was held against him that he was opposed to the
utilisation of the falls. Before ten years had passed the idea
had emerged from its nebulosity into a concrete proposal. The
first practical step to have the falls harnessed for hydro-electric
purposes was taken by the Chillagoe Mines and Railways Com-
pany Ltd., who approached the Lands Department for a lease
of the Falls and the land above them. Their object was to es-
tablish a hydro-electric scheme for the treatment of their Chillagoe
ores. When he heard of the company’s application Draper, who
was Mayor, telegraphed the Home Secretary with a request that
the interests of Cairns be fully safeguarded and that no mon-
opoly be granted the company. The City Council endorsed his
action.
The Minister for Lands (Hon. J. G. Foxton) came to Cairns
in June of that year, and amongst those who accompanied him to
the falls was A. J. Draper. The Mayor pointed out the value of
the falls to the Cairns people, as a tourist resort particularly, and
suggested that if any monopoly were granted not only the beauty
of the falls would be destroyed but, also, future hydro-electric
requirements of Cairns would be jeopardised. The Minister
reserved his judgment pending further details from the company.
But subsequently the Lands Department refused to grant the
lease on the grounds that it was in the jurisdiction of the Railway
Department, if any Government department had any such power.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


The matter appeared to drop out of sight altogether until in
December, 1899, the Dawson Ministry took office (“Andy Daw-
son's still-born ministry,’’ it was called). It retained power for
only seven days, although during the time the new ministers were
probing and searching in the departmental archives. The mem-
ber for Cairns (Givens) unearthed a lease drawn out by the
Railway Department in favour of the Chillagoe Company. The
speech made by Givens in the House raised heated discussion in-
side and outside of Parliament. Even by its friends the late
Government was assailed for the secrecy that had been observed
in the matter, and in Cairns the discussion waged heatedly for a
fortnight owing to the lack of detailed information. Members,
and even ministers apparently, had no knowledge of the nego-
tiations and probably would not have had but for the temporary
change of Government. Public resentment was based upon the
two-fold supposition that the Government had been willing to
hand over to a private syndicate the birthright of all northerners,
and also that the scheme would ruin the falls. Draper condemned
the Government on both counts and particularly resented the
secrecy. The Philp Government, which succeeded the Dawson
Ministry, accepted the opinion of the Crown law officers that the
lease was ultra vires in any event because the Railway Department
had no power to lease any land except such as was actually vested
in that department. That scheme died, but within five years it was
given concrete expression again.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


The Government appointed Mr. William Corin, of Tasmania,
as consulting engineer to report upon the possibility of harnessing
the falls for hydro-electric purposes. The scheme had been sug-
gested by a Sydney syndicate who desired to purchase electric
power from the Government for the manufacturing of calcium
carbide at Cairns. Mr. Corin’s report was to include that and
also the possibilities of electrifying the Cairns railway, the sugar
mills, the City of Cairns and several proposed industrial ventures.
The report was submitted in 1906 but the matter was again per-
mitted to lapse, chiefly owing to the Federal Government's refusal
to grant a protective tariff duty upon calcium carbide.
The objective, however, was kept before the public by a
committee formed in Cairns for the purpose. This committee
was converted into the Cairns Hydro-Electric Power Investigation
Board by special Act of Parliament in 1922 with the special duty
of reporting upon a scheme to the Government. The board com-
prised representatives of the surrounding local authorities, and
had power to draw upon those authorities by precept for its
financing.
Mr. Corin was again empowered, in 1924, to cover the
ground he had previously traversed but also to include in his
review the Atherton Tableland as a possible consumer of current;
to consider the sugar industry in more detail and to investigate
the possibility of transmitting power inland to Chillagoe and other
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


mining fields. Later, reports were drawn up by the Armstrong
Whitworth Company and the board’s own engineer (Mr. P. A.
W. Anthony). The board reported to the Government at the end
of 1927. But the scheme was subsequently amended. A smaller
scheme to cover the City of Cairns and its immediate environs
replaced it. This scheme is under way at the moment. But all
the ground work and the continuous publicity given the full pro-
ject was the work of the board of which, for much of the time,
A. J. Draper was chairman.
His essay in mining on the Mulgrave field, where R. A. Tills
had a water wheel battery in 1886, was not his last experience.
After his association with the Chance Company he became inter-
ested as a shareholder on the Mareeba field about 1893; but his
most spectacular venture was his secretaryship of the “O.K. Cop-
per Mines Developmental Syndicate (No Liability).” The O.K.
was a volcanic funnel, very rich in copper ore. Anyone holding
shares in it at the time received good returns. Draper was more
interested as an official of the company than as a shareholder, and
W. J. Munro was chairman of directors.
The company was formed in 1905 and continued for four or
five years very successfully. But the end was expensive, litigation
arising from a charge brought by Aaron Hirsch and Co., metal
and ore buyers of London. The case was heard in Brisbane in
1909, before probably the most brilliant bench and bar that had
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


conducted any case in Queensland. Draper was a chief witness,
and after the long examination and cross-examination he left the
court with his nerves at their highest tension. The result of the
law suit, and a strike in which E. G. Theodore figured, practically
closed the mine as a business proposition, especially as they coin-
cided with the downward trend of metal prices.
Mining was an important factor in the economic stability of
Cairns in the pre-war years, and in fact had been the actual origin
of the settlement of Trinity Bay. Despite that, it had to stand
by its own strength although that strength was not sufficient to
maintain it for ever against the official support given to other
industries. But during the first decade of the twentieth century busi-
ness was brisk in Cairns; there was plenty of money to spend and
to invest. And most of it came from the mining fields. With
many shows Draper was connected as shareholder, director or
company official. These ventures included the Ord Tin Mining
Company, the Dalziel and the Anglo-Saxon.
As a shareholder, of course, he was commercially interested
in the whole field. Charters Towers’ prosperity was also reflected
in business done in Cairns. Stock operators were busy ;so it was
merely a logical development when the Cairns Stock Exchange
came into being. Draper was with those who originated the Ex-
change, the inaugural meeting of which was held in his office on
March 28, 1906. He was elected first chairman and, as in most
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


offices which he filled, he maintained the position until the office
itself fell from him. He certainly outlived ’change.
Registration fluctuated between 25 and 30 companies and
there were never fewer than 1 4 live members. The members were
so happy with the initial success of the new institution that
they held a grand dinner in Hides’ Hotel in conjunction with
the first annual meeting. ’Change continued to operate, publish-
ing a daily list and meeting twice a day, until about 1912, when
the slump in metal prices robbed it of its usefulness. Draper, who
had dropped out of mining after the “O.K.”judgment, was not
so much personally interested as formerly, but nevertheless he was
one of its foremost supporters to the end. It never actually wound
up. In discussion with Mr. A. H. Clarke, who had agreed to
keep the books open, Draper advised that the exchange be kept
alive. He and Clarke foresaw that with an improvement in metal
prices a recognised stock exchange would be able to function at
once. When A. J. Draper died, no other chairman was appointed,
but the books were still kept open by Mr. Clarke.
Babinda Central Mill.
WITH the successful culmination of the Mulgrave mill cam-
paign, Draper's sugar interests did not languish, nor
were they confined to the one area. The pre-Federation agitation
for a mill on the Russell River had died very hard. It is doubtful
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


if it did die—if the dissolution of the company had not merely put
off the proposition to a more convenient season. Draper and
Munro, Dr. Reed, G. R. Mayers and others never renounced the
idea. They believed that, but for the petty wrangling over a site,
they would have had the mill. Certainly, a big influence in the
abandoning of the scheme was the growing opposition to alien
labour. The Labour Party in the House had secured a clause to
that effect in the Bill which had been refused the Royal assent,
and the Government, which depended for its retention of office
upon the Labour members, who held the balance of power,
would not bring forward a Bill without the clause.
The C.S.R. Company then proposed to construct a mill but
did not go on with the scheme. One of the items that weighed
against its success in the mind of the company was, also, that
alien exclusion clause.
Munro and two or three others upon the Cairns Shire Council
then proposed that the Shire Council should venture into mill
ownership. Considering that their own tramline would be the
means of a considerable saving in costs the idea commended itself
to the council. But a very unobtrusive note from the Home Sec-
retary’s department to the Shire Clerk killed that hope. The
council was notified that it operated under a definite statute in
which no power was delegated to it to engage in the business of
sugar manufacturers.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


The next tentative proposal came from the Adelaide Steam-
ship Company, but owing chiefly to their business relations with
the C.S.R. Company the proposal was almost still-born.
Draper was one of the first to grow cane upon Babinda
Creek, near its junction with the Russell River. Growing was very
costly then—about 1906—but as the Shire Council had contin-
ued its tramline to Babinda the chances of impressing the Govern-
ment were greater than they had been even in 1896, when the first
appropriation had been made, A new scheme was set afoot. While
Munro was interviewing the Premier and the Treasurer in Brisbane,
Draper was urging the Babinda Creek settlers to clear their land
so that they would have a guarantee to offer.
The efforts were so successful that a large public meeting was
held on the balcony of Moroney’s Hotel, in Babinda, on May 19,
1910, with Munro in the chair. A committee or provisional direc-
torate was formed, Draper being one of the members. Again they
got into communication with the Government and their impor-
tunities procured a certain amount of official support. The Sugar
Works Guarantee Act of 1911 was the answer to the committee’s
pleas and laid the foundation of the Babinda and South John-
stone mills. A number of Babinda landholders immediately went
into the area and commenced to clear their blocks. But still
the troubles were not over. The Government, although they had
carried the Bill, held their hand. Surmises and rumours of “insidi-
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


ous influences” operating in the Cabinet room were current and
discontent filled the waiting space. A question in the House
drew from the Premier (Hon. Digby F. Denham) the reply that
the Government had decided to await the end of uncertainty in
the sugar market, which admittedly was then passing through a
critical phase.
Naturally the reply did not strengthen the confidence of the
growers who had risked their all in the enterprise. But they took
heart when it was known that the Premier was to come North. He
was received in Cairns and attended a public meeting at Babinda.
Hastings Reed occupied the chair. There was some eloquence
and plain speaking; but it remained for Draper, the last speaker,
to impress the practical mind of the distinguished guest. It was
Draper who, according to one of his associates, “got down to tin
tacks.” Of all the speeches he delivered during his public career
Draper probably never formulated one more impressive, more
charged with vitality or one so much crammed with data. It was
an array of facts, the comparison with the development of the
Mulgrave mill and the forecast of prosperity—a forecast reasoned
from the existing facts rather than from hopes.
The meeting won the mind of the Premier, and it was to A. J.
Draper that he turned more than to any of the other able speakers
when he announced that the Government had made up its mind.
They had been reluctant to tempt the fickleness of the sugar*
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


market, but the case presented to him was sufficient for them to act
upon. Cheers greeted his announcement that the Government
would go ahead with the mill and follow it with a central mill at
South Johnstone. The promise was kept; tenders were called,
and in 1915 the Babinda Mill put through its first small crushing.
South Johnstone followed a year later.
Shortly after the mill began to operate Draper sold out his
interests in the area and confined his attention to the Mulgrave.
In the terms of the Act the farmers took over the control
of the Babinda Mill from the Government in 1924, when the
Babinda Central Mill Co. Ltd. was formed, with Mr. S. H. Warner
as chairman. Warner, who is still the chairman of directors, fol-
lowed Draper in the chairmanship of the Mulgrave mill.
The Port Authority.
FOLLOWING the provisions in the new Local Authorities
Act relating to port authorities a movement was early
afoot for a Harbour Board Act. Strangely enough, however, it
received no support from A. J. Draper, who had welcomed the
clause in the proposed Local Authorities Act and who had always
been interested in harbour concerns. From his own experience
as an exporter and importer he saw no justification for it. The
“Cairns Post” opposed the effort strenuously. In the first year
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


of the board’s history (1906) the board issued a writ for libel
against the paper, consequent upon the publication of a leading
article. The case appeared to be well in the board’s favour.
Draper sought an interview with the members, and after a frank
and free discussion the writ was withdrawn. Draper for his part
had come out of the incident with a clearer mind regarding the
board members and their enterprise. He became friendly and
frankly acknowledged to the president (Mr. E. C. Earl) that he
admired the work and enthusiasm they were putting into the pro-
ject. He also complimented Earl upon his able chairmanship.
The air had been cleared and in the subsequent years board mem-
bers and officers had many causes to appreciate the assistance and
publicity freely given them by the “Cairns Post.’’ Draper came
to realise that the board could fulfil a service to the district. In
this matter of a harbour board it is satisfactory to recall that
Draper’s opposition existed only in the initial stages, because few
local institutions have been more helpful in promoting the welfare
of the Far North. That his opposition could be maintained long
was not expected. As far back as February, 1885, about seven
months after he arrived in Cairns, he took part in a public meet-
ing to urge the Government to send a dredge to improve the
berthage facilities at the port, and afterwards he never lost sight
of the significance of Cairns as a deep sea trading port of the
future.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


He was besought in after years to contest a seat upon the
board, but he always remained aloof. “I can’t go down there
after the row 1 kicked up when they were getting a start,” was
his summed up attitude.
An Organised Industry.
THE transition from a coloured labour industry to one draw-
ing all its labour supplies from the white race was, of
course, a revolution. Many of the growers resented the enact-
ments, although that attitude of mind was gradually rejected as
the years advanced and the calamities foretold did not materialise.
The sugar industry came to pay the highest seasonal wages in Aus-
tralia, and for some time to make phenomenal profits. It was not,
of course, due to the employment of white labour alone; much
was due to the bounties and later to the embargo upon foreign
grown sugar. For the embargo and its retention Draper was fore-
most in the fight.
But for the years immediately following the Barton Govern-
ment’s “nigger loving” legislation the industry suffered qualms.
Thus the growers were forced to some form of combination to pro-
tect their interests. Definite expression to that aspiration was
given at a congress of farmers held at Townsville in February,
1907. At this “Labour in the Canefields Congress” many ques-
tions were discussed, but the principal outcome, judged in our
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


own day, was the formation of the Queensland Sugar Producers’
Association. The new body “caught on” at once and soon it
had become the Australian Sugar Producers’ Association (the
A.S.P.A.) with Draper, one of its prime movers, as its first
chairman.
The organisation became very influential; the most import-
ant, from an industrial point of view, of all the organisations
formed inside the sugar industry. That is a significant statement
when it is remembered that no industry probably in the world
has called for more organisation and scientific planning than this
cane sugar industry.
The object of the A.S.P.A. was different from that of other
sugar organisations—for instance, the United Canegrowers’ Asso-
ciation, which was purely a growers’ organisation—in that it sought
to combine both the milling and the growing sides of the enter-
prise. By that it was hoped to organise the industry upon a
greater basis, to minimise overlapping and to bring into collabor-
ation the best intelligence of the industry. The steady growth of
the A.S.P.A. in favour has justified the hopes of its founders.
Once it was launched Draper asked to be relieved from the
presidency although he accepted nomination as vice-president.
He was never out of office and always attended the annual confer-
ence as a delegate from Cairns. To him no other organisation in
the industry appeared to be worthy of comparison with the
A.S.P.A.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


In 1928 the association “came of age.” It was decided to
celebrate its 21 st birthday during the meeting of the annual coun-
cil. The Premier (Hon. W. McCormack) and Mr. Charles Tay-
lor, representing the Opposition, were guests of the resultant
function; but one of the appointed delegates was not present.
Death had stepped in a few days earlier and claimed A.J.D.
During the strike and the industrial troubles in the sugar
industry in 1911, it was borne into the minds of Draper and other
prominent leaders of the growing side of sugar manufacture, that
the strength of the mill workers was due to organisation. The
Australian Workers’ Association was the biggest industrial organ-
isation of agricultural workers in Queensland. The growers there-
fore decided to form a similar organisation with a fighting fund.
Consequently a special meeting of growers, held at Nelson, on June,
1911, resolved itself into the Cairns Canegrowers’ Association.
The new organisation was not designed to cover the ground
already covered by the Mulgrave, Russell and Hambledon mill
suppliers’ associations but was more a federal concern to handle
causes in the whole area. W. J. Munro, upon a motion seconded
by Draper, was voted the first chairman.
For some years there had been suggestions and tentative pro-
posals to utilise the by-products of northern sugar mills in subsi-
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


diary industries attached to those mills. As chairman of the most
successful mill in the State, A. J. Draper was, of course, interested
in any such proposition, especially in view of the great waste in-
volved in the discarding of molasses, filter press cake, megass,
etc. A stock fodder was experimented with at the Mulgrave and
gave a certain satisfaction during the drought in the West of
Queensland about 1926. It comprised such ingredients as megass,
filter cake and “chop-chop” (cut up cane-trash). Light lining
boards made from megass—the cane residue from the mills—are
a popular building material in tropical countries and represent an
extensive industry in the U.SIA. The proposition to utilise the
megass of Queensland mills for a similar purpose also captivated
the minds of the chairman and directors of the Mulgrave Central
Mill Co., although nothing concrete has come from the proposals.
Draper’s particular interest was applied to the conversion of
molasses into power spirit for internal combustion engines. He
was a member of a Power Alcohol Committee formed some years
ago in the Far North. Through the efforts of that committee a
company was registered with the object of manufacturing power
alcohol from cassava and molasses. A distillery, which was estab-
lished at Sarina, began to operate shortly before Draper died. He
was a Northern director of the Australian National Power Alcohol
Company, as it was originally called, and remained a director
when the company was somewhat reorganised.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


Aquatics.
WE have frequently referred to his instinctive interest in
things that pertained to the sea. All his life he enjoyed
nothing so much as a spin on the water. Soon after his arrival in
Cairns he and*, his friend Tills spent many a week-end boating.
While at Lilybank also his family enjoyed many picnics on the
water or on the beach at the mouth of the Barron; their own boat
was the means of transport. But before he was married—in Feb-
ruary, 1885—he was elected to the vice-presidency of the first
boating club formed in Cairns. One of the grandest galas was
New Year’s Day of that year when the first regatta was held in
Cairns; A. J. Draper’s “Idalia” won second place in a keel and
centre board race.
It was natural, therefore, that when, after the lapse of 20
years, it was decided to reform an aquatic club his assistance was
proffered; he needed no solicitation. At the inaugural meeting,
held on March 28, 1908, he was elected one of the vice-presidents.
In the following year he was president, and in 1910 he acted as
the official judge. The club had been firmly established and was
moving easily and without drawback to prosperity. Then, on
October 4of the same year, he was elected to the premier position
in the club, that of patron, which he held until his death in 1928.
When it is said that the club encountered no drawbacks the
reference, of course, is to such difficulties as were under its control.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


In other respects it had its trials in common with all organised
bodies. The first was the tragic disappearance of the club’s boat
“Valda” in 1911. The boat left on April 29 for a trip to Greene
Island, one of the loveliest resorts on the Queensland coast. It
is a typical tropic isle on the very fringe of the Great Barrier
Reef, about 16 mlies east and slightly north of Cairns. The island
is in the open seaways and in the very track of the cyclonic storms
that beat up the coast during the early months of the year.
The “Valda” had on board a complement of six youths.
Standing out from Cape Grafton she was seen by watchers on
Greene Island and then disappeared. Those on the island thought
she had gone back to Cairns owing to the threatening weather.
She was reported missing on May 3, and amongst those who were
tireless in organising search parties and exhausting every means
of ascertaining some news of the unfortunate men was A. J.
Draper.
His energy recalled his old-time rescue work in the flooded
Barron district during the great cyclone “Sigma” that bore down
on Cairns in 1899. The terrific gale left terrible damage in its
wake, and not the least to suffer were the Freshwater and Red-
lynch settlers. Draper was the first to put an oar into the river
after the visitation and spent hours rescuing or attempting to
rescue his neighbours. A whole family he reprieved from a pre-
carious situation upon the roof of their own home; amongst others
saved by his efforts, too, were a number of Chinese.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


But the search for the “Valda” was less successful. Although
the vessel was found some months later thrown up on the reef, the
crew were never seen; nothing came up from the merciless waves
to tell of their fate. The search was given up and the incident be-
came one other of the mysteries of the Great Barrier Reef.
During the war years the Aquatic Club was happy in its social
aspect. The membership had been growing steadily and, with it,
had increased popular interest in the sport. Draper influenced the
members to buy Walshe and Company’s old rice mill on the
Esplanade for use as a club house. Its end came in another
cyclone—the disastrous storm of February, 1920. The club house
was swept away; but the first word of cheer came from Draper.
He suggested their calling a public meeting with a view to issuing
debentures for £IOOO, and he headed the list with a donation of
£ 100. That spirit prevailed and the club house that resulted was
grander than the earlier one. It was used many times afterwards
for public functions. In the Willis cyclone of February, 1927,
while the surrounding structures on the water front were being
swept to sea or thrown to the foreshore like matchwood, the new
Aquatic Hall stood firm and defiant as the character of its patron.
Maintaining his interest he rarely failed to follow the club
races always accompanied by his family or some member of it in
his own clinker built launch “The Rip”; and he was just as
often a competitor in the officials’ races. He was a consequent
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


donor of trophies, but better in the minds of the members was his
advice. A memorial in his honour is contested annually by the
boats of the Cairns club.
The club suspended its sporting programmes during the war
owing to its depleted membership. Seventy-two members went
overseas. A. J. Draper assisted at the send-offs to everyone of
them, and at the official welcomes to such as returned.
Northern Patriotic Fund.
A REVIEW of the Great War period could not be complete
without reference to the organisation known as the North-
ern Patriotic Fund. Draper was a member as though automatically.
He did not attend the first few meetings but subsequently was very
ardent in the work and, as Mayor, was chairman of the fund. The
body was formally instituted on August 17, 1914, the executive
comprising representatives of all the public and civic authorities in
Cairns. Subsequently delegates from the neighbouring municipali-
ties were added, although Tinaroo Shire withdrew its affiliation
to link up with the main Queensland Patriotic fund whose head-
quarters were in Brisbane. Eacham Shire then withdrew to fall in
with the Atherton League, and Mareeba formed a “Do Our Best
Society” in their own immediate centre. The War Council and
the R.S.S.I.L.A. in 1916 and 1917 respectively were taken in;
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


otherwise the constitution remained as originated. The whole pur-
pose of the fund was to assist returned soldiers and their depend-
ents. During its operations the receipts amounted to £25,357/0/6,
of which £1937/5/4 was received on account of the Red Cross
Society, Red Cross Equipment Guild and similar bodies; bank in-
terest swelled the receipts by £1 153/9/1 1. The Fund’s expend-
iture included £1073/10/3, granted to the Belgian Relief Fund, in
addition to £1619/8/8 collected expressly for that body. Besides
those outside funds referred to grants were also made to the
Southern Cross Tobacco Fund, the Y.M.C.A., Memorial Fund
account and the Belgian Babies’ Milk Fund. In the early stages of
the war gratuities were made to British sailors’ and soldiers*
widows and orphans; also grants in the form of Christmas cheer
to troops on active service.
The total expenditure under the Dependents’ Allowances sec-
tion was £15,919/18/8. The rate payable to the wife or widowed
mother of a soldier was £1 /1 /- per fortnight which was being
increased in direct ratio with the number of dependent children
to £2/12/6 per fortnight where three children were concerned.
This rate of payment continued until the last dependent was taken
off the list on August 12, 1920. The adults placed upon the de-
pendents’ list numbered 197 and the children 283. They received
payment for varying periods, some being retained upon the list
during the existence of the fund. At one stage the fortnightly pay
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


roll included 110 adults and 15 7 children, the amount disbursed
being £197/18/6.
Certain special cases were dealt with also and lump sums
paid to them. The lowest sum paid in this category was £7
and the highest £67. Finally, a total disbursement of £5148/9/4
was made to 299 returned soldiers in sums varying between £2
and £2OO.
It is possible that a group in New Zealand may have rivalled
the Cairns Fund in the liberality of its disbursements and in the
nature of the cases assisted. But it is certain that no other fund
in Australia equalled it. I have before me the minutes and reports
of the Northern District Patriotic Fund and the temptation to
quote extensively is strong, but this essay is not a detailed history
of particular movements or organisations. However, the follow-
ing letter received by the fund from the Queensland Patriotic Fund
(Brisbane) will serve to perpetuate the record of achievements
standing to the credit of the Northern Fund:—
“We .... would like to point out that the allow-
ance from your fund is considerably higher than that of
any other fund known to us in Australia. Your rate
compared with the basic rate of the State funds of Vic-
toria, New South Wales and Queensland is 50 per cent,
higher.”
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


Little cause for wonder, therefore, that members of the
Northern Fund have often expressed their gratification with having
belonged to it. A. J. Draper frequently regretted that the history
of the fund had not been published in extenso soon after it dis-
banded. On one occasion he stated publicly that the Fund was
the one organisation from which he had emerged without a single
regret. He qualified it later by an admission that his greatest life
interest was the Mulgrave Mill. But the trend of his mind is
apparent. The Fund worked smoothly from the beginning. In
the meetings was perfect harmony. There were none of the an-
tagonisms and bitternesses; none of the “caves” that are common
to all associated bodies; and the end was one of satisfaction. The
honorary secretary of the Fund was Mr. A. E. Wilkinson, who
has been town clerk in Cairns since the year after the fund was
opened.
This war period was a busy one for Draper, who, in addition
to his many public and private interests, found time to enter whole-
heartedly into the affairs of the country. Recruiting campaigns,
comfort funds, war council concerns and many such consider-
ations enlisted his co-operation. From helping to raise war loans
he entered upon the peace loan campaigns at the end of the bitter
four years’ war to 1918.
The first peace loan in that year revealed that Cairns (from
which port was sent into action the first contingent from Ausf
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


tralia) could also raise more than its quota of cash. To stimulate
investment the Central Committee in Brisbane offered a “Flag
of Honour” with an additional star for the district which doubled
its quota. Cairns earned the honour flag, and upon receipt of ad-
vice that the flag was being forwarded, Draper went down to meet
the vessel at the wharf. But no flag came.
He stamped back to the Council Chambers in wrath, and
then sent a telegram to Brisbane: “Met the boat, but no flag on
board. Keep your old flag.”
An apology came in haste; the flag had been held up owing
to a difficulty of obtaining a stick to forward with it. The note
extracted another snort from the irate Mayor of Cairns:
“Sticks!” he snapped. “Do they think we haven’t a thous-
and square miles of sticks on the Atherton Tableland?"
In Loving Memory.
CAIRNS, in common with every other city in Australia, de-
cided to memorialise its soldiers, especially those who had
fallen. And also in common with every city those who called most
loudly for such a memorial did little more than call. Conse-
quently the history of the Cairns War Memorial is not very credit-
able. But for the driving force of a few men and women, who
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


were also active through the war period, nothing would probably
have come of the suggestion to erect a memorial. There are many
who argue, and who did at the time, that a memorial in stone or
brick was useless and not desired. That may be true, but a
memorial of some sort was demanded by the public, and the
arrangements, particularly those of raising funds, were left to
the handful of people who were energetic. Ultimately the credit
could have been apportioned to the chairmen. Aldermen J. G.
Hoare and A. J. Draper, Mayors for the time being, the secre-
tary, G. Ogg, and the treasurer, A. J. Johnston, manager of the
Bank of New South Wales.
The first step towards the desired memorial was taken at a
public meeting held on May 9, 1922. The secretary, Mr. A. E.
Wilkinson (town clerk) and a strong committee was formed. But
things did not go smoothly. They were complaining within a few
months of the poor response made to their appeals, especially “by
those who should have responded warmly.” The assistant secre-
tary, Mr. McLean, went away and the town clerk could not
carry on beyond doing the clerical work; so Mr. George Ogjg
agreed to act as organising secretary. Then public bodies, such
as the Shire Council and the Harbour Board, withheld support
until they knew what form the proposed memorial was to take and
the estimated cost of it. A deputation from the R.S.S.I.L.A. and
the Fathers’ Association proposed a kiosk in Anzac Park with
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


memorial tablets on the walls. After much ado a plan was drawn
up. The proposed building was to have an artistic finish, was to
be replete with band rotunda and with tea rooms, the whole sur-
rounded by garden plots—aesthetic and useful. The cost was to
be from £2OOO to £4OOO. About 20 months after the formation
of the committee the secretary informed the meeting that £544
had been subscribed, and of that the City Council had donated
£IOO. In March, 1924, the committee were becoming tired. The
meeting was stormy and some of the old members had threatened
to resign. The chairman was J. G. Hoare (Mayor) ;he decided
that a memorial in short time was necessary, and he put a sugges-
tion by Mrs. Donaldson to rescind the motion authorising a kiosk.
The motion was defeated upon the Mayor’s casting vote, and it
was decided to lay the foundation stone on the following Anzac
Day.
Into this welter of hesitancy and discontent came the new
Mayor, A. J. Draper. He faced up the question of funds first.
The secretary said that they had a balance of £799. He also saw
that the numbers were evenly divided upon whether the kiosk
should be proceeded with or a cenotaph erected. A motion that
the cenotaph be erected was carried. This was more than two
years after the forming of the committee and four years after the
Armistice. Although he had ranged himself with those favouring
the column he did so upon the condition that it be made service-
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


able to the community as well as ornamental. A four-dial clock
was suggested to be set at the top of the obelisk; that satisfied him.
It records also how Cairns procured its first town clock. Things
ran smoothly until on January 4, 1925, Draper officially laid the
foundation stone of the column at the intersection of Shields and
Abbott streets. In his address he vowed that he would not unveil
the memorial unless all its debt had been wiped off. He did un-
veil it on Anzac Day, 1926. It cost £2074 and the debt out-
standing was £66. However, an anonymous donor forwarded a
cheque that the cenotaph should be unveiled free of debt.
The Water Front.
THE last months of 1925 were critical in the industrial history
of Australia. There were strikes of overseas and Aus-
tralian seamen all around the coast, and the waterside workers
also were endeavouring to settle grievances with the shipping
companies and amongst themselves. Cairns and other northern
ports naturally suffered—both from the local disputes and those
in the South. At the Cairns port the most serious aspect of the
trouble was an internal dispute of the union concerning the rotary
system of pick up. The shipping companies steadily recognised
one section but the other—the Rotary—section appeared to have
the deciding weight. The dispute dragged on for months. Mean-
while district produce, chiefly sugar and timber, was being held up
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


on the wharf. It had dragged out for 53 weeks when a joint meet-
ing of the Cairns Canegrowers’ Association and Tableland timber
interests decided that something should be done to alleviate their
own suffering. They decided to organise a force of primary pro-
ducers either to load their own produce to the vessels or to assist
those watersiders who were willing to do so. A committee, upon
which Draper was a member, was formed to carry out the neces-
sary arrangements to give effect to the decision. As Mayor of
the city, as chairman of the Cairns Canegrowers’ Association,
chairman of the Mulgrave Mill, a business man, associated with
the Chamber of Commerce and the Northern branch of the
Employers’ Federation, it was, perhaps, natural that Draper should
take a leading part in this affair, regrettable as it was from every
point of view.
The resolution was given effect to. On Sunday night, Novem-
ber 1, a number of sugar farmers from Hambledon, the Mulgrave
and Babinda drifted into Cairns. Early on the Monday they were
reinforced by others and by a number of timber men from the
Tablelands. At an early morning muster, about 600 assembled
in front of the Council Chambers and were briefly addressed by
the Mayor (Draper).
He stressed that the mission of the producers was a peaceful
one and that their only interest in the trouble was that their pro-
duce should be loaded to the vessels which were awaiting it.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


About £600,000 worth of sugar and £500,000 worth of timber
had been held up and the farmers were paying £35 daily as demur-
rage upon the railway trucks at the wharf. In addition the
Babinda and Mulgrave mills were borrowing from the Q.N. Bank
about £SOOO each per week to pay wages for the harvesting and
mill work, as the sugar at the wharf was not paid for by the Sugar
Board until it had been placed aboard the ships.
Subsequently the Mayor headed the procession of farmers
down the main streets to the wharf where the pick-up of wharf
workers was to take place. But for a few isolated skirmishes
between watersiders and farmers during the day nothing untoward
happened, but the rotary trouble was over. A number of men
went to work on the wharf and, in the course of a few days, all
the ships in port were being worked.
There was no recrudescence of trouble. In 1927 the wharf
was again disturbed. It was regarded as an outbreak of the old
“rotary” affair; but it was not so.
Jubilee Year.
THE City of Cairns was en fete during the first week in
November, 1926. It was Jubilee Week. Fifty years
before that is in November, 1876 the Government party
in the “Victoria,” to which reference is made early in this record,
tied up at the Inlet, and Cairns was officially named in honor of
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


Governor Cairns. The Jubilee celebrations were elaborate and
thousands of old Cairns people, young Cairns people, and people of
other parts flooded the streets for a week. Corroborees by blacks of
several district tribes and by Torres Strait Islanders or "boys”
from a fleet of luggers then in port, were held upon the Esplanade.
Also, of course, were the forms of celebration indulged by the
white people on such occasions—processions, dinners, fireworks
at sea and ashore. Confetti blocked the drains and the city work-
men merely grinned. And A. J. Draper, the Mayor, regarded it
all genially or bubbled with enthusiasm.
Afterwards he expressed his intense satisfaction that he
had been in the Mayoral chair for the Jubilee. That it was fitting
was generally agreed. He was one of the oldest residents; but
of more importance was it that he had been a local legislator
almost from the beginning of local authority activity in Cairns. He
had seen and helped forward every municipal movement. The
town had grown from probably less than 400 people when he
came to more than 8000, and in that 8000 were not included many
in the outskirts of the town. He had seen the streets converted
from sand tracks from which stumps jutted at intervals, and over
which it was impossible to draw a vehicle, to roads of concrete
and bitumen and macadam. The wild jungle paths leading out
of the town, even as late as the early *9o’s, had been converted to
main roads. Through and above the Barron Valley millions of
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


visitors had travelled by means of the wonderful Cairns Railway,
winding its picturesque way where once intrepid diggers merely
climbed. In another direction the Cairns-Tableland main road
had been opened for traffic only two years before the jubliee.
Yet thousands of travellers had sped over it, upward for 3000
feet, and around its 620 curves. There too, at one time only
packers could travel “over the bump.” It all spelt progress to the
Far North, and Draper, the Jubilee Mayor, was justly proud of his
hour. It was his triumph as much as any man’s. His hour, and
the actual pioneers. He did not forget them. While the visitors
were being feted; while the wealth of the commercial world was
being courted and while Governments were being impressed by
the pageant, A. J. Draper went into the quiet places for his satis-
faction. He and the Mayoress entertained in lavish style the
pioneers of the Cairns District. There were a score of them, some
who had landed on the day Cairns was proclaimed a settlement
and others who came, as the saying would be, five minutes after-
ward.
The pioneers and the children! Draper took both of them
into his own particular care during the jubilee festivities.
“The old fellows and the kids,’’ he said. “One s throwing
his spade away and the other has to pick it up.”
He was always satisfied with his part in the Jubilee commem-
oration.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


His Last Campaign.
HE was gradually drifting from active participation in
council affairs, and after the 1924-27 term he intended
to resign, or at least not to submit himself for re-election. He dis-
cussed the matter with some of his associates who tried to persuade
him against his own judgment. But he was not influenced; his
mind was made up and, as always, only a very great counter influ-
ence would alter it. But that counter influence was at hand. In
February of that year (1927) Cairns suffered from another
cyclonic visitation. In many ways it was more severe than any
of the previous gales. Cairns suffered, not the least damage being
the dislocation of the city’s electric lighting and power system
and the wrecking of its water supply scheme. Apart from all
private damage the cost that had to be faced by the City Council
consequent upon damage to public works was approximately
£14,000.
The council elections were to be held in April, and consider-
ing the matter in the light of the cyclone damage that had to be
repaired, with the relief to be afforded sufferers, Aid. D*rapeif
reversed his decision not to nominate. But he made it clear that
he would offer his services as Mayor only. He made the state-
ment in public and included it in his manifesto to the electors.
Under the Act at that time the candidate highest on the poll after
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


the count was automatically declared to be Mayor. But the elect-
ors did not respond. Although he was elected there were four
candidates ahead of him when the count was concluded. He
frankly admitted his disappointment, and within a few days he
resigned from the council, adhering to his pre-election decision,
“Aut Caesar aut Nulla.”
He attributed his defeat at the poll to several causes; one
he held to be his attitude during the waterside trouble in 1925.
He believed that many working people had bided their time to
attack him, and as the adult franchise system operated there may
have been some justice in his suspicion. But it was not the only
cause. The official Labour candidates!—except one—were also
missing from the elected. Another reason was that a new gener-
ation of electors had arisen which knew not Draper as a legis-
lator. Be that as it may, he accepted the verdict and thence
diverted his energies into channels provided by such vehicles of
expression as the Chamber of Commerce, his sugar concerns and
other public or semi-public bodies.
In the years that followed 1890 he had been building up a
large business with ramifications all over the North, and his release
from civic duties would have allowed him more time to consoli-
date it. Because of his business he had consistently declined to
try his metal in the-wider political field.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


After his retirement from the City Council the suggestion was
again made to him to nominate for State or Federal politics. It
was confidently stated by very prominent supporters of the then
Opposition in the State House that A. J. could easily win his way
to the Premier’s chair. And when one considers the uninspiring
leaders of his own political thought in Queensland at that time
and for some years prior one will probably agree with that
opinion. His force of character, his sound practical mind and his
genius for leadership would have caused a revolution within the
combined parties opposing the Labour Party in the Assembly
during 14 years.
But not only in recent years did that apply. At any time the
brilliant leaders of Queensland political life—Mcllwraith, Philp,
Griffith or Byrnes, to mention some who carried on in the adven-
turous days—whatever their other accomplishments—possessed
no greater political genius than the man who ran their campaigns
in the Cairns electorate. But he had apparently made up his mind
early, and considering the success he had made of business ven-
tures, his course of action appears to have been well guided from
his own point of view, that of the Far North.
In the End —Triumph.
AFTER his resignation from the Council, Mrs. Draper was
happy that he consented to take a trip to the South. It
was one of the happiest holidays they had had for many years.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


It seemed to be that they were young man and young wife a&ain.
Five of their girls had grown out of the family, as it were, and
had started to carve out destinies for themselves. The eldest girl,
Nellie, had become Mrs. Owen Whittick, of Cairns; Ivy had mar-
ried Dr. Howard Lording, of Melbourne; Margery was Mrs.
Norman Mighell, of Cairns (later of Brisbane) ; and Doris was
married to Mr. Rowland Graham, of Brisbane. The youngest
girls were twins, of whom Miss Norma had become Mrs.
*
Painter of Cairns. Thus, only one of the children remained in
the home circle—Miss Mollie Draper.
The holiday was an adventure. There had been suggestions
that it would extend to the Old Country, and many of his friends
advised it. But he had no ambitions to travel outside his own
country. He was particularly bent upon seeing the formal open-
ing of the first Parliament that met at the Federal capital, Can-
berra. He was acutely aware of his inability to represent Cairns
as its Mayor; but he was well known in the South and was received
in official circles as the first citizen of the most northerly city in
Australia.
From Canberra they motored to Melbourne to visit Mrs.
Lording. This absence from Cairns for a few months was a tonic
to him, and he returned refreshed by a new spring of energy. But
there was a difference which no-one extraneous to his family had
suspected. The trip to the South had been needful; it revealed
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


that the long life of strenuous endeavour—of toil and work and
public controversy—had taken toll upon his reserve of physical
strength. His heart had been affected. To the public it was with-
held, of course, and even to himself it is doubtful if Draper admit-
ted its seriousness. But in the light of subsequent tragedy it was
again regretted by his friends that he had not extended his last
holiday to Britain.
Upon his return to Cairns he Hung himself into the turmoil
of affairs. On the night of March 8, 1928, he attended a meeting
of the Cancer Campaign Committee—then recently formed in
Cairns to help combat the spread of cancer in Australia. The
meeting was presided over by the new Mayor (Aid. W. A. Col-
lins) and volunteers were invited to further the aims of the com-
mittee. Draper was the first to offer his services: “In any way you
like,” he said to the chairman. But he could do nothing until his
return from Brisbane.
He left the following morning, his immediate business being,
characteristically, to represent the northern sugar interests at the
two parliaments of the industry—the second annual gathering of
the Queensland Canegrowers’ Association and the 21 st annual
meeting of the A.S.P.A. At the time he was vice-president of
both organisations. He was accompanied by Mr. S. H. Warner
to Sarina, where they attended a directors’ meeting of the power
alcohol company. According to Mr. Warner and others at that
meeting A. J. Draper took an energetic part in all the discussions
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


of the directorate. He then resumed the journey to Brisbane and
Warner returned to Cairns.
The Q.C.G.A. conference was opened on Monday, March
19, and that of the A.S.P.A. on March 26. A. J. Draper was
fated not to attend the second conference nor to add much power
to the deliberations of the first. On the opening day of the
Q.C.G.A. congress, during the lunch adjournment, he was sud-
denly seized by an affection of the heart. He consulted a doctor
who determined that the matter was serious. The patient was re-
moved from his hotel—the Gresham—to the Mater Misericordiae
Hospital at South Brisbane. A message was sent to Mrs. Draper
in Cairns, which, at Draper s instigation, sought to allay any feel-
ing of apprehension that might be engendered in her by the intel-
ligence. The following evening a more urgent message had to be
sent, and Mrs. Draper left for Brisbane on the Wednesday morn-
ing (March 21). But she was destined not to see him again in life.
He was cheerful during the afternoon, but in the evening he had
another heart attack and at 1 1.30 p.m. he passed away.
Mrs. Draper was met at Gympie at noon the next day by
her daughter, Mrs. Norman Mighell. After her arrival arrange-
ments were at once made for the removal of the remains to
Cairns, where a public funeral was accorded the patriot on March
29.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


Then, as when great men die, came spontaneous expressions
of regret from all quarters of the country; from the Premier of
the State (Hon. W. McCormack) and from the lowly sons of
North Queensland living in the land that he had helped to build.
Then, too, was attested the real merit of the man and the coun-
sellor. And there were children who expressed a vague regret.
He had shown all his life a remarkable affection for children. This
has been remarked in his own family life; but it went further.
While he lived at Lilybank almost daily his car was seen travelling
townward crammed with school children who were not his own.
During the Jubilee celebrations it has been already said that he
devoted particular care to the children. M. J. Hogan, the superin-
tendent of the Cairns Ambulance Brigade, tells this of Mayor
Draper:—
They two were walking along one of the back streets during
the Jubilee celebrations when they noticed a shattered bottle upon
the road. Draper looked at it, then walked over and began to
scrape the fragments into the gutter. In response to Hogan’s un-
spoken surprise, he growled: “Good God, man, any of those little
kiddies might run over that with their bare feet.” It is recalled
that many years before—in the middle of the ’nineties—he was
honorary secretary to the Children’s Picnic Committee, the object
of which was to organise annual picnics for all the school children
in the district.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER


Is it wonderful, then, that the children as they grew retained
a feeling of fellowship for the man who was the most out-
standing figure in the life of the Far North for nearly half a cen-
tury.
Great men had come and gone; they had performed grapd
and lasting service to the community; they had amassed wealth
and some had lost it in North Queensland; they had seen the town
and district grow from a mangrove swamp; and they had passed
on. But posterity is busy noting them and awarding the meeds of
honour; but here it is asserted again that, of all, one man had
gone further—had met some of them face to face and had seen
them acknowledge him a greater fighting force, a more tenacious
personality than they—Alexander Frederick John Draper.
THE LIFE OF A. J. DRAPER
