

A SERIES OF LETTERS
“ MOOSAFIR.”
RE-PRINTED FROM THE MELBOURNE “AGE.”
BV
(
(
(
(
(
<
(
<
<
<
<
(
<
c
(
<
(
» (
(
(
<
<
(
(
<
(
(
(
(
(
(
i
<
<
t
C
( ~
<
■$ ;
< lj
(
fßelbourne
PATER & KNAPTON, PRINTERS, 290* LITTLE COLLINS STREET.
MDCCCLXXXIX
jsk.




NORTH-WEST COAST
—OF—
TASMANIA
A SERIES OK LETTERS
—BY —
“MOOSAFIR.”
RE-PRINTED PROM THE MELBOURNE “AGE.”
fjlflbourne:
PATER & KNAPTON, PRINTERS, 290£ LITTLE COLLINS STREET.
MDCCCIXXXIX.


» > *
PREFACE
Journal.
followin'} letters, descriptive of a trip along the
North-west Coast of Tasmania, were written for the
Melbourne “ Age, ” and are now reprinted for general
circulation, by permission of the Proprietors of that


jo-ii-n
TASMANIA
ON THE NORTH-WEST COAST.
BY “ MOOSAFIR.”
fHE Island of Tasmania has been a favorite summer resort of
■ Australians anxious to escape, for a time, the excessive heat
of the continent, or in search of a sanatorium where they
may recuperate the vital powers, enervated by exhausting
business pursuits, or the luxurious gaieties of Australian city life.
Nor could a more prudent choice be made. Tasmania, from its
position, has the advantage of an unrivalled climate, and stands in
the first rank as a sanatorium for invalids. The atmosphei*e is
almost as cool and bracing in summer as that of England, and as
mild and genial in winter as that of Southern Italy or Algeria. The
variation of temperature between these two seasons is remarkably
low, the mean difference between the hottest summer month and the
coldest month in winter averaging, during a period of 30 years, little
more than from 25 to 26 deg., with a mean ozonometrical register of
6.93. It is in every sense of the word a charming climate, free from
trying extremes. We have no blighting winds or destructive
tempests, but a genial healthy atmosphere floating over a fertile and
smilingland, where the ordinary visitor will find much of interest to
■occupy his attention, and the valetudinarian may drink in health and
strength amid scenes of beauty and weeks of unbroken serenity.
I fear, however, that of the thousands of visitors from the main
land, there are, comparatively few who have “ done,’ or know how to
“do ” Tasmania properly. I have simply to say that Hobart and
Launceston are not Tasmania, and those who have enjoyed the
hospitality of our cities, and have even beheld the glories of Brown’s
River or New Norfolk, or visited Tasman’s Peninsular and surveyed
ovith their own eyes those places rendered so conspicuous by the
graphic pen of the late Mr. Marcus Clarke have after all seen but
very little of that which is worth seeing in this festive isle. I desire
to cut out new tracts for tourists and to recommend to them,


especially the route from Melbourne or Sydney to Launceston and
Hobart, via the North West Coast. This gives the advantage of a
short sea voyage—l 6 hours at the most —and opens up the pleasures
of an overland journey of short stages, every period of which is a
new and agreeable surprise. I can remember a time about the
“ fifties,” and very early in them too, when Port Phillipians they
were hardly known as Victorians then—knew very little about
Launceston or Hobart Town, but were very well acquainted with
CIRCULAR HEAD.
That was were the potatoes came from in those days, and there
was quite a little mosquito fleet trading between Stanley and Port
Phillip Bay, and doing a very profitable trade. Times have changed
now, and instead of sloops and cutters and brigs and schooners of a
small tonnage, carrying potatoes, we have the splendidly appointed
steamers of the T.S.N. Company calling regularly at Stanley laden
with passengers and running them along the coast to the Port of
Formby, at the mouth of the Mersey, where they catch the trains of
the Launceston and Western Railway, and rush through with all
speed possible to the coveted termini, Launceston or Hobart. It
has always been a trouble to me to account for the desire of
travelling humanity —tired with the life of big cities —to rush to
those of decidedly inferior quality. Of course in Tasmania they gain
climate, and “ it’s a change,” but what an infinitely superior change it
would be to visit the country districts of an island like this, to mark the
growing townships, the opening up and breaking in of rich agri-
cultural land, the development of mines, the extension of harbor
improvements, railways, telegraphs, &c. I remember hearing a
story of an old Scotch millionaire, who possessed a steam yacht, and
invited' a swell party to a journey on the Nile and a visit to the
famous ruins of Thebes. When they arrived at the point of disem-
barkation mine host was asleep in his bunk. He was roused by a
friend with a hearty shake and “ Mr. here we are, we are just
about to start for Thebes, come on.” Rubbing his eyes Mr.
said, “ Thebes ! Whaur’s Thebes ?” It was explained to him that
Thebes was a famous ruined city of ancient Egypt. Hia reply was
characteristic —“ D—n your ruins, I want to see a thrivin’ place;
I’ll bide, where I am.” The moral of this little anecdote simply is,
that if your Australian readers desire to see a “ thriving place,” they
had better visit Tasmanian capitals —we have two —via the North
West Coast. They will see more of real progress and solid prosperity,
on the overland journey, than is even dreamed of in our capital cities ;
for true it is that your average Tasmanian citizen knows precious
little about Tasmania.
Mostly, the steamers from Melbourne to Stanley can land their
passengers on the wharf, but there are times when the tide is on the
ebb and the wind unfavorable, when it is not quite safe to trust
large boats alongside the present jetty, for fear of their grounding
on the sand, and so losing time. In such case they anchor out about
a few hundred yards, and the ship’s boats convey the passengers on
shore. There is a capital landing place, with steps, and not the


slightest element of danger in the process. Very shortly it is hoped,
Parliament will authorise the construction of an extensive break-
water at Circular Head, plans of which were prepared some time
since by Mr. Napier Bell, C.E., and when that is erected this will be
one of the best harbors of refuge on the coast.
Circular Head takes its name from a rather extraordinary
rocky citadel, which rises abruptly from the coast to a height of
about 500 feet, is almost circular in form, and embraces an area of
about 80 acres of really good land on the summit. This remax*kable
projection of greenstone is surrounded by the ocean, excepting on
the south side, where it is joined to the mainland by a narrow low
isthmus. It is familiarly known as “ The Nut,” and the pretty little
township of Stanley lies at its southern base. The sides of “ The
Nut ” are very precipitous, but there are several tracts by which the
tourist can reach the summit after about a quarter of an hour’s climb ;
and from there a magnificent view of the north coast is unfolded,
extending eastward to the mouth of the River Tamar, and westward
to Cape Grim, including the adjacent islands. This part of Tasmania
was once a favorite resort of the aboriginals, who used to assemble in
considerable numbers and spend the time in fishing, hunting, and
generally in a good aboriginal “ spree.” Not far from the town of
Stanley is a* cave in the rocks, containing numerous bones and other
relics of old time native festivities. Circular Head was originally
settled under the auspices of an English company known as the Van
Dieman’s Land Agricultural Company. This was in the year 1825.
The first secretary and manasrer of the company was one whose name
will be well remembered in Victoria and the colonies generally—Mr.
Edward Curr. In a letter written by him to the Right Hon. Earl
Bathurst, then Secretary of State for the Colonies, the objects of
the organisation were thus set forth—First, the acquirement of a
large area of land, and the encouragement of the growth of fine wool;
second, the improvement of some considerable portion of the waste
and uninhabitable lands of the island. Other objects were also
stated as having “occurred to the directors,” to wit, “mining,
whaling and sealing, distilling and brewing from the company’s own
produce, the lending of money on mortgage, and on such personal
securities as are not transferable by mere delivery or endorsement;
the advancement of money to the colonial Legislature for the purposes
of the colony and the undertaking of public works.” The company
was duly established by an act of the Imperial Parliament and a
Royal charter, the former of which is dated the 10th of June, 1825,
and the latter passed the Great Seal on the 10th of November of the
same year. The capital of the company was, nominally, £1,000,000
sterling in 10,000 shares of £IOO each. At this time Colonel Sorell
had just returned to England from the Government of Van Dieman’s
Land, and through his influence a grant of six blocks of land
was made to the company of 350,000 acres, viz., 150,000 acres at Wool-
worth, 20,000 acres at Circular Head, 10,000 acres at Hampshire
Hills, 10,0Q0 acres at Middlesex plains, 150,000 acres at Surrey
Hills and 10,000 acres at Robbins and Trefoil Islands. Thus
the V.D.L. company may be said to have picked the eyes out
of the country constituting the extreme north-west of Tasmania, now


comprised in the counties of Russell and Wellington. Subsequently
they obtained a grant of about 20,000 acres more at Emu Bay, now
one of the most flourishing parts of the island and the port of
shipment for the famous Mount Bischoff tin. The terms on which
these lands were granted were these :—“ A value of 2s. 6d. per acre
of good pastui-age and tillage, on which a quit rent of one and a
half, or 30s. per £IOO, was imposed, with the right to close for
the whole at 20 years’ purchase.” Ultimately quit rents were
abolished, and the company received the grant of all their valuable
lands for a little over £IO,OOO. The shareholders did not pay up
more than about £2B 10s. per share on the £IO,OOO shares, and
prior to the discovery of the Mount Bischoff tin mines they had
expended about £272,000 in buildings, roads, sheep farming,
agriculture and works of various kinds, while they had sold
considerable quantities of land, and had a very heavy rent roll.
I understand the company has since been re-organised, the present
company being £300,000 in £3O shares. Towards the revenue of
the colony they had contributed only a few pounds in the shape
of police and road rates. After the discovery of the tin mine at
Mount Bischoff the company’s lands became greatly enhanced in
value, and attracted the attention of the Legislature, proposals
being made that negotiations should be entered into to secure the
re-transfer of the lands to the colonial Government, and I have
reason for believing that at this period very good terms might
have been made. The Government, however, neglected their
opportunity, and “ it’s rather too late for it now,” although about
a couple of years ago the matter was again brought before the
Legislative Council but allowed to lapse. The Y.H.L. Company
pursues the even tenor of its way —keeps on making money, and
never minding. They have now a first-class railway connecting
Burnie (Emu Bay) with Waratah, the town of Mount Bischoff; their
farms and cattle stations prosper exceedingly ; they sell alternate
blocks in the townships at splendid prices, quietly awaiting the
unearned increment value to be derived from the progress of
improvements, made at other people’s expense, to gather in magni-
ficent profits from the sale of the intervening allotments. No
wonder successive Treasurers have expressed an ardent desire to
get at them with a gentle tax or two, but they have not been very
successful in such endeavors as yet, whatever may be looming in the
future. I think any hostile feeling towards the company is confined
to political centres. Its local affairs are ably managed by Mr. J.
Norton Smith, and a very good feeling seems to prevail amongst the
tenants, who are generally prosperous, contented and easy going. If
the company does get an advantage, by reason of ; ts monopoly, in the
purchase of cattle and produce there is compensatory benefit in the
presence of a ready customer and sure money. The progress of the
district may not be so lapid as it might have been in a competitive
struggle by many small holders on their own acres ; but if slow it is
sure, and it must be owned that the prosperous condition of the
agriculturists around Circular Head will compare favorably with that
of any other Tasmanian settlement. As the traffic coastwise increases
and people have their eyes opened to the undoubted wealth of this


part of the island, outside capital and energy will be brought to bear,
and any cause for complaint against the “monopoly” will cease
to exist.
The township of Stanley and its sui’roundings offers many
attractions to visitors in search of health and recreation. To the
east and west as far as the eye can reach are fine broad sandy
beaches, along which the treasures of the sea in the shape of shells,
sponges, seaweeds, &c., are scattered in rich profusion, offering a fine
field for the naturalist. About 600 species of marine shells have
been claimed for Tasmania and duly classified by the Rev. J. E.
Tennison Woods and others, and many of these can be obtained
about Half Moon and West Bays on either side of the “ Nut.” Three
or four descriptions of Volute, Cyprea umbilicata, several species of
Crassatella, Venus lamelletta, Pinna, Trigonia, &c , are readily
obtained, while those who understand operating the dredge may
secure many interesting deep water and microscopic species. There
is capital fishing in the bays referred to, native salmon, mullet, perch,
rock cod, flat head, trevalla and flounders being plentiful, and boats
and appliances obtainable at moderate terms. Occasionally good
sport is to be had with seals, and in riding along the beach I came
across the skeleton of a whale, these monsters being sometimes
washed up after storms. The rivers and creeks about Circular Head
offer good sport to the angler, blackfish, native trout, fresh-water
herring and fresh-water lobster being abundant. Votaries of the gun
will find plenty of sport in the surrounding forest, and as the district
literally swarms with hares, those who enjoy coursing may do so to
their heart’s content. The original managers of the Van Dieman’s
Land Company were great men in those parts, in fact were regarded
as Governors of the North, and Mr. Curr especially went in for doing
things quite in the English style. The homestead on the peninsula
at West Head is a fine establishment, standing in the midst of some
really magnificent land, which was originally surrounded by a high
fence, with iron gates, laid out as a park and well stocked with deer,
emu and other interesting creatures. This is a departed glory ; the
present occupant, Mr. Ford, has more utilitarian notions. The deer
park is now a cattle run, the high fences have disappeared, and all
that remains of past splendor is a couple of massive masonry pillars,
between which the park gates used to swing. lam not much of a
botanist, but a very fine series of Tasmanian plants are procurable
about Circular Head, including (so the guide books say) “ some of
the rarer cryptogams, the Cyathea affinis and Todea A-fricana, with
the three beautiful Hymenophyllums, peculiarly luxuriant.” The
surrounding forests yield much very valuable timber, although lam
informed the blue gum is not included. Stringy bark, white or
swamp gum, peppermint, blackwood and myrtle are amongst the
chief timbers obtained ; and of generally ornamental and useful
woods, native myrtle, muskwood, he-oak, honeysuckle, native laurel,
native box, native cherry, are the chief.
In recent years there has been a large amount of settlement on
Government lands to the west and south of Circular Head, and
visitors anxious to ascertain what is being done by the settlers will
find much to interest them by a trip to Duck River, the Montague,.


the Forest, Irish Town and contiguous localities. A new Govern-
ment road is now being made south to the River Arthur, which will
open up much good land and afford access to some fine beds of
timber. At present a Mr. Lee is running a big saw-mill at the Duck
River, and has vessels regularly trading between that port and the
Australian colonies. He has eight miles of railway running back into
the timber beds, with locomotive engine and all necessary appliances.
There is some very fine agricultural land at the Montague River,
occupied by numerous small farmers, who grow potatoes and grain,
mostly for the Melbourne market. A large number of selections have
been recently taken up near the Arthur, along the course of the new
road, and when this is complete settlement will rapidly extend
southward.
There is not much to notice in the general ch iracter of the soil.
Where the country is flat the land is sandy and swampy, with stunted
timber and heath growing on it. The good land is confined to the
hills and rising ground, is somewhat patchy and invariably covered
with a thick growth of timber and scrub, gigantic eucalypti, myrtle,
sassafras and tree ferns, with here and there valuable beds of
blackwood. The expense of the labor required to clear these dense
forests is the chief drawback to agricultural settlement, and it is
really wonderful to see what the pioneers have done in the face of
almost insurmountable difficulties. It is interesting and nice to hear
a well-dressed Australian, ensconced in a comfortable drag and bowl-
ing along a fine metalled road, criticising the “sleepy headed”
Tasmanians, and blowing about what “ we would have done had we
possessed such a splendid country,” &c., &c, I have often wondered
how that critic would look turned on to a 50-acre block of forest
land with a hoe and an axe and told to make his living there. I’m
afraid there would not be much result to blow about. Yet this was
really the start of hundreds of Tasmanian settlers. One of the pioneers
of the Rocky Cape district, about 18 miles from Circular Head, told me
that when he first tried to come through with a light chaise cart he
had to cut his way nearly the whole distance, and in several places
had to detach the wheels and carry the cart along for miles piece
meal. It used to be no uncommon experience in getting potatoes to
port to have to cart the load over miles of road by instalments.
Now, thanks to a more enlightened public policy, we have changed
all that. Whenever good lands is opened up roads and tracts are
made into it, connecting with the main road system of the colony,
and bush settlement nowadays is a comparatively easy matter. I
entertain, however, a profound respect for the hardy old pioneer
settlers, who by their energy and perseverance accomplished so much
in the face of stupendous difficulties. Circular Head is in the police
district of Russell, the area of which is about 2000 square miles, with
a coast line of about 100 miles, and, as showing what an orderly
community it is, one sub-inspector and two constables of the
territorial police preserve the peace and guard the coast. Mr. S.
Anderson, a pioneer settler of the Black River holds the posts of
stipendiary magistrate, coroner, collector of customs, commissioner of
the Supreme Court, master warden of the marine board, chairman of
the school board and factotum in general, Mr. Anderson has been


in the district since the year 1836, and is always pleased to afford
information to inquiring visitors. Circular Head is said to be one
of Tasmania’s vulnerable points, as the Russians or some other
hostile power, intend some day to anchor their ironclads under the
Hunters’ Islands preparatory to making a dash on the coast.
Stanley has therefore set up a rifle club, which numbers about 30
stalwart young farmers, generalled by the local “ Ollapod,” who is
also the local printer. Some bad characters were irreverent enough
to style the club “ a blooming press gang.” However, they have a
good rifle range, and are becoming quite experts in shooting; so if
Admiral Shandygoff comes this way he had better look out.
For should ambition dare to turn
Her envious eye upon our shore,
She’ll find the Patriot fire can burn
As brightly as in days of yore
Old Stanley's sons firm as a rock,
Will swift repel the invader’s shock.
The district sub-inspector of police, Mr. A. Grubb, is—next to his
magisterial chief—the grand old man of Stanley. He possesses a
fund of information and quaint humor, sharpened by long experience
as a newspaper correspondent. The visitor will find him worth
looking up. What he doesn’t know is not worth knowing.
The commerce of Stanley is considerable. Here are a few
figures from the returns of 1888: —Navigation—tonnage: Inwards,
22,286 tons; outwards, 24,264 tons. Imports from the other colonies,
£9245; exports to the other colonies, £23,618; exports coastwise,
£10,000; duties on foreign imports, £1126. There were 8159 acres
of land in cultivation, growing wheat, barlev, oats, hay, potatoes,
hops, apples, pears, &c , &c.. and there were 7807 acres in permanent
artificially sown grasses; 1399 acres of potatoes yielded 6233 tons.
The live stock returns show 780 horses, 3390 cattle, 600 milch cows,
10,871 sheep, 1040 pigs, and 9 goats. The population of the district
is about 1800.
Intending visitors will desire to know something about accom-
modation. There are three veiy good hotels, the proprietors of which
appear to give satisfaction to their customers. I stayed at the
“ Ship,” an old fashioned commodious place, kept by a buxom widow,
Mrs. Ray. who seems as if she could not be too kind to her patrons.
Well furnished bed and sitting rooms, with piano, public rooms, and
a first-class country menu ; ballroom, skating rink, &c., attached.
Visitors staying at the other hostelries give me an equally satisfactory
account of them. Of course I could not try them all. Existing
hotels will do for present requirements, but should the passenger
traffic by this route develop, as I trust it will, there will be room for
several new houses of accommodation. The rage on the north-west
coast at present is roller skating. There was a carnival on the night
I arrived at Stanley, and 1 saw 38 competitors in fancy costumes on
the floor, with an audience numbering about 250 spectators. Stauley
possesses a very good public hall and institute, with reading room
for the public ; circulating library, State school, and numerous stores,
where goods are add under Launceston or Hobart prices. There is the


usual assortment of churches, and a romantically situated “ God’s
acre ” ensconced by the sad sea waves right under “ The Nut.” This
cemetery is fairly kept, and is worth a visit. I have referred to the
prices at which general goods are sold in the Stanley stores. This
is due to the proximity of the port to Melbourne. It is far nearer
the great Victorian capital than it is to our own business centres,
and so most of the goods come across by steamer direct, the business
being transacted by travellers. There will presently be room for a
great expansion of this trade—a fact of which Melbourne merchants
should make a note. In my next I shall endeavour to describe the
route by road along the coast.
IpPW'HERE is a capital coach road from Circular Head to Formby,
the present terminus of the Launceston and Western railway,
' a.Sr hut the traffic along this route is so light that no regular
coach plies on the first stages of the journey. The mail
contractor, Mr. J. Wiseman, of Emu Bay, sends along coaches when
required ; but at present the ordinary conveyance between Stanley
and Table Cape is the mail cart run by a sub-contractor, Mr. E. T.
Breheny, of Circular Head. Until traffic becomes permanently
established, tourists thinking of taking this route should communicate
with Mr. Breheny, at Stanley, or Mr. Wiseman, at Emu Bay, when
arrangements will be made according to their requirements, coach,
waggonette or buggy being at their disposal at the usual rates of
fare. For a small party of gentlemen the drive by the mail cart is
pleasant enough. On leaving Stanley the road follows the beach for
a considerable distance, and the traveller has an opportunity of
witnessing the encroachments made by the sea, and the manner in
which the noble Half Moon Bay is being silted up and destroyed for
want of simple harbor works. In 1881 Mr. C. Napier Bell, C.E.,
reported, at the request of the Tasmanian Government, upon
nec ssary improvements at this harbor, recommending a breakwater
at a cost of, I believe, £12,000, the erection of which would protect
the land from the effect of the swell in easterly weather, and enable
steamers or ships of any tonnage to lie safely alongside the pier at
any state of tide. Successive Governments have promised faithfully
that this very neelful work should be carried out, but their promises
have turned out of the pie crust order. Deputations have travelled
all the way from Circular Head to Hobart to urge the importance of
this matter, returning promise clad to the most satisfactory extent,
but only to be left more naked than before in so far as the break-
water is concerned. Now there is some talk of a local league being
established to bring political pressure to bear to have the work
carried out, and I dare say the next general election may result in its


being advanced a stage. Meanwhile unfortunate Circular Head is
sufficiently distant from the seat of Government to enable Ministers
to forget it, and it is convenient to forget sometimes in the interests
of more importunate maritime settlements further to the eastward.
The Stanleyites are beginning to realise the fact that they are nearer
to Victoria by 120 miles than they are to their own capital, so far as
distance is concerned ; and that while it takes them 50 or 60 hours
of hai d and incessant travel to get to Hobart, they can be landed on
Melbourne wharf after 14 or 16 hours’ comfortable steaming.
Neglected, as they have unquestionably been, by their own paternal
Government, it is little wonder that they should entertain vague ideas
about “ cutting the painter,” and that they are advocates for
annexation to Victoria.
As we drive along in the mail cart we have a fine opportunity
of studying the forces of nature, and observing the destruction of
land which is worked by the waves of the sea. We notice long rows
of rubble stone cropping out from the sand, marking the site of a
former road now completely washed out into the baj 7 . We also notice
fences closely fascined with scrub, intended to protect another track
made at great expense, but utterly useless against the ceaseless action
of the waves. Our driver tells us that the same process is going on in
the bays at either side of the peninsula, and that some vast sand
hummocks which we had seen were two or three years back luxuriant
potato fields. The first few miles of the present road is in many
places undergoing re-construction further inland, but the general
opinion is that unless something be done to protect the harbor it will
only be a matter of time as to when it will be swept away. The
driver of the cart finds it convenient to take to the beach at present,
and the drive over the hard sand on a fine morning is very exhilarating
and enjoyable. For most of the first dozen miles the road runs
through light forest lands within sight of the sea, and several streams
are crossed over good biidges. The scenery is diversified, and such
as would delight the eye of an artist. The last six or seven miles of
the road to Rocky Cape lies through heavy ►andy country, but the
metalled road is now being formed, and will complete between
Stanley and Formby 80 miles of as good turnpike road as any out of
England.
The visitor of utilitarian bent, if he can spare the time and ride
a horse, will find very much to interest him in this first stage of the
journey over the coast. A detour to the mouth of the Black River,
a considerable stream navigable for small vessels for about a mile
above its mouth, will take him over some highly promising mineral
country, chiefly limestone, slate and clay. A few chains above the
river’s mouth there are fine deposits of pure white clay, and running
back from the seashore are some surprising outcrops of pure blue
slate, I should say admirably suited for roofing purposes. I have had
a lot of experience in Tasmanian slate quarries, greatly to my cost.
I know the quarries at Piper’s River well, including the famous
Bangor, but I fancy we have all been on the wrong side of the island;
the slate on the extreme north-west coast is vastly superior in quality,
and would be much more easily worked than any yet tried in this
colony. The whole coast line proceeding eastward is slate, contorted


into all sorts of fantastical shapes, allied with altered sandstones and
quartzites—a very likely looking country for the mineral explorer.
We crossed a capital bridge spanning Crayfish Creek, and very soon
arrived at another watercourse, bearing the name of Stinking Creek,
consequent upon sulphurous fumes which sometimes arise from it.
A short detour brings us to an enormous outcrop of broken slate reef,
right on the seashore, through which runs a very promising looking
quartz vein, heavily charged with pyrites. Some years ago samples
from this reef were sent to Victoria for assay and found to yield as
high as 2 oz. of gold to the ton. I traced it for a considerable
distance along the surface, averaging from 1 to 6 inches in width,
and it seems to exhibit all the probabilities of permanency. Visitors
interested in mining would find it worth while to examine this part
of the coast. With the very perfect processes of the present day for
treating pyrites, there might be a fortune in such a lode.
In 18 miles we reach Detention River-bridge and a complete
change of country. The Detention is a considerable river, well
stocked with black fish, eels, mountain trout, &c., and was so named
because when Sir John and Lady Franklin visited the district in
1840 they were detained here a considerable time, being unable to
cross the river. There is now a capital bridge and a goodly settle-
ment, with school house, post and telegraph office, farm houses, &c.,
but no public house. Your local optionist would have a chance here
of observing the practical effect of his theory in small districts. I
happened to arrive on a Sunday afternoon, and found the youth and
beauty of the settlement vigorously engaged in a rather exciting
cricket match. lam afraid there has been a falling from grace at
Detention. Kot far from the public school is a neat little conventicle,
nestling at the foot of the hill, which was erected some years back by
the Evangelists. I asked whether it would be open in the evening,
but was informed it had been closed for a long time. When it was
first started people attended from the districts all around, coming
many miles to worship, and there was quite a flourishing congrega-
tion. Suddenly it flashed across the minds of some of the young
people that the chapel would be a splendid place for a dance, and
they lost no time in applying to the trustees for the use of it, but
somehow those obtuse old parties did not think it would be in exact
accord with the eternal fitness of things, so they refused. The
flourishing congregation at once withdrew their patronage, and the
chapel has been closed ever since. Probably some day it will be
sold and converted into a skating rink. In the absence of an hotel
the farm house of Mr Robert Dallas, by the side of the road, affords
excellent accommodation for travellers. It is roomy and well furnished,
and Mrs. Dallas and her daughters are untiring in their exertions for
the comfort of their guests. The fare is homely and excellent, and
there is plenty of stabling accommodation. Miss Dallas runs the post
and telegraph office, and her sister the public school. The attendance
at the school is pretty good for a bush place of this sort, but I was
informed that the spur of the compulsory clauses needs to be applied
occasionally. The want of labor is greatly felt by the farmers of this
locality, and the services of the children at home are valuable accord-
ingly, It is a remarkable fact that the farmer’s friend, the


common magpie, is unknown in this district. Mr. Dallas is now
endeavouring to introduce them, and I trust his efforts may be suc-
cessful ; the numerous hawks, however, in the surrounding forest
menace the experiment. This gentleman was one of the very first
settlers of this district, and the parish is named after him. A large
quantity of new land has recently been taken up, and is gradually
being broken in. There is a shipping place at the mouth of the
Detention River available for the despatch of produce, to which small
craft regularly trade. The port of entry for the present is Stanley,
Circular Head. The forests around Detention contain abundance of
splendid timber of nearly every economic variety known to Tasmania
excepting pine, but so far saw-mills or factories have not found their
way to the district.
The mail cart passes Dallas’s for Table Cape at 10 a.m., and
securing a seat the traveller bowls along a magnificent road, through
dense forest land, broken every now and then by cultivation, for
several miles; until we approach the range of hills terminating in
Rocky Cape. Some fine stretches of myrtle forest are passed through
on this part of the road. Cultivation does not seem to have been very
extensive, although the land is of the best description. The settlers
are not a very wealthy^class, and seem to have confined their efforts
to the preliminary stages of scrubbing, ringing the trees and putting
down grass, which grows most luxuriantly. As we approach the
ranges the country changes with remarkable suddenness, the rich
forest lands giving place to high barren hills, chiefly composed of
irregular schists, quartzite and slate ; the low lying land being of the
poorest quality, with tussocks, spear grass, button rushes, heaths, &c ,
in great variety; very few trees of any kind. This continues for
about 2 miles, the road winding around two curious hills, known as
the Sisters ; the telegraph posts taking an independent course right
over the tops of them. There are occasional small gullies, and in one
of them our Jehu points out an historical spot, known as “ Moore’s
Hole,” where a famous Chief Secretary once came to grief, while
escorting the late Sir George Strahan ; standing on his head and
depositing his belltopper in the mud. The local newspapers made a
lot of it at the time, but I believe the hat was never found, although
the head is as vigorous and clear to-day as ever. We rattle along over
the hills, to emerge out of solitude and bari’enness into fresh scenes of
beauty as we approach the district known as Boat Harbor. One of
the most lovely forest scenes imaginable opens to the view as we cross
Sisters Creek, affording a splendid opportunity for the artist in
colors, and causing one to wish for a camera in order that its details
might be fixed and carried away. The land from this point to
Wynyard, Table Cape, is of first-class quality, but along the coast
line is hilly and broken in character. Settlement seems to have
extended only a very small distance into the interior, but where the
back lands have been taken up they are proving very fertile and
productive. The flourishing district of Flowerdale, with its many
well-kept farms, is a proof of the prolific character of this portion of
Tasmania. Orchards and gardens are being laid out with much
success, and as the codlin moth is as yet unknown in this part of the
colonv, the fruit growers have a good prospect before them. This


Flowerdale district is one of the most promising agricultural settle-
ments on the coast. The noble Flowerdale River with its tributaries
runs through it, teeming with all [kinds of fish ; and Jacob’s Boat
Harbor affords an outlet for the produce of the immediate district,
while the harbor of Table Cape at the mouth of the River Inglis is
only a mile or two away. A fine metalled road branches from off the
main road to Boat Harbor, where there is now a good deal of settle-
ment. The distance is a mile and a half. To those who may desire
to take up really good Tasmanian backwoods land, I may recommend
the district extending from Flowerdale to the River Cam. There is
a large amount of land available, ana settlement has not yet extended
10 miles back from the coast. Roads are being constructed south-
ward which will ultimately connect with Mount Bischoff, and give to
these lands a very high value. It is about 7or 8 miles from Boat
Harbor to
WYNYARD,
the township of Table Cape, and as we approach that headland the
country becomes more patchy, embracing considerable areas of light
heathy plains, which, however, yield excellent crops in answer to
cultivation, whilst they cost considerably less to clear than the
heavier basaltic lands and can be bought more cheaply. There is very
little available Crown land in this part of the district. The country
around Wynyard is mostly good agricultural and timber land, and it
is here that Messrs. Moore and Quiggan have their extensive saw-
mills, where they employ a large amount of labor with the very best
machinery. The shipping trade of Wynyard is not considerable, as
the harbor is not what it should be. A large amount of money was
spent some time back in commencing to form a breakwater, but this
has, I believe, been abandoned, and plans proposed by Mr. C. Napier
Bell, C.E., adopted in preference. He recommended the conversion
of an immense natural basin running out between the two reefs,
slightly to the east of the present wharves, into a harbor, and
provided plans and specifications for the same, which I understand
have been approved by Government. As in the case of Stanley,
however, Ministers are a long time in making a move. The surveys
and recommendations were made in 1881, but the commencement of
the work is yet in the future. Wynyard is a lively little town with
three large and comfortable-hotels, and a well conducted coffee
palace. A great deal of building has gone on during the last few
y r ears, and as a road is now being constructed from thence to the
town of Waratah, Mount Bischoff, it is thought that an impetus will
be given to trade, and the value of property much enhanced. There
are several large and well stocked shops and stores on the main
street, while wheelwrights, blacksmiths, bootmakers and other trades-
men find ample employment. Amongst public institutions Wyny*ard
has a good hall, library and reading room. There is a large State
school well attended, and several places of worship. On the outskirts
of the town is a commodious building used under the auspices of the
Table Cape Agricultural and Pastoral Society for annual exhibitions,
which are gradually T increasing in size and populax-ity. Visitors fond


of seaside amusements will find plenty to do at Table Cape, and
lovers of rod and line can have sport galore both in fresh and salt
water. From this township start the regular coaches on the route
to Formby, and the different lines run day and night. The road
from Table Cape to Emu Bay skirts the sea for nearly the whole
distance, and about eight miles on we come to the pretty little town-
ship of
SOMERSET,
embowered in foliage at the mouth of the River Cara. There are
the usual public conveniences—post and telegraph office, police
station, &c. There is one church—also used as a State school —a
store and a number of neat cottages. There are saw-mills here, and
the principal trade is in shipping timber to Melbourne. Two vessels
were being loaded at the wharf as I passed through. Thei’e is an
extensive tract of country at the back of the Cam, chiefly among the
low tier’s north of the River Arthur’, much of which is still open for
selection. The soil is described as stiff basaltic, covered with myrtle
timber, and I am told that where it has been cultivated results have
been highly satisfactory. Between the Rivers Cam and Emu the
land is all the property of the Yan Diemen’s Land Company. They
have sold a few thousand acres, which have been settled upon. The
road from Somerset to Emu Bay runs through settled country, with
numerous homesteads, and several fine farms and handsome estab-
lishments are passed en route. After a spin of about 4 miles we
arrive at what must be termed the chief town of the county of
Wellington,
BURNIE—EMU BAY
This is a large and beautifully situated town, one of the most
eligible seaside resorts in the whole of Tasmania. It is the port of
entry for the county, the head-quarters of the magistracy, Customs
and Marine Board, also the Yan Diemen’s Land Company, and, above
all, it is the coast terminus of the Mount Bischoff railway. It is 92
miles from Launceston, and the population must be over 1000. The
town is in the form of an amphitheatre surrounding the beautiful
bay, the houses rising from the beach to the summit of the hills, a
height of from 300 to 400 feet. The bay is an expansive stretch of
water with a fine sandy beach. It is rather exposed to the eastward,
but well protected from the prevailing north-westerly winds by a
ledge of rocks known as Blackman’s Point and the Red Rock, inside
of which are the harbor and breakwater. The town of Burnie was
wholly the property of the Yan Dieman’s Land Company, and they
adopted the rather knowing expedient of selling only the alternate
town lots and reserving most of the valuable corner blocks. This
had a two-fold advantage for them, securing a certain “ unearned
increment” value for the intervening lots, and cheap fencing; as the
buyers of sold lots had to fence in their property, and in so doing
enclosed at least three sides of the company’s blocks free of cost.
It rather detracts from the appearance of the town to see nearly
every alternate block vacant, overgrown with weeds and generally
neglected, but as land becomes more valuable the company will find


it to their interest to sell, and the condition of the place will be
vastly improved. Already many of these lots have been disposed
of at enhanced prices, and for one coner lot of considerably less than
an acre I am informed over £9OO was obtained only a few weeks
back. The approach to Burnie from the westward is very beautiful,
the road running along the sea beach, facing which for a considerable
distance are suburban residences, with gardens, Ac., one or two occu-
pied as private boarding houses, where excellent accommodation may
be obtained by visitors. The town possesses a number of really good
hotels, with a large amount of accommodation, although apparently
none too much for the traffic in the season. There are a number of
shops and stores which would do honor to a large city, and I observed
several capacious villa residences in course of erection on the higher
lands. Emu Bay wears the aspect of a thoroughly thriving place.
There are saw-mills and yards in the immediate vicinity, which
are sources of considerable profit to their proprietors. Attached to
most of the hotels are first-class billiard rooms, and a commodious
skating rink appears to be well patronised by the inhabitants. The
bay swarms with fish, affording splendid sport, and the Emu and
Blythe Rivers are within easy distance of the town and abound with
herring, blackfish, mountain trout, eels, lobsters, Ac. The land
about the township is of excellent quality, and there are some
beautiful gardens in which flowers and vegetables of every kind
flourish exceedingly.
The great public work of Emu Bay is the breakwater, now under
construction from the plans of Mr. C. Napier Bell, C.E. This work
is much upon the plan of the now famous Colombo breakwater, at
Ceylon, but of course is on a miniature scale. That breakwater
runs out about 3000 feet or more from the land, and cost £900,000
when completed, while the Emu Bay structure is intended to run out
about SUO feet, and may probably cost about £20,000 when complete.
It is being done by instalments ; about 250 feet are now partially
finished, and the work was at a standstill for want of funds. Repre-
sentations were made, however, which induced Government to
proceed, and, as Parliament is now in session, no doubt immediate
arrangements will be made to go on with the work. It certainly
seems foolish to stop now that a complete plant and skilled staff have
just been got into good working order. The steamers of the T.S.N.
Co. can now lie in safety at any state of tide alongside the break-
water, an immense convenience to the inhabitants.
This breakwater is of concrete, cast in rectangular blocks 12 feet
10 inches by 5 feet by 5 feet, and each weighing 25 tons. The
original jetty was a caisson lined with concrete and rubble, but this
was split and partially carried away by the force of the waves. As
the position was favorable, however, the old jetty was made the
starting point of the new breakwater, being strengthened by an
enormous backing of bluestone rubble at a natural batter, the stone
for which was obtained from a remarkable quarry in the hillside just
above. On baring this hill it was found to consist of columnar
basalt, the pillars being packed closely side by side, very similar to
the Giants’ Causeway in Ireland. The quarry men are now tearing
down these pillars and the stone-crusher makes short work of the


material in the preparation of the concrete. The quarry and the
breakwater are but a few yards apart, so that a very short tramway
carries the material and also the travelling crane necessary for
moving and lowering the blocks into position. The bottom, out from
the old jetty, was found to be fine sand overlying a stiff clay, and
divers have to be employed moving the sand and preparing the
bottom to receive the blocks. The jetty, or breakwater, is 25 feet
10 inches wide, and is formed by laying two blocks end on to each-
other. at an angle sloping outwards, and piling others upon them in
series in the same manner. For the greater length of the jetty tho
blocks are thus piled up seven high, and every two pairs of blocks
is bound together by an immense mass of concrete, moulded and
rammed and consolidated into thorough compactness. Each of these
great masses measures 25 feet 10 inches in width by a breadth of
10 feet and a depth of 14 feet. The “ mortar” used for making the
concrete consists of three parts of fine sen sand to one of the best
Portland cement, and it is thoroughly tested in briquets at a pressure
of 1000 lb. to the square inch. The concrete for the 25-ton blocks
is made by mixing the mortar with a sufficient quantity of broken
stone from the crusher, the water used in making the mortar being
pumped from the sea. This mixture is then rammed into moulding
boxes and allowed to set, when the lumps are lifted by the crane,
carried to their position and duly lowered into the water, where they
are placed by the divers. The present depth at the end of the work
is 30 feet at low water.
The Mount Bischoff railway station and sheds and the stores of
the Y.D.L. Company constitute a large establishment at the southern
end of the township, and I need hardly say that the wonderful tin
mine at the Mount, and the populous town of Waratah, to which it
has given rise, are well worthy a visit. The tourist will find the
railway equipped with comfortable coupe carriages, from the windows
of which he can behold some of the most beautiful mountain and
forest scenery in the colony.
fHE drive along the coach road from Emu Bay to Formby is
through one of the richest and most varied divisions of
Tasmania—the county of Devon—a county containing over a
dozen flourishing townships, an area of considerably over
1,000,000 acres, and a population estimated to exceed 12,000. Settle-
ment has progressed very rapidly in this part of the country during
late years, owing to a tolerably liberal outlay on roads and public
works, and most of the good agricultural land has been taken up and
settled upon. For the best part of the distance the road is along the
coast, the sea being nearly always in sight, and the scenery presents
many charming features. The coach travels at a rattling pace, and


in fine weather the journey is most enjoyable. About a mile after
leaving Burnie the Emu River is crossed by a substantial bridge, and
just beyond the little settlement of Wivenhoe is passed, a pretty and
sequestred hamlet, which promises to become an important place in
the future, when cultivation shall have made further advances. The
country for the next few miles is very much broken, the road being
skirted by precipitous rocks of basaltic formation, and the scenery
marked by isolated rocky prominences fringed with native shrubs,
which pop into sight at every turn in an unaccountable and delight-
fully independent sort of way, A grand bit of country for the artist
is this, for the scenery of the coast is very beautiful—a succession of
■charming little bays, interspersed with rocky promontories and
stretches of fine sandy beach, with here and there a wealth of under-
growth and scrub presenting every variety of tint. We cross the
River Blythe over a good bridge, and our Jehu informs us that this
is a famous fishing place for visitors, all the principal fresh water
varieties being procurable. The Blythe appears to be a noble stream,
and it runs through a rather promising mineral country. I was
informed that a few miles from its mouth are vast deposits of
thematite iron ore in situ , with which nothing has as yet been
attempted to be done. The failure of the Port Lempriere iron
enterprise at the mouth of the River Tamar would seem to have
■completely frightened speculators. The cause of that failure was the
presence of chronium in the ore, in such quantities that it could not
be dealt with in the furnace; and this rendered the iron produced
too tough and hard for ordinary commercial purposes. I am in a
position to say that the iron ore at the Blythe is of a totally different
•character and quality to that of the West Tamar, and there is good
reason for believing it could be turned to profitable account.
Tourists of a practical turn might find it worth while to look up
these deposits. I merely tip them the wink. A few miles south-
wards, on the Blythe, is a place called Mount Housetop, which was
once all pegged out for tin claims, and where that mineral is said to
abound. The story goes that before the last remnant of the
Tasmanian aboriginals had been gathered to their fathers some one
exhibited to Truganinni, one ot the last of the gins, samples of tin
•ore. The old lady became very enthusiastic, and said she knew
where “ plenty that stuff.” She then described how in the days of
her youth she and others used to dig it up with sticks. Housetop,
on the Blythe, was the locality indicated, and sure enough, on search
being made, alluvial tin ore was found there, and a rush set in. I
•don’t know whether much work was done, or whether the mineral
was found in payable quantity, but 1 trow not. However,
Truganiuni’s “ plenty that stuff ” may be there } r et, and only want to
be intelligently looked for. I expect at the time of the alleged rush
those concerned were more interested in printing and selling scrip
than in finding tin. North of Mount Housetop gold and copper
were both discovered, so that the country is evidently of varied
mineral character, and perhaps worth attention.
A short di'tance after crossing the Blythe-bridge we find ourselves
•bowling along the shores of a wide and beautiful inlet, known as
Preservation 13ay, and we pass the village of Heybridge which has


the appearance of a rising place, although I am informed its progress
has been slow. A few miles further on and we reach the pretty and
flourishing township of
PENGUIN,
lying under the Dial Ranges, and surrounded by scenes of surpassing
beauty, which invite the tourist to stay and rest awhile. This is a
good held for sportsmen and pleasure seekers generally, and amateur
naturalists, botanists and geologists can here find plenty to do.
There are three good hotels in the town, and one or two first-class
private establishments where tourists can be accommodated. There
are several well stocked stores, a post office, town hall, embryo
museum, public school, churches, &c. Fishing parties can obtain
boats and tackle on moderate terms, and horses and vehicles may be-
hired by those seeking inland pleasures, while the roads all around
are first-class. The trade of the Penguin is chiefly in timber and
agricultural produce, and there is a fine jetty and breakwater, con-
structed by Government some years ago, where vessels of considerable
size can load and discharge in safety. Penguin is a Customs out
station of the Port of Ulverstone, with a landing waiter in charge,
and its exports amount to several thousands of pounds annually, but
it seems difficult to obtain accurate returns. Agricultural settlement
has been much on the increase within the last year or two, some
good roads having been made to a distance of from 15 to 20 miles
from the coast. After this distance the granite country is come upon,
the land being barren and rocky, and more of a mineral character.
There is said to be a considerable quantity of Government land still
available, but the soil is only of medium and inferior quality, and
will probably not be taken up until population increases and greater
road accommodation is afforded.
A few years ago great efforts were made by the residents to-
induce the Government to open and construct a main road from
Penguin to Mount Bischoff, but other counsels prevailed, and the
Bischoff-road is now under construction to Table Cape. The
Penguinites, of course, feel hurt at this, but they do not despair.
There is much valuable mineral country to the south and west
of their township, and it is said good agricultural and timber
land besides. Some day a friendly Minister of Lands and Works-
will get their log rolled for them no doubt.
Penguin has a name of celebrity as a mineral distiict. The
steep, broken rocky hills, known as the Dial Ranges, lying to the
south-east of the township, are generally understood to be mineral
bearing, and copper and other ores have been found amongst them.
About 4 miles back from the coast an outcrop of hematite iron ore
occurs, similar to that I have described as existing at the Blythe.
Some years ago silver ore in considerable quantity was discovered
on the township close to the sea beach. The vein contained
mixed arsenides and sulphides, which according to Mr. Cosmo
Newbery, yielded 15 per cent, copper, 5 per cent, cobalt, and 3 per
cent, nickel, besides 38 oz. 10 dwt. 4 gr. silver to the ton. A company
was formed with a Large capital, styled the Penguine Creek Silver
Mining Company. Shafts were sunk and expensive machinery


•erected, but after a few months’ working the company came to grief,
and was wound up. For several years the mine lay dormant, but
eventually a new company was formed, styled the Neptune, which
has been working on a continuation of the lodes, with varying success.
As I came through, I was informed they expected, almost hourly,
to strike something very good, of which, doubtless, we shall hear
anon. Beds of superior pottery clay are said to exist near the town-
ship, which, it is believed, will some day become valuable. I hear also
there is a vein of manganese at no great distance, besides other
mineral treasures. In fact, the Penguin district would seem to be a
species of natural museum ; had it been a few hundred miles inland,
and comparatively inaccessable, it might have proved a perfect
Paradise for the stock brokers, and company mongers. What pros-
pectuses might not have been issued, what reports concocted, what
specimens produced F But, then, it is awkward to have inquisitive
shareholders popping down by every coach to see for themselves;
they get to know too much From information received at the hands
of an old and practical resident, I have reason to believe, however,
that in the not far distant future those Dial Ranges will be made to
yield up the wealth undoubtedly contained in them, and then Penguin
will become a great place. In the meantime it has many advantages
of position, climate and natural beauty, and your Australian tourists
will not have to regret paying it a visit. A smart drive of about 7
miles, partly through poor forest land, brings us to one of the chief
townships on the coast,
ULYERSTONE—RIVER LEVEN.
In a very few months this rising place will become the western
terminus of the Government railway system, as the extension from
Formby along the coast is now under construction, The visitor who
has previously passed through this part of the island cannot fail to
be struck, on approaching the Leven, by the wonderful growth of
the place. A few years ago a couple of paling shanties alone occu-
pied the western side of the river; now the drive is through a new
township known as West Ulverstone, with pretty cottages on either
side of the road, and one or two stately mansions on the higher lands
contiguous. An English medico, Dr. Spencer, has built himself a
beautiful establishment overlooking the river, his extensive and
well-kept grounds being the admiration of visitors. The Leven is a
very fine river, but unfortunately has a bad entx-ance, although
perfectly accessible to vessels of light dx-aught. A moderate
expenditux-e would soon remove the bar and render the harbor an
important one. This harbor question along the coast seems to be
rather a hard nut fox- Tasmanian Govei-nments to crack. The
inhabitants along all these semi-navigable rivers consider they have
•claims to hai'bor accommodation, while Government does not see its
way to improve them all. Formby, Penguin, Emu Bay and Table
Cape are the favored spots at present, and other places will have to
bide their time. The Leven people may expect to fight a hard
battle to get their wants attended to now that the x-ailway is being
•constructed, because every effort will be made to retain the traffic


for the railway. It does seem absurd that produce intended for
Australian ports should have to be taken about 20 miles by rail, and
then re-handled and shipped, when it might, and should, be put
directly on board steamer at the Ulverstone wharf. Still it must not
be overlooked that present arrangements are a thousand times better
and more convenient than those of a dozen years ago, and no doubt
they will go on improving. “ The mills of the gods grind slowly, but
they do grind,” and no doubt the scouring out of the Leven bar and
the establishment of Ulverstone harbor will be found upon the
programme of the near future.
The Leven River takes its rise among the Surrey Hills in the
county of Russell, about 40 miles inland, and flows through a very
extensive district, including the Castra settlement. It is a noble
stream, well stocked with fish of all kinds, and offering many points
of interest to visitors. It is spanned by a fine pile bridge, across
which the coach rattles into the town of Ulverstone, a really thriving
and busy place. This is now the centre of a considerable district, the
headquartei s of the police and magistracy and a Customs station,
with a landing waiter, tide waiter and Customs agent. Agricultural
produce and timber are the chief exports, and of these from £12,000
to £15,000 worth are annually shipped. The import trade is also
considerable, and is also on the increase, the chief business being
with Victoria. Visitors will find excellent accommodation here, the
hotels being large and well furnished. There are four or five of
them, and the proprietors seem to do their utmost to make things
comfortable. The town boasts a number of public institutions.
There is a fine town hall, with library and reading room attached, a
spacious ball for public entertainments, two skating rinks, court
house, State school, several private educational establishments and
the usual assortment of churches. There are excellent public baths
also; a racing club which maintains a good country course within
easy distance, and there is a farmers’ club which holds periodical
■shows, ranking with any on this side of the colony. The usual
organisations for recreation and amusement all flourish, and there is
even a Parliamentary debating club, which is an attraction, especially
during the long winter evenings. The affairs of the town are
managed by a town board. The streets are broad and well laid out,
and many of the shops and stores, with tleir well stocked fronts of
plate glass, would not discredit a city. Ulverstone is romantically
situated, and sunounding it is really first-class agricultural country,
although much of the land is heavily timbered. There are now
good roads in many directions, and the tourist will find much to
interest him in driving around. About 16 miles south, between the
Leven and the Gawler, is the parish of Castra, into which a really
good road runs. Castra is famed as the paradise to which numerous
retired Indian officers were induced to betake themselves on the
representations of Colonel Crawford, a large reserve being made for
them. The officers came and saw the land, and lo it was very good,
but a short experience of big trees and Tasmanian bush tracks soon
caused an exodus, and now our Indian friends have located them-
selves anywhere but at Castra. Some have taken up land and
established homesteads at the Forth, the Leven, the Gawler and


elsewhere, and some have made for the southern side of the island,,
and rusticate in the vicinity of Hobart, preferring' the delights of the
capital to the rather humdrum attractions of the backwoods. As
the Anglo-Indian community idea was not a success, Government
some years ago threw the reservation open to the public, and a great
deal of the northern portion has been selected and settlement is
progressing. It is estimated that this district contains 10,000 acres of
really first-class land, while there is a considerable area of medium
land, embracing good land in patches, available for selection.
Southward within a radius of from 20 to 25 miles of the port of
Ulverstone shore is fine country, much of which is yet untouched,
but which will in the future form a substantial backbone and main-
tain for this town a position of consequence. It is an interesting
drive of about 6 miles between the Leven and the Forth, and many
pretty homesteads are passed en route, as also an extensive tannery,,
one or two market gardens owned by Chinamen and a brick field..
We notice several large flocks of Angora goats, with their snow white
hair. These were introduced into the distiict some years back by a
Mr. Templar, formerly of Perth, Tasmania, and they seem to flourish
exceedingly. Presently we descend a steep hill to the picturesquely
situated township of
HAMILTOH-ON-FORTH,
and have a fine view of the course of the river and Leith Heads as
its mouth is called. The scene is of wondrous beauty. We are in
the midst of a cluster of verdure-clad hills, and in the valley nestles-
the township with the river flowing through it, enclosed between
banks thickly covered by native shrubs, creepers, ferns and flowers-
in vast variety, mingled with the thick rich greens of the English
blackberry, which seems to have completely over-run the place. We-
pass some good houses, amongst them the abode of Mr. James Smith
(Philosopher Smith), the discoverer of the Mount Bischoti tin mine,
and dash across an excellent bridge to the Bridge Hotel. Here we
are at once recommended fishing and blackberrying, a stroll to the-
heads, Ac., but prefer to rest and listen to the landlady’s account of
the place and its attractions. Yes, the river contains plenty of native
herring—really the English grayling —blacklist), English trout,
mullet, native salmon, Ac. Boats and tackle can be had, and a
guide if needed, to show the most likely places. At the Heads we
can see the railway works and enjoy boating and saltwater fishing
if inclined, and there are lots of good walks and rides to lonely spots
ar-ound. We stroll through the township, and arrive at the conclusion
that it looks more prosperous from the top of the coach than it really
is. There are some good country stores, a town hall and reading
room, Oddfellows’ hall, coffee palace, court house, post and telegraph
office, Ac., and we learn there is a big farming district all about; but
that the march of Tasmanian progress has diverted much of the
business and left Bamilton-on-Forth rather in the shade is painfully
apparent. The railway will pass about two miles to the north,
crossing the river on an iron bridge, thus further ignoring the pretty
little town. It has been proposed to make a loop line to connect


Hamilton with the main line, and this will no doubt be done. It is
a pretty drive oyer the hills from the Forth to
THE DON",
and we pass through some of the best agricultural land in Tasmania,
as the luxuriant crops growing amid the gaunt “ringed” spectres of
ancient giants of the forest amply testify. The potato and grain
fields in this part of the country look splendid, and should prices he
at all satisfactory it should be a grand year for the farmers. The
reaping machines are now at work amongst the wheat and oats, and
at the various stages of the journey the scene is a lively one.
Climbing the hills from Hamilton some picturesque fern gullies are
passed, and the whole road presents many points of beauty. Bass’s
Straits being visible from nearly every eminence. The land through
which the road passes was, a few years ago, covered with dense
forest, but now all this has been cleared away, and the soil—but
little encumbered with timber —is laid out in cultivated farms or
covered with English grass. The settlers have the two harbors of
the Don and Forth, from which their produce may be shipped. The
township pioper is at Don Bridge, but a mile and a half further
north, at the mouth of the river, is the extensive establishment of
the River Don Trading Company, originally a Victorian organisation,
and now the chief outlet for the surrounding agricultural districts,
and one of the most prosperous establishments on the coast. The
company has now its business headquarters at Formby, where they
have splendid premises, presided over by Mr. John Henry. They
purchase produce and conduct a large shipping trade with the
Australian colonies, New Zealand and foreign countries. They have
u substantial tram road running back into the bush a distance of 30
miles or more into the heavily timbered district of Barrington.
From here the timber is trammed to extensive saw-mills at the
settlement, prepared for market and shipped from the Don Heads,
where there is wharf accommodation for vessels of considerable size.
Sawn timber of all kinds is prepared at the mills, and quite an army
of splitters find employment in the bush getting palings, shingles,
posts and rails, staves and other split stuff to meet the export demand.
Furniture is also made up at the mills, chiefly of blackwood and pine,
to supply the wants of settlers along the coast. Some years ago,
when the firm was Cummings, Henry and Co., there was a cask
manufactory at the settlement, where the wattle and blackwood
staves where transformed into casks by the aid of the most improved
American machinery. Unfortunately the whole settlement was
destroyed by fire, and the cask manufactory has not been re-
established, the trade not being sufficient to warrant it. The chief
trade is now in sawn and split timber and general agricultural
produce, and the exports total several thousands of pounds sterling
per annum, being included in the returns for the port of Torquay.
A large business is done in potatoes and the curing of hams and
bacon is an important industry. Fruit and skins are also shipped
in considerable quantities. A few miles from the settlement, on the
line of tramway, are extensive beds of authracite coal, which used to


be profitably worked, but I am told little has been done with it ini
late years. There are extensive limestone deposits also, which are
worked with profit. The lime supplies the coast, and is shipped to
Launceston and elsewhere. This company issue cheques in the form
of bank notes for sums varying from ss. to £2, and these notes pass
from hand to hand, and are received along the coast with as much
confidence as any ordinary bank paper currency. There are two
churches, a mechanics’ institute and lecture hall, public school under
the Board of Education, and several very superior private residences
at this settlement, and tourists will find the slight deviation from
the main road, which is necessary to visit it, well repaid. We
return to the Don-bridge, and, after a very pleasant drive of about
4 miles, arrive at
FORMBY,
the present terminus of the Launceston and Western Railway, and
port par excellence of the north-west coast during this year of Grace?
although, what it may be five years hence, it would be difficult to
forecast. The immediate extension of the railway to the Leven, and
its further extension to Emu Bay—looming in the future—with the
completion of the breakwater at that place, must seriously alter the
status and relations of our coast porta. Meanwhile, as the terminus
of the railway, and of the T. S. N. Co.’s coastal service, Formby
enjoys pre-eminent advantages, and has become an imposing and
populous town within the last two yeai’S and a half. The tourist
here takes the train for Launceston. The line is well equipped, and
the journey occupies 4 hours and 35 minutes, with 24 stations on
the i-oute.
3|||4oßT FREDERICK, as the mouth of the River Mersey is called
liMf on the charts, is fast becoming one of the most important
shipping places in Northern Tasmania, having on its western
shore the commercial and marine town of Foxnnbv, and on its
easteim bank the pretty little township of Torquay, rapidly assuming
the position of a leading watering place. About 15 years ago very
little was thought of either locality. They were then but seaside
hamlets, suiTounded by bush, and when the Government offered
the township lands for sale there was considei'able difficulty in
finding customer's. , Both places managed to keep themselves in
political prominence by entertaining an absurd and unx*easoning
jealously of each other, and there used to be an amusing amount of
chaff as to which place would become the capital of the north-west
coast. They had a competitor in olden days in the township of
Burgess, Port Sorrel, a few miles to the eastward, which many
thought was to be the coming centre of population, but that locality


has become quite obscured by the radiant progress of its western
neighbors, and is now little more than a fishing village, although still
a Customs out-station, and with a considerable export trade in produce.
How it happened I have not been able very clearly to discover, but
by some peculiar turn in the wheel of political fortune the Govern-
ment head-quarters became settled at Torquay. The police buildings,
court house, &c., are there, and Torquay is the title of the port of
•entry. The chief wharves and the principal shipping and commercial
business is transacted on the opposite side of the river at Formby,
and the statistics of trade having reference to these parts comes
under the head of “ Mersey out-station,” so that invidious distinctions
are thus adroitly smothered, and I have no doubt a good deal of heart
burning is prevented. I notice that in 1886 the export trade of this
“ Mersey out-station ” was valued at £74,085, and in 1887 it was
£58,845. The returns for last year are not yet published, but they
.will doubtless show a considerable increase. The imports in 1886
were valued at £65,181, and in 1887 at £6624. but I fancy the
returns for the former year must have included a quantity of railway
plant. The duties collected were in 1886, £5792, and in 1887,
£6820, but as the aforesaid railway plant would come in duty free,
the discrepancy is accounted for. These figures show the importance
of the port as a commercial centre. With the development of the
north-west coast, Formby advanced with rapid strides. On the
extension of the railway the first terminus was fixed there, and
with the opening of the line fortune commenced to smile upon this
favored spot. It soon became the centre of considexahle passenger
traffic with the neighboring colonies. The only steam communica-
tion previously by sea had been by the small coasting steamers
running to and from Launceston. Efforts were made to induce the
T.S.N. Co. to put on a direct steamer to Melbourne, They were
apathetic in the matter, but thanks to the energy of Mr. Maurice
Nathan, of Latrobe, the trade was not to be neglected. He entered
into negotiations with Messrs. Wm. Howard Smith and Co., who at
once appreciated the situation, and commenced running a weekly
steamer from Melbourne, touching at coast ports, and making
Formby its destination. A considerable passenger and goods traffic
was at once established, and the T.S.N. Co. discovered they had
missed their chance. It soon became evident that this would 1e a
favorite route from Australia to Launceston and Hobart, so the com-
pany made a deal with the Melbourne firm, bought them out and
now enjoy the reputation of having established another “ blooming
monopoly.” I suppose there are always grumblers to be found in
all communities, and there are all sorts of accusations brought
against the local company, and perpetual threats of establishing an
opposition one. It may come some day, and prove a good thing, but I
fancy the T.S.N. Co. will be quite able to hold their own. They
have first-class boats, and perform the service with great regularity
and comfort, but time and tide do not always serve for calling in at
all coast ports, and consignees and shippers are frequently incon-
venienced, the goods trade having to give way before the passenger
traffic. The time will no doubt come when a special weekly cargo
boat will be run, and then much of the alleged cause of grumbling
will cease.


We have heard a great deal about the inordinate profits realised
during the Melbourne land boom, but, in proportion to population
and situation, quite as wonderful prices have been obtained at
Formby and Torquay, and land which went a-begging a few years
back at the Government upset prices now sells readily at rates
ranging from £250 to £3OO, and even £5OO, an acre. Of course I
am referring to central township blocks.
Formby is well situated, has been judiciously laid out and is rather
a pretty town. The affairs of the port are under the management
of a marine board; those of the town are conducted by a town board.
The streets are kept in tolerably good order, and there are many
really handsome buildings. There are a number of well furnished
hotels where visitors can obtain every attention ; and there is really a
good coffee palace. There is a Protestant Hall, available for public
gatherings, and on New Year’s day his Excellency the Governor laid
the foundation stone of another large hall, which is being built by
public subscription as a memorial to the late Mr. Justice Giblin,
who was one of Tasmania’s foremost statesmen. This will be styled
the Giblin Memorial Hall. There is a library, a State school, a
branch of the Bank of Van Dieman’s Land, and the National Bank
of Tasmania is about erecting premises to establish a branch. A
txi-weekly news sheet is published, called the North-west Post. There
are several good churches and the usual variety of social organisa-
tions for the instruction and recreation of the people. Some of the
business places are large and handsome edifices. The stores of the
River Don Trading Company have quite an imposing appearance.
The Tasmanian Steam Navigation Company have a fine office, and
there are numerous well stocked shops. The wharves afford berth
accommodation for large vessels ; the John O’Gaunt, a 2000 ton ship,
is now moored alongside discharging railway iron, although there
was a little difficulty in berthing her. As with most of our coast
rivers, the bar at the mouth is the trouble, and a large expenditure
has been authorised for dredging and deepening the Mersey bar, and
for harbor works generally. A large iron steam dredge, named the
Agnew, was especially built at Hobart for the purpose, but she
cannot be called a success, although she is reported as doing good
work. She is hardly fitted for the Service, and can only work on
the bar in fine and moderate weather. During the past few months
Formby has been spreading out towards the Heads, westwards, and
there is now a considerable township there, which is named West
Formby. There are one or two really good houses in the suburban
parts.
Formby is connected with its opposite neighbor, Torquay, at
present by an ordinary punt ferry, which conveys passengers and
vehicles at moderate rates ; but it does not satisfy the growing
aspirations of the people, who sigh for a bridge. lam told there
are other reasons why these good folks want a bridge. The inland
town of Latrobe is about 4 or 5 miles up the estuary of the Mersey,
and the people thereof have wharves, which they clamor to have
improved, and at which considerable improvements are now being
made. This inland harbor accommodates the traffic of a very large
surrounding agricultural country, the farmers being able to ship


’their potatoes, grain and produce generally direct from the Latrobe
wharf, instead of having to send it by train to Formby, to undergo
the additional expense of extra handling and shipment there. A
sum of money was passed last session of Parliament for the
construction of a turning basin at Latrobe ; but a sum of £4OOO
passed by the Assembly for deepening the harbor, during the session
just closed, was negatived in the Legislative Council by the influence
of members interested in Formby. There is, by all accounts, no love
lost between the two places, and it is said the Formbjdtes have
■conceived the bridge idea in the hope of shutting Latrobe out of all
shipping trade except that carried on bjr very small crafts. I give
the story as current, knowing nothing of the merits of the case. As
an outside observer, I think it highly probable that a bridge, or
perhaps two or three bridges, will span the estuary of the Mersey
before many years x’oll by, but of course caie will be taken to provide
all conveniences for the maintenance of ordinary water traffic.
TORQUAY.
I take the Victoria ferry and have a peep at Torquay, which is
really a pretty little village, with such surroundings as should
constitute it a first-class watering place. Miles of fine open beaches
stretch away to Port Sorrel and Badger Head ; and there are in-
numerable beautiful spots to which water parties may betake
themselves. Fish of every description abound, especially flounders,
which in this region are particularly fine. An extensive agricultural
district surrounds Torquay, with splendid roads in all directions, so
that the visitor may enjoy every variety of outing. There is a main
road to the town of Latrobe, a distance of 5 miles, the drive along
which is a very pleasant one. Torquay has one or two fair hotels,
but should visitors from Australia begin to turn their eyes in this
direction extended accommodation would need to be provided.
There is a grand swimming bath, with accommodation for ladies and
gentlemen—one of the best salt-water baths in the colony. It was
built by a syndicate, and is well conducted. Boats are always
available, at moderate rates, for water parties, and there are several
steam launches and a little steamer, which makes daily trips up the
estuary to Latrobe. The town is well supplied with shops, some of
them large and handsome buildings. There is a town hall capable
of seating 800 persons, fitted with stage and all accessories for
dramatic representations, and furnished with a fine grand piano.
There are several pretty churches, and quite a number of residences
of the villa type. No more agreeable place could be imagined for
the rustication of families during the hot summer months, and when
better known it is certain to become a favorite and fashionable
resort of Australians.
SPREYTON.
I return through Formby to the main coast road, preferring
that way to Latrobe instead of taking the train. The drive is an
agreeable one, and many rising little homesteads are observed en
route. About half way we come upon rather a poor stretch of


country, in the centre of which an attempt has been made to-
galvanise a township into life under the name of Spreyton. There
is here a fine school-house built at considerable cost by Government,
but it is without scholars and shut up. There is a large deserted
hotel, and an extensive brewery and malt house, which, however,
does not appear to be doing much business. The water in this
locality is, I am informed, well suited for brewing purposes. The
cluster of houses forming the little village wear a very decayed sort
of aspect, and I regret I cannot refer to Spreyton as a lively place
at present. There is, however; a great potato growing country to
the southward and the Mersey coal measures surround it, so that
when the branch roads are made and the mineral developed, the
little railway station may yet become a scene of busy activity.
There is a good clay in the vicinity and excellent bricks are made from
it. Apr etty drive of 4 miles, with fascinating glimpses of the estuary
of the Mersey through the trees brings us to Tarleton, where coal
was worked until very lately. Crossing the river over a substantial
wooden bridge on bluestone piers, and viewing the iron railway
bridge a few hundred yards below, we enter the third town of the
island.
ft
LATROBE.
Perhaps lam wrong in saying third town. Hobart and Laun-
ceston being now “ cities,” Latrobe may lay claim to being the first
town. At all events it has the appearance of a large and prosperous
place, although I hear a good deal of its glory has departed since the
railway went through. A very few years back the journey from
Launceston (over the country I have described in these articles) and
back again used to occupy about a month. The roads were but
partially formed, and in some seasons almost impassable; they had
to be got over in easy stages, and then Latrobe was a busy business
centre, the market town and chief stopping place of the districts.
Facilities of transit have changed all that; the farmer no longer
needs to put up his trap and his horses in the hostelry, stables, and
instead of doing his business in the market town, he rushes off by
train to Launceston and spends a lot of his money there. Still there
is a vast agricultural district surrounding Latrobe, which maintains
its position as a commercial centre. Its population is estimated at
from 1500 to 2000, and that the inhabitants are fairly well-to-do your
readers may imagine when I say that on the night of my visit a
circus was there, the receipts of one performance being over £125.
Entering the town from the western end, one gains a good impression.
In crossing the bridge a row of extensive stores meet the eye, with
the masts of the shipping immediately in front, and a little to the
right gas works of a considerable size, and a small aerated water and
cordial factory. Gas in all directions, for the illumination of our
optics, the cooking of our food, the slaking of our thirst, and (as I
afterwards heard) gas for a good many other purposes besides.
Crossing the bridge, the road turns sharply to the right and we are
in Gilbert-street, a broad airy looking thoroughfare, quite a mile and
a half long, flanked by handsome shops, hotels and buildings on
either side. The streets of Latrobe seem well kept, and broad


asphalt paths are now being laid. At present the affairs of the town
are managed by the district road board and a board of health.
Neither of these bodies is very flush of funds, and it is remarked by
the residents that they manage to do a great deal in a very
economical way. In Tasmania there is an Act for the special
encouragement of local self-government— i.e., municipal action ; but
it is so hedged about with provisions for the protection of malcontent
minorities that districts desirous of practically applying it find much
difficulty in doing so. Latrobe was ambitious, and wanted to
establish a full blown municipal council, with warden, councillors,.
&c. A majority of the residents petitioned, and got a municipal
district proclaimed, about twelve months ago, but no sooner was the
proclamation out than the local jealousies to which I have previously
referred came into operation, and petitions were sent in to curtail
the boundaries. A new definition was proclaimed, when another set
of malcontents came to the front and the boundaries were altered
again. Other portions of the district found fresh objectors to the
new proclamation, and the municipality is not yet an accomplished
fact, nor is it likely to be for many a long day ; in fact, from what I
can learn, its promoters have become disgusted and given the thing
up in despair. This is a pity, because a local governing authority
with suitable powers is badly wanted. The trouble will possibly end
by the establishment of a town board.
The street I have referred to —Gilbert-street —is the chief
business centre of the town, and contains in its great length many
fine shops and buildings. The court house, post and telegraph office,
are large and commodious premises, nearly opposite the railway
station, and conveniently situated almost in the centre of the town.
There is a free public reading room and circulating library,
Oddfellows’ Hall and Victoria Hall, both available for public
entertainments. There are three banks, half-a-dozen commodious
and well-kept hotels, two coffee palaces, livery stables and every
convenience for the entertainment of tourists, and a number of very
extensive produce stores. Engineering is done in this town in first-
class style. The Vulcan foundry and carriage works, established in
1871, are now very complete ; the premises cover a large area of
ground, and really first-class work is turned out, especially in
agricultural implements and vehicles and in carriages, &c. There is-
a brass foundry, boot factory, flour-mill, steam carpentering, brick
and pipe works, besides several other rising industries. There are
a number of churches and some very handsome residences in a<
portion of the town styled Newton, which is in itself assuming quite
extensive proportions. A bi-weekly newspaper called the Devon
Eerald has been published for a number of years on every Tuesday
and Friday evening. About a mile to the eastward another suburb
is rising to importance, known as Earl Town. A commodious and
well-built cottage hospital for the use of the district has been recently
opened. It was erected by public subscription, and is managed by a
committee.
Latrobe is well situated in the centre of a considerable plain,
surrounded by beautiful hills, from which a grand bird’s eye view is
obtainable over a great stretch of country. The land around is of


varying quality, but the majority of it first-class, so that in whatever
direction one may drive smiling farms and flourishing homesteads
meet the eye. There are several enjoyable outings with really
good roads to travel over, in the course of which the inquisitive
visitor may obtain a practical experience of the style of Tasmanian
farming in all its phases. The Newground, Sassafras and Northdown
districts are within four or five miles of the town, and all present
many interesting features to the visitor, besides a wealth of rich and
varied scenery. Green’s Creek is another favorite resort, as there is
splendid fishing there, and a neat little village, Avith church, school,
hotel, &c.
The River Mersey is one of the best fishing streams in Tasmania,
and abounds with salmon and brown trout, the native herring or
cucumber fish as it is called —really the grayling —which affords
excellent sport to experts with the fly. The best fishing places are
near to Latrobe, and at a place called Kimberley’s ford, a few miles
up the railway line, where there is a siding at which the trains stop.
The season for salmon and trout fishing with rod and line closes on
30th April next. A rod license is payable to the agents of the
Fisheries Board, 10s. per annum, Some of the largest salmon
trout and brown trout taken last season Avere captured Avithin a few
hundred yards of Latrobe-bridge.
Sporting generally is well patronised at Latrobe. There is a
fine recreation ground and a well-kept country racecourse close to
the town. The hunt club numbers a good many members, and has a
fine pack of beagles. The country around affords excellent shooting,
amongst the game obtainable in their seasons being kangaroo and
wallaby, rabbits and hares, quail in abundance, of both the bush and
stubble descriptions ; bronze-winged pigeons, wattle birds, wild duck,
and in some localities, such as Green’s Creek, the black swan.
This prosperous town was, little more than 40 years ago, a dense
bush, and was known as Bonny’s Fold —a place frequented by
enthusiastic anglers for the sake of the cucumber mullet or herring
fishing. There were two little settlements on the south-western side
of the river, known as Sherwood and Bullahoo, the head quarters of
the splitters, Avho brought paling and shingles, &c., for shipment.
Some funny tales could be told of those olden days of Sherwood and
Bullahoo, but it is better to “ let them slide.” Yet there are
reminiscences of interest to general readeis. 1 suppose most
educated Englishmen and colonials Avill have read of the great
chartist riots which occurred in the United Kingdom, betAveen the
years 1840 and 1848, and will know something of the excited scenes
enacted in those days, and the “ pilgrimages of folly ” upon Avhich
some of the malcontents allowed themselves to be led. Of course, in
these more enlightened times, we know that the points of the charter
have nearly all been adopted and are now securely enshrined in our
liberal constitutions, but in the days when they Avere first pro-
pounded they were treasonous against the State, that is, they
were promulgated in defiance of existing authority, and existing
authority got “ its back up ” accordingly and declined to tolerate
treason. So long as the new religion Avas confined to thought and
speech, constituted authority could afford to laugh at it, but when


it developed into overt acts and treason then authority had to be
vindicated, and the result was that a number of very worthy men
found themselves in durance, and several were transported beyond
seas. Amongst these were a trio known as Frost, Williams and
Jones, connected, if 1 remember rightly, with the Newport riots.
They were convicted and sent to Van Dieman’s Land, as Tasmania
was then called, where they carved out very respectable careers-
for themselves. Frost became a well-known watchmaker of
Launceston ; Jones was a farmer at Franklin Village, near the same
city ; and Zephaniah Williams settled amongst the splitters of
Bullahoo and Sherwood, and, being an old English coal miner, was
instrumental in opening up the Mersey coal measures, which for
many years supplied Launceston, and even Hobart, with good
domestic fuel. He was the pioneer of the Tarleton coal district, near
Latrobe. They are all dead now, this famous trio of misguided
patriots, but their works follow them, in the fact that all thev
contended for and sacrificed their liberty for in the stirring times of
the French revolution is now sanctified, and become law in the
constitution of Great Britain and her colonies. There were celebri-
ties of another type connected with old Latrobe. Two quiet and
well enough behaved farm laborers suddenly took to the road, and
developed into fiends of the deepest dye, trying to make their
escape by seizing the schooner Elizabeth at Port Sorrel Their
attempt was frustrated, but they made their way to Victoria in a
whale boat. They succeeded in landing and committing some
terrible atrocities, ultimately ending their days on the scaffold
erected against the north wall of old Melbourne gaol. These men
were Dalton and Kelly, the notorious bushrangers, respecting whose-
exploits Victorian colonists of any standing are doubtless pretty well
informed. Latrobe reminiscences might be carried on ad infinitum,,
but nuff sed.
Patbr & Knapton, Printers, 2901 Little Collin Street, Melbourne.


J Atfry
&16LO
-T 15% 3
M 6&?Lj




