

THE PLACE OF CO-OPERATION
IN SOCIAL ECONOMY.
6\ Ralph Neville, K.C
science of political economy has long Deen
\|]y engaged in the investigation of the laws which
govern production and distribution under existing
institutions
Although the unsatisfactory condition of society suggests
the existence of fundamental error in these institutions
themselves, yet no systematic attempt has hitherto been
made to examine them from this point of view; to dissect
the social fabric, discriminate the good in it from the bad,
refer effects to their causes and define the laws which govern
the welfare of the members of a social community.
Our knowledge of human nature and the manner in
which it is affected by the conditions of life, is already
sufficient to enable us to demonstrate some, at all events,
of the laws of social economy, and by the examination of
the conditions existing in any particular community, to
ascertain with tolerable accuracy how far they are adapted
to secure' the objects which they are intended to promote,
and where they fail to show the causes of failure, and to
indicate the remedy.
By the kind permission of the Editor, 1 propose in this
and other articles to follow, to consider these laws in their
relation to the functions of co-operation in our own com-
munity ; in order to ascertain what form co-operation should
take, and to what extent it is calculated to remedy the evils
apparent in our social system.
As a preliminary step, it is essential to define the object
of society ; and, so far as possible, in terms which will meet
with general acceptance.
The development of the individual physically and men-
tally, must be, I think beyond reasonable controversy, the
first concern of a society like our own, in which the welfare
of the people is professedly the primary object. Upon this
hypothesis the true test of the merit of any given social


condition is how far it is calculated to promote the develop-
ment of the individual; and since the collective effort of
the community must in the main be directed to the produc-
tion of wealth, not as an end in itself, but as a means to
the end above stated, it follows that our methods of
production and distribution should themselves be adapted
to promote this development.
Now, energetic effort and the full exercise of his faculties
are essential to man’s development, and to his happiness.
The point of first importance, therefore, in social life, is
that every man should take his share in the work of the
community under conditions calculated to stimulate his
efforts. The mainspring of human action is self interest,
so that to stimulate his efforts an appeal must be made to
his individual interest. It follows that the remuneration of
labour should be so adjusted that advantage may result
directly from diligent application. Unless the remuneration
earned varies with the effort made, the work done is not
likely to be the best obtainable. The true method of
remunerating labour, therefore, is to make the reward
proportionate to the quantity and quality of the work done.
For the present purpose, it may be assumed that the reward
of labour must be pecuniary; the conclusion follows that
every man should be paid in proportion to the service
he renders.
The Effect of the Wage System upon the
Efficiency of Labour.
Having defined the object of society—the development
of the individual, noted that energetic effort is essential to
attain it, and ascertained the necessity in the industrial arena
of stimulating exertion by apportioning reward to merit; we
are in a position to consider the methods of production
obtaining in this country, in order to ascertain how far they
conform to the conditions essential to social progress.
Speaking generally, production with us is conducted by
individual capitalists who hire the labour necessary for their
undertakings at a wage. The first point for consideration is
to what extent does this wage system act as an incentive to
exertion.
In the first place, we observe that the wage system is
accompanied by combination amongst the wage earners. It
will be readily understood that in the absence of combina-
tion labour would be absolutely at the mercy of capital, and
indeed, the necessity of combination is now so generally
recognised, that to enter upon a demonstration of the point
would be time wasted. The wage system, then, involves
labour combination.


Now labour combinations exhibit certain essential
characteristics. The most important of these arise from
the effort to secure equality of payment, for the purpose of
maintaining identity of interest among the wage earners.
Trades Unionists are perfectly alive to the importance of
resisting any encroachment upon the solidarity of the in-
terests of their members in order to maintain the power of
the Union. As a consequence, schemes of Co-partnership,
profit-sharing and co-operation, were at first viewed
with suspicion by Trades Unionists. It was feared, not
without reason (subject to what I have to say on the subject
hereafter) that such schemes might tend to separate the
interests of those who participated in them, from those of the
general body of labour, and that men, whose own interests
were not bound up in the general rate of wages, would take
a somewhat languid interest in the struggles of their less
fortunate brethren.
The maintenance of equality in wage necessarily tends to
create equality in the return given for the wage. If all mem-
bers of the union are to receive the same remuneration for a
day’s work, a rough standard must be established of what a
day’s work should consist. This standard clearly cannot be
based upon the capacity of the most efficient, for to such a
standard the majority could never attain. The standard
must be one to which all are capable of conforming, and
consequently can never exceed the capacity of the least
efficient. The tendency of combination therefore, is to
reduce the labourof all to the standard of the least efficient;
nor is there much inducement to maintain even this degree
of efficiency. The less work one man performs, the
more he leaves for the rest, and the argument naturally
follows, that by reducing exertion to a minimum, he is con-
sulting the true interests of his class. The workman is
deprived af all interest in the commodities he helps to
produce, since his wages do not depend upon the profits
they realise ; his only concern is to earn his wage with th e
smallest amount of trouble to himself; his only incentive to
exertion, the fear of losing his employment—a danger which
is extremely remote unless he conspicuously fails to reach
the level of his fellow workmen.
The above considerations inevitably lead to the conclusion,
that so far from providing an incentive to exertion, the wage
system affords direct encouragement to idleness and in-
difference. If inefficient work had been the object sought,
it is difficult to imagine a method of remuneration better
adapted to its purpose. That the result is no worse than it
is, is due to the fact that man by nature takes an interest in


his work; wnen once an initial indolence is overcome, he
finds his highest pleasure in the exercise of his faculties.
Fortunately it will take a much longer time than the wage
system has endured, or is likely to endure, to eradicate this
natural characteristic.
The Effect of the Wage System on Distribution.
The mischievous influence of the wage system is not
confined to its effect upon the efficiency of labour. It is
the governing factor in distribution and the potent cause of
the glaring contrast between luxury and want, which dis-
figures our social life. It is directly responsible for the
startling anomaly of over-production accompanied by
unsatisfied demand.
The unsatisfied needs of the majority of the people are
not attributable to want of capacity to produce. This is
shown by the enormous accumulation of wealth by indi-
viduals and the constant recurrence of over-production,
coupled with the fact that the means of increasing
production to an indefinite extent lie ready to our hands.
Under natural conditions, supply and demand balance
one another, yet in our case we find over-supply of com-
modities, in the presence of unsatisfied demand for the same
commodities; the explanation is that the demand remains
unsatisfied because it is an ineffective demand; those
who make it have nothing to give in exchange for the
commodities they require; and this arises from the fact that
the share in the aggregate produce which falls to them is
too small to satisfy all their needs. In other words, they
cannot buy what they want because their wages are too low
to permit them. This is inevitable under the wage system,
in which capital hires labour for the purposes of production,
and takes the profits. It is inevitable because the limits
within which wages can be permanently raised are very
small; that this must be so the following considerations will
show. Roughly speaking, two-thirds of our food supply is
drawn from abroad. Now we can only procure food from
abroad in exchange for goods; but we have no monoply in
the goods we exchange, nor can we force other countries to
take them ; we can only dispose of them by offering them
on terms a trifle more favourable than those of our rivals.
We must sell cheap or lose our markets, while if we lose
our markets we lose our means of subsistance.
The wages of labour form a large item in the cost of the
production of commodities, therefore dearer labour means
higher prices. Having regard to the increasing severity of
competition abroad, an increase in the price of our goods


threatens the existenceof ourforeign trade, and, consequently,
the supply of our means of subsistence. No substantial
and permanent increase of wages is possible therefore,
unless it is accompanied by a corresponding increase in the
efficiency of labour; but we have seen that the wage
system is not conducive to such efficiency. Under that
system wages can never be raised sufficiently to secure to
the working classes an adequate share in distribution. If
the country were self-supporting, the problem presented to
us would be far simpler, but as it is, the solution is not to
be found in short hours and high wages,
But the indictment of the wage system is not yet
exhausted. We have seen that it checks production, both
by decreasing the efficiency’of labour and by unduly limiting
the effective demand of the working classes for the com-
modities produced, but, in addition, we must remember
that the share in distribution which is withheld from labour,
goes to the over remuneration of capital. The result is seen
in. the enormous private fortunes which are one of the
leading characteristics of our time. Thus the wage system,
in addition to its other offences against the public weal, is
to some extent responsible for the rapidly increasing numbers
of the idle class. It is not within the scope of my present
purpose to examine closely how this affects an industrial
community, but one result is conspicuous. The spectacle
of an idle class loaded with titles and dignities occasions
the formation of false and unworthy social ideals, which act
injuriously on all classes of society alike; leading men to
bestow honour where no honour is due, and fostering the
mischievous belief that wealth in idleness is a legitimate
object of ambition
Co-operation—The Substitute for the
Wage System.
fT appears, then, that under the wage system, altnough
the share of labour in distribution is insufficient, it is
impossible to raise wages substantially without en-
dangering the commerce upon which the livelihood of all
classes ultimately depends. On the other hand we see that
the share of capital, the other partner in production,
however excessive, occasions no such danger. In seeking
a remedy for the grievance of labour our first step, therefore,


should be 10 ascertain the difference in principle between
the remuneration afforded to labour and that afforded to
capital. This is easily done ;we see at once that capital is
remunerated out of profits, or rather by profits, for capital
takes them all. Consequently, an increase in the remu-
neration of capital does not increase the cost of the goods
or render them unmarketable. On the other hand, wages
are paid independently of profit, and indeed have to be
paid before it is ascertained whether the goods are
marketable or not.
We conclude, therefore, that labour may be remunerated
to any extent without interference with commerce, so long
as the remuneration is taken from profits. Some experiments
in this direction have already been made, notably in the
case of profit-sharing.
Profit-sharing consists in the division among the em-
ployees of a business of a certain proportion of the profits
dedicated to that purpose by the employer. It is
undoubtedly a step in the right direction and does credit
both to the feeling and intelligence of those who have
voluntarily adopted it; the objections to it relate rather to
its sufficiency than to its propriety. In the first place it will
be seen that it depends entirely upon the goodwill of the
employer, with whom remain all the risks of the business.
The consequence is that the amount allotted to labour is
not likely to be m ore than sufficient to provide a bonus
small in comparison to the aggregate wage. That
efficiency is increased by this system, and that the employer
gets a good return for his outlay is consistent both with
theory and experience ; but the effect of the exertion of an
individual workman in increasing his receipts is not so great
as it might be made, while there is no corresponding penalty
for inefficiency; his principal remuneration, the wage, re-
maining constant. The difficulty of inducing men to sacrifice
immediate inclination in the hope of reaping advantage in
the future is well recognised, and it is to be feared that, in
the absence of any penalty for indolence and indifference,
the hope of a comparatively small gain hereafter, will in
many cases fail to afford a sufficient inducement to exertion.
To obtain the best resmt the appeal to self interest should
be as strong as possible, and it can only be so where men
are working for themselves, assured of the profits of a
business and accepting its risks. If doubt is felt as to the
efficacy of such a stimulus to exertion, a comparison
between -the perfunctory work of the agricultural labourer
and the ceaseless industry of the peasant proprietor should
bring conviction.


If work were satisfactorily done under existing conditions,
the working classes would prove themselves more than
human. On the other hand, if exertion is not stimulated
by emancipation from industrial servitude, they will
prove themselves deficient in the qualities of their race.
It is true that the habits of a lifetime cannot be got
rid of at once, but nature is on the side of improvement;
for, as has been already pointed out, the wage system with
its attendant combination imposes restraints on emulation
and activity, qualities which are natural to mankind.
The days of cottage industries are over; the factory
system has finally superseded them, while the economic law
of increasing returns ensures the predominance of large
businesses. It is useless to attempt to set back the clock.
How, then, are working men in these days to work for
themselves? They can do it in one way, and in one way
only—by co-operation.
The Principles of True Co-operation.
Co-operation may assume various forms Under one of
them a number of persons associate themselves together
for the purpose of acquiring gain, as in the case of limited
companies. Sometimes these companies invite those who
work for them to become members. So far as the workers
are interested in the capital of the company it is well, and
in any case division of capital tends to equalise distribution;
but a more complete form of co-operation is required to
associate labour most effectively for the purpose of pro
duction. Co-operation for this purpose must be directed to
two ends; to increase both the efficiency and the
remuneration of labour. The obstacles which the wage
system puts in the way of both these objects have been
pointed out. They are the necessary result of the remunera-
tion of labour at a fixed rate. Now the objection to a fixed
remuneration does not apply to the case of capital, because
the efficiency of capital is not affected by the amount or
method of its remuneration. So long, however, as capital
hires labour, it will remain master of the situation, and it
will not rest content with a fixed rate of remuneration.
The alternative is for labour either itself to provide, or to
hire the capital necessary for its undertakings, remunerating
capital at a fixed rate. Nothing is gained by allowing
capital to participate in the division of profits, while
everything it takes out of profits is deducted from the
remuneration of labour.
The true form of co-operation for the purposes of
production is seen when the workers themselves’ subscribe
so much of the capital required for their undertaking as


they are unable to borrow; both subscnoed and borrowed
capital receiving a fixed rate of interest, and the whole of
the profits being divided amongst the workers. Any
deviation from this principle weakens the effect of co-opera-
tion with regard both to the efficiency of labour and
equality of distribution.
On this basis, while the efficiency of capital is constant,
co-operation would always have an advantage over private
capital in the greater efficiency of its labour. The factors
in production, however, are not capital and labour only,
there is a third, without which capital and labour can never
produce profitably, namely, management. With regard to
this third factor, management, the position of private
capitalists and co-operators is identical. No doubt there
are cases where the same person possesses capital and
capacity for management, and in such a case the capitalist
has a very strong incentive to exertion; but production is
more and more carried on under hired management, and
co-operators and private capitalists enjoy equal opportunities
for hiring management.
It is upon management that the success of every business
ultimately depends. Capital at present, as a general rule,
hires management as well as labour, but at a higher wage.
Management is evidently procurable by co-operators upon
similar terms. The rate of remuneration, however, paid by
capital for management, is not fixed by the philanthropy of
the capitalists but by the market price of the article. The
capitalist gets it as cheap as he can and co-operators cannot
expect to get it any cheaper. In accordance with the
principle already laid down, they should make the reward
proportionate to the services rendered, and therefore the
remuneration for management should be so far as possible
by a percentage on profits. This again affords an
opportunity for co-operators to gain an advantage over
private capitalists, for the latter, accustomed to swallow all
the profits, are usually too niggardly to permit the partici-
pation of hired management in the profits resulting from its
own success.
So much, however, in truth depends upon management,
that it is hardly possible to pay too high a price for it, so
long as remuneration is made to depend on success, for the
manager will always have to find, say, £lO for the pockets
of his employers before he puts jQ\ in his own. A cheese-
paring policy with regard to management is suicidal.
Capacity has its price like everything else which one man
has and other men want, and that price must be paid or
the article foregone An objection to high remuneration


ifor management, however valuable the services rendered, is
sometimes taken on the ground that labour should receive
the highest reward because “everything is made by labour.”
The fallacy involved in this statement is transparent ; it
would be far truer to say “ nothing is made by labour.” It
is not the axe which fells the tree but the man who wields
the axe, and so capital and labour alike are but instruments
in the process of production, the success of which depends
upon the efficiency with which they are applied to the
creation and ultimate disposal of commodities.
It is true that no commodities are made without labour,
but that is a very different proposition. For the part in pro-
duction which labour plays it should receive a fair remunera-
tion, and one of the objects of co-operation is to ensure that
it does so ; but it is not in accordance with economic principle
that labour should be paid at the same rate as management.
The price of anything in demand is regulated by its rarity,
and you can get a hundred competent workmen for one
competent manager. Equality of payment offends als > against
the rule that in an industrial community every man should
be rewarded according to the value of the services he
renders. Capital, labour, management, are the three factors
in production. Co-operators can meet private capitalists on
equal terms with regard to the first and third, while with
regard to the second they should have a permanent and
important advantage. If co-operators, therefore, understood
their true interests, their success in production should be
assured.
The Effect of Co-operation on Wage Labour.
So far co-operation has been considered from the point
of view of those engaged in it. How will it affect wage
labourers from whose ranks co-operators must be recruited?
That it will largely affect them is evident. When once it is
realised that productive co-operation, if managed on
business principles, can be successfully conducted, the
ambition of the working man will be to save the price of a
share in some co-operative company engaged in the trade
in which he is skilled, so that henceforth he may be assured
of the entire profit resulting from his labour. No sensible
man will continue to work for another if he can work to
greater advantage for himself. The tendency, therefore, of
co-operation will be to withdraw from the ranks of wage
labour a continually increasing number of the best men.
It is the knowledge of this which has caused trade
unionists to look with suspicion upon the movement; and
indeed a question of the utmost importance to their interests


is involved : Will co-operation weaken the cause of com-
bination and leave labour a more easy prey to capital ?•
For my part, if I thought so, I should hesitate long before
advocating co-operation.
Combination is essential to the welfare of wage labour;
and the feeling of loyalty to their class displayed by working
men is worthy of all respect. The fear that the spread of
true co-operation will injure the cause of wage labour is,,
however, entirely groundless; it will, on the contrary,
greatly assist it.
This becomes clear when the conditions at present
affecting the struggle between capital and labour are
understood. The danger threatening trade unionism in the
future lies in the growing tendency to combination shown
by employers, under the pressure of labour organisations.
Upon their ability to counteract this tendency depends the
success of trade unions in their conflicts with capital, for
where employers are properly organised to resist a strike,
strikes are doomed to failure. The reasons for this, though
some are fairly obvious, require an explanation too long to-
be undertaken here, but confirmation of the statement may
be found in the result of the engineers’ strike and the strike
of the South Wales miners.
Now the weakness of all combinations of employers lies
in the risk of abstentions or desertions at some critical
moment. The temptation to seize the opportunity of
immediate profit has generally proved too strong for some
members of the combination, and disintegration has set in.
Under these circumstances the influence of co-operative
productive societies in a conflict between capital and labour
can easily be foreseen. Co-operative societies, not being
dependent upon hired labour, could serve no interests of
their own by combining with employers in a wage dispute ;
on the contrary, a difficulty between capital and labour in
their own trade, would afford them an excellent opportunity
for obtaining increased orders at higher prices. Any com-
bination of employers resisting a strike, or enforcing a
lock-out, would risk encroachment upon their trade by
co-operators ; and as the number and importance of
co-operative societies increased, this risk would become
more and more formidable. The interests, too, of co-
operators in a wage dispute would always be on the side of
labour, for high wages would raise the cost of production to-
the employers, and consequently the price of their goods,
which would give co-operators an advantage in the market,,
for co-operators hire no labour and look for their remunera-
tion to profits.


Nor do the benefits conferred upon wage labour by
co-operation end here. One of the economic effects of
co-operation must be to equalise distribution, and the effect
of more equal distribution would be to increase consump-
tion. Thus, if an individual capitalist makes a profit of
100,000 a year, he probably spends no more than
and saves the remaining ; that is to say,
his consumption of commodities is limited to the value of
but if a co-operative society made the same
profit, the members would probably purchase commodities
to the value of and save In other
words, the percentage of expenditure on a number of small
incomes is likely to be much greater than that on a single
income of the same amount Now increased consumption
means better trade, and good trade means full employment
for hired labour, probably at increased wages.
Again, the withdrawal of the cream of the working classes
from the ranks of hired labour leaves vacancies to be filled,
and these must be filled from below, so that a continual
flow of promotion would be created (quite a novel
experience for labour) from the lower work of unskilled to
the higher rank of skilled labour, from the top of skilled
labour to the plane of industrial freedom, and thence to
assured competence and position. It is plain from the
above considerations that co-operators, by merely pursuing
the course dictated by self interest, will afford much greater
assistance to wage labour than they could ever have done
from within its ranks. In fact, the advantages which may
be expected to accrue to wage labour from the spread of
true co-operation are only less important than tnose which
will result to the co-operators themselves. The regulation,
of capital to its proper position, as the servant of labour and
not its master, provides the key to the solution of the
economic problems of the day. . It strikes directly at the
cause of social disease, the symptoms of which are so
distressing to contemplate


THE EXTENSION OF CO-OPERATION-
GARDEN CITIES.
»ITHERTO we have considered co-operation simply
in its relation to production, but the possibilities
involved in the principle of co-operation are by no
means confined to productive industry. There is little or
nothing worth having which wealth can afford, beyond the
reach of the majority of the people under a wise system of
co-operation; or, perhaps, in this connection, combination
may be the more suitable term The well-to-do classes
have long appreciated and applied the principle of com-
bination, but hitherto, mainly in one direction By the
London Club system men are enabled to enjoy a degree of
comfort and luxury which would, in most cases, be quite
beyond their reach if they depended upon their individual
resources. There is no reason why, as the wage system is
gradually replaced by the co-operative system, the working
classes should not by similar means, secure for themselves
every requisite for the complete development of their
faculties and the full enjoyment of their lives ; beyond this,
the possession of wealth can add nothing to the happiness
of the individual.
It is foreign to my present purpose to investigate the
countless methods by which combination would avail to
mitigate toil and brighten existence; but there is one of
them which, as supplementary to the advantages of pro-
ductive co-operation, calls for notice. I refer to the
acquisition of land for industrial purposes.
Englishmen, not long ago essentially countrymen, roaming
the world in search of room for a country life, are rapidly
becoming essentially townsmen. Agriculture apart, pro-
duction is usually, and perhaps necessarily, carried on in
towns. Now life in towns, under existing conditions, is open
to two very serious objections, the high cost of living and
overcrowding, resulting from the small area over which
the population of a town is spread. In both cases the
principal cause is identical, namely, the high value of town
lands measured by the rent they command. The concourse
of people resorting to a town for the purpose of conducting
their business and pursuing their avocations, invests the
land with a peculiar value quite apart from its intrinsic
worth. Thus land which would naturally be worth or
£2O an acre may, by reason of its position say in London,


become worth hundreds of thousands of pounds an acre,
and be sold by the square foot. This increase in value has
been brought about by the enterprise of the townspeople;
the landowners, generally speaking, having had no share in
creating it; yet the'entire increment finds its way into the
pockets of the latter, and has to be paid by the very people
to whose exertion it is due. This remuneration to the
landowner, irrespective of services rendered, is known to
political economists as the “ unearned increment.”
Evidently, this unearned increment, measured by rent, is
a serious tax upon industry, for rent enters largely into the
cost of commodities, and is often paid several times over
in respect of them, before they reach the hands of the
ultimate consumer. That the increment in the value of
town lands should be secured for the benefit of those, who
create it is, therefore, a matter of great economic importance.
It is no less important from the social point of view; for to
the excessive rent of land, in and near towns, is due over-
crowding, with the consequent physical deterioration of
town-bred people.
Our researchesintotheprinciplesof productive co-operation
will furnish us with the clue to the remedy; for just as the
workman who hires his services out to capital is deprived of
a large portion of the profit of his labour, so the
community in a town, who accept the position of tenants to
the landowners, throw away a portion of the fruits of
their industry, amounting in the aggregate to an enormous
sum. As in the case of the working man the remedy lies
in the acquistion of the capital by himself, so in the case of
the community it lies in the acquisition of the land, which
is but one form of capital.
In the case of established towns the cost of expropriating
the landlords would be so great as to be practically
prohibitive; nor, having regard to the price which must be
paid, could it be other than a hazardous speculation from a
business point of view. When a community has been long
established it is impossible to say with certainty whether or
not the maximum increase in the value of the land has been
reached. A considerable appreciation in the value of land,
however, invariably occurs wherever fresh inhabitants resort
in numbers. It is one thing, therefore, to buy land for a
town at say £lO an acre, and quite another to buy town
land at say an acre. While, therefore, there are
forcible objections to the purchase of existing towns, these
do not apply to the formation of new towns, upon land
purchased by combination at agricultural prices. In the
latter case the whole of the increment in rent, after paying


the interest on the purchase money, may be devoted to the
benefit of the community. For this purpose three things
are required—the land, the purchase money, and the people
to form the industrial community. The land is waiting.
If the people are forthcoming I have little doubt the
purchase money could be found; to what source can we
look for the population if it is not to those whose intelligence
and energy have already led them to adopt co-operation in
its other forms.
My readers will find the scheme for such an enterprise
considered and worked out in the book of Mr. Ebenezer
Howard, entitled “ To-morrow,” doubtless already familiar
to many.
Without pledging myself to every detail, for we still await
the lessons of experience, it may be confidently asserted
that the idea is based upon sound economic principle. In
the increment in the value of town lands lies a huge fund
hitherto carelessly given away, which if wisely utilised might
enable the inhabitants of a town to combine in a great
measure the advantages of a country life with that of a town
life, and, while offering exceptionally favourable conditions
to industry, might raise the standard of existence among the
population to an almost incalculable degree.
Conclusion.
/If" ©OPERATIVE production, as we have seen, fulfils
the requirements of social economy in the following
particulars : first, it affords the necessary incentive
to exertion; secondly, it provides a method of distribution
which, after furnishing a fixed return for capital, rewards as
nearly as may be each in proportion to the services he
renders; thirdly, it is of great educational value, encouraging
the growth of business capacity—a quality of much higher
degree than the mere manual dexterity acquired by the
exercise of a trade; while finally, it possesses a characteristic
without which all others would be vain, it is essentially
constructive and adapted to take its place in industry by
natural development, and the gradual absorption of the less
fit by that which is more fitted to its social environment.
Co-operative producers in the modern industrial com-
munity may be expected to occupy a position similar to
that held by the English yeomen in the days when agriculture


■was the principal industry in the country; but with a better
promise of stability, for whereas the yeoman was selected
by the hereditary principle, in which the germs of decay are
«ver working, the co-operative producer will be chosen by
the natural selection of competence.
It may be objected that co-operation only affects a portion
of social life; while, however, it is true that production can
never occupy the whole of the population, in modified forms
co-operation can be extended to many other employments,
and it must also be remembered that the objections to
increase of wage do not apply to occupations not concerned
with production of commodities affected by foreign com-
petition. More widespread affluence amongst producers may
be expected to lead to a corresponding increase in the
remuneration afforded by other industries. There are, no
doubt, certain industries outside the legitimate field of
co-operation, notably those which partake of the characteristic
of monopolies. As the requirements of an industrial com-
munity begin to be appreciated, we. may expect to see
such industries taken over by the State or the municipal
authorities, and the profits applied for the benefit of the
community. Even here, however, the system of profit
sharing is not necessarily excluded.
While condemning the wage system as the basis of
industrial life, we must not forget that if all possibility of
wage-earning were determined, the source from which the
working man must, in most instances, obtain his capital
would be gone, nor, should his business prove unsuccessful,
would he have any resource to fall back upon. The im-
portant point is that wage-earning should not be, as at
present, the beginning and end of a working man’s career,
but a stepping-stone towards industrial freedom.
Co-operation being constructive and not destructive will
exist side by side with capitalist production until the former
being, as I contend, better fitted for its purpose, pushes out
the latter. The time occupied in the transition will largely
depend upon the readiness with which co-operators accept
the necessity of working in accordance with economic
principles, and utilising the brains which are at their service,
as readily as they have been at the service of the capitalist.
That they will ultimately do so there is no reason to doubt,
for in spite of a certain intellectual phlegm, which makes us
slow to assimilate new ideas, we Englishmen are no fools.
If, however, England is to maintain her position as the
leader of western civilisation, no time must be lost in
abandoning conditions which obstruct progress; there is no
salvation to be found in the wages system.


Our present commercial position, unfortunately, affords
no ground for the complacency with which it is too widely
regarded. The extraordinary rapidity with which our trade
has been overtaken, notably by Germany and America,
should convince the most sanguine of the necessity for
some fresh impulse which may secure our position now so
seriously threatened. The conditions under which we
obtained a prodigious start, enabling us with little difficulty
to maintain commercial supremacy for long years, can never
be repeated, but the development of a system under which
each producer enjoyed the full profit of his labour should
provide an impulse to production sufficiently powerful to
place us once more in the van of progress, and to give us a
fresh start in the commercial race.
Finally, if there be those who at first sight are inclined
to say ; what co-operation offers is not worth holding out
our hands for, we await a scheme of universal brotherhood,
under which each shall work for all, competition cease,
and the strife and antagonism of mankind be dissolved in
universal peace and concord; I answer, the path of human
progress must be pursued laboriously step by step, for such
is the law of evolution revealed to us by Nature. No
sudden transformation of the character of mankind is
possible, yet every step in the direction of development is
a step upward towards the fulfilment of man’s destiny ,
while, even now, in spite of false ideals, in spite of the
obsolete conventions of a worn-out social system, above the
din of battle and the vulgar turmoil of the market,
there rises ever louder, ever more distinct, the compelling
voice of love and human sympathy.
June , Igo i.
