

Under the Patronage of the Lord Mayor of Sydney.
Proceeds from Safes of this Book will be given to the Lord Mayors Patriotic Fund.
THE
ROLL OF HONOR
WAR WITH
GERMANY AND AUSTRIA
1914.
LIST OF OFFICERS & MEN
N.S.W. 1st Division, Australian Imperial Force.
Compiled from Lists supplied by Order of the Commonwealth Defence Department.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
God Save The King!


eL j er.
UJje peer o
jtfu?erica's
product.


THE
ROLL OF HONOR
LIST OF OFFICERS & MEN
NEW SOUTH WALES SECTION OF FIRST DIVISION
AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE.
Compiled from Lists supplied by Order of the Common-
wealth Department of Defence.
The Original and Authentic Publication.
ISSUED UNDER THE PATRONAGE OF THE
LORD MAYOR OF SYDNEY.
Proceeds from Sales will be given to the Lord Mayor's Patriotic Fund.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
(COPYRIGHT).
PUBLISHED BY
TURNER AND SONS
SYDNEY & MELBOURNE.
1914.




CONTENTS.
PAGE
"Rise of Germany’s Military Despotism ' ... ... ... 7
"What Caused the War ..... ... ... ... ' .... ~. 'l6
of Events Preceding the War... ... ... ... 25
“ The Day” ' ... ... ... ... , ... ... 30
Statistical ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 31
"Diary of the War ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33
'The Roll of Honour —
Ist Field Artillery Brigade ... ... ... ... ... 39
Brigade Ammunition Column ... ... ... ... 42
Divisional Ammunition Column ... ... • ... 43
Ist Light Horse Regiment ... ... ... ... ... 44
Headquarters Staff ... ... ... ... ... 44
Machine Gun Section ... ... ... ... ... 44
Ist Light Horse Field Ambulance ... ... ... ... 45
Ist Light Horse Brigade ... ... ... ... ... 45
Ist Infantry Brigade ... ... ... ... ... 48
Ist Battalion ... ... ... ... ... ... 48
2nd Battalion ... ... ... .... ... ... 54
3rd Battalion ... ... ■ ... ... ... ... 59
4th Battalion ... ... ... ... ... ... 65
Ist Australian Division Brigade ... ... ... ... 72
.Army Service Corps ... ... ... ... ... ... 73
Ist Field Ambulance ... ... ... ... ... 74
Nurses ... ... ... ... ... ~ ... ... 76
‘H.M.AvSI V BerrimaD f ... ... ... 77


THE BRAIN
0F...
THE BRITISH ARMY
LORD KITCHENER
In his address to the Members of the First Expedi-
tionary Force sent to France, said
gi Yotr cannot do your duty unless your health is sound/ 1
This famous soldier knew that bad health meant a
weak Army. And thus as it is with the soldier so
it is with the civilian fighting the great trade
battles at home. He should be on the defence with
CLEMENTS TONIC
THE ONE GREAT MEDICINE IN PEACE OR WAR
It is a sure relief for Nervous Breakdown,
Insomnia, Sick Headache, and Indigestion.
—ALL CHEMISTS & STORES SELL IT.I


Field=Marshal Earl Kitchener, K.P., G.C.B., O.M., G.C.S.I., G.C.M.G., G.C.I.E.
In Supreme Command of British Army Administration.




Introduction.
<y^HE ; following pages have been printed and issued to show the
origin of the military' despotism which has been forced upon
the German Nation, and which has compelled other nations
to increase their armaments until Europe has become a huge*armed
camp. The facts given may be relied upon, as they are simply
matters.of history. With regard to the conduct of Germany, both
before and after the outbreak of war, the criticism we have indulged
in is - mild in comparison with the offences of which it has been
guilty. Details are continually coming to hand proving that
preparations for this war had been made by; Germany for many
years prior to its outbreak ; that an avalanche of spies was sent
into England to discover military secrets, the position of our arsenals,
dockyards, etc., and that even while the Kaiser, as the mouthpiece
of his Government, was talking peace and friendship, their prepara-
tions for war were continuing with feverish haste. . Germany’s
honor and integrity have been shattered in the eyes of the civilised
world. Her repudiation of treaties, binding upon honorable nations,
can neither be forgotten or condoned. It puts her outside the pale
of nations from whom a promise can be taken, or a treaty made. The
brutalities of her troops will remain as a bitter memory long after
the war has ceased, and the ruined towns rebuilt. And last, but
not least, her dishonesty, her openly expressed statement that the
end Justifies the means however despicable they may be, her
attempted coercion of small nations, her bullying, truculent- des-
potism, her burning of Louvain in Belgium and destruction of
the historic Cathedral of Rheims in France, not to mention the
many murders and horrible acts of cruelty perpetrated by Prussian
soldiers acting under the commands of their superior officers,
will remain as a brand upon the German nation, or what remains
of it, long after the Allies have completed their work.
Australia is interested' in every detail of the high political
B


ideals' of unbreakable faith which the British Government is up-
holding. It is everything to us that “ scraps of paper ” should be
respected, that obligations are fulfilled, and promises of honor kept.
British integrity will defeat every attempt to lowur these ideals,
or permit them to be trampled in the. mire by any nation, however
powerful, whatever the consequences of her refusal may be. To
this creed Australia has set her seal in the assistance. she is now
rendering. All honor then to the gallant men who have gone forth
from these shores, as well as to those who, though compelled to stay
at home, are yet giving freely of their bravest and best, their blood
and their treasure.
Regarding the lists of Officers and Men published in the latter
part of this book, they have been supplied to us by order of the
Commonwealth Department of Defence, and are absolutely authentic
and reliable. We have to thank the A.A.G. Department in
Sydney, for.. supplying this list so quickly after the departure of the
troopships. Also we would thank those in the offices of the military
authorities who assisted in this compilation by the sacrifice of their
leisure time, so that the public might receive the book with as little
delay as possible. It - says much for the patriotism of all concerned
that these services have been rendered without remuneration.
And we especially desire to thank the Editors of “ Sydney Mail,”
and “Town and Country Journal,” for the use of blocks which
appear herein. Their inclusion will materially help to increase
the value of the book, and thereby, give material assistance to
the Lord Mayor’s Patriotic Fund. ,
TURNER AND SONS.
November, 19 ij.


The Rise of
Germany’s Military Despotism.
THE GERMAN EMPIRE.
jmmfllE development of a small nation into a great empire is
fj. always interesting to the historian, and frequently presents
the world with romantic stories, coupled with valorous
deeds and heroic achievements. But the picture may also possess
another side, and contain many secrets which were best hidden
from a prying world. Probably the history of Prussia may strike
a happy mean-between the two, for while there has been conspicuous
bravery and great patriotism, there has also been much that were
best kept secret and unknown.
PRUSSIA.
The history of Prussia has been ' undoubtedly stormy.
Originally the city of Berlin was the centre of the Duchy of
Brandenburg, and paid fealty to the* Kings of Poland. Frederick
the Great advanced its fortunes until in 1657 it was elevated into
a kingdom, the Elector of Brandenburg becoming the first King
of Prussia, A great increase to its territories took place, Austria
being juggled out of Silesia, and Poland robbed of what is now
West Prussia. Later on the downfall of Poland in the attack
made upon it by Russia, Austria and Prussia led to further
enormous increase of territory. .
A decade later, Prussia was strong enough to stand alone,
having for its immediate neighbours the kingdoms : of Bavaria,
Saxony, Wurtemburg and Hanover, together with 16 Grand
Duchies and six smaller States, each possessing its separate Court
and royal house, and subject to laws of their own making. There
was no unity between any of them, but' much jealousy and
occasional friction. To-day they stand united before the world,
but subjected to the greatest military despotism the world has
ever known,
THE FRENCH TREATY.
In 1806, the-first Napoleon invaded Prussia. The battle of
Jena was fought, and a treaty of peace signed, which contained one
most important and significant clause. By it the Prussian army


wa ® limited to 40,000 men, and it stood, until the unscrupulous
genius of Prince Bismarck solved the knotty problem of how this
provision might be evaded, and thereby founded military despotism.
Of course, the modern method is to complacently break what it is
inconvenient to observe, but in 1806 treaties were not so easily’
broken. Possibly, too, this particular treaty was kept only because
Prussia was yet too. weak to dare to ignore its provisions.
ITS MILITARY DESPOTISM.
Bismarck, then, inaugurated the system of forcing every
Prussian from the age of 17 to come up for military training for a
certain number of years, thence to be passed into the first and
second reserve for another period, and so on to the Landwehr, or
third reserve, finishing only with old age in the Landsturm. By
these means the letter of the treaty was kept though the spirit was
broken. Never did the Prussian army exceed the number to which
it had been limited, yet in a short period the country stood an armed
and trained nation of soldiers, ready for any emergency, and
capable of holding its own against any enemy daring to invade its
sacred shores. This was the foundation of the present military
despotism of Germany, which has kept the nations of the world in
turmoil during so many years, and is now deluging the fairest of
them in a sea of blood.
FIRST EXPERIMENTS.
In 1864 Prussia made its first trial of the weapon Bismarck
had forged. In conjunction with Austria an unprovoked attack
was made upon the small nation of Denmark. The result was not
for a moment in doubt, and Prussia benefited by the forcible an-
nexation of two of its fairest provinces, Schleswig and' Holstein,
which henceforth became Prussian, and are now forced to send
their quota of men to serve in Prussian armies.
' These were the first fruits of the Prussian policy of blood and
iron, but they served only to whet the appetite for further conquests.
WAR WITH AUSTRIA.
The next quarrel was with Austria, Prussia’s companion in the
successful looting of Denmark. Austria demanded a share in the
spoils, but Prussia had carefully occupied the conquered provinces
with her troops. In 1866, the war commenced, but was speedily
terminated. A seven days’ campaign culminated in the complete
overthrow of Austria at the battle of Sadowa, and peace was
declared with all the honors to Prussia. . In justice to Austria it
must be stated that this defeat was largely due to the superior
weapon with which the Prussian troops were armed. It was the
first occasion when the newly invented needle gun was tried in


warfare, and its superiority over the Austrian muzzle loader was at
once established.
When peace was declared, Prussia took a leading place in the
Councils of Europe, while national pride in the victories achieved
grew, and naturally helped to foster the ever-increasing martial
spirit of the people.
. US RESULTS.
Prussia was now fairly embarked upon her military career.
Denmark had been forced to surrender two valuable provinces,
while Austria had been compelled to abandon all pretensions to
suzerainty. The king of Prussia became at once the head of the
group of small Duchies, though he was regarded with ever-increasing
suspicion by the kings of Bavaria, Wurtemberg, Saxony and
Hanover, who saw in his rise no good results to their own cherished
independence. By the side of the throne stood the man of blood
and iron whose genius had made Prussia what it was. ■ Thus in-
spired, and with dreams of greatness to come from war rather than
from peace, Prussia looked around for fresh triumphs. Three years
only were permitted to pass while the army was being strengthened
for the greater work which now loomed before it ; organisation
was improved, a money chest started, and all made ready for the
coming strain. France was to be the next victim, the victories of,
the first Napoleon were to be avenged, and more territory added
to the growing country.- The policy of blood and iron was to be
again put to the test, this time a severe one.
WAR WITH FRANCE.
In 1870 the long looked-for opportunity arrived. A dispute
regarding an occupant for the vacant Spanish throne was eagerly
seized upon as a casus belli, the army was mobilised, and the blow
fell. France was not ready, and had probably made the terrible-
error of under-estimating the strength of her opponent. The
Prussian troops poured across the frontier and everywhere met
with unprecedented success. - Blood and iron "Was again triumphant.
The .trained and disciplined men of Prussia, who willingly obeyed,
the call to arms, were - well 'drilled and magnificently led. In
numbers they far exceeded those of France, while in leadership
there was a marked superiority. At Woerth, Spichern, Gravelotte
and Sedan crushing defeats were inflicted upon the French armies,
her generals were forced' apart to be dealt with separately, one-
army retired into Belgium, there to lay down its arms rather than
infringe the country’s neutrality'; while another was hurled back
into the fortress of Metz, where, after a brief siege of only three-
days, it capitulated. Meantime the triumphant armies of Prussia
swept on to. Paris, which also suffered the horrors of a siege. For


five long months France bore up against the inevitable, but at
length the end came. Paris surrendered and suffered the humilia-
tion of being occupied by Prussian troops. Peace was signed upon
terms most offensive to the pride of France. An indemnity of
£200,000,000 (two hundred millions) had to be paid to the con-
querors, and two of the fairest provinces were annexed. Hence-
forth Alsace and Lorraine, whose ' people were French, with
French ideals and French ambitions, were to be transferred
to an alien nation, to see their sons go forth to swell the Prussian
armies, and even, should occasion arise, be forced to fight against
their own kith and kin. But this is the usual method of Prussian
Government. It was done with the people of the conquered pro-
vinces taken from Denmark, and France must also pay its quota
towards the rising "country’s progress.
THE BIRTH OF GERMANY.
The conclusion of the war' with France saw the birth of the
great German Empire. A federation of the Kingdoms of Prussia,
Bavaria, Saxony, Wurtemberg and Hanover with the 22 smaller
‘Duchies and Landgraves was decided upon. Prussia as a separate
■entity disappeared, and the present German nation was bom.
There was, however, very little change in the political aspect,
■for the new Empire was' still Prussian, with Prussian “slimness ’’ and
Prussian military despotism. This last indeed became accentuated
.as being the real foundation stone of German greatness. - .Each of
the Kingdoms and Duchies retained their power to make laws,
but there was now manacled upon them the fetters of the military
service which was Bismarck’s pet scheme for holding that which
the sword had won. It was, in fact, the most binding of the links
in the new chain, and marks the further development of that
despotism against which Great Britain and her Allies are contend-
ing to-day.
FIRST ARIVIAfVIENTS.
And now Europe began to arm, itself in earnest' against this
aggressive nation which had so quickly grown and whose armies
had proved so irresistible In the field. The year 1871, which saw
peace declared between France and Germany, saw also the be-
ginning of the mighty armies which every nation found it necessary
to raise. The pace in armaments begun by Prussia and continued
by Germany had to be imitated by all the great nations. France
could no longer afford to live unarmed beside so strong an enemy.
Italy quickly took up the cudgels and increased her army; Austria,
Russia, Turkey followed in the insane competition, and Europe
became a huge armed camp. Navies, too, sprang into existence,
.and forced upon every nation enormous expenditure. ' Diplomacy


was ever at work and never relaxed its efforts to preserve the
world’s peace, though with so many nations armed to the teeth
and becoming more and more aggressive this became increasingly
difficult. A watchful eye had ahvays to be kept on Germany, for
here lay the root of all the trouble. Vast sums of money were
continually being spent upon Secret Services, new? and improved
death-dealing weapons, increases to navies, flying and aerial
machines, and all that pertains to war. .The “mailed fist” of
Germany, and “ the sword rattling in its scabbard,” were an
ever incessant demand for added vigilance and greater armaments.
- FURTHER SPOILS.
During the following years Germany succeeded • by more
peaceful means and with the cold approval of other nations to
make considerable additions to her fast growing territories. She
incorporated Lauenberg, Hesse-Cassel, Hesse-Homburg, Hohen-
zollern, Nassau, Frankfurt, and a portion of Hesse-Darmstadt.
And upon all these the military despotism of Bismarck was imposed,
to send their quota' of men to swell the ever-growing German
armies.
NAVAL DEMANDS.
In 1900 a new departure was made by Germany. The Kaiser,
in a noted speech to the Reichstag (the German Parliament) de-
clared that “ Our future is on the water.” This could only bear
one interpretation, and was a distinct challenge to Great Britain.
The preamble to the bill for the allocation of the needed money
declared that the projected navy was to be of such strength that
even the strongest naval Powder would not risk a conflict with it.
Thus to the threatening strength of the German army was now to
be added a navy which should, not be second to that possessed by
any' other Power. When this demand is coupled with the many
occasions when the “ mailed fist ” has been shaken at Great Britain,
it is quite evident why so strong a navy should have been de-
manded. The money required was voted, and from that time-
on the navy of Germany has continued to grow, and to-day is
second only to that of Great Britain.
GERMANY'S AMBITION*
What, now, is the ambition of Germany ? Where is all this
growth of ■ army and navy to lead ? In this matter German
writers have been brutally plain, and have discussed their plans
as openly and fearlessly as though they had no reason to expect
any . opposition. There is a strong Pan-German party which
openly demands The expansion of Germany by the absorption
of the smaller neutral countries left untouched when the German


PATRIOTS !
Drink Success to Eng-
land and the Allies ...
in —-
BRITI iH BEER
GEORGE YOUNGER’S
FGA DRAIN'D
SPARKLING PALE ALE
It is Light and Wholesome, Specially Brewed
for the Australian ‘ climate. Ask for it, and
sec that you get it. Take none that is JUST
AS GOOD.
AUSTRALIAN ' BRANCH, - ‘ -
62 BOOTH STREET, ANttANDALE.
FRANK. W. CLARKE, '■Manager.






nation was first welded together under Bismarck's iron rule. These
would comprise Belgium, Holland, Switzerland and Luxembourg,
all upon the eastern border, with Denmark in the north, and what-
ever could be grabbed from Austria when the great dissolution
of that complex Empire takes place. In addition further" pro-
vinces and territories are to be taken from France, and her Colonial
possessions in Africa and elsewhere are to pass under the German
flag.
lIS ULTIMATE AUVIS,
These demands have been openly made by' German professors,
leaders of thought holding University official positions, writers,
leading politicians, and eminent officers in the army and navy.
Can they be ignored by those who know the history of Prussia
and the grim story of German expansion? Is there not in such a
programme a continuance of the blood and iron policy which the
great master of German craft declared was the only policy Ger-
many could follow ? Its ultimate aim is evidently a world-wide
supremacy, a greatness of Empire which cannot possibly, from
its very vastness, have any rival. Here is an extract from a recent
speech delivered by the Kaiser : They wish to kill Germany. If we
gain—and we must gain—-anew Empire shall arise more splendid than
the world ever saw ; a new Homan German Empire which shall
rule the world which will be happy.” Observe the last few words,
“which shall rule the world” Criticism upon such an utterance is
unnecessary.
ON ITS TRIAL
It is evident that during the 50 years which have elapsed
since Germany was founded it has been upon its trial as a new
factor in European politics. The military system itself has been
on its trial. It was possible that in this system a nation might
find its most idealistic altruism, that it might be the stepping-
stone to a higher civilisation, even to the culture, the possession
of which is so loudly boasted. That it would serve only to drag
its votaries down into the lowest depths, would brutalise its people,
and destroy their liberty was not even suspected ; yet all this
has come to pass. To-day Germany is a spectacle to the world.
Her people groan under the military despotism, yet are powerless
to free themselves from the burden. Under it they suffer and
die victims to Prussian ambitions. In time of peace it forms
the heaviest of taxes to which every male citizen must contribute
by personal service ; in time of war it has led the way to brutalities
which would disgrace the lowest type of savage the world has
yet seen. And this is the ■ yoke Prussian bureaucracy and its
Kaiser would fasten upon mankind. Every country it has con-
quered has had provinces torn away to enrich the conqueror,


9)11(1 their people forced to contribute their quota of services to
the German armies. The end of this war would have similar
results if Germany conquered. There would be more territory
wrenched away, more people passing under the yoke, and a greater
addition to human suffering.
CAN THEY BE TRUSTED ?
It is evident that a country to whom no treaty is binding
cannot be trusted. Force is the only power such a country
can appreciate, and in this instance, at least, force can be
the only remedy which the Powers can apply. Germany
has been weighed in the balance and has been found wanting.
Her pretended culture is but a blind to hide her brutal ambitions,
while behind it all lurks the expressed determination to expand
by the policy of blood and iron. “Parchment is but parchment,
but steel is steel,” has been quoted by her leaders, and to this
there can be but one reply. It is being delivered to-day along
both the eastern and western frontiers by the united armies of the
Allies, and wherever our ships can penetrate or come into contact
with hers upon the world’s high seas.
SHALL GERMAN TYRANNY CONTINUE ?
This, then, is the story of Germany. Blood and iron laid its
foundation-stone, by blood and iron it has been developed and
by blood and iron its rulers have determined it shall continue to
grow. The rights, freedom and liberties of other nations are to be
trampled under foot. There is to be no place in the world for
any nation which would contest its claims to greatness or refuse
submission to its demands. The huge armies it has raised have
challenged other nations to follow or die. Thus enormous arma-
ments have become a necessity if nations would still be free.
German military despotism has forced other nations to similar
armaments, and the world has Germany, and Germany alone to
thank for the immense military and naval burden it has been
compelled to carry. The task which Great Britain has under-
taken in conjunction with her Allies is to suppress this new
tyranny which has arisen, to protect the small nations from its
aggressive power, to preserve intact the freedom of the peoples so
recently won, and finally free the world from the huge armies
Prussian tyranny and Prussian military despotism forced into
existence.
SHALL AUSTRALIA HELP?
Is this a task in which Australia can or should help ? To
this there can be but one answer. There may be little or no risk
of German armies ever penetrating to these shores, there may


even be no risk of Australia being attacked were Great Britain
defeated. But the people of this country do not regard the subject
from a selfish standpoint. It is no question of how Australia
may or may not be affected or benefited. We are all children
of the Empire, however distant we may be from the shores of
the Motherland. We revel in the fact that we are of British blood
and British descent, that the superlatively brave men who are
fighting this terrible battle are our brothers and such as ourselves.
And we love the great country from which we are sprang and hail
her as the protector of the weak, the friend of the oppressed, the
deliverer of the enslaved. We know her records, her struggles to
be free and to see other nations free, and we glory in her strength,
her honesty and justice, her brave defiance of every kind of tyranny
and oppression. Australians know these things and with generous
hands give of their best and bravest, their treasure and blood.
This is °the real patriotism, and is the real bulwark of the British
Empire against unnumbered foes.
SOLID REASONS.
These perhaps are sentimental reasons only why Australia
should help, but there are others still more weighty. There is the
burden of responsibility in that we are a part of the Empire. There
is the fact that German colonial possessions are adjacent to our
own, and that they may easily prove troublesome neighbours.
And there is always the great fear that the downfall of the British
Empire would be the death-knell of Australian liberty, Australian
democracy, and Australia’s ambition to govern itself upon the
best ideals its Statesmen may provide. In the scramble for ter-
ritory should defeat be ours, Australia would find great difficulty
to hold its own. And though this aspect of the question may
never have presented itself to the people of Australia, and has
certainly not influenced the gallant men who presented themselves
for active service, and whose names are presented in the accom-
panying 801 l of Honour, yet it is there all the time, and is one
which must be recognised when history is written. Eor ourselves
we prefer to believe that it is the Empire’s Call which has attracted
our men, that their services are given freely and generously to
uphold the Empire’s honour, and that it is the desire to stand
beside their brothers-in-arms in the hour of the Empire’s danger
that alone has influenced and brought them to the front. The
prayer of those compelled to remain at home is that success may
attend their brave efforts, that our beloved Empire may issue
from the struggle triumphant, and with honour unblemished and
unimpaired, and a safe return be granted Australia s gallant band
•of heroes whose names are herein given.


What Caused the War.
To superficial observers it might be thought that the war
was caused by the assassination of the Archduke Ferdinand and
his wife, by the subsequent demands of Austria upon Servia, and
the interference of Russia. These, however, were the occasions,
eagerly seized upon as pretexts for what had long been decided
upon. Elsewhere we publish a summary of. the events leading
up to this war, but these are not the real reasons for it. In the
long premeditated actions of Germany, in her restless ambitions,
demand for European and Colonial expansion, her desire to sup-
press and further victimise France and be revenged upon England,
in all these will be found the absolute and real reasons for the war.
The events summarised were simply taken advantage of to obtain
at one blow all that German and Prussian bureaucracy has long
determined upon.
HER liTEiTiOiS.
# Germany has scarcely troubled to disguise her intention to
again attack France when the moment was propitious to herself.
What was known as the Moroccan incident nearly precipitated the
conflict, and was only averted by the diplomatic attitude of Great
Britain and France. “ Since .1911,” wrote General von Bernhardi,
sound German policy requires that France should be so com-
pletely crushed that she can never again come across our path S :
“ that the notion of a balance of power in Europe should be put
aside (‘ We must reduce the imaginary European equilibrium to
its- true value, and correspondingly increase our own pow'er ’),
and that some at least of the treaties to which Germany has hitherto
adhered should be deliberately broken.” (And the treaty with
Belgium was particularly referred to.)
PRUSSIA STILL LEADING.
This is but one of the many passages in Count von Bernhardi s
book, -which boldly demands another application of the blood and
iron policy for the expansion of Germany, and should be read in
conjunction with the past history of Prussia. For disguised though
it may be, Germany is still Prussia and is si ill imbued with Prussian
ambitions founded on and encouraged by the success of her blood
and iron policy.
To discover the real cause of the war, therefore, it is necessary
to look far deeper than the immediate events which preceded its.
declaration and examine the policy which Germany has so long-
pursued. Can such an army as has been created and maintained
be for peaceful expansion ? Is the new navy a necessity to main


tain German commerce, or is it meant as a menace to the British
Empire ? In the answering of these questions lies the real cause
of the war. Both the army and navy of Germany has been added
to and strengthened year by year. Why ?
GERMAN SPIES.
Great Britain, France, Belgium, Eussia, all the countries of
Europe, in fact, have been overrun by German spies. Plans of
fortresses, information regarding aerial machines, Dreadnoughts,
cruisers and submarines, new guns and weapons of war, maps of
towns and districts —all has been collected and forwarded to the
German Government for use when required. Great Britain
especially has been invaded by a complete organised gang of spies..
Their machinations have been known, even when it has been found
impossible to catch them red-handed so as to secure conviction.
GERMAN RIVALRY.
Our ships have been matched by German ships. If one type
of Dreadnought carries a certain number of guns the German must
go one better. If the guns our ships carry are 14.2 centimetre,
Germany’s must be heavier and larger. Deliberately Germany has
matched itself against Great Britain, and made no secret of declaring
that it is her greatest rival. , And to rival Germany is an unfor-
giveable crime and must be wiped out in blood.
TALKING PEACE.
And through it all, while newspaper editors have rivalled
each other in flinging insults at Great Britain and our noble Queen
Victoria, while spies have overrun our country to gather informa-
tion for services of war, while ships to rival ours have been built
in ever increasing numbers and strength, the Kaiser has talked
peace and even love. The fears of British Statesmen had to be
allayed at all costs, the little Englanders must be encouraged and
given details on which to work, so the Kaiser continued his honeyed
words even while his , nation was preparing for war.
GERMANY’S PLANS.
But though we know that Germany’s intention has always
been to attack England when the time and circumstances ■ were
convenient, yet it is almost certain that the present time was not
considered appropriate. The plan which, however, was happily
frustrated, evidently to ■ first suppress France, Great Britain’s
probable ally, and so reduce her that any ultimate assistance to
England in the future would be impossible. In other words,
those who stood in the way of Germany were to be defeated and


annihilated separately, beginning with France, probably passing
on to Russia, and ending with Great Britain, whose majestic fleet
would prove, the piece de resistance at this world-wide banquet.
All German writers have agreed that the time for Germany to
strike France was when Great Britain, would be too much - occupied
elsewhere to give any assistance. And this time was considered
to have arrived now. The ■ German Press has been good enough
to publish the reasons why it was thought England could not
interfere, and that' the hour had consequently struck for the de-
struction of France..
GERMAN PROGNOSTICATIONS,
And these were the reasons given. First the threat of civil
war in Ireland. Ulster and the ■ Nationalists were arming and
drilling, almost'a revolt had occurred in the British army, General
French (who is to-day in command of the British troops serving
in France) had handed in his resignation. With this looming upon
the horizon, how could English statesmen interfere in the affairs
of Europe ? As for giving the assistance of her armies against
Germany, it was impossible.
INDIA.
Then there was another reason. India was surging to revolt.
The demand of the natives was “India for Indians,” blows in sup-
port of this had been struck, blood had been shed, a secret pro-
paganda was at work ; the native intellect was seething with
unrest, with native ambitions, and demands for recognition and
representation upon all governing councils. England dare not
withdraw a single soldier ; if she did India would seize upon the
opportunity and revolt.
AFRICA,
Then there was Africa. Another powerful reason for the
non-interference of England. The Boers were still unpacified,
ready to seize upon Africa as their lawful prey, anxious to proclaim
their country a Republic and free from all allegiance to their recent
foe. With these three countries upon her hands, all striving for
independence, all (presumably) hating English rule and the proud,
overbearing English, how . could that most mendacious country
join with France ?
EGYPT AND JAPAN,
Then, too, there was Egypt, where the Mahommedan was
always in incipient revolt and must be held down by force of arms.
And yet another reason why England, could not be feared there


was Japan, England’s ally by treaty. Wonld that country ever
fight by the side of Russia and with Great Britain ? Would it
not rather be against her recent foe, against the Russia so-recently
conquered, that Japan would fight ?
HEROIC BRITAIN.
What was the answer to all these selfish prognostications ?
Was Germany right in her belief that blood and iron the only
force, and was' England wrong in believing in love,- friendship,
gratitude and patriotism ? The answer has been written, in the
life’s blood of these very peoples whom Germany thought were
seething with revolt, and Ireland was the first to attest her un-
swerving allegiance to the Empire. Had they not, with their
blood, helped to build it up, and should they now turn and rend it?
Brothers might disagree regarding, the management of their house,
but was that any reason for destroying it ? Three brothers there
were —the Irish Nationalist, demanding Home Rule andr self-
government ; the Ulsterman, who desired no independence apart
from his father’s house-; and England, holding the scales of Justice,
and the olive branch of Peace, Trouble there might have been
before settlement was reached, but German aggrandisement gave
the answer. With one voice Ireland spoke, her sons rallied to the
Flag, differences were forgotten, hands that had never been clasped
before now sought each other with brotherly grip. ■ Let - this be
an answer and a lesson to German ambitions and German
despotism. Iron and blood is not the only force, gratitude and
love is a greater.
AFRICA AND INDIA’S ANSWER.
And what answer did India give ? Did her student en-
thusiasts look - cynically on and increase their demands, taking
opportunity as their guide ? To-day native Indian troops are
fighting side by side with those of Great Britain, and Indian rulers
without exception have offered their services ; they have turned
to the Flag which secures them in their possessions and guarantees
their independence within their own boundaries. Everywhere
the. answer is the same. Africa gives a noble reply. England
has given us our liberty. Out of her greatness has corhe our
freedom. We will fight for her and with her with all our strength.
Thus every prognostication which Germany made has proved
false. She reckoned by her own ideals of breaking faith and
treaties where profit may be made, and she has failed every-
where. She thought blood and iron the only force. “ Parchment
is but parchment, but steel is steel.”


MOTHER!
MADE IN
ENGLAND
m
binfecta
4 -W
s


Kindly lent by “ Town and Country Journal.”]
N.S.W. Engineer Officers.
From left to right—Back row: Lieuts. N. E. Biden, H. Bachtold, R. J. Dyer,
C. N. Huntley. Front row: Captain J. M. Corlette, Major J. P. L. M'Call,
Lieut. L, Mather.
20




BRITAIN'S FOES.
Where to-day are Germany’s friends, and where are Britain’s
foes ? The whole world has answered. Nowhere can Germany
find a friend to hack her in the field or endorse her bill of credit
and promise to pay. But Britain finds in her hour of trial that
all nations are her friends. They press upon her with sympathy
and aid. Her children—Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Africa
(even distant Norfolk Island sent) —rally to her support and prepare
to shed their blood to preserve her liberty. Yes, Germany, there is
a God, and blood and iron is not the only force.
IN BELGIUM'S DEFENCE.
Gould Britain look on while Trance was attacked, possibly
beaten and dismembered, with the certainty that her own turn
would assuredly come? It is probable that there would have
been no interference until the time for peace had arrived. This
may seem hard, but- it is to Britain’s credit that such a reply can
be made. It was never part of any treaty or assurance that Britain
would uphold the integrity of France. England is the champion
of small nations, and not, necessarily, of great ones. France, indeed,
required no such guarantee.. She was and is strong enough to
withstand the forces of Germany, and would certainly not have
fallen its easy victim as in 1870. What then brought Britain
into the conflict ? To Britain’s everlasting honour let the' reply
be made. It was the bitter cry of the-small nation that called
Britain into the field. Great nations might call in vain, but never
has our country’s ears been, closed to the cry of the weak and
helpless. Let us quote the appeal the King of Belgium made to
our King, and the noble words of Sir Edward Grey in conveying
the appeal to' our Ambassador at Berlin : Remembering the
numerous proofs of your Majesty’s friendship and that of your
predecessor, and the friendly attitude of England in 1870, and the
proof of friendship you have just given us again, I make'a supreme
appeal to the diplomatic intervention of your. Majesty’s; Govern-
ment to safeguard the integrity,of Belgium.”
And to this Sir Edward Grey wrote : “ His Majesty’s Govern-
ment are bound to protest against this violation of a treaty to
which Germany is a party in common with ourselves, and must
request an assurance that the demand made upon Belgium will
not be proceeded with and that her neutrality will be respected by
Germany.”
. THE BELGIAN TREATY.
We had guaranteed the independence and the integrity of
this nation. Germany, too, had placed her signature upon the
deed, but to her it was, indeed, but “a scrap of paper.”- She


offered to indemnify .Belgium for being invaded ; said practically :
“ Let us break the promise to respect your neutrality and we will
make another to respect it after the war is over.” . France, too,
had signed the treaty in regard to Belgium, and France kept it ;
kept it in 1870 when it was to her interest to break it, and was
■ keeping it at the present time with honour to herself. Thus
Britain is fighting in this titanic conflict because she respects the
“scrap of paper ’’ which bears her signature. And Germany
provoked the ' conflict by her unprincipled ignoring of her own
sacred promise.
THE REAL CAUSE*
In German ambitions then lies the real cause of the war,
Germany requires outlets for her huge population, added territory
in Europe, a greater place in the. world’s councils. This nation,
less than 50 years old, must dominate the world.
Already Belgium has been declared to be German territory.
Who now doubts but that given the opportunity, Holland, Switzer-
land and Luxembourg will receive similar treatment ? ' And
Germany wants Colonies, has long wanted them. Only blood
and iron can obtain these, they must be wrested from their present
proprietors and transferred to the' Fatherland. With the, first
signs of European trouble- the time to strike the long meditated
blow arrived, and, as in 1870, it fell with astounding suddenness.
German expansion 'demanded it, and blood and iron were once'
more at work.
GERMANY STILL PRUSSIA.
Though Prussia has practically' been merged into Germany,
yet its policy of blood and iron still prevails. All the governing
powers are Prussian, the bureaucracy is Prussian, and Prussian
ideals, Prussian ambitions are still the foremost to be followed.
The Kaiser of Germany remains the King of Prussia : the policy
which the Prussian Bismarck founded has been welded on to the
more peaceful German States. Germany is out for territorial,
conquest, and is still the-same old Prussia which broke up Denmark,
and wrested Alsace' and Lorraine from France.
PREVIOUS TYRANTS.
The Kaiser is not the first tyrant to enslave a nation and in-
troduce military despotism. He is but an imitator, an inferior kind
of sparrow? sitting on the house roof of Germany while imagining
himself an eagle in the air. The Imperial Caesars of Home had-a
similar ambition, and in this led the way to Rome’s downfall.
Napoleon the. First also tried, but finished his career in a lonely
island. In Central Africa a petty savage at the head*..of the Zulu -


nation tried it, and set the whole' Continent pulsing with fear, before
the inevitable suppression took place. What Getowayo tried in
Africa the “ mailed fist 55 of Kaiser William has been attempting
in Europe, and the result will inevitably be the same. This semi-
civilised Cetewayo, whose armies to-day are threatening European
cities with destruction, wdio has already destroyed the fair city of
Louvain, and the priceless Cathedral of Eheims, has carried his
inherited policy of blood and iron • into a neutral country and
deluged it with blood. Not by such means are great nations
established.
PEACE IMPOSSIBLE.
It is evident that the appetite of such a Power, as Prussia has
proved itself to be can never be satiated. The limitations of to-
day disappear in the conquests .of to-morrow, and nothing but
absolute obliteration will ever suffice. For this and this only is
Great Britain, with Greater Britain, fighting. Such vaulting
ambition must be crushed, such unprincipled aggression must be
obliterated, and Germany, as a nation capable of such aggression,
must cease to exist. The world is too old, too advanced in civilisa-
tion, modem refinement and culture for such aggressive nations
to be tolerated. If Germany cannot reconcile, herself to modem
conditions she must disappear. Certainly. the modern world is
not prepared to attune itself to Prussian methods, or desecrate its
manhood with an imitation of Prussian military despotism. Peace
is impossible while a vestige of Prussian tyranny remains, or while
nations have to guard themselves against German aggression.
A WAR OF EXTERMINATION. .
Lord Rosebery,, the ex-Prime Minister of the United Kingdom,
said in a speech delivered at Broxburn, near Edinburgh : “If
our armies conquer we destroy for ever and make no mistake ;
this war will not be ended by the cession of territory or by a money
indemnity. It is a fight to a finish. ■ If we go under we go under
for ever. 55 It is therefore, we or Germany. Extinction as a Power
will be the lot of the loser. European nations cannot, permit the
existence of an Empire which has turned the entire Continent
into a hell of fear and fever, of hate and tyranny, for so many
years. The mark of Prussia is now upon the entire German nation.
Considered separately the people of the outer States are industrious,
peaceful, honest and meritorious. It is Prussia and Prussia alone
upon whom the blame-must rest. “The Prussian domination, 55
says a writer in the “Mining Standard, 55 “ has converted the
peaceable German into an arrogant, insufferable, truculent, blood-
thirsty brute, and has made of peace itself a horror scarcely less
dreadful than the horror of war. 55


GERMANY WILL PAY*
But it will bo Germany that must pay for all the horrors now
being perpetrated. Useless to try and shift the blame, to select
a scapegoat to wander in the wilderness. For one thing it is to
be hoped there will henceforth be no wilderness, and for another,
the scapegoat is the entire German nation,
THE CONQUEROR'S TERMS*
Whichever way the war is terminated there will be no half
measures. It is a war of extinction to one side or. the other. Either
Britons must cease to sing of their determination “ Never to be
Slaves,” and accept servitude as their lot, or they must conquer
and' extinguish Germany. There is no halfway house, no com-
promise possible. And Great Britain must win. We already
know our fate should Germany win. There is to be an enormous
money indemnity imposed, the surrender of Egypt, no fleet, and
the loss of the larger part of Britain’s Colonies. From France
Germany will take Morocco, and probably Cochin-China, demand
an immense and crippling war indemnity, and be deprived of all
real independence. Belgium and Holland will be annexed, and no
small nation will remain in Europe other than what may be allowed.
Austria-Hungary will help itself to any territory she may desire
in Southern Europe, while Russia will be absolutely impotent to
interfere.
IF THE ALLIES WIN.
But, on the other hand, if the Allies win Germany as a nation
will be rendered powerless-for future trouble. . The great military
despotism of Bismarck will be wiped out, and neither a German
army or navy will remain. The world will at once- be freed from
the huge armaments which have disgraced our civilisation for so
many years, Alsace and Lorraine will revert to France, and
Schleswig-Holstein to Denmark, while Prussian Poland will be
restored to the brave people who inhabit it. German ambitions
will cease to set the world in a turmoil, for probably the Kaiser
himself will vanish amidst the ruin he has created.
A GREATER GERMANY.
' ■ The honest- aspirations of the more peaceful Germans will at
once come to the front, and by them will a greater Germany be
created and Prussia will cease to impose her will, her spying system
and military despotism upon the people, and will be reduced to
the comparatively insignificant position it should never have left.
The world will. be cleaner, more peaceful, and better in every - way
when this most desirable consummation has been achieved..


Summary of Events Preceding the
War.
On June 26th, 1914, at Sarajevo, the capital city of the newly
annexed Austrian province of Bosnia, Archduke Francis Ferdinand,
heir-presumptive to the Austrian throne, and his.wife, the Duchess
of Hohenburg, were fired at and fatally shot by a Servian student
named Prinzip. For this crime Austria decided to take vengeance,
and commenced to mobilise her army against Servia. This led
to diplomatic intervention by Russia, which declared Servia do
be under her protection, and that the interests of Russia would not
permit any invasion without their consent. Austria appealed to
Germany, and the quarrel began to develop.
Diplomatic overtures by other nations, notably Great Britain,
appeared to be succeeding' in either preventing any invasion of
Servia, or limiting the war to that corner of Europe. In reply to
the mobilising of Austria's army, Russia commenced a similar
movement. Directly Austria appealed to Germany, the order for
mobilising the German army was issued by the Kaiser. But while
diplomatic efforts to avert the threatened war were continuing,
the Kaiser made'a personal appeal in a letter written by himself
to the Czar of Russia, to stop mobilising his army and he would do
the same. ■ This the Czar agreed to do, and orders to stop the, col-
lection of troops had been actually issued, when reports from the
Embassy at Berlin arrived, showing the Kaiser s letter was a trick
to gain time, as German mobilising was continuing with feverish
haste. Russia, therefore, continued its preparations, and called
upon France, its ally, to assist. France answered by also mobilising
its army, prepared to strike should Russia be attacked. Diplomatic
overtures by other countries appeared to be succeeding in either
preventing any invasion of Servia or limiting the hostilities to
Austria and Servia. But from this point it became evident Germany
had decided upon war. An ultimatum which Austria was sending
to Servia was submitted to the Kaiser, and with his own hand he
altered it so as to make its demands more stringent, and such as no
self-respecting country could accept. And the order for mobilisa-
tion of German armies was issued.


During this time the diplomatic intervention of Great Britain
had, been continuous in its efforts to keep peace. Germany now
asked Great Britain what its attitude would be in the event of war.
The reply was that neutrality was desired so long ,as France was
not attacked upon the North Coast by the German navy, which for
certain reasons must be avoided ; and, further, that the integrity
of Belgium must be respected. Sir Edward Grey, British Minister
for Foreign Affairs, informed Germany that France had guaranteed
not to use Belgian territory for the passage of troops, and that a
similar assurance would be expected from Germany. This assurance
Germany refused to give. The following note was then despatched
by Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen, British Ambassador at
Berlin :
(Telegraphic)
. Communication 159, Sir Edward Grey to Sir E. Goschen.
Foreign Office,
August 4, 1914.
We hear that Germany has addressed note to Belgian
Minister for Foreign Affairs stating, that German Govern-
ment'will be compelled to carry out if necessary by force
of arms, the measures considered indispensable.
We are also informed' that Belgian territory has
been violated at Gemmenich.
In these circumstances, and in view of the fact that
Germany declined to give the same assurance respecting
Belgium as France gave last week in reply to our request
made simultaneously at Berlin and Paris, we must repeat
that request and ask that a satisfactory reply to it and to
my telegram of this morning be received here by 12
o’clock to-night. If not you are instructed to ask for
your passports, and to say that His Majesty’s Government-
feel bound to take all steps in their power to uphold the
neutrality of Belgium and the observance of a treaty to
which Germany is as much a party as ourselves.
Extract from the reply of Sir E. Goschen, British Ambassador
at Berlin :—•
During the afternoon I received your further telegram of
the same date, and in compliance with the instructions therein
contained, I again proceeded to the Imperial Foreign Office and
informed the Secretary of State that unless the Imperial Government


could give the assurance by 12 o’clock that night that they would
proceed no further with their violation of the Belgian frontier and
stop their advance, X had been instructed to demand my passports
and inform the Imperial Government that His Majesty’s Government
would have to take all steps in their power to uphold the neutrality
of Belgium and the observance of a treaty to which Germany was
as much a party as themselves.
Herr von Jagow replied that to his great regret he could give
no other answer than that which he had given me earlier in the day,
namely, that the safety of the Empire rendered it absolutely neces-
sary that the Imperial troops should advance through Belgium.
I gave His Excellency a written summary of your telegram, and,
pointing out that you had mentioned 12 o’clock as the time when
His Majesty’s Government would expect an answer, asked him
whether, in view of the terrible consequences wdiich would neces-
sarily ensue, it were not possible even at the last moment that their
answer should be reconsidered. He replied that if the time given
were even twenty-four hours or more, his answer must be the same.
I said that in that case I should have to demand my passports.
This interview took place at about 7 o’clock. In a short conversa-
tion which ensued Herr von Jagow expressed his poignant regret
at the crumbling of his entire policy and that of the Chancellor,
which had been to make friends with Great Britain, and then,
through Great Britain, to get closer to France. I said that this
sudden end to my work in Berlin was to me also a matter of deep
regret and disappointment, but that he must understand that under
the circumstances and in view of our engagements, His Majesty’s
Government could not possibly have acted otherwise than they had
done.
I then said that I should like to go and see the Chancellor, as
it might be perhaps the last time I should have an opportunity of
seeing him. He begged me to do so. I found the Chancellor very
agitated. His Excellency at once began a harangue, which lasted
for about twenty minutes. He said that the step taken by His
Majesty’s Government was terrible to a degree ; just for a word-
neutrality,” a word which in war time had so often been disre-
garded—just for a scrap of paper Great Britain was going to make
war on a kindred nation who desired nothing better than to be
friends with her. .... He held Great Britain responsible
for all the terrible events that might happen. I protested strongly
against that statement, and said that in the same way as he and
Herr von Jagow wished me to understand that for strategical
reasons it was a matter of life and death for Germany to advance
through Belgium and violate the latter’s neutrality, so I would wish
him to understand that it was, so to speak, a matter of “ life and
death ” for the honour of Great Britain ..that she should keep her
solemn engagement to do her utmost to defend Belgium’s neutrality


TOOHEYS
ALES
AND
STOUT
THE BEST—
OLD
ORKNEY
WHISKY.






if attacked. That solemn compact simply had to be kept, or what
confidence could anyone have in engagements ■ given by Great
Britain in the future % The Chancellor said, “ But at what price
will that compact have been kept. Has the British Government
thought of that % ” I hinted to his Excellency as plainly as I could
that fear of consequences could hardly be regarded as an excuse
for breaking solemn engagements : but His Excellency was so
excited, so evidently overcome by the news of our action, and so
little disposed to hear reason that I refrained from adding fuel to
the flame by further argument.
After this somewhat painful interview I returned to the
embassy and drew up a telegraphic report of what had passed.
This telegram was handed in at the Central Telegraph Office a little
before 9 p.m. It was accepted by that office, but apparently
never despatched.
(This telegram never reached the Foreign Office.)
“ Kindly lent by Town and Country Journal.”]
Tsing=Tau Fort.
The last Foothold of Germany in China, which surrendered to mixed British
and Japanese Forces, November 8th.


"The Day."
You boasted the Day, and you toasted the Day
And now the Day has come.
Blasphemer, braggart, and coward all,
Little you reck of the numbing ball.
The blasting shell, or the “white arm’s” fall,
As they speed poor home.
You spied for the Day, you lied for the Day,
And woke the Day’s red spleen.
Monster, who asked God’s aid Divine,
Then strewed His seas with the ghastly mine ;
Hot all the waters of the Rhine
Can wash thy foul hands clean.
You dreamed for the Day, you schemed for the Day -
Watch how the Day will go. J 9
Slayer of age and youth and prime
(Defenceless slain for never a crime),
Thou art steeped in blood as' a hog in slime,
False friend and cowardly foe.
Yon have sown for the Day, you have grown for the Day •
Yours is the harvest red. ?
Can you hear the groans and. the awful cries ?
Gan you see the heap of slain that lies,
And sightless turned to the flame-split skies
The glassy eyes of the dead ?
R U df^Tt onge Y° r * he Day ’ y° u have longed for the Day
mat lit the awful flame. J
? Tis nothing to you that hill and plain
Yield sheaves of dead men amid the grain ;
That widows, mourn for their loved ones slain
And mothers curse thy name.
But after the Day there’s a price to pay
For the sleepers under the sod,
And He you have mocked for many a day
Listen, and hear what He has to say:
Vengeance Is mine, I will repay/® '
What can you say to God ?
■—From the London “ Daily Express.”
rvJ a NOTE ~ FOr nT ny yea.rspa.st “To The Day ” has been the popular toast in
eom? Yfi I ong - offic - e f r i! n Dd Po ™ h . n S Bureaucracy It signifies their desire to
come to final grips with Great Britain, both on sea and land, as only then it is
considered, can Germany obtain that government of the entire world which thev
6V ™ n® " ta B a England alone blocks the way to this, therefore
A? k° f En § land 8 downfall) is the popular toast. Read, however,
Ist sSilant m3.r eX P reSsioHS of fri “ d -“P. this poem points a


Statistical.
POPULATIONS.
Great Britain . . . . •• .... .. 45,370,530
France . . . . . • • • • • • • • • 39,601,509
Russia .. . . • • •• • •• 171,059,900
Japan .... .... . . . . . . 52,985,423
Belgium .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7,571,387
Germany . . . . . • • • • • • • • • 64,925,993
Austria-Hungary .. .. .. • • • • • • 49,458,420
Italy .. •• •• •• 35,238,997
ARMIES.
Peace, War.
Great Britain . . . . • • • • 251,706 —-
France . . .. . . . . 504,900 4,000,000
Russia.. . . . . .. .. 949,000 5,000,000
Japan . . . . . . . . . . 250,000 750,000
Belgium . . .. . . .. 53,000 350,000
Germany . . . . . . . . 791,000 4,500,000
Austria-Hungary . . . . • • 396,000 3,000,000
Italy . . . . . . . . . . 304,000 1,000,000
NAVIES.
Great Britain.
Battleships and Battle-cruisers . . • .■> • • .. 66
Cruisers . . • • • • • • • • • • : • • 118
Torpedo vessels ; ... .... -. . • • .■ • • • • • 137
Destroyers . . . . , . . . .... .. ■ ~ 228
Submarines . . . . . • . . • • .... .. 77
France.
Battleships ~ , .;.,■■■■ . . • • • • • • 23
Cruisers .... ... • . . 34
Torpedo boats .. ... .. • • . • • 159
Destroyers .. ... '. . . • • • • * • • • 84
Submarines . . . . , . • • * • • • • • • 78
Germany.
Battleships and battle-cruisers .. ■.. ... .. 42
Cruisers .. . . ... . . . . . . . . ... 47
Torpedo boats ' . . • . • • . • .... ~ 47
Destroyers . . . . .... . . . . . . • • 150
Submarines . . . . . . . . .. • • • • • - 40
Austria*
Battleships . . ...... . . . • .• ♦ • • • • 14
Cruisers . . . . ... . • • • • • 12
Torpedo boats . . . . . • • • • •.. • • 65
Destroyers .. . . ... . . ... ... • • • • 15
Submarines .. . . . . . • • • • . • • • • 6


European Armaments on a Peace Footing.
Army. Navy. . Together.
£ £ £
United Kingdom ... 28,845,000 51,550,000 80,395,000
India . . .. .. 21,886,000 — 21,886,000
France .. . . 57,460,000 19,565,000 77,025,000
Russia.. ; .. .. 72,480,000 ' 25,040,000 ' 97,520,000
Belgium .. . .. 4,040,000 4,040,000
Servia .. . . 1,250,000 — 1,250,000
185,961,000 96,155,000 282,116,000
Germany .. .. 73,830,000 24,050,000 97,880,000'
Austria-Hungary , .. 25,000,000 3,200,000 28,200,000
98,830,000 27,250,000 126,080,000
Italy .. .. .. 16,975,000 10,260,000 27,235,000
Russia.
Battleships ~ . . . . , . : .... 10
Cruisers . . . . . .. ... . . v . . . . 14
Torpedo boats .. . . .. .. . . ... 29
Destroyers . . , . . . . . . , . . ~ .. . 103
Submarines . . .... . . . . . . . . 9 . . ... 20
Italy.
Battleships . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . 12
Cruisers '. . .. .. . . . . . ... 22
Torpedo boats . . ..■ . . . , .... . . 86
Destroyers . . . . .... ... . . .:. . . . . 45
Submarines ... . . . .... . . ' . . .. ■ . . 22
Japan.
Battleships .. ... .. .. . . . , ... 19
Cruisers . . . . . . .... . . 30
Torpedo boats . .. ~ . .. ... . . .. ... 36
Destroyers.... ._. , .■. ' .... . , ... . . 50
Submarines . . . . . . ... , . . ... . . . . 13
COST OF PEACE AND WAR.
The Price We Pay Because of Prussian Military Despotism.
These expenditures represent £1 15s. 6d. per head in the United Kingdom,
£1 18s. sd. per head in France, £1 9s. in Germany, 11s 4d in Russia, 11s. 3d,
in Austria-Hungary, and 10s. Bd. in Belgium. In Italy the expenditure is
15s. sd. per head. In the United Kingdom the navy is the main burden,
but the present war shows that it is effective.
But these £478,000,000 are not all the drain, for. in their early prime'of
life- millions of men are withdrawn from, productive labour to be trained in
the work of destruction.
—From the ‘‘ Daily Telegraph ” (Sydney).


Diary of the War.
June 27. —Assassination of Archduke Francis Ferdinand and his wife at
Sarajevo by a Servian.
July 16.—Hungarian Premier threatens Servia in Diet.
July 21.—Balkan stocks fall heavily on the Berlin Stock Exchange.
July 24.- —Austria demands reparation from Servia,
July 26.—Servia rejects demands, but offers a measure of reparation. Britain
suggests a conference to Germany. Austria declares war against
Servia.
July 27.—Germany rejects suggestions, and threatens mobilisation against
Russia. Consols fall to 71.
July 28.-—Germany begins mobilisation. Russia begins mobilisation,
July 29.—Belgrade bombarded. Germany threatens “ a European con-
flagration” if Russia attacks Austria. Germany attempts to bargain
for Brit fan’s neutrality.
July 30. —Servia invaded. Holland declares neutrality. British Fleet sails
from Portland.
July 31.—London Stock Exchange closed.
August L—Germany declares war on Russia. Railways cut on Franco-
German frontier. French, Belgian, and Swiss mobilisations begin.
Italy declares neutrality. Germany violates neutrality of Luxemburg.
August 2.—Britain warns Germany against violating Belgium’s neutrality.
German advance towards Liege begun. Germany demands that Belgium
shall facilitate the movement of her troops.
August 3.—Australia offers 20,000 men in case of war.
August 4.—-War between Britain and Germany breaks out. British army
mobilises. Belgium invaded. Liege forts attacked. Konigen Luise
sunk off Harwich while mine-laying. Lord Kitchener in supreme con-
trol of army administration. Russians cross the German border.
Germany declares war on France. United States declares neutrality.
August 5. —Japan intimates her full adhesion to terms of alliance.
August 6. —British cruiser Amphion sunk by German mines.
August 7. —French invade Alsace.
August 8. —Germans enter Liege, but forts still hold out.
August 9. —British cruiser Birmingham sinks German submarine Ul5.
August 10. —Australian squadron passes under direct Admiralty control.
Montenegro attacks Austria.
August 11.—German advance guard fighting on Luxemberg frontier.
German cruisers Goeben and Breslau take shelter in Dardanelles.
August 12. —-Britain declares war on Austria. Admiralty declares Atlantic
trade routes safe. Goeben and Breslau purchased by Turkey.
August 13.—Russian army invades Austria.
August 14.—Sir John French, commanding British Expeditionary Force,
reaches Paris.
August 15.—Junction of French and Belgian armies complete. Austrians
defeated on Servian frontier. Severe German defeat at Dinant. Czar
promises freedom to Poland.


rV
st
i'
ijsasf
.Siiiii
ISSssSli
V
*‘l* ‘>l
liiiliii
<. f
■fiSSlii. ‘ :
iSiii:"-
■
(**
l!>
iiiii i n’s.k.
9HHHI
mi m i
mi
Mi
I
BRITISH MANUFACTURE
.-. USED BY .’.
THE KING AND ROYAL FAMILY.


August 17.—Japan sends ultimatum to Germany. Belgian Government
moves from Brussels, to Antwerp. Dutch army moves, to frontier.
French Mediterranean fleet in Adriatic.
August 18.—First Australian contingent embarks.
August 20.—Germans occupy Brussels. Swiss army guards frontier.
August 22.—First great battle begins west of Namur. German cavalry
near Ghent and Ostend. J
August 24. Japan declares war on Germany. Japanese commenced bom-
bardment of Kiao-Chao. Austrian invasion of Servia abandoned.
Germans occupied Luneville. Belgians made sally from Antwerp, and
threw back three German divisions to Vladore.
August 25. Germans attacked French near Nancy, but were repulsed.
. Belgians repulsed Germans' at, Malines. ' Austria mobilised on Italian
frontier. Germans in force attacked French southern frontier, but
were repulsed.
August 26.—Kitchener congratulated British troops on result of four days 5
battle. British losses set down at between 5000 and 7000 men. German
losses enormous. French; War Office ordered abandonment of occupied
territory in Alsace-Lorraine .; Mulhausen evacuated. Belgian protest
against German' outrages published in London. German Government
called up boys between_ ages of 16 and 19. Stated that six distinct
attacks made against British ; all repulsed.
August 27.—Battle raged between Maubeuge and Denain, on extreme left of
Allied line. German columns marched on Valenciennes and Cambraij,
and were cut up. Great German attack at a standstill. Russians
occupied Nederburg, Sensburg, and Bishofsbiirg, East Prussia.
August 28.—Belgians evacuated Mechlin after splendid two days 5 defence.
Germans expelled 60,000 people from the town. United States citizens
volunteering, to join Canadian Expeditionary Force. Address of,
sympathy and appreciation to King Albert of. Belgium moved in British
House of Commons.
August 29.- Louvain burnt and 45,000 inhabitants driven out, ‘with many
atrocities. Inhabitants of East Prussia fleeing to- Berlin and causing
consternation in Germany. British Fleet in' North Sea' attacked German
squadron, destroying five ships without loss to itself.
August 30—Estimated German losses to date 200,000 men. German
Reservists being placed in ranks. British and French forces occupying'
strong defensive position.
August 31. German Samoa occupied by British without resistance. Germans
retire from Ghent and other parts of Belgium/ New battle- started on
the French and English left flank.
September 1. Second day of the new battle in France. Prussian guard
driven back to .Guise. Allies’ left wing gave ground, and Germans
occupied region of La Fera, 70 miles from Paris. Russian army steadily
advancing. Lemberg, capital of Galicia, half encircled.
September 2.— I Third day of great battle before La Fere, round St. Quentin,
Ham, and Peronna , Germans have some successes, but Allies’ lines not
broken through*
September 3.—Amiens falls. Allies still give way. French Cabinet decide
to remove seat of Government from Paris. German patrols within
12 miles of Pans.
September 4.—Lemberg falls to the Russians. Austrian army declared to
be almost put out of action, Russians took 200 guns and 70,000 prisoners
Fans being rapidly put in a condition to stand a siege.


September 5. —-Mr. Asquith declares that Great Britain must persevere till
the end. Germans commence south-easterly move from Paris.
September 6.—Russian strong advance continues along whole Austrian line®
September 7.— Allies advance against enemy and hurl back centre, when
left wing falls back.
September B.—General action along 90 miles of, front. German calculations
upset by success of combined army. Large German forces retreat out
of Belgium. _ . _
September 9.—Action rolls away from Paris. Allies gain ground rapidly.
Russian advance continues unchecked. German forces thought to be
intending to make a stand at Posen.
September 10.—Vienna placed in a state of defence. Consternation in Ger-
many over Russian advance. Southern division of German army in
Prance caught between two fires. Strategical position of the Allies
vastly improved. ' . .
September XL—Defeat of the German right wing in France admitted m
Berlin. End of great battle in East Prussia by Germans being com-
pletely defeated at Lublin.
September 12.— Whole German line in France gives way. Great rout of
part of the invading army. Allies captured 6000 men and 15 guns.
September 13.—Germans in difficulty with their transportation and com-
missariat. Belgians re-occupy Ghent and cut up German army at
Cortenberg. Russian victory over combined Austrian and German
army in Russian Poland;
September 14.—Officially reported that German rout in France is complete.
Invading forces driven back 62 miles. General Von Kluck s army m
difficulties. Austrians lost 98,000 men, 800 officers, and 400 guns.
News of German disaster percolates into Berlin.
September 15.—British army concentrating on the River Aisne. Germany
short of money. America refuses a loan. Of an internal loan or
£50,000,000 asked by the German Government, the people only sub-
. scribed £10,000,000.
September 16.—Germans preparing to make a stand on the Aisne. Heavy
fighting commences. Russian pressure unrelaxed.
September 17.—Several attacks delivered by the enemy repulsed Von Kluck
escaped at Soissons by the arrival of siege guns destined for Paris. Allies
new army from the west encircled the German’s extreme right wing.
September 18.—Battle of the Aisne proceeding/ Allies repulsed ail counter
attacks, Germans sending back their first line troops from East Prussia
to France. Kitchener says there are good grounds for confidence, but
the struggle is bound to be a long one. Battle continue along the whole
of the Oise and the Meuse. Enemy fortifying positions.
Sept. 22.—Fighting continued. German army entrenched
Sept. 23. —Allies continue to gain ground. Belgian victory at Malmes.
Sept. 24.—Three British cruisers sunk by submarines in the North Sea the
Aboukir, Hogue and Cressy. Two submarines of enemy sunk.
Sept. 25.—Allies continue hard fighting. Germans detach portion of their
forces to meet Russia. -
Sept. 26.—Russia defeats Austrians and Germans, and occupy Soldau m
East Prussia.. Austrian destroyer sunk. i
Sept. 28.—Violent fighting continues in France.
Sept. 29.—Russia invades Hungary.
Oct. I.—Allies still gain., Germans lose heavily in. counter attacks.


36




Oct. s.—Austria prepares to remove capital from Vienna to Prague.
Oct. 6.—Antwerp attacked by Germany.
Oct. 7.—Great battle in Franc© continues.
Oct. B.—Japan seizes Jaluit—-headquarters of Germany in Marshall Islands,
Oct. 9. —Germany reinforced in Belgium. Belgian Government removes to
Ostend. British submarine sinks a German destroyer and damages
another. Japanese cruisers sink 3rd-class German cruiser and two
gunboats at Kiao-Chao.
Oct. 10. —Antwerp heavily bombarded. Russians make great advance move-
ment.
Oct. 12.—Antwerp falls, Russia drives Germans from Suwalki and occupy
Lyck in East Prussia.
Oct. 13.—King of Roumania dead. Germany fines Antwerp £20,000,000.
Oct.' 14.—German retreat on right wing. Russian cruiser torpedoed by
German submarine.
Oct. 15.—Germans capture Lille. Colonel Maritz in South Africa, rebels.
Two German submarines sunk by Russian cruisers. ;
O c t. 16. —French troops occupy Ypres. Great battle over 200 miles begins
in Poland.
Oct. 17.—Russia defeats German' army near Warsaw. Turkey informs
Germany that lack of money prevents her mobilizing. British warship
sinks Hamburg-American str. Markomannia, and captures another.
Australians capture s.s. Komet, at Rabaul, New Guinea.
Oct. 19. —British cruiser sinks four . German destroyers off Dutch coast.
Germans occupy Ostend.
Oct. 20. —-Germans driven back in West Belgium.
Oct. 21.—Japanese cruiser sunk by German mine. Italy’s fleet mobilised.
Turkey refuses to discharge German sailors from cruisers Goeben and
Breslau.
Oct. 22. —Portugal decides to support the Allies with 12,000 men and to send
80,000 as soon as can be got ready.
Oct. 23. —Allies occupy Courtrai.
. Oct. 24.—Allies succeed in defeating German troops, both in France and East
Prussia. British submarine E., 3 lost,
Oct. 26. —Violent fighting continues in France. Allies lines . unbroken*
German submarine rammed and sunk by H.M.S. Badger, off Dutch coast,
Oct. 27.—Fighting continues in France and Poland,
Oct. 28.-—lndian troops reinforce British in France. Colonel Maritz, in South
Africa, defeated and wounded.
Oct. 29. —Germans driven over Alsace Lorraine border. More rebellion in
South Africa. Generals Christain de Wet and Beyers join rebels.
Oct. 30. —Germany admits defeat of her army in Poland.
Oct. 31. —Turkey declares war with Russia.
Nov. 2.—Lille re-occupied by Allies. British cruiser, Hermes, torpedoed
and sunk,
Nov. 3 Si-Terrible attack made on Allies lines. Awful slaughter of German
troops and complete defeat. French and British Ambassadors demand
passports from Turkey.
Nov. 4.—A1l German' attacks in France fail. Allies Fleet enters the
Dardenelles and blow up fort.
Nov. 6.—German cruiser Yorck strikes mine and sinks,
Nov. 10. H.M.A.S. “ Sydney ” defeated and wrecked German Cruiser
“Emden.” D
37


$
By Royal Appointment
to the Court of Spain.
C 3
■GLAXO is being
used with" great
satisfaction by ■
tie English and
French Armies at
the Front, which
is prooi of its
great sustaining
powers,
. The food that builds Bonnie. Babies
contains no farinaceous
matter, no cane, sugar,
is pure Cow’s milk in a
desiccated form with
extra Cream and Milk
Sugar.
is a reliable and de-
pendable food lor In-
fants and Invalids,
Obtainable at all
Chemists and Stores,
AWARDED
«l)
iJIIMIi
MEDICAL
mi
Office
• -
fer, %**
18 Bridge St
SYDNEY.
BEWARE OF IMITATIONS.


THE ROLL OF HONOUR
NEW SOUTH WALES
:: :: Ist DIVISION :: ::
AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE
For Service in Europe and the Seat o( War.
1st Field Artillery Brigade.
Headquarters Staff*
Major S. E. Christian
Captain H. W. Lloyd
Lieut. L. K. Cunningham
Attached A.A.V.C.
Capt. G. G. Heslop
Capt. C. L. (PGorman
CpL W. A. Woods
S. Aubrey
Bdr. L. H. Rossiter
a/Bdr. C. W. Baxter
Driver C. L. Coleman
E. J. Collins
F. Greville
W. H. Mills
F. J. Palmer
W. C. Pugh
W. Quinn
A. E. Smart
A. C. Smithson
S. G. Spencer
C. Warren
G. W, M. Wilkinson
Gunner Alderton
P. N. Booley
J. C. Brown
P. Fahy
E. O. D. Fox
H. A. Hayes
J. Lewis
A. P. Lousada
P. Te He McNamara
P. W. Moseley'
C. F„ Swan
H. T. Squire
O. J. Taylor
F. S. Walker
S. G. Willoughby
A. E. Wills
Wrt.-O, P. W. Stewart
Tpr. K. A. ■ Morris
Ist Battery*
Major H. St* J* Sweetland
Capt. G. McLaughlin
Lieut* F. Thorntwaite
Lieut* T* A. Playfair
Lieut. J. H. Newmareh
B.Q.M.S. H. E. B. Thomas
Sgt. S. T. Davidson
■ W. L. Doyle
Me A. Mahoney
R. H. Robinson
Me E. Sheedy
Far.-Sgt. W. Croft
Sad.-Sgt. W. H.
Richardson
W.-Sgt. E. Sutcliffe
CpL G Gault
R. Handley
A. J. Haggarty
R. P. McKillop
F. G. Ross
Bdr. E. Brosban
A. H. Carrington
P. Hendley
B* K. Jefferson
P. J. Kirwan
L. Be Newland
S. Probert.
R. W. E. Bomeril
We Warne
CpL S.S. E. S. D. Kagland
J. Kemp
H. G. Honour
S. Smith
Fitter C. Marshall
Tptr. E.' L. Heydon
G H. Ryan
Sadlr. R. H. Hooper
Gunner A. Addy
He A. Allen
F. Armstrong
G S. Banner :
W» C. Bassett
A. Binns
F. C. Bond
W. F. Brown
A. Burchett
J. D. Clarke
J* Cook
A. G. Crane
We Dacey
C. E. Daniels
R. D. Edwards
D. Ae Elliott


G. A. Elliott
A. Fitz Simmons
R. B. Goodwin
A. Gregg
W. Greer
E. Hanns ■
A. Harrison
M. Hoare
R. A. Hose
T. Hyde
C. H. Jewell
R. John
, R. Knight
C. P. Malligan
H. F. Manning
N. L. McClintock
H. W. Maxwell
T. C. McDonnell
S. A. MacMahon
E. G. Marcke
S. McNamara
R. Mitchell
J. S. D. Munroe
A. J. Patterson
E. A. Parker
R. P. Poltrock
A. Roadie
J. Shiels
E. H. Smith
E. H. Sunderland
A. W. Spiers
B. Tarr .
C. Taylor-
T. Totton
J. B. Trudgett
Driver J. J. Baker
T. D. Baker
J. Barnes
J. S. Banfield
W. Bennett
J. J. Bracken
R. P. Brown
W. Cameron
F. J. Chappie
A. Clarke
C. W. Clarke
R. Clarke
W. Cliffe
A. B. Collins
F. H. Costello
H. Cottier
C. H. Cullen
W. J. Edwards
W. J. Forbes
R. R. Garniss
T. D. Halfpenny
H. E. Hannington
S. Hay ter
D. A. Hinton
W. F. Hodgman
S. Hills
S. Hynes
H. H, Jackson
P. H. Keer
W. H. Kneebone
T. Lang
W. H. Lock
P. D. Lynch
C. Mayes
T. J. McEwan
G. McFarlane
P. Meehan
L. Morgan
A. J. Morrison
E. W. Readford
O. R. Schafer
J. R. Stead
L. E. Taplin
E. C. Walsh
J. Thomas '
H. Ward
J. Winterbottom
F. H. Young.
a/Bdr. A. T. Bowen
Batman R. Dry
L. Keary
D. L. Lacey
E. Lee
W. W. Marriott
J. Mounsey
H. Roberts
W. Solomon
K. Veilgaard
2nd Battery.
Major R. L. R. Rabett
Lieut. C. A, Callaghan
Lieut. C. A. Clowes
Lieut. E. A. Holding
Lieut. J. C. Selmes
B.S.M. J. W. Sexton
Q.M.S. J. Cable
Bgt, L. E. David
W. M. Bradwell
L. Gibson
H. J. Gurd
L. E. Short
Far.-Sgt. T. E. Good-win
T. Barlow
Cpl. W. H* Cleary
N. J, Delaney
N. S. Hollis"
H. W. Morrison
F. W. Thompson
S.S. Cpl. G. H. Clarke
Bdr. R. D. Doughty
E. W. Fairey
W. H. Felste .d
C. E. Fitzpatrick
E. C. Luff
R. W. Muddle
E. 0. Munford
G. H. Todd
Tptr. E. T. Cavanagh
J. Scott
S. Smith
A. H. Elphick
G. L. Hyland
Sadir. G. F. Patterson
E. Buckler
Whir. M. J. Rowling
Gunner G. Abbott
G. Adams
A. W. Anderson
W, Archer
A. E. Beekes
A. E. Blundell
H. Chillingsworth
G. H. B. Clark
W. A. C. Claydon
S. Daley
E. W. Dingle
K. Donald
W. D. Dunn
C. F. Edwards
W. E. Evans
K. H. Fairey
G. G. Finlay
C. W. Foster-
H. S. Fountain
P. L. Gibbs
J. T. Gilligan
W. E. Grimsley
F. Harvey
E. M. Hassell
J. J. Hennington
G. Horan
R. A. Horne
J. Hubbard
C. W. Isaac
L. A. Kerr
H. J. King
G. Kamishansky
A. B. Deeming
W. C. MacDonald
G. S. Maograw.
■ P. A. Macrae
W. J. Maclardy
H. F. Marks
C. A. Mayer
F. M. McPherson
R. McKee
G. W. R. Payne
S. G. Pearce
T. A. Pitt
S. E. Pritchard


N. C. Pyemont
A. E. Rabey
T. B. Rhodes
W. J. Saunders
H. Saunderson
T. E. Sheers
F. P. Sloane
E. M. Smith
E. W. Stanbrough
H. G. Strong
S. Sturts
H. J. L. Sullivan
E. B. Tanner
M. G. Thomson
R. H. Thomson
A. Tomlinson
W. R. Wallace
A. Walton
J. N. Walker
M. S. Williams
C. H. Way
J. Zarron
Driver C. Allen
G. Baastad
J. R. Bailey
L. N. Bates
G. F. Bedford
J. T. Bennett
W. H. Bourne
G. Bradley
H. J. Burnett
J. Callaghan
G. J. L. Challen
R. W. Clinchan
J. Codings
J. Collins
C. Cooke
R. Dawes
T. E. Dornan
W. R. Gendle
L. Goldring
A. H. Goodwin
W. R. Hellyer
J. L. Henry
S. Hey den
J. H. Hill
H. Hughes
J. Jackson
W. H. Josephson
J. W. Lee
T. P. MacLaughlan
V. C. L. Maxwell
G. L. Moth
W. A. R. Mure
L. P. O’Connor
J. T. O’Toole
C. A. Pepper
E. H. Rawlinson
A. G. Samuels
A. Sims
J. Smith
K. J. Summers
W. A. Turner
W. Walpole
S. J. Westbrook
3rd Battery.
Major G. M. H. King
Capt. C. W. Thompson
Lieut. J. M. Irwin
Seed.-Lieut. E. Sheppard
S. E. Sinclair
B.S.M.S A. Schmidt
Far.-Sgt. W. H. Quelch
Sdlr.-Sgt. J. Hoyes
B.Q.M.S. E. J. Ferguson
Sgt. T. W. Colliss
F. A. Jacobs
P. B. J. O’Reilly
G. Rose
W.W. Shaw
CpL L. R. Cooper
C. Hely
G. F. Simpson
J. A. Mulholland
W. E. L. Watson
CpL S. S. B. Wilson
Bdr. F. C. Aarons
A. O- Banks
G. A. K, Buskin
E. W. Bradford
A. C. Gunter
J. R. Kennedy
C. G. Stewart
G. Webb
A. Weingott
Driver A. C. Albert
W. J. Barry
W. P. Bending
H. M. Cairnes
G. J. Clark
J. Coulstock
A. E. Davis
J, F. Doyle
J. Duncan
E. A. Faddy
M, M. Ford
P. Ford
B. H. Forster
A. C. Frater .
G. A. Green
L. D. Hore
R. Horsfall
T. G. Horsley
A. H. Howarth
L. H. Humphreys
A. J. Hunt
P* E. Lee
H. Linde
G. Linsley
C. Lyttle
J* Mansfield
B. W. Marina
A. H. McNamara
W. E. McNuff
C. L. Miller
J. O’Brien
S. A. Ogilvie
R. M. Orme
J. N. Oxley
J. Read
W. Reynolds
B. C. S. Ricketts
R. Rix
N. Seller
A. G. Selmes
J. C. Simcock
H. J. Sly
H. Thomas
L. Trennery
“ E. Turned
O. Wind
A. E. Witts
Gunners H. S. Bennett
A. Breeze
F. W. Brewster
G. E. Brown
W. C. Carter
H. J. Collins
E. T. Cornish
R. T. Cox
T. R. Dargan
A. G. Dickie
J. J. Dirou
J. H. Drummond
A. R. Duff
C. G. Duff
N. Duncan
M. A. Fergusson
E. R. Flynn
F. F. Florance
G. W. Gawler
G. Harrington
W. Hughes
E. Horon
S. G. Jarvis
F. Isaac
P. J. Kern
J. H. King
A. Lee
G. R. Lee
H. Last
R. Lowther
R. E. Linaker
H. C. Mason
J. R. McCarthy


H. McEvoy
■J. A. H. McMullen
F. Mitchell
H. I- Morgan-'
D. J. Murphy --
G. A. Macalister
A. |j| Penrose
W. H. Painter
C. P. Phibbs
H. C. Piccles
P. A. Piddick
W. E. Pinketon
C. B. Primrose
T. J. Protheroe
E. L. Babbitts
A. A. Rochow
O. H. Smith
R. Spencer
J. B. Stevenson
■ W. A. Sullens'
G. E. Thomas
H. G. Tibbs ''
A. Turnbull
A. J. Ward'
G. T. Wensor
F. A. Williams
F. ■ S.- : Williams
C. M. Western
• S.S. W. H. Whitbourn
W. D. McKeddie
Wheeler L. Miller,
Fitter A. T. Sim
Saddler P. F. Mac Donnell
Tptr. FT. T. Crowe
D. Roberts
Sgt.-Ftr. A. G. Cross
Gnr. a/Bdr. E. A. Spring
Brigade Ammu-
nition Column.
Capt. H. F. Kings mill
Capt. A. Sandford
Capt J, L. Sandy
S.S.M. A. Me Lachlan
Q.M.S. J. R. Happell
Ftr.-Sgt. W. T. Hayhow
Sad.-Sgt. J. T. McCaffrey
S.M. H. S. Barrett
Sgt. V. A. Goodwin
C. C. Humphries
P. W. Stewart
P. L. Walsh
G. Bonham
J. L. Johnstone - -
Cpl. W. Ansell
V. Bromgode
C. Kelly
F. W. Steward
J. V. Torpy
Bdr. E. A. Cottier
A. C. Field
J. P, Ford
A. Hayes
W. Higgs
W. Johnston
C. M. Lane
C. S. Walsh
A.-Bdr'. C. T. Drane ■
Sdlr. W. D. Hodgson
W. Martin'
Ftr. G. Gross ;
W. H. Trewhalla
Tptr. E. J. Cann
S. D. Fairland
W. J. Fitton
Batman H. J. McCormack
G. Teo
Whir. F. M. Elphick
Driver H. Anderson
J. A. Baker
R. Beadman
E. C. Barnes ■
S. O. Bell
T. G. Bell
E. W. Blackwell '
A. E. Bourke
J. Buchanan
L. Butcher
A. D. Bruce
J. Carr
M. Carroll
H. Carter
D. Cartwright . .
P. Cannon
F. Cater
G. A. Chessells
F. H. Chilvers
E. B. Clark
W. H. Coombes
J. Cullen
H W. Davidson
J. Davies
J. H. Dawes
T. W. Dawson
E. K. Dixon
F. G. Edwards
W. Frederickson
■ —Friedmann :
G. Garth ;
J. Geer
A. Goodrich
E. G. Greenwood
J. H. Griffiths
' J. C. Haines
A. T. Hannam
H. S. Heaps
E. G. Hellstrom
A. L. Hennes
G. Hill
G. Hitchman
G. Hodge
J. Hudson
R. Hozack
L. Humphreys
L. de K. Huon
E. Hurlev
F. B. Hyliff ■
W. H. Irvine
W. H. Jaekson
T. Johnson-
D. Kelly
H. Kerfoot
H. S. Kingsmill
T. J. Latimer
T. Leaver
J. Lee
de Lepremanche
F. V. Levey
M. L. Llewellan
H. E. Lucas
J. H. Luck
C. W. Mant
H. A. Margrie
A. R. Mason
J. S. McCelland
S. McConnell
R. McCulloch
H. W. McKerrow
McPhail
E. C. Mitchell
H. Mitchenson
J.- Moclair
J. Murray
H. B. FTewmarch
E. R. J. Kichdlls
A. E. FTorman
H. H. Korton '
S. Olver ■
P. A. Pauli
H. W. Payne
J. F. Peisley
R. H. Pendrick
H. L. Pendrie
J. Quinlan
C. Rasmussen
S. G. Redman
L. H. Rial
H. Ryan
J. Ryan
G. L. Sandbrook
T. Shepherd
A. T. Smith' ■
A. W. Smiles ' .
J. Smith '
G. E. Skinner


F. Stephens
J. E. Stone
W. S. Stone
T. H. Suttie
F. B. Tainton
P. L. Taylor
S. Taylor
H. N. Walker
R. Waters
H. Watson
W. Weir
T. Whitton
W. S. Wells
C. Wilkins
E. G. Wood
limner T. R. Appleby
W. G. Arnold
W. T. Adamson
B. Broderick
F. A. Browne
H. H. Brown
R. Byrnes
C. A. Cocks
W. C. Collier
W. E. Cawthray
J. J. Cornell
J. Dalton
R. C. Dalton
F. C. Day
V. H. Deacon
C. E. Fidler
F. G. Gannon
A. H. George
J. C. Gosling
T. B. Hardy
H. Hinds
T. M. Hixon
B. Hogan
P. H. J. G. Hogg
W. A. Joyce
C. A. Lawson
G. Lewis
D. J. Long
P. M. Martin
J. Melrose
J. A. Martin
W. J. Moore
J. A. McLeod
H. McKinley
C. O’Brien
T. B. Persee
S. Poole
H. A. Shoebridge
G. Silver
F. 0. Smith
W. L. Simons
R. Swan
H. E. Tar buck
P. T. Thornton
T. Walsh
J. P. Ward
W. Young
Divisional
Ammunition
Column.
Mo. 1 Section.
Major J. W. S. Lucas
Lieut. E. W. Richards
Secd.-Lieut. D. J. Toomey
Seed.-Lieut, S. W. Garling
Sgt. W. Willis
J. Ives
A. O. McMullin
Sgt.-Far. C. Gordon
Sgt.-Sdlr. P. R. L. M.
Laßeen
Sgt. Whir, A. B, Wad-
dupps
Cpl. A. V. Buckley
H. Wi Mackwell
D. Robertson
R. W. Thomson
Bdr. E. A. Anderson
A. Morley
R. C. Rowley
E. _S. Withers
Shoeing-Smith E. Bailey
W. G. Hilton
D. D. Nicholson
O. Phillips
N. R. Richardson
Saddler K. C. E. Russell
Whir. J. E. Skin
Driver L. H. Barr
L. H. Bird
E. C. Baker
W. Bray
T. E. Considine
E. Chalk
T. H. Callan
E. V. Chignall
F. Creeke
C. K, Dacey
G. Darling
V. Dexter
H. Davis
F. Dennett ,
W. E. Dawson
A. H. Earnshaw
W. Edgar
A.-V.- Fitzgerald f
L. M. Frenberg
L. F. Faulder
F. R. Ferneyhaugh
T. A. Francis
L. Ferguson
E. J. Griffiths
V. P. Gallagher
H. Gilbert
E. L. Guichard
T. G. Griffiths
J. W. Hart
W. Hall
G. E. Hill
J. G. C. Hannam
V. S. Haughey
T. H. Hopkins
A. Hull
H. T. Hampton
E. Johnson ■
R. D. James
S. E. James
A. J ones
B. J. Keates
D. J. Leslie
O. H. Lightbody
A, W. Lister
W. L. Leggatt
J. MacDonald'
J. J. McCarthy
H. H. ■ Martin
W. Martin
W. B. MacPherson
O. H. Matthews
E. Mayne .
C. A. Mitchell
W. J. McNullen
R. R. Murray
' J. "Marshall
W. Mcßae
P. F. Nash .
T. O’Reilly
A. J. Powell
J. M. Price
L, R. C. Priestley
G. A. Parker
A. J. Pass
A. A. Reynolds
R, J. Rulian
D. A. Robertson
R. Stanley
W. W. Sanders
V. B. Shiels
P. G. Smith
E. R. D. Shear an
H. Smith
R. Smith
H. L. Tooth
J. M. Taylor
C. Taylor
W. S. Taylor
W. A. Waddell ■
F. B. Wood


L. H. Wood
A. S. Wood
S. Wilson
J. M. Wilkie
J. J. Wheeler
E. T. Williams
A. Wilins
F. Watts
J. E. Wallis
J. Cushion
F. Sinclair
Gunner G. Bordand
R Bing
B. H. Cairnes
P. Cheeseman
J. Dalton
A. T. Franks
T. H. Flavin
A. S. Ford
E. H. Glading
G. Gandy
H. S. Gallivey
P. Hart
R. Hewnne
M. Hogg
J. Johnston
W. F. B. Kilner
E. J. Langley
H. C. Latimer
J. Lawrence
T. C. Lewis
. R. H. Makinson
A. McCabe
W. J. Murdock
F. R. Newman
H. W. Nicholls
E. J. O’Halloran
J. T. Palmer
M. H. Pointer
J. Pinkerton
K. W. Payne
H. Pauli ■
G. E. Roser
D. O’Hara
W. E. Swords
J. Thomson
H. Watson
No. 2 Section.
Bdr. G. H.’ Asquith
S. Smith
E. F. McGuire
Saddler C. G. Francis
Driver R. J. Black
C. A. C. Billinger
E. G. Carlisle
H. A. Dargin
P. Finlayson
A. Fairhall
P. O. Marshall
P. J. Metcher
M. F. Oakes
G. H. Price
W. A. Rose
F. T. Smith
T. Sinclair
J. K. Tebbutts
Gunner Y. R. Brewer
E. J. W. Bensley
G. A. Burns
E. A. E. Coombs
E. H. Gowen
J. J. Carey
G. W. Down
J. D. Heggarty
E. Hart
S. J. Heath'
J. E. Le Measurer
E. J. Sawyer
A. J. Phelby
P. D. Curphey
W. E. Toovery
E. V. Holland
No. 3 Section.
Sgt. J. Hewlett
Bdr. J. Grady
S. Smith
J. C. Pretty
Whir. A. T. Sims
Batman and Gunner J. T
O’ Sullivan
P. J. McCarthy
1st Light Horse Regiment.
Headquarters
Staff.
Lt.-CoL J. B, Meredith
Major H. V. Vernon
Lieut. R. D. Holman
Lieut. A. L. Fitzpatrick
W.O. F. W. Lindsell
R. H. G. Webb
Trspt.-Sgt. L, S. Elliott
O.R. Sgt. D. H. Sargeant
Sgt.-Trtr. F. R. C. Young
Sgt.-Cook W. J. Harrison
A. T. Poole
Q.M.S. J. Barriman
Sdlr.-Sgt. S. H. Browne
S. W. J. Warneford
Signaller E. W. Cabecroft
J. H. Traill
Batman G. W. Murphy
Private B. T. Barnes
J. C. Bruce
W. T. Clark
J. G. Davidson
D. B. Fitzgerald
W. Garner
C. Hobson
W. Howard
J. Jeffries
G. S. King
J. XJ. Leask
M. McGillan
W. M. Nelson .
A. W. Oakes
W. T. Poile
J. G. Pope
W. Purcell
E. G. Riddell
W. H. Scott
F. T. Sumner
E. S. Tomkins
Driver E. A. E. Brown
J. L. L. Ellis
L. A. Kimball
E. W. Morris
A. Parker
W. Pennell
Attached,
Capt. A. Y. Fullerton
Gapt. B. IL Oliver
Armr.-Sgt. J. F. Dawes
Cpl. G. E. Gabriel
Private F. H. Rye
G. C. Gillies
Machine Gun
Section.
Lieut. J. R. Broadbent
S.S.M. W. J. Knight
Cpl. T. F. Burgess
Private W. J. Abeam
D. Barnes
W. B. Barracluff
T. Calder
W. J. Carroll


44




A. E. Coulter
A. Ellis
R. R. Hetherington
R. Y. Jones
R. V. Jones
F. J. McDonald
P. J. McDonald
J. J. Muldoon
H. Tomlinson
W. H. R. Woods
Driver N. Alexander
R. Davis
R. W. Duff
C. C. Haydon
A. J. Keyes
C. A. Lindsell
G. H. Puckett
P. Shaw
F. H. Wood
1st Light Horse
Field Ambu-
lance.
“A” Section.
Major W. M. Helsham
Capt. P. Fiaschi
Capt. E. M. Ramsden
W.O. E. W. Lacy
Sgt. A. A. Kiernan
C. H. Helsham
S.-Sgt. C, R. Warden
Driver G. McGillivray
C. Cambridge
F. W. Fairlamb
L. Moulds
D. Brownfield
T. N. Mair
R. J. Mcßroom
R. H. Threlfall
A. S. Goodchild
Private G. L. Trickett
E. T. Sturgeon
Driver D. A. Boucher
Private G. A. Rachow
W. F. Boden
A. Bremnell
S. P. Brown
H. J. Cullen
T. P. Dyson-Hugh.es
D. Evans
M. C. Evans
J. P, Ferguson
J. H. Heavens
E. B. Hedley
L. H. Hill
E. Hird
R. C. Holden
W. Jacobs
J. H. Kemp
G. G. Killner
A. Knott
H. H. Lipscomb
- MacLachlan
A. K. Maclean
F. N. McGowen
W. T. McWhirter
W. Robertson
A. H. Rosenthal
H. W. Stanger-Leathes
J. D. Torrens
Driver F. Bell
G. N. Brett
S. Cullen
S. H. James
C. Johnston
A, Kershaw
R. H. Marks
W. T. Needs
G. S. Primmer
T. F. Rotherford
L. Yeats
Tptr. J. W. Mackie
1st Light Horse
Brigade.
"A” Squadron*
Capt. J. M. Reid
Capt. W. S. Lawry
Lieut. A, A. White
Lieut. G. E. I. Tinson
Lieut. N. S. MacMillan
Lieut. 0. B. Ryrie
Sqm Sgt.-Maj. W. H.
James
W. H. McKeown
Sgt. H. Y. Kerr
F. H. Robinson
G. E. Shepherd
Y. B. Stephen
R. R. Wisker
C. W. Gibson
W. C. Jones
J, H. McGregor
Far.-Sgt. J. J. Me Sweeney
S.s. Cpl. J. Dunbar
S. Smith E. Kiley
T. W. Mountain
E. Hedlev
Saddler W. F. Adamson
Tptr. H. L. Boots
R. J. Climo
Cpl. J. A. Markwell
A. J. B. Conroy
R. O. C. Keene
W. G. Irwin
M. Hussey
E. Hansen
K. V. McDonald
C. J. Sheldon
Lance-Cpl. F. A, Bon©
R. Harris
S. H. Harston
R. R. G. Hobden
Signr. R. C. De Leper-
vanche
Private A. A. E, Adams
E. Anger
E. C. Aurisch
W. B. Beale
R. L. Bailey
J. J. Bourke
H. G. Brady
S. B. Brown
H. Burns
W. A. Caldon
H. Campbell
J. S. Campbell
P. Carlyle
T. O. Cassidy
H. C. Champion
W. C. Charlton
W. J. Clasper
P. C. Cobroft
G. C. Crake
A. E. Guffey
G. H. S. Cundy
T. R. Davies
J. H. De Lepervaneh©
J. Dunn
A. S. Durham
F. W. Edwards
H. Edmunds
T. B. Egan
J'. L. Ellerton
C. F. Elliott
D. Evans
G. M. Farrell
R. H. Fenwick
O. Fletcher
H. A. Flitcroft
L. R. Fowler
W. W. Fowler
A. D. Frater
A. M. Garbett
C. J. Gates
J, W. Gleeson
C. Grins on
A. Harper
R. H. Harper
H. W. Hutton
W. Inglis
W. Isted


W. H. Jarrett
W. D. Jarrett,
B. Johnson
C. E. Jones'
L. W. J. Jones
E. Judd ‘
So 1. Kaiser
B. S. Kempe
E. So Kater
W. Keam
Bo J. Kradler
L. H. Krippner
L... A. Kane
U W. Kane
E. A. Leese
So Lee A ’
E. C, Lonsdale
F. Luttreii
L. C. Marsh
A. C. Marshall.
E. E. M. Maxwell
Ho Co Menzies
B. L. McCoy ~
T. W. McCristol
A. I. McDonald.
A. A. Me Lean-
Driver A.,Moore
Private A. J. Michael
O. E. Newton,
H. C. Nowland
Do M. M. O r Connor
Co R. F. Parbury
G. F. Peacock
W. Do Perkins ,
JW H. Pinkerton ■
A. T.’ Pool©
M. Reed .
C. Regner
L. Ross
J. So Robinson
Do J. Ryan
C. Jo Scanlan
Ao Lo Smale
L. B. E. Smith
A. O. Smith
W. J. H. Swanson
S. T. Thurlow
No C. Thackeray
Eo V. Tighe
Go Lo Todd
D. Tomlinson
J. Tory
W. J. Varley
F. Villis
C. M. Warden
J. M. Warnock
L. Go White
H. T. Wigley .
A. E. Willis ';
Ho B. Wilson
A. To Winterton
G. E. Wormack
F. W. C. Wright
P. Zeissen
Driver K. de Afrion
O. A. Wo Fox
P. Jo Hotz
W. J. Hudson
“ B ” Squadron. „
Capt. T. E. W. W. Irwin
Lieut, W. Cox
Secd.-Lieut. B. P. Nettleton
Seed.-Lieut. E. S. Sutton
Seed.-Lieut. G. H. R.
Harris
Seed.-Lieut. A. D. Reid
Sq.-Sgt.-Maj. S. A. Wynn
W. W. Easterbrook
Segt. W. J. Barry •
W. J. Benson
J. D. Duckett
C. W. Edwards
G. Ellis
So Fitzpatrick
R. W. Gibson
J. Green ■
Far,-SgL. A. A.'-.Sutcliffe
S.S. Cpl. S. B. Russell
S,-Smith A. S. Deane
R. F. Pryor
C. L. Vidler
Saddler R. N. Carr
Tptr. Bo W. Croft
M. L. Bogan .:
Cpl. F. A. Elworthy
S. E. Gregory
H. Howarth
M. W.-Kiley ;
J. S. W. Lord
P. Underhill
W. B. Ward
F. B. Nilon
S, So Blakeney, C.M.I.
Lance-Cpl. A. M. Fulton
J. W. Kenny
G. J. Pyke
Private O. Allsopp'
P. S.. Anderson
A. B. Ashworth
G. Barnes .
C. B, Bartholomew
J. Beck
A. V. Bellamy
B. J 9 Bice
A. A. Bland
J. Bretherton
A. P. Broome ■
A. Ao So Cabban
J. H Calthorpe
H. S. Campbell
J. J. Champion
E. E. Collette
J. J. Collins
C. T. Cooper
F® G. Crisp
J. Eo. Crompton
W. Co Cunningham
A. Davis
F. A. Davis ■.*
To S. R. Davis
J. J. Deller
J. Dennis
R. Edwards
H. Endicott
W. P. Enroll
B. I. Evens on
F. B. Ferguson
M. P, Flanagan
G. 'Frank' ■ ' ;
Ji W. Garratt
Bo J. Gehrig
C. M. Gilbert
W. Glass '
A. R. Gorrie
J. P. Greatorex
T. W, Hagley
H. Ho Harris
W. Ro Hartnett
C. S. D. Hay
M. R. Haynes
G. Hills
C. L. G. Howard
G. J, Hughes
E. Johnson
J. V. Johnson
C. S. Kelly
M. M, Kennaine
H. F. Kelt
Po J. Lenehan
G. K. Lucas
A. G. Manning
W. H. Marshall-
Go .McDonald
A. L. McGregor
G. C. McGregor.
J. L. McKay ■
D. I. McLean
E. Y. Mills . t
B. , Mitchell
W. J. Monaghan
W. Monk '
J. Moore
T. W. D. Moore
E. W. Myers
D. Mychael


€. J. Newton
W. D. Oliver
C. V. Paddison
R. R. Parkinson
E. A. Parminter
D. L. Paton
C. W. Paul
W. M. Pearce
R. J. J. Perratt
A. E. Phillips;
R. J. Peon
R. Portley
W. R. Quarmby
J. R. Quarmby
N. L. Quarmby
W. G. Richards
J. Robertson
F. M. Russell
A. Rutherford
R. Termgeour
F. Tellers
E. W. Teller
W. G. Slater
A. Smith
L. G. Stieme
W. J. Thomas
W. Thomson
W. T. Tucker /
W. G. Watson
R. Weppler
B. H. Weppler
R. H. J. White
R. Wise
F. P. Yeomans
R. C. Ross
W. Little
R. B. Yaldwyn
A. G. Robbins
G. K. Hitching
C. W. Harris
J. G. Pope
J. D. Oliver
Driver E. Mychael
H. A. B. Smith
H. F. Smith
W. A. Spence
L. J. Spindler
“ C ” Squadron^
Capt. H. C. Granville
Lieut. D. W. S. Smith " .
Secd.-Lieut. A. A. Butler
Secd.-Lieut. J. 0. H.
Nickoll
Secd.-Lieut. S. L. Edmonds
Secd.-Lieut. R. H*
Wordsworth
S.S.M. G. H. Kirby
S.Q.M.S. J. Davidson ■
Sgt. H. G. Bernie
IST. B. Lovett
R.' R. Matheson
J. B. Poole
J. B. Wright
R. S. Smith -
F. M. Mack
P. R. Revenall
Far.-Sgt. W. J. Simeon
5.5. Cpl. D. J. Small
5.5. C. E. Simpson
H. Berry
J. Hutchinson '
Saddler G. : Smith
Tptr. N. G. Selff
C. Adelt. -
Cpl. F. H. 'Paul
H. Small :
A. W. W.Petf
E. IST. Farrell -
J. H. F. Loveless
L.-Sgt. A. .Dick
Signaller W. M. Nelson
S. J. Penberthy
Private. G. Adams
L. G. Alder
R. Alldrift
F. Ballhausen
W. H. Ballinger
F. Barrow
H. W. Baxter
E. L. Bigg
H. J. Blake
J.. Blenkinsop
A. F. Bongers'
C. Bourke
T. D. Bowes
A. W. Brierley
L. S. Brook
W. H. Brown
S. L. Bunn
A. K. Butter
C. S. Cameron
L. W. Chateau
H. J. Chivers
J. F. Clancy-
E, H. Cole <
G. C. Cooper
W. D. Crichton
M. Crook
A. T. Cunningham
T. J. Dalton
A. D. Davidson
N. S* Davies
E. S. Dowling
G.-I. Dunn
G. P. Edwards
A. Gy Finn- "
J. B. Fisher
T. O. Fitch ■ A;
V. C. Fletcher
E. W. L. Frost
D. Fryer
R. J. Gavin
T. H. Geale
L. G. Gibbs ;
W. H. Gray
P. A. Griffiths
F. A. Guthrie
C. E. Gwilliam
A. C. Hall
R. Hamilton
J. J. Hayes
J. A. Higgs
C. A. Hordern
F. W. Hunt
R. F. Jeffrey
■ R. C. C. Jenkins
W. F. Johns -
F. Keating
L. W. Kelly
J. Lander
J. Law.
R. Lees
C. R. J. Lidster
D. G. S. Lindsay
H. Langford
H. J. Locke
L. A. Lye
Private H. J/ Locke
Driver A. A. Lovett
Private R. A.. L. Mac-
Donald
S. R. Macfarlane
H. J. Mackaness
A. Mackinnon
K. L. Marriott
J. D. McGee
E. M. McMahon
A. H. McMaster
A. B. Merrell
A. C. Miller
S. R. Millar
W. R. Milligan
E. C. Moffatt
G. H. Moore
W, T. Morrice
J. B. Moylan
G. W. Murray
S. C. S. Murray
A. S. McArthur ■
L. Negus ■
H. E. Pfeak
W. H. Peters
C. L. Robinson
G. E. Smith
R. E. J. Smith


J. Squires
D. E, Stewart
J. R. Struthers
G. P. Tice
J. H. Traill
P. H. Treasure
R. S. Trethewey
H. Wall
B. W. Warden
C. C. Weston
T. C. Wheatley
W. A. Whittle
C. E. Williams
N. T. Wilson
H. S. Wraith
G. Wright
W. L. McDonald
C. E. Rennie
E. C. Ranson.
B. I. Reys
E. Yule
J. B. Wrist
Driver I. E. Francis
A. Lithgow
J. Plush
D. Ritchie
W. G. Robinson
E. L. Reffe
J. Reugh
E. L. Rowling
C. T. Ryder
J. P. Sheahan
L. E. Smithers
F. C. Squelch
E. R. Stanford
A. Stanley
H. S. Stevenson
A. Stinson
R. C. Tancred
S. Tapp
W. J. Temple
A. E. Thomson
T. L. Tudhunter
F. H, Tomlins
1st Infantry Brigade.
1st Battalion.
Headquarters
Staff.
Lt.-Col. L. Dobbin
Major F. J. Kindon
Lieut* W. Davidson
Capt. A. G. Christian
Lieut. A. K. McKenzie
Lieut. F. U. J. Tinkler
Batmen.
Pte. J. Maley
J. Francis
F. Best
F. A. Teakle
R. W. Boardman
C. Armstrong
P. Scott
Transport.
Driver W. T. Dick
A. Willis
F. O. Clement
J. Sutherland
C. B. Witley
Pte. J. Hurley
Medical Officers’
Orderlies
Cpl. A. M. L. Mclntosh
Pte. W. Burley
Transport.
Driver F. D. Hoppe
T. A. Robin
V. C. McKell
FT. E. Me Shane
J. C. Waugh
R- J- Naughton
H. A, Charlton
J.' W. Feeney
Signallers.
Pte. R. G. Boulton
J. Logan
J. McClelland
H. G. Cheslyn
J. T. Jennings
P. E. Herford
R. D. Thompson
Q.M.S. M. Delaney
Sgt.-Drummer C. E.
Downes
Pioneer-Sgt. A. J. Shirt
Sgt.-Cook L. W. Murphy
S. G. W. Rickwood
Armr.-Sgt. E. G. Taylor
A. Attached.
Capt. C. W. Thompson
Cpl. A. Heron
Pte. H. A. Mitchell
P. F. Du Rietz
E. F. May
B. F. Ford
Signaller F. L. O’Brien
Machine Gun
Section.
Lieut. G. F. Wootten
Sgt.-Major P. A. H.
Leech
Cpl. E. B. Hedley
Pte. R. W. Jenkinson
T. Arnott
T. Kennedy
D. Downie
1 C. A. Bint
R. Gumming
C. Henson' *
G. H. Sutherland
A. J. Gardner
F. B. Winter
A. J. Rigelsford
C. S. Yule
A. J. Cruise
H. G. Kimbel
J. Whalley
“A” Company.
Major R. C. L. Dawson
Lieut. E. E. L. Lloyd
Lieut. E. V. King
Col.-Sgt. V. L. Hirrod
Sgt. J. J. Green
Sgt. A. E. Barber
Sgt. S. D Buckleton
Cpl. F. H. Hamiston
J. H. Dietze
D. W. Glading
W. Egan
Lance-Cpl. P. J. Reilly
G. H. Adams
J. A. Redford
C. Lee
E. Barker
Bugler H. Hyde
Private W. L. Allen -
J. W. Adams
T. Baer
A. E. Banks


A. Barclay
K. K. Barnett
C. F. Bates
L. J. Billington
F. Binks
H. T. J. Blake
H. J. Blame-Hay
L. F. Bottom
J. T. Brideson
G. Bubear
E. D. Buckleton
B. K. Burne
J. Cairns
T. Cairns
J. L. Cheal
H. B. Churchill
H. W. Carter
J. G. Clark
C. H. Clarke
F. E. Cleveland
L. H. Coates
E. A. Christensen
H. Dawson
A. De A villa
A. Diske
P. R. Douglass
D. Dunnell
H. Ellis
H. F. England
H. A. Fitzhugh
J. D. Flynn
P. E. George
H. J. George
E. A.. Goldsmith
A. Gorman
H. Grady
J. Grant
W. D. Goslett
H. E. Hamer
G. P. Hamilton
W. P. Hampson
E. H. Hartley
A. B. Hawkins
A. Hodgins
B. Hay dock
N. Jackson
A. J. Johnstone
H. D. Jones
W. E. Keig
J. L. Lambert
A. E. Latter
R. A. Lee
W. C. Lye
W. A. Lyne
C. R. Lomas
A. A. Macbeth
H. C. Marter
C. Madsen
B. N. McDonald
T. W. McTackett
M. Menyweather
W. Miller
G. H. Monk
John Moor
W. F. Moore
G. A. Napier
J. W. Neeve
H. Oakes
L. O’Toole
N. T. Pittendridgh
H. G Posse
S. C. Purchase
H. E. Reeve
J. B. Reilly
A. Rixon
J. G. Roberts
J. Reuben
A. Roe
S. J. Samson
K. Schneider
T. Senar
E. J. Sexton
T. Slater
R. Smith
C. H. Snow
E. K. Stewart
J. Sweeney
A. R. Tindale
A. Trenchard
W. Wade
C. C. Walters
J. H. Walters
W. M. Walsh
S. Weingott
J. J. Wilkinson
' S. Wright
J. E. J. Wythes
A. R. War drop
“ B” Company.
Capt. P. T. Hill
Lieut. J, A. Alexander
Lieut. P. S. S. Woodeforde
Color-Sgt. J. W. Chris-
tianson
Sgt. G. T. Clarke
G. M. Drinkwater
G. Armstrong
CpL L. Marks
H. W. Beavis
G. H. Gibbs
F. G. Turner
Lance-Cpl. L. Galli
S. King
Bugler L. L. Cohen
J. E. Manton
Signaller J. Hart
Private H. Allan
B. H. Angel
D. Anthony
R. A. Adair
A. R. Anderson
W. F. Bates
T. Backlog
J. R. Blakey
B. C. Berry
J. Butcher
J. Brown
F. A. Bull
M. Cashel
J. Campbell
H. Collins
R. C. Carr
J. H. Carmichael
H. C. M. Carter
G. Cook
T. F. Carter
W. B. Cameron
M. J. Cogle
A. W. Dunne
G. P. Downer
J, E. Davies
A. Dyer
T. Deval
A. R. Eyles
G. R. Grant
L. Gordon
J. A. Greenless
E. C. Gelding
J. M. Guilfoyle
N. V. Grant
H. R. P. Goodwin
T. Gorman
B. C. Hewitt
E. Healey
K. J. Holmes
S. J. Harris
W. F. Herbert
H. Horwitz
M. R. Howard
A. Hunter
A. Hall
R. R. Hickson
W. C. Jennings
A. Keens
R. H. Kennedy
J. Lane
H. de Largarders
A. Leitch
A. L. Moon
A. G. Meeve
W. C. S. Mansell
D. F. McLeod
W. S. McPherson
C. Morell
A. Morris


A. B. Morley
W. Morris
C. Mathews . ,
L. Murphy
A. Mathews
A. Melling • -
J. S. Moore
F. Norton
L. J. Mathews
I). E. Mat lies on
R. E. Modral ■
P. O’Brien
H. K. O’Leary
R. A. Oldroyd
E. F. Palmer
L. Perrin
J, Parratt
G. D. W. Palmer ■
S. Renshaw
J. Ross
H. T. Rockstroh
A. J- Raffan
H. Robertson ( ,
H. Royle
J. Russell
J. Thor bum 4
W. A. V. Thomas •
J. T. Tollasor
N. Tomlinson
C. Taylor
J. Tailon
C. L. Williams
A. I. Wilson
N. S. Wyse
E. H. Walker
J. Whitaker
J. Watt
C. R. Winch
E. Watman
W. J. Woods
W. Y. Whitford
“ C ” Company.
Capt. F. J. Robins
Lieut. G. Steen
Lieut. H. Williams
Color-Sgt. J. W. Morris
Sgt. A. O. Correy
E. R. Larkin
T. D. Mitchell
O. W. Moore
Lance-Sgt. D. Mitchell
Cpl. A. M. Andrews -
A. T. Brown
S. M. Dykes t
M. Picand
Lance-Cpl. A. V. Adey
J. Barton
H. McKenzie
F. Fergus
H. R. Sparkes
Pay Orderly Room—
Cpl. F. A. C. George
Bugler G. B. Weston ■
W. M. Attenborough
Private A. Anderson
W. S. Barbour
V. M. E. Bance
R. L. Birrell
C. F. Boothman
P. Brushett
A, G. Cafe ,
J. Carle
E. Callaway ,
R. A. Carroll .
R. L. Dick
W. A. Dillock „
C. T. Doran
W. J. Drury
R. C. Eager
J. T. Elsen
S. T. Galloway
J. G. Golder
W. E. Greathead
H. G. Grieves
J. Hansen
R. Harnett
T. G. Harries
G. Honeysett
J. Honan
F. B. Horsford
R. Howe
H. J. Hunter
E. J. Hutchison
J. B. Iredale
C. J. Jagoe
F. G. Jeff kins
H. H. V. Jeff kins
L. J. Irving
F. Kaye
M. J. Larkin
A. Lee
H. G., Lenon
J. D. Lindsay
W. K. Lyle
D. Mackenzie
R. J. Mackenzie
H. McAuley
D. McDonald
H. J. Mellish
C. Mitchell
J, S. Morris
W. Neilson
E. Newton
C. B. Niccoll
J, L. Nicholson
G. Owen
T. Peel
B. J. Perrott r
J. C. Pomery
S. Pepper
C. R. Priest
B. Powell
A. H. Radford
P. S, Rees:
F. A. S. Russell
W. F,' Ruddock
H. Sanson
J. F. Russell
A. R. Selman
J. C. S. Sehnan ■■ .
J. Skelton -
A. C. Smillie / ; V
O. Smith -
C. W. Smith
C. S. Smith
L. J. Smith
W. Smith
M. H. Sparks
A, E. Spratt
W. T. Stringer ,
R. Suttie
W. Swindells
S. A. S. Stewart
T. S. Tait
F. C. Victor
S. J. Watkins
R. West
H. Williamson
T. Willoughby
J. B. Woodward
L. A. Woodward
A. E. J. Wigley ■
“D” Company.
Gapt. A. G. McGuire
Lieut. L. J. Hemption
Lieut. Howell Price
Color-Sgt. J. A. Connelian
Sgr. A, D, Higbid
Cpl. D. H. Potts
T. J. Smith
Bugler W. Plumley
H. G. Hopkins .
Private A. A. Anderson
J. Angus' ‘
J. P. Balfour
A. B. Baker
C. A. Beck
W. J. Bennett
F. Beck
J. Brissett
C. Buckley
A. H. Burns
S. L. Cameron ;


W. Cannon
H. C. H. Caldwell
M. T. Carre
W. Me. F. Carswell
F. Chase
J. C. Caiman
L. Christensen
J. W. Cizzie
H. Clarke
E. F. Cluett
A. V. Corken
S. C. Crummer
H. D. Cox
T. Davis
A. W. Donthy
C. Davis
L. Davies
L, 0. Douglas
O. A. Doust
P. T, Duncan
J. Gannon
H. Gaylor
W. R.’ Goddard
T. Goodman
E. Graham
C. A. Grimshaw
T. B. Habell
W. J. Harford
J. Hendrick
W. L. Herbert
F. Hawkes
J. T. Hicks
R. F. Hodge
E. G. Hodgson
C. R. Howarth
J. C. Henderson
C. Honeyman
H. Y. Howes
G. Hagner
A. T. Jarvis
H. A. Kavanagh
A. H. Kirby
J. J. Kemp
W. T. Jenniiigs ;
V. J. Lannier
W. G. Ledingham
R. Larkin
G. B. Lewis
W. D. McCarthy
F. McCawley
D. McKenna
W. J. McManus
G. E. Medcalfe
M. Mellov
R. Melville
J. M. McKinnery
J. H. McLachlan
L. G. McFadzeah
J. A. Mitchell
R. J. Mozelie
F. S. Moorish.
R. J, Nash
G. W. Palmer
C. Parkes
A. P. Peake ■
W. J. E. Pntland
C. G. M. Read
W. J. Reay
R. A. Reynolds'
E. G. Remn
A. R. Rae
T. Rowe
H. V. Rule
F. Schofield
T. Simpson
H. TV Smallbone
A- C. Smiles '
M. N. Smith
H. Suders
G. R. Spring
W. Taylor
T. Thompson
S. W. Thompson
L. F. Tesch
E. M* Tnders
S. N. Yeness
J. J. Vial
L. C. Vincent
P. Vickers
T. S. Virtue *
C. E. Urry
S. E. Ward
A. Whittaker
A. J, Withers
L. Woishan
A. P. Yule
C. H. Young
“ E ” Company.
Lieut* H. G. Carter
Lieut. A. Champion
Lieut. R. K, S. May
Color-Sgt. A. E. Jackson
Sgt. A. E. Wicks
J. H. Mclntyre
R. C. N. Henderson
Cpl. J. H. Burton
O. R. Rowe
F. W. Butler
H. Swinbourne
Bugler S. H. Davis
A. Hughes
Private W. G. Ackroyd
C. Amos
R. T. Ainslie
E. C. Buck
J. R. Boon
H. H. Boulton
F. G. Bellingham
R. H. W. Bethke ■
B. E. Brook
A, F. Bright
A. P. Blackmore
T. Broughton
V. Bridger
D. N. Brown
S. J. Burman
H* Gumming
D. Chillingsworth '■
H. E. Cox
A. A. Cunynghame
D. W. Dee
T. C. Douglass ■
L, L. Dinnery
G. W. Dawson
C. Dennison
J. W. C. Davis
■ W. R. T. Easton
R. Ellis
F. Fernie
F. W. Gerber
A* J. Goodsell
A. J. Galway
H. Graham
J. Grear
A. Griffith
H. J. Hawarth
■ T. IV Hanrahan
T. J. Heery
S. Hellier
E. Hillas
B. A. Hubbard
H. C > Hall
R. G. Humphreys
W. Hillier
E. C. Hardy
S. Hawkes
J. E.. Hourigan
J. Hastie
A. Jenkins
V. E. Jones
C. C. Judd
A. A. Johnston
M. Larsen
D. Lyall
M. G. McGue
A. S. Metcalfe
L. ■ Murphy
F. W. Muir
P. J. Myres
A. Major
J. Marr
H. L. Montague
H. C. Marshall
V. McLaughlin
M. Moloney


S. Martin
M. Mnllaney
W. H. B. McDonald
J* McNicoll
A. L, C. Makinson
C. J. McCarthy
H. Molson
L. H. F. Nadin
Be C. Norrish
We J, Pastoars
A. S> Phillips
J. Ce He Pickering
A. Preston
H. Payne
G. Pettit
L. H. C. Biggs
He G. F. Bogers
W. A. Bonald
W. He Bowsell
H. J, Bogers
W. Bichards
J. H. Beid
H. G. T. Saunders
Be C. Singleton
C. A. Smith
S. We Scothern
F. C. B. Simon
J. C. Stacy
We Snatchfold
T. We Smith
L. Sjoberg
A. V. Steel
W. H. Taylor
We P. Turner
S. G. Viccras
G. J. Williams
H. C. Wheeler
W. M. Watson
F. M. West
He B. Watson
L. Me Wallis
A. Le Webb
B. S. Watson
ei F" Company.
Capt. C. D. Sasse
Lieut. A. J. Shout
Lieut. Street, G.A.
Color-Sgt. H. Wells
Sgte B. W. McCauchland
B. I. C. McGregor
P. W. Bushton
Cpl. He A. Mitchell
E. J. Ferguson
H. Goodman
M. W. McKean
W, H. Sinee
Lance-Cpl. G. Gould
A. McHolm
W. Tucker
B. Dowther
W. Bowie
B. T. Bichar ds
Private B. E. Barker
A. Barrett
A. Barnes
J. J. T. Bell
A. F. Bolton
W. Benton
F. H. Boon ,
J. Bourke /
B. C. Butterworth
C. A. Boase
A. J. Booth
J. B. Booth
A. T. Collins
A. H. Chapman
B. Crawford
B. Cutter
B. Douglas
C. Dempsey
C. E. Duggan
S. S. Farnell
W. H. Freame
W. G. Frost
H. B. Glover
G. Frazer
A. S. Haddon
Le B. Hall
J. G. Henderson
B. J. Hicks
C. Hogan
B. J. Horan
T. E. Hellyer
G. Hinton
E. W. Hughes
G. E. Bramley
W. G. Jamieson
W. V. Knight
G. Lake
H. M. Lanser
A. B. Loomes
J. H. McGuire
F. E. Mitchell
V. J. Hadden
We D. McCoy
W. Mitchell
W. H. Mansfield
A. B. McQueen
W. L. Murray
O. Murray
G. H. Phillips
W. Portors
W. J. Pickup
S. Philpot
W. Oyston
W, M. O’Brien
P. O’Grady
H. G. Parkinson
W. Le Bidley
T. C« Power
H. Bothwell
B. Salmon
S. B. Simpson
T. Simpson
W. A. E. Smith
F. M. Swann
C. E. Smith
W. J, Stratton
A. E. Stagg
F. L. Stagg
B. D. Steadman
H, A. Turbett
J. G. Turner
F» H. Toynbee
C. Travers
S. B. Traill
J. Tarlington
E. Vickery
B. Wilkinson
G. White
A. A. Wilson
W. Wiles
O. Wood
J. B. Walker
Be D. Mount
D. E. Eeckford
P. E. Coltman
0. G. B. Cork
G, Gregerson
G. E. Gurney
A. War brick
A. W. Hargreaves
F. J. G. Mayger
' H. J. Turner,
S. Glover
V, H. Derrett
W. E. Guthrie
A. Cosgrove
A. E. Campbell
Be D. Duffy
Pe Young
W. Cottman
Ce P. Tracey
“ G" Company.
Capt. B. I. Swannell
Lieut. W. Payne
Seed.-Lieut. W.' S.
Duchesne
Color-Sgt. J. Pegg
Sgt. J. L. Paterson
S. T. Smith
1. D. Carr
Cpl. He He Blunden ,


52




T. Costello
H. Davis
Lance-Cpl. P. W. Me
Intyre
Bugler G. S. Cleveland
Private J. Bruce
E. Y. Biunden
G. J. Bailey
L. C. Bevan
I. R. Britt
T. C. Bannon
F. Bate
T. Baker
H. Barnby
E. J. R. Boxsell
A. R. Bailey
F. Beynon
F. Bett
W. T. Carey
C. A. Cross
R. Crawford
L. R. Donkin
G. F. Davies
G. W. Dawson
H. Dillon
H. R. Dorrington
B. Dutton
G. Doerge
E. Etherington
R. O.* Flower
W. Y. Fowler
Y. C. Farr
A. G. Gunner
D. Golding
C. Graves
H. Hanson
R. Heley
R. Harrington
R. A. Hill
D. O. Hughes
A. Hood
S. Humphries
C. S. Hill
C. Jarman
W. H. Jones
D. S. James
W. J. Keenan
R. C. Kiddle
A. Lakeman
T. Lee
T. McDonald
A. C. Mac Lean
J. MacAuley
W. K. McArthur
F. A. McDermott
S. R. Moore
E. C. Moore
A. MacDonald
F. L. Maitland
L. E. Mayes
P. Northrop
J. H. Neve
J. L. Ogg
A. C. Chilbrook
G. J» Pacey
R. E. ■ Ramsey
J. R. Row
D. Russell
F. J. Sanderson
C. H. Sharpe
W. S. Sims
C. Sharpe
T. H. Stevens
G. H. Spreckley
A. G. Thornton
W. S. Thompson
E. Taylor
J. T. Turner
■ W. Ward
J. Wilson
L. Wake
J. O. Watson
J. Williams,
A. Woodham
A. B. Wood
W. Whitfield
W. R. Yates
F. C. Smith
F. E. Thompson
W, J, Martin
E. A. W. Waver
D. A. Robertson
W. J. King
E. C. Harris
E. Elart
J. Duvar
H. L. Primrose
H. W. Miller
L. W. Hudson
C. L. Kaeppel
C. H. Merton
G. E. Angus
L. R. Allen
T. F. Baxendale
G. F. Parr
A. Schubert
A. E. Harrison
J. Sanderson
T. Rowdon
To McNicholl.
E. A. Ward
W. Lloyd
“ H ” Company.
Capi C. Jackson
Lieut* R. Kersham
Lieut* F. Fogden
Sgt, A. N. Meadmor©
J. H. Kirby
R. B. Horne
T. Turner
Cpl. J. B. Casey
C. T. Nutt
W. J. Ingram
H. T. Dart on
Lance-Cpl. W. G. Trefry
Private A. Am
W. A. Bay re
A. A. Barwick
P. Bozon
J. W. Brown
G. W. Carey
E. R. Checkley
J. B. Cobcroft
L. G. Cole
A. Cleary
.W. Curtiss
Y. S. Dimrock
B. de Pina
F. A. Doodson
S* C Digby
P. F. Dume
H. Eitapence
T. Flattley
G. Truman
S.'W. Ferguson
W. Graham
F. T. Gibson
K. J. Grant
W. H. Griffiths
L. R. Gault
I. G, Gordon
J. Gillen
E. A. Hough
A. Howarth
H. E. Hicks
F. D. Hall
J. C. Hayes
F. L. Hopkins
C. Harrison
B. O. R. Harding
W. J. Hilder
A. Howard
H. Hamblen
J. Jensen
R. Killick
L. Keyzor
L. K. J. Lavers
C. J. Lova
D. R. Lindsay
R. Metcalfe
F. J. Mayes
G. C. Moffat
R. Mackay
C» Meland
J. Mackie
E


A. MeThane
P, B. Miller
N. J. Mullarttey
A. MeThane
S. L. Pail
H T. Norris : '
W. EL Norman
R. E. Newman
J, O’ Connor
H, H. Piltz
G. Paton
F. Powley
H. C. Pyper
S. Penn
M. E. Pull
J. Rush
J. Routledge
E. Russell
H. A. Streatfield
W. Sheed
W. J. Stewart
J. O. Starkey
H, Smith
G. W. Scott
A. S. Tillett
W. H. Sparkes
R. Scrineshaw
L. C. H. Topham
H. Thurgood
S. W. Tucker
L. Wright
J. H. White
L. P. Mayling
A. Hodges
N. W. C. Woodgins
G. R. Waller
H. Williams
O. H. Warren
J. H. Weather bum
W, Woods
R. W. Young
C. Wozon
E. Hayward
E. C. Grenfell
C. Burling
W. Bedchambers
C. Cross
A. Heat-
W. G. Robins
R. Mayer
R. S. Payne
J. Eady
R. H. Duke
M. Broughton
W. P. Payne
H. N. Draper
J. McGillivray
R. A. Lee
1st Infantry Brigade.
2nd Battalion.
Headquarters
Staff.
Lt.-Col. G. F. Braund
Major R. Scobie
Capt. G. T. Wallaek
Lieut. J, F. H, Pain
Lieut, and Q.M. C. A.
Whyte
Lieut, A, D. Shaw
Lieut, E. E. Herrod
A.A.M'C
Capt, H. Flecker
W.O. M. J. Lowe
R.Q.M.S. W. M. Mackay
O.R. Sgt. S. J. E. Hewitt
Sgt, Dr. L. W. Mason
Pioneer Sgt. A. Anderson
Sgt.-Cook G. M. Chateau
Transport Sgt. J. E. M.
Storey
Cpl. A. H. Smith
A. H. Scrivener
W. Slee
W. J. Toms
B. L.' Turner
J, C. Ups ton
R. O. Wilson
G. Wihnott
W. Wass
D. M. Forrest
J. J. Doyle
Lance-Cpl. R. M. Mazen-
gart
S.S.M. J. M. Wells
T. Smith
S. Sth. D. T. Roberts
Private R. S. Ainsworth
T. D. Bartho
L. Bayer
H. Brett
G. E. Buckley
F. Cooper
W. P. Clarke
R. A. K. Doyle
W. E. Duffey
J, Edinburgh
A. F. Gabriel
H. Hanson
G. Hobart
H. G. Hardcastle
J. Hutchison
C. G. Lees on
W. Lewis
P. M. Longworth
J. H. McElroy
A. T. Mclntyre
J. McCann
T. R. Pardel
D. T. Reddan
R. Sutcliffe
R, M. Toomey
C. G. Wade
Driver R. Death
W. Christie
W. Crawford
W. Dunkerley
T. Forrest
R. R. J. Moloney
J. Nelmer
E. J. Perry
W. Pickleson
A. W. Rickler
J, Rogers
W. H. Staden
T. Sweeney
C. J, Stockdale
“A” Company.
Capt. C. R. Richardson
Lieut, G. E. C. Kelly
Lieut, L. J, Morshead
Sgt. T. K. Abbott
A. Finney
T. J. Pattinson
T. EL Worthington.
Color-Sgt. M. J. B. Cotton
Lance-Sgt. J, Dannefoerd
Cpl. J. A. Gardener
C. R. McDongall
E. S. Young
Lance-Cpl. A. G. Coughlan
W, S. Glover
W. EL Paton
E. L, Turron


Bdr. C. C. Parsonson
Private T. B. Anderson
T. J. Bailey
L. Baker
C. H. Barnes
E. C. Bird
A. Begbie
H. Bowie
W. F. Bridger
M. Brown
R. N. Brown
T, D. Brown
W. E. Bruderlin
D. Campbell
F. G. H. Carter
H. W. Cavill
C. L. Chandler
E. Charles
G. L. Chant
S. R. Clark
H. R, P. Cradick
W. R. Cradick
R. R, Dawes
B. R. Doohan
J. T. Doohan
R. V. Dransfield
J. Duckworth
W. J. Edgar
E. A. B. Edwards
L. J. Evans
H. J. Fawcett
K. Fitzpatrick
L. C. Foster
H. Froome
W, A. Gardener
R. Glynn
R. J. Goodman
E. E. Gardiner
J. J. Gray
E. C. H. Haxby
F. E. H. Henry
F. Hilleard
J. R. Holden
W. L. Horne
R. Horton
C. M. Howell
V. W. Hughes
A. D. Hussey
A. Jamieson
B. P. Jay
F. Johnson
E. Jones
A. N. King
E. P. Lawrence
C. A. Bill
B. Little
W. D. Longstaff
E. P. Mahoney
F. J. Manning
C. H. Marsh
J. Mcßurnie
G. McKelvey
D. McKenzie
S. McMurtri©
R. H. Mikkleson
J. F. Mitchell
A. Mills
F. Mortimer
A. V. Moore
C. B. Nash
F. K. Newling
H. B. Noad
J. T. O’Donnell
A. Parkins
W. Pent on
C. H. Proctor
J, G. Powe
G. Rattray
F. Rennie
A. H. Richards
J. H. Richards
E. D. Robinson
J, Ryan
E. H. Southam
J. Smith
J. L. Swan
C. A. Tate
J. Tocchini
R. G. Turner
G. R. Telfer
C. Vickery
W. Walsh
A. Warrington
R. W. Webster
G. Wentworth
H. W. West
F. White
E. Whitehouse
J. P. Whiteford
A. C. Wildon
W. Wilson
T. Woodbridg©
G. F. White
“B” Company.
Capt. 0. G. Gordon
Seed.-Lieut. R. G. Stewart
Seed.-Lieut. H. P. Barton
Sgt. A. A. Cobban
J. Harvey
N. L. Railton
L. S. Rowsell
W. A. Trott
C.-Sgt. J. A. Elliott
Cpl. C. G. Davison
H. A. Jones
Bgr. C. R. Lobban
B. W. Newson
H. P. Wrigley
W. Gibb.
Lance-Cpl. H. E. Amos
A. Davidson
C. R. Gaylard
E. M. Hillman
D. Pheeny
Arn.-Cpl. H. B. Hether
ington
Private S. Anderson
T. A. Anderson
W. F. Armstrong
A. Archibald
J. P. Arnold
A. W. Aston
P. M. Bowling
J. G. Bell
W. Burgin
F. Berry
H. S. Brenner
P. Berryman
S. T. Baker
T. N. Black
E. Bloom
J. Bullock
C. P. Chapman
A. K. Clark
A. H. Collins
E. L. Causer
J. J. Collingwood.
J. M. Clark
L. A. Collyer
E. H. Carter
J. Cameron
H. Carlin
W. H. Dukelow
P. H. Day
O. Duffey
D. T. Elsgood
T. Elliott
A. B. Foster
G. Foster
H. Gentle
N. W. H. Gal©
J. J. Gerraghty
J. H. F. Goodman
G. A. Hibbert
J. Hunt
K. F. Hallan
R. T. Hootan
A. H. W. Holmes
F. Horsfall
A. A. Jagger
J. Johnston
J. C. Jessup
E. H. Jessup
R. G. Jessup
G. A, Kelly .


W. Kelly
T. M. Keith
H. B. Lawrence
G. L. Lewis
B. Lauritz
R. K. Lloyd
N. H. Lowe
D. K. Luidow
C. G. Lind
D. T. Milliken
PS. A. McKinnon
O. D. McNaught
D. J. Monk
H. S. Mascord
E. J. McMeikan
R. Murray
W. Monley
W. Money
D. McLean
W. Mac George
R. Owens
J. W. O’ Brien
A. T. H. Pearson
J. R. Page
E. Patching
W. L. Quinn
I. H. M. Rider
W. H. Robertson
H. Robinson
J. Schweers
E. Smith
A. Smith
J. Smith
L. J. Scott
H. A. Skidmore
R. Summers
D. W. Steedman
J. P. Sullivan
J. Swanston
J. A. Thomas
S. Terrett
G. Tidyman
F. Watson
S. Wilson
P. S. Wolseley
A. E. Wood
S. B. Wye
"O” Company.
Capt A. Dignam
Lieut, R, T. Brown
Lieut. K. J. Fourdrinier
Color-Sgt. L. R. Saul
Sgt. W. Boucher
H. Hartley
R. Howmans
E. E. C. Higginson
Cpl. W. H. Mitchell
C. R. Tonkin
H. Youden
T. H. Davidson
F. Wellisch
Private J. Adams
H. L. Aucher
W. Hois
W. L. .F. Bacon
L. F. W. Barsby
A. N. Basnett
C. Bateman
R. G. Batts
W. Bonner
H. Bouffler
C. Browne
F. Brown
J. T. Bristow
W. Bryan
A. J. Buchanan
T. D. Burke
R. A. Russell
P. H. Clapin
T. Clegg
L. Clifford
“D” Company.
Sgt. R. Coskey
C. C. Hart
F. A. Mayo
Color-Sgt. W. D. Scott
Bugler V. L. Avis
C. K. Carter
Cpl. B. W. Bpikmyre
E. Dunniock
W. E. Miller
J. J. Ryan
Lance-Cpl. W. B. Browne
J. Colan
A. B. Myall
A. J. Stewart
Private C. Alwyn
T. Banks
T. S. Bethel
W. P. Berg
G. Bitmead
O. D. Boyle
E. L. Beattie
J. Brent.
J. T. Britten
M. Browne
J. Burns
L. A. Clinch
R. H. B. Clarence
G. W. Clarke
W. R. Costello
S. A. Cain
J. Chalmers
J. Curran
0. S. Connor
G, W. Cowell'
M. Cnnich
H. H. Davis
W. R. Dilby
C. F. Bobbie
R. G. Elms
R. Gamble
D. R. Gray
T. V. Hammond
H. Hudson
S. Harris
E. Harrison
W. Hopwood
A. H. Herlihy
H. Harber
C. K. Holden
Sgt. C. C. Hart
A. B. Henry
A. Haxelwood
R. A. Jarman
W. G. Kent
G. Keeley
W. H. Keen
R. Laurie
J. Larkins
C. V. Love
J. H. Lumsden
T. G. Marsh
H. McCall
H. F. Morgan
A. O. New
J. McFarlane
J. McErven
T. S. Monks
J. V. Murray
F. E. Moir
W. R. P. McGill
A. W. Mozart
C. Mackie
E. T. McCristal
J. McGilp
W. P. Moylan
J. Newman
M. Newell
H. Newton
A. R. Neall
H. O’Donnell
H. Peden
R. M. Pain
R. J. Palmer
W. J. Quinlan
T. G. J. Ryan
H. L. Reid
W. Rogers
H. G. Rootham
H. B. Richards
T. J. Sullivan
R. Salmon


K. L. Scott
J. B. Smith
A. Simpson
T. S. Smith
R. Touyel
P. Throsley
R. Thomson
C. A. Thomson
E. R. Turner
J. C. S. Waddell
A. F. Wood
A. Warren
A. J. Wilkins
R. D. Yearsden
“ E" Company.
Capt. C. W. Watson
Lieut. D. M. He ugh
Lieut. R. T. Tarrant
Cpl. D. A. McNab
C. O. Olle
K. S. M. Piper
Private H. H. Akers
R. Armstrong
B. Ashton
G. M. Brash
F. M. Bartlett
J. J. Badger
E. A. Butler
H. C. Bourne
J. M. Campbell
A. J. Campbell
R. Cox
L. G. Cherry
T. N. Conville
J. T. Cocks
C. Careless
A. A. Callaghan
L. Collins
F, A. Carrington
H. O. Cooke
A. J. Doyle
J. P. Durnan
L. W. H. Dickson
R. W. Danby
A. P. Davies
D. Evans
A. S. Elwood
F. W. Edwards
W. J. G. Freeman
A. H. Geer
C. F. Hart
E. T. Harvey
B. W. Howes
A. Hornby
R. Harris
J. Hewitt
E. P. Kinsella
M. A. Kirwin
T. Knight
S. Layton
R. Lewry
G. Lane
G. H. Logan
T. R. Miles
J. W. Miles
T. Mason
J. Maxwell
L. Moore
C. J. Miller
W. M. Morgan
H. A. Mortaland
J. W. McKenzie
W. G. McSparron
J. S. Mcßowe
J. C. McEwen
R. S. McLelland
J. B. Nagle
O. S. Olsson
C. Pearce
W. Powell
V. E. Pitt j
L. G. Purcell
A. Parker
E. Parker
J. Penny
J. Ryan
W. A. Reynolds
G. M. Riseley
J, Ryan
W. H. Scott
’N. O. Staggs
E. C. Tayt
A. E. Tabrehan
G. A. Urquhart
C. J. Yyner
R. S. Wood
K. M. S. Wills
F. T. Wright
H. S. Wicking
A. H. Walker
J. H. Winterbottom
A. P. Walters
S. J. Whatan
R. N. Wilson
J. F. Wyndham
D. C. Hobden
T. Heath
W. E. Early
A. A. Daen
B. C. Ronald
J. H. Leach
G. Winchler
R. B. Moffatt
A. Toomey
F. I. Marshall
F. Taylor
H. J. Fuby
J. T. Beech
H. Perry
A. O’Brien
H. Wilson
C. Morgan
E. S. Dunleavy
H. L. Constable
J. Norman
J. F. Owens
J. Cole
G. A. Smith
B. M. Coulow
■ A. B. Warr
C. Towers
A. P. Guest
F. Watson
R. Sutcliffe
“F” Company.
Capt. A. B. Stevens
Lieut, F. G. Smith
Lieut. H. L. Nash
Sgt. H. P. Brown
J. W. S. Dick
H. W. Hancock
H. A. Jones
Color-Sgt. R. A. Flem-
ming
Lance-Sgt. B. Leeks
Cpl. T. W. Burks
J. G. W. Grant
J. W. Park
W. F. Scott
Lance-Cpl. A. Frauenelder
R. Kennedy
J. Ford
R. Smith
G. Staness
T. G. Woods
Bugler D. Cameron
A. Arnold
Private J. A. Ashley
J. Amer
H. G. Aves
O. C. J. Baylis
W. Barkaway
F. B. Barker
W. R. C. Beasley
H. J. Brooks
O. Benson
J. Broomhall
J. L. Boyd
A. Bartlett
C. C. Conn
F. Curtis
H. T. Chaffey
G. E. Cook


Y. C. Charge
A. P. Cottle
H. T. Carpenter
L, Clayton
R. V. Campbell
H, W. Corkett
A. L. T. Doaora
J. W. Dabbs
D. Row
D. F. Faulkiner
W. P. Fitzgibbon
A. M. Faraday
L. Falconer
R. H. Fountain
I, G. Gowbuton
J, Gilmour
O. S. Hopkins
H. E. S. Haddow
G. T, Healy
J. Hewitt
J. S. Haydon
J. D. V. Jones
E. T. Jackson
G. S. Kemmis
F. C. Laird
M. Lalley
T. E. G. Lee
K. M. Larnach
G. Murray
F. Mathers
H. C. Mackay
S. Matthews
C. Mullarkey
J. A. Moffit
R. S. Meek
F. D. A. Martin
H. J. Maguiness
A. E. McGowan
F. T. McCormack
A. C. Mclnness
A. H. McDonald
T. McGill
J. S. McNamara
F. McCarthy
J. F. Nobbs
W. H. O’Neill
J. O’Loughlin
H. H. Pye
P. Penfold
P. J. Penfold
J, H. Peacock
A. H. Pugsley
P. Quinert
G. B. Rider
R. Revnolds
F. D. Robins
F. Robke
A. E. Rowe
C. F. Sandilands
A. E. Steel
F. B. Sheppard
J. P. Scott
J. S. Sherwin
W. G. Smith
C. J. Topliffe
J. Toote
G. Whitfield
J. Wilkins
O. H. Williams
F. West
J. T. Wright
H. H. Hinley
N. Wallace
R. A. Bassan
J. Harkness
A. Harris
S. J. B. Le Serve
J. G. Murray
A. O. Parmenter
W. Raymond
J. J. Yergette
W. E. Wilson '
“G” Company.
Capt. I. F. Campbell
Lieut. R. T. Tarrant
Lieut. E. M. Soiling
Color-Sgt. W. A. Grayston
Sgt. H. Hevdon
S. H. Percy
M. C. McDonald
CpLN. J. Burns
C. K. Miller
H. C. Thacker
D. Stewart
Lance-Cpl. J. Bruce
E. A. Davies
A. F. McGilray
C. D. L. McCarthy
W. H. Wheeler
J. W. Maudsley
Pay-Cpl. I. G. Maclnnes
Private C. A. Brian
T. Brew
L. J. Brownsmith
G. Blacklock
J. E. Bourke
C. Bewt
R. Burns
F. J. Bayliss
T. H. Burdett
J. T. Bourke
H. Bowen
F. A. Cashman
J. A. Costello
C. Cross
B. J. Coding
D. W. K. Campbell
F. Chandler
H. Courtis
T. Doyle
A. E. Dowse
H. Dumbar
C. J. Dixon
J. P. Driscoll
R. E. Dalgluish
T. M. Frazer
S. Friel
C. E. Evans
A. C. G. O. Franch
E. Geary
W. J. Godfrey
E. D. Fitzgerald
P. J. Haughey
F. A. Harris
J. Hall
H. Holtman
J* Hardy
E. H. Jeffreys
A. G. W. Jones
T. H. Julius
C. B. C. Kir ton
M. Keegan
K, G. Keech
E. H. Kelly
C. J. Lawson
W. J. Lane
P. Lambert
J. R. Lambert
J. Lang
W. H. Matthews
T. Murphy
R. D. Murray
J. Metcalfe
C. C. Nashford
J. Mullane
T. G. Mann
F. Mitchell
J, Murray
D. McManus
G. Neal
E. S. O’Donnell
G. H. Plush
S. Perrett
W. A. Pryor
W. J. Peters in
R. Patterson
W. A. Perrie
G. A. Per don
H. M. Patfield
W. E. Plunkett
C. D. Rouchetti
R. W. Rowlands
A. J. Roach
T. L. Roberts
J. C. Stephenson


W. L. Sibbald
S. O. Stafford
J. Speakman
W. O, Schofield
W. J. Smith
W. Scoot
A. R. Stafford
D. W. Scott
. J. C. Sykes
F. R. Stutchbury
R. J. Yidler
M. E. Vanse
V. I. Williams
G. S. Wilkinson
C. Wallis
H. E. White
S. Williamson
J. A. Wright
R. Whatan
R. D. Wilson
S. Yule
0. L. Whaites
“H” Company.
Capt. G. L. B. Concannon
Lieut. G. S. Cook
Secd.-Lt. N. L. R. Griffen
Sgt. R. A. Gouldsay
G. Leader
J. A. Peasey
W. Armstrong
Color-Sgt. T. W. Morgan
€pl. T. R. Carson
C. F. Kennedy
W. O. Mcßoberts
J. B. Powell
J. T. Wheeler
Lance-Cpl. W. Bonnett
B. H. Bramhall
L. 0. Dawson
H. McThane
S'. L. Russell
V. A. Stach
J. H. Sharman
W. H. Voght
C. E. Wilsdon
S. C. Goodall
Private A. Smith
A. Barnett
R. Andrews
H. J. Ash
H. Ashton
B. H. Armstrong
A. Banks
H. Brewer
G. J. Burns
T. D. Brown
J. G. Bennett
J. Burnett
J. H. Bates
J. Brazel
J. H. Craig
W. H. Clay
H. W. Carter
R. C. Cutts
R. E. Coates
J. H. Cumberland
F. W. Duffy
J. G. Dearon
N. J. Dunlop
T. Eager
E. R. Egan
A. Forster
A. E. Fisher
H. Funkenstein
E. H. Fardall
H. Fisher
A. E. Ford
C. E. Freeh
H. C. Grimmer
J. P. Gray
R. Goodher
W. J. Gilbert
F. W. Gibson
J. C. House
W. W. Harris
G. T. Hughes
A. Jackson
S. Johnson
L. A. Kennane
W. R. Law
J. J. McCarthy
C. L. Mumby
W. J. May
H. A. Murray
J. McDougal
C. L. McDermott
F. O’Neil
W. F. Ogg
L. B. Pourbard
A. O. Poison
C. W. Pullen
G. A. Pearce
K. Rourke
A. J. Rawlings
H. C. Roseby
W. H. Wolfe
H. L. Ryan
S. Reilly
R. Sheridan
B. S. Sinfield
F. R. Sheerman
G. G. Shepard
S. Spencer
R. F. Smith
L. K. Smiles
S. W. Smith
W. Thompson
S. Tindal
P. Tyrell
R. West
R. Waunsch
W. H. White
C. Wilkinson
J. Warren
J. Sheridan
J. S. Weaver
W. Ross
H. M. Clarke
T. Bond
T. J. Beecham
C. Johnson
J. Mardiff
W. Nichol
T. B. Pardon
R. W. Gates
E. McKinnon
3rd Battalion.
Headquarters
Staff,
Lt.-Col. R. H. Owen
Major A. J. Bennett
Capt. J. W. B. Bean
Capt. and Adjt. E. S. Brown
Lieut. G. Wall
Lieut. L. S, K. Stevenson
Lieut. H. W. Goldring
R.S.M. A. McAskill
Q.M.S. A. Stronach
O.R. Cpl. S. N. Whitworth
Bugler-Sgt. J. Wilson
Pioneer-Sgt. G. G. Boyd
Sgt.-Cook F. Bourne
Trans.-Sgt. C. T. Agassiz
Signal-Sgt. A. Haynes
Sig.-Pte. F. J. Benyon
A. G. Bailey
L. S. McCallum
G. F. Campbell
W. A. Oates
H. Cooke
E. J. Lowlan
R. D. M. Colyer
D. Ravell
Trns.-Pte. T. B. Britton
R. T. Pearce
A. W. Wood
R. L. Graham
J. J. M. H. Doolan
L. S. Stewart
R. Stewart
J. W. Watterson


D. Hagafty
T. Clifford
W. Gardiner
J. Gilman
E. Clark
Private G. H. Ayre
H. T. Baymond
G. G. Berry
A. Jenkins
H. A. Barry
F. McCarthy
J, W. Dodds
F. J. Murn
C. M. P.' McNamara
A. Bates
Attached A.A.M.C.
Cpl. J. B. Malone
Private. H. A. Carruthers
L. Duncomb
B. F. Moore
J. M. Cavanagh
Arm.-Sgt. O. E. Gemell
Machine Gun
Section.
Lieut. €. J. A. White
Sgt. T. H. Evans
Cpl. L. Collins
Private H. F. Briggs
H. Burke
B. Black
J. P. Gurrey
T. Cunliffe
W. P. G. Donovan
Driver A. J. Day as
Private C. B. Burton
A. B. Graham
E. Morris
C. A. Minns
S. A. Taylor
T. B. Wells
T. Wilson
A. J. Willis
“A” Company.
Capt. M. St, J. Lamb
Lieut. D. McConaghy
Secd.-Lieut. L, W. Street
Color-Sgt. H. W. Crisp
Sgt. B. J. McClelland
J. Boberts
P. W 1 Woods
C. S. Adams
Cpl. W. M. Salisbury
N. Gibbons
J. J. Llewellyn
S. J. Conley
H. McK. Bishop
Bugler C. A. Foster
M. F. Thornton
Private A. D. Arnold
L. Amourous
S. A. Ashdown
.L. Barrett
C, A. Bull
W. E. Berryman
H. Bridle
W. A. Passage
H. A. Bishop
F. W. Bubb '
H. S. Byrne
A. H. Bouquet.
P. J. Brennan
C. W. Baker
K. Crawford
W. Casey
D. Cameron
J. P. Cullen
C. J. Coleman
G. Cretan
A. W. Greves
B. B. Donnelly
T. Duffy
D. W. Digman ,
C. Donaldson
W, B, Dugay
A. E. Dybing
F. Edwards
W. T. Evans
W. M. F ourro
F. Fourro
L. Fishlock
A. Godfrey
C. L. Gregson
J. Hickey
B. Haworth
F. W. Howell
W. J. Hill
S. D. Hewitt
H. Hill
F. Holden
J, E. Haworth
W. G. Inglis
B. V. Johnston
E. H. Jackson
K. H. Jackson
H. H. Kurtz
H, Kemp
B. L. Kelly
A. B. Matthews
J. D. Monk
S. McConnell
y. M. McLure
P. S. Madden
K. D. Maine
C. W. Morris
W. Marshall
M. D. Key
V. H. Kendall
G. H. Leslie
W. D. Lincoln
J. Lyons
E. B. Lathrope
N. C. Lynch
A. Mathers
B. S. Mayo
W. Morrison
W. C. Marshall
J. Mark
A. Outridge
J. Kinkerton
W. Petts
E. Powell
S. W. J. Pynian
F. Bichars don
W. J. Bobertson
M. J. Benehan
J. E. H. Badford
F. E. Bitchie
B. B. Bichards
P. Bados
H. J. Scott
L. Sheppard
L. Smith
J. A. Smith
G. T. Smith
C. W. Smith
H. A. Sykes
J. E. Smith
P. Sweeney
N. Sinduff
E. W. Thorpe
W. Talbot
J. H. Vincent
F. C. Williams
A. Wilkins
A. Wilkins (Albert)
W. Webb
L. C. Wood
J. York
H. J. Bartlett
V. E. Scoullan
A. Siedel
G. Bobinson
“B” Company.
Capt. C. E, Leer
Lieut. R. 0, Cowey
Lieut. 0. G. Howell-Prlee
Color-Sgt. S. N. Dargin
Sgt. E. N. Litchfield
W. B. Schaeffer


[Kindly lent by the " Sydney Mail”]
German Concentration Camp.
Accumulating Stores.
6o




A. K. Martyn
PL L. Palmer
Cpl. A. J. B. Hamilton
E. R. Williams
E. N. Irvine
A. N. Shipp
E. L. Richardson
Bugler J. Bailey
P. C. Seach
Pioneer R. R. Campbell
J. G. Stevenson
Signaller A. McKenzie
J, S. Lowe
A. J. Meakins
J. S. Duke
G. R. Sharp
Cyclist N. H. Hinchcliffe
Stretcher-Bearer H.
Heitman
G. Fishlobke
Driver D. McPherson
R. R. Holl
Cook D. Trott
G. Trotman
Lance-Cpl. R. P. Deane
C. L. Smith
S. G Irving-
Private C. Ackling
O. Boxall
J, Bruggy
F. Barlow
A. C. Balkwill
J. C. Bridges
F. A. Banks
J, Boyland
H. Chadwick
M. F. Carr
G. W. L. Cooper
R. L. Critchley
G. B. Gaily
L. F. De Taxe
T. Davis
C. Dumphy
J,. Eather
W. A. Fabian
A. Farmer
- A. A,. Foley
A. H. Foilers
R. Glascoe
A. A. Gambling
J. Graham
G. N. Goode
J. S. Gillespie
(j. C. Goddard
G. Gordon
J, Goodman
W. H. Gordon
L. W. Hamilton
L. T. Harvey
T. E. Heap
J. J. Jagoe
F. Leighton
J, H. Lee
H. W. Lilley
T. J. McConviiie
G. Maxwell
S. W. Marshall
G. Martin
S. A. McCulloch
E. F. Mudge
R. Munckton
A. J. Markowicz
R. B. Malone
F. H. Matheson
G. S. Maund
W. H. MacMillan
H. W. Minter
R. Mumford
Y. M. Newton
V. Noble
J. O’ Connor
D. G. Oakley
L. C. Parmenter
J. H. Powell
F. Potter
E. G. Paine
G. Preston
W. J. Ryan
J. D. Reynolds
J. C. Rix
J. Rhodes
R. W. Smith
A. B. Symonds
H. J. S. Smith
H. R. Stubbs
H. G. Sykes
H. Spratt
H. Stevens
A. B. Tanner
C. Taylor
H. Welch
T. J. Williams
R. C. Wright
S. A. Watt ■
L. D. Wright
G. Williams
T. D. C. Tutill
A. Ainsworth
T. G. Robertson
P. Scott
P. J. Carroll
J. J. Elliott
C, E. Bryce
P. V. Murray
W. XJppon
“C” Company.
Captain C. W. H. Coulter
Lieut. (Hon. Gapt.) C. D.
Austin
Lieut. €. E. M. Brodziack
Color-Sgt. H. R. W.
Meager
Sgt. T. D. McLeod ■
H. Dixon
A. F. Burrett
W. F. Stead
W. J. Holdaway
Cpl. S. A. Pinkstone
R, G. Young
N. Roberts
J. Braya
Armr.-Cpl. A. Bailey ’
Pioneer W. H. Elton
Bugler R. H. Sedman
F. A. McD. Page
Signaller W. E. Brooks
G. C. Dick
T. Jennings
C. Murray
P. T. Mitchell
W. K. Rixon
Cook W. Way
W. Brett
Driver J. J. Foley
E. Foley
Lance-Cpl. C. J. Campion
Priv ate A. J. Ambrose
H. A,damson
J. Brine
E. F. Blake
R. R. Bonney
H. Bryant
F. B. Beeken
W. Brady
C. S. Buckeridge
J. W. Barrow
B. J, Bruton
J. Brennan
T. Burke
A. L, Costello
L. Bell
B. D. Campbell
A. J. Carnell
J. Christie
W. T. Cunningham
P. Douglas
W. Day
S. W. Dowell
G. De Carteret
J. S. Ducksbury
F. G. Edmonds
J, Evans
R. D. Fergusson


E. L. Fick
O. Fathers
E. Ford
G. H. Fecitt
D. Furrell
B. Grimes
W. A. Gould
F. Gardiner
B. P. Gibson
H. Henry
D. Grant
A. St. Clair Galvin
J. H. Harvey
H. H. Hinton
L. H. Hackett
C. Heddell
W. J. Harding
A. D. Hamilton
R. P. Jensen
F. W. Jenkins
I). Kannar
S. P. Livingstone
A. Laner
E. L. Livermore
G. Lewis
G. Laster
J. T. Litt
N. H. McMillen
IJ. Y. V. MacDonald
R. McDonald
D. C. McDonald
S. B. Marsden
J. Me Glynn
J. M. McFarlane
H. Mitchell
R. D. McGee
W. Miller
R. S. Mara
T. Norris
T. Noakes
J. Owens
C. Osmond
T. Pender
H. G. Pavey
J. Parker
H. Parker
W. Ritchie
G. Richards
L. Say
E. Shoobridge
N. Sexton
F. Sharp
A. Scott
R. Shepherd .
J. Stoker
W. H. Spicer
H. E. Smart
R. L. Stormont
V. G. Tracey
J. Taylor
C. Taylor
S. Ward
S. J. Willis
J. Wills
T, Williamson
“O” Company.
A.-Capt. J. C. Wilson
Lieut. D. T. Moore
Secd.-Lieut. T. L. Gadell
Color-Sgt. W. B. Phipps
Sgt. H. Shooter
L. D. Sheppard
W. N. Giblett
S. W. Garnham
Lance-Sgt. E. J, Wolseley
Cpl. G. E. Nash
J. H. Matthews
E. G. Cunningham
K. Robertson
Private G. Almond
J. A. H. Annetts
G. Atkins
W. A. Bourke
R. W, Bull
R. M. Bereidge
J. J. Bourke
T. Beresford
C. Bourke
A. Bleazhy
B. A. Budd
A. Burrows
W. H. Bryant
A. Bone
G. H. Buckley
V. D. H. Campbell
G. Cruikshank
W. Carter
W. C. Croscombe
T. Carter
E. H. Cheal
L. Chaplin
F. W. Davey
L. E. Dunford
H. A. De Launey
H. J. H. Hamilton
Eliott.
W. H. Etchell
E. O. Evans
F. R. Fleming
J» H. Ford
S. Franks
A. H. Freeman
J. Gallacher
A. Guy
J. G. Graham
T. B. Godart
W. A. Howitt
W. Hardie
G. Hugman
L. C. Hammond
A. W. Heathcote
E. Hockey
H. T. Harris
W. Hill
W. Hunter
W. H. Jackson
F. Gr. Jewell
F. G. Kennewell
C. H. Kahle
W. F. Kluth
J. A. Kennedy
F. Kelly
W. Leach
A. J. Little
K. E. Long worth
W. Lukeman
L. W. Memorey
F. W. Matthews
C. E. Maltby
A. E. Meggy
H. C. Mclnenery
J. McGraith
W. H. Newbury
W. Nicholls
C. J. O’Brien
H. O’Sullivan
F. Oliver
A. V. Peile
L. Penney
E. W. Patton
V. B. Perkins
A. Price
R. Roberts
H. C. P. Roberts
S. M. Ray
A. J. Swain
J. R. Skinner
D. H. Souter
F. G. Simpkins
J. Spalding
W. Thomson
J. H. Thompson
W. E. H. R. Thompson
J. W. Thomson
P. Vile
A. E. Varcoe
L. A. Watson
H. Walton
E. C. Wennerborn
S. L. Watsford
E. R. Wilson
M. H. Whit©
R, P. Whit
La A. Walsh
M. J. Tessmer


J. B. Wicks
S. .Jones
F. Perkins
J. P. Sands
A. E. Vile
J. Flynn
S. C. Templeton
J. A. McLennan
F. J. Lynch
M E" Company.
€apt. T. 0. Smith
Lieut, K. J. Hinde
Lieut, J. E. Barlow
Color-Sgt. A. McDermid
Sgt. C. C. Turner
R. E. F. Pinkstone
C. M. O. White
G. A. Henderson
Cpl. P. I. Hughes
R. T. Dixon
J. Manning
A. B. Lush
Bugler J, R. Spencer
W. Ford
Private J. J. Allan
G. Bettridge
J. Bull
W. J. Bailey
A. W. Baker
T. Blackburn
J. Brinkman
B. Beal
R. M. Bernay
J. O. Buxton
E. C. Chute
C. Combe
C. Cummings
R. T. Cosgrove ,
R. A. Calloway
E. Carle
D. Campbell
P. G. O. Douglas
W. Y. Doodson
Y. A. Bruce
L. J. Duncan
W. C. Downer
R. Docker
J. A. Eichler
M. B. Elder
W. D. Flannery
W. E. Fowles
R. Forrest
P. Forrester
C. W. Fisher
H. Fahey
J, Fad
T. K. Giles
J. W. Garden
C. M. Geddes
C. H. Grey
S. S. Garrard
P. A. Gould
R. L. Graham
W. B. Hatton
W. FI. Harford
P, F. Harty
A. Hallam
H. Haulon
W. G. Henry
E. R. Henry
E. E. Herring
T. G. Hoskins
C. T. Horan
E. C. Hamonet
J. Hamilton
F. Harrison
J. Jamieson
F. B. Johnson
R. K. Lambert
L. B. Lipninan
R. Lanson
F. W. Logan
L. Linn
S. J. Lake
W. Laffan
C. E. Morgan
M. M. Mulcahy
J, A. Morrison
W. J. Morrice
H. G. McFadgen
M. Mcßamara
A. McKay
T. A. McGuirk
W. V. McCann
J. McElroy
A. Mullen
J. F. Raughton -
Y. J. Pinkstone
A. W. F, Phillips
W. J. Perkins
C. A- Pritchard
J. M. Roberts
F. P. Sherman
W. H. Simon
W. J. Shaw
F. H. Senkup
Y. Strong
J. F. Stevenson
E. J. Smalley
J. A. Sire .
C. C. Scott
R. Thorpe
J. C. Traynor ■
G. F. Tudelham
T. Watson
E. J. Wilkinson -
W. J. White
C, R. White
W. Ward
H. Woodruff
E. Whittaker
H. F. C. Wincer
C. A. Waeton
S. H. V. White
H. R. Daws
I. Walls
A. E. Turner
L. P. Walker
“F” Company.
Lieut. R. Bums
Lieut. C. B. Carter
Lieut. W. C. Seeker
Color-Sgt. A. M. D. ■
Bloydes
Sgt. H. G. Howes
J. Bead
J. T. Philpot
M. H. Stewart
Cpl. W. H. C. Rose
A. W. Gillett
A. G. Edwards
R. W. Rosser
W. M. Maxwell
Bugler A. R. Dawson
J. Fitzsimmons
Private F. W. Archer
B. F. Aspinall
W. F. Allen
J, Ballantyre
J. Bottomley
M. H. Berryman
W. Buckley
W. H. Burton
J. S. Murray-Cowper
A. F. Buffett
W. G. Brennan
H. Baker
G. E. Bodley
P. C. Bates
F. C. Boland
R. Cox
K. R. Cribb
A. J. Champion
R. G. Cleland
J. F. Cavanagh
W. J. Carney
M. M. Charlton
J. W. Colless - '
C. W. Benzing.
W. H. Davies
T. H. Evans -
T. W. Earnshaw
H. H. Brekson


E. Terr
W. H. R. Gimbert
C. F. Graff
J. Gordon
T. E. Gill
S. A. Hayman
E. L. Hooper
J. A. Hamilton
J, P. Hobbs
R. A. Humphreys
H, Hoy
J. Head
A. Hine
W. A, Hitchenor
O. H. Hutton
I). Joyce
H. J. Judd
M. E. Wells
H. E. Elbel
P. James
E. A. Kershaw
L. Levy
G. Loader
R. I. Moore
V. Munn
S. W. Murray
G. A. Morris
S. G McGill
G. Miller
P. McEarlean
R. A. Meech
IST. Murray
S. H. Mapp
J, R. McKnight
O. M. McDonald
R. McGregor
P. J. O’Brien
C. J. B. O’Brien
J. F. Pearce
A. G. Powys
C. Park
J. E. Portiels
L. B, Pollard
F. C. Pratt
A. C. Robertson
S. V. Roberts
T. S. Rudkin
A. A. Ruttie
F. Reynolds
A. W. Reid
J. Squires
S. J. Scott
V. E. Smythe
H. A. Smythe
J. R. Simpson
R. Smith
S. J. Simpson
T. T. Sweeney
H. S. Smith
J. W. Sheermer
R. Sweeney
R. A. McMillan
W. H. Thompson
F. Tymms
E. Teague
J. M. Voss
, S. F. P. White
R. Williams
H. Winslett
S. W. Wilson
P. C. Whitty
H. C. Whitten
A. H. Walker
G R. Wadie
L. B. Wilcock
D. Young
“G” Company.
Capt. J. L. Chester
Lieut. E. G. Goldring
Secd.-Lieut. E. Macfarlane
Color-Sgt. P. Goldenstedt
Sgt. T. E. McGowan
R. D. Jones
L. Hamilton
J. Bailey
Cpl. W. E. Campbell
T. J. Hobut
S. Power
G. Gray
Private E. L. Highnett
C. L. Sturt
R. Humberstone
W. Mann
C. W. Walter
R. R. Ammersley
B. C. Archer
W. H. Adams
S. Bums
G. Bushell
J. H. Bryant
G F. C. Bromwich
J. Bell
E. W. Bell
V. J. Barkell
A. Bosworth
E. J. Blacklock
W. H. Botfield
J. J. Burke
M. Casey
H. S. Chapman
S. A. Cliff
R. T. Cornels on
W. E. Crook
W. Chandler
J. W. Darling
W. Delaney'
J. R. Diggins
W. Donnelly
B. A. Douglas
C. E. Dunn
G. Dalstrom
M. W. Day
T. Daly
J. T. Dmican
J. F. Eade
W. J. Farquahson
J. A. Kennedy
E. D. T. Pearson
T. P. Flaherty
A. T. George
W. F. Gibson
A. B. C. Fairweather-
O. T. Biddings
H. G. Hansen
D. Hartley
A. C. Hand
F. G. Hallett
W. J. Heylen
L. G. Holemsby
H. Hague
M. J. J. Hogan
H. E. Hickson
J. S. Hagon
A. A. Hocking
A. J. Jacobs
H. W. Jackson.
A. G. Johnson
T. R. Johnson
F. J, Jarvis
W. C. Kohne
J. R. Keats
S. J. Kennedy
G. Kay
L. W. Miller
H. Masurier
W. N. Maher
J. G. Munro
R. A. Morris
J. H. Mort
A. Maxwell
P. Murphy
G. Mclver
R. A. McLean
M. M. McGrath
S. McAuley
L. MacLachlan
E. C. McDonald
S. Price
F. Prutton
J. Prince
W. J. Piddick
J. Quinn
D. C. Rand
G. Riddle
W. Russell.


C. PL E. Ray
A, Rodgers
E. C. H. Ritchie
J. S. Sloane
A. PL Sloane .
F. E. Smith
T. R. McLintock
F. Summersath
R, C Simons
J. Sharpe
J. PL Schombey
F. Tamblyn
J. G. Thew
H. C. Trim
E. Thomas
F. Taubman
S. P. Vagg
J. F. Ward
R. Wycherley
J. Wilson
F. York
“H” Company.
Capt. W. B, Douglas
Lieut, G. E. McDonald
Lieut. A, T. Butler
Color-Sgt. ‘D. . M.
McGregor
Sgt. W. W. Cavill
W. R. Harris
A. W. McKennon
C. R. Kellaher
Lance-Sgt. D. Hall
Cpl. H. Hallan
C. Blumer
J. H. Crane
E. W. G. Wren
Lance-Cpl. J. J. Button
A. Cummins
Bugler I. Hamilton
Pioneer H. Baldwin
Signaller W. J. Cannon
F. Hudson
J. C. Smillie
A. White
E. S. Wright
Cook E. O. Morris
S. Bushell
Private J. C. Atkinson
C. J. Haan
J. Bubb
G. S. Blumer
, , W. Bell
J. Byrne
R. Bntterworth
H. B. Belling
J. Bourke
H. H. Churchill
W. Chalk ,
H. J. Costello
W. Callaghan
H. Copper
P. G. Collins
R. Doherty
J. Donnelly
J. Dybald
F. C. Dye
T, Eagleshan
R. East
H. W. Faw lo v
J. T. Eook
L. R. Farrands
W. Granger
J. Green
G. R. Green
J. Groves
F. B. Gurney
R. L. Goldsmith
A. Holme
J. H. Hillier
A, T. Haywood
J. K. Hiiton
G. Hughes
J. Howard
J, Hughes
J, Jackson
J. King
E. Knell
H. Klincker
A. Kirkwood
J, I. Keenan
W. A. Locksley
T. Leary
M. Lavelle
W. J. Mantle
J. Macpherson
W. McL. McDonough
A. J. March
P. Me Nam ai* a
J. R. Maples den ■
E. B. Mills
C. J. Mills
A. Nash
B. J. Morris
D. J. Kewell
G. Kelson
0, Holas
T. Phillip
R. Philips on
W. J. Power
D. L. Ryan
W. Rice
L. Robinson
T. Rennie
G. Rowe
T. Ruttle
A. H. Seecombe
R. Scott
J. Stephenson
G. Stevenson
B. C. Smith
J. P. Sullivan
F. Stanewell
J, Towens
J. Thomas
J. J. Turner
G. Terry
B. R. Worthington
W. Worth
S. E. Ward
A.. J. Ghalker
JV. H. K. Wheatley
H. Williamson
D. Walker
H. Young ■
TV. B, Dorrington
A,. L. Lane
S. G. Kerris on
J. King
W.. R. Northhill
J. C. Eldridge
F. <1 White
J. H. Phelps
4th Battalion.
Regimental
Staff.
Lieut.-Col. A. J, Onslow
Thompson
Major C. M. McNaughton
Capt. I. G. Maekay
Lieut Q.M. W. T. Mc-
Donald
R.S.M. (W. 0.) H. C.
Pearce
Q.M.S. J. McLeod
O.R.S. J. M. Muir
Color-Sgt. A. Stenson
Sgt.-Gook E. James
Armr.-Sgt. H. B. Pod-
more
Transport,
Lieut. €. G. Milne
Sgt. S. H. Wade
Driver C. F. R. McMahon
F. Mathews
J. O’ Connor
J. Jeffries
G. Davies
J. J. Ryan
A. W. Downes ,


EL W. Kemp
G, H. Kennedy
W. J. Kelly
A. W. Yates
J. De Water
J. Wylie
Machine Gun
Section.
Lieut. D. R. Brown
Sgt. G. J. Frith
Cpl. J. Peebles
Private R. Barrie \
G. M. S. Brain J
N. Edwards
J. Herbert
Ye L. Hyndes
F. Leonard
C. Madden
J. Maloney
J. Moore
E. C. Nutt all
H 8 E. E. Preece
G. Thomas
H. Sykes
R. M. Warner
Signallers.
Secd.-Lieut. M. P. Smith
S.S.M. J. Sloan
Lance-Sgt. P. C. Reid
Lance-Cpl. H. A. Mann
G. H. Campey
C. Hensler
C. L. Tickner
Cpl. R. D. Orr
Private F. W. Clarke
R. W. Craig
E. D. Gow
W. J. McMann
A. Libbesson
J. Richardson
H. C. Veness
F. E. Watson
“A” Company.
Major D. A. Storey
Lieut, J, Osborne
Lieut, J, D, Christie
Color-Sgt . G. W. Clark
Sgt. IST. Gillies
H. Bilbey
H. Griffiths
Lance-Sgt. G. A. Fuller
Cpl. A. C. Anderson
R. E. Brew
L. A. Sherburne
W. W. Ramsay
Cpl.-Bugler N. Goldwater
Drmr. H. M. Eadie
Private W. A. Aiken
W. H, Anderson
T. Bann
G. G. Bell
P. J. Birnie
H. H. Birt
H. S. Bolden
G. H. Brown
W. Burns
A. D. Campbell
G, Cobley
H. Cohen
L. W. G. Coleman
G. Craig
K. C. Craig
L. P. Curnow
C. B. Currington
J. S. Daly
A. Davidson
H. Doney
W. H. Dudley
S. McP. Dykes
■ L. Edwards
G. D. Eyles
E. L. Fitzgerald
T. H. Flux
R. McL. Ford
J, H. Godfrey
W. J. Goode
T. Gray
N. E. Harris
G. Hill
G. P. Hockey
T. E. Holcombe
H. J. Hudson
E. V. Hughes
C. M. Humphries
J. P. Jenkin
D. T. Johns
S. G. Jury
J. M. *G. Keen
P. B. Kirkwood
T. E. Lamont
T. F. Lett
O. Y. C. Linguist
A. McLeod
J. L. McMaster
R. Mac Niven
L. J. McPherson
W. R. Malcolm
F. R. Meale
E. Middleton
R. Miller
J. A. Mills
T. Mills
G. E. Mure
J. Nagel
C. Nightingale
G. C. Norman
A. G. Nugent
G. E. Nurcombe
G. Paris
A. F. Patterson
J. E. Patterson
R. I. Penman
J. Porter
N. Powell
R. J. Quigley
H. Richards
C. H. Rosewear
P. E. Round
R. C. C. Scot Skirring
E. Scrimshaw
J. Selewood
G. B. G. Simpson
J. H. Sharp
T, Sinclair
G. Smith
W. F. Smith
M. Stackpool
J, Steenson
J. Stewart
R. H. Tanner
E. Tansley
W. L. Tawse
C. S. Thompson
A. Turner
A.' B. Wadsworth
Y. Watts
J. Waugh
J. S. Weir
C. H. Widborne
J, White
J. Y. Wilson
H. E. Woodman
R. Wright
V. Armstrong
C. V. M. Besanko
C. A. Bolden
C. V. Ryrie
A. Yates
J. R. Sanderson
L. H. West
J. P. White
A. Finnelly
F. Holmes
“B” Company,
Gapt. R. J. Clayton
Lieut, E. V. Stacey
Lieut, A, 1. Giles
Color-Sgt. S. H. Defries


Sgt. C. W. Foster
J. Watt
H. 0. Hewlett
J. Naghten
Cpl. L. J. Honey
L. H. Lane
C. McCathie
Lance-Cpl. R. J. Brown
Pay Cpl. S. F. Spratt
Private M. A . Anderson
E. St; L. Atkins
J. Adam
A. L. N. Atkinson
J. Ashworth
J. W. Oilward
J. A. Beil
G. F. Blake
L. V. Bartlett
C. V. R. Bush
A. Browne
H. W. Berman
S. Bennett
D’A. L. Brennan
R. W. Bonnor
A. De C. Blackmore
E. G. Brigden
R. E. Baileyy
H. J. Chidley
W. S. Gotten
S. Coffey
W. H. Chapman
G. H. Curtis
A. Challoner
L. Cormick
E. B. Dunne
. G. H. Dali
J. P. Dee
H. S. Drysdale
H. Dean
C. R. Duke
G. Davies
W. Dunham
P. W. Edmiston
J. W. Edwards
J. J. Folwell
Patrick Feehan
R. P. Fyson
A. Fearnley
G. H. Green
A. G. Gordon .
E. J. Glasscock
H. Gibson
F. M. Gill
W. P. Horsman
.A. E. Hennesey
F. Horne
W. Hartley
F. J. Hall
J. Harrison
W. D. Houghton
J. E. Hanson
A. S. How
F. W. Henslock
C. O. Kelly
E. H. Kirk
D. E. Kinipple
A. G. Lohse
C. Lord
H. J. Millett
A. McDonald
D. Mathieson
E. McGeown
C. R. Mark
J. J. McCormick
J. P. Maher
V. F. Marshall
W. McDonald
H. W. H. Mackay
E. R. Mason
H. Naught on
D O’Connell
C. A. Price
L. Paul
F. G. Quinn
H. A. Richards
S. S. L. Randell
J. O. Roberts
W. Reakes
R. Rowan
J, Ryan
B. G. Shaw
W. F. Smith
H. H. Smith
F. A. Skidmore
N. H. Sheridan
T. C. Somerford
F. H. E. Snowden
R. S. C. Tripp
W. A. Tebbutt
S. Taylor
A. Urquhart
H. Woodrow
J. H. Walton
F. Willis
L. C. A. Warr
A. Waters
S. Williamson
J. Ward
D. J. Young
J. L. McLellan
He Matthews
L. Poole
P, H. Parker
P, Goughian
He Wilkinson
“C” Company,
Lieut. A. J, G. Simpson
Lieut. E. A. Lloyd
Lieut. P. V. F. Turver
Color-Sgt. J. Mitchell
Sgt. H. T. Danson
J, J. Connor
S. F. Freeman
W. E. Oakes
Cpl. H. Kirby
J, ■ Chandler
D. Erwin
A. R. B. Ferguson
Pay Cpl. G. F. Simmonds
Bugler J, Dennis
Private R. Arnold
D. O. Bacon
J. Booth
M. K. Beaner
W. T. Bateman
C. S. Brittendon
J. Barkell
G. W. Bennett
J, H. Booth
L. C. Y. Clay
F. N. Cook
F. G. Carnell
J. P. Curran
J. Cuthbertson
R, S. Cranmer
A. H. Clarke
E. Costin
E. Cusack
J. H. Clancy
H. R. Cox
R. T. Coawn
G. A. Collins
B. Dennison
W. Davies
S. G. Deering
H. A. Dosseter
G. T. Day <
A. L. de Vine
A. Evans
E. Edmondson
N. D. Grant
H. H. Goldsworthy
R. J, Gibbs
C. J. Haooke
H. J. Hickson]
E. D. Hanmmod
R. Hastings
A. Hillas
W. Hogan
N. F. Holmes
G. Hanslow 1
H. H. Howard
E. G. Ireland


W. S. Johnston
G. W. James
F. E. Lee
T. Langston
S. G. Molloy
A : . G. McKern
W. McGilvey
H. L. McKern
L. Mulligan
R. J. McHenry
J. May
L. Molloy
I. G. Macalister
J. K. MacLennan
L. W. McKay
J. Ffolan
J. P. O’Farrell
J. Ormsby '
H. Pearce
R. M. Pearce
W. J. Pearce
G. Poulson
C. R. Peat
C. Quinn
T. W. Ryan
W. G. Robinson
A. R. Robinson
P. L. Reardon
W. L. Ried
J. Robertson
E. Roche
A. Sledge
A. H. Smith
W. Smith
W. Swingier
H. E. Smith.
Rr Sower by
W. E. Skidmore
J. Sullivan
G. F. Thomas
E. R. Tozer
E. J. Turner
H. S. Walters
V. Warner
J. Williamson
F. A. Wright
M. Welch
R. Wilson
S. J. Wells
J. Westcot
J. Ward
J. S. Watson
M. R. Williamson
G. H. Murdoch
M. A. Barton
G. W. Parsons
L, J. Shepherd
E. Ward
A. S. Edwards
J. Buick
C. S. Foster
J. Beattie
J. McGhee
“D” Company.
Capt. A. H. Scott
Lieut. J. S. Anderson ■
Sub-Lieut. W. R. Ffreneh
Color-Sgt. A. W. Bowers
Sgt. J. Lees
B. I. Easton
R. Crawford
J. F. Walsh
Cpl. A. E. Lane
H. R. Brown
R. W. Harslett
F. Bey
Pay-Cpl. L. A. Cnlpan
Private S. A. dams on
G. Andrews
R. A. Anderson
E. J. Anderson
F. Anderson
J. Brown
R. Braby
V. V. Brown
J, L. Brown
A. Ball
X H. Carr
W. Cooper
S. G. Chapman
J. Cronin
J. C. Coate
B. Conroy
S. Bennis
R. L. Bouglas
G. F. Be Witt
T. C. Briscoll
J. T. Boherty
J. Baniels
C. Bavies
R. Bodds
R. J. Baley
A. S. Ellwood
F. W. Easton
C. A. Gilmour
A. FT. Green
E. S. Grace
A. T. Goldie
H. Gibson
E. P, Green
A. A. Gillies
W. J. Hutchinson
W. S. Hickson
C. W. Hooper
R. W. Hardcastle
J. B. Higginbottom
J. W. Hale
J. Hamilton
E. N. Johnson
FT. A. Jacobs
J. R. Kennis
C. S. Kenyon
E. C. Lewis
A. H. Livingstone
H. J. Law
R. Long-
B. Long
H. L. Malcolm
L. G. Matthews
F. C. Messer
J. J. Murray
H. S. Middlehurst
C. W. Meeley
J. Magquire
J. T. Martin
L. F. Mobilia
J. W. McGennan
E. McMillan
F. L. Percy
C. Peterson
W. Phillips
R. G. Piper
C. Regan
J. S. Roydhouse
E. F. Rosberg
H. J. Renny
J. W. Syme
L. Stanford
P. E. South
W. P. Simpson
B. J. Shakespear
M. Shields
A. W. Spurr
S. Savage
E. H. Taylor
A. W. Vickery
H. Wrigley
W. - Walsh
H. W. Williams
B. Williams
H. G. H. Wilkinson
H. A. Wainwright
P. A. Woodward
J. W. Wouters
C. Wilson
H. Whitehead
A. Smith
W. FT. FTorwell
W. Bode
W. FTorman
W. T. Lawrence
W. F. Bass
A. W. Love
R. Blair
W. A. Beach


m
The Gun below is cleverly concealed in the usual sly German way, while the man in observation above is directing the fire.
[Kindly lent by the “Sydney Mail.”]
Observation for Gun=Fire.




S. H. Grice
A. Browe
J. Durham
D. MacDonald
G. Lebbesson
W. C.- Brown
S. H. Beer
F. C. Hailwood
S. Compton
B. W. Criag
J. B. Dixon
F. Schembi
C. F. Bout
D. Dease
M. A. Drice
T. Poggea
H. G. Braden
C. H. Currall
“E” Company.
Capt. S. Milson
Lieut. S, M. Beecher
Secd-Lieut. S. L. Milligan
Color-Sgt. P. G. Miles
Sgt. F. Taplin
J, Howarth
B. A. Macalpine
E. A. Wood
Cpl. A. W. Burns
W. McKenzie
B. T, Hodge
Lance-Cpl. G. J. Hughes
Bugler J. Campbell
S. B. Palver
Private L. C. Atkinson
D. A. C. Barr
G. Barrett
Cpl. W. Bastock
B. P. Guthrie
Private N. H. Blarney
W. H. S. Blair
J, J. Bluett
P. Buchholz
T. S. Butterfield
A. Bracey
J. M. Campbell
C. G. Campion
J. Caldwell
A. Carr-Boyd
T. T. Cartnell
W. Chandler'.
A. Chapman
A. Crakor
W. P. Crowfoot
G. Coates
P. Cockfield
E. K. S. Cox
M S. Cox
J. T. Collins
J. A. Davidson
M. D. Dillon
A. B. Drew
E. Dunshea
C. M. Dukes
T. Edmonds
A. E. Evans
J, F. Ewen
H. Faulkner
T. Farndell
T. Fox
G. Forster
B. V. Fusedale
A. Gammie
J. Glanister
M. Gordon
W. J, Gowans
J. Hainey
T. Harness
E. Harris
A. G. Harrison
H. Hardwick
W. A. Head
F. Henson
A. Howe
G. D. G. Hume
H. P. Huon
C. D. Huon
T. J. Hyland
M. E. Jessop
P. Jones
B. Jones
H. McY. Keith
C. B. Leeke
S. McArthur
E. McCormack
M. McDonald
J. McEvoy
M. McKenzie
H. A. McLachlan
W. G. Martin
F. Marvell
W. Monaghan
C. G. Moore
P. Morrissey
J, F. Murphy
H S. Parkinson
F. B. Penie
J. A. Pritchard
P. E. K. Bound
G. A. Bowley
J. P. Sands
F. H. Savill
G. L. Scott
F. A. Smith
F. Short
W. G. G. Simpson
J. Spencer
W. Scott
J. Snainee
G. Spiers
H. Surguy
B. T. Sevann
W. L. Swankie
A. H. Turnbull
J. Turnbull
V. Turnbull
A. E. Turner
H. Vivian
A. E. Walker
D. Williams
A. S. Wiles
C. Wishaw
T. H. Whiear
J. Woodward
G. H. Curzon
W. Connaffy
W. Franklin
A. E. Jeffries
V. S. W. McCreath
J. Bose
“F" Company.
Lieut. J. K. G. Magee
Lieut. R. J. A. Massie
Lieut. A. R. Edwards
Color-Sgt. J. Howe
Sgt. H. G. Harris
H. E. Morrogh
A. C. Chappell
J. Johnstone
Cpl. C. Boss
J. G. Steber
D. McLennan
A. Wilson
C. E. Bennett
Lance-Cpl. J. H. Hill
W. D. Boberts
C. S. Allerdice
A. N. Hamilton
Bugler E. A. Clinch
Piper B. McKenzie
Private W. Arscott
M. De Hirla
V. Ayers
J. B. Atkinson
W. B. Adams
H. M. Buckley
C. L. Brown
L. Bell
B. Benson
H. I. Brown
J. P. Broderick
J. Briddick
C. M. B. Bosward
B. Bradshaw


J. Ball
E. H Churcher
A. W. Be Carteret
F» M. Coxon
H, E. Cartliew
P. B. Clifton
C. J. Bitchburn
F. Buffy
S. I. Ellis
W. J. Edwards
W. J. Easthope
R. J. Ellis
T. B. Faulds
A® E. B. Fender
H. T. Foran
Freeman
J. C. Gough
W. J. Garvey
H, W. Gammore
G. Gregg
A. W. Gritton
A. F. E. Green
T. Gartung
E. K. Gillies
A. F. Hamlyn
S. J. Harmer
H. Gall
L. Hyland
G. Howard
J. E. Hillis
A. J. Hutchinson
F. Hardwick
G. B. Humphreys
W. Hiam
C. A. Handley
H. Gancock ,
E. A. H. Hughes
W. Irwin
J. S. Jenkinson
P, Kaiser
F. Larg
J. Littler
E 0. Ling
B. K. McKenzie
A. A. "Mcßonald
E. B. McEvoy
W. B. McNeil
B. J. Marshall ~
F. Mann
J. F. Marshall
A. V. Morehouse
E. M. Miles
H. H. Miller
J. Nicoll
W. L, Nicholson
R. Owen
J. O’Brien
A. Patterson
R. R. Passau
J. R. Hussell
B. Keens
F. W. Medhurst
C. F. Williams
A. Walters
W. White
A. T* Wood
W. Wainwright
S. E. J. Milson
G. L. Haining
M. Murphy
R. E. Starkey
A. Spicer
G. Slingsby
J. M. Spain
H. T. Shaw
T. Shaw
R. Thomas
J. C. Watson
R. W 9 Riddle
I. H. Roberts
J. R. Russell
J. B. Riddell
S. E. Smith
R. Stewart
T. Sullivan
B. J. Stockbridge
Signaller A. S. Allen
J. H. Solomons
O* F. J. Wolff
J* J. Jones
“G” Company.
Gapt. J. Heane
Lieut. Chard
Lieut. D. P. French
Color-Sgt. V. A. Tuck
Sgt. R. Watson
M. J. H. Saunders
W. H. B. Booth
T. R. L. Higgins
Cpl. J. B. Taylor
E. E. Barker
J. O’ Sullivan
R. E. Reid
Pay-Cpl. A. S. Caldwell
Bugler A. J. Slater
Private J. F. Andrews
F. R. Arnold
B. B. Brett
W. G. Burtenshaw
W. Babbridge
W. P. Beales
A. H. Barrett
C. M. Buckland
E. M. Corrigan
J. Collins
W. C. Cooper
J. H. Clampett
W. Cliffe
S. B. Corby
A. Campbell
A. H, G. Curry
S. Clarksen
P. Connors
C. S. Cook
A. C. Clark
M. Clark
B. J. Benver
W. H. Bickens
H. Eagles
C. W. Eastaugh
A.
J.^Parnsworth
L. Pullager
C. A. Fisher
E. Fontaine
R. B. Gove
H. B. Harrison
R. Howard
G. L. Harris
P. Hawarth
F. Herron
W. Hoare
W. J. Harkin
R. Jones
A. C, Johnson
A. S. Gess
R. B. Gleason
A. R. Greig
C. Grice
W. Gaskill
B. Grant
R. R. Gilks
B. W. Griffiths
N. C. Hebdon
J, Honan
W. M. Jones
A. E. Keppie
H. J. Keetch
H. M. Kenip
J. P. Kenny
B. Knowles
H. W. Lewis
A. Le Fevre
R. Macßonald
Jj. S. Mountain
J. Miles
V. H. Mercer
H. T, Murr
Je J» Moyland
P. Montague
H. McCawley
W. Noble
C. G. Nankivill
H. O’Brien
A. T. Osborne


W. M. O’ Connor
W. Pouget
F. R. Preddy
G. H. Flows
H. Piggott
W. R. Procter
J 8 C. Rawson
E. H. A. Patrick
W. H. Prichard
G. F. Richardson
E. Robson
H. Raine
B. J. Ross
F. W. Ridgway
J. A. Smith
H. Steam
G. Sykes
C. E. Scott
J. Spratt
E. H. Stone
S. S. Sisley
W. Stewart
B. A. Sinclair
C. E. Sanderson
H. C. Stapleton
A. G. Till
E. A. Tomlinson
H. J. Warren
G. T. Whiteley
J. Watt
E. C. Wilson
W. T. Williams
A. H. Willis
C. Warne.
“H” Company.
CapL C. S. Coltman
Lieut* R* T, P. Seldon
Lieut* F. Fanning*!
Sgt. S. H. Nichols
W. Me I. Pitt
W. Wright
F S. Price
Cpl. M. Booling
E. Lucas
G. S. MacQuarie
L. Noonan
C. F. Lawler
Pay-Cpl. A. R. H. Wright
Bugler G. Hewitt
B. Macßonald
Private A. J. Archibald
A. H. Anderson
J. Acton
F. Brown
P. J. Broadway
W. Bolter
P, Brennan
G. Bolton
B. Bathurst
W. Ball
R. C. Bright
B. Brinkworth
G. Bunn
C. E. Bock
G. Benns
N. Brand
S. Bar tie
A. B. Campbell
G. R. Campbell
W. Campbell
B. P. Clare
W. R. Cummings
K. Chambers
M. L. Colless
C. Clifford
A. J. Cooper
J. Crabtree
R. Christien
N. E. Clout
S. Corless
A. E. Chamberlain
R. P. Buff
W. S. Eiles
E. L. Elliott
A. C. Fuller
A. Ferguson
N. A. Gribble
L. G. Gorman
T. E. Goodali
P. Hannak
W. J. Hall
A. Holt
H. S. Hoken
J. B. Haney
W. Hurley
S. G. Henderson
J. T. Hutson
E. Hides
G. R. Hayward
J. Hodgson
R. H. Heaslip
T. G. Hollands
H. Hodgson
H. Hill
J. E. Jones
C. O. Jones
W. J, Kelly
T. B. P. Keary
J. H. Kemp
R. J. Kenny
W. H. Lynch
J. J. Lym
W. Lucas
B. Marshall
A. J. Maurer
P. J. Mulcair
A. P. Mason
C. C. Mauser
H. Macßonald
J. S. McLean
T. Newstead
A. Oswald
F. G. Padden
H. Piggott
F. Parkins
W. E. Richards-
E. J. Robson
E. F. Rowley
G. Robertson
G. A. Robinson
K. Robertson
G. F. Roddis
R. C. Stapleton
E. W. Taylor
H. Tudor
C. Tindall
L. Thomas
W. J. Tonkin
T. J. Thomson
W. E. Upjohn
M. Wilson
N. A. Wilson
G. A. J. West
W. Wilkinson
W. Whitehead,
J. A. Wilson
J. Whalan
G. H. White
J. F. Wilson
F. H. Wade
J, I. Mcßride
W. C. Weston
C. L. Coulson
W. Martin


1st Australian Division Brigade.
No. 1 Field
Engineer Coy.
Major J. P. L. McCall.
Capt. J. M. C. Corlette
Lieut. L. F. Mather
Lieut. M. E. fiiden
Seed.-Lieut. B. J # Dyer
Seed.-Lieut. C. N. R s
Huntley
R.S.M. F. W. Pankin
C.Q.M.S. C. Speckman
O.R.Sgt. A. B. Littler
Sgt. A. Logan
J. Flackfield
F. H. Johnson
C. W. Keyley
W. Wilson
Far.-Sgt. A. H. Lambert
Dpi. J. A. Pasfield
J. Johnstone
P. J. Polley
C. R. C. Lundy
F. T. Meads
F. T. Newson
A. J. MacDonald
.Secd.-Cpl. P. Boardman
R. G. Dobbie
J. H. Downton
J. Hall
D. McLean
E. A. Hudson
H. Farguson
D. Mackay
Lance-Cpl. W. E. Turnley
A. A. B. Baldwin
W. Batten
C. L. Gray
G. C. Wilson
■ J. J. Gough
C. Campbell
A. E. Shoorsmith ,
Lance-Cpl. Driver W.
Francis
H. Blackwell
Trumpeter F. S. Johnson
Shoe-smith J. Longmore
Bugler G. Sullivan
Batman J. M. Louis
W. I. Phillips
W. T. Rice
W J. Walker
H. Wheeler
C. F. Ryan
Driver C. G. Bailey
E. Bergan
E. H. Cooke
W. J, Blattinson
M. A. Clarke
A. J. Currie
O. Gordon
E, E. Hodges
R. T. Jessop
J. R. Hollingsworth
N. McKee
E. MacPherson
H. W. Macklin
P. H. Macauley
J. D. Page
T. Rose
N. Mylecharane
V. Morris
P. R. Thompson
J. Thorman
J. Thurlley
G. H. Turner
K. W. Waterhouse
P. Weatherelt
Driver-Batman R. M.
Weames
Sapper W. P. Allen
J. B. Abel
C. Akins
A. Anderson
J. G. Ashton
F. Atherton
J. M. Atkins
P, O. Ayton
T. Ball
E. C. Banks
G. H. Bird
R. P. Blair
A. Burgess
W. Burnett
N. J. Clansen
L. G. F. Fuller
G. Bygrave
P. J. Carmichael
G. W. Casburn
G. Chisholm
F. R. Cltiett
S. Cook
B. A. Coram
L. R. Cridland
M. Cummings
G. B. Davidson
R. H. Denning
L. P. J. Doyle
T. E. Drane
T. Dunlop
L, Dyson
H. G. Eggleton
R. Elliott
W. Fahey
H. H. Fairnham
A. Finnie
J. E. Fletcher
W. D. Fraser
W. Freebairn
E. F. H. Frirxgs
C. C. Fowle
A. Garden
S. M. Garrett
L. J, Gatty
H. S. Geddes
W. Gibb
F. Groom
S. A. Girdand
W. B. Goodwin
C. G. A. Gough
P. T. Griggs
W. R. Gilchrist
J. M. Hamilton
FT. E. Hartridge
E. O. Hawkes
W. Hay
E. J. Hayes
E. F. Healy
S. Hense
P. F. Hirst
E. H. Hooper
C. W. R. Hewlett
S. L. Hewlett
G. W. Hulme
W. J. Humphreys
J. R. Huntley
J. S. Innes
H. Jackson
J. Jackson
R. Jesson
L. C. Johnstone
P. G. Keig
R. King
S. Lalor
G. W. Lewenden
T. Liddle
T. Lytton
W. McCracken
J. L. McMahon
R. E. McNair
E. Mackinson
S. Mansfield
N. Masters
F. C. Moore
J. H. Moore
E. Murray
H. A. Murray
N. J. Niccol
J. C. Nicholls
A. L. Ogilvie
A. O’ Sullivan


F. B. Oliver
H. Page
C. E. Page
J. R. Pantlin
F. H. Paton
W. G. Pitt
F. Reynolds
W. E. Robertson
F. Rochester
J. Scales
J. Slattery
G. H. Smithwaite
J. Smith
W. Smith
J. D. Spencer
W. Stalland
A. J. Stock
C. C. Stone
W. A. Sutherland
R. Sutton
A. Taylor
E. C. Tubbenhaver
C. D. Tubett
J. L. Waters
F. L. Wells
H. S. White
F. W. Wilmott
S. Wilson
G. E. M. Wood
P. F. Walsh
R. York
L. W. Powell
A. M. O’Brien
G. C. Gear
W. H. P. Williams
W. B. Aitken
D. Clark
T. Cameron
A. W. Girdler
J. Fern
W. Harvey
Army Service Corps.
Headquarters
Company.
Lieut. €. Reynolds
Lieut. E. A, G. Stoker
Lieut. €. A. Fyke
C.Q.M.S. H. J. Howe
Sgt. H. Horne
C. A. Boyd
S. S. Stead
Lance-Segt. H. Y. Bismir©
S.-Sgt. H. K. Cameron
Whl.-S.-Sgt. A. W. Lane
Fr.-Sgt. H. W. Taylor
Cpl. E. F. Vining
W. Cooper
H. J. Costin
E. L. Edgar
J. H. Webb
Saddler-Cpl. W. G.
Richardson
Lance-Cpl. H. Dawkins
W. H. Cole
C. G. Eastes
C. A. Friend
L. W. Griffiths
IST. Mcl. Morris
Private W. H. Brown
E. DeLaney
E. C. Hudson
P. H. Callahan
W. Hew land
H. V. Gundry
S. Honeysett
T. L. Bathurst
F. Kindien
H. J. Pearson
W. C. Davis
■ A- Klein
R. Sneddon
S.-Sth. R. J. Dawson
W. J, Krogh
W. J. Milligan
C. R. Wiley
Driver H. J. Addis
E. H. Ackling
J. W. Aisbett
J. E. Anderson
E. J. Anthon
W. M. Allan
E. J. Beasey
W. Berman
A. H. Bevis
M. J. Broadhurst
R. O. Bruniges
C. A. Carnie
H. W. Carnegie
M. K. Pollings
G. H. Craythorne
C. Chapman
T. Comes
M. Curry
E. J. Dixon
O. B. Dobbs
H. H. Dudley
A. Elliott
A. R. Elliott
B. F. V. Farley
H. Farthing
G. S. Fawcett
E. M. Fawke
W. G. Gildea
O. L. Gosling
C. W. Gregory
R. J. Gray
J. Hadkins
R. C. Hamilton
A. Hannan
C. Hargrave
R. Hann
B. Hillier
C. Hemming
H. S. Jones,.
C. M. Kavanagh
R. C. Lane
R. Learoyd
R. Lynn
A. McDonald
D. F. McKenzie
O. S. McLaren
H. G. Montague
G. W. Morris
L. K. Musgrove
J. R. O’Neill
A. Nicholls
H. V. L. Owen
A. C. Pant on
J. G. G. Patison
H. J. Pelham
H. W. Quiney
W. H. Priestley
J, Regan
H. Ross
J. G. Rudd
G. R. Rogers
F. A. Robinson
H. F. Ridewood
F. V. Saunders
A. E. Sergeant
S. Shaw
H. G. Spicer
C. U. A. Sutton
A. R. Smith
D. W. Thomas
J. H. Turner
K. W. TJrry
L. V. Vico!
J. J. Waide
R. G. Wise
W. E. Whatley
P. H. Wat man
J. T. Wickendon


No. 2 Company.
Capt, E, J, Munro
Lieut, T, C. Millner
Lieut. W. B. Loveridge
Lieut. D, G. McHattie
W.O. R. W. Dewson
C.S.M. W. H. Stokes
S.-Sgt. S. H. Stephenson
A. H., Stevenson
C. A. Osgood
E. H. Wickham
Sgt. J. L. Beaton
Q-M.S. D. J. Anderson
Whl.-Sgt. J. Olding
S.-Sth. R. A. Slattery
C. S. Smith
L. F. Dallas
H. Roberts
E. Cummins
Cpl. G. Nicholson
R. D. Johnson
B. K. Young
R. Campbell
M. Dixon
S. E. Yeomans
H. McKenzie
Lance-Cpl. N. R. Plomley
A. Malpage
K. M. Me Mur trie
Dr. Lance-Cpl. J. T. C.
Moore
A. Woolman
Tptr. A. Riley
Whr.-Pte. T. H. McCaf-
frey
Sdr.-Pte. E. A. Beplate
Private H. Brook
W, Bryce
J. A. Buchanan
J. A. Clark
W. Duncan
W. A. Francis
R. Hawkins
H. T. Hoghind
H. E. Kent
A. R. Kendrick
J. F. Millins
C. P. Rutledge
J. L. Smith
S. L. Simpson
J. N. Rowe
H. L. Wall
A. C. Wills
Driver A. L. K, Adam
T. J. Ashley
V. D. Atkins
J. W. Barron
J. Bentley
R. B. Bennett
W. Bish
A. F. Brown
G. A. Caw than
S. S. Cooke
B. Cowell
S. F. J. Gowen
W. A. Cox
E. J. Cockrane
G. D. Crawford
B. Davies
C. Dindy
A. Dennis
J. W. Donnelly
F. J. Dyer
N. C. R. Farquhar
G. J. Firmin
F. Floras
W. O. France
J. Fry
R. J. Freeman
F. J. Garland
A. H. Gain
E. Gordon
F. A. Grimsted
P. J. Hampson
G. A. Hall
H. W. Hart
T. Ingram
F. A. Johnson
J. A. Keay ■
H. Kean
J. E. Kilpatrick
R. Law
E. E. Lee
A. J. Lodhen
R. Mayman
J. Mapp
J. McFarlane
H. P. McElvogne
R. McGillivray
N. T. Mulholland
W. J. Mcllveen
G. C. McKay
J. T. Nolan
J. E. Nunns
A. O. O’Dell
C. D. Robertson
M. Rogers ■
A. J. Rose
S. Shaw
S. A. Shearer
E, Sheehy
S. C. Simmonds
F. D. Smith
V. Somers
J. A. D. Sommers
J. C. Swanston
J. P. Swanston
P. R. Slaiter
A. St. George
L, G. Tarrant
J. G. Thomas
F. C. Tedder
I. Tindall
R. Tucker
C. Yarley
H. Walmsley
H. R. Waterhouse
G. Westbrook
G. W. Westbrook
H. J. Williams
C. V. Widdy
C. C, Woodward
1st Field Ambulance.
Lieut.-Col. B. J. New-
mareh
Major R. J. Millard
Major E. S. Stokes
Capt. M. R. G. Poate
Capt. J. B. St. V. Welch
Capt. L. W. Dunlop
Capt. C. E. Wassell
Capt. A. J. Asplnall
Capt. W. E. Kay
Lieut, and Q.M.E. St, J.
Beers
“ A ” Section.
W.O. W. Nive
Sgt. L. H. Griffiths
F. Keating
L. J, Meagher
W. Poole
J. A. Smith
A. H. Lawrence
Lance-Sgt. R, Barnes
Gpl. N. J. Clifton
J. Graham
G. Donaldson
Bugler F. G. Carlton
Batman C. P. Barton
J. H. Downes
A. R. Fleming
P. J. Sullivan
Private C. Abbott
G. G. Auxhall
, R. F. Ayres
H. J. Beavis
W. S. Brady
C. W. Branstan


F. M. O. Buchholts
B. Bullock
A. W. Canty
H. J. Chudleigli
J. H. Cooper
W. H. Drummond
A. Elliott
C. Evans
G. M. Flynn
A. E. Fowler
N. L. Gilchrist
T. J. Hackins
H. Hastings
J. S. B. Heslett
J. F. Heady
W. F. Hollingberry
E. R. Jeffree
A. C. Jones
R. J. Kelly
T. King
H. W. B. Latrpbe
S. K. Lavers
C. L. Levy
T. J. Mcllveen
S. J. McKelvey
FI. E. Miller
R. A. Miller
W. W. Muir
E. M. Nye
J. J. O’Sullivan
R. W. Phillips
J, T. Phelan
S. B. W. Ren
R. E. Reynolds
T. J. Richards
P. H. Richardson
W. J. Rodgers
A. J. Searle
G. C. Simpson
A. L. Smith
C. H. Stevens
R. E. Thompson
G. Warren
S. Woo Hams
E. D. Wooster
T. Yeomans
C. C. Watts
Driver T. J. Brennan
W. Appleton
F. H. Crapley
R. G. Davidson
A. Downie
W. F. Dunne
F. L. Finlay
J. I. Hankin
A. Ireland
M. Lewis
A. Lochrin
J. M. Mark
T. H. Nicholson
E. Pickles
F. H. Schwarz
W. W. Summers
C. K. Watkins
H. H. Wor land
A. L. Westbrook
“ B ” Section.
Sgt. J. W. Brown
H. Campbell
G. T. Say
D. L. R. Geddes
W. H. Langdown
E. Coleman
Cpl. C. P. Webb
C.-W. Gardiner
R. W. Baker'
Batman G. F. Neville
O. T. Price
J. E. Tinman
G. F. Saunders
Private H. V. Archinal
L. Beard
H. Bible
A. C. Bedford
C. S. Single
H, Boardman
B. J. Bryant
R. E. Brown
H. C. Gigonani
J. Concannon
R. G. Crocker
C. W. Dann
A. C. Eldred
F. J. Finch
A. H. Fletcher
L. F. S. Gillett
A. D. Gordon
-T. E. Haines
A. E. Hale
N. N: Hardy
V. Harcourt ■
' G. T. Hill
P. Holmes
A. E. Huntington
R. Hutchinson
B. Jenner
F. P. Laracy
R. D. Marrott
R. McAlpine
T. McLear
J. S. May
J. J. Perkins
A. S, Perry.
L. P. Pickering
W. H. Platt
W. W. Rankine
W. L. Ried
C, E. Robinson
L. G. Smith
E. R. Sparke
L. Spotswood
P. A. Swann
O. H. Swanson
G. T. Stephen
IST. Taylor ■
R. G. Tuck
W. K. Turner
T. Watkinson
A. H. Wilson
O. D. Ward
Driver H. W. Bladin
W. T. Bain
G. A. Cooper
R. R. S. Cowie
E. Ewings
L. E. Forsyth
E. Guest
E. B. Haddow
D. W. Lynch
J. A. G. McCullough
J. W. Pidcock
W. O’Shea
R. O. A. Evans
J. E. Mclntyre
D. F. Robertson
“ C ” Section.
Sergt. R. H. Bulmer
J. R. Earls
S. Reardon
W. Ridge
S.-Sergt. J. J. De Putron
C. J. Harrison
Gpl. G. A. Davies
J. A. Minnis
S. E. Harrison
Private A. Anderson
N. Armfield
F. Attwood
H. D. Averstein
E. F. Bailey
L. Bennett
B. E. Barnes
G. E. Biddell
R. Boots
C. S. Brumwell
J. A. Button
J. P. Caughey
J. W. Coleman
F. H. Grossley
J. J. Croghan
G. Crutchley
T. W. Dawes
E. P. Denton


F. Draper
T. A. Dutton
O. G. Evans
L. J. Evers
R. A. Findley
A. H. Fitz Simmons
F. Flowers
H. W. Freeman
A.. E. Green
J. C. Greenwood
T. Gray
IST. E. P. Guthrie
C. E. Hambly
W. N. Haverstein
E. Hay ton
J. W. H. Ives
S. Johnson
J* H. Laver
J. D. Little
A. L. Lomack
W. C. Martin
T. H. Mcßride
J. L. Mullholland
A. G. Murphy
B. W. North
J. S. O’Brien
C. Y, Owens
R. R. Palmer
A. A. Patterson
R. T. Perkins
D. Ross
A. E. Rowland
C. Ryder
R. B. Shergold
J, W. Smith
J. Soden
B. R. Spotswood
C. H. Smith
H. W. Strout
H. W. I. Tinkson
R. A. Summerville
G. A. Thrum
J. Walton
P. Whetton
J. T. Weir
C. B. West
W. A.. Williamson
P. Wetzel
R. G. Wilby ■
A. J, Whitehead
E. G. Wareham
E. White
J. G. Worland
W. P. Yeadon
Nurses.
Principal Matron E. I.
Gold,
Matron J. B. Johnston
Nursing Sister A. B,
Pocock
P. Frater
A. M. Killett
C. H. Marshall
J. N. M. Walker
A. I. Twynam


[Kindly lent by “Town and Country Journal.”]
N.S.W. Army Medical Corps,
From left to right—Back row: Captains J. B. St. Vincent Welch, L. W.
Dunlop, H. R. G. Poate. Front row: Major R. J. Millard, Lieut. Col. B. J.
New march., V.D.




MIXED NAVAL AND MILITARY FORCES
H.M.A.S. “BERRIMA."
FOR SERVICE IN
PACIFIC OCEAN AND SOUTHERN SEAS
Brigade Staff.
Colonel W. Holmes
Lieut.-Col. N. R. House
Major F. B. Heritage
Captain R. J. A. Travers
Lieutenant B. Holmes
S.S.M. W. Wilkinson
8.0. R. Sgt. F. G. Brown
8.0 R, Cpl. G. J. Richards
Private L. Butler
F. Driver .
F. Fortes cue
D. O’ Hara
BATT. H.Q* STAFF.
Lieut.-Colonel W. W. R*
Watson
Major J. Patou
Captain €. H. D. Lane /
Captain S. F. Goodsell
Lieutenant K. Heritage
Lieutenant R. M. Sadler
W.O. W. Inglis
Q.M.S. H. Garner
QM.S. H. Harris
O.R. Sgt. N. H. Hobbs
Sgt. Drummer A. H. L.
Gray
Pioneer-Sgt. R. L.
Linklater
Sgt.-Cook A. Williams
Tspt.-Sgt. F. W. Baulch
Sig.-Sgt. P. L. Hanley
Armr.-Sgt. Lane
Siglr. Ptes. A. A. Cook
W. Corringhan
H. Ellis
G. H. Facey
G. Griffiths
E. J. Morley
G. H. Smith
L. W. Watson
Trst.-Ptes. G. H. Adams
J. H. Arkinstall
E. S. Bannister
P. A. Blakeman
R. J. Elliott
G. Lavender
A. Matthew
F. P. Mooney
P. W. Mortimer
J. H. Prior
C. B. Reid
O. E. F. Rushbrooke
A. H. Stweart
S. F. Terrell
Ordly. E. A. Drummond
S. H. Peadon
Batmen —-B. L. Hudson .
L. H. Lehmaier
G. W. Liddon
J. D’Arcy Moseley
J. M. MMillan
T. Pallister
F. E. Sandford
C. F. Webb
Attached
Captain H. L. Bruee
Lieut. L. K. Chambers
Machine Gun
Section.
Captain J. L* Harcus
Seed.-Lieut. T. R. Marsden
Sgt. W. Leslie
J. Stewart
Gpl. A. H. Johnson
L. C. Walsh
Drivers N. S. Bate
G. A. V. Hall
C. J. Moynihan
F. B. Waygood
Private J. W. Axtens
A. R. Bates
C. Bnrne
J. Carmichael
J. G. Clasper
E. G. Cooke
A. M. Eichler
C. G. Eitel
A. G. Ellis
C. J. Evers
A. K. Flack
W. R. Glover
R. R. Harris
A. B. Hudson
T. E. Jackson
G. Kerslake
B. C. Knapton
T. Knowler
W. B. 'Muller
P. L. Nicholls
E. H. Spearman
T. Tennant
A. H. Treloar
C. G. Walklate
R. C. Webb
G. F. Withers
u A ” Company.
Major R. H. Beardsmore
Lieut* €. E. Manning
Seed.-Lieut. W. A. Le Roy
Fry
Clr.-Sgt. G. Mack


Sgt. A. F. Anderson
A. Hardy
T. J. E. Lindsay
'W. H. S. Sheppard
Cpl. H. G. Blanchard
P. Hayes
B. Price
W. E. Smith
Private G. G. Allard
H. A. J. Andrews
S. W. Barker
P. Bennett
I. M. Blake
L. W. Blake
C. T. Bolton
F. E. Bond
A. Braddon
F. E. Brewster
A. M. Brightwell
H. G. Brown
R. J. Brown
H. M. Browne
L. K. G. Browning
E. H. Burghart
M. F. Burke
G. Chatting
A. W. Clark
B. P. Clark
F. Cooper
F. Cottam
W. C. Davie
W. E. Davey .
J. A. Deroubaix
W. Desmond
E. C. H. Devlin
F. Donovan
C. E, Dunn
S. Dutton
G. M. Edwards
A. G. Eldershaw
S. R. Ferris
W. Field
A. J. Fitzsimmons
V. Flemming
T. A. Fox
J, R. Fox
F. A. G. Fraser
J. E. Frendin
W. E. Fuller
A. Gallehawk
N. H. Garden
C. George
J. Gibb
E. A. Goodenough
W. J. Graham ■
C. F. Gregory
W. H. G. Guard
C. E. A. Hance :
C. Hardy
33. A. Hardy
W. H. Hardy
H. C. Hawkes
R. J. Hay
H. Heath
H. L. Henley
N. J. Henwood
G. S. Hickey
G. E. Hine
G. C. Hodge
T. E. Holman
W. A. Howard
J. G. James
S. A. Jelfs
F. M. Johnson
H. E. Kane
F. R. Kendrew
E. G. Keyte
W. S. C. Kilpatrick
J. A. King
J. B. Lane
J. C. Lawson
E. I. Lee
T. Livingstone
R. Mackenzie
S. S. Martin
L. F. Mason
J. R. Maulsbury
J. D. Maundreil
J. G. May
L. W. Moore
L. O. McCrae
G. C. C. McKay
A. , S. McLean
J. A. W. Kelson
B. A. Parker
R. Pluck
G. E. Plummer
W. G. Pooley
H. H. Pope
J. Ridge
B. Roy
J. Satterly
H, Shearston
F. M. ■ Stein
D. Stewart
R. G. Stone
F. H. Streeton
S. A. Upton
J. A. Walker
C. A. Walter
■G. S. A. Warr
S. H. Watkins
T. Webb
T. J. Wilson
W. Woof
J. Wright.
“B” Company.
Captain E. C. Norrle
Lieut. A. D, Fisher
Lieut. R. H. Norman
Color-Sgt. F. A. Graham
Robertson
Sgts. W. Hill
R. C. Howland
W. R. C. Robertson
Cpls. L. 33. Fergiuson
J. A. Holdsworth
J. S. Moffcatt
A. E. Manley
J. S. Milkier
Pioneer R. Hall
Private A. Abbott
R. Allen
H. Armstrong
J. W, Bannister
R. Beeby
H. M, Belwood
J. C. Bendrodt
P. Beston
R. R. Bevill
H. M. Blake
W. J. Bone
J. F. Boyd
33. G. Broad
T. J. Burke
F. W. B. Callaway
A. B. Champion
W. H. Chisholm
T. Clatworthy
C. E. Clavton
A. J. Glogg
J. Carmichael
H. Collins
P. B. Corev
E. A. Dailey
E. J. Davenport
A. T. Day -
R. Dickson
G. Dodd
E. D. Donehue
H. C. Duncan
A. Earl
A. H. Edgington
J. E. Fitzgerald
J. M. Fogarty
W. E. Garston
W. H. Gay
W. G. Giliard
S. A. Golding
E. P. Goodrich
J. C. L. Gourlay
J. Halyday
C. E. Hely
E. Henry


H. C. Howard
A. I. Janson
J. E. Kemp
E. J. Kendall
W. E. King
F. J. Kirkland
C. Lakin
G. W. Larken
M. Lawton
E. Lee
R. A. Little
H. Lovell
H. Lumb
H. O- Mascord
G. Mitchell
L. R. Montefiore
G. W. Moore
A. Morris
F. Myers
H. H. McGranger
W. G. MacKenzie
M. R. Macfarlane
,J. MacLaren
I). A. Macßae
H. S. Milne
C. G. Montefiore
W. B. B. Morgan
E. R. Norman
N. O’Brien
A. P. Owen
R. B. Paterson
A. Pinks
S. J. Pitt.
W_. Porritt
F. Y. Porter
V. B. Portman
A. E. Rainey
W. P. Rumsey
M. L. Reynham
'"W. C. Reynolds
A. J. Robinson
R. M. Ross
P. Ryan
E. L C, Scott
E. S. Scott-Holland
O. J. Sheppard
R. M. Snowdon
‘ T. S. Stewart
■G. A. Stone
W. H, R. Stroud
Y. Y. Swale.
H. Y. Tate
F. Telling
F. M. Thomas
E. Townshend
L. E. Turner
A. A. G. Turton
W. R. Waddell
E. W. Wallace
W. H. Walsh
C. S. Wells
W. H. Wiles
W. R. Willing .
D. J. W. Whitehead
J. Wood
E. S. Yard
W. R. Yarrington.
“C”Company.
Captain R. S. Grant-
Thorold
Lieut. R. Partridge
Seed.-Lieut, E. W. Kirke
Color-Sergt. V. E. Crook
Sergt. D. S. Elliott
T. R. St. George
A. K, Hosking
W. W. Crampton
Cpl. C. Taylor
J. Leadbeater
C. E. Grace
C. A. H. Hart
R. White
Private. R. F. Arnold
E. R. Bagley
A. R. Bowden
J. Bradford
S. B. Bridgland
R. F. Y. Broomfield
G. W. Bryant
H. L. Burrington
G. G. Butterworth
P. Carrick
A. E. Collins
P. J. Conroy
J. P. Conway
L. J. Corrigan
G. R. Courtney
G. Coy
R. Creed
R. H. Croasdell
R. W. Cullen
J. Dean
H. A. Delaney
P. Delaney
J. Donald
J. Eather
R. Fell
C. R. Fitzgerald
J. Flanagan
R. E. Fox
W. F. Fox
S. T. Fripp
R. W. Gregg:
D. Greig
N. C. Graham
J. E. Gudgeoin
H. G. Graham
R. H. Gullofremn
P. Hall
C. J. B. Harr aid
O. N. Hayes
W. P. Healy
F. A. W. Hocking
B. Hodgson
J. C. L. Holland
A. Holman
D. T. Howarth
G. Hume
G. W. Hunter
R. Jo Hunter
H. H. Inman
G. Irving
A. James
T. R. James
W. B. James
A. T. Jenkins
F. A. Jones
F. S. J ones
A. W. Johnson
D. Johnson
A. A. Kearns
E. P. Kearns
H. J. King
G. Ti Laws
G. Lavender
J. H. Lear .
J. S. Lees
C. W. Lenton
H. R. Light
E. B. Mason
W. E. May
A. Moore
E. A. Mulford
J. R. McDonald
J. M'Geechan
F. J. M‘Ginty
R. B. M‘Kenzie
J. E. MacPherson
A. M., Howland
J. L. O’Connor
R. J. C. O’Donnell
D. P. O’Keefe
G. Ho Philpot
E. K. Pratt
J. R. Reyner
W. H. Scanlon
N. P. Scheidel :
J. Shepherd
W. J. Skinner
C. S. Smith
M. Solomon
J. M. Stanley
H. Stiefvater
K. P. Stillman
Do P. Sullivan


J. Szablowski
C. S. Taylor
C. H. Taylor
J. Telford
E. A. Thorpe
F. G. Thring
T. Tomlinson
W. Toohey
S. W. Walker
F. D. Wallace
R. Wallach
H. B, Ward
A. M. Wates
A. Welch
H. J. Wells
E. Whitehead
F. Whitehead
W. M, Wilkin
W. Williams
R. C. Williamson
“D” Company.
Captain T. R. MTherson
Lieut. L. B. Ravenseroft
Seed.-Lieut. J. A. M'Dowell
Clr.-Sergt. M. B. Bums
Sgt. W. C. M. Penly
G. W. Oliver
A. W. A. Smith
J. J. Casey
Cpl. A. C. White
W. Acheson
W. C. Graham
J. R. Wilson
T. L. Gitsham
Lance-Cpl. F. R. Milne
A. Brydie
J. A. French
H. Maunder
Signaller O. L. Harber
Bugler J. P. Hardman.
J. W. Sproule
Driver W. E. W. Dawson
T. J. Martin
Pioneer C. E. Clarke
Private E. W. Baker
K. Bayley
W. Besson
J. F. Bingham
J. A. Bovard
E. G. G. Breeze
T. Buckley
G. R. Bullock
A. Burger
J. Cameron
W. J. Carr
G.. T. Challenor
W. J. Churchill
W. E. Clarke
C. W. Coker
S. H. Coles
D. T. Crothers
E. A. Cunningham
A. K. Darby
EE. Davey __
R. A. Dean
El. M. Denny
R. S. D. Dessaix
J. Diehl
J. A. Dixon
L. Dixon
T. Dixon
W. EE. Dowling
F. J. M. Doyle
C. A. Driscoll
T. Dwyer
T. R. L. Eather
C. E. Ebbrell
E. J. Edwards
W. M. Farley
W. W. Fenton
G. J. Finlayson
F. Eleming
W. A. Fraser
EE. E. Friedman
A. E. Gallafent
H. F. E. Garland
S. A. George
D. Goodman
W. J. Gordon
T. J. Gray
T. L. Grayham
L. Grove
J. A. Groves
D. B. EEampton
L. J. EEarrison
S. EEawkes
M. D. EEealey
J. Y. Keeps
K. A. Higgins
E. Hollebon
L. G. EEomden
V. Honeyman
A. H. Hoskins
G. E. Hoyle
R. Hunter
J. J. Hyde
T. B. Hynes
E. Johnson
PE. EG Johnston
F. Jowers
W. H. Jowers
A. E. Kelly
S. B. Knight
R. V. A. Lamond
W. C. H. Lawson
S. C. Leer
A. H. Lovett
W. J. Lowry
E. W. Merritt
J. W. Morrison
W. M. Morrison
F. M‘Glashan
W. J. M‘Kinnon
E. J. Oldfield
Y. H. Perry
; W. Price
P. O, Punch
R. Ramsay
H. Rea
L. C. Reeves
C. R. Roberts
F. Saunders
H. W, Smedley
G. T. Smith
H. R. Tanner
S. W. Thompson
C. H. Vince
W. R. Watkins
V. J. M. Weidner
E. V. Welch
M. J. White
EE. E. Whiteford.
R. Whiteside
H. EL Williams
F. J. Woods
a E” Company.
Captain H. L. Morrison
Lieut. B. H. McLachlan
Seed.-Lieut. G. 0. Manning
Col.-Sgt. F. Buchanan
Sgt. F. A. Tibby
J. K. Wright
W. J. Gordon
F. Carlyle
L. S. Mac queen
W. H. Macqueen
W. I. Black
H. W. Otter
W. EL Curnow
Lance-Cpl. J. L. Willmott
S. L. Willmott
S. B. Godwin
A. E. Lee
Private H. W. Abbott
L. W. Adams
T. Adams
A. G. Anderson
A. M. Anderson
W. G. Bale
W. S. Bawn
W. Beaton
A. J. Berry
G. EL B. Blackburn


A. H. Boyd
W, C, Brown
E. Bullock
B. O. Bush
E. C. Bush
W. E. Buttle
J. J. Casey
A. Chisholm
F. S. M. Clark
F. W. Clark
J. B. Clarke
J. E, Clemence
E. L. Collins
H. L. Coombes
W. G. Corned
A. Cox
G. F. Cox
S. S. Crisp
C. R. Dare
J. J. Doody
A. Downes
A. Drummond
G. H. Drysdale
E. L. Dundas
O. S. Dunn
L. P. Fade
J. Ferguson
A. Fisk
E. F, Frazer
J. Fry
C. Gallagher
E. Grace
G. N. Griffiths
T. W. Green
T. L. Guv
H. P. N. Hall
Q. S. Harber
H. G. Harris
R. S. Harrison
T. Harvey
L. Hodge
C. S. Holland
A, L. Holm
T. W. Howard
R. Hunter
J. C. Jackson
A. James
T. O. Jenkins
J. J. Jones
K. S. Letton
P. F. Lark
C. P. Larsen
R. M. Lee
Lee
S. F. Martin
D. A. Mehan
T. Mitchell
R. Moores
J, McCarthy
G. Neave
H. Nelson
T. Padister
D. M. Paton
C. H. J. Pickett
A. A. Plane
L. G. Plane
A. R. Pope
G. Ponlton
G. A. Presgrave
C. W. Rivers
K. R. Robertson
T. B. Robertson
F. J. Rodini
E. R. Shaw
F. Sheppard
J. D. Smith
L. A. Smith
V. Smith
W. J. Smith
R. E. Snodgrass
S. H. Sparkes
G. Stephenson
P. A. Sullivan
R. J. Taylor
A. J. Teale
W. A. Thomason
W. C. Tilbrook
L. G. Turner
S. G. Turner
E. H. Vere
E. M. Victorsen
R. Walters
S. R. Wasson
H. Watts
A. F. Watson
F. Webb
J, W. Wyatt
G. J. Williams
W. Wilson
“F” Company.
Captain E. Twynam
Lieut, J. M. Maugham
Secd.-Lieut. A. L. K.
Cooper
Color-Sgt. B. E. Luffman
Sgt. W. Keleghan
J, E. Kimpton
J. Plimer
L. N. Schofield
Cpl. F. C. Caller
U. W. Carpenter
W. S. Hair
A. J. Sayell
A. R. Tregear
N. H. Whxitfield
Private J. PH. Aldham
F, H. Allen
V. J. Arthur
G, R. Ashton
H, Atkins
A. R. Ayres
F. C. W. Bailerum
T. E. Beaman
L. Bennett
C. B. Bentley
P. Berry
B. J. Blackett
H. Briant
B. G. Brooks
A. M‘L. C. Buchanan
F. W. Buchanan
E. Burke
J. Carthew
F. J. Chapman
L. A. Clancy
F. A. Connelly
D. S. Cranston
J. N. C. Davies
T. G. Davies
F, H. Day
D. M. Dennis
P. A. Douglas
R. Doyle
W. F. Dunham
G. G. Dunn
C. B. Ewart
W. I. Ferguson
T. Fisk
W. H. Fleming
J. Fletcher
G. F. O. Forth
L. G. Fotheringham
R. Hardwick
H. D. Harper
D. R. A. Hughes
T. H. Jones
W. P. Keys
H. W. Lagerlow
A. Langworthy
J. Laycock
N. T. Lewins
A. Mainstone
J. W. Martin
A. Maskell
B. Mahony
C. E. Merrett
F. E. S. Merrett
F.. Meyers
F. Middlemiss
R. F. Miles
J. R. Mitchell
R. A. Morris
R. B. Morris,
H. Myers
E. M‘Donald


A. J. W. M‘Kay
T. W. L. Neate
H. E. Newton
J. Nowell
J. A. Oag
C. L. Palmer
W. Parkin
IL G. Pearce
W. H. Pittard
P. Plumb
W. E. Preece
J, Prescott
W. E. Rankin
J. Reid
J. H. Reid
J* Reid
R. L. Reynolds
H. Roberts
■ H. Ronald
R. B. Ross
W. Ross
N. C. Russett
Rutter
Seale
, G. V. Shelley
G. Small
J. Smith
J, W. Smith ■ ■
N* F. Smith ■
S. Solomon
A. Stevenson
S. Sullivan
W. G. Tait
J. Tattersall
E. A. Taylor
Teale
O. Therwell
R. B. Tomlinson
K. H. Thompson
J. Walker
W. G. Walters
H. W. Webb
J. Wemyss
F. H. Westbury
A. H. Williams
S. W. Williamson
W. Williamson
E. R. Wyborn
Bugler J. J. Young
“G” Company.
Captain A* W. Ralston
Lieut. J. E. Westgarth
Seed.-Lieut.. P e K. B,
Quinn
OoL-Sgt, H. W. Johnson
Sgt. J, H. C. Simpson
H. Anderson
W. R. Dovey
J. D. D. Henry
Cpl. D. L. Davidson
P. H. M. Curtis
J. R. Nunn
D. Watson
C. T. Collier
Lance-CpL W. J. Smith
R. W. Spalding
L. Lyons
W. H. Glover
T. W. Watson
Private V. H. G Ains-
worth
A. J. Anderson
P. C. Anderson
W. J. Anderson
P. C. Ashmen
L. Avard ,
P. G. Ballington
E. G. Beesley
S. J. Blumenthal
W. S. Bone
A. W. Bower
R. B. Campbell
A. H. Charlton
G. Clune
E. H. Connolly
J. D. Cookson
K. Cooper
L. H. Cross
P. M. Croydon
F. J. H. Currington
A. Davis
C. W. Dunham
F. L. East
E. C. Evans
W. C. Eyles
J, P. Flood
F. A. Foster
H. J. Hall
R. G. Hitchcock
T. S. Horgan
C; A. Johnson
A. L. Jones
W. H. Jullien
J, D. Kirkness
P. F. Lawler
C. J. Levy
G. Linsley
H. J. Louche
H. Luff
W. M. Lyons
■ J. A. Matthews
J, Menfing
E. A. M‘Fadden
J. M‘Govern
W. M s Grath
W. J. Nagle
A. E. Neale
C. P. Nelson
H. D. Nelson
S. New
F. A. Newman
F. Newman
O. Nicholson
C. Niven
S. Noble
A. R. Norton
A. M. Oakes
W. M. O’Brien
J* L. Ogg
J. M. Ogilvie
L. C. O’Halloran
A. O’Hare
R. E. Parsons
W. H. Penny
T. Philip ■
J. Plummer
J. F. Poynting
J. P. Redmond
A. E. Richards
W. L. Richards
C. A. Roberts
E. W. Roberts
R. Robertson
C. A. Ross
A. E. Ryan
R. L. Seymour
E. S. Smith
R. A. W. -Smith
W. D. Smith
J. J. Sowter
C. R. Stuckey
H, A. Tanzer ■
Chris. Tenbosch
H. Thomson ,
J. L. Thorpe
J. B. Torpy
W. Tranter
S. E. -Tucker
E. J. Turner
H. G. Turner
A. B. P. Underwood
A. F. Vandenberg
A. Yenn
R. Verney
W. C. Vincent
A. A. Wallace
S. Walls -
E. J. Ward
W. J. Watriama
W. F. Wilkie
W. E. Wilson
A. V. Wolf
G. S. Woolley


“H” Company.
Major E. F. Martin
Lieut. V. BL B. Sampson
Secd.-Lieut. I* B, Sherbon
Color-Sgt. H. Langtry
Sgt. W. A. Crombie
F. W. Hunt
H. S. Milne
Cpl. A. E. Barnes
G. Thomas
E. H. Reid
E. E. Mnnro
Seed. -Cpl. J. W. Carnell
F. H. Cole
G. M. Porter
G. B. Jenkins
Private A. L. K. Adam
S. Baker
J. H. Banks
W. G. A. Barrington -
J, R. H. Bartlett
S. T. Baylis
S* J. Beckton
J. C. Beil
H. R. Booth
T. Bousfield
E. D. Boyd
H. Bradhnrst
H. L. Bragg
A. D. Briggs
E. B. Brodigan
F. G. Brown
J. E. A. Bruce
J, F. Buckland
J. L. Butler
T. W. Cawley
J. S. Clancy
R. P. Collins
J. Clempson
G. W. Cooker
E. P. Dahl
G. Dallas
J. P. Davis
E. D ernestre
H. C. Denovan
C. C. Evans
C. Ferns
H. Ford
W. A. Frahm
D. H. Garnon
C. A. Gobert
G. St. C. Griffin
H. Grose
A. C. Guthrie
A. T. Hall
W. J. Hammond
R. Harris
H. H. Hayes
F. Hillier
A. Hunt
W. J. Hynes
P. D. Jones
E, V. Kempt on
W. J. King
H. K. Kristensen
A. Kyriako
W. J. Lang
J, C. Lawson
B. Lee
J. I. Leyne
D. H. Lynch
P. Lynch
J. M. Lyons
A. Macdonald
S. J. Macfarlane
A. Marshall
P. R. Maughan
J. G. Meek .
L. W. Meek
W. R. Mohatt
H. P. Montroy
F. J. Moore
J. D. Murray
R. D. M‘Credden
F. McC. M‘Gill
H. J. Hewing
A. N. Northcott
D. O’Hara
E. A. O’Brien
N. Paidas
J. Paulin
G. W. Peterson
F. T. Poole
G. W. B. Powell
H. W. Randall
S. G. Ratsey
R. J. Reid
F. W. Renshaw ,
H. Reynolds
H, Rice .
G. J. Richards
A. H. Richmond
A. W. Rigley ,
H. L. Rogers
W. Rose
S. Rawlinson
E. Ryan
T. L." Saunders
H. L. Sendall
H. E. Shaw
T. W. Sketheway
E. P. Smith
S. M. Smart 3
R. L, Steer
S. P. Stewaart
A. J. Stone
R. V. Sullivian
P. Summersscales
F. W. Taylor
J. E. Tonkin
H. Trafford
G. Trenouth
M. Wakley
A. O. Walden
J. W. Watson
W. T. Watson
J. C. Watt
A. H. Weir
W. A. Williams
F. J. Wilson
G. S. Woolley
E. L. C. Young
Army Medical
Corps.
Captain F. A. Maeguire
Captain J. E. Donaldson
Captain B. C. A. Pockley
W.O. H. Hazlett
Staft-Sgt. J. H. Ward
Staff-Sgt. Dispenser
R. F. M. Wray
Sgt.-Clerk L. J. Mobbs
Sgt. E. D. Spears
Cpl. J. A. Ellis
■ J. W. H. MHullough
(cook)
Private H. A. J. Ahearn
R. J. Bird
- J. E. Craig
C. N. Daly
T. A. Davies
W. L. Dodson
G. Drummond
J. L. B. Forster
N. S. W. Gale
A. T. Gates
N. R. Gooch
D. W. Goodman
G. V. Harvey
J. K. Henderson
C. E. Jifkins
C. King
H. E. Lonsdale
G. MHride
L. C. Owen
H. R. Poole
W. C. C. Richardson
W. A. Riches
F. H. Robinson
C. W. Smith
F. R. Stanley
W. Tovey
W. J. Turnbull
J. H. Walters
H. C. Withers


'Wholly set up and Printed in Australia
by
Simmons Ltd., Printers,
Kent and Druitt Streets, Sydney,
1914.


WHY HAIR
THE CAUSES ';of HaifeEalling: :are
_so varied, - and s© . apparently
trivial in themselves/and '.moreover,
are 'usually 1 present at the- time when
the hair ds still plentiful, that the
Danger Signals are not ’appreciated.
■ Many a man or woman has; had
these signs for years* but has con-
sidered them unimportant, until, too-
date,, one finds- the mischief already--
-done, o and the once beautiful- hair ;
■ showing thin, and baldness.-"cam-
menciiigv The .- usual danger signals' l
- in early or mature life are Scurf or
Dandruff,. Dryness, Brittleness, ' or
Splitting on the ends/ All these.’are
signs which require immediate alien-
, tlon. A very little- care at this stage
will not only ensure Hair Health,
..but will improve immensely in
quantity and brilliance even the'best
.--•heads of hair. My- -
TRUE HAIR GROWER
. is.-known. and sold the world over 5
and I have in my con stilting rooms
upwards of 3000 grateful letters from
men and women, who have derived
much benefit from my prepar-
ations as to compel them to write
and thank me, in many.cases, saying
I was welcome to publish their letters-
if I wished |
Now I do not wish- you fo accent
'my word for any statement I make,
but want you to prove the matter for "
yourself in your own home.
WAS BALD and Grew a New Crop of Hair in 40 Days
Thad tried_almost every advertised preparation wiithout success. Through a chance meet-in-
. with a Swiss savant who had made a study off the human hair, I became possessed of A
formula, which has not only grown new hair m miy own case, but has been successful in
T RIAL S BO X terested? mP^e^e compound. lam offerLgn,
will SoS bS. ££ * toee sUmps for postaee elc - a ” d 1
Address j JOHN CRiAVEN-BURLEIGH
(Dej>t 156) 192 Street, SYDNEY.
packet wSmSmmE,
rIINQ
o^o
fu,
B
P|al r
ITS CARE
AND TREATMENT
VALUABLE ADVICE FOR EVERYBODY


BY
PACKET
{J..INQ
o
Hi
PI'AI.RL,
ITS CARE
AND TREATMENT
.VALUABLE ADVICE FOR EVERYBODY
WHY HAIR
FILLS
OUT!
The CAUSES of Hair Falling- are
1 so varied, and so apparently
trivial in themselves, and moreover,
are usually present at the time when
the hair is still plentiful, that the
Danger Signals are not appreciated.
Many a man or woman has had
these signs for years, but has con-
sidered them unimportant, until, too.
late, one finds the mischief already
done, and The once beautiful hair
showing thin, and baldness com-
mencing. The usual danger signals •
in early or mature life are Scurf or
Dandruff, Dryness, Brittleness, or
Splitting on the ends'. All these are
signs which require immediate atten-
tion. A very little care at this stage
will not only ensure Hair Health,
but will improve immensely in
quantity and brilliance even the best
heads of, hair. My
TRUE HAIR GROWER
is known and sold the world over’
and I have in my consulting rooms
upwards of 3000 grateful letters from
men and women who have derived
so much benefit from my prepar-
ations as to compel them to write
and thank me, in many cases saying
I was welcome to publish their letters
if I wished.
Now I do not wish you to accept
my word for any statement I make,
but want you to prove the matter for
yourself in your own home.
of Hair in 40
I WAS BALD and Grew a Crop of Hair in 40 Days.
I had tried almost every advertised preparation without success. 'Through a chance meeting
with a Swiss savant, who had made a study of the human hair, I became possessed of a
formula, which has not only grown new hair in my .own case, but has been successful in
thousands of others. Having such complete confidence' in this compound, lam offering a
TRIAL BOX to anyone interested.
Send your .full name and address, enclosing three -stamps for postage etc., and I
will send you a free trial box, also my booklet.
Address t JOHN CRAVEN-BURLEIGH
(Deist. 156) 19* . Street,.. ■ SYDNEY.
