

ilfdf'




13 2a 1? U' IK. M a
- ON THE---
APOCRYPHA
By the J'cv T J Smith M.l . Si
Antlrar's Church, JY urracoorle
If you open an ordinary English Bible in
which the Apocrypha is printed, you will find
that the books collected under that name are
fourteen in number, wr.. —L and 11 E*dras,
Tobit, Judith, Esther, Wisdom. Ecclesiastieus,
Baruch, Song of the three children, Susanna,
Bel »nd the Dragon. Prayer of Manusses, 1
and 11 Maccabees. Then if you get hold of a
l)ouay Version of the Old Testament, you will
find that of these fourteen, three are omitted,
viz. —I and 11 Esdras and the prayer of
Manasses. The remaining eleven are all
printed in the Douay Version, though if you
are not accustomed to that Version, you may
not at once find them; for the Song of the
three children and Su-anna and Bel are all
printed as part of Daniel, while the conclusion
of Esther is printed with Esther.
Now, I have a copy of the Latin Bible
issued by Tremellius ind Junius over
threecenturies ago, and I find there printed
a fifteenth Apocryphal book called 111.
Maccabees ; while in SweteV Septuagint,
which is the famous Greek Bible, I find
also a IV. Maccabees, and even a seven-
teenth Apocryphal book called the Psalms of
Solomon. And then, again, I know that had I
been living, say, 1500 years asm, I might have
heard quoted as a part of the Bible such books
as Enoch, the Apocrypha of Baruch, the
Testament of the twelve patriarohs, the
Assumption of Moses, or the book of Jubi-
Here then there are some twenty-two
Apocryphal books surrounding the Old Testa-
ment Scriptures, and of these books I find
some printed with one Bible and some with


another. But I also find that some branches
of the Christian Church not only pick out and
print some of the Apocryphal books, but they
also say that these books which they pick out
and print are true scripture. They assert, I
mean, that these books are of equal authority
with Deuteronomy, or Psalms, or Isaiah, for
instance —that these books are really inspired,
and are therefore a true part of the Bible.
The Greek and Latin Churches do that, but
the Lutheran and Anglican Churches will not
go so far as that. These two Protestant
Churches will not admit that the Apocryphal
books are true Scripture, or that they are
really inspired; but they still allow that they
are a kind of semi-scripture. These books, say
they, have no authority as Scripture; but they
are useful for edifioation and should be read
for that purpose in the Church. But the
Reformed or Calvinistio Churches take up the
position of an extreme denial. They assert
that these writings are of equal value an d
authority only with all other interesting
seoular writings, but they are not scripture,
nor even a semi-scripture.
So when I try to find out what the Apocry-
pha is I come aoross what I may call three
sets of selections. There is the Greek and
Roman selection of eleven books; there is the
Protestant selection of fourteen books; and
there is the student’s or scholar’s selection of
about two dozen books ; but that selection is
really not a selection, for it includes all he can
get. Also, when I try to find out of what
authority or value Apoorynhais, I come across
four sets of judgments. There is the Grpek
and Roman judgment whioh save these bonks
are true 3oripture; there is the Lutheran and
Anghoan judgment whioh says they are semi-
Soripture; there is the Reformed judgment
which tends to depreciate them as of little
value; and there is what may be oalled the
scholar’s, or student’s, or reader’s judgment,
whioh says that these books are always valu-
able, often interesting and sometimes beauti-
ful.
Now, I will try to give you an aopurate idea
of what the Apocrypha really is. Imagine a
plain and out of that plain rises a plateau or
eloping high ground not unlike a small range
of hills; and then again out of that range of
hills there rise two peaks which tower up
towards the sky. Well, thac plain is what we
call human literature. These two peaks
towering up to the sky are the Old and New
Testament Scriptures. That sloping high


ground or plateau or range of hills which leads
up to the great peaks and down again from
them is the Apocrypha. That isthebest pioture
I can put before you to help you to realize
and grasp these books. But of course such a
picture is a picture of this literature regarded
from a human point of view. lam not speak-
ing of inspiration. The Church alone can
determine what literature is inspired and what
is not; and a literature which is inspired is
therehv made a thing apart.
Looking then at this literature called the
Apocrypha, and looking at it in the wav of
this pioture of a sloping range of hills leading
up to and then down from the two great peaks
I am struck at once by the fact that there
must be not one Apoorypha, but four Apocry-
phas. There must be a literature leading up
to the Old Testament Soriptures and then
again one leading down from these Soriptures.
So also there must be a literature leading up
to the New Testament and another literature
leading down from it. And that will give us
four Apocryphas instead of one Apoorvpha;
and we shall probably find that our one Apo-
orypha. the one we are familiar with, is just
one out of these four; while for some reason or
other, the remaining three have never been
taken into acoount.
And that is just what we do find. There
seem to have been four Apocryphal literatures
—one leading up to the Old Testament and
another leading down from it; a third leading
up to the New Testament and the last leading
down from it. But the strange thing is than
our Apocrypha, what we oall the Apocrypha,
that Apocrypha which has tilled so large a
place in the history of the Church, is not made
up of a selection from these four. That is per-
haps what we should have expeoted, viz.—
that a selection would have been made of the
best books in these four literatures, and that
this selection of the best would have been pre-
served and used in the Church as a kind of
help, commentary, extension of the Bible it-
self. Such has not been the case. Our Apo-
crypha is just one out of the four Apooryphas;
one taken away from the other three, and put
into the proud position of being the only book
now-a-days is ever printed as an addition to
Holy Soripture.
Before then I examine our Apocrapha, I
would say something about those other three
which have been pushed altogether on one
side. First, let us take the Old Testament
and search in it to find whether there are any
traces there of a literature whioh seems to have
I)
j\
I)
n
/
-.3*


1/
l)
led up to the Old Testament itself. There are
such traces. We find in the O d Testament re-
ferences to such Writings as the hook of Jasher,
and the book of the Wars of Jehovah. A
book called the Acts of Solomon is also named.
So is the history of Samuel the Seer, the his-
tory of Nathan the prophet, the history of Gad
the Seer. So again is the prophecy of Ahijah
the Shilonite, and the visions of Iddo the Seer;
also the history of the prophet; also
the commentary of the prophet Iddo; also the
history of Jehu, the son of Hanani.
Supposing then that the history of Samuel
mentioned here is the book of Samuel in the
Bible, that still leaves us the names of nine
apparently quite distinct writings quoted or
named in our Old Testament. And that shows
us that there was a large Apocryphal literature
which led up to and prepared readers for the
inspired Scripture. But that literature has
wholly perished. So far as I am aware, no
trace of it has anywhere everibeen discovered.
The substance of it may have been taken up
into the Old Testament, >o it may not have
been found necessary to preserve the literature
itself. Any way we know these two things—
that there was a large Apocryphal literature
leading up to the Old Testament, and that
literature has disa peared.
After the first I will take the last, after the
literature leading up to the Old Testament,
the literature leading down from the new.
And roneerning this I do not think I can do
better than read you an extract from that
exoellent scholar Professor Satiday. He
writes— “ The end of the second century is the
true turning point in the history of the C'non.
We are rightly reminded (by Harnaok) that
the forming of the Canon was not only a pro-
cess of collection and accretion, but even more
a process of reduction and contraction. What
a number of works circulated among the
Churohes of the seoond century all enjoying a
greater or less degree of authority, only to lose
it! In the way of Gospels, those according to
the Hebrews, according to the Egyptians,
according to Peter; in the way of Aots, the so
called Travels of Apostles, the preaching of
Peter, the Acts of Paul, the Acts of Paul and
Thekla; in the way of Epistles, 1 and 11
Clement, and Barnabas; then an allegory like
the Shepherd of Hermas; a manual like the
Didaohe; an apocalypse like that of Peter.
Truly it may said that here too the last was
first and the first last. Several of these books
had a oironlation and a popularity considerably
in excess of that of some of the books now in-
oluded in the Canon. It is oertainly a wonder-
ful feat on the part of the early Church to
I
\


1
have by degrees sifted out this mass of litera-
ture; and still more wonderful that it should
not have discarded, at least so far as the New
Testament is concerned, one single work
which after generations have found cause to
look back upon with any regret. Most valu-
able no doubt many of them may be for enab-
ling us to reconstruct the histoiy of the times,
but there is not one which at this moment we
should say possessed a real claim tobeir.vested
with the authority of the Church.”
I have thus brought under your notice two
out of ocr four Apocryphal literatures, viz.,
that leading up to the Old Testament and
that leading down from the New. But there
remains two more to examine, the two lyine
between the Testaments— the former of which
leads down from the Old Testament, and the
latter leads up to the New. And at once the
thought will be suggested that it must
be hard to distinguish between these two.
For if you have before you two great peaks
and between them a sloping ground connect-
ing them, a kind of declivity which first runs
down and then runs up again, it would be hard
—at least in literature it would be hard—to
distinguish exactly the one declivity from the
other. And that is just what happens. It is
hard to distinguish accurately the Apocrypha
which runs down from the Old Testament from
that other Apoorypha which runs up towards
the New. In faot we probably oould not make
this distinction accurately had we merely our
own modern literary judgment to guide us.
But we have another guide - though it be
chiefly an hypothesis—and that guide I think
will serve.
Whenever a sacred book appears anywhere
let it be granted that there has appeared first
an apooryphal literature leading up to that
sacred book, and that there appears afterwards
another apooryphal literature leading down
from it. But between these two there is a well-
marked distinction of this nature. Concern-
ing the Apocrypha whioh comes after a sacred
book, there is generally a fight to get it into the
Canon, to have it acknowledged as sacred also,
to have it invested with authority as inspired ;
but there is no similar contention concerning
the Apocrypha which came before the sacred
book. The appearance of the sacred book
itself seems to mark a new beginning—viz.,
the interference of the Divine in human liter-
ature. All that came before is regarded as
merely natural, however neoessary it may have
been to the saored book itself, and however
1}
)
j )
s
!
it


intimate its connection with the saored book.
That which came first was merely natural.
Then oame the sacred book, the new super-
natural beginning. Then came the works
which follow on the saored book; ami it is
concerning these works that there arises a
question as to whether they also are sacred or
not. For the supernatural having interfered
in human literature, men do not know exactly
when its interference stops, and when
things relapse back into the merely natural
again.
Applying that test then to the works whioh
lie between the Old and New Testaments I
find that concerning some there was a consid-
able confliot as to whether or not they were to
be regarded as part of the sacred Old Testa-
ment Soriptures; but I fil'd also that concern-
ing others there was no such oonflict at all.
I conclude therefore that the books concerning
which there was a conflict are the true
Apoorypha leading down from the old
Testament; and f hat the books concerning
whioh there was no confliot are that other
Apoorypha which leads up to the New
Testament.
I consider then, at this point, those hooks
whioh form the Apocrypha leading up to the
New Testament. These books are The Book
of Enoch, the Book of Jubilees or Little
Genesis, the Assumption of Moses, the'
Apooalypseof EyZa, the Apocalypse of Baruch,
and the Testament of the Twelve Patriarchs;
perhaps also the Psalms of Solomon, though
this is of all the most difficult book to place,
some regarding it as a part of the Apocrypha
whioh leads down from the Old Testament,
others taking it here. Also I should mention
such books as Joseph’s Prayer, Eldad and
Medad, Apooalypse of Elijah, Apocalypse of
Zephaniah, The Martyrdom of Isaiah, The
Books of Adam, of Abraham, of Jannesand
Jambres, and a Book of Noah.
Now concerning these books, and such as
these, I would remark three things. First,
they were used by the early church fathers,
and some of them even by the New Testament
writes;and we gather that several generations
of those men, who were expecting the Messiah,
or who accepted the Messiah when He ap-
peared, had been feeding their minds on such
books. They were the current popular litera-
ture whioh prepared the way for Christ, for
Christianity, for the Christian Scriptures, and
for the Christian Ohuroh. Next, I notice
that though these books were valued and exten
.
}


sively read and were quoted by individuals as
inspired, yet they were never regarded as
Scripture, nor does there ever seem to have
been any contention in the Councils of the
Church about receiving them into the Canon
of Soripture or rejecting them therefrom.
Last, I note that though many of these books
have been lost so that we know merely their
names or at most a short quotation from them
or a general idea of what had been their con-
tents, yet some have survived almost com-
plete, and even within our own day some of
these old works have been recovered and pub-
lished for all to read.
Of all the books of this Apoorypha, the one
whioh has interested me most is the Book of
Fnoch ; and that not only because it is ex-
pressly quoted in the New Testament as con-
taining genuine propheoies delivered by
Knoch; but especially because, from what I
have read of it, I think that it throws great
light on the Gospels, and reveals co us many
things whioh were quite familiar to the minds
of our Lord and His disciples. It is a book
whioh shows us the kind of ideas and expecta-
tions in which that generation were brought
up, and the kind of reading whioh was oom-
monly passed from hand to hand among the
people.
There are two other names whioh perhaps
should be mentioned in this literature—Jose-
phus and Philo. But I cannot find that
Josephus was in any way a moulding influence
in early Christian literature; and though
Philo was undoubtedly such an influence, yet
he is so separate, he is such a well marked
link in another history—the history of the
combination of Moses and Plato—that I think
it better to omit him from this list. I think
that those who know the subjeot best and feel
the nuanoes of it will agree with me that
Philo's name should be omitted from the
apocryphal literature which leads up to and
introduces the New Testament Soriptures.
I am now at this point in a position to
answer two questions. First what is the
meaning of the word Apocrypha? and seoond
—why, of the four Apooryphas which surround
the saored Soriptures have three been rejected
from consideration while one only has lasted
through the ages as the Apoorypha? The
word Apocrypha means hidden. Of oourse
one cannot talk of ‘hidden’ literature, for
there is a well known law or paradox in the
history of human tradition that the moment
a thing is written down or printed it ceases to


be hidden, while on the other hand unless a
thing be written or printed it ceases to be
fixed. ‘Hidden’ literature accordingly, in the
ordinary sense of the word ‘hidden,’ is a con-
tradiction in terms.
Apoorvpha then meant hidden or withdrawn
from publicity. First it was applied to parch-
ments or rolls which were so worn or so badly
written as to be unfit for public use. Then it
came to mean a book which is unsuitable for
public reading. It may be so, as some parts
of the Holy Scripture are at present;
or it may be so, as through containing
statements derogatory to the Church or
the Priesthood ; or it may be so through
these writings not being inspired or not of
authority inside the Church; or it may be so
through these writings being false or heretical.
I should note here that some also incline to
understand the word Apocrypha as meaning
books who author is hidden or unknown.
Well, among these various shades of meaning,
what we may oall the central and generally
accepted meaning is this: Apocrypha meant
withdrawn from publio use beoause unsuitable
for public reading, and that again because
it does not possess public authority within the
Church.
Now the second question—why of our four
Apooryphas are three passed over without
notice, while one only is regarded as Th«
Apocrypha ? I have already indicated what I
believe to be part of the answer to this ques-
tion. Of the four Apooryphas two are intro-
ductory to the sacred Scriptures, while two
are conclusive to these Soriptures. Well, the
two introductory Apocryphas seem never, so
far as I know, to have aroußed this question;
they did not claim this right; though I admit
that there is some little difficulty with regard
to suoh a book as the Book of Enoch or the
Psalms of Solomon. But then of two conclu-
sive Apooryphas, why is one expelled from the
Church while the other lasts through all these
ages ? The only answer I can give to that is
by pointing you to the influence of one man—
Augustine. But for him, I believe, the
Church would have decreed very early—say dur-
ing the fourth century—that both Apocryphas
were to be dropped out of Scripture and out of
Church use. Augustine, however, who lived
at the dose of the fourth century, threw his
great influence on the side of retaining what
we call the Apocrypha; and so retained it
The othor three Apooryphas have all
perished. They were once no doubt popular
and useful, sometimes even more popular and
more used than Scripture itself; muoh of them


may be taken up into our Scripture looks; but
as a whole they have perished. Only names,
quotations, fragments, general ideas" of them
remain. Scholars unearth a book here or
there. But it is the Scriptures alone that have
lived, for they alone were in public* use and
possessed publio authority in the Church; and
with the Sonptures has lived that one Apocry-
pha which was printed inside the same volume
and which was allowed by the Church to have
some kind of authority and use within its
bounds.
I now come to the examination of this one
Apocrypha whioh is to us the Apoorypha,
which is in faot with most of us the only Apo-
crypha we ever heard of. This literature is a
kind of continuation of the Old Testament
literature and so we must consider the different
parts of the Old Testament Scriptures. These
are, roughly speaking, Law, History, Prophecy,
Psalms, Wisdom, Visions; but of course we
cannot keep them quite distinct. Law runs
into History, and History into Prophecy, and
Prophecy into Visions. Now in the ill poery-
pha, we find no Law and perhaps no Pro-
phecy; but we do find History, Visions, Wis-
dom, and Stories.
First, then I take the history. Suppose one
said-I wish to read anything in the Apoorypha
which will complete my knowledge of Old
Testament history, anything will fill in what
I already know or round it off, or anything
which will bridge the gap between that old
history and the history of the time of the
gospels. I shall suppose some such question
as that put by a reader, and I will so take up
the books of the Apoorypha one by one as to
attempt to answer it.
The first thin? then I find in the Apocrypha
to supply a Rap in the Old Testament is that
little book called the Prayer of Manasseh.
At the end of the book of Chronicles you read
of Manasseh being carried away prisoner to
Babylon, of his eyes being put out, of his being
loaded with fetters. Then you read of his
repentanoe, and of his being sent back foreign
over his own people again, and you read that
after this he lived a new life altogether
changing from having been a vary bad king to
being a very good one. Well, the little book
oalled the Prayer of Manasseh—only half a
page—gives that cry of penitence whioh was
the turning point in his history. And the
strange thing is that in Chronicles it is stated
that this prayer was written down and was to
be found in the history of Hozai or the Seers.
9
SJ


There is nothing perhaps very characteristic
in the prayer and after all it may bB mere
legend or tradition. But we may say of it
what Luther said of another part of the Apo-
crypha—‘‘ls it history ?” Then it is a holy
history. Is it fiction? Then it is a truly
beautiful, wholesome and profitable fiotion.”
The next thing we come to is the Book of
Baruoh and the Epistle of Jeremiah. Baruch
was, you remember, the friend and pupil of
Jeremiah, who stood by him in trouble and
persecution, and went to Egypt with his mas-
ter. The first part of this book is a prayer
which Baruch is supposed to write in Babylon,
a oonfeesion of sin for the Jewish leaders there.
It is a national confession of sin, in which the
author recognises Nebuchadnezzar as the
instrument in God’s hands for punishing the
people. The second part is concerning Wisdom
and the Law, a book of instruction and con-
solation and comfort, showing the people ho«v
to live amid a heathen world. I think both
parts are very fine —especially the conclusion
of the second part which begins “Oh! Jerus-
alem, lock about thee towards the East, and
behold the joy that cometh unto thee from
God,” and which ends, “For God shall lead
Israel with joy in the light of his glory with
the mercy and righteousness that cometh from
Him.”
The Epistle of Jeremiah is also addressed to
the captives, warning them against the idol-
atry which they would find all round them in
the land of their captivity; and though there
be no poetry in the epistle it is a powerful
exposure—what one might call a commonsense
exposure—of the folly of idolatry.
VIII.
As the history troves on we are carried more
and more into the captivity, the life of the
captivity, and the books of the oaptivitv. But
the man whose name is most famous as the
ideal Jew of oaptivity is Daniel; he represents
to all time what a Jew should be, and how a
Jew should behave when in the midst of a
heathen land. And so our next Apocryphal
book is the earlier addition to Daniel—con-
taining the prayer of Azariah in the furnace,
and the song of the three, Hananiah, Mishael,
and Azariah from the midst of the fire. The
most of chat song is familiar to us in what is
oalled the Benedicite—for that famous hymn
of the Christian Church is merely the last
part of the book oalled the Song of the Three
Holy children.
From the oaptivity we work towards the re-
turn, and here in Scripture we find the diffi-


cult books of Ezra and Nehemiah, whioh are
often called I. and 11. Ezra. Well, in the
Apocrypha there is also a book on this period,
called I. Esdras; but it is nothing save a re-
arrangement of the Sciiptural history of Ezra
and Nehemiah —and the rearrangement does
not make the history any clearer. There is
absolutely nothing new or helpful in this book
6xcept one story which is given about Zerub-
babel and his two companions. These three
proposed a riddle to themselves as to what on
earth was strongest. The first said Wine was
the strongest; the second said the King ; the
third (Zerubbabel)said “Womenarethestrong-
est,” but above all “Truth beareth away the
victory.” The great monaroh, Darius, himself
is called upon to decide, and he gives the palm
to Zerubbabel, offering him what reward he
may desire. And then Zerubbabel asks for
justice to Jerusalem, and so wins the mon-
arch’s approval for rebuilding this oity.
Now, this trial and the speeches made by the
three men I admire very much ; the speeches
about the strength of wine and the strength
of the king are good ; but the final speech
about the strength of women and the victory
of truth is, I thinu, excellent. Its shrewd
human wisdom and its lofty faith in Provi-
dence are very impressive.
But there is one more book describing the
history of the people in these days, and that is
the additions to the book of Esther. There
you find given the dream of Mordecai, the
story of how Mordecai helped the king, the
letter of Artaxerxes, the prayer of Mordecai
and of Esther, the soene beoween Esther and
Artaxerxes, and the final decree of Artaxerxes.
The scene between Esther and the King is a
powerful one, and there is also a certain in-
tensity in the prayers of Esther and Mordeoai
whioh gives this book a tone of realism some-
what unusual in these Apocryphal works.
And bo far as I have gone, that, I think,
would describe my feelings about this litera-
ture as a whole. You all know the difference
between speaking or debating and reoitmg.
Speaking is real, reoiting is only make-believe.
The highest that make-believe can attain is
rhetoric, for it is artificial. But the highest
speech can attain is oratory, for it is real. And
so in all forms of speech and literature we dis-
tinguish between the artificial and rhetorical
on the ooe hand, and the real and oratorical
on the other hand. When we are dealing with
the real, soul speaks to soul, and heart leaps
out to heart, and reason gazes on reason—
nothing between. But in the artificial and
rhetorical, the speaker or writer is not in the


midst of the real and speaking to us from out of
it; rather he himself is standing off from it at
a distance and oovering it with words. And
we, the hearers (if we have the instinot of the
real within us), feel that it is all words, elocu-
tion, rhetoric, make-believe, artifice.
Now, in reading the Apocrypha so far—its
prayers and praises, its sermons and exhorta-
tions, its confessions and reasonings—and in
comparing it with Scripture I feel that Sorip-
ture is more real, the Apocrypha more artifi-
cial. In Scripture God stands on one side and
the Evil One on the other, and man be ween,
and out of the reality of his peril man cries.
It may be the highest oratory or the deepest
reason, bub there is never artifioe or rhetoric,
acting or elocution, about it. But in the
Apoorypha the tone is different. The feeling
of reality is gone. Men are talking about
God, rather than talking in the presence of
God. There are fine speeches, fine prayers,
fine rhetorio, fine artifice, but the feeling of
the real is absent; and even in such a power-
ful scene as that between Esther and the
King, one feels the sense of melodrama rather
than of life and revelation.
Now the history of Israel comes to its close,
and this is marked in the Apocrypha by the
two books of the Maccabees. These form
about one quarter of the whole Apoorypha ;
and as faithful, aocurate, historical literature
they are some of the most valuable records we
have anywhere ; but this, of course, applies
especially to the first book of Maccabees
rather than to the second. One family of a
small people in a small land at a small corner
of a huge Empire takes its stand for liberty
and justice and pure religion; defies the
whole power of the whole Empire to crush it;
fights and dies and rises again and fights on,
year after year, until the cause is won ; while
the huge Empire and the great monarchs and
the big battalions and the bursting treasury
all have to retire from the unequal conflict;
and the little land and its heroio family are
left in peace.
There is no more heroio struggle in history
than that, no finer defiance anywhere or at
any time of pure brute force for the sake of
righteousness and the law of God, no more
magnificent stand ever made by the few
against the pure tyranny of numbers and
wealth and overwhelming might. The story
of it is simply told, and it appeals to the mind
of every man who is not a mere tyrant at
heart himself ; it appeals to every man who
can still in these days love heroism, and


oan appreciate a stand made against the whole
world for the sake of something higher than
this world altogether.
These things may be hard to understand in
our day of the self-inberest of individualism
and the tyranny of numbers, when every man
is expeoted to bow down to the idols the world
sets up, or else be destroyed. But still, even
in a weaker and more sordid day, our hearts
thrill when we read the story of the Macca-
bees ; and I am pleased to hear that in some of
the great publio schools of England this work
has been used as a reading-book in religious
history. Before, however, leaving these I ask
you to notice that second Maccabees is related
to first Maooabees, muoh as Ohronioles is re-
lated to Kings. It is fuller, more ecclesiasti-
cal, dwells more on Divine help, and idealises
more the central human figure.
But the next portion of the Apocrypha after
the histories is the stories: pure stories suoh as
Judith, Tobit, Susannah, Bel and the Dragon.
History tells us about the prominent publio
events, but stories show us the aobual life of
the people. History tells us what is done in
courts and camps, in council chambers and
parliaments; but the stories and the songs of
a people show us how the oommon people live
and feel.
Now, tn the Old Testament Scriptures them-
selves there are no pure stories. Some would
have us think that Daniel and Jonah are pure
storips, and some also the Book of Genesis and
so forth. But the general feeling of Scripture
students still is, and may I hope long continue
to be, that in Soripture itself there is hardly
anything like the pure story, hardly anything
I mean like Judith and Tobit, like Susannah
and Bel and the Dragon, If that be so, then
this part of the Apocrypha is something new;
it is not a mere continuation of what lies in
Scripture, it is something different from any-
thing to be found in Soripture.
Let me now look at these stories. Susannah
and Bel and the Dragon seem to he stories
directed against certain abuses and revealing
certain bad oustoms among the people. One is
the unsatisfactory and unfair way of receiving
evidence in a oharge laid against anyone. The
story of Susannah shows how Daniel would
have dealt with such questions; it is a story of
legal injustice being overturned by personal
astuteness, and the objeot of it seems to be to
effect a reform in the way of receiving evi-
■
:
i
/
/


■
deuce, weighing evidence, and especially in
cross-examining witnesses.
The story of Bel and the Dragon is like the
epistle of Jeremiah; it is a tale invented to
show the absurdity of worshipping either idol
or beast, as the peoples of Babylon and Egypt
did. No doubt the dispersed of Israel, living
among these peoples and being influenced
by their civilization and constrained by the
pressure of numbers, were greatly tempted to
forget Jehovah and oease honouring Him, and
to bow down with the bulk of their neighbours
in their heathen temples. Reading the Apo-
crypha as a whole, I am greatly struok by this
fact—that the main oonflict of the books is
always this fight between Jehovah and
Heathenism. Jehovah’s people were in a
miserable minority, mere oapoives or wander-
ers or fugitives, scattered amid the bulk of
Heathenism; and Jehovah’s religion was,
humanly speaking, in danger of being crushed,
forgotten, laid on one side altogether. H«noe
through the Apocrypha, just as all through
Daniel, the watchword is “Stand fast by
Jehovah and defy Heathenism.” And this
story of Bel and the Dragon is just one more
blow struok at Heathenism, ridiculing it and
showing up its falsehood.
Judith has been called a perfeot work of art;
and it is a story somewhat like that of Arthur
and his Knights, a fiction based on the nation's
anoient history, a fiction to fill men's mi ids
with heroieenduranee, and h-lptliem to remem-
ber how great their past had been. And
though the Maooabees and their followers were
the true actual heroes of their own day. yet
the poets and artists who told greab tales of
the past and filled men's minds with great
memories, great hopes, great aspirations, great
ambitions—these men also deserve their share
in the reoord of a people’s history. The
soldiers and sailors of the days of Elisabeth
were the heroic m6n of aotionof that revival of
English national feeling? but the poets and
dramatists who aroused and fed 1 that feeling,
they too were makers of history. And so such
a writer as the author of Judith was a true
helper in the people’s life as well as the greab
Hasmonaeans.
Bub the most interesting story of all is that
of Tobib. It shows a poor Jew, becoming ever
poorer and poorer through his faithfulness to
Jehovah, and yet always remaining faithful.
His alms and his prayers ever ascend as a
memorial before God, and at last God remem-
bers and delivers him. There must have been
thousands of suoh obscure pious Jewish homes,
where amid all adversity the family kept true
(I
■ ; i
■


to the one God of their fathers. The book
also oasts three interesting sidelights on the
life of the people. There is a dog m the story
who is a faithful oompanion of the hero. Now
the dog to the Jew was an unclean animal, but
to the Persian he was the guardian of herds
and homes, like the collie of Sootland;. and so
we see the touch of Persian life in this book.
Also the fish in the story tells of Egyptian life;
for the gall and liver of the crocodile were used
in these parts to cure epilepsy and blindness.
Also we see the presenoe of angels and demons
in the story, showing how the Jew of these days
had oome to feel that both Jehovah and the
Evil One acted on human life through their
ministering spirits.
After history and story oome the proverbs,
the wisdom, the sayings of the people; and
this is by far the largest, the most important,
and the finest part of the Apocrypha—one
third in fact of the whele. The two books of
ib are oalled the Wisdom of Solomon and
Ecclesiastious.
The book of Eoolesiasoicus is more accurately
called the book of the Son of Siraoh or Ben
Siraoh. Different writers name it in several
different ways, but Kcclesiastieus ib the Church
name for the book and has been for centuries.
This work is an almost purely Palestinian or
Jewish production; and herein it differs from
the Kook of Wisdom, foi that shows Greek and
Alexandrian life. Ben Sirack seems to have
been a sorihe who devoted himself not to the
study of the Law, butspeoially to the study of
the book of Proverbs; and, himself claiming
the help of the Divine Wisdom, tries to con-
tinue, supplement, fill out that inspired work
of Soripture. At the same time I do not
think that this book is to be taken as contain-
ing the sayings of just one man; rather I think:
it oontains the proverbial wisdom of a religious
people. For when a people’s inspired teaohers
produce books like Proverbs and Ecclesiastes,
and when these works soak into a people s life,
then the ourrent literature of their religious
life will tend to keep on produoing sayings
huilt on the model of these Scriptures.
Ecolesiastieus then is to be looked upon as a
filling out, a supplementing, a continuing of
the books of Proverbs by the religious thought
of the remnant of Israel.
Now, you yourselves will see that tt is very
hard for me to say anything about this book.
I have been wishing for a long time to take up
the book of Proverbs in my pulmt work but
I have shrunk from the exceeding difficulty of


the task; and about equally difficult would it
be to go into this book. Only a very few things
therefore, scrappy outside things, oan I say
about it.
Listen first to what Schurer says of the
book. “The author inouloates above all the
duty of adhering faithfully to the Law and
keeping the Commandments. But besides
this he also points out bow the truly wise man
is to comport himself in the manifold relation-
ship of practical life. And so his book con-
tains an inexhaustible fund of rules for the
regulation of one’s oonduot in joy and sorrow,
in perplexity and adversity, in sickness and
health, in struggle and temptation, in social
life, in intercourse with friends and enemies;
with high or low, wioh rich or poor, with the
good and the wicked, with the wise and the fool-
ish; in trade, business, and one’s ordinary
oalling; above all in one’s own home and
family in connection with the training of
children, the treatment of menservants and
maidservants, and the way in which a man
ought to behave towards his own wife and the
fair sex generally. In all these manifold rela-
tionships the most preoise directions are furn-
ished, directions that are prompted by a spirit
of moral earnestness, which only now and then
degenerates into mere worldly prudence. The
Counsels of the author are the mature fruit of
a profound comprehensive study of human
things and of a wide experience of life. In
entering as they do into such a multiplicity of
details, they at the same time furnish us with
a lively pioture of the manners, and customs,
and oulture generally of his time and
people.”
I find the book pleasant reading, and easier
reading than Proverbs, for it is arranged bv
subjeots. I oould spend a whole leoure pick-
ing out interesting, or useful, or shrewd, or
deep sayings in it. The general tone of the
book is similar to that of Proverht; a peculiar
mixture of shrewd wisdom, stubborn piety,
sound morality, and reverent humility—tis a
commentary on the text “Be ye wise as
serpents and simple as doves.’' .Simeon the
Righteous said, “Life resteth upon three things
—revelation, worship and kindm ss.” And that
is a guide to this book. For as you read it
you feel that all through there is the revelation
behind it, the revelation on which it rests, the
Law and the Propheoyand the Wisdom. Also
the two great duties impressed upon us men
are those of faithful worship of the one living
and true God, and doing deeds of habitual
kindness towards man. But besides these you
feel another element running through the book


■.
i
\
i
\
/
)
!
\
—the tone of a depressed and beaten minority
amid the world-powers. There is a stubborn
enduranoe in the book, and a steady teaohing
of shrewd wisdom, and a fixed determination
towards a simple, sound, moral life; these
principles then, the virtues of a faithful
minority, I feel all through the book alongside
those of the revelation, the worship, and the
kindness. And with that I leave the book.
Now turn to the most remarkable, the most
interesting, and from a literary point of view,
perhaps the most exoellent book in all the
Apocrypha. I mean the Wisdom of Solomon.
This book is not Palestinian or Jewish in tone,
It oomes from Alexandria; it shews us the
Jew under the influence of Greek life and
Egyptian wealth. In Alexandria the Jewish
youth seems to have yielded to the current of
life, and followed after things that were
Greek, things that were wealthy, things that
were luxurious, things that were of the desire
of the flesh, the desire of the eyes, and the
pride of life. He seems to have forgotten or
discarded the stubborn pieoy, the sound
morals, the enduring faith of his fathers; and
he seems to have read and quoted the book of
Ecolesiastes in Soripture as justifying him in
this Epioureau life.
Well, the author of the Wisdom of Solomon
set himself to fight this tendenoy and beat
back this drift; and so he did it by writing a
book whioli should oombat the evil influence of
the book of Eoolesiastes. Hence the Book of
Wisdom is written as a kind of corrective to
the false impressions reoeived from the Scrip-
ture book of Eoolesiastes. Not that the Sorip-
ture is really in itself imperfeot; but it is
liable to be misunderstood and misapplied by
thoughtless youth and self-indulgent or scepti-
cal men. And so if you study the Book of
Ecclesiastes you will find that the best com-
mentary upon it is the Book of Wisdom.
In itself also you will find that this Book of
Wisdom is an exoellent work ; a work beauti-
ful and delightful to read. It is a kind of
panorama of the history of Israel, shewing the
chosen people led on from oenturv to oenturv
under the guidance of the Angelic Being called
the Divine Wisdom. And especially does this
book hit out at Egypt, the people of Darkness,
the land of Ham. It was Ham and his de-
scendants that God oursed and plagued and
steeped in darkness from of old ; and are the
ohildren of light, the ohildren of the Revela-
tion and the Covenant, are the Jews going to
desert the revelation of their God to follow


/
)
after the darkness, the paganism, the despair,
the blank heathenism and earthly indulgence
of the children of ?
This Book of Wisdom seems to have been
much used by both St. Paul and 3t. John in
their writings, and above all by the author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews. And it is oon-
oerning this work that Ewald writes—“ But
for suoh books there are many things whioh
it would be difficult to oomprehend in a Paul,
a John, and their contemporaries. In the
nervous energy of his proverbial style, and in
the depth of his representation, we have a
premonition of John; and in his conception
of heathenism, a preparation for Paul, like a
warm rustle of the spring ere its time be fully
oome.”
I now come to the last book of all, a book of
visions, the book called 11. Esdras, or the
fourth book of Ezra. This book had a great
vogue in the early Christian Churoh, and
even in the Churoh of the Middle Ages ; and
it oiroulated widely not only in Europe, but
also throughout the Church of the East.
This apoorypha contains seven visions, with
four chapters which are supposed to have
been added by a Christian hand. In these
seven visions Ezra always begins by complain-
ing against God’s providenoe. How is it that
Israel is soorushedand scattered and tormented
while the Greek and the Roman —mere heathen
—are prosperous world-powers? Why always
do the wicked and the heathen, the un-
righteous and the unfaithful, prosper while
God’s peoole have hard things dealt out to
them ? The same ory which we hear from
Jeremiah and Habakkuk we have in this
book from Ezra. And the answer to it is con-
tained in these visions granted him from God.
The details of the visions I need not refer
to ; you all know how hard it is to interpret
Apooalyptio books. But the general lesson is
quite obvious. There is a time for everything.
And God allows the heathen aDd the wioked,
the ungodly, and the unrighteous, and the
unfaithful to aoquirepower and heap up riches
and enjoy prosperity for a time. It is His
will they should d« so. His purposes are
fulfilled thereby. But that does not mean
that He has deserted His people, or thrown
over His oause, or forgotten His revelation.
When the time comes in the fulness of the
\
.
\
/
\


times God will assert His will, overthrow
Mammon and the world, heathenism and the
world-powers, and will bring forth His rem.
nant into viotory and light.
Therefore leb us be faithful and endure j for
that is the last word of the Jewish Apocrypha,
Though the faithful are in a hopeless minority
atrainst the world and the Evil One and their
followers, yet men must keep faithful and
endure, for it is only for a time,
Roll thy way upon Jehovah,
Trust also in Him, and He shall bring it to
pass,
And He shall make thy righteousness go
forth as the light,
And thy judgment as the noonday.
[OOBBEOTION.— In section 8, paragraph 4,
the name Artaxerxes should be Xerxes.]
- ••
(I
(!
/
/
i
\
i
\
i
j
\
/
i
/
.
/
/
\
/




t%*M**-P^*f
Doi, l .
T /
r
11. '•
