

Entered. At Stationers Hall


When I was a youth I plied my pen,
(It’s five or six years, I think, since then,)
And blessed with a modest prophetic mind,
In a vacant mood I have oft designed
U pon my blotting pad in a hand so free,
A pretty little coronet and a great big B !




| Jvly hair was curly, my figure neat,
And I tripped so jauntily down the street,
And the promenade that I did prefer,
Was the nearest way to Downing-street and Westminster;
And I ran against the sentry at the Treas-u-ree,
Whilst dreaming of the coronet, and great big B!


I point with pride to the slaughtered blacks !
Talk of squandered money and wasted lives —
Think what yards of crape are wanted by their widowed
And loudly cheer, with three times three, wives !
The pretty little coronet, and great big B !




What is it makes my name adored ?
The nice muddle we have made abroad !
But at this little muddle I serenely smile,
For I can point to Cyprus as a useful isle !
Though that useful climate might not agree
With the pretty little coronet, and great big B !


I felt that Providence kindly sent
Me to re-model the Parliament,
Where in tones so modest I hum this song,
That / am the only man who can’t go wrong !
For this is the motto of a good To-ree,
A pretty little coronet, and a great big B !


Now look at India, and understand
That “ Peace with Honour” is a piece of land !
J littL X Ctl'wC Willi IIVUIVJUi lb ci Ui IclfKi •
And of all abuse I can bear the brunt,
For I turn on my opponents with a “ scientific front ”
And this is the " spirited poli-cee,”
Of the pretty little coronet, and great big B t


In Asia Minor my proudest work.
Is to pay for improving the noble Turk ;
for I put my hand in the British till,
And I shovel out the millions to pay the bill ;
For I am the saviour of my Coun-lree,
With my pretty little coronet, and great big B !


Whatever the country may say or think,
That the nation is on destruction's brink.
I'll stick to my own opinion, and I
Will have a busy finger in the diplomatic pie,
And so I claim a majori-tee,
For the pretty little coronet, and great big B . f


Now politicians all, whoever you may be,
If you want to rise to the top of the tree,
This golden rule to you applies,
Be very mysterious if you can’t be wise ;
For that’s the royal road, I say, to win K.G.,
The pretty little coronet, and great big BI
Grand Chorus.
For that’s the royal road, I say, to win K f,
A pretty little coronet, and a great big B!
