

1




The World War
Its Relation to the Eastern Question
and Armageddon


A. G. Daniells
A World-Wide Traveller and Lecturer


The World War
Its Relation to the Eastern
Question and Armageddon
ARTHUR G. DANIELLS
SIGNS PUBLISHING COMPANY LIMITED
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia


Entered under Australian Commonwealth
Copyright Act, 1912


FOREWORD
THE story of the world war is familiar to ail. Its daily-increasing horrors
are heralded morning and evening with startling headlines in every
newspaper in every country the world over. It would seem as if
civilisation were committing suicide —that all the forces of knowledge and
power in this enlightened age had contributed to a carnival of self-destruction.
It is plainly evident that an acute crisis in the affairs of the world
has set in, and it is more and more clearly dawning upon the consciousness
of men that this upheaval of the nations may be the prelude of “ the war of
the great day of God, the Almighty.”
A world-problem challenge* attention, and many thoughtful men are
searching for a solution. Says the Springfield Republican, U.S.A.;—
“ Writers who can tell a stupefied world what this fearful portent
means, who can throw light on the great fundamental problems of the race
and give lome hint as to its destiny, will have an attentive and even anxious
audience.”
In this hour of trouble unparalleled in human history, we turn to the
Word of the living God—from the uncertainty of the times to the “sure
word of prophecy.” Now, as in all past crises, that Word is a light which
all men may follow with confidence and hope.
This book is the outgrowth of sincere convictions, and carries a message
which entitles it to candid and thoughtful consideration. It is sincerely
hoped that its perusal may lead many to a better understanding of the
vital significance of this world war in its relation to the coming kingdom of
peace.
THE PUBLISHERS.


CONTENTS
The World War -
The Cause and the Meaning - - 21
The Great Nations Speak for Themselves - 31
The Eastern Question -
The Fate of the Ottoman Empire - 55
Armageddon - - ■ '
Q 7
The Present Outlook
A Kingdom of Righteousness - - 10<J


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
A. G. Daniells, Evangelist ... ... Frontispiece
British in the Trenches ... ... ... ... 12
Principal Battle Fronts, Jan. 1, 1917 ... ... 15
With the British Navy in the North Sea —A Diver 17
The “Forbidden Zones” ... ... ... ... 19
King George V and Queen Mary ... ... 22
Earl Kitchener of Khartoum ... ... ... 25
Right Hon. David Lloyd George ... ... 28
Arctic Conditions in France ... ... ... 30
President Woodrow Wilson ... ... ... 34
King Victor Emanuel 111 of Italy ... ... 37
King Albert of Belgium ... ... ... 39
Some Big Shells Ready for Firing ... ... 44
Italians Attacking High Mountain Positions ... 47
General Joffre ... ... ... ... ... 50
Canine Workers at the Front ... .... ... 53
Destruction of a Zeppelin Raider ... ... 56
Earl Kitchener and Sir Wm. Robertson ... 59
British Shell Bursting on the German Trenches 62
Munition Workers ... ... ... ... 65
King Ferdinand of Rumania ... ... ... 68
German Officer Laying Barbed Wire ... ... 74
The Kaiser ... ... ... ... ... 78
Wounded Men Felling Trees for Trench Props 80
Germans Setting Up Wire Entanglements ... 85
King Constantine of Greece ... ... ... 87
Guns in the Snow in Serbia ... ... ... 89
In Devastated Galicia ... ... ... ... 92
British and Indian Officers ... ... ... 94
Italy and the War —A Crowd of Sympathisers 100
Mud Conditions in France ... ... ... 107
Lord French Inspects Boy Soldiers ... ... 113
German Armoured Train ... ... ... ... 115
One of Italy’s Big Guns ... ... ... ... 120
Austrian Fugitives ... ... ... ... 122
German Infantry ... ... ... ... ... 125


HIS RUMBLING KN
CHARIOT SOUND
WE tread the fearful brink of time!
The world is near its doom ;
Yet to be living is sublime.
world is near its doom ;
be living is sublime.
For light breaks through the gloom.
Dread and alarm spread far and wide
To startle and affright;
Still for His own at eventide
God speaks, — Let there be light!
Portentous are the omens here;
Their certain tones declare
The end of earth’s domain is near.
To meet thy God prepare!
Aghast, the nations, in their fright,
A yawning chasm see;
But faithful children of the light
Herald eternity,
E’en to the earth’s remotest bound
The joyful tidings bring.
We hear His rumbling chariot sound.
He comes, our Judge and King!
Worthie Harris Holden.


British Tank
THE WORLD WAR.
The most gigantic, devastating war recorded in the,
annals of the human race, suddenly broke upon the
world in the summer of 1914. From the very hist,
several of the most powerful nations of earth weie in-
volved, and by the close of 1916 there had been swept
into the cataclysm sixteen nations, representing three-
fifths of the human family, and a like proportion of the
land area of the world. The nations that have not
been drawn into this titanic struggle have found it
most difficult to keep out. It is not without good
reason that this great conflict has been named “ 1 he
World War.”
A Heavy Toll in Human Life.
The world is staggering under the terrific blows
dealt in this great war. The reports of casualties
covering only the first two years of unpiecedentcd
strife are paralyzing —more than four million killed,
nearly fourteen million wounded, and upwards of foui
[ll]


*
a>
X
o
c
o
u
H
-c
-4-t
c
t-H
£
(0
•c
OQ


million taken prisoners and missing—a total of more
than twenty-two million. And yet, notwithstanding
these fearful losses, the third year of warfare was
begun with twenty million or more men still under
arms. These multiplied millions, when called to the
front, were in the vigor of manhood. They were the
strength and flower of this generation.
Dates of Declarations of War
Following is a list of all the formal declarations of war in the
present conflict, with their dates ; also the dates of the more im-
portant cases in which hostilities began without formal notice.
(Ifficial announcements of a state of war, as in the case of Russia
and Bulgaria, are treated as equivalent to formal declarations of
war:—
July 28. Austria v. Serbia.
Aug. 1. Germany v. Russia.
Aug. 3. Germany v. France.
Aug. 4. Germany v. Belgium.
Aug. 4. France v. Germany. 1
Aug. 4. Great Britain v. Germany
Aug. 6. Austria v. Russia.
Aug. 7. Montenegro v. Austria.
Aug. 10. France v. Austria.
Aug. 10. Austria v France.
Aug. 12. Great Britain v. Austria.
Aug. 12. Montenegro v. Germany.
Aug. 23. Japan v. Germany.
Aug. 25. Austria v. Japan.
Aug. 28. Austria v. Belgium.
Oct. 29. Turkey v. Russia. 1
Nov. 2. Russia v. Turkey.
Nov. 5. Great Britain v. Turkey.
Nov. 5. F’rance v. Turkey.
Nov. 7. Belgium v Turkey.
Nov. 7. Serbia v. Turkey.
Nov. 10. Montenegro v. Turkey.
May 23. Italy v. Austria.
June 3. San Marino v. Austria.
Aug. 20. Italy v. Turkey.
Oct. 7. Russia v. Bulgaria.
Oct. 14. Bulgaria v. Serbia.
Oct. 14. Great Britain v. Bulgaria.
Oct. 16. Bulgaria v. Russia.
Oct. 16. France v. Bulgaria.
Oct. 18. Italy v. Bulgaria.
Oct. 18. Montenegro v. Bulgaria.
Mar. 9. Germany v. Portugal.
Mar. 10. Portugal v. Germany.
Mar. 16. Austria v. Portugal. 1
Aug. 28. Italy v. Germany.
Aug. 28. Rumania v. Austria.
Aug. 28. Germany v. Rumania.
Aug. 30. Rumania v. Bulgaria. 2
Aug. 31. Turkey v. Rumania.
Sept. 1. Bulgaria v. Rumania.
■•Began hostilities without formal
declaration.
•“Ultimatum.
Current History, February, 1917, P 891
Never before in the history of the world have such
vast armies been assembled on battlefields, never has
warfare been so deadly, never has the toll in wounded


Country.
Killed.
Wounded.
Prisoners
Total.
England .
. 205,447
512,465
109,358
827 240
France .
870,000
2,704,000
400,000
3,974,(Mhi
Germany .
893,211
3,163,334
245,000
4,30 1,5 4 5
Austria .
523,125
1,775,125
591,000
2,889.250
Bulgaria .
7,500
35,000
6,000
48,500
Turkey .
127,000
550,000
70,000
747,000
Russia . .
. 1,360,000
4,720,000
2,420,000
8,500,000
Italy .
105,000
245,000
55.000
405,000
Serbia . .
60,000
140,000
200.000
400,000
Belgium
50,000
110,000
40,000
200,000
Totals .
. 4,201,283
13,954,924
4,136,358
22,293.535
and dead been so heavy. As Prince Lvoff, President
of the All-Russian Zemstvo Union, says:—
“Millions of strong and noble lives have been swept away;
energy has been wasted and forces have been destroyed
which would have lasted for decades, perhaps for centuries
of peaceful, industrious life. Colossal natural resources have
been consumed, precious treasures accumulated by human
genius have been demolished, which would have subsisted
many generations of humanity. And still there is no end.
Total Casualties for the First Two
Years of the World War
From Aug. 1 1914, to July 31, 1916, as estimated by
the Society foi the Study of the Social Consequences
ot the War, of Copenhagen, Denmark (see Washing-
ton, D.C., “Post,” Sept. 22, 1916).
This merciless destruction has naturally furnished some
foundation for calling this callous and monstrous war a ‘war
of exhaustion.’ ” 1
The war that began in 1914 has filled the world with
more sorrowing relatives, fatherless children, and
broken-hearted widows than any other war since the
world began.
It would seem that the terrible destruction already
wrought would so appall the rulers of the nations in-
volved that they would find some way to bring this
1 “Current History,” May, 1916, p. 344.


struggle to an end. But it does not. The combatants
apparently grow more determined as the war
lengthens. One writer declares that this war seems
“like some infernal dream devised by the imps of hell
sitting in an eternity of inventive council.” Another
says: “The rulers of nations are stupid. It would
seem that they were blinded by the gods. It is as if
madness is upon them, a fatuity incurable; a mania
fatal, malignant, satanic.”
The Principal Battle Fronts, Jan. 1, 1917
New Instruments of Destruction.
The editor of the Washington (D.C.) “Times”' de
dares: —
“The world was horrified when it was first announced that
asphyxiating gases were being used in the present war. It
was appalled, and still is, at the revolution in naval fight-
2 Sept. 17, 1916.


iri'g .. . brought with the submarine. The aircraft, drop-
ping deadly missiles upon defenceless and undefended towns,
brought another shock. The new British armored car is
but one more steel-geared Frankenstein of war. It seems as
if the resources and the ingenuity of modern science were
never so zealous, so persistent, so coldly,
fiendishly determined, _ as they have been in fabricating
engines of destruction.” Yet “as we become accustomed to
the reports of daily agonies of whole populations, sensibili-
ties are benumbed; civilisation pinches itself, wondering
whether it is paralysed. It has reason to fear.”
More Than Half the World at War
ENTENTE.
British Empire . 422.000,000
France and colonies 04,000.000
Russian Empire 171,000,04)0
Italy and colonies 36,8.00,000
Belgium and Congo 23 000 000
07,000,000
Serbia* 3 U,958,000
'2,900,000
m?m,nT gro 516,000
frS'l-; 7,000,000
United States . 1 00,000,000
IS“ ■ • ;;■ .SSSS
,5.,, v.c. ;.v\v;v? : -.vr.v. v. 'StSS
' ' ' ' ■ 0.680,000
Total . . 1.389,772.000
CENTRAL POWERS.
German Empire 7S nmi non
TS& Hm, “ r ■■ " .’•■ « 600 000
Bulgaria’ 3] ,580,000
utllgaria 4,500,000
Total 163,580,000
Population of nations at war ....... 1 553 ss? non
World’s population 1 . I 1,72M26 000
The editor of the New York “Sun” 3 says;
“A!l the world has been stunned by the concussion of
earth-shaking howitzers, dismayed by the rending asunder
o the earth itself in the rage and with the dreadful engines
of the new war—and the people have said: Nothing remains
but brutality and horror; all the glamour and romance are
•July 10, 1916.


J. W. Small & Co., Photo
With the British Nnvy in the North Sea —A Diver


crushed out of life in this hideous catastrophe. Joy is dead,
hope is fled, nothing is left on earth but gloom and death.”
Professor Ferrero, the Italian historian, expresses
the same thought in these words: —
‘‘The Europe in which we were born has in great part
crumbled away since Aug. 1, 1914. Everything has been
upheaved, suspended, overturned, destroyed.”
A Heavy Toll in Money.
Never before has the cost of war in money been so
great. In round numbers, the first two years’ war
cost the nations engaged in it ten billion, pounds—an
average cost of about £13,600,000 a day. And at the
close of the first two years the expense of maintaining
the conflict had reached the astounding sum of
£20,000,000 a day, or about £14,000 a minute, night
and day.
The total expense for operating the Government of
the. United States during 1915 was a little more than
£l4o,ooo.ooo—the amount required to finance this
great war only one short week. These figures are
truly appalling.
Waste and Ruin.
The war that began in 1914 far exceeds, in magni-
tude and waste and ruin, any previous war of which we
have any record. The statistics of all the great wars
of the nineteenth century show that the casualties
amounted to about ten million men, and the expendi-
ture to a little more than £5,000,000,000. The total
cost, in lives and money, of all the great wars of the
previous century aggregates scarcely more than half
the cost of the World War during the first two years
of its progress, from 1914 to 1916.


But, as Mr. Hamilton Holt, editor of the New York
“Independent,” truly says:—
“It is impossible to compute statistically the grief, misery,
and want necessarily involved in these amazing totals.
THE “ FORBIDDEN ZONES”
The Areas of Unrestricted Operation of Submarines since Feb. 1, 1917
Hunger and suffering do not lend themselves to the pro-
cesses of arithmetic. Blasted homes are not to be ex-
pressed in algdbraic symbols, and stunted lives are not to
be interpreted by mathematics.”


Nothing Like It Since the World Began.
It is .becoming more evident, as time passes, that
this world-struggle is a far more serious affair than
was at first realised. Winston Spencer Churchill,
former First Lord of the British Admiralty, writes: —
“When Armageddon burst over Europe, probably no single
brain achieved a complete and rightly proportioned view of
the cataract of events. . . .
“For nearly two years [now more than three] the armies
of Europe have dwelt close together in opposing ditches,
fed by lavish floods of human life arid 'broadening streams
of shot and shell, tormenting each other by ever-growing
and improving agencies of death; and behind them their
countries have transformed the infinitely varied activities of
modern civilisation into three comprehensive institutions of
the barracks, the arsenal, and the hospital. . . .
"Every man, every woman, every workable child, is
gradually being fitted into the war machine.
The editor of “Life” (Australia) observes:—
‘‘The great war grows in scale and significance as each
day passes. It is plainly ‘the war of all the centuries.’
. . . The war will not only give the world a new map; it
will give to civilised history a new date, and perhaps a new
form.”
Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler says:—
“The cataclysm is so awful that it is quite within the
bounds of truth to say that on July 31 [1914] the curtain
went down upon a world which will never be seen again.”
Prince Lvoff expresses the same thought:—
“This war has separated the past from the present by a
heavy curtain. Whenever and however it may come to an
end, it is clear that we are through with the old order of
things, and a new one will have to take its place.”s
In a recent address before the Rumanian Chamber
of Deputies, Mr. Jonescu, leader of the National Demo-
cratic Party, said:—
“We are faced by a catastrophe involving the whole of the
human race; we have before our eyes the declining twilight
of one world, preceding the dawn of another and a new.” 6
‘“Current History,” May, 1916, p. 344. 6 “1d.,” October, 1916, p. 64.


The Cross on which the Peace of the World has been Crucified
THE CAUSE AND THE MEANING.
As the months have rolled by, and the horrors of
the World War have been driven deeper into the
hearts of multiplied millions, the questions have been
repeated with increasing emphasis: What is the cause
of this war? What are these nations fighting about
so desperately? What is the prize for which such
heavy toll is being paid? What does it mean? and
what will be the end-of the struggle?
Facing these pressing inquiries, the editor of the
Springfield “Republican” says:—
“Writers who can tell a stupefied world what this fearful
portent means, who can throw light on the great funda-
mental problems of the race, and give some hint as to its
destiny, will have an attentive and even anxious audience.”
This ‘Tearful portent” must have both a cause and
a meaning. A World War is not being fought with-


J. W. Small & Co., Photo.
King George V and Queen Mary
A snapshot of the King and Queen while on their way to attend a patriotic demonstration


out a cause. The rulers, the Premiers, the Secretaries
of Foreign Affairs, the Ambassadors, the great gene-
rals and admirals of these warring nations, know very
well what is at stake in this great conflict.
Furthermore, a World War must have a great
meaning as well as a great cause. What this colossal
struggle means to the world, how it will leave mankind
when it is over, what will follow—these are questions
of supreme interest to the whole human race. And
the meaning concerns us more vitally and seriously
than does the cause.
Unquestionably, this World War belongs to a
series of epoch-making events which lead toward one
great culminating event in the history and destiny of
the human race. Only a partial explanation of its
meaning can be found in the field of international poli-
cies. treaties, commerce, and the like. Not until the
realm of the supernatural is entered, and the high pur-
pose and controlling power of the Supreme being are
recognised, can there be found a full and satisfactoiy
explanation of this great catastrophe that has over-
taken us.
The insistent demand for an explanation of what is
felt to be the “greatest crime in all history” has led to
a most diligent study of the real cause, and to a clean-
cut statement of the findings in this investigation.
Members of Cabinets, statesmen, and diplomats have
taken the world into their confidence, revealing and ex-
plaining to them international policies, and
complications that had previously been labelled “con-
fidential” and “secret.” Editors, historians, and vete-
ran war correspondents have dug their way into tle


hidden ramifications of international affairs, and have
brought to the public the facts have found.
As a result of this thorough research and candid
explanation, there is a far better understanding now of
the cause of the war than there was when it broke
upon the world so suddenly during the summer of
1914. And a remarkable unanimity of views regard-
ing the cause has been reached. While it is clearly
recognised that there are a number of secondary con-
tributing causes, yet there is a general agreement that
one primary outstanding cause looms above all the
others.
“A World Change.”
In an effort to trace the cause of this World War.
L. T. Hobhouse, in “The World in Conflict,” says
It is not in reality one event that has changed the world
Page a ,^ orld ' chan S e tha t has culminated in a great event.”—
Phis is an important discrimination. The devas-
tating war into which the world has been plunged is
more than an event. It is the culmination of a “world-
change” that has been effected-by decades of interna-
tional expansions, rivalries, and intrigues
These world-conditions clash at so many vital points
that war ts inevitable, unless some of these policies are
abandoned But abandonment would mean serious
oss and the possible elimination of some of the inde
pendent kingdoms. This none are willing to risk.
Fighting for a World-Highway.
Writing from the war zone to the “Christian
Herald” of May 31. 1916. Maynard Owen WHiams


Earl .Kitchener, of Khartoum


gives some very direct statements regarding the prim-
ary cause of the war. He says :
Ihe war is being fought, not for a European capital, but
lu r tr W , odd hl S hwa y- • • • Russia is fighting for access to
the Mediterranean . . . England, through her fleet, the
honeycombed heights of Gibraltar, and the sand ditch at
Suez, will maintain control of the inland sea. . . . Germany
is hghting t o win a commercial triumph over the sea route
to the East. . . . Turkey is on the shortest line between
he population centres of the world. Germany is fighting
for this trade route.” b
Frederic C. Howe, author of “Why War?” pre-
sents a similar view. He says:
When the story of the European war comes to be written
by an impartial historian, its ultimate causes will be found
]W. E , 16 7 1Urd 1 er l . of . the r Archduke Ferdinand in
sma, the alleged mobilization of the armies of Russia, or
the invasion of Belgium. . . . One of the hidden, unofficial
explosives is the struggle for the Mediterranean.”:
In his volume, “Why War?” Mr. Howe shows that
Hie Mediterranean has long since been the storm-
centre of Europe. The colonial policies of England,
France, Germany, Italy, and Russia have, in the main’
revolved about the control of the lands bordering
about it.
Access to, free passage through, or control of, the
Mediterranean is the permanent objective behind the
foreign policy of all the greater European Powers. It
is an objective, however, that lies at the very heart of
the industrial and commercial life of Great Britain and
Russia, that is bound up with all the ambitions of Ger-
many, and that underlies the industrial and financial
aspirations of Italy and the Balkan States. For the
Mediterranean is the greatest trade route in the world
It is the gateway from the Occident to the Orient
Scribner’s Magazine,” May, 1916, p. 621.


The shifting of the seat of war from the French and
Russian frontiers is a shifting from assumed centres of
conflict to the actual centre of conflict—a conflict
which, under diplomatic conversations and conven-
tions, has been going on for the greater part of twenty
years. And it is a struggle almost as old as the world.
Constantinople, the Real Bone of Contention.
The situation outlined in these excerpts has led to
the statement by many authorities that the Near East
is the “storm-centre” of conflict. Prof. Roland G.
Usher, of Washington University, St. Louis, says:
“It should now be evident that there is much to be said
for the view that the key to the present situation is Con-
stantinople. We are dealing with a World War whose
results are not expected to develop in Europe proper. 1 c
key to this situation lies in Constantinople, and the iur
holds it.”
This position is corroborated by many other
writers, one of whom, Dr. H. H. Powers, says:
“Constantinople with its tributary straits is the most
strategic site in the world. . . . When Napoleon and the
Czar Alexander sat down at Tilsit to divide the world
between them, Alexander is said to have plead with
Napoleon: ‘Give or take what you will, but give us Con-
stantinople. For Constantinople my people are prepared to
make any sacrifice.’ Napoleon bent long over the map, and
then straightening up with sudden resolution replied: Con-
stantinople? Never! That means the rule of the wor 1 -'
Nothing has happened since to discredit this judgment.
Merchant and strategist alike still rank Constantinople as
the most valuable of territorial possessions. It is now, as it
was a century ago, the centre of the world’s strategy, and as
such it must be accounted the chief issue in the present
World War. And this is not the first war, nor will it be the
last, to be waged for its possession.” 2
Soon after the war began, one of Europe’s oldest
and most experienced diplomatists ventured to tell the
world what this great conflict was about. Beginning
2 “The Things Men Fight For,” pp. 76, 77.


The Right Hon. David _ Lloyd George


with Austria’s declaration of war on Serbia, he says:—
“What is the vital, paramount importance of Serbia, that
Austria and Germany should have been willing to risk their
very existence as nations to conquer her? ' What is the
extraordinary value of Serbia to Russia, that, at the mere
threat of war, and before a shot had been fired, the Czar’s
armies were summoned together as hurriedly as troops can
be summoned together in Russia?
"The answer is this: Serbia, a small but powerful Slav
country, is the only buffer State in the Balkans that 'bars the
approach of Austria to the Aegean Sea. Salonika, the chief
port to the northern side of the eastern Mediterranean, lies
less than three hundred miles from Belgrade, the Serbian
capital, which is itself situated on the very borders of
Austria-Hungary. Clearly, it is all to the advantage of any
great power which has interests in the Aegean, in the
Balkans generally, or in Asia Minor, that Salonika should
be in its possession, and that the way to Salonika should be
at all times open without the shadow of a doubt.
“Two great powers have vital interests in Asia Minor and
the Aegean. They are Russia on the one hand, and Germany
plus Austria on the other. Up to 1908 the strength of
Turkey rendered the two groups impotent; they could ex-
press vain wishes without taking steps to realise them. . . .
“The long struggle 'between the Teutons and the Slavs
for the possession of the Balkan Peninsula was to be fought
out. Serbia’s paramountcy meant that Russia would dictate
the policy of the peninsula; Serbia’s decline would mean the
end of Russian prestige in the peninsula, as well as the end
of Serbia herself. That—the struggle for Asia Minor—is
the sole reason why Europe has been plunged into war.”
11l his valuable contribution to the literature relat-
ing - to the World War, Prof. Charles Seymour, of Yale
University, says;—
“On the one side stood the Entente Powers, unalterably
convinced that the development of the German world policy
spelled their ultimate or their immediate ruin; on the other,
Germany, equally determined in the belief that failure to
win for herself a position in world affairs comparable to her
influence in European matters, meant economic and national
disaster. Between such opposite poles there could be no
compromise. With each successive crisis the tension in-
creased. Finally, in the summer of 1914, the strain suddenly
exerted upon the thread of fate proved too severe, and it
snapped.” 3
3 “The Diplomatic Background of the War—lB7o-1914,” Introduction,
p. 4.


* -■ - .-.r . ■-. .£_: - > >.is
— **VxX* ' *■ / > *
■ /■**' : >1 1 -• • ■; , v XL- ';• •->*
|P^Bb
1 Wtt >i y . ;
40/i
If ,r.WSfev K'lf
gqBBlWy IB tB m W ;<s - |
» ; wBBj -
isL W^*
" '. *««■• ' ''■*
&f -
: '
,. r .. .., - •
S, **P* /.
-fff
me Ir 4^
— «#*
Arctic Conditions
J. W. Small & Co., Photo.
In France
—mmm mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm " 1 11 1 ' " '


A Zeppelin
THE GREAT NATIONS SPEAK FOR
THEMSELVES
It is evidently the conviction of the leaders of
thought in Europe that one of the fundamental causes
underlying the bitter political struggle for supremacy
is the desire to dominate the commercial and political
interests of the Near East, and thus to command a
leading position among the nations in the trade mar-
kets of the world. This view is very clearly revealed
in official statements made by representatives of the
various nations at war, who have stated their cases for
their respective countries.
Austria-Hungary
Dr. Dumba, while Ambassador from Austria-Hun-
gary to the United States of America, said:—
“The war between Austria-Hungary and Russia may well
be said to be the outcome of conflicting civilisations and
conflicting aims. The controversy between the Dual
Monarchy and the Serbian Kingdom, is only an incident in
the greater struggle between German civilisation as repre-
sented by Austria-Hungary, and Russian aspirations as reipre-


sented by Serbia, the Russian outpost on the southern
frontier of the Dual Monarchy ... £ • of
“The natural expansion of the Germanic uunpi
Austria toward the Near East began after the permanent
expulsion of the Turkish hordes by the victories of I rince
Eugene of Savoy. Parallel with the Austrian expansioi
south-eastward went the Russian advance toward the Black
Sea In an effort to avert a clash in this parallel out
gradually concentring expansion, the Em P e {osep ury—
the Empress Catherine met late in the eighteenth centu y
1787 in the Crimea, and reached an agreement for the d
memberment of Turkey. A
‘•Under this project of monarchs the western part of the
Ottoman Empire, including Bosnia and Herzegovina, now
the bone of contention between Austria on the one banc
and Russia and Serbia on the other, was apportioned to
Austria. To Russia’s share were allotted the regions now
known as Rumania and Bulgaria. It was at this penot
that the Russian dream of the possession of Constantinople,
first broached in a mythical will of Peter the Great, began
to assume reality as a governing principle of Russian
policy in south-eastern Europe.” 1
Count Berchtold, Minister of Foreign Affairs for
Austria-Hungary, says: —
‘‘Austria-Hungary looks upon this war as a purely
defensive one, which has been forced on her by the agitation
directed by Russia against her very existence. Russian
statesmen wish to form an iron ring of enemies around
Austria-Hungary and Germany, in order that Russia’s grasp
on Constantinople and on Asia should never again be
meddled with. . . . Germany knows that Austria-Hungary’s
enemies are her enemies, and that the dismemberment of
the Hapsburg monarchy would mean the isolation of the
German Empire.’'
Germany
Dr. Bernhard Dernburg, special representative of
Germany to the United States following the opening of
the war, stated the case for Germany;—
‘‘Germany has been for about thirty-five years the associate
of Turkey in developing Turkish territory, commerce, and
industry. She has acquired the Oriental railway and built
the Anatolian and Bagdad lines. She has established harbors
and shipping companies, and engaged in mining and very
1 “Why Austria is at War with Russia,” “North American Review,”
September, 1914.


extensive irrigation works. She must be left with a free
hand to go on with this commercial development as far as
she can arrange with the sovereign power of the Porte and
without outside interference. This would mean a recognised
sphere of influence from the Persian Gulf to the
Dardanelles.” 2
General von Bernhardt says : —•
“Even if we succeed in guarding our possessions in the
East and West, and in preserving the German nationality
in its present form throughout the world, we shall not be
able to maintain our present -position, powerful as it is, in
the great competition with the other powers, if we are con-
tented to restrict ourselves in our present sphere of power,
while the surrounding countries are busily extending their
dominions. If we wish to compete further with them, a
policy which our population and our civilisation both entitle
and compel us to adopt, we must not hold back in the hard
struggle for the sovereignty of the world.”
Herr Friedrich Delitzsch, author of “The Moslem
World,” declares:—
“It is to Germany's interest that Islam shall come vic-
torious from the present struggle. For should it ever have
come to pass that the European and Asiatic possessions of
Turkey were to be divided by England, Russia and France,
nothing would prevent Germany from being reduced to the
place of a secondary power. We know how England has
strained every nerve to gain the Bagdad Railway, and thus
strike us at the heart where this precious jewel nestles close.
“It has become our duty for more reasons than one to
protect and aid Turkey in every possible way. This we
must do by way of commercial and scientific leading. We
must help in developing the soil, to extract the treasures
from the ground, to build railways, to give physical and
spiritual assistance to all Osmanic subjects, and to improve
the status of woman. To outline and build from the ground
up will be our chief aim. At present we can barely indicate
the direction in which we would proceed, for we are still
removed from the desired goal.”
Russia
Tu explaining to the Russian Duma the dangers
that threatened the empire, M. Sazonoff, while Pre-
mier, said:—'
2 2 New York “Independent,” Dec. 7, 1914.


President Woodrow Wilson


“The plans for the domination of Germany over the
Turkish Empire comprised the formation of an enormous
German-Mussulman empire, extending from the Scheldt to
the Persian Gulf. Such an empire, which appears in the
dreams of Pan-Germanism as a new caliphate, to which by
historic analogy the name ‘Caliphate of Berlin’ would be
adapted, is, according to them, to strike a mortal blow at
the historic existence oT Russia and Great Britain. It is a
terrifying dream, but God is merciful.”
Professor Milyukoff, Liberal leader in the Duma,
makes the following statement for Russia: —
“We fully realise what is the plan of Germany, and for
what she is carrying on this war. It is clear to everybody
that in the case of victory Germany would create in Europe
a Central State .and would capture or subjugate Turkey
economically, and then politically. ‘Berlin-Bagdad,’ that is
the German idea; and since it has been created, we have np
other choice. The question now is not whether the strait
shall become Russian or remain Turkish; the question is
whether it shall become Russian or remain German.
“We must make no mistake. The question which is now
being decided will probably be decided forever, but there
will scarcely ever be such favorable conditions as there are
now. The chief of these conditions is the attitude of our
allies towards our national problem. ‘Berlin-Bagdad’ is too
real a danger, not only for us, but for Great Britain, with
India and Egypt; and for France, with her prospects in
Syria. On the basis of this real danger an agreement has
become possible between powers which for centuries were
suspicious of each other.
“The end of March (O. S.) and the beginning of April
(N. S.) in 1915 is a date which is well worthy of remem-
brance by large masses of the Russian people. This is the
date when a definite agreement was reached between us and
our allies.” 3
In February, 1915, while the Russian Duma was in
session, M. Kovalevsky, a member of the Assembly,
said in a speech;—
“The experience of the past has shown that disinterested-
ness is a virtue which possesses little political value. The
time has come for plain speaking. It seems best to declare
at once the aims and objects for which Russia is waging
this war. Our first aim must be to bring to a conclusion our
•“Current History,” June, 1916, p. 489.


century-oW quarrel with Turkey regarding the possession
oif the Bosporus and the Dardanelles. The whole of the
southern part of Russia, the most densely populated, the
most industrious, and the richest part of the country, cannot
exist unless we control the Black Sea and can pass freely
to and fro by way of the Narrows. dhe straits of Con-
stantinople are at the same time the padlock and the key
of our house. They must he in Russian hands, together
with the territory on both sides of the channel which con-
trols and commands the waterway. All Russia’s former
quarrels with the Ottoman Empire have arisen about our
access to the sea. Much blood has been shed for it, and
much strength has been wasted. The time has come to
bring the century-old struggle to an end, and to declare
that any attempts made by others, whoever they may be,
to prevent our solving this historical problem in our favor,
must be regarded by Russia as attempts upon her interests
and upon her national honor. The Russian nation must
not be a loser in this war. The vast sacrifices which it has
made must be rewarded.” 4
Italy.
On the Ist of December, 1915, the Italian Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Signor Sonnino, made in the
Italian Chamber the following statement for Italy:—
‘'Thus have we been persuaded of the necessity of making
public and solemn affirmation of the solidarity existing
between the Allies, by renewing, as it were, the agreement
signed by France, England, and Russia on the fifth of
September, 1914, and to which Japan subsequently adhered.
Our formal adhesion has just been made in London. . . .
“The political and economic independence of Serbia is
one of the corner-stones of Italian policy in the Balkans.
It responds to a vital necessity of the very existence of
Italy as a Great Power. The political and economic sub-
jection of Serbia by Austria-Hungary would be tantamount
to a grave and constant peril for Italy. It would be the
construction of an insuperable barrier to our economic ex-
pansion on the opposite shores of the Adriatic. . . .
“The strategic defence of the Adriatic constitutes, indeed,
one of the principal bases of our political action. It is for
Italy a vital necessity, an absolute necessity of legitimate
defence, to aim in the Adriatic at a balance of power which
will compensate us for the unfavorable configuration of our
eastern shore line.” s
4 “Fortnightly Review,” April, 1915, p. 611.
* “World’s Work,” May, 1916.


Great Britain
The editor of the London “Saturday Review”"
states the situation from the British viewpoint. He
says; —
“The cause of the reversal of the British policy in the
Near East, which has passed almost without comment here
King Victor Emmanuel 111 of Italy
as on the Continent, is bound up with, ibut plainly lies far
deeper than, the Austrian ultimatum to Belgrade. The
threat to Serbia was a culmination of a steady German
thrust toward the East. The main difficulty in the German
path in the Near East, the little kingdom of Serbia, was
to be got out of the way by Austria; and, that ‘necessity’
accomplished, Germany would have had the clear road which
"March 6, 1915, pp. 241, 243.


she desired to Turkey, where her ambitions have grown
since the visit of William IT. to the late Sultan with a
grandiose project of financial, commercial and ultimately
political dominance on the Golden Horn, and eventually
through Asia Minor. . , ,
“The first had been completely attained, and Germany s
absolute control of Constantinople has been demonstrated
to the whole world.
“The second had yet to be fulfilled: but it was on the
road to fulfilment. The tortuous and intricate history of
the Anatolian and Bagdad Railways during the last fifteen
years is sufficient evidence of the gradual penetration of
German influence through Asia Minor.
“The 8.8.8. line—Berlin-Byzantium-Baydad—was an in-
strument of German policy in which millions of German
money had been invested, and in whose success the Deutsche
Bank in particular was deeply involved—how deeply is still
a matter of conjecture. This huge scheme, which had made
considerable progress, had added enormously to the already
great influence of Germany in Asia Minor. . . .
“British opinion no longer has any misgiving concerning
the approach of Russian influence towards Constantinople.
Disraeli’s policy was constructed before the first steps had
been taken in Egypt. It was conservative, and the times
are now revolutionarv. Germany’s action has revealed to
us the menace of a Near East under Teuton rule, a menace
which would have been far more formidable than anything
which the past generation of British statesmen imagined
from Russia. ...
“Since its foundation sixteen centuries ago, Constanti-
nople. by position and natural destiny, has been one of the
kev cities of the earth. It has been many times attacked
and twice connuered. Its second conquest, like its founda-
tion. marked the end of an epoch and chanered the historv
of the world. Its third conquest can do no less” (emphasis
supplied).
These National Viewpoints Summarised
Thus it is clear that, through territorial expansion,
increase of populations, agricultural, manufacturing,
and commercial development, and international alli-
ances, a world-change has been effected which presents
many vitally conflicting interests. These clashing in-
terests have finally culminated in the most serious


King Albert of Belgium


clash of nations the world has ever seen. No satis-
factory adjustment seems possible. Great Britain
does not consent to surrender any of the great over-
seas possessions of her far-stretching Empire. As
long as she holds Egypt, India, and Australia, she
must control the Mediterranean highway. She must
continue to hold such strategic positions as Gibraltar,
Suez, the Persian Gulf, and Singapore. To surrender
these would be to invite the dismemberment of her
Empire.
Russia’s situation and policy seem equally vital to
her existence. She has extended her conquests over
a vast area and many peoples. To-day the land area
of her empire is equal to one-seventh of the land area
of the world, while her population is about one-eighth
of the world’s population. Her natural resources are
very great, but she requires an adequate highway to
the world’s markets in order to reap full benefit from
them. She has been struggling for that highway for
centuries. It was to secure a road through the Bal-
tic that Peter the Great moved the capital from Mos-
cow to the Baltic marshes and began the building of
Petrograd. But Germany established her naval base
in the Baltic, between Petrograd and the ocean, thus
placing an effectual menace in Russia’s road.
Then Russian statesmen turned their eyes toward-
the Pacific. At great expense and toil and patience
they built a steel road across the plains of Siberia to
Vladivostock and Port Arthur. Here they were met
by the Japanese, and cut off from the ocean highway.
Again Russia turned to her natural highway, the
Bosporus and the Dardanelles, which she had been


endeavouring to secure for more than a century. But
here she found that Germany had all but succeeded in
throwing a bridge across the Bosporus at Constanti-
nople, which would effectually block her road through
the Bosporus and the Dardanelles to the iEgean and
on to the world’s markets. Believing that the Ger-
man road threatened her very existence, Russia de-
cided to stake all in the endeavour to prevent its com-
pletion.
This brings us to Germany’s interests. She found
herself an enclosed empire, without what she con-
sidered suitable access to the markets of the world.
Her only outlet was through the North Sea. But this
was controlled by England. Thus she found herself
in exactly the same position in which she had placed
Russia in the Baltic. Eventually she turned east-
ward, and began a vast enterprise to secure possession
of the Persian Gulf. If she could establish a high-
way from Berlin to the Persian Gulf, she would n.ot
only secure an open road to the world, but she would
place herself in a position to completely dominate
Russia, and seriously threaten England’s vast Empire
at any time it might seem necessary to her own in-
terests. She claimed that, with England’s highway
already established, and Russia’s about to be driven
through from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean, her
own existence was imperilled. It was for these rea-
sons that she planned “to mow a swathe as wide as
Germany itself across two continents, from the Baltic
to the confines of India.” 7
Austria’s situation was similar to that of Russia
« Powers, “The Things Men Fight For,” p. 230.


and Germany. Her only outlet was down the Adri-
atic, the lower part of which was guarded by the forts
and warships of Italy. For this reason, Austria has
always looked to the yEgean Sea as her only safe,
adequate road to the oceans. With this in view, her
steady policy has been to hew out a clear path to
Salonika. But the Turks and the Slavs of the Balkan
Peninsula have always stood in her way. This has
been true of Serbia especially.
Serbia, being supported by Russia, effectually
blocked Austria in her drive to the and also
Germany in her drive to Constantinople and on to the
Persian Gulf. It appeared to both Austria-Hungary
and Germany that this ring drawn around their
eastern and south-eastern boundaries meant their ruin.
For this reason, they decided to break it at any cost.
As for France and Italy, they both feared the re-
sults of a Teutonic victory. Their position in the
Mediterranean was such that they felt safer under the
paramountcy of England and Russia, and, therefore,
joined them against the Central Powers.
These conditions are so vital to the very existence
of these different powers, that they see no way of sur-
rendering their ground. Yet the conditions clash so
violently that it seems impossible to maintain their
policies’ without war. They have unsheathed their
swords to reach a settlement. The price being paid is
staggering.


THE EASTERN QUESTION
The evidence is abundant and conclusive that the
storm-centre of the World War, which began in 1914,
is the Near East. But this is not a new storm-centre.
It has been the centre of stormy conflicts for centuries.
The World War raging around this centre is one more
added to the many that have been fought by the Euro-
pean Powers over the long-standing dispute as to who
shall possess Constantinople, the Bosporus, and the
Dardanelles. This dispute has been known during
the past century as “The Eastern Question.”
Of this, one writer has said:—
“In its strict and narrow sense, the Eastern Question is
the question, What is to be done with the south-east of
Europe and the contiguous portion of Asia?” “From the
point of view of European politics, the Eastern Question
has come to include the complications arising out of the
possession by the Turks of the east of Europe and the pos-
sibility of Russian predominance in the Sea.” 1
1 Daniel Seelye Gregory, “The Crime of Christendom,’’ do. S, 9.


a
E
VI
o
<«
■o
CS
<u
H
"S
£
V )
«
5
g
o
Cfi


Another writer makes a similar statement:—
“During the last decade the international aspect of the
Eastern Question has 'been the struggle of the forces of
Pan-Slavism and Pan-Germanism.” 2
Thus, it is evident that the present clash of nations
in Europe is a continuation of the conflict growing out
of the old, complicated, never-ending Eastern Ques-
tion.
The coveted control of the great natural highway
—the Bosporus and the Dardanelles —connecting the
Black Sea with the Mediterranean, seems about to slip
from Turkey’s grasp, and this fact makes acute the
problem as to what Power or Powers shall henceforth
control where Turkey has so long exercised absolute
sway. The northern end of this waterway is called
the Bosporus; the middle section, the Sea of Mar-
mora; and the southern end, the Dardanelles. On
the eastern side is Asia Minor; on the western, the
Balkan Peninsula. Since 1453, when the Turks took
Constantinople, and made that historic city the capital
of their empire, they have been in possession of this
waterway linking the Black Sea with the Mediterra-
nean, and thus have been able to exercise a dominant
influence all out of proportion to their position among
the nations of earth.
Of the fierce struggle that has arisen over this ques-
tion, the editor of the Washington “Post” 3 has said:—
“As diplomatic and military activity increases in the
neighborhood of Constantinople, the world’s attention is
directed more and more to the momentous events that arc
impending in that quarter. . . . Constantinople is the
bone of contention between Christian and infidel, between
Teuton and Slav. It is a stupendous drama that is being
unrolled at the Golden Horn—a modern scene of the most
vivid nature, with a background crowded with memorable
2 Charles Seymour, “The Diplomatic Background of the War,” p. 197.
"Aug. 18, 1915.


figures and historic events. Whatever the climax, the
tumultuous happenings of these current months stir the
imagination of the world, and will powerfully affect its
future.”
The Struggle Foretold by Prophets
It is interesting to note that this complicated pro-
blem, with which statesmen have struggled for a cen-
tury, and which, in its latest form, has been convulsing
all Europe, was foretold in the writings of the pro-
phets many centuries ago.
Students of the Bible and of Bible commentaries
are familiar with the prophecies which outline the rise,
history, and downfall of many of the great nations of
earth. The overthrow of Egypt, Assyria, and Baby-
lonia was foretold by the prophets long before their
downfall. The place, power, and final destruction of
the Medo-Persian, Grecian, Roman, and Turkish Em-
pires, also, are definitely set forth in the prophetic
outlines.
The eleventh chapter of Daniel gives a wonderful
forecast of the history of the world from the time of
the Persian Empire, 538 8.C., to the downfall of all
earthly kingdoms. The prophecy opens with Persian
and Grecian conflicts, and closes with the overthrow
and utter ruin of a Power which many expositors
claim represents Turkey.
It is of the greatest importance that the world
should know the meaning of the last specification in
Daniel’s prophecy referring to the Turkish Empire.
It is as follows:
“He shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the
seas in the glorious holy mountain; yet he shall come to
his end, and none shall help him.” Dan. 11: 45.


J. W. Small & Co., Photo.
Italians Attacking High Mountain Positions


The reason it is so important that the meaning of
this event be understood when it is about to take place
is because it is the prelude to the coming of the Prince
of Peace, the greatest of all events in the history of
the world.
By the words, “at that time,” the fall of the Otto-
man Empire and the second coming of Christ are in-
separably connected. The first event is given as the
herald of the second. When the first is taking place,
the world is to know that the other is soon to follow.
These two events unite the present and the future.
The first relates to the kingdoms of this world; the
second, to the kingdom of Christ. The first is the sig-
nal for the close of the history of this world; the
second marks the establishment of the glorious, eter-
nal kingdom of our Lord and Saviour.
The second coming of Christ is an event of supreme
interest and importance to all the world; and as the
final overthrow of the Ottoman Empire is set forth in
the Scriptures as a warning that the advent of Christ
is about to take place, the destruction of the Turkish
power becomes an event of marked significance.
Starts with Persia
The long chain of prophecy given in the eleventh
chapter of Daniel opens as follows:
“Now will I show thee the truth. Behold, there shall
stand u,p yet three kings in Persia; and the fourth shall be
far richer than they all; and by his strength through his
riches he shall stir up all against the realm of Gre'cia.”
Dan. 11: 2.
From this statement it is plain that Persia is the
kingdom with which this prophecy starts. Persia was
to “stir up all against the realm of Grecia,” but was to


meet in Grecia “a mighty king” who should “rule with
great dominion, and do according to his will.” Verse 3.
This mighty king of Grecia, as all know, was Alex-
ander the Great. Of him, and of the vast dominion
over which he extended his conquests, the prophecy
declared:—
“When he shall stand up, his kingdom shall be broken,
and shall be divided toward the four winds of heaven;-and
not to his posterity, nor according to his dominion which he
ruled: for his kingdom shall be plucked up, even for others
beside those.” Verse 4.
Note these specifications: (1) When he shall stand
up, his kingdom shall be broken; (2) it shall be divided
toward the four winds of heaven; (3) not to his pos-
terity, but for others.
These predictions are all clearly met in the history
of Alexander’s conquests, and in the division of his
empire after his death. Note the following historical
facts:—
1. Immediately after his return to Babylon from
his triumphant march through Asia as far east as
India, Alexander died, while still young, and at the
pinnacle of his glory and power. As he left no heir to
the throne, his generals made his weak-minded half-
brother, Arrhidams, king. It was also arranged that
if the expected child of Roxana, Alexander’s wife,
should be a son, he should succeed to the throne. Per-
diccas, one of the generals, was appointed Regent, and
other leading generals were appointed governors of
various provinces and divisions of the empire.
Roxana’s child proved to be a son, but in a short time
both mother and child were murdered.


General Joffre


2. “With the death of Alexander’s son, the empire
of Alexander the Great became only a geographical
conception. In fact, it was split into separate parts,
and the Central Power, continually weakened since
Alexander’s death, had completely vanished. The
generals now regarded the provinces, which had been
originally assigned to them by the higher power
merely for administration, as their own dominion. It
was, therefore, only natural that, after 306 8.C., they
styled themselves ‘kings,’ for kings they had been for
years.” 4
3. “The battle of Ipsus (301 8.C.) resulted in a
permanent division of the vast empire founded by
Alexander the Great, after twenty-two years of san
guinary wars among his generals, during which the
whole of Alexander’s family and all his relatives
perished. The triumphant Seleucus and Lysimachus
divided the dominion of Asia between them; Seleucus
received the Euphrates Valley, north of Syria, Cappa-
docia, and part of Phrygia; while Lysimachus obtained
the remainder of Asia Minor, in addition to Thrace'
which extended along the western shores of the
Euxine as far north as the mouth of the Danube.
Ptolemy was allowed to hold Egypt, along with Pales-
tine, Phoenicia, and Ccele-Syria; while Cassander was
allowed to reign in Macedonia and Greece until his
death.” 8
These, brief historical statements record the fulfil-
ment of every specification given in Dan. 11 : 4.
Within two hundred and thirty-five years after this
prophecy was written, Persia had been overthrown by
Grecia; Alexander, the “mighty king,” had been
* “The World’s History,” Vol. 111., p. 134.
8 “Library of Universal History,” Vol. 111., p. 799.


broken by the hand of death, and his kingdom had
been divided toward the four winds of heaven, “not
to his posterity,” but “for others.”
The King of the North and the King of the South
At this point, two of the four divisions, the east and
the west, drop out of sight, while the other two, the
north and the south, attain greater prominence. The
situation in the year 281 B.C. exactly meets the state-
ment of the prophecy. There were then but two divi-
sions of the Grecian Empire. One was Egypt, in the
south, a strong kingdom; the other was the kingdom
of the Selucidae, in the north, a greater and stronger
kingdom, stretching from Persia in the east to Mace-
donia in the west. These are the two kingdoms desig-
nated in verses 5-15 as “the king of the south” and
“the king of the north.” These two kingdoms, founded
by Ptolemy and Seleucus, for more than one hundred
years very clearly fill in the outline given in the ten
verses that follow their introduction into the prophecy.
There can be no difficulty in determining which is
the kingdom of the south and which is the kingdom of
the north. The location of their territory makes this
unmistakably plain. One is in the south, the other
in the north. It matters not whether their boundaries
remain precisely the same at all times. Sometimes
the kingdom of the south extended farther north into
Palestine than at other times. Seleucus and his suc-
cessors did not always retain all their territory at the
extreme limits east and west. Syria and all of Asia
Minor in the north remained intact, and continued to
be the “king of the north” without a break, to the


o
o
a
6
O
Qi)
CB
s
co
£
B
0
u
fa
<U
A
«
u
V
X
u
0
£
V
c
1
(8
u


time when a new power is introduced by the prophecy,
as noted in verse 16.
The plain facts of history, as related to the pro-
phecy, show us where to look for the king of the south
and the king of the north. We are to look to the
southern division of Alexander’s empire for the king of
the south, and to the northern division for the king of
the north. It is not the particular king nor dynasty,
but the particular locality, that constitutes one the
king of the south and the other the king of the north.
Kings may die, and dynasties may change, yet the
locations remain, and whatever nation may be ruling
in either of these divisions at any time is the king of
that division, whether south or north.
At the close of Dan. 11 : 15, the prophecy, having
given the plainest information regarding the place, the
order of development, and the history of the two king-
doms of Ptolemy and Seleucus for nearly two cen-
turies, now drops these kingdoms, while it traces the
history of events that were to follow to the close of
time. It foretells briefly the history of the Roman
Empire, the great apostasy of the Church during the
Dark Ages, the Reformation of the sixteenth century,
and the French Revolution, which occurred near the
close of the eighteenth century. After passing over this
long period of about two thousand years, the prophecy,
in a very direct, positive way, brings “the king of the
south” and “the king of the north” back to the promi-
nent place which they occupied in the early portion of
the prophecy, showing the part they are to play in the
closing acts of earth’s drama.


French Infantry Awaiting the Poisonous Gas Attack
THE FATE OF THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE
In the closing part of the outline of the history of
the world, recorded by Daniel in the eleventh chapter
of his prophecy, is foretold a bitter conflict between the
king of the north and the king of the south, and
another power that was to make war against them.
The prophecy reads :
“At the time of the end shall the king of the south push
at him: and the king of the north shall come against him."
“The Time of the End ”
The expression, “the time of the end.” is repeatedly
used by the prophet to point out a definite period of
time. There is good ground for believing that this
period must date from the year 1798, the final limit of
the period in which the Papacy exercised its supre-
macy. This prophetic period of twelve hundred and
sixty years is to be reckoned from the issuance, in 533,
of Justinian’s decree recognising the Pope as “the head
of all the churches,” and the events culminating in
538, when Vigilius “ascended the papal chair under the


p
o
•p
a
o
5
S
V)
*
•i
b>
V
!2
'«
K
V
a
a
Hi
N
N
SH
O
c
_0
'■s
y
3
u
8
y
Q


military protection of Belisarius.” It would, accord-
ingly, extend to 1798, when the Pope was taken pri-
soner. marking the close of that series of events which
constituted the giving of the deadly wound to the
Papacy, and the bringing to an end the allotted period
of supremacy over the souls and bodies of men.
At the beginning of “the time of the end” (1798,
as determined by the events of history in fulfilment of
the prophetic outlines), Egypt, the old kingdom of the
south, was under the rule of the Mamelukes; while
A. D. 538
A. D. 1798
Syria, Asia Minor, Thrace, and Macedonia, constitut-
ing the original kingdom of the north, had been for
centuries the Turkish Empire.
Thus, in 1798, if the exposition of the prophecy de-
termining the beginning of “the time of the end” be
correct, “the king of the south” and “the king of the
north” will be found engaged in war with a third
power, which, in Daniel’s prophecy, is designated by
the pronoun “him.” The fact that just such a conflict
as this prophecy foretells was begun in the year 1798,
by Egypt and Turkey and France, leads clearly to the
conclusion that France is the power referred to by
the undeniable facts of history, which meet the speci-
fications of this prophecy.
In the year 1798 France began the conquest of
Egypt and Turkey, thus precipitating a war attended
by results most pathetic and terrible. Egypt resisted
■pushed at him—but was conquered. Turkey’s fate,


however, was different. Turkey triumphed over the
armies of France, and overflowed and passed over, just
as the prophecy said would be done. The full history
of the invasions, the resistances, the victories, and the
defeats of that war, which began in 1798, meets every
specification of the prophecy, and this is the only his-
tory of nations that answers to these predictions.
The French Invasion of Egypt and Turkey
The following brief statements record the facts of
the opening events :
“Bonaparte’s expedition, consisting of forty thousand land
troops and ten thousand seamen, sailed from Toulon for
Egypt on the nineteenth of May, 1798.” 1
“Bonaparte . . . landed safely at Marabout, in Egypt, July
1. The Mamelukes, who then ruled Egypt, were unprepared
for defence. Alexandria was immediately taken [July 2] and
occupied, and the march was then resumed for Cairo
[July 6]. . . .
“Ascending the Nile to the apex of the delta, Bonaparte
learned that the Mamelukes under their beys, with Arabs
and fellahs, amounting in all to thirty thousand men, were
intrenched between Em'babeh and Gizeh, in the plain of the
Pyramids, opposite Cairo. ...
“In spite of the desperate valor displayed,by the Mame-
lukes led by Murad Bey, the French gained a complete
victory (July 21). This battle, called the Battle of the
Pyramids, overthrew the government of the Mamelukes,
and opened Cairo to the French, who entered it the fol-
lowing day.” 2 , , , i .
“The Porte [government of Turkey] solemnly declared
war against France, Sept. 4, 1798, and coalesced with Russia
and England. The Sultan ordered the formation of an army
for the conquest of Egypt. This event rendered the situa-
tion of the French extremely critical.” 3
These statements show plainly that at the time of
the end, in 1798, a war was begun in Egypt, in which
France, Turkey, and Egypt were severally engaged,
each with a separate object in view.
1 “Library of Universal History,” Vol. VIII., p. 2 637.
2 Dryer and Hassell, “History of Modern Europe,” Vol. V., chap. 60,
* A. A. Eaton, “History of the Egyptian Revolutiom,” Vol. 1., p. 98.


J. W. Small & Co.. Photo.
Earl Kitchener and Sir Win. Robertson


“‘ln the year 1213 A. H.’ (or 1798 of our era), says
Adberrahman, ‘was the beginning of the wars, the calamities,
the interruption of the ordinary course of events, in short,
the general ruin.’ ” 3
Of this period another has written:—
“It is at this position that historians open a new and
important epoch of European annals. Practically the whole
continent 'begins to see in Constantinople a valuable
acquisition. Here the greatest struggle of naval, military
and diplomatic powers during the ages began.”
The French Lay Siege to Saint Jean d’Acre
As soon as the Turkish Government at Constanti-
nople had declared war on France, preparations were
begun to meet Napoleon and his forces. An army was
assembled at Damascus, to march southward to attack
Napoleon on the borders of Egypt; while plans were
laid for the gathering of another army of thirty thou-
sand at Rhodes, to be transported by the fleet to Alex-
andria. At the same time, Turkey formed naval alli-
ances with Russia and England, by which she secured
the help of their ships.
Learning of Turkey’s declaration of war, Napoleon,
with his accustomed promptness to act, began his
march from Cairo to Constantinople. Everything
along the route was taken by the French until they
arrived at Saint Jean d’Acre. Here he met a stubborn
resistance by the Turkish forces, who were assisted by
the British ships under the command of Sir Sydney
Smith. With a grim determination which only a
Napoleon could muster, the French laid siege to the
town. The struggle was desperate and long.
Saint Jean d’Acre “was the only fortress in Syria
which could stop him,” says a French historian. “Its
subjugation would make him the undisputed master of
®A.A. Paton, “History of the Hgyptian]Revolation,”BVol. 1. P- 98.


Syria. . . . The garrison defended the town with
a vigor which astonished our troops, who had not been
accustomed to meet with strong resistance from the
Turks, and the greater part of our soldiers who pene-
trated into the town were slain.” 4
The French Forces Threatened by a Turkish Army
“The Turks were not idle. By vast exertions they had
roused the whole Mussulman population to march, in the
name of the prophet, for the destruction of the ‘Christian
dogs.’ An enormous army was marshalled, and was on its
way for the relief of the beleaguered city. Damascus had
furnished its thousands. The scattered remnants of the
fierce Mamelukes, and the mounted Bedouins of the desert
had congregated to rush, with resistless numbers, upon their
bold antagonist. . . .
“Napoleon had been engaged for ten days in an almost
incessant assault upon the works of Acre when the approach
of the great Turkish army was announced. It consisted of
about thirty thousand troops, twelve thousand of whom
were the fiercest and best-trained horsemen in the world.
Napoleon had but eight thousand effective men with whom
to encounter the well-trained army of Europeans and Turks
within the walls of Acre, and the numerous host rushing to
its rescue.” 5
Kleber was sent forward with three thousand men
to meet the Turkish army, which he encountered on
the eastern border of the plain of Esdraelon. The
Turks outnumbered Kleber’s forces ten to one.
“Twelve thousand horsemen, decorated with the most
gorgeous trappings of military show, and mounted on the
fleetest Arabian chargers, were prancing and curvetting in
all directions. A loud and exultant shout of vengeance and
joy, rising like the roar of the ocean, burst from the
Turkish ranks as soon as they perceived their victims enter
the plain. . . . The whole cavalcade of horsemen, with
gleaming sabres and hideous yells, and like the sweep of
the wind, came rushing down upon them. Every man in
the French squares knew that his life depended upon his
immobility, and each one stood, shoulder to shoulder with
his comrades, like a rock. . . .
4 Lanfrey, “The History of Napoleon,” Vol. 1., chap. 11, p. 293.
r ‘ John S. C. Abbott, “The Life of Napoleon Bonaparte,” Vol. 1., chap.
12, p. 217.


■ : msm
:
,
.
, - ••
. - ' v -
■ - ,
* ' > v * - .'•*- >
-■-‘i ; - 'T'v - w K-
- . - 7 <s
■ -- ■ x-, ■ ■ v i ■ «>>■ -
-, , r *
.- ■ ' y'S' '>•>•• ■f? >■'
' ' ■ ■ V ..
r ■ v>£.>,>c• */; x •:* ■ : s,.• • ■
-w vxv .5..
«/. W. Smait <& Co., Photo.
British Shell Bursting on the German Trenches


“At one o’clock, Napoleon, with three thousand men,
arrived on the heights which overlooked the field of battle.
. . . With that instinctive judgment which enabled him,
with the rapidity of lightning, to adopt the most important
decisions, Napoleon instantly took his resolution. He formed
his little band into two squares, and advanced in such a
manner as to compose, with the square of Kleber, a triangle,
inclosing the Turks. Thus, with unparalleled audacity, with
six thousand men he undertook to surround thirty thousand
of as fierce and desperate soldiers as the world has ever
seen. . . .
“The Turks were assailed by a murderous fire instan-
taneously discharged 'from the three points of this triangle.
Discouraged by the indomitable resolution with which they
had been repulsed, and bewildered by the triple assault,
they broke and fled. . . .
“The victory was complete. The Turkish army was not
merely conquered—it was destroyed. As that day’s sun,
veiled in smoke, solemnly descended, like a ball of fire,
behind the hills of Lebanon, the whole majestic array,
assembled for the invasion of Egypt, and who had boasted
that they were ‘innumerable as the sands of the sea, or the
stars of heaven,’ had disappeared to be seen no more. The
Turkish camp, with four hundred camels and an immense
booty, fell into the hands of the victors.” 6
The victory of the French confirmed Napoleon and
his generals in their assurance of victory, not only in
the siege of Acre, but over the whole empire of Tur-
key. Although they had thus far made little head-
way in the siege, Napoleon was resolutely bent on
taking the town.
Pressing the Siege of Acre
“No pen can describe the desperate conflicts and the
scenes of carnage which ensued. Day after day, night after
night, and week after week, the horrible slaughter, without
intermission, continued.” 7
“Column after column of the French advanced to the
assault, but all were repulsed with dreadful slaughter. Every
hour the strength of the enemy was increasing; every hour
the forces of Napoleon were melting away before the awful
storm sweeping from the battlements.” 8
®John S. C. Abbott, “The Life of Napoleon Bonaparte,’’ Vol. 1.,
chap. 12, pp. 218-220. 1 Id., p. 220, 8 Id., chap. 13, p. 224.


Failure and Retreat
“Success was now hopeless. Sadly Napoleon made pre-
parations to relinquish the enterprise.” 9 While “the
baggage, sick, and field artillery were silently dehling to the
rear the heavy cannon were buried in the sand, and on the
twentieth p'f May, Napoleon, for the-first time in his life,
ordered a retreat.” 10
The victorious Turks pursued him, retaking
Southern Palestine, wresting from the French the
whole of Egypt, and adding Libya and Ethiopia to
their African possessions."
ITow clearly Turkey’s victories over the French,
and her conquests in Egypt, Libya, and Ethiopia, meet
the predictions of the prophet! Daniel had foretold
that “the king of the north" would come against the
invader “like a whirlwind, with chariots, and with
horsemen, and with many ships." Dan. 11 :40. Wind
and whirlwind, when used as symbols in prophecy, re-
present strife, war, bloodshed. Dan. 7:2; Jei.
25 : 31-33. In this conflict, Turkey was to make more
than a frantic dash at her enemy. She was to plunge
into war—resolute, prolonged, bloody war. iurkey
did this. She made every preparation for well-sus-
tained, destructive battle with her powerful enemy.
The horrors of the different engagements may well be
represented by a devastating whirlwind.
Again, Turkey was to come “with chariots, and
with horsemen." Abbott says that there was formed
at Damascus a Turkish army of “about thirty thou-
sand troops, twelve thousand of whom were the
fiercest and best-trained horsemen in the world.” And
he adds: “Twelve thousand horsemen . . . mounted
9 Id., chap. 13, p. 224. TTT .
10 Sir Archibald Alison, “History of Europe, Vol. ill., chap. 2t>,
P * “Egypt in the Nineteenth Century,’’ p. 114, by Cameron.


il
s ; Wfe
#i : &|n
y> Sj
■j
’■
if?
”**;• ••
*E
i
r?
r $i
m
p|
i
Jb
i***
IjL
Jmt
- •' ’ *'’*■' ’ **^^**^' ( -" >
if
PHl, 4 |v
jp ...
H
|g|
Ifg
Jj gj<
j
n
Munition Workers
,7. W. Sma// £• Co
, Photo


on the fleetest Arabian charters . . . like the sweep of
the wind, came rushing- down upon” the enemy. Tur-
key was also to come “with many ships.” In addi-
tion to its own fleet, Turkey was supported by the
combined fleets of Russia and England.
In describing the great struggle between France
and Turkey, the historians have used the exact words
in which the prophet foretold the conflict. And the
result of the engagement was just what was predicted.
The king of the north was to “overflow and pass over.”
He was to be the victor.
Napoleon and his hitherto invincible and always
victorious forces had invaded Turkish territory with
the fullest expectation of taking the empire. They
had never known defeat; surely Turkey would go
down as Egypt, Italy, and other countries had fallen
under their terrible onslaughts.
But Turkey did not go down. The prophet had
predicted her triumph, and the prediction was fully
met. The defeat of the French was a surprise to all
Europe, and ever remained a mystery to Napoleon.
Of this experience, Lanfrey says;—
“Many times during the deadly delays of this fatal siege,
in which he experienced his first check, he was heard to
inveigh against ‘this miserable little hole which came against
him and his destiny.’ And many times later, when dwelling
on the vicissitudes of his past life, and the different chances
which had been open to him, he repeated ‘that if Saint Jean
d’Acre had fallen, he would have changed the face of the
world, and been emperor of the East.’ And he generally
added, that it was a grain of sand that had undone all hie
projects.” 12
12 “The History of Napoleon,” Vol. 1., p. 296.


An Overruling Providence
But it was more than the defeat at Acre that de-
cided the issues of Napoleon’s conflict with Turkey.
The mighty hand of Providence was controlling
affairs. The time had not come for the king of the
north to come to his end, which would, no doubt, have
been the result if the colossal designs of Napoleon had
been carried out. This explains why everything in
connection with the invasion of Turkey seemed to con-
spire against the invader. It explains the mystery
of this strange defeat of the French. It was the ful-
filment of the unfailing word of prophecy.
“He shall enter also into the glorious land, . . . and the
land of Egypt shall not escape. But he shall have power
over the treasures of gold and of silver, and over all the
precious things of Egypt: and the Libyans and the
Ethiopians shall he at his steps.” Dan. 11: 41-43.
All this was fulfilled. The “glorious land,” Pales-
tine, was brought under more complete control of the
Porte. Egypt was wrested from the French. Libya
and Ethiopia, with their various dependencies, were
conquered and annexed to Turkey as Egyptian pro-
vinces. And the “treasures ... of Egypt” passed
almost entirelv into the hands of the Turkish rulers.
Mehemet Ali, Turkey’s Governor of Egypt, effected a
“revolutionary transfer of landed property in Egypt,”
by which he secured and destroyed nearly all the title
deeds of the country, making himself “sole possessor
of Egypt. . . . Not a clod of earth, not an ear of corn,
not a piastre profit from sale of grain, belonged to any-
one but himself.” 13
18 Cameron, “Egypt in the Nineteenth Century,” pp. 83-87.


King Ferdinand of Rumania


Turkey’s history in Palestine, Egypt, Libya, and
Ethiopia, from 1798 to 1825, meets the predictions of
the prophecy concerning her triumphs.
The Dismemberment of Turkey Foretold in
Prophecy
_ But after foretelling these splendid victories for
this Power, the prophet predicts trouble, and reverses,
and utter ruin. He says :
Bui tidings out of the east and out of the north shall
MpTi^Da n ;,P4 h t C ° me *° HiS
Turkey had no sooner completed her conquests in
the south (1825) than serious troubles arose in the
north—troubles that have continued to this day. Rus-
sia declared war on Turkey in 1827, and extended her
invasion and conquests as far as Adrianople in the
Balkan Peninsula, and Erzerum in Armenia. Turkey
sued foi peace, and signed the Treaty of Constan-
tinople, losing heavily. Here began a perceptible
disintegration and dismemberment of Turkey, which
has gone steadily on until she has lost every foot of
her possessions m Africa, and nearly all her territory
in Europe. These losses have been so great that, as
the “North American Review” says:—
There is no longer a Turkish Empire in Europe. A strip
of country around Constantinople is still held by the Sultan’s
troops; but all the other provinces of the Turkish Empire
are in the hands of the Balkan confederation.”
The Death Knell of Turkey
And now the Entente Allies have announced that
one of their conditions of peace is the expulsion of the
I urk from Europe. The decision was made when


Turkey joined the Teutonic Powers in their conflict
with the Allied Powers. It was then that Mr.
Asquith, at that time Premier of Great Britain, made
the following declaration for the British Cabinet;
“It is not the Turkish people, it is the Turkish Govern-
ment. that has drawn the sword, and I do not hesitate to
predict that that Government will perish by the sword. It
is they, and not we, who have rung the death knell of the
Ottoman dominions, not only in Europe, but in Asia.”
Following this statement by the British Premier,
M. Sazonoff, then Premier of Russia, in announcing
certain Russian victories over the Turks, said; —•
“The radiant future of Russia on the Black Sea is begin-
ning to dawn near the walls of Constantinople.”
About the same time, Sir Edward Grey, who was
then British Foreign Secretary, stated in the House of
Commons that England was “in entire sympathy”
with Russia’s plans for the settlement of the “politico-
economic problem bound up with her access to the
sea.” And he added: “What form their realisation
will take will, no doubt, be settled in the terms of
peace.”
The Programme of Russia
The plainly expressed policy of Russia was well
understood by both the Premier and the Foreign Sec-
retary of Great Britain when they made their signifi-
cant utterances.
Writing of these important political announcements
made in the capitals of England and Russia, Mr.
Joseph Edgar Chamberlin says:—
“That the programme of Russia and her allies will be
carried out, and that Constantinople will become Russian,


admits of little doubt. Sir Edward Grey did not name Con-
stantinople in his remarks in the House of Commons ex-
pressing England’s sympathy with Russia’s aspirations, but
the Duma pronouncement to which he referred did name it.
and his declaration has no other meaning. It is arranged
that Russia shall take the great city on the Bosporus.” *4
England’s Policy Reversed
Students of world-wide politics are amazed at the
great changes now taking place. As Mr. Frank H.
Simonds says:—
“Thus in a single hour the Eastern Question changed its
whole appearance. Thus England, at last, and unmistakably,
however guarded the diplomatic phrase, renounced the
policy of Beaconsfield, the policy which had provoked the
Crimean War, and sent the British fleet to the Sea of
Marmora to destroy the Treaty of San Stefano.” *5
Mr. Chamberlin adds :
“This news points to a step in history which the world
has awaited with a sort of chill of horror for two hundred
years; which England and France together fought one
great war to prevent; and to discourage which, England has
been more than once on the brink of other wars. After
laying down millions in treasure and many thousands of
lives in the Crimean War in 1853-56, and after the immense
and costly coups of Disraeli’s statesmanship in 1878, it is
now England herself who batters down the gates of Con-
stantinople, in order that Russia may come in and possess
it. Has there ever been so strange a right-about-face in the
history of the nations?” 16
Now, all this is serious for Turkey. It is the cli-
max of the trouble she has been passing through since
1827, when Russia, her powerful enemy in the north,
declared war upon her, pushed Russian victories almost
to the walls of Constantinople, and compelled Turkey
to sign a humiliating treaty. This was the beginning
of a series of Turkish reverses, which has continued to
the present time, and brought the empire to the brink
of ruin.
14 “Evening Mail,” London, Feb. 26, 1916.
16 “Review of Reviews,” New York, April, 1915.
“ “Evening Mail,” London, Feb. 26, 1915.


The trouble growing out of Turkey’s reverses and
disintegration is not confined to the Turkish nation.
It has extended to other nations, until nearly all are
involved.
And there is nothing in sight that gives promise of
relief. The roads of the European nations cross at
Constantinople, and on that cross, as one has said, “the
peace of Europe was crucified.” The sword had been
drawn, and, judging from the avowed purpose of the
nations, it looks as if it will never be sheathed until
Constantinople, the Bosporus, and the Dardanelles
pass from Turkey into the hands of some other Great
Power or combination of Powers.
Will There Be Lasting Peace?
But will that end the trouble, and establish lasting
peace? How will peace be possible under the condi-
tions that are sure to be created? According to the
claims of all the Powers for a hundred years, the
strong nation that possesses the strategic position of
Constantinople will dictate terms to the rest of Europe,
and that surely will not promote the peace of the world.
It requires no stretch of the imagination to see great
trouble ahead of the Powers in their attempts to
arrange terms of peace after the present war closes.
Discussing the question of remapping Europe at
the conclusion of the war, Mr. H. G. Wells says:—
“To the redrawing of that map a thousand complex forces
will come. There will be much attempted over-reaching
in the business, and much greed. Tew will come to
negotiations with simple intentions. In a wrangle, all
sorts of ugly and stupid things may happen. . . . Europe
will blunder into a new set of ugly complications, and pre-
pare a still more colossal Armageddon than this that is now
going on.”


A Battery of “ 120’s/’
ARMAGEDDON
The word “Armageddon” is used by public
speakers and writers the world over to describe and
name the great World War that began in Europe in
the summer of 1914. One editor remarks that,
although “we hear the word ‘Armageddon’ used on all
sides these days in connection with the European
war ... it is exceedingly probable that nine men out
of ten do not know why it is employed to describe a
great conflict or slaughter.”
Although the word is new to the masses, and its
meaning is not very clear, yet to many it seems sug-
gestive of something very serious, and an earnest
desire is manifested everywhere to know its full sig-
nificance.
Those who use the word “Armageddon,” either to
describe or to name the great struggle now going on.
evidently understand that it means a tremendous clash
of the nations of earth—a World War.
Note the following statement by the editor of the
Washington “Post”:—


*A
. J. W. Small & Co., Photo.
German Officer Laying Barbed Wire


‘‘This coming retribution is the battle of Armageddon.
All the world is moving to the conflict. War and justice
joined issue when Cain slew his brother, and the quarrel
is not yet composed, and perhaps the final adjudication will
not come until Armageddon.”
To this editor, Armageddon means a great battle —
all the world moving to the conflict —the ending of the
quarrels of the human race.
The editor of the “North American Review” 1 says:
“Europe stands to-day at Armageddon. On every hand,
its proud peoples are rising in their virile strength, and are
rushing with earth-shaking tread to that (frightful holocaust
which may check our civilisation—giants grappling to the
death in a modern ‘twilight of the gods.’ . . . The great
conflagration has come at last, and to-day all Europe is
wrapped in flames. . . . ‘Europe in arms,’ —the greatest
tragedy in all recorded history. At the uttermost ends of
the earth men prepare to-day for the fight.”
Note the significance of these impressive state-
ments —peoples “rushing with earth-shaking tread” to
a “frightful holocaust”; “all Europe is wrapped in
flames”; “at the uttermost ends of the earth men pre-
pare to-day for the fight”; “the greatest tragedy in all
recorded history”—this great conflict, says the editor,
is “Europe ... at Armageddon.”
Shortly aft£r the present World War began, a
writer in “Collier’s Weekly” said: —
“Now Armageddon has a real meaning. Now we have
roaring in our ears the thunder of the cannons and the
shouting of a continent in conflict. If this be not Arma-
geddon, we shall never suffer that final death grip of the
nations.”
Why This War Has Been Named Armageddon
This is the first war in the history of the world that
has so generally been named Armageddon. In the
records of all the wars preceding the titanic struggle
now going on, there is scarcely any use of this word.
‘September, 1914.


What is the significance of this? Why the general
conviction that this war is Armageddon?
The answer is very clearly given by Dr. Courtney,
editor of the “Fortnightly Review.” In the Septem-
ber (1914) number he began a series of editorials
entitled “Armageddon—and After.” In the first article
he said: —
“In the clash of the two great European organisations,
the Triple Alliance and the Triple Entente, we have all
those wild features of. universal chaos which the writer of
the Apocalypse saw with prophetic eye as ushering in the
great day of the Lord, and paving the way for a new heaven
and a new earth. It is a colossal upheaval But what sort
of a new heaven and a new earth is it likely to usher in?”
This is a truly significant statement. In the use
of the word “Armageddon” the writer borrows the
main part of the title of his editorial from the Apostle
John, who wrote the book of Revelation. He then
states in most impressive language that in this World
War we have a fulfilment of that prophecy which
foretold Armageddon.
A Striking Similarity
These statements from prominent writers in differ-
ent parts of the world are not adduced as proof that
this great devastating war is the Armageddon of the
Scriptures. They are given to show that the feeling
prevails that Armageddon is here, and to explain why
this impression obtains. The points of similarity be-
tween the prophecy regarding Armageddon and this
gigantic struggle are so striking that it is easy to con-
clude that this war is either Armageddon or its pre-
lude. If it is not the real event, it would seem that it
must be its immediate precursor.


The Armageddon of the Bible is to be so great an
event, so terrible in character, and so full of serious
meaning to all the world that it ought to be given the
most earnest, painstaking study. This will require a
careful investigation of Bible prophecies and of inter-
national problems.
The Scriptures the Source of Information Regarding
Armageddon
It is an interesting and significant fact that the
Bible is the original source of information regarding
the Armageddon to which so many speakers and
writers are now calling attention. The “Encyclopedia
Britannica” says:—
'‘From the application of the word ‘Armageddon' to the
great battle at the end of time, comes the use of the phrase
‘an Armageddon’ to express any great slaughter or final
conflict.” 2
In the writings of the Apostle John is given the
first published statement in regard to Armageddon, as
follows: —
“The sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river
Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way
of the kings of the East might 'be prepared.” Rev. 16: 12.
“And I saw coming out of the mouth of the dragon, and
out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the
false prophet, three unclean spirits, as it were_ frogs:
“For they are spirits of demons, working signs; which go
forth unto the kings of the whole world, to gather them
together unto the war of the great day of God, the
Almighty. ...
“And they gathered them together into the place which is
called in Hebrew Har-Magedon.” Rev. 16: 13-16, A. R. V.
A Well-defined Outline
This prophecy presents the following clearly-de
fined outline: —
1. The drying up of the waters of the Euphrates,
2 Eleventh edition, article “Armageddon.”


The Kaiser


to prepare or clear the way for the gathering of the
kings of the East. Verse 12.
2. The deceptive working of demon spirits on the
minds and hearts of all the kings and nations of the
earth, inciting them to war and bloodshed. Verses
13, 14.
3. The gathering of the misled, war-maddened
nations of the whole world to fight “the battle of the
great day of God, the Almighty.’’ Verse 14.
4. The place of this great battle —Armageddon—
or the plain of Esdraelon, in Palestine. Verse 16.
5. The time when all this is to take place—namely,
when Christ, the Saviour and Deliverer, is about to
come. Verse 15.
Happily, the Scriptures furnish data for a clear,
rational interpretation of the prophecy which presents
this momentous programme of events.
Tfie Drying Up of the River Euphrates
The first specification in the prophetic outline is the
following:—
"the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river
Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up.” Rev. 15: 12.
The river Euphrates is mentioned many times in
the Scriptures. It first appears in Gen. 2 : 14, as one
of' the four rivers of the Garden of Eden. The
Euphrates of to-day rises in the mountains of Armenia,
and flows down the Mesopotamian valley to the Per-
sian Gulf. On its banks once stood the great city of
Babylon, “‘the beauty of the Chaldees’ excellency.”
Isa. 13 : 19. At present the Euphrates is a Turkish
river, because the land through which it flows is
Turkish territory.


o
o
-c:
Q,
6
o
Ql
«
5
co
6
X
a
o
u
ft-
X
u
c
V
u
H
u
0
MH
cn
v
u
u
H
C
*3
c
S
T 3
OJ
*0
c
3
0
£


The prophecy foretells the drying up of the water
of the Euphrates. This is not to be understood to
mean the drying up of the literal water of the river.
Water, when used in prophecy, stands for people. This
is the interpretation given to John, as follows: —‘‘The
waters which thou sawest . . . are peoples, and multi-
tudes, and nations, and tongues." Rev. 17 : 15. The
prophet Isaiah uses the term ‘‘waters” to symbolise
the Assyrian hosts that came against the inhabitants
of Palestine. “The waters of the river, strong and
many, even the Ring of Assyria, and all his glory,
the prophet declares, “shall come up over all his chan-
nels, and go over all his banks.” Isa. 8: 7. ihese
Scriptures establish the fact that water, whether
rivers or seas, is used symbolically to represent
peoples and nations. When so used, a river would
naturally represent the people through whose land it
flows.
On this principle of interpretation, it is claimed
that the river Euphrates, being a Turkish river, would
at the present time represent Turkey. The language
used, then, very appropriately describes the drying up,
shrinking, disintegrating process that Turkey has been
undergoing during the past century. The prediction
will be fully met when Turkey comes “to his end,” as
expressed by the prophet Daniel in draper 11, verse 45.
This is the view of Guinness, who says:—
“The drying up of the Euphrates . . . has long been
understood" to refer to the wasting away ot the Turkish
power.”
Deceived and Maddened by Demons
“I saw . . . spirits of demons, working signs; which
go forth unto the kings of the whole world, to gather
them together unto the war.’ Rev. 16 : 13, 14, A.R.V,


The war of Armageddon will have in it and back
of it more than men. It will have men deceived and
maddened by satanic agencies. It is not here claimed
that the war now devastating Europe and staggering
the whole world is the entire fulfilment of the predic-
tion of that deceptive work of demons by which rulers
and people will be blinded and crazed, and led into
wanton, devastating war. But if ever warring nations
seemed to be under the control of satanic powers, get-
ting ready-for Armageddon, it is at this time.
Before this clash of nations began, the British
Foreign Secretary said in the House of Commons: “It
is really as if, in the atmosphere of the world, there
were some mischievous influence at work which
troubles and excites every part of it.” Then came this
war, which the editor of the “North American Review”
calls “the greatest tragedy in all recorded history.”
Prof. Edgar Lucien Larkin, in charge of the Lick
Astronomical Observatory on the summit of Mt.
Hamilton, California, makes the following startling
statement:—
"The mind of the human race is now in a dangerous
state. How do I know this?—By reading my simply
amazing letters received daily from so many parts of the
world, and by conversing with travellers here from nearly
every nation on the planet. Human thought is in an
abnormal paranoiac condition. A paranoiac is liable to be-
come violent at any moment. So is the human race, now
as I write. I would not have the reader see the letters re-
ceived here; I burn them. They reveal an awful state of
mentation. But I am in correspondence with scientific
researchers in mind in many parts of the world. They write
me of unusual mental states. Some fearful influence is
agitating the lower faculties of the mind of man. My
books have elicited thousands of replies, and I am alarmed
over the thoughts therein. I assert and state and send forth
from this mountain summit this day, Feb. 21, 1916, that the
mind of the human race is in a dreadful condition.” 3
•San Francisco “Examiner,” Feb. 25, 1916.


Under the title, “War Madness,” the editor of the
Springfield “Republican” says:—
“Is war a craze which periodically sweeps over people?
. . . It certainly seems so. Such popular fury for fighting
as appears to pervade Europe just now has the aspect of
demoniacal possession.’’
Principal L. P. jacks, Dean of Manchester College,
Oxford, and editor of the “Hibbert Journal,” declares:
“In the two years during which the war has been in pro-
gress a number of men, women and children, roughly equal
to the total population of London, have been killed. Perhaps
live times as many have been wounded, making with the
killed a total not far short of the population of Great Britain.
What it lias cost in material wealth to accomplish this result
would be hard to say; probably $75,000,000,000
| £ 15,000,000,000] is well within the mark. ...
“We have come to this, —that about three hundred million
human beings on this side and two hundred million on that
are now engaged in trying to inflict upon each other the
greatest possible amount of death, mutilation, and material
loss, and have so far succeeded as to kill or wound forty
millions and to destroy $75,000,000,000 [£15,000,000,000]
worth of wealth at the very least.
“A proposal has been made to insure perpetual peace by
a new piece of machinery—a federation of all the States con-
trolled by a World Parliament. It is a proposal which
leaves me cold. ...
“The federation of the world would be a cockpit of civil
war. Before any such form of internationalism can be suc-
cessfully attempted, a preliminary step must be a complete
change of nature in each of the combining States.” 4
The statements of these editors and scholars re-
garding the present situation are true to the facts, and
represent the opinions of many men of keen vision and
great opportunities for observation.
The Whole World to be Involved.
In the war of Armageddon the whole world will be
represented and involved, for with prophetic eye John
saw demon spirits going “forth unto the kings of the
* Quoted in “Current History,” October, 1916, pp. 113-115.


whole 'ivorld, to gather them together unto the war.”
Fifty years ago it would hardly have been possible
to suggest international complications that would drag
the whole world into the vortex of war. But the
nations have been making history, and to-day it is not
difficult to outline a tangle that would involve every
nation in the world. In fact, the tangle is well in
sight, and it is now very difficult to see how the causes
of the present great war can possibly be prevented
from eventually leading the whole world into the battle
of Armageddon.
Where the Battle of Armageddon Will be Fought
“They gathered them together into the place which
is called in Hebrew Har-Magedon.” Rev. 16 : 16,
A.R.V.
From this reading it is evident that Armageddon is
a place—the place where “the battle of that great day
of God” is to be fought. That battle may be called
the “Battle of Armageddon,” the same as Napoleon’s
battle with the Mamelukes near the Pyramids of Egypt
is called the “Battle of the Pyramids.” Nelson’s naval
battle with the French at the mouth of the Nile has
come down in history as the “Battle of the Nile.”
The storm centre of the last great clash of the
nations, the place where the decisive battle of the last
world-struggle is to be fought, will be Armageddon.
Of this place, the “Encyclopedia Americana” says:—
“Armageddon, the great battle field where occurred the
chief conflicts between the Israelites and their enemies. The
name was applied to the table-land of Esdraelon in Galilee
and Samaria, in the centre of which stood the town of
Megiddo, on the site of the modern Lejjun.”




Armageddon Also Named Esdraelon
From this statement it appears that the place called
Armageddon was also called Esdraelon.
“This name is given to the great plain of central Palestine,
which extends from the Mediterranean to the Jordan,
separating the mountain ranges of Carmel and Samaria
from those of Galilee. ... It is the ancient plain of Megiddo,
the Armageddon of Revelation 16; 16.” 5
By a glance at the map of Palestine it will be easy
to locate this plain called Armageddon and Esdraelon.
Starting at the base of Mt. Carmel, on the Mediterra-
nean Sea, its southern line runs in a south-easterly
direction along the Samaria ranges to Mt. Ebal, near
the Jordan. Here the plain turns to the north-east as
far as Mt. Tabor, not far from the Sea of Galilee.
From that point the northern boundary extends west-
ward to the plain of Acre, on the Mediterranean Sea.
The most southern point of this plain is about forty
miles north of Jerusalem.
Although the Apostle John is the only Bible writer
who uses the word “Armageddon” in foretelling world-
struggles, he is not the only prophet who foretells the
great war of Armageddon. His prophecy agrees with
the prophecies given by other inspired writers cen-
turies before his time. The prophet Daniel, in fore-
telling the clash that will take place among the nations
at the time of Turkey’s downfall, describes this as “a
time of trouble, such as never was since there was a
nation.
From Constantinople to Jerusalem
In his prophetic outline of the nations, Daniel fore-
tells the transfer of the Turkish capital from Constan-
tinople to Jerusalem. Of Turkey he says: —
8 Abbott, “Dictionary of Religious Knowledge.”
•See Dan. 11 : 40-45; 12: 1.


King Constantine of Greece


He shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the
seas in the glorious holy mountain; yet he shall come to his
end, and none shall help him.”
Two things are here foretold of the Turk: First, he
shall establish his palace in the “glorious holy moun-
tain”; second, he shall then “come to his end.”
The palace, it is fair to assume, stands for the dwell-
ing-place of the sovereign—the capital. “The glo-
rious holy mountain” to which this capital is to be re-
moved is Mt. Zion, where Jerusalem stands. This is
made plain by Daniel, who says:—
“O Lord, according to all Thy righteousness, I beseech
Thee, let Thine anger and Thy fury be turned away from
Thy city Jerusalem, Thy holy mountain.” Dan. 9: 16.
The prophet Zechariah corroborates this state-
ment ;
“Thus saith the Lord: I am returned unto Zion, and will
dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and Jerusalem shall be
called a city of truth; and the mountain of the Lord of
hosts the holy mountain.” Zech. 8; 3.
Thus is plainly foretold the transfer of Turkey’s
capital from Constantinople to Jerusalem. Every-
thing in sight at this time indicates that the Turk
must soon leave Constantinople. Turkey’s victories
in Egypt from 1798 to 1825 were among her last.
From that time until the present Turkey has been
going to pieces. She has lost all her possessions in
Africa, and all in Europe save a small portion of the
Balkan Peninsula surrounding Constantinople. And
now this small fraction seems destined to be wrested
from her. As the editor of the Los Angeles “Times”
says;—
“The day of the Turk in Europe is practically at an end.
. . . Constantinople, a position of wonderful advantage, must
fall into new hands, and all are wide open to catch the
prize.”


fr
1
»
JjM It %Sv v
***.
r
■ ' i r
m f
• % Mi||
—
H|k •*.
’*
Guns in the Snow in Serbia
J. W. Small & Co., Photo


A Drying-up Process
Describing the gradual decay of Turkey, Lord
Bryce says: —
“The high-water mark of Turkish conquest had been
reached when Vienna was saved by the Polish King, John
Sobieski, in A.D. 1683. Ever since then the recession of the
water has been uninterrupted. . . .
“One by one its European provinces have been stripped
away. Hungary was lost, and then in succession iransylvania
and Bessarabia, and the two Danubian principalities which
now constitute the Rumanian kingdom, and Greece, and
Serbia, and Bosina, and Thessaly, and Eastern Rumelia, and
Crete. ... ,
“It would indeed, have before now been torn to pieces by
revolt or absorbed by rapacious neighbors had not the
mutual jealousies of the European States interposed a
“If. during the last hundred years, the Turkish Empire
had stood alone and unbefriended, as the east Roman Em-
pire had stood alone in the fourteenth and lifteenth cen-
turies, it would before now have perished from the earth.
The process of decay goes steadily on for the most obvious
of all reasons. . . •
“The conditions are such that, even if by some amazing
chance such a man as Solyman the Magnificent, or Akbar
the Great, were to come to the throne, there is little
probability that the process of decline could be arrested.
Jt advances with the steady march of a law of nature. Every
European statesman knows this. Every thinking man _in
Turkey itself knows it. That hopefulness must be blind
indeed which does not recognise that the problem now' is
not how to keep the Turkish Empire permanently in being,
but how to minimise the shock of its fall and what to sub-
stitute for it.”
A Tragic Event.
The tragic character of what is now taking place in
Turkey is expressed by Albert Bushnell Hart, profes-
sor of history in Harvard University, as follows: —
“Tragic as are the obsequies of a soldier, how much more
tragic are the obsequies of a nation, the last ceremonies oyer
a proud empire which for half a millennium has caused its
people to rejoice and its enemies to tremble.
“That is what the world is witnessing now. The sick man


of Turkey is dying at last. The government offices are
open; Constantinople is there; twenty millions of Turkish
subjects still live; hundreds of thousands of men are called
soldiers, and a score of vessels name themselves a navy.
Nevertheless Turkey is seeing its last days. It h ye
weeks, months, perhaps a few years; but the end is in sight;
the country is dying.”
And this is precisely what the prophets foretold.
Daniel said: “He shall come to his end, and none shall
help him.” Dan. 11 :45. John said this nation would
be “dried up.” And both of these prophets declared
that its end would be accompanied by the greatest
trouble the world had ever known. Said Daniel;
“There shall be a time of trouble, such as never was
since there was a nation even to that same time.
Dan. 12 :1. John declared that, when the Turkish
Empire should be “dried up,” the way would “be pre-
pared”—made ready—for the nations to gather at
Armageddon for “the war of the great day of God, the
Almighty.” See Rev. 16 : 13-16.
These predictions, written many centuries ago, are
now in process of rapid fulfilment. Though the great
Armageddon is not yet being fought, nor has that awful
“time of trouble” gripped the world, these events are
approaching with alarming rapidity. The generation
now living is watching the fulfilment as it is told
almost hourly in the daily papers. How serious are
these great events! How full of meaning to the
world!
Joel’s Prophecy of War.
The prophet Joel foresaw this time and the tremen-
dously serious events now occurring. He saw the
manifestation of the war spirit and the anger of the
nations. He heard the universal proclamation of




war. He saw such colossal preparations for war that
it appeared as if the nations were turning- their imple-
ments of agriculture into instruments of warfare and
destruction. He saw the nations —awakened, aroused,
maddened —gathering in the land of Palestine for
battle. And there he saw their overthrow and utter
destruction. His prophecy should be read with the
greatest care by all the world just now. Here is his
graphic description :
“Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles: Prepare war, wake
up the mighty men, let all the men of war draw near; let
them come up: beat your ploughshares into swords, and your
pruning hooks into spears: let the weak say, I am strong.
Assemble yourselves, and come, all ye heathen, and gather
yourselves together round about: thither cause thy mighty
ones to come down, O Lord. Let the heathen be wakened,
and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat: for there will I
sit to judge all the heathen round about.
All Pointed to the Same Events.
That Daniel, Joel, and John were all foretelling the
same great events seems evident. They all located
them at the same time in the world’s history —namely
at its close. Daniel said they would take place at the
time when Michael, the Prince of Peace, should arise
and take the government upon His shoulders. Dan.
12 :1. Joel said they would be when “the day of the
Lord is near.” John said they would occur when
Christ should declare, “Behold, I come.” Rev. 16 : 15.
Furthermore, these prophets all predicted a war
that would bring upon the world “a time of trouble,
such as never was since there was a nation, even to
that same time.”
These prophets all pointed to the same source for
deliverance —namely, to the world’s Redeemer, the




Son of the Most High. He, they all united in declar-
ing, will be “the hope of His people.” Joel 3 : 16.
Why should it be thought incredible that the great
war of to-day may be the beginning of the end—the
prelude of a war that will end in the extermination of
all the nations of the earth?
World’s History Outlined in Prophecy.
Centuries ago the prophecies of the Bible foretold
the overthrow of the great world kingdoms that have
been established in the earth. Standing in the pre-
sence of Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon, the pro-
phet Daniel traced the rise and fall of one kingdom
after another down to the close of time, when the
Prince of Peace will establish His universal and ever-
lasting kingdom on the earth.
To Nebuchadnezzar, who represented the kingdom
over which he ruled, Daniel said:—
“After thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee,
and another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule
over all the earth. And the fourth kingdom shall be strong
as iron. . . . The [this] kingdom shall be divided” into a
number of kingdoms. “They shall not cleave one to another.
. . . And in the days of these kings [kingdoms] shall the
God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be
destroyed; and the kingdom shall not be left to other people,
but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms,
and it shall stand forever.” Dan. 2; 39-44.
Stormy Conflicts Foretold.
This is a very brief but truly accurate forecast of
the succession of the great kingdoms that have come
and gone since Babylon flourished. In subsequent
prophecies, Daniel foretold the stormy conflicts that
would sweep these kingdoms away one after another.'
The history that fulfils these prophecies is full of in-
terest and importance, even though it be the history of
devastating wars.
7 See Daniel 7.


g 6 The World War
No., the prophecies that loreteUd. waro‘ A--
geddon predict a universal wa . kingdoms
nations, a war that wi sw are j ust as clear and
of the world. These P ro P*^ hose which foretell the
r;r^r“s-"-
Armageddon Closes
The pr ° ph 7\ e heTrm e ageddon conflict. John tell
ins the time of the J\rm* a God.” Whe
us it is “the battle th *’. Saviour says, “Behold,
come “ b ° w“en uis iver. there will behear d «*£
Xout of thettenfoleof heavem Dani ,
Rev. 16:15. 17 Micha & e l [Christ] stand up, tj
“\t that time shall t children of tl i
great Prince which standeth £ sha U be
people: ... and at that found written m t
livered, every one taat U Joel says it v.
book.” Dan 12 :1- P P artd th „
hope of His people”
“■ -.-.njks. -*sss» i
sad? t'ragifhistory of this world- devastatin „ 4
Armageddon ,s to w „, then do
Of the human rac* pm . pose> “fight th T>
they now deda _ That was the outl*
troversy out to a finish n as ~ eX .j
by the prophets, and it is
to-day.


THE PRESENT OUTLOOK
The achievements of this age have increased the
opportunities of the human race beyond the wildest
imagination of men in former generations. These op-
portunities are placed alike within the grasp of single
individuals, of combinations of individuals, and of
nations.
There are single men to-day who wield greater
•jyej than a whole nation did a few centuries ago.
this power is multiplied as men centre their in-
vests and endeavours in commercial, political, and
national organisations.
Realising the value and the advantages of these in-
creased opportunities, nations have become possessed
boundless ambitions to extend their boundaries,
ir commerce, and their power. It is these ambi-
P G so possible of realisation, that multiply the pro-
uaoi7ties and dangers of international competition, and
strife, and war.
4 [97]


As ocean traffic has developed, the great nations
have been in sharp, determined competition to estab-
lish themselves in advantageous and strategic posi-
tions in all parts of the world. To this end they have
built navies and merchant fleets, they have secured
extensive colonial possessions, and developed far-
reaching commercial enterprises.
A Race for Advantages
But with all this extension of boundary lines, in-
crease of population, and growth of commerce, no
nation seems to be satisfied. Russia’s determination
to gain greater advantages by securing free, safe, per-
manent access to the oceans, through the Bosporus
and the Dardanelles, has always been looked upon by
the other nations as a great menace to their interests
and welfare. On the other hand, the nations claim
that Germany’s determination to establish a route,
under German control, from the North Sea to the Per-
sian Gulf, imperils their very existence.
Surveying the whole field, it is difficult to see any-
thing ahead but war as long as the nations have power
to fight. Ihe victory of the Allies would wreck the
Teutonic policy of expansion and commercial supre-
macy, It would hold Germany in England’s grip in
the North Sea. It would continue the possibility of
France’s recovering Alsace and Lorraine. It would
give Russia the waterway from the Black Sea'to the
Mediterranean, It would fortify England in the
Mediterranean, at the Suez Canal, and in her overseas
possessions. And it would strengthen France and
Italy. All this would cut off Germany’s road to the


Persian Gulf, and Austria’s route to the iEgean Sea.
This would give Russia a dominant position in the
Balkan Peninsula, which the Teutonic Powers believe
would threaten their existence.
On the other hand, the triumph of the Teutonic
Powers would reverse all this. It would add to
Germany’s territory, commerce, power, and security.
It would make Germany’s influence supreme in Con-
stantinople, and German trade and industry dominant
in Syria, Arabia, and the valley of the Euphrates. It
would establish Austria-Hungary’s control over the
northern part of the Balkan Peninsula, and give her a
naval base at Salonika, on the Aegean—a position
which she has long sought. It would also give her a
dominant position in the Adriatic.
This issue was clearly understood before the war
began. Each side knew full well what defeat would
mean, and all parties went into the struggle to fight to
the death for victory. With such tremendous inter-
ests at stake, and in such violent conflict, what are the
probabilities before us? Do they presage peace or
war?
A Dark Outlook
With the horrors of the great war growing more
terrible at each new turn of affairs, alarm regarding
the future is deepening. So far, the developments of
the conflict have disappointed everybody. Things
have not gone as was expected. The situation seems
to become more complicated and puzzling. The hope
of a settlement of the differences, and of general, per-
manent peace, is growing smaller as the struggle con-
tinues. Some of the men of largest vision are openly


ID
In
4)
0
2
s
a
E
>.
tn
UN
o
■d
*
0
u
U
<
1
«
£
m
X
•a
c
(0
j*
5


predicting that this war will not bring peace. It may
cease for a time; but, after a lull, a storm greater in its
sweep, and more devastating in its effects, is likely to
burst upon the world.
In a careful and extended review of conditions now-
existing, Prof. Edward Alsworth Ross, head of the de-
partment of sociology in the University of Wisconsin,
states his conclusion as follows:
■‘A cool, relentless analysis of the situation discloses litde
ground for hopeful anticipation. On the contrary, the
prospect is one of the blackest humanity has ever faced. Such
is the appalling outlook if we continue on the national line.”
Conflict Not Ended by Expulsion of Turkey
The taking of Constantinople will not end the con-
flict. The waterway from the Black Sea to the Medi-
terranean must go with Constantinople. And it would
seem that the territory along this waterway must go
with it. That would involve a struggle for the eastern
part of the Balkan Peninsula, and at least the western
part of Asia Minor. Thus, the Turk would be forced
back into Syria and Palestine, into the very region
where the prophet saw him established—“the glorious
holy mountain,” Jerusalem.
But the prophet saw beyond the establishment of
the Turkish capital at Jerusalem. He saw and fore-
told the overthrow, the utter ruin, of the Government
of Turkey after it had planted its capital in Jerusalem.
From the conditions that have developed in recent
times, and from the complex and wholly unsolved pro-
blem of the disposal of Asiatic Turkey, it is easy to see
how quickly there could arise fiery complications re-
garding the division of Asiatic Turkey and the posses-


sion of the city of Jerusalem, that would lead to
another devastating war, which would blot the Turkish
Government out of existence.
This danger is clearly foreseen by close students of
conditions in the Near 'East. Referring to the recent
agreement of the Allies, that, if they are victorious,
Russia shall have Constantinople and the Dardanelles,
J. Ellis Barker says:—
“While we may rejoice that the ever-threatening- problem
of Constantinople has at last been eliminated, it is possible
that another may arise in its place. The question of Asiatic
Turkey may convulse the world in a series of devastating
wars unless it be solved together with the other great ques-
tions which will come up for settlement at the Peace
Congress.
“Innumerable great and small problems will have to be
considered at the Peace. Not only the map of Europe, but
that of the world, will have to be redrawn. The coming
settlement will be greater, and may be far more difficult,
than that made at Vienna a hundred years ago. . . .
“The question of Asiatic Turkey is undoubtedly a far
more difficult question than that of Constantinople. . . .
The importance and value of Asiatic Turkey, . . . can
scarcely be over-exaggerated, for it occupies undoubtedly
the most important strategical position in the world. It
forms the nucleus and centre of the Old World._ It
separates, and at the same time connects, Europe, Asia, and
Africa, three continents which are inhabited by approxi-
mately nine-tenths of the human race. . . .
“A powerful Asiatic Turkey can obviously dominate not
only the Bosporus, the Dardanelles, and the Suez Canal,
but the very narrow entrance of the Red Sea near Aden,
and that of the Persian Gulf near Muscat as well. It must
not be forgotten that only a comparatively short distance,
a stretch of country under the nominal rule of weak and
decadent Persia, separates Asiatic Turkey from the Indian
frontier. It is clear that Asiatic Turkey, lying in the centre
of the Old World, is at the same time a natural fortress of
the greatest defensive strength and an ideal for a sur-
prise attack upon southern Russia, Constantinople, the
Aegean Islands, Greece, the Suez Canal, Egypt, Persia,
Afghanistan, and India.”


Mr. Barker quotes Prof. Dr. A. Sprenger, former
director of the Mohammedan College of Calcutta, who
wrote in his book, “Babylonia, the Richest Land of
Antiquity, and the Most Valuable Field of Colonisa-
tion at the Present Time,” published in 1886:
"‘The Orient is the only territory of the earth which has
not yet been seized by the expanding nations. It is the
most valuable field of colonisation. If Germany does not
miss its opportunity, and seizes it before the Cossacks have
put their hands upon it, the whole German nation will gain
by the colonisation of the East. As soon as several hundred
thousand German soldier-colonists are at work in that
glorious country, the German Emperor can control the fate
of Western Asia and the peace of all Asia.’ . . .
“It seems necessary for the peace of the world," Mr.
Barker comments in conclusion, "that Asiatic Turkey in its
entirety should be neutralised . . . under the auspices of a
strong but non-military and unaggressive State. ... If the
powers should not be able to agree, ... it would become
necessary to divide Asiatic Turkey into zones of influence.
. . . However, it seems very doubtful whether the partition
of Asiatic Turkey would prove a final one. It is much to
be feared that it would lead to a disaster perhaps as great
as the present war.” *
Thus, it appears that, the more carefully we study
the situation in the Near East, the more clearly it is
seen that the storm-centre of the world-conflicts is to
be Asiatic Turkey. For a hundred years Constanti-
nople has been the storm-centre of European Powers.
That city is about to pass from Turkey into other
hands, and as soon as the transfer is made, the storm-
centre, it seems evident, will move to Asiatic Turkey.
Future Possession of Jerusalem.
From the first days of the fiery Crusades to the
present hour the possession of Jerusalem has been a
question of contention among the nations and religious
bodies of both Europe and Asia. Elements of dan-
ger still lurk in this contention.
I “The Nineteenth Century and After,” June, 1916.


It is significant that already, on the eve of Turkey’s
expulsion from Constantinople, claims to the future
possession of Jerusalem are being set up. Herr A.
Kirchenheim, in the “Deutsche Revue,” under the sig-
nificant question, “Who is to have Jerusalem?” says:
“The solution of this question is an important part of the
so-called Eastern Question. Constantinople, of course, is
the brilliant on the possession of which everything will
turn —from the military, the political, and the economic side
the most important; Jerusalem is the other precious stone
for the possession of which men fought in the times of the
Crusades, and which again some seventy years ago became
the cause of feuds and war. The question of the future of
Jerusalem and of Palestine may not be exactly a burning
one, but it is certainly one which the politician will have
to consider very soon. . . . From the German standpoint,
the ipowers could not now do anything better or wiser than
give Germany the preference in Jerusalem. The question is,
Will the powers consider Germany the most suitable
country to take over the administration of this part of Asia
Minor?” 2
It is certainly true that the solution of the ques-
tion as to who is to have Jerusalem is an important
part of the Eastern Question. While Constantinople
is the great “brilliant” in the Near East, Jerusalem is
the other “precious stone” coveted by all. The ques-
tion of the future of Jerusalem and Palestine, as Mr.
Kirchenheim says, “may not be exactly a burning one,
but it is certainly one which the politician will have to
consider very soon.” He then asserts Germany’s
claim, and asks if the Powers will “consider Germany
the most suitable country to take over the administra-
tion of this part of Asia Minor.” The war now devas-
tating Europe is an expression of the refusal of the
Powers to allow Germany to take over the administra-
tion of either Constantinople or any part of Asia
Minor.
’Quoted in “Review of Reviews,” March, 1914.


Unholy War in Palestine
Already men have the conviction that the present
World War is going to be carried into Palestine and
finished there. “That millions are concerned about
what is to become of Palestine and Jerusalem,” ob-
serves the editor of “Current Opinion,” 3 “is more than
evident from the many discussions of this theme found
in leading periodicals.”
Prof. L. Schneller, a resident of Jerusalem, tells us
that—
“Jerusalem has now become a great military centre. The
town and the public highways are crowded with soldiers
and their equipment. . . . The citadel of the city, with its
two mighty towers dating back to the times of King Herod,
is the scene of great things. Not since the days of the
Crusader have such things been witnessed in this sacred
territory. The government has by compulsory purchase
secured from the French owners the railroads of the land,
especially that from Joppa to Jerusalem. The Holy Land
has again become what it was in the days of the great
world powers of antiquity—Babylon, Assyria, and Egypt—
the military and commercial gateway between Asia and
Africa.” 4
The editor of the “Sun” declares:—
“As the war develops, we may look for early news of
clashes in Bible lands. At best the Latins and Greeks are
normally in a state of armed truce there. Even the fear of
the Moslem does not drive them together. In Constanti-
nople, Jerusalem, Beirut, Alexandria, and elsewhere in the
region of the Mediterranean, each of these faiths has a
section of the city to itself. Religion means more politically
than it does spiritually to the people of the Balkans and of
the lands which were the scene of Bible history.
“One of the likeliest effects of the war will be the realisa-
tion by certain powers of their dreams for possession of
Palestine. Russia is thirsty for the warm waters of the
Mediterranean, and Austria has long been resolute to possess
a seaport on the Sea.
“These contending and intricate international aspirations
are likely to brush aside the Sultan’s throne, and to result
in the division of the Turkish Empire. Land and oil fields
• June, 1916. * Idem.


down in the storied region of the Garden of Eden are
coveted by both Germany and Britain; and we may hear
strange news from the Persian Gulf ere peace pacts are
signed.” s
Under the title, “Will the War End in Palestine?”
Mr. Maynard Owen Williams makes the following - sig-
nificant statements: —
“The present war is bringing into new prominence a land
that has been the battlefield of history. Once again the
attention of the world is being turned to the land of Syria.
The battle fields of antiquity may be the battle fields of
to-morrow. Geography has laid its impress on the land,
and history repeats itself along geographical lines. . . .
“Another battle may drench Esdraelon in blood.
Jerusalem, formerly sheltered by its aloofness from the
plains, now holds a prominent place in the thoughts of the
governments whose magnificent hospices have almost
hidden the little city which lies on the direct line of the
advance towards Egypt. Unholy war threatens to bring
sorrow and suffering once more to the land of Calvary. . . .
"Thus it will be seen that it is by no means an improbable
thing that tiny Judea, the birthplace of Christ, may be
stirred by the rumble of troop trains, and even quiet
Bethlehem may feel the ominous throb of a land stirred by
the throes of war. The Holy Land may be the turning-
point.
“The citizens of Nazareth may gaze down upon the great
battle field of the centuries, and see there the final conflict.”
Misguided by Demons.
The Apostle John saw the nations deceived, mis-
guided, inflamed, and crazed by demon spirits. He
saw these nations locked in deadly combat that ended
in the extermination of the race. Then he heard the
voice of God saying, “It is done.” Then there came
“a great earthquake, such as was not since men were
upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so
great. . . . And every island fled away, and the moun-
tains were not found.” Rev. 16 : 18-20.
•New York “Evening Sun,” Aug. 8, 1914.


3
c
c.
n
o
13
a
0*
s
5‘
•-»
a
3
o
ft
%
3
in
5
a
o
o
T*
o
o


This account agrees with all the others of the Bible
which tell of the end of all things earthly. It is the
same as that given by Joel, in which he tells of the
universal proclamation of war, the beating of the im-
plements of agriculture into instruments of destruc-
tion; of the aroused, awakened heathen nations gather-
ing in great multitudes about the valley of Jehoshaphat
in Palestine. Then he adds:—
"Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe. . . . The
Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter His voice from
Jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth shall shake: but
the Lord will be the hope of His people.” Joel 3; 13-16.
These seers must surely have had a view of the
same great world-conflict and the same terrible conse-
quences. They saw the warring nations hushed in
death, and the bloody strife forever past.
Thus the real Armageddon, the Armageddon of the
Bible, is a most serious afifair. It is under satanic
leadership. It is backed by boundless ambition for
conquest, and insatiable thirst for power. It corner
at the close of human history, setting at naught the
highest ideals of both civilisation and Christianity.
Armageddon is the last act in the drama of human
history. It ends with the extermination of the human
race, except those who have before found refuge in
God, and it leaves the world in utter ruin.


Sweeping London’s Skies
A KINGDOM OF RIGHTEOUSNESS
When the great war of Armageddon closes, the
curtain will go down on a world that will never re-
appear. That war will close an age—an age of con-
diet between the forces of good and of evil, an age
made terrible by enmity, strife, war, bloodshed, and by
indescribable sorrow and suffering.
But that will not be the end of the human race.
Another and a better age will follow. In the purpose
of the Creator there is something for mankind infi-
nitely better than anything that has been experienced
during the present age of mixed good and evil, with
the evil apparently triumphant. As surely as there is
a Supreme Being, so surely is there to be “a new
heaven and a new earth.” Ihe day is coining when
the reign of sin will be broken, and its very existence
ended. Then the knowledge of the glory and righteous-
ness of God will cover the earth ‘‘as the waters cover
the sea.” Hah. 2 : 14. Then the kingdom of God
will be established among men, and He will cause


“wars to cease unto the end of the earth.” P s . 46 :9.
-This is the hope that inspires and sustains every
believer in the Word of the living- God. As another’
has said
"In the midst of wars and rumors of wars, of national
changes and the uncertainty which attends all human
planning, this kingdom is the refuge' of faith. Wearied as
we may be with the rising and falling, the waxing and
waning, the uplifting and the destroying, which are the
successive developments of man's wisdom and power we
may give glory to God that we stand near a throne that
can shelter us always, and belong to a kingdom that cannot
3e moved. And as the noise of the conflict between the
the evil is heard all around us, importing a terrible
crisis for the nations of earth, “shaking the foundations of
fortune, rending the fondest associations of life, and casting
a veil of uncertainty on all the prospect before us. it is an
unspeakable privilege to see that our Lord’s throne stands
unshaken, and the light of His glory still beams on Mount
Zion, bor the judgments which confound the nations with
terror, reveal Christ to the church as He rides on the storm-
and, amid the upheavmgs of kingdoms, rises to Him the
ascription: Thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory
There is no dimness in the vision of the prophets
concerning God’s everlasting- kingdom.
‘The word of God is pledged. The power of Satan shall
be broken; death is to be destroyed; the earth shall be
redeemed; the stains of sin shall be effaced from the abodes
Prophecy is burdened with this pledge of a
hV ldJ t w U f mp n S ° / *T or ” l P l< ' te that n °thing can be desired to
be added to it; and the last prayer of the Bible is for the
SmtleteTis” work. ; h e L ° rd ’ ‘° aSSl,me His kinB:dom and
The plan of redemption provides for both a gospel
of righteousness and a kingdom of righteousness. The
gospel is preparing subjects for the kingdom. The
gospel belongs to this age, the kingdom to the future
age. When the gospel work is finished, this age will
end, and there will follow a new age, in which the
kingdom of righteousness will be established. This
1 Rev. Robert R. Booth. a Idem.


is the clearly announced purpose of God for mankind,
When His Son came to this world as the Saviour of
men, it was declared that this was preparatory to His
kingship. Of Him the heavenly messenger said: —
“He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the
Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto Him the throne
of His Father David: and He shall reign over the house
of Jacob forever; and of His kingdom there shall be no
end.” Luke 1: 32, 33.
Centuries before the first advent of Christ, the
prophet Isaiah had been instructed to announce;—
“Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given: and the
government shall he upon His shoulder: and His name shall
be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The
everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase
of His government and peace there shall be no end, upon
the throne of David, and upon His kingdom, to order it,
and to establish it with judgment and with justice from
henceforth even forever.” Isa. 9: 7, 8.
He shall be called “The Prince of Peace.” and “the
government shall be upon His shoulder.” In the ful-
ness of time He will take control of affairs. The gov-
ernment of this world will then pass from the hands of
men to the Son of God. It is then that “the king-
doms of this world” will become “the kingdoms of our
Lord, and of His Christ: and He shall reign for ever
and ever.” Rev. 11 : 15. Then will be fulfilled the
prophecy of Daniel, that to the Son of God there was
given “dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all
people, nations, and languages should serve Him: His
dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not
pass away, and His kingdom that which shall not be
destroyed.” Dan. 7 ; 14.
The subjects of this kingdom wi l ! be the redeemed,
the saints of the Most High; for “the kingdom and


dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the
whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints
of the Most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey Him.”
Dan. 7 :27.
These subjects are now being prepared by the gos-
pel of salvation. Thus it is that, throughout this age,
there has been a sharp conflict between the forces of
good and of evil. As the culmination of the con-
troversy approaches, the conflict will grow more fierce,
and the visible agencies ranged on opposite sides will
become more active under their opposing leaders. This
is the Divine programme as set forth in the Scriptures
of truth.
The Great World-Movements
The piophecies of the Bible foretell two great
world-movements which are to be signs, heralds, of the
approaching end of human history and of the setting
up of tile glorious and everlasting kingdom of our
Lord and Saviour. One of these signs is a movement
resulting in the world-wide proclamation of the gospel
of peace on earth and good will to men. The other
sign is a movement that will result in universal war
among - the nations of the world.
These two movements are direct opposites. One
is for peace; the other is for conflict. One brings life ;
the other brings death. One is for restoration ; the
other is for destruction.
These movements are both world-wide in their
operations. The gospel is to be “preached in all the
woild for a witness unto all nations.” Matt. 24 : 14.


r
o
a
*3
•t
3
ft
cr
3
■d
ft
o
x
W
o
c/>
o
s
ft*
co
C/3
2
03
o
o
t)
tr
o
o


The war is to be carried on by “the kings of the earth
and of the whole world.” Rev, 16 : 14.
Both movements are to be in operation at the same
time. While the heralds of the cross will be proclaim-
ing the gospel of peace on earth, good will to men, sal-
vation from sin, and life everlasting, the war-maddened
nations will be preaching war, beating their plow-
shares into swords, and preparing for the mightiest
conflict of all the long, bloody history of the human
race.
Both of these world-movements are declared to be
signs of the “day of God” and of the “end of the
world.” They are active, impressive, ever-present
signs.
These movements are led by two different forces:
The unseen, heavenly agencies, that work for righte-
ousness, life, and everlasting happiness, are in charge
of the great gospel movement; the unseen forces that
stand for sin, death, and eternal ruin are marshalling
the nations of earth for universal war and devastation.
To Every Nation, Tongue, and People.
f he universality of the movement that results in
the proclamation of the gospel throughout the world is
one of the great outstanding facts of Biblical prophecy.
Prom first to last, the gospel is set forth as a world-
movement —“world-wide in its adaptation, its inten-
tion, and its power.”
Of the far-reaching extent of Christ’s life and death
and ministry for men, Jehovah has declared through
Isaiah;—
.It is a light thing that Thou shouldst be My servant to
raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved


J. W. Small & Co., Photo.
German Armoured Train


of Israel; 1 will also give Thee for a light to the Gentiles
[heathen], that Thou mayest be My salvation unto the end
of the earth.” Isa. 49: 6.
And Malachi, the last of the Old Testament pro-
phets, declared that “from the rising of the sun even
unto the going down of the same” the name of Christ
would be “great among the Gentiles.” Mai. 1:11.
During His life on earth Christ confined His jour-
neys and labours to the little land of Palestine, but He
boldly declared that the message He there proclaimed
would eventually go to the ends of the earth. He
said:—
this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the
world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the
end come.” Matt. 24; 14.
What a daring prediction! At the time He made
it, Jesus stood almost alone in the world. He was not
recognised by any of the world’s great and influential
leaders. Ihe Roman Government was against Him.
His own nation had rejected Him. His followers
were few, and of the most common sort. He had
been born in the stable of an inn. During His pub-
lic ministry He was so poor that He had no regular
home, and He made no provision for food. When
not entertained by others. He slept in the open; and
oftentimes He gathered such fruits and grains from
the land as the customs of the times permitted. He
knew that at the close of His career as a man among
men, He was to be crucified with criminals, and to be
buried in a borrowed tomb.
Put, notwithstanding these untoward conditions,
and in the face of them all. He calmly, confidently,’
boldly declared to all men, through all time, that His


message would be proclaimed to all the people of the
world. The movement He had set on foot would, He
gave assurance, spread over the face of the earth, tak-
ing permanent root and bearing glorious fruit in every
nation.
How wonderfully have the centuries worked out
the forecast of this lone Man of Galilee! io-day the
possibilities for the fulfilment of His bold prediction
are all that could be desired. To-day His gospel is
being “preached in all the world.” This prophecy of
the Master furnishes the explanation of the marvellous
developments of the past century.
Explorers the Pathfinders for Missionaries.
Much that pertains to exploration, discovery, in-
vention, education, and the world’s progress generally
has surely been stimulated and controlled by an over-
ruling Providence for the proclamation of Christ s
gospel throughout the world.
Exploration and discovery have given civilised
nations clear, well-defined knowledge of all the habit-
able parts of the world. This is the first time in the
history of man when the whole earth, with its many
peoples, has become universally known. As late as
the opening of the nineteenth century, nearly one-third
of the globe was absolutely unknown to civilised
people.
“At the beginning of Queen Victorias reign, practical. y
nothing was known of the interior of China and Japan,
Central Asia, Thibet, and, Afghanistan. As late as 1880 the
interior of Africa was almost a blank.”
How different the conditions to-day! During the
past century, explorers, navigators, and discoverers


have found every land, ascended every navigable
river, and penetrated to the very heart of nearly every
nation and tribe on the face of the earth. This has
opened India, China, Japan, Africa, the island groups
of the Pacific, South America, and all other lands, to
Western civilisation and Christian missionary en-
deavour.
Marvellous Transportation Facilities.
While explorers have been bringing to the know-
ledge of the world the location, distribution, and con-
ditions of the races, inventors and capitalists have, at
the same time, been hard at work providing transpor-
tation facilities for safely, yet quickly, reaching any
and eveiw part of the world.
When the nineteenth century opened there was not
an ocean steamer afloat, nor was there a mile of railroad
on the planet. Now there are steamship lines tra-
versing the seas to every important port on the globe,
while the railway lines reach the enormous total of
nearly one million miles—enough to belt the globe
forty times. These railway lines open continents,
cross sandy deserts, bridge rivers, and scale and tunnel
mountain ranges. By means of these transportation
facilities, a journey can be made around the world in a
little more than a month, and almost the remotest mis-
sion station in a heathen land can be reached within
two months from an administrative centre in a Chris-
tian land.
The captains of industry, who have provided these
transportation facilities at the expense of untold mil-
lions of dollars, have had uppermost in their plans the


world’s commerce; but the great Ruler of men and
nations has had in view the evangelisation of the
world in this generation, and has thus controlled their
ambitions and directed their energies.
The Transmission of Knowledge.
By means of the printing press, the telegraph and
cable and telephone lines, the public school systems,
the public libraries, and the scientific, historical, and
geographical societies, information can now be easily
and speedily conveyed to the great masses throughout
the world. Sixty thousand newspapers are being pub-
lished and widely distributed in all lands. As Henry
Ward Beecher once said: —
“Knowledge may be said, almost literally, to be without
money and without price, when for a penny a man, every
day may have newspapers that cover the contemporaneous
history of the globe. Books are cheaper than bread. None
are so poor that they cannot have the reading of the record
of events transpiring in every nation on the globe. And
while we multiply the means of knowledge at home, the
facility of transportation makes it easier to send them to
the uttermost parts of the_ earth than in our fathers days
it was to supply the near districts of our own land.
How wonderfully have been developed the material
instruments by which the knowledge of truth may be
multiplied and diffused! It is literally true, as Dr.
Leonard has observed, that “steamships, railroads, and
international postal systems, telegraph and cable lines,
are all placed under tribute that the way of the king-
dom of God may be established in all the earth.
The Rule of Protestant Nations.
One great change that has taken place in the inter-
ests of foreign mission conquests has been the.transfer
of a large proportion of the territory of the world
* “The Way of the Lord Prepared,” p. 86.


i f \ m
t -
5BBKa5Sr^ >> ' SS y JcSt i|S^3
|KE E > ui v
$ ' : 'H
** «U" ,i ®*MS5& • *®&*^jEBC3
J. W. Small & Co., Photo.
One of Italy’s Big Guns


from non-Christian nations to nations favouring
tianity. In 1600, “only seven per cent, of the terri-
tory of the world was controlled by C hristian nations,
but to-day eighty-two per cent., so that the growth of
Christian control has passed, in three hundred years, <
from seven to eighty-two per cent., while the control
of non-Christian nations has decreased from ninety-
three per cent, to eighteen per cent.’’
There are more millions of people under the rule of
Protestant nations to-day than there are under the
rule of all the heathen nations combined. There is
great significance in this change of population from
the control of non-Christian to Protestant nations. It
is altogether in favour of the efforts of the Christian
Church to make Christ known to all men. iM'Ko-X OAs
~ T y / jt f 6
The Bible and World Evangelism
The Bible is Christ’s message in written form, and
to-day it is in greater demand than at any previous
time in its centuries of existence. For a hundred
years, the Bible societies have been printing and cir-
culating great numbers of this book. The average
yearly circulation of the Bible and portions thereof at
the present time is more than fifteen millions of
copies. It is now printed in more than five hundred
languages and dialects. The American Bible
Society, in its annual report for 1913, declared that the
requests which came to the society during that year
for more copies of the Bible were so pressing and in-
sistent as to be in the nature of demands, and this
after a hundred years of great activity, during which




this one society distributed a hundred million copies
and parts of copies!
During the same century the British and Foreign
Bible Society distributed two hundred and twenty-
seven million copies. And still that book is the best
seller in the world. Having survived hundreds of bit-
ter attacks from its enemies, it is now the most potent
book in the hands of the human race. It lives in the
hearts of men, influencing them more and more as the
years go by. This marvellous fact is a mighty chal-
lenge to every man. All hail the power of Jesus’
word!
Closed Doors Have Opened
The growth, the power, and the achievements of
the foreign missions movement during the past cen-
tury are truly marvellous. One hundred years ago
there were less than one hundred Protestant mission-
aries at work in non-Christian lands. These were
confined to a very few places. In fact, most of the
heathen world was closed against them. Now all but
a very few lands are wide open to Christian mis-
sionaries.
And these open doors in all parts of the world are
being entered. To-day there are twenty-five thou-
sand foreign missionaries stationed in non-Christian
and non-Protestant lands. These foreign workers are
assisted by one hundred and twenty-five thousand
native Christians who have accepted the gospel. Thus,
by preaching and teaching, by circulating the Scrip-
tures and Christian literature, and by living Christian
lives, the missionaries are making known the gospel


to multiplied millions who had never heard of it a few
decades ago. John R. Mott says
d here never was a time when simultaneously in so
many sections of the world the opportunities for the ex-
tension o 1 the Christian religion were so numerous and so
extensive as at the present time. This is true in the Far
bast and the Near East, in southern Asia, in the Pacific
island world, in nearly all parts of Africa, and of Latin
. merica. Moreover, so far as one can forecast the future,
t iere is not likely to come a time when the opportunities
will be greater than those with which the Christian church
must deal to-day.”
The Approaching End of the Ages.
Thus, while the World War that involved so many
of the Great Powers in 1914. presages the rapid ap-
proach of universal war and universal ruin—even the
Armageddon of prophetic Scripture that is to result in
the utter destruction of the kingdoms of this world—
God is bringing into operation special providences for
the furtherance of the gospel movement which will
result in the establishment of the everlasting king-
dom of our Lord and Saviour. The great outstanding
world-movements now in progress can have no other
meaning. They are divinely appointed signs of the
approaching end. Soon will be heard a voice from
heaven declaring, “The former things are passed away.
.. . . Behold, I make all things new.” Rev. 21 :4, 5.
Thus, and only thus, will be realised the hopes of those
who to-day are looking for a new and better world fol-
lowing the cessation of hostilities among the nations.
The predictions of the Bible prophets are declared to
be “true and faithful” (Rev. 21 : 5) ; they will surely
come to pass.


.. '■ -
■ iijJ^
„ ~*>*XT , Ti
H
\
kH
■-. iPr**
■> -
German Infantry
,/. W. Small & Co., Photo.


The Gospel Invitation.
In the marvellous missionary movement of the
present generation may be read the compassionate
purpose of God in behalf of the entire human race.
To-day is sounding in every land the message:—
“Fear God, and give glory to Him; for the hour of His
judgment is come: and worship Him that made heaven, and
earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.” Rev. 14: 7.
In connection with this are given solemn warnings
against becoming entangled with any world-move-
ments the outcome of which will be utter destruction.
(See verses 8-12.) This message of warning and en-
treaty is the everlasting gospel now sounding in all the
earth. And with the proclamation of this message is
given the warning of our Saviour Himself; “Behold, I
come quickly. . . . Blessed are they that do His com-
mandments, that they may have right to the tree of
life, and may enter in through the gates into the city”
Then the world’s Redeemer and King will take this
sin-cursed, storm-tossed, blood-drenched world into
His own control for its full and complete reconstruc-
tion. This present world, with all its sin and misery,
will pass away. Every trace of sin and its terrible
effects will be removed. All things will be made
new. And this earth, thus renewed and restored to
its Eden beauty, will be given to those who have ac-
cepted Christ as their Saviour and King.
What a world that will be! What an age in which
to live! Of that .life and that kingdom there will be
no end.
“The Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let
him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is
athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take th<?
water of life freely.” Rev. 22 : 17.


THE CROSS ON WHICH THE PEACE OF
THE WORLD HAS BEEN CRUCIFIED.
